arXiv:2301.04725v1  [cs.CR]  11 Jan 2023GeNeDis manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Blockchain For Mobile Health Applications
Acceleration With GPU Computing
Georgios Drakopoulos ·Michail Marountas ·
Xenophon Liapakis ·Giannis Tzimas ·Phivos
Mylonas ·Spyros Sioutas
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Blockchain is a linearly linked, distributed, and very robu st data structure.
Originally proposed as part of the Bitcoin distributed stac k, it found a number of ap-
plications in a number of ﬁelds, most notably in smart contra cts, social media, secure
IoT, and cryptocurrency mining. It ensures data integrity b y distributing strongly en-
crypted data in widely redundant segments. Each new inserti on requires veriﬁcation
and approval by the majority of the users of the blockchain. B oth encryption and ver-
iﬁcation are computationally intensive tasks which cannot be solved with ordinary
off-the-shelf CPUs. This has resulted in a renewed scientiﬁ c interest in secure dis-
tributed communication and coordination protocols. Mobil e health applications are
growing progressively popular and have the enormous advant age of timely diagnosis
of certain conditions. However, privacy concerns have been raised as mobile health
application by default have access to highly sensitive pers onal data. This chapter
presents concisely how blockchain can be applied to mobile h ealth applications in
order to enhance privacy.
Keywords Blockchains ·Digital health ·Edge computing ·Mobile computing ·
Mobile applications ·Majority protocols ·GPU computing
Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation (2010) 65Y05·68Q05·68Q10·68W10
G. Drakopoulos and P. Mylonas
Department of Informatics, Ionian University, Greece
E-mail:{c16drak, fmylonas }@ionio.gr
X. Liapakis
Interamerican SA, Greece
E-mail: liapakisx@interamerican.gr
G. Tzimas
Technological and Educational Institute of Western Greece , Antirrio Campus, Greece
E-mail: tzimas@teimes.gr
M. Marountas and S. Sioutas
Computer Engineering and Informatics Department, Univers ity of Patras, Greece
E-mail:{marounta, sioutas }@ceid.upatras.gr2 Drakopoulos et al.
1 Introduction
Perhaps the most well studied recent advent in the domain of d istributed comouting
and data structures is that of blockchain. The latter acts as a public or private ledger
and from a structural perspective is a linear, distributed, and robust data structure in
the sense that not only the insertion of new data requires spe cial permission from its
stakeholders, mostly but not necessarily ordinary netizen s with a legitimate vested
interest in a given blockchain, which is obtained from speci ally designed consen-
sus protocols, but also the true netizen identities partici pating to a given block chain
as well as data contained therein are strongly encrypted, ty pically with a public key
scheme such as SHA-256. Additionally, the exact location of data insertion is decided
on the basis of a secure hash function. Finally, when the numb er of netizens partici-
pating to a blockchain is large, typically in the thousands, it becomes difﬁcult to hack
or game it as any malicious changes become visible almost imm ediately.
Having the computational properties just described, a bloc kchain is an excellent data
structure for securely storing large volumes of informatio n for a very broad spec-
trum of purposes including but not limited to smart contract s, digital health informa-
tion, smart city and smart infrastructure status, ﬁnancial macrotransactions as well
as gaming and social media microtransactions, and insuranc e information. In fact,
the blockchain as a data structure was initially part of the B itcoin stack as described
in Nakamoto (2008) or as later explored in cryptocurrency su rveys as for instance
Antonopoulos (2014) or Antonopoulos (2017). Since then, ho wever it took a life of
its own with numerous parties developing some version of the original blockchain for
their own purposes.
Blockchain is not the only recent computationally intensiv e development. Fields
like numerical and distributed deep learning such as the tra ining of multilyayer con-
volutional and recurrent neural networks, complex systems simulation such as brain
networks and protein-to-protein interaction networks, as large scale social network
analysis are notorious for their quick scaling. One respons e to the need for additional
computational power was the development of hardware aiming at massive parallelism
through special purpose GPUs along with the associated soft ware which can take ad-
vantage of such specialized hardware and can orchestrate th e appopriate sequence
of computations to derive the desired result. Google Tensor Flow, a low level frame-
work whose primary unit is a tensor as explained among others in Abadi et al. (2016),
namely a multidimensional array, belongs to this category.
The primary objective of this chapter is to concentrate and s uccintly present the
ways TensorFlow and GPU computation in conjunction with blo ckchain can em-
power applications in the domains of digital health and insu rance market. As a sec-
ondary objective, the computational capabilities and the d ataﬂow model of Tensor-
Flow are analysed.Blockchain For Mobile Health Applications 3
Table 1 Notation of this chapter.
symbol meaning
△= Deﬁnition or equality by deﬁnition
/angbracketleftsk/angbracketright Sequence with elements sk
|/angbracketleftsk/angbracketright| Sequence cardinality
The remaining of this work is structured as follows. In secti on 2 the relevant scien-
tiﬁc literature regarding blockchain, GPU computing, and t heir applications is brieﬂy
reviewed. The properties of the blockchain as well as these o f TensorFlow are de-
scribed in section 3, whereas the blockchain applications i n the domains of digital
health and insurance are explored in section 4. The main ﬁndi ngs of this chapter as
well as possible future research directions are stated in se ction 5. Finally, table 1
summarises the notation of this work.
2 Previous Work
Blockchains were formally introduced in the seminal Bitcoi n work of Nakamoto
(2008). Their technological innovation and the potential t o become a disruptive tech-
nology was explored among others in Barber et al. (2012) and i n Cachin (2016). The
combination of blockchains with the IoT and their applicati ons to the mainstream in-
dustrial sector in conjunction with the upcoming digital tr ansformations of Industry
4.0 are the focus of Miller (2018). Practical ways and the ass ociated challenges to
implement a blockchain over IoT and edge computing are shown in Zyskind et al.
(2015). The ﬁnancial prospects of Bitcoin in terms of wealth accumulation as well as
the properties of Bitcoin versus the traditional ﬁat curren cy are the focus of a num-
ber of works, for instance Antonopoulos (2014), Antonopoul os (2017), Kosba et al.
(2016), Swan (2015), and B¨ ohme et al. (2015). The distribut ed implementation of
blockchains is discussed in Abbas et al. (2018) and in Pass et al. (2017), whereas se-
curity aspects of the blockchains are treated in Puthal et al . (2018). A large number
of blockchains besides the Bitcoin stack can be found in Unde rwood (2016).
Since the original public description of TensorFlow in Abad i et al. (2016) and in
Abadi (2016) it was widely adopted from the deep learning com munity. In Matthews et al.
(2017) a Gaussian process generator implemented with rudim entary TensorFlow op-
erations is described in detail. For a new graph resilience m etric based on paths
see Drakopoulos et al. (2018b) along the lines of the regular ization methodology of
Kanavos et al. (2017). The advantages of and the ways for visu alising the TensorFlow
computations are Wongsuphasawat et al. (2018). For tensor a pplications in social net-
work analysis such as multiway digital inﬂuence estimation see Drakopoulos et al.
(2017), community structure discovery Drakopoulos et al. ( 2018a), and graph based
k-means initialization Drakopoulos et al. (2016). Finally , for a genetic algorithm for
clustering tensors containing linguistic and spatial data see Drakopoulos et al. (2019).4 Drakopoulos et al.
3 Parallelism and Blockchain
3.1 Blockchains
As their collective name suggests, from a structural point o f view blockchains are,
typically very long, linearly linked nodes. Each such node c ontains part of the post-
marked information stored in the data structure along with s ome administrative in-
formation. The data stored in a blockchain can never be erase d, although it can be
updated provided all interested parties agree on that. Thus , both the original and the
updated data are stored, making audits efﬁcient.
Perhaps the most important advantages of selecting a blockc hain scheme besides
the increased security are the following:
–Blockchains support a very large volume of transactions whi ch can take place
almost simultaneously because of their very inherent distr ibuted nature. There-
fore, their stakeholders can perform any desired number of t ransactions within
a very reasonable amount of time without worrying about the e xact transaction
execution time, which in certain cases may inﬂuence the tran saction cost.
–The stakeholders of a given blockchain can stay informed of t he global status of
the blockchain in almost real time. Thus, not only can they pe rform transactions
but they can also know their results almost immediately or at least at the moment
the latter are actually executed.
–Blockchains, either public or private, offer full transpar ency since every partic-
ipant to a given blockchain is free to validate any tranactio n which took place
within that blockchain. Additionally, the veriﬁcation pro tocols are deliberately
built so that veriﬁcation be easy even for netizens with low c omputational re-
sources, for instance a smartphone or a tablet. This reinfor ces the trust toward
properly implemented and managed blockchains.
–In the case of a catastrophic loss, a properly implemented bl ockchain can at least
partially rebuild itself from the segments stored at the com puters of its stakehold-
ers. This is feasible given the increased redundancy integr ated into a blockchain.
–From a software engineering viewpoint, each blockchain nod e is a relatively sim-
ple construct and, therefore, it can be managed with little o r no human interven-
tion. Thus, a blockchain administrator is only required to c ontrol certain a few key
parts of the data structure, making blockchains easy and ine xpensive to maintain.
–Last but not least, any third parties and intermediaries are no longer necessary.
The interested parties can directly communicate and get cur rent quotes or any
other vital pieces of information from each other.
Notice that blockchains are not immune to various sophistic ated attacks, although
the latter typically require considerable resources which are nowadays well within
the capabilities of a dedicated hacker group or of a governme nt agency. Although
directly attacking the encryption protocols may not be a wis e course of action, unless
some knowledge of the private key is available, using a zero d ay exploit is.Blockchain For Mobile Health Applications 5
As with any new technology, blockchain management software is by no means error
free. However, most known attacks so far take on a completely different approach
akin to a brute force attack by relying on big botnet networks in order to take charge
of a small or medium sized blockchain.
Yet another method, holistic in nature, for attacking a bloc kchain is through the use
of control theory concepts. The current state, in any way tha t is estimated by the
attacker, of a large blockchain is represented as a control v ector x[n]. Then a usually
linear state space model is formulated as follows:
x[n+1]△=Ax[n]+bu[n]
y[n+1]△=cTx[n+1]+du[n] (1)
If the attacker can insert an appropriate input sequence /angbracketleftuk/angbracketright, then, depending on the
modelling correctness, he may bring the entire system to an u ndersirable state. Of
course, such a sequence may not exist or its cardinality |/angbracketleftuk/angbracketright|might approach inﬁnity.
3.2 TensorFlow
Google TensorFlow is a low level programming framework base d on the dataﬂow
programming paradigm and using tensors, namely multidimen sional arrays, as its
primary data structure. Originally developed for simulati ng brain networks, it is a
powerful tool for deep learning. It has ofﬁcial APIs for Pyth on and C++, whereas
unofﬁcial APIs are being developed for a number of establish ed programming lan-
guages. Moreover, it has computational kernels for CPUs, GP Us, and TPUs.
Besides the methods for elementary operations such as Krone cker and Hadamard
tensor multiplication, minimum location, tensor reshapin g, and tensor factorizations
such as Kruskal and Tucker decompositions, TensorFlow has a number of numerical
optimizers which are common in deep learning such as AdaGrad . Also, TensorFlow
supports checkpoints, allowing the early termination of a t raining process.
Within a blockchain context, TensorFlow can accelerate num erical computations
for hashing or encryption. Additionally, it can be used to tr ain a neural network,
recurrent, convolutional, autoencoding, or otherwise, wh ich can predict the volume
in the immediate future, so that a bursty load of transaction s can be better balanced
throughout the blockchain nodes. Moreover, similar networ ks can be built in order
to predict which blockchain user will be the next to generate a chunk of data or will
ask for a transaction veriﬁcation, again for load balancing purposes. Finally, large
deep learning networks can in theory be deployed in order to m ount an attack on the
encryption protocol used by a given blockchain, but to the be st of the knowledge of
the authors, no such use has been recorded.6 Drakopoulos et al.
4 Applications
The blockchain as a ledger structure, either public or priva te, because of its secure
and distributed design is a place for storing sensitive data such as health condition
and ﬁnancial transactions. Additionally, as stated earlie r any intermediaries are elim-
inated, at least in a higher level. Thus, any fees and premium s such as taxes or bank
processing fees are also, in theory at least, automatically gone.
Regarding the digital health world, blockchain-based appl ications have an enormous
potential. The following list contains some of the most prom inent ones.
–The medical records of a netizen can be stored with safety in a blockchain and
can be recovered only by the certiﬁed health professional wh o cure the netizen
regardless of their location or whether they have cured her b efore.
–Blockchain can facilitate automated monitoring of selecte d biomarkers by smart-
phones and the measurements can be compared against persona lized baselines.
–Netizens have much improved control over their personal rec ords and their con-
sent can be obtained under more transparent and clear condit ions.
–Netizens can use micropayments or mobile payments in order t o procure medicines,
further protecting their privacy.
Concerning the growing insurance market, there is also a sig niﬁcant room for blo-
ckchain-based applications. Some indicative are the follo wing:
–Netizens can search easier for attractive offers and can con tact insurance agents
directly in order to negotiate for even better offers. This c an also be done through
software agents conﬁgured to look speciﬁc offers or terms.
–Netizens and insurance agents can hold smart contracts such as property and ve-
hicle electronic contract purchses in blockchains. At a lat er point, should the need
arise, they can directly renegotiate contract terms which w ill be also recorded in
the blockchain, provided the interested parties reach an ag reement.
–Once smart contracts are recorded, ordinary shallow or deep learning algorithms
can be run atop the blockchain in order to identify possible f raud cases.
–Blockchains simplify considerably payments and can even be combined with mo-
bile payments. Payment records remain immutable and consti tute proof that a
payment indeed took place at the time indicated.
–Claims can be automatically veriﬁed by smartphones and othe r personal devices
which are connected to the blockchain, reducing thus the adm inistrative burden
and the overhead.
At this point it should also be reminded that the general adva ntages of section 3 also
hold in addition to those listed above.
5 Conclusions
The twofold epicenter of this chapter was the blockchain app lications in the domains
of digital health and insurance market and the ways Google Te nsorFlow, a low levelBlockchain For Mobile Health Applications 7
computational framework for computationally intensive ap plications, can be used to
accelerate the associated computations. The blockchain ha s numerous applications in
the domains of medical healthcare and insurance. Moreover, it reinforces the privacy
and transparency conditions and, thus, help establish a via ble and scalable market.
Further research directions include the development of ext ensively tested blockchain
management systems so that most, if not all, zero day exploit s are eliminated. More-
over, given the recent advances in quantum computing which m ake large scale brute
force attacks feasible, stronger cryptographic schemes sh ould be sought in order to
protect the sensitive personal data stored in blockchains.
Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporatio n with the donation
of the Titan Xp GPU used for this research.
References
Abadi M (2016) TensorFlow: Learning functions at scale. ACM SIGPLAN Notices
51(9):1–1
Abadi M, et al. (2016) TensorFlow: A system for large-scale m achine learning. In:
OSDI, vol 16, pp 265–283
Abbas N, Zhang Y , Taherkordi A, Skeie T (2018) Mobile edge com puting: A survey.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal 5(1):450–465
Antonopoulos AM (2014) Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking digit al cryptocurrencies.
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Antonopoulos AM (2017) Mastering Bitcoin: Programming the open blockchain.
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Barber S, Boyen X, Shi E, Uzun E (2012) Bitter to better - How to make Bitcoin a
better currency. In: International Conference on Financia l Cryptography and Data
Security, Springer, pp 399–414
B¨ ohme R, Christin N, Edelman B, Moore T (2015) Bitcoin: Econ omics, technology,
and governance. Journal of Economic Perspectives 29(2):21 3–38
Cachin C (2016) Architecture of the hyperledger blockchain fabric. In: Workshop on
Distributed Cryptocurrencies and Consensus Ledgers, vol 3 10
Drakopoulos G, Gourgaris P, Kanavos A, Makris C (2016) A fuzz y graph framework
for initializing k-means. IJAIT 25(6):1–21
Drakopoulos G, Kanavos A, Mylonas P, Sioutas S (2017) Deﬁnin g and evaluating
Twitter inﬂuence metrics: A higher order approach in Neo4j. SNAM 71(1)
Drakopoulos G, Gourgaris P, Kanavos A (2018a) Graph communi ties in Neo4j: Four
algorithms at work. Evolving Systems DOI 10.1007/s12530-0 18-9244-x
Drakopoulos G, Liapakis X, Tzimas G, Mylonas P (2018b) A grap h resilience metric
based on paths: Higher order analytics with GPU. In: ICTAI, I EEE
Drakopoulos G, Stathopoulou F, Kanavos A, Paraskevas M, Tzi mas G, Mylonas P,
Iliadis L (2019) A genetic algorithm for spatiosocial tenso r clustering: Exploiting
TensorFlow potential. Evolving Systems DOI 10.1007/s1253 0-019-09267-88 Drakopoulos et al.
Kanavos A, Drakopoulos G, Tsakalidis A (2017) Graph communi ty discovery algo-
rithms in Neo4j with a regularization-based evaluation met ric. In: WEBIST
Kosba A, Miller A, Shi E, Wen Z, Papamanthou C (2016) Hawk: The blockchain
model of cryptography and privacy-preserving smart contra cts. In: IEEE sympo-
sium on security and privacy, IEEE, pp 839–858
Matthews DG, et al. (2017) GPﬂow: A Gaussian process library using TensorFlow.
The Journal of Machine Learning Research 18(1):1299–1304
Miller D (2018) Blockchain and the Internet of Things in the i ndustrial sector. IT
Professional 20(3):15–18
Nakamoto S (2008) Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash s ystem
Pass R, Seeman L, Shelat A (2017) Analysis of the blockchain p rotocol in asyn-
chronous networks. In: Annual International Conference on the Theory and Appli-
cations of Cryptographic Techniques, Springer, pp 643–673
Puthal D, Malik N, Mohanty SP, Kougianos E, Yang C (2018) The b lockchain as a
decentralized security framework. IEEE Consumer Electron ics Magazine 7(2):18–
21
Swan M (2015) Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy. O’Rei lly Media, Inc.
Underwood S (2016) Blockchain beyond Bitcoin. Communicati ons of the ACM
59(11):15–17
Wongsuphasawat K, et al. (2018) Visualizing dataﬂow graphs of deep learning mod-
els in TensorFlow. Transactions on visualization and compu ter graphics 24(1):1–12
Zyskind G, Nathan O, et al. (2015) Decentralizing privacy: U sing blockchain to pro-
tect personal data. In: SPW, IEEE, pp 180–184