OpenMP Advisor
Alok Mishra
Computer Science
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY, USA
almishra@cs.stonybrook.eduAbid M. Malik
Computer Science Initiative
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY, USA
amalik@bnl.gov
Meifeng Lin
Computer Science Initiative
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, New York, USA
mlin@bnl.govBarbara Chapman
Computer Science
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, New York, USA
barbara.chapman@stonybrook.edu
Abstract
With the increasing diversity of heterogeneous architecture
in the HPC industry, porting a legacy application to run on
different architectures is a tough challenge. In this paper, we
present OpenMP Advisor, a first of its kind compiler tool
that enables code offloading to a GPU with OpenMP using
Machine Learning. Although the tool is currently limited to
GPUs, it can be extended to support other OpenMP-capable
devices. The tool has two modes: Training mode and Predic-
tion mode. The training mode must be executed on the target
hardware. It takes benchmark codes as input, generates and
executes every variant of the code that could possibly run
on the target device, and then collects data from all of the
executed codes to train an ML-based cost model for use in
prediction mode. However, in prediction mode the tool does
not need any interaction with the target device. It accepts a
C code as input and returns the best code variant that can
be used to offload the code to the specified device. The tool
can determine the kernels that are best suited for offloading
by predicting their runtime using a machine learning-based
cost model. The main objective behind this tool is to main-
tain the portability aspect of OpenMP. Using our Advisor,
we were able to generate code of multiple applications for
seven different architectures, and correctly predict the top
ten best variants for each application on every architecture.
Preliminary findings indicate that this tool can assist com-
piler developers and HPC application researchers in porting
their legacy HPC codes to the upcoming heterogeneous com-
puting environment.
Keywords: openmp, gpu, machine learning, cost model, clang
1 Introduction
Over two decades have passed since what has been referred
to as “ the death of Moore’s law ” [38] and the transition to
multi-core processors from ever-faster single chips. However,
Jan, 2023, arxiv
2023. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnngiven the increasing number of transistors on a chip, one
could argue that Moore’s law has not yet been completely
broken; rather, it is no longer possible to run these transis-
tors at ever-increasing speeds. This is a result of Dennard
scaling [7], a related effect that occurred at the same time as
the reduction in transistor size. The main outcome of Den-
nard scaling was that power density remained constant as
transistor size decreased. Dennard had found that because
voltage and current scale proportionally with feature size
and power scales proportionally with area, performance per
watt doubles roughly every two years. Consequently, what
went wrong was not the ability to etch smaller transistors,
but rather the capacity to reduce the voltage and current
they require to function properly.
Developers in the HPC industry have started looking be-
yond Moore’s law and hardware developers have improved
chip performance by configuring a growing number of com-
pute cores. This rapid change in architecture hardware ne-
cessitates programming language updates and modification
of application code to exploit the cores, e.g. by inserting
pthreads or OpenMP [ 6] constructs into the source code.
The HPC community was quick to embraced this multi-core
processor technology.
In the last decade, General Purpose Graphics Processing
Units (GPGPUs) have been attached to the multi-core proces-
sors on many HPC platforms in order to benefit from their
ability to handle large amounts of data parallelism with low
power consumption. Initially intended for graphics opera-
tions, they are now being used extensively by HPC clusters
and for general-purpose computing on graphics processing
units. Although there are some notable exceptions, the most
recent TOP500 list [ 37] clearly demonstrates the trend to-
ward heterogeneous HPC platforms, particularly those using
GPUs. A significant portion of the systems are heteroge-
neous, with AMD or NVIDIA GPUs typically providing high
performance per watt.
1arXiv:2301.03636v1  [cs.DC]  9 Jan 2023Jan, 2023, arxiv Mishra et al.
#pragma omp target
for(int i=0; i<N_i; i++) {
for(int j=0; j<N_j; j++) {
for(int k=0; k<N_k; k++) {
for(int l=0; l<N_l; l++) {
/* ... COMPUTE ... */
}
}
}
}
Code 1. Loops of Wilson Dslash Operator
1.1 The Challenge
Many programmers are adapting their code to take advan-
tage of GPUs. Unfortunately, optimizing the computational
power of a GPU while minimizing overheads is a laborious
process that may necessitate re-engineering large sections
of code and data structures. The development of code for
systems with extreme heterogeneity and numerous devices
will be much more challenging. Therefore, it is essential to
create tools that will relieve the application scientists of the
burden of such development.
Despite the variety of programming models available, it
is still quite challenging to optimize large scale applications
consisting of tens-to-hundreds of thousands lines of code.
Even when using a directive based programming model such
as OpenMP, pragmatizing each kernel is a repetitive and
complex task. OpenMP offers a variety of options for of-
floading a kernel to GPUs. However, the application scientist
must still figure out all the intricate GPU configurations. To
demonstrate the complexity of porting a kernel to emerging
exascale hardwares, we use a kernel from the Lattice Quan-
tum Chromodynamics (LQCD) [ 2] application, which is a
computer-friendly numerical framework for QCD. One of
LQCD’s key computational kernels is the Wilson Dslash op-
erator [ 19], which is essentially a finite difference operator,
to describe the interaction of quarks with gluons.
The Wilson Dslash operator, 𝐷, in four space-time dimen-
sions is defined by Equation 1.
𝐷𝑖 𝑗
𝛼𝛽(𝑥,𝑦)=4∑︁
𝜇=1[((1−𝛾𝜇))𝛼𝛽𝑈𝑖 𝑗
𝜇(𝑥)𝛿𝑥+^𝜇,𝑦
+(1+𝛾𝜇)𝛼𝛽𝑈†𝑖 𝑗
𝜇(𝑥+ˆ𝜇)𝛿𝑥−^𝜇,𝑦)](1)
Here𝑥and𝑦are the coordinates of the lattice sites, 𝛼,𝛽are
spin indices, and 𝑖,𝑗are color indices. 𝑈𝜇(𝑥)is the gluon field
variable and is an 𝑆𝑈(3)matrix.𝛾𝜇’s are 4×4Dirac matrices
that are fixed. The complex fermion fields are represented as
one-dimensional arrays of size 𝐿𝑋×𝐿𝑌×𝐿𝑍×𝐿𝑇×𝑆𝑃𝐼𝑁𝑆×
𝐶𝑂𝐿𝑂𝑅𝑆×2for the unpreconditioned Dirac operator, where
𝐿𝑋,𝐿𝑌,𝐿𝑍and𝐿𝑇are the numbers of lattice sites in the 𝑥,𝑦,𝑧
and𝑡directions, respectively. The spin and color degrees of
freedom, which are commonly 4 and 3, are denoted by the
variables𝑆𝑃𝐼𝑁𝑆 and𝐶𝑂𝐿𝑂𝑅𝑆 .When we express Equation 1 in C++, it has four nested for
loops iterating over 𝐿𝑇,𝐿𝑍,𝐿𝑌,and𝐿𝑋, as shown in Code 1.
When we keep the values of 𝐿𝑇,𝐿𝑍,𝐿𝑌,and𝐿𝑋at16each, the
COMPUTE section of the code has over 5 million variable
definitions, 1.2 billion variable references, over 150 million
addition/subtraction, 163 million multiplication, and so on.
Additionally, this function is called several times throughout
the LQCD application.
It is a herculean task for an application scientist to un-
derstand the physics, transform it into computer program,
analyze the offloadable kernel, and then consider how to par-
allelize it to execute efficiently on an HPC cluster. To get the
best performance out of a GPU, an application scientist needs
a thorough understanding of the underlying architecture,
algorithm, and interface programming model. Alternately,
they could test out various GPU transformations until they
find the most effective one. However, none of these strategies
is very efficient.
1.2 Our Contribution
This paper presents OpenMP Advisor , a first-of-its-kind
compiler tool that advises application scientists on various
OpenMP code offloading strategies. This tool performs the
following tasks to successfully address the challenges of
effectively transforming an OpenMP code:
1. detect potentially offloadable kernel;
2. identify data access and modification in kernel;
3.recommend several potential OpenMP variants for offload-
ing that kernel to the GPU;
4.evaluate the profitability of each kernel variant via an
adaptive cost model;
5.insert pertinent OpenMP directives to perform offloading.
Although the tool is currently limited to GPUs, it can be
extended to support other OpenMP-capable devices. In the
rest of the paper, we first discuss state of the art work that is
related to and precedes our work in Section 2. Then we define
our OpenMP Advisor in Section 3, and its implementation
in Section 4. Section 5 covers the experiments carried out in
this paper and the analysis of the result. Finally, we conclude
our work with discussions of future plans in Section 6.
2 Related Work
Many studies have looked into how to best manage GPU
memory when data movement must be explicitly managed.
A fully automatic system for managing and optimizing CPU-
GPU communication for CUDA programs is provided by
Jablin et.al. [13]. Gelado et.al. [9] present a heterogeneous
computing programming model to simplify and optimize
GPU data management. OMPSan [ 1] performs static analy-
sis on explicit data transfers that have already been inserted
into an OpenMP code. However, these studies do not pro-
vide insight into how data must be transferred and how data
reusability on GPU can be used for implicitly managed data
2OpenMP Advisor Jan, 2023, arxiv
between multiple kernels. Mishra et.al. [ 26] proposed a tech-
nique for statically identifying data used by each kernel and
automatically recognizing data reuse opportunities across
kernels. In our work, we use this technique to manage data
between the CPU and the GPU.
Recently, Roy et.al. [31] developed BLISS, a novel approach
for auto-tuning parallel applications without the need for
instrumentation, domain-specific knowledge, or prior knowl-
edge of the applications. With the help of Bayesian optimiza-
tion, this auto-tuner creates a collection of various light-
weight models that can rival the output quality of a com-
plex, heavyweight Machine Learning (ML) model. Other
autotuners like BOHB[ 8], HiPerBOt [ 23], GPTune [ 20] and
ytopt [ 40] frequently use Bayesian optimization in this con-
text. However, due to their expensive evaluation functions,
tuning large-scale applications remains a challenge. Besides,
the need to optimize HPC programs on heterogeneous hard-
ware (such as GPUs) and software configurations prevents
the widespread use of these auto-tuning techniques in the
Exascale era. HPC applications are getting extremely hetero-
geneous, complicated, and increasingly expensive to analyze.
There is a need for a tool like ours that assists application
scientists to offload their code to GPUs. Other related re-
search on automatic GPU offloading by Mendonça et.al. [22]
and Poesia et.al. [30] can benefit from our tool by including
our technique of data optimization and cost model in their
framework, further reducing the challenges of using GPUs
for scientific computing. However, developing a cost model
is time-consuming, and practically all contemporary com-
pilers, such as LLVM/Clang [ 21], adopt a straightforward
“one-size-fits-all” cost function that does not perform opti-
mally in the situation of extreme heterogeneous architecture.
With the use of a neural network model, COMPOFF [ 24]
offers a new portable cost model that statically estimates the
cost of OpenMP offloading on different architectures. We
extend the techniques defined in COMPOFF to develop a
portable static cost model to be used in our OpenMP Advisor
tool.
3 OpenMP Advisor
We design and develop the OpenMP Advisor, a compiler tool
which transforms an OpenMP code to effectively offload to a
GPU. This tool identifies OpenMP kernels, suggest a number
of possible OpenMP variants for offloading that kernel to the
GPU, and predict the cost of running each of these kernels
separately using a static neural network-based compile time
cost model. The OpenMP Advisor’s first version aids the
application scientists in writing code for accelerators like
GPUs. This Adviser, however, can be extended to support all
OpenMP-enabled devices.
The tool has two modes: Training mode and Prediction
mode. The training mode must be executed on the targethardware. It takes all benchmark codes as input and gen-
erates all possible variants of the code to run on the target
device. Then it collects data from all generated codes to train
an ML-based cost model for use in prediction mode. In pre-
diction mode the tool does not need any interaction with the
target device. It accepts C/C++ code as input and returns the
best code variant that can be used to offload the code to the
specified device. The tool can determine the kernels that are
best suited for offloading by predicting their runtime using a
machine learning-based cost model as defined in Section 4.2.
3.1 Attribubtes
The following are the key attributes of the OpenMP Advisor.
1.Static – Access to GPUs is a significant challenge when
analyzing an application using GPU offloading. During
development, many application scientists may not have
easy access to GPUs. As a result, it is critical that in the
prediction mode our Advisor performs all its analysis at
compile time and does not require runtime profiling. Even
in the training mode, sometimes it is impractical to predict
certain values during code generation. In order to help
the advisor in such circumstances, we provide a json file
for input where users can provide these values.
2.Minimalistic – The Advisor makes no changes to the
kernel’s body. It simply identifies the application’s omp
target regions and adds various OpenMP directives and
clauses to generate multiple kernel variants.
3.Correctness – The Advisor verifies the correctness of the
generated code to keep in line with OpenMP programming
model. Currently, the advisor does not modify the kernel
body and does not guarantee the correctness of its content.
Consequently, despite its ability to predict the optimal
scenario for GPU offloading, it generates the top N (N
provided by the user) code variants and lets the application
scientist select which code to utilize.
4.Portability – The Advisor is portable to multiple com-
piler and HPC clusters. In our work we worked on four
different compilers: LLVM/clang (nvptx), LLVM/clang
(rocm), GNU/gcc and NVIDIA HPC/nvc. The advisor also
works for a variety of HPC clusters with different GPUs:
such as Summit [ 28], Ookami [ 3], Wombat [ 29] and Sea-
wulf [ 39] clusters using NVIDIA GPUs and Corona [ 17]
using AMD GPUs. Limited work was also done on the
Intel Devclouds [12] with Intel GPU and icpx compiler.
5.Adaptability – The advisor is adaptable enough to accept
new applications. When attempting to predict for a new
application where real-time data collection is difficult or
impractical, the application scientist could create a proxy
application similar to the target application and train the
model using data collected on the proxy application.
3.2 Design
Before proceeding with the implementation, there were a
few design challenges that needed to be addressed. The first
3Jan, 2023, arxiv Mishra et al.
concern was which toolkit or compiler to employ in the de-
velopment of our framework. This was a straightforward
question since we used the most popular library at the time
– the LLVM compiler project. LLVM is a library for building,
optimizing, and producing intermediate and/or binary ma-
chine code. Like most modern compilers, LLVM divides the
compilation process into three levels:
•Front-end translates high-level language (like C/C++, for-
tran) to LLVM-IR.
•Middle-end performs several optimization passes on the
LLVM-IR.
•Back-end converts the optimized LLVM-IR into the as-
sembly language of the corresponding platform.
We chose the Clang compiler (ver 14.0.0) because our
target applications are written in C/C++. Clang is a tool
development platform as well as the front-end for the C
language family in the LLVM project. Because of its library-
based architecture, it is easier and more flexible to reuse and
integrate new features into other projects.
We then had to decide at what level we should implement
our framework. Despite the fact that LLVM’s strength lies
in the LLVM-IRs, our requirement is to generate and return
C/C++ code to the scientist. We require the accurate source
location from a C/C++ file in order to insert OpenMP di-
rectives into that file. Although the LLVM-IR can contain
source code information in source level debugging, the ac-
curacy of the source location cannot be guaranteed. On the
other hand Clang’s AST closely resembles both the written
C++ code and the C++ standard. Clang has a one-to-one
mapping of each token to the AST node and an excellent
INPUT
Benchmark Codes
cluster
 gpu_arch
KERNEL ANALYSIS
kernel.cpp
 AST
 Identification
 Analysis
CODE TRANSFORMATION
Source Location
 Code Generation
 Code Insertion
TRANSFORMED CODES
kernel_1.cpp
 kernel_2.cpp ....
 kernel_84.cpp
COST MODEL
Feature Extraction
Dimension Reduction
DatasetTrained
Cost
Model
model_cluster_gpu
ANN
Figure 1. High level flow of the Training modesource location retention for all AST nodes. The AST is the
best place to get accurate source code information. Hence
we implemented our Advisor in Clang. The Advisor follows
the design depicted in Figure 1 in the training mode, and Fig-
ure 2 in the prediction mode. Both modes have three major
modules, which are explained in the following subsections
-Kernel Analysis (Section 4.1), Cost Model (Section 4.2) and
Code Transformation (Section 4.3).
4 Implementation
A preprocessed AST is much easier to work with than source-
level C/C++ code, and we can always easily refer to the
original code by using Clang’s Plugins [ 5] interface. Clang
Plugins enable the execution of additional user-defined ac-
tions during compilation. The compiler loads a plugin from
a dynamic library at runtime. The FrontendAction inter-
face, which enables user-specific actions to be executed as
part of the compilation, is the typical entry point to a Clang
Plugin. To run the tools over the AST, Clang provides the
ASTFrontendAction interface, that handles action execu-
tion. We define and register PluginOMPAdvisor , a plugin
that implements the CreateASTConsumer method, which re-
turns an OMPAdvisorASTConsumer that consumes (or reads)
the Clang AST. We can create generic actions on an AST
using this ASTConsumer interface. This interface provides
theHandleTranslationUnit function, which is only called
after the entire source file has been parsed. In this case, a
INPUT
N
 kernel.cpp
 cluster
 gpu_arch
KERNEL ANALYSIS
AST
Identification
Data Analysisparse AST
var_1
 var_2 ...
 var_84analyze and suggest variants
cost1
 cost2 ...
 cost84
Sort codes based
on cost and
select top N codessortCOST MODEL
Trained
Cost
Model
Feature
Extraction
Dimension
Reduction
Predicted Runtime
CODE TRANSFORMATION
Source Location
Code Generation
Code Insertion
OUTPUT N CODES
kernel_1.cpp
 kernel_2.cpp ...
 kernel_N.cpp
Figure 2. High level flow of the Prediction mode
4OpenMP Advisor Jan, 2023, arxiv
translation unit effectively represents an entire source file,
and an ASTContext object represents the AST for that source
file.
Clang also provides a RecursiveASTVisitor class, which
traverses the entire Clang AST in preorder or postorder
depth-first order, visiting each node. In our Advisor we de-
fine an OMPAdvisorVisitor , which is an instance of the
RecursiveASTVisitor , to visit any type of AST node, such
asFunctionDecl andStmt , by simply overriding their visit
function, such as VisitStmt orVisitFunctionDecl . Rather
than directly calling any of the Visit* functions, we use the
TraverseDecl function, which calls the appropriate Visit*
function in the background. To continue traversing the AST
(to investigate additional nodes), we return true from such
Visit* functions, and false to stop the traversal and effec-
tively terminate the Clang compilation process.
4.1 Kernel Analysis
This is the first module which the HandleTranslationUnit
method calls in both the Prediction and Training mode. As
the name implies, this module analyzes an OpenMP kernel.
Overall, this module takes as input a C/C++ source file, an-
alyzes it, and outputs all possible GPU offloading variants.
This module is responsible for three tasks: Identifying Kernels,
Data Analysis andVariant Generation .
4.1.1 Identifying Kernels. User’s input is utilized to help
us identify a target region since the scope of this project is
not to automatically parallelize the code. An application
scientist only needs to use the “ omp target directive” to
mark the region. We parse the clang AST to search for
theOMPTargetDirective node, which is a subclass of the
OMPExecutableDirective class and an instance of the Stmt
class. We override the OMPAdvisorVisitor class’s VisitStmt
method and check each visited Stmt to see if they are the
OMPTargetDirective node. Once a kernel is identified, we
assign it a unique id and create an instance of the class "Ker-
nelInformation." In that object we store information like,
unique_id, start and end locations of the kernel, function
from which the kernel is called, whether the kernel is called
from within a loop and the number of nested forloops. All
of this information will further be used to identify variables
accessed within kernels.
4.1.2 Data Analysis. The next step is to determine what
data the kernel uses. Due to the high cost of data transfers
both to and from the GPU, careful data management and
mapping between host and device are required for the use of
accelerators in HPC. OpenMP does not specify how the data
should be handled by the compiler in implicit data transfer.
Application scientists are deterred from GPU utilization due
to the complexities in achieving effective data management.
Automatically identifying and utilizing GPU data in an ap-
plication can reduce the burden on application scientists and
improve overall execution time. We expanded on Mishra etal’s work [ 26] on Data Transfer and Reuse Analysis , which
describes how to determine which variables are being used
by a kernel. We use the Clang AST to implement live vari-
able analysis for each kernel, concentrating only on variables
used within a kernel. One limitation of this work is that it
cannot determine the range of an array during compilation.
In our implementation, we extended the analysis to deter-
mine the array’s range as declared in the code. However,
such an analysis is not always possible, particularly when
dealing with global variables or pointer manipulation. To
overcome this obstacle we expect the user to specify the
array’s range in the data map clause. If the user does not
specify the range of an array to map to the GPU, we as-
sume that all arrays used within the kernel are declared in or
passed to the kernel-defining function. We continue to per-
form live variable analysis to determine which variables to
synchronize between the CPU and GPU and calculate their
sizes. Our approach has a limitation in that we currently
map data between the CPU and GPU only before and after
the kernel. Managing data transfer during kernel execution
is a task for the future.
Before the variables are stored in the KernelInformation
object, we classify them into five groups, based on how they
are accessed before, during, or after the kernel:
•alloc : These are the variables that are being assigned within
the kernel for the first time and no data transfer to the
GPU is required.
•to: These are variables that were assigned before but were
only accessed and not modified within the kernel. This
data must be transferred to the device but does not have
to be transferred back to the host.
•from : These are variables that are updated within the ker-
nel and accessed after the kernel call. This category does
not require data transfer to the device, but it does necessi-
tate data transfer from the device to the host.
•tofrom : These are variables that are assigned before ,up-
dated within andaccessed after the kernel definition. This
type of data must be transferred in both directions between
the host and the device.
•private : Finally, these are variables that are defined and
used only within the kernel, and does not need to be trans-
ferred between the host and the device.
Data labeled alloc ,to, and tofrom are mapped in “ omp
target enter data ” directives before the kernel, while
data labeled from andtofrom are mapped in “ omp target
exit data ” directives after the kernel.
4.1.3 Variant Generation. Finally, we generate a number
of different kernel variants that can be used to offload the
kernel to the GPU. We’ll start by counting how many nested
collapsible for loops are there. In the current implementation,
we can check up to four levels of collapsing the for loops.
We chose four nested loops because, as shown in Code 1, the
Wilson Dslash kernel has four for loops. Each of these for
5Jan, 2023, arxiv Mishra et al.
#pragma omp target teams distribute collapse(1)
for (int i = 0; i < N_i; i++) { <= Loop 0
#pragma omp parallel for collapse(3) schedule(static)
for (int j = 0; j < N_j; j++) { <= Loop 1
for (int k = 0; k < N_k; k++) { <= Loop 2
for (int l = 0; l < N_l; l++) { <= Loop 3
...
}
}
}
}
Code 2. Four nested “ for” loops, with “ teams distribute ”
in Loop 0and “ parallel for collapse(3) ” in Loop 1.
loops is given a unique Loop number ranging from 0−3. Loop
0 is always expected to be distributed across all teams on the
GPU. The variants are generated based on five parameter:
•Value of collapse used in distribute directive
•Value of collapse used in parallel for directive
•Position of the parallel for directive
•Scheduling type of the loop iterations
•Data transfer between the host and the device
The total number of forloops and the position of the
parallel for directive determine the maximum value of
collapse that can be used in the teams distribute and
parallel for directive. Suppose there are four forloops,
as shown in Code 2. If the parallel for directive is at
Loop 0, the “ teams distribute parallel for " directive
will be combined and thus the collapse clause for teams
distribute directive does not exist. If the parallel for di-
rective is located on Loop 𝑥(where 1≤𝑥≤3), then the max-
imum possible value of collapse for the teams distribute
directive is𝑥. Whereas for the parallel for directive, the
maximum possible value of collapse is(𝑁𝑈𝑀−𝑥), where
𝑁𝑈𝑀 is the total number of for loops.
The scheduling type of the loop iteration could be one of
static ,dynamic orguided . Using different permutations
of these parameters, we could generate a variety of GPU
offloading code variants. Once all of the variants have been
generated, we use our static cost model to predict the runtime
of each of these generated kernels. The total number of
# for loops # Variants
1 6
2 18
3 42
4 84
Table 1. Number of Variants expected to be generated for
each number of for loopsvariants that can be produced for a particular number of
for loops is shown in Table 1.
4.2 Cost Model
A compile-time cost model is required to select the best
option from all the variants generated by the Kernel Analysis
module. Most modern compilers employ analytical models to
calculate the cost of executing the original code as well as the
various offloading code variants. Building such an analytical
model for compilers is a difficult task that necessitates a
lot of effort on the part of a compiler engineer. Recently,
machine learning techniques have been successfully applied
to build cost models for a variety of compiler optimization
problems. For our tool we extended COMPOFF [ 24] to be
used as our cost model. COMPOFF is a machine learning
based compiler cost model that statically estimates the cost of
OpenMP offloading using an artificial neural network model.
Their results show that this model can predict offloading
costs with an average accuracy greater than 95%. The major
limitation of COMPOFF was that they had to train a separate
model for each variant. In our work, we add more training
data and extend it to train a single cost model for all variants.
As soon as we know the prediction for the generated vari-
ant, we store it in the instance of the KernelInformation
class so that the Kernel Transformation module can use it.
But the biggest challenge in implementing an ML based cost
model is the lack of available training data. To overcome
this problem, we wrote additional benchmark applications
and adopted some benchmarks from the Rodinia benchmark
suite [ 4]. The goal is to include a broader class of benchmarks
that would cover the spectrum of statistical simulation, linear
algebra, data mining, etc. For this we developed applications
tabulated in Table 2. More applications from various other
domains will be added to this repository in the future.
4.3 Kernel Transformation
In the Kernel Transformation module we need to actually
transform the original source code based on the analysis and
predictions from the previous modules. For the given kernel,
we generate every possible code variation in the Training
mode. However, before we can generate code in Prediction
mode, we must first address another crucial question. Which
code should we generate? Should we only generated code
for the fastest kernel? Regrettably, once the directives are in
place, neither the Advisor nor OpenMP validate the kernel’s
correctness. This is inline with the OpenMP philosophy as
well. As a result, we can only guarantee the correctness of
the generated OpenMP directive in our framework.
So how can we overcome this problem? We could generate
code for every possible variation, as we do during training,
and let the user choose which one to use. But this means that
users will be overwhelmed with information. Alternatively,
we could ask the user to provide a number for the maximum
number of codes to generate. The predicted runtime can
6OpenMP Advisor Jan, 2023, arxiv
Application Domain Description
Breadth First
Search (bfs) [34]†Graph
AlgorithmsBFS is a graph traversal algorithm frequently employed in a variety of academic and
professional fields.
Correlation
Coefficient
(correlation) [32]StatisticsThe Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient is a measurement of the linear correlation between
two sets of data.
Covariance
(covariance)Probability
TheoryThe sample covariance are statistics calculated from a sample of data on one or more
random variables.
Gaussian
Elimination
(gauss) [33]†Linear AlgebraGaussian Elimination computes result row by row, solving for all of the variables in a linear
system.
K-nearest
neighbors
(knn) [35]†Data MiningThe k-nearest neighbors technique utilizes proximity to classify or predict how a single
data point will be grouped. It is a non-parametric, supervised learning classifier.
Laplace’s Equation
(laplace) [15]Numerical
AnalysisIn physics, Laplace’s equation is a second-order partial differential equation.
Matrix-Matrix
Multiplication (mm)Linear AlgebraThe most significant matrix operation is arguably matrix multiplication, extensively
utilized in a variety of fields, including the solution of linear systems of equations,
translation of coordinate systems, etc.
Matrix Vector
Multiplication (mv)Linear Algebra A simple matrix-vector multiplication.
Matrix Transpose
(mt)Linear Algebra The transpose of a matrix is simply a flipped version of the original matrix.
Particle Filter
(particle) [36]† Medical ImagingThe particle filter is a statistical estimator of a target item’s location given noisy
measurements of the target’s location and an idea of the object’s movement in a Bayesian
framework.
Proxy App
(proxy_app)-NA-This is a proxy app that has same number of loops and performs similar computation to
our target app, the Wilson Dslash operator. Whenever it is difficult to collect data on real
applications, proxy apps help us collect more data.
Table 2. Benchmark Applications. Apps marked†are adopted from the Rodinia Benchmark Suite [4].
be put as a comment before the kernel in every piece of
code. The application scientist will then have more power
to accept or reject the generated code. We will be able to
produce a single code and provide it to the user once the issue
of validating an OpenMP code for correctness is resolved.
Until then, our Advisor will be able to generate the top best
variants as specified by the application scientist.
Regardless, we need to write a module to modify the exist-
ing source code and generate a new code. Clang provides the
Rewriter interface, whose primary function is to route high-
level requests to the involved low-level RewriteBuffers . A
Rewriter assists us in managing the code rewriting task.
In the Rewriter interface we can set the SourceManager
object which handles loading and caching of source files
into memory. This object assigns distinct FileIDs to each dis-
tinct #include chain and is the owner of the MemoryBuffer
objects for all of the loaded files. The SourceManager can
be queried to obtain information about SourceLocation ob-
jects, which can then be converted into spelling or expansion
locations. Spelling locations represent the bytes that corre-
spond to a token, while expansion locations represent the
location in the source file of the code. For example, in the
case of a macro expansion, the spelling location indicateswhere the expanded token originated, while the expansion
location specifies where it was expanded.
TheRewriter is a critical component of our plugin’s ker-
nel transformation module. The strategy used here is to
meticulously alter the original code at crucial locations to
0: // Predicted Runtime: 1.2 s
1: #pragma omp target enter data map(...)
2: #pragma omp target teams distribute collapse(2)
for (int i = 0; i < N_i; i++) {
3:
for (int j = 0; j < N_j; j++) {
4: #pragma omp parallel for schedule(dynamic)
for (int k = 0; k < N_k; k++) {
5:
for (int l = 0; l < N_l; l++) {
...
}
}
}
}
6: #pragma omp target exit data map(...)
Code 3. Location of the seven generated code.
7Jan, 2023, arxiv Mishra et al.
carry out the transformation rather than handling every pos-
sible AST node to spit back code from the AST. For this, the
Rewriter interface is essential. It is an advanced buffer man-
ager that effectively slices and dices the source using a rope
data structure. For each SourceManager , the Rewriter also
stores the low-level RewriteBuffer . Together with Clang’s
excellent retention of source location for all AST nodes,
Rewriter makes it possible to remove and insert code very
precisely in the RewriteBuffer . When the update is fin-
ished, we can dump the RewriteBuffer into a file to obtain
the updated source code.
In the Kernel Transformation module, we create a vector of
seven strings. The location of these seven strings are shown
in Code 3. The first string (at #0) is always the comment
that maintains the text −“Predicted Runtime: ## s ”.
As the text suggests ##is the predicted runtime for this
particular kernel variant. This string is always placed before
the kernel’s start location. Then comes the target enter
data construct (at #1). This directive handles what memory
on the GPU needs to be created for the kernel and what
data needs to be sent to the GPU before execution. This
string is always placed right after the comments string. The
next string (at #2) contains the OpenMP directive which
specifies that this is the kernel to offload to the target. To gain
maximum performance out of the GPU, we should always
distribute the kernel across all the teams available in the GPU.
Hence this string always contain the directive −“#pragma
omp target teams distribute ”. The variant determines
whether this directive contains any other clauses such as
collapse ormap, and what will be the values of the clause.
This string is always placed immediately before the kernel’s
start location, but after the target enter data string. The
remaining strings ( #3,#4and#5if required by the variant)
are placed just before the start location of their nested for
loop. If these strings are not needed by a variant, they are
Cluster GPU Compiler Version
Summit LLVM/clang (nvptx) 13.0.0
[28]NVIDIA
Tesla V100 GNU/gcc (nvptx-none) 9.1.0
Corona
[17]AMD Radeon
Instinct MI50LLVM/clang (rocm-5.3) 15.0.0
Ookami
[3]NVIDIA Tesla
V100LLVM/clang (nvptx) 14.0.0
Wombat
[29]NVIDIA Tesla
A100LLVM/clang (nvptx) 15.0.0
Seawulf LLVM/clang (nvptx) 12.0.0
[39]NVIDIA
Tesla K80 NVIDIA/NVC 21.7
Intel De-
vCloud
[12]Intel Xeon
E-2176 P630Intel/icpx 2021.1.2
ExxactNVIDIA
GeForce RTX
2080LLVM/clang (nvptx) 14.0.0
Table 3. Cluster and Compilers used in experimentleft empty and no code is inserted in their location. The last
string (at #6) is the target exit data construct, which
identifies the data that must be released from the GPU or
returned to the CPU. If not empty, each of these strings is
always terminated by a new line. Once these seven strings
are in their proper location, the code is dumped into a new
C++ file and returned to the application scientists, who can
choose the best code based on the kernel runtime provided
in the comment. They could choose whether to accept or
reject the transformations, and then choose which file to
build and link with their code.
5 Experiments and Evaluations
We used several clusters and compilers, as shown in Table 3,
to test and evaluate our tool. For the purposes of this study,
we only use one GPU per node on the cluster. The manage-
ment of multiple GPUs is left for future research. The three
modules explained in Section 4 need different experiments.
5.1 Experiment 1 - Data Analysis
First, we test our Advisor against all benchmark applications
to determine whether or not data is correctly identified and
generated. In order to conduct this experiment, we made use
of our advisor to generate code that used the correct data
between the host and the device. Additionally, we manually
altered each benchmark algorithm to map all data to and
from the GPU. We executed all the codes on each cluster,
as shown in Table 3, and gathered data about the volume
and the duration of the data transfer. We found that the
Advisor improved the data management in all cases. Figure 3
shows the amount of data transferred (in GB) between the
CPU and the GPU before and after transformation for all
benchmark applications. After applying our transformation,
we can clearly see that the amount of data transfer has indeed
been considerably reduced. Reduced data transfer has an
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Data Transfer (GB)After Transform
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7bfscorrelationcovariancegausslaplaceknnmmmvmtparticleproxy_appwilson_dslash
Before Transform
Figure 3. Total Data transfer for all Benchmarks Before and
After Data Analysis
8OpenMP Advisor Jan, 2023, arxiv
Summit Corona Ookami Wombat Seawulf Intel ExxactData Transfer Time (ms)Before Transform
0200400600
After Transform
Figure 4. Data Transfer time (ms) for Wilson Dslash Op-
erator on different Clusters for Before (1.5GB) and After
(0.75GB) transformation
impact on all applications’ data transfer times. On all the
available clusters, we ran these applications and collected
the data transfer times. Figure 4 shows the data transfer time
for the Wilson Dslash Operator across different clusters.
5.2 Experiment 2 - Code Generation
In the first experiment, the code generation for data anal-
ysis has already been tested. But that experiment does not
generate different variants of code. In the second experi-
ment, we use our Advisor to generate every possible code
combination using each of the Benchmark applications, as
discussed in Section 4.1.3. Table 4 shows the result of this ex-
periment, which matches with the expected result in Table 1.
We compiled all of these codes for various clusters using the
compilers shown in Table 3. Some compilers (NVIDIA/nvc
on Seawulf and LLVM/Clang 15 on Wombat) do not support
dynamic or guided scheduling on a GPU, resulting in compi-
lation failure. Apart from that, all of the codes successfully
compiled and ran on their respective clusters. We collected
the runtime of each of the kernels in this experiment, to be
used by our cost model.
We collected the data for the Intel architecture a while
ago, and we don’t currently have access to the cluster to con-
duct new experiments. As a result we had very limited data
for Wilson Dslash Operator and no data for our proxy_app
on the Intel architecture. We were unable to gather many
data points for the Exxact machine (with NVIDIA GeForce
GPUs) due to the unavailability of compute nodes. Both these
clusters has only around 2,000data points each.
Seawulf has NVIDIA K80 GPUs, which is the slowest of
the GPUs we’re using in our experiment. So each kernel runs
longer on Seawulf than it would on any other cluster. On
the other hand, most variants of kernels failed to compile
on Wombat due to their compilers not supporting dynamic
and guided scheduling on GPUs. Due to these reasons, we
could only collect around 3,000data points on Seawulf and
Wombat. All our kernels compiled and ran successfully on
Summit, Corona and Ookami and we were able to collect
over10,000data points on each of these architectures.Application Kernel # LoopsVariants
Generated
kernel1 1 6bfskernel2 1 6
correlation kernel1 1 6
kernel1 1 6covariancekernel2 1 6
gauss kernel1 2 18
kernel1 2 18laplacekernel2 2 18
knn kernel1 1 6
mm kernel1 2 18
mv kernel1 1 6
mt kernel1 2 18
kernel1 1 6
kernel2 1 6
kernel3 1 6
kernel4 1 6
kernel5 1 6
kernel6 1 6particle
kernel7 1 6
Proxy App kernel1 4 84
Wilson Dslash kernel1 4 84
Table 4. Number of variants generated for all applications
5.3 Experiment 3 - Cost Model
To build our cost model, we extended the COMPOFF model
from six variants to all 84 variants. We build our cost model
in the testing mode and then use it to predict the runtime in
the prediction mode. Our cost model utilizes an MLP model
with six layers: one input layer, four hidden layers, and one
output layer. We set the number of neurons on multiples of
the number of input features rather than choosing a random
number of neurons in each hidden layer or conducting an
exhaustive grid search (number of neurons in the first layer).
As a result, the first, second, third, and fourth hidden layers,
with 33 input features, have 66, 132, 66, and 33 neurons,
respectively.
The weights of linear layers are set using the glorot initial-
ization method, which is described in [ 10]. The bias is set to
0, and the batch size for training data is set to 16 in all runs.
As the underlying optimization algorithm, we evaluate SGD
(Stochastic Gradient Descent), Adam [ 16] and RMSprop [ 11].
Since it provides optimal performance on transformations
for both HPC clusters, we chose the RMSprop optimization
algorithm with an initial learning rate of 0.01 that is stepped
down by a factor of 0.1 every 30 epochs and weight decay of
0.0001 for 150 epochs. The Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
loss function is used to train all models, as defined by Equa-
tion 2, where ¯𝑦𝑖and𝑦𝑖represent the predicted and ground
truth runtimes, respectively.
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸(¯𝑦,𝑦)=vut
1
𝑁𝑁∑︁
𝑖=0(¯𝑦𝑖−𝑦𝑖)2 (2)
9Jan, 2023, arxiv Mishra et al.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240050100150200250
Actual (sec)Predicted (sec)RMSE (sec)
Summit : 0.998
Corona : 0.453
Ookami : 0.588
Wombat : 3.837
Seawulf : 2.753
Intel : 17.699
Exxact : 6.725
Figure 5. Validation of Cost Model on different clusters
We split the dataset used by all benchmark applications
into two parts: training (80%) and validation(20%). The valida-
tion set do not occur in any learning for the model. The only
augmentation applied to the training and validation data is
Z-score standardization. The model is trained using the train-
ing set, and after that, testing data are given to the model
to test its performance. In order to determine the standard
deviation of the prediction errors, we compute the RMSE.
The lower this value, the better our model. However, what
constitutes a good RMSE is determined by the range of data
on which we are computing RMSE. One way to determine
whether an RMSE value is “good” is to normalize it using
the following formula:
𝑁𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸(¯𝑦,𝑦)=𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸(¯𝑦,𝑦)
(𝑦𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑦𝑚𝑖𝑛)(3)
This yields a value between 0 and 1, with values closer to
0 indicating better fitting models. Having a model with a
normalized RMSE of less than 0.1 is considered successful in
this study.
We can see that a simple MLP performs admirably in all
of our applications, as evidenced by the strong correlation
between actual and predicted data in Figure 5. It was an-
ticipated that Intel and Exxact’s model would perform the
worst because of the lack of data. However, the model for
Exxact performed much better (and also showed signs of
convergence) than that on Intel because we were able to
collect some data for our proxy app on the Exxact system.
Both Wombat and Seawulf performed moderately well when
compared to other models trained on a larger dataset. It is
still an open question that how much data is enough data to
train an ML model. We have observed from Figure 5, how-
ever, that if we have more than 10,000data points for our
model, we will be able to train a model that is much more
acceptable.
5.4 Experiment 4 - Prediction
Finally, for our final set of experiments we use our Advisor to
predict the top 10 best variants for the Wilson Dslash Oper-
ator. Once the top 10 variants are identified we use the Code
Transformation module to generate those 10 code variants
and return them back to the user. The Advisor takes as inputthe base Wilson Dslash kernel, and generates the top 10 best
kernels as predicted by the cost model. As shown in Figure 6,
we plot the actual and predicted runtimes of all the 84 gener-
ated variants (sorted by actual runtime) of one such kernel
when run on the Summit supercomputer. We can clearly
see a strong correlation between the actual and predicted
runtime for all the variants. The same correlation can be
found in almost all kernels across all clusters. In Figure 7, we
display the Wilson Dslash operator’s RMSE and normalized
RMSE for each cluster. The range of runtimes (in seconds) for
each cluster is mentioned below their name in the plot. We
currently do not have access to the Intel cluster to conduct
new experiments, and the Intel dataset contained very few
data from the targeted Wilson Dslash kernel and none from
our proxy_app. So, even if we make a prediction using this
model, there is no way to validate it. Consequently, we did
not conduct this experiment on the Intel architecture and
the result is marked as −𝑁𝐴−. As expected on Exxact, the
target kernel’s RMSE increased significantly (11.153s) due
to less data in its dataset. Even with a normalized RMSE of
0.279, it fell short of our expectation of 0.1. Nonetheless, this
model demonstrated some correlation between the actual
and predicted data. In contrast, Wombat and Seawulf per-
formed reasonably well and were able to predict the top 10
kernel variants despite having an RMSE of 4.273s and 3.375s,
respectively. However, with 0.033 and 0.066, respectively,
their normalized RMSE was well within our expectation. As
per our observation, their RMSE can also be improved by
adding more data for these clusters. Finally, as shown in Fig-
ure 7, the RMSE rates for Summit, Corona, and Ookami are
less than one second each, and they were able to accurately
predict the top ten kernel variants.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we introduced the OpenMP Advisor, a compiler
tool that advises application scientists on various OpenMP
code offloading strategies. Although the tool is currently
restricted to GPUs, it can be extended to support other
OpenMP-capable devices. Using our Advisor, we were able
to generate code of multiple applications for seven different
4555
Max error for kernels >45s = 3.04sRuntime (sec)"Actual"
"Predicted"
0 20 40 60 80024
Variant numberMax error for kernels <2s = 0.76s
Figure 6. Wilson Dslash operator’s Actual and Predicted
Runtimes (in sec) on Summit for all variants sorted by run-
time, where 𝐿𝑋,𝐿𝑌,𝐿𝑍and𝐿𝑇are set to 32,32,32and16.
10OpenMP Advisor Jan, 2023, arxiv
0
0.2
0.4Normalized
RMSE
Summit
[0 - 49s]Corona
[0 - 23s]Ookami
[0 - 53s]Wombat
[0 - 65s]Seawulf
[0 - 103s]Intel Exxact
[0 - 40s]369
RMSE(s)(0.020) (0.008) (0.008)(0.033) (0.066)(-NA- )
(0.279)
0.9980.190 0.4474.2733.375
-NA-11.153
Figure 7. RMSE and Normalized RMSE for predicting the
runtime of all variants of Wilson Dslash operator on different
clusters for𝐿𝑋,𝐿𝑌,𝐿𝑍,𝐿𝑇set at 32,32,32,16each. The range
of runtimes for each cluster is mentioned below their name.
architectures, and correctly predict the top ten best variants
for each application including a real world application (the
Wilson Dslash operator) on every architecture. Preliminary
findings indicate that this tool can assist compiler developers
and HPC application scientists in porting their legacy HPC
codes to the upcoming heterogeneous computing environ-
ment. As a next step, we will extend our tool to include the
following tasks:
•Data synchronization between host and device during
kernel execution.
•Offload computation to multiple GPUs [14] via tasks.
•Expand benchmarks to include more kernels to cover a
wider range of applications.
•Collect more data for all architectures and expand our
research to include new GPUs and compilers.
•Our cost model can currently predict the runtime of ker-
nels whose data size and level of parallelism are known at
compile time. We could extend our model to predict the
best variants for a variety of data sizes, and then use the
OpenMP metadirective [ 27] directive to generate multiple
directive variants for each range.
•According to previous studies [ 18,25], OpenMP GPU of-
floading performance can be enhanced by using unified
memory between the CPU and GPU and such analysis
should be a part of our Advisor.
•Support OpenMP Advisor for all OpenMP directives, not
just target offloading.
•Extend the Advisor to other directive-based models, such
as OpenACC.
This tool is a first-of-its-kind attempt to build a framework
for automatic GPU offloading using OpenMP and machine
learning; as a result, there is plenty of room for improvement.
Acknowledgement
This research was supported by the Exascale Computing
Project (17-SC-20-SC), a collaborative effort of the U.S. De-
partment of Energy Office of Science and the National Nu-
clear Security Administration. This material is also based
upon work supported by the National Science Foundationunder grant no. CCF-2113996. This research used resources
of the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility at the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory, which is supported by the Office
of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract
No. DE-AC05-00OR22725. The authors would like to thank
Stony Brook Research Computing and Cyberinfrastructure,
and the Institute for Advanced Computational Science at
Stony Brook University for access to the SeaWulf comput-
ing system, which was made possible by a $1.4M National
Science Foundation grant (#1531492).
References
[1]Prithayan Barua, Jun Shirako, Whitney Tsang, Jeeva Paudel, Wang
Chen, and Vivek Sarkar. 2019. OMPSan: static verification of openmp’s
data mapping constructs. In International Workshop on OpenMP .
Springer, Auckland, New Zealand, 3–18.
[2]Brower, Richard, Christ, Norman, DeTar, Carleton, Edwards, Robert,
and Mackenzie, Paul. 2018. Lattice QCD Application Development
within the US DOE Exascale Computing Project. EPJ Web Conf. 175
(2018), 09010. https://doi.org/10.1051/epjconf/201817509010
[3]Andrew Burford, Alan Calder, David Carlson, Barbara Chapman, Fi-
rat Coskun, Tony Curtis, Catherine Feldman, Robert Harrison, Yan
Kang, Benjamin Michalowicz, et al .2021. Ookami: Deployment and
Initial Experiences. In Practice and Experience in Advanced Research
Computing . ACM, New York, 1–8.
[4]Shuai Che, Michael Boyer, Jiayuan Meng, David Tarjan, Jeremy W
Sheaffer, Sang-Ha Lee, and Kevin Skadron. 2009. Rodinia: A bench-
mark suite for heterogeneous computing. In 2009 IEEE international
symposium on workload characterization (IISWC) . Ieee, 44–54.
[5]Clang, Plugins 2022. Clang Plugins. Retrieved Apr 20, 2022 from
https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangPlugins.html
[6]Leonardo Dagum and Ramesh Menon. 1998. OpenMP: an industry
standard API for shared-memory programming. IEEE computational
science and engineering 5, 1 (1998), 46–55.
[7]Robert H Dennard, Fritz H Gaensslen, Hwa-Nien Yu, V Leo Rideout,
Ernest Bassous, and Andre R LeBlanc. 1974. Design of ion-implanted
MOSFET’s with very small physical dimensions. IEEE Journal of solid-
state circuits 9, 5 (1974), 256–268.
[8]Stefan Falkner, Aaron Klein, and Frank Hutter. 2018. BOHB: Robust
and efficient hyperparameter optimization at scale. In International
Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 1437–1446.
[9]Isaac Gelado, John E Stone, Javier Cabezas, Sanjay Patel, Nacho
Navarro, and Wen-mei W Hwu. 2010. An asymmetric distributed
shared memory model for heterogeneous parallel systems. In Proceed-
ings of the fifteenth International Conference on Architectural support
for programming languages and operating systems . 347–358.
[10] Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. 2010. Understanding the difficulty
of training deep feedforward neural networks. In Proceedings of the
thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics .
JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 249–256.
[11] Geoffrey Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky. 2012. Neural
networks for machine learning lecture 6a overview of mini-batch
gradient descent. Cited on 14, 8 (2012), 2.
[12] Intel. 2021. Intel Developer Cloud. Retrieved October
25, 2022 from https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/
tools/devcloud/overview.html
[13] Thomas B Jablin, Prakash Prabhu, James A Jablin, Nick P Johnson,
Stephen R Beard, and David I August. 2011. Automatic CPU-GPU
communication management and optimization. In Proceedings of the
32nd ACM SIGPLAN conference on Programming language design and
implementation . 142–151.
11Jan, 2023, arxiv Mishra et al.
[14] Vivek Kale, Wenbin Lu, Anthony Curtis, Abid M Malik, Barbara Chap-
man, and Oscar Hernandez. 2020. Toward supporting multi-GPU
targets via taskloop and user-defined schedules. In International Work-
shop on OpenMP . Springer, 295–309.
[15] Kushal Kedia. 2009. Hybrid programming with openmp and mpi . Tech-
nical Report. Technical Report 18.337 J, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
[16] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A Method for
Stochastic Optimization. In 3rd International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,
Conference Track Proceedings , Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (Eds.).
http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
[17] Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. 2019. LLNL - Corona. Re-
trieved October 25, 2022 from https://hpc.llnl.gov/hardware/compute-
platforms/corona
[18] Lingda Li, Hal Finkel, Martin Kong, and Barbara Chapman. 2018. Man-
age openmp GPU data environment under unified address space. In
International Workshop on OpenMP . Springer, 69–81.
[19] M Lin. 2016. Optimization of the Domain Wall Dslash Kernel in
Columbia Physics System. (2016), 269.
[20] Yang Liu, Wissam M Sid-Lakhdar, Osni Marques, Xinran Zhu, Chang
Meng, James W Demmel, and Xiaoye S Li. 2021. GPTune: multitask
learning for autotuning exascale applications. In Proceedings of the
26th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel
Programming . 234–246.
[21] LLVM. 2021. LLVM Cost Model .https://llvm.org/doxygen/CostModel_
8cpp.html
[22] Gleison Mendonça, Breno Guimarães, Péricles Alves, Márcio Pereira,
Guido Araújo, and Fernando Magno Quintão Pereira. 2017. DawnCC:
automatic annotation for data parallelism and offloading. ACM Trans-
actions on Architecture and Code Optimization (TACO) 14, 2 (2017),
13.
[23] Harshitha Menon, Abhinav Bhatele, and Todd Gamblin. 2020. Auto-
tuning parameter choices in HPC applications using Bayesian opti-
mization. In 2020 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing
Symposium (IPDPS) . IEEE, 831–840.
[24] Alok Mishra, Smeet Chheda, Carlos Soto, Abid M. Malik, Meifeng
Lin, and Barbara Chapman. 2022. COMPOFF: A Compiler Cost model
using Machine Learning to predict the Cost of OpenMP Offloading. In
2022 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium
Workshops (IPDPSW), May 30-June 3, 2022 . IEEE.
[25] Alok Mishra, Lingda Li, Martin Kong, Hal Finkel, and Barbara Chap-
man. 2017. Benchmarking and evaluating unified memory for OpenMP
GPU offloading. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on the LLVM
Compiler Infrastructure in HPC . 1–10.
[26] Alok Mishra, Abid M Malik, and Barbara Chapman. 2020. Data Trans-
fer and Reuse Analysis Tool for GPU-Offloading Using OpenMP. In
International Workshop on OpenMP . Springer, 280–294.
[27] Alok Mishra, Abid M Malik, and Barbara Chapman. 2020. Extending
the LLVM/Clang Framework for OpenMP Metadirective Support. In
2020 IEEE/ACM 6th Workshop on the LLVM Compiler Infrastructure
in HPC (LLVM-HPC) and Workshop on Hierarchical Parallelism for
Exascale Computing (HiPar) . IEEE, 33–44.
[28] ORNL. 2017. Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility - Summit
Supercomputing cluster. Retrieved October 25, 2022 from https:
//www.olcf.ornl.gov/summit/
[29] ORNL. 2020. Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility - Wombat
cluster. Retrieved October 25, 2022 from https://www.olcf.ornl.gov/
olcf-resources/compute-systems/wombat/
[30] Gabriel Poesia, Breno Guimarães, Fabricio Ferracioli, and Fernando
Magno Quintão Pereira. 2017. Static placement of computation on
heterogeneous devices. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Lan-
guages 1, OOPSLA (2017), 1–28.
[31] Rohan Basu Roy, Tirthak Patel, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari.2021. Bliss: auto-tuning complex applications using a pool of diverse
lightweight learning models. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN
International Conference on Programming Language Design and Imple-
mentation . 1280–1295.
[32] Patrick Schober, Christa Boer, and Lothar A Schwarte. 2018. Corre-
lation coefficients: appropriate use and interpretation. Anesthesia &
Analgesia 126, 5 (2018), 1763–1768.
[33] Rodinia Benchmark Suite. 2018. Gaussian Elimination .https://www.
cs.virginia.edu/rodinia/doku.php?id=gaussian_elimination
[34] Rodinia Benchmark Suite. 2018. Graph Traversal - Breadth First Search .
https://www.cs.virginia.edu/rodinia/doku.php?id=graph_traversal
[35] Rodinia Benchmark Suite. 2018. K-nearest Neighbors .https://www.cs.
virginia.edu/rodinia/doku.php?id=k-nearest_neighbors
[36] Rodinia Benchmark Suite. 2018. Particle Filter .https://www.cs.virginia.
edu/rodinia/doku.php?id=particle_filter
[37] Top500. 2021. Top500 supercomputer sites. https://www.top500.org/
lists/top500/2022/06/
[38] Ilkka Tuomi. 2002. The lives and death of Moore’s Law. First Monday
(2002).
[39] Stony Brook University. 2019. SeaWulf, computational cluster at
Stony Brook University. Retrieved October 25, 2022 from https:
//it.stonybrook.edu/help/kb/understanding-seawulf
[40] Xingfu Wu, Michael Kruse, Prasanna Balaprakash, Hal Finkel, Paul
Hovland, Valerie Taylor, and Mary Hall. 2022. Autotuning PolyBench
Benchmarks with LLVM Clang/Polly loop optimization pragmas using
Bayesian optimization. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and
Experience 34, 20 (2022), e6683.
12