David C. Wyld et al. (Eds): MLSC, ITCSS, ACSTY, SOFE, NATP, BDAB - 2023   
pp. 153 -166, 2023. CS & IT  - CSCP 2023                                                                DOI: 10.5121/csit.2023.130212   
PRIVACY -PRESERVING  ONLINE SHARING 
CHARGING PILE SCHEME WITH DIFFERENT 
NEEDS MATCHING  
 
Zhiyu Huang1,2 
 
1School of Computer Science and Engineering, Hunan University of Science 
and Technology, Xiangtan, China  
2Hunan Key Laboratory for Service Computing and Novel Software 
Technology, Xiangtan, China  
 
ABSTRACT  
 
With the development of electric vehicles, more and more electric vehicles have difficulties in 
parking and charging. One of the reasons is that the number of charging piles is difficult to 
support the energy supply of electric vehicles, and a large number of private charging piles 
have a long idle time, so the energy supply problem of electric vehicles can be solved by sharing 
charging piles. The shared charging pile scheme uses Paillier encryption sche me and improved 
scheme to effectively protect user data. The scheme has homomorphism of addition and 
subtraction, and can process information without decryption. However, considering that 
different users have different needs, the matching is carried out af ter calculating the needs put 
forward by users. This scheme can effectively protect users' privacy and provide matching 
mechanisms with different requirements, so that users can better match the appropriate 
charging piles. The final result shows that its e fficiency is better than the original Paillier 
scheme, and it can also meet the security requirements.  
 
KEYWORDS  
 
Private charging pile sharing service , Privacy protection , Demand analysis , Homomorphic 
encryption , Internet of things   
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
 
With th e advancement of "carbon peak and carbon neutral" goals and the development of electric 
vehicles (EVs), EVs have the potential to effectively reduce air pollution caused by daily 
transportation  [1]. As the number of EVs on the road increases, the demand fo r charging 
infrastructure also increases. However, the current prevalence and coverage of charging stations 
are insufficient to meet this demand[2 -3]. Surveys have shown that between 2015 and 2020 in 
Table 1, the number of EVs and charging stations has bee n steadily increasing, with a particularly 
notable increase in the number of private charging stations, from 8,000 in 2015 to 874,000 in 
2020 [16]. However, compared to the growth rate of EVs, the number of charging stations is still 
far from adequate. As a  result, for those EV users who are unable to install charging stations, the 
problem of charging difficulties is becoming increasingly apparent. In 2020, the Chinese 
government proposed to include charging stations as one of the fields of the nation's "new  
infrastructure", with an estimated investment of approximately 10 billion to build charging 
stations. According to international data surveys, it is expected that by 2030, there will be 5 
million EVs on the road in California alone, and 12 -24 million priv ate charging stations and 10 -
20 million public charging stations globally. Charging facilities have become an indispensable 154         Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)  
infrastructure in new energy development planning [4 -5]. Considering the high installation cost 
of charging piles [6], other technol ogies are needed to make up for the shortcomings of charging 
piles.  
 
Table 1 Approximate number of electric vehicles and charging piles in the world  
 
Year  2015  2016  2017  2018  2019  2020  
Number of electric 
vehicle  570  1280  1840  2740  3890  4840  
Number of pu blic 
charging piles  58 149 240 387 516 807 
Number of private 
charging piles  8 63 232 477 703 874 
 
With the rapid development of Internet of Things technology, Internet of Things devices connect 
everything and have gradually entered the mode of Internet o f Everything [7 -9]. As one of the 
applications of the Internet of Things, the Internet of Vehicles can realize the information 
exchange between vehicles and provide certain research value and commercial value. The 
application of V2X technology of the Inter net of Vehicles in cloud (edge) computing is the 
cornerstone of building a smart city and smart transportation [10 -12]. At present, the research on 
shared charging pile is still in the initial stage. The traditional charging pile sharing scheme 
generally c onsists of three entities, including charging pile provider, electric vehicle and 
matching server, in which both buyers and sellers upload their own information to the server for 
matching calculation, and the server returns the matching results to both buy ers and sellers, as 
shown in Fig 1. However, in the traditional charging pile sharing scheme, the user's information 
is published or uploaded to the server through simple encryption, and the server needs to decrypt 
the participants' information to get thei r plaintext information. Therefore, in the traditional 
scheme, the user's privacy may be attacked and leaked. In the traditional charging pile sharing 
system, all information will be published directly on the Internet. One of the biggest problems 
faced by the system is that users will expose their private information to the public platform when 
they apply for it. For example, a malicious user has used a certain charging station. The charging 
pile is marked and recorded, and he may not use it directly throug h the platform when he knows 
that the charging pile is unmanaged for a period of time.  
 
At the same time, there is also the possibility that the shared service platform exposes the privacy 
of customers. Because the location information of electric vehicle s may include workplaces, 
home addresses, special hospitals or frequently visited entertainment venues, buyers' hobbies and 
health status information are leaked, and the privacy of charging pile sellers  will also be greatly 
affected  threaten. On the other hand, once the information of buyers and sellers is obtained by 
malicious attackers, not only will there be profitable and targeted advertisements, but also related 
work and home addresses will be threatened, and may even lead to personal safety. Therefore , in 
order not to disclose the private information of customers, it is necessary to design a secure 
service platform. This paper proposes the use of homomorphic encryption technology to protect 
the privacy of users.  
 
In order to meet the above challenges,  the main contributions of this paper are summarized as 
follows:  
 
1) We use homomorphic encryption technology to encrypt user information, and at the same 
time use homomorphic characteristics to process ciphertext, and match the obtained results in the 
cloud server. In the public service platform, users' effective information will not be exposed, and 
matching can be completed efficiently.   Computer Science & Information Technolo gy (CS & IT)                                        155 
2) For users with different needs, we designed the demand parameter $ \omega$. Through 
matching calculation, we can get the mat ching index parameter W. By comparing W, we can get 
the most suitable buyers and sellers. This requirement parameter can better match users with 
different requirements.  
 
3) We use chinese remainder theorem (CRT) to speed up the modular exponentiation in the 
decryption process of cloud server, CRT is used to convert ab from Zn^2 to Zp^2 and Zq^2 for 
calculation. We use Paillier scheme with optimized parameters, which can speed up the 
encryption calculation although it loses homomorphism.  
 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we introduce the homomorphic 
encryption, parameter optimization of Paillier scheme and china remainder theorem. In Section 3, 
we introduce the system  model  and present the proposed scheme. In Section 4, we descr ibe the 
performance evaluation results. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 5. 
 
2. RELATED WORK  
 
In this section, homomorphic encryption technology, parameter optimization of Paillier scheme 
and Chinese remainder theorem are introduced.  
 
2.1. Homomorphic Encryption  
 
Encryption technology is often used to protect privacy, among which homomorphic encryption is 
a special encryption method, which has the characteristics of directly calculating encrypted data, 
such as addition and multiplication, and will not reve al any information of the original text during 
the calculation process. And the calculated result is also encrypted, and the result obtained after 
decrypting the processed ciphertext with the key is exactly the result obtained after processing the 
original  text. Paillier scheme has the homomorphism of addition/subtraction. For plaintext m1 
and m2, there is a function E () that makes E(m1+m2)=E(m1) \cdot E(m2). Paillier scheme 
satisfies the standard semantic security of encryption scheme[13], that is, the cip hertext is 
indistinguishable (IND -CPA) under the attack of selected plaintext, that is, the information about 
plaintext will not be leaked in ciphertext. Its security is proved by the hypothesis of deterministic 
composite residue. So far, no algorithm can be cracked in polynomial time, so Paillier encryption 
scheme is considered to be safe. The detailed process includes the following steps.  
 
 KeyGen()  : Pick two prime numbers p and q compute n = p * q and λ=lcm(p -1,q-1). 
Choose a random number g, and gcd(L(g ^λ mod n^2),n) = 1, computer μ=(L(g^λ mod 
n^2))^( -1) mod n, where L(x) = (x -1)/n the public and private keys are pk = (n,g) and sk 
=(λ,μ) , respectively.  
 
 Encrypt()  : Enter the plaintext message m and select the random number r. Encrypt 
plaintext:  
 
,                          (1) 
 
 Decrypt()  : Enter ciphertext C. Calculate plaintext message:  
 156         Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)  
     
 .            (2) 
 
2.2. Parameter Optimization of Paillier schem e 
 
In order to simplify computation without affecting the algorithm's correctness, the algorithm may 
take g=n+1 during the key generation phase[14]. This allows for the simplification of the 
calculation of $g^m$ during the encryption process.  
For g^m=(n+1)^m, using the binomial theorem, we can express g^m as the sum of the product of 
the binomial coefficient s and the corresponding powers of n and 1, where each term of the sum 
can be calculated efficiently.  
 
      
 ,  (3)  
 
As the previous m -1 terms are multiples of n, under the condition of modulo $n^2$ operation, 
they can all be eliminated, thus this modulo e xponentiation operation can ultimately be simplified 
to one modulo multiplication operation, thus accelerating the encryption process.  
 
            
 ,                    (4) 
 
Decrypt ciphertext c:  
.            (5) 
 
2.3. Chinese remainder theorem  
 
The Chinese R emainder Theorem, also known as the Sunzi Theorem, originates from the ancient 
Chinese mathematical treatise "Sunzi Suanjing" and describes the isomorphism of two algebraic 
spaces. Specifically, an algebraic space can be decomposed into several mutually or thogonal 
subspaces and the original space corresponds one -to-one to the decomposed space, similar to two 
forms of the same space. Specifically, when n = pq and p, q are relatively prime, there exists the 
algebraic isomorphism property: a mod n = a mod p + a mod q, thus the operations under mod n 
can be transformed into operations under mod p and mod q. By converting to this form, the 
calculation efficiency is higher. Therefore, this property can be utilized to accelerate modular 
exponentiation operations un der mod n.  
 
3. THE PROPOSED SCHEME  
 
3.1. System Model 
 
The matching scheme of shared charging piles consists of multiple electric vehicle buyers, 
multiple charging pile sellers, multiple edge proxy servers, a cloud server and a certificate 
certification center. Al l entities communicate through the mobile network. The Figure.1  describes 
our system  model.  
 
Electric vehicle  (EVs): As a user of shared charging piles, when charging piles are needed, a 
charging request will be sent out, and the EV set is expressed as {1,  …, i, …, I}. After receiving 
the response, you will get the public key of information encryption, and the terminal equipment  Computer Science & Information Technolo gy (CS & IT)                                        157 
of the Internet of Things will encrypt the information to be sent with the public key and send it to 
the nearest proxy server.  
 
Private charging piles  (PCPs): As a provider of shared charging piles, there will be J private 
charging piles in a given area, and the collection of charging piles is denoted as {1, …, j…, J}. 
Each PCP is managed by the owner and is equipped with a socket for  EV charging. When each 
PCP has free time, it will issue an application for energy supply, and the provided information 
will be encrypted on the Internet of Things terminal equipment with the provided public key, and 
then the encrypted information will be sent to the nearest proxy server.  
 
Proxy server : The proxy server has certain computing power, and is mainly responsible for 
collecting the encrypted information provided by nearby electric vehicle buyers and charging pile 
sellers who apply for matching, a nd using homomorphic characteristics to calculate the encrypted 
information. In the calculation process, important information is protected by Paillier, and the 
edge proxy server will not get useful information.  
 
Cloud server : A cloud server is a server wi th powerful computing power, which can process 
encrypted information sent by proxy servers. After processing the information, use the matching 
scheme provided to match the buyer and the seller. After the matching, the best matching object 
will be obtained,  and then the next round of matching will be carried out.  
 
Certificate certification  (CA) : The certificate certification is the only authoritative identity 
certification institution and is completely reliable. All user entities need to be registered and 
authenticated by the certificate authority, and when the user sends an application, the 
corresponding public and private key pairs are generated by the key management center of the 
certificate authority and sent to the corresponding users. The information of  the certificate 
certification center is absolutely confidential, and there is no possibility of collusion.  
 
 
 
Figure.1 System model.  
 
 
 158         Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)  
3.2. Requests and Information Encryption  
 
In the shared charging pile matching system, the certificate certification center  is responsible for 
managing and issuing public keys and maintaining public key information. In the system, electric 
vehicle buyers and charging pile sellers provide information, including location, price, demand 
and other information. Buyers of electric v ehicles need to provide their own location xi,yi, 
proposed price (r i), farthest acceptable distance d imax, demand 
 i=1,2,··· ,n={0，1} and the price 
proposed by the demand  
 . The seller of charging piles needs to provide the location 
(xj,yj), the price (r j), the demand 
 j=1,2,··· ,n={0，1} of charging piles  and the price 
 . 
After the user sends a request, the certificate certificatio n center will send the public key pk to the 
user, and the electric vehicle buyer and the charging pile seller will select the random numbers r i 
and r j respectively, and use the public keys pk, r i and r j to encrypt the provided information.  
 
,                        (6) 
 
,           (7) 
 
After encryption, C m are obtained. The buyers of electric vehicles package C m and w and send 
them to the proxy server. The sellers of charging piles send C m to the proxy server. Except at the 
user end, the private informa tion of users is all the information obtained after encryption and 
processing.  
 
3.3. Ciphertext Processing  
 
The proxy server has a certain computing power, and can use the homomorphic 
addition/subtraction characteristics of pailiier encryption scheme to process  the ciphertext 
information as well as the plaintext. The process is as follows.  
 
  
 ,              (8) 
 
,          (9) 
 
The demand of buyers and sellers is encrypted by homomorphic addition, and the information 
such as location, price and demand price is  encrypted by homomorphic subtraction to get the sum 
of the processed information and the difference of the information. Among them, the main 
function of (8) is to judge whether the demand of electric vehicle buyers can be met. Information 
difference is a difference comparison between the information provided by buyers and sellers, 
which can reflect the information similarity of both parties. The smaller the information 
difference, the closer the information provided by the charging pile seller is to the pr eference of 
the electric vehicle buyer, which is more suitable for matching and has a higher matching 
probability. On the contrary, the larger the information difference between the two parties means 
that the user's matching probability will be smaller.  
 
 
 
 
 
  Computer Science & Information Technolo gy (CS & IT)                                        159 
3.4. Information Decryption  
 
The cloud server owns the private key sk issued by CA, including p and q. In Paillier 
cryptosystem, the main cost of decryption is modular exponentiation under Z n^2. With the private 
key (decomposition p, q of n), the modular ex ponentiation under Z n^2 can be converted into Z p^2 
and Z q^2 by CRT.  
 
The optimization function using CRT is expressed as L p(x)=(x-1)/p and L q(x)=(x-1)/q respectively, 
and the decryption process needs to be divided by using the following mathematical princ iples.  
 
,         (10) 
 
,                                           (11)  
 
,                                          (12)  
 
,         (13) 
 
,          (14) 
 
CRT(m p,mq mod pq) is to use CRT to calculate the modulus index, and the detailed process is as 
follows. For the modulus index ab mod n, n=pq, CRT is used to convert ab from Z n to Z p and Z q 
for calculation. Calculate the mapping ab of  Z p on m p=ap^bp, where a p=a mod p can be obtained 
from euler theorem, where φ(p)=p -1 is Euler function. Calculate the  mapping m q=aq^bq of aq on 
ab, which is the same as the calculation process of m p. Calculate m p and m q separately and then 
aggregate them back.  
 
,        (15) 
 
Because p and q are coprime, there are  q-1(mod p)q+p-1(mod q)p=1 . Substituting into the formula  
(15) gives:  
 
,        (16) 
 
In Paillier scheme, CRT is used to speed up decryption of plaintext to get plaintext m. After 
receiving the processed information, the modular operation under Z n^2 is converted into modular 
operation under Z p^2 and Z q^2 by usi ng private key sk by using China remainder theorem, and then 
decrypted.  
 
,         (17) 
 
.         (18) 
 
3.5. System Matching  
 
After decryption by using CRT -optimized decryption scheme, the sum of information and the 
difference between information are obtaine d. After obtaining the decrypted information, first 
calculate the distance between the buyer i and the seller j:  160         Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)  
 
,          (19) 
 
The maximum acceptable distance of the EV buyer i is also encrypted and decrypted, because the 
maximum acceptable distance d oes not carry specific information such as location and price, so it 
is not regarded as important privacy information, so the cloud server gets the same clear text d imax 
as the user. To meet the matching conditions of buyer i, we must first compare the dir ect distance 
between buyer and seller. If d dij<dimax, it means that the distance between buyer i and seller j is 
less than the maximum distance accepted by buyer i, which meets the matching conditions. If 
ddij>dimax, the distance between users i and j does  not meet the conditions, the seller j cannot match 
the buyer. Remove the unqualified sellers by comparison before proceeding to the next step.  
 
Demand analysis is an interesting part of this paper. We consider that different buyers of electric 
vehicles ma y have different needs. Specifically, the distance and price are the information that 
the buyer i and the seller j must provide. Besides, other related demands αi and αj can be set, 
and the sum of them can be obtained through information and calculation. There are three 
situations:  
 
Case1: a αij=0, indicates that neither user has this requirement.  
 
Case2: a αij=1, it means that only one of the buyer i or the seller  j owns the demand, and in case1 
and case2, the corresponding i and j are removed because the demand cannot be provided.  
 
Case3: a αij=2, it means that i have the demand, and j can also provide the demand. At this time, 
whether to use it can be judged by th e demand price difference d rij . 
 
i) when d rij<0, it means that the price proposed by i is less than that proposed by j. At this time, i 
and j cannot match. ii)When a αij=2 and d rij>0 are met at the same time, it means that i and j meet 
the matching conditions,  and the corresponding i and j are added to the matching set.  
 
After getting the matching set that meets the distance and demand, the cloud server will make the 
final price matching. For buyer i, all sellers j who meet the demand will calculate the demand 
price difference d rij provided by i and j through formula ( 9). Because there is no information in 
the buyer's preferences that can lead to the leakage of location information, w are also 
unimportant information that can be obtained in the cloud server only  after being decrypted by 
the private key sk. At this time, the information in the cloud server includes the location 
information difference ddij, demand and value a ij, price information difference d rij, demand price 
difference d rij, buyer's preferences w and the number k of sellers j in the number matching set. 
When matching the buyer i of the electric vehicle, the seller j in the matching set is calculated 
respectively to obtain W ij. 
 
,        (20) 
 
For buyer i, W ij is used as a matching evaluation index  to judge the suitability of matching with 
seller j. So we sort W ij in descending order. The smallest W ijmin is obtained, which means that the 
current sellers j and u are the most suitable matching objects in terms of price and demand, so i 
match j.   Computer Science & Information Technolo gy (CS & IT)                                        161 
3.6. Matchi ng Result Return  
 
After the matching of buyer i is completed, the cloud server will send a request to the 
successfully matched i and j. User i and j use the Paillier scheme with optimized parameters to 
generate public keys pk i and pk j and send them to the cloud server. The cloud server generates a 
random number r, and encrypts the private key sk with pk i and pk j. 
 
,        (21) 
 
And the matched result is packaged and sent to the proxy server. The proxy server stores the 
encrypted address information upload ed by the user. After receiving the packaged result and the 
encrypted private key, the proxy server finds the corresponding encrypted address information 
CLoci and C Locj and the encrypted price information C rj of the seller j through the matching results i  
and j. The proxy server packages and sends the ciphertext of C Locj, C rj and private key sk 
encrypted with public key pk i to buyer i, and packages and sends the ciphertext of C Locj and 
private key sk encrypted with public key pk j to seller j. The buyer I a nd the seller j use their own 
private keys to decrypt and get sk . 
 
,         (22) 
 
Then use sk to decrypt the encrypted address information C Loci , CLocj  and r j. 
 
,         (23) 
 
At this time, the buyer I is matched, and the I+1th buyer is matched in th e next round, and the 
matched seller J is eliminated from the matching set until the last seller set is empty, indicating 
that the current round of matching has ended. Re -apply to CA, get a new public and private key 
pair, and start the next round of match ing. 
 
4. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION RESULTS  
 
4.1. Number Analysis  
 
In this section, we consider a 3km*3km scene with different numbers of I buyers and J sellers. 
All the simulations are done on python and on 2.5 GHz Inter Core i5 -7300HQ CPU and 32G 
RAM. Finally, all t he simulation results are averaged in 50 simulations, and the consistent results 
are finally obtained.  
 
Paillier encryption algorithm is a public key encryption algorithm based on number theory, which 
has high performance in security and time cost.  
The fol lowing is the time cost of operating on a piece of data of the original Paillier encryption 
algorithm:  
 
Randomly generate public key and private key: O(1)  
 
Encryption operation: O(log n)  
 
Decryption operation: O(log n)  
 162         Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)  
Addition/subtraction operation (addi ng/subtracting two ciphertext numbers): O(1)  
 
Where n refers to the length of the public key (the number of digits of the modulus).  
 
In our simulation experiment, for I buyers and J buyers, the time cost from issuing an application 
to obtaining the corresp onding public key is O(1). For all users, because the encryption operation 
uses the original Paillier encryption scheme, its time cost corresponds to O(log n). Our setting is 
that all users encrypt on the terminal equipment of the Internet of Things, and e ach user does it 
independently, so the time cost is fixed regardless of the number of matching users. When a user 
encrypts n data, the time cost is n*O(log n). When the terminal equipment of the Internet of 
Things encrypts the information to be sent, the p roxy server will add/subtract the ciphertext data, 
and the corresponding operation is O(1). Every buyer I in the proxy server needs to add and 
subtract with the seller J. For J sellers and K pieces of information, the time cost is J*k*O(1). For 
I buyers, t he total time cost required for calculation in the proxy server is I*J*k*O(1). Decrypt 
each calculated result in the cloud server. Under the condition that all sellers meet the 
requirements, the time cost of each decryption operation is O(log n) correspond ing to I*J*k 
calculation results. After decryption, we execute the matching algorithm, calculate the matching 
index wij for M users who satisfy user I, and then get the minimum matching index wijmin for 
user I after sorting it, with the time cost of j*O(1) . At this time, the buyer I and the seller J are 
successfully matched. The time cost corresponding to the above process is shown in Table 2.  
 
Table 2 Paillier scheme time cost in this paper  
 
 I buyers  J sellers  n data  Buyer 
matching  Index 
ranking  
Encrypt  O(log n)  O(log n)  k*O(log n)  / / 
Process  / / k*O(1)  I*J*k* O(1)  j*O(1)  
Decrypt  O(log n)  O(log n)  k*O(log n)  / / 
 
In the process of decryption, we use CRT to speed up the calculation process. The original 
Paillier encryption algorithm needs to do modular exponential operation under Z n^2. However, 
when the cloud server knows the private key sk and the corresponding coefficients p and q, the 
modular exponentiation under Z n^2 is transformed to Z p^2 and Z q^2, thus improving the encryption 
and decryption effici ency. The time required to decrypt the ciphertext with the original Paillier 
encryption scheme and the time required to accelerate the calculation with CRT are shown in the 
figure. As can be seen from Figure .2, the decryption time is about 1/3 of that of P aillier 
encryption scheme after accelerated calculation with CRT. Compared with DJN scheme [15], the 
decryption time is basically the same as that of Paillier scheme. Therefore, using CRT to speed 
up the decryption process can effectively improve efficienc y. 
  Computer Science & Information Technolo gy (CS & IT)                                        163 
 
 
Figure.2 Computational overhead of data encryption and decryption with different schemes  
 
After the cloud server gets the matching result, it sends out a successful matching application, 
and the buyer I and the seller J call the Paillier encryption algorithm with optimized parameters to 
generate a public key pair, and send the public key n to the cloud server, and the private key is 
stored at the user end. Compared with the original Paillier encryption algorithm, the encryption 
scheme with parameter optimization simplifies the modular exponential operation into a modular 
multiplication, which speeds up the encryption process. Its time efficiency is shown in Figure .3. 
 
 
 
Figure.3 Comparison of encryption time cost between Paillier scheme and parameter  optimization  
 
4.2. Correctness Analysis  
 
For ciphertext C in paillier scheme with optimized parameters, its correctness is expressed as:  
 
 164         Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)  
     
 
,         (24) 
 
For ciphertext C in Paillier scheme which uses CRT optimization for decryption, its correctness  is 
expressed as:  
 
 
 
             
 ,          (25) 
 
Where  hp, hq, m p, m q and are obtained from formula (1 0), formula (1 1), formula (1 2) and formula 
(13) respectively.  
 
4.3. Security Analysis  
 
First of all, we assume that there are curious buyers and sellers, denoted as B, who want to attack 
through some information on the network to obtain other users' private information. In this paper, 
the original Paillier encryption scheme was adopted before the matching was completed. This 
scheme has been fully studied, s o far there is no polynomial time algorithm to break it, so the 
security of Paillier encryption scheme is considered to be reliable. When B obtains the ciphertext 
message and the processed ciphertext message in the proxy server through attack, it cannot ob tain 
effective information because there is no corresponding private key sk. So in the proxy server, we 
think the information is safe and reliable. When the processed information is sent to the cloud 
server, the cloud server needs to use the private key sk  to decrypt the information. Suppose that B 
obtains the sum and difference of the decrypted information in the cloud server through special 
means attack, and these B have their own information, they will infer other useful information 
through the differenc e between the existing information and the information obtained by the 
attack in the cloud server. When inferring the position of other sellers through the difference 
between their own position information and the obtained position information, because the re is 
only a straight distance, the inferred information cannot locate the specific position of the seller. 
From the above, even if the attack obtains the encrypted information in the proxy server or the 
decrypted information in the cloud server, B cannot infer the valid information. Therefore, for 
curious buyers and sellers, our scheme is safe and effective.  
 
Secondly, for the premeditated attacker C, in our scheme, in order to prevent C from 
eavesdropping, all the communication between entities is encrypt ed. In our scheme, the random 
number r generated each time is different, and the encrypted result is also different. After 
attacking the information obtained by the proxy server and the cloud server, the user's location 
information and price information ca nnot be obtained through calculation. And we will refresh 
the key after each round of user matching. In this case, we think the scheme is also safe and 
effective.  
 
 
 
  Computer Science & Information Technolo gy (CS & IT)                                        165 
5. CONCLUSIONS  
 
In this paper, we solve the security problem of shared charging pile scheme through 
homomorphic encryption technology. In order to protect the privacy of users' location and 
provide matching strategies for users with different needs, we have formulated a privacy 
protection shared charging pile scheme based on users with different needs. First of all, we use 
the public key to encrypt the information in the terminal equipment of the Internet of Things, 
which effectively protects the privacy information such as location. Through homomorphism, the 
ciphertext matching the user is calcul ated in the proxy server, and CRT is used in the cloud server 
to accelerate the encryption process. We design the matching rules, calculate the matching index 
W and compare them to get the most suitable matching result. When we return the results, we use 
Paillier scheme with optimized parameters to effectively speed up the encryption process. 
Finally, our numerical analysis results show that the decryption time after CRT optimization is 
about 1/3 of the original Paillier scheme and DJN scheme. The encryptio n time after parameter 
optimization is 1/3 faster than that of the original Paillier scheme. At the same time, we also 
analyzed the security of the scheme, and the attacks of both curious users and malicious attackers 
are safe and reliable in the scheme on  the public platform.  
 
REFERENCES  
 
[1] J. Zhang, H. Yan, N. Ding, J. Zhang, T. Li and S. Su, “Electric Vehicle Charging Network 
Development Characteristics and Policy Suggestions, ” 2018 International Symposium on Computer, 
Consumer and Control (IS3C), 2018 , pp. 469 -472. 
[2] S. Qiao, "Technical Analysis and Research on DC Charging Pile of Electric Vehicle," 2021 
International Conference on Smart City and Green Energy (ICSCGE), 2021, pp. 89 -93. 
[3] Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Li, B. Wu, Y. -Y. Chiang and X. Zhang, "Efficient Deployment of Electric 
Vehicle Charging Infrastructure: Simultaneous Optimization of Charging Station Placement and 
Charging Pile Assignment," in IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 22, no. 
10, pp. 6654 -6659, Oct. 2021.  
[4] A. J. Qarebagh, F. Sabahi and D. Nazarpour, "Optimized Scheduling for Solving Position Allocation 
Problem in Electric Vehicle Charging Stations," 2019 27th Iranian Conference on Electrical 
Engineering (ICEE), 2019, pp. 593 -597. 
[5] H. Hu, S. Ni and L.  Zhang, "Analysis of the carrying capacity of charging station based on regional 
charging demand," 2020 7th International Conference on Information Science and Control 
Engineering (ICISCE), 2020, pp. 1688 -1691.  
[6] S. Mallapuram, N. Ngwum, F. Yuan, C. Lu a nd W. Yu, “Smart city: The state of the art, datasets, 
and evaluation platforms, ” 2017 IEEE/ACIS 16th International Conference on Computer and 
Information Science (ICIS), 2017, pp. 447 -452. 
[7]   I. M. Nafi, S. Tabassum, Q. R. Hassan and F. Abid, "Effect o f Electric Vehicle Fast Charging Station 
on Residential Distribution Network in Bangladesh," 2021 5th International Conference on Electrical 
Engineering and Information Communication Technology (ICEEICT), 2021, pp. 1 -5. 
[8]  C. Liu, K. T. Chau, D. Wu and S . Gao, “Opportunities and Challenges of Vehicle -to-Home, 
Vehicle -to-Vehicle, and Vehicle -to-Grid Technologies, ” in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 101, no. 
11, pp. 2409 -2427, Nov. 2013.  
[9] Y. Wang, Z. Su and K. Zhang, “A Secure Private Charging Pile Sharing  Scheme with Electric 
Vehicles in Energy Blockchain, ” 2019 18th IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security And 
Privacy In Computing And Communications/13th IEEE International Conference On Big Data 
Science And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE), 2019, pp. 648 -654. 
[10] Zhao Tong,Feng Ye,Ming Yan,Hong Liu,Sunitha Basodi.A Survey on Algorithms for Intelligent 
Computing and Smart City Applications[J].Big Data Mining and Analytics,2021,4(03):155 -172. 
[11]  Anagnostopoulos T ,  Luo C ,  Ramson J , et al. A multi -agent system for distributed smartphone 
sensing cycling in smart cities[J]. Journal of Systems and Information Technology, 2020, ahead -of-
print(ahead -of-print).  166         Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)  
[12] Vidal S . Intelligent transport system in smart cities: aspects  and challenges of vehicular networks and 
cloud[J]. Computing reviews, 2019(7):60.  
[13] Paillier P . Public -Key Cryptosystems Based on Composite Degree Residuosity Classes[C]// 
Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT '99, International Conference on the Theory and 
Application of Cryptographic Techniques, Prague, Czech Republic, May 2 -6, 1999, Proceeding. 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1999.  
[14] Catalano D , Gennaro R , Howgrave -Graham N , et al. Paillier's Cryptosystem Revisited. 2002.  
[15] Ivan, Damgrd, Mads, e t al. A generalization of Paillier's public -key system with applications to 
electronic voting[J]. International Journal of Information Security, 2010, 9(6):371 -385. 
[16] https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=1691272446545480912&wfr=spider&for=pc  
 
 
 
© 2023 B y AIRCC Publishing Corporation. This article is published under the Creative Commons 
Attribution (CC BY) license.  
 
 