Safehaul: Risk-Averse Learning for Reliable
mmWave Self-Backhauling in 6G Networks
Amir Ashtari Gargari, Andrea Ortizy, Matteo Pagin, Anja Kleiny, Matthias Hollickz, Michele Zorzi, Arash Asadix
Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Italy, {amirashtari, paginmatte, zorzi}@dei.unipd.it
yCommunications Engineering Lab, TU Darmstadt, Germany, {a.ortiz, a.klein}@nt.tu-darmstadt.de
zSecure Mobile Networking Lab (SEEMOO), TU Darmstadt, Germany, mhollick@seemoo.tu-darmstadt.de
xWireless Communications and Sensing Lab (WISE), TU Darmstadt, Germany, aasadi@wise.tu-darmstadt.de
Abstract —Wireless backhauling at millimeter-wave frequencies
(mmWave) in static scenarios is a well-established practice in
cellular networks. However, highly directional and adaptive
beamforming in today’s mmWave systems have opened new
possibilities for self-backhauling. Tapping into this potential,
3GPP has standardized Integrated Access and Backhaul (IAB)
allowing the same base station to serve both, access and backhaul
trafﬁc. Although much more cost-effective and ﬂexible, resource
allocation and path selection in IAB mmWave networks is
a formidable task. To date, prior works have addressed this
challenge through a plethora of classic optimization and learning
methods, generally optimizing a Key Performance Indicator
(KPI) such as throughput, latency, and fairness, and little
attention has been paid to the reliability of the KPI. We propose
Safehaul, a risk-averse learning-based solution for IAB mmWave
networks. In addition to optimizing average performance, Safe-
haul ensures reliability by minimizing the losses in the tail of
the performance distribution. We develop a novel simulator and
show via extensive simulations that Safehaul not only reduces the
latency by up to 43.2% compared to the benchmarks, but also
exhibits signiﬁcantly more reliable performance, e.g., 71.4% less
variance in achieved latency.
Index Terms —Millimeter-Wave Communication, Integrated
Access and Backhaul (IAB), Self-backhauling, Wireless Backhaul
I. I NTRODUCTION
The emergence of mmWave cellular systems created a
unique opportunity for cellular operators to leverage a scalable
and cost-effective approach to deal with network densiﬁcation.
The fact that mmWave base stations can support ﬁber-like
data rates facilitates the use of the same base station for
both access and backhaul trafﬁc, a solution which in 3GPP
parlance is referred to as Integrated Access and Backhaul
(IAB). Consequently, 3GPP has included IAB in the standard
[1], [2] covering the details on architecture, higher layer
protocols, and the radio. Although Release 17 of the 5G-
NR deﬁnes the interfaces, architectures, and certain system
parameters, the actual conﬁguration and resource allocation is
left to operators.
Traditional self-backhauled networks featured ﬁxed-wireless
links decoupled from access networks with static conﬁgu-
rations. In contrast, IAB should account for the dynamic
nature of the backhaul links (particularly in dense mmWave
deployments) and their integration with the access network.
Further, IAB allows the trafﬁc to traverse several hops (i.e.,base stations) to reach its destination, adding a new dimension
to the problem’s complexity. In addition to the scheduling
problem, an IAB network should: (i)solve the problem of path
selection and link activation at the backhaul while considering
inter-cell interference and (ii)decide on serving access or
backhaul trafﬁc depending on the access load and the ingress
backhaul trafﬁc from neighboring base stations.
Prior work. Methodologically, the majority of the existing
works [3]–[11] focus on classic optimization techniques to
solve the above-mentioned problem. However, given the large
number of parameters involved, such formulations often result
in (non-)convex problems that are too complex for real-time
operations. Nonetheless, they are valuable indicators to mark
the upper-bound performances. Recently, some works focus on
more practical solutions which can be deployed in real net-
works [12]–[14]. Speciﬁcally, these works leverage Reinforce-
ment Learning (RL) to tackle both resource allocation and/or
path selection in IAB mmWave networks and demonstrate that
RL-based solutions achieve real-time performance.
Regardless of the methodology, prior works mostly aim
at maximizing the network capacity [3]–[10], minimizing
latency [15], [16] and improving throughput fairness [4], [17].
Although optimizing capacity and latency is a challenging
task by itself, network operators are often more concerned
about the reliability of such approaches . This is the underlying
reason that many commercial products rely on simpliﬁed but
reliable algorithms for resource allocation, despite their sub-
optimal performance.".
In this article, we propose Safehaul, a reinforcement
learning-based solution for reliable scheduling and path selec-
tion in IAB mmWave systems under network dynamics. We
use the concept of risk aversion, commonly used in economics
[18], [19], to measure and enhance the reliability of Safehaul.
The following summarizes our contributions:
We model the scheduling and path selection problem
in IAB mmWave networks as a multi-agent multi-
armed bandit problem (Section III). We consider multiple
ﬁber base stations simultaneously supporting many self-
backhauled mmWave base stations. In our model, the self-
backhauled base stations independently decide the links
to activate. The consensus among the base stations is
reached via standard-deﬁned procedures (Section IV-C).arXiv:2301.03201v2  [cs.NI]  12 Jan 2023We present the ﬁrst solution to provide reliable perfor-
mance in IAB-enabled networks (Section IV). Speciﬁ-
cally, we investigate the joint minimization of the average
end-to-end latency and its expected tail loss for each base
station. To this aim, we propose Safehaul, a learning
approach that leverages a coherent risk measure called
Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) [18]. CVaR measures
the tail average of the end-to-end latency distribution that
exceeds the maximum permitted latency, thus ensuring
the reliability of the network.
We provide a new means of simulating multi-hop IAB
networks by extending NVIDA’s newly released GPU-
accelerated simulator, i.e., Sionna [20] (Section V).
Speciﬁcally, we add codebook-based analog beamform-
ing capability for both uplink and downlink commu-
nications. Further, we extend Sionna by implementing
system-level components such as layer-2 schedulers and
buffers and Backhaul Adaptation Protocol (BAP)-like
routing across the IAB network. We believe our IAB
extensions will be instrumental for the open-source eval-
uation of future research on self-backhauled mmWave
networks.
Exploiting the above simulator, we evaluate and bench-
mark Safehaul against two of the state-of-the-art algo-
rithms [16], [21]. The results conﬁrm that Safehaul is
signiﬁcantly more reliable than benchmarks as it exhibits
much tighter variance both in terms of latency (up to
71.4%) and packet drop rate (at least 39.1%). Further,
Safehaul achieves up to 43.2% lower average latency
and 11.7% higher average throughput than the reference
schemes.
II. S YSTEM MODEL
We consider a cellular system with Nbase stations capable
of self-backhauling and Dbase station with a ﬁber connection
to the core network. Following 3GPP terminology, we refer to
self-backhauled base stations as IAB-nodes (BS node) and the
ﬁber base stations as IAB-donors (BS donor ). Each IAB-node
connects to the core network via a (multi-hop) wireless link
to an IAB-donor. The sets of all BSs node and BSsdonor are
denoted byN=f1;:::;NgandD=f1;:::;Dg, respec-
tively. The system works in a time-slotted fashion starting
from time slot i= 1 until a ﬁnite time horizon I. All the
time slotsi= 1;:::;I have the same duration. The IAB-
nodes are equipped with two RF chains. One RF chain is
used exclusively for the communication with cellular users
(access network), while the second RF chain is used for self-
backhauling. In line with the 3GPP speciﬁcation [22], we
assume half-duplex self-backhauling, i.e., in each time slot
ian IAB-node can either transmit data, receive data or remain
idle.
We model the connections between the base stations as a
graphGi=fV;Eig, see Fig. 1. The set V=N[D of vertices
is formed by all the BS node and BSdonor in the system. The set
Eiof edges is composed of the available wireless links (n;l)
between a BS noden2N and any BS (BS donor or BSnode)
Fig. 1: Example of a graph Gi
l2V in time slot i. Note that the graph Giis not static. In a
given time slot i, some links can be unavailable due to failure,
blockage, or interference. Thus, only feasible wireless links are
considered in the set Ei. The pathXn;dfrom BSnodento any
BSdonordis a sequence of intermediate links (n;l). Note that
Xn;dchanges over time according to the trafﬁc loads of the
intermediate BS node and the channel conditions. We model the
activation of link (n;l)with the binary variable xn;l;i. When
xn;l;i= 1, the link is activated and BSs nodentransmits to BS
l2V during time slot i. Conversely, xn;l;i= 0 indicates the
link is deactivated and no transmission can occur.
Each BSnodenhas a ﬁnite data buffer with capacity Bmax
n
to store the backhaul data to be transmitted to any of the
BSsdonor . In each time slot i, BSnodenis characterized by
its load and average queuing time. The load, denoted by
Bn;i2N, indicates the number of data packets stored in the
buffer at the beginning of time slot i. The average queuing
timetq
n;i2R+is the average number of time slots the current
packets in the data buffer have been stored. Additionally, we
denote byttx
n;l;i2R+andMn;l;i2R+the transmission
time from BS nodento BSlin time slot i, and the amount
of successfully transmitted data on the link, respectively. We
deﬁne the maximum tolerable latency Tmax as the maximum
time a packet can take from its source BS node to any BS donor .
Any packet that is not delivered before Tmaxmilliseconds will
be dropped. The average maximum end-to-end latency Tn;d
from BSnodento BSdonordis the average, over the complete
time horizon I, of the maximum delay a packet originating
from BSnodentakes to reach any BS donordin time slot i.
This is calculated as:
Tn;d=1
IIX
i=1Tn;d;i; (1)
whereTn;d;i is the maximum end-to-end latency among all
the packets originating in BS nodenwhich reach BS donord
in time slot i.Tn;d;i is a sample of the random variable Tn;d
drawn from an unknown stationary probability distribution P
that depends on the activated links xn;l;i, the cellular user’s
mobility, the location of the BS noden, the interference in the
system, and the queue dynamics. Considering (1), the average
end-to-end latency in the system Tis deﬁned as
T=1
NDNX
n=1DX
d=1Tn;d: (2)III. P ROBLEM FORMULATION
The joint minimization of the average end-to-end latency
and the expected value of its tail loss in IAB-enabled networks
is formulated in this section. We ﬁrst introduce CVaR, the risk
metric accounting for minimizing the events in which the end-
to-end latency is higher than Tmax. Next, we formulate the
optimization problem in the complete network.
A. Preliminaries on CVaR
Traditionally, latency minimization in IAB-enabled net-
works has focused on optimizing the expected value of a
latency function [15], [16]. However, such an approach fails
to capture the time variability of the latency distribution, thus
leading to unreliable systems in which Tn;d;i>T max, for any
i= 1;:::;I ,n2N andd2D.For this purpose, we consider
not only the average end-to-end latency Tin the system, but
also its expected tail loss based on the CVaR [18], [23].
Having in mind that Tn;dis a random variable, we assume it
has a bounded mean on a probability space (
;F;P), with 
andFbeing the sample and event space, respectively. Using
a risk level2(0;1], the CVaR(Tn;d)ofTn;dat risk level
quantiﬁes the losses that might be encountered in the -tail.
More speciﬁcally, it is the expected value of Tn;din its-tail
distribution [23]. Formally, CVaR(Tn;d)is deﬁned as [18]
CVaR(Tn;d) = min
q2R
q+1
E[maxfTn;d q;0g]
;(3)
where the expectation in (3) is taken over the probability
distributionP. Note that lower CVaR(Tn;d)results in higher
reliability in the system because the expected end-to-end
latency in the -worst cases is low. Moreover, note that 
is a risk aversion parameter. For = 1,CVaR(Tn;d) =
E[Tn;d]which corresponds to the traditional risk-neutral case.
Conversely, for = 0,lim!0CVaR(Tn;d) = supfTn;dg.
CVaR has been shown to be a coherent risk measure, i.e., it
fulﬁlls monotonicity, subadditivity, translation invariance, and
positive homogeneity properties [24].
B. Optimization Problem
We aim to jointly minimize the average end-to-end latency
and its expected tail loss for each BS node. For this purpose, we
decide which of the (n;l)links to activate in each time slot i
during the ﬁnite time horizon I. In the following, we formulate
the optimization problem from the network perspective and
consider the sum over all the BS node in the system. The latency
minimization problem should consider three different aspects:
(i)link activation is constrained by the half-duplex nature of
self-backhauling, (ii)only data stored in the data buffers can
be transmitted, and (iii)packet drop due to buffer overﬂow
should be avoided. Formally, the problem is written as:
minimize
fxn;l;i;i2[1;I]gX
n2NX
d2DTn;d+CVaR(Tn;f)(4a)
subject toX
l2Vxn;l;i+X
l2Nxl;n;i= 1; n2N; (4b)iX
j=1Bn;iiX
j=1Mn;l;i; n2N;l2V; (4c)
iX
j=1Bl;j+iX
j=1Mn;l;jBmax
l;n2N;l2V; (4d)
xn;l;i2f0;1g; n 2N;l2V: (4e)
In (4a),2[0;1]is a weighting parameter to trade between
minimizing the average end-to-end latency Tn;dand the ex-
pected loss of its tail. As the considered scenario is not static,
solving (4) requires complete non-causal knowledge of the
system dynamics during the complete time horizon I. How-
ever, in practical scenarios, knowledge about the underlying
random processes is not available in advance. For example,
the IAB-node’s loads Bn;idepend not only on the transmitted
and received backhaul data, but also on the randomly arriving
data from its users. Similarly, the amounts of transmitted data
Mn;l;i depend on the varying channel conditions of both BS
nandl. As a result, the exact values of Tn;l;i,Bn;iandMn;l;i
are not known beforehand. For this reason, we present in Sec.
IV Safehaul, a multi-agent learning approach to minimize in
each BSnode the average end-to-end latency and the expected
value of the tail of its loss.
IV. O UR PROPOSED SOLUTION : SAFEHAUL
In this section, we describe Safehaul, a multi-agent learning
approach for the joint minimization of the average end-to-end
latency and its expected tail loss in IAB mmWave networks.
In Safehaul, each BS node independently decides which links
(n;l)to activate in every time slot iby leveraging a multi-
armed bandit formulation. The consensus among the BS node
is reached by exploiting the centralized resource coordination
and topology management role of IAB-donors [1, Sec. 4.7.1].
A. Multi-Armed Bandit Formulation
Multi-armed bandits is a tool well suited to problems in
which an agent makes sequential decisions in an unknown
environment [25]. In our scenario, each BS nodendecides, in
each time slot i, which of the links (n;l)to activate without
requiring prior knowledge about the system dynamics. The
multi-armed bandit problem at BS nodencan be characterized
by a setAnof actions and a set Rnof possible rewards.
The rewards rn;i2Rnare obtained in each time slot ias
a response to the selected action an;i2 An. Speciﬁcally,
the actions are the links that BS nodencan activate, and the
rewards are a function of the observed latency. We deﬁne An
as
An=f(n;l);(m;n)jn;m2N; l2Vg; (5)
where link (n;n)indicates the BS nodenremains idle. As
blockages, overloads, or failures might render certain links
(n;l)temporarily unavailable, we deﬁne the set An;iAn
of available actions in time slot ias
An;i=f(n;l);(l;n)j(n;l);(l;n)2Eig: (6)
Selecting action ai= (n;l)in time slot iimpliesxn;l;i= 1.The rewards rn;iare a function of the end-to-end latencies
Tn;d;i and depend on whether at BS nodena link (n;l)or(l;n)
is activated. BS nodenis connected to the BS donor via multi-
hop wireless links. Consequently, Tn;d;i cannot be immediately
observed when a link (n;l), withl =2D is activated. In fact,
the destination BS donordmight not even be known to BS node
nat time slot i. To overcome this limitation, we deﬁne the
rewardsrn;ias a function of the next-hop’s estimated end-to-
end latency ^Tl;d;ias
rn;i=(
tq
l;i+ttx
n;l;i+^Tl;d;i;for link (n;l)
tq
n;i+^Tn;d;i; for link (l;n);(7)
where ^Tl;d;iis calculated as
^Tl;d;i= min
(l;m)2Ei^Tl;m;i: (8)
B. Latency and CVaR Estimation
As given in (7) and (8), BS nodenlearns which links (n;l)
to activate by building estimates of the expected latency ^Tn;l
associated to each of them. Let Kn;l;i=Pi
j=1xn;l;i be the
number of times link (n;l)has been activated up to time slot
i.^Tn;lis updated using the sample mean as
^Tn;l;i+1=Kn;l;i^Tn;l;i+rn;i
Kn;l;i+ 1; (9)
where the subindex iis introduced to emphasize that the
estimate is built over time. The CVaR deﬁnition given in (3)
requiresTn;dwhich, as discussed before, is known a priori.
Hence, we leverage the non-parametric estimator derived in
[26] to estimate the CVaR of a link (n;l). To this aim, let
~r1
n;:::; ~rKn;l;in be all the rewards received up to time iordered
in a descending fashion, i.e., ~r1
n ~rKn;l;in . The estimated
\CVaRi(n;l)at time slot iis calculated as [26]
\CVaRi(n;l) =1
dKn;l;iedKn;l;ieX
k=1~rk
n: (10)
Using the estimates in (9) and (10), BS node computes the
valueQn(an;i= (n;l))associated to the selected action an2
An, and deﬁned as
Qn(an;i) =^Tn:l;i+\CVaRi(n;l): (11)
Note that (11) is aligned with the objective function in (4a).
Actions with an associated low value Qn(an;i)lead to lower
end-to-end latency and a low expected value on its tail.
C. Consensus
All the BS node independently decide which links to activate
based on their estimates of the end-to-end latency. As a con-
sequence, conﬂicting actions may be encountered. A conﬂict
occurs when two or more BS nodenandmaim at activating
a link to a common BS l,l2V, i.e.,xn;l;i=xm;l;i= 1. We
reach consensus by ﬁrst retrieving the buffer and congestion
status of the various IAB-nodes, leveraging the related BAP
layer functionality [1, Sec. 4.7.3]. With this information atAlgorithm 1 Safehaul algorithm at each BS node
Input:,,An
1: Initialize ^Tn;l,\CVaR(n;l), andQnfor all (n;l)2E1
2: Set counters Kn;l= 0 and initial action an;1= (n;n)
3:forevery time slot i= 1;:::;I do
4: perform action an;iand observe reward rn;i .Eq. (7)
5: increase counter Kn;lby one
6: update latency estimate ^Tn;l .Eq: (9)
7: update CVaR estimate \CVaR(n;l) .Eq: (10)
8: update Qn(an;i) .Eq: (11)
9: select next action an;i+1using-greedy .Eq. (12)
10: share an;i+1,tq
n;iandBn;iwith the others BS node
11: if required, update an;i+1to reach consensus .Sec. IV-C
12:end for
hand, conﬂicts are resolved by prioritizing the transmission
of the BS node with the larger queuing times tq
n;iand loads
Bn;i. Then, we let the IAB-donor mark as unavailable the
time resources of the remaining base stations with conﬂicting
scheduling decisions [1, Sec. 10.9]. Note that as the learning
is performed at each BS node, only the link activation decision
and the weighted sum of tq
n;iandBn;iare transmitted. Thus,
low communication overhead is maintained.
D. Implementation of Safehaul
Here, we describe how the above-mentioned solution can
be implemented in a real system. Speciﬁcally, we elaborate
on the required inputs and the interactions among the different
entities as well as the pseudo-code of Safehaul, see Alg. 1.
Safehaul is executed at each BS noden. For its implemen-
tation, the network operator provides ,andAnas an
input.is the risk level parameter that inﬂuences the level
of reliability achieved in the system. Similarly, controls the
impact the minimization of the latency in the -worst cases
has on the overall performance. Both parameters, and, are
set by the network operator depending on its own reliability
requirements. The set Andepends on the considered network
topology which is perfectly known by the network operator.
The setAnincludes all links (n;l)and(l;n)to and from the
ﬁrst-hop neighbors of BS noden.
The execution of Safehaul begins with the initialization of
the latency and CVaR estimates, and the values Qof the
actions inAn. Additionally, the counters Kn;l, that support
the calculations of ^Tn;land\CVaR(n;l), are initialized for all
links inAn(line 1-2). These parameters are updated and learnt
throughout the execution of Safehaul. At time slot t= 0, no
transmission has occurred and Bn;0= 0. Hence, BS noden
remains idle for the ﬁrst time slot i= 1, i.e.,an;1= (n;n)
(line 2). Next, and in all the subsequent time slots i2[1;I],
the selected action is performed and the corresponding reward
is obtained (line 4). If BS nodentransmits in time slot i, i.e.,
an;i= (n;l), the reward rn;iis sent by the receiving BS
lthrough the control channel. If an;i= (l;n), the reward
rn;idepends, as given in (7), only on the current estimates at
BSnodenand the status of its buffer Bn;i. With the observed
rewardrn;i, the counter for action an;iis increased and the
latency and CVaR estimates are updated (lines 5-7). Using
the new estimates (lines 6 and 7), the value Q(an;i)of theperformed action an;iis updated (line 8). The next action
an;i+1is then selected according to -greedy (line 9). -greedy
is a well-known method to balance the exploitation of links
with estimated low latency, and the exploration of unknown
but potentially better ones. In -greedy a random action an;i+1
from the setAn;iis selected with probability 2[0;1]. With
probability (1 ), the action that yields the estimated lowest
value is chosen, i.e.,
an;i+1=8
<
:randomly selected action from An;i;ifx
argmax
bn2An;iQn(bn); ifx>;
(12)
wherexis a sample taken from a uniform distribution in the
interval [0;1]. Once the action an;i+1is selected, it is shared
with other BS node in the network along with tq
n;iandBn;i
(line 10). As described in Section IV-C, this goes through
the control channel. If conﬂicts arise, consensus is reached by
prioritizing the transmission of BS node with the largest loads
and queuing times (line 11).
The regret of Safehaul is deﬁned as the expected loss caused
by the fact that the optimal action is not always selected
[27]. For brevity, we omit the regret analysis of Safehaul.
Nevertheless, a regret bound can be derived following an
approach similar to the work in [28] but including the -greedy
considerations [27]. Moreover, the bound should account for
the fact that the probability of not selecting an optimal action
also depends on the actions of the other BSs node.
V. S IMULATION SETUP
Given the lack of access to actual 5G (and beyond) network
deployments, prior works mostly rely on home-grown simu-
lators for performance evaluation. Although a valid approach,
these simulators often cannot fully capture the real network
dynamics, introducing strong assumptions in the physical
and/or the upper layers of the protocol stack. Until very
recently, the most complete simulator for IAB networks was
a system-level simulator [29] developed as an extension of
the ns-3 mmWave module [30]. Despite accurate modeling of
the IAB protocol stack, it is currently behind the latest IAB
speciﬁcations1. Moreover, the ns-3 IAB extension is unsuitable
for large simulations with hundreds of nodes due to reliance
on an older version of the mmWave module. Therefore, in
our work we opt for Sionna [20], which is an open-source
GPU-accelerated toolkit based on TensorFlow. The tensor-
based implementation supports the native integration of neural
networks and prototyping complex communication systems.
However, unlike the aforementioned ns-3 module, Sionna
is a physical layer-focused simulator that does not explicitly
model 5G networks, thus lacking the characterization of the
5G-NR upper-layer protocol stack. Hence, we extend Sionna
by including the system-level functionalities such as MAC-
level scheduling and RLC-level buffering. Furthermore, since
Sionna exhibits slight differences compared to the 5G-NR
1For instance due to the assumption of layer-3 (instead of layer-2) relaying
at the IAB-nodes which was based on a draft version of the TR 38.874 [31].
Sector sweepBeam
 reﬁnementBackhaulAccess
Fig. 2: Schematic of the hierarchical beam management procedure. First, the
general direction is estimated using wide beams (top). Then, the search is
reﬁned using the narrow beams codebook.
physical layer, we extend Sionna’s physical layer model [20]
with the 5G-NR procedures. All these contributions will be
made publicly available upon publication of this article. In the
following, we describe the details of our extensions.
A. Extensions to Sionna’s physical layer module
In this section, we describe the physical layer modiﬁcation
that were necessary to evaluate IAB scenarios using Sionna.
1) Codebook-based Beamforming: Sionna’s native beam-
forming only supports Zero-Forcing (ZF) pre-coding in down-
link. Therefore, as a ﬁrst step, we extend Sionna by im-
plementing an NR-like codebook-based analog beamforming
both at the transmitter and at the receiver. Speciﬁcally, we
assume that the beamforming vectors at the transmitter wtx
and at the receiver wrxare a pair of codewords selected
from a predeﬁned codebook. The codebook is computed by
deﬁning a set of beam directions f!n;mgwhich scans a given
angular sector with a ﬁxed beamwidth. The steering vector
an;mcorresponding to direction !n;mcan be computed as:
an;m=h
1;:::;ej2
d(iHsinnsinm+iVcosm);:::;
ej2
d((NH 1)sinnsinm+(NV 1)cosm)iT
;(13)
whereNHandNVare the number of horizontal and vertical
antenna elements, respectively. The horizontal and vertical
index of a radiating element is denoted by iH2[0; NH]and
iV2[0; NV], respectively. nandmrepresent the azimuth
and elevation angles of !n;m. Next, we deﬁne the codebook
as the setf pNHNV 1an;mg.
In line with the 5G-NR beam management procedure [32],
we assume the lack of complete channel knowledge, i.e.,
the communication endpoints do not know the corresponding
channel matrix. Accordingly, an exhaustive search is con-
ducted to identify the best pair of codewords resulting in
the highest Signal to Interference plus Noise Ratio (SINR).
Speciﬁcally, we leverage a hierarchical search [33], in which
the communication pairs ﬁrst perform a wide-beam search
(a.k.a. sector-level sweep) in which the transmitter and receiver
approximate the direction of communication, see Fig. 2. Next,
the beamforming direction is ﬁne-tuned through a beam reﬁne-
ment procedure going through a codebook with narrow beams.
Consequently, we employ two types of codebooks, one with
wide beams for sector sweep and another with narrow beams
for beam reﬁnement.Simulator
nonPHY
Sec. V-BDataTypes
sub Class()PHY
Physical
iab()
DataType
Instants
iab_id
cell_id
location
Antenna & BF
Tx_Buffer
Rx_BufferSetup()
Class
Instants
Topology()
simulation_mode
run_time
Access()
Backhaul()
packet()
DataType
Instants
packet_id
packet_size
frame_id
UE_id
Cell_id
Delay
passed_path_listpath()
DataType
Instants
path_id
from_IAB
to_IAB
SINR
path_rate
path_equippedDataFlow
Sec. V-B1Control Plane
Buffer
RLC-like
Instants
RX DU RLC
TX MT RLCBAP-like
Sec. V-B2
Instants
3GPP Standard
TS 38.340
Path Selection
Policy
Instants
Safehaul
SCAROS
MLRScheduler
Sec. V-B3
Instants
RoundRobin()Sionna
Sec. VExtended
Modules
Sec. V-A
Instants
3GPP TR 38.901
Channel models
MU-MIMO
OFDM
5G-NRInstants
Beamforming
ICI & SINR
Fig. 3: Overall design of our Sionna’s extension. The red blocks represent our
additions to the baseline simulator, i.e., Sionna [20].
2) SINR Computations: Since Sionna does not natively
calculate the SINR, we add this functionality to the simulator
to better model the impact of interference in our simulations.
We compute SINR experienced by Transport Blocks (TBs)
by combining the power of the intended signal with that of
the interferers and the thermal noise. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
compute the power Piof the intended signal at receiver iover
frequencyfand at time slot t. Then, we obtain the overall
interference power by leveraging the superposition principle
and summing the received power from all other interfering
base stations Pk(t; f)wherek2Nandk6=i. For the
purposes of this computation, we assume that each interferer
employs the beamforming vector yielding the highest SINR
towards its intended destination. Similarly, the transmitter
and receiver use the beamforming conﬁguration estimated
via the hierarchical search procedure. Finally, the SINR is
i(t; f) =Pi(t;f)P
i2N;k6=iPk(t;f)+(t;f)where(t; f)is the thermal
noise at the receiver.
B. System-level extensions to Sionna
As mentioned, Sionna is mainly a physical layer simulator.
However, to get closer to IAB networks as speciﬁed in Rel.
17, we have extended Sionna by implementing a selection of
system-level features. To such end, we introduced a discrete-
event network simulator for modeling IAB networks. This
system-level extension operates atop Sionna and provides
basic functionality such as a Medium Access Control (MAC)-
level scheduler, layer-2 buffers, and data ﬂow and path se-
lection mechanisms. Our simulator, as depicted in Fig. 3,
generates a variety of system-level KPIs such as latency,
throughput, and packet drop rate.
1) Data Flow and buffer: 3GPP has opted for a layer 2-
relaying architecture for IAB-nodes where hop-by-hop Radio
Link Control (RLC) channels are established. This enables
retransmissions to take place just over the afﬂicted hops, thus
preventing the need for traversing the whole route from the
IAB-donor whenever a physical layer TB is not decoded.
Consequently, this design results in a more efﬁcient recov-
ery from transmission failures and reduces buffering at the
40°43'N40°44'N40°45'NLatitude
74°02'W 74°W 73°58'W 73°56'W
LongitudeNYC OpenData, State of New Jersey, Esri, HERE,
Garmin, GeoTechnologies, Inc., USGS, EPA 1 mi  1 km IAB-nodes
IAB-donorFig. 4: Locations of the 223 BS node and BS donor in Manhattan, NYC.
communication endpoints [34]. To mimic this architecture,
we have implemented RLC-like buffers at each base station.
Speciﬁcally, each IAB-node features layer-2 buffers for both
receiving and transmitting packets. For instance, the data ﬂow
for an uplink packet is the following. The User Equipment
(UE) generates packets and sends a transmission request to
the base station. Consequently, the scheduler allocates OFDM
symbols for this transmission, which is eventually received and
stored at the RX buffer of its Distributed Unit (DU). Next, the
packet is placed into the TX buffer to be forwarded to the
suitable next hop IAB-nodes. This procedure is repeated until
the packet crosses all the wireless-backhaul hops and reaches
the IAB-donor. Note that the packet can be dropped due to a
violation of latency constraints or interference.
2) Backhaul Adaptation Protocol: To manage routing
within the wireless-backhauled network, the 3GPP introduced
the BAP, i.e., an adaptation layer above RLC which is re-
sponsible for packet forwarding between the IAB-donor and
the access IAB-nodes [35]. Our simulator mimics this by
associating each IAB-node to a unique BAP ID. Moreover, we
append a BAP routing ID to each packet at its entry point in
the Radio Access Network (RAN) (i.e., the IAB-donor and the
UEs for DL and UL data, respectively). Then, this identiﬁer
is used to discern the (possibly multiple) routes toward the
packet’s intended destination [35]. The choice of the speciﬁc
route is managed by Safehaul.
3) Scheduler: Finally, we implement a MAC-level sched-
uler which operates in a Time Division Multiple Access
(TDMA) mode. The scheduler periodically allocates the time
resources to backhaul or access transmissions in a Round-
Robin fashion. Speciﬁcally, each cell ﬁrst estimates the num-
ber of OFDM symbols needed by each data ﬂow by exam-
ining the corresponding buffer. Then, the subframe’s OFDM
symbols are equally allocated to the users. If a user requires
fewer symbols to transmit its complete buffer, the excess
symbols (the difference between the available slot length and
the needed slot length) are dispersed to the other active users.
VI. P ERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In our simulations, we consider a realistic cellular base sta-
tion deployment in Manhattan, New York City2. Speciﬁcally,
2The locations correspond to the network of T-Mobile, as it has the largest
deployment among the operators.0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Simulation time [ms]46810121416Latency [ms]
Safehaul
SCAROS
MLR(a) Average per-UE end-to-end latency
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Simulation time [ms]5060708090Throughput [Mbps]
Safehaul
SCAROS
MLR (b) Average per-UE throughput
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Simulation time [ms]0.050.100.150.20Packet drop rate [%]
Safehaul
SCAROS
MLR (c) Average per-UE packet drop rate
Fig. 5: Average network performance for 100 UEs and 80Mbps per-UE source rate (Scenario 1).
TABLE I: Simulation parameters.
Parameter Value
Carrier frequency and bandwidth 28 GHz and 400 MHz
IAB RF chains 2 (1 access + 1 backhaul)
Pathloss model UMi-Street Canyon [36]
Number of BS nodeN 223
Source rate {40, 80} Mbps
IAB Backhaul and access antenna array 8H×8V and 4H×4V
UE antenna array 4H×4V
IAB and UE height 15 m and 1.5 m
IAB antenna gain 33 dB
Noise power 10 dB
Risk level 0.1
Reliability weight factor  1
we collect the locations of N= 223 5G-NR base stations
in an area of 15 Km2as depicted in Fig. 4. The detailed
simulation parameters are provided in Table I. We used the
channel model outlined by 3GPP in TR 38.901 [36], which
provides a statistical channel model for 0.5-100 GHz, and
analyzed the "Urban Micro (UMi)-StreetCanyon" scenario.
Benchmarks. To provide better insights on the performance
of Safehaul, we replicate two approaches from the state of
the art: (i)Scalable and Robust Self-backhauling Solution
(SCAROS), a learning-based approach that minimizes the
average latency in the network [16], and (ii)Maximum
Local Rate (MLR), a greedy approach aiming to maximize
throughput by selecting the links with the highest data rate.
Our evaluation consists of four scenarios studying the
convergence of the algorithms to a steady state, the number of
IAB-nodes, the number of IAB-donors, and the impact of risk
aversion. When demonstrating the results, we show the average
throughput, latency, and packet drop rate per UE. Furthermore,
we show the statistical variance of the obtained results using
candlesticks which include the max, min, mean, and 10 and
90 percentiles of the achieved performance.
A. Scenario 1: Average Network Performance
Analyzing the performance of the algorithms as a function
of time is crucial to determine the convergence speed of the
learning-based techniques, i.e., Safehaul and SCAROS. Hence,
in Fig. 5 we show the average network performance over time
for three metrics: latency, throughput, and packet drop rate.In Fig. 5a, we can observe that Safehaul rapidly converges
to an average latency of approximately 8:6ms which is 12:2%
and43:4% lower than the latency of SCAROS and MLR,
respectively. The high performance of Safehaul stems from
the joint minimization of the average latency and the expected
value of its tail loss, which results in avoiding risky situations
where latency goes beyond Tmax. This is not the case for
SCAROS where we observe a high peak in the latency before
convergence, i.e., in between zero and 1000 ms. It is exactly
the avoidance of such transients in Safehaul that leads to
higher reliability in the system. The reliability offered by
Safehaul allows operators to deploy self-backhauling in an
online fashion and without disrupting the network operation.
Moreover, it protects the networks from the transients that may
arise from changes in the network topology. The performance
of MLR is constant throughout the simulation, as it is not
designed as an adaptive algorithm.
Figure 5b shows that the risk-aversion capabilities of Safe-
haul have no negative impact on the average throughput in the
network. The performance of Safehaul is comparable to that
of SCAROS, approximately 79:3Mbps, and 11:7% larger than
the performance of MLR.
The performance shown in Figure 5c is consistent with the
behaviour observed in Figure 5a. As Safehaul additionally
minimizes the -worst latency, it achieves the lowest packet
drop rate, compared to the reference schemes, namely, 16:6%
and25:0% lower than SCAROS and MLR, respectively.
B. Scenario 2: Impact of Network Size
In Fig. 6 we evaluate the reliability of the three considered
approaches for different network sizes. Speciﬁcally, we vary
the number of BS node starting from 25 up to 100. At the
same time, we increase the load in the network by increasing
the number of UEs. From the ﬁgures, we can clearly see that
Safehaul consistently achieves a lower variation compared to
the reference schemes. This veriﬁes that Safehaul achieves the
intended optimization goal, i.e., the joint minimization of the
average performance and the worst-case losses.
Fig. 6a shows that Safehaul is able to maintain an al-
most constant latency as the number of BS node increases.
Speciﬁcally, the variation of latency with Safehaul is 56.1%25 50 75 100 200
Number of IAB-nodes1012141618Latency [ms]Safehaul
SCAROS
MLR(a) Per-UE end-to-end Latency
25 50 75 100 200
Number of IAB-nodes39.239.439.639.840.040.240.4Throughput [Mbps]Safehaul
SCAROS
MLR (b) Per-UE throughput
25 50 75 100 200
Number of IAB-nodes0.140.160.180.200.22Packet drop rate [%]Safehaul
SCAROS
MLR (c) Per-UE packet drop rate
Fig. 6: Network performance for f25;50;75;100;200gIAB-nodes and 40Mbps per-UE source rate (Scenario 2).
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Simulation time [ms]2468Latency [ms]
1 IAB-Donor
2 IAB-Donors
3 IAB-Donors
4 IAB-Donors
5 IAB-Donors
(a) Average per-UE end-to-end Latency
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Simulation time [ms]303540455055Throughput [Mbps]
1 IAB-Donor
2 IAB-Donors
3 IAB-Donors
4 IAB-Donors
5 IAB-Donors (b) Average per-UE throughput
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Simulation time [ms]0.000.050.100.150.20Packet drop rate [%]
1 IAB-Donor
2 IAB-Donors
3 IAB-Donors
4 IAB-Donors
5 IAB-Donors (c) Average per-UE packet drop rate
Fig. 7: Network performance for 100 UEs and 40Mbps per-UE source rate, versus the number of IAB-donors (Scenario 3).
and 71.4% less than SCAROS and MLR , respectively. Fur-
thermore, Safehaul achieves 11.1% and 43.2% lower latency
compared to SCAROS and MLR. MLR’s high variance is due
to a lack of adaptation capabilities, hence its latency variance
is governed by the network’s underlying random processes.
As shown in Fig. 6b, the average throughput of the learning-
based approaches Safehaul and SCAROS remains constant
for the different values of network size. However, the lowest
variation in the throughput is achieved by Safehaul, i.e., only
0.40 compared to 0.51 and 0.79 in the benchmark schemes.
Such behaviour corroborates Safehaul’s reliability capabilities.
The packet drop rate for different number of IAB-nodes is
shown in Fig. 6c. Safehaul not only consistently outperforms
the reference schemes, but also with the minimum variation
in the results (by at least 39.1% compared to benchmarks).
Considering the largest network size and load, i.e., 200 BS node
and 400 UEs, Safehaul achieves 11.2% and 24.9% lower
packet drop rate compared to SCAROS and MLR, respectively.
C. Scenario 3: Impact of number of IAB-donors
Although the benchmark schemes do not support multi-
IAB-donors, Safehaul is designed to accommodate such sce-
narios. In Fig. 7, we investigate the impact of the number
of IAB-donors on Safehaul. Speciﬁcally, the network load is
constant in this scenario, i.e., the number of UEs is ﬁxed.
We observe in Fig. 7a that the highest latency is experienced
when only one IAB-donor is present in the network. Thisstems from the tributary effect of self-backhauling where
the trafﬁc ﬂows towards a central entity which itself can
become a bottleneck. As the number of IAB-donor increases,
the trafﬁc ﬂow is more evenly distributed, resulting in lower
latency. Speciﬁcally, from an average latency of 8.2 ms for
D= 1, to an average latency of 1.7 ms when D= 5. As
mentioned, since the load is constant in this scenario, the
average throughput remains also constant for all different
numbers of IAB-donors, see Fig. 7b. However we should
highlight that Safehaul’s learning speed is maintained for the
different values of D. This is an important design feature
of Safehaul because having more BS donor means that the
number of paths a BS node has to the core network increases
exponentially. From a learning perspective, such increment
implies a larger action set and a lower learning speed. Safehaul
avoids this problem by learning the average latency based on
the estimates of its neighbors and not on the complete paths to
the BSdonor . Finally, Fig. 7c shows that increasing the number
of BSsdonor signiﬁcantly reduces the packet drops, which also
stems from a better distribution of trafﬁc ﬂows in the network
as observed in Fig. 7a.
D. Scenario 4: Impact of risk parameter 
The deﬁnition of losses in the tail of the latency distribution
is controlled by the risk level parameter . Its impact on
the average latency is shown in Fig. 8, where an increasing
behaviour is observed for 0:7. The lowest latency is0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Risk level1.92.02.12.2Latency [ms]
Fig. 8: Average latency for 100 UEs and 20 Mbps per-UE source rate, versus
the risk level (Scenario 4)
achieved for = 0:1, which corresponds to the most risk-
averse, and therefore the most reliable, case out of all the
considered ones. As grows, the performance of Safehaul
tends to that of the risk-neutral case.
VII. R ELATED WORK
Self-backhauling wireless networks have been studied in
different contexts. Ranging from the so-called Heterogeneous
Networks (HetNets) and IAB 5G New Radio (NR) systems, to
Cloud Radio Access Networks (C-RANs), each has considered
a different set of premises and optimization goals. In this
section, we review the related work in the context of basic
assumptions and their optimization goals. Furthermore, we
shed light on some of the common but perhaps unrealistic
assumptions which we refrain from in this article.
Ideal backhaul links. Numerous works assume either an
inﬁnite or ﬁxed capacity backhaul link . This is often motivated
due to the presence of a wired ﬁber link between the Small
Base Stations (SBSs) and the Macro Base Station (MBS) [3],
[5]–[7]. Indeed, most of these works consider a scenario where
a centralized Baseband Unit (BBU) is connected to several
Remote Radio Heads (RRHs), i.e., radios which lack signal
processing capabilities [3], [5], [6]. In particular, the authors
of [6] consider an even more complex scenario referred to
as F-RAN, i.e., a C-RAN where RRHs feature caching and
signal processing capabilities. However, in an IAB context it
is fundamental to consider limited-rate, time-varying backhaul
channels and to study the impact of such limitations on the
performance of the RAN.
Constrained topologies. It is often assumed that self-
backhauled networks have a speciﬁc topology . This assumption
usually simpliﬁes the problem and makes it tractable and/or
solvable in polynomial time. For instance, the authors of [8],
[9], [12] assume a single-hop network where each SBS is
directly connected to the MBS. In [10], a k-ring deployment
is considered, i.e., a topology where a single IAB-donor
provides backhaul connectivity to krings of IAB-nodes. Even
though this topology can be used to model networks with
arbitrary depth, it maintains a symmetric load for each node,
an assumption which generally does not hold in real networks.
In fact, the 3GPP does not impose any limits on the number
of IAB-nodes which can be connected to a given IAB-donor,nor does it set an upper bound on the number of wireless hops
from the latter to other wireless-backhauled base stations [22].
Accordingly, in our problem formulation we consider IAB
networks with an arbitrary number of nodes and an arbitrary
maximum wireless hops between MBSs and SBSs.
Simplistic trafﬁc models. Some works assume either a
full buffer trafﬁc model and/or impose ﬂow conservation
constraints . In particular, the authors of [7], [37] consider
systems where the capacity of each link can always be fully
exploited thanks to the presence of inﬁnite data to transmit at
each node . However, in actual IAB deployments the presence
of packets at the MBSs and SBSs is conditioned on the status
of their RLC buffers and, in turn, on the previous scheduling
decisions . Moreover, packets can actually be buffered at the
intermediate nodes , thus preventing the need for transmitting
a given packet in consecutive time instants along the whole
route from the IAB-donor to the UEs (or vice versa).
Optimization goals. The works in the literature focus on
different optimization goals. Therefore, they prioritize differ-
ent network metrics. For instance, the authors of [38] aim
to optimize the beam alignment between MBSs and SBSs.
Instead, the work of [4] aims to compute the optimal user-
to-base-station association. However, they neglect backhaul
associations and focus on the access only. In [4], [8], [37],
[39] the objective function is a function of the users data-
rate. In particular, the authors of [37] optimize the max-min
user throughput, arguing that such a metric better captures the
performance of the bottleneck links. In [15], the average rate
of each link is maximized under bounded delay constraint.
In our work, we focus on reliability by minimizing not only
the average end-to-end delay, but also the expected value of
the worst-case performance. The work closest to this article
is SCAROS [16], a learning-based latency-aware scheme
for resource allocation and path selection in self-backhauled
networks. Assuming a single IAB-donor, the authors study
arbitrary multi-tier IAB networks considering the impact of
interference and network dynamics. In contrast to this work,
we aim at enhancing the reliability of the IAB-network by
jointly minimizing the average end-to-end delay and its ex-
pected tail loss. Moreover, considering realistic deployments,
our proposed Safehaul supports networks with an arbitrary
number of IAB-donors.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed the ﬁrst reliability-focused sche-
duling and path selection algorithm for IAB mmWave net-
works. Via extensive simulations, we illustrated that our RL-
based solution can cope with the network dynamics including
channel, interference, and load. Furthermore, we demonstrated
that Safehaul not only exhibits highly reliable performance
in the presence of the above-mentioned network dynamics
but also, it outperforms the benchmark schemes in terms of
throughput, latency and packet-drop rate. The reliability of
Safehaul stems from the joint minimization of the average
latency and the expected value of its tail losses. The latter is
achieved by leveraging CVaR as a risk metric.Reliability is a highly under-explored topic that deﬁnitely
deserves more investigation. Some interesting research direc-
tions are the maximization of reliability under the assump-
tion of statistical system knowledge, or the evaluation of
the network’s reliability when the functionality of the BAP
layer is compromised. Furthermore, our system-level extension
to Sionna can be further developed to support an arbitrary
number of RF chains and in-band backhauling, allowing more
extensive investigation of IAB protocols and architecture.
IX. A CKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was partly funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft within the mm-Cell project and the
Collaborative Research Center 1053 MAKI, by the LOEWE
initiative (Hesse, Germany) within the emergenCITY center,
the Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung through the
Open6GHub project and by the European Commission through
Grant No. 861222 (H2020 ITN MINTS project).
REFERENCES
[1] 3GPP, “NR; Overall description; Stage-2,” Technical Speciﬁcation (TS)
38.300, Jun. 2022, version 17.1.0.
[2] ——, “NR; Integrated Access and Backhaul (IAB) radio transmission
and reception,” Technical Speciﬁcation (TS) 38.174, Jun. 2022, v.17.1.0.
[3] C. Pan, H. Zhu, N. J. Gomes, and J. Wang, “Joint precoding and RRH
selection for user-centric green MIMO C-RAN,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun. , vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 2891–2906, Mar. 2017.
[4] A. Alizadeh and M. Vu, “Load balancing user association in millimeter
wave MIMO networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 18, no. 6,
pp. 2932–2945, Mar. 2019.
[5] X. Huang, G. Xue, R. Yu, and S. Leng, “Joint scheduling and beamform-
ing coordination in cloud radio access networks with QoS guarantees,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 5449–5460, Aug. 2015.
[6] H. T. Nguyen, H. D. Tuan, T. Q. Duong, H. V . Poor, and W.-J. Hwang,
“Nonsmooth optimization algorithms for multicast beamforming in
content-centric fog radio access networks,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process. ,
vol. 68, pp. 1455–1469, Jan. 2020.
[7] M. E. Rasekh, D. Guo, and U. Madhow, “Interference-aware routing and
spectrum allocation for millimeter wave backhaul in urban picocells,”
inProc. IEEE Allerton , Sep. 2015, pp. 1–7.
[8] G. Kwon and H. Park, “Joint user association and beamforming design
for millimeter wave UDN with wireless backhaul,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun. , vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 2653–2668, Oct. 2019.
[9] A. Pizzo and L. Sanguinetti, “Optimal design of energy-efﬁcient mil-
limeter wave hybrid transceivers for wireless backhaul,” in 15th Inter-
national Symposium on Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc,
and Wireless Networks (WiOpt) . IEEE, Jun. 2017, pp. 1–8.
[10] M. N. Kulkarni, A. Ghosh, and J. G. Andrews, “Max-min rates
in self-backhauled millimeter wave cellular networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.01040 , 2018.
[11] L. F. Abanto-Leon, A. Asadi, A. Garcia-Saavedra, G. H. Sim, and
M. Hollick, “Radiorchestra: Proactive management of millimeter-wave
self-backhauled small cells via joint optimization of beamforming, user
association, rate selection, and admission control,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications , 2022.
[12] W. Lei, Y . Ye, and M. Xiao, “Deep reinforcement learning-based
spectrum allocation in integrated access and backhaul networks,” IEEE
Trans. on Cogn. Commun. Netw. , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 970–979, May 2020.
[13] B. Zhang, F. Devoti, I. Filippini, and D. De Donno, “Resource allocation
in mmWave 5G IAB networks: A reinforcement learning approach based
on column generation,” Computer Networks , vol. 196, p. 108248, Jun.
2021.
[14] Q. Cheng, Z. Wei, and J. Yuan, “Deep Reinforcement Learning-based
Spectrum Allocation and Power Management for IAB Networks,” in
Proc. IEEE ICC Workshops , Jul. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[15] T. K. Vu, C.-F. Liu, M. Bennis, M. Debbah, and M. Latva-Aho, “Path
selection and rate allocation in self-backhauled mmwave networks,” in
Proc. IEEE WCNC , Jun. 2018, pp. 1–6.[16] A. Ortiz, A. Asadi, G. H. Sim, D. Steinmetzer, and M. Hollick,
“SCAROS: A Scalable and Robust Self-Backhauling Solution for Highly
Dynamic Millimeter-Wave Networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. ,
vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 2685–2698, Oct. 2019.
[17] M. Pagin, T. Zugno, M. Polese, and M. Zorzi, “Resource Management
for 5G NR Integrated Access and Backhaul: A Semi-Centralized Ap-
proach,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 753–767,
Jul. 2022.
[18] R. T. Rockafellar and S. Uryasev, “Optimization of conditional value-
at-risk,” Journal of Risk , vol. 2, pp. 21–41, 2000.
[19] H. Levy, Stochastic Dominance . Springer Science+Business Media
New York, 1998.
[20] J. Hoydis, S. Cammerer, F. A. Aoudia, A. Vem, N. Binder, G. Marcus,
and A. Keller, “Sionna: An Open-Source Library for Next-Generation
Physical Layer Research,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11854 , Mar 2022.
[21] M. Polese, M. Giordani, A. Roy, D. Castor, and M. Zorzi, “Dis-
tributed path selection strategies for integrated access and backhaul at
mmWaves,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom , Feb. 2018, pp. 1–7.
[22] 3GPP, “NR; Study on integrated access and backhaul,” Technical Spec-
iﬁcation (TS) 38.874, Jan. 2019, v.16.0.0.
[23] R. Rockafellar and S. Uryasev, “Conditional value-at-risk for general
loss distributions,” Journal of Banking & Finance , vol. 26, no. 7, pp.
1443–1471, 2002.
[24] G. C. Pﬂug, Some Remarks on the Value-at-Risk and the Conditional
Value-at-Risk . Boston, MA: Springer US, 2000, pp. 272–281. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-3150-7_15
[25] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction ,
2nd ed. MIT Press, 2018.
[26] S. X. Chen, “Nonparametric Estimation of Expected Shortfall,” Journal
of Financial Econometrics , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 87–107, Nov. 2007.
[27] P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and P. Fischer, “Finite-time analysis of
the multiarmed bandit problem,” Machine Learning , vol. 47, no. 2–3,
p. 235–256, may 2002. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1023/A:
1013689704352
[28] N. Galichet, M. Sebag, and O. Teytaud, “Exploration vs exploitation vs
safety: Risk-aware multi-armed bandits,” in Proc. 5th Asian Conference
on Machine Learning , vol. 29. Canberra: PMLR, 13–15 Nov 2013, pp.
245–260.
[29] M. Polese, M. Giordani, A. Roy, S. Goyal, D. Castor, and M. Zorzi,
“End-to-End Simulation of Integrated Access and Backhaul at
mmWaves,” in Proc. IEEE CAMAD , Oct. 2018, pp. 1–7.
[30] M. Mezzavilla, M. Zhang, M. Polese, R. Ford, S. Dutta, S. Rangan, and
M. Zorzi, “End-to-End Simulation of 5G mmWave Networks,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts. , vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2237–2263, 2018.
[31] 3GPP, “NR; Study on integrated access and backhaul,” Technical Spec-
iﬁcation (TS) 38.874, 2018, v.0.6.0.
[32] M. Giordani, M. Polese, A. Roy, D. Castor, and M. Zorzi, “A tutorial
on beam management for 3GPP NR at mmWave frequencies,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts. , vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 173–196, Sept. 2019.
[33] K. Hosoya, N. Prasad, K. Ramachandran, N. Orihashi, S. Kishi-
moto, S. Rangarajan, and K. Maruhashi, “Multiple sector ID capture
(MIDC): A novel beamforming technique for 60-GHz band multi-Gbps
WLAN/PAN systems,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. , vol. 63, no. 1,
pp. 81–96, Oct. 2014.
[34] C. Madapatha, B. Makki, C. Fang, O. Teyeb, E. Dahlman, M.-S. Alouini,
and T. Svensson, “On integrated access and backhaul networks: Current
status and potentials,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. , vol. 1, pp. 1374–
1389, Sep. 2020.
[35] 3GPP, “NR; Backhaul Adaptation Protocol (BAP) speciﬁcation,” Tech-
nical Speciﬁcation (TS) 38.340, May 2022, v.17.0.0.
[36] ——, “Study on channel model for frequencies from 0.5 to 100 GHz,”
Technical Report (TR) 38.901, Jun. 2018, v.15.0.0.
[37] D. Yuan, H.-Y . Lin, J. Widmer, and M. Hollick, “Optimal joint routing
and scheduling in millimeter-wave cellular networks,” in Proc. IEEE
INFOCOM , Oct. 2018, pp. 1205–1213.
[38] S. Hur, T. Kim, D. J. Love, J. V . Krogmeier, T. A. Thomas, and
A. Ghosh, “Millimeter wave beamforming for wireless backhaul and
access in small cell networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 61, no. 10,
pp. 4391–4403, Sep. 2013.
[39] Y . Zhu, Y . Niu, J. Li, D. O. Wu, Y . Li, and D. Jin, “QoS-aware scheduling
for small cell millimeter wave mesh backhaul,” in Proc. IEEE ICC , Jul.
2016, pp. 1–6.