arXiv:2301.09618v2  [physics.flu-dyn]  21 Mar 2023This draft was prepared using the LaTeX style ﬁle belonging t o the Journal of Fluid Mechanics 1
The internal structure of forced fountains
Jingzi Huang †, Henry C. Burridge and Maarten van Reeuwijk
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK
(Received xx; revised xx; accepted xx)
We study the mixing processes inside a forced fountain using data fr om direct
numerical simulation. The outer boundary of the fountain with the a mbient is a
turbulent/non-turbulent interface. Inside the fountain, two int ernal boundaries, both
turbulent/turbulent interfaces, are identiﬁed: 1) the classical b oundary between upﬂow
and downﬂow which is composed of the loci of points of zero mean ver tical velocity; and
2) the streamline that separates the mean ﬂow emitted by the sour ce from the entrained
ﬂuid from the ambient (the separatrix). We show that entrainment due to turbulent
ﬂuxes across the internal boundary is at least as important as tha t by the mean ﬂow.
However, entrainment by the turbulence behaves substantively d iﬀerently from that by
the mean ﬂow and cannot be modelled using the same assumptions. Th is presents a
challenge for existing models of turbulent fountains and other envir onmental ﬂows that
evolve inside turbulent environments.
Key words: turbulent fountains, entrainment
1. Introduction
Understanding the process of turbulent mixing within ﬂuid ﬂows is a ub iquitous
challenge in the modelling of environmental processes, and in our exp loitation of similar
physical processes to meet societal needs and demands (Fernan do 1991). Frequently,
the understanding of the process of turbulent mixing between dist inct bodies of ﬂuid is
approached by seeking to investigate the exchanges of the physic al properties between
these ﬂuid bodies. In some circumstances, the region where these exchanges occur is
robustly deﬁned by the constraints imposed by the presence of so lid boundaries; with
the ﬂuid behaviour in the proximity of that region being signiﬁcantly alt ered by these
boundaries. Examples range in scale, at least, from the ﬂow throug h the windows of
our buildings (Gladstone & Woods 2001) to the regions that occur wh en continental
landmasses and the ocean ﬂoor conspire to create so-called ‘strait s’, which aﬀects the
dynamics of our global oceans (Finnigan & Ivey 1999, 2000). Howev er, an even wider
range of exchanges between distinct bodies of ﬂuid can be driven by turbulence in the
absence of any solid boundary. The study of such exchanges is long -standing and ongoing
(see Dimotakis 2005, for a broad review). It is this type of exchang e, speciﬁcally that
within a canonical turbulent forced fountain, which forms the focu s of this study.
The term ‘turbulent fountain’ describes the ﬂow in which the buoyan cy force opposes
the initial momentum ﬂux of an ejection from a localised source; for e xample, a nega-
tively buoyant high Reynolds number jet continuously injected upwa rds into a uniform
quiescent environment will produce a turbulent fountain (Hunt & Bu rridge2015). In this
†Email address for correspondence: jingzi.huang17@imperi al.ac.uk2 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
frame of reference, quasi-steady fountains consist of an inner c ore, herein the ‘upﬂow’,
shroudedbyareturningcounterﬂow,hereinthe‘downﬂow’(see, forexampleTurner1966;
Mcdougall 1981). Amongst other applications (see Hunt & Burridge 2015), turbulent
fountains play important roles in determining the environment within o ur buildings (e.g.
Lin & Linden 2005), water recirculation and puriﬁcation (e.g. Bloomﬁe ld & Kerr 2000),
and the forced heating or cooling of enclosed spaces (Baines et al.1990). The dynamics
of high-Reynolds number high-P´ eclet number miscible fountains can be described by
consideration of a single dimensionless parameter (Burridge & Hunt 2 014): the source
Froude number
Fr0=M05/4
Q0|F0|1/2=w0/radicalbig
|b0|r0, (1.1)
whereQ0,M0,F0are the integral source ﬂuxes, per unit π, of volume, momentum, and
buoyancy, respectively; b0=F0/Q0is the source buoyancy scale, r0=Q0/M1/2
0is the
source radial scale, and w0=M0/Q0is the characteristic vertical velocity at the source.
Note that r0is the physicalradiusofthe sourceonlyifonetakesthe velocitypro ﬁleatthe
source to be uniform (i.e. top-hat). These fountains: a) oﬀer a ric h variety of turbulent
exchanges across non-solid boundaries, b) are canonical ﬂows an d as such can inform our
fundamental understanding of the physics of these processes, and c) have been relatively
unexplored, compared with other canonical ﬂows, like plumes or jet s.
Exchanges driven by turbulence, in the absence of a solid boundary , have traditionally
been studied from perspectives driven by two distinct motivations. Firstly, that of
understanding, and often modelling, the fundamental physics for these processes, e.g.,
the modelling of gravitationalconvection of turbulent plumes and je ts (e.g. Morton et al.
1956); orsecondly,fromaneedtoaccountforthe eﬀectsofthe sephysicalprocesseswithin
societal applications, e.g., the modelling of atmospheric dynamics for weather prediction
(for example Neggers et al.2002). These diﬀerent motivations haveled to subtly diﬀerent
meanings of the same key terms within diﬀerent ﬁelds of scientiﬁc liter ature. As such,
we devote some eﬀort to clarifying, ﬁrst the history, and then our usage of these terms,
in particular ‘entrainment’.
When driven by the desire to develop widely applicable models for the eﬀ ects of
turbulence, the term‘entrainment’ hasclassicallyreferredexclus ivelyto the drawingin of
mass (volume) by a region of turbulent ﬂuid from an ambient backgro und (Morton et al.
1956); implicitly this occurs across what is now termed a ‘turbulent/n on-turbulent
interface (TNTI)’. This physical process is relevant to a broad clas s of canonical ﬂows,
e.g., jets (Abramovich et al.1984), plumes (Priestley & Ball 1955; Morton et al.1956),
temporal jets (Van Reeuwijk & Holzner 2014), clouds (De Rooy et al.2013), growing
regions of turbulence driven by an oscillating grid (Thompson & Turne r 1975), and be-
tween fountain ﬂows and the environment at their envelope (Burrid ge & Hunt 2016); for
a thorough review see Da Silva et al.(2014). By deﬁnition, a quantity that is exchanged
from the background into the region of interest is referred to as b eing entrained, or
‘entrainment’; if it leaves the region of interest it is often referred t o as being detrained
or ‘detrainment’ — we adhere to this usage of these terms.
In the context of these scientiﬁc endeavours, the term ‘turbulen t entrainment’ has
historically been used to emphasise the physical mechanism by which t his process occurs.
However, this ‘entrainment’ is classically associated with a mean inﬂow velocity across
the TNTI which is related to a characteristic velocity of the ﬂow within the region of
interest, in this case, the only region of turbulent ﬂuid, via an entra inment coeﬃcient
(Turner 1986). This inﬂow might not only be associated with ﬂuxes of mass (volume),
but also with other quantities such as momentum and buoyancy (Tallu ruet al.2022).3
This can be insigniﬁcant, as in the canonical cases of plumes or jets w hen the background
is a quiescent uniform environment, but becomes signiﬁcant, for ex ample, whenever the
backgroundis stratiﬁed or in motion. These considerationsare per tinent to the modelling
of the momentum and buoyancy exchanges between the upﬂow and downﬂow within
fountains(Bloomﬁeld & Kerr2000;Shrinivas & Hunt2014,hereafte rreferredtoasBK00
and SH14, respectively).
More recently, some studies have focused on cases where the bac kground ﬂuid is also
turbulent (rotational) so that the exchanges occur across a tur bulent/turbulent interface
(TTI) (Kankanwadi & Buxton 2020; Van Reeuwijk et al.2021). In cases that feature a
TTI, the use of the term ‘turbulent entrainment’ referring to the transport by the mean
properties of a turbulent ﬂow region is no longer helpful, since the ﬂo w is turbulent on
both sides of the interface (TTI).
An unambiguous terminology is thus needed to describe the diﬀerent exchanges when
dealing with TTIs. We will refer to the exchanges into our region of int erest (which must
be deﬁned explicitly in each case) due to the mean ﬂow properties as ‘m ean entrainment’
and the exchanges due to turbulence as ‘turbulent entrainment’. H owever, to avoid a
conﬂict with the classical usage of the terms, we shall not use the t erm ‘turbulent
entrainment’ in isolation, instead we always explicitly specify the quan tity that is being
exchanged, e.g. ‘mean volume entrainment’ and ‘turbulent momentu m entrainment’, etc.
The aforementioned entrainment terms can be deﬁned rigorously u sing the example
of a slender axisymmetric steady-state jet/plume/fountain deve loping in the direction
of the coordinate z, for which the integral continuity equation and transport equatio n
of a generic scalar, or vector component, Xin absence of sources are given by (see
Van Reeuwijk et al.2021)
d
dz/integraldisplay
ΩwdA=−/contintegraldisplay
∂ΩVgdℓ, (1.2)
d
dz/integraldisplay
Ω/parenleftbig
wX+w′X′/parenrightbig
dA=−/contintegraldisplay
∂Ω/parenleftbig
VgX+V′gX′/parenrightbig
dℓ. (1.3)
Here, the velocity component in the z-direction is denoted w, and integration is per-
formed over a domain Ω, orthogonal to the z-direction, that encompasses the ﬂow
within the region of interest; ∂Ωdenotes the boundary of Ω. The overbar indicates
the domain is chosen based on a Reynolds-averaged quantity: in the case of jets/plumes,
this Reynolds-averaged quantity is typically a small fraction ǫof the centreline velocity
wc(Van Reeuwijk et al.2016), i.e. Ωis the domain for which w > ǫwc. Since the ﬂow is
statistically axisymmetric and time-independent, the interface can equally be described
using a single-valued function r=ht(z).
The instantaneous entrainment velocity across the interface is de notedVg, which is
the diﬀerence between the local ﬂuid velocity and the boundary velo city. Following
Van Reeuwijk et al.(2021), we write this as
Vg=u−Dht
Dt=u−wdht
dz, (1.4)
where D ht/Dtis the material derivative representing the boundary velocity, uand
ware the instantaneous radial and streamwise velocity components of ﬂuid on the
interface ∂Ω, respectively. For the case under consideration, htis time-independent due
to consideration of a boundary deﬁned by a Reynolds-averaged qu antity, in which case
this term then simpliﬁes as per the right-hand side (RHS) of (1.4). Re ynolds-averaging
the expression above results in Vg=u−wdht
dz. Note that since we choose the interface4 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
Figure 1. Schematic illustrating the entrainment of volume and scala rs across interfaces
separating the ﬂow within the chosen region of interest, whi ch is by deﬁnition turbulent, and
the environment. Two diﬀerent cases emphasise our chosen te rminology: a) a non-turbulent
environment, and b) a turbulent environment. Transport or e xchanges across the interface, here
all termed‘entrainment’,areillustratedbyarrows; forea chentrainment,theassociated transport
term and its naming convention are highlighted. Black arrow s represent the entrainment that is
associated with mean ﬂow, while the red arrow represents tha t associated with turbulence.
based on a threshold of velocity, the last term is negligibly small compa red to the ﬁrst,
and we recover the classical entrainment velocity Vg=ufor jets/plumes.
The RHS of (1.2) represents the mean volume entrainment , as the transport is due to
the mean quantity Vg, in this case Vg=u. The ﬁrst term on the RHS of (1.3) represents
themean scalar entrainment termVgXand the second term of the RHS is the turbulent
scalar entrainment termV′gX′(by deﬁnition Xcan also be a vector component, e.g.
w; we omit the ‘vector’ in the name here for simplicity). Note that volum e entrainment
can only be caused by the mean ﬂow, but allother transported properties (momentum,
buoyancy, etc.) can have both a mean and a turbulent component.
The terms for entrainment are illustrated schematically in ﬁgure 1. T he ﬁgure illus-
trates the entrainment from an ambient of two cases: a) the ambie nt is non-turbulent so
that the interface is a TNTI, for which only mean volume entrainment and mean scalar
entrainment can occur at the interface (e.g. the interface betwe en a turbulent fountain
and the quiescent environment); b) the ambient is turbulent so tha t the interface is a
TTI (e.g. the interface between the upﬂow and downﬂow inside a tur bulent fountain), for
which, besides mean volume entrainment and mean scalar entrainmen t, turbulent scalar
entrainment can occur at the interface. Instantaneous exchan ges at the TTI can and do
occur in both directions (as allowed in the BK00 model of a fountain or measured at
cloud edge De Rooy et al.2013), but the Reynolds averaged quantities discussed here
are the net value of these bi-directional exchanges.
In some circumstances, the ﬂuid on one particular side of the TTI ha s a larger
turbulence intensity and so the choice of the ‘region of interest’ (o r ‘ﬂow region’)
and ‘background’ is obvious. However, for more complex ﬂuid ﬂows t his is not so
straightforward. For example, in a fountain one can distinguish bet ween an upﬂow and
a downﬂow, which are modelled separately (BK00). Here, in the upﬂo w and in the
downﬂow, turbulence levels can be of comparable turbulence intens ity, with standard
metrics switching from being typically larger in the upﬂow near the sou rce, to the
downﬂow further from the source. Another example is a cumulus clo ud, where it is5
Figure 2. The whole simulation domain with an illustration of an insta ntaneous fountain
depicted by plotting an isosurface of buoyancy, coloured ac cording to the local vertical velocity.
The unit of the length is the number of nodes.
also diﬃcult to distinguish on which side of the interface between the c loud core and
descending shell the turbulence intensity is largest (De Rooy et al.2013; Heus & Jonker
2008; Nair et al.2020). Thus in order to distinguish ‘entrainment’ and ‘detrainment’,
one must always clearly deﬁne the ‘region of interest’, as this will dete rmine whether one
should use the term entrainment (exchange into the region) or det rainment (exchange
out of the region). For completeness, we note that should the exc hanges illustrated in
ﬁgure 1(b) be evaluated to be negative then, following our convent ion, this would result
in the reversal of the direction of the arrows, and the exchanges would thus be termed
‘detrainment’.
The aim ofthis workis to study the internalstructureofa turbulen t forcedfountain; to
do so, we use direct numerical simulation (DNS) to investigate a highly forced fountain.
The structure of the paper is as follows: in §2 we describe the numerical simulation
details. In §3 we describe the instantaneous fountain observation and discuss the internal
structure of a Reynolds-averaged fountain, we divide the founta in into three regions of
interestwithtwoturbulent/turbulentinterfaces.In §4weintroducetheintegralquantities
of a fountain and appropriate conservation equations in order to ﬁ nd the ﬂux and
entrainment budgets of mass, momentum and buoyancy. In §5 we examine the vertical
variation in ﬂuxes within the three ﬂow regions. In §6 we discuss entrainment across the
interfaces respectively, including that near the fountain top; end ing with a comparison of
the entrainment coeﬃcients from our DNS to those of other studie s. Concluding remarks
are made in §7.6 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
2. Simulation details
We simulate an axisymmetric fountain driven by an isolated source of u niform (top-
hat) vertical upwards velocity w0and opposing (negative) buoyancy b0where buoyancy
is deﬁned as b=g(ρe−ρ)/ρa, in which ρandρedenote the density of fountain ﬂow
and environment, respectively, and ρais a reference density. The domain has size Lx×
Ly×Lz= 160r0×160r0×100r0wherer0is the circular source radius. The coordinate
system has its origin in the bottom corner with the z-direction upwards (ﬁgure 2), and
the source is located in the centre at ( Lx/2,Ly/2,0). The source ﬂuxes, per unit π, of
volumeQ0, momentum M0, buoyancy F0, and (again per unit π) the integral buoyancy
B0, can be deﬁned as
Q0=w0r2
0, M0=w2
0r2
0, F0=w0b0r2
0, B0=b0r2
0. (2.1)
The fountain source is such that the source Froude number is Fr0= 21 which sits
well above the threshold ( Fr0/greaterorsimilar4.0) for the region described as forced fountains
(Burridge & Hunt 2012). The Reynolds number is Re0=w0r0/ν= 1667, suﬃcient
such that our simulations sit within a Reynolds number regime ( Re0/greaterorsimilar1000) for which
the experiments of Burridge et al.(2015) demonstrate that the bulk behaviour of the
fountain, in particular the fountain rise height, is broadly independe nt ofRe0, and the
ﬂow can be regarded as high Reynolds number, or ‘turbulent’.
For these turbulent highly forced fountains universal scalings exis t based on consid-
eration of a point source fountain of momentum ﬂux, M0, and opposing buoyancy ﬂux,
F0. By consideration of the length scale LF=M3/4
0/|F0|1/2=r0Fr0(cf.Turner 1966,
who originally deﬁned the length scale based on physical ﬂuxes, rath er than the ﬂuxes
per unit π, i.e., there is a ratio of π1/4between the two length scales) and time scale
TF=M0/|F0|=/radicalbig
r0/|b0|Fr0(Burridge & Hunt 2013), results for forced fountains are
therefore universal when scaled on Fr0. Herein, we use these scales to normalise all
quantities, making our ﬁndings directly applicable to all turbulent fou ntain ﬂows with
source Froude number Fr0/greaterorsimilar4 (Hunt & Burridge 2015). For example, we normalise all
volume ﬂuxes using QF=L3
F/TF=M5/4
0/|F0|1/2(QF∝Q0Fr0Baineset al.1993) and
for all quantities concerning the entrainment of volume, momentum and buoyancy, we
useqF=QF/LF=M1/2
0,mF=M0/LF, andfF=F0/LF, respectively. The size of our
cuboidal domain in these units, is Lx×Ly×Lz= (7.55LF)2×4.72LF.
The incompressible Navier-Stokes equations under the Boussinesq approximation are
solved numerically using DNS on a uniform Cartesian grid of Nx×Ny×Nz= 12803
cells. The grid size is resolved smaller than two Kolmogorov scales, suc h as∆x=
Lx/Nx<2ηK. Here the Kolmogorov scale ηK= (ν3/ǫ)1/4, where ǫis the averaged
integral dissipation rate of turbulent kinetic energy over the entir e fountain height. The
code employed is SPARKLE, which uses a spatial discretization of fou rth-order accuracy
and a third-order Adams-Bashforth time integration scheme. Det ails of the numerical
method used in SPARKLE can be found in Craske & van Reeuwijk (2015 ).
A Dirichlet boundary condition w=w0,b=b0is applied at the source to ensure the
uniform source value. We initiate the turbulence by applying an uncor related perturba-
tion of 1% to the velocities in the ﬁrst cell above the source. The bou ndary condition at
the domain top has a Neumann condition on velocity and buoyancy, an d at the domain
bottom, the boundary condition is ‘free slip’ with a Neumann condition on buoyancy
(except at the source). The four sidewalls of the domain are period ic, raising potential
concerns that ﬂuid leaving from one side and re-entering at the opp osite can potentially
inﬂuence the fountain ﬂow — we mitigate this concern in two ways. Firs t, we ensure that
the domain is suﬃciently large that the dynamics of the fountain are u naﬀected by any7
-6-5-4-3-2-10
Figure 3. Time series of normalised local integral buoyancy, B(z,t)/B0, within the fountain.
The instantaneous fountain height is outlined by the solid l ine. The horizontal dashed line marks
the initial height and the dash-dotted line marks mean stead y height. Within the ﬁgure, the
darker shades of blue represent the greater negative buoyan cy.
transport at the domain edges. To do this, we checked a variety of fountain ﬂow statistics
for a domain that is about 50% smaller. We found no substantial diﬀer ences between the
domain in terms of the fountain (outer boundary) and the exchang es across the internal
boundaries (deﬁned later on). These results are presented in app endix §A. Second, to
avoid any accumulation of buoyancy within the domain aﬀecting our re sults, a buoyancy
‘sink’ region is set within a thin region (of height r0) at the bottom of the domain and, to
avoid aﬀecting the source, only within the region r/greaterorequalslant9r0— within this sink region the
ﬂuid buoyancy is gradually adjusted by a ‘nudging’ process towards the environmental
value, i.e. the buoyancy is nudged to the zero in this region (Stevens et al.2014).
Observations show that the longest timescales in a forced fountain ﬂow are the
timescalerequiredtoestablishastatisticallysteadystate(foundh eretobeapproximately
5TF), followed by the timescales of the large-scale low-frequency ﬂuct uations near the
fountain top. The latter timescale is approximately 2 TF(Burridge & Hunt 2013). We
ran our simulations for a duration of 16 TFin order to allow suﬃcient time for the ﬂow
to reach a statistically steady state and then experience a number of the largest scale
ﬂuctuations in the region near the top of the fountain, a region whic h we describe as the
‘fountain cap’. Instantaneous statistics were obtained at a vertic al plane at the centre of
the domain with time increments of 0 .09TF. Azimuthally Reynolds averaged data was
computed and stored every 0 .14TFonce the fountain is in a statistically steady state
by partitioning the domain into concentric cylindrical shells and avera ging over all cells
lying within a given shell (Craske & van Reeuwijk 2015; Van Reeuwijk et al.2016).
3. Flow observations and internal structure
3.1.Observations of instantaneous fountain
A video showing the fountain from the initial transient state to the s tatistically steady
state can be found within the supplementary material. Figure 3 show s a time series of
the evolution of the vertical distribution of the horizontally integra l buoyancy within the8 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
fountain B(per unit π), which is deﬁned as
B(z,t) =1
π/integraldisplayLx
0/integraldisplayLy
0b(x,y,z,t) dxdy≈/integraldisplayLx
0b(x,z,t)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglex−Lx
2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledx,(3.1)
for practical reasons (namely, instantaneous data is taken at a c entral vertical plane),
our evaluation comes via the approximation in (3.1)).
Fountain ﬂows typically feature a region at the fountain cap which is c haracterised
by the formation and collapse of large-scale structures within the f ountain ﬂow as is
observed in ﬁgure 3. The fountain height is determined by a thresho ld 0.01B(zb), where
B(zb) is the time-averaged integral buoyancy at a height zb/LF= 1.63 which we deﬁne
as the fountain cap base (see §3.2). During t/TF/lessorsimilar5.0 which we regard as the initial
transient period, the upﬂow reaches an initial height at t/TF≈2.2, and the downﬂow is
yet to be fully developed until t/TF≈4.0. After t/TF≈5.0, the fountain can be said
to have reached a statistically steady state, and the fountain heig ht ﬂuctuates around a
mean steady height. The ratio of initial to steady heights is approxim ately 3:2, in line
with experimental measurements (Turner 1966; Burridge & Hunt 2 012). Note that the
heights referred to here are taken from measurements only in the central vertical plane.
Figure 3 shows the characteristic (dark blue) inclined stripes that in dicate the falling of
distinct negatively buoyant ﬂuid structures within the downﬂow, as previously discussed
for fountains in statistically steady state by Burridge & Hunt (2013 ); Mingotti & Woods
(2016). The thin region, z/LF/lessorsimilar0.05 in which the local buoyancy is nudged to the
environmental value in order to avoid the accumulation of buoyancy in the domain can
also be observed.
3.2.Internal structure of Reynolds averaged fountain
Once the fountainhasreacheda statisticallysteadystate,its ave ragedformis governed
by the axisymmetric Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations in the high-Reynolds
number limit, namely
1
r∂(ru)
∂r+∂w
∂z= 0, (3.2a)
1
r∂
∂r(ruw+ru′w′)+∂
∂z(ww+w′w′) =−∂p
∂z+b, (3.2b)
1
r∂
∂r(rub+ru′b′)+∂
∂z(wb+w′b′) = 0, (3.2c)
where·represents the time average (mean): bis the mean buoyancy. The mean velocity
components ( u,w) correspond to the radial direction rand vertical direction zrespec-
tively. The mean pressure pis the kinematic pressurefrom which the hydrostaticpressure
ﬁeld resulting from the environmental density has been subtracte d.
Figure 4(a) shows the internal structure of the Reynolds-avera ged fountain in its
statistically steady state with the shaded colour indicating the mean vertical velocity,
w=w(r,z), at that location. We deﬁne the point at which the mean vertical ve locity
on the centreline ﬁrst falls to zero to be the ‘height of the upﬂow’, de notedziand we
ﬁndzi/LF≈2.22. Some works (e.g. BK00) attempted to model fountains only via t he
application of ‘plume-like’ ﬂow theory, whilst others acknowledged th e need to model
a ‘cap’ region near the fountain top via distinct considerations (e.g. Mcdougall 1981,
and SH14). The fountain cap region can be considered to be the reg ion of ﬂow enclosed
by the outer boundary above some height zb, which we term the fountain cap base. The
deﬁnitionusedtodeterminetheheightofthefountaincapbasevar iesbetweenstudies;for9
Figure 4. The normalised mean vertical velocity w/wF, where wF=M1/4
0|F0|1/2, within
the time-averaged fountain marked by colour with regions of : upwards velocities shaded red,
downward shaded blue, and zero vertical velocity being whit e. (a) Highlights the internal
structure of the fountain by overlaying the vertical veloci ties with relevant boundaries: the
inner boundary (blue line), outer boundary (red line), and t he separatrix (purple line). The thin
dash-dotted line marks the loci of points where the maximum d ownﬂow vertical velocity occurs.
(b) the vertical velocities are overlaid with velocity stre amlines. The fountain cap base is marked
by the horizontal dashed line.
example, Mcdougall (1981) theoretically modelled the cap region as a hemisphere whose
radius is half of its base vertical height, SH14 and Hunt & Debugne (2 016) deﬁned the
cap base locating at where the local Froude number of upﬂow is equa l to√
2. In their
experimental study of fountains, Talluru et al.(2022) investigated the sensitivity of their
ﬁndings to the choice cap base deﬁnition, dependent on a local Frou de number condition
(in the upﬂow); they found that the ratio of the volume ﬂux entrain ed within the cap,
to that in the upﬂow at the cap base, was insensitive to the location o f the cap base
when the local Froude number condition was chosen to be in the rang e 1.2–1.8. The
numerical study of Awin et al.(2018) deﬁned the cap base at the location where the
radius of upﬂow is the widest. Speciﬁcally for our fountain, the locat ions of the cap base
following each of the three above deﬁnitions from the existing literat ure are all within
the region 1 .60/lessorequalslantz/LF/lessorequalslant1.65. Therefore, our precise choice of deﬁnition is of little
signiﬁcance and, somewhat arbitrarily, we choose to deﬁne the fou ntain cap base as the
point of maximum upﬂow radius, giving, zb/LF= 1.63.
The downﬂow of the steady fountain and the environment are sepa rated by the outer
boundary of radius rf=rf(z), this also constitutes the boundary of fountain ﬂow. The
outer boundary is deﬁned by the loci of points at which the mean buo yancyb= 0.01bcc,
wherebcc=b(0,zb) is the centreline mean buoyancy at the fountain cap base level
which is about 0 .36b0. The sensitivity of our results to the constant within the threshold
b= 0.01bcc, that was used to determine the outer boundary is presented in ap pendix
§A; this sensitivity is not deemed signiﬁcant. The top of the outer bou ndary (also the
ﬁnal steady height of the entire time-averaged fountain) is locate d atzf/LF≈2.45, i.e.10 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
zf/r0≈2.45Fr0, which is close to the value 2 .46 reported by Burridge & Hunt (2012),
and alsoagreeswell with other experimental literature (see Turne r 1966; Mizushina et al.
1982; Baines et al.1990). The outer boundary generallyincreasesfrom the top to bo ttom
as, too, does the area of downﬂow. We ﬁnd that the height of the c ap region (from cap
basetothe top)is zf−zb= 0.82LF,whichcomprisesaboutone-thirdofthetotalfountain
height. We note that the fountain cap region is not our primary focu s but we do include
some analysis in §6.2, and we mark the location of the fountain cap base in all relevant
ﬁgures for completeness.
Below the cap, the ﬂow can be divided into two regions separated by a n internal
boundary, or interface. Herein, we investigate two diﬀerent deﬁn itions of this internal
boundary.The ﬁrstistodecomposethe fountainintoanupﬂowreg ionwhere wispositive
(shaded red in ﬁgure 4) and a downﬂow region where wis negative (shaded blue), that
are separated by the inner velocity boundary rideﬁned by the loci of points at which
w= 0. The radial position of this inner velocity boundary (hereinafter ‘inner boundary’)
riincreases to a maximum width at z/LF≈1.63 (in fact the deﬁnition of cap base) and
decreasestozeroabove,atthepointatwhichthemeancentreline velocityreducestozero.
Shown in ﬁgure 4(b) are the streamlines of the mean velocity, {u,w}. By construction,
the streamlines are horizontal on the inner boundary since the ver tical velocity is zero.
The streamlines in ﬁgure 4(b) then provide our second deﬁnition of t he internal
boundary.Thestreamlinesillustratethat theﬂowbeinginjected fr omthe sourceis, inthe
mean, separatedfrom the entrained ambientﬂow by astreamline th at originatesfrom the
stagnationpointatthe top ofthe innerboundary.Thisseparatrix ,whichwedenote rs(z),
is highlighted by the purple line in ﬁgure 4(a) and deﬁnes our second int ernal boundary.
The streamlines outside the separatrix show the environmental ﬂu id is entrained into
the downﬂow and eventually leaves the domain from the side. The str eamlines cross the
outer boundary at some angle to the horizontal indicating that the entrainment velocity
has some vertical component. The streamlines inside the separatr ix either originate from
the source or are closed loops within the upﬂow, crossing the inner b oundary twice —
this highlights that, in the mean, the upﬂowing core entrains near th e source and then
detrains ﬂuid into downﬂow further from the source (above z/LF≈1.20).
By construction, there is no mean exchange across the separatr ix, and so the volume
ﬂux inside rsis conserved. Exchange across the separatrix rscan thus only occur by
turbulence. By deﬁnition, the separatrix intersects the centrelin e at the height z=zi,
i.e.rs(zi) =ri(zi) = 0. The separatrix divides the downﬂow into an ‘inner downﬂow
region’ (the region between the inner boundary and separatrix), and an ‘outer downﬂow
region’ (the region between the separatrix and outer boundary) . The outer downﬂow
region contains all mass (volume) that has been entrained from the environment. These
regions and boundaries are all shown in ﬁgure 4(a). Except close to the fountain top,
the location of the separatrix (purple line) is very similar to that of th e vertical velocity
maximum (thin black dashed line). This suggests that the ﬂuid beyond the vertical
velocity maximum is entrained from the environment.
The relevance of the separatrix rsto fountain ﬂows is highlighted by consideration of
the ﬁeld lines of mean buoyancy ﬂux {ub,wb}, and total buoyancy ﬂux {ub+u′b′,wb+
w′b′}, plotted in ﬁgures5(a) and 5(b), respectively,both with the buoy ancyﬁeld overlaid.
Here we note that, as (3.2 c) demonstrates, only the total buoyancy ﬂux is a conserved
quantity. This implies that for the ﬁeld lines of mean buoyancy, there is a sink-source
term and the total buoyancy between the two ﬁeld lines need not be conserved. As the
mean buoyancy ﬂux is the product of the velocity ﬁeld and the scalar buoyancy ﬁeld,
the ﬁeld lines of mean buoyancy ﬂux are similar to the streamlines inside the fountain11
Figure 5. The normalised mean buoyancy ﬁeld b/bF,bF=M−5/4
0|F0|3/2, overlaid with three
fountain boundaries presented in ﬁgure 4 and: (a) ﬁeld lines of mean buoyancy ﬂux {ub,wb},
where the grey lines mark the ﬁeld lines outside the separatr ix; (b) ﬁeld lines of total buoyancy
ﬂux{ub+u′b′,wb+w′b′}.
presented in ﬁgure 4(b) within the separatrix. As the environment has neutral (zero)
buoyancy, the fountain source is the only source of (negative) bu oyancy. Therefore it is
worth noting from ﬁgure 5(a) that: ﬁrstly, no ﬁeld lines exist outsid e the outer boundary
rf; and secondly, the buoyancy injected from the source cannot be transported outside
of the separatrix rsby the mean buoyancy ﬂuxes. However, we can observe there is me an
transport of (negative) buoyancy ﬂux within the outer downﬂow b eyond, as indicated by
the grey ﬁeld lines between the purple boundary, rs, and red boundary, rf. Combining
observations from ﬁgure 5(a) and ﬁgure 5(b) highlights that it is on ly turbulence that
transfers the negative buoyancy across rsinto the outer downﬂow region, i.e. allthe
negative buoyancy within the outer downﬂow is the result of turbule nt exchange across
rs. The ﬁeld lines of total buoyancy ﬂux in ﬁgure 5(b) evidence the tra nsfer of buoyancy
acrossthe separatrixdue to turbulence. Since the total buoyan cyﬂux within the fountain
is conserved, the buoyancy ﬂux in the upﬂow equals the buoyancy ﬂ ux in the downﬂow.
Note that the streamlines and ﬁeld lines indicate that, as expected, the dynamics
of the outer downﬂow below z/LF≈0.5 are visibly aﬀected by the (free-slip) bottom
boundary, e.g. the ﬂow is forced radially outwards in that region. To ensure the absence
of boundary eﬀects in the data presented herein, we therefore o nly display data from
the outer downﬂow region for z/LF>0.66 in all further analyses. However, the inner
downﬂow region is not likely to be signiﬁcantly aﬀected since this ﬂuid is e ntrained by
the upﬂow. We, therefore, consider our results for the inner dow nﬂow region to be valid
over the full height.12 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
4. Integral equations
The theoretical work in this section presents exact transport bu dgets for each ﬂow re-
gion. We integrate (3.2 a)-(3.2c) over the radial coordinate rbetween two radial locations
r1(z) andr2(z) and employ the Leibniz integration rule to give conservation equatio ns
(per unit π) for the ﬂuxes of volume, momentum, and buoyancy as
dQ
dz=q1−q2, (4.1a)
d(M+M′+P)
dz=B+m1−m2, (4.1b)
d(F+F′)
dz=f1−f2. (4.1c)
The integral quantities, per unit π, are deﬁned as
Q≡2/integraldisplayr2
r1wrdr, B ≡2/integraldisplayr2
r1brdr,
M≡2/integraldisplayr2
r1w2rdr, M′≡2/integraldisplayr2
r1w′2rdr, P≡2/integraldisplayr2
r1prdr,
F≡2/integraldisplayr2
r1wbrdr, F′≡2/integraldisplayr2
r1w′b′rdr,(4.2)
whereBis the integral mean buoyancy. The quantities M,M′andPcorrespond to the
integral mean momentum ﬂux, turbulent momentum ﬂux and pressu re. Moreover, Fand
F′denote the integral mean buoyancy ﬂux and turbulent buoyancy ﬂ ux. Depending on
the region of interest, the inner boundary can take the locations r1(z) ={0,ri(z),rs(z)},
and the outer boundaries r2(z) ={ri(z),rs(z),rf(z)}, with the only condition being that
r2(z)> r1(z). The perpendicular exchanges of volume, momentum and buoyanc y across
the boundary rj(withj=i,f,ors) are deﬁned as
qj= 2r/parenleftbigg
u−wdr
dz/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
rj, (4.3a)
mj= 2r/parenleftbigg
uw−w2dr
dz/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
rj+2r/parenleftbigg
u′w′−w′2dr
dz/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
rj+2r/parenleftbigg
−pdr
dz/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
rjand,(4.3b)
fj= 2r/parenleftbigg
ub−wbdr
dz/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
rj+2r/parenleftbigg
u′b′−w′b′dr
dz/parenrightbigg/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
rj, (4.3c)
respectively. The terms associated with the radial change, i.e. d r/dz, are ‘Leibniz terms’.
As discussed in §1, the perpendicular exchange of volume ﬂux qj(4.3a) only comprises
a mean contribution, and the mean entrainment velocity Vg, see (1.4), is clearly recog-
nisable. The term mj, (4.3b), is the perpendicular exchange of momentum ﬂux which is
comprised of a mean momentum ﬂux (the ﬁrst term on the RHS; note that this term is
equal to 2 rVgwevaluated at rj) and turbulent momentum ﬂux terms (the second and
third terms on the RHS; with the second term equal to 2 rV′gw′evaluated at rjand
the third term accounting for the eﬀects of pressure which are ty pically small compared
to the second term). The term fj, (4.3c), is referred to as the perpendicular exchange
of buoyancy ﬂux which is comprised of one term for mean buoyancy e ntrainment (the
ﬁrst term on the RHS; equal to 2 rVgbevaluated at rj) and one for turbulent buoyancy
entrainment (the second term on the RHS; equal to 2 rV′gb′evaluated at rj). Whether13
these exchanges are termed ‘entrainment’ or ‘detrainment’ depe nds solely on the chosen
‘region of interest’ and the sign of the ﬂux.
In the remainder of this section, the budgets for the upﬂow, down ﬂow and inner
downﬂow are presented by substituting appropriate boundaries in to the equations above.
For completeness, we note that since we use a buoyancy that is con sistently deﬁned
relative to the uniform ambient ﬂuid our buoyancy formulation corre sponds to both that
termed ‘BFI’ by BK00, which is also that used by SH14.
4.1.Upﬂow region
The upﬂow budgets can be obtained by integrating from the centre line to the inner
boundary, i.e. r1(z) = 0 and r2(z) =ri(z). Denoting upﬂow quantities with subscript ‘ u’,
it immediately follows that (4.1 a–4.1c) for the upﬂow region become
dQu
dz=−qi, (4.4a)
d(Mu+M′
u+Pu)
dz=Bu−mi, (4.4b)
d(Fu+F′
u)
dz=−fi. (4.4c)
By stipulating that Qu=r2
uwu,Mu=r2
uw2
uandBu=r2
ubu, the characteristic (top-
hat) upﬂow vertical velocity wu, buoyancy bu, and radius ruare deﬁned
wu≡Mu
Qu, bu≡BuMu
Q2u,andru≡Qu
M1/2
u. (4.5)
These natural characteristicscales will be used to investigate the entrainment coeﬃcients
in section 6.3.
4.2.Downﬂow region
The downﬂow budget (i.e. including both the inner and outer downﬂow ), can be
obtained by integrating from the inner boundary to the fountain ed ge, i.e.r1(z) =ri(z)
andr2(z) =rf(z). As the ﬂow direction is opposite to the upﬂow, we deﬁne a downwar d
coordinate zd.Atransformation z→ −zimpliesthat w→ −w,b→ −binordertoachieve
invariance of the equations (3.2 a–3.2c). From the deﬁnitions, (4.2), it now follows that
the integral downﬂow quantities are given by Qd=−Q,Md=M,Fd=F,Bd=−B
and d/dzd=−d/dz, with the transformation of the turbulent quantities following an
equivalent form. Substitution into (4.1 a)–(4.1c) results in
dQd
dzd=qi−qf, (4.6a)
d(Md+M′
d+Pd)
dzd=Bd+mf−mi, (4.6b)
d(Fd+F′
d)
dzd=ff−fi. (4.6c)
The radial coordinate remains unchanged in this transformation. T herefore, a positive
volume ﬂux qfcontributes negatively to the downﬂow budget. Note that at the o uter
boundary, the term ‘ mf’ can be interpreted as −(−mf), where −mfis an outwards
ﬂux of downward momentum (consider (4.3 b) atrj=rfunder coordinate zd). Similar
understanding holds true for the buoyancy ﬂux term ffin (4.6c). At the inner boundary,
the exchange of volume ﬂux, qi, contributes oppositely to the upﬂow and downﬂow14 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
(4.4a,4.6a) as the volume ﬂux exchanged out of the upﬂow will increase the volu me
ﬂux in the downﬂow and vice versa . However, in terms of the upﬂow, mirepresents an
outward ﬂux of upward momentum which reduces the upﬂow moment um ﬂux, so that
a negative sign is correctly associated with miin (4.4b); with respect to the downﬂow
and the coordinate zd,−midenotes a ﬂux of downward momentum into the downﬂow
(radially outward) at the inner boundary, this contributes positive ly to the downﬂow
momentum. Hence the sign convention in (4.4 b) and (4.6 b), with equivalence, for the
termfiin (4.4c) and (4.6 c).
The downﬂow region has a characteristic annular cross-section ar ea, which can be
denoted(perunit π)asr2
d−r2
u(BK00);thus,theﬂuxescanbewrittenas Qd= (r2
d−r2
u)wd,
Md= (r2
d−r2
u)w2
d,Bd= (r2
d−r2
u)bdand it follows that the natural characteristic scales
are
wd≡Md
Qd, bd≡BdMd
Q2
d,andrd≡/radicalBigg
Q2u
Mu+Q2
d
Md. (4.7)
4.3.Inner downﬂow region
The transport budgets for the inner downﬂow region can be obtain ed by integrating
from the inner boundary to the separatrix, i.e. r1(z) =ri(z) andr2(z) =rs(z). As
the ﬂow in this region is by deﬁnition downward, the transformation a pplied to §4.2 is
required. Denoting inner downﬂow quantities with subscript ‘ id’, we obtain
dQid
dzd=qi−qs, (4.8a)
d(Mid+M′
id+Pid)
dzd=Bid+ms−mi, (4.8b)
d(Fid+F′
id)
dzd=fs−fi. (4.8c)
5. Integral quantities
The vertical variation in the normalised integral quantities in the upﬂ ow, downﬂow,
and inner downﬂow (the portion of the downﬂow that falls within the s eparatrix) are
shown in ﬁgure 6. Buoyancy ﬂuxes and integral buoyancy are norm alised by absolute
values of BFandF0, respectively, in order to accurately reﬂect the opposing or assis ting
action of the buoyancy force on each of the ﬂows. We choose to dis cuss any ﬂow regions
in the direction of their ﬂow, i.e. we discuss any downward ﬂowing regio ns from top to
bottom (that is in the direction of the downwards coordinate zd).
Figure6(a)showsthatbelow z/LF≈1.11,theupﬂowvolumeﬂuxincreases,suggesting
a net volume entrainment into the upﬂow in this region. Above z/LF≈1.11 the volume
ﬂux in the upﬂow decreases due to the volume detrainment into the d ownﬂow. The
ﬁgure also shows that the volume ﬂux in the upﬂow is identical to that within the
inner downﬂow; this conﬁrms that, by construction, the volume ﬂu x is conserved within
the separatrix. The volume ﬂux in the downﬂow increases from the t op of the fountain
showing net volume entrainment by the downﬂow. Noting that the do wnﬂow consists
of both inner- and outer-downﬂow regions, the diﬀerence betwee n the downﬂow and
the inner downﬂow, reassuringly, conﬁrms that ﬂuid from the envir onment is entrained
into the fountain outer downﬂow over the full height of the outer b oundary. Careful
observation of the streamlines in ﬁgure 4(a) conﬁrms these above observations.
Figure 6(b) plots the normalised vertical evolution of mean vertical momentum ﬂuxes.15
Figure 6. Integral quantities for the upﬂow, downﬂow and inner downﬂo w region, each
normalised by the relevant source scales. The vertical dash ed marks ﬂuxes of zero where
appropriate.
Themeanmomentumﬂuxintheupﬂow, Mu,decreases,tozeroatthetopoftheupﬂow zi,
as the buoyancy acts to decelerate the ﬂow; whilst this buoyancy t hen acts to enhance
the mean momentum ﬂux in the downﬂow Md. The momentum ﬂux within the inner
downﬂow Midis also shown to increase from the top of the fountain until the heigh t
z/LF≈0.88, below which Midthen decreases back towards zero. The magnitudes of
the mean momentum ﬂux MuandMdare, perhaps surprisingly, approximately equal
(despite the signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the characteristic ve locity and radial scales
within the two ﬂows); this suggests that, broadly speaking, fount ain ﬂuid roughly attains
the same momentum ﬂux on the way back down that it originally had on t he way up.
Figure 6(c) plots the normalised turbulent vertical momentum ﬂux. The maximum
turbulent momentum ﬂux in upﬂow M′
uoccurs relatively low down within the fountain
(aboutz/LF≈0.88, i.e. about a third of the height of the fountain), the reason for this
is unclear. The turbulent momentum ﬂux in the downﬂow M′
dcontinuously increases
from the fountain top, in line with the suggestion that, since the buo yancy increases
the mean momentum ﬂux, the turbulent momentum ﬂux broadly scale s with the mean
momentum ﬂux. Again, for heights z/LF/lessorsimilar1.92, there is a surprisingly close agreement
between the magnitude of the turbulent momentum ﬂuxes in the upﬂ ow and downﬂow,
perhaps suggesting that both these turbulent ﬂuxes might be pre dominantly driven by
the mean momentum ﬂuxes over much of the fountain height. In-de pth analysis of the
data in ﬁgures 6(b) and 6(c) show that the ratio of turbulent and m ean momentum ﬂux
M′/Mis greatest near the fountain top, suggesting analysis of the dyna mics via mean
ﬂow statistics might be insuﬃcient in this region.16 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
Figure 6(d) shows that the integral buoyancy in the upﬂow Buis negative, while in
the downﬂow Bdis positive. Combining (4.4 b) and (4.6 b), conﬁrms that the integral
buoyancy is, in fact, a sink for Mubut a source for Md. The magnitudes of all the
three ﬂow regions peak near z/LF≈1.50. The inner downﬂow region contains nearly
half of the integral buoyancy in the downﬂow, evidence that the bu oyancy within the
inner downﬂow is more concentrated than the outer downﬂow (i.e., t he inner downﬂow
is denser than the outer downﬂow).
Figure 6(e) and (f) show the mean and turbulent vertical buoyanc y ﬂuxes respectively.
Unlike the momentum ﬂuxes, the turbulent buoyancy ﬂuxes are muc h smaller than the
mean in all ﬂow regions, suggesting that the turbulence aﬀects the buoyancy ﬂuxes less
than it does the momentum ﬂuxes. The upﬂow mean buoyancy ﬂux Fuis negative due
to its opposing buoyancy; it is noteworthy that for z/LF/lessorsimilar1.20, the mean buoyancy
ﬂux in the upﬂow is approximately constant suggesting that in this re gion, whilst the
integral buoyancy within the upﬂow is increasing (ﬁgure 6(d)), a pa rticular interplay
between radial growth, upﬂow velocity, and entrainment from the downﬂow, must exist
to maintain this approximately constant ﬂux which then breaks down at greater heights.
When lookingat the mean quantities, the inner downﬂowbuoyancyﬂu x is approximately
half that of the total downﬂow. However, the turbulent buoyanc y ﬂux in the inner
downﬂow region is a much smaller fraction of the total, implying that mo st of the
downﬂowingturbulentbuoyancyﬂuxistransportedintheouterdo wnﬂowregion.Finally,
ﬁgure 6(e) and (f) show that, although relatively weak, the turbu lent buoyancy ﬂuxes act
in the same direction as the mean buoyancy ﬂuxes within both the upﬂ ow and downﬂow.
6. Entrainment
The rich variety of exchanges, herein ‘entrainment’, between the f ountain upﬂow, the
returning downﬂow, and the fountain cap is crucial in determining th e bulk dynamics of
fountain ﬂows, including the interactions with the environment. We n ow examine these
in detail.
6.1.Vertical evolution of entrainment
Figure 7 shows the entrainment terms, see (4.3), at each of the de ﬁned internal
boundaries ri,rsand the outerboundary rf. As expected all entrainmenttermsapproach
zero at the top of their respective boundary (i.e. where these bou ndaries also approach
r= 0).
Results for the volume exchange at the inner boundary (the term qi, ﬁgure 7(a)) are
reassuringly supportive of the observation of the ﬂuxes in ﬁgure 6 (a). We note that
for the upﬂow region, there is a change from net entrainment to ne t detrainment at
z/LF≈1.11, where the local Froude number of upﬂow is 2 .87, about twice of the value
at the fountain cap base. By construction, the mean momentum en trainment is close
to zero at the inner boundary (ﬁgure 7(d)), but the momentum ex change associated
with turbulence by the upﬂow is signiﬁcant over much of the fountain height — this
acts to reduce both the momentum ﬂuxes of the upﬂow (4.4 b) and downﬂow (4.6 b),
either by entrainment of downward momentum ﬂuctuations into, or detrainment of
upward momentum ﬂuctuations from the upﬂow; which of these is do minant could be
rigorously determined by investigations of the instantaneous tran sports, for example, via
a quadrant plot but this is beyond the scope of the current study. Alternatively, in terms
of the turbulent stress −u′w′on the boundary, the interpretation of the reduction of
upﬂow momentum ﬂux is that it experiences substantial shear by th e downﬂow, thereby17
Figure 7. The vertical variation of the normalised (a–c) volume entra inment, (d–f) total
momentum entrainment and (g–i) total buoyancy entrainment at the (left column) inner
boundary, (middle column) outer boundary and (right column ) the separatrix respectively. The
mean and turbulent components of momentum and buoyancy entr ainment are included. The
total volume entrainment is also the mean. The dash-dotted l ine in (b) shows the vertical
component of mean volume entrainment. The horizontal dashe d line marks the fountain cap
base. The vertical dashed line marks the line of zero exchang e.
decelerating the upﬂow. As the upﬂow and downﬂow are opposite to one another, the
shear will also decelerate the downﬂow.
The buoyancy exchange at the inner boundary (ﬁgure 7(g)) exhib its signiﬁcant contri-
butions from both the mean ﬂow and turbulence. The mean compone nt offiexhibits a18 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
similar variationto that of qi(ﬁgure 7(a)), consistent with the view that buoyancycan be
both entrained and detrained by the mean ﬂow at diﬀerent heights a ccording to Vgb. By
contrast, the turbulent component of fiis negative at all heights; suggesting that with
respect to the upﬂow, there is either detrainment of negative buo yancy ﬂuctuations, or
entrainment of positive buoyancy ﬂuctuations.
A schematic illustration of the net ﬂux qj,mjandfj(withj=i,f,ors) shown in
ﬁgure 8 is intended to clarify the sign of the exchanges. During the f ollowing discussion,
this sketch is intended to act as a useful visual reference of the e xchanges. The arrows
indicate the sign of the exchanges of volume, momentum and buoyan cy between the
vertical ﬂuxes of relevant ﬂow regions, at various heights within th e fountain. Taking
the above inner boundary as an example, in ﬁgure 8(a), the volume e xchange across the
inner boundary (blue line) qibelowz/Lf= 1.11 has a leftward arrow which denotes a
negative ﬂux (in this case radially inward). Combined with (4.4 a), this illustrates that qi
increases the volume ﬂux in the upﬂow in that region.
At the outer boundary (ﬁgure 7(b)), there is mean volume entrain ment from the envi-
ronment into the downﬂow. Inspired by the streamline patterns sh own in ﬁgure 4(b), we
include results for the vertical component of volume entrainment a t the outer boundary
within ﬁgure7(b); forwhichthe contributionissigniﬁcantwithinthe r egionz/LF/greaterorsimilar1.63,
i.e. within the fountain cap region. Our results highlight that the volum e entrainment
into the fountain from the environment is generally greater than th e volume exchange
within the fountain (see ﬁgure 7(a)). Figure 7(e) shows there is ve ry low momentum
entrainment into the downﬂow at the outer boundary due to low velo cities and levels of
turbulence beyond; reassuringly, the buoyancy entrainment at t he outer boundary, ff, is
shown to be negligible (ﬁgure 7(h)).
Along the separatrix there is, by construction, no volume exchang e associated with
the mean ﬂow (see ﬁgures 7(c), (f), and (i)). For z/LF/greaterorsimilar1.77,msis positive, becoming
negativeatlowerheightsandlesseningtheinnerdownﬂowmomentum ﬂux(4.8b).Despite
the separatrix being at larger radial locations, the magnitude of tu rbulent momentum
exchange there (ﬁgure 7(f)), is still markedly smaller than that at the inner boundary
(ﬁgure 7(d)), suggesting weaker turbulence at the separatrix t han at the inner boundary.
Figure 7(i) shows that fsacts to reduce the buoyancy ﬂux in the inner downﬂow. Note
that the ﬁgure shows fsexhibits a linear decrease with the height up to z/LF≈1.95,
which by adding the integral buoyancy conservation equation (4.4 c) and (4.8 c), implying
that the total vertical buoyancy ﬂux F+F′of the fountain inside the separatrix grows
quadratically with the height (for which, in ﬁgure 6(e) one would need to combine the
mean buoyancy ﬂux in the upﬂow, blue line, with that of the inner down ﬂow, purple
line).
6.2.Integral entrainment in the fountain cap region
As one might expect, the vertical evolution of entrainment of the v arious quantities
(ﬁgure 7) shows signiﬁcant changes within the fountain cap region, e.g. sharp peaks
in volume and buoyancy exchanges, and the momentum exchange mschanges the sign
around the cap base (ﬁgure 7(f)). Note that in this region, Williamso net al.(2011)
suggested that the momentum transportis signiﬁcantlyaﬀected b y the pressuregradient,
and is also the region dominated by low-frequency ﬂuctuations that complicate the ﬂow
dynamics (e.g. Williamson et al.2011; Burridge & Hunt 2013). In this subsection, we
focus onﬂuxes apparentupon integratingthe entrainmentovert he heightofthis fountain
cap region.19
Figure 8. Schematic illustration depicting the sign of the exchange ﬂ uxes across the identiﬁed
boundaries: right being positive and left being negative of the exchanges across the relevant
boundaries within thefountain: (a) volume exchange, (b)mo mentum exchangeand (c) buoyancy
exchange. From left to right, each pane contains vertical li nes: black marks the fountain’s centre
line, blue illustrates the inner boundary, purple the separ atrix, and orange the outer boundary.
Green horizontal solid arrows represent the ﬂuxes associat ed with the mean ﬂow, while green
dashed arrows represent those associated with turbulence. The dashed black lines mark any
height at which the exchange changes sign. The grey areas rep resent the fountain cap region.
The vertical coordinate is drawn approximately to scale, bu t the scale of the arrows itself does
not represent the magnitude of the entrainment exchanges.
The integral entrainment across the boundaries over the founta in cap is
Qcap,j=/integraldisplayzt
zbqjdz, M cap,j=/integraldisplayzt
zbmjdz, Fcap,j=/integraldisplayzt
zbfjdz, (6.1)
wherezt=zifor inner boundary and separatrix,while zt=zffor outer boundary. These
quantities show the volume, momentum and buoyancy exchanges, r espectively, across
the corresponding boundary integrated over the cap region. The values are presented in
table 1 with two normalisations: ﬁrstly, by the relevant forced foun tain scales, e.g., QF,
M0, and|F0|, and secondly, by the upﬂowing ﬂuxes at the cap base, namely,
Qub=Qu(zb)≈0.09QF, (6.2)
Mub=Mu(zb)+M′
u(zb)≈0.36M0and, (6.3)
Fub=Fu(zb)+F′
u(zb)≈ −0.71|F0|. (6.4)
These upﬂowing ﬂuxes at the cap base highlight that around one-th ird of the source
momentum ﬂux reaches the cap region; and nearly three-quarter s of the fountain’s total
buoyancy ﬂux passes through the cap region. These facts, comb ined with the results in
table 1, highlight the importance of the cap region for the dynamics o f fountains. Figure
8 is intended to aid interpretation of table 1 by indicating the direction s ofQcap,j,Mcap,j
andFcap,j.
Table 1 shows that the integral volume entrainment by the cap is Qcap,f=−0.22QF,
combining this with the results for the bulk fountain entrainment (i.e. that the
total entrainment ﬂux for these highly forced fountains is approx imately 0 .77QF
Burridge & Hunt 2016), would suggest that more than a quarter of all fountain’s volume
entrainment occurs within the cap (we note that our bottom bound ary condition
prohibits us making our own estimates of the bulk volume entrainment by the fountain).
Meanwhile, Qcap,f=−2.40Qubshows that the integral volume entrainment from the
environment is about two and a half times larger than that injected a t the cap base,20 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
Qcap,j
QFQcap,j
QubMcap,j
M0Mcap,j
MubFcap,j
|F0|Fcap,j
|Fub|
Fluxes across inner boundary, ri0.09 1.00 0.12 0.34−0.75−1.00
Fluxes across separatrix, rs 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.14−0.45−0.60
Fluxes across outer boundary, rf−0.22−2.40 0.02 0.05 0.00 0.00
Table 1. Integral volume, momentum and buoyancy entrainment across the boundaries within
the fountain cap region, normalisation both by the relevant forced fountain scales and by the
upﬂowing ﬂuxes across at the cap base are presented for conve nience.
agreeing with the data taken from Awin et al.(2018) and from Talluru et al.(2022) for
a turbulent forced fountain.
Considering the exchanges across the inner boundary within the ca p region, we note
thatQcap,i/Qub= 1.00 conﬁrms that, as expected, all upcoming volume ﬂux is detrained
into the downﬂow region. The momentum ﬂux detrained out of upﬂow ,Mcap,i, is
approximately 35% of the upﬂowing momentum ﬂux, suggesting arou nd two-thirds of
vertical momentum ﬂux that enters the cap is acted on by the pres sure gradient and
opposing buoyancy. The integral buoyancy detrainment Fcap,i/|Fub|=−1.00 shows the
buoyancy ﬂux injected into the cap is all detrained into the downﬂow ; furthermore,
more than half of this is then detrained from the inner downﬂow to th e outer downﬂow
(Fcap,s/|Fub|=−0.60).
6.3.Entrainment coeﬃcients
In this section, we calculate the entrainment coeﬃcients from our D NS data, and
comparethem to those employedin otherstudies, in particularthe f ountain model BK00.
Classically, entrainment coeﬃcients have been used to represent t he rate of dilution of
a ﬂow; this approach has proved valuable to the modelling of a broad s et of classes
of turbulent free-shear ﬂows. This concept was popularised by Mo rtonet al.(1956)
(referred to as the MTT entrainment model), who successfully cha racterised the bulk
entrainment of mass by a plume by relating the ﬂuid entrainment veloc ity across the
plume edge to local characteristic scales via a constant entrainmen t coeﬃcient. The
application of this concept to bulk-averaged models of fountains ca me somewhat later
(Mcdougall 1981) and continues to be developed, e.g. BK00 and SH1 4. In the most
general case presented to date, these apply the entrainment co eﬃcients to estimate the
mass,momentum andbuoyancyexchangesofthe upﬂowandthe do wnﬂow.Typically,the
entrainment coeﬃcients in models were either assumed constant wit h values determined
by analogy to a more simple canonical ﬂow (e.g. a jet and or a line plume, as in the case
of Mcdougall 1981, BK00), or approximated empirically based on eith er experimental or
numerical studies of fountains (e.g. SH14).
Notably, BK00represented the fountain upﬂow and downﬂowas tw o separate ﬂows: an
upwardnegativelybuoyantjet, anda downward(annular)line plume , respectively; which
both entrain via their boundaries. As a result, unlike our Reynolds-a veraged statistics,
they parameterised two-way entrainment at the inner boundary: the upﬂow entrains
from the downﬂow with a velocity ωiwhile the downﬂow entrains from the upﬂow with
a velocity ωd. Meanwhile, the downﬂow also entrains from the environment via the outer
boundarywith a velocity ωf, seeﬁgure12. DNS Simulations, orhigh ﬁdelity experiments,
could enable conditionally sampled data to directly inform such a param eterisation (e.g.
to parameterise simultaneous entrainment and detrainment of the upﬂow) should use of
such a parameterisationbe deemed necessary.In orderthat rea derscan checkconsistency21
with relative ease, the BK00 model and governing equations are rep roduced in appendix
§B using the notation and coordinate system presented herein.
BK00 considered two formulations of body force acting on the upﬂo w, and two
formulations of velocity scale characteristic of entrainment; in com bination, this leads
to four diﬀerent cases to consider. In terms of the body force, t he ﬁrst formulation (BFI)
assumed the buoyancy force acting on the upﬂow depends directly on the density of the
environment,that is in ournotation Buasevident in (4.4 b) and (B1 c). The second,BFII,
assumed the buoyancy force is relative to the local density diﬀeren ce between the upﬂow
and downﬂow, that is in our notation Bu+Bd. In agreement with SH14, we assert that
BFI is a uniquely appropriate formulation for the body force; we, th erefore, consider only
BFI. In terms of the characteristic entrainment velocity, the ﬁrs t formulation considered
by BK00, which we denote ‘EI’, assumed the mean entrainment velocit y should be
proportional to the diﬀerence in velocity between the upﬂow and do wnﬂow, so that
the three entrainment velocities in BK00 can be written as
−ωI
i=αi00(wu+wd), ωI
d=αf00wd,−ωI
f=αf00wd, (6.5)
where,αiandαfare the mean volume entrainment coeﬃcient of the upﬂow and
downﬂow, respectively, the subscript ‘00’ denotes the variables a s used in BK00, the
superscript ‘I’ denotes the entrainment formulation EI. The nega tive sign in ωiandωf
indicates entrainment velocity into upﬂow and downﬂow (see append ix§B for details).
Note that BK00 parameterised the downﬂow as having the same ent rainment coeﬃcient
αf00at both boundaries — the physical reasoning for this remains unclea r.
Neglecting all the turbulent and Leibniz terms, and taking entrainme nt parameterisa-
tion EI, (4.4 a) becomes
qi= 2αI
iru(wu+wd), qf= 2αI
frdwd, (6.6)
whereαI
iandαI
fare the entrainment coeﬃcients for the upﬂow and downﬂow, resp ec-
tively, that are evident from our DNS data under entrainment form ulation EI. When
applying entrainment formulations presented here, it should be clar iﬁed that BK00
prescribedthesameconstantentrainmentcoeﬃcients, αi00andαf00,andthenappliedtwo
formulations to calculate entertainment velocities apparent within t heir fountain model;
for our DNS data we measured the actual ﬂuxes entrained and the n directly determined
the relevant entrainment coeﬃcients. Substituting (6.5) into (B1 a) and combining with
(4.4a),providestherelationshipsbetweenourentrainmentcoeﬃcients andthoseofBK00,
under formation EI, as
αI
i=αi00−αf00wd
wu+wd,andαI
f=αf=αf00. (6.7)
In their second entrainment formulation ‘EII’, BK00 assumed the me an entrainment
velocity is related to a characteristic velocity depending only on the r elevant fraction of
the total shear, i.e. the sum of the magnitude of velocity on either s ide of the interface.
Thus the entrainment equations of BK00 under EII are
−ωII
i=αi00wu, ωII
d=αf00wd,−ωII
f=αf00wd, (6.8)
with the relevant equations for our data being
qi= 2αII
iruwu, qf= 2αII
frdwd. (6.9)
Therefore, the relationships between our entrainment coeﬃcient s and those of BK00,22 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
under formation EII, become
αII
i=αi00−αf00wd
wu,andαII
f=αf=αf00. (6.10)
We note that, BK00 assumed constant entrainment coeﬃcients th roughout the height of
the fountain and calibrated their model (against a single statistic of fountain behaviour;
namely, the fountain rise height), for the four combinations of bod y forces and entrain-
ment formulations, always taking the same values for each of their t wo entrainment
coeﬃcients, speciﬁcally αi00= 0.085 and αf00= 0.147 — for this reason our notation
does not distinguish between entrainment formulations when denot ing the coeﬃcients of
the BK00 model.
The other fountain model worthy of consideration is that of SH14; they assumed
that only entrainment by the upﬂow occurred at the inner boundar y (i.e. only inward
exchanges over the full height of their upﬂow z/LF/lessorequalslant1.62). With this assumption,
(6.7) and (6.10) reduce to αI
i=αII
i=αi00. SH14 took the inner boundary entrainment
coeﬃcient to be αi= 0.06, andαf= 0.15 for the entrainment coeﬃcient at downﬂow
at outer boundary (these values being loosely based on those repo rted in the studies of
Williamson et al.2011; Burridge & Hunt 2013) — the precedents set by SH14’s model
were followed by Debugne & Hunt (2016).
Examination of ﬁgure 9, which plots our measurements of the entra inment coeﬃcients
and those used in fountain models thus far, challenges the validity of the entrainment
assumptions that underpin the important contributions to founta in modelling of BK00,
SH14, and Debugne & Hunt (2016). The ﬁgure plots the values of αiandαf, according
to both entrainment formulations, i.e. calculated from our DNS data according to (6.6)
and (6.9). Firstly, comparison of our data to that of Milton-McGurk et al.(2022) yields
similar values — Milton-McGurk et al.(2022), to our knowledge, being the only other
study to report the vertical variation of entrainment coeﬃcient a t the inner boundary of
highly forced fountains ( Fr/greaterorequalslant15) based on measurements (therein under entrainment
formulation EI and reported as a variation with the local Richardson number of the
upﬂow). Both studies determine that the entrainment coeﬃcient c hanges sign at a
particularheight within the upﬂow. Secondly, irrespectiveofthe en trainmentformulation
chosen, the notable variation in our measurements of αiandαfwith height renders the
assumption of constant αfin BK00, and constant αiandαfin SH14, as questionable.
Thirdly,(6.7)and(6.10)providetherelationshipsthatmustholdtru efortheentrainment
modelling at the inner boundary of BK00 to be valid.
Figure9(a)plotstheLHSof (6.7)and(6.10),i.e.theequivalententr ainmentcoeﬃcients
calculatedfromourdata,namely, αI
iandαII
i.Inaddition,itshowstheproﬁlesthatfollow
from the existing theory, by substituting the constants used in BK 00, i.e.αi00= 0.085
andαf00= 0.147 into the RHS of (6.7) and (6.10), and using our measured values o f the
velocity scales. It is clear from the ﬁgure that these relationships d o not hold true for
the values taken; furthermore, we have tested various other ch oices for the entrainment
constants within the BK00 formulation and there is an equally poor ag reement for all
physically reasonableentrainment constants.These facts highligh t that an integralmodel
of fountains, that captures the exchanges within the fountain, is yet to be developed, or
at least parameterised appropriately. Integral models, to date, have been parameterised
based on matching a single measurable statistic of fountain behaviou r, the fountain
height (albeit sometimes both the initial and steady rise heights, e.g. Debugne & Hunt
2016), but our results suggest that no integral model has even b een able to qualitatively
captured the appropriate exchanges within fountains. As such, t he agreement with the
calibrated metric might be unique and all other fountain metrics from such models23
Figure 9. The vertical evolution of entrainment coeﬃcients both calc ulated based on Reynolds
averaging our DNS data ( αI
i,αII
i, andαf, see (6.6) and (6.9)) and, for direct comparison,
the appropriately adjusted entrainment coeﬃcients used in BK00, SH14, and Debugne & Hunt
(2016) (who used same entrainment coeﬃcients of SH14) are al so plotted. a) The entrainment
coeﬃcients of the upﬂow at the inner boundary ( αI
iandαII
i, shown as blue dashed line and solid
line, respectively), the entrainment coeﬃcients of BK00 pr esented in adjusted form (lines with
mark, using velocity scales from our DNS and taking the entra inment constants from BK00,
namelyαi00= 0.085 and αf00= 0.147, see (6.7) and (6.10)), and the value used in both SH14
and Debugne & Hunt (2016), αi= 0.06 (vertical black line). The vertical dashed line marks zer o
coeﬃcient. b) The entrainment coeﬃcient of the downﬂow at th e outer (orange line) calculated
from (6.6) and (6.9) — which give the identical result, and th e entrainment coeﬃcients used in
BK00 and SH14 (thin black solid line and dashed line, respect ively).
may be questionable. We have shown, §6.1, that the total buoyancy exchanges, and the
mean volume entrainment at the inner boundary, broadly follow a simila r dependence
of the vertical coordinate (see ﬁgures 7(a) and (g)); combined w ith ﬁgure 9, it shows
that fountain models are yet to provide the capability to predict the se fundamental
exchanges which must aﬀect the total weight of fountain ﬂuid supp orted by a given
source momentum ﬂux. This highlights a major researchchallenge in f ountain modelling,
future models of fountains should seek validation via multiple statistic s, not a single
criterion (e.g. fountain height) as has been carried out previously.
In addition, by their very construction, bulk averaged fountain mo dels (e.g. BK00
and SH14) did not account for the turbulent exchanges within foun tains, e.g. turbulent
momentum entrainment and turbulent buoyancy entrainment. We h ave shown in §5
and§6.1 that there is signiﬁcant integral vertical turbulent momentum ﬂ ux (M′, see
ﬁgure 6(c)), and the turbulent momentum exchanges and turbule nt buoyancy exchanges
at the inner boundary (turbulent component of miandfi, respectively, see ﬁgure 7(d)
and (g)). Hence, we challenge future models of fountains to accou nt for these exchanges
driven by turbulence, at the very least implicitly, within their paramet erisation.
Following the BK00 model, but considering entire budgets (we choose to consider only
EII, a choice of little consequence), the total momentum entrainm ent (4.4b) and total24 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
Figure 10. The entrainment coeﬃcients for the upﬂow from our data: volu me entrainment αi
from (6.10), momentum αm,iobtained from the budget (6.11 a) and buoyancy αf,ifrom the
budget (6.11 b); i.e. all consistent with BK00’s EII formulation.
buoyancy entrainment (4.4 c) are
mi= 2αi,mruw2
u, (6.11a)
fi= 2αi,fruwubu. (6.11b)
Figure 10 shows entrainment coeﬃcients for momentum αi,mand buoyancy αi,fgiven
by (6.11), respectively. The ﬁgure, for contrast, also re-plots αII
i, from (6.10), the plot
clearly highlights that taking the same entrainment coeﬃcient to par ameterise exchanges
of volume, momentum and buoyancy is inappropriate. More researc h is clearly needed to
determine a suitable route to developing appropriate models of turb ulent fountains; our
leading suggestion is that the latest understanding of transports across both TNTIs and
TTIs be considered in depth. Note that we do not present the entr ainment coeﬃcients
decomposed into mean and turbulent components due to the lack of self-similarity of the
radial proﬁles within the fountain ( cf.Milton-McGurk et al.2022).
7. Conclusion
The structure of a forced fountain was investigated by decompos ing the fountain into
regions based on two distinct internal boundaries. The ﬁrst compr ised the classical de-
composition into an upﬂow and a downﬂow,via the internal boundary ri(z) characterised
by the loci of zero vertical velocity. The second exploited a separa trix, a streamline rs(z)
that forms the boundary between the ﬂow emitted from the sourc e and entrained from
the environment. Both of these boundaries are turbulent/turbu lent interfaces (TTIs),
which can have both mean and turbulent contributions to entrainme nt across their
boundary.Forthe internalboundariesinvestigatedhere,wesho wedthatfortheboundary
ri, entrainment ﬂuxes are large and consist both of mean and turbule nt components.
However, the boundary rsby construction exhibits zero mean entrainment, since it is a
streamline; hence, only turbulent exchanges can occur across.
The ﬁndings reported herein indicate that turbulent entrainment ﬂ uxes across the25
internal boundary are of similar magnitude to, and sometimes larger than, the mean
entrainment ﬂuxes. This has important implications for the modelling o f turbulent
entrainment. Indeed, the classical view of entrainment considers mean entrainment only,
which then implies that an associated entrainment velocity can be deﬁ ned across the
interface, and entrainment of all other quantities (e.g. momentum , buoyancy) can then
simply be obtained by multiplying that entrainment velocity by some loca l characteristic
value of that quantity. The DNS data broadly supported this obser vation, in that
the vertical variation of the ﬂuxes of mean volume entrainment and mean buoyancy
entrainment across riexhibited a similar form (note the mean momentum entrainment
which was zero by construction on ri). However, the vertical variation of turbulent
entrainment ﬂuxes across riexhibits an entirely diﬀerent form to the mean entrainment
ﬂuxes and therefore requires diﬀerent modelling. Even for the ‘clas sical’ (mean volume)
entrainment ﬂux, the agreement between our DNS data and existin g models was poor
when the entrainment ﬂux was normalised by suitable local characte ristic scales, sug-
gesting that parameterisation following MTT and deploying a constan t entrainment
coeﬃcient is inappropriate for fountains and needs to be reconside red. We further
showed that diﬀerent magnitudes of values are required for the re spective entrainment
coeﬃcientstoappropriatelyparameteriseeithermeanentrainmen t,turbulentmomentum
entrainment, or turbulent buoyancy entrainment. This reinforce s our suggestion that
alternativemodelling strategies,perhapsguided by moredetailed st udies ofthe transport
across TNTIs and TTIs, might be fruitful if predictions of fountain behaviour, beyond
their rise heights, are required. This is of relevance to many applicat ions of fountains, for
example, those produced within Under Floor Air Distribution Systems (Lin & Linden
2005) where predictions of fountain rise height only determine the v ertical extent within
the room that the cool air might rise; the cooling eﬀect that occupa nts feel is further
aﬀected by the temperature of the rising and falling cooler air — this d epends both on
the fountain’s mixing with the environment and the mixing within the fou ntain’s internal
structure.
Finally, we assert that without greater regard to the modelling of th e fountain cap
region, insuﬃcient progress might be made. In this region the ﬂow is e ntirely dominated
by the formation and collapse of large-scale turbulent structures — characterised by
periodic ﬂuctuations in fountain rise height and responsible for the d ark bands typically
seen in time series images of fountain (e.g. see ﬁgure 3 and Burridge & Hunt 2012).
Fountain modelling to date hasfocused on models that reﬂect only qu antitiesofthe mean
ﬂow — our results suggest that both turbulent exchanges, and th e transient nature of
the fountain cap region, may be of importance in future modelling eﬀo rts.
Acknowledgements
The computations were performed on the UK National Supercompu ting Service
ARCHER2 and were made possible by the EPSRC-funded UK Turbulenc e Consortium
(grant reference EP/R029326/1).
Declaration of interests
The authors report no conﬂict of interest.26 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
Figure 11. (a) Fountain boundaries, inner boundary ri(blue) and outer rf(orange) both from
the standard domain (solid lines) and a small domain (dashed lines). (b) From the standard
domain, the fountain outer boundary using a buoyancy thresh old of 0.01bcc(solid line), 0 .02bcc
(dot-dashed line), and 0 .005bcc(dotted line). The horizontal black line marks z/LF= 0.66
below where the data of downﬂow is discarded. Mean volume ent rainment at inner boundary qi
(c) and at outer boundary qf(d) of the standard domain (solid lines) and small domain (da shed
lines) respectively.
Appendix A. Comparison with smaller ﬂow domain
To validate that the eﬀect of the domain size, in particular the side-w all periodic
boundary condition, was insigniﬁcant in our results we simulated ident ical source condi-
tions in a ‘small’ domain (of volume (100 r0)3and grid size 10243); we refer to the domain
used to simulate all other results presented herein as ‘standard’.
Figure 11(a) plots the fountain inner boundary, ri, and outer boundary, rf, for
simulations in both the standard and small domains. The eﬀects of do main size on the
fountain boundaries are negligible, particularlywhen one notes that we discard all results
for the downﬂow (including rf) below the height z/LF= 0.66, with the typical change
in the radial location of the boundaries with domain size being less than 7%. Moreover,
by integrating the volume of fountain V=/integraltextzf
02πrf(z)dz= 82730 r3
0≈8.70L3
F, the
fountain occupies around 3% of the standard domain, suggesting t he standard domain is
of an appropriate size.
To check the location of the outer boundary is relatively insensitive t o the choice of
buoyancy threshold ( b= 0.01bcc), ﬁgure 11(b) plots the outer boundary using both a
larger threshold, b= 0.02bcc, and a smaller threshold, b= 0.005bcc. The ﬁgure evidences
that the outer boundary is indeed insensitive on the choice thresho ld, within our range
of interest and especially above z/LF= 0.66. We therefore conclude that our outer
boundary, rf, contains the vast majority of fountain ﬂuid and is appropriate.
To ensure the entrainment at the boundaries is also less inﬂuenced b y the domain,
ﬁgure 11(c) and 11(d) plot the mean volume entrainment qiandqfof two domains
respectively. The lines agree well though there is a relatively greate r diﬀerence in qfnear
the fountain top. By calculating the integral volume entrainment of the fountain cap
Qcap, the value of the small domain is about −0.19QF, not far from the value of the
standard domain which is −0.22QF.27
Figure 12. Fountain model BK00, with the arrows indicating the directi on of variables.
Appendix B. The integral equations of BK00
In order to provide a direct comparison of the entrainment coeﬃcie nts of the well-
established BK00 model to those presented herein, i.e. those appa rent on rigorous
application of Reynolds averaging of the governing equations, we ﬁr st present the BK00
model in our notation (the notation introduced in §4) within ﬁgure 12. The velocities ωi,
ωdcharacterise the two-wayentrainment across the inner boundar y, andωfcharacterises
the entrainment at the outer boundary. As these velocities are de ﬁned under our outward
horizontal direction, ωiandωfhere should associate with a negative sign to represent
the entrainment velocity into the respective ﬂow.
In the model of BK00, the integral ﬂuxes are deﬁned equivalently t o those deﬁned in
(4.5)–(4.7) and note that the BK00 model assumed (top-hat) unif orm ﬂuid properties
and velocities in each ﬂow region. BK00 directly applied integral conse rvation laws for
volume, momentum and buoyancy ﬂuxes which resulted in
dQu
dz= 2ru(−ωi)−2ruωd, (B1a)
dQd
dzd= 2rd(−ωf)−2ru(−ωi)+2ruωd, (B1b)
dMu
dz=Bu+2ru(−ωi)(−wd)−2ruωdwu, (B1c)
dMd
dzd=Bd+2ruωd(−wu)−2ru(−ωi)wd, (B1d)
dFu
dz= 2ru(−ωi)(−bd)−2ruωdbu, (B1e)
dFd
dzd= 2ruωd(−bu)−2ru(−ωi)bd. (B1f)
As is typical, BK00 considered mean integral ﬂuxes only, and thus th e terms
M′
u,Pu,F′
u,M′
d,PdandF′
din (4.4) and (4.6) are identically zero. Momentum and
buoyancy entrainment from the environment is assumed to be neglig ible. As discussed
in§6.1, BK00 use two-way entrainment at the inner boundary, which th en implicitly
contains the Leibniz contributions to the exchange.
We note that the BK00model assumes top-hat conditions which imply that the upﬂow28 Huang, Burridge and Van Reeuwijk
region has a width ru=Qu/M1/2
u; in reality, the proﬁles are not top-hat and thus
the actual internal boundary is located at a greater radial positio n and equivalent to
ri≈1.25ru. Another consequence of the top-hat assumption is that the mom entum and
buoyancy on the boundary are equivalent to their values in the upﬂo w or downﬂow.
REFERENCES
Abramovich, G. N., Girshovich, T. A., Krasheninnikov, S. I. , Sekundov, A. N. &
Smirnova, I. P. 1984 The theory of turbulent jets (2nd revised and enlarged e dition).
Moscow Izdatel Nauka .
Awin, L. A., Armfield, S. W., Kirkpatrick, M. P., Williamson , N. & Lin, W. 2018
Entrainment in the crown region of forced turbulent fountai ns. 21st Australasian Fluid
Mechanics Conference Adelaide, Australia.
Baines, W. D., Corriveau, A. F. & Reedman, T. J. 1993 Turbulent fountains in a closed
chamber. J. Fluid Mech. 255, 621–646.
Baines, W. D., Turner, J. S. & Campbell, I. H. 1990 Turbulent fountains in an open
chamber. J. Fluid Mech. 212, 557–592.
Bloomfield, L. J. & Kerr, R. C. 2000 A theoretical model of a turbulent fountain. J. Fluid
Mech.424, 197–216.
Burridge, H. C. & Hunt, G. R. 2012 The rise heights of low- and high-Froude-number
turbulent axisymmetric fountains. J. Fluid Mech. 691, 392–416.
Burridge, H. C. & Hunt, G. R. 2013 The rhythm of fountains: the length and time scales of
rise height ﬂuctuations at low and high Froude numbers. J. Fluid Mech. 728, 91–119.
Burridge, H. C. & Hunt, G. R. 2014 Scaling arguments for the ﬂuxes in turbulent miscible
fountains. J. Fluid Mech. 744, 273–285.
Burridge, H. C. & Hunt, G. R. 2016 Entrainment by turbulent fountains. J. Fluid Mech.
790, 407–418.
Burridge, H. C., Mistry, A. & Hunt, G. 2015 The eﬀect of source Reynolds number on the
rise height of a fountain. Phys. Fluids 27(4), 047101.
Craske, J. & van Reeuwijk, M. 2015 Energy dispersion in turbulent jets. part 1. direct
simulation of steady and unsteady jets. J. Fluid Mech. 763, 500–537.
Da Silva, C. B., Hunt, J. C., Eames, I. & Westerweel, J. 2014 Interfacial layers between
regions of diﬀerent turbulence intensity. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 46(1), 567–590.
De Rooy, W. C., Bechtold, P., Fr ¨ohlich, K., Hohenegger, C., Jonker, H., Mironov,
D., Pier Siebesma, A., Teixeira, J. & Yano, J.-I. 2013 Entrainment and detrainment
in cumulus convection: an overview. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 139(670), 1–19.
Debugne, A. L. R. & Hunt, G. R. 2016 A phenomenological model for fountain-top
entrainment. J. Fluid Mech. 796, 195–210.
Dimotakis, P. E. 2005 Turbulent mixing. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 37(1), 329–356.
Fernando, H. J. S. 1991 Turbulent mixing in stratiﬁed ﬂuids. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 23(1),
455–493.
Finnigan, T. D. & Ivey, G. N. 1999 Submaximal exchange between a convectively forced
basin and a large reservoir. J. Fluid Mech. 378, 357–378.
Finnigan, T. D. & Ivey, G. N. 2000 Convectively driven exchange ﬂow in a stratiﬁed sill-
enclosed basin. J. Fluid Mech. 418(1), 313–338.
Gladstone, C. & Woods, A. W. 2001 On buoyancy-driven natural ventilation of a room with
a heated ﬂoor. J. Fluid Mech. 441, 293–314.
Heus, T. & Jonker, H. J. J. 2008 SubsidingShells around Shallow Cumulus Clouds. J. Atmos.
Sci.65(3), 1003–1018.
Hunt, G. & Debugne, A. 2016 Forced fountains. J. Fluid Mech. 802, 437–463.
Hunt, G. R. & Burridge, H. C. 2015 Fountains in industry and nature. Annu. Rev. Fluid
Mech.47(1), 195–220.
Kankanwadi, K. S. & Buxton, O. R. H. 2020 Turbulent entrainment into a cylinder wake
from a turbulent background. J. Fluid Mech. 905, A35.
Lin, Y. J. P. & Linden, P. F. 2005 The entrainment due to a turbulent fountain at a density
interface. J. Fluid Mech. 542, 25–52.29
Mcdougall, T. J. 1981 Negatively buoyant vertical jets. Tellus33(3), 313–320.
Milton-McGurk, L., Williamson, N., Armfield, S. & Kirkpatr ick, M. 2022
Characterising entrainment in fountains and negatively bu oyant jets. J. Fluid Mech. 939,
A29.
Mingotti, N. & Woods, A. W. 2016 On turbulent particle fountains. J. Fluid Mech. 793, R1.
Mizushina, T., Ogino, F. & Takeuchi, H. e. a. 1982 An experimental study of vertical
turbulent jet with negative buoyancy. W¨ arme- und Stoﬀubertragung 16, 15–21.
Morton, B. R., Taylor, G. I. & Turner, J. S. 1956 Turbulent gravitational convection from
maintained and instantaneous sources. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 234(1196), 1–23.
Nair, V., Heus, T. & van Reeuwijk, M. 2020 Dynamics of Subsiding Shells in Actively
Growing Clouds with Vertical Updrafts. J. Atmos. Sci. 77(4), 1353–1369.
Neggers, R. A. J., Siebesma, A. P. & Jonker, H. J. J. 2002 A Multiparcel Model for
Shallow Cumulus Convection. J. Atmos. Sci. 59(10), 1655–1668.
Priestley, C. H. B. & Ball, F. K. 1955 Continuous convection from an isolated source of
heat.Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 81(348), 144–157.
Shrinivas, A. B. & Hunt, G. R. 2014 Unconﬁned turbulent entrainment across density
interfaces. J. Fluid Mech. 757, 573–598.
Stevens, R. J., Graham, J. & Meneveau, C. 2014 A concurrent precursor inﬂow method for
large eddy simulations and applications to ﬁnite length win d farms. Renew. Energy 68,
46–50.
Talluru, K., Williamson, N. & Armfield, S. 2022 Entrainment and dilution in a fountain
top.J. Fluid Mech. 941, A24.
Thompson, S. M. & Turner, J. S. 1975 Mixingacross an interface duetoturbulencegenerated
by an oscillating grid. J. Fluid Mech. 67(2), 349–368.
Turner, J. S. 1966 Jets and plumes with negative or reversing buoyancy. J. Fluid Mech. 26(4),
779–792.
Turner, J. S. 1986 Turbulent entrainment: the development of the entrain ment assumption,
and its application to geophysical ﬂows. J. Fluid Mech. 173, 431–471.
Van Reeuwijk, M. & Holzner, M. 2014 The turbulence boundary of a temporal jet. J. Fluid
Mech.739, 254–275.
Van Reeuwijk, M., sallizoni, P., Hunt, G. & Craske, J. 2016 Turbulent transport and
entrainment in jets and plumes: A DNS study. Phys. Rev. Fluids 1.
Van Reeuwijk, M., Vassilicos, J. C. & Craske, J. 2021 Uniﬁed description of turbulent
entrainment. J. Fluid Mech. 908, A12.
Williamson, N., Armfield, S. W. & Lin, W. 2011 Forced turbulent fountain ﬂow behaviour.
J. Fluid Mech. 671, 535–558.