Understanding the main failure scenarios of subsea blowout preventers
systems: An approach through Latent Semantic Analysis
Gustavo Jorge Martins de Aguiar, Ramon Baptista Narcizo, Rodolfo Cardoso, Iara Tammela,
Edwin Benito Mitacc Meza, Danilo Colombo, Luiz Antônio de Oliveira Chaves, Jamile Eleutério
Delesposte
Federal Fluminense University, Rua Recife, Rio das Ostras, 28895-532, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Abstract
The blowout preventer (BOP) system is one of the most important well safety barriers during the
drilling phase because it can prevent the development of blowout events. This paper investigates
BOP system’s main failures using an LSA-based methodology. A total of 1312 failure records
from companies worldwide were collected from the International Association of Drilling Contrac-
tors’ RAPID-S53 database. The database contains recordings of halted drilling operations due
to BOP system’s failures and component’s function deviations. The main failure scenarios of the
components annular preventer, shear rams preventer, compensated chamber solenoid valve, and hy-
draulicregulatorswereidentiﬁedusingtheproposedmethodology. Thescenarioscontainedvaluable
information about corrective maintenance procedures, such as frequently observed failure modes,
detection methods used, suspected causes, and corrective actions. The ﬁndings highlighted that the
major failures of the components under consideration were leakages caused by damaged elastomeric
seals. The majority of the failures were detected during function and pressure tests with the BOP
system in the rig. This study provides an alternative safety analysis that contributes to under-
standing blowout preventer system’s critical component failures by applying a methodology based
on a well-established text mining technique and analyzing failure records from an international
database.
Keywords: Blowout preventer, Oﬀshore drilling, Failure analysis, Latent semantic analysis,
Maintenance procedures, Operations safety
1. Introduction
When the pressure in the underground reser-
voir exceeds the pressure applied by the drilling
ﬂuid column, an uncontrolled ﬂow of gas, oil,
or other well ﬂuids occurs through the wellbore
and into the atmosphere or the sea, depend-
ing on whether the operation is subsea or sur-
face [1]. This event is known as a blowout.
Though rare, blowouts are among the most
feared and violent accidents in the oil and
gas industry, posing a signiﬁcant threat to as-sets, human lives, and the environment [2].
Blowouts in deepwater oil and gas well explo-
ration and development cause not only massive
environmentaldisastersandpropertylossesbut
also fatalities [3]. It is one of the major events
that contribute to the risks of oﬀshore drilling
operations [4, 5]. Blowouts risk alone con-
tributes 40 percent to 50 percent of the total
risk of loss of life, environmental impact, and
economic value loss for ﬁxed platforms in the
North Sea [6].
January 4, 2023arXiv:2301.00844v1  [cs.IR]  2 Jan 2023The blowout preventer (BOP) system is one
of the most important well safety barriers dur-
ing the drilling phase because it can prevent
the development of blowout events by closing
and sealing the well [7]. Due to the risks of
blowout events, blowout preventers are criti-
cal to the monitoring and maintenance of well
integrity and the safety of the crew and the
environment [8]. The Gulf of Mexico, the
North Sea, oﬀshore West Africa, and oﬀshore
Brazil are experiencing increasing oil and gas
exploration and production from deepwater lo-
cations with water depths exceeding 300 me-
ters [9]. Deepwater drilling activities utilize
subseablowoutpreventers, andthedistancebe-
tween the BOP system and the drilling rig is
approximately three kilometers [10]. Drilling
operations face operational and technological
challenges that are becoming increasingly com-
plex due to the extreme variables of the deep-
water drilling seabed environment, such as low
temperature and high pressure [11].
A blowout preventer is a group of valves re-
motely controlled from the rig and serves as
the main barrier in well control in the event of
a blowout [7, 12]. While the primary form of
control in the drilling phase is hydrostatic pres-
sure, which is counterbalanced by the weight of
the drilling mud, the BOP system is considered
one of the last resources capable of prevent-
ing blowouts [13]. Blowout preventers are de-
signedtosealthewellduringemergencycontrol
events and test and training scenarios to guar-
antee the system’s capability to perform the re-
quired function [14]. Recognized industry reg-
ulations and standard requirements have been
implemented as guidelines for testing strategies
thatcanbeusedtodetectpotentialfailuresand
reduce blowout preventer system unavailabil-
ity [15–18]. Despite their importance in per-
forming the required function, the components
are primarily monitored through testing, and
numerous functional and pressure tests are re-
quired to ensure the safety barriers during op-
erations [19].The world realized the critical importance
of the BOP system after the Macondo well
blowout accident at the Deepwater Horizon
semi-submersible drilling rig in 2010 [7, 8, 20].
The blowout resulted in 11 deaths, 4.9 million
barrels of crude oil spilled, and signiﬁcant pol-
lution and ecological damage [8, 21]. Aside
from the estimated $42 billion in losses, the
event raised concerns about the BOP system
and compelled the oil and gas industry to es-
tablish new maintenance and operating stan-
dards to improve BOP reliability [20, 22, 23].
Following the accident, BOP risk analysis be-
came more critical in oil exploration and pro-
duction projects, and the public’s perception
of the risk of oﬀshore drilling increased due to
theevent’sconsequences[24,25]. However, risk
management practices have not kept up with
the growing complexity of drilling operations
(due to the industry’s expansion into deepwa-
ter areas), leading to more severe disasters [3].
Failures in equipment and components of
complex systems are problems that have long
demanded engineering attention for diﬀerent
purposes [26, 27]. Deviations from the oper-
ating condition of equipment or systems can
cause not only ﬁnancial damage but also loss
of human life and environmental damage [27].
In this context, oﬀshore drilling also requires
a high level of safety. Oﬀshore drilling rig
blowouts and explosions pose signiﬁcant ﬁnan-
cial, environmental, and human life risks [24,
28, 29]. Failures in the blowout preventer can
aﬀect the availability of the entire production
system because of the high risks [30]. Making
decisions in the face of indications of failure of
one of the BOP system’s components is one of
the industry’s most signiﬁcant challenges [31].
In many instances, when a BOP’s failure is
detected, the equipment must be taken out of
operation for repair, and the return to opera-
tion may take up to a week or more depending
on availability on board [20]. Furthermore, the
withdrawal of the blowout preventer stack and
the marine drilling riser system due to failure
January 4, 2023is one of the most expensive downtime (non-
productivetime)eventsin oﬀshore drilling, and
millions of dollars that are lost each year due
to downtime can be avoided through improve-
ments in BOP system’s reliability [32]. This
event becomes even more costly than suspen-
sion due to scheduled maintenance [33]. In [34],
subsea BOP system’s failures in the Gulf of
Mexico between 2007 and 2009 were investi-
gated, and the study collected 156 failures that
resultedin13448hours(560days)ofdowntime.
Given that any problem or failure that requires
the withdrawal of the blowout preventer costs
approximately $1.2 million per day [23], a total
of $672.4 million was lost as a result of the 156
failures.
Conducting BOP system’s failure studies
is critical in assisting oil and gas companies
in identifying which systems and components
are prone to failure and, as a result, provid-
ing knowledge about failure’s scenarios for use
in loss prevention decision-making [35]. The
study of blowout preventer system failures re-
quires a systematic analysis of the BOP sys-
tem and an understanding of the main critical
failures and their consequences if a blowout oc-
curs [36].
More and more companies in the oil and gas
industry are striving to collect data and cre-
ate databases about their operations to extract
knowledge and support future management de-
cisions [37]. Failure records are essential be-
cause they are used as input for data analyt-
ics processes to improve industry safety, per-
formance, and knowledge [38]. While text de-
scriptions of the interventions written by the
maintenance technicians can be found in a
database of maintenance records, maintenance
optimization is frequently limited to informa-
tion about the time of maintenance interven-
tions due to the diﬃculty of automatically an-
alyzing texts [39]. Natural language eﬀorts in
maintenance data pose a signiﬁcant challenge
due to its unstructured nature and technical
language with particular terms [40].Few studies have examined maintenance text
records to understand equipment maintenance
interventions better and improve future deci-
sions. In [41], a semi-supervised conditional
random ﬁeld (CRF)-based information extrac-
tion approach is proposed to extracting in-
formation entities from bridge inspection re-
ports identifying existing deﬁciencies, and per-
form maintenance actions. In [42], a text min-
ing method is used to extract the most com-
mon product failure stories and their causes
of failure and regression analyses to look into
the links between consumer repair experiences
and future purchasing behaviors. In [39], a
method is proposed to using textual informa-
tion to identify equipment degradation states
by clustering maintenance records and develop-
ing a stochastic multi-state degradation model
using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN).
In [43], a text mining method is developed to
understand defects of a secondary device in
an intelligent substation that combines global
vectors for word representation (GloVe) and
attention-based bidirectional long short-term
memory (BiLSTM-Attention). In [44], a text
mining method is used to extracting informa-
tion about failure patterns in building systems
and components from CMMS databases on in-
teresting parts of the database containing work
orders about component’s failures. In [45],
a hybrid natural language processing (hybrid-
NLP) algorithm is used to extract entities that
represent electrical equipment. In [46], a sus-
tainable fault diagnosis model based on imbal-
anced text mining and natural language pro-
cessing technology is used to extract fault fea-
ture words from ﬁeld fault data. In [47], a
method is developed to identifying root cause
factors by extracting root cause text from un-
structured data using a keyword extraction
method. In [48], a deep learning method is
proposed to processing a power grid malfunc-
tion report that combines text data mining ori-
ented recurrent neural networks (RNN) with
long short-term memory (LSTM). In [49], a
January 4, 2023text mining method is used to extract addi-
tional information reports and used an inte-
grated spatial-temporal approach, namely the
Geographically and Temporally Weighted Or-
dered Logisgression (GTWOLR) to model the
natural gas pipeline incident reports. In [50],
a new methodology based on a series of steps
is proposed to preprocess and decompose the
service history to identify relevant words and
sentences that distinguish an unhealthy wind
turbine from a healthy one.
This study aims to identify and analyze the
most common failure scenarios of the follow-
ing components of the BOP system: annu-
lar, shear rams, regulator, and compensated
chamber solenoid valve. Furthermore, as well,
to determine how the failures were detected
and which maintenance actions were taken.
In order to accomplish this, latent semantic
analysis (LSA) was used to generate concepts
that represent topics based on BOP corrective
maintenance text records from an international
database known as RAPID-S53, which is de-
rived from the BOP Reliability Joint Industry
Project managed by the International Associa-
tion of Drilling Contractors (IADC). The LSA
was used in this paper because it can retrieve
multiple conceptual topics based on documents
with similar contexts, resulting in topic group-
ings of documents and terms [51, 52]. Given
the records’ context, these concepts can be in-
terpreted as failure scenarios incorporating do-
main expert knowledge. Understanding the
scenarios is critical for acting to improve in-
dustry safety by reducing accident risks and in-
creasing equipment availability.
LSA has proven to be a valuable tool
for analyzing reviews, products feedbacks,
maintenance interventions reports, and other
textual records capable of assisting decision-
making [53]. Customers were segmented and
analyzed by [54] using a combination of group
RFM analysis and probabilistic latent semantic
analysis models, and the results indicated that
the developed approach provides insight andcaptures a wide range of customer preferences.
In [55], Latent Semantic Analysis, Text2Vec,
and Doc2Vec techniques are used to analyze
data from the Parkinson’s Progression Markers
Initiative (PPMI). In [56], the main accident
topics in a database of railroad equipment
accident descriptions maintained by the Fed-
eral Railroad Administration in the United
States are identiﬁed using LSA and LDA.
In [51], groups of contextually similar terms
from future-oriented data sources, including
experts’ and the general public’s concerns
about drone technology, are extracted using
the LSA. In [57], the LSA is used to extract
essential topics in a large group of paper
abstracts from the ﬁeld of Multiple Criteria
Decision Making (MCDM), and they were able
to identify principle categories and signiﬁcant
themes contained in the text.
The proposed research’s main contribution
is that the information gathered could as-
sist in the development of maintenance plan-
ning actions, reliability studies, and support
in identifying critical conditions for the well
drilling system’s shutdown decision. Further-
more, text mining results provide a rich addi-
tional source of data for future predictive an-
alytics workﬂows, and leveraging unstructured
data resources allows for more accurate predic-
tive models [38].
The paper is structured as follows. Section
2 discusses the theoretical background and rel-
evant literature on accidents in the oil and gas
industry and the components and functions of
blowout preventer systems. Section 3 describes
the research methodology, which includes data
collection and the use of LSA. Sections 4 and
5 present the research ﬁndings and the discus-
sion. Section 6 presents the ﬁndings’ conclu-
sions and implications. Finally, Section 7 dis-
cusses the research’s limitations as well as sug-
gestions for further studies.
January 4, 20232. Theoretical background
2.1. Blowouts in oﬀshore drilling
The demand for oil and gas sources has
increased in recent decades due to economic
growth, and oil and gas remain the primary en-
ergy resources [24]. Drilling is a crucial part
of the oil and gas industry, and its success
will be determined by its ability to improve
its processes’ operational reliability and avail-
ability signiﬁcantly [58]. Deepwater drilling life
cycle phases are well planning, drilling, and
completion, with the drilling phase encompass-
ing many activities such as drilling, running
casing, cementing, circulation, ﬂuid displace-
ment, and clean-up [59]. Given that deepwater
drilling entails complex operations that must
be completed in short periods and that errors
can cost tens of millions of dollars, balanc-
ing risks, schedules, and budgets is a diﬃcult
task [59, 60].
Because of the signiﬁcant ﬁnancial invest-
ment required and the fact that drilling wells
are hazardous operations, safety is a top pri-
ority, and the activities are strictly regulated
through regulations and laws [61]. Accidents
during the drilling phase generally halt pro-
duction and harm the image of companies in-
volved, so measures to reduce the frequency
and severity of accidents are critical [62]. Fur-
thermore, as the industry approaches reservoirs
atdeeperwaterdepthsandinmorecomplexge-
ological formations, drilling operations become
more complex, resulting in increased risks [3].
The well control operation aims to keep the
well integrity by addressing the procedures to
be followed when formation ﬂuids begin to ﬂow
into the wellbore [2, 63]. Blowout is the uncon-
trolled ﬂow of formation ﬂuids to the surface,
anditisoneofthemajoreventsthatcontribute
to the risks associated with oﬀshore drilling [5].
A blowout occurs when a kick (the ﬂow of
formation ﬂuid into the wellbore) is not dis-
covered early enough, or when safety barriers
in the well, such as blowout preventers, fail toseal [2]. When the formation pressure over-
comes the pressure exerted by the ﬂuid column,
such as drilling ﬂuid, a blowout occurs [16].
Blowouts are an expensive and feared opera-
tional hazard in oﬀshore drilling, causing de-
lays as well as ﬁres, explosions, casualties, asset
damage, and environmental damage [6].
Because of the severe consequences of deep-
water blowouts, scholars have conducted exten-
sive research on them [25]. April 20, 2010, well
blowout, also known as the Deepwater Horizon
accident, prompted questions about the safety
of deepwater drilling [8]. The gas exploded
and caught ﬁre on the rig’s deck, killing eleven
workers, and the blowout caused oil to ﬂow for
two months from the damaged well [8]. This
environmental disaster aﬀects local economies,
sensitivecoastlines, andwildlifethroughoutthe
Gulf region and still [64–66]. On August 16,
1984, a blowout occurred on the Enchova Cen-
tral oil rig in Brazil. The majority of the work-
ers on the platform were safely rescued, but 42
people died due to a failure in the lifeboat low-
ering system, and six of them died while jump-
ing from a height of 30 to 40 meters into the
water [67]. A second blowout occurred on April
24, 1988, when the BOP could not seal the
well and attempts to prevent the event failed.
The platform was destroyed after a drill pipe
was forced out of the well and struck one of
the platform’s legs, causing sparks to ignite gas
from the blowout [62]. The operators of the
Montara H1 oil and gas well lost control of the
well on August 21, 2009, resulting in a blowout.
There were no serious injuries or deaths due
to the incident, but uncontrolled hydrocarbons
spilled into the atmosphere for 75 days [61]. On
October 21, 1982, on Eugene Island Block 361,
well-control was lost in the Gulf of Mexico, and
a signiﬁcant blowout and ﬁre occurred. One or
more shallow gas sands with slightly abnormal
pressures charged the gas ﬂow, which ﬂowed
outside the drill pipe and upward through the
annular preventer, resulting in a full-scale gas
blowout [68].
January 4, 2023According to [62] analysis from data col-
lected since 1956, blowouts are historically the
most common type of accident in all world
regions. In North America, 38 accidents in-
volving blowouts were recorded, accounting for
38% of all accident types in the region. The
same pattern was observed in Europe and for
North Sea operations, with 9 (28%) blowouts
recorded. Blowouts were also the most com-
mon accident type in South America, Asia, and
Africa, accounting, respectively, for 29(82.8%),
12 (46.2%), and 8 (57.2%). This data em-
phasizes the dominance of blowouts over other
types of accidents during well drilling opera-
tions.
2.2. Blowout preventers system
ABOPisanelectro-hydraulicsystemusedto
seal, control and monitor oil and gas wells [7,
16]. It was built to handle high pressures and
preventblowoutsbysealingthewellwithanan-
nular preventer and shear rams preventers [63].
The two main subsystems of the subsea BOP
system are the BOP stack and the control sys-
tem [15]. A blowout preventer stack is consti-
tuted of one or two annular preventers, three to
six ram preventers, two connectors (one con-
necting the BOP to the wellhead connector
and the other connecting the lower marine riser
package to the BOP), and four to ten choke
and kill valves, according to [18]. Drilling com-
panies use several annular preventers and ram
preventers as system redundancies to improve
the reliability of the BOP stack [7]. Figure 1
shows a typical conﬁguration of a subsea BOP
system.
One of the most critical barriers capable of
preventing blowouts during deepwater drilling
operations is the annular blowout preven-
ter [70]. An annular preventer is a blowout
preventer that seals between the tube and the
wellbore or an open hole using a shaped seal-
ing elastomeric component [16]. The annular
preventer eﬀectively maintains a seal around
the drill pipe even as it rotates during drilling,
but it is not as eﬀective as ram preventers
Figure 1: Typical conﬁguration of a subsea BOP
stack [69].
at sealing on an open hole, and it must be
capable of closing the wellbore to comply with
regulations [7].
The steadily increasing wall thickness, be-
cause drilling ultradeep wells places signiﬁcant
demands on the drill string, required to absorb
high tensile loads, has exceeded the capacity of
some shear rams to shear drill pipe successfully
in some cases [71]. Pipe rams, blind shear rams
(BSR), and casing shear rams (CSR) are the
three main types of ram preventers. Pipe rams
close around a drill pipe, restricting ﬂow be-
tween the drill pipe and the wellbore [7]. While
blind shear rams are designed to cut the drill
string as the rams close oﬀ the well, casing
shear rams should be able to cut the casing as
well, and they should be able to eﬀectively seal
January 4, 2023the hole against the ﬂow of oil and gas in emer-
gencies such as potential blowouts [15]. Among
the various devices on the BOP, blind shearing
rams serve as the last line of defense, and two
BSRs are used in some deepwater BOP to in-
crease the chances of cutting the drill pipe and
sealing the well [72, 73].
Although there are two types of subsea BOP
control systems, hydraulic and multiplexed
(MUX), the MUX system is the more recent
and widely used because as exploration depth
increased, problems with the reaction time of
umbilicals used in the hydraulic control sys-
tem were observed, and hydraulic lines control-
ling the pilot valves were replaced with sepa-
rate electric cables operating the compensated
chamber solenoid valves (CCSV) [18, 35]. Most
subsea blowout preventers used for deepwater
drilling are similar to those used for shallow-
water drilling, but the BOP is controlled by
a multiplex control system, which reduces the
time it takes for the BOP functions to acti-
vate [73].
The blowout preventer MUX control sys-
tem comprises two subsystems: an electrical
system and a hydraulic system that includes
components such as pumps, valves, accumu-
lators, ﬂuid storage and mixing equipment,
and a manifold [7, 15]. The drilling rig’s sur-
face control components include three com-
puters in the central control unit (CCU), the
driller’s station, and the toolpusher’s station,
as well as three programmable logic controllers
(PLC) [74, 75]. The CCU is the brain behind
the subsea BOP control system, and it uses the
PLCs to send commands from surface control
stations and panels to the subsea control point
of distribution (POD) [74]. Six ﬁber optic re-
peaters complete the communications between
the CCU and the blue and yellow subsea elec-
tronics modules (SEM) via two fully indepen-
dent subsea umbilical cables made up of optical
ﬁbers and electrical wires to transmit signals
and power [75]. The blue and yellow SEMs are
designed to decode surface signals, and theircomplete independence allows for a fully redun-
dant system for controlling all subsea functions
and communicating with the CCU [76]. The
decoded signal activates an electrical solenoid
valve in the subsea POD, which sends a hy-
draulic pilot signal to the appropriate func-
tion hydraulic valve, also known as subplate-
mounted valves (SPM) [76].
Control points of distribution (PODs) are
essential to the performance of a subsea con-
trol system. Each POD contains the compen-
sated chamber solenoid valves, pressure trans-
ducers, subplate-mounted valves, pressure reg-
ulators, ﬂowmeters, and hydraulic accumula-
tors [74, 77]. PODs are identical and can
be mounted in either the blue or yellow loca-
tion [16]. Decoded signals operate the PODs
from the SEMs, but only one of them receives
hydraulic ﬂuid for performing BOP functions,
making the operation of the other POD inef-
fective [78]. The CCSV then sends a hydraulic
signal to the corresponding SPM, which is ac-
tuated and sends pressurized hydraulic ﬂuid to
the BOP system’s function [76].
Hydraulic regulators, which reduce the pres-
sure in the supplied ﬂuid through the rigid hy-
draulic line before entering the POD, are an-
other important component of the BOP con-
trol system [16, 18]. The regulator’s spools
control sizes of oriﬁces of supply, output, and
vent ports according to the pressure down-
stream and upstream the valve, but there are
two types of pressure regulators valves present
in the BOP control system [79]. The ﬁrst type
is a manual regulating valve known as manual
koomey regulators (MKR) and has the desired
outlet pressure set on the surface using the ad-
justment nut before it is put into operation in
theBOPsystem[80] .Theotherisremotelyad-
justable regulators known as hydraulic koomey
regulators (HKR), which can be regulated re-
motely from the surface via the BOP system’s
control panel [79].
Each POD contains an accumulator used in
the MUX system to store hydraulic ﬂuid to be
January 4, 2023used in case of hydraulic ﬂow demands and the
loss of power supply to the pumps [18, 80]. The
accumulators in the BOP stack should provide
enough volume and pressure of an available hy-
draulic ﬂuid to actuate the speciﬁed well con-
trol equipment and enough residual pressure to
maintain sealing capability [16, 81]. To bet-
ter understand how accumulators operate, con-
sider an order to close the BOP ram. As pre-
sented before, the signal will be transmitted
fromthecentralcontrolunit(CCU)totheSEM
for decoding and then to the POD. The spe-
ciﬁc compensated chamber solenoid valve will
then open to performing the function, trigger-
ing the SPM valve to change position and al-
lowing high-pressure ﬂuid stored in the accu-
mulator to pass through, closing the ram [78].
BOP components are mainly monitored
through tests, and two of the most critical
tests performed on the BOP are the pressure
test and the function test [19]. A function test
is an operation of a BOP system’s component
that aims to verify its intended operation (that
it can do what it is intended to do) and must
be performed at least once a week [16]. Only
the ability to perform the function of a BOP
is tested when it is function tested, which
is insuﬃcient to ensure the safety of drilling
operations because the capability of sealing
the wellbore is not guaranteed [5]. Pressure
testing the BOP entails evaluating both the
capability to act the BOP function and seal oﬀ
a pressure, it must also be performed regularly,
with no more than 21 days between tests, and
it consists of two tests: the low-pressure test
and the high-pressure test [16].
3. Methodology
The method was divided into three major
phases: initial procedures, LSA procedures,
and post-LSA procedures. Each major phase
was made up of stages and smaller steps, and
the ﬁrst phase, initial procedures, consisted of
collecting failure records and preparing data.
The second phase, LSA procedures, consists ofpreprocessing, which prepares the failure de-
scriptions for analysis, and LSA processing of
the preprocessed records. The third phase is
the post-LSA procedures, which begin with
creating failure scenarios using the concepts-
terms and document-concepts matrices, fol-
lowed by the ﬁnal validation of the MFS matrix
by domain experts. The method was applied
to BOP corrective maintenance text records
from the RAPID-S53 international database,
managed by the International Association of
DrillingContractors(IADC).Figure2showsan
overview of the methodology of this research.
Figure 2: Overview of proposed methodology.
3.1. Data collection
The RAPID-S53 database used in this re-
search results from the BOP Reliability Joint
Industry Project, in which oil and gas ex-
ploration companies, drilling contractors, and
original equipment manufacturers (OEM) from
all over the world participated. The database
January 4, 2023includes global records of deviations in equip-
ment functions and drilling operations inter-
ruptions associated with the BOP system, and
it is maintained by the International Associa-
tion of Drilling Contractors (IADC). The main
objective of this database is to provide a large
amount of data that individual companies can
use to improve the reliability and eﬃciency of
well control equipment.
There are guidelines for the register of events
in the RAPID-S53 database. It is necessary
to generate a report for each event in which a
component of the well control equipment was
considered to be malfunctioning. If no immedi-
ate physical corrective action is required to be
applied directly to a component in order for it
to operate as designed, the event does not need
to be reported. However, events during main-
tenance and testing should continue to be re-
ported, but only defects (failures) and not any
event related to preventive maintenance, such
as a component preventive replacement [82].
The data was collected from RAPID-S53 to
a worksheet. There are records of failure events
from January 2012 to November 2018 from 26
diﬀerent companies, 6380 registers. Although
the registers recorded information related to
the failure event, such as the amount of us-
age at the time of failure, hours of repair time,
hours of non-productive time, this research fo-
cused on the event description to identify and
understand the main failure scenarios of the
BOP system. The failure texts are 448 terms
long on average, corresponding to two or three
paragraphs explaining the failure observed, the
componentsandpartsaﬀected, detectionmeth-
ods, and corrective actions.
3.2. Data preparation
Given the complexity of the blowout preven-
ter system, which is made up of several sub-
systems with numerous components and parts,
it was necessary to work with subsets of the
registers to improve the ability of the concepts
generated by the LSA approach to describethe main failure scenarios for some components
perceived more critical for the BOP system.
In [5], data on subsea BOPs on the Gulf of
Mexico’soutercontinentalshelffortenmonths,
from July 1997 to May 1998, is gathered and
the 117 failures recorded resulted in 3638 hours
of downtime (non-productive time). The ram
preventers account for 41% of the downtime,
with a total time loss of 1505 hours, the pri-
mary control system accounts for 28% (1021
hours), and the annular preventer accounts for
9% (337 hours) of the downtime caused by
BOP’s failures. In [34], a reliability study that
observed subsea BOP’s failures in the Gulf of
Mexico is presented, and the data comprises
156 failures registered and 13448 hours of non-
productive time from 2007 to 2009. Failure
events caused by the BOP control system, such
as regulator’s failure, solenoid valve’s failure,
and control ﬂuid leak, were the primary con-
tributors, accounting for 35% of the unplanned
non-productive time, with a total time loss of
4712 hours. Annular preventers and ram pre-
venters are the second and fourth most signif-
icant sources of downtime events in [34], ac-
counting for 17% (2345 hours) and 13% (1766
hours).
Key components of the blowout preventer
system were chosen for analysis using the data
presented. The data was segmented based on
thecomponentsidentiﬁedinthefailurerecords.
The latent semantic analysis was performed
on textual descriptions of failures of the fol-
lowing components: annular preventers, shear
ram preventers, compensated chamber solenoid
valves, and hydraulic regulators. It is critical
to note that the database does not diﬀerentiate
between blind shear ram and casing shear ram.
However, it was expected that the LSA applied
to the failure event description ﬁeld would al-
low for the distinction of the two components’
failure scenarios. Similarly, the component in-
dication as regulator is used in the RAPID-
S53 database to record failures of both the hy-
draulic koomey regulator (HKR) and the man-
January 4, 2023ual koomey regulator (MKR).
The RAPID-S53 was cut into smaller
datasets according to the components, and
the data associated with the components se-
lected was gathered in speciﬁc worksheets. The
tokenization of terms (unigrams, bigrams, and
trigrams) was then performed with a minimum
frequency of 2.5 percent of the total records for
each component worksheet to form an initial
bag-of-words (BoW). These BoWs were ana-
lyzed and used to assist in creating a dictionary
of terms containing bigrams and trigrams that
are common in a database containing technical
texts such as the RAPID-S53. The purpose is
that terms such as annular element, soak test,
seal plate, vent port, and weep hole, which
used to appear separately, will appear in the
concepts with the character underline joining
the two or three words that make up the term,
facilitating concept interpretation. This list
was also used to create a synonym dictionary.
Figure 3 illustrates the relationship between
this study’s latent semantic analysis and data
preparation.
Figure 3: Overview of the research initial procedures.
Python, a programming language increas-
inglybeingusedinacademicresearch, wasused
in this study [83], was used in this study. An-
other tool used that has become popular in
the data science area is the Jupyter Notebook.The NumPy, Matplotlib, Seaborn, Scikit-learn,
Pandas, Pandas-Proﬁling, NLTK, and SciPy li-
braries were used in this research [84–90].
The speciﬁc worksheets correspond to a total
of 1312 failure records and 6565 hours of down-
time. Consideringthepreviouslystatedcostsof
downtime, thefailuresdocumentedinthework-
sheets resulted in a monetary loss of more than
$300 million. While annular component fail-
ures account for 247 records, contributing to
2778 hours of non-productive time, shear rams’
failures account for 310 records, contributing
to 1706 hours of downtime. Failures of the
regulator and CCSV, both components of the
BOP control system, correspond to 421 failures
(1121 hours of non-productive time) and 334
failures (960 hours of non-productive time), re-
spectively.
3.3. Latent Semantic Analysis
Many models have been developed in re-
cent decades to understand the use of words
found in textual documents, which is a sig-
niﬁcant challenge due to the various contexts
in which words can be used [91]. Because a
text is an unstructured form of information
with high complexity, and because it is com-
posed of many words or terms (such as bigrams
and trigrams) combined to form diﬀerent ideas
throughout the text, reducing the number of
terms by removing words that are not relevant
to the ideas presented in the text is essential
to making the analysis possible [92–94]. Work-
ing with thousands of dimensions can have a
negative impact on textual mining results, and
reducingthenumberofdimensionscanimprove
accuracy and eﬃciency without sacriﬁcing sig-
niﬁcant aspects of the data [95]. The latent
semantic analysis (LSA), ﬁrst introduced as
an information retrieval technique [96, 97] and
later deﬁned as knowledge acquisition, induc-
tion, and representation theory [98], is a model
that can retrieve topics and ideas from texts
records with similar contexts [51].
LSA is a well-known mathematical approach
for extracting and presenting textual data in a
January 4, 2023semantic structure [51, 96]. The mathematical
model is based on the idea that words with sim-
ilar meanings are more likely to occur in similar
contexts [56]. It acquires semantic knowledge
by utilizing word associations found in training
documents [96]. As a result, the system’s inter-
pretation of a word is determined by how the
training corpus uses language and how words
are associated in the training corpus [91]. The
model generates semantic representations for
words by analyzing the statistical pattern of
joint occurrence of words across the training
corpus [56]. The semantic space constructed
from corpus documents contains semantic vec-
tors, also known as concepts or topics. Each
of them has a speciﬁc value associated with
each word in the set of documents, and this
value can be interpreted as that word’s con-
tribution to the formation of the speciﬁc con-
cept [97]. Thus, latent semantic analysis can
examine the relationships and similarities be-
tween documents and the terms (the compo-
sition of one or more words) contained within
those documents and identify the ideas (topics)
presented in texts [98].
LSA consists of three major steps, accord-
ing to [51] and [57]. The ﬁrst step is to create
a term frequency (TF) matrix, in which each
line represents a word or term, and each col-
umn represents a document or context, and
individual cell entries contain the frequency
with which a term occurs in a document [99].
Some studies consider using the preprocess-
ing procedures as the ﬁrst step to getting bet-
ter results [57]. The frequency of terms is
then transformed to form a matrix of terms
and documents with transformed values known
as term frequency-inverse document frequency
(TF-IDF), reﬂecting how important a word
is to a document in a collection [53]. Fi-
nally, toreducethematrix’sdimensionalitywas
used the singular-value decomposition (SVD),
which is an eigenvector decomposition and fac-
tor analysis technique [96]. This division into
three major steps is quite similar to the divi-sion presented by [99], which divides into four
major steps, the ﬁrst three of which are iden-
tical to those presented and the last of which
isassociatedwithinformationretrievalthrough
vector similarity.
Preprocessing steps, in general, involve ﬁl-
tering out documents of interest to the analyst
and eliminating words and terms that are ir-
relevant [100]. Several studies emphasize the
importance of preprocessing procedures in text
mining research to improve techniques used for
information retrieval and topics modeling [92–
94]. Removal of stopwords and stemming are
the most commonly used techniques for prepro-
cessing textual data [94]. Other essential pre-
processing techniques include removing unnec-
essary punctuation, converting letters to lower-
case, and lemmatization [92].
Tokenization, the ﬁrst activity of the text
preprocessing stage in this study, transforms
these texts into vectors composed of all of the
words and terms contained within them [93]. It
was possible to identify the essential terms that
will be considered in the preprocessing stage
and to build a dictionary of terms and syn-
onyms by using initial experimental tokeniza-
tion. Tokenization was very important for the
current research because many technical terms
and expressions, such as component names and
maintenance procedures, were found frequently
in RAPID-S53 database failure records. In this
study, unnecessary punctuation was removed,
letters were converted to lowercase, and stop-
words were removed from the registers in this
order. Following that, the texts were lemma-
tizedwithWordNetPoStaggingandtheWord-
Net lemmatizer [101, 102]. According to some
studies, lemmatization, despite having a higher
computational cost, is more precise than stem-
mization and produces better results [103, 104].
Another reason for using lemmatization rather
thanstemminginthisstudyisthatstemmingis
morelikelytoproduceincorrectornon-existent
terms, which is exacerbated by the highly tech-
nical nature of the texts describing the BOP
January 4, 2023system’s failures.
Followingthepreprocessingproceduresisthe
stage of constructing the matrix of terms and
documents and calculating the frequency of
each term presented in the dictionary built
for each failure record. The frequency value
is then transformed to construct the TF-IDF
matrix, which reduces the inﬂuence of words
proportionally to their occurrence, given that
these words do not signiﬁcantly contribute to
the understanding of the various topics in the
records [105]. According to [99], there are var-
ious methods for calculating the entries of the
TF-IDF matrix, and in this study, it was cal-
culated as
wij=tfijid fi (1)
where,
id fi=log1 +N
1 +ni
+ 1 (2)
Nis the total number of records in the corpus,
andniis the number of records containing the
term indicated by index i. The id fiindicates
therarityofoccurrenceofthetermindicatedby
index iin document j, and the higher the value
obtained, the rarer it is. The euclidean norm
is then applied to the resulting TF-IDF vectors
for each document. As a result, the ﬁnal TF-
IDF vectors are denoted as vjand calculated
as follows.
vj=wjp
w1j2+w2j2+  +wnj2(3)
The ability of the singular values decomposi-
tiontechniquetoreducethedimensionsoflarge
volumes of data to a more manageable number
without losing a signiﬁcant amount of informa-
tionfromtheoriginalvariablesiswhyLSAuses
it [105]. The SVD satisﬁes the requirement of
working with the TF-IDF matrix, which con-
tains a large volume of data [96].
Mathematically, SVD decomposes the terms
and documents matrix or the TF-IDF matrix,
Atd,into the product of three other matri-
ces:Gtm, an orthogonal matrix with m repre-
senting the dimensionality of the data, Smm,a diagonal matrix with single values ordered in
descending order, and Ddm, a transpose of the
column orthogonal matrix [96–98]. That is to
say,
Atd=GtmSmm(Ddm)T(4)
Where tdenotes the number of terms and d
denotes the number of documents in the cor-
pus. Thematricesaretruncatedinanarbitrary
number of concepts, denoted as k, to remove
thenoiseintheoriginalmatrixandthusextract
the semantic relations of the documents [106].
The SVD result is the best k-dimensional ap-
proximation to the original matrix in terms of
the least square error [99].
In the same latent semantic space created
by singular values decomposition, each term
anddocumentisrepresentedasak-dimensional
vector [99]. Each nlatent semantic concept, in
the interval I= [1;2; : : : ; k ], is associated with
asetofvalues, knownasloadings, fortermsand
documents. So, the SVD generates two matri-
ces of concepts loadings, one for the words and
one for the documents. These terms and docu-
ment loadings can be used to interpret or label
each concept [51]. Figure 4 illustrates the LSA
stages and outputs.
The optimal number of concepts is an open
problem in science, and analyzing the graph of
the singular values of the concepts produced
is one of the most common methods for deter-
mining this number [105]. The logic goes that
the higher the singular value associated with
the concept, the better it can explain the data
variance [107]. In the context of failure records,
conceptswithhighersingularvaluesalmostcer-
tainly deﬁne the components’ main failure sce-
narios (which appeared more frequently in the
records). Visualizing the elbow in the graph or
when there are accelerating decreasing returns
is one possible criterion for deﬁning the con-
cepts under consideration [105, 108]. Several
studies have investigated the terms that con-
tribute the most to concepts (via term load-
ings) in conjunction with the singular values
technique to uncover topics hidden in textual
January 4, 2023Figure 4: Overview of LSA and post-LSA procedures and outputs.
records or documents [109, 110]. Given the im-
possibility of analyzing all of the concepts gen-
erated by the SVD, using singular values as a
cut-oﬀ rule to deﬁne the number of concepts
that should be analyzed is an interesting solu-
tion.
Constructing scenarios involves concept in-
terpretation using the term loadings of the
Concept-Term (CT) matrix and the documents
loadings of the Document-Concept (DC) ma-
trix [52]. The high-loading terms and docu-
ments were analyzed to identify failure scenar-
ios, which are composed of information regard-
ing corrective maintenance operations. Deﬁn-
ing the appropriateterm anddocument loading
threshold value is critical and can impact the
interpretation process, but there are no estab-
lished methods for determining the value [51].
According to [111] ,researchers must empiri-
cally determine the appropriate loading thresh-
old values for each scenario based on coherence.
Each concept may have a diﬀerent threshold
value for its terms or documents, but high load-
ing values are required to ensure the scenario is
reasonably concrete [51].Given that the corpus used in this study was
composedoffailurerecordstexts, thegenerated
concepts’ high loading terms were highly tech-
nical. The majority of these terms were compo-
nent names, detection methods, observed fail-
ures, andcorrectiveactions. So, thedomainex-
perts responsible for interpreting the concepts
andconstructingthefailurescenariosdidasim-
ple classiﬁcation of the terms, which can sup-
port the construction of failure scenarios stage
as an initial step of the interpretation process.
Figure 5 shows an example of a high loading
terms classiﬁcation for a theoretical concept.
The classiﬁcation is not necessary for interpret-
ing the concepts, but it does help with interpre-
tation.
4. Results
To extract the main failure scenarios, the
maximum number of concepts, k, was empir-
ically set as ten since this number of concepts
is higher than the number of main failure sce-
narios expected by the authors for each BOP
component. It was then used the singular val-
January 4, 2023Figure 5: Example of terms classiﬁcation of a theoreti-
cal concept.
ues elbow graph combined with the high load-
ing terms and documents contextual analysis
to determine the number of concepts to be an-
alyzed by domain experts. Figure 6 shows sin-
gular values graphs for each BOP component
to the ten concepts with higher singular values.
Following the analyses, eight concepts asso-
ciated with BOP stack components were cho-
sen, four annular preventer’s concepts and four
shear ram preventer’s concepts. As with the
BOP stack’s components, eight concepts re-
lated to BOP control system’ components have
been selected, ﬁve regulator’s concepts, and
three compensated chamber solenoid valve’s
concepts. When analyzing the concepts, it was
evaluated that a maximum of twenty-ﬁve terms
was suﬃcient for understanding each concept’s
failure scenario. All concepts are given names
(denoted by the combination of the component
name abbreviation and the number of the order
in which it was generated, for example, AC1 for
the annular preventer’s concept one), and their
highest loading terms are reported in Table 1
and Table 2.
The concepts were independently interpreted
by four experts of BOP system’s functions, fail-ures, and maintenance operations based on the
CT matrix terms loadings of the terms that
contribute the most to each concept and the
DC matrix highly related failure records, which
have high loadings. The results were then
compared, and the interpretation was similar
for the majority of the scenarios constructed.
Some minor disagreements were solved through
discussion. The following failure scenarios rep-
resent the concepts’ ﬁnal interpretation.
Scenario AC1 : The annular’s leakage fail-
ure is the subject of this scenario. Aside from
the leakage failure, the records highly associ-
ated with this scenario show that scratches on
theannularpistonwereobservedduringinspec-
tions. Some records described them as light
scratches, while others were more speciﬁc, stat-
ing that they did not exceed an acceptable
depth deﬁned by the original equipment man-
ufacturer (OEM). The most aﬀected compo-
nents are the head seals, chamber seals, piston
seals, and annular sealing element (packer el-
ement). The leaks were caused by seal cuts,
pinching, and wear, according to the records.
Because the seals are made of elastomeric ma-
terial (rubber), seal damage and wear can re-
sult in ﬂuid leaks due to leakage paths. There
appears to be no diﬀerence in the likelihood
of failure occurrence for both lower and up-
per annular preventers. Failures were detected
throughsurfacepressuretests(thetermsurface
refers to the fact that the tests were performed
with the BOP in the rig). According to the
records highly connected to this scenario, after
the leakage was noticed, the annular was disas-
sembled at the surface to investigate and iden-
tify the cause of the incident. The corrective
action is the installation of a new component
during maintenance. The observed failure may
aﬀect the capability of the BOP system to seal
the well in an emergency.
Scenario AC2 : The scenario is about pro-
trusion failure of the annular’s sealing spher-
ical element due to the passage of drill pipes
and their joints. The annular element pro-
January 4, 2023Figure 6: Singular values graphs
Table 1: BOP Stack components related concepts and their highest loading terms
Concept Singular
ValuesTerms that contribute the most to each concept
Annular’s failures concepts
AC1 6.304 seal; annular; test; pressure; leak; pressure_test; element; mainte-
nance; BOP; piston; new; description; fail; upper_annular; inspect;
lower_annular; root_cause; open; replace; instal; observe; close; damage.
AC2 3.333 element; fail; test; annular_element; root_cause; pressure_test; main-
tenance; description; BOP; rubber; upper_annular_element; tool;
drill_pipe; attempt; cycle; joint; pull; pass; protrude; hold; closure; packer.
AC3 2.840 piston; element; score; maintenance; new; description; replace;
adapter_ring; inspect; damage; pit; annular_piston; cause; root_cause;
change; surface; sent; rubber; disassembly; annular_element; area; bore;
replacement; seal_area; swarf.
AC4 2.509 seal; lower_annular; roll; wellbore; upper; cap; o-ring; mud; housing;
adapter; replace; instal; ﬂuid; pull; rubber; weep_hole; packer; element;
anti_extrusion; remove; leak; polypak_seal; adapter_ring.
Shear ram’s failures concepts
SRC1 6.485 seal; pressure; test; bonnet; leak; blind_shear_ram; door; BOP; operator;
open; maintenance; inspect; pressure_test; fail; close; o-ring; ram; new;
description; damage; remove; hinge; replace.
SRC2 3.717 bolt; blade; inspect; upper; crack; block; ram_block; low; maintenance;
non_destructive_test; shear_ram; fail; pressure_test; blind_shear_ram;
rubber; description; lateral_seal; torque; shear; end_of_well.
SRC3 3.186 pressure; pressure_test; ram; fail; low; rubber; shear_ram; hold; test; BOP;
blind_shear_ram; prior; attempt; wellbore; complete; packer; high; sur-
face; change; initial; cavity; good; cycle.
SRC4 2.927 door; hinge; aft; assembly; piston; forward; damage; pressure; year; body;
pressure_test; close_chamber; remove; notice; crew; poslock; pit; cham-
ber_test; plug; shear_ram; cavity; fwd; lock.
trudes into the wellbore area. The test drill
pipe joints can wedge it because it is made
of an elastomeric material (rubber). Failures
werediscoveredduetotheimpossibilityofpass-
ing drill pipes and their joints or testing tools
through the annular element and pressure tests
performed during operation (subsea). The de-
tection of the failure through the impossibil-
ity of passing drill pipe joints with the annular
in operation was more common than throughpressure tests in the records highly associated
with this scenario. The corrective action for
this scenario is the replacement of the compo-
nent during maintenance.
Scenario AC3 : This scenario involves an-
nular’s piston damage such as pitting and scor-
ing (the terms, scuﬃng, and scratches were
used as synonyms too). Pitting failure is a type
of corrosion that results in oxidation marks on
thecomponent. Thescoringisusuallyfoundon
January 4, 2023the upper section of the piston, where it comes
into contact with the adapter ring seals. Ac-
cording to some highly associated records, the
scoring occurrence is related to piston damage
that resulted in a raised edge between the pis-
ton and adapter ring. Other records indicated
that foreign material was found on the cham-
ber head. The majority of the failures were ob-
served during routine maintenance operations
through surface inspection with annular disas-
sembly. The corrective action is the replace-
ment of the component during maintenance.
The drill’s rotation generates acceptable metal-
lic debris during drilling operations, and there
is also ferrous debris leftover from milling or
cutting the casing. When drilling mud exits
the well and returns to the surface, rock debris,
metallic and ferrous particles pass through the
BOP stack, potentially entering the cavities of
the annular and shear ram preventers and dam-
aging parts such as the piston. A few records
related to this scenario indicated that the cause
of failure was that there is nothing to protect
the piston from scratches and also that the ma-
terial removed from scratches was found at the
top when the piston was returning to the open
position.
Scenario AC4 : This scenario is about an-
nular’s leakage failure caused by rolling seals.
A leak path is formed when the seal rolls out
of the seal proﬁle. According to failure records,
this failure occurs more frequently in the an-
nular cap seal. While some failure records ar-
gue that this failure is a recurring issue with
the cap seal and a design ﬂaw, others claim
that failures occurred due to maintenance er-
rors, such as installing the incorrect seal. The
seal rolling identiﬁcation by disassembling and
inspecting the annular after one pressure test-
ing with leaks appears frequent in the highly
associated failure records. Leakage frequently
occurs through a weep hole, which is a hole
placed downstream of a seal to open a leakage
pathandaccusethesealoflosingintegrity. The
component replacement is the corrective actionfor this scenario.
Scenario SRC1 : This scenario involves
leakage failures caused by damaged seals, such
as o-rings, on the blind shear ram. Seal damage
and wear can result in leakage paths and, as a
result, ﬂuid leakage. Failures were detected us-
ing functional tests and pressure tests, the ma-
jority of which were performed at the surface
and the stump test of the blind shear ram. Af-
ter visually detecting the leak, a common pro-
cedure is to bleed oﬀ the pressure and remove
the BSR door from the body, and then dam-
aged seals, such as pinched, and leakage paths
are observed. Some highly related records show
thattheproblemoccurredmorefrequentlywith
backup o-rings and polypak seals, but other
records show that the failure can aﬀect other
seals. According to one of these maintenance
records, the bonnet studs were coated with grit
and dirt around the cylinder head, with even
more debris on the inner piston. The correc-
tive action for this scenario is the component
replacement. Another common procedure ap-
pears to be the execution of chamber tests to
verify the BSR’s capability to perform its re-
quired function. The leak was more common
in the blind shear ram door or door hinge than
in others parts.
Scenario SRC2 : The fractures or cracks in
the blind shear ram blade’s bolts are the sub-
jects of this scenario. Failures were detected
by non-destructive tests and inspection of the
component. According to the highly associated
records, this failure is an ongoing issue, and it
probably is a design or material issue. The cor-
rective action is the replacement of the cracked
blade bolts. The presence of the term end of
well indicates that this failure scenario is typ-
ically detected at the ending of drilling opera-
tions procedures, such as surface tests.
Scenario SRC3 : This scenario is about the
failure of blind shear ram’s seals, which aﬀects
the component’s capability to maintain the
pressurelevelsrequired. High-pressuretestsex-
ecuted with the BOP system in the rig detected
January 4, 2023the failures. A common procedure after detect-
ing a failure is to bleed oﬀ the pressure and
disassemble the BSR to investigate the cause.
According to the records, the failure was de-
tected only during high-pressure tests, not dur-
inglow-pressureteststhatyieldedsuccessfulre-
sults. In this scenario, the corrective action is
to replace the seals in the BSR. According to
some records, this failure was caused by a de-
sign ﬂaw or a manufacturing error, while others
report it was caused by seal wear and tear.
Scenario SRC4 : The leakage failure in the
blind shear ram’s doors, bonnets, and hinges
is the subject of this scenario. Some highly
related records indicated that these failures oc-
curred due to problems with parts such as bolts
and seals. The records reported that the oc-
currence was caused by wear in the compo-
nents and parts, but it is worth noting that a
few pointed to maintenance errors as the root
cause of the failure. The majority of the fail-
ureswereidentiﬁedduringroutinemaintenance
operations by performing a chamber test on the
BSR.Inthisscenario, thecorrectiveactionisto
replace the damaged components or parts dur-
ing maintenance. Another common procedure
appears to be the execution of chamber tests
to determine whether or not the component’s
leakage has been resolved.
Scenario RC1 : Thisscenarioisaboutleak-
age failure in the HKR and MKR regulators
due to damaged seals, such as o-rings. The ma-
jority of the failures were detected during sur-
face soak tests. After visually detecting a leak
coming from the vent tube, a common proce-
dureistobleedoﬀthepressureanddisassemble
the regulator, where damaged seals and leak-
age paths were discovered. The corrective ac-
tion for this scenario is to replace or rebuild the
damaged component during maintenance using
a repair kit. Finally, the regulator is tested,
and if no leaks are found, the maintenance is
completed. According to the strongly related
records, the failures were caused by wear and
tear in the regulators and their parts.Scenario RC2 : This scenario describes a
failure caused by the HKR regulators’ inability
to reach and (or) maintain the required pres-
sure, despite increase and decrease commands
executed on the control panels. Highly related
failure records indicated that pressure ﬂuctua-
tions above the required set pressure occurred.
Failuresweredetectedduringsurfacefunctional
tests as well as with the BOP in subsea op-
eration. According to the records, after the
pressure oscillations were detected, the regu-
lator was disassembled to investigate possible
causes of the failure. The corrective action for
this scenario is the replacement or the repair
(overhaul)oftheregulatorduringmaintenance.
Wear and tear in components, such as o-rings,
was suspected as the cause of the failures.
Scenario RC3 : This scenario involves reg-
ulator’s leakage failure in both the HKR and
the MKR. Failures were detected during func-
tional tests at the surface and soak tests, with
ﬂuid leaking through the vent tube. This sce-
nario is similar to scenario RC1. These leaks
weredetectedbypassingﬂuidthroughtheweep
hole, which is a hole placed downstream of a
seal to open a leak path and accuse the spring
housing seal of failing. The vent hole and vent
tube are connected to the spring housing com-
ponent, and also any damage to the seals, such
aso-rings, canresultinﬂuidenteringthespring
housingandbeingdetectedasaleakwhenﬂow-
ing through the spring house seal’s weep hole.
The corrective action for this scenario is the re-
placement of the damaged components, such as
o-rings and spring housing seals, during main-
tenance.
Scenario RC4 : This scenario is similar to
the scenario RC3. The diﬀerences between the
scenarios are due to the characteristics of the
leakage. Thevastmajorityofthecasesinvolved
drips. Soak tests and surface function tests
were used to detect the failures. The compo-
nent replacement during maintenance was the
corrective action for this scenario.
Scenario RC5 : This scenario describes
January 4, 2023Table 2: BOP Control System components related concepts and their highest loading terms
Concept Singular
ValuesTerms that contribute the most to each concept
Regulator’s failures concepts
RC1 7.379 regulator; leak; pressure; vent; note; maintenance; bop; blue_POD; instal;
yellow_POD; soak_test; test; remove; ﬂuid; o_ring; replace; description;
valve; POD; new; observe; rebuilt; seal; oem.
RC2 3.358 pressure; maintenance; description; POD; increase; function_test; regu-
late; decrease; overhaul; surface; swap; subsea; maintain; yellow_POD;
pilot_pressure; fail; root_cause; set; check; spare; new; supply_regulator;
circuit; rov.
RC3 3.092 soak_test; leak; root_cause; replace_new; blue_POD; oem; mainte-
nance; note; description; assembly; manifold_regulator; yellow_POD;
supply_regulator; function; spring_housing; BOP; manual_regulator;
vent_tube; function_test; crew; spare; detect; start; weep_hole; con-
trol_POD.
RC4 2.945 valve; vent; constantly; vent_tube; manifold_regulator; pressure;
soak_test; time; replace_new; function; root_cause; drip; pilot_regulator;
stop; notice; blue_POD; cycle; increase; range.
RC5 2.755 note; pressure; yellow_POD; damage; manifold_regulator; o_ring;
shear_seal; vent_port; seal_plate; crew; blue_POD; soak_test; re-
place_new; come; annular_regulator; internal; BOP; inspect; subsea; low;
revision; seal; component; regulate.
Compensated chamber solenoid valve’s failures concepts
SVC1 6.738 CCSV; leak; valve; solenoid; POD; function; blue; maintenance; note;
soak_test; remove; BOP; test; yellow_POD; replace; ﬂuid; instal; descrip-
tion; observe; open; inspect; vent; new; rebuilt; o_ring.
SVC2 3.999 valve; test; maintenance; pass; built; built_incorrectly; event; re-
ceive_oem_unused; pressure; straight; sustain; receive_oem; dedicate;
end_of_well; test_bench; oem; apply; prior; warehouse; seal; vent; de-
scription; root_cause; vent; ﬂuid; damage.
SVC3 3.578 solenoid; shear_seal; seal_plate; common; troubleshoot; leak; BOP; re-
place_oem; multiple; disassemble; bench_test; test; solenoid_bank; reacti-
vation; report; cameron; fail; currently; rig; run; investigation; drain; wear;
receive; surface.
January 4, 2023HKR regulator leakage caused by damaged
components such as shear seals, o-rings, and
seal plates. The failures were detected during
surface soak tests, with the leaking occurring
through the vent port. Following the detec-
tion, the regulator was disassembled in order to
determine the cause of the failure. According
to some highly associated records, they found
damages in the shear seals, such as cut, ex-
truding, and nibbling o-rings, shear seals, and
scratches in the seal plate. The corrective ac-
tion for this scenario is to replace damaged
components during maintenance.
Scenario SVC1 : The failure of compen-
sated chamber solenoid valves due to leakage
is the subject of this scenario. Soak tests and
functional tests, both performed at the surface,
were used to detect the failures. According to
highly related records, leakage frequently oc-
cursintheventtube. Aftervisuallydetectinga
leakfromtheventtube, acommonprocedureis
to remove and disassemble the CCSV for inves-
tigation. The immediate corrective action for
thisscenarioistoreplacethecomponent, which
can be a rebuilt or new valve, and test to see
if the failure has been resolved. The records
with a high score in this scenario indicated a
variety of failure causes. They report that the
leaks were caused by wear and tear on the seal
plates and damage to the seals, including the
seal assembly, o-rings, and shear seals. Some of
the seal plates had been worn and scuﬀed.
Scenario SVC2 : This scenario is similar to
scenario SVC1. According to the highly related
records, when pressure was applied, the valve
would not seal and allow ﬂuid to pass straight
through to the vent. The tests were conducted
at the surface, probably near the well’s end or
before the event.
Scenario SVC3 : This scenario is about
CCSV’s leakage. Leaks were discovered during
functional tests performed at the surface due to
a stream of ﬂuid passing through the common
vent or common drain on the solenoid bank.
According to the highly associated records, acommon procedure is troubleshooting to iden-
tify the speciﬁc compensated chamber solenoid
valve leaking and then disassembling to inves-
tigate. Some reported ﬁnding scratches and
wear signals on the seal plate and shear seal
and leaks caused by wear and tear. In this sce-
nario, the corrective action is to replace the en-
tireCCSVorjustthesealsduringmaintenance.
5. Discussion
The failure scenarios reported in this re-
search evidenced that critical failure modes in
BOP system’s components can occur for vari-
ous reasons and can be detected using a vari-
ety of methods. Some scenarios were similar to
others, but they diﬀered in minor ways, such
as the failures observed and detection methods
or detection conditions. For example, some an-
nular leakage failures occurred due to diﬀerent
component problems, such as damaged head
seals, chamber seals, or piston seals, and these
failures were sometimes detected through pres-
sure tests and other times through functional
tests. Despite the use of the singular values
elbow graph, domain experts were essential to
solve the problem of analyzing failure scenarios
that were very similar to others and concepts
that lacked essential parameters, such as fail-
ure modes, by helping to determine the cut-oﬀ
number of concepts to be considered for analy-
sis in this study. It is worth noting that some
of the excluded concepts had similar terms and
high loading failure records to the selected con-
cepts for analysis. They may represent a varia-
tion of the failure scenario, taking into account
a less frequent dimension, such as one diﬀerent
detection method.
LSA results highlighted the scenarios of fail-
ure that were more frequent in the RAPID-S53
non-planned corrective maintenance records of
the BOP system. Three or more failure scenar-
ios reported more frequently in the database
were found for the components under consid-
eration, as expected by the authors. Also was
January 4, 2023possible to identify the aﬀected systems, sub-
systems, components, detection methods used,
observed failures, and immediate corrective ac-
tions taken to solve the problem for all scenar-
ios. Aside from the fact that the components
interact with each other, ﬁndings show that
failures and maintenance actions diﬀer depend-
ingonthecomponentandevenwithinthesame
component due to the type of failure observed.
This characteristic of the results is most likely
due to the complexity of the blowout preven-
ter system and its components, which contain
a large number of subcomponents and parts.
To fully comprehend the ﬁndings of this
study, it is essential to assess the similarities
and diﬀerences between the failure scenarios
and the ﬁndings of other studies related to
the selected BOP system’s components. An-
nular failure scenarios reported leakage failures
caused by damaged or rolled seals, annular’s
piston damage, and protrusion of the annu-
lar’s sealing spherical element. In [5], was ob-
served that six of the 12 annular preventer’s
failures collected in the study were internal
leakage (leakage through a closed annular) fail-
ures, while the other six were failures to fully
open. In a more recent study, out of a total of
24 annular preventer’s failures collected, failed
tofullyopenandinternalleakagewerethemost
common failure modes, accounting for 15 of
the failures [112]. These observed major fail-
ure modes are present in the failure scenarios.
The internal leakage failure mode is included
in the leakage failure, and the protrusion of
the annular’s sealing spherical element, which
is part of scenario AC2, is equivalent to the fail-
ure to fully open. One internal leakage failure
collected in [112] had a similar context to sce-
nario AC3 because after opening the upper an-
nularpreventer, somemetalswarfwasobserved
stuck between the annular piston and the hous-
ing, andthecorrectiveactionwastoremovethe
piston, adaptor ring, and packing element and
replace all with new parts. In [34], many inter-
nal leakage failures that occurred through theweep holes due to damaged seals, as seen in sce-
narios AC1 and AC4, were reported. They also
reported one undetailed annular failure discov-
ered during testing before running the BOP,
which was corrected by replacing the piston.
SimilartothefailuresinscenarioAC3, thisfail-
ure was probably discovered during inspections
of the disassembled annular preventer.
The detection method varies depending on
the failure observed, but in general, in annu-
lar preventer’s failure scenarios, surface pres-
sure tests and subsea pressure tests are the
most frequent, followed by inspection and sur-
face functional tests. Several failure records as-
sociated with the concepts reported using hy-
draulic tests in conjunction with the disassem-
bled annular inspection to identify the causes
of leakage failures, a fact which [34] also ob-
served. Most fully open failures observed in re-
liabilitystudieswereduetotheinabilitytopass
drill pipes or testing tools through the annu-
lar spherical element, necessitating an increase
in tool load (over-pull), and leakage failures
are primarily identiﬁed through subsea pres-
sure tests [34, 112]. Furthermore, the most
common maintenance corrective actions for an-
nular preventer’s failure scenarios were compo-
nent replacement, but in some cases, the entire
annular preventer was replaced. These main-
tenance procedures were observed for failures
collected in other reliability studies from 1999
to 2019 [5, 34, 112], suggesting that having
a standby annular preventer stored is less ex-
pensive than the non-productive time costs of
awaiting repair aﬀected components in some
cases.
The shear rams’ failures included both blind
shear ram’s and casing shear ram’s failures, but
thehighloadingtermsandrecordsforeachcon-
cept only included BSR’s failures. CSR’s fail-
ures were almost certainly reported much less
frequently than BSR’s failures, and this could
be examined further in a more focused study.
When the pressure within the drilling system
becomes uncontrollable, the blind shear ram in
January 4, 2023a BOP system is the critical last line of de-
fense, and if the BSR is available on-demand,
a blowout will not occur [15]. Thus, the BSR
is a critical component to the safety of drilling
operations and the blowout preventer system.
Failure modes of leakage due to damaged seals,
damaged components such as doors and hinges,
fractures and crackings in the bolts, and in-
ability to maintain required pressure levels due
to damaged seals were all present in the blind
shear rams’ scenarios. The two previous relia-
bility studies [34, 112] collected and analyzed
a few blind shear ram’s failures, and when
the two studies were combined, a total of six
blind shear ram’s failures were gathered. Five
of the six failures were caused by leakages in
the BSRs, four of which were internal leakages
(through a closed ram), and one was an exter-
nal leakage. One internal leakage was reported
without the aﬀected component or the causes
speciﬁed, so this failure could be included in
scenarios SRC1, SRC3, or SRC4, depending on
the real unreported causes and detection meth-
ods. Another internal leakage occurred due to
lateral t-seal failure, which allows for the exis-
tence of leakage paths and is compatible with
scenario SRC1. A failure in the bonnet seals
caused one other internal leakage, and the ex-
ternal leakage was caused by a failure in the
bonnet door seals, both of which are similar
to the highly related failures observed in sce-
nario SRC4. The ﬁfth reported leakage failure
was leakage through the BSR EVO lock motor
while it was in the unlock position. The sixth
failure occurred when a BSR failed to close due
to the hydraulic hose not being connected to
the manifold, and the failure occurred during
BOP’s maintenance. None of the previously
reported failures are compatible with SRC2,
which involves fractures or cracks in the shear
ram blade’ bolts.
Surfacepressuretestsarethemostfrequently
reported method of detecting BSR’s failures in
the blind shear ram’s preventer failure scenar-
ios, followed by inspection and surface func-tional tests. The use of hydraulic tests to iden-
tify leaks, followed by disassembling the blind
shear ram’s for inspection to determine the
causes of the failures, is a common procedure
in the scenarios’ highly related failures. Three
of the ﬁve leakage failures identiﬁed in the
previous reliability studies [34, 112] were de-
tected during the BOP installation testing, one
through pressure tests and one during the exe-
cutionofafunctiontest. Inthreeoftheleakage
failures, theblowoutpreventerwaspulledtore-
pair and replace the aﬀected components, one
did not specify the corrective actions, and one
reported that the failure was corrected thirteen
days later when the BOP was on the rig for
other reasons. The scenarios indicated more
failures in tests performed with the blowout
preventer in the rig and did not address the
need to pull the BOP from subsea to the rig.
However, the failures reported in the reliability
studies, in which the BOP was pulled, and the
drilling company lost productive time, high-
lighttheimportanceoftheblindshearrampre-
venter to drilling operations safety.
This study’s regulator’s failure scenarios in-
dicated leakage due to damaged seals, compo-
nent’s failures such as seal plates and spring
housing, and failures due to the regulator’s in-
ability to reach and (or) maintain the required
pressure. The ﬁndings, such as scenarios RC1
and RC2 (which suggested seal wear and tear
as the cause of failure), support some scholars’
perception [113] that were deteriorating shear
seals (i.e., through scoring, erosion) one of the
primary causes of ﬂuid leakages in the regula-
tor component because a deteriorated seal on
either the supply or vent spool cannot isolate
the connecting paths. This fact strengthens the
link perceived in the scenarios between ﬂuid
leakage and damaged seals. Regulator’s inter-
nal leaks are an important failure mode to the
BOP system safety because they are undesir-
able states that can impact the system’s ex-
pected life, operational availability, and over-
all system and environmental safety [113]. The
January 4, 2023scenarios RC3, RC4, and RC5 indicated leak-
ages that can occur because of a deteriorated
seal, but the scenarios are compatible with
leakages caused by damages as cut, extrud-
ing, and nibbling seals. The scenario RC2 rep-
resents a potentially dangerous failure of the
BOP system because pressure oscillations cre-
ated or not damped by a pressure regulator
cause dynamic loading of neighboring compo-
nentsthatmaynothavebeenconsideredduring
their design [113]. In some cases, the scenarios
RC1, RC3, and RC5 can cause pressure oscilla-
tions and the regulator’s inability to maintain
the required pressure, as indicated in RC2, but
this depends on the leakage characteristics.
Compensated chamber solenoid valves are an
essential component of the BOP control sys-
tem,andthefailurescenariosSVC1,SVC2,and
SVC3indicatedthatleakageswerethemostfre-
quently observed failures, with the diﬀerences
between the scenarios relying mainly on main-
tenance operations. When an operator com-
mands the BOP system to perform a speciﬁc
function, a signal is sent from the central con-
trol unit to the SEM for decoding and then
to a speciﬁc compensated chamber solenoid
valve (placed in the POD and associated with
the desired function) that opens, causing an
SPM valve to change position and allowing
high-pressure ﬂuid stored in the accumulator
to ﬂow [78]. Because each function has its own
compensated chamber solenoid valve and some
functions are more critical to the BOP system
than others (e.g., blind shear ram close, annu-
lar preventer close), if the CCSV fails to trig-
ger the subplate-mounted valve, the function
aﬀecteddeﬁnestheriskassociatedwiththefail-
ure. Failures in compensated chamber solenoid
valves may result in an inability to command
the other components studied and, as a result,
perform their required functions. Leaks in con-
trolsystemcomponents, suchassolenoidvalves
and regulators, increase operating costs, while
excessive leakage can lead to a loss of hydraulic
pressure in the control circuit [10].The majority of failures in regulator’s fail-
ure scenarios were detected via surface func-
tional tests or inspection, whereas the main de-
tection methods in CCSV scenarios were func-
tional tests and soak tests, both of which were
performed with the BOP in the rig. The pro-
cedure to inspect the component to investigate
the cause of failure after the leakage is detected
through hydraulic tests is also common in the
highly related failures of compensated chamber
solenoid valve and regulator’s scenarios. Thus,
the scenarios of the four components point to
this as a common procedure in the oil and gas
industry, at least for failures of the components
under consideration.
The ﬁndings indicated that tests were crit-
ical for detecting failures of the four compo-
nents studied and for the safety of the drilling
phase operations and activities, as tests pro-
cedures appear in the scenarios and high re-
lated failure records of the DC matrix. Even
though the textual failure records in RAPID-
S53 are generated by a wide range of drilling
contractors, each of which has its monitoring
procedures, thescenariosindicatedspeciﬁcpro-
cedures capable of detecting diﬀerent failure
modes. These procedures are likely to be more
eﬀective in monitoring the capability of stud-
ied components to perform their required func-
tions. However, many failures were detected
during tests performed with the blowout pre-
venter in the rig, which presents a challenge
for the companies because these tests are ex-
pensive to monitor the BOP system condition.
When the blowout preventer is pulled to the
rig, drilling operations should be halted, and
the companies must bear the costs of retriev-
ing and maintaining the BOP system and non-
productive time for the entire rig. Another im-
portant question raised by the scenarios is the
eﬀectiveness of the tests or other monitoring
procedures conducted with the blowout pre-
venter in subsea to monitor the capability of
the components studied in performing their re-
quired functions, and why the majority of fail-
January 4, 2023ures were detected by tests executed while the
system was on the rig. If the pressure within
thedrillingsystembecomesuncontrollable, and
theBOPissubseawithcomponentssuchasthe
annular preventer and shear ram preventer un-
available to close the wellbore on demand, the
entire rig is in danger.
6. Conclusion
This paper uses a text mining approach
based on the well-known LSA method to ex-
tractinformationandunderstandthemainfail-
ure scenarios of four blowout preventer’s com-
ponents: annular preventers, shear ram pre-
venters, regulators, and compensated chamber
solenoidvalves. Atotalof1312failuresandcor-
rective maintenance descriptions reported by
engineersandtechniciansinchargeofBOPsys-
tem maintenance is examined in this research
to assess the most common failures, detection
methods, repair practices, causes of failures,
challenges that drilling companies face, and
their experience with BOP system’s failures for
each component. At least three main failure
scenarios were found for each of the four BOP’s
componentsstudiedbasedonunstructuredfail-
ure descriptions. Although this study only
examined failure descriptions for four compo-
nents, it represents a step toward understand-
ing the BOP system’s main failure scenarios.
This research has both theoretical and prac-
tical potentialities. In an academic sense, un-
like previous research, this study focused solely
on textual descriptions of the failures, which
contained information such as failure mode,
causes, and detection method, and contributes
to an understanding of the main failures of the
BOP system. Given the scarcity of research
on the most common blowout preventer fail-
ures and maintenance procedures, the failure
scenarios presented in this paper may be useful
for future studies. There is also a lack of infor-
mation available on BOP test procedures that
were more eﬀective in detecting certain types offailures. Scholars may use the scenarios to ex-
amine the maintenance procedures associated
with corrective maintenance, to support relia-
bility and safety analysis, and risk management
withinformationaboutthe failures, or asan in-
put to develop theoretical models of BOP sys-
tem condition monitoring for the components
studied.
Furthermore, the ﬁndings indicating tests
performed with the blowout preventer in the
rig as a main detection method of the fail-
uresrequireextraattentionsincethisreinforces
the importance of the recent eﬀorts of schol-
ars, agencies, and oil and gas companies to in-
crease the reliability of the BOP system. Few
studies used text mining to analyze mainte-
nance descriptions (texts that are very techni-
cal and complex), and the approach described
in this paper has the potential to mitigate
the technical vocabulary problem inherent in
maintenance data. It produced promising re-
sults when analyzing unstructured failure de-
scriptions to identify the main failure scenar-
ios. Through customization and adaptation,
the approach presented in this study can be
used to extract relevant information of main-
tenance procedures contained in databases of
others equipment.
Drilling companies and BOP manufactur-
ers can use the failure scenarios to improve
their services and products. Even though each
drilling company has its procedures for investi-
gating anomalies detected in the BOP system
during drilling activities, managers in charge
of blowout preventer systems can use the sce-
narios to support decisions when investigat-
ing anomalies on the components studied be-
cause they indicated detection methods that
are likely more eﬀective in detecting speciﬁc
failures. Understanding the most common fail-
ure modes, detection procedures capable of
identifying them, and their causes can also
support engineers and technicians to develop
better maintenance procedures and reliability
analysis of the blowout preventer system. The
January 4, 2023ﬁndings establish a level of relevance (the sin-
gular values) between each component’s failure
scenarios, allowing drilling contractors to focus
their eﬀorts on monitoring the failures that oc-
cur more frequently. The level of relevance is
critical to reducing the costs of the activities
carried out during the drilling phase. The fail-
ure scenarios can provide a reliable assessment
of component failures to BOP manufacturers,
which can aid in designing better products or
services. Regulatory agencies, for example, can
use the ﬁndings to encourage oil and gas com-
panies to take action, which is critical for im-
proving industry safety by lowering accident
risks while increasing equipment availability.
The ﬁndings may prompt oil and gas compa-
nies to reconsider the testing procedures used
on BOP system’s components. The testing of
the blowout preventer system is critical to in-
creasing safety, as demonstrated by the scenar-
ios. However, the more frequently the BOP
is tested, the lower the system’s availability.
Testing the system is detrimental not only to
its availability but also because each function
test, even if it does not overload the system,
accounts for one less function in the system’s
useful life. If a component is designed to be
used 200 times, it will lose 1/200 of its use-
ful life for each function test. When examining
components over a long period, function tests
can signiﬁcantly reduce their expected service
life. For example, the service life of an annu-
lar preventer is usually 500 pressurizations or
15 years for its top cover and housing [70, 114],
so if the component is tested at least once a
week, assuming that it was not pressurized for
anything except tests, the annular will have a
service life of about ten years. The annular’s
estimated service life is ﬁve years if one pres-
surization per week due to drilling activities
is included, three years if two pressurizations
are included, and so on. This eﬀect is wors-
ened when investigating the impact of pressure
testing, as it overloads the system. Therefore,
drilling companies must consider the eﬀective-ness of the procedures they use to investigate
anomalies detected in the BOP system because
they can reduce the service life of the compo-
nents to a fraction of what it should be. As
previously stated, the failure scenarios can as-
sist them in determining which procedures are
likely to be more eﬀective.
7. Limitations
Althoughthisstudyisastepforwardinusing
failure records textual data, it is worth noting
some limitations. The non-planned corrective
maintenance descriptions were added to the
RAPID-S53 through an open question on the
failure event registration form, and the descrip-
tions contain some subjectivity, even though
the text is highly technical. There is a diﬀer-
ence in the quality of the records when con-
sidering the volume of information in the de-
scriptions, which varies according to experi-
ence and engagement in reporting all the de-
tails of the failures. The entire investigation
has been reported in some descriptions, includ-
ing details such as failure mechanisms, proper
as input to discussions about condition-based
maintenance. However, there are others cases
with very brief descriptions of corrective main-
tenance, which is detrimental to the database
and research. These two types of records are
few and have little impact on LSA results, but
drilling companies must strive to improve the
engagement of the workers responsible for re-
porting failures so that the descriptions contain
more information than they have now.
Based on a well-known text mining tech-
nique, the analysis generated knowledge about
the most common failures and corrective main-
tenance procedures related to the BOP sys-
tem’s components studied. On the other hand,
because the failure records were only collected
from the RAPID-S53, the results obtained are
restricted to a single database. Besides that,
even though the database have reports from re-
gions across all globe, the majority of failure
records are from drilling companies working in
January 4, 2023the United States part of the Gulf of Mexico,
and because of that, the results of the analy-
sis may not reﬂect the main failure modes in
all countries. While failure descriptions for an-
nular preventers and shear ram preventers in
the US part of the Gulf of Mexico correspond
to approximately 60-65 percent of the data ex-
amined, failure descriptions for regulators and
compensated chamber solenoid valves in the
same location correspond to approximately 80
percent.
The scenarios were presented so that the
LSA generates concepts (from higher to lower
singular values), which can be related to the
frequency of occurrence in the textual failure
records. Some failure scenarios that appear as
second, third, or fourth may pose a greater risk
to the rig’s safety than failures indicated in the
ﬁrst scenario of the components. Thus, the
severity of the failure modes is not taken into
account by the latent semantic analysis. LSA
is carried out through systematic and mathe-
matical analysis, but there is human involve-
ment in interpreting the concepts, which in-
troduces subjectivity. The relevance of analyst
knowledge to the outcome of text mining using
the LSA approach cannot be underestimated.
This limitation was addressed through a revi-
sion conducted with a team of researchers, en-
gineers, and technical workers with oil and gas
industry experience.
8. Suggestions
The study’s ﬁndings shed light on the break-
down of failure events by components’ failures
modes, detection methods, corrective actions,
suspectedcauses, andthefrequencywithwhich
they occur. Future research could use the re-
sults of a scientiﬁcally based procedure as a
base for reliability studies in the BOP sys-
tem’s components under consideration, as well
as the development of theoretical models of
condition monitoring, maintenance procedure
assessment, risk management, and safety anal-
ysis. The industry regulations and standard re-quirements have been developed and evolved to
improve the safety of the drilling phase [16, 18].
However, the ﬁndings reinforce that oil and
gas companies, regulatory agencies, technology
institutes, and scholars must research intelli-
gent and practical solutions to improve BOP
system availability while maintaining or im-
proving safety. It is critical for the future of
drilling oil and gas companies to increase the
eﬀectiveness of monitoring procedures by pur-
suing innovative ways to monitor the BOP sys-
tem, such as new technologies, techniques, and
approaches related to condition-based mainte-
nance of the components as other intelligent so-
lutions. These eﬀorts are essential to increase
the availability of the blowout preventer sys-
tem, and the safety of the rig crew and the en-
vironment.
In [15], for example, a state-based approach
is proposed to analyze unavailability by incor-
porating BSR preventer testing activities into
a multiphase Markov process, and investigated
the eﬀects of testing errors and delayed re-
pairs on the likelihood of component unavail-
ability. In [30], an integrated a fault tree
analysis updated with a near real-time failure
database is used into the operational decision-
making process to reduce non-productive time
on drilling rigs due to complex failure prop-
agation within the BOP system. In [70], a
high-ﬁdelity method is proposed to monitor-
ing the stress of the annular preventer’s top
cover and housing that combines the theoret-
ical calculation method (TCM), ﬁnite-element
analysis (FEA), and stress testing experiment
(STE). In [115], an adaptive model-based ap-
proach is proposed to real-time condition mon-
itoringofannularpreventer’sfunctionsbycom-
biningaﬁrst-principlesmodelwithin-ﬁelddata
by adapting model coeﬃcients, interpreted as
annular preventer’s health indicators. These
are examples of recent studies that presented
new solutions for improving drilling operations’
safety while increasing the availability of BOP
system’s components, both of which are criti-
January 4, 2023cal to the oil and gas industry’s future and sus-
tainability. Eﬀorts in this direction are likely to
improve maintenance management and indus-
try safety by reducing accident risks.
The discussion in this study can be ex-
panded by using cuttings from the database
to other important components of the blowout
preventer system, such as pipe rams and SPM
valves, to understand their main failure scenar-
ios. Furthermore, maintenance intelligent so-
lutions, such as the gathering of video reports,
have potential to increase the volume of infor-
mation described by technicians and engineers.
Inthiscontext, thechallengeofahumanexpert
examining each service entry can rise substan-
tially. So, the ability of text mining methods,
such as the LSA, to reduce the dimensions of
large volumes of data to a more manageable
number without losing a signiﬁcant amount of
information can be explored by scholars and oil
and gas companies to extract useful informa-
tion from textual descriptions of maintenance
procedures.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge the ﬁnan-
cial support of Brazil’s national oil company,
Petrobrás (No.ANP: 20741-5).
References
[1] N. Khakzad, F. Khan, N. Paltrinieri, On the ap-
plication of near accident data to risk analysis of
major accidents, Reliability Engineering & Sys-
tem Safety 126 (2014) 116–125. doi:10.1016/j.
ress.2014.01.015 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2014.01.
015
[2] N. Khakzad, F. Khan, P. Amyotte, Quantitative
risk analysis of oﬀshore drilling operations: A
Bayesian approach, Safety Science 57 (2013)
108–117. doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2013.01.022 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2013.01.
022
[3] B. Verweijen, K. Lauche, How many blowouts
does it take to learn the lessons? An in-
stitutional perspective on disaster develop-
ment, Safety Science 111 (2019) 111–118.doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2018.06.011 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2018.06.
011
[4] L. Xue, J. Fan, M. Rausand, L. Zhang, A safety
barrier-based accident model for oﬀshore drilling
blowouts, Journal of Loss Prevention in the Pro-
cessIndustries26(1)(2013)164–171. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2012.10.008 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2012.10.008
[5] P. Holand, W. Hauser, M. Rausand, Reliability
of subsea BOP systems for deepwater application
(11 1999).
URL https://www.bsee.gov/sites/bsee.gov/ﬁles/
tap-technical-assessment-program/319aa.pdf
[6] L. B. Andersen, Stochastic modelling for the
analysis of blowout risk in exploration drilling,
Reliability Engineering & System Safety 61 (1-
2) (1998) 53–63. doi:10.1016/s0951-8320(97)
00067-7.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0951-8320(97)
00067-7
[7] Z. Liu, Y. Liu, B. Cai, D. Zhang, C. Zheng,
Dynamic Bayesian network modeling of reliabil-
ity of subsea blowout preventer stack in pres-
ence of common cause failures, Journal of Loss
Prevention in the Process Industries 38 (2015)
58–66. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.
2015.09.001 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2015.09.001
[8] J. E. Skogdalen, I. B. Utne, J. E. Vinnem,
Developing safety indicators for preventing
oﬀshore oil and gas deepwater drilling blowouts,
Safety Science 49 (8-9) (2011) 1187–1199.
doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2011.03.012 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2011.03.
012
[9] L. Zheng, P. D. Yapa, F. Chen, A model for
simulating deepwater oil and gas blowouts -
Part I: Theory and model formulation, Journal
of Hydraulic Research 41 (4) (2003) 339–351.
doi:10.1080/00221680309499980 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/
00221680309499980
[10] T. Wassar, M. Mutlu, M. A. Franchek, J. Gui-
terrez, Leakage Monitoring of Subsea Blowout
Preventer Control System, in: Day 2 Tue, May
01, 2018, Vol. 2, OTC, 2018, pp. 1214–1220.
doi:10.4043/28955-MS .
[11] B. Cai, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Liu, J. R. Gao, C,
Resilience evaluation methodology of engineering
systems with dynamic-Bayesian-network-based
degradation and maintenance, Reliability Engi-
neering & System Safety 209 (2021). doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2021.107464 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2021.107464
[12] F. B. Martins, J. Bittencourt, M. S. Santos,
January 4, 2023T. M. Amato, Improving BOP Reliability
Through an Integrated Management Approach,
in: Oﬀshore Technology Conference, OTC, 2015.
doi:10.4043/26182-MS .
URL https://onepetro.org/OTCBRASIL/
proceedings/15OTCB/1-15OTCB/
RiodeJaneiro,Brazil/84035
[13] J. P. Sattler, BOP Performance Post - Macondo
- How Are We Doing?, in: SPE Arctic and
Extreme Environments Technical Conference
and Exhibition, Society of Petroleum Engineers,
2013. doi:https://10.2118/166869-MS .
URLhttps://onepetro.org/SPEDC/proceedings/
13DC/All-13DC/Amsterdam,TheNetherlands/
176818
[14] M. Aﬄeck, M. Gilleland, Background to the
Development of a Remote Controlled Drilling
Blowout Preventer (BOP) Activation Technology
for Surface BOP Applications, in: SPE/IADC
Middle East Drilling Technology Conference
and Exhibition, Society of Petroleum Engineers,
2016. doi:https://10.2118/178221-MS .
URLhttps://onepetro.org/SPEDC/proceedings/
13DC/All-13DC/Amsterdam,TheNetherlands/
176818
[15] S. Wu, L. Zhang, A. Barros, W. Zheng, Y. Liu,
Performance analysis for subsea blind shear ram
preventers subject to testing strategies, Reliabil-
ity Engineering & System Safety 169 (2018) 281–
298. doi:10.1016/j.ress.2017.08.022 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2017.08.
022
[16] API, API standard 53: blowout prevention
equipment systems for drilling wells (2018).
URL http://iwcc.ir/wp-content/uploads/2020/
01/API-St-53-2018.pdf
[17] BSEE, Blowout Preventer (BOP) maintenance
and inspection study ﬁnal report for the bureau
of safety and environmental enforcement (2013).
URL https://www.bsee.gov/sites/bsee.gov/ﬁles/
tap-technical-assessment-program//693aa.pdf
[18] ISO, ISO 14224: Petroleum and natural gas in-
dustries - Collection and exchange of reliability
and maintenance data for equipment (2016).
[19] F. B. Martins, R. Cardoso, I. Tammela,
D. Colombo, B. A. de Matos, Applying CBM
and PHM concepts with reliability approach
for Blowout Preventer (BOP): a literature
review, Brazilian Journal of Operations &
Production Management 15 (1) (2018) 78–95.
doi:10.14488/bjopm.2018.v15.n1.a8 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.14488/bjopm.2018.
v15.n1.a8
[20] N. Lukin, Gestão do risco de falha do preven-
tor anular de BOP multiplexado submarino
(September 2016).URL https://teses.usp.br/teses/disponiveis/3/
3151/tde-28092016-110330/pt-br.php
[21] V. Pranesh, K. Palanichamy, O. Saidat,
N. Peter, Lack of dynamic leadership skills
and human failure contribution analysis
to manage risk in deep water horizon oil
platform, Safety Science 92 (2017) 85–93.
doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2016.09.013 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2016.09.
013
[22] J. P. Sattler, BOP Performance - Developments
and Consequences in a Post-Macondo World,
in: and others (Ed.), SPE/IADC Drilling Con-
ference, Vol. 2, Society of Petroleum Engineers,
2013. doi:10.2118/163531-MS .
URLhttps://onepetro.org/SPEDC/proceedings/
13DC/All-13DC/Amsterdam,TheNetherlands/
176818
[23] J. R. Huse, I. A. Alme, BOP Reliability
monitored Real Time, in: and others (Ed.),
European HSE Conference and Exhibi-
tion, Society of Petroleum Engineers, 2013.
doi:https://doi.org/10.2118/164987-MS .
URL https://onepetro.org/speuhse/proceedings/
13HSE/All-13HSE/London,UnitedKingdom/
177899
[24] X. Meng, X. Li, W. Wang, G. Song, G. Chen,
J. Zhu, A novel methodology to analyze accident
path in deepwater drilling operation considering
uncertain information, Reliability Engineering &
System Safety 205 (2021) 107255–107255. doi:
10.1016/j.ress.2020.107255 .
URL 10.1016/j.ress.2020.107255
[25] Z. Yuan, Y. Hashemian, D. Morrell, Ultra-
deepwater blowout well control analysis under
worst case blowout scenario, Journal of Natural
Gas Science and Engineering 27 (2015) 122–129.
doi:10.1016/j.jngse.2015.08.047 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2015.08.
047
[26] M. Shaﬁee, E. Enjema, A. Kolios, An Integrated
FTA-FMEAModelforRiskAnalysisofEngineer-
ing Systems: A Case Study of Subsea Blowout
Preventers, Applied Sciences 9 (6) (2019) 1192–
1192. doi:10.3390/app9061192 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/app9061192
[27] J. R. C. Bacelo, Análise de risco e da conﬁabili-
dade em sistemas complexos e reparáveis (2016).
URL http://pos.ucpel.edu.br/ppgeec/wp-
content/uploads/sites/8/2018/03/8AA-
BACELO.pdf
[28] M. M. Abaei, E. Arzaghi, R. Abbassi,
V. Garaniya, S. Chai, F. Khan, A robust
risk assessment methodology for safety anal-
ysis of marine structures under storm condi-
tions, Ocean Engineering 156 (2018) 167–178.
January 4, 2023doi:10.1016/j.oceaneng.2018.02.016 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.
2018.02.016
[29] B. Cai, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Tian, X. Dong, S. Yu,
Using Bayesian networks in reliability evaluation
for subsea blowout preventer control system, Re-
liability Engineering & System Safety 108 (2012)
32–41. doi:10.1016/j.ress.2012.07.006 .
URL 10.1016/j.ress.2012.07.006
[30] M. Mutlu, Z. Arnold, M. A. Franchek, J. Meraz,
Qualitative Fault Tree Analysis of Blowout Pre-
venter Control System for Real Time Availability
Monitoring, in: Oﬀshore Technology Conference,
OTC, 2017. doi:10.4043/27814-MS .
URL https://doi.org/10.4043/27814-MS
[31] T. Jacobs, BOP Monitoring Seeks To Reduce
Downtime, IncreaseInsight, JournalofPetroleum
Technology 66 (2014) 58–66. doi:https://doi.
org/10.2118/0714-0058-JPT .
URL https://doi.org/10.2118/0714-0058-JPT
[32] P. Holand, M. Rausand, Reliability of Subsea
BOP systems, Reliability Engineering 19 (4)
(1987) 263–275. doi:10.1016/0143-8174(87)
90058-8.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0143-8174(87)
90058-8
[33] S. Klakegg, Improved methods for reliability
assessments of safety-critical systems: An appli-
cation example for BOP systems (June 2012).
URL https://ntnuopen.ntnu.no/ntnu-xmlui/
bitstream/handle/11250/240869/629218_
FULLTEXT01.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
[34] P. Holand, H. Awan, Reliability of Deepwater
Subsea BOP Systems and Well Kicks, ES 201252
(2012).
URL https://www.bsee.gov/sites/bsee.gov/ﬁles/
tap-technical-assessment-program/674aa.pdf
[35] E. Drægebø, Reliability Analysis of Blowout
Preventer Systems: A comparative study of
electro-hydraulic vs. all-electric BOP technology
(2014).
URL https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/
52099996.pdf
[36] H. Meng, G. Chen, X. Liu, Y. Zhu, An oil recov-
ery technique for emergency response in deepwa-
ter blowout accidents, Safety Science 113 (2019)
134–143. doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2018.11.011 .
URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0925753518306209
[37] H. Lu, L. Guo, M. Azimi, K. Huang, Oil and
Gas 4.0 era: A systematic review and out-
look, Computers in Industry 111 (2019) 68–90.
doi:10.1016/j.compind.2019.06.007 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.
2019.06.007
[38] K. R. Holdaway, Harness Oil and Gas Big Datawith Analytics, in: Harness Oil and Gas Big
Data with Analytics, 1st Edition, Vol. 1, Wi-
ley, 2014, pp. 1–384. doi:https://doi.org/10.
1002/9781118910948 .
URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/book/
10.1002/9781118910948
[39] Z. Yang, P. Baraldi, E. Zio, A novel method
for maintenance record clustering and its
application to a case study of maintenance
optimization, Reliability Engineering &
System Safety 203 (2020) 107103–107103.
doi:10.1016/j.ress.2020.107103 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2020.
107103
[40] Y. Zhao, T. H. Xu, Text mining based fault
diagnosis for vehicle on-board equipment of
high speed railway signal system, Tiedao Xue-
bao/Journal of the China Railway Society 37 (8)
(2015) 53–59. doi:10.3969/j.issn.1001-8360.
2015.08.009 .
[41] K. Liu, N. El-Gohary, Ontology-based semi-
supervised conditional random ﬁelds for auto-
mated information extraction from bridge in-
spection reports, Automation in Construction 81
(2017) 313–327. doi:10.1016/j.autcon.2017.
02.003.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2017.
02.003
[42] A. R. Mashhadi, B. Esmaeilian, W. Cade,
K. Wiens, S. Behdad, Mining consumer experi-
ences of repairing electronics: Product design in-
sights and business lessons learned, Journal of
Cleaner Production 137 (2016) 716–727. doi:
10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.07.144 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.
07.144
[43] K. Chen, R. J. Mahfoud, Y. Sun, D. Nan,
K. Wang, H. H. Alhelou, P. Siano, Defect Texts
Mining of Secondary Device in Smart Substa-
tion with GloVe and Attention-Based Bidirec-
tional LSTM, Energies 13 (17) (2020) 4522–4522.
doi:10.3390/en13174522 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en13174522
[44] H. B. Gunay, W. Shen, C. Yang, Text-mining
building maintenance work orders for component
fault frequency, Building Research & Information
47 (5) (2019) 518–533. doi:10.1080/09613218.
2018.1459004 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09613218.2018.
1459004
[45] Z. Kong, C. Yue, Y. Shi, J. Yu, C. Xie, L. Xie,
Entity Extraction of Electrical Equipment Mal-
functionTextbyaHybridNaturalLanguagePro-
cessing Algorithm, IEEE Access 9 (2021) 40216–
40226. doi:10.1109/access.2021.3063354 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/access.2021.
January 4, 20233063354
[46] L. Shi, A. Li, L. Zhang, Sustainable Fault Di-
agnosis of Imbalanced Text Mining for CTCS-3
Data Preprocessing, Sustainability 13 (4) (2021)
2155–2155. doi:10.3390/su13042155 .
URL https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/13/4/
2155
[47] L. Yang, K. Li, D. Zhao, S. Gu, D. Yan, A Net-
work Method for Identifying the Root Cause of
High-Speed Rail Faults Based on Text Data, En-
ergies 12 (10) (2019) 1908–1908. doi:10.3390/
en12101908 .
URL https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/12/10/
1908
[48] D.Wei, B.Wang, G.Lin, D.Liu, Z.Dong, H.Liu,
Research on Unstructured Text Data Mining and
Fault Classiﬁcation Based on RNN-LSTM with
Malfunction Inspection Report, Energies 10 (3)
(2017) 406–406. doi:10.3390/en10030406 .
URL http://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/10/3/
406
[49] X. Li, P. Penmetsa, J. Liu, A. Hainen, S. Nam-
bisan, Severity of emergency natural gas
distribution pipeline incidents: Application of
an integrated spatio-temporal approach fused
with text mining, Journal of Loss Prevention in
the Process Industries 69 (2021) 104383–104383.
doi:10.1016/j.jlp.2020.104383 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2020.
104383
[50] M. A. Blanco, P. Marti-Puig, K. Gibert,
J. Cusidó, J. Solé-Casals, A Text-Mining Ap-
proach to Assess the Failure Condition of Wind
Turbines Using Maintenance Service History, En-
ergies 12 (10) (2019) 1982–1982. doi:10.3390/
en12101982 .
URL https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/12/10/
1982
[51] H. Kwon, J. Kim, Y. Park, Applying LSA text
mining technique in envisioning social impacts
of emerging technologies: The case of drone
technology, Technovation 60-61 (2017) 15–28.
doi:10.1016/j.technovation.2017.01.001 .
URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0166497217300044
[52] R. Blake, R. Ayyagari, Analyzing Information
Systems Security Research to Find Key Topics,
Trends, and Opportunities, Journal of Informa-
tion Privacy and Security 8 (3) (2012) 37–67.
doi:10.1080/15536548.2012.10845660 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15536548.2012.
10845660
[53] X. Pan, H. Wang, W. You, M. Zhang, Y. Yang,
Assessing the reliability of electronic products
using customer knowledge discovery, Reliability
Engineering & System Safety 199 (2020) 106925–106925. doi:10.1016/j.ress.2020.106925 .
URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0951832019307732
[54] A. Apichottanakul, M. Goto, K. Piewthongngam,
S. Pathumnakul, Customer behaviour analy-
sis based on buying-data sparsity for multi-
category products in pork industry: A hy-
brid approach, Cogent Engineering 8 (1) (2021)
1865598–1865598. doi:10.1080/23311916.2020.
1865598.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/23311916.2020.
1865598
[55] M. Frasca, G. Tortora, Visualizing correlations
among Parkinson biomedical data through
information retrieval and machine learning
techniques, Multimedia Tools and Applications
(2021). doi:10.1007/s11042-021-10506-x .
URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11042-
021-10506-x
[56] T. Williams, J. Betak, A Comparison of LSA and
LDA for the Analysis of Railroad Accident Text,
Procedia Computer Science 130 (2018) 98–102.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2018.04.017 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.04.
017
[57] G. Kou, Y. Peng, An Application of Latent
Semantic Analysis for Text Categorization,
International Journal of Computers Commu-
nications & Control 10 (3) (2015) 357–357.
doi:10.15837/ijccc.2015.3.1923 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.15837/ijccc.2015.3.
1923
[58] N. Ramzali, M. R. M. Lavasani, J. Ghodousi,
Safety barriers analysis of oﬀshore drilling
system by employing Fuzzy Event Tree
Analysis, Safety Science 78 (2015) 49–59.
doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2015.04.004 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2015.04.
004
[59] J. E. Skogdalen, J. E. Vinnem, Quantitative risk
analysis of oil and gas drilling, using Deepwa-
ter Horizon as case study, Reliability Engineer-
ing & System Safety 100 (2012) 58–66. doi:
10.1016/j.ress.2011.12.002 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2011.12.
002
[60] D. Rich, B. Rogers, Q. Dyson, K. Olson,
J. Smart, D. Tiﬃn, GoM deepwater completions
- The devil is in the details, in: Oﬀshore Tech-
nology Conference, Vol. 1, Society of Petroleum
Engineers, 2010. doi:10.2523/20399-MS .
URL http://www.spe.org/elibrary/servlet/
spepreview?id=OTC-20399-MS
[61] J. Hayes, Operator competence and capac-
ity - Lessons from the Montara blowout,
Safety Science 50 (3) (2012) 563–574.
January 4, 2023doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2011.10.009 .
URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0925753511002803
[62] Z. Ismail, K. K. Kong, S. Z. Othman,
K. H. Law, S. Y. Khoo, Z. C. Ong, Eval-
uating accidents in the oﬀshore drilling of
petroleum: Regional picture and reducing
impact, Measurement 51 (1) (2014) 18–33.
doi:10.1016/j.measurement.2014.01.027 .
URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0263224114000414
[63] M. Abimbola, F. Khan, N. Khakzad, Dynamic
safety risk analysis of oﬀshore drilling, Journal
of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries 30
(2014) 74–85. doi:10.1016/j.jlp.2014.05.002 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2014.05.
002
[64] S. B. Joye, A. Bracco, T. M. Özgökmen, J. P.
Chanton, M. Grosell, I. R. MacDonald, E. E.
Cordes, J. P. Montoya, U. Passow, The Gulf of
Mexico ecosystem, six years after the Macondo
oil well blowout, Deep Sea Research Part II: Top-
ical Studies in Oceanography 129 (2016) 4–19.
doi:10.1016/j.dsr2.2016.04.018 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dsr2.2016.04.
018
[65] C. M. B. Burns, J. A. Olin, S. Woltmann, P. C.
Stouﬀer, S. S. Taylor, Eﬀects of Oil on Terrestrial
Vertebrates: Predicting Impacts of the Macondo
Blowout, BioScience 64 (9) (2014) 820–828. doi:
10.1093/biosci/biu124 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/biosci/biu124
[66] C. R. Fisher, A. W. J. Demopoulos, E. E. Cordes,
I. B. Baums, H. K. White, J. R. Bourque, Coral
Communities as Indicators of Ecosystem-Level
Impacts of the Deepwater Horizon Spill, Bio-
Science 64 (9) (2014) 796–807. doi:10.1093/
biosci/biu129 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/biosci/biu129
[67] Q. Qi, I. Ershaghi, Aspects of Oilﬁeld re-
lated Accidents, in: and others (Ed.), SPE
Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition,
Vol. 5, Society of Petroleum Engineers, 2013.
doi:10.2118/166412-MS .
URL https://onepetro.org/SPEATCE/
proceedings/13ATCE/2-13ATCE/NewOrleans,
Louisiana,USA/172722
[68] W. H. Martin, E. A. Marsh, E. G. Nubble, Inves-
tigationofOctober1982blowoutandﬁre, Eugene
Island Block 361, Gulf of Mexico (1983).
URL https://doi.org/10.3133/ofr83113
[69] B. Cai, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Tian, Y. Zhang,
R. Ji, Application of Bayesian Networks in
Quantitative Risk Assessment of Subsea Blowout
Preventer Operations, Risk Analysis 33 (7)
(2013) 1293–1311. doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.2012.01918.x .
URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1111/j.1539-6924.2012.01918.x
[70] W. Li, Y. Tang, Y. He, Simulation and ex-
perimental analysis of critical stress regions of
deep-water annular blowout preventer, Engineer-
ing Failure Analysis 106 (2019) 104161–104161.
doi:10.1016/j.engfailanal.2019.104161 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engfailanal.2019.
104161
[71] M. J. Jellison, R. B. Chandler, M. Payne, J. S.
Shepard, Ultradeep Drilling Pushes Drillstring
Technology Innovations, SPE Drilling & Com-
pletion 23 (02) (2008) 190–200. doi:10.2118/
104827-pa .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.2118/104827-pa
[72] L. Zhu, S. F. Estefen, J. N. De, M. Chuju-
talli, J. H. Souza, Mil, Numerical Simulation
of Shear Ram Performance, in: ASME 2018
37th International Conference on Ocean, Oﬀ-
shore and Arctic Engineering, Vol. Volume
11B: Honoring Symposium for Professor Car-
los Guedes Soares on Marine Technology
and Ocean Engineering, American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, Madrid, Spain, 2018.
doi:10.1115/OMAE2018-78100 .
URL https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.
org/OMAE/proceedings/OMAE2018/51333/
Madrid,Spain/277381
[73] P. Holand, Reliability of Deepwater Subsea
Blowout Preventers, SPE Drilling & Completion
16 (1) (2001) 12–18. doi:10.2118/70129-pa .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.2118/70129-pa
[74] B. Cai, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Tian, Y. Zhang,
J. Liu, Performance evaluation of subsea
blowout preventer systems with common-
cause failures, Journal of Petroleum Sci-
ence and Engineering 90-91 (2012) 18–25.
doi:10.1016/j.petrol.2012.04.007 .
URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0920410512000903
[75] B. Cai, Y. Liu, Q. Fan, Y. Zhang, S. Yu,
Z. Liu, Performance evaluation of subsea BOP
control systems using dynamic Bayesian net-
works with imperfect repair and preventive
maintenance, Engineering Applications of Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence 26 (10) (2013) 2661–2672.
doi:10.1016/j.engappai.2013.08.011 .
URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0952197613001681
[76] B. Cai, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Tian, H. Li, C. Ren,
Reliability analysis of subsea blowout preventer
control systems subjected to multiple error
shocks, Journal of Loss Prevention in the
Process Industries 25 (6) (2012) 1044–1054.
doi:10.1016/j.jlp.2012.07.014 .
January 4, 2023URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0950423012001106
[77] G. Childs, J. Sattler, R. Williamson, Shear ram
capabilities study for US minerals management
service: Requisition No. 3-4025-1001 (2004).
URL https://www.bsee.gov/sites/bsee.gov/ﬁles/
tap-technical-assessment-program/463aa.pdf
[78] Ø. Sætre, Reliability assessment of subsea BOP
control systems (2015).
URL https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/
30875719.pdf
[79] M. Mutlu, T. Wassar, M. A. Franchek, J. A.
Gutierrez, Condition and Performance Analysis
of a Subsea BOP Control System Pressure
Regulator, Oﬀshore Technology Conference 2
(2018) 1193–203. doi:10.4043/28861-MS .
URL https://onepetro.org/OTCONF/
proceedings/18OTC/2-18OTC/Houston,Texas,
USA/179170
[80] M. Mutlu, M. A. Franchek, J. A. Gutierrez,
L. R. Pereira, System level performance and
reliability investigation of hydraulic circuits
using physics based models, in: and others
(Ed.), ASME 2016 Dynamic Systems and
Control Conference, Vol. 2, The American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2016, pp. 1–10.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1115/DSCC2016-9717 .
URL https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/
DSCC/proceedings-abstract/DSCC2016/50701/
V002T21A003/231110
[81] J. Quispe, S. F. Estefen, J. N. De, M. Souza, Mil,
Hydraulic Analytical Model of the BOP Control
System to Estimate Related Response Times, in:
ASME 2018 37th International Conference on
Ocean, Oﬀshore and Arctic Engineering, Vol. 1,
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2018,
pp. 1–11. doi:10.1115/OMAE2018-78274 .
URL https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.
org/OMAE/proceedings/OMAE2018/51203/
Madrid,Spain/277851
[82] IADC, International Association of Drilling
Contractors. Reliability and Performance Infor-
mation Database Guidance Document (2017).
URL https://www.safeocs.gov/forms/WCR_
Guidance_Rev2.1.pdf
[83] K. J. Millman, M. Aivazis, Python for Scientists
andEngineers,ComputinginScience&Engineer-
ing 13 (2) (2011) 9–12. doi:10.1109/mcse.2011.
36.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/mcse.2011.36
[84] S. van der Walt, S. C. Colbert, G. Varoquaux,
The NumPy Array: A Structure for Eﬃcient Nu-
merical Computation, Computing in Science &
Engineering 13 (2) (2011) 22–30. doi:10.1109/
mcse.2011.37 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/mcse.2011.37[85] J. D. Hunter, Matplotlib, Matplotlib: A
2D Graphics Environment, Computing in
Science & Engineering 9 (3) (2007) 90–95.
doi:10.1109/MCSE.2007.55 .
URL http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
4160265/
[86] M. Waskom, O. Botvinnik, P. Hobson, J. War-
menhoven, et al., Seaborn: Statistical data
visualization (July 2018).
URL https://zenodo.org/record/1313201#
.YM4_b_KSm00
[87] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort,
V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, et al., Scikit-
Learn: Machine Learning in Python, Journal of
Machine Learning Research 12 (2011) 2825–2830.
URL https://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume12/
pedregosa11a/pedregosa11a.pdf
[88] W. Mckinney, et al., pandas: a Foundational
Python Library for Data Analysis and Statistics,
Python for High Performance and Scientiﬁc
Computing 14 (9) (2011) 1–9.
URL https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
265194455_pandas_a_Foundational_Python_
Library
[89] E. Loper, B. S, NLTK: The Natural Language
Toolkit, in: and others (Ed.), Proceedings of
the ACL-02 Workshop on Eﬀective tools and
methodologies for teaching natural language pro-
cessing and computational linguistics, Vol. 1 of
ETMTNLP ’02, Association for Computational
Linguistics, USA, 2002, pp. 63–70. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.3115/1118108.1118117 .
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0205028
[90] E. Jones, T. Oliphant, P. Peterson, et al., SciPy:
Open Source Scientiﬁc Tools for Python (2001).
URL http://www.scipy.org/
[91] P. J. Kwantes, N. Derbentseva, Q. Lam, O. Var-
tanian, H. H. Marmurek, Assessing the Big Five
personality traits with latent semantic analysis,
Personality and Individual Diﬀerences 102 (2016)
229–233. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2016.07.010 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2016.07.
010
[92] G. Orellana, B. Arias, M. Orellana, V. Saquicela,
F. Baculima, N. Piedra, A Study on the Impact
of Pre-Processing Techniques in Spanish and
English Text Classiﬁcation over Short and Large
Text Documents, in: 2018 International Con-
ference on Information Systems and Computer
Science (INCISCOS), Vol. 2018, IEEE, 2018, pp.
277–283. doi:10.1109/INCISCOS.2018.00047 .
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
8564539/
[93] D. Eler, D. Grosa, I. Pola, R. Garcia, R. Correia,
J. Teixeira, Analysis of Document Pre-Processing
Eﬀects in Text and Opinion Mining, Information
January 4, 20239(4)(2018)100–100. doi:10.3390/info9040100 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/info9040100
[94] C. F. da Silva, O. Santos, R. Vieira, Evaluat-
ing the use of linguistic information in the pre-
processing phase of Text Mining, Inteligência Ar-
tiﬁcial 9 (26) (2006) 59–66. doi:10.4114/ia.
v9i26.845 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.4114/ia.v9i26.845
[95] S. Ramírez-Gallego, B. Krawczyk, S. García,
M. Woźniak, F. Herrera, A survey on data pre-
processing for data stream mining: Current sta-
tus and future directions, Neurocomputing 239
(2017) 39–57. doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2017.01.
078.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2017.
01.078
[96] S. T. Dumais, G. W. Furnas, T. K. Landauer,
S. Deerwester, R. Harshman, Using latent seman-
tic analysis to improve access to textual informa-
tion, in: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on Human factors in computing systems - CHI
’88, Vol. Part F1302, ACM Press, 1988, pp. 281–
285. doi:10.1145/57167.57214 .
URL http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=
57167.57214
[97] S. Deerwester, S. T. Dumais, G. W. Furnas, T. K.
Landauer, R. Harshman, Indexing by latent se-
mantic analysis, Journal of the American Society
for Information Science 41 (6) (1990) 391–407.
doi:10.1002/(sici)1097-4571(199009)41:
6<391::aid-asi1>3.0.co;2-9 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1097-
4571(199009)41:6<391::aid-asi1>3.0.co;2-9
[98] T. K. Landauer, P. W. Foltz, D. Laham,
An introduction to latent semantic analysis,
Discourse Processes 25 (2-3) (1998) 259–284.
doi:10.1080/01638539809545028 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
01638539809545028
[99] S. T. Dumais, Latent semantic analysis, An-
nual Review of Information Science and Technol-
ogy 38 (1) (2005) 188–230. doi:10.1002/aris.
1440380105 .
URLhttps://dx.doi.org/10.1002/aris.1440380105
[100] R. Feldman, J. Sanger, The Text Mining Hand-
book, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2006. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511546914 .
URL https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/
identiﬁer/9780511546914/type/book
[101] C. Fellbaum, WordNet, in: R. Poli, H. Michael,
A. Kameas (Eds.), Theory and Applications
of Ontology: Computer Applications, Springer
Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2010, pp. 231–243.
doi:10.1007/978-90-481-8847-5\_10 .
URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-90-
481-8847-5_10[102] C. Fellbaum, WordNet: An Electronic Lex-
ical Database, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, 1998.
URL https://wordnet.princeton.edu/
[103] V. Balakrishnan, L.-Y. Ethel, Stemming
and Lemmatization: A Comparison of Re-
trieval Performances, Lecture Notes on
Software Engineering 2 (3) (2014) 262–267.
doi:10.7763/lnse.2014.v2.134 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.7763/lnse.2014.v2.
134
[104] T. Korenius, J. Laurikkala, K. Jrvelin, M. Juhola,
Stemming and lemmatization in the clustering
of ﬁnnish text documents, in: Proceedings of
the Thirteenth ACM conference on Information
and knowledge management - CIKM ’04, ACM
Press, 2004, pp. 625–633. doi:10.1145/1031171.
1031285.
URL http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=
1031171.1031285
[105] G. D. Miner, J. Elder, R. A. Nisbet, Prac-
tical Text Mining and Statistical Analysis
for Non-structured Text Data Applica-
tions, 1st Edition, Academic Press, 2012.
doi:10.1016/C2010-0-66188-8 .
URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/C20100661888
[106] M. W. Berry, S. T. Dumais, G. W. O’Brien,
Using Linear Algebra for Intelligent Information
Retrieval, SIAM Review 37 (4) (1995) 573–595.
doi:10.1137/1037127 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1137/1037127
[107] M. Yalcinkaya, V. Singh, Patterns and trends in
Building Information Modeling (BIM) research:
A Latent Semantic Analysis, Automation in Con-
struction 59 (2015) 68–80. doi:10.1016/j.
autcon.2015.07.012 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2015.
07.012
[108] N. Evangelopoulos, T. Ashton, K. Winson-
Geideman, S. Roulac, Latent Semantic Analysis
and Real Estate Research: Methods and Appli-
cations, Journal of Real Estate Literature 23 (2)
(2015) 353–380. doi:10.1080/10835547.2015.
12090411 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10835547.2015.
12090411
[109] E. Sezgen, K. J. Mason, R. Mayer, Voice of
airline passenger: A text mining approach to
understand customer satisfaction, Journal of
Air Transport Management 77 (2019) 65–74.
doi:10.1016/j.jairtraman.2019.04.001 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jairtraman.
2019.04.001
[110] Jahiruddin, M. Abulaish, L. Dey, A concept-
driven biomedical knowledge extraction and
January 4, 2023visualization framework for conceptualiza-
tion of text corpora, Journal of Biomed-
ical Informatics 43 (6) (2010) 1020–1035.
doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2010.09.008 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2010.09.
008
[111] N. Evangelopoulos, X. Zhang, V. R. Prybutok,
Latent Semantic Analysis: ﬁve methodological
recommendations, European Journal of Informa-
tion Systems 21 (1) (2012) 70–86. doi:10.1057/
ejis.2010.61 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2010.61
[112] P. Holand, Subsea BOP Reliability, Testing, and
Well Kicks (2019).
URL https://exprosoft.com/wp-content/
uploads/2019/11/BOP-Final-report-15102019-
signert-Open-1.pdf
[113] M. Mutlu, T. Wassar, M. A. Franchek, J. A.
Gutierrez, Condition and Performance Analysis
of a Subsea BOP Control System Pressure
Regulator, in: Oﬀshore Technology Confer-
ence, OTC, Houston, 2018, pp. 1193–1203.
doi:10.4043/28861-MS .
URL https://onepetro.org/OTCONF/
proceedings-abstract/18OTC/2-18OTC/
D021S017R002/179170
[114] W. Qibing, Z. Shichao, W. Ge, Z. Xin,
F. Chuanxin, Z. Chen, et al., Research of
the fatigue life and abandonment judgment of
subsea BOP, Oil Field Equipment 46 (6) (2017)
1–5.
URL http://en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/
CJFDTotal-SKJX201706001.htm
[115] T. Wassar, M. Mutlu, M. A. Franchek, O. Hat-
tab, Model-Based Health Monitoring of Annular
Blowout Preventers, SPE Drilling & Completion
34(04)(2019)458–467. doi:10.2118/197041-pa .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.2118/197041-pa
January 4, 2023