arXiv:2301.03035v2  [cs.IT]  3 Aug 20231
Cross Far- and Near-ﬁeld Wireless Communications
in Terahertz Ultra-large Antenna Array Systems
Chong Han, Yuhang Chen, Longfei Yan, Zhi Chen, and Linglong D ai
Abstract — Terahertz (THz) band owning the abundant multi-
ten-GHz bandwidth is capable to support Terabit-per-secon d
wireless communications, which is a pillar technology for 6 G
and beyond systems. With sub-millimeter-long antennas, ul tra-
massive (UM)-MIMO and reﬂective intelligent surface (RIS)
systems with thousands of array elements are exploited to
effectively combat the distance limitation and blockage pr oblems,
which compose a promising THz ultra-large antenna array
(ULAA) system. As a combined effect of wavelength and array
aperture, the resulting coverage of THz systems ranges from
near-ﬁeld to far-ﬁeld, leading to a new paradigm of cross-
ﬁeld communications. Although channel models, communicat ions
theories, and networking strategies have been studied for f ar-
ﬁeld and near-ﬁeld separately, the uniﬁed design of cross-ﬁ eld
communications that achieve high spectral efﬁciency and lo w
complexity is still missing. In this article, the challenge s and
features of THz ULAA cross-ﬁeld communications are investi -
gated. Furthermore, cross-ﬁeld solutions in three perspec tives are
presented, including a hybrid spherical- and planar-wave c hannel
model, cross-ﬁeld channel estimation, and widely-spaced m ulti-
subarray hybrid beamforming, where a subarray as a basic uni t
in THz ULAA systems is exploited. The approximation error of
channel modeling accuracy, spectral efﬁciency, and estima tion
error of these designs are numerically evaluated. Finally, as a
roadmap of THz ULAA cross-ﬁeld communications, multiple
open problems and potential research directions are elabor ated.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The boosting wireless trafﬁc demands inspire increasing
research attention to the exploration of future six-genera tion
(6G) and beyond communication systems. To break the bot-
tleneck of limited bandwidth, the new spectrum in the Ter-
ahertz (THz) band, which ranges from 0.1 to 10 THz and
possesses abundant continuous bandwidth over tens of GHz, i s
regarded as a pillar technology to meet the terabits per seco nd
(Tbps) data rates for 6G communication systems [1]. On
the downside, as one major challenge, the THz wave suffers
from severe propagation losses caused by large free space
attenuation and strong molecular absorption, which thus li mit
Chong Han is with Terahertz Wireless Communications (TWC) L aboratory,
and with Department of Electronic Engineering and Cooperat ive Medianet
Innovation Center (CMIC), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, S hanghai 200240,
China (e-mail: chong.han@sjtu.edu.cn).
Yuhang Chen and Longfei Yan are with Terahertz Wireless Comm unications
(TWC) Laboratory, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
(e-mails: {yuhang.chen, longfei.yan }@sjtu.edu.cn).
Zhi Chen is with the National Key Laboratory of Science and Te chnology
Communications, University of Electronic Science and Tech nology of China,
Chengdu 611730, China (e-mail: chenzhi@uestc.edu.cn).
Linglong Dai is with the Beijing National Research Center fo r Infor-
mation Science and Technology (BNRist) as well as the Depart ment of
Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100 084, China (e-mail:
daill@tsinghua.edu.cn).the communication distance [2]. Moreover, being reliable o n
the line-of-sight (LoS) transmission due to diffuse scatte ring,
signal propagation in the THz band is prone to be blocked by
various obstacles in the communication channel.
Fortunately, the sub-millimeter wavelength in the THz band
makes it possible to compactly arrange hundreds and even
thousands of antennas in a small area, which composes ultra-
massive multi-input multi-output (UM-MIMO) systems [3].
By generating razor-sharp narrow beams with high beam-
forming gain, UM-MIMO systems can effectively combat the
distance limitation problem. Furthermore, reﬂective inte lligent
surface (RIS) systems, by arranging a bountiful number of
passive reﬂecting elements, can effectively solve the bloc kage
problem [2]. By employing UM-MIMO and RIS, the com-
posed THz ultra-large antenna array (ULAA) system operates
with a massive number of sub-millimeter-long active and
passive elements.
In THz ULAA systems, one question arises: do THz signals
propagate in far-ﬁeld ,near-ﬁeld , orcross-ﬁeld of the antenna
array? As a classic boundary between far- and near-ﬁeld, the
Rayleigh distance for the antenna array is proportional to t he
square of the array aperture divided by the wavelength, whic h
is calculated as2S2
λ, whereSdenotes the array aperture, and
λrepresents the wavelength [4]. As a result, the Rayleigh
distance grows with the rapid increment of array size, as
well as the decrement of wavelength. Considering a uniform
planar array (UPA) with 1024 elements at the transmitter (Tx )
and receiver (Rx) operating at 0.3 THz with half-wavelength
spacing, the Rayleigh distance is calculated as around 1m. T his
distance could be further increased to tens and even hundred s
of meters in THz widely-spaced multiple-subarrays (WSMS)
systems [5], i.e., co-located yet distributed arrays.
With such a system conﬁguration, communications range
from near-ﬁeld to far-ﬁeld in typical indoor and outdoor
scenarios, e.g., metaverse, vehicular communications, et c.
Therefore, a new paradigm of cross-ﬁeld communications
in THz ULAA systems is emerging, in typical outdoor and
indoor scenarios of THz ULAA cross-ﬁeld communications
as shown in Fig. 1. It is worth noticing that the deﬁnition
of cross-ﬁeld is similar to hybrid-ﬁeld in traditional radar
and communication systems [6]. By contrast, the hybrid-ﬁel d
stresses the coexistence of far- and near-ﬁeld paths of the
channel, while the cross-ﬁeld emphasizes the transmission
distance spans from near- to far-ﬁeld.
Although UM-MIMO and RIS systems have been recently
exploited, such as channel modeling and analysis [7], [8],
channel estimation [9], [10], beam training [11], [12], bea m-
forming design [3] and multiple access [13], among other2
UM-MIMO 
RIS 
Rayleigh 
distance 
Near-field 
users Far-field 
user 
User moving from far-
field to near-field 
Outdoor 
RIS 
Rayleigh 
distance THz access point 
Near-field 
users 
Far-field 
user 
Indoor metaverse 
Fig. 1. Illustration of typical THz ULAA cross-ﬁeld communi cations.
topics, the separate designs in either far-ﬁeld or near-ﬁel d are
invalid as uniﬁed solutions of the cross-ﬁeld communicatio ns.
On one hand, the planar-wave model (PWM) where the wave
propagation is approximated as a plane is adopted in the far-
ﬁeld. The omission of the non-linear phase term results in lo w
complexity and satisfactory accuracy, which, however, cau ses
inaccuracy and thus transmission performance degradation
when it comes to the near-ﬁeld. On the other hand, the
spherical-wave model (SWM) derived from the electromag-
netic (EM) wave theory is considered as the ground-truth.
SWM is useful when the communication range is shorter than
the Rayleigh distance, i.e., in the near-ﬁeld. Nevertheles s, the
high complexity makes SWM impractical, especially in the fa r-
ﬁeld. In conclusion, neither SWM nor PWM can be efﬁciently
applicable in THz ULAA cross-ﬁeld communications.
In this article, we investigate the challenges of THz ULAA
cross-ﬁeld communications in Sec. II from channel and
ULAA architecture perspectives. The analysis indicates th at
in contrast to microwave multi-antenna systems, THz ULAA
systems could take a subarray instead of an antenna as a
unit, based on the practical consideration of hardware and
transmission design. The cross-ﬁeld solutions are present ed
in three perspectives in Sec. III, including hybrid spheric al-
and planar-wave channel model (HSPM), compressive sensing
(CS)-based cross-ﬁeld channel estimation and WSMS hybrid
beamforming, all of which are inspired by the subarray units
in THz ULAA systems. Numerical results are presented in
Sec. IV to illustrate the modeling accuracy, estimation err or
and spectral efﬁciency of these methods, respectively. Mul tiple
open problems and research directions for 6G THz ULAA
cross-ﬁeld communications are elaborated in Sec. V. Finall y,
this paper is summarized in Sec. VI.
II. C HALLENGES OF THZULAA C ROSS -FIELD
COMMUNICATIONS
In this section, the challenges and unique features of THz
ULAA cross-ﬁeld communications from channel and ULAA
architecture perspectives are elaborated.
A. Challenges From Cross-ﬁeld Channel Perspective
In terms of channel modeling, since THz ULAA commu-
nication distance crosses far- and near-ﬁeld, either SWM orPWM models result in considerably high complexity or model-
ing accuracy degradation. On one hand, in SWM, considering
one antenna pair between Tx and Rx for a propagation path,
the amplitude and phase of the channel response are indi-
vidually calculated, leading SWM the ground-truth channel
model. However, the number of parameters to determine SWM
is proportional to the production of the number of antennas
and the number of propagation paths, which reaches 107if
we consider 1024 antennas at Tx and Rx, and sparse THz
multi-paths (e.g., less than 10) [5].
On the other hand, as an approximation of SWM in the far-
ﬁeld region, PWM regards the radio-wave front as a plane. The
channel response of one antenna can be derived from the phase
difference between it and the reference antenna. Therefore , to
determine PWM, only channel parameters of the reference
antenna are required, of which the number is comparable
to the number of THz sparse multi-paths, e.g. 10, and thus
much smaller than that of SWM. Nevertheless, PWM becomes
inaccurate in the near-ﬁeld region due to phase approximati on
error by the planar-wave propagation assumption [14].
The selection of transmission technologies is heavily in-
ﬂuenced by channel models, therefore, most of the literatur e
transmission technologies are speciﬁcally designed based on
either PWM or SWM. However, neither SWM nor PWM based
technologies are effectively suitable for cross-ﬁeld comm u-
nications. By deploying SWM, transmission designs have to
consider the massive number of parameters in SWM, leading
which suffer from high complexity. For example, angle and
propagation distance information should be considered to d e-
termine the phases of SWM elements, which, therefore, shoul d
be considered in channel estimation and beam training. For
comparison, only angle information is considered in PWM-
based designs. The additional distance domain information
results in high complexity of channel estimation and beam
training [9], [12].
By contrast, due to the inaccuracy of PWM in the near-ﬁeld,
transmission technologies based on PWM, such as channel
estimation and beam training, suffer from signiﬁcant estim a-
tion and training accuracy losses, respectively, especial ly in
the near-ﬁeld region [15]. In addition, examples of channel
capacity based on PWM and SWM are shown in Fig. 2.
For systems equipped with 1024-element WSMS operating at3
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Communication distance (m)20304050607080Channel capacity (bit/s/Hz)SWM
PWM
22.8%Rayleigh distance
25.6m
0 5 10 15 20
Communication distance (m)20406080100Channel capacity (bit/s/Hz)SWM
PWM
17.7%Rayleigh distance
1.02m
Fig. 2. Channel capacity based on PWM and SWM in different com munication distances and frequencies. The WSMS with 1024 el ements and 4 subarrays
is considered in the left ﬁgure, the subarray spacing is 64 ti mes the wavelength. The uniform planar array (UPA) with 1024 elements is deployed in the right
ﬁgure. Communication frequency is ﬁxed as 300 GHz.
300 GHz, the capacity based on PWM is 22.8%lower than
that of SWM at a 15m communication distance. The capacity
difference ampliﬁes as the distance reduces to the near-ﬁel d,
suggesting the inaccuracy of PWM. Moreover, it is worth
noticing that there still exists a capacity gap between PWM
and SWM even when the communication distance exceeds
the Rayleigh distance. This needs to be highlighted that the
Rayleigh distance is derived based on the phase difference
between PWM and SWM above a certain discrepancy. By
viewing the mismatch of the channel capacity, one can tell
Rayleigh distance itself is an approximate boundary betwee n
the far- and near-ﬁelds, instead of zero to one leap.
B. Challenges From ULAA Architecture Perspective
The design of THz ULAA architecture and transmission
technologies should carefully consider the THz hardware
complexity, power consumption, and propagation features. In
particular, THz hardware such as phase shifters and RF-chai ns
possess high manufacturing costs and energy consumption.
Inspired by this, the basic component of THz ULAA could
convert to subarrays, instead of antennas as in the microwav e
band, typical structures including array-of-subarray (Ao SA),
dynamic array-of-subarray (DAoSA), WSMS and dynamic-
subarray with ﬁxed-true-time-delay (DS-FTTD) [5]. Each RF -
chain could dynamically connect to one or several subarrays
through switches and phase shifters, such as DAoSA and
DS-FTTD. The subarray-based ULAA design reduces the
required number of phase shifters and RF-chains, leading
to low hardware complexity and power consumption. From
THz wave propagation perspective, compared to traditional
structures without the subarray units, the beamforming gai n
and transmission ﬂexibility are guaranteed in these subarr ay-
inspired architectures through dedicated beamforming alg o-
rithm design [5]. Speciﬁcally, the disjoint subarrays poss ess
capabilities to independently generate narrow beams with h igh
beamforming gain, helping overcome the propagation loss.
Moreover, subarray coordination can be simultaneously con -
ducted through digital processing, which provides ﬂexibil ity
in transmission design.
With such ULAA architecture, several structural constrain ts
impose challenges to cross-ﬁeld communication design. Asillustrated in Fig. 2, the channel capacity increases in the near-
ﬁeld with the decrement of distance, mainly due to the addi-
tional spatial degree-of-freedom (SDoF) brought by the non -
linear channel phases [5]. The SDoF enhances the multiplexi ng
capability and thus the channel capacity. However, to unlea sh
this near-ﬁeld spatial multiplexing potential, more RF-ch ains
are needed compared to the far-ﬁeld scenario, which causes
inconsistent design requirements, i.e., low hardware comp lex-
ity and power consumption of the THz ULAA architecture.
Moreover, as only a small number of RF-chains are deployed
compared to the number of antennas, the received signals
are severely compressed from the antenna dimension to the
RF-chain dimension. To obtain complete channel informatio n,
observations of the antenna dimension are required, which,
however, results in overwhelmed pilot overhead for channel
estimation, as multiple pilot transmissions comparable to the
number of antennas are needed. In addition, beam management
is jointly conducted by analog beams generated by subarrays
and digital baseband. In cross-ﬁeld communications, both
hardware constraints, e.g., constant module constraint of the
phase shifter, and far- and near-ﬁeld effects including ang le
and distance resolutions, need to be carefully addressed.
III. C ROSS -FIELD SOLUTIONS IN THZULAA S YSTEMS
In this section, we introduce three cross-ﬁeld technologie s
based on subarray architecture in THz ULAA systems, includ-
ing the HSPM channel model, CS-based cross-ﬁeld channel
estimation and WSMS hybrid beamforming.
A. HSPM Channel Model
Channel models act as the fundamental of transmission
design. To assist THz ULAA cross-ﬁeld communications, a
channel model should balance high accuracy and low complex-
ity, and be efﬁciently suitable for far- and near-ﬁeld. In TH z
ULAA systems, the subarrays are regarded as basic units. A
physical subarray usually contains substantially fewer an tennas
than the entire ULAA, e.g., 64 elements. As a result, the
Rayleigh distance for a subarray is typically small, e.g., 0 .05m
for a 64-element square shape subarray operating at 0.3 THz.
Inspired by these facts, an HSPM is proposed in [14], as
shown in Fig. 3. HSPM employs PWM within one subarray.4
濷 濷 濷Communication 
distance Subarray 
Rayleigh distance 
ULAA 
near-field ULAA 
far-field Subarray 
near-field Subarray 
far-field 
ULAA Subarray 
1
Subarray 
KULAA 
Rayleigh distance 
Fig. 3. An illustration of HSPM channel model.
The PWM-based modeling remains precise since it is rea-
sonable to consider that transmissions are always conducte d
in the far-ﬁeld originating from a subarray. By contrast,
SWM is deployed among subarrays to address the near-ﬁeld
spherical-wave propagation for improved modeling accurac y,
since communications are conducted in a cross far- and near-
ﬁeld of the entire ULAA. Due to the deployment of hybrid
PWM and SWM modeling, HSPM is accurate compared to
PWM in both far- and near-ﬁeld regions.
In terms of modeling complexity, the required number of
parameters to determine HSPM is proportional to the produc-
tion of subarrays at Tx, Rx, and the number of propagation
paths in the channel, which is much smaller than that of
the SWM. Although the modeling complexity of HSPM is
slightly higher than PWM, by further dividing the physical
subarray into several virtual subarrays, deploying PWM wit hin
the virtual subarray, and SWM among virtual subarrays durin g
the modeling process, HSPM is effective in achieving balanc ed
accuracy and complexity.
B. Cross-ﬁeld Channel Estimation
It is necessary to obtain accurate channel state informatio n
at the antenna level, which helps to determine the analog and
digital precoding. To observe a high dimensional channel wi th
a small number of RF-chains, multiple pilot transmissions a re
needed, resulting in high pilot overhead. To solve this, CS-
based channel estimation methods were widely explored in
both far- and near-ﬁeld communications [9], [10]. By exploi t-
ing the sparsity of the THz ULAA wireless channel, these
schemes can recover the high-dimensional channel matrix
from compressed observation and achieve low pilot overhead .
To deploy the CS-based methods, the wireless channel
needs to be sparsely represented by a codebook. In near-
ﬁeld transmission with SWM, both angular and distance
dimensions are sampled, and each sampled point relates to
one grid, i.e., one realization of the codebook. The sparse
representation codebook is constructed by collecting the a rray
steering vectors of these points. As the number of grids is
usually much larger than the propagation paths, the channel
could be sparsely represented. However, this two-dimensio nal
sampling leads to excessive codebook dimension, which brin gs
overwhelming operational complexity [9]. By contrast, for far-
ﬁeld PWM, a path’s incident angle is considered the samefor the entire ULAA. Therefore, one-dimensional sampling o n
the angular domain is enough to compose the codebook [10].
Nevertheless, this sampling strategy mismatches the near- ﬁeld
environment, resulting in low estimation accuracy in the cr oss-
ﬁeld propagation environment.
The subarray units in ULAA open new access to CS-based
cross-ﬁeld channel estimation [6], [15]. Speciﬁcally, wit hin
each subarray, the incident angle of a path is considered
to be the same for all subarray elements. Therefore, during
the operation, the angular domain of the subarray channel is
sampled to compose a subarray codebook. Moreover, among
subarrays, the incident angle of a path is considered to be
different for different subarrays. To account for this, the
angular samplings for different subarrays are independent . In
this case, both near- and far-ﬁeld channels can be sparsely
represented by the subarray-based method. The proposed
sparse representation method possesses the same complexit y
as traditional solutions based on PWM, which, however, owns
much higher accuracy in the near-ﬁeld. Moreover, compared
to the joint angular and distance domain sparse representat ion
using SWM, the computational complexity of the proposed
codebook is signiﬁcantly reduced.
After that, different channel estimation algorithms could be
designed to recover the antenna level channel. For example,
the separate side estimation (SSE) in [15] decouples the non -
zero grid estimation at Tx and Rx to achieve low complexity.
Moreover, the dictionary shrinkage estimation (DSE) in [15 ]
exploits the spatial correlation among subarrays, i.e., th e
incident angles for different subarrays are close in the spa tial
domain, to further reduce the complexity. In addition, the ﬁ xed
point iteration, as well as deep learning tools, are deploye d
in [6] to estimate the cross-ﬁeld channel with high efﬁcienc y.
Notably, in wideband systems, the channel response varies
with carrier frequencies. The wideband channel estimation can
be conducted by dividing multiple subcarriers. In this case , the
sub-channel on each subcarrier could be regarded as invaria nt
and estimated by the above channel estimation methods.
C. WSMS Hybrid Beamforming
With strong sparsity in the THz channel, the spatial mul-
tiplexing capability in the far-ﬁeld is upper bounded by the
number of propagation paths, i.e., the inter-path multiplexing ,
instead of the number of antennas as in the microwave band.
However, it is observed in Fig. 2 that the channel capacity
gap between SWM and PWM increases by reducing the
communication distance. This is caused by the additional sp a-
tial multiplexing gain brought by spherical-wave propagat ion
in the near-ﬁeld region, as explained in Sec. II-B, namely,
theintra-path multiplexing . Speciﬁcally, when spherical-wave
propagations are introduced, a notable effect is that the ph ases
of columns/rows in the channel matrix for a particular prop-
agation path become linearly independent [5]. This results in
additional SDoF thus multiplexing gain that can be exploite d
for one propagation path among different antennas. Since th e
intra-path multiplexing gain is not limited by the number of
multipath, it is naturally applicable and promising for THz
communications with a notable channel sparsity. Therefore ,5
transmissions in the near-ﬁeld by processing higher spectr al
efﬁciency with both inter- and intra-path multiplexing are
preferred for THz ULAA systems [5].
However, the near-ﬁeld range is limited, only covering a
certain proximal range, especially in the outdoor scenario .
For example, within 1m by equipping compact UPA with
1024 elements at Tx and Rx in Fig. 2. To further enhance
the spatial multiplexing even in the far-ﬁeld of the compact
array, a WSMS hybrid beamforming architecture is studied
in [5]. Unlike traditional architectures where antenna spa cing
of the entire array equals half of the wavelength, the WSMS
enlarges subarray spacing to tens or even hundreds of times
half-wavelength. The antenna spacing within the subarray i s
set as half of the wavelength. In this way, the near-ﬁeld regi on
is expanded to tens to hundreds of meters. Compared to the
far-ﬁeld transmissions, the total multiplexing gain is imp roved
by a factor equal to the number of subarrays. In conclusion,
by jointly exploiting the inter-path and intra-path multip lexing,
this co-located or distributed WSMS can signiﬁcantly enhan ce
spatial multiplexing and, thus, data rate.
In terms of WSMS hardware manufacture, the RF-chains
and phase shifters are equipped for each subarray. Within th e
subarray, each RF-chain connects to several phase shifters ,
which number equals the antennas. Moreover, the antennas,
phase shifters, and RF-chains are disjoint from each other.
Therefore, the analog beamforming matrix holds a block-
diagonal structure, with the phase of each element satisfyi ng
constant module constraint. Those constraints are address ed
in the analog and digital beamforming algorithms design. It is
worth noticing that the WSMS operates with small fractional
bandwidth, i.e., the ratio between the bandwidth and centra l
frequency. For example, at 5 GHz bandwidth at 0.3 THz carrier
frequency. In THz wideband systems with large fractional
bandwidth, a kind of beam-squint effect that could reduce
the array gain and spectral efﬁciency should be carefully
addressed [5].
IV. P ERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the performances of HSPM,
subarray-based channel estimation method and WSMS hybrid
beamforming structure. During our simulation, the planar-
shaped THz ULAA is deployed at both Tx and Rx. We choose
a carrier frequency at 0.3 THz, and the number of multi-path i s
set as 2 [5]. In the WSMS structure, the number of subarrays
and RF-chains is set as 4, and the number of antennas in
ULAA is 1024 unless otherwise speciﬁed. Therefore, the
number of antennas of a subarray equals 256. Moreover, the
bandwidth is selected as 5GHz.
To illustrate the advantage of HSPM in ULAA systems,
we numerically evaluate the approximation errors of HSPM
and PWM in different communication distances by calculatin g
their differences from the ground-truth SWM. The approxima -
tion error is obtained as /bardblHM−HS/bardbl2
F//bardblHS/bardbl2
F, whereHM
andHSdenote the adopted channel matrix based on HSPM
or PWM and the SWM channel matrix, respectively, /bardbl · /bardblF
depicts the Frobenius norm. Notably, the approximation err or
of the SWM equals 0 in this case. As shown in Fig. 4, HSPM0 50 100 150
Communication distance (m)-40-30-20-100Channel approximation error (dB)PWM N=256
PWM N=1024
HSPM N=256
HSPM N=1024
Fig. 4. Channel approximation error in different communica tion distances.
Subarray spacing is ﬁxed at 32 times wavelength.
possesses much higher modeling accuracy compared to PWM.
With 1024 antennas in the system, the approximation error of
HSPM is 22.5dB lower than PWM at 40m. Moreover, we
calculate the number of parameters required for representi ng
different channel models. In the considered setup with 1024
antennas and 4 subarrays at BS and UE, the required number
of parameters for SWM and PMW are around 4×106and
12, respectively. For comparison, the required numbers of
parameters for HSPM is around 400. Therefore, we can state
that HSPM achieves around 175 times higher accuracy than
PWM, while it deploys 0.01% and 33 times the number of
parameters of SWM and PWM, respectively.
In Fig. 5, the channel estimation normalized mean-square-
error (NMSE) based on traditional discrete Fourier transfo rm
(DFT) [10], proposed SSE and low complexity DSE [15] are
evaluated, respectively. We observe that channel estimati on
based on the proposed subarray codebook including SSE and
DSE possesses much higher estimation accuracy than the tra-
ditional method. At SNR=15dB, the SSE possesses 4dB lower
NMSE than the traditional DFT-based method, validating its
superiority. Moreover, the proposed DSE also achieves 1dB
lower NMSE than the traditional method. Complexities of
the far-ﬁeld, subarray-based, and low complexity methods a re
obtained as C(N2),C(N)andC/parenleftbigN
K/parenrightbig
, respectively, where N
andKdenote the number of antennas and subarrays in the
THz ULAA system. Notably, both SSE and DSE are based
on on-grid sparse channel representation codebooks that ta ke
the subarray as a unit. The estimation accuracy of which is
strictly limited by the grid resolution. Although increasi ng the
number of grids or performing grid reﬁnement could further
improve the estimation accuracy, it comes at the cost of high er
computational complexity, which is not preferred in THz UM-
MIMO systems with a massive number of antennas [15].
Finally, in Fig. 6, we compare the spectral efﬁciency
between WSMS and traditional compact array systems in
the literature. It is worth noticing that the compact array
refers to the array with half-wavelength antenna spacing. M ost
existing array structures belong to this category, e.g., th e fully
connected (FC), array-of-subarray (AoSA) and DAoSA [5]. 4
widely-spaced subarrays are deployed in the WSMS architec-
ture. The communication distance is ﬁxed at 40m. The spectra l
efﬁciency is obtained by calculating channel capacities ba sed6
0 10 20 30
SNR (dB)-15-10-50Estimation NMSE (dB)DFT
SSE
DSE
Fig. 5. Comparision of different channel estimation method s.
0 5 10 15 20
Transmit power (dBm)020406080100Spectral efficiency (bits/s/Hz)Compact array
WSMS 64
WSMS 128
WSMS 256
Fig. 6. Spectral efﬁciency in different hybrid beamforming architectures.
on different structures, which values reﬂect the upper boun ds
of spectral efﬁciency. In Fig. 6, the subarray spacing is set
as 64, 128 and 256 times of wavelength, respectively. It is
observed the multiplexing gain is enhanced by the widely
spaced architectural design. Speciﬁcally, the spectral ef ﬁciency
of the THz WSMS hybrid beamforming architecture is 3.2
times higher than the traditional compact array counterpar t
at 15 dBm transmit power and 128λsubarray spacing. It
is further observed that by considering HSPM, the spectral
efﬁciency increases with the WSMS subarray spacing. This is
due to the fact that a larger subarray spacing leads to greate r
differences among the sub-channels of subarrays, which hel ps
enhance the multiplexing gain.
V. O PEN PROBLEMS AND POTENTIAL RESEARCH
DIRECTIONS
In this section, we elaborate open problems and future re-
search directions for THz ULAA cross-ﬁeld communications.
A. Theoretical Bounds
Existing studies have experimentally demonstrated that
ULAA hybrid-ﬁeld communications have the potential of
achieving performance enhancement, including channel mod -
eling accuracy, channel estimation NMSE and spectral efﬁ-
ciency [5], [6], [14], [15]. However, as fundamental to com-
munication system design, the theoretical bounds of the cro ss-
ﬁeld technologies, such as system capacity, degree of freed om,estimation Cramer-Rao lower bound (CRLB), etc., are still
lacking. For example, it is worth exploring the CRLB and
proposing effective cross-ﬁeld parameter estimation algo rithms
to approach it. Moreover, the training and system conﬁgurat ion
could be designed with the aim of decreasing the CRLB. In
all previous analyses, the effects of subarray division, su barray
distance, and communication distance need to be explored an d
possibly optimized to guide the system design. In addition, it is
worth systematically analyzing and evaluating the overall cost
and beneﬁt of the subarray-based solution in the cross-ﬁeld
by jointly taking the hardware limitation, power consumpti on,
and capacity enhancement into consideration.
B. Practical Hardware Efﬁcient Design
The hardware difﬁculty and cost for THz ULAA hardware
grow simultaneously as communication frequency moves to
the THz band. This inspires the use of fewer RF-chain and
phase shifters to compose the hybrid ULAA architecture [3].
However, as analyzed in Sec. II-B, more RF-chains and
phase shifters are needed to unleash the spatial multiplexi ng
capability in the near-ﬁeld, which contradicts the low hard ware
cost requirement. In the meantime, the required number of
RF-chains in the far-ﬁeld is smaller compared to the near-
ﬁeld case, due to the limited SDoF. As the ULAA hardware
structure is usually ﬁxed, it is difﬁcult to simultaneously
meet the cross-ﬁeld spatial multiplexing and hardware cost
requirements. As two potational solutions, the WSMS in-
troduced in Sec. III-C enlarges the near-ﬁeld region to the
typical communication distance. Moreover, a distance-awa re
precoding structure (DAP) was proposed [4]. By inserting a
selection circuit between phase shifters and RF-chains, ea ch
RF-chain can be ﬂexibly activated or inactivated according to
the SDoFs. Although both structures could be deployed for
cross-ﬁeld transmissions, the required number of RF-chain s
and phase shifters are larger than the structures designed
for far-ﬁeld transmission. It is still worth exploring a mor e
efﬁcient structure to balance spatial multiplexing and har dware
cost in cross-ﬁeld transmissions.
C. Cross-ﬁeld Beam Training
To establish reliable ULAA transmissions, a beam-searchin g
process, known as beam training, is required to realize narr ow
beam alignment. In the far-ﬁeld, the beams only process
angular resolution and beam training searches the angular
domain to ﬁnd the best beam pair [11]. To perform near-ﬁeld
beam training, joint searchings in the angular and distance
domains are conducted in the literature [4], [12]. On one
hand, as the searching beams are obtained from a pre-deﬁned
beam codebook, the far-ﬁeld codebook designs are unable to
meet the joint angular and distance resolutions in the cross -
ﬁeld. On the other hand, although the near-ﬁeld codebooks
can be deployed for far-ﬁeld, the additional distance domai n
searching undoubtedly increases the training overhead des pite
the codebook design and training strategy, which incurs hig h
complexity and is thus not preferred in cross-ﬁeld. To study the
efﬁcient uniﬁed cross-ﬁeld beam training framework, ﬁrst, the
angular and distance domain beam patterns in the cross-ﬁeld7
should be identiﬁed, by considering different communicati on
distances and ULAA structure. Second, to achieve low traini ng
overhead, it is worth exploring the suitable training beams
for alignment. For example, the study of hierarchical code-
books with non-uniformly adjustable beamwidth in angular
and distance domains [4], or directly using the far-ﬁeld bea m
for training and proposing beam estimation algorithms for
alignment. Moreover, the training strategy for both single and
multi-user scenarios, as well as beam tracking strategies u nder
user movement needs further study.
D. Multi-user Communications and Networking
Although THz cross-ﬁeld communication has been studied
for physical layer single link transmission [5], its impact
on medium access control (MAC) and networking has not
drawn enough research attention. A recent study on multiple
access in the near-ﬁeld [13] has shown that compared to the
spatial division multiple access (SDMA) in the far-ﬁeld, th e
multiple accessibilities could be enhanced by the new dista nce
dimension division ability in the near-ﬁeld, which is named
as location division multiple access (LDMA). However, as
the communication distance crosses near- and far-ﬁeld, it i s
necessary to study the uniﬁed cross-ﬁeld multiple access, b y
accounting for distance and angular beam resolutions in dif fer-
ent communication distances. For example, dividing the use of
the LDMA and SDMA with a distance threshold. Moreover,
due to the change of physical layer characteristics, in the
networking process, universal schemes with angular-dista nce-
multiplxing are needed, to meet the transmission coverage,
and deafness avoidance as well as control channel selection
in the node discovery and coupling process. The cross-ﬁeld
impacts on interference cancellation, network topology as well
as routing require further study.
VI. C ONCLUSION
THz ULAA systems are widely exploited by effectively
combating the distance limitation and blockage problem. Wi th
the enlarged dimension of ULAA, typical communications
distances reach both far- and near-ﬁeld, resulting in a new
paradigm of cross-ﬁeld communications. In this article, we
investigate the challenges and features of ULAA hybrid-
ﬁeld communications from channel and ULAA architecture
perspectives. The cross-ﬁeld HSPM, CS-based channel es-
timation, and WSMS hybrid beamforming framework are
introduced and evaluated. Finally, multiple open problems and
potential research directions to ULAA cross-ﬁeld communi-
cations awaiting to be explored are presented, including th e-
oretical bounds, hardware-efﬁcient designs, cross-ﬁeld b eam
training and multi-user communications and networking.
VII. A CKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grants 62171280 and by the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of
China.REFERENCES
[1] T. S. Rappaport, Y . Xing, O. Kanhere, S. Ju, A. Madanayake , S. Mandal,
A. Alkhateeb, and G. C. Trichopoulos, “Wireless Communicat ions and
Applications Above 100 GHz: Opportunities and Challenges f or 6G and
Beyond,” IEEE Access , vol. 7, pp. 78 729–78 757, 2019.
[2] Z. Chen, C. Han, Y . Wu, L. Li, C. Huang, Z. Zhang, G. Wang, an d
W. Tong, “Terahertz Wireless Communications for 2030 and Be yond:
A Cutting-Edge Frontier,” IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 59, no. 11, pp.
66–72, Nov. 2021.
[3] A. M. Elbir, K. V . Mishra, S. A. V orobyov, and R. W. Heath, “ Twenty-
ﬁve years of advances in beamforming: From convex and noncon vex op-
timization to learning techniques,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag. , vol. 40,
no. 4, pp. 118–131, Jun. 2023.
[4] M. Cui, Z. Wu, Y . Lu, X. Wei, and L. Dai, “Near-Field MIMO
Communications for 6G: Fundamentals, Challenges, Potenti als, and
Future Directions,” IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 40–46,
Jan. 2023.
[5] C. Han, L. Yan, and J. Yuan, “Hybrid Beamforming for Terah ertz Wire-
less Communications: Challenges, Architectures, and Open Problems,”
IEEE Wireless Commun. , vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 198–204, Aug. 2021.
[6] W. Yu, Y . Shen, H. He, X. Yu, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Hy brid
Far- and Near-Field Channel Estimation for THz Ultra-Massi ve MIMO
via Fixed Point Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE Globecom , Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, 2022, pp. 1–6.
[7] F. Bohagen, P. Orten, and G. E. Oien, “On Spherical vs. Pla ne Wave
Modeling of Line-of-sight MIMO Channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun. ,
vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 841–849, Mar. 2009.
[8] E. Bj ¨ornson and L. Sanguinetti, “Power Scaling Laws and Near-Fie ld
Behaviors of Massive MIMO and Intelligent Reﬂecting Surfac es,”IEEE
Open J. Commun. Society , vol. 1, pp. 1306–1324, Sept. 2020.
[9] Y . Han, S. Jin, C.-K. Wen, and X. Ma, “Channel Estimation f or Ex-
tremely Large-Scale Massive MIMO Systems,” IEEE Wireless Commun.
Lett., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 633–637, May 2020.
[10] A. Alkhateeb, O. El Ayach, G. Leus, and R. W. Heath, “Chan nel Es-
timation and Hybrid Precoding for Millimeter Wave Cellular Systems,”
IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process. , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 831–846, Oct.
2014.
[11] C. Lin, G. Y . Li, and L. Wang, “Subarray-Based Coordinat ed Beam-
forming Training for mmWave and Sub-THz Communications,” IEEE
J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 2115–2126, Sept. 2017.
[12] W. Liu, H. Ren, C. Pan, and J. Wang, “Deep Learning Based B eam
Training for Extremely Large-Scale Massive MIMO in Near-Fi eld
Domain,” IEEE Commun. Lett. , vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 170–174, Jan. 2023.
[13] Z. Wu and L. Dai, “Multiple access for near-ﬁeld communi cations: Sdma
or ldma?” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1918–1935,
Jun. 2023.
[14] Y . Chen, L. Yan, and C. Han, “Hybrid Spherical-and Plana r-Wave
Modeling and DCNN-powered Estimation of Terahertz Ultra-m assive
MIMO Channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 7063–
7076, Oct. 2021.
[15] Y . Chen, R. Li, C. Han, S. Sun, and M. Tao, “Hybrid Spheric al- and
Planar-Wave Channel Modeling and Estimation for Terahertz Integrated
UM-MIMO and IRS Systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , to
appear 2023.
BIOGRAPHIES
Chong Han is John Wu & Jane Sun Endowed Associate Professor with
the Terahertz Wireless Communications (TWC) Laboratory an d with Depart-
ment of Electronic Engineering and Cooperative Medianet In novation Center
(CMIC), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.
Yuhang Chen is currently pursuing a Ph.D. degree in the Terahertz Wirele ss
Communications (TWC) Laboratory, Shanghai Jiao Tong Unive rsity, China.
Longfei Yan is currently pursuing a Ph.D. degree in the Terahertz Wirele ss
Communications (TWC) Laboratory, Shanghai Jiao Tong Unive rsity, China.
Zhi Chen is a Professor with University of Electronic Science and Tec hnology
of China.
Linglong Dai is an associate professor at Tsinghua University. He has rec eived
six conference best paper awards and four journal best paper awards.