Design and Assessment of a Bimanual Haptic
Epidural Needle Insertion Simulator
Nitsan Davidor, Student Member, IEEE , Yair Binyamin, Tamar Hayuni and Ilana Nisky, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —The case experience of anesthesiologists is one of
the leading causes of accidental dural punctures and failed
epidurals - the most common complications of epidural analgesia
used for pain relief during delivery. We designed a bimanual
haptic simulator to train anesthesiologists and optimize epidural
analgesia skill acquisition. We present an assessment study
conducted with 22 anesthesiologists of different competency levels
from several Israeli hospitals. Our simulator emulates the forces
applied to the epidural (Touhy) needle, held by one hand, and
those applied to the Loss of Resistance (LOR) syringe, held by
the other one. The resistance is calculated based on a model of
the epidural region layers parameterized by the weight of the
patient. We measured the movements of both haptic devices and
quantified the results’ rate (success, failed epidurals, and dural
punctures), insertion strategies, and the participants’ answers to
questionnaires about their perception of the simulation realism.
We demonstrated good construct validity by showing that the
simulator can distinguish between real-life novices and experts.
Face and content validity were examined by studying users’
impressions regarding the simulator’s realism and fulfillment of
purpose. We found differences in strategies between different
level anesthesiologists, and suggest trainee-based instruction in
advanced training stages.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Delivery is one of the most painful experiences in a
woman’s life, and epidural analgesia is the most common
option for pain relief during delivery with a rate of 60%
in Israel [1] and 71% in the United States [2]. Epidural
injections are also used to relieve pain in the chest, abdominal,
and lower extremity surgeries and for chronic pain relief [3].
The two most common errors or complications of epidural
analgesia are failed epidurals (FE), which are insertions of
the needle to a superficial location (that will not produce
analgesia and cause the need to perform a re-do), and dural
punctures (DP), occurring in 0.4-6% of cases [4], leading to
post-dural puncture headaches in 70-80% of the cases [5] and
subsequently longer hospitalizations [6], higher chronic pain
rates [7], and postpartum depression. The most prominent risk
factor for both errors is the experience of the anesthesiologists
[8] who attain competency within 1-90 attempts [9].
This research was supported in part by the Israeli Science Foundation
(grant 327/20) and by the Helmsley Charitable Trust through the Agricultural,
Biological and Cognitive Robotics Initiative and by the Marcus Endowment
Fund, both at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev.
Nitsan Davidor and Ilana Nisky are from the Department of
Biomedical Engineering and the School of Brain Sciences and
Cognition, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
nitsanti@post.bgu.ac.il, nisky@bgu.ac.il
Tamar Hayuni and Yair Binyamin are from the Department of Anesthesiol-
ogy, Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva,
Israel. yairben1@gmail.com, tamarhayuni@gmail.comIn the epidural anesthesia procedure, medication is inserted
into the epidural space, allowing it to block pain signals
from traveling from the spine to the brain, hence producing
analgesia [10]. To arrive at the epidural space, the anesthesi-
ologists use an epidural (Touhy) needle, i.e., a hollow needle
with a curved tip [11], [12]. The needle is inserted into the
patient’s skin in the back area. It proceeds through several
tissues located between the skin and the epidural space (Fig.
1) while avoiding the spinous process. Once the Touhy needle
is ultimately inserted into the epidural space, a catheter may
be threaded through the Touhy needle and remain there after
the needle has been removed. The anesthetic is then admin-
istered using said catheter. The task of stopping the needle
immediately after passing the rigid Ligamentum Flavum (i.e.,
the final tissue preceding the epidural space) is mechanically
challenging and requires extensive technical training [9]. The
thickness of the epidural space in the lumbar region is 5-
17 millimeters (depending on patient parameters) [13], which
creates a very small margin for error, and continued movement
with the needle will cause an Accidental Dural Puncture
(ADP). This is exacerbated by patient variability [8] (e.g., due
to obesity or age) affecting the dimensions and stiffness of the
layers [13]–[15].
Since epidural needle insertion is a blind procedure, the
”loss of resistance” (LOR) technique helps identify the epidu-
ral space as the Touhy needle encounters the various ligaments
of the lumbar vertebral column [12], [16] (Fig. 1). This
Fig. 1. The epidural region. The left and right hands are holding the Touhy
needle and LOR syringe, respectively. The Touhy needle is inserted into the
epidural space; Such an insertion would be considered a success (green X
symbol). The light red X symbol represents a failed epidural (an insertion too
superficial, not reaching the epidural space), and the dark red X represents
a dural puncture (an insertion too deep, puncturing the dura mater). The
difficulty of the task stems from the lack of visual feedback, as well as the
thinness of the epidural space, which is encountered after passing through the
rigid Ligamentum Flavum, leaving a very small margin for error.arXiv:2301.11036v3  [cs.HC]  14 Aug 2023technique is bimanual; the anesthesiologists insert the Touhy
needle into the ligaments with one hand and attach a minimal-
friction syringe filled with air or saline to the end of the
needle with the other hand. Then, they push the needle to
advance it and sense the stiffness by applying a force to
the plunger with their thumb. The tougher and more fibrous
Ligamentum Flavum applies a high resistive force on the
needle and the fluid, but once the needle enters the epidural
space, the resistance is lost (hence LOR) [12], [17]. This
haptic feedback informs the operator of the needle location
within the various tissue layers and loss of resistance from
potential spaces [17]. Since the task is complex and relies on
delicate haptic information, several systems assisting epidural
needle insertions have been developed, including [18], which
presented a novel controller, providing augmented force per-
ception to the operator and newly emerging techniques that
assist by guiding the needle to the epidural space, or by helping
the operator correctly identify the loss of resistance [12].
Due to the challenges of the task, the procedure is con-
sidered the most difficult technique among anesthetic manual
tasks to be learned by residents [9], [19]. However, even in
state-of-the-art training curricula for anesthesiology residents,
they do not acquire knowledge and skills in a controlled
and safe environment under close supervision. Instead, the
training is performed as part of their clinical practice, which
is limited by the residents’ restricted working hours and, more
importantly, jeopardizes patient safety [20], [21].
Medical simulation may solve the trade-off between allow-
ing for high-quality skill acquisition and unharmed patient
care. Integrating simulations into resident training programs
allows for certain skills to be acquired before meeting the
first patient in a clinical setting [21]. Furthermore, practic-
ing a range of manual skills in a virtual environment can
be standardized and adjusted to create the desired settings.
Residents can repeatedly train at any time until mastering the
task [22] while maintaining patient safety [20]. Simulation-
based training is beneficial as an addition to traditional training
methods in simulated hypoxemia and hypotension scenarios
[23] and in simulated central venous catheter (CVC) insertions
[22]. In the latter, the effects were shown to diminish over
time, and, thus, training was suggested to be maintained by
repetitive simulation practice. Medical simulation was also
shown to be effective in simulating needle insertions and
lumbar punctures – commercially available haptic devices have
been successfully utilized for needle insertion simulators in
the past [24], [25]. Another application of medical simulation
is the assessment of trainee level [20], which may potentially
eliminate the effect of subjectivity in resident-level assessment
in many manual tasks.
In the development of any type of simulator, it is essential
to thoroughly investigate its validity. A simulator is considered
valid if it accurately reflects the task it is designed to simulate
with regard to the specific learning goals and the target
population [26]. There are three primary types of validity to
consider in simulation design: face validity, content validity,
and construct validity. Face validity is the subjective viewusers have of how realistic a simulation is, and it can be
evaluated using subjective reports, e.g., questionnaires about
the resemblance level of each part of the simulator to the
real-life environment [15], [26]–[28]. When examining face
validity, it is important to take into consideration the users’
ability to respond to questionnaires and rely more on responses
given by users with rich experience in the real-life task [26],
[29], [30]. Content validity, another subjective assessment of
simulators, examines the usefulness of a simulation in its
original purpose [31], e.g., as a training or an assessment tool,
as viewed by expert users [31], [32].
Construct validity is a more objective assessment of sim-
ulators, compared to face and content validity; it determines
whether the simulator can differentiate between real-life ex-
perts and novices. As such, it is considered one of the most
important aspects of simulation evaluation [28]. Construct
validity testifies to the simulator’s ability to provide an ac-
curate representation of the real task; a simulation with good
construct validity should be able to accurately reflect the dif-
ferences in performance among individuals, such as between
real-life novices and experts, and also within individuals as
they develop over time. This would show that the simulation
is consistent with the real-world principles [15], [26]. Testing
construct validity can be performed through expert versus
novice comparisons [15], [26]–[28], [33], [34]. Its assessment
is more objective than face and content validity as it can be
tested in a more neutral and impersonal manner.
Several epidural simulators have been designed since the
early 1980s, and they consist of two types: manikins [14],
[35], [36] and robotic [13], [15], [27], [37], [38]. Manikin
simulators allow the palpation of the vertebral column, which
assists the anesthesiologists in identifying the correct initial
needle insertion site [35], [36]. However, they do not support
any patient variability nor allow modification of the training
difficulty, geometry, or mechanical resistance of the tissue with
trainee progress [14].
Robotic simulators use haptic devices to render resistive
forces [14] that emulate the forces applied to the Touhy
needle when encountering the different tissues in the epidural
region [37]. Such simulators enable representation of various
body types [14], [15], [27]. Additionally, kinematic data, such
as injection trajectories and velocities, can be recorded to
provide information on the trainees’ progress and improvement
with practice. Examples of previous haptic epidural simulators
include an electrical haptic interface coupled with a pneumatic
cylinder [37] and a motor with a pulley-cable mechanism for
transmitting forces in the needle insertion direction [27]. In
another simulator [38], the force data was obtained in a needle
insertion trial on a porcine cadaver and used to recreate the
feeling of epidural insertion.
Robotic epidural simulators are effective and promising
[14], but there is still much room for further development.
Previous simulators were uni-manual, although this task is
performed bimanually in real-life. They simulated only the
forces applied to the Touhy needle without considering those
applied to the LOR syringe, an important tool for perceivingthe environment stiffness [16], [17]. Additionally, using the
kinematic data acquired by both haptic devices – and, more
specifically, the data regarding probing movements performed
using the LOR syringe – allows for a deeper analysis of
strategies, which can assist in the understanding of better
training approaches [39]. This cannot be done in a uni-manual
configuration. Furthermore, a smart training program based
on sensorimotor learning principles [40], [41] has never been
introduced into these robotic simulators. Although robotic sim-
ulators today can facilitate patient-based variability, a training
program incorporating variability and other motor learning
principles has never been designed and implemented.
Some robotic simulators, such as the Mediseus [15], pro-
vide, in addition to the haptic feedback, visual feedback as
to the needle’s location within the patient’s body during the
procedure. This may be especially beneficial at the beginning
of the training to build a mental map between the experienced
forces and the penetration into the different layers. However,
even though it may assist the user, visual feedback does not
exist in the real procedure and, therefore, may be unnecessary
and impede transfer to real procedures. Therefore, in the
current study, we chose to develop and assess our robotic
simulator without the addition of such visual feedback.
We developed a novel simulator that incorporates the haptic
feedback, which is received in both hands, using two hap-
tic devices. By doing so, we provide the user with haptic
information not only to emulate the forces applied to the
Touhy needle but also to the LOR syringe. Additionally, we
implemented the simulation with patient weight variability.
This was done to account for the different patient body types
that affect the task in the real-life procedure and to set the
ground for testing the added value of motor variability and
its ability to enhance learning in this task in the future. We
present the simulator design and the results of an assessment
study. To test face and content validity, we collected the
answers to visual analog scale (V AS) questionnaires testing the
simulator’s resemblance to the real-life task and its suitability
as a training or assessment tool. To test construct validity, we
compared the success rates of anesthesiologists with different
competency levels. We also examined error rates and sizes
across participant levels. Further, we studied the movement
control strategies that participants employed by measuring
their velocities in the different layers of the epidural region
and utilization of the probing tool – the number of probing
movements participants performed with the LOR syringe, their
depth, and rate.
II. M ETHODS
A. Simulator Design
We designed a bimanual simulator using two ’Phantom
Omni’ haptic devices (Fig. 2a). One haptic device is mounted
by a Touhy needle (Fig. 2b), and the other is connected to an
LOR syringe (Fig. 2c). Both the Touhy needle and the LOR
syringe were connected to the haptic devices using 3D-printed
custom-made adapters using an ’Ultimaker S5’ printer.To render resistive forces, we used the ’Chai-3D’ C++
simulation framework (the code will be released upon pub-
lication). We used Visual Studio 2013, on a ’Dell Inspiron
13’ laptop. The use of a laptop, in addition to the two haptic
devices (which are light-weighted), allowed for transporting
the simulator to different hospitals or medical conferences to
reach anesthesiologist participants population.
We relied on the model proposed in [13] to render resis-
tive forces as the trainees cross the different layers in the
epidural region (Fig. 3). According to this model, each tissue
can be emulated by creating a different non-linear spring –
polynomials with different orders and parameters mapping the
instantaneous penetration depth of the needle into the tissue
layer to a force applied by the haptic devices according to:
F=a0+a1∆d+a2∆d2+a3∆d3, (1)
where ∆drepresents the needle penetration depth into the
tissue layer (in mm), and a0, a1, a2anda3are constants that
differ between the different tissue layers and regions within
each layer, and their values are presented in Table I.
This model considers each tissue in the epidural region and
subdivides the needle insertion forces in most tissue layers
into two regions: before and after the puncture of the tissue
layer (BP and AP, respectively). The forces applied before
the puncture (BP) result from the stiffness forces that are
affected by the tissue elasticity before its perforation. The
forces applied after the puncture (AP) can be modeled as
a sum of the cutting force, which is the force required to
cut through the tissue, and the frictional force, caused by
the needle shaft’s contact within the tissue [13]. Because the
Subcutaneous Fat is encountered right after the puncturing of
the skin, the skin layer includes only the BP stage, and the fat
comprises only the AP stage. The epidural space is not a layer
that can be punctured, but rather a space to be entered into,
and hence does not have BP and AP regions and generally
has zero resistance. Note that although the skin is commonly
regarded as a tissue that requires a very high cutting force, the
Ligamentum Flavum has been shown in several force models
(including [13] and [25], [42]) to require an even higher cutting
force.
Touhy 
Needle
LOR
Syringe(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 2. (a) Bimanual epidural simulator, (b) one haptic device is connected to
a Touhy needle, and another (c) to an LOR syringe. Both are connected using
custom-made 3D-printed adapters. Note that the simulator provides haptic
information only.TABLE I
TISSUE FORCE PARAMETERS (TOUHY NEEDLE , AVERAGE PATIENT BODY MASS)
Tissue Stage a0[N] a1[N/mm] a2[N/mm2]a3[N/mm3] ∆d range [mm]
Skin BP 0.0075 0.0037 −0.0015 0.0008 0<∆d <13.92
Fat AP 1.9212 0.1437 −0.1682 0 13.92<∆d <17.15
Supraspinous LigamentBP 0.628 0.2637 0.0343 0 17.15<∆d <19.37
AP 1.3855 −0.7174 0.0923 0 19.37<∆d <20
Interspinous LigamentBP 1.4021 0.3054 0 0 20<∆d <23.18
AP 2.3761 0 0 0 23.18<∆d <41.18
Ligamentum FlavumBP 2.3761 0.4783 −0.0186 0 41.18<∆d <44.79
AP 3.861 −0.0539 −0.0375 0 44.79<∆d <48.38
Epidural Space – 0 0 0 0 48.38<∆d <56.98
1) Empirical adjustment of the model: To account for the
limitations of our haptic devices (3DSystems Touch), such as
high friction and a limited force range, we implemented some
adjustments to the force model proposed in [13]. The purpose
of these adjustments was to amend the model such that the
forces would be as realistic as possible by verifying it with
an expert user. We iteratively changed the parameters with
the help of an expert anesthesiologist (author YB) until he
found the model appropriate. As a result of this process, the
parameters in Table I are adjusted compared to those proposed
in [13], such that the parameters in [13] for the haptic device
connected to the Touhy needle, and for a patient of an average
body mass of 71 kg, are multiplied by a scaling factor of 0.3.
Additionally, we set the epidural space’s force to zero (unlike
the value of 2.5 N, proposed in [13]) to intensify the sense of
loss of resistance. To render the forces applied by the second
haptic device, which is connected to the LOR syringe, we
used a scaling factor of 2 ( FLOR = 2·FTouhy ). We opted
not to incorporate the deflection model proposed in [13] for
simplicity and since this is the first prototype of the simulator.
2) Introducing patient weight variability: To add patient
weight-related variability, we adopted an adjustment to the
model of the epidural regions of female patients with variable
body masses proposed in [13]. We added variability in layer
Fig. 3. Forces exerted by haptic devices for two different patient body masses:
(a) 55 kg and (b) 115 kg (black lines). For reference, the 55 kg patient model is
also presented in (b) (gray lines). The ordinate is the exerted force in Newtons.
The dashed lines represent the forces exerted by the haptic device connected
to the Touhy needle, and continuous lines represent the forces exerted by
the haptic device connected to the LOR syringe. The abscissa is the needle
penetration depth in millimeters, with results (top boxes) corresponding to
the chosen injection site: failed epidural (FE), success (S), and dural puncture
(DP). The background colors and numbers represent the layers in the epidural
region, as depicted in the color map.thickness and stiffness according to:
Tt=At p
Aw(Bm/Am)/π
Rw!3
(2)
where Ttis the tissue thickness, Atis the average tissue
thickness (according to ∆dranges in Table I). Aw= 574 .94
cm2is the average female waist area, Rw= 13.53cmis the
average female waist radius, Bmis the relevant body mass
in kg, and Am= 71 kgis the average body mass for a
female patient aged between 20-29 years; all according to [13].
We used the average patient weight of 71 kg in some of the
trials and three different body masses of 55, 85, and 115 kg
when we wanted to add patient weight variability (see details
in the ’experimental procedures’ section). These figures were
inserted into Eq. 2, with the different values of Bmaffecting
the tissue thickness.
To account for the patient weight effect on tissue stiffness,
we divided ∆dbyTt/At. This scaling yielded changes in
the stiffness and thickness of each layer according to the
patient body mass. However, the value of the rendered force
in the layer was unchanged, as depicted in Fig. 3b, where two
patients of different body masses (55 kg in gray in 115 kg in
black) are shown. In this example, the challenge is highlighted
– the epidural space of the patient with the lower body mass is
more superficial than that of the patient with the higher body
mass and is at a depth equal to that of the higher body mass
patient’s Subcutaneous Fat.
B. Experimental Procedures
The experiment included two sessions of data collection:
the first ( N1= 7) took place in Soroka Medical Center. The
second session ( N2= 15 ) was conducted during the 2021 Is-
rael Society of Anesthesiologists annual conference (Tel Aviv,
Nov 2021). We set up a booth at the conference and invited
the attendees to participate. In total, 22 anesthesiologists from
several hospitals in Israel, with different levels of experience,
participated in our experiment. The participants were volun-
teers and had no previous connection with the authors. They
all signed an informed consent form, as stipulated by the
human participants’ research committee approval, and were
not compensated for their participation. To assess their skill
level, we asked participants to fill out questionnaires in which
we inquired about their years of experience, an estimatednumber of epidural injections they had performed thus far,
and whether they were residents or attendings.
Participants sat next to a table on which the two hap-
tic devices were placed. They were instructed to hold the
Touhy needle (connected to one haptic device) with their
non-dominant hand and the LOR syringe (connected to the
second haptic device) with their dominant hand, similar to
the technique used in real procedures. During the experiment,
the participants wore headphones with active noise cancelling
effect (Bose QC35) to eliminate auditory cues, including
noises produced by the haptic devices, and more specifically,
a noise produced when arriving at the epidural space and
losing resistance. Such noises are not present in the real-life
procedure and might affect performance, and hence should
be eliminated. The participants received no auditory or visual
information, as this simulator version provides solely haptic
feedback.
During the first data collection session, the experiment
consisted of 12 test trials. Since this protocol lacked a period
of acclimatization to the simulator, we decided to add three
familiarization trials at the beginning, such that in the second
data collection session, the experiment consisted of 15 trials:
three familiarization trials followed by 12 test trials. In each
trial, the participants were instructed to perform a virtual
needle insertion using the simulator and verbally indicate
when they reached the selected injection site (i.e., where they
perceived the epidural space was, and where they would insert
the epidural catheter). Participants were told the patient’s body
mass at the beginning of each trial, as such information is
available in the real-life procedure. During the familiarization
trials, participants were allowed to familiarize themselves with
the virtual environment and were provided feedback on the
trial result. A ‘success’ would be identifying the epidural
space correctly. For a patient with an average body mass,
as shown in Table I, a trial would be considered successful
if the participant identified the epidural space in the range
of48.38<∆df<56.98mm (where ∆dfis the final
needle penetration depth, where the participant chooses to halt
and provide a verbal cue). A ‘failed epidural’ would be an
undershoot ( ∆df<48.38mm), which in real-life would result
in the need to perform a re-do, and a ‘dural puncture’ would
be an overshoot ( ∆df>56.98mm). During the test trials,
participants received no feedback as to the trial result.
The forces exerted by the haptic devices in the familiariza-
tion trials were designed to emulate the epidural region of a
female patient with an average weight of 71 kg (Table I). In the
test trials, the exerted forces emulated three different patient
TABLE II
ANESTHESIOLOGIST LEVEL ASSIGNMENT SYSTEM
Categorical
LevelYears of
ExperienceEstimated
Number
of EpiduralsPosition
1 0 to 1 0 to 50 Resident
2 1+ to 3 50+ to 300
3 Over 3 Over 300 Attendingbody masses; 55, 85, and 115 kg. Each weight appeared four
times, and the order of the trials was mixed into four blocks
of the three patient weights.
C. Data Analysis
1) Data recording: We recorded the kinematic data (in-
sertion trajectory, velocity, and final injection site) of both
haptic devices (each of them separately) at approximately 1
kHz. This allowed online error feedback (which was provided
to participants in the familiarization trials, see more in the
’experimental procedures’ section) and offline data analysis for
trainee evaluation and progress monitoring. Since the data was
recorded from both haptic devices, we were able to examine
the kinematics of the Touhy needle and the LOR syringe
separately (Fig. 4, 5). Therefore, we could observe not only the
proceeding through the different tissues in the epidural region
(which is performed using the Touhy needle) but also examine
the probing movements performed with the LOR syringe,
which are used to perceive the environment stiffness. We did
not use the familiarization trials for the data analyses but rather
the test trials only. To eliminate differences in familiarization
between the two data collection sessions, we used only the
final nine trials of the data collected during the first session.
Anesthesiologists’ levels (novices N=6, intermediates N=9,
and experts N=7) were determined according to a tailored
level assignment system (Table II), which took into consider-
ation the anesthesiologists’ years of experience, an estimated
number of epidural injections they had performed prior to
participating in the study, and whether they were residents or
attendings. For each of the three categories, we determined the
categorical level per participant (the level could be assigned
as either one, two, or three). Next, to achieve the overall level
of the anesthesiologist, we averaged and rounded the levels.
2) Performance and validity analysis: To study the per-
formance in the task, i.e., to quantify the rate of the three
result types: failed epidural, success, and dural puncture, we
recorded the final injection site chosen by the participant in
each trial. Then, we examined the result for each trial and the
rate of each result per participant throughout the test trials. We
compared the failed epidural, success, and dural puncture rates
of participants in the three different levels. The success rate
allows for assessing the trainee’s level of competency when
performing the procedure in the virtual environment. When
examining the trainee’s errors, we can learn more about their
strategies. For instance, a higher rate of failed epidurals could
imply excessive caution, as opposed to a higher rate of dural
punctures, which could indicate recklessness.
To assess the simulator’s construct validity, we aimed to
test users’ performances in the simulated environment. The
reasoning behind that was that demonstrating that real-life
experts perform better with the simulator compared to novices
will show good construct validity. To do so, we examined the
success rates (the metric best suited to assess performance
level) of participants in different experience levels. In addition,
we used the final injection sites to calculate the error size
in millimeters in each trial. This was defined as the distanceof the chosen injection site from the correct epidural space
location. A successful trial would yield an error of 0 mm,
a failed epidural would yield a negative error, and a dural
puncture – a positive one. We took the absolute value of the
error, so as not to allow failed epidurals and dural punctures to
cancel out one another. We compared errors in absolute value
and anesthesiologist levels.
To evaluate the simulator’s face and content validity, we
asked participants to respond to questionnaires regarding the
level of resemblance of each layer to the tissue in real-life.
There were three additional questions regarding the compati-
bility of the simulator as a training and assessment tool, and
the participants’ overall impression of the simulator. To collect
the responses, we used the 100 mm visual analog scale (V AS).
The V AS is a continuous scale, 100 mm long, which allows
participants to mark an estimated response to a question upon
it [43]. When using this scale for estimating realism (com-
pared to the real-life environment), ’0’ represents ’completely
unrealistic’ and ’100’ represents ’completely realistic’. When
using it for testing the simulator’s suitability as a training
or assessment tool, ’0’ represents ’completely unsuitable’ and
’100’ represents ’completely suitable’.
Four of the participants in this study did not fill out the
questionnaires, as they had so little experience with the real-
life environment, they did not feel confident to compare
between the real-life environment and the virtual one (hence
the smaller sample size compared to the number of participants
in the study). We divided the remaining 18 participants in our
analysis into two groups: anesthesiologists who had performed
less than 500 epidurals prior to participating in this experi-
ment (’Inexperienced’, N=11), and anesthesiologists who had
performed 500 or more epidurals prior to this experiment
(’Experienced’, N=7). We chose this method for dividing the
participants since we aimed to examine the degree to which
participants perceive the virtual environment as similar to the
real-life one. Therefore, it was crucial to separate between
the responses of individuals that have a rich experience with
the real-life environment and those who do not. Note that
among the participants in the inexperienced group, some had
performed only a few epidurals (under 20). For each question
and group, we calculated the mean scores and their 95%
confidence intervals.
3) Probing kinematics analysis: We quantified how the
participants used the LOR syringe. To do so, we recorded
kinematic data from both haptic devices separately. We used
only the data recorded in the part that emulated the patient
back – starting from the point where the penetration depth
of the device connected to the Touhy needle ( ∆d) was zero.
Then, to obtain the probing movements with the LOR syringe,
we subtracted the location of the device connected to the
Touhy needle from the location of the device connected to the
LOR syringe (eq. 3). This allowed us to separate between the
probing movements and the Touhy needle proceeding through
the layers in the epidural region. Due to the LOR syringe
length (10.5-15 cm, depending on how deep inside the syringe
the plunger is), there is an inherent distance between thetwo haptic devices. To allow for calibrated ’zero’ points, we
subtracted this length from the trajectory of the LOR syringe
as well. To obtain the exact length per trial, we took the
location of the haptic device connected to the LOR syringe
where ∆d= 0.
Padj.= ∆PLOR−PTouhy , PTouhy >0 (3)
where Padj.is the adjusted trajectory, ∆PLOR is the location
of the haptic device connected to the LOR syringe (after the
’zero’ point calibration), and PTouhy is the location of the
haptic device connected to the Touhy needle; all units are
provided in millimeters.
The main purpose of this adjustment was to separate the
peaks that occurred due to LOR probing movements from
those stemming from sudden movements with the Touhy
needle. To find the number of probing movements, we used
the ’findpeaks’ function in Matlab on the adjusted trajectory;
to assess the penetration depth of each probing movement,
we measured each peak’s height in millimeters. To attain
the probing movement rate, we measured the time difference
between each pair of consecutive peaks, and used its inverse.
To assess the number of probing movements and the mean
penetration depth in each trial, we used the number of probing
movements enumerated in each trial, and for each probing
movement, its depth. Then, we calculated the mean penetration
depth across all probing movements in the trial. To obtain
the probing movement rate per trial, we calculated the mean
of the inverse time differences throughout the entire trial.
Subsequently, to test them against anesthesiologist level or trial
result, we calculated the mean number of probing movements,
mean penetration depth, and mean rate across all relevant trials
(according to the factor we wanted to test it against).
Additionally, we examined the location of each probing
movement within the different layers of the epidural region.
1 Skin 2 Subcutaneous Fat 3 Supraspinous Ligament 4 Interspinous Ligament 5 Ligamentum Flavum 6 Epidural Space 7 Dura Mater
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1     2      3  4    5      6A
CB
1     2      3  4    5      6
Fig. 4. Probing movement obtaining: (A) The trajectory of the haptic device
connected to the Touhy needle. (B) The trajectory recorded by the haptic
device connected to the LOR syringe, where the two haptic devices’ ’zero’
points are calibrated. (C) The adjusted trajectory (according to eq. 3), and
detected probing movements. The background colors and numbers represent
different tissue layers in the epidural region, as depicted in the color map.We normalized the number of probing movements in each
layer by dividing it by the thickness of the layer in millime-
ters. We chose this normalization of the number of probing
movements since the presence inside a tissue for a larger
distance would provide more opportunities to probe. Thus,
probing more in a thicker tissue would not necessarily imply
that there was uncertainty in this tissue.
We also calculated the mean velocity of the haptic device
connected to the Touhy needle in each layer in the epidural
region for each participant.
4) Statistical Analysis: In our statistical analysis, we com-
pared several contrasts: result rates, error size, probing move-
ment enumeration, probing movement penetration depth, and
probing movement rate. None of the metrics were distributed
normally, and hence, we chose non-parametric statistical meth-
ods. For each metric, we calculated the mean and the non-
parametric bootstrap 95% confidence intervals. We used the
Kruskal-Wallis test to determine whether there were statisti-
cally significant differences between the success rates (Fig.
6b), error sizes (Fig. 6d), number of probing movements,
probing movement penetration depths, and probing movement
rates (Fig. 8a-c) of the different anesthesiologist levels. In
these models, the three categorical independent variables were
the anesthesiologist levels (novices, intermediate, and experts),
and the dependent variables were the success rates each
participant achieved, the absolute value errors calculated for
each participant, the mean number of probing movements per
trial, the average probing movement depth, and the probing
movement rate. When we found a significant effect of expertise
level, we performed post-hoc pairwise comparisons with the
Wilcoxon rank-sum test and used the Bonferroni correction
for multiple comparisons.
The analysis of probing movement numbers, their penetra-
tion depth, and their rate against the trial result (Fig. 8d-f)
would ideally be analyzed with a repeated-measures model.
However, since the metrics were not normally distributed,
and there were many missing data points (only 6 of the 22
participants had all three data points), we could not fit models
that accounted for the repeated measures, and chose instead
to analyze these results using the Kruskal-Wallis test.
To analyze the differences in error rates within participant
levels, we used the Wilcoxon signed-rank test and compared
failed epidural rates and dural puncture rates in each of the
three anesthesiologist levels separately (Fig. 6c).
III. R ESULTS
To help explain how we calculated the metrics introduced
in this section, we first present a visual demonstration of
the kinematic data we recorded to provide an intuition about
needle insertion trajectories of successful and unsuccessful
trials, along with different LOR probing strategies performed
by participants with different levels of experience.
In Fig. 5, we display several examples of trajectories
performed by the hand holding the Touhy needle alongside
probing movements with the LOR syringe. Fig. 5a depicts
the trajectories and probing movements of two participants, anovice and an expert, in a trial that was successful for both
participants. The LOR probing trajectories demonstrate that
the participants had different strategies; The expert participant
(red) probed more often and more superficially than the novice
(blue). This result is aligned with a trend we observed for most
of the participants. An example of a trial that resulted in a
failed epidural performed by a novice participant is shown in
Fig. 5b. The needle insertion is halted within the green area,
representing the Ligamentum Flavum, which indicates that the
participant did not arrive at the epidural space. An example
of a trial that resulted in a dural puncture performed by an
intermediate-level participant is shown in Fig. 5c, where the
Touhy needle crossed through the epidural space (gray area)
and arrived at the Dura Mater (orange area).
To assess the construct validity of our simulator, we ex-
amined the effect of anesthesiologist level on success rate in
the virtual task. In Fig. 6a, the distribution of the different
result types in all the trials of novice, intermediate, and expert
participants are depicted, highlighting that novices make the
most errors, followed by intermediate and, finally, the expert
participants. Fig. 6b depicts that the success rate indeed
depends on the participant’s level of expertise, supported by
a statistically significant effect of expertise (Kruskal-Wallis
yielded χ2= 8.41,p= 0.0149 ,d f= 2). Post-hoc analysis
revealed a significant difference between novices (level 1)
and experts (level 3), ( p1−3= 0.0129 ,p1−2= 0.5240 ,
p2−3= 0.1147 ).
We also studied the rates of the two error types (failed
epidural and dural puncture) separately for the three anes-
thesiologist levels (Fig. 6c). We observed the same trends in
all participant levels; the failed epidural rate appears to be
higher than the dural puncture rate. However, these results
were not statistically significant (Wilcoxon signed-rank tests
yielded p1= 0.5411 ,p2= 0.3711 ,p3= 0.75), which prevents
us from drawing concrete conclusions.
To further analyze errors, we assessed the effect of the
anesthesiologist level on error size (measured as the absolute
distance value of the chosen injection site from the correct
epidural space location). The results depicted in Fig. 6d
demonstrate an inverse relationship between participant level
and error; Novices’ errors appeared to be larger in size than
those of intermediate-level anesthesiologists and experts. This
result was supported by statistical significance (Kruskal-Wallis
yielded χ2= 8.38,p= 0.0152 ,d f= 2). Post-hoc analysis
revealed a significant difference between novices (level 1)
and experts (level 3), and between intermediate-level anes-
thesiologists (level 2) and experts (level 3) ( p1−3= 0.0241 ,
p2−3= 0.0436 ,p1−2= 0.8850 ).
To assess face and content validity, participants’ responses
to V AS questionnaires were evaluated (Fig. 7) and presented
separately for two groups (’Inexperienced’ and ’Experienced’).
The responses’ means were calculated for each question (for
each tissue layer and for three questions evaluating the simu-
lator) and for each group of participants. In most layers of the
epidural region (all layers but the Ligamentum Flavum, Fig.
7a), the responses of the experienced group were higher than(c)1 2                        3               4                                5                         6            71
Patient Weight: 55 kg
(b)1               2 3                   4                                                                     5 Patient Weight: 115 kg1
(a)1   23           4  5     6
1         2 3   4   5           6Patient Weight: 115 kg1 Skin 2 Subcutaneous Fat 3 Supraspinous Ligament 4 Interspinous Ligament 5 Ligamentum Flavum 6 Epidural Space 7 Dura Mater
2323
4
5
6
74
5
6
7
1
23
4
5
6
7
Fig. 5. Kinematic data recorded by the two haptic devices. In all panels, the top boxes represent the participants’ trajectories with the Touhy needle and
the bottom boxes represent probing movements with the LOR syringe (see a detailed description of the calculation method in the ’Data Analysis’ section).
Different background colors and numbers represent different tissue layers in the epidural region, as depicted in the color map for tissue layers. The patient
weight correlated to the trial is denoted in the top boxes. (a) Trajectories and probing movements as performed by a novice and an expert. Both participants
succeeded in this trial. (b) Trajectories and probing movements of a novice participant in a trial that resulted in a failed epidural. (c) Trajectories and probing
movements of an intermediate-level anesthesiologist in a trial that resulted in a dural puncture.
or equal to those of the inexperienced group. This was also
the case for the evaluation of the overall simulator impression
and its suitability as a training tool (Fig. 7b). The overall
impression mean score of the experienced group, as well as
this group’s mean score for the loss of resistance and suitability
as a training tool, were relatively high (82.22 ±14 mm, 81.24
±22.2 mm, and 80.82 ±12.4 mm, respectively).
To study probing strategies, we assessed the effect of
anesthesiologist level on the number of probing movements
and their penetration depths and rate (Fig. 8a-c). It appeared
that experts and intermediate-level anesthesiologists used a
larger number of probing movements compared to novices, and
these movements were more superficial and fast, although all
* *
*
Fig. 6. Result rates as a function of participant level. (a) Pie charts of
mean result rates for all three results (failed epidural, success, and dural
puncture); each chart represents a different anesthesiologist level. (b) Colored
bars represent success rate. The gray points represent each participant’s mean
success rate, the error bars represent the mean confidence intervals, and the
asterisks indicate a statistically significant difference ( p <0.05). (c) Colored
bars represent error rates, i.e., failed epidural (FE) and dural puncture (DP).
Dashed black vertical lines represent the separation between the different
participant levels. The gray points represent the rate each participant achieved
for each of the two error types. (d) Colored bars represent the mean absolute
value of the error in millimeters. The gray points represent the absolute value
errors of each participant.three results were not significant (Kruskal-Wallis tests ( d f= 2)
yielded χ2
num = 4.27,pnum = 0.1182 ,χ2
depth = 3.316
pdepth = 0.1911 ,χ2
rate= 3.83,prate= 0.1471 ).
Additionally, we assessed the effect of each trial’s result on
the number of probing movements in the trial. Fig. 8d demon-
strates that utilizing a small number of probing movements
led to a higher chance of causing a dural puncture (Kruskal-
Wallis yielded χ2= 12.03,p= 0.0024 ,d f= 2). Post-hoc
analysis revealed a significant difference between the number
of probing movements in trials that resulted in dural punctures
and trials that resulted in both failed epidurals and successful
trials ( pFE−DP= 0.0114 ,pS−DP= 0.0037 ). No difference
was found between the mean number of probing movements
in trials that led to failed epidurals and successful trials
(pFE−S= 1). Examining the probing movements’ depths and
A
B
Fig. 7. Visual analog scale questionnaire responses evaluated by two groups:
inexperienced and experienced. (A) Face validity: blue bars represent the
mean V AS score calculated for each of the different layers in the epidural
region and their similarity to the real-life tissue and the overall impression.
(B) Content validity: yellow bars represent mean V AS scores calculated for
the compatibility of the simulator as a training and assessment tool. In both
(A) and (B), the error bars represent the mean confidence intervals, and the
gray points represent the V AS scores given by each participant in the relevant
category.rate (Fig. 8e-f) indicated that the movements used in successful
trials and trials that resulted in failed epidurals were often
more superficial and fast than the probing movements in trials
that resulted in dural punctures, although this result was not
significant (Kruskal-Wallis ( d f= 2) yielded χ2
depth = 0.85,
pdepth = 0.6527 ,χ2
rate= 2.23,prate= 0.3273 ).
We also conducted an exploratory analysis of the normalized
number of probing movements performed (Fig. 9a) and the
mean velocity (Fig. 9b) in each of the layers in the epidural
region. Accordingly, we present the analysis results without
any statistical analysis. We did not have predictions about the
probing strategies for the different layers, and the current study
is under powered due to the large number of layers combined
with the small number of data points at each anesthesiologist
level. Nevertheless, we present these results to be used as a
pilot for future studies.
Studying the layer in the epidural region in which probing
movements were performed (Fig. 9a) indicated that all partic-
ipants probed the greatest number of probing movements in
the three layers preceding the epidural space: the Supraspinous
Ligament, Interspinous Ligament, and Ligamentum Flavum.
There is a relationship between participant level and probing
movements’ number in most layers (4 out of 6 layers); it
appeared that experts and intermediate-level anesthesiologists
probed more than novices in these layers.
We also examined the mean velocity of the Touhy needle
in the different layers of the epidural region; the results
depicted in Fig. 9b demonstrate that participants decreased
their velocity in the Interspinous Ligament (and continued with
a decreased velocity afterward).
IV. D ISCUSSION
In this study, we designed and assessed a novel bimanual
simulator for epidural analgesia, using two haptic devices
D E F*
*B A C
Fig. 8. Probing movements. The abscissa in (A)-(C) is the participant level,
and in (D)-(F), it is the trial outcome. The ordinate in (A),(D) is the mean
number of probing movements performed in each trial, in (B),(E) - the mean
penetration depth of these probing movements, and in (C),(F) - the probing
movement frequency. The gray points represent the mean values for each
participant. The error bars are the mean confidence intervals, and the asterisks
indicate statistical significance ( p <0.05).
A
B
Fig. 9. Location analysis. The abscissa is the layer of the epidural region,
and the ordinate in (A) is the mean normalized number of probing movements
per trial. Colored bars represent the mean number of probing movements
performed in each trial for each layer in the epidural region, divided by the
layer thickness in millimeters. The ordinate in (B) is the mean velocity. The
different colors represent the different anesthesiologist levels. Dashed black
vertical lines represent the separation between the layers. The gray points
represent the mean values performed by each participant in the relevant layer,
and the error bars represent the mean confidence intervals.
and custom-made adapters to the instruments used in the
real-life procedure (a Touhy needle and an LOR syringe).
The simulator is novel in the sense that it is bimanual,
allowing for the emulation of the forces applied not only
to the Touhy needle, as was done thus far, but to the LOR
syringe as well. We used a force model based on the one
proposed in [13], and scaled it following an iterative process
of adjustment to the experience of an expert anesthesiologist,
which allowed us to render resistive forces, considering the
haptic devices’ limitations and striving for maximum realism.
We modeled multiple patient body weights that allowed for
motor variability which has the potential to enhance motor
learning [41]. We conducted a study with 22 anesthesiologists
of different experience levels. Our relatively small sample size
primarily results from the specialized nature of the participant
population (anesthesiologists), which limited the feasibility
of obtaining a more extensive sample. We found that the
simulator was able to distinguish between real-life novices
and experts, demonstrating good construct validity. Face and
content validity, as assessed by the V AS questionnaire re-
sponses, varied between the different questions. In some, the
more experienced users’ satisfaction level was low, and we
suggest some interpretations for this result in this section. In
others, the mean scores provided by experienced users were
relatively high, suggesting good face and content validity,though validating the simulator accordingly remained difficult,
due to several limitations presented in this section. Analysis
of the kinematic data demonstrated differences in strategies
between anesthesiologists of different experience levels, and
implied a relationship between strategies and outcomes in the
virtual task.
The relation between anesthesiologist level and their suc-
cess rate in the virtual environment validates the simulator’s
construct validity according to [26], as it demonstrates that
the simulator is able to distinguish between real-life novices
and experts. The statistically significant difference between
novices and experts supports this claim. Testing construct
validity in this manner has been adopted in the past by
several groups [26], [33], [34], [44], including [33], who
compared the performance of novice and expert golfers in
a golf VR simulation, and [34], who compared experts and
novice surgeons in minimally invasive surgical simulations.
Bright et al. [44] observed significant differences between
experts and novices in a surgical simulator. Additional to
differences in performance level, they also revealed differences
in control strategies, which provided a novel method of assess-
ing construct validity in medical simulators. In this section,
we also address differences in strategies observed between
novices and experts and suggest methods of utilizing these
characteristics to enhance training with our simulator.
In the evaluation of the V AS questionnaire responses, we
chose to put more emphasis on the experienced group, as these
are more experienced users we can rely on to compare the
virtual and real-life environments. Further, evaluating face and
content validity using expert opinions is commonly used in the
medical simulator field and beyond [26], [29], [31]. In most
layers and in the overall impression (Fig. 7a), the experienced
group’s mean scores were relatively high, and the ’Loss of
Resistance’, which is the most important haptic aspect required
to succeed in the task (as it informs the anesthesiologist of
reaching the epidural space), received the highest score in the
layer category.
These results suggest good face validity; however, due to
several reasons, we are still limited in our ability to validate
the simulator. First, it is difficult to interpret the subjective
ratings without comparison to other systems (e.g., a uni-
manual epidural simulator). If the literature would propose an
official threshold for what is a ’good’ V AS score to determine
face validity, we could compare to such threshold. However,
such gold standard does not exist, and the absolute scores are
difficult to interpret and be used to determine the validity of
the simulator. Further investigation and comparison to other
simulators will be necessary to validate the simulator in the
future.
Additionally, there are several limitations in the simula-
tor design, that we would expect to be better reflected in
participant reports: these limitations include insights that we
received from several expert anesthesiologists (including the
author YB), that the Ligamentum Flavum has a unique texture,
which is not well-emulated in this simulator. Other limitations
include the lack of the deflection model proposed in [13],and the absence of visual information, which highly affects
face validity [26]. We aim to address all these issues in future
versions of the simulator. The fact that these limitations did
not affect the V AS scores as much as we would expect testifies
to the weakness of these subjective evaluations.
In this version of the simulator, we chose not to incorporate
visual information because we posit that the haptic aspect of
the task is the most important. This is because the needle
insertion task is a blind procedure (the needle is inserted into
the patient’s skin, and the anesthesiologist does not receive
any visual information as to its location). We believe that
this choice has contributed to the construct validity of our
simulator, but adding visual information might improve user
satisfaction and affect face validity. Hence, in future versions
of the simulator, we will consider adding visual information
that aims to emulate the real-life environment by simulating
a delivery suite in which a patient is sitting on a hospital
bed. Such visual information should not include any feedback
regarding the needle location within the epidural region since
this visual information is not provided to the anesthesiologist
in the real-life procedure.
The simulator was perceived by experienced users as a
better tool for training than assessment (Fig. 7b). We designed
this simulator for training, and hence, this result implies
good content validity. However, it is possible that in their
answers, the participants did not consider all relevant factors.
For example, if they would consider cost and training time,
they might lower the scores of the suitability of the simulator
as a training tool. Such perspective was demonstrated in
[45] and [46], where inserting the needle into a banana was
preferred over other simulators that were rated more realistic
because of its cost efficiency. In addition, our analysis of
the performance and strategies revealed differences between
different experience levels of anesthesiologists. This means
that in contrast to the answers of participants, the simulator can
be used as an objective assessment tool. Both aspects highlight
the challenges of validating the simulator based on subjective
participant reports.
Error rates allow us to study strategies in terms of caution
versus recklessness. It appears that all participants erred on
the side of safety. This result can imply a level of insecurity;
some participants (especially novices) are more likely to fear
an over-shoot, thus resulting in mistakenly halting the needle
insertion too superficially. For others, this result demonstrates
the comprehension of how potentially harmful accidental dural
punctures are, explaining why they made such efforts to avoid
them, occasionally risking a result of failed epidural. Another
possible interpretation for this result is the fact that participants
knew their actions were being examined, and hence deployed
a higher level of caution.
Measurement of error sizes allows us to examine how far the
chosen injection site was from the correct epidural space. The
result shown in Fig. 6d reinforces the result shown in Fig. 6a-
c, as it demonstrates that not only were novices’ errors more
prevalent than those of intermediate-level anesthesiologists and
experts, they were also more prominent.Probing movement enumeration, depth, and rate evaluation
showed that using less probing movements can lead to a
higher risk for dural punctures, and that experts probed more
than novices. The use of less probing movements was often
accompanied by a larger depth and slower rate; however,
this was not supported by our statistical analysis. We argue
that experts and intermediate-level anesthesiologists (that were
shown to be more successful and perform fewer dural punc-
tures according to Fig. 6) probe more than novices since they
know that utilizing the probing tool can assist in perceiving
the environment stiffness and help prevent dural punctures
(as shown in Fig. 8d). Hence, they choose to use it more
often. However, additional studies are needed to ascertain these
preliminary observations.
Probing movement location analysis was evaluated in an
exploratory manner without statistical analysis. Accordingly,
we discuss the results cautiously. Fig. 9a indicated that all
participants probed the most in the three layers preceding
the epidural space. This does not align entirely with our
original hypothesis, which would suggest that participants
probe the most in the Ligamentum Flavum preceding the
epidural space. Instead, it appears that participants began their
extensive probing (indicating higher awareness of proximity
to the epidural space) earlier. In most layers, experts probed
more than novices, which coincides with the result implying
that experts utilize the probing tool more than novices. The
only exceptions were the Skin and Subcutaneous Fat layers,
where experts used the tool less than novices. This supports
the previous result, as it demonstrates that the only layers in
which experts probed less were those where they were certain
they hadn’t reached the epidural space yet (due to the fact that
the needle insertion had just begun) and hence did not need
to make efforts to perceive the environment stiffness.
Velocity analysis was also evaluated in an exploratory man-
ner, and Fig. 9b depicted that all participants had decreased
their velocity in the Interspinous Ligament. This result par-
tially coincides with the large number of probing movements
presented in the three layers preceding the epidural space in
Fig. 9a. It appears that although participants had started to
probe the environment stiffness in the Supraspinous Ligament
(showing a higher level of awareness and preparation towards
encountering the epidural space), they still began decreasing
their velocity only in the Interspinous Ligament, which is the
second of the three mentioned layers.
The differences in strategies between different level anes-
thesiologists shown in this section lead us to suggest trainee-
specific feedback and instructions in advanced training stages
(e.g., for intermediate-level anesthesiologist training). We ar-
gue that our simulator is necessary to allow novices to train
in a virtual environment before performing their first real-life
epidural analgesia procedure, but also that anesthesiologists
should continue training with it throughout their residency
to maintain skill acquisition level [22]. In advanced training
stages, we suggest that trainees be presented with a summary
of the strategies they had performed (e.g., how many probing
movements they performed, the location in the epidural regionin which these probing movements took place, how they
adjusted their velocity, etc., with respect to the trial result), and
that trainees be instructed with methods to improve, based on
expert strategies harvested in this study. This teaching method,
which incorporates repeated practice and refined instruction,
has been shown as a key step in technical skill acquisition
for surgical residents [47], [48]. Furthermore, the trainee-
specific approach proposed here is one of the principles that
can enhance adult learning [47].
V. C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, we presented the design and assessment
of a bimanual simulator for optimizing skill acquisition in
epidural analgesia. The simulator we designed comprises two
haptic devices connected to the real-life task instruments and
emulates the structure and resistance of the epidural region,
while allowing for patient weight variability and data acqui-
sition for both online and offline data analysis. We used the
simulator to examine the performance of 22 anesthesiologists
of different competency levels and demonstrated that it can
distinguish between real-life novices and experts, suggesting
good construct validity. Experienced users’ V AS questionnaire
responses were examined to assess face and content validity,
and we discussed the limitations in interpretation of the results
and challenges in validation of the simulator. Our strategy
analysis suggests that experts utilize probing with the LOR
syringe (which is a tool for perceiving the environment’s
resistance) more than novices and that insufficient utilization
of said tool yields a higher dural puncture rate. We argue
that the simulator could be used as a tool for training novice
anesthesiologists before encountering their first real-life case,
and consequently increase patient safety, and that practice with
it should be maintained and refined to be trainee-specific over
time. Integrating the simulator into the training curricula can
improve the training paradigm, compared to the ’see one, do
one, teach one’ approach implemented today.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Shatalin, C. Weiniger, I. Buchman, Y . Ginosar, S. Orbach-Zinger,
and A. Ioscovich, “A 10-year update: national survey questionnaire of
obstetric anesthesia units in israel,” International Journal of Obstetric
Anesthesia , vol. 38, 11 2018.
[2] A. J. Butwick, C. A. Wong, and N. Guo, “Maternal Body Mass Index
and Use of Labor Neuraxial Analgesia,” Anesthesiology , vol. 129, no. 3,
pp. 448–458, Sep. 2018.
[3] R. M. Buenaventura, S. Datta, S. Abdi, and H. S. Smith, “Systematic
review of therapeutic lumbar transforaminal epidural steroid injections,”
Pain Physician , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 233–51, 2009.
[4] C. W. Berger, E. T. Crosby, and W. Grodecki, “North American survey
of the management of dural puncture occurring during labour epidural
analgesia,” Can J Anaesth , vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 110–114, Feb. 1998.
[5] M. Lewis, J. Lafferty, M. Sacks, V . Pallares, and M. TerRiet, “How
much work is required to puncture dura with tuohy needles?” British
Journal of Anaesthesia , vol. 85, no. 2, pp. 238–241, 2000.
[6] K.-H. Kwak, “Postdural puncture headache,” Korean J Anesthesiol ,
vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 136–143, Apr. 2017.
[7] Y . Binyamin, P. Heesen, S. Orbach-Zinger, Y . Gozal, D. Halimi,
A. Frenkel, and A. Ioscovich, “Chronic pain in parturients with an
accidental dural puncture: A case-controlled prospective observational
study,” Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica , vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 959–
966, 2021.[8] J. H. Kim, S. Y . Song, and B. J. Kim, “Predicting the difficulty in
performing a neuraxial blockade,” Korean Journal of Anesthesiology ,
vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 377–381, 2011.
[9] C. Konrad, G. Sch ¨upfer, M. Wietlisbach, and H. Gerber, “Learning
manual skills in anesthesiology: Is there a recommended number of
cases for anesthetic procedures?” Anesth Analg , vol. 86, no. 3, pp. 635–
639, Mar. 1998.
[10] K. E. Torske and D. H. Dyson, “Epidural analgesia and anesthesia,”
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice , vol. 30,
no. 4, pp. 859–874, 2000.
[11] Fr ¨olich, M. A., Caton, and Donald, “Pioneers in epidural needle design,”
Anesthesia & Analgesia , vol. 93, no. 1, pp. 215–220, 2001.
[12] G. Capogna, Epidural Technique In Obstetric Anesthesia . Springer
International Publishing, 2020, pp. 55–76.
[13] A. L. Brazil, A. Conci, E. Clua, L. K. Bittencourt, L. B. Baruque, and
N. d. Silva Conci, “Haptic forces and gamification on epidural anesthesia
skill gain,” Entertainment Computing , vol. 25, pp. 1–13, Mar. 2018.
[14] N. Vaughan, V . N. Dubey, M. Y . K. Wee, and R. Isaacs, “A review
of epidural simulators: Where are we today?” Medical Engineering &
Physics , vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 1235–1250, Sep. 2013.
[15] v. K. J. Lee RA, van Zundert TCRV , “Evaluation of the Mediseus®
Epidural Simulator - ProQuest,” Anaesthesia and Intensive Care , no. 2,
pp. 311–318, Mar 2012.
[16] A. M. P. Dogliotti, “Research and Clinical Observations on Spinal Anes-
thesia: With Special Reference to the Peridural Technique.” Anesthesia
& Analgesia , vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 59–65, Apr. 1933.
[17] C. Wang, P. Calle, J. C. Reynolds, S. Ton, F. Yan, A. M. Donaldson,
A. D. Ladymon, P. R. Roberts, A. J. de Armendi, K.-m. Fung, S. S.
Shettar, C. Pan, and Q. Tang, “Epidural anesthesia needle guidance
by forward-view endoscopic optical coherence tomography and deep
learning,” Scientific Reports , vol. 12, no. 1, 2022.
[18] H. Li, X. Nie, D. Duan, Y . Li, J. Zhang, M. Zhou, and E. Magid, “An
admittance-controlled amplified force tracking scheme for collaborative
lumbar puncture surgical robot system,” The International Journal of
Medical Robotics and Computer Assisted Surgery , vol. 18, no. 5, p.
e2428, 2022.
[19] S. Rajagopalan, K. Shah, D. Guffey, C. Tran, M. Suresh, and A. Wali,
“Predictors of difficult epidural placement in pregnant women: A
trainees’ perspective,” Journal of Anaesthesiology Clinical Pharmacol-
ogy, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 548–552, 2019.
[20] K. W. Houben, C. L. M. van den Hombergh, R. E. Stalmeijer, A. J.
Scherpbier, and M. A. E. Marcus, “New training strategies for anaes-
thesia residents,” Current opinion in anaesthesiology , vol. 24, no. 6, pp.
682–686, 2011.
[21] J. M. Rodriguez-Paz, M. Kennedy, E. Salas, A. W. Wu, J. B. Sexton,
E. A. Hunt, and P. J. Pronovost, “Beyond “see one, do one, teach one”:
toward a different training paradigm,” Postgraduate medical journal ,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 63–249, 2009.
[22] C. Smith, G. C. Huang, L. R. Newman, P. F. Clardy, D. Feller-Kopman,
M. Cho, T. Ennacheril, and R. M. Schwartzstein, “Simulation training
and its effect on long-term resident performance in central venous
catheterization,” Simulation in Healthcare: The Journal of the Society
for Simulation in Healthcare , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 146–151, 2010.
[23] C. S. Park, L. R. Rochlen, E. Yaghmour, N. Higgins, J. R. Bauchat,
K. G. Wojciechowski, J. T. Sulliva, and R. J. Mccarthy, “Acquisition of
critical intraoperative event management skills in novice anesthesiology
residents by using high-fidelity simulation-based training,” Anesthesiol-
ogy (Philadelphia) , vol. 112, no. 1, pp. 202–211, 2010.
[24] T. R. Coles and N. W. John, “The effectiveness of commercial haptic
devices for use in virtual needle insertion training simulations,” in
2010 Third International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human
Interactions . IEEE, 2010, pp. 148–153.
[25] Y . Li, J. Zhang, D. Gui, and H. Li, “Enhanced epidural tissue perception
for pediatric patients by an interactive lumbar puncture simulator,”
in2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics
(ROBIO) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 1767–1772.
[26] D. J. Harris, J. M. Bird, P. A. Smart, M. R. Wilson, and S. J. Vine, “A
Framework for the Testing and Validation of Simulated Environments
in Experimentation and Training,” Front Psychol , vol. 11, p. 605, Mar.
2020.
[27] V . Manoharan, D. Van Gerwen, J. J. Van Den Dobbelsteen, and
J. Dankelman, “Design and validation of an epidural needle insertion
simulator with haptic feedback for training resident anaesthesiologists,”
in2012 IEEE Haptics Symposium . IEEE, 2012, pp. 341–348.[28] A. Gavazzi, A. N. Bahsoun, W. Van Haute, K. Ahmed, O. Elhage,
P. Jaye, M. S. Khan, and P. Dasgupta, “Face, content and construct
validity of a virtual reality simulator for robotic surgery (sep robot),”
The Annals of The Royal College of Surgeons of England , vol. 93, no. 2,
pp. 152–156, 2011.
[29] G. Sankaranarayanan, B. Li, K. Manser, S. B. Jones, D. B. Jones,
S. Schwaitzberg, C. G. Cao, and S. De, “Face and construct validation of
a next generation virtual reality (gen2-vr©) surgical simulator,” Surgical
endoscopy , vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 979–985, 2016.
[30] N. A. Stanton and S. V . Stevenage, “Learning to predict human error:
issues of acceptability, reliability and validity,” Ergonomics , vol. 41,
no. 11, pp. 1737–1756, 1998.
[31] F. Yaghmaie, “Content validity and its estimation,” Journal of medical
education , vol. 3, no. 1, 2003.
[32] A. J. Hung, P. Zehnder, M. B. Patil, J. Cai, C. K. Ng, M. Aron, I. S.
Gill, and M. M. Desai, “Face, content and construct validity of a novel
robotic surgery simulator,” The Journal of urology , vol. 186, no. 3, pp.
1019–1025, 2011.
[33] D. J. Harris, G. Buckingham, M. R. Wilson, J. Brookes, F. Mushtaq,
M. Mon-Williams, and S. J. Vine, “Exploring sensorimotor performance
and user experience within a virtual reality golf putting simulator,”
Virtual Reality , vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 647–654, Sep. 2021.
[34] E. Bright, S. Vine, M. R. Wilson, R. S. W. Masters, and J. S. McGrath,
“Face validity, construct validity and training benefits of a virtual reality
turp simulator,” International Journal of Surgery , vol. 10, no. 3, pp.
163–166, Jan. 2012.
[35] M. A. Broom, G. Milne, and E. M. McGrady, “Evaluation of the Genesis
Epidural-Spinal Injection Simulator,” International Journal of Obstetric
Anesthesia , vol. 33, pp. 90–92, Feb. 2018.
[36] G. Capogna, A. Coccoluto, E. Capogna, and A. Del Vecchio, “Objective
evaluation of a new epidural simulator by the compuflo® epidural
instrument,” Anesthesiology Research and Practice , vol. 2018, 2018.
[37] A. Lelev ´e, R. Moreau, L. Krahenbuhl, F. Sigwalt, C. Bauert, Q. Rouby
et al. , “Designing an accurate and customizable epidural anesthesia
haptic simulator,” in 2019 International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 8353–8359.
[38] N. Vaughan, V . N. Dubey, M. Y . Wee, and R. Isaacs, “Haptic interface
on measured data for epidural simulation,” in International Design
Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in
Engineering Conference , vol. 45011. American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, 2012, pp. 13–17.
[39] N. Davidor, Y . Binyamin, T. Hayuni, and I. Nisky, “Using lor syringe
probes as a method to reduce errors in epidural analgesia – a robotic
simulation study,” 2023.
[40] D. J. Herzfeld and R. Shadmehr, “Motor variability is not noise, but grist
for the learning mill,” Nature Neuroscience , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 149–150,
Feb. 2014, number: 2 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[41] A. K. Dhawale, M. A. Smith, and B. P. ¨Olveczky, “The Role of
Variability in Motor Learning,” Annu Rev Neurosci , vol. 40, pp. 479–
498, Jul. 2017.
[42] B. Esterer, S. Gabauer, R. Pichler, D. Wirthl, M. Drack, M. Hollen-
steiner, G. Kettlgruber, M. Kaltenbrunner, S. Bauer, D. F ¨urst et al. ,
“A hybrid, low-cost tissue-like epidural needle insertion simulator,” in
2017 39th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 42–45.
[43] N. Crichton, “Visual analogue scale (vas),” J Clin Nurs , vol. 10, no. 5,
pp. 706–6, 2001.
[44] E. Bright, S. J. Vine, T. Dutton, M. R. Wilson, and J. S. McGrath,
“Visual control strategies of surgeons: a novel method of establishing
the construct validity of a transurethral resection of the prostate surgical
simulator,” Journal of Surgical Education , vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 434–439,
2014.
[45] T. H. Pedersen, J. Meuli, E. J. Plazikowski, M. Buttenberg, M. Kleine-
Br¨uggeney, C. A. Seidl, L. Theiler, and R. Greif, “Loss of resistance: A
randomised controlled trial assessing four low-fidelity epidural puncture
simulators.” European journal of anaesthesiology , vol. 34, no. 9, pp.
602–608, 2017.
[46] D. Raj, R. M. Williamson, D. Young, and D. Russell, “A simple epidural
simulator: a blinded study assessing the ’feel’ of loss of resistance in
four fruits,” Eur J Anaesthesiol , vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 405–408, Jul. 2013.
[47] R. K. Reznick, “Teaching and testing technical skills,” The American
journal of surgery , vol. 165, no. 3, pp. 358–361, 1993.
[48] J. A. Kopta, “An approach to the evaluation of operative skills.” Surgery ,
vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 297–303, 1971.