Forecasting Natural Gas Prices with Spatio-Temporal
Copula-based Time Series Models
Sven Papperta,∗, Antonia Arsovaa,b
aChair of Econometrics, Department of Statistics, TU Dortmund University, Germany
bRWI – Leibniz Institute for Economic Research, Germany
Abstract
Commodity price time series possess interesting features, such as heavy-tailedness,
skewness, heteroskedasticity, and non-linear dependence structures. These features
pose challenges for modeling and forecasting. In this work, we explore how spatio-
temporalcopula-basedtimeseriesmodelscanbeeﬀectivelyemployedforthesepurposes.
We focus on price series for fossil fuels and carbon emissions. Further, we illustrate
how the t-copula may be used in conditional heteroskedasticity modeling. The
possible emergence of non-elliptical probabilistic forecasts in this context is examined
and visualized. The problem of ﬁnding an appropriate point forecast given a non-
elliptical probabilistic forecast is discussed. We propose a solution where the forecast
is augmented with an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN). The ANN predicts the best (in
MSE sense) quantile to use as point forecast. In a forecasting study, we ﬁnd that the
copula-based models are competitive.
Keywords: Commoditiy Prices, Copula-based time series, Conditional Volatility,
Forecasting, Vine Copula
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: pappert@statistik.tu-dortmund.de (Sven Pappert),
arsova@statistik.tu-dortmund.de (Antonia Arsova)
Preprint submitted to Contributions to Statistics January 10, 2023arXiv:2301.03328v1  [stat.AP]  9 Jan 20231. Introduction
Modeling and forecasting commodity prices is important for trading, political
decision making and economic adjustments. Especially in recent times, forecasting
natural gas prices has gained importance following the russian invasion of Ukraine. In
this work we focus on modeling and forecsting short-term natural gas future prices
jointly with related commodity prices. We model the time series jointly to exploit the
additional information carried by their mutual dependence. To this aim we employ
spatio-temporal copula based time series models.
Copulas are popular choices to model the cross-sectional dependence in time series
with the copula-GARCH approach in ﬁnancial markets [ 16,18] as well as in energy
markets [ 2,7]. In the copula-GARCH approach the temporal dependence of each
time series is modeled by typical time series models, such as ARMA-GARCH. The
cross-sectional dependence structure of the time series can be captured by ﬁnding the
copula of the standardized residuals of the univariate time series model. However, such
models are only able to allow for ﬂexible dependence structures in the cross-sectional
dimension. The mean process is modeled linearly.
On the other hand, temporal copula modeling (or ’copula-based time series modeling’)
as well as spatio-temporal copula time series modeling oﬀers an alternative to classical
linear time series approaches. The models are able to ﬂexibly model cross-sectional as
well as temporal dependencies. There is emerging literature on the topic. Chen & Fan
[8] investigate the estimation of copula-based semiparametric time series models. The
authors provide conditions for β-mixing and prove consistency as well as asymptotic
normality using the Delta method. Beare [ 4] further investigates mixing conditions.
Smith et al. [ 23] decompose serial dependence of intraday electricity load using pair
copula constructions. Simard and Rémillard [ 21] investigate the forecasting perfor-
mance of the spatio-temporal t-copula dependent on the strength and structure of the
dependence as well as the marginal distributions. Beare & Seo [ 5] as well as Nagler et
al. [19] examine spatio-temporal vine copula models.
Examples where ﬂexible dependence modeling can be important are the following. The
cross-sectional dependence between international stock markets can be asymmetric
with dominant lower tail dependence, indicating the phenomenon of contagion in
ﬁnancial markets. This was investigated by Hu [ 16]. It was found that the asymmetric
dependence dominates. With regard to energy markets it was found by Aloui et al.
[2] that crude oil and gas markets rather comove during bullish periods. Thereby also
2displaying an asymmetric cross-sectional dependence structure. A concise example
for a possible emergence of non-linear dependence structures in the temporal domain
and hence requiring sophisticated dependence modeling is given in the introduction of
the work by Beare [ 4]. The continous growth of ﬁnancial time series contrasted with
their sudden and quick decrease represent an asymmetric temporal relation. Thus
cross-sectional as well as temporal dependence modeling can be important in many
ﬁelds.
In this paper we explore the possibilities and performances of spatio-temporal copula
models for modeling energy market time series. The basic idea underlying spatio-
temporal time series modeling with copulas is a decomposition of the joint distribution.
Using Sklars theorem, [ 22] the joint distribution of consecutive observations is decom-
posed into dependence and marginal structure, FXt,Xt−1(a,b) =C/bracketleftbig
FXt(a),FXt−1(b)/bracketrightbig
.
Various copula speciﬁcations can be employed. In this work, the t-copula [ 11] and the
gaussian copula are considered as basic copula models for spatio-temporal time series
modeling. Vine copula models [ 1,9] are also considered. Spatio-temporal forecasting
with the t-copula was examined in [ 21]. The spatio-temporal vine copula modeling of
multivariate time series is, among others, explored in [5, 19, 23].
Using the notion of conditional copulas, the models can be used for forecasting. The
resulting probabilistic forecasts can be non-elliptical. It is not obvious what constitutes
a sensible point forecast in this case. The expectation value is a sensible point forecast
for elliptical or almost elliptical probabilistic forecasts. For non-elliptical forecasts,
e.g. a bimodular probabilistic forecast, the expecation value predicts points that are
unlikely. One possible solution to this problem would be to take the mode of the
probabilistic forecast as the point forecast. Another possibility is to augment the
forecasting procedure by an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN)1The ANN predicts which
quantile of the probabilistic forecast is optimal (in MSE sense) as point forecast. The
inputs of the ANN are past values of the times series and the last optimal quantiles.
One advantage of the ANN-augmented forecast is that the ANN can be estimated and
used for prediction completely independent from the probabilistic time series model
estimation and forecast. It is well known that ANNs are very powerful with regards
to point forecasting. In this approach the ANN point forecasts are also equipped
with an underlying probabilistic distribution, enabling the calculation of conﬁdence
1We refer to [14] for a concise introduction.
3intervals and other distributional properties. The models performances are examined
in a forecasting study. A model closely related to the model from [ 6], which was shown
to outperform other popular models, is considered as benchmark. We ﬁnd that the
spatio-temporal copula time series modeling with ANN-augmented point forecasts are
competitive for natural gas and related commoditiy prices forecasting.
The main contributions of this paper are two-fold. The ﬁrst contribution is the appli-
cation oriented exploration of spatio-temporal (vine) copula time series models for the
energy market. We evaluate the performance of the models in a forecasting study and
ﬁnd that they perform well. The second contribution is the methological exploration
of point forecasting from non-elliptical probabilistic forecasts and the inclusion of
ANN-augmented forecasts.
In the next Section, Sect. 2, the data used in this work is introduced brieﬂy. Sect. 3
describes the statistical methods used in this work. The empirical results of the
forecasting study are presented in Sect. 4, while Sect. 5 summarizes the results and
outlines some avenues for future research.
2. Data description
The time series analyzed in this work are extracted from the web-platform
investing.com using the Pythonpackage investpy [10]. We analyze month-ahead
natural gas futures (NGas) from the Netherlands (TTF Hub). The related commodities
used for modeling are short-term carbon emission futures (CEF), short term brent oil
futures (oil) and short term coal futures (coal). The analyzed time series are comprised
of daily observations. The obervation period spans from March 2010 to February 2021.
In total, the time series comprises 2861 observations. Missing values, which occur
especially during the holidays are trivially imputated as the last known value. The
original time series are non-stationary. To obtain stationarity, which is necessary for
the methods used in this report, the time series are diﬀerenced once. The diﬀerenced
time series are displayed in Fig. 1. The hypothesis of non-stationarity in the ﬁrst
diﬀerences is rejected by the Dickey-Fuller test at the level α= 0.01for all time series.
3. Statistical Methods
This section comprises the description of the methods used in this report. First
copulas and related notions are introduced. The copula speciﬁcations used in the
4analysis are presented and discussed. The application of copulas to time series modeling
follows. The emergence of non-elliptical probabilistic forecasts is examined with regard
to the t-copula. It is shown how the t-copula may be used to model conditional
heteroskedasticity. The need for new point forecast methods is presented.
3.1. Copulas
Copulas are distribution functions on the unit cube with uniform marginals:
C: [0,1]d→[0,1]. (1)
Copulas gain their relevance by Sklars Theorem [ 22]. It states that every multivari-
ate distribution can be decomposed into a copula and marginal distributions. Let
X1,...,Xdbe real valued random variables with joint distribution FX1,...,Xdand
marginal distributions FX1,...,FXd. Then it holds that there exists a copula Csuch
that
FX1,...,Xd(x1,...,xd) =CU1,...,Ud[FX1(x1),...,FXd(xd)], (2)
where (U1,...,Ud) := (FX1(X1),...,FXd(Xd)). In the following the indices of the cop-
ula will be dropped. If the random variables X1,...,Xdare continous then the decom-
position is unique [ 17]. The pseudo-observation (u1,...,ud) :=FX1(x1),...,FXd(xd)
are, by virtue of the probability integral transformation, realizations from a uniform
distribution, Ui=FXi(Xi)∼U[0,1],i∈{1,...,d}[3]. This permits the copula to
be interpreted as the dependence structure of the random variables X1,...,Xd. The
−5.0−2.50.02.55.0Natural Gas
−5.0−2.50.02.55.0Oil
−5.0−2.50.02.55.0Coal
−5.0−2.50.02.55.0
2010 2015 2020
DateCarbon
Figure 1: First diﬀerences of the respective commodity price time series.
5copula density, cwhich couples the joint density fX1,...,Xdand marginal densities
fX1,...,fXdcan be derived directly from Eq. 2 by taking derivatives,
fX1,...,Xd(x1,...,xd) =c[FX1(x1),...,FXd(xd)]fX1(x1)...fXd(xd),(3)
c[u1,...,ud] =∂dC[u1,...,ud]
∂u1...∂ud. (4)
The copula density is important for estimation via maximum likelihood as well as for
the visualization of dependence structures. In this paper the copula density will also
be used to introduce the notion of vine copula models. Another important notion
for dependence modeling is the conditional copula of U1,...,UigivenUi+1,...,Ud,
respectively the conditional copula density. The conditional copula (density) can also
be derived from Eq. 2. It is given by [21],
C[u1,...,ui|ui+1,...,ud] =∂ui+1...∂udC[u1,...,ud]
c[ui+1,...,ud], (5)
c[u1,...,ui|ui+1,...,ud] =c[u1,...,ud]
c[ui+1,...,ud]. (6)
Conditional copulas are especially relevant for conditional time series models as
presented in this paper. The relation between the conditional density and the copula
is as follows,
fX1,...,Xi|Xi+1...Xd(x1,...,xi|xi+1,...,xd) =c[FX1(x1),...,FXd(xd)]
c[ui+1,...,ud](7)
×fX1(x1)...fXi(xi).
The copula approach to multivariate modeling allows for separate modeling of marginal
properties and dependence structure. This feature renders the approach far more
ﬂexible than standard multivaritate modeling. Joint distributions such as the multi-
variate normal or students t-distribution restrict the choice of marginal distributions.
In the copula approach, marginal distributions can be arbitrary. Also the dependence
structure of random variables can have various features, that have to be accounted for
by choosing an appropriate copula speciﬁcation. In this work, the gaussian, Clayton,
Gumbel and t-copula are utilized. In the following they will be introduced brieﬂy as
the joint distribution of random variables Ui∼U[0,1],i∈{1,...,d}. The gaussian
copula is a popular choice for the modeling of linear dependence structures. The gaus-
sian copula is constructed by extracting the dependence structure of the multivariate
6normal distribution and ﬁltering the marginal inﬂuences,
Cgaussian[u1,...,ud] = Φ Σ[φ−1(u1),...,φ−1(ud)], (8)
whereφis the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution
andΦΣis thed-variate cumulative distribution function of the normal distribution
with correlation matrix Σ. The correlation matrix Σ∈[0,1]d×dcontainsd(d−1)
2
dependence parameters, ρ1,...,ρd(d−1)
2, governing the linear dependencies among
the random variables U1,...,Ud. The density of a bivariate gaussian copula with
dependence parameter ρ= 0.4is displayed in the upper left panel of Fig. 2. The
density only displays a linear relation between the variables. Similar to recovering
linear dependence structures from the multivariate normal distribution, heavy-tailed
dependence structures can be recovered from the multivariate students t-distribution
using the t-copula
Ct[u1,...,ud] =tΣ,ν[t−1
ν(u1),...,t−1
ν(ud)]. (9)
wheretνis the cumulative distribution function of the students t-distribution with
degree of freedom νandtΣ,νis the cumulative distribution function of the multivariate
t-distribution with correlation matrix Σand degree of freedom ν. Incorporating
the degree of freedom ν∈(0,∞)permits heavy tailed dependence structures. The
heavy-tailedness can be interpreted as extreme events coinciding. A lower degree of
freedomνimplies heavier tails. The density of a bivariate t-copula with dependence
parameterρ= 0.4and degree of freedom ν= 4is displayed in the upper right panel
of Fig. 2. The density displays the linear relation between the variables as well as
the coincidence of extreme events. Another class of dependence structures can be
described as asymmetric dependence structures. Two relevant copulas are the Gumbel
and Clayton copula. The Gumbel copula exhibits dominant upper tail dependence
while the Clayton copula exhibits dominant lower tail dependence. Their bivariate
densities are displayed in the lower left, respectively lower right panel of Fig. 2. Both
copulas are part of the archimedean copula family. Hence they are constructed as
C[u1,...,ud] = Ψ−1(Ψ(u1) +...+ Ψ(ud))with a suitable generator function Ψ[12],
7[15]. The generators for the Gumbel, respectively Clayton copula are given by
ΨClayton(t) = (1 +t)−1
θ, (10)
ΨGumbel(t) =e−t1
θ. (11)
The dominant lower tail dependence of the Clayton copula can be interpreted as lower
tail events coinciding more often than upper tail events and vice versa for the dominant
upper tail dependence of the Gumbel copula. An even more ﬂexible copula model is
the vine copula model. Vine copula models will be explained next.
3.2. Vine Copulas
Vine copulas are special pair copula constructions. The idea of pair copula
constructions amounts to decomposing a d-variate dependence structure into a product
of bivariate copulas. The joint density of drandom variables can, by virtue of the
law of total probability, be decomposed into a product of conditional densities. Using
the relation between conditional densities and copula densities (Eq. 8), one possible
decomposition can be derived as [1, 9],
c[u1,...,ud] =d−1/productdisplay
j=1d−j/productdisplay
i=1c[ui,ui+j|ui+1,...,uj−1]. (12)
0.000.250.500.751.00
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
u1u2
0.000.250.500.751.00
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
u1u2
0.000.250.500.751.00
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
u1u2
0.000.250.500.751.00
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
u1u2
Figure 2: Simulated density plots of four diﬀerent two-dimensional copula speciﬁcations. The upper
left plot shows the gaussian copula density with dependence parameter set to ρ= 0.4. Upper right
shows the t-copula density with dependence parameter ρ= 0.4and degree of freedom ν= 4. The
lower left plot displays the Gumbel copula density with dependence parameter θ= 2. The lower right
plot displays the Clayton copula density with dependence parameter θ= 2. All plots were created
with simulations with 2000 samples.
8The decomposition is not unique. The decomposition in Eq. 12 is called drawable
vine (D-vine). The unconditional copulas in the product all capture the dependence
structure of neighboring variables, e.g. c[ui,ui+1],c[ui+1,ui+2]and so forth. In a
graphical representation, the connection between the variables resembles a straight
line, hence the name D-vine.2The vine copula approach allows for ﬂexible dependence
modeling. It is advantageous in contexts where the bivariate dependence structures
between variables can take diﬀerent shapes, e.g. the dependence structure between
variableU1andU2is linear whereas the dependence structure between U2andU3
is heavy-tailed and so forth. Vine copula models can be estimated by maximum
likelihood, we refer to [1] for details.
3.3. Modeling Time Series with Spatio-Temporal Copulas
In this subsection, the copula-based time series models will be reviewed and
summarized. It will be explained how these models can be used for forecasting. First,
the temporal copula modeling (see for example [ 8], [4]) will be introduced. Eventually
the combination of cross-sectional and temporal copula modeling, the spatio-temporal
copula modeling, will be introduced. The exposition is based on the spatio-temporal
t-copula modeling from [ 21] and vine copula modeling from [ 5,19,23]. Further it
will be examined how conditional temporal copula models oﬀer a new approach to
conditional heteroskedasticity modeling. The emergence of non-elliptical conditional
distributions, respectivelyprobabilisticforecasts, willbeexempliﬁed. Theconsequences
for forecasting and the need for new point forecasting methods will be discussed.
LetXtbe a univariate stationary Markov (1)time series. The temporal evolution of
the time series is completely speciﬁed by the joint distribution of random variables
from consecutive time points i.e. FXt,Xt−1. Using Sklars theorem (Eq. 2), the joint
distribution can be decomposed into copula and marginal distributions,
FXt,Xt−1(a,b) =C/bracketleftbig
FXt(a),FXt−1(b)/bracketrightbig
. (13)
By the stationarity of Xt,FXt=FXt−1=:FX. Hence the model can be determined
by choosing an appropriate marginal distribution FXand an appropriate copula
speciﬁcation. Note that the marginal distribution FXis the unconditional distribution
2Anotherspecialclassofdecompositionsarecanonicalvines(C-vine). Inthisdecomposition, theun-
conditional dependence structures are all centered around one variable, e.g. c[ui,ui+1],c[ui,ui+2],....
In a graphical representation, the unconditional connection between variables resembles a star. In
this work only D-vines are used.
9ofXt. Conditional properties of the time series are completely determined by the
conditional copula. The conditional density of Xt|Xt−1is given by
fXt|Xt−1(a|b) =c[FX(a),FX(b)]fX(a). (14)
Hence, for forecasting, the conditional density of Xt|Xt−1=xt−1can be used as
probabilistic forecast. This model can be understood as a generalization of the
AR(1)model [23]3. The gaussian autoregressive model can be recovered by choosing
C=CgaussianandFX= Φ. When allowing other dependence structures, any temporal
dependency representable by a copula can be reproduced. The concept of the copula
based time series models can be further illustrated by its conditional model equation,
Xt|(Xt−1=xt−1) =F−1
X(C−1[ut|FX(xt−1)]), ut∼U[0,1]. (15)
In this formulation, the non-linear connection between XtandXt−1becomes obvious.
The generalization of the temporal copula time series model to d-variate time series,
hence spatio-temporal time series models, is straight forward. Let Xt= (X1,t,...,Xd,t)
be stationary Markov (1)time series. The structure of the time series is completely
captured by the joint distribution of XtandXt−1,
FXt,Xt−1(a,b) =C[FX1(a1),...,FXd(ad),FX1(b1),...,FXd(bd)].(16)
The conditional density given observations from time point t−1is as follows,
fXt|Xt−1(a|b) =c[FX1(a1),...,FXd(ad),FX1(b1),...,FXd(bd)]
c[FX1(b1),...,FXd(bd)](17)
×fX1(a1)·...·fXd(ad).
To sample from the conditional distribution, as necessary for Monte-Carlo approx-
imations of conditional forecasts, the following procedure is employed [ 21]. First
transform the observations at time t−1to pseudo-observations. This is done by
applying the probability integral transform to the observations, (ut−1,1,...,ut−1,d) :=
(FX1(xt−1,1),...,FXd(xt−1,d)). Then sample n d-dimensional realizations from the
conditional copula, Eq. 5. (Details on how to sample from the t-copula can be found
3The generalization to AR(p)models can be achieved by permiting the time series to be a
Markov (p)process.
10in [21]. Details to sampling from vine copulas can be found in [ 1]). At last, the n
realizations have to be quantile transformed with their respective marginal distri-
bution, yielding the nsamples of the conditional distribution. Relevant models for
this work are the following. First, the spatio-temporal time series model where the
copula is speciﬁed as the gaussian copula (Eq. 8). The marginals are approximated
non-parametrically by the empirical distribution.
FXt,Xt−1(a,b) = Φ Σ[φ−1(Femp
X1(a1)),...φ−1(Femp
Xd(ad)), (18)
φ−1(Femp
X1(b1)),...,φ−1(Femp
Xd(bd))].
This model is sensible to use when the dependence structure between the variables as
well as the temporal dependence is linear. When the dependence strucure exhibits
heavy-tailedness, the spatio-temporal t-copula model with non-parametric marginals
poses a viable option,
FXt,Xt−1(a,b) =tν,Σ[t−1
ν(Femp
X1(a1)),...t−1
ν(Femp
Xd(ad)), (19)
t−1
ν(Femp
X1(b1)),...,t−1
ν(Femp
Xd(bd))].
For more ﬂexible modeling, the spatio-temporal D-vine copula with non-parametric
marginals can be utilized. For convenience, the model is presented in terms of its joint
density and with variables (a,b) =:p
fXt,Xt−1(p) =/producttext2d−1
j=1/producttext2d−j
i=1c[FXi(pi),FXi+j(pi+j)|FXi+1(pi+1),...,FXj−1(pj−1)]
×fX1(p1)·...·fXd(pd)fX1(pd+1)·...·fXd(p2d).(20)
This model is sensible to use when the dependence between variables diﬀers in its
structure or when the temporal dependence diﬀers from the cross-sectional dependence.
As for solely temporal modeling, the temporal t-copula is employed,
FXt,Xt−1(a,b) =tν,Σ[t−1
ν(Femp
X(a)),t−1
ν(Femp
X(b))]. (21)
The heavy-tailed temporal dependence that this model exhibits is suitable for condi-
tional heteroskedasticity modeling as will be discussed next.
Theconditionaldistributions,respectivelyprobabilisticforecastsfrom(spatio)-temporal
copula time series models can be non-elliptical because of non-linear inﬂuences of the
11conditioning variable. In the following the behavior of the conditional distributions
will be examined with regard to the temporal t-copula with standard normal marginal
distribution4. The emergence of non-elliptical conditional densities from the heavy-
tailed t-copula is visualized in Fig. 3. When the conditioning variable takes moderate
values around u1= 0.5the resulting conditional density is approximately elliptical.
However, when the conditioning variable takes extreme values e.g. u1= 0.03and
u1= 0.97, the conditional density becomes bimodular. Thus, depending on the value
of the conditioning variable, the resulting conditional density can have fundamentally
diﬀerent structures. This behavior oﬀers a new approach to conditional heteroskedas-
ticity modeling. Instead of widening the conditional density as in GARCH models,
the density gets bimodular. This can be viewed as a sensible approach to volatility
because the extreme behavior in volatile phases is mirrored in this model: When the
time series takes a very low value at time point t−1it can be expected that the value
at time point twill either be also very low or very high. The variance at time point t
is increased nevertheless, but the mechanism for the increased variance is a new one.
The temporal t-copula approach to conditional volatility, however, holds a problem.
When the conditional density is non-elliptical it is not clear what constitutes a sensible
point forecast. The expectation value may not be suitable in extreme cases where the
conditional density is bimodular because the expectation value will take a value which
is less probable than e.g. the modes. Taking the mode as point forecast could be a
solution. Another possible solution to the problem of point forecasting is to augment
the forecast by a artiﬁcial neural network (ANN). The ANN predicts which quantile
of the conditional distribution is best (in terms of MSE) to use as point forecast. The
inputs of the ANN are past values of the time series and the last optimal quantiles.
The ANN architecture used in this work is the basic multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
structure. We refer to [14] for an introduction to the topic.
4. Results
This section comprises the results of the expanding window forecasting study,
investigating the performance of diﬀerent models. The ﬁrst 1000 observations (ranging
4The choice of the standard normal distribution is just for convenience. The example would still
be valid with other marginal distributions, e.g. students t-distribution.
12from 2010-03-16 to 2013-12-08) are used as training data set. The following models
are considered for evaluation.
1)The temporal t-copula model with non-parametric marginals, Eq. 21, henceforth
denoted by Tem-t,
2)The spatio-temporal D-vine copula model Eq. 20, henceforth denoted by S-Tem
D-vine,
3) The spatio-temporal t-copula model, Eq. 20, henceforth denoted by S-Tem-t,
4)The spatio-temporal gaussian copula model, Eq. 19, henceforth denoted by
S-Tem-gaussian,
5)The Autoregressive moving average model with external regressors and absolute
value, threshhold generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity model,
henceforth denoted by ARMAX-AVTGARCH (closely related to the model from
[6]).
The models distributional forecasting performance is examined by the continous ranked
probability score (CRPS) [ 13]. Further, the ANN assisted point forecasts of the S-Tem
0.000.250.500.751.00
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
u1u2
0.00.10.20.3
−2 0 2
Φ−1(u2|u1=0.03)density
0.00.10.20.3
−3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3
Φ−1(u2|u1=0.97)density
0.00.20.40.6
−2 −1 0 1
Φ−1(u2|u1=0.5)density
Figure 3: Visualization of the conditional density structure depending on the value of the conditioning
variable. The underlying model assumes the t-copula with dependence parameter ρ= 0.4and degree
of freedom ν= 2. The marginal distribution is assumed as the standard normal distribution. The
upper left panel shows the copula density of 2000 realizations of the before mentioned t-copula. The
three lines indicate the three cases where the conditinal density is examined. The conditional density
is calculated by aggregating all values in the neighborhood ( u1±0.025) of the conditioning variable
and quantile-transforming them. The density in the upper right panel displays the conditional density
givenu1= 0.03. The lower panels display the conditional densities given u1= 0.5, respectively
u1= 0.97.
13Table 1: Aggregated CRPS values of the competing models for their one day-ahead probabilistic
forecast for the four commodities. The CRPS is evaluated for the period 2013-12-19 – 2021-02-23,
comprising 1861 obervations.
Model/
CommodityS-Tem
D-VineARMAX-
AVTGARCHTem-t S-Tem-t S-Tem-
gaussian
Natural Gas 0.236 0 .227 0 .230 0 .234 0 .234
Oil 0.564 0 .548 0 .551 0 .559 0 .558
Coal 0.400 0 .389 0 .392 0 .398 0 .397
CEF 0.236 0 .222 0 .229 0 .234 0 .234
D-vine model and the Tem-t model are compared with the point forecasts from the
ARMAX-AVTGARCH model. For each time series the ARMAX-AVTGARCH model
is ﬁtted individually. All models are estimated via Maximum Likelihood. However, the
marginals of the copula models are estimated non-parametrically to avoid transmitting
estimation errors [ 20]. The order of the variables in the S-Tem D-vine copula model is
ﬁxed as
CEF – coal – oil – NGas – NGas lag – oil lag – coal lag – CEF lag .(22)
This order is chosen to enable the lagged natural gas price to directly interact with
the non-lagged natural gas price. The gaussian, Gumbel, Clayton and t-copula are
allowed as bivariate copulas in the D-vine decomposition (Eq. 12). The probabilistic
forecasts of all models are approximated by Monte-Carlo simulations with 1000
samples for each forecast. Table 1 displays the models performances in terms of the
CRPS. The ARMAX-AVTGARCH model performs best with regard to univariate
distributional forecasting. However, the S-Tem D-vine model, the S-Tem-t and the
Tem-t model are competitive. The performance of the copula models may be enhanced,
when the marginal distributions are modeled parametrically. The empirical marginal
distributions of the copula may not capture all marginal features of the time series.
More versatile copula models could be used to enhance the forecast. The conditional
dependence modeling may only be able to capture parts of the conditional eﬀects. The
probabilistic forecasts from the Tem-t model during a volatile period is displayed in
Fig. 4. During volatile times the probabilistic forecasts are non-elliptical. During these
times the ANN-augmented point forecasts can be valuable. The point forecasting
performance of the models can be found in Table 2. The evaluation starts at the
2001st observation, because the ﬁrst 1000 probabilist forecasts are used to train the
ANN. The hybrid, ANN-augmented S-Tem vine and the ANN-augmented Tem-t model
14Table 2: Aggregated RMSE values of the competing point forecasting procedures for the four
commodities. The RMSE is evaluated for the period 2017-10-23 – 2021-02-23, comprising 861
observations.
Model/
CommodityS-Tem
D-Vine
ANNARMAX-
AVTGARCHS-Tem
D-Vine
MeanS-Tem
D-Vine
ModeTem-t
ANN
Gas 0.594 0 .600 0 .599 0 .597 0 .589
oil 1.222 1 .222 1 .236 1 .246 1 .220
coal 1.000 0 .999 1 .009 1 .002 0 .997
CEF 0.605 0 .608 0 .614 0 .604 0 .607
generate the best point forecasts. The point forecasts of the ARMAX-AVTGARCH
model are competitive though. Note that the ANN model used for forecasting is build
according to the basic multi-layer perceptron architecture. It is not perfectly suitable
for catching sequential patterns. Using recurrent neural networks, especially long
short-term memory architectures could enhance the performance even more and could
be subject to future research. Also incorporating a measure for the structure of the
probabilistic forecast could enhance the performance. However, this would requiere
more advanced architectures.
5. Conclusion
The application of copula-based time series models to natural gas and related
commoditiy prices is explored in this work. An expanding window forecasting study
is conducted. The time series used for analysis are extracted from investing.com
Aug 15
Sep 01
Sep 15
−2 −1 0 1 2
density
Figure 4: Probabilistic forecasts for natural gas futures generated from the temporal t-copula model.
The forecast densities can be non-elliptical during volatile times (August 2019 – September 2019)
15via the Pythonpackage investpy . The time series comprises short term future price
series of natural gas, crude oil, coal and carbon emissions.
After introducing the basic notions of dependence modeling with copulas and the
D-Vine copula, the copula based time series models from the literature are reviewed.
The emergence of non-elliptical probabilistic forecasts is exempliﬁed using the tem-
poral t-copula. It is visualized how the temporal t-copula oﬀers a new approach to
conditional heteroskedasticity modeling. It is not clear what constitutes a sensible
point forecast when the probabilistic forecast is non-elliptic. To this end a artiﬁcial
neural network is employed to predict what quantile of the probabilistic forecast is
best to use as point forecast. The inputs of the artiﬁcial neural network are past values
of the multivariate time series and the last best quantiles of the probabilistic forecast.
In the forecasting study, the predictive performance of the temporal t-copula, the
spatio-temporal t-copula and the spatio-temporal D-Vine copula is examined. The
marginal distributions are estimated by the respective empirical distribution. The per-
formance is compared with the performance of an autoregressive moving-average model
with external regressors and absolute value, threshhold generalized autoregressive
conditional heteroskedasticity modeling (ARMAX-AVTGARCH). A closely related
model was recently shown to be the best model for natural gas forecasting. Hence
it is understood as benchmark model. The distributional predicitive performance
is examined by the continious ranked probability score (CRPS). We ﬁnd that the
copula-based time series models are competitive with the ARMAX-AVTGARCH
model. The point forecasts are evaluated by the root mean squared error (RMSE).
The ANN-augmented point forecasts perform best, although the forecasts from the
ARMAX-AVTGARCH model are still competitive.
The performance of the copula-based time series models could be enhanced by mod-
eling the marginal distributions parametrically. The non-parametric modeling may
not catch all marginal features of the time series. However, this procedure requieres
the estimation to be conducted in one step to guarantee eﬃcient estimation. Another
possibility to enhance the performance is to consider more versatile copula models.
The current modeling may not capture all conditional features of the time series.
Another possibility, with regard to the vine copula model, is to consider other vine
structures. In this work the D-vine structure was imposed. Other structures may
be able to capture the dependencies better. As for the point forecasts, it was shown
that the ANN-augmented forecasts perform well. Even though we choose to utilize
16the standard multi-layer perceptron architecture, which can not model sequential
information perfectly well, the precision was increased. Using more sophisticated
architectures that are more suited to catch sequential information will be subject to
future research. It would also be interesting to use other models to predict the best
quantile for point forecasting.
Acknowledgement:
The authors gratefully acknowledge the computing time provided on the Linux HPC
cluster at Technical University Dortmund (LiDO3), partially funded in the course of
the Large-Scale Equipment Initiative by the German Research Foundation (DFG) as
project 271512359.
References
[1]Aas, K., Czado, C., Frigessi, A. & Bakken, H. (2009). Pair-copula construtions
of multiple dependence. Insurance: Mathematics and economics, 44(2):182-198,
2009.
[2]Aloui, R., Aïssa, M. S. B., Hammoudeh, S. & Nguyen D. K. (2014). Dependence
and extreme dependence of crude oil and natural gas prices with applications to
risk management. Energy Economics, 42:332-243, 2014.
[3]Angus, J. E. (1994). The probability integral transform and related results. SIAM
review, 36(4), 652-654.
[4]Beare, B. K. (2010). Copulas and temporal dependence. Econometrica, 78(1),
395-410.
[5]Beare, B. K., & Seo, J. (2015). Vine copula speciﬁcations for stationary multi-
variate Markov chains. Journal of Time Series Analysis, 36(2), 228-246.
[6]Berrisch, J., & Ziel, F. (2022). Distributional modeling and forecasting of natural
gas prices. Journal of Forecasting.
[7]Berrisch, J., Pappert, S., Ziel, F., & Arsova, A. (2022). Modeling Volatil-
ity and Dependence of European Carbon and Energy Prices. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2208.14311.
17[8]Chen, X., & Fan, Y. (2006). Estimation of copula-based semiparametric time
series models. Journal of Econometrics, 130(2), 307-335.
[9]Czado, C. (2010). Pair-copula constructions of multivariate copulas. In Copula
theory and its applications (pp. 93-109). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
[10]Del Canto, A. (2021). Investpy–Financial Data Extraction from Investing. com
with Python. GitHub Repository.
[11]Demarta, S., & McNeil, A. J. (2005). The t copula and related copulas. Interna-
tional statistical review, 73(1), 111-129.
[12]Genest, C., & Rivest, L. P. (1993). Statistical inference procedures for bivariate
Archimedean copulas. Journal of the American statistical Association, 88(423),
1034-1043.
[13]Gneiting, T., &Raftery, A.E.(2007). Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and
estimation. Journal of the American statistical Association, 102(477), 359-378.
[14]Higham, C. F., & Higham, D. J. (2019). Deep learning: An introduction for
applied mathematicians. Siam review, 61(4), 860-891.
[15]Hofert, M. (2008). Sampling archimedean copulas. Computational Statistics &
Data Analysis, 52(12), 5163-5174.
[16]Hu, L. (2006). Dependence patterns across ﬁnancial markets: a mixed copula
approach. Applied ﬁnancial economics, 16(10), 717-729.
[17] Joe, H. (2014). Dependence modeling with copulas. CRC press.
[18]Jondeau, E., & Rockinger, M. (2006). The copula-garch model of conditional
dependencies: An international stock market application. Journal of international
money and ﬁnance, 25(5), 827-853.
[19]Nagler, T., Krüger, D., & Min, A. (2022). Stationary vine copula models for
multivariate time series. Journal of Econometrics, 227(2), 305-324.
[20]Patton, A. (2013). Copula methods for forecasting multivariate time series.
Handbook of economic forecasting, 2, 899-960.
[21]Simard, C., & Rémillard, B. (2015). Forecasting time series with multivariate
copulas. Dependence modeling, 3(1).
18[22]Sklar, M. (1959). Fonctions de repartition an dimensions et leurs marges. Publ.
inst. statist. univ. Paris, 8, 229-231.
[23]Smith, M., Min, A., Almeida, C., & Czado, C. (2010). Modeling longitudinal data
using a pair-copula decomposition of serial dependence. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 105(492), 1467-1479.
19