A First Rigorous Attempt to Explain Charge
Transport in a Protein-Ligand complex
Roisin Braddell1y, Jone Uria-Albizuri2y, Jean-Bernard Bru1;2;3, Seram
Rodrigues1;3,
1Basque Center for Applied Mathematics, Mazarredo, 14 48009, Bilbao,
Basque Country, Spain
2Departamento de Matem aticas y EHU Quantum Center, Facultad de
Ciencia y Tecnolog a, Universidad del Pa s Vasco, Apartado 644, 48080
Bilbao, Spain
3IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Plaza Euskadi 5 48009
Bilbao, Spain.
yThese authors contributed equally to this work.
* jb.bru@ikerbasque.org * srodrigues@bcamath.org
1 Abstract
Recent experimental evidence shows that when a protein (or peptide) binds
to its ligand pair, the protein eectively \switches on" enabling long-
range charge transport within the protein. Astonishingly, the protein-
ligand complex exhibits conductances in the order of nanosiemens over
distances of many nanometers and macroscopic Ohm's law emerges. Here,
we investigate this emergent phenomenon via the framework of many-body
(fermionic) quantum statistical principles. We propose a simple model
which gives rise to an Ohm's law with vanishing quantum eects in its ther-
modynamic limit (with respect to length scales). Specically, we consider
protein-ligand complexes as a two-band 1D lattice Hamiltonian system in
which charge carriers (electrons or holes) are assumed to be quasi-free. We
investigate theoretically and numerically the behavior of the microscopic
current densities with respect to varying voltage, temperature and length
within reasonable physiological parameter ranges. We compute the cur-
rent observable at each site of the protein-ligand lattice and demonstrate
how the local microscopic charge transport behavior generates the macro-
scopic current. The overall framework contributes to the search for unifying
principles for long-range charge transport and associated emergent laws in
protein complexes, which is crucial for bioelectronics.
Keywords : charge transport, protein-ligand conductivity, many-body quan-
tum statistical principles, emergence of Ohm's law
2 Introduction
Charge transport at atomic scales constitutes one of the most fundamental
processes for sustaining life on earth. It mediates the exchange of energy
and matter between a living system and its environment. Within a living
1arXiv:2301.13111v1  [physics.bio-ph]  5 Jan 2023system, proteins mediate charge transport and there are about 42 million
proteins in a single cell. These form a complex network of circuits ca-
pable of a plethora of functions: precise catalytic actions, highly specic
substrate recognition, analyte binding, directional electron tunneling and
energy conversion to name but a few. This has fuelled an ambitious quest
in both academia and industry to achieve a theoretical understanding and
technological control of the ow of charges, with the ultimate aim of de-
veloping advanced technologies. Indeed, in recent times we have witnessed
the development of radical electronic chips and photonic integrated circuits
where charge transport makes possible information exchange, information
processing and data storage [12, 20]. However, current technologies are ap-
proaching their physical limits of miniaturization. This, in turn, imposes
limits on computational speed, energy eciency, storage because of the
emergence of noise and quantum eects. Polymers and bio-polymers (i.e.
proteins and peptides) have emerged as potential candidates for nano-scale
bio-electronics, which could circumvent the shortcomings of previous tech-
nologies and would additionally enable bio-compatibility (i.e. nano circuits
that interface with cells or entire organs to monitor or treat disease). In-
deed, the discovery of electrically conductive polymers, which led to the
award of Nobel Prize in chemistry in the year 2000, has revolutionized sev-
eral technologies: corrosion inhibitors, compact capacitors, antistatic coat-
ing and smart windows that control the amount of light that ows through
[8, 19, 11, 21, 28]. In parallel, research on the conductivity of peptides and
proteins is radically transforming our understanding of bio-polymer charge
transport and is inspiring novel bio-electronics (e.g. molecular switches,
bio-rectiers and bio-transistors [29, 9]). Moreover, these new ndings are
revealing that protein function is probably not just associated with pro-
tein shape and their conformations, but also their conductivity. Indeed,
a series of astonishing recent experiments have found that when a protein
(e.g. streptavidin, which in its natural state lacks known electrochemical
activity) binds to its ligand pair (e.g. streptavidin-biotin complex) then the
protein eectively \switches on" enabling charge transport within the pro-
tein. Surprisingly, the protein-ligand complex exhibits conductances in the
order of nanosiemens over distances of many nanometers, orders of magni-
tude more than could be accounted for by electron tunneling. Additionally,
it displays a linear voltage-current relationship (Ohm's law) super-imposed
by telegraph noise [32]. These ndings warrant a theoretical underpinning
since the current models in the literature for protein conductivity are un-
able to explain this phenomenon.
Indeed, over the years, several theoretical and computational models have
been developed to explain biological charge transfer (exchange of electrons
occurring between an ionically conductive electrolyte and a protein in con-
tact with the electrolyte) and charge transport (electrons owing through
a protein in the absence of electrolyte or electrolyte participation) [5]. The
majority of these models are underpinned by the Marcus Theory of Elec-
tron Transfer [22, 23] and extensions of it, know as Marcus-Hush the-
ory [13]. This unifying theory expresses how electrons transition from an
electron donor (D) to an acceptor (A) or sequences of D-A, mediated by
oxidation-reduction (redox) centers (e.g. metal atoms, cofactors, amino
acids/aromatic side chains, electrodes, etc) or electron sinks/sources (e.g.
electrolytes). The primary goal of models built upon the Marcus-Hush
theories have been to explain short-range electron transitions either via
quantum-tunneling or hopping.
2Examples of such models are, superexchange (SE), ickering resonance
(FR), thermally-activated hopping (TH), diusion-assisted hopping (DH)
[14]. Other computational methods, include density functional theory cal-
culations [31] or detailed molecular dynamics simulations [26, 27]. n con-
trast, presently there is no unifying theory for long-range biological charge
transport akin to the Marcus-Hush theory of electron transfer. Present
approaches use sequential SE, FR, TH, DH steps, if for each step, the dis-
tance between redox centers are suciently short for eective tunneling
(20A ), the energy levels of the redox centers are similar and there is
strong coupling between electronic states [4]. Long-range charge transport
is hypothesized to occur through the formation of bands (e.g. mediated via
formation of new bonds or crystalline structures) thus giving rise to elec-
tronic states that are delocalized within the entire peptide. In this case,
it's conceivable to model free (conducting) electrons (or holes) as classical
particles moving in continuous bands of delocalized electronic states, pos-
sibly leading to Ohm-like characteristics or nonlinear current-voltage as in
semi-conductors. Thus, it is fundamental to develop unifying theories from
rst principles of quantum mechanics, which can under appropriate ther-
modynamical limits give rise to Ohm-like laws and as a by-product provide
insights about possible mechanisms for long-range biological charge trans-
port.
Fortunately, in a parallel literature, a community of Mathematical-
Physicists (including one of the authors) have been developing novel mathe-
matically rigorous charge transport theories based on many-body (fermionic)
quantum statistical principles [6, 25, 15, 7, 6, 16, 17, 25]. These develop-
ments aimed to explain experiments showing that quantum eects van-
ish rapidly and macroscopic laws for charge transport emerge at length
scales larger than a few nanometers. Specically, Ohm's law survives for
nanowires (silicon - Si doped with phosphorous - P) at 20 nm and even
at low temperatures 4.2K) [1, 10]. The present manuscript attempts to
exploit these novel theoretical frameworks but now focused towards ex-
plaining long-range charge transport in protein-ligand complexes that ex-
hibit Ohmic characteristics superimposed with telegraph noise [32]. As
a rst attempt, we provide the simplest possible model of a nite length
protein-ligand, where we assume the protein-ligand complex as a single
molecule and we do not consider telegraph noise. Since we build upon
these novel theoretical developments we will treat the underlying many-
body system within the algebraic formulation for lattice fermion systems.
Such systems can easily become computationally expensive or completely
intractable and thus to make mathematical calculations amenable, we as-
sume that the model is quasi-free ; meaning the inter-particle interaction is
suciently weak. Then by invoking the rigorous mathematical results on
our proposed lattice model we determine from the expectation values of mi-
croscopic current densities the classical Ohmic currents as well as possible
semiconducting behaviors. This leads us with a preliminary insight into po-
tential quantum eects. Moreover, by looking at the occupation numbers
of the lattice of the \protein-ligand" we observe directly the mechanism of
charge transport.
33 Description of the Many-Fermion Model
The aim of the present manuscript is to provide a rst modelling attempt
to explain protein-ligand charge-transport that exhibits conductances in
the order of nanosiemens over distances of many nanometers [32]. Therein,
protein-ligand complexes are placed within their natural aqueous environ-
ment and conductances are measured with a Pd substrate (i.e. a working
electrode) and in tandem with a scanning tunneling microscope (STM).
Surprisingly, the protein-ligand complexes within their natural electrolyte
environment do not exhibit charge transfer (between the protein-ligand
and electrolyte) but rather display long-range charge-transport with Ohmic
characteristics superimposed with telegraph noise. Eectively, the protein
seems to \switch on" when coming in contact with binding agents (i.e.
ligands) that appear to inject charge carriers into their interiors. Inspired
by these experimental observations, we propose a simplied model where
we consider the protein-ligand as a single one dimensional lattice where
fermions (electrons) may hop from a conducting band 1 to a second non-
conducting band 0. The non-conducting band attempts to model the pos-
sibility that fermions may become trapped (via a hopping term, similar
to a classic semi-conductor). The measuring apparatus, that is, the Pd
substrate and STM electrode tip are modelled as two standard conduc-
tors via two half-lines of arbitrarily large length, respectively on the right
and left sides of the lattice (i.e. the protein-ligand complex), serving only
as large fermionic reservoirs. The model does not consider the aqueous
environment since the experimental measurements are undertaken in an
electrical potential region that does not induce ion current ows [32]. Al-
though charge carriers like electrons (or holes) have spin 1/2, we do not
consider spin eects and thus the magnetic properties of the systems are
not studied. This leads us to a two band lattice model described via the
second quantization formalism as discussed in subsequent sections.
3.1 The Model at Equilibrium
We rst consider the Hamiltonian at equilibrium associated with our pro-
posed two-band 1D lattice model. Omitting the spin of charge carriers, we
thus use the one-particle Hilbert space dened by:
h:=`2(Zf0;1g) :=8
<
:( (x))x2Zf0;1gC:X
x2Zf0;1gj (x)j2<19
=
;
(1)
while the fermionic Fock space is denoted by
F:=1M
n=0Pnh
n(2)
withPnbeing the projection to anti-symmetric functions of h. Denote
bya
x;b(resp.ax;b) the creation (resp. annihilation) operator of a spinless
fermion atx2Zin the band b2f0;1gacting on the fermionic Fock space.
We will now describe a general Hamiltonian for this particular system with
parameters x;x2fp;rgwhich give the strength of the relevant terms
for fermions in the protein (p) and reservoirs (r) respectively. How the
strength of these terms is chosen is discussed in section 3.3.
43.1.1 Conducting Band
Letl2N,p0 andp;12R. We dene the conducting band a 1D
quantum system of length 2 la, 2l+ 1 being the number of lattice sites
anda(in nm) being the lattice spacing, by the following Hamiltonian:
Hp;1:=p0
@2Np;1 X
y;x2Z\[ l;l]:jx yj=1a
y;1ax;11
A p;1Np;1;(3)
where
Np;1:=lX
x= la
x;1ax;1 (4)
is the so-called particle number operator in band 1. The above Hamiltonian
has two well-identied parts: The rst term in the RHS of (3) gives the
kinetic energy of fermions, this being the (second quantization of the) usual
discrete Laplacian with hopping strengths p0 (in eV). The remaining
part in the RHS of (3) gives the basic energy level of the band 1 inside
the 1D quantum system, p;12R(in eV) being the so-called chemical
potential associated with the conducting band.
3.1.2 Insulating Band and Band Hopping
Givenl2Nand a chemical potential p;02R(or Fermi energy), the
Hamiltonian in the insulating band 0 of the quantum system (of length
2la) is given as a basic energy level  p;0N0, where
Np;0:=lX
x= la
x;0ax;0 (5)
is the particle number operator in the band 0. In particular, no hopping
between lattice sites of the band 0 is allowed. However, we add a band-
hopping term, allowing electrons to hop from one band to another via the
hopping strength 0 (in eV). Thus, we have the following Hamiltonian:
Hp;0:= p;0N0 lX
x= l 
a
x;0ax;1+a
x;1ax;0
: (6)
3.1.3 The Fermion Reservoirs
Givenl;L2NwithLl,r0 andr2R, the system is assumed to be
between two fermion reservoirs, the Hamiltonian of which is given by
Hr:=r0
@2Nr X
x;y2Z\([ L;l 1][[l+1;L]):jx yj=1a
y;1ax;11
A rNr(7)
where
Nr:=l 1X
x= La
x;1ax;1+LX
x=l+1a
x;1ax;1 (8)
is the particle number operator in the reservoirs. We assume the reser-
voirs have a single band. Similar to the 1D quantum system, randr
5(in eV) give the hopping strength and chemical potential inside the reser-
voirs, respectively. Note that the chemical potentials in the left and right
reservoirs (resp. in f L;:::;l 1gandfl+ 1;:::;Lg) are the same in this
case. Dierent chemical potentials for each reservoir are possible, leading
to similar, albeit slightly more complex, behaviors. Thus, we refrain from
considering this case in our model to keep scientic discussions as simple
as possible.
3.1.4 The Full Hamiltonian
Keeping in mind the electric connection between the 1D quantum system,
the substrate and the tip in [32], the full Hamiltonian is equal to
HL:=Hp;1+Hp;0+Hr+Hr p (9)
where the Hamiltonian
Hr p:= # 
a
 l 1;1a l;1+a
 l;1a l 1;1+a
l+1;1al;1+a
l;1al+1;1
allows fermions to hop between the reservoirs and the band 1 of the 1D
quantum system via the hopping strength #0 (in eV).
For anyL;l2NwithLl, all Hamiltonians can be seen as linear
operators acting only on the restricted (fermionic) Fock space
FL:=1M
n=0Pnh
n
LC22(2L+1)F (10)
constructed from the one-particle Hilbert space
hL:=f 2h:8x2Zf0;1gn[ L;L];  (x) = 0g`2(Z\[ L;L]f0;1g):
(11)
The dimension of the Fock space FLgrows exponentially with respect
toL2N, rapidly making a priori numerical computations expensive for
L1. However, a key assumption of our proposed quantum model is
its quasi-free nature. This means that the many-fermion system can be
entirely described within the one-particle Hilbert space, which is in this case
equal to hL. In particular, the numerical computations are therefore done
on a space of dimension dim hL= 2 (2L+ 1), instead of dim FL= 22(2L+1)
as for general (possibly interacting) fermion systems. For more details, see
Supplementary Material, section 8.
3.1.5 The Gibbs State
In the algebraic formulation of quantum mechanics, a state is a continuous
linear functional on B(FL), the Banach space of bounded linear operators
onFL, that is positive ( (A)0 ifA0) and normalized ( (1) = 1). If
the system is at equilibrium at initial time t= 0, the equilibrium state is
given by the Gibbs state associated with the full Hamiltonian HL, dened
at temperature T >0 (in K) and suciently large L2Nby
(A) :=TraceFL
Ae (kBT) 1HL
TraceFL 
e (kBT) 1HL; A2B(FL); (12)
6where kBis the Boltzmann constant (in eV :K 1). As usual, it is convenient
to use the parameter := (kBT) 1>0, which is interpreted as the inverse
temperature of the system (in eV 1). This state can be studied in the one-
particle Hilbert space hL(11) because it is a (gauge-invariant) quasi-free
state, allowing us to greatly simplify the complexity of the equations. See
Section 8.3 for more details.
3.2 The model driven by an electric potential
3.2.1 Dynamics induced by electric potentials
Application of a voltage across the system results in a perturbed Hamilto-
nian
HL() :=HL+E (13)
with
E:= l 1X
x= La
x;1ax;1+lX
x= lx
l 
a
x;1ax;1+a
x;0ax;0
+LX
x=l+1a
x;1ax;1;
2R(in V) being a parameter controlling the size of the voltage. Note
that the electric potential dierence is increases linearly across the protein.
Note also that we take symmetric potential, meaning that the left reservoir
(inf L;:::;l 1g) has its chemical potential (or Fermi energy) shifted by
 , while the chemical potential of the right reservoir (in fl+ 1;:::;Lg)
is shifted by + . The applied voltage on the quantum system is therefore
2. A non-symmetric choice is of course possible, leading to similar, albeit
slightly more complex, dynamical behaviors. The symmetric choice is taken
for the sake of simplicity.
In the algebraic formulation of quantum mechanics (cf. the Heisenberg
picture), the dynamics of the system is a continuous group ( ()
t)t2Rdened
on the nite-dimensional algebra B(FL) by
()
t(A) := eit~ 1HL()Ae it~ 1HL(); A2B(FL); (14)
at any time t2R(in s). In particular, a physical quantity represented by
an observable Abecomes time-dependent. The expectation value of this
physical quantity value is given by the real number (()
t(A)), its variance
by(()
t(A)2 (t(A))2), and so on, since the initial state of the system
(t= 0) is given by the Gibbs state dened by (12).
Like the Gibbs state, the resulting dynamics are quasi-free and it can
thus be studied in the one-particle Hilbert space hL(11). This feature
allows us to greatly simplify the complexity of the equations. See Section
8.4 for more details.
3.2.2 Current Observables
The denition of current observables is model dependent in general. To
compute them, it suces to consider the discrete continuity equation (in
terms of observables) for the fermion-density observable
nx(t):=()
t(a
x;bax;b) (15)
7at lattice site x2f L;:::;Lgand timet2Rin the band b2f0;1g:
@tnx;b(t) =()
t 
i~ 1
HL();a
x;bax;b
(16)
where [A;B]:=AB BAis the usual commutator. For any xed x2
f L;:::;Lgandb= 1, one straightforwardly computes from the Canonical
Anticommutation Relations (24) that
@tnx;1(t) =()
t(I(0)
(x;x)) +pX
y2Z\[ l;l]:jx yj=1()
t(I(1)
(x;y)) (17)
+#()
t
x; lI(1)
( l 1;x)+x;lI(1)
(l+1;x)+x; l 1I(1)
(x; l)+x;l+1I(1)
(x;l)
+rX
y2Z\([ L;l 1][[l+1;L]):jx yj=1()
t(I(1)
(x;y));
(L>l> 1) where, for any x;y2f L;:::;Lgandb2f0;1g,
I(b)
(x;y):=i~ 1 
a
x;1ay;b a
y;bax;1
: (18)
Observe that the positive signs in the right-hand side of (17) come from
the fact that the particles are positively charged, I(x;y)being the observable
related to the ow of positively charged, zero-spin, particles from the lattice
sitexto the lattice site y. Negatively charged particles can of course be
treated in the same way. In fact, there is no experimental data on the sign
of the charge carriers in [32], even if it is believed that the proximity of
bands associated with oxidizable amino acid residues to the metal Fermi
energy suggests that hole transport is more likely.
We calculate the current inside the system, that is, we calculate the
second term in the RHS of equation (18). Therefore, the current density
observable inf l;:::;lgproduced by the electric potential dierence 2 
0 at any time t2Ris thus equal to
J(t;):=qe
2ll 1X
x= lf()
t(I(1)
(x+1;x)) (0)
t(I(1)
(x+1;x))g (19)
withqebeing the charge (in C) of the fermionic charge carrier (electron or
hole). Note that we remove the possible free current on the systems when
there is no electric potential, even if one can verify in this specic case that
it is always zero at equilibrium. Observe also that we do not consider (i)
currents in the left and right fermion reservoirs, (ii) contact currents from
the reservoirs to the 1D quantum system (in f l;:::;lg) and (iii) currents
from the conducting band 1 to the trapping band 0. These currents can
easily be deduced from Equation (17): for (i)-(iii), see the terms in (17)
withr,#andrespectively.
3.2.3 Current Expectations and Fluctuations
Expectation values of all currents are obtained by applying the state of the
system. For instance, if the initial state of the system is the Gibbs state
dened by (12), the expectation of the current density (in A) produced
by the electric potential dierence 2 0 (in V) inf l;:::;lgat any time
t2R(in s) and temperature T >0 (in K) equals
E(J(t;)) :=(J(t;)): (20)
8Quantum uctuations of an observable Aare naturally given by the
variance
Var(A) =E[A2] E[A]2: (21)
Applied to the current observables, this leads to the current variance.
More generally, all moments associated with current observables can be
dened in a similar way, according to usual probability theory. We refrain
from considering higher moments than the variance in the sequel in order
to keep things as simple as possible. This is however an important question
to be studied in future research works in the context of the telegraph noise.
Indeed, as shown in [32, Fig. S7], the telegraph noise is characterized by a
bimodal distribution of currents, which could be investigated by some sta-
tistical methods involving 3rd and 4th order moments (such as the kurtosis
and skewness).
Note nally that the current density is an average of currents over the
linef l;:::;lgand it should converge rapidly to a deterministic value, as
l!1 . Similar to the central limit theorem in standard probability theory,
one could study the rescaled variance
2lVar (J(t;)) =1
2l
E
(2lJ(t;))2
 E(2lJ(t;))2
;
which should converge to a xed value. As shown in [17] for a one-band
model, this quantity should be directly related with the rate of convergence
of the current density, as l!1 . This is however not studied in detail here.
3.3 Choosing the Parameters of the System
We subsequently ne tune the proposed model by appropriately choosing
a physiologically suitable parameter set. However, because of the novelty
of the protein-ligand complexes experiment outlined in [32], the associated
microscopic parameters and data are still scant. Nevertheless, our aim is to
provide a general theoretical framework, where particular model instances
can rst lead to qualitative agreement and future improvements to quan-
titative and complete explanation of this phenomenon. Consequently, we
choose parameters that are physically plausible and with the correct order
of magnitude.
In general, we will assume \room temperature", i.e., T 300 K and
this determines the value of := (kBT) 138:7 eV 1. The lattice
length,l, will be set in accordance to the peptides/proteins considered in
[32]. However, we rst need to x the lattice spacing aof our model. In
crystals, the lattice spacing is of the order of a few angstroms, and it is
natural to assume roughly the same order of magnitude inside molecules.
In our prototypical example, we set1a'0:3 nm. Following [32], we
consider a 1D quantum system of several nanometers, more precisely of
a size between 2 nm and 10 nm or even a little more. This corresponds
to a 1D quantum system of length 2 lbetween about 6 :66 and 33:33, i.e.,
l2[3;17]. For typical experiments we choose l= 5 (i.e., 3 nm) and explore
the eect of varying the length of the 1D quantum system. Concerning
the length of the reservoirs, they have to be as large as possible in the
sense that Lland our choices are constrained by the computational
1E.g., in pure silicone (Si), it is about 0 :2 nm [3]. In the 2D lattice formed by
CuO 4in the cuprate superconductor La 2CuO 4, the lattice spacing of the oxygen ions is
0:2672 nm [30, Sect. 6.3.1], corresponding to a lattice spacing of the copper ions equal
to 0 :3779 nm.
9(a) Evolution of the Current
 (b) A rolling average for  I, ex-
pressed as a percentage of the current
I
Figure 1: Comparison of current evolution and absolute dierence of the
current between timesteps of 0 :01 ps for the conductor type model ( =
0:01) and semi-conductor type model ( = 0:125) for= 0:1. For= 0:01
the time taken to reach the stationary regime is 0 :1 ps, for= 0:125 the
time taken is approximately 0 :25 ps.
tractability. Moreover, we choose Llin such a way as to eliminate
articial \nite size" eects, as discussed in Section 5.1.
Appropriate ranges of pandr, that is the hopping strength of a
fermion in the 1D quantum system (in f l;:::;lg, band 1) and fermion
reservoirs respectively, can be derived from the lattice spacing aand the
eective mass of charge carriers m'Cme, wheremeis the electron mass.
IfC= 1, then a general hopping strength equals
:=~2
ma2=~2
Cmea2'0:85 eV:
We setr= 0:85 inside the reservoirs and take epsilon slightly smaller
inside the protein, p= 0:65 eV (C'1:3). In real systems, the eective
mass of an electron is usually larger than the electron mass, but since we
have no concrete information at our disposal we only make the reservoir
more conducting than the conducting band of the 1D quantum system. We
note that changes to epsilon on the magnitude of 0 :1 0:2 eV do not have
a signicant eect on the behavior of the system, unlike changes to the 
parameter.
Similarly, the hopping strength #controlling the hopping strength be-
tween the 1D quantum system and fermionic reservoirs should be of the
same order. For simplicity, we choose #= (p+r)=2 , meaning a very good
hopping contact between the 1D quantum system and the two reservoirs.
In real systems, this variable could be modied to encode bad connections
between reservoirs and the 1D quantum system.
The choice of fundamentally alters the nature of the model, with the
1D quantum system acting as a conductor or exhibiting semi-conductor
like behaviors depending on the choice of . We explore both situations.
Finally, note that the voltage applied in the experiments described in
[32] is of the order of one tenth of volts. For instance, for 0 :1 V applied on
the 1D quantum system, we are still in the linear response regime without
any telegraph noise, see [32, Fig. 1]. Naively, this looks coherent with the
energy scale used here, which is of the order of tenth of electronvolts.
10(a) Current in the conductor ( =
0:01)
(b) Current in the semiconductor
(= 0:125)
Figure 2: Evolution of the current for dierent lengths of the charge-carrier
reservoirs for 2 f0:1;0:2gand a variety of dierent reservoir lengths
showing the nite duration of the stationary regime and subsequent current
collapse.
4 Methods
Using the quasi-free property of the model one can calculate the evolution
of the expectation value of the current density. For quasi-free equilibrium
states and dynamics, the phase space can be reduced from the Fock space,
which is of dimension 22(2L+1), to a one-particle phase space of dimension
2(2L+ 1). This is achieved by replacing the Hamiltonian with an equiva-
lent one-particle Hamiltonian which denes dynamics on the one-particle
Hilbert space hL(11). This allows for an ecient computation of quantities
(20) and (21). See Supplementary Material, section 8, for more details.
The model was written in Python and is largely built with the NumPy
package. The code is well-suited for calculating higher-order powers of
observables (in this case, the current observable) which are needed to in-
vestigate the statistical properties of these observables. The limitation
here is increasing computational complexity (see for instance Supplemen-
tary material section 8.6) which could rapidly become a problem with the
extension of this method to higher dimensions. However, this approach
is well-adapted to nanometric quantum systems as found, for example, in
biological systems. The calculations of charge transport were performed
on a MacBook Pro with a 2,4 GHz Quad-Core Intel Core i5-processor.
5 Results
The nature of the model is altered by hopping terms in (6) between both
bands, the strength of which is the parameter . For= 0, orclose to 0
the system behaves as a 1D-conductor. The expectation value (20) of the
current is directly proportional to the applied voltage until it saturates, by
reaching a maximum value. As increases the model starts to exhibit semi-
conductor like behavior, with low current until a threshold value of voltage
at which the conducting band begins to exhibit partially lled charge-
carrier states. After the threshold voltage, the current (20) increases in an
approximately linear manner until it saturates.
11(a) Occupation number evolution for
the conductor case ( = 0:01) during
stationary regime.
(b) Occupation number evolution for
the conductor case ( = 0:01) after
current collapse.
Figure 3: Occupation number evolution for the conductor case ( = 0:01)
during stationary regime (a) and after current collapse (b). Larger times
are encoded via bolder blue/orange lines. The dashed lines represent the
values for the limit state, i.e., the Gibbs state when the full system is in
presence of an electric potential = 0:1.
5.1 Reservoirs and Finite Size Eects
Numerical simulations were performed for numerous dierent parameters.
For a given set of parameters, we calculate the mean current by disregarding
transients and specically averaging the current over the course of 0 :1 ps in
thesteady regime , i.e., in the time interval in which the current change is
negligible. For practical purposes, we say the current change is negligible
when it deviates by less than 10 3Aover 0:1 ps. See Fig. 1(b). In
practice, the steady regime exists for a nite interval of times depending on
the sizes of the reservoirs, which are directly tuned by the parameter L2N.
This can be seen in Fig. 2, where the length of the steady regime always
increases with respect to Land would be stationary for all suciently
large times in the limit L!1 . We do not provide here a mathematical
proof of this conjecture, but this feature was present in all our numerical
computations.
In fact, our numerical computations inevitably induce nite size eects.
This can be well understood via the depletion of charge carriers in the nite
reservoirs, which yield a current collapsing as seen in Fig. 2 for nite L
and suciently large times. This depletion is explicitly demonstrated in
Fig 3 which gives the fermionic occupation number
E
()
t 
a
x;1ax;1
:=
()
t 
a
x;1ax;1
(22)
at timet0 in each lattice site x2f L;:::;Lgin the band 1. One
can observe that the depletion of the occupation number is directly cor-
related to the collapsing of the current, as expected with a naive classical
viewpoint.
5.2 Emergence of Semi-Conductors
Although the experiments performed in [32] show that a set of protein-
ligand complexes display Ohm-like conductivity (i.e. possibly via the for-
mation of new molecular bonds that give rise to delocalized electronic states
akin to conductors) we also predict formation of semi-conductor type char-
acteristics. Although this has not been experimentally observed so far,
12(a) Mean current in the stationary
regime for= 0:01.
(b) Behavior of variance with respect
tofor= 0:01.
(c) Mean current in the stationary
regime for= 0:05.
(d) Behavior of variance with respect
tofor= 0:05.
(e) Mean current in the stationary
regime for= 0:125.
(f) Behavior of variance with respect
tofor= 0:125.
Figure 4: Ohm's law for the 1D-Conductor: As is increased the range
of values of the voltage for which the induced current varies linearly with
respect to voltage decreases. As increases further the 1D quantum sys-
tem begins to exhibit semi-conductor like behavior, with high-resisitivty at
lower voltages and a transition to conductor like Behavior at a threshold
voltage.
13our model predicts the existence of protein-ligand complexes with such a
behavior, as anticipated for this kind of model. This is achieved by rst
noticing that the two bands in the model are linked with each other via
the terms
  
a
x;0ax;1+a
x;1ax;0
; 0; x2f l;:::;lg;
for all lattice sites inside the system of lattice number 2 l(corresponding
to a 1D quantum system of length 2 la,abeing the lattice spacing in nm),
see (6). The parameter allows us to control the nature of the conductor.
For= 0, the two bands are disconnected and the system behaves as a
regular conductor. In particular, the current increases linearly with voltage
for suciently small electric potentials. This behavior is seen for 1
and the same behavior holds true for small 6= 0, see, e.g., Fig. 4(a). All
these phenomena are of course expected and can in fact be mathematically
showed in great generality, see, e.g., [7, 6], even in the limit of innitely
largeLl1.
For6= 0 the linear relationship between current and voltage progres-
sively disappears as the average resistivity increases at lower voltages. The
origin of this behavior can be studied by looking at the occupation numbers
of the dierent lattice sites for the limit Gibbs state at dierent values of
, see Figure 5. For non-zero gamma as increases the occupation num-
bers for the limit Gibbs state in the non-conducting band also increase.
As this insulating band becomes saturated at the x= l;llattice-sites,
the 1D quantum system once again starts to act as a conductor. For su-
ciently strong , this phenomenon starts to be visible in terms of the charge
transport within the (conducting) band 1:
In Figure 5(b), we anticipate a change of current response at a satura-
tion voltage of approximately 0 :15V, which is precisely the case, as shown
in 4. In fact, at 0:1 the system starts to exhibit this semi conductor-like
behavior, see Figures 4(c) and 4(e). This behavior is concomitant with the
current uctuations given in Figs. 4(b){4(f): The high electric resistance
for small voltages is associated with an increase of the current uctuations
until some saturation regime (corresponding to the voltage threshold) from
which the uctuations decrease again, as in the conductor case. Note that
the current uctuations once again increase in any case for suciently large
voltage beyond the linear (resp. piece wise linear) regime in the conductor
(resp. semi-conductor) case.
To complement this discussion, Figs. 6 shows the dierence between
the semiconductor ( = 0:125) and conducting cases ( = 0:01) in terms of
time-dependent occupation numbers, at a xed = 0:1. In this last case,
the second band inside the 1D-quantum system is slightly time dependent,
in contrast with the trivial case = 0. But, the eects of the band 0 on
currents are negligible while they signicantly alter the transport properties
at= 0:125, as explained above. The saturation phenomenon leading to
the semi-conductor like behavior can also be seen by comparing Figs. 6(a),
6(c), 6(e) for = 0:125 and= 0:1 with Fig. 7c for the same but at
= 0:2, keeping in mind Fig 4(e).
5.3 Dependence on the Length of the System
In 2012, the accuracy of the macroscopic laws of charge transport have
been shown for nanowires (of a few nanometers scale) of Si doped with
phosphorus atoms, even at very low temperature (4.2 K) [1]. This implies
14(a) Conducting Band: Occupation
numbers for the conducting band
(band 1) for the limit (Gibbs) state
for dierent values of .
(b) Conducting Band: The size of
the occupation number peak in at
the edge of the protein (i.e. the site
x=l) as a function of in band 1 of
the 1D quantum system.
(c) Insulating Band: Occupation
numbers for the insulating band b=
0 for the limit (Gibbs) state for dif-
ferent values of .
(d) Insulating Band: The size of the
occupation number peak in at the
edge of the protein as a function of
.
(e) Insulating Band: Occupation
numbers for the insulating band
(band 0) after reaching the steady
state regime for dierent values of ,
with initial state equal to the equilib-
rium (Gibbs) state of the 1D quan-
tum system with no voltage applied.
(f) Conducting Band: Occupation
numbers for the conducting band
(b= 1) after reaching the steady
state regime for dierent values of
, with the initial state equal to the
equilibrium (Gibbs) state of the 1D
quantum system with no voltage ap-
plied.
Figure 5: Plots of the fermionic occupation numbers for the semiconductor
(= 0:125). At lower voltages the second band has an eect on the current.
As the voltage increases the fermionic density in the insulting band starts
to saturate at 0:15, at which point the conducting Behavior dominates.
15(a) Full system - Conducting band -
semi conductor ( = 0:125).
(b) Full system - Conducting band
(band 1) - conductor ( = 0:01).
(c) 1D quantum system - band 1 -
semi conductor ( = 0:125).
(d) 1D quantum system - band 1 -
conductor ( = 0:01).
(e) 1D quantum system - band 0 -
semi conductor ( = 0:125).
(f) 1D quantum system - band 0 -
conductor ( = 0:01).
Figure 6: Fermionic occupation number at = 0:1 as a function of the
lattice sites for several times. Larger times are encoded via bolder blue
lines. The dashed lines represent the values for the expected limit Gibbs
state, when the full system is in presence of an electric potential. The 1D
quantum system lies between the sites  5 and 5.
16(a) Full system - Con-
ducting band (band 1)
- semi conductor ( =
0:125).
(b) 1D quantum system -
band 1 - semi conductor
(= 0:125).
(c) 1D quantum system -
band 0 - semi conductor
(= 0:125).
Figure 7: Fermionic occupation number at = 0:2 as a function of the
lattice sites for several times. Larger times are encoded via bolder blue
lines. The dashed lines represent the values the expected limit Gibbs state,
when the full system is in presence of an electric potential. The 1D quantum
system lies between the sites  5 and 5.
(a)= 0:01;= 0:1 
R2= 0:9830
(b)= 0:125;= 0:1 
R2= 0:9998
Figure 8: Exponential ts for the conducting (a) and semi-conducting (b)
1D quantum systems.
that quantum eects can vanish extremely rapidly with respect to growing
space scales.
From a mathematical perspective, the expectation of microscopic cur-
rent densities with respect to growing space scales converges, as proven
in [16, 6]. Furthermore, quantum uncertainty of microscopic electric cur-
rent densities around their (classical) macroscopic value decays exponen-
tially fast with respect to the volume of the region of the lattice where
an external electric eld is applied. This was specically shown for non-
interacting lattice fermions with disorder (one-band, any dimension) [25,
17].
Our model does not have any random external potential, but two bands
inside the system of length 2 l, which corresponds in our unit to
2la= 2l3A;
see Section 3.3. Therefore, we analyze how fast the convergence of the
current density converges to a xed value.
In Fig. 8, we conrm the exponential convergence of the current density
to a xed value as conjectured from [25, 17]. In particular, in these nu-
merical experiments, 2 nm is already a large quantum object in the sense
that the limit point is already reached. Note, nally, that the semicon-
ductor and conductor cases have the same behavior with respect to such
convergences.
175.4 Dependence on Temperature
The energy scale used here are of the order of tenth of volts electronvolts.
This is coherent with the voltage applied in the experiments described in
[32]. In this energy scale, a room temperature, i.e., T 300 K, corre-
sponding to an inverse temperature := (kBT) 138:7 eV 1, already
refers to a very low temperature regime. Consequently, the transport prop-
erties of the system are basically independent of temperatures below room
temperatures.
On the one hand, this is coherent with observations done in [18] on
charge transport in some 1D quantum system. On the other hand, the
energy scale used here may be inaccurate in many situations. We therefore
explain the behavior of the model in the high temperature regime, which
basically refers to 1, even if it corresponds to nonphysical tempera-
tures (T11604 K) in our energy scale. This is performed in Fig. 9,
showing an expected decrease of currents (equivalently an increase of the
electric resistance) as the temperature increases. This is true for all regimes
(conductor and semi-conductor). In the same way, the variance increases
with the temperature, since thermal uctuations are of course added to the
purely quantum ones. See Fig. 9.
In contrast with the case = 0 with no insulating band 0, the two-band
system has very interesting behavior for small temperatures: The current
uctuations are basically increasing, as naively anticipated, except in the
semi-conductor regime for small temperatures. See Fig. 10. Remarkably,
the current reaches a maximum value for some non-zero temperature before
decreasing to zero in the limit !0. See again Figs. 9 and 10. It means
in this case that the rst excited state of the model interestingly favors
the existence of currents, as compared with the ground states. It seems
that this occurs for all 6= 0 and this eect increases with to the point
that even the current variance starts to become non-monotone. This is a
non-trivial information on the spectral properties of the model.
6 Conclusion
A rst modelling attempt, based on many-body (fermionic) quantum sta-
tistical principles, is given to explain how Ohm's law emerges in long-
range charge transport within protein-ligand complexes, the conductances
of which have been measured in aqueous solutions and via STM and Pd
substrate [32]. To this end, we build upon the mathematically rigorous
framework (explored by one of the authors and collaborators), which pro-
vides proof for the convergence of the expectations of microscopic current
densities and also crucially explains how the microscopic (quantum) eects
on charge transport vanishes with respect to growing space scales [6, 16].
This is coherent with [17, 25] showing the exponentially fast (with respect
to growing scales) disappearance of quantum eects on electric currents
for non-interacting lattice fermions with disorder (one-band, any dimen-
sion) [17, 25].
This leads us to propose for the protein-ligand complexes a simple
quasi-free two band lattice model described via the second quantization
formalism, where the non-conducting band attempts to capture the possi-
bility that fermions may become trapped (via a hopping term, similar to
a classic semi-conductor). Noteworthy, the model does not consider aque-
ous environment (natural to proteins) since the experiments we seek to
18(a) Conductor ( = 0:01): Relation-
ship between current and tempera-
ture at= 0:1.
(b) Conductor ( = 0:01): Relation-
ship between Quantum Fluctuations
and temperature at = 0:1.
(c) Between the conducting and semi-
conducting regimes: ( = 0:05): Re-
lationship between current and tem-
perature at = 0:1.
(d) Between the conducting and
semiconducting regimes ( = 0:05):
Relationship between Quantum Fluc-
tuations and temperature at = 0:1.
(e) Semiconductor ( = 0:125): Re-
lationship between current and tem-
perature at = 0:1.
(f) Semiconductor ( = 0:125): Re-
lationship between Quantum Fluctu-
ations and temperature at = 0:1.
Figure 9: Temperature dependence for the 1D quantum system in the con-
ducting regime. The dashed line is the asymptotic for innite temperature,
corresponding to computations at = 0.
19(a) Conductor ( = 0:01): Relation-
ship between temperature of the 1D
quantum system and current gener-
ated at= 0:1.
(b) Conductor ( = 0:01) Relation-
ship between temperature of the 1D
quantum system and the quantum
uctuations of the current at = 0:1.
(c) Between the conducting and semi-
conducting regimes ( = 0:05): Rela-
tionship between temperature of the
1D quantum system and current gen-
erated at= 0:1.
(d) Between the conducting and
semiconducting regimes ( = 0:05):
Relationship between temperature of
the 1D quantum system and current
generated at = 0:1.
(e) Semiconductor ( = 0:125): Rela-
tionship between temperature of the
1D quantum system and current gen-
erated at= 0:1.
(f) Semiconductor ( = 0:125): Rela-
tionship between temperature of the
1D quantum system and the quan-
tum uctuations of the current at
= 0:1.
Figure 10: Temperature dependence for the properties of 1D quantum
system in the conducting and semiconducting regimes.
20explain were undertaken in an electrical potential region where ion current
ows are not expected (i.e. no charge transfer is anticipated) [32]. By
xing physiological parameter sets (although not all microscopic parame-
ters are available due to the novelty of these experiments) we then study
the charge transport of our nanometric quantum protein-ligand system in
a mathematically rigorous way, without approximations (up to numerical
precision) or a priori assumptions. The behavior of charge transport given
here is therefore perfectly reliable, without any possible discussion up to
the original denition of the model. Ultimately, we show how charge trans-
port in a protein-ligand complex (modelled as a two-band lattice quantum
system) leads to the emergence of Ohm-like law, therefore providing a ten-
tative explanation for the experiments in [32]. We also show that there is
exponentially fast convergence of the expectations of microscopic current
densities. This should be related to the existence of non-vanishing current
variance of linear response currents, consistent with previous studies under
natural conditions on the (random) disorder [17, 25]). We expect that this
is also true also for several-band models.
Admittedly however, the model's voltage-current curve exhibits a dis-
crepancy of several orders of magnitude when compared to that of the
experiment. Specically, the voltage applied in the experiments described
in [32] is of the order of tenth of volts and the systems remains in the
linear response regime. If this is correct, then the energy scales of the
model should be of the same order. This yields a quantitative discrepancy
since the rigorously computed currents are of the order of A (see Figs.
4(a){4(f)), whereas the measured currents in [32] are of the order of 10 1
nA, 104times smaller. This issue cannot be a priori solved by reducing
the hopping strength #0 between the reservoirs and the band 1 of the
1D quantum object (1D quantum system). Preliminary numerical com-
putations show that the value of #has to be extremely small to reduced
the current by 4 orders of magnitude, at the cost of almost isolating the
1D quantum system from the reservoirs and destroying the main transport
properties described here.
Since there is no approximations or a priori assumptions on the model,
there is probably an issue related to all the energy scales, meaning that
the voltage seen by the protein/peptide is far less than tenth of volts.
On the other hand, lower energy scales change the meaning of the low
temperature regime, which may be in contradiction with previous results
[18]. See discussions in Section 5.4.
Several reasons could be behind this discrepancy, to list a few:
1. This may indicate that there is underlying biophysical phenomenon
that the present model does not capture, which we will investigate in
future works;
2. This could be related to the aqueous environment surrounding the
peptide/protein-ligand complexes enabling charge transfer, although
the original experiments claim otherwise [32];
3. While we did investigate a range of parameter regions, there is still
the possibility that some parameters could be far o.
Nevertheless, our framework provides a novel approach to study rig-
orously charge transport (under quantum and thermal uctuations) and
to understand the breakdown of the classical (macroscopic) conductivity
21theory at microscopic scales. The theory can be applied to both biologi-
cal transport and other physical systems and in this sense it is a unifying
approach. In particular, the theory allows us to explain the emergence
of electronic states that are delocalized within a protein/peptide or physi-
cal systems. Hence we provide predictions for both conducting and semi-
conducting like properties, although semi-conductor type characteristics
has not yet been observed since only six protein-ligand complexes have
been tested so far [32]. Nevertheless, these predictions could be tested in
future experiments. The basic nature of the model allows it to be read-
ily adjusted to explore a variety of dierent phenomena. For instance, an
external potential such as
lX
x= lv(x)a
x;1ax;1;
withv(x)2[ 1;1] being some (i.i.d.) random variables (cf. the Ander-
son model), could have been considered without breaking the quasi-free
property of the model. This term can be used to verify and study the
linear dependence of the resistivity with respect to the length lof the 1D
quantum system (another version of Ohm's law). Note indeed that this
property on the resistivity does not hold true for our two-band model (like
for the one-band one, i.e., for = 0), since the current does not seem to
vanish in the limit of innite l(Fig. 8) while it is expected [25, 17] to be
equal to the macroscopic one at relatively small lengths l.
In the immediate future we will investigate the discrepancy of the model
(as explained above) and we will study the emergence of the telegraph noise
as observed in the protein-ligand complex experiments (see [32, Fig. S7]).
Presently, as far as we know, there is no theory based from rst princi-
ples of Quantum mechanics to explain telegraph noise. Current theories
are mainly phenomenological, modelled via a (Markovian continuous-time)
stochastic process that jumps discontinuously between two distinct values,
as it is shown for currents in [32, Fig. S7]. The telegraph noise is in partic-
ular characterised by a bimodal distribution of currents. Since this can be
characterised via some statistical methods involving higher moments (like
the kurtosis and skewness) besides the variance, our approach can be used
to understand the appearance of the telegraph noise via a purely quantum
microscopic theory.
In the future, it will be interesting to develop theories to explain long-
range (micrometer-scale) conduction through peptides/proteins and through
supramolecular structures, such as coiled-coils, -sheets,-helices, colla-
gen, or elastin mimics etc. This is important because the molecular and
organic electronics community are currently developing systems that merge
conjugated molecules with amino acids, which form electronically delocal-
ized supramolecular structures that facilitate long-range charge transport.
Thus a theory that supports this will be fundamentally interesting and
potentially signicant for the development of bioelectronic materials. The
limiting factor of our proposed framework is the rapid increase in compu-
tational complexity for systems with higher dimensions.
Finally, our code is freely accessible at:
https://github.com/RoisinMary/quasifree chargetransport.git and can read-
ily run in a standard computer (e.g. we run it on a MacBook Pro with a
2,4 GHz Quad-Core Intel Core i5-processor).
227 Acknowledgment
J.-B. Bru is supported by the Basque Government through the grant SR,
JBB and RB acknowledge support from Ikerbasque (The Basque Founda-
tion for Science), and the Basque Government through the BERC 2022-
2025 program and by the Ministry of Science and Innovation: BCAM
Severo Ochoa accreditation CEX2021-001142-S / MICIN / AEI / 10.13039/501100011033.
SR further acknowledges of the RTI2018-093860-B-C21 funded by (AEI/FEDER,
UE) and acronym \MathNEURO". JBB meanwhile acknowledges of the
grant PID2020-112948GB-I00 funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033
and by "ERDF A way of making Europe", as well as the COST Action
CA18232 nanced by the European Cooperation in Science and Technol-
ogy (COST). JUA aknowledges support from the Spanish Government,
grants PID2020-117281GB-I00 and PID2019-107444GA-I00, partly from
European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), and the Basque Govern-
ment, grant IT1483-22.
8 Appendix
The quasi-free nature of the model allows a signicant reduction of the
dimension for the numerical calculation. In this appendix we shortly recall
the necessary theory for the convenience of the reader.
8.1 The One-particle Picture
We use the algebraic formulation of quantum many-body problems, which
is, from a conceptual point of view, the natural one, as the underlying
physical system is many-body. Moreover, it has some advantageous tech-
nical aspects, both specic (like the possibility of using Bogoliubov-type
inequalities in important estimates) and general ones (like the very power-
ful theory of KMS states). However, in the present paper we only deal with
non-interacting fermions and in this specic example, one can equivalently
use the one-particle picture, as explained in detail in [25, Section C.3].
For instance, the Hamiltonian dened on the fermionic Fock space F(2)
is the second quantization of the following one-particle Hamiltonian acting
on the one-particle Hilbert space h(1): Let  be the usual 1D-discrete
Laplacian dened on `2(Z) by
[(')](x) := 2'(x) +X
z2Z;jzj=1'(x+z); x2Z; '2`2(Z):(23)
We consider a conducting band b= 1 and an insulating band b= 0 as well
as spinless fermions. Thus, the one-particle Hilbert space h(1) is in this
case equal to
h:=`2(Zf0;1g)`2(Z)`2(Z):
In particular, if '= ('0;'1)2hthen'0corresponds to the insulating
bandb= 0, while '1refers to the conducting band b= 1. For any set
Z, we dene the orthogonal projection Pfrom`2(Z) to`2(). For
anyn2N, let n:=f n;:::;ngand xL;l2NwithL>l .
Then, the Hamiltonians
Hp:=Hp;1+Hp;02B(F); H r p2B(F) and Hr2B(F)
23are the second quantization of the one-particle Hamiltonians
hp:=Pl0
0Pl p;01 1
 1 p p;11Pl0
0Pl
hr p:=0 0
0Pf l 1; l;l;l+1g0 0
0 2#1 #0 0
0Pf l 1; l;l;l+1g
hr:=0 0
0PLnl0 0
0 r r10 0
0PLnl
;
respectively. All other quantities dened in Section 3, including current ob-
servables (see [25, Section C.3]), can be written as the \second quantized"
version of one-particle objects, like the velocity operator in the case of cur-
rents. This is possible because all our quantities are related to operators
that are quadratic in the elds.
8.2 CAR C{Algebras
In the algebraic formulation of fermion systems, the CAR C{algebra as-
sociated with a Hilbert space H, denoted by CAR ( H), is theC{algebra
generated by a unit 1and a familyfa(')g'2Hof elements satisfying Con-
ditions (a){(b):
(a) The map '7!a(')is (complex) linear.
(b) The familyfa(')g'2Hsatises the Canonical Anticommutation Rela-
tions (CAR): For all '1;'22H,
a('1)a('2) +a('2)a('1) = 0; a('1)a('2)+a('2)a('1) =h'1;'2ih1:
(24)
IfHis nite dimensional then it is well-known that CAR ( H) is{isomorphic
to theC{algebraB(F(H)) of all bounded linear operators acting on the
fermionic Fock space F(H) constructed from H. In particular,
CAR ( hL)B(FL)(CAR ( h); L2N; (25)
see (10){(11). Note that CAR ( H)(B(F(H)) for innite-dimension
Hilbert spacesH, making the algebraic approach more general. In par-
ticular, CAR ( h)(B(F). See, e.g., [15] for more details.
Note that the creation and annihilation operators fax;b;a
x;bg(x;b)2Zf0;1g
in the denitions of Hamiltonians in Section 3 correspond to
ax;b:=a(ex;b) and a
x;b:=a(ex;b)(26)
for each lattice site x2Zand bandb2 f0;1g, wherefexgx2Zis the
canonical orthonormal basis of h:=`2(Zf0;1g) dened by ex;b(y;c) :=
x;yb;cfor allx;y2Zandb;c2f0;1g.
8.3 Quasi-Free States
Gauge-invariant quasi-free states on a CAR C{algebra CAR (H) are pos-
itive and normalized linear functionals 2CAR (H)such that, for all
N1;N22Nand'1;:::;'N1+N22H,
(a('1)a('N1)a('N1+N2)a('N1+1)) = 0 (27)
ifN16=N2, while in the case N1=N2N,
(a('1)a('N)a('2N)a('N+1)) = det [(a('k)a('N+l))]N
k;l=1:
(28)
24See, e.g., [2, Denition 3.1], which refers to a more general notion of quasi-
free states. The gauge-invariant property corresponds to (27), whereas [2,
Denition 3.1, Condition (3.1)] only imposes the quasi-free state to be even,
which is a strictly weaker property than being gauge-invariant.
Quasi-free states are therefore particular states that are uniquely xed
by two-point correlation functions. In fact, a quasi-free state is uniquely
dened by its so-called one-particle density matrix D 2B(H) of the state
, which is dened through the conditions
h'1;D'2iH=(a('2)a('1)); ' 1;'22H: (29)
Note that D satises 0D1H.
Since the full Hamiltonian HL2CAR ( hL)B(FL) (see (9) and (25))
is the second quantization of an explicit one-particle Hamiltonian
hL:=hp+hr+hr p
acting on the one-particle Hilbert space hL(11), one proves that the Gibbs
state (12) is a quasi-free state with one-particle density matrix equal to
D= (1 + ehL) 12B(hL) (30)
at xed inverse temperature  >0. See, e.g., [24, Section 2.3]. In particu-
lar, all correlation functions of the many-fermion system can be numerically
computed within the one-particle Hilbert space hL, thanks to (27){(28) and
(30).
8.4 Quasi-Free Dynamics
In the algebraic formulation of quantum mechanics (cf. the Heisenberg
picture), dynamics occur in a CAR C{algebra, CAR (H) via a strongly
continuous group ( t)t2Rof{automorphisms of CAR ( H). A quasi-free
dynamical system associated with a one-particle Hamiltonian hacting on
His a strongly continuous group ( t)t2Rof{automorphisms of CAR ( H)
uniquely dened by the conditions
t(a(')) =a 
eith'
; '2H:
The time evolution of a state is given by ( t)t2Rin the Schr odinger
picture of quantum mechanics. If the dynamics ( t)t2Rand the state are
both quasi-free then, for all times t2R,tis a quasi-free state with
one-particle density matrix equal to
Dt= e ithDeith2B(H):
In other words, D tis the solution to the Liouville equation in the one-
particle Hilbert space H.
Dene now the Hamiltonian hL() by
hL() :=hL+e
for2Rand natural numbers L>l , whereeis the operator dened, for
any'2hand (x;b)2Zf0;1g, by
[e(')] (x;b) := 1[ Lxl 1]'(x;b)
+x
l1[ lxl]'(x;b)
+1[l+ 1xL]'(x;b);
251[S] being the characteristic function of a set S. The Hamiltonian hL()
can again be seen as an operator acting on the one-particle Hilbert space
hL(11). In the present paper, the dynamics ( ()
t)t2Ris dened by (14) on
either CAR ( h)(B(F) or CAR ( hL)B(FL) for natural numbers L>l .
Since the full Hamiltonian HL()2B(FL) (see (13)) with electric poten-
tials is the second quantization of hL(), one proves that the dynamics
(14) is quasi-free:
()
t(a(')) := eit~ 1HL()a(')e it~ 1HL()=a
eithL()'
; '2hL:
(31)
See, e.g., [24, Section 2.3]. In particular, the Gibbs state (12) evolves in
the Schr odinger picture within the set of quasi-free states and all physical
quantities can be deduced from one-particle considerations. In this paper,
we take advantage of this fact to signicantly reduce the complexity of the
calculations.
8.5 Example of Current Densities
Recall that elementary current observables are dened by (18), that is,
I(b)
(x;y):=i~ 1 
a
x;1ay;b a
y;bax;1
(32)
for natural numbers L > l ,x;y2f L;:::;Lgandb2f0;1g. Therefore,
by using (26) and (29){(31), we can compute its expectation in the Gibbs
stateat timet2Ras follows:
(()
t(I(b)
(x;y))) = 2~ 1=mn
()
t(a
y;bax;1)o
= 2~ 1=mn

a(eithL()ey;b)a(eithL()ex;1)o
=D
ex;1;e ithL()(1 + ehL) 1eithL()ey;bE
H(33)
for natural numbers L>l ,x;y2f L;:::;Lg,b2f0;1gand2R. Using
this formula and an explicit formulation of the one-particle Hamiltonian
hL(), we compute the expectation (20) of the current density observable
J(t;) dened by (19).
In order to calculate the variance
Var(J(t;)) =
J(t;)2
 (J(t;))2(34)
of this current, we additionally use Equation (28) in the following case:
 
a
x;1ay;1a
u;1av;1
= 
a
x;1ay;1
 
a
u;1av;1
+ 
ay;1a
u;1
 
a
x;1av;1
;
(35)
for anyx;y;u;v2Z, because the Gibbs state is quasi-free.
8.6 Discussion of the Implementation
Here computations were performed to nd the variance but the code can
easily be extended to compute higher moments which could be instrumental
in identifying, for example, a bi-modal distribution which is characteristic
of telegraph noise. Code automatically implementing the simplifying CAR
relations signicantly reduces the diculty of computing higher-order mo-
ments. However, because of the increasing number of linear operations
needed such calculations can become expensive for Llarge (see Fig. 11).
26Figure 11: A plot of computation times versus 2( L+1), the number of sites
in a system. The computation time grows exponentially with increasing L.
References
[1] B. Weber et al. \Ohm's Law Survives to the Atomic Scale". In: Sci-
ence 335.6064 (2012), pp. 64{67.
[2] H. Araki. \On Quasifree States of CAR and Bogoliubov Automor-
phisms". In: Publ. RIMS, Kyoto Univ. 13 (1971), pp. 385{442.
[3] P Becker and G Mana. \The Lattice Parameter of Silicon: A Survey".
In:Metrologia 31 (1994), pp. 203{209.
[4] David N. Beratan et al. \Charge Transfer in Dynamical Biosystems,
or The Treachery of (Static) Images". In: Accounts of Chemical Re-
search 48.2 (2015), pp. 474{481.
[5] Jochen Blumberger. \Recent Advances in the Theory and Molecular
Simulation of Biological Electron Transfer Reactions". In: Chemical
Reviews 115.20 (2015), pp. 11191{11238.
[6] J.-B. Bru and W. de Siqueira Pedra. \From the 2nd Law of Thermo-
dynamics to the AC-Conductivity Measure of Interacting Fermions
in Disordered Media". In: Math. Models Methods Appl. Sci. 24.14
(2015), pp. 2587{2632.
[7] J.-B. Bru and W. de Siqueira Pedra. \Microscopic Conductivity of
Lattice Fermions at Equilibrium { Part II: Interacting Particles". In:
Lett. Math. Phys. 106.1 (2016), pp. 81{107.
[8] J. H. Burroughes et al. \Light-emitting diodes based on conjugated
polymers". In: Nature 347.6293 (1990), pp. 539{541.
[9] Mark Elbing et al. \A single-molecule diode". In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 102.25 (2005), pp. 8815{8820.
[10] D. K. Ferry. \Ohm's Law in a Quantum World". In: Science 335.6064
(2012), pp. 45{46.
[11] R.E. Gleason. \How far will circuits shrink?" In: Science Spectra 20
(2000), p. 32.
[12] C Groves. \Simulating charge transport in organic semiconductors
and devices: a review". In: 80.2 (2016), p. 026502. doi:10.1088/
1361- 6633/80/2/026502 .url:http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/
1361-6633/80/2/026502 .
27[13] N. S Hush. \Adiabatic Rate Processes at Electrodes. I. Energy-Charge
Relationships". In: J. Chem. Phys. 28 (1958), pp. 962{972.
[14] Nicole L. Ing, Mohamed Y. El-Naggar, and Allon I. Hochbaum. \Go-
ing the Distance: Long-Range Conductivity in Protein and Peptide
Bioelectronic Materials". In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry B
122.46 (2018), pp. 10403{10423.
[15] W. de Siqueira Pedra J.-B. Bru. \Lieb-Robinson Bounds for Multi-
Commutators and Applications to Response Theory". In: Springer-
Briefs in Mathematical Physics 13 (2017).
[16] W. de Siqueira Pedra J.-B. Bru and C. Hertling. \AC-Conductivity
Measure from Heat Production of Free Fermions in Disordered Me-
dia". In: Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. 220.2 (2016), pp. 445{504.
[17] W. de Siqueira Pedra J.-B. Bru and A. Ratsimanetrimanana. \Quan-
tum Fluctuations and Large Deviation Principle for Microscopic Cur-
rents of Free Fermions in Disordered Media". In: Pure and Applied
Analysis 2.4 (2020), pp. 943{971.
[18] W. de Siqueira Pedra J.-B. Bru and A. Ratsimanetrimanana. \Solid-
State Electron Transport via the Protein Azurin is Temperature-
Independent Down to 4 K". In: J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 11 (2020),
pp. 144{151.
[19] D. de Leeuw. \Plastic Electronics". In: Physics World (1999), p. 31.
[20] Dalton LR et al. \Theory-inspired nano-engineering of photonic and
electronic materials: Noncentro symmetric charge-transfer electro-
optic materials". In: 51.10 (2007), pp. 1263{1277. doi:10.1016/
j.sse.2007.06.022 .url:https://www.cheric.org/research/
tech/periodicals/view.php?seq=699684 .
[21] M.G.Kanatzidis. \Conductive Polymers". In: Chem. Eng. News 3
(1990), p. 36.
[22] R. A. Marcus. \Electrostatic Free Energy and Other Properties of
States Having Nonequilibrium Polarization. I". In: J. Chem. Phys.
24.5 (1956), pp. 979{989.
[23] R. A. Marcus. \On the Theory of Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
Involving Electron Transfer. I". In: Journal of Chemical Physics, 24.5
(1956), pp. 966{978.
[24] W. de Siqueira Pedra N. J. B. Aza J.-B. Bru and L. C. P. A. M.
M ussnich. \Large Deviations in Weakly Interacting Fermions - Gen-
erating Functions as Gaussian Berezin Integrals and Bounds on Large
Pfaans". In: Rev. Math. Phys. 34.1 (2022), p. 2150034.
[25] W. de Siqueira Pedra N. J. B. Aza J.-B. Bru and A. Ratsimanet-
rimanana. \Accuracy of Classical Conductivity Theory at Atomic
Scales for Free Fermions in Disordered Media". In: J. Math. Pures
Appl. 125 (2019), pp. 209{246.
[26] S-Y Sheu et al. \Charge transport in a polypeptide chain". In: The
European Physical Journal D-Atomic, Molecular, Optical and Plasma
Physics 20.3 (2002), pp. 557{563.
[27] Sheh-Yi Sheu, Edward W Schlag, and Dah-Yen Yang. \A model
for ultra-fast charge transport in membrane proteins". In: Physical
Chemistry Chemical Physics 17.35 (2015), pp. 23088{23094.
28[28] Hideki Shirakawa et al. \Synthesis of electrically conducting organic
polymers: halogen derivatives of polyacetylene, (CH)". In: J. Chem.
Soc., Chem. Commun. 16 (1977), pp. 578{580.
[29] Miriam del Valle et al. \Tuning the conductance of a molecular
switch". In: Nature Nanotechnology 2.3 (2007), pp. 176{179.
[30] R. Wesche. \Physical Properties of High-Temperature Superconduc-
tors". In: Wiley series in materials for electronic and optoelectronic
applications (2015).
[31] Shihai Yan et al. \Computational studies on electron and proton
transfer in phenol-imidazole-base triads". In: Journal of computa-
tional chemistry 31.2 (2010), pp. 393{402.
[32] Bintian Zhang et al. \Role of contacts in long-range protein conduc-
tance". In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116.13
(2019), pp. 5886{5891.
29