RECOMED : A Comprehensive Pharmaceutical  
Recommend ation  System  
 
Mariam Zomorodi1,*, Ismail Ghodsollahee2, Jennifer H. Martin3, Nicholas J. Talley3, Vahid 
Salari4, Pawel  Plawiak1,5, Kazem Rahimi6, U. Rajendra Acharya7 
1 Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Computer Science and Telecommunications, Cracow University of 
Technology, Krakow, Poland  
2 Department of Computer Engineering, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad , Iran  
3 NHMRC Centre for Research Excellence in Digesti ve Health, Hunter Medical Research Institute (HMRI), The 
University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia  
4 Institute for Quantum Science and Technology, Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.  
5 Institute of Theoretical and Applied Informatics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Gliwice, Poland  
6 Deep Medicine, Nuffield Department of Women’s and Reproductive Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom  
7 School of Mathematics, Physics and Computing, University of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba, QLD, Australia  
 
OBJECTIVES:  To build  dataset s containing useful information  from drug databases and 
recommend a list of drugs to physicians and patients with high accuracy by consider ing 
features  of a spectrum of people, diseases , and chemicals . 
METHODS:  A comprehensive pharmaceutical  recommend ation  system was designed 
based on the features of a spectrum of people, diseases , and medicines  extracted from two 
major drug databases, a dataset of patients and drug  information.  Then the recommendation 
was given , and the response was analysed  using  patient and caregiver ratings and the 
knowledge  obtained from drug  specifications  and interaction s. Sentiment analysis  was 
employed by natural language processing approaches in pre-processing , along with  neural 
network -based method s and recommender system algorithms  for modelling  the system. 
Patient  conditions and medicine features were used for making two mode ls based on matrix 
factorisation . Then we used drug interaction  criteria  to filter drugs with  severe  or mild  
interactions with other drugs.  We developed a deep learning model for recommending drugs by using data from 2304  
patients as a training set, and then we used data from 660 patients as our validation set. We 
used knowledge from critical drug information and combined the model’s outcome  into a 
knowledge -based system with the rules obtained from constraint s on taking medicine.  
RESULTS:  The results sho w that our recommendation system can recommend  an 
acceptable combinati on of medicine s according to the existing real-life prescriptions 
available . Compared with conventional matrix factorisation, our proposed model improves 
the accuracy, sensitivity, and hit rate by 26%, 34%, and 40%, respectively . In addition, i t 
improves the accuracy, sensitivity, and hit rate by an average of 31%, 29%, and 28%  
compared to  other machine learning methods . We have open -sourced our implementation 
in Python.  
CONCLUSION : Compared to  conventional machine learning approaches, we obtained 
average accuracy, sensitivity, and hit rat e of 31%, 29%, and 28% , respectively . Compared  
to conventional matrix factorisation , our proposed method improve d the accuracy, 
sensitivity, and hit rate by 26%, 34%, and 40%, respectively . However , it is acknowledged 
that this is not the same as clinical accuracy or sensitivity , and more accurate results can 
be obtained b y gathering larger datasets . 
 
Keywords:  recommend ation  system; drug recommend ation  system; drug information 
extraction; hybrid recommendation method  
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
Recommendation systems (RS) are knowledge extraction systems that use information retrieval 
approaches to help people make better decision s and discover items through a  complex information 
space  [1], [2]. They have been around for many years , and with the advancement in machine 
learning approaches, their use ha s been widened , and it helps people to make  more appropriate  
decisions in using different products . The popularity of using RS in different fields has increased 
since the announcement of the Netflix Prize competition that aimed to predict movie rates [ 3]. The recommender system application is  extensive:  from entertainment to e-commerce, the tourism 
industry , and medical recommender systems . Also, with rapid  progress in artificial intelligence, 
there has been a greater acceleration in the application of recommender systems and their 
development . 
The use of RS in medical science requires particular attention.  The medical recommendation h as 
some distinct features that make it special and must be used  carefully . And because it affect s 
people’s health , there are many concerns about  using RS for them . On the other hand , many people 
die every year because of medication errors. It has been reported as the world’s third leading cause 
of death in [4], according to an Iceland ic study. T his makes the use of intelligent systems in 
medical science valuable and necessary.  Drug prescription is  also vital for physicians  and involves 
considering different aspects , such as patient demographics, ethnicity, age, medication history , the 
specification of drugs for diseases related to the recommend ation in question, and the medicine  
effectiveness  for that specific case are among such concerns .  
There are as  many different medicines as 24000  [5] in just one database , however not all are for 
specific diseases or patients. Nevertheless a recommendation system  to perform a set of 
suggestions for a particular  patient with a specific disease might  help physicians  in considerations 
of prescribing the most appropriate medicines and also help patients to have a better choice in 
using drugs.  
Recommender systems can b e distinguished by the degree of risk  imposed when a user accepts a 
recommendation  [6]. In this regard,  the medical domain can be seen as high risk , primarily  due to  
the recommendation given to the user . 
On the other hand, while having a comprehensive drug recommender system is important, 
designing a n accurate  system requires a dataset of drugs with patient outcomes, patient ratings, 
reviews, and drug information . 
We gathered this information from two different and well-known data bases  Drugs.com  [5] and 
Druglib.com  [7], and we built t hree datasets wh ich train the system and construct  the final model.  
Finally, p utting all of them together, we  propose d a novel drug recommender system called  
RECOMED  that learns the patient , medication history and drug features and also user reviews for 
different drugs to recommend a new drug to a patient.   The novelty of this work  lies in the following parts :  
1- Propos e a pharmaceutical recommender system by considering the features of patients and 
medicines , including patients’ conditions,  age, gender, drug side effects , and drug 
categories . 
2- Perform ing pre-processing steps  on databases Druglib.com  and Drugs.com  websites to 
gather the appropriate data for our recommendation system, leading  to comprehensive 
dataset s for drug information.  
3- Our system considers sentiment analysis of reviews , the prescriptions of doctors,  and 
different  similarity measures for recommending a medicine  and its dose and other 
recommendations , including side  effects and warning s for their usage . 
4- Our system consists of a knowledge -based component to exclude drugs with serious side 
effects for a specific patient.  
5- We propose d a model to predict the likely efficiency of medicine s for patients.  
The next section introduces  the drug  recommender systems  and their challenges.  Then in Section 
3, we provide  the current  state-of-the-art recommender systems methods , specifically drug 
recommender systems . Section 4 elaborates on  our proposed comprehensive  drug recommender 
system  in detail . Section 5 provides the results of this work , plus a discussion about them.  Finally, 
in Section 6, we conclude the paper and present the future directions of this research.  
 
2. RECOMMENDER SYSTEMS IN MEDICAL SCIENCE  
One of the attractive and important applications of recommendation systems is medical 
recommendations and drug products.  While they usually use  the same recommendations  
Here are the major difference s between medical recommender systems and other recommender 
system s: 
- Medical recommender systems care more about the health  of patients  than to make a profit . 
- Security i s the primary goal in drug recommender systems.   
- Many existing recommender system techni ques cannot be used , and others  must be used 
cautiously  because of safety issues.  - In the long term, ti me is considered an important  factor  in recommending a drug . In many 
situations,  some drugs' negative effects are  discovered over time. One example  is 
zimeldine , with t he increased  risk of developing Guillain -Barre syndrome [18]. Rofecoxib, 
and Lumiracoxib  are two more examples . Rofecoxib was withdrawn from the market  about 
one year after marketing approval  because of concerns about the increased risk of heart 
attack and stroke caused by using  it in a long-term and high-dosage  [19]. Lumiracoxib was 
also withdrawn due to the concern that it may cause liver failure  [20]. So, a comprehensive 
medical recommender system should consider ratings in different time stamps  to accurately 
estimate side effects  discovered over time.  
In the drug recommender system , the domain is medicine , and the exact  content s to be 
recommended are one or more  of the following list s: 
1. A list of drugs  > 1. 
2. The dos e -  the amount of drug taken at one time . 
3. The f requency at which the drug doses are taken over time . 
4. Duration , which is how long the drug is taken . 
Number s 2 to 4 in the above list  are referred to as  the dosage . Therefore, we can define a drug 
recommender system  as a smart system  that is able to recommend  a list of drugs plus their dosage s 
with high accuracy in terms of a real prescription of a physician and also to have  a positive effect 
on a patient , which available data can partially verify . 
It should be  noted that , of course , there is no medicine recommender system that we can trust 
thoroughly , and like other artificial intelligence systems applied in healthcare , their use and ethical 
issues must be addressed appropriately [ 21], [22]. 
 
3. LITERATURE REVIEW  
Medical  recommender systems have been around for many years , even before  the emergence of  
recommender systems  as a new field in computer science . According to [ 23], medicine 
recommender systems fall in to two broad  categories named “ontology and rule -based 
approaches ” and “data mining and machine learning -based” approaches.  Ontology -based recommender systems use the hierarchical organization of users and items to improve the 
recommendation [ 24].  
Data mining and machine learning  algorithms in the medical field are used to predict and 
recommend thing s like drug usefulness, having a disease [ 25], [26], the condition of the user, or 
ratings  [27], [28]. For example , SVM, backpropagation neural network, and ID3 decision tree have 
been used in [ 29] for recommending drugs . The performance  of these approaches  has been 
compared  in th e above  work , and t he authors have shown that SVM has better accuracy and 
efficiency than the other algorithms. The ir data set contains patients’ age, sex, blood pressure, 
cholesterol, Na and K levels, and drug.  
Some other researche rs, while described as  medical or medicine recommender system s, consider 
a detection and classification task where the trained dataset  has some patient attributes , and based 
on that , the objective of the work is the detection or prediction of disease . Then  for each disease , 
a set of medici nes is recommended  [29]. 
Sentiment analysis of drug reviews is one of the basic approaches for drug recommendation s [30], 
[31], [32], [33], [34]. The sentiment analysis in these works mainly aims to recommend a drug or 
extract  useful information like adverse drug reactions . 
In [33], different deep learning approaches , such as CNN, LSTM, and BERT , have been 
investigated for  sentiment analysis of patients’ drug reviews.  In another work, the combination of 
CNN -RNN has been applied .  
In addition to  recommendation systems, sentiment analysis and opinion mining of drug reviews is 
an active research area in drug review processing [35]. This analysis can be used for automatic 
opinion mining  and recommend ing drugs.  
A hybrid knowledge -based medical prescription approach has been presented in [ 36]. Th e authors  
use historical medical prescriptions to recommend a list of medicines to physicians. The approach 
uses the similarity between cases where a case is a medical information like demography, 
treatment, age, sex, symptoms, and diagnosis. Based on the degree of similarity , a drug list is 
produced. The list is complemented by Bayesian reasoning , where a model of the conditional 
probability of drugs is built.  This appr oach has been applied in Humphrey & Partners Medical 
Services Limited medical centre . Some works in medical recommendation have focused on particular drugs like diabetes  [37]. Their 
model is based on the ontology of medic al knowledge and a decision decision -making approach 
for multiple criteria and  computes the medication. T hen by using the entropy , the information 
about  patient’ history  has been computed , and finally , the most appropriate medications have been 
recommended to the physicians.  
Many recommender system approaches  have not been well considered in the medical and 
pharmaceutical recommendations. However, u sing polarity in sentiment analysis of use r 
comments is one of the important parts of using NLP in recommendation systems.  It can be viewed 
as determining whether a word or phrase in the document or even a whole document is positive, 
negative, or neutral  in general.   
Figure 1 shows the broad classification of different recommendation system approaches in 
pharmaceutical research . We can see a growing tendency to use  machine learning approaches in 
this field.  
 
 
Figure 1: Broad classification of recommendation system techniques.  
 Drug 
Recommendation 
SystemsCollaborative FilteringMemory Based User -Based Filtering WaveLet [ 38]
Item -Based Filtering
Model Based Matrix FactorizationSVD
SVD++
Content Based Machine Learning T-Recs [ 39]
Knowledge -BasedMachine LearningData mining Framework 
[40]
Ontology -basedMCDM & Entropy [ 37]
SWRL [41] , [42], [43]
GalenOWL [44]
Panacea [ 45]
SemMed [ 46]
HybridCB & Knowledge Based Machine Learning LOD cloud mining [ 47]
User CF & Knowledge 
BasedMachine LearningDiaTrack [ 48]
Personalized Clinical 
Prescription [ 49]
CADRE [ 50]
Item Based CF & 
Knowledge BasedMachine Learning Data Driven[ 51]4. Material and methods  
In this section , we formulate the medicine recommender system problem and present our approach 
for the general medicine recommender system.  
Many recommendation system s, like collaborative filtering and content -based approaches , mainly  
rely on past information to make decisions for the current situation. It is not always the case in the  
domain of  drug recommendation. The patient’s  condition is different compared to the ot her 
patients and compared to the same patient over time.  So, in addition to the history information like 
general rates, reviews, and the effective rate of the drug , it is necessary to use the patient's current 
condition  to make a more accurate decision.  We also cannot rely on diversity -based 
recommendations as it is used in some recommender systems , like the one used in Netflix ; even  if 
the drug is not rated high , it can be  suitable for some patients.   
On the other hand, many recommender systems rely on user knowledge ; when there is a lack of 
user knowledge, we cannot personalise  them. While we have an adequate dataset for our 
recommendation task, the problem emerges when new input s enter  the system. In our medicine 
recommender system, these inputs  can be new patients or new drugs. Cold start  problem is a term 
used for this problem , and i t is a challenging issue in designing any recommender system.  We 
reduced this effect by applying a clustering -based approach.  Because drugs are clustered into a 
specific category, w e can put a new drug  in the category which belongs to it , so we use the same 
rating for the new drugs as those  in that category . This is effective in solving the cold start problem 
in our recommender system .  
Proposed method  
This section discusses all phases of  our model  for building RECOMED  system.  
We present a novel hybrid drug recommender system (RS) with features of several  recommender 
systems . The system  uses natural language processing (NLP) and  other  machine learning 
techniques  to implement  the system . The propose d approach  uses CB, CF model -based , 
knowledge -based, and deep learning  for drug recommendation . Here in this section , we elaborate 
on each step toward the final drug recommendation for each patient. After a very intensive web 
crawling through  two well -known pharmaceutical websites , Drugs.com  and Druglib.com , and 
building three different datasets , feature extraction and modelling  are performed.  Then  in the next step, recommendation s for proper drug s are provided . Detailed implementation of this stage is 
given in section 5.4. At the final stage, the list of drugs is refined based on  defined rules  and the 
ratings and drug features  which is an important aspect of our medicine recommender system.  
Figure 2  represent s the whole RECOMED  model in the training stage of our work consists of four 
components , and  we elaborate on each phase of our approach in more detail in the following part s. 
The first two components deal with dataset extraction and preprocessing steps and the second two 
deal with modelling the recommendations and using the final knowledge -based decision. Figure 3 
is a graphical representation of the first two parts.  
4.1. Dataset extraction  
In this work , any recommendation for drugs and their dosage is based on the patients’ features like 
age, gender, previous illness, and other drugs they consume, and drugs’ features like drug 
classification, side effects, and drug interac tions. So, in this phase, the extraction of user features, 
drug features, and drug interaction datasets from Drugs.com   and Druglib.com  databases is 
accomplished. In the second step of this phase, the dataset is prepared for clustering and modelling 
the recommendation system. The review field in the drug recommendation database contains users ' 
and caregivers’  opinions about drugs ' effectiveness. Based on our information , none of the existing 
datasets have complete and comprehensive patient  and drug information . 
We built three different datasets named users , drugs , and interactions . 
4.2. Drugs and users datasets  
Druglib.com and Drugs.com were employed in this work to extract information about patients and 
drugs and  build two datasets named drugs and patients. We should mention that there are also other 
databases for drug  information and recommendations, like SIDER [52], for drug side effects. We 
intend to  include them in future works  to build a complete drug dataset . Three features side effects, 
benefits, and membership in a given drug category were considered for drugs.  
First, different drug categories and side effects were extracted in tables  1 and 2. There are 150 
different drug categories , and 128 side effects were extracted from the Druglib.com  database.   
Figure 2: Components of RECOMED  drug recommendation system in the training stage.  
 
 
Figure 3 - Dataset extraction and preprocessing in our proposed appro ach 
 
TABLE   1- DRUG CATEGORIES LIST 
Category  Index  
Acetylcholine -Agonists  1 
Adrenergic -Alpha -Agonists  2 
 … 
Vasodilators  150 
 
TABLE   2-DRUGS SIDE EFFECTS  
Side Effects  Index  
Completed suicide  1 
Confusional state  2 
 … 
Wrong drug administered  128 
 
Then  drug benefits  were  also extracted and combined with the information in the above tables , and 
finally , the drugs dataset was prepared , as is partially  shown in Table 3.  
TABLE 3- DRUG S DATASET  
Benefits  Side Effects  Drug Category  Drug Name  Index  88 … 2 1 128 … 2 1 150 … 2  1 
0 … 1 1 0 … 0 0 0 … 0 1 Hytrin Terazosin  1 
0 … 0 0 0 … 1 1 0 … 0 1 Mirtazapine  2 
… … … … … … … … … … … … … … 
0 … 0 0 0 … 0 0 1 … 0 0 Proscar Finasteride  480 
 
We also extract ed the users  dataset of patient  features and  comments  on different drugs. Six 
features are considered for users dataset s: age, gender, current disease  (condition) , other 
conditions , other drugs  are taken , and user level , which is patient or caregiver.  
Table 4 represents the structure of this dataset.  
TABLE 3- USER S DATASET  Comment  
Side 
Effects  
Effective
ness 
Overall 
Rating  
Drug 
Name  
Other 
Drug  
Other 
Conditio
n 
Conditio
n 
Genus  
Age 
Level  
index  
… 
Severe Side 
Effects  
Ineffective 
1 
Mirtazapine 
None 
Sleeplessness 
Depression 
Male 22 
Patient 
1 
… 
Moderate 
Side Effects  
Ineffective 
2 
Mirtazapine 
None 
None 
Depression 
Male 38 
Patient 
2 
 ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ... … 
… 
Mild Side 
Effect  
Moderately 
Effective 
4 
Proscar 
Finasteride  
None 
None 
Hair loss 
Male 
 28 
Patient  3294  
 
4.3. Interaction s dataset  
The last dataset prepared in this work is the interaction s dataset. This information is important for 
recommending the appropriate  medicine list  to the patients.  We extracted drug interaction 
information from Drugs.com , and after mapping drugs’ names with their counterparts in 
Druglib.com , the interaction dataset , partially presented in Table 5 , was created  with 180 drug 
interaction information . 
TABLE   4-DRUG INTERACTION DATASET  
 Abilifish … Cimbaita … Syntroid … zyban 
Abilifish … … Moderate … .. … … 
Accupril … … … … Moderate … … 
Aciphex … … Major … - … … 
… … … … … … … … 
Zyban … … … … … … … 
 4.4. Dataset p reparation  
In this phase , our dataset is prepared for creating the recommendation model in the next step. First , 
using Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques , user and drug features are extracted , and 
then normalisation  and clustering are accomplished to prepare the datasets for model ling the 
recommendation system. Here, we elaborate on each of these steps:  
 
4.5. Feature extraction  
The first pre -processing step is feature extraction from user  feature  and drug features datasets.  
Bag-Of-Words (BOW) method is used for this purpose.  
NLP for extracting drug and user features  
The feature extraction was mainly  performed using natural language processing (NLP) techniques. 
Two well -known methods to extract text features by NLP are  Bag-of-Words (BOW) and term 
frequency -inverse term frequency (TF -IDF).  
Our proposed pharmaceutical recommendation system uses the BOW  feature extraction metho d 
to perform feature extraction from database texts. This method consists of four steps:  
• Text pre-processing  
• Vocabulary creation  
• Building f eature matrix  
• Polarity of user comment s 
Here, every part of this process has been described:  
4.6. Text  pre-processing  
In the text  pre-processing  step, all punctuations and symbols are removed , and abbreviations are 
converted into their full names or phrase s. Some of these conversions are presented in Table 6. 
Moreover, spelling mistakes w ere corrected using the TexBlob library of Python, and stop words 
were removed using a predefined list of stop words.  
 
 TABLE  6- EXAMPLES  OF ABBREVIATIONS  TO FULL  NAME  CONVE RSIONS  
Original Form Abbreviations 
high blood pressure HBP 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease COPD 
premenstrual syndrome PMS 
obsessive -compulsive disorder  OCD 
 
Vocabulary creation  
Using NLP techniques, a vocabulary of words is created in the second step of feature extraction . 
For this purpose, an array of words is created by checking all registered words in the dataset. This 
array is constructed from unique words of the dataset and their frequency. Words are rearranged 
according to their frequ ency to deal with the random filling of the feature matrix . Moreover, to 
deal with the sparseness of the feature matrix, words with low frequency are removed. Some of 
the most frequent words extracted  from the dataset s created and discussed in the previous section  
can be seen in Table 7. 
 
TABLE 7. EXAMPLES OF MOST FREQUENT WORDS IN DATASETS.  
Frequency Term 
33 Pain 
22 Infection 
15 Surgery 
13 Chronic 
 
Building f eature matrix  
The feature matrix is created in the third step of extracting the features . For this purpose, a unique 
word is assigned to each column of the matrix , and a new row is considered for each user review. 
Each cell of this matrix represents the existence of the word in the user’s review , which is 
essentially zero or one . 
 
Polarity of user comments  (PUC)  
We used NLP and opinion mining to extract PUC . This approach aims at extracting the opinion of 
users as a positive or negative comment.  The output of this component is used in the users’ r ating 
matrix.   
ALGORITHM 1. COMMENT POLARITY ACQUISITION  
Input: 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 ,𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠  
Output: 𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑂𝑓𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠  
1. 𝑅𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐿𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠  𝑎𝑛𝑑  𝐸𝑚𝑜𝑗𝑖𝑠  from  𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠   
2. 𝑅𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠  𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚  𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠  
3. 𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑  𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑖𝑧𝑒  (𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 ) 
4. 𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑  𝐿𝑒𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 ) 
5. 𝐹𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦  𝑜𝑓 𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠 (𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 ) 
6. 𝑇𝑒𝑥𝑡𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑏 (𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 ) 
 
Combined User Rating Acquisition  
To have a more accurate rating for drugs, we considered the combined user comments and ratings 
from different sources . This overall rating is called Combined User Rating Acquisition (CUR) 
parameter  and is obtained from analysing  user comments and ratings as follows:  
1. 𝑂𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑙𝑙  𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  ∈𝑍,0≤𝑂𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑙𝑙  𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  ≤10 
2. 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠  ∈𝐸,𝐸={Ineffective ,Marginally  Effective ,Moderately  Effective ,
Considerably  Effective ,Highly  Effective } 
3. 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒  𝐸𝑓𝑓 𝑒𝑐𝑡 ∈𝑆,𝑆={𝑁𝑜 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒  𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡 ,𝑀𝑖𝑙𝑑  𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒  𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡 ,𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒  𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒  𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡 ,
𝑆𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒  𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒  𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡 ,𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑙  𝑆𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒  𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒  𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡 } 
4. User Comment  
  
CUR parameter is calculated as equat ion (6), and the above parameters are replaced by CUR in 
the user feature matrix:  
CUR =(𝑂𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔
10+𝐷𝑂𝐸
4)
2− 𝐷𝑂𝑆
4+𝑃𝑈𝐶
2      (6) 
In equation ( 6), DOE (Degree of Effectiveness)  represents the degree of drug effectiveness. The 
user selects  the effectiveness of a drug from a list of f ive different  options: Ineffective , Marginally 
Effective , Moderately Effective , Considerably Effective , and Highly Effective , and it takes  a number 
in the range [0 -4]. Similarly, DOS (Degree of Side Effects) is the degree that a drug has a side 
effect (range [0 -4]), and t he numbers applied in the denominator are for normalization purpose.  
PUC (Polarity of User Comments) is calculated using Natural Language Processing (NLP) , and 
opinion mining techniques  and the nltk library in Python are used in this regard. Algorithm 1 shows 
the steps of the work for calculating PUC.  Normalization - After extracting features from drug and user datasets, t hese features should also 
be normalized to perform better in training the model .  
 
 Combined User 
Rating  (CUR)  
Drug Name  
Other Drug  
Other Condition  
Condition  
Genus  
Age 
Level  
index  
 
Comment  
Side Effects  (DOS)  
Effectiveness  (DOE)  
Overall Rating  
Drug Name  
Other Drug  
Other Condition  
Condition  
Genus  
Age 
Level  
Index  
0.05 
Mirtazapine  
None 
Sleeplesness  
depression  
male 
22 
patient  1  0.8 
(Obtained 
from 
PUC)  0.75 0 0.1 
Mirtazapine  
None 
Sleeplesness  
depression  
male 
22 
patient  1 
… … … … … … … … …  … … … … … … … … … … … … 
0.1 
Proscar  
None 
None 
Hair loss  
male 
28 
patient  3294   
0.2 0.25 0.5 0.4 
Proscar  
None 
None 
Hair loss  
male 
28 
patient  3294  
 
Figure 4- Combination of different user ratings for a given drug  
 
Figure 4 is the final user rating dataset after applying the combined user rating acquisition stage.  
This stage converts the dataset on the left side into the right -side dataset. Each column in both 
datasets ha s a given user ’s features along with the drug name they rate . In the left-side dataset , we 
can see different user ratings , and then in the right -side dataset , these ratings are combined into 
CUR using equation  (6). 
 
4.7. Clustering  
Clustering is considered one of the main steps in a recommender system for improving diversity, 
consistency, and reliability [ 53]. Clustering has been considered in many works in recommender 
systems , particularly for reducing the sparsity of data [ 54], [55]. Due to the sparseness of the rating 
matrix , we consider a clustering -based approach , and patients  are cl ustered  before performing the matrix factorisation , which is elaborated in the next part . This cl ustering  is mostly required  because 
users  usually review only one drug corresponding to a specific disease , so the rating matrix is 
highly sparse. Clustering can help group the users and drugs with similar features and significantly 
resolve the sparsity problem . Users are cl uster ed based on their gender, age, comment s, and being 
patient or caregive r. It is clear that after cl ustering , each class of users  review s several  drugs, which 
can improve the matrix factorisation  process.  In the same way , drugs are also clustered based on 
their side eff ect, effectiveness, interaction, etc.  
We used a modified K -means algorithm [5 6] to perform this clustering . While  the original K -
means  algorithm is  unsupervised , used for clustering , the number of clusters is pre -determined . So 
it couldn't be utilized in the same way in our proposed drug recommendation system. Therefore, 
in this paper, we employ ed the U -Kmeans method  [56]. This method performs the unsupervised 
K-means and determines the best cluster numbers that lead to better classification performance. 
Each row of the dataset and the centre  of each cluster are represented by F= { 𝑓1,…,𝑓𝑛}  and A= 
{𝑎1,…,𝑎𝑘} respectively  and the K -means objective function is d efined as ( 7). 
      
𝐽(𝑀,𝐴)=∑ ∑ 𝑀𝑖𝑗‖𝑓𝑖−𝑎𝑗‖𝑘
𝑗=1𝑛
𝑖=1     (7) 
 
 Where in ( 7), 𝑘 is the number of clusters, 𝑛 is the number of dataset features, and 𝑀𝑖𝑗 indicates 
the membership of 𝐹𝑖 to the  𝑗𝑡ℎ cluster. In the K -means algorithm, this objective function must be 
minimized . In [57], an entropy -based method is proposed to improve K -means. In this method, to 
determine the centers of the clusters, Equation ( 8) is added to the objective function . 
𝐵𝑛∑ 𝑎𝑗𝑘
𝑗=1ln𝑎𝑗   (8) 
       In (8), the effect of the cluster imbalance is added to the objective function. As can be seen in 
(9), when the   𝐵𝑛 coefficient of the improved objective function is zero . The following K-means 
objective function is obtained . 
 
𝐽(𝑀,𝐴)=∑ ∑ 𝑀𝑖𝑗‖𝑥𝑖−𝑎𝑗‖𝑘
𝑗=1𝑛
𝑖=1 −𝐵∑ 𝜂𝑗𝑘
𝑗=1 ln𝜂𝑗  (9) 
        Where in this equation, 𝜂𝑗 represents the number of members of a cluster, which is determined 
by (10). 
𝜂𝑗=∑ 𝑀𝑖𝑗𝑛
𝑖=1 𝑥𝑖
∑ 𝑀𝑖𝑗𝑛
𝑖=1   (10) 
 
       In [56], equation  (11) is considered to determine the optimized number of clusters. By adding 
this term to equation (10), the final objective  function is obtained as  (12). 
L∑ ∑ 𝑀𝑖𝑗𝑘
𝑗=1 ln𝑎𝑗𝑛
𝑖=1      (11) 
𝐽(𝑀,𝐴,𝑎)=∑ ∑ 𝑀𝑖𝑗‖𝑥𝑖−𝑎𝑗‖𝑘
𝑗=1𝑛
𝑖=1 −𝐵∑ 𝑎𝑗𝑘
𝑗=1ln𝑎𝑗−L∑ ∑ 𝑀𝑖𝑗𝑘
𝑗=1 ln𝑎𝑗𝑛
𝑖=1     (12) 
      The pseudocode of the U -K-means classification method based on the approach in  [56] is 
presented  in Algorithm 2. 
Algorithm   .2 Our modified Pseudo code of U -Kmeans  based on [54]. 
1. 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝑐(0)=𝑛,𝛼𝑘(0)=1
𝑛,𝑎𝑘(0)=𝑥𝑖  
2. 𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠  𝐿(0)=𝐵(0)=1  
3. 𝑆𝑒𝑡 𝑡=0 ,𝜀>0 
4. 𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑙𝑒 𝑚𝑎𝑥 ‖𝑎𝑘𝑡+1−𝑎𝑘𝑡‖<𝜀 
5.       If ‖𝑥𝑖−𝛼𝑘‖2−𝐿𝑙𝑛𝛼𝑘=min
1≤𝑘≤𝑐‖𝑥𝑖−𝑎𝑘‖2−𝐿𝑙𝑛𝛼𝑘 
6.             𝑀𝑖𝑘(𝑡+1)=1 
7.       Else 
8.             𝑀𝑖𝑘(𝑡+1)=0 
9.       𝐿(𝑡+1)=𝑒−𝑐(𝑡+1)/250 
10.       𝛼𝑘(𝑡+1)=∑𝑀𝑖𝑘
𝑛+(𝐵
𝐿)𝛼𝑘(𝑡)ln𝑎𝑘𝑡−∑ 𝛼𝑠𝑡 𝑐
𝑠=1𝑛
𝑖=1 ln𝑎𝑠𝑡 
11.       𝐵𝑡+1=𝑚𝑖𝑛 (∑ exp  (−𝜂𝑛|𝑎𝑘𝑡+1−𝑎𝑘𝑡|)𝑐
𝑘=1
𝑐,1−max
1≤𝑘≤𝑐(1
𝑛∑ 𝑀𝑖𝑘𝑛
𝑖=1)
−max
1≤𝑘≤𝑐𝑎𝑘𝑡∑ ln𝑎𝑘𝑡 𝑐
𝑘=1) 
12.       𝑢𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒  𝐶𝑡 𝑡𝑜 𝐶𝑡+1 𝑏𝑦 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑  𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟  𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑎𝑘𝑡+1≤1
𝑛 
13.       𝑎𝑘∗=𝑎𝑘∗
∑ 𝑎𝑠∗ 𝑐(𝑡+1)
𝑠=1 
14.       𝑀𝑖𝑘∗=𝑀𝑖𝑘∗
∑ 𝑀𝑖𝑠∗ 𝑐(𝑡+1)
𝑠=1 
15.       𝑎𝑘=∑ 𝑀𝑖𝑘𝑥𝑖𝑗𝑛
𝑖=1
∑ 𝑀𝑖𝑘𝑛
𝑖=1 
16.       𝑖𝑓 𝑡≥60 𝑎𝑛𝑑  𝑐(𝑡−60)−𝑐𝑡=0 
17.             𝐵(𝑡+1)=0 
18.       t=t+1 
 
 
 TABLE  8: RATE MATRIX WITHOUT CLASSIFICATION  
619 618 617 616 615 … 6 5 4 3 2 1 Drugs 
 
Users 
           1 1 
3    3        2 
   5         3 
            … 
          1  979 
 3           980 
      3      981 
 
TABLE   9: RATE MATRIX AFTER CLASSIFICATION  
619 618 617 616 615 … 6 5 4 3 2 1 Drugs 
 
Users 
           1 1 
3    3        2 
   5         3 
            … 
          1  38 
 3           39 
      3      40 
 
 
4.8. Mode lling 
In the next step, the clustering outcome is used  to build a recommender system model able to 
recommend the best drugs. Later, we filter the model's output with a knowledge -based component 
for safety reasons . 
 
Neural Network -based Matrix Factorization  
Matrix factorization is a popular method for recommender systems aiming at finding two 
rectangular matrices called user and item matrices with smaller sizes than the rating matrix  [58]. 
The dot product between these two matrices results  in the rating matri x.  To reduce the computational overhead,  cope with the sparsity of the ratings, and increase  accuracy , 
we propose d a neural network -based matrix factorization technique . The f irst two matrices , Rating 
and Effectiveness , are construct ed by extracting  information from Druglib.com .  
In our model, the rating matrix 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 ∈R𝑛∗𝑚 is estimated as the multiplication of two matrices 
𝐶𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑛∗𝑘 and 𝐷𝑟𝑢𝑔𝑠𝑘∗𝑚 as (13): 
𝑅𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑔 ≈Clusters .𝐷𝑟𝑢𝑔𝑠𝑇    (13) 
 
This model  applies  a neural network  algorithm  to estimate the users’ comments for each medicine. 
Clustered users and drugs  and also users’ and drugs’ features are used in building this new model , 
as illustrated in Figure 5. 
Figure 5- Our proposed customized matrix factorization method .  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
𝑏𝑚 
 𝑏2 𝑏1     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
    Drug 
Cluster k 
… 
Drug 
Cluster 2 
Drug 
Cluster 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Drug m 
… 
Drug 2 
Drug 1 
  
    𝑐1,𝑚  𝑐1,2 𝑐1,1 Drug 
Feature 
1          𝑑1,𝑚  𝑑1,2 𝑑1,1 Latent 
Factor 1  
 
𝑐2,𝑚  𝑐2,2 𝑐2,1 Drug 
Feature 
2          𝑑2,𝑚  𝑑2,2 𝑑2,1 Latent 
Factor 2 
    …              … 
𝑐𝑘,𝑚  𝑐𝑘,2 𝑐𝑘,1 Drug 
Feature 
k          𝑑𝑘,𝑚  𝑑𝑘,2 𝑑𝑘,1 Latent 
Factor k    
 
 
 
 
User 
Feature k 
… 
 
User 
Feature 2 
User 
Feature 1 
   
   
User 
Feature k 
… 
User 
Feature 2 
User 
Feature 1 
 
𝑟1,𝑚  𝑟1,2 𝑟1,1  𝑢1,𝑘   
𝑢1,2 𝑢1,1 User 
1  𝑏1  𝑟1,𝑚  𝑟1,2 𝑟1,1 
 𝑐1,𝑘  𝑐1,2 𝑐1,1 User 
Cluster 
1 
𝑟1,𝑚  𝑟2,2 𝑟2,1  𝑢2,𝑘   
𝑢2,2 𝑢2,1 User 
2  𝑏1  𝑟1,𝑚  𝑟2,2 𝑟2,1 𝑐2,𝑘  𝑐2,2 𝑐2,1 User 
Cluster 
2 
          …            … 
𝑟𝑛,𝑚  𝑟𝑛,2 𝑟𝑛,1  𝑢𝑛,𝑘   
𝑢𝑛,2 𝑢𝑛,1 User 
n  𝑏𝑛  𝑟𝑛,𝑚  𝑟𝑛,2 𝑟𝑛,1 𝑐𝑛,𝑘  𝑐𝑛,2 𝑐𝑛,1 User 
Cluster 
n 
User Ratings       Drug Ratings   User embedding  
(User Weights)  Drug Cluster Features 
sEmbedding  Drug Embedding  
(Drug Weights)  
  Drug Bias  
 
User Cluster Features  
 User Bias   
The input to the neural network is user a nd drug-clustered features. Drug  Embedding and User  
Embedding matrices are the input to this network . The output of the network is two ratings. One 
of them resulted from the neural network MF with classified user features, and the other one is 
from the neural network MF with classified drug features.  With sparse rating matrices, the forward 
and backward pa ss calculations are accomplished just for non -zero ratings to reduce the 
computation load . The neural network layer output is calculated as:  
𝑎𝑧+1=𝑓𝑧+1(∑ 𝑤𝑖𝑧+1.𝜓𝑧+1(𝑛,𝑚).𝑎𝑖𝑧+𝑏𝑗𝑧+1 𝐾
𝑖=1 )      𝑖∈(1,𝐾),𝑗∈(1,𝑀𝑁),𝑧∈(0,𝑍−1),𝑛∈
(0,𝑁),𝑚∈(0,𝑀) (14) 
In this equation, 𝑓𝑧+1 is the activation function, 𝑤𝑖𝑧+1 are the weights, 𝑏𝑗𝑧+1 are the biases, 𝑍 is the 
number of layers, 𝑀 is the number of drugs, 𝑁 is the number of users, 𝑎𝑍 is the output of the 
network, 𝐾 is the number of the features for drugs or users, and  𝑀𝑁 represents the number of 
drugs in the user network and represents the number of users in the drugs network.  And finally 
𝜓𝑧+1 is the rating existence function defined as:  
{𝜓𝑧+1(𝑛,𝑚)=1      𝑖𝑓(𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑛,𝑚  𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡  𝑜𝑟 𝑧<𝑍−1)
𝜓𝑧+1(𝑛,𝑚)=0      𝑖𝑓(𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑛,𝑚 𝑛𝑜𝑡 𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑠𝑡 )                 (15) 
Also, the backward pass calculations are as equations (16) to ( 19) for the output and hidden layers 
respectively:  
For the output:  
∆𝑜𝑢𝑡 =(𝑅(𝑛,𝑚)−𝑎𝑍).𝜓𝑍(𝑛,𝑚).𝑓𝑧+1′(𝑎𝑍)    𝑛∈(0,𝑁),𝑚∈(0,𝑀) (16) 
∆𝑊𝑍=∆𝑜𝑢𝑡.𝑎𝑍.𝛾𝑍 (17) 
For the hidden layers:  
∆𝐻𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑧=𝑓′(𝑎𝑧).∑∆𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑖 𝑖 .𝑤𝑖𝑧         𝑖∈(1,𝐾),𝑧∈(0,𝑍−1) (18) 
∆𝑤𝑧=∆𝐻𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑧.𝑎𝑧.𝛾𝑧       𝑧∈(0,𝑍−1) (19) 
In these equations, 𝑓𝑧+1′ is the gradient of the activation function, 𝑅(𝑛,𝑚) is the rating 
corresponding to the users or drugs, ∆𝑊𝑍 is the error correction for the output layer, ∆𝑤𝑧 are the 
error corrections for the hidden layers, and 𝛾𝑧 is the learning rate. The weight updates are also 
according to equation (20):  𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑧=𝑤𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑧+∆𝑤𝑧 𝑧∈(0,𝑍) (20) 
 
4.9. Knowledge -based component  
After modeling the recommendation system, s everal  constraints on the model output are applied . 
The final stage in the recommendation process  is based on the  knowledge -based technique . The 
knowledge -based recommendation is a specific recommender system that can be used in 
combination with other algorithms or  alone.   
The aim of using this module is its huge impact in increasing the safety of the recommendations.  
We extracted and gathered  rules in the drug recommendation domain as queries. These rules are 
based on Drug Interactions  and Adverse Events . Using these rules, we can prevent recommending 
drugs that lead to events like death, hospitalization, disability, and life-threaten ing events.  The 
flowchart of this component has been extracted from Figure 2 and redrawn in Figure 6. 
The set of these rules which our knowledge -based component considers falls into these two 
categories:  
- Base d on patients’ features : 
o Gender is allowed to recommend  a drug . 
o The age is allowed for recommending a drug . 
- Based on d rug interaction s: 
o The recommended drug has no interaction with  other  drugs taken by the user .  
Figure 6- Knowledge -based component of our proposed approach  based on the bottom left  of 
Figure 2. 
 
Table 10 presents knowledge -based rules based on patient’s features that have been considered in 
this work . For example, a ccording to this  table , a drug can only be recommended if the patient's 
age is in the allowed range and  the gender is allowed for recommending the drug.  
TABLE  10- USER FEATURE -BASED RULES  
Zometa   Actemra  Abilify  Drug  Name  
31 … 29 24 Minimum  Not allowed age 
ranges  67 … 64 45 Maximum  
0 … 1 0 None 
Allowed gender 0 … 0 0 Female  
0 … 0 0 Male 
1 … 0 1 Both 
 
 
Start 
  
New User Registration 
User Weights  
& Biases Sets  
Drug Weights 
& Biases Sets  
  
Compute 10 High Rated  
Drug Recommendation  
Drug[i] Interaction? 
  
I=0 
I<10 
  
I=i+1 
Drug 
Interation Set  
 
End 
 
 Recommendation.append(Drug[i] 
Knowledge -
based 
Recommend ations 
based on the model  
  
User Features  
Filter Set  
Drug[i] Allowed?  
Drug Recommendation For our proposed knowledge -based component, another adverse events dataset  is generated  from 
Druglib.com . The structure of this dataset is presented in Table 11. Features in this  dataset  include  
age, gender, the name of the drug taken by a given  patient, its adverse event, reaction, and other 
drugs used by the patient.  
TABL E11-ADVERSE EVENTS DATASET  
Other Drug  Adverse Event  Reaction  Genus  Age Drug Name  Index  
- Death   male 63 Ability 
(Airipiprazole)  1 
... … … … … ... … 
Insulin  Death; 
Hospitalization   female  47 Acterma  12 
… … ... … … … … 
Fluticasone propiate ; 
Salmeterol; Carbemazepine  Hospitalization   male 50 Zyprexa  2486 
 
We used Gaussian and Poisson distribution  for patients ' age and gender  from the above dataset  for 
the adverse event s of using a specific drug . These adverse events can be death, hospitalization, 
disability, or other life-threat ening event s. 
Since , in this case , we require the average and standard deviation, b y using Poisson and Gaussian 
distribution , it is possible  to compute the allowed gender for recommending a drug to a patient  
using much less  memory than machine learning for this specific task.  
Assume that on average , by recommending a drug 𝛾 for 𝜂 times to patients with 𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟  =
 𝑓𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒  they experience one of the adverse events mentioned in Table 11, then the probability 
that by recommending drug 𝛾 to a female patient she experience s one of the adverse events is 
calculated as  equation ( 21): 
𝑃𝑛(𝑥)=𝑒−𝜆𝐹𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒𝛶𝜆𝐹𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒𝛶     𝜆𝐹𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒𝛶=𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟  𝑜𝑓 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑒  𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡
𝜂  (21) 
And similarly , for a male patient , this probability is calculated as  equation ( 22): 
𝑃𝑛(𝑥)=𝑒−𝜆𝑀𝑎𝑙𝑒𝛶𝜆𝑀𝑎𝑙𝑒𝛶     𝜆𝑀𝑎𝑙𝑒𝛶=𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟  𝑜𝑓 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑒  𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡
𝜂 (22) 
 Using the above calculations, if the probability of an adverse event for each gender and each 
medicine is more than a given  threshold value, the medicine is removed from the list and is not 
recommended to the patient.  In this paper , we set the 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑 = 50% . 
Also, normal distribution was used for setting the rules related to the patients ages . Suppose the 
average and standard deviation of a patient’s age who have taken medicine 𝛾 and has an adverse 
event is represented by 𝜇 and 𝜎, respectively. In that case,  the normal distribution function related 
to age is as equation (23): 
𝑓(𝑥)=1
√2𝜋σ𝛶𝑒−1
2(𝑥−μ𝛶
σ𝛶)2
 (23) 
and so for patients who are taking medicine 𝛾, equation (17) for  age range  has to be met  to 
minimize the adverse event  (24): 
𝑋𝜖(𝜇𝛶−1.96(𝜎𝛶
√𝑛),𝜇𝛶+1.96(𝜎𝛶
√𝑛)),1−𝑎=95% ,𝑍0.975=1.96 (24) 
 
In this research , we used the rules related to the users’ features and the medicine rules and drug 
interactions we are also considering . In this regard, the drug interactions dataset was used  to 
exclude recommendation s for drugs having high interactions with other drugs.  
 
5.  RESULTS  
This section discusses our proposed drug recommendation system implementation  and the new ly 
generated datasets . First, we explain the extracted and new ly generated datasets and then we will 
demonstrate the results of our implemented system.  
The dataset  
As discussed in the proposed method, w e used the information from two databases of drugs 
Druglib.com  [7] and Drugs.com  [5]. The first database Druglib.com  is a comprehensive resource 
for drug information. For each drug, a variety of information such as description, side -effects, drug 
ratings & reviews by patients, and clinical pharmacology has been provided. Also, Drugs.co m is 
another database for drug information , and many recommendation systems have been suggested that use this database to build their model s. Both the original and the revised version of Drugs.com  
have been used in RS to evaluate the performance of the approaches.  
We crawled the se pharmaceutical websites to construct our intended datasets with the required 
features in a structured way. As a result, w e gathered much useful  information about drugs and 
patients’ conditions  and collected  them into three datasets  as follows:   
- The first extracted dataset is the  Rating dataset consists of patients’ features and their 
ratings on drugs consisting of 3294  samples . 
- The second dataset consists of Drug features containing drug categories, side effects, and  
benefits . 
- The last dataset is the Interaction dataset containing interactions between drugs.  
To evaluate the performance of our system , we used the most popular  existing machine learning 
evaluation metrics. Accuracy, sensitivity (recall), specificity, and precision were the basic metrics 
that we applied to our model.  
We used 70 percent of the samples  (2304  samples)  in the dataset for training our model , 20 percent 
(660 samples) for  evaluation, and 10 percent (330 samples) for the test. 
After obtaining the values for true positive (TP), false positive (FP), true negative (TN), and false 
negative (FN), different metri cs can be calculated.  
We compared our results with the existing approaches  in [29], [50], [59], [60], and [61]. We 
implemented the algorithms in these papers with the datasets they have applied.  
In [29], SVM and recurrent neural network (RNN) have been used to recommend  a drug to a 
patient. In [ 50] the authors first considered the clustering of drugs according to the drug 
information, like the algorithm proposed in this paper . Then collaborative filteri ng is used to 
recommend  a drug. But u nlike our work , these haven’t considered the classification of users and 
their features. Finally, in [5 9], an improved matrix factorization has been used,  which filters the 
results using NSGA -III to improve  the accuracy, diversity, novelty, and recall.   
Table 12 represents  the comparison results between our work and other drug recommendation 
systems  in terms of important machine learning me trics. TABLE 12: COMPARISON RESULT OF OUR PROPOSED RECOMMENDATION SYSTEM 
WITH OTHER STATE -OF-THE -ART APPROACHES  
F1-Measure Precision Specificity Sensitivity Accuracy  
0.07 0.04 0.33 0.75 0.34 SVM[ 26]  
0.18 0.31 0.86 0.13 0.31 Neural Network [26]  
0.41 0.32 0.54 0.61 0.55 Kmeans User CF  [48]  
0.39 0.41 0.66 0.39 0.63 NSGA III  [57]  
0.38 0.33 0.49 0.45 0.48 Conventional MF  [58]  
0.45 0.36 0.38 0.60 0.45 MLP  [59]  
0.65 0.62 0.64 0.69 0.65 Proposed Method 
 
Comparison results consist  of the F2 measure, ROC, and confusion matrix of different approaches  
depicted in Figures 7 to 10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7- Comparison result of F2 measure metric  
 
Figure 8- comparison result of ROC . 
00.20.40.6
F2 Measure
SVM [26] Backpropagation [26]
Kmeans CF [48] NSGA II [57]
ConvMF [58] MLP [59]
Proposed Method 
 
Figure 9- comparison result of MCC.  
 
Figure 10- Comparison result of the confusion matrix . 
 
Figur e 11 -Confusion matrix obtained for the  proposed method . 
 
The confusion matrix of predictions of our approach for user ratings compared to other approaches 
is shown in Figure 10. Also, t he construction of confusion matrix for different ratings  is also shown 
in Figure 11. The predictions are compared with actual ratings of users, and drugs  for the case 
when they are considered separately  and then the ratings are combined  according to our proposed 
approach . 
One of the important components of our recommender system is the final knowledge -based 
approach. This component prevents death, hospitalization, and disability  by considering drug 
interactions and the user’s age . The a dverse Events Dataset is used in this regard to our system's 
performance  for recognizing such cases and recommending the appropriate drugs . This dataset 
contains 2486 samples, where 80%  of them are used for rule extraction, and the remaining 20%  
are for the test. 
The following parameters are considered for the evaluation:  
𝐷𝑒𝑎𝑡 ℎ 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 =𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟  𝑜𝑓 𝐷𝑒𝑎𝑡 ℎ
𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟  𝑜𝑓 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦  𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 =𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟  𝑜𝑓 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦  
𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑁𝑢𝑚 𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 
𝐻𝑜𝑠𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 =𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟  𝑜𝑓 𝐻𝑜𝑠𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  
𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟  𝑜𝑓 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 
For comparison, the system's performance for different adverse events was calculated one time 
without  a knowledge -based component and the second time  using this component.  
Table 13 and Figure 12 represent the results of this comparison.  
TABLE 13 - COMPARISON RESULTS OF KNOWLEDGE -BASED COMPONENT  
Adverse event  Without knowledge -based 
component  With knowledge -based 
component  
Death rate  44% 6% 
Hospitalization  15% 2% 
Disability  4% 0.7%  
 
 
Figure 12- Comparison result of adding knowledge -based in the recommendation system . 01020304050
Death Rate Disability Rate Hospitalization Rate
With Knowledge Base Without Knowledge baseKnowledge -based component is an essential part of a drug recommendation system in reducing 
adverse events and improving the quality of recommendations. We also considered one more 
important metric for recommender systems evaluations:  hit rate . 
The data set's  testing samples (330) are utilized in hit -rate evaluation . The hit -rate in evaluation is 
calculated by the ratio of the total hits in the top  10 recommended drugs returned for all users  and 
the total testing samples. So if 𝜂 is the number of relevant predicted drugs  for all users , and 𝑁 is 
the total number of testing samples , according to [6 2], the hit -rate is calculat ed as  equation (25) : 
ℎ𝑖𝑡_𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 =𝜂
𝑁  (25) 
The result of hit rate evaluation is represented in Figure 1 3. As it can be seen from this figure, our 
proposed approach has the ℎ𝑖𝑡 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒  = 0.49, which means it recommends more accurately than 
all other approaches.  
 
 
Figure 13- Top-10 hit -rate recommendation systems . 
 
The next evaluation metric is cumulative hit -rate, which represents the number of hits with ratings 
above a given threshold and  ignores the predicted ratings lower than the threshold . The result of 
the cumulative hit -rate with the threshold  set to 4 is shown in Figure 1 4. The cumulative hit -rate 
is calculat ed as  (26): 00.10.20.30.40.50.6
Top-10 Hit Rate
SVM [26] NeuralNetwork [26] Kmeans Used CF [48]
NSGA III [57] Conventional MF [58] MLP [59]
Proposed Method                 𝐶𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒  𝐻𝑖𝑡 −𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒 =𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟  𝑜𝑓 ℎ𝑖𝑡𝑠 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑎𝑏𝑜𝑣𝑒  𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑
𝑁 (26) 
The utilization of this threshold makes a better match with the user’s interest in the recommended 
drug.  As our approach is a comprehensive system in terms of using different  techniques and 
thorough datasets it is clear that we can achieve better results than other existing drug 
recommender systems which are limited to just one technique and using a limited dataset.  
 
Figure 14- Top-10 cumulative hit -rate of recommendation systems . 
 
6.  DISCUSSION  
Our results are encouraging in the field of drug recommendations. The m odel has combined the 
benefits of basic recommender approaches with l ow computational overhead through a novel 
model ling approach and using statistical methods. It also classifies drugs and users in terms of 
their features, leading  to high accuracy compared to state -of-the-art algorithms.  In addition, using 
knowledge -based co mponent at the final stage of the recommendation system has improved  
significantly adverse events and the quality of recommendations.  However,  better results can be 
achieved by considering other factors like the characteristics of diseases and recommending drugs 
based on disease features in addition to the features of patients and drugs.  
 
7. CONCLUSION  00.050.10.150.20.250.30.35
Top-10 Cumulative Hit Rate
SVM [26] NeuralNetwork [26] Kmeans Used CF [48]
NSGA III [57] Conventional MF [68] MLP [59]
Proposed MethodIn this paper, we proposed a comprehensive drug recommender system that takes advantage of all 
basic recommender system techniques and applies natural language processing, neural network -
based matrix factorization, and , more importantly, emplo ys knowledge -based recommendations  
to recommend the most accurate drugs to patients.  Compared  to conventional matrix factorization, 
our proposed method improves the accuracy, sensitivity, and hit rate by 26%, 34%, and 40%, 
respectively . However it is acknowledged that this is not the same as clinical accuracy or 
sensitivity. In comparison with other machine learning approaches, we obtai ned an  accuracy, 
sensitivity, and hit rate by an average of 31%, 29%, and 28% , respectively . Our approach can be 
used as a n adjunct tool  to recommend medicines to patients at the correct dose for them, and to 
reduc e prescribing  errors.  
In the future , we will extend the knowledge and information extraction from drug databases and 
include all existing patient feature s in the user features . We will also  model an  integrat ion of  the 
features of the disease in the recommendation . These features can be captured by general 
practitioners , may help improve the proposed drug recommender system performance and make  
more accurate recommendations by having more  relevant features . In the final output of the 
RECOMED system , we also include the dosage and effectiveness  of a drug in addition to the list 
of drugs.  Also, in our future work , we will extract the information from other drug resources like 
the SIDER database for drug  side effects . 
At the end , it should be noted that a physician would still need to  review the recommendations, 
check for clinical sense, before prescribing  the recommended medicines , for safety reasons.  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
We would like to express our sincere gratitude to Mohammad Beheshti  Roui , whose invaluable assistance 
in designing the graphical figures presented in this paper greatly enhanced the visual clarity and overall 
quality of our work.  
 
 DATA AVAILABILITY  
The datasets generated during the current study are available in the 
https://github.com/Datase tsLibrary/ RECOMED  repositories. In addition, preprocessed datasets 
and source code of this study are also available at 
https://github.com/DatasetsLibrary/ RECOMED Tool . 
 
REFERENCES  
1. McNee, Sean Michael.  Meeting user information needs in recommender systems. University of 
Minnesota, 2006.  
2. Pérez -Gallardo, Y., Alor -Hernández, G., Cortes -Robles, G., & Rodríguez -González, A. (2013). 
Collective intelligence as mechanism of medical diagnosis: The iPixel approach.  Expert 
Systems with Applications,  40(7), 2726 -2737.  
3. Bennett, James, et al. "K dd cup and workshop 2007."  ACM SIGKDD Explorations 
Newsletter  9.2 (2007): 51 -52. 
4. Anderson, James G., and Kathleen Abrahamson. "Your Health Care May Kill You: Medical 
Errors."  ITCH. 2017.  
5. Drugs.com.  https://www.drugs.com/support/about.html . 
6. Burke, R., & Ramezani, M. (2011). Matching recommendation technologies and domains. 
In Recommender systems handbook  (pp. 367 -386). Springer, Boston, MA.  
7. Druglib.com - Drug Information, Research, Clinical Trials, News  
8. Falk, Kim.  Practical recommender systems. Simon and Schuster, 2019.  
9. Ning, X., Desrosiers, C. and Karypis, G., 2015. A comprehensive survey of neighborhood -based 
recommendation methods. Recommender systems handbook, pp.37 -76. 
10. Lops, Pasquale, Marco de Gemmis, and Giovanni Semeraro. "Content -based recommender 
systems: State of the art and trends." Recommender systems handbook (2011): 73 -105. 
11. Burke, R., 2002. Hybrid recommender systems: Survey and experiments.  User modeling a nd 
user-adapted interaction,  12(4), pp.331 -370. 
12. Zhang, Shuai, et al. "Deep learning based recommender system: A survey and new 
perspectives." ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 52.1 (2019): 1 -38. 
13. Singhal, A., Sinha, P. and Pant, R., 2017. Use of deep learning in  modern recommendation 
system: A summary of recent works.  arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.07525.  14. Hao, X., Zhike, H. and Yichen, S., 2020. ClothNet: A Neural Network Based Recommender 
System.  Fuzzy Systems and Data Mining VI: Proceedings of FSDM 2020,  331, p.261.  
15. Zhou, X., Li, Y. and Liang, W., 2020. CNN -RNN based intelligent recommendation for online 
medical pre -diagnosis support.  IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and 
Bioinformatics,  18(3), pp.912 -921. 
16. Cheng, H.T., Koc, L., Harmsen, J., Shaked, T., C handra, T., Aradhye, H., Anderson, G., 
Corrado, G., Chai, W., Ispir, M. and Anil, R., 2016, September. Wide & deep learning for 
recommender systems. In  Proceedings of the 1st workshop on deep learning for recommender 
systems  (pp. 7 -10). 
17. Lu, J., Wu, D., Mao , M., Wang, W. and Zhang, G., 2015. Recommender system application 
developments: a survey.  Decision Support Systems,  74, pp.12 -32. 
18. Fagius, Jan, et al. "Guillain -Barré syndrome following zimeldine treatment."  Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry  48.1 (1985): 65 -69. 
19. Bresalier, R.S., Sandler, R.S., Quan, H., Bolognese, J.A., Oxenius, B., Horgan, K., Lines, C., 
Riddell, R., Morton, D., Lanas, A. and Konstam, M.A., 2005. Cardiovascular events 
associated with rofecoxib in a colorectal adenoma chemoprev ention trial.  New England 
Journal of Medicine,  352(11), pp.1092 -1102.  
20. Geusens, Piet, and Willem Lems , Efficacy and tolerability of lumiracoxib, a highly selective 
cyclo -oxygenase -2 (COX2) inhibitor, in the management of pain and  
osteoarthritis , Therapeutics and clinical risk management  4, no. 2 (2008): 337 -344. 
 
21. Milossi, M., Alexandropoulou -Egyptiadou, E. , & Psannis, K. E. (2021). AI Ethics: Algorithmic 
Determinism or Self -Determination? The GPDR Approach.  IEEE Access,  9, 58455 -58466  
22. Price, W., and I. I. Nicholson. "Artificial intelligence in the medical system: four roles for 
potential transformation."  Yale JL & Tech.  21 (2019): 122.  
23. Stark, Benjamin, et al. "A literature review on medicine recommender systems."  International 
Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications (IJACSA)  10.8 (2019): 6 -13. 
24. Sheridan, P., Onsjö, M., Becerra, C., Jimenez, S., & Dueñas, G. (2019). An Ontology -Based 
Recommender System with an Application to the Star Trek Television Franchise.  Future 
Internet,  11(9), 182.  
25. Roui, Mohammad Beheshti, Mariam Zomorodi, Masoomeh Sarvelayati, Moloud Abdar, Hamid 
Noori, Paweł Pławiak, Rysz ard Tadeusiewicz et al. "A novel approach based on genetic algorithm to speed up the discovery of classification rules on GPUs."  Knowledge -Based 
Systems  231 (2021): 107419.  
26. Abdar, M., and Mariam Zomorodi -Moghadam. "Impact of patients’ gender on parkinson’s  
disease using classification algorithms."  Journal of AI and Data Mining  6, no. 2 (2018): 277 -
285.  
27. Hossain, Md Deloar, Md Shafiul Azam, Md Jahan Ali, and Hakilo Sabit. "Drugs rating 
generation and recommendation from sentiment analysis of drug reviews usi ng machine 
learning." In  2020 Emerging Technology in Computing, Communication and Electronics 
(ETCCE), pp. 1 -6. IEEE, 2020.  
28. Komal Kumar, N., and D. Vigneswari. "A drug recommendation system for multi -disease in 
health care using machine learning." In  Advan ces in Communication and Computational 
Technology, pp. 1 -12. Springer, Singapore, 2021.  
29. Bao, Youjun, and Xiaohong Jiang. "An intelligent medicine recommender system 
framework."  2016 IEEE 11Th conference on industrial electronics and applications (ICIEA). 
IEEE, 2016.  
30. Basiri, Mohammad Ehsan, et al. "A novel method for sentiment classification of drug reviews 
using fusion of deep and machine learning techniques."  Knowledge -Based Systems  198 (2020): 
105949.  
31. Gräßer, F., Kallumadi, S., Malberg, H., & Zaunseder, S . (2018, April). Aspect -based sentiment 
analysis of drug reviews applying cross -domain and cross -data learning. In  Proceedings of the 
2018 International Conference on Digital Health  (pp. 121 -125).  
32. Hossain, Md Deloar, et al. "Drugs Rating Generation and Rec ommendation from Sentiment 
Analysis of Drug Reviews using Machine Learning."  2020 Emerging Technology in 
Computing, Communication and Electronics (ETCCE). IEEE, 2020.  
33. Colón -Ruiz, C., & Segura -Bedmar, I. (2020). Comparing deep learning architectures for 
sentiment analysis on drug reviews.  Journal of Biomedical Informatics,  110, 103539.  
34. Garg, S. (2021, January). Drug recommendation system based on sentiment analysis of drug 
reviews using machine learning. In  2021 11th International Conference on Cloud Computi ng, 
Data Science & Engineering (Confluence)  (pp. 175 -181). IEEE.  
35. Noferesti, Samira, and Mehrnoush Shamsfard. "Resource construction and evaluation for 
indirect opinion mining of drug reviews."  PloS one  10.5 (2015): e0124993.  
36. Ting, S. L., et al. "A hybrid k nowledge -based approach to supporting the medical prescription 
for general practitioners: Real case in a Hong Kong medical center."  Knowledge -Based 
Systems  24.3 (2011): 444 -456. 37. Chen, R. C., Chiu, J. Y., & Batj, C. T. (2011, July). The recommendation of me dicines based 
on multiple criteria decision making and domain ontology —An example of anti -diabetic 
medicines. In  2011 International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics  (Vol. 1, pp. 
27-32). IEEE.  
38. L. Brandão, F.P. Belfo, A. Silva,  Wavelet -based cancer drug recommender system,  Procedia 
Comput Sci,  Elsevier,  vol. 181 , 2021, pp. 487 -494, 10.1016/j.procs.2021.01.194  
39. Hamed, A. A., Roose, R., Branicki, M., and Rubin, A. 2012. T -Recs: Time -aware Twitter -based 
Drug Recommender System. 2012  IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social 
Networks Analysis and Mining.  
40. A. Aliper, S. Plis, A. Artemov, A. Ulloa, P.Mamoshina, A. Zhavoronkov, Deeplearning  
applications for predicting pharmacological properties of drug repuposing using transcript data, 
MoL Pharm, 13 (7)(2016), pp. 2524 -2530  
41. Chen, R. -C., Huang, Y. -H., Bau, C. -T., and Chen, S. -M. 2012. A recommendation system based 
on domain ontology and SWRL for antidiabetic drugs selection. Expert Systems with 
Applications 39, 4, 3995 –4006.  
42. Guo, W. Y. 2008. Reasoning with semantic web technologies in ubiquitous computing 
environment. Journal of Software 3, 8, 27 –33.  
43. Mahmoud, N. and Elbeh, H. 2016. IRS -T2D. Individualize Recommendation System for Type2 
Diabetes Medication Based on Ontology and SWRL. In Proceedings of the 10th International 
Conference on Informatics and Systems - INFOS '16. ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, 
203–209. DOI=10.1145/2908446.29084 95.  
44. Doulaverakis, C., Nikolaidis, G., Kleontas, A., and Kompatsiaris, I. 2012. GalenOWL: 
Ontology -based drug recommendations discovery. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 3, 14.  
45. Doulaverakis, C., Nikolaidis, G., Kleontas, A., and Kompatsiaris, I. 2014. Panac ea, a semantic -
enabled drug recommendations discovery framework. Journal of Biomedical Semantics 5, 13.  
46. Rodríguez, A., Jiménez, E., Fernández, J., Eccius, M., Gómez, J. M., Alor -Hernandez, G., 
Posada -Gomez, R., and Laufer, C. 2009. SemMed: Applying Semanti c Web to Medical 
Recommendation Systems. 2009 First International Conference on Intensive Applications and 
Services.  
47. Kushwaha, N., Goyal, R., Goel, P., Singla, S., and Vyas, O. P. 2014. LOD Cloud Mining for 
Prognosis Model(Case Study. Native App for Drug R ecommender System). AIT 04, 03, 20 –28. 
48. Medvedeva, O., Knox, T., and Paul, J. 2007. DiaTrack. Web -based application for assisted 
decision -making in treatment of diabetes. Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges 23, 1, 
154–161. 49. Zhang, Q., Zhang, G., Lu, J. , and Wu, D. 2015. A framework of hybrid recommender system 
for personalized clinical prescription. 2015 International Conference on Intelligent Systems and 
Knowledge Engineering.  
50. Zhang, Y., Zhang, D., Hassan, M. M., Alamri, A., and Peng, L. 2015. CADRE. C loud-Assisted 
Drug REcommendation Service for Online Pharmacies. Mobile Netw Appl 20, 3, 348 –355. 
51. Sun, L., Liu, C., Guo, C., Xiong, H., and Xie, Y. 2016. Data -driven Automatic Treatment 
Regimen Development and Recommendation. KDD '16 Proceedings of the 22n d ACM 
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 1865 –1874.  
52. Kuhn, M., Letunic, I., Jensen, L.J. and Bork, P., 2016. The SIDER database of drugs and side 
effects.  Nucleic acids research,  44(D1), pp.D1075 -D1079.  
53. Beregovskaya, I. and Koroteev, M., 2021. Review of Clustering -Based Recommender 
Systems.  arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.12839.  
54. Tian, Y., Zheng, B., Wang, Y., Zhang, Y. and Wu, Q., 2019. College library personalized 
recommendation system based on hybrid recommendation algorithm.  Procedia CIRP,  83, 
pp.490 -494. 
55. Sun, Z. and Luo, N., 2010, August. A new user -based collaborative filtering algorithm 
combining data -distribution. In  2010 International Conference of Information Science and 
Management Engineering  (Vol. 2, pp. 19 -23). IEEE.  
56. K. P. Sinaga and M. -S. Yang, "Unsupervised K -Means Clustering Algorithm," in IEEE Access, 
vol. 8, pp. 80716 -80727, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2988796.  
57. M.-S. Yang, C. -Y. Lai, and C. -Y. Lin, ‘‘A robust EM clustering algorithm for Gaussian mixture 
model s,’’ Pattern Recognit., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 3950 –3961, Nov. 2012  
58. Koren, Y., Bell, R. and Volinsky, C., 2009. Matrix factorization techniques for recommender 
systems.  Computer,  42(8), pp.30 -37. 
59. Zhihua Cui, Peng Zhao, Zhaoming  Hu, Xingjuan Cai, Wensheng Zhang , Jinjun Chen, An 
improved matrix factorization based model for many -objective optimization recommendation, 
Informatic Science Elsevier, 2021  
60. Ivan Carrera, Eduardo Tejera and Ines Dutra, Simple Matrix Factorization Collabo rative 
Filtering for Drug Repositioning on Cell Lines, In Proceedings of the 14th International Joint 
Conference on Biomedical Engineering Systems and Technologies (BIOSTEC 2021) - Volume 
5 
61. A. Aliper, S. Plis, A. Artemov, A. Ulloa, P.Mamoshina, A. Zhavoron kov, Deep learning 
applications for predicting pharmacological properties of drugs and drug repurposing using 
transcriptomic data, Molecular pharmaceutics, 13 (7)(2016), pp. 2524 -2530 . 62. Dashpand Mukund, and George Karypis. “item -based top -n recommendation a lgorithms.” 
ACM Transactions on Informatics Systems (TOIS), 22.1 2004: 143 -177. 
 