arXiv:2301.07198v2  [physics.hist-ph]  19 Jan 2023Resurfaced 1964 VRT video interview of
Georges Lemaˆ ıtreJournal for the History of Astronomy
XX(X): 1–7
©The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned
www.sagepub.com/
SAGE
Satya Gontcho A Gontcho1, Jean-Baptiste Kikwaya Eluo2and Paul Gabor2
Abstract
On December 31 2022, the Vlaamse Radio- en Televisieomroepo rganisatie (VRT), the national public-service
broadcaster for the Flemish Community of Belgium, recovere d a video recording of a 1964 interview of Georges
Lemaˆ ıtre. Up until now, that footage was thought to have bee n lost. This footage represents a unique insight into
the views of the physicist often coined as the ”father of the B ig Bang”. The interview was conducted in French and is
available online with Flemish subtitles. In an effort to mak e this treasure broadly available, we provide in this paper
some brief context, an English translation of the interview as well as the French transcript for reference.
Keywords
Transcript, Translation, Historically signiﬁcant interv iew
Introduction
Georges Lemaˆ ıtre (1894-1966) was a Professor of Physics
at the Catholic University of Leuven and a Roman Catholic
priest. He is widely known as being among the ﬁrsts
to formulate a theory of the Big Bang. He has also
independently attributed the observed recession of nearby
galaxies to an expanding Universe. In 2018, the Internation al
Astronomical Society voted to rename Hubble Law the
Hubble–Lema ˆıtre Law . Georges Lemaˆ ıtre is undeniably
one of the key physicist of the XXthcentury and an
important ﬁgure of the history of astronomy ( Lemaˆ ıtre 1927 ;
Lemaˆ ıtre & Eddington 1931 ;Lemaˆ ıtre 1931 ). A video
interview of Georges Lemaˆ ıtre talking about his work is a
historical gem. As such, we aim to make this recording as
accessible as possible for the astronomy community, and
the general public at large. In the next section, we give
some context on the recovered footage, clarify the translat ion
process and provide the translation of the interview.
The VRT Interview
On Saturday December 31 2022, the Vlaamse
Radio- en Televisieomroeporganisatie (VRT)
published an online article making available to
the public a video interview of Georges Lemaˆ ıtre:
https://www.vrt.be/fr/2022/12/31/la-vrt-a-retrouve- dans-.../ .
This 19 minutes and 47 seconds interview was thought to
have been lost after its broadcasting on Friday February 14
1964, and only a ∼3 minutes excerpt preserved. Luckily,
it was recently recovered by the VRT as the video had
in fact been mislabelled and therefore misclassiﬁed. To
our knowledge, it is the only video interview of Georges
Lemaˆ ıtre in existence. It took place about 2 years before
his passing. The interview was pre-recorded at a date
unknown. Journalist Jerome Verhaeghe conducted the
interview and did the on-air introduction on the day of the
broadcast. During the interview, Georges Lemaˆ ıtre mentio ns
a conference in Namur (Belgium) that took place a couplemonths prior. On Sunday June 23 1963, Georges Lemaˆ ıtre
held a public lecture in Namur titled ”Universe & Atom” at
the ”Leuven at work: scientiﬁc research from recent years”
conference organized by the Association of the Friends of
Leuven. The proceeding from this conference was given
to one of the organizers who deemed it, at the time, too
technical to be published. In 2007, the family from the
organizer passed the Namur proceeding onto philosopher of
science Dominique Lambert who made it public in Lambert
(2007 ). Based on available historical records, this is deemed
to be the last publicly held lecture that Georges Lemaˆ ıtre h as
given. However, it is difﬁcult to establish with certainty t hat
this is the conference in Namur that Georges Lemaˆ ıtre refer s
to in the VRT interview.
The transcript of the VRT interview, in French, can be
found in the appendix. The transcript was done to the best of
our abilities to retain word for word what Georges Lemaˆ ıtre
said. For the sake of clarity, the English translation has
been very lightly edited. For the reader to know what to
expect with regards to the ﬁdelity of the French to English
translation, let us illustrate the editing choices we have
made with an example fully in English. If the word for
word transcript read ”The... hum ... to address your questio n
properly I will.... I’ll focus ﬁrst of all on... you know... o n
aspect X”, the English translation will read ”To address
your question properly, I will focus ﬁrst of all on aspect X”.
The translation is by no means perfect. We tried to stick as
closely as possible to what Georges Lemaˆ ıtre said, without
1Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, B erkeley,
CA 94720, USA
2Vatican Observatory Research Group, Steward Observatory, University
of Arizona, 933 N. Cherry Avenue, Tucson, AZ 85719, USA
Corresponding authors:
Jean-Baptiste Kikwaya Eluo, Satya Gontcho A Gontcho
Email: jbkikwaya@arizona.edu ,SatyaGontcho@lbl.gov
Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2017/01/17 v1.20]2 Journal for the History of Astronomy XX(X)
adding any modern turn of phrases, but simply removing
superﬂuous mumbling and repetitions that are common in
unscripted live conversations.
In the following translation, Jerome Verhaeghe will be
referred to as JV and Georges Lemaˆ ıtre as GLM. We
have added [in brackets] some comments such as,
but not limited to, pointing out part of the audio that are
unintelligible, change of voice from GLM in order to add
emphasis to his speech, and some clariﬁcations on what
”he”/”it”/”this” refers to when the phrases get long and the
repeated use of such pronouns might confuse the reader.
English translation
[VRT video interview starts.]
GLM: It is not very easy to answer your question
because there are many aspects that we can develop on.
Perhaps we could begin, in order to situate the question,
by recalling a text that the great French mathematician,
´Elie Cartan [´Elie Joseph Cartan, Fellow of
the Royal Society] , used at the beginning of a
remarkable conference in 1927 on the theory of groups and
geometry. He [´Elie Cartan] alluded to the general
tendency of modern physics which, he said, is repugnant
to the idea of having laws [of physics] , that would
in each region of space, involve space as a whole. And
this is exactly what characterizes and opposes, in a way, a
simple application of the Theory of Relativity to the theory
of Fred Hoyle [Sir Fred Hoyle, Fellow of the
Royal Society] . It is that Fred Hoyle, in presenting his
Steady State theory, implies that the whole universe satisﬁ es
a group, a particular group, which satisﬁes space as a whole.
Maybe it could be explained more clearly because I can see
that it is not very clear. It could be explained more clearly
by saying this: a very long time ago, before the theory of the
expansion of the universe (some 40 years ago), we expected
the universe to be static. We expected that nothing would
change. It was an a priori idea that applied to the whole
universe...[interrupted by JV]
JV: ...that was consistent with experiment *...
[interrupted by GLM]
GLM: No, not at all. Not at all! It was an a priori idea.
For which there was no experiment. And the facts relating to
the expansion of the universe made this theory inadmissible .
So we realized that we had to admit change. But those
who wanted for there to be no change wanted to minimize
this change. In a way, they would say: ”while we can only
admit that it changes, it should change as little as possible ”.
Let it change only in scale. That everything happens on a
larger scale but that it happens in the same way. And this
is what was ﬁrst introduced by Milne [Edward Arthur
Milne, Fellow of the Royal Society] under
the name of ”cosmological principle” and later under the
name of ”perfect cosmological principle” and then by the
very idea of the Steady State Theory. This is what you ﬁnd
in his letters, he says: ”if you try to say there is some sort
of coherent plan in the universe, I think I would agree”.It is the idea that there is a plan. It’s not the idea that the
universe has laws and that these laws build something
more or less coherent. But it is the idea that there is a
plan. Obviously it’s a bit of a Leibnizian [Gottfried
Wilhelm Lebiniz] idea that the universe is made as
well as possible, probably a pantheistic type of Leibniz ide a.
We can see that from his [Milne] own personal ideas,
can’t we? In any case, from the scientiﬁc point of view, it is
the idea that there is an overall plan. Whereas the general
idea of physics, as Cartan expressed it, is that the laws are
local, are differential and that this set cannot be very regu lar.
At least not as regular as Hoyle expected...
JV:... it doesn’t necessarily have to be this regular?
GLM: It doesn’t have to be regular, and in any case, it
should not be expected to. And that’s what Hoyle senses.
And he has a difﬁculty in admitting it. You remember, he
said that when he started this theory, he thought he had to
reject it. The expression he wrote down: ”well nothing much
happens, nothing much happens” [...] because, he said,
there should be creation . What does this mean... creation
? This word, creation, brings with it a whole philosophical
or religious resonance that has nothing to do with the
question. Behind this word, creation, what is there? There i s
simply that the apparition of hydrogen, as Hoyle supposes,
is something quite fantastic and unexpected. That’s why
he used the word creation. It is absolutely unexpected.
And if I had to use another imagery to express the same
thing, I would say that this hydrogen appears in a totally
unexpected way like a ghost [dramatic emphasis on
the word "ghost"] . It’s a kind of ghost as it would
appear in castles in Scotland. To introduce a kind of ghostly
hydrogen in this way would avoid the difﬁculty that the
principle of Steady State seemed to be in opposition to the
Principle of Conservation of Energy. In opposition with
basically the most secure and solid thing in physics [i.e.
the Energy Conservation Principle] . In order
to maintain all this, one admits a... ghostly production
of hydrogen. And what can we expect from hydrogen
appearing without any physical reason, without any normal
connection? One could... expect it to disappear in the same
way as it appeared. So this is how this theory presents itself .
As a theory imposing an assumption analogous to the apriori
that you should look for a static solution ... [unclear]
... that you are looking for a solution with a minimum of
change. Which, for my part, along with others, I am opposed
to[that static solution] in the sense that I don’t
think that it is the tendency of modern physics to admit
that there are global laws in the universe, absolute laws,
laws that, in Hoyle’s expression, would imply a ”design”,
would imply a plan. I cannot picture things working that way.
JV:You are one of the creators of a theory that is a part,
if you will, of what Hoyle calls the ”Big Bang” theories, the
theories of the big explosion. What is your theory, and if
∗[Could be understood as "empirical evidence".]
Prepared using sagej.clsGontcho A Gontcho, Kikwaya Eluo and Gabor 3
possible at all Monsignor†, could you explain it in just a few
words?
GLM: Look, I wouldn’t want to... the question is too
broad for this. In fact, Hoyle recognizes that there are many
theories that he calls ”Big Bang theory”, right. I don’t know
to what extent the arrows he shoots against these theories
are actually hitting the mark. But as far as the oldest of
these theories is concerned, the one I proposed in 1931
under the name of the hypothesis of the primeval atom‡,
I have the impression that his arrows do not reach me at
all. I am even a little surprised that he doesn’t realize this ,
because we have so often had the opportunity to talk, Hoyle
and me, in the most friendly way. If you like, I have the
impression that he was mostly concerned with what he
imagined the theory to be rather than what it is. Especially
the aspect of it that I have developed. So I think that this
theory escapes... [unintelligible] ... if you like, I can
try...[unintelligible] ... I can’t develop the whole
theory, but I’ll say how it escapes [Hoyle’s arrows] .
He basically says that according to his theories... I would
like to ﬁnd his exact text [GLM ruffling through
his sheets of paper] : ”And quite early on in the
game, all the galaxies are supposed to have formed and then
should therefore be..” and so on§. This is not at all how I
have ever considered the theory of the primeval atom. There
is a beginning... we may touch on other aspects at some
point... there is a beginning very different from the presen t
state of the world, a beginning in multiplicity which can
be described in that it can be described in the form of the
disintegration of all existing matter into an atom. What wil l
be the ﬁrst result of this disintegration, as far as we can
follow the theory, is in fact to have a universe, an expanding
space ﬁlled by a plasma, by very energetic rays going in
all directions. Something which does not look at all like a
homogeneous gas. Then by a process that we can vaguely
imagine, unfortunately we cannot follow that in very many
details, gases had to form locally; gas clouds moving with
great speeds... [interrupted by JV]
JV:Condensations¶?
GLM: No, it is not a question of condensation. Gas. Not
condensations precisely, because all the universe was... a ll
the plasma was quasi homogeneous. There had to have been
places where gas clouds formed which stopped the rays and
in this process of stopping the rays (whatever the process by
which it is done), it is obvious that the very high nuclei must
have broken up, must have produced a lot of hydrogen. So
that from the point of view of astronomical development of
the whole universe, we ﬁnd ourselves with distinct gaseous
clouds which are almost entirely made up of hydrogen.
Now this is the key point of Hoyle’s theory: it all starts with
hydrogen. The essential difference is whether this hydroge n
is produced naturally by a reasonable physical process or, o n
the contrary, it is a kind of phantom hydrogen which appears
with just the right amount of hydrogen to verify an a priori
law. Obviously, we can expect that a part of these rays has
escaped from this condensation process. And here we have
a different element, perhaps in the theory of the primeval
atom: it is that a part of the rays has escaped with almost nohydrogen and that these rays can be found... we can hope
that they are found, in the cosmic rays. This is a theory
that was put forward not only by myself, but by Regener
[Erich Rudolf Alexander Regener] a long time
ago, who called cosmic rays fossil rays in the sense that
they are the testimony of the very ﬁrst ages of the world.
And I, for my part, preferred to call them the rays of the
primeval ﬁreworks , which are preserved in the remarkably
empty space and reach us... giving us a testimony of the
ﬁrst ages of the world... obviously, a bit of poetry in there.
Anyway. The starting point remains the same, it is hydrogen,
whether it is created hydrogen or hydrogen coming from
other things. Bondi [Sir Hermann Bondi, Fellow
of the Royal Society] assures us that Hoyle’s work
was inspired by the Steady State theory and that it [Hoyle’
work] might not have been produced if Hoyle had not
invented the Steady State theory. I recognize that this is
certainly a very great excuse for this [Steady State]
theory because I have the greatest admiration for Hoyle’s
work. It brought something very ﬁrst class, very solid... th e
way in which he and his collaborators were able to show
how, from hydrogen in the stars, different [celestial]
bodies could form; it is a ﬁrst class result. And I would
say[a result] almost of a much more solid level than
anything we can do as a cosmogonic theory. So if it is really
this idea of Steady State theory that made this possible,
well, I would be happy about that. But what I have to say
is that, for my part, I ﬁnd it just as simple to welcome this
magniﬁcent result within the framework of a theory where
hydrogen is natural hydrogen rather than to welcome it in a
theory where hydrogen would be phantom hydrogen, I don’t
see any difference between the two.
JV:Monsignor, does the fact that the universe, according
to your theory, has a beginning (at least one beginning)...
does it have a religious meaning for you, a religious
signiﬁcance?
GLM: Well, of course it must be explained... It is quite
clear that in these interviews, the use of the word creation
has provoked a rather particular turn in these interviews.
Each one of them freely, and legitimately, exposed their
views... These views were presented rather from the
agnostic, materialist, or rather pantheist point of view. I
don’t think there would be any interest... any advantage
in me opposing these positions that everybody are aware
of... to make a confession of my religious convictions. It
wouldn’t make much sense. The point is, to answer your
question by dismissing precisely what many people expect,
[the point] is that I am not defending the primeval
atom for the sake of whatever religious ulterior motive. Of
course, nobody knows exactly what one’s psychology is,
really. But, not only consciously I don’t have this idea at al l,
I think that the impact of this theory in the philosophical,
†[Honorific form of address for certain members
of the male clergy (akin to the English "Your
Excellency").]
‡FR: hypoth` ese de l’atome primitif
§[said in English by GLM.]
¶[Could also be translated as condensates .]
Prepared using sagej.cls4 Journal for the History of Astronomy XX(X)
philosophicoreligious problem is essentially different. It is a
point obviously a little delicate. I am a bit afraid to elabor ate
on it in a few words now. I elaborated on it extensively in
a conference that I gave a few months ago in Namur and
that was on your airwaves, but on the French airwaves||
and it is precisely that if my theory is correct, it makes
the philosophical problem of creation disappear, in a way.
This is, moreover, what was developed in the preface of
my little book on the primeval atom by Professor Gonseth
[Ferdinand Gonseth] from Zurich who showed that
there was a certain philosophical resonance of my theory in
the sense that it made disappear some antinomies posed by
Kant[Immanuel Kant] .
JV:If I’m not mistaken, Monsignor, did you not warn the
religious authorities even against... [interrupted by
GLM]
GLM: Look, ﬁrst of all I am far too respectful of the
religious authorities who know well enough what they have
to do. But certainly I would warn... I have always warned
my colleagues, well-meaning spirits, who would like to
take argument on this. But let’s go a little bit more into the
substance of the question. When one poses the problem
of the beginning of the world, one is almost always faced
with a rather essential difﬁculty: to ask oneself, why did it
begin at that moment? Why didn’t it start a little earlier?
And in a certain sense, why wouldn’t it have started a little
earlier? So it seems that any theory that involves a beginnin g
must be unnatural. To say ”we decide at this point that it
begins”... This is what was expressed by saying: ”it is made
of nothing”. That is to say that we expected it to come
from something; and we say ”it doesn’t come from this
something, it’s made of nothing”. Well... the point of view
I’m coming to is quite different. That is, the beginning is
so unimaginable, so different from the present state of the
world that such a question does not arise. And even more
than that. This beginning is the beginning of multiplicity.
The fundamental idea is... I can’t develop it with more
details now... it is the beginning of multiplicity. It is the
idea that the universe, which exists in quanta, in packets of
determined energy, begins with a single quantum, or a very
small number of quanta, so that it is impossible to wonder
from what it would come, from what it would have been
divided from. The whole development of entropy is that
quanta divide themselves, develop, etc. At the beginning, i f
there is only one, we cannot ask ourselves where it comes
from. Then the question does not arise to say that it comes
from nothing. It is a background of space-time for which
no problem arises. Or if you want, when one holds oneself
as the spiritualist, with the idea that it comes from God,
etc. ... well, one would like to take God in default for this
’initial ﬂick’ as Laplace [Pierre-Simon, Marquis
de Laplace] said. Well it doesn’t hold, because the
beginning... the bottom of the space-time is so different fr om
all our conceptions that there is no more problem. And then
obviously for an atheist, everything/anything cannot rema in,
I cannot continue to speak if God doesn’t support me in
the existence, that’s for sure, isn’t it? But that’s nothing ,
that’s the general stance of christian philosophy. But ther e’s
nothing special about the beginning. And the beginning isnot a place where you would touch God as a hypothesis,
where if you like, I’ll talk about Laplace’s initial ﬂick,
since we’re now talking about conferences in English... I
recall Jeans [Sir James Hopwood Jeans, Fellow
of the Royal Society] words ”the ﬁnger of God
agitating the ether” [dramatic voice] , that was the
beginning. Well, that’s not... that’s not a pleasant idea fo r a
religious mind. It’s an idea that brings God down into the
realm of primary causes, and I think one of the contributions
that a theory like mine can make is to avoid just such
difﬁculties.
JV:So, to state things plainly, you refuse to accept the
idea that God should explain the movement of galaxies.
GLM: Of course, it goes without saying! Absolutely.
That is to say if God supports the galaxies, he acts as God,
he does not act as a force that would contradict everything.
It’s not V oltaire’s watchmaker who has to wind his clock
from time to time, isn’t it... [laughs]. There!
JV:Thank you very much, Monsignor.
[VRT video interview ends.]
Remarks on the term ”initial ﬂick”
It seems that the term chiquenaude , translated as ﬂick, is
being misattributed to Laplace in this interview. The term
was used by Blaise Pascal to refute Ren´ e Descartes’ form
of theism. In his book Thoughts (Pascal 1670 ), Pascal says:
”Je ne puis pardonner ` a Descartes: il aurait bien voulu,
dans toute sa philosophie, pouvoir se passer de Dieu ; mais
il n’a pu s’empˆ echer de lui faire donner une chiquenaude
pour mettre le monde en mouvement.” In English: ”I cannot
forgive Descartes: he would have liked, in all his philosoph y,
to be able to do without God; but he could not help to have
him give a ﬂick to set the world in motion.”
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Vlaamse Radio- en Televisieomroeporg an-
isatie (VRT), the national public-service broadcaster for the Flemish
Community of Belgium, for access to the 1964 recovered video
interview of Georges Lemaˆ ıtre. In particular, Kathleen Be rtrem
(VRT Archive & Communication departments) for her availabi lity.
Our thanks also go to Dominique Lambert for his prompt return
on our draft and sharing his experience and expertise on Geor ges
Lemaˆ ıtre with us. SGG is supported by the Director, Ofﬁce of
Science, Ofﬁce of High Energy Physics of the U.S. Department of
Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH1123. JBKE and PG
are supported by the Vatican and the Vatican Observatory Res earch
Group.
/bardblBelgian Radio-television of the French Community (R.T.B.F .)
Prepared using sagej.clsGontcho A Gontcho, Kikwaya Eluo and Gabor 5
References
Lemaˆ ıtre G., Univers et Atome in Lambert D., L’itin´ eraire spirituel
de Georges Lemaˆ ıtre, Bruxelles, Lessius, 2007, pp. 199-21 6.
Lemaˆ ıtre G., Un Univers homog` ene de masse
constante et de rayon croissant rendant compte de
la vitesse radiale des n´ ebuleuses extra-galactiques,
Annales de la Soci&eacute;t&eacute; Scientiﬁque de
Bruxelles, V olume 47, January 1927, Pages 49–59,
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1927ASSB...47...4 9L.
Lemaˆ ıtre G., Eddington A. S., The Expanding Uni-
verse, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-
ety, V olume 91, Issue 5, March 1931, Pages 490–501,
https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/91.5.490 .
Lemaˆ ıtre G., The Beginning of the World from the Point
of View of Quantum Theory. Nature 127, 706 (1931).
https://doi.org/10.1038/127706b0 .
Pascal B., Pens´ ees, I, 19, 51.
Appendix: French transcript
[Vid´eo de la VRT commence.]
GLM: Et bien ce n’est pas tr` es facile de r´ epondre ` a
cette question. Parce qu’il y a beaucoup d’aspects que l’on
peut d´ evelopper. Mais peut-ˆ etre pourrions-nous commenc er
pour situer la question par rappeler un texte que le grand
math´ ematicien franc ¸ais, ´Elie Cartan, avait employ´ e en
d´ ebutant une conf´ erence remarquable, il fut en 1927, sur
la th´ eorie des groupes et la g´ eom´ etrie. Et voici ce qu’il
dit. Il fait allusion ` a la tendance g´ en´ erale de la physiqu e
moderne qui r´ epugne, dit-il, ` a l’id´ ee de soumettre des lo is
a priori, faisant intervenir dans chaque r´ egion de l’espac e,
l’espace tout entier. Et c’est exactement cela qui caract´ e rise
et qui oppose, en quelque sorte, une simple application
de la th´ eorie de la relativit´ e ` a la th´ eorie de Fred Hoyle.
C’est que, Fred Hoyle, en pr´ esentant sa Steady State
Theory **implique que l’univers tout entier satisfait ` a un
groupe, un groupe particulier, qui v´ eriﬁe tout l’ensemble
de l’espace. Mais peut-ˆ etre pourrait-on encore l’expliqu er
plus clairement parce que je vois que ce n’est pas tr` es clair
ainsi. On pourrait peut-ˆ etre l’expliquer plus clairement en
se disant ceci : avant, il y a tr` es longtemps, avant la th´ eor ie
de l’expansion de l’univers il y a une quarantaine d’ann´ ees ,
et bien on s’attendait ` a ce que l’univers soit statique, ` a c e
que que rien ne change. Et bien, c’´ etait au fond une id´ ee
a priori qui s’appliquait ` a tout l’ensemble de l’univers. . .
[interrompu par JV]
JV:. . . qui correspondait ` a l’exp´ erience [interrompu
par GLM]
GLM: Non, pas du tout. Pas du tout! C’´ etait une id´ ee
a priori. Pour laquelle il n’y avait aucune exp´ erience. Et
les faits relatifs ` a l’expansion de l’univers ont rendu cet te
th´ eorie inadmissible. Alors on s’est rendu compte qu’il
fallait admettre changement. Mais ceux qui tenaient ` a ce
qu’il n’y ait pas de changement ont voulu minimiser ce
changement. Et on dit ”Et bien, il faut bien admettre que
c ¸a change, mais que c ¸a change le moins possible. Que c ¸achange simplement d’´ echelle. Que tout se reproduise mais ` a
une ´ echelle un peu plus grande. Que tout se reproduise de
la mˆ eme fac ¸on.” Et c’est cela qui a d’abord ´ et´ e introduit par
Milne sous le nom de principe cosmologique et plus tard
principe cosmologique parfait . Et ensuite l’id´ ee mˆ eme de
la Steady State Theory. C’est bien cela, n’est-ce-pas, que
nous pouvons trouver dans ses textes: il dit: “if you try to
say there is some sort of coherent plan in the universe, I
think I would agree”. C’est l’id´ ee qu’il y a un plan. Ce n’est
pas l’id´ ee que l’univers a des lois et que ces lois bˆ atissen t
plus ou moins quelque chose de plus ou moins coh´ erent.
[d´efaut bande audio] C’est l’id´ ee qu’il y a un plan.
´Evidemment c’est dans le fond une id´ ee du type de Leibniz;
que l’univers est fait pour le mieux possible, d’un type de
Leibniz probablement... probablement panth´ eiste. Nous l e
voyons bien d’apr` es les id´ ees personnelles qu’il d´ evelo ppe,
n’est-ce-pas? Mais en tout les cas, du point scientiﬁque, un e
id´ ee qu’il y a un plan d’ensemble. Tandis que l’id´ ee g´ en´ e rale
de la physique comme l’exprimait Cartan, c’est que les lois
sont locales, sont diff´ erentielles et que l’ensemble ne pe ut
pas avoir une tr` es grande r´ egularit´ e comme l’attend Hoyl e.
JV:Ne doit pas n´ ecessairement avoir cette r´ egularit´ e ?
GLM: Ne doit pas n´ ecessairement l’avoir et qu’on ne
doit pas l’attendre. Et d’ailleurs c’est bien ce que Hoyle
sent, c’est qu’il a une difﬁcult´ e ` a l’admettre. V ous vous
rappelez qu’il me disait que lorsqu’il a commenc´ e cette
th´ eorie, il a cru devoir la rejeter. Et l’expression qu’il n otait :
”well nothing much happened. nothing much happened”,
n’est-ce pas, pour un temps. Parce que, dit-il, il devrait
y avoir cr´ eation. Mais qu’est-ce que c ¸a veut dire, ce mot
cr´ eation ? Ce mot cr´ eation, au fond, c ¸a entraˆ ıne toute un e
r´ esonnance philosophique ou religieuse qui n’a rien ` a avo ir
avec la question. Derri` ere ce mot de cr´ eation, qu’est-ce q u’il
y a ? Il y a tout simplement que l’apparition de l’hydrog` ene,
comme la suppose Hoyle, est quelque chose de tout ` a fait
fantastique et inattendu. C’est pour c ¸a qu’il a employ´ e le
mot cr´ eation. C’est absolument inattendu. Et si je devais
employer une autre image pour exprimer la mˆ eme chose,
je dirais que cet hydrog` ene apparaˆ ıt de mani` ere totaleme nt
inattendue comme un fantˆ ome [emphase dramatique
sur ce dernier mot] . C’est une sorte de fantˆ ome tel
qu’ils apparaissent, paraˆ ıt-t-il, dans les chˆ ateaux d’ ´Ecosse.
Et introduire une sorte d’hydrog` ene fantomal ainsi pour.. .
pour ´ eviter la difﬁcult´ e qui se pr´ esentait, la difﬁcult´ e
qui se pr´ esentait, c’est que le principe de Steady State
paraissait en opposition avec la conservation d’´ energie.
Avec au fond ce qu’il y a de plus sˆ ur, de plus solide en
physique. N’est-ce-pas ? Et bien pour maintenir tout de
mˆ eme tout cela, on admet une production d’hydrog` ene
absolument fantomale. Et qu’est-ce que l’on peut attendre
d’un hydrog` ene apparaissant ainsi; sans aucune raison
physique, sans aucune connexion normale ? On pourrait
tout au plus attendre qu’il disparaisse comme il est apparu.
Alors voil` a donc comment cette th´ eorie se pr´ esente, au
fond. Comme une th´ eorie imposant un a priori . Un apriori
analogue ` a l’apriori que vous pouvez avoir de chercher
∗∗FR: th´ eorie de l’´ etat stationnaire
Prepared using sagej.cls6 Journal for the History of Astronomy XX(X)
une solution statique, de chercher une solution avec le
minimum de changement. Et contre lequel, pour ma part,
et avec d’autres, je m’oppose dans ce sens que je ne pense
pas que[... cherche ses mots ...] c ¸a soit la
tendance de la physique moderne d’admettre qu’il y a
dans l’univers des lois globales, des lois absolues, des loi s
qui, dans l’expression de Hoyle, impliqueraient un design,
impliqueraient un but, un plan, n’est-ce-pas? Ce n’est pas
comme c ¸a enﬁn que je puis me repr´ esenter les choses.
JV:V ous ˆ etes un des cr´ eateurs d’une th´ eorie qui est une
partie, si vous voulez, dans l’ensemble de ce que Hoyle
appelle les ”Big Bang Theory”. Donc les th´ eories de la
grande explosion. Quelle est votre th´ eorie, si c’est possi ble
bien entendu Monseigneur de l’expliquer en quelques mots
seulement ?
GLM: Mais ´ ecoutez, je ne voudrais pas... mmh, la
question est trop vaste comme ceci. Mais enﬁn, Hoyle
reconnaˆ ıt qu’il y a beaucoup de th´ eories qu’il appelle ”Bi g
Bang theory”, n’est-ce pas... [inaudible] Moi je ne sais
pas jusqu’` a quel point les ﬂ` eches qu’il d´ ecoche contre ce s
th´ eories, r´ eellement, atteignent leur but. Mais pour ce q ui
concerne la th´ eorie la plus ancienne parmis ces th´ eories,
celle donc que j’ai propos´ e en 1931 sous le nom d’ hypoth `ese
de l’atome primitif , bah j’ai l’impression que ses ﬂ` eches
ne m’atteignent pas du tout. Et je suis mˆ eme un peu ´ etonn´ e
qu’il ne s’en rende compte pas tellement parce qu’enﬁn
nous avons tellement souvent eu l’occasion de causer,
Monsieur Hoyle et moi, de la mani` ere la plus amicale,
n’est-ce-pas... [inaudible] ... j’ai l’impression qu’il
s’est surtout attach´ e ` a ce qu’il s’imaginait de ces th´ eor ies
plutˆ ot que, et surtout l’aspect particulier d’ailleurs qu e j’ai
toujours d´ evelopp´ e. Je pense donc que cette th´ eorie ´ ech appe
pour l’instant ... je ne vais pas d´ evelopper l’ensemble de l a
th´ eorie, mais je voudrais dire, essentiellement, en quoi e lle
´ echappe. Il dit essentiellement que d’apr` es ses th´ eorie s...
j’aimerais retrouver son texte exact [fouille dans
ses feuilles de papier] ”And quite early on the
game, all the galaxies are supposed to have formed and then
should therefore be.. ” and so on††. Mais ce n’est pas du
tout ainsi que j’ai jamais consid´ er´ e la th´ eorie de l’atom e
primitif. Il y a un commencement, nous y reviendrons
peut-ˆ etre ` a d’autres aspects, un commencement tr` es diff ´ erent
de l’´ etat actuel du monde, un commencement en multiplicit´ e
qui peut ˆ etre d´ ecrit pour autant qu’on peut le faire sous
forme de la d´ esint´ egration de toute la mati` ere existante sous
forme d’un atome. Quel va ˆ etre le premier r´ esultat de cette
d´ esint´ egration pour autant qu’on peut suivre la th´ eorie , et
bien c’est d’avoir un univers, un espace en expansion rempli
par un plasma, par des rayons tr` es ´ energiques allant dans
tous les sens. Quelque chose qui ne ressemble pas du tout
` a un gaz homog` ene. Alors par un proc´ ed´ e que l’on peut
vaguement imaginer, mais malheureusement qu’on ne peut
pas suivre fort en d´ etails, il a dˆ u se former localement, il a
dˆ u se former des gaz par places, de nu´ ees gazeuses anim´ ees
de grandes vitesses... [interrompu par JV]
JV:Des condensations ?GLM: Pas... hm il ne s’agit pas de condensations. Des
gaz! Pas pr´ ecis´ ement des condensations, parce que tout
l’univers ´ etait, tout le plasma ´ etait ainsi de mani` ere qu asi
homog` ene. Il a dˆ u se former, par places, du gaz, qui a
alors arrˆ et´ e les rayons et dans ce processus d’arrˆ et (que l
que soit le d´ etail dans lesquel c ¸a se fait), il est ´ evident
que les noyaux tr` es ´ elev´ es ont dˆ u se briser, ﬁnalement,
ont dus produire beaucoup d’hydrog` ene. De sorte que, au
point de vue du d´ eveloppement vraiment astronomique
de tout l’univers, on se trouve devant des nu´ ees gazeuses
distinctes qui sont presque enti` erement de l’hydrog` ene.
Or c’est l` a l’essentiel de la th´ eorie de Hoyle, c’est de
commencer avec de l’hydrog` ene. L’essentiel, n’est-ce pas ,
la diff´ erence, c’est de savoir si cet hydrog` ene s’est prod uit
naturellement par un processus physique raisonnable, ou
au contraire c’est une sorte d’hydrog` ene fantomal qui
arrive tout juste avec la quantit´ e voulue pour v´ eriﬁer une
loi pos´ ee a priori. ´Evidemment on peut s’attendre ` a ce
qu’une[inaudible] partie de ces rayons ait ´ echapp´ e ` a
ce processus de condensation. Et l` a, nous avons un ´ el´ emen t
diff´ erent peut-ˆ etre dans la th´ eorie de l’atome primitif ,
c’est qu’une partie des rayons ont ´ echapp´ e, et ne comptant
presque pas d’hydrog` ene, et que ces rayons peuvent se
retrouver.. et que l’on peut esp´ erer qu’ils se trouvent, da ns
les rayons cosmiques. C’est une th´ eorie qui a ´ et´ e avanc´ e e
non seulement par moi-mˆ eme, mais par Regener il y a
bien longtemps qui les appelaient... il appelait les rayons
cosmiques des rayons fossiles; dans ce sens qu’ils sont le
t´ emoignage des tous premiers ˆ ages du monde et que, pour ma
part, je pr´ ef´ erais appeler les rayons du feu d’artiﬁce pri mitif,
qui se sont conserv´ es dans l’espace remarquablement vide
et nous parviennent en nous t´ emoignant, en nous donnant
un t´ emoignage des premiers ˆ ages du monde... ´ evidemment
un peu de po´ esie l` a-dedans. Quoiqu’il en soit, n’est-ce
pas... le point de d´ epart reste le mˆ eme c’est l’hydrog` ene ,
que ce soit de l’hydrog` ene cr´ e´ e, que ce soit de l’hydrog` e ne
provenant d’autre chose. Bondi nous assure que les travaux
de Hoyle ont ´ et´ e inspir´ es par la ”Steady State theory”
et qu’ils [les travaux de Hoyles] n’auraient peut-ˆ etre pas
´ et´ e produits si Hoyles n’avait pas invent´ e la Steady Stat e
Theory. Je reconnais que c’est certainement au moins une
tr` es grande excuse pour cette th´ eorie. Parce que j’ai la pl us
grande admiration pour ces travaux de Hoyle qui ont apport´ e
quelque chose de tout premier plan, de tout ` a fait solide,
que la mani` ere dont lui-mˆ eme, avec des collaborateurs, a
pu montrer comment ` a partir de l’hydrog` ene pouvait se
former dans les ´ etoiles les diff´ erents corps est un r´ esul tat de
tout premier plan et je dirais presque d’un niveau beaucoup
plus solide que tout ce que nous pouvons faire comme
th´ eorie cosmogonique. Donc si r´ eellement c’est cette id´ ee
de Steady State Theory qui a rendu cela possible, ben, je
m’en r´ ejouirais. Mais ce que je dois dire, c’est que, pour ma
part, je trouve tout aussi simple d’accueillir ces magniﬁqu es
r´ esultats dans le cadre d’une th´ eorie o` u l’hydrog` ene es t
de l’hydrog` ene naturel plutˆ ot que de l’accueillir dans un e
th´ eorie o` u de l’hydrog` ene serait de l’hydrog` ene fantom al, je
ne vois pas de diff´ erence entre les deux.
††[inaudible]
Prepared using sagej.clsGontcho A Gontcho, Kikwaya Eluo and Gabor 7
JV: Monseigneur, est-ce que le fait que l’univers,
selon votre th´ eorie, a un commencement (au moins un
commencement), est-ce que cela a pour vous un sens
religieux, une signiﬁcation religieuse ?
GLM: Et bien, il faut naturellement vous expliquer, il y
a, il est bien clair que dans ces interviews, l’emploi du mot
cr´ eation a provoqu´ e un tour assez particulier ` a ces inter views.
Chacun d’entre eux a tr` es librement et tr` es l´ egitimement
expos´ e ses vues.. ces vues se pr´ esentaient plutˆ ot sous un e
forme agnostique, mat´ erialiste, ou plutˆ ot panth´ eiste. Je
ne pense pas qu’il y aurait le moindre int´ erˆ et, le moindre
avantage que j’oppose ` a ces positions que tout le monde
connaˆ ıt, que je fasse ici une profession de mes convictions
religieuses, ca n’aurait pas beaucoup de sens. Aussi, je
pense que le point de vue est plutˆ ot de r´ epondre ` a votre
question en ´ ecartant justement ce que beaucoup de gens
imaginent: c’est que je d´ efends l’atome primitif, je ne sai s
pas moi avec quelle id´ ee, quelle arri` ere-pens´ ee religie use,
n’est-ce-pas. Naturellement, personne ne sait exactement
quelle est sa psychologie et ce qu’il fait r´ eellement. Mais ,
non seulement consciemment je n’ai pas du tout cette
id´ ee, n’est-ce-pas... Mais mˆ eme, n’est-ce-pas, je pense que
l’impact de cette th´ eorie dans le probl` eme philosophique ...
philosophico-religieux, est essentiellement diff´ erent . C’est
un point ´ evidemment un peu d´ elicat, j’ai un peu peur de
d´ evelopper en quelques mots maintenant. Je l’ai d´ evelopp ´ e
tr` es largement dans une conf´ erence que j’ai faite il y a
quelques mois ` a Namur et qui a ´ et´ e sur vos ondes, mais ` a
l’antenne franc ¸aise‡‡, n’est-ce-pas, et c’est justement que si
ma th´ eorie est correcte, elle fait en quelque sorte dispara ˆ ıtre
le probl` eme philosophique de la cr´ eation. C’est d’ailleu rs
ce qui a ´ et´ e d´ evelopp´ e dans la pr´ eface de mon petit livre
sur l’atome primitif par le Professeur Gonseth de Zurich,
n’est-ce pas, qui a justement, avec raison, montr´ e qu’il y
avait une certaine r´ esonance philosophique de ma th´ eorie en
ce sens qu’elle faisait disparaˆ ıtre certaines des antinom ies
pos´ ees par Kant.
JV: Si je ne me trompe pas, Monseigneur, est-ce que
vous n’avez pas mis les autorit´ es religieuses mˆ eme en gard e
contre[interrompu par GLM]
GLM: Non ´ ecoutez, d’abord je suis beaucoup trop
respectueux des autorit´ es religieuses qui savent bien ce
qu’elles ont ` a faire, certainement pas les autorit´ es reli gieuses,
mais certainement je mettrais, j’ai toujours mis en garde
mes coll` egues, des esprits bien intentionn´ es, n’est-ce- pas,
qui voudraient prendre argument de cela. Mais je crois qu’il
vaut tout de mˆ eme mieux aller un peu plus dans le fond de
la question: pourquoi s’en est-il pas [ininteligible] ?
Et bien, lorsqu’on se pose le probl` eme du d´ ebut du monde,
on se trouve presque toujours devant une difﬁcult´ e assez
essentielle: de se demander pourquoi c ¸a commence-t-il
` a ce moment-l` a ? Pourquoi c ¸a n’aurait-il pas commenc´ e
un peu plus tˆ ot ? Pourquoi.... Et en un certain sens,
pourquoi c ¸a n’aurait-il commence un peu plus tˆ ot? De
telle sorte qu’il semble que toute th´ eorie qui implique un
commencement doit ˆ etre quelque chose de peu naturel. De
dire “on d´ ecide ` a ce moment l` a que c ¸a commence”. C’est ce
qui s’exprimait en disant : ”c’est fait de rien”. C’est-` a-d irequ’on s’attendait ` a ce que c ¸a provienne de quelque chose;
et on dit “c ¸a ne provient pas de ce quelque chose, c’est
fait de rien”. Eh bien. . . le point de vue auquel j’arrive
est tout diff´ erent. C’est-` a-dire que le commencement est
tellement inimaginable, tellement diff´ erent de l’´ etat a ctuel
du monde qu’une pareille question ne se pose pas. Et mˆ eme,
plus que cela. Ce commencement est le commencement
de la multiplicit´ e. L’id´ ee fondamentale c’est – et cela, e t
je ne peux pas le d´ evelopper avec quelque peu de d´ etails
maintenant. Mais enﬁn l’id´ ee, c’est le commencement de
la multiplicit´ e, c’est que l’univers qui existe en quanta,
en paquets d’´ energie d´ etermin´ ee, commence avec un seul
quantum, ou un tout petit nombre de quanta de telle sorte
qu’il est impossible de se demander de quoi il proviendrait,
de quoi il serait divis´ e. Tout le d´ eveloppement de l’entro pie,
c’est que les quanta se divisent, se d´ eveloppent, etc. Au
d´ epart s’il n’y en a qu’un, on ne peut pas se demander d’o` u
il vient. Et alors la question ne se pose pas de dire qu’il
vient de rien. C’est un fond de l’espace-temps pour lequel
aucun probl` eme ne se pr´ esente. Ou si vous voulez, lorsqu’o n
se tient comme le spiritualiste a l’id´ ee que tout provient
de Dieu, etc. Et bien, on voudrait prendre en quelque sorte
Dieu en d´ efaut pour dire ”Et bien l` a on le touche dans
cette chiquenaude initiale” comme disait Laplace, ou des
choses ainsi... Et bien il ´ echappe, il ´ echappe parce que le
d´ ebut, le fond de l’espace-temps est tellement diff´ erent de
toutes nos conceptions qu’il n’y a plus de probl` eme. Et
alors ´ evidemment pour un ath´ eiste, n’est-ce pas, tout/ri en ne
peut subsister, je ne pourrais pas continuer ` a parler si Die u
ne me soutenait dans l’existence, c’est bien sˆ ur, n’est-ce
pas ? Mais il n’y a rien, c ¸a, c’est l’attitude g´ en´ erale de l a
philosophie chr´ etienne. Mais il n’y a rien de sp´ ecial pour le
commencement. Et le commencement n’est pas un endroit
o` u l’on toucherait Dieu comme une hypoth` ese, o` u si vous
voulez, je vais parler de la chiquenaude initiale de Laplace ,
puisque nous parlons maintenant des conf´ erences faites
en anglais... Je rappelle les mots de Jeans ”the ﬁnger of
God agitating the ether” [voix dramatique] , voil` a le
commencement. Et bien, cela, n’est pas, ce n’est pas une
id´ ee agr´ eable pour un esprit religieux. C’est une id´ ee qu i fait
descendre Dieu dans le domaine des causes premi` eres et je
crois qu’une des contributions que peut apporter une th´ eor ie
telle que la mienne, c’est d’´ eviter justement ces difﬁcult ´ es.
JV: Donc, vous vous refusez ` a l’id´ ee que Dieu devrait
expliquer le mouvement des galaxies pour le dire tr` es
concr` etement.
GLM: ´Evidemment, c’est clair c ¸a! C’est clair, c’est-` a-dire
que si, Dieu soutient les galaxies, mais il agit en Dieu. Il
n’agit pas comme une force qui viendrait en contredire
tout. Ce n’est pas l’horloger de V oltaire qui doit de temps
en temps remonter son horloge, n’est-ce pas. . . [Rires] .
V oil` a.
JV:Merci beaucoup Monseigneur.
[Vid´eo de la VRT se termine.]
‡‡Radio-t´ el´ evision belge de la Communaut´ e franc ¸aise (R. T.B.F.)
Prepared using sagej.cls