arXiv:2301.03518v1  [physics.optics]  9 Jan 2023Size Eﬀects in Periodic Metamaterials
Victor V. Gozhenko
Institute of Physics, Natl. Acad. of Sciences of Ukraine,
46 Nauky Ave., Kyiv 03680, Ukraine∗
1Abstract
The optical properties of periodic electromagnetic metama terials are considered as functions of
their relative unit cell size d/λ. The reﬂection Rand transmission Tcoeﬃcients are numerically
calculated for some realistic metamaterials in a wide range of their relative unit cell size values
that comprises diﬀerent operating regimes of the metamater ials. Peculiarities in RandTbehavior
are discussed and the causes of those peculiarities are outl ined. The obtained results support the
opinion on inapplicability of the very homogenization conc ept to metamaterials whose unit cell size
is comparable to the incident wavelength, in contrast to som e previously published results.
I. INTRODUCTION
Most of the electromagnetic metamaterials are periodic str uctures, and their unit cells
consist of artiﬁcial inclusions designed to get a speciﬁc el ectromagnetic response (e.g., neg-
ative refraction or selective reﬂectivity) of the metamate rial sample as a whole. Periodic
metamaterial can be treated as a continuous and homogeneous medium if its unit cell size
Figure 1. The concept of metamaterials homogenization. A pe riodic metamaterial with unit cells
of sizedis lit by an incident electromagnetic wave whose wavelength isλ. Ifd≪λ, then the
incident wave cannot “feel” the metamaterial inhomogeniti es, and metamaterial behave itself like
a continuous and homogeneous medium, whose parameters are εeﬀ,µeﬀ,neﬀ. Representation of a
metamaterial by the corresponding homogeneous medium is co rrect if the optical properties (e.g.,
reﬂectance and transmittance) of the metamaterial and the m edium are the same.
∗vigo@iop.kiev.ua
2d(the lattice constant) is much smaller then its operating wa velength λ,d≪λ. In such a
case, the metamaterial can be characterized by its eﬀective parameters—the eﬀective per-
mittivity εeﬀ, permeability µeﬀ, and index of refraction (the refractive index) neﬀ=√εµ, see
Fig. 1.
Calculation of the eﬀective parameters values for a given me tamaterial (with given shape,
size, and material of its inclusions, as well as the size and g eometry of its unit cell) is im-
portant, for example, for predicting the optical propertie s the metamaterial will reveal in
experiments and applications, and is based on calculating t he local electric and magnetic
ﬁelds within the unit cell and proper averaging of those ﬁeld s over the cell. Sometimes—in
case of simple inclusions—it can be done analytically; in ge neral case, numerical computa-
tions are required.
To facilitate calculation of the eﬀective parameters of per iodic metamaterials, a number
of homogenization theories and methods were proposed (see, e.g., Refs. 1–6). Those methods
diﬀer from each other by, particularly, the way they calcula te the average values of the local
ﬁelds in the metamaterials.
In metamaterials applications, condition d≪λ(say,d= 0.01λ) is not always met. For
example, optical applications (where λ≈400...800nm) implies that the unit cell size
should be of the order of 50 nm or less. However, metamaterial s withd= 200...300nm
(i.e.,d/λ≈0.25...0.5) are often used there because the less the unit cell size, the more
expensive manufacturing process of the metamaterial sampl e. On the other hand, some
applications—most notably the negative index of refractio n—require for a metamaterial to
work in the resonant regime (where the negative nis achieveable) meaning d/λ≈0.5...1.0.
Therefore, some authors tried to elaborate homogenization methods suitable for an extended
range of d/λvalues, and not only for small d. Some of them believe that their methods are
valid for metamaterials with substantial or even arbitrary unit cell size (e.g., Refs. 1, 3, and
6).
Strictly speaking, any homogenization method can give plau sible results for metamate-
rials working in the long wavelength (quasistatic) regime o nly, where the condition d≪λ
is satisﬁed. In the opposite case of short (relative to the un it cell size) waves, d≫λ, the
very homogenization concept should fail, and metamaterial s cannot be treated as homoge-
neous media. In this case, propagation of incident waves thr ough a metamaterial obeys the
geometrical optics laws, and reﬂection of an incident wave f rom the metamaterial inclusions
3plays a crucial role. Last, in the intermediate regime, wher ed≈λ, homogenization meth-
ods should not work since they do not account for the diﬀracti on eﬀects (e.g., the Bragg’s
reﬂection) which are signiﬁcant in this case.
Earlier [4], it was shown that diﬀerent homogenization meth ods give more and more di-
verging results as the relative unit cell size of metamateri als increases from zero to approx-
imatelyd/λ= 0.4. At larger d/λvalues, calculations of homogenized eﬀective parameters
of a metamaterial can still formally be performed, but those parameters cannot describe
correctly the optical properties of the metamaterial.
In the present paper, the optical properties of periodic met amaterials are considered in a
wider range of their relative unit cell sizes d/λ, and the eﬀects of the cell size on the optical
behaviour of the matematerials is discussed in more details .
II. BASIC FORMULAE
We are interested in calculating the observable quantities —transmittance Tand re-
ﬂectance Rof a metamaterial—which are dimensionless coeﬃcients deﬁn ed as
T=Itr
I0, R=Iref
I0,
whereI0,Itr,Irefare the intensities of incident, transmitted through the me tamaterial, and
reﬂected waves. The intensities are the energy ﬂux densitie s of the corresponding waves and
can be calculated as time-averaged values of the Poynting ve ctorSof those waves (indices
are omitted below for simplicity):
I=/angbracketleftS/angbracketright=1
τt+τ/integraldisplay
tS(t′)dt′
In case of monochromatic incident plane wave
E=E0e[i(k·r−ωt)], (1)
H=H0e[i(k·r−ωt)](2)
all the waves involved are also monochromatic and their inte nsities can be calculated from
I=1
2Re(E×H∗),
4where the asterisk denotes the complex conjugation. From th e energy conservation law
applied to the interaction of electromagnetic waves with a l ossy medium, it follows
T+R+A= 1,
whereAis the absorptance (the absorption coeﬃcient) of the medium which deﬁne the rate
of electromagnetic energy absorption inside it. If TandRvalues for a medium are known
(i.e., are experimentally measured or theoretically calcu lated), its absorptance can be found
as
A= 1−T−R.
III. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Numerical simulations are carried out for metamaterials wi th cubic lattice and consisted of
inclusions of various shapes that are often used in metamate rial science and applications—
spheres, rods, Split-Ring Resonators (SRRs), and Ω-like inclusions (“omegas”). Optical
reﬂectance Rand transmittance Tof the simulated metamaterials are calculated in a wide
range of their relative unit cell size d/λat several values of the incidence angle θ. Calculations
ofRand transmittance Tare complemented with the local Eﬁeld distributions across
the unit cells in diﬀerent regimes the metamaterials operat e in. All the calculations are
performed with COMSOL Multiphysics software. Presented be low are exemplary calculation
results.
Schematics of the unit cells of the simulated metamaterials are shown in Fig. 2. The
materials are primarily inﬁnite monolayers of thickness dand that in Fig. 2d is a triple layer
of thickness 3d. The unit cell size d= 500 nm is the same for all the materials and remains
unchangeable in all the calculations. Variations in the rel ative unit cell size d/λare made
by changing the wavelength λof the incident wave.
From Fig. 3 one can see that all the inclusions give a prominen t response to the incident
wave even at normal incidence, the response of spherical inc lusions being dipole-like (see
panel (a), the ﬁeld distribution in the middle plane), while those of “SRRs with rods” system
and “omegas” are more tricky.
The incidence angle θalso aﬀects the electromagnetic ﬁeld distribution inside m etama-
terials: even for simple spherical inclusions in the quasis tatic regime ( λ= 10d) the electric
5Figure 2. Unit cells of the simulated metamaterials: (a) a mo nolayer of spherical particles; (b) a
monolayer of omegas; (c) a monolayer of SRRs and rods; (d) a tr iple layer of spherical particles.
All the inclusions are made of gold, and the size of the indivi dual unit cells is d= 500 nm.
ﬁelds in the unit cell diﬀer substantially at normal and obli que incidence, see Fig. 4.
Shown in Figs. 5–7 are the transmission and reﬂection spectr a numerically calculated for
the metamaterials depicted in Fig. 2a,c,d.
According to Fig. 5, at normal incidence of a long enough wave withλ= 3000 nm (which
is six times the unit cell size d) onto the monolayer of golden spheres, the metamaterial
behaves itself as a transparent sheet: its reﬂection coeﬃci entRin this regime is close to
zero, and its transmission coeﬃcent Tis near unity. If λdecreases and approaches the unit
cell sized, the metamaterial gradually looses its transparency and be comes more and more
reﬂective. The reﬂection coeﬃcient has its maximum R= 0.45atλ= 1.2d= 600 nm,
and the transmission coeﬃcient is minimal ( T= 0.3) at this point. Further decrease of λ
results in monotonic increase of the material transparency (with the peak value T≈0.77at
λ=d= 500 nm) and monotonic decrease of its reﬂectance up to R≈0. The radical change
in the behavior of RandTatλ≤600nm (when d/λ≥0.83)is probably due to the onset
of the diﬀraction and interference eﬀects in the periodic me tamaterial.
Note that the sum T+Rbecomes distinctly less then unity at λ≤650nm, ord/λ≥
0.77. It means that light absorption by the metamaterial is subst antial in this case. The
minimum value of the absorption coeﬃcient A= 1−T+R≈0.67is observed at λ= 550
nm, which implies that about one third of the incident energy ﬂux is absorbed by the
metamaterial inclusions. The absorption can be ascribed to electric currents induced in
individual inclusions (golden spheres) by the incident wav e as well scattered waves from
neighboring particles.
Analogous behavior is observed at oblique incidence (see th e respective curves in Fig. 5
6Figure 3. Local distributions of the absolute value of the el ectric ﬁeld Einside the unit cells of the
metamaterials shown in Fig. 2a–c. Left column, the ﬁeld on th e unit cell boundaries; right column,
the ﬁeld in the middle plane of the cells. λ= 1000 nm, normal incidence ( θ= 0). Directions of
EandHvectors of the incident wave are depicted in panel (a). Distr ibution of |E|allows one to
easily determine those places where the electric energy is c oncentrated.
for the case of θ= 45◦): with decreasing λ, the region of insuﬃcient changes in R,Tpasses
(starting from λ≈1.8d= 900 nm) to the region of their abrupt changes and oscillating
behavior. Note, however, that the metamaterial in this case is semi-transparent even at
largeλ:R+T≈0.62atλ= 3000 nm.
The plots in Fig. 6 refer to the monolayer of golden inclusion s “SRR plus rod” and have
7Figure 4. Local distribution of |E|over the unit cell boundaries in a monolayer of golden sphere s
atλ= 5000 nm. (a)θ= 0; (b)θ= 45◦.
Figure 5. Transmission and reﬂection spectra of a monolayer of golden spheres at normal and
oblique incidence, θ= 0andθ= 45◦.
three distinct regions at both normal and oblique incidence . With decrease in λfrom its
maximum value 5000 nm to approximately 3200 nm, the optical p roperties of the monolayer
change monotonically. Further, up to λ≈1400nm, there is the region of oscillations, where
one can observe peaks and dips of RandTat wavelenghts that are nearly multiples of
d= 500 nm. Those peaks and dips can be ascribed to the grating resona nces occurred in
8Figure 6. Transmission and reﬂection spectra of a monolayer of golden inclusions “SRRs plus rods”
at normal and oblique incidence, θ= 0andθ= 45◦.
periodic systems as a result of interaction between their st ructural elements excited by the
incident wave. With further decrease in λ, the oscillations of RandTbecome more chaotic.
As in the case of spherical inclusions, the layer of SRRs and r ods looks translucent even at
large enough wavelenghts: T+R <0.6atλ= 10d= 5000 nm.
The peculiarities in the optical behavior of monolayers of g olden spheres and SRRs with
rods can also be observed in a thicker triple layer of golden s pheres, see Fig. 7. In this case,
notice the two peaks in R(at normal and oblique incidence) and the dip in T(at normal
incidence) which are all located exactly at λ= 1000 nm, which is two times the lattice
constant d. Obviously, they can be ascribed to the above mentioned grat ing resonances.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
The obtained results conﬁrm the opinion [4] that any metamat erial homogenization
method should be used with care in the intermediate operatin g regimes, when the metama-
terial unit cell size is of the order of the operating wavelen gth. The value of the relative unit
cell sized/λat which homogenization methods fail to predict the optical properties of pe-
riodic metamaterials depends on the geometry and material p arameters of their inclusions.
For the metamaterials we considered here, abrupt and substa nial changes in the optical
properties (as compared to their longwavelength values) oc cur at diﬀerent values of d/λ:
near 0.56 for the monolayer of golden spheres at oblique inci dence, 0.4 for the triple layer of
9Figure 7. Transmission and reﬂection spectra of a triple lay er of golden spheres at normal and
oblique incidence, θ= 0andθ= 45◦.
golden spheres at normal incidence, and near 0.16 for the mon olayer of SRRs with rods. For
largerd/λvalues, a crucial role in the optical properties formation p lay the diﬀraction and
interference eﬀects in the metamaterials, so the propertie s exhibit an oscillating behavior
which cannot be predicted within the homogenization concep t.
[1] Pendry J.B., Holden A.J., Robbins D.J. and Stewart W.J. IE EE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech.
472075–84 (1999).
[2] D. Smith and J. Pendry, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 23391-403 (2006).
[3] I. Tsukerman, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 28577–86 (2011).
[4] V.V. Gozhenko, A.K. Amert, and K.W. Whites , New J. Phys. 15043030 (2013).
[5] S. Yoo et al., Nanophotonics 8 (6) 1063–1069 (2019).
[6] O. Rybin and V. Khardikov, Optik 268169768 (2022).
10