High-ﬁdelity imaging of a band insulator in a three-dimensional optical lattice clock
William R. Milner,1,∗Lingfeng Yan,1Ross B. Hutson,1Christian Sanner,1and Jun Ye1,†
1JILA, NIST and University of Colorado, 440 UCB, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA
We report on the observation of a high-density, band insulating state in a three-dimensional optical lattice
clock. Filled with a nuclear-spin polarized degenerate Fermi gas of87Sr, the 3D lattice has one atom per site in
the ground motional state, thus guarding against frequency shifts due to contact interactions. At this high density
where the average distance between atoms is comparable to the probe wavelength, standard imaging techniques
suffer from large systematic errors. To spatially probe frequency shifts in the clock and measure thermodynamic
properties of this system, accurate imaging techniques at high optical depths are required. Using a combination
of highly saturated ﬂuorescence and absorption imaging, we conﬁrm the density distribution in our 3D optical
lattice in agreement with a single spin band insulating state. Combining our clock platform with this high ﬁlling
fraction opens the door to studying new classes of long-lived, many-body states arising from dipolar interactions.
Optical lattice clocks integrate quantum many-body
physics and precision metrology to achieve state-of-the-art
measurement precision [1–5]. To advance clock performance,
one wishes to probe as many atoms as feasible for the longest
possible coherence time. Improvements in both precision and
accuracy of optical lattice clocks, with increased atom num-
bers, have been enabled by the development of high-ﬁdelity,
microscopic imaging of the atomic cloud to spatially resolve
clock shifts [6, 7]. The combination of high density and long
coherence time will allow characterization of novel systematic
effects such as that arising from dipolar interactions between
atoms on neighboring lattice sites [8–11]. Lattice thermom-
etry [12] and studies of novel physics such as SU( N) mag-
netism [13, 14] will also beneﬁt from accurate imaging at high
density where these phenomena emerge.
To optimize atom number while minimizing interaction-
related dephasing, a clock platform based on a 3D lattice
geometry and Fermi-degenerate matter has been developed
[7, 15]. Following nuclear spin polarization [16, 17], the Pauli
exclusion principle mandates there is at most one atom per lat-
tice site in the ground motional state. To ensure this ground
state motional occupation during lattice loading we operate
withkBT <kBTF</planckover2pi1ωbg, whereT,TF,/planckover2pi1ωbgrefers to the
atomic temperature, Fermi temperature and lattice bandgap
respectively [18]. At the highest density affordable with one
fermion per lattice site, this system realizes an insulating state
of matter where tunnelling is suppressed [15, 19]. Combining
this high-density system with spin-orbit coupling generated
from clock addressing will enable exploring cluster state gen-
eration and tunable spin models [20, 21].
Differential frequency shifts across the optical lattice en-
coding potential systematic effects can be spatially resolved
by combining in situ imaging and narrow-line clock spec-
troscopy [6]. To extract these frequency shifts, two subse-
quent images of the ground and excited state density distribu-
tions are required. Thus for our clock platform, accurate in
situimaging at high density is imperative. In our lattice where
the average distance between atoms ( 407nm) is comparable
to the probe wavelength ( 461nm), imaging with a weak, reso-
nant probe is strongly perturbed. Both collective effects medi-
ated by dipolar interactions [22] and systematic defects such
as lensing of the probe beam [23, 24] introduce errors to thereconstructed density distribution at high density.
To mitigate these systematic effects, different techniques
can be used to reduce the absorption cross section and make
the cloud ”optically thin”. These techniques can be broadly
divided into two categories: dispersive imaging at large de-
tuning from resonance [25–27] and saturated imaging at high
intensity [28–31]. For dispersive imaging extracting informa-
tion about the atomic density often requires spatially ﬁltering
the scattered and unscattered light in the Fourier plane of the
imaging system, demanding precise fabrication and alignment
of custom optics. Additionally, careful studies of dispersive
imaging show that residual systematic effects at ﬁnite detun-
ing are non-negligible and can be addressed using differential
measurement schemes at opposite detuning [32]. To address
these imaging errors in this work, we use both highly saturated
ﬂuorescence and absorption imaging.
In this Letter, we report on the observation of a band in-
sulating state in our 3D optical lattice clock. Using highly
saturated imaging to mitigate imaging errors, with a satura-
tion parameter far greater than the optical depth, we accu-
rately conﬁrm the density distribution in our 3D optical lattice
in good agreement with thermodynamic calculation. We ex-
tend previous work using high intensity ﬂuorescence imaging
[28], conﬁrming the accuracy of this imaging technique in a
new high density regime with a degenerate Fermi gas of87Sr
[16, 33]. With atomic densities as high as 6×1014atoms/cm3,
we observe systematic agreement with atom counts obtained
via time-of-ﬂight absorption imaging and identify the range
where the extracted atomic density distribution is not blurred
by our imaging pulse.
Our high intensity imaging scheme is outlined in Fig. 1.
The combination of atomic level structure and relatively large
mass of87Sr is particularly well suited for our imaging tech-
nique, providing a cycling transition with a large scattering
rate while avoiding signiﬁcant motional effects from the imag-
ing pulse. The transition from1S0to1P1with linewidth
Γ = 2π×30.5MHz provides a large photon scattering rate
with minimal depumping to dark states during the imaging
time [34]. During a 1 µs pulse at full saturation about 100
photons per atom are scattered and the atoms accelerate at
a=/planckover2pi1kΓ
2mwherekis the imaging light wavenumber and m
is the atomic mass. The net momentum transfer amounts toarXiv:2301.03343v1  [physics.atom-ph]  9 Jan 20232
FIG. 1. Schematic of our clock platform. Vertical and horizontal
imaging systems with numerical apertures of 0.2and0.1respectively
provide measurements of the 2D density distribution ˜n. Accounting
for the lattice spacing a= 407 nm,˜na2is determined from highly
saturated absorption imaging. To mitigate imaging errors, the atoms
are highly saturated and each scatters photons with a maximum rate
ofΓ/2. Measurements from our high resolution imaging system in-
tegrated along gravity are presented in panel (a), where the density
distribution is extracted for thermodynamic modeling. Images from
the horizontal imaging system in panel (b) are just used to determine
our atom cloud aspect ratio for our inverse Abel transform.
a Doppler shift of kaτ = 2.8 MHz which is much less than
the transition linewidth Γ/2π. Finally, the linear displace-
ment for a 1µs pulse at full saturation is justaτ2
2=0.6µm.
This linear displacement and corresponding Doppler shift can
be largely cancelled in ﬂuorescence imaging by retroreﬂect-
ing the incident beam. The spread in transverse position due
to random momentum transfer from spontaneous emission
is/planckover2pi1k
6mt3/2/radicalbig
Γ/2<0.1µm over a 1 µs pulse duration and
small compared to our 1.3µm imaging resolution [35]. Using
highly saturated absorption imaging, we measure the column
density distribution ˜nin our optical lattice in Fig. 1(a). Ac-
counting for the lattice spacing a= 407 nm corresponding
to the87Sr magic wavelength at 813nm, the scaled column
density ˜na2is plotted.
Saturated absorption and ﬂuorescence imaging are beneﬁ-
cial in comparison to standard imaging techniques in a num-
ber of ways. In this highly saturated regime the scattering rate
is largely immune to beam intensity, frequency, and pointing
ﬂuctuations. Given the saturation intensity Isat= 40 mW/cm2
for the imaging transition, a Gaussian probe beam with 20
mW of optical power and a 100 µm waist corresponds to a
peak intensity of I∼3000 Isat, within the typical constraints
of a standard imaging laser system. Given that the probe beam
is attenuated through the atom cloud, a saturation parameter
I/Isatmuch greater than the optical depth is required to fully
saturate the imaging transition. We note parallels between ﬂu-
orescence and absorption imaging at high saturation. In both
cases, the extracted atom number is determined by a singlevariable. For ﬂuorescence imaging, this corresponds to the
number of collected photons per atom and for saturated ab-
sorption imaging the number of missing photons per atom in
the probe beam. Thus, both ﬂuorescence and saturated ab-
sorption imaging can be calibrated via a single absolute atom
number measurement. For images in our 3D lattice, we de-
termine our atom number via clock excitation fraction ﬂuctu-
ations arising from quantum projection noise (QPN) [36, 37].
For ﬂuorescence imaging, only a single image of collected
ﬂuorescence in an arbitrary direction is required, minimizing
fringing and simplifying image processing substantially. Flu-
orescence imaging also avoids limited dynamic range issues
suffered from high intensity absorption imaging. Strategies
such as multiple measurements at varying intensity to deter-
mine the atomic density in different regions of the cloud may
be taken to confront this issue [30, 31]. The primary disad-
vantage of ﬂuorescence imaging in comparison to absorption
imaging is that the signal-to-noise is generally worse [37]. To
optimize signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in ﬂuorescence imaging,
the photon collection efﬁciency and therefore the numerical
aperture (NA) of the imaging system, must be maximized. In
our experiment, the vertical and horizontal imaging systems
have numerical apertures of 0.2and0.1, corresponding to col-
lection efﬁciencies of approximately 1and0.2percent. Al-
ternatively, if spatial resolution is not required then the pulse
duration can be extended enhancing the number of detected
photons.
To motivate the development of our high intensity imaging
technique, systematic errors associated with standard in situ
imaging techniques at high density are presented in Fig. 2.
Absorption imaging at I ∼Isatand high intensity ﬂuorescence
imaging are presented side-by-side for comparison. To study
these systematic errors at high density, we prepare a sample
with optical depth >200by producing a degenerate Fermi
gas with 10 nuclear spin components, ≈2×105atoms and a
T/TFof approximately 0.1 in a crossed dipole trap. The errors
associated with low intensity absorption imaging can be seen
twofold. First, the reconstructed optical depth from absorp-
tion detection in the upper left panel is far too low, two orders
of magnitude less than the expected value of ∼200. This
erroneously low optical depth is attributed to effects such as
enhanced forward emission and lensing of probe light [23].
Secondly, the reconstructed optical depth in the upper right
panel increases after a 500µs time-of-ﬂight expansion con-
clusively demonstrating the density dependence of these ob-
served systematic errors.
In comparison, saturated ﬂuorescence imaging yields a far
larger reconstructed optical depth and diffuses following ex-
pansion as expected. We compare this reconstructed 2D den-
sity distribution with the expected distribution corresponding
to a Fermi gas. Using independently measured experimental
values, we calculate this distribution with no free parameters
[38]. The total atom number and reduced temperature T/T F
are determined from time-of-ﬂight absorption imaging at low
density with an optical density ∼1. The trapping frequencies
are extracted from parametric conﬁnement modulation. Using3
FIG. 2. A comparison of high intensity ﬂuorescence and standard ab-
sorption imaging ( I∼Isat) at optical depths exceeding 200in our
highly degenerate Fermi gas is shown. In situ absorption imaging at
low intensity yields strikingly erroneous measurements at high den-
sity. The calculated 2D Fermi gas distribution according to our ex-
perimental parameters is shared for comparison in qualitative agree-
ment.
these parameters, we calculate both an in situ and 500µs time-
of-ﬂight Fermi gas proﬁle for comparison with our measure-
ments. We observe qualitative agreement between measure-
ment and calculation at these extremely high optical depths.
Intrigued by the measurements presented in Fig. 2, we un-
dertake a quantitative study on the ﬁdelity of our saturated
imaging technique. We present a calibration method for ﬂu-
orescence detection, using the total number of collected ﬂuo-
rescence photons for comparison with an accurate atom num-
ber reference. Absorption imaging at low density following
time-of-ﬂight expansion serves as an appropriate calibration.
Following expansion for 7 ms, the optical depth is ∼1and
systematic imaging errors can be safely ignored. To inde-
pendently calibrate the atom number in our 10 spin Fermi
gas, we prepare a thermal sample and use measured density
ﬂuctuations to determine the effective absorption cross sec-
tion [39–41]. In Fig. 3(a) we ensure this calibration shows
systematic agreement with atom numbers between approxi-
mately 1×105and4×105, varied by increasing our ﬁnal
evaporation trap depth. For the 3µs pulse duration used, the
ﬁtted calibration is in reasonable agreement with calculation
using the measured quantum efﬁciency and imaging system
numerical aperture [37]. To ensure that the imaging transition
is fully saturated, the laser intensity at 1µs pulse duration is
increased until the collected photon number plateaus, as seen
in the ﬁgure inset.
To perform accurate spatially resolved measurements, we
must also determine the blurring induced by our imaging
pulse. Just as collective effects introduce errors to the re-
FIG. 3. (a) Calibration method for in situ ﬂuorescence detection us-
ing atom counts from time-of-ﬂight absorption imaging. Collected
photon counts from both the vertical and horizontal imaging systems
are plotted, with solid and dashed lines representing ﬁts to the hori-
zontal and vertical measurements respectively. Inset: Collected pho-
ton count with vertical imaging system as a function of I/I satat 1
µs pulse duration. (b) Peak column density as a function of ﬂuo-
rescence pulse duration. Measurements are normalized by 1.9 ×1011
atoms/cm2, the column density at the shortest pulse duration of 500
ns. Images at 500ns and 2µs in inset are plotted for comparison.
The error bars denote the standard error of the mean.
constructed density distribution, any systematic changes to ˜n
introduced by our imaging pulse must be determined. To cal-
ibrate this blurring in Fig. 3(b), we extend the ﬂuorescence
pulse duration and examine the peak column density as atoms
diffuse. The inset shows averaged images from 500 ns and
2µs pulse durations. We note that we observe no atom loss
or molecular formation over the full 2 µs range, conﬁrmed by
the detected photon count increasing linearly with pulse dura-
tion. To minimize blurring, we carefully retroreﬂect our probe
beam by optimizing the backcoupled light through the probe
optical ﬁber. At pulse durations up to 1 µs, we conﬁrm that
the peak column density decreases by <5%. [37].
Motivated by the calibration reported in Fig. 3, we directly
determine the 3D density distribution in a deep optical lattice
via saturated in situ absorption imaging. We form a cubic lat-
tice with trap depths of approximately 60,70, and 50Erin
three orthogonal directions, where Eris the lattice photon re-
coil energy ≈h×3.5kHz. Following forced evaporation
with 10nuclear spin states we spin polarize using a focused
beam detuned from the3P1intercombination line to form a
state-dependent potential, removing nearly all but the mF= -
9/2atoms [16, 17]. Clock spectroscopy conﬁrms ≈90% spin
purity. An additional step of spin puriﬁcation is applied by4
FIG. 4. (a) The three-dimensional density distribution and the corre-
sponding lattice ﬁlling fraction are determined from in situ absorp-
tion image in Fig. 1(a) and the use of an inverse Abel transformation.
(b) A linecut along z= 0provides the data points in circle. Errorbars
are both the statistical uncertainty of the Abel transformation and
atom number uncertainty added in quadrature. We start with a pre-
diction based on HTSE calculation, using independently measured
values for the temperature, atom number, and harmonic conﬁnement.
The best ﬁt to the data results in a 10% reduction of the measured as-
pect ratioωy/ωxand5%reduction of the measured T/TF. The red
line captures this ﬁt, with temperature uncertainty in the shaded band.
The blue dashed line is a ﬁt to Gaussian in qualitative disagreement
withna3.
coherently driving the mF= -9/2atoms into the excited clock
state and removing any residual spins with a resonant imaging
pulse. Absorption imaging directly provides us with the col-
umn density distribution ˜n, integrated through the vertical axis
along gravity as depicted in Fig. 1(a). Based on our Fig. 3(b)
analysis, we choose a pulse duration of 1µs to minimize blur-
ring and a saturation intensity of 54(4) , substantially larger
than peak optical density of ∼15. To spatially probe the band
insulator plateau we use an imaging magniﬁcation of 38.8to
achieve an effective pixel size of 412nm, roughly equal to the
lattice constant a= 407 nm. We note that our effective pixel
size is smaller than our optical resolution of 1.3µm, thus our
imaging system is optically oversampled. To extract the 3D
density distribution, we use an inverse Abel transform [42].
Given our vertical imaging is not along an axis of cylindri-
cal symmetry, nmust be appropriately scaled by the aspect
ratio of the spatial density distribution [37]. The aspect ra-
tio is independently calibrated using the absorption imaging
measurement in Fig. 1(b).At this high magniﬁcation, the SNR in ﬂuorescence imag-
ing for a 1µspulse duration is limited by a combination of
read noise and photon shot noise. We found that even after
extensive averaging the extracted 3D density distribution us-
ing an inverse Abel transform was sensitive to small ﬂuctua-
tions in ˜n. Thus, saturated absorption imaging with a superior
SNR provides a more robust technique to characterize the 3D
density distribution. This extracted 3D density distribution is
plotted in Fig. 4(a).
To judge the ﬁdelity of our measured 3D density distri-
bution, we compare the line cut at z= 0 with calculation
in Fig. 4(b). To estimate the density distribution, we use a
High Temperature Series Expansion (HTSE) calculation in
the atomic limit [12, 14, 37, 43]. The ingredients of this cal-
culation include values for the atomic temperature, harmonic
conﬁnement, and total atom number. Given the density dis-
tribution only depends on the ratio of the respective harmonic
conﬁnements, the measured aspect ratios from Fig. 1 are used
for our HTSE calculation. The total atom number Nis de-
termined from quantum projection noise measurements [37].
To estimate the temperature including heating during lattice
loading, we measure the reduced temperature T/TFin time-
of-ﬂight after a round-trip from the lattice back to the dipole
trap and determine an entropy-per-particle increase of 0.25(6)
kB. Inferring an entropy increase of 0.13(3)kBin a single
lattice loading sequence, we estimate a T/TFof0.165(7) .
Although we did not perform a cross-dimensional thermaliza-
tion measurement to directly verify thermal equilibrium, the
uncertainty in our temperature is included in the shaded band
of the HTSE calculation in Fig. 4(b) [44, 45]. We note that the
extended plateau region is larger than our 1.3µm imaging res-
olution. To further quantify the imaging ﬁdelity, we compare
na3to a Gaussian ﬁt in clear disagreement with data.
In conclusion, we report on the observation of a spin-
polarized, band insulating state in our 3D optical lattice clock.
This has been enabled by characterizing saturated in situ
imaging techniques to accurately determine our density dis-
tribution. Broadly, the saturated imaging techniques in this
work will be applicable for studies of SU( N) magnetism and
thermodynamics in the Mott-insulating regime [46, 47]. With
the high ﬁlling fraction demonstrated in this work, many-body
states arising from dipolar interactions can be generated be-
tween atoms on neighboring lattice sites [8, 9].
Acknowledgement . We thank D. Kedar for maintain-
ing the ultrastable clock laser used in this work and A. Aep-
pli, K. Kim, J. M. Robinson, M. Miklos, and Y . M. Tso for
useful discussions. We thank K. Kim, N. D. Oppong, and
L. Sonderhouse for careful reading of the manuscript and for
providing insightful comments. Funding for this work is pro-
vided by NSF QLCI OMA-2016244, DOE Center of Quan-
tum System Accelerator, DARPA, AFOSR, V . Bush Fellow-
ship, NIST, and NSF Phys-1734006.5
∗william.milner@colorado.edu
†ye@jila.colorado.edu
[1] T. Bothwell, C. J. Kennedy, A. Aeppli, D. Kedar, J. M. Robin-
son, E. Oelker, A. Staron, and J. Ye, Nature 602, 420 (2022).
[2] W. F. McGrew, X. Zhang, R. J. Fasano, S. A. Sch ¨affer, K. Beloy,
D. Nicolodi, R. C. Brown, N. Hinkley, G. Milani, M. Schioppo,
et al. , Nature 564, 87 (2018).
[3] A. Aeppli, A. Chu, T. Bothwell, C. J. Kennedy, D. Kedar, P. He,
A. M. Rey, and J. Ye, Science Advances 8, 42 (2022).
[4] B. J. Bloom, T. L. Nicholson, J. R. Williams, S. L. Campbell,
M. Bishof, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, S. L. Bromley, and J. Ye,
Nature 506, 71 (2014).
[5] T. L. Nicholson, S. L. Campbell, R. B. Hutson, G. E. Marti,
B. J. Bloom, R. L. McNally, W. Zhang, M. D. Barrett, M. S.
Safronova, G. F. Strouse, et al. , Nat. Comm. 6, 1 (2015).
[6] G. E. Marti, R. B. Hutson, A. Goban, S. L. Campbell, N. Poli,
and J. Ye, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 103201 (2018).
[7] S. L. Campbell, R. B. Hutson, G. E. Marti, A. Goban, N. D.
Oppong, R. L. McNally, L. Sonderhouse, J. M. Robinson,
W. Zhang, B. J. Bloom, et al. , Science 358, 90 (2017).
[8] D. E. Chang, J. Ye, and M. D. Lukin, Phys. Rev. A 69, 023810
(2004).
[9] A. Cidrim, A. PineiroOrioli, C. Sanner, R. B. Hutson, J. Ye,
R. Bachelard, and A. M. Rey, Physical Review Letters 127,
013401 (2021).
[10] S. Kr ¨amer, L. Ostermann, and H. Ritsch, EPL (Europhysics
Letters) 114, 14003 (2016).
[11] R. B. Hutson, et al. Collective dipolar interactions in a near
unity ﬁlled three-dimensional optical lattice clock, in prepara-
tion (2023).
[12] C. Hofrichter, L. Riegger, F. Scazza, M. H ¨ofer, D. R. Fernandes,
I. Bloch, and S. F ¨olling, Phys. Rev. X 6, 021030 (2016).
[13] A. V . Gorshkov, M. Hermele, V . Gurarie, C. Xu, P. S. Julienne,
J. Ye, P. Zoller, E. Demler, M. D. Lukin, and A. Rey, Nat. Phys.
6, 289 (2010).
[14] S. Taie, R. Yamazaki, S. Sugawa, and Y . Takahashi, Nature
Physics 8, 825 (2012).
[15] R. B. Hutson, A. Goban, G. E. Marti, L. Sonderhouse, C. San-
ner, and J. Ye, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 123401 (2019).
[16] L. Sonderhouse, C. Sanner, R. B. Hutson, A. Goban,
T. Bilitewski, L. Yan, W. R. Milner, A. M. Rey, and J. Ye,
Nat. Phys. 16, 1216 (2020).
[17] S. Stellmer, R. Grimm, and F. Schreck, Phys. Rev. A 84,
043611 (2011).
[18] S. Will, PhD Thesis (Springer Science & Business Media,
2012).
[19] U. Schneider, L. Hackermuller, S. Will, T. Best, I. Bloch, T. A.
Costi, R. Helmes, D. Rasch, and A. Rosch, Science 322, 1520
(2008).
[20] M. Mamaev, R. Blatt, J. Ye, and A. M. Rey, Phys. Rev. Lett.
122, 160402 (2019).
[21] M. Mamaev, I. Kimchi, R. M. Nandkishore, and A. M. Rey,
Phys. Rev. Research 3, 013178 (2021).
[22] F. Andreoli, M. J. Gullans, A. A. High, A. Browaeys, and D. E.Chang, Phys. Rev. X 11, 011026 (2021).
[23] W. Ketterle, D. S. Durfee, and D. Stamper-Kurn, arXiv (1999).
[24] S. P. Rath, T. Yefsah, K. J. G ¨unter, M. Cheneau, R. Desbuquois,
M. Holzmann, W. Krauth, and J. Dalibard, Phys. Rev. A 82,
013609 (2010).
[25] S. Kadlecek, J. Sebby, R. Newell, and T. Walker, Opt. Lett. 26,
137 (2001).
[26] C. C. Bradley, C. A. Sackett, and R. G. Hulet, Phys. Rev. Lett.
78, 985 (1997).
[27] M. R. Andrews, M. O. Mewes, N. J. Van Druten, D. S. Durfee,
D. M. Kurn, and W. Ketterle, Science 273, 84 (1996).
[28] M. T. DePue, S. L. Winoto, D. Han, and D. S. Weiss, Opt.
Comm. 180, 73 (2000).
[29] G. Reinaudi, T. Lahaye, Z. Wang, and D. Gu ´ery-Odelin, Opt.
Lett. 32, 3143 (2007).
[30] T. Yefsah, R. Desbuquois, L. Chomaz, K. J. G ¨unter, and J. Dal-
ibard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 130401 (2011).
[31] L. Chomaz, L. Corman, T. Yefsah, R. Desbuquois, and J. Dal-
ibard, New Journal of Physics 14, 055001 (2012).
[32] Y .-R. Lee, M.-S. Heo, J.-H. Choi, T. T. Wang, C. A. Chris-
tensen, T. M. Rvachov, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. A 85,
063615 (2012).
[33] C. Sanner, L. Sonderhouse, R. B. Hutson, L. Yan, W. R. Milner,
and J. Ye, Science 374, 979 (2021).
[34] D. S. Barker, B. J. Reschovsky, N. C. Pisenti, and G. K. Camp-
bell, Phys. Rev. A 92, 043418 (2015).
[35] M. A. Joffe, W. Ketterle, A. Martin, and D. E. Pritchard, JOSA
B10, 2257 (1993).
[36] W. M. Itano, J. C. Bergquist, J. J. Bollinger, J. M. Gilligan, D. J.
Heinzen, F. L. Moore, M. G. Raizen, and D. J. Wineland, Phys.
Rev. A 47, 3554 (1993).
[37] Supplemental materials with description of imaging signal-to-
noise comparison, QPN atom number calibration, density dif-
fusion, and HTSE calculations.
[38] W. Ketterle and M. Zwierlein, arXiv (1999).
[39] C. Sanner, E. J. Su, A. Keshet, R. Gommers, Y .-i. Shin,
W. Huang, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 040402
(2010).
[40] W. G. Tobias, K. Matsuda, G. Valtolina, L. De Marco, J.-R. Li,
and J. Ye, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 033401 (2020).
[41] T. M ¨uller, B. Zimmermann, J. Meineke, J.-P. Brantut,
T. Esslinger, and H. Moritz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 040401
(2010).
[42] V . Dribinski, A. Ossadtchi, V . A. Mandelshtam, and H. Reisler,
Rev. Sci. Inst. 73, 2634 (2002).
[43] K. R. A. Hazzard, V . Gurarie, M. Hermele, and A. M. Rey,
Phys. Rev. A 85, 041604(R) (2012).
[44] C. R. Monroe, E. A. Cornell, C. A. Sackett, C. J. Myatt, and
C. E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 414 (1993).
[45] G. Valtolina, K. Matsuda, W. G. Tobias, J.-R. Li, L. De Marco,
and J. Ye, Nature 588, 239 (2020).
[46] A. Goban, R. B. Hutson, G. Marti, S. Campbell, M. Perlin,
P. Julienne, J. D’incao, A. Rey, and J. Ye, Nature 563, 369
(2018).
[47] X. Zhang, M. Bishof, S. L. Bromley, C. V . Kraus, M. S.
Safronova, P. Zoller, A. M. Rey, and J. Ye, Science 345, 1467
(2014).Supplemental material to
High-ﬁdelity imaging of a band insulator in a three-dimensional optical lattice clock
Density diffusion
Here we provide supplemental analysis to the data pre-
sented in Fig. 3(b). In panel A of Fig. S1, we plot the in-
tegrated counts along the xaxis of each image. We see an
asymmetry emerge along the direction of the probe beam as
the pulse duration is extended. This asymmetry suggests that
the observed density diffusion may arise from inhomogeni-
ety between the incident and retroreﬂected beams. While the
power is certainly mismatched, this could also be due to ei-
ther imperfect spatial alignment or mode mismatch given the
divergence of the probe beam.
We also plot the total counts in each image as a function of
pulse duration in panel B. The linear character of the counts
over the full pulse duration range suggests that we do not ob-
serve appreciable atom loss or pumping to dark states. The
counts at each pulse duration are normalized to the counts at
500ns. The inset shows the Gaussian RMS width of the cloud
as a function of pulse duration.
Signal-to-noise comparison
In the main text of the paper we refer to both saturated ab-
sorption and ﬂuorescence imaging. We provide a quantita-
tive comparison of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) between
the two techniques here. We express our signal-to-noise for a
detection pixel in terms of the normalized variance V(N)/N,
whereNdenotes the number of atoms within the respective
detection region. For ﬂuorescence imaging the SNR is simply
determined by the shot noise associated with the number of
detected photons. To calculate the total atom number, we ﬁrst
convert the ﬂuorescence counts detected on our camera to the
number of collected photons. Then, using the collection efﬁ-
ciency of our imaging system and scattering rate of our atomic
transition we determine the conversion of detected photons
per atom. On our CCD camera, we measure nacounts in a
given pixel. Using the quantum efﬁciency qof the imaging
system, and the camera conversion gain gin units of counts
per photo electron, we inferna
qgphotons. At full saturation,
the atomic scattering rate isΓ
2and the number of photons scat-
tered per atom is Psc=Γ
2×τ, whereτis the pulse duration.
Finally, we denote the collection efﬁciency as Y, determined
by the numerical aperture of our imaging system and by ra-
diation pattern anisotropies. Combining terms, the total atom
number isN=na
gqYP sc. Using error propagation, we deter-
mine the variance VFl(N).
VFl(N) =/parenleftBig∂N
∂na/parenrightBig2
V(na) =/parenleftBig1
gqYPsc/parenrightBig2
gna (1)
FIG. S1. Panel (a) shows the integrated counts from the images in
Fig. 3(b) of the main text along the xaxis as a function of pulse du-
ration. The total counts at each pulse duration is plotted in panel (b),
normalized by the counts at 500ns. Given the detected photon count
increases linearly with pulse duration, we observe minimal atom loss
or molecular formation over the full 2 µs range. The inset shows the
Gaussian RMS width of the cloud as a function of pulse duration.
Here, we have used the fact that the distribution of gener-
ated photo electrons neis binomial. Thus, V(na) =V(g×
ne) =g2V(ne) =g2ne=gna. Combining terms:
VFl(N)/N=1
qYPsc(2)
The SNR associated with absorption imaging is more com-
plicated given the formula for the atom number in Eq. 3 has
both logarithmic and linear terms and involves two images na
andnbwith and without atoms present. Here, Aandσ0refer
to the effective pixel size accounting for the imaging system
magniﬁcation and effective atomic absorption cross section,
respectively. Similar to ﬂuorescence imaging, an appropriate
error propagation of the naandnbterms determines Eq. 4 and
Eq. 5. We summarize the formulas here and point a reader to
reference [1] for a full derivation.arXiv:2301.03343v1  [physics.atom-ph]  9 Jan 20232
N=A
σ0log(nb
na) +2
Γτgq(nb−na) (3)
VAbs(N) =g˜A2(1
na+1
nb) +g˜B2(na+nb) + 4g˜A˜B(4)
˜A=A
σ0,˜B=2
qgτΓ(5)
We compare the different techniques in Fig. S2 using the
experimentally relevant parameters for our imaging system.
In both cases, a 1µs resonant pulse is used with a numerical
aperture of 0.2and a quantum efﬁciency of 85%. For the ﬂuo-
rescence SNR in blue, the transition is assumed to be fully sat-
urated and scatters photons with a rate of Γ/2. For theI/Isat
=∼55we use for our inverse Abel measurements, the SNR
in absorption imaging is superior to ﬂuorescence imaging in
regions where the column density is higher than 2atoms/a2.
Particularly given our peak density of ˜na2=∼20in Fig. 1(a),
absorption imaging provides a better SNR in the regions of
high density where we extract our peak ﬁlling fraction. At a
critical OD of 0.17, ﬂuorescence detection under our experi-
mental parameters provides a superior SNR at all imaging in-
tensities. We note these calculations neglect technical noise,
in particular camera readout noise, which can be accounted
for by offsetting V(na)accordingly. This contribution will
disproportionately reduce the SNR of ﬂuorescence imaging,
as the ﬂuorescence counts are substantially lower than the ab-
sorption counts.
To probe ﬁne spatial details in our atomic cloud, an imag-
ing resolution smaller than the length scale of these spatial
features is required. To achieve this condition, a sufﬁciently
large numerical aperture imaging system must be utilized and
aberrations must be minimized. In this case, the imaging res-
olution is fundamentally limited by diffraction. We veriﬁed
the diffraction-limited performance of our NA =0.2objec-
tive lens by propagating a point source at 461 nm through
a test setup (including all imaging path optics and vacuum
viewports) and measuring the point-spread function.
While absorption and ﬂuorescence imaging rely on the
same light scattering process (they only collect different parts
of the scattered EM ﬁeld [2]), the signal amplitudes for these
two methods scale differently with the NA. When collect-
ing ﬂuorescence, the solid angle coverage of the imaging sys-
tem proportionally affects the signal down to the lowest spa-
tial frequencies. This is not the case for absorption imaging,
where the amplitude of spatial frequency components below
theNA-dependent bandwidth is constant as the NA is further
increased (assuming the lens fully covers the probe beam). In
other words, for ﬂuorescence imaging, most of the signal light
gets collected in the outer ring fraction of the lens aperture,
which renders it particularly susceptible to lens imperfections.
0 20 40 60 80 100
I/Isat0.00.51.01.52.0Var(N)/N
Absorption beam intensity1 s pulse duration, NA = 0.2
Saturated fluorescence
OD = 0.17, 0.28 atoms/a2
OD = 1.2, 2 atoms/a2
OD = 3.1, 5 atoms/a2
OD = 6.1, 10 atoms/a2
OD = 12.2, 20 atoms/a2FIG. S2. SNR comparison between absorption and ﬂuorescence
imaging. The relevant imaging parameters from the main ﬁgures of
the paper are used for this calculation. For absorption imaging the
atom count variance scales inversely proportional with intensity in
the non-saturated limit I/lessmuchIsat, and proportional with intensity in
the high saturation limit. The variance is for both imaging methods
proportional to 1/τ. In the fully saturated regime (and assuming no
technical noise) the normalized variance for ﬂuorescence imaging is
independent of atomic column density. To avoid imaging defects at
the high densities used in clock operation, an I/Isat>50was used
in all imaging measurements. The black dashed line indicates the
intensity used for our inverse Abel measurements.
HTSE calculation
To accurately model the density distribution in our 3D lat-
tice, we use a High Temperature Series Expansion (HTSE)
calculation in the atomic limit. The general Hamiltonian for
SU(N) symmetric fermions in a 3D lattice in the atomic limit
takes the following form:
HAL=U
2/summationdisplay
i,σ/negationslash=σ/primeˆni,σˆni,σ/prime+/summationdisplay
i,σViˆni,σ (6)
On a lattice site i, there are just two competing energy
scales: an interaction energy Ubetween particles and a po-
sition dependent energy offset Viaccording to the harmonic
conﬁnement. By using the local density approximation µ=
V(x,y,z )−µ0, whereV(x,y,z ) =1
2m(ω2
xx2+ω2
yy2+ω2
zz2)
andµ0corresponds to the peak chemical potential in the lat-
tice. For the spin-polarized system in this work, U = 0 and the
calculations are substantially simpliﬁed.
Ultimately, we want to express the density distribution
n(µ,T,r )in terms of the chemical potential, atomic tempera-
ture, and position in the lattice. On a lattice site i, we express
the Grand partition function Zand Grand potential Ω:
Z(µ,T,r ) =N=1/summationdisplay
σ=0/parenleftbiggN
σ/parenrightbigg
e−βµσ(7)3
Ω =−kBTln(Z)
From here, we determine the entropy and occupancy per
lattice sitei:
s(µ,T,r ) =−∂Ω
∂T=kBln(Z) + ∆s
∆s=kB
Zβµe−βµ(8)
n(µ,T,r ) =−∂Ω
∂µ=1
Z(µ,T)e−βµ(9)
We accurately determine the total atom number Nlatfrom
in situ absorption imaging and total entropy Slatvia time-of-
ﬂight ﬁtting to a non-interacting Fermi-Dirac proﬁle. Simi-
larly, we express the entropy sand occupation non a given
lattice site using Eq. 8 and Eq. 9 expressed in terms of T
andµ. We then determine global ﬁtting parameters Tandµ0
to ensure the integrated entropy and occupancy over all lat-
tice sites equals our experimentally measured values. After
determining µ0andTto realize the equality in Eq. 9, we cal-
culaten(µ,T,r ). A linecut of n(µ,T,r )atz= 0is plotted in
Fig. 4(b).
Inverse Abel transform
We outline our reconstruction procedure here using mea-
surements of the atomic cloud aspect ratios and an inverse
Abel transform: First, we use saturated absorption images
along a vertical axis aligned with zand a horizontal axis
aligned with xcorresponding to Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(b) to
determine the aspect ratios ωx/ωyandωx/ωzrespectively.
Next, we perform an inverse Abel transform on the Fig. 1(a)
image to reconstruct an initial three-dimensional density dis-
tribution. Given there is no axis of cylindrical symmetry in
our system geometry, the reconstructed density from the in-
verse Abel transform must be appropriately re-scaled.
Treating our system as an ellipsoid with radii rx,ry,rz
andNatoms the density is nlat=N/VlatwhereVlat=
4
3πrxryrz. We extract the inverse Abel transform for the
Fig. 1(a) image along the xaxis, given the largest Band in-
sulator plateau will occur along the axis with the weakest har-
monic conﬁnement. The density distribution from this pro-
cedure assumes a volume of VAbel =4
3πrxrxry. Thus we
scale the extracted density by nAbel/nlat=rz
rx=ωz/ωxus-
ing the measured aspect ratio from Fig. 1(b). Given excess
noise around the origin, the x=0point is interpolated with
the neighboring point in Fig. 4(a). This reconstruction proce-
dure was cross-checked with simulated density distributions
to ensure its ﬁdelity. The three-point Abel transform method
was used for this work, which has been independently studied
to verify its ﬁdelity [3].QPN calculation
To calibrate our atom number, we analyze quantum projec-
tion ﬂuctuations using the narrow-linewidth clock transition
between the1S0and3P0states in87Sr. Using a clock laser
stabilized to our 8 mHz linewidth silicon reference cavity, ro-
tation noise due to laser instability can be neglected in these
measurements [4]. Additionally, ﬂuctuations in total counts
are<2%and not a limiting systematic for determining the
atom number calibration. Referenced in many texts [5], by
preparing atoms in a superposition of1S0to3P0the variance
Vof the measured excitation fraction is related to the mean
atom number ¯Nand mean excitation ¯peby:
VQPN =¯pe(1−¯pe)
¯N(10)
To determine this variance, we do many subsequent mea-
surements of peunder identical operating conditions. For a
measurement ito determine pi
e, two ﬂuorescence counts ˜Ci
g
and˜Ci
eare read off a region of interest of our camera includ-
ing our atoms. These counts are subtracted by two averaged
dark frames ¯Bgand¯Beto yieldCi
g=˜Ci
g−¯Bg,Ci
e=˜Ci
e−¯Be.
We would like to determine the coefﬁcient athat satisﬁes
Ni
e=aCi
e/τ,Ni
g=aCi
g/τ. We can immediately see that
the excitation fraction has no dependence on this coefﬁcient:
pi
e=aCi
e
aCie+aCig(11)
However, the total atom number Ni=a(Ci
e+Ci
g)/τ=
aCi
t/τdoes. Rewriting Eq. 10, we see a measurement of the
variance VQPN , the mean excitation ¯pe, and the mean total
counts ¯Ctcan determine a.
VQPN =¯pe(1−¯pe)
a¯Ct/τ(12)
The coefﬁcient acan be interpreted as the ”atoms per count
per pulse duration”. In principle, with knowledge of the quan-
tum efﬁciency, gain, scattering rate, numerical aperture, and
radiation pattern one could calculate this value. Practically,
assumptions about the radiation pattern based on the quanti-
zation axis and probe light polarization make this calculation
more difﬁcult. In practice, it is much more straightforward to
directly measure athan to individually measure each of these
values with high accuracy.
The observed variance of the excitation fraction Vpehas
contributions from quantum projection noise (QPN), photon
shot noise (PSN), and camera readout noise (RN):
Vpe=VQPN +VPSN +VRN (13)
Heregis the detector gain in units of counts per electron.4
VPSN =¯pe(1−¯pe)
¯Ct×g (14)
VRN=R2
¯Ct2(2¯p2
e−2¯pe+ 1) (15)
VPSN can be understood intuitively considering the ratio
VQPN/VPSN . The number of signal electrons (equivalently
the number of collected photons multiplied by the camera
quantum efﬁciency) per atom determines the relative scaling
ofVQPN andVPSN .
VQPN
VPSN=1
g×a(16)
105 3×1044×1046×104
Ct (counts)105
Var(pe)
FIG. S3. Readout noise calibration. A πpulse on our optical clock
transition is used so pe≈1 andVpe=R2
¯Ct2+C. We use 4 pulse
durations between 5and20µs to varyCt. We ﬁtR= 100.2±24.6
andC= 2.73×10−6±1.02×10−6.
To determine awe need to accurately calibrate VRNand
VPSN . We see atpe= 1,VPSN ,VQPN = 0. Thus, measur-
ingVpeatpe= 1will independently determine VRN.
We wish to ﬁtRand ensure it is consistent with the cameras
speciﬁed readout noise. To extract this value, we use 4 pulse
durations between 5and20µs to varyCt. This is illustrated
in Fig. S3. In practice, we ﬁt
Vpe=R2
¯Ct2+C (17)
We ﬁtR= 100.2±24.6andC= 2.73×10−6±1.02×
10−6. For our circular ROI there are X= 889 pixels in the
masked radius. For the calibrated gain g= 1.59counts/e- and
readout noise r= 2.4e- respectively ,Rcalc=√Xgr =
94.7in agreement with R= 100.2±24.6. We note that thegain and readout noise of the camera are close to speciﬁca-
tion. Dark counts over our 30ms exposure are < .1e- and
considered negligible.
Next, we wish to determine aQPN . To do so, we perform a
second measurement at pe= 0.5. The variance of this dataset
contains contributions from VQPN ,VPSN , andVRN. Us-
ing the measuredRvalue, we subtract the VRNcontribution.
Next, we ﬁt the data in Fig. S4 to:
Vpe=0.5(1−0.5)
a¯Ct/τ+0.5(1−0.5)
¯Ct×g (18)
We ﬁtaQPN = 1.72±0.16. This is in reasonable agree-
ment with the calculated value of 1.43 assuming Γ/2 scatter-
ing into 4πwhile also accounting for the measured quantum
efﬁciency.
105 4×1046×104
Ct (counts)2×105
3×105
4×105
Var(pe)
FIG. S4.aQPN calibration. The atoms in our optical lattice are
placed in a superposition of the ground and clock states with a π/2
pulse sope≈0.5 for these measurements and Vpeis ﬁt to Eq. 18.
We determine aQPN = 1.72±0.16.
READOUT NOISE
Here, we derive the readout noise term used in our variance
measurements. The expressions used are somewhat different
than other literature, given that we use averaged dark frames
¯Beand¯Bg. Recall,pe=Ce
Ce+Cg. To determine the readnoise
contribution to the excitation fraction, we perform standard
error propagation:
VRN=/parenleftBig∂pe
∂Ce/parenrightBig2
V(Ce) +/parenleftBig∂pe
∂Cg/parenrightBig2
V(Cg) (19)
Here,
∂pe
∂Cg=Ce
(Ce+Cg)2=pe
(Ce+Cg)(20)5
∂pe
∂Ce=Cg
(Ce+Cg)2=1−pe
(Ce+Cg)(21)
To determine V(Ce)consider anXpixel region-of-interest
for which we extract Cg,Cein two separate measurements.
Each pixel contains rread noise in electrons. The single pixel
read noise in units of counts is thus g×ri. The total noise in
this region of interest is summed in quadrature pixel-by-pixel
V(Cg),V(Ce) =/summationtext
X(ri×g)2=Xr2g2=R2. Plugging
terms in Eq. 19:
VRN=R2
¯Ct2(2¯p2
e−2¯pe+ 1) (22)
Imaging system parameters for Fig. 3(a)
In Table 1 is a summary of the imaging parameters for the
measurements in Fig. 3(a). For Fig. 1 and Fig. 4, a 1 µs pulse
duration was used. In Fig. 3(b), we vary the pulse length be-
tween 500 ns and 2 µs. Atom number ﬂuctuations in time-
of-ﬂight absorption imaging for these measurements have a
standard deviation less than 2 %.
Table 1
Vertical imaging system
Numerical aperture 0.23
Pulse duration 3µs
Total photons scattered per atom at full
saturation287
Collection efﬁciency 1.3 %
Camera quantum efﬁciency 0.85
Imaging system quantum efﬁciency 0.65
Calculated photon count per atom 2.06
Measured photon count per atom 1.91(1)
Horizontal imaging system
Numerical aperture 0.10
Pulse duration 3µs
Total photons scattered per atom at full
saturation287
Collection efﬁciency 0.25 %
Camera quantum efﬁciency 0.78
Imaging system quantum efﬁciency 0.72
Calculated photon count per atom 0.402
Measured photon count per atom 0.445(3)[1] G. E. Marti, PhD Thesis (University of California, Berkeley,
2014).
[2] W. Ketterle, D. S. Durfee, and D. Stamper-Kurn, arXiv (1999).
[3] D. D. Hickstein, S. T. Gibson, R. Yurchak, D. D. Das, and
M. Ryazanov, Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 90, 065115
(2019).
[4] D. Matei, T. Legero, S. H ¨afner, C. Grebing, R. Weyrich,
W. Zhang, L. Sonderhouse, J. Robinson, J. Ye, F. Riehle, et al. ,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 263202 (2017).
[5] W. M. Itano, J. C. Bergquist, J. J. Bollinger, J. M. Gilligan, D. J.
Heinzen, F. L. Moore, M. G. Raizen, and D. J. Wineland, Phys.
Rev. A 47, 3554 (1993).