A Web -Based Secure Access System Using Signature 
Verification  over Tablet PC  
Fernando Alonso -Fernandez, Julian Fierrez -Aguilar, Javier Ortega -Garcia, 
Joaquin Gonzalez -Rodriguez  
 
Escuela Politecnica Superior, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, 
Ctra. Colmenar k m. 15, E -28049 Madrid, Spain  
Tel.: +34 -91-4973 363, fax: +34 -91-4972235  
email: Fernando.alonso@uam.es  
 
ABSTRACT  
 
Low cost portable devices capable of capturing signature signals are being increasingly used . 
Additionally, the  social and legal acceptance of t he written signature  for authentication purposes 
is opening a range of new application s. In this paper, we describe a highly versatile and scalable 
prototype for Web-based secure access using signature verification. The proposed architecture 
can be easily extended to work with different kind of sensors and large scale databases.  Several 
remarks are also given on security and privacy of  network -based signature verification.  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Personal authentication in our networking society is becoming a crucia l issue [ 1]. In this 
environment, there is a recent trend in using measures of physiological or behavioral  traits for 
person authentication, which is also referred to as biometric authentication . Biometrics provides 
more security and convenience than tradi tional authentication  methods  which rel y in what you 
know (such as a password) or what you have (such as an ID card)  [2]. Within b iometrics , 
signature verification has been an intense field of study due to its social and legal acceptance 
[3,4]. 
 In this pa per, we present a prototype for Web -based secure access using signature verification. 
The increasing use of  low cost  portable devices capable of capturing signature signals such as 
Tablet PCs, mobile telephones or PDAs is resulting in a growing demand of s ignature -based authentication applications. Our prototype uses a Tablet PC for signature acquisition [5 ] but it can 
be easily extended to other signature acquisition devices  as well . 
 
WEB-BASED SECURE ACCESS USING SIGNATURE VERIFICATION  
 
The global archite cture of our prototype is shown in Fig. 1. A  signature  verification  server  
manages the verification process. This server communicates with a web server, which manages 
the communication with the user terminal  using the  HTTP protocol  through a network. In our 
prototype, the user terminal is a Tablet PC  and both the web server and the signature verification 
server are installed in a standard PC  that communicates with the Tablet PC thorough a LAN . 
 
 
Fig. 1: global architecture of the implemented prototype  
 
The proposed architecture is highly versatile. User terminal can be any device capable of 
capturing on- line signatures, from cheap digitizing tablets to more expensive Tablet PCs [ 5]. It is 
also highly scalable, since we can use powerful servers capable of managing several transactions 
in parallel, not only HTTP-based but using any other secured or unsecured protocol.  Table 1 
summarizes several applications that can use the proposed architecture.  
 
This architecture can also be adapted to work in other situations such as:  
 
• The signature verification server has low storing capacity . Users can be provided with a 
smartcard with its statistical model stored in it [ 6]. This approach saves considerable hard 
disk space in the central server and avoids the statistical models being stolen by a hacker or 
accidentally deleted by system administrators. On the contrary, the statistical model have to 
be transfer red thorough a network and thus  they can be intercepted by other users if no 
encrypt ion or secure connection is used.   
• The signature verification server has low processing capacity . The user terminal can then 
be allowed to perform the verification process, notifying  to the central server the 
acceptation/rejection decision. This approach saves considerable processing power in the 
signature verification server and reduces the amount of data to be transferred. In addition, the 
user templates never are transmitted, so they cannot be intercepted. On the other hand, we need to ensure that only a uthorized terminals  notify acceptation/rejection decisions.   
 
Table 1: Applications of a network-based signature verification system.  
Applications  Example  
e-banking  Access to bank account  
e-commerce  Secure transactions in Internet  
Login  Secure access to  home/office computer, LAN, Web account, 
mobile telephone, laptop, PDA, etc.  
POS (Point -Of-Sale)  Secure payment with credit card, verifying customers before 
charging their credit cards.  
Physical access control  Secure access to restricted areas  
Medical r ecords 
management  Secure access to medical records. Only authorized users are 
allowed to get access.  
e-Government  Secure operations such as ID card or driver license  
renovation, income tax return submission, etc.  
Electronic data security  Access and encr yption of sensitive data  
 
USER ENROLMENT  
 
The next steps are performed in order to enroll  a user in the system:  
 
1. The user is first authorized by an administrator in the signature verification server.  A 
username and a temporary password are assigned to the user. This ensures that only desired 
users have authorization to use the signature-based  verification system.  
 
2. Secondly, the user is requested to provide 5 signatures. These 5 signatures are used to 
generate a statistical model which characterizes the id entity of the user  [7]. The statistical 
model is generated in our prototype using the coordinate trajectories and pressure signals provided by the Tablet PC [ 5]. Technical details of the algorithm  for statistical model 
generation  can be found in [ 8, 9]. In our system, the  user can provide its 5 signatures 
remotely  with a downloadable application by using the temporary password assigned in the 
previous step. This scheme provides high flexibility.  If a more secure environment is needed, 
another option is to e nroll  the users only in the presence of an administrator.  
 
In order to account for the time variability of the signature signals, the 5 signatures  used for 
enrolment are provided in two different sessions separated by a certain amount of time , typically 
1 to 3 days . In addition,  the statistical model of the  user is updated along time by using the 
signature acquired in  the last successful access.  
 
THE SIGNATURE VERIFICATION SERVER  
 
The signature verification server manages the verification process. It receiv es the requests for 
verification and decides if the user is accepted or not. In Fi g. 2 we can see the  main window  of 
our signature verification server.  It shows the last transactions that have been realized, which are 
also stored on a log file. It also all ows to perform  the following actions:  
 
• User authorization , as described in the previous section . 
• User management . The next information is available for each  enrolled  user: name, date of the 
last successful  access, number of unsuccessful accesses since the last  successful  access,  and 
block status.  If a user accumulates a certain number of continuous unsuc cessful accesses, 
he/she is blocked. In Fig. 3  we can see the user management window.   
• System management. This module has the following options : storage pla ce of the user’s data, 
unsuccessful accesses allowed to the users, communication settings of the signature 
verification server, storage place of the log file,  rules for updating the statistical models  of a 
user, etc. 
 
It is supposed that only authorized administrators have access to the signature verification server.  
  
Fig. 2: main window of the signature verification server  
  
Fig. 3: user management window of the signature veri fication server  
 
USAGE OF  THE WEB- BASED SECURE ACCESS  CLIENT  
 
Once enrolled in the system, the  user has access to the proper URL  using its terminal. Fig. 4  
shows the main window of our prototype, where the username and a signature realization are 
requested.  If the user is accepted , he/she will be allowed to access to his account . If not, an 
appropriate message will indicate that he/ she has been rejected.  
  
Fig. 4: main window of our Web-based secure access prototype 
 
SECURING A NETWORK -BASED SIGNATURE VERIFICATION SYSTEM  
 A discussion of issues and concerns related to  the design of a secure fingerprint recognition 
system is addressed in [ 10]. Some of these concerns also apply in the case of signature 
verification systems.  
 
When designing a recognition system, we have to decide whether it is going to operate in 
verification or identification mode  [1]. In verification mode, an individual who desires to be 
recognized claims an identity , and the system compares the captured biometric data with the  
biometric template  corresponding to the claimed identity . In identification mode, the system 
recognizes an individual by comparing the captured biometric data with the templates  of all the 
users stored in the system . If the number of users is large, verification mode  is recommended 
unless identification is strictly necessary.  
 Typically, developers and integrators of systems and applications are not the producers of 
hardware and core software. Several factor s should be taken into account when choosing 
hardware and so ftware components : choose  proven hardware and software technology, check 
standards compliance with platforms or operating systems, evaluate cost versus performance 
trade-off,  ask for available support , etc. An SDK is usually supplied by the vendors, but sy stem 
designers will usually have to develop specific applications for managing the enrolment, 
managing the storage and retrieval of templates and information, setting up the system options, 
etc. 
 
A policy of how to deal with users with bad quality signatur es has to be defined. In signature -
based verification this is related to  users wh ose signature is easy to imitat e. An attended 
enrolment can deal with  this problem, forcing  users to provide signatures which are not easy to 
imitate , but this may result in future false rejection alarms. It is said that the security of the entire 
system is only as good as the weakest “password”, so users with simple  signature s may 
compromise the security of the overall application.  
 
System administration is an important issue.  The administrator may instruct users and make them 
familiar with the signature acquisition device. He is also in charge of the state of the acquisition 
devices if the verification is made in a supervised scenario. Monitoring the system log is also an 
impo rtant task to find out if the system is being subjected to attacks.  A threat model for the 
system has to be defined  and the system has to be guarded against them . The threat model  has to 
be based on what needs to be protected and from whom. The typical thr eats in a verification  
system are the following:  
 
• Denial of Service (DoS): the system is damaged, so legitimate users can no longer access it.  
• Circumvention : illegitimate users gain access to the system.  
• Repudiation: a legitimate user denies having accesse d the system.  
• Covert acquisition: trait samples of a legitimate user are obtained without his knowledge and 
subsequently used for illegitimate access.  
• Collusion: illegitimate access by means of special super -users who are allowed to bypass the 
verification  stage.  
• Coercion : a genuine user is forced to access the system.  
 In Fig. 5  we can see the main modules and dataflow paths in a signature verification system. The 
eight  possible attack points marked are:  1) Scanner, 2 ) Channel between the scanner and the 
feature extractor, 3) Feature extractor , 4) Channel between the feature extractor and the matcher , 
5) Matcher , 6) Database, 7) Channel between the database and the matcher , 8) Channel between 
the matcher and the application requesting verification.  
 
Note th at attacks 2, 4 , 7 and 8 are launched against communications channels,  and are collectively 
called “replay” attacks. Signals in these channels can be intercepted and used at a later time. 
Attacks 1, 3, 5 and 6 are launched against system modules and are called Trojan horse attacks. A 
Trojan horse program can disguise itself as the module and bypass the true module, submitting false signals.  For example, a Trojan horse program can perform  a circumvention or denial -of-
service (DoS)  attack by always generating  an acceptance or rejection decision in the matcher, 
respectively.  Also, t he sensor can be destroyed in a denial -of-service (DoS) attack . 
 It is very important that the feature extractor, matcher and database reside at a secure and trusted 
location. The sc anner should implement some securit y capabilit ies (e.g.: encryption). Also, a 
mechanism of trust should be established between  the components of the system. Mutual 
identification can be achieved by embedding a shared secret (e.g.: a key for a cryptographic  
algorithm) or by using a Certificate Authority  (CA - an independent third party that everyone 
trusts and whose responsibility is to issue certificates).  
 
 
Fig. 5: design of a signature verification system. The possible security attack points are 
marked with numbers from 1 to 8.  
 
PRIVACY I SSUES  
 
Privacy is the ability to lead one’s own life free from intrusions, to remain anonymous, and to 
control access to one’s own personal information [ 2]. It is widely accepted that biometric identifiers provide positive person recognition better than conventional technologies  (token- based 
or knowledge -based ). But several arguments and objections are given against biometric 
recognition:  hygiene of biometric scanners that require contact ; negative connotations associated 
with some biometrics used in crimin al investigation (DNA, fingerprint, face) ; inference of 
information from biological measurements ; linkage of biometric information between different 
applications, allowing to track individuals, either with or without permission ; acquisition of 
biometric sa mples without knowledge of the person, allowing covert recognition of people ; etc. 
The abuse of biometric information is an open issue that should be addressed by governments, 
industry and organizations. Unless a consensus is reached, citizens may be reluctant to provide 
biometric measurements and to use biometric recognition systems.  
 
One way to deal with some of the associated privacy problems is the use of systems with the 
information in a decentralized  place over which the individual has complete contr ol. For example, 
a smartcard can be issued with the tem plate of the user stored in it  [6]. Even more, as the 
computational power of smartcards is continuously increasing, it will be possible to implement the verification step inside the card in a match -on-card  architecture.  The card will  only have to 
deliver the acceptation/rejection decision. In that case, neither the template of the user nor the 
acquired biometric samples  are sent to any centralized application.  
 
CONCLUSIONS  
 
A prototype for Web-based secure access using signature verification has been  described. The 
proposed architecture ensures high versatility and scalability. The signature  verification server,  
which manages the verification process, is capable of communicating with a variety of sensors 
through several kinds  of networks using standard protocols such as HTTP.  It can be customized 
depending on factors such as: allowed number of users, cost of the acquisition sensors, network 
used in the access, storing or processing capacity of the signature verification server, etc.   
 Several issues have to  be taken into account when designing a network-based signature 
verification system: mode of operation (verification or identification), selection of hardware and 
software components, policy with users with bad quality signatures, administration of the system, 
definition of a threat model , detection of  attacks and implementation of a mechanism of trust 
between components of the system.  Privacy is sues have to be also considered when designing a 
system based on biometric information .  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
This work has been supported by BBVA, BioSecure NoE and the TIC2003-08382 -C05 -01 project 
of the Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology. F. A. -F. and J. F.-A. thank Consejeria de 
Educacion de la Comunidad de Madrid and Fondo Social Europeo for supporting their PhD 
studies.  
 REFERENCES  
 [1] A. K. Jain, A. Ross and S. Prabhakar, “An Introduction to Biometric Recognition”, IEEE 
Trans . on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 4-20, Janua ry 2004.  
 [2] S. Prabhakar, S. Pankanti, and A. K. Jain, “Biometric Recognition: Security & Privacy 
Concerns”, IEEE Security & Privacy Magazine, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 33 -42, March -April 2003  
 
[3] R. Plamondon and, S.N. Srihari: “On -line and off -line handwrit ing recognition: A 
comprehensive survey”, IEEE Transa . on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,  Vol. 22, 
No. 1,  pp. 63 -84, January 2000.  
 
[4] M. Faundez -Zanuy, “Signature verification state -of-the-art”, IEEE Aerospace and Electronic 
Systems Magazine,  Vol. 20, No. 7, pp. 28-32, July 2005.  
 [5] F. Alonso -Fernandez, J. Fierrez-Aguilar, and J. Ortega-Garcia, “Sensor interoperability and 
fusion in signature verification: A case study using Tablet PC”, Proc. IWBRS, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, Vol. 3 718, pp. 180-187, October 2005.  
 
[6] R. Sanchez-Reillo, “ Smart card information and operations using biometrics”, IEEE 
Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine, Vol. 16, No. 4,   pp. 3 -6, April 2001.  
 
[7] J. Fierrez- Aguilar, Loris Nanni, J. Lopez -Peñalba, J. Ortega-Garcia and Davide Maltoni, “An 
on-line signature verification system based on fusion of local and global information”, Proc. 
AVBPA, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3546, pp. 523-532, July 2005.  
 [8] J. Ortega-Garcia, J. Fierrez- Aguilar, J . Martin -Rello, J. Gonzalez-Rodriguez, “Complete 
signal modelling and score normalization for function-based dynamic signature verification ”, 
Proc. AVBPA, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2688, pp. 658 –667, 2003.  
 
[9] J. Fierrez -Aguilar, J. Ortega- Garcia, J. Gonzalez-Rodriguez, “Target dependent score 
normalization techniques and their application to signature verification ”, IEEE Trans. on SMC -C, 
Special Issue on Biometric Systems, Vol. 35, 2005.  
 [10] D. Maltoni, D. Maio, A. K. Jain and S. Prabhakar , Handbook of Fingerprint Recognition, 
Springer 2003.  
 
 
FERNANDO ALONSO-FERNANDEZ  received the M.S. degree in Electrical Engineering in 
2003, from Universidad Politecnica de Madrid. Since 2004 he is with the Computer Engineering 
Department, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, where he is currently working towards the Ph.D. 
degree on biomet rics. He has published over 10 international contributions. His research interests 
include signal and image processing, pattern recognition and biometrics.  
 JULIAN FIERREZ -AGUILAR received the M.S. degree in Electrical Engineering in 2001, from 
Universidad Politecnica de Madrid. Since 2004 he is with the Computer Engineering Department, 
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, where he is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree on 
multimodal biometrics. His research interests include signal and image processing,  pattern 
recognition and biometrics. He has published over 35 international contributions. He was the 
recipient of the Best Poster Award at AVBPA 2003 , the Rosina Ribalta Award from the Epson 
Iberica Foundation to the best PhD Proposal in 2005, the Best St udent Paper at ICB 2006, and led 
the development of the UPM signature veri fication system ranked 2nd in SVC 2004.  
 JAVIER ORTEGA-GARCIA received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering in 1996 from 
Universidad Politecnica de Madrid. He is currently an Associate Professor at the Computer 
Engineering Department, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid. His research interests are focused on 
forensic acoustics and biometrics signal processing. He has published over 50 international contributions. He has participated in several scientific and technical committees, and has chaired 
“Odyssey -04, The ISCA Speaker Recognition Workshop” . 
 JOAQUIN GONZALEZ -RODRIGUEZ received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering in 
1999 from Universidad Politecnica de Madrid. He is currently and Associate Professor at the 
Computer Engineering Department, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid. His research interests are 
focused on signal processing, biometrics and forensics. He is an invited member of ENFSI and 
has been vice-chairman for “Odyssey -04, The ISCA Speaker Recognition Workshop” . 
 