IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. X, NO. X, DECEMBER 2022 1
Valuing Distributed Energy Resources for
Non-Wires Alternatives
Nicholas D. Laws, Student Member, IEEE, and Michael E. Webber
Abstract —Distributed energy resources (DER) as non-wires
alternatives, regardless of owner, have the potential to reduce
system operating costs and delay system upgrades. However,
it is difﬁcult to determine the appropriate economic signal to
incentivize DER investors to install capacity that will beneﬁt
both the DER investors and the system operator. In an attempt
to determine this co-optimal price signal, we present a bilevel
optimization framework for determining the least cost solution to
distribution system over-loads. A key output of the framework is
a spatiotemporal price signal to DER owners that simultaneously
guarantees the DER owners’ required rate of return and mini-
mizes the system operation costs. The framework is demonstrated
with a case by which the system operator considers utility owned
battery energy storage systems, traditional system upgrades,
and energy purchase from DER owners. The results show that
by valuing DER for non-wires alternatives the utility owned
storage system sizes can be reduced, less hardware upgrades are
necessary, and upfront capital costs as well as operating costs
are reduced.
Index Terms —Power distribution planning, Power distribution
economics, Optimization methods, Non-wires Alternatives, Dis-
tributed energy resources.
I. I NTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
As population and electriﬁcation grow, there is pressure
on local electric distribution utilities to increase overall ca-
pacity and upgrade equipment to maintain high reliability.
These actions include simple maintenance such as vegetation
management, but also replacing and upgrading transformers,
installing more lines, replacing lines with newer ones, and so
forth.
However, those traditional actions related to the wires and
poles of the distribution system might not keep pace with load
growth that will accommodate rapid electric vehicle adoption
or widespread installation of electric heat pumps as a way
to reduce on-site fuel use for space and water heating. As a
consequence, there is an acute need for non-wires alternatives
that can be used to improve overall system performance.
Some of those alternatives include demand response and
distributed energy resources, such as local power generation
and/or storage.
Though distributed energy resources avoid additional load-
ing on the distribution lines, traditional utility funding models
do not always support their installation. Furthermore, market
signals can be confusing and do not encourage DER instal-
N. D. Laws is with the Walker Department of Mechanical Engineering, The
University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA (e-mail: nlaws@utexas.edu).
M. E. Webber is with the Walker Department of Mechanical Engi-
neering, The University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA (e-mail: web-
ber@mail.utexas.edu).
Manuscript received December 14, 2021.TABLE I: Nomenclature
Decision Variables
x2RMupper level primal decision variables
y2RNlower level primal decision variables
z2f0;1gKupper level primal binary decision variables
2RJlower level, dual variables for equality constraints
2RN
+lower level dual variables for upper bounds
2RN
+lower level dual variables for lower bounds
Parameters
V2RJNlower level equality constraint coefﬁcients
w2RJlower level equality constraints right-hand-side
y2RNupper bounds for lower level, primal decision variables
y2RNlower bounds for lower level, primal decision variables
a upper level scaling coefﬁcient for cost of DER energy
b lower level scaling coefﬁcient for income from selling
energy to upper level
c2RNlower level cost coefﬁcients for lower level decisions y
Sets and Indices
E set of edges in the network
N set of nodes in the network
NDER set of nodes for potential DER investors
NBESS set of nodes for potential BESS installations
NTRFX set of nodes for potential transformer upgrades
NLINE set of nodes for potential line upgrades
S set of demand charge periods
T set of time steps
j set of phases connected to node j
lation even though novel business models are emerging that
would reduce total system cost.
Given this context, this research seeks to explain how
DER might be appropriately valued in light of increasing
electriﬁcation and EV adoption in an era when traditional grid
enhancements are hobbled by cost and policy hurdles.
Early evaluations of DER for non-wires alternatives com-
pared costs and beneﬁts of known DER capacities and loca-
tions against capacity upgrade costs [1]. A common theme
in the literature for valuing DER as non-wires alternatives
accounted for the single perspective of the distribution system
operator (DSO). For example, Contreras-Ocana et al . devel-
oped a model that puts DER costs and beneﬁts in competition
with upgrade deferrals from a single perspective, at a single
location (substation or transformer) with forecasted overloads
[2]. By neglecting power ﬂow constraints they were able to
account for many types of DER including energy efﬁciency
investments. However, without a network model the DER are
presumably installed at the single, overloaded location.
The valuable work by Andrianesis et al. demonstrates howarXiv:2301.06636v2  [eess.SY]  10 Mar 2023IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. X, NO. X, DECEMBER 2022 2
to determine a locational marginal value (LMV) of DER in
a three step process, where the value of DER is determined
relative to the locational marginal cost of traditional system
upgrades [3]. The method in [3] also only accounts for the
DSO perspective, implicitly assuming that DER will behave
in a manner that best suits the system operator’s cost function
and constraints. Furthermore, it is assumed that the LMV is
sufﬁcient to motivate DER investment and that the LMV will
not motivate behavior that leads to greater operating costs or
the need for additional system upgrades.
The work by Garcia-Santacruz et al . is perhaps the ﬁrst
to account for both the DSO and DER owner perspectives
when valuing DER for non-wires alternatives [4]. The DSO
perspective is represented by minimizing energy losses in a
relaxed branch ﬂow model [5]. The DER owner perspective
is represented by maximizing a DER utilization factor, i.e.
minimizing the amount of energy curtailed. The system losses
and DER utilization factors are combined in a single cost
function with weighting factors that must be selected by the
planner. To make their problem tractable, only 24 hours of
loading is modeled, which prevents representation of the full
value proposition of DER.
The method presented in this paper addresses several gaps in
the literature for valuing DER as non-wires alternatives. First,
by leveraging a bilevel optimization framework, we account
for the perspectives of DER investors and the DSO without
the need for ad-hoc weighting factors. Second, we determine
a co-optimal, spatiotemporal price signal that simultaneously
minimizes DSO costs while guaranteeing the DER owners’
ﬁnancial returns. And third, the optimal locations and capac-
ities of both utility-owned and third-party-owned DER are
determined while obeying power ﬂow constraints.
The following sections present the proposed framework for
valuing DER for non-wires alternatives and example applica-
tions of the framework. The examples use a year of hourly
loads, which accounts for the full value proposition of DER
for non-wires alternatives.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
To account for the objectives and constraints of both the
DSO and the potential DER investors we employ a bilevel
optimization framework. Bilevel optimization problems, also
known as Stackelberg Games, are generally intractable. How-
ever, by ensuring that the lower level problem is linear the
bilevel problem can be converted into an equivalent single
level problem [6]. Furthermore, under certain conditions the
bilinear products of dual variables, i.e. shadow prices, and
primal variables can be linearized [7]. This last point is
especially important since we seek to optimize the product
of the price signal from the DSO and the power injection
decisions of the DER investors.
The general bilevel optimization framework is shown inProblem 1 (with nomenclature in Table I).
min
x;yf(x;y) +a
bX
j2N DERX
t2Tj;tyEXP
j;t (1a)
s.t.g(x;y)0 (1b)
y2arg min
y2RNc|y bX
j2N DERX
t2Tx
j;tyEXP
j;t (1c)
s.t.yyy(;) (1d)
Vy=w(): (1e)
The components of the framework in (1) are:
the upper level cost (1a), which includes a generic
functionf(x;y)and a second term that represents the
payment to DER owners via the product of the lower
level shadow price j;tand export decisions yEXP
j;t;
the upper level generic constraint set g(x;y)0;
the upper level is constrained by the lower level decisions
ybeing in the optimal space of the lower level problem;
the lower level problem has a linear cost function given
x(1c), which includes:
–a generic cost c|yand
–the income from the upper level via price signal x
j;t
times the exported DER energy yEXP
j;t;
and the linear lower level constraints with the associated
dual variables in parentheses (1d)-(1e).
The key feature of the framework is the exchange of money
between the DSO in the upper level and the DER investors in
the lower level via the products of the upper level price signal
decisions and the lower level export decions in the objective
functions (1a) and (1c). As we show in the following, the
DSO in the upper level can effectively set the marginal price of
DER investors when the DSO wishes; and the sum of the total
compensation paid to DER investors must meet the investors’
required rate of return.
As shown in [7]1:
j;t=b x
j;t (2)
which means that the upper level payment to DER can be
written:
a
bX
j2N DERX
t2Tj;tyEXP
j;t=aX
j2N DERX
t2Tx
j;tyEXP
j;t: (3)
In other words, we have formed a zero-sum game in which the
upper level, or DSO’s, cost of DER energy is equal to the DER
owners’ income (with the exception of the scaling coefﬁcients
aandbthat we will use to account for each party’s cost of
capital). Furthermore, the product of the dual variable j;tand
the DER dispatch variable yEXP
j;tcan be shown to equal a linear
sum [7]:
X
j2N DERX
t2Tj;tyEXP
j;t=1
VyEXP 
w| c|y |y+|y
(4)
1See Equation (9) in [7] when the index kis equal to the index for a given
yEXP
j;t, the variable has zero coefﬁcients in the cost vector c, and no bounds
are binding (i.e. = 0 and= 0).IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. X, NO. X, DECEMBER 2022 3
whereVyEXPis the coefﬁcient of the lower level export variable
in the lower level load balance equations.
To convert the bilevel problem (1) into a single level
problem it is important to note that the the lower level problem
described by (1c) – (1e) is linear given x. The conversion to a
single level is achieved by replacing the lower level problem
with its Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions [8]. The KKT
conditions make the lower problem a mixed-integer linear
problem. Problem (5) shows the single level equivalent of (1):
min
x;y;z;;;f(x;y;z) +a
bX
j2N DERX
t2Tj;tyEXP
j;t (5a)
s.t.g(x;y)0 (5b)
c+bTx+V|+ =0 (5c)
yyy (5d)
Vy=w (5e)
?(y y) (5f)
?(y y) (5g)
Note that the complementary constraints (5f) and (5g) can be
handled with integer variables or special order sets [9]. Also,
the entries of the vector bin (5c) are zero except for the entries
that correspond with the price signal x
j;t. The non-zero values
ofbare set to pwfLLin the examples.
Problem 5 is a mixed integer non-linear problem . Using the
result from [7] the product of andyin (5a) can be linearized
as shown in (4). Also, if the upper level cost function f(x;y)
and constraints g(x;y)are linear then the single level problem
is mixed-integer linear. However, there are no requirements on
the form of the upper level problem within the framework. For
example, the constraints in the upper level can represent any
power ﬂow equations and integer decisions.
III. U SE-CASE EXAMPLES
To demonstrate the value of the proposed framework we
start with a system that has expected transformer and line
over loads. The system planner or DSO, as the ﬁrst player in
the upper level, seeks to ﬁnd the lowest cost solution to the
expected over loads by choosing from:
line and transformer upgrades,
battery energy storage systems (BESS),
and/or purchasing DER energy at a time and space
varying price of its choosing.
The DSO makes these choices with knowledge of how the
lower level, i.e. potential DER investors, will react to the price
signal. The DER investors, as the second players in the lower
level, choose from:
purchasing energy at a known ﬁxed price to meet demand,
and/or investing in DER to meet load as well as (possibly)
receive compensation for exported energy.
We presume that the DER investors’ required rate of return
(RoR) is known. The model is formulated such that DER
will only be purchased if the RoR can be reached. The DSO
decisions are also subject to power ﬂow constraints, such as
line ﬂow and transformer loading limits.For reference we compare three scenarios in each use-case:
1) The base case with component overloads and the tradi-
tional upgrade costs.
2) The minimum cost solution considering only utility
owned BESS (no DER value).
3) The minimum cost solution considering BESS and valu-
ing DER as a non-wires alternative.
The input data and the results are summarized in Figure 1.
Note that we assume that the DER are PV systems by using
a time-varying production factor from [10]. We presume to
have expected hourly load proﬁles over a year for each load
bus in the network2. In the base case the utility must pay
for new lines and transformers due to expected over loads.
The examples are built upon the IEEE 13 bus distribution test
system. Transformer upgrade costs are estimated using values
from [12] and line costs were obtained from a large municipal
distribution utility.
Fig. 1: Summary of the use-case example inputs and outputs used to
demonstrate the method for valuing DER for non-wires alternatives.
Figure 2 gives an overview of the overloaded network
components, where the DSO is considering installing BESS,
and where it is possible for the DER investors to install PV
systems.
650
645 632 633
604 611 671
652 680692 675646 634
Utility BESS Option
3rd-Party PV Optionoverloaded linesoverloaded lines
Fig. 2: Overview of the IEEE 13 Bus Test System showing the DER and
BESS options as well as the overloaded lines and transformers. Secondary
transformers at buses 634, 646, and 675 have peak loads of 143%, 111%, and
167% as percent of ratings respectively. Overloaded lines are all assumed to
have 110% overloads compared to their capacity ratings. Graphic by Jeffrey
M. Phillips.
2Random combinations of proﬁles from [11] were scaled to match the test
system.IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. X, NO. X, DECEMBER 2022 4
A. System Planner Problem
The upper level problem in the bilevel framework represents
the system planner’s perspective. The upper level cost function
f(x;y)is the sum of battery capital costs, the cost of trans-
former and line upgrades, the cost of bulk energy purchased,
and the peak demand charges:
f(x;y) =X
j2NBESS;82j 
cBkWxBkW
j;+cBkWhxBkWh
j;
+X
j2NTRFcTRF
jzTRF
j+X
j2NLINEcLINE
jzLINE
j
+pwfULX
t2T0
@cLMP
tX
20P+
0;;t1
A
+pwfULX
s2(1;:::;jSj)cDEM
sPMAX
s(6)
The cost coefﬁcients in (6) are deﬁned in Table II and the
variables in (6) are deﬁned in Table III. Note that the net
power at the feeder head P0;;tdecisions implicitly include
lower level decisions via the power ﬂow constraints shown
below. Also, we assume that the DSO is not compensated
for exported power by including only the non-negative power
P+
0;;t(deﬁned in (7)) at the feeder head in the objective
function.
P+
0;;t0 (7a)
P+
0;;tP0;;t;82;8t2T (7b)
DSO are not typically compensated for exported power and
can even be restricted to not export at all by contractual
agreements or regulations.
The upper level present worth factor pwfULaccounts for
annual recurring costs, and is deﬁned as:
a=pwfUL=X
y21::N years(1 +re)(1 +rc)
1 +rWACCy
(8)
wherereis the annual cost of electricity growth rate, rcis
the annual energy consumption growth rate, and rWACC is the
planner’s weighted average cost of capital rate.
The system planner also has the option to purchase energy
from DER (as described in the Section II). For these use-
case examples we set the coefﬁcient ain (3) equal to the
system planner’s present worth factor pwfUL. The additional
cost component for the planner is thus:
pwfULX
j2N DERX
t2Tx
j;tyEXP
j;t: (9)
The system planner considers purchasing BESS systems,
which can preclude or reduce the size of system upgrades,
lower the cost of bulk energy purchases via energy arbitrage,
as well as reduce peak demand charges. The BESS operational
constraints are shown in (10).
xSOC
j;;t=xSOC
j;;t 1+xB+
j;;t xB 
j;;t=
8j2N BESS;82j;8t2T(10a)TABLE II: Parameter values for the distribution system planner in the use-case
example.
name description value
cBkWcost of BESS inverter [$/kW] 300
cBkWhcost of BESS capacity [$/kWh] 250
cTRF
jcost of a new transformer [$] 150,000
cLINE
jcost of a new line [$] length 200+15,000
cLMP
t wholesale cost of energy [$/kWh] [13]
cDEM
s peak demand cost in period s[$/kW] 50
 BESS efﬁciency [fraction] 0.96
RTRF
jincrease in transformer rating [kW] varies
RTRF
j existing transformer rating [kW] varies
RLINE
jincrease in line rating [kW] varies
RLINE
j existing line rating [kW] varies
re energy cost growth rate [year 1] 0.03
re energy consumption growth rate [year 1] 0.03
rWACC weighted avg. cost of capital [year 1] 0.10
TABLE III: System planner decision variables for the use-case example with
descriptions and units. The planner can invest in BESS at different locations,
dispatch the BESS to minimize costs, purchase DER energy, and/or upgrade
system components.
name description
xBkW
j;BESS inverter capacity [kW]
xBkWh
j;BESS energy capacity [kWh]
xB+
j;;tBESS charge rate [kW]
xB 
j;;tBESS discharge rate [kW]
xSOC
j;;tBESS state-of-charge [kWh]
x
j;tPrice of DER exported energy [$/kWh]
zTRF
jbinary for transformer upgrade [0/1]
zLINE
jbinary for transformer upgrade [0/1]
xBkW
j;xB+
j;;t+xB 
j;;t;8j2N BESS;82j;8t2T (10b)
xBkWh
j;xSOC
j;;t;8j2N BESS;82j;8t2T (10c)
xSOC
j;;0= 0:5xBkWh
j;;8j2N BESS;82j(10d)
xSOC
j;;T = 0:5xBkWh
j;;8j2N BESS;82j(10e)
xSOC
j;;t0;xBkWh
j;0;8j2N BESS;82j;8t2T (10f)
In words, the BESS constraints are:
(10a) deﬁnes the time evolution of the battery state of
charge;
(10b) says that the sum of the battery power decisions
can be at most the inverter rating;
(10c) says that the battery state of charge is at most the
battery energy rating;
(10d) says that the initial state of charge is half of the
energy rating;
(10e) says that the ﬁnal state of charge is half of the
energy rating; andIEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. X, NO. X, DECEMBER 2022 5
(10f) says that the state of charge and energy rating
decisions are non-negative.
The system planner has binary decisions for transformer and
line upgrades (see Table III). If a component is upgraded then
its operational limits are expanded by the difference in capacity
between the original component and the new component. This
fact is reﬂected in Equation (11) for transformers and Equation
(12) for lines.
 RTRF
j zTRF
jRTRF
jPj;;tRTRF
j+zTRF
jRTRF
j;
8j2JTRF;82j;8t2T(11)
 RLINE
j zLINE
jRLINE
jPij;;tRLINE
j+zLINE
jRLINE
j;
8j2JLINE;82j;8t2T
(12)
The planner’s constraint set also includes a three phase, un-
balanced LinDistFlow model [14].3The power ﬂow constraints
are shown in (13).
Pij;;t +Pj;;t X
k:j!kPjk;;t = 0;
8j2N;82j;8t2T(13a)
Qij;;t +Qj;;t X
k:j!kQjk;;t = 0;
8j2N;82j;8t2T(13b)
vj;t=vi;t+MP
ijPij;t+MQ
ijQij;t;
8(i;j)2E;8t2T(13c)
P0;;t=P01;;t820;8t2T (13d)
Q0;;t=Q01;;t;820;8t2T (13e)
Pj;Pj;;tPj;8j2N;82j;8t2T (13f)
Qj;Qj;;tQj;8j2N;82j;8t2T (13g)
Pij;Pij;;tPij;8(i;j)2E;82j;8t2T (13h)
Qij;Qij;;tQij;8(i;j)2E;82j;8t2T (13i)
vvj;;tv;8j2N;82j;8t2T (13j)
The real and reactive power balances are shown in (13a)
and (13b) respectively. Equation (13c) deﬁnes the vector of
voltage magnitudes squared for each phase, where MP
ijand
MQ
ijare 33 matrices of line resistances and reactances
(see equations (20) and (21) in [14]), the vector vj;t=
[vj;1;t;vj;2;t;vj;3;t]|collects the phase voltages (squared), and
similarly the vectors Pij;t= [Pij;1;t;Pij;2;t;Pij;3;t]|and
Qij;t= [Qij;1;t;Qij;2;t;Qij;3;t]|collect the phase line ﬂows.
Equations (13d) and (13e) state that the net power at the feeder
head is equal to power transferred along the lines from node
zero to one. And the remaining constraints (13f) – (13j) deﬁne
upper and lower bounds.
The peak demand in each demand period PMAX
s is deﬁned
as the highest demand at the substation in a demand period:
PMAX
sX
20P0;;t8t2s;8s2S (14)
3As part of this work an open-source Julia implementation of LinDistFlow
was created [15].Lastly, the upper level includes a structural constraint that
prevents simultaneous import and export of energy:
yIMP
j;;t?yEXP
j;;t;8j2N DER;82j;8t2T (15)
B. DER Investor Problem
The potential DER investors have known demands and a
time varying cost of energy. Note that if DER costs are low
enough (or energy costs high enough) it is possible that DER
capacity is installed even in the absence of the price signal.
The lower level costs are:
X
j2N DER 
ckW
jykW
j+pwfLL"
cOMykW
j+X
t2TcIMP
j;tyIMP
j;t#!
;(16)
which in words is the sum over all potential DER investor
nodesNDERof:
the capital cost of DER ckW
jykW
j,
the operations and maintenance cost of DER cOMykW
j,
and the cost of energy cIMP
j;tyIMP
j;t.
The DER investor parameters and variables are summarized
in Tables (IV) and (V) respectively.
The lower level beneﬁts (negative costs) are the sum of the
price signal x
j;tfrom the upper level and the exported energy
yEXP
j;tover time and space:
 pwfLLX
j2N DERX
t2Tx
j;tyEXP
j;t: (17)
Note that the bilinear product of upper and lower level
decisions in (17) are linearized when the lower level problem
is replaced with its KKT conditions (see (5)).
The lower level present worth factor pwfLL, deﬁned in (18),
accounts for the:
years of the analysis period Nyears,
the RoR,
the annual cost of energy growth rate re,
and the annual energy consumption growth rate rc.
b=pwfLL=X
y21::N years(1 +re)(1 +rc)
1 +RoRy
(18)
TABLE IV: DER investor baseline parameters for the use-case example.
name description value
ckW
jcost of DER at node j[$/kW] 1,600
cOMannual cost of operations and maintenance
[$/(kW-year)]17
cIMP
j;tcost of energy imported [$/kWh] 0.15
dj;t uncontrollable demand [kW] [16]
fprod
j;tproduction factor, 0–1 [10]
re energy cost growth rate [year 1] 0.03
re energy consumption growth rate [year 1] 0.03
ROR required rate of return [year 1] 0.15
The DER investor load balance deﬁnes the net power
injection for each node and time step:
dj;t yDER
j;t=yIMP
j;t yEXP
j;t(j;t);8j2N DER;8t2T (19)IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. X, NO. X, DECEMBER 2022 6
TABLE V: DER investor variables for the use-case example. The investor
chooses how much capacity to install as well as how to dispatch the system.
name description
ykW
jcapacity of DER at node j[kW]
yIMP
j;tenergy imported [kWh]
yEXP
j;tenergy exported [kWh]
yDER
j;tenergy produced [kWh]
Lastly, the real power production of any DER is limited by
the purchased capacity and a time-varying production factor
(between zero and one):
yDER
j;tykW
jfprod
j;t;8j2N DER;8t2T (20)
IV. R ESULTS
Figure 3 provides a high level summary of the results. In the
baseline case the system planner must upgrade the overloaded
components and cannot invest in BESS nor purchase DER
energy. The total lifecycle cost (LCC) for the planner is
$8.41M over 20 years of operations, including the capital costs
of upgrades. A break down of the planner’s baseline costs are
summarized in Table VI.
Upfront Capex Annual Opex NPV01234567$Mbaseline
BESS only
BESS+DER
Fig. 3: Case study summary results. See Table VI for a break down of the
upfront capital costs (capex) and the annual operating costs (opex). The net
present value (NPV) is by deﬁnition zero in the baseline case.
Figure 4 shows the annual costs in the base scenario. Note
that the ﬁrst bar represents the upfront capital costs, which
in the base case include the traditional upgrade costs for the
lines and transformers with expected over loads. The annual
operating costs include the cost of bulk energy as well as the
coincident peak demand charges.
Next, we present the results for the system planner when
considering only BESS investments (without purchasing DER
energy). The DSO can install BESS at nodes 632 and/or 634
(see Figure 2). In this scenario it is cost optimal for the DSO
to install a 4.4 hour, 21.8 kW BESS at bus 634 and a 4.8
hour, 961 kW BESS at bus 632. With these BESS the total
life cycle cost is $6.43M, yielding $1.98M in savings over
the base scenario. The addition of the BESS also prevent the
need to upgrade one of the lines (632-633) as well as the
transformer at bus 634.
Comparing the cash ﬂows with and without BESS in Figures
4 and 5 respectively, yields two key observations: i) theTABLE VI: A summary of the use-case example results for the baseline, BESS
only, and BESS with DER valued as non-wires alternatives. All dollar values
are in millions. (Abbreviations: “LCC” = lifecycle cost, “Trfx” = transformer,
“capex” = capital cost.)
Baseline BESS only BESS & DER
Total LCC $8.41 $6.43 $5.42
Net present value – $1.98 $2.99
Trfx upgrades $0.45 $0.30 $0.15
Line upgrades $0.76 $0.65 $0.12
Bulk energy $3.09 $1.70 $1.17
Demand charges $4.11 $2.61 $2.25
BESS capex – $1.47 $0.96
DER energy – – $0.75
Lines upgraded 4/4 3/4 1/4
Trfxs upgraded 3/3 2/3 1/3
0 5 10 15 20
Year from now0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2$Mtotal trfx upgrade cost
total line upgrade costcost of bulk energy
demand charges
Fig. 4: Upfront capital costs (in year zero) and annual, discounted operating
costs for the DSO in the base case with traditional upgrades.
1.52.02.5
cost of bess
total trfx upgrade cost
total line upgrade costcost of bulk energy
demand charges
0 5 10 15 20
Year from now0.00.20.4$M
Fig. 5: Upfront capital costs (in year zero) and annual, discounted operating
costs for the DSO considering only BESS (no DER). Note the much higher
upfront costs when compared to the base line upfront costs in Figure 4 come
with the beneﬁt of lower annual operating costs as compared to the base
scenario.
planner’s upfront capital costs are approximately doubled with
the BESS investment, even though the line and transformer
upgrade costs are reduced relative to the base case; and ii) the
ﬁrst year operating costs are reduced by approximately $0.2M
with the optimal BESS.
In the third and ﬁnal scenario we include the value ofIEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. X, NO. X, DECEMBER 2022 7
DER for non-wires alternatives. Now, with the option to
purchase DER energy the DSO total lifecycle cost is $5.42M,
yielding an additional cost reduction of $1.01M over the
BESS only scenario for a total net present value of $2.99M.
The DSO reduces its cost of energy by purchasing DER
exported energy at the DER investor’s marginal cost, in this
case 15 cents/kWh4. Additionally, with the DER contributions
the DSO only needs to upgrade one of the three overloaded
transformers (at bus 675) and one set of the four overloaded
lines (692-675). Table VI summarizes the costs when valuing
DER.
Figure 6 shows the annual cash ﬂows for the third scenario
with DER valued. Note that the upfront costs are comparable
to the base scenario but the annual operating costs are sig-
niﬁcantly reduced when compared to the base scenario cash
ﬂows in Figure 4.
0 5 10 15 20
Year from now0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2$Mcost of bess
total trfx upgrade cost
total line upgrade costcost of bulk energy
demand charges
cost of der energy
Fig. 6: Upfront capital costs (in year zero) and annual, discounted operating
costs for the DSO considering BESS and DER for non-wires alternatives. The
upfront capital costs are comparable to the traditional upgrade costs and much
lower than the upfront costs in the BESS only scenario shown in Figure 5.
Also, the annual operating costs are much lower than the baseline scenario
shown in Figure 4 and lower than the BESS only scenario, even with the
additional cost of purchasing DER energy.
For reference we also provide the DER investor results with
and without the DSO price signal in Table VII. Note that the
net present cost values are the same with and without the price
signal. In both cases the DER investors obtain their required
rate of returns. However, in the case with the price signal the
additional costs of the larger DER systems are offset with the
income from selling energy as well as the additional energy
cost savings.
TABLE VII: Use-case example results summary for DER investors with and
without the price signal from the DSO. All dollar values are in millions.
(Abbreviations: “capex” = capital cost.)
no signal with signal
Net present cost $2.79 $2.79
DER Capex $0.43 $1.59
Income – $0.51
Energy cost savings $0.53 $1.30
Bus 634 capacity 67 kW 138 kW
Bus 646 capacity 124 kW 305 kW
Bus 675 capacity 79 kW 550 kW
4We do not use time-varying retail rates to keep the use-case examples
relatively easy to understand. However, there is no limit on the form of the
retail rates.V. D ISCUSSION
Using the proposed framework for valuing DER as non-
wires alternatives, the use-case examples demonstrate the
potential for reducing system operating costs in ways that
beneﬁt the DSO as well as DER investors. Ultimately, it is
reasonable to expect that lower system costs will lead to lower
costs for all customers.
The use-case examples assumed that DER investors con-
sider PV systems since they are cost-competitive in many
areas and are not subject to emission regulations like back-
up gas generators. However, back-up gas generators could
provide a signiﬁcant value proposition for both the DSO and
DER investors by providing power during evening peak loads
(unlike PV systems) as well as serve customer critical loads
during outages. The proposed framework for valuing DER can
account for gas generators by removing the time varying limit
on the DER production and adjusting the cost parameters.
All scenarios were solved on a 2017 Macbook Pro with two
each 2.8 GHz Quad-Core Intel i7 chips, 16 GB of RAM, and
Gurobi version 9. The bilevel problem solve time was limited
to one hour, in which it reached an optimality gap of less
than two percent. While the long solve time may indicate that
the bilevel method may not scale well to large problems, no
efforts were made to make the bilevel problem easier to solve.
Future work could include appropriately scaling the problem
coefﬁcients as well as decomposing the problem into sub-
problems and leveraging advanced solution techniques.
A major advantage of the proposed framework is its ﬂexibil-
ity. For example, it is straightforward to account for different
DER types in the lower level problem, as long as they can
be modeled in a linear fashion. The upper level problem is
not limited to linear equations, as demonstrated in the use-
case example with the inclusion of integer decisions for the
transformer and line upgrades. Another example of leveraging
the ﬂexibility of the framework would be to replace the non-
negative bulk power purchases P+
0;;twith the net power P0;;t
in the upper level objective (6). Valuing power exported to the
bulk system would increase the value of DER for non-wires
alternatives by adding another value stream for the DSO. For
example, it is possible that DSO could sell excesss energy in
a bulk market.
VI. C ONCLUSION
Valuing DER for non-wires alternatives appropriately is a
difﬁcult task. The framework proposed in this work accounts
for both the system planner’s perspective and the DER investor
perspectives. The bilevel optimization framework guarantees
that solutions minimize the planner’s costs over the chosen
horizon as well that the DER investors achieve their required
rate of returns. In light of FERC Order 2222 [17] and expected
growth in load and DER adoption [18] it is becoming more
and more important for system planners to work with DER
investors to plan efﬁcient distribution power systems.
Using a use-case example we showed how the framework
can be leveraged to value DER for non-wires alternatives.
Comparing life cycle costs over 20 years for the system
planner, the results show that by valuing DER for non-wiresIEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. X, NO. X, DECEMBER 2022 8
alternatives the DSO can avoid upgrading most of the over
loaded components as well as achieve a net present value of
nearly $3M relative to the cost of the traditional upgrades.
We also compared the solution with DER valued to a scenario
with utility owned batteries and no third-party DER value. The
results show that the DSO can achieve an additional $1M in
net present value when valuing DER relative to the scenario
with utility owned batteries.
In future work we intend to leverage the bilevel framework
in a transactive control context. Transactive control methods
that account for the DSO perspective and the DER owner
objectives are necessary to appropriately motivate DER to
provide services that beneﬁt the entire system.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Piccolo and P. Siano, “Evaluating the impact of network investment
deferral on distributed generation expansion,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems , vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1559–1567, 2009.
[2] J. E. Contreras-Ocana, Y . Chen, U. Siddiqi, and B. Zhang, “Non-
wire alternatives: An additional value stream for distributed energy
resources,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy , vol. 11, no. 3,
pp. 1287–1299, 2019.
[3] P. Andrianesis, M. Caramanis, R. D. Masiello, R. D. Tabors, and
S. Bahramirad, “Locational marginal value of distributed energy re-
sources as non-wires alternatives,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid ,
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 270–280, 2019.
[4] C. Garc ´ıa-Santacruz, A. Marano-Marcolini, and J. L. Mart ´ınez-Ramos,
“Optimal location of distributed energy resources considering investment
costs, use of resources and network constraints,” IEEE Access , vol. 9,
pp. 163 379–163 390, 2021.
[5] M. Farivar and S. H. Low, “Branch ﬂow model: Relaxations and
convexiﬁcation—part i,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 28,
no. 3, pp. 2554–2564, 2013.
[6] S. Dempe and A. Zemkoho, “Bilevel optimization,” in Springer opti-
mization and its applications. Vol. 161 . Springer, 2020.
[7] N. D. Laws and G. A. Hanasusanto, “Linearizing bilinear products of
shadow prices and dispatch variables in bilevel problems for optimal
power system planning and operations,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems , 2022.
[8] S. Dempe, Foundations of bilevel programming . Springer Science &
Business Media, 2002.
[9] E. Beale and J. J. Forrest, “Global optimization using special ordered
sets,” Mathematical Programming , vol. 10, pp. 52–69, 1976.
[10] National Renewable Energy Laboratory, “PVWatts Calculator,” 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://developer.nrel.gov/docs/solar/pvwatts/
[11] M. Deru, K. Field, D. Studer, K. Benne, B. Grifﬁth, P. Torcellini, B. Liu,
M. Halverson, D. Winiarski, M. Rosenberg et al. , “Us department of
energy commercial reference building models of the national building
stock,” 2011.
[12] K. Horowitz, “2019 distribution system upgrade unit cost database
current version,” National Renewable Energy Laboratory-Data (NREL-
DATA), Golden, CO (United . . . , Tech. Rep., 2019.
[13] Ercot real-time market information. [Online]. Available: https://www.
ercot.com/mktinfo/rtm
[14] D. B. Arnold, M. Sankur, R. Dobbe, K. Brady, D. S. Callaway, and
A. V on Meier, “Optimal dispatch of reactive power for voltage regulation
and balancing in unbalanced distribution systems,” in 2016 IEEE Power
and Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM) . IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–5.
[15] N. D. Laws. Lindistﬂow, julia package. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.github.com/nlaws/LinDistﬂow
[16] Deru et al., “U.s. department of energy commercial reference building
models of the national building stock,” National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, Tech. Rep. TP-5500-46861, 2011.
[17] (2020, September) FERC News Order 2222.
[Online]. Available: https://www.ferc.gov/news-events/
news/ferc-opens-wholesale-markets-distributed-resources- n
landmark-action-breaks-down
[18] S. Nalley and A. LaRose, “Annual energy outlook 2022 (aeo2022),”
Energy Information Agency , p. 23, 2022.
Nicholas D. Laws Nicholas D. Laws is a PhD
candidate in the Webber Energy Group at The Uni-
versity of Texas at Austin and a Power Systems
Optimization Engineer at Camus Energy. His re-
search focuses on the integration of clean distributed
energy resources in ways that beneﬁt all stakehold-
ers. He holds a Bachelor of Science in Aerospace
Engineering from Boston University and a Master
of Science from Dartmouth College, Thayer School
of Engineering.