ARXIV PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 2023 1
On Modeling Network Slicing Communication
Resources with SARSA Optimization
Eduardo S. Xavier, Nazim Agoulmine and Joberto S. B. Martins
Abstract —Network slicing is a crucial enabler to support the
composition and deployment of virtual network infrastructures
required by the dynamic behavior of networks like 5G/6G mobile
networks, IoT-aware networks, e-health systems, and industry
verticals like the internet of vehicles (IoV) and industry 4.0.
The communication slices and their allocated communication
resources are essential in slicing architectures for resource
orchestration and allocation, virtual network function (VNF)
deployment, and slice operation functionalities. The communi-
cation slices provide the communications capabilities required
to support slice operation, SLA guarantees, and QoS/ QoE
application requirements. Therefore, this contribution proposes a
networking slicing conceptual model to formulate the optimiza-
tion problem related to the sharing of communication resources
among communication slices. First, we present a conceptual
model of network slicing, we then formulate analytically some
aspects of the model and the optimization problem to address.
Next, we proposed to use a SARSA agent to solve the problem
and implement a proof of concept prototype. Finally, we present
the obtained results and discuss them.
Index Terms —Network Slicing, Communication Slice, Re-
source Allocation, Conceptual and Analytical Model, Machine
Learning, SARSA.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Network slicing is a crucial enabler to support the composi-
tion and deployment of virtual network infrastructures required
by the dynamic behavior of networks like 5G/6G mobile
networks, IoT-aware networks, e-health systems, and industry
verticals like the internet of vehicles (IoV) and industry 4.0 [1]
[2] [3]. In general, the slicing process results from the need
to share resources among existing infrastructures to improve
performance, provide cost-efﬁcient solutions, and optimize
operation [4].
This technology is already used in the context of 5G
networks [1] [5] and provided as a service (slice-as-a-Service:
SlaaS) by network operators. This allows customs to create
their private virtual networks (slices) tailored to their speciﬁc
application domains and to develop their own business mod-
els. Network slicing is expanding its use in other scenarios
of telecommunication networks, content provider networks
(ISPs), experimental networks, and IoT systems, among others
[6].
Xavier, Eduardo F. is with Salvador University (UNIFACS), Brazil -
eduardo.sidney@animaeducacao.com.br
Agoulmine, Nazim is with University of Paris Saclay, University of Evry
- IBISC Lab, France - nazim.agoulmine@univ-evry.fr
Martins, Joberto S. B. is with Salvador University (UNIFACS), Brazil -
joberto.martins@gmail.com
This work IS supported by ANIMA Institute and FAPESP - MCTIC -
Project 2018/23097-3.Network slice instance life cycle process such as commis-
sioning, operating, and decommissioning [1] requires appro-
priate network communication resources. A communication
slice1eventually represents a set of communication resources
that can be used in the slicing process. It holds resources like
links, optical slots, virtual private networks (VPNs), and other
communication facilities necessary to provide the exchange
of information among logical slices, and architectural slicing
entities and for supporting the slicing process functionalities.
The communication slice resources signiﬁcantly impact the
performance of the resulting sliced virtual network (SVN)
or virtual network operator (VNO). Among the most com-
mon network characteristics that impact the network slicing
process, we can mention delay-aware network slicing like in
5G deployments [7], quality of service (QoS) aware network
slicing [3], energy-aware network slicing [8], and, in general,
application-dependent and multi-domain network slicing [9].
The objective of this paper is therefore to propose a concep-
tual model of slice communication and formulate analytically
some of its aspects. The model should be able to capture the
set of communication resources to support the optimization
of the allocation of communication resources to the different
slices on top of various underlying technologies (e.g. Elastic
Optical Networks - EON [10], MultiProtocol Label Switching
- MPLS [11], others)
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the
related work and Section III introduces the concept of multido-
main sliced virtual networks. Section IV presents a conceptual
and analytical model for a communication slice used in the
network slicing process. Section V presents a proof of concept
of using the models with a SARSA agent optimizing the
allocation of bandwidth resources for a communication slice.
Finally, Section VI presents the ﬁnal considerations.
II. R ELATED WORK
There have been a very signiﬁcant number of state-of-
art research projects launched in the area during the last
decade such as SFI2 (Slicing Future Internet Infrastructures)
[12] [13], NECOS (Novel Enablers for Cloud Slicing) [14],
SELFNET [15] and MATILDA [16], standardization initiatives
launched by the IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) [17],
3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project) [18], ITU (ITU-T
- Telecommunication Standardization) [19], ETSI (European
Telecommunications Standards Institute) [20] and ONF (Open
Networking Foundation) [21] and published surveys [2] [22]
1A specialized slice that provides communication services among network
slicing entitiesarXiv:2301.04696v1  [cs.NI]  11 Jan 2023ARXIV PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 2023 2
[23] [24] [25]. These different initiatives have focused on
different technical aspects, architectures, and slicing strategies,
and all require communication slices to operate and manage
the provided functionalities.
However, these slicing architectures, projects, and initiatives
did only address the conceptual and analytical modeling of the
basic structures and functionalities that compose the slicing
process in a preliminary way or did only indicate them as
future challenges to solve. To the best of our knowledge, the
conceptual and analytical modeling of communication slices
is a new contribution to the network slicing domain.
III. R ESOURCES , SLICE AND SLICED VIRTUAL NETWORK
(SVN)
A multi-domain Sliced Virtual Network (SVN) as viewed
in Figure 1 is a multi-domain or a multi-tenant2infrastructure
that is dynamically conﬁgured and deployed by requesting and
orchestrating resources from a pool of providers on domains.
Figure 1. A Multi-Domain Sliced Virtual Network (SVN) and its Resources
A. The Slice
For the scope of this paper aiming at the slicing model and
deployment understanding, it is essential to conceptualize the
vision of a slice as a component of the sliced virtual network.
We deﬁne a slice as a speciﬁc resource, service, function,
or set of resources, services, and functions virtualized, shared,
and grouped using any software or hardware facility. The slice
2For the scope of this paper, a tenant can be a network domain, a service
provider, a business unit, or a speciﬁc multi-tier or single-application tier
providing resources for network slicing.with its resources, services, and functions physically resides
in nodes or other physical deployments in domains.
As such, slice resource examples are virtual machines,
virtual switches with hosts deployed with OpenFlow, chunks
of bandwidth belonging to a physical link, slots of a ﬁber
EON deployment, LSP MPLS connections, shared spectrum
in 5G radio access networks (RAN), and others. Slice function
and service examples are virtual network functions (VNFs) de-
ployed over a network providing speciﬁc services or facilities
to the user.
Considering this slice basic concept, an SVN encompasses
resources, services, and functions with the necessary commu-
nication resources to interconnect them inside domains and
between domains as illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 2. A Generic SVN with Slices View
In general, resources belonging to the same SVN reside in
different domains and are physically or virtually attached to
nodes in their respective domains (Figure 2).
The network slicing architecture functionalities (resource
marketplace, resource broker, resource orchestrator, slice in-
stantiation, slice monitoring, and others) are distributed in
terms of the domains participating in the SVN deployment
and certainly, depend on the proposed architecture and the
deployed functional blocks of the network slicing architecture
(SELFNET, NECOS, SFI2, MATILDA, other).
B. Communication Resources and Communication Slice
In order to allow the execution of the network slicing pro-
cess and functionalities in any deployed slicing architecture,
it is necessary to allocate communication resources allowing
communication among the entities involved in the slicing pro-
cess. Furthermore, once the SVN is deployed, communication
resources are also necessary to support the communication
requirements of the applications running (slice operation).ARXIV PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 2023 3
Figure 3. Intradomain and Interdomain Communication Slices
The generic view of communication resources used by a
network slicing infrastructure to enable resource orchestration,
deployment, and slice operation is illustrated in Figure 3.
We assume that the slicing process to create a sliced
virtual network (SVN) involves single or multiple domains
(Dx;:::;D z). Each domain is generically conﬁgured by a
single or a set of nodes ( ni;:::n j) hosting resources and
domains that are interconnected by communication resources.
Acommunication slice is then deﬁned as a set of commu-
nication resources orchestrated and allocated between slices,
nodes, network-slicing entities, and domains. As such, the
domain nodes ( ni;:::n j) hosting resources and domains are
interconnected by communication slices ( Cx;:::C y).
We identify two types of communication slices that are
orchestrated and deployed with distinct conﬁgurations and
characteristics:
Intradomain communication slices; and
Interdomain communication slices.
In infrastructures composed of network domains, the mod-
eling assumes that a gateway concentrates all communications
between different domains.
We focus in this paper speciﬁcally on interdomain com-
munications and how to model it in terms of communication
slices.
IV. N ETWORK SLICING INTERDOMAIN COMMUNICATIONS
The objective of a network slicing interdomain communi-
cation model is to formally structure and capture the needs in
terms of communications for the slicing process. It also allows
the identiﬁcation of parameters leading to the optimization of
the resource allocation process.
A. Network Slicing Assumptions
We ﬁrst introduce the following assumptions in the con-
text of network-slicing interdomain communications that are
necessary for our modeling and problem formulation:
Each network domain is SDN-compatible;
Each network domain gateway GW_Di(Figure 3) is an
SDN-enabled switch whose programmed behavior is to
route packets between domains;Notation Description
Dli
iThe domain ilocated in physical location li
RDli
iDomain’s set of shareable resources at a physical location
RDli
i
iA shareable resource at domain Dli
i
R_ISli
DiThe infrastructure and service resources
R_Cli
DiThe network communication resources
BDi;DjBandwidth between domains
LDi;DjPacket loss between domains
DlDi;DjDelay between domains
Bni;nj Bandwidth between nodes
Lni;nj Packet loss between nodes
Dlni;nj Delay between nodes
P_RCli
Dk;DjSet of communication’s link parameters between domains
Table I
NOTATION AND VARIABLES
Each network domain implements monitoring mecha-
nisms to collect performance monitoring parameters;
All intradomain and interdomain links are conﬁgurable
in terms of allocated resources; and
All network domains support network resource identiﬁ-
cation and has capabilities for resource allocation.
B. Network Slicing Model
Based on these assumptions, we can now specify an analyt-
ical model of multi-domain SVN considering a set of network
domains federating together their resources and infrastructures
to the slicing process:
@=<Dli
i;Dlj
j;Dlk
k;:::;Dlz
z> (1)
Where:
Dli
iis a network infrastructure domain located at site li.
Each network infrastructure domain Dli
ihas a set of share-
able resources such as:
RDli
i=<RDli
i
i;RDli
i
j;RDli
i
k;:::;RDli
iz> (2)
Where:
RDli
iis the set of shareable resources provided by Di
and located at site li;
RDli
i
iis one particular shareable resource.
There are different types of resources at each network
infrastructure domain location Dli
i:
Infrastructure appliance like virtual machines, access
points, and IoT devices;
Computing services like virtual network functions (VNF),
storage and computing services; and
Communications services like physical links, LSPs
(MPLS Link Switched Paths), ﬁber lambdas, and 5G
connections.
For the purpose of the SVN model, we distinguish between
two types of resources:
Infrastructure and service resources - R_ISli
Di; and
Communications resources - R_Cli
Di.ARXIV PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 2023 4
Users (clients) request infrastructure, service, and commu-
nication resources that are orchestrated by a network slicing
software (NECOS, MATILDA, other) to create their sliced
virtual network (SVN) as illustrated in Figure 1.
The communication resources R_Cli
Diprovide the intercon-
nection of infrastructure and service resources R_ISli
Difor
intradomain and inter-domain connections. As such, for the
SVN modeling there are two distinct communication resources
or communication slices (Figure 3):
Intradomain communication slices used between internal
nodes of the domain: R_Cli
Di[nj;nk]; and
Interndomain communication slices used between do-
mains:R_Cli
Di;Dk
The communication slices are characterized by as set of pa-
rameters related to interdomain (Equation 5) and intradomain
(Equation 4) communications:
P_RCDi;Dj=<BDi;Dj;LDi;Dj;DlDi;Dj> (3)
P_RCni;nj=<Bni;nj;Lni;nj;Dlni;nj> (4)
Where:
BDi;Djis the available bandwidth between domains Di
andDj;
LDi;Djis the packet loss between domains DiandDj;
DlDi;Djis the delay between domains DiandDj.
Bni;njis the available bandwidth between nodes niand
njin a domain;
Lni;njis the packet loss between nodes niandnjat a
domain; and
Dlni;njis the packet delay between nodes niandnjat
a domain.
Figures 1 and 3 illustrate a generic view of the slicing
process and related interdomain communications. The network
slicing infrastructure setup from the point of view of commu-
nication resources is as follows:
A set of domains ( Di);
A single communication slice (conﬁgurable link or an-
other communication resource) between domains; and
A SDN switch (gateway) programmed to handling the
interdomain packet routing among domains.
The interdomain slice communication parameters
P_RCli
Dk;Djare conﬁgured during the slicing commissioning
phase, as proposed in the 3GPP network slicing reference
architecture and model [26].
An SVN will require resources of distinct domains to be
allocated end-to-end:
SLDi
k=<RDli
i
i;RDli
i
j;RDliy
k;:::;RDliyz> (5)
The communication slice modeling assumes that each do-
main contributes to a set of different resources that are located
in various physical sites (domains).
The model is agnostic to the issue of trafﬁc distinction
between packets generated with the slices already instantiated
Figure 4. Openﬂow Switch Handling Operation and Management Slicing
Generated Packets
(slice operation) and packets generated by the network slicing
management software installed (orchestrator, resource market-
place, monitoring, others).
The slicing-related interdomain trafﬁc between domains is
handled by an SDN switch as illustrated in Figure 4.
In summary, the interdomain trafﬁc at the gateway is com-
posed of the packets generated (operation and management) by
all resources belonging to the domain Dihaving as destination
the domain Dj.
The slicing communication model assumes that domains
have only one network connection together. In other words, the
domains do not act as intermediate domains switching packets
in the path to a destination domain.
For the interdomain packets at the gateway, the following
deﬁnitions hold (Figure 4):
All packets belonging to a set of resources RDli
i
i at
domainDiwith the same performance parameters con-
straint use a speciﬁc queue Qn;
Nswitch queues handle the packet generated by the
shareable resources at domain Di;
The switch queues have SDN resources control capa-
bilities controlled by SDN Controllers [27] for resource
control;
A priority is assigned to each output queue; and
Each queue has a threshold level control parameter PQn.
The priority and threshold level assigned to the queues are
used to support for optimization (e.g. optimization controller
as shown in the following section).
In summary, the model assumes that packets generated from
any sliced resource with similar performance constraints are
grouped in the same controlled queue in the gateway.
The following hypotheses are considered for the control of
the intradomain packets and the gateway queues as highlighted
in Figures 3 and 5):
Intradomain communications will be based on existing
underlying communication technologies (MPLS LSPs
connections, EON ﬁber slots, other);ARXIV PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 2023 5
Figure 5. Interdomain Communication Slice and Gateway at Domain i
A gateway handles all the inbound and outbound inter-
domain trafﬁcs,
In a domain, each node hosting sharing resources for the
slicing creates a path to the gateway,
Each path associated with a resource provided by a node
is associated with a particular queue in the gateway.
The intradomain slice communication analytical model is
not the focus of this paper, and these premises make clear
its interrelation with the interdomain modeling and allows the
independent modeling of it.
The optimization problem to solve here is the sharing of the
communication resources between the different slices taking
into account the QoS requirement of each slice. This means
scheduling the packet originating from the different slices
towards the different available queues in the gateway. This
a complex engineering problem that is difﬁcult to solve in an
analytical way considering all the parameters that need to be
taken into account. For that, we propose to investigate the use
of a Reinforcement Learning SARSA agent which is explained
in the following section.
V. SARSA A GENT TO OPTIMIZE RESOURCES SHARING
The interdomain communication slice model is now applied
to the network slicing deployment setup illustrated in Figure
5 in which we have:
A multidomain slicing infrastructure with ndomains;
A single communication slice between domains; and
A SDN-capable switch (gateway) handling bidirectional
interdomain packets between the domains.
In terms of the proof of concept, each interdomain commu-
nication slice has a reinforcement learning SARSA agent aim-
ing to optimize the allocation of communication resources. The
RL-SARSA agent acts during slice operation to dynamically
keep performance parameters accordingly to management-
deﬁned objectives.
The interdomain slice communication parameters
(P_RCli
Dk;Dj) are conﬁgured during the slicingcommissioning phase and are dynamically adjusted by
the SARSA agent during the slice operation phase.
A. SARSA Agent Model and Conﬁguration
The objective of the SARSA agent is to control the queue
ﬂushing transmission rates to preserve the performance param-
eters deﬁned by the manager while sharing unused resources.
The slice communication queues ( Qi) are conﬁgured as
follows:
Three queues corresponding to three performance param-
eters controlled by the agent;
Each conﬁgured queue threshold ( Thi) corresponds to
the performance parameter assigned to the queue and
served to packets generated by sliced resources with this
requirement, and
Each queue Qihas two states: below threshold (BT) and
above threshold (AT).
The actions deﬁned for the queues in the ATstate are to
increase the transmission rate, reduce the transmission rate,
and do nothing. Each executed state/action has a deﬁned
reward.
The SARSA agent and communication slice parameters and
initial conditions for running are as follows:
Agent conﬁguration parameters:
–Epsilon-greedy policy = 8%;
–Learning rate = 20%; and
–Discount factor = 80%
Threshold limit (triggers agent action) = 50%
Agent actions: bandwidth increased or reduced by 10%
Maximum number of attempts = 500
Queue priorities are: p1,p2andp3withp1>p2>p3.
SARSA Q-values are therefore updated based on the Equa-
tions 6:
Q(xt;at) Q(xt;at) +[rt+1+Q(xt+1;at+1)
 Q(xt;at)](6)ARXIV PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 2023 6
B. Implementation and tests
The simulation environment was conﬁgured on a Linux
(Ubuntu 22.04.1 LTS) Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-3470 CPU @
3.20GHz desktop. The Visual Studio Code v.1.73.0 and Python
v3.10.6 are used to execute the tests and the statistical analysis.
Each test run scenario has a minimum process cycle of 104
packet production for each queue with a Poisson distribution.
The SARSA agent is called each time any queue reaches
its conﬁgured threshold. The SARSA agent processes up
to 500 episodes in search of a new conﬁguration of the
ﬂushing bandwidth distribution among queues to keep buffer
occupation in the conﬁgured threshold limit.
C. The Slice Communication Evaluation Results
A series of tests have been undertaken. It aims to overload
the queues to evaluate the behavior of the agent. The three
deﬁned scenarios are the following:
Scenario 1 - One of the queues is overloaded;
Scenario 2 - Two queues are overloaded; and
Scenario 3 - All queues are overloaded.
The dynamics of the overloaded queues are conﬁgured as
follows:
First set trafﬁc 30% above the queue deﬁned limit for 10
minutes;
Increase to 50% above its deﬁned limit for additional 10
minutes;
Increase to 80% above its deﬁned limit for additional 10
minutes; and
Increase to 100% above its deﬁned limit for additional
10 minutes.
Figures 6 and 7 illustrate the SARSA agent’s behavior for
scenario one. Figure 6 plots the state of the queues while they
are being saturated with overload trafﬁc of packets. The queue
transmission rate (ﬂushing rate) conﬁgured by the SARSA
agent is illustrated in Figure 7. We observe that the total
available bandwidth for the link is distributed and reconﬁgured
among the queues according to the dynamic need to ﬂush
packets from a speciﬁc queue and keep queue occupation
below the deﬁned threshold.
For scenario two, the behavior of the SARSA agent is
illustrated in Figure 8. In this scenario, two queues may
overload, and, as observed in scenario one, the SARSA agent
reconﬁgures the queue’s transmission rate to keep buffer oc-
cupation below the deﬁned threshold. The agent can deal with
simultaneous overload for the simulation-deﬁned parameters
by keeping queue occupation as required.
Finally, the behavior of the SARSA agent for scenario 3
is illustrated in Figure 9 and is equivalent to its behavior on
scenario two.
VI. F INAL CONSIDERATIONS
This paper presents a conceptual model of network slicing
and present an analytical model to allocate communication
resources between slide process. The conceptual model is
along with a SARSA agent that optimize the allocation of com-
munication resources among slices. The SARSA agent usesthe conceptual model to formulate the required communication
ressources of each slice. A proof of concept implementation
of the SARSA agent aims to demonstrate that the SARSA
agent contributes to dynamically adjusting and controlling
the slice communication parameters between domains. The
proposed conceptual model demonstrates the feasibility and
ease of handling different types of communication resources
for optimizing the communication slice. Future work includes
the leverage of the conceptual model with the integration of
intradomain and interdomain models and the new formulation
of the distributed optimization problem to solve by a federation
of SARSA agents.
REFERENCES
[1] Shalitha Wijethilaka and Madhusanka Liyanage. “Sur-
vey on Network Slicing for Internet of Things Real-
ization in 5G Networks”. In: IEEE Communications
Surveys Tutorials 23.2 (2021), pp. 957–994.
[2] A. A. Barakabitze, A Ahmad, R Mijumbi, and A Hines.
“5G Network Slicing Using SDN and NFV: A Survey
of Taxonomy, Architectures and Future Challenges”. en.
In:Computer Networks 167 (Feb. 2020), p. 106984.
[3] F. Yousaf, M. Gramaglia, V . Friderikos, B. Gajic, D. von
Hugo, B. Sayadi, V . Sciancalepore, and M. Crippa.
“Network Slicing with Flexible Mobility and Qos/Qoe
Support for 5g Networks”. In: IEEE International Con-
ference on Communications . May 2017, pp. 1195–1201.
[4] P K Thiruvasagam, A Chakraborty, and C. Murthy.
“Resilient and Latency-Aware Orchestration of Network
Slices Using Multi-Connectivity in MEC-Enabled 5G
Networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Network and
Service Management 18.3 (Sept. 2021), pp. 2502–2514.
[5] M Chahbar, G Diaz, A Dandoush, C Cérin, and K
Ghoumid. “A Comprehensive Survey on the E2E 5G
Network Slicing Model”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Network and Service Management 18.1 (Mar. 2021),
pp. 49–62.
[6] I Kovacevic, A Shaﬁgh, S Glisic, B Lorenzo, and E
Hossain. “Multi-Domain Network Slicing With Latency
Equalization”. In: IEEE Transactions on Network and
Service Management 17.4 (Dec. 2020), pp. 2182–2196.
[7] Jonathan Prados-Garzon and Tarik Taleb. “Asyn-
chronous Time-Sensitive Networking for 5G Backhaul-
ing”. In: IEEE Network 35.2 (Mar. 2021), pp. 144–151.
ISSN : 1558-156X. DOI: 10.1109/MNET.011.2000402.
[8] Y . Xiao and M. Krunz. “Dynamic Network Slicing
for Scalable Fog Computing Systems With Energy
Harvesting”. In: IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications 36.12 (Dec. 2018), pp. 2640–2654.
[9] K. Samdanis, X. Costa-Perez, and V . Sciancalepore.
“From Network Sharing to Multi-Tenancy: The 5G Net-
work Slice Broker”. In: IEEE Communications Maga-
zine 54.7 (July 2016), pp. 32–39.
[10] Gilvan Durães, Rafael Reale, Romildo Bezerra, Alexan-
dre Fontinele, André Soares, and Joberto S. B. Martins.
“Evaluating the Applicability of Bandwidth Allocation
Models for EON Slot Allocation”. en. In: ProceedingsARXIV PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 2023 7
Figure 6. Test Scenario 1 - One Gateway Queue Overloaded - Queue Size
Figure 7. Test Scenario 1 - One Gateway Queue Overloaded - Queue Flushing Rate
Figure 8. Test Scenario 2 - Two Gateway Queues Overloaded - Queue SizeARXIV PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 2023 8
Figure 9. Test Scenario 3 - Three Gateway Queues Overloaded - Queues Size
of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced Net-
works and Telecommunications Systems (IEEEANTS) .
India, Dec. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[11] Luc de Ghein. MPLS Fundamentals . CISCO Press,
2007. ISBN : 1-58705-197-4.
[12] G. N. Dias, J. F. Rezende, L N. Ciuffo, I. Machado,
Flavio Silva, Tereza C. de Brito, F. Redigolo, Joberto
S. B. Martins, Leobino Sampaio, and Antonio Abelem.
“SFI2 - Slicing Future Internet Infrastructures project”.
In:Proceedings of the The Global Experimentation for
Future Internet (GEFI) . Coimbra, Portugal, Nov. 2019,
pp. 1–3.
[13] Joberto S B Martins, Tereza C. Carvalho, Flavio Silva,
and Rodrigo Moreira. SFI2 Network Slicing Reference
Architecture . Technical Report TR03/2022. Universi-
dade de São Paulo - USP, 2022, pp. 1–12.
[14] S Clayman, A Neto, F Verdi, S Correa, S Sampaio, I
Sakelariou, L Mamatas, R Pasquini, K Cardoso, F Tusa,
C Rothenberg, and J Serrat. “The NECOS Approach to
End-to-End Cloud-Network Slicing as a Service”. In:
IEEE Communications Magazine 59.3 (Mar. 2021).
[15] J Nightingale, Qi Wang, J M. Alcaraz Calero, E
Chirivella-Perez, M Ulbricht, J A. Alonso-López, R
Preto, T Batista, T Teixeira, M J Barros, and C Reinsch.
“QoE-Driven, Energy-Aware Video Adaptation in 5G
Networks: The SELFNET Self-Optimisation Use Case”.
In:Int. J. Distributed Sens. Networks 12.1 (2016).
[16] P Gouvas, A Zafeiropoulos, C Vassilakis, E Fotopoulou,
G Tsiolis, R Bruschi, R Bolla, and F Davoli. “Design,
Development and Orchestration of 5G-Ready Applica-
tions over Sliced Programmable Infrastructure”. In: 29th
International Teletrafﬁc Congress (ITC) . V ol. 2. Sept.
2017, pp. 13–18.
[17] IETF. Framework for IETF Network Slices . RFC- Re-
quest for Comments draft-ietf-teas-ietf-network-slice-
framework-00. Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar.
2021, pp. 1–18.
[18] 3GPP. 5G-Evolution-3GPP . Technical Report Release
16-17. 3GPP, 2020, pp. 1–54.[19] Telecommunication Standardization ITU-T. Framework
of Network Virtualization for Future Networks . Tech.
rep. ITU-T Y .3011. ITU-T - Telecommunication Stan-
dardization, Jan. 2012, pp. 1–28.
[20] ETSI. Mobile Edge Computing A key technology to-
wards 5G . Technical Report WP No. 11. European
Telecommunications Standards Institute, Sept. 2015.
[21] ONF - Open Networking Foundations. Applying SDN
Architecture to 5G Slicing . Technical Report TR-526.
ONF - Open Networking Foundations, 2016, pp. 1–19.
[22] Shunliang Zhang. “An Overview of Network Slicing
for 5G”. In: IEEE Wireless Communications 26.3 (June
2019), pp. 111–117.
[23] X Foukas, G Patounas, A Elmokashﬁ, and M K Marina.
“Network Slicing in 5G: Survey and Challenges”. In:
IEEE Communications Magazine 55.5 (May 2017),
pp. 94–100.
[24] Alexandros Kaloxylos. “A Survey and an Analysis of
Network Slicing in 5G Networks”. In: IEEE Communi-
cations Standards Magazine 2.1 (Mar. 2018), pp. 60–65.
[25] I Afolabi, T Taleb, K Samdanis, A Ksentini, and H
Flinck. “Network Slicing and Softwarization: A Sur-
vey on Principles, Enabling Technologies, and Solu-
tions”. In: IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials 20.3
(2018), pp. 2429–2453.
[26] 3GPP. 3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical
Speciﬁcation Group Services and System Aspects; Man-
agement and Orchestration; Concepts, Use Cases and
Requirements . Technical Speciﬁcation 3GPP TS 28.530
V15.0. 3GPP, 2019, p. 30.
[27] Eliseu Torres, Rafael Reale, Leobino Sampaio, and
Joberto S. B. Martins. “A SDN/OpenFlow Framework
for Dynamic Resource Allocation based on Bandwidth
Allocation Model”. In: IEEE Latin America Transac-
tions 18.5 (Apr. 2020), pp. 853–860.