ASEAN's Portfolio Investment in a Gravity Model∗
Tomoo Kikuchiaand Satoshi Tobeb
aGraduate School of Asia-Pacic Studies, Waseda University
bSchool of Policy Studies, Kwansei Gakuin University
January 16, 2023
Abstract
We investigate the elasticity of portfolio investment to geographical distance in a
gravity model utilizing a bilateral panel of 86 reporting and 241 counterparty coun-
tries/territories for 2007-2017. We nd that the elasticity is more negative for ASEAN
than OECD members. The dierence is larger if we exclude Singapore. This indicates
that Singapore's behavior is very dierent from other ASEAN members. While Sin-
gapore tends to invest in faraway OECD countries, other ASEAN members tend to
invest in nearby countries. Our study also shows the emergence of China as a signicant
investment destination for ASEAN members.
Keywords: portfolio investment; ASEAN; gravity model; Poisson Pseudo Maximum
Likelihood
JEL Classication: F21; F34; O16
∗We would like to thank Benedict Tiu and Yupeng Wang for their excellent research assistance. We
would like to thank Mariel Monica R. Sauler and Junko Koeda for helpful comments that helped us revise
the paper. This research was funded by Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation Foundation for Interna-
tional Cooperation. Corresponding author: Tomoo Kikuchi. Nishi-Waseda Bldg.7F, 1-21-1 Nishi-Waseda,
Shinjyuku-ku, Tokyo 169-0051 Japan. Email: tomookikuchi@waseda.jp .
1arXiv:2301.05443v1  [econ.GN]  13 Jan 20231 Introduction
Net portfolio investment of ASEAN started to become positive for the period after the Asian
Financial Crisis in 1997 (see Figure 1). This means that ASEAN invests in securities in the
rest of the world more than the rest of the world invests in securities in ASEAN. On the
other hand, the opposite is true for OECD after 2000, which is the period of our interest in
this paper.
Figure 1: Net portfolio investment of ASEAN and OECD (% of GDP, 5-year moving average
across countries)
Source: IMF Balance of Payments. Note: From 1970 to 2020, ASEAN members increased from 5 to 10 and
OECD members from 22 to 37. There are also missing data for some years. The net portfolio investment of
OECD fell from -76 billion USD in 2001 to -500 billion USD in 2002. This is mainly caused by the US and
the UK, whose net portfolio investment fell from -325 billion USD to -425 billion USD and from 183 billion
USD to -64 billion USD respectively accounting jointly for 48% of the drop in the net portfolio investment
of OECD.
Since 2001 ASEAN's portfolio investment asset in OECD has increased much more in OECD
than ASEAN (see Figure 2(a)). This suggests that ASEAN's capital markets are less inte-
grated than its goods markets, which have seen a steady growth in inter-regional trade in
past years (compare Figure 2(c) and 2(d)). In contrast, OECD-OECD portfolio investment
and trade have both grown over time (see Figure 2(b) and 2(d)). This tendency of ASEAN
to invest in securities outside more than inside the region seems to go against regional -
nancial integration that has been promoted after the Asian Financial Crisis in 1997. Indeed,
comparing 2(a) and 2(b) we can see that around 80 percent of OECD's portfolio assets are
in OECD while only 7 percent of ASEAN's portfolio assets are in ASEAN (60 percent in
2OECD) as of 2020. This concentration of portfolio investment in OECD also contributes to
economic growth in OECD as shown in ?.
(a) Porfolio investment of ASEAN
 (b) Portfolio investment of OECD
(c) Trade of ASEAN
 (d) Trade of OECD
Figure 2: Portfolio investment and trade of ASEAN and OECD (USD billion)
Source: Portfolio investment data are from IMF CPIS including 5 ASEAN countries and 34 OECD countries.
Trade data are from UN Comtrade including 10 ASEAN countries and 34 OECD countries.
The purpose of this paper is to investigate the property of ASEAN's portfolio investment
in comparison with OECD's. Unless otherwise stated, we refer to Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore and Thailand, the so-called ASEAN-5, for which data are widely
available as ASEAN. Since regional economic integration entails free movement of produc-
tion factors within a geographical space, we employ a gravity model approach using a bi-
lateral portfolio investment asset dataset to examine the elasticity of portfolio investment
to geographical distance. Our bilateral panel includes 86 reporting and 241 counterparty
countries/territories for the period 2007-2017. The coordinated portfolio investment survey
(CPIS) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) reports the bilateral gross stock of port-
folio investment in each year based on the residency of investors and issuers. The series can
be divided into two sub-categories: the equity instrument (investment) and the debt instru-
ment (investment). In this paper we also make use of the data provided by Coppola et al.
3(2021) who complied a restatement of the CPIS portfolio investment data from a residency
to nationality basis, which is available for the period 2007-2017. By comparing the results
of residency and nationality-based data we can reveal the role of tax havens for portfolio
investment allocation of ASEAN.
Our main results are:
1. For 2007-2017 the elasticity of both debt and equity investment to distance is more
negative for ASEAN than for OECD. This means that the tendency to invest in se-
curities issued in nearby countries is stronger for ASEAN than OECD. This tendency
is even stronger for ASEAN excluding Singapore. This suggests that Singapore's be-
havior is dierent from other ASEAN members. While Singapore tends to invest in
faraway countries, other ASEAN members tend to invest in nearby countries.
2. Relative to 2007 the elasticity of debt investment to distance has become more positive
in the recent years for ASEAN while it has become more negative for OECD. ASEAN
excluding Singapore follows a similar trend as OECD. This is consistent with a dramatic
increase in Singapore's debt investment in the US over the past decade (Singapore is
far away from New York relative to other investment destinations).
3. Relative to 2007 there is no signicant change in the elasticity of equity investment to
distance in the recent years for both ASEAN and OECD except that it has become
positive on a residency basis in the original CPIS data for ASEAN and on a residency
basis in the data by Coppola et al. (2021) for OECD in recent years. The deviating
results are due to dierent coverage of countries in each data set and suggest that
China for ASEAN and tax havens for OECD in recent years have become signicant
equity investment destinations. ASEAN excluding Singapore follows a similar trend
as OECD.
The results highlight the role of Singapore as a platform for both inward investment from
other ASEAN members and outward investment to distant OECD members. In fact, Sin-
gapore is ASEAN's largest host for multinational companies attracting portfolio investment
from other ASEAN members as well as ASEAN's largest investor in the US and China. In
other words, the contrasting investment behaviors of Singapore and other ASEAN mem-
bers are not just caused by Singapore's investment behavior but also by Singapore being a
major destination for portfolio investment of other ASEAN members. Therefore, ASEAN's
nancial integration would inevitably require a higher exposure of Singapore to securities in
ASEAN.
4Gravity model estimation is widely applied to analysis using bilateral trade ow data but also
international asset allocation data (for a theoretical background see Okawa and Van Win-
coop, 2012) such as foreign direct investment (FDI) in Head and Ries (2008) and De Sousa
and Lochard (2011), cross-sectional bilateral portfolio equity ows in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2008), equity ows using panel data covering 1989 to 1996 in Portes and Rey (2005), and US
bilateral asset holdings data in Chit u et al. (2014). There are several features of our paper
that should be highlighted in relation to the literature. First, we employ a structural gravity
model estimation combining the Poissson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood (PPML) approach
with a set of various xed-eects. The structural gravity model can solve concerns on omit-
ted variable bias, heteroskedasticity and zero observations, which are well known challenges
in estimating gravity models (see Anderson and Van Wincoop, 2003; Silva and Tenreyro,
2006). Second, we provide a comparison between residency and nationality-based data to
reect the signicance of tax havens in international nancial markets in recent years. Third,
we use a comprehensive dataset covering a wide range of investor and issuer countries from
2007 to 2017 and contrast general patterns of asset allocation of ASEAN and OECD.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the dataset. Section 3
introduces our baseline specication and presents our main results. Section 4 discusses the
portfolio investment of Singapore and other ASEAN members. Section 5 concludes.
2 Bilateral panel data
This paper uses a bilateral panel data covering 86 reporting and 241 counterparty coun-
tries/territories from 2007 to 2017. The country lists are provided in Table A.1 and A.2.
The original bilateral portfolio investment asset data are from the CPIS by the IMF. We also
make use of the data provided by Coppola et al. (2021) who complied a restatement of the
CPIS portfolio investment data from a residency to nationality basis. The restatement from
a residency to nationality basis is particularly important for tax havens such as the Cayman
Island, Hong Kong or Singapore that attract large investment to companies that have in
most cases other nationality but reside in the tax havens. For example, consider Alibaba
Group Holding Ltd., which is a Chinese multinational technology company incorporated in
the Cayman Islands, and listed in the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) as well as in the
Stock Exchange of Hong Kong (SEHK). When investors buy shares of the company listed
either in NYSE or SEHK, it is recorded as equity investment in the Cayman Islands on a
residency basis. On a nationality basis, however, the same investment is recorded as equity
5investment in China as its main base of operation is in China.
Unfortunately, the CPIS data contain only total portfolio investment but not the decompo-
sition into debt and equity investment in China. The nationality- and residency-based data
by Coppola et al. (2021) contain both debt and equity investments in China but their cov-
erage is less comprehensive compared to the original CPIS data. For example, the data do
not include 28 reporting countries, of which 15 are OECD countries. Therefore, we present
results using all three datasets: 1) the residency-based data by Coppola et al. (2021), 2)
the nationality-based restatement data by Coppola et al. (2021), and 3) the residency-based
original CPIS data. The geographical distance is calculated using the latitudes and longitude
of the single largest cities in countries provided by the CEPII database. In the following
analysis the distance is expected to capture costs associated with investing in a remote
country. Unlike in international trade where geographical distance matters as goods need
to be transported, we might think that distance matters less for global capital allocation.
Nevertheless, to the extend that investment is related to other economic activities such as
international trade, we believe that the geographical distance should matter for portfolio
investment too.
Figure 3 highlights the geographical asset allocation of ASEAN. We divide issuer countries
into 10 groups based on the geographical distance from investor countries (i.e., ASEAN
members). Each bin in horizontal axis covers 2000 kilometers from the investors. The rst
bin includes countries located from 0 to 2000 kilometers away from the investor countries,
the second bin from 2000 to 4000 kilometers away and so on.1The gure underscores a weak
tendency of ASEAN to invest in a nearby country and that the US has over the past two
decades become a dominant destination for both debt and equity investments of ASEAN. In
addition, the gure shows that China has become a signicant equity investment destination
for ASEAN.
In contrast to ASEAN, Figure 4 shows that OECD has a strong tendency to invest in nearby
countries. The US is a signicant destination of both debt and equity investments for OECD
but unlike for ASEAN it is in dierent bins for dierent members. In addition, we can see
that China has become a signicant equity investment destination for OECD, which is also
located in dierent bins for dierent members. Note that the US is 14000-16000km away
from most of ASEAN members while it is in varying distance away for dierent OECD
1The gures are created by dividing the bilateral distance measures between the single largest cities from
the CEPII GeoDist Database by 2000km in order to create a histogram with 10 bins. Counterpart countries
are then divided by color into ASEAN, US, and Non-ASEAN Non-US categories.
6(a) Debt in 2007
 (b) Debt in 2017
(c) Equity in 2007
 (d) Equity in 2017
Figure 3: Portfolio investment (nationality basis) of ASEAN in 10 distance groups (2000km
per bin, USD billion)
Source: Restated Bilateral External Portfolios - \Tax Haven Only" data are based on the work by Coppola
et al. (2021) and were taken from www.globalcapitalallocation.com . Note: 5 ASEAN source countries
(Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand) and 144 destination countries.
members. China is 4000-6000km away from most of ASEAN members while it is too in
varying distance away for dierent OECD members. This suggests that the tendency of
ASEAN members to invest in faraway countries can largely be attributed to the dominance
of the US as a destination for both debt and equity investments of ASEAN members. In
addition, the signicance of China as a destination for equity investment of ASEAN members
should contribute to weaken the trend of ASEAN members to invest in equities issued in
faraway countries.
3 Gravity in portfolio investment
Section 2 shows that ASEAN as a whole has a tendency to invest in faraway countries while
OECD has a tendency to invest in nearby countries. This section examines the elasticity of
portfolio investment to geographical distance for ASEAN and shows that Singapore behaves
dierently from other ASEAN members in allocating its portfolio investment.
7(a) Debt in 2001
 (b) Debt in 2017
(c) Equity in 2007
 (d) Equity in 2017
Figure 4: Portfolio investment of OECD in 10 distance groups (2000km per bin, USD billion)
Source: Distance is taken from CEPII GeoDist Database. Restated Bilateral External Portfolios -
\Tax Haven Only" data are based on the work by Coppola et al. (2021) and were taken from www.
globalcapitalallocation.com . Note: 19 OECD source countries and 196 destination countries.
3.1 Baseline analysis
This subsection presents the baseline results. To investigate the elasticity of portfolio in-
vestment to distance for both ASEAN and OECD as well as the rest of the world (ROW),
we estimate a gravity model using the PPML estimation method that can reduce concerns
such as heteroscedasticity and zero observations. In particular, zero observation is a serious
issue in our application because almost one half of our observations are zeros.2Our baseline
specication is
Portfoliok
i;j;t= exp
ASEAN(lnDistance i;jDASEAN)
+OECD(lnDistance i;jDOECD) +ROW(lnDistance i;jDROW) +i;t+i;t	
"i;j;t;(1)
wherePortfoliok
i;j;trepresents the gross stock of portfolio investment asset, and superscript
kcorresponds to the types of portfolio investment: debt or equity instrument; Distance i;j
2Silva and Tenreyro (2006) shows that the method performs well when the proportion of zeros is large
by Monte Carlo simulations.
8represents the geographical distance between the single largest cities in a particular pair
country;DASEAN,DOECDandDROWare dummy variables that take a value of one if a
reporting country is in ASEAN, OECD or ROW and zero otherwise; i;tandj;tare reporting
country-time specic xed eects and counterparty country-time specic xed eects. "i;j;t
is the error term.
Reporting and counterparty country-time xed eects control country-specic time varying
factors. For example, they can control the sizes of GDP of investor and issuer countries in
each year, both of which are often included in traditional plain-vanilla gravity models as
well as geographical distance. In addition to the two types of xed eects, structural gravity
models often include country-pair xed eects (Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003)). The
pair-xed eects can control time-invariant country-pair specic factors, such as geographical
distance, common ocial language, contiguous borders, and presence of colonial ties between
investor and issuer countries. In this baseline analysis, however, specication excludes the
country pair-xed eects to focus on average elasticity of the distance throughout sampled
period. Inclusion of both the pair-xed eects and geographical distance causes perfect
collinearity, because they are time-invariant country-pair specic variables indexed by (i,
j)-level. We show the estimation results based on the specication with country pair-xed
eects in the next subsection. We use the gross stock of portfolio investment asset as netting
of gross asset and liability may overlook key information on asset allocation of domestic
and foreign investors.3The coecients of our interest are ASEAN,OECDandROWthat
capture the relative elasticity to distance of each country group.
Figure 5 plots the coecients of distance for each country group with 95 percent condence
intervals. Panel (a) shows that the elasticity of distance to portfolio debt investment is
negative and statistically signicant for all country groups and datasets, which is consistent
with the typical behavior observed in gravity model estimations using bilateral trade ows.
The result suggests that the investors prefer debt securities issued in a nearby country.
However, the size of the coecients is dierent across the groups. They are more negative in
ASEAN and ROW compared to OECD. Panel (b) shows similar results for equity investment.
These results indicate that ASEAN and ROW investors in equities are more sensitive to
distance than OECD investors. One might think that these results contradict our observation
of ASEAN's portfolio investment in Section 2. In the following we will solve those seemingly
contradicting observations.
Each ASEAN member diers in terms of level of economic development, depth of domestic
3Standard gravity estimations for trade uses gross export or import too.
9(a) Debt investment
 (b) Equity investment
Figure 5: Baseline analysis
Note: The gures plot the coecients of interaction terms of geographical distance (logged) and
ASEAN/OECD dummy with 95 percent condence intervals based on standard error clustering at country-
pair level. The circle, diamond, and square markers represent the results using residency-based, nationality-
based, and CPIS residency-based data. We omit the coecients of ROW to focus on the ASEAN-OECD
comparison. The full results are available on request.
(a) Debt investment
 (b) Equity investment
Figure 6: Baseline analysis (ASEAN ex-SGP dummy)
Note: The gures plot the coecients of interaction terms of geographical distance (logged) and ASEAN
ex-SGP/OECD/ROW dummy with 95 percent condence intervals based on standard error clustering at
country-pair level. The circle, diamond, and square markers represent the results using residency-based,
nationality-based, and CPIS residency-based data. We omit the coecients of ROW to focus on the ASEAN-
OECD comparison. The full results are available on request.
10nancial market, and preference of investors. Especially, Singapore being an international
nancial center plays a special role in the group. Figure 6 presents the results when the
specication uses ASEAN ex-Singapore dummy (i.e., ASEAN4-member dummy) instead of
ASEAN5-member dummy. Panel (a) shows the results for debt investment. The coecients
of ex-SGP ASEAN become more negative compared to those of ASEAN presented in Figure
5(a). The size of the coecients are around -1.3 for ASEAN ex-SGP, while they are around
-1.0 for ASEAN. Comparing Figures 6(b) and 5(b) the coecients for equity investment of
ASEAN ex-SGP are also slightly more negative than those of ASEAN. The results indicate
that Singapore investors are less sensitive to distance than other ASEAN investors. There-
fore, we obtain contrasting results when we treat ASEAN as a whole and when we treat them
separately. This is particularly the case because of Singapore's dominant position both as
investor and investment destination in ASEAN as we will discuss in Section 4.
3.2 Time-series change in portfolio investment
This subsection investigates the change in the elasticity of portfolio investment to distance
over time. The specication is
Portfoliok
i;j;t= exp(2017X
t=2008ASEAN
t (lnDistance i;jtDASEAN)
+2017X
t=2008OECD
t (lnDistance i;jtDOECD) +i;t+i;t+i;j)
"i;j;t:(2)
The setting follows the baseline analysis described in the previous section, except for includ-
ing the interaction terms of geographical distance (ln Distance i;j), time-xed eects ( t), and
ASEAN/OECD dummy ( DASEANandDOECD) as well as country-pair xed eects ( j;i).
Interacting the distance and time-xed eects enables us to include country pair-xed ef-
fects. The interaction terms are country-pair-time-specic variables indexed by (i, j, t)-level,
so we can avoid multicollinearity with country-pair xed eects indexed by (i, j)-level. Spec-
ication with full set of xed eects (i.e., reporting/counterparty country-time xed eects
and country-pair xed eects) is the standard setting in structural gravity literature (e.g.,
Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003)), which can reduce the concern on possible estimation
bias.4The coecients of our interest are ASEAN
t andOECD
t that capture the relative elas-
4We conrm that the specication additionally including the interaction term of geographical distance,
time-xed eects, and ROW dummy delivers similar results. Including reporting country-time xed eects,
11ticity to distance in each year and country group compared to a specic base year. We set
the rst year of the sample, i.e., 2007, as the base year. Thus, the sequences of ASEAN
t and
OECD
t capture the time variation of the elasticity from 2008 to 2017 in each country group.
Figure 7 plots the time variation of the coecients of debt investment to distance with 95
percent condence intervals. The blue and red markers represent the results of the residency-
and nationality-based data provided by Coppola et al. (2021) and the green markers represent
the results of the residency-based CPIS data. Panels (a) and (b) report the results of ASEAN
and OECD.
(a) ASEAN
 (b) OECD
Figure 7: Debt investment
Note: The gures plot the coecients of interaction terms of geographical distance (logged), time-xed
eects, and ASEAN/OECD dummy with 95 percent condence intervals based on standard error clustering
at country-pair level. The circle and diamond markers represent the results using residency- and nationality-
based data.
Panel (a) shows that the coecients of ASEAN get larger and signicant since the mid-
2010, while they are small and insignicant in the 2000s. All three datasets follow a similar
pattern. The positive elasticity indicates that ASEAN tends to invest in bonds issued in
a faraway country compared to the base year 2007. This is consistent with the fact that
ASEAN has increased its portfolio investment to faraway OECD countries (see Figure 2(a))
and in particular in the US in the past decade (see Figure 3(a) and 3(b)).
Panel (b) shows the result for OECD. The elasticity presents a contrasting pattern to that
of ASEAN and gets more negative and signicant after the late-2000s indicating that OECD
counterparty country-time xed eects, and country-pair xed efects is the rst best choice in estimating a
structural gravity model (Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003) and Silva and Tenreyro (2006)).
12tends to invest in bonds issued in a nearby country compared to the base year 2007. The
three datasets largely deliver similar results. The result is consistent with the fact that
OECD members have increased investment in bonds issued by other OECD members (see
Figure 2(b)) who are in close proximity relative to the distance between ASEAN and OECD
members (see Figure 4(a) and 4(b)).5
(a) ASEAN
 (b) OECD
Figure 8: Equity investment
Note: The gures plot the coecients of interaction terms of geographical distance (logged), time-xed
eects, and ASEAN/OECD dummy with 95 percent condence intervals based on standard error clustering
at country-pair level. The circle and diamond markers represent the results using residency- and nationality-
based data.
Figure 8 reports the results for equity investment. The results show qualitatively similar
patterns for ASEAN and OECD especially for nationality-based data. The coecients are
not statistically dierent from zero throughout the sample period. The results indicate that
there is little change in the geographical allocation of equity investment for ASEAN and
OECD. This is consistent with our earlier observations for ASEAN (compare Figure 3(c)
and 3(d)) and OECD (compare Figure 4(c) and 4(d)). Note that the points of the original
residency-based data deviate from the other two data points based on Coppola et al. (2021)
in Figure 8(a) because the original residency-based data do not provide data for equity
investment in China, which is 4000-6000km away from most of ASEAN members (see Figure
3(c) and 3(d)). We conrmed that the coecients estimated by the three dataset (i.e.,
Coppola et al. (2021)'s data on a residency-basis and a nationality-basis, and the CPIS data
on a residency-basis) are similar if we use the same sample countries. This suggests the
5In the literature on bilateral trade ows, the negative coecients of distance is known as \distance
puzzle", where estimated negative impact of distance on trade ows has remained persistently large across
major dierent settings and samples (e.g., (Disdier and Head, 2008; Yotov, 2012)).
13dierence between the three dataset comes from the coverage of the countries rather than
the restatement from residency- to nationality-basis.
(a) Debt investment
 (b) Equity investment
Figure 9: Portfolio investment of ASEAN ex SGP
Note: The gures plot the coecients of interaction terms of geographical distance (logged), time-xed
eects, and ASEAN ex-Singapore dummy with 95 percent condence intervals based on the standard error
clustering at the country-pair level. The circle and diamond markers represent the results using residency-
and nationality-based data.
Figure 9 presents the results when the specication uses ASEAN ex-SGP. Figure 9(a) shows
the results for debt investment. The elasticity gets negative and largely signicant after
the late-2000s, which is similar to the results for OECD presented in Figure 7(b). Figure
9(b) shows that the result for equity investment is similar to that for OECD too. These re-
sults indicate that investors in ASEAN except Singapore have not signicantly changed their
behavior in allocating portfolio investment across countries since the base year 2007. There-
fore, the positive trend in the elasticity of ASEAN's debt investment to distance observed
in Figure 7(a) must be driven by Singapore.
4 Discussions
Section 3 shows that the elasticity of portfolio investment to distance is more negative for
ASEAN than OECD. However, the dierence is less signicant when we exclude Singapore
from the ASEAN sample. This suggests that Singapore's investment behavior is very dier-
ent from other ASEAN members. Therefore, this section will examine the role of Singapore
for portfolio investment of ASEAN as a whole.
144.1 Portfolio investment of Singapore and other ASEAN members
Table 1 shows debt investment of ASEAN members in OECD, ASEAN and the rest of the
world. Singapore allocates above 70 percent of its debt investment to OECD in 2007 and
2017. Besides Singapore and Indonesia other ASEAN members increased the allocation
of their debt investment to ASEAN but decreased the allocation to OECD from 2007 to
2017. This is consistent with our result that the elasticity of debt investment to distance
is more negative for ASEAN ex-SGP than for ASEAN, and indicates that Singapore is the
global debt investor in ASEAN. Figure 10 shows a network chart indicating the relative
Table 1: Debt investment (nationality basis) allocation of ASEAN members
Note: ASEAN 5 countries and 144 destination countries. Restated Bilateral External Portfolios - \Tax Haven
Only" data based on the work by Coppola et al. (2021) and obtained from www.globalcapitalallocation.
com.
investment size of ASEAN countries in top 10 countries in 2007 and 2017.6The gure shows
that Singapore is absolutely ASEAN's largest investor in foreign debt and the US grew to
become the dominant destination of its debt investment from 2007 to 2017. Indeed, the US
alone accounts for 43 percent of ASEAN's debt investment in 2017.7Notably, emerging as
the number two destination China accounts for 13 percent of ASEAN's debt investment in
2017. This largely explains the positive trend in the elasticity of ASEAN's debt investment
shown in Figure 7(a).
Table 2 shows that Singapore's allocation of equity investment is largely similar to that of
other ASEAN members from 2007 to 2017 as seen in Figure 8(a) and 9(b). Both Singapore
and other ASEAN members' allocation has decreased from 67 to 63 percent to OECD, has
increased from 25 to 30-32 percent to the rest of the world, and has decreased from 8-9
6The size of each \thread" denotes a relative size for each graph (year), so we can not compare the
investment size across graphs (years). The network charts are created using the replication code available
athttps://github.com/global-capital-allocation-project/redrawing-the-map .
7Malaysia and Indonesia feature within ASEAN's top 10 debt investment destinations. However, the
amount is dwarfed by Singapore's investment in the US and China.
15(a) 2007
 (b) 2017
Figure 10: Debt investment (nationality basis) of ASEAN members in top 10 countries
Note: 144 destination countries. Restated Bilateral External Portfolios - \Tax Haven Only" data based on
the work by Coppola et al. (2021) and obtained from www.globalcapitalallocation.com .
Table 2: Equity investment (nationality basis) allocation of ASEAN members
Note: Note: ASEAN 5 countries and 144 destination countries. Restated Bilateral External Portfo-
lios - \Tax Haven Only" data based on the work by Coppola et al. (2021) and obtained from www.
globalcapitalallocation.com .
to 5-8 percent to ASEAN. Figure 11 shows that Singapore is absolutely the largest equity
investor among ASEAN members too. The US and China have grown to become the most
dominant destinations accounting for 31 and 21 percent of ASEAN's equity investment in
2017, most of which is Singapore's investment. The gure also shows that the large equity
investment of Singapore in ASEAN in 2007 is in Malaysia, which has since then fallen out of
top 10 equity investment destinations of ASEAN members. On the other hand, Singapore
features as a top 10 destination of ASEAN's equity investment. Note that the US is 14000-
16000km away and China is 4000-6000km away from most ASEAN members. The presence
16(a) 2007
 (b) 2017
Figure 11: Equity investment (nationality basis) of ASEAN countries in top 10 countries
Note: Note: 144 destination countries. Restated Bilateral External Portfolios - \Tax Haven Only" data
based on the work by Coppola et al. (2021) and obtained from www.globalcapitalallocation.com .
of China as a destination for ASEAN's equity investment explains why the elasticity of equity
investment to distance is less negative than that of debt investment for ASEAN given the
relative proximity of China to ASEAN members (see Figure 5 and 6).
4.2 Singapore's role in ASEAN
Section 4.1 showed the dominant role of Singapore for ASEAN's portfolio investment. Con-
sidering its size of GDP relative to other ASEAN members, Singapore's portfolio investment
is disproportionately large. On the other hand, Singapore is also a major destination of
ASEAN's portfolio investment. Figures 12 shows the time series of portfolio investment of
ASEAN members on a nationality basis from 2007 to 2017 sorted according to dierent des-
tinations. We can see that Singapore is a major destination for both debt investment (see
Figure 12(a)) and equity investment (see Figure 12(b)) on a nationality basis for Malaysia.
Given the relatively large investment size of Malaysia we can say that Singapore attracts
most of ASEAN's portfolio investment.
We now examine the changes in data the restatement (i.e., from a residency to nationality
basis) makes to ASEAN's portfolio investment. The changes highlight 1) ASEAN's invest-
ment in multinational companies residing in Singapore and 2) Singapore's investment in
17(a) Debt
 (b) Equity
Figure 12: Portfolio investment (nationality basis) of ASEAN countries from 2007 to 2017
(USD billion)
Note: Note: 144 destination countries. Restated Bilateral External Portfolios - \Tax Haven Only" data
based on the work by Coppola et al. (2021) and obtained from www.globalcapitalallocation.com .
multinational companies in other tax havens such as the Cayman Island.8
Figure 13(a) shows the top 10 changes in each ASEAN member's investment after the re-
statement (ASEAN members are highlighted in blue). We can see that Singapore records by
far the largest changes but for all ASEAN countries the restatement increases investment in
China and the US and decreases investment in tax-haves such as the Cayman Island, Singa-
pore, Hong Kong, and the Netherlands. This suggests that there is a signicant amount of
investment from ASEAN in Chinese and American companies located in those tax-havens
outside China and the US such as Singapore's investment in Chinese companies in the Cay-
man Island and Hong Kong (e.g. Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and Tencent Holdings Ltd.).
We estimate that roughly 50 billion USD out of Singapore's portfolio investment of 70 billion
USD on a residency basis in the Cayman Islands and Hong Kong is in Chinese companies.9
Next to Singapore, Malaysia records the largest changes. Malaysia's investment after the
8The database provided by Coppola et al. (2021) identies the identity of the issuer of debt or equity
but not of the investor. Therefore, it can not tell us the nationality of multinational companies who reside
in Singapore and invest outside Singapore.
9If we assume that the entire drop in Singapore's investment in Hong Kong (20 billion USD) and in the
Cayman Islands (30 billion USD) is due to investment in Chinese companies, we get roughly 50 billion USD.
18(a) Investment from ASEAN
 (b) Investment into ASEAN
Figure 13: Portfolio investment from and into ASEAN: Top 10 changes (nationality - resi-
dency) in 2017 (USD million)
Note: 144 destination countries. Restated Bilateral External Portfolios - \Tax Haven Only" data based on
the work by Coppola et al. (2021) and obtained from www.globalcapitalallocation.com .
restatement falls the largest in Singapore (see Malaysia in Figure 13(a)). This shows that
Singapore is the largest host of Malaysia's investment in multinational companies outside
their home countries. On the other hand, Malaysia's investment after the restatement rises
the largest in China (see Malaysia in Figure 13(a)) suggesting that Malaysia invests a sig-
nicant amount in Chinese companies residing in Singapore (see Figure 14). We estimate
that roughly 2 billion USD out of Malaysia's total portfolio investment of 25 billion USD on
19a residency basis in Singapore in 2017 is in Chinese companies.10
Figure 14: Malaysia's investment in Singapore
Figure 13(b) shows the top 10 changes in investment into ASEAN members after the re-
statement (ASEAN members are highlighted in blue). We can see that Singapore records
the largest changes but the dierence to other ASEAN members is not as large as in Figure
13(a) when we compare ASEAN members as investors. The largest rise in investment in
all ASEAN members after the restatement is from the US and Japan showing that the two
countries invest in ASEAN companies outside their homes more than in multinational com-
panies in each of ASEAN members. Notably, Malaysia records the largest fall for investment
in Singapore (see Singapore in Figure 13(b)). Therefore, Singapore is not only the largest
host of Malaysia's investment in multinational companies outside their home country as seen
in Figure 13(a) but Malaysia is the largest international investor in such multinational com-
panies in Singapore. These examples show that Singapore is a platform for multinational
(e.g. Chinese) companies to raise capital attracting inward portfolio investment from other
ASEAN members.
To summarize, Singapore's investments in tax havens such as the Cayman Island and Hong
Kong, which are largely investments in Chinese and American companies, are by an order
of a magnitude larger than other ASEAN member's investments in those tax havens. On
the other hand, ASEAN members (Malaysia in particular) invest in multinational (Chinese
in particular) companies residing in Singapore. Note that those investment in multinational
(non-Singaporean) companies in Singapore as well as Singapore's investments in multina-
tional companies in tax havens only highlight Singapore's role as a platform for both inward
10If we assume that Malaysia invests in Chinese companies in Hong Kong, the Caymand Islands and
Singapore and that most of the drop in Malaysia's investment in Hong Kong (2.5 billion USD) and two
thirds of the drop in the Cayman Islands (1 billion USD) is due to investment in Chinese companies, we get
roughly 2 billion USD (5 :5 2:5 1 = 2).
20and outward investments in multinational companies (whose nationality is dierent from res-
idency) but are only a part of Singapore's overall outward investments as well as investments
of other ASEAN members in Singapore.
5 Conclusion
It is often argued that ASEAN as a whole tend to invest in securities outside more than
inside the region. We estimate a gravity model using the PPML estimation method utilizing
a bilateral panel of 86 reporting and 241 counterparty countries/territories for the period
2007-2017. We nd that the elasticity of both debt and equity investments to geographi-
cal distance is actually more negative for ASEAN than for OECD. However, we nd that
the ASEAN-OECD dierence in elasticity gets smaller when we exclude Singapore from the
ASEAN sample. This indicates that Singapore's investment behavior is very dierent from
that of other ASEAN members. Singapore tends to invest in faraway countries predomi-
nantly in the US while other ASEAN members tend to invest in nearby countries. Since
Singapore's investment is disproportionately large, its behavior drives the investment of
ASEAN as a whole. Indeed, Singapore facilitates both inward investment from ASEAN and
outward investment to OECD. Multinational companies in Singapore attract investment
from ASEAN, in particular, Malaysia. On the other hand, Singapore is by far ASEAN's
largest investor in American and Chinese companies residing tax haves such as the Cayman
Island and Hong Kong. Lastly, the elasticity of equity investment is less negative than that
of debt investment for ASEAN reecting the increasing presence of China as a destination
for equity investment.
Our analysis shows that geographical distance inhibit ASEAN's portfolio investment more
than OECD's but Singapore dees gravity and invests in faraway OECD countries. There-
fore, ASEAN's nancial integration would inevitably require a higher exposure of Singapore's
investment to ASEAN. Is it the high level of nancial development that facilitate portfolio
investment among OECD members who happen to be relatively close to each other? It
might be that having a developed nancial market Singapore invests in the US and other
OECD countries because the developed nancial markets are better connected. Our gravity
model uses only distance and xed eects to estimate portfolio investment. It remains as a
future research to investigate the determinants in reporting and counterparty countries that
can explain our results and hold the key for nancial integration.
21A Appendix
Table A.1: List of reporting countries
Note: Data availability of reporting country as of 2017. yReporting countries Coppola et al. (2021)'s data
do not cover.
22Table A.2: List of counterparty countries
Note: Data availability of counterparty countries as of 2017.
23References
Anderson, J. E. and E. Van Wincoop (2003): \Gravity with gravitas: A solution to
the border puzzle," American economic review , 93, 170{192.
Chit u, L., B. Eichengreen, and A. Mehl (2014): \History, gravity and international
nance," Journal of international Money and Finance , 46, 104{129.
Coppola, A., M. Maggiori, B. Neiman, and J. Schreger (2021): \Redrawing the
map of global capital ows: The role of cross-border nancing and tax havens," The
Quarterly Journal of Economics , 136, 1499{1556.
De Sousa, J. and J. Lochard (2011): \Does the single currency aect foreign direct
investment?" The Scandinavian Journal of Economics , 113, 553{578.
Disdier, A.-C. and K. Head (2008): \The puzzling persistence of the distance eect on
bilateral trade," The Review of Economics and statistics , 90, 37{48.
Head, K. and J. Ries (2008): \FDI as an outcome of the market for corporate control:
Theory and evidence," Journal of International Economics , 74, 2{20.
Lane, P. R. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2008): \International investment patterns,"
The Review of Economics and Statistics , 90, 538{549.
Okawa, Y. and E. Van Wincoop (2012): \Gravity in international nance," Journal of
international Economics , 87, 205{215.
Portes, R. and H. Rey (2005): \The determinants of cross-border equity ows," Journal
of international Economics , 65, 269{296.
Silva, J. S. and S. Tenreyro (2006): \The log of gravity," The Review of Economics
and statistics , 88, 641{658.
Yotov, Y. V. (2012): \A simple solution to the distance puzzle in international trade,"
Economics Letters , 117, 794{798.
24