Pseudopotential Bethe-Salpeter calculations for shallow-core x-ray absorption
near-edge structures: excitonic eﬀects in -Al 2O3
M. Laura Urquiza,1,2Matteo Gatti,1,2,3and Francesco Sottile1,2
1LSI, CNRS, CEA/DRF/IRAMIS, École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, F-91120 Palaiseau, France
2European Theoretical Spectroscopy Facility (ETSF)
3Synchrotron SOLEIL, L’Orme des Merisiers, Saint-Aubin, BP 48, F-91192 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
(Dated: April 25, 2023)
We present an ab initio description of optical and shallow-core x-ray absorption spectroscopies in a
uniﬁedformalismbasedon thepseudopotentialplane-wavemethodattheleveloftheBethe-Salpeter
equation (BSE) within Green’s functions theory. We show that norm-conserving pseudopotentials
are reliable and accurate not only for valence, but also for semicore electron excitations. In order
to validate our approach, we compare BSE absorption spectra obtained with two diﬀerent codes:
the pseudopotential-based code EXCand the all-electron full-potential code Exciting . We take
corundum-Al2O3as an example, being a prototypical material that presents strong electron-
hole interactions for both valence and core electron excitations. We analyze in detail the optical
absorption spectrum as well as the Al L 1and L 2;3edges in terms of anisotropy, crystal local ﬁelds,
interference and excitonic eﬀects. We perform a thorough inspection of the origin and localization of
the lowest-energy excitons, and conclude highlighting the purely electronic character oﬀ the pre-edge
of L 1and the dichroic nature of the optical and L 23spectra.
I. INTRODUCTION
X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and optical ab-
sorption are complementary techniques to determine ma-
terialsproperties. Inopticalabsorption,valenceelectrons
are excited into unoccupied conduction states across the
band gap (or the Fermi energy in metals). Their excita-
tionsdeterminethecolor(orthetransparency)ofmateri-
alsandarecrucialtomanymaterialspropertiesandfunc-
tionalities, spanning from optoelectronics to solar energy
conversion and storage. In XAS, promoted to unoccu-
pied conduction bands are instead core electrons, tightly
bound to the nuclei. X-ray absorption near-edge struc-
tures (XANES), also known as near-edge X-ray absorp-
tion ﬁne structure (NEXAFS), being element speciﬁc,
is a probe of the atomic environment, giving structural
and chemical information1. In the simplest independent-
particle picture, XANES spectra are proportional to the
unoccupied density of states, projected on the absorbing
atom and the angular momentum component that is se-
lected by dipole selection rules, whereas optical spectra
can be interpreted on the basis of the joint density of
states of valence and conduction bands. In both spectro-
scopies, the interaction between the excited electron and
the hole left behind can strongly alter this independent-
particle picture. Indeed, the electron-hole attraction can
give rise to excitons, i.e bound electron-hole pairs, lead-
ing to a transfer of spectral weight to lower energies in
the spectra, including the formation of sharp peaks at
their onset.
Given the importance of XANES spectroscopy, sev-
eraltheoreticalmethodshavebeendevelopedtointerpret
the measured spectra in solids, taking care of core-hole
eﬀects at diﬀerent levels of approximation2. The most
eﬃcient approaches are, on one side, multiple scattering
methods3–8, and, on the other side, multiplet models9–11.While the former usually neglect the electronic interac-
tions, the latter are often semiempirical (i.e., not entirely
parameter-free) and generally neglect solid-state eﬀects,
being a many-body solution of ﬁnite-cluster models.
Since the excitations of the core electrons are localised at
the absorbing atoms, delta-self-consistent-ﬁeld ( SCF)
methods can be also employed, nowadays usually within
ﬁrst-principles density-functional theory12–20. The core-
excited atom is treated as an impurity in a supercell ap-
proach, and the presence of the core hole is taken into ac-
count in diﬀerent ways, from the Z+1 approximation21,22
(the absorbing atom is assumed to have one additional
nuclear charge), to the half core-hole approximation23,24
(also known as Slater’s transition-state method) or the
full core-hole approximation (the electron removed from
the core is put at lowest conduction band, or ionized).
Alternatively, XANES excitation spectra can be directly
obtained within linear-response theory25,26, which is the
standard approach for valence excitations and optical
spectra as well27. In this case, two possible options are
time-dependent density-functional theory28–30(TDDFT)
and the Bethe-Salpeter equation31–35(BSE) of Green’s
function theory36,37. Since TDDFT lacks of eﬃcient ap-
proximationsfordescribingaccuratelyexcitoniceﬀectsin
solids38, the BSE, even though computationally more ex-
pensive, is usually more reliable27. In the present work,
the solution of the BSE will therefore be also our pre-
ferred choice to simulate valence and shallow-core exci-
tation spectra within the same formalism.
In the simulation of core excitation spectra, the in-
tuitive technique to represent the single-particle wave
functions are all-electron methods. They explicitly deal
with core electrons in extended materials by partitioning
the space into interstitial and muﬃn-tin (MT) regions,
where wave functions are described diﬀerently according
to their localisation degree39–42. Instead, methods that
are based on plane-wave expansions cannot deal explic-arXiv:2301.04199v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  24 Apr 20232
itly with the quickly oscillatory behavior of core elec-
trons, tightly localised near the nuclei, which are instead
generally taken into account eﬀectively through the de-
sign of suitable pseudopotentials43. Plane-wave methods
are computationally cheaper and new theoretical devel-
opments are easier to implement in plane-wave computer
codes. Moreover, the separation between core electrons,
kept frozen, and valence electrons, treated explicitly, is
often not rigid. Between valence and deep core electrons,
there are often also shallow-core (or semicore) electrons,
which in the pseudopotential framework can be in princi-
ple also treated as valence electrons, although at a price
of higher computational cost. However, in all the cases,
the pseudopotential formalism also introduces an impor-
tant approximation, requiring a pseudization of the va-
lence wave functions near the nuclei that makes them
smoother and node free.
In the recent past, much work has been devoted to
assess pseudopotential calculations for ground state44–47
and excited-state properties with respect to all-electron
methods, notably for self-energy calculations of quasi-
particle band structure energies48–59. In the present
work, we directly address the question of the validity
of the pseudopotential approximation for XANES spec-
tra of shallow-core edges (i.e., for electron binding en-
ergies smaller than 180 eV), investigating the limits of
use of pseudo wave functions for shallow-core states in
many-body BSE calculations. It is clear that the de-
scription of deep core levels will be always out of reach
for plane-wave basis methods. However, the high plane-
wavecutoﬀrequiredbysemicorestatescanbenowallevi-
ated by the new generation of ultrasoft norm-conserving
pseudopotentials60. Besides the promised lower compu-
tational cost for shallower core levels, an advantage of
pseudopotential plane-wave calculations with respect to
all-electron methods is that they do not make any hy-
pothesis concerning the localisation of the core hole in-
side the muﬃn tin of the absorbing atom61.
In particular, here we investigate the eﬀects of the
electron-hole interactions on the optical absorption and
shallow-core XANES spectra of alumina. -Al2O3is a
wide-gap insulator, with many possible applications as a
structuralceramic(e.g. asareplacementtoSiO 2gateox-
ide technology) and optical material (also thanks to the
high-damage threshold for UV laser applications), and
a prototypical system to investigate core-hole eﬀects in
XANES spectroscopy12,62–67.
The article is organised as follows. After a short de-
scription of the employed methodology in Sec. II, com-
prising a review of the theoretical background (Sec. IIA)
and a summary of the computational details (Sec. IIB),
Sec. III presents the results of the calculations together
with their analysis. In Sec. IIIB pseudopotential cal-
culations are assessed with respect to all-electron bench-
marksforbothopticalandAlL 2;3XANESspectra, while
Sec. IIIC contains a discussion on the issue of the core-
hole localisation in the muﬃn tin for the Al L 1XANES
spectrum. Sec. IIID compares the calculated spectrawith available experiments and analyses the eﬀects of
the electron-hole interactions on the spectra. Finally,
Sec. IV draws the conclusions summarizing the results of
the work.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Theoretical background
In the framework of Green’s function theory36, the
Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE) yields the density re-
sponse function from the solution of a Dyson-like equa-
tion for the two-particle correlation function68. In the
GW approximation (GWA) to the self-energy69, with
a statically screened Coulomb interaction W, the BSE
takes the form of an excitonic Hamiltonian27in the basis
jvckiof transitions between occupied vkand unoccupied
bandsck(i.e., uncorrelated electron-hole pairs):
hvckjHexcjv0c0k0i=Evckvv0cc0kk0+hvckjvc Wjv0c0k0i:
(1)
HereEvck=Eck Evkare the interband transition en-
ergies calculated in the GWA, while vcis the Coulomb
interaction without its macroscopic component (i.e., the
component G= 0in reciprocal space). The stati-
cally screened Coulomb interaction W= 1vcis usu-
ally calculated adopting the random-phase approxima-
tion (RPA) for the inverse dielectric function  1.
The GWA-BSE is nowadays the state-of-the-art ap-
proach for the simulation, interpretation and prediction
of optical spectra in solids36,37,70–72, and is more and
more used also for the simulation of core-level excita-
tion spectra2,73–89. A great advantage of theory with re-
spect to experiments is the possibility to separately sup-
press (or activate) the various interactions at play in the
materials, which allows one to single out their speciﬁc
eﬀect on the spectra and the materials properties. By
setting to zero the two electron-hole interactions, vcand
 W, the excitonic Hamiltonian (1) reduces to a diago-
nal matrix and corresponds to the independent-particle
approximation (IPA). By switching on the electron-hole
exchange interaction vcin Eq. (1), one retrieves the
RPA. With respect to the IPA, the RPA includes the so-
called crystal local ﬁeld eﬀects90,91. They are related to
the inhomogeneous charge response of materials through
the induced microscopic Hartree potentials counteract-
ing the external perturbations. Finally, by also switch-
ing on the electron-hole direct interaction  W, the full
BSE (1) describes excitonic eﬀects, which are due to the
electron-hole attraction92. The electron-hole interactions
contributing to the oﬀ-diagonal matrix elements of the
BSE (1) give rise to a mixing of the independent-particle
transitions, which is formally obtained from the solution
of the eigenvalue equation for the excitonic hamiltonian:
HexcA=EA.
The absorption spectra, expressed both in the optical
and XANES regimes by the imaginary part of the macro-3
scopicdielectricfunctionIm M(!)inthelongwavelength
limitq!0, in the so-called Tamm-Dancoﬀ approxima-
tion can be directly written in terms of eigenvectors A
and eigenvalues Eof the BSE Hamiltonian (1) as:
ImM(!) = lim
q!082

q2X
X
vckAvck
~vck(q)2
(! E);
(2)
where 
is the crystal volume, and
~vck(q) =Z
'
vk q(r)e iqr'ck(r)dr(3)
are the independent-particle oscillator strengths. Here
the single-particle orbitals 'iare usually Kohn-Sham or-
bitals. If the exciton energy Eis smaller than the small-
est independent-particle transition energy Evck, the ex-
citonis said to be bound: the diﬀerence between Evck
andEis its binding energy.
The contribution of each exciton to the spectrum can
be analysed by introducing the cumulative function:
S(!) = lim
q!08

q2Evck<!X
vckAvck
~vck(q)2
:(4)
Since the eigenvectors Aand the oscillator strengths
~(q)are both complex quantities, the cumulative func-
tion (4) is not a monotonic function of !. The limit
S(!!1 )is the oscillator strength of the exciton 
in the absorption spectrum. If it is negligibly small, the
exciton is said to be dark, otherwise it is called a bright
exciton, for it contributes to the spectrum. Even in the
q!0limit, the oscillator strengths ~(q)depends on the
direction of q, so each exciton can at the same time be
a bright exciton in one polarization direction and dark in
another.
Finally, the investigation of the electron-hole correla-
tion function for each exciton ,
	(rh;re) =X
vckAvck

vk(rh)ck(re);(5)
gives information about the localisation in real space of
the electron-hole pair, which results from the electron-
hole attraction. Assuming that the hole is in a speciﬁc
position rh=r0
h, one can visualize the corresponding
density distribution of the electron j	(r0
h;re)j2.
B. Computational details
We have performed calculations using both a pseu-
dopotential (PP) plane-wave method and a full-
potential all-electron (AE) linearized augmented plane-
wave method. AE calculations have been done in par-
ticular to assess the validity of PP calculations for the
core-level excitations (see Sec. IIIB). The converged BSE
absorptionspectraandtheiranalysis(seeSec.IIID)havebeen then obtained in the PP framework. In the pseu-
dopotential case, we have used the Abinitcode93for
the ground-state and screening calculations, and the EXC
code94for the BSE calculations. In the all-electron case,
we have used the Exciting code95for obtaining all the
benchmark results.
The Kohn-Sham ground-state calculations have been
performed within the local density approximation96
(LDA).
We have employed norm-conserving Troullier-
Martins97(TM) and optimized norm-conserving
Vanderbilt60,98(ONCVPSP) pseudopotentials. In
particular, for the absorption spectra a special TM
pseudopotential99treating also Al 2sand2pstates as
valence electrons has been used. Calculation with the
ONCVPSP pseudopotential converged with 42 Hartree
cutoﬀ of the plane-wave expansion, while the hard TM
pseudopotential required 320 Hartree.
The statically screened Coulomb interaction Whas
been obtained (within the RPA) with the ONCVPSP
pseudopotential (without Al 2sand2pcore levels), in-
cluding100bands, andwithacutoﬀof8and14.7Hartree
for the Kohn-Sham wave functions for the optical and
shallow-core excitations, respectively. The size of the
screening matrix in the plane-wave basis was 6 Hartree
for the optical and 8 Hartree for the core spectrum. We
haveveriﬁedthat,contrarytocalculationsofthescreened
interaction for other materials like silicon54or simple
metals100–102, the eﬀect of core polarization is negligible
in-Al2O3.
For the all-electron results, the ground-state calcula-
tionswereperformedusingaplanewavecutoﬀ, RMTjG+
kjmax, of 18 Hartree and muﬃn-tin (MT) spheres RMTof
2 bohr and 1.45 bohr for aluminum and oxygen, respec-
tively. The RPA screening was obtained with 100 con-
duction bands and a cutoﬀ in the matrix size of 5 Hartree
(maintaining the same cutoﬀ of the ground state for the
plane waves).
TheGWbandstructurehasbeenapproximatedwithin
a scissor correction model. The LDA conduction bands
have been rigidly shifted upwards by 2.64 eV, which cor-
responds to the band gap correction obtained within
the perturbative G 0W0scheme by Marinopoulos and
Grüning103.
The BSE calculations for the absorption spectra have
been performed with shifted k-point grids (i.e., not con-
taining high-symmetry kpoints), which allowed for a
quicker convergence of the spectra71. The optical ab-
sorption spectrum converged with a 10 1010k-point
grid, while the XANES spectra at the Al L 2;3and L 1
edges converged with a 8 88k-point grid. The exciton
analysis and plot have been instead done with a smaller
 -centered 444k-point grid.
The BSE spectra for the optical spectrum or the
XANES spectra at the Al L 2;3and L 1edges had a dif-
ferent convergence rate with respect to the number of
empty bands considered in the BSE hamiltonian. Fig. 1
showstheirconvergencestudy(carriedoutherewithare-4
FIG. 1: Convergence of BSE absorption spectra with the number of unoccupied conduction bands (cb). (Left)
Optical spectrum. (Middle) XANES at L 2;3edge. (Right) XANES at L 1edge.
duced number of kpoints in a  -centered 222k-point
grid). While the optical spectrum (left panel) quickly
converges with the number of empty bands, the XANES
spectra (middle and right panels) require many more
empty bands, also to converge the lowest energy peak.
In the converged spectra, obtained with many more k
points, this slow convergence is partially attenuated by
the fact that the spectra become smoother. The opti-
cal absorption spectra have been thus obtained with 12
valence bands and 12 unoccupied bands. The XANES
spectra at the L 2;3and L 1edges included all the corre-
sponding core levels together with 30 unoccupied bands.
A 0.1 eV Lorentzian broadening has been applied to the
spectra.
In the all-electron BSE calculations, we considered the
same parameters used in the calculation of the screening:
9Hartreeforthewavefunctioncutoﬀand5Hartreetode-
scribetheelectron-holeinteractions. Inthepseudopoten-
tial BSE calculations, we have used a cutoﬀ of 30 Hartree
(110 Hartree) for the Kohn-Sham wavefunctions expan-
sion in the optical (semi-core) spectra, and 7.3 Hartree
for the plane-wave representation of the electron-hole in-
teractions. Wenotethat, asusual(seee.g.104), theplane-
wave cutoﬀs for the BSE matrixelements can be signiﬁ-
cantly reduced with respect to the high cutoﬀ needed for
the ground-state calculation. Therefore, even for pseu-
dopotential BSE calculations of shallow-core excitations,
the limiting factor remains the large size of the BSE
hamiltonian (1) in extended systems, which is given by
the number of electron-hole transitions (i.e., the number
of occupied bands the number of unoccupied bands 
the number of kpoints in the full Brillouin zone).
III. RESULTS
A. Crystal and electronic structure of -Al 2O3
The crystal structure of corundum -Al2O3is trigo-
nal (see Fig. 2). In the primitive rhombohedral unit cell
(space group R 3c, number 167) there are two formula
units. The corundum structure can also be viewed as
FIG. 2: Primitive rhombohedral unit cell of the crystal
structure of -Al2O3. Red and grey balls represent O
and Al atoms, respectively. The Al atoms are aligned
along the cartesian zaxis, which is the vertical direction
in the ﬁgure, while the O atoms belong to the xyplanes
perpendicular to it.
a hexagonal cell containing six formula units with alter-
nate layers of Al and O atoms in planes perpendicular
to the hexagonal cHaxis. In the -Al2O3structure all
Al atoms occupy octahedral sites coordinated with 6 O
atoms, which form two equilateral triangles located re-
spectively slightly above and below each Al atom along
thecHdirection.
We adopted the experimental lattice parameters from
Ref.105:aH=bH= 4.7589 Å and cH= 12.991 Å in the
hexagonal unit cell, which corresponds to aR= 5.128 Å
and= 55:287in the rhombohedral primitive cell. In
the reference frame used in the simulations, the hexago-5
nalcHaxis is aligned along the cartesian zaxis, which is
the vertical direction in Fig. 2.
FIG. 3: (Left) LDA Kohn-Sham band structure of
-Al2O3. The top of the valence band has been set to
zero. Density of states projected on (middle) Al and
(right) O atoms, resolved in the angular components: s
(red),p(blue) and d(green).
The left panel of Fig. 3 shows the Kohn-Sham LDA
band structure along a high symmetry path in the ﬁrst
Brillouin zone, together with the projected density of
states on the Al (middle panel) and O (right panel)
atoms.-Al2O3has a direct bandgap at the  point,
which amounts to 6.21 eV in the LDA. This value is in
very good agreement with the result of Ref. 106 ob-
tained with the same experimental lattice parameters.
Calculations103,106–108that adopt a crystal structure op-
timised within the LDA, rather than the experimental
one, instead obtain larger band gaps. In particular, the
diﬀerence with respect to Ref. 103 is 0.51 eV. We refer to
Ref. 108 for a detailed analysis of the dependence on the
band gap on the lattice parameters. As usual, the Kohn-
Sham band gap underestimates the experimental funda-
mental gap, estimated to be 9.57 eV from temperature-
dependentvacuumultraviolet(VUV)spectroscopy63and
9.6 eV from conductivity measurements109.
The 6 bands located between -19 eV and -15.9 eV are
the O 2sstates, while the upper 18 valence bands, start-
ing at-7 eV, are mostly due to O 2pstates, partially
hybridised with Al states. The valence bands are quite
ﬂat along the entire path. The bottom conduction band
consists of Al 3shybridised with O 3sat the  point and
also with O 2pelsewhere, showing a strong dispersion
around the  point. The higher conduction bands have
mainly Al 3pand3dcharacter, also hybridised with O
states. This overview of the electronic properties con-
ﬁrms the intermediate covalent-ionic nature of the chem-
ical bond in -Al2O3.
Finally, the Al 2pand 2score levels (not shown in
Fig. 3) in LDA are located 61.7 eV and 99.4 eV below
the top valence, which, as usual, largely underestimates
the experimental values110of 70.7 eV and 115.6 eV, re-
spectively. The calculations do not include the spin-orbit
coupling, so the 2p1=2and2p3=2levels are not split. In
all cases, we have veriﬁed that pseudopotential and all-electron calculations give the same band structures and
core-level energies.
B. All-electron benchmark at the Al L 2;3edge
One of the main goals of this work is to demonstrate
that shallow-core spectra can be calculated with high
accuracy also using the pseudopotential approximation.
Even when reliable pseudopotentials provide accurate re-
sults in ground-state DFT calculations for the charge
density or the total energy, or in GW calculations for
quasiparticle excitations, the question whether they also
give accurate XANES spectra should be examined care-
fully. In DFT or GW calculations, the quantities of in-
terest result from many integrals where the details of
the single matrix elements are not crucial. Instead, op-
tical absorption and XANES spectra additionally reﬂect
directly the quality of the individual dipole matrix el-
ements in Eq. (3), which is a much more stringent re-
quirement. In the XANES regime, indeed, excitation en-
ergiesaresubstantiallyhigherthanthosefoundinoptical
spectra, which implies that the matrix elements involve
regions of space closer to the ionic cores. In a norm-
conserving pseudopotential approach, the true shallow
core wavefunction is replaced by a pseudo-wavefunction.
While their norms are identical, the true wavefunction
and the pseudo-wavefunction are diﬀerent for distances
to the ionic cores that are smaller than the cutoﬀ radii.
Therefore, as a consequence of the pseudization of the
wavefunctions, the dipole matrix elements (3) for the
XANES spectra could be inaccurate in a pseudopoten-
tial scheme, even for accurate pseudopotentials that are
reliable for DFT and GW calculations (such as the ones
used in the present work). The limits of the accuracy of
pseudopotentials for XANES spectra of shallow core lev-
els, to the best of our knowledge, have not been explored
so far.
We used full-potential all-electron calculations, consid-
eredasthegold-standardcomputationalmethod95,112, to
benchmark the optical and core spectra calculated with
PPs. In order to perform this comparison properly, for
bothopticalabsorptionandAlL 2;3edgeXANESspectra,
the same choice has been made for the occupied states
includedexplicitlyinthetwocalculations, andtheresult-
ing spectra were converged consistently in the two cases
(see Sec. IIB).
The valence and L 2;3spectra obtained at diﬀerent lev-
els of approximations, IPA, RPA and BSE, are shown
in the top and bottom panels of Fig. 4, respectively. We
canmakeseveralobservationsforbothopticalabsorption
and XANES spectra: i) The results of the left panels of
Fig. 4 show that the pseudopotential approximation re-
produces the all-electron spectra with excellent accuracy
within the IPA. ii) For the RPA spectra (central panels)
we ﬁnd a similar result. This is in part related to the fact
that local ﬁelds eﬀects are not important in the energy
ranges considered here. iii) Finally, also the full BSE cal-6
FIG. 4: Comparison of absorption spectra calculated with pseudopotential (red lines) and all-electron (blue lines)
methods, using a  -centered 888k-point grid, (left panels) in the independent particle approximation (IPA),
(middle panels) in the random-phase approximation (RPA), and (right panels) from the full Bethe-Salpeter equation
(BSE). (Upper panels) Optical spectra (with 12 valence bands and 20 conduction bands). (Bottom panels) XANES
spectra at Al L 2;3edge (with 12 core levels and 12 conduction bands).
culations (right panels) with the two approaches are in
very good agreement. To have an idea of what can be
expected, we note that a recent comparison between dif-
ferent BSE calculations of XAS spectra presented larger
discrepancies89. The origin of the residual diﬀerence be-
tween the BSE spectra in Fig. 4 lies in the diﬀerent treat-
ment between the two codes of the integrable singularity
of the diagonal matrix elements of electron-hole attrac-
tion Win Eq. (1), calculated in reciprocal space, when
k k0=q= 0and the reciprocal-lattice vectors are
G=G0= 0. We note that the diﬀerent treatment of this
singularityhasbeenrecentlyidentiﬁedastheoriginofnu-
mericallydiﬀerentresultsalsoinacomparisonamongdif-
ferent codes for GW quasiparticle calculations113. This
singularity is, in fact, eliminated in the BSE by evaluat-
ing the integral
 4

 1
G=0;G0=0(q!0)1
(2)3Z

q=0dq1
q2;
where 
q=0= 
BZ=Nk. In order to carry out, numeri-
cally or analytically, this integral, one has to deﬁne the
shape for the little volume 
q=0around the origin of the
Brillouin zone and, in anisotropic materials, choose the
q!0direction in order to evaluate the inverse dielec-
tric function  1(q!0). The diﬀerent details about
how this integral is performed can be found in Ref.114
and Refs.115, for EXCand Exciting , respectively. If we
exclude this singular contribution, the two BSE results
become superimposed, as in the IPA case. In addition,
this contribution vanishes (more or less rapidly accordingto the kind of exciton116,117) in the convergency with k
points. Fig. 5 indeed shows that the diﬀerences in the
spectra obtained with the two codes tend to vanish with
increasing number of kpoints.
Most importantly for the scope of the present work,
for this detailed comparison we ﬁnd that the diﬀerences
between the PP and AE codes remain always of the same
order of magnitude for both valence and shallow-core
spectra. Therefore, in summary, we can safely conclude
that the benchmarks with respect to the all-electron ap-
proach show that pseudopotential calculations for optical
and XANES spectroscopies for semicore states are reli-
able and accurate.
C. Interference eﬀects at the Al L 1edge
Thecomparisonbetweenall-electronandpseudopoten-
tial calculations is more delicate for the Al L 1edge, since
in this case the semicore electrons are treated diﬀerently
by the two codes. While Exciting considers the Al 2s
states as core states, entirely contained inside the muﬃn
tin, in EXCthey are treated in the same manner as the
valence electrons. Moreover, Exciting ﬁxes the core hole
at a single speciﬁc atomic site, whereas EXCtreats all the
atomic sites on equal footing.
One of the limitations of the linearized augmented-
plane-wave (LAPW) method is that it could give a wrong
description of semicore states when they are considered
to be contained only inside the muﬃn-tin (MT) sphere,7
8 9
Energy [eV]00.511.52
  8 kp - PP
  8 kp - AE00.511.52Im εM
10 kp - PP
10 kp - AE00.511.52
12 kp - PP
12 kp - AE
FIG. 5: Convergence of BSE optical spectra calculated
with pseudopotential (PP) (solid lines) and all-electron
(AE) (dot-dashed lines) methods (with 2 conduction
and 2 valence bands), for increasing number of kpoints
( -centered grids with 8, 10 and 12 divisions for
bottom, central and top panel, respectively).
but they actually overlap signiﬁcantly with valence elec-
trons or are too extended to be entirely contained inside
the MT95,118. In order to overcome this problem, lo-
cal orbitals are included to complement the basis. How-
ever, the quality of this basis set depends on the choice
of energy parameters95,119. In addition, interference ef-
fects between diﬀerent atomic sites could play an impor-
tant role, but they would not be straightforwardly taken
into account when considering the core states only in-
side a single muﬃn-tin88. For all these reasons, since
we have already validated the pseudopotential approach
for the Al L 2;3edge spectra, we can now conversely use
EXCto benchmark the Al L 1edge spectra obtained with
Exciting .
The L 1edge absorption spectra calculated using diﬀer-
ent levels of approximations are shown in Fig. 6. Notice
that in EXCall the 4 bands corresponding to the 2s state
of the 4 Al atoms need to be included in the calculations
in order to properly represent the electronic transitions,
while in Exciting only one occupied level is considered:
the2sstate of the Al atom where the core hole is sit-
ting. For a quantitative comparison between the two
approaches, since there are 4 equivalent Al atoms in the
unit cell, the spectrum obtained with Exciting has been
multiplied by 4.
In all level of approximations, the pseudopotential and
all-electron spectra diﬀer slightly (and more than in the
optical or L 2;3edge cases), showing that interference ef-
fects among the Al atoms come to play. These inter-
ferences are quite small in -Al2O3, also because the Al
atoms lie at equivalent positions in the unit cell, but they
are in any case clearly detectable in the comparison in
Fig. 6. It has been shown that these eﬀects can be evenmore signiﬁcant in other materials88. While including
these eﬀects is still possible with Exciting (and with all
approaches that ﬁx the core hole in a speciﬁc position)
by doing multiple calculations and generalizing Eq. (2),
as described in detail in Ref. 88, interferences are natu-
rally taken into account by pseudopotential approaches,
where all atoms are treated on the same footing and only
a single calculation is needed.
D. Optical and XANES spectra: valence and
shallow-core excitations
1. Comparison with experiments
Fig. 7 compares the calculated absorption spectra
ImM(!)with experiment, for both the optical absorp-
tioncorrespondingtovalenceexcitationsandtheXANES
spectrum of the shallow-core excitations at the Al L 2;3
edge. The same ﬁgure also displays the results of the
calculations at the Al L 1edge, where, to best of our
knowledge, no experimental XANES spectra are avail-
able for-Al2O3, since this core level excitation is less
commonly studied than the Al K edge65,66,123,124. In all
cases, the presence of sharp and pronounced peaks at the
onset of the BSE spectra (red lines), which are absent in
the RPA and IPA spectra (orange and green lines), is an
evidence of strong excitonic eﬀects. Taking into account
theelectron-holeattractionintheBSEisthekeytobring
the calculations in agreement with experiment.
As already discussed in Ref. 103, for the optical ab-
sorption in the polarization direction perpendicular to
thezaxis (i.e. in the xyplane), where two VUV spec-
troscopy experiments120,121are available, there are large
discrepancies between the experimental spectra them-
selves [see Fig. 7(a)]. They agree on the position of the
absorption onset and the presence of a sharp peak at
9.2 eV, while they largely diﬀer in the intensities of
the various spectral features. Those diﬀerences can be
attributed to the fact that both absorption spectra have
been obtained from measured reﬂectivity data using the
Kramers-Kroning relations, which introduces uncertain-
ties in the Im M(!)spectra. The calculated optical spec-
tra in Fig. 7(a)-(b) have been blueshifted by 0.7 eV. This
underestimation of the onset of the absorption spectrum
is a manifestation of the underestimation of the band
gap by the perturbative G 0W0approach, which is a sys-
tematic error for large gap materials125. As a matter
of fact, the 2.64 eV scissor correction that we have em-
ployed here, which is taken from the G 0W0calculation
in Ref. 103, underestimates the band gap correction to
the LDA. The BSE calculation in Ref. 103 is also in very
good agreement with the present result: the diﬀerence in
the peak positions is actually due to the LDA band gap
diﬀerence (see Sec. IIIA). The BSE spectrum in the xy
polarization reproduces well the spectral shape measured
by French et al.121, while there are larger diﬀerences with
the experimental spectra in both polarizations measured8
106 108 110 112 114 116 118 120
Energy [eV]00.0050.010.0150.02Im εMIPA - pseudopotential
IPA - all-electron x 4
106 108 110 112 114 116 118 120
Energy [eV]00.0050.010.0150.02Im εMRPA - pseudopotential
RPA - all-electron x 4
106 108 110 112 114 116 118 120
Energy [eV]00.010.020.030.040.05Im εMBSE - pseudopotential
BSE - all-electron x 4
FIG. 6: XANES spectra at the Al L 1edge calculated with EXC(pseudopotential code) and Exciting (all-electron
code). All the calculations are performed using a  -centered 888grid of kpoints and 30 unoccupied bands. In
EXCwe include the 4 2sbands corresponding to the 4 Al atoms, while in Exciting we include only one 2slevel (i.e.,
the2sstate on the Al atom where the core hole is created). For this reason, the spectra of Exciting are multiplied
by 4.
by Tomiki et al.120.
At the Al L 2;3edge, see Fig. 7(c), the calculated spec-
tra have been blueshifted by 9.75 eV, which matches well
the needed correction to the LDA Al 2pcore level energy
(see Sec. IIIA). The calculations neglect the spin-orbit
couplingandthereforemissthesplittingofthemainpeak
into a doublet separated by 0.47 eV in the high-resolution
experimental XANES spectrum from Ref. 122 (which
also agrees well with previous experiments120,126,127). In
the spectra, the ﬁrst, most prominent, excitonic peak is
followed by a series of lower intensity peaks. While the
absolute intensity of the experimental spectrum is arbi-
trary, the relative intensity of the ﬁrst and second peaks
gives information about the coordination number of Al
and the nature of the chemical bond: a lower symme-
try enhances the intensity of the second peak. More-
over, a lower coordination shifts the edge to lower ener-
gies, while higher bond ionicity shifts the edge to higher
energies67,122.
At the Al L 1edge there is no available experiment.
Therefore, the curves in Fig. 7(d) have been shifted by
19.5 eV, in order for the smallest independent-particle
transition energy, from the Al 2sband to the bottom-
conduction band, to match the experimental value of
125.2 eV, which corresponds to the sum of the funda-
mental band gap plus the binding energy of the Al 2s
states63,110(see Sec. IIIA). We ﬁnd that the main promi-
nent excitonic peak in the BSE spectra is preceded by a
pre-edgestructure,moreevidentinthe xydirection(solid
lines). At the Al K edge, which mainly probes the analo-
gous 1s!3ptransition, there has been much work to ex-
plaintheoriginofasimilarprepeakstructure12,65,128–133,
which has been ﬁnally interpreted in terms of atomic vi-
brations enabling monopole transitions to unoccupied Al
3sstates. In the present case, the calculations do not
take into account the coupling with atomic vibrations
and nevertheless the BSE spectra show a prepeak struc-
ture. This ﬁnding therefore calls for a detailed compar-
ison with other calculations including atomic vibrations
and, possibly, experiments at the Al L 1edge.2. Anisotropy and local ﬁeld eﬀects
The-Al2O3crystal is optically uniaxial. As shown
by Fig. 7(a)-(b), at the onset of the optical spectrum
the anisotropy is rather small, while it becomes larger
for higher energy features. The lowest energy exciton is
visible along the zpolarization, while it is dark in the
perpendicular xypolarization. It is separated by 25
meV from a pair of degenerate excitons that are visible
in the perpendicular xydirection and, conversely, dark
in thezdirection. Tomiki et al.120experimentally deter-
mined a similar splitting of the exciton peaks in the two
polarizationdirections(35meVatroomtemperatureand
86meVat10K).Weﬁndthatthebindingenergyofthese
excitons is of order of 0.3 eV, which is more than twice
the 0.13 eV value estimated from temperature-dependent
VUV spectroscopy63. A similar splitting of the lowest
energy exciton occurs also at the L 2;3edge120, where its
binding energy largely increases up to 1.6 eV. For the op-
tical and the L 2;3cases, both the lowest energy exciton
in the BSE spectrum and the excitation at the smallest
independent-particle transition energy in the IPA spec-
trum have a signiﬁcant oscillator strength. Instead, at
the L 1edge the lowest energy transitions have a 2s!3s
character and are dipole forbidden. We ﬁnd that the
binding energy of the lowest dark exciton at the L 1edge
is 1.2 eV. The lowest bright excitons in the zandxypo-
larization directions are located 1.6 eV and 1.8 eV above
it, respectively. They belong to the prepeak in the spec-
trum. In this case, we deﬁne their binding energy as the
diﬀerence with respect to the corresponding ﬁrst allowed
transition in the IPA spectrum: it amounts to 0.6 eV.
The splitting of the main exciton peak in the two polar-
izations is also the largest one at the L 1edge, being more
than 0.2 eV.
By comparing the RPA and IPA optical spectra, or-
ange and green lines in Fig. 7(a)-(b), respectively, we
note that the eﬀect of crystal local ﬁelds is quite small
for both polarizations, in contrast to typical layered van
der Waals materials like graphite, where local ﬁeld ef-9
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Energy [eV]02468Im εMIPA xy
RPA xy
BSE xy
Exp Tomiki et al
Exp French et al.(a)
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Energy [eV]012345678Im εMIPA z
RPA z
BSE z
Exp Tomiki et al.(b)
75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90
Energy [eV]00.10.20.30.40.5Im εMExp Weigel et al.
BSE xy
BSE z
RPA xy
RPA z
IPA xy
IPA z(c)
124 126 128 130 132 134
Energy [eV]00.010.020.030.040.05Im εMIPA xy
IPA z
RPA xy
RPA z
BSE xy
BSE z(d)
FIG. 7: Comparison of theoretical results with experimental data from Tomiki et al.120and French et al.121for the
optical absorption, and Weigel et al.122for the XANES at the L 2;3edge. The calculated spectra are obtained in the
independent particle approximation (IPA), green lines, in the random-phase approximation (RPA), orange lines, and
from the solution of the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE), red lines. Optical absorption spectra for polarization in the
(a)xyplane and (b) in the zdirection: the calculated spectra have been blueshifted by 0.7 eV. (c) Absorption
spectra at the L 2;3edge in the xy(solid lines) and z(dot-dashed lines) polarizations compared to the isotropic
XANES experimental spectrum122, to which a vertical oﬀset has been added for improved clarity. (d) Absorption
spectra at the L 1edge in the xy(solid lines) and z(dot-dashed lines) polarizations.
fects are strong for the polarization along the hexagonal
axis134. Marinopoulos and Grüning103also found that
local ﬁeld eﬀects are not essential to describe satisfac-
torily the low energy part of the experimental spectra,
whereas they become crucial for higher energies (above
16 eV, not shown in Fig. 7), in correspondence to the ex-
citation of the more localised O 2selectrons. Indeed, the
degree of electron localisation directly correlates with the
degree of charge inhomogeneity, which is a key factor for
the induced microscopic local ﬁelds. One may therefore
expect that the excitation spectra of shallow-core levels,
which are even more localised, should be more aﬀected
by local ﬁeld eﬀects. This phenomenon has been in fact
observed for many shallow-core levels135–139. However,
in-Al2O3for both the L 2;3and L 1edges the compari-
son of the absorption spectra calculated within the RPAand in the IPA shows that local ﬁeld eﬀects are actually
negligible140(even weaker than in the optical regime).
We can understand this result by noticing that the in-
tensity of the L 2;3and L 1absorption spectra is one or
two orders of magnitude smaller than for the optical ab-
sorption. This large intensity diﬀerence reﬂects the fact
that Al 2pand2sstates are much less polarizable than
valence states. Therefore, even though their electronic
charge is much more localized and inhomogeneous, local
ﬁelds associated to the excitations of Al 2pand2sare
small because they are weakly polarizable, which also
leads to weak induced potentials.10
3. Analysis of excitonic eﬀects
Excitonic eﬀects in solids can be understood as the
result of the mixing of the independent-particle, verti-
cal interband transitions at various kpoints in the Bril-
louin zone, which are weighted by the excitonic coeﬃ-
cientsA
vck, i.e., the eigenvectors of the excitonic Hamil-
tonian (1). The analysis of the excitonic coeﬃcients
therefore directly informs on the character of the exci-
ton.
Fig. 8 represents, projected on the LDA band struc-
ture, the partial contributionsA
vck~vckto the oscilla-
tor strength of the lowest energy bright excitons in the
absorption spectra of Fig. 7.
Each independent-particle transition vk!ckis repre-
sentedbyapairofcircles, oneintheoccupiedband vand
one in the unoccupied band c, whose size is proportional
tothe valueof thecontribution. For theoptical spectrum
(left panel of Fig. 8), we consider the exciton giving rise
to the ﬁrst peak in the absorption spectrum in the z
polarization. Our analysis shows that the largest con-
tribution stems from the top-valence bottom-conduction
transition at the  point, in correspondence to the direct
band gap. The next kpoints along the L  X line in the
conduction band give a contribution that is already 10
times smaller. The others are even smaller. This is due
to the fact that for this exciton the top-valence bottom-
conduction transition at the  point has the predominant
coeﬃcientAvck
, together with a large single-particle os-
cillatorstrength ~vckinthezdirection. Instead,thesame
~vckis negligibly small in the xorydirection, explaining
why the same exciton is dark in the xyplane.
For the L 2;3and L 1excitation spectra, all the kpoints
for the corresponding core levels are involved in the spec-
tra, as one may expect from the fact that the core levels
are not dispersive. Also for ﬁrst exciton peak in the L 2;3
XANES spectrum (middle panel of Fig. 8), the lowest
conduction band at the  point gives the largest con-
tribution, having a large Al 3scharacter (see Sec. 3).
However, in this case the other kpoints of the bottom
conduction band and the higher conduction bands signif-
icantlycontributetothespectrumaswell. Thisillustrate
the deviation from a simple independent-particle picture
of a Al 2p!3satomic transition, since many transitions
are mixed together to produce the excitonic peak at the
onset of the L 2;3XANES spectrum.
For the L 1XANES spectrum (right panel of Fig. 8),
we consider the ﬁrst bright exciton in the zpolariza-
tion direction, which belongs to the prepeak in the spec-
trum in Fig. 7(d). Contrary to the other two cases, the
bottom-conduction band at the  point gives no contri-
bution, consistently with the 2s!3scharacter of the
transition, which is dipole forbidden. The largest contri-
butions are instead given by the kpoints along the  T
line of the bottom conduction band, which have 3pchar-
acter as well. Even in this case higher conduction bands
contribute signiﬁcantly to the intensity of the excitonic
prepeak.The plot in Fig. 9 of the cumulative sums S(!), see
Eq. (4), as a function of the number of conduction bands
explains the diﬀerent convergence behavior between the
optical and XANES spectra shown in Fig. 1. By increas-
ing the number of conduction bands in the BSE Hamilto-
nian (1), the largest possible independent-particle transi-
tion energy progressively increases. Therefore, the curves
for larger numbers of conduction bands extend to higher
energies. However, in the case of the optical spectrum
(top panel), the cumulative sum S(!)rapidly converges
to the ﬁnal result. Already considering transition ener-
gies within 12 eV from the smallest one and including 15
conduction bands in the BSE hamiltonian give a result of
the oscillator strength very close to 100%. Instead, in the
case of the L 2;3edge (bottom panel), the range of transi-
tion energies needed to get close to 100% has to be much
larger, of the order of 50 eV above the smallest transition
energy. Moreover, the various curves in the bottom panel
of Fig. 9 do not overlap, as it is the case for the optical
spectrum in the upper panel. This behavior indicates
that at the L 2;3edge interband transitions to higher con-
duction bands in the BSE hamiltonian mix together with
transitions to lower conductions bands, which aﬀects the
behavior of the cumulative sum S(!)also at lower ener-
gies. The reason of this strong mixing is the fact that at
the L 2;3edge there are many interband transitions with
similar intensity. This, in turns, explains why the con-
vergence of the XANES spectrum with the number of
conduction bands is slow (see Fig. 1), and requires extra
care.
The lowest-energy dark excitons, both in the opti-
cal spectrum and the L 2;3edge, have a cumulative sum
S(!)that is always close to zero. It means that all the
independent-particle oscillator strengths ~vckare always
small, indicating dipole forbidden transitions. The situ-
ation is instead diﬀerent for the lowest dark exciton at
the L 1edge. In this case, some transitions to the lowest
conduction bands have a weak but not zero contribu-
tionj~vckAjto the spectrum, as shown by their repre-
sentation on the LDA band structure in the top panel
of Fig. 10. The corresponding cumulative sum S(!),
bottom panel of Fig. 10, is indeed not always zero: it
has even two distinct peaks, before progressively decreas-
ing to zero, giving rise to a dark exciton. This suggests
theoccurrenceofdestructiveinterferenceofcontributions
~vckAof diﬀerent sign, involving transitions over a large
range of energy. Moreover, it also shows that including
not enough conduction bands in the BSE hamiltonian (1)
would produce a weak excitonic peak in the spectrum. It
is another indication that an independent-particle pic-
ture is here inadequate, whereas the strong electron-hole
interaction manifest itself as the (positive or negative)
interference of many electron-hole pairs.
Fig. 11 displays the electron density distribution
j	(r0
h;re)j2for a ﬁxed position of the hole r0
hfor the
wavefunction of the lowest bright excitons in the spec-
tra. In the color plots, we consider a cut of the three-
dimensional distribution in the xyplane, perpendicular11
T L
 X10
5
05101520Energy [eV]
100101102
010203040
T L
 X62.0
61.5
102
101
100
010203040
T L
 X100.0
99.5
103
102
101
FIG. 8: Contributions of independent transitions to the lowest energy bright exciton intensity in the absorption
spectra: (left) for the optical spectrum; (middle) for the XANES at theL 2;3edge; (right) for the XANES at the L 1
edge. The three plots are performed for polarization in the zdirection. The size of the circles is proportional to
j~vckAvck
j.
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
Energy [eV]00.20.40.60.81Sλ(ω)
30 cb
20 cb
15 cb
10 cb
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Energy [eV]00.20.40.60.81Sλ(ω)
160 cb
100 cb
60 cb
10 cb
FIG. 9: Cumulative sums S(!)as a function of
number of conduction bands (cb) in the BSE
hamiltonian for the lowest energy bright exciton in the
zdirection for (top panel) the optical spectrum (bottom
panel) and the XANES spectrum at the L 2;3edge. In
each case, the zero of the energy axis has been set to
the smallest independent-particle transition energy and
S(!)has been normalised to its largest value.
to thezaxis, containing the hole. In all cases, the hole
position (represented by the black ball in Fig. 11) has
beenchosenslightlyawayfromtheatomsalongtherhom-
bohedralcdirection, in order to avoid the nodes of the
orbitals. This is the reason why the electron distribu-
tion is not symmetrical around the hole. For an uncor-
related electron-hole pair, the electron density would be
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Energy [eV]00.20.40.60.81Sλ(ω)FIG. 10: Contributions of independent transitions to
the dipole strength of the lowest energy dark exciton in
the XANES spectrum at the L 1edge. (Top panel) The
size of the circle is proportional to j~vckAj. (Bottom
panel) Corresponding cumulative sum S(!). The zero
of the energy axis has been set to the smallest
independent-particle transition energy and the intensity
normalised to the largest value.
delocalised all over the crystal, corresponding to a Bloch
wavefunction. The eﬀect of the electron-hole correlation
is instead to localise the electron density around the hole.
For the optical spectrum (left panel), the hole has been
placed near an O atom, consistently with the main char-12
FIG. 11: Exciton correlation function 	(rh;re)for the lowest bright exciton in the (left) optical and (middle) L 2;3
edge spectra and (right) at the prepeak at the L 1edge. The position of the hole rhis ﬁxed at r0
h(see black ball).
The color plots show the corresponding electron density distribution j	(r0
h;re)j2in thexyplane perpendicular to
thezaxis contaning the hole. In order to avoid nodes of the orbitals, the hole position has been slightly displaced
from an oxygen atom for the optical exciton, and from an aluminum atom for the L 23andL1edge by 0.05 aRalong
thecdirection. The intensity goes from 0 to the maximum value of the square of the excitonic wavefunctions.
acter of the valence band (see Sec. IIIA). Here we dis-
cover that the electron charge is also surprisingly located
at the O atoms, and quite delocalised in the xyplane.
This picture is indeed in contrast with the naive expec-
tation of a charge transfer O !Al nature of the exciton,
which is based on the largely ionic character of the elec-
tronic properties of -Al2O3. However, the strong Al-
O hybridisation of the bottom conduction bands makes
it possible for the exciton to localise entirely on the O
atoms. The nature of the exciton in -Al2O3therefore
turns out to be similar to what found141,142in other ionic
materials like LiF, where, analogously, for a hole ﬁxed at
a F atom, the electron charge is located mainly on F
atoms as well.
Finally, the other two panels of Fig. 11 show the wave-
functions of the ﬁrst bright exciton at the L 2;3edge and
in the prepeak of the L 1edge. In both cases, the hole is
localised close to an Al atom. For the L 2;3edge, the re-
sulting electron charge has the shape of an Al 3sorbital.
For the L 1edge, the cut shows a distorted Al 3porbital
pointing to the next neighbor O atom. In these cases, the
electron charge is entirely localised around the same Al
site, displaying the atomic nature and the Frenkel char-
acter of the core excitons.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Insummary, wehavepresentedapseudopotentialcom-
putational scheme that permits one to evaluate optical
and XANES spectra on the same footing, using the same
basis set for valence and shallow-core electrons. We have
validated the approach by comparison with full potential
all-electron calculations, at three diﬀerent levels of the-
ory, independent-particle approximation, RPA and full
excitonic calculation, within the BSE formalism. We
have applied this approach to study the optical and semi-coreexcitationsofcorundum -Al2O3, apromisingmate-
rial for its optical and structural properties. Both optical
and XANES spectra present strong many-body eﬀects
that require the highest level of theory for an accurate
description. In particular, the intense exciton feature in
the XANES spectrum at the L 1edge could be measur-
able. To the best of our knowledge, this edge has never
been measured. Our prediction therefore opens up new
avenues for the measurement of unoccupied Al 3p states
also by means of soft x-ray spectroscopy.
The anisotropy in the optical regime reveals a diﬀer-
ent order of excitons in the zand perpendicular xydi-
rections: the ﬁrst exciton is bright along z, followed by
dark excitons, while it is the opposite in the perpendic-
ularxydirection. This indicates a fully linear dichroic
character of the spectra. The same splitting occurs also
for the L 2;3edge. Moreover, we ﬁnd a pre-edge feature
at the Al L 1edge that has a purely electronic nature.
This seems to contrast with the origin of the pre-edge
observed in XANES spectra at the Al K edge attributed
to the coupling with phonons. Our work therefore calls
for a careful examination of the role of phonons at the
Al L 1edge as well. Finally, the main exciton peak in the
optical absorption spectrum of -Al2O3does not have
a O!Al charge transfer character, as one would expect
from the largely ionic nature of the electronic structure of
-Al2O3. Instead, as a consequence of the electron-hole
correlation, the exciton is localised on O atoms only.
This work opens the way for an accurate description
of other shallow-core spectroscopies within a pseudopo-
tential scheme, such as electron energy loss near-edge
structures (ELNES) or x-ray Raman scattering (XRS).
Finally, treating shallow-core, valence, and conduction
states on the same footing can be particularly useful to
describe resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS).13
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge valuable discussions with Christian
Vorwerk. We thank the French Agence Nationale de la
Recherche (ANR) for ﬁnancial support (Grant Agree-
ments No. ANR-19-CE30-0011). Computational time
was granted by GENCI (Project No. 544).
1J.vanBokhovenandC.Lamberti,eds., X-Ray Absorption
and X-Ray Emission Spectroscopy: Theory and Applica-
tions(Wiley, 2016).
2F. M. de Groot, H. Elnaggar, F. Frati, R. pan Wang,
M. U. Delgado-Jaime, M. van Veenendaal, J. Fernandez-
Rodriguez, M. W. Haverkort, R. J. Green, G. van der
Laan, Y. Kvashnin, A. Hariki, H. Ikeno, H. Ramanan-
toanina, C. Daul, B. Delley, M. Odelius, M. Lundberg,
O. Kuhn, S. I. Bokarev, E. Shirley, J. Vinson, K. Gilmore,
M. Stener, G. Fronzoni, P. Decleva, P. Kruger, M. Rete-
gan, Y. Joly, C. Vorwerk, C. Draxl, J. Rehr, and
A. Tanaka, Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and Related
Phenomena 249, 147061 (2021).
3T. Fujikawa, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 52,
4001 (1983).
4T. A. Tyson, K. O. Hodgson, C. R. Natoli, and M. Ben-
fatto, Phys. Rev. B 46, 5997 (1992).
5D. Ahlers, G. Schütz, V. Popescu, and H. Ebert, Journal
of Applied Physics 83, 7082 (1998).
6J. J. Rehr and R. C. Albers, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 621
(2000).
7J. J. Rehr, J. J. Kas, M. P. Prange, A. P. Sorini, Y. Taki-
moto, and F. Vila, Comptes Rendus Physique 10, 548
(2009).
8J. J. Rehr, J. J. Kas, F. D. Vila, M. P. Prange, and
K. Jorissen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 12, 5503 (2010).
9F. de Groot, Coordination Chemistry Reviews 249, 31
(2005), synchrotron Radiation in Inorganic and Bioinor-
ganic Chemistry.
10F. De Groot and A. Kotani, Core level spectroscopy of
solids(CRC press, 2008).
11M. W. Haverkort, M. Zwierzycki, and O. K. Andersen,
Phys. Rev. B 85, 165113 (2012).
12S.-D. Mo and W. Y. Ching, Phys. Rev. B 62, 7901 (2000).
13C. Gougoussis, M. Calandra, A. P. Seitsonen, and
F. Mauri, Phys. Rev. B 80, 075102 (2009).
14M. Taillefumier, D. Cabaret, A.-M. Flank, and F. Mauri,
Phys. Rev. B 66, 195107 (2002).
15O. Bunău and M. Calandra, Phys. Rev. B 87, 205105
(2013).
16S. Mazevet, M. Torrent, V. Recoules, and F. Jollet, High
Energy Density Physics 6, 84 (2010).
17B. Hetényi, F. De Angelis, P. Giannozzi, and R. Car, The
Journal of Chemical Physics 120, 8632 (2004).
18D. Prendergast and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 215502
(2006).
19S.-P. Gao, C. J. Pickard, A. Perlov, and V. Milman,
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 21, 104203 (2009).
20J. C. A. Prentice, J. Aarons, J. C. Womack, A. E. A.
Allen, L. Andrinopoulos, L. Anton, R. A. Bell, A. Bhan-
dari, G. A. Bramley, R. J. Charlton, R. J. Clements, D. J.
Cole, G. Constantinescu, F. Corsetti, S. M.-M. Dubois,K. K. B. Duﬀ, J. M. Escartín, A. Greco, Q. Hill, L. P. Lee,
E. Linscott, D. D. O’Regan, M. J. S. Phipps, L. E. Rat-
cliﬀ, A. R. Serrano, E. W. Tait, G. Teobaldi, V. Vitale,
N. Yeung, T. J. Zuehlsdorﬀ, J. Dziedzic, P. D. Haynes,
N. D. M. Hine, A. A. Mostoﬁ, M. C. Payne, and C.-K.
Skylaris, The Journal of Chemical Physics 152, 174111
(2020), https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0004445.
21H. P. Hjalmarson, H. Büttner, and J. D. Dow, Phys. Rev.
B24, 6010 (1981).
22K. Lie, R. Brydson, and H. Davock, Phys. Rev. B 59,
5361 (1999).
23L. Triguero, L. G. M. Pettersson, and H. Ågren, Phys.
Rev. B58, 8097 (1998).
24B. P. Klein, S. J. Hall, and R. J. Maurer, Journal of
Physics: Condensed Matter 33, 154005 (2021).
25J. J. Rehr, J. A. Soininen, and E. L. Shirley, Physica
Scripta2005, 207 (2005).
26Y. Liang, J. Vinson, S. Pemmaraju, W. S. Drisdell,
E. L. Shirley, and D. Prendergast, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118,
096402 (2017).
27G. Onida, L. Reining, and A. Rubio, Rev. Mod. Phys.
74, 601 (2002).
28N. A. Besley, M. J. G. Peach, and D. J. Tozer, Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 11, 10350 (2009).
29O. Bunău and Y. Joly, Phys. Rev. B 85, 155121 (2012).
30O. Bunău and Y. Joly, Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter24, 215502 (2012).
31G. Strinati, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1519 (1982).
32G. Strinati, Phys. Rev. B 29, 5718 (1984).
33E. L. Shirley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 794 (1998).
34J. A. Carlisle, E. L. Shirley, L. J. Terminello, J. J. Jia,
T. A. Callcott, D. L. Ederer, R. C. C. Perera, and F. J.
Himpsel, Phys. Rev. B 59, 7433 (1999).
35E. Shirley, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 61,
445 (2000).
36R. M. Martin, L. Reining, and D. M. Ceperley, Inter-
acting Electrons: Theory and Computational Approaches
(Cambridge University Press, 2016).
37F. Bechstedt, Many-Body Approach to Electronic Excita-
tions: Concepts and Applications ,SpringerSeriesinSolid-
State Sciences (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014).
38S. Botti, A. Schindlmayr, R. D. Sole, and L. Reining,
Reports on Progress in Physics 70, 357 (2007).
39J. Wills, M. Alouani, P. Andersson, A. Delin, O. Eriks-
son, and O. Grechnyev, Full-Potential Electronic Struc-
ture Method: Energy and Force Calculations with Density
Functional and Dynamical Mean Field Theory , Springer
Series in Solid-State Sciences (Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2010).
40O. K. Andersen, Phys. Rev. B 12, 3060 (1975).
41E. Sjöstedt, L. Nordström, and D. Singh, Solid State
Communications 114, 15 (2000).14
42G. K. H. Madsen, P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, E. Sjöstedt, and
L. Nordström, Phys. Rev. B 64, 195134 (2001).
43M. C. Payne, M. P. Teter, D. C. Allan, T. A. Arias, and
J. D. Joannopoulos, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 1045 (1992).
44A. Willand, Y. O. Kvashnin, L. Genovese, A. Vázquez-
Mayagoitia, A. K. Deb, A. Sadeghi, T. Deutsch, and
S. Goedecker, The Journal of Chemical Physics 138,
104109 (2013).
45K. Lejaeghere, V. V. Speybroeck, G. V. Oost, and S. Cot-
tenier, Critical Reviews in Solid State and Materials Sci-
ences39, 1 (2014).
46G. Prandini, A. Marrazzo, I. E. Castelli, N. Mounet, and
N. Marzari, npj Computational Materials 4, 2057 (2018).
47K. Lejaeghere, G. Bihlmayer, T. Björkman, P. Blaha,
S. Blügel, V. Blum, D. Caliste, I. E. Castelli, S. J. Clark,
A. D. Corso, S. de Gironcoli, T. Deutsch, J. K. Dewhurst,
I. D. Marco, C. Draxl, M. Dułak, O. Eriksson, J. A.
Flores-Livas, K. F. Garrity, L. Genovese, P. Giannozzi,
M. Giantomassi, S. Goedecker, X. Gonze, O. Grånäs,
E. K. U. Gross, A. Gulans, F. Gygi, D. R. Hamann,
P. J. Hasnip, N. A. W. Holzwarth, D. Iuşan, D. B.
Jochym, F. Jollet, D. Jones, G. Kresse, K. Koepernik,
E. Küçükbenli, Y. O. Kvashnin, I. L. M. Locht, S. Lubeck,
M. Marsman, N. Marzari, U. Nitzsche, L. Nordström,
T. Ozaki, L. Paulatto, C. J. Pickard, W. Poelmans,
M. I. J. Probert, K. Refson, M. Richter, G.-M. Rignanese,
S. Saha, M. Scheﬄer, M. Schlipf, K. Schwarz, S. Sharma,
F. Tavazza, P. Thunström, A. Tkatchenko, M. Torrent,
D. Vanderbilt, M. J. van Setten, V. V. Speybroeck, J. M.
Wills, J.R.Yates, G.-X.Zhang, andS.Cottenier,Science
351, aad3000 (2016).
48W. Ku and A. G. Eguiluz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 126401
(2002).
49K. Delaney, P. García-González, A. Rubio, P. Rinke, and
R. W. Godby, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 249701 (2004).
50M. L. Tiago, S. Ismail-Beigi, and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev.
B69, 125212 (2004).
51M. van Schilfgaarde, T. Kotani, and S. V. Faleev, Phys.
Rev. B74, 245125 (2006).
52C. Friedrich, A. Schindlmayr, S. Blügel, and T. Kotani,
Phys. Rev. B 74, 045104 (2006).
53R. Gómez-Abal, X. Li, M. Scheﬄer, and C. Ambrosch-
Draxl, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 106404 (2008).
54E. Luppi, H.-C. Weissker, S. Bottaro, F. Sottile, V. Ve-
niard, L.Reining, andG.Onida,Phys.Rev.B 78,245124
(2008).
55J. c. v. Klimeš, M. Kaltak, and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B
90, 075125 (2014).
56C. Friedrich, M. C. Müller, and S. Blügel, Phys. Rev. B
83, 081101 (2011).
57C. Friedrich, M. C. Müller, and S. Blügel, Phys. Rev. B
84, 039906 (2011).
58H. Jiang and P. Blaha, Phys. Rev. B 93, 115203 (2016).
59H. Jiang, Phys. Rev. B 97, 245132 (2018).
60D. R. Hamann, Phys. Rev. B 88, 085117 (2013).
61The same hypothesis is made when the core orbitals are
obtained from a calculation of the isolated atom89,143,144.
62R. H. French, Journal of the American Ceramic Society
73, 477 (1990).
63R. H. French, D. J. Jones, and S. Loughin, Journal of the
American Ceramic Society 77, 412 (1994).
64I. Tanaka and H. Adachi, Phys. Rev. B 54, 4604 (1996).
65D. Cabaret, P. Sainctavit, P. Ildefonse, and A.-M. Flank,
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 8, 3691 (1996).66P. Ildefonse, D. Cabaret, P. Sainctavit, G. Calas, A.-M.
Flank, and P. Lagarde, Physics and Chemistry of Miner-
als25, 112 (1998).
67J. A. van Bokhoven, T. Nabi, H. Sambe, D. E. Ramaker,
and D. C. Koningsberger, Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter13, 10247 (2001).
68G. Strinati, Rivista del Nuovo Cimento 11, 1 (1988).
69L. Hedin, Phys. Rev. 139, A796 (1965).
70S. Albrecht, L. Reining, R. Del Sole, and G. Onida, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 80, 4510 (1998).
71L. X. Benedict, E. L. Shirley, and R. B. Bohn, Phys. Rev.
Lett.80, 4514 (1998).
72M. Rohlﬁng and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B 62, 4927
(2000).
73J. Vinson, J. J. Rehr, J. J. Kas, and E. L. Shirley, Phys.
Rev. B83, 115106 (2011).
74J. Vinson and J. J. Rehr, Phys. Rev. B 86, 195135 (2012).
75K. Gilmore, J. Vinson, E. Shirley, D. Prendergast,
C. Pemmaraju, J. Kas, F. Vila, and J. Rehr, Computer
Physics Communications 197, 109 (2015).
76K. Gilmore, J. Pelliciari, Y. Huang, J. J. Kas, M. Dantz,
V. N. Strocov, S. Kasahara, Y. Matsuda, T. Das,
T. Shibauchi, and T. Schmitt, Phys. Rev. X 11, 031013
(2021).
77A. Geondzhian and K. Gilmore, Phys. Rev. B 98, 214305
(2018).
78C. D. Dashwood, A. Geondzhian, J. G. Vale, A. C.
Pakpour-Tabrizi, C. A. Howard, Q. Faure, L. S. I. Veiga,
D. Meyers, S. G. Chiuzbăian, A. Nicolaou, N. Jaouen,
R. B. Jackman, A. Nag, M. García-Fernández, K.-J.
Zhou, A. C. Walters, K. Gilmore, D. F. McMorrow, and
M. P. M. Dean, Phys. Rev. X 11, 041052 (2021).
79J. Vinson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 24, 12787 (2022).
80W. Olovsson, I. Tanaka, P. Puschnig, and C. Ambrosch-
Draxl, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 21, 104205
(2009).
81W. Olovsson, I. Tanaka, T. Mizoguchi, P. Puschnig, and
C. Ambrosch-Draxl, Phys. Rev. B 79, 041102 (2009).
82W. Olovsson, I. Tanaka, T. Mizoguchi, G. Radtke,
P. Puschnig, and C. Ambrosch-Draxl, Phys. Rev. B 83,
195206 (2011).
83C. Vorwerk, C. Cocchi, and C. Draxl, Phys. Rev. B 95,
155121 (2017).
84C. Vorwerk, B. Aurich, C. Cocchi, and C. Draxl, Elec-
tronic Structure 1, 037001 (2019).
85C.Vorwerk, F.Sottile, andC.Draxl,Phys.Rev.Research
2, 042003 (2020).
86R. Laskowski and P. Blaha, Phys. Rev. B 82, 205104
(2010).
87Y. Yao, D. Golze, P. Rinke, V. Blum, and Y. Kanai,
Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 18, 1569
(2022).
88C. Vorwerk, F. Sottile, and C. Draxl, Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys.24, 17439 (2022).
89M. Unzog, A. Tal, and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B 106,
155133 (2022).
90S. L. Adler, Phys. Rev. 126, 413 (1962).
91N. Wiser, Phys. Rev. 129, 62 (1963).
92Thereisalsothepossibilitytoinclude  Wandexclude vc,
whichcorrespondstothedescriptionoftripletexcitations.
93X. Gonze, F. Jollet, F. Abreu Araujo, D. Adams,
B. Amadon, T. Applencourt, C. Audouze, J.-M. Beuken,
J. Bieder, A. Bokhanchuk, E. Bousquet, F. Bruneval,
D. Caliste, M. Côté, F. Dahm, F. Da Pieve, M. Delaveau,15
M. Di Gennaro, B. Dorado, C. Espejo, G. Geneste,
L. Genovese, A. Gerossier, M. Giantomassi, Y. Gillet,
D. Hamann, L. He, G. Jomard, J. Laﬂamme Janssen,
S. Le Roux, A. Levitt, A. Lherbier, F. Liu, I. Lukače-
vić, A. Martin, C. Martins, M. Oliveira, S. Poncé,
Y. Pouillon, T. Rangel, G.-M. Rignanese, A. Romero,
B.Rousseau, O.Rubel, A.Shukri, M.Stankovski, M.Tor-
rent, M. Van Setten, B. Van Troeye, M. Verstraete,
D. Waroquiers, J. Wiktor, B. Xu, A. Zhou, and
J. Zwanziger, Comput. Phys. Commun. 205, 106 (2016).
94L. Reining, V. Olevano, F. Sottile, S. Al-
brecht, and G. Onida, “The exc code,” https:
//etsf.polytechnique.fr/software/Ab_Initio/ ,
unpublished.
95A. Gulans, S. Kontur, C. Meisenbichler, D. Nabok,
P. Pavone, S. Rigamonti, S. Sagmeister, U. Werner, and
C. Draxl, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 26,
363202 (2014).
96W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).
97N. Troullier and J. L. Martins, Phys. Rev. B 43, 1993
(1991).
98M. van Setten, M. Giantomassi, E. Bousquet, M. Ver-
straete, D. Hamann, X. Gonze, and G.-M. Rignanese,
Computer Physics Communications 226, 39 (2018).
99J. S. Zhou, L. Reining, A. Nicolaou, A. Bendounan,
K. Ruotsalainen, M. Vanzini, J. J. Kas, J. J. Rehr,
M. Muntwiler, V. N. Strocov, F. Sirotti, and M. Gatti,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117,
28596 (2020).
100K. Sturm, E. Zaremba, and K. Nuroh, Phys. Rev. B 42,
6973 (1990).
101A. A. Quong and A. G. Eguiluz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 3955
(1993).
102J.S.Zhou, M.Gatti, J.J.Kas, J.J.Rehr, andL.Reining,
Phys. Rev. B 97, 035137 (2018).
103A. G. Marinopoulos and M. Grüning, Phys. Rev. B 83,
195129 (2011).
104A. Lorin, M. Gatti, L. Reining, and F. Sottile, Phys. Rev.
B104, 235149 (2021).
105E. E. Newnham and Y. M. Haan, Zeitschrift fur Kristal-
lographie - Crystalline Materials 117, 235 (1962).
106W. C. Mackrodt, M. Rérat, F. S. Gentile, and R. Dovesi,
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 32, 085901 (2019).
107R. Ahuja, J. M. Osorio-Guillen, J. S. de Almeida,
B. Holm, W. Y. Ching, and B. Johansson, Journal of
Physics: Condensed Matter 16, 2891 (2004).
108R. Santos, E. Longhinotti, V. Freire, R. Reimberg, and
E. Caetano, Chemical Physics Letters 637, 172 (2015).
109F. G. Will, H. G. DeLorenzi, and K. H. Janora, Journal
of the American Ceramic Society 75, 295 (1992).
110B. Crist, Handbooks of Monochromatic XPS Spectra: Vol-
ume 2 : Commercially Pure Binary Oxides (XPS Inter-
national LLC, 2004).
111X. Gonze, R. Stumpf, and M. Scheﬄer, Phys. Rev. B 44,
8503 (1991).
112P. Puschnig and C. Ambrosch-Draxl, Phys. Rev. B 66,
165105 (2002).
113T. Rangel, M. D. Ben, D. Varsano, G. Antonius,
F. Bruneval, F. H. da Jornada, M. J. van Setten,
O. K. Orhan, D. D. O’Regan, A. Canning, A. Ferretti,
A.Marini, G.-M.Rignanese, J.Deslippe, S.G.Louie, and
J. B. Neaton, Computer Physics Communications 255,
107242 (2020).
114S.Albrecht, Optical Absorption Spectra of Semiconductorsand Insulators: ab initio calculations of many-body eﬀects ,
Ph.D. thesis, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau (1999).
115P. Puschnig, Excitonic Eﬀects in Organic Semi-
Conductors - An Ab-initio Study within the LAPW
Method, Ph.D. thesis (2002).
116F. Fuchs, C. Rödl, A. Schleife, and F. Bechstedt, Phys.
Rev. B78, 085103 (2008).
117V. Gorelov, L. Reining, W. R. L. Lambrecht, and
M. Gatti, “Robustness of electronic screening eﬀects
in electron spectroscopies: example of v 2o5,” (2022),
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.06285.
118S. Goedecker, Phys. Rev. B 47, 9881 (1993).
119D. Singh, Phys. Rev. B 43, 6388 (1991).
120T. Tomiki, Y. Ganaha, T. Shikenbaru, T. Futemma,
M. Yuri, Y. Aiura, S. Sato, H. Fukutani, H. Kato,
T. Miyahara, A. Yonesu, and J. Tamashiro, Journal of
the Physical Society of Japan 62, 573 (1993).
121R. H. French, H. Müllejans, and D. J. Jones, Journal of
the American Ceramic Society 81, 2549 (1998).
122C. Weigel, G. Calas, L. Cormier, L. Galoisy, and G. S.
Henderson, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 20,
135219 (2008).
123J.A.vanBokhoven, H.Sambe, D.E.Ramaker, andD.C.
Koningsberger,TheJournalofPhysicalChemistryB 103,
7557 (1999).
124T. Mizoguchi, I. Tanaka, S.-P. Gao, and C. J. Pickard,
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 21, 104204 (2009).
125M.vanSchilfgaarde, T.Kotani, andS.Faleev,Phys.Rev.
Lett.96, 226402 (2006).
126W. L. O’Brien, J. Jia, Q.-Y. Dong, T. A. Callcott, J.-E.
Rubensson, D. L. Mueller, and D. L. Ederer, Phys. Rev.
B44, 1013 (1991).
127W. L. O’Brien, J. Jia, Q.-Y. Dong, T. A. Callcott, D. R.
Mueller, D. L. Ederer, and C.-C. Kao, Phys. Rev. B 47,
15482 (1993).
128D. Cabaret, E. Gaudry, M. Taillefumier, P. Sainctavit,
and F. Mauri, Physica Scripta 2005, 131 (2005).
129D. Cabaret and C. Brouder, Journal of Physics: Confer-
ence Series 190, 012003 (2009).
130C. Brouder, D. Cabaret, A. Juhin, and P. Sainctavit,
Phys. Rev. B 81, 115125 (2010).
131D.Manuel, D.Cabaret, C.Brouder, P.Sainctavit, A.Bor-
dage, and N. Trcera, Phys. Rev. B 85, 224108 (2012).
132R. Nemausat, C. Brouder, C. Gervais, and D. Cabaret,
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 712, 012006 (2016).
133S. Delhommaye, G. Radtke, C. Brouder, S. P. Collins,
S. Huotari, C. Sahle, M. Lazzeri, L. Paulatto, and
D. Cabaret, Phys. Rev. B 104, 024302 (2021).
134A. G. Marinopoulos, L. Reining, V. Olevano, A. Rubio,
T. Pichler, X. Liu, M. Knupfer, and J. Fink, Phys. Rev.
Lett.89, 076402 (2002).
135N. Vast, L. Reining, V. Olevano, P. Schattschneider, and
B. Jouﬀrey, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 037601 (2002).
136L.Dash, F.Bruneval, V.Trinité, N.Vast, andL.Reining,
Computational Materials Science 38, 482 (2007), selected
papers from the International Conference on Computa-
tional Methods in Sciences and Engineering 2004.
137S. Huotari, J. A. Soininen, G. Vankó, G. Monaco, and
V. Olevano, Phys. Rev. B 82, 064514 (2010).
138P. Cudazzo, K. O. Ruotsalainen, C. J. Sahle, A. Al-Zein,
H. Berger, E. Navarro-Moratalla, S. Huotari, M. Gatti,
and A. Rubio, Phys. Rev. B 90, 125125 (2014).
139K. Ruotsalainen, A. Nicolaou, C. J. Sahle, A. Eﬁmenko,
J. M. Ablett, J.-P. Rueﬀ, D. Prabhakaran, and M. Gatti,16
Phys. Rev. B 103, 235136 (2021).
140It is well known that local ﬁeld eﬀects, expressed as
electron-hole exchange interaction in the BSE framework,
are essential to get the correct branching ratios between
L2and L 3components, see e.g.74,75,145. However, in the
present case the neglect of spin-orbit coupling does not
allow us to resolve the two components. For -Al2O3
an electron–hole exchange energy of 0.3 eV has been
estimated122,126.
141M. Rohlﬁng and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2312(1998).
142M. Gatti and F. Sottile, Phys. Rev. B 88, 155113 (2013).
143E. L. Shirley, Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and Re-
lated Phenomena 136, 77 (2004), progress in Core-Level
Spectroscopy of Condensed Systems.
144P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994).
145A. L. Ankudinov, Y. Takimoto, and J. J. Rehr, Phys.
Rev. B71, 165110 (2005).