CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
ELIJAH FOXA, MALLESH M. PAIB,C, AND MAX RESNICKD
ABSTRACT : Modern blockchains guarantee that submitted transactions will be in-
cluded eventually; a property formally known as liveness. But financial activity
requires transactions to be included in a timely manner. Unfortunately, classical
liveness is not strong enough to guarantee this, particularly in the presence of a
motivated adversary who benefits from censoring transactions. We define censor-
ship resistance as the amount it would cost the adversary to censor a transaction for
a fixed interval of time as a function of the associated tip. This definition has two
advantages, first it captures the fact that transactions with a higher miner tip can be
more costly to censor, and therefore are more likely to swiftly make their way onto
the chain. Second, it applies to a finite time window, so it can be used to assess
whether a blockchain is capable of hosting financial activity that relies on timely
inclusion.
We apply this definition in the context of auctions. Auctions are a building block
for many financial applications, and censoring competing bids offers an easy-to-
model motivation for our adversary. Traditional proof-of-stake blockchains have
poor enough censorship resistance that it is difficult to retain the integrity of an
auction when bids can only be submitted in a single block. As the number of bid-
ders nin a single block auction increases, the probability that the winner is not
the adversary, and the economic efficiency of the auction, both decrease faster than
1/n. Running the auction over multiple blocks, each with a different proposer, al-
leviates the problem only if the number of blocks grows faster than the number of
bidders. We argue that blockchains with more than one concurrent proposer have
can have strong censorship resistance. We achieve this by setting up a prisoner’s
dilemma among the proposers using conditional tips.
KEYWORDS : Censorship Resistance, Auctions, Blockchain, MEV
ADUALITY LABS ELIJAH @DUALITY .XYZ
BDEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS , RICEUNIVERSITY MALLESH .PAI@RICE .EDU
CSPECIAL MECHANISMS GROUP MALLESH .PAI@SPECIALMECHANISMS .ORG
DSPECIAL MECHANISMS GROUP MAX @SPECIALMECHANISMS .ORG
JUNE 27, 2023
Pai gratefully acknowledges support from the NSF (CCF-1763349).arXiv:2301.13321v2  [econ.TH]  26 Jun 2023CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
1. I NTRODUCTION
Blockchain consensus algorithms typically guarantee liveness , meaning valid transac-
tions will be included on chain eventually. But financial applications, are time sensitive.
For these to function as intended, valid transactions must be included on the blockchain
in a timely manner. This requires something stronger than liveness: censorship resistance .
To quote Buterin (2015), censorship resistance is “ensuring that transactions that people
want to put into the blockchain will actually get in in a timely fashion, even if “the powers
that be”, at least on that particular blockchain, would prefer otherwise.”
In this paper, we propose a formal definition that quantifies censorship resistance in
the sense of Buterin (2015) above. We abstract away from the details of the chain and
view it as a public bulletin board with two operations: a read operation, which always
succeeds, and a write operation. The write operation succeeds when the transaction with
an associated tip is added to the bulletin board and fails otherwise. We then define the
censorship resistance of this public bulletin board as the amount it would cost a motivated
adversary to cause a write operation to fail, as a function of the associated tip.
This definition has two advantages that are useful in applications. The first stems from
the fact that we define censorship resistance as a function of the underlying tip: this cap-
tures how transactions with a higher tip can be more expensive to censor, and therefore
are more likely to successfully make it on chain. The second is that by capturing the cen-
sorship resistance of a specific public bulletin board, with an associated length of time
for a transaction to be added/ considered censored, we can capture the trade-off between
censorship resistance an speed for specific blockchain designs.
Having presented this definition, we apply it to tackle whether a given public bulletin
board is sufficiently censorship resistant to host a given mechanism. This is tricky because
it depends on both the tips of the underlying transaction(s) and the motivation of the
adversary, both of which are potentially endogenously determined by the mechanism.
This paper considers whether existing proof of stake blockchains are sufficiently cen-
sorship resistant to host time sensitive auctions. We consider auctions for two reasons.
First, the cost of being censored and the benefits of censoring competing bids are easy to
quantify in an auction. Therefore, for a given public bulletin board with fixed censorship
resistance, we can determine whether the auction will actually function as intended. Sec-
ond, auctions are already a popular mechanism on-chain: for example, Maker DAO, the
entity behind popular stablecoin DAI, uses Dutch clock auctions to sell the right to liqui-
date collateral for distressed loans, and additionally digital goods such as NFTs may also
be auctioned off on-chain. Also, several important future developments will require auc-
tions on-chain, from the very organization of Ethereum (Monnot (2022)), to proposals by
other large organizations to move current off-chain auctions on-chain (Flashbots (2022)).
1FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
Formally, we consider a seller of a single unit of an indivisible good who runs a second-
price auction on-chain. The seller encodes the rules of the second-price auction in a smart
contract. The contract selects the bidder who submitted the highest bid over a predefined
period and sets the payment to the second-highest bid. But since all of this takes place on
a blockchain, before a bid can be submitted to the auction, it must be included in a trans-
action on-chain. Valid transactions are submitted to a mempool . Each slot, the proposer
gathers transactions from the mempool into a block that will eventually be added to the
chain. Proposers have complete autonomy over which transactions to include.
The power of the proposer to determine the contents of the block and, therefore, the
outcome of the auction sets up a competition for inclusion. Bidders include tips for the
proposer along with their bids. The proposer receives these tips if and only if the cor-
responding transactions are included in his block. We suppose that there is a single col-
luding bidder who may offer a bribe to the proposer in exchange for omitting certain
transactions. In distributed systems terminology, this single colluding bidder who may
bribe the proposer if they believe it profitable for them to do so is our threat model .
We show that in the auction setting, tips for inclusion are a public good since they
provide security to other transactions and only benefit the bidder who pays the tip if
they win the auction. In contrast, bribes for omission are purely for private benefit and
make other bidders worse off in equilibrium. Consequently, our results suggest that the
colluding bidder is highly advantaged in this game. In particular, we show that as the
number of honest bidders increases, the colluding bidder wins the auction increasingly
often and collects an increasingly large share of the surplus created by the auction.
Notably, we assume that bids are sealed, that is, that the colluding bidder must choose
which transactions to try and omit based solely on the associated tip. We show that the
colluding bidder can back out the private bids (and therefore whether it is profitable to
attempt to censor these bids) based on these public tips. This suggests that cryptographic
approaches (e.g. commit-reveal schemes) are not a silver bullet for resolving censorship
concerns in such settings.
We then consider two alternate designs that improve censorship resistance. The first
is to run the auction over multiple slots with a different proposer for each. We find that
this achieves sufficient censorship resistance only if the number of blocks grows faster
than the number of bidders. This is undesirable for reasons external to our model; for
example, executing the auction in a short window is important for financial applications.
MEV auctions in particular are concerned about speed, since they need to clear at least
once every slot – once every 12 seconds on Ethereum.
The second is to have blockchains with multiple concurrent block proposers, k>1,
and allow bidder tips to be conditioned not only on inclusion, but also on the number
of proposers who include the bid within a slot. This allows bidders to set up a sort of
2CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
“prisoner’s dilemma” among the proposers by offering to pay a large tip Twhen only one
proposer includes, and a small tip t≪Tif multiple proposers include. Each proposer is
incentivized to include since if they are alone in including the transaction, there is a high
tip attached. Therefore, all proposers include the bid in equilibrium. However, censoring
is expensive, since censoring requires that each proposer be bribed Tfor a total cost of kT.
This leads to a low expected tip of ktbut an asymmetrically expensive censorship cost of
kT≫kt. This asymmetry allows for a pooling equilibrium in which the probability of
censorship is 0, the tips no longer reveal the bids, and the expected total tips are low.
2. R ELATED LITERATURE
Censorship resistance, for various definitions of the term, is a key desideratum moti-
vating the adoption of blockchains. This property was mentioned in some of the earliest
writings on the subject, e.g., Buterin (2015). More recently, this property has come under
additional scrutiny due to two major developments. The first, Proposer Builder Separa-
tion (PBS) in Ethereum, explicitly establishes an auction for the right to build the next
block. Block builders who win this auction decide which transactions make it onto the
chain and, more importantly for our purpose, which transactions do not. PBS therefore
enables a motivated adversary to censor specific transaction(s) by purchasing the right to
build the next block and intentionally omitting those transactions (Buterin (2021)). The
second relates to US OFAC sanctions on certain Ethereum addresses, and the subsequent
decision by certain block builders to exclude transactions including those addresses from
blocks that they build. Effects of this (and a related definition of censorship resistance)
are studied in Wahrstätter et al. (2023).
The literature on auctions, even restricting to papers that explicitly think about auctions
in the context of blockchains, is much larger. In such auctions, bids are rarely announced
simultaneously, and maintaining the seal on bids transmitted through public channels
requires cryptography. For example, a simple cryptographic second-price sealed-bid auc-
tion involves bidders submitting the hash of their bids rather than the bids themselves
and then revealing the hash after all bids have been submitted. Ferreira and Weinberg
(2020) showed that, using a cryptographically secure commitment scheme, it is possible
to design an auction that is optimal, strategy proof and credible (in the sense of Akbar-
pour and Li (2018, 2020)). More complicated cryptographic approaches can eliminate the
need to reveal any information beyond the results of the auction and can also accom-
modate combinatorial auctions (Lee et al. (2001); Elkind and Lipmaa (2004); Suzuki and
Yokoo (2003)).
Auctions are commonly cited as use cases for the verifiable computation that smart
contracts provide. This was originally envisaged in Szabo (1997), who noted that “. . . a
blockchain with a built-in fully fledged Turing-complete programming language that can
3FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
be used to create “contracts” . . . simply by writing up the logic in a few lines of code”,
see also Galal and Youssef (2019); Blass and Kerschbaum (2018). Auctions have also been
suggested as a desirable mechanism to decide the order and inclusion of transactions to
mitigate MEV (Kulkarni et al. (2022)). Historically, these were decided by a combination
of auction and speed-based mechanisms, leading Daian et al. (2020) to compare MEV with
high-frequency trading as described in Budish et al. (2015). Initially, inclusion and prior-
ity within the block were decided by priority gas auctions (PGAs), since most validators
gathered transactions directly from the mempool and ordered them according to their
miner tips, breaking ties using a first come first serve rule (Daian et al. (2020)). But re-
cently, a super-majority of validators have switched their execution clients to MEV-boost
compatible versions, meaning the right to decide inclusion and ordering for most blocks
is sold to the highest bidder. These bidders are typically established builders who spe-
cialize in extracting the maximum value from each block. The leading advocate for this
approach has been Flashbots, the company behind the initial open source MEV client.
Their next product SUAVE, aims to move these auctions on-chain Flashbots (2022).
Previous MEV mitigation research has focused on fairness rather than censorship (Kelkar
et al. (2020, 2021)). But Ferreira and Parkes (2022) showed that for every sequencing rule
of trades through a liquidity pool, there exists a way for the proposer to obtain non-zero
risk-free profits suggesting that ordering based MEV is inevitable with current on chain
financial application design. In response to this, researchers have suggested that frequent
batch auctions or other order-agnostic mechanisms might alleviate the MEV that arises
from transaction ordering power (Johnson et al. (2022)).
On-chain auctions have also been studied as a mechanism for the sale of non-fungible
tokens (NFTs) Milionis et al. (2022). Gradual dutch auctions (GDAs) Frankie et al. (2022),
are a dynamic mechanism for selling multiple NFTs. Kulkarni et al. (2023) explores the
credibility of GDAs and finds that an auctioneer can bid to artificially raise the sale price
and create the appearance of demand.
3. F ORMALIZING CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE
As we described above, we abstract away from the details of the blockchain and instead
consider solely the functionality as a public bulletin board. For instance, for our leading
application of the auction , the public bulletin board can be written to, which is how bids
may be submitted, and can be read from, which is how the auction can then be executed.
For simplicity, we assume that once a message has been successfully written to , it can be
read without friction. For example, any transaction included in an Ethereum block can be
read by any full node.
4CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
DEFINITION 1(Public Bulletin Board) .A Public Bulletin Board has two publicly callable func-
tions:
(1)write (m,t)takes as input a message m and an inclusion tip t and returns 1if the message
is successfully written to the bulletin board and 0otherwise.
(2)read()returns a list of all messages that have been written to the bulletin board over the
period.
Some subtlety must be observed in the definition of a public bulletin board. First, the
write function takes as input not only a message mbut also a tip t. Here our definition
departs from Choudhuri et al. (2017). This models proposer tips and other forms of val-
idator bribes. To motivate this, consider that the write function on Ethereum is unlikely to
succeed without a sufficient tip, and so the behavior of write is very different depending
on the size of the associated tip.
Example 1 (Single Block) .In the case of a single block, the write (m,t)operation consists
of submitting a transaction mwith associated tip t. write (m,t)succeeds if the transaction
is included in that block on the canonical chain.
Example 2 (Multiple Blocks) .In the case of kblocks with rotating proposers, the writeop (m,t)
operation consists of submitting a transaction mwith associated tip tduring the period
before the first block is formed. write (m,t)succeeds if the transaction is included in any
of the kblocks.
We can now model the relationship between the tip tand the success of the write op-
eration as a function. This function provides a flexible definition of the bulletin board’s
censorship resistance.
DEFINITION 2(Censorship Resistance of a Public Bulletin Board) .The censorship resistance
of a public bulletin board Dis a mapping φ:R+→R+that takes as input the tip t correspond-
ing to the tip in the write operation write (·,t)and outputs the minimum cost that a motivated
adversary would have to pay to make the write fail.
This definition allows us to compare the censorship resistance of two bulletin boards
even when the inner machinations of those mechanisms are profoundly different. This
definition also easily extends to cases where tips are multi-dimensional. i.e. t∈Rn+by
substituting φ:R+→R+toφ:Rn+→R+.
Example 1 (continued) .The cost to censor this transaction would simply be tin the un-
congested case because the motivated adversary has to compensate the proposer at least
as much as the proposer would be losing from the tip. So:
φ(t) =t (1)
5FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
Example 2 (continued) .In the case of kblocks with rotating proposers, the write (m,t)
operation consists of submitting a transaction mwith associated tip tduring the period
before the first block is formed. write (m,t)succeeds if the transaction is included in any of
thekblocks. The cost to censor this transaction would be ktsince each of the kproposers
must be bribed at least tto compensate them for the forgone tip on the transaction that
they each had the opportunity to include. So:
φ(t) =kt. (2)
4. M ODELLING THE AUCTION
We are now in a position to use our definitions to understand the censorship resistance
of a sealed-bid auction, for various design parameters.
We consider a traditional independent private values setting. There is a single seller
with a single unit of an indivisible good for sale. There are n+1 buyers for the good,
n≥1— we denote the set of bidders by N={0, 1, . . . , n}. Each of these buyers i∈N
has a private value for the good, vi. We suppose buyer 0’s value v0is drawn from a
distribution with CDF F0and density f, and the other buyers’ values are are drawn i.i.d.
from a distribution with CDF Fand density f. Both distributions have bounded support,
we normalize these to be equal to the unit interval [0, 1]. Several of our results will be
for the special case F=F0=U[0, 1]. Bidders know their own vi; and n,F, and F0are
common knowledge among all bidders and the seller.
The seller wants to conduct a sealed bid second-price auction with reserve price r. As
described in this introduction, the point of departure of our model is that this auction runs
on a blockchain. Initially, we consider an auction that accepts bids in a single designated
block. Below, we formally define this game and our solution concept.
In an idealized world with honest/ non-strategic proposers, the auction would run as
follows:
(1) The seller announces the auction.
(2) All buyers privately commit their bids to the auction as transactions.
(3) Proposer(s) include these transactions on relevant block(s).1
(4) The second-price auction is computed based on the included bids, i.e., the highest
bid is selected to win if this bid ≥r, in this case paying a price of max {r, other bids }.
In particular, we assume that the idealized sealed-bid nature of off-chain auctions can
be achieved on-chain via cryptographic methods2. We also assume that the set of bids
submitted for the auction is public (the bid itself may be private, but the fact that it exists
as a bid is public).
1We abstract away from issues such as block size constraints/ congestion.
2This can be practically achieved by submitting the hash of the bid and revealing it later.
6CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
Our main concern is that bids submitted for this auction may be censored, that is, omit-
ted from a block. More specifically, we suppose that after all other bids are submitted, but
before they are revealed, a designated bidder, bidder 0, can pay the proposer of the block
tocensor bids. These censored bids are then excluded from the block and have no impact
on the auction. We assume that the proposer is purely profit focused and that bidder’s
utilities are quasilinear.
Formally, we consider the following game:
(1) The seller announces second-price sealed-bid auction with reserve price rto be
conducted over a single block.
(2) Buyers learn their values vi←F.
(3) Buyers 1, . . . , neach simultaneously submit a private bid biand a public tip ti.
(4) Buyer 0 observes all the other tips tiand can offer the proposer of the block a take-
it-or-leave-it-offer of a subset S⊆ {1, . . . , n}of bidders and a bribe pto exclude
that subset’s bids. Bidder 0 also submits his own bid b0.
(5) The proposer accepts or rejects bidder 0’s bribe and constructs the block accord-
ingly, either including N\Sif he accepts or Notherwise.
(6) The auction is computed based on the bids included in the block.
In the next section, we consider the case of auctions over multiple sequential blocks with
independent proposers and the case of simultaneous proposers. Those games are variants
of the game above. We describe them in-line.
Formally, pure strategies in this game are:
•For players i∈ {1, . . . , n}: A tuple of bidding and tipping strategies βi:[0, 1]→
ℜ+,τi:[0, 1]→ ℜ +for players i∈ {1, . . . n}, that is, player iwith value vibids
βi(vi)and tips τi(vi).
•For player 0: an offer to the proposer θ0:ℜn+×[0, 1]→2N× ℜ +, and a bid
function β0:ℜn+×[0, 1]→ ℜ +, i.e. as a function of tips t= (τ1(v1), . . . , τn(vn))
and his own value v0, an offer θ0(t,v0)and a bid β0(t,v0).
•For the proposer, given the tips tand an offer from player 0, θ0(t,v0), a choice of
which bids to include.
Since our game is an extensive-form game of incomplete information, our solution con-
cept is the Perfect Bayes-Nash Equilibrium (PBE). This requires strategies to be mutual
best-responses, as is standard in most equilibria. Additionally, for each player, it requires
the player to have beliefs about unknowns at every information set (on-, and off-, path) at
which they are called upon to play such that their strategy maximizes their expected util-
ity given the beliefs and others’ strategies. Beliefs are correct on path (i.e., derived from
the prior, and Bayesian updating given agents’ strategies), and unrestricted off path.
7FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
Note that the proposer has multiple potential indifferences: e.g., should they include a
bid with 0 tip? Should they censor a set of bids if bidder 0’s offered bribe exactly equals
the total tip from that set? We assume that given tips tfrom bidders {1, . . . , n}and an
offer from bidder 0 to censor subset Sfor a bribe of p, the proposer includes the bids of
N−Sif and only if p≥∑i∈Sti, and includes bids from all Notherwise (i.e., we break
proposer indifferences in favor of bidder 0 so that best responses are well defined).
There are multiple PBEs of the game, driven in part by the fact that there are multiple
equilibria in a second price auction (for instance, there is an equilibrium in the second
price auction for one player to bid a high value and all others to bid 0). However, most of
these equilibria are in weakly dominated strategies. We therefore focus on the following
class of equilibria:
(1) Bidders {1, . . . n}submit a truthful bid, i.e. βi(vi) = vi. Note that this is a weakly
dominant strategy for them. In addition, these bidders use a symmetric tipping
function τ, that is, τi(·) =τ(·).
(2) Bidder 0 bids equal to his value if he believes, given the tips of {1, . . . n}, that there
is a nonzero probability that he could win the auction, otherwise he bids 0 or does
not bid.
In what follows, we simply refer to a PBE that satisfies this refinement as an equilibrium
of the game (with no qualifier). We reiterate that there are multiple PBEs of the original
game; we are simply restricting attention to these “reasonable” equilibria for tractability.
5. R ESULTS
Our results are easiest for the case that n = 1, that is, there are two bidders. We present
this as an illustration before considering the general case.
5.1. Two Bidder Case
Suppose there are only two bidders, one “honest” bidder 1 with value drawn according
to distribution F, and one “colluding” bidder who has the opportunity to collude with the
proposer, bidder 0, with value drawn independently from distribution F0. We assume that
F0satisfies a regularity condition, that is, that F0(t)/f0(t)is non-decreasing in t.
The equilibrium in this case is easy to describe:
PROPOSITION 1.The following constitutes an equilibrium of the game with 2 bidders, i.e. N =
{0, 1}, when the seller announces a second-price auction with a reserve price r =0:
•Bidder 1 submits a truthful bid, and his tipping strategy as function of his value v 1is given
by t 1(v1)solves (v1−t)−F0(t)
f0(t)=0.
8CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
•Bidder 0’s strategy as function of the observed tip t 1and his value v 0is given by
σ0(t1,v0) =

bribe t 1≤v0,
don’t bribe t 1>v0.
where bribe is shorthand for paying t 1to the proposer in exchange for omitting bidder 1’s
transaction. Further bidder 0submits a nonzero bid in the auction if and only if he bribes
the proposer.
•The proposer accepts bidder 0’s bribe whenever it is offered and omits bidder 1’s bid, other-
wise the proposer includes both bids.
Before providing a proof of this result, the following corollary summarizes the outcome
that results in this equilibrium when F=F0=Uniform [0, 1]. For comparison, recall that
in the (standard) second price auction when both buyers have values drawn i.i.d. from
Uniform [0, 1], the expected revenue is 1/3 and each bidder has an ex ante expected surplus
of 1/6.
COROLLARY 1.Bidder 0wins the object with probability3
4, and has an expected surplus of13
48,
while bidder 1wins the auction with probability1
4and has an expected surplus of1
12. Revenue for
the seller in this auction is 0, and the expected tip revenue for the proposer is1
4.
In short, the proposer collects all the revenue from this auction, while the seller collects
none. Bidder 0 is substantially advantaged by his ability to see bidder 1’s tip and then
decide whether to bribe the proposer or not (wins the auction with higher probability,
collects more of the surplus). Our results for n>1 are similarly stark except for the fact
that the auctioneer collects some positive revenue when n>1, although this revenue
rapidly decreases as nincreases.
PROOF .The proof of the proposition is straightforward so we describe it briefly in line.
First to see that bidder 1 should bid his value (our refinement restricts attention to these)
note that bidder 1 has two actions, he privately submits a bid b1and publicly submits
a tip t. Since bids only matter after inclusion has been decided, which is also after tips
have been paid, tips are a sunk cost and what remains is simply a second price auction,
in which truthful bidding is a weakly dominant strategy. Therefore it is (part of) an equi-
librium for bidder 1 to bid his value.
Notice that bidder 1 does not benefit from submitting a tip t>v1since even if he wins,
he will end up paying more in tips (in addition to possible fees from the auction) than
he values the item. Knowing this, it is always weakly better for player 0 to pay tto omit
player 1’s bid when v0≥t. Thus player 0 bribes the proposer if and only if v0≥t. In that
9FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
case player 1’s expected utility as a function of his tip is:
E[U1(v1,t)] = F0(t)(v1−t).
Taking the derivative with respect to t, and setting it equal to 0, we get, as desired, that
t1(v1)solves (v1−t)−F0(t)
f0(t)=0.
Now that we have found a candidate equilibrium, we have some more work to do to
verify that it is in fact a PBE. Formally, bidder 1’s beliefs at his only information set are
that v0∼Uniform [0, 1]. By our regularity condition, t1(·)is strictly increasing. Bidder 0’s
beliefs, conditional on bidder 1’s tip being t1are given by
v1=

t−1
1(t1)t1≤t1(1),
1 otherwise.
Notice that the case of t1>t1(1)is off the equilibrium path. Finally note that Bidder 0’s
strategy to bribe whenever his value exceeds bidder 1’s tip, and to bid only if he is willing
to bribe, constitutes a best response. This concludes the proof. ■
Notice that even though bids are completely private in this model, because of the trans-
action inclusion micro-structure, bids are effectively revealed by the tips attached to them.
This calls into question whether we can conduct sealed bid auctions of any type on chain.
We can also describe the equilibrium for the case where the seller chooses an auction
with a reserve price r>0. For brevity we describe this informally:
t1(v1)solves (v1−r−t)f0(r+t)−F0(r+t) =0 if solution exists,
t1(v1) =0 otherwise.
Our regularity condition implies that there exists v=r+F0(r)
f0(r)>rsuch that t1(v1) = 0
forv≤vand strictly increasing for v>v. Bidder 0’s strategy is to bribe and submit a bid
only if his value v0>t1+rwhere t1is the observed tip.
PROPOSITION 2.The following constitutes an equilibrium of the game with 2 bidders, i.e., N =
{0, 1}, when the seller announces a second-price auction with a reserve price r >0:
•Bidder 1 submits a truthful bid, and his tipping strategy as function of his value v 1is given
by t 1(v1) =v1/2−r whenever v 1>2r and 0otherwise.
•Bidder 0’s strategy as function of the observed tip t 1and his value v 0is given by
σ0(t1,v0) =

bribe t 1+r≤v0
don’t bribe o.w.
10CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
0 25 50 75 100
Number of Honest Bidders0.00.20.40.6Expected Total Tip
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0000.0250.0500.0750.1000.125
FIGURE 1. Expected Total Tips and Tipping functions for F=F0∼
Uniform [0, 1]
where bribe is shorthand for paying t 1to the proposer in exchange for omitting bidder 1’s
transaction. Further bidder 0submits a non-zero bid in the auction if and only if he bribes
the proposer.
•The proposer accepts bidder 0’s bribe whenever it is offered and omits bidder 1’s bid, other-
wise the proposer includes both bids.
Note that while the seller does receive positive revenue in this case, they do not realize
any “benefit” from running an auction relative to posting a “buy it now” price of r. We
formalize this in the following corollary:
COROLLARY 2.Suppose buyer values are i.i.d. Uniform [0, 1]. Assuming r ≤1
2, Bidder 0wins
the object with ex-ante probability (1−r)(1−(1
2−r)2), while bidder 1wins the object with
ex-ante probability (1−2r)(r
2+1
4). The expected revenue of the seller is r (1−r2), which is the
same as the revenue for posting a “buy it now” price of r. The proposer makes an expected revenue
of1
4(1−2r)2.
Again bidder 0 has a strong advantage in this auction. Tips are no longer perfectly
revealing, since a non-empty interval of bidder values tip 0, but remain weakly monotone
in bid and perfectly revealing when strictly positive.
5.2. Three or more bidders
We now turn to the case where n≥2, i.e., N={0, 1, . . . , n}.
At first the problem of finding an equilibrium may appear intractable since bidder 0’s
best-response problem is itself complicated: there are 2npossible subsets of {1, . . . , n}
and the problem of finding the best subset to buy out is therefore non-trivial. The tipping
function of bidders {1, . . . , n}needs to be a best response to this (accounting for how
changing their tip changes the probability that they are censored given a distribution of
other tips). Nevertheless, there is an easy to describe equilibrium. To construct it, the
following lemma is useful:
11FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
LEMMA 1.Suppose that the tipping strategy of buyers 1 . . . n is such that t (v)≤v/n. Then we
have that the best response for bidder 0, as a function of his own value v 0and observed vector of
tipst= (t1. . .tn)can be described as:
σ0(v0,t1, . . . , tn) =

bribe , ∑n
i=1ti≤v0
don’t bribe ,∑n
i=1ti>v0
where bribe is shorthand for paying the proposer ∑itiin exchange for omitting all of bidder 1
through n’s transactions.
PROOF .To see this note that:
n
∑
i=1t(θi)≤n
∑
i=1θi
n≤n
∑
i=1max(θ1,θ2, . . . , θn)
n=max(θ1,θ2, . . . , θn).
and therefore bribing the proposer and buying out all the bids (and therefore winning the
object for free in the auction) is more profitable than buying out any subset of the bids and
possibly losing the auction or having to pay more than the bribes for that subset would
have cost. ■
This lemma is useful because, in equilibrium, the tipping strategy of bidders 1 through
nwill satisfy this property. Bidder 0’s strategy is therefore straightforward (analogous to
the case N={0, 1}). We are now in a position to describe the equilibrium in this game.
PROPOSITION 3.The following constitutes an equilibrium of the game with n +1bidders,
N={0, 1, . . . , n}, and buyer values drawn i.i.d. from Uniform [0, 1]when the seller announces a
second-price auction with a reserve price r =0:
•Bidders 1 through n submit truthful bids, and their tipping strategy as function of their
value v iis given by:
t(v) =

0 v<v,
1
2n(vn−vn)o.w.(3)
where v solves
(n+1)vn
n(n−1)−vn+1
(n+1)−1
n(n+1)=0. (4)
•Bidder 0’s strategy as function of the observed tips t 1, . . . , tnand their value v 0is given by
σ0(v0,t1, . . . , tn) =

bribe , ∑n
i=1ti≤v0
don’t bribe ,∑n
i=1ti>v0
12CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
where bribe is shorthand for paying ∑itito the proposer in exchange for omitting bidder 1
through n’s transactions. Further bidder 0submits a truthful nonzero bid in the auction if
and only if he bribes the proposer.
•The proposer accepts bidder 0’s bribe whenever it is offered and omits the other bids, other-
wise the proposer includes all bids.
It is easy to see that (4) has exactly 1 root in [0, 1]by observing that the left hand side
is increasing in von[0, 1], and evaluates to a negative number at v=0 and a positive
number for θ=1. Unfortunately, we cannot analytically derive these roots for arbitrary
nsince polynomials of order ≥5 do not have explicit roots (and even for n=2, 3 these
are not particularly nice); however, we can use a zero finding algorithm to compute these
numerically. The results for the uniform case are presented in Figure 1.
Analytically, we can bound how this root varies with n. Note that the expected total tip
isnE[t(v)]and substituting in (3) and simplifying via (4), we have that the expected total
tip=vn
n−1. The following proposition describes the asymptotic behavior of the expected
total tip:
PROPOSITION 4.Let v(n)describe the solution to (4)as a function of n. There exists n large
enough such that for n >n, we have1
n≤v(n)n≤1√n.
Proposition 4 is particularly useful when you consider the fact that for large n, by the
law of large numbers, the total tip concentrates around the expected tip with high prob-
ability (buyer values are i.i.d. bounded random variables). Furthermore, by Proposition
4, this is decreasing at a rate at least 1/ n√n: asngrows, and individual bidders are will-
ing to tip less. To see why tipping is only profitable when it leads to the bid not being
censored andwinning the auction, but increasing the tip increases the probability that all
bids are not censored. In short, tips have public goods type properties. Indeed, the rate
of tipping shrinks fast enough so that the total tip is also decreasing. Therefore bidder
0 wins the auction with increasing probability in n, asymptotically tending to 1. Note
that the seller only receives revenue when there is more than one bidder in the auction
(or more generally, in the auction with a reserve price r, makes revenue larger than the
reserve price)— and this happens with vanishing probability as ngrows large.
PROPOSITION 5.As n grows large, the expected revenue of the auction with reserve price r
reduces asymptotically to the expected revenue of a published price of r.
5.3. General Distributions
It is straightforward to generalize our results to the case where bidders {1, . . . , n}are
distributed according to some general distribution with density fand CDF Fon[0, 1].
13FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.00.51.01.52.02.5Beta Distribution PDFs
0 20 40 60 80 100
Number of Bidders0.000.050.100.15Expected Total Tip
FIGURE 2. Expected Total Tips for F0∼Uniform [0, 1],F∼Beta(α,β)
ASSUMPTION 1.We assume throughout that F satisfiesRv
0Fn−1(θ)dθ≤v
nfor all v ∈[0, 1].
Formally, we have the following proposition:
PROPOSITION 6.The following constitutes an equilibrium of the game with n +1bidders, i.e.
N={0, 1, . . . , n}, when the seller announces a second-price auction with a reserve price r =0,
bidder 0has a value Uniform [0, 1]and bidders 1through n have values distributed i.i.d. according
to a distribution with density f and CDF F satisfying Assumption 1:
•Bidders 1 through n submit truthful bids, and their tipping strategy as function of their
value v iis given by:
t(v) =

0 v<v,
1
2Rv
vFn−1(θ)dθo.w.(5)
where v solves
Z1
0Fn−1(θ)dθ−Z1
vFn(θ)dθ=n+1
n−1Zv
0Fn−1(θ)dθ. (6)
•Bidder 0’s strategy as function of the observed tips t 1, . . . , tnand their value v 0is given by
σ0(v0,t1, . . . , tn) =

bribe , ∑n
i=1ti≤v0
don’t bribe ,∑n
i=1ti>v0
where bribe is shorthand for paying ∑itito the proposer in exchange for omitting bidder
1 through n’s transactions. Further bidder 0submits a true nonzero bid in the auction if
and only if he bribes the proposer.
•The proposer accepts bidder 0’s bribe whenever it is offered and omits the other bids, other-
wise the proposer includes all bids.
14CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
This proposition allows us to numerically solve for tipping behavior in this auction.
Using the flexible Beta distribution for a range of parameters, we compute nE[t]as a
function of nin Figure 2.
Analytical results for the case where bidder 0’s value is distributed non-uniformly ap-
pear out of reach. To see why—for bidders 1 through n, part of the payoff of increasing
their tip is increasing the probability that bidder 0 chooses not to buy them out. When
bidder 0’s value is distributed uniformly, the increase in probability is constant and inde-
pendent of others’ tips (which from the perspective of the bidder is a random variable).
This simplifies the optimality condition and makes it analytically tractable. Nevertheless,
the intuition above suggests that our qualitative results (seller expected revenue drops
to close to the posted price, tips do not offer much “protection” due to the public goods
nature of tips suggests, bidder 0 has a strong advantage in the auction) carry over to this
case as well.
6. R ESTORING CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE
We now discuss possible design choices to provide additional censorship resistance, so
that an auction can be run on chain with the desired results.
6.1. Auction over Multiple Blocks
We now investigate whether running the auction over multiple blocks restores the de-
sired behavior. Formally, recall that using multiple blocks as the underlying public bul-
letin board had a higher censorship resistance (Example 2) than in the case of a single
block (Example 1).
Formally we consider the following dynamic game corresponding to an auction being
run over mblocks. We assume that each of these blocks is produced by an independent
proposer.3
(1) Period 0: Bidders learn their values vi. Bidders 1, . . . , neach submit simultane-
ously a private bid biand a public tip ti.
(2) Period jforjin 1 to k: Bidder 0 observes which bids from 1, . . . nhave not been
included in a block in periods 1 to j−1. They offer Proposer ja take-it-or-leave-it-
offer of a subset Sjof the unincluded bids and a payment pjto exclude that subset.
The proposer jobserves the tips and the offer from Bidder 0 and decides which
bids if any to include.
(3) Period m+1: The seller’s auction is run on blocks produced in periods 1 to m.
3In practice, an majority of blocks on major blockchains is produced by one of a small oligopoly of pro-
posers. We discuss the implications of this in the sequel.
15FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
If a transaction is included in period j, it is removed from the set of bids in the mempool,
its tip is attributed to proposer jwhere jis the block it was included in, it is included in
the auction, and it cannot be included in subsequent blocks.
Note that the game we describe is a natural extension of the previous game to the case
of an auction over m>1 blocks. In particular, it reduces to the original game for the case
ofm=1. We consider the same refinement as before, which applies to this game in a
similar fashion.
Note that there are two possible sources of additional security in this auction. The first
is mechanical: in order to censor a transaction, intuitively, bidder 0 has to bribe mpro-
posers, which is more expensive for a given tip. The second is that the marginal returns
to a tip have increased (increasing a tip by qincreases the cost to censor for bidder 0 by
mq, and decreases the probability they can afford it correspondingly).
In our results, we show that the latter effect is null. In particular, we show that for
m<n, the tipping behavior of bidders 1, . . . nstays unaffected.
Formally, we have the following result:
PROPOSITION 7.Suppose buyers 1to n have values drawn i.i.d. U [0, 1]and buyer 0has value
drawn i.i.d. U [0,κ]forκ>m. The following constitutes an equilibrium of the game with n +1
bidders, i.e. N ={0, 1, . . . , n}, when the seller announces a second-price auction with a reserve
price r =0to be run over m blocks for m <n: Bidders 1 through n and the proposers have the
same strategy as in Proposition 3.
Bidder 0’s strategy as function of the observed tips t 1, . . . , tnand his value v 0is given by
σ0(v0,t1, . . . , tn) =

bribe , m∑n
i=1ti≤v0,
don’t bribe ,otherwise,
Before we proceed, we comment on the assumption that bidder 0’s value is distributed
U[0,κ]. Suppose bidder 0 is distributed U[0, 1], but bidders 1 to ntip as in Proposition 3.
Note that with positive probability the total tip could exceed 1 when m>1. Therefore,
given bidders 2 to nfollow the tipping strategy of Proposition 3, bidder 1 will have incen-
tives to shade their tip relative to t(·). After all, the marginal value of a tips depends on
the how they increase the probability of not being censored. From the Proof of 3, in the
case of m=1, increasing one’s tip on the margin always increases the probability that the
bids are not censored, because the total tip is strictly smaller than 1 with probability 1 on
path. Intuitively, therefore if bidder 0 is distributed U[0, 1], and the auction is conducted
over m>1 blocks, the equilibrium tipping strategy for bidders 1 to nis weakly lower
than the corresponding tipping strategy for m=1 (Proposition 3). This can be shown
numerically, but is out of reach analytically.
16CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
Note that we had already shown that expected total tip of nbidders was smaller than
1/n3/2. Therefore, the probability that bidder 0 does not censor the remaining bids col-
lapses to 0 as ngrows large, as long as mgrows sublinearly with n. To see that we had
already shown that expected total tip of nbidders was smaller than 1/ n3/2. Therefore m
times this for m<nstill grows smaller than 1/√n.
Put differently, guaranteeing the auction outcome is “as desired” requires m>n. This
comes with its own costs: for example, the auction would have to remain open for a
relatively long time which may be undesirable, particularly for financial applications.
6.2. Multiple Concurrent Block Proposers
Depending on the number of bidders and the time constraints inherent to the specific
auction application, it may not be feasible to hold the auction for long enough to achieve
the desired censorship resistance level.
A different solution we now consider would be to allow more than one proposer within
a single slot. Formally, we now consider kconcurrent block proposers (by analogy to
our previous section where we considered ksequential block producers). The seller an-
nounces an auction which will execute within the single slot, i.e. the bids included on at
least one of the kconcurrent produced blocks will be included in the auction.
In view of the concurrency, we allow bidders to submit conditional tips, which depend
on the number of proposers who include the transaction. For simplicity, we consider a
twin tip , i.e., each bidder submits a conditional tip of the form (t,T), where Tis paid
if only a single proposer includes bidder 1’s transaction and tis paid if more than one
proposer includes the transaction.
OBSERVATION 1.With k concurrent proposers and conditional tipping, the censorship resistance
of a conditional tip (t,T)is straightforwardly verified as:
φ(t,T) =kT. (7)
It is important to note that the conditional tip disentangles the cost of inclusion (for the
transacting party) from the cost of censoring, i.e. if T≫t, then the censorship resistance
iskTwhich is much larger than the cost of inclusion, kt.
After the honest bidder observes v1and submits his private bid b1and public tip (t,T),
the bribing bidder submits a bribe to each proposer. Formally, we first consider the fol-
lowing game:
(1) Seller announces second-price sealed-bid auction with reserve price rto be con-
ducted over a single slot.
(2) Buyers learn their values vi∼F.
(3) Buyers 1, . . . , neach submit simultaneously a private bid biand a public tip ti,Ti.
17FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
(4) Buyer 0 observes all the other tips ti,Tiand simultaneously offers each proposer a
take-it-or-leave-it-offer of a subset S⊆ {1, . . . , n}of bidders and a payment pto
exclude that subset’s bids. Bidder 0 also submits his own bid b0.
(5) Each Proposer simultaneously accepts or rejects bidder 0’s offer and constructs the
block accordingly i.e., either containing bids of set N\SorN.
(6) The auction is computed based on the union of the bids included in all blocks, tips
are paid based on the inclusion behavior.
As before we focus our attention on equilibria where Bidders {1, . . . , n}bid truthfully
in the auction. Note that each proposer, in choosing whether to censor a transaction,
needs to reason about the behavior of other proposers since that potentially affects their
tip if they include the transaction.
PROPOSITION 8.Consider the Multiple Concurrent Block Proposer game, with m proposers and
n=1honest bidder, i.e., N ={0, 1}, with bidder i’s value drawn from a distribution with CDF
Fiand PDF f i.
This game has an equilibrium where the outcome of the auction is the same as a standard second
price auction without a censorship step and where the expected tip by each bidder to each proposer
is t.
In particular, bidders 1’s tipping strategy in equilibrium is given by:
t1(v1) =0, T1(v1) =1 (8)
Bidder 0’s offer strategy to the proposer based on their own value v 0and the observed tips (t,T)is
z0(t,T,v0) =

0C(v0)<mT
T C (v0)≥mT.(9)
Here C (v0)is buyer 0’s net value to censoring bidder 1’s bid (i.e., the difference their profit
from censoring the competing bid and winning in the auction for free (v 0); and their expected
surplus from competing with bidder 1in the auction). Finally, the proposer’s strategies are to
censor transactions with the following probabilities:
p(z,t,T) =

0 z<t
 z−t
T−t1
m−1t≤z<T
1 z≥T(10)
The above proposition may admittedly appear a little dense. We provide the following
corollary regarding (on-path) equilibrium behavior.
18CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
COROLLARY 3.Consider the equilibrium proposed in Proposition 8 for any m ≥2. On path,
bidder 0does not bribe the proposers and instead competes in the second-price auction. All bidders
pay0in tips on path. Equilibrium tips do not reveal bids.
Further, a careful study of the proof of Proposition 8 shows that the Corollary con-
tinues to hold even when n>1. Therefore even 2 concurrent block proposers restore
the “desired” outcome relative to a single block proposer system. This is partly driven
by concurrency of block proposers which removes the “monopoly” that they have over
transaction inclusion, and partly by the conditional tip. The conditional tip allows bidder
1 to get security via a high-tip offer conditional on inclusion by only a single proposer.
This high tip offer makes it very expensive for bidder 0 to attempt censor bidder 1’s bid
since they would need to pay mtimes the high tip to censor the bid by all mproducers.
Therefore, no bribe is offered. Further, this tip never needs to be paid, since both pro-
posers find it weakly dominant to include the bid and pick up the low tip.4As an aside,
note that this also restores equilibrium bid privacy, since tips no longer reveal bids.
Finally, we should note that the conditional tipping logic we identify could also be
applied to an auction over multiple blocks, achieving more censorship resistance than
previously. However, it doesn’t
7. D ISCUSSION
Our results suggest that single proposer blockchains are not ideal for holding time sen-
sitive auctions when the number of potential bidders is large. In our results, collusion
arrangements are extremely profitable for the colluding bidder but only marginally prof-
itable for the proposer. However, this is because we restrict the model to have one po-
tential colluding bidder who can bribe the proposer. In reality, there are many possible
colluding bidders, and only one proposer in each slot, the proposer could end up charg-
ing for the right to collude and extract a significant portion of the value that the colluding
bidder gains from the arrangement. In fact, the predominant block building system, MEV-
boost, can be thought of as a direct channel through which the proposer can sell the right
to censor transactions to the highest bidder. This suggests that one driver of MEV is the
proposer’s right to determine inclusion. Previous work has focused on a different source:
the proposer’s right to order transactions within a block. From the position that proposer
4Note that t=0 supports alternative asymmetric equilibria in the inclusion subgame where only a single
proposer includes the transaction. In the broader game, these would correspond to the equilibria in the
single proposer cases where Tsubstitutes for the old single dimensional tip. However, when tis bounded
away from 0, these equilibria disappear, since it is now strictly dominant for the proposer to include the bid
in the inclusion subgame.
19FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
ordering power is the source, order agnostic mechanisms should solve MEV . But if cen-
sorship power is the source, these order agnostic mechanisms, including the second price
auction we study here, could be just as susceptible to value extraction.
Another proposed source for MEV is the public nature of transactions in the mempool.
The argument is, transactions in the mempool are sitting ducks, waiting to be front-ran.
It follows that, if transactions are encrypted while in the mempool, they will be less sus-
ceptible to MEV . But our results demonstrate that even when bids in the auction are en-
crypted, public tips may reveal private bids.
As the previous paragraph suggests, cryptographic solutions do not immediately solve
the censorship problem unless they also appropriately modify consensus to bind the pro-
poser (cf our multiple concurrent proposer suggestion): for example consider an MPC
based approach. One way to implement it would be to use an integer comparison MPC
protocol to compare the private tips and choose the top k. Then, if the proposer chose not
to include those top k, they could be penalized, or the block could be considered invalid
by consensus. Note that this requires changing consensus as well as the mempool, and it
requires multiple validators to participate in MPC, each of whom can add transactions to
the process. In that way it is similar to the multiple concurrent block proposer proposer
scheme we describe. However, in this scheme, the proposer also retains the option to
accept a bribe rather than use the MPC protocol, i.e., they may accept a bribe that exceeds
the expected value of the top k tips.
Implemented purely as a private mempool solution without changing consensus, the
main impediment is enforcing the proposer’s commitment to this block inclusion strat-
egy: i.e., MPC allows us to compute the k transactions with the highest tips in a private
fashion, but does not bind the proposer to include these. The proposer remains free to
censor any subset of these transactions if it is profitable for them to do so.
7.1. Multiple Concurrent Proposers in the Real world
There are projects trying to implement multiple concurrent proposers by appropriately
modifying the Tendermint protocol.5Representatives from at least one major chain, have
also mentioned concurrency as a goal going forward, in order to scale throughput and de-
crease latency from the user to the nearest proposer within a given slot.6The co-founder,
and CEO of Solana even mentioned MEV resistance as a motivation for the desirability
of multiple concurrent block proposers.7Our results suggest that proposer rents arising
from the proposer’s temporary monopoly on inclusion shrink sharply under multiple
concurrent proposers using our conditional tip logic. To see the order of magnitude, note
5See, e.g., https://blog.duality.xyz/introducing-multiplicity/ .
6See, e.g., https://blog.chain.link/execution-and-parallelism-for-dag-based-bft-consensus/ .
7Seehttps://twitter.com/aeyakovenko/status/1584676110948012032 .
20CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
that total payments by MEV-boost to proposers on Ethereum totaled $245 million since
Sept 2022 (the merge), see https://dune.com/arcana/mev-boost). This is quite large in
comparison to the total value created by MEV and contributes to high transaction fees for
users. That said multiple proposer protocols are not a panacea. Beyond the engineering
difficulties themselves, we see a few other impediments. Firstly, ordering—with a single
proposer, a canonical ordering of transactions within the block is simply the order that
the leader put them in. Once we add multiple proposers, the ordering becomes less clear.
Secondly, multiple proposers may be more susceptible to Distributed Denial of Service
(DDOS) attacks: allowing every validator to submit transactions opens the network up
to a DDOS attack where adversaries include many transactions to slow down the chain.
Finally there are issues of redundancy and state bloat: the multiple proposer approach
potentially leads to considerable redundancy within the slot (the same transaction may
be included by many different proposers).
7.2. Future Directions
From a theoretical perspective, this work leaves open questions of how censorship in
on chain auctions might effect the equilibria of auctions with different assumptions about
bidder valuations. For example a natural extension to our results would be to consider
honest bidders with interdependent or common values. This may be a better model for
on chain order flow auctions and collateral liquidation auctions.
Our results are based on the assumption that a single bidder has been selected as the
colluding bidder in advance, but an assumption that would track more closely to the
realities of MEV-boost would be to have the right to collude be auctioned off after bids
have been submitted. If the right to collude is auctioned off before the bids are submitted,
then our results would still hold, since our result would simply be a subgame of the
larger game being considered, and the result would be that proposers end up with a
larger share of their monopoly rents; however, when the right to collude is auctioned off
after transactions have been submitted, and therefore after bidders discover their types,
the players who are willing to pay to collude are more often those who value the item
more. This could warp the equilibrium slightly.
Outside of mechanism design, this work provides a strong theoretical justification for
investigating multiple concurrent block proposer based consensus frameworks as a tool
for MEV mitigation. Specifically, we identify conditional tipping as a powerful tool to
combat censorship in situations where there are more than one block proposer.
Indeed, strong censorship-resistance is beneficial to other systemically important smart
contracts. Oracle feeds require timely inclusion guarantees to be useful, and censorship
in order to manipulate on-chain financial markets is a serious concern. Hedging contracts
21FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
such as options need to be censorship resistant so that they can be exercised, and con-
versely, the underwriter has an incentive to censor. Similarly, optimistic rollups rely on
censorship resistance for their security, an attacker who wishes to manipulate an opti-
mistic rollup only needs to censor the fraud proofs for a period of time. To combat this,
optimistic rollups currently leave a long window for fraud proof submission before final-
izing (e.g. 7 days). Stronger censorship resistance could allow them to achieve finality
faster with the same security.
Another advantage is that proposer rents arising from the proposer’s temporary mo-
nopoly on inclusion shrink sharply under multiple concurrent proposers using our con-
ditional tip logic. To see the order of magnitude, note that total payments by MEV-
boost to proposers on Ethereum totaled $245 million since Sept 2022 (the merge), see
https://dune.com/arcana/mev-boost ). This is quite large in comparison to the total
value created by MEV and contributes to high transaction fees for users.
Another potential tool for combating censorship on chain, that we have not discussed,
is a data availability layer. Instead of being submitted to a blockchain directly, bids could
be submitted to a data availability layer, nodes could then compute the results of the auc-
tion based on whichever transactions were included on the data availability layer. This is
similar to holding the auction directly on chain except that the nodes tasked with curating
a data availability layer do not necessarily need to participate in consensus. The require-
ments for a data availability layer are weaker than those required for a full blockchain
so it may be easier to integrate multiple proposer architecture on data availability layers
than on blockchains themselves.
22CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
REFERENCES
Akbarpour, Mohammad and Shengwu Li , “Credible Mechanisms.,” in “EC” 2018, p. 371.
and , “Credible auctions: A trilemma,” Econometrica , 2020, 88(2), 425–467.
Blass, Erik-Oliver and Florian Kerschbaum , “Strain: A secure auction for blockchains,”
in “European Symposium on Research in Computer Security” Springer 2018, pp. 87–
110.
Budish, Eric, Peter Cramton, and John Shim , “The high-frequency trading arms race:
Frequent batch auctions as a market design response,” The Quarterly Journal of Econom-
ics, 2015, 130(4), 1547–1621.
Buterin, Vitalik , “The Problem of Censorship,” https://blog.ethereum.org/2015/06/
06/the-problem-of-censorship Jun 2015.
, “State of research: increasing censorship resistance of transactions under pro-
poser/builder separation (PBS),” https://notes.ethereum.org/@vbuterin/pbs_cen
sorship_resistance Jun 2021.
Choudhuri, Arka Rai, Matthew Green, Abhishek Jain, Gabriel Kaptchuk, and Ian
Miers , “Fairness in an unfair world: Fair multiparty computation from public bulletin
boards,” in “Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Com-
munications Security” 2017, pp. 719–728.
Daian, Philip, Steven Goldfeder, Tyler Kell, Yunqi Li, Xueyuan Zhao, Iddo Bentov,
Lorenz Breidenbach, and Ari Juels , “Flash boys 2.0: Frontrunning in decentralized ex-
changes, miner extractable value, and consensus instability,” in “2020 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP)” IEEE 2020, pp. 910–927.
Elkind, Edith and Helger Lipmaa , “Interleaving cryptography and mechanism design:
The case of online auctions,” in “Financial Cryptography: 8th International Conference,
FC 2004, Key West, FL, USA, February 9-12, 2004. Revised Papers 8” Springer 2004,
pp. 117–131.
Ferreira, Matheus VX and David C Parkes , “Credible Decentralized Exchange Design
via Verifiable Sequencing Rules,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15569 , 2022.
and S Matthew Weinberg , “Credible, truthful, and two-round (optimal) auctions
via cryptographic commitments,” in “Proceedings of the 21st ACM Conference on Eco-
nomics and Computation” 2020, pp. 683–712.
Flashbots , “The future of MeV is suave: Flashbots,” Nov 2022.
Frankie, Dan Robinson, Dave White, and andy8052 , “Gradual Dutch Auctions,” Apr
2022.
Galal, Hisham S and Amr M Youssef , “Verifiable sealed-bid auction on the ethereum
blockchain,” in “Financial Cryptography and Data Security: FC 2018 International
23FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
Workshops, BITCOIN, VOTING, and WTSC, Nieuwpoort, Curaçao, March 2, 2018, Re-
vised Selected Papers 22” Springer 2019, pp. 265–278.
Johnson, Nicholas AG, Theo Diamandis, Alex Evans, Henry de Valence, and Guillermo
Angeris , “Concave Pro-rata Games,” 2022.
Kelkar, Mahimna, Fan Zhang, Steven Goldfeder, and Ari Juels , “Order-fairness for
byzantine consensus,” in “Annual International Cryptology Conference” Springer
2020, pp. 451–480.
, Soubhik Deb, Sishan Long, Ari Juels, and Sreeram Kannan , “Themis: Fast,
strong order-fairness in byzantine consensus,” Cryptology ePrint Archive , 2021.
Kulkarni, Kshitij, Matheus VX Ferreira, and Tarun Chitra , “Credibility and Incentives
in Gradual Dutch Auctions,” arXiv , 2023.
, Theo Diamandis, and Tarun Chitra , “Towards a theory of maximal extractable
value i: Constant function market makers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.11835 , 2022.
Lee, Byoungcheon, Kwangjo Kim, and Joongsoo Ma , “Efficient public auction with one-
time registration and public verifiability,” in “Progress in Cryptology—INDOCRYPT
2001: Second International Conference on Cryptology in India Chennai, India, Decem-
ber 16–20, 2001 Proceedings 2” Springer 2001, pp. 162–174.
Milionis, Jason, Dean Hirsch, Andy Arditi, and Pranav Garimidi , “A Framework for
Single-Item NFT Auction Mechanism Design,” in “Proceedings of the 2022 ACM CCS
Workshop on Decentralized Finance and Security” 2022, pp. 31–38.
Monnot, Barnabe , “Unbundling PBS: Towards protocol-enforced proposer commitments
(PEPC),” https://ethresear.ch/t/unbundling-pbs-towards-protocol-enforced-p
roposer-commitments-pepc/13879?u=barnabe Oct 2022.
Suzuki, Koutarou and Makoto Yokoo , “Secure generalized vickrey auction using homo-
morphic encryption,” in “Financial Cryptography: 7th International Conference, FC
2003, Guadeloupe, French West Indies, January 27-30, 2003. Revised Papers 7” Springer
2003, pp. 239–249.
Szabo, Nick , “Formalizing and securing relationships on public networks,” First monday ,
1997.
Wahrstätter, Anton, Jens Ernstberger, Aviv Yaish, Liyi Zhou, Kaihua Qin, Taro
Tsuchiya, Sebastian Steinhorst, Davor Svetinovic, Nicolas Christin, Mikolaj Bar-
czentewicz et al. , “Blockchain Censorship,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18545 , 2023.
24CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
APPENDIX A. O MITTED PROOFS
A.1. Proof of Proposition 3
PROOF .We first need consider the tipping strategy t(v). To do this we first work out the
expected utility for player 1 when all other n−1 “honest” bidders are bidding according
tot(·)and bidder 0 is following the strategy above, i.e., censoring all the bids whenever
the total tip doesn’t exceed their value:
U(v,t) =Zv
0. . .Zv
0 
F0(n
∑
j=2t(vj) +t)(v−max(vj))!
dv2. . .dvn (11)
−tE"
F0(n
∑
j=2t(vj) +t)#
.
Here the first term is expected profit of the buyer in the auction , and the second term is
the expected cost of the tip: tip times the probability that the bid is not censored and the
tip is therefore charged. Note that since the buyer 0’s value is distributed uniformly, so
F0(∑n
j=2t(vj) +t) =∑n
j=2t(vj) +t.8
=⇒U(v,t) =Zv
0. . .Zv
0 
(n
∑
j=2t(vj) +t)(v−max(vj))!
dv2. . .dvn
−tE"
(n
∑
j=2t(vj) +t)#
.
Differentiating with respect to t
∂U(v,t)
∂t=Zv
0. . .Zv
0 (v−max(vj))
dv2. . .dvn−E"
(n
∑
j=2t(vj))#
−2t.
Therefore optimality implies that t(v)must solve:
=⇒vn
n−E"
(n
∑
j=2t(vj))#
−2t(v)≤0.
with the inequality binding when t(v)>0.
Let us denote E[t(vj)]by c.
=⇒vn
n−(n−1)c−2t=0.
8Formally, this is only true as long as ∑n
j=2t(vj) +t<1, but our solution will be such that ∑n
1t(vi)≤1 for
any profile of values i.
25FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
Therefore we have that:
t(v) =

0 v<v,
1
2
vn
n−(n−1)c
o.w.
where v= (( n2−n)c)1/n. Finally, since E[t(vj)] = c, it must be that
Z1
v1
2vn
n−(n−1)c
dv=c,
=⇒1
n(n+1)(1−vn+1)−(n−1)c(1−v) =2c.
Putting together we have that
vn+1
n(n+1)+ (n+1)c−(n−1)cv=1
n(n+1). (12)
Recall that v= (( n2−n)c)1/n=⇒c=vn
n(n−1). Substituting this into (12) we have
vn+1
n(n+1)+ (n+1)vn
n(n−1)−(n−1).vn
n(n−1).v=1
n(n+1).
=⇒(n+1)vn
n(n−1)−vn+1
(n+1)−1
n(n+1)=0, (13)
as desired.
Further by observation, we have that the assumption of Lemma 1 is satisfied, i.e., t(v)≤
v
nand therefore we have from Lemma 1 that Bidder 0’s bribing strategy is a best response
to these tips. ■
As an aside, we note that the the first step in the proof, i.e. noting that F0(∑n
j=2t(vj) +
t) =∑n
j=2t(vj) +tunder the uniform distribution, allows to make the E[F0(∑n
j=2t(vj) +
t)]in the first expression analytically tractable. This is the reason we are unable to gener-
alize beyond the uniform distribution for bidder 0.
A.2. Proof of Proposition 4
First suppose vn=1/√n. Substituting in to the left hand side of (13), we have
n+1
n(n−1)√n−1
(n+1)(√n)n+1
n−1
n(n+1).
Note that the first term is O(1/n3/2), and the latter two terms are smaller. So the left hand
side is always positive.
Therefore we have that vn≤1√n(since the left hand side of (13) goes from negative to
positive and is 0 at the unique root).
This in turn implies that nc≤1
(n−1)√n.
26CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
By a similar argument we can argue that vn>1/n. To see this, note that substituting
into left hand side of (13), we have
n+1
n2(n−1)−1
(n+1)(n)n+1
n−1
n(n+1),
=(n+1)2−n(n−1)
n2(n−1)(n+1)−1
(n+1)(n)n+1
n,
=3n+1
n2(n−1)(n+1)−1
(n+1)(n)n+1
n.
Note that the first term is O(1/n3), while the second term is ≈O(1/n2), so for n large this
will be negative.
A.3. Proof of Proposition 5
Repeating the calculation of the proof of Proposition 3, we have that a bidder of value
v’ indirect utility from a tip of tgiven all other n−1 bidders tip according to t(·)is given
by
U(v,t) =Zv
r. . .Zv
r 
P0(v0<r+n
∑
j=2t(vj) +t)(v−max(vj))!
dv2. . .dvn
+P0(v0<r+t)rn−1(v−r)−tE"
F0(r+n
∑
j=2t(vj) +t)#
t.
Again, the buyer 0’s value is distributed uniformly, so F0(r+∑n
j=2t(vj) +t) =r+∑n
j=2t(vj) +
t.
=⇒U(v,t) =Zv
r. . .Zv
r 
(r+n
∑
j=2t(vj) +t)(v−max(vj))!
dv2. . .dvn
+ (r+t)rn−1(v−r)−tE"
(r+n
∑
j=2t(vj) +t)#
.
Differentiating with respect to t, we have
∂U(v,t)
∂tZv
r. . .Zv
r (v−max(vj))
dv2. . .dvn+rn−1(v−r)−E"
r+ (n
∑
j=2t(vj))#
−2t.
The first two terms are just the interim expected surplus of a bidder with value vin a
second price auction with n bidders and reserve price r, which by revenue equivalence is
the integral of the allocation of lower types, i.e.,
Zv
r. . .Zv
r (v−max(vj))
dv2. . .dvn+rn−1(v−r)
27FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
=Zv
rθn−1dθ,
=vn
n−rn
n.
Therefore, substituting back in, optimality of t(·)requires that
vn
n−rn
n−r−E"
n
∑
j=2t(vj)#
−2t(v)≤0,
with equality whenever t(v)>0. Therefore we have that:
t(v) =

1
2
vn
n−(n−1)cr−(r+rn
n)
v≥(n((n−1)cr+ (r+rn
n))1/n
0 otherwise
where cr=E[t(v)].
Therefore we have t(v) =1
2
vn
n−(n−1)cr−(r+rn
n)
when v>vand 0 otherwise.
Recall that when r=0,t(v) =1
2
vn
n−(n−1)c
. Therefore cr<cand(n−1)cr−(r+
rn
n)>n−1c.
Therefore the equilibrium tipping function t(v)when r>0 are first order stochastically
dominated by the tipping function when r=0. We already showed in Proposition 4 that
the tipping function when r=0 as a function of nimplies that total tips collapse to 0
at a super-linear rate. Therefore that continues to be the case here, and the Proposition
follows.
A.4. Proof of Proposition 6
Repeating the calculation of the Proof of Proposition 3 but assuming that the bidders
are now distributed according to some distribution F, an taking first order conditions, we
must have that
Zv
0Fn−1(v)dv−c−2t(v)≤0
with it binding whenever t(v)>0.
So we must have:
t(θ) =

0 v≤v
1
2 Rv
0Fn−1(v)dv−(n−1)c
o.w.
where c,vjointly solve
Zv
0Fn−1(v)dv= (n−1)c,
28CENSORSHIP RESISTANCE IN ON-CHAIN AUCTIONS
Z1
0t(v)dF(v) =c.
Note that the latter equation can be written as:
Z1
v1
2Zv
0Fn−1(v)dv−(n−1)c
dF(v) =c
=⇒Z1
vZv
0Fn−1(v)dv−(n−1)c
dF(v) =2c,
=⇒Z1
vZv
0Fn−1(v)dv
dF(v) =(2+ (n−1)(1−F(v)))c,
writingRv
0Fn−1(v)dv=S(v)and doing integration by parts
=⇒S(1)−S(v)F(v)−Z1
vFn(v)dv=(2+ (n−1)(1−F(v)))S(v)
n−1,
=⇒S(1)−Z1
vFn(v)dv=n+1
n−1S(v),
as desired.
Note that under Assumption 1, 1, this implies that the assumption of Lemma 1 con-
tinues to be satisfied, i.e., t(v)≤v
nand therefore we have from Lemma 1 that Bidder 0’s
bribing strategy is a best response to these tips.
A.5. Proof of Proposition 7
The proof follows from the Proof of Proposition 3. To see this, note that if bidder 0
is distributed U[0,κ], given the conjectured strategies of 1 to n, we have the total tip is
always smaller than the highest possible value of bidder 0. Therefore the proof continues
to hold as written: bidder 0 being distributed U[0,κ]changes (11) by a multiplicative
constant1
κ, and therefore this does not affect the optimization.
A.6. Proof of Proposition 8
PROOF .We proceed by backward induction. First consider the subgame where tips (t,T),
and bribe zhave already been offered. Given that all other proposers are censoring with
probability p. The expected utility for proposer ias a function of censoring probability pi
is given by:
piz+ (1−pi)(pm−1)T+ (1−pi)(1−pm−1)t.
Differentiating this with respect to piwe have
z−pm−1T−t+pm−1t.
29FOX, PAI, AND RESNICK
Therefore for a symmetric mixed equilibrium of the subgame it must be that
0=z−t−(T−t)pm−1
=⇒p=z−t
T−t 1
m−1
Given this, the probability of successfully censoring the bid for a given bribe z∈[t,T]is
pm=z−t
T−t m
m−1
If the value of censorship to the bribing bidder is Crelative to the no censorship case, then
the expected utility of the bribing bidder relative to the no censorship case as a function
ofzis
Cpm−mzp=Cz−t
T−t m
m−1
−mzz−t
T−t 1
m−1
Define u≡1
T−t1/m−1, and q≡z−t. Substituting in to the latter expression, we have
umCqm
m−1−u
mtq1
m−1+mqm
m−1
Note that this is convex in q, and therefore the solution is to either tip t(which effectively
is the same as tip 0), or tip T. Finally, note that C≤v0by definition.
Given this, the strategy of (t,T) = ( 0, 1)is a best response for bidder 1 since it will
result in bidder 0 offering a bribe of 0. ■
30