1
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be trans-
ferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible.
RIC-O: Efﬁcient placement of a disaggregated
and distributed RAN Intelligent Controller with
dynamic clustering of radio nodes
Gabriel M. Almeida, Gustavo Z. Bruno, Alexandre Huff,
Matti Hiltunen, Elias P. Duarte Jr., Cristiano B. Both, Kleber V . Cardoso
Abstract
The Radio Access Network (RAN) is the segment of cellular networks that provides wireless
connectivity to end-users. O-RAN Alliance has been transforming the RAN industry by proposing
open RAN speciﬁcations and the programmable Non-Real-Time and Near-Real-Time RAN Intelligent
Controllers (Non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC). Both RICs provide platforms for running applications
called rApps and xApps, respectively, to optimize the behavior of the RAN. We investigate a disaggre-
gation strategy of the Near-RT RIC so that its components meet stringent latency requirements while
presenting a cost-effective solution. We propose the novel RIC Orchestrator (RIC-O) that optimizes
the deployment of the Near-RT RIC components across the cloud-edge continuum. Edge computing
nodes often present limited resources and are expensive compared to cloud computing. For example, in
the O-RAN Signalling Storm Protection, Near-RT RIC is expected to support end-to-end control loop
latencies as low as 10ms. Therefore, performance-critical components of Near-RT RIC and certain xApps
Gabriel M. Almeida and Kleber V . Cardoso are with the Universidade Federal de Goi ´as (UFG), Brazil. E-mail:
fgabrielmatheus, kleber g@inf.ufg.br
Gustavo Z. Bruno and Cristiano B. Both are with the University of Vale do Rio dos Sinos (UNISINOS), Brazil. E-mail:
zanattabruno@edu.unisinos.br, cbboth@unisinos.br
Alexandre Huff is with Universidade Tecnol ´ogica Federal do Paran ´a, Brazil. E-mail:alexandrehuff@utfpr.edu.br
Matti Hiltunen is with AT&T Labs Research, USA. E-mail: hiltunen@research.att.com
Elias P. Duarte Jr. is with Universidade Federal do Paran ´a, Brazil. E-mail: elias@inf.ufpr.brarXiv:2301.02760v1  [cs.NI]  7 Jan 20232
should run at the edge while other components can run on the cloud. Furthermore, RIC-O employs an
efﬁcient strategy to react to sudden changes and re-deploy components dynamically. We evaluate our
proposal through analytical modeling and real-world experiments in an extended Kubernetes deployment
implementing RIC-O and disaggregated Near-RT RIC.
Index Terms
RAN Intelligent Controller, O-RAN, Near-RT RIC, placement, disaggregation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The Radio Access Network (RAN) is considered the most critical segment of a cellular
network [1]. A RAN comprises network nodes that provide direct wireless connection to end-
users. It requires continuous innovations to improve the overall mobile network performance
and user experience. Novel RAN technologies have included innovations related to wireless
communication technologies (e.g., mmWave, massive MIMO, intelligent reﬂective surfaces,
and THz communications). Other innovations are related to current networking technologies,
particularly network softwarization, virtualization, programmability, and management (e.g., NFV ,
SDN, Network Slicing, and Zero touch network & Service Management). Traditionally, the
RAN accounts for most of the CAPEX and OPEX costs of a wireless mobile network. Network
operators also have to face several hurdles, such as interoperability issues, resulting from the
diversity of hardware from different vendors and the burden of continuously supporting new
services and applications. In this context, the O-RAN Alliance [2] has been transforming the
RAN industry by proposing open, virtualized, fully interoperable, and intelligent mobile networks
[3].
The O-RAN Alliance deﬁnes a series of speciﬁcations describing open interfaces to ensure
multi-vendor interoperability among the main components that form the RAN. That “openness”
has been carefully introduced to allow interoperability without hurting the intellectual property of
the participating companies. Given the signiﬁcant investments necessary to promote innovation
of RAN technologies, this approach is essential to keep the interest of those companies in
contributing to this vital area. Yet another advantage of an open RAN is that it decreases the
barriers for newcomers that can contribute to solving speciﬁc problems and move the technology
further, particularly in academia. On a side note, it is important to highlight that O-RAN3
speciﬁcations [4] are aligned with 3GPP standards [5]. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that
as the 3GPP introduces enhancements, they are promptly incorporated by the O-RAN Alliance.
The new RAN architecture [4] stands out as a key contribution among the O-RAN speciﬁca-
tions. The architecture combines concepts from SDN and NFV and also takes into account cloud-
native technologies while largely adopting Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning
(ML) technologies [6]. It adopts SDN concepts, such as control and data planes separation and
the possibility of having a remote RAN controller. The design of a RAN controller presents
formidable challenges, as it must support the execution of tens to hundreds of RAN functions
while featuring a large protocol stack. The O-RAN architecture splits the controller into two main
building blocks: the Near-Real-Time RAN Intelligent Controller (Near-RT RIC) for time-sensitive
operations and the Non-Real-Time RAN Intelligent Controller (Non-RT RIC) for operations that
present fewer time restrictions. Moreover, the O-RAN speciﬁcations standardize open interfaces
among the architecture components, which run as virtual (network) functions (or services) on
cloud-native infrastructures.
Those RAN controllers run AI/ML-based applications that establish control loops with the
RAN nodes under their management. The Non-RT RIC runs applications called rApps that
demand control loops to time intervals above 1s. The Near-RT RIC runs applications called
xApps that establish control loops constrained to time intervals between 10ms and 1s. The time
constraint of a given control loop depends on the RAN function under the management of the
corresponding xApp. For example, an xApp related to medium access management may need
to complete the control loop under the 10ms threshold, while an xApp related to user session
management may tolerate longer delays of up to 1s. In a large RAN, the Near-RT RIC (or some
of its components) and latency-sensitive xApps must be replicated and assigned to manage a
limited set of RAN nodes, i.e., a cluster of RAN nodes. Determining the minimum number of
Near-RT RIC instances and where they must run is a non-trivial resource allocation problem.
The problem becomes even more challenging considering the dynamics of a mobile wireless
network. While this problem has been previously identiﬁed [7], some works rely on multiple
instances of the Near-RT RIC [8]. Also, to the best of our knowledge, there is no comprehensive
solution to the problem as we describe in the present work.
In this work, we propose a disaggregation strategy of the Near-RT RIC so that individual
components can be distributed and placed across the cloud-edge continuum. We also propose a
RIC Orchestrator (RIC-O) to deploy (or place) and monitor the Near-RT RIC components so that4
they can meet the stringent latency requirements. The RIC-O employs optimization to deploy
the Near-RT RIC components across the cloud-edge continuum while keeping the overall cost
as low as possible. Edge computing nodes often present limited resources and are expensive
compared to cloud computing nodes. While performance-critical components of the Near-RT
RIC platform and certain xApps should run at the edge, other components can run on cloud
nodes. Furthermore, RIC-O employs a fast and efﬁcient strategy to react dynamically to sudden
changes and redeploy components. We also explore the ﬂexibility of the O-RAN architecture to
introduce a proposal that replicates some speciﬁc components of the Near-RT RIC. We evaluate
the proposal through analytical modeling and real-world experiments in an extended Kubernetes
deployment that runs the RIC-O and the disaggregated Near-RT RIC.
The main contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:
Proposes a disaggregation strategy to place the Near-RT RIC components across the cloud-
edge continuum;
Formalizes the problem of minimizing the overall cost of the placement of Near-RT RIC
components while ensuring the latency-sensitive control loop;
Proposes a hybrid approach that combines heuristic and optimal strategies to quickly provide
cost-efﬁcient solutions for placing Near-RT RIC components;
Provides performance evaluation results to illustrate the advantage of the proposed approach;
All implementations are publicly available, including the source code*, thus, allowing the
work reproducibility.
Section II presents an overview of the O-RAN architecture, particularly of the Near-RT
RIC. Section III describes the related work. Section IV provides the system model, problem
formulation, and the optimal and heuristic strategies for the placement of the Near-RT RIC
components. Section V introduces the RIC orchestrator, i.e., the proposed architecture that allows
efﬁcient placement of Near-RT RIC components and clustering of RAN nodes across the cloud-
edge continuum. The implementation of the RIC orchestrator is described in Section VI. Real-
world experiments and an analytical performance evaluation are presented in Section VII. Finally,
Section VIII concludes the article and discusses future work.
*https://github.com/LABORA-INF-UFG/paper-GGAMECK-20235
II. B ACKGROUND
The O-RAN architecture deﬁnes two RICs responsible for controlling and managing RAN
nodes on different time scales. While the Non-RT RIC is in charge of tasks that can present a
latency above 1s, the Near-RT RIC is responsible for tasks that demand a latency between 10ms
and 1s. Figure 1 illustrates the O-RAN architecture highlighting the Near-RT RIC internal compo-
nents. Several of those components are not latency-sensitive, such as the Management Services ,
thexApp Manager , the Subscription Manager , and A1and O1terminations. However, E2
Nodes , E2 termination ( E2T),xApps , and Shared Layers can be sensitive to latency and require
correct placement. The xApp Manager provides a ﬂexible way for deploying and managing the
near real-time applications (xApps). The xApps are applications that run services responsible
for improving the performance of the RAN. Each xApp runs a well-deﬁned function to access,
control, and monitor E2 Nodes . While some xApps may implement latency-sensitive functions,
other xApps can also tolerate latencies up to 1s depending on the tasks they execute. Moreover,
xApps can provide services to other xApps. The Subscription Manager is responsible for
providing E2 subscriptions from xApps to E2 nodes. The Management Services includes several
services provided by the Near-RT RIC to the xApps and E2 nodes, such as routing management,
alarm notiﬁcation service, logging, and E2 node management.
A1O1
E2T      Messaging Infrastructure Termination xAppAxAppBxAppZ …Subscription 
Manager xApp 
Manager Management 
Services …
R-NIB, UE-NIB, … Service Management and Orchestration (SMO) 
Near-RT RIC Internal Architecture Non-RT RIC 
E2 Nodes (RAN) E2AP (Insert) E2AP (Control) O1
Shared Layers 
Fig. 1. O-RAN architecture.
The A1termination also shown in Fig. 1 provides an interface between Non-RT RIC and
Near-RT RIC to exchange information about policies and machine learning models that are exe-6
cuted by xApps. The O1termination represents the interface between the Service Management
and Orchestration (SMO) framework with network functions and E2 nodes. This termination
enables the SMO to execute Fault, Conﬁguration, Accounting, Policy, and Security (FCAPS)
operations on those network functions and E2 nodes. All O-RAN components are expected to
support the O1termination when exchanging messages with SMO. The SMO is responsible for
managing and orchestrating the entire RAN, relying on the Non-RT RIC for RAN optimization,
and the O1termination for RAN instrumentation. Moreover, SMOis in charge of managing and or-
chestrating any cloud infrastructure in use [4]. The E2Tis responsible for connecting the Near-RT
RICwith one or more E2 Nodes using E2 Application Protocol (E2AP) and E2 Service Model
(E2SM) which are described further. The Messaging Infrastructure element corresponds to
the underlying messaging subsystem employed by all the Near-RT RIC components to exchange
information [9]. The Shared Layers correspond to the Shared Data Layer (SDL) and Shared
Time-Series Layer (STSL), which are high-speed interfaces for accessing shared data storage
by several stateless Near-RT RIC components and xApps. R-NIB andUE-NIB are examples of
databases that store network information for RAN and User Equipment (UE), respectively.
According to the O-RAN speciﬁcations [4], RAN nodes (i.e., DUs, CUs, or O-RAN-compliant
LTE eNBs) are E2 Nodes controlled through the E2 interface. This interface allows the Near-
RT RIC to control procedures and functionalities of those nodes and is logically organized
into two parts: E2AP and E2SM. E2AP enables the communication between the Near-RT RIC
and E2 nodes, which provide four services to the Near-RT RIC: Report, Insert, Control, and
Policy [9]. The Report service allows xApps to subscribe to E2 nodes to receive information
about speciﬁc RAN events. The Insert service also provides RAN information to xApps, but
also allows xApps to conﬁgure E2 nodes through control messages. The Control service allows
the Near-RT RIC and xApps to send control messages to E2 nodes, which can initiate new
procedures or resume a previously suspended procedure associated with that E2 node. Such a
procedure should specify exactly and completely the functional behavior of a given E2 node.
Finally, the Near-RT RIC uses the Policy service to establish policy-driven monitoring and control
the behavior of the corresponding E2 node [10]. These services can be combined in different
ways to implement E2SMs. An E2SM [9] can be described as a contract between xApps and
the RAN functions on E2 nodes. Each RAN function exposed by a given E2SM allows the
Near-RT RIC to monitor, suspend, stop, override or even control the behavior of the RAN on
that E2 node. Therefore, xApps and their corresponding E2 nodes must implement the same7
E2SM deﬁnitions to communicate and control the RAN.
The E2AP Insert service is the most latency-sensitive loop of the Near-RT RIC. This loop
starts when a given E2 node sends a message to the E2Tusing the E2AP (Insert) service. The
E2T, in its turn, delivers that message to the corresponding xApp . This xApp then processes the
message and sends back the corresponding reply using the E2AP Control service. Moreover,
the control loop can involve access to Shared Layers (i.e., SDL or STSL), it may also have to
access one or more databases (e.g., R-NIB andUE-NIB ) and even other xApps , as illustrated in
Fig. 1. We note that in some use cases, such as the O-RAN Signaling Storm Protection [11], it
is essential to deliver the RIC control message back to the E2 node within the 10ms threshold.
In this example use case, the E2 node suspends the current procedure execution and waits for
the corresponding reply from an E2AP (Control) service to resume its operation. Although an
E2 node can apply a default action when the 10ms threshold is exceeded, this usually implies
applying further optimization procedures and performance penalties for the RAN. In this work,
we propose to disaggregate and distribute the Near-RT RIC components to guarantee the latency
restrictions of the time-sensitive xApps, which execute under a control loop limit of 10ms.
The O-RAN Software Community (OSC) provides an open-source reference implementa-
tion [12] of the Near-RT RIC. This implementation also functions as a baseline that allows the
community to explore alternative deployments, including, for instance, replication, among other
innovations. The SMO framework must be particularly aware of any alternative conﬁguration
so that it can dynamically (1) detect any latency violation (e.g., latency above the limit in the
critical loop); (2) redeploy components to solve the violations; (3) re-orchestrate the Near-RT
RIC components; and, (4) reconﬁgure all involved elements. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the SMO
communicates with all RAN elements, including the E2 Nodes , through the O1interface that
offers the necessary means to reconﬁgure and reorganize the cluster of E2 nodes that each E2T
andxApps are responsible for. Current SMOs do not fully implement all tasks in a coordinated
manner. We claim one of the contributions of the current work is to present an SMO extension that
can provide all necessary capabilities to accomplish those tasks coherently. Another contribution
is related to task (2), which comprises the resource allocation problem, for which we formulate
and propose optimal and heuristic strategies.8
III. R ELATED WORK
This section presents an overview of related work that also has a focus on the RIC architecture.
In a small RAN with a few dozen or less E2 nodes, it may be possible to deploy a single Near-RT
RIC that satisﬁes the latency-sensitive control loop of the corresponding xApps. However, larger
RANs with hundreds or even thousands of E2 nodes demand a different approach. Dryjanski and
Kliks [7] present two options for implementing the Near-RT RIC: centralized and distributed.
In the centralized option, every E2 node (i.e., the whole gNB or eNB) is handled by the same
and only Near-RT RIC, which can take uniﬁed decisions for an individual E2 node and globally
optimize operations. In the distributed option, each E2 node type (i.e., O-CU, O-DU, or O-eNB)
is handled by a specialized instance of the Near-RT RIC that allows optimizing these individual
types of E2 nodes. The authors discuss the impact of these two implementation options in the
design of the E2 interface. However, they do not tackle the distribution and replication of the
Near-RT RIC components.
Singh and Nguyen [13] propose a framework called O-RANFed to deploy and optimize a set
of Federated Learning (FL) tasks that provide 5G slicing services in the context of the O-RAN
speciﬁcations. To be precise: the authors introduce a theoretical model of the RIC architecture
with support for FL. Moreover, the authors present an optimization model for the problem of
local learning selection and resource allocation. The performance of FL improves with modeling
and training done in every iteration. However, some details of the proposed FL-supporting RIC
architecture are missing.
Huff, Hiltunen, and Duarte [14] discuss and evaluate techniques to make the RIC fault-tolerant
while preserving high scalability. The fundamental assumption of this work is that traditional
replication techniques cannot sustain high throughput and low latency as required by RAN
elements. The authors propose techniques that use state partitioning, partial replication, and fast
re-route with role awareness to decrease the overhead. Moreover, the authors implemented the
fault tolerance techniques as a library called RFT (RIC Fault Tolerance) considering a distributed
RIC, but do not deal with the problem of the placement of RIC components in a disaggregated
virtual infrastructure.
D’Oro et al. [8] introduced a novel orchestration framework called OrchestRAN for the Non-
RT RIC. OrchestRAN allows network operators to specify high-level control and inference
objectives. The orchestrator deﬁnes the optimal set of data-driven algorithms and their execution9
locations to achieve intents speciﬁed by the network operators. The work assumes that a complete
instance of the Near-RT RIC is deployed to control each cluster of E2 nodes. Moreover, the
authors show that the intelligence orchestration problem in O-RAN is NP-hard and design low-
complexity approaches to support real-world applications. A prototype of OrchestRAN was
implemented and tested at scale on Colosseum, i.e., the world’s largest wireless network emulator
with hardware in the loop.
Schimidt, Irazabal, and Nikaein [15] presented FlexRIC, a software development kit to build
specialized service-oriented controllers. FlexRIC has a centralized modular architecture with
a minimal footprint and is designed for extensibility. The authors validate FlexRIC building
implementations for two use cases: (i) a recursive RAN controller to allow multiple tenants
to concurrently control and operate their services in a shared infrastructure over heterogeneous
5G networks, and (ii) an SD-RAN controller supplying programmability for RAN slicing with
multi-radio technology, and ﬂow-based trafﬁc control aiming at low-latency communications.
Balasubramanian et al. [16] disaggregate the traditional monolithic control plane RAN ar-
chitecture. The authors introduce a Near-RT RIC platform that decouples the control and data
planes of the RAN. The motivation of the project is to work towards intelligent and continuously
evolving radio networks by fostering network openness and empowering network intelligence
with AI-enabled applications. The authors provide functional and software architecture of the
Near-RT RIC and discuss related design challenges. Moreover, they elaborate on how the Near-
RT RIC can enable network optimization in 5G for the dual-connectivity use case using machine
learning control loops. In this context, the Near-RT RIC architecture design is generic, providing
several options for its implementation and deployment.
Other works focus on developing xApps and rApps. For example, Cao et al. [17] [18] propose
an intelligent user access control scheme with Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). A federated
DRL-based method is proposed with a global model server running on RIC that updates the
distributed deep Q-networks (DQNs) parameters to optimize the performance of DQNs trained
by UE. Johnson, Maas, and Van Der Merwe [19] introduce NexRAN, a use case of the Powder
mobile and wireless research platform, allowing closed-loop control of an approach for O-RAN
slicing. O-RAN slicing, in this case, is implemented in the srsRAN open-source mobility stack
and is exposed through a custom service model to xApps, executing on a Near-RT RIC.
IV. S YSTEM MODEL , PROBLEM FORMULATION ,10
AND THE PROPOSED STRATEGY
In the following, we describe the system model, formulate the problem, and describe the
optimal and heuristic strategies proposed to solve the problem.
A. System Model
We assume a Radio Access Network that follows the O-RAN speciﬁcations and is composed
of a setN=fn1;n2;:::;njNjgof E2 nodes and a set C=fc1;c2;:::;cjCjgof edge computing
nodes (CNs), where each CN is a host consisting of a general purpose hardware characterized
by its processing capability (cProc
m), memory (cMem
m), and storage (cSto
m)resources. Moreover, we
consider a node c0representing a cloud computing infrastructure (e.g., a large data center) with
unlimited processing, memory, and storage resources but positioned far from the E2 nodes. We
propose disaggregating the Near-RT RIC so that different components can run on various nodes.
The nodec0and each CN cm2Ccan run any disaggregated RIC function as long as it does
not exceed its resources. To represent the overlay communication network among all nodes, we
deﬁne a graph G= (V;E)withV=VC[Nrepresenting the nodes (where VC=fc0g[C), and
E=feij;vi;vj2Vg represent the set of links, where each link is characterized by its latency
eLat
i;j. Ifvi=vj, theneLat
i;j= 0, which is relevant for different components running on the same
computing node. As illustrated in Fig. 2, c0and each CN cm2Ccan communicate with each
other, while each E2 node ni2Ncan communicate with c0or any CN cm2C. Therefore,
the paths starting at E2 nodes and ending at computing nodes (that run RIC components) are
deﬁned over this graph G.
Cloud node 
Edge computing node 
E2 node n2 n1 n|N|c1 c2 c|C|c0
Fig. 2. Overlay communication network among E2 nodes and CNs.
We assume that the Near-RT RIC can be disaggregated and distributed into ﬁve main groups
of components: Near-RT RIC Management (RIC Man), E2T, SDL/STSL, NIBs, and xApps, as11
illustrated in Fig. 3. Each E2 node ni2Nis connected to an E2T component, which servers a set
of xAppsA=fxApp1;xApp2;:::;xAppjAjg. While the control loop of a latency-sensitive xApp
must be monitored per E2 node ( ni2N), we are also interested in creating clusters of E2 nodes
to minimize the replication of Near-RT RIC components, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The red lines
with arrows in this ﬁgure represent the control loop that each latency-sensitive xApp establishes
with each E2 node. Given the computing nodes where the Near-RT RIC components are running
and the graph from Fig. 2, it is possible to compute the round-trip latency starting from an E2
nodeni2N, going through an E2T until an xApp (and possibly other RIC components), and
back by the same path.
For each E2 node ni2N, there are four atomic (or indivisible) groups: RIC Man, E2T,
SDL/STSL, and NIBs, which the placement is represented by a tuple p= (r;t;s;d ). We also
employ the following auxiliary variables: Rcm=f0;1gthat indicates if CN cm2V Cruns
at least an instance of RIC Man,Tcm=f0;1gthat indicates if CN cm2V Cruns at least
an instance of E2T, Scm=f0;1gthat indicates if CN cm2V Cruns at least an instance of
SDL/STSL, andDcm=f0;1gthat indicates if CN cm2VChosts at least one NIB instance. For
example, the tuple p= (c0;c1;c1;c1)represents RIC Man running on c0and the other atomic
groups running on c1, i.e.,Rc0= 1,Tc1= 1,Sc1= 1, andDc1= 1. Finally, we deﬁne a set
of conﬁgurations P=fp1;p2;:::;pjPjgthat lists all combinations of atomic groups running in
the available computing nodes. However, the group of xApps can be further disaggregated and
distributed into multiple computing nodes and, therefore, is not part of this conﬁguration.
E2TAxAppAxAppZ … 
Near-RT 
RIC Management 
SDL/STSL 
NIBs Near-RT RIC 
Summarized 
Internal Architecture 
E2 Nodes cluster A E2TZxAppA'xAppZ' … 
SDL/STSL 
NIBs … 
E2 Nodes cluster Z … 
Fig. 3. Summarized version of the Near-RT RIC architecture.12
B. Problem Formulation
The objective function minimizes the total cost to run a disaggregated and distributed Near-
RT RIC. The cost has two parts, one ﬁxed and another variable. The ﬁxed cost corresponds to
activating or leasing a CN, which is paid independently of the number of consumed resources.
While the variable cost depends on the number of Near-RT RIC components running on a CN.
Each computing node may be assigned a ﬁxed cost, a variable cost, or both.
Let the decision variable xp
i2f0;1grepresent the choice of conﬁguration p2Pto serve E2
nodeni2N. LetUp
cm=f0;1gindicate if CN cm2V Cis used in conﬁguration p2P. The
activation (or leasing) of CN cm2VCis given by:
Ucm=8
>><
>>:1;ifP
ni2NP
p2P(xp
iUp
cm)>0
0;otherwise:(1)
The ﬁxed cost is deﬁned as:
Fix=X
cm2VC(UcmF(cm)); (2)
whereF(cm)2Rrepresents the cost to activate CN cm2VC. While the ﬁxed cost may be less
common in cloud-native infrastructures, it is included in the model to make it ﬂexible enough
to represent conﬁgurations such as bare-metal services.
Let the decision variable ya
i;m2f0;1grepresent the choice of xApp a2A, running on
cm2VC, to control the E2 node ni2N. The utilization of CN cm2VCto run xApp a2Ais
given by:
Aa
cm=8
>><
>>:1;ifP
ni2Nya
i;m>0
0;otherwise:(3)
The variable cost is deﬁned as:
V ar=X
cm2VC
RcmCR(cm) +TcmCE(cm) +ScmCS(cm)
+DcmCD(cm)
+X
a2AAa
cmCAa(cm); (4)
whereCR(cm),CE(cm),CS(cm),CD(cm), andCAa(cm)represent the cost of running RIC Man,
E2T, SDL/STSL, NIBs, and xApp a2A, respectively, on a given CN cm2VC.13
The objective function of minimizing the total cost is ﬁnally deﬁned as:
minimize Fix+  V ar: (5)
Next, we present the constraints of the problem. For each E2 node ni2N, exactly a single
conﬁguration p2Pmust be selected:
X
p2Pxp
i= 1;8ni2N: (6)
The latency-sensitive control loop has two mandatory segments. The latency of the ﬁrst one
is measured between E2 node ni2Nand CNcm2VC, which runs the corresponding E2T:
LcT
i=X
cm2VC((xp
i)TcmeLat
ni;cm);
where(xp
i) =f0;1gindicates if CN cm2VCruns the E2T that controls the E2 node ni2N.
Concerning the second segment of the latency-sensitive control loop, its latency is measured
between CN cm2VCthat runs E2T (associated with the E2 node ni2N) and CNcm02VC
that runs xApp a2A(responsible for controlling the same E2 node ni2N):
LcT;cA
i =X
cm;cm02VC((xp
i;ya
i;m0)Aa
cm0eLat
cm;cm0);
where(xp
i;ya
i;m0) =f0;1gindicates if CNs cm;cm02V Crun, respectively, E2T and xApp
a2Aresponsible for controlling the E2 node ni2N.
In a latency-sensitive control loop, however, an xApp a2A(running on CN cm2V C)
may need to access an SDL/STSL (running on CN cm02VC) to reach a NIB (running in CN
cm002VC). This communication has the following latency:
LcA;cS;cD
i = (a)X
cm;cm0;cm002VC 
(ya
i;m;xp
i)Scm0eLat
cm;cm0
+0(ya
i;m;xp
i)Dcm00eLat
cm0;cm00
;
where (a) =f0;1gindicates if xApp a2Aneeds to access SDL/STSL and NIB; (ya
i;m;xp
i) =
f0;1gindicates if CNs cm;cm02 V Crun, respectively, xApp a2Aand SDL/STSL; and
0(ya
i;m;xp
i) =f0;1gindicates if CNs cm;cm002V Crun, respectively, xApp a2Aand NIB.
These components are related to E2 node ni2N.14
Additionally, in a latency-sensitive control loop, an xApp a2A(running on CN cm2V C)
may need to interact with other xApp a02A(running on CN cm02VC), which generates the
following latency:
LcA;cA0
i = 0(a)X
cm;cm02VC((ya
i;m;ya0
i;m0)Aa0
cm0eLat
cm;cm0);
where 0(a) =f0;1gindicates if xApp a2Aneeds to communicate with another xApp, and
(ya
i;m;ya
i;m0) =f0;1gindicates if CNs cm;cm02VCrun, respectively, xApps a;a02A, which
control the E2 node ni2N.
Considering the potential chain of xApps AchAinvolved in the control loop of a certain
xAppa2A, its total latency is the sum of the four previous equations and cannot exceed the
thresholda:
LcT
i+LcT;cA
i +LcA;cS;cD
i + (7)
X
a;a02Ach 
LcA;cA0
i +LcA0;cS;cD
i
a;8ni2N;8a2A:
The Near-RT RIC components running on a CN cm2V Cmust not exceed its processing
capability (cProc
m), memory (cMem
m), and storage (cSto
m)resources:
RcmRProc+TcmTProc+ScmSProc+DcmDProc+
X
a2AcmA(Aa
cmAa;Proc)cProc
m;8cm2VC; (8)
RcmRMem+TcmTMem+ScmSMem+DcmDMem+
X
a2AcmA(Aa
cmAa;Mem)cMem
m;8cm2VC; (9)
RcmRSto+TcmTSto+ScmSSto+DcmDSto+
X
a2AcmA(Aa
cmAa;Sto)cSto
m;8cm2VC; (10)
whereR;T;S;D, andAa;represent processing, memory, and storage demands for RIC Man,
E2T, SDL/STSL, NIBs, and xApp a2AcmA, respectively.
As discussed in [20], the problem represented by Equation (5) is NP-Complete because it
corresponds to a mixed-integer quadratic programming (MIQP) decision. The proof shows that
there is a polynomial-length certiﬁcate for yes-instances of the MIQP decision so that the MIQP
decision is in NP. Moreover, the proof that the MIQP decision is NP-complete consists of15
providing a polynomial-time reduction of the problem for determining whether there is a cut of
cardinality at least kin a graphG(which is NP-complete) to an instance of the MIQP decision.
C. Heuristic Strategy
MIQP problems such as the one represent by Equation (5) can be optimally solved using
traditional solvers, e.g., IBM ILOG CPLEX. However, this problem has a large number of
decision variables that can be estimated as (jNjjVCj)comp+(jNjjVCj)jAj, wherecomp represents
the number of Near-RT RIC components. For example, a conﬁguration with jNj= 100 E2 nodes,
comp = 4,jVCj= 5computing nodes, and jAj= 5xApps involves more than 31013optimization
variables. Therefore, due to the computational time and the number of resources required, which
are extremely high, solving the problem optimally is impractical, even for small instances of the
problem, as we present in Section VII.
To deal with large instances of the problem and quickly provide solutions for RIC-O re-
orchestration requests, the efﬁcient heuristic strategy described as Algorithm 1 is proposed. The
heuristic starts with a feasible solution and then seeks to improve the cost efﬁciency through a
greedy strategy. The heuristic takes as input the same parameters used in the optimal strategy and
produces as output the placement of the Near-RT RIC components across CNs, including xApps.
The output is represented by Places [ni;‘Near-RT RIC component’ ], whereni2Nidentiﬁes the
E2 node that is associated with a ‘Near-RT RIC component’, which can be RIC Man (Ri), E2T
(Ti), SDL/STSL (Si), NIBs (Di), or xApp ai2Ai. Moreover, let (Zi;) =Ti[Ai[Si[D i
be the ordered set of components involved in the latency-sensitive control loop, as described in
Section IV-A and illustrated in Fig. 3. We present additional details in the following.
Initially, for each ni2N, the heuristic strategy seeks to place every Near-RT RIC component
i2(Zi;)at the closest CN cm2VCwith enough available resources, as shown in Algorithm 1
(lines 1–3). This corresponds to the best solution regarding latency, but it ignores the cost of CNs
and causes unnecessary replication of Near-RT RIC components, e.g., E2T and xApps, which
also increases cost. Next (lines 4, 5), in CNcost [^i], the algorithm sorts in decreasing order of
cost the list of CNs that are available for running each Near-RT RIC component ^i2R i[(Zi;).
RIC Man is included because it is a Near-RT RIC component, despite of not being involved in
the latency-sensitive control loop. The last part of the algorithm (lines 6–9) focuses on improving
cost efﬁciency. First (line 7), the RIC Man component is placed on the cheapest CN ni2N
that has enough available resources. RIC Man tends to be placed on c0since this tends to be16
Algorithm 1: Heuristic strategy
Input : The same input of the optimal strategy
Output: Placement of the Near-RT RIC components
1forallni2Ndo
2 foralli2(Zi;)do
3Places [ni;i] closestCN(ni;i)
4forall ^i2Ri[(Zi;)do
5CNcost [^i] sortByDecreasingCost( ^i,VC)
6forallni2Ndo
7Places [ni;Ri] rePlace(Ri;CNcost [Ri])
8 foralli2(Zi;)do
9Places [ni;i] rePlace(i;CNcost [i])
10returnPlaces [;]
the cheapest CN, and, generally, function rePlace determines that node has enough available
resources. Moreover, a single RIC Man is probably able to serve all E2 nodes. Last (lines 8,
9), the algorithm seeks to ﬁnd the cheapest CN ni2Nfor each Near-RT RIC component
i2(Zi;). Therefore, in addition to checking CN resource availability, function rePlace also
checks compliance with the latency-sensitive control loop. These ﬁnal steps of the heuristic also
tend to reduce the number of instances of Near-RT RIC components because a single component
may be able to ensure the latency is within the required threshold for multiple E2 nodes.
The proposed heuristic strategy solves the problem in polynomial time and produces sat-
isfactory results regarding the placement of the Near-RT RIC components, as we present in
Section VII. To be precise, the asymptotic complexity of the Algorithm 1 is O((comp +jAj)2
jNjjV Cj), which represents the placement of all Near-RT RIC components that serve all E2
nodes, considering, in the worst case, all available CNs.
V. RIC O RCHESTRATOR
This section describes the architecture of the RIC-O which is responsible for the dynamic
and efﬁcient placement of the disaggregated Near-RT RIC components. The architecture of the
RIC-O is shown in Fig. 4, along with some of the RIC components required to describe the17
orchestrator. RIC-O was designed considering components that run in both Non-RT RIC and
Near-RT RIC. The RIC-O Optimizer and RIC-O Deployer run on the Non-RT RIC, while
theRIC-O Triggers execute on the Metrics Server of the Near-RT RIC. The Monitoring
System is in charge of monitoring resource usage of the Near-RT RIC components, E2 Nodes ,
andO-Cloud infrastructure, in addition to throwing alerts whenever it detects threshold violations
in the latency-sensitive control loop.
Near-RT RIC Near-RT RIC 
Management Service Management and Orchestration (SMO) 
Non-RT RIC 
E2 Nodes (RAN) SDL/STSL RIC-O Optimizer RIC-O Deployer 
O2 
O-Cloud NIBs NIBs xApps xApps xApp
E2 O1A1
Monitoring System 
Alert Manager Metrics Server 
RIC-O Triggers TSDB 
xApps xApps E2T
Fig. 4. RIC-O architecture.
The Metrics Server is a monitoring module that collects metrics information from all
xApp andE2T instances running on the Near-RT RIC platform. Example metrics include CPU
utilization, memory usage, and the communication latency to monitored instances. The latency
to access SDL/STSL shared layers and databases are also collected by the Metrics Server .
All metrics are stored in a time-series database ( TSDB ) for further processing and reporting.
The RIC-O Triggers component consists of predeﬁned alert rules (e.g., the latency is above a
given threshold) upon the occurrence of which an alert is generated. As the Metrics Server
detects some metric violation that is associated with some trigger, it notiﬁes the Alert Manager
that a metric has been violated. The Alert Manager , in its turn, sends a message to the RIC-O18
Optimizer requesting a new round of optimization to reconﬁgure the system so that it can satisfy
the metric that has been violated.
When a request is delivered to the RIC-O Optimizer , it fetches the current metric measure-
ments from the Metrics Server , executing the optimization strategies described in Section IV.
The heuristic and optimal optimization strategies run in parallel. The heuristic strategy should
ﬁnd a new solution quickly. However, the optimal strategy is executed even if the heuristic
completes earlier. The solution generated by the optimal strategy is only applied if is superior to
the heuristic and if it becomes available before a new notiﬁcation of metric violation. The RIC-O
Optimizer sends the conﬁguration of the computed solution to the RIC-O Deployer , which
redeploys the Near-RT RIC components accordingly. The redeployment is only executed if the
RIC-O Optimizer ﬁnds a solution different from the previous one. Lastly, the RIC-O Deployer
uses the standardized O2interface deﬁned by O-RAN to exchange messages with the O-Cloud
element to effectively apply the new placement.
VI. I MPLEMENTATION
We implemented a proof-of-concept prototype of RIC-O to validate and evaluate our proposal.
The prototype is described in this section, along with the testbed used for its evaluation. RIC-O
Optimizer andRIC-O Deployer were implemented using the Python language. The Monitoring
System component comprises the monitoring subsystem of the Near-RT RIC platform [21] that
runs on Kubernetes (K8S). The Near-RT RIC uses Prometheus to collect metrics, and Metrics
Server corresponds to the main Prometheus server. Metrics are collected at the pod and cluster
levels and stored as time series data in the internal Prometheus database ( TSDB ). Prometheus
was a natural choice to collect metrics in our proposal since it is the native solution of K8S for
data collection and is part of the Near-RT RIC platform from the O-RAN SC.
We also employed the Alert Manager component from Prometheus to handle alerts issued by
different client applications (e.g., Metrics Server ). Alert handling may include deduplicating,
grouping, silencing, inhibiting, and routing alerts to other endpoints. The Alert Manager notiﬁes
RIC-O Optimizer of the need for starting a new optimization round when a given RIC-O trigger
detects a latency threshold has been violated. The RIC-O Triggers element was implemented
using the Prometheus Query Language (PromQL). In this context, our prototype monitors CPU,
memory, and network latency from K8S system pods, Near-RT RIC pods, and K8S nodes.
One of the monitored metrics is the latency-sensitive control loop of the Near-RT RIC, which19
cannot surpass a given threshold (i.e., above 10ms for certain control loops). Upon reaching this
threshold, a trigger launches the RIC-O Optimizer to compute a new placement solution for
the Near-RT RIC components. After the optimization is computed, a notiﬁcation is delivered to
RIC-O Deployer , which redeploys the Near-RT RIC components based on the outcome of the
RIC-O Optimizer .
Figure 5 shows the message exchange between the RIC-O components, Monitoring System,
Near-RT RIC components, and the O-Cloud element while orchestrating the optimization and
deployment tasks. Initially, the deployment is executed as a response to the original request
coming from the network operator. Subsequently, a re-deploy is executed only after the Alert
Manager sends a notiﬁcation to the RIC-O Optimizer due to a latency violation in the Near-RT
RIC control loop or due to the unavailability of required computing resources in the O-Cloud
element.
Notify RIC (Re)deployment Send metrics data 
Request metrics data 
SMO 
RIC-O 
Deployer RIC-O 
Optimizer Near-RT RIC 
Components O-Cloud Alert 
Manager 
Deploy (Re)allocation Plan 
Instantiate RIC Components 
Notify Instantiation 
Deallocate RIC Components 
Notify Deallocation Run Optimization 5
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15Monitoring 
System 
Send metrics data 
Send metrics data from RIC and O-Cloud 1
2
3
4
6
7
Only on 
Redeploying For
Each 
Demand Reallocation Plan Request metrics data 
Request metrics data from RIC and O-Cloud 
Send (Re)allocation Plan Monitoring 
Loop 
Fig. 5. Messages exchanged for Near-RT RIC optimization.
The Monitoring System shown in Fig. 5 collects metrics regularly from the Near-RT RIC
Components and the O-Cloud element. These metrics include CPU and memory usage of20
Near-RT RIC pods, K8S nodes, and their communication latency (messages 1, 2, 3, and 4).
The Monitoring Loop is executed regularly at every second. Once Metrics Server notiﬁes
Alert Manager that a given RIC-O trigger has been violated, message 5 is delivered to RIC-O
Optimizer .
Afterward, the RIC-O Optimizer starts a reallocation plan to compute the placement of the
Near-RT RIC Components that run on the O-Cloud element. RIC-O Optimizer then requests
metrics information that includes the available computing resources of K8S pods, CNs, and the
communication latency between them (messages 6 and 7), which is the information required
as input for the optimization strategies. Next, the heuristic and optimal strategies are initiated
and run in parallel (message 8). Once an outcome from the optimization strategies becomes
available, it is sent to the RIC-O Deployer in message 9. Eventually, if there is enough time
for computing the optimal solution, two outcomes are generated. The RIC-O Deployer , in turn,
starts deploying the new (re)allocation plan in O-Cloud through the O2 interface deﬁned by
O-RAN (message 10). Near-RT RIC components are instantiated by O-Cloud , which is notiﬁed
when all the components are deployed (messages 11 and 12). In the particular case when the
Near-RT RIC components were deployed previously, O-Cloud releases the resources of the Near-
RT RIC components that are no longer required (messages 13 and 14). Finally, O-Cloud notiﬁes
theRIC-O Deployer that the deployment has ﬁnished (message 15).
We also implemented an extended xApp and an E2 simulator (E2Sim), both coded in C++
language. Our implementation is based on the open-source versions of the Bouncer xApp*and
the E2Sim†from the O-RAN SC. Moreover, we included new features and updated the service
models of both the Bouncer xApp and E2Sim. Originally, the Bouncer and E2Sim employed the
Key Performance Measurement service model (E2SM-KPM) to expose performance measure-
ments of logical functions running on E2 Nodes [22]. However, E2SM-KPM does not support
RAN control through the E2AP Control service. Therefore, we implemented the E2SM-RC
(RAN Control) [23] service model, which provides RAN control. Figure 6 shows the message
exchange between the Bouncer xApp, E2Sim , and Near-RT RIC components. The goal is to
monitor the latency-sensitive control loop between the E2 nodes and the corresponding xApp.
We assume that all the Near-RT RIC components and E2Sim are already set up and running
*https://gerrit.o-ran-sc.org/r/admin/repos/ric-app/bouncer
†https://gerrit.o-ran-sc.org/r/admin/repos/sim/e2-interface21
when Bouncer xApp is deployed.
Control 
Loop Near-RT RIC Management 
loop Registration Request 
Registration Response 
REST Subscription Request 
RIC Subscription Response RIC Subscription Request Subscription 
Manager Routing 
Manager xApp 
Manager E2T E2Sim 
REST Subscription Response 
Route Create 
E2 Subscription Request 
E2 Subscription Response 
REST Subscription Notification 3.1
3.2
3.3
4
65
7
8Bouncer 
xApp List Request 
RIC Insert Request 
RIC Insert Request 1.1
1.2
9
10
RIC Control 
RIC Control 11
123.4xApp List Response 
Route Create 
a) Update Routes 
b) Update Routes 
a) Update Routes 
b) Update Routes 2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.4
3.4par
Fig. 6. Messages exchanged for xApp deployment and execution.
When Bouncer xApp initializes, it registers itself with the Near-RT RIC platform by sending
a registration message to xApp Manager , which sends back a reply indicating the outcome
(messages 1.1 and 1.2). In the meantime, the Routing Manager periodically retrieves the list
of xApps registered in xApp Manager to set up the corresponding routing rules in the Near-RT
RIC platform (messages 2.1 and 2.2). Moreover, the Routing Manager builds a routing table
for all registered xApps (message 2.3) and then distributes it to Bouncer andE2T (messages
2.4a and 2.4b). These routes are required to allow transparent and dynamic message delivery to
the endpoints concerned in the communication. During the registration, the Bouncer xApp also22
subscribes to Subscription Manager to receive messages from the E2AP Insert service from
the RAN (messages 3.1 and 3.2). Upon receiving the subscription request, the Subscription
Manager notiﬁes Routing Manager to create the corresponding routing rules to deliver those
messages to Bouncer xApp (message 3.3). Next, the Routing Manager distributes the generated
routing rules to the respective endpoints (messages 3.4a and 3.4b).
Additionally, the Subscription Manager issues a new subscription request (message 4) to
theE2T, which implements the E2 interface to communicate with E2 nodes. The E2T then
deals with the subscription communication with the E2Sim (messages 5 and 6) according to the
subscription that the Bouncer xApp has generated in message 3.1. The communication between
E2TandE2Sim is established through Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP). Messages
7 and 8 notify Subscription Manager andBouncer xApp about the subscription outcome. At
this point, Bouncer xApp is fully deployed in the Near-RT RIC platform, and communication
with E2Sim can take place through the E2Tcomponent.
TheControl Loop block in Fig. 6 illustrates the latency-sensitive control loop of 10ms. When
a given E2 node issues a RIC Insert Request message to the Near-RT RIC, the E2 node suspends
its execution and waits for the corresponding reply message (i.e., RIC Control) to resume its
operation. Messages 9-12 illustrate this control loop that needs to complete within the 10ms
threshold. If no RIC Control message is delivered within this threshold time, a default action is
executed by the E2 node, which usually implies penalties in the optimization and performance of
RAN. Moreover, we implemented the capability of computing the control loop latency between
E2Sim andBouncer xApp. In this case, E2Sim collects the timestamps on sending message 9 and
receiving message 12. The latency-sensitive control loop is exported to the Prometheus metrics
collector.
VII. E VALUATION
This section presents a performance evaluation of RIC-O both from a theoretical perspective,
using analytical modeling (in Subsection VII-A), and from a practical perspective, employing
real-world experiments (in Subsection VII-B). The ﬁrst part of the evaluation focuses on scala-
bility, while the second mainly deals with timing issues.23
A. Analytical modeling
In this part of the evaluation, we assume as RAN topology a next-generation hierarchical
network with 512 E2 nodes organized in three main tiers [24]. The top one (Tier-1) is closest
to the core and so to the cloud node (i.e., c0). The one-way latency (in ms) between the tiers
is a uniform random choice from the set f1;2;2;3;3g, and the one-way latency from Tier-1
toc0is 4ms. We vary the number of edge computing nodes (i.e., cm2C) along the network
tiers and, for each number of CNs, extract an overlay topology equivalent to the one shown
in Fig. 2. There is always a cloud node, and all others are edge computing nodes distributed
from bottom to top in the hierarchical RAN network as the number of CNs increases. The cloud
node has no ﬁxed cost and presents the following variable cost for Near-RT RIC components:
two (RIC Man, E2T), one (SDL/STSL, NIBs), and one (xApp). There are two xApps, and both
of them access the database, i.e., SDL/STSL and NIBs. Additional information about underlay
RAN topology, and Near-RT RIC is presented in Table I.
Parameters Tier-1 Tier-2 Tier-3
Number of E2 nodes 5 20 487
CN ﬁxed cost 10 20 30
CN variable cost: (RIC Man, E2T),
(SDL/STSL, NIBs), (xApps)4, 2, 1 8, 4, 2 16, 8, 4
cProc
m (cores) 32 16 8
cMem
m (GB) 64 32 16
cSto
m(GB) 256 256 256
Near-RT RIC requirements Proc Mem Sto
RIC Man 4 8 4
E2T 2 4 2
SDL/STSL 2 4 1
NIBs 1 2 50
xApps 1 2 1
TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF THE UNDERLAY RAN TOPOLOGY AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE NEAR-RT RIC COMPONENTS .
We ﬁrst investigate to which extent the complexity of the exact optimization model (Sub-
section IV-B) limits its scalability. Although our heuristic strategy (Subsection IV-C) is very
efﬁcient, it is necessary to investigate the quality of its solutions, i.e., how close to optimal those
solutions tend to be. Therefore, we evaluate and compare the optimal and heuristic strategies24
regarding computing time and objective function as presented in Fig. 7. The computing time is
related to the scalability of each strategy, and the objective function, i.e., the total cost, represents
the quality of the solution. Moreover, the metrics vary as a function of the number of CNs.
Fig. 7. Comparison between the optimal and heuristic strategies regarding computing time and total cost (objective function).
We can observe in Fig. 7 that the optimal strategy scales poorly, being unable to ﬁnd a solution
for a RAN with 12 CNs even after running for an entire day. Therefore, the optimal strategy
is rarely helpful for large real-world instances. Nevertheless, the heuristic strategy scales very
well and ﬁnds a solution for 512 CNs in less than 10 seconds. Concerning the quality of the
solutions, as expected, the heuristic strategy cannot always ﬁnd the optimal solution. However,
a decreasing trend can be discerned in the objective function that suggests the heuristic strategy
is in the right direction, including in scenarios with a large number of CNs, e.g., 512 CNs. In
those cases, the cheapest edge computing nodes (i.e., those in Tier-1) are readily available, and
the solution improves noticeably.
We further investigate the optimization strategies by evaluating the number of instances of the
main Near-RT RIC components involved in the latency-sensitive control loop, i.e., xApps and
E2T. As presented in Fig. 8, our heuristic strategy ﬁnds the best (i.e., the smallest) number of E2T
instances, matching the result obtained by the optimal strategy when this is available and keeping
it at the minimum (i.e., one instance) as the number of CNs increases. Moreover, the heuristic
strategy ﬁnds some non-optimal solutions for the number of xApps instances, e.g., with four25
2 4 6 8 10 12 16 32 64 128 256 512
CNs (#)012345Instances (#)
Heuristic
OptimalxApps
xAppsE2T
E2T
Fig. 8. Comparison between optimal and heuristic strategies regarding the number of xApps and E2T instances.
and six CNs. This behavior is expected from our heuristic strategy because it prioritizes Near-
RT RIC components involved in the latency-sensitive control loop in the following order: E2T,
xApps, SDL/STSL, and NIBs. Since latency optimization and cost optimization are performed
in this order and without revisiting previous decisions for improvement, the heuristic strategy
potentially ﬁnds non-optimal solutions involving xApps, SDL/STSL, or NIBs.
B. Real-world experiments
In this part of the evaluation, we run the experiments in a scenario with ﬁve CNs, which are
virtual machines (VMs) with the following conﬁguration: 4 vCPUs, 8 GB RAM, and 50 GB
of the virtual disk. One CN represents the cloud node (i.e., c0), and the others represent the
edge computing nodes (i.e., cm2C). These CNs are worker nodes in a K8S cluster managed
by a master node running a sixth VM with the following conﬁguration: eight vCPUs, 16 GB
RAM, and 100 GB of the virtual disk. All VMs are hosted on a DELL PowerEdge M610 server
with four Intel Xeon X5660 processors and 192 GB RAM, which runs VMware ESXi 6.7 as the
hypervisor. Additional details about the software tools employed in the experiments are available
in the public repository of this article. We also employed an E2 simulator to represent four E2
nodes that must be served by the Near-RT RIC. Overlay and underlay topologies are the same
in this part of the evaluation and correspond to the one presented in Fig. 2.
To illustrate the orchestration capabilities of RIC-O, we designed two scenarios in which the
latency-sensitive control loop is disrupted and show how our proposal acts to bring the Near-RT
RIC back to normal operation. In the ﬁrst scenario, RIC-O must deal with a sudden and high
increase in the latency of the path used to serve a certain E2 node. The second scenario is
more challenging because RIC-O needs to deal with a CN that becomes unavailable, i.e., any26
latency-sensitive control loop involving this CN disappears since the Near-RT RIC components
running in it suddenly become inaccessible.
In a real-world RAN, the latency between a pair of nodes may change due to a (re)route
decision in the underlying network, for example. Since our underlay network matches the overlay
one, we emulate the sudden increase in the latency between the E2 node and its corresponding
E2T by reconﬁguring the latency in the virtual link connecting these nodes. Figure 9 illustrates the
main events occurring along the time in this scenario. This ﬁgure shows the status of the control
loop between each E2 node and its corresponding xApp. In addition, the ﬁgure presents the CPU
utilization of some essential software components (i.e., RIC-O Deployer ,RIC-O Optimizer ,
xApps, and E2T), which helps keep track of the actions performed by RIC-O.
Control loop 
failure Control loop 
satisfied Start 
redeploy Optimization 
trigger 
Fig. 9. Reaction to a sudden violation of requirements of the latency-sensitive control loop.
As illustrated in Fig. 9, the ﬁrst scenario is initially in a fully operational state, and the
latency-sensitive control loop of each E2 node is satisﬁed by the Near-RT RIC thanks to the
initial orchestration deﬁned by RIC-O. Then, at time instant 150s, the latency of the control loop
from E2 node 4 increases suddenly and remains persistently above 10ms, as indicated by event
Control loop failure in the ﬁgure. After 10 seconds, the Monitoring System considers that the
event is a consistent control loop violation and notiﬁes the RIC-O Optimizer to compute a
new solution, at time instant 160s, as indicated by the event Optimization trigger . The heuristic
strategy of the RIC-O Optimizer quickly ﬁnds a solution and requests RIC-O Deployer to apply27
this new placement nearly 5 seconds later, as indicated by the event Start redeploy . The RIC-O
Optimizer keeps running the optimal strategy thread. Finally, the redeploy of the Near-RT RIC
components and reconﬁguration of E2 nodes completes at time instant 200s, as indicated by
event Control loop satisﬁed , when the latency-sensitive control loop is again limited to 10ms.
Figure 9, and also Fig. 10 show a few measurements of the control loop that go above 10ms.
This behavior is related to the underlying operating system and virtualization platform (i.e.,
hypervisor). A tight threshold of 10ms is on such a sensitive scale that even a traditional process
scheduler may sometimes cause a small variation. Since ﬁne-tuning those systems are out of the
scope of this work, we conﬁgured the Monitoring System to report only persistent violations
of the 10ms threshold in latency-sensitive control loops.
The second scenario, in which a CN suddenly crashes, may either represent a software or
hardware failure, or network outage. We emulate this behavior by abruptly forcing a shutdown
of the VM running the CN. Figure 10 illustrates the main events occurring along the time in
this scenario. Similar to Fig. 9, Fig. 10 also shows the status of the control loop between each
E2 node and its corresponding xApp. However, we have not identiﬁed relevant information that
justiﬁed presenting measurements related to Near-RT RIC nor RIC-O components.
CN down Finish 
redeploy Start 
redeploy Optimization 
trigger 
Fig. 10. Reaction to sudden unavailability of CN under use.
As illustrated in Fig. 10, the second scenario also starts from a fully operational state, where
the latency-sensitive control loops of all E2 nodes are satisﬁed by the Near-RT RIC thanks to the
initial orchestration deﬁned by RIC-O. The CN running Near-RT RIC components responsible
for serving the E2 node 4 suddenly becomes unavailable, as indicated by the event CN down
in the ﬁgure. In this case, the latency-sensitive control loop of this E2 node is totally disrupted,
i.e., there are no more measurements of the control loop. After 50 seconds, the Monitoring
System detects the problem and notiﬁes the RIC-O Optimizer to compute a new solution, as28
indicated by the event Optimization trigger . This time interval for reporting the problem may
seem long, but it is the default K8S policy for detecting worker node unavailability. Again,
after nearly 5 seconds, the heuristic strategy of RIC-O Optimizer ﬁnds a solution and requests
RIC-O Deployer to apply the new placement, as indicated by the event Start redeploy . Finally,
the redeployment of the Near-RT RIC components ﬁnishes, and the latency-sensitive control loop
of E2 node 4 is reestablished at time instant 130s, as indicated by the event Finish redeploy .
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we claim that the most efﬁcient approach to ensure that the Near-RT RIC is able to
deal with a large real-world RAN is by disaggregating and distributing its components. However,
it is necessary to orchestrate these components properly across the edge-cloud continuum to
ensure the latency-sensitive control loop that involves xApps running over the Near-RT RIC.
Therefore, we propose the RIC orchestrator (RIC-O) that employs a hybrid strategy combining
optimal and heuristic strategies for efﬁcient placement of the Near-RT RIC components. We
evaluate RIC-O through analytical modeling and real-world experiments to illustrate its properties
and beneﬁts. Future work includes the investigation of machine learning-based time series
forecasting for improving the orchestration of Near-RT RIC components. Moreover, the adoption
of the O-RAN architecture by large-scale production networks will provide additional data on
its usage, thus allowing extensive investigation of novel optimization techniques. Finally, we
envision the potential of the RIC-O being adopted as part of the Non-RT RIC, running as an
rApp, which will demand further experiments and software integration.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was conducted with partial ﬁnancial support from the National Council for Scientiﬁc
and Technological Development (CNPq) under Grant Nos. 405111/2021-5 and 130555/2019-3
and from the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES) -
Finance Code 001, Brazil. Moreover, RNP partially supported the work, with resources from
MCTIC, Grant No. 01245.010604/2020-14, under the 6G Mobile Communications Systems
project and by MCTIC/CGI.br/S ˜ao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) through the Project
SAMURAI - Smart 5G Core And MUltiRAn Integration under Grant 2020/05127-2 and Pro-
grammability, ORchestration and VIRtualization of 5G Networks (PORVIR-5G) under Grant No.
2020/05182-3.29
REFERENCES
[1] V . S. Pana, O. P. Babalola, and V . Balyan, “5G radio access networks: A survey,” Array , vol. 14, p. 100170, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2590005622000315
[2] O-RAN Alliance, “O-RAN Alliance,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.o-ran.org/
[3] A. Garcia-Saavedra and X. Costa-P ´erez, “O-RAN: Disrupting the Virtualized RAN Ecosystem,” IEEE Communications
Standards Magazine , vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 96–103, 2021.
[4] O-RAN Alliance, “O-RAN Architecture Description,” O-RAN Alliance, Tech. Rep. O-RAN.WG1.O-RAN-Architecture-
Description-v07.00, 2022.
[5] 3GPP, “3GPP TS 38.401 V17.1.1 - NG-RAN; Architecture description,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Tech.
Rep., 2022.
[6] B. Balasubramanian et al. , “RIC: A RAN Intelligent Controller Platform for AI-Enabled Cellular Networks,” IEEE Internet
Computing , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 7–17, 2021.
[7] M. Dryja ´nski and A. Kliks, “The O-RAN Whitepaper 2022 RAN Intelligent Controller, xApps and rApps,” RIMEDO
Labs, Tech. Rep., 2022.
[8] S. D’Oro et al. , “OrchestRAN: Network Automation through Orchestrated Intelligence in the Open RAN,” in IEEE
Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM) , 2022, pp. 270–279.
[9] O-RAN Alliance, “Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller Architecture & E2 General Aspects and Principles,” O-RAN
Alliance, Tech. Rep. O-RAN.WG3.E2GAP-v02.02, 2022.
[10] ——, “Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller, E2 Application Protocol (E2AP),” O-RAN Alliance, Tech. Rep. O-
RAN.WG3.E2AP-v02.03, 2022.
[11] ——, “O-RAN.WG1.Use-Cases-Detailed-Speciﬁcation-v09.00,” O-RAN Alliance, Tech. Rep., 2022.
[12] ——. O-RAN Software Community (SC). [Online]. Available: https://oran-osc.github.io
[13] A. K. Singh and K. Khoa Nguyen, “Joint Selection of Local Trainers and Resource Allocation for Federated Learning in
Open RAN Intelligent Controllers,” in IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC) , 2022, pp.
1874–1879.
[14] A. Huff, M. Hiltunen, and E. P. Duarte, “RFT: Scalable and Fault-Tolerant Microservices for the O-RAN Control Plane,”
inIFIP/IEEE International Symposium on Integrated Network Management (IM) , 2021, pp. 402–409.
[15] R. Schmidt, M. Irazabal, and N. Nikaein, “FlexRIC: an SDK for next-generation SD-RANs,” in 17th International
Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies (CoNEXT) , 2021, p. 411–425.
[16] B. Balasubramanian et al. , “RIC: A RAN Intelligent Controller Platform for AI-Enabled Cellular Networks,” IEEE Internet
Computing , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 7–17, 2021.
[17] Y . Cao et al. , “Federated Deep Reinforcement Learning for User Access Control in Open Radio Access Networks,” in
IEEE International Conference on Communications , 2021, pp. 1–6.
[18] ——, “User Access Control in Open Radio Access Networks: A Federated Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 3721–3736, 2022.
[19] D. Johnson, D. Maas, and J. V . D. Merwe, “NexRAN: Closed-loop RAN slicing in POWDER -A top-to-bottom open-source
open-RAN use case,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM Workshop on Wireless Network Testbeds, Experimental evaluation
(WiNTECH) , 2021, pp. 17–23.
[20] A. D. Pia et al. , “Mixed-integer quadratic programming is in NP,” Mathematical Programming , vol. 162, no. 1, pp.
225–240, 2017.
[21] O-RAN SC, “RIC Alarm System,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://wiki.o-ran-sc.org/display/RICP/RIC+Alarm+System30
[22] O-RAN Alliance, “Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller E2 Service Model (E2SM) KPM,” O-RAN Alliance, Tech.
Rep. O-RAN.WG3.E2SM-KPM-v02.02, 2022.
[23] ——, “Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller E2 Service Model (E2SM), RAN Control,” O-RAN Alliance, Tech.
Rep. ORAN.WG3.E2SM-RC-v01.02, 2022.
[24] F. Z. Morais, G. M. F. De Almeida, L. L. Pinto, K. Cardoso, L. M. Contreras, R. d. R. Righi, and C. B. Both, “PlaceRAN:
optimal placement of virtualized network functions in Beyond 5G radio access networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Computing ,
pp. 1–1, 2022.