Sub-ppb aerosol detection at a distance of 30 meters by millijoule 
femtosecond laser pulse filamentation in air  
Jiewei Guo a,b,c,#, Zhi Zhanga,b,c,#, Nan Zhanga,b,c*, Binpeng Shanga,d, Jiayun Xuea,d, Yuezheng Wanga,c, Shishi Taoa,c, 
Bofu Xiea,c, Lanjun Gu oa,b,d, Lie Lina,b,d, Weiwei Liua,b,c* 
a Institute of Modern Optics, Eye Institute, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China  
b Tianjin Eye Hospital , Tianjin  300020, China  
c Tianjin Key Laboratory of Micro -scale Optical Information Science and Technology, T ianjin 300350,  China  
dTianjin Key Laboratory of Optoelec tronic Sensor and Sensing Network Technology, Tianjin 300350, China  
# Equal contributors  
* Corresponding author. E -mail: zhangn@nankai.edu.cn , liuweiwei@nankai.edu.cn   
 
ABSTRACT  In this work, sub -ppb aerosol detection is achieved by femtosecond laser  filament with a single pulse energy of 4 mJ at a 
distance of  30 m. A concave mirror with an open aperture of 41.4 cm is employed in an off -axis optical system to focus the femtosecond 
laser beam and collect the fluorescence of NaCl aerosol. The simulation  and experimental results show that the astigmatism can be gr eatly 
reduced when femtosecond laser beam is incident non -symmetrically on the concave mirror. Compared with the case that femtosecond 
laser strikes at the center of the concave mirror, the inten sity of the optical filament is increased by 69.5 times, and the detection of limit 
of sodium chloride aerosol is reduced by 86%, which is down to 0.32 ppb. The improved excitation scheme in this work utilizes the 
nonsymmetrical beam spot on the concave m irror to compensate the non -symmetry induced by the off -axis setup, reducing the 
astigmatism of the focusing laser beam and improving the aerosol’s detection of limit . 
KEYWORDS  femtosecond laser filamentation; sub -ppb detection of limit; astigmatism compensation ; remote sensing .  
 
1. Introduction  
During the propagat ion of high intensity femtosecond laser pulses in transparent media, the laser beam can 
overcome the natural diffraction and form a plasma channel with a diameter of ~100  
um , which is termed of optical 
filament [1-4]. The formation of the laser filament can be attributed to the dynamic balance among the beam 
diffraction, the optical Kerr effect induced self -focusing and the defocusing by t he plasma [5]. Femtosecond laser 
filament has a nearly constant laser intensity of about 1013 ~ 1014 W/cm2 [6, 7] , which is sufficient to cause the 
ioniza tion and fragmentation of molecules [8]. The ionization or dissociation of molecules or atoms emits the 
fingerprint fluorescence spectrum during the relaxation process, which  provides the capability of detecting the 
chemical compo sition in a long distanc e[9-12]. 
Compared with the current methods of atmospheric aerosol composition detection, such as ion chromatography 
(IC)[13], gas chromatography (GC) [14], atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) [15], mass spectrometry (MS) [16], 
etc., femtosecond laser filament -induced plasma spectroscop y (FIPS) can realize rea l-time remote sensing of the 
chemical composition of air pollutants in different forms, such as sol id, aerosol, gas, etc., which has aroused 
widespread research interest. In pr evious works, Daigle et al. [17] reported that the detection limit was ~33ppm with 
femtosecond laser pulses of 72 mJ at a distance of 5 0 m. Then, Daigle et al. [18] reported the det ection limits for 
different constituents in aerosol: 12 7 mg/L (127 ppm) for Fe, 27 mg/L (27 ppm) for Cu, 9 mg/L  (9 ppm) for Pb, and 
3mg/L (3 ppm) for Na. Recently, using a femtosecond laser with relatively low pulse energy (4.4 mJ), Golik et al. [19] 
measur ed the filament -induced fluorescence of aerosols containing Al, Ba, N a, etc. The detection limit of Na was 0.7 
mg/L (0.7 ppm)  at a distance of 0.5 m.  Figure 1 compares the detection limit of Na measured in this work and the 
detection limits achieved in lit eratures. It should be noted that the limit of detection reported in literatures is presented 
in the form of the mass ratio o f the metal element in t he water droplet (solution concentration). For the convenience of 
comparison, the limit of detection obtain ed in this work is also presented by the solution concentration (0.02 5 ppm, 
corresponding to 0.32 ppb in air) in Figure 1 . 2                            
 
Fig. 1. Reported detecti on limits with different laser pulse energies at different distances. [17-23] The red ball represents the measurement 
results reporte d in the literatures, and the “NK” logo represents the mea surement result in this work . 
 
The femtosecond laser is considered an attractive LIDAR technology for real -time detection of atmospheric aerosol 
composition due to its unique filamentation pro perties i n the atmosphere. However, improving the detection 
sensi tivity is still a techni cal problem faced by this technology. The self -focusing distance is proportional to the 
square of the beam diameter [17], but in fact, femtosecond laser filamentation s ystem composed of refraction optical 
components is difficult to achieve large diameter, light weight and low cost [24, 25] . Although reflective femtosecond 
laser filamentation system has the advantages of large aperture, no chromatic aberration, light weigh t and lo w cost 
which is widely used in atmospheric remote sensin g and Earth observation [26-28], astigmatism is inevitably 
introduced for the off -axis optical system composed of a concave lens and a large diameter concave mi rror. Therefore, 
a simple and eff icient scheme that can reduce the astigmatism o f the off -axis system is badly needed for increasing the 
intensity of the filament. Daigle et al. replaced the concave lens with a deformable mirror to correct the wavefront 
aberration in a closed -loop system [29]. However, the low energy  efficiency and low damage threshold of deformable 
mirro rs limit the application  in the remote sensing by high intensity femtosecond laser filamentation. Spatial light 
modulators (SLM) are also used to correct the astigmatism [30-32]. However, SLM's low laser damage thres hold 
limits its operatio n in high -power laser systems. Recently, Tao et al. proposed to eliminate astigmatism by designing a 
phase plate with free -form surface [33], whereas one phase plate is onl y suitable for cer tain optical setup with fixed 
focal le ngth.  
In this paper, we found experimentally that the astigmatism in the off -axis femtosecond laser filamentation system 
can be reduced by breaking the symmetry of the beam spot distribution on the co ncave mirror. The numerical 
simulations demonstrate that  most of the wavefront d istortion due to the off -axis configuration can be corrected by the 
non-symmetrical incidence of the laser beam on the concave mirror. After compensating the astigmatism, a fil ament 
was generated at a distance of 30 m, which is prac ticall y limited by the l ab size. The intensity of the optical filament is 
increased by 69.5 times, and the detection of limit of sodium chloride aerosol is reduced by 86%, which is down to a 
record of  0.32 ppb in air, corresponding to 0.025 ppm (mass conce ntrati on) of Na+ in aero sol droplets.  
3. 2. Setup design and numerical simulations  
To enhance th e filament intensity and improve the detection limit of aerosol, the astigmatism of the off -axis 
femtose cond laser filamentation system must be reduced as much as possible. The off -axis optical setup is simulated 
using Zemax software. In Figure 2a the col limated laser beam is focused at a distance of 30 m using the lens group 
composed of a plano -concave lens  ( = 25 mm, f = -150 mm ) and a concave mirror (  = 41.4  cm, f = 2 m ). The 
diver gent laser beam after passing through the concave lens strikes on the concave mirror at an incident angle of 2.5° . 
Further deceasing the incident angle will cause the laser bea m focused by the concave mirror be blocked by the beam 
steering mirror (M1 in Fi gure 2a). The beam spot diameter 
2(1 )e  on the concave mirror is 20.2 cm. W hen the beam 
spot on the concave mirror is symmetric relative to the center of th e concave mirror, obvious astigmatism appears near 
the focal spot as is shown in  the insets of Figure 2a. Sagittal beam and tangential beam conver ge before and after the    
  3 
 geome tric focus of the system, respectively. To quantitatively present the astigmatism  of the setup in Figure 2a, the 
dependences of the beam diameters  
2(1 )e  along X and Y directions on the laser propagation distance were 
calculated and shown in Figure 2b. From Fig ure 2b, it is found that the distance between the sagitt al and tangential 
focus lines is 40 cm for the setup in Figure 2a. With the help  of Zemax software, the wavefront phase on the concave 
mirror can be calculated, which is shown in Figure 2c. It indicat es that the non -symmetric wavefront phase exists on 
the concave mirror leads to the large astigmatism when the b eam strikes at the cente r of the concave mirror . 
In order to evaluate the astigmatism of Figure 2a quantitatively, the aberration characteristics of the system were 
analyzed through the wave aberratio n of the system , and the zernike fringe polynomial was u sed to characterize the 
wave aberration of the system, where the fifth and sixth terms ( Z5 and Z6) of the Zernike Fringe polynomials 
respectively representing the astigmatism in X and Y directions are  calculated. Z5 is 
() ( )2
5 cos 2 C P A  and Z6 is 
() ( )2
6 sin 2 C P A
, in which A is the angle measured counterclockwise from the local +x axis, P is the normalized 
radial coordinate, C5 and C6 are astigmatism coefficients. Since the laser bea m is incident on the concave mirror 
obliquely in the XOZ  plane, only  C5 in the x  direction is non -zero, which is calculated to be 
1.26 , and 
60 C= .  
It is found numerically that when the concave mirror moves toward s -x direction, C5 gradually decreases to zero. 
When the  beam spot is just tange nt to the edge of the concave mirror as is shown in Figure 3a, i .e. the concave mirror 
shifts 10.6 cm towards -x direction, most of the astigmatism can be reduced (see Figure 3 b) and the wavefront of the 
beam spot on the concave mir ror is nearly symmetric (see Figure 3c). In this case, C5 and C6 are respectively 0.045λ 
and 0. The beam profiles at different propagat ion distances are shown in the insets of Figure 3a. Clearly, the beam 
quality near the focal spot has been greatly improv ed. 
The main difference betwe en the two optical setups in Figures 2a and 3a is the different relative position between 
the laser beam spot and the concave mirror which is shown in Figure 4a. Figure 4b  illustrates the variations of the 
astigmatic parameter β along the propagation direc tion for the optical system with central/edge incidence. The 
astigmatic parameter β is defined as the ratio of the beam width 
( , )jW j X Y=  in the X and Y directions. 
1=   
represents the beam  spot is circular. It is  seen from Figure 4b that the edge incidence fully optim izes the astigmatism 
of the off -axis system, and the beam spot has a circular shape . 
 
 
Fig. 2.  Off-axis reflective filamentation system. The laser beam strikes at the center o f the concave mirror. (a ) Off -axis reflective setup; (b) 
dependences of the beam diam eters in X and Y directions on the propagation distance; (c) wavefront phase distribution of the incident 
laser on the concave mirro r. 4                            
 
Fig. 3. Off-axis reflective filame ntation system. The lase r beam strikes non -symmetrically on the concave mirror. (a) Off -axis reflective 
setup; (b) dependences of the beam diameters in X and Y directio ns on the propagation distance; (c) wavefront phase distribution of the 
incident laser o n the concave mirror . 
 
Fig. 4. (a) Different relative position between the beam spot and the concave mirror in Figures 2a and 3a; (b) variations of the asti gmatic 
parameter β along the propagation direction . 
 
3. Experimental results and discussions  
3.1. Off-axis reflection system for femtosecond laser filamentation and aerosol detection  
In this work, a commercial Ti:Sapphire femtosecond laser system (Legend Elite, Coher ent In c.) was employed to 
generate 500 Hz, 35 fs, 800 nm, 4 mJ laser pulses. The schematic diagram of the experimental setup is shown in 
Figure 5a. The laser pulse output from the laser system was focused by a lens group consisting of a concave lens ( L1, 
 = 25 mm, f = −150 mm ) and a concave mirror ( L2,  = 41.4 cm, f = 2 m) which is identical to those used in the 
numerical simulations. The geometrical focus of the lens group locates 30 m away from the concave mirror (L2). The 
laser pulse is incident non -symmetri cally  on one side of the concave mirror after passing through the concave lens, 
and the reflected laser beam by the concave mirror is focused and form optical filament at a distance of 30 m relative 
to the concave mirror (L2).  
In order to characterize  the lengt h and intensity distribution of the optical filament, a microphone (V306, Olympus. 
Ltd) combined with an amplifier (5072PR, Olympus. Ltd) an oscilloscope (DPO3034, Tektronix Inc.) is used to 
measure the ultrasonic wave emitted from the optical fi lament. Th e typical time domain ultrasonic signal is shown in 
Figure 5b. Because the length of laser filament (~40 cm) is much longer than the spatial resolution (~0.87 cm) of the 
ultrasonic microphone, the microphone is mounted on an electrically driven s liding rai l and moved parallel to the laser 
propagation direction to measure the length and distribution of the filament point by point. The spatial step of the 
microphone is 2.5 cm which is just the spatial resolution of the microphone . 
To analyze the residual asti gmatism, a CCD camera is used to record the variation of the cross -sectional intensity 
distribution of the laser beam spot along the beam propagation direction. It should be noted that in order to protect the 
CCD camera from be ing damaged, all the beam spo ts are captured under the linear optical propagation with 
attenuated pulse energy.  
An aerosol generator (HRH -WAG3, Beijing Huironghe Technology Co., Ltd.) is employed to generate sodium 
chloride aerosol with different concentrat ions. The aerosol is stably injected into the tube by controlling the air pump    
  5 
 of the generator to interact with the filament, which is shown in Figure 5c. The mean diameter of the particle size 
inside the tube is about 2  
um  measured by an aerodynamic part icle size spectrometer (TSI3 321, TSI Inc). The laser 
filament ionizes the aerosol and generate fingerprint fluorescence which is collected by the concave mirror and 
focused onto the end of the tail fiber. The backward fluorescence was detected by a grating  spectrometer (Omni -λ 300, 
Zolix Ltd.) equipped with an intensified CMOS camera (Istar -sCMOS, Andor TechnologyLtd.) . 
 
 
Fig.5 . (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup; (b) typical ultrasonic signal in time domain; (c) aerosol generating devic e. 
 
3.2. Improving the limit of de tection of aerosol using the astigmatism -compensated off -axis system  
Figures 6a and 6b show the beam profile’s variation along the laser propagation direction respectively for the cases 
that the laser spot strikes at the center or one side of the concave m irror. The diameter 
2(1 )e  of the laser spot at 
different positions along the laser propagation direction was extracted and shown in Figures 6c and 6d, which are 
highly consistent with the simulation  results. Experimental re sults show that the astigmatism is greatly compensate d 
and the distance between the sagittal and tangential focus lines is reduced to be zero when the laser beam 
non-symmetrically strikes on the concave mirror. Figure 6e illustrate s the variations of the a stigmatic parameter β 
along the propagation direction , which also agrees well with the simulation results. The astigmatism compensation 
method proposed here is applicable for different focal lengths, which is superior to the free -form surfaces that only 
works with one specifi c focal length [22] . 
 6                            
 
Fig.6  Variation of beam profiles near the geometric focus along the laser propagation direction recorded by CCD camera. (a) and (c) : 
beam profiles and beam diameters for the case of laser beam incident on the center of the concave m irror; (b) and (d): beam prof iles and 
beam diameters for the case of laser beam incident on one side of the concave mirror; (e) variations of the astigmatic parame ter β along 
the propagation direction . 
 
Figure 7 presents the ultrasonic signal intensity as a function of the laser propa gation distance, and the black dotted 
line represents 3 times standard deviation of the background noises. Due to the astigmatism during the laser 
filamentation when the lase r beam strikes at the center of the concave mirror, the ultrasonic signal of the l aser 
filament has two peaks along the laser filament, respectively representing the sagittal and tangential focal spot. It 
should be noted that the Y -axis ruler of the pink d ata is on the right to facilitate analysis. After compensating the 
astigmatism by making the laser beam non -symmetrically incident on the concave mirror, only one peak is left and its 
intensity increases by ~70 times, which will greatly enhance the fingerp rint fluorescence spectrum of aerosol excited 
by the laser filament.  
 
Fig. 7 Ultr asonic signal intensity along the femtosecond laser filament  
    
  7 
 Figures 8a and 8c show the filament -induced fluorescence spectra of NaCl aerosol with different concentrations 
recorded respectively by the optical setups in Figures 2a and 3a. The exposure time  of 30 s was adopted for all the 
measurements, and the gain of ICMOS camera is also identical for these spectral curves. Figure s 8b and 8d present 
the integral intensity of fingerprint fluorescence peak as a function of Na+ concentration, which are respect ively 
obtained using the data in Figures 8a and 8c. It can be found that in the logarithmic coordinate system, the relation 
between the integral intensity and Na+ concentration can be well fitted by a linear function. The intersection point of 
the fitted l ine and 3σ line is the detection limit of NaCl aerosol for the setup used in this work. It can be found that in 
the off -axis re flection femtosecond laser filamentation system, the detection limit can be reduced by 86% when the 
laser beam spot strikes non -symmetrically on the concave mirror, leading to a sub -ppb limit of detection, which is the 
lowest one as we know.  
 
 
Fig. 8 . (a) Fluorescence spectra of NaCl aerosol with different concentrations when the laser beam symmetrically strikes on the concave 
mirror (see Figure 2a); (b) integral intensity of the fingerprint fluorescence peak of NaCl aerosol as a function of Na+ concentr ations 
which is summarized using the data in (a); (c) fluorescence spectra of NaCl aerosol with different concentrations when the l aser beam 
non-symmetrically strikes on the concave mirror (see Figure 3a);; (d) integral intensity of the fingerprint fluorescen ce peak of NaCl 
aerosol as a function of Na+ concentrations which is summarized using the data in (c).  
 
Due to the limited size of the laboratory, we can only achieve the experimental verification at a distance of 30 m. In 
practical ambient air environme nt, air turbulence may have many adverse effects on laser transmission when the 
detection distance reaches the order of kilometers , such as the beam cross -sectional intensity distortion, pulse 
temporal profile distortion and phase fluctuation [34, 35] . Fort unately, many spatiotemporal modulation methods have 
been developed to overcome the turbulence induced beam distortion [36, 37] . Furthermore, our previous experimental 
results also show that the air turbulence may even improve the limit of detection of aero sol due to the generation of 
multiple optical filaments, i.e. the increase of the filament number [38]. 
4. Conclusion  
In this work, a novel method which can eliminate the astigmatism of the large -aperture off -axis femtosecond laser 
filamentation system is proposed. Astigmatism in off -axis system is mainly  caused by the non -symmetric wavefront 
distortion when the beam is obliquely incident into the optical setup. By introducing additional non -symmetricity in 
the off -axis optical setup, the astigmatism is almost completely eliminated. As a r esult, the limit of detection of 
aerosol by femtosecond laser filament induced fluorescence is significantly improved, which achieves a record of 
sub-ppb aerosol detection limit in a distance of 30 m by millijoule laser pulse. The results in this paper sol ve one of 
the key  problems hindering the femtosecond laser filament remote sensing, which greatly promotes the development 
of the related research fields . 
                                           8                            Acknowledgments  
This work was supported by National Key Re search and Development Program of China (2018YFB0504400).; 
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (63223052) . 
Compliance with ethics guidelines  
Jiewei Guo , Zhi Zhang, Nan Zhang, Bin peng S hang, Jiayun Xue , Yuezheng Wang, Shishi Tao, Bofu Xi e, Lanjun 
Guo,Lie Lin and Weiwei Liu  declare that they  have no conflict of interest or financial conflicts to disclose.  
References  
[1] Fontaine BL, Vidal F, Jiang ZM, Chien CY, Comtois D, Desparois A et al. Filamentation of ultrashort  pulse laser beams 
resulting from their propagation over long distances in  air. Physics of Plasmas. 1999;6:1615 -21. 
[2] Liu W, Gravel J -F, Thé berge F, Becker A, Chin SL. Background reservoir: its crucial role for long -distance propagation 
of femtosecond la ser pulses in air. Applied Physics B. 2005;80:857 -60. 
[3] Akozbek N, Becke r A, Chin SL. Propagation and filamentation of femtosecond laser pulses in optical media. Laser 
Physics. 2005;15:607 -15. 
[4] Hosseini SA, Azarm A, Daigle J -F, Kamali Y, Chin SL. Fila ment-induced amplified spontaneous emission in 
air–hydrocarbons gas mixtur e. Optics Communications. 2014;316:61 -6. 
[5] Qi P, Lin L, Su Q, Zhang N, Sun L, Liu W. In -situ visualization of multiple filament competition dynamic during 
nonlinear propagation of femtosecond laser. Scientific Reports. 2017;7.  
[6] Kasparian J, Sauerbrey RA, Chin SL. The critical laser intensity of self -guided light filaments in air. Applied Physics B. 
2000;71:877 -9. 
[7] Xu S, Zheng Y, Liu Y, Liu W. Intensity clamping during dual -beam interference. Laser Physics. 2010;20:1968 -72. 
[8] Yao J, Chu W, Liu Z, C hen J, Xu B, Cheng Y. An anatomy of strong -field ionization -induced air lasing. Applied 
Physics B. 2018;124:1 -17. 
[9] Yuan S, Chin See L, Zeng H -P. Femtosecond filamentation induced fluorescence technique for atmospheric sensing. 
Chinese Physics B. 2015;24 . 
[10] Chin SL, Xu HL, Luo Q, Thé berge F, Liu W, Daigle J -F et al. Filamentation “remote” sensing of chemical and 
biological agents/pollutants using only one femtosecond laser source . Applied Physics B. 2009;95:1 -12. 
[11] Xu H -L, Chin SL. Femtosecond Laser  Filamentation for Atmospheric Sensing. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland). 
2010;11:32 - 53. 
[12] Li H, Wei X -Y, Xu H, Chin SL, Yamanouchi K, Sun H. Femtosecond laser filamentation for sen sing combustion 
intermediates: A comparative study. Sensors and Actuators B-chemical. 2014;203:887 -90. 
[13] Pannier F, Dauchy X, Potin -Gautier M, Astruc A, Astruc M. Speciation of butyltin compounds by ion chromatography 
coupled to electrothermal atomic ab sorption spectrometry. Applied Organometallic Chemistry. 1993;7:213 -8. 
[14] Blase RC, Patrick EL, Mitchell JN, Libardoni MJ. Analysis of cave atmospheres by comprehensive two -dimensional 
gas chromatography (GC× GC) with flame ionization detection (FID). Ana lytical Chemistry Research. 2015;3:54 -62. 
[15] Pallier V, Serpaud B, Feuil lade-Cathalifaud G, Bollinger J -C. Comparison of voltammetric and AAS methods for 
As(III) quantification in presence of iron species in model water samples with a low mineral content . International Journal 
of Environmental Analytical Chemistry. 2011;91:1 - 16. 
[16] Monge ME, Harris GA, Dwivedi P, Ferná ndez FM. Mass spectrometry: recent advances in direct open air surface 
sampling/ionization. Chemical reviews. 2013;113 4:2269 -308. 
[17] D aigle JF, Mejean G, Liu W, Theberge F, Xu HL, Kamali Y et al. Long range  trace detection in aqueous aerosol using 
remote filament -induced breakdown spectroscopy. Applied Physics B -Lasers and Optics. 2007;87:749 -54. 
[18] Daigle J -F, Mathieu P, Roy G, Simard  J-R, Chin SL. Multi -constituents detection in contaminated aerosol clou ds using 
remote -filament -induced breakdown spectroscopy. Optics Communications. 2007;278:147 -52. 
[19] Golik S, Mayor AY, Lisitsa VV, Tolstonogova YS, Ilyin AA, Borovskiy AV et al . Limi ts of Detection of Chemical 
Elements in an Aqueous Aerosol in Filament -Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy. Journal of Applied Spectroscopy. 
2021;88:337 - 42. 
[20] Luo Q, Xu HL, Hosseini SA, Daigle J -F, Thé berge F, Sharifi M et al. Remote sensing of pollu tants using femtosecond 
laser pulse fluorescence spectroscopy. Applied Physics  B. 2006;82:105 -9. 
[21] Daigle JF, Kamali Y, Chateauneuf M, Tremblay G, Theberge F, Dubois J et al. Remote sensing with intense filaments 
enhanced by adaptive optics. Applied Phy sics B -Lasers and Optics. 2009;97:701 -13. 
[22] Gravel JF, Luo Q, Boudreau D, T ang XP, Chin SL. Sensing of halocarbons using femtosecond laser -induced 
fluorescence. Analytical Chemistry. 2004;76:4799 -805. 
[23] Liu W, Xu HL, Mé jean G, Kamali Y, Daigle J -F, A zarm A  et al. Efficient non -gated remote filament -induced 
breakdown spectrosco py of metallic sample. Spectrochimica Acta Part B: Atomic Spectroscopy. 2007;62:76 -81. 
[24] Liu W, Thé berge F, Daigle J -F, Simard PT, Sarifi SM, Kamali Y et al. An efficient cont rol of ultrashort laser filament 
location in air for the purpose of remote sen sing. Applied Physics B. 2006;85:55 -8. 
[25] Zeng B, Wang T -J, Hosseini SA, Cheng Y, Xu Zz, Liu W et al. Enhanced remote filament -induced breakdown 
spectroscopy with spatio -tempor ally chirped pulses. Journal of The Optical Society of America B -optical Physics. 
2012;29:3226 -30. 
[26] Meng Q, Wang H, Wang K -j, Wang Y, J i Z, Wang D. Off -axis three -mirror freeform telescope with a large linear field 
of view based on an integration mirro r. Applied optics. 2016;55 32:8962 -70.    
  9 
 [27] Garoli D, Rodriguez de Marcos LV, Larruquert JI, Corso AJ, Proietti Zaccaria R, Pelizzo MG. Mir rors for space 
telescopes: degradation issues.  Optics + Optoelectronics2020.  
[28] Nan R. Five hundred meter aperture  spherical radio telescope (FAST). Science in China Series G. 2006;49:129 -48. 
[29] Daigle JF, Kamali Y, Bernhardt J, Liu W, Marceau C, Azar m A et al. Generation of powerful filaments at a long 
distance using adaptive optics. Optics Communications. 2008;281 :3327 -35. 
[30] He A, Quan C. Wavefront correction for spatial nonuniformity of the liquid crystal on silicon based spatial light 
modulator.  Optics and Lasers in Engineering. 2019.  
[31] Maurer C, Jesacher A, Bernet S, Ritsch -Marte M. What spatial light modu lators can do for optical microscopy. Laser & 
Photonics Reviews. 2011;5.  
[32] Jesacher A, Schwaighofer A, Fü rhapter S, Maurer C, Bernet S, Ritsch -Marte M. Wavefront correction of spatial light 
modulators using an optical vortex image. Optics express. 2007; 15 9:5801 -8. 
[33] Tao S, Xie B, Xue J, Zhang Z, Zhang N, Guo L et al. Giant enhancement of acoustic and fluorescence emission from 
an off -axis reflective femtosecond laser filamentation system. Optics express. 2022;30 21:38745 -52. 
[34] Kandidov VP, Kosarev a OG, Tamarov MP, Brodeur A, Chin SL. NONLINEAR OPTICAL PHENOMENA: 
Nucleation and random movement of filaments in the propagation of high -power laser radiation in a turbulent atmosphere. 
1999.  
[35] Mé chain G, Couairon A, Andre YB, d'Amico C, Franco M, Prad e BS et al. Long -range self -channeling of infrared 
laser pulses in air: a new propagation regime without ionization. Applied Physics B. 200 4;79:379 -82. 
[36] Zeng T, Yang M. A simple method to suppress turbulence -induced multiple filamentation. Laser Physic s. 2019;29.  
[37] Zhang Z, Liang X, Goutsoulas M, Li D, Yang X, Yin S et al. Robust propagation of pin -like optical beam through 
atmospheric  turbulence. Apl Photonics. 2019;4.  
[38] Liu J, Zhang Z, Shang B, Chu C, Sun L, Zhang N et al. Enhancement of multi -filament generation and 
filament -induced fluorescence by turbulence. Optics Communications. 2022;517.  
 