Heegaard splittings and virtually special square complexes
Chandrika Sadanand
June 21, 2023
Abstract
We give a new perspective of Heegaard splittings in terms square complexes and Guirardel’s notion
of a core which allows for combinatorial measurement of the obstruction to being a connect sum of
Heegaard diagrams. A Heegaard splitting is a decomposition of a closed orientable 3-manifold into two
isomorphic handle bodies that have a shared boundary surface. Usually, a number of curves on the shared
boundary surface, called a Heegaard diagram, are used to describe a Heegaard splitting. We define a larger
object, the augmented Heegaard diagram , by building on methods of Stallings and Guirardel to encode
the information of a Heegaard splitting.
Augmented Heegaard diagrams have several desirable properties: each 2-cell is a square, they have
non-positive combinatorial curvature and they are virtually special . Restricting to manifolds that do not
have S1×S2as a connect summand, augmented Heegaard diagrams are tied to the decomposition of a
3-manifold via connect sum as described above.
Contents
1 Introduction 2
2 Preliminaries 4
2.1 Heegaard splittings and diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.2 VH complexes and special square complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.3 Guirardel core . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
3 Heegaard splittings as Stallings maps 7
3.1 From Heegaard splittings to two-dimensional maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3.2 From two-dimensional maps to Heegaard splittings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.3 Heegaard diagrams and handle slides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4 A picture of Stallings maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4 Irreducibility, immersions and square complexes 14
4.1 Irreducibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2 Tautness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3 Immersions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5 Virtually special square complexes and the augmented Heegaard diagram 24
5.1 Non-positively curved square complexes that are virtually special . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.2 Group Actions on Trees and the Guirardel Core . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3 Complexity of the Guirardel core and augmented Heegaard diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3.1 Construction of augmented Heegaard diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.3.2 Area properties of the augmented Heegaard diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6 Future directions 34
1arXiv:2301.09527v2  [math.GT]  17 Jun 20237 Example: Lens spaces 35
7.1 Genus 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7.2 Genus 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
1 Introduction
Any closed 3-manifold Mis the union of two handle bodies of genus gintersecting along their common
boundary surface (a Heegard splitting). The information in this decomposition is typically encoded by a set
of curves on the boundary surface called a Heegaard diagram. Stallings shows that it can equally well be
encoded by a homotopy class of maps between two 2-complexes: the boundary surface and the product
of a bouquet of gcircles with it itself. We call this map (up to homotopy) the Stallings map (see Section
3).
Thehandle slide group acts transitively on the set of Heegaard diagrams that describe a particular Heegaard
splitting, and Out(Fg)×Out(Fg) modulo a small kernel acts transitively on the Stallings maps describing a
particular Heegaard splitting. We find that these two structures are equivalent in the following way.
Theorem 3.5 Stallings maps are in bijection with Heegaard diagrams for a given Heegaard splitting. The
handle slide group is isomorphic to Out(Fg)×Out(Fg)modulo a small kernel. The bijection is equivariant
with respect to these actions and this isomorphism.
A Heegaard splitting is said to be reducible if there is an essential simple closed curve on the splitting
surface that bounds a disk in each of the handle bodies. If a Heegaard splitting is not reducible it is said
to be irreducible . A continuous map from a surface to a product of bouquets of circles must by no means
be injective; it can exhibit “folding” and “crumpling” behaviour. In fact, a Stallings map cannot be an
embedding. The first insight of this note is that a Stallings map for an irreducible Heegaard splitting can be
simplified (via combinatorial moves) to be a local embedding (see Section 4):
Theorem 4.12 An irreducible Heegaard splitting can be encoded by a Stallings map which is locally an
embedding.
More generally, for a Stallings map for any Heegaard splitting, as long as S2×S1is not a connect summand
ofM, the map can be simplified so that it is locally an embedding everywhere except for a minimal disjoint
union of subsurfaces. In this case, the Stallings map factors through a space, which we call a pinched surface ,
resulting from collapsing these subsurfaces to points.
Theorem 5.4 Suppose Mdoes not have S2×S1as a connect summand, and has a Heegaard splitting
M=H1∪H2. Then there is a Stallings map for the Heegaard splitting that factors through a pinched surface
Σ∗such that the quotient map is locally an embedding.
Corollary Local geometric structures on the target (or codomain) 2-complex can be pulled back to the domain
surface (or pinched suface) by the locally injective Stallings map.
For example the codomain is naturally decomposed into squares with the link of each vertex having cycles
with at least four edges. This means the combinatorial curvature of the codomain is at most zero. These
properties can be pulled back to the domain surface (or pinched surface) to give a non-positively curved
square complex structure. Namely the domain surface is tiled by squares with at least four squares meeting
at each vertex. In fact, more is true about this square complex structure.
Proposition 5.1 The Stallings map can be encoded by a non-positively curved square complex structure on
the quotient of the domain Σ∗that is virtually special (in this case, this means the edges can be labelled by V
(vertical) or H (horizontal) such that each square has a pair of opposite edges that are V, and the other pair
2of edges are H, and when a finite sheeted cover is taken, the closed horizontal and vertical strips of squares
satisfy some injectivity conditions, see Section 2.2)
This vertical-horiztontal property on a surface can alternately be understood as a half-translation structure in
the case where the domain is a surface (Namely, it is possible to make a developping mapping of the squares
toR2to make planar charts on the complement of the vertices so that all the transition maps between charts
needed to recover the surface are compositions of translations and rotations by π).
We now add to this square complex structure to form what we call the augmented Heegaard diagram . This
will allow for a characterization of irreducibility.
Recall that an essential simple closed curve on the splitting surface is said to be reducing if it bounds an
embedded disk in each of the handle bodies. These disks provide an embedded copy of S2⊆M. IfS2×S1
is not a connect summand of M, this S2separates Minto two connect summands. Call a Heegaard diagram
simple if there is a set of disjoint reducing curves that decompose the Heegaard splitting M=H1⊔H2entirely
into minimal genus Heegaard splittings of its prime connect summands. Furthermore, these reducing curves
must not intersect any of the Heegaard diagram curves. Given a Heegaard diagram, it is difficult to know
whether it is simple. One might hope that the Heegaard diagram with the minimal number of intersections
is simple, but Osborne has given counterexamples to this [9]. Whitehead and Volodin-Kuztnetsov-Fomenko,
each conjectured that some combinatorial properties could be used to detect whether a Heegaard diagram
is simple, but their conjectures have proven to be false, outside of specific cases of low genus [11] [12] [13]
[18].
Similarly, (assuming S2×S1is not a connect summand of M) in Theorem 5.4, we see that the Stallings
map for a Heegaard splitting sends many curves to points, all of which are reducing. However, even after
simplifying, a Stallings map may not pinch a maximal multicurve of reducing curves, revealing the connect
sum structure of M. More structure is needed.
With this in mind, we construct the augmented Heegaard diagram Cin Section 5. The augmented Heegaard
diagram consists of the square complex Σ∗with some additional disks (also tiled by squares) attached. We use
the virtually special square complex structure of Σ∗and Stallings maps to construct C, which is also virtually
special. We find that by further simplifying the Stallings map for a given Heegaard splitting, the area of C
can be minimized, and that in this case, Σ∗pinches a set of reducing curves that maximally decomposes M
with respect to connect sum.
Theorem 5.11 If the augmented Heegaard diagram Cis of minimal area in its Out(Fg)×Out(Fg)orbit,
the associated Heegaard diagram is simple.
The statement of Theorem 5.11 can be seen as a generalization and adjustment of conjectures of Whitehead
and Volodin-Kuznetsov-Fomenko, which were found to be false [11] [12] [13] [18].
In order to constuct Cand prove Theorem 5.11, we consider the virtually special square complex Σ∗as a
pair of actions of the fundamental group of the splitting surface Σ on trees (see Section 5.2). Each action
encodes the attachment of a handle body to the surface, and so the information of the Heegaard splitting
and 3-manifold is contained in the comparison of these actions.
In 2005 Vincent Guirardel introduced a kind of a “convex” core, comparing two actions of a group on R-trees
[7]. The size of the core measures the obstruction to the two actions being equivariant projections of a single
action on a tree. This can be interpreted as the core measures how close a Heegaard splitting is to a connect
sum of several copies of S2×S1. When two actions of π1(Σ) on a tree are exactly the same, they encode the
attachment of two handle bodies to Σ in the same way. This constructs a connect sum of several copies of
S2×S1. In this case, the Guirardel core is not even full-dimensional.
More generally the Guirardel core has been used to study the orbit of cofinite actions on an R-tree by
subgroups of Out(Fg) [2], [4], [5], [6], [10]. This makes it particularly well-suited for the problem in this
paper, since the Stallings maps for a given Heegaard splitting form an Out(Fg)×Out(Fg) orbit.
We find that the Guirardel core is indeed intimately related to the Stallings map of a Heegaard splitting.
Letf: Σ→G1×G2be a Stallings map encoding a Heegaard splitting (where Σ is the splitting surface and
3G1andG2are bouquets of circles). Let Sbe the cover of Σ corresponding to ker f∗. Let T1×T2be the
universal cover of G1×G2and let ˆf:S→T1×T2be the lift of f. The fundamental group of Σ acts on S
and on T1×T2(it acts on the latter in the form of f∗π1(Σ)). It is these actions of π1(Σ) on T1andT2that
encode the Heegaard splitting.
S T1×T2
Σ G1×G2ˆf
f
Theorem 5.7 Letp1andp2be the coordinate projections of T1×T2. The Guirardel core of the actions of
π1(Σ)onT1andT2is the smallest set Xsuch that ˆf(S)⊆Xandp1−1(t)is connected for every t∈T1and
p2−1(t)is connected for every t∈T2.
This leaves us with four interrelated ways to capture the information of a Heegaard splitting and they are each
in 1-1 corresponance: Heegaard diagrams, Stallings maps, virtually special square complex structures, pairs
of actions of π1(Σ) on trees. There are combinatorial moves corresponding to handle slides for Heegaard
diagrams for each of the other three structures. Just as there are many Heegaard diagrams for a single
Heegaard splitting, there are many homotopy classes of maps, many square complex structures, and many
pairs of actions of π1(Σ) on trees all encoding the same Heegaard splitting.
This geometric picture leads to the question of characterizing the relationship between properties of these
structures, properties of the Heegaard splitting and the nature of the 3-manifold they describe. This work is
completed for genus one Heegaard splittings in Section 7, which is devoted to Lens spaces. The tractability
of special cube complexes for geometric group theory methods led to a proof of the virtual Haken conjecture
[1]. A program exploring the higher genus cases might give a 2-dimensional and similarly tangible perspective
on the classification of 3-manifolds.
More specifically, one might look for algorithms to minimize the area of Cin terms of the core, relating
properties of Cfor irreducible 3-manifolds to properties of its JSJ-decomposition, and exploring how to lever-
age methods of special square complexes to prove theorems about 3-manifolds via the augmented Heegaard
diagram.
Outline
Section 2 lays out the definitions and prelimaries of Heegaard spltitings as well as the geometric group theory
tools that are used to understand Stallings maps, such as special square complexes and the Guirardel core.
Section 3 defines Stallings maps, and details their relationship to Heegaard diagrams. Section 4 relates
Stallings maps and irreducibility of Heegaard splittings, proving Theorem 5.4. Section 5 constructs the
augmented Heegaard diagram and proves Theorem 5.11. Section 6 lists questions for future study. Section 7
works through the example of Heegaard splittings of genus one, finding their Stallings maps, and Guirardel
cores.
Acknowledgements
The author acknowledges Dennis Sullivan for suggesting this problem and guiding the author through a PhD.
Great thanks are due to Mark Hagen and Chris Leininger, who listened to endless iterations of this work,
providing suggestions, feedback and support, and to Scott Taylor for reading through an initial draft in detail
and providing some corrections. Thank you to Moira Chas for repeatedly insisting that this work should
be published. Finally, the author acknowledges Tali Pinsky, Tarik Aougab, Nissim Ranade, Cameron Crowe
and Michael Wan for helpful conversations that brought clarity.
2 Preliminaries
We recall some definitions and facts that will be useful in later sections.
42.1 Heegaard splittings and diagrams
Definition 2.1. AHeegaard splitting orHeegaard decompostion ofMis a decomposition M=H1∪ H 2,
where H1andH2are homeomorphic 3-manifolds that intersect in their shared boundary, which is a surface
of genus g. Further, each Hiis ahandle body . Namely, H1andH2are the result of taking a closed 3-ball
and attaching g1-handles, or solid cylinders.
Figure 1: A handle body of genus four.
The shared boundary ∂H1=∂H2will be called the splitting surface Σg, where gis the genus.
Every compact 3-manifold without boundary has infinitely many Heegaard decompositions (of higher and
higher genus).
Definition 2.2. AHeegaard diagram describing a Heegaard splitting is a triple (Σ g,A,B), where AandB
are sets of gcurves on a surface of genus g, Σg, with the following properties.
1. The curves in Arepresent a basis for a Lagrangian subspace of homology (they are a maximal set of
homologically non-trivial, independent, disjoint representatives) each with null homotopic image under
ι1, the inclusion of Σ ginto the handle body H1.
2. the curves in Brepresent a basis for a Lagrangian subspace of homology (they are a maximal set of
homologically non-trivial, independent disjoint representatives) each with null homotopic image under
ι2, the inclusion of Σ ginto the handle body H2.
It is common to call the free homotopy classes in Ablue diagram curves and those in Bred diagram curves .
They will be depicted in these colours in figures.
The curves in Adictate the attachment of H1to Σ gwith the following procedure. Cut Σ galong the curves
ofA. This yields a sphere with 2 gdisks removed, because the curves are homologically non-trivial and
independent and because there are gof them. Label all the boundary components by the curve in Athey
were cut from. Glue 2 gdisks to this space to form a sphere. Attach a 3-ball to the sphere. Finally identify
pairs of the glued on disks according to the labeling on their boundary. Similarly, the curves in Bdictate the
attachment of H2to Σ g, and thus one can reconstruct a Heegaard splitting from a diagram.
Definition 2.3. Two Heegaard diagrams ( A,B) and ( A′,B′) on a surface of genus gdiffer by a handle slide
ifB=B′, andA\ {γ}=A′\ {γ′}such that for some δ∈A,δ,γ, and γ′bound a pair of pants. The roles
ofAandBmay be reversed as well.
Theorem 2.4. (Reidemeister-Singer [15] [16]) Given two Heegaard diagrams for a Heegaard decomposition,
one can be obtained from the other by performing a finite sequence of handle slides.
2.2 VH complexes and special square complexes
Here, the definitions from “VH complexes, towers and subgroups of F×F” by Bridson and Wise [3] as well
as “Special Cube complexes” by Haglund and Wise [8] are introduced.
5Definition 2.5. Acombinatorial map of CW complexes is a continuous map between two CW complexes
such that each open cell is sent homeomorphically onto an open cell. A CW complex is called combinatorial
if all its attaching maps are combinatorial. Finally a square complex is a combinatorial CW complex of
dimension two, where the top dimensional cells are attached along loops that are four edges long.
Definition 2.6. A square complex is VH if the edges can be partitioned into two sets: vertical (V) and
horizontal (H) so that the attaching map of each 2-cell alternates between vertical and horizontal edges.
LetXbe a VH complex. Let XHbe the 0-skeleton X(0)with the horizontal edges attached and let XVbe
the 0-skeleton X(0)with the vertical edges attached.
Definition 2.7. The connected components of the complement X\XHare called horizontal corridors . Sim-
ilarly, the connected components of the complement X\XVare called the vertical corridors . Consider how
the horizontal corridors must attach to XHto reconstruct X(and similarly for the vertical corridors and
XV). A VH complex is clean if the attaching maps of the horizontal (and respectively vertical) corridors to
XH(and respectively XV) are injective.
VH complexes are the predecessors of special cube complexes which are cube complexes that don’t exhibit
certain pathological behaviours. We recall the following definition, but ask the reader to see [8] for the details.
Definition 2.8. A square complex is special if:
1. Each hyperplane embeds.
2. No hyperplane directly self osculates.
3. No hyperplane indirectly self osculates.
A square complex is virtually special if it has a finite-sheeted cover that is special.
See [8] for definitions of hyperplane and direct and indirect self osculation.
2.3 Guirardel core
Below, the definitions of “Core and intersection number for group actions on trees” by Guirardel [7] are
introduced. The reader is encouraged to consult this paper as a reference for more details.
Begin with two actions of a group Gon a trees T1andT2, or equivalently an action of GonT1×T2. In this
paper we will be looking at the special case where T1=T2=Tand it is an infinite tree where every vertex
is of the same finite valence, and edges are of length 1. Below, we give Vincent Guirardel’s definitions for
this case [7]
Definition 2.9. Adirection δis a connected component of T\ {x}for some point xinT. A quadrant
Q=δ1×δ2is the cartesian product of two directions (and therefore is a subset of T×T).
Definition 2.10. Let (t1, t2)∈T×T. A quadrant Q=δ1×δ2isheavy if there exists a sequence {γn} ⊆G
such that
•γn·(t1, t2)∈Qfor all n,
•dδ1(t1, γn·t1)→ ∞ asn→ ∞ (where dδ1(t1, γn·t1) is the distance between t1andγn·t1inδ1) and
•dδ2(t2, γn·t2)→ ∞ asn→ ∞ (where dδ2(t2, γn·t2) is the distance between t2andγn·t2inδ2).
Qislight if it is not heavy.
6Now we can define the core, which is used to compare the pair of actions on T.
Definition 2.11. Thecore CofT×Twith respect to the action of Gis the complement of the union of
light quadrants in T×T. The intersection number of the two actions is the co-volume of the action of Gon
C. In other words, the intersection number is the number of 2-cells in C/G, or the area of C/G.
The larger the intersection number, the larger the obstruction to finding a third tree T3with an action of
π1(Σg) and surjective equivariant maps onto T1andT2. In the case where Gacts on T1andT2in the same
way, C/π 1(Σg) has zero area. It is common for the area to be infinite, and we will confront this fact in
Section 5.
We finish by stating a characterization of the core that will be helpful later on.
Theorem 2.12 (Proposition 5.1 in [7]) .LetGact on two trees T1andT2such that C̸=∅. Let F⊆T1×T2
be a non-empty closed connected G-invariant subset with connected fibres. Then Fcontains C. Moreover, C
is the intersection of all such sets F.
3 Heegaard splittings as Stallings maps
3.1 From Heegaard splittings to two-dimensional maps
Given a Heegaard splitting M=H1∪ H2, with a splitting surface Σ g=∂H1=∂H2, there are two inclusion
maps ιi: Σg−→ H i. Knowing these two maps is sufficient to reconstruct M. The two maps can be expressed
as a single product map ι1×ι2: Σg−→ H 1× H 2.
Now, we simplify by considering this map up to homotopy, and considering the spaces up to homotopy
equivalence. We post-compose ι1andι2by a deformation retraction that takes Hito a graph of genus
g,∨gS1. Let ι′
1andι′
2be the respective compositions. This gives a map from a surface to a product of
graphs.
f=ι′
1×ι′
2: Σg−→G1×G2
There was some choice in the construcion of f, above, and to account for this, we consider all possible out-
comes together as a class of maps AM,H1,H2.
Definition 3.1. LetM=H1∪ H 2be a Heegaard splitting. Let Σ gbe the splitting surface and let ιibe in
the inclusion maps Σ g→ H ifori= 1,2. The set AM,H1,H2is defined as {f: Σg→G1×G2}, where Giare
graphs of genus gand each coordinate fiis homotopic to ιi, up to homotopy equivalence of the target, Hi.
We say that a map f∈ AM,H1,H2encodes ordescribes the Heegaard splitting M=H1∪ H 2.
Note that if f∈ AM,H1,H2andf′is homotopic to f,f′must also be in AM,H1,H2. Therefore AM,H1,H2can
be partitioned into homotopy classes.
These maps are truly two-dimensional in the sense that both their domain and target spaces are two-
dimensional and they display properties such as folding, and branch covering behaviour (locally homotopic
to the holomorphic map z7→zn).
Remark 3.2.Note that ι′
ihas the following properties:
1. The homology kernel of ι′
ihas rank gand has a basis with representatives that are simple, closed,
non-intersecting curves.
2. These representatives have null homotopic image (because being null-homologous and null-homotopic
are equivalent in a graph).
73. The image of the homology under ι′
i∗must be rank gas well, meaning that ι′
i∗is surjective on homology.
This implies that the map induced on fundamental groups must also be surjective, since the codomain
is a graph.
The first property implies the other two above. These properties are not changed up to homotopy nor
homotopy equivalence, and therefore any map in AM,H1,H2will bear these properties in each of its coordi-
nates.
3.2 From two-dimensional maps to Heegaard splittings
Begin with a map ffrom a surface of genus gto the product of two bouquets of gcircles, whose coordinates’
homology kernel is of rank g, and each have a basis with representatives that are simple, closed, non-
intersecting curves (property (1) from Remark 3.2 above). One may construct a Heegaard splitting M=
H1∪H2. This is done simply by taking the two sets of gcurves representing a basis for the homology kernels
as a Heegaard diagram. Indeed, fdescribes M=H1∪ H 2uniquely.
Proposition 3.3. Consider a map f: Σg→G1×G2, where Giare graphs of genus g. Suppose f=f1×f2
and the homology kernels of fi∗with i= 1,2have bases that can each be represented by a set of gdisjoint
simple closed curves. Then there exists a unique Heegaard splitting M=H1∪ H 2such that f∈ AM,H1,H2.
Proof. This proof considers one coordinate of the map fat a time. We show that there is a unique inclusion of
Σginto a handle body H1as its boundary that is equivalent to f1up to homotopy and homotopy equivalence
of the target. The proof for f2follows similarly.
Existence Consider f1: Σg→G1, the first coordinate of f. Recall that property (1) implies properties
(2) and (3). Properties (1) and (2) guarantee the existence of gsimple, closed, non-intersecting curves with
null homotopic image (which represent a basis of the homology kernel of f1). Therefore, the map f1factors
through a space constructed by gluing gdisks to Σ galong these curves. We note that this space has non-
trivial π2, but that the target G1does not, and so f1must in fact factor through inclusion to the handle
bodyH1obtained by gluing a 3-ball along the π2class of the previous space. See Figure 2 below. Note
that the map d(in Figure 2) induces an isomorphism on homology and inherits the property (3) from f1
(π1-surjectiveness).
Σg
 G1
H1
f1
d
Figure 2: The map f1must factor through a handle body H1.
It remains to show that the map dis part of a homotopy equivalence, and also the uniqueness of H1with
this property.
8To show that dis part of a homotopy equivalence, consider the following diagram.
A:=∨gS1H1 G1 ∨gS1=:Bh
dje
The diagram shows homotopy equivalences handjbetween ∨gS1andH1and a graph of genus grespectively.
It suffices to show that j◦d◦his part of a homotopy equivalence. To this end, a map, ewill be constructed
that forms a homotopy equivalence together with j◦d◦h. The labels AandBhelp clarify discussion about
the map e.
The fundamental groups of these spaces will be discussed assuming the chosen base point of both copies of
∨gS1is the wedge point.
Consider a copy of S1inB. It represents a generator of the fundamental group, [ α]. The map dinherits
π1-surjectiveness from f1, and so there is a preimage of [ α] byj◦d◦h. Call this preimage [ a]. Pick some
a∈[a]. Now we construct eby sending αto the image of alinearly, and sending each copy of S1inB
similarly to the representative chosen by the procedure outlined in this paragraph.
To show that eandj◦d◦hare homotopy inverses, consider a copy of S1inB. Consider it as a based loop
β. By construction, ( j◦d◦h)◦e(β) and βare base-point homotopic. Turning attention to e◦(j◦d◦h),
consider a copy of S1inA. Consider it as a loop, γ, that represents an element of π1(A). Note that the
construction of eguarantees that both [ γ] and its image by e◦(j◦d◦h) have the same image in π1(A).
Simultaneously applying these based homotopies, we get a homotopy between identity and ( j◦d◦h)◦eand
e◦(j◦d◦h) respectively.
Uniqueness Uniqueness follows rather quickly. Suppose there were inclusions into two handle bodies H1
andfH1that were equivalent to f1. These are shown below with dand˜dboth homotopy equivalences.
fH1
Σg G1
H1˜d
f1
d
One can simply compose dand˜dto show that in fact the two inclusions are equivalent (up to homotopy and
homotopy equivalence of the target). Thus each coordinate of fencodes the attachment of a handle body to
Σgin a unique way, encoding a unique Heegaard splitting.
From this proof, it is clear that the Heegaard splitting M=H1∪ H 2can be reconstructed from any map in
AM,H1,H2. This justifies the terminology of Definition 3.1 (that a map f∈ AM,H1,H2encodes the Heegaard
splitting M=H1∪ H 2).
We summarize the situation with the following corollary.
Corollary 3.4. A map f: Σg→G1×G2encodes a Heegaard splitting iff it satisfies property (1) from
Remark 3.2, Section 3.1.
93.3 Heegaard diagrams and handle slides
Heegard diagrams and Stallings maps
In order to study AM,H1,H2more systematically and relate it to Heegaard diagrams, we focus on the subset
BM,H1,H2⊆ A M,H1,H2where G1andG2are bouquets of gcircles. Let BM,H1,H2denote the homotopy classes
of maps in BM,H1,H2. Next, consider the equivalence relation on BM,H1,H2generated by [ f]∼[f′] if and only
if there exists f∈[f],f′∈[f′] and ksuch that k◦f=f′, where k:∨gS1→ ∨gS1is a homeomorphism.
Finally, let BM,H1,H2:=BM,H1,H2/∼.
Notice that ghas the effect of permuting the circles of ∨gS1or reversing the orientation of some of the circles
of∨gS1. Therefore, elements in the quotient, BM,H1,H2broadly keep track of which part of Σ gwrap around
a circle of ∨gS1without recording which circle is which, or the direction in which the surface wraps around
it. It turns out that this information is equivalent to a Heegaard diagram.
Theorem 3.5. There is a bijection S:{Heegaard diagrams for M=H1∪ H 2} →BM,H1,H2. Any map that
is a representative of S(x)is called a Stallings map for the Heegaard diagram x.
Proof. We define a bijection S−1:BM,H1,H2→ {Heegaard diagrams for M=H1∪ H 2}as follows.
Defining S−1Begin with [ f]∈BM,H1,H2and pick any representative f∈[f]. Let f1andf2be the two
coordinates of f(in other words, f=f1×f2). By Proposition 3.3, one can think of the first coordinate f1, as
inclusion of Σ ginto a handle body H1as its boundary, followed by a homotopy equivalence f′
1:H1→ ∨gS1.
Leth:∨gS1→ H 1be the other part of this homotopy equivalence. There are many Heegaard diagrams for
the attachment of H1to Σ gby this inclusion. However, [ f] determines one of them canonically using the
following idea, and this canonical diagram is taken to be S−1([f]).
Letb∈ ∨gS1be the bouquet point. Pick distinct points s1, . . . , s gin (∨gS1), such that si̸=b, and there
is one point on each circle. Pick generators {σi}forπ1(∨gS1) such that the circle that contains siis a
representative for σi. The idea is that the points {si}determine disks in H1, whose boundaries form the
desired Heegaard diagram. The details of this process are laid out below.
Choose smooth structures on H1and on the components of ∨gS1\ {b}. Then modify f1by a homotopy so
that it is smooth with respect to these structures (using Whitney’s approximation theorem) and so that it
is transverse to the points si(using Thom transversality). Now {f−1
1(si)}is a collection of simple closed
curves. Label each curve in f−1
1(si) by σi. This way, one can associate an intersection word in the letters
{σi}for curves on Σ g.
Suppose there is an isuch that f−1
1(si) consists of at least two simple closed curves γandδ. If there is an
oriented simple curve arc αin Σ g\ {f−1
1(si)}intersecting γandδwhose intersection word is σiσ−1
i, then
a neighbourhood of α∪γ∪δis a pair of pants P. One boundary component of the pants is homotopic to
γ, one is homotopic to δ, and the third is homotopic to a concatenation of the form γ·α·δ·α−1(with
appropriate choices of orientation for γandδ). In this case, f1can be modified by a homotopy supported
onPso that f−1
1(σi) is a single curve tracing γ·α·δ·α−1. Each such modification reduces the number
of curves in {f−1
1(si)}, and so after a point, there are no more arcs travelling between two curves in Σ g
with intersection word σiσ−1
ifor all i. Next, modify f1by another homotopy to remove any null homotopic
curves in {f−1
1(si)}(this is possible because ∨gS1is aspherical). Both these homotopies can be realized by
modifying f1by a homotopy to that it is locally a Morse function, and then pushing parts of the surface
above or below the height value si.
After these modifications, {f−1
1(si)}is a set of disjoint essential simple closed curves, and there are no
cancelling homotopic pairs. This means that these curves fall into at most 3 g−3 homotopy classes.
In the proof of Proposition 3.3, we see that f1factors through a map d:H1→ ∨gS1, and dis part of a
homotopy equivalence, together with a map h:∨gS1→ H 1. This implies that the curves {f−1
1(si)}are null
homotopic when included into H1. Therefore they bound (immersed) disks in H1. In fact, it is possible to
find embedded disks that these curves bound. This will be proved in Proposition 4.4 and does not depend
on any additional hypotheses.
10si si
Figure 3: The coordinates of the Stallings map locally as a Morse function.
Consider h(∨gS1). Each circle must be sent to a curve in H1that intersects these disks in some pattern.
Modifying hby a homotopy so that these intersections are transverse, d∗◦h∗(σi) can be read off as the
intersection word of the h-image of the ithcircle with the disks. Since dandhform a homotopy equivalence,
d∗◦h∗(σi) =σi. So, the ithcircle must have intersection word that reduces to σiin the free group π1(∨gS1).
However, since it is not possible for an arc to run between two distinct curves with intersection subword
σiσ−1
i, the only possibility is that hcan be modified by a homotopy so that each circle in h(∨gS1) intersects
the corresponding disk exactly once. This implies that f−1(si) contains a non-separating curve. If f−1(si)
contained a second curve as well for some i, then there would be an arc γintersecting these two distinct curves
with intersection word σiσ−1
i. This is a contradiction. Therefore f−1(si) consists of a single non-separating
curve.
Thus, there are exactly gdisjoint non-separating simple closed curves in {f−1
1(si)}. Because these gcurves
are null homotopic when included into H1, are homologically independent, and we know f1∗isπ1-surjective;
from Proposition 3.3, we know they must form a Heegaard diagram for the attachment of H1to Σ g.
To show that this half Heegaard diagram is unique, consider that if there was another half Heegaard diagram
obtained in the way above, the curves of this diagram would be the preimages of s1, . . . s gby a map ˜f1that
is homotopic to f1. Label the curves of this second diagram σ1, . . . σ g. Since the two diagrams are not the
same, there must be an isuch that the σitwo curves are not homotopic. Consider the homotopy between
f1and ˜f1. The preimage of siby this homotopy sweeps out a surface immersed in Σ g, bounded by the two
σicurves. This implies that the two σicurves are homologous. Two non-separating curves are homologous
if and only if they are homotopic. This is a contradiction. Therefore the half Heegaard diagram obtained
above is unique.
In the same way, the second half of the Heegaard diagram is uniquely determined by f2. We let this Heegaard
diagram be S−1([f]).
Checking S−1is surjective Given a Heegaard diagram for M=H1∪ H 2, a map f: Σg→ ∨gS1× ∨gS1
that is sent to this Heegaard diagram by S−1can be constructed. To construct the first coordinate f1, attach
disks and a 3-ball to Σ gaccording to the blue Heegaard diagram curves to obtain H1. Then take a smooth
structure on H1, and choose a tubular neighbourhood of the disks (each neighbourhood homeomorphic to
D×(−1,1) with D× {0}being the disk around which the neighbourhood is chosen).
Letf1send each disk to a distinct point in {s1, s2, . . . s g}. The tubular neighbourhood around each disk
is mapped to the interval of ∨gS1\ {b}containing the corresponding siby forgetting the first coordinate
ofD×(−1,1), and applying a homeomorphism from ( −1,1) to the desired interval. The complement of
the tubular neighbourhoods is mapped to the bouquet point b. The second coordinate, f2is constructed
similarly.
Note that {f−1
j(si)}i,jare the diagram curves and S−1([f]) is the Heegaard diagram we began with. the
second coordinate f2is constructed similarly.
11Checking S−1is injective Suppose [ f] and [ f′] are in BM,H1,H2and that S−1([f]) =S−1([f′]). Let
f∈[f] and f′∈[f′]. Then after modifying fandf′by a homotopy if necessary, {(f′)−1(si)}iis a set of g
simple closed curves that homotopic to the gcurves {f−1(si)}ifor all i. After possibly composing fwith
a homeomorphism k:∨gS1→ ∨gS1, we may assume that for each i, the curve ( f′)−1(si) is homotopic to
f−1(si). Modifying ffurther by homotopy, we may assume f−1(si) = (f′)−1(si) for all i.
Since∨gS1\ ∪i{si}is contractible, fcan be modified by a homotopy that is supported on the complement
of∪if−1(si) so that the resulting map sends every point outside a tubular neighbourhood of ∪if−1(si) to
the bouquet point b. The components of the tubular neighbourhood of ∪if−1(si) are each homeomorphic
toS1×(−1,1), and the modified fsends the tubular neighbourhood of f−1(si) to the maximal interval in
∨gS1containing si. The map f′can be modified by a homotopy to have the same properties.
The modified maps fandf′now agree on the complement of a tubular neighbourhood of ∪if−1(si). It
remains to show that they agree up to homotopy on each component of the tubular neighbourhood of
∪if−1(si). This amounts to showing that the path {π} ×(−1,1) in the tubular neighbourhood of f−1(si)
is mapped by fandf′to wrap around the ithcircle in ∨gS1in the same direction. However, this can be
guaranteed by an appropriate choice of kearlier. Therefore [ f] = [f′].
Handle slides and Stallings maps
Given any two Heegaard diagrams for M=H1∪ H 2, there is a finite sequence of handle slides that can be
applied to one to obtain the other. Now that we know that The set of Stallings maps BM,H1,H2is in bijection
with the set of Heegaard diagrams for M=H1∪H2, one might wonder about the relationship between these
Stallings maps and how it relates to the notion of handle slide.
The group Out(Fg)×Out(Fg) acts on BM,H1,H2by the action ( a, b)·f1×f2=a◦f1×b◦f2where aandb
denote elements in Out(Fg) as well as maps ∨gS1→ ∨gS1inducing these elements on the fundamental group
(these maps must be part of homotopy equivalences). Note that up to homotopy, there is only one choice of
the maps aandb. One choice is made for each element of Out(Fg) so that this action is well defined.
Note that any map that is part of a homotopy equivalence of ∨gS1to itself determines an element of Out(Fg)
by its action on the fundamental group. Recall that any two maps in BM,H1,H2differ by a homotopy
equivalence of each of the two coordinates of ∨gS1× ∨gS1. Therefore, given f, f′∈ BM,H1,H2, there is an
element ( a, b) ofOut(Fg)×Out(Fg) such that ( a, b)·fis homotopic to f′. This induces a transitive action
on the quotient BM,H1,H2. The action is well defined because given a∈Out(Fg), for every homeomorphism
k:∨gS1→ ∨gS1, there is another homeomorphism j:∨gS1→ ∨gS1such that the map a◦f1is homotopic
toj◦(a◦k◦f1). Namely, jcan be chosen to be a homeomorphism in the homotopy class of a◦k−1◦a−1
(recall ais part of a homotopy equivalence, so there must be a homeomorphism in this class).
Since BM,H1,H2is in bijection with the set of Heegaard diagrams for M=H1∪ H 2(Theorem 3.5), the
action of Out(Fg)×Out(Fg) must translate into an action by handle slides. Let K′be the normal closure
of the elements of Out(Fg) that permute the generators or replace a generator with its inverse. Then let
K1≤Out(Fg)×Out(Fg) be the subgroup K′×1and let K2≤Out(Fg)×Out(Fg) be the subgroup 1×K′.
Then K:=K1∩K2is the kernel of the action of Out(Fg)×Out(Fg) onBM,H1,H2.
Proposition 3.6. The group Out(Fg)×Out(Fg)/Kis isomorphic to H×Hwhere His the handle slide
group acting on a handle body of genus g. The actions of Out(Fg)×Out(Fg)/KonBM,H1,H2andH×Hon
the set of Heegaard diagrams of a Heegaard splitting of genus gare equivariant with respect to the bijection
Svia this isomorphism.
Proof. The handle slide group His generated by individual handle slides. Beginning with a generator ( a, b)
ofOut(Fg)×Out(Fg), we would like to show that the map S([f])7→S((a, b)·[f]) acts on the set of Heegaard
diagrams in one of two ways on each set of gcurves. It either as the identity in H, or it acts as a single
handle slide. We will see that this defines a homomorphism Out(Fg)×Out(Fg)→H×H, and show that its
kernel is K. As with most proofs in this paper, we prove this statement for one coordinate, and the second
coordinate follows similarly.
12Letjbe an automorphism of the free group Fg. Then jinduces a homotopy equivalence of the bouquet of
gcircles to itself. In the case where jis an inner automorphism, the homotopy equivalence is homotopic to
identity. If not, jrepresents an element of Out(Fg). The group Out(Fg) is generated by automorphisms that
send a single generator to its inverse, and act on the other generators as identity, as well as automorphisms
that send a generator to the product of two generators and act on the other generators as identity. The first
type fixes every element of BM,H1,H2, and therefore the Heegaard diagram obtained is unchanged as well. If
jis of the second type, its action on f1can be realized gradually using a path p(t) in the outer space Og
such that p(0)◦f1=f1andp(1)◦f1=j◦f1. Intuitively, p(t) folds one circle around another as shown in
the comic strip in Figure 4.
Figure 4: A generator of Out(Fg) is shown inducing a handle slide
At each moment in time t, Let Y(t) be the target space of p(t)◦f1. Choose points {si}one at the midpoint
of each edge of Y(t). Take the preimage of these points and simplify by a homotopy as in the proof of
Proposition 3.5, so that there is a single curve in the preimage of each si. When t̸= 0 or 1, one connected
component PofY(t)\ ∪i{si}contains a single trivalent vertex. The preimage of Pmust be a subset of Σ g
bounded by three curves in the preimage of {si}. This surface cannot have positive genus because p(t) is a
homotopy equivalence. If the surface had positive genus, there would be two intersecting degree one homology
classes that have trivial image by p(t)◦f1. This contradicts Property (1) of Stallings maps. Therefore, P
must be a pair of pants. When t= 0 or 1, the preimage of {si}are Heegaard diagrams (as in Proposition 3.5)
and one of the cuffs of the pair of pants Pdisappears. This is exactly the combinatorial move known as a
handle slide.
This defines a homomorphism φ:Out(Fg)→H. A composition of generators of Out(Fg) may act by
permuting the generators. These compositions must have trivial image by φsince the set of midpoints of
edges is unchanged by a permutation of the copies of S1. Thus the kernel of φisK′. Then φ×φinduces an
isomorphism between the quotient Out(Fg)×Out(Fg)/KandH×H, as desired.
3.4 A picture of Stallings maps
We would like to study the nature of these maps. It is natural to ask whether they can be homeomorphisms
(thinking of these as the nicest possible map between two-dimensional spaces). We will see in the final section
about Lens spaces that there is one Heegaard splitting that can be encoded as a homeomorphism between
tori (the genus one Heegard splitting of S3). However, outside the genus one case, this is not possible, since
the target space is no longer a manifold.
It is valuable to spend a moment understanding the topology of a cartesian product of two bouquets of gcir-
cles. There are three types of points: manifold points (which have neighbourhoods homeomorphic to discs),
book-like points (which have neighbourhoods homeomorphic to several disks intersecting in a curve), and
the singular point (which is the product of the two wedge points). All together this forms a non-positively
curved square complex with one vertex, 2 gedges and g2squares. It is comprised of many one-square tori that
intersect pairwise in an edge or a vertex. The link of the vertex is homeomorphic to the complete bipartite
graph K2g,2g. Note that this graph is not planar, and so ( ∨gS1)×(∨gS1) cannot be embedded in R3.
13Figure 5: topology of product neighbourhoods of G1×G2. The bottom left neighbourhood cannot be
embedded in R3, due to additional square “tiles” that are not shown here. The ellipses indicate that these
are missing.
4 Irreducibility, immersions and square complexes
We will now focus on the case where the Heegaard splitting is irreducible. Here, is it possible to pull our
maps tight in some sense, removing folding and crumpling, and this gives an even more concrete picture of
the maps, allowing understanding of the reducible case through decomposition by connect sum. Some set up
is needed to formalize and prove this result. We begin with some definitions
Definition 4.1. Consider an embedded curve γon Σ g. Take an open tubular neighbourhood Tofγof
width small enough that Tis homeomorphic to an open cylinder. Consider a tubular neighbourhood Uof
γthat is contained in T. Removing the image of γfrom Uleaves two connected components. One of these
components will be called AUand the other will be called BU. Now we define an equivalence relation on the
set of tubular neighbourhoods of γcontained in T. Any two components of (possibly distinct) deleted tubular
neighbourhoods are equivalent if and only if their intersection is non-empty. Notice that there are two equiva-
lence classes and AUandBUare in different classes for any given U. Call these two classes the two sides of γ.
A set intersects a side of γif it intersects all the sets in this equivalence class. Consider an arbitrary constant
curvature metric on Σ g. Let Uϵbe the tubular neighbourhood of γof width ϵ(with ϵsmall enough so that
Uϵis contained in T). Then the number of connected components of the intersection of a set Xwith a side
ofγis defined as the limit of the number of connected components of X∩AUϵasϵ→0 (respectively BUϵ,
depending on which side).
A wave move is a combinatorial change that one can make to a Heegaard diagram without changing the
3-manifold it describes. The proof of this is originally written by Volodin, Kuznetzov and Fomenko in 1974
[19], but is explained below.
Definition 4.2. Given a half Heegaard diagram on the surface Σ g, awave move consists of the following
steps.
1. Pick a simple arc γthat begins and ends on a diagram curve δ, does not intersect any other diagram
curves, and intersects only one side of δin two components;
2. Thicken the union of δandγin Σ gto obtain a pair of pants (see Figure 6);
3. Replace δwith another cuff of this pair of pants (if it creates a new Heegaard diagram).
14Figure 6: The diagram curve δis shown in red and the arc γis shown in yellow. Representatives of the free
homotopy classes [ α] and [ β], shown in two ways: (i) as a union of segments of δandγ, and (ii) as the cuffs
of a pair of pants constructed by δandγ.
Figure 7: The embedding of the pair of pants introduced in Figure 6.
Call the two curves forming the other cuffs of the pair of pants αandβ. We shall see in the proof of the next
theorem that either replacing δwith αorδwith βalways results in another Heegaard diagram. Further, we
shall see that the new Heegaard diagram describes the same Heegaard decomposition.
Theorem 4.3 (Volodin, Kuznetzov, Fomenko [19]) .Applying a wave move to a half Heegaard diagram does
not change the attachment of a handle body described.
Proof. To show that one of these swaps must give a new Heegaard diagram for the same Heegaard decom-
position, two cases must be explored combinatorially.
Case 1: αorβis isotopic to a diagram curve. Ifαis isotopic to another curve in the original half
Heegaard diagram, then βmust not be, since δmust be homologically independent from the other curves.
Then, by a single handle slide, δcan be replaced by βto give a new Heegaard diagram, describing the same
attachment of a handlebody to Σ g. Similarly, if βis isotopic to a curve in the original half Heegaard diagram,
then δcan be replaced with α.
Case 2: Neither αnorβis isotopic to a diagram curve Assume neither αnorβis isotopic to a curve
in the original half Heegaard diagram. In this case, cut Σ galong all the diagram curves, and label them to
recall the identifications needed to recover Σ g. This is a sphere with 2 gdiscs removed. Note that, by the
way it is defined, γdoes not intersect any diagram curves. Therefore, the graph given by the union of δand
theγcan be embedded in the sphere with 2 gdiscs removed. By thickening this graph in this space, the pair
of pants bounded by δ,α, and βare embedded as well.
Either αorβmust separate one copy of δfrom the other. Without loss of generality let it be β. The aim is
to show that δcan be replaced by βto give a new Heegaard diagram associated to the same attachment of
a handle body.
15Figure 8: Sis shown before and after identifications.
Figure 9: A pair of pants decomposition of S.
This will be shown by constructing a sequence of embedded pairs of pants that dictate a sequence of handle
slides that ultimately make the desired replacement.
Cut along β. This produces two connected components. Pick either one of these to work with. Call this
space S. We will embed our pairs of pants that dictate handle slides in this space. Identify as many of the
diagram curves as possible to each other. Each identification creates a handle with a diagram curve wrapped
around it.
In general Sis now a surface of genus pwith n+ 2 boundary components ( nboundary components besides δ
andβ). Further, Shas a diagram curve around each handle, and isotopic to each of the boundary components
except for β. Using the classification of surfaces, the surface Sand the diagram curves are homeomorphic
to the surface and curves shown in Figure 9. Consider the following pair of pants decomposition by curves:
δ, γ1. . . , γ 2p, . . . , γ 2p+n=β.
By a handle slide, the problematic curve can be replaced by γ1to give a new Heegaard diagram associated to
the same Heegaard decomposition. A second handle slide allows γ1to be replaced by γ2. Next γ2is replaced
with γ3, and so on until γ2p+(n−1)is replaced with β, as desired.
The author rediscovered the wave move for herself during her graduate studies, and found that it is incredibly
useful! It is the key to almost every proof in this paper.
4.1 Irreducibility
Recall that Heegaard splitting is irreducible if no essential simple closed curve on the splitting surface bounds
a disk in H1and in H2.
Proposition 4.4. LetHbe a handle body and let Σbe the surface that is its boundary. Let γbe an essential
simple closed curve on Σ, that is nullhomotopic in H. Then γbounds an embedded disk in H.
16Proof. Choose half a Heegaard diagram, that describes the attachment of Hto Σ. Since γis nullhomotopic
inH, the cyclic word produced by its intersection with the diagram curves must reduce to identity in the
free group on ggenerators. Thus, the arcs of γthat run between diagram curves dictate a number of wave
moves that change the diagram so that it does not intersect γat all, while still describing the attachment of
Hto Σ.
CutHalong the embedded disks bounded by diagram curves. Note that γis not cut since it does not
intersect any diagram curves. The remaining space is homotopic to a closed 3-ball with 2 gdisks removed on
the boundary. γis an embedded curve on the boundary of this 3-ball. It is clear that γbounds an embedded
disk in this space. Identifying pairs of disks to recover H, we see that γbounds an embedded disk in H.
Remark 4.5.Proposition 4.4 shows that irreducibility of a Heegaard splitting is equivalent to the following:
no essential simple closed curve in Σ is nullhomotopic in both H1andH2. This property is much more easily
verified than the definition, and will be used extensively in what follows.
Definition 4.6. LetSbe a closed orientable surface and let G1,G2be graphs. A Stallings map f:S−→
G1×G2is said to be irreducible if it encodes an irreducible Heegaard decomposition.
Remark 4.7.Proposition 4.4 implies that if fis an irreducible map, then ker f∗has no non-trivial element
with a representative that is a simple closed curve.
Notation 1. The traditional picture of a Heegaard diagram is of red and blue curves. Following this tradition,
we will refer to the two sets of curves as though one set is red and the other is blue.
Proposition 4.8. LetM=H1∪ H 2be an irreducible Heegaard decomposition. The complement of the
curves of any associated Heegaard diagram in Σgis homeomorphic to a finite union of discs. In other words,
the Heegaard diagram fills the surface.
Proof. Consider the handle body Hiand the gcurves of a Heegaard diagram that encode its attachment to
Σg. Notice that the complement of these curves in Σ gis sent to a null-homotopic subset of Hibyιi.
Now suppose the proposition were false. That is, suppose that there was a Heegaard diagram for M=H1∪H2
that has a complement with a connected component that is not a disk. This implies that there is an essential
simple closed curve in the complement of the diagram. Since it does not intersect any blue curves, it must
have null-homotopic image by ι1and since it does not intersect any red curves, it must have null-homotopic
images by ι2. This contradicts the irreducibility of of M=H1∪ H 2.
Notation 2. The discs described above can be thought of as polygons with alternating red and blue edges
made from segments of Heegaard diagram curves.
4.2 Tautness
Definition 4.9. A Heegaard diagram is taut if every connected component of the complement intersects a
side of a diagram curve in at most one connected component.
A region of Σ gis shown in Figure 10, with two complementary polygonal components of two different
Heegaard diagrams. The first picture is not taut. The open polygon intersects the same side of a curve in
two connected components. The second picture is taut. Here, while the open polygon does intersect the sides
of a curve in two connected components, they are the opposite sides.
Theorem 4.10. Every Heegaard decomposition has at least one associated taut Heegaard diagram.
Proof. The proof is constructive, beginning with any Heegaard diagram and modifying it until a taut Hee-
gaard diagram is achieved.
If this Heegaard diagram is already taut, we are finished.
17Figure 10: Two regions of Heegaard diagrams. The left is not taut, while the right is taut.
Figure 11: An orange segment that intersects the same side of a diagram curve in two connected components.
If not, there exists a connected component of the complement that intersects some diagram curve twice on
the same side. Such incidences will be called problems . Notice that multiple problems may occur on a single
complementary component, or along a single curve.
Given a problem, without loss of generality, let the problematic curve be red and call it δ. Consider a curve
segment γwith one end point on each of the two segments shared by the problematic curve and problematic
component, and with interior inside the problematic component. Such a segment is shown in Figure 11 for
the problem first seen in Figure 10.
Thicken the union of δandγin Σ gto obtain a pair a pants. One cuff of the pair of pants is isotopic to δ,
call the other two cuffs αandβ. Replace the problematic curve δwith αorβto produce a new Heegaard
diagram. This Heegaard diagram describes the same Heegaard splitting by Theorem 4.3, since we have just
applied a wave move.
This swap strictly reduces the number of intersections between red and blue curves.
Figure 12 includes the minimal number of blue arcs possible so that the complementary region containing γ
intersects a side of δin two connected components . The elimination of an intersection point is seen in either
case.
Repeat this process as long as there is a problem, each time reducing the intersections between red and blue
curves by at least one. The number of intersections is finite and bounded below by zero. Therefore, this
process must end with a taut configuration.
18δ
α βγ
Figure 12: Applying wave move to the red half of the Heegaard diagram, seen in the pair of pants.
Figure 13: A neighbourhood of the problematic curve δbefore and after the wave move, this time with a few
more blue arcs.
Applying Theorem 4.10 to irreducible Heegaard splittings, where every Heegaard diagram is filling (Propo-
sition 4.8) gives the following result immediately.
Theorem 4.11. Every irreducible Heegaard splitting has a taut and filling Heegaard diagram.
4.3 Immersions
The goal of this section is to prove the following theorem.
Theorem 4.12. There is a locally injective map f: Σg−→(∨gS1)×(∨gS1)encoding every irreducible
Heegaard decomposition of genus greater than zero.
This theorem is a corollary of the following lemma, which we will prove in detail.
Lemma 4.13. The Stallings map corresponding to a taut and filling Heegaard diagram without bigons is
locally injective.
Taking Lemma 4.13 to be true, all Heegaard diagrams of irreducible Heegaard splittings are filling by Propo-
sition 4.8, and we have seen in Theorem 4.11 that there is a taut diagram for each irreducible decomposition.
Therefore Theorem 4.12 follows.
To prove Lemma 4.13, consider a taut, filling Heegaard diagram without bigons for some Heegaard decom-
position M=H1∪ H 2. Let the curves describing the attachment of H1to Σ gbe blue. Similarly, let the
curves describing the attachment of H2to Σ gbe red.
This diagram will be used to give a particular map f: Σg−→(∨gS1)×(∨gS1). We will see that fis locally
injective and then the proof of Proposition 4.13, will be reduced to checking that fdescribes M=H1∪ H 2.
19Figure 14: A region of Σ gis shown with orientations chosen on the Heegaard diagram curves. The two
coordinates of ( ∨gS1)×(∨gS1) are shown with blue and red points chosen as well as orientations on the
edges.
Figure 15: The definition of fon the interior of a square.
Defining f:In the target, ( ∨gS1)×(∨gS1), consider each coordinate ( ∨gS1). For simplicity (and fore-
shadowing), call one the blue coordinate and the other the red coordinate. After removing the wedge point
of∨gS1,gopen intervals remain. Orient these intervals arbitrarily. In the blue copy of ∨gS1, Pick gpoints,
one at the midpoint of each of these intervals. Call these blue points. Pick a bijection between the set of blue
points and the set of blue diagram curves. Repeat the process on the red coordinate, and call the chosen
points red points. Now orient the diagram curves on Σ garbitrarily.
Recalling the definition of “side,” there is now a right side (and left side) of each curve using these orienta-
tions. In the bouquet of circles, there is also a right side of each of the points in the intervals picked out in
the preceding paragraph.
Due to Proposition 4.8, this Heegaard diagram induces a cell decomposition structure on Σ g. Every vertex
in this cell decomposition is quadrivalent. Consider the dual cell decomposition. Every face in the dual
decomposition must have four edges (it is a cell decomposition of squares). We metrize Σ gso that these
dual 2-cells are squares with the diagram curves intersecting the midpoint of the edges of each square. Each
square has one blue curve and one red curve running through it, cutting it precisely into quarters. The two
diagram curves that run through a given square are associated to two points: one in the blue coordinate
∨gS1and one in the red coordinate ∨gS1. We would like to construct a map f: Σg−→(∨gS1)×(∨gS1).
The idea is that fsends the interior of each square homeomorphically to the product of maximal intervals
which contain these two points. The interior of the squares are mapped by fsuch that the right side of the
red curve is sent to the right side of the red point and the right side of the blue curve is sent to the right side
of the blue point.
20Now we say precisely how to set this up. Consider fas two coordinates f=f1×f2, where fi: Σg−→ ∨gS1.
Each of the 1-cells in the square cell decomposition of Σ gintersects exactly one diagram curve in one point.
If this diagram curve is blue, let f1send the open 1-cell to the maximal interval subset of ∨gS1that contains
the blue point assigned to the diagram curve. This should be done in such a way so that the half interval
that intersects the right side of the diagram curve is sent to the right of the blue point. Let the boundary of
this 1-cell be sent to the wedge point. If the diagram curve is red, let f2send the open 1-cell to the maximal
interval subset of ∨gS1that contains the red point assigned to the diagram curve, with the boundary of the
1-cell being sent to the wedge point. Now consider a closed 2-cell in the square cell decomposition of Σ g.
f1andf2are defined on alternating boundary edges of this cell. To define f1, we consider the square as
[0,1]×[0,1], where f1is defined on [0 ,1]× {0}and on [0 ,1]× {1}. The rest of the square is sent by f1to a
straight-line homotopy between the definition(s) of f1on [0,1]× {0}and [0 ,1]× {1}. The map f2is defined
on the closed 2-cell similarly. The map fis defined this way on all of Σ gand it is by definition continuous. It
is also clear that frestricted to the interior of each cell is a homeomorphism onto a cell of the square complex
structure of ( ∨gS1)×(∨gS1). Therefore fis a combinatorial map of square complexes (see Section 2.2 for
definitions).
In order to prove Proposition 4.13, we must check that fis locally injective and that it describes the Heegaard
decomposition. In order to do this, we need two lemmas.
Lemma 4.14. fis locally injective.
Proof. In order to prove that fis an immersion, or locally injective, it suffices to show that fis locally
injective at the vertices of Σ g. This is because fis a combinatorial map of square complexes (See [8]).
Consider a vertex, v, of the square complex structure on Σ g. Note that it is contained in the interior of a
single polygon of the dual cell decomposition induced by the Heegaard diagram curves (since the squares
are dual to this decomposition). Consider a small disk neighbourhood Dofvand the intersection of the
cells of the square complex structure with D. Recall that fsends 1-cells homeomorphically to 1-cells, and
2-cells homeomorphically to 2-cells. Therefore, in order for fto be locally injective at v, it is sufficient that
f(D∩σ)∩f(D∩δ) =∅where σ, δare cells in Σ gof the same dimension.
Suppose two 1-cells σandδmeeting at vhave f(D∩σ)∩f(D∩δ)̸=∅. It follows that f(σ) =f(δ). By the
definition of f1andf2on the 1-skeleton of Σ g, this means that σandδintersect the same Heegaard diagram
curve. (Recall that each 1-cell intersects exactly one diagram curve.) This means that the polygon dual to
the vertex vhas two edges that are intervals on a single diagram curve. The hypothesis that the images of
the intersection with Dintersect implies that one side of this diagram curve intersects the open polygon in
two connected components, one along each of these edges. Thus the Heegaard diagram is not taut. This is
a contradiction.
Suppose there are two 2-cells σandδ, that meet at vandf(σ) =f(δ). Suppose further that f(D∩σ)∩
f(D∩δ)̸=∅. There must be two 1-cells e1ande2that lie consecutively in the boundary of σthat intersect
D. The edges e1ande2must be sent to consecutive 1-cells in the boundary of f(σ), incident to f(v). This
is because fis a continuous combinatorial map of square complexes. Similarly, There are two 1-cells, e3and
e4that lie consecutively in the boundary of δthat must be sent to two consecutive edges in the boundary of
f(δ) incident to f(v). The set {ei}must contain at least three elements. If it contained 2 or fewer elements,
it would imply that only two squares meet at v(or that vdoes not have a surface neighbourhood). If only
two squares meet at v, then the Heegaard diagram dual to the square complex structure contains a bigon.
This contradicts the assumptions of our setting, see Lemma 4.13.
Since f(δ) =f(σ), it is possible to find three or four connected components of D∩(∪iei)\ {v}that are
sent by fto two distinct connected components of edges in f(D)\f(v). We have already shown this is not
possible earlier in this proof, as this means that there are two distinct 1-cells ekandejmeeting at vthat
have f(D∩ej)∩f(D∩ek)̸=∅.
21Figure 16: A genus two example of one coordinate of f.
Since fis a combinatorial map, these are the only pathologies that would prevent ffrom being injective on
D. Therefore fis locally injective at the vertices of Σ gand therefore an immersion.
We are now ready to prove Proposition 4.13. The remaining work consists of checking that fdescribes the
given Heegaard decomposition.
Proof of Lemma 4.13. Begin with a taut filling Heegaard diagram on a surface of genus greater than zero.
Construct the locally injective map f: Σg→(∨gS1)×(∨gS1) as above. It remains to show that fdescribes
the Heegaard decomposition we began with.
Recall that fdescribes M=H1∪ H 2if, up to homotopy equivalence of the domain, and product homotopy
equivalence of the target, f=ι1×ι2: Σg−→ H 1× H 2, where ιiare the inclusion maps from the separating
surface to H1andH2respectively. First, we check that f1=ι1up to homotopy equivalence of the target
space. Consider the fibres of f1. In what follows, refer to the example shown in Figure 16. Recall that f1
sends the interior of each square in Σ gto a maximal interval in ∨gS1. The blue curve running through the
square is sent to the blue point in this interval. In fact, the full pre-image of each blue point in Σ gis a blue
diagram curve. The full pre-image of any other point in the same maximal interval as a blue point is an
isotopic curve. It may help to think about these statements on one closed square at a time first, and then put
them together. The full pre-image of the wedge point is graph on Σ ggiven by the 1-skeleton of the square
complex structure, with the edges that intersect blue diagram curves removed. This can be seen by thinking
about each square first. The pre-image of the wedge point in each closed square is the boundary edges that
do not intersect a blue diagram curve. Notice that all the fibres except the pre-image of the wedge point are
topological circles. All this follows from the definition of f.
Consider including Σ ginto a larger space H, defined as follows. Remove the f1pre-image of the wedge point
from Σ g. Each connected component of the remaining space is made up of the squares through which a given
blue diagram curve runs. It is a cylinder of squares of “height” 1. There are gsuch cylinders remaining, and
they have a product structure of (0 ,1)×S1induced by the fibres of f. Include these cylinders into solid
cylinders, (0 ,1)×D2so that the S1fibres are included as boundaries to the D2fibres of the solid cylinder.
The idea is to glue Σ gback together, and glue the solid cylinders back together accordingly. We now formalize
this idea as follows. First glue two disks to each solid cylinder, so that it is [0 ,1]×D2instead of (0 ,1)×D2.
Parametrize the D2coordinate of these cylinders as a unit disk using polar coordinates ( r, θ), 0≤r≤1.
Now glue Σ gback together along the pre-image of the wedge point. If two boundary disks ( {0} ×D2or
{1} ×D2) are identified along an arc on their S1boundary, each point in this arc belongs to a ray in each
of the two disks. Identify these rays. Call the resulting space H. Note that the centres of all the boundary
disks are identified in this process. This is because the pre-image of the wedge point is connected. If it were
22Figure 17: The cone structure of half of a solid cylinder.
not connected, then a collection of Heegaard diagram curves would separate the connected components. The
union of these curves would be separating on Σ gand this contradicts the Heegaard diagram curves being
homologically independent.
Claim 1. His a handle body and there is a homeomorphism ϕ:H −→ H 1so that the inclusion ι: Σg,→ H
is equal to ϕ◦ι1.
Recall that in order to complete the proof of Proposition 4.13, we wanted to show that f1=ι1up to homotopy
equivalence. If Claim 1 is true, the proof is completed by noting that ∨gS1is a deformation retract of H.
The deformation retraction is realized by taking each point on each disk in the solid cylinders ( r, θ), and
continuously shrinking the radius r to 0. Call this deformation retraction d. Each cylinder becomes an
interval, and the way the solid cylinders were glued together leads to these intervals being glued together
into a bouquet of circles. This can be seen by considering the glueing locus under d, and noting that it is
all sent to a single point in the end. Then note that f1=d◦ιbecause we set up the product structure on
the hollow cylinders so that each S1fibre was the f1pre-image of a point in ∨gS1(not the wedge point). So
we have f1=d◦ι=d◦ϕ◦ι1, and d◦ϕis a homotopy equivalence as desired (since the composition of a
homeomorphism and deformation retraction gives a homotopy equivalence together with inclusion composed
with a homeomorphism). This completes the proof of Lemma 4.13.
Now we prove Claim 1.
Proof of Claim 1. Recall how H1is attached to Σ g: a disk is attached along each blue diagram curve on Σ g,
and then a 3-ball is attached to the resulting 2-complex. We claim that the method of attaching His equiva-
lent to this. Consider, in the construction of H, the disk {1
2}×D2in each solid cylinder. The S1boundary of
such a disk is a blue diagram curve. So both constructions attach disks along the blue diagram curves. Let A
be the space remaining when we remove these disks and Σ gfromH. We will prove that Ais homeomorphic to
a 3-ball that is attached to the rest of Hin the same way that the 3-ball is attached in the construction of H1.
The middle disk {1
2}×D2cuts each solid cylinder in half. Each half is a cone on a disk given by the “bottom”
and “sides” of the cylinder. This is shown below.
The two cones share the disk {1
2} ×D2. Note that the cone structure restricted to {0} ×D2and{1} ×D2is
compatible with the polar coordinates chosen on these disks. Recall that when the solid cylinders are glued
together to form H, rays of one of these disks are identified with rays of another. This implies that Acan
be expressed as a cone relating to the cone structure we have placed on the half cylinders. Cut Σ galong the
blue diagram curves (cut the cylinders in half). Glue in disks along all boundary components. This is simply
23Figure 18: Heegaard diagram for a lens space with fundamental group Z13
S2.Ais the interior of the cone on this space. That is, an open 3-ball. In this way, it is seen that HandH1
are attached to Σ gin the same way, completing the proof.
Remark 4.15.It is natural to ask whether Theorem 4.12 has a converse. Namely if fbeing locally injective
implies that the Heegaard splitting it encodes is irreducible. Osborne has provided examples that show that
this is not the case [14]. Figure 18 depicts one such diagram for a genus two Heegaard splitting for a lens
space with fundamental group Z13. The diagram is taut and filling, and therefore the map encoding it is
locally injective, however it must be reducible since the genus is greater than one.
5 Virtually special square complexes and the augmented Heegaard
diagram
We have seen the emergence of square complex structures as we study Stallings maps. We now discuss
the properties of these square complexes, and interpret them further in the language of geometric group
theory.
5.1 Non-positively curved square complexes that are virtually special
Note that the cartesian product of two graphs naturally has the structure of a non-positively curved square
complex. A square complex is non-positively curved if cycles in the link of every vertex have length at least
four. The precise definitions and terminology about square complex structures can be found in [8].
When fis locally injective, a non-positively curved square complex structure can be pulled back to the
surface Σ g, giving Σ ga tiling by squares where at least four squares meet at each vertex. The hyperplanes
of this square complex structure (the curves dual to the square tiling) are precisely the Heegaard diagram
curves. This is seen in the constructive proof of Theorem 4.12 and Proposition 4.13. Therefore the following
properties of the square complex structure are immediate.
•Hyperplanes do not self intersect (the hyperplanes are Heegaard diagram curves, and these do not self
intersect)
•The square complex is a VH-complex (V stands for vertical and H stands for horizontal. The blue
curves of the Heegaard diagram are the vertical hyperplanes, and the red curves are the horizontal
hyperplanes, see Definition 2.6).
•Hyperplanes are two-sided (because all tubular neighbourhoods of simple closed curves on Σ gare
orientable)
•Hyperplanes do not directly self-osculate (since the Heegaard diagram is taut). Therefore the VH-
complex is clean .
The definitions of clean VH-complexes can be found breifly in Section 2.2. For more detail, see [3]. Note that
the hyperplanes may indirectly self-osculate and they may also interosculate, so the square complex structure
is not special and so, while fis a local embedding, it is not a local isometry.
24Proposition 5.1. The square complex structure on Σgdual to a taut Heegaard diagram is virtually special.
Proof. This is a corollary of Theorem 5.7 in [8], which states that any compact VH-complex with clean
horizontal hyperplanes is virtually special. The square complex structure here has both horizontal and
vertical hyperplanes being clean. The surface Σ gis certainly compact. Thus, we have the desired result.
The connection between the square complex structure and geometric group theory methods can be used to
understand fbetter (see Section 5.2).
To end the section, we state a generalized version of Theorem 4.12 for all Heegaard splittings.
Definition 5.2. Apinched surface Pis given by the quotient S/∼of a surface by an equivalence relation of
the following form. Given a finite set of compact connected subsurfaces of Swith boundary, x∼y⇐⇒ x=y
orxandyare in the same component of the chosen subsurfaces. We call the images of the non-trivial equiv-
alence classes pinching points
We distinguish pinched surfaces from singular surfaces with nodes, since a subsurface that has more boundary
components than an annulus can be pinched to a point in the quotient in Definition 5.2, leading to multiple
connected compact surfaces identified at a single point in the quotient.
Definition 5.3. Thegraph of a pinched surface S/∼is given as follows. Let Xbe the union of the finite
set of subsurfaces of Sin the definition of ∼. There is one vertex for each connected component of X, as
well as one vertex for each connected component of S\X. There is an edge connecting two vertices if the
regions of Sthey represent share a boundary.
Note that this graph is bipartite. A connected component of Xcannot share a boundary with another
connected component of Xsince they are disjoint compact subsurfaces. Therefore, the corresponding vertices
cannot have an edge connecting them. If two connected components of the complement of Xshared a
boundary, this would mean that the boundary curve is a connected component of X. However, Xis a union
of subsurfaces, so this is not possible. Therefore the corresponding vertices cannot have an edge connecting
them.
Theorem 5.4. Suppose that Mdoes not have S2×S1as a connect summand, and has Heegaard splitting
M=H1∪ H 2. Then there is a Stallings map ffor this splitting that factors through a quotient to a
pinched surface Σ∗. The pinched surface Σ∗has a square complex structure such that the the quotient map
is a combinatorial map of square complexes that is locally injective. Further, the Heegaard splitting can be
recovered from the square complex structure on Σ∗.
Proof. By Theorem 4.10, a taut Heegaard diagram for M=H1∪H2can be chosen. Then let fbe a Stallings
map descibing it. Next, take a the union of some tubular neighbourhoods of the curves. Any component of
the complement must have null homotopic image by f. The pinched surface Σ∗is constructed by making
each non-simply connected component of the complement a single equivalence class, and making any other
point a singleton equivalence class, and then taking the quotient. Up to homotopy, fmust factor through
Σ∗.
The graph of Σ∗cannot have any cycles. A cycle consists of a set of vertices and edges arranged in a circle.
Since the graph is bipartite, if there was a cycle, the vertices must alternate in whether they correspond to a
subsurface of Σ gthat is pinched, or not. In particular, this implies that the cycle cannot consist exclusively
of vertices that correspond to subsurfaces of Σ gthat are not pinched. Let A⊆Σgbe a subsurface that is
pinched, and whose corresponding vertex is part of the cycle. Any essential simple closed curve γonAis
a reducing curve. Further, it is non separating in Σ gsince a path can be found from one side of γto the
other that projects to a path that goes around the cycle in the graph of Σ∗. By Proposition 4.4, the reducing
curve γbounds an embedded disk in H1and another disk in H2. This forms a copy of S2⊆Mthat is not
separating (since γis not separating). This implies that S2×S1is a connect summand of M, a contradiction.
25Note that a closed surface subset of Σ∗cannot be homeomorphic to a sphere. This could only occur when
in Σ g, a connected component Cof the tubular neighbourhood of the Heegaard diagram has genus 0. Then
in the quotient, every complementary surface region bordering the image of Cis simply connected, forming
a sphere. However, then each diagram curve in Cwould be separating on the sphere in Σ∗, and therefore
separating in Σ g(since the graph of Σ∗is a tree). This is a contradiction.
Further, there are no open surface subsets of Σ∗whose closure is a pseudo-manifold. If this were the case,
there would be a connected component Cof the tubular neighbourhood of the Heegaard diagram with two
boundary curves that bound the same complementary region. In this case, any one of those boundary curves
is a reducing, non-separating curve on Σ g, a contradiction (again, because it implies that S2×S1is a connect
summand of M).
Therefore Σ∗consists of several closed surfaces of positive genus identified along points in a tree like fashion
(more than two may be identified at a point).
Consider the image of the Heegaard diagram curves in Σ∗. If a diagram curve passed from one surface
subset of Σ∗to another, it must have passed through one of the pinching points. This is not possible by the
definition of Σ∗. If a number of curves are homologous in one of the surface subspaces, they must have been
homologous in Σ g. If any two quotient curves intersect in Σ∗, the original two curves must have intersected
in Σ g. Finally if a quotient diagram curve γwere to separate the surface subspace it lies in, the original curve
γmust have been separating in Σ g. This is because the complement of every subsurface of Σ gused in the
definition of Σ∗is not connected (since the graph of Σ∗is a tree, removing any vertex leaves a disconnected
space). Therefore there cannot be any curve from one side of γto the other side, since it would project to a
cycle in the graph of Σ∗.
Therefore the image of the Heegaard diagram curves on each surface subspace of Σ∗are disjoint, as well as
homologically non-trivial and independent. If any surface subset of Σ∗contains fewer red or blue curves than
its genus, then Σ ghad fewer red or blue curves respectively than its genus. If a surface subset of Σ∗had more
blue (respectively red) curves than its genus, since they do not intersect each other, one must be separating
on the subsurface, which in turn implies that it is separating on Σ g, since the graph of Σ∗is a tree. This
is a contradiction. Therefore the quotient of the diagram curves form a Heegaard diagram on each surface
subset of Σ∗. This Heegaard diagram must be taut and filling because the diagram on Σ gwas taut, and the
quotient procedure described precisely takes each component of the complement that was not homeomorphic
to a disk, and makes it so. Therefore the Lemma 4.13 can be applied to each surface subset to show that the
quotient map is homotopic to a locally injective map.
Note that any simple closed curves on Σ gin the pre-image of a point of Σ∗are reducing curves (that is, they
are null homotopic in H1and in H2). Thus if Σ g̸= Σ∗,M=H1∪ H 2is reducible and the restriction of f
to the surface subspaces of Σ∗are encodings of Heegaaard splittings of connect summands.
The square complex structure on each closed surface subset of non-positive Euler characteristic is dual to the
Heegaard diagram on the subsurface, so it contains all the information of the Heegaard splitting.
In the case where S2×S1is a connect summand, the portion of Σ∗corresponding to S2×S1may not be
a surface subspace, but rather a pseudo manifold of genus 0, on which fcannot be locally injective. In the
cases where Σ g= Σ∗,fitself is locally injective and Σ ginherits a square complex structure so that fis a
combinatorial map of square complexes.
There have been several proposed methods to combinatorially reduce or simplify a Heegaard diagram to a
normal form from which the topology of the 3-manifold is more readily recognized ( for example the White-
head conjecture [20] and Volodin-Kuznetsov-Fomenko conjecture [19] for S3). Each is true in certain cases,
but not generally [12]. At this point, it is natural to ask whether Theorem 5.4 gives one such method to
recognize the connect sum structure of the 3-manifold. However, Remark 4.15 describes an example of the
failure of taut Stallings maps to pinch every reducing curve. Nevertheless, the structure of Stallings maps
suggest that there is something beyond the surface that can be manipulated and simplified. We expose and
explore this in the remainder of the paper, where we will use the following definition.
26Definition 5.5. A Heegaard diagram is simple if there is a maximal disjoint set of separating reducing
curves on Σ gthat do not intersect the Heegaard diagram (these reducing curves must induce the prime
decomposition of the 3-manifold, possibly with additional S3connect summands if the Heegaard splitting is
stabilized). A Heegaard diagram is not simple if every maximal disjoint set of separating reducing curves on
Σgintersects the Heegaard diagram. A Stallings map describing a simple Heegaard diagram is also called
simple .
Note that if a Heegaard diagram for the 3-manifold Mis simple and fis a Stallings map for the Heegaard
diagram, the surface subspaces of Σ∗each form minimal genus ( ≥1) Heegaard diagrams for the prime connect
summands of M.
5.2 Group Actions on Trees and the Guirardel Core
LetM=H1∪H2be a 3-manifold with a Heegaard decomposition. Let fbe a Stallings map for this Heegaard
splitting. By the proof of Theorem 4.10, we may assume that fis taut after possibly replacing it with another
Stallings map in its Out(Fg)×Out(Fg) orbit. In this section, we uniformly assume that S2×S1is not a
connect summand of M. By Theorem 5.4, fmay be modified by a homotopy so that it factors through a
pinched surface Σ∗with a square complex structure, and fis a combinatorial map of square complexes that
is locally injective on each surface subspace of Σ∗. The Heegaard diagram corresponding to fis taut but not
necessarily filling. This is the setting for the analysis that follows.
Consider the following commutative diagram of covering spaces, where T1andT2are each a copy of the
universal cover of ∨gS1,Sis the cover of Σ gcorresponding to the kernel of f∗:π1(Σg)→π1((∨gS1)×(∨gS1)),
and ˆfis the corresponding lift of f.
S T1×T2
Σg (∨gS1)×(∨gS1)ˆfπ1(Σg) π1(Σg)×π1(Σg)≥∆π1(Σg)
f
Consider the action of π1(Σg) on this diagram. The group π1(Σg) acts on Sby deck transformations (with
kernel equal to ker( f∗)). It also acts on Tiby deck transformations. This is because Tiis the universal cover
of∨gS1with the free group on ggenerators Fg, acting as deck transformations. The inclusion of Σ gas the
boundary of a handle body is π1-surjective, and therefore fi∗:π1(Σg)→Fgis surjective as well. Thus each
element α∈π1(Σg) acts by the deck transformation fi∗(α) onTi. This creates an action of π1(Σg)×π1(Σg)
onT1×T2, and the diagonal subgroup ∆ π1(Σg)(elements of the form ( x, x)) gives an action of π1(Σg) on
T1×T2. The map ˆfis equivariant with respect to the actions of π1(Σg) onSand on T1×T2.
We would like to understand the diagonal action of π1(Σg) onT1×T2because this is where the information
of the 3-manifold Mis hidden. The Guirardel core (Definition 2.11, and defined with more details in [7])
provides a way to understand the compatibility of the two coordinates of this action. The larger the volume
of the core (a subset of T1×T2), the larger the obstruction to finding a third tree T3with an action of π1(Σg)
and surjective equivariant maps onto T1andT2.
For instance, if π1(Σg) acts on T1andT2in the same way, the Guirardel core has zero volume and every
simple closed curve in Σ gis reducing. The corresponding Heegaard diagram is the connect sum of several
genus one diagrams for S2×S1. This diagram completely reveals the connect sum structure of this particular
3-manifold.
The precise relationship between the Guirardel core and Heegaard decompositions can be elucidated using
Stallings maps, as we shall see in the following theorem. Recall that the Guirardel core is the subset of
T1×T2given by removing all the light quadrants (see Definition 2.11, which recounts the definition in [7]).
Letˆf1and ˆf2be the coordinates of ˆf.
Lemma 5.6. A quadrant δ1×δ2ofT1×T2is heavy iff it intersects ˆf(S).
27Proof. Letˆf1and ˆf2be the coordinates of ˆf. Suppose δ1×δ2∩ˆf(S) =∅. Using any point in ˆf(S) as the
base point, its orbit must be contained in ˆf(S) because the map ˆfis equivariant with respect to the group
action. For this reason, there can be no sequence of elements in the orbit of the base point that is contained
inδ1×δ2. Therefore δ1×δ2must not be heavy (and therefore must be light).
Conversely, suppose δ1×δ2∩ˆf(S)̸=∅. This is equivalent to ˆf−1
1(δ1)∩ˆf−1
2(δ2)̸=∅. We show that δ1×δ2
must be heavy. Consider the covers S1andS2of Σ gcorresponding to the subgroups ker f1∗and ker f2∗of
π1(Σg) respectively. These covers are planar surfaces that are the boundaries of the universal covers of the
handle bodies H1andH2respectively. In fact, ˆf1can be interpreted as the projection from StoS1followed
by the inclusion of S1into the universal cover of H1, followed by a deformation retraction d1of this space to
T1(a lift of the deformation retraction of H1to∨gS1). The blue Heegaard diagram curves lift to separating
curves in S1and the red Heegaard diagram curves lift to separating curves in S2. This is because on Σ gthey
are the pre-images of midpoints of edges in ∨gS1byf1andf2respectively, and so in Si, we may think of
them as the pre-images of the mid points of edges of Tiby the deformation retraction dialluded to above.
Recall that these curves are taut but not filling.
To understand how a path γinˆSis sent to a path in T1byˆf1, we may project γtoS1and observe the
algebraic intersection with blue diagram curves. (Recall that the blue diagram curves are the pre-images of
the midpoints of the edges in T1). The sum of the absolute value of the algebraic intersection numbers of γ
with each of the blue diagram curves is the distance between the end points of ˆf1(γ) inT1.
Letx∈ˆf−1
1(δ1)∩ˆf−1
2(δ2). Ifxis on (the lift of a) Heegaard diagram curve, it can be perturbed slightly to
be off all diagram curves while remaining in x∈ˆf−1
1(δ1)∩ˆf−1
2(δ2) (since this set is open and the curves are
not full-dimensional sets).
From here, we seek a sequence {αi·x}iwhere αi∈π1(Σg), such that the sequences of distances {dT1(x, αi·x)}i
and{dT2(x, αi·x)}iare both unbounded. We construct a sequence by constructing a path in Sbeginning at
xthat does not backtrack significantly when its image is projected to each tree. The backtracking in the Ti
is monitored by algebraic intersection with blue diagram curves when projected to Si.
Since xis not on a lifted Heegaard diagram curve, it must be in the interior of a connected component of the
complement in S. Call these complementary components. Since fis locally injective, this complementary
component cannot have a problem, and therefore, at most two edges of the boundary are sent to the boundary
ofδ1×δ2and they cannot both be the same colour. The complementary component must have at least four
edges, so there must be a way for a path beginning at xto exit the complementary component via a vertex
(transversally crossing a red and blue hyperplane simultaneously) without exiting ˆf−1
1(δ1)∩ˆf−1
2(δ2).
The path has now entered a new complementary component in S. We now extend the path further, taking
care not to back track at each step. This new complementary component must also not have a problem.
Therefore, as long as the path does not exit this complementary component by crossing the same two edges it
crossed upon entry, the path’s image will not back track in T1and in T2. The complementary component has
least four edges, and so again, it is possible to exit this complementary component via a vertex (simultaneously
transversally crossing a blue and red hyperplane) without backtracking in T1and in T2.
We continue in this way, extending the path. Each time the path crosses diagonally over a vertex (simul-
taneously transversally crossing a blue and red diagram curve), its image goes one unit deeper in T1and
T2.
LetNbe the number of complementary components in Σ g. We extend the path from xas above until it
visits N+ 10 complementary components. At this point, we extend the path by a segment connecting it to
the the nearest point in the π1(Σg) orbit of x. This is at most Ncomplementary components away. The
completed path now connects xto a point α1·xfor some α1∈π1(Σg). The image of the path moves distance
N+ 10 units deeper into δ1andδ2, and then backtracks at most Nunits. In total then, dTj(x, α1·x)≥10
forj= 1,2.
We find αi+1·xby extending our path from αi·xin the same way as above: first taking care to move N+10
unit deeper into both trees, and then proceeding to the nearest point in the orbit of x. This constructs a
28sequence {αi}so that dTj(x, αi·x)≥10i, for both j= 1,2. These sequences of distances are unbounded as
desired. Therefore, by definition, δ1×δ2is heavy.
Lemma 5.6 implies that the Guirardel core contains ˆf(S), but it also cannot be much larger than ˆf(S)
(because every quadrant not intersecting ˆf(S) is light).
In fact, the Guirardel core is the minimal (with respect to inclusion), non-empty π1(Σg)–invariant closed
connected set such that the fibres of the projections to T1andT2are connected (see [7], section 5). The
theorem below then follows and characterizes the relationship between fand the core.
Theorem 5.7. Letf: Σg→(∨gS1)×(∨gS1)be a locally injective Stallings map describing a Heegaard
decomposition. The Guirardel core of the actions of π1(Σ)onT1andT2is the smallest set Xsuch that
ˆf(S)⊆Xandp1−1(t)is connected for every t∈T1andp2−1(t)is connected for every t∈T2.
Proof. LetXbe the the smallest set Xsuch that ˆf(S)⊆Xandp1−1(t) is connected for every t∈T1and
p2−1(t) is connected for every t∈T2. The core contains ˆf(S) and the fibres of p1andp2are connected in the
core, so the core must contain X. On the other hand, Xis a non-empty, π1(Σg)–invariant, closed, connected
set, and the projections to T1andT2are connected by definition, so the core must be contained in X. This
implies that Xis the Guirardel core.
5.3 Complexity of the Guirardel core and augmented Heegaard diagrams
Letfbe a taut Stallings map describing a Heegaard splitting for a 3-manifold M. We continue to assume
thatS2×S1is not a connect summand of M. Recall that ffactors through a pinched surface Σ∗. Let the
factor map be g: Σ∗→ ∨gS1× ∨gS1. Let ˆΣ∗be the cover of Σ∗that corresponds to the kernel of g. Then
ˆffactors through ˆΣ∗with factor map ˆ g:ˆΣ∗→T1×T2.
S T1×T2
ˆΣ∗
Σg (∨gS1)×(∨gS1)
Σ∗ˆf
ˆg
f
g
Given a Heegaard splitting, all choices of Stallings maps [ f] encoding it have the same π1-kernel, f∗, so the
topology of the cover Sis fixed. As we pass through the Out Fg×OutFgorbit of f, passing through all the
maps Σ g→ ∨gS1that describe the splitting, the square complex structure on ˆΣ∗changes and ˆfchanges. If
there is a reducing curve in Σ g, it lifts to S. The disk its image bounds in T1×T2is in the Guirardel core,
because of the coordinate-wise convex condition. A longer reducing curve suggests more squares in the core
needed to form a disk that this curve bounds. This leads to the following question.
Question 5.8.Does the smallest (in some sense) Guirardel core in the Out Fg×OutFgorbit give an fthat
is simple (pinches a maximal set of reducing curves, see Definition 5.5)?
If the answer to this question is positive, we would have a new characterization for Heegaard diagrams that
are connect sums of irreducible diagrams. Then working with Guirardel cores, it may be possible to find a
combinatorial algorithm to move within the Out Fn×OutFnorbit to find these diagrams.
One attempt to compare sizes of Guirardel cores, comes from looking at their quotients. Given a Stallings
map fencoding a Heegaard splitting, let Gfbe the quotient of the Guirardel core (of the action of π1(Σg) on
29T1andT2) by the diagonal action of π1(Σg). The area of Gf, in terms of number of squares, could be used as
a measure of the size of the Guirardel core. However even Gfis likely infinite in many cases. Nevertheless,
the following construction gives a partial answer to Question 5.8. We look at a certain subset of the core
whose quotient does have finite area.
5.3.1 Construction of augmented Heegaard diagrams
Begin with a taut Stallings map for a Heegaard splitting for a 3-manifold Mthat does not have S2×S1as
a connect summand. Consider an embedded disk in T1×T2whose boundary is a subset of ˆf(S), and when
pulled back to S, and then projected to Σ g, the boundary is a simple closed curve γ. Note that such a disk
is in the Guirardel core due to the convexity of fibres. We would like to focus on this part of the Guirardel
core.
Take the pinched surface ˆffactors through, ˆΣ∗, and attach an isomorphic disk (tiled with squares in the
same way) along the pullback of its boundary. The quotient map ˆ g:ˆΣ∗→T1×T2can be extended to this
disk by sending it to the isomorphic disk bounded by ˆ g(γ) inT1×T2. The unextended map ˆ gis locally
injective. If the extended ˆ gis no longer locally injective, we do not want to include the disk. In this way, the
augmented Heegaard diagram is built by attaching disks that do not disrupt the local injectivity. A precise
definition will follow shortly.
Given a taut Stallings map ffor a Heegaard splitting of M, the boundary components of the subsurfaces
that are pinched by fprovide a set of disjoint reducing curves. We may use the two disks each of these
reducing curves bounds (one in each handle body) to decompose Mby connect sum. The connect summands
come with Heegaard splittings of lower geni (that add to give the original genus). In this way, we look at the
closed surface subspaces of Σ∗as Heegaard splittings of connect summands of M.
We may ask whether each of these are reducible. If frestricted to one of the surface subspaces describes a
reducible Heegaard splitting, then by Haken’s lemma, there must be a reducing curve on the splitting surface.
Since S2×S1is not a connect summand, this curve must be separating, and thus we may use the two disks
it bounds (one in each handle body) to decompose Mfurther by connect sum. We continue in this way
until we have a set of disjoint reducing simple closed curves on Σ such that the connect components of the
complement represent irreducible Heegaard splittings of the prime connect summands of M.
There are many choices in the procedure above, and so there are several sets of curves one may end with.
For any given possibility, we may construct an augmented Heegaard diagram.
Definition 5.9. Given a taut Stallings map ffor a Heegaard splitting, and a maximal set of disjoint reducing
curves {γ1, . . . γ n}, constructed as above (namely, so that they include the curves bounding the subsurfaces
pinched by f), we construct the augmented Heegaard diagram by gluing disks to Σ∗along each γi. Beginning
with the pinched surface Σ∗, for each γi, consider its lift to ˆΣ∗, ˆγi(recall ˆΣ∗is the pinched surface ˆffactors
through). The image ˆ g(ˆγi) inT1×T2bounds a disk D. We attach an isometric copy of Dto Σ∗along γi
and extend the map gto send this copy to the projected image of Din∨gS1× ∨gS1. By modifying γiby a
homotopy, and removing some peripheral squares of D, it is possible to choose Dso that the extended map
gremains locally injective. The resulting square complex is an augmented Heegaard diagram C.
Notice that we now have the following commutative diagram, with ˆCbeing the cover of Ccorresponding to
30kerg∗.
S T1×T2
ˆC
Σg (∨gS1)×(∨gS1)
Cˆf
ˆg
f
g
The purpose of only attaching disks that maintain the local injectivity of ˆ gis that this ensures that ˆCandC
are clean V H-complexes. Note that Cis compact, and therefore virtually special.
Remark 5.10.LetMbe a 3-manifold that does not have S1×S2as a connect summand. A Heegaard
decomposition of Mis irreducible if and only if it has an augmented Heegaard diagram that is a surface.
It is also notable that one could define the augmented Heegaard diagram for a Stallings map fthat is not
taut. In this case, fwould still factor through a pinched surface, however, the factor map would not be locally
injective. In this case, the image of ˆfis may not be contained in the Guirardel core. However, one could still
attach disks along reducing curves as in Definition 5.9 to obtain an augmented Heegaard diagram.
5.3.2 Area properties of the augmented Heegaard diagram
The fact that one may take irreducible Heegaard diagrams and then take their connect sum to form a
Heegaard diagram for the connect sum of the 3-manifolds they represent implies that certainly there exist
Heegaard diagrams that are simple, as in Definition 5.5. Equivalently, there exist Stallings maps that pinch a
maximal reducing multicurve. However, as mentioned earlier, it is difficult to detect from the combinatorics
of a Heegaard diagram whether it is simple. The following theorem relates the area (number of squares) of
an augmented Heegaard diagram to whether it is simple or not.
Theorem 5.11. LetM=H1∪H2be a Heegaard splitting of a 3-manifold Mthat does not have S2×S1as a
connect summand. In the space of Stallings maps, BM,H1,H2, each has several augmented Heegaard diagrams.
Of all of these, the Stallings map with the smallest-area augmented Heegaard diagram C, has C= Σ∗. In
other words, a Stallings map with the smallest-area augmented Heegaard diagram is simple.
We will see in the proof below that a Stallings map with the smallest-area augmented Heegaard diagram
must also be taut. To make a Stallings map taut is equivalent to simplifying a Heegaard diagram with wave
moves along curves that do not intersect the Heegaard diagram. While it had been conjectured by Whitehead
and Volodin-Kuznetso-Fomenko that this may be enough to simplify a Heegaard diagram (of S3), it has been
shown that this is not enough [11] [12] [13] [18]. Theorem 5.11 quantifiably describes how to continue to
simplify all the way.
Overall, we see that asking for a Stallings map to be taut ties it to the Guirardel core (Theorem 5.7). In order
for this Stallings map to be simple, the Guirardel core must have a sense of minimal complexity, which is
made precise by minimizing the area over all possible augmented Heegaard diagrams (Theorem 5.11).
Proof. Assume that S2×S1is not a connect summand of M. Let [ f]∈BM,H1,H2. Suppose that C̸= Σ∗.
We claim that by applying a sequence of handle slides, the area of Ccan be reduced. Specifically, we reduce
the area by applying wave moves to pinch curves that previously had a disk attached along them. The idea
is that this eliminates the need to attach any disks to Σ∗to obtain C.
Consider γ, a simple closed curve in Σ∗, along which a disk is attached in C. Let ˆ γbe a lift of γtoS. Then
ˆf(ˆγ) bounds a disk in T1×T2.
31Consider the intersection word of γwith the Heegaard diagram corresponding to [ f]. Let b1, . . . b nbe the
blue letters that appear and let r1, . . . r mbe the red letters that appear in this intersection word. (In other
words, b1, . . . b nare the blue curves γintersects and r1, . . . r mare the red curves γintersects). The cyclic
intersection word of γcan be reduced to the trivial word using the relation that r’s and b’s commute. This
implies that each intersection noted by biis paired with another noted b−1
iwith which it will cancel in the
reduction process (respectively for r’s). Each cancelling pair bounds a hyperplane in the disk bounded by
ˆf(ˆγ). Further, two hyperplanes in the disk intersect if and only if their end points on ˆf(ˆγ) are linked.
ˆf(ˆγ)
Figure 19: Disk in T1×T2with ˆf(ˆγ) as boundary.
Since ˆf(ˆγ) is null homotopic in T1×T2, there exists an isuch that a subsegment of γprovides a path from
bito itself intersecting the same side twice without intersecting any other blue curves (corresponding to the
place in the intersection word where cyclic reduction can begin). In other words, a wave move can be applied
tobialong a subsegment of γ. Note that this segment of γmay intersect red curves, and so after applying
the wave move, new squares may emerge on Σ∗corresponding to the intersection of biand these red curves,
see Figure 20.
Continue in this way, applying wave moves until γdoes not intersect any Heegaard diagram curves. At this
point γis pinched in Σ∗. Further, any new squares added to Σ∗that remain after this process correspond
to pairs of Heegaard diagram curves whose intersection points with γare linked. Thus the new squares are
in bijection with a subset of the squares in the disk γbounded in Cbefore the modifications, see Figure 20.
(While this is not always the case, there are instances where strictly fewer new squares are created. One such
example is seen in Figure 20)
We claim that the segments of the Heegaard diagram curves that were deleted in these wave moves must
have had some intersections with other diagram curves. Thus, the total number of squares in Chas been
reduced by this move. This is proven as follows:
Begin by assuming the deleted arcs of Heegaard diagram curves had no intersections. Orient γand choose
a base point away from any intersections with diagram curves. Take closed tubular neighbourhoods of the
arcs of b1, . . . b nandr1, . . . , r mthat are deleted in the process above. Call them τ1. . . τnandν1, . . . ν m
respectively. Choose these neighbourhoods so that they do not intersect the base point of γ, and so that the
boundaries of τ1. . . τnandν1, . . . ν mthat run alongside b1, . . . b nandr1, . . . , r mdo not intersect any other
curves in the original Heegaard diagram. This is possible because of our assumption that the arcs of b1, . . . b n
andr1, . . . , r mthat are deleted do not have any intersections.
Consider a new curve ηgiven by beginning at the base point of γand following γ, until the first boundary
ofτ1. . . τnorν1, . . . ν mis intersected. Then follow that boundary until it intersects γagain. At this point
follow γagain until another boundary of τ1. . . τnandν1, . . . ν mis intersected. Then follow this boundary
32γ γ r1
b2
r1b1
b2r1
b2
r1b1
b1
b2
γ
r1
b1b2r1b2
b1 r1b2Portion of original Heegaard diagram.
Disk tiled
by squares
attached
along γinC.Heegaard diagram after wave
move applied to b1along seg-
ment of γ.
Disk at-
tached along
γinCnow
has fewer
squares.
Several wave moves applied
so that Heegaard diagram no
longer intersects γ.
Here, γis pinched in C
and does not bound a
disk of positive area.
Figure 20: Before and after several wave moves have been applied. Heegaard diagram curves have been
oriented arbitrarily so that intersection with γcan be seen more easily. Note that in this case, one new
intersection is created in the Heegaard diagram, between r1anb1.
until it returns to γ. Continue in this way, see Figure 21.
The process ends if ηreturns to the base point of γ. There are only finitely many boundary arcs of τ1. . . τn
andν1, . . . ν m, and segments of γbetween these. If the process does not end, ηmust eventually intersect
itself somewhere other than the base point. This is not possible because, for each arc in η, there is a unique
arc that could possibly precede it. Therefore, the process ends and ηis a simple closed curve.
Further, we have assumed that the boundaries of τ1. . . τnandν1, . . . ν mdo not intersect any Heegaard
diagram curves, and so ηdoes not intersect any of the curves of the original Heegaard diagram. Therefore,
before the modifications, ηis a curve that must be pinched in Σ∗, or bound a disk in Σ g.
Depending on the choice of base point on γ, there are many choices for η. As long as the deleted arcs of
b1, . . . b nandr1, . . . , r mare not all on the same side of γ, it is possible to choose the base point so that η
intersects γtransversally, see Figure 21. If ηis pinched, this is a contradiction since the pinched curves and
the curves along which disks are glued in to form Care disjoint. If ηbounds a disk in Σ g, this disk must not
contain any Heegard diagram curves. However, by construction there are Heegaard diagram curves on either
side of η, a contradiction.
In the case where the deleted arcs of b1, . . . b nandr1, . . . , r mare all on the same side of γ, the assumption
that they have no intersections imply that γbounds a disk on this side in Σ∗(before attaching disks to form
C!). This is because, by definition of Σ∗, the Heegaard diagrams on each surface subspace of Σ∗are filling.
This is a contradiction because γmust be an essential curve in Σ∗.
33Figure 21: By choosing the base point between two deleted arcs of Heegaard diagram curves that are on
opposite sides of γ,ηintersects γtransversally (figure on the left). Otherwise, this may not be the case
(figure on the right).
In either case, the deleted arcs of b1, . . . b nandr1, . . . , r mmust have had some intersections. This translates
to squares being deleted in Σ∗when the wave moves are applied. Looking to C, we see that some squares may
be added, but these are in bijection with a subset of the squares that are deleted. The above now guarantees
that this is a proper subset, and so, applying these wave moves reduces the area of C.
Corollary 5.12. Given a 3-manifold Mthat does not have S1×S2as a connect summand, the minimum-
area augmented Heegaard diagram over all possible augmented Heegaard diagrams describing Mcorresponds
to a Heegaard splitting that is not stabilized.
Proof. Given a Heegaard splitting of M, the minimum-area augmented Heegaard diagram Cfor this splitting
is equal to Σ∗and corresponds to a simple Heegaard diagram. If the Heegaard splitting was stabilized, one
of the surface subspaces Xof Σ∗must be a surface of genus one that forms an augmented Heegaard diagram
forS3. Consider collapsing this subsurface to a point to make a new pinched surface. This new pinched
surface must be an augmented Heegaard diagram for a Heegaard splitting of Mas well, since it has the same
set of connect summands that are not S3. However, the area of the new augmented Heegaard diagram must
be strictly less than the original augmented Heegaard diagram. This implies that the original augmented
Heegaard diagram was not of minimum area across all possible augmented Heegaard diagrams describing M,
a contradiction. Thus the original Heegaard splitting must have been stabilized.
6 Future directions
While the previous section gives a partial answer to Question 5.8, it would be great if one could find a more
explicit description of augmented Heegaard diagrams, as complexity of the Guirardel core, as opposed to
using the Stallings map. This would allow results and methods for Guirardel cores to be applied to Heegaard
splittings more readily.
This paper connects several different structures: Heegaard diagrams, Stallings maps, virtually special square
complexes, Guirardel cores of a surface group acting on a pair of trees. One natural question is how the
properties of the 3-manifold all these structures describe is manifested.
Question 6.1.What methods and theorems from the study of Guirardel cores and virtually special square
complexes be used to prove statements about 3-manifolds, using the connection provided by Theorems 5.4,
5.7 and 5.11
34Figure 22: S1×S1shown with a blue point and a red point selected on each coordinate circle.
7 Example: Lens spaces
7.1 Genus 1
Consider genus 1 Heegaard splittings. These are lens spaces. They are all prime, and S2×S1is the only
lens space that is reducible. This is because any essential simple closed curve on the two-dimensional torus
does not separate the surface. Therefore the existence of a curve that bounds a disk in both handle bodies
implies the existence of a two-dimensional sphere embedded in the lens space that does not separate. It is
well-known that an embedded, non-separating 2-sphere implies that S2×S1is a connect summand of the
manifold. This is a contradiction, as we have excluded S2×S1in our hypothesis and lens spaces are prime.
Therefore, there cannot be a reducing curve and the Heegaard splitting is irreducible. Note that this means
that the genus 1 Heegaard splitting of S3is considered irreducible. We restrict attention to irreducible lens
spaces in what follows (we do not consider S2×S1).
A lens space can be described by two integer parameters pandq, and is denoted L(p, q). Genus one Heegaard
splittings for Lens spaces are pairs of simple essential curves on a two-dimensional torus. For simplicity, we
define the pand the qin terms of Heegaard diagrams. This is not how it is usually done, but this view ties
in best with this note. It is left as an exercise for the reader to show that these definitions are equivalent to
the usual ones.
The first integer, pis equal to the number of intersections of a Heegaard diagram for L(p, q) (notice there are
no handle slides for the single genus case). The second integer, qis coprime to p, and is found by starting
at a point on a diagram curve and numbering the intersection points as one travels along the curve (pick a
direction). Then starting at a point on the other curve, read off the numbers while travelling along it (pick a
direction). The consecutive numbers on the list obtained will differ by a constant, modulo p. This constant is
q, and L(p, q) =L(p,−q(mod p)) =L(p, q−1(mod p)). Recall, the fundamental group of the lens space L(p, q)
isZ/Zp.
Consider the domain and the target for Stallings maps that encode genus one Heegaard splittings. The
splitting surface is the two-dimensional torus, and the target space is the product of two bouquets of a single
circle. This is also the two-dimensional torus. Now Theorem 4.12 implies that there is a locally injective
representative map that encodes the Heegaard splitting. Locally injective endomorphisms of T2are covering
maps. And so, the irreducible lens spaces can be encoded by finite sheeted covering maps of the torus.
Proposition 7.1. The degree of the covering map is p.
Proof. Begin with a covering map f:T2−→S1×S1that describes L(p, q). Recall, that one can obtain
a Heegaard diagram for the encoded splitting by taking the curves that are the coordinate pre-images of
a point on each circle coordinate of S1×S1. In Figure 22, we see two points whose pre-image should be
considered to obtain a diagram. The pre-image of the blue points should be coloured blue and the pre-image
of the red points should be coloured red.
35Figure 23: Pre-images of the red and blue points.
Note that the fiber above the blue point and the fiber above the red point intersect once in the target space
(shown in Figure 22). Call the intersection point y. Now, in the domain T2, the diagram we obtained has p
intersection points. Therefore there are ppre-images of y. This shows that the degree of fisp.
In the example in Figure 23, using the notation of the proof above, fis the map between tori and it describes
L(5,2).
The other integer, q, can be seen as follows. Recall that the squares can be combinatorially drawn as the
dual to the Heegaard diagram. This shows how the psquares are attached together to give a torus.
Remark 7.2.The square complex structure of the domain T2is given by attaching psquares to make a
cylinder of circumference pand height one, and then attaching the remaining boundary components with a
q
ptwist. There is a distinct square complex structure for each lens space. These can each be thought of as a
point in the moduli space of conformal structures on T2.
Aq
ptwist is needed because otherwise, there would not be a single Heegaard diagram curve of each colour
after gluing. The countable set of points in the moduli space that encode Heegaard diagrams of Lens spaces
is unbounded since L(p,1) always has a simple closed curve of length√
2 and a transversal curve of length p
(taking the squares to have unit side lengths). So as p→ ∞ , the first curve becomes conformally short.
These Stallings maps are simple, since there are no reducing curves and Σ = Σ∗=C. The space T1×T2is
homeomorphic to R2, and the Guirardel core is the entire plane.
7.2 Genus 2
Any genus 2 Heegaard splitting of a Lens space is reducible. However, some Stallings maps encoding genus
two Heegaard splittings of Lens spaces are taut. Further in these examples, the square complex Σ∗has
smaller total area than their genus 1 counterparts. These examples were found by Osborne, and they give
a counterexample to a converse to Theorem 4.12. Figure 18 shows one such Heegaard diagram of a Lens
space with fundamental group Z13. A Heegaard decomposition of genus one for this manifold would have
an augmented Heegaard diagram of area 13 (see Section 7.1). The genus two diagram shown in Figure 18
corresponds to a Stallings map hsuch that Σ g= Σ∗has area 11. However, Cmust also contain disks of
squares attached along a maximal disjoint set of reducing curves. A reducing curve which bounds a disk of
area 15 is shown in Figure 24. This brings the area of Cwell above its genus one counterpart.
36ab
x
yηaaaaayyy
Figure 24: A taut and filling Heegaard diagram for a Lens space with fundamental group Z13. The curves
aandbare red, while the curves xandyare blue. The curve ηis reducing, and bounds the disk shown at
right in the augmented Heegaard diagram C.
References
[1] I. Agol. The virtual haken conjecture. Documenta Mathematica , 18:1045–1087, 2013.
[2] J. Behrstock, M. Bestvina, and M. Clay. Growth of intersection numbers for free group automorphisms.
J. Topol. , 3:280–310, 2010.
[3] M Bridson and D. Wise. VH complexes, towers and subgroups of F×F.Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. ,
126:481–497, 1999.
[4] M. Clay, J. Mangahas, and A. Pettet. An algorithm to detect full irreducibility by bounding the volume
of periodic free factors. The Michigan Mathematical Journal , 64:279–292, 2014.
[5] M. Clay and A. Pettet. Twisting out fully irreducible automorphisms. Geom. Funct. Anal. , 20(3):657–
689, 2010.
[6] M. Clay and A. Pettet. Relative twisting in outer space. J. Topol. Anal. , 4(2):173–201, 2012.
[7] V. Guirardel. Coeur et nombre d’intersection pour les actions de groupes sur les arbres. Annales
Scientifiques de l ´Ecole Normale Sup´ erieure , 38, 08 2005.
[8] F Haglund and D. Wise. Special cube complexes. Geometric and Functional Analysis , 17:1551–1620,
2008.
[9] J. Hempel. 3-Manifolds . AMS Chelsea Publishing, Providence, Rhode Island, 1976.
[10] C. Horbez. Sphere paths in outer space. Algebr. Geom. Topol. , 12(4):2493–2517, 2012.
[11] O Morikawa. A counterexample to a conjecture of Whitehead. Math. Sem. Notes Kobe Univ. , 8:295–298,
1980.
[12] M Ochiai. A counterexample to a conjecture of Whitehead and Volodin-Kuznetsov-Fomenko. J. Math.
Soc. Japan , 31(4):687–691, 1979.
[13] M Ochiai. A Heegaard diagram of the 3-sphere. Osaka Journal of Mathematics , 22, 10 1984.
[14] R. P. Osborne. Heegaard diagrams of lens spaces. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society ,
84(3):412 – 414, 1982.
[15] K. Reidemeister. Zur dreidimensionalen topologie. Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg , 11:189–194, 1933.
[16] J. Singer. Three-dimensional manifolds and their heegaard diagrams. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. , 35:88–
111, 1933.
37[17] J. R. Stallings. How not to prove the Poincar´ e Conjecture. Annals of Mathematics Studies , 60:83–88,
1966.
[18] O. Viro. The Volodin-Kuznetsov-Fomenko conjecture on Heegaard diagrams is false. Uspeki Math.
Nauk. , 32:175 – 176, 1977.
[19] I. A. Volodin, V. E. Kuznetsov, and A. T. Fomenko. The problem of discriminating algorithmically the
standard three-dimensional sphere. Russian Math. Surveys , 29(5):71–172, 1974.
[20] J. H. C Whitehead. On certain sets of elements in a free group. Proc. London Math. Soc. , 41:48 – 56,
1936.
[21] D. Wise. Non-positively curved squared complexes, aperiodic tilings, and non-residually finite groups .
PhD thesis, Princeton University, 1996.
38