Overcoming Inverse-square Law of Gravitation and
Luminosity for Interstellar Hyperspace Navigation
by Celestial Objects
Nghi C. Nguyen
HSSS Science
Virginia, USA
nghi@hsss.science
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3913-1828
Abstract —Interstellar travel with hyperdrive or warp drive
technologies presents navigating challenges when traveling speed
approaches or exceeds the speed of light. Conventional methods
such as inertia, magnetic, controlled gyros, visual or radar
navigation, all have their limit at near-light speed due to
inverse-square laws for gravitation, luminosity, and isotropic
radiator. Near-ﬁeld gravitational force of Alcubierre Warp Drive
and Hyperdrive makes inertia, magnetic, and controlled gyros
ineffective within the hyperbolic curvature of spacetime’s strong
gravitational and magnetic alignment.
In this paper, we propose novel methods to increase total
luminosity and decrease error propagation during subluminal
or luminal interstellar transits by navigation with star maps.
We demonstrate with theoretical and simulation models in ﬁrst
order approximation results that are correlated to eccentric
and concentric of light bands, ebbing and ascending of light
streaks, and centric of celestial distance. Finally our models show
that both near-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld celestial objects enhance error
correction and navigation vectors even when the traveling speed is
approaching the speed-of-light. We demonstrate that our method
of varying a spaceship’s primary axis rotational rate and angle of
approach are superior than traveling at a straight line, especially
when the traveling speed is approaching or exceeding the speed
of light.
Index Terms —interstellar travel, hyperspace, FTL navigation,
celestial navigation, star tracker, GNC
I. B ACKGROUND
Navigating in hyperspace presents many challenges. Space-
time distortion at luminal or super-luminal speed by Special
Relativity and near-ﬁeld effects of gravitational tidal forces
by General Relativity make conventional navigating methods
error-prone [1]. A small degree of error during hyperspace
navigation would cause either parsec distance misses or worse,
a spaceship coming out of hyperspace right on top of a planet
or a star.
Conventional methods such as inertia, magnetic, controlled
gyros, visual or radar navigation, all have their limit at near-
light speed due to inverse-square laws for gravitation (New-
ton’s laws), luminosity (light intensity), and isotropic radiator
(radio & radar). Near-ﬁeld gravitational force of Alcubierre
Warp Drive and Hyperdrive makes inertia, magnetic, and
controlled gyros ineffective within hyperbolic curvature of
spacetime’s strong gravitational and magnetic alignment [2].Navigation by star maps of celestial is still the ideal method
in interstellar travel because the relative incident angle of
arriving star lights faraway do not change signiﬁcantly relative
to traveling distance. In this paper, we propose a novel
method to overcome the inverse-square law of gravitation and
luminosity. When we apply both rotational rates of approach,
major angle and minor!, in line with traveling vector, star
map quality increases signiﬁcantly due to total illumination
over larger area. Uniquely resulting star lights aggregate into
various navigational bands or streaks that further enhance
error correction for controlling the spacecraft. Monitoring
spacetime dilation of light streaks over time and correlating
with wavelength spectral shift act as control feedback to
the Guidance, Navigation and Control (GNC) system of a
spacecraft.
II. I N-SYSTEM TRANSIT VERSUS INTERSTELLAR
NAVIGATION
In-system or inner-system transit present a different set
of navigation and avoidance strategies than inter-system or
interstellar traveling. Within a single or binary star system,
its stars act as primary light sources as well as illuminating
any large celestial objects orbiting this system; their near-ﬁeld
illumination dominate the quality and accuracy of star maps.
For within a star system, there are a sufﬁcient quantity of
illuminated celestial objects with known orbiting planes to give
a precise location of a spacecraft relative to its star.
Secondly, it is not wised to engage warp-drive or hyperdrive
for inner-system traveling between in-system planets for long
duration. Traveling at luminal speed would be very short in
relative distance to those of a star system, as well increasing
the risk of collision with other in-system objects. A preferred
method is to engage short jumps for precise traveling; this
method eliminates the need for enduring navigation using
warp-drive or hyperdrive.
Star systems are sparsely populated in our universe, their
sizes are minuscule to large empty space and black void
separated by light-year distances. Interstellar travel with warp-
drive and hyperdrive between the nearest systems wouldarXiv:2301.11130v2  [physics.gen-ph]  1 Feb 2023take months or perhaps years. In luminal or super-luminal–
also known as faster-than-light (FTL)–mode traveling, all
light sources are far-ﬁeld and subject to inverse-square law
of luminosity reducing their quality, as well as spacetime
distortions induced by Special Relativity [3]. Most critically,
warp-drive and hyperdrive generate near-ﬁeld gravitational
tidal forces that are dominating spaceship’s perceptibility of
arriving star lights under inverse-square law of gravitation by
General Relativity’s spacetime curvature. This paper applies
to this type of interstellar traveling.
III. E FFECTS OF NEAR-FIELD GRAVITATIONAL SOURCES
UNDER GENERAL RELATIVITY
Both Alcubierre’s warp drive [4] and the author’s hyperdrive
[5] require near-ﬁeld sources of gravitational matter and anti-
matter. This section details the near-ﬁeld effects of strong grav-
itational sources under General Relativity [6], and proposes
various techniques to enhance navigation by celestial lights
during hyperspace traveling mode.
A. Usable Field-of-View
Interstellar navigation by celestial objects require an unob-
structed view to the star ﬁelds in the frame of the traveling
spacecraft, deﬁned as usable ﬁeld-of-view (FOV). There are
many types of instruments to collect star lights, from wide
angle camera systems and crude devices such as coarse sun
sensor to precision focal systems such as star trackers, that
can detect spectral bands from visible to non-visible such as
near-infrared and x-ray. In this paper, we use visible light band
as the reference spectrum with wavelength between 400nm to
780nm, “Fig. 1”.
Fig. 1. Visible Spectrum of Light [7].
For transit in-system, a spaceship with an array of light
receivers strategically positioned around its hull would have
unfettered access to a 360 degree FOV , with sun shields to
block out powerful rays from the in-system primary star. Inter-
stellar travel with conventional propulsion technologies rarely
needs sun shield deployment due to the majority of transit
time being in the void or empty black space between star
systems. However, warp drive and hyperdrive generate massive
gravitational sources in close-distance to the spaceship, and
strong gravitational tidal near-ﬁeld forces make gravitational
lensing that limit the usable FOV [5].B. Alcubierre’s warp drive
Alcubierre’s warp drives require equal and opposite grav-
itational ﬁelds generated by matter (blackhole) and anti-
matter (whitehole) as shown in “Fig. 2”. A time-stable bubble
envelopes the spaceship, protecting it from time dilation due
to Special Relativity effect of FTL traveling speed. The aft
whitehole is generated by concentrated anti-matter to produce
space expansion behind the ship pushing it; at the same time
the blackhole by concentrated matter produces a contraction
of space pulling the spaceship forward. This push-pull effect
from space expansion and opposite contraction requires close
proximity of the whitehole and blackhole to the spaceship
in equal distance. It requires a dedicate balancing control to
keep blackhole and whitehole apart, as anti-matter and matter
annihilate themselves and the spaceship in contact.
Fig. 2. Conceptual Alcubierre’s Warp Drive.
Within the time bubble, spaceship is buffered by strong
gravitational ﬁelds that subject the front and rear views to
strong and weak gravitational lensing. Gravitational lensing
makes far-ﬁeld celestial objects appear in different locations
than their true coordinates. Error of near-ﬁeld General Rela-
tivity increases proportionally with gravitational lensing angle,
compounding position dilution of precision for navigation.
In the case of Alcubierre’s warp drive, the gravitational
lensing regions behind the spaceship are larger than in the
forward lensing region; aft expansion of space pushes arriving
lights away from the spaceship, as opposed to pulling into
for the case of forward space contraction “Fig. 3”. Ideal FOV
to triangulate traveling spaceship with the most precision of
position are light arriving from the normal region without
gravitational lensing. Therefore, FOV of normal region by
Alcubierre spacecraft during hyperspace would be limited to
the radial axis but not the axis transverse to the direction of
travel.
Computing Euclidean coordinates of a traveling spacecraft
in 3-dimensional (3D) space using known star map for nav-
igation, requires a minimum of three reference stars in FOV .
Ideally the three reference stars are noncoplanar, maximally
separated and orthogonal in their 3D planes, which yield the
least circular error propagation, “Fig. 4”.
For Alcubierre spacecraft, its limited FOV forward and
backward in the transverse axis leads to the most error
propagation in radial dimensions orthogonal to the transverse
axis, “Fig. 5”. The circular error or position dilution growsFig. 3. Alcubierre Field-of-View Regions.
Fig. 4. Ideal Separation in 2D FOV .
proportionally with gravitational ﬁeld strength, distance to the
gravitational ﬁeld, and relative traveling speed.
Fig. 5. Alcubierre Radial Error due to Limited FOV .
C. Hyperdrive with -offset
The author proposed a concept of hyperdrive spaceship
that does not require exotic anti-matter [5]. Without aft space
expansion, the spacecraft is required to keep a ﬁxed distance
ds0to forward blackhole with an angle from the transverse
axis of travel, “Fig. 6”. As spacecraft continuously falls into
forward blackhole and regenerative blackhole moves away
keeping their relative distance ds0constant, a time-stable
bubble envelops both the spacecraft and the blackhole as
observed from the third person frame.
Fig. 6. Conceptual of Hyperdrive Spacecraft.The hyperdrive spaceship has full access to 180 degree
aft region; its FOV encompasses larger polar angles than
Alcubierre’s. With larger FOV , circular error propagation is
decreased in both the radial and transverse axis, “Fig. 7”.
Fig. 7. Hyperdrive Spacecraft FOV .
The spaceship needs to trade off between angle for
operating safe margin, relative traveling speed, and FOV . Their
relationship is such that larger improves safety for spaceship
to operate in hyperspace but at the cost of slower linear relative
speed and reduced FOV .
D. Hyperdrive with -offset and!-rotation
Hyperdrive ship can effectively increases its FOV by adding
an!rotation around the transverse axis in line with the travel-
ing direction, “Fig. 8”. Due to small angle gained by -offset
from traveling vector, rotating FOV around its transverse axis
yields smaller angular cone of lensing region polar opposite
totraverse angle by the rate of !over time.
Fig. 8. Improving FOV cone with !-rotation.
E. 2D View Projection by Horizontal Coordinate System
For ﬂight instrumentation, it is necessary to use Horizontal
Coordinate System for celestial navigation. Take a polar co-
ordinate system: Polar North is travel vector, Zenith is above
the spaceship’s observer bridge and Nadir below, with bridge
ﬂoor is the reference plane or horizontal plane, “Fig. 9”.
Using the spaceship’s observer bridge as the reference point,
Azimuth is the horizontal angle of the star from Polar North
projected onto the horizontal plane. Attitude, also known as
elevation, is the angle between the star to horizon plane. For
head-up display (HUD) of ﬂight instruments, a 3D projection
onto 2D polar coordinates, “Fig. 10”, carry all the information
with 360 degree FOV around the spaceship. The 2D HUD
contains tracking objects in degrees by Cartesian coordinate
as (azimuth, altitude) translated to Polar coordinate as (;),Fig. 9. Horizontal Coordinate System.
for0azimuth360and 90altitude90, and
their relationship:
azimuth =cos()
altitude =sin()(1)
Fig. 10. HUD Flight Instrument of Horizontal Coordinate System.
To calculate error propagation of reference star map during
ﬂight, it is necessary to project 3D Euclidean coordinates with
the spaceship as the reference frame onto a 2D Cartesian
plane orthogonal to the transverse axis of travel, “Fig. 11”.
This 2D Cartesian plane limits FOV display to half of the
hemisphere, to either forward and aft sections. It is easier for
human to perceive parallel projection of 2D Cartesian view
than instrument HUD view, hawking to star ﬁeld from the
view point on Earth.
Fig. 11. FOV in 2D Cartesian Form.
These 2D Cartesian coordinates are expressed in degrees in
(azimuth, altitude) converted from polar form (;), limited
to 90azimuth;altitude 90, or in radians, =2
azimuth;altitude =2.F . Effective Gain in Error Distribution Lapse over Time
Take a reference star with a nominal distance d=10 parsecs,
azimuth = +45, and altitude = 0in horizontal coordinate at
timet1; after traveling a distance xat timet2, this star’s
new position has azimuth = +60, and altitude = 0. Without
accounting for relativistic shift of luminosity, FOV changes
fromt1tot2are shown in “Fig. 12”.
Fig. 12. Example of Star Transiting in 2D FOV .
Adding a full 360clockwise!rotation around the trans-
verse axis in line with the traveling direction between t1to
t2, 2D FOV from the reference of the spacecraft is shown
in Fig. 13, with the star transiting in clockwise direction, by
converting polar coordinates to Cartesian using trigonometric
functions of Eq. 1.
Fig. 13. Example of Star Transiting with !Rotation.
Perceived reference star luminosity from the spacecraft is
apparent magnitude mthat classiﬁed the level of brightness
of stars, for which Vega is the standard reference star with
m= 0 as viewed from Earth. The effective error propagation
distributionof a star tracking through 2D Cartesian plot is its
apparent magnitude mcollected over distance xover time
t:
=  t(m)!x
t(2)
From “Fig. 13”, the effective error propagation distribution
gained by using 2D FOV of celestial reference over time
lapse tby a full rotation !over travel distance x, is the
circumference distance by averaging:
x= 2average = 0:5832(3)
whichis polar radius in radian unit as:average =(45 + 60)
2
180= 0:292 (4)
Compared with no rotation from “Fig. 12”, error propaga-
tion distribution over distance time lapse for x!=0is:
x!=0= (60 45)
180= 0:083 (5)
Asmis the same apparent magnitude perceived from the
spacecraft FOV for both cases, != 0 and!= 2, thus the
effective gain of one rotation over the same traveling distance
xover time tis:
Gain=0:5832
0:083722 (6)
Error propagation is further degraded when accounting for
inverse-square law of luminosity and by Special Relativity at
luminal traveling speed, which leads to next section.
IV. E FFECTS OF RELATIVISTIC DOPPLER UNDER SPECIAL
RELATIVITY
A. Wien’s Displacement Law
Stefan-Boltzmann Law deﬁnes total radiant power emitted
from a surface proportional to the fourth power of its absolute
temperature, with Ebeing the radiant heat energy emitted,
Tthe absolute temperature (K), and Stefan-Boltzmann
constant of 5:67037441910 8(W=m2=K4)as:
E=T4(7)
German physicist Wilhelm Wien found the inverse relation-
ship between the temperature of a blackbody and the wave-
length at which it emits the most light. Wien’s Displacement
Law states that the spectral radiance of black-body radiation
per unit wavelength reach a maximum at a certain wavelength
mby an inverse proportion to temperature T, withbWien’s
displacement constant of 2:89777195510 3(mK)as:
m=b=T (8)
Thus the inverse relationship between temperature and peak
wavelength of blackbody radiation is shown as “Fig. 14”. Each
visible star would have a unique spectral and peak wavelength
by Stefan-Boltzmann and Wien’s Laws; their varied mass,
size, and age invariably dictate their surface temperature,
which correlate with their absolute spectral magnitude or
intrinsic luminosity. The star’s unique spectral magnitudes or
spectral ﬁngerprints can aid our navigation by referencing
their spectral peak mand relative luminosity m. However,
the spectral peaks are subjected to the relativistic Doppler
effect proportionally to traveling speed =v=c, and relative
luminositymsubjected by inverse squared distance.
Fig. 14. Blackbody Radiation Chart of Wien’s Displacement Law [8].
B. Hertzsprung-Russell Diagrams
The relationships of celestial reference in distance, luminos-
ity, temperature, and spectral can be captured in a Hertzsprung-
Russell diagram, or H-R diagram. The diagram is named after
astronomers, Ejnar Hertzsprung and Henry Norris Russell who
independently developed the plot in early 1912 that show
correlation between the majority of stars lie along a diagonal
band called main sequence, “Fig. 15”.
Fig. 15. Hertzsprung-Russell Diagram [9].
The H-R diagram is useful for comparative charting of
stars by their characters, absolute magnitude (intrinsic lu-
minosity) and spectral class based on surface temperature.
Astronomer Annie Cannon while at Harvard classiﬁed star
spectral sequence by their temperature, OBAFGKM . This
spectral sequence is known as the Harvard classiﬁcation, with
Ostars being the hottest with temperatures of around 40,000
Kelvin (K) and Mstars the coolest at around 2,500K; our Sun
is a G2 type with and a surface temperature of around 6,000K,
“Fig. 16”.
C. Inverse-square Law of Luminosity
By Conservation of Energy, the total energy Pof a point
source stellar irradiance emanated over a spherical surface isFig. 16. Actual H-R Diagram Based on Hipparcos Data [10].
constant as:
P=jIjAsurface =jIj4d2(9)
wheredis the distance from the point source, and jIjis the
intensity function at the surface. This gives intensity of point
source at distance dperceived at the spaceship as:
jIj=P
4d2(10)
Apparent energy Pmperceived at the receiver from a
distancedis the apparent magnitude m, and apparent radius
rmis the radius of apparent star light. Thus the 2D projected
Cartesian area a=r2
morthogonal to starlight vector per-
ceived by the spaceship’s receiver is the total apparent energy,
a function of intensity jIjand surface area aas:
Pm=jIja=P
4d2r2
m=r2
m
4d2P (11)
Thus, we derive the ratio of mandMas a function of
distancedas:
m
M=Pm
P=r2
m
4d2(12)
or
m=r2
m
4d2M (13)
which proves that apparent magnitude has an inverse-square
distance relationship to absolute magnitude that agrees with
the Inverse-square Law of Luminosity.Therefore, a referenced star can be projected onto the 2D
FOV from 3D polar coordinates as (m;)wheremis a
functionF(rm;d;M ),dis spaceship-star distance, Mis star’s
absolute magnitude, and is a pair projected 2D Cartesian
ﬁeld of (azimuth;altitude ); apparent radius rmis a function
of the receiver’s focal length and sensitivity in ﬁlter Fxband
analog to digital conversion of measured apparent radiant area
(Eq. 14). These referenced stars can be projected onto 2D
Cartesian FOV Plot of “Fig. 11”, with apparent magnitude m
represented as area circle rmand color coded for intensity as a
function of absolute magnitude Madjusted for inverse-square
distanced.
From Eq. 6, we can now apply distance effect to Error
Propagation Distribution Gainusing Eq. 12 of distance d2
by trigonometric functions of xand. Given reference stars
are signiﬁcantly far compared to travel distance, dx,d
distance has minimal effect to Gainfunction when angular
rotation!is applied.
D. Exploiting Stellar Spectra Shift
Referenced star’s relative luminosity or apparent magnitude
mreceived by spectral receivers is normalized by reverse
logarithmic scale where Fxis the observed irradiance using
spectral ﬁlter xandFx;0the calibrated reference ﬂux of the
receiver within spectral band x
mx= 5log100Fx
Fx;0(14)
Stellar bolometric magnitude MEderived from Eq. 7, is the
total of all radiation emitted by a star at all wavelengths. It
is inefﬁcient to use bolometric magnitude for navigation due
to receiver’s limited bandwidth, a trade off between ﬁlter x
thermal noise, focal length, and aperture sensitivity. Thus we
limit stellar spectra Mvisual to the visible band, “Fig. 1”.
From “Fig. 16”, the majority of stars (90%) have unique
stellar spectral ﬁngerprints with peak wavelength M(Eq. 8)
within the visual band limited by the receiver’s ﬁlter x. With
exception of pulsar class, referenced stellar systems have ﬁxed
and unique peak wavelength that do not change signiﬁcantly
over traveling time. For example, our Sun spot cycle is about
11 years which alters the surface temperature and effects solar
irradiance output by only 0:07% [11].
Under Special Relativity, relativistic Doppler effect is
caused by the relative motion between the referenced star
and moving spaceship. As the spaceship approaches the star,
the arrival light wavefront decreases in wavelength, a physics
phenomenon called blueshift; and moving apart is redshift,
reference to “Fig. 1 Visible Spectrum”. Spaceship traveling
velocityvis expressed as Lorentz factor andrelative to
the speed of light cby their relationship:
=1p
1 2(15)
=v
c(16)The laws of Relativistic Doppler effects for arriving light
wavelength :
= (17)
From polar coordinate of referenced star, we know the angle
of approach and compute the relativistic Doppler shift as:
=cos()r
1 1
2(18)
For error correction and navigation using relativistic
Doppler shift [12], the equation can be inverted to correlate
traveling speed to approaching angle with measured peak
wavelength as:
=arccos
(1 1
2) 1
2
(19)
Take a study case of three stars with their spectral peak
wavelength at 475nm (blue), 575nm (yellow), and 650nm
(red). We plot their peak wavelength blueshift as a function
of approaching angle , “Fig. 17” for relative approaching
speed at 0.1 cand 0.5c. The blueshift is non-linear, propor-
tional to the traveling speed and inversely proportional at
approaching angle with maximum blueshift occurring when
the spaceship directly approaches the star.
Fig. 17. Peak Spectral Blueshift Plot as Function of Angle of Approach.
Thus we demonstrate that we can improve travel vector
correlation and navigational error correction to spaceship’s
GNC systems with only two unique referenced stars with
different peak wavelength mand FOV angle . The spaceship
can effectively navigate in hyperspace using a few known
celestial objects as references by exploiting the relativistic
Doppler shift, proportional to the relative traveling speed and
Lorentz factor . Relativistic Doppler shift works for both
forward and backward FOV of the spacecraft, exploiting both
redshift and blueshift phenomenons as stars are receding and
approaching traveling spacecraft.V. N AVIGATION BY STELLAR PARALLAX
A. Solar Parallax
Solar parallax is a method for determining distance to
nearby stars against static background using Earth-Sun known
orbit; stellar parallax is the measuring of apparent shift of
nearby stellar systems against the cosmic background as for
determining the distance of the object using trigonometric
parallax [13]. From Earth, it takes half a year or half an Earth-
Sun orbit to measure a nearby star against cosmic background,
“Fig. 18”.
Fig. 18. Solar Parallax.
Solar parallax is useful to measure nearby star systems
in terms of parallax angle in arc second (arcsec) using as-
tronomical unit (AU), the norm distance between Earth and
Sun. Parallax angle, p(arcsec), increases as the distance to
measuring object becomes closer to Earth.
d=1
p(20)
B. Exploiting Stellar Parallax
Stellar parallax is difﬁcult because it requires a known
orbital reference object; and it is only useful to measure
distance to nearby stellar objects that are not in the stellar
orbit with referencing background objects. Interstellar travel-
ing spaceships would have difﬁculty ﬁnding nearby known
reference orbiting objects in known star catalogs, especially
when spaceships are exploring uncharted systems.
We propose a novel navigating method to apply trigonomet-
ric parallax to any stars within spaceship FOV . As spaceship
rotates with angular rate !inline to traveling vector, we
already know which stellar objects are nearby by their relative
viewing angle and relativistic Doppler spectral shift; the
larger , the smaller the spectral shift, and the closer stellar
objects are to the traveling spacecraft. Therefore if we make
a spacecraft traveling in a spiral with major angle with
an radiusr, it effectively allows this spiral trajectory to
make parallax measurements to nearby stellar objects within
the spacecraft FOV , performing both ranging and angular
measurements, “Fig. 19”.
Exploiting relativistic Doppler shift, an interstellar traveling
spaceship can measure the traveling angle to nearby referenced
star. Adding major traveling spiral with rotational rate over
xdistance effectively create parallax for trilateration to
determine spaceship coordinates. By exploiting both parallax
and spectral relativistic shift [14], the spaceship can accurately
compute ranging dsto this referenced star against far cosmicFig. 19. Travel Vector with Spiral to Create Parallax.
background, and accounting for slant range d1andd2from
x. Our simulations demonstrate both major spiral rotation
angleand minor!produced relativistic spectral shift 
that correlated to measured and, enabling parallax
exploitation with large proportional to traveling speed .
This method of spiral traveling to exploit stellar parallax
only needs one nearby star. The parallax angle pis propor-
tional to the distance displacement xand FOV angle .
Thus the faster the spacecraft travels, the better navigation and
ranging from parallax. Most critically, the larger FOV angle 
is preferred for both Alcubierre’s warp drive and hyperdrive
with limited forward and backward FOV , “Fig. 3”.
VI. I MPROVING RANGING USING VARIABLE CELESTIAL
X-RAY SOURCES
An existing method of using variable celestial x-ray sources
such as pulsars can be used to improve ranging accuracy
during hyperdrive [15]. This method requires known pulsars
with predicted periodic signatures (time and phase) and
visible within the spacecraft’s usable FOV “Fig. 20”.
The primary beneﬁt of using variable celestial sources is
such that range determination achieves “higher precision in the
radial dimension than in the two transverse directions” [16].
Hyperdrive limits usable FOV to a higher angle of approach
relative to reference celestial objects. As such this method
reduces dominant error propagation in the radial dimension
due to lack of available celestial objects in FOV with small 
in transverse direction.
Fig. 20. Pulsar ranging from a reference point and spacecraft position.
At luminal and super-luminal traveling speed, this exploit
eliminates the need for a ﬁxed known reference time sourceagainst as measurement to variable celestial source. As space-
craft traveled in hyperspace, relative distance and phase of
the spacecraft over time are useful for Time Difference of
Arrival method (TDOA) for ranging determination by ex-
ploiting Doppler shift , with spacecraft’s onboard clock
acted as reference timing source against pular’s longer periodic
signatures, “Fig. 21”.
Fig. 21. Pulsar ranging from TDOA with relativistic shift.
We can exploit geometric relationships of relative displace-
ments in transverse xand radial d, applying relativistic
effect of spacecraft-pulsar TDOA and phase with angle to
celestial objects. Relationship to navigation error or position
dilution, is increasingly proportional to celestial distance d
but inversely to traveling speed and angle vector , as
well measuring time trelative to pulsar’s periodic . As
such spacecraft’s GNC beneﬁts from precised ranging with
correlated traveling speed , reducing position dilution of mea-
surement errors in both transverse direction xby exploiting
minor rotation !, and radial dimension with pulsar’s ranging
[15] correlated with to celestial objects.
Lastly, relativistic Doppler shift by Special Relativity apply
equally to x-ray spectra of known pulsars. The measured
relativistic Doppler shift of the same celestial source further
reduces ranging error propagation for both range single and
multiple differences [15]. Previous exploits using relativistic
Doppler shift and parallax require the spacecraft to carry
internal timing reference. Pulsar’s known periodic phase carry
inherent timing reference that spacecraft can lock-onto and
improve geopositioning and correlate onboard timing clocks
against these known timing reference sources that correlated
to relativistic shift in phase and spectral peak.
VII. 2D FOV S IMULATION BY FIRST ORDER
APPROXIMATION
We present our simulations in Matlab by First Order ap-
proximation that accounted for relativistic Lorentz boost of
a spaceship to a reference celestial and spectral Doppler
shift of celestial object’s luminous peak [17]; we did not
account for space expansion nor gravitational curvature of
space (gravitational lensing). Our simulation codes and resultsare publicly available as part of Open Science Framework
projects [18].
From previous section of Eq. 13, a celestial object with rel-
ative 3D Euclidean coordinate in spaceship frame is projected
onto 2D Cartesian FOV , “Fig. 11”, by relationship
azimuth =dcos()
altitude =dsin()(21)
The Cartesian coordinate pair (azimuth, altitude) or (x, y)
can be converted to polar coordinates ( ,)
=p
(x2+y2)
=arctan (y
x)(22)
Thus centric factor of celestial object in spaceship 2D
FOV is closer to Cartesian origin coordinate (0,0) when ( ,
) approaches zero. In ﬁrst order, relativistic Doppler effect
changes apparent magnitude mwith peak wavelength color
representing blueshift when celestial object approaching, or
redshift when receding.
A. Minor Rotation Rate Projected onto 2D FOV
Simulating for “Fig. 13”, we demonstrate by adding minor
rotation!around the traveling vector of spacecraft, displaying
transit by celestial object for spaceship’s xdisplacement.
“Fig. 22” is the simulation result with 1= 45and2= 60,
with minor rotation !rate at 0and2perxlinear distance
by traveling speed = 0:5c, shown in both 2D Polar and
Cartesian form; color bar of Cartesian plots is relative spectral
Doppler shift of celestial spectral peak of 700mn.
Fig. 22. Minor Rotation != 0 and!= 2rates.
For eccentric expansion of star in 2D FOV , the spaceship
approaching angle to celestial object is increasing while
during concentric contraction, is decreasing until FOV =
(0,0) when the celestial object is directly in the traveling path.
The rate of eccentric and concentric is !rate in radians.B. Major Spiral Rate Projected onto 2D FOV
From previous simulation, we add a major spiral rotation 
around traveling vector with diameter xat2rate, “Fig. 23”.
This simulation demonstrates relationship of traveling spiral
maximum distance d2to celestial object or ebb (receding), and
minimum distance d1or ﬂow (ascending) as celestial object
transiting 2rotation projected in 2D FOV in spaceship frame.
Fig. 23. Major Rotation and Minor!.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
We present our theoretical and simulation models in ﬁrst
order approximation with only three input factors: Lorentz ,
major, and minor !. Our models produce three outputs that
are correlated to the eccentric and concentric of light bands,
ebbing (receding) and ﬂow (ascending) of celestial transits,
and centric of celestial coordinate (azimuth and altitude).
Finally our models show that both near-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld
celestial objects enhanced GNC’s navigation correction and
position dilution even when traveling speed approaches the
speed of light. We demonstrate that our method of varying
rotational rate !and angle of approach is superior to
traveling at a straight line, especially when the Lorentz factor
is approaching c.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Author acknowledges and is grateful for math and grammar
corrections, and Matlab code development from physicist Tim-
ofey Golubev of Michigan State University during manuscript
writing.
REFERENCES
[1] S. W. Hawking, and G. R. Ellis. “The large scale structure of space-
time”. Cambridge University Press, 1973.
[2] J. Earman, and J. Eisenstaedt. “Einstein and singularities”. Studies In
History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, vol. 30, p. 185-235, 1999.
[3] M. Morris, K. Thorne, and U. Yurtsever. “Wormholes, time machines,
and the weak energy Condition”. Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 61, p. 1446-1449,
1988.[4] M. Alcubierre. “The warp drive: hyper-fast travel within general rela-
tivity”. Classical and Quantum Gravity, vol. 11, p. L73, 1994.
[5] N. C. Nguyen. “Key technological developments enabling human cosmic
ﬂight”. International Astronautical Congress, IAC-22-A1.IP.28.x67262,
2022.
[6] N. C. Nguyen. “Transforming near-ﬁeld micro-gravity sources into far-
ﬁeld life support Systems”. International Astronautical Congress, IAC-
22-A1.IPB.11.x67265, 2022.
[7] “Visible spectrum of light.” Encyclopædia Britan-
nica, https://www.britannica.com/science/color/The-visible-
spectrum#/media/1/126658/91330. Accessed 31 December 2022.
[8] “Blackbody radiation.” Encyclopædia Britan-
nica, https://www.britannica.com/science/Wiens-
law#/media/1/643338/127565. Accessed 31 December 2022.
[9] “Nick strobel’s astronomy notes.” Nick Strobel,
https://www.astronomynotes.com. Accessed 11 January 2023.
[10] “Actual HR diagram based on Hipparcos data.” European Space
Agency, https://sci.esa.int/web/education/-/35774-stellar-radiation-
stellar-types?section=hertzsprung-russell-diagram. Accessed 11 January
2023.
[11] C. D. Camp, and K. Tung. “Surface warming by the solar cycle as
revealed by the composite mean difference projection”. Geophysical
Research Letters, vol. 34, no. 14, 2007.
[12] X. Chen, Z. Sun, Q. Huang, M. Liu and W. Zhang, ”Hardware in-the-
loop simulation of celestial angle and velocity measurement integrated
navigation system,” 2018 37th Chinese Control Conference, Wuhan,
China, 2018, pp. 4821-4826, doi: 10.23919/ChiCC.2018.8483167.
[13] A. Hirshfeld. “Parallax: the race to measure the cosmos”. W. H.
Freeman, 2001.
[14] X. Tong et al., ”Attitude oscillation detection of the ZY-3 satellite by
using multispectral parallax images,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 3522-3534, June 2015, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2014.2379435.
[15] S. I. Sheikh, , A. R. Golshan, and D. J. Pines. “Absolute and relative
position determination using variable celestial x-ray sources.” 30th An-
nual AAS Guidance and Control Conference. Breckenridge, Colorado:
American Astronautical Society, 2007.
[16] P. S. Ray, S. I. Sheikh, P. H. Graven, M. T. Wolff, K. S. Wood, and
K. C. Gendreau. “Deep space navigation using celestial x-ray sources.”
Proceedings of the 2008 National Technical Meeting of The Institute of
Navigation, 2008.
[17] Hsss Science Code Repository, https://github.com/NghiHsss/Hsss-
Science-Public/. Accessed 1 Febuary 2023.
[18] “Hyperspace and interstellar travel project”, Open Science Framework,
https://osf.io/sx5rq/, doi: 10.17605/OSF.IO/SX5RQ.