Characteristics of ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in model mixed-wet porous
media: patterns, pressures, and scalings
Ashkan Irannezhad,1Bauyrzhan K. Primkulov,2Ruben Juanes,2and Benzhong Zhao1,
1Department of Civil Engineering, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada
2Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
1arXiv:2302.03072v1  [cond-mat.soft]  6 Feb 2023Abstract
We study the characteristics of ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in simple mixed-wet porous micromodels nu-
merically using a dynamic pore network model. The porous micromodel consists of distinct water-wet and
oil-wet regions, whose fractions are systematically varied to yield a variety of displacement patterns over
a wide range of capillary numbers. We ﬁnd that the impact of mixed-wettability is most prominent at low
capillary number, and it depends on the complex interplay between wettability fraction and the intrinsic
contact angle of the water-wet regions. For example, the fractal dimension of the displacement pattern is a
monotonically increasing function of wettability fraction in ﬂow cells with strongly water-wet clusters, but
it becomes non-monotonic with respect to wettability fraction in ﬂow cells with weakly water-wet clusters.
Additionally, mixed-wettability also manifests itself in the injection-pressure signature, which exhibits ﬂuc-
tuations especially at low wettability fraction. Speciﬁcally, preferential ﬁlling of water-wet regions leads to
reduced effective permeability and higher injection pressure, even at vanishingly small capillary numbers.
Finally, we demonstrate that scaling analyses based on a weighted average description of the overall wet-
ting state of the mixed-wet system can effectively capture the variations in observed displacement pattern
morphology.
INTRODUCTION
Fluid-ﬂuid displacement in porous media is a complex phenomenon with signiﬁcant practical
importance. The behavior of ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in porous media impacts various natural and
industrial processes such as geological carbon sequestration [1, 2], water inﬁltration into soil [3, 4],
enhanced oil recovery (EOR) [5, 6], and polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) electrolyzers [7, 8].
Decades of research have illustrated that the displacement process is governed by the competition
between capillary and viscous forces as characterized by the capillary number Ca, and the viscosity
contrast between the invading and defending ﬂuid as characterized by the viscosity ratio M[9]. In
addition, the invading ﬂuid’s relative afﬁnity to the solid surface in the presence of the defending
ﬂuid (i.e. wettability) as characterized by the contact angle also exerts fundamental control
over the ﬂow behavior [10–12]. For instance, when the displacing ﬂuid is more wetting to the
porous media than the displaced ﬂuid (i.e., imbibition), the ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement pattern is
generally more compact than the opposite case (i.e., drainage) [12–16]. Today, we have a fairly
good understanding of how the interplay between Ca, M, andimpact ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement
2in porous media with spatially uniform wettability [17].
In contrast, our knowledge of ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in porous media with spatially-heterogeneous
wettability (i.e., mixed-wet) is much less complete, despite its common occurrence in natural sys-
tems. Mixed-wettability in natural porous systems could originate from the spatial variation in
mineral composition and surface roughness. Although reservoirs and aquifers consist primarily
of water-wet minerals such as quartz and calcite, they also include other constituent minerals
with different wettability states [18, 19]. Moreover, water-wet minerals are known to become
oil-wet after exposure to polar hydrocarbon components (e.g., asphaltenes) and some micro-
organisms [20–22]. Indeed, high-resolution in-situ contact angle measurements of oil-bearing
reservoir rocks have shown mixed-wettability with a wide range of contact angles [23–25]. In
the context of geological carbon sequestration, recent experiments have demonstrated that cyclic
injection of supercritical CO 2and brine altered the wettability of a Bentheimer sandstone core,
making it less water-wet [26].
The behavior of ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in mixed-wet porous media is markedly different from
uniform-wet porous media. The signiﬁcant inﬂuence of mixed-wettability on multiphase ﬂow in
porous media ﬁrst emerged in the oil industry, where mixed-wet cores often displayed higher oil
displacement efﬁciency than water-wet cores after waterﬂooding experiment [27, 28]. This behav-
ior is attributed to the existence of interfaces with very low mean curvature and negative Gaussian
curvature (i.e., coexisting curvatures with opposite signs in orthogonal directions) [29]. Low mean
curvature leads to low capillary pressures, while negative Gaussian curvature leads to good connec-
tivity within ﬂuids of the same phase, such that water and oil can ﬂow simultaneously [24, 29, 30].
In the context of CO 2storage, it has been observed that CO 2-brine displacement in mixed-wet
rocks results in less CO 2trapping compared to the same process in water-wet rocks [31–33].
Characterizing the wetting state of porous media with heterogeneous wettability is the ﬁrst step
to understanding ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in mixed-wet porous media [34]. While the wettability
of uniform-wet porous media can be described by its contact angle , describing the wettability of
even the simplest mixed-wet porous media consisting of solids exhibiting just two contact angles
requires knowledge of (i) the value of each contact angle, ii) fraction of the porous media covered
by solids of each contact angle (i.e., wettability fraction), iii) spatial distribution of the wettability
heterogeneity as characterized by the correlation length of clusters with different contact angles as
well as their sizes [35].
Due to the various complexities involved in fully characterizing the wetting state of natu-
3ral mixed-wet porous media, systematic and mechanistic investigation of the impact of mixed-
wettability on ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in porous media can be greatly aided by the use of simple
analog systems with well-controlled geometry and wettability states [36–39]. Geistlinger et al.
[38] performed waterﬂooding experiments in an air-ﬁlled mixed-wet micromodel, which was fab-
ricated by mixing water-wet ( = 0) and oil-wet ( = 100) glass beads in a cylindrical con-
tainer. They observed a decrease in residual trapping as the fraction of water-wet beads increased
from 30% to 70%. Murison et al. [36] conducted waterﬂooding experiments in oil-ﬁlled bead
columns where half of the beads’ area was water-wet ( = 20) while the other half was oil-wet
(= 130). They observed smoothing of the ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement front as the correlation
length of different wettability clusters decreased. More recently, Irannezhad et al. [39] studied the
radial displacement of oil by water in mixed-wet microﬂuidic ﬂow cells patterned with cylindrical
posts. The bulk of the ﬂow cell was oil-wet ( = 120), and mixed-wettability was introduced
by placing discrete water-wet clusters that were either weakly water-wet ( = 60) or strongly
water-wet (= 30). The experiments revealed surprising displacement patterns that arise as a
result of mixed-wettability — the invading water preferentially ﬁlls strongly water-wet clusters
but encircles weakly water-wet clusters instead. This counter-intuitive ﬁnding was attributed to
the ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface conﬁguration at mixed-wet pores, which resemble S-shaped saddles with
mean curvatures close to zero.
While well-designed analog experiments have contributed to our mechanistic understanding of
ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in mixed-wet porous media, they remain prohibitively expensive to sweep
a wide range of the relevant parameter spaces. Pore-scale modelling is a useful alternative in this
endeavor, since it has become increasingly more predictive in recent years [12]. Bakhshian and
Hosseini [40] investigated the effect of wettability heterogeneity on the ﬂow of supercritical CO 2
and brine in a 1:2mm3digital rock sample using lattice Boltzmann (LB) simulations. Speciﬁcally,
they increased the fraction of CO 2-wet portions of the simulation domain from 10% to 50% and
observed more residual trapping of CO 2. However, LB simulations remain computationally chal-
lenging and expensive [41]. In contrast, pore-network models are attractive due to their intuitive
nature and relatively low computational cost [42], and they have been applied in a recent study to
extend the classic Lenormand’s diagram to include the impact of wettability [17].
Here, we employ a dynamic pore network model to investigate the impact of mixed-wettability
on ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in simple model porous media consisting of water-wet and oil-wet
regions with distinct contact angles. For each contact-angle pair, we systematically vary the wet-
4tability fraction and study the displacement pattern over a wide range of Ca. We ﬁnd that the dis-
placement pattern is controlled by the interplay between Ca, wettability fraction, and intrinsic wet-
tability of the water-wet regions, leading to complex behaviors. Furthermore, mixed-wettability
induces ﬂuctuations in the injection pressure, whose magnitude has a large viscous component,
even at vanishingly small Ca. Finally, we demonstrate that scaling analyses based on a simple,
weighted average description of the overall wettability of the model mixed-wet porous media can
effectively predict the ﬁnger width of the displacement pattern.
METHOD
We design a microﬂuidic porous media by placing 16;000cylindrical posts on an irregular
triangular lattice. The lattice is generated inside a 5-inch diameter circle using the pdemesh tool
in MATLAB. We assign the radius of each post to be 47% of the distance between its center and
the nearest neighboring post’s center. In our system, the radius of the posts follow a Gaussian-like
distribution that ranges from 110m to 850m with a median value of 340m. The pore throat
sizes follow a lognormal-like distribution that ranges from 50m to 700m with a median value
of200m. We make the posts’ height h= 200m to match the median pore throat size.
We implement mixed-wettability by placing water-wet clusters in a simulation domain that
is otherwise oil-wet. Speciﬁcally, we randomly assign Nposts as the seeds for generating the
water-wet clusters. At each seed post, we draw a circle with a radius of 5 median posts and make
all posts and surfaces within the circle water-wet. Overlapping circles merge and form a single
cluster (Fig. 1a). Increasing Nincreases the wettability fraction fw, which is deﬁned as the number
of water-wet posts to the total number of posts. In this model, oil-wet and water-wet regions are
separated by sharp boundaries connecting the adjacent pores centers (Fig. 1a top inset). The top
and bottom surfaces of the mixed-wet pores also have spatially heterogeneous wettability (Fig. 1a
bottom inset).
We apply a dynamic pore-network model to simulate ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in mixed-wet
microﬂuidic cells. The model was ﬁrst introduced in Irannezhad et al. [39], but we describe its
details for the ﬁrst time here. Our mixed-wet model is based on the model of ﬂuid-ﬂuid displace-
ment in uniform-wet porous media developed by Primkulov et al. [43]. The model establishes
an analogy between multiphase ﬂow in porous media and electrical current in a circuit with ﬁxed
resistors and moving capacitors. This analogy enables the model to capture the effects of capillary
5FIG. 1. (a) We develop a dynamic pore network model to simulate ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement through ana-
log porous media with spatially heterogeneous wettability (i.e., mixed-wet). The ﬂow geometry is radial
and quasi-two-dimensional, consisting of 16;000cylindrical posts. We achieve mixed-wettability by
placing base water-wet clusters (blue regions) that span 5 posts in a domain that is otherwise oil-wet (gray
regions). The base water-wet clusters merge and form larger clusters (top inset). The water-wet and oil-
wet regions are separated by sharp boundaries (bottom inset). (b) Fluid-ﬂuid interface at a mixed-wet pore
throat resembles an S-shaped saddle in three dimensions [39]. Our model explicitly calculates the criti-
cal pressures of pore-scale instabilities and advances the ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface when either a burst, touch, or
overlap event occurs. (c) Our pore network model captures the nuanced and complex behavior of multi-
phase ﬂow in mixed-wet porous media [39]. The invading water (yellow) preferentially ﬁlls the water-wet
clusters with contact angle = 30(left panel), but encircles the water-wet clusters with = 60(right
panel). The oil-wet clusters have = 120in both cases. Experiments and simulations are conducted at
Ca= 110 4[39].
6pressure (at pore throats where ﬂuid-ﬂuid interfaces exist) and viscous pressure drop (at all pore
throats) simultaneously throughout the network. Adding wettability effects to the model requires
an understanding of invasion mechanisms at the pore-scale, where ﬂuid-ﬂuid interfaces advance
as invading ﬂuid pressure increases. This advancement eventually leads to the invasion of the
adjacent pore through one of the three possible types of invasion events [11, 44]: i) Burst , equiv-
alent to Haines jump [45], occurs when there is no stable conﬁguration for a ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface
connecting two posts. Thus, the interface suddenly invades the adjacent pore and splits into two
interfaces; ii) Touch occurs when the ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface connecting two posts touches a third
post’s body. Similar to the burst event, the ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface splits into two interfaces; and iii)
Overlap occurs when two neighboring ﬂuid-ﬂuid interfaces meet on a common post. In this case,
the two interfaces merge and form a single, wider interface spanning the neighboring posts. The
conﬁguration of any given ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface can be described by its in-plane and out-of-plane
curvatures.
In a quasi-2D, uniform-wet microﬂuidic cell, the interface’s out-of-plane radius of curvature
routis constant and equal to h=(2cos), while its in-plane radius of curvature rindecreases as the
interface advances through the pore throat. Therefore, capillary pressure at the interface gradually
increases as the interface advances, until the interface undergoes an invasion event (i.e., burst,
touch, or overlap). The capillary pressure associated with pore invasion is termed the critical
capillary pressure, and it is given by pcrit
c==r out+min
=rburst
in;=rtouch
in;=roverlap
in
, where
is the interfacial tension between the two ﬂuids, and rburst
in,rtouch
in,roverlap
in are the in-plane radii of
curvatures corresponding to burst, touch and overlap events, respectively. These in-plane radii
of curvatures for pore invasion mechanisms in a uniform-wet microﬂuidic cell have been derived
in Primkulov et al. [14].
The ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface conﬁguration at a mixed-wet pore throat is more complex. In particu-
lar, the interface has been observed to be saddle-shaped [29]. Additionally, in-situ measurements
of ﬂuid-ﬂuid interfaces in carbonate rocks have revealed that their mean curvatures are notice-
ably lower in mixed-wet rocks compared to similar water-wet rocks [29, 46]. Recent experiments
in mixed-wet microﬂuidics provided high-resolution visualization of the ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface be-
tween two posts of contrasting wettabilities, which resembles an S-shaped saddle in 3D with mean
curvatures close to zero [39].
The in-plane view of a typical S-shaped ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface at a mixed-wet pore throat is shown
in Fig. 1b. Post 1 is an oil-wet post with contact angle o, radiusR1, and center coordinate A (0;0),
7while post 2 is a water-wet post with contact angle w, radiusR2, and center coordinate B (X2;0).
We approximate the S-shaped interface as two circular arcs (_
CEand_
EH) that smoothly connect
at the wettability boundary. The centers of_
CEand_
EH are located at I ( Xp1,Yp1) and G (Xp2,
Yp2), while their radii are given by rp1andrp2, respectively. We denote the distance between points
A and I asd1, which is given by the law of cosines at the triangle 4AIC as
d1=q
R2
1+r2
p1 2R1rp1cos( o): (1)
Similarly, the distance d2between points B and H is given by
d2=q
R2
2+r2
p2 2R2rp2cosw: (2)
As the ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface advances through the pore throat, point I and point G each traces a
circle described by
X2
p1+Y2
p1=d2
1; (3a)
(Xp2 X2)2+Y2
p2=d2
2: (3b)
Since_
CEand_
EH smoothly join at point E, we construct the right triangle 4IGD and ﬁnd the
distanced3between points I and G
d3=rp1+rp2=q
(Xp2 Xp1)2+ (Yp1 Yp2)2: (4)
Furthermore, the right triangles 4IGD and4EGF are similar triangles, which leads to
rp2
rp1+rp2=Xp2 Xwb
Xp2 Xp1; (5)
whereXwbis the x-coordinate of the wettability boundary.
Finally, we note that the mean curvature of the ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface in the oil-wet region must
equal that in the water-wet region at equilibrium, since capillary pressure is constant along the
entire interface. Therefore,
1
rp1+2 coso
h= 1
rp2+2 cosw
h: (6)
The shape of the ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface at the mixed-wet pore throat is fully described by Xp1,Yp1,
Xp2,Yp2,rp1, andrp2. For a given rp1, we ﬁrst solve for rp2(Eq. (6)). We then solve for d1andd2
(Eqs. (1)-(2)), followed by solving for Xp1,Yp1,Xp2, andYp2(Eqs. (3)-(5)).
8We follow the algorithm below to ﬁnd the critical capillary pressures associated with burst,
touch, and overlap invasion events. Starting with a large rp1, we solve Eqs. (1)-(6). If no valid
solution is found, we decrease rp1and repeat the process until a valid ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface is found.
We then depict the interface and check if touch or overlap will occur. Touch occurs when the de-
picted interface intersects a neighboring third post, while overlap occurs when the depicted inter-
face intersects an adjacent interface [11, 44]. We successively decrease rp1until no valid solution
can be found, which corresponds to the point when burst occurs. Similar to the homogeneous-wet
case, the critical capillary pressure for pore invasion is given by
pcrit
c=2coso
h+min
=rburst
p1;=rtouch
p1;=roverlap
p1
: (7)
Our model captures the effects of viscous pressure drop across the system by solving the equations
of Poiseuille’s law and mass conservation for the network of pore throats. We impose constant
ﬂow boundary condition at the inlet pore throats and constant pressure boundary condition at
the outlet pores along the perimeter. We assign the viscosities of the defending ﬂuid and the
invading ﬂuid to be def= 50 mPas andinv= 0:99mPas, respectively, and the interfacial
tension between the ﬂuids to be = 13 mN/m. These ﬂuid-ﬂuid properties correspond to the
microﬂuidic experiments of Irannezhad et al. [39], which enables direct comparison between the
model predictions and the experiments. Speciﬁcally, the model captures the salient behaviors
of the mixed-wet microﬂuidic experiment – the invading ﬂuid preferentially ﬁlls the water-wet
clusters with contact angle = 30, but encircles the weakly water-wet clusters with contact angle
= 60instead (Fig. 1c). The oil-wet regions of the ﬂow cell have a contact angle of = 120in
both cases.
RESULTS
Phase diagram. We apply the dynamic pore-network model to investigate ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement
in simple mixed-wet microﬂuidics. Speciﬁcally, each simulation domain consists of water-wet
regions with contact angle wand oil-wet regions with contact angle o. We consider three different
contact angle pairs — w-o= 30-120,60-120,60-150. Our systematic investigation includes
varying the wettability fraction ( fw= 2% ,26%,50%,76%,98%) and capillary number (Ca =
510 4,110 4,510 5,110 5,510 6) over a wide range of values. Here, the
macroscopic Ca =ov=measures the relative importance between viscous and capillary forces.
9FIG. 2. Phase diagrams of the invading ﬂuid morphology at breakthrough for different wettability fractions
(left to right: 2%,26%,50%,76%,98%) and capillary numbers (top to bottom: Ca = 510 4,110 4,
510 5,110 5,510 6). (a) Phase diagram corresponding to mixed-wet porous media with contact
angle pairs of 30-120. (b) Phase diagram corresponding to mixed-wet porous media with contact angle
pairs of 60-120. (c) Phase diagram corresponding to mixed-wet porous media with contact angle pairs of
60-150.10FIG. 3. Quantitative measures of the displacement patterns. (a) Normalized ﬁnger width and (b) fractal
dimension in mixed-wet domains with contact angle pairs of 30–120(blue circles), 60–120(black
diamonds) and 60–150(orange squares). The data at the lowest capillary number (Ca = 510 6) is
highlighted. Distribution of burst, touch, and overlap events as a function of fwin mixed-wet domains with
contact angle pairs of (c) 30–120, (d) 60–120and (e) 60–150.
The characteristic velocity is deﬁned as v=Q=(h2rin), whererinis the distance between the
cell’s center and its closest post. Additionally, for each fw, we design three mixed-wet cells with
different base water-wet cluster placements to verify the reproducibility of the results. Fig. 2 shows
the phase diagrams of the ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement patterns in mixed-wet domains consisting of
the three contact angle pairs, and at different Ca and fw. Qualitatively, the displacements display
the canonical viscous ﬁngering pattern at high Ca for all mixed-wettability conditions. As Ca
decreases, the displacement patterns become more compact with increasing fw, though this effect
is much more noticeable in mixed-wet domains with contact angle pair of 30-120compared to
domains with contact angle pairs of 60-120and60-150.
Quantitative measures. To quantify the morphological properties of the displacement patterns,
we calculate the dimensionless ﬁnger width ( wf) and the fractal dimension ( Df).Dfis calculated
11FIG. 4. Evolution of injection pressure as a function of fwat (a) a high capillary number (Ca = 510 4)
and (b) a low capillary number (Ca = 510 6) for different wettability fractions. The water-wet region
has a contact angle of w= 30, while the oil-wet region has a contact angle of o= 120. (c) Snapshot
of the pressure map as the invading water ﬁlls a water-wet cluster at Ca = 510 6forfw= 20% . The
preferential ﬁlling of the water-wet cluster causes the local redistribution of the defending oil, leading to
non-negligible viscous pressure loss even at very low Ca.
via the box-counting method [47, 48], while wfis deﬁned as the average ﬁnger width normalized
by the average pore size [11, 44, 49, 50].
Increasing Ca leads to smaller wfin all mixed-wet domains due to viscous effects. Increasing
fwonly yields moderately higher wfin mixed-wet domains with contact angle pairs of 60-120
and60-150, though the positive correlation between wfandfwis signiﬁcantly more prominent
in mixed-wet domains with a contact angle pair of 30-120(Fig. 3a). Variations in wfcan be ex-
plained by the pore-scale invasion mechanism. The dominant pore invasion mechanism in oil-wet
porous media is burst, while pores in water-wet porous media experience more overlap [14, 49].
During overlap events, the invasion of one pore destabilizes the ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface at the neigh-
boring pore, creating a smoother displacement front [11, 13, 44]. Therefore, wfincreases with
increasingfw. Furthermore, the probability of overlap events occurring increases as the invad-
ing ﬂuid becomes more wetting to the porous media [13, 14, 49]. Indeed, tracking the invasion
12event type reveals that increase in overlap events with increasing fwis much more signiﬁcant in
mixed-wet domains with a contact angle pair of 30-120, compared to the mixed-wet domains
with contact angle pairs of 60-120and60-150(Fig. 3c-e).
We measure the fractal dimension of the displacement patterns at the lowest capillary number
(Ca= 510 6), which characterizes the extent to which the displacement patterns ﬁll space in 2
dimensions (Fig. 3b). As expected, Dfincreases with increasing fwin mixed-wet domains with
a contact angle pair of 30-120due to the rise in overlap-driven smoothing of the displacement
front. However, this is not the case in mixed-wet domains with contact angle pairs of 60-120
and60-150, whereDfis a non-monotonic function of fw, andDfreaches a maximum at fw=
50%. This surprising behavior can be rationalized by the following arguments: at low fw, the
broadening of the displacement pattern is controlled by the size and distribution of the water-wet
clusters — increasing the size and number of water-wet clusters increases Df; at highfw, however,
the broadening of the displacement pattern is controlled by the intrinsic wettability of the water-
wet clusters — more strongly water-wet clusters will yield higher Dfdue to a higher probability
of overlap events. We note that such contrasting behaviors have been observed in waterﬂooding
experiments in mixed-wet oil-bearing porous media. For instance, Singhal et al. [51] found that
oil recovery efﬁciency increases monotonically as the fraction of the water-wet surface area of the
porous medium increases. In contrast, Skauge [52, 53] found that oil recovery efﬁciency shows
a non-monotonic trend according to wettability, with highly mixed-wet cores showing higher oil
recovery efﬁciency than mostly water-wet and oil-wet cores.
Pressure signatures. We track the injection pressure evolution to gain further insight into the
macroscopic impact of mixed-wettability on ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in porous media. Injection
pressure is a valuable piece of information in various subsurface applications including geological
carbon sequestration [54] and hydraulic fracturing [55], and it can help inform the wettability state
of the porous medium [56]. The injection pressure consists of the capillary pressure across the
interface between the invading and defending ﬂuid, and the combined viscous pressure loss in the
two ﬂuids.
At high Ca, viscous pressure loss dominates and the injection pressure decreases monotoni-
cally as the more viscous defending ﬂuid is pushed out by the less viscous invading ﬂuid. This
decreasing trend in injection pressure is observed in all cases regardless of the wettability state of
the domain (Fig. 4a). Interestingly, the signature of wettability is evident even at the highest cap-
illary number (Ca = 510 4) — the injection pressure is consistently higher in a purely oil-wet
13domain compared to a purely water-wet domain. These results agree with the injection pressure
measurements in uniform-wet microﬂuidic experiments [12]. The injection pressures observed in
mixed-wet domains fall between those in purely oil-wet and water-wet domains (Fig. 4a).
At low Ca, capillary pressure dominates and the injection pressure is controlled by the wettabil-
ity of the domain. Indeed, the injection pressure ﬂuctuates around a mean positive value in a purely
oil-wet domain (i.e., drainage), but around a mean negative value in a purely water-wet domain
(i.e., imbibition). Closer inspection shows that the injection pressure ﬂuctuations are larger in a
purely oil-wet domain than in a purely water-water domain (Fig. 4b, c). This difference in ﬂuctu-
ations is attributed to the prevalence of burst invasion events in drainage, whose critical capillary
pressures are larger than those of touch and overlap invasion events, which are more prevalent in
imbibition [49, 57, 58].
Intuitively, at vanishingly small Ca, one would expect the injection pressure to ﬂuctuate be-
tween the drainage capillary pressure and the imbibition capillary pressure in a mixed-wet domain,
as the invading water transits oil-wet and water-wet clusters. Surprisingly, this is not what we see
in mixed-wet domains with small fw— instead, we observe that the injection pressure ﬂuctuates
between the drainage capillary pressure and some pressure that is much higher than the imbibition
capillary pressure (Fig. 4b). This deviation can be explained by the fact that once the invading wa-
ter encounters a water-wet cluster, all of the injected volume will preferentially enter that region
of the micromodel. Since the water-wet clusters are small at low fw, the preferential ﬁlling within
this localized region will cause the defending ﬂuid to redistribute along the invasion front, leading
to non-negligible viscous pressure loss even at very low Ca. Indeed, as the invading water enters
a water-wet cluster ( w= 30,fw= 20% ), the difference between the measured injection pres-
sure and the imbibition capillary pressure equal the viscous pressure in the defending oil (Fig. 4c).
Therefore, mixed-wettability could decrease the effective permeability of porous media at low Ca.
As the invading water exits the water-wet cluster, the injection pressure increases to the drainage
capillary pressure. Consequently, the period of the ﬂuctuations indicates the size of the water-wet
cluster. At high fw, the invading water has access to many connected water-wet pores at any given
time, and the injection pressure closely tracks the imbibition capillary pressure (Fig. 4b).
Wettability index description of mixed-wet systems. Despite the complexities involved in fully
characterizing the wettability of mixed-wet systems (e.g., contact angles, wettability fraction, etc.),
it is sometimes helpful to approximate the wettability state of a porous medium by a single pa-
rameter. One of the simplest representations of this idea is the wettability index (WI), which in its
14general form is given by [34]
WI=iX
n=1i1 i2
12fi; (8)
wherefiis the areal fraction of surface i,12is the interfacial tension between ﬂuid 1 and ﬂuid
2, andi1,i2are the interfacial tensions between surface iand the two ﬂuids. Young’s equation
relates the interfacial tensions to the contact angle. For our mixed-wet system with two distinct
contact angles and oil-water as the ﬂuid-ﬂuid pair, incorporating Young’s equation gives
WI=fwcosw+ (1 fw) coso: (9)
Therefore, WI is a weighted average description of the overall wettability of the porous media.
Here, we examine the effectiveness of WI in predicting the ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement pattern as
characterized by the ﬁnger width wfat low capillary number (Ca = 510 6). We ﬁnd that WI
successfully collapses wfextracted from simulations conducted in more than 50 different mixed-
wet porous media. Additionally, this master curve matches the one obtained from simulations of
ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in uniform-wet porous media, which both show that ﬁnger width increases
with increasing WI (Fig. 5a).
We take the weighted average description of ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in mixed-wet porous me-
dia one step further via scaling analysis and derive two dimensionless parameters that capture the
behavior of wfacross all Ca. We ﬁrst compare the relative importance of the characteristic vis-
cous pressure pvand capillary pressure pcat the pore-scale [49, 50, 59, 60]. The characteristic
viscous pressure is given by the pressure drop in the viscous defending ﬂuid over a characteristic
lengthl
pv= 32defv(a+h)2
a2h2l; (10)
wherevis the characteristic injection velocity, aandlare the median pore length and pore throat
size, respectively. The characteristic capillary pressure is assumed to be the capillary pressure
corresponding to a burst event at a characteristic pore throat
pc=; (11a)
=2 cos
h+2
a(^lcos+p^l2cos2+ 1 + 2 ^l); (11b)
whereis the critical interface curvature required for burst to occur (detailed derivation of Eq. 11b
is included in the Supplemental Material ),^l=d=ais the ratio between the median post diameter
and the median pore throat size (Fig. 5b). The ratio between pvandpcyields a modiﬁed capillary
15FIG. 5. Wettability index description of mixed-wet systems. (a) We extract the average ﬁnger width wf
from ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement simulations in more than 50 mixed-wet porous media of different contact
angle pairs ( w-o= 30-120,60-120,60-150) and wettability fractions. Plotting wfvs the wettability
index (WI) collapses the dataset onto a single curve, which matches the results obtained from simulations
performed in uniform-wet porous media with different wettabilities. Ca = 510 6in all simulations.
(b) Invasion front conﬁguration at two adjacent pores. (c) Ca?andN?
coopexplain the variations in wfin
15 different mixed-wet domains ( w-o= 30-120,60-120,60-150;fw= 2%;26%;50%;76%;98%)
over a wide range of capillary numbers.
number Ca?, which takes into account the wettability of the system [13, 49, 50]. In our mixed-
wet system, water-wet and oil-wet regions have the same characteristic viscous pressure drop, but
noticeably different capillary pressure. We take the weighted average of the characteristic capillary
pressures in the water-wet and oil-wet regions and arrive at
Ca?=32(a+h)2l
a2h2(fww+ (1 fw)o)Ca; (12)
wherewandoare the critical interface curvatures (Eq. 11b) for water-wet and oil-wet regions,
respectively.
Ca?alone is not able to capture the displacement pattern across different wettabilities, since
it does not account for the different types of invasion events (i.e., burst, touch, overlap). It is
well-known that overlap events promote cooperative pore ﬁlling, which leads to more compact
displacement (i.e. wider ﬁngers) [11, 12, 14, 44]. To capture the effect of cooperative pore ﬁlling,
we calculate the dimensionless cooperative number ( Ncoop) for our system. Speciﬁcally, Ncoop
evaluates the relative likelihood of overlap and burst events by comparing the critical capillary
pressures associated with the two invasion event types [13]. Ncoopfor a characteristic pore is given
16by
Ncoop=
2++ arccos(r2
p+d2
1 d2
4
2d1rp) + arccos(a+d
2d1) ; (13a)
rp=^lcos+p^l2cos2+ 1 + 2 ^l
2
a; (13b)
whereis the median angle between two neighboring interfaces. Detailed derivation of Ncoopis
included in the Supplemental Material . PositiveNcoopindicates burst events are more likely to
occur than overlap, while negative Ncoopsuggests the opposite. Finally, we take the weighted av-
erage of the cooperative number for the water-wet region ( Ncoop,w ) and the oil-wet region ( Ncoop,o)
to arrive at a modiﬁed cooperative number for the mixed-wet system
N?
coop=fwNcoop,w + (1 fw)Ncoop,o: (14)
Ca?andN?
coopexplain the variations in wfin different mixed-wet domains over a wide range of
capillary numbers (Fig. 5c). In our system, the critical modiﬁed capillary number Ca?
cd=D
610 3, whereDis the diameter of the domain. For Ca?>Ca?
c, viscous pressure dominates,
and the displacement pattern consists of long, thin ﬁngers (small wf) that are typical in viscous
ﬁngering. For Ca?<Ca?
c, the displacement pattern is dependent upon the amount of cooperative
smoothing in the system such that wide ﬁngers (large wf) start to emerge for N?
coop<0.
CONCLUSIONS
We have investigated ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in simple mixed-wet porous media consisting of
distinct water-wet and oil-wet regions using a dynamic pore network model. We generate phase
diagrams of the displacement patterns for three different water-wet/oil-wet contact angle pairs
over a wide range of Ca (Fig. 2). The impact of mixed-wettability is most prominent at low Ca,
whose effect on the displacement pattern is controlled by the complex interplay between wetta-
bility fraction and the intrinsic contact angle of the water-wet regions (Fig. 3). Our simulations
also provide insights into the pressure signature of ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in mixed-wet porous
media, which displays ﬂuctuations that cannot be explained by capillary pressure alone, even at
vanishingly small Ca (Fig. 4). We ﬁnd that the injection pressure ﬂuctuations are modulated by the
viscous pressure of the defending ﬂuid due to preferential ﬁlling of isolated water-wet regions, and
the duration of the ﬂuctuations are determined by the size of the water-wet regions. One surprising
consequence of this complex interplay is that at low Ca, mixed-wettability could simultaneously
17result in reduced effective permeability, but more effective sweep of the defending ﬂuid. Finally,
we derive scaling arguments based on a weighted average description of the overall wettability of
the mixed-wet porous medium, which effectively capture the variations in displacement pattern
morphology as characterized by the ﬁnger width (Fig. 5). Our study presents a systematic under-
standing of the relationship between contact angle, wettability fraction, and capillary number in
governing ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in simple mixed-wet porous media, and it serves as a platform
upon which more complex mixed-wet porous media can be investigated.
APPENDIX A. MODEL GEOMETRY
In our system, the diameters of the posts follow a Gaussian-like distribution that ranges from
220 to 1700 m. Additionally, the pore-throat size follows a lognormal-like distribution that ranges
from 50 to 700 m.
FIG. 6. Characteristics of the micromodel domain: (a) post diameter (b) pore-throat size.
APPENDIX B. CRITICAL INTERFACE CURV ATURE FOR BURST
Our aim here is to determine the critical interface curvature for a burst to occur in a typical
pore throat conﬁguration in the model. In this conﬁguration, the ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface connects two
posts with diameters d(i.e., the median post diameter in the system) where the closest distance
between these posts is equal to a(i.e., the median pore throat size in the system). The wettability
of the posts is the same and their contact angles are equal to . After translation and rotation of the
coordinate system, the center of post A is positioned at (0;0)and the center of post B is located
at (a+d;0). Fig. 9 shows the ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface arc_
CDwith the center of P(xp;yp)in the pore
18throat. We denote the distance between points A and P as d1, which is given by the law of cosine
at the triangle4APC as
d1=sd
22
+r2
p 2d
2
rpcos: (15)
We denote the distance between points B and P as d2, which is equal to d1.
As deﬁned in Primkulov et al. [14], a burst event occurs when the center of the ﬂuid-ﬂuid
interface has the following conﬁguration
X2
p=d2
1; (16)
(Xp X2)2=d2
2; (17)
whereX2is thexcoordinate of the center of post B, and it is equal to a+d. Solving equations
15-17, we ﬁnd the radius of curvature of the ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface corresponding to a burst event as
rp=^lcos+q
^l2(cos)2+ 1 + 2 ^l
2
a; (18)
where ^l=d=a. The mean curvature of the interface at a burst event is deﬁned as = (1=rp+
1=rout), whererout=h=(2 cos)is the out of plane curvature of the interface. Consequently, the
critical interface curvature for a burst to occur is equal to
=2 cos
h+2
a(^lcos+p^l2cos2+ 1 + 2 ^l): (19)
FIG. 7. Fluid-ﬂuid interface conﬁguration at a median size pore throat.
19DERIV ATION OF THE DIMENSIONLESS COOPERATIVE NUMBER
To determine whether a burst event precedes an overlap event in a pore throat, we deﬁne the
dimensionless cooperative number Ncoop. Fig. 8 shows two adjacent pore throats consisting of
three posts with similar diameter d, pore throat size aand contact angle which is the most
representative for our system. The angle between two neighboring interfaces \ABC is denoted
. We denote the angle between the line connecting points D and B and the line connecting A and
B as1. Similarly, we denote the angle between the line connecting point G and B and the line
connecting B and C as 2.
Increasing the pressure of the invading ﬂuid advances the two adjacent interfaces within the
pore throat until they meet (i.e., an overlap event occurs). These two interfaces must satisfy the
geometric condition 1+2=[61]. To determine whether a burst event is preceded by an
overlap event, we must calculate 1and2corresponding to a burst event, and then calculate 
= (1+2): (20)
Here,>0indicates that 1+2<, and thus a burst occurs before the interfaces can overlap.
In contrast,  < 0suggests that 1+2> , which means that an overlap event will take place
and the interfaces merge and form a new ﬂuid-ﬂuid interface. Given that the pore throats in the
FIG. 8. Fluid-ﬂuid interface conﬁguration at a median size pore throat.
20system are similar, and consequently the burst radius of the interfaces, we can rewrite the equation
with1=2=and deﬁne the cooperative number Ncoopas
Ncoop=
2=
2 : (21)
In Fig. 8, we connect points P and B to form a line with length d1. We then deﬁne the right
4BPF with acute angle given by
= arccosa+d
2d1
: (22)
Applying the law of cosines in the triangle 4BPD gives
d
2=q
r2
p+d2
1 2d1rpcos; (23)
where=   . We rearrange Eq. 23
= arccos(r2
p+d2
1 d2
4
2d1rp) arccosa+d
2d1 : (24)
Substituting Eq. 24 into Eq. 21 gives
Ncoop=
2++ arccos(r2
p+d2
1 d2
4
2d1rp) + arccos(a+d
2d1) : (25)
robinzhao@mcmaster.ca
FIG. 9. Ca?andN?
coopexplain the variations in wfin 15 different mixed-wet domains ( w-o= 30-120,
60-120,60-150;fw= 2%;26%;50%;76%;98%) over a wide range of capillary numbers.
21[1] C. W. MacMinn, M. L. Szulczewski, and R. Juanes, CO 2migration in saline aquifers. Part 1: Capillary
trapping under slope and groundwater ﬂow, J. Fluid Mech. 662, 329 (2010).
[2] M. L. Szulczewski, C. W. MacMinn, H. J. Herzog, and R. Juanes, Lifetime of carbon capture and
storage as a climate-change mitigation technology, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 5185 (2012).
[3] R. J. Glass, J.-Y . Parlange, and T. S. Steenhuis, Wetting front instability: 1. Theoretical discussion and
dimensional analysis, Water Resour. Res. 25, 1187 (1989).
[4] L. Cueto-Felgueroso and R. Juanes, Nonlocal interface dynamics and pattern formation in gravity-
driven unsaturated ﬂow through porous media, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 244504 (2008).
[5] F. Orr and J. Taber, Use of carbon dioxide in enhanced oil recovery, Science 224, 563 (1984).
[6] L. W. Lake, Enhanced Oil Recovery (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989).
[7] C. Lee, B. Zhao, R. Abouatallah, R. Wang, and A. Bazylak, Compressible-gas invasion into liquid-
saturated porous media: Application to polymer-electrolyte-membrane electrolyzers, Phys. Rev. Ap-
plied 11, 054029 (2019).
[8] B. Zhao, C. H. Lee, J. K. Lee, K. F. Fahy, J. M. LaManna, E. Baltic, D. L. Jacobson, D. S. Hussey,
and A. Bazylak, Superhydrophilic porous transport layer enhances efﬁciency of polymer electrolyte
membrane electrolyzers, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci. 2, 100580 (2021).
[9] R. Lenormand, E. Touboul, and C. Zarcone, Numerical models and experiments on immiscible dis-
placements in porous media, J. Fluid Mech. 189, 165 (1988).
[10] J. P. Stokes, D. A. Weitz, J. P. Gollub, A. Dougherty, M. O. Robbins, P. M. Chaikin, and H. M. Lindsay,
Interfacial stability of immiscible displacement in a porous medium, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 1718 (1986).
[11] M. Cieplak and M. O. Robbins, Dynamical transition in quasistatic ﬂuid invasion in porous media,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 2042 (1988).
[12] B. Zhao, C. W. MacMinn, and R. Juanes, Wettability control on multiphase ﬂow in patterned microﬂu-
idics, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, 10251 (2016).
[13] R. Holtzman and E. Segre, Wettability stabilizes ﬂuid invasion into porous media via nonlocal, coop-
erative pore ﬁlling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 164501 (2015).
[14] B. K. Primkulov, S. Talman, K. Khaleghi, A. R. Shokri, R. Chalaturnyk, B. Zhao, C. W. MacMinn,
and R. Juanes, Quasistatic ﬂuid-ﬂuid displacement in porous media: Invasion-percolation through a
wetting transition, Phys. Rev. Fluids 3, 104001 (2018).
[15] T. Lan, R. Hu, Z. Yang, D.-S. Wu, and Y .-F. Chen, Transitions of ﬂuid invasion patterns in porous
media, Geophys. Res. Lett. 47, e2020GL089682 (2020).
22[16] J. Yang, M. Saadat, I. Azizov, M. Dudek, G. Øye, and P. A. Tsai, Wettability effect on oil recovery
using rock-structured microﬂuidics, Lab Chip 22(2022).
[17] B. K. Primkulov, A. A. Pahlavan, X. Fu, B. Zhao, C. W. MacMinn, and R. Juanes, Wettability and
Lenormand’s diagram, J. Fluid Mech. 923, A34 (2021).
[18] P. Ustohal, F. Stauffer, and T. Dracos, Measurement and modeling of hydraulic characteristics of
unsaturated porous media with mixed wettability, J. Contam. Hydrol. 33, 5 (1998).
[19] W. Abdallah, J. S. Buckley, A. Carnegie, J. Edwards, B. Herold, E. Fordham, A. Graue, T. Habashy,
N. Seleznev, C. Signer, et al. , Fundamentals of wettability, Oilﬁeld Rev. 19(2007).
[20] M. T. Tweheyo, T. Holt, and O. Torsæter, An experimental study of the relationship between wettabil-
ity and oil production characteristics, J. Pet. Sci. Eng. , 179 (1999).
[21] D. M. O’Carroll, L. M. Abriola, C. A. Polityka, S. A. Bradford, and A. H. Demond, Prediction of two-
phase capillary pressure–saturation relationships in fractional wettability systems, J. Contam. Hydrol.
77, 247 (2005).
[22] T. Bultreys, L. Van Hoorebeke, and V . Cnudde, Simulating secondary waterﬂooding in heterogeneous
rocks with variable wettability using an image-based, multiscale pore network model, Water Resour.
Res. 52, 6833 (2016).
[23] M. Andrew, B. Bijeljic, and M. Blunt, Pore-scale contact angle measurements at reservoir conditions
using x-ray microtomography, Adv. Water Resour. 68, 24 (2014).
[24] A. AlRatrout, M. J. Blunt, and B. Bijeljic, Wettability in complex porous materials, the mixed-wet
state, and its relationship to surface roughness, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, 8901 (2018).
[25] M. J. Blunt, Q. Lin, T. Akai, and B. Bijeljic, A thermodynamically consistent characterization of
wettability in porous media using high-resolution imaging, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 552, 59 (2019).
[26] A. L. Herring, C. Sun, R. T. Armstrong, and M. Saadatfar, Insights into wettability alteration during
cyclic scco2-brine injections in a layered bentheimer sandstone, Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control 122,
103803 (2023).
[27] R. Salathiel, Oil recovery by surface ﬁlm drainage in mixed-wettability rocks, J. Pet. Technol. 25,
1216 (1973).
[28] A. R. Kovscek, H. Wong, and C. J. Radke, A pore-level scenario for the development of mixed wetta-
bility in oil reservoirs, AIChE J. 39, 1072 (1993).
[29] Q. Lin, B. Bijeljic, S. Berg, R. Pini, M. J. Blunt, and S. Krevor, Minimal surfaces in porous media:
Pore-scale imaging of multiphase ﬂow in an altered-wettability Bentheimer sandstone, Phys. Rev. E
2399, 063105 (2019).
[30] A. Scanziani, Q. Lin, A. Alhosani, M. J. Blunt, and B. Bijeljic, Dynamics of displacement in mixed-
wet porous media, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 476, 20200040 (2020).
[31] A. S. Al-Menhali, H. P. Menke, M. J. Blunt, and S. C. Krevor, Pore scale observations of trapped CO 2
in mixed-wet carbonate rock: Applications to storage in oil ﬁelds, Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 10282
(2016).
[32] A. S. Al-Menhali and S. Krevor, Capillary trapping of CO 2in oil reservoirs: Observations in a mixed-
wet carbonate rock, Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 2727 (2016).
[33] C. Chang, T. J. Kneafsey, J. Wan, T. K. Tokunaga, and S. Nakagawa, Impacts of mixed-wettability on
brine drainage and supercritical co2 storage efﬁciency in a 2.5-d heterogeneous micromodel, Water
Resour. Res. 56, e2019WR026789 (2020).
[34] R. T. Armstrong, C. Sun, P. Mostaghimi, S. Berg, M. R ¨ucker, P. Luckham, A. Georgiadis, and J. E.
McClure, Multiscale characterization of wettability in porous media, Transp. Porous Media 140, 215
(2021).
[35] R. Guo, L. E. Dalton, M. Fan, J. McClure, L. Zeng, D. Crandall, and C. Chen, The role of the spatial
heterogeneity and correlation length of surface wettability on two-phase ﬂow in a co2-water-rock
system, Adv. Water Resour. 146, 103763 (2020).
[36] J. Murison, B. Semin, J. C. Baret, S. Herminghaus, M. Schr ¨oter, and M. Brinkmann, Wetting hetero-
geneities in porous media control ﬂow dissipation, Phys. Rev. Appl. 2, 034002 (2014).
[37] T. Hiller, J. Ardevol-Murison, A. Muggeridge, M. Schr ¨oter, and M. Brinkmann, The impact of wetting-
heterogeneity distribution on capillary pressure and macroscopic measures of wettability, SPE Journal
24(2019).
[38] H. Geistlinger, B. Zulﬁqar, S. Schlueter, and M. Amro, New structural percolation transition in frac-
tional wet 3d-porous media: A comparative CT study, Water Resour. Res. 57, e2021WR030037
(2021).
[39] A. Irannezhad, B. K. Primkulov, R. Juanes, and B. Zhao, Fluid-ﬂuid displacement in mixed-wet porous
media, Physical Review Fluids 8, L012301 (2023).
[40] S. Bakhshian and S. A. Hosseini, Pore–scale analysis of supercritical CO2–brine immiscible displace-
ment under fractional–wettability conditions, Adv. Water Resour. 126, 96 (2019).
[41] B. Zhao, C. W. MacMinn, B. K. Primkulov, Y . Chen, A. J. Valocchi, J. Zhao, Q. Kang, K. Bruning,
J. E. McClure, C. T. Miller, et al. , Comprehensive comparison of pore-scale models for multiphase
24ﬂow in porous media, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 13799 (2019).
[42] M. J. Blunt, Flow in porous media — pore-network models and multiphase ﬂow, Curr. Opin. Colloid
Interface Sci. 6(2001).
[43] B. K. Primkulov, A. A. Pahlavan, X. Fu, B. Zhao, C. W. MacMinn, and R. Juanes, Signatures of ﬂuid-
ﬂuid displacement in porous media: Wettability, patterns and pressures, J. Fluid Mech. 875(2019).
[44] M. Cieplak and M. O. Robbins, Inﬂuence of contact angle on quasistatic ﬂuid invasion of porous
media, Phys. Rev. B 41, 11508 (1990).
[45] W. B. Haines, Studies in the physical properties of soil. v. the hysteresis effect in capillary properties,
and the modes of moisture distribution associated therewith, J. Agric. Sci. (20).
[46] R. T. Armstrong and D. Wildenschild, Microbial enhanced oil recovery in fractional-wet systems: A
pore-scale investigation, Transp. Porous Media 92, 819 (2012).
[47] N. Kenkel and D. Walker, Fractals in the biological sciences, Coenoses , 77 (1996).
[48] M. R. Schroeder, Fractals, Chaos, Power Laws: Minutes from an Inﬁnite Paradise , Dover ed. (W. H.
Freeman and Company, 2009).
[49] B. K. Primkulov, A. A. Pahlavan, X. Fu, B. Zhao, C. W. MacMinn, and R. Juanes, Signatures of ﬂuid–
ﬂuid displacement in porous media: wettability, patterns and pressures, J. Fluid Mech. 875(2019).
[50] R. Holtzman, Effects of pore-scale disorder on ﬂuid displacement in partially-wettable porous media,
Sci. Rep. 6, 1 (2016).
[51] A. Singhal, D. Mukherjee, and W. Somerton, Effect of heterogeneous wettability on ﬂow of ﬂuids
through porous media, J. Can. Pet. Technol. 15(1976).
[52] A. Skauge and B. Ottesen, A summary of experimentally derived relative permeability and residual
saturation on north sea reservoir cores, in Paper SCA 2002-12 presented at the International Sympo-
sium of the Society of Core analysts , V ol. 22 (2002) p. 25.
[53] L. K. Høiland, K. Spildo, and A. Skauge, Fluid ﬂow properties for different classes of intermediate
wettability as studied by network modelling, Transp. Porous Media 70, 127 (2007).
[54] S. Bachu, CO 2storage in geological media: Role, means, status and barriers to deployment, Prog.
Energy Combust. Sci. 34, 254 (2008).
[55] N. R. Warner, R. B. Jackson, T. H. Darrah, S. G. Osborn, A. Down, K. Zhao, A. White, and A. Ven-
gosh, Geochemical evidence for possible natural migration of marcellus formation brine to shallow
aquifers in pennsylvania, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109(2012).
[56] V . Sygouni, C. D. Tsakiroglou, and A. C. Payatakes, Capillary pressure spectrometry: Toward a new
25method for the measurement of the fractional wettability of porous media, Phys. Fluids 18, 053302
(2006).
[57] K. J. M ˚aløy, L. Furuberg, J. Feder, and T. Jøssang, Dynamics of slow drainage in porous media, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 68, 2161 (1992).
[58] F. Moebius and D. Or, Interfacial jumps and pressure bursts during ﬂuid displacement in interacting
irregular capillaries, J. Colloid Interface Sci 377, 406 (2012).
[59] R. Holtzman and R. Juanes, Crossover from ﬁngering to fracturing in deformable disordered media,
Phys. Rev. E 82(2010).
[60] R. Toussaint, G. Løvoll, Y . M ´eheust, K. J. M ˚aløy, and J. Schmittbuhl, Inﬂuence of pore-scale disorder
on viscous ﬁngering during drainage, EPL (Europhysics Letters) 71, 583 (2005).
[61] R. Holtzman and E. Segre, Wettability stabilizes ﬂuid invasion into porous media via nonlocal, coop-
erative pore ﬁlling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115(2015).
26