arXiv:2302.06207v2  [math.AT]  5 Sep 2024GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND
TOPOLOGICAL ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY
TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Abstract. We introduce global model categories as a general framework to
capture several phenomena in global equivariant homotopy t heory. We then
construct genuine stabilizations of these, generalizing the usual passage from
unstable to stable global homotopy theory. Finally, we deﬁn e theglobal topo-
logical Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology of an ultra-commutative ring spectrum and
express it in terms of a genuine stabilization in our framewo rk in analogy with
the classical non-equivariant description obtained by Bas terra and Mandell.
Contents
Introduction 1
1. A reminder on G-equivariant and G-global homotopy theory 6
2. Global model categories 16
3. Global stability 22
4. The stabilization of global spaces 37
5. Global brave new algebra 41
6. Global topological Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology 54
7. The stabilization of global NUCAs 70
References 77
Introduction
Cohomology theories like topological K-theory and the various ﬂavors of cobor-
dism are among the most fundamental tools of algebraic topology. M any of the
examples one encounters in practice come with additional structur e in the form of
multiplications and power operations, and these can often be exploit ed fruitfully,
as for example in the classical proof that the Hopf maps deﬁne non- trivial elements
in the stable homotopy groups of spheres via the Steenrod operat ions on singular
cohomology. In terms of the representing spectra, these extra algebraic data are
encoded in a highly structured multiplication, making the representin g spectra so-
calledE∞-ring spectra . In good model categoriesofdiagram spectra like symmetric
or orthogonal spectra [HSS00, MMSS01], such E∞-ring spectra are represented by
strictly commutative algebras, and they can also be conveniently de scribed in the
language of∞-categories.
G-equivariant cohomology theories , asmodelledby genuineG-spectrainthesense
of equivariant stable homotopy theory, are a reﬁnement of cohom ology theories to
the context of objects endowed with extra symmetries in the form of an action of a
(ﬁnite) group G. Many classical cohomology theories have equivariant analogues,
leading for example to G-equivariant topological K-theory and cobordism.
2020Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. Primary 55P91, 55P43, secondary 18N40, 55U35.
Key words and phrases. Global homotopy theory, model categories, genuine stabili ty, topolog-
ical Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology, ultra-commutative ring s pectra.
12 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
When we study highly structured multiplications on these, interestin gnew struc-
ture arises in the form of norm maps , which can be thought of as twisted multipli-
cations. As a motivating algebraic example, consider an ordinary com mutative ring
Rwith an action by a ﬁnite group Gand anH-ﬁxed point r∈RHfor a subgroup
H⊂G. Then the normofris the product
NG
H(r) =/productdisplay
gH∈G/Hg.r,
which is now a G-ﬁxedpoint. This yields a multiplicative map NG
H:RH→RG,
and together with inclusions of ﬁxed points as restrictions and similar ly deﬁned
additive transfers , this gives rise to the structure of a Tambara functor [Tam93] on
the collection{RH}H⊂Gof ﬁxed points of R. More generally, the zeroth homotopy
groups of any genuineG-E∞-ring spectrum naturally admit the structure of a
Tambara functor and in particular come with norm maps. These norm s have been
famously exploited in the solution of the Kervaire-invariant-one pro blem by Hill,
Hopkins, and Ravenel [HHR16], renewing interest in this rich struct ure.
It turns out that many important equivariant cohomology theories like cobor-
dism andK-theory exist in a uniform fashion for large classes of groups, like all
ﬁnite or all compact Lie groups. This is the perspective taken by global homotopy
theory[Sch18, Hau19]. Such global objects come with extra structure in t he form of
inﬂations (restrictions along surjective group homomorphisms), and incorp orating
this additional information can allow for easier analysis of equivariant phenomena,
the most prominent example being the recent proof of an equivarian t Quillen theo-
rem linking equivariant bordism to formal group laws by Hausmann [Ha u22], which
crucially relies on the global perspective.
The correct notion of ‘multiplicative global cohomology theories’ are theultra-
commutative ring spectra , which are commutative algebras in a suitable model cat-
egory of global spectra. The zeroth homotopy groups of such an ultra-commutative
ring spectrum form a so-called global power functor , the global analogue of a G-
Tambarafunctor forﬁxed G, in particularcomingwith normmaps foranyinclusion
H⊂Gof ﬁnite groups. Currently, no purely ∞-categorical description of ultra-
commutative ring spectra is known.
Obstruction theory and topological Andr´ e-Quillen cohomo logy.As com-
mutative ring spectra encode such a rich additional structure in th eir homotopy
groups and represented cohomology, their study has received mu ch attention. How-
ever, the existenceofstructured multiplications onspectra isa ve rysubtle question:
while many important spectra do come with the structure of an E∞-ring spectrum,
suchasthespherespectrum, Eilenberg-MacLanespectra, K-theoryandThomspec-
tra, or spectra of topological modular forms, some other natura lly deﬁned spectra
do not admit such a structured multiplication. The prime examples of t his are
Moore spectra, where it has been long known that S/2 does not admit a unital
multiplication in the homotopy category and no S/pcan have a structured associa-
tive (i.e.A∞-)multiplication, see [AT65, Theorem 1.1] and [Ang08, Example 3.3].
Similarly, the Brown-Peterson spectrum BP(for any prime p) does not support an
E∞-multiplication [Law18, Sen17].
In order to derive positive results, in some cases obstruction theo retic meth-
ods can be applied, with famous examples being the result of Goerss a nd Hop-
kins [GH04] that Morava E-theory admits a unique E∞-ring structure, or the
usage of Postnikov towers of commutative ring spectra in order to construct an
E4-multiplication on BPby Basterra and Mandell [BM13]. Both of these results
rely ontopological Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology , a cohomology theory for commuta-
tive ring spectra introduced by Basterra [Bas99] as an adaptation of a cohomologyGLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 3
theory originally deﬁned by Andr´ e and Quillen for ordinary commutat ive rings
[And67, Qui70]. The latter is deﬁned as a derived functor of K¨ ahler d iﬀerentials,
andasimilarapproachisused byBasterraforthe topologicalversio n, usingamodel
category of spectra in which commutative ring spectra model E∞-ring spectra.
A crucial observation in the construction of classical algebraic Andr´ e-Quillen
cohomology is that for a ﬁxed commutative ring R, one can identify the category
ofR-modules with the category of abelian group objects in augmented R-algebras,
which allows to interpret Andr´ e-Quillen homology and cohomology as a derived
abelianization procedure. In the topological case, a similar result wa s obtained by
Basterra and Mandell [BM05], who showed that for a commutative rin g spectrum
R, topological Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology exhibits the category of R-modules as a
stabilization of the category of augmented R-algebras.
Global topological Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology. Given the wealth ofstructure
encoded in the multiplication on an ultra-commutative ring spectrum ( even com-
pared to a non-equivariant E∞-ring spectrum), a global obstruction theory would
be particularly desirable. As the ﬁrst step towards this, we adapt t he theory of
topological Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology to the context of global hom otopy theory in
this article. In particular, we deﬁne the global topological Andr´ e- Quillen homology
and cohomology of ultra-commutative ring spectra, prove a Hurew icz theorem in
this setting, and construct Postnikov towers for ultra-commuta tive ring spectra.
As the main result of this paper (see Theorem B below) we then identif y global
topological Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology as a suitable global stabilization in analogy
with the non-equivariant result of Basterra–Mandell, justifying th at this is indeed
the ‘correct’ global analogue of classical topological Andr´ e-Quille n cohomology.
To put this into perspective, recall that any suitably nice model or ∞-category
admits a stabilization [Sch97, Lur18], obtained by inverting the suspension-loop ad-
junction. However, the passage between unstable and stable equ ivariant or global
homotopy theory is more subtle, related to the existence of trans fer maps between
equivariant stable homotopy groups mentioned above. In the equiv ariant setting,
we can instead concisely express it as a genuine stabilization [GM23, Appendix C]:
the passage from unstable to stable G-equivariant homotopy theory is given by
universally inverting the 1-point compactiﬁcation SGof the regular real represen-
tation, instead of just the usual sphere S1(i.e. the 1-point compactiﬁcation of the
trivial 1-dimensional representation). Sadly, however, this appr oach can not be
immediately adapted to the global world—for example, a computation by Schwede
shows that only the ordinary non-equivariant spheres are inverte d when passing
from unstable to stable global homotopy theory.
SimilarlytoanideadescribedbyGepnerandNikolaus[GN15], wesolvethis issue
in the present paper by looking more generally at G-global homotopy theory in the
sense of [Len20] for all ﬁnite groups G, which for the trivial group G= 1 recovers
usual global homotopy theory. In this setting, we then describe t he passage from
unstable to stable G-global homotopy theory for all ﬁnite groups Gsimultaneously :
it is given by inverting SGinG-global homotopy theory for all Gin a compatible
way (see Theorem A below).
Global model categories. To make this precise, we introduce the notion of a
global model category (Deﬁnition 2.11). Roughly speaking, such a global model
category Cconsists ofa category Ctogetherwith two (suitably nice) Quillen equiv-
alent model structures on the category G-CofG-objects in C, called the projective
andﬂatmodel structures, that interact in a prescribed way with restrict ion along
group homomorphisms, formalizing the behaviour established for un stable and sta-
bleG-global homotopy theory in [Len20]. As our main examples, we introd uce and4 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
study global model categories Sof global spaces, Spof global spectra, MRof
R-modules, and ComR/Rof augmented R-algebras for an ultra-commutative ring
spectrumR.
IfCis apointedglobal model category (i.e. Chas a zero object) and Gis
ﬁnite, the homotopy category Ho( G-C) comes with an equivariant suspension-loop
adjunction
SG∧L–: Ho(G-C)⇄Ho(G-C) :RΩG
(recovering the usual one for pointed global spaces), and we call C(genuinely)
stableif this adjunction is an adjoint equivalence for every G.
With this deﬁnition, both the global model category of global spect ra and of
R-modules are stable. For a general global model category Con the other hand,
we can construct a global stabilization in the form of a homotopy universal map to
a stable global model categoryby considering suitable G-global spectrum objects in
C, reﬁning and generalizing the non-equivariant construction of [Sch 97]. We then
compute this global stabilization in two key cases:
First, we show that the global stabilization of global spaces is indeed given by
global spectra in this setting:
Theorem A (see Theorem 4.1) .The suspension spectrum-loop space adjunction
Σ•
+:S⇄Sp:Ω•
exhibits the global model category Spof global spectra as global stabilization of the
global model category Sof global spaces.
This in particular serves as a sanity check for our framework, but it also allows
us to provide a description of the previously elusive passage betwee n unstable and
stable global homotopy theory in terms of a universal property.
The main application of this theory, however, lies in the calculation of t he global
stabilizationofthe categoryofaugmented R-algebrasforan ultra-commutativering
spectrumR:
Theorem B (see Theorem 6.38 for a precise statement) .LetRbe a ﬂat ultra-
commutative ring spectrum. Then the global model category MRofR-modules is the
global stabilization of the global model category ComR/Rof augmented R-algebras,
and the universal map reduces on homotopy categories to the ‘ global abelianization’
functor from the construction of global topological Andr´ e -Quillen cohomology.
Andr´ e-Quillen (co)homology of global power functors. Just like topological
Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology is a ‘higher algebra’ version of a cohomolog y theory for
ordinary rings, there is a notion of global Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology [Sta22, Chap-
ter 1] of ‘commutative global rings,’ i.e. the aforementioned global p ower functors;
a similar theory of equivariant Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology for Tambara functors has
moreover been studied by Hill [Hil17].
This theory enjoys several properties one would expect of a globa l analogue
of Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology: for example, it can be described in deg ree 0 in
terms of derivations of global power functors and in degree 1 by a g lobal version of
Grothendieck’s Exalcomm-functor. However, it also suﬀers from a serious defect:
it does not admit a global analogue of Quillen’s transitivity long exact sequence . As
explained in [Sta22], this failure can be traced back to an anomaly of th e abelian
category of global functors, ﬁrst observed by Lewis [Lew99]: its projective objects
are not necessarily ﬂat. In contrast to that, global topological Andr´ e-Quillen coho-
mology, as considered in this paper, does come with a transitivity exa ct sequence,
see Corollary 6.17.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 5
Related work. Another perspective on the relation between unstable and stable
equivarianthomotopy theory is provided by parameterized higher category theory in
the sense of Barwick, Dotto, Glasman, Nardin, and Shah [BDG+16, Nar16], which
emphasizes the extra algebraic structure encoded in the additive t ransfers (or more
precisely the so-called Wirthm¨ uller isomorphisms underlying them) as a form of
‘genuine semiadditivity.’
Using this language, Cnossen, Linskens, and the ﬁrst author [CLL2 3a] have con-
currently introduced the concept of global∞-categories . These again come with a
notion of genuine stability (now deﬁned via the aforementioned Wirthm¨ uller iso-
morphisms), and the main result of op. cit. describes a certain explicit global
∞-category of global spectra (again built from G-global spectra for all ﬁnite G) as
the genuine stabilization in this sense of an analogous global ∞-category of global
spaces—in fact, global spaces and global spectra admit universal descriptions in
this framework as the free presentable and free presentable gen uinely stable global
∞-category, respectively, which immediately implies the above descrip tion.
It is not hard to showthat anyglobalmodel categorygivesriseto a (presentable)
global∞-category via Dwyer-Kan localization, which for SandSpprecisely re-
covers the aforementioned global ∞-categories of global spaces and global spectra;
in particular, the two notions of global stabilization agree in this case . However,
while it is natural to expect them to also agree in general, this is not cle ar a priori;
the ﬁrst author plans to come back to this question in future work.
Outline. In Section 1 we give a recollection of G-equivariant and G-global homo-
topy theory, in particular describing the rich ‘change of group’-calc ulus present in
the latter. We then formalize this calculus in Section 2 in the notion of a global
model category .
Section 3 is devoted to the notion of stability for global model categories and
the general construction of global stabilizations. In Section 4 we c ompute this
stabilization in the case of global spaces, proving Theorem A.
In Section 5 we develop the theory of modules and algebras in stable G-global
homotopy theory, and in particular deﬁne corresponding global mo del categories.
Afterwards, we introduce ( G-)global and G-equivariant topological Andr´ e-Quillen
cohomology in Section 6 and express the former via the global stabiliz ation of
augmented commutative algebras, proving Theorem B. This proof in turn relies
on a hard technical result about the stabilization of the free-forg etful adjunction
between modules and non-unital commutative algebras (so-called ‘N UCAs’), to
which all of Section 7 is devoted.
Acknowledgements. The ﬁrst author would like to thank Bastiaan Cnossen and
Sil Linskens for helpful discussions. The second author would like to thank Stefan
Schwede for his support and supervision. Both authors would furt her like to thank
the anonymous referee for helpful feedback that in particular led to the inclusion
of Subsection 6.3.
This article is partially based on work supported by the Swedish Resea rch Coun-
cil under grant no. 2016-06596 while the ﬁrst author was in residen ce at Institut
Mittag-Leﬄer in Djursholm, Sweden in early 2022.
During the time this article was written, the second author was supp orted by
the Max-Planck Insitute for Mathematics, Bonn, and was an assoc iate member of
the Hausdorﬀ Center for Mathematics at the University of Bonn. S ubsections 6.1
and 6.2 are adapted from results contained in the dissertation of th e second author.6 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
1.A reminder on G-equivariant and G-global homotopy theory
Throughout, let Gbe a ﬁnite group. To set the stage, we recall several model
categorical aspects of G-equivariant andG-global homotopy theory .
1.1.G-equivariant homotopy theory. We begin with the classical unstable
equivariant story:
Proposition 1.1. LetFbe a family of subgroups of G, i.e. a non-empty collection
of subgroups that is closed under subconjugates. Then there is a unique model
structure on G-SSetin which a map fis a weak equivalence or ﬁbration if and only
iffHis a weak homotopy equivalence or Kan ﬁbration, respectivel y, of simplicial
sets for all H∈F. We call this the F-equivariant model structure and its weak
equivalences theF-weak equivalences . It is simplicial, proper, and combinatorial
with generating coﬁbrations
{G/H×(∂∆n֒→∆n) :H∈F,n≥0}
and generating acyclic coﬁbrations
{G/H×(Λn
k֒→∆n) :H∈F,0≤k≤n}.
Moreover, a map is a coﬁbration in it if and only if it is levelw ise injective and
every simplex not in its image has isotropy in F. Finally, ﬁltered colimits in it are
homotopical.
Proof.By [Ste16, Example 2.14] we get a coﬁbrantly generated (hence com binato-
rial) model structure with the above weak equivalences, ﬁbrations , and generating
(acyclic) coﬁbrations, while Proposition 2.16 of op. cit. provides the characteri-
zation of the coﬁbrations. The remaining properties are easy to ch eck, also see
[Len20, Proposition 1.1.2] for a complete proof. /square
Example 1.2.If we takeF=Aℓℓto be the collection of all subgroups of G, then
we get a model structure with coﬁbrations the underlying coﬁbrat ions of simplicial
sets, while weak equivalences and ﬁbrations are those maps fsuch thatfHis a
weak equivalence or ﬁbration, respectively, for every subgroup H⊂G.
We will refer to this model structure simply as the G-equivariant model structure
and to its weak equivalences as G-equivariant weak equivalences .
Example 1.3.LetG,Hbe ﬁnite groups. We write GG,Hfor the family of graph
subgroups ofG×H, i.e. groups of the form Γ K,ϕ:={(k,ϕ(k)) :k∈K}for a
subgroupK⊂Gand a homomorphism ϕ:K→H. Note that Kandϕare
actually uniquely determined for any graph subgroup, and a subgro upL⊂G×H
is a graph subgroup if and only if it intersects Htrivially, i.e. L∩(1×H) = 1.
We now apply the proposition for F=GG,Hto get a graph model structure on
(G×H)-SSet, which in the case H= 1 recovers the previous model structure.
For general H, a map is a coﬁbration in this model structure if and only if it is
levelwise injective and Hacts freely outside the image.
We will also need a variant of the above model structure with more co ﬁbrations:
Proposition 1.4. LetGbe a ﬁnite group and let Fbe a family of subgroups.
Then there is a unique model structure on G-SSetwith weak equivalences the F-
equivariant weak equivalences and coﬁbrations the injecti ve coﬁbrations, i.e. the
underlying coﬁbrations of simplicial sets. We call this the injectiveF-equivariant
model structure . It is simplicial, proper, combinatorial with generating c oﬁbrations
{G/H×(∂∆n֒→∆n) :H⊂G,n≥0},
and ﬁltered colimits in it are homotopical.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 7
Observe that forF=Aℓℓthis recoversthe G-equivariant model structure again.
Proof.This isa folkloreresult; the earliestappearancein the literature(wit hSSet∗
instead of SSet) we are aware of is [Shi04, Proposition 1.3] where this is already
referred to as a ‘well-known’ model structure. A full proof in our s etting can be
found as [Len20, Proposition 1.1.15]. /square
We will frequently use the following well-known ‘change of group’ prop erties of
the above model structures, all of which can also be found in [Len20 , 1.1.4]:
Lemma 1.5. LetGbe a ﬁnite group and let α:H→H′be a homomorphism of
ﬁnite groups. Then the adjunction
α!:= (G×α)!:(G×H)-SSetGG,H⇄(G×H′)-SSetGG,H: (G×α)∗=:α∗
is a Quillen adjunction. If αis injective, then also
α∗:= (G×α)∗:(G×H′)-SSetGG,H′⇄(G×H)-SSetGG,H: (G×α)∗=:α∗
is a Quillen adjunction. /square
Lemma 1.6. Letα:G→G′be an injective homomorphism of ﬁnite groups and
letHbe a ﬁnite group. Then
α∗:= (α×H)∗:(G′×H)-SSetGG′,H→(G×H)-SSetGG,H
is both left and right Quillen. /square
Next, we come to the stable situation, where we will use Hausmann’s m odel
[Hau17] based on symmetric spectra, which we brieﬂy recall:
Construction 1.7.We write Σfor theSSet∗-enriched category whose objects are
ﬁnite sets and with morphism spaces
mapsΣ(A,B) :=/logicalordisplay
i:A→BinjectiveSB/integerdividei(A).
Composition is given by smashing, i.e. if Cis yet another object, then the composi-
tion mapsΣ(A,B)∧mapsΣ(B,C)→mapsΣ(A,C) is given on the wedge summands
corresponding to i:A→Bandj:B→Cas
SB/integerdividei(A)∧SC/integerdividej(B)∼=Sj(B)/integerdivideji(A)∧SC/integerdividej(B)∼=SC/integerdivideji(A)֒→/logicalordisplay
k:A→CinjectiveSC/integerdividek(A)
where the ﬁrst isomorphism is induced by j, the second one is the canonical iso-
morphism, and the ﬁnal map is the inclusion of the summand indexed by ji.
Deﬁnition 1.8. Asymmetric spectrum (in simplicial sets) is an SSet∗-enriched
functorΣ→SSet∗. We write Spectra for the corresponding category of enriched
functors and enriched natural transformations, which is itself en riched, tensored,
and cotensored over SSet∗with (co)tensoring deﬁned levelwise.
IfGis any group, then we write G-Spectra for the category of G-objects in
Spectra and call its objects G-symmetric spectra or simply (by slight abuse of
language)G-spectra.
Remark 1.9.Symmetric spectra are often instead deﬁned in a ‘coordinatized’ fa sh-
ion as sequences( Xn)n≥0of basedΣ n-simplicialsets together with maps S1∧Xn→
Xn+1that interact suitably with the actions. For the equivalence to the a bove def-
inition we refer the reader to [Hau17, 2.4].
Wewill nowconstructequivariantmodel structuresonthe catego ryofG-spectra.
Just like non-equivariantly, these come in a projective and aﬂatversion, and will
be obtained by Bousﬁeld localizing suitable level model structures:8 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Proposition 1.10. There is a unique model structure on G-Spectra in which a
mapfis a weak equivalence or ﬁbration if and only if f(A)is aGG,ΣA-weak equiva-
lence or ﬁbration, respectively, for every ﬁnite set A. We call this the G-equivariant
projective level model structure and its weak equivalences the G-equivariant level
weak equivalences . It is combinatorial with generating coﬁbrations
/braceleftbig/parenleftbig
G+∧Σ(A,–)/parenrightbig
/H∧(∂∆n֒→∆n)+:Aﬁnite set,H∈GG,ΣA,n≥0/bracerightbig
.
Moreprecisely, forthe aboveto be aset (asopposed to a properc lass), we should
restrict to a set of ﬁnite sets hitting all isomorphism classes; in all wh at follows we
will ignore this and similar technicalities.
Proof.See [Hau17, Corollary 2.26 and discussion afterwards]. /square
Proposition 1.11. There is a unique model structure on G-Spectra in which a
mapfis a weak equivalence or ﬁbration if and only if f(A)is a weak equivalence or
ﬁbration, respectively, in the injectiveGG,ΣA-model structure for every ﬁnite set A.
We call this the G-equivariant ﬂat level model structure . Its weak equivalences are
precisely the G-equivariant level weak equivalence; moreover, a map is a co ﬁbration
in the ﬂat level model structure on G-Spectra if and only if it is a coﬁbration in
the ﬂat level model structure on Spectra (i.e. forG= 1); we will refer to these
maps as ﬂat coﬁbrations .
Finally, the G-equivariant ﬂat level model structure is combinatorial wi th gener-
ating coﬁbrations
/braceleftbig/parenleftbig
G+∧Σ(A,–)/parenrightbig
/H∧(∂∆n֒→∆n)+:Aﬁnite set,H⊂G×ΣA,n≥0/bracerightbig
.
Proof.The construction of the model structure and the identiﬁcation of the gen-
erating coﬁbrations is [Hau17, Corollary 2.25 and discussion afterw ards], while the
characterization of the ﬂat coﬁbrations is Remark 2.20 of op. cit. /square
Remark 1.12.We will never need to know how the generating acycliccoﬁbrations
of the above two model structures look like; the curious reader ca n ﬁnd them in
Hausmann’s treatment referred to above.
Deﬁnition 1.13. AG-spectrumXiscalledaG-Ω-spectrum ifforeveryH⊂Gand
all ﬁniteH-setsA⊂Bthe derived adjoint structure map X(A)→RΩB/integerdivideAX(B)
is anH-equivariant weak equivalence, where Hacts onX,A, andB.
Herewe arederivingΩB/integerdivideAwith respect to the H-equivariantmodel structureon
H-SSet ∗; in particular, if Xis ﬁbrant in either of the above level model structures,
then the above is already represented by the ordinary adjoint str ucture map.
We will also frequently reexpress the above condition as saying that for all ﬁnite
H-setsA,Cthe mapX(A)→RΩCX(A∐C) is a weak equivalence.
Theorem 1.14. The projective G-equivariant level model structure on G-Spectra
admits a Bousﬁeld localization with ﬁbrant objects precise ly the projectively level
ﬁbrantG-Ω-spectra. Similarly, the ﬂat G-equivariant level model structure admits a
Bousﬁeld localization with ﬁbrant objects the ﬂatly level ﬁ brantG-Ω-spectra. Both of
these model structures are combinatorial, and they have the same weak equivalences,
which we call the G-equivariant weak equivalences .
Proof.See [Hau17, Theorems 4.7 and 4.8]. /square
Remark 1.15.Let us say something about the generating acyclic coﬁbrations of t he
abovemodelstructure, see[Hau17, Example2.37anddiscussionaf terTheorem4.8]:
for any ﬁnite set A, the spectrum Σ(A,–) corepresents evaluation at Aby the
enrichedYonedalemma; similarly SB∧Σ(A∐B,–) corepresents X/m⊣pst≀→ΩBX(A∐B).
By another application of the Yoneda Lemma we therefore get a map λA,B:SB∧GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 9
Σ(A∐B,–)→Σ(A,–) such that maps( λA,B,X) agrees up to conjugation by
natural isomorphisms with the adjoint structure map X(A)→ΩBX(A∐B) for
any symmetric spectrum X.
If nowH⊂Gacts onA,B, thenλA,Bbecomes a map of H-spectra (denoted
λH,A,B) with respect to the induced actions, and we factor it asa project ivecoﬁbra-
tionκH,A,Bfollowed by a level weak equivalence ρH,A,B. Then a set of generating
acyclic coﬁbrations is given by taking a set of generating acyclic levelcoﬁbrations
and adding the pushout product maps ( G+∧HκH,A,B)/squareifor allH⊂G, all ﬁnite
H-setsA,B(up to isomorphism), and all generating coﬁbrations i.
Remark 1.16.As a teaser for the things to come, we recall that any combinatoria l
simplicial (left) proper model category admits a stabilization [Sch97]. We remark
without proof that on associated ∞-categories this models the universal stabiliza-
tion in the sense of [Lur18, Corollary 1.4.4.5], i.e. the initial example of an adjunc-
tion to a presentable stable ∞-category, or equivalently the result of universally
inverting Σ := S1∧– in the presentable world.
However, while we have a Quillen adjunction Σ∞
+:G-SSet⇄G-Spectra :Ω∞
for either of the above model structures, as already mentioned in the introduction
this does notmodel the stabilization in the above na¨ ıve sense. Rather, this deﬁn es
a ‘genuine stabilization’ universally inverting the functor SG∧– (in presentable
∞-categories), where Gacts via permuting the smash functors of SG=/logicalandtext
GS1, or
equivalently the functors SA∧– for all ﬁnite G-setsA, see [GM23, Appendix C] or
[CMNN20, Theorem A.2].
The main disadvantage of the approach via symmetric spectra is tha t the weak
equivalences are only indirectly deﬁned in terms of specifying the loca l objects.
However, there is a notion of π∗-isomorphism , which we will now introduce, that
while not accounting for all G-equivariant weak equivalences is at least coarse
enough for many purposes:
Construction 1.17.LetH⊂Gand letUHbe a complete H-set universe, i.e. a
countableH-set into which any other countable H-set embeds equivariantly, and
writes(UH) for the poset of ﬁnite H-subsets ofUH.
For everyG-spectrumXand everyk≥0 we then deﬁne
πH
k(X) = colim A∈s(UH)[SA∐{1,...,k},|X(A)|]H
∗
where [,]H
∗denotes the set of H-equivariant based homotopy classes (for maps of
H-topological spaces) and the transition maps are given by
[SA∐{1,...,k},|X(A)|]H
∗SB/integerdivideA∧–−−−−−→ [SB/integerdivideA∧SA∐{1,...,k},SB/integerdivideA∧|X(A)|]H
∗
∼=[SB∐{1,...,k},SB/integerdivideA∧|X(A)|]H
∗
σ− →[SB∐{1,...,k},|X(B)|]H
∗
for allA⊂B, whereσdenotes the structure map of the symmetric spectrum and
the unlabelled isomorphism is the canonical one. Similarly, for k<0 we deﬁne
πH
k(X) = colim A∈s(UH)[SA,|X(A∐{1,...,−k})|]H
∗
with the analogously deﬁned transition maps.
For everyk∈ZandH⊂G,πH
kXis naturally an abelian group [Hau17, Deﬁni-
tion 3.1]; however, we will not need this group structure below.
Deﬁnition 1.18. A mapf:X→YofG-spectra is called a (G-equivariant) π∗-
isomorphism ifπH
kfis an isomorphism for all H⊂Gand allk∈Z.10 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Remark 1.19.The above homotopy groups are independent of the choice of UHup
to natural, but in general non-canonical isomorphism [Hau17, 3.3]. I n particular,
the notion of π∗-isomorphism is independent of any choices.
Theorem 1.20. Everyπ∗-isomorphism of G-spectra is a G-equivariant weak equiv-
alence.
Proof.See [Hau17, Theorem 3.36] /square
Warning 1.21.While restriction along injective homomorphisms preserves all of
the above structure [Hau17, 5.2], the equivariant model structur es do not interact
reasonably with restrictions along generalhomomorphisms, unlike their unstable
siblings. In particular, if α:G→G′is not injective, then α∗will typically notsend
G′-equivariant weak equivalences to G-equivariant ones.
One nice property of the G-global theory we will introduce in the following
two subsections is that it comes with homotopically meaningful ‘chang e of group’
adjunctions (which we will later formalize in the notion of a global model category ),
and in particular that restriction along arbitrary homomorphisms will indeed be
homotopical.
1.2.Unstable G-global homotopy theory. LetGcontinue to denote a ﬁnite
group. Wewillnowrecall G-global homotopy theory inthesenseof[Len20]; thisgen-
eralizes global homotopy theory (for ﬁnite groups) in the sense of Schwede [Sch18],
and will be the key tool in this article to express and prove propertie s of the latter.
Again, we begin with the unstable story:
Construction 1.22.The forgetful functor SSet→Setsending a simplicial set Xto
its set of vertices admits a right adjoint E, given explicitly by ( EX)n=X1+nwith
the evident functoriality in Xand with structure maps induced by the canonical
identiﬁcation X1+n∼=HomSet([n],X).
Deﬁnition 1.23. We writeIfor the category of ﬁnite sets and injective maps, and
we letIdenote the simplicial category obtained by applying Eto all hom sets.
We write I-SSetfor the enriched category of enriched functors I→SSetand call
its objectsI-spacesorglobal spaces . More generally, we write G-I-SSetfor the
category of G-objects in I-SSetand call its objects G-I-spacesorG-global spaces .
Proposition 1.24. There is a unique model structure on G-I-SSetin which a
map is a weak equivalence or ﬁbration if and only if f(A)is a weak equivalence or
ﬁbration, respectively, in the GΣA,G-equivariant model structure for every ﬁnite set
A. We call this the G-global level model structure and its weak equivalences the
G-global level weak equivalences . This model structure is proper, simplicial, and
combinatorial with generating coﬁbrations
{I(A,–)×ϕG×(∂∆n֒→∆n) :H⊂ΣA,ϕ:H→G,n≥0},
where×ϕdenotes the quotient of the ordinary product by the diagonal of the right
action ofHonI(A,–)via its tautological action on Aand the right action on G
viag.h=gϕ(h).
Finally, ﬁltered colimits of G-global level weak equivalences are again G-global
level weak equivalences.
Proof.See [Len20, Proposition 1.4.3]. /square
Just like for G-symmetric spectra, we will now Bousﬁeld localize this to get the
model structure we are actually after. However, unlike for G-symmetric spectra, we
can actually explicitly describe both the weak equivalences and the loc al objects.
We start with the former:GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 11
Construction 1.25.LetAbe any set, possibly inﬁnite, and let Xbe anI-simplicial
set. Then we deﬁne
X(A) := colim
B⊂AﬁniteX(B)
with transition maps induced by functoriality of X. This becomes a functor in X
in the obvious way; in particular, if Gacts onX, thenX(A) becomes naturally a
G-simplicial set.
In addition, the monoid End( A) of self-maps of Aacts naturally on the above by
permuting the terms ofthe colimit. Thus, if Ais anH-set andXis aG-I-simplicial
set, thenX(A) becomes an ( H×G)-simplicial set.
Deﬁnition 1.26. A mapf:X→YofG-I-simplicial sets is called a G-global
weak equivalence if for every ﬁnite group Hand some (hence any) complete H-set
universeUHthe induced map f(UH) is aGH,G-equivariant weak equivalence, or
equivalently (replacing Hby a subgroup if necessary) for every ϕ:H→Gthe map
(ϕ∗f)(UH) is anH-equivariant weak equivalence.
Next, we come to the analogue of the notion of an Ω-spectrum in this setting:
Deﬁnition 1.27. AG-I-simplicialsetiscalled staticifforeveryﬁnite group Hand
all ﬁnite faithfulH-setsA⊂Bthe mapX(A)→X(B) induced by the inclusion is
aGH,G-weak equivalence.
Theorem 1.28. TheG-global level model structure on G-I-SSetadmits a Bous-
ﬁeld localization with weak equivalences the G-global weak equivalences. Its ﬁbrant
objects are precisely the level ﬁbrant staticG-I-simplicial sets.
This model structure is again combinatorial (with the same g enerating coﬁbra-
tions), simplicial, proper, and ﬁltered colimits in it are h omotopical.
Proof.See [Len20, Theorem 1.4.30]. /square
We will also need the following injective variant of the above model str ucture:
Theorem 1.29. There is a unique model structure on G-I-SSetwith weak equiv-
alences the G-global weak equivalences and coﬁbrations the injective co ﬁbrations.
We call this the injectiveG-global model structure . It is combinatorial, simplicial,
proper, and ﬁltered colimits in it are homotopical.
Proof.See [Len20, Theorem 1.4.37]. /square
Remark 1.30.The category G-I-SSetofG-objects in Fun( I,SSet) also carries
aG-global level model structure analogous to Proposition 1.24 and th is admits a
Bousﬁeld localization with the static objects as local objects such t hat the resulting
model category is Quillen equivalent to G-I-SSet, see [Len20, Theorem 1.4.31].
However, the weak equivalences of this model structure are some what complicated
(similarly to the situation for symmetric spectra), and in particular t hey cannot
just be checked by evaluation at complete H-set universes. The passage from Ito
Iis precisely what eliminates this subtlety, which is why the above model will be
more convenient for us.
In addition to these, [Len20, Chapter 1] also studies various models ofG-global
homotopy theory based on a certain monoid Mand the simplicial monoid EM
obtained via Construction 1.22 from this, that are related to the ab ove via (zig-
zags of) Quillen equivalences.
As promised, the above G-global model structures support a rich ‘change of
group’ calculus:12 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Proposition 1.31. Letα:G→G′be any group homomorphism. Then the restric-
tionα∗:G′-I-SSet→G-I-SSetis homotopical and we have Quillen adjunctions
α!:G-I-SSetG-global⇄G′-I-SSetG′-global:α∗
α∗:G′-I-SSetinjectiveG′-global⇄G-I-SSet injectiveG-global:α∗.
Proof.See [Len20, Lemma 1.4.40 and Corollary 1.4.41]. /square
Proposition 1.32. Letα:G→G′be aninjective homomorphism. Then also
α!:G-I-SSet injectiveG-global⇄G′-I-SSetinjectiveG′-global:α∗
α∗:G′-I-SSetG′-global⇄G-I-SSetG-global:α∗.
are Quillen adjunctions.
Proof.See [Len20, Lemmas 1.4.42 and 1.4.43]. /square
As everyG-I-simplicial set is injectively coﬁbrant, the above implies via Ken
Brown’sLemma that α!is homotopicalfor injectiveα. The following generalization
of this (which makes precise that ‘free quotients are homotopical’) w ill be a key
input in many arguments, see in particular Example 2.14.
Proposition 1.33. Letα:G→G′be any homomorphism and let f:X→Ybe a
G-global weak equivalence such that ker(α)acts levelwise freely on XandY. Then
α!fis aG′-global level weak equivalence.
Proof.WefactorfintheG-globalmodelstructureasanacycliccoﬁbration j:X→
Zfollowed by a ﬁbration p(automatically acyclic). Then α!jis aG′-global weak
equivalence by Proposition 1.31, so it suﬃces to show that also α!pis a weak
equivalence; we will show that it is even a G′-global level weak equivalence.
To this end, we observe that for any generating coﬁbration iand every ﬁnite set
Athe mapi(A) is a coﬁbration in the GΣA,G-equivariant model structure since G
acts freely onI(B,A)×ϕGfor every ﬁnite faithful H-setBand homomorphism
ϕ:H→G. As evaluation at Ais cocontinuous, we see that the claim holds more
generally for all coﬁbrations, and in particular for the above map j. Thus, ker( α)
also acts levelwise freely on Z; the claim therefore follows by applying [Len20,
Proposition 1.1.22] levelwise (with M= ΣAandE=Aℓℓ). /square
1.3.StableG-global homotopy theory. Finally, wecometomodelsof stableG-
global homotopy theory [Len20, Chapter 3]; we restrict ourselve s to the basics here
and will recall further constructions and results (in particular mon oidal properties
and the tensoring over G-global spaces) later when needed.
1.3.1.Model structures. On the pointset level, our models will again be simply
given by symmetric spectra with a G-action, and we once more start with suitable
level model structures [Len20, Propositions 3.1.20 and 3.1.23]:
Proposition 1.34. There is a unique model structure on G-Spectra in which a
map is a weak equivalence or ﬁbration if and only if f(A)is aGΣA,G-weak equiva-
lence or ﬁbration, respectively, for every A∈Σ. We call this the G-globalprojective
levelmodelstructure and its weak equivalences the G-globallevelweakequivalences .
It is proper, simplicial, combinatorial with generating co ﬁbrations
{Σ(A,–)∧HG+∧(∂∆n֒→∆n)+:A∈Σ,H∈GΣA,G,n≥0},
and ﬁltered colimits in it are homotopical. /squareGLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 13
Proposition 1.35. There is a unique model structure on G-Spectra in which a
map is a weak equivalence or ﬁbration if and only if f(A)is a weak equivalence
or ﬁbration, respectively, in the injectiveGΣA,G-model structure. We call this the
G-global ﬂat level model structure ; its weak equivalences are precisely the G-global
level weak equivalences and its coﬁbrations are the ﬂat coﬁb rations. This model
structure is proper, simplicial, combinatorial with gener ating coﬁbrations
{Σ(A,–)∧HG+∧(∂∆n֒→∆n)+:A∈Σ,H⊂ΣA×G,n≥0},
and ﬁltered colimits in it are homotopical. /square
Warning 1.36.Beware that the notion of G-global level weak equivalence diﬀers
from theG-equivariant level weak equivalences : the former is a condition on the
H-ﬁxed points for H∈GΣA,Gfor varying A, while the latter is a condition for
H∈GG,ΣA.
Deﬁnition 1.37. AG-spectrumXis called aG-globalΩ-spectrum if for all ﬁnite
groupsHand all ﬁnite faithfulH-setsA⊂Bthe derived adjoint structure map
X(A)→RΩB/integerdivideAX(B)
is aGH,G-weak equivalence.
Again, for a G-spectrum that is ﬁbrant in either of the above level model struc-
tures, the derived adjoint structure map is already modelled by the ordinary one.
Deﬁnition 1.38. A mapfinG-Spectra is called a G-global weak equivalence
ifϕ∗fis anH-equivariant weak equivalence for every ﬁnite group Hand every
homomorphism ϕ:H→G.
Theorem 1.39. TheG-global projective level model structure admits a Bousﬁeld
localization with weak equivalences the G-global weak equivalences. We call this the
G-global projective model structure ; its ﬁbrant objects are precisely those G-global
Ω-spectra that are ﬁbrant in the G-global projective level model structure.
This model structure is again combinatorial (with the same g enerating coﬁbra-
tions as before), simplicial, proper, and ﬁltered colimits in it are homotopical.
Proof.See [Len20, Theorem 3.1.41 and Proposition 3.1.47]. /square
Theorem 1.40. TheG-global ﬂat level model structure admits a Bousﬁeld local-
ization with weak equivalences the G-global weak equivalences. We call this the G-
global ﬂat model structure ; its ﬁbrant objects are precisely those G-globalΩ-spectra
that are ﬁbrant in the G-global ﬂat level model structure.
This model structure is again combinatorial (with the same g enerating coﬁbra-
tions as before), simplicial, proper, and ﬁltered colimits in it are homotopical.
Proof.See [Len20, Theorem 3.1.40 and Proposition 3.1.47]. /square
Remark 1.41.ForG= 1 the above two model structures agree and recover Haus-
mann’sglobal model structure [Hau19, Theorem 2.18].
Again, there is also an injective version of the above model structu res:
Theorem 1.42. There is a unique model structure on G-Spectra with weak equiv-
alences the G-global weak equivalences and coﬁbrations the injective co ﬁbrations.
We call this the G-global injective model structure . It is combinatorial, simplicial,
proper, and ﬁltered colimits in it are homotopical.
Proof.See [Len20, Corollary 3.1.46]. /square14 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
1.3.2.Change of group adjunctions. As promised (and unlike their equivariant
counterparts), these model structures behave nicely under ch anging the group:
Proposition 1.43. Letα:G→G′be any homomorphism. Then the restriction
α∗:G′-Spectra→G-Spectra is homotopical and we have Quillen adjunctions
α!:G-SpectraG-gl. proj.⇄G′-SpectraG′-gl. proj.:α∗
α∗:G′-SpectraG′-gl. ﬂat⇄G-SpectraG-gl. ﬂat:α∗
α∗:G′-SpectraG′-gl. inj.⇄G-SpectraG-gl. inj.:α∗.
Proof.Everything except for the statement about the injective model s tructures
appears in [Len20, Lemmas 3.1.49 and 3.1.50]. For the ﬁnal statement , it then only
remains to show that α∗preserves injective coﬁbrations, which is immediate from
the deﬁnition. /square
Proposition 1.44. Letα:G→G′be aninjective homomorphism. Then we also
have Quillen adjunctions
α∗:G′-SpectraG′-gl. proj.⇄G-SpectraG-gl. proj.:α∗
α!:G-SpectraG-gl. ﬂat⇄G′-SpectraG′-gl. ﬂat:α∗
α!:G-SpectraG-gl. inj.⇄G′-SpectraG′-gl. inj.:α∗.
Proof.The latter two statements are [Len20, Propositions 3.1.52 and 3.1.53 ]. For
the ﬁrst statement it then only remains (as α∗is homotopical) that α∗sends acyclic
ﬁbrations of the G-global projective (level) model structure to acyclic ﬁbrations in
theG-global projective (level) model structure. Using that acyclic ﬁbr ations are
deﬁned levelwise and adjoining, this amounts to saying that
(ΣA×α)∗:(ΣA×G′)-SSetGΣA,G′→(ΣA×G)-SSetGΣA,G
preservescoﬁbrationsfor everyﬁnite set A. This is immediate fromLemma 1.5. /square
Again, suitably free quotients are homotopical in our setting:
Proposition 1.45. Letα:G→G′be any homomorphism, and let f:X→Ybe
aG-global weak equivalence in G-Spectra such that ker(α)acts levelwise freely on
XandYoutside the basepoint. Then α!fis aG′-global weak equivalence.
Proof.See [Len20, Proposition 3.1.54]. /square
1.3.3.The smash product. Theusualsmashproductofsymmetricspectragivesusa
smash product on G-Spectra by pulling through the G-actions. This is compatible
with the above model structures:
Theorem 1.46. The smash product deﬁnes left Quillen bifunctors
G-SpectraG-global ﬂat×G-SpectraG-global ﬂat→G-SpectraG-global ﬂat
G-SpectraG-global proj.×G-SpectraG-global ﬂat→G-SpectraG-global proj.
Note that in the second adjunction, indeed only oneof the input factors is
equipped with the projective model structure (the correspondin g statement where
both factors are equipped with the projective model structures follows immedi-
ately).
Proof.See [Len20, Propositions 3.1.63 and 3.1.64]. /square
In particular, smashing with a ﬁxed ﬂat G-spectrum is left Quillen for either
of the above model structures, so it preserves weak equivalence s between coﬁbrant
objects by Ken Brown’s Lemma. The following (easy) G-global analogue of the
equivariant Flatness Theorem [Hau17, Proposition 6.2] strengthens this result:GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 15
Proposition 1.47. (1)LetXbe anyG-spectrum. Then X∧–preservesG-
global weak equivalences between ﬂatG-spectra.
(2)LetXbe aﬂatG-spectrum. Then X∧–preservesG-global weak equiva-
lences.
Proof.See [Len20, Proposition 3.1.62]. /square
1.3.4.Relation to stable equivariant homotopy theory. On the pointset level, G-
global and G-equivariant spectra are the same objects, and every G-global weak
equivalence is in particular a G-equivariant weak equivalence. Thus, the identity of
G-Spectra descendstoexhibit the G-equivariantstable homotopycategoryasalo-
calization of the G-global one. This localization admits both adjoints (fully faithful
for formal reasons), which has the following model categorical ma nifestation:
Proposition 1.48. The adjunctions
id:G-SpectraG-equivariant projective ⇄G-SpectraG-global ﬂat :id
id:G-SpectraG-global ﬂat ⇄G-SpectraG-equivariant ﬂat :id
are Quillen adjunctions.
Proof.See [Len20, Proposition 3.3.1 and Corollary 3.3.3]. /square
1.3.5.Suspension spectra. Finally, we come to the relation between unstable and
stableG-global homotopy theory:
Construction 1.49.LetXbe anI-simplicial set (or an I-simplicial set). We deﬁne
a symmetric spectrum Σ•
+Xvia (Σ•
+X)(A) =SA∧X(A)+; ifi:A→Bis an
injection of ﬁnite sets, then the structure map is given by
SB/integerdividei(A)∧(SA∧X(A)+)∼=SB∧X(A)+SB∧X(i)+−−−−−−−→SB∧X(B)+
wheretheunlabelledisomorphismisinducedby i. Thisbecomesanenrichedfunctor
inXas follows: given a map f:X×∆n→YofI-simplicial sets (or I-simplicial
sets), we have a map (Σ•
+X)∧∆n
+→Σ•
+Yof symmetric spectra given in degree A
by
(SA∧X(A)+)∧∆n
+∼=SA∧(X(A)×∆n)+SA∧fA−−−−−→SA∧Y(A)+
where the unlabelled isomorphism is the obvious one. We can then lift th is to a
functor
(1.1) Σ•
+:G-I-SSet→G-Spectra
by pulling through the G-actions.
Proposition 1.50. The functor (1.1)admits a simplicial right adjoint Ω•. We
have Quillen adjunctions
Σ•
+:G-I-SSetG-gl. proj.⇄G-SpectraG-gl. proj.:Ω•
Σ•
+:G-I-SSetG-gl. inj.⇄G-SpectraG-gl. inj.:Ω•,
and in particular Σ•
+is homotopical.
Beware that [Len20] uses Ω•for the corresponding right adjoint in I-simplicial
sets instead and introduces more complicated notation for the abo ve right adjoint
inI-simplicial sets. As we will only need the latter, we have decided to cha nge
notation here.
Proof.See [Len20, Corollary 3.2.6 and Remark 3.2.7]. /square16 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Remark 1.51.We brieﬂy remark on the above right adjoint. As a functor from
I-SSet, Σ•
+has a left adjoint ω•deﬁned via ( ω•X)(A) = ΩAX(A) with the ev-
ident functoriality in each variable. The functor Ω•is accordingly obtained by
postcomposing ω•with the right adjoint I-SSet→I-SSetof the forgetful func-
tor, and this as usual gives the right adjoint for general Gby pulling through the
action. As the forgetful functor G-I-SSet→G-I-SSetis the left half of a Quillen
equivalence for the projective G-global model structures [Len20, Theorem 1.4.49],
we obtain a natural G-global level weak equivalence between the restriction of
G-SpectraΩ•
−−→G-I-SSetforget−−−→G-I-SSet
to projectively ﬁbrant objects and the corresponding restrictio n ofω•; this is all we
will need about Ω•below.
2.Global model categories
In this section, we introduce the framework of global model categories which will
then in particular allow us later to express the universal property o f the passage
from global spaces to global spectra.
2.1.Preglobal model categories. Webeginbydescribingaslightlymoregeneral
notion:
Deﬁnition 2.1. Apreglobal model category consists of a locally presentable cate-
goryC, which is enriched, tensored, and cotensored over SSet, together with two
model structures on the category G-CofG-objects in Cfor each ﬁnite group G,
called the projective andﬂatG-global model structures , such that the following
conditions are satisﬁed:
(1) The projective and the ﬂat G-global model structure have the same weak
equivalences (which we call the G-global weak equivalences ) and the adjunc-
tion id:G-Cproj⇄G-Cﬂat:id is a Quillen adjunction (i.e. every projective
coﬁbration is also a ﬂat coﬁbration, or equivalently every ﬁbration o f the
ﬂat model structure is also a ﬁbration in the projective one).
(2) Both the projective and the ﬂat model structure on G-Care left proper,
combinatorial, and simplicial.
(3) For every homomorphism α:H→Gof ﬁnite groups the restriction functor
α∗:G-C→H-Cpreserves weak equivalences, ﬂat coﬁbrations, and projec-
tive ﬁbrations. Moreover, if αis injective, then α∗also preserves projective
coﬁbrations and ﬂat ﬁbrations.
In particular, α∗is always left Quillen for the ﬂat model structures and
right Quillen for the projective ones; if αis injective, then α∗is also right
Quillen forthe ﬂat model structuresand left Quillen for the project iveones.
Example 2.2.LetC=I-SSet. For every ﬁnite group G, we can equip G-I-SSet
with theG-global model structure and the injectiveG-global model structure as
projective and ﬂat model structures, respectively, and these a re left proper, combi-
natorial, and simplicial (Theorems 1.28 and 1.29). Propositions 1.31 an d 1.32 then
show that this yields a preglobal model category, which we denote b ySand call
thepreglobal model category of global spaces .
Example 2.3.LetC=Spectra be the category of symmetric spectra. For every
ﬁniteG, we can equip G-Spectra with the projective and injective G-global model
structure. Propositions 1.43 and 1.44 then show that this yields a pr eglobal model
category Sp, which we call the preglobal model category of global spectra .GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 17
Remark 2.4.By the same argument we could have used the ﬂatinstead of the
injective model structures to yield another preglobal model category (wh ich is the
motivation for the above terminology). However, for now the abov e choices will
be more convenient; later, when we consider algebraic structures on global spectra,
we will see a return of the ﬂat model structures (or more precisely their ‘positive’
cousins).
Non-example 2.5.Ifweinsteadconsiderthe G-equivariant projectiveandﬂatmodel
structures from Theorem 1.14, this does notmakeSpectra into a preglobal model
category: for example, the restriction α∗along any non-injective homomorphism α
does not preserve equivariant stable weak equivalences, and it is no t right Quillen
for the equivariant projective model structures.
We emphasize that this should not be seen as some pointset level art ifact—
instead, it is a model categorical manifestation of the fact that th e left derived
functorLα∗does not admit a left adjoint [CLL23b, Warning 9.8]. In the alter-
native higher categorical framework of [CLL23a, CLL23b] this lea ds to the global
∞-category of equivariant spectra not being ‘globally presentable,’ b ut only ‘equiv-
ariantly presentable.’
Example 2.6.LetCbeapreglobalmodelcategoryandlet Gbeaﬁnite group. Then
we have a preglobal model category G-Cwith underlying category G-Cand with
the model structures on G′-(G-C) transported from ( G′×G)-Calong the evident
isomorphism of categories. In particular, specializing to the previou s examples we
get preglobal model categories of G-global spaces and of G-global spectra.
Example 2.7.Finally, we introduce a more exotic example. Let Fbe aglobal
family, i.e. a non-empty collection of ﬁnite groups closed under subquotien ts (hence
in particular under isomorphisms). We make E:=SSetinto a preglobal model
category as follows: for every ﬁnite group G, we write G∩Ffor the family of
subgroups of Gthat belong toF, and we equip G-SSetwith the (G∩F)-model
structure and the injective ( G∩F)-model structure, respectively.
If nowα:G→G′is any group homomorphism, then α∗clearly preserves in-
jective coﬁbrations, and it preserves weak equivalences and proj ective ﬁbrations as
(α∗X)H=Xα(H)andα(H) is a quotient of H. Moreover, if αis injective, then α∗
also preservesprojective coﬁbrations as for any G′-simplicial set Xand any simplex
xthe isotropy groups satisfy Iso α∗X(x) =α−1(IsoX(x)), which is isomorphic to a
subgroup of Iso X(x). Finally, α!always preserves injective coﬁbrations (as quo-
tients by group actions preserve injections of sets), and if αis injective, then this
moreoversends ( G∩F)-weak equivalences to ( G′∩F)-weak equivalences by [Len20,
Proposition 1.1.18] (for M= 1), so it is left Quillen for the injective equivariant
model structures as claimed.
We call the resulting preglobal model category EFthepreglobal model category
ofF-equivariant spaces (the reader is invited to choose for themselves whether E
is an abbreviation for ‘equivariant’ or ‘exotic’).
The simplicial enrichment, tensoring, and cotensoring of CmakeG-Cnot only
enriched, tensored, and cotensored over SSetbut over all of G-SSet: the tensoring
and cotensoring are just given by equipping the non-equivariant te nsoring or coten-
soring with the diagonal and conjugation G-action, and the enrichment is given by
taking the mapping space in C(i.e. without regards to G-actions) and equipping it
with the conjugation G-action. In the same way, we obtain for any ﬁnite group H
a functor –×–:(G×H)-SSet×G-C→(G×H)-Cgeneralizing the tensoring.18 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Lemma 2.8. LetG,Hbe ﬁnite groups. Then the above functors
(G×H)-SSetGG,H×G-Cproj→(G×H)-Cproj
(G×H)-SSet×G-Cﬂat→(G×H)-Cﬂat
are left Quillen bifunctors.
In particular, specializing to H= 1, both the projective and ﬂat model structure
onG-Care enriched in the model categorical sense over G-SSetwith the usual
equivariant model structure.
Proof.Let us consider the case of the projective model structures ﬁrs t. By adjoint-
ness, it is enough to show that
G-Cop
proj×(G×H)-Cproj→(G×H)-SSetGG,H
(X,Y)/m⊣pst≀→maps(triv HX,Y)
is a right Quillen bifunctor. By deﬁnition of the model structure on th e right this
amounts to saying that for every K⊂Gandϕ:K→Hthe functor ( X,Y)/m⊣pst≀→
mapsK(i∗X,(i,ϕ)∗Y) toSSetis a right Quillen bifunctor, where i:K ֒→Gis
the inclusion. However, as ( i,ϕ)∗is right Quillen and i∗is left Quillen for the
projective model structures, this follows at once from the fact t hatK-Cprojis a
simplicial model category.
For the ﬂat model structures, we observe that triv H:G-Cﬂat→(G×H)-Cﬂatis
left Quillen. Replacing GbyG×Hif necessary, we may therefore assume without
loss of generality that H= 1. However, in this case we are similarly reduced by
adjointness to proving that X,Y/m⊣pst≀→mapsK(X,Y) is a right Quillen bifunctor for
any subgroup K⊂G. This in turns follows again from the fact that the restriction
G-Cﬂat→K-Cﬂatis both left and right Quillen and that K-Cﬂatis simplicial. /square
2.2.Global model categories. In order to support a good theory of genuine sta-
bilizations we will need one extra condition in addition to the axioms of a preglobal
model category. To motivate this we ﬁrst recall:
Lemma 2.9. Let
(2.1)A B
C Dqg
p
f
be a pullback square of groups such that p(whence also q) is surjective, and let C
be a complete category. Then the Beck-Chevalley transforma tion
A-CB-C
C-CD-Cq∗⇒g∗
p∗
f∗
(i.e. the canonical mate
f∗p∗η− →q∗q∗f∗p∗=q∗g∗p∗p∗ǫ− →q∗g∗
of the identity transformation) is an isomorphism.
Proof.This is well-known (see e.g. [Joy08, Proposition 11.6] for a result in muc h
greater generality), but also easy enough to prove directly: if X∈B-C, then
f∗p∗X=Xkerpas objects of C, whileq∗g∗X= (g∗X)kerq, and the Beck-Chevalley
transformation is the unique map over X. The claim follows as g(kerq) = kerpby
virtue of (2 .1) being a pullback. /squareGLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 19
Proposition 2.10. LetCbe a preglobal model category. Then the following are
equivalent:
(1)For every pullback square (2.1)of ﬁnite groups in which all maps are sur-
jections, the Beck-Chevalley transformation f∗◦Rp∗⇒Rq∗◦g∗is an
isomorphism in Ho(C-C).
(2)For every pullback square (2.1)of ﬁnite groups and surjections, the Beck-
Chevalley transformation Lg!◦q∗⇒p∗◦Lf!is an isomorphism in Ho(B-C).
(3)For every diagram
(2.2) C A Bq g
of ﬁnite groups such that kerq∩kerg= 1, every ﬁbrant X∈B-Cﬂat, and
some (hence any) ﬁbrant replacement g∗X→YinA-Cﬂatthe induced map
q∗g∗X→q∗Yis aC-global weak equivalence.
(4)For every diagram (2.2), every coﬁbrant X∈C-Cproj, and some (hence
any) coﬁbrant replacement Y→q∗XinA-Cprojthe induced map g!Y→
g!q∗Xis aB-global weak equivalence.
Deﬁnition 2.11. A preglobal model category satisfying the equivalent conditions
of Proposition 2.10 is called a global model category .
Proof of Proposition 2.10. The equivalence (1) ⇔(2) follows at once from the fact
that the two maps in question are total mates of each other. We will now show
that (1)⇔(3); the argument that (2) ⇔(4) is then analogous.
For the proof of (3) ⇒(1) we consider a pullback as in (2 .1) and we ﬁx a ﬁbrant
objectX∈B-Cﬂatand a ﬁbrant replacement functor ι: id⇒PforA-Cﬂat. By
naturality of ι, we then have a commutative diagram
f∗p∗X q ∗q∗f∗p∗X q ∗g∗p∗p∗X q ∗g∗X
q∗Pq∗f∗p∗X q ∗Pg∗p∗p∗X q ∗Pg∗Xη
q∗ιq∗g∗ǫ
q∗ι q∗ι
q∗Pg∗ǫ
inC-C. Here the top horizontal composite is an isomorphism by the previou s
lemma; moreover, the bottom composite f∗p∗X→q∗Pg∗Xrepresents the Beck-
Chevalley transformation f∗Rp∗⇒Rq∗g∗, so this is the map we want to be a
C-global weak equivalence. However, the right hand vertical map is a C-global
weak equivalence by assumption, so the claim follows by 2-out-of-3.
Conversely, for the proof of (1) ⇒(3) we ﬁrst observe that the above shows
that for any pullback square (2 .1) of surjections and any ﬁbrant X∈B-Cﬂatthe
canonical map q∗g∗X→Rq∗g∗Xis aC-global weak equivalence.
We will now use this to prove the special case of (3) in which both qandgare
surjective: namely, we set D=A/ker(g)ker(q) and we deﬁne p:B→Das the
composite
Bg−1
−−→∼=A/ker(q)։A/ker(g)ker(q) =D
and analogously we deﬁne a surjective homomorphism f:C→D. We now claim
that the commutative square
A B
C Dqg
p
f
of surjections is a pullback square; with this established, the above observation will
then complete the proof of the special case.20 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
To prove that this is indeed a pullback, ﬁrst note that ( g,q):A→B×DC⊂
B×Cis injective as ker( g,q) = ker(g)∩ker(q) = 1. Thus, it only remains to prove
surjectivity. For this we let ( b,c)∈B×Cwithp(b) =f(c); thus, ifa∈Awith
g(a) =b, thenfq(a) =pg(a) =p(b) =f(c), soc=q(a)¯xfor some ¯x∈ker(f). By
surjectivityof q, wecanthen write c=q(ax)forsomex∈q−1(ker(f)) = ker(g); but
we also have g(ax) =g(a)g(x) =b, soaxis the desired preimage of ( b,c)∈B×DC.
Now we can prove the general case of (3): we factor qas a surjection q′:A→C′
followed by an injection i:C′→C, and we factor gas a surjection g′:A→B′
followed by an injection j:B′→B. If nowX∈B-Cﬂatis ﬁbrant, then also
j∗X∈B′-Cﬂatis ﬁbrant as jis injective. Thus, if g∗X= (g′)∗j∗X→Yis any
ﬁbrant replacement in A-Cﬂat, then applying the above special case to j∗Xshows
thatq′
∗g∗X→q′
∗Yis aC′-global weak equivalence. The right hand side is ﬁbrant
inC′-Cﬂat, and we claim that the left hand side is at least ﬁbrant in C′-Cproj; as
i∗is right Quillen for the projective model structures by injectivity, K en Brown’s
Lemma will then show that also the induced map i∗q′
∗g∗X→i∗q′
∗Yis aC-global
weak equivalence, and as this agrees with q∗g∗X→q∗Yup to conjugation by
isomorphisms, this will then complete the proof of the proposition.
To prove the claim, we note that ker( g′)∩ker(q′) = ker(g)∩ker(q) = 1, so the
above argument yields a pullback square
A B′
C′D′g′
q′f′
p′
of ﬁnite groups and surjections. Thus, another application of Lem ma 2.9 shows
q′
∗g∗X=q′
∗(g′)∗i∗X∼=(p′)∗f′
∗i∗X. However, f′
∗i∗Xis ﬁbrant in D′-Cﬂat, hence in
particular in D′-Cproj, so (p′)∗f′
∗i∗Xis ﬁbrant in C′-Cprojas desired. /square
Remark 2.12.The ﬁrst two formulations above are the ‘morally correct ones,’ and
they correspond to the notions of global continuity andglobal cocontinuity in pa-
rameterized higher category theory [BDG+16, MW21]. In contrast to that, Con-
dition (3) is the statement we will actually use later (namely, in the pro of of The-
orem 3.28), while the ﬁnal formulation is the one that is easiest to che ck in our
examples below. Intuitively, we can think of a projectively coﬁbrant object in
G-Cas a ﬂat one for which the G-action is ‘free’ in some sense (cf. for example
Lemma 2.8); the ﬁnal formulation of the above axiom can then be view ed as a very
abstract incarnation of the slogan that ‘free quotients are homot opical.’
Remark 2.13.In the above proof we have seen how a pointset level condition
(certain ﬁbrant replacements being sent to weak equivalences) en codes a Beck-
Chevalley condition for derived functors. Similarly, the pointset leve l conditions for
a preglobal model category can be seen to encode various compat ibility conditions
between the derived functors. As a concrete example, consider a n injective homo-
morphismi:H→Gand a surjection p:K→G. If we write j:p−1(H)→Kand
q:p−1(H)→Hfor the restricted maps, then Lemma 2.9 shows after dualizing that
j!q∗∼=p∗i!. As all functors are left Quillen for the ﬂat model structures (usin g that
iandjare injective), this then induces an equivalence Lj!q∗∼=p∗Li!of derived
functors. Similarly, one can give a ‘Mackey double coset formula’ exp ressingk∗Li!
for injective kas a (derived) coproduct of maps of the form Lℓ!r∗, again coming
from an analogous formula for non-derived functors.
Note that conversely this type of argument tells us that we cannot get away
with a single model structure for each G-Cfor which restrictions are always both
left and right Quillen. For example, for any Gthe projection s:G→1 satisﬁesGLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 21
s!s∗∼=id, so if both s!ands∗were left Quillen we would deduce Ls!s∗∼=id. This
is however not true for G-global spaces: we have Ls!s∗(∗)∼=I(G,–)/G, whose
underlying non-equivariant space is a K(G,1).
Example 2.14.Both SandSpare global model categories: this follows from
Propositions 1.33 and 1.45, respectively: if X∈B-Cis projectively coﬁbrant, then
Bacts freely on it, hence ker( q) acts freely on g∗Xasgis injective when restricted
to ker(q).
Example 2.15.Anyshiftofaglobalmodelcategoryisagainaglobalmodelcategor y.
This follows immediately from the third formulation.
Non-example 2.16.Letpbe a prime and let Fbe a global family of groups con-
tainingZ/pbut notZ/p×Z/p, for example the global family of groups of order at
mostp. We claim that the preglobal model category EFfrom Example 2.7 is not
a global model category; in particular, the conditions of the above proposition are
not vacuous.
Tothisend, wewillshowthatCondition(4)isnotsatisﬁed. Weset B=C=Z/p
andA=B×Cwithqandgthe respective projections. Then the ( B∩F)-model
structure is just the Aℓℓ-model structure, and in particular X=∗is coﬁbrant in
it. We now let Y→∗=g∗(∗) be a coﬁbrant replacement in the ( A∩F)-model
structure, and we claim that q!(Y) =Y/Bhas non-connected C-ﬁxed points, so it
is in particularly not weakly equivalent to q!(∗) =∗.
For this, let us observe that the isotropy Iσof a simplex σofYonly depends
on the class [ σ] inY/B(asAis abelian). Moreover, [ σ] isC-ﬁxed if and only if
Iσcontains an element of the form ( b,1) withb∈Barbitrary. Conversely, for
anyb∈Bthere exists a vertex ybofYwithIyb∋(b,1): namely, ( b,1) generates
a subgroup K⊂Aisomorphic to Z/p, soYKis weakly contractible, hence in
particular non-empty.
We now claim that [ y0] and [y1] cannot be joined by a sequence of C-ﬁxed edges
inY/B. For this, let us consider any C-ﬁxed edge [ e] with vertices [ x],[y]. Then
Ix⊃Ie⊂Iy. On the other hand, Ie/ne}⊣ti≀nsl⊣sh= 1 as [e] isC-ﬁxed, while Ix,Iy/ne}⊣ti≀nsl⊣sh=Aas
YA=∅sinceA /∈F. Thus, it follows for cardinality reasons that all of the above
inclusions are equalities, and in particular Ix=Iy.
Now assume [ y0] and [y1] were actually connected by a sequence of C-ﬁxed
edges. Then it would follow from the above by induction that Iy0=Iy1, whence
in particular (0 ,1),(1,1)∈Iy0. However, then Iy0=Awhich is impossible by the
same argument as above.
2.3.Global Quillen adjunctions. Finally, let us discuss the appropriate notion
of Quillen adjunctions in this context:
Deﬁnition 2.17. LetC,Dbe preglobal model categories. A global Quillen ad-
junctionF:C⇄D:Uis a simplicially enriched adjunction F:C⇄D:Uof
the underlying categories such that for every ﬁnite group Gthe induced adjunction
G-C⇄G-Dis a Quillen adjunction for both model structures.
We callF⊣Gaglobal Quillen equivalence if in addition each G-C⇄G-Dis
a Quillen equivalence (for the projective or, equivalently, for the ﬂa t model struc-
tures).
Example 2.18.The suspension-loop adjunction Σ•
+:I-SSet⇄Spectra :Ω•de-
ﬁnes a global Quillen adjunction S⇄Sp, see Proposition 1.50.
Lemma 2.19. LetF:C⇄D:Ube a global Quillen equivalence of preglobal model
categories. Then Cis a global model category if and only if Dis so.22 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Proof.Associated to any pullback square (2 .1) of ﬁnite groups and surjective maps,
we obtain a coherent cube
Ho(A-C) Ho( B-C)
Ho(A-D) Ho( B-D)
Ho(C-C) Ho( D-C)
Ho(C-D) Ho( D-D)q∗g∗
p∗g∗
f∗
q∗
f∗p∗
where all front-to-back maps are given by RU, the front and back face commute
strictly, and the remaining squares are ﬁlled by the natural isomorp hisms coming
from the fact that all functors are right Quillen for the projective model structures
and commute strictly on the pointset level.
Passing to canonical mates with respect to the adjunctions q∗⊣Rq∗andp∗⊣
Rp∗we then get a coherent cube
Ho(A-C) Ho( B-C)
Ho(A-D) Ho( B-D)
Ho(C-C) Ho( D-C)
Ho(C-D) Ho( D-D)Rq∗g∗
Rp∗
Rq∗g∗
f∗
f∗Rp∗
in which the transformations in the top, bottom, left, and right fac e are isomor-
phisms (the latter two use that RUis an equivalence). Using again that all front-
to-back maps are equivalences, it follows that the natural transf ormation ﬁlling the
front square is an isomorphism if and only if the one ﬁlling the back squa re is so,
which immediately yields the claim. /square
3.Global stability
In this section we will introduce a notion of genuine stability for global model
categories and construct universal stabilizations in this setting.
3.1.Pointed (pre)global model categories. As usual, in order to talk about
stability we ﬁrst have to talk about pointedness:
Deﬁnition 3.1. A preglobal model category Cis called pointedif the underlying
category Cis pointed in the usual sense, i.e. has a zero object.
Remark 3.2.Recall [Hir03, Hir15] that for a model category Cthe category C∗of
pointed objects (i.e. the slice ∗/Cunder our favourite terminal object) carries a
model structure in which a map is a weak equivalence, ﬁbration, or co ﬁbration, if
and only if it is so in C. IfCis left proper, right proper, orcombinatorial, then so is
C∗, with generating (acyclic) coﬁbrations in the latter case being given by applying
the left adjoint (–) += (–)∐∗:C→C∗to a set of generating (acyclic) coﬁbrations
ofC. Moreover, if Cis simplicial, then C∗is enriched as a model category over
SSet∗(hence in particular over SSet) by taking the basepoints of the mapping
spaces to be the zero maps, while the tensoring K∧Xis induced by the tensoring
K×XinCoverSSetby collapsing∗×X∐K×∗. Analogously, we again get
–∧–:(G×H)-SSet∗×G-C∗→(G×H)-C∗.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 23
If nowF:C⇄D:Uis a Quillen adjunction, then Ulifts toU∗:D∗→C∗
(as it preserves terminal objects); Fdoes not necessarily lift directly, but we get
C∗→F(∗)/D, which we can postcompose with pushforward along the unique
mapF(∗)→∗to get a functor F∗:C∗→D∗left adjoint to U∗. As ﬁbrations and
weak equivalences are deﬁned in the underlying categories, we immed iately see that
F∗⊣U∗is a Quillen adjunction again.
In particular, given a preglobal model category Cwe can make the category
C∗into a preglobal model category C∗this way, coming with a global Quillen
adjunction (–) +:C⇄C∗:forget. IfCis actually a global model category, then
so isC∗(see the third formulation in Proposition 2.10). Moreover, if
(3.1) F:C⇄D:U
is a global Quillen adjunction, then F∗⊣U∗deﬁnes a global Quillen adjunction
F∗⊣U∗.
Lemma 3.3. If(3.1)is a global Quillen equivalence , then so is the induced global
Quillen adjunction F∗⊣U∗.
Proof.We prove more generally that for any Quillen equivalence L:A⇄B:Rof
left proper model categories the induced Quillen adjunction L∗⊣R∗is a Quillen
equivalence. This is well-known, and can also be deduced with a bit of wo rk from
[Rez02, Proposition 2.7], but we do not know of an explicit reference in the litera-
ture, so we provide a direct argument.
For this, we ﬁrst observe that R∗still reﬂects weak equivalences between ﬁbrant
objects (as everything is deﬁned in underlying categories), i.e. its r ight derived
functor is conservative. To complete the proof it suﬃces that for every coﬁbration
∗→Xand some (hence any) ﬁbrant replacement L∗(∗→X)→Zthe induced
mapX→R∗L∗(∗→X)→RZinCis a weak equivalence.
Forthis, wepickacoﬁbrantreplacement Q→∗. Factoringtheinducedmap Q→
∗→Xas a coﬁbration followed by a weak equivalence we then get a commuta tive
diagram
(3.2)Q Y
∗X
in whichboth verticalmapsareweakequivalences. In particular,th is isahomotopy
pushout, i.e. (as Q→Yis a coﬁbration), the induced map Y/Q→Xis a weak
equivalence of coﬁbrant objects in A∗. It therefore suﬃces to prove the claim for
Y/Qinstead ofX, i.e. we may assume without loss of generality that (3 .2) is an
honestpushout. We then consider the diagram
LQ LY
L∗LX
∗L∗X
where the upper half is the image of (3 .2) underL(whence a pushout) and the
lower half is the pushout deﬁning L∗(∗→X); in particular, also the total rectangle
is a pushout. As L(Q→Y) is a coﬁbration ( Lbeing left Quillen) and the left
hand vertical map is a weak equivalence, we conclude that the right h and vertical
compositeLY→L∗(∗→X) is a weak equivalence because Dis left proper. Thus,
ifL∗(∗→X)→Zis any ﬁbrant replacement (in C∗), then the composite LY→Z24 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
is a ﬁbrant replacement (in C). We conclude that the composite Y→RLY→RZ
represents the derived unit of L⊣R(asYis coﬁbrant), so it is a weak equivalence.
The claim follows by 2-out-of-3 as the composite X→Y→RZrepresents the
derived unit for L∗⊣R∗. /square
Finally, arguing as in Remark 3.2, we deduce from Lemma 2.8:
Corollary 3.4. LetG,Hbe ﬁnite groups and let Cbe a pointed preglobal model
category. Then the smash product deﬁnes left Quillen bifunc tors
/parenleftbig
(G×H)-SSet∗/parenrightbig
GG,H×G-Cproj→(G×H)-Cproj
(G×H)-SSet∗×G-Cﬂat→(G×H)-Cﬂat.
In particular, both the projective and ﬂat model structure o nG-Care enriched as
model categories over G-SSet ∗. /square
3.2.Genuine stability. Recall from Remark 1.16 that the passage from G-spaces
toG-spectra can be understood as inverting smashing with the sphere sSAfor all
ﬁniteG-setsA. While we cannot apply this directly to the passage from global
spaces to global spectra in that way (as smashing with SAfor a non-trivial G-setA
does not make sense directly), smashing with SAmakes sense for G-globalspaces,
and following an idea of [GN15] (or more generally the philosophy of par ameterized
higher category theory) we can then try to characterize the pas sage from unstable
to stable global homotopy theory by looking more generally at what h appens in
G-global homotopy theory for all Gsimultaneously:
Deﬁnition 3.5. A global model category Cis called genuinely stable (or simply
stable) if it is pointed and the Quillen adjunction SA∧–:G-C⇄G-C:ΩAis a
Quillen equivalence for every ﬁnite group Gand every ﬁnite G-setA(for the ﬂat
or, equivalently, the projective model structures).
Note that specializing to A=∗with trivial G-action shows that each G-Cis in
particular stable in the usual sense.
Proposition 3.6. The global model category Spfrom Example 2.3 is stable.
Proof.The usual smash product of symmetric spectra deﬁnes a left Quillen bifunc-
tor
(3.3) G-SpectraG-equiv. proj.×G-SpectraG-gl. ﬂat→G-SpectraG-gl. ﬂat
by Theorem 1.46 together with Proposition 1.48, making the G-global ﬂat model
structure tensored over the G-equivariant projective one.
If nowAis any ﬁnite G-set, then Σ∞SAis coﬁbrant in the G-equivariant projec-
tive model structure, so Σ∞SA∧L– agrees with the left derived functor of SA∧–;
it therefore suﬃces to show that Σ∞SA∧L– is an autoequivalence of the G-global
stable homotopy category. But by [Hau17, Proposition 4.9] the an alogous functor
is an autoequivalence of the G-equivariant stable homotopy category, so we get a
projectively coﬁbrant G-equivariant spectrum Dtogether with a zig-zag of weak
equivalences of projectively coﬁbrant objects between D∧Σ∞SAandS. As (3.3) is
a left Quillen bifunctor, this then shows that D∧L– is the desired quasi-inverse. /square
Remark 3.7.In the above argument we crucially use that Σ∞SAis actually coﬁ-
brant in the equivariant projective model structure (and not just ﬂat); in particular,
(3.3) is not left Quillen for the G-equivariant ﬂatmodel structure. On the other
hand, we could have just as well used the G-global projective model structure in-
stead of the ﬂat one everywhere.
Lemma 3.8. LetF:C⇄D:Ube a global Quillen equivalence of pointed global
model categories. Then Cis stable if and only if Dis so.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 25
Proof.LetGbe a ﬁnite group and Aa ﬁniteG-set. AsFis a simplicial and hence
alsoSSet∗-enriched left adjoint, there is a (canonical) isomorphism ﬁlling
G-C G-C
G-D G-D,FSA∧–
F
SA∧–
and as all participating functors are left Quillen (say, for the proje ctive model
structures), this induces an isomorphism L(SA∧–)◦LF∼=LF◦L(SA∧–) of left
derived functors. The claim follows by 2-out-of-3. /square
Remark 3.9.LetCbe a stable global model category and let Gbe a ﬁnite group.
Then the shift G-Cis again stable: if G′is any ﬁnite group and Ais a ﬁniteG′-set,
then viewing it as a ( G′×G)-set with trivial G-action shows that the left Quillen
functorSA∧–:G′-G-C→G′-G-Cis a Quillen equivalence.
3.3.Spectriﬁcation. Non-equivariantly, the universal stabilization of a suitably
nice simplicial model category Ccan be computed by spectrum objects in C. In
this subsection, we introduce a reﬁnement of this construction to our framework;
the universal property will then be established in the next subsect ion.
Construction 3.10.LetCbe a pointed preglobal model category. We write Sp( C)
for the category of SSet∗-enriched functors Σ→C. A mapfin Sp( C) is called a
global level weak equivalence iff(A) is a weak equivalence in Σ A-Cfor every ﬁnite
setA. Moreover, fis called a projective global level ﬁbration orﬂat global level
ﬁbration if eachf(A) is a ﬁbration in the projective Σ A-global model structure or
ﬂat ΣA-global model structure, respectively.
More generally, if Cis an arbitrary preglobal model category, then we deﬁne
Sp(C) := Sp( C∗).
Proposition 3.11. Assume Cis pointed. The global level weak equivalences and
global projective (ﬂat) level ﬁbrations are part of a simpli cial, combinatorial, and
left proper model structure on Sp(C). We call this the global projective (ﬂat) level
model structure . A possible set of generating coﬁbrations is given by
{Σ(A,–)∧ΣAi:A∈Σ,i∈IΣA}
whereIdenotes a set of generating coﬁbrations of the projective (ﬂ at) model struc-
ture onΣA-C, and similarly a set of generating acyclic coﬁbrations is gi ven by
{Σ(A,–)∧ΣAj:A∈Σ,j∈JΣA}
for setsJΣAof generating acyclic coﬁbrations of the respective model s tructure on
ΣA-C.
HereΣ(A,–)∧ΣAfis the map obtained from the levelwise tensoring over SSet∗
by dividing out the diagonal Σ A-action.
Remark 3.12.Replacing CbyC∗we immediately get an analogous statement for
unpointed C, with generating (acyclic) coﬁbrations now of the form Σ(A,–)∧ΣAf+
for generating (acyclic) coﬁbrations fof ΣA-C.
Fortheproofofthepropositionwewillusethefollowingeasycriterio n,cf.[Sch18,
Proposition C.23] or [Hau17, Deﬁnition 2.21]:
Lemma 3.13. LetIbe a small SSet∗-enriched category, and let Cbe a locally
presentable category enriched over SSet∗. Assume we are given for each X∈Ia
combinatorial model structure on End(X)-C(the category of enriched functors from
the fullSSet∗-subcategory spanned by XtoC) with generating coﬁbrations IXand26 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
generating acyclic coﬁbrations JX, such that the following ‘consistency condition’
is satisﬁed: for every Y∈I, any relative{I(X,Y)∧End(X)j:X∈I,j∈JX}-cell
complex is a weak equivalence in End(Y)-C.
Then there is a unique model structure on the category I-Cof enriched functors
I→Cin which a map fis a weak equivalence if and only if f(X)is a weak
equivalence or ﬁbration, respectively, in the given model s tructure on End(X)-C
for allX∈I. This model structure is combinatorial with generating coﬁ brations
{I(X,–)∧End(X)i:X∈I,i∈IX}
and generating acyclic coﬁbrations
{I(X,–)∧End(X)j:X∈I,j∈JX}.
Proof.The forgetful functor I-C→/producttext
X∈IEnd(X)-Chas a left adjoint given by
F:=/coproducttext
X∈II(X,–)∧End(X)prX. We will verify the conditions of the Crans-Kan
Transfer Criterion [Hir03, Theorem 11.3.2] for this adjunction, whic h will then
providethe desired model structure and showthat it is coﬁbrantly generated(hence
combinatorial) with the above sets of generating (acyclic) coﬁbrat ions. By local
presentability, every set permits the small object argument, so w e only have to
show that every relative F(J)-cell complex is a weak equivalence where Jis a set of
generating acyclic coﬁbrations of the right hand side. But for the s tandard choice
of generating acyclic coﬁbrations this precisely amounts to the abo ve consistency
condition. /square
Proof of Proposition 3.11. Letusconsiderthecaseoftheﬂatmodelstructuresﬁrst.
To verify the above consistency condition, it suﬃces to show that f or all ﬁnite sets
A⊂Bthe map Σ(A,B)∧ΣA–: ΣA-Cﬂat→ΣB-Cﬂatis left Quillen. To this end,
we observe that we can identify Σ(A,B) with (Σ B)+∧ΣB/integerdivideASB/integerdivideAas simplicial
sets with left Σ B- and right Σ A-action, see [Hau17, proof of Proposition 2.24], so
Σ(A,B)∧ΣA– factors as the composite
ΣA-CﬂatSB/integerdivideA∧–−−−−−→ (ΣA×ΣB/integerdivideA)-Cﬂatk!−→ΣB-Cﬂat
wherek: ΣA×ΣB/integerdivideA→ΣBis the evident embedding. As kis injective, the second
arrow is left Quillen, and so is the ﬁrst one by Corollary 3.4.
The consistencycondition forthe projectivemodel structure fo llowsimmediately
from the one for the ﬂat model structure as it has fewer coﬁbrat ions and the same
weak equivalences, proving the existence of the projective level m odel structure.
As(acyclic) ﬁbrationsand the cotensoringon Sp( C)aresimply deﬁned levelwise,
we immediately see that these model structures are again simplicial. S imilarly, for
left properness it is enough to observe that all generating coﬁbra tions of either
model structure are levelwise ﬂat coﬁbrations (as Σ(A,B)∧ΣA– is left Quillen for
the ﬂat model structures by the above), so that every coﬁbrat ion in Sp( C) is in
particular a levelwise ﬂat coﬁbration. /square
Applying this to the shifts G-CofC(Example 2.6) gives us two left proper,
simplicial, andcombinatorialmodel structureson G-Sp(C) that wecallthe G-global
projective level model structure andG-global ﬂat level model structure . Their weak
equivalences and ﬁbrations are those maps fsuch thatf(A) is a weak equivalence
or ﬁbration, respectively, in the corresponding model structure on (G×ΣA)-Cfor
everyA∈Σ.
In contrast to this, the coﬁbrations are not just simply deﬁned lev elwise, but
rather in terms of a left lifting property. Nevertheless we can say s omething about
the individual levels of the above coﬁbrations; we begin with the ﬂat c ase where we
have already noticed in the above proof:GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 27
Corollary 3.14. Letfbe a coﬁbration in G-Sp(C)ﬂatand letBbe a ﬁnite set.
Thenf(B)is a coﬁbration in (G×ΣB)-Cﬂat. /square
In the projective case we get a slightly weaker statement:
Lemma 3.15. Letibe a projective coﬁbration in G-Sp(C). Theni(B)is a coﬁ-
bration inG-Cprojfor every ﬁnite G-setB.
Proof.It is enough to prove this for the generating coﬁbrations. But for any ﬁnite
setAand any (G×ΣA)-global projective coﬁbration i
(Σ(A,–)∧ΣAi)(B) = (Σ(A,B)∧i)/ΣA
andΣ(A,B)∧iis a (G×ΣA)-global projective coﬁbration by Corollary 3.4; the
claim follows as quotients preserve projective coﬁbrations. /square
Lemma 3.16. The projective and ﬂat G-global level model structures deﬁne a pre-
global model category Sp(C)level. IfCis actually a global model category, then so
isSp(C)level.
Proof.We may assume without loss of generality that Cis pointed.
By the above, both model structures are simplicial, combinatorial, a nd left
proper. Moreover, it is clear that they have the same weak equivale nces and that
every (generating) projective coﬁbration is also a ﬂat coﬁbration . Thus, it only
remains to verify the change-of-group properties.
For this let α:G→G′be any group homomorphism. Then the restriction
(α×id)∗: (G′×ΣA)-C→(G×ΣA)-Cpreserves weak equivalences and pro-
jective ﬁbrations. Thus, α∗:G′-Sp(C)→G-Sp(C) preserves level weak equiva-
lences as well as projective level ﬁbrations. Moreover, if αis injective, then each
(α×id)∗: (G′×ΣA)-C→(G×ΣA)-Calso preserves ﬂat ﬁbrations, so that α∗
preserves ﬂat level ﬁbrations.
Similarly, one shows that α∗:G-Sp(C)→G′-Sp(C) preserves acyclic ﬂat level
ﬁbrations for any α, so thatα∗preserves ﬂat level coﬁbrations, and that α∗also
preserves acyclic projective level ﬁbrations if αis injective, so that α∗preserves
projective level coﬁbrations in this case.
Altogether we have shown that Sp (C) is a preglobal model category. Now as-
sume Cis actually a global model category, let g:A→Bandq:A→Cbe
homomorphisms with ker g∩kerq= 1, letX∈B-Sp(C)ﬂat levelbe ﬁbrant, and
leti:g∗X→Ybe a ﬁbrant replacement in A-Sp(C)ﬂat level; we have to show that
q∗(i) is aC-global level weak equivalence. But for any ﬁnite set D,X(D) is ﬁ-
brant in (B×ΣD)-Cﬂatandi(D) is a ﬁbrant replacement in ( A×ΣD)-Cﬂat. Thus,
(g∗i)(D) = (g×ΣD)∗(i(D)) is a (C×ΣD)-global weak equivalence as Cis a global
model category and ker( g×id)∩ker(q×id) = 1, whence g∗iis aG-global level
weak equivalence as desired. /square
Lemma 3.17. LetF:C⇄D:Ube a global Quillen adjunction. Then also
Sp(F): Sp(C)level⇄Sp(D)level:Sp(U)
is a global Quillen adjunction. If F⊣Gis a global Quillen equivalence, then so is
Sp(F)⊣Sp(U).
Proof.By Lemma 3.3, we may assume without loss of generality that CandD
are pointed. Passing to shifts it further suﬃces to prove that Sp( F)⊣Sp(U) is
a Quillen adjunction for both level model structures and a Quillen equ ivalence if
F⊣Uis a global Quillen equivalence.
For the ﬁrst statement it is enough to observe that Sp( U) preserves (acyclic)
ﬁbrations in either model structure as they are simply deﬁned levelw ise.28 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
For the second statement, it suﬃces to prove that this is a Quillen eq uivalence
for the ﬂat model structures. But indeed, if X∈Sp(C)ﬂatis ﬂat, then X(A) is
ﬂat for every Aby Corollary 3.14; similarly, if FX→Yis a ﬁbrant replacement,
then eachFX(A)→Y(A) is a ﬁbrant replacement in Σ A-Cﬂat. Now the composite
X→UFX→UYrepresents the derived unit for Xby deﬁnition, but at the same
time eachX(A)→UY(A) represents the derived unit for Σ A-F⊣ΣA-Uby the
above, so it is a Σ A-global weak equivalence by assumption. Analogouslyone shows
that also the derived counit is a global level weak equivalence, ﬁnishing the proof
of the lemma. /square
As before, we now want to restrict to a suitable notion of Ω-spectr a via Bousﬁeld
localization.
Deﬁnition 3.18. LetCbe a preglobal model category. An object X∈Sp(C)
is called a globalΩ-spectrum if for every ﬁnite group H, every ﬁnite H-setAand
every ﬁnite H-setBthe derived adjoint structure map
(3.4) X(A)→RΩBX(A∐B)
is anH-global weak equivalence.
HerewearederivingΩBwith respectto the H-globalprojectivemodel structure;
in particular, if Xis ﬁbrant in either of the above level model structures, then (3 .4)
is already represented by the ordinary adjoint structure map. No te that there are
nofaithfulness assumptions on AandBhere.
Againwecanapplythistothe shiftsof CbyG; wewillrefertothe corresponding
objects ofG-Sp(C) asG-globalΩ-spectra.
Remark 3.19.In the deﬁnition of a G-global Ω-spectrum we can equivalently ask
for the adjoint structure map X(A)→RΩBX(A∐B) to be a (G×H)-global weak
equivalence for all ﬁnite ( G×H)-setsA,B(instead of just for H-sets). Namely, we
can simply replace HbyG×Hin the above and then restrict along the diagonal
G×H→G×H×G.
In order to construct the corresponding Bousﬁeld localizations we need some
additional notation:
Construction 3.20.As already used in the description of the generating (acyclic)
coﬁbrations, performing the tensoring over SSet∗levelwise gives us a bifunctor
(3.5) – ∧–:Spectra×C→Sp(C),
which preserves colimits in each variable separately. In particular, X∧– has a right
adjointF(X,–): Sp( C)→Cfor every spectrum X. From this, we get bifunctors
–∧–:G-Spectra×G-C→G-Sp(C) (3.6)
F:G-Spectraop×G-Sp(C)→G-C (3.7)
by pulling through the G-actions everywhere.
Lemma 3.21. The smash product (3.6)is a left Quillen bifunctor with respect to
theG-equivariant projective level model structure on G-Spectra and the projective
G-global (level) model structureselsewhere. Dually, (3.7)is a right Quillen bifunctor
for these model structures.
Proof.Again, we may assume Cto be pointed. By adjunction, it will be enough
to show that the functor
G-Cop
proj.×G-Sp(C)proj. level→G-SpectraG-equiv. proj. levelGLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 29
given by taking mapping spaces levelwise is a right Quillen bifunctor. As a lso the
weak equivalences and ﬁbrations are deﬁned levelwise, it suﬃces to s how that
maps:G-Cop
proj.×(G×ΣA)-Cproj.→/parenleftbig
(G×ΣA)-SSet∗/parenrightbig
GG,ΣA-equiv.
is a right Quillen bifunctor for every ﬁnite set A. By another adjointness argument,
this then follows from Corollary 3.4. /square
Proposition 3.22. TheG-global projective level model structure on G-Sp(C)ad-
mits a Bousﬁeld localization whose ﬁbrant objects are preci sely theG-globally pro-
jectively level ﬁbrant G-globalΩ-spectra. We call the resulting model structure the
G-global projective model structure . It is again left proper, combinatorial, and
simplicial.
Proof.As before we may assume that Cis pointed, and replacing CbyG-Cif
necessary, it suﬃces to prove this for G= 1.
As Sp( C)proj. level is left proper, combinatorial, and simplicial, it will be enough
by the localization machinery of [Lur09, Proposition A.3.7.3] to give a se tSof
coﬁbrations such that a ﬁbrant X∈Sp(C)proj. level is a global Ω-spectrum if and
only if for every f∈Sthe restriction maps( f,X) is an acyclic Kan ﬁbration.
For this we recall from Remark 1.15 for any ﬁnite group Hand any ﬁnite H-
setsA,Bthe mapλH,A,B:SB∧Σ(A∐B,–)→Σ(A,–) corepresenting X(A)H→
(ΩBX(A∐B))Handitsfactorization λH,A,B=ρH,A,BκH,A,BintoanH-equivariant
projective coﬁbration followed by a level weak equivalence. Moreov er, let us pick
for each ﬁnite group Ha setIHof generating coﬁbrations of H-Cproj. We now
claim that the set
(3.8) S:={κH,A,B /squareHi:H,A,B,i∈IH}
of (balanced) pushout products, where Hruns through all ﬁnite groups and Aand
Bthrough ﬁnite H-sets, has the desired properties.
To this end we ﬁrst observe that each ordinary pushout product κH,A,B /squareiis
a coﬁbration in H-Sp(C)proj. level by Lemma 3.21, so that κH,A,B /squareHiis indeed a
projective coﬁbration in Sp( C) as Sp(C)levelis a preglobal model category. Now
by adjointness maps( κH,A,B /squareHi,X) is an acyclic Kan ﬁbration if and only if the
mapF(κH,A,B,trivHX) has the right lifting property in H-Cagainst all maps of
the formi/square(∂∆n֒→∆n)+. Lettingivary, we conclude (as on the one hand H-C
is tensored over SSetand as on the other the pushout product with ( ∂∆0→∆0)+
gives back the original map up to isomorphism) that maps( κH,A,B /squareHi,X) is an
acyclic Kan ﬁbration for all i∈IHif and only if F(κH,A,B,trivHX) is an acyclic
ﬁbration in H-Cproj. On the other hand, F(κH,A,B,trivHX) is always a ﬁbration
becauseFis a right Quillen bifunctor (Lemma 3.21 again) and Xwas assumed
to be projectively level ﬁbrant (so that triv HXisH-globally projectively level
ﬁbrant). Thus, maps( κH,A,B /squareHi,X) is an acyclic ﬁbration for all iif and only
ifF(κH,A,B,trivHX) is a weak equivalence in H-C. However, ρH,A,Bis anH-
equivariant level weak equivalence between projectively coﬁbrant H-equivariant
spectra (as κH,A,Bis a coﬁbration and the source and target of λH,A,Bwere coﬁ-
brant), so Ken Brown’s Lemma shows that F(ρH,A,B,trivHX) is anH-global weak
equivalence. Thus, F(λH,A,B,trivHX) is anH-global weak equivalence if and only
ifF(κH,A,B,trivHX) is so. Since F(λH,A,B,trivHX) is conjugate to the adjoint
structure map X(A)→ΩBX(A∐B), the claim follows. /square
Remark 3.23.We also explicitly describe the set of maps used to obtain the G-
global projective model structure by localization in the above proo f. Considering
the shiftG-C, we see that this is given as
(3.9)SG:={κH,A,B /squareHi:Hﬁnite group ,A,BﬁniteH-sets,i∈IG×H}.30 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Corollary 3.24. For any ﬁnite group G, there is a unique model structure on
G-Sp(C)whose coﬁbrations are the G-global ﬂat level coﬁbrations and whose weak
equivalences are the G-global weak equivalences. This model structure is simplic ial,
combinatorial, and left proper. Moreover, its ﬁbrant objec ts are precisely the G-
globalΩ-spectra that are ﬁbrant in the G-global ﬂat level model structure.
Proof.Again, we may assume that Cis pointed and G= 1. As every global
projective level coﬁbration is also a global ﬂat level coﬁbration, we can localize
the global ﬂat level model structure at the maps (3 .8); as every ﬁbration in the
global ﬂat level model structure is also a ﬁbration in the global proj ective level
model structure, the above argument then shows that a level ﬁb rant spectrum is
ﬁbrant in this new model structure if and only if it is a global Ω-spectr um. It only
remains to show that the weak equivalences of this model structur e are again the
global weak equivalences. But by abstract nonsense about Bousﬁ eld localizations,
a mapfin Sp( C) is a weak equivalence in this global ﬂat model structure if and
only if [f,X] is bijective for every global Ω-spectrum, where [ ,] denotes the hom
set in the localization of Sp( C) at the global level weak equivalences. As the same
characterization applies to the global projective model structur e, the claim follows
immediately. /square
Warning 3.25.It might be tempting to assume that the generating acyclic coﬁ-
brations of the above G-global model structures are given by adding the set SG
from (3.9) to the generating acyclic coﬁbrations of the level model struct ure, anal-
ogously to the equivariant situation (Remark 1.15). We warn the rea der however
that while all of these are clearly acyclic coﬁbrations, it is not clear wh ether they
generate, and more generally the localization machinery employed ab ove does not
provide any control about the generating acyclic coﬁbrations. In fact, the explicit
identiﬁcation of the generating acyclic coﬁbrations in the equivarian t case referred
to above crucially relies on rightproperness of the level model structure, which is
not assumed in our setting.
Despite these wordsof warning, the following result will often allow us topretend
that the generating acyclic coﬁbrations are of the above form:
Proposition 3.26. LetGbe a ﬁnite group and let Dbe a left proper simplicial
model category with a simplicial Quillen adjunction F:G-Sp(C)proj. level ⇄D:U.
Then the following are equivalent:
(1)Fis left Quillen as a functor G-Sp(C)proj→D.
(2)Fsends the maps in SGto weak equivalences.
(3)Usends ﬁbrant objects to G-globalΩ-spectra.
The analogous statement for the ﬂat G-global (level) model structure also holds.
The proof will in turn rely on the following general result:
Lemma 3.27. LetF:C⇄D:Ube a simplicial adjunction of left proper simplicial
model categories. Then F⊣Uis a Quillen adjunction if and only if Fpreserves
coﬁbrations and Upreserves ﬁbrant objects.
Proof.See [Lur09, Corollary A.3.7.2]. /square
Proof of Proposition 3.26. The equivalence (1) ⇔(3) is an instance of the above
lemma, while for (1) ⇒(2) it suﬃces to observe that the maps in SGare acyclic
coﬁbrations. Thus, it only remains to prove (2) ⇒(3).
For this, let Xbe ﬁbrant and let f∈SG. Then maps( f,UX) agrees by enriched
adjointness up to conjugation with maps( Ff,X), so it is an acyclic ﬁbration as Ff
is an acyclic coﬁbration and Xwas assumed to be ﬁbrant. But UXis level ﬁbrant,GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 31
so lettingfvary this implies by the proof of Proposition 3.22 that UXis aG-global
Ω-spectrum as desired. /square
Theorem 3.28. LetCbe a global model category. Then the projective and ﬂat G-
global model structures on G-Sp(C)assemble into a global model category Sp(C).
Proof.Again, we may assume that Cis pointed. We have already seen that all of
these model structures are left proper and combinatorial. Moreo ver, the projective
and the ﬂat G-global model structure have the same weak equivalences (namely ,
theG-global weak equivalences), and every projective coﬁbration is als o a ﬂat one
by Lemma 3.16.
For the functoriality properties, let α:G→G′be any homomorphism. Then
α!⊣α∗is a Quillen adjunction for the projective levelmodel structures, hence
in particular with respect to the projective levelmodel structure on G-Sp(C) and
the actual projective model structure on G′-Sp(C). By Proposition 3.26 it will
therefore suﬃce to prove that α∗sends any ﬁbrant X∈G′-Sp(C)projto aG-global
Ω-spectrum. Indeed, as we already know that α∗Xis projectively level ﬁbrant, this
amount to saying that the adjoint structure map
(α∗X)(A)→ΩB(α∗X)(A∐B)
is a (G×H)-global weak equivalence for all ﬁnite H-setsA,B. However, this map
agrees with the restriction of the adjoint structure map along α×id:G×H→
G′×H; as (α×id)∗is homotopical, the claim follows.
Next, we will show that α∗⊣α∗is a Quillen adjunction for the ﬂat model
structures; arguing as above, this amounts to saying that if X∈G-Sp(C)ﬂatis
ﬁbrant, then α∗(X)(A)→ΩB(α∗X)(A∐B) is a (G′×H)-global weak equivalence
for all ﬁnite H-setsA,B. This is where we will need that Cis aglobal(and not
just a preglobal) model category: namely, we pick functorial ﬁbra nt replacements
in (G×H)-Cﬂatto get a commutative diagram
X(A) ΩBX(A∐B)
Y1 Y2.∼∼
∼
Here the top arrowis a ( G×H)-global weak equivalence by assumption on X, while
the vertical arrows are so by construction; thus, also the lower h orizontal arrow is
a weak equivalence by 2-out-of-3. We want to show that applying ( α×id)∗sends
the top arrow to a ( G′×H)-global weak equivalence, for which it is then enough to
show by another application of 2-out-of-3 that it sends all the rem aining arrows to
(G′×H)-global weak equivalences. For the lower horizontal arrow this is s imply an
instance of Ken Brown’s Lemma. We will now show that also the left han d vertical
arrow is sent to a ( G′×H)-global weak equivalence; the argument for the right
hand vertical arrow will then be analogous.
For this, we observe that X(A) is ﬁbrant in ( G×ΣA)-Cﬂatby deﬁnition of the
G-global ﬂat model structure. Thus, if ρ:H→ΣAclassiﬁes the H-action onA
and we deﬁne g:= (id×ρ):G×H→G×ΣA,q:= (α×id):G×H→G′×H,
then we precisely want to show that q∗sends the ﬁbrant replacement g∗X(A)→Y1
in (G×H)-Cﬂatto a weak equivalence. However, as ker g= 1×(kerρ) has trivial
intersection with (ker α)×1 = kerq, this is simply an instance of what it means for
a preglobal model category to be global.
Asα∗is left Quillen for the ﬂat global model structures, it in particular sen ds
acycliccoﬁbrationsto G-globalweakequivalences. However,anyacyclic ﬁbration in
theG′-globalﬂatmodelstructureisinparticulara G′-globallevelweakequivalence,32 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
and as Sp (C)levelis a preglobal model category, it follows that α∗sends these to
G-global (level) weak equivalences. Thus, α∗is actually homotopical.
Now assume that αis injective. Then α∗is left Quillen for the projective model
structures as it preserves projective (level) coﬁbrations by Lem ma 3.16 and is ho-
motopical by the above. Moreover, α!⊣α∗is a Quillen adjunction for the ﬂat level
model structures and α∗sends ﬁbrant objects to G-global Ω-spectra by the above,
soα!⊣α∗is also a Quillen adjunction for the ﬂat model structures.
Finally, letg:A→Candq:A→Bbehomomorphismswith ker( g)∩ker(q) = 1,
letXbe ﬁbrant in C-Sp(C)ﬂat, and letι:g∗X→Ybe a ﬁbrant replacement in
A-Sp(C)ﬂat; we have to show that q∗ιis aB-global weak equivalence. However,
by the above g∗Xis anA-global Ω-spectrum, so ιis actually an A-globallevel
weak equivalence. The claim therefore follows from Sp (C)levelbeing a global model
category. /square
The above spectriﬁcation construction is compatible with global Quille n adjunc-
tions and global Quillen equivalences:
Proposition 3.29. LetF:C⇄D:Ube a global Quillen adjunction of global
model categories. Then Sp(F): Sp(C)⇄Sp(D) :Sp(U)is a global Quillen adjunc-
tion. IfF⊣Uis a global Quillen equivalence, then so is Sp(F)⊣Sp(U).
Proof.By Lemma 3.3 we may assume that CandDare pointed. Moreover, it
suﬃces as usual to show that Sp( F): Sp( C)⇄Sp(D) :Sp(U) is a Quillen adjunc-
tion in the usual sense for the projective and ﬂat model structur es, and a Quillen
equivalence (say, for the ﬂat ones) if F⊣Uis a global Quillen equivalence.
For the ﬁrst statement, we observe that this holds for the level m odel structures
by Lemma 3.17, so that it suﬃces that the right adjoint sends proje ctively ﬁbrant
objects to global Ω-spectra, which is a direct consequence of Ken Brown’s Lemma.
For the second statement, we let Y∈Sp(D)ﬂatﬁbrant and X→GYa coﬁbrant
replacement in the global ﬂat level model structure. Then FX→FUY→Y
represents the derived counit LFRUY→Yfor the global ﬂat model structure, but
also for the global ﬂat levelmodel structure; thus, it is a global weak equivalence
by Lemma 3.17.
The proof that also the derived unit is an isomorphism is more involved. The
crucial observation for this is the following:
Claim.LetW∈Sp(C) be a ﬂat global Ω-spectrum. Then Sp( F)(W) is again a
global Ω-spectrum.
Proof.LetHbeaﬁnitegroup. As F⊣UisanSSet∗-enrichedadjunction, thereare
naturalcomparisonisomorphisms K∧F(X)→F(K∧X)forallK∈H-SSet ∗,X∈
H-C. Specializing to K=SBfor some ﬁnite H-setBand using that all functors
in sight are left Quillen for the ﬂat model structures, these derive t o isomorphisms
SB∧LLF(X)→LF(SB∧LX) in the homotopy category. Passing to canonical
mates gives us a natural comparison map LFRΩBX→RΩBLF(X) which is again
an isomorphism as LFis assumed to be an equivalence. Plugging in the deﬁnitions,
this comparison map is represented for an Xthat is coﬁbrant in the ﬂatmodel
structure and ﬁbrant in the projective one by
(3.10) F(Y)F(π)−−−→F(ΩBX)→ΩBF(X)ΩBι−−→ΩBZ
whereπ:Y→ΩBXisa coﬁbrantreplacementin the ﬂatmodel structure, the unla-
belled arrowis the comparisonmap coming from the enrichment, and ι:F(X)→Z
is a ﬁbrant replacement (say, in the ﬂat model structure); in part icular, the com-
posite (3.10) is anH-global weak equivalence.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 33
With this at hand, we can now prove the claim. As Sp( F) is left Quillen with
respect to the ﬂat level model structures, we may assume withou t loss of generality
thatWis also ﬁbrant in the ﬂat level model structure. Let now Hbe a ﬁnite group,
and letA,Bbe ﬁniteH-sets; we have to show that the composite
(3.11) F(W(A))˜σ− →ΩBF(W(A∐B))ΩBι−−→ΩBZ
is anH-global weak equivalence, where the ﬁrst map is the ordinary adjoin t struc-
ture map and ιis a ﬁbrant replacement F(W(A∐B))→ZinH-Cﬂat. For this we
pick a factorization
W(A)Y ΩBW(A∐B)κπ
∼
inH-Cﬂatof ˜σinto a coﬁbration κfollowed by a weak equivalence π; note that κ
is actually an acyclic coﬁbration by 2-out-of-3 and that Yis coﬁbrant as W(A) is,
so thatπis a coﬁbrant replacement. Then we have a commutative diagram
ΩBF(W(A∐B)) ΩBZ
F(W(A)) F(ΩBW(A∐B))
F(Y)ΩBι
F(˜σ)
F(κ)˜σ
F(π)
in whichF(κ) is a weak equivalence as Fis left Quillen, while the composite
F(Y)→ΩBZagrees with (3 .10) forX:=W(A∐B)∈H-C, so it is a weak
equivalence by the above. Thus, also the top composite (3 .11) is a weak equivalence
by 2-out-of-3, ﬁnishing the proof of the claim. △
It suﬃces now to show that the derived unit X→RULFXis an isomorphism
wheneverXis a ﬂat globalΩ-spectrum . But indeed, this is represented by the
compositeX→UFX→UYwhereFX→Yis a ﬁbrant replacement in the
global projective model structure. By the claim, FXis a global Ω-spectrum, so
this is actually a level ﬁbrant replacement; thus, this composite also represents
the derived unit for the corresponding level model structures an d the claim follows
again from Lemma 3.17. /square
Finally, let us show that the above construction actually fulﬁlls its pur pose:
Theorem 3.30. LetCbe a global model category. Then Sp(C)is stable.
For the proof of the theorem, we may as usual assume without loss of generality
thatCis pointed. We now want to proceed in the same way as for Sp(see
Proposition 3.6 above), so we ﬁrst need to introduce a suitable smas h product with
G-equivariant symmetric spectra:
Construction 3.31.Let us write∧for the essentially unique SSet∗-enriched functor
Spectra×Sp(C)→Sp(C) that preserves tensors and colimits in each variable and
such that Σ(A,–)∧(Σ(B,–)∧X) =Σ(A∐B,–)∧Xwith the evident functoriality
inA,B∈ΣandX∈C. For any ﬁnite group G, we then obtain a pairing
(3.12) – ∧–:G-Spectra×G-Sp(C)→G-Sp(C)
by pulling through the G-actions.
There is then a unique way to extend the evident isomorphisms
Σ(∅,–)∧(Σ(B,–)∧X) =Σ(∅∐B,–)∧X∼=Σ(B,–)∧X34 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
and
(Σ(A,–)∧Σ(B,–))∧(Σ(C,–)∧X) =Σ((A∐B)∐C,–)∧X
∼=Σ(A∐(B∐C),–)∧X
=Σ(A,–)∧(Σ(B,–)∧(Σ(C,–)∧X))
to makeG-Sp(C) tensored over G-Spectra . Since all adjoints exist by local pre-
sentability, G-Sp(C) is then alsoenrichedandcotensoredover G-Spectra ; the next
proposition can therefore be reformulated as saying that G-Sp(C)projis enriched in
the model categorical sense over G-SpectraG-equiv. proj. .
Proposition 3.32. The pairing (3.12)is a left Quillen bifunctor with respect to the
G-equivariant projective model structure on G-Spectra and theG-global projective
model structure on G-Sp(C).
For the proof we will need:
Lemma 3.33. LetAbe any ﬁnite G-set. Then the shift shA:G-Sp(C)→G-Sp(C)
is right Quillen for the G-global projective model structures.
Proof.As before, it suﬃces to show that shAis right Quillen for the corresponding
level model structures and that it sends ﬁbrant objects to G-global Ω-spectra.
For the ﬁrst statement, we simply note that ev B◦shA:G-Sp(C)→(G×ΣB)-C
factors as the composition
G-Sp(C)proj. lev.evA∐B−−−−→(G×ΣA∐B)-Cprojres−−→(G×ΣA×ΣB)-Cprojϕ∗
−−→(G×ΣB)-Cproj
whereϕis deﬁned via ϕ(g,σ) = (g,g.–,σ), and each of these is right Quillen by
deﬁnition.
Finally, ifXis ﬁbrant, then shAXis level ﬁbrant by the above, hence shAX
will be aG-global Ω-spectrum if and only if X(A∐B)→ΩCX(A∐B∐C) is a
(G×H)-global weak equivalence for all ﬁnite H-setsB,C. This follows easily from
Remark 3.19 (letting Hact trivially on AandGact trivially on B,C). /square
Proof of Proposition 3.32. Let us ﬁrst prove the analogous statement where we
equipG-Spectra with theG-equivariant projective levelmodel structure. Adjoin-
ing over, it will be enough here to show that
G-Sp(C)op×G-Sp(C)→G-Spectra
X,Y/m⊣pst≀→/parenleftbig
A/m⊣pst≀→maps(X,shAY)/parenrightbig
(with the evident functoriality in A,X,Y) is a right Quillen bifunctor. As all
structure in sight is deﬁned levelwise, this amounts to saying that ( X,Y)/m⊣pst≀→
maps(X,shAY) is a right Quillen bifunctor to (G×ΣA)-SSet∗with theGG,ΣA-
modelstructure. However,asSp (C)isaglobalmodelcategory,triv ΣA:G-Sp(C)→
(G×ΣA)-Sp(C) is right Quillen for the projective model structures, and so is the
endofunctor shAof (G×ΣA)-Sp(C) (whereGacts trivially on Aand ΣAacts
tautologically) by the previous lemma. Thus, the claim follows from Cor ollary 3.4
applied to the global model category Sp (C).
For the original statement, all that remains now is to show that the pushout
product of any standard generating acyclic coﬁbration jofG-SpectraG-equiv. proj.
with any generating coﬁbration iofG-Sp(C) is again a G-global weak equivalence.
However, if jis even a level weak equivalence, this follows from the above, while
the other generating acyclic coﬁbrations are precisely the maps ( G+∧HκH,A,B)/square
kfor subgroups H⊂G, ﬁniteH-setsA,B, and (generating) coﬁbrations kof
G-Sp(SSet)G-equiv. proj. , see Remark 1.15. The pushout product ( G+∧HκH,A,B /square
k)/squareican then be identiﬁed with κH,A,B /squareH(G+∧(k/squarei)) whereHacts on theGLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 35
second factor via its right action on G. By the above, k/squareiis a (level) coﬁbration;
by construction of the G-global projective model structure it therefore only remains
to show that
G+∧–:G-Sp(C)→(G×H)-Sp(C)
(whereGactsdiagonallyand Hacts fromthe right) isleft Quillen forthe projective
(level) model structures. However, as Sp (C) is a (pre)global model category and G
is coﬁbrant in (G×H)-SSetGG,H(Hacting freely from the right), this is simply
an instance of Corollary 3.4 again. /square
Proof of Theorem 3.30. This follows from Proposition 3.32 in the same way as in
the proof of Proposition 3.6. /square
3.4.The universal property of spectriﬁcation. Throughout, let CandD
be global model categories. We begin by explaining in which sense the a bove
construction Sp is idempotent:
Lemma 3.34. Assume Cis pointed. Then we have a global Quillen adjunction
(3.13) Σ∞:=S∧–:C⇄Sp(C) :Ω∞:= ev∅.
Proof.It is clear from the deﬁnitions that Ω∞is right Quillen (already for the level
model structures). /square
Corollary 3.35. LetCbe any global model category. Then we have a global Quillen
adjunction
Σ∞
+:=S∧(–)+:C⇄Sp(C) :Ω∞:= ev∅. /square
Theorem 3.36. LetCbe a global model category. Then Cis stable if and only if
it is pointed and the global Quillen adjunction (3.13)is a global Quillen equivalence.
Proof.Stability is preservedunder global Quillen equivalences (Lemma 3.8), s o ‘⇐’
follows from Theorem 3.30. By the usual shifting argument it now suﬃ ces to show
that Σ∞:C⇄Sp(C) :Ω∞is a Quillen equivalence whenever Cis stable.
For this we ﬁrst observe that LΣ∞takes values in global Ω-spectra. Namely,
ifX∈Cﬂatis coﬁbrant, then the ordinary structure maps SB∧(Σ∞X)(A)→
(Σ∞X)(A∐B) are isomorphisms for all ﬁnite groups Hand ﬁniteH-setsAandB.
However, (Σ∞X)(A) =SA∧Xis coﬁbrant in the ﬂat H-global model structure,
so we can identify this with the derived map SB∧L(Σ∞X)(A)→(Σ∞X)(A∐B).
By stability, the adjoint map (Σ∞X)(A)→RΩB(Σ∞X)(A∐B) is then also an
H-global weak equivalence as desired.
It follows immediately that for every coﬁbrant X∈Cﬂatthe ordinary unit X→
Ω∞Σ∞Xalready represents the derived unit. As the former is an isomorphis m,
the derived unit is a global weak equivalence.
To complete the proof, it is now enough to show that Ω∞reﬂects weak equiva-
lences between global Ω-spectra. But indeed, if f:X→Yis a map of global Ω-
spectra such that f(∅) is a global weak equivalence, then RΩAf(A) is a ΣA-global
weak equivalence as it is conjugate to f(∅) (equipped with the trivial Σ A-action).
Thus,f(A) must be a Σ A-global weak equivalence as ΩA: ΣA-C→ΣA-Cis part
of a Quillen equivalence (say, for the ﬂat model structures). /square
Deﬁnition 3.37. AglobalQuillenadjunction C⇄Discalleda global stabilization
ifDis stable and the induced global Quillen adjunction Sp (C)⇄Sp(D) is a global
Quillen equivalence.
Theorem 3.38. LetCbe any global model category. Then Σ∞
+:C⇄Sp(C) :Ω∞
is a global stabilization.36 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Proof.We have already shown in Theorem 3.30 that Sp (C) is stable. Replacing C
byG-Cas usual, it then only remains that Sp(Σ∞
+): Sp( C)⇄Sp(Sp(C)) : Sp(Ω∞)
is a Quillen equivalence. Comparing the right adjoints we immediately see that this
agrees with Sp(Σ∞) : Sp( C∗)⇄Sp(Sp( C∗)) : Sp(Ω∞), so we may further assume
thatCis pointed.
For the proof, we identify the SSet∗-category Sp(Sp (C)) with the category of
SSet∗-enriched functors Σ⊗Σ→CwhereΣ⊗Σdenotes the SSet∗-categorywith
objects the pairs ( A,B) of ﬁnite sets and with mapping spaces
mapsΣ⊗Σ((A,B),(A′,B′)) = mapsΣ(A,A′)∧mapsΣ(B,B′)
with the evident composition. We take the convention that the ﬁrst factor of
Σ⊗Σcorresponds to the ‘outer Sp’, so Sp(Ω∞) corresponds to restriction along
the inclusion i1:Σ→Σ⊗Σ,A/m⊣pst≀→(A,∅). On the other hand, restricting along the
other inclusion i2:Σ→Σ⊗Σcorresponds to the Quillen equivalence Ω∞.
We now write Π: Σ⊗Σ→Σfor the usual symmetric monoidal structure (used
to constructthe smashproduct ofspectra), givenon objectsb y(A,B)/m⊣pst≀→A∐B. By
restricting, this gives rise to a simplicial functor Π∗: Sp(C)→Sp(Sp(C)), which
admits a simplicial left adjoint Π !by enriched Kan extension.
Claim.The simplicial adjunction Π !⊣Π∗is a Quillen adjunction with respect to
the projective model structures.
Proof.Let us consider the case of the level model structures ﬁrst, whic h amounts to
saying that Sp( C)→ΣA-Sp(C),X/m⊣pst≀→(Π∗X)(A) is right Quillen for the projective
model structures everywhere. However, this can be identiﬁed wit h the composition
Sp(C)projtrivΣA−−−−→ΣA-Sp(C)projshA
−−→ΣA-Sp(C)proj
of which the ﬁrst functor is right Quillen as Sp (C) is a global model category while
the second one is so by Lemma 3.33.
It then only remains to show that if Xis ﬁbrant in the global projective model
structure on Sp( C), then Π∗Xis a global Ω-spectrum, i.e. for every ﬁnite group H
and every ﬁnite H-setsA,B, the map shAX→ΩBshA∐BXis anH-global weak
equivalence. But indeed, this is even an H-global level weak equivalence: if Cis
any ﬁnite set, then after evaluating at Cthis is simply the adjoint structure map
X(C∐A)→ΩB(C∐A∐B), which is an ( H×ΣC)-global weak equivalence since
Xwas assumed to be a global Ω-spectrum (letting Σ Cact trivially on AandB
whileHacts trivially on C). △
The unitality isomorphisms of the symmetric monoidal structure on Σnow give
us isomorphisms Ω∞◦Π∗∼=id∼=Sp(Ω∞)◦Π∗. As all functors are right Quillen,
this induces isomorphisms RΩ∞◦RΠ∗∼=id∼=RSp(Ω∞)◦RΠ∗of derived functors.
In particular, as RΩ∞is an equivalence (Theorems 3.30 and 3.36), also RΠ∗is an
equivalence by 2-out-of-3, and hence so is RSp(Ω∞) by the same argument. /square
Remark 3.39.WriteGLOBMOD for the opposite of the large category of global
model categories and global right Quillen functors, localized with res pect to the
global Quillen equivalences. Then Proposition 3.29 implies that Sp descends to an
endofunctor QofGLOBMOD . MoreovertheglobalQuillenadjunctionsΣ∞
+⊣Ω∞
induce a natural transformation η: id⇒Q.1
1Here it comes in handy that we deﬁned the underlying 1-catego ry to consist of right Quillen
functors: Ω∞= ev∅is strictly natural while Σ∞
+is only pseudonatural. However, the approach
via left Quillen functors or by encoding both adjoints at the same time could also be made to
work, as it is not hard to show using a cocylinder argument tha t isomorphic functors become equal
after localizing at the global Quillen equivalences in eith er case.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 37
By Theorems 3.30 and 3.36, the map ηQCis an isomorphism in GLOBMOD
for every C; similarly, Theorem 3.38 above shows that QηCis an isomorphism.
Thus, it follows by abstract nonsense that Qis a Bousﬁeld localization onto its
essential image (i.e. the stable global model categories) with unit giv en byη. Put
diﬀerently, for any global model category C, Ω∞: Sp(C)→C(or more generally
the right adjoint in any global stabilization in the sense of Deﬁnition 3.3 7) is the
homotopy universal example of a global right Quillen functor from a stableglobal
model category, and dually for the left adjoints.
4.The stabilization of global spaces
In this section we will prove:
Theorem 4.1. The global Quillen adjunction
(4.1) Σ•
+:S⇄Sp:Ω•
from Example 2.18 is a global stabilization.
This can be seen as a sanity check for our framework, but it also allow s us to
describe the passagefrom unstable to stable globalhomotopy the ory via a universal
property: (4 .1) is the homotopy-universal example of a global Quillen adjunction
fromSto a stable global model category.
For the proof, we will compare Spto the global stabilization constructed in the
previous section. This will require some preparations:
Construction 4.2.We deﬁne a functor ∆∗: Sp(S)→Spectra as follows: if Xis
a spectrum in pointed I-simplicial sets, then ∆∗X(A) =X(A)(A) with structure
maps
SB/integerdividei(A)∧X(A)(A)σ− →X(B)(A)X(B)(i)−−−−−→X(B)(B)
for every injection i:A→Band with the evident enriched functoriality in X.
By the enriched Yoneda Lemma, ∆∗admits an enriched left adjoint ∆ !which is
characterized up to unique enriched isomorphism by the condition th at it preserves
colimits and tensors and satisﬁes ∆ !Σ(A,–) =Σ(A,–)∧I(A,–)+with the evident
functoriality in A. Writing simplices of Σ(A,B) forB∈Σas equivalence classes
[i,σ] of an injection i:A→Band a simplex σofSB/integerdividei(A), the unit of Σ(A,–) is
then given in degree BbyΣ(A,B)→Σ(A,B)∧I(A,B)+,[i,σ]/m⊣pst≀→[i,σ]∧i.
By enriched Kan extension, ∆∗moreover admits a simplicial right adjoint ∆ ∗.
Our actual goal now is to prove:
Theorem 4.3. For any ﬁnite group Gthe simplicial adjunction
(4.2) ∆ !:G-SpectraG-global projective ⇄G-Sp(S)G-global projective :∆∗
is a Quillen equivalence.
The proof will occupy the remainder of this section; for now, let us a lready
remark how it implies Theorem 4.1:
Proof of Theorem 4.1. We already know that Σ•
+⊣Ω•is a global Quillen adjunc-
tion and that Spis stable (Proposition 3.6). Thus, it only remains to show that
G-Sp(Ω•) derives to an equivalence of homotopy categories for every ﬁnite G. To
this end, we consider the diagram
(4.3)G-Sp(Sp)proj.G-gl. G-Spectraproj.G-gl.
G-Sp(S)proj.G-gl.G-Sp(Ω•)Ω∞
∆∗38 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
of right Quillen functors. This does not commute strictly, but after restricting to
ﬁbrant objects, Remark 1.51 shows that the lower composite is give n up to natural
G-global (level) weak equivalence by sending a G-bispectrum Xto the spectrum
δ(X) given by A/m⊣pst≀→ΩAX(A)(A) with the evident functoriality. We moreover
have a natural map σ: Ω∞X→δ(X) given in degree Aby the map X(∅)(A)→
ΩAX(A)(A) induced by the adjunct structure map. If Xis ﬁbrant, then each
X(∅)→ΩAX(A) is a (G×ΣA)-global weak equivalence of ﬁbrant objects in the
projective ( G×ΣA)-global model structure, hence a ( G×ΣA)-global level weak
equivalence. In particular, after evaluating at A, this is aGΣA,G×ΣA-equivariant
weak equivalence, hence a GΣA,G-equivariant weak equivalence with respect to the
diagonal Σ A-action. Thus, σis aG-global (level) weak equivalence for every ﬁbrant
X. Altogether, we therefore have an isomorphism RΩ∞∼=R(G-Sp(Ω•))◦R∆∗of
right derived functors.
However, the top arrow in (4 .3) induces an equivalence of homotopy categories
by stability of Sp(Proposition 3.6), and so does ∆∗by the previous theorem. The
claim now follows from 2-out-of-3. /square
It remains to prove Theorem 4.3.
Lemma 4.4. The simplicial adjunction (4.2)is a Quillen adjunction.
Proof.We will ﬁrst show that ∆∗preserves (acyclic) level ﬁbrations. Indeed, if
f:X→Yis any map in G-Sp(S), then (∆∗f)(A) =f(A)(A). If nowfis a
G-global (acyclic) level ﬁbration, then f(A) is a (G×ΣA)-global (acyclic) ﬁbration,
hence in particular a ( G×ΣA)-global (acyclic) level ﬁbration, so that f(A)(A) is
an (acyclic)GΣA,G×ΣA-equivariant ﬁbration. As before, it is then in particular a
GΣA,G-equivariant (acyclic) ﬁbration with respect to the diagonal action , i.e. ∆∗f
is an (acyclic) level ﬁbration as desired.
To complete the proof, it nowonly remains to show that ∆∗sends ﬁbrant objects
toG-global Ω-spectra. But indeed, if Xis ﬁbrant and A,Bare ﬁniteH-sets, then
X(A)→ΩBX(A∐B) is a (G×H)-global weak equivalence between projectively
ﬁbrant (G×H)-global spaces, hence a ( G×H)-global level weak equivalence. In
particular, (∆∗X)(A) =X(A)(A)→ΩBX(A∐B)(A) is aGΣA,G×H-equivariant
weak equivalence. Thus, if Aisfaithful, then this is aGH,G×H-weak equivalence by
Lemma 1.6 and whence a GH,G-equivariant weak equivalence with respect to the
diagonal action.
Now the adjoint structure map of ∆∗Xfactors as
X(A)(A)˜σ(A)−−−→ΩBX(A∐B)(A)ΩBX(A∐B)(incl)−−−−−−−−−−−→ ΩBX(A∐B)(A∐B);
ifHacts faithfully on A, then the ﬁrst map is a GH,G-equivariant weak equivalence
by the above, and so is the second one by the same computation as X(A∐B) is a
ﬁbrant (G×H)-I-space. /square
Lemma 4.5. The functor ∆∗:G-Sp(S)G-global proj.→G-SpectraG-global proj. re-
ﬂectsG-global weak equivalences between ﬁbrant objects, i.e. its right derived functor
R∆∗is conservative.
Proof.Letf:X→Ybe a map of ﬁbrant objects such that ∆∗fis aG-global weak
equivalence. As ∆∗is right Quillen, ∆∗Xand ∆∗Yare ﬁbrant, so ∆∗fis even aG-
global level weak equivalence, i.e. f(A)(A) is aGH,G-equivariant weak equivalence
of (G×H)-simplicial sets for every ﬁnite group Hand any ﬁnite faithful H-setA.
We want to show that f(A) is already a ( G×ΣA)-global level weak equivalence,
i.e. that for every ﬁnite set Bthe mapf(A)(B) is aGΣB,G×ΣA-equivariant weak
equivalence, or put diﬀerently that for every ﬁnite group Hacting arbitrarily on A
and faithfully on Bthe mapf(A)(B) is aGH,G-equivariant weak equivalence.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 39
For this we consider the commutative diagram
X(A)(B) ΩBX(A∐B)(B) ΩB(∆∗X)(A∐B)
Y(A)(B) ΩBY(A∐B)(B) ΩB(∆∗Y)(A∐B)˜σ
f(A)(B) ΩBf(A∐B)(B)ΩBX(A∐B)(incl)
ΩB(∆∗f)(A∐B)
˜σ ΩBX(A∐B)(incl)
AsHacts faitfully on A∐B, the right hand vertical map is a GH,G-equivariant
weak equivalence by the above. Moreover, as X(A)→ΩBX(A∐B) is a (G×H)-
global weak equivalence of ﬁbrant objects and Hacts faithfully on B, the top left
horizontal map is a GH,G-weak equivalence, and so is the lower left horizontal map
by the same argument. Finally, X(A∐B) is a ﬁbrant ( G×H)-I-space, so that the
top right horizontal map is a GH,G-equivariant weak equivalence, and likewise for
the lower right horizontal map. The claim now follows by 2-out-of-3. /square
We now want to prove the following strengthening of the above lemma :
Proposition 4.6. The functor ∆∗createsG-global weak equivalences.
For the proof, it will be crucial to understand the behaviour of ∆∗on generating
(acyclic) coﬁbrations , and more generally on maps of the form Σ(A,–)∧ΣAffor
mapsfin(G×ΣA)-I-SSet∗. For this we recall the following standard construc-
tion:
Construction 4.7.LetXbe a spectrum and let Ybe a pointedI-simplicial set.
Then we write X⊗Yfor the spectrum with ( X⊗Y)(A) =X(A)∧Y(A) and
structure maps
SB/integerdividei(A)∧(X⊗Y)(A) =SB/integerdivideA∧X(A)∧Y(A)σ∧Y(i)−−−−→X(B)∧Y(B) = (X⊗Y)(B)
for every injection i:A→B. This becomes a functor Spectra×I-SSet ∗→
Spectra in the evident way, which we as usual promote to
(4.4) – ⊗–:G-Spectra×G-I-SSet ∗→G-Spectra.
Put diﬀerently we have for any G-spectrumXand anyG-I-simplicial set Y
an equality X⊗Y= ∆∗(X∧Y) for the levelwise smash product G-Spectra×
G-I-SSet ∗→G-Sp(S∗) =G-Sp(S), and likewise for maps.
Proposition 4.8. The tensor product (4.4)preservesG-global weak equivalences
in each variable.
Proof.LetXbe aG-spectrum and let g:Y→Y′be aG-global weak equivalence
inG-I-SSet ∗. We will show that X⊗gis even aπ∗-isomorphism, for which we let
ϕ:H→Gbe any homomorphism. Then the eﬀect of ϕ∗(X⊗g) = (ϕ∗X)⊗(ϕ∗g)
onπH
∗agrees up to conjugation by isomorphisms with the one of ϕ∗X∧(ϕ∗g)(UH),
see [Len20, Lemma 3.2.11]. But ( ϕ∗g)(UH) is anH-equivariant weak equivalence,
soϕ∗X∧(ϕ∗g)(UH) is even an H-equivariant level weak equivalence, in particular
aπ∗-isomorphism. This completes the proof that the tensor product p reserves
G-global weak equivalences in the second variable.
On the other hand, let f:X→X′be aG-global weak equivalence of G-global
spectra and let Ybe anyG-global space; we want to show that f⊗Yis aG-global
weak equivalence. Arguing precisely as above, we see that – ⊗Ypreservesπ∗-
isomorphisms, so we may assume without loss of generality that fis a map between
ﬂatG-spectra. Under this assumption, [Len20, Proposition 3.2.14] prov ides us with40 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
a commutative diagram
X∧Σ•Y X⊗Y
X′∧Σ•Y X′⊗Yψ
∼
f∧Σ•Y f⊗Y
ψ∼
in which the horizontal maps are π∗-isomorphisms (in particular G-global weak
equivalences). By Proposition 1.47 the left hand vertical arrow is a G-global weak
equivalence, so the claim follows by 2-out-of-3. /square
Proof of Proposition 4.6. ByLemma4.5,itsuﬃcestoprovethat∆∗ishomotopical.
We already know that ∆∗preserves acyclic ﬁbrations, so it only remains to show
that it also sends acyclic coﬁbrations to weak equivalences. To this e nd, we will
show that ∆∗is in fact also leftQuillen as a functor to G-SpectrainjectiveG-global.
Let us ﬁrst prove that ∆∗is left Quillen as a functor G-Sp(S)proj.G-global level→
G-Spectrainj.G-global. Indeed, it clearly sends generating coﬁbrations to injective
coﬁbrations, so we only need to show that it sends generating acyc lic coﬁbra-
tions to weak equivalences. Such a generating acyclic coﬁbration is n ow of the
formΣ(A,–)∧ΣAj+for someA∈Σandja (generating) acyclic coﬁbration in
(G×ΣA)-I-SSet. Then
(4.5) ∆∗(Σ(A,–)∧ΣAj+) = (Σ(A,–)⊗j+)/ΣA;
butΣ(A,–)⊗j+is a (G×ΣA)-global weak equivalence by Proposition 4.8, and
ΣAacts freely on Σ(A,–), so Proposition 1.45 shows that the quotient (4 .5) is
aG-global weak equivalence. This completes the argument for the leve l model
structure.
For the actual claim, it suﬃces now by Proposition 3.26 to show that ∆∗sends
the maps in the set SGfrom (3.9) to weak equivalences, i.e. the maps κH,A,B /squareHi+
for ﬁnite groups H, ﬁniteH-setsA,B, and generating coﬁbrations i:X→Yof
the projective model structure on (G×H)-I-SSet∗.
Forthis, we will pickthe generatingcoﬁbrationsasin Theorem1.28(s o that they
aremapsbetweencoﬁbrantobjects), andwewillshowthat f:= ∆∗(κH,A,B/squarei+) isa
(G×H)-global weak equivalence; the claim will then follow from Proposition 1 .45
again asfis an injective coﬁbration and Hacts levelwise freely on projectively
coﬁbrant (G×H)-global spaces.
To show that fis a (G×H)-global weak equivalence, write S,Tfor the source
and target of κH,A,Band consider the image
S⊗X+S⊗Y+
T⊗X+ P
T⊗Y+/rightanglenwκH,A,B⊗X+S⊗i+
κH,A,B⊗Y+
T⊗i+f
under ∆∗of the diagram deﬁning κH,A,B /squarei+. NowκH,A,Bis anH-equivariant
weak equivalence of H-equivariantly projectively coﬁbrantH-spectra, whence an
H-global weak equivalence by Proposition 1.48 and thus a ( G×H)-global weak
equivalence with respect to the trivial G-actions. Proposition 4.8 therefore shows
thatκH,A,B⊗X+andκH,A,B⊗Y+are (G×H)-global weak equivalences. But on
the other hand κH,A,B⊗X+is also an injective coﬁbration by direct inspection, so
the pushout S⊗Y+→Pis again a (G×H)-global weak equivalence. We conclude
by2-out-of-3that also fis a(G×H)-globalweakequivalence, whichthen completesGLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 41
the proof that ∆∗(κH,A,B /squareHi+) is aG-global weak equivalence and hence the proof
of the proposition. /square
Proposition 4.9. LetHbe a ﬁnite group, let Abe a ﬁnite faithful H-set, and let
ϕ:H→Gbe any homomorphism. Then the unit
η:Σ(A,–)∧ϕG+→∆∗∆!(Σ(A,–)∧ϕG+)
is aG-global weak equivalence.
Proof.By design,ηis induced by the ‘diagonal’map Σ(A,–)→Σ(A,–)⊗I(A,–)+;
in particular, it has a left inverse induced by the unique map p:I(A,–)→∗. By
2-out-of-3it therefore suﬃces to showthat ( Σ(A,–)⊗p+)∧ϕG+=ϕ!(Σ(A,–)⊗p+)
is aG-global weak equivalence.
Forthiswenotethat pisanH-globalweakequivalence, whencesois Σ(A,–)⊗p+
by Proposition 4.8. By faithfulness, Hacts freely on Σ(A,–) outside the basepoint,
so the claim follows again from Proposition 1.45. /square
Proof of Theorem 4.3. AsR∆∗is conservative (Lemma 4.5), it is enough to show
that the derived unit is an isomorphism in the homotopy category. As ∆∗is ho-
motopical (Proposition 4.6), this amounts to saying that the ordina ry unitX→
∆∗∆!Xis aG-global weak equivalence for every projectively coﬁbrant G-global
spectrumX.
This is a standard cell induction argument: namely, ∆ !is left Quillen while ∆∗
is a left adjoint sending coﬁbrations to injective coﬁbrations, so that it is enough to
prove the claim for the sources and targets of the standard gene rating coﬁbrations,
see e.g. [Len20, Lemma 1.2.64]. However, these are of the form Σ(A,–)∧ϕG+∧K+
for some simplicial set K; as the tensoring over SSetis homotopical and the unit
is compatible with the tensoring (∆ !⊣∆∗being a simplicial adjunction), the claim
therefore follows from the previous proposition. /square
5.Global brave new algebra
We now turn our attention to multiplicative structures in stable G-global ho-
motopy theory, generalizing results for G= 1 by Schwede [Sch18, Chapter 5] and
Hausmann [Hau19, Section 3].
5.1.Positive model structures. Already in the non-equivariant setting, the
study of commutative ring spectra from a model categorical pers pective requires
one to introduce suitable ‘positive’ model structures. This subsec tion is devoted to
the construction of positive ﬂat and projective G-global model structures; however,
as most of this is entirely parallel to the construction of the usual G-global model
structures [Len20, 3.1], we will be somewhat terse here.
Proposition5.1. There is a unique model structureon G-Spectra in which a map
fis a weak equivalence or ﬁbration if and only if f(A)is aGΣA,G-weak equivalence
or ﬁbration, respectively, for every non-empty ﬁnite setA. We call this the positive
G-global projective level model structure and its weak equivalences the positiveG-
global level weak equivalences . It is combinatorial with generating coﬁbrations
(5.1){Σ(A,–)∧ϕG+∧(∂∆n֒→∆n)+:A/ne}⊣ti≀nsl⊣sh=∅,H⊂ΣA,ϕ:H→G,n≥0},
simplicial, proper, and ﬁltered colimits in it are homotopi cal.
Proof.To see that the model structure exists and is coﬁbrantly generat ed (hence
combinatorial) with the above generating coﬁbrations it suﬃces to c heck the ‘con-
sistency condition’ of [Sch18, Proposition C.23] for the GΣA,G-model structure on
(G×ΣA)-SSet∗forA/ne}⊣ti≀nsl⊣sh=∅and the model structure on (G×Σ∅∅∅)-SSet∗in
which only isomorphisms are coﬁbrations. However, it is clear that fo rA/ne}⊣ti≀nsl⊣sh=∅each42 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Σ(A,B)∧ΣA– sends the usual generating acyclic coﬁbrations of (G×ΣA)-SSet∗
to injective coﬁbrations and weak equivalences (also see [Len20, pr oof of Proposi-
tion 3.1.20]) and even to isomorphisms for A=∅.
Right properness, the statement about ﬁltered colimits, and the P ullback Power
Axiom for simplicial model categories follow immediately as all relevant c onstruc-
tions and notions are levelwise. Finally, all (generating) coﬁbrations are injective
coﬁbrations, so left properness follows in the same way. /square
Similarly one gets:
Proposition 5.2. There is a unique model structure on G-Spectra in which a
mapfis a weak equivalence or ﬁbration if and only if f(A)is a weak equivalence
or ﬁbration, respectively, in the injectiveGΣA,G-model structure for every A/ne}⊣ti≀nsl⊣sh=∅.
We call this the positive ﬂat G-global level model structure ; its weak equivalences
are again the G-global positive level weak equivalences. Moreover, it is c ombinatorial
with generating coﬁbrations
(5.2){(Σ(A,–)∧G+)/H∧(∂∆n֒→∆n)+:A/ne}⊣ti≀nsl⊣sh=∅,H⊂ΣA×G,n≥0},
simplicial, proper, and ﬁltered colimits in it are homotopi cal. /square
Remark 5.3.The above generating coﬁbrations agree with the generating coﬁb ra-
tions of Hausmann’s G-equivariant positive ﬂat model structure from [Hau17, dis-
cussion after Proposition 2.28]. In particular, the above coﬁbratio ns are indepen-
dent of the group Gand agree with what Hausmann calls positive ﬂat coﬁbrations ,
cf. Remark 2.20 of op. cit.
For later use we record the following relationship to the usual proje ctive and ﬂat
coﬁbrations:
Lemma 5.4. Letf:X→Ybe a map in G-Spectra . Then:
(1)fis a positive ﬂat coﬁbration if and only if it is a ﬂat coﬁbrati on andf(∅)
is an isomorphism.
(2)fis a positive G-global projective coﬁbration if and only if it is a G-global
projective coﬁbration and f(∅)is an isomorphism.
Proof.This is immediate from the characterizationofcoﬁbrationsin terms o flatch-
ing maps given in [Sch18, Proposition C.23]. /square
Deﬁnition 5.5. AG-spectrumXis called a positiveG-globalΩ-spectrum if for
every ﬁnite group H, anynon-empty ﬁnite faithful H-setA, and every ﬁnite H-set
Bthe adjoint structure map
X(A)→RΩBX(A∐B)
is aGH,G-weak equivalence.
As before, if Xis ﬁbrant in either of the above positive level model structures,
then this is represented by the ordinary adjoint structure map.
Proposition 5.6. There is a unique model structure on G-Spectra whose coﬁbra-
tions are the positive G-global projective coﬁbrations and whose weak equivalence s
are the usual G-global weak equivalences. We call this the positiveG-global projec-
tive model structure . Its ﬁbrant objects are precisely the positively projectiv ely level
ﬁbrant positive G-globalΩ-spectra.
Moreover, it is again combinatorial with generating coﬁbra tions(5.1), simplicial,
proper, and ﬁltered colimits in it are homotopical.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 43
Proof.We will ﬁrst construct a Bousﬁeld localization with the above ﬁbrant o b-
jects. For this we recall the maps λH,A,B:SB∧Σ(A∐B,–)→Σ(A,–) from
Remark 1.15 for ﬁnite groups Hand ﬁniteH-setsA,B. Varying over all homomor-
phismsϕ:H→Gfrom ﬁnite groups to Hand restricting Atonon-empty faithful
H-sets, the maps ϕ!λH,A,Bare then maps between coﬁbrant objects of the positive
G-global projective level model structure corepresenting ϕ-ﬁxed points of the ad-
joint structure maps. Factoring each of them as a coﬁbration κϕ,A,Bfollowed by a
G-globalpositive levelweakequivalence, [Lur09, PropositionA.3.7.3]a pplied to the
set of allκϕ,A,B’s then gives a Bousﬁeld localization with the above ﬁbrant objects,
and this is automatically again combinatorial, left proper, simplicial, and ﬁltered
colimits in it are homotopical (see [Len20, Lemma A.2.4] for the ﬁnal st atement).
We now claim that the weak equivalences agree with the G-global weak equiva-
lences. For this we ﬁrst observe that the identity constitutes a Qu illen adjunction
G-SpectrapositiveG-global proj. ⇄G-SpectraG-global proj. by Lemma 3.27as the left
adjoint preserves coﬁbrations and the right adjoint preserves ﬁ brant objects. On
the other hand, a simple coﬁnality argument shows that positive G-globallevel
weak equivalences are π∗-isomorphisms, hence in particular G-global weak equiva-
lences, so every weak equivalence in the above model structure is a G-global weak
equivalence.
Conversely, let f:X→Ybe aG-global weak equivalence; we want to show that
it is a weak equivalence in the above model structure. Using the prev ious direction
and functorial factorizations in the above model structure, we r educe by 2-out-of-3
to the case that XandYare ﬁbrant in the above sense, i.e. they are positive G-
global Ω-spectra and positively projectively level ﬁbrant. Then th e natural maps
X→ΩshX,Y→ΩshYare positive G-global level weak equivalences, and Ωsh f
isaG-globalweakequivalenceof G-globalΩ-spectra,henceinparticulara(positive)
G-global level weak equivalence. Thus, another application of 2-out -of-3shows that
alsofis a positive G-global level weak equivalence, hence in particular a weak
equivalence in the above model structure as claimed.
Finally, we observe that despite its deﬁnition right properness is inde pendent of
the class of ﬁbrations [Rez02, Proposition 2.5], so right properness of the positive
G-global projective model structure follows from right propernes s of the usual G-
global projective model structure. /square
Proposition 5.7. There is a unique model structure on G-Spectra whose coﬁ-
brations are the positive ﬂat coﬁbrations and whose weak equ ivalences are the usual
G-global weak equivalences. We call this the positive ﬂat G-global model structure .
Its ﬁbrant objects are precisely those positive G-globalΩ-spectra that are ﬁbrant in
the positive ﬂat G-global level model structure.
Moreover, this model structure is again combinatorial with generating coﬁbra-
tions(5.2), simplicial, proper, and ﬁltered colimits in it are homotop ical.
Proof.Arguing precisely as before we get a model structure with the desir ed coﬁ-
brations and ﬁbrant objects. By abstract nonsense about Bous ﬁeld localizations, a
mapfis a weak equivalence in this model structure or the one from the pre vious
proposition if and only if [ f,T] is bijective for every positive G-global Ω-spectrum
T, where [,] denotes hom sets in the localization at the positive G-global level
weak equivalences. In particular, its weak equivalences agree with t he ones from
the previous proposition, i.e. with the G-global weak equivalences.
Finally, all the remaining properties are established precisely as in the previous
proposition. /square
Remark 5.8.ForG= 1 the above two model structures again agree, and they
recover Hausmann’s positive global model structure [Hau19, Theorem 2.18].44 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Remark 5.9.We will never need to know explicitly how the generating acyclic
coﬁbrationsintheabovemodelstructureslooklike. However,wer ecordforlateruse
thatthegeneratingcoﬁbrations(5 .2)aremapsbetweencoﬁbrantobjects, so[Bar10,
Corollary 2.7] shows that we can also ﬁnd a set of generating acyclic c oﬁbrations
for the positive G-global ﬂat model structure consisting of maps between coﬁbran t
objects.
Next, we come to functoriality properties:
Lemma 5.10. Letα:H→Gbe any homomorphism. Then we have Quillen
adjunctions
α!:H-Spectrapos.H-global proj. ⇄G-Spectrapos.G-global proj. :α∗
α∗:G-Spectrapos.G-global ﬂat ⇄H-Spectrapos.H-global ﬂat :α∗.
Proof.For the ﬁrst statement, we ﬁrst observethat this holds for the c orresponding
level model structures as a consequence of Lemma 1.5. For the ac tual model struc-
tures at hand it suﬃces then to observe that α∗sends ﬁbrant objects to positive
H-global Ω-spectrum by direct inspection.
For the second statement, it is clear that α∗preserves positive ﬂat coﬁbrations
and sendsG-global weak equivalences to H-global weak equivalences. /square
Lemma 5.11. Letα:H→Gbeinjective. Then we also have Quillen adjunctions
α!:H-Spectrapos.H-global ﬂat ⇄G-Spectrapos.G-global ﬂat :α∗
α∗:G-Spectrapos.G-global proj. ⇄H-Spectrapos.H-global proj. :α∗.
Proof.For the ﬁrst statement we observe that α!sends generating coﬁbrations to
generating coﬁbrations by direct inspection and that it is homotopic al by Proposi-
tion 1.44.
Forthe secondstatement, the correspondingstatement forlev el model structures
follows from the fact that α∗sendsGΣA,G-coﬁbrations toGΣA,H-coﬁbrations by
Lemma 1.5. The actual claim then follows as α∗is homotopical. /square
Arguing as for the usual model structures we then conclude from the above:
Corollary 5.12. The positive G-global projective and ﬂat model structures for
varyingGmakeSpectra into a global model category Sp+. /square
On the other hand we have straight from the deﬁnition of coﬁbratio ns and weak
equivalences:
Corollary 5.13. The identity deﬁnes a global Quillen equivalence Sp+⇄Sp./square
Finally let us record how the smash product behaves with respect to the above
model structures:
Corollary 5.14. The smash product G-Spectra×G-Spectra→G-Spectra is
a left Quillen bifunctor in each of the following cases:
(1)theG-global positive ﬂat model structure and the G-global ﬂat model struc-
ture on the source, and the G-global positive ﬂat model structure on the
target
(2)theG-global positive ﬂat model structure and the G-global projective model
structure on the source, and the G-global positive projective model structure
on the target
(3)theG-global positive projective model structure and the G-global ﬂat model
structure on the source, and the G-global positive projective model structure
on the target.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 45
Proof.For the ordinary projective and ﬂat model structures this is Theo rem 1.46.
The claims now follow from this via Lemma 5.4 and the natural isomorphis m (X∧
Y)(∅)∼=X(∅)∧Y(∅) for all symmetric spectra X,Y. /square
5.2.Smash powers and norms. Next, we come to homotopical properties of
smash powers.
Construction 5.15.LetXbe aG-spectrum and let n≥1. Then the n-fold smash
powerX∧ncarriesncommuting G-actions as well as a Σ n-action (by permuting
the factors). Together these assemble into a natural action of t hewreath product
Σn≀G= Σn⋉Gn, lifting (–)∧nto a functor G-Spectra→(Σn≀G)-Spectra .
Construction 5.16.LetH⊂Gbe ﬁnite groups and set n:=|G/H|. Then any
choiceofright H-cosetrepresentatives g1,...,gndeﬁnesaninjectivehomomorphism
ι:G→Σn≀Has follows: ι(g) = (σ(g);h1(g),...,hn(g)) withggi=gσ(g)(i)hi(g).
The composite
(5.3) NG
H:H-Spectra(–)∧n
−−−→(Σn≀H)-Spectraι∗
−→G-Spectra
is then called the (Hill-Hopkins-Ravenel) norm.
For our purposes, the key result on the equivariant behaviour of t he norm will
be the following:
Theorem 5.17. The composite (5.3)sendsH-equivariant weak equivalences be-
tween ﬂatH-spectra toG-equivariant weak equivalences (of ﬂat G-spectra).
Proof.This is the special case N= 1 of [Hau17, Theorem 6.8]. /square
We now want to consider the smash powers and norms from a G-global perspec-
tive. Here we will prove the following stronger result:
Theorem 5.18. Letf:X→Ybe aG-global weak equivalence and assume Xand
Yare ﬂat. Then f∧nis a(Σn≀G)-global weak equivalence.
Restricting along the above homomorphism ιthis immediately implies:
Corollary 5.19. LetH⊂Gbe ﬁnite groups. Then NG
H:H-Spectra→G-Spectra
sendsH-global weak equivalences of ﬂat H-spectra toG-global weak equivalences (of
ﬂatG-spectra). /square
Proof of Theorem 5.18. Letf:X→Ybe aG-global weak equivalence of ﬂat G-
spectra. As a ﬁrst step, we will show that f∧nis a (Σn≀G)-equivariant weak
equivalence. For this, the key observation will be that while the norm is deﬁned
in terms of the smash power, in the global setting we can also go the o ther way
round, cf. [Sch18, Remark 5.1.7-(iv)]. Namely, write K⊂Σn≀Gfor the subgroup of
those (σ;g1,...,gn) withσ(1) = 1, which comes with a projection homomorphism
π:K→G,π(σ;g1,...,gn) =g1. If we now ﬁx for each i= 1,...,na permutation
σiwithσi(1) =i, then the ( σi;1,...,1) form a system of coset representatives of
(Σn≀G)/K, and one easily checks from the deﬁnitions that the resulting homom or-
phismι: Σn≀G→Σn≀Kis of the form
(σ;g1,...,gn)/m⊣pst≀→(σ;(?;g1,?,...),(?;g2,?,...),...)
where ‘?’ denotes an entry we don’t care about.
Nowπ∗fisaK-equivariantweakequivalencebyassumptionon f,soNΣn≀G
K(π∗f)
is a (Σn≀G)-equivariant weak equivalence by Theorem 5.17. But by the above d e-
scription of ι, this agrees with f∧nas map of (Σ n≀G)-spectra, completing the proof
of the claim.
Now letϕ:H→Σn≀Gbe any map. We have to show that ϕ∗(f∧n) is an
H-equivariant weak equivalence. For this we view fas a map of ( G×H)-spectra46 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
via the trivial H-action. Applying the above with Greplaced by G×Hthen shows
thatf∧nis a Σn≀(G×H)-equivariant weak equivalence where all copies of Hact
trivially. The claim now follows by restricting along the injective homomorphism
H(ϕ,id)−−−−→(Σn≀G)×Hδ− →Σn≀(G×H)
withδgiven byδ(σ;g1,...,gn;h) = (σ;(g1,h),...,(gn,h)). /square
Finally, we come to the key property of the positivemodel structures that will
allow us to establish model structures on commutative algebras belo w:
Lemma 5.20. LetXbe apositiveﬂat spectrum and let n≥1. Then the Σn-action
onX∧nis levelwise free outside the basepoint.
Proof.This is a special case of [Har14, Proposition 7.7*-(a)]. /square
Corollary 5.21. Letf:X→Ybe aG-global weak equivalence and assume Xand
Yarepositively ﬂat. Thenf∧n/Σnis aG-global weak equivalence again.
Proof.By Theorem 5.18, f∧nis a (Σn≀G)-global weak equivalence, hence in par-
ticular a (Σ n×G)-global weak equivalence. The claim follows as Σ nacts freely on
both source and target by the previous lemma. /square
5.3.Global model categories of modules. Throughout, let Gbe a ﬁnite group.
Deﬁnition 5.22. AG-global ring spectrum is a monoid R(for the smash product)
inG-Spectra . We write ModG
R(or simply ModRifGis clear from the context)
for the category of (left) modules in G-Spectra over the monoid R.
Proposition 5.23. LetRbe aG-global ring spectrum. Then the positive projective
and positive ﬂat G-global model structure on G-Spectra transfer along the free-
forgetful adjunction
R∧–:G-Spectra ⇄ModR:U.
This model structure is proper, simplicial, and combinator ial with generating coﬁ-
brationsR∧Iand generating acyclic coﬁbrations R∧Jfor sets of generating
(acyclic) coﬁbrations I,Jof the positive projective/ﬂat G-global model structure.
Moreover, ﬁltered colimits in it are homotopical.
Proof.For the existence of the model structure, we verify the assumpt ions of the
Crans-Kan Transfer Criterion. By local presentability, every set admits the small
object argument, so it only remains to show that for some (hence a ny) setJof gen-
erating acyclic coﬁbrations of G-SpectraG-global ﬂat the forgetful functor Usends
relative (R∧J)-cell complexes to weak equivalences. However, Uis also a left ad-
joint, so it suﬃces to show that it sends maps in R∧Jto acyclic coﬁbrations in the
injectiveG-global model structure . TakingJto consist of maps between coﬁbrant
objects (see Remark 5.9), this is immediate from Proposition 1.47.
The model structure is clearly combinatorial with the above genera ting (acyclic)
coﬁbrations, right proper, and simplicial, and ﬁltered colimits in it are h omotopical.
To see that it is also left proper it suﬃces to observe that Uis also left Quillen as a
functor into the injectiveG-global model structure onG-Spectra by the above, so
that the claim follows from left properness of G-SpectraG-global injective via [Len20,
Lemma A.2.15]. /square
Remark 5.24.The corresponding statement for the usual projective and ﬂat m odel
structures hold as well (by the same argument); however, for us the above ver-
sion will be more convenient as we later want to relate the above to ca tegories of
commutative algebras.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 47
Construction 5.25.LetHbe a ﬁnite group. Identifying H-ModG
Rwith the cat-
egory of modules in (H×G)-Spectra (withHacting trivially on R), we get
positive projective and ﬂat model structures on H-ModG
R, which are equivalently
transferred from (H×G)-Spectra along the evident forgetful functor.
Lemma 5.26. The above make ModG
Rinto a global model category MG
R.
Proof.We already observed that all of these model structures are comb inatorial,
simplicial, and (left) proper. To complete the proof that this deﬁnes apreglobal
model category it is then enough to note that α∗commutes with both UandR∧–
for anyα:H→H′, so thatα∗commutes with Uby passing to mates; thus, all the
functoriality properties follow from the corresponding statement s forSp+.
Similarly, the fact that MG
Ris aglobalmodel category follows from the corre-
sponding result for G-Sp+using the third formulation in Proposition 2.10. /square
Corollary 5.27. The global model category MG
Ris stable.
Proof.LetHbe a ﬁnite group and Aa ﬁniteH-set. Then SA∧– commutes with
the forgetful functor U, so it is homotopical. Thus, also the (total or equivalently
left) derived functors commute. Similarly, ΩAcommutes with U, and as both are
right Quillen their right derived functors also commute (via the mate o f the above
equivalence). The claimnow followsimmediately fromthe correspondin gstatement
forG-Sp(Proposition 3.6) as Ho( U) is conservative. /square
Lemma 5.28. LetGbe a ﬁnite group and let Rbe aﬂatG-global ring spectrum.
Then we have global Quillen adjunctions
R∧–:G-Sp+⇄MG
R:UandU:MG
R⇄G-Sp+:F(R,–)
Moreover, both R∧–andUare homotopical.
Proof.By deﬁnition, Upreserves weak equivalences as well as ﬁbrations in either
model structure; in particular, it is right Quillen. Moreover, it sends generating
coﬁbrations to coﬁbrations by Proposition 5.14, so it is also left Quillen . Finally,
alsoR∧– is homotopical by the Flatness Theorem (Proposition 1.47). /square
AsModG
Ris a stable model category, its homotopy category is naturally a tria n-
gulated category. For later use, we record a t-structure on this , for which we ﬁrst
have to recall the truehomotopy groups (as opposed to the na¨ ıve ones considered
before) of a G-global spectrum:
Construction 5.29.LetXbe aG-global spectrum, let ϕ:H→Gbe a homomor-
phism from a ﬁnite group H, and letk∈Z. We deﬁne the truek-thϕ-equivariant
homotopy group as
ˆπϕ
k(X) := [Σ•+k
+I(H,–)×ϕG,X],
where [,] denotes the hom set in the G-global stable homotopy category; note that
ˆπϕ
k(X) carries a natural abelian group structure by additivity of the latt er, and
that distinguished triangles induce long exact sequences in ˆ πϕ
∗by general nonsense
about triangulated categories.
We moreoverwrite ˆ πk(X) forthe collectionofall ϕ-equivarianthomotopygroups
for varying ϕ, together with all natural maps between them. For G= 1, this struc-
ture can be explicitly described as a global (Mackey) functor [Sch22, Remark 6.5];
we will never need an explicit description for non-trivial G.
Remark5.30.Thetrueϕ-equivarianthomotopygroupsof Xcanbe equivalentlyde-
scribed as the true H-equivariant homotopy groups of the H-equivariant spectrum
ϕ∗X, see [Len20, Corollary 3.3.4].48 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Proposition 5.31. LetRbe aG-global ring spectrum.
(1)The triangulated category Ho(ModG
R)is compactly generated with gener-
atorsR∧Σ•
+/parenleftbig
I(A,–)×ϕG/parenrightbig
for ﬁnite sets A, subgroups H⊂ΣA, and
homomorphisms ϕ:H→G.
(2)Assume that Risconnective , i.e. for every k<0the true homotopy groups
ˆπkR(of the underlying G-global spectrum) are trivial. Then Ho(ModG
R)
carries a t-structure with
•connective part the connective R-modules
•coconnective part those R-modulesXthat are coconnective in the
sense that ˆπkX= 0for allk>0.
Moreover, the connective part is the smallest subcategory c ontaining the
above generators that is closed under coproducts, extensio ns, and suspen-
sion.
Proof.ForR=S, i.e. the case of G-global spectra, these are part of [CLL23a,
Theorem 7.1.12] and its proof.
We will now deduce the general case from this. For this we ﬁrst note that we
have an exact adjunction
(5.4) R∧L–: Ho(G-SpectraG-global)⇄Ho(ModG
R) :U
with conservative right adjoint by construction, so the R∧Σ•
+I(A,–)×ϕGare a set
ofgenerators(herewesecretlyusedProposition1.47toidentify R∧LΣ•
+I(A,–)×ϕG
with the underived smash product). We now observe that coprodu cts ofG-global
spectra are homotopical [Len20, Lemma 3.1.43] and that Upreserves them on the
pointset level; it follows that also coproducts in ModG
Rare homotopical, and that
the right adjoint in (5 .4) preserves coproducts, so that its left adjoint preserves
compact objects. This completes the proof of the ﬁrst statemen t.
For the second statement, we use the above together with [ATLS0 3, Theo-
rem A.1] to obtain a t-structure on Ho( ModG
R) whose connective part is the
smallest subcategory closed under coproducts, suspensions, an d extensions con-
taining the R∧Σ•
+I(A,–)×ϕG’s; we claim that this is the t-structure described
above. To see this, we ﬁrst observe that an R-moduleXis coconnective in this
t-structure if and only if [Σ T,X] = 0 for all T∈Ho(ModG
R)≥0. Specializing to
T=R∧Σ•+k
+I(A,–)×ϕGand using the adjunction isomorphisms shows that Xis
then coconnective in the above sense. Conversely, for ﬁxed Xthe class of objects
Tsuch that [ΣkT,X] = 0 for all k>0 is easily seen to be closed under coproducts,
suspension, and extensions (using the long exact sequence for th e last statement),
so ifXhas trivial positive homotopy groups, then X∈Ho(ModG
R)≤0.
To identify the connective part, we will ﬁrst show:
Claim.LetX,Ybe connective G-global spectra. Then the derived smash product
X∧LYis again connective.
Proof.The derived smash product comes from a left Quillen bifunctor, so it p re-
serves coproducts in each variable and is exact in each variable. By t he t-structure
onG-global spectra recalled above, it therefore suﬃces to show that the (derived,
or equivalently underived) smash product of any two of the above g enerators of the
G-global model structure is again connective. However, a simple Yon eda argument
shows that Σ•
+I(A,–)∧Σ•
+I(B,–)∼=Σ•
+I(A∐B,–) naturally in AandB, so
/parenleftbig
Σ•
+I(A,–)×ϕG/parenrightbig
∧/parenleftbig
Σ•
+I(B,–)×ψG/parenrightbig∼=Σ•
+/parenleftbig
I(A∐B)×(G×G)/parenrightbig
/(H×K)
(whereH⊂ΣA,K⊂ΣBare the sources of ϕandψ, respectively), which is clearly
connective again. △GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 49
AsRis connective, the claim shows that the exact coproduct preservin g functor
U: Ho(ModG
R)→Ho(G-Spectra ) sends the chosen generators to connective spec-
tra; thus, Ho( ModG
R)≥0iscontainedinthepreimageunder UofHo(G-Spectra )≥0,
i.e. all objects of Ho( ModG
R)≥0are connective in the above sense. Conversely, if X
is connective then we have a distinguished triangle
X≥0→X→X≤−1→ΣX≥0
withX≥0∈Ho(ModG
R)≥0andX≤−1∈Ho(ModG
R)≤−1by the axioms of a t-
structure. Then X≥0is connective by the above and hence so is X≤−1by the long
exactsequence. Butontheotherhand, X≤−1hasvanishingnon-negativehomotopy
groups by the above identiﬁcation of the coconnective part, so X≤−1= 0 and hence
X∼=X≥0∈Ho(ModG
R)≥0as claimed. /square
As a consequence of Corollary 5.27, the suspension spectrum-loop space adjunc-
tiondeﬁnesaglobalQuillenequivalencebetween MG
RanditsstabilizationSp (MG
R),
so the latter contains no new homotopy theoretic information. Nev ertheless, the
concrete model will be useful later for comparisons to other stab ilizations, and we
close this discussion by understanding its weak equivalences a bit bet ter.
Lemma 5.32. LetRbe aG-global ring spectrum. Then the G-global weak equiva-
lences in Sp(MG
R)are closed under pushouts along injective coﬁbrations (i.e . level-
wise injections) as well as under arbitrary ﬁltered colimit s.
Proof.For the ﬁrst statement, let i:X→Ybe an injective coﬁbration, and let
f:X→Zbe aG-global weak equivalence. We factor f(say, in the projective
model structure) as an acyclic coﬁbration kfollowed by an acyclic ﬁbration p; in
particular,pisaG-globallevelweakequivalence. Thenwehaveaniteratedpushout
square
X H Z
Y K Pi
/rightanglenwf
k∼
/rightanglenwp∼
j
ℓ q
in whichℓis an acyclic coﬁbration (as a pushout of an acyclic coﬁbration) and jis
again an injective coﬁbration. Thus, applying left properness of th e injective model
structure levelwise we see that qis aG-global (level) weak equivalence; the claim
follows asqℓis a pushout of f=pkalongi.
The second statement follows similarly from the corresponding stat ement for
ModG
R, also see [Len20, Lemma A.2.4]. /square
Lemma 5.33. LetRbe a ﬂatG-global ring spectrum. Then both adjoints in the
Quillen adjunction
Sp(R∧–): Sp(G-Sp+)⇄Sp(MG
R) :Sp(U)
are homotopical. Moreover, the projective model structure onSp(MR
G)is transferred
from the projective model structure on Sp(G-Sp+)along the above adjunction, and
likewise for the ﬂat model structures.
Beware that in general stabilization does notcommute with transferring model
structures!
Proof.By Lemma 5.28 bothfunctors are left Quillen (for either model structure),
in particular they send ﬂat acyclic coﬁbrations to weak equivalences . Moreover,
both Sp( U) and Sp(R∧–) preserve level weak equivalences as UandR∧–are ho-
motopical by the aforementioned lemma. Factoring an arbitrary we ak equivalence50 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
into a ﬂat coﬁbration followed by a level weak equivalence we see that both functors
are in fact homotopical.
Now letf:X→Ybe a map in Sp( MG
R) such that Sp( U)(f) is a weak equiv-
alence; we have to show that fis a weak equivalence. As Sp( U) is homotopical,
we may assume by 2-out-of-3 that fis a map of ﬁbrant objects. But then also
Sp(U)(f) is a map of ﬁbrant objects, whence a level weak equivalence, so th at also
fis a (level) weak equivalence.
Finally, to prove that the projective and ﬂat model structures on Sp(MG
R) are
transferredalongtheaboveadjunction, wewillﬁrstshowthatth etransferredmodel
structures exist, and then prove that they agree with the given o nes.
For the existence, it suﬃces by local presentability that Sp( R∧–)(J)-cell com-
plexes are sent by Sp( U) to weak equivalences, where Jis our favourite set of
generating acyclic coﬁbrations. But as Sp( U) is left Quillen we only have to show
that Sp( U) sends maps in Sp( R∧–)(J) to acyclic coﬁbrations, which follows at
once since also Sp( R∧–) is left Quillen.
Now we simply observe that the transferred model structure has the correct
acyclic ﬁbrations (obviously) as well as weak equivalences (by the ab ove), so it
agrees with the given model structure as claimed. /square
Remark 5.34.The second half of the lemma holds true more generally for all (not
necessarily ﬂat) G-global ring spectra R; however, we will only need the above
version, which is slightly easier to prove.
5.4.Global model categories of algebras. Now we come to the key objects of
study for the rest of this paper.
Deﬁnition 5.35. Anultra-commutative G-global ring spectrum is a commutative
monoidR(for the smash product) in G-Spectra . We write:
(1)UComG=G-UCom for the category of commutative monoids
(2)UComG
Rforthecategoryof R-algebras(i.e.commutativemonoidsin ModG
R
for the relative smash product, which is canonically isomorphic to the slice
R/UComG).
Proposition 5.36. LetRbe a connective G-global ultra-commutative ring spectrum
and equip Ho(ModG
R)with the t-structure of Proposition 5.31. Then the derived
relative smash product restricts to functors
–∧L
R–: Ho(ModG
R)≥m×Ho(ModG
R)≥n→Ho(ModG
R)≥m+n
for allm,n∈Z.
Proof.The relative smash product comes from a left Quillen bifunctor, so it is
exact in each variable and moreover preserves coproducts in each variable. We
therefore reduce ﬁrst to the case m=n= 0, and then (by the characterization
of the connective part of the t-structure) to proving that the G-global spectrum
(R∧Σ•
+I(A,–)×ϕG)∧R(R∧Σ•
+I(B,–)×ϕG) is connective. But this is isomorphic
toR∧(Σ•
+I(A,–)×ϕG)∧(Σ•
+I(A,–)×ψG), which is connective by the claim in
the proof of Proposition 5.31 (and ﬂatness of the two suspension s pectra). /square
Next, we turn to model structures on UComGand more generally on categories
ofR-algebras for G-global ultra-commutative ring spectra R. These model struc-
tures can be constructed using the monoid axiom of [SS00] and the commutative
monoid axiom of [Whi17]. We recall the relevant results and then show t hat these
axioms are satisﬁed for the positive projective and ﬂat G-global model structures.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 51
Construction 5.37.Let (C,⊗,1) be a cocomplete closed symmetric monoidal cate-
gory. For any object XinC, we denote by PmX=X⊗m/Σmthem-th symmetric
power ofX. We consider a generalization of the pushout product
f/squareg:A⊗Y∐A⊗BX⊗B→X⊗Y
of two morphisms f:A→Xandg:B→Y:
Letf:A→Xbe a morphism in C, andm≥1. We consider the poset category
P({1,...,m}) and the hypercube-shaped diagram
W(f):P({1,...,m})→C,
S/m⊣pst≀→W1(f,S)⊗...⊗Wm(f,S),
where
Wk(f,S) =/braceleftBigg
Aifk /∈S,
Xifk∈S.
To an inclusion i:S ֒→T, the functor W(f) assigns the morphism W(f,i) =
W1(f,i)⊗...⊗Wm(f,i), where
Wk(f,i) =/braceleftBigg
id ifk /∈T/i⋉tegerdivideS,
fifk∈T/i⋉tegerdivideS.
This diagram deﬁnes a morphism
f/squarem:Qm:= colim P({1,...,m})/integerdivide{1,...,m}W(f)→X⊗m=W(f,{1,...,m}).
This morphism is Σ m-equivariantforthe actionsinduced by the permutation action
of Σmon{1,...,m}, and hence induces a map
(5.5) f/squarem/Σm:Qm/Σm→PmX=X⊗m/Σm.
on coinvariants.
Deﬁnition 5.38. Let (C,⊗,1) be a symmetric monoidal model category. We say
thatCsatisﬁes the
(1)monoid axiom if every/parenleftbig
{acyclic coﬁbrations }⊗C/parenrightbig
-cellular map is a weak
equivalence.
(2)commutative monoid axiom if for any acyclic coﬁbration f:X→Yand
anyn≥0, the map f/squaren/Σnis an acyclic coﬁbration.
(3)strong commutative monoid axiom if for any coﬁbration or acyclic coﬁbra-
tionf:X→Yand anyn≥0, the map f/squaren/Σnis a coﬁbration or an
acyclic coﬁbration, respectively.
Proposition 5.39. Let(C,⊗,1)be a combinatorial symmetric monoidal model
category satisfying the monoid axiom and commutative monoi d axiom, and let R
be a commutative monoid in C. Then:
(1)the category ModRofR-modules inherits a model structure from C, trans-
ferred along the adjunction
C ModR.R⊗–
U
(2)the category CAlgRof commutative R-algebras inherits a model structure
fromC, transferred along the free-forgetful adjunction
C CAlgR.R⊗P:=R⊗/coproducttext
n≥0Pn
U52 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
(3)the category NUCARof non-unital commutative R-algebras (i.e. R-modules
Mequipped with an associative and commutative multiplicati onM∧RM→
M) inherits a model structure from C, transferred along the free-forgetful
adjunction
C NUCAR.R⊗P>0:=R⊗/coproducttext
n>0Pn
U
Proof.The ﬁrst assertion is part of [SS00, Theorem 4.1], the second of [Wh i17,
Theorem 3.2, Remark 3.3] and the last of [Sta22, Theorem B.2.6]. /square
Remark 5.40.We comment on the proof of the result for non-unital commutative
algebras in [Sta22]. As for the other results, the main step is an analy sis of certain
pushouts in the category of non-unital commutative algebras. Fo r simplicity, we
restrict toR=1. Explicitly, for a symmetric monoidal model category ( C,⊗,1),
we consider morphisms h:K→Landp:K→XinC, whereXis a non-unital
commutative algebra, and we analyze the pushout
(5.6)P>0K P>0L
X PP>0h
˜p
f
in the category NUCA of non-unital commutative algebras. For the proof of Propo-
sition 5.39, we need to check that if his an acyclic coﬁbration, then the pushout
morphismf:X→Pis a weak equivalence. We show this by deﬁning a ﬁltration
X=P0f1−→P1f2−→...→colimn≥0Pn=P.
Here, thePnare iteratively deﬁned via pushouts
(Qn+1/Σn+1)∐X⊗(Qn+1/Σn+1) Pn+1L∐X⊗Pn+1L
Pn Pn+1.h/squaren+1/Σn+1∐X⊗h/squaren+1/Σn+1
tn+1 Tn+1
fn+1
We will never need to know how the vertical maps are deﬁned precise ly; informally,
tnis given by mapping all entries in KtoXviapand multiplying all resulting
terms from Xtogether, whereas all entries in Lare collected into P0<∗≤nL.
We will also need the following criterion for left properness:
Proposition 5.41. LetCbe a combinatorial symmetric monoidal model cate-
gory satisfying the monoid axiom and strong commutative mon oid axiom. Then
the transferred model structure on CAlgis left proper provided all of the following
conditions are satisﬁed:
(1)Cis left proper and ﬁltered colimits in it are homotopical.
(2)There exists a set of generating coﬁbrations for Cconsisting of maps be-
tweencoﬁbrant objects.
(3)For anyX∈Cand any coﬁbration i, pushouts along X⊗iare homotopy
pushouts.
(4)For any coﬁbrant X, the functor X⊗–is homotopical.
Proof.This is a special case of [Whi17, Theorem 4.17], also see [Len20, Theo-
rem 2.1.34] for the reduction to White’s result. /square
Let us now specialize this to algebraic structures on G-global spectra:GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 53
Proposition 5.42. LetGbe a ﬁnite group. Then the positive projective and posi-
tive ﬂatG-global model structures on G-Spectra are symmetric monoidal. More-
over, they satisfy both the monoid axiom as well as the strong commutative monoid
axiom.
Proof.The pushout product axiom is immediate from Corollary 5.14. Moreove r, if
p:S+→Sis a coﬁbrant replacement in either of these model structures, an dX
is anyG-spectrum, then X∧pis aG-global weak equivalence by ﬂatness of Sand
Proposition 1.47. Thus, both model structures are symmetric mon oidal.
For the monoid axiom, we simply observe once more that for any G-global spec-
trumRand any acyclic coﬁbration (say, in the positive ﬂat model structur e)jthe
mapR∧jis aG-global weak equivalence and an injective coﬁbration.
If nowfis a positive ﬂat coﬁbration then f/squarenis a positive ﬂat coﬁbration simply
by monoidality, also see [Hau17, Remark 6.9]; the strong commutative monoid ax-
iomforpositiveﬂatcoﬁbrationsfollowsas(–) /Σnpreservespositiveﬂatcoﬁbrations
(since triv Σnclearly preserves acyclic ﬁbrations).
In the projective case we explicitly compute that for a generating c oﬁbration
f=Σ(A,–)∧HG+∧(∂∆m֒→∆m) withHacting faithfully on A/ne}⊣ti≀nsl⊣sh=∅the map
f/squaren/Σnagrees up to isomorphism with
(5.7) Σ(n×A,–)∧Σn≀HGn
+∧(∂∆m֒→∆m)/squaren
+
where Σn≀Hacts onn×Avia (σ,h•).(i,a)/m⊣pst≀→(σ(i),hi.a), which is faithful as
A/ne}⊣ti≀nsl⊣sh=∅andHacts faithfully. Now ( ∂∆m֒→∆m)/squaren
+is a coﬁbration of simplicial
sets andGacts freely on Gn, soGn
+∧(∂∆m֒→∆m)/squaren
+is aGΣn≀H,G-coﬁbration,
whence (5.7) is a projective coﬁbration again.
Finally, for the (strong) commutative monoid axiom for acyclic coﬁbr ations,
we note that we can as before pick sets of generating acyclic coﬁbr ations con-
sisting of maps between positively ﬂat G-spectra. It therefore suﬃces by [GG16,
Corollaries 10 and 23] that for any G-global weak equivalence fof positively ﬂat
G-spectra also f∧n/Σnis a weak equivalence, which is precisely the content of
Corollary 5.21. /square
Corollary 5.43. LetGbe a ﬁnite group and let Rbe aG-global ultra-commutative
ring spectrum. Then the positive projective and ﬂat G-global model structures on
ModG
Rtransfer along the free-forgetful adjunction P:ModG
R⇄UComG
R:U. The
resulting model structures are again combinatorial, prope r, simplicial, and ﬁltered
colimits in it are homotopical.
Proof.Identifying UComG
Rwith the slice R/UComG, it suﬃces to consider the
caseR=S. Thus, the existence of the model structure follows from White’s
criterion (Proposition 5.39) and the previous proposition.
As the model structure is transferred from G-Spectra , we immediately see that
it is combinatorial, right proper, simplicial, and that ﬁltered colimits in it a re
homotopical. It remains to check left properness, for which we will v erify the
assumptions of Proposition 5.41:
We know from Propositions 5.6 and 5.7 that both positive model struc tures
onG-Spectra are left proper, that ﬁltered colimits in them are homotpical, and
moreover the standard generating coﬁbrations are maps of coﬁb rant objects. As
already observed above, for any Xand any (generating) coﬁbration i,X∧iis an
injective coﬁbration, so pushouts along it are homotopy pushouts . Finally, if X
is coﬁbrant in either of the two model structures, then X∧– is homotopical by
Proposition 1.47. /square
Again, we more generally get positive projective and ﬂat model stru ctures on
H-UComG
Rfor all ﬁnite groups H.54 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Lemma 5.44. These make UComG
Rinto a global model category ComG
R, and the
free-forgetful adjunction deﬁnes a global Quillen adjunct ionP:MG
R⇄ComG
R:U.
Proof.For the ﬁrst statement one argues precisely as for MG
R(Lemma 5.26). The
second statement is clear. /square
Deﬁnition5.45. LetRbeaG-globalultra-commutativeringspectrum, considered
asacommutativealgebraoveritselfinthe obviousway. An augmented commutative
R-algebra is an object of the slice UComG
R/R, i.e. a commutative R-algebraA
together with an R-algebra homomorphism ǫ:A→R(note thatǫis automatically
a retraction of the unit R→Aby unitality).
Remark5.46.Arguing asin Remark 3.2, UComG
R/Rcarriesa left propersimplicial
combinatorial model structure in which a map is a weak equivalence, ﬁ bration, or
coﬁbration, if and only if it is so in the positive projective model struc ture on
UComG
R. Analogously, we get a positive ﬂat model structure and via the usu al
identiﬁcations these make UComG
R/Rinto a global model category ComG
R/R.
Deﬁnition 5.47. LetRbe aG-global ultra-commutative ring spectrum. We de-
note the category of non-unital commutative R-algebras by NUCAG
R.
Corollary 5.48. LetGbe a ﬁnite group and let Rbe aG-global ultra-commutative
ring spectrum. Then the positive projective and ﬂat G-global model structures on
ModG
Rtransfer along the free-forgetful adjunction P>0:ModG
R⇄NUCAG
R:U.
The resulting model structures are again combinatorial, pr oper, simplicial, and ﬁl-
tered colimits in them are homotopical.
Proof.All statements except for left properness follow as in the case of o rdinary
commutative algebras (Corollary 5.43). For left properness, on th e other hand, we
observe that the (non-full) inclusion UComG
R֒→NUCAG
Radmits a left adjoint K
given byX/m⊣pst≀→(R֒→R∨X) with the unique multiplication extending the one on
X. ThenKpreserves(generating) coﬁbrationsby direct inspection, and it is homo-
topical by [Len20, Lemma 3.1.43]. Finally, it also reﬂects weak equivalen ces as on
the level of underlying G-spectraXis naturally a retract of R∨X=K(X). Thus,
left properness of NUCAG
Rfollows from left properness of UComG
Rby [Len20,
Lemma A.2.15]. /square
Again, we get more generally positive projective and ﬂat model stru ctures on
H-NUCAG
Rfor all ﬁnite groups H.
Lemma 5.49. These make NUCAG
Rinto a global model category NG
R, and the
free-forgetful adjunction deﬁnes a global Quillen adjunct ionP>0:MG
R⇄NG
R:U.
Proof.For the ﬁrst statement one argues precisely as for MG
R, while the second
statement is clear from the deﬁnitions. /square
6.Global topological Andr ´e-Quillen cohomology2
In this section, we introduce G-global versions of topological Andr´ e-Quillen co-
homology. The classical non-equivariant cohomology theory was int roduced by
Basterrain[Bas99]asacohomologytheoryfor(augmented)comm utativeS-algebras.
Thealgebraicpredecessorhomologytheory,asdeﬁnedbyAndr´ e andQuillen[And67,
Qui70], is deﬁned as a derived functor of K¨ ahler diﬀerentials which in t urn may
be constructed as the module of indecomposables of the augmenta tion ideal of
an augmented algebra. Both Basterra’s construction of topologic al Andr´ e-Quillen
(co)homology as well as our G-global version below mimic this construction.
2The contents of the ﬁrst two subsections of this section are a n adapted version of part of the
thesis of the second author [Sta22, Chapter 2].GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 55
6.1.The cotangent complex in general model categories. Our construction
works in a general abstract setting: throughout, we ﬁx a combina torial and stable
symmetric monoidal model category Csatisfying the monoid axiom and commuta-
tive monoid axiom, such that ﬁnite coproducts in Care homotopical; the examples
the reader should keep in mind and to which we will later specialize are th e positive
G-global model structures on G-Spectra constructed in Section 5.
Deﬁnition 6.1. LetRbe a commutative monoid in C, and letSbe an augmented
R-algebra, with augmentation ǫ:S→R. Then we deﬁne the augmentation ideal
I(S) ofSas the strict pullback
I(S)S
∗R/rightangleseǫ
in the category Mod RofR-modules.
This inherits the structure of a non-unital R-algebra from S, yielding a func-
torI: CAlgR/R→NUCAR. There also is a unitalization functor in the other
direction, given as
K: NUCAR→CAlgR/R, J/m⊣pst≀→R∐J.
This object is equipped with a multiplication using the multiplications on RandJ
as well as the R-module structure on J.
Additionally, we deﬁne a functor taking a non-unital commutative alg ebra to its
module of indecomposables.
Deﬁnition 6.2. LetRbe a commutative monoid in C, andJbe a non-unital
commutative R-algebra with multiplication map µ:J⊗RJ→J. Then we deﬁne
themodule of indecomposables Q(J) ofJas the strict pushout
J⊗RJ J
∗ Q(J)µ
/rightanglenw
in ModR.
This deﬁnes a functor Q: NUCAR→ModR. In the other direction, we can
equip anR-module with the zero multiplication to obtain a functor
Z: ModR→NUCAR.
Proposition 6.3. The functors
CAlgR/R NUCAR ModR
IK Q
Z
deﬁne two Quillen adjunctions for the induced model structu res from Section 5.4,
with left adjoints the top arrows. The Quillen adjunction K⊣Iis a Quillen
equivalence. Moreover, the functors KandZare homotopical.
Proof.The factthat the twopairsoffunctorsareadjointcanbe seenfr om explicitly
considering the unit and counit. For the ﬁrst adjunction, the unit is given by the
square
J R∐J
∗Rincl
pr56 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
and the counit by ( η,incl):R∐I(A)→A, whereη:R→Ais the unit map for the
algebraA. For the second adjunction, the unit is given by the projection J→Q(J)
from the deﬁning pushout, considered as a map of non-unital comm utative monoids
for the zero multiplication on Q(J). The counit is deﬁned by the square
M⊗RM M
∗ M∗
id
for anyR-moduleM, where the top morphism is the zero map.
The ﬁrst adjunction then is a Quillen adjunction, since Kpreserves both coﬁ-
brations and acyclic coﬁbrations of non-unital commutative algebr as. For this,
it suﬃces to check the generating (acyclic) coﬁbrations, which are of the form
R⊗P>0fforfa generating (acyclic) coﬁbration of C. These morphisms are sent
byKtoR⊗Pf, which are precisely the generating (acyclic) coﬁbrations for the
model structure on the category of augmented algebras. We con clude thatKis left
Quillen and hence the ﬁrst adjunction is a Quillen adjunction. Further more, since
coproducts are homotopical in C, alsoKis homotopical.
For the second adjunction, we observe that the right adjoint Zis the identity
on underlying objects and morphisms. Since for both the model cat egory of non-
unital algebras and modules, the ﬁbrations and weak equivalences a re deﬁned on
underlying objects, we see that Zis right Quillen and homotopical.
Finally, we need to check that K⊣Iis a Quillen equivalence. We check the
following criterion from [Hov99, Deﬁnition 1.3.12]: Let J∈NUCARbe a coﬁbrant
non-unital commutative R-algebra and S∈CAlgR/Rbe a ﬁbrant augmented
algebra. Then we have to show that a morphism f:KJ→Sis a weak equivalence
if and only if its adjoint ˜f:J→ISis a weak equivalence. Since Sis ﬁbrant, the
augmentation ǫ:S→Ris a ﬁbration in C, and hence the deﬁning diagram
I(S)S
∗Rincl
ǫ
is a homotopy pullback square in C. The map η:R→Adeﬁnes a section to ǫ, so
the distinguished triangle
I(S)incl−−→Sǫ−→R→ΣI(S)
in Ho( C) splits and the counit ( η,incl) is a weak equivalence. Moreover, since ˜fis
a retract of R∐˜fandR∐(–) is homotopical, one is a weak equivalence if and only
if the other is one. In total, since we have the relation f= (η,i)◦(R∐˜f), we see
thatK⊣Iis a Quillen equivalence. /square
We also have a base-change adjunction
(6.1) CAlgR/S CAlgS/SS⊗R–
forget
foranyR-algebraS. Sincethe forgetfulfunctoristheidentity onunderlyingobjects
and morphisms, it is right Quillen, so also this adjunction is a Quillen adjun ction.
Deﬁnition 6.4. LetRbe a commutative monoid in Cand letSbe a commutative
R-algebra. Then we deﬁne the abelianization functor as the composite
AbS/R: Ho(CAlgR/S)S⊗L
R–−−−−→Ho(CAlgS/S)RI−−→Ho(NUCA S)LQ−−→Ho(ModS).GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 57
Remark 6.5.The name abelianization for the above construction originates in alge-
bra,whereitisanobservationgoingbacktoBeck[Bec03]thatabelia ngroupobjects
in the category of augmented algebras over a commutative ring Rare equivalently
R-modules, with the equivalence given by square-zero extensions in o ne direction
andtheaugmentationidealintheother. OnethenobservesthatK ¨ ahlerdiﬀerentials
deﬁne a left adjoint functor to the inclusion of abelian group object s, interpreted
as modules, into all augmented algebras.
In our context of G-global homotopy theory, we show in Theorem 6.38 that
AbR/R=LQRIcan be interpreted as a global stabilization.
Proposition 6.6. LetRbe a commutative monoid in CandSbe a commutative
R-algebra. The functors
Ho(CAlgR/S) Ho(Mod S)AbS/R
LK◦RZ
are adjoint, with abelianization being the left adjoint.
Proof.We use the Quillen adjunctions from Proposition 6.3 and (6.1) to calcula te
for anS-moduleMand anR-algebraTwith augmentation to S:
Ho(ModS)(AbS/R(T),M)∼=Ho(NUCA S)((RI)(S⊗L
RT),(RZ)(M))
∼=Ho(CAlgS/S)((LK)(RI)(S⊗L
RT),(LK)(RZ)(M))
∼=Ho(CAlgR/S)(T,(LK)(RZ)(M)). /square
Using these adjunctions, we now deﬁne the cotangent complex:
Deﬁnition 6.7. LetRbe a commutative monoid in CandSbe anR-algebra.
The cotangent complex of SoverRis deﬁned as the object
ΩS/R= AbS/R(S) = (LQ)(RI)(S⊗L
RS)
in Ho(Mod S).
Example 6.8.IfR→Sis a weak equivalence, then Sis initial in Ho(CAlgR/S).
As AbS/Ris a left adjoint by the proposition above, we conclude that Ω S/R= 0.
For any square
R R′
S S′
in the model category CAlg, we obtain an induced morphism on cotang ent com-
plexes ΩS/R→ΩS′/R′asS-modules. This arises from the universal property of
pushouts and pullbacks.
For any commutative R-algebraS, we also obtain a natural universal derivation
(6.2) dS/R:S→ΩS/R
by composing the unit S→S∐ΩS/R= (KZ)(AbS/R(S)) of the adjunction in
Proposition 6.6 with the projection to Ω S/R.
This cotangent complex behaves just as in the classical case of com mutative
algebras, in that is comes with a transitivity exact sequence and a ba se-change
formula. These properties allow us to consider the cotangent comp lex as deﬁning
a cohomology theory for augmented commutative algebras. In ord er to establish
these properties, we ﬁrst need to consider how the augmentation ideal and inde-
composables behave under base changes.58 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Lemma 6.9. LetRbe a commutative monoid in C, letSbe a commutative R-
algebra, and let Tbe an augmented commutative R-algebra. Then the commutative
square
(6.3)IR(T)⊗RS T⊗RS
∗ S
induces a morphism
RIR(T)⊗L
RS→RIS(T⊗L
RS),
which is an isomorphism in the homotopy category of non-unit al commutative S-
algebras.
Proof.The square (6.3) induces a natural transformation IR(–)⊗RS⇒IS(–⊗RS)
by considering pullbacks. Here, the functor (–) ⊗RScan be left derived, and
the functors Ican be right derived. We thus consider the double category of
model categories and left and right derivable functors. In this con text, [Shu11,
Theorem 7.6] shows that taking homotopy categories and derived f unctors is a
double pseudofunctor. In particular, the natural transformat ion above induces a
transformation
RIR(–)⊗L
RS⇒RIS(–⊗L
RS)
as desired.
SinceIis a Quillen equivalence with inverse K, we can show that this trans-
formation is a natural isomorphism in the homotopy category by con sidering its
mate
LKS(–⊗L
RS)⇒LKR(–)⊗L
RS.
This transformation is induced from the natural isomorphism S∐(–⊗RS)∼=
(R∐–)⊗RSof left Quillen functors, and hence is a natural isomorphism. /square
Lemma 6.10. LetRbe a commutative monoid in C, letSbe a commutative
R-algebra and Jbe a non-unital commutative R-algebra. Then the commutative
square
(6.4)(J⊗RJ)⊗RS J⊗RS
∗ QR(J)⊗RS
induces a morphism
LQS(J⊗L
RS)→LQR(T)⊗L
RS,
which is an isomorphism in the homotopy category of S-modules.
Proof.As both the functors labelled Qand the base change (–) ⊗RSare left
Quillen functors, the desired morphism can be obtained from the nat ural mor-
phismQS(J⊗L
RS)→QR(J)⊗L
RSinduced on pushouts by the diagram (6.4),
by considering coﬁbrant replacements. Moreover, as (–) ⊗RSis a left adjoint, it
preserves pushouts, which implies that this morphism is an isomorphis m. /square
Lemma 6.11. LetRbe a commutative monoid in Cand letSandTbe commu-
tativeR-algebras with a map S→Tof commutative R-algebras. Assume moreover
thatCAlg( C)is left proper or that Sis coﬁbrant as a commutative R-algebra. Then
a homotopy coﬁber of S⊗L
RT→T⊗L
RTinCAlgT/Tis given by T⊗L
ST.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 59
Proof.This statement may be shown by considering coﬁbrant replacement s. In
order to calculate S⊗L
RT, we consider a coﬁbrant replacement Γ RS→SofSas
a commutative R-algebra. Moreover, in order to calculate T⊗L
RT, we decompose
the morphism Γ RS→S→Tinto a coﬁbration followed by a weak equivalence as
ΓRS→ΓRT→T.
We now take the homotopy coﬁber of
ΓRS⊗RT→ΓRT⊗RT.
This morphism arises from applying the left Quillen functor – ⊗RT: CAlgR/T→
CAlgT/Tto the coﬁbration Γ RS→ΓRTbetween coﬁbrant objects, so it is itself
a coﬁbration between coﬁbrant objects. Hence, its homotopy co ﬁber is represented
by the 1-categorical coﬁber, which can be calculated as
(ΓRT⊗RT)⊗ΓRS⊗RTT∼=(ΓRT⊗ΓRSΓRS⊗RT)⊗ΓRS⊗RTT∼=ΓRT⊗ΓRST.
We now need to compare this with Γ ST⊗ST, where Γ STis a coﬁbrant replacement
ofTasacommutative S-algebra. Forthis, itsuﬃcestoestablishaweakequivalence
ΓRT⊗ΓRSS→ΓSTof commutative S-algebras. As both Γ RT⊗ΓRSSand ΓSTare
coﬁbrantS-algebras (since – ⊗ΓRSSis left Quillen and by deﬁnition, respectively),
the left Quillen functor – ⊗STthen preserves this weak equivalence.
In order to establish this weak equivalence, we consider the diagram
ΓRS S ΓST
ΓRT⊗ΓRSS
ΓRT T.≃
≃
≃
Here,S→ΓST→Tis the factorization of S→Tinto a coﬁbration followed by
an acyclic ﬁbration provided by the coﬁbrant replacement Γ ST. As ΓRS→ΓRT
is a coﬁbration, so is S→ΓRT⊗ΓRSSand the diagonal dashed morphisms exist
by the lifting property. Moreover, since either the categories in qu estion are left
proper orSis coﬁbrant, we conclude that the morphism Γ RT→ΓRT⊗ΓRSSis a
weak equivalence. Hence we indeed have a weak equivalence Γ RT⊗ΓRSS→ΓST
as desired by the 2-out-of-3 property. /square
From this coﬁber calculation, we deduce the transitivity sequence f or the cotan-
gent complex.
Theorem 6.12. LetR→S→Tbe a sequence of commutative monoids in C.
Moreover, assume that either CAlg( C)is left proper or that Sis coﬁbrant as a
commutative R-algebra. Then the sequence
ΩS/R⊗L
ST→ΩT/R→ΩT/S,
induced from functoriality of Ω, admits the structure of a homotopy coﬁber sequence
ofT-modules.
Proof.We consider the morphism S⊗L
RT→T⊗L
RTofT-algebrasaugmented to T.
By Lemma 6.11, the homotopy coﬁber of this morphism in CAlgT/Tis given by
T⊗L
ST. SinceIis a Quillen equivalence and Qis left Quillen, applying LQT◦RIT
to the resulting homotopy coﬁber sequence yields a homotopy coﬁb er sequence of
T-modules. This takes the form
LQT(RIT(S⊗L
RT))→LQT(RIT(T⊗L
RT))→LQT(RIT(T⊗L
ST)).
The last two terms are by deﬁnition the cotangent complexes Ω T/Rand ΩT/S. We
thus only have to identify the ﬁrst term as Ω S/R⊗L
ST.60 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
For this, we observe that S⊗L
RT∼=(S⊗L
RS)⊗L
STand use Lemmas 6.9 and 6.10
to calculate
LQT(RIT(S⊗L
RT))∼=LQT(RIT((S⊗L
RS)⊗L
ST))
∼=LQT(RIS(S⊗L
RS)⊗L
ST)
∼=LQS(RIS(S⊗L
RS))⊗L
ST
∼=ΩS/R⊗L
ST.
In total, we obtain the desired homotopy coﬁber sequence. /square
As a special case of the previous theorem we can now make precise t hat the
cotangent complex is homotopy invariant in each variable.
Corollary 6.13. AssumeCAlg( C)is left proper, let R′→Rbe a weak equivalence
of commutative monoids in C, and letSbe a commutative R-algebra. Then the
induced map ΩS/R′→ΩS/Rin the homotopy category of S-modules is an isomor-
phism.
Proof.By the previous theorem, the homotopy ﬁber of the this map is given by
ΩR/R′⊗L
RS, which is trivial by Example 6.8. The claim follows by stability of
C. /square
In the same way one shows:
Corollary 6.14. AssumeCAlg( C)is left proper, let Rbe a commutative monoid,
and letS→S′be a weak equivalence of commutative R-algebras. Then the induced
mapΩS/R⊗L
SS′→ΩS′/Ris an isomorphism in the homotopy category of S′-
modules. /square
Moreover, we also get base change and additivity results.
Proposition 6.15. LetRbe a commutative monoid in CandSandTbe two
commutative R-algebras. Assume that CAlg( C)is left proper or that SandTare
coﬁbrant in R/CAlg( C). Then there are natural isomorphisms
ΩS⊗L
RT/T∼=ΩS/R⊗L
RTand
ΩS⊗L
RT/R∼=(ΩS/R⊗L
RT)∐(S⊗L
RΩT/R).
Proof.For the ﬁrst assertion, we calculate
ΩS⊗L
RT/T∼=LQS⊗L
RT(RIS⊗L
RT((S⊗L
RT)⊗L
T(S⊗L
RT)))
∼=LQS⊗L
RT(RIS⊗L
RT((S⊗L
RS)⊗L
S(S⊗L
RT)))
∼=LQS⊗L
RT(RIS(S⊗L
RS)⊗L
S(S⊗L
RT))
∼=LQS(RIS(S⊗L
RS))⊗L
S(S⊗L
RT)
∼=ΩS/R⊗L
RT.
The second assertion follows from observing that the transitivity c oﬁber sequences
forR→S→S⊗L
RTandR→T→S⊗L
RTﬁt together to deﬁne splittings for each
other, and applying the ﬁrst assertion to the resulting cotangent complexes. /square
6.2.Topological Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology of G-global ring spectra. By
Proposition 5.42, the positive G-global model structures on G-Spectra are sym-
metric monoidal and satisfy the monoid and strong commutative mon oid axiom;
moreover, coproducts in them are homotopical by [Len20, Lemma 3.1.43]. We can
therefore specialize the above discussion to this setting, yielding:GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 61
Deﬁnition 6.16. LetRbe aG-global ultra-commutative ring spectrum and Sbe
anR-algebra. The cotangent complex of SoverRis deﬁned as
ΩS/R= (LQ)(RI)(S∧L
RS).
This is an S-module, and the homology and cohomology theories represented b y
it are called (G-global) topological Andr´ e-Quillen (co)homology . Explicitly, for an
S-moduleM, topological Andr´ e-Quillen (co)homology of SoverRwith coeﬃcients
inMis deﬁned as
TAQ∗(S,R;M) = ˆπ∗(ΩS/R∧L
SM)
TAQ∗(S,R;M) = ˆπ−∗(RF(ΩS/R,M)).
Here,Fdenotes the internal hom in the category of S-modules.
As a consequence of Theorem 6.12 and Proposition 6.15, we obtain a t ransitivity
sequence and base change for these. We explicitly state the trans itivity sequence
in homotopy groups.
Corollary 6.17. LetR→S→Tbe morphisms of G-global ultra-commutative
ring spectra, and let Mbe aT-module. Then there are long exact sequences
···→TAQn+1(T,S;M)→TAQn(S,R;M)→TAQn(T,R;M)→TAQn(T,S;M)→···
and
···→TAQn(T,S;M)→TAQn(T,R;M)→TAQn(S,R;M)→TAQn+1(T,S;M)→···
induced from the coﬁbre sequence from Theorem 6.12. /square
We now present two applications of the above theory to the study o fG-global
ultra-commutative ring spectra. The ﬁrst is a Hurewicz theorem, w hich says that
vanishing of the (relative) Andr´ e-Quillenhomology detects equivale nces ofG-global
ultra-commutative ring spectra. The other application is a constru ction of Post-
nikov towers for global ultra-commutative ring spectra, with k-invariants in global
topological Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology. These applications are analo gous to the
usage of topological Andr´ e-Quillen homology in [Bas99, Chapter 8], b ut the proofs
are simpliﬁed by the use of t-structures.
Both of these results need a connectivity hypothesis, and the ﬁrs t step is to
consider how the indecomposables functor Qinteracts with connectivity.
Lemma 6.18. LetRbe a connective G-global ultra-commutative ring spectrum
andJbe a coﬁbrant non-unital commutative R-algebra. Suppose moreover that J
isn-connected for n≥0. Then also Q(J)isn-connected, and the adjunction unit
q:J→Q(J)induces an isomorphism on ˆπkforn+1≤k≤2n+1.
Proof.The module of indecomposables is deﬁned via the coﬁber sequence
J∧RJ→Jη− →Q(J)
ofR-modules. Here, Jisn-connected by assumption, while J∧RJis (2n+ 1)-
connected by Proposition 5.36; the claim follows from the long exact s equence. /square
We now come to the Hurewicz theorem. To state this, recall the univ ersalderiva-
tiondS/R:S→ΩS/Rfor anyR-algebraη:R→S. By naturality, the composite
Rη−→SdS/R−−−→ΩS/R
in Ho(ModG
R) will factor through Ω R/R, so it is zero by Example 6.8. Thus, dS/R
alwaysnon-canonically factors through an R-module map C(η)→ΩS/R.62 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Theorem 6.19 (Hurewicztheorem) .LetRbe aconnective G-global ultra-commuta-
tive ring spectrum and let Sbe a connective commutative R-algebra such that the
unit mapη:R→Sis ann-equivalence for n≥1. ThenΩS/Risn-connected,
the factorization of dS/RthroughC(η)is unique, and this induces an isomorphism
ˆπn+1(C(η))∼=ˆπn+1(ΩS/R).
Proof.After coﬁbrant replacement, we may assume that Sis a coﬁbrant commu-
tativeR-algebra. We consider the diagram
R S C (η)
S S∧RS S∧RC(η).η
η ι
The ﬁrst line of the diagram is a coﬁber sequence by deﬁnition, and th e second
line arises from it by applying S∧R–. SinceSis coﬁbrant, this again is a coﬁber
sequence. The vertical morphisms are the inclusions as the right fa ctors. By Propo-
sition 6.3, the counit
S∨RI(S∧RS)→S∧RS
is an equivalence, and thus by comparing coﬁbers we obtain S∧RC(η)∼=RI(S∧R
S). We now consider the composition
C(η)ι− →S∧RC(η)∼=RI(S∧RS)q− →ΩS/R,
where the last map is an instance of the unit map J→LQ(J) considered in
Lemma 6.18, for the non-unital algebra J=S∧RC(η)∼=RI(S∧RS). Sinceηis
n-connected, so is C(η). AsSis connective, also S∧RC(η) isn-connected, and the
morphismιis an isomorphism on ˆ πkfork≤n+1. By Lemma 6.18, also qinduces
an isomorphism on ˆ πkfork≤n+1, ﬁnishing the proof that Ω S/Risn-connected
and that ˆπn+1(C(η))∼=ˆπn+1(ΩS/R) via the above composite C(η)→ΩS/R.
Unravelling the deﬁnition of this morphism C(η)→ΩS/R, we observe that it is
indeed induced by the universal derivation dS/R:S→ΩS/R. It then only remains
to prove uniqueness of the factorization through C(η), for which we consider the
following portion of the long exact sequence in cohomologyassociate dto the coﬁber
sequenceR→S→C(η):
···←[S,ΩS/R]←[C(η),ΩS/R]←[ΣR,ΩS/R]←···
Here [,] denotes hom sets in Ho( ModG
R). The claim amounts to saying that
[S,ΩS/R]←[C(η),ΩS/R] is injective, for which it suﬃces that [Σ R,ΩS/R] = 0.
But indeed, by adjunction [Σ R,ΩS/R]∼=ˆπidG
1(ΩS/R) which vanishes as Ω S/Ris
n-connected by the above and we have assumed n≥1. /square
Corollary 6.20. LetRbe a connective G-global ultra-commutative ring spectrum,
and letSbe a connective R-algebra such that the unit map η:R→Sis1-connected
andΩS/R≃0. Thenη:R→Sis already an equivalence.
Proof.Supposeηis not an equivalence, and let ˆ πk(C(η)),k≥2 be the ﬁrst non-
trivial homotopy group of the cone. Then also ˆ πk(ΩS/R)/ne}⊣ti≀nsl⊣sh= 0 by Theorem 6.19, in
contradiction to triviality of the cotangent complex. /square
Next, we construct Postnikov towers for global ultra-commutat ive ring spectra.
For this, we explain how elements of the topological Andr´ e-Quillen co homology
parametrize extensions of algebras.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 63
Construction 6.21.LetRbe aG-global ultra-commutative ring spectrum, Sbe a
commutative R-algebra and Mbe anS-module. By adjunction and the deﬁnition
of topological Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology, we have the identiﬁcation s
TAQn
idG(S,R;M)∼=Ho(G-Spectra )/parenleftbig
S,ΣnRF(ΩS/R,M)/parenrightbig
∼=Ho(G-Spectra )/parenleftbig
S,RF(ΩS/R,ΣnM)/parenrightbig
∼=Ho(ModG
S)/parenleftbig
S,RF(ΩS/R,ΣnM)/parenrightbig
∼=Ho(ModG
S)(ΩS/R,ΣnM)
∼=Ho(UComG
R/S)(S,S∨ΣnM).
In particular, for a given class k∈TAQn
idG(S,R;M), we may interpret it as a
morphismS→S∨ΣnMofcommutative R-algebrasover S. We formthe homotopy
pullback
S[k] S
S S∨ΣnMι
k
inR-algebras and call it the extension of Sbyk. Here, the right vertical map is
the inclusion of Sas the ﬁrst wedge summand.
Topological Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology can be related to usual coho mology rep-
resented by a G-global spectrum by the universal derivation dS/R:S→ΩS/Rcon-
structedin(6.2). Precompositionwiththisderivationtakesamap ˜k: ΩS/R→ΣnM
representing an element in TAQn
idG(S,R;M) to the map ˜k◦dS/R:S→ΣnM. By
the deﬁnition of the universal derivation, this agrees (in the homot opy category)
with the composition
pr◦k:S→S∨ΣnM→ΣnM,
wherekis the adjoint to ˜kunder the adjunction between square-zero extensions
and K¨ ahler diﬀerentials.
Using this translation, we observe that S[k] is also the homotopy pullback in the
total square
S[k] S∗
S S∨ΣnM ΣnMι
k pr
and hence the homotopy ﬁber of ˜k◦dS/Rin the category of R-modules.
IfXis any ultra-commutative ring spectrum, then its zeroth homotopy groups
ˆπ0Xcome with additional norm maps, deﬁned via the multiplication on smash
powers, giving them the structure of a so-called global power functor [Sch18, Deﬁ-
nition 5.1.6]. In the next theorem, we will need that conversely any glo bal power
functorFgives rise to an ultra-commutative Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum HF,
i.e. an ultra-commutative global ring spectrum with ˆ π0(HF)∼=Fas global power
functors and ˆ πk(HF) = 0 fork/ne}⊣ti≀nsl⊣sh= 0, see [Sch18, Theorem 5.4.14]. As the corre-
sponding result in G-globalhomotopytheory for general Ghas not been established
yet, this means we have to restrict to G= 1 here; however, once the correspond-
ing theory of Eilenberg-MacLane spectra is set up, the same result will hold for
arbitraryG, with the same proof.
Theorem 6.22. LetRbe a connective global ultra-commutative ring spectrum.
Then there is a sequence R0,R1,...of commutative R-algebras together with maps64 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Rn+1→RnofR-algebras and classes kn∈TAQn+1
e(Rn,R;Hˆπn+1(R)), such that
the following properties are satisﬁed:
(1)R0∼=Hˆπ0(R)andRn+1∼=Rn[kn],
(2) ˆπk(Rn) = 0fork>n,
(3)the unit maps ηn:R→Rnare(n+1)-equivalences.
Proof.We deﬁneR0=Hˆπ0(R) as an Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum for the global
power functor ˆ π0(R). This is a global ultra-commutative ring spectrum, and it
comes with a morphism η0:R→Hˆπ0(R) of ultra-commutative ring spectra induc-
ing an isomorphism on ˆ π0(see the remark before [Sch18, Theorem 5.4.14]). Hence
R0is a possible ﬁrst stage of the Postnikov tower.
Now suppose that we have constructed the tower up to level n. In particular,
we have a morphism ηn:R→Rnof ultra-commutative ring spectra that is an
(n+1)-equivalence, and ˆ πn+2(Rn) = ˆπn+1(Rn) = 0. The Hurewicz theorem 6.19
showsthat thus Ω Rn/Ris (n+1)-connectedand ˆ πn+2(ΩRn/R)∼=ˆπn+1(R). This iso-
morphism deﬁnes a morphism ˜kn: ΩRn/R→Σn+2Hˆπn+1(R) ofR-modules, which
corresponds to an element kn∈TAQn+1
e(Rn,R;Hˆπn+1(R)).
Using this element and Construction 6.21, we deﬁne Rn+1=Rn[kn]. This comes
with a map Rn+1→RnofR-algebras. Furthermore, as an R-module, the algebra
Rn+1is the homotopy ﬁber of the map
RndRn/R−−−−→ΩRn/R˜kn−→Σn+2Hˆπn+1(R).
Hencethemorphism ηn+1:R→Rn+1isindeedan( n+2)-equivalenceandallhigher
homotopy groups of Rn+1vanish. Thus, the theorem follows by induction. /square
6.3.Equivariant topologicalAndr´ e-Quillen(co)homology. By[Hau17,The-
orem 4.7] the G-equivariant ﬂat model structure recalled in Theorem 1.14 also ad-
mits a ‘positive’ version, with the same weak equivalences, but with co ﬁbrations
thepositiveﬂat coﬁbrations. In this subsection, we will specialize the cotangen t
complex formalism to this setting, yielding a deﬁnition of G-equivariant topological
Andr´ e-Quillen (co)homology, and we will explain how it relates to the G-global
theory developed in the previous section.
Proposition 6.23. The positive G-equivariant ﬂat model structure on G-spectra
satisﬁes all the assumptions for the construction of the the abstract cotangent com-
plex, i.e.
(1)It is a combinatorial stable model category.
(2)It is a symmetric monoidal model category and it satisﬁes bot h the monoid
axiom and the commutative monoid axiom.
(3)Finite coproducts are homotopical.
Moreover, the induced model structure on commutative monoi ds (i.e. commutative
G-ring spectra) is left proper.
Proof.By[Hau17, discussionafterTheorem4.8], thepositiveﬂatequivarian tmodel
structure is combinatorial. Moreover,it is stable as the usual equiv ariant ﬂat model
structure is so.
By[Hau17, Subsection 6.1], the model structureismoreoversymme tric monoidal
and satisﬁes the monoid axiom, while the strong commutative monoid a xiom is
veriﬁed in Proposition 6.22 of op. cit.
The third property is an instance of [Hau17, Proposition 4.2-(1)].
Finally, to show that the induced model structure on commutative m onoids is
left proper, it suﬃces to verify the assumptions of Proposition 5.41 .
The positive ﬂat model structure is left proper by [Hau17, Proposit ion 4.2-(4)],
andmoregenerally loc. cit.showsthat foranycoﬁbration ipushouts along X∧iareGLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 65
homotopy pushouts. To prove that ﬁltered colimits in it are homotop ical, it suﬃces
to consider the usual equivariant ﬂat model structure. By [Len20 , Lemma A.2.4] it
then further suﬃces to prove the analogous statement for the e quivariant ﬂat level
model structure, where this is clear.
The standard generating coﬁbrations are maps of coﬁbrant obje cts. Finally,
the equivariant Flatness Theorem [Hau17, Proposition 6.2-(i)] in par ticular shows
that smashing with any ﬁxed coﬁbrant object is homotopical. This co mpletes the
veriﬁcation of the assumptions of Proposition 5.41 and hence the pr oof that the
transferred model structure on commutative monoids is left prop er. /square
We therefore obtain a G-equivariant cotangent complex for any map R→Sof
commutative G-ring spectra, that we will denote by ΩG-equiv
S/Rto avoid confusion
with theG-global cotangent complex ΩG-gl
S/Rof the previous section. Explicitly:
Deﬁnition 6.24. LetRbe a commutative G-ring spectrum, and let Sbe a com-
mutativeR-algebra. We deﬁne
ΩG-equiv
S/R:=LQRI(S∧L
RS)
and call it the G-equivariant cotangent complex . HereQis the indecomposables
functor as before, Idenotes the augmentation ideal, and all functors are derived
with respect to the (lifts of the) equivariant positive ﬂat model structure.
For anyS-moduleMwe then deﬁne the G-equivariant topological Andr´ e-Quillen
(co)homology groups as the true equivariant homotopy groups
TAQequiv
∗(S,R;M) = ˆπ∗(ΩS/R∧L
SM)
TAQ∗
equiv(S,R;M) = ˆπ−∗(RF(ΩS/R,M)).
Remark 6.25.ForG= 1, this recovers Basterra’s original construction of topolog-
ical Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology [Bas99] (translated from S-modules to symmetric
spectra).
The results of Subsection 6.1 then specialize to show that this is homo topy
invariant, comes with a transitivity long exact sequence, and satisﬁ es the base-
change formula.
Remark 6.26.There is also a positive analogue of the equivariant projective model
structure [Hau17, Theorem 4.8], with the usual weak equivalences a nd with gener-
ating coﬁbrations the maps
(Σ(A,–)∧G+)/H∧(∂∆n֒→∆n)+
for all ﬁnite non-empty A,H⊂G×ΣA, andn≥0. While this does notsatisfy
the commutative monoid axiom, the transferred model structure s on commutative
algebras and NUCAs still exist as the Crans-Kan transfer criterion for the positive
projective model structures is a formal consequence from the o ne for the positive
ﬂatmodel structures. As both ZandIare still right Quillen for these model
structures by direct inspection, we can then equivalently deﬁne th e equivariant
cotangent complex by deriving with respect to the positive equivaria ntprojective
model structures everywhere.
6.3.1.G-global vs.G-equivariant topological Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology. In orderto
comparethese construction to their G-globalanalogues, we ﬁrst have to understand
how to embed commutative G-ring spectra into G-global ultra-commutative ring
spectra.
Lemma 6.27. The identity constitutes a Quillen adjunction
G-SpectraG-equivariant pos. proj. ⇄G-SpectraG-global pos. ﬂat .66 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Proof.By Proposition 1.48, (acyclic) coﬁbrations in the projective G-equivariant
model structure are also (acyclic) coﬁbrations in the G-global ﬂat model structure.
As the positive equivariant projective model structure has fewer coﬁbrations than
the usual equivariant projective model structure, it then only re mains to show that
the generating coﬁbrations of the positiveequivariant projective model structure
arepositive ﬂat coﬁbrations. This follows immediately from Lemma 5.4 as the
above generating coﬁbrations are clearly isomorphisms in degree ∅. /square
In particular, we have an exact adjunction
L: Ho(G-SpectraG-equiv)⇄Ho(G-SpectraG-global) :forget
of triangulated categories in which the right adjoint is a localization an dLis there-
fore fully faithful; we call the objects in its essential image left induced .
Using the transferred model structures (Remark 6.26), the iden tity then also
deﬁnes Quillen adjunctions between commutative monoids, yielding an adjunction
Lcom: Ho(UComG-equiv)⇄Ho(UComG-gl) :forget.
Here the right adjoint is still a localization, so that Lcomis fully faithful; again, we
call the objects in its essential image left induced .
Warning 6.28.The diagram
Ho(UComG-equiv) Ho( UComG-gl)
Ho(G-SpectraG-equiv) Ho( G-SpectraG-gl)Lcom
forget forget
L
doesnotcommute, even for G= 1.
For example, the spectrum X:= Σ•
+I(1,–)∼=Σ(1,–)∧S1is coﬁbrant in the
positive non-equivariant projective model structure, so the fre e commutative ring
spectrum P(X) :=/logicalortext
n≥0Σ•
+I(n,–)/Σnis coﬁbrant in the corresponding model
structure on commutative monoids, hence represents a left induc ed commutative
ring spectrum. However, the global stable homotopy type repres ented by its un-
derlying spectrum is notleft induced: for example, it contains Σ•
+I(2,–)/Σ2as a
retract, which is non-equivariantly but not globally weakly equivalent toLΣ∞
+BΣ2.
Construction 6.29.LetRbe a commutative G-ring spectrum. In the same way
as before, we get an adjunction Ho( ModG-equiv
R)⇄Ho(ModG-gl
R). We will now
explain how we can modify this to instead obtain an adjunction that lan ds in
modules overLcomR.
For this note that on the pointset level, LcomRis simply a coﬁbrant replacement
in the positive projective equivariant model structure, and in part icular it comes
with an equivariant weak equivalence ǫ:LcomR→R(modelling the counit of the
derived adjunction). We can therefore consider the composite
LR: Ho(ModG-equiv
R)ǫ∗
−→Ho(ModG-equiv
LcomR)L− →Ho(ModG-gl
LcomR).
Lemma 6.30. The functor ǫ∗is an equivalence. In particular, LRis fully faithful.
Proof.The functor ǫ∗is conservative and it has a left adjoint ǫ!=L(R∧LcomR–).
It therefore suﬃces that the unit X→ǫ∗ǫ!Xis an isomorphism for every X. As
both adjoints preserve arbitrary coproducts, it suﬃces to chec k this on generators
of the triangulated category of R-modules.
The homotopy category of G-spectra is generated by the objects Σ∞
+G/Hfor
H⊂Gby [Hau17, Proposition 4.9-(3)], so Ho( ModG-equiv
R) is generated by the
objectsR∧Σ∞
+G/Hby the same argument as in the proof of Proposition 5.31. ButGLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 67
on these the unit can be identiﬁed with the map LcomR∧Σ∞
+G/H→R∧Σ∞
+G/H,
so the claim follows by ﬂatness of Σ∞
+G/H. /square
Using this, we can now make precise in which sense the G-equivariant cotangent
complexcanbe recoveredfromthe G-globaloneviapassingtoleft-induced G-global
ultra-commutative ring spectra:
Proposition 6.31. LetR→Sbe a map of commutative G-ring spectra. Then
there exists a canonical isomorphism
LSΩG-equiv
S/R∼=ΩG-gl
LcomS/LcomR
inHo(ModG-gl
LcomS). In particular, ΩG-equiv
S/RandΩG-gl
LcomS/LcomRbecome canonically
isomorphic in Ho(ModG-equiv
LcomS).
Proof.It suﬃces to prove the ﬁrst statement; the second one will then f ollow by
applying the forgetful functor from G-globalLcomS-modules to G-equivariant ones.
By Corollary 6.13 we may assume that Ris coﬁbrant as a commutative G-ring
spectrum (so that LcomR=R). Using Corollary 6.14 and the deﬁnition of Lcom
andLSwe are then further reduced to showing that LΩG-equiv
S/R∼=ΩG-gl
S/RasG-global
S-modules whenever R→Sis a coﬁbration.
We now have a commutative diagram
Ho(UComG-gl
R/S) Ho( UComG-gl
S/S) Ho( NUCAG-gl
S) Ho( ModG-gl
S)
Ho(UComG-equiv
R/S) Ho( UComG-equiv
S/S) Ho( NUCAG-equiv
S) Ho( ModG-equiv
S)forgetforget
forgetHo(K)
≃
forgetHo(Z)
forget
forget Ho(K)≃
Ho(Z)
comingfromthe analogousdiagramofcommutinghomotopicalfunct ors. Passingto
left adjoints yields a natural isomorphism AbG-gl
S/R◦Lid∼=L◦AbG-equiv
S/R, and chasing
through the (positively projectively coﬁbrant) object id SofUComG-equiv
R/Syields
the claim. /square
Corollary 6.32. LetH⊂Gbe any subgroup and let M∈Ho(ModG-equiv
S). Then
we have a canonical isomorphism
TAQH
∗(S,R;M)∼=TAQH֒→G
∗(LcomS,LcomR;LSM)
between the equivariant and global topological Andr´ e-Qui llen homology groups.
Proof.We have canonical identiﬁcations
LS(ΩG-equiv
S/R∧L
SM) =Lǫ∗(ΩG-equiv
S/R∧L
SM)∼=L(ǫ∗ΩG-equiv
S/R∧L
LcomSǫ∗M)
∼=LSΩG-equiv
S/R∧L
LcomSLSM
where the ﬁnal isomorphism comes from the equality of underived fu nctors, while
the second one follows from the fact that the inverse ǫ!ofǫ∗is induced by a strong
symmetric monoidal functor. Combining this with the previous propo sition, we
obtainLS(ΩG-equiv
S/R∧L
SM)∼=ΩG-gl
LcomS/LcomR∧L
LcomSLSM. Forgetting structure, we
conclude that the underlying G-equivariant spectra of ΩG-gl
LcomS/LcomR∧L
LcomSLSM
and ΩG-equiv
S/R∧L
SMagree. The claim follows by taking homotopy groups. /square
Similarly one shows:
Corollary 6.33. LetH⊂Gbe any subgroup and let M∈Ho(ModG-gl
S). Then
we have a canonical isomorphism
TAQ∗
H(S,R;forgetM)∼=TAQ∗
H֒→G(LcomS,LcomR;ǫ∗M).68 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
In particular, if N∈Ho(ModG-equiv
S), then we have a canonical isomorphism
TAQ∗
H(S,R;N)∼=TAQ∗
H֒→G(LcomS,LcomR;LSN). /square
6.3.2.The Postnikov tower for commutative G-ring spectra. We close this subsec-
tionby discussingequivariantanaloguesofthe Hurewicztheoreman dthe Postnikov
tower.
We start with the Hurewicz theorem. Since this is entirely analogous t o the
G-global statements proven above, we will be very brief here.
Lemma 6.34. LetRbe a connective G-ring spectrum. Then Ho(ModG-equiv
R)car-
ries a t-structure with connective part Ho(ModG-equiv
R)≥0given by those R-modules
that are connective as G-equivariant spectra, and with coconnective part those spe c-
tra whose positive homotopy groups vanish.
Moreover, if Ris commutative, then the derived smash product restricts to
Ho(ModG-equiv
R)≥m×Ho(ModG-equiv
R)≥n→Ho(ModG-equiv
R)≥m+n
for allm,n∈Z.
Proof.We will argue for R=S. The general case then follows from this by the
same arguments as in the proofs of Propositions 5.31 and 5.36.
For the ﬁrst statement, we recall once more from [Hau17, Propo sition 4.9-(3)]
that the triangulated category Ho( G-SpectraG-equiv) is compactly generated with
generators the objects Σ∞
+G/HforH⊂G. Thus, [ATLS03, Theorem A.1] yields a
t-structure with connective part the subcategory generated b y the Σ∞
+G/Hunder
coproducts, supensions, and extensions. Arguing as in the proof of Proposition5.31
we then see that this t-structure admits the above description.
For the second statement we may reduce as before to proving tha t the derived
smash product sends the generators to connective spectra. As suspension spectra
are ﬂat, the derived smash product is given by the non-derived sma sh product
and we immediately compute Σ∞
+G/H∧Σ∞
+G/K∼=Σ∞
+(G/H×G/K), which is
evidently connective. /square
Theorem 6.35 (Equivariant Hurewicz Theorem) .LetRbe a connective commuta-
tiveG-ring spectrum, and let η:R→Sbe ann-equivalence for some n≥1. Then
ΩG-equiv
S/Risn-connected, the factorization of the universal derivation dS/Rthrough
C(η)is unique, and it induces an isomorphism ˆπn+1(C(η))∼=ˆπn+1(ΩG-equiv
S/R).
Proof.With the previous lemma at hand, we can copy the proofs of Lemma 6.1 8
and Theorem 6.19 verbatim. /square
Now we come to the Postnikov tower for connective G-equivariant commutative
algebras.
Construction 6.36.LetR→Sbe a map of commutative G-ring spectra and let
Sbe anR-module. Analogously to Construction 6.21 we can interpret any k∈
TAQn
G(S,R;M) as a morphism ˜k: ΩG-equiv
S/R→ΣnMofS-modules, or equivalently
(via the adjunction between abelianization and square-zero exten sions) as a map
k:S→S∨ΣnMof commutative G-equivariant R-algebras over S.
To such a class we can then associate a commutative R-algebraS[k] overSvia
the homotopy pullback
S[k] S
S S∨ΣnM./rightanglese
kGLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 69
As explained in the global case, the underlying R-module map S[k]→Scan be
equivalently viewed as the homotopy ﬁber of the composite ˜k◦dS/R:S→ΣnM.
IfRis a commutative G-ring spectrum, then its zeroth homotopy groups ˆ π0(R)
acquire the structure of a so-called G-Tambara functor . By [Ull13, Theorem 5.1],
this construction admits a section, sending any G-Tambara functor Tto a suitable
Eilenberg-MacLane commutative G-ring spectrum HT, reﬁning the usual equivari-
ant Eilenberg-MacLane spectra for Mackey functors.
Theorem 6.37. LetRbe a connective commutative G-ring spectrum. Then there
exists an inﬁnite tower ···→R2→R1→R0of commutative R-algebras together
with classes kn∈TAQn+1
G(Rn,R;Hˆπn+1(R))satisfying the following properties:
(1)R0∼=Hˆπ0(R)andRn+1∼=Rn[kn].
(2) ˆπk(Rn) = 0fork>n
(3)The unit maps R→Rnare(n+1)-equivalences.
Proof.By [Ull13, Theorem 5.2], His right adjoint to ˆ π0when we restrict to con-
nectivecommutative G-ring spectra. In particular, we obtain a map R→R0:=
Hˆπ0(R) yielding the bottom stage of the tower.
Now assume we have already constructed the tower up to Rn. In particular
the unitR→Rnis an (n+ 1)-equivalence, and ˆ πk(Rn) = 0 fork > n. By the
equivariant Hurewicz Theorem and the long exact sequence we ther efore see that
ΩG-equiv
Rn/Ris (n+1)-connected with
ˆπn+2(ΩRn/R)∼=ˆπn+2(C(η))∼=ˆπn+1(R).
This isomorphism then deﬁnes a map of R-modules ˜kn: ΩRn/R→Σn+2Hˆπn+1(R)
corresponding to a class kn∈TAQn+1
G(Rn,R;Hˆπn+1(R)). The previous construc-
tion therefore yields an R-algebraRn+1=Rn[kn] together with an R-algebra map
Rn+1→Rn, whose underlying R-module map exhibits Rn+1as homotopy ﬁber of
the composite Rn→ΩG-equiv
Rn/R→Σn+1Hˆπn+1(R). The long exact sequence then
showsthatR→Rn+1is an(n+2)-equivalenceandthat ˆ πk(Rn+1) = 0fork>n+1,
ﬁnishing the inductive step. /square
6.4.(Co)Homology as a stabilization. We now explain how G-global topolog-
ical Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology can be interpreted as a global stabiliz ation:
Theorem 6.38. LetRbe a ﬂatG-global ultra-commutative ring spectrum. Then
all the global Quillen adjunctions
(6.5) MR Sp(MR) Sp (NR) Sp (ComR/R)Σ∞
Ω∞Sp(Z)Sp(Q) Sp(K)
Sp(I)
are global Quillen equivalences. In particular, the compos ite
MRZ−−→NRI−1
−−→ComR/R
inGLOBMOD (which on homotopy categories gives the right adjoint to AbR/R)
is the universal map from a stable global model category to ComR/R.
For the proof, the main step is to show that another stabilization of a global
Quillen adjunction is an equivalence, namely the free-forgetful adj unction for non-
unital commutative R-algebras:
Theorem 6.39. In the above situation, the global Quillen adjunction
(6.6) Sp(MR) Sp (NR)Sp(P>0)
Sp(U)70 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
is a global Quillen equivalence.
The proof of this requires a substantial amount of work, and we de vote all of
Section 7 to it. For now, let us use it to deduce Theorem 6.38:
Proof of Theorem 6.38. SinceK⊣Iis a global Quillen equivalence, so is the glob-
ally stabilized adjunction Sp (K)⊣Sp(I) by Proposition 3.29. Moreover, the global
model category MRis globally stable (Corollary 5.27), so the stabilization adjunc-
tion
MR Sp(MR)Σ∞
Ω∞
is a global Quillen equivalence by Theorem 3.36.
Finally, we have to consider how the adjunction Q⊣Zbehaves upon stabiliza-
tion. For this, we use that by Theorem 6.39 the adjunction (6 .6) is a global Quillen
equivalence. We now observe that the composite Q◦P>0:MR→NR→MR
of left Quillen functors is naturally isomorphic to the identity. Thus, t he same is
true after stabilization, and also the associated composite of left d erived functors
is naturally isomorphic to the identity. Hence, Q⊣Zinduces a global Quillen
equivalence after stabilization by 2-out-of-3, ﬁnishing the proof. /square
7.The stabilization of global NUCAs
7.1.Computing the stabilization. This section is devoted to the proof of The-
orem 6.39. We begin by recasting the left adjoint Sp (P>0) into a more convenient
form:
Construction 7.1.LetX,Y∈Sp(Sp). We deﬁne X⋄Yas the bispectrum with
(X⋄Y)(B) =X(B)∧Y(B) (where the right hand side is the usual Day convolution
smash product on Spectra ) and structure maps
SA∧(X⋄Y)(B) =SA∧X(B)∧Y(B)δ− →SA∧X(B)∧SA∧Y(B)
σ∧σ−−−→X(A∐B)∧Y(A∐B) = (X⋄Y)(A∐B)
where the ﬁrst map is induced by the diagonal SA→SA∧SA. This becomes a
functor in the obvious way.
IfGacts onXandHacts onY, thenG×Hacts onX⋄Yvia functoriality;
ifG=H, we will typically equip X⋄Ywith the diagonal G-action, yielding a
bifunctor on G-Sp(Sp) = Sp(G-Sp).
Finally, let X∈G-Sp(Sp) and letn≥1. Then we obtain ncommuting G-
actions on the n-fold⋄-productX⋄n, which together with the Σ n-action via per-
muting the factors assemble into a (Σ n≀G)-action. We will also frequently view
X⋄nas an object in (Σ n×G)-Sp(Sp) via the diagonal G-action.
More generally, if Ris a (G-)global ultra-commutative ring spectrum, then we
deﬁne⋄Ras the pointwise smash product over R, yielding functors Sp( MG
R)×
Sp(MG
R)→Sp(MG
R).
Remark 7.2.For later use we record that the same construction can be applied
more generallyin the categories Fun(Σ,Spectra ) andFun(Σ,ModG
R) ofallSSet-
enriched (as opposed to SSet∗-enriched) functors Σ→Spectra orΣ→ModG
R,
respectively. For these larger categories, ⋄and⋄Rare the tensor product of a
symmetric monoidalstructurewith unit the constant functor at SorR, respectively
(while unitality fails in Sp( Sp) and Sp( MG
R)).
If nowX∈Sp(Sp), then comparing right adjoints yields a natural isomor-
phism Sp( P>0
R)Sp(R∧–)(X)∼=Sp(R∧–)Sp(P>0
S)(X) = Sp(R∧–)/parenleftbig/logicalortext
n≥1X⋄n/Σn/parenrightbig
.
Non-equivariantly, Basterra and Mandell [BM05, Theorem 2.8] prov ed that theGLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 71
summands indexed by n>1 vanish (for suitably coﬁbrant X), and this is the key
non-formal ingredient used to compare spectra of R-NUCAs with R-modules (The-
orem 3.7 of op. cit.). Similarly, the following G-global comparison will be the key
computational ingredient to the proof of our Theorem 6.39:
Theorem 7.3. (1)LetX,Y∈G-Sp(Sp)levelwise ﬂat. Then X⋄YisG-
globally weakly equivalent to 0.
(2)LetX∈G-Sp(Sp)levelwise positively ﬂat. Then X⋄n/ΣnisG-globally
weakly equivalent to 0for everyn>1.
(3)Ifi:X→Yis a levelwise positive ﬂat coﬁbration, then i/squaren/Σn:Qn/Σn→
Y⋄n/Σnis a levelwise positive ﬂat coﬁbration and a G-global weak equiva-
lence for every n >1. In particular, if Yis levelwise positively ﬂat, then
Qn/ΣnisG-globally weakly equivalent to 0.
The proof will be given below after some preparations; for now, let u s use it to
deduce the theorem:
Proof of Theorem 6.39. Fix a ﬁnite group H. We have to show that H-Sp(P>0)⊣
H-Sp(U) is a Quillen equivalence for the ﬂat model structures. Replacing Gby
G×H(and letting Hact trivially on R), we may assume without loss of generality
thatH= 1.
Claim.The positive ﬂat global model structure on Sp( MG
R) transfers to Sp( NG
R)
along Sp( P>0)⊣Sp(U).
Proof.As the positive ﬂat global model structure on Sp( MG
R) is in turn transferred
from Sp(G-Sp+) (Lemma 5.33) it suﬃces to consider the composite adjunction
Sp(R∧P>0
S): Sp(G-Sp+)⇄Sp(NG
R) :Sp(U).
By local presentability, we only have to show that every Sp( R∧P>0
S)(J)-cell com-
plex is sent by Sp( U) to aG-global weak equivalence, where Jis our favourite set
of generating acyclic coﬁbrations of G-Sp(Sp).
For this, we consider a pushout square
Sp(R∧P>0)(A) Sp( R∧P>0)(B)
X YSp(R∧P>0)(j)
k
in Sp( NG
R) withj∈J. We wanttoexpressSp( U)(k) asa transﬁnitecompositionof
weak equivalences, for which we note that we can identify the 1-cat egory Sp( NG
R)
over Sp( Sp) with non-unital commutative monoids in Sp( MG
R) with respect to the
non-unital symmetric product ⋄R. While we cannot literally apply Remark 5.40
in this setting (for lack of unitality), we can do this inside the larger ca tegory
Fun(Σ,ModG
R), which (as spectrum objects are closed inside SSet-enriched func-
tors under all colimits) then factors kas a map in G-Sp(Sp) into a transﬁnite
composition of maps knﬁtting into pushout squares
Sp(R∧–)(Qn/Σn∨X⋄Qn/Σn) Sp( R∧–)(L⋄n/Σn∨X⋄L⋄n/Σn)
· ·Sp(R∧–)(j/squaren/Σn∨X⋄j/squaren/Σn)
kn
inG-Sp(Sp). Appealing to Theorem 7.3 above, the top map is a map between
weakly contractible objects, hence a weak equivalence, and moreo ver a levelwise
positive ﬂat coﬁbration (in particular an injective coﬁbration). Thu s, alsoknis a72 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
weak equivalence, and hence so is Sp( U)(k) since ﬁltered colimits in Sp( MG
R) are
homotopical (Lemma 5.32). As Sp( U) preserves ﬁltered colimits, it then follows
by the same argument that also any transﬁnite compositions of map s of the above
form are sent to G-global weak equivalences as desired. △
We now observe that the transferred model structure and the g lobal model
structure on Sp( NG
R) have the same acyclic ﬁbrations (namely, those maps f
for which each f(A) is a ﬁbration in the positive ﬂat ( G×ΣA)-global model
structure on ( G×ΣA)-Sp(Sp+)) and the same ﬁbrant objects (namely, those X
for which each X(A) is (G×ΣA)-globally positively ﬂatly ﬁbrant and for which
X(A)→ΩBX(A∐B) is a (G×H)-global weak equivalence of NUCAs or equiv-
alently of spectra for all H-setsA,B). Thus, the two model structures actually
agree, and in particular we see that Sp( U): Sp( NG
R)→Sp(MG
R) preserves and
reﬂects weak equivalences. To complete the proof, it suﬃces now t o show that the
ordinary unit X→Sp(UP>0)(X) is a weak equivalence for every coﬁbrant X.
This is again a standard cell induction argument [Len20, Corollary 1.2.6 5] using
Theorem 7.3: we let Hdenote the class of all objects for which the above is
a weak equivalence. If Yis a levelwise positively ﬂat G-bispectrum and X=
Sp(R∧–)(Y), then the unit for Xagrees up to isomorphism with the inclusion
of the ﬁrst summand of/logicalortext
n≥1Sp(R∧–)(Y⋄n/Σn), so it is a weak equivalence by
Theorem 7.3, i.e. Sp( R∧–)(Y)∈H; in particular, Hcontains the initial object
0 as well as all sources and targets of the usual generating coﬁbr ationsI. However,
His closed under pushouts along coﬁbrations (as the right Quillen func tor Sp(U)
sendsthesetohomotopypushoutsbystabilityandleftpropernes s)aswellasﬁltered
colimits (as these are homotopical by Lemma 5.32 and preserved by S p(U)), so
Hmore generally contains all I-cell complexes, whence all coﬁbrant objects by
Quillen’s Retract Argument. /square
7.2.The levelwise smash product is trivial. In this subsection we will com-
plete the proof of Theorem 6.39 by proving Theorem 7.3.
7.2.1.The case of ordinary spectra. For this, we ﬁrst consider the analogues of
Construction 7.1 and Theorem 7.3 for ordinary G-spectra:
Construction 7.4.LetX,Ybe spectra. We deﬁne X⋄Yas the spectrum with
(X⋄Y)(B) =X(B)∧Y(B) (smash product ofpointed simplicialsets) andstructure
maps
SA∧(X⋄Y)(B) =SA∧X(B)∧Y(B)δ− →SA∧X(B)∧SA∧Y(B)
σ∧σ−−−→X(A∐B)∧Y(A∐B) = (X⋄Y)(A∐B)
where the ﬁrst map is induced by the diagonal SA→SA∧SA. This becomes a
functor in the obvious way.
IfXandYareG-spectra, then we equip X⋄Ywith the induced action. Given
anyn≥1, we view X⋄nas a (Σn≀G)- or (Σn×G)-spectrum.
Proposition 7.5. LetX,YbeG-spectra.
(1)X⋄YisG-globally weakly contractible.
(2)Letn>1. ThenX⋄nis(Σn≀G)-globally weakly contractible.
Proof.We will prove the second statement, the proof of the ﬁrst one bein g similar
but easier. We will show that it is even π∗-isomorphic to 0, for which we will need
the following easy geometric input:GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 73
Claim.LetHbe a ﬁnite group and let F,Abe ﬁniteH-sets such that Fis non-
empty and free while |A|>1. Then the diagonal embedding δ:SF→SA×Fof
H-topological spaces isH-equivariantly based nullhomotopic.
Proof.The mapδis the 1-point compactiﬁcation of the diagonal map δ:R[F]→
R[A×F]. Now the H-ﬁxed points of the source have dimension |F/H|while the
H-ﬁxed points of the target have dimension |(A×F)/H|=|A|·|F/H|>|F/H|
where the ﬁrst equality uses freeness of F. In particular, there exists an H-ﬁxed
pointp∈R[A×F] outside the diagonal. But then
(0,1]×R[F]→R[A×F]
(t,x)/m⊣pst≀→p+t−1(δ(x)−p)
isH-equivariant and one easily checks that this extends to an equivaria nt based
homotopyfromthemapconstantat ∞tothediagonalembedding SF→SA×F.△
Fix now a ﬁnite group Hand a homomorphism ϕ:H→Σn≀G; we will show
thatπϕ
0(X⋄n) = 0, the argument in other dimensions being analogousbut requiring
slightly more notation. For this we pick an exhaustive sequence B0⊂B1⊂···⊂
UHof our favourite complete H-set universeUHsuch that each Bk+1/i⋉tegerdivideBkcontains
a freeH-orbit. Then
πϕ
0(X⋄n) = colim B∈s(UH)[SB,|ϕ∗(X⋄n)(B)|]H
∗∼=colimk[SBk,|ϕ∗(X⋄n)(Bk)|]H
∗
by coﬁnality. But on the other hand, if F⊂Bk+1/i⋉tegerdivideBkis a freeH-orbit, then
the transition map [ SBk,|ϕ∗(X⋄n)(Bk)|]H
∗→[SBk+1,|ϕ∗(X⋄n)(Bk+1)|]H
∗factors
by deﬁnition through
[SF∧SBk,SF∧|ϕ∗(X⋄n)(Bk)|]H
∗δ∧|ϕ∗(X⋄n)(Bk)|−−−−−−−−−−−→ [SF∧SBk,S(prΣn◦ϕ)∗n×F∧|ϕ∗(X⋄n)(Bk)|]H
∗
which is null by the claim. /square
Beware that Theorem 7.3 does not follow simply by applying the propos ition
levelwise; inparticular,taking X=Y= Σ∞Sintheﬁrstitemwehave( X⋄Y)(A)∼=
Σ2·AS, soX⋄Yis not globally levelequivalent to 0. Instead, the reduction will
require further preparation.
7.2.2.The external smash product. We begin by introducing yet another smash
product:
Construction 7.6.LetX,Y∈Spectra . Then we deﬁne the external smash product
X/hatwide∧Y∈Sp(Spectra ) as the bispectrum with ( X/hatwide∧Y)(A)(B) =X(A)∧Y(B) and
with the evident structure maps, i.e. ( X/hatwide∧Y)(A) =X(A)∧Yand (X/hatwide∧Y)(–)(B) =
X∧Y(B) as spectra. Again, we extend this to G-spectra by pulling through the
G-action.
Note that the above agrees with the functor – ∧–:Spectra×C→Sp(C)
considered in Subsection 3.3, specialized to C=Spectra . However, in our setting
using ‘∧’ again would be highly ambiguous, which is why we introduced the above
notation.
Theorem 7.7. LetGbe any ﬁnite group. Then the external smash product
–/hatwide∧–:G-SpectraG-global×G-SpectraG-global→G-Sp(Sp)G-global
is homotopical in both variables.
The statement for the second variable is actually quite easy:
Lemma 7.8. LetXbe aG-spectrum and let fbe aG-global weak equivalence of
G-spectra. Then X/hatwide∧fis aG-global weak equivalence in G-Sp(Sp).74 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Proof.IfAis any ﬁnite set, then fis a (G×ΣA)-global weak equivalence (with
respect to the trivial Σ A-actions), and hence so is X(A)∧f. Thus,X/hatwide∧fis even
aG-global level weak equivalence. /square
Theproofthattheexternalsmashproductisalsohomotopicalint heﬁrstvariable
is much harder. We begin with somefurther closure propertiesofth eG-globalweak
equivalences of G-Sp(Sp) similar to Lemma 5.32:
Lemma 7.9. Letf:X→Ybe aG-global weak equivalence in G-Sp(Sp)and let
α:G→G′be a homomorphism of ﬁnite groups. Assume that ker(α)acts levelwise
freely outside the basepoint on XandY. Thenα!fis aG′-global weak equivalence.
Proof.Employing functorial factorizations in the G-global projective levelmodel
structure we obtain a commutative diagram
X′Y′
X Y∼f′
∼
f
such that the vertical maps are G-global level weak equivalences and X′,Y′are
projectively coﬁbrant. Then f′is aG-global weak equivalence by 2-out-of-3, and
henceα!f′is aG′-global weak equivalence by Ken Brown’s Lemma. By another
application of 2-out-of-3, it will then be enough to show that α!sends the vertical
maps toG′-global weak equivalences. However, G(and hence in particular ker α)
acts levelwise freely outside the basepoint on X′andY′by [Len20, Remark 3.1.22]
together with Lemma 3.15 (for the trivial G-action on the indexing set), whence
the claim follows from Proposition 1.45. /square
Moreover, one proves in the same way:
Lemma 7.10. The levelwise smash product
(G-SSet ∗)G-equivariant×G-Sp(Sp)G-global→G-Sp(Sp)G-global
is homotopical in each variable. /square
Proof of Theorem 7.7. Write Hfor the class of G-global spectra Xsuch that – /hatwide∧X
is homotopical. Our goal is to show that Hconsists of all objects, which will be
done in several steps.
Step 1. For every Y∈G-I-SSet ∗we have Σ•Y∈H.
Plugging in the deﬁnitions, we have for every G-global spectrum Tand all ﬁnite
setsA,Ba natural isomorphism
(T/hatwide∧Σ•Y)(A)(B) =T(A)∧SB∧Y(B)∼=SB∧T(A)∧Y(B)
=/parenleftbig
G-Sp(Σ•)(T/hatwide⊗Y)/parenrightbig
(A)(B)
where/hatwide⊗denotesthe‘externaltensorproduct’ofa G-spectrumwitha G-I-simplicial
set, i.e. the G-spectrum object in I-SSet ∗given by (T/hatwide⊗Y)(A)(B) =T(A)∧Y(B)
with the obvious functoriality. Letting AandBvary, one then easily checks that
the above induces a natural isomorphism T/hatwide∧Σ•Y∼=G-Sp(Σ•)(T/hatwide⊗Y). However,
G-Sp(Σ•) is left Quillen (say, for the projective model structures) and pre servesG-
global level weak equivalences (Proposition 1.50), so it is in fact fully h omotopical.
Thus, it will be enough to show that – /hatwide⊗YsendsG-global weak equivalences of
G-spectra to G-global weak equivalences in G-Sp(S). However, by Proposition 4.6
the latter are detected by the diagonal restriction ∆∗, and ∆∗(–/hatwide⊗Y) = –⊗Y
preservesG-global weak equivalences of G-spectra by Proposition 4.8.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 75
Step 2. For every Y∈G-I-SSet ∗we have Σ•Y∈H.
By Lemma 7.8 and 2-out-of-3, His closed under G-global weak equivalences. But
[Len20, Theorem 1.4.31 and Proposition 3.2.2] yield a G-global weak equivalence
Σ•Y≃Σ•(I×IY) for some pointed G-I-simplicial setI×IY, so the claim follows
from the previous step.
Step 3. For every ﬁnite G-setAand everyK∈G-SSet ∗,Σ(A,–)∧K∈H.
The endofunctor SA∧– ofG-Sp(Sp) is homotopical (by the previous lemma) and
part ofa Quillen equivalence(by stability), so it reﬂects weakequivale nces. Thus, it
suﬃces to show that SA∧(f/hatwide∧Σ(A,–)∧K) is aG-global weak equivalence for every
G-global weak equivalence f. However, this is conjugate to f/hatwide∧/parenleftbig
SA∧Σ(A,–)/parenrightbig
∧K,
and by a simple Yoneda argument SA∧Σ(A,–)∼=Σ•
+I(A,–) naturally in A(hence
G-equivariantly). Thus, the claim follows from the previous step.
Step 4. Let Hbe a ﬁnite group, ϕ:H→Ga homomorphism, and Aa ﬁnite faithful
H-set. Then Σ(A,–)∧ϕG+∧K∈Hfor every pointed G-simplicial set K.
Applying the previous step with Greplaced by G×Hshows that the functor
–/hatwide∧Σ(A,–)∧G+∧KsendsG-global weak equivalences to ( G×H)-global weak
equivalences, where Hacts onAin the given way, on Gfrom the right via ϕ,
and trivially everywhere else. However, as Ais faithful,Hacts freely on Σ(A,B)
outside the basepoint for every ﬁnite set B. Thus, Lemma 7.9 immediately implies
that (–/hatwide∧Σ(A,–)∧G+∧K)/H∼=–/hatwide∧Σ(A,–)∧ϕG+∧Kis homotopical.
Step 5. Every projectively coﬁbrant G-global spectrum is contained in H.
Fix aG-globalweak equivalence f:T→U, which induces a naturaltransformation
T/hatwide∧–⇒U/hatwide∧–. We want to show that this is a weak equivalence on all projec-
tively coﬁbrant objects. This is again a standard cell induction argu ment [Len20,
Lemma 1.2.64]: by the previous step the claim is true for the sources a nd targets
of the standard generating coﬁbrations, and moreover for any G-spectrumVthe
functorV/hatwide∧– preserves colimits as well as injective coﬁbrations; the claim there fore
follows from Lemma 5.32.
Step 6. All G-global spectra belong to H.
EveryG-global spectrum is weakly equivalent to a projectively coﬁbrant on e. The
claim therefore follows from the previous step together with Lemma 7.8. /square
7.2.3.Proof of triviality. Usingthis, wecanproveakeyspecialcaseofTheorem7.3:
Proposition 7.11. LetAbe any ﬁnite set, let Xbe a positively ﬂat (G×ΣA)-
spectrum, and let n >1. Then(Σ(A,–)/hatwide∧ΣAX)⋄n/ΣnisG-globally weakly con-
tractible.
Proof.Reordering factors we have
(Σ(A,–)/hatwide∧X)⋄n(B)(C)∼=Σ(A,B)∧n∧X∧n(C)
inducing a G×(Σn≀ΣA)-equivariant isomorphism of bispectra ( Σ(A,–)/hatwide∧X)⋄n∼=
Σ(A,–)⋄n/hatwide∧X∧n. By Proposition7.5, Σ(A,–)⋄nis Σn≀(G×ΣA)- and hence also G×
(Σn≀ΣA)-globallyweaklycontractible,soTheorem7.7showsthat Σ(A,–)⋄n/hatwide∧X∧nis
G×(Σn≀ΣA)-globallyweaklycontractible. NowΣn
Aactslevelwisefreelyonthis(asit
already does so on Σ(A,–)∧n), whence Lemma 7.9 shows that ( Σ(A,–)/hatwide∧ΣAX)⋄n∼=
Σ(A,–)⋄n/hatwide∧Σn
AX∧nis (G×Σn)-globally weakly contractible. But Σ(A,–)/hatwide∧ΣAXis
levelwise positively ﬂat, so the Σ n-action on its n-th⋄-power is free by Lemma 5.20,
and the proposition follows by another application of Lemma 7.9. /square
In the same way one shows:76 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
Proposition 7.12. LetA,Bbe ﬁnite sets, let Xbe a ﬂat (G×ΣA)-spectrum, and
Ya ﬂat(G×ΣB)-spectrum. Then (Σ(A,–)/hatwide∧ΣAX)⋄(Σ(B,–)/hatwide∧ΣBY)isG-globally
weakly contractible. /square
From this we can immediately easily deduce the following slight strenght ening
of the ﬁrst part of Theorem 7.3:
Proposition 7.13. LetX,Y∈G-Sp(Sp)and assume at least one of them is
levelwise ﬂat. Then X⋄YisG-globally weakly contractible.
Proof.We ﬁrst observe the following closure properties:
Claim.For any (levelwise) ﬂat X∈G-Sp(Sp) the class of objects Yfor which
X⋄Yis weakly contractible is closed under (a) ﬁltered colimits and(b) pushouts
along levelwise ﬂat coﬁbrations.
Proof.We will prove the second statement, the argument for the ﬁrst on e being
similar. Consider a pushout in G-Sp(Sp) as on the left
A B
C D/rightanglenwiX⋄A X⋄B
X⋄C X⋄D/rightanglenwX⋄i
such thatiis levelwise ﬂat. Applying X⋄– to this yield a pushout as on the right
(asX⋄– is cocontinuous), and X⋄iis a levelwise ﬂat coﬁbration (in particular an
injective coﬁbration). Thus, if X⋄A,X⋄B,X⋄Dare weakly contractible then so
isX⋄Dby Lemma 5.32. △
Using this, the previous proposition immediately proves the special c ase thatY
is ﬂat andX=Σ(A,–)/hatwide∧ΣAZfor some ﬂat Z. But for any ﬂat Y, the class of X
for whichX⋄Yis weakly contractible is again closed under ﬁltered colimits and
pushouts along ﬂat coﬁbrations (by symmetry), proving the case that bothXand
Yare ﬂat. As for any levelwise ﬂat Zboth –⋄ZandZ⋄– preserveG-globallevel
weak equivalences, the claim now follows by coﬁbrant replacement. /square
Proof of Theorem 7.3. The ﬁrst statement is a special case of the previous propo-
sition. For the second statement, we observe that the class of levelwise positively
ﬂatX∈G-Sp(Sp) such that X⋄n/ΣnisG-globally weakly contractible contains
0 and is closed under ﬁltered colimits. To complete the proof it is then e nough to
show that it is also closed under pushouts along generating coﬁbrat ions, for which
we more generally consider any pushout
(7.1)Σ(A,–)/hatwide∧ΣAX Σ(A,–)/hatwide∧ΣAY
Z PΣ(A,–)/hatwide∧ΣAi
j/rightanglenw
such thati:X→Yis a positive ﬂat coﬁbration of ( G×ΣA)-spectra and Zis
levelwise positively ﬂat with Z⋄n/Σn≃0 for alln >1; we will prove that also
P⋄n/Σn≃0 for alln >1. For this, we apply [GG16, Theorem 22] (to the larger
category of all SSet-enriched functors) yielding factorizations
Z⋄n/Σn=Qn
0→Qn
1→···→Qn
n−1→Qn
n=P⋄n/ΣnGLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 77
ofj⋄n/Σnfor allnsuch that we have for k<n−1 a pushout
(7.2)Z⋄(n−k)/Σn−k⋄Qk
k−1 Z⋄(n−k)/Σn−k⋄P⋄k/Σk
Qn
k Qn
k+1Z⋄(n−k)/Σn−k⋄j/squarek/Σk
/rightanglenw
(where fork= 0 the empty⋄-power has to be interpreted as a formal unit) while
Qn
n−1→Qn
nrecoversj/squaren/Σn.
Claim.For all 0≤k<nthe mapQn
k→Qn
k+1is a levelwise ﬂat coﬁbration.
Proof.Fork=n−1 this is an instance of the strong commutative monoid axiom
for the (say, non-equivariant) positive ﬂat model structure on s ymmetric spectra.
Fork<n−1, on the other hand, we observe that the top arrow in the pushou t
square (7.2) is a positive levelwise ﬂat coﬁbration by the above special case and
levelwise ﬂatness of Z⋄(n−k)/Σn−k. The claim follows immediately. △
By (ordinary) stability, it therefore suﬃces to show that the 1-ca tegoricalcoﬁber
ofQn
k→Qn
k+1is trivial for all 0 ≤k < n. However by the aforementioned
[GG16, Theorem 22], this coﬁber is isomorphic to Z⋄(n−k)/Σn−k⋄coﬁb(j)⋄k/Σk.
For 0<k<n this isG-globally weakly contractible by Proposition 7.13, while for
k= 0 this isG-globally weakly contractible by assumption on Z. Finally, if k=n,
then we observe that coﬁb( j)∼=Σ(A,–)/hatwide∧ΣAcoﬁb(i) because of the pushout (7 .1);
as coﬁb(i) is levelwise positive ﬂat, the claim now follows from Proposition 7.11.
Finally, for the third statement, we simply argueasbefore to seeth at for anylev-
elwisepositiveﬂatcoﬁbration ithepushoutproduct i/squaren/Σnisagainalevelwisepos-
itive ﬂat coﬁbration, and that its (1-categorical) coﬁber agrees w ith coﬁb(i)⋄n/Σn,
which isG-globally weakly contractible by the second statement. /square
References
[And67] Michel Andr´ e, M´ ethode simpliciale en alg` ebre homologique et alg` ebre c ommutative ,
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 32, Springer-Verlag, Be rlin-New York, 1967.
[Ang08] Vigleik Angeltveit, Topological Hochschild homology and cohomology of A∞ring spec-
tra, Geom. Topol. 12(2008), no. 2, 987–1032.
[AT65] Shˆ orˆ o Araki and Hirosi Toda, Multiplicative structures in modqcohomology theories.
I, Osaka J. Math. 2(1965), 71–115.
[ATLS03] Leovigildo Alonso Tarr´ ıo, Ana Jerem´ ıas L´ opez, and Mar´ ıa Jos´ e Souto Salorio, Con-
struction of t-structures and equivalences of derived categories , Trans. Am. Math.
Soc.355(2003), no. 6, 2523–2543.
[Bar10] Clark Barwick, On left and right model categories and left and right Bousﬁel d local-
izations, Homology Homotopy Appl. 12(2010), no. 2, 245–320.
[Bas99] Maria Basterra, Andr´ e-Quillen cohomology of commutative S-algebras , J. Pure Appl.
Algebra 144(1999), no. 2, 111–143.
[BDG+16] Clark Barwick, Emanuele Dotto, Saul Glasman, Denis Nard in, and Jay Shah,
Parametrized higher category theory and higher algebra: Ex pos´ e I – Elements of
parametrized higher category theory , preprint, arXiv:1608.03657 , 2016.
[Bec03] Jonathan M. Beck, Triples, algebras and cohomology , Repr. Theory Appl. Categ. 2
(2003), 1–59, reprint of the PhD thesis from 1967.
[BM05] Maria Basterra and Michael A. Mandell, Homology and cohomology of E∞ring spec-
tra, Math. Z. 249(2005), no. 4, 903–944.
[BM13] ,The multiplication on BP , J. Topol. 6(2013), no. 2, 285–310.
[CLL23a] Bastiaan Cnossen, Tobias Lenz, and Sil Linskens, Parametrized stability and the uni-
versal property of global spectra , preprint, arXiv:2301.08240 , 2023.
[CLL23b] Bastiaan Cnossen, Tobias Lenz, and Sil Linskens, Partial parametrized presentability
and the universal property of equivariant spectra , preprint, arXiv:2307.11001 , 2023.
[CMNN20] Dustin Clausen, Akhil Mathew, Niko Naumann, and Ju stin Noel, Descent and van-
ishing in chromatic algebraic K-theory via group actions , to appear in Ann. Sci. ´Ec.
Norm. Sup´ er. (4) , available as arXiv:2011.08233 , 2020.78 TOBIAS LENZ AND MICHAEL STAHLHAUER
[GG16] Sergey Gorchinskiy and Vladimir Guletski˘ ı, Symmetric powers in abstract homotopy
categories , Adv. Math. 292(2016), 707–754.
[GH04] Paul G. Goerss and Michael J. Hopkins, Moduli spaces of commutative ring spectra ,
Structured ring spectra, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser ., vol. 315, Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2004, pp. 151–200.
[GM23] David Gepner and Lennart Meier, On equivariant topological modular forms , Compos.
Math.159(2023), no. 12, 2638–2693.
[GN15] David Gepner and Thomas Nikolaus, The universal property of global spectra and
elliptic cohomology , Homotopy Theory, Oberwolfach Rep. 12 (Paul G. Goerss, John
P. C. Greenlees, and Stefan Schwede, eds.), EMS Press, 2015.
[Har14] John E. Harper, Corrigendum to “Homotopy theory of modules over operads in s ym-
metric spectra” ,https://arxiv.org/abs/0801.0193v4 , 2014.
[Hau17] Markus Hausmann, G-symmetric spectra, semistability and the multiplicative norm,
J. Pure Appl. Algebra 221(2017), no. 10, 2582–2632.
[Hau19] ,Symmetric spectra model global homotopy theory of ﬁnite gro ups, Algebr.
Geom. Topol. 19(2019), no. 3, 1413–1452.
[Hau22] ,Global group laws and equivariant bordism rings , Ann. Math. (2) 195(2022),
no. 3, 841–910.
[HHR16] Michael A. Hill, Michael J. Hopkins, and Douglas C. R avenel,On the nonexistence of
elements of Kervaire invariant one , Ann. Math. (2) 184(2016), no. 1, 1–262.
[Hil17] Michael A. Hill, On the Andr´ e-Quillen homology of Tambara functors , J. Algebra 489
(2017), 115–137.
[Hir03] Philip S. Hirschhorn, Model Categories and Their Localizations , Math. Surv. Monogr.,
vol. 99, Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society (AM S), 2003.
[Hir15] ,Overcategories and undercategories of model categories , available as
arXiv:1507.01642 , 2015.
[Hov99] Mark Hovey, Model Categories , Math. Surv. Monogr., vol. 63, Providence, RI: Amer-
ican Mathematical Society, 1999.
[HSS00] Mark Hovey, Brooke Shipley, and Jeﬀ Smith, Symmetric spectra , J. Am. Math. Soc.
13(2000), no. 1, 149–208.
[Joy08] Andr´ e Joyal, The Theory of Quasi-Categories and its Applications , Lecture notes,
available at https://ncatlab.org/nlab/files/JoyalTheoryOfQuasiCa tegories.pdf ,
2008.
[Law18] Tyler Lawson, Secondary power operations and the Brown-Peterson spectru m at the
prime 2, Ann. Math. (2) 188(2018), no. 2, 513–576.
[Len20] Tobias Lenz, G-Global Homotopy Theory and Algebraic K-Theory, to appear in
Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. , available as arXiv:2012.12676 , 2020.
[Lew99] L. Gaunce Lewis, jr., When projective does not imply ﬂat, and other homological
anomalies , Theory Appl. Categ. 5(1999), 202–250.
[Lur09] Jacob Lurie, Higher Topos Theory , Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009,
updated version available at www.math.ias.edu/ ~lurie/papers/HTT.pdf .
[Lur18] ,Higher Algebra ,preprint,available at https://www.math.ias.edu/ ~lurie/papers/HA.pdf ,
2018.
[MMSS01] Michael A. Mandell, J. Peter May, Stefan Schwede, a nd Brooke Shipley, Model cate-
gories of diagram spectra , Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3) 82(2001), no. 2, 441–512.
[MW21] Louis Martini and Sebastian Wolf, Colimits and cocompletions in internal higher
category theory , preprint, arXiv:2111.14495 , 2021.
[Nar16] Denis Nardin, Parametrized higher category theory and higher algebra: Ex pos´ e IV –
Stability with respect to an orbital ∞-category , preprint, arXiv:1608.07704 , 2016.
[Qui70] Daniel G. Quillen, On the (co-) homology of commutative rings , Applications of Cat-
egorical Algebra (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XVII, New Y ork, 1968), Amer.
Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1970, pp. 65–87.
[Rez02] Charles Rezk, Every homotopy theory of simplicial algebras admits a prope r model,
Topology Appl. 119(2002), no. 1, 65–94.
[Sch97] Stefan Schwede, Spectra in model categories and applications to the algebra ic cotan-
gent complex , J. Pure Appl. Algebra 120(1997), no. 1, 77–104.
[Sch18] ,Global Homotopy Theory , New Math. Monogr., vol. 34, Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2018.
[Sch22] ,Global algebraic K-theory, J. Topol. 15(2022), no. 3, 1325–1454.
[Sen17] Andrew Senger, The Brown-Peterson spectrum is not E2(p2+2)at odd primes ,
arXiv:1710.09822, 2017.GLOBAL MODEL CATEGORIES AND TOP. ANDR ´E-QUILLEN COHOMOLOGY 79
[Shi04] Brooke Shipley, A convenient model category for commutative ring spectra , Homotopy
Theory: Relations with Algebraic Geometry, Group Cohomolo gy, and Algebraic K-
Theory. Papers from the international conference on algebr aic topology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL, USA, March 24–28, 2002, Contemp. Math., vol. 346, Provi-
dence, RI: American Mathematical Society (AMS), 2004, pp. 4 73–483.
[Shu11] Michael Shulman, Comparing composites of left and right derived functors , New York
J. Math. 17(2011), 75–125.
[SS00] Stefan Schwede and Brooke Shipley, Algebras and modules in monoidal model cate-
gories, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3) 80(2000), no. 2, 491–511.
[Sta22] Michael Stahlhauer, Andr´ e-Quillen homology of global power functors and ultra -
commutative ring spectra , Ph.D. thesis, University of Bonn, 2022, available at
https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:hbz:5-69505 .
[Ste16] Marc Stephan, On equivariant homotopy theory for model categories , Homology Ho-
motopy Appl. 18(2016), no. 2, 183–208.
[Tam93] Daisuke Tambara, On multiplicative transfer , Commun. Algebra 21(1993), no. 4,
1393–1420.
[Ull13] John Ullman, Tambara functors and commutative ring spectra , preprint,
arXiv:1304.4912 , 2013.
[Whi17] David White, Model structures on commutative monoids in general model ca tegories,
J. Pure Appl. Algebra 221(2017), no. 12, 3124–3168.
T.L.: Mathematisches Institut, Rheinische Friedrich-Wil helms-Universit ¨at Bonn, En-
denicher Allee 60, 53115 Bonn, Germany & Mathematical Instit ute, University of
Utrecht, Budapestlaan 6, 3584 CD Utrecht, The Netherlands ( current address )
M.S.: Mathematisches Institut, Rheinische Friedrich-Wil helms-Universit ¨at Bonn, En-
denicher Allee 60, 53115 Bonn, Germany