Index analysis: an approach to understand signal transduction
with application to the EGFR signalling pathway
Jane Kn ochel1,¤, Charlotte Kloft2, Wilhelm Huisinga3,*
1Institute of Mathematics, Universit at Potsdam, Germany and Graduate Research Training
Program PharMetrX: Pharmacometrics & Computational Disease Modeling, Freie Universit at
Berlin and Universit at Potsdam, Germany
2Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Institute of Pharmacy, Freie Universit at
Berlin, Germany
3Institute of Mathematics, Universit at Potsdam, Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24-25, 14476
Potsdam/Golm, Germany
¤Current address: AstraZeneca R&D, M olndal, Sweden
* huisinga@uni-potsdam.de
Abstract
In systems biology and pharmacology, large-scale kinetic models are used to study the dynamic
response of a system to a specific input or stimulus. While in many applications, a deeper
understanding of the input-response behaviour is highly desirable, it is often hindered by the
large number of molecular species and the complexity of the interactions. An approach that
identifies key molecular species for a given input-response relationship and characterises dynamic
properties of states is therefore highly desirable. We introduce the concept of index analysis;
it is based on different time- and state-dependent quantities (indices) to identify important
dynamic characteristics of molecular species. All indices are defined for a specific pair of input
and response variables as well as for a specific magnitude of the input. In application to a
February 20, 2023 1/41arXiv:2302.08815v1  [q-bio.QM]  17 Feb 2023large-scale kinetic model of the EGFR signalling cascade, we identified different phases of signal
transduction, the peculiar role of Phosphatase3 during signal activation and Ras recycling during
signal onset. In addition, we discuss the challenges and pitfalls of interpreting the relevance
of molecular species based on knock-out simulation studies, and provide an alternative view
on conflicting results on the importance of parallel EGFR downstream pathways. We envision
that index analysis will be beneficial in comparing different model scenarios (e.g., healthy and
diseased conditions), in designing more informed model reduction approaches, and in translating
large-scale systems biology models from early to late phase in drug discovery and development.
Author summary
In systems biology, the response of signalling networks to various molecular stimuli is studied by
use of large and complex kinetic models. Prominent examples include the epidermal growth
factor receptor signalling cascade and its response to growth factors or therapeutic interventions
by small molecules and therapeutic protein drugs. The design of targeted interventions requires a
detailed understanding of the signalling cascade, the identification of key molecular constituents
and their functional role in propagating the signal. A quantitative analysis of such systems,
however, is challenging due the size of the model and the complexity of molecular interactions.
We present an approach based on time- and state dependent quantities called indices that
quantify different characteristic dynamic features of the molecular constituents. This allows for
a more in-depth understanding of how the signal propagates through the network and elicits its
response. Our findings for the epidermal growth factor receptor signalling cascade provide new
insights on the dynamic interplay of key molecular players.
Introduction
Large scale models of biochemical reaction networks are increasingly used to study the dynamical
response of a system to a specific input. The response is often measured in terms of some output
quantity of interest. Examples include the therapeutic inhibition of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) signalling cascade in cancer [1,2] or the development of anti-coagulant drugs
February 20, 2023 2/41targeting the blood coagulation network [3]. Understanding the input-response relationship for
a given model, however, is a challenging task when the order (dimension) of the model is large
and the interactions between its constituents are manifold.
We introduce a novel approach to characterise the dynamic property of state variables within
signalling network by means of time- and state dependent quantities, called indices. All indices
are specific for a given input-response relationship and a given magnitude of the input. The
sensitivity-based input-response index allows to quantify the dynamical importance of states. It
is based on the product of two local sensitivity coefficients; the first coefficient quantifies the im-
pact of the input on a given state variable at a given time, while the second coefficient quantifies
how a perturbation of a given state variable at a given time impacts the output on the remaining
time interval. States having a large input-response index are considered dynamically important.
To further characterise states with a low input-response index, we define the environmental and
the partial steady state classification indices. They are based on a comparison of the original
kinetic system to a modified kinetic system and allow to identify very slow state variables
(environmental) or very fast state variables (partial steady state). Two additional state clas-
sification indices allow to study the impact of removing/neglecting state variables in the network.
Approaches to study complex systems biology models include sensitivity analysis [4], and model
reduction techniques, like lumping and time-scale separation [5 {9] or profile likelihood based
reduction [10]. Sensitivity analysis quantifies how a change in parameters and/or initial states
influences the system output. Several different techniques have been developed such as local
and global sensitivity analysis [4], with only local sensitivity analysis focusing on a given input-
response relationship. Based on sensitivity coefficients, the parameters/initial states are ranked
as important or unimportant for the model output [11], but in particular appropriate scaling of
the coefficients for comparability remains a challenge, see also Discussion. For model reduction
techniques, a common interpretation is to classify state variables that are part of the reduced
model as important and those that are not part of the reduced model as unimportant. Different
model reduction techniques such as time-scale separation or balanced truncation exploit different
February 20, 2023 3/41underlying characteristics of the system. In time scale separation, the system dynamics needs
to present different time scale, where a partitioning into slow and fast states and a subsequent
quasi-steady state approximation of the fast variables results in the reduced model [12]. In
balanced truncation [13], the basic idea is to transform the system into its principal components
and neglect the least important components while still maintaining the same input-response
behaviour as the original system. Balanced truncation has seen limited application for signalling
networks [5]. The authors conclude that there is no "one size fits all" model reduction technique
as each approach exploits different model characteristics, consequently there have been various
attempt to combine different techniques [5]. Profile likelihood based model reduction utilises
parameter identifiability to designate likely parameter candidates for reduction [10]. It is a
powerful tool for model reduction, focussing on experimental data and parameters, rather than
on states variables and time. There appear, however, some interesting links between their
four scenarios and our proposed indices. In [14], we introduced the concept of an empirical
input-response index by building and expanding on concepts from control theory (empirical
controllability and observability gramians). Given some input and response, the empirical index
quantifies the relevance of a state variable for the given input-response relationship by some
finite set of perturbations. We illustrated in a clinically relevant setting, how the empirical
index can guide us to reduce a large systems biology model of the blood coagulation network
by eliminating states variables, either by completely removing them from the system or by
assuming them to be constant.
In the present article, we substantially extend the concept of an index and at the same time
focus on understanding a given signal transduction network rather than reducing it. This index
analysis is first introduced based on a number of simple model systems to ease understanding of
the different index types and their application. We finally illustrate the power of index analysis
in application to a large-scale model of the EGFR signalling cascade [1, 15]. This signalling
network has been intensively studied in the context of tumour genesis and tumour progression
as well as for anti-cancer treatment strategies, e.g., to overcome drug resistance in non-small
cell lung cancer [16]. From a signal transduction point of view, the EGFR network remains a
challenging system due to the large number of interacting molecular species and its multiple
February 20, 2023 4/41parallel pathways.
Methods
Many dynamical models in systems biology/pharmacology are of the form
dx
dt(t) =f 
x(t);p
; x(t0) =x0+u0 (1)
y(t) =h 
x(t)
(2)
withx(t)2Rndenoting the vector of state variables at time t2[t0;T], andp2Rmdenoting
the vector of parameters. The function f:RnRm!Rnrepresents the reaction kinetic model,
and is typically of the form
f(x;p) =MX
=1(x;p) (3)
with stoichiometric vectors 2Rnand reaction rates 2Rof the reactions = 1;:::;M .
The function h:Rn!Rqmapsx(t) to the output y(t) of interest, often only a single state
variable. The initial condition x(t0) comprises two parts: (i) the state x02Rnof the system
prior to the stimulus, and (ii) an input or stimulus u02Rnat timet0. The solution of the
ordinary differential equations (ODEs) in eq. (1) is written as
x(t) = t;t0(x0+u0) (4)
with state transition function t;t0. The output then takes the form
y(t) =h 
t;t0(x0+u0)
: (5)
The assumptions on f(time-independence) and h(independent on parameters p) can be relaxed.
In the sequel, we used both, zkand [z]kto denote the kth entry of a vector z= (z1;:::;zn); the
February 20, 2023 5/41choice depended on whatever was deemed easier to read. An analogous notation was used for
matrices.
Input-response index. The (sensitivity-based) input-response index quantifies the dynamic
importance (to be defined below) of state variables. The input-response index for a state xkat
timet2[t0;T] is based on two factors that characterise to what extent
(i) perturbations in the input u0impact the state variable xkat timet
(ii)perturbations in the state xkat timetimpact the output yon the remaining time interval
[t;T].
It is well-known that signalling cascades might respond differently to different magnitudes of
the same input variable. Consequently, we defined the input-response index relative to some
reference input uref. It defines a reference trajectory
xref(t) = t;t0(x0+uref);t2[t0;T] (6)
according to eq. (1). To quantify the extent to which a perturbation of the input impacts a
given state variable, we considered a perturbed input uper=uref+ uperand quantified the
impact using a first-order Taylor approximation (indicated by the dot on top of the \=" sign)
xper(t) = t;t0(x0+uper) _ = t;t0(x0+uref) +Ju(t;t0)uper (7)
with Jacobian
Ju(t;t0) =@
@ut;t0(x0+u)
u=uref=@xref(t)
@u:
Relative to the reference input, this resulted in a perturbation
xk(t) =h
xper(t) xref(t)i
k_ =h
Ju(t;t0)uperi
k
of thekth state variable at time t2[t0;T]. The larger [ Ju(t;t0)]k;ithe stronger the ith input
February 20, 2023 6/41impacts the kth state variable at time t. If [Ju(t;t0)]k;i= 0, then the ith input has no impact
on thekth state variable at time t. This quantification alone, however, is not sufficient to
infer the importance of state variables for a specific input-response relationship, since it only
quantifies the first aspect (i) above.
Thus, we next quantified the extent to which a perturbation of the kth state variable at timpacts
the output yon the remaining time interval. The key idea is to reinterpret the perturbation
xk(t) as an input
uxk(t) = (0;:::; 0;xk(t);0;:::; 0)2Rk 1RRn k
to the model system in eq. (1)with (unperturbed) initial condition xref(t) at initial time t.
This resulted in the perturbed output (to first order Taylor approximation):
yper;xk(t)(t) =h
t;t 
xref(t) +uxk(t)
_ =h
t;t 
xref(t)
+Jy(t;t0)uxk(t) (8)
witht2[t;T]. Realising that
yref(t) =h
t;t0 
x0+uref
=h
t;t 
xref(t)
; (9)
we thus quantified the resulting perturbation on the jth output component as
h
yper;xk(t)(t) yref(t)i
j_ =h
Jy(t;t0)uxk(t)i
j
with Jacobian
Jy(t;t) =@h 
t;tx
@x
x=xref(t):
Analogously as above, the larger [ Jy(t;t)]j;kthe stronger the kth state variable at time t
impacts the jth output during the remaining time interval. If [ Jy(t;t)]j;k= 0, then the kth
state variable has at time tno impact on the jth output.
February 20, 2023 7/41We finally defined the sensitivity-based input-response index irk(t) of thekth state variable at
timetas
h
irk(t)i
ji=1
TZT
t
Jy(t;t)
j;k2
dt1
2
h
Ju(t;t0)i
k;i: (10)
The definition is motivated from control theory (see also below). The first factor represents
the time-average integrated impact of an (infinitesimal) state perturbation over the time span
[t;T] on the output; the integral form guarantees that a transient impact during the time span
is taken into account, even if it occurs only during some short time span in the interval [ t;T].
If, however, only the output at a single event time tevent is of interest, then [ Jy(tevent;t)]j;k
rather than the integral should be considered. For time-dependent inputs, also the second factor
becomes an integral; for delta-type inputs as in our case it reduced to a single value at the initial
time.
In general, irk(t) is a matrix of dimension (number of outputs) (number of inputs). For the
common situation of a single state input (i.e., u0has only a single, say ith non-zero entry)
and a single response state (i.e., y(t) =h(x(t)) =xr(t)2Rfor some state index r6=i), the
input-response index is real-valued and can be written in terms of two local sensitivity coefficients
irk(t) =1
TZT
tSr;k(t;t)2dt1
2
jSk;i(t;t0)j (11)
with sensitivity coefficients
Sm;j(t2;t1) =h
S(t2;t1)i
m;j="
@t2;t1x
@x
x=xref(t1)#
m;j: (12)
It is a distinct feature of the input-response index that it combines both, the impact of the input
on a state variable as well as the impact of the state variable on the output. Neither one nor
the other on its own is in general informative to quantify the relevance of a state variable for a
February 20, 2023 8/41given input-response relationship. In a control theoretical setting, the factors
Ok(t) =1
TZT
tSr;k(t;t)2dt1
2
andCk(t) =Sk;i(t;t0) (13)
can be interpreted as a controllability index Ckand an observability index Ok.
To ease comparison of the ir-indices for different points in time, we normalised each index by
the sum of all indices, resulting in the normalised ir-indices (nir):
nirk(t) =irk(t)
sum-ir(t); sum-ir( t) =nX
j=1irj(t): (14)
As a result, the nir-index takes only values between 0 and 1. The sum of ir-indices is also of
interest, as it gives some indication on the overall magnitude of the ir-values. Details on the
computation and the extension to time-dependent input or fixed output time of the ir-indices
can be found in the Supplementary Material S2&3 Text.
We classified a state variable as dynamically important, if its input-response index is above a
(user-defined) threshold at some point in time. A threshold of 10% was successfully used in all
examples of the results section. The relevance of the input-response index is two-fold: (i) it
allows to characterise the dynamic pattern of importance of a state variable: When is a state
variable important for the input-response relationship? At which times is it less important?
And (ii) it allows to identify state variables that are not dynamically important and to further
characterise them.
State classification indices. The motivation of additional state classification indices is to
further characterise states with a small input-response index. In such a case, the impact of the
input on a state variable is insufficient to see a marked change in the output. This includes the
two extreme cases, that the input has no impact on that state variable, or that the state variable
has no impact on the output. The former would typically be considered an environmental state
February 20, 2023 9/41variable, the latter be considered negligible. It can be shown that also state variables with very
fast dynamics have a low input-response index.
We introduced four state classification indices: env k, pssk, pnegkand cnegk(for definition, see
below). For the kth state variable, they all take the common form
h
indk(t)i
j=1
Zj(t)ZT
t
yref(s) y(k)
mod(s)
j2
ds1=2
(15)
witht2[t0;T] and normalisation constant Zj(t) =RT
t[yref(s)]j2ds. The definition of the
state classification indices has some similarity with the first factor of the irkindex in eq. (10).
However, rather than perturbing the kth state variable at tand simulating with the original
system of ODEs, now the state variable is unperturbed and the system of ODEs is modified
(details below). In both cases, the difference to the reference solution is quantified on the
remaining time interval [ t;T]. Up to time t, the modified system coincides with the refer-
ence system, so no additional factor appears in the definition in eq. (15) (in contrast to the
second factor in eq. 10). We finally note that the normalised indices can take values larger than 1.
We defined four state classification indices; they aim at classifying a state from the perspective
of their effect on the output.
•The environment index (envk) quantifies to what extent the kth state variable can
be classified as an environmental state, defined as being constant in time. Thus, the
modification of the system of ODEs at time tis to set the right hand side (RHS) of the
kth ODE to zero.
•Thepartial steady state index (pssk) quantifies to what extent the kth state variable can
be classified as being instantaneous in steady state; since this only affects the kth state
variables, it is a partial steady state of the system. Its dynamics is characterised by an
algebraic equation rather than on ODE|the kth state variable is simply a function of
other state variables. Thus, the modification of the system of ODEs at time tis to set
February 20, 2023 10/41the left hand side of the kth ODE to zero, resulting in a system of differential-algebraic
equations (DAEs). Many numerical solvers can integrate this type of equations. Of note,
we used the term 'partial steady state' to differentiate it from a quasi-steady state, which
typically involves the exploitation of additional conservation laws. For further illustration
and clarification, see the analysis of the enzyme kinetics model given in the Supplementary
Material S4 Text.
•The partially and completely neglected indices (pnegk,cneg) quantify to what extent the
kth state variable can be neglected and thus removed from the system. This can be done
in two different ways: Consider the reaction A *) B *C. When neglecting C, we
might either want to partially remove C from the system and maintain its 'producing'
reaction (thus maintaining the degrading reaction of B), resulting in A *) B *,
or we might want to completely remove Cand all reactions involving it, resulting in
A *) B.
Thus, for the partially neglected index pnegk, the modification to the system of ODEs is
to set all reaction rate constants to zero that involve the kth state variable as reactant
species. In many reaction kinetic systems, this can easily be realised by setting xk(t) = 0
for allt2[t;T]. For the completely neglected index cnegk, the modification to the system
of ODEs is to set all reaction rate constants to zero that involve the kth state variable as
reactant or product species.
The state classification indices only measure the impact (of a specific change of the system of
ODEs) on the output. For a final classification of a state variable, it is, however, important to
also measure the impact on the state variable itself. Thus, for the state classification indices
envkand qssk, we additionally defined a corresponding relative state approximation error
rel-state-err k(t) =1
Z(t)ZT
t
xref(s) xmod(k)(s)
k2
ds1=2
(16)
witht2[t0;T] and normalisation Z(t) =RT
t[xref(s)]k2ds. Note that for the indices pnegk
andcnegk, the relative state approximation error is not meaningful, since it equals 1 by definition.
February 20, 2023 11/41We classified a state variable as environmental or in partial-staedy state, if the corresponding
state classification index andthe state approximation error are both below a (user-defined)
threshold for all times t2[t0;T]. We classified a state variable as partially or completely
negligible, if the partially/completely neglected index is below a (user-defined) threshold for all
timest2[t0;T]. In all examples, we successfully used a threshold of 0 :1, consistent with the
threshold of 10% for the ir-index. Fig. 1 summaries the strategy we used to classify states.
ir-index≥
≤< 
classified as 
dynamic stateall indices refer to the k-th state variable
env / pss index
rel-state error
≤ > 
classified as 
environmental state / 
in partial steady-statecneg / pneg
index
≤ > 
unclassifiedclassified as 
completely / partially
negligible state
Figure 1. Decision tree for state classification based on indices . See text for details.
February 20, 2023 12/41Material
We chose a number of simple model systems to illustrate the application, interpretation and
usefulness of the indices, of which one is included in the Results section and the remaining are
included in the Supplementary Material S4 Text.
We then studied the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor signalling network [1,15,17] to
illustrate how the indices allow to obtain detailed insights into the dynamic behaviour of com-
plex, large-scale systems biology/pharmacology models. The EGFR system is an an important
pathway in cell division, death, motility and adhesion [1,18,19]. In addition, it is of key interest
in the development of anti-cancer therapies, as the pathway is often dysfunctional in tumour
cells. We used a detailed model of the EGFR reaction network [15] consisting of 106 state
variables and 148 reactions. We followed [15] regarding the abbreviations of state variable names.
The original model includes a lumped pseudo state of degradation products that serves as a
substitute for various individual degradation products. To allow for a more refined analysis
of receptor degradation, we modified the original model by separating the degraded receptor
species ( EGF-EGFR)2-deg into six separate degradation products, increasing the number of
state variables by six to 112. This extension does not change the remaining system dynamics.
All initial conditions and parameter values for the model were taken from [15, Suppl. Table 2].
In addition, all corrections reported in [20] were taken into account.
The model was implemented in Matlab 2021b and will be uploaded to the permanent and
open-access repository zenodo. In contrast to our expectations, the system published in [15] is
not in steady state in the absence of EGF, i.e., the stimulus of the system. Some state variables
do change, including EGFR, EGFRi, Grb2, Sos and Grb2-Sos; see Supplementary Material S2
Fig. To ensure comparison to the original publication in [15], however, we did not make any
further changes.
February 20, 2023 13/41Results
Index analysis for illustrative model system
To illustrate the index analysis in application, we first considered a simple reaction cycle model
sketched in Figure 2. In the model, the signal A transforms B into C, which in turn activates D.
In addition, A, C and D may be subject to degradation. In this example, A is considered the
input and D the response variable. We distinguished three different scenarios defined by the
parameter values in Table ??. These were chosen to illustrate how the indices allow to analyse
and differentiate between the scenarios. We use Scenario 1 to introduce the indices in detail and
build on this in Scenarios 2 and 3. We used the decision-tree in Figure 1 to guide the analyses.
A
B C
Dkon
koff
ksynkdegkcka
***(A) (B)
Scenariokakonkofkcksynkdeg
11001002e43e450100
2101010550100
322500050100
Figure 2. Simple reaction cycle model and scenario-specific parameter values . (A)
Reaction network, and (B) parameter values for the three scenarios, for which the model system
was studied. The time span was t2[0;0:1] min, the input A, and the response variable D. The
initial conditions were identical in all three scenarios: ( A0;B0;C0;D0) = (2;100;5;0) nM. Units:
konin 1/nM/min; all other reaction rate constants in 1/min.
Figure 3A shows the time course of the state variables, while Figure 3B shows the normalised
ir-indices. Here and in all other analyses, we empirically (as with many thresholds) used a
threshold of 10%; this choice was supported a-posteriori by the results. One nicely observes
from panel B that the dynamic importance of state variables changes substantially over time:
Initially, the signal Ahas the largest dynamic importance; it decays, however, very quickly and
below a threshold of 10%. This threshold has been chosen empirically (as for most thresholds).
In contrast, the indices of all other state variables are negligibly small initially and increase
February 20, 2023 14/41steeply. While B and D reach interim values of 45% around 2 min, C increases only up to 10%,
before it starts to decays again. It stays below 10% for the entire time span. The dynamic
importance of B and D continue to evolve with almost opposite behaviour. Eventually, B decays
and D increases to its maximal value. For a classification of states, the particular features of
the index are not considered relevant; the key feature considered is whether an index stays
below the threshold for all times, or not. For the input-response index, we considered a state
dynamically unimportant, if its ir-index stays below the threshold of 10% for the entire time
span. Otherwise, we consider it as 'not unimportant', i.e., as dynamically important. Thus, we
considered A, B and D as dynamically important, but not C.
0 5 10
t [min] 10-310-1100101102concentration [nM]A
B
C
D(A)
0 5 10
t [min] 10-300.20.40.60.81nir-indexA
B
C
D
threshold(B)
Figure 3. Scenario 1 of the simple reaction cycle model: time course of state
variables and normalised indices . Time course of state variables (left) and normalized
ir-indices (right) for the model specified in Figure 2.
The top graphics of Figure 4 show the state classification indices for two states, B (left) and
C (right). These indices are designed to further analyse the characteristics of dynamically
unimportant states, i.e, here state C. We also included state B, though dynamically important,
for illustration only. A state classification index below the threshold for all times is considered
indicative of the corresponding index classification type (environmental, in partial steady state,
negligible).
February 20, 2023 15/410 5 10
t [min]10-310-310-210-1100101normalised indexenv
pss
cneg
pneg
threshold(A)
0 5 10
t [min]10-310-310-210-1100101normalised indexenv
pss
cneg
pneg
threshold(B)
0 5 10
t [min]10-310-310-210-1100101rel state errorenv
pss
cneg
pneg
threshold(C)
0 5 10
t [min]10-310-310-210-1100101rel state errorenv
pss
cneg
pneg
threshold(D)
0 5 10
t [min]10-310-1100101102concentration [nM]A
B
C
D(E)
0 5 10
t [min]10-310-1100101102concentration [nM]A
B
C
D(F)Figure 4. Scenario 1 of the simple reaction cycle model: Relative state
approximation error and modified dynamics . A: State classification indices for state B
and B: for state. C: Relative state approximation errors for B and D: for C. E: Comparison of
reference dynamics and modified dynamics from t= 0 (dashed lines) for B as environmental
state and F: for C in partial steady state. For details on the model, see Figure 2.
February 20, 2023 16/41For a state classification as environmental or in partial-steady state, also the relative state ap-
proximation error (shown in Figure 4) is taken into account. Since the normalised input-response
indices for B was above the threshold, we would expect to see no further characteristics for state
B. In contrast, give the below-threshold normalised input-response indices for C, we would hope
to get further indications for its classification. In line with these expectations, none of the state
classification indices for B is below the threshold, while for C a single index (the partial steady
state index) is below the threshold for all times. This is an indication for C being in a partial
steady state. This is finally confirmed by Figure 4D. The middle panels show the relative state
approximation errors for state B (left) and C (right). We infer that only the classification of
C being in partial steady state (red dashed line) results in an approximation error below the
threshold for all times. The bottom-right panel illustrates the impact of modifying the reaction
system to enforce C being in partial steady state from time t= 0 onwards. As can be seen, the
solution of the modified system (dashed lines) is a very good approximation to the solution of
the reference model (solid lines). For sake of illustration, the bottom left panel show the impact
of modifying the system so that B is environmental (i.e. constant) from t= 0 onwards. Clearly
and in line with the large environmental index of B, the resulting approximation is very poor.
Thus, we conclude for Scenario 1 that C can be considered in partial steady state, while all
other states are considered as dynamically important.
For Scenarios 2+3, Figure 5 shows the time course of all state variables and the normalised
input-response indices. For Scenario 2 (left column), we conclude from Figure 5C that all states
are classified as dynamically important, since no nir-index is below the threshold for all times. In
contrast, for Scenario 3, we conclude from Figure 5D that only states A and D are dynamically
important, while states B and C are not. Figure 6 (top) shows the state classification indices
for B (left) and C (right). Two indices are below the threshold for all times: the env-index for
B and the pss-index for C. The bottom panel finally confirms this classification. The relative
state approximation errors for B as environmental state (left, solid blue line) and C as in partial
steady state (right, dashed red line) are below the threshold for all times.
For Scenario 2, we conclude that all states are dynamically important. For Scenario 3, in
February 20, 2023 17/41contract, only A and D are dynamically important, while B is an environmental state and C is
in partial steady state.
The input-response index classifies whether or not a state variable is considered dynamic for a
particular set of parameters and given input-output relationship. The four state classification
indices provide further understanding in which way the state variable with a low input-response
index (below 10%) impact the output either as a constant (environmental), in partial steady
state or whether it can be neglected (partially or completely). Further simple model system
to help guide understanding and use of the index analysis can be found in the Supplementary
Material S4 Text.
February 20, 2023 18/410 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1
t [min]100101102concentration [nM]A
B
C
D(A)
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1
t [min]100101102concentration [nM]A
B
C
D(B)
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1
t [min]00.20.40.60.81nir-indexA
B
C
D
threshold(C)
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1
t [min]00.20.40.60.81nir-indexA
B
C
D
threshold(D)Figure 5. Scenario 2 & 3 of the simple reaction model: A & B: Time course of
state variables and C & D: normalised ir-indices for Scenario 2 (left) and Scenario 3
(right). For details on the model, see Figure 2.
February 20, 2023 19/410 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1
t [min]10-310-210-1100101normalised indexenv
pss
cneg
pneg
threshold(A)
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1
t [min]10-310-210-1100101normalised indexenv
pss
cneg
pneg
threshold(B)
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1
t [min]10-310-210-1100101rel state errorenv
pss
cneg
pneg
threshold(C)
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1
t [min]10-310-210-1100101rel state errorenv
pss
cneg
pneg
threshold(D)Figure 6. Scenario 3 of the simple reaction model: A &B : State classification
indices and C&D: normalised state classification indices for state B (left) and C
(right). For details on the model, see Figure 2.
Input-response indices of the EGFR signalling pathway guide subsequent anal-
ysis of the key molecular species
To illustrate applicability and usefulness to large-scale systems, we next performed an index
analysis of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signalling cascade. The EGFR pathway
is activated by binding of EGF to EGFR. Dimerised EGF-EGFR autophosphorylates and
recruits a series of adaptor molecules called GAP, Grb2 and Sos. Signal transduction may occur
via membrane-bound or internalised species; in addition it occurs via two major pathways:
the Shc-dependent and the Shc-independent pathway. The two pathways, however, do not act
February 20, 2023 20/41independently from each other, since there are many molecules involved in both pathways. Both
pathways eventually activate Ras-GDP, a well-known oncogene and the merging point of both
pathways. Subsequent activation of Raf transduce the signal to the MAP kinase cascade and
finally to ERK. The output signal is double-phosphorylated ERK, which transiently increases
as a response to the input stimulus. In view of the input (EGF) and the output (ERK-PP), the
signalling cascade is sometimes termed the EGF{ERK-PP system. A graphical representation
can be found in the Supplementary Material S1 Fig.
While the principal transduction of the signal is well known, the relative importance of the
different pathways (Shc-dependent and Shc-independent, membrane-bound vs. internalised
forms) and its molecular constituents is still not well understood.
0 20 40 60 80 100
t [min]024681012ERK-PP [molecules/cell]106
0 2 40510106     zoom(A)
0 20 40 60 80 100
t [min]108101010121014sum-ir(t)0 2 4101210131014     zoom(B)
Figure 7. Output signal and sum of ir-indices evolving over time A: Transient
increase of ERK-PP (output) in response to the EGF (input) stimulus. Inset zoom: signal
activation occurs within 3 min. B: Sum of ir-indices over time, showing three phases: initial
peak (0-0.3 min), high plateau (0.3-3 min), and low plateau including decay (3-100 min)
To index-analyse the EGFR signalling cascade, we chose a constant extra-cellular EGF stimulus
of 50 nM and a time interval [0, 100] min, as in [15]. Figure 7A shows the temporal response of
the ERK-PP output signal; the peak of the signal is reached within 3 min. The sensitivity-based
indices were determined according to eq. (11). Figure 7B shows the sum of the ir-indices over
February 20, 2023 21/41time. We clearly identify three different phases: an initial peak (0-0.3min), a short high plateau
(until 3min); followed by an extended and finally decaying low plateau. While the extended
low plateau corresponds to the decay phase of the output, the initial peak and the short high
plateau correspond to signal onset and steep increase
Figure 8 shows all normalised ir-indices that exceed a threshold of 10% at least once during
the time span|20 out of a total of 112. The threshold value was chosen empirically, but
also matched a gap in the decay of the maxima of the normalised input-response indices (see
Figure 8D). In broad terms, Figure 8 shows an ordered appearance and disappearance of states,
as might be expected. A closer examination reveals that at any point in time there exist often 3{5
states with a normalised ir-index above 10%, but always at least one index (see Supplementary
Material S14 Fig). At any point in time, there are thus only a few dynamically important states
responsible for the transduction of the input to the output. For further analysis, the 20 states
with a maximal normalised ir-index exceeding 10% are coloured in light blue in the EGFR
model cartoon in Figure 9. Interestingly, the 20 states all belong either to the membrane-bound
and Shc-dependent receptor species (as opposed to the internalised or Shc-independent species),
or the free cytosolic Ras, Raf, MEK and ERK species (as opposed to the internalised species).
February 20, 2023 22/410 0.1 0.2 0.3
t [min]00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7nir-indexEGF
EGFR
EGF-EGFR
(EGF-EGFR)2
(EGF-EGFR*)2
GAP
Ras-GDP
Ras-GTP
(EGF-EGFR*)2-GAP-Shc*-Grb2-Sos-Ras-GDP
MEK-Raf*
MEK-P
MEK-PP(A)
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
t [min]00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7nir-indexGAP
Ras-GDP
Ras-GTP
MEK-Raf*
MEK-P
MEK-PP
ERK
ERK-MEK-PP
ERK-P
ERK-P-MEK-PP
ERK-PP
Phosphatase3
ERK-PP-Pase3
ERK-P-Pase3(B)
20 40 60 80 100
t [min]00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7nir-indexGAP
MEK-Raf*
MEK-P
MEK-PP
ERK
ERK-MEK-PP
ERK-P
ERK-P-MEK-PP
ERK-PP
Phosphatase3
ERK-PP-Pase3
ERK-P-Pase3(C)
0 20 40 60 80 100
k00.20.40.60.81max(nirk)above threshold
below threshold
threshold = 0.10(D)Figure 8. Normalised ir-indices over time and ordered maximal value . A, B and C:
Normalised ir-indices for the three phases (0-0.3 min, 0.3-3 min, 3-100 min). Shown are all 20
indices with a maximal value exceeding 10%. D: Order of decay of maximum value of the
normalised ir-indices. All 20 states above the threshold of 10% are membrane-bound or free
cytosolic forms and (as far as applicable) belong to the Shc-dependent pathway|as opposed to
internalised forms and the Shc-independent pathway; see Supplementary Material S3 Table.
The state just below the threshold is (EGF-EGFR)2-GAP-Shc-Grb2-Sos.
Further observations can be gained from Figure 8: First, not all species that are absolutely
necessary to transmit EGF to ERK-PP have a normalised ir-index exceeding 10%, including
adaptor proteins Shc, Grb2, Sos as well as Raf and MEK. Second, while Phosphatase3 is known
to be involved in signal deactivation, its nir-index already peaks around 1.4 min and thus during
February 20, 2023 23/41signal activation. Phosphatase 1 and 2, however, do not seem to have a similar role during
the activation phase. Finally, MEK-P and ERK-P-MEK-PP seem to be relevant during the
deactivation phase (see Figure 8C), while we would rather associate them with the activation
phase. The analyses below are guided by these observations.
EGF
EGFREGF-EGFR (EGF-EGFR)2
(EGF-EGFR*)2
Sos
Ras-GTP
Ras-GTP*Ras-GDP
ERK ERK-P ERK-PPMEK-P MEK
P'ase3Raf(EGF-EGFR*)2-GAP-Shc*-Grb2-SosGAP
MEK-PPRaf*
P'ase2P'ase1Shc
ProtProtGrb2
(A) membrane EGFR signalling
internalisation⇀↽
recyclingEGFi
EGFRiEGF-EGFRi (EGF-EGFRi)2
(EGF-EGFRi*)2
Sos
Rasi-GTP
Rasi-GTP*Ras-GDP
ERK ERKi-P ERKi-PPMEKi-P MEK
P'ase3Raf(EGF-EGFRi*)2-GAP-Shc*-Grb2-SosGAP
MEKi-PPRafi*
P'ase2P'ase1Shc
ProtiProti*
**
*
*Grb2*
(B) internalised EGFR signalling
Figure 9. Schematic with state classification of the signal transduction network
focussing on the Shc dependent pathway , including the 20 state variables with largest
maximum input-response index (light blue, see Figure 8D), environmental state variables
(purple), state variables in quasi-steady state (green) and further state variables (dark blue).
States being part of the membrane-bound and internalised pathway are coloured orange in
panel (B). The red boxes mark the input and output state variables; coloured dots as part of
reaction arrows indicate intermediate complexes. A similar graphic for the Shc-independent
pathway is given Supplementary Material S13 Fig.
Phosphatases1{3 show very different behaviours and functions
Phosphatase3 (abbreviated P'ase3, when part of a complex) is involved in de-phosphorylation of
ERK-P and ERK-PP (see also Figure 9). Figure 10A depicts the time course of key molecular
species involved in the local Phosphatase3 network during signal activation. Once the kinase
MEK-PP is present, it phosphorylates ERK via ERK-P to ERK-PP. Rather than observing an
increase in ERK-P followed by ERK-PP, however, we first see a steep increase of ERK-P:P'ase3,
February 20, 2023 24/41indicating that Phosphatase3 immediately binds ERK-P to form a complex and subsequently
de-phosphorylates it. Only when the level of Phosphatase3 decreases sufficiently, ERK-P levels
increase markedly. As with ERK-P, double-phosphorylated ERK-PP is immediately bound by
Phosphatase3 and subsequently de-phosphorylated, as can be inferred from the step increase
of ERK-PP:P'ase3. Again, only when the Phosphatase3 level further decreases, the output
signal ERK-PP increases to high levels. Thus, Phosphatase3 delays signal onset by sequestering
ERK-P and ERK-PP; moreover, it controls the ERK-PP peak concentration as well as signal
deactivation. This is confirmed by simulating the model with no Phosphatase3, as shown in
Figure 10B. In summary, the described action of Phosphatase3 can be understood as a protection
mechanism against activation of ERK-PP by spurious or random phosphorylation of ERK or
ERK-P in the absence of a signal.
For Phosphatase1, Figure 11A show the normalised state classification indices. Since both,
the env-index and the corresponding relative state error (not shown) are below the threshold,
we classify Phosphatase1 as environmental. A further look at the Phosphatase1 levels of the
reference model (see Figure 11B) is confirmatory. In addition, the prediction of the modified
model with constant Phosphatase1 levels from t= 0 on (i.e., as environmental state) are shown;
the differences to the original model predictions are very minor.
We coloured all state variables classified as environmental in pink in the model scheme in
Figure 9. We infer that only one other species|Prot, a coated pit protein that mediates receptor
internalisation|is classified as environmental.
February 20, 2023 25/410 1 2 3
t [min]102104106concentration [molecules/cell]Phosphatase3
ERK-P-Pase3
ERK-P
ERK-PP-Pase3
ERK-PP(A)
0 20 40 60 80 100
t [min]00.511.522.5concentration [molecules/cell]107
ERK-PP (reference)
ERK-PP (no Phosphates 3)
0 2 40510106     zoom(B)Phosphatase3Figure 10. Relevance of Phosphatase3. A: concentration-time profiles of Phosphatase3
and relevant cytosolic ERK species during signal activation. B: comparison of the output
ERK-PP for the reference simulation (solid lines) and a modified model (dashed lines) with no
Phosphatase3. As a result, signal activation speeds up by roughly 1 min, in addition to lack of
signal deactivation.
For Phosphatase2, none of the normalised state classification indices are below the threshold for
all times; as shown in Figure 11C. A closer look at important species related to Phosphatase2
(not shown) revealed that a noticeable fraction of Phosphatase2 is bound to internalised MEK,
e.g., MEKi-P and MEKi-PP (10-12% for a substantial amount of time). This suggests that
internalised MEK plays an important role in sequestering Phosphatase2. Figure 11D further
supports this hypothesis: it shows the predictions of the reference model and a modified model
with no internalised MEK species (all MEKi-species classified as cneg). Due to increased
availability of free Phosphatase2, free MEK-PP levels are lower, and ERK-P bound MEK-PP
levels are higher, the preceding species of ERK-PP. As a consequence, the signal is attenuated.
This might indicate that the pool of internalised MEK plays a role in signal prolongation by
sequestering Phosphatase2.
February 20, 2023 26/410 20 40 60 80 100
t [min]10-410-2100102normalised indexenv
pss
cneg
pneg
threshold(A)
0 20 40 60 80 100
t [min]102104106concentration [molecules/cell]ERK-PP
Phosphatase1(B)Phosphatase1
0 20 40 60 80 100
t [min]10-410-2100102normalised index
env
pss
cneg
pneg
threshold(C)
0 20 40 60 80 100
t [min]102104106concentration [molecules/cell]ERK-PP
MEK-PP
Phosphatase2
ERK-P-MEK-PP(D)Phosphatase2Figure 11. Analyses of Phosphatase1 (top) & 2 (bottom) A: State classification indices
for Phosphatase1; B: comparison of the output ERK-PP and Phosphatase1 for the reference
simulation (solid lines) and a modified model (dashed lines) with constant Phosphatase1 levels.
C: State classification indices for Phosphatase2; D: comparison of the output ERK-PP,
Phosphatase2 and two MEK-PP species for the reference simulation (solid lines) and a modified
model (dashed lines) without MEK internalisation. Absence of internalised MEK increases free
Phosphatase2 levels and thereby deactivates the signal more quickly.
February 20, 2023 27/410 20 40 60 80 100
t [min]10-410-2100102normalised indexenv
pss
cneg
pneg
threshold(A)
0 20 40 60 80 100
t [min]100102104106concentration [molecules/cell]ERK-PP
Raf*(B)Raf*
0 20 40 60 80 100
t [min]10-410-2100102normalised indexenv
pss
cneg
pneg
threshold(C)
0 20 40 60 80 100
t [min]102103104105106107concentration [molecules/cell]ERK-PP
Ras-GDP(D)Ras-GTP*Figure 12. Analyses of Raf, Ras-GTP.A: State classification indices for Raf; B:
comparison of the output ERK-PP and Raffor the reference simulation (solid lines) and a
modified model (dashed lines) with Rafin partial-steady state. C: State classification indices
for Ras-GTP; D: comparison of the output ERK-PP and Ras-GTPfor the reference
simulation (solid lines) and a modified model (dashed lines) with partially neglected Ras-GTP
(pneg).
Rafdynamics is fast throughout activation and deactivation
The maximal value of the ir-index of Rafis 0:17%10% (see Supplementary Material S3
Table), a surprisingly small number given the relevance of Rafin signal transduction. Fig-
ure 12A & B show the normalised state classification indices and the corresponding relative state
February 20, 2023 28/41approximation errors for Raf. Since both, the pss-index and the corresponding relative state
error are below the threshold, we classified Rafas partial-steady state. The C panel shows the
prediction of the reference model and a modified model with Rafin partial-steady state from
t= 0; the profiles are indistinguishable. Thus, signal propagation through Rafis `instantaneous'.
We coloured all state variables classified as partial-steady state in light green in the model
scheme in Figure 9. We infer that several other species, including a large fraction of internalised
species, act on an instantaneous time scale.
Ras-GTPrecycling is important for signal prolongation
The cycle of Ras-GDP activation and Ras-GTP inactivation is a central motif of the signalling
cascade (see Figure 9). While Ras-GDP and -GTP have nir-indices above the threshold, the
inactivated form Ras-GTPhas a nir-indices below the threshold for all times. Figure 12A shows
the state classification indices for Ras-GTP. Since none of them is below the threshold for all
times, no further classification is possible (see also Figure 1). Figure 12B shows the prediction
of the reference model and a modified model with Ras-GTPpartially neglected ( pneg) from
t= 0, i.e., removed from the network. The result is a response attenuation; the Ras-GDP profile
clearly shows that the re-activation of Ras-GTPto Ras-GDP does play an important role in
signal prolongation by replenishing the pool of Ras-GDP molecules|starting already from 1 min
onwards and remaining important even during signal decline.
February 20, 2023 29/410 20 40 60 80 100
t [min]100102104106108concentration [molecules/cell]ERKPP
RasGDP
RasGTP
total EGFR at membraneFigure 13. Analyses of receptor degradation. Comparison of the output ERK-PP and
Raffor the reference simulation (solid lines) and a modified model (dashed lines) with no
degradation from six internalised receptor species (those with degradation reaction in Figure 9,
realised by classifying the degradation products as cneg).
Degradation of internalised receptors-complexes results in faster decrease of
Ras-GTP levels
Prot-mediated internalization and subsequent degradation of internalised receptor species plays
an important role in output signal shut-down. Figure 9B shows six internalised EGFR species
including degradation (out of 16 degradation reactions in total). For these six receptor species,
degradation has a large impact on the output signal. Figure 13 shows the prediction of the
reference model and a modified model with no degradation of these six species from t= 0
(realised by classifying the corresponding degradation products, e.g., ( EGF-EGFR)2-deg as
completely negligible). Without degradation of these receptor species, the signal is strongly
prolonged: An elevated concentration of internalised receptors increases the recycling rate to
the membrane, impacting the total concentration of membrane-bound receptor species. While
the cytosolic species Ras-GDP is hardly changed, elevated receptors levels eventually increase
the activation rate from Ras-GDP to Ras-GTP via increased levels of (EGF-EGFR)2-GAP-
Shc-Grb2-Sos. Increased levels of activated Ras-GTP, finally, result in a prolonged output signal.
February 20, 2023 30/41Discussion
We defined the sensitivity-based input-response index and four state classification indices that
together can be used to analyse signal transduction networks. All indices are (i) time- and
state-dependent; defined (ii) for a specific input-output relationship; and (iii) for a specific
magnitude of the input. We have illustrated the approach for simple small-scale models and
demonstrated for the EGFR signalling network, how index analysis can provide an in-depth
view on the role and contribution of the different molecular species.
The sensitivity-based input-response index is defined in terms of two sensitivity coefficients. In
sensitivity analysis, local sensitivity coefficients measure the impact of changes in parameters
por initial conditions (also seen as input parameters) on a response variable xras a function
of time [4]. They are used, e.g., for parameter sensitivity analysis or to study the robustness
of signal transduction pathways. A key challenge in sensitivity analysis is to account for scale-
difference and to make them invariant to transformation of units and thus comparable. A
common solution is to consider scaled sensitivity coefficients
Gr;i(t) =@xr(t)
@pipi
xr(t); (17)
resulting in a unitless quantity know as the logarithmic gain [21], or as control or response
coefficient in metabolic control analysis [22,23]. In signalling cascades, signals are often propa-
gated through a series of activation steps. Activated forms temporarily rise from zero/very low
concentrations to their maximum, while inactive forms almost vanish. In such a situation, the
scaling above is highly problematic, since xr(t)0 at initial times for active forms and xr(t)0
at later times for inactive forms, resulting in ill-defined coefficients or numerical problems. Of
note, metabolic control analysis has mainly be applied to metabolic systems in steady state,
where such problems are absent. The input-response index differs in two regards: (i) it considers
the integral of the first factor in eq. (17) rather than the evaluation at a single point in time;
and (ii) it scales with the controllability index of the kth state variable (see eqs. (11) and(13)),
rather than the factor p=xr(t) in eq. (17). This makes a key difference and firmly links the
February 20, 2023 31/41input-response index to a specific input, ensures invariance under internal unit transformations;
and at the same time resolves the above scaling issue.
In signalling cascades, some state variables are important for very short periods of time. There-
fore if a state variable is dynamically important at some point in time (even, if only for a
very brief period of time), we consider it to be not dynamically irrelevant, i.e., dynamically
relevant. This motivates the choice of the maximum of the input-response index as the relevant
characteristic. For applications to chronic progressive diseases, longer time periods are of
interest. Then, slow changes in endogenous or exogenous factors may determine the rate of
change in the system, while such changes are likely to be irrelevant on short time intervals. In
this case, the metric might need to be changed, e.g., to the integral over the input-response index.
While the sensitivity-based input-response index is a measure of importance based on the original
(unmodified) system, the state classification indices are measures involving a modification of the
system. It is important to realise that a small state classification index solely indicates that
the corresponding modification has a low impact on the output. This might be due to different
reasons:
(i)the modification has a low impact on the concentration-time profile of the corresponding
state|and as a consequence, also on the output;
(ii)the system is able to compensate for the impact of the modification on the state variable|
and as a consequence, the impact on the output is low;
(iii) the state is not relevant for the input-output relationship|so even a larger impact on the
state variable does not impact the output.
By using the state classification index in combination with the relative state approximation
error, we aim to distinguish between (i) and (ii) for environmental and partial-steady state
classifications. The partially/completely neglected indices are defined to identify case (iii). It
is, however, important to note that a low partially/completely neglected index may as well
be indicative of case (ii). See the analysis and illustration of the parallel pathways model in
February 20, 2023 32/41the Supplementary Material S4 Text. This is also of relevance in EGFR signal transduction,
where conflicting results have been reported concerning the importance of the Shc-dependent
pathway [11, 24]. The authors in [24] state that the Shc-dependent pathway only plays an
important role for low EGF concentrations. Their statement was based on a simple in silico
knock-out study of the system. In contrast, the authors in [11] use sensitivity as well as flux
analysis to conclude that signalling transduction proceeds primary through the Shc-dependent
pathway. This contradiction was in part resolved in [25] by analysing the reactions of the EGFR
signalling cascade model. They found that the production of Ras-GTP is indeed mostly mediated
by the Shc-dependent pathway, while in case of the Shc knock-out, the Shc-independent pathway
takes over the full activation of Ras-GTP. This analysis is easily reproduced with the completely
neglected index (cneg): a knock-out of either all Shc-dependent or all Shc-independent species
result in both cases in low relative errors on the output ERK-PP (5.5 % and 1.1 %, respectively).
In light of the low relative errors (and without knowledge on the pathway), one would conclude
that neither the Shc-dependent nor the Shc-independent pathway is important. This conclusion,
however, is falsified by the joint knock-out resulting in a 100 % relative error on the output
ERK-PP (no output at all). The example clearly illustrates that care has to be taken when
interpreting the importance of states or entire pathways from (in-silico, but also in-vitro/vivo)
knock-out studies.
Index analysis approaches the question differently. The input-response indices clearly highlight
the important dynamic role of the Shc-dependent species. Importantly, the ir-indices do not
require a modification (e.g., knock-out) of the system|in a certain sence, they measure the
dynamic importance of states non-invasively. At the same time, our analysis shows that many
states of the Shc-independent pathway are classified as being in partial-steady state. Hence, it
is the \dynamic nature of the state variables" that is the most prominent difference between
the Shc-dependent or Shc-independent pathway.
The precise impact of receptor internalisation and the role of internalised species is still up to
debate [1,11,15]. We infer from Figure 9 that a prominent difference between the membrane-
February 20, 2023 33/41bound and internalised pathway is again the \dynamic nature of the state variables". No
internalised species is classified as dynamic (large nir-index), while a large number is classified as
partial-steady state. Using the partially/completely neglected index, we identified the relevance
of receptor degradation from specific internalised receptor species (indicated by degradation
reactions in Figure 9). Absence of receptor degradation from these species increases the pool of
internalised receptors and thus receptor recycling to the membrane; this eventually results in
higher levels of activated Ras-GTP and finally in signal prolongation. At the same time, we
identified the role of internalised MEK in sequestering Phosphatase2 in complexes, lowering the
deactivation rate of Rafand thereby prolonging the signal.
A detailed study of the EGFR signalling pathway is presented in [15]. The authors quantified the
relevance of reactions based on the concept of impact control coefficients, and the importance of
proteins based on a fractional change of their total concentration. The time-dependent output
was described by three characteristics: the amplitude, duration and integral of the ERK-PP
profile. Index analysis allows a complementary view on the system. It focusses on individual
state variables and on time, in contrast to reactions and lumped total concentrations. In [26]
general principles that govern signal transduction are identified, with the central conclusion
that collectively, kinases control amplitudes more than duration, whereas Phosphatases tend
to control both. Our time-resolved index analysis of the Phosphatases of the EGRF signalling
network, in particular Phosphatase3, supports this conclusion and adds an additional detail:
Phosphatases might also control the time to signal onset. In addition, we identified mechanistic
principles underlying the conclusion including, e.g., the stoichiometric ratio of the Phosphatases
and their binding partners (see paragraph on Phosphatases1{3 in the Results). While free
Phosphatase1 levels are hardly impacted by complex formation with Raf, free Phosphatase3
levels are reduced by three orders of magnitude; nearly 100 % of Phosphatase3 is sequestered in
complex with ERK-PP for a long time.
Overall, the input signal EGF exerts its impact on the output ERK-PP only during a very small
time window (see Supplementary Material S14 Fig, left); it does so by strongly impacting, i.e.,
February 20, 2023 34/41controlling, state variables during this time frame. In combination with roughly seven orders of
magnitude smaller observability indices (see Supplementary Material S15 Fig, right), this can
be interpreted as some robustness property of the signalling cascade. Random fluctuations of
constituents in the absence of an input signal are unlikely to span several order of magnitude
needed to spontaneously activate the cascade.
Index analysis naturally links to model reduction. In [14], we introduced an empirical input-
response index by building and expanding on the concepts of controllability and observability
from control theory. Based on the empirical index, we proposed an iterative model reduction
scheme. In application to the blood coagulation network, we illustrated its usefulness in a clini-
cally relevant setting. A key feature of the proposed model reduction technique is its reference to
a local regime in the state space (by defining a reference input in addition to input/output state
variables). We demonstrated the advantage of such a local approach by identifying different
reduced models based on different reference inputs. For the given application, this allowed to
understand the lack of impact of certain genetic modifications for the outcome of the standard
blood coagulation test and the presence of impact for a modified test. In the present work,
the focus is rather on understanding a given signal transduction network. At the same time,
the index analysis provides new insights and opens new possibilities for future model reduction
approaches. By introducing state classification indices jointly with corresponding relative state
approximation errors, we clearly discriminate between the impact of an approximation on the
output and on the state itself. The newly introduced state classification indices provide further
options for the model reduction approach proposed in [14].
Index analysis may contribute to the identification of promising new drug targets in the future
by providing a deeper understanding of the pharmacologically targeted system. Moreover, we
envision that index analysis will be beneficial to study the difference between a healthy and
diseased state, e.g., by comparing the index analyses of the two conditions and identifying state
variables that change their input-response index or state classification index.
February 20, 2023 35/41All in all, we believe that the proposed index analysis approach substantially broadens our
means to analyse and understand complex signal transduction models in systems biology.
Acknowledgments
J.K. kindly acknowledges financial support from the Graduate Research Training Program
PharMetrX: Pharmacometrics & Computational Disease Modelling, Berlin/Potsdam, Germany.
Author contributions
J.K. and W.H designed the research, developed the algorithm realisation and carried out the
simulations; all authors discussed the results; J.K and W.H. drafted the manuscript; all authors
revised and finalised the manuscript.
Supplementary Material
S1 Text. EGFR system.
S1 Fig. Simplified illustration of EGFR signalling cascade.
S2 Fig. EGFR signalling network prior to a stimulus. An illustration of state variables
that are not in steady state prior to any EGF stimulus. For details on the model, see Material
Section in the main article.
S2 Text. Computation ir-indices
S3 Text. Extension to time-dependent input or fixed output time
S4 Text. Additional index analysis for small-scale illustrative model systems
S3 Fig. Reaction network of the parallel pathways model.
February 20, 2023 36/41S1 Table. Model specification for the parallel pathway model. For the two scenarios of
the model in Figure , the parameter values are stated below. The time span was t2[0;0:05] min,
the input A, and the response D. The initial conditions were ( A0;B0;C0;D0) = (20;0;0;0) nM,
in addition to S0(in nM) specified below. Units: kab;kac;kbd;kcdin 1/nM/min; all other
reaction rate constants in 1/min.
S4 Fig. Scenario 'with crosstalk' of the parallel pathways model: time course of
state variables and normalised indices. A: Time course of state variables and B: normalized
ir-indices. C: State classification indices for states B and D: for C.
S5 Fig. Scenario 'with crosstalk' of the parallel pathways model: Relative state
approximation error and modified dynamics. A: Relative state approximation errors for
C. B: Comparison of reference dynamics (solid lines) and modified dynamics from t= 0 (dashed
lines) for C in partial steady state or D: completely neglected. C: Comparison of reference
dynamics (solid lines) and modified dynamics from t= 0 (dashed lines) for B completely
neglected.
S6 Fig. Scenario no crosstalk of the parallel-pathways model: A: Time course of state
variables and B: normalised ir-indices. C: state classification indices for B and D: for C.
S7 Fig. Scenario no crosstalk of the parallel-pathways model: A: Comparison of
reference dynamics (solid lines) and modified dynamics from t= 0 (dashed lines) for B
and B: for C being completely neglected. C: state classification indices and D: relative state
approximation errors for S.
S8 Fig. Reaction network of the enzyme kinetics model.
S2 Table. Model specification for the enzyme kinetics model. For the two scenarios
of the model in Figure , the parameter values are stated below. The time span was t2[0;30] min,
the input A, and the response P. The initial conditions were ( A0;S0;C0;P0) = (50;0;0;0) nM,
February 20, 2023 37/41in addition to E0(in nM) specified below. Units: konin 1/nM/min; all other reaction rate
constants in 1/min.
S9 Fig. Scenario 1 of the enzyme kinetics model: time course of state variables
and normalised indices . A: Time course of state variables and B: normalized ir-indices. C:
State classification indices for state C and D: for state E.
S10 Fig. Scenario 1 of the enzyme kinetics model: Relative state approximation
error and modified dynamics . A: Relative state approximation errors for C and B: for E.
C: Comparison of reference dynamics (solid lines) and modified dynamics from t= 0 (dashed
lines) for C in partial steady state and D: for E as environmental state.
S11 Fig. Scenario 2 of the enzyme kinetic model: A: Time course of state variables
and B: normalised ir-indices. C: Comparison of reference dynamics (solid lines) and modified
dynamics from t= 0 (dashed lines) for C in partial steady state. D: Comparison of reference
dynamics (solid lines) and modified dynamics from t= 0 (dashed lines) with conservation law
E+C in addition to C in partial steady state.
S12 Fig. Decision tree for state classification based on indices including lumping
S5 Text. How to setup a new model for Index Analysis
S13 Fig. Schematic with state classification of the signal transduction network
focussing on the Shc-independent pathway , including the state variables with large maxi-
mum input-response index (light blue, see Figure 4D), environmental state variables (purple),
state variables in quasi-steady state (green) and further state variables (dark blue). States being
part of the membrane-bound and internalised pathway are coloured orange in panel (B). The red
boxes mark the input and output state variables. Note that the difference to the Shc-dependent
pathway is the absence of Shc (adaptor protein between GAP and Grb2).
S14 Fig. Number of normalised ir-indices above the threshold of 10%.
February 20, 2023 38/41S15 Fig. Sum of contr- and obs-indices evolving over time. Left: Sum of contr-indices
over time, showing three phases: initial sharp peak (0-0.3 min), second prolonged peak (0.3-
3 min), and a slow, still uncomplete recovery period (3-100 min). Right: Sum of obs-indices over
time, showing three phases: initial sharp decline (0-1.5 min), marginal increase (1.5-20 min), and
a strong decline (20-100 min). Note the very different scales on the y-axis.
S3 Table. Normalised input-response indices for the EGFR system; sorted accord-
ing to their maximum
References
1.Schoeberl B, Eichler-Jonsson C, Gilles ED, M uller G. Computational modeling of the
dynamics of the MAP kinase cascade activated by surface and internalised EGF receptors.
Nature Biotechnology. 2002;20(4):370{375.
2.Schoeberl B, Pace E A, Fitzgerald J B, Harms B D, Xu L, Nie L, Linggi B, Kalra A,
Paragas V, Bukhalid R, Grantcharova V, Kohli N, West K A, Leszczyniecka M, Feldhaus
M J, Kudla A J, Nielsen U B. Therapeutically Targeting ErbB3: A Key Node in
Ligand-Induced Activation of the ErbB Receptor{PI3K Axis, Science Signaling. 2009;
2(77):p.ra31.
3.Wajima T, Isbister GK, Duffull SB. A Comprehensive Model for the Humoral Coagulation
Network in Humans. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics. 2009;86:290{298.
4.Zi Z. Sensitivity analysis approaches applied to systems biology models. IET Systems
Biology. 2011;5(6):336.
5.Snowden TJ, van der Graaf PH, Tindall MJ. A combined model reduction algorithm for
controlled biochemical systems. BMC Systems Biology. 2017;11(1):17.
6.Okino MS, Mavrovouniotis ML. Simplification of Mathematical Models of Chemical
Reaction Systems. Chemical Reviews. 1998;98(2).
February 20, 2023 39/417.Dokoumetzidis A, Aarons L. Proper lumping in systems biology models. IET Systems
Biology. 2009;3(1):40{51.
8.Brochot C, T oth J, Bois FY. Lumping in pharmacokinetics. Journal of pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics. 2005;32(5-6):719{36.
9.Li G, Tomlin AS, Rabitz H, T oth J. A general analysis of approximate nonlinear
lumping in chemical kinetics. I. Unconstrained lumping. The Journal of Chemical Physics.
1994;101(2):1172.
10.Maiwald T, Hass H, Steiert B, Vanlier J, Engesser R, Raue A. Kipkeew F, Bock H H,
Kaschek D, Kreutz C, Timmer J Driving the model to its limit: Profile likelihood based
model reduction. PLoS ONE. 2016;11(9):e0162366.
11.Liu G, Swihart MT, Neelamegham S. Sensitivity, principal component and flux analysis
applied to signal transduction: The case of epidermal growth factor Bioinformatics. 2005;
21(7):1194{1202
12.Gunawardena J. A Linear Framework for Time-Scale Separation in Nonlinear Biochemical
Systems PLOS One. 2012; 7(5): e36321
13.Moore B. Principal component analysis in linear systems: Controllability, observability,
and model reduction IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 1981; 26(1):17{32
14.Kn ochel J, Kloft C, Huisinga W. Understanding and reducing complex systems pharma-
cology models based on a novel input-response index. Journal of Pharmacokinetics and
Pharmacodynamics. 218; 45(1):139-157
15.Hornberg JJ, Binder B, Bruggeman FJ, Schoeberl B, Heinrich R, Westerhoff HV. Control
of MAPK signalling: from complexity to what really matters. Oncogene. 2005;24(36):5533{
5542.
16.Saafan H, Foerster S, Parra-Guillen ZP, Hammer E, Michaelis M, Cinatl J, et al. Utilising
the EGFR interactome to identify mechanisms of drug resistance in non-small cell lung
February 20, 2023 40/41cancer? Proof of concept towards a systems pharmacology approach. European Journal
of Pharmaceutical Sciences. 2016;94:20{32.
17.Roberts PJ, Der CJ. Targeting the Raf-MEK-ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase
cascade for the treatment of cancer. Oncogene. 2007;26(22):3291{3310.
18.Yarden Y, Sliwkowski. Untangling the ErbB signaling network. Nature Reviews Molecular
Cell Biology. 2001;2(February):127{137.
19.Kholodenko BN, Demin OV, Moehren G, Hoek JB. Quantification of short term
signaling by the epidermal growth factor receptor. Journal of Biological Chemistry.
1999;274(42):30169{30181.
20.Hornberg, Binder, Bruggeman, Schoeberl, Heinrich, Westerhoff http://models.cellml.
org/exposure/48c4b41256d698c4d18aace1cb159865 Accessed: 2022-03-03
21.Bl uthgen N, Legewie S. Robustness of signal transduction pathways. Cell Mol Life Sci.
2013 Jul;70(13):2259-69.
22.Hofmeyr JHS. Metabolic control analysis in a nutshell. Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Systems Biology. 2001; p. 291{300.
23. Ingalls B P, Sauro H M. Sensitivity analysis of stoichiometric networks: an extension of
metabolic control analysis to non-steady state trajectories. Theoretical Biology; 2003;
222; 23{36.
24.Saez-Rodriguez J, Kremling A, Conzelmann H, Bettenbrock K, Gilles ED. Modular
Analysis of Signal Transduction Networks. IEEE Control Systems. 2004;24(4):35{52.
25.Gong Y, Zhao X. Shc-dependent pathway is redundant but dominant in MAPK cascade
activation by EGF receptors: A modeling inference. FEBS Letters. 2003;554(3):467{472.
26.Hornberg, J.J., Bruggeman, F.J., Binder, B., Geest, C.R., de Vaate, A.J.M.B., Lankelma,
J., Heinrich, R. and Westerhoff, H.V. Principles behind the multifarious control of signal
transduction. The FEBS Journal. 2005; 272: 244-258.
February 20, 2023 41/41