arXiv:2302.12671v2  [math.CV]  29 May 2023The stars at inﬁnity in several complex variables
Anders Karlsson∗
May 28, 2023
Abstract
This text reviews certain notions in metric geometry that ma y have further applica-
tions to problems in complex geometry and holomorphic dynam ics in several variables.
The discussion contains a few unrecorded results and formul ates a number of questions
related to the asymptotic geometry and boundary estimates o f bounded complex domains,
boundary extensions of biholomorphisms, the dynamics of ho lomorphic self-maps, Teich-
müller theory, and the existence of constant scalar curvatu re metrics on compact Kähler
manifolds.
1 From complex to metric
Pick’s striking reformulation of the Schwarz lemma in [Pi16 ] started a rich development of
metric methods in complex analysis. The Schwarz-Pick lemma states that every holomorphic
self-map of the unit disk Ddoes not increase distances in the Poincaré metric. Modifyi ng a
deﬁnition of Carathéodory, Kobayashi deﬁned in the 1960s a l argest pseudo-distance kZon
each complex space Zso that every holomorphic map is nonexpansive in these dista nces. A
pseudo-distance is a metric except that there may exist dist inct points xandysuch that
d(x,y) = 0 . Indeed, kC≡0. On the other hand, kDis the Poincaré metric and one sees
that Liouville’s theorem that bounded entire functions are constant immediately follows from
these assertions. This is not a shorter proof of this theorem , but places it into a diﬀerent
framework that also explains the Picard’s little theorem. C omplex space where the Kobabyshi
pseudo-distance is an actual distance are called Kobayashi hyperbolic and this is via Lang’s
conjectures from the 1970s connected to ﬁniteness of the num ber of rational solutions to
diophantine equations [La74, La86].
Metric methods are thus rather old in the subject of several c omplex variables, but as seen for
example in [BG20, BGZ21, AFGG22, BNT22, Z22, GZ22, L22], the met ric perspective has
developed strongly also in recent years. The present paper t ries to outline a few further possible
directions mostly to do with boundaries and intrinsic struc tures on them. One classic topic in
complex analysis is the question of the extension of holomor phic maps to the boundary of the
domain, a problem for which also the Bergman metric has been us ed. In Riemannian geometry,
boundary maps were considered in the 1960s by Mostow for the p roofs of his landmark rigidity
theorems. At an early stage his ideas did not attract much int erest from the Lie group
community, instead encouragement came from Ahlfors, the fa mous complex analyst [Mo96].
Nowadays, since the inﬂuence of Gromov having Mostow’s and M argulis’ work as a starting
∗The author was supported in part by the Swiss NSF grants 20002 0-200400 and 200021-212864, and the
Swedish Research Council grant 104651320.
1point, boundaries at inﬁnity and extensions of maps between them are a staple of geometric
group theory. In completing the circle as it were, these metr ic ideas have since been applied
to the above-mentioned complex analytic question [BB00, CL21 ].
In another direction, an important problem in complex geome try is to understand when a
given compact Kähler manifold admits a constant scalar curv ature Kähler metric in the same
cohomology class. This study started in the 1950s by Calabi w ho for this purpose introduced
a ﬂow on a certain space of metrics on the underlying manifold . In response to a conjecture
of Donaldson, Streets proposed to study a related weak Calab i ﬂow on the metric completion
of Calabi’s space equipped with a certain L2-type metric. This ﬂow is nonexpansive in this
metric and therefore metric versions of the Denjoy-Wolﬀ the orem could be relevant for this
set of problems. This is discussed more in section 5 and we ref er to [CC02, BDL17, CCh21]
for references on this topic. We thus see an example of an enti rely diﬀerent use of metric
methods, more in the spirit of Teichmüller theory, for probl ems in several variable complex
geometry.
The present paper reviews the stars from [K05]. Given a metri c spaceXwith a compacti-
ﬁcationX, we associate an extra structure of the boundary ∂X:=X\X. This boundary
structure consists of subsets called stars, which are limits of generalized halfspaces, and is an
isometry invariant in case the isometries act naturally on t he boundary. Everything is deﬁned
in terms of distances, without any knowledge about the exist ence of geodesics. The interest
of these notions comes from that:
• the stars measure the failure of Gromov hyperbolicity ( e.g.Proposition 8), and this is
useful when extending the theory of Gromov hyperbolic space s to more general metric
spaces ( e.g.[K05, section 4]);
• the stars provide a way of describing the asymptotic geomet ry in any given compactiﬁca-
tion, and boundary estimates can sometimes be translated in to qualitative information
(e.g.Theorem 11, [K05, sections 8,9], [DF21]);
• the stars restrict the limit sets of nonexpansive maps (The orem 14);
• a contraction lemma dictates the dynamics of isometries (L emma 4);
• there are conceivable versions of boundary extensions of i sometric maps ( cf.Question
G).
As I have argued in a paper originally entitled From linear to metric [K21], the methods
discussed here are also useful in other mathematical and sci entiﬁc subjects. And while the
metric ideas in the present paper are rather uniﬁed and focus ed, their consequences belong
to a diverse set of topics. Let me illustrate the latter by hig hlighting three such results. The
ﬁnal section establishes:
Theorem. (Theorem 22) Let Rn=f1◦f2◦...◦fnbe the composition of randomly selected
holomorphic self-maps of a bounded domain XinCN. Letddenote the Kobayashi distance
and assume Xis a weak visibility domain in the sense of Bharali-Zimmer. T hen a.s. unless
1
nd(x,Rnx)→0,
asn→ ∞, there is a random point ξ∈∂Xindependent of xsuch that
Rnx→ξ,
asn→ ∞.
2In section 5 the following improvement of [X21, Corollary 4. 2] is obtained:
Corollary. (Corollary 20) Let (Y,ω)be a compact Kähler manifold that is geodesically unsta-
ble. LetΦtbe the weak Calabi ﬂow on the associated completed space E2of Kähler metrics in
the same class. Then Φt(x)lies on sublinear distance to a unique geodesic ray γast→ ∞.
In particular, which is a signiﬁcantly weaker statement, Φt(x)converges as t→ ∞ to the point
deﬁned by γin the visual boundary. This type of statement was establish ed and exploited in
[CS14] for the purpose of partially conﬁrming a conjecture o f Tian.
Finally, recall the notion of extremal length initially stu died by Grötzsch, Beurling and Ahlfors.
LetMbe a closed surface with complex structure xandαan isotopy class of a simple closed
curve on M, and deﬁne
Extx(α) = sup
ρ∈[x]ℓρ(α)
Area(ρ),
where the supremum is taken over all metrics in the conformal class ofx. We have from
section 4:
Corollary. (Corollary 13) Let fbe a holomorphic self-map of the Teichmüller space of M.
Then there exists a simple closed curve βsuch that
lim
n→∞Extfn(x)(β)1/n= lim
n→∞/parenleftbigg
sup
αExtfn(x)(α)
Extx(α)/parenrightbigg1/n
,
where the supremum is taken over all simple closed curves on M.
Acknowledgements: Part of this text was presented at the INdAM workshop in the Pa laz-
zone in Cortona, Tuscany in September of 2021. I heartily tha nk Filippo Bracci, Hervé
Gaussier, and Andrew Zimmer, for organizing this stimulati ng workshop and for their gener-
ous invitation. It happened to take place around the time of a pandemic and just a week short
of the 700th anniversary of the death of Dante Alighieri, the great Florentine poet. Given this
context, upon arrival in Cortona admiring the clear starry n ight sky, and in view of the topic
of my lecture, however modest, it was impossible not to assoc iate to Dante since the concept
of stars is such an important one in his Commedia .
“E quindi uscimmo a riveder le stelle.”
2 Boundaries, halfspaces, and stars at inﬁnity
Boundaries. Let(X,d)denote a metric space, for example a complex domain with the
Kobayashi metric assumed (Kobayashi) hyperbolic. Let Xbe a compactiﬁcation of Xwith
which we mean a compact Hausdorﬀ space Xand a topological embedding i:X→Xsuch
thatX=i(X). Often we suppress the map iand consider Xsimply as a subset of X.
In the best case scenario the isometries of Xextend naturally to homeomorphisms of X, in
this case we speak of an Isom(X)-compactiﬁcation. The corresponding (ideal) boundary is
∂X:=X\i(X). There is also a weaker notion that only insists that iis continuous and
injective, but that Xis not necessarily homeomorphic to i(X), we will refer to this as a weak
compactiﬁcation.
3Example 1. In the case of bounded domains in complex vector spaces CN, we can consider
the closure which often is called the natural boundary, here I will call it the natural extrinsic
boundary. Complex automorphisms of the domain may not exten d to the boundary, the
question of when they do is a classical topic as mentioned in t he introduction.
Example 2. For any metric space there is always an intrinsic method of a w eakIsom(X)-
compactiﬁcation, called the horofunction bordiﬁcation or as I prefer, following Rieﬀel, the
metric compactiﬁcation , which is increasingly seen as being of fundamental importa nce. Given
a base point x0of the metric space X, let
Φ :X→RX
be deﬁned via
x/ma√sto→hx(·) :=d(·,x)−d(x0,x).
With the topology of pointwise convergence, this is a contin uous injective map and the closure
Φ(X)is compact and Hausdorﬀ. The elements of Xh:=Φ(X)are called metric functionals .
In the case Xis a proper geodesic space this construction gives a compact iﬁcation in the
stricter sense. If Xis a proper metric space the elements of ∂Xare called horofunctions , the
typical example of such comes from geodesic rays and are call edBusemann functions. (in the
literature starting with Rieﬀel this word is also used for li mits along almost geodesics).
A major question is to investigate the exact relation betwee n these two examples: the metric
compactiﬁcation in the Kobayashi metric, which is the natur al intrinsic compactiﬁcation, and
the natural extrinsic boundary of bounded complex domains. See for example [AFGG22]. Let
me record it as follows:
Question A: LetXbe a bounded complex domain with the Kobayashi metric. How an d when
can one relate the natural extrinsic boundary with the bound ary from the metric compactiﬁca-
tion?
Let(X,d)denote a metric space and Xa compactiﬁcation of X. For a subset W⊂Xwe set
d(x,W) := inf
w∈W∩Xd(x,w).
Halfspaces. Letx0∈X. The (generalized) halfspace deﬁned by W⊂Xand real number
Cis
H(W,C) :=Hx0(W,C) :={z:d(z,W)≤d(z,x0)+C}.
We also use the notation H(W) :=H(W,0). These notions have the advantage that they do
not refer to geodesics which may or may not exist.
Stars at inﬁnity. Letξ∈∂Xand denote by Vξthe collection of open neighborhoods of ξ
inX. The star ofξbased at x0is
Sx0(ξ) =/intersectiondisplay
V∈VξH(V),
where the closure is taken in X, and the star ofξis
S(ξ) =/uniondisplay
C≥0/intersectiondisplay
V∈VξH(V,C).
4It is immediate that ξ∈Sx0(ξ)⊂S(ξ). The second deﬁnition removes an a priori dependence
onx0. In all examples I can think of, the two deﬁnitions actually c oincide, which in other
words means that the ﬁrst deﬁnition is independent of the bas e point chosen.
Question B: When is S(ξ) =Sx0(ξ)?
The motivation for calling these sets stars is that they are subsets at inﬁnity of the space
and they have a tendency to be star-shaped in appropriate sen ses or even to coincide with
the notion of star in the theory of simplicial complexes. In a ddition they are closely related
to visibility properties of the compactiﬁcation (see Propo sition 8) so one could appeal to the
light emitting property of physical stars.
Afaceis a non-empty intersection of stars. The following notion w ill be used below, the dual
star ofξ:
S∨(ξ) :={η∈∂X:ξ∈S(η)}
It was observed in [K05] that in all the examples considered t here,S∨(ξ) =S(ξ), which
could be called star-reﬂexivity , and raised the question whether or when it is the case. In an
insightful paper by Jones and Kelsey [JK22] examples of homo geneous graphs, certain Diestel-
Leader graphs, with their metric compactiﬁcation were show nnotto have this property.
Understanding this phenomenon better has some additional i nterest in view of results like
Theorem 14 or Proposition 7 below.
Question C: Which spaces and compactiﬁcations are star reﬂexive in the s ense that S∨(ξ) =
S(ξ)for allξ∈∂X?
An obvious case of S∨(ξ) =S(ξ)is when S(ξ) ={ξ}.Such points are called hyperbolic
because for example for any Gromov hyperbolic space with its standard Gromov boundary
every point is hyperbolic. We call compactiﬁcations with th is property hyperbolic. Another
classical example of a hyperbolic compactiﬁcation is the en d compactiﬁcation of any proper
metric space. For bounded complex domains with Kobayashi me tric, every natural extrinsic
boundary point that is C2-smooth and strictly pseudoconvex is hyperbolic as P.J. Tho mas
informed me, see also below and [K05, Corollary 35].
Question D: For convex or pseudoconvex domains with the usual boundary, what are the
Kobayashi stars?
Hilbert’s metric on convex domains has a very simple answer p rovided in [K05, Proposition
32]: the stars and faces coincides with the usual homonymous notions for convex sets.
Teichmüller spaces of closed surfaces are of great importan ce and are biholomorphic to bounded
pseudoconvex domains. They have a natural metric, the Teich müller metric, which Royden
showed coincides with the Kobayashi metric. The recent pape r by Duchin and Fisher [DF21]
makes substantial progress toward [K05, Conjecture 46] det ermining the stars in the Teich-
müller metric with the Thurston compactiﬁcation which is de ﬁned in terms of topology and
hyperbolic geometry. It has been observed for a long time tha t the complex analytic notions
have a complicated relationship with the concepts from the a pproach of hyperbolic geometry,
but here there is a hope of a clean tight connection.
One can deﬁne the star-distance d⋆as in [K05, DF21] to be the induced path distance on ∂X,
in the extended sense that distances may be inﬁnite, from deﬁ ning
d⋆(ξ,η) = 0⇐⇒ξ=η
and ifξ/\e}atio\slash=η
d⋆(ξ,η) = 1⇐⇒η∈S(ξ)orξ∈S(η).
5In the case of an Isom(X)-compactiﬁcation the isometries obviously act by isometry also on
(∂X,d⋆). It is a trivial concept in case Xis Gromov hyperbolic with its standard boundary.
This is related to Tits incidence geometry at inﬁnity in nonp ositive curvature and conjecturally
([K05, DF21]) the star distance restricted to the simple clo sed curves of the Thurston boundary
isometric to the curve complex deﬁned in pure topological te rms, see [DF21] for more details
and for a conjectural outline arriving at such a result.
Let me mention the following useful fact, the sequence criterion for star membership of Duchin-
Fisher extending a lemma in [JK22]:
Lemma 3. [DF21] Let (X,d)be a metric space and Xa compactiﬁcation of X. Assume that
Xis ﬁrst countable. Then η∈S(ξ)if and only if for every neighborhood UofηinX, there
are sequences xn→ξ, yn→Uand a constant C≥0such that
d(yn,xn)≤d(yn,x0)+C.
In particular, if there is such sequences with yn→η, thenη∈S(ξ).
Isometries, when well-deﬁned as maps of X, preserve the star distance. This stands in contrast
to an opposite phenomenon namely that topologically isomet ries tend to have strong contrac-
tion properties on Xas expressed by Lemma 4 below. Especially this is the case whe n there
are many hyperbolic points but on the other hand it can reduce to no contraction for example
in case of the euclidean spaces with the usual visual boundar ies (if one takes an ℓ1metric
instead there is some contraction). The north-south dynamics is one of the most important
features in the theory of word hyperbolic group, and states t hat for any sequence of group
elements gnwhich converges to ξ+whenn→ ∞ andg−1
ntoξ−, it holds that for any two
neighborhoods V+ofξ+andV−ofξ−eventually everything outside U−is mapped inside U+
bygn.This is generalized without any hyperbolicity assumption, and to any compactiﬁcation,
just adding an “ H”:
Lemma 4. (The contraction lemma [K05]) Let (X,d)be a metric space and Xa com-
pactiﬁcation of X. Letgnbe a sequence of isometries such that gnx0→ξ+∈∂Xand
g−1
nx0→ξ−∈∂Xas nn→ ∞. Then for any neighborhoods V+ofξ+andV−ofξ−, there
existsN >0such that
gn(X\H(V−))⊂H(V+)
for alln≥1.
In [K05] a reﬁnement in the case Isom(X)-compactiﬁcations is also formulated. In words, gn
eventually maps everything outside the star of ξ−into any neighborhood of the star of ξ+.
Note that it is allowed that the two boundary points are the sa me, such as is the case for
iterates of a parabolic isometry in hyperbolic geometry. Th e interplay between the invariance
of the star distance and the contractive property of Lemma 4 c an sometimes be used to rule
out non-compact automorphism groups, see [K05, Theorem 4] f or an example. In a more
classical direction it recovers Hopf’s theorem on ends whic h states that any topological space
Xthat is a regular covering space of a nice compact space must h ave either 0, 1, 2 or a
continuum, of ends. In particular it applies to ﬁnitely gene rated groups and the ends of their
Cayley graphs. This generalizes in view of Lemma 4 to any hype rbolic compactiﬁcation with
stars replacing ends.
Question E: Are there applications of the tension between the invarianc e of the star distance
and the contraction lemma also for groups of biholomorphism s of certain complex domains?
To exemplify this idea:
6Proposition 5. Let(X,d)be a proper metric space and XanIsom(X)-compactiﬁcation of
X. Assume that a noncompact group of isometries of Xﬁxes a ﬁnite set Fof boundary points.
ThenFis contained in two stars.
Proof. By properness of X, compactness of Xand the noncompactness of the isometry group,
we can ﬁnd isometries gnsuch that gnx0→ξ+∈∂Xandg−1
nx0→ξ−∈∂Xasn→ ∞. Since
Fis ﬁnite, by passing to a ﬁnite index subgroup, which does not aﬀect the noncompactness,
we may assume that the group ﬁxes the elements of Fpointwise. Any point outside the two
stars associated to ξ±must be contracted to these stars according to the contracti on lemma.
Such a point cannot be ﬁxed, hence F⊂S(ξ+)∪S(ξ−).
3 Geodesics and boundary estimates
Let us begin by the following simple observation:
Proposition 6. LetXbe a proper metric space with compactiﬁcation X. To any geodesic
rayγthere is an associated face of ∂Xbeing the non-empty intersection of all the stars which
contain limit points of γ(t)ast→ ∞. In particular, all limit points of γ(t)are contained in
this face at inﬁnity.
Proof. Since the space is proper, any geodesic ray only accumulate a t the boundary. Take any
two limit points γ(ni)→ξandγ(kj)→η. For any ni> kjwe have
d(γ(ni),γ(kj)) =ni−kj< d(γ(ni),γ(0))≤d(γ(ni),x0)+d(x0,γ(0)).
This implies that γ∈S(η)sinceγ(ni)stays closer to each neighborhood of ηup to the
constant C=d(x0,γ(0)). since the two limit points were arbitrary, this shows that a ny limit
point belongs to the star of any other limit point. Thus this i ntersection of stars is non-empty
and contains all limit points.
Recall that any geodesic ray deﬁnes a Busemann function thus c onverges to a boundary point
in this compactiﬁcation. Related to Question A we have:
Question F: When do Kobayashi geodesic rays converge to a boundary point in bounded
complex domains?
Partial results follow from works such as [BGZ21, AFGG22] and earlier papers that identify
the natural extrinsic boundary with the Gromov boundary, si nce geodesic rays always converge
in the latter boundary. Note that drawing from the analogy wi th Hilbert’s metric on convex
domains (discussed by Vesentini in [V76]) the paper [FK05] s uggests that it could be a more
general phenomenon since it is shown there that Hilbert geod esic rays always converge even
for general convex domains that often are not Gromov hyperbo lic.
I think this is related to questions of extending biholomorp hismsf:X→Yto the boundaries.
Since Kobayashi geodesic rays are mapped to Kobayashi geode sic rays, and if these, say
emanating from x0, are in bijective correspondence with boundary points, the n there is such
an extension. In Mostow’s work in higher rank he obtained inc idence preserving boundary
maps. So even when there are no well-deﬁned boundary maps one could formulate a vague,
more general question in this direction:
Question G: Are there results of the type that biholomorphims or proper h olomorphic maps
induce maps between the face lattices of the boundaries?
7Some trivial examples and for more discussion of this in the m etric setting, see [K05]. Ob-
viously it will depend on the boundaries, and one optimistic possibility could be that if one
takes the metric compactiﬁcation of the domain space, then i t would map to the boundary
(or its faces if the boundary is too large) of the range space. Some interesting results and
insightful discussion of related type can be found in Bracci- Gaussier’s papers [BG20, BG22].
In view of the these papers another question is:
Question H: What are the relations between stars and the intersection of horoballs with the
boundary?
The following relation is simple for the metric compactiﬁca tion (I emphasize that we are here
primarily discussing horoballs in the above sense, while th ere are also the more general notions
of Abate’s small and large horoballs deﬁned in 1988 that have been of importance in complex
geometry since then, see [A91]):
Proposition 7. Let∂Xbe the metric boundary of a proper metric space. Let Hξbe a horoball
centered at ξ∈∂X.Then
Hξ∩∂X⊂S∨(ξ).
Proof. Letxn→hin the metric compactiﬁcation, which means that
h(y) = lim
n→∞d(y,xn)−d(x0,xn).
Suppose that a sequence ykbelongs to the ﬁxed horoball Hξ, which means that for some C
and allk
C≥h(yk) = lim
n→∞d(yk,xn)−d(x0,xn).
This implies that for any C′> Cand anykthere is an Nsuch that d(xn,yk)≤d(xn,x0)+C′
for alln > N . From the deﬁnitions we then have that for any limit point ηof the sequence
yk, it holds that ξ∈S(η).
Thevisibility property of a compactiﬁcation has its origin from Eberlein-O’Neill i n nonpositive
curvature and has recently entered into complex analysis in signiﬁcant ways, see for example
[BZ17, BM21, BNT22] for more discussion. One deﬁnition is as fol lows: for any two boundary
pointsξandηthere are disjoint closed neighborhoods VξandVηand a compact set Ksuch
that any geodesic segment connecting VξandVηmust also meet K, alternatively formulated,
there is a bound on the distance from x0to each such geodesics. Real hyperbolic spaces
have this property while Euclidean spaces do not have it, in t heir standard visual (=metric)
compactiﬁcations. In this context the following is immedia te:
Proposition 8. Assume that Xis a geodesic space which means that every two points can
be connected by a geodesic segment. Suppose that for two dist inct boundary points, there are
disjoint neighborhoods of them such that all geodesics conn ecting these neighborhoods have
bounded distance to x0.Then the two stars are disjoint.
Proof. The assumption means that the distance between points near ξand points near ηis
up to a bounded amount the sum of the respective distance to x0.The conclusion now follows
from the deﬁnition of stars: points near one of the boundary p oint will eventually all lie outside
the halfspaces around the other.
If all stars are disjoint, then we must have that S(ξ) ={ξ}for every ξ∈∂X, and I call such
compactiﬁcations hyperbolic as mentioned above.
8Corollary 9. If a compactiﬁcation of a geodesic space has the visibility p roperty, then it is a
hyperbolic compactiﬁcation.
Since it seems not clear when Kobayashi domains are geodesic spaces, Bharali and Zimmer,
see [BZ17, BM21], deﬁned a weaker notion of visibility (see als o these papers for a wealth of
examples). Let Xbe a bounded domain in CNwith its associated Kobayashi distance d. Fix
someκ >0, by [BZ17, Proposition 4.4] any two points in Xcan be joined by a (1,κ)-almost
geodesic which means a path σ:I→Xsuch that
|t−s|−κ≤d(σ(t),σ(s))≤ |t−s|+κ
for allt,s∈I. LetXbe the closure Xabove referred to as the natural extrinsic compactiﬁca-
tion ofX. We say that Xis avisibility domain if for any two distinct boundary points ξand
ηand neighborhoods VandWinXof these two points such that V∩W=∅, there exists
a compact set KinXsuch that for any x∈V∩Xandy∈W∩Xand any (1,κ)-almost
geodesic σjoining these two points, σintersects K.
Theorem 10. LetXbe a bounded domain in CNandXits closure. Assume that it is a
visibility domain for the Kobayashi distance. Then
S(ξ) ={ξ}
for every ξ∈∂X=X\X.
The proof is a minor adaptation of Proposition 8 in view of [BZ1 7, Proposition 4.4]. See also
the proof of Theorem 22 below.
Question I: Are there in some cases precise relations between visibilit y and boundary points
being hyperbolic? Are hyperbolic compactiﬁcations a large r class than visibility compactiﬁca-
tions?
This is of interest in the Wolﬀ-Denjoy context discussed bel ow. Here is a way to get visibility
and hyperbolic points from estimates for the Kobayashi dist ances, taken from [K05]:
Theorem 11. ([K05, Theorem 37]) Let Xbe a bounded C2-smooth domain in CNwhich
is complete in the Kobayashi metric. Assume that for the inﬁn itesimal Kobayashi metric
KX(z;v)there are some constants ǫ >0andc >0such that
KX(z;v)≥c/bardblv/bardbl
δ(z,∂X)ǫ
for allz∈Xandv∈CN, where/bardbl·/bardblandδrefer to the Euclidean norm and distance re-
spectively. Then S(ξ) ={ξ}for every ξ∈∂Xand the compactiﬁcation has the visibility
property.
The estimate in the assumption of the theorem is established in [Ch92] for smooth pseudo-
convex bounded domains with boundary of ﬁnite type in the sen se of D’Angelo. This has
subsequently been extended in important ways, in [KT16, Lem ma 5], the Goldilocks domain
of Bharali-Zimmer in [BZ17], and [BM21, Theorem 1.5].
4 Wolﬀ-Denjoy type theorems
An early application of the Schwarz-Pick lemma was found in 1 926 seemingly as a conversation
viaComptes Rendus of the French Academy of Sciences between Wolﬀ and Denjoy. It states
9that any holomorphic self-map of the unit disk either has a ﬁx ed point, or its orbits converge
to a single point in the boundary circle and every horodisk at that point is an invariant set.
Extensions of this has generated a vast literature, startin g with Valiron, Heins, H. Cartan,
Hervé, Vesentini, Abate, Beardon and many others, see [HW21] for references. Most exten-
sions, assume something like Gromov hyperbolicity or weake r property (like visibility or strict
convexity). The stars will be used for a weaker conclusion bu t in a much more general setting.
I will mention two purely metric versions, one in terms of the metric compactiﬁcation and the
other one in terms of the stars at inﬁnity for any given compac tﬁcation of interest.
LetXbe a metric space and consider maps fbetween metric spaces that are nonexpansive
in the sense that
d(f(x),f(y))≤d(x,y)
for allx,y∈X. Isometries are important examples and the composition of n onexpansive
maps remains nonexpansive.
As was remarked in the very beginning Kobayashi provided a fu nctor from complex spaces and
holomorphic maps into psuedo-metric spaces and nonexpansi ve maps, thereby constituting a
very signiﬁcant class of examples.
One deﬁnes the minimal displacement d(f) = inf xd(x,f(x))and the translation number
τ(f) = lim n→∞d(x,fn(x))/n, which exists by a well-known subadditivity argument. Thes e
numbers are analogs of the operator norm and spectral radius , respectively, in particular note
thatτ(f)≤d(f).They have been studied to some extent in the complex analytic literature,
by Arosio, Bracci, Fiacchi and Zimmer in particular, see [AB16 , AFGG22, AFGK22].
The following, which I think of as a kind of weak spectral theo rem in the metric category
[K21, K22a], can be viewed as a partial extension of the theor em of Wolﬀ and Denjoy:
Theorem 12. ([K01]) Letf:X→Xbe a nonexpansive map of a metric space X. Then
there is a metric functional hsuch that
h(fnx0)≤ −τ(f)k
for alln≥1, and
lim
n→∞−1
nh(fnx) =τ(f).
The theorem implies as very special cases, with geometric in put speciﬁc in each case, extensions
of the Wolﬀ-Denjoy theorem for holomorphic maps [K01, K05], von Neumann’s mean ergodic
theorem [K22a, K21], and Thurston’s spectral theorem for su rface homeomorphisms [K14,
H16]. Moreover, it has been applied in non-linear analysis, see e.g. [LN12] and gave the
classiﬁcation of isometries of Gromov hyperbolic spaces ev en when non-locally compact and
non-geodesic. It also provided new information for isometr ies of Riemannian manifolds. Its
proof has subsequently been used several times in the settin g of Denjoy-Wolﬀ extensions in
several complex variables, see [HW21]. Maybe it can also be u seful for pseudo-holomorphic
self-maps, see [BC09].
To illustrate how a metric generalization of the Wolﬀ-Denjo y theorem can give back to complex
geometry in a diﬀerent way, we show the following. Extremal l ength was deﬁned in the
introduction.
Corollary 13. Letfbe a holomorphic self-map of the Teichmüller space of M. Then there
exists a simple closed curve βsuch that
lim
n→∞Extfn(x)(β)1/n= lim
n→∞/parenleftbigg
sup
αExtfn(x)(α)
Extx(α)/parenrightbigg1/n
,
10where the supremum is taken over all simple closed curves on M.
Proof. For more information and bibliographic details, see [K14]. Holomorphic maps do not
expand Teichmüller distances since it coincides with the Ko bayashi metric d. Kerckhoﬀ showed
to following formula (in particular implying that this expr ession is symmetric)
d(x,y) =1
2logsup
αExtx(α)
Exty(α),
where the supremum is taken of isotopy classes of simple clos ed curves on M. Denote by τthe
translation length τ(f)deﬁned above. Liu and Su showed that the metric compactiﬁcat ion
coincides with the Gardiner-Masur compactiﬁcation, and th anks also to Miyachi there is a
description of the metric functionals. From Theorem 12 we th en have
−τn≥h(fn(x)) = logsup
αEP(α)
Extfn(x)(α)1/2−C≥logD
Extfn(x)(β)1/2−C,
for some curve β(withD=EP(β)>0which must exist) for all n >1. This gives
Extfn(x)(β)≥D2e2Ce2τn.
The other inequality, for any ǫ >0and all suﬃciently large nfollows from the supremum in
Kerckhoﬀ’s formula:
Extfn(x)(β)≤C1e2(τ+ǫ)n.
The result now follows.
Here is a result that applies to any compactiﬁcation, in part icular to holomorphic self-maps
of bounded domains with the standard boundary as a subset of CN.
Theorem 14. ([K05, Theorem 11]) Let f:X→Xbe a nonexpansive map of a proper metric
space. Assume that Xis a sequentially compact compactiﬁcation of X. Then either the orbit
is bounded or there is a boundary point ξ∈∂Xsuch that for any x∈X, every limit point of
fn(x)asn→ ∞in∂Xis contained in S∨(ξ).
In the usual settings where one assumes something that impli esS∨(ξ) ={ξ}, we of course may
conclude that the orbits converge to this boundary point, as in the usual Denjoy-Wolﬀ theorem.
In view of [DF21] a corollary, that no doubt is only a partial r esult, can be formulated:
Corollary 15. Letfbe a holomorphic self-map of the Teichmüller space of a close d surface.
If the orbit is unbounded and has an accumulation point ξthat is a uniquely ergodic foliation
in the Thurston boundary, then fn(x)→ξasn→ ∞and any x.
A conceivable strengthening of the theorem could be that the limit set in the unbounded case
has to be contained in a single face, compare with Propositio n 6 for an analogy. In order to
be less vague, while more risky, let us formulate the followi ng conjecture:
Conjecture 16. LetXbe a bounded domain in CNequipped with Kobayashi metric and
assume it is a proper metric space. Let X⊂CNbe the standard closure. Let f:X→X
be holomorphic. Then either the orbits stay away from the bou ndary or there is a closed face
F⊂∂Xin the above metric sense such that for any x∈Xevery accumulation point of fn(x)
asn→ ∞belongs to F.
11Theorem 14 provides a partial result. Note that one could als o ask the same instead using
the notion of face as the a priori non-metric sense of being an intersection of ∂Xwith a
hyperplane. This relates to [A91, AR14] which imply partial results on the conjecture in cases
that the domain is convex or has a simple boundary.
Here is another partial result:
Proposition 17. LetXbe a bounded domain in CNequipped with Kobayashi metric. Let
X⊂CNbe the standard closure. Let f:X→Xbe holomorphic. Assume that d(z,fn(z))ր
∞monotonically for some z∈X. Then there is a closed face F⊂∂Xin the above metric
sense such that for any x∈Xevery accumulation point of fn(x)asn→ ∞belongs to F.
Proof. Given two subsequences fni(z)→ξ∈∂Xandfkj(z)→ηasi,j→ ∞.For anyni> kj
we have
d(fni(z),fkj(z))≤d(z,fni−kj(z))< d(z,fni(z))≤d(fni(z),x0)+d(x0,z).
For any neighborhood Vofηwe can ﬁnd a large enough jso thatfkj(z)∈V, and the above
inequality means that
fni(z)∈H(V,C)
for allilarge enough and where C=d(x0,z). Henceξ∈S(η). Since this was for two arbitrary
sequence we must also have η∈S(ξ)and can conclude that Fbeing the intersection of all the
stars of all accumulation points contains all accumulation s points (even when changing ztox
since the respective orbits stay on bounded distance and thi s does not inﬂuence the stars).
The same argument would work if one merely knew that for some a >0,d(z,fan(z))ր ∞.
This is presumably most often the case, but it may not be so eas y to guarantee.
5 The Calabi ﬂow
Given a Kähler manifold with a ﬁxed Kähler class, a natural qu estion is to determine whether
there exists a canonical choice of Kähler metric in this clas s. One potential such choice,
generalizing Riemann surface theory and Kähler-Einstein m etrics, is to look for metrics of
constant scalar curvature.
Let(Y,J,ω)be a compact connected Kähler manifold and consider the spac eHof smooth
Kähler metrics in the cohomology class [ω], introduced by Calabi in the 1950s. This space
can be equipped with a Riemannian metric (Mabuchi-Semmes-D onaldson) of Weil-Petersson
or Ebin type with nonpositive sectional curvatures and such that the metric completion E2is
a CAT(0)-space admitting a concrete description in terms of plurisubharmonic functions (due
to Darvas). The Calabi ﬂow on Hin the space of metrics does not expand distances as long as
it exists. It is believed to exists for all times. Moreover it is expected that either the ﬂow con-
verges to a constant scalar curvature metric or it diverges a nd should asymptotically contain
some information about the Kähler structure (made precise i n a conjecture of Donaldson in
terms of geodesic rays). Streets suggested to study a weak Ca labi ﬂow Φt, which is nonexpan-
sive being the gradient ﬂow of a convex function M, theK-energy of Mabuchi, and exists for
all time and coincides with the Calabi ﬂow when it exists. I re fer to [CC02, BDL17, X21] for
more information and appropriate references. The works of M ayer and Bacak in pure metric
geometry play an important role here, let me add another good reference [CaL10] on gradient
ﬂows of convex functions on CAT(0)-spaces generally.
12From a ﬂow Φtwe can deﬁne the time-one map f(x) = Φ1(x), and we have that fn(x) = Φn(x).
From what has been said we have that fis a nonexpansive self-map of a complete CAT(0)-
space.
Motivated by this it should be useful to see what can be said ab out the iteration of nonexpan-
sive maps in the setting of CAT(0)-spaces (note by the way tha t since the Kobayashi metric
is a supremum-type metric it is almost never CAT(0) apart fro m the well-known exceptional
cases). Some results and arguments for locally compact spac es are contained in Beardon
[Be90].
For general complete CAT(0)-spaces, in the case that the orb its offare bounded, several
authors have observed the existence of a ﬁxed point, notably Kirk in [Ki03]. I gave the
following argument in my doctoral thesis:
Proposition 18. Letfbe a nonexpansive map of a complete CAT(0)-space. If the orbi ts are
bounded, then fhas a ﬁxed point.
Proof. It follows from CAT(0), in fact the uniform convexity, that b ounded subset possesses
a unique circumcenter, which is a point that is the center of a closed ball of minimal radius
containing the set. The uniform convexity also leads to that the intersection of any nested
sequence of decreasing closed convex sets is nonempty, beca use the circumcenters form a
Cauchy sequence and the limit is a point in the intersection.
Given an orbit xn:=fn
n(x)we can construct an invariant, bounded, closed convex set in the
following way. For each k >1we letCkbe the intersection of the closed balls with centers
atxnand radius the diameter of the orbit. These are non-empty, bo unded and convex.
Moreover f:Ck→Ck+1, so the the closure of the union of all Ckis the desired invariant
set. Such sets are ordered by inclusion and every linearly or dered chain has a lower bound
via the intersection, thus Zorn’s lemma provides a minimal e lement. The circumcenter of this
minimal element must be a ﬁxed point of f.
CAT(0)-spaces have the so-called visual bordiﬁcation consisting of equivalence classes of geodesic
rays (this is is not related to the visibility property above ). For proper spaces it coincides
with the metric compactiﬁcation.
Theorem 19. Letfbe a nonexpansive map of a complete CAT(0)-space X. If the orbits are
bounded, then fhas a ﬁxed point. If df:= infxd(x,f(x))>0, then there exists a unique
geodesic ray γfromxsuch that
1
nd(fn(x),γ(dfn))→0,
asn→ ∞, andb(f(x))≤b(x)−dffor allxwherebdenotes the Busemann function associated
toγ. In particular, f(x)converges to the class of γin the visual bordifcation. If df= 0, then
there is a metric functional hsuch that h(f(x))≤h(x)for allx.
Proof. The bounded orbit case is treated in Proposition 18. It is kno wn from [GV12] that for
any nonexpansive self-map fof a CAT(0)-space, since it is a star-shaped hemi-metric spa ce,
the minimal displacement dfequals the translation length τf. Therefore τf>0, and a special
case of the main result in [KM99] then shows that there is a uni que unit-speed geodesic ray γ
fromxsuch that1
nd(fn(x),γ(dfn))→0.
13In particular, which is strictly weaker, fn(x)converges to the visual boundary point [γ]for
anyx∈X. Letbbe the Busemann function associated to the geodesic ray emana ting from
x0representing the class of γ. This is the unique Busemann function such that ( cf.[KL06])
−1
nb(fnx)→df.
Theorem 12 now implies moreover that b(f(x))≤b(x)−dfwhich holds for all xin view of
[GV12]. And in the remaining case that df= 0and the inﬁmum is not attained, Theorem 12
gives a metric functional hsuch that h(fn(x0))≤0for alln >0.When the space is CAT(0)
this can be improved, see [K01] or [GV12], to give the remaini ng assertion for any x.
Anyone from complex dynamics, or attentive reader of the pre vious sections, will notice that
this too is a Wolﬀ-Denjoy type theorem in a purely metric sett ing, but now with implications
for complex geometry. It is known, see [BDL17], that either th e trajectories of the weak Calabi
ﬂow converges to a constant scalar curvature metric, or they diverge,d(x,Φt(x))→ ∞ for any
x. In the latter case on would like to know some directional beh avior, for example the notion
of weakly asymptotic geodesic ray introduced by Darvas-He a nd studied in [BDL17], which is
a notion much weaker (for example not necessarily unique) th an the one in Theorem 19. In
a special case there is more precise asymptotic convergence to a geodesic ray known [CS14,
Theorem 6.3] used to prove the main result concerning unique ness properties of constant scalar
curvature metrics in that same paper. We will compare the abo ve with Xia’s paper [X21].
Having as a starting point an inequality and conjecture of Do naldson in [Do05], Xia proved
an analog of the conjecture when enlarging the space from HtoE2, namely:
C:= inf
x∈E2|(∂M)(x)|= max−M(ℓ)
/bardblℓ/bardbl
where the maximum on the right is taken over boundary points / geodesic rays in E2. The
expression |(∂M)(x)|is the local upper gradient of the Mabuchi energy. If its inﬁm um is
strictly positive (Y,ω)is called geodesically unstable (and in particular admitting no constant
scalar curvature metric in its class). Recent results on geo desic stability and the existence of
constant scalar curvature Kähler metrics can be found in [CC h21].
Let me formulate the following that improves and reproves pa rts of [X21, Corollary 1.2, Corol-
lary 4.2]:
Corollary 20. Let(Y,ω)be a compact connected Kähler manifold that is geodesically unstable.
LetΦt(x)be the weak Calabi ﬂow on the associated space E2starting from x. Then there exists
a unique geodesic ray γfromxon sublinear distance to Φt(x0), that is
1
td(Φt(x),γ(Cn))→0,
whereCis deﬁned above. In particular Φt(x)→[γ]∈∂E2ast→ ∞, for any x.
Proof. The geodesic unstability asserts that the inﬁmum of the grad ient is strictly positive,
C >0, which implies that the escape rate of the weak Calabi ﬂow is l inear, see [CaL10]. The
corollary is now a consequence of Theorem 19.
There are many studies on the geodesics in spaces like HandEp, see [B22, AhC22] for two
recent papers in the complex setting and references therein . It might therefore be of interest
that the argument I suggest here (from [KM99]) constructs th e geodesic from the ﬂow in a way
14that does not use any compactness argument. From my point of v iew, related to Theorem 12
above, it should also be fruitful to study the dual notion to g eodesics, the metric functionals
ofE1andE2.
Apart from the constant scalar curvature problem, automorp hisms of the underlying Kähler
manifold act by isometry on the Calabi space and also fall und er Theorem 19:
Corollary 21. Letfbe a complex automorphism of a compact Kähler manifold. If
d:= inf
xd(x,f(x))>0
for the action on E2, then there is a unique geodesic ray γfromxsuch that
1
nd(fn(x),γ(dn))→0,
andfﬁxes the corresponding boundary point in the visual bordiﬁc ation ofM.
Proof. For CAT(0)-spaces any boundary limit point of the orbit is ﬁx ed byfas is well known,
see for example [K22b], since two sequences of bounded dista nce from each other converge to
the same equivalence class of geodesic ray when they converg e.
Even in the case d= 0, it holds that fﬁxes a metric functional of Ep([K22b]). A condition
likeinfxd(x,f(x)) = 0 wherefis a diﬀeomorphism of an underlying compact manifold acting
instead by isometry on a space of metrics was proposed by D’Am bra and Gromov in [DG91]
as(quasi-) unipotency off.
Question J: How to describe or understand the metric functionals for the Calabi-Mabuchi
space and what do the relevant results discussed in this pape r imply concretely for the Calabi
ﬂow, Donaldson’s conjecture, and automorphisms of the Kähl er manifold?
A ﬁnal remark is that in the standard visual bordiﬁcation, th e stars are identiﬁed in [K05,
Proposition 25] as:
S(ξ) =Sx0(ξ) ={η:∠(η,ξ)≤π/2}=S∨(ξ),
where∠denotes the Tits angle between two geodesic rays and is symme tric in its arguments.
Example. The stars for Euclidean spaces are half-spheres (the Tits an gle coincides with the
usual notion of angle) and for hyperbolic spaces they are poi nts (since any two boundary
points can be joined by a geodesic line giving the angle π).
6 Random iteration
The above discussion has involved iterations fnof a holomorphic self-map f. In some contexts
one meets the generalization to the composition of several d iﬀerent holomorphic maps. When
looking at the asymptotics one can compose them in two ways, f orward or backward. The
latter, i.e.
Rn=f1◦f2◦...◦fn
behaves best when studying individual orbits and appears fo r example in the theory of contin-
ued fractions. Indeed, a continued fraction expansion of a n umber is exactly such an expression
wherefi(z) =ai/(bi+z) are certain Möbius maps, and letting n→ ∞. Other examples con-
sidered by Ramanujan and Polya-Szegö are inﬁnite radicals ( fi(z) =√aiz+bi) and iterated
exponentials ( fi(z) =az
i), see [Lo99] for more details. In these contexts one conside rs the
15limit of the corresponding Rn(0)asn→ ∞. There is also a connection to Nevanlinna-Pick
interpolation.
Some papers on this topic, see for example [BCMN04, AC22, JS22 ], take arbitrary sequences
of maps (like in iterated function systems and the theory of f ractals) and sometimes call them
random iteration . Here we will only discuss Rnfor actually randomly selected holomorphic
mapsfi.
We formalize the setting as follows, more general than the us ualrandom assumption of inde-
pendently, identically distributed selected maps. Let (T,Ω,µ)be an ergodic measure preserv-
ing system with µ(Ω) = 1 . Given a measurable map f: Ω→Ginto a semigroup, we deﬁne
the following ergodic cocycle :R(n,ω) =f(ω)f(Tω)...f(Tn−1ω)or in probabilistic notation
leaving out the measure space: Rn=f1f2...fn. It is integrable if
/integraldisplay
Ωd(x,f(ω)x)dµ <∞
for some x∈X.Then by a well-known consequence of Kingman’s subadditive e rgodic theorem,
the limit exist
τ:= inf
n1
n/integraldisplay
d(x,R(n,ω)x)dµ= lim
n→∞1
nd(x,R(n,ω)x)
for almost every ωand by ergodicity τis independent of ω.
Recall the notion of visibility domain from section 3.
Theorem 22. LetRn=f1f2...fnbe an integrable ergodic cocycle of holomorphic self-maps o f
a bounded domain XinCNthat is a visibility domain with the Kobayashi distance d. Then
almost surely it holds that unless
1
nd(x,Rnx)→0
asn→ ∞, there is a random point ξ∈∂Xsuch that
Rnx→ξ
n→ ∞, for any x∈X.
Proof. Fixx∈X. Assume that for a.e. ω
1
nd(x,R(n,ω)x)→τ >0.
Take0< ǫ < τ. By [KM99, Proposition 4.2], for a.e. ω,there is a sequence of ni→ ∞ andK
such that
d(x,R(ni,ω)x)−d(x,R(ni−k,Tkω)x)≥(τ−ǫ)k
for allK < k < n i. Note that d(R(ni,ω)x,R(k,ω)x)≤d(x,R(ni−k,Tkω)x)by the nonex-
pansive property. This implies that
d(x,R(ni,ω)x)+d(x,R(k,ω)x)−d(R(ni,ω)x,R(k,ω)x)≥(τ−ǫ)k
for allK < k < n i(for large kwe could even insert a 2on the right hand side). Hence
the left hand side tends to inﬁnity as k < n i→ ∞. By compactness we may assume that
R(ni,ω)x→ξsome point ξ=ξ(ω)∈∂X.
Now suppose that for some subsequence kj,R(kj,ω)x→ηfor some other boundary point
η. Fix two disjoint closed neighborhoods VandWofξandηrespectively. Consider all
16large enough jsuch that R(kj,ω)x∈Wand take a corresponding ijsuch that kj< nij
andR(nij,ω)x∈V, and take an almost geodesic σjjoining these two orbit points. By the
visibility assumption there is a Cindependent of jsuch that there exists tjfor which
d(x,σj(tj))< C,
for all large j. Sinceσjis an almost geodesic we have
d(R(kj,ω)x,σj(tj))+d(σj(tj),R(nij,ω)x)≤d(R(nij,ω)x,R(kj,ω)x)+3κ.
Therefore by the triangle inequality
d(R(nij,ω)x,R(kj,ω)x)> d(x,R(nij,ω)x)+d(x,R(kj,ω)x)−2C−3κ.
So for an inﬁnitude of niandks we have
d(x,R(ni,ω)x)+d(x,R(k,ω)x)−d(R(ni,ω)x,R(k,ω)x)<2C+3κ,
but this contradicts the previous estimate. The conclusion follows.
Without the visibility assumption, a more general result (i n view of Theorem 10) holds corre-
sponding to Theorem 14:
Theorem 23. [K05, Theorem 18]Let (X,d)be a proper metric space, Xa compactiﬁcation,
andRn=R(n,ω)an integrable ergodic cocycle. Assume that τ >0.Then for a.e. ωthere is
a boundary point ξ=ξ(ω)such that
Rnx→S∨(ξ)
asn→ ∞.
The proof is similar to the previously stated theorem. It is n ot so easy in general to determine
when the linear rate of escape τis0or strictly positive. The diﬀerence in escape rate can be
exempliﬁed by Brownian motion in euclidean spaces ( τ= 0and no directional convergence)
and hyperbolic spaces ( τ >0and asymptotic convergence). Another result that ultimate ly
might prove to be yet more general, is the following random ve rsion of Theorem 12 above:
Theorem 24. (Ergodic theorem for noncommuting random operations, [KL0 6, GK20]) Let
Rn=R(n,ω)be an integrable ergodic cocycle of nonexpansive maps of a me tric space (X,d)
assuming everything is measurable. Then there exists a.s. a metric functional h=hωofX
such that
lim
n→∞−1
nh(Rnx) =τ.
The proof in the isometry case uses the extension of the maps t o the metric compactiﬁcation,
while the general case instead uses intricate subadditive e rgodic theory. How to deduce results
like Theorem 22 from this latter result is explained in the pr oof of [GK20, Corollary 5.2]. This
reference also contains a result on the behavior of the Ahlfo rs-Beurling extremal length under
the random iteration of holomorphic maps of Teichmüller spa ces.
Example. LetXbe the Teichmüller space associated to a higher genus closed orientable
surface. Let Rnbe a non-degenerate random walk on the group of its complex au tomorphisms
(which by a theorem of Royden coincides with the mapping clas s group in topology). The
17Teichmüller metric coincides with the Kobayashi metric (ag ain by Royden). The metric com-
pactiﬁcation coincides with the Gardiner-Masur compactiﬁ cation of Teichmüller space [LS14].
The group in question acts properly on this space that has at m ost exponential growth and
is a non-amenable group, it then follows from a theorem by Gui varch that then the escape
rate isτ >0. Therefore every random walk converges to a dual star at inﬁn ity of Teichmüller
space. See [K14] for more details and references. Note that [ DF21] investigated the stars in
the Thurston compactiﬁcation, while for this other complex analytic boundary there has so
far not appeared any study of its stars.
References
[A91] Abate, Marco, Iteration theory, compactly divergent sequences and commuting
holomorphic maps. Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa Cl. Sci. (4) 18 (1991), no. 2,
167–191.
[AR14] Abate, Marco; Raissy, Jasmin, Wolﬀ-Denjoy theorems in nonsmooth convex do-
mains. Ann. Mat. Pura Appl. (4) 193 (2014), no. 5, 1503–1518.
[AC22] Abate, Marco; Christodoulou, Argyrios, Random iter ation on hyperbolic Riemann
surfaces. Ann. Mat. Pura Appl. (4) 201 (2022), no. 4, 2021–20 35.
[AhC22] Åhag, Per; Czyz, Rafel, Geodesics in the Space of m-S ubharmonic Functions With
Bounded Energy, IMRN, 2022, https://doi.org/10.1093/imrn /rnac129
[AB16] Arosio, Leandro; Bracci, Filippo, Canonical models fo r holomorphic iteration.
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 368 (2016), no. 5, 3305–3339.
[AFGG22] Arosio, L.; Fiacchi, M.; Gontard, S.; Guerini, L. T he horofunction boundary of
a Gromov hyperbolic space, Math. Ann. (2022). https://doi. org/10.1007/s00208-
022-02551-0
[AFGK22] Arosio, L.; Fiacchi, M.; Guerini, L.; Karlsson, A. ; Backward dynamics of non-
expanding maps in Gromov hyperbolic spaces, arXiv:2210.17 480
[BB00] Balogh, Zoltán M.; Bonk, Mario, Gromov hyperbolicity and the Kobayashi met-
ric on strictly pseudoconvex domains. Comment. Math. Helv. 75 (2000), no. 3,
504–533.
[Be90] Beardon, A. F. Iteration of contractions and analytic m aps. J. London Math. Soc.
(2) 41 (1990), no. 1, 141–150.
[BCMN04] Beardon, A. F.; Carne, T. K.; Minda, D.; Ng, T. W. Rando m iteration of analytic
maps. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems 24 (2004), no. 3, 659–67 5.
[BDL17] Berman, Robert J.; Darvas, Tamás; Lu, Chinh H. Convexi ty of the extended K-
energy and the large time behavior of the weak Calabi ﬂow. Geo m. Topol. 21
(2017), no. 5, 2945–2988.
[B22] Berndtsson, B. Long geodesics in the space of Kähler metri cs. Anal. Math. 48
(2022), no. 2, 377–392.
18[BM21] Bharali, Gautam; Maitra, Anwoy, A weak notion of visibi lity, a family of examples,
and Wolﬀ-Denjoy theorems. Ann. Sc. Norm. Super. Pisa Cl. Sci . (5) 22 (2021), no.
1, 195–240.
[BZ17] Bharali, Gautam; Zimmer, Andrew, Goldilocks domains, a weak notion of visibil-
ity, and applications. Adv. Math. 310 (2017), 377–425.
[BC09] Blanc-Centi, Léa, On the Gromov hyperbolicity of the Ko bayashi metric on strictly
pseudoconvex regions in the almost complex case. Math. Z. 26 3 (2009), no. 3,
481–498.
[BG20] Bracci, Filippo; Gaussier, Hervé, Horosphere topolog y. Ann. Sc. Norm. Super. Pisa
Cl. Sci. (5) 20 (2020), no. 1, 239–289.
[BG22] Bracci, F.; Gaussier, H. Abstract boundaries and conti nuous extension of biholo-
morphisms. Anal. Math. 48 (2022), no. 2, 393–409.
[BGZ21] Bracci, Filippo; Gaussier, Hervé; Zimmer, Andrew, Ho meomorphic extension of
quasi-isometries for convex domains in C^d and iteration theory. Math. Ann. 379
(2021), no. 1-2, 691–718.
[BNT22] Bracci, Filippo; Nikolov, Nikolai; Thomas, Pascal J. Visibility of Kobayashi
geodesics in convex domains and related properties. Math. Z . 301 (2022), no. 2,
2011–2035.
[CC02] Calabi, E.; Chen, X. X. The space of Kähler metrics. II . J. Diﬀerential Geom. 61
(2002), no. 2, 173–193
[CL21] Capogna, Luca; Le Donne, Enrico, Conformal equivale nce of visual metrics in
pseudoconvex domains. Math. Ann. 379 (2021), no. 1-2, 743–7 63.
[CaL10] Caprace, Pierre-Emmanuel; Lytchak, Alexander At i nﬁnity of ﬁnite-dimensional
CAT(0) spaces. Math. Ann. 346 (2010), no. 1, 1–21.
[CS14] Chen, Xiuxiong; Sun, Song Calabi ﬂow, geodesic rays, and uniqueness of constant
scalar curvature Kähler metrics. Ann. of Math. (2) 180 (2014 ), no. 2, 407–454.
[CCh21] Chen, Xiuxiong; Cheng, Jingrui On the constant scal ar curvature Kähler metrics
(II)—Existence results. J. Amer. Math. Soc. 34 (2021), no. 4 , 937–1009.
[Ch92] Cho, Sanghyun, A lower bound on the Kobayashi metric n ear a point of ﬁnite type
in Cn. J. Geom. Anal. 2 (1992), no. 4, 317–325.
[DG91] D’Ambra, G.; Gromov, M. Lectures on transformation g roups: geometry and dy-
namics. Surveys in diﬀerential geometry (Cambridge, MA, 19 90), 19–111, Lehigh
Univ., Bethlehem, PA, 1991
[Do05] Donaldson, S. K. Lower bounds on the Calabi functiona l. J. Diﬀerential Geom. 70
(2005), no. 3, 453–472.
[DF21] Duchin, Moon; Fisher, Nate, Stars at inﬁnity in Teich müller space. Geom. Dedicata
213 (2021), 531–545.
[FK05] Foertsch, Thomas; Karlsson, Anders, Hilbert metric s and Minkowski norms. J.
Geom. 83 (2005), no. 1-2, 22–31.
19[GV12] Gaubert, Stéphane; Vigeral, Guillaume, A maximin ch aracterisation of the escape
rate of non-expansive mappings in metrically convex spaces . Math. Proc. Cam-
bridge Philos. Soc. 152 (2012), no. 2, 341–363.
[GZ22] Gaussier, Hervé; Zimmer, Andrew, A metric analogue o f Hartogs’ theorem. Geom.
Funct. Anal. 32 (2022), no. 5, 1041–1062.
[GK20] Gouëzel, S; Karlsson, A. Subadditive and multiplica tive ergodic theorems, J. Eur.
Math. Soc. 22 (2020), no. 6, 1893–1915.
[H16] Horbez, Camille, The horoboundary of outer space, and growth under random
automorphisms. Ann. Sci. Éc. Norm. Supér. (4) 49 (2016), no. 5, 1075–1123.
[HW21] Huczek, A.; Wiśnicki, A. Wolﬀ-Denjoy theorems in geo desic spaces. Bull. Lond.
Math. Soc. 53 (2021), no. 4, 1139–1158.
[JS22] Jacques, Matthew; Short, Ian Semigroups of isometri es of the hyperbolic plane.
Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN 2022, no. 9, 6403–6463.
[JK22] Jones, Keith; Kelsey, Gregory A. On the asymmetry of s tars at inﬁnity. Topology
Appl. 310 (2022), Paper No. 108016, 10 pp.
[K01] Karlsson, Anders, Non-expanding maps and Busemann fun ctions. Ergodic Theory
Dynam. Systems 21 (2001), no. 5, 1447–1457.
[K05] Karlsson, Anders, On the dynamics of isometries. Geom . Topol. 9 (2005),
2359–2394.
[K14] Karlsson, Anders, Two extensions of Thurston’s spect ral theorem for surface dif-
feomorphisms. Bull. Lond. Math. Soc. 46 (2014), no. 2, 217–22 6.
[K21] Karlsson, Anders, From linear to metric functional an alysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 118 (2021), no. 28, Paper No. e2107069118, 5 pp.
[K22a] Karlsson, Anders, Elements of a metric spectral theo ry. Dynamics, geometry,
number theory—the impact of Margulis on modern mathematics , 276–300, Univ.
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 2022
[K22b] Karlsson, Anders, A metric ﬁxed point theorem and som e of its applications,
arXiv:2207.00963v2.
[KL06] Karlsson, Anders; Ledrappier, François, On laws of l arge numbers for random
walks. Ann. Probab. 34 (2006), no. 5, 1693–1706.
[KM99] Karlsson, Anders; Margulis, Gregory A. A multiplica tive ergodic theorem and
nonpositively curved spaces. Comm. Math. Phys. 208 (1999), no. 1, 107–123.
[KT16] Khanh, Tran Vu; Thu, Ninh Van, Iterates of holomorphi c self-maps on pseudocon-
vex domains of ﬁnite and inﬁnite type in C^n. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 144 (2016),
no. 12, 5197–5206.
[Ki03] Kirk, William A. Geodesic geometry and ﬁxed point the ory. Seminar of Mathe-
matical Analysis (Malaga/Seville, 2002/2003), 195–225, C olecc. Abierta, 64, Univ.
Sevilla Secr. Publ., Seville, 2003.
20[La74] Lang, Serge, Higher dimensional diophantine proble ms. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 80
(1974), 779–787
[La86] Lang, Serge, Hyperbolic and Diophantine analysis. Bu ll. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.)
14 (1986), no. 2, 159–205.
[LN12] Lemmens, Bas; Nussbaum, Roger, Nonlinear Perron-Fro benius theory. Cam-
bridge Tracts in Mathematics, 189. Cambridge University Pr ess, Cambridge, 2012.
xii+323 pp.
[L22] Lemmens, Bas, A metric version of Poincaré’s theorem co ncerning biholomorphic
inequivalence of domains. J. Geom. Anal. 32 (2022), no. 5, Pa per No. 160, 20 pp.
[LS14] Liu, Lixin; Su, Weixu, The horofunction compactiﬁca tion of the Teichmüller met-
ric. Handbook of Teichmüller theory. Vol. IV, 355–374, IRMA Lect. Math. Theor.
Phys., 19, Eur. Math. Soc., Zürich, 2014.
[Lo99] Lorentzen, Lisa Convergence of compositions of self -mappings. XII-th Conference
on Analytic Functions (Lublin, 1998). Ann. Univ. Mariae Cur ie-Skłodowska Sect.
A 53 (1999), 121–145.
[Mo96] Mostow, G.D. Remarks delivered at a memorial event fo r Lars Ahlfors, Yale Uni-
versity, 1996
[Pi16] Pick, G. Über eine Eigenschaft der konformen Abbildu ng kreisförmiger Bereiche,
Math. Ann. 77 (1916), 1–6.
[V76] Vesentini, Edoardo Invariant metrics on convex cones . Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup.
Pisa Cl. Sci. (4) 3 (1976), no. 4, 671–696.
[W14] Walsh, Cormac, The horoboundary and isometry group of Thurston’s Lipschitz
metric. Handbook of Teichmüller theory. Vol. IV, 327–353, I RMA Lect. Math.
Theor. Phys., 19, Eur. Math. Soc., Zürich, 2014.
[X21] Xia, Mingchen On sharp lower bounds for Calabi-type fu nctionals and destabilizing
properties of gradient ﬂows. Anal. PDE 14 (2021), no. 6, 1951 –1976.
[Z22] Zimmer, Andrew, Subelliptic estimates from Gromov hy perbolicity. Adv. Math.
402 (2022), Paper No. 108334, 94 pp.
Section de mathématiques, Université de Genève, Case posta le 64, 1211 Genève, Switzerland;
Mathematics department, Uppsala University, Box 256, 751 05 Uppsala, Sweden.
21