arXiv:2302.01889v1  [hep-th]  3 Feb 2023A Worldsheet Approach to N= 1 Heterotic Flux Backgrounds
Dan Isra¨ el and Yann Proto
Sorbonne Universit´ e, CNRS, Laboratoire de Physique Th´ eori que et Hautes ´Energies, LPTHE,
F-75005 Paris, France
E-mail:israel@lpthe.jussieu.fr ,yproto@lpthe.jussieu.fr
Abstract
Heterotic backgrounds with torsion preserving minimal sup ersymmetry in four dimen-
sions can be obtained as orbifolds of principal T2bundles over K3. We consider a
worldsheet description of these backgrounds as gauged line ar sigma-models (GLSMs)
with (0,2) supersymmetry. Such a formulation provides a useful fram ework in order
to address the resolution of singularities of the orbifold g eometries. We investigate the
constraints imposed by discrete symmetries on the correspo nding torsional GLSMs. In
particular, theprincipal T2connection over K3isinheritedfrom(0 ,2) vector multiplets.
As these vectors gauge global scaling symmetries of product s of projective spaces, the
corresponding K3 geometry is naturally realized as an algebraic hypersurfa ce in such a
product (or as a branched cover of it). We outline the general construction for describ-
ing such orbifolds. We give explicit constructions for auto morphisms of order two and
three.Contents
1 Introduction 2
2 Heterotic compactiﬁcations and supersymmetry 5
2.1 Hull–Strominger equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.2 Heterotic ﬂux backgrounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
3 Linear worldsheet models for ﬂux compactiﬁcations 8
3.1 Torsional (0 ,2) gauged linear sigma-model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.1.1 Lagrangian for the K3 base . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.1.2 Lagrangian for the gauge bundle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.1.3 Lagrangian for the torus ﬁber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.2 Green–Schwarz mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4 Orbifolds with N= 1 spacetime supersymmetry 12
4.1 Discrete symmetry action and properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2 Constraints from the worldsheet perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2.1 Orbifold action in the GLSM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
4.2.2 Conditions for spacetime supersymmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2.3 Invariance of the anomaly matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3 Comments on compatible ﬂux backgrounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5 Smooth N= 1 compactiﬁcations from Z2orbifolds 21
5.1 A model with two vector multiplets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2 A model with three vector multiplets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.3 Heterotic/type II duality and orientifold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6 Torsional compactiﬁcations with singularities from Z3orbifolds 29
6.1 A model with three vector multiplets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.2 Orbifold and singular points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7 Discussion 32
A Conventions for (0 ,2) superspace 34
A.1 Supermultiplets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
A.2 Gauge couplings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .36
A.3 Lagrangians with (0 ,2) supersymmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
11 Introduction
Heterotic ﬂux compactiﬁcations provide a very natural fram ework in order to build phenomeno-
logical models within string theory. With such compactiﬁca tions, grand uniﬁed gauge groups can
be incorporated easily, while the question of moduli stabil ization is partly addressed by turning
on ﬂuxes along the internal manifold. Heterotic ﬂux backgro unds can also lead us to a better
understanding of string vacua, as the quantum geometry of st ring compactiﬁcations outside the
Calabi–Yau landscape remains largely unknown.
Familiar Calabi–Yau compactiﬁcations come with several fa cilitating characteristics. Theorems
of Yau [1] and Donaldson–Uhlenbeck–Yau [ 2,3] ensure the existence of classical solutions to the
heterotic equations of motion, when there is no topological obstruction. Moreover, such back-
grounds admit a large volume limit in the moduli space, which allows for a perturbative treatment
parametrized by the radius of the internal manifold. With th is perturbative expansion, α′correc-
tions to the ﬁeld equations can be processed order by order, i n order to extend classical solutions
to the exact string solutions [ 4,5].
These features are lost for the most part when turning to hete rotic ﬂux compactiﬁcations,
which are associated with non-K¨ ahler geometries. Beyond t he K¨ ahler realm, some crucial aspects
disappear, such as Hodge decomposition or special geometry . The aforementioned theorems do
not extend to torsional spaces, and existence of solutions h as to be proven case by case. A major
technical challenge also comes from the Bianchi identity. F or non-K¨ ahler manifolds, it becomes
highly non-linear in the ﬂux. Moreover, as the Bianchi ident ity does not scale homogeneously
under rescalings of the internal metric, some of the cycles o f the internal manifold are typically
ﬁxed at α′size. The corresponding two-dimensional worldsheet theor y is thus strong coupled,
and the validity of the eﬀective supergravity can be question ed. A worldsheet approach becomes
inevitable to probe the theory.
Whileconditions forafour-dimensionalheterotic supergr avity compactiﬁcation topreservemin-
imalN= 1 supersymmetry are well understood [ 6,7], a very limited number of such backgrounds
is known to exist. The main class of solutions consists of a pr incipalT2bundle over a K3 surface.
The particular structure of these spaces allows to circumve nt most of the diﬃculties that come with
non-K¨ ahler compactiﬁcations. Dual M-theory constructio ns [8] lead to believe that, even if the α′
expansion of such solutions is to be taken with caution, thei r existence should still be guaranteed.
Furthermore, while the torus cycles of these solutions are q uantized in α′, the base volume can be
taken arbitrarily large. Consequently, such compactiﬁcat ions admit a good eight-dimensional large
volume limit, which corresponds to the heterotic theory com pactiﬁed on T2.
For this class of torsional backgrounds one can identify eig ht supercharges in space-time.1Ex-
tended spacetime supersymmetry imposes strong constraint s on the worldsheet superconformal
1Turning on some components of the curvature of the torus bund le reduces by half the number of supersymmetry
preserved by the geometry [ 9]; they have no known worldsheet realization in the formalis m that we use in this work.
2ﬁeld theory. Maintaining N= 2 spacetime supersymmetry requires that the internal righ t-moving
superconformal algebra, with central charge ¯ c= 9, splits into a (0 ,4) piece with ¯ c= 6 and a free
(0,2) piece with ¯ c= 3 and two U(1) currents [ 10]. If such a theory is to be constructed geomet-
rically,2then the corresponding target space must be a T2bundle over a K3 base [11]. These
torsional backgrounds thus constitute a rather generic cla ss of solution in the context of N= 2
compactiﬁcations.
A possible window in the far lesser known N= 1 heterotic ﬂux compactiﬁcations is oﬀered
by orbifold constructions. Quotienting the previous ﬂux co mpactiﬁcation by a discrete group
yields new heterotic solutions, which can break part of the s ymmetries of the initial vacuum [ 12].
These are non-K¨ ahler versions of the Borcea–Voisin constr uction of Calabi–Yau three-folds [ 13,14].
Building this parent geometry from special classes of K3 surfaces3which admit ﬁnite group actions
with a non-trivial action on (2 ,0) cohomology, it is possible to construct solutions which p reserve
only half of the initial supersymmetry, i.e. N= 1 in four dimensions. As K3 non-symplectic
automorphisms generically admit a ﬁxed locus, the resultin g orbifold geometry inherits singular
points or curves which await for resolution in order for the o rbifold to deﬁne a consistent smooth
supergravity solution (the singular geometry may still deﬁ ne a consistent string vacuum). However,
whileCalabi–Yau resolutionscanbedealt withconvenientl y, notably throughthemachineryof toric
geometry, carrying over these constructions to non-K¨ ahle r spaces is a challenging problem.
Fortunately, the worldsheet description of heterotic back grounds can account for ﬂuxes. A
particularly fruitful approach is oﬀered by some two-dimens ional (0,2) gauge theories, namely
gauged linear sigma models (GLSMs), whose infrared ﬁxed poi nt is expected to provide non-linear
sigma models on the desired target spaces [ 15]. While initially introduced to describe Calabi–Yau
compactiﬁcations, this construction has been extended in [ 16] to theT2bundles over K3 previously
introduced. The key characteristic of this formulation is a worldsheet realization of the Green–
Schwarz mechanism, which implements the T2ﬁbration by an interplay between the chiral anomaly
of theK3 base and a classical non-invariance of the torus ﬁber under gauge transformations. The
resulting non-anomalous (0 ,2) gauge theory is expected to ﬂow in the infrared to a superco nformal
non-linear sigma model whose target space has the propertie s of the N= 2 ﬂux solution. The
theory also exhibits a non-anomalous R-symmetry, as well as a left-moving U(1) ﬂavor current,
which is necessary to ensure the existence of an appropriate GSO projection.
This worldsheet construction provides a practical setting to extract several quantities about the
compactiﬁcations. The massless spectra of the ﬂux backgrou nds can (in principle) be computed
from a phase of the model which admits an asymmetric Landau–G inzburg orbifold description [ 17].
Other aspects of the theory can also be explored, such as T-du ality transformation properties [ 18]
or computation of α′-exact renormalization-invariant quantities as supersym metric indices [ 19,20],
2The analysis of [ 11] assumes a smooth geometry for the target space.
3SuchK3 surfaces are not generic in the moduli space.
3and the threshold corrections in the corresponding four-di mensional theory [ 21].
While constructed for ﬂux backgrounds with N= 2 spacetime supersymmetry, this (0 ,2) two-
dimensional gauge theory model provides us with a very natur al setting to study the N= 1
orbifolds of [ 12]. Obtaining such orbifolds in a controlled worldsheet theo ry framework is essential.
We stress again that a two-dimensional approach is unavoida ble when it comes to heterotic ﬂux
compactiﬁcations, as the α′expansion of supergravity cannot be trusted, even more in th e presence
of singularities. Furthermore, with a (0 ,2) description of the orbifolds, the previously mentioned
worldsheet computations should carry over to the quotient ﬁ eld theories. Finally, recall that the
N= 1 orbifolds of [ 12] generically admit a ﬁxed locus. We will restrict ourselves to orbifolds which
admit isolated ﬁxed points only, keeping in mind their possi ble resolution. Indeed, while we expect
the resolution of orbifolds with ﬁxed curves to be rather inv olved, the situation is more familiar for
orbifold with isolated ﬁxed points only. In particular, the re already exist well-developed techniques
to handle the resolution of singularities in gauged linear s igma models [ 22,23], so constructing a
(0,2) GLSM framework for these N= 1 orbifolds gives a ﬁrst step in this direction.4Obtaining
a resolved worldsheet model for N= 1 geometries would give a strong hint for the existence of
SU(3) structurebackgroundswithﬂuxes, whichwouldappearin theinfraredlimit oftheworldsheet
theory. This constitutes our main motivation for the follow ing work.
This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we recall the conditions for obtaining N= 1
backgrounds in heterotic supergravity, putting some empha sis on the torsional solutions and their
extended supersymmetry. The worldsheet set up is reviewed i n section 3, with a description of
(0,2) gauged linear sigma-models and their torsional extensio n. With these in hand, section 4
starts by a review of the main features of N= 1 orbifolds in the eﬀective spacetime theory. Then,
we introduce general properties of the corresponding orbif old in the worldsheet theory. As the
orbifold of the GLSM yields a geometrical action in the low en ergy phase of the model, desired
properties for this induced automorphism guide us to speciﬁ c worldsheet models. In particular, a
non-trivial orbifold action on vector multiplets is unavoi dable. This results in strong constraints on
the possible models. Vector multiplets have a direct interp retation in the geometrical phase, which
guides us very naturally to selected geometries, namely hyp ersurfaces in products of projective
spaces, or branched covers over those. After this general se t up, we construct in sections 5and6
some explicit N= 1 orbifolds. These require the identiﬁcation of distingui shed conﬁgurations in
the moduli space of K3 surfaces that satisfy all the constraints presented in the previous section.
In section 5, we introduce a smooth compactiﬁcation, contructed from a d iscrete action of order
two. In section 6, we present another orbifold, which results from a discrete Z3action. The latter
example admits singular points which will need to be resolve d. Finally in section 7we summarize
the main result and suggest some avenues for future work.
4As we will see later, the usual GLSMs constructions still nee d to be adapted to our particular setting, as the
orbifolds considered here have a somehow non-standard acti on. In particular, they act by permutation on some vector
and chiral multiplets.
42 Heterotic compactiﬁcations and supersymmetry
Let us start by reviewing supersymmetric four-dimensional ﬂux compactiﬁcations of heterotic su-
pergravity.
2.1 Hull–Strominger equations
The geometry of compactiﬁcations of the heterotic string to four dimensions is considerably con-
strained by supersymmetry. For a conﬁguration preserving m inimal supersymmetry, requiring the
external space to be maximally symmetric leaves Minkowski a s the only possibility. The internal
six-dimensional space Xthen has to come with a SU(3) structure, which must solve the Hull–
Strominger system [ 6,7]. For the hermitian (1 ,1)-formJand the holomorphic (3 ,0)-form Ω, this
translates as the diﬀerential equations
d/parenleftbig
e−2ϕJ∧J/parenrightbig
= 0,d/parenleftbig
e−2ϕΩ/parenrightbig
= 0. (2.1)
The bosonic ﬁelds are then obtained from this SU(3) structure, with the internal metric being the
hermitian metric associated to J, while the three-form ﬂux Hfollows from H=⋆e2ϕd(e−2ϕJ) =
i(¯∂−∂)J. The dilaton is determined, up to a constant, by the exact Lee form ofJ(and of Ω).
Equations ( 2.1) are supplemented by equations for the gauge bundle V, which must be a holo-
morphic vector bundle whose corresponding curvature Fsatisﬁes the Hermitian Yang–Mills equa-
tions with zero slope
F∧J2= 0, F∧Ω = 0, F∧¯Ω = 0. (2.2)
Lastly, the gauge and tangent bundles are tied together by th e Bianchi identity5
2i∂¯∂J+α′
4/parenleftig
trF2−trR2
(+)/parenrightig
= 0, (2.3)
where 2i ∂¯∂J= dH, andR(+)is the curvature of the connection with torsion Γ (+)= Γ +1
2H.
Provided this connection satisﬁes some SU(3) instanton condition [ 24], these supersymmetry con-
ditions are enough to guarantee the full bosonic equations o f motion, to ﬁrst order in α′.
2.2 Heterotic ﬂux backgrounds
The non-K¨ ahlerity of a heterotic background satisfying th e Hull–Strominger system is encoded
in the torsion H= i(¯∂−∂)J. When this ﬂux vanishes at leading order in α′, the conditions
for Calabi–Yau compactiﬁcations of [ 25] are recovered. In this case, solutions are guaranteed by
existence theorems [ 1–3], provided some topological conditions are satisﬁed: the K ¨ ahler space X
should have trivial canonical bundle, and the gauge bundle Vshould be polystable.
5The trace over gauge indices is normalized by ﬁxing the index of embedding of the gauge group GinE8×E8or
Spin(32)/Z2.
5For non-K¨ ahler backgrounds, the geometry is less controll ed, but some classes of solutions are
still known. The most trusted one was discovered in [ 8] by duality from type IIB orientifolds.
Geometry of the internal space
Thegeometry of thesix-dimensional compactiﬁcation space Xconsistsof aprincipal T2bundleover
aK3 baseSwith holomorphic two-form Ω Sand K¨ ahler form JS. ItsSU(3) structure, described
in [26], is constructed from the Calabi–Yau structure of the compl ex surface Sas
J= e2ϕJS+ia
2τ2Θ∧¯Θ,Ω = e2ϕ/radicalbigga
τ2ΩS∧Θ, (2.4)
whereaandτ=τ1+iτ2are the constant area and complex structure moduli, paramet rizing the
torus metric
GIJ=a
τ2/parenleftigg
1τ1
τ1|τ|2/parenrightigg
. (2.5)
The (1,0)-form Θ appearing in ( 2.4) is built from two globally deﬁned one-forms ΘIas Θ =
Θ1+τΘ2. This one-form can be written locally as Θ = d θ+Af, from the T2complex coordinate
θ=θ1+τθ2and a complexiﬁed U(1) connection one-form Af=A1
f+τA2
fonK3. Supersymmetry
constrains the curvature ωf=1
2π√
α′dΘ =ω1
f+τω2
fof thisT2connection one-form6as
ωf∧JS= 0, ω f∧ΩS= 0, (2.6)
whereωI
f∈H2(S,Z). In particular, supersymmetry forbids a (0 ,2) part for ωf, but turning on
a (2,0) part is still possible. However, such a piece is not presen t in the worldsheet construction
considered in the following, and for our purposes ωfwill be considered to be a primitive (1 ,1)-form.
We will come back later to the eﬀect of this choice.
The ﬂux corresponding to this geometry takes the form
H=⋆Sde2ϕ+HI∧ΘI(2.7)
withHI=−2π√
α′GIJωJ
f. This ﬂux is subject to integrality restrictions [ 27,28], which translate
into quantization conditions HI∈H2(S,2π√
α′Z)7for the forms HIappearing in the horizontal-
vertical decomposition ( 2.7). The resulting integrality constraint reads
GIJωJ
f∈H2(S,Z). (2.8)
Consequently, the torus area is quantized. More generally, taking also into account a possible
constant B-ﬁeld along T2, one ﬁnds that the complexiﬁed K¨ ahler and complex structur e moduli
should belong to the same imaginary quadratic number ﬁeld, s ee [18] for details.
6This normalization corresponds to a periodicity θI∼θI+2π√
α′for the torus coordinates.
7The diﬀerence with the quantization condition appearing in [28] is due to a diﬀerent normalization of torus
coordinates.
6Thegauge bundleis builtout of astableholomorphicbundleo verK3endowed withaHermitian
Yang–Mills connection, whose curvature satisﬁes
F∧JS= 0, F∧ΩS= 0, F∧¯ΩS= 0. (2.9)
Such a conﬁguration respects all the conditions required by supersymmetry. The only missing
equation is the Bianchi identity, which turns out to be a top f orm onK3. Indeed, the curvature
R(+)is horizontal on Swhenωfdoes not have a (2 ,0) part [28]. The Bianchi identity reads
1
2∆Se2ϕJ2
S−4π2α′a
τ2ωf∧¯ωf+α′
4trF2−α′
4trR2
(+)= 0. (2.10)
In cohomology, it can be recast in the form
−a
τ2ωf∧¯ωf−1
2p1(V)+1
2p1(TS) = 0 (2.11)
withp1(V) andp1(TS) the ﬁrstPontryagin classes of the gauge bundle and the K3 tangent bundle.
Integration over the K3 base yields the consistency condition
−a
τ2/integraldisplay
Sωf∧¯ωf+1
16π2/integraldisplay
StrF2= 24. (2.12)
Provided this topological condition is satisﬁed, it was sho wn in [29,30] that the Bianchi identity
admits a smooth solution for the dilaton. The proof of [ 29] is carried out with a diﬀerent choice of
connection for the tangent bundle, namely the Chern connect ion ΓC. Indeed, for this connection
the four-form tr R2
Cis horizontal and (2 ,2) — this is what allows a non-perturbative treatment of
the Bianchi identity in the ﬁrst place. However, existence o f solutions is believed to still hold when
using the connection with torsion Γ (+), as the analysis of the partial diﬀerential equation does not
rely too heavily on the details of the connection [ 28]. Moreover, this non-perturbative analysis
might even allow for a treatment of higher order α′corrections as perturbations of the non-linear
solution.
Consequences of extended supersymmetry
Discarding the (2 ,0) piece for the complexiﬁed T2curvature ωfhas an important consequence.
TheSU(3) structure of Xstays supersymmetric under any deformation of complex stru cture for
theK3 base. This invariance under rotations of the hyper-K¨ ahle r structure of K3 reﬂects a greater
amount of symmetry. Indeed, such a solution preserves N= 2 supersymmetry in spacetime, which
is as much as K3×T2.
This diﬀerence can also be understood from an eight-dimensio nal perspective, by considering
the heterotic theory compactiﬁed on T2. There, it can be seen that a non-trivial ﬁbration breaks
some global worldsheet symmetries, whose nature is very diﬀe rent depending on the choice of
7ωf[28]. While turning on a (1 ,1) part breaks a left-moving symmetry, tied to the gauge sect or, a
non-zero (2 ,0) part would however break a right-moving symmetry, on the s upersymmetric side of
the heterotic string.
Extended supersymmetry leads to major simpliﬁcations on th e supergravity side. The Bianchi
identity becomes for N= 2 a single scalar equation on K3. Moreover, the torsional connection
R(+)is purely horizontal. This leads to the hope that this equati on can be corrected order by order
inα′, and that a perturbation of the solution of [ 29] (which proves the existence of a solution to
the Bianchi identity using the Chern connection for the tang ent bundle) would solve this corrected
equation up to any order in α′.
Another crucial diﬀerence between N= 1 and N= 2 appears when considering the world-
sheet linear models of [ 16], described in the following section. Indeed, as a conseque nce of (0 ,2)
supersymmetry, the GLSM construction can accommodate (1 ,1)-forms only. This is the case in
particular for the curvature of the torus bundle. Consequen tly, only the N= 2 solution admits a
linear worldsheet description.
3 Linear worldsheet models for ﬂux compactiﬁcations
A worldsheet construction for the torsional geometry descr ibed in the previous section can be
formulated inthelanguageof (0 ,2) gauged linear sigma-models. Inthesemodels, introduced in[15],
an explicit description of the internal space appears as som e “geometrical phase”, in the infrared
limit. While the initial construction applied to Calabi–Ya u compactiﬁcation, the description of
non-K¨ ahler backgrounds with the topology of T2ﬁbrations over a K3 base was considered in [ 16],
with the generalization to arbitrary torus moduli describe d in [18]. We summarize below the main
features of the construction, for the abelian case which is r elevant here.
3.1 Torsional (0 ,2) gauged linear sigma-model
The six-dimensional heterotic background Xis described by a worldsheet Lagrangian of the form
L=Lb+Lg+Lf, (3.1)
withLbthe contribution to the Lagrangian from the base, Lgfrom the gauge bundle and Lffrom
the torus ﬁber. As for any chiral theory in two dimensions, th e Lagrangian Lcould generically
suﬀer from anomalies. Cancellation of these anomalies allow s to link the base and the ﬁber through
a Green–Schwarz type mechanism.
3.1.1 Lagrangian for the K3 base
TheK3 baseScan be described as a (0 ,2) gauged linear sigma-model, which is a two-dimensional
gauge theory with (0 ,2) supersymmetry. The ﬁeld content of this model consists of a number nvof
8abelian vector multiplets ( Aα,Vα), which couple to ncchiral multiplets Φi, as well as to nfFermi
multiplets Γr. We denote by qi
αandqr
αthe charges of the chiral and Fermi multiplets. Conventions
for supersymmetry multiplets are spelled out in appendix A.
The Lagrangian for the base Stakes the form
Lb=/integraldisplay
d2θ/parenleftigg
−i
2nc/summationdisplay
i=1e2qi
αAα¯ΦiD−Φi−1
2nf/summationdisplay
r=1e2qr
αAα¯ΓrΓr−1
8e2δαβ¯ΥαΥβ/parenrightigg
+/integraldisplay
dθ/parenleftigg
−µ
2nf/summationdisplay
r=1ΓrJr(Φ)+1
4tαΥα/parenrightigg
+h.c.,(3.2)
withδαβthe Killing metric of the U(1)nvalgebra. The model is speciﬁed by the choice of polyno-
mialsJr(Φ) appearing in the superpotential, and Fayet–Iliopoulos (FI) parameters tα= irα+1
2πθα.
We assume that all the Fermi multiplets obey the standard chi rality condition, i.e. ¯D+Γ = 0.
In the usual construction of [ 15], the GLSM is expected to admit an infrared limit where
the gauge ﬁelds become non-dynamical8and can be integrated out. If the imaginary part of
the FI parameters is large, one gets a “geometrical phase” su ch that vacua of the model form a
complex manifold: the scalars φicorrespond to coordinates on a (weighted) projective space , and
the vacuum manifold is carved into this ambient projective s pace by the polynomial equations
Jr(φ) = 0. The massless right-handed fermions appearing in the ch iral multiplets become sections
of the tangent bundle, and the vectors correspond to (1 ,1)-forms in the target space, that we
denoteηα∈H2(S,Z). The sizes of the associated divisors are encoded in the ima ginary part of
the Fayet–Iliopoulos parameters.
Several characteristic classes of the base Scan be read directly from the GLSM. In particular,
the Chern characters read [ 16]
ch1(TS) =/parenleftiggnc/summationdisplay
i=1qi
α+nf/summationdisplay
r=1qr
α/parenrightigg
ηα, (3.3a)
ch2(TS) =1
2/parenleftiggnc/summationdisplay
i=1qi
αqi
β−nf/summationdisplay
r=1qr
αqr
β/parenrightigg
ηα∧ηβ. (3.3b)
The Calabi–Yau condition c1(TS) = 0 for the vacuum manifold translates in the GLSM as the
condition
nc/summationdisplay
i=1qi
α+nf/summationdisplay
r=1qr
α= 0 (3.4)
for the charges of the multiplets. One needs also to ensure th at, for every Abelian worldsheet gauge
ﬁeld, the charges of chiral multiplets (including those app earing in the gauge bundle Lagrangian)
sum to zero, in order that the FI couplings are invariant unde r RG-ﬂow.9
8Formally, this limit corresponds to e→ ∞.
9If these conditions are not satisﬁed for an otherwise consis tent models, one can add “spectator” pairs of charged,
massive chiral and fermi multiplets, without changing the I R geometry, see [ 31].
9The canonical example for the K3 base is built out of one vector multiplet ( A,V), four chiral
multiplets Φ 1,...,4ofU(1) charge +1 and one Fermi multiplet Γ of charge −4, with the Fermat
superpotential J(Φ) = Φ4
1+···+Φ4
4. In the geometric phase, chiral ﬁelds get reinterpreted as CP3
homogeneous coordinates, and the superpotential carves ou t a quartic hypersurface CP3[4] in this
projective space. The vector multiplet gives rise to a (1 ,1) formηwith self intersection +4. The
K¨ ahler form is JS=rη, while the Chern classes are given by c1(TS) = 0 and c2(TS) = 6η2.
Lastly, a crucial piece of the construction comes from the ga uge anomaly of the Lagrangian.
Indeed, as spinors of diﬀerent chiralities live in diﬀerent su persymmetry multiplets, their contribu-
tions to the variation of the path integral measure under a ga uge transformation do not cancel out
generically. The eﬀective Lagrangian transforms as
δLb,eﬀ=1
8Abαβ/integraldisplay
d2θΞαΥβ+h.c. with Abαβ=nc/summationdisplay
i=1qi
αqi
β−nf/summationdisplay
r=1qr
αqr
β.(3.5)
While cancellation of any anomaly is necessary for the consi stency of the full quantum theory, we
do not require yet the vanishing of ( 3.5), as the Lagrangian for the torus ﬁber will also give a
non-zero (classical) contribution.
3.1.2 Lagrangian for the gauge bundle
The model can also accommodate a gauge bundle, which is descr ibed by supplementing a number
mfof Fermi multiplets ΨsofU(1) charges ls
α, as well as mcchiral multiplets Pjof charges lj
α. The
contribution to the Lagrangian describing the gauge bundle takes the form
Lg=/integraldisplay
d2θ
−i
2mc/summationdisplay
j=1e2lj
αAα¯PjD−Pj−1
2mf/summationdisplay
s=1e2ls
αAα¯ΨsΨs

−µ
2/integraldisplay
dθmc/summationdisplay
j=1Pj/parenleftiggmf/summationdisplay
s=1ΨsQjs(Φ)/parenrightigg
+h.c.,(3.6)
whereQjs(Φ) are polynomials in the chiral multiplets of the base. In t he geometric phase, the
Fermi multiplets Ψscorrespond to sections of some gauge bundle built over the ba seS.
Similarly as before, Chern characters of the gauge bundle ca n be obtained straightforwardly
from the charges of the multiplets as
ch1(V) =
mc/summationdisplay
j=1lj
α+mf/summationdisplay
s=1lr
α
ηα, (3.7a)
ch2(V) =1
2
−mc/summationdisplay
j=1lj
αlj
β+mf/summationdisplay
s=1ls
αls
β
ηα∧ηβ. (3.7b)
10(Notice the change of sign for ch2compared to the case of the base).
TheLagrangianforthegaugebundleisalsogenerically anom alous, withtheeﬀective Lagrangian
transforming as
δLb,eﬀ=1
8Agαβ/integraldisplay
d2θΞαΥβ+h.c. with Agαβ=mc/summationdisplay
j=1lj
αlj
β−mf/summationdisplay
s=1ls
αls
β. (3.8)
The canonical example corresponding to the example of CP3[4] described above consists of four
Fermi superﬁelds Ψsof charge +1 and one chiral superﬁeld Pof charge −4. The superpotential
coupling is built out of polynomials Qi(Φ) satisfying/summationtext4
i=1ΦiQi(Φ)∝J(Φ). The case Qi=∂iJ
corresponds to the tangent bundle TS, while other choices give deformations of TS. In any case,
the Chern classes of such a bundle are c1(V) = 0 and c2(V) = 6η2.
3.1.3 Lagrangian for the torus ﬁber
The contribution to the Lagrangian describing the torus ﬁbe r is built out of two shift chiral multi-
plets ΩI=1,2of integer charge wI
α. These are chiral superﬁeldswhose imaginary part shift-sy mmetry
is gauged (rather than the phase of the superﬁeld), see appen dixAfor details. In target-space,
their (gauged) imaginary parts correspond to the real coord inates on the torus ﬁber, while their
real parts are decoupled free bosons (which are an artifact o f this construction). The Lagrangian
takes the form
Lf=1
2/integraldisplay
d2θGIJ/parenleftbig
ReΩI+wI
αAα/parenrightbig/parenleftig
∂−ImΩJ+wJ
βVβ/parenrightig
−i
4hIα/integraldisplay
dθΥαΩI+h.c.,(3.9)
with the constant torus metric GIJdeﬁned by ( 2.5). The superpotential couplings of the shift
multiplets with the gauge super-curvatures Υαare characterized by hIα∈Z. These coupling
constants are quantized in order for the path integral to be i nvariant under shifts ΩI∝ma√sto→ΩI+2iπ
for any values of the instanton numbers nα=−1
2π/integraltext
Fα.
Only the imaginary part of the shift multiplets describe the relevant degrees of freedom of the
torus, which can be seen from the invariance of the Lagrangia n under integer shifts of ImΩI. As
supersymmetry requires the complexiﬁcation of these coord inates into complex chiral multiplets,
the non-compact part of the ﬁber described by ReΩIshould decouple. This requirement translates
into conditions on the couplings hIαgiven by [ 18]
hIα+GIJwJ
α= 0. (3.10)
With this choice of axial couplings, the ﬁber Lagrangian des cribes a C×T2target space, where
the non-compact direction is non-interacting and can be fac torized out. In addition, quantization
conditions on hIαgive back the integrality constraints ( 2.8).
11The Fayet–Ilioupoulos type gauge couplings of the shift mul tiplets with the gauge curvatures
are classically anomalous. The non-invariance of the Lagra ngian under a gauge transformation
reads
δLf=−1
4GIJwI
αwJ
β/integraldisplay
dθΞαΥβ+h.c.. (3.11)
In particular, the torus ﬁber can only add a negative contrib ution to non-mixed anomalies.
3.2 Green–Schwarz mechanism
In the previous construction, the base and the torus ﬁber liv e in diﬀerent multiplets, and there
is no interaction terms coupling them. Indeed, they only int erplay with each other through their
couplings to gauge ﬁelds. For the full theory to be consisten t, gauge symmetry should be preserved
in the eﬀective theory. Under a gauge transformation, the Lag rangian varies as
δLeﬀ=1
8Aαβ/integraldisplay
dθΞαΥβ+h.c., (3.12)
with the shifted anomaly matrix
Aαβ=Abαβ+Agαβ−2GIJwI
αwJ
β. (3.13)
The origin of this anomaly is very diﬀerent for the base and the ﬁber. On one side, it is a one-loop
eﬀect due to spinors of diﬀerent chiralities living in diﬀerent U(1)nvgauge representations. On
the other side, it comes from a classical non-invariance of d ynamical Fayet–Iliopoulos couplings
in the action. Furthermore, this variation should not be cor rected by higher order contributions
in perturbation theory: the variation of the path integral m easure is one-loop exact, and the
superpotential is not renormalized beyond one-loop.
Vanishing of the anomaly matrix ( 3.13) has a direct interpretation in the geometric phase of
the model. The equation can be rewritten at the level of forms , withωI
f=wI
αηα, as
1
2Aαβηα∧ηβ=−GIJωI
f∧ωJ
f−ch2(V)+ch2(TS). (3.14)
Vanishing of the anomaly reproduces exactly the Bianchi ide ntity (2.11).
4 Orbifolds with N= 1 spacetime supersymmetry
In the following, we describe the general construction of su persymmetric orbifolds of the worldsheet
models described in section 3. We start by reviewing the supergravity construction intro duced
in [12], focusing on quotient manifolds that preserve four superc harges in spacetime.
124.1 Discrete symmetry action and properties
Starting from a heterotic ﬂux background Xdescribed in section 2, which preserves N= 2 su-
persymmetry, new heterotic solutions have been constructe d in [12] by orbifolding Xby some
discrete symmetry group Zp. Depending on the choice of orbifold, it is possible to prese rve all
supersymmetry, half of it, or to break it completely. We will consider orbifolds preserving N= 1
supersymmetry. We ﬁrst recall the construction of [ 12].
Preservation of N= 1 supersymmetry under the orbifold restricts the discrete action on the
SU(3) forms J, Ω to be trivial. However, it is still possible to have a non-t rivial action on the K3
base, as long as it is compensated by the orbifold action on th eT2ﬁber.
In order to preserve only half supersymmetry, the orbifold s hould break the hyper-K¨ ahler struc-
ture of the base. Denoting by σa generator of Zp, the orbifold should act on the K3 surface Sas
a non-symplectic automorphism
σ:JS→JS,ΩS→ξΩS, (4.1)
withξ= e2πi/p. This phase shift is balanced out by a rotation of the torus, w ritten in local
coordinates θ=θ1+τθ2as
σ:θ→¯ξθ. (4.2)
This rotation should be compatible with the lattice structu re of the torus. For a generic complex
structure parameter τ, only the Z2case is consistent, while speciﬁc points in moduli space als o
allow the possibility of Z3,Z4andZ6.
In order to accommodate the T2-ﬁbered structure of X, theT2connection one-forms also have
to rotate under the orbifold as
σ:Af→¯ξAf. (4.3)
This allows the globally deﬁned form Θ to transform with the s ame phase rotation under the
orbifold, and the holomorphic 3-form Ω is thus invariant.
For later convenience, we rewrite this transformation in te rms of real quantities as
σ:θI→R(σ)IJθJ, (4.4a)
AI
f→R(σ)IJAJ
f, (4.4b)
whereR(σ) denotes the rotation matrix
R(σ) =/parenleftigg
Reξ+τ1
τ2Imξ|τ|2
τ2Imξ
−1
τ2ImξReξ−τ1
τ2Imξ/parenrightigg
(4.5)
which preserves the torus metric ( 2.5), as it obeys R(σ)TGR(σ) =G.
Lastly, the action of the orbifold in the gauge sector must al so be chosen. For the quotient
geometry to be well-deﬁned, the Yang–Mills curvature Fshould be invariant under σ. A possibility
13istobuild Foutofformson Sthat areinvariantunderthediscreteaction. Diﬀerent orbif oldactions
on gauge ﬁelds are also allowed, in particular it is possible to supplement the geometrical action of
σon theK3 base with an action on the algebra generators. It is then pos sible to have a non-trivial
action on the primitive forms of Sused to construct the gauge curvature, as long as a there is
compensating action on the Lie algebra. Note that invarianc e of gauge ﬁelds is understood, of
course, up to a gauge transformation.
If all of these requirements are met, the full supersymmetry constraints stay invariant under
the orbifold, and the quotient geometry preserves N= 1 supersymmetry.
Non-symplectic automorphisms of K3
The orbifold action on the base Scorresponds to a non-symplectic automorphism of K3. As these
discreteK3 symmetries are quite constrained, only a limited number of cases need to beconsidered.
We recollect here a few facts about such automorphisms, lead ing to the relevant possibilities for
our orbifold construction.
A non-symplectic automorphism of order pof aK3 surface Sis a diﬀeomorphism σ:S→S
which acts on the holomorphic (2 ,0)-form Ω Sas
σ⋆ΩS=ξΩS, (4.6)
whereξis ap-th root of unity generating Zp. The automorphism σacts on the lattice H2(S,Z)
by the isometry σ⋆, and its invariant sublattice is denoted S(σ). As the holomorphic (2 ,0)-form is
not invariant under the automorphism, S(σ) has to be a sublattice of the Picard lattice [ 32]
Pic(S) =H1,1(S)∩H2(S,Z). (4.7)
Theﬁxed locus of a K3non-symplectic automorphism can beeither empty, or the di sjoint union
of points and smooth curves. This ﬁxed locus can be completel y characterized. Remarkably, for
pprime, the topological structure of the ﬁxed locus determin es the action of σ⋆on theK3 lattice
H2(S,Z) uniquely [ 33].
For our purposes, as the orbifold should also act by a rotatio n of the torus ﬁber, the only
automorphisms to consider are those compatible with the com plex structure of the torus. For a
generic complex structure parameter τ, only an order two automorphism is consistent, while τ= i
allows for the order four, and τ=ζ= e2πi/3allows for the orders three and six.10
As we will explain later, the K3 automorphisms we want to consider should not leave invaria nt
curves. Then the ﬁxed locus of the automorphism will in most c ases consist of a number of isolated
ﬁxed points. The existence of these invariant points can be t raced down to the holomorphic
Lefschetz ﬁxed-point formula, as underlined in [ 12]. At any such point pi∈S, the action of the
10Other cases could be considered by acting on a Γ 2,2+nlattice in place of the Γ 2,2lattice of T2.
14automorphism σcan be linearized and diagonalized to a local action σi. Ifσonly admits isolated
ﬁxed points, the holomorphic Lefschetz formula then relate s the local action at these points to the
actionσ⋆on cohomology as
/summationdisplay
q(−1)qtr/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
H0,q(S)σ⋆=/summationdisplay
{pi}1
det(1−σi). (4.8)
Forσa non-symplectic automorphism acting as ( 4.6) onH2,0(S), the traces in the left-hand side
evaluate to 1+ ¯ξ. The Lefschetz formula then dictates the possible numbers o f isolated ﬁxed points,
which diﬀer depending on the order of the automorphism.
Order two For a Z2actionσ: ΩS→ −ΩS, the action of σat a ﬁxed point can be locally
diagonalized (up to a permutation of the coordinates) as
σi=/parenleftigg
−1 0
0 1/parenrightigg
(4.9)
and corresponds to a ﬁxed curve: there are no isolated ﬁxed po ints. This is compatible with the
Lefschetz formula, as the trace of σ∗inH0(S) andH0,2(S) gives respectively +1 and −1, so the
total contribution is vanishing. Thus, the only possibilit y forof anon-symplectic involution without
ﬁxed curve is the Enriques involution, which acts freely on t he surface S.
Order three For a Z3actionσ: ΩS→ζΩS, the action of σcan similarly be linearized and
diagonalized at a ﬁxed point to one of the following local act ions
σi=/parenleftigg
ζ0
0 1/parenrightigg
,/parenleftigg
ζ20
0ζ2/parenrightigg
. (4.10)
The ﬁrst one corresponds to a ﬁxed curve, while the second cor responds to an isolated ﬁxed point.
Such a point gives in the Lefschetz formula a contribution de t−1(1−σi) =−ζ/3. Asσacts by
the identity on H0(S) and by ζ2onH0,2(S), the contribution to the trace in cohomology is given
by 1+ζ2=−ζ. Therefore, there is also a unique possibility for a non-sym plectic automorphism
without ﬁxed curves [ 34], which has exactly three ﬁxed points.
Order four For an order four automorphism σ: ΩS→iΩS, one ﬁnds the following possible
local actions
σi=/parenleftigg
i 0
0 1/parenrightigg
,/parenleftigg
−i 0
0−1/parenrightigg
. (4.11)
Only the second one corresponds to an isolated ﬁxed point, an d has det−1(1−σi) = (1−i)/4. The
cohomology contribution in the Lefschetz formula evaluate s to 1−i. Thus, any Z4non-symplectic
automorphism without ﬁxed curve must have exactly four isol ated ﬁxed points.
15Order six For an order six automorphism σ: ΩS→ −ζ2ΩS, the local action of the automor-
phism at any ﬁxed point can be diagonalized to
σi=/parenleftigg
−ζ20
0 1/parenrightigg
,/parenleftigg
−ζ0
0ζ/parenrightigg
,/parenleftigg
ζ20
0−1/parenrightigg
. (4.12)
Thelast twocases correspondtoisolated ﬁxedpointsandhav e respectively det−1(1−σi) = (1−ζ)/3
and det−1(1−σi) = (1−ζ)/6. In the Lefschetz formula, the trace of σ∗in Dolbeault cohomology
givesatotalcontribution1 −ζ. Consequently, ordersixnon-symplecticautomorphismswi thnoﬁxed
curves can have from three to six ﬁxed points, depending on th e local action of the automorphism
at these points.
Thus, only few non-symplectic automorphismsof K3can beconsidered dependingon thediscrete
symmetry group: the Enriques involution for Z2, a non-symplectic automorphism with three ﬁxed
points for Z3, a non-symplectic automorphism with four ﬁxed points for Z4, and non-symplectic
automorphisms with three, four, ﬁve, or six ﬁxed points for Z6. For all these automorphisms, the
corresponding action on the lattice H2(S,Z) can be worked out, we refer to [ 32,33] for details.
4.2 Constraints from the worldsheet perspective
Inthetorsional worldsheetmodeldescribedinsection 3, theorbifold σbecomesadiscretesymmetry
of order pacting on (0 ,2) multiplets. This symmetry should preserve the form of the Lagrangians
Lb,LgandLfindependently. While in general, such Zpsymmetries would bequiteunconstrained,
herethediscrete action mustalso reduce, in thegeometric p haseof themodel, to the N= 1orbifold
discussed above. We will see that this restricts considerab ly possible classes of allowed models.
4.2.1 Orbifold action in the GLSM
The orbifold action on the multiplets should both preserve t he invariance of the three contributions
to the Lagrangian independently and reproduce the required geometrical transformation in the
geometric phase. For now we consider the general case of a Zporbifoldσ, though cases of interest
correspond to p= 2,3,4,6.
Shift multiplets
Theshift chiral multiplets ΩIcorrespondtotorus coordinates, sothey shouldtransforma ccordingly
asσ: Ω1+τΩ2→¯ξ(Ω1+τΩ2), or equivalently as
σ: ΩI→R(σ)IJΩJ, (4.13)
with the rotation matrix R(σ) deﬁned in ( 4.5).
16Vector multiplets
Recall that for the orbifold action described in subsection 4.1, the rotation ( 4.2) of the torus
coordinates must be reproduced by the rotation of the T2connection one-forms, according to ( 4.3),
in order for the quotient geometry to be deﬁned consistently . Otherwise, the patching between
diﬀerent charts of Xwould not be well-deﬁned in the orbifold geometry.
This consistency condition is mirrored in the GLSM. In eq. ( 3.9), couplings between shift
multiplets and vector ﬁelds prevent ( 4.13) from being a discrete symmetry of the torus Lagrangian
if vector ﬁelds stay invariant. The only option for Lfto be preserved by the orbifold is to allow
for a non-trivial transformation of vector ﬁelds under σ. This transformation should be linear. We
denote it by
σ:Aα→ S(σ)αβAβ, (4.14a)
Vα→ S(σ)αβVβ, (4.14b)
with some constant matrix S(σ) satisfying S(σ)p=Inv. The condition for the invariance of the
kinetic terms of the torus Lagrangian can be stated in terms o f this matrix as
wI
βS(σ)βα=R(σ)IJwJ
α. (4.15)
This condition also guarantees the invariance of the axioni c coupling appearing in eq. ( 3.9).
Interpretation of S(σ) in the geometric phase is straightforward. Indeed, the (1 ,1)-forms ηα
inherited from vector multiplets generate a sublattice of P ic(S) of rank nv. The rotation matrix
S(σ) can be understood as the restriction of σ⋆to this sublattice. Equation ( 4.15), obtained
in the GLSM as a condition for invariance of the torus Lagrang ian, amounts to the following
transformation law of ωI
f
σ⋆ωI
f=R(σ)IJωJ
f, (4.16)
or equivalently σ⋆ωf=¯ξωffor the complexiﬁed T2curvature.
Invariance of the gauge sector of the base Lagrangian under t he orbifold gives additional con-
ditions on the constant matrix S(σ) specifying the transformation of vector multiplets. In or der
for the gauge kinetic term to be unchanged, this matrix must p reserve the Killing metric, i.e. it
should be a O(nv) matrix, such that S(σ)TδS(σ) =δ. Invariance of the Fayet–Ilioupoulos term is
equivalent to the condition
tβS(σ)βα=tα (4.17)
for the complexiﬁed K¨ ahler parameters. Geometrically, th is can be recast as the invariance of the
K¨ ahler form σ⋆JS=JS.
17Chiral and Fermi multiplets
For the matter sector, the orbifold action on chiral and Ferm i multiplets must be speciﬁed. The
discussion is very similar for both kinds of multiplets: the following comments for chiral multiplets
can be straightforwardly translated to Fermi multiplets.
Looking at the kinetic terms in the Lagrangians LbandLg, there is an obvious possibility for
the orbifold action on some chiral multiplet Φ of charge qα, which requires that the charges are
invariant under the linear transformation of the vector mul tiplets, that is qβS(σ)βα=qα. If this
condition is satisﬁed, then any action of the form
σ: Φ→ξqΦ (4.18)
preserves the kinetic term. In this action, the orbifold act s by a phase rotation, with qan integer
andξq= e2πiq/p.
Such a choice turns out to be too restrictive, as invariance o f the charges under S(σ) implies
that some factor of the gauge group does not act on the chiral m ultiplets. There is a second
possibility which allows chiral multiplets of non-invaria nt charges. For the orbifold action to leave
the Lagrangian invariant, it is necessary that such chiral ﬁ elds come in p-tuples Φ1,Φ2,...,Φp,
with the orbifold acting on the tuple by a permutation
σ: Φℓ→Φℓ+1forℓ= 1,...,p. (4.19)
(Here the notation is that Φp+1= Φ1). The charges for such a p-tuple should be related by
qℓ+1
α=qℓ
βS(σ)βαforℓ= 1,...,p. (4.20)
Similar orbifold actions are possible for Fermi multiplets .
Choosing such an orbifold action on the chiral and Fermi mult iplets, either with a phase or by a
permutation, all the kinetic terms are invariant. The only t ransformation to worry about is the one
of the superpotential. The orbifold σconstrains greatly the choices of couplings and polynomial s
allowed in the superpotential. Some examples of models with invariant superpotentials will be
discussed in later sections.
4.2.2 Conditions for spacetime supersymmetry
In the geometric phase that appears in the low energy limit of the GLSM (when the imaginary
part of the FI parameters are large and positive), each one of the vector multiplets ( Aα,Vα) gives
a (1,1)-formηα∈H2(S,Z). The K¨ ahler form of the base Sis constructed from these cohomology
elements as
JS=rαηα, (4.21)
withrαthe imaginary parts of the FI parameters tα.
18The two-form used to ﬁber the torus can be read from the Lagran gianLbas
ωf= (w1
α+τw2
α)ηα. (4.22)
Recall that preservation of eight spacetime supercharges c onstrains this torus curvature ωfto be a
primitive form of H1,1(S). In the GLSM, ωfis a (1,1)-form by construction, but the condition of
primitivity is not generically satisﬁed. Therefore, this c ondition should be imposed on the models
considered. In particular, there should be at least two vect or multiplets. Otherwise, with only one
vector multiplet, the resulting JSandωfwould beproportional, and the correspondingbackground
would not preserve spacetime supersymmetry.
Similarly, the gauge bundle is also constrained by supersym metry to couple to the base with a
primitive curvature F∈H1,1(S). In the GLSM, the gauge connection appears in the gaugings o f
Fermi multiplets in ( 3.6). The choice of charges of Fermi multiplets is thus also cons trained.
4.2.3 Invariance of the anomaly matrix
One crucial element in the worldsheet construction is the sh ifted anomaly matrix Aαβassociated
withU(1)nvgauge transformations of the GLSM, see eq. ( 3.13). Gauge anomalies allow to link
theK3 base, the gauge bundle and the torus ﬁber. Vanishing of Aαβis a necessary condition for
consistency of the quantum theory, just as the Bianchi ident ity is necessary for consistency of the
supergravity solutions.
Being a symmetric matrix, the anomaly matrix has a priori1
2nv(nv+1) components. Never-
theless, invariance of the Lagrangian under the orbifold im plies that it obeys
S(σ)γαAγδS(σ)δβ=Aαβ. (4.23)
This invariance of the anomaly matrix under S(σ) rotations ensures the vanishing of some of its
components. One can choose a (complex) basis of the gauge alg ebra such that S(σ) takes the
diagonal form
1n0
ξ1n1
...
ξp−11np−1
(4.24)
wheren0,...,n p−1are the dimensions of eigenspaces of S(σ), withn0+···+np−1=nv. Then,
condition ( 4.23) implies the vanishing of any mixed anomaly of two vector mul tiplets that do not
sit in the same S(σ) eigenspace. This guarantees the vanishing of some compone nts of Aαβ. The
number of components left is1
2n0(n0+1)+···+1
2np−1(np−1+1). These should be cancelled by
choosing appropriate charges for the supersymmetry multip lets.
194.3 Comments on compatible ﬂux backgrounds
In summary, the orbifold construction in the worldsheet the ory is subject to several requirements:
1. the GLSM should, in some phase of its vacua, describe the to pology of a smooth heterotic
ﬂux background X;
2. this background, before orbifolding, should preserve N= 2 supersymmetry in spacetime;
3. the action of orbifold on this geometric phase should pres erve the SU(3) structure of X,
rotating the torus ﬁber along with a non-symplectic automor phism of the base;
4. the orbifold action should not admit any ﬁxed curve in the v acuum manifold (though isolated
ﬁxed points are allowed).
Whiletheﬁrstthreeconditionsonlyreﬂecttheworldsheeta nalogoftheorbifoldconstructionof[ 12],
the last one may seem more ad hoc. This condition stems from th e fact that the singularities of
the orbifold geometry need to be resolved in order to obtain a consistent supergravity background.
For isolated ﬁxed points, standard GLSM techniques for tori c resolutions might apply to our (0 ,2)
description, in a similar fashion as the description of [ 22].
Meeting all these requirements can, in practice, be diﬃcult . The more constrained part turns
out to be the Lagrangian for the base S. Indeed, by construction, K3 is realized in the GLSM
as embedded in a product of projective spaces CPα, with each vector multiplet Υαgiving rise to
the associated K¨ ahler form ηα. The transformation law of vectors ( 4.14) thus dictates the kind of
geometries one should be looking for: as vector multiplets a re swapped by the orbifold, the same
should go for the associated projective spaces. The base Sshould therefore be constructed as a
hypersurface in a product of projective spaces, and its non- symplectic automorphism should be
inherited from a discrete action in the ambient space, which mixes the diﬀerent CPα. Branched
covers of such hypersurfaces are also allowed by the GLSM con struction, as we will see in the
following sections.
Starting from such a model, some requirements of supersymme try can be checked explicitly. As
an example, consider a model for a K3 surface Sbuilt out of pvector multiplets Υ1,Υ2,...,Υp,
with the orbifold acting in the gauge sector by the permutati on
S(σ) =
0 1
0 1
......
0 1
1 0
. (4.25)
20For such a model, the only possible Fayet–Iliopoulos coupli ng for the base Lagrangian is of the
form
1
4/integraldisplay
dθt/parenleftbig
Υ1+Υ2+···+Υp/parenrightbig
, (4.26)
from which the K¨ ahler form of Scan be read as JS=r/parenleftbig
η1+η2+···+ηp/parenrightbig
. In order to implement
theT2ﬁbration, a (1 ,1)-form with the correct transformation law under σcan be obtained as
ωf=w/parenleftbig
η1+ξη2+···+ξp−1ηp/parenrightbig
, withw∈Rcorresponding to the charge of shift multiplets.
The condition of primitivity for ωfcan then be checked directly, depending on the superpotenti al
deﬁning the hypersurface.
Other examples can be built in a similar spirit. Nevertheles s, it is not always guaranteed that
such a geometry exists. Indeed, requiring a discrete Zpsymmetry restricts the possible choices for
the superpotential. As there is a non-trivial action on the c hiral multiplets, some monomials will
not be allowed by the discrete symmetry. In some cases, the re maining allowed monomials will not
be enough to deﬁne a smooth hypersurface: they may all vanish on a singular subset.
Moreover, even in cases when such a smooth N= 2 background is found, with an orbifold
mixing vector multiplets according to ( 4.14), it is still not sure that all constraints will be satisﬁed.
Indeed, the transformation of Ω Sunderthe orbifold should also bechecked, in order for the or bifold
to break half supersymmetry. Finally, since we demand that t he orbifold does not ﬁx any curve of
S, this reduces again the number of possible conﬁgurations.
5 Smooth N= 1 compactiﬁcations from Z2orbifolds
In this section, we consider explicit worldsheet construct ions forN= 2 heterotic ﬂux backgrounds
which admit a Z2orbifold action that results in a freely-acting involution on the geometry, thus
leading to smooth backgrounds preserving N= 1 spacetime supersymmetry.
5.1 A model with two vector multiplets
For the model we consider in the following, the K3 base is built out of six chiral multiplets that
we denote X1,X2,Y1,Y2andW1,W2, and two Fermi multiplets Γ 1, Γ2. These ﬁelds couple to
two vector multiplets ( A1,V1) and (A2,V2), with charge assignment given in table 1. This speciﬁc
choice of charges satisﬁes the Calabi–Yau condition ( 3.4).
X1X2Y1Y2W1W2Γ1Γ2
U(1)11 1 0 0 1 1 −2−2
U(1)20 0 1 1 1 1 −2−2
Table 1: Charge assignment of the Z2model
21The superpotential that we consider is of the form
−µ
2/integraldisplay
dθ(Γ1J1+Γ2J2), (5.1)
withJ1,2(X,Y,W) two polynomials in the chiral multiplets of U(1)1×U(1)2charge (2 ,2), to ensure
classical gauge invariance. We also allow for two Fayet–Ili opoulos parameters t1,t2.
For the purposes of our construction, the resulting Lagrang ianLbshould be invariant under a
Z2orbifoldσ. This involution acts on the chiral multiplets as
σ:{X1,X2,Y1,Y2,W1,W2} → {Y1,Y2,X1,X2,−W1,−W2}, (5.2)
while vector multiplets transform as
σ:/braceleftbig
(A1,V1),(A2,V2)/bracerightbig
→/braceleftbig
(A2,V2),(A1,V1)/bracerightbig
. (5.3)
Fermi multiplets Γ 1,2stay invariant under the orbifold. As they appear in the supe rpotential, this
constrains possible choices for the polynomials J1,2which should also be invariant. An explicit
example of such polynomials is
J1=W2
1+f1(X,Y) with f1(X,Y) =X2
1Y2
1+X2
2Y2
2+λ1/parenleftbig
X2
1Y2
2+X2
2Y2
1/parenrightbig
,(5.4a)
J2=W2
2+f2(X,Y) with f2(X,Y) =X2
1Y2
1+X2
2Y2
2+λ2/parenleftbig
X2
1Y2
2+X2
2Y2
1/parenrightbig
,(5.4b)
whereλ1,2are two complex constants. The last constraint imposed on th e Lagrangian by requiring
invariance under σis that the Fayet–Iliopoulos term should be of the form
1
4/integraldisplay
dθt/parenleftbig
Υ1+Υ2/parenrightbig
, (5.5)
so only one Fayet–Iliopoulos parameter tcan be turned on in the orbifold theory.
In order to make contact with the constraints described in se ction4, the action of σon the
vector multiplets can be written in terms of the O(2) matrix
S(σ) =/parenleftigg
0 1
1 0/parenrightigg
. (5.6)
The charges of the two pairs of chiral multiplets X1,2andY1,2satisfy the constraint ( 4.20). The
equality of the two Fayet–Iliopoulos parameters comes from the constraint ( 4.17).
Branched covering description
The vacuum manifold in the “geometrical phase” corresponds to conﬁgurations of the ﬁelds for
whichthescalar potential vanishes. For thescalar compone ntsofthechiral multiplets, thisamounts
to six real equations: two of them come from D-terms, and take the form (in Wess–Zumino gauge)
|x1|2+|x2|2+|w1|2+|w2|2=r, (5.7a)
|y1|2+|y2|2+|w1|2+|w2|2=r. (5.7b)
22The other four are F-terms and correspond to the vanishing of the polynomials J1andJ2:
w2
1+f1(x,y) = 0, (5.8a)
w2
2+f2(x,y) = 0. (5.8b)
With the residual gauge symmetry acting by a phase on the scal ars, the manifold described by
these equations has real dimension four.
Noticethatfor r >0,x1andx2canneverbothvanishsimultaneously. Moreover, theytrans form
with the same charge under U(1)1, which is complexiﬁed to C⋆by supersymmetry. Therefore, they
can be understood as coordinates on a sphere CP1. Similarly, y1andy2correspond to coordinates
on another sphere.
At a generic point of CP1×CP1, two values of w1and two values of w2satisfy the F-term
constraints ( 5.8), except at the branched locus deﬁned by
Σ1:f1(x,y) = 0, (5.9a)
Σ2:f2(x,y) = 0. (5.9b)
Both Σ 1and Σ2correspond to a degree (2 ,2) hypersurface in CP1×CP1, so they are curves of
genusg(Σ1) =g(Σ2) = 1, which intersect at eight points. Both curves are smooth for the choice of
f1,2given in ( 5.4) and generic choices of λ1,2.11Thus, the vacuum manifold Scan be understood
as a smooth 4-fold cover of CP1×CP1branched over Σ 1∪Σ2. The Euler characteristic can be
computed from
χ(S) = 4χ(CP1×CP1)−2χ(Σ1)−2χ(Σ2)+χ(Σ1∩Σ2), (5.10)
which gives χ(S) = 24 as expected for a K3 surface.
There are two distinguished classes C1andC2of Pic(S), cut out by the two hyperplanes
{p}×CP1, (5.11a)
CP1×{p}, (5.11b)
for some point pofCP1. Their intersection matrix reads
Cα·Cβ=/parenleftigg
0 4
4 0/parenrightigg
. (5.12)
Denoting by η1andη2their Poincar´ e duals, the K¨ ahler form of the K3 surface is JS=r(η1+η2),
whileη1−η2gives a primitive class with self intersection −8. In therms of these forms, the second
Chern class of the K3 surface is c2(TS) = 2(η1)2+2(η2)2+6η1η2.
11It is suﬃcient to choose λ1andλ2distinct and non-zero, with λ2
1,λ2
2,λ1λ2/negationslash= 1.
23Note that these classes appear quite explicitly in the GLSM. Integrating out the vector multi-
plets in the infrared limit yields for example
A1−A2=−1
2ln/parenleftbig¯X1X1+¯X2X2/parenrightbig
+1
2ln/parenleftbig¯Y1Y1+¯Y2Y2/parenrightbig
, (5.13)
with the Fubini–Study K¨ ahler potential for both spheres.
Gauge bundle
The geometry for the K3 base has to be supplemented by a gauge bundle Vover it. There are
several possibilities to describe such a bundle. As the gaug e bundle can only couple to primitive
forms, the Fermi multiplets cannot be charged under Υ1+ Υ2(though couplings to Υ1−Υ2are
still allowed). Consequently, the anomaly associated to th e K¨ ahler form has to be cancelled by
the chiral multiplets only. The choice of charges for these c hiral multiplets then dictates possible
couplings for the polynomials that appear in the superpoten tial.
A speciﬁc example is spelled out in table 2. This vector bundle over Sis described by four
chiral multiplets and an even number mf= 2Nof Fermi multiplets. Only 2 ninsof these Fermi
superﬁelds are charged under gauge transformations, they w ill give contributions to the second
Chern class c2(V).
P1P2P3P4Ψ1,...,ninsΨnins+1,...,NΨN+1,...,N+ninsΨN+nins+1,...,2N
U(1)1−3−1 0 0 1 0 −1 0
U(1)20 0 −3−1−1 0 1 0
Table 2: Charge assignment for a gauge bundle Vover the Z2model
The charge content does not fully deﬁne the ﬁber Lagrangian, as the superpotential must still
be speciﬁed. The gauge charges given in table 2restrict possible couplings: for example, the
Fermi multiplets Ψs=1,...,ninscan only couple with P1andP2, through polynomials Q1s(X,Y) and
Q2s(X,Y) ofU(1)1×U(1)2charge (2 ,1) and (0 ,1). Similarly, Ψs=N+1,...,N+ninscan couple with
P3,P4through polynomials Q3s(X,Y) andQ4s(X,Y) of bidegree (1 ,2) and (1 ,0).
For the corresponding vector bundle V, diﬀerent choices for the superpotential correspond to
diﬀerent deformations. The topology of Vis still determined by the choice of charges of table 2,
with Chern characters ch1(V) =−4(η1+η2) andch2(V) =−5((η1)2+(η2)2)+2nins(η1−η2)2.
For this example, the orbifold action on Vtakes the form
σ:/braceleftbig
P1,P2,P3,P4/bracerightbig
→/braceleftbig
P3,P4,P1,P2/bracerightbig
, (5.14a)
/braceleftbig
Ψ1,...,ΨN,ΨN+1,...,Ψ2N/bracerightbig
→/braceleftbig
ΨN+1,...,Ψ2N,Ψ1,...,ΨN/bracerightbig
.(5.14b)
Choosing polynomials Q1s(X,Y) =Q3s+N(Y,X) andQ2s(X,Y) =Q4s+N(Y,X), this Z2trans-
formation leaves the Lagrangian invariant.
24The geometric interpretation of ( 5.14) follows immediately: the gauge bundle is a sum of two
factorsV=V1⊕V2, withV1built out of the Nﬁrst Fermi multiplets, and V2out of the Nlast
ones. These two factors are exchanged by the orbifold accord ing to
σ:V1⊕V2→V2⊕V1. (5.15)
ThisZ2action can be understood as an exchange of the two E8factors in which Vis embedded,
thereby reducing the rank of the gauge group, in the same spir it as in CHL constructions [ 35].
Fibering the torus
Complementing the GLSM for K3 with a torus ﬁber is now straightforward. In order to preser ve
spacetime supersymmetry, the torus coordinates must be cou pled to a primitive form. In our
setting, this form is given freely by the vector multiplet Υ1−Υ2. Therefore, the only freedom in
the torus Lagrangian is the choice of charges wI
1=−wI
2. These two charges carry the responsibility
of cancelling the full anomaly of the base.
Fortunately, invarianceunderthe Z2orbifoldconstrains theallowed formoftheanomaly matrix.
Theconstraint ( 4.23) along with the form ( 5.6) of the matrix S(σ) implementing the orbifold on the
vector multiplets implies that the anomaly matrix must sati sfyA11=A22, so only two components
of the full anomaly have to be cancelled. One of these two can b e compensated by the torus ﬁber,
while for the other one, contributions from the base and the g auge bundle should balance out. For
the choices of charges of the model, with the gauge bundle spe ciﬁed in table 2, this is indeed the
case. Then for this choice, the full Lagrangian deﬁnes a cons istent quantum theory on the condition
that the charges wI
1=−wI
2obey12
a
τ2ωf∧¯ωf= (3−nins)(η1−η2)2. (5.16)
Here,nins= 0,1,2 allow for a non-trivial ﬁbration, while for nins= 3 one recovers K3×T2. For
nins>3, it is not possible to construct a consistent theory.
We see in this example that the GLSM puts an upper limit nins= 3 on the instanton number
of the gauge bundle, very similar to the topological conditi on (2.12) which arises in the classical
theory. Indeed, Fermi multiplets in the gauge sector contri bute to the anomaly with a similar sign
than the shift multiplets associated to the torus ﬁbration.
Enriques involution
The action ( 5.2) ofσon the chiral multiplets can be understood geometrically in theK3 phase of
the model. The two ambient spheres CP1×CP1are swapped by the involution. The same goes for
the four covers deﬁned by the values of w1andw2. The transformation of the holomorphic form
12Note that this condition is speciﬁc to the choice of bundle V.
25ΩSunder the involution can be worked out explicitly. This is mo st easily seen by embedding the
surfaceSinCP5using the Segre map
[z1:z2:z3:z4:z5:z6] = [w1:w2:x1y1:x1y2:x2y1:x2y2]. (5.17)
In these CP5homogeneous coordinates, Sappears as a complete intersection CP5[2,2,2] deﬁned
by the vanishing locus of three quadric polynomials
j1=z2
1+z2
3+z2
6+λ1/parenleftbig
z2
4+z2
5/parenrightbig
, (5.18a)
j2=z2
2+z2
3+z2
6+λ2/parenleftbig
z2
4+z2
5/parenrightbig
, (5.18b)
j3=z3z6−z4z5. (5.18c)
Choosing local coordinates of CP5, e.g.u1=z1/z6,...,u5=z5/z6, the holomorphic (2 ,0)-form has
the local expression
ΩS=1
u1u2du4∧du5 (5.19)
up to a constant factor. The involution acts on the CP5coordinates as
σ: [z1:z2:z3:z4:z5:z6]→[−z1:−z2:z3:z5:z4:z6]. (5.20)
Translating this action in local coordinates, one can see th at ΩStransforms as σ: ΩS→ −ΩS,
and the action of the orbifold on the base corresponds to a non -symplectic automorphism of K3.
It can be checked from the action ( 5.2) that the involution σacts without ﬁxed point: it is
therefore the Enriques involution of the K3 surface S.
5.2 A model with three vector multiplets
The previous example has two vector multiplets, and the orbi foldσacts on these multiplets by a
permutation. This structure is not generic, and to avoid any misconception we give in the following
a diﬀerent example where the Z2action on vector multiplets leaves one of them invariant. In the
associated geometry, this invariant multiplet gives rise t o an invariant primitive form, which can
be coupled to the gauge sector.
X1X2Y1Y2Z1Z2WΓ1Γ2
U(1)11 1 0 0 0 0 1 −1−2
U(1)20 0 1 1 0 0 1 −1−2
U(1)30 0 0 0 1 1 0 −2 0
Table 3: Charge assignment of the second Z2model
26The following example has (0 ,2) ﬁeld content spelled out in table 3. This GLSM has three
vector multiplets. The superpotential is chosen to be
J1=f(X,Y,Z) withf(X,Y,Z) = (X1Y1+X2Y2)(Z2
1+Z2
2)+(X1Y2−X2Y1)Z1Z2,(5.21a)
J2=W2+g(X,Y) withg(X,Y) = (X2
1+X2
2)(Y2
1+Y2
2)+λX1X2Y1Y2, (5.21b)
withλa complex constant. Two Fayet–Iliopoulos parameters tandt′can also be turned on, with
a contribution to the superpotential given by
1
4/integraldisplay
dθ/parenleftbig
t/parenleftbig
Υ1+Υ2/parenrightbig
+t′Υ3/parenrightbig
. (5.22)
Thecorresponding K3surfacecan beunderstoodasadoublecover of Mover thecurveΣ, where
Mis the manifold deﬁned by f(X,Y,Z) = 0 with χ(M) = 8, while Σ is the curve f(X,Y,Z) =
g(X,Y) = 0 with g(Σ) = 5. Here X1,2,Y1,2andZ1,2are understood as coordinates on CP1×
CP1×CP1.
Fixing the coordinates on any one of the three CP1s deﬁnes a hyperplane. The associated
classesC1,C2,C3, have intersection numbers
Cα·Cβ=
0 4 2
4 0 2
2 2 0
. (5.23)
The Enriques involution of the K3 surface descends from the orbifold
σ:{X1,X2,Y1,Y2,Z1,Z2,W} → {Y1,Y2,X1,X2,−Z1,Z2,−W}, (5.24a)
{Γ1,Γ2} → {Γ1,Γ2}, (5.24b)
/braceleftbig
(A1,V1),(A2,V2),(A3,V3)/bracerightbig
→/braceleftbig
(A2,V2),(A1,V1),(A3,V3)/bracerightbig
. (5.24c)
It can be checked that this Z2orbifold does not admit any ﬁxed point.
The K¨ ahler form of the K3 surface is JS=r(η1+η2) +r′η3. The torus can couple to the
primitive form η1−η2, that transforms with a sign under σ. In addition, the geometry also has
a primitive invariant form that gauge Fermi superﬁelds can c ouple to. This form is given by
r(η1+η2)−(2r+r′)η3.
5.3 Heterotic/type II duality and orientifold
In the lore of string duality, one of the most familiar exampl es is the relation between compactiﬁ-
cations of the heterotic theory on K3×T2and the type IIA theory on a K3-ﬁbered Calabi–Yau
manifold [ 36,37], related to the six-dimensional duality between type II on K3 and heterotic on
T4[38]. ForT2ﬁbrations over K3, the presence of ﬂux makes the duality less controlled. Pot en-
tial duals were considered in [ 27], as some K3-ﬁbered Calabi–Yau manifolds lacking a compatible
elliptic ﬁbration with section.
27Consideringsucha dual pairof aheterotic ﬂuxbackground Xandthe corresponding K3-ﬁbered
Calabi–Yau Y, both preserving N= 2 supersymmetry, one can wonder how the heterotic orbifold
would translate on the type II side under duality. The Z2orbifold acts on the heterotic side without
any ﬁxed point. With an adiabatic argument similar to theone of [39], onecan expect this heterotic
orbifold to beequivalent to some undeterminedinvolution σYon the typeII side. As this involution
must preserve only N= 1 supersymmetry, it should be an orientifold, acting on the Calabi–Yau
Yby an orientation-reversing isometry. The resulting quoti ent geometries should yield a dual pair
withN= 1 supersymmetry.
Such an N= 1 duality is actually discussed in [ 39] in the case of K3×T2. We expect that a
similar reasoning still applies in the case of heterotic ﬂux backgrounds, so we reproduce here the
main arguments. Thespace Yconsideredin[ 39] can bedescribedas K3ﬁberedover CP1, andhasa
distinguishedantiholomorphic involution, acting onthe CP1basecoordinates uwiththeﬁxed-point
free involution u→ −1/¯uand preserving K3 ﬁbers. Following the adiabatic argument, taking the
CP1baseverylarge, aﬁber-wiseapplicationofstringdualityl eadstoaheteroticcompactiﬁcation on
T4ﬁbered over CP1. This geometry can surely be understood as T2ﬁbered over some K3 surface,
with this K3 base described by an elliptic ﬁbration. The antiholomorph ic involution of Ywould
then translate on the heterotic side to an inversion of the to rus ﬁber coordinate, and an involution
σSof the base S. Describing SasT2ﬁbered over CP1, the adiabatic argument of above dictates
howσSshould act: the CP1base should transform with the same antiholomorphic involu tion as
on the type IIA side, and T2ﬁbers should be preserved. This freely acting symmetry of Sis the
Enriques involution (with respect to some choice of complex structure). Thus, the construction
found on the heterotic side reﬂects exactly the geometry des cribed in previous sections.
While in the construction of [ 39] the orbifold action on the heterotic gauge bundle is less
straightforward to derive, it is underlined in that if the se cond Chern class is divided equally in
the twoE8factors, a possibility for the automorphism is an exchange o f the two factors. This also
reﬂects the orbifold action ( 5.15) found in the GLSM construction.
What can we learn about the type II dual of the heterotic N= 1 geometry described in this
section — if such a dual exists? Based on the arguments of [ 27], the dual of a N= 2 heterotic ﬂux
background should be given by a Calabi–Yau space Yadmitting a K3 ﬁbration, but no compatible
elliptic ﬁbration. In addition, this type II dual should adm it a freely-acting antiholomorphic invo-
lutionσYpreserving the K3 ﬁbration, so that Y/σYgives aN= 1 dual to X/σby the adiabatic
argument.
IfYis described by an embedding in some ambient manifold (e.g. a projective space or a
toric variety), it seems reasonable to expect the involutio n to be inherited from an action on the
ambient space. Whether Yadmits or not a freely-acting discrete automorphism group Γ descending
from symmetries of its ambient space can, in many cases, be ch ecked explicitly. Some conditions
28allow ruling out manifolds, for example several topologica l indices of Y(notably χ(Y)) should be
divisible by the order of the group |Γ|. For complete intersection Calabi–Yau manifolds (CICYs),
conﬁgurations admitting free linear group actions have bee n investigated algorithmically in [ 40].
Outofthe7890Calabi–Yaumanifoldsof[ 41], only166ofthemadmitinvolutionsinheritedfroma Z2
projective action. Such CICY conﬁgurations are especially simple and amenable to computations.
Notably, most conﬁgurations admit a favorable description [42], which is an embedding of the
Calabi–Yau in a product of projective spaces, such that all d ivisors descend from the ambient
space. Conditions for the existence of a K3/elliptic ﬁbration (as well as their compatibility) can
be framed as conditions on divisors, so for favorable CICY co nﬁgurations they can be checked
systematically. As an example, consider the Calabi–Yau spa ceYconstructed as a bidegree (2 ,4)
hypersurface in CP1×CP3. It hash1,1(Y) = 2 and h2,1(Y) = 86, so it is a favorable conﬁguration,
with the two divisors DandD′descending from CP1andCP3. The space Yexhibits an obvious
K3 ﬁbration, with the corresponding divisor Dsatisfying D3=D2·D′= 0 and D·c2(Y) = 24.
Consequently, Ycannot admit a compatible elliptic ﬁbration: this would req uireh1,1(Y)≥3.
In principle, the above critera limit the numberof candidat es for aN= 1 dual in a given class of
geometries. However, one should be careful not to exclude to o quickly manifolds that do not meet
all requirements: sometimes Calabi–Yau spaces can admit di screte symmetries that do not descend
from automorphisms of their ambient spaces. This phenomeno n appears already for CICY spaces,
where the same manifold can admit several conﬁgurations in d iﬀerent projective spaces, with the
diﬀerent descriptions related by ineﬀective splitting [ 41]. Sometimes diﬀerent conﬁgurations share
common projective discrete symmetries, but it can also happ en that a symmetry is only manifest
in one speciﬁc conﬁguration. An instructive illustration o f this situation is presented in [ 43], where
discrete symmetries of CICYs are studied using their favora ble descriptions. In this setting, only
101 manifolds admit a freely-acting involution, including some manifolds that were not in the
original list of [ 40].
6 Torsional compactiﬁcations with singularities from Z3orbifolds
For a Z3orbifold, the generator σ, which acts on the holomorphic two-form as Ω S→ζΩS, should
act on the two-form ωfused to ﬁber the torus as
σ:ωf→ζ2ωf. (6.1)
The corresponding K3 base should thus have, in addition to its K¨ ahler form, addi tional (1 ,1)-
formsω1
fandω2
fwhose Z3transformation law reproduces ( 6.1). We introduce in this section a
GLSM for a heterotic ﬂux background Xadmitting such a discrete symmetry. The orbifold is not
freely-acting, but leaves nine points of Xﬁxed, based at three diﬀerent points of K3. The quotient
geometry is a singular supergravity background preserving N= 1 spacetime supersymmetry.
296.1 A model with three vector multiplets
A possible construction is the following: the K3 surface is constructed from seven chiral multiplets
X1,X2,Y1,Y2,Z1,Z2,W, as well as two Fermi multiplets Γ 1, Γ2. These superﬁelds couple to
three vector multiplets gauging a group U(1)1×U(1)2×U(1)3, with charge assignment given in
table4. Again, this choice of charges satisﬁes the condition ( 3.4) which ensures c1(TS) = 0.
X1X2Y1Y2Z1Z2WΓ1Γ2
U(1)11 1 0 0 0 0 1 −1−2
U(1)20 0 1 1 0 0 1 −1−2
U(1)30 0 0 0 1 1 1 −1−2
Table 4: Charge assignment of the Z3model
The Lagrangian for the base is then fully speciﬁed by the poly nomials appearing in the super-
potential, which we will choose to be
J1=f(X,Y,Z) with f(X,Y,Z) =X1Y1Z1+X2Y2Z2, (6.2a)
J2=W2+g(X,Y,Z) withg(X,Y,Z) =X2
1Y2
2Z2
2+ζ2X2
2Y2
1Z2
2+ζX2
2Y2
2Z2
1
+X2
2Y2
1Z2
1+ζ2X2
1Y2
2Z2
1+ζX2
1Y2
1Z2
2,(6.2b)
as well as the Fayet–Iliopoulos parameters, taken to be equa l (t1=t2=t3).
The coordinates X1,2,Y1,2andZ1,2describe three CP1s. The degree (1 ,1,1) polynomial
f(X,Y,Z) carves in this product a hypersurface Mof Euler characteristic χ(M) = 6. The ge-
ometry of the base Scan then be understood as a double cover of M, with the two branches
corresponding to the two possible values of W. The branched locus is a curve Σ of genus g(Σ) = 7,
corresponding to the vanishing of g(X,Y,Z). With the choice of superpotential ( 6.2), bothMand
Σ are smooth. Accordingly, the Euler characteristic is χ(S) = 2χ(M)−χ(Σ) = 24.
Corresponding to the three vector multiplets, the geometry has three (1 ,1)-forms ηα. These
forms are the Poincar´ e duals of the classes Cαcut out by
{p}×CP1×CP1,CP1×{p}×CP1,CP1×CP1×{p}. (6.3)
Their intersection matrix reads
Cα·Cβ=
0 2 2
2 0 2
2 2 0
. (6.4)
The second Chern class of Scan be obtained directly from the anomaly matrix of the base L a-
grangian and reads
c2(TS) = (η1)2+(η2)2+(η3)2+4(η1η2+η2η3+η3η1). (6.5)
306.2 Orbifold and singular points
TheZ3orbifold generator σacts on the (0 ,2) multiplets as
σ:{X1,X2,Y1,Y2,Z1,Z2,W} →/braceleftbig
Y1,Y2,Z1,Z2,X1,X2,ζ2W/bracerightbig
, (6.6a)
{Γ1,Γ2} →/braceleftbig
Γ1,ζ2Γ2/bracerightbig
, (6.6b)
/braceleftbig
(A1,V1),(A2,V2),(A3,V3)/bracerightbig
→/braceleftbig
(A2,V2),(A3,V3),(A1,V1)/bracerightbig
. (6.6c)
With the polynomials deﬁning the hypersurface transformin g asσ:f→f, g→ζg, the La-
grangian is invariant. In the geometric phase, the holomorp hic two-form can be shown to transform
as
σ: ΩS→ζΩS, (6.7)
and the orbifold σacts as a non-symplectic automorphism. It admits three ﬁxed points correspond-
ing to
X1=Y1=Z1= 1, (6.8a)
X2=Y2=Z2=−1,−ζ,−ζ2, (6.8b)
W= 0 (6.8c)
(or any point in the same gauge equivalence class).
ThisK3Lagrangian can thencoupletothetorusLagrangian, withco mplex structureparameter
τ=ζ. In order to ﬁber the torus, the complexiﬁed torus curvature ωfcan be chosen proportional
to the primitive (1 ,1)-form
η1+ζη2+ζ2η3, (6.9)
such that it transforms as ( 6.1). This form can only compensate for some of the chiral anomal ies
of the GLSM, but the rest needs to be canceled by the gauge bund le.4.20Generically, any U(1)3
GLSM could have six diﬀerent anomalies (mixed and non-mixed) . The invariance of the anomaly
matrix of the orbifold ( 4.23) forbids three of these to be non-zero. The coupling to the to rus allows
compensating for one of the three anomalies left, the other t wo must be cancelled by the gauge
bundle. A possible choice is to take ﬁve charged chiral multi pletsPjandmfFermi multiplets Ψs,
with charges spelled out in table 5. These couple to the base Lagrangian with the polynomials
Qjs(X,Y,Z) appearing in the superpotential, with the degree of the pol ynomials chosen to ensure
gauge invariance, e.g. Q1s(X,Y,Z) should be of tridegree (1 ,1,0). The resulting bundle Vhas
ch1(V) =−4(η1+η2+η3) andch2(V) =−2((η1)2+(η2)2+(η3)2)−3(η1η2+η2η3+η3η1).
TheZ3transformation for the gauge bundle must also be speciﬁed. A s the ﬁelds P1,P2,P3
carry diﬀerent charges under the diﬀerent U(1) factors, they must be swapped by the orbifold. The
two other multiplets P4,P5as well as the Fermi multiplets stay invariant under σ. The polynomials
Qjsshould then transform accordingly.
31P1P2P3P4P5Ψs
U(1)1−1 0 −1−1−10
U(1)2−1−1 0 −1−10
U(1)30−1−1−1−10
Table 5: Charge assignment for a gauge bundle Vover the Z3model
While for this example of gauge bundle, scalar charges do not sum to zero, non-renormalization
of the FI parameters can still be obtained by adding a pair of s pectator ﬁelds, as explained in [ 31].
Supplementing the model with a chiral multiplet Sof charges (1 ,1,1) and a Fermi multiplet Σ of
charges ( −1,−1,−1) does not change the anomaly nor the condition c1= 0. Moreover, adding a
term/integraltext
dθmsSΣ+c.c. inthesuperpotentialensuresthat thesespectators donot aﬀectthegeometric
phase. These auxiliary multiplets are also compatible with the orbifold action: they have the same
charge under the three U(1) factors, so they can stay invariant under σ.
The resulting geometry has
ch2(TS)−ch2(V) = (η1)2+(η2)2+(η3)2−(η1η2+η2η3+η3η1)
= (η1+ζη2+ζ2η3)∧(η1+ζ2η2+ζη3).(6.10)
The full Lagrangian is then well-deﬁned, provided the charg es of the torus are chosen to cancel
the corresponding anomaly. Quotienting by Z3then gives a N= 1 geometry with singular points
based at the three ﬁxed points ( 6.8) of theK3 surface.
7 Discussion
In this work, we have extended the (0 ,2) worldsheet description of N= 2 heterotic ﬂux vacua,
introduced in [ 16], to models preserving N= 1 supersymmetry in four dimensions, by considering
(0,2) gauged linear sigma-models admitting appropriate discr ete symmetries.
Supersymmetry constrains possible models, and in particul ar the classes of K3 surfaces that
have to be considered. In the GLSM, the main takeaway is that t he orbifold should have a non-
trivial action on vector multiplets. These vector multiple ts are usually associated to the symplectic
forms of ambient projective spaces. In that respect, requir ing the existence of a supersymmetry-
preservingdiscretesymmetryintheGLSMguides usvery natu rally toselected geometrical settings:
the torsional background must be constructed from a K3 base13S⊂CPK1×··· × CPKnv, with
vector multiplets spanning a rank nvsublattice of Pic( S). In addition, this surface Shas to admit
a discrete Zpsymmetry under which some CPKαfactors are permuted.
13As underlined above, hypersurfaces in weighted projective spaces or branched covers are also possible.
32Many distinct families of K3 surfaces can be constructed as complete intersections in p roducts
of projective spaces. Diﬀerent conﬁgurations yield the same surface topologically, but they do not
admit the same deformations. Indeed, while K3 admits a 20-dimensional space of complex struc-
ture deformations, only a subspace of these moduli is access ible when describing it as a complete
intersection. Consequently, not all classes of K3 surfaces admit projectively induced discrete sym-
metries. As an example, a smooth hypersurface of degree (2 ,3) inCP1×CP2gives aK3 surface,
and it can be shown that such a conﬁguration does not admit a Z2symmetry inherited from an
involution of the ambient projective spaces [ 41]. In our construction, this conﬁguration would not
allow for a GLSM description of the Enriques involution. On t he other hand, building K3 as a
degree (2 ,2,2) hypersurface in CP1×CP1×CP1enables a linear (0 ,2) description.
For our purposes, a necessary feature of the construction is , more generally, a speciﬁc K3
class which admits a projectively induced Zpsymmetry, in order to lift the discrete action to
the GLSM. Vector multiplets must transform under the orbifo ld so that they can couple to the
torus shift multiplets, yielding a non-trivial ﬁbration. M oreover, the resulting automorphism of
the base Smust be non-symplectic, and should not leave invariant curv es. While such constrains
are obviously not satisﬁed by most members of of the K3 moduli space, it is still possible to pick
particular conﬁgurations that meet all requirements.
Orbifolds of order two can give smooth compactiﬁcations wit h minimal supersymmetry. How-
ever, such geometries only have SU(2)×Z2structure. For orbifolds of order three, four or six, the
quotient geometry necessarily admits (at least) singular p oints, based at the points of K3 which
are ﬁxed by the non-symplectic automorphism. These orbifol d singularities have to be resolved to
obtain a consistent heterotic background. However, unlike the K¨ ahler setting, there is no topo-
logical condition guaranteeing the existence of a solution . Thus, the resolved geometry must be
obtained by smoothing out locally singular points, and patc hing these local solutions into a global
compact geometry, while preserving the supersymmetry cond itions (2.1). No existence theorem for
such resolutions has been proven so far.
The worldsheet construction should give a more workable fra mework in order to address the
resolution. In(0 ,2) GLSMs, resolution techniques[ 22,23]typically rely onsupplementingthemodel
with an additional vector multiplet, along with a chiral mul tiplet gauged under this additional U(1)
symmetry. The resulting model has diﬀerent phases, obtained by varying the Fayet–Iliopoulos
parameter associated with the new vector. In some limit, the additional multiplets are set to zero
and the singular orbifold reappears, with the discrete tran sformation given by a residual gauge
transformation associated to the extra U(1). In another limit, the model is fully resolved, and
the new chiral multiplet becomes a coordinate on the divisor associated to the resolution. The
GLSM then gives a model with the topology of the resolved mani fold, which is expected to ﬂow
to a conformal ﬁeld theory in the infrared. Thus, obtaining a worldsheet model for the resolution
would give strong evidence for the existence of a heterotic ﬂ ux background with SU(3) structure.
33However, it should be noted that the orbifold action in our mo del is quite unusual: it does not
actonchiralmultipletsonlybyphasemultiplication, butg enerically alsorequirespermutingsomeof
them for consistency. In addition, vector multiplets also t ransform with a constant rotation matrix.
Adapting (0 ,2) resolution methods thus requires some modiﬁcations: in p articular, the orbifold
can no longer be understood as a residual U(1) gauge transformation. It would be interesting to
see how to reframe the worldsheet resolutions in this contex t. A possible direction would be to
understand them as non-abelian GLSMs: indeed, the orbifold action on (0 ,2) multiplets can surely
be understood as a residual non-abelian gauge transformati on.
Anindirecthintoftheexistence ofaresolved geometry coul dalsobefoundbystudyingLandau–
Ginzburgorbifold phases of these GLSMs, by a careful analys is of the twisted sectors. Indeed, while
a freely acting orbifold would only project out sectors of th e theory, for an orbifold with ﬁxed points
twisted operators also have to beconsidered. Resolution mo des could then beidentiﬁed as marginal
operators in the twisted sectors of the superconformal ﬁeld theories that the models ﬂow to in the
infrared.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Alessandra Sarti for useful correspon dence, and Ruben Minasian for dis-
cussions.
A Conventions for (0 ,2) superspace
Covariance under (0 ,2) supersymmetry is made manifest by working in (0 ,2) superspace, built
by supplementing the worldsheet coordinates σ+,σ−, with fermionic coordinates θ+,¯θ+, where
¯θ+= (θ+)†. The supersymmetry generators are then
Q+=∂
∂θ++i¯θ+∂+,¯Q+=−∂
∂¯θ+−iθ+∂+, (A.1)
and satisfy the (0 ,2) supersymmetry algebra
/braceleftbig¯Q+,Q+/bracerightbig
=−2i∂+ (A.2)
with−i∂+the generator of the right-moving worldsheet translation. The supersymmetric deriva-
tives are deﬁned as
D+=∂
∂θ+−i¯θ+∂+,¯D+=−∂
∂¯θ++iθ+∂+, (A.3)
and satisfy/braceleftbig¯D+,D+/bracerightbig
= 2i∂+.
34A.1 Supermultiplets
Supersymmetry multiplets are constructed as (0 ,2) superﬁelds, which are complex functions Θ on
superspace transforming under a supersymmetry variation a s
δΘ =/parenleftbig
ǫ+Q++¯ǫ+¯Q+/parenrightbig
Θ. (A.4)
A chiral multiplet Φ obeys the constraint
¯D+Φ = 0. (A.5)
Its component expansion is
Φ =φ+√
2θ+λ+−iθ+¯θ+∂+φ (A.6)
withφa scalar and λ+a right-moving fermion.
A Fermi multiplet Γ satisﬁes the same chirality constraint14
¯D+Γ = 0, (A.7)
but its lowest component is a left-moving fermion γ−. Its component expansion also displays an
auxiliary ﬁeld Gas
Γ =γ−+√
2θ+G−iθ+¯θ+∂+γ−. (A.8)
A vector multiplet is built out of two real superﬁelds AandV. Both are unconstrained but
transform under super-gauge transformations as
A → A +i
2(¯Ξ−Ξ),V → V −1
2∂−(Ξ+¯Ξ), (A.9)
where the super-gauge parameter Ξ is a chiral superﬁeld. In o rder to make the ﬁeld content of this
multiplet more manifest, super-gauge transformations can be used to ﬁx the Wess–Zumino gauge,
where the vector multiplet has the component expansion
A=θ+¯θ+A+, (A.10a)
V=A−−2iθ+¯µ−−2i¯θ+µ−+2θ+¯θ+D. (A.10b)
The residual gauge symmetry is then a usual U(1) gauge transformation, generated by super-gauge
parameters of the form Ξ = ρ−iθ+¯θ+∂+ρ, withρreal. The gauge curvature appears in the Fermi
multiplet
Υ =¯D+(∂−A+iV), (A.11)
with the expansion
Υ =−2/parenleftbig
µ−−iθ+(D−iF01)−iθ+¯θ+∂+µ−/parenrightbig
(A.12)
whereF01=1
2F−+.
14This constraint can be generalized to ¯D+Γ =√
2E(Φ) with Ean holomorphic function of chiral ﬁelds.
35A.2 Gauge couplings
Consider a (0 ,2) model with a number nvof abelian vector multiplets ( Aα,Vα). The gauged sector
is coupled to matter by imposing the following gauge transfo rmations for chiral superﬁelds. A
chiral multiplet Φ with charges qαtransforms under a super-gauge transformation as
Φ→eiqαΞαΦ. (A.13)
The derivative ∂−Φ does not transform covariantly, and needs to be supplement ed by the gauge-
covariant derivative
D−Φ =∂−Φ+iqα(Vα−i∂−Aα)Φ (A.14)
which has the right transformation law under super-gauge tr ansformations, that is
D−Φ→eiqαΞαD−Φ. (A.15)
Note that the gauge curvature appears in
¯D+D−Φ =qαΥαΦ. (A.16)
In the construction of our models, we also consider shift chi ral multiplets which have diﬀer-
ent transformation laws. A shift multiplet Ω with charges wαtransforms under a super-gauge
transformation as
Ω→Ω+iwαΞα(A.17)
A.3 Lagrangians with (0 ,2) supersymmetry
Throughout this paper, the action Sof a model is related to its Lagrangian Lby
S=1
2π/integraldisplay
d2σL. (A.18)
Manifestly (0 ,2) supersymmetric Lagrangians are obtained by integrating superﬁelds over their
fermionic coordinates, with the Berezin measure normalize d as
/integraldisplay
dθ θ+= 1,/integraldisplay
d2θ θ+¯θ+= 1. (A.19)
HereweconsidertheLagrangianforasinglevector multiple t(A,V), onechiralmultipletΦofcharge
qand one Fermi multiplet Γ of charge q′, though generalization to multiple ﬁelds is straightforwa rd.
The Lagrangian for the matter sector takes the form
Lm=−i
2/integraldisplay
d2θe2qA¯ΦD−Φ−1
2/integraldisplay
d2θe2q′A¯ΓΓ−µ
2/integraldisplay
dθΓJ(Φ)−µ
2/integraldisplay
d¯θ¯Γ¯J(¯Φ) (A.20)
36where the superpotential term is constructed from a holomor phic function J.15The Lagrangian of
the gauge sector is
Lg=−1
8e2/integraldisplay
d2θ¯ΥΥ+t
4/integraldisplay
dθΥ+¯t
4/integraldisplay
d¯θ¯Υ (A.21)
and includes a Fayet–Iliopoulos term, with t= ir+θ
2π.
The corresponding scalar potential (obtained by integrati ng out the auxiliary ﬁelds) is
U(φ,¯φ) =e2
8/parenleftbig
q|φ|2−r/parenrightbig2+µ
2|J(φ)|2. (A.22)
Lastly, the Lagrangian for a shift multiplet Ω of charge wis of the form
Ls=−i
4/integraldisplay
d2θ/parenleftbig
Ω+¯Ω+2wA/parenrightbig/parenleftbig
∂−(Ω−¯Ω)+2iwV/parenrightbig
(A.23)
References
[1] S.-T. Yau, On the Ricci Curvature of a Compact K¨ ahler Manifold and the Comp lex
Monge-Amp` ere Equation, I ,Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 31(1978) 339–411 .
[2] S. K. Donaldson, Anti Self-Dual Yang-Mills Connections over Complex Algebrai c Surfaces
and Stable Vector Bundles ,Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. 50(1985) 1–26 .
[3] K. Uhlenbeck and S. T. Yau, On the Existence of Hermitian-Yang-Mills Connections in
Stable Vector Bundles ,
Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 39(1986) 257–293 .
[4] E. Witten, New Issues in Manifolds of SU(3) Holonomy ,Nucl. Phys. B 268(1986) 79 .
[5] L. Witten and E. Witten, Large Radius Expansion of Superstring Compactiﬁcations ,
Nucl. Phys. B 281(1987) 109–126 .
[6] C. M. Hull, Compactiﬁcations of the Heterotic Superstring ,
Phys. Lett. B 178(1986) 357–364 .
[7] A. Strominger, Superstrings with Torsion ,Nucl. Phys. B 274(1986) 253 .
[8] K. Dasgupta, G. Rajesh and S. Sethi, M Theory, Orientifolds and G-Flux,
JHEP08(1999) 023 , [hep-th/9908088 ].
[9] M. Becker, L.-S. Tseng and S.-T. Yau, Heterotic K¨ ahler/non-K¨ ahler Transitions ,
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 12(2008) 1147–1162 , [0706.4290 ].
15In our models this function will always be polynomial.
37[10] T. Banks and L. J. Dixon, Constraints on String Vacua with Space-Time Supersymmetry ,
Nucl. Phys. B 307(1988) 93–108 .
[11] I. V. Melnikov and R. Minasian, Heterotic Sigma Models with N=2 Space-Time
Supersymmetry ,JHEP09(2011) 065 , [1010.5365 ].
[12] M. Becker, L.-S. Tseng and S.-T. Yau, New Heterotic Non-K¨ ahler Geometries ,
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 13(2009) 1815–1845 , [0807.0827 ].
[13] C. Borcea, K3 Surfaces with Involution and Mirror Pairs of Calabi-Yau Man ifolds,AMS/IP
Stud. Adv. Math. 1(1996) 717–743.
[14] C. Voisin, Miroirs et involutions sur les surfaces K3 , inJourn´ ees de g´ eom´ etrie alg´ ebrique
d’Orsay - Juillet 1992 , no. 218 in Ast´ erisque. Soci´ et´ e math´ ematique de France , 1993.
[15] E. Witten, Phases of N=2 theories in two-dimensions ,Nucl. Phys. B 403(1993) 159–222 ,
[hep-th/9301042 ].
[16] A. Adams, M. Ernebjerg and J. M. Lapan, Linear Models for Flux Vacua ,
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 12(2008) 817–852 , [hep-th/0611084 ].
[17] A. Adams and J. M. Lapan, Computing the Spectrum of a Heterotic Flux Vacuum ,
JHEP03(2011) 045 , [0908.4294 ].
[18] D. Isra¨ el, T-Duality in Gauged Linear Sigma-Models with Torsion ,JHEP11(2013) 093 ,
[1306.6609 ].
[19] D. Israel and M. Sarkis, New Supersymmetric Index of Heterotic Compactiﬁcations with
Torsion,JHEP12(2015) 069 , [1509.05704 ].
[20] D. Israel and M. Sarkis, Dressed Elliptic Genus of Heterotic Compactiﬁcations with T orsion
and General Bundles ,JHEP08(2016) 176 , [1606.08982 ].
[21] C. Angelantonj, D. Israel and M. Sarkis, Threshold Corrections in Heterotic Flux
Compactiﬁcations ,JHEP08(2017) 032 , [1611.09442 ].
[22] S. Groot Nibbelink, Heterotic Orbifold Resolutions as (2,0) Gauged Linear Sigma Models,
Fortsch. Phys. 59(2011) 454–493 , [1012.3350 ].
[23] M. Blaszczyk, S. Groot Nibbelink and F. Ruehle, Gauged Linear Sigma Models for Toroidal
Orbifold Resolutions ,JHEP05(2012) 053 , [1111.5852 ].
[24] S. Ivanov, Heterotic Supersymmetry, Anomaly Cancellation and Equatio ns of Motion ,
Phys. Lett. B 685(2010) 190–196 , [0908.2927 ].
38[25] P. Candelas, G. T. Horowitz, A. Strominger and E. Witten ,Vacuum Conﬁgurations for
Superstrings ,Nucl. Phys. B 258(1985) 46–74 .
[26] E. Goldstein and S. Prokushkin, Geometric Model for Complex non-K¨ ahler Manifolds with
SU(3) Structure ,Commun. Math. Phys. 251(2004) 65–78 , [hep-th/0212307 ].
[27] I. V. Melnikov, R. Minasian and S. Theisen, Heterotic Flux Backgrounds and their IIA
Duals,JHEP07(2014) 023 , [1206.1417 ].
[28] I. V. Melnikov, R. Minasian and S. Sethi, Heterotic Fluxes and Supersymmetry ,
JHEP06(2014) 174 , [1403.4298 ].
[29] J.-X. Fu and S.-T. Yau, The Theory of Superstring with Flux on non-K¨ ahler Manifolds a nd
the Complex Monge-Amp` ere Equation ,J. Diﬀ. Geom. 78(2008) 369–428, [ hep-th/0604063 ].
[30] K. Becker, M. Becker, J.-X. Fu, L.-S. Tseng and S.-T. Yau ,Anomaly Cancellation and
Smooth non-K¨ ahler Solutions in Heterotic String Theory ,Nucl. Phys. B 751(2006) 108–128 ,
[hep-th/0604137 ].
[31] J. Distler, Notes on (0,2) Superconformal Field Theories , 1, 1995, hep-th/9502012 .
[32] V. V. Nikulin, Finite Automorphism Groups of K¨ ahler K3 Surfaces ,Trans. Moscow Math.
Soc.38(1980) 71–135.
[33] M. Artebani, A. Sarti and S. Taki, K3 Surfaces with non-Symplectic Automorphisms of
Prime Order ,Mathematische Zeitschrift 268(June, 2011) 507–533 .
[34] M. Artebani and A. Sarti, Non-Symplectic Automorphisms of Order 3 on K3 Surfaces ,
Mathematische Annalen 342(Dec., 2008) 903–921 .
[35] S. Chaudhuri, G. Hockney and J. D. Lykken, Maximally Supersymmetric String Theories in
D<10,Phys. Rev. Lett. 75(1995) 2264–2267 , [hep-th/9505054 ].
[36] S. Kachru and C. Vafa, Exact Results for N=2 Compactiﬁcations of Heterotic Strings ,
Nucl. Phys. B 450(1995) 69–89 , [hep-th/9505105 ].
[37] S. Ferrara, J. A. Harvey, A. Strominger and C. Vafa, Second Quantized Mirror Symmetry ,
Phys. Lett. B 361(1995) 59–65 , [hep-th/9505162 ].
[38] C. M. Hull and P. K. Townsend, Unity of Superstring Dualities ,
Nucl. Phys. B 438(1995) 109–137 , [hep-th/9410167 ].
[39] C. Vafa and E. Witten, Dual String Pairs with N=1 and N=2 Supersymmetry in Four
Dimensions ,Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 46(1996) 225–247 , [hep-th/9507050 ].
39[40] V. Braun, On Free Quotients of Complete Intersection Calabi-Yau Manifol ds,
JHEP04(2011) 005 , [1003.3235 ].
[41] P. Candelas, A. M. Dale, C. A. Lutken and R. Schimmrigk, Complete Intersection
Calabi-Yau Manifolds ,Nucl. Phys. B 298(1988) 493 .
[42] L. B. Anderson, X. Gao, J. Gray and S.-J. Lee, Fibrations in CICY Threefolds ,
JHEP10(2017) 077 , [1708.07907 ].
[43] J. Gray and J. Wang, Free Quotients of Favorable Calabi-Yau Manifolds ,
JHEP07(2022) 116 , [2112.12683 ].
40