arXiv:2302.10561v2  [cs.IT]  15 Feb 2024Model-free Optimization and Experimental Validation of RIS-assi sted
Wireless Communications under Rich Multipath Fading
Tianrui Chen, Minglei You, Yangyishi Zhang, Gan Zheng, Jean Baptiste Gros,
Geoffroy Lerosey, Youssef Nasser, Fraser Burton, and Gabri ele Gradoni
Abstract —Reconﬁgurable intelligent surface (RIS) devices have
emerged as an effective way to control the propagation chann els
for enhancing the end-users’ performance. However, RIS opt i-
mization involves conﬁguring the radio frequency response of a
large number of radiating elements, which is challenging in real-
world applications due to high computational complexity. I n this
paper, a model-free cross-entropy (CE) algorithm is propos ed to
optimize the binary RIS conﬁguration for improving the sign al-
to-noise ratio (SNR) at the receiver. One key advantage of th e
proposed method is that it only requires system performance
indicators, e.g., the received SNR, without the need for cha nnel
models or channel state information. Both simulations and
experiments are conducted to evaluate the performance of th e
proposed CE algorithm. This study provides an experimental
demonstration of the channel hardening effect in a multi-an tenna
RIS-assisted wireless system under rich multipath fading.
Index Terms —Reconﬁgurable intelligent surface (RIS), Phase
shifts optimization, Cross-entropy algorithm, Channel ha rdening.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Reconﬁgurable intelligent surfaces (RISs), with the poten tial
to implement smart radio environments, have emerged as an
energy-efﬁcient and cost-effective technology to create a de-
sirable propagation channel between the transceivers by ph ase
shifts of imping signals [1]. Compared to the conventional
diagonal RIS design, the novel beyond diagonal RIS structur e
increases the ﬂexibility of the RIS phase shifts and enhance s
the channel gain accordingly [2] [3]. However, the phase shi fts
optimization is a challenging problem due to a large number
of discrete variables being optimized. Many researchers ha ve
made efforts on such optimizations for RIS-aided wireless
communications. A genetic algorithm was proposed in [4] to
optimize the phase shifts of RIS in massive multiple-input-
multiple-output (MIMO) system, but it requires statistica l
channel state information (CSI) estimation [5]. A Monte-
Carlo (MC) based random energy passive beamforming was
proposed for RIS-assisted wireless power transfer systems [6],
Tianrui Chen and Minglei You are with University of Nottingh am (Email:
{Tianrui.Chen, Minglei.You }@nottingham.ac.uk), Gan Zheng is with Univer-
sity of Warwick (Email: gan.zheng@warwick.ac.uk), Yangyi shi Zhang and
Fraser Burton are with Applied Research, BT (Email: {yangyishi.zhang,
fraser.burton }@bt.com), Jean Baptiste Gros, Geoffroy Lerosey and Youssef
Nasser are with Greenerwave (Email: {jean-baptiste.gros, geoffroy.lerosey,
youssef.nasser }@greenerwave.com), and Gabriele Gradoni is with Universit y
of Surrey (Email: g.gradoni@surrey.ac.uk).
This work was supported in part by Digital Nottingham Projec t, by
CELTIC-NEXT C2019/2-5: Artiﬁcial Intelligence Enabled Ma ssive Multiple-
Input Multiple-Output (AIMM) Project, by the Royal Society under Grant
IEC\NSFC\223152, and by the European Space Agency under Grant
12893212. Gabriele Gradoni has been supported by the EU H202 0 RISE-6G
Project under Grant 101017011, and by the Royal Society Indu stry Fellowship
under Grant INF \R2\192066.and this method can be implemented without CSI. Addition-
ally, other MC sampling based algorithms, such as simulated
annealing (SA) [7] and Metropolis–Hastings (MH) [8], are
also capable to solve such RIS optimization problem. The
aforementioned state-of-the-art works provided only nume rical
simulations but not experimental evaluations. Some works
made efforts on experimental evaluations of the RIS optimiz a-
tion in wireless communications, e.g., multiple links in in door
environment [9] and millimeter wave beamforming [10].
In the Massive MIMO scenario, the essence of the channel
hardening is that the channel variations reduce as more an-
tennas are added [11]. The state-of-the-art works focus on t he
numerical studies about the channel hardening in RIS-aided
communications such as in Rayleigh fading model [12] and
under large intelligent surface scenario [13]. However, to the
authors’ best knowledge, existing works have not provided
their experimental validations of the channel hardening ef fect
in the RIS-assisted communications [14]. The main contribu -
tions of this work are summarized as follows:
•A cross-entropy (CE) algorithm is proposed to optimize
the RIS conﬁguration for SNR enhancement. It is a
model-free algorithm that can be applied to arbitrary use
cases and scenarios. Additionally, it only requires the
received SNR as performance feedback and does not need
channel model or CSI.
•In addition to numerical simulations, experimental eval-
uations are performed for the proposed CE algorithm in
a RIS-aided communication system operating within an
electromagnetic reverberation chamber (RC) that emu-
lates rich multipath fading [15].
•In contrast to the channel hardening studied by numerical
simulations in the literature, this work provides experi-
mental validations of the channel hardening effect in the
RIS-assisted communication system.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the system model and problem formulation of a
RIS-aided communication system. The proposed model-free
CE algorithm for the RIS phase shifts optimization is presen ted
in Section III. Section IV introduces both the simulation an d
the experiment settings, followed by the corresponding res ults
in Section V. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. S YSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
A RIS-assisted communication system is considered as il-
lustrated in Fig. 1, where the RIS is equipped with Nreﬂective
elements located between the base station (BS) with a MIMO
M-antenna array and the single-antenna user equipment (UE).Fig. 1: An illustration of the RIS-assisted communication system w ithN=
152 elements. The RIS elements are dipoles which cause omnidire ctional
scattering, and the metallic cavity whose symmetry is broke n by the stirrer
supports rich multipath fading. With a strong line of sight ( LOS), the fading
channel gain is expected to be Ricean distribution.
Lethbu∈CM×1,hru∈CN×1andHbr∈CM×Ndenote
the channels between BS-UE, RIS-UE and BS-RIS, respec-
tively. RIS reﬂection coefﬁcients are denoted as the diagon al
matrixΦ∈CN×N, whose element Φnn=ejφn,∀n=
1,...,N . Letx={xn}N
n=1denote the phase shifts of N
RIS elements, where xndenotes the binary phase shift of the
n-th element, xn= 0andxn= 1represent a 0 and a πphase
shift, i.e., φn= 0 andφn=π, respectively. Therefore the
channelhfor the RIS-aided link between the BS and the UE
can be formulated as follows:
h(x) =hbu+HbrΦ(x)hru, (1)
where correlated Ricean channels are considered for hbuand
hruas follows:
hi=/radicalbig
βi/parenleftbigg/radicalbiggκi
1+κiai+/radicalbigg
1
1+κiR1
2
iui/parenrightbigg
,i∈ {bu,ru},
(2)
whereβiis the path gain, κiis the Ricean K-factor,aiis the
topology speciﬁc steering vectors, ui∼ CN(0,I), andRi,
i∈ {bu,ru}, is the correlation matrix given in [16]:
(Rbu)vw=ρdvw/db
bu,
(Rru)vw= sinc(2dvw)withsinc(2dr) =ρru,(3)
wheredvwdenotes the distance between the v-th and the w-
th antenna/element at the BS/RIS. dbanddrdenote the BS
antenna and RIS element spacing, respectively. ρbuandρru
denote the nearest neighbour BS antenna and RIS element
correlations, respectively, and 0≤ρbu≤1,0≤ |ρru| ≤1.
A rank-1 LOS condition is considered between BS and RIS
channelHbras follows:
Hbr=/radicalbig
βbrabaH
r, (4)
whereβbris the path gain between the BS and the RIS, aband
arare the steering vectors at the BS and the RIS, respectively.
The received signal yat the UE is given as follows:
y(x) =h(x)s+n, (5)
wheresis the transmitted signal with power Qand the noise
vectorn∼ CN/parenleftbig
0,σ2I/parenrightbig
.
Leth(x) = [h1(x),...,h M(x)]T, wherehm(x)denotesthe channel between the m-th antenna at the BS and the UE
with the RIS conﬁguration x, andm= 1,...,M . The signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR) of the UE denoted by ξis written as
ξ(x) =|/summationtextM
m=1hm(x)|2Q
σ2. (6)
The objective of the RIS optimization problem is to max-
imize the SNR of the UE by optimizing the phase shifts of
the RIS elements. This problem involving Nintegers is non-
convex, hence challenging to obtain the solution, especial ly
when N is large. It can be formulated as
max
xξ(x),subject to xn∈ {0,1}, n= 1,...,N , (7)
Given that the received SNR is nearly proportional to N2
whenNis large, and that the ratio between the variance and
the mean squared SNR approximately follows the 1/Nscaling
[12], SNR optimization may also enhance channel hardening.
III. C ROSS -ENTROPY ALGORITHM FOR PHASE SHIFTS
OPTIMIZATION IN RIS- AIDED COMMUNICATION
This work aims at optimizing a large number of discrete
phase shifts in a moderate time complexity and evaluating it s
performance experimentally. The CE-based methods have bee n
successfully applied to solve such discrete optimization p rob-
lems in wireless communications, e.g., joint antenna selec tion
[17]. Hence, the CE algorithm is considered to solve this
RIS optimization challenge for the SNR improvement, which
mainly depends on the Kullback-Leibler cross-entropy and t he
importance sampling in an iterative manner, each iteration
includes four key phases: 1) generate a large number of
random samples representing RIS conﬁguration according to a
speciﬁed probability distribution; 2) conﬁgure each sampl e to
RIS and collect the corresponding performance, e.g., recei ved
SNR, in the absence of CSI; 3) sort the samples in descending
order with respect to the performance indicator; and 4) upda te
the distribution based on the top samples to generate better
samples in the next iteration. The detailed CE algorithm for
the binary RIS optimization is given in Algorithm 1. To save
time, if the CE algorithm has not yet converged to a binary
vector at the end of the speciﬁed iterations, it will be enfor ced
to be binary based on the probabilities as described in Step 5 .
Algorithm 1 presents a case of binary phase shifts due to the
property of the RIS devices used for experiments. However,
it can be simply extended to multi-phase scenarios. Let C
denote the number of phase shifts. For C >2, the probability
distribution Ptwill be a C×Nmatrix with Pt
cndenoting the
probability that the n-th RIS element to be the c-th phase at
thet-th iteration. Since each element must be associated with
only one of the phase shifts, the random samples may not meet
this constraint where a projection strategy [17] is require d to
guarantee the feasibility of the random samples. Other step s
for the multi-phase scenario will be the same as Algorithm 1.
Compared to the optimal solutions, the proposed CE algo-
rithm reduces the computational complexity while achievin g
sub-optimal performance. With larger TandK, the perfor-
mance can be further enhanced but it will consume more
time. Overall, it is a trade-off between performance and tim eAlgorithm 1: CE Algorithm for RIS Optimization.
Step 1: Initialize the Bernoulli probability vector P0={P0
n}N
n=1with
P0
n= 0.5, whereP0
ndenotes the initial probability of the n-th RIS
element to be one. Set the total number of iterations as Tand the
iteration index t= 1.
Step 2: Randomly generate Ksamples{xj}K
j=1according to Bernoulli
distribution with probability P(t−1), wherexj={xj
n}N
n=1, andxj
n
denotes the binary phase shift of the n-th element of the j-th sample.
Step 3: Commit each RIS conﬁguration and collect the corresponding
performance indicator, e.g., received SNR.
forj= 1 :Kdo
- Commit xjas RIS conﬁguration.
- Record the received SNR as ξj.
end for
Step 4: Sort{xj}K
j=1in a descending order as {xσj}K
σj=1w.r.t.ξj.
Step 5: Select the best J=⌈ϕK⌉samples from {xσj}K
σj=1, where
ϕdenotes the quantile, e.g., ϕ= 0.1, and then update the probability
vector PtwithPt
n=/summationtextJ
σj=1xσj
n
J, n= 1,...,N .
if Ptconverges to a binary vector then
Break
else ift=Tthen
Post-process Ptto be a binary vector with Pt
n= 1
ifPt
n>0.5, otherwise Pt
n= 0,n= 1,...,N .
else
Sett=t+1 and go to Step 2.
end if
Step 6: Return Ptas the optimized RIS conﬁguration x∗.
complexity. However, this work mainly focuses on the exper-
imental evaluation of the proposed algorithm. Therefore, a n
SNR improvement is favorable instead of the global optimum.
IV. S IMULATION AND EXPERIMENT SETTINGS
A. Simulation Settings
Note that the proposed CE algorithm for RIS optimization is
model-free, which is not limited to any speciﬁc channel mode l.
The channel model introduced in Section II and its parameter s
[16] given in Table I are adopted only for simulation purpose .
TABLE I: Main system parameters for simulations.
Parameters Values Parameters Values
βbu -81.7077 dB κbu/κru 1
βru -67.0360 dB ρbu/ρru 1
βbr -34.1514 dB σ2-65 dBm
The vertical uniform rectangular array in the y-z plane is
considered for the steering vectors aias follows [18]:
ai=ai,y⊗ai,z,i∈ {bu,ru,b,r}, (8)
where⊗is the Kronecker product operation. Speciﬁcally,
ai,y=/bracketleftBig
1,ej2πλisinθisinωi,...,ej2πλi(Ki,y−1)sinθisinωi/bracketrightBig
,
ai,z=/bracketleftBig
1,ej2πλicosθi,...,ej2πλi(Ki,y−1)cosθi/bracketrightBig
,
(9)
andKi,yandKi,zdenotes the number of antenna in the y
and z axis, respectively, where Ki,yKi,z=KiandKi=M
fori∈ {bu,b}andKi=Nfori={ru, r}.θiandωi
are elevation/azimuth angles of arrival or angles of depart ure.
λiis the wavelength, where λbu=λb= 0.5andλru=λr
satisfying sinc (2λr) =dr, with the nearest neighbour RIS
element correlation 0≤ |dr| ≤1. The following parameters areused throughout the simulations: θb= 109.9◦,ωb=−29.9◦,
θr= 77.1◦,ωr= 19.95◦,θbu= 80.94◦,ωbu=−64.35◦,
θru= 71.95◦,ωru= 25.1◦[16].
B. Experiment Setup
All experiments are conducted in the static RC which
provides a multipath fading environment as shown in Fig.
1. The beneﬁt of testing the RISs in RC, not in free-space,
is that the backscattering from the cavities changes the EM
reﬂective response of the RISs themselves, hence the model-
free optimization works as if the RISs operate in arbitrary
indoor environments. The BS and the UE are modeled and im-
plemented by the Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP )
X310 devices. Main parameters used for USRP are listed
in Table II. RIS devices from Greenerwave are used in the
experiments, and each RIS device has N0= 76 conﬁgurable
elements. Detailed introduction about RIS is given in [14]. The
proposed algorithm is executed on a laptop at the receiver si de
which connects to RIS devices via USB cables to control them.
TABLE II: Main parameters of the transceiver (USRP).
Parameters Values
Center Frequency 5 GHz
Master Clock Rate 200 MHz
Interpolation / Decimation Factor 100
Tx Gain 10 dB
Rx Gain 10 dB
V. N UMERICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section provides both numerical and experimental eval -
uations for the proposed CE algorithm in RIS-aided wireless
networks. Unless otherwise stated, for both simulations an d
experiments, M= 2,N= 152 ,T= 15 ,K= 100 ,ϕ= 0.1
and the transmit gain of 10 dB are adopted for performance
evaluations, and the average SNR is given by 1000 collected
SNR values in the following results. The proposed CE algo-
rithm is compared with the following benchmarks:
•SA[7]: This method mainly relies on the MC sampling,
where the initial temperature and the ﬁnal temperature
are set to be 100 and 10−8, respectively, and the cooling
rate is set to be 0.995.
•MH [8]: In addition to the MC random sampling, this
method adopts an acceptance ratio between the SNRs
achieved by the new sample and the current sample to
decide whether to accept or reject the new candidate.
•Conditional Sample Mean (CSM) [19]: This method
depends on the average performance of a large number
of random samples conditioned on each phase shift of
each RIS element.
•Without RIS : This scenario acts as a lower bound.
For fair comparisons, the CE algorithm that has Titerations
withKrandom samples per iteration is equivalent to the
benchmarks with TK samples, and they are uniformly called
Titerations in the following sections.
Note that the simulations are performed based on the Ricean
channel model introduced in Section IV-A. For experiments,
the channel in the RC is a general Ricean channel emulating
the scenario in simulations.A. Case Study on Iterations
The performance of the proposed CE algorithm and the
benchmarks is studied on different numbers of iterations as
illustrated in Fig. 2.
1 3 5 10 15 20 25
Iterations-505101520 SNR (dB)RIS by CE
RIS by MH
RIS by SA
RIS by CSM
Without RIS
(a) Simulations.
1 3 5 10 15 20 25
Iterations4681012 SNR (dB)RIS by CE
RIS by MH
RIS by SA
RIS by CSM
Without RIS
(b) Experiments.
Fig. 2: Performance on different numbers of iterations.
For the simulations shown in Fig. 2a, the average SNR
is only -1.9 dB without RIS. The proposed CE algorithm
increases the SNR to around 16 dB, which outperforms the
MH, the SA and the CSM benchmarks when the CE converges
(from 10 iterations). From experiment results shown in Fig.
2b, the average SNR is only 4.8 dB without RIS, while the
CE algorithm enhances the SNR to nearly 12 dB, which
indicates superior SNR improvement than the benchmarks.
The difference in channel models between the simulations
and the experiments in the RC will result in performance
differences in the early iterations, which can be observed i n
Fig. 2. Both simulation and experiment outcomes demonstrat e
that the proposed CE algorithm brings a better quality of
service for the end-user.
B. Channel Hardening
Channel hardening involves changing the number of RIS
elements. However, practical RIS devices do not allow to
conﬁgure only parts of elements due to hardware limitations .
In the experiment, N∗=⌈N/N0⌉RIS devices are used, and
ifN < N 0N∗, thenN0N∗−NRIS elements will be set to
be zeros in order to imitate that Nelements are optimized.
The channel hardening performance of the proposed CE
algorithm is compared against the benchmarks as shown in
Fig. 3, where the results are given by the average SNR (solid
lines), 10% and 90% quantiles of 1000 collected SNRs (dashed
lines) for measuring the channel hardening effects.
Fig. 3 validates that the average SNRs of all algorithms
improve with an increasing number of RIS elements. The
proposed CE method outperforms the benchmarks in terms of
both SNR improvement and channel hardening, and it shows10 19 38 76 114 152
Number of RIS Elements-10-50510152025SNR (dB)RIS by CE
RIS by MH
RIS by SA
RIS by CSM
Without RIS
N2
(a) Simulations.
10 19 38 76 114 152
Number of RIS Elements4681012 SNR (dB)RIS by CE
RIS by MH
RIS by SA
RIS by CSM
Without RIS
(b) Experiments.
Fig. 3: Performance on channel hardening.
greater advantages than the benchmarks with growing num-
bers of RIS elements. Additionally, the practical experime nts
achieve stronger channel hardening than the simulations.
In Fig. 3a, a curve of N2is also given, which demonstrates
that the CE algorithm achieves a similar trend as indicated b y
the square law expectation [12] between the SNR and the N2.
Despite the fact that the SNR improvements in the experiment s
in Fig. 3b slightly deviate from the square law due to the
potential inﬂuence of imperfect RIS element deactivation,
the CE approach leads to signiﬁcant SNR enhancement and
channel hardening.
In order to further evaluate the channel hardening perfor-
mance, Fig. 4 demonstrates the ratio between the variance
and the mean square of the collected SNRs with increasing
numbers of RIS elements. Both simulation and experiment
results in Fig. 4 indicate that the ratio generated by the CE
algorithm and benchmarks generally keeps decreasing with
largerN, and the proposed CE algorithm remains the lowest,
e.g., for N= 152 , the ratio is approximately 0.15 and
1×10−4for simulation and for experiment, respectively, which
illustrates that the channel hardening performance of the C E
algorithm is superior to the benchmarks. Additionally, the
performance of the CE algorithm generally follows the trend
of the curve of the theoretical scaled 1/N.
C. Time Complexity
The execution time of the proposed CE and the benchmarks
is compared for N= 152 ,T= 15 andK= 100 as
shown in Table III, where all algorithms show a similar level
of time performance for the simulation and the experiment,
respectively. The reason is that they share the same complex ity
of approximately O(TKN). For the simulation, the execution
time of the proposed CE algorithm is 49 ms, which is close to10 19 38 76 114 152
Number of RIS Elements00.10.20.30.40.50.6 Variance/Mean2RIS by CE
RIS by MH
RIS by SA
RIS by CSM
Without RIS
1/N
(a) Simulations.
10 19 38 76 114 152
Number of RIS Elements00.20.40.60.811.2 Variance / Mean210-3
RIS by CE
RIS by MH
RIS by SA
RIS by CSM
Without RIS
1/N
(b) Experiments.
Fig. 4: Performance on channel hardening (variance /mean2).
the MH and the SA, and achieves nearly 20 ms faster than
the CSM. For the experiment, the execution time is given
by the overall time induced by the optimization algorithms,
which are ranging from 46 s to 48 s approximately, wherein
conﬁguring random samples to RIS devices consumes in total
21 s, which is also decided by hardware. Although the CSM
achieves comparable SNR boost and channel hardening as
the CE algorithm, the proposed CE algorithm requires less
execution time.
TABLE III: Overall execution time for N= 152 ,T= 15 and
K= 100 in seconds.
Algorithms CE SA MH CSM
Simulation 0.0490 0.0453 0.0449 0.0683
Experiment 46.0229 45.6679 45.6322 48.3675
VI. C ONCLUSION
This work proposes a CE optimization algorithm for the
RIS-aided communication system. It only adopts received
SNR as performance feedback and does not require CSI. Be-
sides, it is model-free and applicable to scenarios of arbit rary
channel models. Proved by simulations and experiments, the
proposed CE-based RIS optimization algorithm outperforms
the benchmarks with better end-user SNRs, while maintain-
ing similar time complexity. Additionally, the proposed CE
algorithm achieves stronger channel hardening effects tha n
the benchmarks, which is promising for channel stability.
Moreover, the proposed CE algorithm can be easily extended
to multi-phase RIS optimizations for broad applications. I t can
be implemented in the multiuser scenario and will be studied
in the future work.
VII. A CKNOWLEDGEMENT
We are grateful to Anas Al Rawi (OFCOM) for the insights
on the problem of RIS-assisted Channel Hardening.REFERENCES
[1] S. Basharat, S. A. Hassan, H. Pervaiz, A. Mahmood, Z. Ding , and
M. Gidlund, “Reconﬁgurable intelligent surfaces: Potenti als, applica-
tions, and challenges for 6G wireless networks,” IEEE Wireless Com-
munications , vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 184–191, Sep. 2021.
[2] Q. Li, M. El-Hajjar, I. Hemadeh, A. Shojaeifard, A. A. Mou rad,
B. Clerckx, and L. Hanzo, “Reconﬁgurable intelligent surfa ces relying
on non-diagonal phase shift matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology , vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 6367–6383, Mar. 2022.
[3] H. Li, S. Shen, and B. Clerckx, “Beyond diagonal reconﬁgu rable
intelligent surfaces: From transmitting and reﬂecting mod es to single-
, group-, and fully-connected architectures,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications , Oct. 2022.
[4] K. Zhi, C. Pan, H. Ren, and K. Wang, “Power scaling law anal ysis
and phase shift optimization of RIS-aided massive MIMO syst ems with
statistical CSI,” IEEE Transactions on Communications , vol. 70, no. 5,
pp. 3558–3574, Mar. 2022.
[5] S. Ahmed, S. Lambotharan, A. Jakobsson, and J. A. Chamber s, “Param-
eter estimation and equalization techniques for communica tion channels
with multipath and multiple frequency offsets,” IEEE transactions on
communications , vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 219–223, Feb. 2005.
[6] Z. Lu, Y . Zhao, and X. Li, “Monte-carlo based random passi ve energy
beamforming for reconﬁgurable intelligent surface assist ed wireless
power transfer,” Digital Communications and Networks , Nov. 2022.
[7] N. M. Mohammed, S. C. Creagh, S. Terranova, H. Taghvaee, M . Lodro,
G. Tanner, and G. Gradoni, “Reconﬁgurable intelligent surf ace design in
phase-space,” in 2022 3rd URSI Atlantic and Asia Paciﬁc Radio Science
Meeting (AT-AP-RASC) . Gran Canaria, Spain: IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–4.
[8] Q. Deng, S. Xie, C. Lu, X. Liang, Q. Wang, C. Li, and X. Chen,
“A metropolis-hasting-sampling approach for precoding in downlink
massive MIMO systems,” in 2021 IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference Workshops (WCNCW) . Nanjing, China: IEEE,
2021, pp. 1–5.
[9] M. Lodro, J.-B. Gros, S. Greedy, G. Lerosey, A. A. Rawi, an d
G. Gradoni, “Experimental evaluation of multi-operator RI S-assisted
links in indoor environment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07788 , 2022.
[10] J.-B. Gros, V . Popov, M. A. Odit, V . Lenets, and G. Lerose y, “A recon-
ﬁgurable intelligent surface at mmwave based on a binary pha se tunable
metasurface,” IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society , vol. 2,
pp. 1055–1064, May. 2021.
[11] E. Bj¨ ornson, J. Hoydis, L. Sanguinetti et al. , “Massive MIMO networks:
Spectral, energy, and hardware efﬁciency,” Foundations and Trends® in
Signal Processing , vol. 11, no. 3-4, pp. 154–655, Nov. 2017.
[12] E. Bj¨ ornson and L. Sanguinetti, “Rayleigh fading mode ling and channel
hardening for reconﬁgurable intelligent surfaces,” IEEE Wireless Com-
munications Letters , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 830–834, Dec. 2020.
[13] M. Jung, W. Saad, Y . Jang, G. Kong, and S. Choi, “Performa nce analysis
of large intelligent surfaces (LISs): Asymptotic data rate and channel
hardening effects,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications ,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2052–2065, Jan. 2020.
[14] J. B. Gros, G. Lerosey, F. Lemoult, M. Lodro, S. Greedy, a nd G. Gradoni,
“Multi-path fading and interference mitigation with recon ﬁgurable in-
telligent surfaces,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08290 , 2022.
[15] V . M. Primiani, M. Barazzetta, L. Bastianelli, D. Miche li, E. Moglie,
R. Diamanti, and G. Gradoni, “Reverberation chambers for te sting
wireless devices and systems,” IEEE Electromagnetic Compatibility
Magazine , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 45–55, Jul. 2020.
[16] I. Singh, P. J. Smith, and P. A. Dmochowski, “Optimal SNR analysis for
single-user RIS systems in Ricean and Rayleigh environment s,”IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications , Jun. 2022.
[17] Y . Zhang, G. Zheng, C. Ji, K.-K. Wong, D. J. Edwards, and T . Cui,
“Near-optimal joint antenna selection for amplify-and-fo rward relay
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 9,
no. 8, pp. 2401–2407, Aug. 2010.
[18] C. L. Miller, P. J. Smith, P. A. Dmochowski, H. Tataria, a nd
M. Matthaiou, “Analytical framework for full-dimensional massive
MIMO with ray-based channels,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Signal Processing , vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1181–1195, Aug. 2019.
[19] S. Ren, K. Shen, Y . Zhang, X. Li, X. Chen, and Z.-Q. Luo, “C onﬁg-
uring intelligent reﬂecting surface with performance guar antees: Blind
beamforming,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , Nov.
2022.