Electromagnetic turbulence simulation of tokamak
edge plasma dynamics and divertor heat load during
thermal quench
Ben Zhu1, Xue-qiao Xu1and Xian-Zhu Tang2
1Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California 94550, USA
2Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico
87545 USA
E-mail: zhu12@llnl.gov
June 2023
Abstract. The edge plasma turbulence and transport dynamics, as well as the
divertor power loads during the thermal quench phase of tokamak disruptions
are numerically investigated with BOUT++’s flux-driven, six-field electromagnetic
turbulence model. Here transient yet intense particle and energy sources are applied
at the pedestal top to mimic the plasma power drive at the edge induced by a core
thermal collapse, which flattens core temperature profile. Interesting features such as
surging of divertor heat load (up to 50 times), and broadening of heat flux width (up to
4 times) on the outer divertor target plate, are observed in the simulation, in qualitative
agreement with experimental observations. The dramatic changes of divertor heat load
and width are due to the enhanced plasma turbulence activities inside the separatrix.
Two cross-field transport mechanisms, namely the E×Bturbulent convection and the
stochastic parallel advection/conduction, are identified to play important roles in this
process. Firstly, elevated edge pressure gradient drives instabilities and subsequent
turbulence in the entire pedestal region. The enhanced turbulence not only transports
particles and energy radially across the separatrix via E×Bconvection which causes
the initial divertor heat load burst, but also induces an amplified magnetic fluctuation
˜B. Once the magnetic fluctuation is large enough to break the magnetic flux surface,
magnetic flutter effect provides an additional radial transport channel. In the late stage
of our simulation, |˜Br/B0|reaches to 10−4level that completely breaks magnetic flux
surfaces such that stochastic field-lines are directly connecting pedestal top plasma to
the divertor target plates or first wall, further contributing to the divertor heat flux
width broadening.arXiv:2302.06859v2  [physics.plasm-ph]  16 Jun 2023BOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 2
1. Introduction
Tokamak disruptions are a major concern for future reactors such as ITER [1, 2] as
the rapid release of plasma thermal and magnetic energy threatens machine integrity.
A tokamak disruption is known to occur in two phases, a thermal quench phase
characterized by the rapid loss of stored thermal energy in the core and a subsequent
slower current quench phase characterized by the loss of stored magnetic energy
(i.e., decay of plasma current). It is commonly expected that a naturally occurring
major disruption on ITER would produce a core thermal collapse in the order of a
millisecond [3, 4, 5]. Since an ITER plasma has roughly 200-300 mega-joule (MJ) of
thermal energy, this would correspond to 200-300 gigawatts (GW) of plasma power
exhaust if all of this energy is immediately deposited onto the divertor and first wall.
This can be compared with a steady-state ITER burning plasma that would have around
150 megawatts (MW) of plasma power load on the plasma-facing components (PFC).
In a mitigated thermal quench, on the condition that a sufficiently long lead time
on disruption precursors allows the prompt injection of high-Z pellets into the core
plasma, most of this plasma power is to be radiatively exhausted to the PFC with good
uniformity. In case that option is not available due to the short lead time or that the
impurity radiative exhaust does not perform as desired, a significant fraction of the
plasma power would arrive at the PFC in the form of plasma kinetic energy. This is the
scenario we will investigate in this paper.
Experiments on current tokamaks reveal that the plasma energy released from the
core temperature collapse, which defines the duration of the thermal quench, does not
arrive at the divertor and first wall immediately. Instead, there can be a sizable delay
between the core temperature collapse and the heat pulse measured on the divertor plate.
What likely happened is that the original edge/boundary plasma, which is relatively cold
compared with core plasma before a disruption, serves as a buffer that temporally stores
the thermal energy released from the core. The effectiveness of the buffer can be aided
by the massive gas release from the divertor/wall that have previously stored significant
amount of irradiating plasma ions in a short pulse machine, or from the opening of
the safety gas valves when they are tripped by the first indication of excessive divertor
heating. The resulting higher edge/boundary plasma density increases its heat capacity
to hold the plasma energy released from the core thermal collapse. This physical scenario
is consistent with the experimental observation that the divertor heat load rise time τr
often matches the thermal quench duration τ; while the energy deposition time (i.e.,
the decay time of divertor heat load after it reaches the maximum) is longer than τ.[4]
Another interesting and important experimental observation on existing tokamaks,
is that the divertor heat load could increase tenfold or more [4, 5], but the divertor
heat flux width λqcould broaden a few times [2]. The most intuitively obvious causes
are (i) field line stochasticization that smears and broadens the plasma wetting area on
the divertors and (ii) the enhanced turbulent transport that can increase the scrape-
off layer width and thus divertor plasma wetting area. For the former, it is knownBOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 3
that 3D magnetic perturbation can produce complicated strike point pattern on the
divertor plates, both poloidally and toroidally. [6, 7, 8] For the latter, it was previously
understood that for large devices like ITER, the scrape-off layer width would be set by
turbulent as opposed to neoclassical transport in steady-state operation. [9, 10, 11, 12]
In the context of tokamak disruptions, naturally occurring disruptions are almost always
associated with significant 3D MHD activities that break the magnetic flux surfaces, so
the mechanism of (i) is to be expected for divertor heat flux broadening. A distinction
can be made here depending on whether the disruption is initially driven by internal
or external MHD modes. If the disruption is dominated by external modes, the same
thermal-quench-inducing MHD activities would also set the divertor heat flux width
broadening. For a core thermal collapse induced by internal MHD modes, there is the
possibility that the first phase of the core thermal collapse is a flattening of the core
temperature profile, which results in significant steepening of the edge pressure profile.
This paper focuses on this second scenario and investigates how the pedestal and scrape-
off layer respond to an overloading of plasma heating power from upstream core plasmas.
The physics aims are to understand how the excessive power loading at the edge can
drive divertor heat flux broadening in both space and time.
Our work can be contrasted with previous thermal quench simulations using
extended MHD codes such as NIMROD [13], M3D-C1 [14] and JOREK [15], which
captures the global MHD activities but not the edge turbulence commonly observed
in pedestal and scrape-off layer transport studies. The approach chosen here is also
different from the gyrokinetic and fully kinetic simulations of tokamak thermal quench.
For examples, the collisionless plasma transport process in a prescribed stochastic 3D
circular field was studied by the electrostatic gyrokinetic code GTS [16], and a fully
kinetic 1D3V calculation was performed to explore the dynamics of electron and ion
thermal collapse in an open field-line by VPIC [17]. In this study, thermal quench in
a diverted edge plasma is investigated with the BOUT++ global six-field turbulence
model [18] in a realistic tokamak geometry. This kind of simulation resolves the
electromagnetic edge turbulence, and allows the quantification of the distinct roles
and comparative importance of turbulence-induced E×Btransport and the parallel
transport along stochastic field lines in setting the spatial and temporal profile of divertor
heat flux during a thermal quench.
The paper is organized as follows. The physics model and simulation set up are
first introduced in Section 2. Section 3 presents the BOUT++ simulated divertor heat
load evolution. The observed surging of heat load and broadening of heat flux width
are qualitatively consistent with experimental observations. Section 4 studies the role
of edge turbulence inside the separatrix in setting the downstream divertor heat load.
Section 5 focuses on the impact of turbulence induced magnetic fluctuation and how
the amplified ˜Brchanges the edge magnetic topology. Section 6 further analyzes the
contributions of E×Bturbulent convection and stochastic parallel advection and/or
conduction to radial particle and heat flux in this case. Finally, Section 7 summarizes
and discusses our key findings.BOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 4
2. Physics model and numerical setup
2.1. Physics model
The numerical tool used in this paper is the six-field electromagnetic turbulence
model within BOUT++ framework [18] based on the drift-reduced two-fluid Braginskii
equations [19]. This model has been extensively used to study ion-scale ( kρi≪1), low
frequency ( ω≪ωci) turbulence in tokamak edge plasmas; and a similar set of equations
is implemented in other 3D fluid-based electromagnetic edge turbulence codes, such as
GBS [20], GDB [21], and GRILLIX [22]. In this model, six independent but nonlinearly
coupled variables – ion density ni, electrostatic potential ϕ, ion parallel velocity V∥,i,
perturbed parallel magnetic flux A∥, electron and ion temperature Te,i, are evolved as
∂
∂tni=−1
Bˆb×∇⊥ϕ+V∥iˆb
·∇ni−2ni
Bˆb×κ·∇⊥ϕ+2
ZeBˆb×κ·∇⊥Pe
−niB∇∥V∥i
B
+B
Ze∇∥J∥
B
+Sn, (1)
∂
∂tϖ=−1
Bˆb×∇⊥ϕ+V∥iˆb
·∇ϖ+B2∇∥J∥
B
+ 2ˆb×κ·∇P
−1
2Ωih
niZeVDi·∇ 
∇2
⊥ϕ
−miΩiˆb×∇ni·∇V2
Ei
+1
2Ωi
VE·∇ 
∇2
⊥Pi
− ∇2
⊥(VE·∇Pi)
, (2)
∂
∂tV∥i=−1
Bˆb×∇⊥ϕ+V∥iˆb
·∇V∥i−1
mini∇∥P−VDi·∇V∥i−V∥iSn
ni, (3)
∂
∂tA∥=−∇∥ϕ+η∥
µ0∇2
⊥A∥+1
ene∇∥Pe+0.71kB
e∇∥Te, (4)
∂
∂tTi=−1
Bˆb×∇⊥ϕ+V∥iˆb
·∇Ti+2
3nikB∇∥q∥i+2me
miZ
τe(Te−Ti)
−2
3Ti2
Bˆb×κ
·
∇ϕ+1
Zen i∇Pi+5
2kB
Ze∇Ti
+B∇∥V∥i
B
−4
3ΩiTiV∥iˆb×κ·∇V∥i+2SE
i
3ni−TiSn
ni, (5)
∂
∂tTe=−1
Bˆb×∇⊥ϕ+V∥eˆb
·∇Te+2
3nekB∇∥q∥e−2me
mi1
τe(Te−Ti)
−2
3Te2
Bˆb×κ
·
∇ϕ−1
ene∇Pe−5
2kB
e∇Te
+B∇∥V∥e
B
+ 0.712Te
3eneB∇∥J∥
B
+2
3nekBη∥J2
∥+2SE
e
3ne−TeSn
ne. (6)
Here the magnetic curvature κis defined as κ=ˆb·∇ˆb≃ˆb0·∇ˆb0with unit
vector ˆb0=B0/|B0|denoting the direction of equilibrium magnetic field B0. This
approximation implies that the perturbed magnetic field ˜B≃ ∇A∥×ˆb0shall remainBOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 5
small comparing to the equilibrium magnetic field B0, i.e., ˜B≪ |B0|. The vorticity ϖ
takes the form
ϖ=nimi
B
∇2
⊥ϕ+1
ni∇⊥ϕ·∇⊥ni+1
Zen i∇2
⊥Pi
, (7)
and the total parallel current density J∥=J∥0+j∥consists of both equilibrium
current density J∥0provided by kinetic equilibrium reconstruction and perturbed current
density j∥=−∇2
⊥A∥/µ0. All the transport coefficients in our model follow the original
Braginskii transport model [23] except for the parallel thermal conductivities κ∥e,iwhich
are “flux-limited” by
κeff
∥e,i=αe,ine,ivthe,iL∥κB
∥e,i
αe,ine,ivthe,iL∥+κB
∥e,i(8)
to ensure the parallel heat flux q∥e,iis bounded by the local free-streaming condition.
In Equation 8, vthe,iare the local electrons and ions thermal speeds; and the parallel
characteristic length is given by L∥= 2πqR with qthe safety factor. In our simulation,
flux limiting coefficients are set to be α= 0.5 for both electrons and ions. The external
plasma sources terms Sn, SE
i, SE
eprovide volumetric particle and heat flux source to
replenish the plasma loss at the divertor targets in transport time-scale simulations; or
in this study, they are used to over-drive a quiescent edge plasma system as discussed
below.
2.2. Simulation setup
Figure 1: (a) DIII-D like lower single null discharge geometry and BOUT++ simulation
domain (in blue lines), and (b) radial density and temperature profiles n, T e,iand safety
factor qof initial equilibrium with source region shaded.
In this study BOUT++ simulation is started with a lower single-null H-mode
plasma equilibrium with genetic DIII-D tokamak H-mode parameters which has beenBOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 6
used for the validation of BOUT++ edge turbulence model on heat flux width
scaling [24]. As illustrated in Figure 1, the radial simulation domain spans from
ψn= 0.85 to ψn= 1.1 and covers a large portion of pedestal top, pedestal or steep
gradient region, as well as the scrape-off-layer. This equilibrium has profound density
and electron temperature pedestals at ψN= 0.98,q95= 3.8, and electron and ion
temperature around 500 eV while the density about 0 .8×1020m−3atψn= 0.95. The
mesh resolution used in this study is ( nx, ny, nz) = (260 ,64,64) where ( x, y, z ) represents
the radial, field-line and toroidal directions respectively. For computational efficiency
only one-fifth of torus is simulated. We assume that plasma perturbation is zero at
the outer radial boundary, i.e., the outer wall is “far” away from the perturbed region
such that ˜ ni=˜Te,i=˜ϕ=˜V∥i=˜j∥=∇2
⊥A∥= 0 at ψn= 1.1; while for the inner
radial boundary at ψn= 0.85, homogeneous Neumann boundary condition is prescribed
for plasma density, temperature and electrostatic potential, and the perturbed parallel
current density, along with vanishing ion parallel velocity. In the field-line ( y) direction,
twist-shift periodicity is enforced inside the separatrix and Bohm sheath criterion is
applied in the open field-line region [25]. The torodial ( z) direction is naturally periodic.
The initial edge equilibrium showed in Figure 1 is marginally stable for peeling-
ballooning modes. Therefore, a source-free simulation is first performed for 0 .136 ms to
obtain a mild turbulent, non-disruptive edge plasma by allowing initial instabilities to
grow and plasma profile to relax. In order to mimic extreme heat flux outflows from the
core to the edge region when a core thermal quench occurs, volumetric flux source terms
Sn, SE
i, SE
eare turned on to simulate transient but intense flux arrived at the pedestal
top. For simplicity, sources are assumed to be Gaussian shape radially and uniform
along poloidal and toroidal directions,
Sn,E=S0
n,Eexp"
−(ψn−ψ0)2
2δ2
ψ#
. (9)
The source centers at ψ0= 0.934 with a width δψ= 0.025, so that nearly all the
particles and power are deposited at the pedestal top. In this simulation, the applied
injection power is 1 GW, equally partitioned between electrons and ions, and lasts for
85µs. Therefore, between 0 .136 ms to 0 .221 ms, a total of 85 kJ energy, roughly 15% of
the total plasma thermal energy of a typical DIII-D H-mode plasma is injected. After
t= 0.221 ms, source terms are turned off once again.
3. Divertor heat load evolution
As mentioned in Section 2, there are three phases in our thermal quench simulation
depending on whether the external plasma sourcing is applied or not. The initial
0.136 ms source-free simulation is the first phase to set up a quiescent edge plasma
system as the baseline; the second phase is from 0 .136−0.221 ms when the intensive
heating and fueling are turned on; the third source free phase is for t >0.221 ms.BOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 7
We first examine the heat load on the divertor target plate in our simulation.
Figure 2(a) shows the time history of electron temperature Te,OMP at the outboard
mid-plane near the pedestal top ( ψn= 0.95), and the corresponding peak amplitude of
toroidally averaged heat flux at outer divertor target plate. It can be seen that in phase 1
without external plasma sourcing, pedestal top electron temperature remains at 500 eV
level and the peak heat load slowly increases and statures at 40 MW/m2. A monotonic,
almost linear increase of pedestal top electron temperature is observed immediately after
power injection is started. At t= 0.221 ms, pedestal top electron temperature exceeds
1000 eV, twice the initial value. When the power injection is turned off, pedestal top
Te,OMPgradually decreases. The peak heat load at divertor target follows the evolution
of pedestal top Te,OMPbut with an apparent delay. Specifically, it starts to increase at
tr≃0.179 ms, (here we define the rising time begins at the 5% of the maximum power
load); and reaches its maximum value at tp≃0.294 ms. The rising time τr=tp−tris
roughly 115 µs, which is slightly longer than 85 µs — the thermal quench time τTQwe
set in the simulation.
Figure 2: Toroidally averaged (left)outboard midplane pedestal top temperature
evolution, and (right) outer divertor heat load profiles (mapped back to outboard
midplane) during the simulation.
Figure 2(b) depicts the outer divertor heat load profiles at different times. Note
here although the heat load is measured at divertor plate, it is projected back to the
outer mid-plane to eliminate the influence of target angle with respect to the magnetic
field. Without excessive sourcing, the heat flux width is about 2 mm and the peak
amplitude is around 40 MW/m2. These values are consistent with typical DIII-D H-
mode discharges. Once the thermal quench occurs, heat flux amplitude increases and
the width widens. As much as 50 times larger maximum heat load on the outer divertor
target plate — from 40 MW/m2to 2 GW/m2, and 3 to 4 times wider width — from
2 mm to 6 −8 mm are observed in our simulation. Interestingly, the peak heat load
drops after reaching its maximum value at t= 0.289 ms; the heat flux width appears to
remain at the similar level even at the later time (e.g., t= 0.345 ms).
We remark that divertor heat load features in our thermal quench simulation, suchBOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 8
asτr≥τTQ, peak heat load increasing by an order of magnitude and width broadening
by 3-4 times, are in quantitative agreement with experimental observations on ASDEX-
U [4] and TEXTOR [2].
Figure 3: Outer divertor heat load profiles at selected times. Here ζis the toroidal angle
andψnis the normalized radial location.
The non-smooth radial profiles of toroidally averaged Q∥att= 0.264 ms and
afterwards suggest that Q∥could be nonuniform toroidally. For instance, multiple
filaments may hit the divertor plate at different radial and toroidal locations, hence,
causing multiple peaks in the toroidally averaged profile. To better assess the toroidal
distribution of Q∥, full outer divertor target heat flux footprints at selected times are
illustrated in Figure 3 that highlight 2D structures of heat flux. Here heat flux are
once again projected back to the outer mid-plane for a fair comparison. At the early
stage of the simulation, heat load is concentrated in the near scrape-off-layer (e.g.,
1< ψ n<1.01) and only very weak striation patterns are observed. However, at
t= 0.245 ms and t= 0.3 ms, helical striation patterns become clearly visible and
the heat load extends towards the far scrape-off-layer region (e.g., ψn>1.01). These
striation patterns on the divertor target indicate that the magnetic field structure may
be altered in the simulation and hence impacts the divertor heat load [26]. Further
discussion and analysis will be presented in Sections 5 and 6.
4. Enhanced edge turbulence fluctuation
Previous BOUT++ transport and turbulence studies find that turbulence activities
inside the separatrix have strong influences on divertor heat exhaust [24]. In this study
as we deliberately over-drive the edge plasma to mimic thermal quench process, weBOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 9
anticipate that turbulence would again play an important role in setting divertor heat
load and width.
In the simulation, edge turbulence is found to enhance substantially with intensive
heating and fueling as expected. The poloidal snapshots of normalized pressure
perturbation show that the system is quiescent and the fluctuation is localized between
the peak gradient region ( ψn≈0.98) and the separatrix prior to thermal quench
(Figure 4(a)). Once the plasma outflow from the core arrives at the pedestal top,
it steepens the pressure profile which excites pressure-gradient-driven instabilities,
resulting in not only stronger but also wider turbulent region across the entire pedestal
region (Figure 4(b)). Even after the outflow is turned off, the turbulence persists in the
system and keeps spreading to the entire simulation domain. The overall fluctuation
level increases about 8 times comparing to the beginning (Figure 4(c)). Note that
the turbulence in general has the ballooning structure, i.e., stronger on the outboard
side, we therefore analyze the pressure fluctuation spectrum at the outboard mid-plane
for these three selected snapshots to understand whether the turbulence and transport
characteristics are also changed as shown in Figure 5. The system initially has a fairly
low turbulent fluctuation level with the dominant mode nz= 15 at ψn= 0.99. As
the pedestal is elevated, at t= 0.221 ms, there are two comparable amplitude modes,
nz= 10 at ψn= 0.98 and nz= 20 at ψn= 0.92, corresponding to the two steep gradient
regions caused by the Gaussian shaped source. At t= 0.289 ms, the dominant mode
has even lower nz= 5 at ψn= 0.99. The shifting to lower nzmodes implies that larger
eddies are forming as the simulation progresses. These large eddies are more resilient to
flow and magnetic shears; hence, they provide a more efficient radial transport channel
to rapidly transfer particles and heat across the separatrix. Also, from Figure 5, it is
clear that turbulence spreading in our simulations is occurring not only in configuration
space, but also in k−space.
Figure 4: Poloidal snapshots of normalized pressure perturbation at (a) t= 0.136 ms,
(b)t= 0.221 ms and (c) t= 0.289 ms.BOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 10
Figure 5: Toroidal mode number analysis of normalized pressure perturbation at the
outboard mid-plane at (a) t= 0.136 ms, (b) t= 0.221 ms and (c) t= 0.289 ms.
Figure 6: Normalized perturbed pressure at outboard mid-plane and the corresponding
outer divertor heat load.
As we have confirmed that strong turbulence is present in the thermal quench
simulation, we now look into the relation between the turbulence inside the separatrix
and the heat load down at the divertor target. Figure 6 displays the time evolution of
radial normalized pressure perturbation profile at outboard mid-plane and the radial
outer divertor heat flux profile, again mapped back to outboard mid-plane. Clearly
divertor heat load response is lagging behind the mid-plane fluctuations. However, in
general, there is a good correspondence between these two quantities – as the outboard
turbulence activity enhances, divertor heat load also increases. To better illustrate the
correlation between the outboard turbulence fluctuation and downstream divertor target
heat flux, we plot both quantities at slightly different radial location in Figure 7. The
pressure perturbation is just inside the separatrix at ψn= 0.995 while the divertor heat
load is just outside the separatrix at ψn= 1.005. The vertical axis has been re-scaled
to roughly match both quantities at the baseline level (i.e., t≃0.136 ms) and theirBOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 11
Figure 7: Evolution of outboard mid-plane total plasma pressure fluctuation inside the
separatrix and the outer divertor target plate heat load.
maximum (i.e., t≃0.294 ms). At the early stage of divertor heat load rising time (e.g.,
t= 0.185−0.245 ms), divertor heat load appears to well correlated with the mid-plane
turbulence level after accounting for a roughly 45 µs delay. This relatively short lag in
time implies that the surging divertor heat load is largely influenced by electron parallel
conduction. In our simulation, the (unperturbed) field-line length L0between outboard
mid-plane and the outer divertor target just outside the separatrix is about 16 m and
the local electron and ion temperature initially are about 150 and 400 eV respectively,
so the sound speed and electron thermal speed are around cs= 2×105m/s and
vth,e= 5×106m/s. Based on these numbers, the characteristic parallel advection time
istadvection = 2L0/cs≃160µs; while the electron free streaming (upper limit of electron
thermal conduction) tfs,e=L0/vth,e≃3µs. One could also estimate the characteristic
parallel conduction time for electrons based on the effective (i.e., flux-limited) thermal
conductivity in our simulation κeff
∥,e≃3×106m2/s, so tconduction ,e=L2
0/κ∥,e= 85 µs.
Therefore, parallel advection is too slow to explain the short lag between upstream
(e.g., outboard mid-plane) turbulence enhancement and the downstream (e.g., divertor
target) heat load rise in our simulation. Meanwhile, electron parallel thermal conduction
process is fast enough to transport upstream power down to the target plate, and
hence the primary contributor to the heat load surging. During this time period (i.e.,
t= 0.185−0.245 ms at divertor target), heat flux width λqincreases from 2 mm to
about 4 mm as illustrated in Figure 2(b). This over-driven thermal quench simulation is
an example of heat flux width λqscaling transitions from drift to turbulence dominant
regime as the cross-field transport increases [24]. In this turbulence dominant regime,
classical heuristic drift-based model for scrape-off-layer scaling [27] becomes invalid due
to the presence of large amplitude fluctuations along the field-line.
Another interesting observation from Figure 7 is that after t≃0.2 ms at upstream,
ort≃0.245 ms at downstream, the nice correspondence between outboard mid-plane
turbulence and divertor heat load is less obvious despite the trend still matches. This isBOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 12
likely due to the complete destruction of magnetic flux surfaces which will be discussed
in next Section.
5. Amplified magnetic fluctuations
In the electromagnetic drift-reduced Braginskii model, turbulence is almost always
accompanied by magnetic fluctuations. Even for the electrostatic-instability-dominated
turbulence, finite perturbed parallel vector potential A∥exists as long as there is a non-
zero perturbed parallel current j∥. Here we first revisit how the electromagnetic effect
is incorporated in the drift-reduced Braginskii model. Without loss of generality, one
can write the perturbed magnetic field ˜Bin term of perturbed vector potential A
˜B=∇ ×A. (10)
In Coulomb gauge ∇ ·A= 0, so that A∥/L∥∼ |A⊥|/L⊥, where L⊥, L∥are the
perpendicular and parallel characteristic lengths of the perturbation. If L∥≫L⊥for
strongly magnetized plasmas, then A∥/|A⊥| ∼L∥/L⊥≫1. Similarly, the ratio between
perpendicular and parallel component of the perturbed field is
|˜B⊥|
˜B∥=|(∇ ×A)⊥|
(∇ ×A)∥∼A∥
L⊥+|A⊥|
L∥
|A⊥|
L⊥∼1 +L2
⊥
L2
∥
L⊥
L∥≫1. (11)
Thus, drift-reduced Braginskii model neglects ˜B∥, and only keeps the A∥/L⊥
contribution to ˜B⊥such that the perturbed magnetic field is written as
˜B=˜B⊥=∇ ×
A∥ˆb0
. (12)
This expression may be further simplified as ˜B≃ ∇A∥×ˆb0if the characteristic length
of equilibrium field LB≫L⊥. Therefore, strictly speaking, drift-reduced Braginskii
model is “semi” not “full” electromagnetic, i.e., the background field is assumed to be
incompressible ( δB∥= 0). Nevertheless, the assumptions used in this derivation such
asL∥≫L⊥,LB≫L⊥are well satisfied for tokamak edge plasmas and also confirmed
by extended full-MHD simulations [28].
With the perturbed field expression, the parallel gradient operator in the model
now has two separate terms,
∇∥f=
ˆb0+˜b
· ∇f=ˆb0· ∇f−ˆb0
B× ∇A∥· ∇f. (13)
The first term on the right-hand-side denotes the parallel gradient of quantity falong
the unperturbed background field; while the second term represents the additional cross-
field transport due to the perturbed field, often referred as “magnetic flutter” effect. It
is well known that magnetic flutter term could enhance radial transport level via direct
contribution [25] or by indirect influencing of the turbulence saturation mechanism [29].BOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 13
Figure 8: Poloidal snapshots of normalized radial component of perturbed magnetic
field ˜Br/B0at (a) t= 0.136 ms, (b) t= 0.221 ms and (c) t= 0.289 ms.
Here we will first look at the impact of magnetic flutter effect on the magnetic field
structure and then quantify its influence on radial transport in next Section.
Figure 8 shows the poloidal snapshots of normalized radial component of perturbed
magnetic field ˜Br/B0att= 0.136, 0 .221 and 0 .289 ms, same as the normalized
perturbed pressure snapshots in Figure 4. Although its value is often small, |˜Br/B0|is
an important metric of measuring the disturbance of local magnetic flux surface. Not
surprisingly, |˜Br/B0|increases significantly in the thermal quench simulation. Initially
att= 0.136 ms without over-driving the system, |˜Br/B0| ≃2×10−5and the magnetic
perturbation is primarily localized near the separatrix and concentrated on the outboard
side, except for the inner divertor leg region. This result is consistent with the most
BOUT++ edge turbulence simulations. However, at the end of intensive heating
t= 0.221 ms, the pedestal top region has a large magnetic perturbation with relative
amplitude up to 2 ×10−4uniformly distributed poloidally. Even after the sources were
turned off, the perturbation level continues to grow and can reach to 10−3level at the
late stage of the simulation (e.g., t >0.3 ms).
TheO(10−4) level radial magnetic field perturbation has a drastic impact on the
edge magnetic field topology as illustrated by the evolution of Poincar´ e plots in Figure 9.
At the linear stage of the simulation (e.g., t= 0.01 ms), perturbation induced by
instabilities is negligible such that all the magnetic flux surfaces inside the separatrix
are intact. When simulation enters fully nonlinear stage (e.g., t= 0.116 ms), saturated
turbulence disturbs the magnetic field-lines mostly near the separatrix and forms a
layer of weakly stochastic field-lines; while the interior magnetic flux surfaces remain
unbroken. However, shortly after excessive fueling and heating (e.g., t= 0.17 ms),
enhanced magnetic perturbation in the pedestal region distorts the local magnetic
geometry. As a result, the stochastic layer originally localized near the separatrix startsBOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 14
Figure 9: Evolution of Poincar´ e plots in BOUT++ thermal quench simulations.
Snapshots are taken at (a) t= 0.010 ms, (b) t= 0.116 ms, (c) t= 0.170 ms and
(d)t= 0.196 ms.
to penetrate inward. At t= 0.196 ms, almost all of flux surfaces in our simulation
domain have been destroyed and the entire magnetic field within the “closed flux region”
becomes stochastic.
Figure 10: Evolution of (a) magnetic connection length Lc, and (b) final interception
region of magnetic field-lines launched at outboard mid-plane. Here, CFR – closed flux
region, OB/IB – outer/inner boundary, OD/ID – outer/inner divertor.BOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 15
The stochastization of magnetic field-lines in the tokamak edge region has a
profound influence on the magnetic connection length Lc. Figure 10 shows the evolution
ofLcand final field-line interception region for magnetic fields located at outboard
midplane in our simulation. In this analysis, we trace 48 radial uniformly distributed
field-lines passing ψn∈[0.859,1.086] on the outboard midplane at time tin both + y
and−ydirections for a maximum of 250 poloidal turns and record the field-line length
L(+)
candL(−)
cif it intercepts the divertor target or outer boundary. The connection
length is defined as Lc= min( L(+)
c, L(−)
c); i.e., Lcis the field-line length from the start
point (i.e., outboard midplane in this case) to the nearest endpoint on a plasma facing
component. If the field-line hits the inner boundary or remains in the closed flux region
after 250 poloidal turns, we consider L(+)
c, orL(−)
c=∞. In an ideal equilibrium without
any perturbation, 30 out of the 48, or, 62.50% of the field-lines are started at ψn<1 and
therefore should remain “closed” with Lc=∞; while the rest 37.50% of the field-lines are
considered as “open” field-lines landing on the outer divertor and have Lc≈20 m. This
scenario is approximately true till the onset of instability at around t= 0.05 ms. During
the nonlinear saturated stage (e.g., from t= 0.05 to 0 .136 ms), the weakly stochastic
layer near the separatrix reduces closed magnetic field-line percentage to 55.27%; while
the percentage of open field-lines ended at outer divertor target is 44.64%, and the rest,
which is a small portion (0.09%), ended on the outer boundary. The typical magnetic
connection length within this weakly stochastic layer is around 100 −1000 m. With the
enhanced magnetic fluctuation in external sourcing phase ( t= 0.136−0.221 ms), it is
clear to see the rapid expansion of stochastic layer in Figure 10. At around t= 0.2 ms,
the entire pedestal region is stochastic. Overall, in this time period, percentage of field-
lines remain closed is 43.12% (with 0.5% intercepting inner boundary); while 56.62%,
0.1%, and 0.17% of the field-lines are ended on outer divertor, inner divertor and outer
boundary respectively. This stochastic magnetic field persists even after the heating
and fueling are turned off. During t= 0.221−0.345 ms, only 12.3% of the field-lines are
closed (4.99% within the 0 .85< ψ n<1 region and 7.30% reach at inner boundary). The
rest 87.7% are open field-lines ending at outer divertor (64.86%), inner divertor (8.18%),
and outer boundary (14.67%). Interestingly, the majority of the field-lines that end at
the outer boundary are from the inner region (e.g., ψn<0.95). This is because all
the field-lines in this analysis are started from outboard mid-plane so that these near
the separatrix (e.g., ψn≃0.98) are likely entering the SOL immediately and hitting
the outer divertor directly following the stochastic field-lines as the poloidal distance is
limited and the magnetic perturbation level is relatively large (e.g., |˜Br/B0| ∼10−4).
On the other hands, field-lines originated from the inner region has a large enough radial
displacement to winding around, entering the SOL further away from divertor plates
and hence ending at the outer boundary. The averaged magnetic connection length Lc
of open field-lines in ψn<1.0 region is on the order of 400 m.
The change of magnetic topology in our thermal quench simulation can also be
verified by examining the statistics of field-lines on an initially closed magnetic flux
surface. To get a better statistics, a total of 3584 spatial points uniformly sampled alongBOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 16
Figure 11: Temporal evolution of (a) open vs closed field-lines on ψn= 0.95 surface,
and (b) the maximum, minimum and flux surface averaged connection length of open
field-lines.
the field-line and toroidal directions on ψn= 0.95 surface are selected as the starting
points. The percentages of closed versus open field-lines, as well as the maximum,
minimum, and averaged magnetic connection length Lcof open field-lines at different
times of the simulation are illustrated in Figure 11. Prior to t= 0.136 ms, the majority
(≥95%) of the field-lines on ψn= 0.95 surfaces are “closed”, indicating that the pedestal
top plasma is well-confined magnetically as there are only a few percents of the total
field-lines leaking into the SOL region due to turbulence induced magnetic perturbation.
Shortly after the thermal quench onset, the “closed” field-line population drops to about
10% and stays at the similar level for the rest of the simulation, suggesting that the
ψn= 0.95 surface is quickly distorted and the pedestal top plasma is likely directly
connect to the divertor target plates and/or wall (outer boundary) during the thermal
quench. The rapid drop of Lc,max, Lc,min and⟨Lc⟩after t= 0.136 ms implies the
magnetic fluctuation level increases substantially; and the trending continues even after
the outflow from the core stops at t= 0.221 ms.
6. Radial particle and heat flux analysis
In this section, we will quantitatively analyze radial transport contributions from E×B
turbulent convection process and parallel advection/conduction process (i.e., magnetic
flutter effect). The radial particle flux Γ n,rand heat flux Qpα,rin BOUT++ turbulence
simulations with the presence of perturbed magnetic fields is
Γn,r=n(⃗b0× ∇ϕ)r
B0+nV∥i
⃗b0× ∇A∥
r
B0. (14)
Here the first term on the right-hand-side is due to the radial component of E×B
convection (i.e., cross-field turbulent transport) while the second term is caused
by perturbed magnetic field along radial direction (i.e., parallel advection process).BOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 17
Analogously, for radial heat flux Qpα,r
Qpα,r=3
2pα(⃗b0× ∇ϕ)r
B0+5
2pαV∥α
⃗b0× ∇A∥
r
B0+κ∥α
⃗b0× ∇A∥
r
B0· ∇Tα, (15)
where the third term on the right-hand-side is the radial projection of parallel conductive
heat flux in the presence of perturbed magnetic field. Note that in our model, the
classical perpendicular heat flux due to collision is neglected as κ⊥≪κ∧≪κ∥for both
ions and electrons.
Figure 12: Temporal evolution of (a) particle, and (b) power across the separatrix.
We first evaluate the total radial flux across the separatrix since only the flux
across the separatrix ends at the divertors and wall. Figure 12 shows the total
particle and power across the separatrix with individual contributions from E×B
convection and magnetic flutter effect. Not surprisingly, the perturbed magnetic field
has minimum impact ( <0.1%) on the particle transport. This is because (1) the quasi-
neutral condition forces electrons to move along with ions in our model and (2) ion
parallel advection (i.e., nV∥i) is weak inside the separatrix as we assume the equilibrium
current J∥0is all carried by electrons (i.e., V∥i0= 0). Unlike the E×Bconvection
process which treats electrons and ions equally, the magnetic flutter effect often weights
differently for electron and ion thermal transport. The parallel advection heat flux
contributions (i.e., second term on the RHS of Equation 15) are negligible, again, as
a consequence of vanishing equilibrium current at the separatrix assumption in our
model (i.e., V∥e0=V∥i0= 0 at ψn= 1). For the parallel conductive flux, because
electrons are much more mobile (or lighter) than ions, electron parallel conductive heat
flux is roughly two orders of magnitude larger than ion parallel conductive heat flux
(e.g., κ∥e/κ∥i∼(mi/me)1/2∼57 for deuterium plasma). Therefore, in a perturbed
magnetic field, electrons often have a much larger radial heat flux component from
the magnetic flutter effect than ions. In this study, the turbulent E×Bconvection
dominates the radial heat transport. This is particularly true for ions as magnetic
flutter only contribute less than 1% of total ion radial heat flux for the entire simulations.
However, for electrons, magnetic flutter effect does play an important role. It accountsBOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 18
for roughly 10% of the total electron radial heat flux prior to the thermal quench onset
(i.e., t= 0.136 ms) and this number gradually increases to 30% – only a factor of 2
smaller than E×Bconvection process, in the later stage as the magnetic field becomes
fully stochastic. This finding is in a good agreement with BOUT++’s previous study
on DIII-D type-I ELM that magnetic flutter effect can substantially enhance the radial
heat transport and as a consequence, the total energy loss increases by ∼33% [25]. It is
also consistent with the recent nonlinear extended MHD study on ELM dynamics [30]
and the electromagnetic gyrokinetic scrape-off-layer turbulence study [31]. Therefore,
it is possible that under certain plasma conditions, electron radial thermal transport
may be dominated by the stochastic field transport instead of turbulent E×Bprocess
during the thermal quench phase.
7. Conclusion
In this paper we report the thermal quench simulation performed with BOUT++ six-
field electromagnetic turbulence model with a particular focus on the governing physics
of edge plasma transport as well as the divertor heat load in this transient event.
The simulation is carried out for a generic, quiescent DIII-D lower-single-null H-mode
plasma with a short period of intense particle and energy injection at the pedestal top
to mimic the plasma outflow from the core region when thermal quench is triggered.
The nonlinear simulation result quantitatively reproduces several important edge plasma
features observed in experiments. For example, the divertor heat-load surging and heat-
flux width broadening. Experimental observation confirms an order of magnitude heat
load increasing [4, 5] and a few times divertor heat flux width broadening [2] during
the thermal quench. While in our study, the maximum heat load on the outer divertor
target plate increases 50 times and the heat flux width expands 4 times. Similar to
the experiments, simulation also shows that the divertor heat load rise time τrroughly
matches the thermal quench duration τ. Our analysis indicates that this is a result
from divertor heat load is governed by electron parallel conduction process at the early
stage. More interestingly, the divertor heat footprint alters from quasi-coherent pattern
to striation pattern after thermal quench occurs.
The dramatic increasing of divertor heat load and broadening of heat flux width are
tied to the enhanced turbulence activities. In the simulation, the maximum turbulent
fluctuation level increases approximately 6 times, and the turbulent region expands from
near the separartix to the entire simulation domain. The turbulence characteristics are
also changing. As the dominant modes shift to lower wave-vector k, larger eddies and
filaments provide a more effective radial transport channel. The temporal evolution
of heat load on the outer divertor (downstream) is found to be strongly correlated
with the turbulence activity at outer board mid-plane (upstream). By estimating the
characteristic transport times and comparing the values to the observed lagging time,
we conclude that electron parallel thermal conduction is the dominant divertor heat
exhaust mechanism.BOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 19
The enhanced plasma turbulence also comes with the amplified magnetic
perturbation that causes the late-appeared striation heat load pattern on the divertor.
Our field-line tracing analysis indeed shows that the intact magnetic surfaces starts
to deform and break along with the thermal quench process from edge to core, and
eventually the magnetic field becomes fully stochastic when |δBr/B0| ∼10−4. Therefore,
shortly after thermal quench onsets, the destroyed magnetic flux surfaces are no longer
able to confine plasma in the pedestal region; instead, core plasma now can directly
connect to the plasma facing component so that the parallel transport combined with
finite perturbed Br(i.e., magnetic flutter effect) may overwhelm the other radial
transport mechanisms. Our further analysis suggests that in our simulation, the
turbulent E×Bradial transport dominates the magnetic flutter effect in terms of
transport particles and energy across the separatrix. However, the magnetic flutter
effect does facilitate the electron radial heat transport as it contributes roughly 30% of
the total energy carried by electrons across the separatrix in the late stage.
The authors would like to remark a few caveats of this study. For instance, the
bootstrap current is assumed stationary, and the flux-limited parallel heat flux model
is used in current study. Giving the substantial change of plasma profiles, the former
assumption is questionable. Also, the additional coefficient αin flux-limited expression
could impact the relative roles of the turbulent E×Btransport and the magnetic
flutter effect. Future thermal quench simulations are planned to include a self-consistent
bootstrap current model, to employ a better Landau-fluid/kinetic [32] parallel heat flux
closure, and to extend the simulation domain to full torus. These improvements will
highlight the peeling drive of the edge instability, which may result in a lower- nmode
dominated turbulence with even larger magnetic fluctuations such that the electron
radial heat transport is primarily carried by the stochastic conduction process.
Acknowledgments
We thank the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Fusion Energy Sciences and Office
of Advanced Scientific Computing Research for support under the Tokamak Disruption
Simulation (TDS) Scientific Discovery through Advanced Computing (SciDAC) project,
both at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) under Contract DE-AC52-
07NA27344 and at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) under contract No.
89233218CNA000001. This research used resources of the National Energy Research
Scientific Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported by the
Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-
05CH11231. LLNL-JRNL-845128
Reference
[1] Sugihara M, Shimada M, Fujieda H, Gribov Y, Ioki K, Kawano Y, Khayrutdinov R, Lukash V
and Ohmori J 2007 Nuclear Fusion 47337BOUT++ simulation of thermal quench 20
[2] Lehnen M, Aleynikova K, Aleynikov P, Campbell D, Drewelow P, Eidietis N, Gasparyan Y, Granetz
R, Gribov Y, Hartmann N et al. 2015 Journal of Nuclear Materials 46339–48
[3] Riccardo V, Loarte A et al. 2005 Nuclear fusion 451427
[4] Hender T, Wesley J, Bialek J, Bondeson A, Boozer A, Buttery R, Garofalo A, Goodman T, Granetz
R, Gribov Y et al. 2007 Nuclear fusion 47S128
[5] Lehnen M, Arnoux G, Hartmann N, Brezinsek S, Devaux S, Huber A, Jachmich S, Kruezi U,
Matthews G, Reux C et al. 2013 Journal of Nuclear Materials 438S102–S107
[6] Evans T, Moyer R and Monat P 2002 Physics of Plasmas 94957–4967
[7] Evans T, Roeder R, Carter J, Rapoport B, Fenstermacher M and Lasnier C 2005 Experimental
signatures of homoclinic tangles in poloidally diverted tokamaks Journal of Physics: Conference
Series vol 7 (IOP Publishing) p 174
[8] Evans T, Joseph I, Moyer R, Fenstermacher M, Lasnier C and Yan L 2007 Journal of Nuclear
Materials 363570–574
[9] Chang C S, Ku S, Loarte A, Parail V, Koechl F, Romanelli M, Maingi R, Ahn J W, Gray T,
Hughes J et al. 2017 Nuclear Fusion 57116023
[10] Li Z Y, Xu X Q, Li N M, Chan V and Wang X G 2019 Nuclear Fusion 59046014
[11] Wang X, Xu X, Snyder P B and Li Z 2021 Nuclear Fusion 62026024
[12] He X X, Xu X Q, Li Z Y, Zhu B and Liu Y 2022 Nuclear Fusion 62056003
[13] Izzo V, Whyte D, Granetz R, Parks P, Hollmann E, Lao L and Wesley J 2008 Physics of Plasmas
15056109
[14] Ferraro N, Lyons B C, Kim C C, Liu Y Q and Jardin S C 2018 Nuclear Fusion 59016001
[15] Nardon E, Hu D, Artola F, Bonfiglio D, Hoelzl M, Boboc A, Carvalho P, Gerasimov S, Huijsmans
G, Mitterauer V et al. 2021 Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 63115006
[16] Yoo M G, Wang W, Startsev E, Ma C, Ethier S, Chen J and Tang X 2021 Nuclear Fusion 61
126036
[17] Zhang Y, Li J and Tang X Z 2023 Europhysics Letters 14154002
[18] Zhu B, Seto H, Xu X q and Yagi M 2021 Computer Physics Communications 267108079
[19] Simakov A N and Catto P J 2003 Physics of Plasmas 104744–4757
[20] Ricci P, Halpern F, Jolliet S, Loizu J, Mosetto A, Fasoli A, Furno I and Theiler C 2012 Plasma
Physics and Controlled Fusion 54124047
[21] Zhu B, Francisquez M and Rogers B N 2018 Computer Physics Communications 23246–58
[22] Stegmeir A, Coster D, Ross A, Maj O, Lackner K and Poli E 2018 Plasma Physics and Controlled
Fusion 60035005
[23] Braginskii S 1965 Reviews of plasma physics 1
[24] Xu X, Li N, Li Z, Chen B, Xia T, Tang T, Zhu B and Chan V 2019 Nuclear Fusion 59126039
[25] Xia T and Xu X 2015 Nuclear Fusion 55113030
[26] Frerichs H, Reiter D, Schmitz O, Evans T and Feng Y 2010 Nuclear fusion 50034004
[27] Goldston R J 2011 Nuclear Fusion 52013009
[28] Pamela S, Bhole A, Huijsmans G, Nkonga B, Hoelzl M, Krebs I, Strumberger E and Contributors
J 2020 Physics of Plasmas 27102510
[29] Rogers B and Drake J 1997 Physical Review Letters 79229
[30] Cathey A, Hoelzl M, Futatani S, Lang P, Lackner K, Huijsmans G, Pamela S, G¨ unter S, team J,
Team A U et al. 2021 Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 63075016
[31] Mandell N, Hammett G, Hakim A and Francisquez M 2022 Physics of Plasmas 29042504
[32] Wang L, Zhu B, Xu X q and Li B 2019 AIP Advances 9015217