Generation of genuine all-way entanglement in defect-
nuclear spin systems through dynamical decoupling
sequences
Evangelia Takou1,2, Edwin Barnes1,2, and Sophia E. Economou1,2
1Department of Physics, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 24061 Blacksburg, VA, USA
2Virginia Tech Center for Quantum Information Science and Engineering, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA
Multipartite entangled states are an es-
sentialresource forsensing, quantumerror
correction, and cryptography. Color cen-
ters in solids are one of the leading plat-
forms for quantum networking due to the
availability of a nuclear spin memory that
can be entangled with the optically active
electronic spin through dynamical decou-
pling sequences. Creating electron-nuclear
entangled states in these systems is a dif-
ficult task as the always-on hyperfine in-
teractions prohibit complete isolation of
the target dynamics from the unwanted
spin bath. While this emergent cross-talk
can be alleviated by prolonging the en-
tanglement generation, the gate durations
quickly exceed coherence times. Here we
show how to prepare high-quality GHZ M-
like states with minimal cross-talk. We in-
troduce the M-tangling power of an evo-
lution operator, which allows us to verify
genuine all-way correlations. Using exper-
imentally measured hyperfine parameters
of an NV center spin in diamond coupled
to carbon-13 lattice spins, we show how to
usesequentialorsingle-shotentanglingop-
erations to prepare GHZ M-like states of up
toM= 10qubits within time constraints
that saturate bounds on M-way corre-
lations. We study the entanglement of
mixed electron-nuclear states and develop
a non-unitary M-tangling power which
additionally captures correlations arising
from all unwanted nuclear spins. We
further derive a non-unitary M-tangling
Evangelia Takou: etakou@vt.edu
Edwin Barnes: efbarnes@vt.edu
Sophia E. Economou: economou@vt.edupower which incorporates the impact of
electronic dephasing errors on the M-way
correlations. Finally, we inspect the per-
formance of our protocols in the presence
of experimentally reported pulse errors,
finding that XY decoupling sequences can
lead to high-fidelity GHZ state prepara-
tion.
1 Introduction
Generating and distributing entanglement is one
of the most fundamental yet non-trivial require-
ments for building large-scale quantum networks.
Entanglement is the key ingredient of quan-
tum teleportation, robust quantum communica-
tion protocols, or alternative quantum computa-
tion models such as the one-way quantum com-
puter [1, 2, 3], or fusion-based quantum compu-
tation [4]. In the context of cryptography, en-
tangled states ensure secure communications via
quantumkeydistributionorquantumsecretshar-
ing protocols [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Error detec-
tion [12, 13] and correction [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]
schemes are based on the encoding of informa-
tion onto entangled states, such that errors can
be detected or corrected by utilizing correlations
present in entangled states. At the same time,
distributed entanglement increases the sensitiv-
ity and precision of measurements [20, 21].
Defect platforms offer an electronic qubit fea-
turing a spin-photon interface that enables the
generation of distant entanglement [22, 23, 24],
as well as nuclear spins that serve as the long-
lived memories needed for information storage
and buffering. Several protocols based on re-
mote entanglement or entanglement within the
electron-nuclear spin system have already been
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 1arXiv:2302.05580v3  [quant-ph]  23 Mar 2024demonstrated in these platforms, including quan-
tum teleportation [25], quantum error correc-
tion [17, 18, 19], enhanced sensing [26, 27, 28],
and entanglement distillation [29]. The electron-
nuclear spin entanglement is usually realized
through dynamical decoupling (DD) sequences;
large entangled states can be created by applying
consecutive sequences with the appropriate inter-
pulse spacings. By tuning the interpulse spac-
ings, one can select different nuclear spins to par-
ticipate in entangling gates while decoupling the
electron from the remaining always-on coupled
nuclear spin bath [30].
A major issue is that entangled states often
decohere faster than product states [31, 32], so
entanglement must be preserved for long enough
times to complete quantum information tasks.
Additionally, in defect platforms, the unwanted
spin bath sets a lower bound on the duration of
entangling gates, which should be long enough
to suppress unwanted interactions that lower the
quality of target entangled states. Despite this
challenge, generation of electron-nuclear entan-
gled states has been realized experimentally in
NV [33], in SiV centers in diamond [34, 35], and
in SiC defects [36]. In particular, Bradley et al.
demonstrated experimentally in an NV defect in
diamond electron-nuclear GHZ states involving
up to 7 qubits [33] by combining DD sequences
with direct RF driving of the nuclear spins, ac-
companied by refocusing pulses to extend the en-
tanglement lifetime. This direct driving was nec-
essary to improve the selective coupling of indi-
vidual nuclear spins. Although successful, this
method introduces experimental overhead and
heating of the sample due to the direct RF driv-
ing of the nuclei, potentially creating scalability
issues. Another problem is that as the number
of parties contributing to the entangled state in-
creases, a larger gate count and longer sequences
are needed, exacerbating dephasing. Failure to
provide optimal isolation from unwanted nuclei
further deteriorates the electron-nuclear entan-
gled states. Therefore, a more efficient approach
to generating electron-nuclear spin entanglement
withintimeconstraintsandverifyingitsexistence
is necessary for large-scale applications.
Inthispaper,weaddressthesechallengesbyin-
troducing a framework for preparing high-quality
GHZ states of up to 10 qubits within time con-
straints. Using experimental parameters froma 27 nuclear spin register well-characterized by
Taminiau et al.[37], we show how to improve
sequential entanglement generation methods by
minimizing the cross-talk induced by the un-
wanted nuclear spin bath. We find that it is
possible to prepare GHZ-like states with max-
imal all-way correlations in excess of 95%and
gate errors lower than 0.05 %due to residual en-
tanglement with unwanted nuclei. We show how
to prepare GHZ-like states with single-shot op-
erations, reducing the gate times at least two-
fold compared to the sequential scheme while of-
fering decoupling capabilities comparable to the
latter. We present a closed-form expression for
theM-tangling power of the evolution operator
and use this to develop a method for verifying
genuine multipartite entanglement. Remarkably,
this metric depends only on two-qubit Makhlin
invariantsandiscloselyrelatedtotheone-tangles
we introduced in Ref. [38]. This simplification
allows us to systematically determine the DD se-
quences that maximize all-way correlations as de-
siredforgeneratingmultipartiteentangledstates.
Further, we analyze the entanglement of mixed
electron-nuclear states and derive a non-unitary
M-tangling power that captures residual entan-
glement links arising from unwanted nuclei. We
incorporate electronic dephasing errors into the
M-tangling power and derive a simple closed-
form expression. Finally, we study the impact of
pulse control errors on the M-way correlations.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we
discuss methods for generating electron-nuclear
spin entangled states using DD sequences. In
Sec. 3, we introduce the M-tangling power of
an evolution operator. In Sec. 4, we show how
to prepare GHZ M-like states through sequential
or single-shot entanglement protocols. In Sec. 5,
we quantify the entanglement of electron-nuclear
mixed states by tracing out unwanted spins. In
Sec. 6, we study the non-unitary M-tangling
power of the electron-nuclear target subspace,
which encodes correlations arising from the en-
tire electron-nuclear system. Finally, in Sec. 7
we study the effect of electronic dephasing errors
as well as pulse control errors on the M-tangling
power.
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 2Multi-spin schemeSequential scheme
MW𝑡𝑁𝑡!𝑁!𝑡"𝑁"MW123𝑡#𝑁#(a)(b)
Figure 1: Schematics of two protocols for generating GHZ M-like states (shown for M= 4and using the CPMG
sequence). (a) The multi-spin scheme is capable of generating direct entanglement between the electron and a
subset of nuclei from the nuclear spin register in a single shot. (b) The sequential scheme requires M−1consecutive
entangling gates to prepare a GHZ M-like state.
2 Establishing electron-nuclear entan-
glement
One way to generate electron-nuclear entangle-
ment is through DD sequences, which are trains
ofπ-pulses applied on the electron spin that are
interleaved by free evolution periods. These se-
quences are constructed by concatenating a basic
π-pulse unit of time ta certain number of iter-
ations,N. Well-known examples are the Carr-
Purcell-Meiboom-Gill (CPMG) [39, 40, 41, 42]
and Uhrig (UDD) [43, 44] sequences, which
have been used experimentally for example in
Refs. [45, 30, 17, 33, 46], or proposed for defects
in Ref. [47]. In the defect-nuclear spin system,
DD sequences serve a two-fold purpose; i) they
average out the interactions between the electron
and unwanted nuclei and, ii) under so-called reso-
nance conditions, they selectively entangle a tar-
get nuclear spin with the electron [30]. These
resonances correspond to specific values of t, and
they are generally distinct for each nuclear spin,
as they depend on the hyperfine (HF) parameters
of each nucleus. By composing consecutive se-
quenceswithdifferentparameters(i.e., unittimes
tand iterations N), we can thus create entangle-
ment between the electron and multiple nuclei.
We refer to this standard experimental approach
of entangling one nuclear spin at a time with the
electron as “sequential". In Ref. [38], we showed
that alternatively single-shot operations can be
used to entangle the electron with a subset of nu-
clei from the register, significantly reducing gatetimes compared to the sequential approach. Fig-
ure 1 summarizes the two approaches to generat-
ing electron-nuclear entanglement.
Figure 1(a) depicts the multi-spin scheme im-
plemented by a single-shot entangling opera-
tion, and Fig. 1(b) shows the sequential scheme
which requires M−1entangling gates to pre-
pare GHZ M-like states. The M−1entangling
gates are realized by composing sequences of dif-
ferent interpulse spacings and iterations of the
unit, such that a different nuclear spin is selected
from the register based on the resonance condi-
tion.
GHZMstates are created by initializing the
electron in the|+⟩state, polarizing the nuclear
spins in the|0⟩state [48, 17], and then perform-
ing electron-nuclear entangling gates via DD se-
quences. Probabilistic (deterministic) initializa-
tion of the nuclear spins in |0⟩can be achieved
through measurement-based (SWAP-based) ini-
tialization [49]. After state initialization, one can
performaDDsequencetogenerateentanglement.
Setting the sequence unit time tto be a nuclear
spin resonance time forces that nuclear spin to
rotate along an axis conditioned on the electron
spin state. If the axes are anti-parallel and along
the±xdirection, and the unit is iterated an ap-
propriate number of times, the nuclear spin can
accumulate a rotation angle of ϕ=π/2, real-
izing a CR x(±π/2)electron-nuclear entangling
gate [30]. Repeating this process by changing the
unit timetand iterations Nof the subsequent se-
quence (and assuming the k-th target spin is ro-
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 3tated only during the k-th evolution; trivial non-
entanglingrotationscouldhappenonthe k-thnu-
cleus during the remaining evolutions) creates a
stateequivalenttoGHZ M= (|0⟩⊗M+|1⟩⊗M)/√
2
up to local operations:
CRx/parenleftbigg
mkπ
2/parenrightbigg⊗k
|+⟩|0⟩⊗k=1√
2/summationdisplay
j∈{0,1}|j⟩|m(k)
jy⟩⊗k,
(1)
wheremk=±1,m(k)
jcan be +1or−1for thek-
thnucleus, andwedefined |±y⟩= (|0⟩±i|1⟩)/√
2.
For example, if all the gates are CR x(π/2), then
the resulting state is (|0⟩|−y⟩⊗k+|1⟩|y⟩⊗k)/√
2.
This is the idea behind the sequential entangle-
ment protocol. The multi-spin entanglement pro-
tocol produces a more complicated state since the
electron-nuclear evolution now becomes a CR xz
gate (see Ref. [38]), but the resulting state is still
locally equivalent to GHZ M. In this latter setup,
multiple nuclei are simultaneously entangled with
the electron via a single-shot operation.
Quantifying the quality of GHZ M-like states
using a fidelity overlap is computationally costly
since we would need to optimize over local gates.
This optimization becomes more difficult for
larger entangled states. In the following section,
we introduce an entanglement metric that allows
us to quantify genuine all-way correlations in an
arbitrarily large electron-nuclear spin system, us-
ingonlytheinformationoftheevolutionoperator
generated by π-sequences. With this analysis we
are able to translate the M-tangling capability of
such an evolution operator irrespective of the to-
tal system size, into simple spin-spin correlation
metrics between the central spin and each of the
M−1nuclear spins. Our analysis throughout the
paper is completely general and is not restricted
by the choice of DD sequence or by the choice of
the defect system. It is further generically valid
for any type of nuclear spins present in the regis-
ter (provided they have spin I= 1/2). The code
used to simulate all our following results can be
found in [50].
3M-tangling power
Genuine multipartite entanglement of GHZ M-
like states can be verified with metrics such
as entanglement witnesses [51, 52, 53], concen-
tratable entanglement [54], or the so-called M-
tangles [55, 56, 57]. We choose to work with thelatter, which are usually defined in terms of a
state vector (or, more generally, a density opera-
tor). TheM-tangles,τM(|ψ⟩)∈[0,1], distinguish
the GHZ entanglement class from other entangle-
ment classes. For example, the three-tangle satu-
rates to 1 for the GHZ 3state, whereas it vanishes
for the|W⟩= 1/√
3(|100⟩+|010⟩+|001⟩)state.
TheM-tangles are invariant under permutations
of the qubits and SLOCC, and are entanglement
monotones1[58]. Since they are defined based on
a state vector, their calculation requires that we
make an assumption about the initial state of the
register, which is then evolved under the π-pulse
sequence. We circumvent this issue by focusing
instead on the capability of a gate to saturate all-
way correlations and thus prepare states locally
equivalent to GHZ M.
We introduce the M-tangling power of a uni-
tary, which we define to be the average of the M-
tangleϵp,M(U) :=⟨τM(Uρ0U†)⟩, over all initial
productstates, ρ0. Theformulasof M-tanglesex-
pressed in terms of the state vector can be found
in Appendix A.1 and in Refs. [55, 57, 56].
In our system, the total evolution operator (of
the electron and M−1nuclear spins) produced
by DD sequences has the form:
U=/summationdisplay
j∈0,1σjj⊗M−1
l=1R(l)
nj, (2)
whereσjj≡ |j⟩⟨j|are projectors onto two of
the levels in the electron spin multiplet, and
R(l)
nj:=e−iϕ(l)
j/2(σ·n(l)
j)is the rotation that acts on
thel-th nuclear spin and, in general, depends on
the electron spin state. Due to the fact that the
evolution is controlled only on the electron, we
find that we can compactly express the M-tangle
of a given state as [see Appendix A.2]:
τM(ρ) =tr[ρ⊗2˜P], (3)
whereρ⊗2is the density matrix of two copies of
theM-qubit system living in the Hilbert space
HM2.˜Pis the product of projectors onto the
antisymmetric (or symmetric) space of the i-th
subspace and its copy, i.e.
˜P=

/producttextM
j=1P(−)
j,j+M,evenM
P(+)
1,1+M/producttextM
j=2P(−)
j,j+ModdM,(4)
1More precisely, the M-tangles monotonically decrease
under SLOCC, due to single qubit measurements.
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 4whereP(±)
j,j+M= 1/2(1±SWAPj,j+M), and with
SWAPj,j+M=/summationtext
α,β∈{0,1}|α⟩j|β⟩j+M⟨β|j⟨α|j+M.
Note that we have fixed system “1” to be the elec-
tron’s subspace. (If the control qubit corresponds
toadifferentsubspace, thenforodd M, theprod-
uct of antisymmetric projectors needs to exclude
the control system from the copies, and instead
weapplyP(+)onthesectorsofthecontrolqubit).
For evenM≥4, Eq. (3), holds for density ma-
tricesρobtained by any arbitrary U, whereas
for oddM, Eq. (3) holds strictly for states ob-
tained by CR-evolutions. (We verified this nu-
merically, comparing with the exact expressions
ofτMthat hold for states obtained by arbitrary
evolutions.) By averaging Eq. (3) over all prod-
uct initial states, we prove that the M-tangling
power of an operator Uhas the simple expression
[Appendix A.2]:
ϵp,M(U) := 2MTr[U⊗2Ωp0(U†)⊗2˜P],(5)
with Ωp0= (d+ 1)−M/producttextM
j=1P(+)
j,j+M, whered= 2
(dimension of qubit subspace). Equation (5) is
exact for any arbitrary U(M), forMeven and
M≥4, whereas for odd Mit holds only for CR-
type evolution operators of the form of Eq. (2).
The simple structure of CR-type evolution oper-
ators generated by π-sequences allows us to de-
rive analytically a closed-form expression for the
M-tangling power for an arbitrarily large nuclear
spin register coupled to the electron. In Ap-
pendix A.3, we prove that the M-tangling power
of the operator Uof Eq. (2), is given by:
ϵp,M(U) =/parenleftbiggd
d+ 1/parenrightbiggMM−1/productdisplay
k=1(1−G(k)
1), (6)
whereG1is the so-called Makhlin invariant [59],
which we have shown that for a π-pulse sequence
is given by [38]:
G(k)
1=/parenleftig
cosϕ(k)
0
2cosϕ(k)
1
2+ (n0·n1)(k)sinϕ(k)
0
2sinϕ(k)
1
2/parenrightig2
,
(7)
withG1∈[0,1]. Hereϕ(k)
0(ϕ(k)
1) is the rota-
tion angle that the kth nuclear spin undergoes
when the electron is in the |0⟩(|1⟩) state, and
n(k)
0(n(k)
1) is the corresponding nuclear rotation
axis.G(k)
1characterizes the evolution of the kth
nuclearspinundertheDDsequenceandisrelated
to the bipartition entangling power of the nuclear
spin with the remaining register, i.e., the nuclear
one-tangle given by ϵnuclear
p = 2/9(1−G1)[38].The nuclear one-tangle is a faithful metric of se-
lectivity; its minimization ensures that the spin is
decoupled from the register, while its maximiza-
tion implies that the particular spin attains max-
imal correlations with the register.
The remarkable simplicity of Eq. (6) allows
us to check whether a controlled unitary of the
form of Eq. (2) is capable of preparing GHZ M-
like states. Saturating the bounds of all-way cor-
relations between the electronic defect and the
nuclear register translates into minimizing G1
(or, equivalently maximizing ϵnuclear
p) of the nu-
clei that will be part of the GHZ state, and
implies that the maximum M-tangling power is
[d/(d+ 1)]M.
At this point, we should mention a caveat
of theM-tangle metric. In Ref. [56] it was
mentioned that the four-tangle cannot discrim-
inate the entanglement of a GHZ 4-like state from
that of bi-separable maximally entangled states,
e.g.,|Φ+⟩⊗2, where|Φ+⟩is one of the four
Bell states; in both cases the four-tangle is 1.
Similarly,τ6(|GHZ 6⟩) = 1 = τ6(|Φ+⟩⊗3), but
τ6(|GHZ 3⟩⊗2) = 0. Analogously, the even M-
tangle cannot discriminate the entanglement of
a GHZMstate from the entanglement of M/2
copies of two-qubit maximally entangled states
|Bell⟩⊗M/2(see also Ref. [60]). Nevertheless, in
our system we have the extra condition that G1
of allM−1nuclei should be minimized to satu-
rate all-way correlations. Hence, if we fail to min-
imize at least one out of the M−1{G1}quan-
tities, we know that the evolution operator will
never be able to prepare genuine multipartite en-
tanglement between all Mparties. Another way
to understand this is to consider the example of
4 qubits, and the entangling gate CR x(π/2)⊗3=
σ00⊗3
i=1Rx(π/2) +σ11⊗3
i=1Rx(−π/2). If we act
with CRx(π/2)⊗3on arbtirary initial states, we
can at most prepare a GHZ 4-like state, but we
will never be able to prepare two individual Bell
pairs, since correlations are constrained to be dis-
tributed among all parties connected by the elec-
tron (since we are dealing with a central spin type
system). Similar statements hold for the multi-
spin method that utilizes CR xzgates. There-
fore, we can safely use the M-tangle metrics to
detect genuine multipartite electron-nuclear (and
nuclear-nuclear) spin entanglement.
Let us further comment that the M-tangling
power is derived by averaging over all product
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 5(and pure) states, so it only tells us how well the
dynamics of Ucan saturate the all-way correla-
tions of pure product states. No conclusion can
be made, however, if one has a statistical mixture
of such states (i.e., a mixed state).
In the following section, we show how to op-
timize the sequential or multi-spin schemes and
guide the selection of nuclei from the register to
generate genuine all-way correlations within time
constraints.
4 Creation of GHZ M-like states
Symbol Meaning
|GHZ| GHZ size
Lnuc Total #of nuclei
j Spin index∈[1,Lnuc]
N Sequence iterations
k Resonance #
(n0·n1)(j)Dot product of rotation axes for j-th spin
ϵnuc(j)
p Nuclear one-tangle of j-th spin
{N∗
k(j)} Iterations for k-th resonance where
ϵnuc(j)
p is maximal
δt/u Tolerance of target/unwanted one-tangles
δE Gate error tolerance
t Unit time
t(j)
kUnit time at k-th resonance of j-th spin
T Gate time of total sequence
Tmax Gate time tolerance
G(j)
1 Makhlin-invariant of j-th spin
Table 1: Meaning of the symbols that we use in the
flowchart of Fig. 2 to describe the optimization steps for
the sequential and multi-spin protocols.
4.1 Sequential scheme for GHZ 3states
WefirstbeginwiththetaskofgeneratingGHZ M-
like states using the sequential scheme, which re-
quiresM−1consecutive gates. Hereafter, we
refer to the collection of M−1entangling gates
as the composite evolution.
Under this scheme, to entangle the nuclei with
the electron, we need to ensure that during each
evolution we rotate conditionally only one par-
ticular nuclear spin, meaning we maximize its
one-tangle. At the same time, all other nuclear
one-tangles should be minimal in each evolution,
so that we suppress cross-talk arising from the
nuclear spin bath. The procedure of identifying
optimal nuclear spin candidates and sequence pa-
rameters is shown in Fig. 2 and explained in moredetail in Appendix G. Depending on the size of
the GHZ state, we set different tolerances for un-
wanted/target one-tangles, and gate time restric-
tions within T∗
2of the nuclei (see Table 2 of Ap-
pendix G). At the end of this procedure, we are
left with different options for selectively entan-
gling a single nuclear spin with the electron.
After identifying the optimal sequence param-
eters and nuclear spin candidates, we compose
theM−1entangling gates and create a “case” of
a composite evolution operator, from which we
can extract the Makhlin invariants G1associated
with the evolution of each nuclear spin. This pro-
cess allows us to calculate the M-tangling power
of the composite gate (using Eq. (6)) and verify
if it can prepare genuine multipartite entangle-
ment. Further, as we showed in Ref. [38], we can
analytically calculate the induced gate error due
to residual entanglement links with the unwanted
nuclei. This unresolved entanglement could make
the target gate deviate from the ideal evolution,
which we take to be the composite M−1en-
tangling operations in the absence of unwanted
spins; minimization of this gate error thus en-
sures a better quality of the GHZ-like states that
we produce.
We start with the simplest case of generat-
ing GHZ 3-like states using the sequential scheme.
Throughout the rest of the paper, we focus on the
CPMG sequence (t/4−π−t/2−π−t/4)N, where
tis the unit time, πrepresents a π-pulse, and N
is the number of iterations of the basic unit. For
concreteness, we consider an NV center in dia-
mond and define the qubit states of the electron
to be|0⟩ ≡ |ms= 0⟩and|1⟩ ≡ |ms=−1⟩.
We further use the hyperfine parameters of the
13C nuclear spins from the 27 nuclear spin reg-
ister characterized by the Taminiau group [37],
and following their conventions we label the nu-
clear spins as C jwithj∈[1,27]. Despite these
choices, the analysis that follows is general and
valid for any π-sequence or electronic defect in
diamond or SiC, and for nuclei with spin I= 1/2
(e.g.,13C in diamond,13C and29Si in silicon car-
bide).
In Fig. 3(a), we show the nuclear one-tangles
(scaled by the maximum value of 2/9) for 39 dif-
ferent composite evolutions (labeled as “cases”)
that can prepare GHZ 3-like states. Each realiza-
tion corresponds to a unique nuclear spin com-
bination that is entangled with the electron (the
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 6For each 𝑗spin and resonance 𝑘≤𝑘!"#:Vary 𝑡∈[𝑡$%−𝛿𝑡,𝑡$%+𝛿𝑡]. For each 𝑡:1.Set 𝑁!"#=round&!"#'2.∀𝑁∈[1,𝑁()*]find 𝜖+,-.(0), ∀𝑙∈[1,𝐿234]
Accept caseReject caseGate error<𝛿5?YesNoFor all possible {(𝑡,𝑁)}:Check if there are |GHZ|-1 one-tangles that satisfy 𝜖+6)7.,-.>𝛿'& 𝐿234−(|GHZ|-1)one-tangles that satisfy 𝜖+-,9.,-.<𝛿3Pass all acceptable {(𝑡,𝑁)}to next stepRe-arrange acceptable cases in terms of unique spin combinations entangled with the electron For each unique combination choose an optimal (𝑡,𝑁)(e.g., such that 𝜖+,;(𝑈)is maximal)For each unique combination pass the information of the evolution of unwanted spins to gate error calculationFor each 𝑁<∈𝑁$∗%Set 𝑁=1. For 𝑗∈[1,𝐿,-.]& for 𝑘∈[1,𝑘()*]:1.Find 𝑡around 𝑡$(%)such that 𝐧𝟎⋅𝐧𝟏(%)is minimal2.Find {𝑁$∗(%)}using 𝐺@%
Form all possible combinations of sets selecting |GHZ|-1 nuclei that satisfy ∑A𝑡A⋅𝑁′A<𝑇()*Compose 𝑈𝑡BCDE@F$%&'(…𝑈𝑡@F(for each nuclear spin & all possible combinationsInput: |GHZ|, 𝑘!"#,𝑇!"#, 𝛿',𝛿3,𝛿5𝑁′⋅𝑡<𝑇()*?YesCalculate 𝜖+,-.(0G%)𝜖+,-.(0)<𝛿3,∀𝑙≠𝑗? NoReject 𝑁′Pass 𝑁′& 𝑡to next step
For each case:𝜖+-,9.,-.<𝛿3?(∀unwanted spins)𝜖+6)7.,-.>𝛿'?(∀target spins) Yes
Accept caseReject caseYesNoGate error<𝛿5?YesNoReject caseMulti-spin schemeSequential schemeFigure 2: Flowcharts that summarize the steps we follow to find optimal sequences that prepare GHZ M-like states,
utilizing the sequential or multi-spin scheme. The various symbols are defined in Table 1.
(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)
Figure3: GenerationofGHZ 3-likestatesviathesequentialprotocol. Eachcase #correspondstoadifferentcomposite
DD sequence that sequentially entangles a pair of nuclei with the electron to generate GHZ 3-like states. (a) Nuclear
one-tangles (scaled by 2/9) after the two entangling gates. The first (second) bar of each case corresponds to a
particular nuclear spin, labeled as C j. (b) Nuclear rotation angles ( ϕ:=ϕ0) and (c) dot products of nuclear rotation
axes at the end of the composite evolution of the two entangling gates. (d) M-tangling power for each case of
composite evolution. (e) Total gate time of the sequence and (f) gate error of the composite evolution due to
residual entanglement with the remaining nuclear spins that are not part of the GHZ 3-like state.
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 7(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)Figure 4: Generation of GHZ 3-like states using the multi-spin protocol. Each case #corresponds to a different DD
sequence that simultaneously entangles a pair of nuclei with the electron to generate GHZ 3-like states. (a) Nuclear
one-tangles (scaled by 2/9) after the single-shot operation. (b) Nuclear rotation angles and (c) dot products of
nuclear rotation axes at the end of the single-shot entangling operation. (d) M-tangling power for each case. (e)
Total gate time of the sequence and (f) gate error of the evolution due to residual entanglement with the remaining
nuclear spins that are not part of the GHZ 3-like state.
text above the bars indicates which13C nuclear
spins are involved). The first (second) bar of
each case corresponds to the one-tangle of the
first (second) target nuclear spin at the end of
the composite evolution of two entangling gates.
Each entangling gate is implemened using an op-
timal unit time tof the sequence and an optimal
numberNof iterations of the unit. Since we op-
timizetclose to the resonance time of the respec-
tive nuclear spin, the dot product of the nuclear
axes is n0·n1≈−1. Thus, the maximization of
the first (second) one-tangle happens when the
first (second) nuclear spin rotates by ϕ=π/2
[see Eq. (7)], during the first (second) evolution.
(NotethatforeachCPMGevolutionitholdsthat
ϕ0=ϕ1≡ϕ, see also Ref. [38]).
The composition of the two entangling opera-
tions gives rise to total rotation angles ϕ0̸=ϕ1
for each nuclear spin. The nuclear rotation an-
glesϕ:=ϕ0are shown in Fig. 3(b), and the
dot products of the rotation axes are depicted
in Fig. 3(c). Due to the composite evolution, the
total nuclear rotation angles deviate from π/2,
and the rotation axes are no longer anti-parallel
for all cases. However, as we noted in Ref. [38],G1can be minimized as long as n0·n1≤0. Due
to the unwanted one-tangle tolerances we impose,
we ensure that only one out of the M−1gates
will conditionally rotate the target spin we in-
tend to entangle with the electron. The remain-
ing evolutions will approximately leave the en-
tanglement of that specific spin with the elec-
tron intact. For example, the first (second) tar-
get spin will evolve approximately trivially (i.e.,
in an unconditional manner) during the second
(first) evolution, hence preserving the high en-
tanglement between all parties at the end of all
the gates. This behavior is confirmed in Fig. 3(d)
where we show the M-tangling power (scaled by
[d/(d+ 1)]M, which is higher than 0.99 across all
different cases. In Fig. 3(e), we further show the
total gate time, which we have restricted to less
than 2 ms so that we are within the coherence
times of the nuclei ( T∗
2∈[3,17]ms; see Ref. [61]).
Further, in Fig. 3(f), we show the gate error due
to residual entanglement of the target subspace
with unwanted nuclei. We note that for vari-
ous realizations, the gate fidelity can exceed 95 %
(e.g., cases “2”, “7”, “19”, “23”,“30”, “37”), imply-
ing small levels of cross-talk with the remaining
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 825 unwanted nuclear spins.
4.2 Multi-spin scheme for GHZ 3states
Next, we proceed with the multi-spin scheme,
which can prepare GHZ 3-like states with a single-
shot entangling operation. To identify optimal
nuclearspincandidatesandsequenceparameters,
we follow a slightly different procedure, shown in
Fig. 2 and explained more in Appendix G. In this
case, we require that two nuclear one-tangles are
maximized for the same sequence parameters and
under the gate time restriction of 2 ms. At the
same time, we require small values of unwanted
one-tangles to minimize the cross-talk with the
remaining nuclear spin bath. We summarize the
results of this method in Fig. 4. In Fig. 4(a), we
show the one-tangles of two nuclei that are max-
imized by a single-shot gate for 15 different DD
sequences. To accept these cases as “optimal”,
we require that the target one-tangles are greater
than a threshold, here set to 0.9. Figure 4(b)
shows the nuclear rotation angles, and Fig. 4(c)
shows the dot products of the nuclear rotation
axes for each case. Since now the sequence unit
time will not in principle coincide with the res-
onance of both target spins (since their HF pa-
rameters are distinct), the nuclear rotation axes
will not be anti-parallel for both nuclei. However,
when n0·n1≤0for a particular nuclear spin,
then if it is also rotated by the appropriate angle,
the one-tangle can be maximal (see for example
cases “2”, “7”, “8”, “11” and Ref. [38] for a more
detailed explanation). Thus, the feature of non-
antiparallel axes can be compensated by rotating
thenuclearspinsbyanglesthatdeviatefrom π/2.
On the other hand, if n0·n1>0,G1cannot go
to 0, and the one-tangle can never be 1 (see case
“4”, for nuclear spin C5). In Fig. 4(d) we show
theM-tangling power (scaled by [d/(d+ 1)]M)
of the multi-spin gate. As expected, the M-
tangling power saturates to 1 when the nuclear
one-tangles are also maximal. In Fig. 4(e), we
show the gate time of the multi-spin operation,
and in Figure 4(f), the gate error. We note that
for various cases, the multi-spin gate duration is
at least two times shorter (see for example, cases
“4”, “11”, “22” ) compared to the sequential one.
Thus, the multi-spin gates can be equally reliable
as the sequential gates, but with the additional
advantage of being significantly faster compared
to the latter.4.3 Generating GHZ Mstates
We can use similar ideas to extend the size of the
GHZM-like states. In Fig. 5(a), we show the M-
tangling power of composite evolutions that can
prepare GHZ M-like states up to M= 10qubits.
The nuclear one-tangles for all different realiza-
tions are provided in Appendix H. Figure 5(b)
shows the gate error of the composite evolution
due to the presence of the remaining 27−(M−1)
nuclear spins, whereas Fig. 5(c) shows the total
gate time of the composite sequences. As the size
of the GHZ-like states increases, it becomes more
difficult to eliminate the cross-talk between the
target nuclei since we need to ensure that only
one out of the M−1evolutions rotates condi-
tionally one of the M−1target nuclei. However,
we still find acceptable cases that can prepare up
to GHZ 10-like states with M-tangling power over
0.95. The infidelity tends to increase as we per-
form more entangling gates because it becomes
more likely that at least one of the M−1en-
tangling operators will induce cross-talk between
the target subspace and the remaining nuclear
spin bath. However, it is still possible to create
GHZ 6-like states within ∼2ms, and even GHZ 9-
or GHZ 10-like states within 4ms, a significant
improvement compared to gate times reported in
Ref. [33], which could be as high as 2.371 ms for
controlling only a single nuclear spin.
We also study the possibility of creating
GHZM-like states for M > 3via the multi-spin
scheme. In principle, due to the more constrained
optimization that requires the simultaneous max-
imization of M−1nuclear one-tangles, we expect
that we will find fewer acceptable cases that re-
spect the bounds we set for target/unwanted one-
tangles. In Fig. 6(a), we show the nuclear one-
tangles for various cases of single-shot entangling
operations, which can create up to GHZ 9-like
states. Figure 6(b) shows the M-tangling power
of the single-shot gate, whereas Fig. 6(c) shows
the gate error. We note that the infidelity can
in principle be less than 0.1, but the M-tangling
power is not high enough in all cases, due to im-
perfect entanglement between target nuclei and
the electron.
Figure 6(d) shows the gate time of the multi-
spin operation. Once again, the gates are signifi-
cantly faster compared to the sequential scheme.
While for the sequential protocol increasing the
numberofpartiesoftheGHZ M-likestatesimplies
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 9(a)(b)(c)Figure 5: Preparing states locally equivalent to GHZ Mvia the sequential scheme. Each case #corresponds to a
unique composite DD sequence that selects M−1nuclei from the register. (a) M-tangling power of the composite
M−1entangling gates for various cases. (b) Gate error of the composite evolution due to the presence of unwanted
nuclei, and (c) gate time of the total sequence for each case and each different size of GHZ-like states. The panels
from top to bottom correspond to GHZ 4, GHZ 5, GHZ 6, GHZ 7, GHZ 8, GHZ 9and GHZ 10states. The nuclear one-
tangles for each case and value of Mcan be found in Appendix H.
(a)(b)(c)(d)
Figure 6: Creating GHZ M-like states using the multi-spin protocol. (a) One-tangles of nuclei that participate in the
GHZ-like state. (b) M-tangling power of the single-shot operation. (c) Gate error due to residual entanglement with
unwanted nuclei from the register. (d) Gate time of the single-shot operation.
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 10durations of the total gate that only increase, the
multi-spin operations follow a different trend. To
understand this, note that the sequential scheme
requires higher-order resonances (i.e., longer unit
times) to suppress unintended couplings with un-
wanted nuclei. Higher-order resonances are also
neededtoensurethatonlyonetargetnuclearspin
is rotated conditionally by each of the M−1se-
quential gates. Thus, increasing the GHZ size
makes the requirement to resort to higher-order
sequences, in principle, more stringent. On the
other hand, increasing the size of the GHZ M-like
state in the multi-spin protocol means that we
need to gradually reducehow well we decouple
the electron from the spin bath and allow inter-
actions of the electron with increasingly more nu-
clear spins. In contrast to the sequential scheme,
wethusneedtoshortentheunittime, whichgives
usacceptablecasesofrealizingGHZ M-likestates.
Of course, the duration of the single-shot gate
also depends on the number of times, N, we re-
peat the unit and on the constraints we impose
on the target all-way correlations and unwanted
nuclear one-tangles. In principle, a shorter ba-
sic unit can lead to faster operations. For exam-
ple, it is remarkable that multi-partite entangled
states can be prepared within 1 ms or even faster
with only one entangling gate (see for example,
the case of the GHZ 8-like state). Experimentally,
depending on the nuclear HF parameters, this
method could be highly beneficial for preparing
entangled states involving nuclear spin clusters
fast, whereas the entanglement could be boosted
using distillation protocols [29].
Overall, both the sequential and multi-spin
protocols can generate high-quality GHZ M-like
states with reasonable gate times. Our formal-
ism based on the M-tangling power allows us to
identify optimal scenarios of preparing entangled
states with minimal cross-talk. Interestingly, a
hybrid entanglement generation scheme involving
both single-shot and sequential gates could offer
a more realistic path to scalability by drastically
reducingthenumberofentanglingoperationsand
gate times.
5 Entanglement of mixed states
So far we have made no assumption about the
initial state of the system and focused instead
on the capability of the gates to produce entan-gled states. We have used the gate error due
to residual entanglement links and the unwanted
nuclear one-tangles as a metric of mixedness in
the GHZM-like states prepared by DD sequences.
We now work with a density matrix for the total
system and inspect the entanglement of a target
subspace after we trace out the unwanted nuclear
spins. This partial trace operation will result, in
general, in a mixed state for the target subspace,
for which we cannot use directly the M-tangles
that are defined for pure states.
In the case of mixed states, the M-tangles
are calculated via so-called convex roof construc-
tions [55, 62]:
τM(ρ) =min/summationdisplay
ipiτ(|ψi⟩), (8)
where the minimum is taken over all ensembles
with probabilities piand pure states|ψi⟩that re-
construct the mixed state density operator. The
ensemble that gives the minimum value of the
tangle is known as optimal. Such convex roof
extensions are necessary to ensure an entangle-
ment monotone, but since the minimum of a
sum of convex functions is not always convex, we
need to take the convex hull of Eq. (8) (see also
Refs. [63, 62]).
Finding the optimal ensemble is a non-trivial
task as it entails searching over all possible de-
compositions of the mixed state. This task be-
comes even harder when the rank of the reduced
density matrix is large. However, for our prob-
lem, we find that starting from an arbitrary pure
stateofthetotalsystemandtracingoutanynum-
ber of nuclei, the maximum rank of the reduced
density matrix is 2. This is due to the form of
the total evolution operator, which can produce
at most GHZ M-like states (if extra single-qubit
gates are not allowed) given the appropriate ini-
tial state. Further, the maximum rank proves
that the creation of |W⟩-like states is impossi-
ble if one allows only entangling gates generated
by DD sequences. In Appendix I we derive the
eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the density ma-
trix, of which two are nonzero, provided the elec-
tron starts from a superposition of |0⟩and|1⟩.
The analytical expression of the eigenvalues
and eigenvectors of the reduced density matrix
of the target subspace allows us to find the opti-
mal ensemble that minimizes the M-tangle of the
mixed state. This can be done using the meth-
ods developed in Ref. [62]. The first step is to di-
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 11agonalize the reduced density matrix of the sys-
tem. Based on the eigendecomposition we can
then construct the trial state:
|ψtrial⟩=/radicalig
λ+|v+⟩−eiχ/radicalig
1−λ+|v−⟩,(9)
where|v±⟩are the eigenvectors of the rank-2
mixed state and λ±the two nonzero eigenvalues.
Since any ensemble can be obtained by acting
with unitaries on the diagonalized reduced den-
sity matrix, minimizing the entanglement of the
trial state by varying the angle χimplies that we
obtain the entanglement of the optimal ensemble
that reconstructs the mixed state. The angle χ
controls the relative phase of the eigenvectors.
Our system consists of 28 qubits, so simulating
the total density matrix is computationally hard.
The fact that we obtain the reduced density ma-
trix analytically [see Appendix I] allows us to find
the impact of the unwanted spins on the target
subspace. Working with a density matrix neces-
sitates that we specify the system’s initial state.
In the literature, it is often assumed that the nu-
clear spin bath starts from the maximally mixed
state. This assumption, however, would result
in maximal entanglement in the target subspace
(provided we perform close to perfect gates and
once the electron-nuclear target register is pu-
rified) free from cross-talk, since the maximally
mixed state of the unwanted spins would remain
invariant under any unitary evolution. This is far
from true since the target subspace suffers from
cross-talk from unwanted nuclei introduced by
the entangling gates. On the other hand, consid-
ering a pure state for the entire electron-nuclear
register is again unrealistic, but we choose this
convention to find how classical correlations due
to the partial trace operation manifest in the tar-
get subspace.
For the following analysis, we will use the 39
caseswefoundforcreatingGHZ 3-likestates(gen-
eralization to larger dimension of the target sub-
space is straightforward) from Sec. 4 via the se-
quential scheme. We further use the analytical
expression of the three-tangle, first introduced in
Ref. [55]. To prepare an entangled state with
genuine all-way correlations, we need to find the
appropriate initial state for the target subspace,
upon which we act with the entangling oper-
ations. In most cases, this state needs to be
|+⟩|0⟩⊗M−1. (Recall that the CR x(π/2)gates
are locally equivalent to CNOT.) If this initialstate does not give rise to a three-tangle of at
least 0.95, we then optimize over the initial three-
qubit state (we assume a sampling of 0.05πfor
θ∈[0,π]and0.1πforγ∈[0,2π]for each qubit
state|ξ⟩= cos(θ/2)|0⟩+eiγsin(θ/2)|1⟩). It is
thus possible that other initial states might give
slightly larger three-tangles than the ones we will
show later on. We further assume that the initial
state of the bath is |0⟩⊗27−(M−1).
We begin with the following setup. In Sec. 4,
we found 39 cases of preparing GHZ 3-like states
using the sequential scheme, via the composition
of two consecutive DD sequences. The composite
evolution rotates both target and unwanted nu-
clei. Some unwanted spins might evolve slightly
conditionally on the electron. Thus, we need to
update the initial state of all spins under the
composite evolution. Using the analytical expres-
sion of the reduced density matrix, we obtain its
eigenvalues and eigenvectors and arrange the 39
cases in increasing value of the largest eigenvalue,
p=λ+.
(a)(b)
Figure 7: (a) Three-tangle of the pure state of the target
subspace ignoring unwanted nuclei (purple), and three-
tangle of either eigenvector (blue) of the mixed state for
each of the 39 cases of Fig. 3. The 39 cases are sorted
in terms of largest eigenvalue, λ+=p, shown along the
x-axis. (b) Three-tangle of the mixed electron-nuclear
state (red), obtained by minimizing the entanglement of
the trial state of Eq. (9) for each value of p. The dashed
line shows the convex hull.
In Fig. 7(a), we show the three-tangle of the
pure state prepared using the composite evolu-
tions of Fig. 3 by ignoring the presence of un-
wanted nuclei. Using the three-tangle, we ver-
ify that all-way correlations are maximal across
all cases, as expected based on the fact that we
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 12approximately saturated the M-tangling power
(and we also use the appropriate three-qubit ini-
tial state). We further show the three-tangle of
the two eigenvectors, |v±⟩, as a function of the
largest eigenvalue p, obtained by diagonalizing
the mixed state (after tracing out unwanted nu-
clei). The three-tangle of |v+⟩coincides with
the three-tangle of |v−⟩, which means that the
unwanted bath creates a mixture of two terms,
which both have the same M-way entanglement
and are GHZ 3-like states. Another feature we
observe is that the all-way correlations of the
eigenvectors|v±⟩coincide with those of the pure
GHZ 3-likestateofthetargetelectron-nuclearreg-
ister. Hence, tracing out the unwanted spins
makes the reduced state classically correlated,
but the amount of entanglement in each term of
the mixed state is unaffected.
In Fig. 7(b), we then use the two eigenvectors
to build the trial state and find the minimum of
the three-tangle as we vary χfor each value of
p. Since we are tracing out 25 unwanted nuclei,
we see that the entanglement of the mixed state
reduces substantially. One simple way to under-
stand this feature is to think of a trial (pure) two-
qubit state which is a superposition of two Bell
states. When we have the equal superposition,
the two-qubit concurrence goes to 0, whereas for
different weights between the two terms, the con-
currence is 0< C (|ψ⟩)≤1. A similar thing
happens here, with the difference that the su-
perposition terms are two GHZ 3-like states. In
Appendix J, we show that the three-tangle of the
superposition of two orthogonal GHZ 3states is
muchmoresensitivecomparedtotheconcurrence
of the superposition of two orthogonal Bell states
for the two-qubit case. Even for large values of p
(i.e.p= 0.9)theminimumthree-tangleisaround
∼0.64for the GHZ 3mixture compared to the
minimum concurrence which is ∼0.8for the Bell
mixture. In Fig. 7(b), we further show the convex
hull of the minimum value of the three-tangle. In
the scenario we are studying, the minimum value
of the three-tangle is not convex since the pure
state of the target subspace does not have per-
fect correlations due to slightly imperfect gates
(i.e., gates that cause over- or under-rotation of
the nuclei). If the gates create perfect all-way
entanglement then both eigenvectors are perfect
GHZ 3-like states, and the minimum of the three-
tangle is convex in terms of p, and is given byτmin(p) = (1−2p)2(see Appendix J).
We should further comment that our results
depend highly on the initial state of the system.
Since the evolution is conditional on the electron,
if the initial state of the unwanted spins is not the
appropriate one to generate the maximum possi-
ble entanglement, cross-talk will be suppressed.
Also, as the system’s initial state is generically
mixed, the rank of the reduced density matrix
after tracing out unwanted nuclei will be larger
than 2. However, the simple model we assumed
in this section captures qualitatively how the M-
way entanglement changes as the target subspace
becomes more mixed, as a result of residual en-
tanglement with unwanted nuclei.
In the next section, we show another way
of understanding the unwanted residual entan-
glement in terms of the non-unitary entangling
power of the entire quantum channel, where now
the partial trace operation is translated into the
operator-sum representation [64].
6 Non-unitary entangling power
An alternative way to include the impact of un-
wanted nuclei on the target subspace is to use the
Kraus operators associated with the partial trace
channel. In Ref. [38], we derived the Kraus oper-
ators for an arbitrary number of nuclei coupled to
a single electron spin. Here, we use this result to
derivetheM-tanglingpoweroftheevolutionthat
the target system undergoes due to the presence
of the unwanted nuclei. Because this is a gener-
alization for non-unitary dynamics, we will refer
to this metric for brevity as the non-unitary M-
tangling power.
The density matrix of the total system evolves
under the unitary Ugiven by Eq. (2). If we
trace out the unwanted nuclei, the target sub-
space evolves under the quantum channel E(ρ) =/summationtext2L−K−1
k=0Ekρ0E†
k, whereEkare the Kraus oper-
ators corresponding to unwanted nuclei, Lis the
number of total nuclei in the bath, and Kis the
number of target nuclear spins. In this case, the
M-tangling power (where M=K+ 1) of the
quantum channel reads [65]:
ϵp,M(E) := 2M/summationtext2L−K−1
r,s=0Tr[(Er⊗Es)Ωp0(Er⊗Es)†˜P],
(10)
with the same definitions for Ωp0and ˜Pwe intro-
duced in Sec. 3. Since the total evolution is con-
trolled on the electron, it is possible to derive a
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 13closed-form expression for the M-tangling power
of the channel, which reads (see Appendix A.4):
ϵp,M(E) =ϵp,M(U)
2/parenleftigg
1+/productdisplay
j∈
unw. nuc./braceleftigg
G(j)
1+W(j)/bracerightigg/parenrightigg
(11)
withW(j)given by:
W(j)=/parenleftig
n(j)
z,0cosϕ(j)
1
2sinϕ(j)
0
2−n(j)
z,1cosϕ(j)
0
2sinϕ(j)
1
2
−(n(j)
x,1n(j)
y,0−n(j)
x,0n(j)
y,1) sinϕ(j)
0
2sinϕ(j)
1
2/parenrightig2
(12)
We find that the M-tangling power of the chan-
nel is upper-bounded by the unitary M-tangling
power of the target space, i.e. ϵpM(E)≤ϵp,M(U).
The equality is satisfied when the unwanted sub-
space evolves trivially (i.e., irrespective of the
electron’s state), in which case it holds that
G(j)
1= 1andW(j)= 0,∀j. Therefore, whenever
ϵp,M(E)< ϵp,M(U), we know that the unwanted
spin bath possesses nonzero correlations with the
target subspace. This is an alternative way to see
that the entanglement of the mixed state is lower
compared to the pure case, a feature we already
observed in Sec. 5.
Figure 8: (a) Comparison of the unitary, ϵp,M(U), with
the non-unitary, ϵp,M(E),M-tangling power for the 29
casesofFig.5thatprepareGHZ 4-likestatesinthetarget
subspace, viathesequentialprotocol. (b)Comparisonof
ϵp,M(U)withϵp,M(E)forthe7casesofFig.6forprepar-
ing GHZ 4-like states via the multi-spin protocol. In both
panels, the dark blue bars show the unitary M-tangling
power, the pink bars the non-unitary M-tangling power,
whereas the green bars show an approximation of the
latter.The remarkable simplicity of Eq. (11) allows
us to obtain full information of the entanglement
distribution within the electron-nuclear register,
irrespective of the total number of qubits in the
system, or number of nuclear spins we are trac-
ing out. Using ϵp,M(E), we can find how well
the gate we design saturates the M-way cor-
relations of the target subspace, given the fact
that there might be residual unwanted correla-
tions linking the target subspace with unwanted
spins; those unwanted correlations are encoded
in the Kraus operators. An extra advantage of
this approach is that we never need to assume
an initial state of the electron-nuclear register, as
we did for example in Sec. 5. To compare the
non-unitary M-tangling power against ϵp,M(U),
we consider as an example the optimal cases we
identified for preparing GHZ 4-like states from
Sec. 4 for either the sequential or the multi-spin
schemes. The results for the sequential scheme
are shown in Fig. 8(a). The dark blue bars show
the unitary M-tangling power across 29 realiza-
tions, and the pink bars show the non-unitary M-
tangling power. As expected, ϵp,M(E)is lower in
all cases due to unresolved crosstalk, and this de-
viation is enhanced when the gate error is larger
[see Fig. 5(b)]. A similar feature is observed
in Fig. 8(b) for the 7 cases of preparing GHZ 4-
like states using the multi-spin scheme. Specifi-
cally, for case “5”, for which we found the lowest
gate error emerging from residual entanglement
across the 7 cases [see Fig. 6(b)], the non-unitary
M-tangling power is closer to the unitary one.
Hence, this verifies our previous observation that
the mixed electron-nuclear states we create in the
target subspace remain GHZ M-like, but their en-
tanglement is reduced whenever correlations be-
tween the target subspace and the unwanted spin
bath are present.
In Fig. 8, we also display with green bars an
approximate expression for ϵp,M(E), where we set
W(j)= 0,∀j. We note that the approximate ex-
pression agrees very well with the exact expres-
sion ofϵp,M(E).
Finally, let us discuss the computational com-
plexity related to the various entanglement met-
rics we introduced. The calculation of the G1
Makhlin invariants and hence of target/unwanted
one-tangles scales linearly with the number of nu-
clear spins, since each G1quantity describes the
evolution of a single nuclear spin. Thus, the M-
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 14tangling power, ϵp,M(U), can be calculated with-
out computational difficulty. Similarly, ϵp,M(E)
scales linearly with the size of the total size of the
register (including target and unwanted nuclei),
and can also be calculated without difficulty. The
infidelity of the target gate due to the presence of
unwanted spins requires a summation over 2L−K
Kraus operators. Therefore, the starting point to
identify optimal cases for preparing GHZ M-like
states is to calculate the target/unwanted one-
tangles in order to maximize (minimize) target
(unwanted) correlations. To further inspect the
optimal cases in terms of gate error, one can then
proceed with this metric to obtain full informa-
tion about the dynamics of the system.
7 Additional error analysis
In this section, we study the effect of pulse con-
trol errors and dephasing errors that can occur on
the electronic qubit. To find the impact of those
errors, we consider only their contribution to the
M-tangling power of the target subspace.
7.1 Target subspace M-way entanglement un-
der electronic dephasing
We begin by considering dephasing errors for the
electronic qubit. The dephasing error can be rep-
resented via the Kraus operators [66]:
K0=/radicalbig
λ0/parenleftigg
eiθt0
0e−iθt/parenrightigg
(13)
K1=/radicalbig
λ1/parenleftigg
e−iθt0
0eiθt/parenrightigg
. (14)
In Appendix B, we prove that the “dephased”
M-tangling power of the target subspace (con-
sisting of the electron and target nuclei) has a
simple closed-form expression. In particular, for
a CPMG decoupling sequence of unit time, t, and
ofNiterations, it takes the form:
ϵp,M(Edeph) =/parenleftig2
3/parenrightigM1 +R
2M/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1),(15)
whereRis given by:
R=/parenleftig
λ2
0+λ2
1+ 2λ0λ1cos(θt)/parenrightig2N×
/parenleftig
λ2
0+λ2
1+ 2λ0λ1cos(2θt)/parenrightigN.(16)In the case where we compose CPMG sequences
of different unit times tjand iterations Nj(as we
do, for example, in the sequential scheme), the
functionRtakes the form:
R=/productdisplay
j/parenleftig
λ2
0+λ2
1+ 2λ0λ1cos(θtj)/parenrightig2Nj×
/parenleftig
λ2
0+λ2
1+ 2λ0λ1cos(2θtj)/parenrightigNj.(17)
We verify that in the limit of λ0= 1andλ1= 0,
we recover the ideal ϵp,M(U)for the target sub-
space. Wefurtherfindthatthe M-tanglingpower
in the presence of electronic dephasing errors is
bounded from below by 50%.
We begin by studying the impact of the elec-
tronic dephasing for the 39 cases of preparing
GHZ 3-like states via the sequential scheme. The
results are shown in Fig. 9(a), where we consider
λ0= 0.98,λ1= 1−λ0, and dephasing angles
ranging from θ−1= 400µs toθ−1= 50µs. We
see that for θ−1= 400µs, we preserve high M-
tangling power over 90 %for most realizations.
For a dephasing angle θ−1= 100µs, we find
several cases with M-tangling power around 80-
85%. For a dephasing angle θ−1= 50µs, the
M-way correlations can drop to less than 60%
across many cases.
In Fig. 9(b), we repeat the calculations for the
27 cases of preparing GHZ 3-like states using the
multi-spinprotocol. The M-tanglingpowerofthe
multi-spin protocol remains higher in the pres-
ence of electronic dephasing compared to the se-
quential scheme. We even observe that for the
smallest dephasing angle of θ−1= 50µs, we have
several cases which exceed 80 %M-way correla-
tions. This behavior is expected since the multi-
spin scheme is, in principle, faster than the se-
quential protocol, and hence it is less sensitive to
electronic dephasing errors.
Figure9(c)showsthe M-tanglingpowerofcase
“1” of the sequential scheme, as a function of λ0
andθ−1, whereas Fig. 9(d) shows the M-tangling
power of case “1” of the multi-spin scheme. In the
sequential scheme, we control the nuclei C1 and
C18 (with a gate time ∼1843.2µs), whereas, in
the multi-spin protocol, we control the nuclei C1
and C2 (with a gate time ∼1366.5µs). Although
theresultsofFig.9(c)andFig.9(d)shouldnotbe
compared directly due to the different total tim-
ings, we note that the multi-spin scheme is more
robust to dephasing errors. In Appendix C, we
provide another example where we compare the
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 15(a)(b)(c)(d)Figure 9:M-tangling power of the target subspace when the electronic qubit experiences dephasing. (a) M−tangling
power for the 39 cases of preparing GHZ 3-like states with the sequential protocol. (b) M-tangling power of the 27
cases of preparing GHZ 3-like states with the multi-spin scheme. The darker blue bars in (a) and (b) correspond to
the no-dephasing scenario, whereas the remaining colors include electronic dephasing with dephasing angles θ−1=
(400,100,50)µs. For the cases where we consider dephasing, we set λ0= 0.98. (c)M-tangling power for case #1
of the sequential scheme for different dephasing angles and λ0parameters. (d) Same as in (c) but for case #1 of
the multi-spin scheme.
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 16performanceofthemulti-spinschemewiththese-
quential, but now for case “16”. Although case “7”
ofthemulti-spinschemehasatotalsequencetime
longer than the sequence time of the sequential
scheme, we find again that the multi-spin scheme
is more robust to dephasing. We attribute this
feature to the more complicated dephasing chan-
nel of the sequential scheme. The expression of
ϵp,M(Edeph)for the sequential scheme is described
by different unit times tjand iterations Njsince
we are composing CPMG sequences to control
each nucleus. We believe that this feature can
potentially lead to M-way correlations that are
more sensitive to electronic dephasing errors.
7.2 Target subspace M-way entanglement un-
der pulse errors
We now consider the effect of pulse errors dur-
ing the control of the electronic spin. We as-
sume that the pulse error results in an over- or
under-rotation along the ˆx-axis of the electron.
We model such errors by modifying the perfect
Rx(π)acting on the electron into Rx(π+ϵ) =
e−iπ/2(1+ϵ)σx.Such rotation angle errors yield
an evolution operator which is no longer block-
diagonal. Consequently, we cannot use the M-
tangling power we found in Eq. (6). Addition-
ally, we cannot study the M-tangling power for
an odd-sized system since, as we mentioned in
Sec. 3, the expression of Eq. (5) is only applicable
to CR-type evolution operators. This difficulty
in describing the M-way correlations on the evo-
lution operator level for odd Marises from the
fact that averaging over all initial states is not
straightforward due to the expression of the odd
M-tangle we start with. Nevertheless, by model-
ing the rotation angle error in this way, we still
preserve unitary dynamics, and we can find the
impact of such errors on the M-tangling power of
even-sized systems numerically by making use of
Eq. (5).
First, we consider systematic errors and study
their impact on the cases of preparing GHZ 4-
like states via the sequential or multi-spin pro-
tocols. In Fig. 10(a) and Fig. 10(b), we show
theM-tangling power for the 29 cases of prepar-
ing GHZ 4-states, assuming a systematic over-
rotation of ϵ= 2%andϵ= 8%respectively. The
dark blue bars depict the error-free case. The
light blue bars correspond to the XY2 sequence,
whereas the orange bars to the CPMG sequence,including the over-rotation errors. In the case of
2%error, we see that CPMG can provide high
values ofM-way correlations only for a few cases
(e.g., case “5”, case “11”, case “17”, case “24”).
However, if we consider the XY2 sequence whose
one unit ist/4−(π)X−t/2−(π)Y−t/4, we find
that the impact of the error on the quality of the
GHZ states is negligible. For an over-rotation er-
ror of 8%, theM-way correlations accumulated
via the CPMG sequence are lower than 50%,
whereas the XY2 sequence still provides high en-
tanglement across almost all cases (all cases be-
sides case “9” and case “20”).
We observe a similar behavior of systematic
over-rotation errors for the multi-spin scheme.
We depict the results for the multi-spin proto-
col in Fig. 10(c) and Fig. 10(d), where we assume
a systematic over-rotation error of 2%and8%,
respectively. For 2%error, we find that ϵp,M(U)
obtainedviatheXY2schemeisextremelyrobust,
although the pulse iterations per case are in gen-
eral high:N= 128for case “1”, N= 76for case
“2”,N= 124for case “3”, N= 136for case “4”,
N= 78for case “5”, N= 223for case “6”, and
N= 243for case “7”. For an 8%error shown
in Fig. 10(d), case “6” and case “7” display the
most prominent reduction in M-way correlations
across all cases, which is consistent with the large
number of decoupling unit iterations.
The robustness of XY-sequences to pulse errors
has already been reported extensively in the lit-
erature [42, 67, 68, 69]. In Ref. [69], a quantum
process tomography protocol called boostrap was
used to determine control pulse errors for the π
andπ/2pulses. Itwasmentionedthereinthatthe
π/2pulses show twice as much variation than π-
pulseerrorsindicatingthatthepulseedgeshavea
larger impact on shorter pulses. The pulse errors
were taken as constant during each run and the
same for different runs. The reported error val-
ues forπ-pulses were ϵx=ϵy=−0.02(rotation
errors forπXandπYpulses),qx= 0.005(ˆx-axis
component of πYrotation),qy= 0(ˆy-axis com-
ponent ofπXrotation) and qz=±0.05(ˆz-axis
component of πXandπYrotations). More im-
portantly Ramsey, spin-echo, XY4, CPMG, and
UDD simulations with those parameters were in
strong agreement with experimental data. The
estimated pulse error was 1%. In Ref. [68] XY-
sequences were used to cancel out the systematic
pulseerrors, suppressdecoherenceoftheelectron,
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 17(a)
(c)(d)(b)Figure 10: Generation of GHZ 4-like states in the presence of systematic over-rotation pulse errors. (a), (b) M-
tangling power using the 29 cases we found for preparing GHZ 4-like states via the sequential scheme, assuming a
systematic error of 2%in (a), and of 8%in (b). (c), (d) M-tangling power for the 7 cases of preparing GHZ 4-like
states using the multi-spin scheme assuming a 2%error in (c), and an 8%error in (d). In all panels, the bars with
the highest value of ϵp,M(U)correspond to the error-free case. The orange bars show the CPMG including pulse
errors, whereas the light blue bars show the XY2 including pulse errors. All bars are scaled by the maximal value of
(2/3)4.
(a)(b)
Figure 11: Generation of GHZ 4-like states in the presence of random over-/under-rotation pulse errors. (a) Mean
M-tangling power using the 29 cases we found for preparing GHZ 4-like states via the sequential scheme, assuming
rotation angle errors sampled from a normal distribution with standard deviation σ= 0.01. (b) Mean M-tangling
power for the 7 cases of preparing GHZ 4-like states via the multi-spin scheme assuming the same standard deviation.
In both (a) and (b), the bars with the highest value of ϵp,M(U)correspond to the error-free case. The orange bars
correspond to the CPMG case including pulse errors, whereas the light blue bars show the XY2 case including pulse
errors. All bars are scaled by the maximal value of (2/3)4. Each error bar for CPMG and XY2 in (a) captures the
range ofϵp,M(U)where we run 500 trials per case, with different random samplings per sequence iteration. In (b),
we perform 1000 random trials per case to display the error bars.
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 18as well as suppress artificially injected magnetic
noise, which was introduced in the same stripline
that was used for the control pulses. The fidelity
of a singleπ-pulse on the electron was again es-
timated to be 99 %using calibration techniques
from Ref. [41, 67]. Therefore, since the π-pulse
microwave control can typically exceed 99 %for
defect platforms, we expect that the M-tangling
power we evaluate for the 2%systematic rotation
error will be close to the experimentally observed
one. In Appendix E, we perform another simu-
lation with the aforementioned error parameters
and verify that the M-tangling power we obtain
for the ideal CPMG sequence is close to the one
obtained via the XY2 sequence in the presence of
pulse imperfections. This reveals that combining
our protocols with the XY2 decoupling sequence
is sufficient to prepare high-fidelity GHZ Mstates
in the presence of realistic experimental errors.
We continue the pulse error analysis, assuming
random over-/under-rotation pulse errors, which
we sample from a normal distribution with stan-
dard deviation σ= 0.01. In Fig. 11(a), we show
the meanM-tangling power for the XY2 (light
bluebars)andfortheCPMG(orangebars), using
the 29 cases of preparing GHZ 4-like states with
the sequential scheme. In each case, we run 500
independent trials where we sample anew from
the normal distribution (per iteration of the de-
couplingunit), andweevaluatethemean ϵp,M(U)
across the 500 trials. For comparison, we also
display the ideal ϵp,M(U)per case. CPMG and
XY2 perform on par when random pulse errors
are present. The error bars mark the range of
ϵp,M(U)for the 500 trials per case. We observe
that for the sequential scheme, the M-tangling
power in the presence of random pulse errors is
higher than 0.7 across all cases.
In Fig. 11(b), we show the mean M-tangling
power for the 7 cases of preparing GHZ 4-like
statesusingthemulti-spinscheme. Wesampleer-
rors from the normal distribution with standard
deviationσ= 0.01and repeat the calculation
500 times per case to collect statistics and eval-
uate the mean M-tangling power. Once again,
we observe that the XY2 and CPMG sequences
perform on par in the presence of random over-
/under-rotation errors. The error bars per case
correspond to the range of ϵp,M(U)for a total of
500 random trials.
Overall, we find that the generation of high-quality GHZ Mstates is possible with the current
state-of-the-art experimental control and con-
straints. Our formalism provides a detailed anal-
ysis of the entanglement generation in the pres-
ence of errors and allows us to address the prob-
lem of designing optimal entangling gates that
saturate all-way correlations.
8 Conclusions
Genuine multipartite entangled states are an
essential component of quantum networks and
quantum computing. Exploiting the full poten-
tial of nuclear spins in defect platforms for large-
scale applications requires precise and fast entan-
glement generation. We showed under what con-
ditions decoupling sequences produce gates capa-
ble of maximizing all-way correlations and quan-
tified the entanglement capability of the gates
through the M-tangling power. Using this for-
malism, we guided the selection of sequence pa-
rameters and nuclear spin candidates to prepare
high-quality GHZ M-like states by appropriate
driving of the electron spin. We improved the se-
quential entanglement generation scheme, push-
ing the gate time to as low as 4 ms for preparing
GHZ-likestatesofupto10spins. Wealsostudied
the possibility of direct entanglement generation,
whichperformsonparwiththesequentialscheme
in decoupling capabilities, with the extra advan-
tage that the latter approach drastically reduces
the gate count and speeds up the entanglement
generation. Further, westudiedtheentanglement
of mixed states, revealing that the M-way corre-
lations of a target subspace are sensitive to resid-
ual entanglement with the unwanted nuclei. We
introduced a non-unitary M-way entanglement
metric, which additionally captures correlations
between the target subspace and the unwanted
nuclei and showed that it is upper-bounded by
theunitary M-tanglingpower. Wederivedanon-
unitaryM-tangling power for the target subspace
in the presence of electronic dephasing errors, re-
vealing that the multi-spin protocol can have in
principle superior performance compared to con-
ventional schemes due to its shorter implemen-
tation time. Finally, we studied the impact of
pulse errors on the target subspace M-tangling
power and showed that our protocols combined
with XY decoupling sequences can provide high-
fidelity preparation of GHZ states in the presence
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 19of realistic experimental errors. Our results pave
the way for the systematic and efficient creation
of multi-partite entanglement in spin defect sys-
tems for quantum information applications.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Chenxu Liu,
Yanzhu Chen, Filippos Tzimkas-Dakis and Is-
abela Gnasso for useful discussions. This work
was supported by the NSF (awards 1741656,
2137953, and 2137645) and the Commonwealth
Cyber Initiative (CCI), an investment in the ad-
vancement of cyber R&D, innovation, and work-
force development [70].A Mathematical treatment of M-way
entanglement
A.1 Formulas of M-tangles expressed in terms
of the state vector
For any even M≥4theM-tangle is given by [55,
56]:
τM(|ψ⟩) : =|⟨ψ|σ⊗M
y|ψ∗⟩|2
=⟨ψ|σ⊗M
y|ψ∗⟩⟨ψ∗|σ⊗M
y|ψ⟩
=Tr[|ψ⟩⟨ψ|σ⊗M
y|ψ∗⟩⟨ψ∗|σ⊗M
y]
=Tr[ρσ⊗M
yρ∗σ⊗M
y]
= 2MTr[ρ⊗2M/productdisplay
i=1P(−)
i,i+M],(18)
where in the last line, we have linearized the
equation of the M-tangle by introducing a sec-
ond copy and projecting onto the antisymmet-
ric space of subsystems iandi+M, defined
asP(−)
i,i+M= 1/2(122M×22M−SWAPi,i+M), with
SWAPi,i+M=/summationtext
α,β∈{0,1}|α⟩i|β⟩i+M⟨β|i⟨α|i+M.
ForM= 3, the three-tangle can be expressed in
the following form [55]:
τ3(|ψ⟩) : =τBC|A−τA|B−τA|C, (19)
whereτBC|A= 2(1−Tr[(TrBC[ρ])2])is the
one-tangle of the electron ( Ais the sys-
tem of the electron partitioned from the
space of the two nuclei represented by sys-
temsBandC), andτA|B=Tr[ρAB˜ρAB]−√
2/radicalbig
(Tr[ρAB˜ρAB])2−Tr[(ρAB˜ρAB)2](sim-
ilar definition holds for τA|C), with
˜ρAB=σ⊗2
yρ∗
ABσ⊗2
y.τA|B(orτA|C) is also known
as the entanglement of formation and is alterna-
tively given by τA|B=max[0,λ1−λ2−λ3−λ4],
whereλjare the square roots of eigenval-
ues (in decreasing order) of ρAB˜ρAB, with
ρAB=TrC(ρ).
An alternative way to write the three-tangle (as in Ref. [71]) is:
τ3(|ψ⟩) : =/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle−(⟨ψ|1⊗σy⊗σy|ψ∗⟩)2+ (⟨ψ|σx⊗σy⊗σy|ψ∗⟩)2+ (⟨ψ|σz⊗σy⊗σy|ψ∗⟩)2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle. (20)
This is a complicated expression and averaging this quantity to find the M-tangling power of an
arbitrary evolution operator for M= 3is a difficult task. However, for CR-type evolution operators
we find that it holds ⟨ψ|1⊗σy⊗σy|ψ∗⟩= 0 =⟨ψ|σz⊗σy⊗σy|ψ∗⟩. Considering⟨ψ|1⊗σy⊗σy|ψ∗⟩
we can show that this vanishes for CR-type evolutions:
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 20⟨ψ|1⊗σy⊗σy|ψ∗⟩=⟨ψ0|(CR)†1⊗σy⊗σy(CR)∗|ψ∗
0⟩
=⟨ψ0|σjj⊗l[R(l)
nj]†(1⊗σy⊗σy)σkk⊗l(R(l)
nk)∗|ψ∗
0⟩
=⟨ψ0|σjj⊗l[R(l)
nj]†σ(l)
y(R(l)
nj)∗|ψ∗
0⟩∝⟨ψ0,B|σy|ψ∗
0,B⟩⟨ψ0,C|σy|ψ∗
0,C⟩= 0,(21)
where we have used the fact that R†
njσy(Rnj)∗=
σyas well as the property ⟨ϕ|A|ϕ⟩=⟨ϕ|σyC|ϕ⟩=
⟨ϕ|σy|ϕ∗⟩= 0, whereAis an anti-linear operator
whose expectation value vanishes for all states
|ϕ⟩ ∈ HandCdenotes complex conjugation.
Analogously, one can prove that ⟨ψ|σz⊗σy⊗
σy|ψ∗⟩= 0. Thus, these results simplify the ex-
pression of the three-tangle for states generated
by CR-type evolutions, meaning that we can ex-
press it as:
τ3(|ψ⟩) : =|⟨ψ|σx⊗σy⊗σy|ψ∗⟩|2
=Tr[ρ(σx⊗σy⊗σy)ρ∗(σx⊗σy⊗σy)].
(22)
We can linearize the above formula by noticing
that we can write the three-tangle by extending
the Hilbert space into a 6 qubit system:
τ3(|ψ⟩) = 23Tr[ρ⊗2P(+)
143/productdisplay
i=2P(−)
i,i+3]. (23)
The above expression can be understood as a
“vectorized” form of Eq. (22), since we note that
|σy⟩=vec(σy) =−i(|01⟩−|10⟩), which means
P(−)= 1/2(1−SWAP )between the sectors iand
i+Mcanberepresentedas P(−)=1
2|σy⟩⟨σy|. We
alsofoundthatEq.(23)canbegeneralizedtoodd
M > 3, for arbitrary initial (pure) product states
evolved under a CR-type evolution:
τM(|ψ⟩) = 2MTr[ρ⊗2P(+)
1,1+MM/productdisplay
i=2P(−)
i,i+M].(24)
The most general expression for the odd M-
tangle for states that undergo arbitrary unitary
evolution can be found in Ref. [57]. We also veri-
fied by numerical inspection that Eq. (24) agrees
with the definition of the odd tangle of Ref. [57]
when the evolution is CR-type.
A.2 Entangling power of multipartite gates us-
ingM-way entanglement metrics
We define the M-tangling power as the average
of theM-tangleϵp,M=⟨τM(Uρ0U†)⟩, where the
averageistakenoverallinitialproductstates |ψ0⟩ofMqubits, with ρ0=|ψ0⟩⟨ψ0|. To combine
both the even Mand oddMcases, we define ˜P
as:
˜P=

/producttextM
i=1P(−)
i,i+MevenM
P(+)
1,1+M/producttextM
i=2P(−)
i,i+ModdM.(25)
In order to perform the average we consider the
uniform distribution of product states |ψ0⟩ofM
qubits. For example, for a single-qubit state
cos(θ/2)|0⟩+eiϕsin(θ/2)|1⟩, the uniform distri-
bution isP(θ,ϕ) = 1/(4π) = (/integraltextsinθdθdϕ )−1.
Averaging over the uniform distribution in
HM2, we find that the M-tangling power reads:
ϵp,M(U) = 2M⟨Tr[U⊗2ρ⊗2
0(U†)⊗2˜P]⟩|ψ0⟩⊗2
= 2MTr[U⊗2⟨ρ⊗2
0⟩|ψ0⟩⊗2(U†)⊗2˜P]
= 2MTr/bracketleftig
U⊗2/integraldisplay
dµ(|ψ0⟩⟨ψ0|)⊗2(U†)⊗2˜P/bracketrightig
= 2MTr[U⊗2Ωp0(U†)⊗2˜P],
(26)
where Ωp0= (d+ 1)−M/producttextM
i=1P(+)
i,i+M, withd= 2
andP(+)
i,i+M= 1/2(12M×2M+SWAPi,i+M). To
prove the expression for Ωp0, it suffices to note
that the uniform distribution of product states
factorizes, and hence we can consider the total
average as averages of the sectors iandi+M,
∀i. Thus, we have Ωp0=/producttextM
iωi,i+M. Since Ωp0
is symmetric under the exchange of iandi+M,
we then have ωi,i+M=cP(+)
i,i+M, wherecis a con-
stant equal to c= (d+ 1)−1(see also Ref. [72]).
Alternatively, the combined integral of the sec-
torsiandi+Mcan be expressed in terms of an
integral over the unitary group where the initial
state is fixed and we vary the unitary acting on i
andi+Msystems:
/integraldisplay
dµ(U′)(U′⊗U′)ρ⊗2
0(U′†⊗U′†)
=1
d(d−1)(Tr[ρ0]−Tr[ρ0SWAPi,i+M])P(−)
i,i+M
+1
d(d+ 1)(Tr[ρ0] +Tr[ρ0SWAPi,i+M])P(+)
i,i+M
=2
d(d+ 1)P(+)
i,i+M=1
d+ 1P(+)
i,i+M,
(27)
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 21where we have used the fact that Tr [ρ0] = 1and
Tr[ρ0SWAPi,i+M] = 1.
Note that for even M, theM-tangling power
holds for arbitrary gates U, whereas for odd M
it holds only for controlled evolutions of the form
U=/summationtext
j∈0,1σjj⊗M−1
l=1R(l)
nj.
A.3 Proof of M-tangling power for CR-
evolution
Before going into the proof, it will be use-
ful to find the action of products of sym-
metric/antisymmetric projectors (which
project onto the sectors iandi+M) on
a trial product state. Suppose we have a
collection of states {|ϕl⟩,|ϕl+M⟩}M
l=1. Sup-
pose further that we have the ordered ket
|ϕ1⟩1...|ϕM⟩M|ϕ1+M⟩1+M...|ϕ2M⟩2M :=/producttextM
l=1|ϕl⟩l|ϕl+M⟩l+M. If we act with the projec-
tors ˜P(±)=/producttextM
i=1P(±)
i,i+M, on the above state we
find:
2M˜P(±)M/productdisplay
l=1|ϕl⟩l|ϕl+M⟩l+M=
M/productdisplay
l=1/bracketleftbig|ϕl⟩l|ϕl+M⟩l+M±|ϕl+M⟩l|ϕl⟩l+M/bracketrightbig.(28)Note that for the above equality to hold it is im-
portant that both the kets and the symbols inside
the kets are labeled by an index; otherwise if the
kets are not labeled the above expression holds
only up to re-ordering of the unlabeled kets.
To derive a closed-form expression for the M-
tangling power of CR-type gates in defect sys-
tems, we start by considering odd M. For odd
M, we start from the general expression:
ϵp,M(U) = 2MTr[U⊗2Ωp0(U†)⊗2˜P], (29)
and we define the vector |m;m+M⟩=
|m1⟩1...|mM⟩M|m1+M⟩1+M...|m2M⟩2M. The
action of the projectors P(+)
1,1+M/producttextM
l=2P(−)
l,l+Mon
the above vector yields:
˜P|m;m+M⟩=1
2M(|m1⟩1|m1+M⟩1+M+|m1+M⟩1|m1⟩1+M)M/productdisplay
l=2/bracketleftbig|ml⟩l|ml+M⟩l+M−|ml+M⟩l|ml⟩l+M/bracketrightbig.
(30)
Next, we define:
(U†)⊗2=σii⊗M
r=2(R(r−1)
ni)†⊗σkk⊗M
r′=2(R(r′+M−1)
nk)†= [⊗l(Q(l)
i)]†[⊗l(Q(l)
k)]†(31)
and
U⊗2=σjj⊗M
s=2R(s−1)
nj⊗σpp⊗M−1
s′=2R(s′−1+M)
np= [⊗lQ(l)
j][⊗lQ(l)
p], (32)
where we have suppressed the symbol of summation. In the above expressions we have defined Q(l)
g
to beQ(1)
g=σggforl= 1, orQ(l)
g=R(l−1)
ng, forl̸= 1. Using Eq. (31) and Eq. (30), we evaluate
2M(U†)⊗2˜P|m;m+M⟩:
2M(U†)⊗2˜P|m;m+M⟩=/parenleftig
(Q(1)
i)†|m1⟩1(Q(1)
k)†|m1+M⟩1+M+ (Q(1)
i)†|m1+M⟩1(Q(1)
k)†|m1⟩1+M/parenrightig
×
M/productdisplay
l=2(Q(l)
i)†|ml⟩l(Q(l)
k)†|ml+M⟩l+M−(Q(l)
i)†|ml+M⟩l(Q(l)
k)†|ml⟩l+M
(33)
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 22We then find the action of [2(d+ 1)]MU⊗2Ωp0on the bra⟨m;m+M|:
M/productdisplay
l=1l⟨ml|Q(l)
jl+M⟨ml+M|Q(l)
p(d+ 1)MΩp0=/parenleftig
1⟨m1|Q(1)
j1+M⟨m1+M|Q(1)
p+1⟨m1+M|Q(1)
p1+M⟨m1|Q(1)
j/parenrightig
×
M/productdisplay
l=2l⟨ml|Q(l)
jl+M⟨ml+M|Q(l)
p+l⟨ml+M|Q(l)
pl+M⟨ml|Q(l)
j.
(34)
Thus, we find that [2(d+ 1)]M2MTr[U⊗2Ωp0(U†)⊗2˜P]is equal to:
/summationdisplay
i,k,p,j/summationdisplay
{ml},{ml+M}/bracketleftig
(δm1
jδj
iδi
m1)(δm1+Mpδp
kδk
m1+M) + (δm1+Mpδp
iδi
m1)(δm1
jδj
kδk
m1+M)
+ (δm1
jδj
iδi
m1+M)(δm1+Mpδp
kδk
m1) + (δm1+Mpδp
iδi
m1+M)(δm1
jδj
kδk
m1)/bracketrightig
×
M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
⟨ml|Q(l)
j(Q(l)
i)†|ml⟩⟨ml+M|Q(l)
p(Q(l)
k)†|ml+M⟩−⟨ml|Q(l)
j(Q(l)
i)†|ml+M⟩⟨ml+M|Q(l)
p(Q(l)
k)†|ml⟩+
⟨ml+M|Q(l)
p(Q(l)
i)†|ml⟩⟨ml|Q(l)
j(Q(l)
k)†|ml+M⟩−⟨ml+M|Q(l)
p(Q(l)
i)†|ml+M⟩⟨ml|Q(l)
j(Q(l)
k)†|ml⟩/bracerightig
=
/summationdisplay
i,k,p,j/summationdisplay
{m1},{m1+M}/bracketleftig
(δm1
jδj
iδi
m1)(δm1+Mpδp
kδk
m1+M) + (δm1+Mpδp
iδi
m1)(δm1
jδj
kδk
m1+M)
+ (δm1
jδj
iδi
m1+M)(δm1+Mpδp
kδk
m1) + (δm1+Mpδp
iδi
m1+M)(δm1
jδj
kδk
m1)/bracketrightig
×
M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
i)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
k)†]−Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
i)†Q(l)
p(Q(l)
k)†] +Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
i)†Q(l)
j(Q(l)
k)†]
−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
i)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
k)†]/bracerightig
(35)
where we have used the property/summationtext
{mi},{mi+M}/producttext
i=/producttext
i/summationtext
{mi},{mi+M}. We now work with the first
expression of the Kronecker delta’s which gives:
/summationdisplay
p,j/summationdisplay
m1,m1+M(δm1
jδj
m1)(δm1+Mpδp
m1+M)×
M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
j)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
p)†]−Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
j)†Q(l)
p(Q(l)
p)†] +Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]
−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]/bracerightig
=
/summationdisplay
p,j/summationdisplay
m1,m1+M(δm1
jδj
m1)(δm1+Mpδp
m1+M)×M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
4−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]/bracerightig
=
/summationdisplay
p,jM/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
4−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]/bracerightig
=
2M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
4−(Tr[Q(l)
0(Q(l)
1)†])2/bracerightig
=
2M/productdisplay
l=2(4−4G(l−1)
1) = 2×4M−1M/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1),(36)
where we have used the fact that 2−1Tr[Q(l)
0(Q(l)
1)†] = cosϕ(l−1)
0
2cosϕ(l−1)
1
2+ (n0·
n1)(l−1)sinϕ(l−1)
0
2sinϕ(l−1)
1
2≡/radicalig
G(l−1)
1, as well as 4−(Tr[Q(l)
0(Q(l)
0)†])2= 4−(Tr[Q(l)
1(Q(l)
1)†])2= 0.
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 23The second term with the Kronecker deltas reads:
/summationdisplay
p,j/summationdisplay
m1,m1+M(δm1+Mpδp
m1)(δm1
jδj
m1+M)×
M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†]−Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†] +Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
p)†Q(l)
j(Q(l)
j)†]
−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
p)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
j)†]/bracerightig
=
/summationdisplay
p,j/summationdisplay
m1,m1+M(δm1+Mpδp
m1)(δm1
jδj
m1+M)×M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†]−4/bracerightig
=
/summationdisplay
p,jδp
jδj
p×M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†]−4/bracerightig
= 0.(37)
For similar reasons the third term of Kronecker deltas also vanishes. Working with the last term of
Kronecker deltas we find:
/summationdisplay
p,j/summationdisplay
{ml},{ml+M}/bracketleftig
(δm1+Mpδp
m1+M)(δm1
jδj
m1)/bracketrightig
×M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†]−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
p)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
j)†]/bracerightig
=/summationdisplay
p,jδp
pδj
jM/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig/parenleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]/parenrightig2
−4/bracerightig
= 2×4M−1(−1)M−1M/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1) = 2×4M−1M/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1),
(38)
where we made use of (−1)M−1= 1sinceM−1is even. Therefore, our final expression for odd Mis:
2MTr[U⊗2Ωp0(U†)⊗2˜P] = 2M 1
(d+ 1)M1
2M1
2M4×4M−1M/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1) =/parenleftigd
d+ 1/parenrightigMM/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1),
(39)
which concludes our proof.
For evenM, note that ˜P=/producttextM
i=1P(−)
i,i+M. Again, we follow a similar procedure and start by calcu-
lating the action of 2M(U†)⊗2˜Pfrom the left on the ket |m;m+M⟩, which gives:
2M(U†)⊗2˜P|m;m+M⟩=/bracketleftig
(Q(1)
i)†|m1⟩1(Q(1)
k)†|m1+M⟩1+M−(Q(1)
i)†|m1+M⟩1(Q(1)
k)†|m1⟩1+M/bracketrightig
×
M/productdisplay
l=2(Q(l)
i)†|ml⟩l(Q(l)
k)†|ml+M⟩l+M−(Q(l)
i)†|ml+M⟩l(Q(l)
k)†|ml⟩l+M.
(40)
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 24Now, we combine Eq. (34) with Eq. (40), to obtain [2(d+ 1)]M2MTr[U⊗2Ωp0(U†)⊗2˜P(−)]:
/summationdisplay
i,k,p,j/summationdisplay
{ml}
{ml+M}/bracketleftig
⟨m1|Q(1)
j⟨m1+M|Q(1)
p+⟨m1+M|Q(1)
p⟨m1|Q(1)
j/bracketrightig
×
/bracketleftig
(Q(1)
i)†|m1⟩(Q(1)
k)†|m1+M⟩−(Q(1)
i)†|m1+M⟩(Q(1)
k)†|m1⟩/bracketrightig
×
M/productdisplay
l=2/bracketleftig
⟨ml|Q(l)
j⟨ml+M|Q(l)
p+⟨ml+M|Q(l)
p⟨ml|Q(l)
j/bracketrightig/bracketleftig
(Q(l)
i)†|ml⟩(Q(l)
k)†|ml+M⟩−(Q(l)
i)†|ml+M⟩(Q(l)
k)†|ml⟩/bracketrightig
=
/summationdisplay
i,k,p,j/summationdisplay
m1,m1+M/bracketleftig
(δm1
jδj
iδi
m1)(δm1+Mpδp
kδk
m1+M)−(δm1
jδj
iδi
m1+M)(δm1+Mpδp
kδk
m1)
+ (δm1+Mpδp
iδi
m1)(δm1
jδj
kδk
m1+M)−(δm1+Mpδp
iδi
m1+M)(δm1
jδj
kδk
m1)/bracketrightig
×
M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
i)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
k)†]−Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
i)†Q(l)
p(Q(l)
k)†] +Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
i)†Q(l)
j(Q(l)
k)†]
−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
i)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
k)†]/bracerightig
.
(41)
First, we focus on the first term of Kronecker deltas, which gives:
/summationdisplay
i,k,p,j/summationdisplay
m1,m1+M(δm1
jδj
iδi
m1)(δm1+Mpδp
kδk
m1+M)×
M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
i)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
k)†]−Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
i)†Q(l)
p(Q(l)
k)†] +Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
i)†Q(l)
j(Q(l)
k)†]
−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
i)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
k)†]/bracerightig
=
/summationdisplay
p,j/summationdisplay
m1,m1+M(δm1
jδj
m1)(δm1+Mpδp
m1+M)
M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
j)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
p)†]−Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
j)†Q(l)
p(Q(l)
p)†] +Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]
−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]/bracerightig
=
/summationdisplay
p,j/summationdisplay
m1,m1+M(δm1
jδj
m1)(δm1+Mpδp
m1+M)M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
4−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]/bracerightig
= 2×4M−1M/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1).
(42)
It is further easy to show that the second and third terms of Kronecker deltas in Eq. (41) evaluate to
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 250, for similar reasons as in the odd case. The fourth term of Kronecker deltas produces:
/summationdisplay
i,k,p,j/summationdisplay
m1,m1+M/bracketleftig
−(δm1+Mpδp
iδi
m1+M)(δm1
jδj
kδk
m1)/bracketrightig
×
M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
i)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
k)†]−Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
i)†Q(l)
p(Q(l)
k)†] +Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
i)†Q(l)
j(Q(l)
k)†]
−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
i)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
k)†]/bracerightig
=
/summationdisplay
p,j/summationdisplay
m1,m1+M/bracketleftig
−(δm1+Mpδp
m1+M)(δm1
jδj
m1)/bracketrightig
×
M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†]−Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†] +Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
p)†Q(l)
j(Q(l)
j)†]
−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
p)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
j)†]/bracerightig
=
/summationdisplay
p,j/summationdisplay
m1,m1+M/bracketleftig
−(δm1+Mpδp
m1+M)(δm1
jδj
m1)/bracketrightigM/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
p)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†]−4/bracerightig
= 2×4M−1M/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1).
(43)
Therefore, the expression 2MTr[U⊗2Ωp0(U†)⊗2˜P]for evenMreads:
ϵp,M(U) = 2MTr[U⊗2Ωp0(U†)⊗2˜P] =1
(d+ 1)M1
2M1
2M2M×4×4M−1M/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1) =/parenleftigd
d+ 1/parenrightigMM/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1).
(44)
A.4M-tangling power of non-unitary quan-
tum evolution
In this section we consider a setup where we have
Lnuclear spins with Kof them being the target
ones, andL−Kbeing the unwanted spins. Thus,
the target subspace has M=K+ 1qubits, con-
sisting of the electron and Ktarget nuclear spins.
In Ref. [38] we showed that the Kraus operators
associated with the partial trace operation of the
L−Kunwanted spins have the closed form ex-
pression:
Ei=/summationdisplay
j∈{0,1}f(i)
jσjj⊗K
l=1R(k)
nj, (45)
withf(i)
jgiven by:
f(i)
j=/productdisplay
mi⟨0|R(mi)
nj|0⟩/productdisplay
m′
i⟨1|R(m′
i)
nj|0⟩, (46)
where for the i-th Kraus operator, the first prod-
uct is taken over the unwanted spins comprising
the environment that are in |0⟩, and the sec-
ond product is taken over the unwanted spins
that are in|1⟩. If all spins are in |0⟩, then
the second product is 1, whereas if all spins arein|1⟩the first product is 1. Further, we have
⟨0|Rnj|0⟩= cosϕj
2−inj,zsinϕj
2and⟨1|Rnj|0⟩=
−isinϕj
2(nx,j+iny,j).
The evolution of the target subspace is thus de-
scribed by the Kraus operators via the quantum
channelE(ρ) =/summationtext
kEkρ0E†
k. To include the im-
pact of the unwanted subspace into the M-way
entanglement that is generated by the quantum
evolution, we define the M-tangling power of the
non-unitary quantum channel:
ϵp,M(E) = 2M⟨Tr[ρ⊗2
E˜P]⟩|ψ0⟩⊗2
= 2M2L−K−1/summationdisplay
r,s=0Tr[(Er⊗Es)⟨ρ⊗2
0⟩|ψ0⟩⊗2(Er⊗Es)†˜P]
= 2M2L−K−1/summationdisplay
r,s=0Tr[(Er⊗Es)Ωp0(Er⊗Es)†˜P].
(47)
Clearly,inthelimitofaunitarychanneli.e., Er=
Es=U(the summation is over the unique Kraus
operator) we recover the M-tangling power of a
unitary.
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 26To derive a closed-form expression, we follow a similar procedure as in the unitary case. We begin
by defining
E†
r⊗E†
s= (f(r)
i)∗(f(s)
k)∗σii⊗M
x=2(R(x)
ni)†⊗σkk⊗M
x′=2(R(x′+M−1)
nk)†= (f(r)
i)∗(f(s)
k)∗[⊗l(Q(l)
i)]†[⊗l(Q(l)
k)]†
(48)
and
Er⊗Es=f(r)
jf(s)
pσjj⊗M
x=2R(x)
nj⊗σpp⊗M
x′=2R(x′+M−1)
np=f(r)
jf(s)
p[⊗lQ(l)
j][⊗lQ(l)
p]. (49)
Starting with the odd Mcase, we find that [2(d+ 1)]M2M/summationtext
r,sTr[(Er⊗Es)Ωp0(Er⊗Es)†˜P]reads:
/summationdisplay
r,s/summationdisplay
ik,pj/summationdisplay
m1,m1+Mf(r)
jf(s)
p(f(r)
i)∗(f(s)
k)∗/braceleftig
(δm1
jδj
iδi
m1)(δm1+Mpδp
kδk
m1+M) + (δm1+Mpδp
iδi
m1)(δm1
jδj
kδk
m1+M)
+ (δm1
jδj
iδi
m1+M)(δm1+Mpδp
kδk
m1) + (δm1+Mpδp
iδi
m1+M)(δm1
jδj
kδk
m1)/bracerightig
×
M/productdisplay
l=2/braceleftig
Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
i)†]Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
k)†]−Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
i)†Q(l)
p(Q(l)
k)†] +Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
i)†Q(l)
j(Q(l)
k)†
−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
i)†]Tr[Q(l)
j(Q(l)
k)†]/bracerightig
=/summationdisplay
r,s/summationdisplay
p,j/parenleftig
|f(r)
j|2|f(s)
p|2+f(r)
jf(s)
p(f(r)
p)∗(f(s)
j)∗/parenrightig
×M/productdisplay
l=2(4−Tr[Q(l)
p(Q(l)
j)†]2)
= 4M−1/summationdisplay
r,s(|f(r)
1|2|f(s)
0|2+|f(r)
0|2|f(s)
1|2+f(r)
0f(s)
1(f(r)
1)∗(f(s)
0)∗+f(r)
1f(s)
0(f(r)
0)∗(f(s)
1)∗)/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1)
= 2×4M−1/parenleftig
1 +/summationdisplay
r,sℜ[(f(r)
0)∗(f(s)
1)∗f(r)
1f(s)
0]/parenrightig/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1),
(50)
where we have made use of the fact that only the first and last terms of products of Kronecker deltas
survive. Therefore we find that ϵp,M(E)for the odd case is:
ϵp,M(E) =1
22M1
(d+ 1)M2M×2×4M−1/parenleftig
1 +2L−K−1/summationdisplay
r,s=0ℜ[(f(r)
0)∗(f(s)
1)∗f(r)
1f(s)
0]/parenrightig/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1)
=/parenleftigd
d+ 1/parenrightigM1
2/parenleftig
1 +2L−K−1/summationdisplay
r,s=0ℜ[(f(r)
0)∗(f(s)
1)∗f(r)
1f(s)
0]/parenrightig/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1).(51)
whereas for the even case following similar steps we obtain:
ϵp,M(E) =/parenleftig1
d+ 1/parenrightigM1
22M2M22M−22L−K−1/summationdisplay
r,s=0/parenleftig
|f(r)
0|2|f(s)
1|2+|f(r)
1|2|f(s)
0|2+ 2ℜ[(f(r)
0)∗(f(s)
1)∗f(r)
1f(s)
0]/parenrightigM/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1)
=/parenleftigd
d+ 1/parenrightigM1
42L−K−1/summationdisplay
r,s=0/parenleftig
|f(r)
0|2|f(s)
1|2+|f(r)
1|2|f(s)
0|2+ 2ℜ[(f(r)
0)∗(f(s)
1)∗f(r)
1f(s)
0]/parenrightigM/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1)
=/parenleftigd
d+ 1/parenrightigM1
2/parenleftig
1 +2L−K−1/summationdisplay
r,s=0ℜ[(f(r)
0)∗(f(s)
1)∗f(r)
1f(s)
0]/parenrightigM/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1).
(52)
In the above expressions we have made use of the completeness relation i.e.:
2L−K−1/summationdisplay
r,s=0E†
rEs=1δr
s⇒/summationdisplay
r,s/summationdisplay
i,j(f(r)
i)∗f(s)
j[σii⊗l(R(l)
ni)†][σjj⊗lR(l)
nj] =1δr
s
⇒/summationdisplay
r,s/summationdisplay
i(f(r)
i)∗f(s)
iσii⊗l1(l)=1δr
s⇒
/summationdisplay
iσii[/summationdisplay
r,s(f(r)
i)∗f(s)
i]⊗l1(l)=δr
s1⊗l1(l)⇒/parenleftigg/summationtext
r,s(f(r)
0)∗f(s)
0 0
0/summationtext
r,s(f(r)
1)∗f(s)
1/parenrightigg
=/parenleftigg
δr
s0
0δr
s/parenrightigg
,(53)
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 27which means that/summationtext
r|f(r)
0|2= 1 =/summationtext
r|f(r)
1|2, and hence we can write:
/summationdisplay
r|f(r)
0|2×/summationdisplay
s|f(s)
1|2+/summationdisplay
s|f(s)
0|2×/summationdisplay
r|f(r)
1|2= 2⇒/summationdisplay
r,s|f(r)
0|2|f(s)
1|2+|f(r)
1|2|f(s)
0|2= 2. (54)
We note that the expressions for even/odd num-
ber of qubits in the target subspace are identical.Further, the non-unitary M-tangling power is up-
per bounded by the unitary M-tangling power.
Let us now simplify the expression that appears due to the summation over Kraus operators. We
first define the set S={1,2,...,L−K}of unwanted spin indices. Let P(S)be the power set of S,
i.e.:
P(S) : =/braceleftig
{},{1},{2},...,{L−K},...
{1,2},{1,3},...,{1,L−K},...
{1,2,...,L−K}/bracerightig
.(55)
This power set is useful in order to write down which unwanted spins are in |0⟩or|1⟩in the Kraus
operators. Let p∈P(S)be an element of the power set and l∈pbe an unwanted spin index within
the subsetp. We now start from:
ℜ[2L−K−1/summationdisplay
r,s=0(f(r)
0)∗(f(s)
1)∗f(r)
1f(s)
0] =/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2L−K−1/summationdisplay
r=0(f(r)
0)∗f(r)
1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
=
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/summationdisplay
p∈P(S)/braceleftig/parenleftig/productdisplay
l∈p⟨0|(R(l)
n0)∗|0⟩/productdisplay
l′∈S\p⟨1|(R(l′)
n0)∗|0⟩/parenrightig/parenleftig/productdisplay
l∈p⟨0|R(l)
n1|0⟩/productdisplay
l′∈S\p⟨1|R(l′)
n1|0⟩/parenrightig/bracerightig/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
=
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/summationdisplay
p∈P(S)/braceleftig/productdisplay
l∈p⟨0|(R(l)
n0)∗|0⟩⟨0|R(l)
n1|0⟩/productdisplay
l′∈S\p⟨1|(R(l′)
n0)∗|0⟩⟨1|R(l′)
n1|0⟩/bracerightig/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
=
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/summationdisplay
p∈P(S)/productdisplay
l∈pαl/productdisplay
l′∈S\pβl′/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
.(56)
In the last line we have defined αl=⟨0|(R(l)
n0)∗|0⟩⟨0|R(l)
n1|0⟩, andβl=⟨1|(R(l)
n0)∗|0⟩⟨1|R(l)
n1|0⟩. To
evaluate the above expression, let us look into some examples. If we have one unwanted nuclear spin,
thenP(S) ={{},{1}}, and so it holds:
/summationdisplay
p∈P(S)/productdisplay
l∈pαl/productdisplay
l′∈S\pβl′=α1·1 + 1·β1=α1+β1. (57)
If we have 2 unwanted nuclear spins, then we find:
/summationdisplay
p∈P(S)/productdisplay
l∈pαl/productdisplay
l′∈S\pβl′=α1α2+α1β2+α2β1+β1β2= (α1+β1)(α2+β2). (58)
Similarly, if we have 3 unwanted nuclear spins, the summation over the power set evaluates to:
/summationdisplay
p∈P(S)/productdisplay
l∈pαl/productdisplay
l′∈S\pβl′=α1α2α3+α1β2β3+α2β1β3+α3β1β2+α1α2β3+α1α3β2+α2α3β1+β1β2β3
=α1(α2α3+β2β3) +β1(α2β3+α3β2) +α1(α2β3+α3β2) +β1(α2α3+β2β3)
= (α1+β1)(α2α3+β2β3) + (α1+β1)(α2β3+α3β2)
= (α1+β1)(α2α3+β2β3+α2β3+α3β2)
= (α1+β1)(α2(α3+β3) +β2(α3+β3))
= (α1+β1)(α2+β2)(α3+β3).
(59)
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 28Therefore, we can now generalize this result to an arbitrary number of L−Kunwanted nuclear spins
as:
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/summationdisplay
p∈P(S)/productdisplay
l∈pαl/productdisplay
l′∈S\pβl′/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleL−K/productdisplay
j=1(αj+βj)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
=L−K/productdisplay
j=1|αj+βj|2=L−K/productdisplay
j=1|(αj+βj)R+i(αj+βj)I|2=
L−K/productdisplay
j=1/braceleftigg/parenleftbigg/radicalig
G(j)
1/parenrightbigg2
+/parenleftig
n(j)
z,0cosϕ(j)
1
2sinϕ(j)
0
2−n(j)
z,1cosϕ(j)
0
2sinϕ(j)
1
2−(n(j)
x,1n(j)
y,0−n(j)
x,0n(j)
y,1) sinϕ(j)
0
2sinϕ(j)
1
2/parenrightig2/bracerightigg
=
L−K/productdisplay
j=1/braceleftigg
G(j)
1+/parenleftig
n(j)
z,0cosϕ(j)
1
2sinϕ(j)
0
2−n(j)
z,1cosϕ(j)
0
2sinϕ(j)
1
2−(n(j)
x,1n(j)
y,0−n(j)
x,0n(j)
y,1) sinϕ(j)
0
2sinϕ(j)
1
2/parenrightig2/bracerightigg
.
(60)
We see that again G1quantities related to unwanted nuclear spins appear in the expression. Finally,
the full expression of the non-unitary entangling power reads:
ϵp,M(E) =ϵp,M(U)
2/parenleftigg
1 +/productdisplay
j∈
unwanted nuc./braceleftigg
G(j)
1+
/parenleftig
n(j)
z,0cosϕ(j)
1
2sinϕ(j)
0
2−n(j)
z,1cosϕ(j)
0
2sinϕ(j)
1
2−(n(j)
x,1n(j)
y,0−n(j)
x,0n(j)
y,1) sinϕ(j)
0
2sinϕ(j)
1
2/parenrightig2/bracerightigg/parenrightigg
.
(61)
BM-tangling power of target sub-
space under dephasing channel
In this section, we extend our formalism to in-
clude dephasing errors that can occur on the elec-
tron during the entanglement generation. The
dephasing on the electron can be expressed via
the following Kraus operators [66]:
K0(˜t) =/radicalbig
λ0/parenleftigg
eiθ˜t0
0e−iθ˜t/parenrightigg
K1(˜t) =/radicalbig
λ1/parenleftigg
e−iθ˜t0
0eiθ˜t/parenrightigg
, (62)
whereλ0+λ1= 1. Assuming that dephas-
ing occurs during the free evolution periods, theelectron-nuclear spin register evolves under the
new Kraus operators:
Dfree
deph,m(t) = [Km(t)⊗K
l=11(l)]Uf(t)
=/summationdisplay
j,qκ(m)
qq(t)σqqσjj⊗K
l=1˜R(l)
nj
=/summationdisplay
j,qκ(m)
qq(t)σqjδq
j⊗K
l=1˜R(l)
nj
=/summationdisplay
jκ(m)
jj(t)σjj⊗K
l=1˜R(l)
nj.(63)
Notethatwealsousethenotation ˜Rnjtoindicate
that this nuclear rotation is the one that happens
in a single free evolution unit and should not be
confused with Rnj, which is the total rotation in-
duced by a single unit of a decoupling sequence
(e.g., a CPMG or UDD nsequence).
Without loss of generality, we assume the CPMG unit, during which we have the total Kraus
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 29operators (neglecting global phases):
DCPMG
deph,m=Dfree
deph,m3(t/4)[Rx(π)⊗l1(l)]Dfree
deph,m2(t/2)[Rx(π)⊗l1(l)]Dfree
deph,m1(t/4)
=/summationdisplay
j,r,qκ(m1)
jj(t/4)κ(m2)
rr(t/2)κ(m3)
qq(t/4)σjjRx(π)σrrRx(π)σqq⊗K
l=1˜R(l)
nj˜R(l)
nr˜R(l)
nq
=/summationdisplay
j,r,qκ(m1)
jj(t/4)κ(m2)
rr(t/2)κ(m3)
qq(t/4)σjrRx(π)σqq[δj
0δ1
r+δj
1δ0
r]⊗K
l=1˜R(l)
nj˜R(l)
nr˜R(l)
nq
=/summationdisplay
j,r,qκ(m1)
jj(t/4)κ(m2)
rr(t/2)κ(m3)
qq(t/4)σjq[δr
0δ1
q+δr
1δ0
q][δj
0δ1
r+δj
1δ0
r]⊗K
l=1˜R(l)
nj˜R(l)
nr˜R(l)
nq
=/summationdisplay
j,r,qκ(m1)
jj(t/4)κ(m2)
rr(t/2)κ(m3)
qq(t/4)σjq[δr
0δ1
qδj
0δ1
r+δr
1δ0
qδj
0δ1
r+δr
0δ1
qδj
1δ0
r+δr
1δ0
qδj
1δ0
r]⊗K
l=1˜R(l)
nj˜R(l)
nr˜R(l)
nq
=/summationdisplay
j,r,qκ(m1)
jj(t/4)κ(m2)
rr(t/2)κ(m3)
qq(t/4)σjq[δr
1δ0
qδj
0δ1
r+δr
0δ1
qδj
1δ0
r]⊗K
l=1˜R(l)
nj˜R(l)
nr˜R(l)
nq.
(64)
We label the Kraus operators of one unit with the bitstring m= (m1,m2,m3), where each mjcan
take the value of 0 or 1. The only non-zero terms occur for (q,j,r ) = (0,0,1)and(q,j,r ) = (1,1,0),
respectively. Thus, the Kraus operator reads:
DCPMG
deph,m=/summationdisplay
jκ(m1)
jj(t/4)κ(m3)
jj(t/4)κ(m2)
j⊕1j⊕1(t/2)σjj⊗l˜R(l)
nj˜R(l)
nj⊕1˜R(l)
nj
=/summationdisplay
j/radicalig
λm1eiθt/4(−1)j⊕m1/radicalig
λm3eiθt/4(−1)j⊕m3/radicalig
λm2eiθt/2(−1)j⊕m2⊕1σjj⊗l˜R(l)
nj˜R(l)
nj⊕1˜R(l)
nj
=/summationdisplay
j/radicalig
λm1λm2λm3eiθt/4[(−1)j⊕m1+(−1)j⊕m3]eiθt/2(−1)j⊕m2⊕1σjj⊗l˜R(l)
nj˜R(l)
nj⊕1˜R(l)
nj
=/summationdisplay
j/radicalig
λm1λm2λm3eiθt/4[(−1)j⊕m1+(−1)j⊕m3+2(−1)j⊕m2⊕1]σjj⊗l˜R(l)
nj˜R(l)
nj⊕1˜R(l)
nj
=/summationdisplay
jgj(m1,m2,m3,θ,t)σjj⊗lR(l)
nj,(65)
where we have defined:
gj(m1,m2,m3,θ,t) =/radicalig
λm1λm2λm3eiθt/4[(−1)m1⊕j+(−1)m3⊕j+2(−1)m2⊕j⊕1]. (66)
Also, we define⊕as addition modulo 2. It is easy to verify that the Kraus operators for one decoupling
unit satisfy/summationtext
m1,m2,m3[DCPMG
deph,m]†DCPMG
deph,m=1as follows:
/summationdisplay
m1,m2,m3[DCPMG
deph,m]†DCPMG
deph,m=/summationdisplay
m1,m2,m3,j,kλm1λm2λm3σjjσkk⊗l/parenleftig
R(l)
nj/parenrightig†R(l)
nk
=/summationdisplay
m1,m2,m3λm1λm2λm3/summationdisplay
jσjj⊗l1(l)
=/summationdisplay
m1,m2λm1λm2(λ0+λ1)1
=/summationdisplay
m1λm1(λ0+λ1)21
= (λ0+λ1)31=1,(67)
where we have used the fact that λ0+λ1= 1. For multiple decoupling units, the Kraus opera-
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 30tor is simplyDCPMG
deph,m=/producttextN
k=1DCPMG
deph,m(k), where
Nis the number of iterations of a single unit.
In this notation, each m(k)consists of indices
(m(k)
1,m(k)
2,m(k)
3), and each one of them takes
the value 0 or 1. Each Kraus operator is distin-
guished by a different ordering of 0s and 1s in the
total vector m. ForNiterations, we have 23N
such Kraus operators. For brevity of notation,
we will label the composite Kraus operators that
result after NCPMG iterations as DN,q, where
q= 1,...,23Nlabels which Kraus operator we are
referring to out of all Kraus operators.Let us now look into the M-tangling power,
where we focus on the subspace of the electron
and theKtarget nuclear spins, and we ignore
contributions from unwanted nuclei. This tar-
get subsystem now evolves under the non-unitary
channelEdeph(ρ) =/summationtext
rDN,rρ[DN,r]†. We first
start by definingDN,r=/summationtext
j˜g(r)
jσjj⊗lR(l)
nj. Note,
that hereR(l)
njis the rotation after Niterations,
acting on the l-th nuclear spin. Thus, we can
express the non-unitary M-tangling power of the
channel as:
ϵp,M(Edeph) = 2M23N−1/summationdisplay
r,s=0Tr[DN,r⊗DN,s⟨ρ⊗2
0⟩(DN,r⊗DN,s)†˜P]
=/parenleftbiggd
d+ 1/parenrightbiggM1
2/parenleftigg
1 +/summationdisplay
r,sℜ[(˜g(r)
0)∗(˜g(s)
1)∗˜g(r)
1(˜g(s)
0)]/parenrightiggM/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1)
=/parenleftbiggd
d+ 1/parenrightbiggM1
2(1 +R)M/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1),(68)
where we have made use of the results we found
in the previous section. We have also defined
R=/summationtext
r,sℜ[(˜g(r)
0)∗(˜g(s)
1)∗˜g(r)
1(˜g(s)
0)]. Note that
in this case, the entangling power expresses only
the evolution in the target subspace. In other
words, we do not include the correlations that
arise from the unwanted spins. In the limit of no
dephasing, i.e., λ0= 1,λ1= 0andθ= 0, theonly Kraus operator that survives corresponds to
the bitstring of m= [0,..., 0]T, and we recover
the unitary channel. We can verify this from the
above equation, since we will have r=s= 0and
˜g(r)
0= ˜g(r)
1=√
λ0= 1.
The expression for ˜g(r)
jis defined as follows:
˜g(r)
j=N/productdisplay
k=1/radicalig
λm(k)
1λm(k)
2λm(k)
3exp/bracketleftbiggiθt
4((−1)j⊕m(k)
1+ (−1)j⊕m(k)
3+ 2(−1)j⊕m(k)
2⊕1)/bracketrightbigg
=/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalbtN/productdisplay
k=1λm(k)
1λm(k)
2λm(k)
3exp/bracketleftigg
iθt
4N/summationdisplay
k=1/parenleftbigg
(−1)j⊕m(k)
1+ (−1)j⊕m(k)
3+ 2(−1)j⊕m(k)
2⊕1/parenrightbigg/bracketrightigg
.(69)
Using the above definitions and considering only 1 CPMG iteration, we find the following expression
for the sum:
R= (λ2
0+λ2
1+ 2λ0λ1cos(θt))2(λ2
0+λ2
1+ 2λ0λ1cos(2θt)). (70)
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 31ForNCPMG iterations we can show that Ris given by:
R=ℜ/bracketleftig/summationdisplay
r,sf(r)(f(s))∗/bracketrightig
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/summationdisplay
rf(r)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleN/productdisplay
k=1f(m(k)
1)f(m(k)
2)f(m(k)
3)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
=N/productdisplay
k=1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglef(m(k)
1)f(m(k)
2)f(m(k)
3)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
=/parenleftig
(λ2
0+λ2
1+ 2λ0λ1cos(θt))2(λ2
0+λ2
1+ 2λ0λ1cos(2θt))/parenrightigN
.(71)
In the first line we defined f(r)= (˜g(r)
0)∗˜g(r)
1. Using the above result, we find that the expression of the
M-tangling power of the target subspace in the presence of dephasing errors is:
ϵp,M(Edeph) =/parenleftigd
d+ 1/parenrightigM1 + (λ2
0+λ2
1+ 2λ0λ1cos(θt))2N(λ2
0+λ2
1+ 2λ0λ1cos(2θt))N
2M/productdisplay
l=2(1−G(l−1)
1).
(72)
It is easy to verify that in the limit of λ0= 1, (λ0= 0)λ1= 0(λ1= 1) we get the unitary M-tangling
power as expected.
If we are composing pCPMG sequences of different unit times tjand iterations Njthen we will
have:
R=p/productdisplay
j=1/parenleftig
λ2
0+λ2
1+ 2λ0λ1cos(θtj)/parenrightig2Nj/parenleftig
λ2
0+λ2
1+ 2λ0λ1cos(2θtj)/parenrightigNj(73)
Based on the above expression we verify that in
thelimitwhereall psequenceshavethesametime
t=tj,∀j∈[1,p], we recover the previous expres-
sion forR. In particular, the above expression is
the one we use for the sequential protocol when
the electron undergoes dephasing.
C Comparison of sequential with
multi-spin schemes in the presence of
electronic dephasing
In this section, we compare the performance
of the multi-spin with the sequential scheme in
the presence of electronic dephasing errors. In
Fig. 12(a) we show ϵp,M(Edeph)of case “16” of
preparing GHZ 3-like states for the sequential
scheme. In Fig. 12(b) we show again ϵp,M(Edeph)
of case “7” of preparing GHZ 3-like states for the
multi-spin scheme. The nuclei we control with
the sequential scheme are C5 and C13, and with
the multi-spin scheme, C4 and C5. The to-
tal sequence time for the sequential scheme is1357.9µs, and for the multi-spin is 1916.6µs.
Although the multi-spin scheme requires slightly
longer time than the sequential one, it is again
more robust to dephasing errors. This feature
could be attributed to the different unit times tj
and sequence iterations Njthat enter the expres-
sionofϵp,M(Edeph)forthesequentialschemesince
we are composing CPMG sequences of different
timings and iterations in the sequential protocol.
D Comparison of XY2 and CPMG per-
formance to pulse errors
In this section, we study over-/under-rotation er-
rors for the electronic control pulses. We consider
the optimal cases we found in the main text for
preparing GHZ 4-like states via the sequential or
multi-spin scheme. The systematic pulse errors
are simulated as Rx/y(π+ϵ) =e−iπ/2(1+ϵ)σx/y
for the CPMG and XY2 sequences. We calcu-
late the deviation between the M-tangling power
of the target subspace in the absence of errors,
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 32(a)(b)Figure 12:M-tangling power of the target subspace when the electron undergoes dephasing. (a) ϵp,M(Edeph)for
case # 16for preparing GHZ 3-like states via the sequential scheme as a function of the dephasing angle θandλ0.
(b) Same as in (a) for case # 7of the multi-spin scheme.
(a)(c)
(b)CPMGXY2
Figure 13: (a) ∆ϵp,M(U) :=|ϵp,M(U)ϵ=0−ϵp,M(U)ϵ̸=0|as a function of systematic over-rotation pulse error for the
7 cases of preparing GHZ 4-like states via the multi-spin scheme with the XY2 sequence. (b) Same as (a), but using
CPMG. (c) Same as (a), but for the 29 cases of preparing GHZ 4-like states via the sequential scheme, using XY2.
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 33ϵp,M(U)ϵ=0, with the one in the presence of er-
rors,ϵp,M(U)ϵ̸=0. We define this deviation as
∆ϵp,M(U) =|ϵp,M(U)ϵ=0−ϵp,M(U)ϵ̸=0|.
InFig.13(a), weshow ∆ϵp,M(U)forthe7cases
of preparing GHZ 4-like cases via the multi-spin
scheme, assuming the XY2 sequence. The differ-
ent colored lines correspond to each one of the
7 cases, and the labels correspond to the num-
ber of total sequence iterations. We see that
for small pulse errors ( ≤3−4%), the devia-
tion in estimating this quantity is on the order
10−3−10−2. Additionally, we expect that as the
number of pulses increases, the deviation is, in
principle, enhanced [e.g., see dark red line versus
green line]. This feature, however, does not al-
ways hold since the dynamics are case-dependent
and tend to corrupt the GHZ preparation differ-
ently. In Fig. 13(b), we repeat the same calcu-
lation assuming the CPMG sequence for a range
of systematic pulse errors from 0.1−0.8%. As
expected, the ability of the CPMG sequence to
prepare high-quality GHZ 4-like states is severely
impacted by the pulse errors.
In Fig. 13(c), we display in four panels the de-
viation inM-tangling power for the 29 cases of
preparing GHZ 4-like states using the sequential
protocol. Thelabelscorrespondtothetotalnum-
ber of iterations,/summationtext3
j=1Nj. In this scenario, we
areassumingtheXY2sequence. Wenoticeasim-
ilarperformanceasforthemulti-spinscheme,and
theresultsagainrevealtherobustnessofXY2un-
der moderate pulse errors ( ≤3−4%).
E Rotation angle and rotation axis er-
rors
In this section we consider the effect of rotation
angle and rotation axis errors on the M-tangling
power. We consider as an example the 7 cases
of preparing GHZ 4-like states via the multi-spin
scheme. To showcase the robustness of the XY2
decoupling sequence, we consider both rotation
axis and rotation angle errors, assuming the esti-
mated parameters from Ref. [69], which we also
mentioned in Sec. 7.2. In particular, we model
the erroneous πXandπYpulses as:
Rx(π+ϵx) =e−i(π+ϵx)/2(√
1−q2zσx+qzσz),(74)
Ry(π+ϵy) =e−i(π+ϵy)/2(qxσx+√
1−q2x−q2zσy+qzσz).
(75)In Fig. 14 we show the ideal M-tangling power
(dark blue bar) assuming a perfect CPMG decou-
pling sequence. The light blue bars correspond to
the XY2 decoupling sequence which includes the
errorsϵx=ϵy=−0.02,qz= 0.05,qx= 0.005.
We observe that the deviation in the expected
M-way correlations in the presence of both rota-
tion axis and rotation angle errors is sufficiently
small, and hence the XY2 decoupling sequence
can be reliably used in experiments to prepare
high-fidelity GHZ states.
Figure 14: Robustness of XY2 decoupling sequence in
the presence of pulse and rotation axis errors. The dark
blue bars show the ϵp,M(U)we find via the ideal CPMG
sequence for the 7 cases of preparing GHZ 4-like states
via the multi-spin scheme. The light blue bars show
theϵp,M(U)obtained via the XY2 decoupling sequence
assuming both rotation axis and rotation angle errors.
F Uncertainty in HF parameters
Inthissection, weconsidertheeffectoferrorsdue
to uncertainty in the experimentally measured
HF parameters of the nuclear spins. We use the
same optimal sequence parameters we found for
theHFparametersweconsideredinthemaintext
and additionally shift the HF parameters Aand
Bof the target nuclear spins by 0.01 or 0.05 kHz.
In Fig. 15, we consider a 0.01 kHz shift and plot
thedeviation ∆ϵp,M(U) :=ϵp,M(U)−ϵuncertain
p,M (U)
for the cases of preparing GHZ states up to 6
qubits for the sequential scheme in Fig. 15(a) and
for the multi-spin scheme in Fig. 15(b). We ob-
serve that the presence of a 0.01 kHz uncertainty
in the HF parameters only produces a negligi-
ble uncertainty on the order of 10−3relative to
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 34our ideal calculations for ϵp,M(U). In Fig. 16,
we repeat the same calculations for the sequen-
tial scheme in Fig. 16(a) and for the multi-spin
scheme in Fig. 16(b), assuming a shift of the HF
parameters by 0.05 kHz. We note that the error
in the estimation of ϵp,M(U)is on the order of
10−2−10−3. Thus, based on the experimentally
achievable accuracy in the measured HF param-
eters [37], we can estimate the M-tangling power
to a relatively narrow confidence interval. Opti-
mization within a small range of the optimal pa-
rameterst∗andN∗thatwefindfordefinitevalues
of HF parameters can guide the experimental cal-
ibration of the timing of the pulses and optimal
sequence iterations.
G Optimization process for GHZ M-like
generation
Here we highlight the optimization procedure for
generating GHZ M-like states using the sequen-
tial or multi-spin protocols. In Fig. 2 of the main
text, we show a diagram of the optimization pro-
cedure for the sequential protocol. First, we need
to provide as inputs:
•the size of the GHZ-like state we want to
prepare (|GHZ|),
•the maximum resonance number ( kmax) to
search for each nuclear spin,
•the maximum time for the total sequence
and of individual gates ( Tmax),
•the tolerances of unwanted/target nuclear
one-tangles,
•the gate error tolerance.
Then, for each nuclear spin, we search over all
resonances by varying the unit time around each
resonance by δt=±0.2µs, and with a time step
of5×10−3µs and select as optimal the unit time
twhere n0·n1is as close as possible to the value
−1. Having fixed the unit time, we then use the
analyticalexpressionsfortheminimaof G1which
give us the number of iterations that maximize
the nuclear one-tangle [see Ref. [38] for the ex-
pressions of the minima]. Since G1is periodic,
there are multiple numbers of iterations that can
minimizeG1, and so we usually truncate to about15maximaoftheone-tangles, whichwealsopost-
select such that N·t≤Tmax. Note that here
Tmaxcould be the gate time restriction we impose
for the gate time of a single decoupling sequence,
rather than the total gate time restriction for the
composition of all sequential gates. We then in-
spect all elements in the sets of {t,N}and keep
those that give a sequence with gate time smaller
thanTmax. After this step, we calculate the re-
maining nuclear one-tangles and check if they are
smaller than the unwanted one-tangle tolerance.
If this is not satisfied, we reject that particular
(t,N)case, whereas if this is satisfied, we store
the unit time and number of iterations. We re-
peat this process for each nuclear spin, such that
we have all the possible unit times and iterations
that can give maximal entanglement of the tar-
get spins with the electron while keeping the un-
wanted one-tangles minimal. At this stage, we
have multiple unit times and iterations that sat-
isfy these requirements.
We then combine the unit times and iterations
corresponding to sets associated with the selec-
tion of any|GHZ|−1nuclei out of the entire nu-
clear register, such that the total decoupling se-
quencedoesnotexceedthemaximumtime, Tmax.
Foreachsuchnuclearspincombination, weevolve
all nuclei individually under the composite evolu-
tion and obtain their nuclear one-tangles. At this
step, each nuclear spin combination is associated
with multiple unit times and iterations that we
could consider, so we need to choose which tand
Nwe keep for each distinct nuclear spin combina-
tion. We choose those tandNwhich give rise to
a maximalM-tangle at the end of the composite
|GHZ|-1 entangling gates. Different choices could
be made here, e.g., selecting the tandNthat
givetheshortestgatetimeorpenalizingbothgate
time and the deviation from the maximal possi-
bleM-tangle using an appropriate cost function.
At this stage, we have narrowed down nuclear
spin candidates and associated each nuclear spin
combinationwithaparticularsequencecomposed
of timestjand iterations Njthat gives rise to
maximalM-way entanglement. For each of these
cases, we inspect whether the unwanted nuclear
one-tangles of the composite evolution are below
theunwantedone-tangletoleranceweimposed. If
this is satisfied, we accept this case and proceed
with the calculation of the gate error. Finally,
we accept this case if the gate error is lower than
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 35(a)(b)Figure 15: (a) ∆ϵp,M(U) :=ϵp,M(U)−ϵuncertain
p,M (U)for the sequential scheme. ϵuncertain
p,M (U)is the error value if
we introduce a 0.01kHz shift in the HF parameters of the target spins. (b) ∆ϵp,M(U)for the multi-spin scheme.
ϵuncertain
p,M (U)is the error value if we introduce a 0.01kHz shift in the HF parameters of the target spins. The various
panels show the deviation in the M-tangling power for GHZ 3-like, GHZ 4-like, GHZ 5-like, and GHZ 6-like states.
(a)(b)
Figure 16: (a) ∆ϵp,M(U) :=ϵp,M(U)−ϵuncertain
p,M (U)for the sequential scheme. ϵuncertain
p,M (U)is the error value if
we introduce a 0.05kHz shift in the HF parameters of the target spins. (b) ∆ϵp,M(U)for the multi-spin scheme.
ϵuncertain
p,M (U)is the error value if we introduce a 0.05kHz shift in the HF parameters of the target spins. The various
panels show the deviation in the M-tangling power for GHZ 3-like, GHZ 4-like, GHZ 5-like, and GHZ 6-like states.
GHZ Total gate time Individual gate time Gate error Target Unwanted kmaxδt time step
size tol. (µs) tol. (µs) tol. one-tangle tol. one-tangle tol. (µs) (µs)
3 2000 2000 0.1 0.99 0.1 18 0.2 5×10−3
4 2000 2000 0.1 0.99 0.1 18 0.2 5×10−3
5 2300 2300 0.1 0.9 0.1 18 0.2 5×10−3
6 2500 2500 0.11 0.9 0.12 18 0.2 5×10−3
7 3300 3300 0.12 0.9 0.12 18 0.2 5×10−3
8 3700 2000 0.13 0.9 0.12 18 0.2 5×10−3
9 4000 1400 0.13 0.85 0.15 18 0.2 5×10−3
10 4000 1400 0.19 0.87 0.22 18 0.2 5×10−3
Table 2: Tolerances (tol.) and relevant parameters for the optimization of the generation of GHZ M-like states using
the sequential protocol.
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 36GHZ Gate time Gate error Target Unwanted kmaxδt time values
size tol. (µs) tol. one-tangle tol. one-tangle tol. (µs)
3 2000 0.11 0.9 0.1 10 0.25 500
4 2000 0.101 0.9 0.1 10 0.25 500
5 2300 0.1 0.84 0.125 10 0.25 400
6 2500 0.13 0.88 0.12 10 0.25 200
7 2800 0.13 0.85 0.15 10 0.25 200
8 3000 0.15 0.85 0.15 10 0.25 200
9 3000 0.15 0.82 0.15 10 0.25 200
Table 3: Tolerances (tol.) and relevant parameters for the optimization of the generation of GHZ M-like states using
the multi-spin protocol.
the gate error tolerance. In Table 2, we provide
the tolerances and relevant parameters we set for
each GHZ size.
Regarding the multi-spin protocol, we are not
composing gates since we are interested in a
single-shot operation that generates direct en-
tanglement of the electron with multiple nuclei.
We explain here the procedure we follow accord-
ing to the flowchart of Fig. 2. We start with
one nuclear spin selected from the entire register
and find its resonance time for some particular
resonance number k. We vary the unit time t
within±0.25µs and define an upper bound for
the maximum number of iterations that respects
the gate time restriction for the particular unit
time. Then, for all unit times and N∈[1,Nmax]
we obtain all the nuclear one-tangles using the
knowledge of rotation angles and the dot product
ofthenuclearaxesforeachnucleusgivenoneiter-
ation. Then, for all possible times and iterations,
wecheckhowmanyone-tanglesareabovethetar-
get one-tangle tolerance and how many are below
the unwanted one-tangle tolerance. If we have
|GHZ|−1one-tangles above the target one-tangle
tolerance, and all other nuclear one-tangles are
below the unwanted one-tangle tolerance, then
we accept this case. We repeat this process by
choosing a different resonance number k, up to
somekmax. Then, we select a different nuclear
spin from the register as our starting point and
repeat all the aforementioned steps.
Aftercompletingtheabovestage, wehavemul-
tiple times and iterations for which we maximize
|GHZ|−1target one-tangles simultaneously. We
then rearrange all these cases corresponding to
different unit times and iterations in terms of
unique spin combinations. For each spin com-bination, we select the time and iterations of
the single-shot operation, which give the maxi-
malM-tangle. Similar to the sequential scheme,
the choice of narrowing down particular tand
Ncould be based on minimal gate time or a
cost function that both minimizes gate time and
maximizes the M-tangle for the particular spin
combination. Finally, for each spin combination
we evolve all unwanted nuclear spins individually,
such that we pass this information to the calcu-
lation of the gate error. If the gate error is below
the tolerance we imposed, we then accept this
case.
H One-tangles of Sequential Scheme
for generation of GHZ M-like states
Here we present the nuclear one-tangles corre-
sponding to the sequential entanglement scheme
of Fig. 5. The nuclear one-tangles for all different
realizations of entangling M−1nuclei with the
electron to prepare GHZ M-like states are shown
in Fig. 17. The labels above each bar of each
case refer to some13C nuclear spin of the register
labeled as C j, withj∈[1,27].
I Eigendecomposition of mixed state
To keep the discussion general, we consider Lnu-
clear spins, with Kof them being the target ones
and hence, L−Kbeing the unwanted nuclei. To
derive the optimal ensemble for the calculation
of entanglement of the mixed state, we make the
assumption that the initial state of the system is
any arbitrary product pure state:
|ψ0⟩=|ψel⟩⊗L
l=1|ψ(l)
nuc⟩, (76)
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 37Figure 17: One-tangles of nuclear spins after composing M−1sequential entangling gates to create the cases of
Fig. 5. Each case corresponds to a distinct DD sequence that selects different nuclei from the nuclear spin register.
Each bar shows the one-tangle of a particular nuclear spin, and the text above the bars corresponds to the nuclear
spin labels. From top to bottom, we show the nuclear one-tangles for the generation of GHZ 4-like up to GHZ 10-like
electron-nuclear entangled states.
where|ψel⟩=α|0⟩+β|1⟩, withα,β∈Cand
|α|2+|β|2= 1. Under a CR-type evolution the
electron-nuclear system evolves into:
|ψ⟩=U|ψ0⟩=/summationdisplay
j∈{0,1}σjj|ψel⟩⊗L
l=1R(l)
nj|ψ(l)
nuc⟩.
(77)
Thus, the full density matrix reads:
ρ=/summationdisplay
j,k∈{0,1}σjjρelσkk⊗lR(l)
njρ(l)
nuc(R†
nk)(l).(78)
Next, suppose that we wish to trace out the last
L−Kspins from the density operator (assuming
that we have ordered the basis such that these
appear last in the Kronecker product):
ρred=/summationdisplay
j,k[σjjρelσkk⊗K
l=1R(l)
njρ(l)
nuc(R†
nk)(l)]
×L−K/productdisplay
l=1Tr[R(l+K)
njρ(l+K)
nuc (R†
nk)(l+K)]
=/summationdisplay
j,kfjkσjjρelσkk⊗K
l=1R(l)
njρ(l)
nuc(R†
nk)(l),
(79)
where we have defined fjk =
/producttextL−K
l=1Tr[R(l+K)
njρ(l+K)
nuc (R†
nk)(l+K)], withf00= 1 =f11andf10=f∗
01. Next, we are
interested in finding the eigenvectors and eigen-
values of the reduced density matrix. To do so,
we apply the inverse CR gates on the target
subspace of the electron and Ktarget nuclei to
find:
ρ′
red=/summationdisplay
jkfjkσjjρelσkk⊗K
l=1ρ(l)
nuc
=/parenleftigg
|α|2αβ∗f01
α∗βf10|β|2/parenrightigg
⊗lρ(l)
nuc.(80)
Thus, we can easily find the eigenvalues of the
electron’s reduced density matrix which read:
λ±=1
2/parenleftig
1±/radicalig
(|α|2−|β|2)2+ 4|α|2|β|2|f01|2/parenrightig
,
(81)
whereas the eigenvectors are given by:
v±=1/radicalig
1 + (|β|2−λ±
c)2/parenleftigg
−|β|2−λ±
c
1/parenrightigg
, (82)
withc=α∗βf10(providedc̸= 0). Now, to find
the eigenvectors of the total reduced density ma-
trix, we need to reapply the controlled gates of
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 38the target subspace on the matrix whose columns
are the two eigenvectors:
[|v′
+⟩,|v′
−⟩]T=U[|v+⟩⊗l|ψ(l)
nuc⟩,|v−⟩⊗l|ψ(l)
nuc⟩]T.
(83)
Thus, we now have the diagonalized density op-
erator:
ρdiag=λ+|v′
+⟩⟨v′
+|+λ−|v′
−⟩⟨v′
−|, (84)
which means that we can use the trial state:
|ψtrial⟩=/radicalig
λ+|v′
+⟩−eiχ/radicalig
1−λ+|v′
−⟩,(85)
to find the entanglement of the mixed reduced
density matrix of the electron and the target nu-
clei. Note that given arbitrary initial states, the
highest rank that the reduced density matrix can
have (irrespective of the initial pure state of the
system, the number of total nuclei, or the number
of nuclei we trace out) is 2, due to the form of the
controlled evolution operator.
Inthecasewhentheelectronstartsfromanon-
superposition state e.g., when β= 0, we find that
the two eigenvalues are λ+= 1andλ−= 0. The
corresponding eigenvectors are |v+⟩=|0⟩and
|v−⟩=|1⟩, which after reapplying the controlled
gates read:
[|v′
+⟩,|v′
−⟩]T=U[|0⟩⊗l|ψ(l)
nuc⟩,|1⟩⊗l|ψ(l)
nuc⟩]T.
(86)
Inthisscenario,since λ−= 0,thereduceddensity
matrix corresponds to a pure product state.
J Concurrence and three-tangle
Here we compare the entanglement of rank-2
mixed states involving two qubits with the en-
tanglement of rank-2 mixed states involving three
qubits. For two-qubit pure states the concur-
rence is defined as C(ρ) =/radicalig
2(1−Tr[ρ2
A]) =/radicalig
2(1−Tr[ρ2
B]), whereρA(B)is the reduced den-
sity matrix of system A (B). The entanglement
of a mixed two-qubit state can be computed with
similar methods as in the main text by minimiz-
ing the concurrence of a trial state. We assume
that we have a trial state of the form:
|ψtrial,2⟩=√p|Φ+⟩+/radicalbig
1−peiχ|Φ−⟩,(87)
where|Φ±⟩= 1/√
2(|00⟩±|11⟩)are the two Bell
states. We further consider a rank-2 mixed three-
qubitstatewhichisthemixtureoftwo |GHZ±⟩=1/√
2(|0⟩⊗3±|1⟩⊗3)states. Thus, similarly to the
main text, we define the trial state:
|ψtrial,3⟩=√p|GHZ+⟩+/radicalbig
1−peiχ|GHZ−⟩.
(88)
For each value of p∈[0,1]we vary the rela-
tive phase of the two terms, χ, for both|ψtrial,2⟩
and|ψtrial,3⟩, and obtain the minimal concur-
rence, or three-tangle, respectively. We plot the
results as a function of pin Fig. 18. We ob-
serve that the minimum concurrence, as well as
the minimum three-tangle are both convex func-
tions. In fact, the minimum concurrence is given
byC= 2|p−1/2|and the minimum three-tangle
by(1−2p)2. We note that for all values of p(ex-
cept forp= 1/2where we have maximal mixed
states) the minimum three-tangle is lower than
the minimum concurrence, and hence the three-
way entanglement is more sensitive to the rela-
tive ratio of the superposition terms in the mixed
state than the concurrence of two-qubit mixed
states.
Figure 18: Minimum concurrence of a mixture of Bell
states (blue), and minimum three-tangle of a mixture
of|GHZ±⟩states (red). The black dashed line is the
analytical expression of the minimum three-tangle.
J.1 Parameters for 27 nuclear spins
The HF parameters for the 27 nuclear spin regis-
ter we consider in the main text are presented in
Table 4 and can also be found in Refs. [37, 61].
References
[1] Robert Raussendorf and Hans J. Briegel. “A
one-way quantum computer”. Phys. Rev.
Lett.86, 5188–5191 (2001).
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 39C atomsA
2π(kHz)B
2π(kHz) C atomsA
2π(kHz)B
2π(kHz)
C1 -20.72 12 C14 -19.815 5.3
C2 -23.22 13 C15 -13.971 9
C3 -31.25 8 C16 -4.66 7
C4 -14.07 13 C17 -5.62 5
C5 -11.346 59.21 C18 -36.308 26.62
C6 -48.58 9 C19 24.399 24.81
C7 -8.32 3 C20 2.690 11
C8 -9.79 5 C21 1.212 13
C9 213.154 3 C22 7.683 4
C10 17.643 8.6 C23 -3.177 2
C11 14.548 10 C24 -4.225 0
C12 20.569 41.51 C25 -3.873 0
C13 8.029 21.0 C26 -3.618 0
C27 -4.039 0
Table 4: Hyperfine parameters of the13C atoms we con-
sidered in the paper.
[2] H. J. Briegel, D. E. Browne, W. Dur,
R. Raussendorf, and M. Van den Nest.
“Measurement-based quantum computa-
tion”. Nature 5, 19–26 (2009).
[3] Robert Raussendorf and Tzu-Chieh Wei.
“Quantum computation by local measure-
ment”. Annual Review of Condensed Matter
Physics3, 239–261 (2012).
[4] Sara Bartolucci, Patrick Birchall, Hector
Bombin, Hugo Cable, Chris Dawson, Mer-
cedes Gimeno-Segovia, Eric Johnston, Kon-
rad Kieling, Naomi Nickerson, Mihir Pant,
Fernando Pastawski, Terry Rudolph, and
Chris Sparrow. “Fusion-based quantum com-
putation”. Nat. Commun. 14, 912 (2023).
[5] Mark Hillery, Vladimír Bužek, and An-
dré Berthiaume. “Quantum secret sharing”.
Phys. Rev. A 59, 1829–1834 (1999).
[6] W. Tittel, H. Zbinden, and N. Gisin. “Ex-
perimental demonstration of quantum secret
sharing”. Phys. Rev. A 63, 042301 (2001).
[7] K. Chen and H.-K. Lo. “Conference key
agreement and quantum sharing of classical
secrets with noisy ghz states”. In Proceed-
ings. International Symposium on Informa-
tion Theory, 2005. ISIT 2005. Pages 1607–
1611. (2005).
[8] Y.-J. Chang, C.-W. Tsai, and T. Hwang.
“Multi-user private comparison protocol us-
ing ghz class states”. Quantum Inf. Process.
12, 1077–1088 (2013).
[9] B. A. Bell, D. Markham, D. A. Herrera-
Martí, A. Marin, W. J. Wadsworth, J. G.
Rarity, and M. S. Tame. “Experimentaldemonstration of graph-state quantum se-
cret sharing”. Nat. Commun. 5, 5480 (2014).
[10] M. Leifgen, T. Schröder, F. Gädeke, R. Rie-
mann, V. Métillon, E. Neu, C. Hepp,
C. Arend, C. Becher, K. Lauritsen, and
O. Benson. “Evaluation of nitrogen- and
silicon-vacancy defect centres as single pho-
ton sources in quantum key distribution”.
New. J. Phys. 16, 023021 (2014).
[11] Nicoló Lo Piparo, Mohsen Razavi, and
William J. Munro. “Memory-assisted quan-
tum key distribution with a single nitrogen-
vacancy center”. Phys. Rev. A 96,
052313 (2017).
[12] Norbert M. Linke, Mauricio Gutierrez,
Kevin A. Landsman, Caroline Figgatt,
Shantanu Debnath, Kenneth R. Brown,
and Christopher Monroe. “Fault-tolerant
quantum error detection”. Sci. Adv. 3,
e1701074 (2017).
[13] M. G. M. Moreno, A. Fonseca, and M. M.
Cunha. “Using three-partite ghz states
for partial quantum error detection in
entanglement-based protocols”. Quantum
Inf. Process. 17, 191 (2018).
[14] N. H. Nickerson, Y. Li, and S. C. Ben-
jamin. “Topological quantum computing
with a very noisy network and local error
rates approaching one percent”. Nat. Com-
mun.4, 1756 (2013).
[15] B. A. Bell, D. A. Herrera-Martí, M. S. Tame,
D. Markham, W. J. Wadsworth, and J. G.
Rarity. “Experimental demonstration of a
graph state quantum error-correction code”.
Nat. Commun. 5, 3658 (2014).
[16] G. Waldherr, Y. Wang, S. Zaiser, M. Ja-
mali, T. Schulte-Herbrüggen, H. Abe,
T. Ohshima, J. Isoya, J. F. Du, P. Neumann,
and J. Wrachtrup. “Quantum error correc-
tioninasolid-statehybridspinregister”. Na-
ture506, 204–207 (2014).
[17] T. H. Taminiau, J. Cramer, T. van der Sar,
V. V. Dobrovitski, and R. Hanson. “Uni-
versal control and error correction in multi-
qubit spin registers in diamond”. Nat. Nan-
otechnol.9, 171–176 (2014).
[18] J. Cramer, N. Kalb, M. A. Rol, B. Hensen,
M. S. Blok, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen,
R. Hanson, and T. H. Taminiau. “Repeated
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 40quantum error correction on a continuously
encoded qubit by real-time feedback”. Nat.
Commun. 7, 11526 (2016).
[19] M.H.Abobeih,Y.Wang,J.Randall,S.J.H.
Loenen, C. E. Bradley, M. Markham, D. J.
Twitchen,B.M.Terhal,andT.H.Taminiau.
“Fault-tolerantoperationofalogicalqubitin
a diamond quantum processor”. Nature 606,
884–889 (2022).
[20] Zachary Eldredge, Michael Foss-Feig,
Jonathan A. Gross, S. L. Rolston, and
Alexey V. Gorshkov. “Optimal and secure
measurement protocols for quantum sensor
networks”. Phys. Rev. A 97, 042337 (2018).
[21] B. Koczor, S. Endo, T. Jones, Y. Mat-
suzaki, and S. C. Benjamin. “Variational-
state quantum metrology”. New J. Phys. 22,
083038 (2020).
[22] H. Bernien, B. Hensen, W. Pfaff, G. Kool-
stra, M. S. Blok, L. Robledo, T. H.
Taminiau, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen,
L. Childress, and R. Hanson. “Heralded en-
tanglement between solid-state qubits sep-
arated by three metres”. Nature 497, 86–
90 (2013).
[23] P. C. Humphreys, N. Kalb, J. P. J. Morits,
R. N. Schouten, R. F. L. Vermeulen, D. J.
Twitchen, M. Markham, and R. Hanson.
“Deterministic delivery of remote entangle-
ment on a quantum network”. Nature 558,
268–273 (2018).
[24] M. Pompili, S. L. N. Hermans, S. Baier,
H. K. C. Beukers, P. C. Humphreys, R. N.
Schouten, R. F. L. Vermeulen, M. J. Tiggel-
man, L. dos Santos Martins, B. Dirkse,
S. Wehner, and R. Hanson. “Realization of a
multinode quantum network of remote solid-
state qubits”. Sci. 372, 259–264 (2021).
[25] S. L. N. Hermans, M. Pompili, H. K. C.
Beukers, S. Baier, J. Borregaard, and
R. Hanson. “Qubit teleportation between
non-neighbouring nodes in a quantum net-
work”. Nature 605, 663–668 (2022).
[26] S. Zaiser, T. Rendler, I. Jakobi, T. Wolf, S.-
Y. Lee, S. Wagner, V. Bergholm, T. Schulte-
Herbrüggen,P.Neumann,andJ.Wrachtrup.
“Enhancing quantum sensing sensitivity by
a quantum memory”. Nat. Commun. 7,
12279 (2016).[27] Alexandre Cooper, Won Kyu Calvin Sun,
Jean-Christophe Jaskula, and Paola Cap-
pellaro. “Environment-assisted quantum-
enhanced sensing with electronic spins
in diamond”. Phys. Rev. Applied 12,
044047 (2019).
[28] V. Vorobyov, S. Zaiser, N. Abt, J. Meinel,
D. Dasari, P. Neumann, and J. Wrachtrup.
“Quantum fourier transform for nanoscale
quantum sensing”. Npj Quantum Inf. 7,
124 (2021).
[29] N. Kalb, A. A. Reiserer, P. C. Humphreys,
J. J. W. Bakermans, S. J. Kamerling, N. H.
Nickerson, S. C. Benjamin, D. J. Twitchen,
M. Markham, and R. Hanson. “Entangle-
ment distillation between solid-state quan-
tum network nodes”. Sci. 356, 928–
932 (2017).
[30] T. H. Taminiau, J. J. T. Wagenaar,
T.vanderSar,F.Jelezko,V.V.Dobrovitski,
and R. Hanson. “Detection and control of
individual nuclear spins using a weakly cou-
pled electron spin”. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109,
137602 (2012).
[31] S. F. Huelga, C. Macchiavello, T. Pellizzari,
A. K. Ekert, M. B. Plenio, and J. I. Cirac.
“Improvement of frequency standards with
quantum entanglement”. Phys. Rev. Lett.
79, 3865–3868 (1997).
[32] André R. R. Carvalho, Florian Mintert, and
AndreasBuchleitner. “Decoherenceandmul-
tipartiteentanglement”. Phys.Rev.Lett. 93,
230501 (2004).
[33] C. E. Bradley, J. Randall, M. H. Abobeih,
R. C. Berrevoets, M. J. Degen, M. A.
Bakker, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, and
T.H.Taminiau. “Aten-qubitsolid-statespin
register with quantum memory up to one
minute”. Phys. Rev. X 9, 031045 (2019).
[34] C. T. Nguyen, D. D. Sukachev, M. K.
Bhaskar, B. Machielse, D. S. Levonian, E. N.
Knall, P. Stroganov, R. Riedinger, H. Park,
M. Lončar, and M. D. Lukin. “Quantum net-
worknodesbasedondiamondqubitswithan
efficient nanophotonic interface”. Phys. Rev.
Lett.123, 183602 (2019).
[35] C. T. Nguyen, D. D. Sukachev, M. K.
Bhaskar, B. Machielse, D. S. Levonian, E. N.
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 41Knall, P. Stroganov, C. Chia, M. J. Bu-
rek, R. Riedinger, H. Park, M. Lončar, and
M. D. Lukin. “An integrated nanophotonic
quantum register based on silicon-vacancy
spins in diamond”. Phys. Rev. B 100,
165428 (2019).
[36] A. Bourassa, C.r P. Anderson, K. C. Miao,
M. Onizhuk, H. Ma, A. L. Crook, H. Abe,
J. Ul-Hassan, T. Ohshima, N. T. Son,
G. Galli, and D. D. Awschalom. “Entangle-
ment and control of single nuclear spins in
isotopically engineered silicon carbide”. Nat.
Mater.19, 1319–1325 (2020).
[37] M. H. Abobeih, J. Randall, C. E. Bradley,
H. P. Bartling, M. A. Bakker, M. J. Degen,
M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, and T. H.
Taminiau. “Atomic-scale imaging of a 27-
nuclear-spinclusterusingaquantumsensor”.
Nature576, 411–415 (2019).
[38] Evangelia Takou, Edwin Barnes, and
Sophia E. Economou. “Precise control of
entanglement in multinuclear spin registers
coupled to defects”. Phys. Rev. X 13,
011004 (2023).
[39] H. Y. Carr and E. M. Purcell. “Effects of
diffusion on free precession in nuclear mag-
neticresonanceexperiments”. Phys.Rev. 94,
630–638 (1954).
[40] S. Meiboom and D. Gill. “Modified spin-
echo method for measuring nuclear relax-
ation times”. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 29, 688–
691 (1958).
[41] G.deLange, Z.H.Wang, D.Ristè, V.V.Do-
brovitski, andR.Hanson. “Universaldynam-
ical decoupling of a single solid-state spin
from a spin bath”. Sci. 330, 60–63 (2010).
[42] Terry Gullion, David B Baker, and Mark S
Conradi. “New, compensated carr-purcell se-
quences”. Journal of Magnetic Resonance
(1969)89, 479–484 (1990).
[43] G. S. Uhrig. “Exact results on dynamical de-
couplingby πpulsesinquantuminformation
processes”. New J. Phys. 10, 083024 (2008).
[44] Götz S. Uhrig. “Keeping a quantum bit alive
by optimized π-pulse sequences”. Phys. Rev.
Lett.98, 100504 (2007).
[45] N. Zhao, J.-L. Hu, S.-W. Ho, J. T. K. Wan,
and R. B. Liu. “Atomic-scale magnetometryof distant nuclear spin clusters via nitrogen-
vacancy spin in diamond”. Nat. Nanotechnol
6, 242–246 (2011).
[46] Zhi-Hui Wang, G. de Lange, D. Ristè,
R.Hanson, andV.V.Dobrovitski. “Compar-
ison of dynamical decoupling protocols for a
nitrogen-vacancy center in diamond”. Phys.
Rev. B85, 155204 (2012).
[47] W. Dong, F. A. Calderon-Vargas, and
S. E Economou. “Precise high-fidelity elec-
tron–nuclear spin entangling gates in nv cen-
ters via hybrid dynamical decoupling se-
quences”. New J. Phys. 22, 073059 (2020).
[48] W. Pfaff, T. H. Taminiau, L. Rob-
ledo, Bernien H, M. Markham, D. J.
Twitchen, and R. Hanson. “Demonstration
of entanglement-by-measurement of solid-
state qubits”. Nat. Phys. 9, 29–33 (2013).
[49] M. Abobeih. “From atomic-scale imaging to
quantum fault-tolerance with spins in dia-
mond”. PhDthesis. DelftUniversityofTech-
nology. (2021).
[50] Evangelia Takou. ““Code to sim-
ulate the GHZ states generation””.
https://github.com/eva-takou/GHZ_
States_Public (2023).
[51] D. Chruscinski and G. Sarbicki. “Entangle-
ment witnesses: construction, analysis and
classification”. J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 47,
483001 (2014).
[52] G. Carvacho, F. Graffitti, V. D’Ambrosio,
B. C. Hiesmayr, and F. Sciarrino. “Experi-
mental investigation on the geometry of ghz
states”. Sci Rep. 7, 13265 (2017).
[53] Qi Zhao, Gerui Wang, Xiao Yuan, and
Xiongfeng Ma. “Efficient and robust de-
tection of multipartite greenberger-horne-
zeilinger-like states”. Phys. Rev. A 99,
052349 (2019).
[54] JacobL.Beckey, N.Gigena, PatrickJ.Coles,
and M. Cerezo. “Computable and oper-
ationally meaningful multipartite entangle-
ment measures”. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127,
140501 (2021).
[55] Valerie Coffman, Joydip Kundu, and
William K. Wootters. “Distributed entan-
glement”. Phys. Rev. A 61, 052306 (2000).
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 42[56] Alexander Wong and Nelson Christensen.
“Potential multiparticle entanglement mea-
sure”. Phys. Rev. A 63, 044301 (2001).
[57] Dafa Li. “The n-tangle of odd n qubits”.
Quantum Inf. Process. 11, 481–492 (2012).
[58] Ryszard Horodecki, Paweł Horodecki,
Michał Horodecki, and Karol Horodecki.
“Quantum entanglement”. Rev. Mod. Phys.
81, 865–942 (2009).
[59] Yuriy Makhlin. “Nonlocal properties of two-
qubit gates and mixed states, and the opti-
mization of quantum computations”. Quan-
tum Inf. Process. 1, 243–252 (2002).
[60] X.LiandD.Li. “Relationshipbetweenthen-
tangle and the residual entanglement of even
n qubits”. Quantum Info. Comput. 10, 1018-
1028 (2010).
[61] C.E.Bradley. “Orderfromdisorder: Control
of multi-qubit spin registers in diamond”.
PhD thesis. Delft University of Technology.
(2021).
[62] Andreas Osterloh, Jens Siewert, and Armin
Uhlmann. “Tanglesofsuperpositionsandthe
convex-roof extension”. Phys. Rev. A 77,
032310 (2008).
[63] Robert Lohmayer, Andreas Osterloh, Jens
Siewert, and Armin Uhlmann. “Entan-
gled three-qubit states without concurrence
and three-tangle”. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97,
260502 (2006).
[64] Michael A. Nielsen and Isaac L. Chuang.
“Quantum computation and quantum infor-
mation: 10th anniversary edition”. Cam-
bridge University Press. (2010).
[65] Fan-ZhenKong, Jun-LongZhao, MingYang,
and Zhuo-Liang Cao. “Entangling power
and operator entanglement of nonunitary
quantum evolutions”. Phys. Rev. A 92,
012127 (2015).
[66] Anthony W. Schlimgen, Kade Head-
Marsden, LeeAnn M. Sager-Smith, Prineha
Narang, and David A. Mazziotti. “Quantum
state preparation and nonunitary evolution
with diagonal operators”. Phys. Rev. A 106,
022414 (2022).
[67] Zhi-Hui Wang, Wenxian Zhang, A. M.
Tyryshkin, S. A. Lyon, J. W. Ager, E. E.
Haller, and V. V. Dobrovitski. “Effect ofpulse error accumulation on dynamical de-
coupling of the electron spins of phospho-
rus donors in silicon”. Phys. Rev. B 85,
085206 (2012).
[68] T. Van der Sar. “Quantum control of sin-
gle spins and single photons in diamond”.
PhD thesis. Delft University of Technology.
(2012).
[69] G. De Lange. “Quantum control and co-
herence of interacting spins in diamond”.
PhD thesis. Delft University of Technology.
(2012).
[70] “https://cyberinitiative.org/”.
[71] Christopher Eltschka, Andreas Osterloh,
and Jens Siewert. “Possibility of generalized
monogamy relations for multipartite entan-
glement beyond three qubits”. Phys. Rev. A
80, 032313 (2009).
[72] Paolo Zanardi, Christof Zalka, and Lara
Faoro. “Entangling power of quantum evolu-
tions”. Phys. Rev. A 62, 030301 (2000).
Accepted in Quantum2024-02-28, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 43