 Improving Energy Management of Hybrid Electric 
Vehicles by Considering Battery Electric -Thermal 
Model  
A. Mousaei   
Dept . Electrical and Computer 
Engineering  
University of Tabriz  
Tabriz, Iran  
a.mousaei@tabrizu.ac.ir 
Abstract— This article proposes an offline Energy 
Management System (EMS) for Parallel Hybrid Electric 
Vehicles (PHEVs). Dividing the torque between the Electric 
Motor (EM) and the Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) requires 
a suitable EMS. Batteries are vital to HEVs and significantly 
impact overall vehicle cost and performance. High temperature 
and high battery State of Charge (SOC) are the main factors that 
accelerate battery aging. SOC is the most critical state variable 
in EMS and was usually considered the only dynamic variable in 
previous studies. For simplicity, the battery temperature was 
often assumed to be constant, and the effect of EMS on 
temperature change was neglected. In this paper, we first apply 
Dynamic Program ming (DP) to a PHEV without considering 
battery temperature variations. Then, the battery model is 
improved by modeling the cooling system to take into account 
temperature variations and show how neglecting the thermal 
dynamics of the battery in EMS is imp ractical. Finally, by 
integrating battery temperature as a state variable in the 
optimization problem, a new EMS is proposed to control battery 
temperature and SOC variation. Simulation results of the tested 
vehicle show that the proposed method controls b attery charge 
and temperature. The proposed EMS method prevents 
uncontrolled fluctuations in battery temperature and reduces its 
deterioration rate.   
Keywords — Energy Management System, Dynamic  
Programming, Parallel Hybrid Electric Vehicles, Battery  
Temper ature, Corrosion  
I. INTRODUCTION  
Two-thirds of the petroleum used worldwide is consumed 
by cars, and about half of this amount is related to passenger 
cars. Pollution caused by fuel consumption and dependence 
on external sources has motivated much research and 
advances in replacing conventional power generation and 
transmission systems based on Internal Combustion Engines 
(ICE) with renewable and clean energy sources. On the other 
hand, the power of pure Electric Vehicles (EVs), due to the 
high cost  and low capacity of the batteries, does not meet the 
general needs except for special applications. As a result, one 
of the primary motivations for the production of Hybrid 
Electric Vehicles (HEVs) has been to take advantage of the 
high power of Conventio nal Vehicles (CVs) and the low 
emission of EVs [1].  
HEVs have two directions to provide their driving force: 
ICE, the Electric Machine (EM), and the battery. The most 
crucial issue for control engineers in these vehicles is the issue 
of EMS. The proper per formance of HEVs, regardless of the 
type of structure and the characteristics of various 
components, is highly dependent on the EMS. The control 
algorithm of EMS in HEVs specifies how to divide the 
demand power or demand torque between the electric and 
thermal units of the vehicles to follow a driving cycle according to the minimal fuel consumption and emission of 
pollutants [1,2].  
In the last two decades, various methods have been 
presented for the EMS of these vehicles [1 -7]. The control 
theory of EMSs, d ivide into two categories: based on rules and 
based on optimal control. Although rules -based methods are 
more straightforward, they do not provide the optimal 
response, and optimal control -based methods are used to 
obtain the optimal response.  
The standard  classification of methods based on optimal 
control divides them into offline and online forms. All offline 
methods' common assumption knows all road and driving 
conditions. This assumption is necessary to reach the optimal 
answer. Although the offline met hods are not directly 
applicable to the online control of vehicles, their response can 
be used to select the best performance, compare the online 
techniques, and define reference routes in online mode. In 
online forms, a cost function is usually minimized.  Therefore, 
all online methods are suboptimal, and their measurement 
criteria are close to the overall optimal results obtained by 
offline methods. Online methods that only use momently 
information have far from the optimal answer. The methods 
that use pat tern recognition and processing previously stored 
information depend highly on the conditions and the driving 
cycle for which they are designed. They do not have a suitable 
answer for other driving cycles [1 -8]. The essential methods 
based on optimal contr ol are Dynamic Programming  (DP) for 
offline energy management [3,9] and Pontriagin's Minimum 
Principle (PMP) for online energy management [4,9].  
In the standard EMS, the cost function is the amount of 
fuel consumption, and the only dynamic variable is the State 
of Charge (SOC) of the battery. Therefore, parts of the vehicle, 
like the battery, are modeled using lookup tables and static 
maps. Due to the size and cost of the batteries, especially in 
plug-in HEVs, the vehicle's battery is very vulnerable to hig h 
temperatures. So, their continuous charging and discharging 
and optimal battery use are necessary and vital [5].  
Many studies have been done to optimize the use of 
batteries in HEVs.  [8] and [10,11] have studied the modeling 
of battery temperature change s. A group of articles has 
modeled battery temperature changes without including them 
in the EMS problem.  Another group of articles also considered 
the State of Health (SOH) of the battery in the optimization 
problem but assumed the battery temperature to be constant.  
In [12 -14], battery life and its degree of SOH are modeled.  
Unsuitable working conditions reduce battery life and cause 
increased internal resistance and a decrease in capacity, and  
[12] and [14] have modeled this action.  In [7], the battery life 
is considered in the EMS problem, but the battery temperature 
is assumed to be constant.  The design of different systems for the thermal management of batteries has been studied in [15] 
and [16]. References [17] and [18] have presented methods  to 
estimate battery SOC, and [19] the optimal range of battery 
temperature has been investigated. In [20], the battery's 
lifetime depends only on its current. Still, a more accurate 
model must consider other parameters affecting the battery's 
performance for a general conclusion. In [21], it was viewed 
as an equation of state instead of evaluating the SOH in the 
cost function. Because the ranges of SOH and SOC variables 
are very different, two controllers were used to follow the 
reference, but the optimali ty of the response was not 
guaranteed. Considering that battery temperature is a critical 
and essential factor in corrosion , a penalty for battery 
temperature was considered [22]. But battery temperature is 
the only factor regarded in this reference, while  other elements 
effectively reduce battery lifetime, even at mild temperatures. 
In [23], optimal energy management was presented with a cost 
function that includes fuel consumption and battery health. 
This article used a model for corrosion  dependent on ba ttery 
temperature and the current passing through it. The limitation 
of this article was that the vehicle's battery was modeled 
statically, and the battery's temperature was assumed to be 
constant. [24] has shown that the battery lifetime of vehicles 
in temperateness ( on average between -3 °C to 32 °C) is 73 to 
94% more than in tropic  (up to  32 °C) areas. The reference of 
[25] presented a method to estimate battery lifetime and 
investigated the effect of driving style on the battery in 
addition to temperatu re and current. The reviewed references 
show the harmful effects of increasing the battery temperature 
on the battery and the vehicle's performance. Still, it has not 
been presented in the form of EMS. Also, the references that 
have addressed the issue of EMS have considered the battery 
temperature as constant or ignored the dependence of the 
parameters on the battery temperature.  
In this article, an offline EMS using DP is first 
implemented for an HEV whose model is presented in [1]. In 
this model of the H EV, a cooling system that uses air as a heat 
transfer fluid has been used. The battery model is improved by 
modeling this cooling system, including the battery's electric 
and thermal dynamics. With this, battery temperature changes 
are modeled as a dynamic  variable, and then battery 
temperature is added to the fuel consumption optimization 
system as a controlled state variable. This way, the proposed 
energy management system will have two equations of state: 
SOC and battery temperature. It will be shown tha t battery 
temperature and SOC are under control during the energy 
management process and do not go out of the desired range.  
Therefore, the innovations of this article are:  
1. Improving the vehicle model by modeling the 
battery cooling system and considering battery 
temperature changes for an HEV.  
2. Offline energy management by DP method with 
two equations of the state, including SOC and 
battery temperature, in the optimization problem 
based on the improved model.  
II. DYNAMIC MODEL OF HEV  
Unlike conventional and ele ctric vehicles, HEVs have at 
least two sources of power to propulsion (figure1):  An ICE or 
a fuel cell as a fuel converter and an Electric Machine (EM) 
with a battery, supercapacitor, or flywheel as a source of 
energy storage.  
Battery Converter EMFuel 
SourceICETorque Coupling
Gear Box
Wheels 
Fig. 1.  The structure of the Parallel HEV  
For energy management, the longitudinal dynamics of the 
vehicle are used to model the vehicle's chassis, which 
calculates the car's speed according to equation (1) with the 
thrust force.  Figure 2 shows the relation (1) . 
mdV(t)
dt=Ft(t)-[Fa(t)+Fr(t)+Fg(t)+Fd(t)] (1) 
αFrV
FgFa
FtFd
 
Fig. 2.  Forces acting on the vehicle  
III. MODEL OF BATTERY  
The battery of HEVs is formed by connecting several 
identical cells in series.  Therefore, one cell is usually modeled, 
and the battery's output voltage will be the cells' total voltage.  
In the discussion of energy management, the electrical 
equivalent circuit of Figure (3) is usually used  to model the 
battery.  This equivalent circuit includes the internal resistance 
of the battery  (Rb) and an ideal voltage source called V oc as the 
battery's open -circuit voltage.  For simplicity, the battery 
temperature is assumed to be constant, and the internal 
resistance and open -circuit voltage will depend only on the 
SOC.  
Voc (SOC, θ)Rb (SOC, θ)
Voc, Cell+
-
 
Fig. 3.  Equivalent circuit of the battery  
According to equation (2), the SOC of the battery will be 
calculated. We have:  
𝑆𝑂𝐶(𝑡)=𝑆(𝑡)
𝑆0 (2) 
As mentioned in the introduction, to control the battery's 
temperature, increase its lifetime, and improve the vehicle's 
performance, it is necessary to consider the changes in the 
temperature of the battery in the EMS. For this purpose, the 
proposed model  in [12] and [14] is used for the battery. The 
presented model for the battery consists of two electrical and 
thermal parts. The electrical model calculates the battery 
voltage and SOC, and the thermal model predicts the battery 
temperature. The electrical  sub-system of the battery model is 
shown in Figure ( 3). For this model, SOC changes can be 
calculated as follows:  𝑑𝑆𝑂𝐶(𝑡)
𝑑𝑡=−𝐼𝑏(𝑡)
𝑆0 (3) 
𝑉𝑜(𝑡)=𝑉𝑜𝑐(𝑡)−𝑅𝑏(𝑡)𝐼𝑏(𝑡) (4) 
In the above relationships, S(t) is the battery's current 
charge, S0 is its total capacity, and I b is the current of the 
battery, which is obtained by equation (5).  
Ib=Voc-√Voc2-4RbPm
2Rb (5) 
To examine the thermal model of the battery, its cooling 
system is shown in Figure (4).  This system uses air as a heat 
transfer fluid.  This system is less complex than the system that 
uses liquid.  Using air as a heat transfer fluid system works well 
for parallel HEVs, but a liquid cooling system is preferred for 
series HEVs.  Figure (4) shows the temperature of the air 
entering the channel.  According to passing air through the 
channels, the battery is cooled and the temperature of the air 
at the exit of the channels reaches out. 
Cooling 
platesBattery 
CellsTbTin,1
Tin,2 Tout,2Tout,1
 
Fig. 4.  Cooling system with two channels  
In the thermal model of the battery, based on the law of 
conservation of energy, the temperature changes of the battery 
cell follow equation ( 6), where θ is the battery temperature, Q g 
is the speed of the heat generation, and Q d is the speed of 
depletion heat by the channels of the c ooling system. Also, m C 
and C P,C, are the battery cell's weight and specific heat 
capacity, respectively.  
mCCP,Cdθ
dt=Qg-Qd (6) 
In [28], the speed of the heat generation is shown by 
equation ( 7). Equation ( 7) ∂Voc
∂θ, can be ignored compared to 
other sentences [11].  
Qg=Ib.(Voc-Vo-∂Voc
∂θθ) (7) 
The heat removed by the cooling system, according to 
equation (8), includes the heat removed from channels 1 and 
2. 
Qd=Qku,1+Qku,2 (8) 
When the air enters the channels with a temperature lower 
than the temperature of the battery, the heat of the battery is 
removed through surface convection  by the channels. The 
speed of heat removal from each channel is calculated by 
equation (9). Accordi ng to this equation, the heat exchange 
speed in  the channels' output is a function of the temperature 
at the channel's output and the temperature of the battery cell.  
Qku,i=h̅iAch(θ-θout,i) (9) 
Where A ch is the area of the heat transfer of the channel, 
ℎ̅𝑖 is the average heat transfer coefficient, and out, i is the air 
temperature at the outlet of channel i. According to the energy balance equation, the heat exchange speed at the channels' 
entrance is eq ual to the speed of heat exchange at the exit of 
the channels. Therefore, relation ( 10) can be written.  
Qku,i-Qu,i=0 (10) 
The speed of the heat exchange at the entrance of the 
channels, which is a function of the temperature of the air 
entering and exit ing the channel, is obtained by equation (11).  
Qu,i=ρairCp,airqp,air(θout,i-θin,i) (11) 
That, the air is the air density, C p,air is the specific heat 
capacity, and q p,air, is the volume flow speed of air in the 
channels.  Using relations (8) to (11) and removing out,i from 
these relations, equations (12) to (17) are obtained to calculate 
the heat dissipation rate (Qd). 
Qd=α1θ+α2θin,1+α3θin,2 (12) 
α1=1
Rku, 1+Ru, 1+1
Rku, 2 (13) 
α2=-1
Rku, 1+Ru, 1 (14) 
α3=-1
Rku, 2+Ru, 2 (15) 
Rku, i=1
h̅iAch (16) 
Ru, i=1
ρairCp,airqp,air, i (17) 
According to equations ( 6) to (17), the equation of state for 
battery temperature will be according to relation ( 18). 
θ̇=RbIb2
mcCP, c-α1θ+α2θin,1+α3θin,2
mcCP, c (18) 
IV. ENERGY MANAGEMENT METHOD  
Optimal energy management consists of finding the 
control law to minimize the cost function during the driving 
cycle considering the driving needs and the various 
constraints defined on the state and control variables. There 
are many expr essions for optimal control [1]. The cost 
function in energy management methods includes criteria 
such as fuel consumption, pollutant emissions, drivability, 
gradeability, or a combination [32]. The proposed method 
selects the cost function according to eq uation ( 19). In this 
cost, the function ṁf is fuel consumption speed . 
J=∫ṁfTf
0(ω(t),u(t))dt  (19) 
The control variable u in this system is the ratio of torque 
division.  Having the total required torque in the wheels of the 
vehicle, T w, and the ratio u, which the supervisory controller 
determines, according to the relations ( 20) and ( 21), the 
demanded torque in the ICE and the EM, T e, and T m, 
respectively can be calculated.  
Tm(t)+Te(t)=Tw(t) (20) 
u(t)=Tm(t)/Tw(t) (21) According to the above contents and relationships (1) to 
(21), the vehicle's final model combines dynamic equations 
and maps.  The calculation process in this model is that first, 
the traction force (F t) and the required torque of the vehicle 
(Tw) to reach the driving cycle speed (v) are obtained.  Then, 
according to the u, the torque of the EM and ICE is calculated.  
In the next step, having the speed and torque of the motors, 
their power is obtained with the help of efficiency maps of 
these motors.  The follo wing relationship (equations (2 2) to 
(27)) is related to the battery current. Finally, the changes in 
the state of charge and temperature of the battery are 
calculated as state variables with the last two relationships of 
this model.  In the standard energy  management method used 
in most previous references, the only dynamic state variable 
of the system is the SOC of the battery, and the static model 
is used for the rest of the vehicle components . 
Using the reference tables for the battery model and 
ignoring  the thermal dynamics and temperature changes of 
the battery will cause damage to the battery and reduce its 
lifetime. Since the battery of HEVs is the most sensitive and 
expensive component, its performance dramatically impacts 
the vehicle's performance.  It is necessary to keep SOC and its 
temperature within a specific range for optimal vehicle 
performance.  In this article, to control the temperature of the 
battery in addition to its SOC during energy management, 
taking into account the electric -thermal dy namics of the 
battery, the energy management problem is defined with two 
state variables, SOC and  with relations (2 2) to ( 27). 
x(t)=[SOC(t) (t)]T (22) 
ẋ(t)=
[    -Ib
S0
RbIb2
mcCP, c-α1θ+α2θin,1+α3θin,2
mcCP, c ]    
 (23) 
SOClow≤SOC(t)≤ SOChigh (24) 
SOC(Tf)∈[SOCN,min,SOCN,max] (25) 
θlow≤θ(t)≤θhigh (26) 
θ(Tf)∈[θN,min,θN,max] (27) 
Methods such as Linear Programming (LP), Dynamic 
Programming (DP), and evolutionary algorithms are used to 
find the optimal answer to the energy management problem 
of HEVs. DP has the most use and the best performance 
among all the implemented methods because it guarantees the 
ultimate optimal solution based on Bellman's optimality 
principle [33] and [34]. As will be shown below, the problem 
optimal energy management (e quations (2 2) to ( 27)) is fully 
compatible with the form of the problem in DP (equations 
(28) to (3 3)). 
DP is a very suitable method for finding the optimal 
control and path of state variables in problems of the form 
(26) problems in which K = 0, 1,…, N.  
In relations ( 28) to (3 3), g N(xN) is a penalty to limit the 
final value of the state variable, and g k(xk,uk), is the Cost-to-
go function . The value of this function is the cost of applying 
uk at the moment k to a system with state function g k(xk,uk) 
and initial value x 0. minuk∈Uk{gN(xN)+∑gN(xk,uk)N-1
0 (28) 
xk+1=fk(xk,uk) (29) 
x0=x0 (30) 
xN∈T⸦Rn (31) 
xN∈Xk⸦Rn (32) 
uN∈Uk⸦Rn (33) 
Since DP is a numerical method, the continuous control 
problem should be discretized from ( 28) to ( 33). The 
method's accuracy depends on the meshing accuracy or the 
resolution of time and state spaces.  
Another critical issue is the value of the cost function for 
impossible states.  Allocation  of infinite transfer cost is the 
first method proposed for such points.  As said, interpolation 
is used to determine the cost function of transmitting the 
middle points of space networking.  Then doing interpolation 
for points adjacent to impossible states will cause those points 
to be interpreted as unbelievable points, which is the 
fundamental problem of assigning the infinite value.  Some 
methods were proposed to solve this problem; among them, 
it is possible to mention giving a huge value instead of an 
infinite value [36] . 
The DP algorithm calculates the optimal cost function 
Jk(xi) as follows, starting from the end of the path (k=N) and 
performing recursive calculations until k=0 and for all points 
of the discrete time -state space:  
1. Determining the initial  value of the cost 
function in k=N.  
jN(xi)={jN(xi)                      xi∈T
∞                            else (34) 
The transfer cost function is zero at the last moment 
because there is no next state.  In problems where the final 
value of the state variable is bound, 𝑗𝑁(𝑥𝑖)  is equal to the 
penalty for the deviation of the final value.  According to ( 19), 
the final value of the SOC and battery temperature variables 
is limited in the energy management problem. This limitation 
is determined by the set T in (3 1). At this stage, according to 
the final values of SOC and θ outside the limits defined in the 
problem , the value ∞ (infinite) is assigned. So, the paths 
leading to these values will not be the opti mal path and the 
answer to the problem.  
2. Calculation of the optimal cost function 
𝑗𝑁(𝑥𝑖)  at all points of the discrete space for 
k=N-1 to k=0 and for 𝑥𝑖∈𝑋𝑘. 
jN(xi)=minuk∈Uk{gk(xi,uk)+jk+1(fk(xi,uk))} (35) 
In the intermediate steps, an optimal path is found for 
each state space point until the path's end and stored for use 
in the following steps. Each sub -problem is solved once and 
its answer is saved, and with this, the repetition of sub -
problems is prevented when their answers are need ed again. 
The transfer cost function 𝑗𝑁(𝑥𝑖) is the cost of moving from 
the point xi at the moment k to the end of the optimal path, 
which is formed by two terms gk(xi,uk) and jk+1(fk(xi,uk)). 
The first term is the cost of the transfer from the point xi at 
the moment k to the point fk(xi,uk) at the moment k+1, and the second term is the cost of the optimal path from this new 
point to the end of the path, which was calculated and stored 
in the previous step. This way, by continuing this algorithm 
until k= 0, the optimal control signal is obtained at every 
moment. Finally, the optimal control sequence 𝜋=
{𝜇0,𝜇1,…,𝜇𝑁−1} is obtained.  
V. SIMULATION RESULTS  
The vehicle under investigation is the Hyper Daimler 
Chrysler parallel Electric Hybrid Vehicle from the Mer cedes 
A-Class series, presented in [1].  The values of the general 
parameters of the vehicle are given in Table I, and the 
specifications of the vehicle's battery are shown in Table II.  
TABLE I.  GENERAL PARAMETERS OF THE VEHICLE  
Parameter  Value (Unit)  
Vehicle weight  1800 (Kg)  
Wheel radius  0.3 (m)  
Rolling friction  144 (N)  
Aerodynamic coefficient  0.48 (N.s2.m-2) 
The m aximum torque of the ICE  199 (N.m)  
The m aximum torque of the EM  133 (N.m)  
The maximum  speed of the ICE  503 (rad.s-1) 
The maximum  speed of the EM  600 (rad.s-1) 
TABLE II.  LI-ION BATTERY MODEL PARAMETER VALUES  
Parameter  Value (Unit)  
Length  0.19 (m)  
Width  0.145 (m)  
Thickness  0.005 (m)  
Mass  3.84 (Kg)  
Nominal capacity  15 (A.h)  
Nominal voltage  3.75 (V)  
Specific heat capacity  800 (J.kg-1.K-1) 
The driving cycle used in the simulation is the JN -1015 
(Japan), with the specifications listed in Table III.  Also, the 
speed -time diagram of JN -1015 is shown in figure 5.  
TABLE III.  SPECIFICATIONS OF JN-1015  (JAPAN ) 
Parameter  Value (Unit)  
Distance  4165.27 (m)  
Time  660 (s)  
The highest speed  19.44 (m.s-1) 
Average speed  8.5 (m.s-1) 
Average acceleration  0 (m.s-2) 
 
Fig. 5.  Driving cycle  JN-1015 (Japan)  First, by ignoring the effect of the thermal dynamics of the 
battery, the changing temperature is not considered in the 
relationships of the optimization problem.  The only variable 
is the SOC, and the values of its parameters are given in Table 
IV. 
TABLE IV.   VARIABLES IN THE SOC  
Parameter  Value  
SOC low 0.4 
SOC high 0.7 
SOC 0 0.5 
SOC N, min 0.54 
SOC N, max 0.55 
Fuel consumption in this method is equal to 4.3 liters per 
100 kilometers. Figure 6 shows SOC changes. As mentioned, 
in HEV  that the network cannot recharge; the  final charging 
level should be close to its initial value. It can be seen in Figure 
6 that SOC approaches the initial value at the end of the path. 
 
Fig. 6.  SOC for energy management without battery temperature control  
Figure 7 shows how to divide the demanded  torque 
between EM and ICE by the control  variable  
u(t)=Tm(t)/Tw(t). Due to  the power of the EM being  less 
than the ICE, high torques are inevitably provided by the ICE. 
For amounts of torque that both EM and ICE can provide , the 
priority is with the EM, provided that the battery charge level 
does not fall below the minimum allowed charge. Negative 
torques are also used by the EM (in generator mode) to charge 
the battery.  
 
Fig. 7.   Torque split between EM and ICE  
As mentioned in th e optimization problem in this section, 
the battery's temperature  was considered constant. Now, using 
the parameters of the battery model and the resulting internal 
resistance and battery current vectors, we will show the effect 
of the EMS  on the battery t emperature.  
In figure 8, it can be seen that the battery's temperature has 
increased to about 57.2 °C due to being neglected in the 
optimization despite the presence of the cooling system.  In the 
following, the results of the proposed method are shown.  In 
this method, the improved battery model described in section 
4.2 is used in the optimization problem.  Battery temperature 
is considered the second state variable next to SOC in dynamic 
planning.  SOC parameter values are the same as in table IV, 
and battery  temperature is set in table V.  
 
Fig. 8.   Changing the battery temperature without control  
TABLE V.  SPECIFICATIONS OF JN-1015  (JAPAN ) 
Parameter  Value (Unit)  
θlow 10 (K)  
θhigh 30 (K)  
θ0 20 (K)  
θN, min 15 (K)  
θN, max 25 (K)  
Adding upper and lower limits of the battery's temperature 
to the optimization problem has resulted in less battery usage.  
In this case, if providing the demanded torque causes the 
temperature to increase and approaches the upper limit of the 
temperature, it will be prevented.  This will improve the 
operation of the ICE and, as a result, increase fuel 
consumption.  Fuel consumption in this mode has reached 5.1 
liters per 100 kilometers.  Figures 9 and 10 show the proposed 
method's SOC and battery temperature changes.  
 
Fig. 9.   SOC in the proposed method  
It can be seen that in addition to SOC, the battery 
temperature also remains within the specified range, and its 
final value has reached 25.45 °C.  
Fig. 10.   Changing the battery temperature in the proposed method  
VI. ONCLOTION  
This article proposed a method for offline energy 
management of Hybrid Electric Vehicles based on the optimal 
use of the battery for HEVs. The problem of optimal energy 
management of these vehicles is a non -linear problem with 
different performance limitations according to modeling and 
system variables. Dynamic Programming, a numerical 
solution method, is suitable for finding the optimal answer to 
such a problem offline. This method was applied to the vehicle 
under study with the assumption of constant battery 
temperature. By modeling batter y temperature changes, it was 
shown that the assumption of continuous battery temperature 
is impractical, and the effect of energy management on battery 
temperature cannot be ignored. According to the results, by 
ignoring the control of temperature changes  in the energy 
management strategy, the value of SOC from the initial value 
of 55% decreased to 49.4% by a change of 10.19%, then 
returned to 55%. Also, in this case, the battery's temperature 
reached 57.2 °C from 20 °C with a sharp change of 186%, 
which w ill cause many disadvantages, including correction 
and reduced battery life. In the proposed method, according to 
the control of the battery temperature changes, the value of 
SOC reached 56.6% from 55%, with an increase of 2.73%. 
Also, in the proposed stra tegy, the battery's temperature 
increased by 27.25% and reached 25.45 °C from 20 °C. 
According to this article's results, changes in SOC improved 
by 12.92% in the proposed method. Also, compared to 
conventional energy management methods, the proposed 
metho d reduced changes in the battery temperature by 6.82 
times and increased battery life . 
 
REFERENCES  
[1] L. Guzzella  and A. Sciarretta,  Vehicle  Propulsion Systems, 
Introduction to Modeling and Optimization, Springer, 2013.  
[2] A. A. Malikopoulos, “Supervisory Power Management Control 
Algorithms for Hybrid Electric Vehicles: A Survey,” IEEE 
Transactions on  Intelligent  Transportation  Systems,  vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 
1869 -1885, 2014.  
[3] A. Mousaei, M. B. Bannae Sharifian and N. Rostami, "An Improved 
Fuzzy Logic Control Strategy of an Optimized Linear Induction 
Motor Using Super Twisting Sliding Mode Controller," 2022 13th 
Power Electronics, Drive Systems, and Technologies Conference 
(PEDS TC), 2022, pp. 1 -5, doi: 
10.1109/PEDSTC53976.2022.9767465.  
[4] K. Namwook, C. Sukwonand P. Huei, “Optimal Control of Hybrid 
Electric V ehicles Based on Pontryagin's Minimum Principle,” IEEE 
Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 19, no. 5,pp. 1279 -
1287, 2011.  
[5] A. Mousaei and M. B. B. Sharifian, "Design and optimization of a 
linear induction motor with hybrid secondary for textile applications," 
2020 28th Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE) , 
2020, pp. 1 -6, doi: 10.1109/ICEE50131.2020.9260 773. 
[6] L. Serrao et al., “Open Issues in Supervisory Control of Hybrid 
Electric Vehicles: A Unified Approach Using Optimal Control 
Methods,” Oil & Gas Science and Technology –Revue d’IFP Energies  
nouvelles,  vol. 68, no. 1,pp.  23-33, 2013.  
[7] G. Paganelli et al., “Equivalent Consumption Minimization Strategy 
for Parallel Hybrid Powertrains,”  in IEEE  55th Vehicular  Technology 
Conference, VTC Spring 2002.  
[8] A. Mousaei, M. B. Bannae Sharifian and N. Rostami, "Direct Thrust 
Force Control (DTFC) of Optimized Linear Induct ion Motor with 
Super Twisting Sliding Mode Controller (STSMC)," 2021 12th Power 
Electronics, Drive Systems, and Technologies Conference (PEDSTC) , 
2021, pp. 1 -5, doi: 10.1109/PEDSTC52094.2021.9405903.  
[9] L. Serrao  et al., “Optimal  Energy  Management  of Hybrid E lectric 
Vehicles Including Battery Aging,”  in American Control  Conference 
(ACC), IEEE 2011.  
[10] C. H.Zheng et al., “TheEffect of Battery Temperature on Total Fuel 
Consumption of  Fuel Cell Hybrid Vehicles,” International Journal of 
Hydrogen Energy,vol. 38, no. 13, pp. 5192 -5200, 2013.  
[11] D.E. Kirk, Optimal Control Theory: An Introduction, Courier 
Corporation,2012.  
[12] A. Mousaei, M. B. Bannae Sharifian and N. Rostami, "An Improved 
Predictive Current Control Strategy of Linear Induction Motor Based 
on Ultra -Local Model and Extended State Observer," 2022 13th 
Power Electronics, Drive Systems, and Technologies Conference 
(PEDSTC) , 2022, pp. 12 -18, doi: 
10.1109/PEDSTC53976.2022.9767535.  
[13] A. Cordoba -Arenas et al., “Capacity and Power Fade Cycle -Life 
Model for Plug -in Hybrid Electric Vehicle Lithium -ion Battery Cells 
Containing Blended Spinel and Layered -Oxide Positive Electrodes,” 
Journal of Power Sources, vol. 278,pp. 473 -483,2015.  
[14] R.Mahamudand  C. Park,  “Reciprocating  Air Flow for Li -ion Battery 
Thermal Ma nagement to Improve Temperature Uniformity,” Journal 
of Power Sources, vol. 196, no. 13,pp. 5685 -5696, 2011.  
[15] H.Park,  , “A Design  of Air Flow  Configuration  for Cooling Lithium -
ion Battery in Hybrid Electric Vehicles,” Journal Of Power Sources, 
vol. 239(Supp lement C), pp. 30 -36,2013.  
[16] D. Di Domenico, E. Prada and Y . Creff, “An Adaptive  Strategy  for Li-
ion Battery  Internal  State Estimation,” Control Engineering Practice, 
vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 1851 -1859, 2013.  
[17] J. Kalawoun et al., “From a Novel Classification of  the Battery  State  
of Charge  Estimators  Toward a Conception of an Ideal One,” Journal 
of Power Sources, vol. 279,pp. 694 -706, 2015.  
[18] J. Sun et al., “LiFePO4 Optimal Operation Temperature Range 
Analysis for EV/HEV ,” International Conference on Life System 
Modeling and Simulation and International Conference on Intelligent 
Computing for Sustainable Energy and Environment, pp. 476 -485, 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014.  
[19] L. Serrao et al., Optimal Energy Management of Hybrid  Electric  
Vehicles  Including  Battery  Aging. In: Proceedings Of The IEEE 
American Control Conference  (ACC),  San Francisco,  Ca, Jun 29–Jul 1, 
2011.  
[20] S. Ebbesen, P. Elbert, and L. Guzzella, “Battery State -of-Health 
Perceptive Energy Management  for Hybrid  Electric  V ehicles,”  IEEE 
Transactions on V ehicular Technology, vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 2893 –2900, 
Sep., 2012.  
[21] T. M. Padovani et al., “Optimal Energy Management Strategy 
Including Battery Health Through Thermal Management for Hybrid 
Vehicles,” IFAC Proceedings V olumes, vol. 46, no. 21, pp. 384 -389, 
2013.  
[22] L. Tang, G. Rizzoni, and S. Onori, “Energy Management  Strategy  for 
HEVs  Including  Battery Life Optimization,” IEEE Transactions on 
Transportation  Electrification,  vol. 1, no. 3, October  2016.  
[23] T. Yuksel et al.,  "Plug -in Hybrid Electric V ehicle LiFePO4 Battery 
Life Implications of Thermal Management, Driving Conditions, and 
Regional Climate."  Journal  of Power  Sources,  vol. 338, pp. 49 -64, 
2017.  
[24] M. Jafari et al., "Electric Vehicle Battery Cycle Aging Evaluation in 
Real-World Daily Driving and Vehicle -To-Grid Services." IEEE 
Transactions on Transportation Electrification, vol. 4, no .1, pp. 122 -
134, 2018.  [25] T. Nüesch et al., “Equivalent Consumption Minimization Strategy for 
the Control of Real Driving NOx Emissions of a Diesel Hybrid 
Electric  V ehicle,”  Energies,  vol. 7, no. 5,pp.  3148 -3178, 2014.  
[26] A. Pesaran, M. Keyser and S. Burch,“An Approach for Designing 
Thermal Management Systems for Electric and Hybrid Vehicle 
Battery Packs,” National Renewable EnergyLaboratory, Go lden, CO 
(US), 1999.  
[27] D. Bernardi, E. Pawlikowski and J. Newman, “A General Energy 
Balance for Battery Systems,” Journal Of the  Electrochemical Society, 
vol. 132, no. 1, pp. 5 -12, 1985.  
[28] K. B. Wipke  et al., "ADVISOR  2.1: A User-Friendly Advanced 
Powertrain S imulation Using a  Combined  Backward/Forward  
Approach."  IEEE transactions on vehicular technology, vol. 48, no. 6, 
pp. 1751 -1761, 1999.  
[29] T. Markel  et al., " ADVISOR:  a Systems  Analysis Tool  for Advanced  
Vehicle  Modeling."  Journal  of power  sources,  vol. 110, no. 2, pp. 255-
266, 2002.  
[30] T. Barlow et al., "A Reference Book of Driving Cycles for Use in The 
Measurement of Road Vehicle Emissions," TRL Published Project 
Report, 2009.  
[31] R.E.Bellman  and S.E. Dreyfus,  Applied  Dynamic Programming, 
Princeton University Press, 2015.  
[32] Arash Mousaei, Nasim Bahari, Guo Mieho, Artificial Neural 
Networks (ANN) of Proposed Linear Induction Motor with Hybrid 
Secondary (HLIM) Considering the End Effect, American Journal of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering . V olume 5, Issue 1, June 2021 , 
pp. 32 -39. doi: 10.11648/j.ajece.20210501.15  