TOPOLOGICAL PROOFS OF CATEGORICAL COHERENCE
PIERRE-LOUIS CURIEN AND GUILLAUME LAPLANTE-ANFOSSI
”We shall construct KPn, as a CW-complex, in Section 2 and show that it is an pn´1q-ball. This gives an
instant one-step proof of MacLane’s theorem in full generality.”
– Mikhail M. Kapranov
Abstract. We give a short topological proof of coherence for categorified non-symmetric
operads by using the fact that the diagrams involved form the 1-skeleton of simply con-
nected CW complexes. We also obtain a “one-step” topological proof of Mac Lane’s
coherence theorem for symmetric monoidal categories, as suggested by Kapranov in 1993.
Our analysis is based on a notion of combinatorial homotopy, which we further study in
the special case of polyhedral complexes, leading to a second geometrical proof of coher-
ence which is very close to Mac Lane’s original argument. We use Morse theory to show
that this second method is (strictly) less general than the first. We provide a detailed
analysis of how both methods allow us to deduce these two categorical coherence results
and discuss possible generalizations to higher categories.
Introduction
Then-dimensional permuto-associahedron, a CW-complex whose faces are in bijection
with parenthesized ordered partitions of n`1 letters, was first introduced by M. Kapranov
in his study of higher dimensional Yang–Baxter equations, through the moduli spaces of
curves M0,n`1pRqand the solutions of the Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov equation [Kap93]. It
was later realized as a convex polytope by V. Reiner and G. M. Ziegler [RZ94], and more
recently through the nested braid fan by F. Castillo and F. Liu in [CL23].
The present study stems from a desire to understand the epigraph, taken from the intro-
duction of [Kap93]: what is the precise relationship between the permuto-associahedron and
Mac Lane’s coherence theorem for symmetric monoidal categories? We show that the sim-
ple connectedness of the former implies the latter, thereby refining and proving Kapranov’s
claim (see Theorem 2.16).
Date : May 9, 2024.
2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 18N20, Secondary 52B11.
Key words and phrases. Categorified operads, categorical coherence, Seifert–Van Kampen theorem, poly-
topes, MacLane coherence theorem, rewriting theory, Morse theory.
The second author was supported by the Andrew Sisson Fund and the Australian Research Council
Future Fellowship FT210100256.
1arXiv:2302.07391v2  [math.AT]  8 May 20242 PIERRE-LOUIS CURIEN AND GUILLAUME LAPLANTE-ANFOSSI
This is done through a general “topological coherence theorem” which applies to any
simply connected, regular CW complex (Theorem 1.1). Applying it to the operahedra, an-
other family of polytopes which encodes categorified non-symmetric operads [DP15, COI19,
Lap22], we obtain a “one-step” proof of the associated coherence theorem as well.
There is little price to pay, though. For both theorems, one needs to provide a precise
bijective correspondence between the 1-skeleton (resp. the 2–cells) on the topological side,
and canonical morphisms (resp. bifunctoriality, naturality, and applications of coherence
conditions) on the categorical side (Propositions 2.6 and 2.13). Since the 2-skeleton of
the permuto-associahedra corresponds to other basic canonical morphisms and coherence
conditions than those of Mac Lane (hexagons and naturality of the involutive braiding on
one hand versus dodecagons on the other hand), one needs to show that the two presenta-
tions are equivalent, which is non-trivial, see Remark 2.17. There is yet a third equivalent
presentation (and hence another proof of coherence) due to D. Barali´ c, J. Ivanovi´ c and
D. Petri´ c [BIP19], that matches the 2-skeleton of a different polytope, which unlike the
permuto-associahedron is simple, see Remark 2.14.
We further investigate a topological incarnation of Mac Lane’s original argument, in
the spirit of rewriting theory. We study polyhedral complexes endowed with a generic
orientation vector, or equivalently a Morse function in the sense of [BB97], whose 1-skeletons
naturally feature terminating and confluent rewriting systems (Proposition 1.12). We focus
on the family of simply connected polyhedral complexes whose outgoing links are connected.
The study of directed paths on their 1-skeleton leads to a second general proof of coherence
(Theorem 1.9). In particular, this second theorem can be applied to all polytopes, allowing
us to give a second, “rewriting-theoretic” proof of both previously mentioned coherence
results. In the case of operahedra, our rewriting proof simplifies the original proof of Doˇ sen
and Petri´ c [DP15], see Remark 2.2.
It is worth noting that, while the above polyhedral complexes admit abstract rewriting
systems on their 1-skeleton, the family of operahedra (which includes the associahedra,
encoding non-symmetric monoidal categories) further admits term rewriting systems, which
exhibit more structure and are the subject of a companion paper [CLA24]. In contrast, we
shall argue that the abstract rewriting approach to symmetric monoidal categories is not
informative, see Remark 2.18.
Using Morse theory on affine cell complexes [BB97], we relate our two approaches by
showing that the second is (strictly) less general than the first (Proposition 1.5).
Our two general topological coherence theorems can be used to prove other categorical
results where polytopes appear, such as coherence for monoidal functors between monoidal
categories [Eps66], see Section 3.1. They also shed light on some statements in the literature,
such as the proof of [KV94, Prop. 3.9], see Section 3.2. This all points towards further
investigation of the relationship between n-categorical coherence and n-connectedness of
appropriate spaces. While topological proofs of 2-categorical coherence already appeared in
[Gur11], higher dimensional results have been obtained recently by S. Barkan in the context
of8-operads [Bar22], for which the present results could well be the strict, n“1 case.TOPOLOGICAL PROOFS OF CATEGORICAL COHERENCE 3
1.Topological coherence
1.1.Coherence ` a la Van Kampen. LetXbe a regular CW complex, and let Xk,kě0
denote its k-skeleton. For an edge eofX, denote its attaching map fe:S0ÑX0. Consider
the category ApXqwith set of objects X0, and generating morphisms αe:fep´1qÑfep1q
andα´1
e:fep1qÑfep´1qfor each edge ePX1. Acombinatorial path onXis a composable
sequence of αandα´1morphisms (a word inαandα´1). Two combinatorial paths γ, γ1P
ApXqpx, yqwith the same endpoints are said to be parallel .
LetAbe a 2-cell of X, letfA:S1ÑX1be its attaching map, and xPX0be a vertex
in the image of fA. Then fAdefines a morphism γAPApXqpx, xq, given by the sequence
of edges e1, . . . , e nin its image starting at xand respecting the anti-clockwise orientation
ofS1. Here, one selects αeiif the orientation of fArestricted to eiagrees with the one of
fei, and α´1
eiotherwise. Two parallel combinatorial paths γ, γ1are said to be elementary
combinatorially homotopic if they differ exactly by a relation of the form αeα´1
e“idfep1q
orα´1
eαe“idfep´1q, or of the form γA“idx, for some 2-cell Aand vertex xas above.
That is, one can rewrite γintoγ1orγ1intoγby replacing some (possibly empty) subword
ofγwith an equivalent subword using a relation γA“idx. More generally, two parallel
combinatorial paths are combinatorially homotopic if they are related by a sequence of
elementary combinatorial homotopies.
The quotient of the category ApXqby the relations αα´1“α´1α“id is the free
groupoid FpXqgenerated by the αmorphisms. Let CpXqdenote the further quotient of
the groupoid FpXqby the relations γA“idxfor some choice of x, for each 2-cell AofX.
In other words, CpXqis the quotient of ApXqby the combinatorial homotopy equivalence
relation. Note that the definition of CpXqdoes not depend on the choice of x, for every
2-cell A. Indeed, if x1‰xPA0defines a relation γ1
A“idx1, we have γ1
A“δγAδ´1inFpXq,
where δis the morphism in ApXqpx, x1qinduced by γA. Thus, a path γcan be rewritten
intoγ1using γA“idxif and only if it can be rewritten using γ1
A“idx1.
Let ΠpXqdenote the fundamental groupoid ofX, that is the groupoid with objects the
points of Xand morphisms the homotopy classes of paths between them.
Theorem 1.1. Any two parallel combinatorial paths on Xare combinatorially homotopic
if and only if every path component of Xis simply connected.
Proof. ForYĎX, let us write Π pXqYfor the full subcategory of the fundamental groupoid
ofXspanned by Y. Then, we have an isomorphism of groupoids
ΠpXqX0–CpXq.
To show this, one proceeds in three steps. First, one shows that the fundamental groupoid
ΠpX1qX0of the 1-skeleton of Xis free on the homotopy classes of maps generated by the
attaching maps of the 1-cells, that is, free on the α-morphisms [Bro06, 9.1.5]. Thus, one
gets ΠpX1qX0–FpXq. Second, one shows that the fundamental groupoid Π pX2qX0of the
2-skeleton of Xis the free groupoid Π pX1qX0modulo the relations γA“1, for Aa 2-cell
ofX[Bro06, 9.1.6]. This is done through repeated application of the Seifert–Van Kampen
theorem; one then has Π pX2qX0–CpXq. Third, one shows that the inclusion of X2in
Xinduces an isomorphism of fundamental groupoids Π pX2qX0–ΠpXqX0[Bro06, 9.1.7],4 PIERRE-LOUIS CURIEN AND GUILLAUME LAPLANTE-ANFOSSI
which concludes the proof of the isomorphism Π pXqX0–CpXq. The theorem then follows,
since every path component of Xis simply connected if and only if its fundamental groupoid
ΠpXqis trivial, which holds if and only if its full subcategory Π pXqX0is trivial. □
Note that any CW complex is locally path connected, and therefore is connected if and
only if it is path connected. Therefore, we could have replaced in the preceding theorem
“path component” by “connected component”.
Let us say that Xiscombinatorially connected if there is a combinatorial path between
any two vertices of X. In the course of the preceding proof, we have in particular showed
the following.
Corollary 1.2. A regular CW complex Xis combinatorially connected if and only it is
connected.
1.2.Coherence ` a la Morse. LetXĂRnbe a polyhedral complex. Let ⃗ vPRnbegeneric
on the edges of X, meaning that for any pair of vertices x, yPXbelonging to the same
edge of X, we havex⃗ v, xy‰x⃗ v, yy. Such a generic vector ⃗ vinduces a natural orientation on
the edges of X, directed from the source vertex where the functional x⃗ v,´yis minimal to
the target vertex where it is maximal.
One of the basic, very useful facts about polyhedral complexes is that, for any face
FĎXofX, there is a unique source vertex scpFqsuch that all its adjacent edges eĎF
are outgoing, and a unique sink vertex skpFqwhose adjacent edges are all incoming, see
[Zie95, Thm. 3.7]. More generally a vertex whose adjacent edges eĎXare all incoming is
called a local sink , and when Xhas only one such vertex, we call it global sink and denote
it by skpXq.
LetH:“tyPRn|x⃗ v, yy“0ube the linear hyperplane orthogonal to ⃗ v. For every vertex
xPX, choose εą0 such that the interval between x⃗ v, xyandx⃗ v, xy`εdoes not contain
the image of any other vertex under the “height” function x⃗ v,´y.
Definition 1.3. Theoutgoing link Lk`px, Xqof a vertex xPXis the intersection FXpH`
x`ε⃗ vqof the family of faces Fpx, Xq:“tFĎX|scpFq“xuwith the affine hyperplane
H`x`ε⃗ v.
Recall from [Zie95, Sec. 2.1] that the vertex figure P{xof a polytope Pat a vertex x
is obtained by cutting Pby a hyperplane that cuts off the single vertex x. Such a cut
establishes a bijection between the pk´1q-faces of P{xand the k-faces of Pwhich contain
x[Zie95, Prop. 2.4].
Lemma 1.4. For any kě0, there is a bijection between the k-faces of Fpx, Xqand the
pk´1q-faces of Lk`px, Xq.
Proof. Each maximal face of Fpx, Xqwith respect to inclusion is a polytope P, for which
the intersection PXpH`x`ε⃗ vqis the vertex figure P{xofPatx. By [Zie95, Prop. 2.4],
there is a bijection between the k-faces of Pand thepk´1q-faces of P{x. Collecting these
bijections for all maximal faces of Fpx, Xq, and making the appropriate identifications, we
get the desired global bijection. □TOPOLOGICAL PROOFS OF CATEGORICAL COHERENCE 5
In this section we shall focus on polyhedral complexes whose outgoing links are connected.
The following proposition gives the topological significance of this condition.
Proposition 1.5. LetXbe a polyhedral complex. If there is a generic vector ⃗ vPRnsuch
that the outgoing link of every vertex is connected, then every path component of Xis simply
connected.
Proof. Let⃗ vPRnbe generic with respect to X, and suppose that the outgoing link of
every vertex is connected. Since ⃗ vis generic on edges, it defines a Morse function x⃗ v,´y
onX, in the sense of [BB97, Def. 2.2]. As in classical Morse theory, one can determine the
homotopy type of Xby considering its successive level sets. For tPRdenote by Xtthe
closed subspace of Xcontaining points xsuch thatxx,⃗ vyis at least t. Let xbe a vertex
ofXof height h“ xx,⃗ vy. Observe first that Xh`ϵ, for some small ϵą0, is homotopy
equivalent to Xh1where h1ąhis the next greater height at which there is a vertex. That
is, the homotopy type of Xcan only change at vertices [BB97, Lem. 2.3]. Then, one proves
that Xhis homotopy equivalent to the pushout of Xh`ϵwith the cone over the outgoing
link of xalong the outgoing link of x[BB97, Lem. 2.5]. By our assumption, the outgoing
link of xis connected, and thus the cone over it is simply connected. Since the pushout
of simply connected spaces over a connected space is always simply connected (this is an
application of the Seifert–Van Kampen theorem), we obtain by induction that every path
component of Xis simply connected [BB97, Point (3) of Cor. 2.6]. □
The converse of Proposition 1.5 is not true in general: many simply connected polyhedral
complexes, as the one represented in Figure 1, have disconnected outgoing links, for many
(sometimes for all) choices of generic orientation vectors.
Figure 1. A simply connected polyhedral complex which admits discon-
nected outgoing links for every choice of generic vector.
An important class of complexes which have connected outgoing links are polytopes,
which will be our main object of study in the next sections.6 PIERRE-LOUIS CURIEN AND GUILLAUME LAPLANTE-ANFOSSI
Proposition 1.6. LetPĂRnbe a polytope, and let ⃗ vPRnbe generic with respect to P.
Then, the outgoing link of every vertex of Pis connected.
Proof. Define the linear hyperplane H:“ tyPRn| x⃗ v, yy “ 0u, and consider the two
half-spaces H´:“tyPRn|x⃗ v, yyă0uandH`:“tyPRn|x⃗ v, yyă0u. Since ⃗ vis not
perpendicular to any edge of P, it defines a partition of the vertices of the vertex figure P{x
into two connected components: the vertices that lie in H´, which correspond to incoming
edges of Patx, and the vertices that lie in H`, which correspond to outgoing edges of P
atx. Thus, the outgoing link of xis connected, and the proof is complete. □
From now on we shall suppose that the polyhedral complexes Xthat we consider are
endowed with a regular CW structure and provided with a generic vector ⃗ v. Combining
Proposition 1.5 with Theorem 1.1, we have that any polyhedral complex Xwhose outgoing
links are connected satisfies the property that “any two parallel combinatorial paths on
Xare combinatorially homotopic”. We shall now derive this same result by following
an alternative, more combinatorial path (indeed!), getting close to the proof of [ML63,
Thm 3.1].
A combinatorial path γonXisdirected if for any pair pe, fqof consective edges in γ, we
have that skpeq“scpfq. When no ambiguity arises, we will omit the adjective “combinato-
rial” and say only “directed path”.
In the rest of this section we shall use the notion of combinatorial connectedness, which
as we have seen in Corollary 1.2 is equivalent to connectedness for the spaces we consider.
Lemma 1.7. LetXbe a polyhedral complex with generic vector ⃗ vsuch that the outgoing
link of every vertex is combinatorially connected. Let e, e1be two edges of Xsuch that
scpeq “ scpe1q, and suppose that there are directed paths from skpeqandskpe1qto local
sinks sands1, respectively. Then, we have s“s1.
Proof. Define the height hpxqof a vertex xas the length of the longest directed path in
Xstarting at x. Since ⃗ vis generic and X0is finite, this is well-defined. We proceed
by induction on hpxq. The statement holds vacuously for vertices xsuch that hpxq “0.
Suppose that the assertion above holds for all vertices xPXsuch that hpxq “n, and
consider an xwith hpxq “n`1. Since the outgoing link Lk`px, Xqis combinatorially
connected, there is a combinatorial path θin Lk`px, Xqbetween the vertices corresponding
toeande1(Lemma 1.4). θdetermines a sequence of edges e0:“e, e1, . . . , e k, e1“:ek`1ofX
with scpeiq“xfor all 0ďiďk`1. Moreover, each consecutive pair ei, ei`1determines a
2-face Fi`1ofX. Now, choose for each eiwith 1ďiďk, a directed path of maximal length
starting at sk peiqand passing through sk pFiq. Each of these paths ends at a local sink si,
including s0:“sandsk`1:“s1. Since we have hpskpeiqqă hpxqfor all 0ďiďk`1, we can
apply induction to the two directed paths from sk peiqtosiandsi`1, which gives si“si`1.
Therefore, we have s“s0“s1“¨¨¨“ sk“sk`1“s1, as desired. □
Two parallel directed paths are said to be elementary combinatorially homotopic if they
are as undirected paths. They are combinatorially homotopic if they are related by a
sequence of elementary combinatorial homotopies between directed paths.TOPOLOGICAL PROOFS OF CATEGORICAL COHERENCE 7
The following Proposition 1.8 and its consequence Theorem 1.9 expresses in topological
terms the original proof technique used by Mac Lane in [ML63, Thm 3.1]. Note that
this Proposition 1.8 involves first directed paths, while Theorem 1.9 treats the general,
undirected case.
Proposition 1.8. LetXbe a polyhedral complex, and let ⃗ vbe generic on the edges of X.
Consider the following three properties:
(i) the outgoing link of every vertex is combinatorially connected,
(ii) there is a global sink in every connected component,
(iii) any two parallel directed combinatorial paths on Xare combinatorially homotopic.
Then, Xsatisfies (i) if and only if it satisfies (ii) and (iii).
Proof. First, we prove that (i) implies (ii). Suppose that there are two local sinks s1ands2
in the same connected component of X. Consider a combinatorial path γbetween s1ands2,
whose existence is garanteed by Corollary 1.2. We proceed by induction on the number of
peaks inγ, that is the number of vertices xwhich are the source sc peq“x“scpe1qof two
edges e, e1ofγ. The path γhas at least a peak, otherwise s1ands2would not be both
local sinks. If γhas a unique peak, Lemma 1.7 implies that s1“s2. Now suppose that for
anykďn, ifγhaskpeaks, then we have s1“s2. Ifγhasn`1 peaks, consider the first
peak x“scpeq“scpe1qofγ. By Lemma 1.7, there is a directed path δfrom skpe1qtos1.
Replacing the initial section of γending in e1byδ, we get a path with npeaks, and by the
induction hypothesis we get s1“s2, completing the proof.
Second, we prove that (i) implies (iii). Let us assume that Xis connected, otherwise we
apply the same reasoning to each connected component. From the preceding paragraph,
we know that Xhas a global sink sk pXq. Suppose that the outgoing link of every vertex is
combinatorially connected. Let γandγ1be two parallel directed paths between two vertices
xandy. We prove that they are combinatorially homotopic. We proceed by induction on
the maximal length mof a directed path between xandyinX. Without loss of generality,
we can suppose that y“skpXq, since if y‰skpXqwe can always find a directed path
between yand skpXq. The cases when m“0 and m“1 are trivial. Suppose that the
hypothesis holds up to m“k´1, kě2, and consider two paths γandγ1for which m“k.
Leteande1denote the edges of γandγ1that are adjacent to x. We examine three cases.
(1) If e“e1, we can apply the induction hypothesis to γzeandγ1ze1.
(2) If e‰e1and both edges are on the same 2-face FofX, then using the induction
hypothesis we have that γandγ1are respectively combinatorially homotopic to the
paths δandδ1defined as follows: they go from x“scpFqto skpFqby the unique path
containing eande1, respectively, and then from sk pFqtoyalong the same arbitrary
directed path. Since δandδ1are combinatorially homotopic by definition, the
conclusion follows from the transitivity of the combinatorial homotopy equivalence
relation.
(3) Suppose that e‰e1, and that eande1arenoton the same 2-face of X. Since the
outgoing link of xis combinatorially connected, there exists a combinatorial path θ
between the vertices corresponding to eande1in this link (Lemma 1.4). For every
edge eiofXin the path θ, choose a directed path γiinXfrom xtoy“skpXq8 PIERRE-LOUIS CURIEN AND GUILLAUME LAPLANTE-ANFOSSI
going through ei. Now apply Point (2) above to every pair of parallel directed paths
pγi, γi`1qwith eiandei`1consecutive in θ, and conclude again by transitivity of
the combinatorial homotopy equivalence relation.
Finally, we prove that (ii) and (iii) imply (i). Suppose that every pair of parallel directed
combinatorial paths are combinatorially homotopic. We show that for any vertex x, its
outgoing link is combinatorially connected. Indeed, take two edges e, e1ofXwith source x,
and consider their extensions to directed paths γ, γ1from xto skpXq. By hypothesis, these
two paths are combinatorially homotopic, that is, there is a sequence of parallel directed
paths from γtoγ1. The collection of first edges in each of these paths defines a combinatorial
path between eande1in the outgoing link of x. Thus, this link is combinatorially connected.
□
Theorem 1.9. LetXbe a polyhedral complex with generic vector ⃗ vsuch that the outgoing
link of every vertex is combinatorially connected. Then, any two parallel combinatorial paths
onXare combinatorially homotopic.
Proof. Assume that Xis connected, otherwise apply the argument to each connected com-
ponent. By Proposition 1.8, the polyhedral complex Xadmits a global sink sk pXqand the
conclusion holds for directed paths. Let us show that this implies the undirected version.
Letγbe an undirected combinatorial path on Xbetween xandy. For every vertex z
along γ, one can choose a directed path δzfrom zto skpXq. We observe that for any edge
e:zÑz1ofγ, the directed paths δzandδz1eare combinatorially homotopic by hypothesis.
Going from xtoyinductively one edge at a time and using transitivity of the homotopy
equivalence relation, one obtains that γis combinatorially homotopic to δ´1
yδx. Taking an-
other combinatorial path γ1parallel to γ, the same argument shows that γ1is combinatorial
homotopic to δ´1
yδx. Thus γandγ1are combinatorially homotopic, which completes the
proof. □
As Proposition 1.5 shows, the class of polyhedral complexes to which Theorem 1.9 ap-
plies is a strict subclass of simply connected complexes. This implies that the converse of
Theorem 1.9 does not hold, and thus that Mac Lane’s original proof is far from reaching
the full generality of Theorem 1.1. However, it will be sufficient for our purposes, since –as
we have seen in Proposition 1.6– it applies to any polytope.
Another feature of generically oriented polyhedral complexes is that their 1-skeleton
defines abstract rewriting systems which are terminating and confluent, as we now show.
1.3.Rewriting systems. We refer to [BN98] for more details on rewriting systems.
Definition 1.10. Anabstract rewriting system is a set Atogether with a binary relation Ñ.
We denote by˚Ý Ñthe reflexive and transitive closure of Ñ. We say that pA,Ñqislocally
confluent (resp. confluent ) if for all a, a1, a2PAsuch that a1ÐaÑa2(resp. a1˚Ð Ýa˚Ý Ña2),
there exists a term bwith a1˚Ý Ñb˚Ð Ýa2. The diagramTOPOLOGICAL PROOFS OF CATEGORICAL COHERENCE 9
a
a1 a2
b˚ ˚
is called a local confluence diagram . A rewriting system is terminating if every reduction
sequence aÑa1Ña2Ñ¨¨¨ eventually must terminate. An element aPAisreducible if
there exists an a1PAsuch that aÑa1; otherwise it is called irreducible – the rewriting
synonymous of local sink! We say that bis anormal form ofaifa˚Ý Ñbandbis irreducible.
Given a polyhedral complex Xand a generic vector ⃗ v, one can consider the abstract
rewriting system defined by ⃗ von the vertices of X.
Definition 1.11. The vertices rewriting system is the pairpX0,Ñqmade of the set of
vertices X0ofX, together with the following relation: we have xÑyifxandyare vertices
of the same edge and xv, xyăx v, yy.
According to this definition, we have x˚Ý Ñyif and only if there is a directed path from
xtoyinX1. The hypothesis of Theorem 1.9 imposes that the rewriting system pX0,Ñqis
terminating and confluent.
Proposition 1.12. LetXbe a polyhedral complex and ⃗ vbe a generic vector. If the out-
going link of every vertex is combinatorially connected, the rewriting system pX0,Ñqis
terminating and confluent.
Proof. Since ⃗ vis generic, and thus strictly increasing along edges, it defines a partial order,
and since the set X0is finite, the rewriting system pX0,Ñqis terminating. By Proposi-
tion 1.8, there is a global sink in each connected component of X. Confluence then follows:
given any pair of vertices x, yin the same connected component, since ⃗ vis generic there are
directed paths x˚Ý Ñs˚Ð Ýyto the global sink sof this connected component. □
Corollary 1.13. The abstract rewriting system on the vertices of any oriented polytope P
is terminating and confluent. Moreover, every pair of vertices admits a unique normal
form skpPq.
Recall that a polytope Pissimple if each vertex of Pis incident to precisely dim Pedges.
Lemma 1.14. If a polytope Pis simple, then there is a bijection between the local confluence
diagrams ofpP0,Ñqand the oriented boundaries of the 2-faces of P.
Proof. When Pis simple, the vertex figure P{xof every vertex xis a simplex [Zie95,
Prop. 2.16], with each edge in P{xcorresponding to a 2-face of P(Lemma 1.4). Thus every
pair of edges e, e1with source x“scpeq“scpe1qdetermines a 2-face of P. □
Not much more can be said at this level of generality. For the specific familiy of operahe-
dra that we will consider in the next section, the rewriting systems possess more structure
(they are term rewriting system) and are studied in a companion paper [CLA24].10 PIERRE-LOUIS CURIEN AND GUILLAUME LAPLANTE-ANFOSSI
2.Categorical coherence
2.1.Categorified non-symmetric operad. Throughout this section we consider struc-
tures without units. Unless otherwise stated, the adjective “non-unital” will be implicitly
assumed.
Definition 2.1. Acategorified non-symmetric operad Pis a collection tPpnqunPNof small
categories equipped with bifunctors
˝i:PpnqˆPpkqÝÑPpn`k´1q,for 1ďiďn ,
and for each κPPpmq,µPPpnq,νPPpkq, 1ďiďm, 1ďjďnnatural isomorphisms
βκ,µ,ν :pκ˝iµq˝j`i´1ν–ÝÑκ˝ipµ˝jνq,
θκ,ν,µ :pκ˝iνq˝j`k´1µ–ÝÑp κ˝jµq˝iν ,when iăj ,
such that the following diagrams commute: the pentagonal
ppκ˝τq˝µq˝ν
pκ˝pτ˝µq˝νq
κ˝ppτ˝µq˝νq
κ˝pτ˝pµ˝νqqpκ˝τq˝pµ˝νqβκ,τ,µ˝1ν
βκ,τ˝µ,ν
1κ˝βτ,µ,νβκ˝τ,µ,ν
βκ,τ,µ˝νppκ˝τq˝µq˝ν
ppκ˝τq˝νq˝µ
ppκ˝νq˝τq˝µ
pκ˝νq˝pτ˝µqpκ˝pτ˝µq˝νθκ˝τ,µ,ν
θκ,τ,ν˝1µ
βκ˝ν,τ,µβκ,τ,µ˝1ν
θκ,τ˝µ,ν
ppκ˝τq˝µq˝ν
ppκ˝µq˝τq˝ν
ppκ˝µq˝νq˝τ
pκ˝pµ˝νqq˝τpκ˝τq˝pµ˝νqθκ,τ,µ˝1ν
θκ˝µ,τ,ν
βκ,µ,ν˝1τβκ˝τ,µ,ν
θκ,τ,µ˝ν
and hexagonal identitiesTOPOLOGICAL PROOFS OF CATEGORICAL COHERENCE 11
ppκ˝τq˝µq˝ν
pκ˝pτ˝µqq˝ν
κ˝ppτ˝µq˝νq
κ˝ppτ˝νq˝µqppκ˝τq˝νq˝µ
pκ˝pτ˝νqq˝µβκ,τ,µ˝1ν
βκ,τ˝µ,ν
1κ˝θτ,µ,νθκ˝τ,µ,ν
βκ,τ,ν˝1µ
βκ,τ˝ν,µppκ˝τq˝µq˝ν
ppκ˝µq˝τq˝ν
ppκ˝µq˝νq˝τ
ppκ˝νq˝µq˝τppκ˝τq˝νq˝µ
ppκ˝νq˝τq˝µθκ,τ,µ˝1ν
θκ˝µ,τ,ν
θκ,µ,ν˝1τθκ˝τ,µ,ν
θκ,τ,ν˝1µ
θκ˝ν,τ,µ
.
The diagrams above hold for all instances of composable βandθ; these depend on the
indices i, j, k , which are omitted for the sake of readability. Observe that a categorified
non-symmetric operad concentrated in arity 1 is a non-symmetric monoidal category.
As explained in Proposition 2.6 below, one can picture an object µPPpnqas a planar tree
with one vertex decorated by µ,nleaves and one root (a corolla ). The˝ibifunctors then
correspond to the operation of grafting a corolla on top of another. Iterated applications of
the˝ican be visualized as fully nested planar trees, with vertices decorated by objects of P,
see Figure 2. A nesting of a planar tree is a collection of subtrees ( nests ) which are either
included in one another or disjoint. A nesting is fullif its number of nests is maximal, equal
to the number of internal edges of the tree [Lap22, Def. 2.2].
κτµ
ν ρ
12
34
Figure 2. A fully nested planar tree.
Theβandθarrows correspond to the sequential and parallel axioms of an operad, and
relate the two possible ways of fully nesting a tree with 3 vertices, see Figure 3. Moreover,
there is then one coherence diagram (pentagon or hexagon) for every planar tree with 4
vertices, see Figure 4.12 PIERRE-LOUIS CURIEN AND GUILLAUME LAPLANTE-ANFOSSI
κµν
βÝÑ
κµν
κµ νθÝÑ
κµ ν
Figure 3. Theβandθisomorphisms defining a categorified non-symmetric operad.
κτµν
κτµ
ν
κτ µν
κτµ ν
κτ µ ν
Figure 4. The five planar trees with four vertices, giving rise to the pen-
tagonal (first three) and hexagonal (last two) identites.
Remark 2.2.K. Doˇ sen and Z. Petri´ c introduced in [DP15, Sec. 12] the notion of weak
Cat-operad. Despite looking different at first sight, the two notions are in fact equivalent.
The crucial observation is the following: the θ-isomorphisms of Doˇ sen–Petri´ c comprise both
the isomorphisms θin Definition 2.1 and their inverses θ´1. Therefore, there are only two
pentagonal coherence diagrams in the definition of a weak Cat-operad, the equations ( β
pent e) and ( βθ2e) of [DP15, Section 9]. The set of diagrams of the form ( β pent e) is the
same as the set of diagrams which arises from the first pentagon in Definition 2.1, while the
set of diagrams of the form ( βθ2e) is partitioned into the sets of diagrams which arise from
the second and third pentagons in Definition 2.1.
We will give in Theorem 2.5 two topological proofs of coherence for categorified non-
symmetric operads. A benefit of our presentation is that, adopting the oriented approach
(see the second proof of Theorem 2.5), we get a proof of coherence where βandθare
both treated as rewriting rules, in contrast with the proof in [DP15], which proceeds in
two stages, much like in Mac Lane’s proof of coherence for symmetric monoidal categories
(see Remark 2.18): first get rid of β(rewriting), then deal with θ.
Definition 2.3. Astrong morphism of categorified non-symmetric operads F:PÑQis
a collection of functors Fn:PpnqÑQpnqtogether with natural isomorphisms
γκ,µ:Fm´1`npκ˝iµq–ÝÑFmpκq˝iFnpµq
such that the following diagrams commute:TOPOLOGICAL PROOFS OF CATEGORICAL COHERENCE 13
Fppκ˝µq˝νq
Fpκ˝µq˝Fpνq
pFpκq˝Fpµqq˝Fpνq
Fpκq˝pFpµq˝FpνqqFpκ˝pµ˝νqq
Fpκq˝Fpµ˝νqγκ˝µ,ν
γκ˝µ˝1Fpνq
βFpκq,Fpµq,FpνqFpβκ,µ,νq
γκ,µ˝ν
1Fpκq˝γµ,νFppκ˝νq˝µq
Fpκ˝νq˝Fpµq
pFpκq˝Fpνqq˝Fpµq
pFpκq˝Fpµqq˝FpνqFppκ˝µq˝νq
Fpκ˝µq˝Fpνqγκ˝ν,µ
γκ,ν˝1Fpµq
θFpκq,Fpνq,FpµqFpθκ,ν,µq
γκ˝µ,ν
γκ,ν˝1Fpνq
.
It is said to be strict if the natural isomorphisms are identities.
Once again, the diagrams above hold for all instances of βandθarrows, and we have
omitted thepi, j, kq-indices for readability. Observe that a strong (resp. strict) morphism
between categorified non-symmetric operads concentrated in arity 1 is a strong (resp. strict)
monoidal functor between non-symmetric monoidal categories.
2.2.Coherence for categorified non-symmetric operads. We now aim at the coher-
ence theorem for categorified non-symmetric operads. In order to state the theorem, we
construct the free non-symmetric categorified operad on a family of sets S“tSnuně1. We
define a family of categories S“tSnuně1whose objects are given by the following rules:
(1) if aPSn, then ais an object of Sn;
(2) if t1PSmandt2PSn, then t1˝it2is an object of Sm´1`n, for any 1ďiďm.
If an object t1is inSn, we say that t1hasarity n. Now we define a set Mofbasic morphisms
β:pt1˝it2q˝j`i´1t3Øt1˝ipt2˝jt3q:β´1for every t1PSm, t2PSn, t3PSk, 1ďiďm
and 1ďjďn, and θ:pt1˝it3q˝j´1`kt2Øpt1˝jt2q˝it3:θ´1whenever iăj. We then
define the generating morphisms of the family Sby the following rules:
(1) if ϕPM, then ϕis a generating morphism of S;
(2) if ϕ:t1Ñt2is a generating morphism in S, and t3PS, then ϕ˝iid :t1˝it3Ñt2˝it3
and id˝jϕ:t3˝jt1Ñt3˝jt2are generating morphisms, for any i(resp. j) between 1
and the arity of t1(resp. t3).
Note that by construction, for every morphism ϕ:t1Ñt2, the objects t1andt2have
the same arity, and we say that ϕhas this arity . We then define Snas the free category
over all generating morphisms of arity n. This finishes the construction of our family Sof
categories.
Definition 2.4. We denote by FpSqthe quotient of the family of categories Sby localiza-
tion (inverting the βandθmorphisms), the axioms of bifunctors for the ˝i, the naturality
conditions for βandθ, and the coherence diagrams (pentagons and hexagons) defining a
categorified non-symmetric operad.14 PIERRE-LOUIS CURIEN AND GUILLAUME LAPLANTE-ANFOSSI
We obtain that FpSqis the free categorified non-symmetric operad on S. That is, for any
categorified non-symmetric operad P, and for any family of functions ρn:SnÑObpPpnqq,
there is a unique strict morphism of non-symmetric categorified operads FpSqÑPwhich
extends ρ“ tρnuně1. By precomposing it with the quotient map SÑFpSq, we get a
levelwise functor rr´ss :SÑP.
Theorem 2.5 (Coherence theorem) .For any categorified non-symmetric operad P, for any
family of functions ρ:SÑObpPq, and for any two parallel morphisms ϕ1, ϕ2:t1Ñt2
inS, we haverrϕ1ss“rr ϕ2ss.
In order to prove this Theorem 2.5, we need to first recall the construction of the oper-
ahedra , a family of polytopes whose faces are in bijection with the set of all nestings of a
planar tree. We refer to [Lap22, Sec. 2] for details, see also [DP15, Sec. 13] and [COI19].
Given a planar tree twith ninternal edges, and a full nesting Noft, one associates a
point Mpt,NqPRnvia a simple algorithm which is due to J.-L. Loday [Lap22, Sec. 2.2].
Theoperahedron PtĂRnis the convex hull of the points Mpt,Nq, for all maximal nestings
Noft. It has dimension n´1. One then shows that the poset of nestings of t, ordered
by reverse inclusion, is isomorphic to the poset of faces of Pt[Lap22, Prop. 2.15]. The
dimension of a face is given by nminus the number of nests in the corresponding nesting
oft.
Reading a planar tree tfrom the leaves to the root defines a family of incoming edges
and one outgoing edge at each vertex of t. Given the family of sets Sand a planar tree t,
we say that a decoration of the vertices of tby elements of Sisadmissible if at every vertex
the number of incoming edges is equal to the arity of the element of Sdecorating it. Now,
let us consider the collection OpSqof polytopes with one copy of the operahedron Ptfor
each admissible decoration of the planar tree tby elements of S.
Proposition 2.6. There are bijections between
(1) objects of Sand vertices of the operahedra in OpSq,
(2) generating morphisms of Sand edges of the operahedra in OpSq,
(3) bifunctoriality, naturality and coherence diagrams and 2-faces of the operahedra
inOpSq.
Proof. To each element aofSn, we associate a planar corolla with nleaves and vertex
decorated by a. Then, we identify a˝ibwith the planar tree obtained from grafting the
corolla decorated by bat the ith leaf of the corolla decorated by a. Continuing in this
fashion, and remembering the order in which we graft the corollas, we obtain all possible
fully nested planar trees with vertices decorated by elements of S(Figure 2). A generating
morphism finSis an application of one of the associativity rules βorθto a fully nested
treet, moving only one nest (Figure 3). If thasninternal edges, forgetting the nest that
has been moved gives a nesting of twith n´1 nests. We associate to fthe edge of the
operahedron PtinOpSqlabeled by this nesting, see [Lap22, Def. 2.8 & Prop. 3.11]. It
remains to consider all the possible diagrams one can obtain by applying two generating
morphisms to a given fully nested tree twith ninternal edges. These arise from moving
two different nests in the same fully nested tree. Starting by moving one or the other of
these 2 nests, one faces two types of situations:TOPOLOGICAL PROOFS OF CATEGORICAL COHERENCE 15
(A1) If the two nests are disjoint, one obtains a bifunctoriality square,
(A2) If the two nests are nested, but do not share the same root, one obtains a naturality
square,
(B) If the two nests are nested and share the same root, one obtains either a pentagon
or a hexagon as in Definition 2.1.
To such a diagram, we associate the 2-face of the operahedron PtinOpSqcorresponding to
the nesting of tobtained by forgetting the two nests that have been moved along the edges.
We refer to [CLA24, Sec. 2] for a more detailed analysis of the 2-faces. □
Remark 2.7.The fact that every possible choice of initial moves gives rise to a 2-face
amounts to the fact that the operahedron Ptis a simple polytope [DP11, Sec. 9]. As
Lemma 1.14 shows, this property garantees the correspondence between geometric and
rewriting-theoretic proofs of coherence, see [CLA24] for more details on the latter.
The conceptual origin of the bijections of Proposition 2.6 is the fact that the combinatorics
of the faces of the operahedra correspond exactly to the monad of trees [LV12, Sec. 5.6.1].
Or, said differently, it lies in the fact that the operahedra encode (via the cellular chains
functor) the minimal resolution of the colored symmetric operad whose algebras are non-
unital non-symmetric operads, see [VdL03] and [Lap22, Sec. 4.1].
We are now ready to prove Theorem 2.5, using either our non-oriented or oriented topo-
logical coherence results for polytopes.
Proof of Theorem 2.5. From Point (2) in Proposition 2.6, we have that the morphisms of S
are in bijection with combinatorial paths on the operahedra of OpSq. Two parallel mor-
phisms in Sthus define two parallel combinatorial paths on some operahedron PtinOpSq.
Since an operahedron Ptis simply connected, Theorem 1.1 implies that these two combi-
natorial paths are combinatorially homotopic. By Point (3) in Proposition 2.6 the 2-faces
of the operahedra are exactly either a bifunctoriality or naturality square, a pentagon or
a hexagon (witnessing a coherence condition) as in Definition 2.1. Therefore, two parallel
morphisms ϕ1, ϕ2inSare equal in the quotient FpSq, and thus their images rrϕ1ss,rrϕ2ss
are also equal in P. □
Second proof of Theorem 2.5. Alternatively, since the operahedra are polytopes, one can
use Proposition 1.6 and Theorem 1.9. As shown in [Lap22, Prop. 3.11], choosing a generic
vector ⃗ vwhich has strictly decreasing coordinates gives the orientations of the diagrams
given in Definition 2.1 on the 2-faces. One then obtains a topological proof of coherence
which follows closely the original proof of Mac Lane [ML63, Thm. 3.1], suitably generalized
to categorified operads. □
Following Remark 2.2, we have that Theorem 2.5 gives an alternative, more economi-
cal proof of coherence for weak Cat-operads [DP15, Prop. 14.2]. Incidentally, it gives an
alternative input to the proof of coherence for cyclic symmetric categorified operads [CO20].
Restricting the theorem above to non-symmetric operads concentrated in arity 1, the
category FpSqbecomes the free non-symmetric monoidal category on S, and we get the
following corollary.16 PIERRE-LOUIS CURIEN AND GUILLAUME LAPLANTE-ANFOSSI
Corollary 2.8 (Mac Lane coherence theorem for non-symmetric monoidal categories) .For
any non-symmetric monoidal category C, for any function ρ:SÑObpCq, and for any two
parallel morphisms ϕ1, ϕ2:t1Ñt2inS, we haverrϕ1ss“rr ϕ2ss.
Remark 2.9.As mentioned at the end of Section 1.3, the rewriting systems obtained on the
vertices of the operahedra by choosing a generic vector with strictly decreasing coordinates
are in fact term rewriting systems. The faces of type (B) in Point (3) of Proposition 2.6 (the
coherence conditions) correspond precisely to the critical pairs of these rewriting systems,
see [CLA24, Sec. 3.4]. Moreover, the associated posets on fully nested planar trees have
recently been shown to be lattices [DS24].
2.3.Symmetric monoidal categories. We now formulate and prove Mac Lane’s coher-
ence theorem for symmetric monoidal categories in the same style as above. Recall that in
a symmetric monoidal category C, in addition to the natural isomorphisms β, with compo-
nents βκ,µ,ν :pκbµqbνÑκbpµbνq, there are involutive natural transformations τ,
with components τµ,ν:µbνÑνbµ. Here, we use κ, µ, ν, . . . to range over the objects of
the category, consistently with the notation used in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. In addition to the
pentagons, obtained from the first pentagon in Definition 2.1 by replacing ˝withb, there
are hexagons
pκbµqbν
κbpµbνq
pµbνqbκ
µbpνbκqpµbκqbν
µbpκbνqβ
τ
βτb1
β
1bτ
for all objects κ, µ, ν inC.
In order to state the coherence theorem, we construct a free category on a set Sof
generating objects . We define a small category SMLwhose set of objects
TS“ď
tTA|Ais a non-empty finite subset of Su
is defined as follows:
(1) if aPS, then aPTtau;
(2) if t1PTAandt2PTB, and if AXB“H, then t1bt2PTAYB.
We can see the objects of SMLas fully parenthesized words over Swhere letters are not
repeated. We then define a set MMLofbasic morphisms β:pt1bt2qbt3Øt1bpt2bt3q:β´1
andτ:t1bt2Øt2bt1, for every t1, t2, t3PTS. We then define the generating morphisms
ofSMLby the following rules:
(1) if ϕPMML, then ϕis a generating morphism;TOPOLOGICAL PROOFS OF CATEGORICAL COHERENCE 17
(2) if ϕ:t1Ñt2is a generating morphism and t3PTS, then ϕbid :t1bt3Ñt2bt3
and idbϕ:t3bt1Ñt3bt2are generating morphisms.
We then define SMLas the free category over all generating morphisms. This finishes the
construction of the category SML.
Definition 2.10. We denote by FpSqthe quotient of SMLby localization (inverting the β
morphisms), by the axioms τt1,t2˝τt2,t1“1, by the axioms of bifunctors, by the naturality
conditions for βandτ, and by the coherence conditions of symmetric monoidal categories.
By freeness, we have that for any symmetric monoidal category C, and for any function
ρ:SÑObpCq, there is a unique functor rr´ssML:SMLÑCwhich extends ρand sends
the formal basic morphisms to the actual canonical morphisms of C. This functor factorizes
through the quotient map r´sML:SMLÑFpSq.
It turns out that Kapranov’s topological proof is not based on the above presentation
ofFpSq, but on another presentation of this category, that is made explicit in [BIP19, Sec. 2].
Let us recall this presentation. We define another category SKas follows. Its objects are
the same as those of SML. We define a set MKofbasic morphisms β:pt1bt2qbt3Ø
t1bpt2bt3q:β´1for every t1, t2, t3PTS, and τ:abbØbbafor every a, bPS, i.e.,
welimit τto generating objects .Generating morphisms are defined in the same way as for
SML. We note that by construction SKis a wide subcategory of SML.
Definition 2.11. We denote by FpSqKthe quotient of SKby localization (inverting the
βmorphisms), by the axioms τa,b˝τb,a“1, by the axioms of bifunctors, by the naturality
conditions for β, by the coherence conditions of monoidal categories, and by the axioms in
dodecagonal form given by the solid arrows in Figure 5 (left), for a, b, c ranging over Sonly.
We pause here to reflect on the difference between the two presentations. In the second
one, we have less generators, and we have lost hexagons. For an intuition, here is how Mac
Lane himself motivated his hexagonal axioms (verbatim, just changing the notation to fit
with ours) in [ML63]:
The instance τκbµ,νinterchanges the block κµwith the single letter ν; the
hexagon condition states that this interchange may be replaced by two in-
stances of τwhich interchange single letters with ν. Repeated such replace-
ment using instances of the hexagon shows that any interchange of successive
blocks may be replaced by interchanges of successive letters.
In other words, hexagons are now taken as definitions rather than axioms. But how do we
guarantee that the general τmorphisms defined in this way define a natural transformation?
This is what the dodecagons are for.
LetCbe a symmetric monoidal category. By freeness again, any function ρ:SÑObpCq
extends uniquely to a functor rr´ssK:SKÑC. This functor is the restriction of rr´ssML
toSK, and factorizes through the quotient functor r´sK:SKÑFpSqK.
Theorem 2.12 (Kapranov coherence theorem for symmetric monoidal categories) .For any
two parallel morphisms ϕ1, ϕ2:t1Ñt2inSK, we haverϕ1sK“rϕ2sK.18 PIERRE-LOUIS CURIEN AND GUILLAUME LAPLANTE-ANFOSSI
Figure 5. Kapranov dodecagons.
In order to prove this “Kapranov style” coherence, we need to first recall the construc-
tion of the permuto-associahedra , a family of polytopes whose faces are in bijection with
parenthesized ordered partitions of a finite set. We refer to [Zie95, Sec. 9.3] for details, see
also [Kap93] and [RZ94]. Given a finite set Aof cardinal nand a parenthesized permuta-
tionσof its elements, one associates a section γσof the projection from the n-cube to the
cyclic polygon with n`1 vertices [Zie95, Ex. 9.14], whose integral over the base gives a
point MpσqinRn. The permuto-associahedron PAis the convex hull of the points Mpσq,
for all parenthesized permutations σof the elements of A. It has dimension n´1. One
then shows that the poset of parenthesized ordered partitions of A, ordered according to
the rules below, is isomorphic to the poset of faces of PA[Zie95, Thm. 9.15].
Parenthesized ordered partitions of Acan be drawn as planar trees whose leaves are
decorated with the parts of a partition of A. The subface relation ăis defined by two
clauses: one can contract an edge of the tree, or remove a node all of whose incoming edges
are leaves and decorate its outcoming edge – now a leaf – with the union of the decorations
of those incoming edges. The maximal face is A. For example, with A“ta1, . . . , a 7u, the
following is a face:
pta1uta4uta2, a6uqta3, a5, a7u
which is covered by the following two elements.
pta1uta4uta2, a6uqta3, a5, a7uăta1uta4uta2, a6uta3, a5, a7u
pta1uta4uta2, a6uqta3, a5, a7uăta1, a2, a4, a6uta3, a5, a7u.TOPOLOGICAL PROOFS OF CATEGORICAL COHERENCE 19
Given the set S, let us consider the collection PpSqof polytopes with one copy of the
permuto-associahedron PAfor each finite subset AĂS.
Proposition 2.13. There are bijections between
(1) objects of SKand vertices of the permuto-associahedra in PpSq,
(2) generating morphisms of SKand edges of the permuto-associahedra in PpSq,
(3) bifunctoriality, naturality and coherence diagrams and 2-faces of the permuto-associahedra
inPpSq.
Proof. The 0-dimensional faces of PAare fully parenthesized words whose letters are sin-
gletons, and are in obvious bijective correspondence with the elements of TA. The 1-
dimensional faces are
‚either fully parenthesized words whose letters are singletons but for one letter which
is a two-element set tai, ajuand feature an application of the basic morphism τai,aj,
‚or an “almost” fully parenthesized word of singletons, with just one parenthesis
removed, yielding a subword ptaiutajutakuq, featuring an application of the basic
morphism βai,aj,akorβ´1
ai,aj,ak– the orientation of the edge being “decided” by the
shape of its end vertices.
Finally, the 2-dimensional faces can be analyzed much in the same way as in Proposi-
tion 2.6, and seen to correspond to bifunctoriality, naturality of β, and to the pentagons
and dodecagons. We have pictured the poset view of the latter in Figure 5 (right). The
reader can also convince himself on this figure how the orientation of the βarrows on the
left can be reconstructed from the non-oriented dodecagon on the right. □
Proof of Theorem 2.12. The proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 2.5, using either the
Van Kampen (Theorem 1.1) or the Morse (Proposition 1.6 and Theorem 1.9) technique. □
Remark 2.14.Alternatively, one could use the same strategy with the simple permutoassoci-
ahedra from [BIP19], involving yet another equivalent presentation of symmetric monoidal
categories.
The following proposition establishes relations between the Mac Lane and Kapranov
presentations of symmetric monoidal categories.
Proposition 2.15 (Kapranov–Mac Lane comparison) .
(1) Let ϕ1, ϕ2:t1Ñt2be parallel morphisms of SK, and suppose that rϕ1sK“rϕ2sK.
Thenrϕ1sML“rϕ2sML.
(2) Let ϕbe a morphism of SML. Then there is a morphism ψofSKsuch thatrϕsML“
rψsML.
Proof. The proof of Point (1) is visualized in Figure 5 (left). The two dotted lines delimit
two Mac Lane hexagons on the top and at the bottom and a naturality square in the
middle. Explicitly, the two dotted τ-morphisms are τa,bbcandτa,cbb. As for Point (2), we
observe that a morphism ψas in the statement can be obtained by repeatedly applying the
procedure described by Mac Lane in the quotation which follows Definition 2.11 above. □20 PIERRE-LOUIS CURIEN AND GUILLAUME LAPLANTE-ANFOSSI
Theorem 2.16 (Mac Lane coherence theorem for symmetric monoidal categories) .For any
symmetric monoidal category C, for any function ρ:SÑObpCq, and for any two parallel
morphisms ϕ1, ϕ2:t1Ñt2inSML, we haverrϕ1ssML“rrϕ2ssML.
Proof. Since the functor rr´ssMLfactorizes through the functor r´sML, it is enough to prove
thatrϕ1sML“rϕ2sML. By Point (2) of Proposition 2.15, there exist ψ1andψ2inSKsuch
thatrψ1sML“ rϕ1sMLandrψ2sML“ rϕ2sML. In particular ψ1andψ2are parallel, so
by Theorem 2.12 we get rψ1sK“ rψ2sK, and by Point (1) of Proposition 2.15 we have
rψ1sML“rψ2sML. Thus, we have rϕ1sML“rψ1sML“rψ2sML“rϕ2sML, which concludes
the proof. □
Remark 2.17.One can see easily that this proof also shows that the categories FpSqK
andFpSqare isomorphic. The statement of this fact is unrelated to coherence issues, but
its proof relies on Kapranov style coherence. In other words, the proof that Kapranov’s
conditions imply Mac Lane’s conditions is non-trivial, in contrast to the converse direction
(cf. Proposition 2.15); a result of the magic of polytopes!
Remark 2.18.Note that contrary to the case of the operahedra, there does not seem to exist
an orientation vector whose induced orientation on the edges of the permuto-associahedra
coincides with a consistent orientation of the βandτarrows based on conventions inde-
pendent of the orientation vector . This follows from the observation that the dodecagon
(Figure 5, left) involves β´1arrows. The same remarks apply to the simple permuto-
associahedra of [BIP19]. As for the original presentation of Mac Lane (for which no poly-
topal correspondence is known), one could still hope to have an associated term rewriting
system. But instead Mac Lane’s proof (rightly!) proceeds in two stages: first using rewriting
for the monoidal part ( βonly), and then dealing with the symmetric part using Coxeter’s
presentation of the symmetric groups. It seems that one cannot do better. Indeed, even
if Mac Lane’s hexagon does not involve β´1arrows, the latter would pop up when taking
the combinatorics of orientation of the τarrows into account. As an illustration, suppose
that we decide to move parentheses to the right for β, fix a total order on Sand split the
involutive τintoτandτ´1according to where the maximum lies. Then, for µăκăνthe
hexagon becomes
pκbµqbν
κbpµbνq
pµbνqbκ
µbpνbκqpµbκqbν
µbpκbνqβ
τ
βτb1
β
1bτ
and a local confluence diagram for the pair of rewritings out of pµbνqbκcannot be
completed without inverting βarrows.TOPOLOGICAL PROOFS OF CATEGORICAL COHERENCE 21
3.Perspectives
3.1.Further applications. One can also use the same strategy to prove coherence for
unital non-symmetric monoidal categories, using the unital associahedra of F. Muro and A.
Tonks [MT14].
It is natural to ask if the construction of unital associahedra could be extended to the
permutoassociahedra, in such a way as to provide a topological proof of coherence for unital
symmetric monoidal categories. The question of the existence of these constructions at the
operadic level (i.e. does there exist unital operahedra, symmetric operahedra, and unital
symmetric operahedra?) is, to our knowledge, still open as well.
Another immediate application of Theorem 1.1 is the coherence of strong non-symmetric
monoidal functors between non-symmetric monoidal categories [Eps66]. The corresponding
topological objects are in this case the family of multiplihedra [Sta70, For08]. The general-
ization to strong morphisms between non-symmetric categorified operads also goes through,
involving this time the family of multiploperahedra described at the end of the introduction
in [LM23].
In the same spirit as in Theorem 2.5, one could obtain coherence results for categorifica-
tions of many operad-like structures, for instance the ones described in [BMO23]: categori-
fied modular operads, wheeled properads, and permutads (shuffle algebras), among others.
In order to treat cyclic and symmetric structures, one could take inspiration from the re-
duction process followed in [CO20] for the case of cyclic symmetric categorified operads.
3.2.Higher categories. Theorem 1.1 shows the precise relationship between coherence
and connectedness. In addition to Kapranov’s claim [Kap93], it clarifies other statements
in the literature, such as the proof of [KV94, Prop. 3.9]. There, the incipit “since Pnis a
convex polytope” could be replaced by a more precise “since Pnis simply connected”.
In the case of (symmetric) monoidal categories, Theorem 1.1 demonstrates that coherence
is equivalent to the vanishing of the first homotopy groups of the (permuto-)associahedra.
Since the (permuto-)associahedra are contractible, and therefore all their homotopy groups
vanish, one could hope for a topological proof of higher dimensional coherence theorems.
One dimension higher, N. Gurski has shown in [Gur11, Thms. 22 & 23] that coherence for
(braided) monoidal bicategories is equivalent to the vanishing of fundamental 2-groupoids
of braid groups. Recent results of S. Barkan provide evidence for higher dimensional state-
ments, relating coherence diagrams of 8-operads to the connectivity of certain operadic
partition complexes [Bar22]. It seems likely that the present results could be interpreted as
a strict version and a special case of [Bar22, Thm. B]. It would be interesting to see how
the permuto-associahedra arise in the strictification process, and how they are related to
operadic partition complexes.
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank all the participants of the Roberta Seminar
held on September 30th, 2020 in Paris for planting the seeds of the present note. We would
like to thank Andrea Bianchi for enlightening discussions, for pointing out mistakes in a first
draft, and for reminding us of the Seifert–Van Kampen theorem. Finally, we are grateful to
Zoran Petri´ c for precious discussions on weak Cat-operads, to Marcy Robertson and to the22 PIERRE-LOUIS CURIEN AND GUILLAUME LAPLANTE-ANFOSSI
anonymous referee for helpful comments which led to substantial improvements of the paper.
The first author wishes to thank the Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach for
several visits as a Research Fellow in 2020 and 2021, thanks to which much of the work
presented here, as well as in the companion paper [CLA24], could take off. The second
author would like to thank the Copenhagen Center for Geometry and Topology as well as
the Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in Bonn where part of this work was carried out.
References
[Bar22] Shaul Barkan, Arity Approximation of 8-Operads , ArXiv e-prints (2022), arXiv:2207.07200 .
[BB97] Mladen Bestvina and Noel Brady, Morse theory and finiteness properties of groups , Inventiones
mathematicae 129(1997), no. 3, 445–470.
[BIP19] Djordje Barali´ c, Jelena Ivanovi´ c, and Zoran Petri´ c, A simple permutoassociahedron , Discrete Math-
ematics 342(2019), no. 12, 111591.
[BMO23] Michael Batanin, Martin Markl, and Jovana Obradovi´ c, Minimal models for graph-related (hy-
per)operads , Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 227(2023), no. 7, 107329.
[BN98] Franz Baader and Tobias Nipkow, Term Rewriting and All That , Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1998.
[Bro06] Ronald Brown, Topology and groupoids , Booksurge Publishing, 2006.
[CL23] Federico Castillo and Fu Liu, The permuto-associahedron revisited , European Journal of Combina-
torics 110(2023), 103706.
[CLA24] Pierre-Louis Curien and Guillaume Laplante-Anfossi, Term rewriting on nestohedra , ArXiv e-prints
(2024), arXiv:2403.15987 .
[CO20] Pierre-Louis Curien and Jovana Obradovi´ c, Categorified Cyclic Operads , Applied Categorical Struc-
tures 28(2020), no. 1, 59–112.
[COI19] Pierre-Louis Curien, Jovana Obradovi´ c, and Jelena Ivanovi´ c, Syntactic aspects of hypergraph poly-
topes , Journal of Homotopy and Related Structures 14(2019), no. 1, 235–279.
[DP11] Kosta Doˇ sen and Zoran Petri´ c, Hypergraph polytopes , Topology and its Applications 158 (2011),
1405–1444.
[DP15] ,Weak cat-operads , Logical Methods in Computer Science 11(2015), no. 1, 1–23.
[DS24] Colin Defant and Andrew Sack, Operahedron lattices , ArXiv e-prints (2024), arXiv:2402.12717 .
[Eps66] D. B. A. Epstein, Functors between tensored categories , Inventiones mathematicae 1(1966), no. 3,
221–228.
[For08] Stefan Forcey, Convex hull realizations of the multiplihedra , Topology Appl. 156 (2008), no. 2,
326–347.
[Gur11] Nick Gurski, Loop spaces, and coherence for monoidal and braided monoidal bicategories , Advances
in Mathematics 226(2011), no. 5, 4225–4265.
[Kap93] Mikhail M. Kapranov, The permutoassociahedron, Mac Lane’s coherence theorem and asymptotic
zones for the KZ equation , Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 85(1993), no. 2, 119–142.
[KV94] M. M. Kapranov and V. A. Voevodsky, 2-categories and Zamolodchikov tetrahedra equations , Proc.
Sympos. Pure Math., vol. 56, p. 177–259, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1994.
[Lap22] Guillaume Laplante-Anfossi, The diagonal of the operahedra , Advances in Mathematics 405(2022),
108494.
[LM23] Guillaume Laplante-Anfossi and Thibaut Mazuir, The diagonal of the multiplihedra and the tensor
product of A-infinity morphisms , Journal de l’ ´Ecole polytechnique — Math´ ematiques 10(2023),
405–446.
[LV12] Jean-Louis Loday and Bruno Vallette, Algebraic operads , Grundlehren Der Mathematischen Wis-
senschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences], vol. 346, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
2012.TOPOLOGICAL PROOFS OF CATEGORICAL COHERENCE 23
[ML63] Saunders Mac Lane, Natural associativity and commutativity , Rice Univ. Studies 49(1963), no. 4,
28–46.
[MT14] Fernando Muro and Andrew Tonks, Unital associahedra , Forum Mathematicum 26(2014), no. 2,
593–620.
[RZ94] Victor Reiner and G¨ unter M. Ziegler, Coxeter-associahedra , Mathematika 41(1994), no. 2, 364–393.
[Sta70] James D. Stasheff, H-spaces from a homotopy point of view , Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol.
161, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1970.
[VdL03] Pepijn Van der Laan, Coloured Koszul duality and strongly homotopy operads , ArXiv e-prints (2003),
arXiv:0312147 .
[Zie95] G¨ unter M. Ziegler, Lectures on polytopes , Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 152, Springer-Verlag,
New York, 1995.
IRIF, CNRS, Universit ´e Paris Cit ´e and πr2team, Inria, France.
Email address :curien@irif.fr
School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
Email address :guillaume.laplanteanfossi@unimelb.edu.au