Reclaiming Privacy and Performance over
Centralized DNS
Rashna Kumar
Northwestern University
rashnakumar2024@u.northwestern.eduFabián E. Bustamante
Northwestern University
fabianb@cs.northwestern.edu
ABSTRACT
The Domain Name System (DNS) is both a key determinant
of users’ quality of experience (QoE) and privy to their tastes,
preferences, and even the devices they own. Growing con-
cern about user privacy and QoE has brought a number of
alternative DNS services, from public DNS to encrypted and
Oblivious DNS. While offering valuable features, these DNS
variants are operated by a handful of providers, reinforcing a
trend towards centralization that has raised concerns about
privacy, competition, resilience and Web QoE.
The goal of this work is to let users take advantage of
third-party DNS services, without sacrificing privacy or per-
formance. We follow Wheeler’s advice, adding another level
of indirection with an end-system DNS resolver, Ónoma , that
improves privacy, avoiding DNS-based user-reidentification
by inserting and sharding requests across resolvers, and im-
proves performance by running resolution races among re-
solvers and reinstating the client-resolver proximity assump-
tion content delivery networks rely on. As our evaluation
shows, while there may not be an ideal service for allclients
inallplaces, Ónoma dynamically finds the bestservice for
anygiven location.
1 INTRODUCTION
Domain Name System (DNS) is a key component of the
Internet. Originally designed to translate domain names to
IP addresses [ 50], it has evolved into a complex infrastructure
providing platform for a wide range of applications.
Today DNS is a key determinant, directly and indirectly,
of users’ quality of experience (QoE) and privy to their tastes,
preferences, and even the devices they own. It directly deter-
mines user performance as, for instance, accessing any web-
site requires tens of DNS resolutions [ 13,14,16]. Indirectly,
a user’s specific DNS resolver determines their QoE as many
content delivery networks (CDNs) continue to rely on DNS
for replica selection. As we show in Sec. 2, despite some adop-
tion of anycast [ 4,17] and EDNS Client Subnet (ECS) [ 19],
and the promise of CDN-ISP collaborations [ 3,55,57,73],
many CDNs continue to rely on the assumption that the
location of a client’s resolver provides a good proxy for the
client’s own location [22, 36].
Beyond its critical role in the user’s experience, clear
text DNS requests can have a significant impact on privacyand security and, in certain parts of the world, on human
rights [ 5,20,74]. The set of DNS requests issued by a user re-
veals much about their tastes, preferences, or the devices they
own and how they used them [ 6,12,32,40], even when using
VPN or Tor [ 31]. Prior work [ 10,51] shows that browsing pro-
files, a subset of users’ DNS request streams, are both highly
distinctive (e.g., 98-99% of browsing profiles are unique) and
stable (e.g., re-identifiability rate as high as 80%), suggesting
the viability of browser profiles as user identifiers.
Concerns about user privacy and QoE have served as moti-
vation for a number of alternative DNS techniques and third-
party services, from public DNS to encrypted and Oblivious
DNS [ 43,62,62,68]. Google Public DNS was announced
in late 2009 promising better performance and higher reli-
ability [ 29], while DNS over HTTPS (DoH), DNS over TLS
(DoT), DNSCrypt, and Oblivious DNS are some of the latest
proposals to make DNS more secure [26, 47, 68].
While offering some valuable features, these DNS vari-
ants are operated by a handful of providers such as Google,
Cloudflare or IBM, strengthening a concerning trend toward
DNS centralization and its implications [ 39,41,70]. First, the
use of encrypted DNS, while avoiding man-in-the-middle
attacks, does not necessarily improve client’s privacy as the
DNS provider has access to the highly-unique, unencrypted
request streams of millions of clients and is a clear target
for a court order to release data in bulk [ 67]. Second, while
centralized DNS could offer better DNS response times, it
may result in worst Web QoE as it breaks CDNs’ assumption
about the proximity between users and their resolvers [ 53].
Our evaluation (§4) shows that, despite the large-scale de-
ployment of many third-party DNS services, the proximity
to users of their resolvers varies widely across locales [ 22].
While EDNS IP Subnet extension is meant to address this
problem, prior work [ 22] shows that adoption of ECS across
the Internet is minuscule and even large providers, such as
Cloudflare, have stopped supporting it due to privacy con-
cerns [ 56].1Last, part of the Internet’s inherent resilience
lies in its diversity; centralization leads to a clustering of
multiple risks, from technical to economic ones [ 39], while
increasing the potential impact of any single failure [23].
1The Cloudflare’s CEO commented that his company is instead exploring
an alternative to the EDNS IP Subnet extension for user geolocation [56].
1arXiv:2302.13274v1  [cs.CR]  26 Feb 2023The goal of our work is to let users take advantage of third-
party DNS services without sacrificing privacy or performance.
Our approach follows Wheeler’s advice, adding another level
of indirection with an end-system DNS resolver.2We present
Ónoma , an end-system resolver that:
(1)enhances privacy by sharding users’ requests across
multiple resolvers [8, 34, 36] (§4.2.1),
(2)reduces reidentifiablitly by adaptively inserting pop-
ular requests on a user DNS request stream based on
the uniqueness of a requested domain (§4.2.2),
(3)improves DNS performance, independently of a user’s
location and specific DNS or CDN services’ deploy-
ments, by running resolution races [ 69] among re-
solvers (§4.3.1) and
(4)addresses the QoE impact of client-LDNS mismatch
problem [53] (§4.3.2).
We evaluate Ónoma across geographic locales and with
different DNS services, content providers, and CDNs and
a range of settings for sharding, insertion and racing. Our
evaluation results show that Ónoma can take advantage of
third-party DNS while avoiding user re-identification – 100%
of the users can not be re-identified (are k-anonymous) with
low insertion and sharding requests across 8 resolvers (§4.2).
Our results also demonstrate that, across a number of DNS
resolvers and CDNs, Ónoma can improve average resolution
time by 38.8% by racing just two resolvers, and can yield up
to 10% shorter Time-To-First-Byte(§4.3). More importantly,
the average performance of Ónoma is better or equal to the
best service for most CDN and individual DNS at any locale
(§6). While there may not be an ideal service for all clients
inallplaces, Ónoma dynamically selects the bestservice for
anygiven location.
2 BACKGROUND
In the following paragraphs, we provide background on DNS,
the relation between DNS and CDNs and recent trends in
the DNS market.
The process of DNS resolution involves at least a stub
resolver that asks questions from a recursive resolver which,
in turn, finds the answer by asking one or more authoritative
DNS servers. Traditionally, the user’s recursive resolver has
been provided by the user’s ISP and found, in networking
terms, generally close to their users.
ISP DNS recursive resolvers are, however, not always the
best in terms of resolution time [ 2,61], and slower DNS
resolutions can significantly impact users’ QoE. Besides res-
olution performance, there are several other potential draw-
backs of using an ISP provided resolver in terms of reliability,
privacy and censorship [11, 46, 60].
2“All problems in computer science can be solved by another level of indi-
rection”, David WheelerPartially in response to these issues, a third-party ecosys-
tem has evolved around DNS over the years. Services such
as OpenDNS, UltraDNS and Google Public DNS [ 29] offer
a number of valuable features, from load balancing, nonce
prepending and shared caching for performance, to phishing
and botnet detection for security. More recently, some of
these same providers have begun to offer DNS over HTTPs
(DoH), DNS over TLS (DoT) and DNSCrypt [ 26] using en-
cryption between the DNS stub and the provided recursive
resolver to prevent on-path eavesdropping, spoofing, and
blocking [ 21,58]. These DNS services typically host servers
on multiple sites around the globe and use anycast to guide
DNS clients to the nearest resolver. Note, of course, that
the resolution times experienced by any particular client
will depend in part on their location and proximity to these
“nearest” resolvers for their chosen DNS service.
The proximity, or lack thereof, between clients and their
DNS resolvers can impact not just resolution times. This
observation has been at the core of CDNs mapping systems,
sometimes referred to as redirection , the process by which the
CDN decides the replica server where to redirect a client’s
request for content to improve user-perceived performance
and balance the load across servers [33].
The proximity, or lack thereof, between clients and their
DNS resolvers can impact not just resolution times, depend-
ing on the CDN redirection method. While most of the
time DNS-based redirection performs well, the “client-LDNS
mismatch” hurts performance by directing users to distant
servers. EDNS Client Subnet (ECS) aims to address this prob-
lem by allowing a client’s resolver to forward a portion of
the client’s IP address to an authoritative DNS server. While
a number of large-scale DNS services and some CDNs have
adopted ECS, older et al. [ 22] shows that adoption of ECS
across the Internet is minuscule and even large providers,
such as Cloudflare, have stopped supporting it due to privacy
concerns [56].
To illustrate the potential impact of client-LDNS mismatch,
we select top50 Alexa sites3in the US and resolve the re-
sources of these sites, hosted on the two most popular CDNs
– Akamai and Amazon CloudFront, using the Ripe Atlas DNS
API. We use probes in the US and the RIPE probes’ resolvers
as local resolvers, and use distant regional resolvers in Ar-
gentina and India. We measure the median round-trip time
(RTT) of five runs to the replicas assigned using the local
and distant resolvers. If a CDN does not rely on DNS for redi-
rection, one would expect no RTT differences between the
replicas assigned when using the different resolvers. If, on
the other hand, a CDN does rely on DNS-based redirection,
there should be larger RTTs to the replicas assigned with
3We discuss the use of Alexa regional rankings in Sec.8.
2(a) Akamai CDN
Figure 1: Client-LDNS mismatch problem and CDN
redirection. Latency to assigned replica servers for
Akamai and Amazon CloudFront for resources in
top50 US websites. The client in the US is using lo-
cal DNS resolvers (cyan) and distant resolvers in Ar-
gentina and India.
increasingly distant resolvers, even when the client location
does not change.
Figure 1 clearly illustrates the client-LDNS mismatch prob-
lem with the two most popular CDNs (full set of graphs in
§A). The RTTs to replicas assigned when using a local re-
solver are consistently lower - up to an order of magnitude
lower at the median than those to replicas assigned when
using any of the distant resolvers (e.g., 9ms for the local
resolver and 160ms with a resolver in India in the case of
Akamai), and the overall distributions are ordered matching
the relative geographic distances of the replicas.
3 ÓNOMA’S MOTIVATIONS AND GOALS
Concerns about user privacy and QoE have served as mo-
tivation for a number of alternative DNS techniques and
third-party services [ 26,29,43,62,68,68]. While offering
some valuable features, these DNS variants are operated by
a handful of providers such as Google, Cloudflare or IBM,
strengthening a concerning trend toward DNS centralization
and its implications [ 39,41,41,70]. We briefly discuss these
implications, as they motivate the design of Ónoma, and
present its derived goals.
For starters, DNS-over-Encryption services are not pri-
vacy panacea. While they protect user data from ISPs and
man-in-the-middle attacks, they expose all information to
the recursive DNS providers. Prior studies [ 10,51] have an-
alyzed the uniqueness of users’ web browsing histories, a
subset of their DNS request streams, and shown that users’
browsing profiles are both highly distinctive and stable (andthus a viable tracking vector). Centralized DNS is also an eas-
ier target for court order to release data in bulk [ 67] and no
privacy agreement policy by a DNS provider can escape that.
Recent work on Oblivious DNS addresses some of these con-
cerns by preventing queried domains from being associated
with the client identity [ 62,68]. However, Oblivious DNS
also increases the cost of DNS resolutions and contributes
to the client-LDNS mismatch problem impacting users’ web
QoE.
In addition, consolidation may also result in lower in-
frastructure resilience and increases the risk of a captive
market [ 41]. Using measurements from 100,000 users of the
OONI app, Radu et al. [ 59] show that Google and Cloudflare
control 49.7% of the resolver market. Part of the Internet’s in-
herent resilience lies in its diversity (i.e., different networks,
peerings, code base and servers), and centralization leads to
a clustering of multiple such risks, at once increasing the
probability of failures andthe potential impact of any single
failure [1, 23].
Finally, while many of these infrastructures are perva-
sive [ 18], for specific locales a particular third-party DNS
service may not have nearby servers to offer [ 53], negatively
impacting both DNS resolution times and web QoE for users
of the many CDNs that continue to rely on DNS for replica
selection. Poor user-mappings can lead to increased delays
and worsening QoE, lower engagement [ 44] and revenue
loss [71].
Ónoma’s Goals. The emergence of a handful of third-
party recursive DNS services is a natural result of a ma-
turing Internet market and the benefits of economies of
scale. Ónoma’s design aims to let users take advantage of
third-party DNS services while avoiding the potential costs.
Specifically, Ónoma aims to improve privacy by avoiding
re-identification of users based on their DNS request streams,
and achieve performance comparable to that of the best per-
forming services in the user’s locale, independently of any
deployment of any specific DNS service, while avoiding re-
liance on any single DNS service. In addition, Ónoma should
be an easy-to-install, readily-deployable solution that by-
passes the need for agreements and coordination between
providers (CDNs, DNS or ISPs).
4 SYSTEM DESIGN
In the following paragraphs, we present the key features of
Ónoma’s design, experimentally motivating and illustrating
the benefits of each of its features. We close the section with
an overview of Ónoma’s system design.
4.1 Privacy and Third-party DNS
A recursive DNS resolver is privy to much information about
a user’s taste, preferences and habits. Prior studies [ 10,51]
3have analyzed the uniqueness of users’ web browsing histo-
ries. Olejnik et al. [ 51], among other findings, show that out
of the 382,269 users that completed their popular site test,
94% had unique browsing histories. They found that with
just the 50 most popular sites in their users’ histories – a
subset of their DNS request streams – they were able to get
a very similar distribution of distinctive histories compared
to complete knowledge of the site list. The replication study
by Bird et al. [ 10] confirm this and show that such histories
are also highly stable and thus a viable tracking vector.
Beyond having access to detailed DNS request traces of
million of users [ 29], large third-party services are also an
easier target for court order to release data in bulk [ 67] and
no privacy agreement policy can escape that.
Ónoma improves privacy by avoiding DNS-based user
identification through (𝑖)domain specific sharding [ 8,34,36]
and(𝑖𝑖)DNS request insertion.
4.2 Evaluating Privacy Gains
Since DNS resolvers are, by definition of their functional-
ity, privy to the unencrypted version of the requested re-
sources, the best privacy a user could expect is in terms of
k-anonymity. A dataset is said to be k-anonymous if the in-
formation for each person contained in the release cannot be
distinguished from at least 𝑘−1individuals whose informa-
tion also appear in the release. To measure the k-anonymity
value, we group users with the same profile (computed using
jaccard distance between the profiles) in the same cluster.
Users in clusters of size 1 (k-value = 1), can be re-identified
on the basis of unique profiles.
We evaluate the privacy gains of the different techniques
used by Ónoma in terms of their impact on k-anonymity.
We use for this two weeks of users’ DNS logs, separated by
one week, collected (using CLI [ 52] and Splunk [ 66]) and
made available (anonymized) by the Information Technol-
ogy Center (IT) team at our institution. This two-week log
correspond to 85,967 users. For every user, the DNS request
logs consist of a browsing history, over a window of time,
including all urls resolved by the user during that time.
From the DNS request logs of every user, we construct a
boolean vector of distinct domains, thereby removing all fre-
quency measures. This boolean vector comprises the union
of the 50 most popular domains visited by each user in our
set and ranks the domains based on their popularity across
all users. The length of our data collection window, and the
format and size of the vector of popular domains we used,
follows Olejnik et al. [51] and Bird et al. [10]’s approaches.
Ethics. Since DNS requests are by their nature sensitive,
some ethical questions arise that we address here.
To preserve the privacy of our users, the data we receive
from the IT team consists of the sites visited by each userstored against random non-persistent ids so our data does
not give us access to any personal identifiers of users. These
ids are one-way hashes and can not be mapped back to the
users. They are, however, unique for each user allowing us
to check if we can correctly re-identify users (anonymized)
based on their DNS request logs. Since we are not able to
identify individual users, we cannot associate the specific
queries of any sensitive nature with any particular user. At
most we can only identify the queries that are being made.
In addition, we submitted our methodology to our institu-
tion’s ethical review board and were given a determination
of “not human research”.
4.2.1 Domain-specific Sharding. Previous work has sug-
gested sharding – scattering DNS requests, randomly, across
different resolvers – as a way to address centralization con-
cerns and to improve privacy [ 8,34,36]. Sharding prevents
any single resolver from acquiring the complete user’s re-
quest stream. However, if all DNS requests were distributed
randomly across the available DNS servers, after a suffi-
ciently long period of time, each DNS providers will have
been queried for most DNS questions. Thus, a basic random
distribution of request across resolvers makes each DNS ser-
vice provider able to obtain a full view of the client’s request
stream and construct their profile.
Ónoma avoids this by using domain-specific sharding [ 7].
After selecting a DNS provider for a query, Ónoma stores
this mapping in a domain-to-DNS map. All of subsequent
queries of a user under the same SLD will be directed to the
same DNS server. This form of sharding [ 8] limits the view
of DNS service providers to a subset of the users’ queries,
preventing any provider from constructing a full user profile.
To evaluate the privacy benefits of domain specific shard-
ing, we select users, from the two-week data set, with DNS
request streams including more than 50 unique SLDs.4We
apply the domain specific sharding algorithm on the request
streams of each user and distribute the requests across a set
of resolvers, 𝑅, which we referred to as the sharding value.
Each resolver stores a bit vector for each user (a union of
the 50 most popular domains visited by all users, initially
set to zero) and sets the bit to one for the user if the cor-
responding domain is found in the user’s request stream.
Our privacy goal is to challenge re-identification, ensuring
that the vector maps at each resolver for different users are
similar for several ( 𝑘>1) users.
Figure 2 shows the cumulative distribution function (CDF)
of k-anonymity, averaged across resolvers, for different shard-
ing values. No sharding provides the baseline and has the
lowest level of k-anonymity with k-values of 1, i.e., unique
4We ran our analysis over a window of different days in the two-week
period and obtained similar results.
4Figure 2: K-anonymity values of the set of users with
different sharding values.
profiles, for over 88% of users. This is consistent with previ-
ous findings on the uniqueness of browsing histories [ 10,51].
A sharding value of 2, that is when a user’s request stream
is sharded across two resolvers, drops the set of users that
can be re-identify to 79%; the maximum sharding value of
8 in this analyzes reduces this to 49%. A concern with high
sharding values is that while relying on more resolvers may
improve improve k-anonymity, it also increases the chance
of finding an under-performing resolver which can impact
the user’s average resolution time. We illustrate this and
discuss Ónoma response in Sec. 4.3.
4.2.2 Popular Request Insertion. Domain specific shard-
ing, while clearly useful, has limited impact on k-anonymity.
Ónoma further improves the k-anonymity of users by adap-
tively inserting popular requests on a users’ DNS request
stream based on its uniqueness. The more distinctive the
request streams, the higher the fraction of popular DNS re-
quest streams needed to make it similar (higher 𝑘) to other
users’ request streams.5
Our current implementation inserts a number, an “inser-
tion factor”, of popular domains randomly sampled from the
top50 most popular sites,6for every unique domain in the
users’ request stream. We consider a domain as unique if it
is not part of the top500 most popular sites. The approach is
clearly independent of both the specific list and the subsets
(top50 and top500) we use.
To analyze the privacy benefits of popular request inser-
tion, we follow the same approach as in our evaluation of
sharding, and apply our insertion algorithm with different
values of the insertion factor 𝑓. As before, each recursive
resolver stores a bit vector per user, recomputed for each
value of 𝑓as insertion causes an addition of requests to the
5Ónoma lets users to direct truly distinctive or otherwise problematic do-
mains to an Oblivious DNS [62, 68], thus limiting its performance impact.
6We exclude a configurable blacklist of domains.users’ request streams. Each resolver, as before, sets the bit
to one for a given user if it sees the corresponding domain
in the user’s request stream.
Figure 3: K-anonymity values for different insertion
factors and a sharding value of 2.
Figure 3 shows the CDF of k-anonymity values for differ-
ent insertion factors (no insertion and insertion factors of 1,
2 and 3) and sharding value of 2. The figure shows that, even
for the lowest sharding value, an insertion factor of 2 results
in k-anonymity larger than 2 for over 98% of users. Insertion
factors of 1, 2 and 3, yield k-anonymity larger than two for
79%, 98% and 100% of users respectively. With a sharding
value of 8 (not shown), increasing the insertion values by
the same degree yields 2-anonymity for 86%, 99% and 100%
with insertion factors of 1, 2 and 3.
Figure 4 shows the benefit of higher sharding values for
a given insertion factor. For an insertion value of 3, shard-
ing values of 2 and 8 increase the number of users with
2-anonymity to 100% (and 4-anonymity by 53% of users).
The insertion of popular requests comes at the cost of
additional requests. Even for a fixed insertion factor, the
number of additional requests inserted will vary as this is
a function of the uniqueness of a user’s request stream. We
estimated the mean overhead (and standard deviations) of
different insertion factors for users in our dataset. Table 1
summarizes this overhead, as percentage of bytes added to
a user’s request stream, for three different insertion factors
– 1, 2 and 3. For these factors, the average overhead ranges
from 20.27% to 42.29%. Given that DNS is responsible for
less than 0.1% of total traffic volume [ 63], even the highest
overhead should minimally impact network load.
Ónoma uses a combination of popular request insertion and
domain specific sharding to achieve k-anonymity for a large
number of users, with relatively low overhead, while avoid-
ing other potential costs of centralization. Figure 4 shows
the combined effect of sharding and insertion in the distri-
bution of k-anonymity values across all users in our dataset
5Table 1: Privacy overhead for insertion factors.
Insertion Factor Mean (%) Std Dev
1 20.27 3.91
2 33.37 5.33
3 42.29 5.89
for an insertion factor of 3. Sharding over 4 resolvers with
an insertion factor of 3 yields 2-anonymity for over 100% of
users (and 4-anonymity for ≈60% of users).
Figure 4: K-anonymity values of users in our dataset
with insertion factor of 3.
4.3 Performance and Third-party DNS
Despite the global scale of many of these DNS services’ in-
frastructures [ 18], not all regions are equally covered by all
services. For specific locales, a particular third-party DNS
service may not have nearby servers to offer users, or have
fewer or farther away servers than a different service. This
can negatively impact both DNS resolution times and web
QoE [ 53] for users of the many CDNs that continue to rely
on DNS for replica selection, translating into lower engage-
ment [44] and potential loss of revenue [71].
To illustrate the extent to which the best DNS service
is location specific, we measure the DNS resolution times
with different DNS services in different countries. We se-
lect Argentina, Germany, India and the US; one country in
each of the top four continents in terms of Internet users
(Asia, North America, Europe, South America). In each lo-
cale, we determine the performance of three popular services
– Google, Quad9 and Cloudflare – as well as two regional
DNS services. For each country, we select the top50 sites and
issue multiple DNS requests (three) for each of the resources
included in those pages. We record the minimum TTFB from
the three repeated runs to ignore any transient spikes in the
latency. To ensure we are assigned to the correct resolver forclients in each specific country, we use a VPN (NordVPN)
with servers in the selected countries.
Figure 5 plots the CDFs of the resolution time for popular
resources in two of these countries, India and the US (full
set of graphs in §A). The resolution times of all resources,
for each DNS provider in a country, are plotted relative to
the DNS service performing best in the average case. Service
resolution times are relative to Quad9 in the US and to Cloud-
flare in India. We can see that in the median case, Google
performs as well as Cloudflare but Regional2 performs 40ms
worse than Cloudflare and Regional1 performs 87ms worse
than Cloudflare in India. In the US, Regional 1, Regional2
and Cloudflare have a difference of less than 10ms from the
best resolver(Quad9) whereas Google performs 25ms worse
than Quad9(for the 50th percentile).
(a) IN
 (b) US
Figure 5: DNS resolution times of individual, public
DoH and DNS providers in IN and the US relative
to the best performing DNS service in each country
(Cloudflare for IN and Quad9 for the US).
Figure 6 is a bump graph that summarizes the rankings
of the evaluated services, based on DNS resolution times,
across countries. Each service is associated with a differently
colored line. The different lines change positions as the as-
sociated service changes rank positions between countries.
The plot clearly illustrates that the ranking among DNS ser-
vices varies widely across locales7. Figure 5 illustrates the
differences in relative resolution times using Germany and
the US as examples (full set of graphs in §A). While Quad9
has the best resolution times in the US, Google ranks the
lowest. On the other hand, Cloudflare has the best resolution
times in India while Google performs second to the best. The
maximum (average) Kendall tau distance8between rankings
is 0.6 (0.37) clearly showing that there is no bestDNS service
for every location.
7We repeated this measurement over a period of a week and noticed that
the ranking changed over time as well
8The Kendall tau rank distance is a metric, ranging form 0 to 1, that counts
the number of pairwise disagreements between two ranking lists.
6Table 2: Regional DNS resolvers IP references.
Countries Regional 1 Regional 2
AR 190.151.144.21 200.110.130.194
DE 46.182.19.48 159.69.114.157
IN 182.71.213.139 111.93.163.56
US 208.67.222.222 208.67.220.220
Figure 6: A bump graph of DNS resolution times rank-
ing across countries (Regional DNS services in Ta-
ble 2). The maximum (avg) Kendall tau distance be-
tween rankings is 0.6 (0.37) showing that there is no
bestDNS service for every location.
The differences in performance across DNS services means
that sharding requests will result in high performance vari-
ability. To illustrate this we plot CDFs of the resolution time
for popular resources in different countries using different
DNS services and basic sharding. Figure 7 shows the reso-
lution times for each service relative to the best performing
resolver in Germany (full set of graphs in §A). The figures
clearly show that the resolution times of sharding in each
locale are affected by the worst performing DNS service in
a locale (Regional1 service in Germany) thereby increasing
the resolution times of sharding in comparison to the better
performing DNS services.
Domain specific sharding, while improving privacy, will
most likely not improve performance variability as all queries
belonging to a given domain could be assigned to a randomly
selected (potentially the slowest/fastest for the locale) DNS
service and the association persists for all resolution request
of the associated domain.
4.3.1 Racing. Ónoma addresses this potential problem by
using resolution races [ 69] that place DNS services in compe-
tition with each other. For each DNS request, Ónoma uses a
configurable number of DNS resolvers and issues the same re-
quest to each of them simultaneously, returning to the client
the first response from the first resolver that successfully
resolves the query addressing the problem of high latency
caused by latency variance. This redundancy comes with
negligible cost on bandwidth for potentially significant im-
provements on resolution times.
(a) DE
Figure 7: DNS resolution times of individual, public
DoH and DNS providers and sharding in Germany rel-
ative to the best performing DNS service (Quad9).
A potential issue of racing DNS services is the associated
tradeoff between privacy and performance. Racing a larger
number of DNS services increases the chances of finding the
bestresolver for that request and locale, but also increases
the fraction of the user’s DNS request stream seen by any
particular service.
To illustrate this tradeoff, we conduct an experiment mea-
suring the performance and request stream exposure of dif-
ferent racing configurations. We shard 100 resources, in the
top50 sites in the US, across different DNS providers. We issue
resolution requests for these resources to a randomly selected
resolver, and run races between two and three resolvers for
each resolution request. Table 3 presents a summary of these
results.
Table 3: Resolution times with Ónoma running no
resolution races, racing 2 and racing 3 resolvers, and
the associated percentage of requests each resolver re-
ceives.
Resol Time Request %
Mean Std Dev Max Avg
No Racing 42.22 38.13 20.34 12.5
Racing 2 25.83 12.42 28.10 25.0
Racing 3 21.34 6.53 42.31 37.5
The table show the performance advantages of racing.
Just racing two resolvers offers a percentage improvement
of 38.8%, while racing three provides an additional 17.88%
improvement on resolution time.9
9A reminder of the power of two random choices [49].
7Table 3 also show the tradeoff posed by increasing the
number of raced resolvers showing the percentage increase
(maximum and average) of the DNS request stream exposed
by each of these strategies to the different resolvers. The
maximum percentage of requests seen by each resolver in-
creases from 20.34%, with no racing , to 28.10% when racing
2 resolvers and 42.31% when racing 3 resolvers. Racing 2
resolvers achieves the best balance between privacy and
performance in our analysis and we set this as the default
configuration of Ónoma.
Finally, we also show the tradeoff between privacy and
performance across different DNS variants, such as DNS
over Tor, our ISP DNS, third-party DNS services, sharding
and Ónoma. Figure 8 shows box plots of resolution times (x
axis) for each DNS variant and the y-axis shows the privacy
gain for each DNS variant in terms of the percentage of
users that have at least 2-anonymity. The figure shows that
DNS over Tor gives the maximum privacy but significantly
worse resolution times, whereas ISP DNS while providing the
best performance compromises on privacy significantly. We
show that sharding improves 2-anonymity but by randomly
distributing requests across popular DNS providers it can
also significantly hurt performance. Ónoma, on the other
hand, gives the best privacy and performance for users.
Figure 8: Privacy and/or Performance. Average DNS
resolution times and corresponding 2-anonymity val-
ues of different DNS variants and Ónoma.
4.3.2 Direct Resolution. Even if certain third-party DNS
services result in faster resolution time for their users, the
same users can still experience worsening Web QoE, de-
pending on the specific deployment of the DNS services and
popular CDNs infrastructures in their region, and the map-
ping policies of these CDNs. Differences in relative distance
between the users and their recursive DNS resolvers can
result in poor mapping of a user to a CDN replica server and
higher delays in getting objects hosted by those replicas.
Figure 9: Relative popularity of CDNs in top50 Re-
gional sites in Argentina, Germany, India and the US.
The popularity of CDNs varies across locales. Fig-
ure 9 shows the relative popularity of different CDNs per
country. Each cluster represents a country and each bar indi-
cates the number of resources, from the top50 regional sites,
hosted on a particular CDN. Clearly, the relative ranking
of CDNs as host to the most poular resources varies across
locales. For instance Germany’s popular sites and resources
seem to be preferentially hosted on Fastly (44% resources)
whereas, the other three countries rely primarily – although
to different degrees – on Akamai (ranging from 44% to 50%).
Additionally Amazon has relatively better presence in the
US, but not in the other three countries.
User’s QoE is impacted by the choice of DNS service
depending on the locale. To evaluate how users’ QoE in
different locales for content hosted on different CDNs varies
with the choice of DNS service, we then conduct an exper-
iment measuring time-to-first-byte (TTFB) as a proxy for
Web QoE. TTFB gives the minimum response time for the
content obtained from the CDN replica and thus measures
the effectiveness of the CDN mapping. For this experiment,
we use resources from the top50 regional sites hosted on the
most popular CDN in each country (Fig. 9).
We load each resource three times using Google’s light-
house [ 30] for different (CDN, country) combinations using
the same VPN service and record the minimum TTFB for
each resource. We use the minimum value to ignore any
transient spikes in TTFB measurements.
From the recorded TTFB measurements with each resolver
for the (CDN, country) combination, we find the best per-
forming resolver, in the median case, and calculate the per-
centage difference in TTFB of each DNS service from this
baseline for the given CDN and locale.
Figure 10 plots a CDF of this difference in TTFB. The fig-
ure shows that different DNS providers result in different
TTFB for resources hosted on different CDNs, across differ-
ent locales. Cloudflare which performs worst in Germany
for content hosted on Fastly, shows 10% higher TTFB in
the median case compared to the best service (Regional1)
8(a) AR,Akamai
 (b) DE,Fastly
 (c) IN,Akamai
 (d) US,Akamai
Figure 10: Percentage Difference in TTFB of individual, public DoH and DNS resolvers per country, relative to
the best DNS service in that locale, across different countries. Cloudflare which performs worst in Germany for
content hosted on Fastly, shows 10% greater TTFB in the median case compared to the best service (Regional).
(a) Akamai
(b) Amazon
Figure 11: DNS resolvers ranking by TTFB for re-
sources hosted on different CDN across different coun-
tries. The maximum (avg) Kendall tau distance be-
tween rankings is 0.4 (0.27) for Akamai and 0.7 (0.53)
for Amazon.
and Google (with the worst TTFB in IN,Akamai) shows 1%
higher TTFB in the median case compared to the best service
(Regional2).
Figure 11 is a bump graph further highlighting this point
(full set of graphs in §A). The figure ranks DNS resolvers by
TTFB for resources hosted on different CDNs across different
countries and highlight their relative changes in ranks. For
instance, Google gives the worst QoE for content hosted
on Akamai in the US and India (even though Google gives
second best DNS resolution times in India as shown in Fig. 6),
but results in best QoE for content hosted on Amazon in
Argentina (where it has the second worst resolution time asseen from Fig. 6). This reiterates that the user’s web QoE in
fact depends on the specific deployment of the DNS services
and popular CDNs infrastructures in their region, and the
mapping policies of these CDNs.
To address the QoE impact of using different third-party
DNS resolvers and CDNs in different locales, Ónoma combines
racing with direct resolution [ 53] when resolving content that
is hosted by a CDN. It uses the response from the fastest
DNS resolver for direct resolution. Direct resolution com-
bines the best aspect of interative and recursive DNS resolu-
tion to obtain improved CDN redirections for each resource.
It leverages the cache of a recursive resolver to efficiently
map a Canonical Name (CNAME) to an authoritative name
server, but directly contacts the CDN’s authoritative server
to obtain a precise redirection for the client. This gives the
CDN’s authoritative server better information of the clients’
actual network location and allows for a better replica as-
signment [53].
To understand the aggregated benefits of the combined
approach, we compare the performance of Ónoma with that
of sharding. Since sharding, by itself, randomly distributes
DNS requests across a set of public DNS servers, the resulting
performance matches the average performance of public
DNS services in each region and can serve as a baseline for
comparison. We load each resource, of the regional top50
sites three times and compute the minimum TTFB.
Figure 12 presents a CDN of the percentage difference
in TTFB for both Ónoma and sharding, relative to the best
performing DNS service for a particular (CDN, country) com-
bination (complete graphs in §A). The figure includes plots
for Argentina for content hosted on Akamai. The graphs
show the clear dominance of Ónoma over sharding across
CDNs in both locales, with a median improvement of 9.34%
in Argentina with Akamai CDN.
9(a) AR,Akamai
Figure 12: Percentage Difference in TTFB of Sharding
and Ónoma relative to the best DNS service across the
US and Argentina.
4.4 Overview
Ónoma lets users leverage the benefits of third-party DNS
services while(𝑖)providing improved k-anonymity, via a
combination of sharding and popular domain insertion, (𝑖𝑖)
consistently better resolution times than individual DNS
resolvers, independently of the locale, by running resolution
races, and(𝑖𝑖𝑖)and without impacting users’ web experience
via direct resolution.
Figure 13: Ónoma interaction with DNS resolvers.
Pseudocode 1 provides a high-level description of Ónoma’s
DNS request resolution process, while Fig. 13 illustrates its
interaction with the different DNS resolvers.
5 IMPLEMENTATION
We have implemented Ónoma as an end-system resolver
running on users’ machines. Ónoma is implemented in 3,510
lines of Go code, excluding comments, and is designed asPseudocode 1 Resolution process followed by Ónoma.
forDNS resolution do
ifdomain ∉DomainMap then
Run races among resolution
Add domain and winner resolver to DomainMap
end if
ifdomain ∉popular domains then
forinsertion-factor do
Sample a popular domain
Insert the domain in request stream
end for
end if
ifCDN-ized domain then
Direct resolution for domain
end if
end for
a background service. It is readily deployable and easy-to-
install on any operating system and neither requires any
modification to the user’s operating system nor coordination
with existing CDN or DNS services. The implementation in-
cludes a light-weight, client-side application (under 500MB)
hosting a simple user interface to let users install, start and
stop the service and modify default configuration settings
such as changing the set of DNS resolvers used for sharding
and racing, and the request insertion factor. Ónoma main-
tains a set of DNS services which includes popular public
encrypted services – Google, Cloudflare and Quad9 – as
well as a set of regional public DNS services available at the
clients’ location.
Ónoma also implements a measurement module to per-
form experimentation on the clients’ side. Ónoma uses the
collected results to indentify optimal default values for shard-
ing, racing and insertion, as well as dynamically select the
best DNS resolvers for the user’s locale.
6 END-TO-END EVALUATION
In this section, we present results from an end-to-end evalu-
ation of Ónoma, combining all the design features discussed.
In our evaluation we compare Ónoma’s performance with
that of different third-party DNS services, across locales and
CDNs. We use TTFB, as the performance metric for compar-
ison, and the resources hosted on the top50 regional sites, as
a proxy of users’ QoE in those regions.
The reported results were collected by the measurement
module that is part of Ónoma, which runs all the experiments
in the background (§5). We set up the evaluation measure-
ments in the selected locations using a VPN service, using
different DNS settings including public DoH resolvers, re-
gional resolvers and Ónoma. We focus on three CDN services
– Akamai, Amazon and Fastly – and the resources they host.
For each DNS setting and (CDN, country) combination,
the measurement module loads the set of resources with
Google Lighthouse. It records the minimum TTFB from three
10repeated runs, finds the best performing resolver, in the me-
dian case, and calculates the percentage difference in TTFB
between each DNS service and the indentified best DNS
service for a given CDN and locale.
Figure 14 presents boxplots of the performance of different
DNS services and Ónoma (full set of graphs in §A). The plots
are relative to the best performing resolver for a given CDN
and locale (e.g., Cloudflare for Akamai in the US). Boxplots
clearly show the median and the first and third quartiles, as
well as the minimum and maximum values (upper and lower
whiskers) of the collected TTFB data. The outliers of the data
are shown by circles above and below the whiskers.
The figure shows that the performance of Ónoma is ei-
ther best, or comparable to the average performance of the
public DNS services. Ónoma gives consistently a lower inter-
quartile range (third quartile - first quartile), indicated by the
colored boxes in the plot (blue box for other providers and
green for Ónoma), for most cases. Median performance of
Ónoma is better than the best Service for most CDN, country
combinations or at least comparable to all the DNS services
tested for that locale. We see significant performance im-
provement with content hosted on Amazon in Germany and
with content hosted on Akamai in India and the US. For
instance, the inter-quartile range (IQR) of Ónoma is 18.4%
in the US, for Akamai’s content, but for other DNS services
it ranges between 18.7% to 24.8%. For Akamai’s content in
India, Ónoma gives an IQR of 1.7% and for other DNS ser-
vices the IQR ranges between 1.7% to 2.5%. Note that Ónoma
attains this for any combination of CDN and locale and with
high values of k-anonymity (§4.2).
7 RELATED WORK
Our work builds on an extensive body of research on char-
acterizing and improving DNS performance, privacy and its
impact on users’ QoE. For over two decades since Mock-
apetris [ 50], DNS has been the subject of several measure-
ment studies in the wild [ 2,38,42,45,48,53,64,72]. Much of
this work has focused on caching, performance and scalabil-
ity across locales (e.g., [ 42,45], and the interaction between
DNS and content distribution (e.g., [48, 53, 64]).
The appearance of open DNS resolvers, offered by compa-
nies such as Google and OpenDNS, and the follow-up EDNS-
client-subnet DNS extension (ECS) [ 24], motivated prior
work to understand these services’ relative performance [ 2]
and their potential impact on QoE [ 28,53,57]. These and
other related efforts have shown that user-mapping accu-
racy is worsening, leading to increased delays, lower engage-
ment [44] and revenue loss [71].
Despite some adoption of anycast [ 4,17] and the promise
of CDN-ISP collaborations [ 3,55,57,73], many CDNs con-
tinue to rely on DNS-based server redirection. Otto et al. [ 53]proposed direct resolution as an alternative end-user approach
to address the impact of remote DNS resolvers on Web QoE
despite the limited adoption of ECS. Direct resolution lever-
ages the recursive DNS server to obtain the authoritative
server for CDN-hosted content, but have the client itself
do the final resolution by directly contacting the author-
itative server operated by the CDN. This yields better lo-
calization and, thus QoE performance, without additional
privacy costs [ 54]. Ónoma adopts direct resolution, including
caching of the CDN-run authoritative name server to avoid
additional delay in resolution (Sec.4).
Beyond performance, increasing concerns about user pri-
vacy has served as motivation for new DNS techniques and
services. Recent work evaluates the relative performance
and QoE impact of DNS-over-Encryption variants [ 13,37],
and assess their implementations, deployment configura-
tions [ 25,47] and policy implications [ 27,35]. Deccio et
al.[25] also show that only 0.15% of open resolvers and a
negligible number of authoritative servers support DNS pri-
vacy, and those that do comes from a handful of popular
DNS providers such as Cloudflare, Facebook, Google, Quad9.
Although the benefits provided by DNS-over-Encryption
against certain threats are clear, there are significant pri-
vacy concerns associated with the need to trust the DNS
operator with the entire request trace of users. Schmitt et
al. [62] proposes Oblivious DNS to address centralization, by
obfuscating the queries that the recursive resolver sees by
adding its own authoritative ODNS resolver. A few closely
related efforts [ 8,34,36] have proposed and evaluated the
use of DNS request sharding to mitigate the privacy con-
cerns from exposing all DNS resolution to a single DNS-
over-Encryption service, potentially grouping requests per
domain to avoid distribution of similar names to different
resolvers [ 8]. Ónoma builds on this idea (Sec. 3) and shows
the degree of additional privacy it provides by avoiding DNS-
based user-reidentification through domain specific sharding
and by adaptively inserting popular requests on a user DNS
request stream based on the uniqueness of a requested do-
main. Ónoma also avoids the potential performance costs
of sharding by dynamically selecting the different DNS ser-
vices to use, depending on the user’s location, and racing
resolvers [ 69]. Other recent works have questioned the actual
privacy benefits of encrypted DNS and proposed solutions
to address some of them (e.g., [ 15,65]) which could be easily
adopted by Ónoma.
The design of Ónoma, leverages an extensive body of work
to introduce, to the best of our knowledge, the first end-user
DNS resolver to take advantage of the privacy and perfor-
mance benefits of centralized DNS services while avoiding
the associated costs.
11(a) AR,Akamai
 (b) IN,Akamai
 (c) US,Akamai
(d) DE,Akamai
 (e) DE,Amazon
 (f) DE,Fastly
Figure 14: Performance of Ónoma and of individual, public DoH and DNS resolvers per country, relative to the
best DNS service across CDNs and countries. The top set focuses on one CDN, Akamai, across countries while
the bottom set focuses on different CDNs in Germany. The graph for Akamai in Germany is included only once.
Ónoma offers consistently better performance across CDN and country combinations.
8 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this section we discuss limitations of our approach and its
evaluation. For starters, we focus on challenging attempts
at user re-identification by third-party DNS resolvers, mo-
tivated by the findings of Olejnik et al. [ 51] and Bird et
al. [10]. Due to the privileged position of DNS resolvers
in the resolution path, the best privacy a user could expect is
in terms of k-anonymity. We adopt the user identification ap-
proach and follow the evaluation model and settings of prior
work [ 10,51]. We do not claim this to be the only approach
to (re)identify users, but we posit that the combination of
popular domain insertion and sharding will complicate the
task of user identification by most third-party resolvers. The
opportunistic use of Oblivious DNS [ 62,68] for resolving
truly distinctive or otherwise problematic domains further
challenge re-identification while limiting the performance
impact of the technique.
In this work we opted for Alexa’s regional ranking as
this offers country specific rankings available to the com-
munity, and includes in its listing regional domain aliases
for instance yahoo.com.jp and yahoo.com. Other popular
rankings, such as Tranco compile their regional rankings by
computing an intersection global ranking and the domains
appearing in the country-specific Chrome User ExperienceReport list. These rankings, therefore, miss all region spe-
cific domain aliases. While we are exploring the use similar-
web’s [ 9] regional ranking for future work, we note that our
analysis and evaluation of Ónoma is largely independent of
specific website rankings.
Finally, we also note that the dataset used for our evalua-
tion, collected from our university network for a two-week
period, can be biased both in terms of the population and
the time window over which it was collected. In future work,
we are exploring ways to expand our evaluation dataset.
9 CONCLUSION
Third-party recursive DNS services offer a number of valu-
able features, from high resolution performance to improved
privacy through encrypted and Oblivious DNS. At the same
time, these DNS variants are operated by a handful of providers
such as Google, Amazon and Cloudflare, strengthening a con-
cerning trend toward DNS centralization and its implications,
ranging from user privacy and QoE, to system resilience and
market competition. We presented Ónoma , an end-system
DNS resolver that let users take advantage of third-party
DNS services without sacrificing privacy or performance.
Our evaluation shows the benefits of Ónoma across locales,
with different DNS services, content providers, and CDNs.
12REFERENCES
[1]Abhishta Abhishta, Roland van Rijswijk-Deij, and Lambert Nieuwen-
huis. 2019. Measuring the Impact of a Successful DDoS Attack on the
Customer Behaviour of Managed DNS Service Providers. 48, 5 (2019).
[2]Bernhard Ager, Wolfgang Mühlbauer, Georgios Smaragdakis, and Steve
Uhlig. 2010. Comparing DNS resolvers in the wild.
[3]R. Alimi, R. Penno, and Y. Yang. 2011. ALTO Protocol . RFC 7285. IETF.
[4]H.A. Alzoubi, S. Lee, M. Rabinovich, and J.V. Merwe O. Spatscheck.
2008. Anycast CDNS revisited.
[5]Anonymous. 2012. The Collateral Damage of Internet Censorship by
DNS Injection. 42, 3 (July 2012).
[6]Anonymous. 2014. The NSA and GCHQ’s QUANTUMTHEORY Hack-
ing Tactics. The Intercept (2014). https://theintercept.com/document/
2014/03/12/nsa-gchqs-quantumtheory-hacking-tactics/
[7]Jari Arkko. 2019. Centralized Architectures in Internet Infrastruc-
ture. Network Working Group – Internet Draft draft-arkko-arch-
infrastructure-centralisation-00. IETF.
[8]Jari Arkko, Martin Thomson, and Ted Hardie. 2020. Selecting Resolvers
from a Set of Distributed DNS Resolvers . Internet-Draft. Internet Engi-
neering Task Force.
[9]Subin B. 2021. 7 Best Alexa.com Alternatives for Website Rank-
ing and Traffic Analysis. (Dec 2021). https://beebom.com/
best-alexa-com-alternatives/
[10] Sarah Bird, Ilana Segall, and Martin Lopatka. 2020. Replication: Why
We Still Can’ Browse in Peace: On the Uniqueness and Reidentifiability
of Web Browsing Histories. In Proc. of USENIX SOUPS .
[11] Stéphane Bortzmeyer. 2015. DNS Censorship (DNS
Lies) As Seen By RIPE Atlas. RIPE Labs. (December
2015). https://labs.ripe.net/Members/stephane_bortzmeyer/
dns-censorship-dns-lies-seen-by-atlas-probes.
[12] Stephane Bortzmeyer. 2015. DNS Privacy Considerations . RFC 7626.
IETF.
[13] Timm Bottger, Felix Cuadrado, Gianni Antichi, Elder Leao Fernandes,
Garth Tyson, Igancio Castro, and Steve Uhlig. 2019. An Empirical
Study of the Cost of DNS-over-HTTPS.
[14] Ilker Nadi Bozkurt, Anthony Aguirre, Balakrishnan Chandrasekaran,
P. Brighten Godfrey, Gregory Laughlin, Bruce Maggs, and Ankit Singla.
2017. Why is the Internet so slow?!
[15] Jonas Bushart and Christian Rossow. 2020. Padding Ain’t Enough:
Assessing the Privacy Guarantees of Encrypted DNS. In Proc. of USENIX
FOCI .
[16] Michael Butkiewicz, Harsha V. Madhyastha, and Vyas Sekar. 2011.
Understanding Website Complexity: Measurements, Metrics, and Im-
plications.
[17] M. Calder, A. Flavel, Ethan Katz-Bassett, Ratul Mahajan, and J. Padhye.
2015. Analyzing the performance of an anycast CDN.
[18] Matt Calder, Xun Xun Fan, Zi Hu, Ethan Katz-Bassett, John Heidemann,
and Ramesh Govindan. 2013. Mapping the Expansion of Google’s
Serving Infrastructure.
[19] F. Chen, R. K. Sitaraman, and M. Torres. 2015. End-User Mapping:
Next Generation Request Routing for Content Delivery.
[20] Mariengracia Chirinos, Andrés Azpúrua, Leonid Evdokimov, and Maria
Xynou. 2016. The State of Internet Censorship in Venezuela. Open
Observatory of Network Interference (OONI) Blog. (August 2016).
https://ooni.org/post/venezuela-internet-censorship/.
[21] CloudFlare. 2021. Running a DNS over HTTPS client . Cloudflare Docs.
CloudFlare. https://developers.cloudflare.com/1.1.1.1/dns-over-https/
cloudflared-proxy.
[22] Matt Colder, Xun Fan, and Liang Zhu. 2019. A Cloud Provider’s View
of EDNS Client-Subnet Adoption.[23] David Coldewey. 2020. Cloudflare DNS goes down, taking a large
piece of the Internet with it. TechCrunch Blog. (July 2020). http:
//tcrn.ch/3pbDJzL.
[24] C. Contavalli, W. Gaast, D. Lawrence, and W. Kumari. [n. d.]. Client
subnet in DNS queries . RFC 7871. IETF.
[25] Casey Deccio and Jacob Davis. 2019. DNS Privacy in Practice and
Preparation.
[26] Frank Denis and Yecheng Fu. 2013. DNSCrypt Website.
https://dnscrypt.info/. (2013).
[27] IETF (dprive) Working Group. 2014. DNS PRIVate Exchange (dprive)
Working Group Charter. https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/dprive/
charter/. (October 2014).
[28] Xun Fan, Ethan Katz-Bassett, and John Heidemann. 2015. Assessing
affinity between users and CDN sites.
[29] Google. 2009. Introducing Google Public DNS. Google Code
Blog. (December 2009). http://googlecode.blogspot.com/2009/12/
introducing-google-public-dns-new-dns.html
[30] Google. 2022. Google Lighthouse. (2022). https://chrome.google.com/
webstore/detail/lighthouse/blipmdconlkpinefehnmjammfjpmpbjk?
hl=en
[31] Benjamin Greschbach, Tobia Pulls, Laura M. Roberts, Phillip Winter,
and Nick Feamster. 2017. The Effect of DNS on Tor’s Anonymity.
[32] Christian Grothoff, Matthias Wachs, Monika Ermert, and Jacob Appel-
baum. 2015. NSA’s MORECOWBELL: Knell for DNS. (2015). https:
//cryptome.org/2015/01/MORECOWBELL-Analysis-Grothoff-etal.
pdf.
[33] Shuai Hao, Yubao Zhang, Haining Wang, and Angelos Stavrou. 2018.
End-Users Get Maneuvered: Empirical Analaysis of Redirection Hi-
jacking in Content Delivery Networks.
[34] Nguyen Phong Hoang, Ivan Lin, Seyedhamed Ghavamnia, and Michalis
Polychronakis. 2020. K-resolver: Towards Decentralizing Encrypted
DNS Resolution. In Proc. of MADWeb .
[35] Paul Hoffman. 2020. Local and Internet Policy Implications of Encrypted
DNS. Technical Report OCTO-003v3. ICANN. https://www.icann.org/
en/system/files/files/octo-003-30apr20-en.pdf.
[36] Austin Hounsel, Kevin Borgolte, Paul Schmitt, and Nick Feamster. 2020.
D-DNS: Towards Re-Decentralizing the DNS. (February 2020).
[37] Austin Hounsel, Kevin Borgolte, Paul Schmitt, Jordan Holland, and
Nick Feamster. 2019. Analyzing the Costs (and Benefits) of DNS, DoT,
and DoH for the Modern Web.
[38] C. Huitema and S. Weerahandi. 2000. Internet Measurements: the
Rising Tide and the DNS Snag. In Proc. of ITC Specialist Seminar on
Internet Traffic Measurement and Modeling .
[39] Geoff Huston. 2019. DNS Resolver Centrality. APNIC Blog. (September
2019). https://labs.apnic.net/?p=1260.
[40] Geoff Huston and Joao Luis Silva Dama. 2017. DNS Privacy. Internet
Protocol Journal 20, 1 (March 2017).
[41] Internet Society. 2020. Consolidation in the Internet Economy . Global
Internet Report. Internet Society. https://future.internetsociety.org/
2019/
[42] Jaeyeong Jung, Emil Sit, Hari Balakrishnan, and Robert Morris. 2001.
DNS performance and the effectiveness of caching.
[43] E. Kinnear, T. Pauly, C. Wood, and P. McManus. 2019. Adaptive DNS:
Improving Privacy and Name Resolution . Network Working Group –
Internet Draft. IETF.
[44] S. S. Krishnan and R. K. Sitaraman. 2012. Video Stream Quality Im-
pacts Viewer Behavior: Inferring Causality using Quasi-Experimental
Designs.
[45] Richard Liston, Sridhar Srinivasan, and Ellen Zegura. 2002. Diversity
in DNS performance measures.
[46] Yabin Liu, Han Hee Song, Ignacio Bermudez, Alan Mislove, Mario
Baldi, and Alok Tongaonkar. 2015. Identifying Personal Information
13in Internet Traffic.
[47] Chaoyi Lu, Baojun Liu anbd Zhou Li, Shuang Hao, Haixin Duan, Ming-
ming Zhang, Chunying Leng, Ying Liu, Zaifeng Zhang, and Jianping
Wu. 2019. An End-to-End, Large-Scale Measurement of DNS-over-
Encryption: How Far Have We Come?
[48] Z. M. Mao, C. D. Cranor, F. Douglis, M. Rabinovich, O. Spatscheck,
and J. Wang. 2002. A precise and efficient evaluation of the proximity
between web clients and their local DNS servers.
[49] Michael Mitzenmacher. 2001. The power of two choices in randomized
load balancing. 12, 10 (October 2001).
[50] Paul Mockapetris. 1987. Domain Names – Concepts and Facilities . RFC
1034. IETF.
[51] Lukasz Olejnik, Claude Castelluccia, and Artur Janc. 2012. Why Johnny
Can’t Browse in Peace: On the Uniqueness of Web Browsing History
Patterns. In Proc. of HotPETs .
[52] Oracle 2016. Oracle Cloud Infrastructure . Oracle. https://docs.oracle.
com/en-us/iaas/tools/oci-cli/3.7.2/oci_cli_docs/oci.html.
[53] John Otto and Mario Sánchez John Rula Fabián E. Bustamante. 2012.
Content delivery and the natural evolution of DNS: remote DNS trends,
performance issues and alternative solutions.
[54] John Otto, Mario Sánchez, John Rula, Ted Stein, and Fabián E. Busta-
mante. 2012. namehelp: intelligent client-side DNS resolution.
[55] I. Poese, B. Frank, G. Smaragdakis, S. Uhlig, A. Feldmann, and B. Maggs.
2012. Enabling Content-aware Traffic Engineering. 42, 5 (2012).
[56] Matthew Prince. 2019. Comment by Cloudflare CEO on Hacker News.
Hacker News. (May 2019). https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=
19828702.
[57] Enric Pujol, Ingmar Poese, Johannes Zerwas, Georgios Smaragdakis,
and Anja Feldmann. 2019. Steering hyper-giants’ traffic at scale.
[58] Quad9. 2009. DoH with Quad9 DNS Servers. Quad9 Blog. (July 2009).
https://www.quad9.net/doh-quad9-dns-servers/.
[59] Roxana Radu and Michael Hausding. 2020. Consolidation in the DNS
resolver market – how much, how fast, how dangerous? Journal of
Cyber Policy 5, 1 (February 2020), 46–64.
[60] Paul F. Roberts. 2005. Comcast suffers DNS outage, denies pharming
link. (Apr 2005). https://www.networkworld.com/article/2318771/
comcast-suffers-dns-outage--denies-pharming-link.html.
[61] John P. Rula and Fabián E. Bustamante. 2014. Behind the Curtain –
Cellular DNS and Content Replica Selection.
[62] Paul Schmitt, Anne Edmundson, Allison Manjin, and Nick Feamster.
2019. Oblivious DNS: Practical privacy for DNS queries. In Proc. on
Privacy Enhancing Technologies .
[63] Kyle Schomp, Mark Allman, and Michael Rabinovich. 2014. DNS
Resolvers Considered Harmful.
[64] A. Shaikh, R. Tewari, and M. Agrawal. 2001. On the effectiveness of
DNS-based server selection.
[65] Sandra Siby, M. Juárez, C. Díaz, N. Vallina-Rodriguez, and C. Troncoso.
2020. Encrypted DNS -> Privacy? A Traffic Analysis Perspective. In
Proc. of NDSS .
[66] Splunk Inc. [n. d.]. Splunk. ([n. d.]). https://www.splunk.com/.
[67] Jennifer Valentino-devries. 2019. Secret F.B.I. Subpoenas Scoop
Up Personal Data From Scores of Companies. (Sep 2019).
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/20/us/data-privacy-fbi.html?
smid=tw-nytimes&smtyp=cur.
[68] Tanya Verna and Sudheesh Singanamalla. 2020. Improving DNS Pri-
vacy with Oblivious DoH in 1.1.1.1. CloudFlare Blog. (December 2020).
https://blog.cloudflare.com/oblivious-dns/.
[69] Ashish Vulimiri, Oliver Michel, P. Brighten Godfrey, and Scott Shenker.
2012. More is Less: Reducing Latency via Redundancy.
[70] Synthia Wang, Kyle MacMillan, Brennan Schaffner, Nick Feamster,
and Marshini Chetty. 2021. A First Look at the Consolidation of DNS
and Web Hosting Providers. (October 2021).[71] Kathryn Whitenton. 2020. The Need for Speed, 23 Years Later. NN/g
Nielsen Norman Group Blog. (May 2020). https://www.nngroup.com/
articles/the-need-for-speed/.
[72] Craig E. Wills and Hao Shang. 2000. The Contribution of DNS Lookup
Costs to Web Object Retrieval . Technical Report WPI-CS-TR-00-12.
Worcester Polytechnic Institute.
[73] H. Xie, Y. R. Yang, A. Krishnamurthy, Y. G. Liu, and A. Silberschatz.
2008. P4P: Provider Portal for Applications.
[74] Maria Xynou, Arturo Filastò, Mahsa Alimardani, Sina Kouhi, Kyle
Bowen, Vmon, and Amin Sabeti. 2017. Internet Censorship in Iran:
Network Measurement Findings from 2014-2017. Open Observatory
of Network Interference (OONI) Blog. (September 2017). https://ooni.
org/post/iran-internet-censorship/.
14A APPENDIX
In this section we include the remaining graphs from our
motivation, system design and evaluation of Ónoma.
A.1 The importance of DNS for CDN
replica selection
Figure 15 shows the remaining graphs to illustrate the im-
portance of DNS for redirection. The client in the US is using
a local DNS resolver (cyan) and distant ones in Argentina
and India.
(a) Amazon
 (b) Fastly
Figure 15: Latency to assigned replica servers (/24) for
Amazon and Fastly for resources of top50 US websites.
Figure 16 shows the full set of the graphs to illustrate
the importance of DNS for replica selection for the client in
(a) Akamai
 (b) Amazon
(c) Fastly
Figure 16: Latency to assigned replica servers (/24) for
Akamai, Amazon CloudFront and Fastly for resources
of top50 German websites. The client in Germany uses
a recursive DNS resolvers local (cyan) and distant ones
in Sweden and India.
(a) AR
 (b) DE
Figure 17: DNS resolution times of individual, public
DoH and DNS providers in the Argentina and Ger-
many, relative to the best performing DNS service,
across each country.
Germany using a local DNS resolver (cyan) and distant ones
in Sweden and India.
A.2 Performance and Third-party DNS
Figure 17 shows the remaining graphs to show how resolu-
tion times of different resolvers varies in different locales.
A.3 Sharding Performance and
Third-party DNS
Figure 18 shows the remaining graphs to show that reso-
lution times of different resolvers and sharding varies in
different locales.
A.4 The Impact of CDN and DNS on Web
QoE across locales
Figure 19 shows the graph for the ranking of public and
regional DNS resolvers by TTFB for resources hosted on
Fastly in different locales.
A.5 End-to-end Evaluation of Ónoma
Figure 21 shows the remaining graphs for the end-to-end
evaluation of Ónoma, comparing Ónoma to other DNS providers
for content hosted on different CDNs across the locales.
15(a) US
 (b) AR
 (c) IN
Figure 18: DNS resolution times of individual, public DoH and DNS providers and sharding in the Argentina, India
and the US relative to the best performing DNS service, across each country.
Figure 19: DNS resolvers ranking by Time-to-First-
Byte for resources hosted on Fastly across different
countries.
(a) US,Amazon
 (b) US,Fastly
(c) AR,Amazon
 (d) AR,Fastly
Figure 20: Percentage Difference in Time-to-First-
Byte of Sharding and Ónoma relative to the best DNS
service across the US and Argentina. For every CDN,
country combination shown in the graph Ónoma per-
forms better than sharding.
(a) AR,Amazon
 (b) AR,Fastly
(c) IN,Amazon
 (d) IN,Fastly
(e) US,Amazon
 (f) US,Fastly
Figure 21: Performance of individual, public DoH and
DNS resolvers in each country and using Ónoma, rela-
tive to the best DNS service across different CDNs and
countries.
16