Revisiting the Second Law and Weak Cosmic
Censorship Conjecture in High-Dimensional
Charged-AdS Black Hole: an Additional
Assumption
Md Sabir AliID1∗, Hasan El MoumniID2†, Jamal KhallouID2‡, Karima
MasmarID3§ ¶
1Department of Physical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Kolkata,
Mohanpur, 741246, India.
2LPTHE, Physics Department, Faculty of Science, Ibn Zohr University, Agadir, Morocco.
3Laboratory of High Energy Physics and Condensed Matter HASSAN II University, Faculty of
Sciences Ain Chock, Casablanca, Morocco.
February 22, 2023
Abstract
The verication of the second law of black hole mechanics and the WCCC in the
context of enthalpy as mass of the black hole and its related thermodynamic proper-
ties has not been tested through a vast number of literature in the recent past. Such
studies are of great physical importance as they provide us with a large number of
information regarding the thermodynamics and the dynamics of AdS black hole sys-
tems. We invest the prior limited surveys of such analysis to investigate the WCCC for
theD- dimensional asymptotically AdS-charged black holes characterized by its mass
(M), electric charge ( Q), and AdS radius ( l) under the absorption of scalar particles
of chargeq. We examine the WCCC by analyzing the energy-momentum condition of
the electrically charged particles as absorbed by the black holes. We prove that the
conjecture is well veried irrespective of whether the initial black hole congurations
∗alimd.sabir3@gmail.com
†h.elmoumni@uiz.ac.ma (Corresponding author)
‡jamalkhallou@gmail.com
§karima.masmar@gmail.com
¶Authors are in alphabetical order.
1arXiv:2302.07026v2  [hep-th]  21 Feb 2023are extremal or non-extremal by changing its charge, the AdS radius, and their varia-
tions. We show that the rst law and the WCCC are valid for all spacetime dimensions
(D) independent of the choice of the parameters characterizing the black holes. But to
verify the second law in the extremal and non-extremal congurations one has to be
very cautious as it gets strongly aected by the choices of the values of the black hole
parameters and their variations. In other words, we use charged particle dynamics as
described by the Hamilton-Jacobi equation to obtain the energy-momentum relation
as the charged particle dropped into the higher dimensional charged AdS black hole
and verify the thermodynamic laws when the scalar charged particle gets absorbed by
the black holes and correspondingly the black hole neutralization in dierent manners.
Additionally, we further probe the validity of WCCC in such a black hole background.
In the context of the extended phase space, taking the grand canonical potential into
account allow us to obtain the missing information about the variation of the cosmo-
logical constant necessary to construct the extended phase space, namely the notion
of the black hole pressure, and which is absent in the previous literature so far.
Contents
1 Introduction 3
2 On a charged particle dynamics in the Charged Anti-de-Sitter black hole
background 5
2.1 The charged Anti-de-Sitter Black Hole thermodynamics: A succinct review of
the extended phase space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.2 An infalling particle in a black hole: Energy and momentum . . . . . . . . . 6
3 The second law of thermodynamics under dierent considerations 8
3.1 The rst assumption: internal energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.2 The second assumption: enthalpy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.3 The third assumption: grand potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4 The Weak cosmic censorship conjecture 15
5 Black hole neutralization 22
5.1 Isentropic neutralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.2 Eective entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.3 Isobar neutralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6 Constant electric potential absorption: Grand canonical description 37
27 Conclusion 45
1 Introduction
Because of the seminal work of Hawking [1], we realize that a black hole isn't just a celestial
object, but yet, a thermodynamic system. Just like the ordinary thermodynamic systems,
there are additionally, four laws for the black hole thermodynamic framework [2], which
are valid near the horizon. The signicance of black hole thermodynamics comes from the
discovery of a fascinating connection between theories of gravity, and quantum eld theory.
This bridge allows us to construct the rst brick in our understanding of a possible quantum
gravity theory.
Furthermore, the event horizon where the laws of the black hole thermodynamics are
dened, disguises the curvature singularity from the outside observers located at innity [3].
When the horizon is destroyed, the singularity turns into what is called a naked singularity.
At such a location, any physical law is no longer valid and it's broken [4]. Consequently,
the horizon is assumed to be stable according to the weak cosmic censorship conjecture
(WCCC). Despite the fact that it is generally accepted without demonstration procedure
that this conjecture applies to black holes, its validity should be tested. The validity test
can be realized by adding an electrically charged particle having its own energy-momentum
and is getting absorbed by the black hole [5]. As a result, a catastrophic countdown may
happen to the event horizon as the infalling charged particles are absorbed, the singularity
may disappear and it can become the naked one indicating the violation of the WCCC. If the
horizon survives to exist, it should hide the singularity behind and the WCCC is respected.
A lot of investigations regarding the enthalpy formalism have been proposed in the recent
past in order to suciently probe the quantum gravitational nature of the AdS black holes
[6{14]. Such studies have been emphasized and limited to the rst law and dimensional
verication of the Smarr-Gibbs-Duhem relation. However, the propositions regarding the
thermodynamics laws at the black hole horizon and the WCCC are still lacking concrete
analysis for the AdS spacetime. The rst two laws of the black hole mechanics and also
the WCCC were studied for the charged AdS black holes [15] and with an additional scalar
hair [16]. The rst law and the WCCC are not violated for such cases, whereas the second
law is found to be violated in the near extremal case although it is held for the extremal
cases for particular choices of the charge parameter of the electrically charged particles that
are absorbed by the black holes. Such studies have also been extended to the Born-Infeld-
AdS [17], low-dimensions black hole models [18], and the Kerr-Newman-AdS black holes. In
the Kerr-Newman-AdS black holes too [19] we have the WCCC to be valid and the second
law might be valid or violated if the charge parameter or the spin parameter are varied. As a
limiting case when the charge parameter Q= 0, we can refer our reader to [20], for a similar
analysis of the Kerr-AdS black holes. More interestingly, the WCCC is found not to be held
in the dimensionally extended near-extremal AdS black holes in f(R) gravity [21].
Concretely speaking, numerous research activities have been performed to show that the
3WCCC might still be plausible for a variety of black hole congurations. As a consequence
of such analysis, people also examined whether the rst two laws of black hole thermody-
namics are valid when the particle absorption process takes place. Although a lot of work
has been done, no consistent conclusion has been reached on a concrete basis, see for exam-
ple, refs. [20{34]. In particular, while studying the viability of the laws of thermodynamics
and/or to ensure existence of the stable horizon via particle absorption, two assumptions
associated with the energy of the particle have been found in the literature. The rst one
is due to Gwak's work [35], where it is assumed that the changes in the black hole's inter-
nal energy happened due to the change in the infalling particles, i.e., E=dU. Under this
assumption, even though the rst law is satised, the second law is found to be violated.
Moreover, the extremality and the near-extremality conditions of the black holes remain
the same. The second assumption [36] stipulates that the energy of the absorbed particle
is accompanied by the change in black hole enthalpy, E=dM. Under such assumptions,
the rst, as well as the second laws of the black hole mechanics, are identically satised.
Besides, black hole's event horizon is stable for the extremal as well as the near-extremal
congurations. But at the core of this proposal lies a deciency of the argument that one
can think o: the assumption that in the conventional holographic dictionary one deals with
the largeNregime of the boundary CFT, but the value of N, however large it is, taken as
a constant entity which is not in favor of the formalism in which the cosmological constant
is considered no more as a constant quantity but as a variable thereby contributing to the
rst law [7, 37{39]. Furthermore, associating the connection of the holographic description
to the extended phase space has led us to nd a variety of rich phase structure of the AdS
black holes [40{42], which has further revealed a new notion to study the heat engines from
holographic perspectives [43]. Such ndings in the phase structure has unveiled a new door,
that is known in the scientic community as the AdS/CFT duality. This way, we had been
able to incorporate the grand canonical ensemble, where we restored the missing piece of
information by varying the cosmological constant and its conjugate uid dynamical pressure.
Furthermore, no evidence of second law violation is no longer valid in the extended black
hole thermodynamics [44].
The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the motion of a test
electrically charged particle in a charged AdS black hole background in the D-dimensional
and some of the thermodynamic quantities are briey presented along with the uid dynam-
ical cosmological constant. In section 3, we derive the rst law of thermodynamics when
an electrically charged particle gets absorbed and put the second law under examination for
dierent energy assumptions, namely: internal energy, enthalpy, and the grand canonical
potential. We prove by incorporating the last quantity to show the second law to be held,
although the cosmological constant varies. Furthermore, within section 4 and by recalling
the minimum point of the blackening factor f(r) and probing the variation around it we
assert that it should respect the WCCC even though we varied the cosmological constant for
such a black hole background. Consequently, one discusses the second law and the neutral-
ization process at constant black hole's event horizon entropy, by considering the eective
4entropy formalism and then an isobaric process. To complete our study, in section 5, we
turn our attention to a grand canonical description within a xed grand canonical potential
absorption, and thereby permitting an elegant check to the third law even though we include
the (P;V) pairs in rst law. The last section is devoted to the conclusion.
2 On a charged particle dynamics in the Charged Anti-
de-Sitter black hole background
In this section, we would investigate the motion of a charged particle to test the laws of
thermodynamics, especially the second law, and the WCCC in the high dimensional charged
AdS background.
2.1 The charged Anti-de-Sitter Black Hole thermodynamics: A
succinct review of the extended phase space
To start with we write the Einstein-Maxwell action in the D-dimensional AdS spacetime
S= 1
16Z
dDxp g(R FF 2): (1)
In whichRis the Ricci scalar, the Maxwell eld strength Fand electric potential Aare
dened to be
F=@A @A; Adx= QD
rD 3dt: (2)
The metric pertaining to the above action, for a static spherically symmetric AdS spacetime
in higher dimensions is written as
ds2= f(r)dt2+dr2
f(r)+r2d
2
D 2; (3)
where the blackening factor is
f(r) = 1 2MD
rD 3+Q2
D
r2D 6+r2
l2; (4)
andd
2
D 2represents line element of the ( D 2)-dimensional unit sphere and is denoted as
d
D 2=D 2X
i=1 iY
j=1sin2j 1!
di;  0=
2; D 2=: (5)
The metric components are functions of mass and charge parameters MDandQDalong
with an AdS radius l. These parameters are proportional to the black hole mass M, electric
chargeQ, and cosmological constant  [45]
M=(D 2) 
D 2
8MD; Q =(D 2) 
D 2
8QD; = (D 1) (D 2)
2l2: (6)
5The RN-AdS black hole has an event horizon at r=rhwhere the constraint f(rh) = 0 is
satised. In terms of rh, the Hawking temperature T, Bekenstein-Hawking entropy S, and
the electric potential are expressed, respectively, as
T=f0(rh)
4=1
2l2
rh (D 3)Q2
Dl2
r2D 5
h+(D 3)MDl2
rD 2
h
; S =
D 2rD 2
h
4; =QD
rD 3
h:
(7)
In the black hole's enthalpy formalism, the cosmological constant, , plays the role of
pressureP, and its conjugate quantity is viewed as a thermodynamic volume, V, of the
black hole. The connection of the thermodynamic pressure and volume in D-dimensional
AdS spacetime, respectively, read [46]
P= 
8=(D 1) (D 2)
16l2; V =
D 2
D 1rD 1
h: (8)
In thermodynamics of black holes, the rst law states that the innitesimal change of the
masses between two nearby solutions equals the dierences of entropy times the Hawking
temperature plus some additional work terms [46, 47]. When the pressure term is included
we obtain a generalization of the rst law of black hole mechanics. Thus the rst law for a
U(1) charged AdS black holes with the inclusion of ( P;V) pair yields
dM=TdS +VdP + dQ: (9)
Remember that when the pressure term is included in the laws of thermodynamics, the black
hole massMshould play the role of enthalpy [48, 49]. All the essential thermodynamics
quantities in hand, we shall intend, in the next section to obtain the energy-momentum
relation of a charged particle near the event horizon. It is noticeable that the energy-
momentum of the charged particle is absorbed by the high dimensional charge AdS black
hole. We are interested in a scalar particle only, so we employ the following Hamilton-Jacobi
equation to probe the dynamical nature of the absorbed charged particle.
2.2 An infalling particle in a black hole: Energy and momentum
In this section, we consider the dynamics of an electrically charged particle whose energy-
momentum is controlled by the charge black hole spacetime. To deal with the dynamics of
an electrically charged particle we nd out the connections among the conserved quantities,
such as the conserved energy and the angular momentum.
We construct the equation of motion of the electrically charged particle with charge q,
using the Hamilton-Jacobi formalism in the presence of the gauge potential A
g(p qA) (p qA) = m2; (10)
wheremis the rest mass of the particle, and pis the four momentum of the charged scalar
particle with
p=@I; (11)
6an where the quantity Istands for the Hamilton-Jacobi action. As the spacetime admits
two Killing vectors corresponding to tand, one can write the Hamilton-Jacobi action using
the variable separations
I= Et Ir(r) +L+D 3X
i=1Ii(i): (12)
Herein, the conserved quantities energy ( E) and angular momentum ( L), respectively, arise
from the time translation symmetry along t-axis and the rotation symmetry about D 2=-
axis. For velocities of the particle Eq.(3) we can express the Hamilton-Jacobi equation using
Eq.(12) as
m2 1
f(r)(E+qA)2+f(r) (@rIr(r))2+1
r2D 3X
i=1 iY
j=1sin 2j 1!
(@iIi(i))2+1
r2 D 2Y
j=1sin 2j 1!
L2= 0:
(13)
Separating the angular part from the radial one gives
D 3X
i=1 iY
j=1sin 2j 1!
(@iIi(i))2+ D 2Y
j=1sin 2j 1!
L2=C1; (14)
whereC1is a constant such that
C1=r2
f(r)(E+qA)2 m2r2+r2f(r) (@rIr(r))2: (15)
wherefore, Eq.(12) can be written as
I= Et+Z
drp
R+L+D 3X
i=1Z
dip
i; (16)
in which, we have set
R=(E+qA)2
f(r)2
1 (C1+m2r2)f(r)
(E+qA)2r2
;
i=Ci Ci+1
sin2i; CD 2=L2:(17)
Hence, the radial momentum prcan be written as
pr=(E+qA)s
1 (C+m2r2)f(r)
(E+qA)2r2: (18)
7We shall investigate how a charged scalar particle is engulfed by a black hole and how it
aects the black hole's thermodynamics. We focus on how the particle behaves when it is
close to the event horizon, where f(r)!0. Therefore, the energy of the particle reads
E=jpr
hj+qQD
rD 3
h: (19)
It is noteworthy to mention that we have chosen the positive sign in front of jpr
hjto keep
Eandjpr
hjare of the same signs and also to ensure the ow of time in the positive direc-
tion [50]. After obtaining the energy-momentum relation, we shall employ it to check the
thermodynamic laws and the WCCC in the black hole enthalpy formalism.
3 The second law of thermodynamics under dierent
considerations
The energy and charge should be conserved when the charged particle falls into the black
hole, and it is given by the sum of the electric potential of the charged particle and its
radial momentum near the event horizon. We use this relation in order to incorporate the
thermodynamics of the charged AdS black holes. Such a phenomenon occurs when the
ingoing charged scalar particles with energy Eand electric charge qare absorbed by the
charged AdS black holes. Consequently, both the black hole's thermodynamic potential and
the charge are changed with the horizon radius and the pressure. In such a situation, the
mass, charge, horizon radius, and pressure of the black holes should also change. This leads
us to connect the changes in the energy and the electric charge of the particle to the rst
law.
Rigorously speaking, we will look for which thermodynamic potential is varied by the same
quantity as that of the particle, and this potential's variation is supported by the change of
the black hole congurations following in view of the rst law.
3.1 The rst assumption: internal energy
We presume that the energy of the particle alters the black hole's internal energy [17,35,51].
Given asU(Q;S;V ), the internal energy depends on the charge, entropy, and volume of the
black hole, and their variations as the charged particle is getting absorbed as it falls into the
black hole. It should also be dQ,dS, anddVdependent, as can be shown from the following
equation.
E=dU=d(M PV); dQ =q: (20)
From the rst law of thermodynamics given in (13), we have
dU=TdS PdV + dQ: (21)
8Thus the variation of the internal energy in the limit of f(r)!0, is obtained from Eq.(9)
as
dU=jpr
hj+qQD
rD 3
h: (22)
The entropy changes accordingly as
dS= (D 2)Sdrh
rh; (23)
where the change of the black hole event horizon, drh, is rewritten as independent variables
just like (dQ;jpr
hj) pairs of the particle. However, near the horizon, df(rh) =dfhdoes not
change since f(rh+drh) = 0, that is to say
dfh=@fh
@rhdrh+@fh
@MdM+@fh
@QdQ+@fh
@ldl= 0: (24)
We note from (7) and (8) that the entropy and volume depend only on the event horizon
radius and that their changes are proportional to drh, however, the variation of internal
energy depends on the variation of the volume and entropy dierently, as we Furthermore,
the event horizon radius uctuation drhis independent of dl, and the rst principle of
thermodynamics does not account for pressure change. Thus increasing the internal dose
does not imply the increase of the event horizon and hence the entropy! We calculate the
variation of the event horizon while simultaneously resolving (21), (22), and eqref24 in order
to conrm this prediction. Consequently, the event horizon's uctuation is obtained to be
drh=16jpr
hjr3
h
(D 2) (D 3) (1 Q2
Dr6 2D) 
D 2rD 1: (25)
Using (7) and (8), we can write (25) as
drh=4jpr
hjr2
h
(D 2) (D 3)S(1 2): (26)
Therefore, the corresponding variation in the the black hole entropy is expressed as
dS=4jpr
hjrh
(D 3) (1 2): (27)
When 2>1, the uctuation of entropy could be negative. Therefore, when rh< r 0, we
have a violation of the second rule of thermodynamics, whit
r0=Q1
D 3
D: (28)
We plot in Fig.1 the variation of the black hole entropy as a function of event horizon radius
with dierent dimensions.
9(a)D= 4
 (b)D= 5
(c)D= 6
 (d)D= 7
Figure 1: Entropy variation dSas a function of event horizon radius rhfor dierent dimensions with
jpr
hj= 1,Q= 1,l= 1anddQ= 0:1.
We observe that the second law is violated particularly for the extremal condition where
dSe<0 and for all black hole congurations when rh<r 0. Whereas, for rh>r 0the entropy
varies positively and the second law is respected. Moreover, the variation of the entropy
diverges at rh=r0.
The variation of the extremal black hole's entropy is obtained from (26) using the expres-
sion of the extremal value of the electric charge :
dSe= 4jpr
hjl2
(D 1)rh; (29)
which is always negative for all dimensions as we can see in Fig.2
10Figure 2: Variation of entropy dSefor the extrema black hole as a function of spacetime dimension D,
withjpr
hj= 1,Q= 1,l= 1anddQ= 0:1.
where we have plotted the entropy variations in the extremal case as a function of the
spacetime dimension.
This behavior is unphysical because the black hole is regular where rh=r0and hence the
divergence of the entropy does not make sense. Therefore, we conclude that the energy of
the particle does not have absorbed via the internal energy of the black hole.
3.2 The second assumption: enthalpy
In this subsection, we suppose that the energy of the particle changes the enthalpy Hof
the black hole as it was assumed in [52]. The enthalpy is a Legendre transformation of the
internal energy such as
H=U+PV: (30)
In the present assumption, the enthalpy Hrelates to the black hole's mass M. Given as
H(Q;S;P )), the enthalpy is a function of the black hole's charge, entropy, and pressure.
Thus, according to the following equation, the variation in enthalpy when the charged scalar
particle falls into the black hole should be written in terms of dQ,dS, anddP
E=dH=dM; dQ =q: (31)
Thus the variation of the enthalpy is given from Eq.(19)
dM=jpr
hj+qQD
rD 3
h: (32)
According to (9), the variation of the black hole mass reads
dM=@M
@rhdrh+@M
@QdQ+@M
@ldl: (33)
11Hence, the change in the event horizon is given by
drh=2r2
h[2jpr
hjl3+ (D 2)rhSdl]
(D 2)Sl[(D 1)r2
h+ (D 3)l2(1 2)]; (34)
which veries the expression given in [52] for four dimensions. Therefore, the dierential
change in the black hole's entropy is rewritten as
dS=2rh[2jpr
hjl3+ (D 2)rSdl]
l[(D 1)r2
h+ (D 3)l2(1 2)](35)
Our problem is that we have any information about how the pressure varies. In other words,
we have two unknown quantities, drhanddl, and we have just one equation which is the
rst law of thermodynamics. In fact, the equation (24) is identical to the equation for the
rst law and provides no further details. Therefore, in order to close the system, we require
an additional dynamical equation.
3.3 The third assumption: grand potential
The partition function is crucial whenever we need statistical and thermodynamical descrip-
tions of a system. In the semiclassical limit, we have
Z=e SE; (36)
whereSEis the euclidean action which is related to the free energy Fin the grand canonical
ensemble by1
F Q = Tlog (Z) =TSE; (37)
such thatF Q is the grand potential [53, 54]. The least action principle in black hole
thermodynamics is read [13,55,56],
d(F Q) = 0; (38)
traducing the black hole's dynamical stability and it's ensured by minimizing potential.
Now that we are in possession of an additional equation in addition to the rst law and
we can solve our problem correctly. When (32) and (38) are resolved concurrently, the event
horizon and AdS radius vary as follows
drh=2Er2
h
(D 2) (D 3)S;
dl= l
2P2jpr
hj+E(2 1)
2V 8PEr2
h
(D 2) (D 3)V
:(39)
1In usual thermodynamical systems we have F N=TSEwhereFis Helmholtz energy, Nis the
number of particles and is the chemical potential. In black hole thermodynamics, we replace Helmholtz
energy,U TS, with Gibbs energy, M TS, because the black hole mass plays the role of enthalpy.
12Therefore, the modication to the black hole's entropic change is re-expressed as
dS=2Erh
(D 3); (40)
thanks to (8), one can write down the variation of the pressure as
dP= 2Pdl
l; (41)
thus
dP=2jpr
hj+E(2 1)
2V 8PEr2
h
(D 2) (D 3)V: (42)
We have, from (40), the variation of the entropy is always positive and proportional to
event horizon radius at a xed absorbed energy for all dimensions2. We show the variation
of black hole entropy in Fig. 3 as a function of the event horizon radius for various AdS
spacetime dimensions, and we note that the variation of entropy is positive and increases
linearly as the black hole gets bigger.
2The energy of the absorbed particle depends on rhas we can see in (19), but it tends to jpr
hjwhen
rh!1 orq!0:
13(a)D= 4
 (b)D= 5
(c)D= 6
 (d)D= 7
Figure 3: Entropy variation dSas a function of event horizon radius rhfor dierent dimensions with
jpr
hj= 1,Q= 1,l= 1anddQ= 0:1.
We plot in Fig. 4 the variation of the black hole pressure as a function of the event horizon
radius for dierent AdS spacetime dimensions. We observe that the dierential change in
the pressure is always positive for the extremal black hole and it becomes quickly negative
for the non-extremal case and vanishes when the black hole gets larger. Hence, for the black
hole with large horizon radius, we can consider the absorption of a particle as an isobar
thermodynamic process, particularly for higher dimensional black holes.
14(a)D= 4
 (b)D= 5
(c)D= 6
 (d)D= 7
Figure 4: Pressure variation dPas a function of event horizon radius rhfor dierent dimensions with
jpr
hj= 1,Q= 1,l= 1anddQ= 0:1.
In Fig.5, we depict the change of the dierential entropy and pressure as a function of
spacetime dimension for the extremal cases. We notice that dierential entropy for the
extremal case decreases for higher dimensional spacetime as it is shown in (40) while the
variation of the pressure is always positive and gets larger for higher dimensional spacetime.
4 The Weak cosmic censorship conjecture
According to the WCCC, no singularities will be seen from asymptotic null innity for the
future observer. That is to say, a black hole event horizon must be required to shield singu-
larities from an observer situated at spatial innity. The weak cosmic censorship hypothesis
must therefore be supported by the existence of an event horizon. We will observe the black
hole's ability to absorb a charged particle to determine if it has an event horizon. Specically,
we are going to discuss how f(r) varies in such a scenario.
We illustrate in Fig. 6 the behavior of the f(r) function in terms of the radial coordinate
r.
15(a)
 (b)
Figure 5: Entropy (a) and pressure (b) variation dPas a function of spacetime dimension with jpr
hj= 1,
Q= 1,l= 1anddQ= 0:1.
Figure 6: The variation of f(r)function in terms of rwithD= 4,Q= 1,l= 1andM= 1:3.
There are two horizons, the inner (Cauchy) horizon located at riand the event horizon
(the outer horizon) at rh. The metric function f(r) decreases rst for r<rmin, then admits
a minimum at r=rmin. Forr > rmin, the function is ever-increasing. At r=rmin, the
16functionf(r) must meet the following conditions
f(rmin) =fmin=0
@f(r)
@r
r=rmin=f0
min= 0
@2f(r)
@r2
r=rmin=f00
min>0(43)
We have a vanishing value = 0 for the extreme black hole, i.e., when ri=rh, where
is a suciently small quantity for near extremal congurations. Both the Cauchy and event
horizons remain on either side of rmin. The associated black hole parameters, M,Q, andl
are transformed to ( M+dM;Q+dQ;l+dl) when the particle's charge is absorbed by the
black hole. As a result, the minimum value and event horizon will be located at ( rmin+
drmin;rh+drh). Additionally, the transformation of f(r) transcends to dfmin. Following the
transformation, the new minimum point is encoded as
@f(r)
@r
r=rmin+drmin=f0
min+df0
min= 0; (44)
which in turn gives
df0
min=@f0
min
@rmindrmin+@f0
min
@MdM+@f0
min
@QdQ+@f0
min
@ldl= 0: (45)
The transformed relation for the function, f(rmin), reads
f(rmin+drmin) =fmin+dfmin=+@fmin
@MdM+@fmin
@QdQ+@fmin
@ldl
: (46)
We can impose the following conditions of near-extremal case such that
!; rh=rmin+; (47)
that is to say that horizon of the near-extremal black hole is located slightly to the right of
the minimum point. It is to be mentioned that the minimum of the transformed function
has a negative contribution and is arguably very small. This is given as jj;1. For the
near-extremal black hole, the transformed minimum value is
fmin+dfmin= 2Ermin
D 21 2
S+4r3
min
(D 3)Vl2
+O(): (48)
Forthwith, we focus on the extremal situation ( ;= 0) and we remove Qandlterms by
usingfmin= 0. The transformed minimum value of the function f(r) now becomes
fmin+dfmin= 0; = 0= 0: (49)
17Therefore, the extremal black hole always stays at its stable minimum, which leads us to con-
clude that its phase cannot be changed, even if it is charged or discharged by the electrically
charged particle absorption, as reported in [35].
Although the above result seems to be correct apparently, there is a caveat in assuming
thatdrmin=drh. To see this discrepancy, we calculate drminand compare it to drh. We
compute the minimum point drminin extremal black holes using (32), (39) and (45), which
reads
drmin=(D 2) (D 3)Sr3
h[E2+ (D 2) (jpr
hj dQ)] 4(D 1)EPVr4
h
(D 2) (D 3)PVS [(D 4) (D 1)r2
h+ (D 3)l2((3D 8) 2+ (D 2))];
(50)
that can be put under the following form
drmin=r3
h[E2+ (D 2) (jpr
hj dQ)] 2 (D 1)PVr2
hdrh
PV[(D 4) (D 1)r2
h+ (D 3)l2((3D 8) 2+ (D 2))]; (51)
where we have used (40). It is obvious from the above expression that drminis dierent from
drhand it could be negative also, particularly, when
dQ<jpr
hj
: (52)
The variation of the minimum point drminas a function of spacetime dimensions for the
extremal black holes for various values of the absorbed particle charge is depicted in Fig. 7,
and one can observe from it that drminis negative when dQ= 0:05 for all dimensions, so
(a)dQ= 0:05
 (b)dQ= 0:3
Figure 7: Variation of the minimum point drminas a function of spacetime dimensions in extremal black
holes for dierent absorbed particle charge dQwithjpr
hj= 0:1,Q= 1andl= 1.
the minimum point is shifted to the left, whereas for dQ= 0:3,drminis positive and the
minimum point is displaced to the right.
18Furthermore, we reveal in Fig. 8, the variation of f(r) after the particle absorption process
in the two dierent situations that we have introduced in the previous paragraph: ( a) when
the minimum point is shifted to the left and ( b) when it is shifted to the right.
(a) Shift to the left.
 (b) Shift to the right.
Figure 8: Variation of f(r)function after the particle absorption in the two situations: when the minimum
point is shifted to the left and when it is shifted to the right.
It's remarked that the event horizon radius varies signicantly and is always greater than
the minimum point variation, drh>drmin. Whendrh=drmin, the extremal black hole still
remains extremal even after the particle absorption. Therefore, for the extremal black hole,
we can write
dfmin<0 =)drh>drmin;
dfmin= 0 =)drh=drmin;(53)
Thus, if we want to look for the behavior of the function f(r), it is sucient to compare
drhanddrminfor dierent parametric values. This in turn will lead us to know whether the
black hole is still in the extremal or non-extremal state.
Next, we intend to study numerically a neutralization and recharging of an extremal black
hole. We begin with an extremal black hole with Q= 1 which will absorb an estimated 103
negatively charged particles with constant electric charge dQ= 0:002. It is clear from the
radial momentum that it should depend on the event horizon radius such that
jpr
hj= 2jdQj; (54)
besides, in order to ensure that the particle energy is positive. We illustrate in Fig. 9
the evolution of f(r) function and the black hole projection on x yplane during the
absorption of 103particles where every particle has a negative charge dQ= 0:002. In the
beginning, we have an extremal black hole with Q= 1, the black hole eventually absorbs
negative charge and breaks down to a non-extremal state, and continues absorbing particles
19(a)
 (b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9: (a) and (c): Evolution of f(r)function during absorption of 103particles with a xed electric
chargedQ= 0:002. (b) and (d): Evolution of black hole projection on xyplan during absorption of 103
particles with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:002. The initial conditions are Q= 1,l= 1,M= 1:23,
rh= 0:65andD= 4.
till it becomes Schwarzschild-like after it has absorbed 500 particles. Moreover, the black
hole charge becomes negative till it ips the sign of the initial value and nally the charge
becomesQ= 1.
Proceeding with similar arguments, we show in Fig.10 the evolution of dierent ther-
modynamic variables during the absorption of 103particles with a xed electric charge
dQ= 0:002. We have begun with an extremal black hole in a four-dimensional spacetime
withQ= 1 andl= 1. We observe that the entropy increases during the absorption of parti-
20(a) Black hole entropy as a function of elec-
tric charge.
(b) Black hole pressure as a function of the
black hole event horizon.
(c) Black hole mass as a function of electric
charge.
(d) Black hole temperature as a function of
the black hole event horizon.
Figure 10: Evolution of dierent thermodynamical variables during an absorption of 103particles with a
xed electric charge dQ= 0:002. The initial conditions are Q= 1,l= 1,M= 1:23,rh= 0:65andD= 4.
cles and thereby verifying the second law which is found to held. Moreover, the entropy has
an inection point where the black hole gets neutralized. The black hole's pressure increases
near the extremal case as it is expected, and then it begins to decrease and changes its
concavity near rh=rs= 1:2 corresponding to the neutralized black hole case. In addition,
the inection point in the pressure curve corresponds to a discontinuity of its derivative that
indicates a possible phase transition at this point. Subsequent analysis of the black hole
mass and entropy evolution share the same qualitative behavior. Whereas, the black hole
temperature prole shows a clear phase transition at rh=rs. Indeed, for rh<rsthe black
hole is positively charged and hence absorbs negative charges to be neutralized. We see that
21the temperature increases before the phase transition, but when the black hole is neutral-
ized (rh=rs), the temperature switches o both its monotony and concavity indicating a
discontinuity in its rst derivative, and therefore represents a hallmark of phase transition.
Furthermore, to consolidate with such a phase transition behavior we recall the free energy
portrait as a function of the black hole event horizon as is shown in Fig.11. Clearly, the
(a)
 (b)
Figure 11: (a) Free energy and (b) electric potential as a function of black hole event horizon during
absorption of 103particles with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:002. The initial conditions are Q= 1,l= 1,
M= 1:23,rh= 0:65andD= 4.
F rhdiagram unveils a discontinuity in its derivative arming that a phase transition
occurs when the black hole changes the sign of its charge. Additionally, we notice that the
electric potential has an inection point where it vanishes. Therefore, the electric potential
changes its sign at this point, where it alters its concavity too.
5 Black hole neutralization
In this section, we attend to examine the black hole neutralization, concretely, the neutral-
ization of an extremal black hole and the uctuations around the Schwarzchild-like state
(vanishing charge solution) following a variety of thermodynamics processes.
5.1 Isentropic neutralization
Herein, we discuss the isentropic process where the entropy of any thermodynamic system
remains constant. Such a process happens when the thermodynamic system is both adiabatic
and reversible. Using Eq.(40) and Eq.(19), we have an isentropic neutralization when the
22electric charge q=dQof the absorbed particle has the value3
q= jpr
hjrD 3
h
QD; (55)
We begin to discuss by looking at the isentropic relaxation to the neutral state. We depict
in Fig. 12, the neutralization of an extremal black hole in four AdS spacetime dimensions
which absorbs 500 particles with dQ= 0:002 respecting Eq.(55). When the extremal black
(a)
(b)
Figure 12: Evolution of f(r)function during an isentropic absorption of 500particles with a xed electric
chargedQ= 0:002. The initial conditions are Q= 1,l= 1,M= 1:23,rh= 0:65andD= 4.
hole begins to be neutralized, it breaks down to a non-extremal state keeping the size of
the event horizon radius the same, but the inner horizon radius decreases. Moreover, the
mass and the entropy are constant. Next, we illustrate in Fig.13 dierent thermodynamic
quantities characterizing the isentropic neutralization of an extremal black hole.
The (a) and (b) panels reveal that the pressure and temperature of the black hole share
qualitatively the same behavior, indeed they increase during the neutralization and reach
their maximum value, PsandTswhen the black hole is completely neutralized. Moreover,
the temperature becomes non-null once the black hole has absorbed a charge and it breaks
into a non-extremal black hole. From the ( c) panel, we notice that the free energy decreases
linearly in terms of temperature as it is expected while keeping the mass and the entropy
constant. The potential in the grand canonical ensemble, F Q, decreases quicker to reach
the critical point where a phase transition is expected as shown in the ( d) panel.
The next relevant step is to look at the oscillations of the black hole around the Scwarzchild-
like state with constant amplitude. This means that we begin with an extremal black hole
3Which implies that the charge of the absorbed particle has the inverse sign of the black hole charge, and
thereby leading to the neutralization of the black holes and the electrically charged particle system.
23(a) Pressure as a function of black hole elec-
tric charge.
(b) Temperature as a function of black hole
electric charge.
(c) Free energy as a function of black hole
electric charge.
(d) Grand potential as a function of black
hole electric charge.
Figure 13: Evolution of dierent thermodynamical variables during an isentropic absorption of 500particles
with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:002. The initial conditions are Q= 1,l= 1,M= 1:23,rh= 0:65and
D= 4.
state in which the value of the electric charge varies between + Qand Q. We simulate the
absorption of 105particles over N= 50 periods. Within each period, the black hole gets
neutralized through the isentropic process, then gains its charge and ultimately it becomes
charged with the opposite signature but with the same magnitude, after, it gets neutralized
isentropically again and recharged with the same charge as it was at the beginning. The
results of the simulation are displayed in Fig.14.
We see that the entropy increases at each period with a xed quantity,  S= 12:55, so
it increases linearly in terms of the number of periods, which means that the black hole
24(a) Entropy as a function of black hole elec-
tric charge.
(b) Entropy as a function of the number of
periods.
(c) Pressure as a function of black hole elec-
tric charge.
(d) Pressure as a function of the number of
periods.
(e) Temperature as a function of black hole
electric charge.
(f) Temperature as a function of the number
of periods.
Figure 14: Evolution of dierent thermodynamical variables during absorption of 105particles over 50
periods. The initial conditions (blue dot) are Q= 1,l= 1,M= 1:23,rh= 0:65, andD= 4.
25gets larger. While the pressure increases within every neutralization but it decreases quickly
when the black hole gets charged. Hence, it decreases quickly in terms of the number of
periods and tends to zero which means that the geometry of spacetime tends to be at.
Furthermore, the vanishing temperature associated with the extremal case at the beginning
of the simulation increases quickly during the rst period where we observe a peak that
corresponds to the breaking of the extremal black to a non-extremal one. Then it decreases
while the black hole gets larger in size. We mention that the increase of the temperature
does not mean that the black hole tends to be extremal, because when the black hole gets
larger, it goes so far from the extremal state as illustrated in Fig.15, where the extremal
(a)
 (b)
Figure 15: (a) : Evolution of f(r)function during an absorption of 105over 50periods . (b) : Evolution
of black hole projection on xyplan during an absorption of 105over 50periods. The initial conditions are
Q= 1,l= 1,M= 1:23,rh= 0:65andD= 4.
black hole (red curve) becomes very large after 25 period (green curve). Moreover, when the
event horizon radius gets larger, the inner horizon radius gets smaller such as after 50 period
(purple curve) the event horizon is so far from the inner horizon that tends to zero.
To probe the phase transitions, we plot in Fig. 16 the behavior of dierent thermodynamic
potentials during the absorption of 105particles over 50 periods. One observes that the mass
is constant during every process of neutralization but it increases when the black hole gets
charged. The quantity  Mreects that the mass increases at each period is not constant
and decreases with the number of the periods grows.
Nevertheless, the mass becomes more important when the black hole becomes larger. The
free energy and the grand canonical potential curves decrease as function temperature when
the black hole breaks into a non-extremal state and a phase transition occurs when the
black hole is neutralized. Such behavior is repeated qualitatively in each period and it is
amortized as the black hole gets larger, i.e., the electric charge becomes negligible compared
to the mass. Both free energy and grand potential decrease quickly in terms of the number
26(a) Mass as a function of black hole electric
charge.
(b) Mass as a function of the number of pe-
riods.
(c) Free energy as a function of black hole
electric charge.
(d) Free energy as a function of the number
of periods.
(e) Grand potential as a function of black
hole electric charge.
(f) Grand as a function of the number of pe-
riods.
Figure 16: Evolution of dierent thermodynamic potentials during an absorption of 105particles over 50
periods. The initial conditions (blue dot) are Q= 1,l= 1,M= 1:23,rh= 0:65, andD= 4.
27of periods, which indicates that the black hole becomes more stable.
Let us now consider the neutralization of an extremal black hole using the same process but
the amplitude of the oscillations decreases with the number of periods to get a Schawrzchild-
like state at the end. That to say, we begin with a charge of Q= +Qe, the black hole
will be neutralized through the isentropic process and gets charged negatively with Q=
 (N 1)Qe=N, then it will be neutralized again through the same isentropic process, and
gets charged positively with Q= +(N 1)Qe=N, whereNis the number of periods used
in the simulation. We repeat this process each period ( Nperiods) until we get Q= 0 and
the black hole stops oscillating. The Fig.17 shows the evolution of the function f(r) and
the projection of the black hole on x yplane during an isentropic neutralization of an
extremal black hole with an absorption of 105over 50 periods in the usual four dimensions.
The black hole size grows quickly before forming a Schwarzchild-AdS black hole. Finally,
(a)
 (b)
Figure 17: (a): Evolution of f(r)function during an isentropic neutralization of an extremal black hole
with the absorption of 105over 50periods. (b) : Evolution of black hole projection on xyplan during an
isentropic neutralization of an extremal black hole with an absorption of 105over 50periods. The initial
conditions are Q= 1,l= 1,M= 1:23,rh= 0:65andD= 4.
the grand potential decreases very quickly to reach its minimum value which corresponds to
the stable point and the preferred state. Afterward, we examine the evolution of dierent
thermodynamic quantities that are displayed in Fig. 18.
28(a) Entropy as a function of black hole elec-
tric charge.
(b) Entropy as a function of the number of
periods.
(c) Pressure as a function of the number of
periods.
(d) Temperature as a function of the number
of periods.
(e) Mass as a function of the number of pe-
riods.
(f) Grand potential as a function of the num-
ber of periods.
Figure 18: Evolution of dierent thermodynamical quantity during an isentropic neutralization with the
absorption of 105particles over 50periods. The nal state which is an AdS-Schwarzchild black hole is
represented by a green dot. The initial conditions (blue dot) are Q= 1,l= 1,M= 1:23,rh= 0:65, and
D= 4.
29The gure reveals that the entropy loses its previous linear behavior as is seen in the
case of free oscillations and now it increases monotonously respecting the second law and
converges to the stable point (green dot) which is the Schwarzchild-AdS state. The pressure
decreases very quickly and which means that the AdS radius gets very large. In addition,
the temperature unveils qualitatively the same behavior as in free oscillations. Indeed, it
increases when the black hole becomes non-extremal and decreases to reach its minimum at
the Schwarzchild-AdS state. Besides, the mass increases quickly in the beginning because the
black absorbs the kinetic and the electromagnetic energy of the particle, but when the black
approach the Schwarzschild-AdS state, the mass converges to its maximum value because
the absorbed electromagnetic energy becomes very small and the absorbed kinetic energy as
well.
Before ending this subsection, we should mention that the isentropic neutralization is an
adiabatic and reversible process, such an idealization does not possibly occurs in the case
of a black hole. Absorption of a particle is an irreversible process and the variation of the
entropy should be strictly positive dS > 0. That is the proposal that we will attend to
discuss in the next subsection.
5.2 Eective entropy
In this subsection, we turn our attention to the eective thermodynamics that has attracted
increasing interest, particularly in the context of dS black holes and thermodynamics of
multiple horizons [38,46,57{60]. In the case of multiple horizons context, all of the horizons
should be taken into account and treated simultaneously as the rst laws of black holes should
be held equally at each horizon. In what follows, we will recall the eective approach to reveal
that eective entropy varies when we have an isentropic neutralization. The absorption of
a particle that respects the relation Eq.(55) is a reversible process since the entropy is still
constant in such cases.
In our considered black hole model, two horizons persist, namely, the inner horizon riand
the vent horizon (outer horizon). The rst law of thermodynamics associated with the event
horizon is given in Eq.(9) but for the inner horizon, its rst law reads
dM= TidSi+VidP+ idQ; (56)
where the dierent thermodynamical variables that describe the inner horizon are given by
Ti= 1
4@f(r)
@r
r=ri; S =
D 2rD 2
i
4i=QD
rD 3
iandVi=
D 2
D 1rD 1
i:(57)
The variation of the black hole mass during an absorption of a charged particle can be written
dM=@M
@ridri+@M
@QdQ+@M
@ldl: (58)
30Using Eq.(32) and Eq.(39), we can express driin terms of ri,rh,Q,l,dQandD, thereby
the variation of the inner entropy, dSi4.
In Fig.19, we depict the inner entropy variation dSias a function of inner horizon radius
rifor dierent dimensions where the event horizon is xed to the extremal radius which
corresponds to an isentropic process (the entropy associated with the event is xed).
(a)D= 4
 (b)D= 5
(c)D= 6
 (d)D= 7
Figure 19: Inner entropy variation dSias a function of inner horizon radius rifor dierent dimensions
withjpr
hj= 1,Q= 1,l= 1anddQ= 0:1. The event horizon is xed to the extremal radius.
From this gure, one can notice that the dierential change in the inner entropy is ever
decreasing and negative for all dimensions and decreases when the inner horizon increases.
The minimum value corresponds to the extremal state. However, the dierential change
in the inner entropy vanishes when the inner horizon tends to zero which corresponds to
a Schwarzchild-like state5. The fact that the innitesimal change in the inner entropy
4We do not write down the expression of drianddSibecause they are large and they are not necessary.
5Schwarzchild-like state does not have an inner horizon, but the null inner horizon radius corresponds to
a Schwarzchild-like black hole
31is negative which does not guarantee the violation of the second law, but it conrms it,
such conrmation comes from the minus sign in front of the entropy in the rst law of
thermodynamics given in Eq.(56).
Through the eective thermodynamics framework, the thermodynamics rst law [38] is
obtained to be
dM=TeffdSeff+VeffdP+ effdQ; (59)
with Eq.(9) and Eq.(56) in hand the rst law Eq.(59) becomes
dM= TTi
T+Tid(S Si) +VTi+ViT
T+TidP+Ti+ iT
T+TidQ; (60)
with the eective thermodynamic variables given by [57]
Teff=TTi
T+Ti; Veff=VTi+ViT
T+Ti;
eff=Ti+ iT
T+Ti;(61)
with the eective entropy dened as in [38,60],
Seff=S Si (62)
leading to a vanishing eective entropy for an extremal black hole.
Let's now check the validity of the second law within eective entropy, particularly during
an isentropic neutralization. Indeed, we have shown that the entropy can be kept constant
during an isentropic neutralization which contradicts the fact that the process of absorbing
a particle is an irreversible transformation. Then, we illustrate in Fig. 20 the behavior of
dierent eective thermodynamic variables during an isentropic neutralization of an extremal
black hole in four dimensions. From Fig.20, we observe that the eective entropy increases
and reaches its maximum at the Schwarzchild-like state even though the entropy associated
with the event horizon is constant, the entropy of the inner horizon decreases. This means
that this is not a reversible process as the eective entropy is ever-increasing. However,
the eective temperature also increases during such a process and has qualitatively the same
behavior as the event horizon temperature. The eective free energy shows the same behavior
as that of the free energy associated with the event horizon and it increases quasi-linearly in
terms of eective temperature to reach its minimum at the Schwarzchild-like state. Whereas
the eective grand canonical potential has a dierent behavior, it grows quickly in terms
of eective temperature when the extremal black breaks into a non-extremal one, but once
it reaches its minimum it changes its monotony and then increases to have the same value
at Schwarzchild-like state as it does in the case of the extremal state. This behavior is not
necessarily a sign of phase transition but is due to the change in the electric interaction
strength.
Similar to the previous analysis, before we nish this subsection we would like to prob the
validity of the second law is respected in the eective entropy context when the black bole
32(a) Eective entropy as a function of black
hole electric charge.
(b) Eective Temperature as a function of
black hole electric charge.
(c) Eective free energy as a function of black
hole electric charge.
(d) Eective grand potential as a function of
black hole electric charge.
Figure 20: Evolution of dierent eective thermodynamical variables during an isentropic absorption of
103particles with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:001. The initial conditions are Q= 1,l= 1,M= 1:23,
rh=ri= 0:65andD= 4.
gets charged. We start with an extremal black hole possessing a charge + Qand then let it
get charged until it is doubled in terms of charge. The entropy of such a process is depicted
in Fig.21 for a four dimensions case
It can be remarked that both inner horizon entropy and outer entropy (entropy associated
with event horizon) increase when the black hole gets charged but the outer entropy increases
quicker than the inner horizon entropy and thereby resulting in increasing the eective
entropy of the combined inner and outer horizons. Therefore, the thermodynamic second
law is not only respected by the entropy associated with the event horizon but it is veried
and respected also by the eective entropy.
33Figure 21: Black hole entropy as a function of electric charge when an extremal black hole gets charged
absorbing 103particle with a xed charge dQ= 0:001. The initial conditions are Q= 1,l= 1,M= 1:23,
rh=ri= 0:65andD= 4.
5.3 Isobar neutralization
In this last subsection, we will be interested in an isobar neutralization which is to say a
neutralization with a xed pressure. Such a process is very interesting in the context of the
thermodynamical description of charged AdS black holes, particularly the rst and second-
order phase transitions. In addition, such a process also draws our attention to conclude
that there exists an equivalence between the charged AdS black hole and Van der Waals-type
uids where the description is generally done at a xed pressure.
The isobaric absorption can be ensured using Eq.(30) and then the following constraints
jpr
hj=  [(D 1)r2
h+ (D 3)l2(1 2)]
(D 1)r2
h (D 3)l2(1 + 2)dQ; (63)
where the sign of dQshould be chosen to make jpr
hjpositive. In addition, we should respect
the second condition
E=jpr
hj+dQ>0; (64)
which means that the black hole does not lose energy (nothing can escape from a black hole).
Using Eq.(63) and Eq.(64), the condition that the particle should be absorbed with a xed
pressure respecting the condition
dQ
E<0; (65)
which means that an isobar process may occur only when the black gets neutralized. This
condition is not always veried particularly for an extremal black hole. Indeed, we see
in Fig.22 that this condition is not veried for the extremal, thereby we shall study the
neutralization of a non-extremal black hole.
34(a)
 (b)
Figure 22: (a) RatiodQ
Eand (b)f(r)function for dierent masses as a function of event horizon radius
withQ= 1,l= 1andD= 4.
Let's begin the simulation of the absorption process with a non-extremal black hole with
M0= 1:5 andrh= 1 which veries the condition, Eq.(65), as it is shown in Fig. 22 and
will absorb 103negatively charged particles with a xed charge dQ= 0:001 in an isobaric
process. We show in Fig. 23 the evolution of the blackening function f(r) and the black hole
projection on x yplane during the isobar absorption of 103negatively charged particles.
35(a)
 (b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 23: (a) and (c): Evolution of f(r)function during absorption of 103particles with a xed electric
chargedQ= 0:001. (b) and (d): Evolution of black hole projection on xyplan during absorption of 103
particles with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:001. The initial conditions are Q0= 1,l= 1,M0= 1:5,
rh= 1andD= 4.
We observe that the black hole gets larger quickly when it absorbs the rst 500 particles
and then converges slowly to the Scwarzchild-like state.
Since the neutralization is isobaric in nature, we can use the heat capacity at a xed
pressure to analyze the stability of the black hole in such a process. We recall that the heat
capacity at xed pressure is given by
CP=@M
@T
P; (66)
36and the system is stable when CP>0 and unstable when CP<0. We graphically reveal
in Fig. 24 the evolution of entropy and heat capacity at a xed pressure during the isobar
neutralization. We observe that the entropy increases when the black hole gets neutralized
(a)
 (b)
Figure 24: (a) Entropy as a function of black hole electric charge during an isobar absorption of 103
particles with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:001. (b) Heat capacity at constant pressure in terms of black
hole temperature during an isobar absorption of 103particles with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:001. The
initial conditions are Q0= 1,l= 1,M0= 1:5,rh= 1andD= 4.
respecting the second law. The heat capacity curve at xed pressure shows that the black
hole is stable during this process. It is worth noticing that a black could not get charged
with an isobar process because such transformation violates the condition Eq.(65).
6 Constant electric potential absorption: Grand canon-
ical description
To place the last brick of our study, we will be interested in constant electric potential
absorption. The main interest in such a process comes from the context of the thermo-
dynamical description of charged AdS black holes within the grand canonical description.
Unfortunately, we cannot have a neutralization with constant potential because the nal
state is neutral, hence the potential vanishes. Moreover, we will see below that even partial
neutralization is not possible.
To keep the electric potential constant during an absorption we use Eq.(30) and then the
condition reads
jpr
hj=dQ1 2
; (67)
which should be positive and we should respect the second condition given in Eq.(65). Com-
37bining the two-equation, the conditions to ensure constant electric absorptions are
dQ
>0;
2<1;(68)
hence the constant electric absorption makes the black hole more charged and it is impossible
to get neutralized in such a process.
For instance, in four dimensions with Q= 1, we see in Fig.25
Figure 25: Electric potential square as a function of event horizon radius with Q= 1,l= 1, andD= 4.
38that a constant electric potential absorption is impossible in the case of extremal and near
the extremal situations, but such a process is possible only when rh> r 0. Whenrh=r0,
the black hole absorbs only the electrostatic energy ( jpr
hj= 0).
We begin with a non-extremal black hole with rh=r0,Q= 1, andl= 1 that will absorb
105particles withjpr
hj= 0 such that the electric potential is kept constant. We plot again
in Fig.26 the evolution of f(r) function and the black hole projection on xyplan during the
absorption of 105positive particles. We observe that when the black hole absorbs particles
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Figure 26: (a) and (c): Evolution of f(r)function during absorption of 105particles with a xed electric
chargedQ= 0:001. (b) and (d): Evolution of black hole projection on xyplan during absorption of 105
particles with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:001. The initial conditions are Q0= 1,l= 1,M0= 1:5,rh= 1
andD= 4.
at the constant electric potential it gets larger but it tends to form an extremal black hole.
39Therefore, one veries the second law as we can observe in Fig. 27 that the entropy of the
black (associated with the event horizon) increases during the absorption. Moreover, the
(a)
 (b)
Figure 27: (a) Entropy as a function of black hole charge during absorption of 105particles with a xed
electric charge dQ= 0:001. (b)fmin=f(rmin)in terms of black hole electric charge during absorption of
105particles with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:001. The initial conditions are Q0= 1,l= 1,M0= 1:5,
rh= 1andD= 4.
inner entropy increases also such that the eective entropy given in Eq.(62) increases too.
Hence, the evolution of eective entropy veries the second law as well. We notice that at
the extremal state, the eective entropy vanishes, but as it increases during the absorption,
leading to conclude that we cannot reach an extremal state even though fmin=f(rmin) tends
to zero (but it is always dierent from zero !) as it is shown in Fig.27. This result veries
and respects the third law of thermodynamics which stipulates that it is impossible for any
process, no matter how idealized, to reduce the entropy of a system to its absolute-zero value
in a nite number of operations.
We illustrate in Fig.28 the evolution of the black hole temperature as a function of the
electric charge and we observe that it decreases quickly and tends to zero (but it is always
dierent from zero !), thereby the system tends to form an extremal black hole but it is
possible at a nite charge, it can be formed only with an innite charge conrming to the
third law of thermodynamics. As the absorption occurs at xed electric potential, we dene
the heat capacity at the xed electric potential as
C=
T@S
@T
; (69)
and the system criteria of stability is controlled by the sign of the heat capacity, indeed the
system is stable when C>0 and unstable when C<0. The heat capacity at xed electric
potential in terms of black hole temperature is also depicted in the right panel of Fig.28,
40(a)
 (b)
Figure 28: (a) Temperature as a function of black hole charge during absorption of 105particles with a
xed electric charge dQ= 0:001. (b) Heat capacity at the constant electric potential in terms of black hole
temperature during absorption of 105particles with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:001. The initial conditions
areQ0= 1,l= 1,M0= 1:5,rh= 1andD= 4.
and from which, we notice that Cis always positive, meaning that the black hole is stable
during such absorption.
In order to verify that this behavior is the same for all constant potential processes we take
another scenario where jpr
hj6= 0. From Fig.25 we choose rh= 1:1 as an initial condition and
we make the black hole absorb 105particles according to Eq.(67), then, we plot in Fig.29 the
evolution of f(r) function and the black hole projection on xyplan during the absorption of
105positive particles.
41(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Figure 29: (a) and (c): Evolution of f(r)function during absorption of 105particles with a xed electric
chargedQ= 0:005. (b) and (d): Evolution of black hole projection on xyplan during absorption of 105
particles with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:005. The initial conditions are Q0= 1,l= 1,M0= 1:67,
rh= 1:1andD= 4.
One can see that the black hole has qualitatively the same behavior as in Fig.26 but it needs
to absorb a great charge to tend to an extremal state. Indeed, when it absorbs  Q= 500
it is still far from the extremal state. Hence, one checks the second law as we can observe
in Fig.30 that the entropy of the black (associated with the event horizon) increases during
the absorption. Moreover, the inner horizon entropy increases also such that the eective
entropy given in Eq.(62) increases too. Hence, the evolution of eective entropy veries the
second law as well. We notice also that at the extremal state, the eective entropy vanishes,
but as it increases during the absorption we conclude that we cannot have an extremal state
even though fmin=f(rmin) tends to zero (but it is always dierent from zero !) as it is
42(a)
 (b)
Figure 30: (a) Entropy as a function of black hole charge during absorption of 105particles with a xed
electric charge dQ= 0:005. (b)fmin=f(rmin)in terms of black hole electric charge during absorption of
105particles with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:005. The initial conditions are Q0= 1,l= 1,M0= 1:67,
rh= 1:1andD= 4.
shown in Fig.30. This result is in good agreement with the third law of thermodynamics.
We plot in Fig.31 the evolution of the black hole temperature as a function of the electric
and the heat capacity at xed electric potential in terms of black hole temperature. We
observe that it decreases quickly and tends to zero (but it is always dierent from zero !),
thereby the system tends to form an extremal black hole but it is possible at a nite charge,
it can be formed only with an innite charge conrming to the third law of thermodynamics.
Moreover,C>0 which means that the black hole is stable during such absorption.
Further, in Fig.31 we give the variation of the black hole temperature as a function of the
electric charge (left panel) and the heat capacity at xed electric potential in terms of black
hole temperature (right panel).
43(a)
(b)
Figure 31: (a) Temperature as a function of black hole charge during absorption of 105particles with a
xed electric charge dQ= 0:005. (b) Heat capacity at the constant electric potential in terms of black hole
temperature during absorption of 105particles with a xed electric charge dQ= 0:005. The initial conditions
areQ0= 1,l= 1,M0= 1:67,rh= 1:1andD= 4.
We observe that it decreases quickly and tends to zero (but it is always dierent from zero
!), thereby the system tends to form an extremal black hole but it is possible at a nite charge,
it can be formed only with an innite charge conrming to the third law of thermodynamics.
Moreover,C>0 means that the black hole is stable during such absorption.
Finally, we depict in Fig.32 the evolution of black hole pressure as a function of the electric
charge for dierent initial conditions.
(a)M0= 1:5 andrh= 1.
 (b)M0= 1:67 andrh= 1:1.
Figure 32: Black hole pressure as a function of electric charge during a constant electric potential absorp-
tion. The initial conditions are Q0= 1,l= 1, andD= 4.
44We observe that the pressure decreases during the absorption, that is to say, the cosmo-
logical constant (which is negative) increases, thus the AdS spacetime tends to be a at
spacetime.
7 Conclusion
The black hole thermodynamics in AdS spacetime, where the mass Mis considered to be
enthalpy, has been brought to the forefront of modern theoretical high-energy physics, be-
cause of its relevance to the AdS/CFT correspondence. Promoting the status of the negative
cosmological constant ( <0), as a thermodynamic pressure, P= =8, and dening the
thermodynamic volume, V=@M
@PjQ;rh, have enriched the thermodynamics analysis of the
phase structure of the AdS black holes. In this work, we revisit the second law and the
WCCC for the higher dimensional charged AdS black holes, where the absorption of the
charged scalar particles took place by the black hole itself. The absorption of the charged
particles alters the initial congurations of the black holes, and therefore the nal state might
transit to another black hole conguration. Assuming the nal conguration as the black
hole, we verify that the rst law still holds even if it absorbs charged particles. We nd that
the minimum of the blackening function f(r) got shifted to the left or the right depending
on the charged particles' absorption by the black hole. We consider both the extremal and
near extremal congurations of the black holes in order to verify the possible existence of
the black holes' event horizon and consequently the WCCC to be held. The justication
was made by evaluating the blackening factor f(r). These arguments validated the WCCC
through the investigation of the function f(r) around the minimum point. We started with
the extremal and near extremal conditions at the initial stage, and end with the dierent
extremal and near extremal black hole congurations at the nal state with the proviso that
the condition drmin<drhis held. But for drmin=drhthe initial and nal extremal congu-
rations are the same. As a generic condition, if a charged scalar eld was getting swallowed
up by the black hole it would change the location of the minimum and the variation of the
minimum point has been plotted as a function of the spacetime dimension D. Though the
minimum point is not xed for the initial and nal non-extremal situations, still it preserves
the existence of the event horizon, thereby respecting the WCCC throughout the process.
To this end, perhaps the most important analysis is the black hole neutralization and the
validation of the second law. We investigated the neutralization process at constant black
hole's event horizon entropy (isentropic process), and also through the eective entropy for-
malism. We observed that the second law always holds to be good as the entropy always
increases through an irreversible process. It has also a relation connecting the electric po-
tential, the electric charge, and the AdS radius as well as the variations of electric charge
and the AdS radius. When we keep the value of the AdS radius xed and vary the electric
charge we found for dierent choices of the electric charges gave dierent results. Similarly,
for a xed electric charge, if we vary the AdS radius then also we saw that it would give
45rise to dierent results. We also envisaged the isobar neutralization to verify the rst and
second-order phase transitions of the charged AdS black holes in higher dimensions. In this
process also, the entropy increases when the black hole got neutralized and thereby respect-
ing the universality of the second law. We can speculate from these analyses that for the
(non-)extremality conditions the overcharging of the black holes is not possible as it would
lead to the violation of the universality of the second law.
An important related analysis is that of constant electric potential in the context of
extended-phase space thermodynamics. Such a grand canonical description was made to
give a nal touch to our study toward verifying the second law of black hole mechanics. An-
other interesting result that we could infer from such a study is the verication of the third
law of the black hole mechanics, i.e., to say during the absorption of the constant electric
potential the eective entropy increases and we could never reach the extremal state even
thoughf(r) tends to zero at r=rmin. We also observed that the event horizon temperature
as a function of charge and the heat capacity as a function of the temperature approached
the near extremal congurations. But they couldn't approach an extremal state for a nite
charge value of the positively charged particles. It could be attained at the charge value
Q!1 and thereby conrm the third law of black hole mechanics. We also inferred from
the heat capacity Cthat it is always positive, and hence the black hole is always thermo-
dynamically stable.
In the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence, the contribution of a negative cosmological
constant in the rst law of the black holes' AdS bulk is equivalent to the variation of the
number of degrees of freedom, N, of the boundary eld theory CFT. We wish to study our
analysis in terms of the CFT dictionary, where the rst law should include the chemical
potential term. We shall return to this issue in the near future.
Acknowledgment
The research of M. S. A. is supported by the National Postdoctoral Fellowship of the Science
and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science and Technology (DST),
Government of India, File No., PDF/2021/003491.
References
[1] S. W. Hawking. Black Holes and Thermodynamics. Phys. Rev. D, 13:191{197, 1976.
[2] M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim. Asymptotically anti-De Sitter Spaces. Commun.
Math. Phys., 98:391{424, 1985.
46[3] Roger Penrose. Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
14:57{59, 1965.
[4] R. Penrose. Gravitational collapse: The role of general relativity. Riv. Nuovo Cim.,
1:252{276, 1969.
[5] Robert Wald. Gedanken experiments to destroy a black hole. Annals ofPhysics,
82(2):548{556, 1974.
[6] Brian P. Dolan. Pressure and volume in the rst law of black hole thermodynamics.
Class. Quant. Grav., 28:235017, 2011.
[7] David Kubiznak and Robert B. Mann. P-V criticality of charged AdS black holes.
JHEP, 07:033, 2012.
[8] Sharmila Gunasekaran, Robert B. Mann, and David Kubiznak. Extended phase space
thermodynamics for charged and rotating black holes and Born-Infeld vacuum polar-
ization. JHEP, 11:110, 2012.
[9] Robie A. Hennigar, Wilson G. Brenna, and Robert B. Mann. P vcriticality in
quasitopological gravity. JHEP, 07:077, 2015.
[10] A. Belhaj, M. Chabab, H. El Moumni, K. Masmar, M. B. Sedra, and A. Segui. On Heat
Properties of AdS Black Holes in Higher Dimensions. JHEP, 05:149, 2015.
[11] Wei Xu and Liu Zhao. Critical phenomena of static charged AdS black holes in conformal
gravity. Phys. Lett. B, 736:214{220, 2014.
[12] M. Chabab, H. El Moumni, S. Iraoui, and K. Masmar. Phase Transition of Charged-
AdS Black Holes and Quasinormal Modes : a Time Domain Analysis. Astrophys. Space
Sci., 362(10):192, 2017.
[13] Peng Wang, Houwen Wu, and Haitang Yang. Thermodynamics and Phase Transitions
of Nonlinear Electrodynamics Black Holes in an Extended Phase Space. JCAP, 04:052,
2019.
[14] Zhi Luo, Hao Yu, and Jin Li. Eects of a global monopole on the thermodynamic phase
transition of a charged AdS black hole*. Chin. Phys. C, 46(12):125101, 2022.
[15] Bogeun Gwak. Thermodynamics with Pressure and Volume under Charged Particle
Absorption. JHEP, 11:129, 2017.
[16] Deyou Chen, Wei Yang, and Xiaoxiong Zeng. Thermodynamics and weak cosmic cen-
sorship conjecture in Reissner-Nordstr om anti-de Sitter black holes with scalar eld.
Nucl. Phys. B, 946:114722, 2019.
47[17] Xiao-Xiong Zeng and Hai-Qing Zhang. Thermodynamics and weak cosmic censorship
conjecture in Born-Infeld-anti-de Sitter black holes. Chin. Phys. C, 45(2):025112, 2021.
[18] Xiao-Xiong Zeng, Yi-Wen Han, and De-You Chen. Thermodynamics and weak cosmic
censorship conjecture of BTZ black holes in extended phase space. Chin. Phys. C,
43(10):105104, 2019.
[19] Bogeun Gwak. Weak Cosmic Censorship Conjecture in Kerr-(Anti-)de Sitter Black Hole
with Scalar Field. JHEP, 09:081, 2018.
[20] Xiao-Xiong Zeng and Hai-Qing Zhang. Thermodynamics and weak cosmic censorship
conjecture in the Kerr-AdS black hole. Nucl. Phys. B, 959:115162, 2020.
[21] Ke-Jian He, Guo-Ping Li, and Xin-Yun Hu. Violations of the weak cosmic censorship
conjecture in the higher dimensional f(R) black holes with pressure. Eur. Phys. J.C,
80(3):209, 2020.
[22] Deyou Chen. Weak cosmic censorship conjecture in BTZ black holes with scalar elds.
Chin. Phys. C, 44(1):015101, 2020.
[23] Shi-Qian Hu, Bo Liu, Xiao-Mei Kuang, and Rui-Hong Yue. Revisiting black hole ther-
modynamics in massive gravity: charged particle absorption and shell of dust falling.
Chin. Phys. C, 44:105107, 2020.
[24] Baoyi Chen, Feng-Li Lin, and Bo Ning. Gedanken Experiments to Destroy a BTZ Black
Hole. Phys. Rev. D, 100(4):044043, 2019.
[25] Si-Jiang Yang, Jun-Jie Wan, Jing Chen, Jie Yang, and Yong-Qiang Wang. Weak cosmic
censorship conjecture for the novel 4 Dcharged Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet black hole with
test scalar eld and particle. Eur. Phys. J.C, 80(10):937, 2020.
[26] Wen-Bin Feng, Si-Jiang Yang, Qin Tan, Jie Yang, and Yu-Xiao Liu. Overcharging a
Reissner-Nordstr om Taub-NUT regular black hole. Sci.China Phys. Mech. Astron.,
64(6):260411, 2021.
[27] Bogeun Gwak. Weak Cosmic Censorship with Pressure and Volume in Charged Anti-de
Sitter Black Hole under Charged Scalar Field. JCAP, 08:016, 2019.
[28] Jing Liang, Xiaobo Guo, Deyou Chen, and Benrong Mu. Remarks on the weak cosmic
censorship conjecture of RN-AdS black holes with cloud of strings and quintessence
under the scalar eld. Nucl. Phys. B, 965:115335, 2021.
[29] Guo-Ping Li, Ke-Jian He, and Bing-Bing Chen. Testing thermodynamic laws and weak
cosmic censorship conjecture of conformal anomaly corrected AdS black hole. Eur. Phys.
J.Plus, 136(1):2, 2021.
48[30] W. F. Nie, Y. Y. Feng, and X. G. Lan. Availability of the thermodynamics and weak
cosmic censorship conjecture for a charged AdS black hole in the large dimension limit.
Int.J.Theor. Phys., 60(11-12):4145{4161, 2021.
[31] De-Chang Dai, Djordje Minic, and Dejan Stojkovic. Bulk entropy is crucial to validate
the second law of the extended black hole thermodynamics. JHEP, 12:126, 2021.
[32] Peng Wang, Houwen Wu, and Haitang Yang. Thermodynamics of nonlinear electro-
dynamics black holes and the validity of weak cosmic censorship at charged particle
absorption. Eur. Phys. J.C, 79(7):572, 2019.
[33] Ayyesha K. Ahmed, Sanjar Shaymatov, and Bobomurat Ahmedov. Weak cosmic
censorship conjecture for the (2+1)-dimensional charged BTZ black hole in the Ein-
stein{Gauss{Bonnet Gravity. Phys. Dark Univ., 37:101082, 2022.
[34] Si-Jiang Yang, Yu-Peng Zhang, Shao-Wen Wei, and Yu-Xiao Liu. Destroying the event
horizon of a nonsingular rotating quantum-corrected black hole. JHEP, 04:066, 2022.
[35] Bogeun Gwak. Thermodynamics with pressure and volume under charged particle
absorption. Journal ofHigh Energy Physics, 2017(11):129, 2017.
[36] Shi-Qian Hu, Yen Chin Ong, and Don N. Page. No evidence for violation of the second
law in extended black hole thermodynamics. Phys. Rev. D, 100(10):104022, 2019.
[37] M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim. THE COSMOLOGICAL CONSTANT AS A CANON-
ICAL VARIABLE. Phys. Lett. B, 143:415{420, 1984.
[38] David Kubiz n ak, Robert B Mann, and Mae Teo. Black hole chemistry: thermodynamics
with lambda. Classical andQuantum Gravity, 34(6):063001, 2017.
[39] Shao-Wen Wei and Yu-Xiao Liu. Insight into the Microscopic Structure of an AdS Black
Hole from a Thermodynamical Phase Transition. Phys. Rev. Lett., 115(11):111302,
2015. [Erratum: Phys.Rev.Lett. 116, 169903 (2016)].
[40] Jia-Lin Zhang, Rong-Gen Cai, and Hongwei Yu. Phase transition and thermodynamical
geometry for Schwarzschild AdS black hole in AdS 5×S5spacetime. JHEP, 02:143, 2015.
[41] A. Belhaj, M. Chabab, H. El Moumni, K. Masmar, and M. B. Sedra. On Thermody-
namics of AdS Black Holes in M-Theory. Eur. Phys. J.C, 76(2):73, 2016.
[42] M. Chabab, H. El Moumni, and K. Masmar. On thermodynamics of charged AdS black
holes in extended phases space via M2-branes background. Eur. Phys. J.C, 76(6):304,
2016.
[43] Cliord V. Johnson. Holographic Heat Engines. Class. Quant. Grav., 31:205002, 2014.
49[44] H. El Moumni, J. Khallou, and K. Masmar. Evidence for NO violation of the second
law in extended black hole thermodynamics. Int.J.Mod. Phys. D, 31(13):2250100,
2022.
[45] Yu Tian and Xiao-Ning Wu. Dynamics of gravity as thermodynamics on the spherical
holographic screen. Phys. Rev. D, 83:021501, Jan 2011.
[46] Brian P. Dolan, David Kastor, David Kubiz n ak, Robert B. Mann, and Jennie Traschen.
Thermodynamic volumes and isoperimetric inequalities for de sitter black holes. Phys.
Rev. D, 87:104017, May 2013.
[47] Brian P Dolan. Where is the pdv in the rst law of black hole thermodynamics? Open
Questions inCosmology, 2012.
[48] Mirjam Cveti c, Gary W Gibbons, D Kubiz n ak, and Christopher N Pope. Black hole
enthalpy and an entropy inequality for the thermodynamic volume. Physical Review D,
84(2):024037, 2011.
[49] David Kastor, Sourya Ray, and Jennie Traschen. Enthalpy and the mechanics of ads
black holes. Classical andQuantum Gravity, 26(19):195011, 2009.
[50] Demetrios Christodoulou. Reversible and irreversible transformations in black-hole
physics. Phys. Rev. Lett., 25:1596{1597, Nov 1970.
[51] Deyou Chen. Thermodynamics and weak cosmic censorship conjecture in extended
phase spaces of anti-de sitter black holes with particles' absorption. The European
Physical Journal C, 79(4):353, 2019.
[52] Shi-Qian Hu, Yen Chin Ong, and Don N Page. No violation of the second law in
extended black hole thermodynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05870, 2019.
[53] Harry W. Braden, J. David Brown, Bernard F. Whiting, and James W. York. Charged
black hole in a grand canonical ensemble. Phys. Rev. D, 42:3376{3385, Nov 1990.
[54] Claudia S. Pe ca and Jos e P. S. Lemos. Thermodynamics of reissner{nordstr om{anti-de
sitter black holes in the grand canonical ensemble. Phys. Rev. D, 59:124007, May 1999.
[55] Peng Wang, Houwen Wu, and Haitang Yang. Thermodynamics and phase transition
of a nonlinear electrodynamics black hole in a cavity. Journal ofHigh Energy Physics,
2019(7):2, 2019.
[56] Kangkai Liang, Peng Wang, Houwen Wu, and Mingtao Yang. Phase structures and
transitions of born{infeld black holes in a grand canonical ensemble. The European
Physical Journal C, 80(3):1{14, 2020.
[57] M. Chabab, H. El Moumni, and J. Khallou. On Einstein-non linear-Maxwell-Yukawa
de-Sitter black hole thermodynamics. Nucl. Phys. B, 963:115305, 2021.
50[58] Miho Urano, Akira Tomimatsu, and Hiromi Saida. The mechanical rst law of black
hole spacetimes with a cosmological constant and its application to the schwarzschild{de
sitter spacetime. Classical andQuantum Gravity, 26(10):105010, 2009.
[59] Li-Chun Zhang, Meng-Sen Ma, Hui-Hua Zhao, and Ren Zhao. Thermodynamics of
phase transition in higher-dimensional reissner{nordstr om{de sitter black hole. The
European Physical Journal C, 74(9):3052, 2014.
[60] Sourav Bhattacharya. A note on entropy of de sitter black holes. TheEuropean Physical
Journal C, 76(3):112, 2016.
51