arXiv:2302.09670v1  [q-bio.QM]  19 Feb 2023Ergodic characterization of non-ergodic anomalous diﬀusi on processes
Madhur Mangalam∗
Division of Biomechanics and Research Development, Depart ment of Biomechanics,
and Center for Research in Human Movement Variability,
University of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, NE 68182, USA
Ralf Metzler
Institute of Physics & Astronomy, University of Potsdam, 14 776 Potsdam, Germany
Damian G. Kelty-Stephen
Department of Psychology, State University of New York at Ne w Paltz, New Paltz, New York 12561, USA
Anomalous diﬀusion in a variety of complex systems abounds i n nature and spans multiple space
and time scales. Canonical characterization techniques th at rely upon mean squared displacement
(MSD) break down for non-ergodic processes, making it challengi ng to characterize anomalous
diﬀusion from an individual time-series measurement. Non- ergodicity reigns when the time-averaged
mean square displacement TA-MSD diﬀers from the ensemble-averaged mean squared displaceme nt
EA-MSD even in the limit of long measurement series. In these cases, the typical theoretical
results for ensemble averages cannot be used to understand a nd interpret data acquired from time
averages. The diﬃculty then lies in obtaining statistical d escriptors of the measured diﬀusion process
that are not non-ergodic. We show that linear descriptors su ch as the standard deviation ( SD),
coeﬃcient of variation ( CV), and root mean square ( RMS ) break ergodicity in proportion to non-
ergodicity in the diﬀusion process. In contrast, time serie s of descriptors addressing sequential
structure and its potential nonlinearity: multifractalit y change in a time-independent way and
fulﬁll the ergodic assumption, largely independent of the t ime series’ non-ergodicity. We show
that these ﬁndings follow the multiplicative cascades unde rlying these diﬀusion processes. Adding
fractal and multifractal descriptors to typical linear des criptors would improve the characterization
of anomalous diﬀusion processes. Two particular points bea r emphasis here. First, as an appropriate
formalism for encoding the nonlinearity that might generat e non-ergodicity, multifractal modeling
oﬀers descriptors that can behave ergodically enough to mee t the needs of linear modeling. Second,
this capacity to describe non-ergodic processes in ergodic terms oﬀers the possibility that multifractal
modeling could unify several disparate non-ergodic diﬀusi on processes into a common framework.
I. INTRODUCTION
Anomalous diﬀusion abounds in nature—atoms in
magneto-optical traps [1, 2], DNA, lipids, and proteins
[3–12], bacteria, cells, and parasites [13–19], foraging w ild
animals [20–22] and human hunter gatherers [23, 24], eco-
nomic markets [25–27], and various other processes [28–
31] show anomalous diﬀusion that spans multiple scales
(Fig. 1a). All these processes are characterized by an
erratic change of an observable (e.g., position, tempera-
ture, or stock price) over time (Fig. 1b). “Anomalous” im-
plies that the observable x’s mean squared displacement
(MSD) does not grow linearly with time t,∝an}bracketle{tx2(t)∝an}bracketri}ht∝t,
as predicted by Fick’s theory of diﬀusion, but follows
another power–law pattern ∝an}bracketle{tx2(t)∝an}bracketri}ht ∝tα, withα∝ne}ationslash= 1.
Frequently, α <1, indicating subdiﬀusion [16, 32–38].
Superdiﬀusion—characterized by α >1—is less com-
monly reported than subdiﬀusion but is often observed
in active physical and biological systems [33, 39–46].
Widespread evidence of anomalous diﬀusion processes
has sparked a major theoretical eﬀort to comprehend
and formally organize the mechanisms that might ex-
∗Correspondence should be sent to: mmangalam@uomaha.edu.plain them. This endeavor has resulted in various mathe-
matical models with and without long-range correlations
and varied spatial (step length) and temporal (step du-
ration) random distributions. Models of anomalous dif-
fusion have grown from elaborations of Brownian mo-
tion, which depicts the movement of a small particle
in a ﬂuid due to thermal forces. Brownian motion em-
bodies ordinary diﬀusion when MSD grows linearly with
time,∝an}bracketle{tx2(t)∝an}bracketri}ht∝t[48]. In a curious turn of terminology,
anomalous diﬀusion emerges as the more general case—
“anomalous is normal" [49], and these widespread appli-
cations of diﬀusion modeling come from adding anoma-
lous nuance to these ﬂuctuation patterns in the narrow
case of so-called “ordinary” diﬀusion [49]. The anomalous
diﬀusion underlying an observed process can be mod-
eled as fractional Brownian motion (FBM) [50], scaled
Brownian motion (SBM) [51, 52], noisy continuous-time
random walk (nCTRW) [53]—a variant of CTRW [54],
annealed transient time motion (ATTM) [55], or Lévy
walk (LW) [56]. These diﬀusion processes show subtle
diﬀerences in how ﬂuctuations are distributed in time (for
details of the models, see Appendix A). The theoretical
challenge for explaining anomalous diﬀusion compounds
with the observation that these diﬀerent processes are
not mutually exclusive—they may only reﬂect distinct
modes into which the same observable system can tran-2
FIG. 1. Random walks or anomalous diﬀusion processes, which are deﬁned by unpredictable variations in an observable, ca n
be found in a wide range of systems over a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. (a) Examples include atoms in magneto-
optical traps, the diﬀusion of biological components such a s DNA, lipids, and proteins, bacteria and cell motility, and foraging
wild animals. (b) Random walks in three-dimensional spaces may be dimensionally reduced: 1D, proteins sliding along DN A
segments; 2D, receptors diﬀusing across the plasma membran e; 3D, cells migrating through a three-dimensional matrix. The
color code of the trajectories represents time. (c) Represe ntative trajectories and corresponding MSD for diﬀusive ( α= 1, black
lines), subdiﬀusive ( 0< α <1, blue lines), and superdiﬀusive ( 1< α <2, red lines) motion. The underlying anomalous diﬀusion
model can be classiﬁed as fractional Brownian motion (FBM), scaled Brownian motion (SBM), continuous-time random walk
(CTRW), annealed transient time motion (ATTM), or Lévy walk (LW). These diﬀusion models produce subtle changes (detail s
of the models are described in “Methods” section). A traject ory can show a change-point by switching the diﬀusion model o r
exponent as a result of diﬀusion in a spatially heterogeneou s environment. Adapted from Muñoz-Gil et al. [47].
sition [47, 57]. A single observed trajectory can switch
at change points among regimes best explained by diﬀer-
ent of these models as a result of interactions with the
surroundings in a heterogeneous environment [3, 7, 8, 58–
61] (Fig. 1c). Often, the observed motion also simulta-
neously exhibits features of more than a single of the
“elementary" stochastic models. Despite their common
heritage in Brownian motion [62], these processes exhibit
seemingly disparate modes of nonlinear and non-ergodic
behavior [49, 61, 63–66]. The challenge is that modeling
the causal evolution from one mode to another requires
causal models, and prevailing statistical approaches to
causal modeling largely assume linearity and ergodicity.
A leading motivation to study anomalous diﬀusion
models is to detect and classify speciﬁc anomalous diﬀu-sion processes in empirical data. However, all the above
factors make this classiﬁcation a challenging feat. There-
fore, recent attempts include Bayesian [67–71] as well
as machine learning (ML) approaches [47, 72–76], and
even unsupervised approaches [77–82]. However, these
attempts are based on predominantly atheoretical selec-
tion of features which may not necessarily be related to
plausible generating mechanisms [83, 84]. A more theo-
retically deﬁned set of features can potentially improve
the ML-powered characterization of anomalous diﬀusion
processes in empirical data.
One possible resolution lies in the observation that
temporal correlations and non-Gaussianity are common
features of multifractal processes. Multifractal geome-
try is also a formalism that speciﬁcally addresses the in-3
termittent, non-ergodic ﬂuctuations across a wide range
of scales and the nonlinear interactions of short-range
events with large-scale contextual factors [85, 86]. Mul-
tifractality is observed in strong anomalous diﬀusion
[87, 88]. Thus, these anomalous processes with com-
mon heritage in the Brownian-motion formalism may ﬁnd
a common reuniﬁed description. This point is not to
say that the models generating these diﬀerent regimes of
anomalous diﬀusion are explicitly multifractal. Instead,
it is to recognize that multifractal geometry has long been
considered a modeling framework broad enough to ex-
plain how these diﬀerent modes of anomalous diﬀusion
evolve over time and sometimes with change points from
one mode to another [89]. Critically, the ﬁrst step to-
wards explanation through prevailing causal models is
meeting the basic benchmark of ergodicity for the tra-
ditionally linear statistical structure of causal model-
ing. We use numerical simulations to test the hypothesis
that multifractal geometrical estimates of these diﬀusive
properties oﬀer an ergodic descriptor that makes these
disparate diﬀusion processes amenable to linear causal
framework.
Eﬀorts so far have addressed the twofold challenges of
properly quantifying empirical diﬀusion processes and of
doing so with the appropriate model. The diﬃculty here
is that both concerns must be pursued largely in tan-
dem: we must empirically estimate the value of model
parameters, and to ensure these estimates are eﬀective,
we must be sure to use a model appropriate to the
data. Best practices for balancing parameter estimation
with model speciﬁcation includes analyzing the empiri-
cal time-series data with various statistical observables
such asMSD, spectral power analysis, Van-Hove corre-
lation functions, step-length or ﬂight-time distribution ,
and ergodicity breaking parameter [31, 90–99]. However,
data interpretation can be subjective and is contingent
on the ﬁdelity of the observed data which is inevitably
constrained by length and number of observations, mea-
surement noise, and sample spatiotemporal heterogene-
ity.
It is important to note that the preceding best prac-
tices are sometimes at odds with the characteristic non-
ergodicity of many anomalous-diﬀusion processes. That
is to say, the constraints imposed by ergodicity on diﬀu-
sion modeling set in well before any thoughts about lin-
ear causal models to articulate any causal developmental
relationships among disparate anomalous-diﬀusion pro-
cesses. Non-ergodicity entails a failure of individual tim e-
series measurements to represent an ensemble. Non-
ergodicity reigns when TA-MSD diﬀers from EA-MSD .
Sample-size constraints on measurements of non-ergodic
processes thus dramatically constrain the interpretation
of the canonical characterization techniques that rely on
MSD. In these cases, the typical theoretical results for
ensemble averages cannot be used to understand and in-
terpret data acquired from time averages. For example,
FBM is ergodic for α= 0.1, though convergence of the
EA-MSD toTA-MSD may be slower for values of theanomalous exponent close to 1 [100]. The ergodicity in
FBM requires careful analysis as a function of α[101–
104], and often higher order moments accounting for the
skewness and kurtosis are necessary to study ergodicity
breaking in FBM [105]. CTRW, ATTM, and SBM show
weak ergodicity breaking [7, 55, 88, 106–109]. Finally,
LW shows a distinct kind of ergodicity breaking—named
ultra-weak non-ergodicity—in which ensemble and time
averages only diﬀer by a constant factor [110, 111]. De-
riving inferences from canonical estimates submitted to
linear causal models makes the questionable compromise
of enforcing similarity while neglecting diversity for for -
mal convenience, given the variability in the ergodic fea-
tures of these diﬀusion processes. Moreover, such infer-
ences may obscure any artifacts of non-ergodicity or fail
to articulate the systematic changes that lead to non-
ergodicity, potentially obscuring any genuine individual
diﬀerences and discarding any generalizable truths we
might have gleaned from the same diversity that was in-
tended to represent these disparate models of nonlinear-
ity and non-ergodicity [103].
Here, we have used cascade-dynamical descriptors
rooted in the multifractal formalism to compare the
ergodicity-related diﬀusive properties of various anoma-
lous processes. An important theoretical move be-
yond attempts at formal convenience may be explic-
itly addressing the underlying mechanisms generating
non-ergodicity in empirical examples of anomalous dif-
fusion. In this sense, multifractal geometry is not
merely convenient because it aﬀords an analytical reper-
toire for addressing features sometimes seen in diﬀerent
anomalous-diﬀusion processes. Rather, multifractal ge-
ometry is a theoretically valid means to estimate param-
eters of cascade dynamics that can generate a wide vari-
ety of intermittent, non-ergodic behavior. If we encode
those aspects of the diﬀusion process known to gener-
ate non-ergodicity, these parameter estimates might be
ergodic—and indeed, current evidence shows that they
are [101, 104]. We know, for instance, that fGnob-
served in biological and psychological phenomena break
ergodicity primarily due to the interdependencies among
factors unfolding at multiple spatial and temporal scales
[112–116]. The scale-invariant shape of the power-law
autocorrelation in fGn—quantiﬁed as the fractal expo-
nentHfGnshows none of the ergodicity breaking of the
fGnseries [104]. Although fGnis a linear process, one
possible explanation for power-law scaling is the nonlin-
ear interactions across scales in cascade processes known
to generate intermittent, non-ergodic behavior [85]. The
strength of cascade dynamics can be quantiﬁed as the
multifractal spectrum width ∆αand then as t-statistic
comparing that multifractal-spectrum width to spectrum
widths for linear surrogates tMF[117, 118]. If cascades
can explain the non-ergodic behavior of all anomalous dif-
fusion processes, then ∆αandtMFmight avoid display-
ing the breaking of ergodicity and can be submitted to
linear models of cause and eﬀect. Indeed, we have shown
that forfGn, all three descriptors: HfGn,∆α, andtMF,4
avoid ergodicity breaking [101, 104]. Even without any
interest in causal modeling to examine the developmen-
tal change among modes of anomalous diﬀusion, this ap-
proach of extending beyond MSD to more generalized
multifractal modeling can help apparently restoring bro-
ken ergodicity for all forms of anomalous diﬀusion pro-
cesses.
The structure of this article is as follows. We ﬁrst
provide a comparative analysis of ergodic properties of
synthetic FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW time
series with diﬀerent values of the anomalous exponent.
We then provide a comparative analysis of ergodic prop-
erties of the time series of linear and cascade-dynamical
descriptors of these synthetic time series. We dis-
cuss how the latter descriptors—rooted in multifractal
formalism—encode the nonlinearity that might generate
non-ergodicity in these anomalous diﬀusion processes.
Finally, we discuss the implications of using cascade-
dynamical descriptors of anomalous diﬀusion processes
to meet the needs of linear modeling and classify speciﬁc
anomalous diﬀusion processes in empirical data.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Simulating FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and
LW series
We simulated using MATLAB (Matlab Inc, Natick,
MA) 50,001-sample synthetic trajectories generated ac-
cording to each of the following ﬁve diﬀerent anomalous
diﬀusion models (Fig. 2a): (i) FBM (ergodic)—a motion
with correlated long-range steps [50], (ii) SBM (weakly
non-ergodic)—a motion whose diﬀusion coeﬃcient fea-
tures deterministic time-dependent changes [51, 52], (iii )
nCTRW (weakly non-ergodic)—a variant of CTRW [54],
a motion undergoing local trapping with a wide distri-
bution of waiting times [53], (iv) ATTM (weakly non-
ergodic)—a motion with random changes of the diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcient in time [55], and (iv) LW (ultra-weakly
non-ergodic)—a motion displaying irregular jumps with
constant velocity [56]. Appendix A describes the anoma-
lous diﬀusion models considered and the algorithm used
to simulate each process in more detail. The anomalous
exponent was restricted to α≥0.1because smaller ex-
ponents produce practically immobile trajectories. Note
that FBM, SBM, nCTRW, and ATTM are considered
in the subdiﬀusive range 0.1≤α≤1and LW is sub-
diﬀusive in the range α≥1. We simulated 100 se-
ries using each of the 10 diﬀerent exponents for each
model:α={0.1,0.2,...,1}for FBM, SBM, nCTRW,
and ATTM, and α={1.1,1.2,...,2}for LW. Each series
was then diﬀerentiated and unsigned to obtain a 50,000-
samples ﬂuctuation series. All analysis was conducted
on these unsigned ﬂuctuation series because multifrac-
tal analysis require all values in a time series to be pos-
itive. Using unsigned values is a common practice in
fractal and multifractal analysis. A shuﬄed version ofeach original ﬂuctuation series was generated for com-
parison, because ergodicity is about how sequence exem-
pliﬁes a typical mean trajectory of a sample of realiza-
tions. Shuﬄing breaks the sequence, producing additive
white Gaussian noise (awGn) that oscillates around the
mean. Finally, each original series x(t)was segmented
into 100 non-overlapping 500-sample segments, s, such
thats={s1,s2,...,s 100}. The corresponding shuﬄed
version for each process was likewise segmented. 100-
sample time series of linear and nonlinear descriptors
were then obtained across these segmented series. This
procedure breaks long-range correlations in the process,
as we will see below.
B. Estimating linear descriptors
We computed EA-MSD andTA-MSD for each trajec-
tory of each process. We deﬁned EA-MSD as
∝an}bracketle{tx2(t)∝an}bracketri}ht=1
NN/summationdisplay
i=1/bracketleftbig
xi(t)−xi(0)/bracketrightbig2, (1)
for a set of Ntrajectories, and we deﬁned the time aver-
age mean squared displacement ( TA-MSD ) as
δ2(τ) =1
L−mL−m/summationdisplay
i=1/bracketleftbig
x((i+m)∆t)−x(i∆t)/bracketrightbig2,(2)
when the series is sampled at Ldiscrete times τ=m∆t.
We also computed MSD-related three linear descrip-
tors for each of the 100 non-overlapping 500-sample seg-
ments for the original version (i.e., unshuﬄed) and a shuf-
ﬂed version (i.e., a version with the temporal information
destroyed) of each process. We deﬁned the standard de-
viation (SD) as
SD=/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalbt1
TT/summationdisplay
t=1/parenleftBig
x(t)−x(t)/parenrightBig2
, (3)
whereTis the ﬂuctuation series length, and we deﬁned
the coeﬃcient of variation ( CV) as
CV=/radicalbigg
1
T/summationtextT
t=1/parenleftBig
x(t)−x(t)/parenrightBig2
x(t). (4)
We also deﬁned the root mean square ( RMS ), i.e.,
RMS=/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalbt1
TT/summationdisplay
t=1|x(t)|2. (5)
C. Estimating cascade-dynamical descriptors
We computed three cascade-dynamical descriptors for
each of the 100 non-overlapping 500-sample segments for5
FIG. 2. Simulated anomalous diﬀusion processes and their er godic properties. (a) Sample trajectories, and the corresp onding
ﬂuctuation series, generated according to the following ﬁv e models: fractional Brownian motion (FBM, ergodic), scale d Brown-
ian motion (SBM, weakly non-ergodic), noisy continuous-ti me random walk (nCTRW, weakly non-ergodic), annealed trans ient
time motion (ATTM, weakly non-ergodic), and Lévy walk (LW, u ltra-weakly non-ergodic). While FBM, SBM, nCTRW, and
ATTM are strictly subdiﬀusive ( 0.1≤α≤1), LW is superdiﬀusive ( α≥1). The anomalous exponent αranges from 0.1
to 1 for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, and ATTM, and from 1.1 to 2 for LW, with an increment of 0.1 from top to bottom. (b)
Ergodicity-breaking parameter ( EB)-vs.-logtcurves for each of the ﬁve processes ( N= 100 ; lag is∆ = 10 samples). The diﬀer-
ent decay rates of EB→0ast→ ∞ for diﬀerent diﬀusion models and exponents indicates that e ach process breaks ergodicity
to diﬀerent extents: FBM, ergodic; SBM, weakly non-ergodic ; nCTRW, weakly non-ergodic; ATTM, weakly non-ergodic; and
LW, ultra-weakly non-ergodic. Additionally, for SBM, nCTR W, and ATTM, EBdiﬀers between the original series (colored
circles and lines) and their shuﬄed versions (grey circles a nd lines). For LW, EBfor the original and shuﬄed series completely
coincide. For FBM, EBfor the shuﬄed series for all αcoincide with EBfor the original series with α= 0.5. Hence, grey circles
and lines are eclipsed by colored circles and lines for FBM an d LW.6
the original version (i.e., unshuﬄed) and a shuﬄed ver-
sion (i.e., a version with the temporal information de-
stroyed) of each process.
1. Accessing fractality using detrended ﬂuctuation analys is
Detrended ﬂuctuation analysis (DFA) computes the
Hurst exponent, HfGn, quantifying the strength of long-
range correlations in series [119, 120] using the ﬁrst-orde r
integration of T-length time series x(t):
y(i) =i/summationdisplay
k=1/parenleftBig
x(k)−x(t)/parenrightBig
, (6)
wherei= 1,2,3,...,T . DFA computes root mean square
(RMS ; i.e., averaging the residuals) for each linear trend
yn(t)ﬁt toNnnon-overlapping n-length bins to build a
ﬂuctuation function:
f(v,n) =/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalbt1
NnNn/summationdisplay
v=1/parenleftbigg1
nn/summationdisplay
i=1/parenleftBig
y/parenleftbig
(v−1)n+i/parenrightbig
−yv(i)/parenrightBig2/parenrightbigg
,
(7)
where n = {4, 8, 12, . . . } < T/4. f(n)is a power law,
f(n)∼nHfGn, (8)
whereHfGnis the scaling exponent estimable using log-
arithmic transformation:
logf(n) =HfGnlogn. (9)
HigherHfGncorresponds to stronger long-range correla-
tions.
2. Assessing multifractal spectrum width using the
direct-estimation of singularity spectrum
Chhabra and Jensen’s [121] direct method estimates
multifractal spectrum width ∆αby sampling a series x(t)
at progressively larger scales using the proportion of sig-
nalPi(n)falling within the vth bin of scale nas
Pv(n) =Nn/summationtext
k=(v−1)n+1x(k)
/summationtextx(t), (12)
where n = {2, 4, 8, 16, . . . } < T/8. As nincreases,Pv(n)
represents a progressively larger proportion of x(t),
P(n)∝nα, (11)
suggesting a growth of the proportion according to one
“singularity” strength α[122].P(n)exhibits multifrac-
tal dynamics when it grows heterogeneously across time
scalesnaccording to multiple singularity strengths, such
that
P(nv)∝nαv, (12)whereby each vth bin may show a distinct relationship
ofP(n)withn. The width of this singularity spectrum,
∆α= (αmax−αmin), indicates the heterogeneity of these
relationships [123, 124].
Chhabra and Jensen’s [121] method estimates P(n)
forNnnon-overlapping bins of n-sizes and transforms
them into a “mass” µ(q)using aqparameter emphasiz-
ing higher or lower P(n)forq>1andq<1, respectively,
in the form
µv(q,n) =/bracketleftbig
Pv(n)/bracketrightbigq
Nn/summationtext
j=1/bracketleftbig
Pj(n)/bracketrightbigq. (13)
Then,α(q)is the singularity for mass µ-weightedP(n)
estimated as
α(q) =−lim
Nn→∞1
lnNnNn/summationdisplay
v=1µv(q,n)lnPv(n)
= lim
n→01
lnnNn/summationdisplay
v=1µv(q,n)lnPv(n). (14)
Each estimated value of α(q)belongs to the multifractal
spectrum only when the Shannon entropy of µ(q,n)scales
withnaccording to the Hausdorﬀ dimension f(q)[121],
where
f(q) =−lim
Nn→∞1
lnNnNn/summationdisplay
v=1µv(q,n)lnµv(q,n)
= lim
v→01
lnnNn/summationdisplay
v=1µv(q,n)lnµv(q,n). (15)
For values of qyielding a strong relationship be-
tween Eqs. (14) & (15)—in this study, correlation co-
eﬃcientr >0.995, the parametric curve (α(q),f(q))or
(α,f(α))constitutes the multifractal spectrum and ∆α
(i.e.,αmax−αmin) constitutes the multifractal spectrum
width.rdetermines only an adequately strong part of the
multifractal spectrum is considered. This tradition of us-
ing a correlation-coeﬃcient benchmark began with Dixon
and Kelty-Stephen [112] trying to operationalize the con-
cerns raised by Zamir [125], and all Kelty-Stephen-co-
authored empirical work using Chhabra and Jensen’s
[121] multifractal analysis since has used this same bench-
mark. The use of correlation coeﬃcient has regularly pro-
vided multifractal spectra whose widths have been signiﬁ-
cant predictors of various behavioral outcomes [118, 126–
137]. So, whatever may be arbitrary in this choice of
correlation coeﬃcient and whatever may be determined
alternatively/equally/more correctly or usefully, the sy s-
tematic application of this standard across an entire se-
ries of experimental datasets has not left the estimated
measures of multifractal spectrum width altogether use-
less.7
3. Assessing multifractality due to nonlinearity using
surrogate testing
To identify whether a nonzero ∆αreﬂects multifractal-
ity due to cascade-like interactivity, ∆αfor the original
series was compared to ∆αfor 32 Iterated Amplitude Ad-
justed Fourier Transform (IAAFT) surrogates [138, 139].
IAAFT randomizes original values time-symmetrically
around the autoregressive structure, generating surro-
gates that randomize phase ordering of the original series’
spectral amplitudes while preserving linear temporal cor-
relations. The one-sample t-statistic (henceforth, tMF)
takes the subtractive diﬀerence between ∆αfor the orig-
inal series and the 32 surrogates, dividing by the stan-
dard error of the spectrum width for the 32 surrogates.
The greater the value of tMF, the greater the amount of
multifractality in the original series due to nonlinear as
opposed to linear sources.
D. Estimating ergodicity breaking parameter EB
for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW series,
and the corresponding TA- MSD,SD,CV,RMS,
HfGn,∆α, andtMFseries
Ergodicity can be quantiﬁed using a dimensionless
statistic of ergodicity breaking EB, also known as the
Thirumalai-Mountain metric [91, 98] and already men-
tioned by Rytov et al. [95], computed by subtracting the
squared total-sample variance from the average squared
subsample variance and dividing the resultant by the
squared total-sample variance:
EB(x(t)) =/angbracketleftBig/bracketleftBig
δ2(x(t))/bracketrightBig2/angbracketrightBig
−/angbracketleftBig
δ2(x(t))/angbracketrightBig2
/angbracketleftBig
δ2(x(t))/angbracketrightBig2. (16)
Rapid decay of EBto0for progressively larger samples,
i.e.,EB→0ast→∞ implies ergodicity. Thus, for
Brownian motion EB(x(t)) =4
3(∆
t)[140, 141]. Slower
decay indicates less ergodic systems in which trajectories
are less reproducible, and no decay or convergence to a
ﬁnite asymptotic value indicates strong ergodicity break-
ing [100]. EB-vs.-tcurves thus allow testing whether a
given time series fulﬁlls ergodic assumptions or breaks
ergodicity and the extent to which it breaks ergodicity.
For instance, Deng and Barkai [100] have shown that
for FBM,
EB(x(t)) =

k(HfGn)∆
tif0<HfGn<3
4
k(HfGn)∆
tlnt ifHfGn=3
4
k(HfGn)(∆
t)4−4HfGnif3
4<HfGn<1.
(17)
Likewise, Thiel and Sokolov [142] have shown that for
SBM,
EB(x(t)) =

4Zα/parenleftbigg
∆
t/parenrightbigg2α
ifα≤1
2
4α2
3(2α−1)∆
tifα>1
2,(18)whereZα=/integraltext1
0dy/integraltext∞
0dx[(x+1)α−(x+y)α]2. For any
positive value of the anomalous exponent α,EBfor SBM
vanishes and shows a crossover between two types of t-
dependence at α= 1/2[142]. Compare also [88]. Despite
the vanishing EB, SBM is weakly non-ergodic, i.e., en-
semble and time averages are disparate.
The present work is less focused on ﬁrmly meeting
the criterion of EBconverging to zero or a very low ﬁ-
nite value within our ﬁnite samples. Instead, we aim to
compare the decay rate in EBin FBM, SBM, nCTRW,
ATTM, and LW, and the corresponding TA-MSD ,SD,
CV,RMS ,HfGn,∆α, andtMFseries. We used the com-
parison among anomalous diﬀusion processes as a mea-
sure of ergodicity breaking instead of strict convergence
to zero. We computed EBfor the unsigned series ob-
tained for the original and a shuﬄed version of each pro-
cess (range = T/50; lag∆= 10 samples), for TA-MSD for
the original and a shuﬄed version of each process (range
=T/50; lag∆= 10 samples), and for each TA-MSD ,
SD,CV,RMS ,HfGn,∆α, andtMFseries computed
over the 100 non-overlapping segments for the original
and a shuﬄed version of each process (range = s/2; lag
∆= 1 segment).
III. RESULTS
A. Ergodicity breaking depends on the type of the
diﬀusion process and the anomalous exponent α
We observe noteworthy ergodicity-related diﬀerences
across the ﬁve types of anomalous diﬀusion processes and
diﬀerent values of the anomalous exponent α. FBM for
smaller values of α(i.e.,α→0.1) and SBM for larger
values ofα(i.e.,α→1) return and converge towards
the mean over a bigger ensemble, suggestive of ergodic-
ity (Fig. 2a). The respective EB-vs.-tcurves conﬁrmed
this observation. For FBM, EB→0asα→0.1, and
for SBM, EB→0asα→1(Fig. 2b). FMB appears
to break ergodicity for larger values of α, indicated by
little to no decay in EBwitht. SBM appears to break
ergodicity for smaller values of α, which, despite decay
inEBwitht, do not even reach 1. Ergodicity in FBM
and SBM is further conﬁrmed by the observation that
theEB-vs.-tcurves almost entirely coincide for the orig-
inal and shuﬄed trajectories as α→0.1for FBM and
α→1for SBM, indicating that these processes behaved
as awGn. In contrast, the EB-vs.-tcurves for the origi-
nal and shuﬄed versions coincide to progressively lesser
extent asα→1for FMB and α→0.1for SBM. Overall,
not only EBfor the ﬁve processes does not converge to
an acceptably small value within our observation time,
the FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW trajectories
show highly variable rates of decays in EB:EB(x(t)) =
−1.01∆
sto−0.18∆
s,−1.05∆
sto−0.42∆
s,−1.11∆
sto−
0.25∆
s,−1.87∆
sto−0.45∆
s,and−1.02∆
sto−0.99∆
s, re-
spectively, where ∆ in∆
t= 10, a not atypical value for
many empirical data.8
Unlike FBM and SBM, nCTRW, ATTW, and LW di-
verge and never return towards the mean over a bigger
ensemble, suggestive of ergodicity breaking in these pro-
cesses (Fig. 2a). EBquickly decays with tbut does not
even reach 1for nCTRW and ATTW for smaller values of
α(i.e.,α→0.1) and for LW for all values of α, suggestive
of weak ergodicity breaking (Fig. 2b). EBshowed little
to no decay with tfor nCTRW and ATTW for larger
values ofα(i.e.,α→1), suggestive of stronger break-
ing of ergodicity. This ergodicity breaking of nCTRW
and ATTW is further conﬁrmed by the ﬁnding that the
EB-vs.-tcurves for the original and shuﬄed nCTRW and
ATTW coincide to progressively lesser extent as α→1.
LW showed the weakest ergodicity breaking, wherein EB
quickly decays with tfor all values of αbut does not
reach1. Hence, FBM and SBM apparently break er-
godicity for larger and smaller values of the anomalous
exponentα, nCTRW, ATTM, and SBM break ergodicity
to diﬀerential extents.
B.TA-MSD reﬂects ergodicity-related diﬀerences
among diﬀerent anomalous diﬀusion processes
Figs. 3a & 3b show that TA-MSD grows with lag
time∆for all ﬁve types of anomalous diﬀusion pro-
cesses—FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW—in the
entire range of ∆. (The individual amplitudes scatter
owing to the stochasticity in the generation of these tra-
jectories. Such scatter characteristics of anomalous diﬀu -
sion processes can be used to reliably distinguish between
FBM from nCTRW processes, for instance, [107, 143].)
Furthermore, the growth of TA-MSD shows diﬀerential
dependence on the anomalous exponent αacross the ﬁve
processes. For example, this dependence was strongest
for FBM and lowest for LW, suggesting that the growth
rates ofTA-MSD might not provide suﬃcient resolution
to distinguish multiple trajectories of the same process
with diﬀerent anomalous exponents. EBforTA-MSD
remains constant across t(Fig. 3c); indeed, TA-MSD for
FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW show no decay
whatsoever in EB:EB(TA-MSD( t)) = 0 for all values of
the anomalous exponent α. Hence, TA-MSD mask any
ergodicity-related diﬀerences among the ﬁve processes
and processes with diﬀerent anomalous exponents and
cannot be used as a stable causal predictor in the lin-
ear modeling of cause-eﬀect relationships in this type of
analysis.
C.MSD-related linear descriptors such as SD,
CV, andRMS reﬂect ergodicity-related diﬀerences
among diﬀerent anomalous diﬀusion processes
SDfor FBM for all values of the anomalous exponent
αand SBM for α= 1—the particular case in which SBM
is reduced to awGn—return and converge towards the
mean over a bigger ensemble, suggestive of ergodicity(Fig. 4a). In contrast, SDfor SBM, nCTRW, ATTW,
and LW diverge and never return towards the mean over
a bigger ensemble, suggesting ergodicity breaking in the
SDseries for these processes. The ergodicity breaking
parameter vs. segment curves, i.e., EB-vs.-scurves, con-
ﬁrmed these trends. EB→0ass→ ∞ for FBM
for all values of αand SBM for α= 1—the particular
case in which SBM is reduced to awGn (Fig. 4b). EB
shows no decay with sfor SBM, a much slower decay
withsfor nCTRW, and a quick decay but to a much
larger value for ATTM and LW, especially for larger
values ofα(i.e,α→1), conﬁrming ergodicity break-
ing inSDfor these processes. Overall, the SDseries
for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW show highly
variable initial rates of decay in EB:EB(SD(s)) =
−1.32∆
sto−0.84∆
s,−1.25∆
sto0.48∆
s,−1.49∆
sto−
0.23∆
s,−1.83∆
sto−1.16∆
s,and−1.11∆
sto−1.04∆
s, re-
spectively, where ∆ = 1 . In other words, the SDseries
for the ﬁve processes show highly variable rates of decay
inEB.
Except for some minor diﬀerences, the ergodicity
breaking behavior of CVresembles that of SD.CVfor
FBM return and converge towards the mean for all values
of the anomalous exponent αand SBM for α= 1—the
particular case in which SBM is reduced to awGn—return
and converge towards the mean over a bigger ensem-
ble, suggestive of ergodicity (Fig. 5a). In contrast, CV
for SBM, nCTRW, ATTW, and LW diverge and never
return towards the mean over a bigger ensemble, sug-
gesting ergodicity breaking in the CVseries for these
processes. The EB-vs.-scurves conﬁrmed these trends.
EB→0ass→ ∞ for FBM for the most part but
show marginal ergodicity breaking for larger values of
α(Fig. 5b). CVseries for SBM behaved ergodically
forα= 1—the particular case in which SBM is reduced
to awGn, but CVseries for SBM for other values of α
showed strong ergodicity breaking. CVseries for nC-
TRW break ergodicity, with stronger ergodicity break-
ing for larger α.CVseries for ATTM and LW also
show marginal ergodicity breaking, wherein EBquickly
decayed with sbut did not reach 1. Overall, the CV
series for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW show
highly variable initial rates of decay in EB:EB(CV(s)) =
−1.33∆
sto−0.87∆
s,−1.62∆
sto−1.02∆
s,−1.49∆
sto−
0.20∆
s,−1.51∆
sto−1.09∆
s,and−1.15∆
sto−1.06∆
s, re-
spectively, where ∆ = 1 . In other words, the CVseries
for the ﬁve processes show highly variable rates of decay
inEB.
RMS series behaved exactly as SDseries for all ﬁve
processes. RMS for FBM for all values of the anoma-
lous exponent αand SBM for α= 1—the particular
case in which SBM is reduced to awGn—return and con-
verge towards the mean over a bigger ensemble, sugges-
tive of ergodicity (Fig. 6a). In contrast, RMS for SBM,
nCTRW, ATTW, and LW diverge and never return to-
wards the mean over a bigger ensemble, suggesting er-
godicity breaking in the RMS series for these processes.
TheEB-vs.-scurves conﬁrmed these trends. EB→09
FIG. 3. Ergodicity breaking in TA-MSD . (a)TA-MSD for 100 simulated trajectories of the ﬁve anomalous diﬀusio n pro-
cesses—FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW, for two values of the an omalous exponent α(blue:α= 0.2 for nCTRW,
ATTM, FBM, and SBM, and α= 1.2 for LW; red: α= 0.9 for nCTRW, ATTM, FBM, and SBM, and α= 1.9 for LW. (b)
EA-MSD (colored solid lines) and TA-MSD (colored dash-dotted lines) for the ﬁve anomalous diﬀusion processes—FBM, SBM,
nCTRW, ATTM, and LW. The anomalous exponent αranges from 0.1 to 1 for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, and ATTM, and from 1.1
to 2 for LW, with an increment of 0.1 from dark blue to dark red. (c)EB-vs.-scurves for TA-MSD for the ﬁve processes and
diﬀerent values of α(N= 100 ; lag is∆ = 10 samples). The EB-vs.-scurves all coincide at 100but have been shifted vertically
for convenience of presentation, and hence, the vertical ax is is given in arbitrary units.
ass→ ∞ for FBM for all values of αand SBM for
α= 1—the particular case in which SBM is reduced to
awGn (Fig. 6b). EBshows no decay with sfor SBM,
a much slower decay with sfor nCTRW, and a quick
decay but to a much larger value for ATTM and LW,
especially for larger values of α(i.e,α→1), conﬁrming
ergodicity breaking in RMS for these processes. Over-
all, theRMS series for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM,
and LW show highly variable initial rates of decay in
EB:EB(RMS(s)) =−1.36∆
sto0.64∆
s,−1.23∆
sto−
1.00∆
s,−1.28∆
sto−0.53∆
s,−1.84∆
sto−0.18∆
s,and−1.12∆
sto−1.04∆
s, respectively, where ∆ = 1 . In other
words, theRMS series for the ﬁve processes show highly
variable rates of decay in EB.
D. Multifractal descriptors provide an ergodic
characterization of non-ergodic anomalous diﬀusion
processes
TheHfGnseries—quantifying the strength of tem-
poral correlations in each of the 100 non-overlapping10
FIG. 4. Ergodicity breaking in SD. (a) Representative SDseries (SDcalculated across the 100 non-overlapping 500-sample
segments) for the ﬁve anomalous diﬀusion processes—FBM, SB M, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW. The anomalous exponent α
ranges from 0.1 to 1 for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, and ATTM, and from 1.1 to 2 for LW, with an increment of 0.1 from dark blue
to dark red. Grey trajectories indicate SDseries for the corresponding shuﬄed versions. (b) EB-vs.-scurves for SDseries for
the ﬁve processes and diﬀerent values of α(N= 100 ; lag is∆ = 1 segment). Grey curves indicate mean EB-vs.-scurves for
the corresponding shuﬄed versions.
500-sample segments of the synthetic trajectories—shows
signs of restoring ergodicity to the description of some
of these processes. The HfGnseries for FBM behaved
ergodically (i.e., EB→0ass→ ∞ ) independent of
the anomalous exponent α, and so do HfGnseries for
LW (Fig. 7). However, the HfGnseries for LW show a
marginal dependence on α, as theEBtaper oﬀ at higher
values ofs. This result is further strengthened by the
observation that these EB-vs.-scurves entirely coincide
with the original and shuﬄed trajectories. The HfGnse-
ries for SBM show strong ergodicity breaking with EB
initially having a converging-to-zero trend but then tak-
ing an upward turn and increasing with sfor the rest
of the range. The only exception to this trend is the
HfGnseries for the SBM trajectories for α= 1—the
particular case in which SBM is reduced to awGn. The
HfGnseries for CTRW and ATTM also behaved er-
godically with a few exceptions: the HfGnseries for
CTRW break ergodicity at larger values of αand the
HfGnseries for the original and shuﬄed ATTM tra-
jectories diverge with increasing α. On average, the
HfGnseries for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW
show the initial rates of decay in EB:EB(HfGn(s)) =
−1.23∆
s,−1.23∆
s,−0.97∆
s,−1.08∆
s,and−1.12∆
s, respec-tively, where ∆ = 1 . In other words, the HfGnseries for
the ﬁve processes show very similar rates of decay in EB.
The∆αseries—quantifying the width of the multi-
fractal spectrum in each of the 100 non-overlapping 500-
sample segments of the synthetic trajectories—also show
signs of restoring ergodicity to all ﬁve processes, albeit
with some exceptions pertaining to speciﬁc values of the
anomalous exponent. The ∆αseries for FBM behave er-
godically (i.e., EB→0ass→∞) independent of α,
and so do the ∆αseries for LW (Fig. 8). However, the
∆αseries for LW show marginal dependence on α, as
EBtaper oﬀ at higher values of s. The∆αseries for
SBM show strong ergodicity breaking with EBinitially
having a converging-to-zero trend but then taking an up-
ward turn and increasing with sfor the rest of the range.
The only exception to this trend is the ∆αseries for the
SBM trajectories for α= 1—the particular case in which
SBM is reduced to awGn. The ∆αseries for CTRW and
ATTM also behave ergodically with a few exceptions: the
∆αseries for CTRW break ergodicity at larger values of
α, and the ∆αseries for the original and shuﬄed ATTM
trajectories diverge with increasing α. On average, the
∆αseries for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW show
the average initial rates of decay in EB:EB(∆α(s)) =11
FIG. 5. Ergodicity breaking in CV. (a) Representative CVseries (CVcalculated across the 100 non-overlapping 500-sample
segments) for the ﬁve anomalous diﬀusion processes—FBM, SB M, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW. The anomalous exponent α
ranges from 0.1 to 1 for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, and ATTM, and from 1.1 to 2 for LW, with an increment of 0.1 from dark blue
to dark red. Grey trajectories indicate CVseries for the corresponding shuﬄed versions. (b) EB-vs.-scurves for CVseries for
the ﬁve processes and diﬀerent values of α(N= 100 ; lag is∆ = 1 segment). Grey curves indicate mean EB-vs.-scurves for
the corresponding shuﬄed versions.
−1.23∆
s,−1.22∆
s,−0.93∆
s,−1.12∆
s,and−1.16∆
s, respec-
tively, where ∆ = 1 .
ThetMFseries—quantifying multifractality due to
nonlinearity in each of the 100 non-overlapping 500-
sample segments of the synthetic trajectories—for all
ﬁve processes—FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and
LW—show a rapid decay of EBwith a progressively
larger sample of segments, i.e., EB→0ass→0
fort→ ∞ (Fig. 9). On average, the tMFseries
for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW show the
average initial rates of decay in EB:EB(tMF(s)) =
−1.20∆
s,−1.24∆
s,−1.20∆
s,−1.17∆
s,and−1.20∆
s, respec-
tively, where ∆ = 1 . In other words, the tMFseries for
the ﬁve processes do not vary in the initial rates of decay
inEB. Moreover, the EB-vs.-scurves show a marginal
dependence on the anomalous exponent αat higher val-
ues ofs, except for ATTM for which the EB-vs.-scurves
show marginally higher dependence on α. Notably, the
EB- vs.-scurves entirely coincide for the original and
shuﬄed trajectories, demonstrating that the ergodic be-
havior of the tMFseries for the original series did not
diﬀer from the shuﬄed versions that lack any temporal
correlations found in the original trajectories. Hence, th e
tMFseries fully restore broken ergodicity to a descriptionof all ﬁve diﬀusion processes and all values of α. This
result strongly resonates with previous ﬁndings on 1/f
noise,1/fnoise with diﬀerent levels of non-Gaussianity,
and binomial multiplicative cascades [101, 102, 104].
E. Multifractal spectrum distinguish diﬀerent
anomalous diﬀusion processes
Fig. 10a shows the multifractal spectrum for the ﬁve
processes—FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW and
diﬀerent values of the anomalous exponent α. FBM
shows highly symmetric spectra with initially ﬂeeting and
then increasing diﬀerence between the original spectrum
and those of the corresponding IAAFT surrogates for
largerα. This trend is conﬁrmed by an initially ﬂeet-
ing and then increasing percentage of FBM trajectories
with the wider-than-surrogate spectrum and an initially
ﬂeeting and then increasing tMFvalues with an increase
inα(Figs. 10b and 10c).
SBM shows highly asymmetric multifractal spectra,
with the completely missing right half of the spectrum
and with the spectra becoming more asymmetric with
an increase in αand resembling the spectra for FBM at12
FIG. 6. Ergodicity breaking in RMS . (a) Representative RMS series (RMS calculated across the 100 non-overlapping 500-
sample segments) for the ﬁve anomalous diﬀusion processes— FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW. The anomalous exponent
αranges from 0.1 to 1 for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, and ATTM, and from 1.1 to 2 for LW, with an increment of 0.1 from dark
blue to dark red. Grey trajectories indicate RMS series for the corresponding shuﬄed versions. (b) EB-vs.-scurves for RMS
series for the ﬁve processes and diﬀerent values of α(N= 100 ; lag is∆ = 1 segment). Grey curves indicate mean EB-vs.-s
curves for the corresponding shuﬄed versions.
α= 1—the particular case in which SBM is reduced to
awGn (Fig. 10a). This asymmetry reﬂects the putative
eﬀects of large qmoments, which exacerbate the eﬀects of
smaller ﬂuctuations in the estimation of the multifractal
spectrum. The diﬀerence between the original spectrum
and those of the corresponding IAAFT surrogates is more
prominent for smaller values of α, a trend which was con-
ﬁrmed by the reduction in tMFvalues with an increase
inα(Fig. 10c).
nCTRW shows asymmetric multifractal spectra
throughout but a more leftward skewed spectrum for
α→1(Fig. 10a). Again, this asymmetry reﬂects the
putative eﬀects of small qmoments, which exacerbate
the eﬀects of larger ﬂuctuations in the estimation of the
multifractal spectrum. However, despite these ﬂuctua-
tions in asymmetry of the multifractal spectrum, the dif-
ference between the original spectrum and those of the
corresponding IAAFT surrogates increase sharply with
α, a trend conﬁrmed by the increase in the percentage of
nCTRW trajectories with the wider-than-surrogate spec-
trum and an increase in tMFvalues with an increase in
α(Figs. 10b and 10c).
ATTM shows highly asymmetric and distorted multi-
fractal spectra, but the skew direction does not dependonαin a principled way (Fig. 10a). Nonetheless, the
diﬀerence between the original spectrum and those of
the corresponding IAAFT surrogates increased sharply
withα. While the percentage of ATTM trajectories
with the wider-than-surrogate spectrum increase with α
(Fig. 10b), tMFvalues show only marginal increase with
α(Fig. 10c).
LW shows highly asymmetric multifractal spectra, al-
most with missing left half of the spectrum when α→1
(Fig. 10a). This asymmetry reﬂects the putative eﬀects of
smallqmoments, which exacerbate the eﬀects of larger
ﬂuctuations in the estimation of the multifractal spec-
trum. The spectra of the original trajectories and the
corresponding IAAFT surrogates also do not diﬀer in a
principled manner. This ambiguity is evident in the low
percentage of LW trajectories with wider-than-surrogate
spectrum (<50out of100; Fig. 10b) and comparable
tMFvalues across all α(Fig. 10c).
In short, the ﬁve anomalous diﬀusion processes all
show multifractal evidence of nonlinearities, albeit mi-
nor diﬀerences in the percentage of trajectories showing
multifractal evidence and the strength of evidence. No-
tably, the shape of the multifractal spectrum reﬂected
the respective generative mechanism—e.g., symmetric13
FIG. 7. Ergodicity breaking in the strength of temporal corr elations, HfGn. (a) Representative HfGnseries (HfGncalculated
across the 100 non-overlapping 500-sample segments) for th e ﬁve anomalous diﬀusion processes—FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM,
and LW. The anomalous exponent αranges from 0.1 to 1 for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, and ATTM, and from 1.1 to 2 for LW, with
an increment of 0.1 from dark blue to dark red. Grey trajector ies indicate HfGnseries for the corresponding shuﬄed versions.
(b)EB-vs.-scurves for HfGnseries for the ﬁve processes and diﬀerent values of α(N= 100 ; lag is∆ = 1 segment). Grey
curves indicate mean EB-vs.-scurves for the corresponding shuﬄed versions.
spectra for FBM, left slewed spectra for SBM and right
skewed spectra for LW reﬂecting the fact that smaller
and larger ﬂuctuations, respectively, characterize these
two processes. While more detailed interpretations war-
rant further investigations, it is evident that multifrac-
tal analysis can diagnose certain diﬀerences among these
anomalous diﬀusion processes.
IV. DISCUSSION
This work explores preliminary steps towards a uni-
ﬁed framework grounded in the multifractal formalism
[117, 138, 144] for restoring ergodicity to a descrip-
tion of anomalous diﬀusion processes [145–147]. We
used synthetic data representing various anomalous dif-
fusion processes for a wide range of anomalous exponent
α, both ergodic and non-ergodic, approximated by ﬁve
disparate mathematical models: FBM, ergodic; SBM,
weakly non-ergodic; CTRW, weakly non-ergodic; ATTM,
weakly non-ergodic; and LW, ultra-weakly non-ergodic.
We show that TA-MSD andMSD-related linear descrip-
tors such as SD,CV, andRMS break ergodicity. In
contrast, time series of descriptors addressing sequen-tial structure and its potential nonlinearity: multifrac-
tality, and, to some extent, fractality, change in a time-
independent way and are ergodic descriptors insensitive
to the weak ergodicity breaking of the process. Thus,
these descriptors return the same information for any
kind of diﬀusion process and the anomalous exponent
α. Further analysis revealed that these ﬁndings directly
followed the multiplicative cascades underlying these dif -
fusion processes, as the shape and symmetry of the multi-
fractal spectrum—and those of the corresponding surro-
gate series—diﬀerentiated these processes. Thus, the sta-
tistical descriptors analyzed here provide very diﬀerent,
complementary information to other statistical descrip-
tors. Two particular points bear emphasis here. First,
because multifractal descriptors of anomalous diﬀusion
remain ergodic, they can be submitted to linear causal
modeling. Second, this capacity to describe non-ergodic
anomalous diﬀusion processes in ergodic terms oﬀers the
possibility that multifractal modeling could unify these
processes into a common framework.
Multifractal formalisms can serve as the desired ana-
lytical framework for linear causal modeling of anomalous
diﬀusion processes. Whereas TA-MSD andTA-MSD -
related linear descriptors like SD,CV, andRMS that14
FIG. 8. Ergodicity breaking in multifractal spectrum width ,∆α. (a) Representative ∆αseries (∆αcalculated across the 100
non-overlapping 500-sample segments) for the ﬁve anomalou s diﬀusion processes—FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW. The
anomalous exponent αranges from 0.1 to 1 for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, and ATTM, and from 1.1 to 2 for LW, with an increment
of 0.1 from dark blue to dark red. Grey trajectories indicate ∆αseries for the corresponding shuﬄed versions. (b) Mean
EB-vs.-scurves for ∆αseries for the ﬁve processes and diﬀerent values of α(N= 100 ; lag is∆ = 1 segment). Grey curves
indicate mean EB-vs.-scurves for the corresponding shuﬄed versions.
are typically submitted to linear causal models [148–150]
break ergodicity [101, 103, 104]. In contrast, multifrac-
tal descriptors remain ergodic and hence, oﬀer a reliable
and stable set of causal predictors [112, 114, 118, 127,
128, 130, 133, 151–155]. Although MSD remains preva-
lent in measuring active matter, our present results res-
onate with a growing interest in multifractal modeling
in many of these active-matter ﬁelds, e.g., bio-molecules
moving within cells [156–159], animals foraging in the
wild [160–163], and the emergence of collective dynamics
such as swarming and milling [128, 164, 165], have be-
gun to embrace multifractal formalisms. We hope that
the current ﬁndings might emphasize the importance of
these approaches.
The ergodicity of multifractal descriptors allows the
possibility that cascade dynamics constitute a statisti-
cally testable causal framework that may explain these
disparate anomalous-diﬀusion regimes. The current ﬁnd-
ings underscore that multifractal structure is not merely
an abstract side-eﬀect, nor is it a nuisance to be col-
lapsed into the noise terms to avoid cluttering the lower-
dimensional aspects of our generative models [166, 167].
The accumulating evidence of multifractal structure and
its relevance for describing and predicting structuralchange has implicated a causal role in cascading dynam-
ics [85, 114, 168]. Indeed, the high-dimensional aspect
of cascade dynamics sometimes raises new and unfamil-
iar questions about the relationship between causality
and low-dimensional determinism. Indeed, we may feel
most conﬁdent explaining when we have reduced our
model systems to a minimal set of control parameters.
That conﬁdence may lead us to take for granted that
the low-dimensional constraint needed for deterministic
modeling is required to model and explain causal re-
lationships. Our commitment to low-dimensional cau-
sation is so strong that scholars will even reason that
low-dimensionality and so determinism is a matter of ob-
server’s knowledge: e.g., the suggestion that, if only we
knew how the system works, then we might no doubt see
that causation is low-dimensional after all [169]. How-
ever, the mutually fostering growth of multifractal es-
timation and cascade-dynamical modeling has strength-
ened the possibility that causation may not need low di-
mensionality. Philosophical, logical, and empirical ap-
proaches have all begun to point to growing comfort
and ﬂuency with the concepts of stochastic causation
[168, 170–173], and even stochastic-deterministic blends
that reﬂect the cascade-like dynamics across multiple15
FIG. 9. Ergodicity breaking in multifractal nonlinearity, tMF. (a) Representative tMFseries (tMFcalculated across the 100
non-overlapping 500-sample segments) for the ﬁve anomalou s diﬀusion processes—FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATTM, and LW. The
anomalous exponent αranges from 0.1 to 1 for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, and ATTM, and from 1.1 to 2 for LW, with an increment
of 0.1 from dark blue to dark red. Grey trajectories indicate tMFseries for the corresponding shuﬄed versions. (b) EB-vs.-s
curves for tMFseries for the ﬁve processes and diﬀerent values of α(N= 100 ; lag is∆ = 1 segment). Grey curves indicate
meanEB-vs.-scurves for the corresponding shuﬄed versions.
scales [174].
The observed variety of multifractal spectrum across
the ﬁve simulated anomalous diﬀusion processes suggests
that multifractal formalisms could also aid in time-series
characterization and clustering. The rate of generation
of time series is exponentially increasing in all areas of
physical and life sciences, and the production of ad-hoc
analytical tools is accompanying this growth [175–177].
Many of these attempts use Bayesian [67–71] and ML
approaches [47, 72–76], and even unsupervised [77–82] to
detect speciﬁc anomalous diﬀusion processes and the un-
derlying mathematical model, especially deviation from
pure Brownian behavior in terms of the anomalous ex-
ponent. However, these attempts still lack the accuracy,
sensitivity, and speciﬁcity necessary, say, for understan d-
ing how diﬀusion properties change over time due to envi-
ronmental heterogeneity (e.g., patches with diﬀerent vis-
cosity on a cellular membrane), time-varying properties
of the observable (e.g., diﬀerent activation states of a
molecular motor). This limitation may reﬂect that these
attempts typically rely on manual or automatic extrac-
tion of features that may not have to do with plausi-
ble generating mechanisms [83, 84]. Including multifrac-
tal descriptors with MSD-related linear descriptors mightimprove the ML-powered characterization and clustering
of anomalous diﬀusion processes.
Interdependent ﬂuctuations can cause interactions
across a wide range of spatiotemporal scales, altering
the context for subsequent ﬂuctuations. Cascade insta-
bilities, e.g., can produce turbulent structures, which
are complex ﬂows in which once-parallel currents col-
lapse or explode into a dizzying, possibly limitless vari-
ety of vortices and eddies, with intermittent swelling and
ebbing throughout space and time [85, 89, 178]. Indeed,
anomalous diﬀusion and Lévy walks distinguish active
from inertial turbulence [19]. Our results indicate that
the various diﬀusion coeﬃcients are thoroughly intercon-
nected with the speciﬁc geometries of ﬂuctuations con-
stituting the measured series. The connection between
multifractality and various models of anomalous diﬀu-
sion is also being noticed both theoretically [51, 179–182]
and empirically [162, 163, 168, 183–186]. Multifractal
formalisms and anomalous-diﬀusion processes thus ap-
pear to be entwined in a vibrant, expanding, far-reaching,
and synergistic relationship originating from the out-of-
equilibrium character, lack of detailed balance, and of
time-reversal symmetry, multiscale nature, nonlinearity
and multi-body interactions that typify living and evolv-16
FIG. 10. Multifractal formalism appears to be as a nonlinear analytical method that uniﬁes several disparate non-ergod ic
anomalous diﬀusion processes into a common framework of mul tiplicative cascades. (a) Multifractal spectrum for the ﬁv e
types of anomalous diﬀusion processes—FBM, SBM, nCTRW, ATT M, and LW. The anomalous exponent α.αranges from
0.1 to 1 for FBM, SBM, nCTRW, and ATTM and from 1.1 to 2 for LW, wi th an increment of 0.1 from dark blue to dark
red. The thick colored curve in each plot indicate the multif ractal spectrum ﬁr the original series, and the thin grey cur ves
in each plot indicate the multifractal spectrum for a sample of ﬁve corresponding IAAFT surrogates. The axes have been
stretched to match the minimum and maximum values of ( α(q),f(q)). (b) percentage of simulated trajectories with the wider-
than-surrogates spectrum, i.e., tMF>1.96. (c) Multifractal nonlinearity tMFfor processes with the wider-than-surrogates
spectrum.17
ing systems [187]. Future investigations could further
explore the relationship between the various features of
the multifractal spectrum and anomalous diﬀusion.
Appendix A: Theoretical models
1. Fractional Brownian motion
In fractional Brownian motion (FBM), x(t)is a Gaus-
sian process with stationary increments, it is symmet-
ric,∝an}bracketle{tx(t)∝an}bracketri}ht= 0, and importantly its EA-MSD scales
as∝an}bracketle{tx(t)∝an}bracketri}ht= 2KHt2H, whereHis the Hurst exponent
and is related to the anomalous exponent αasH=
α/2[50, 188]. The two-time correlation for FBM is
∝an}bracketle{tx(t1)x(t2)∝an}bracketri}ht=KH(t2H
1+t2H
2−|t1−t2|2H). FBM can
also be deﬁned as a process that arises from a generalized
Langevin equation with non-white noise (or fractional
Gaussian noise, fGn). ThefGnhas a standard normal
distribution with zero mean and power-law correlations:
<ξfGn(t1)ξfGn(t2)>= 2KHH(2H−1)|t1−t2|2H−2+
4KHH|t1−t2|2H−1δ(t1−t2).(A1)
The FBM features two regimes: one in which the noise
is positively correlated ( 1/2< H <1, i.e.,1< α <2,
superdiﬀusive) and the other in which the noise is neg-
atively correlated ( 0< H <2, i.e.,0< α <1, subdif-
fusive). For H= 1/2(α= 1) the noise is uncorrelated,
hence the FBM converges to Brownian motion.
Various numerical approaches have been proposed to
solve the FBM generalized Langevin equation. We use
the method described by Bardet et al. [189] via the Mat-
lab function wfbm() . Details about the numerical imple-
mentations can be found in the associated reference.
2. Scaled Brownian motion
The scaled Brownian motion (SBM) is a process de-
scribed by the Langevin equation with a time-dependent
diﬀusivity
dx(t)
dt=√
2Ktξ(t), (A2)
whereξ= 1is white Gaussian noise [190]. In the case
whenK(t)has a power-law dependence on to tsuch that
K(t) =αKαtα−1,EA-MSD follows< x2(t)>N=Kαtα
withK(t) = Γ(1+α)Kα. The numerical implementation
of SBM is presented in Algorithm 1 .
Algorithm 1: Generate SBM trajectory
Input:
length of the trajectory T
anomalous exponent α
Deﬁne:
erfcinv (/vector a)→Inverse complementary error function
of/vector aU(L)→returnsLuniform random numbers ∈[0,1]
Calculate:
/vector∆x←(1α,2α,...,Tα)−(0α,1α,...,(T−1)α)
/vector∆x←2/radicalbig
(2)UL/vector∆x
/vector x←cumsum (/vector∆x)
Return:/vector x
3. Noisy continuous-time random walk.
The continuous-time random walk (CTRW) is a family
of random walks with arbitrary displacement density for
which the waiting time, i.e., the time between subse-
quent steps, is a stochastic variable [54]. We considered
a speciﬁc case of CTRW with waiting times following a
power-law distribution ψ(t) =t−σand displacements fol-
lowing a Gaussian distribution with variance Dand zero
mean. In such case, the anomalous exponent is α=σ−1
(EA-MSD =∝an}bracketle{tx(t)2∝an}bracketri}ht∝tα). To obtain noisy CTRW (nC-
TRW) [53], white Gaussian noise with 0 mean and stan-
dard deviation equal to the standard deviation of the cor-
responding CTRW ﬂuctuation series was added to each
CTRW series. Since the waiting times follow a power-
law distribution, for σ= 2,EA-MSD features Brownian
motion with logarithmic corrections [63].
The numerical implementation of CTRW is presented
inAlgorithm 2 . Notice that the variable τstands
for the total time at i-th iteration. The output vector
/vector xcorresponds to the position of the particle at the
irregular times given by /vectort.
Algorithm 2: Generate CTRW trajectory
Input:
length of the trajectory T
anomalous exponent α
diﬀusion coeﬃcient D
Deﬁne:
/vector x→empty vector
/vectort→empty vector
N(µ,S)→Gaussian random number generator with
meanµand standard deviation s
i= 0;τ= 0
Whileτ <T do
tisample randomly from ψ(t)∼t−σ
xi←xi−1+N(0,√
D)
τ←τ+ti
i←i+1
end while
Return:/vector x,/vectort
4. Annealed transient time motion
The annealed transient time motion (ATTM) implements
the motion of a Brownian particle with time-dependent18
diﬀusivity [55]. The observable performs Brownian mo-
tion for a random time t1with a random diﬀusion coef-
ﬁcientD1, then fort2withD2, and so on. The diﬀusion
coeﬃcients follow a distribution such that P(D) =Dσ−1
withσ >0asD→0and that decays rapidly for
largeD. If the random times tare sampled from a
distribution with expected value E[t|D] =D−γ, with
σ < γ < σ + 1, the anomalous exponent is α=σ/γ.
Here, we consider that the distribution is a delta func-
tion,Pt(t|D) =δ(1−D−γ). Hence, the time tiin which
the observable performs Brownian motion with a random
diﬀusion coeﬃcient Diisti=D−γ
i, withDiextracted
from the distribution described above.
The numerical implementation of ATTM is presented
inAlgorithm 3 . Note that, in contrast to nCTRW and
LW, now the only output is /vector xbecause the trajectory is
already produced at regular time intervals.
Algorithm 3: Generate ATTM trajectory
Input:
length of the trajectory T
anomalous exponent α
sampling time ∆t
Deﬁne:
Whileσ>γ andγ >σ+1do
σ←uniform random number ∈(0,3]
γ=σ/α
end while
BM(D,t,∆t)→generates a Brownian motion trajec-
tory of length twith diﬀusion coeﬃcient D, sampled at
time intervals ∆t
Whileτ <T do
Di←sample randomly from P(D)Dσ−1
ti←D−γ
i
number of steps Ni=round(ti/∆t)
x1,...,xi+Ni←BM(D,t,∆t)
i←i+Ni+1
τ=τ+Ni∆t
end while
Return:/vector x
5. Lévy walk
The Lévy walk (LW) is a particular case of superdiﬀu-
sive CTRW. Like subdiﬀusive CTRW, the ﬂight time,i.e., the time between steps, for LW is irregular [56], but,
in contrast to subdiﬀusive CTRW, the distribution of
displacements for LW is not Gaussian. We considered
the case in which the ﬂight times follows the distribu-
tionψ(t) =t−σ−1. At each step, the displacement is
∆xand the step length is |∆x|. The displacements are
correlated with the ﬂight times such that the probabil-
ity to move a step ∆xat timetand stop at the new
position to wait for a new random event to happen is
ψ(∆x,t) =1
2δ(|∆x|−vt)ψ(t), wherevis the velocity.
The anomalous exponent is given by
EB(x(t)) =/braceleftBigg
2 if0<σ<1
3−σif1<σ<2.(A3)
The numerical implementation of LW is presented in
Algorithm 4 . Notice that we use a random number r,
which can take values 0 or 1, to decide in which sense
the step is performed. The output vectors /vector xrepresent
irregularly sampled positions and times.
Algorithm 4: Generate LW trajectory
Input:
length of the trajectory T
anomalous exponent α
Deﬁne:
/vector x→empty vector
/vectort→empty vector
v→random number∈(0,10]
i= 0
Whileτ <T do
ti←sample randomly from ψ(t)∼t−σ−1
xi(−1)rvti, where random ris 0 or 1 with equal prob-
ability.
τ←τ+ti
i←i+1
end while
Return:/vector x,/vectort
[1] Y. Sagi, M. Brook, I. Almog, and N. Davidson, Observa-
tion of anomalous diﬀusion and fractional self-similarity
in one dimension, Physical Review Letters 108, 093002
(2012).
[2] J. Zhao, Q. Deng, S. M. Avdoshenko, L. Fu, J. Eckert,
and M. H. Rümmeli, Direct in situ observations of single
Fe atom catalytic processes and anomalous diﬀusion at
graphene edges, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 111, 15641 (2014).[3] D. S. Banks and C. Fradin, Anomalous diﬀusion of pro-
teins due to molecular crowding, Biophysical Journal
89, 2960 (2005).
[4] E. Barkai, Y. Garini, and R. Metzler, Strange kinetics
of single molecules in living cells, Physics Today 65, 29
(2012).
[5] G. Guigas and M. Weiss, Sampling the cell with anoma-
lous diﬀusion—The discovery of slowness, Biophysical
Journal 94, 90 (2008).19
[6] F. Höﬂing and T. Franosch, Anomalous transport in the
crowded world of biological cells, Reports on Progress
in Physics 76, 046602 (2013).
[7] J.-H. Jeon, V. Tejedor, S. Burov, E. Barkai, C. Selhuber-
Unkel, K. Berg-Sørensen, L. Oddershede, and R. Met-
zler,In vivo anomalous diﬀusion and weak ergodicity
breaking of lipid granules, Physical Review Letters 106,
048103 (2011).
[8] J.-H. Jeon, H. M.-S. Monne, M. Javanainen, and
R. Metzler, Anomalous diﬀusion of phospholipids and
cholesterols in a lipid bilayer and its origins, Physical
Review Letters 109, 188103 (2012).
[9] D. Krapf and R. Metzler, Strange interfacial molecular
dynamics, Physics Today 72, 48 (2019).
[10] R. Metzler and J. Klafter, The random walk’s guide to
anomalous diﬀusion: A fractional dynamics approach,
Physics Reports 339, 1 (2000).
[11] K. Ritchie, X.-Y. Shan, J. Kondo, K. Iwasawa, T. Fu-
jiwara, and A. Kusumi, Detection of non-Brownian dif-
fusion in the cell membrane in single molecule tracking,
Biophysical Journal 88, 2266 (2005).
[12] I. M. Tolić-Nørrelykke, E.-L. Munteanu, G. Thon,
L. Oddershede, and K. Berg-Sørensen, Anomalous dif-
fusion in living yeast cells, Physical Review Letters 93,
078102 (2004).
[13] T. E. Angelini, E. Hannezo, X. Trepat, M. Marquez,
J. J. Fredberg, and D. A. Weitz, Glass-like dynamics
of collective cell migration, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 108, 4714 (2011).
[14] P. Dieterich, R. Klages, R. Preuss, and A. Schwab,
Anomalous dynamics of cell migration, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 105, 459 (2008).
[15] P. Dieterich, O. Lindemann, M. L. Moskopp, S. Tauzin,
A. Huttenlocher, R. Klages, A. Chechkin, and
A. Schwab, Anomalous diﬀusion and asymmetric tem-
pering memory in neutrophil chemotaxis, PLOS Com-
putational Biology 18, e1010089 (2022).
[16] I. Golding and E. C. Cox, Physical nature of bacterial
cytoplasm, Physical Review Letters 96, 098102 (2006).
[17] S. Hapca, J. W. Crawford, and I. M. Young, Anomalous
diﬀusion of heterogeneous populations characterized by
normal diﬀusion at the individual level, Journal of the
Royal Society Interface 6, 111 (2009).
[18] A. Lagarde, N. Dagès, T. Nemoto, V. Démery, D. Bar-
tolo, and T. Gibaud, Colloidal transport in bacteria sus-
pensions: From bacteria collision to anomalous and en-
hanced diﬀusion, Soft Matter 16, 7503 (2020).
[19] S. Mukherjee, R. K. Singh, M. James, and S. S. Ray,
Anomalous diﬀusion and Lévy walks distinguish active
from inertial turbulence, Physical Review Letters 127,
118001 (2021).
[20] S. Benhamou, How many animals really do the Lévy
walk?, Ecology 88, 1962 (2007).
[21] A. James, M. J. Plank, and A. M. Edwards, Assessing
Lévy walks as models of animal foraging, Journal of the
Royal Society Interface 8, 1233 (2011).
[22] A. M. Reynolds and C. J. Rhodes, The Lévy ﬂight
paradigm: Random search patterns and mechanisms,
Ecology 90, 877 (2009).
[23] C. T. Brown, L. S. Liebovitch, and R. Glendon, Lévy
ﬂights in Dobe Ju/’hoansi foraging patterns, Human
Ecology 35, 129 (2007).
[24] D. A. Raichlen, B. M. Wood, A. D. Gordon, A. Z. Mab-
ulla, F. W. Marlowe, and H. Pontzer, Evidence of lévywalk foraging patterns in human hunter–gatherers, Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, 728
(2014).
[25] A. G. Cherstvy, D. Vinod, E. Aghion, I. M. Sokolov, and
R. Metzler, Scaled geometric Brownian motion features
sub-or superexponential ensemble-averaged, but lin-
ear time-averaged mean-squared displacements, Phys-
ical Review E 103, 062127 (2021).
[26] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, L. A. N. Amaral,
X. Gabaix, and H. E. Stanley, Economic ﬂuctuations
and anomalous diﬀusion, Physical Review E 62, R3023
(2000).
[27] A. Vázquez, J. G. Oliveira, Z. Dezsö, K.-I. Goh, I. Kon-
dor, and A.-L. Barabási, Modeling bursts and heavy
tails in human dynamics, Physical Review E 73, 036127
(2006).
[28] F. A. Oliveira, R. M. Ferreira, L. C. Lapas, and M. H.
Vainstein, Anomalous diﬀusion: A basic mechanism for
the evolution of inhomogeneous systems, Frontiers in
Physics 7, 18 (2019).
[29] I. M. Sokolov and J. Klafter, From diﬀusion to anoma-
lous diﬀusion: A century after Einstein’s Brownian mo-
tion, Chaos 15, 026103 (2005).
[30] S. F. Timashev, Y. S. Polyakov, P. I. Misurkin, and S. G.
Lakeev, Anomalous diﬀusion as a stochastic component
in the dynamics of complex processes, Physical Review
E81, 041128 (2010).
[31] O. Vilk, E. Aghion, T. Avgar, C. Beta, O. Nagel,
A. Sabri, R. Sarfati, D. K. Schwartz, M. Weiss,
D. Krapf, et al., Unravelling the origins of anomalous
diﬀusion: From molecules to migrating storks, Physical
Review Research 4, 033055 (2022).
[32] A. Bancaud, S. Huet, N. Daigle, J. Mozziconacci,
J. Beaudouin, and J. Ellenberg, Molecular crowding af-
fects diﬀusion and binding of nuclear proteins in hete-
rochromatin and reveals the fractal organization of chro-
matin, EMBO journal 28, 3785 (2009).
[33] A. Caspi, R. Granek, and M. Elbaum, Enhanced diﬀu-
sion in active intracellular transport, Physical Review
Letters 85, 5655 (2000).
[34] F. Höﬂing, K.-U. Bamberg, and T. Franosch, Anoma-
lous transport resolved in space and time by ﬂuorescence
correlation spectroscopy, Soft Matter 7, 1358 (2011).
[35] G. Seisenberger, M. U. Ried, T. Endress, H. Buning,
M. Hallek, and C. Brauchle, Real-time single-molecule
imaging of the infection pathway of an adeno-associated
virus, Science 294, 1929 (2001).
[36] P. R. Smith, I. E. Morrison, K. M. Wilson, N. Fernan-
dez, and R. J. Cherry, Anomalous diﬀusion of major
histocompatibility complex class I molecules on HeLa
cells determined by single particle tracking, Biophysical
Journal 76, 3331 (1999).
[37] S. C. Weber, A. J. Spakowitz, and J. A. Theriot, Bac-
terial chromosomal loci move subdiﬀusively through a
viscoelastic cytoplasm, Physical Review Letters 104,
238102 (2010).
[38] S. C. Weber, J. A. Theriot, and A. J. Spakowitz, Sub-
diﬀusive motion of a polymer composed of subdiﬀusive
monomers, Physical Review E 82, 011913 (2010).
[39] D. Arcizet, B. Meier, E. Sackmann, J. O. Rädler, and
D. Heinrich, Temporal analysis of active and passive
transport in living cells, Physical Review Letters 101,
248103 (2008).
[40] A. Caspi, R. Granek, and M. Elbaum, Diﬀusion and20
directed motion in cellular transport, Physical Review
E66, 011916 (2002).
[41] M. de Jager, F. J. Weissing, P. M. Herman, B. A. No-
let, and J. van de Koppel, Lévy walks evolve through
interaction between movement and environmental com-
plexity, Science 332, 1551 (2011).
[42] M. H. Duits, Y. Li, S. A. Vanapalli, and F. Mugele, Map-
ping of spatiotemporal heterogeneous particle dynamics
in living cells, Physical Review E 79, 051910 (2009).
[43] M. C. Gonzalez, C. A. Hidalgo, and A.-L. Barabasi, Un-
derstanding individual human mobility patterns, Nature
453, 779 (2008).
[44] F. Leoni and G. Franzese, Structural behavior and dy-
namics of an anomalous ﬂuid between attractive and re-
pulsive walls: Templating, molding, and superdiﬀusion,
Journal of Chemical Physics 141, 174501 (2014).
[45] A. Mashanova, T. H. Oliver, and V. A. Jansen, Evidence
for intermittency and a truncated power law from highly
resolved aphid movement data, Journal of the Royal So-
ciety Interface 7, 199 (2010).
[46] R. Nathan, W. M. Getz, E. Revilla, M. Holyoak,
R. Kadmon, D. Saltz, and P. E. Smouse, A movement
ecology paradigm for unifying organismal movement re-
search, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
105, 19052 (2008).
[47] G. Muñoz-Gil, G. Volpe, M. A. Garcia-March,
E. Aghion, A. Argun, C. B. Hong, T. Bland, S. Bo,
J. A. Conejero, N. Firbas, et al., Objective compari-
son of methods to decode anomalous diﬀusion, Nature
Communications 12, 1 (2021).
[48] K. Pearson, The problem of the random walk, Nature
72, 294 (1905).
[49] J. Klafter and I. M. Sokolov, Anomalous diﬀusion
spreads its wings, Physics World 18, 29 (2005).
[50] B. B. Mandelbrot and J. W. Van Ness, Fractional Brow-
nian motions, fractional noises and applications, SIAM
Review 10, 422 (1968).
[51] S. Lim and S. Muniandy, Self-similar gaussian processe s
for modeling anomalous diﬀusion, Physical Review E
66, 021114 (2002).
[52] J.-H. Jeon, A. V. Chechkin, and R. Metzler, Scaled
Brownian motion: A paradoxical process with a time de-
pendent diﬀusivity for the description of anomalous dif-
fusion, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 16, 15811
(2014).
[53] J.-H. Jeon, E. Barkai, and R. Metzler, Noisy continuous
time random walks, The Journal of Chemical Physics
139, 09B616_1 (2013).
[54] H. Scher and E. W. Montroll, Anomalous transit-time
dispersion in amorphous solids, Physical Review B 12,
2455 (1975).
[55] P. Massignan, C. Manzo, J. Torreno-Pina, M. García-
Parajo, M. Lewenstein, and G. Lapeyre Jr, Nonergodic
subdiﬀusion from Brownian motion in an in homoge-
neous medium, Physical Review Letters 112, 150603
(2014).
[56] J. Klafter and G. Zumofen, Lévy statistics in a hamil-
tonian system, Physical Review E 49, 4873 (1994).
[57] Y. Lanoiselée and D. S. Grebenkov, Non-gaussian diﬀu-
sion of mixed origins, Journal of Physics A: Mathemat-
ical and Theoretical 52, 304001 (2019).
[58] D. S. Banks, C. Tressler, R. D. Peters, F. Höﬂing,
and C. Fradin, Characterizing anomalous diﬀusion in
crowded polymer solutions and gels over ﬁve decades intime with variable-lengthscale ﬂuorescence correlation
spectroscopy, Soft Matter 12, 4190 (2016).
[59] J. A. Dix and A. Verkman, Crowding eﬀects on diﬀusion
in solutions and cells, Annual Review of Biophysics 37,
247 (2008).
[60] D. Molina-Garcia, T. Sandev, H. Safdari, G. Pagnini,
A. Chechkin, and R. Metzler, Crossover from anomalous
to normal diﬀusion: Truncated power-law noise corre-
lations and applications to dynamics in lipid bilayers,
New Journal of Physics 20, 103027 (2018).
[61] I. M. Sokolov, Models of anomalous diﬀusion in crowded
environments, Soft Matter 8, 9043 (2012).
[62] S. Abe and S. Thurner, Anomalous diﬀusion in view
of Einstein’s 1905 theory of Brownian motion, Physica
A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 356, 403
(2005).
[63] J. Klafter and I. M. Sokolov, First Steps in Random
Walks: From Tools to Applications (Oxford University
Press, Oxford, UK, 2011).
[64] R. Metzler and J. Klafter, The restaurant at the end
of the random walk: Recent developments in the de-
scription of anomalous transport by fractional dynam-
ics, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General
37, R161 (2004).
[65] J. M. Sancho, A. Lacasta, K. Lindenberg, I. M. Sokolov,
and A. Romero, Diﬀusion on a solid surface: Anomalous
is normal, Physical Review Letters 92, 250601 (2004).
[66] I. M. Sokolov, J. Klafter, and A. Blumen, Fractional
kinetics, Physics Today 55, 48 (2002).
[67] J. Krog and M. A. Lomholt, Bayesian inference with in-
formation content model check for Langevin equations,
Physical Review E 96, 062106 (2017).
[68] J. Krog, L. H. Jacobsen, F. W. Lund, D. Wüstner,
and M. A. Lomholt, Bayesian model selection with frac-
tional Brownian motion, Journal of Statistical Mechan-
ics: Theory and Experiment 2018, 093501 (2018).
[69] S. Park, S. Thapa, Y. Kim, M. A. Lomholt, and J.-
H. Jeon, Bayesian inference of Lévy walks via hidden
markov models, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
Theoretical 54, 484001 (2021).
[70] S. Thapa, M. A. Lomholt, J. Krog, A. G. Cher-
stvy, and R. Metzler, Bayesian analysis of single-
particle tracking data using the nested-sampling algo-
rithm: Maximum-likelihood model selection applied to
stochastic-diﬀusivity data, Physical Chemistry Chemi-
cal Physics 20, 29018 (2018).
[71] S. Thapa, S. Park, Y. Kim, J.-H. Jeon, R. Metzler, and
M. A. Lomholt, Bayesian inference of scaled versus frac-
tional Brownian motion, Journal of Physics A: Mathe-
matical and Theoretical 55, 194003 (2022).
[72] S. Bo, F. Schmidt, R. Eichhorn, and G. Volpe, Mea-
surement of anomalous diﬀusion using recurrent neural
networks, Physical Review E 100, 010102 (2019).
[73] F. Cichos, K. Gustavsson, B. Mehlig, and G. Volpe,
Machine learning for active matter, Nature Machine In-
telligence 2, 94 (2020).
[74] N. Granik, L. E. Weiss, E. Nehme, M. Levin, M. Chein,
E. Perlson, Y. Roichman, and Y. Shechtman, Single-
particle diﬀusion characterization by deep learning, Bio-
physical Journal 117, 185 (2019).
[75] J. Janczura, P. Kowalek, H. Loch-Olszewska,
J. Szwabiński, and A. Weron, Classiﬁcation of particle
trajectories in living cells: Machine learning versus
statistical testing hypothesis for fractional anomalous21
diﬀusion, Physical Review E 102, 032402 (2020).
[76] G. Muñoz-Gil, M. A. Garcia-March, C. Manzo, J. D.
Martín-Guerrero, and M. Lewenstein, Single trajectory
characterization via machine learning, New Journal of
Physics 22, 013010 (2020).
[77] J. Pineda, B. Midtvedt, H. Bachimanchi, S. Noé,
D. Midtvedt, G. Volpe, and C. Manzo, Geometric deep
learning reveals the spatiotemporal ﬁngerprint of micro-
scopic motion, arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06355 (2022).
[78] M. Gajowczyk and J. Szwabiński, Detection of anoma-
lous diﬀusion with deep residual networks, Entropy 23,
649 (2021).
[79] A. Gentili and G. Volpe, Characterization of anomalous
diﬀusion classical statistics powered by deep learning
(CONDOR), Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
Theoretical 54, 314003 (2021).
[80] P. Kowalek, H. Loch-Olszewska, Ł. Łaszczuk, J. Opała,
and J. Szwabiński, Boosting the performance of anoma-
lous diﬀusion classiﬁers with the proper choice of fea-
tures, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theo-
retical 55, 244005 (2022).
[81] G. Muñoz-Gil, G. G. i Corominas, and M. Lewenstein,
Unsupervised learning of anomalous diﬀusion data an
anomaly detection approach, Journal of Physics A:
Mathematical and Theoretical 54, 504001 (2021).
[82] H. Seckler and R. Metzler, Bayesian deep learning for
error estimation in the analysis of anomalous diﬀusion,
Nature Communications 13, 6717 (2022).
[83] P. Kowalek, H. Loch-Olszewska, and J. Szwabiński,
Classiﬁcation of diﬀusion modes in single-particle track-
ing data: Feature-based versus deep-learning approach,
Physical Review E 100, 032410 (2019).
[84] H. Loch-Olszewska and J. Szwabiński, Impact of feature
choice on machine learning classiﬁcation of fractional
anomalous diﬀusion, Entropy 22, 1436 (2020).
[85] B. B. Mandelbrot, Intermittent turbulence in self-
similar cascades: Divergence of high moments and di-
mension of the carrier, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 62,
331 (1974).
[86] D. Schertzer, S. Lovejoy, F. Schmitt, Y. Chigirinskaya ,
and D. Marsan, Multifractal cascade dynamics and tur-
bulent intermittency, Fractals 5, 427 (1997).
[87] N. Gal and D. Weihs, Experimental evidence of strong
anomalous diﬀusion in living cells, Physical Review E
81, 020903 (2010).
[88] A. Rebenshtok and E. Barkai, Distribution of time-
averaged observables for weak ergodicity breaking,
Physical Review Letters 99, 210601 (2007).
[89] M. F. Shlesinger, B. West, and J. Klafter, Lévy dynam-
ics of enhanced diﬀusion: Application to turbulence,
Physical Review Letters 58, 1100 (1987).
[90] D. Ernst, J. Köhler, and M. Weiss, Probing the type of
anomalous diﬀusion with single-particle tracking, Phys-
ical Chemistry Chemical Physics 16, 7686 (2014).
[91] Y. He, S. Burov, R. Metzler, and E. Barkai, Random
time-scale invariant diﬀusion and transport coeﬃcients,
Physical Review Letters 101, 058101 (2008).
[92] E. Kepten, A. Weron, G. Sikora, K. Burnecki, and
Y. Garini, Guidelines for the ﬁtting of anomalous dif-
fusion mean square displacement graphs from single
particle tracking experiments, PLoS One 10, e0117722
(2015).
[93] D. Krapf, N. Lukat, E. Marinari, R. Metzler, G. Os-
hanin, C. Selhuber-Unkel, A. Squarcini, L. Stadler,M. Weiss, and X. Xu, Spectral content of a single
non-brownian trajectory, Physical Review X 9, 011019
(2019).
[94] M. Magdziarz, A. Weron, K. Burnecki, and J. Klafter,
Fractional brownian motion versus the continuous-time
random walk: A simple test for subdiﬀusive dynamics,
Physical Review Letters 103, 180602 (2009).
[95] S. M. Rytov, Y. A. Kravtsov, and V. I. Tatarskii, Prin-
ciples of Statistical Radiophysics: Wave Propagation
Through Random Media , Vol. 4 (Springer, Berlin, Ger-
many, 1989).
[96] J. Ślęzak, R. Metzler, and M. Magdziarz, Codiﬀerence
can detect ergodicity breaking and non-gaussianity, New
Journal of Physics 21, 053008 (2019).
[97] V. Sposini, D. S. Grebenkov, R. Metzler, G. Oshanin,
and F. Seno, Universal spectral features of diﬀerent
classes of random-diﬀusivity processes, New Journal of
Physics 22, 063056 (2020).
[98] D. Thirumalai, R. D. Mountain, and T. Kirkpatrick,
Ergodic behavior in supercooled liquids and in glasses,
Physical Review A 39, 3563 (1989).
[99] O. Vilk, E. Aghion, R. Nathan, S. Toledo, R. Metzler,
and M. Assaf, Classiﬁcation of anomalous diﬀusion in
animal movement data using power spectral analysis,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01609 (2022).
[100] W. Deng and E. Barkai, Ergodic properties of frac-
tional Brownian-Langevin motion, Physical Review E
79, 011112 (2009).
[101] D. G. Kelty-Stephen and M. Mangalam, Fractal and
multifractal descriptors restore ergodicity broken by
non-Gaussianity in time series, Chaos, Solitons & Frac-
tals163, 112568 (2022).
[102] D. G. Kelty-Stephen and M. Mangalam, Ergodic char-
acterization of non-ergodic multiplicative cascade pro-
cesses, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Appli-
cations.
[103] M. Mangalam and D. G. Kelty-Stephen, Point esti-
mates, simpson’s paradox, and nonergodicity in bio-
logical sciences, Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews
125, 98 (2021).
[104] M. Mangalam and D. G. Kelty-Stephen, Ergodic de-
scriptors of non-ergodic stochastic processes, Journal of
the Royal Society Interface 19, 20220095 (2022).
[105] M. Schwarzl, A. Godec, and R. Metzler, Quantifying
non-ergodicity of anomalous diﬀusion with higher order
moments, Scientiﬁc Reports 7, 1 (2017).
[106] G. Bel and E. Barkai, Weak ergodicity breaking in the
continuous-time random walk, Physical Review Letters
94, 240602 (2005).
[107] S. Burov, J.-H. Jeon, R. Metzler, and E. Barkai, Sin-
gle particle tracking in systems showing anomalous dif-
fusion: The role of weak ergodicity breaking, Physical
Chemistry Chemical Physics 13, 1800 (2011).
[108] A. G. Cherstvy and R. Metzler, Nonergodicity, ﬂuctu-
ations, and criticality in heterogeneous diﬀusion pro-
cesses, Physical Review E 90, 012134 (2014).
[109] H. Safdari, A. G. Cherstvy, A. V. Chechkin, F. Thiel,
I. M. Sokolov, and R. Metzler, Quantifying the non-
ergodicity of scaled Brownian motion, Journal of
Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 48, 375002
(2015).
[110] D. Froemberg and E. Barkai, Time-averaged Einstein
relation and ﬂuctuating diﬀusivities for the Lévy walk,
Physical Review E 87, 030104 (2013).22
[111] A. Godec and R. Metzler, Finite-time eﬀects and ul-
traweak ergodicity breaking in superdiﬀusive dynamics,
Physical Review Letters 110, 020603 (2013).
[112] J. A. Dixon, J. G. Holden, D. Mirman, and D. G.
Stephen, Multifractal dynamics in the emergence of
cognitive structure, Topics in Cognitive Science 4, 51
(2012).
[113] E. A. Ihlen and B. Vereijken, Interaction-dominant dy -
namics in human cognition: Beyond 1/fαﬂuctuation,
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 139, 436
(2010).
[114] D. G. Kelty-Stephen, I. C. Lee, N. S. Carver, K. M.
Newell, and M. Mangalam, Multifractal roots of supra-
postural dexterity, Human Movement Science 76,
102771 (2021).
[115] H. Kloos and G. Van Orden, Voluntary behavior in cog-
nitive and motor tasks, Mind and Matter 8, 19 (2010).
[116] G. C. Van Orden, J. G. Holden, and M. T. Turvey, Self-
organization of cognitive performance, Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology: General 132, 331 (2003).
[117] D. G. Kelty-Stephen, E. Lane, and M. Mangalam, Mul-
tifractal test for nonlinear changes in time series, Be-
havioral Research Methods (2021).
[118] M. Mangalam, N. S. Carver, and D. G. Kelty-Stephen,
Multifractal signatures of perceptual processing on
anatomical sleeves of the human body, Journal of The
Royal Society Interface 17, 20200328 (2020).
[119] C.-K. Peng, S. V. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, M. Simons, H. E.
Stanley, and A. L. Goldberger, Mosaic organization of
dna nucleotides, Physical Review E 49, 1685 (1994).
[120] C.-K. Peng, S. Havlin, H. E. Stanley, and A. L.
Goldberger, Quantiﬁcation of scaling exponents and
crossover phenomena in nonstationary heartbeat time
series, Chaos 5, 82 (1995).
[121] A. Chhabra and R. V. Jensen, Direct determination of
the f (α) singularity spectrum, Physical Review Letters
62, 1327 (1989).
[122] B. B. Mandelbrot and B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal
Geometry of Nature , Vol. 1 (WH Freeman, New York,
NY, 1982).
[123] T. C. Halsey, M. H. Jensen, L. P. Kadanoﬀ, I. Procaccia,
and B. I. Shraiman, Fractal measures and their singu-
larities: The characterization of strange sets, Physical
Review A 33, 1141 (1986).
[124] B. B. Mandelbrot, Fractals and Scaling in Finance: Dis-
continuity, Concentration, Risk (Springer, New York,
NY, 2013).
[125] M. Zamir, Critique of the test of multifractality as ap -
plied to biological data, Journal of Theoretical Biology
225, 407 (2003).
[126] C. A. Bell, N. S. Carver, J. A. Zbaracki, and D. G.
Kelty-Stephen, Non-linear ampliﬁcation of variability
through interaction across scales supports greater ac-
curacy in manual aiming: Evidence from a multifractal
analysis with comparisons to linear surrogates in the
Fitts task, Frontiers in Physiology 10, 998 (2019).
[127] L. Bloomﬁeld, E. Lane, M. Mangalam, and D. G. Kelty-
Stephen, Perceiving and remembering speech depend on
multifractal nonlinearity in movements producing and
exploring speech, Journal of the Royal Society Interface
18, 20210272 (2021).
[128] N. S. Carver, D. Bojovic, and D. G. Kelty-Stephen,
Multifractal foundations of visually-guided aiming and
adaptation to prismatic perturbation, Human Move-ment Science 55, 61 (2017).
[129] N. S. Carver and D. G. Kelty-Stephen, Multifractality
in individual honeybee behavior hints at colony-speciﬁc
social cascades: Reanalysis of radio-frequency identiﬁ-
cation data from ﬁve diﬀerent colonies, Physical Review
E95, 022402 (2017).
[130] N. Jacobson, Q. Berleman-Paul, M. Mangalam, D. G.
Kelty-Stephen, and C. Ralston, Multifractality in pos-
tural sway supports quiet eye training in aiming tasks:
A study of golf putting, Human Movement Science 76,
102752 (2021).
[131] D. G. Kelty-Stephen, L. A. Stirling, and L. A. Lipsitz,
Multifractal temporal correlations in circle-tracing be-
haviors are associated with the executive function of
rule-switching assessed by the Trail Making Test, Psy-
chological Assessment 28, 171 (2016).
[132] D. G. Kelty-Stephen, M. P. Furmanek, and M. Man-
galam, Multifractality distinguishes reactive from proac -
tive cascades in postural control, Chaos, Solitons &
Fractals 142, 110471 (2021).
[133] M. Mangalam and D. G. Kelty-Stephen, Multiplicative-
cascade dynamics supports whole-body coordination for
perception via eﬀortful touch, Human Movement Sci-
ence70, 102595 (2020).
[134] D. G. Stephen and J. A. Dixon, Strong anticipation:
Multifractal cascade dynamics modulate scaling in syn-
chronization behaviors, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 44,
160 (2011).
[135] D. G. Stephen, W.-H. Hsu, D. Young, E. L. Saltzman,
K. G. Holt, D. J. Newman, M. Weinberg, R. J. Wood,
R. Nagpal, and E. C. Goldﬁeld, Multifractal ﬂuctuations
in joint angles during infant spontaneous kicking reveal
multiplicativity-driven coordination, Chaos, Solitons &
Fractals 45, 1201 (2012).
[136] D. W. Teng, C. L. Eddy, and D. G. Kelty-Stephen, Non-
visually-guided distance perception depends on match-
ing torso ﬂuctuations between training and test, Atten-
tion, Perception, & Psychophysics 78, 2320 (2016).
[137] R. M. Ward and D. G. Kelty-Stephen, Bringing the non-
linearity of the movement system to gestural theories
of language use: Multifractal structure of spoken En-
glish supports the compensation for coarticulation in
human speech perception, Frontiers in Physiology 9,
1152 (2018).
[138] E. A. F. E. Ihlen, Introduction to multifractal detren ded
ﬂuctuation analysis in Matlab, Frontiers in Physiology
3, 141 (2012).
[139] T. Schreiber and A. Schmitz, Improved surrogate data
for nonlinearity tests, Physical Review Letters 77, 635
(1996).
[140] A. G. Cherstvy, A. V. Chechkin, and R. Metzler,
Anomalous diﬀusion and ergodicity breaking in hetero-
geneous diﬀusion processes, New Journal of Physics 15,
083039 (2013).
[141] R. Metzler, J.-H. Jeon, A. G. Cherstvy, and E. Barkai,
Anomalous diﬀusion models and their properties: Non-
stationarity, non-ergodicity, and ageing at the centenary
of single particle tracking, Physical Chemistry Chemical
Physics 16, 24128 (2014).
[142] F. Thiel and I. M. Sokolov, Scaled brownian motion as
a mean-ﬁeld model for continuous-time random walks,
Physical Review E 89, 012115 (2014).
[143] J.-H. Jeon and R. Metzler, Analysis of short subdiﬀusi ve
time series: Scatter of the time-averaged mean-squared23
displacement, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
Theoretical 43, 252001 (2010).
[144] D. G. Kelty-Stephen, K. Palatinus, E. Saltzman, and
J. A. Dixon, A tutorial on multifractality, cascades, and
interactivity for empirical time series in ecological sci-
ence, Ecological Psychology 25, 1 (2013).
[145] S. Ritschel, A. G. Cherstvy, and R. Metzler, Universal -
ity of delay-time averages for ﬁnancial time series: An-
alytical results, computer simulations, and analysis of
historical stock-market prices, Journal of Physics: Com-
plexity 2, 045003 (2021).
[146] D. Vinod, A. G. Cherstvy, W. Wang, R. Metzler, and
I. M. Sokolov, Nonergodicity of reset geometric Brown-
ian motion, Physical Review E 105, L012106 (2022).
[147] W. Wang, A. G. Cherstvy, R. Metzler, and I. M.
Sokolov, Restoring ergodicity of stochastically reset
anomalous-diﬀusion processes, Physical Review Re-
search 4, 013161 (2022).
[148] S. Kian-Bostanabad and M.-R. Azghani, The relation-
ship between RMS electromyography and thickness
change in the skeletal muscles, Medical Engineering &
Physics 43, 92 (2017).
[149] J. Vink, M. Westover, A. Pascual-Leone, and M. Shaﬁ,
EEG functional connectivity predicts propagation of
TMS-evoked potentials, Brain Stimulation 10, 516
(2017).
[150] J. J. Vink, D. C. Klooster, R. A. Ozdemir, M. B. West-
over, A. Pascual-Leone, and M. M. Shaﬁ, EEG func-
tional connectivity is a weak predictor of causal brain
interactions, Brain Topography 33, 221 (2020).
[151] C. R. Booth, H. L. Brown, E. G. Eason, S. Wallot,
and D. G. Kelty-Stephen, Expectations on hierarchical
scales of discourse: Multifractality predicts both short-
and long-range eﬀects of violating gender expectations
in text reading, Discourse Processes 55, 12 (2018).
[152] D. G. Kelty-Stephen and J. A. Dixon, Interwoven ﬂuctu-
ations during intermodal perception: Fractality in head
sway supports the use of visual feedback in haptic per-
ceptual judgments by manual wielding., Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology: Human Perception and Perfor-
mance 40, 2289 (2014).
[153] M. Mangalam, R. Chen, T. R. McHugh, T. Singh,
and D. G. Kelty-Stephen, Bodywide ﬂuctuations sup-
port manual exploration: Fractal ﬂuctuations in pos-
ture predict perception of heaviness and length via ef-
fortful touch by the hand, Human Movement Science
69, 102543 (2020).
[154] M. Mangalam, N. S. Carver, and D. G. Kelty-Stephen,
Global broadcasting of local fractal ﬂuctuations in a
bodywide distributed system supports perception via
eﬀortful touch, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 135, 109740
(2020).
[155] S. Wallot and D. G. Kelty-Stephen, Interaction-
dominant causation in mind and brain, and its impli-
cation for questions of generalization and replication,
Minds and Machines 28, 353 (2018).
[156] N. Cardenas, S. Kumar, and S. Mohanty, Dynamics
of cellular response to hypotonic stimulation revealed
by quantitative phase microscopy and multi-fractal de-
trended ﬂuctuation analysis, Applied Physics Letters
101, 203702 (2012).
[157] S. Chaieb, Š. Málková, and J. Lal, Why the wrinkling
transition in partially polymerized membranes is not
universal? Fractal-multifractal hierarchy, Journal ofTheoretical Biology 251, 60 (2008).
[158] V. Rezania, F. C. Sudirga, and J. A. Tuszynski, Mul-
tifractality nature of microtubule dynamic instability
process, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Ap-
plications 573, 125929 (2021).
[159] A. Wawrzkiewicz-Jałowiecka, P. Trybek,
B. Dworakowska, and Ł. Machura, Multifractal
properties of BK channel currents in human glioblas-
toma cells, Journal of Physical Chemistry B 124, 2382
(2020).
[160] E. D. Gutiérrez and J. L. Cabrera, A neural coding
scheme reproducing foraging trajectories, Scientiﬁc Re-
ports5, 1 (2015).
[161] Y. Ikeda, P. Jurica, H. Kimura, H. Takagi, Z. R. Struzik ,
K. Kiyono, Y. Arata, and Y. Sako, C. elegans episodic
swimming is driven by multifractal kinetics, Scientiﬁc
Reports 10, 1 (2020).
[162] F. G. Schmitt and L. Seuront, Multifractal random walk
in copepod behavior, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and its Applications 301, 375 (2001).
[163] L. Seuront and H. E. Stanley, Anomalous diﬀusion and
multifractality enhance mating encounters in the ocean,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111,
2206 (2014).
[164] V. Balaban, S. Lim, G. Gupta, J. Boedicker, and P. Bog-
dan, Quantifying emergence and self-organisation of En-
terobacter cloacae microbial communities, Scientiﬁc Re-
ports8, 1 (2018).
[165] H. Koorehdavoudi, P. Bogdan, G. Wei, R. Mar-
culescu, J. Zhuang, R. W. Carlsen, and M. Sitti,
Multi-fractal characterization of bacterial swimming dy-
namics: A case study on real and simulated Serra-
tia marcescens , Proceedings of the Royal Society A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 473,
20170154 (2017).
[166] Y. Chen, M. Ding, and J. S. Kelso, Long memory pro-
cesses (1/fαtype) in human coordination, Physical Re-
view Letters 79, 4501 (1997).
[167] A. B. Slifkin and J. R. Eder, Trajectory evolution and
changes in the structure of movement amplitude time
series, Human Movement Science 71, 102617 (2020).
[168] S. Lovejoy and D. Schertzer, The Weather and Climate:
Emergent Laws and Multifractal Cascades (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2018).
[169] L. R. Karhausen, Commentary: Coda—A Socratic dia-
logue: Plato, International Journal of Epidemiology 30,
710 (2001).
[170] R. Bahar, C. H. Hartmann, K. A. Rodriguez, A. D.
Denny, R. A. Busuttil, M. E. Dollé, R. B. Calder, G. B.
Chisholm, B. H. Pollock, C. A. Klein, et al., Increased
cell-to-cell variation in gene expression in ageing mouse
heart, Nature 441, 1011 (2006).
[171] F. Sanabria, Internal-clock models and misguided vie ws
of mechanistic explanations: A reply to Eckard & Lattal
(2020), Perspectives on Behavior Science 43, 779 (2020).
[172] E. Shahar, Estimating causal parameters without targ et
populations, Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice
13, 814 (2007).
[173] J. Vijg, Loss of gene coordination as a stochastic caus e
of ageing, Nature Metabolism 2, 1188 (2020).
[174] J. Van Hateren, Active causation and the origin of
meaning, Biological Cybernetics 109, 33 (2015).
[175] O. M. Cliﬀ, J. T. Lizier, N. Tsuchiya, and B. D. Fulcher,
Unifying pairwise interactions in complex dynamics,24
arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11941 (2022).
[176] B. D. Fulcher, M. A. Little, and N. S. Jones, Highly
comparative time-series analysis: The empirical struc-
ture of time series and their methods, Journal of the
Royal Society Interface 10, 20130048 (2013).
[177] B. D. Fulcher and N. S. Jones, hctsa: A computational
framework for automated time-series phenotyping using
massive feature extraction, Cell Systems 5, 527 (2017).
[178] S. Lovejoy, D. Schertzer, and P. Silas, Diﬀusion in
one-dimensional multifractal porous media, Water Re-
sources Research 34, 3283 (1998).
[179] V. V. Afanasiev, R. Z. Sagdeev, and G. M. Zaslavsky,
Chaotic jets with multifractal space-time random walk,
Chaos 1, 143 (1991).
[180] W. Chen, H. Sun, X. Zhang, and D. Korošak, Anoma-
lous diﬀusion modeling by fractal and fractional deriva-
tives, Computers & Mathematics with Applications 59,
1754 (2010).
[181] J.-R. de Dreuzy, P. Davy, J. Erhel, and J. de Bré-
mond d’Ars, Anomalous diﬀusion exponents in contin-
uous two-dimensional multifractal media, Physical Re-
view E 70, 016306 (2004).
[182] L. Gmachowski, Fractal model of anomalous diﬀusion,
European Biophysics Journal 44, 613 (2015).
[183] D. R. Bickel, Simple estimation of intermittency in mu l-
tifractal stochastic processes: Biomedical applications ,
Physics Letters A 262, 251 (1999).
[184] R. Menu and T. Roscilde, Anomalous diﬀusion and lo-
calization in a positionally disordered quantum spin ar-ray, Physical Review Letters 124, 130604 (2020).
[185] L. Seuront, F. G. Schmitt, M. C. Brewer, J. R. Strick-
ler, and S. Souissi, From random walk to multifractal
random walk in zooplankton swimming behavior, Zool.
Stud43, 498 (2004).
[186] A. Shariﬁ-Viand, M. Mahjani, and M. Jafarian, Inves-
tigation of anomalous diﬀusion and multifractal dimen-
sions in polypyrrole ﬁlm, Journal of Electroanalytical
Chemistry 671, 51 (2012).
[187] M. R. Shaebani, A. Wysocki, R. G. Winkler, G. Gomp-
per, and H. Rieger, Computational models for active
matter, Nature Reviews Physics 2, 181 (2020).
[188] J.-H. Jeon and R. Metzler, Fractional Brownian mo-
tion and motion governed by the fractional Langevin
equation in conﬁned geometries, Physical Review E 81,
021103 (2010).
[189] J.-M. Bardet, G. Lang, G. Oppenheim, A. Philippe, and
M. S. Taqqu, Generators of long-range dependent pro-
cesses: A survey, in Theory and Applications of Long-
Range Dependence , edited by P. Doukhan, G. Oppen-
heim, and M. A. Taqqu (Birkhäuser, Boston, MA, 2003)
pp. 579–623.
[190] G. Muñoz-Gil, C. Romero-Aristizabal, N. Mateos,
F. Campelo, L. I. de Llobet Cucalon, M. Beato,
M. Lewenstein, M. F. Garcia-Parajo, and J. A. Torreno-
Pina, Stochastic particle unbinding modulates growth
dynamics and size of transcription factor condensates
in living cells, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 119, e2200667119 (2022).