Location-based AR for Social Justice:
Case Studies, Lessons, and Open Challenges
Hope Schroeder
hopes@mit.edu
MIT
USARob Tokanel
tokanel.r@gmail.com
Columbia University
USA
Kyle Qian
kylecqian@gmail.com
Stanford University
USAKhoi Le
khoivietle2@gmail.com
Stanford University
USA
ABSTRACT
Dear Visitor andCharleston Reconstructed were location-based aug-
mented reality (AR) experiences created between 2018 and 2020
dealing with two controversial monument sites in the US. The
projects were motivated by the ability of AR to 1) link layers of
context to physical sites in ways that are otherwise difficult or im-
possible and 2) to visualize changes to physical spaces, potentially
inspiring changes to the spaces themselves. We discuss the projects’
motivations, designs, and deployments. We reflect on how physical
changes to the projects’ respective sites radically altered their out-
comes, and we describe lessons for future work in location-based
AR, particularly for projects in contested spaces.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Mixed / augmented reality ;
Empirical studies in interaction design .
KEYWORDS
Augmented reality, human-centered computing
ACM Reference Format:
Hope Schroeder, Rob Tokanel, Kyle Qian, and Khoi Le. 2023. Location-based
AR for Social Justice: Case Studies, Lessons, and Open Challenges. In Ex-
tended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA ’23), April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544549.3573855
1 INTRODUCTION
Augmented reality (AR) adds layers of content onto our perceptual
field that can meaningfully alter the way we see and interpret
the world around us. It can help us examine physical spaces by
adding location-specific context and imagine how the world could
be different. AR allows us to experience the impossible, forging
new ways of interacting with our surroundings through an exciting
emerging medium. These capabilities become especially powerful
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CHI EA ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
©2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9422-2/23/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544549.3573855when applied to contested public spaces, which are often the sites
of competing worldviews and visions for the future.
Physical symbols of the legacy of slavery in the US—such as
Confederate and antebellum period monuments—have become the
subject of increased scrutiny and debate over the past several years.
In the wake of the mass shooting in Charleston in 2015, and in
the years following the white supremacist rally in Charlottesville
in 2017, calls to investigate the legacy of monuments intensified,
and extended beyond Confederate monuments to other contested
public spaces as well.
We were a team of students based at Stanford and Columbia in-
terested in how carefully designed AR experiences could help inter-
rogate structures and power dynamics in public space. We believed
we could add layers of storytelling that brought relevant voices to
the space in ways that would be impossible without the assistance
of technology. We received a Magic Grant from the Brown Institute
for Media Innovation for Charleston Reconstructed , a project inter-
vening on Charleston, South Carolina’s most infamous monument
using AR. A local prototype for Charleston Reconstructed became
its own project at Stanford called Dear Visitor .
In our first project, Dear Visitor , a monument’s conspicuous
absence was an opportunity to not only instantiate the monument
as it should have been, but also to digitally add layers of institutional
memory that are impossible through purely traditional media. In a
fitting twist, the AR project eventually led to a permanent physical
change to the space.
In our second project, Charleston Reconstructed , a monument’s
conspicuous presence highlighted the legacy of slavery in Charleston,
South Carolina’s most prominent park, Marion Square, for decades.
We used AR to enact three interventions and surface historical per-
spectives in the square. We completed and beta-tested the project,
but the project lagged physical changes in the world when the
original monument was taken down in June 2020 in the wake of
the George Floyd protests.
In this piece, we describe the designs of the projects, lessons
learned from their deployment, and open challenges we still see for
future work of this kind.
1.1 Technological motivation
Ronald Azuma has asserted that the fundamental value of AR comes
from the unique combination of digital content and physical reality
such that “virtual content is connected to reality in compelling andarXiv:2302.02050v1  [cs.HC]  4 Feb 2023CHI EA ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Schroeder, Tokanel, Qian, et al.
meaningful ways." [ 1] AR has seen myriad technological advances
in recent decades and several surges in popularity in the commercial
sphere. However, AR has yet to live up to its potential as a vehicle
for facilitating meaningful experiences situated in the physical
world. Though modern AR systems are adept at detecting basic
properties such as position and shape, they generally lack the ability
to infer physical properties like material, or semantic properties
like identity and cultural significance. In other words, modern AR
systems can understand where things are, but seldom what they
are, and rarely why they matter.
As a result, Pokémon Go, the most well-known AR application
in popular use, features content which is overlaid on reality, but
which lacks meaningful connection to it. Other platforms, such as
Google Lens, are capable of basic semantic understanding of an
object or site, but are currently primarily reference tools that lack
interactivity and content.
While the technology required for generalized semantic under-
standing using commercially available AR does not yet exist, many
necessary elements for creating location-based AR experiences do.
We used visual markers to trigger the location-based experiences
we designed, thus deploying a temporary solution to the problem
of semantic understanding of the space. This allowed us to explore
the promises and challenges of creating meaningful location-based
AR before it is achievable at scale.
With both technological and social goals in mind, we created
Charleston Reconstructed andDear Visitor , two location-based AR
experiences. Lessons from these case studies will be useful in plan-
ning for future projects as the technology develops.
1.2 Related work
Several other projects have meaningfully engaged with site-specific
AR, such as 110 Stories , which used AR to visualize an outline of the
Twin Towers against the New York skyline, showing the towers’
outline before the 9/11 attacks. The experience demonstrates an
intentional usage of AR which combines content with context,
elevating both the physical space and the digital augmentation.
Another project, Stonewall Forever , incorporated archival materials
related to the Stonewall riots into an AR smartphone app which
projected a large, dynamic rainbow into the physical site of the
riots in New York City, and invited users to leave comments on
the virtual monument. Another project currently in development
called “If These Streets Could Talk" will show elements of Jewish
archival history overlaid on sites in the Jewish quarter of Budapest,
with planned deployments in other European cities as well.
2 CASE STUDIES
2.1 Dear Visitor
2.1.1 Motivation for the project. In 2015, Chanel Miller was sexu-
ally assaulted behind a dumpster on Stanford campus. Her victim
impact statement was published on BuzzFeed and went viral during
the #MeToo movement. As part of its handling of the sexual assault
case, Stanford agreed to build a contemplative garden at the site
of the assault per Chanel Miller’s request, which would include
a plaque with a quote from her victim impact statement. Miller’s
initial proposed quote was rejected by Stanford on the premise
that it might be triggering to survivors, [ 3] prompting outrage andactivism on campus. [ 5] Stanford rejected additional quotes that
Miller proposed, and Miller withdrew from the negotiation process.
The otherwise completed contemplative garden, located in a remote
part of Stanford campus between two undergraduate residences,
was therefore left unmarked for several years. Our team learned
about these events in fall 2018, and we realized that AR provided
a way to bring Chanel Miller’s words to the garden and create
engagement with the physical space in a way that proved difficult
otherwise.
2.1.2 Stakeholder interviews. Starting this project in a thoughtful
way required identifying and communicating with many stakehold-
ers. We had conversations with students who had lived near the
garden, activists who had rallied for a plaque, administrators at
Stanford and its Title IX office, and student leaders past and present.
Interviewees recommended follow-up interviews with additional
subjects.
We performed semi-structured interviews with past and present
Stanford students, discussing their knowledge of and relationship to
the garden, their opinions about the plaque, and what they wished
to impart on the garden’s future visitors. We also collected stories
from students who lived near the space, one of whom described
overhearing a pair of male students talking about their sexual ex-
ploits in the unmarked garden, illustrating the need for a marker
at the site. These anecdotes from interviews were edited into clips
which formed the audio content of the AR experience.
2.1.3 Design. We received design feedback from students, activists,
and university stakeholders on an ongoing basis. The final version
of the experience began with a brief textual introduction to Chanel
Miller, the context behind the garden, and our intentions for the
project. The user then began the AR portion of the experience by
pointing the tablet viewfinder at an image marker placed next to
the garden. When the tablet successfully anchored, two plaques
and seven letters materialized on-screen in and around the garden.
The plaques were digital renditions of two different physical plaque
designs displaying two different quote suggestions from Chanel
Miller. Tapping on the plaques played audio recordings of Miller
reading the quotes. The plaque at the entrance of the garden, where
the original plaque was proposed for installation, featured the first
quote that was rejected by Stanford. The second plaque, placed in
front of the fountain on the ground, featured another quote Miller
suggested but that was also not approved.
AR letter envelopes, with attached audio from student inter-
viewees discussing the space, floated near eye level in the garden
during the experience. Tapping a letter opened an audio player
which played the corresponding clip. The letters played interviews
of various students and student activists, all of whom were asked
what they would want future visitors to the garden to know (hence
the title, Dear Visitor ). A counter in the corner of the screen kept
track of how many clips the user had heard. See accompanying
supplemental materials for a video of an abbreviated walk-through
of the experience.
2.1.4 Tech & Implementation. The experience was created in Unity
with an Apple ARKit SDK and 3D models created in Blender, and
was deployed to iPad Pro tablets. We decided to use tablets instead
of headsets to maximize visual fidelity and viewport size whileLocation-based AR for Social Justice:
Case Studies, Lessons, and Open Challenges CHI EA ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
minimizing cost. At the time of the project’s deployment, headsets
like the Magic Leap were both prohibitively expensive and used
optical see-through designs, which meant they had small viewports
and struggled in outdoor environments. We found smartphone
viewports to be too small for a high-quality experience.
The constraints of the project guided our choice of AR anchoring
mechanism. We used image markers, which match an image file in
the app to the image’s printed counterpart. Marker-based anchoring
is common and fairly easy to use, but most importantly, we found
this method to be the most reliable in the face of lighting changes
and other outdoor environmental factors. We used a printed image,
0.2m by 0.2m, placed next to the garden, which was scanned by
each experience participant.
While we extensively considered other anchoring mechanisms
such as 3D object recognition (e.g., of inset stones around the foun-
tain), we found them unreliable outdoors. In particular, they had
difficulty adapting to changes in lighting even within a single day.
Anchoring to a 3D stone pattern during the day might work at first,
but if the stone pattern were obscured by shadows from nearby
trees a few minutes later, anchoring would fail. If 3D object or scene
recognition were to one day become more reliable, it would be the
preferred method of anchoring, since it would be able to anchor on
features native to the physical scene.
2.1.5 Launch. The Dear Visitor experience was painstakingly cre-
ated and reviewed with stakeholders, a process which took almost
an entire academic year. As the experience neared completion, we
conducted a beta test, followed by a full launch, which fortuitously
coincided with Chanel Miller’s book launch and identity reveal (she
had previously been known as Emily Doe).
We organized a day-long launch event in September 2019. More
than 100 people participated in the experience, which had “tick-
eted" time slots to control crowding in the space. We had on-site
volunteers start users with the tablet and headphones and remain
nearby in case of technical difficulties. Because of the charged na-
ture of the subject matter, we designed a voluntary, non-digital
offboarding experience to help participants process the app expe-
rience. All visitors were invited to participate in the offboarding
experience, and most did. Participants were invited to hand write
their own physical “Dear Visitor" letters to others who visit the
space. Figure 1 shows an example of a letter. More than 50 such
letters were written on the day of the event. To conclude the event,
the remaining visitors gathered in a circle to read powerful quotes
from Chanel Miller’s victim impact statement in solidarity.
2.1.6 Impact. Many publications wrote about the Dear Visitor
launch event given the high-profile nature of Chanel Miller’s iden-
tity reveal and book release, including BBC News ,The Guardian , and
The LA Times . This press allowed us, and the many other activists
dedicated to this issue, to direct further attention to the issue of the
plaque. Following the launch event and Miller’s book release, calls
for action to install the real plaque at the garden proliferated. A
petition to install the plaque gained more than 2,200 signatures and
was sent to the Stanford administration, and the Stanford Faculty
Senate unanimously voted to install it. [ 8] Several unofficial physi-
cal plaques were put up at the site by activists during this period.
[11] In February of 2020, the official plaque was installed. [6]
Figure 1: An example anonymous letter written in the off-
boarding experience of Dear Visitor
Figure 2 shows a side-by-side image of the digital plaque on the
left, designed by us for the Dear Visitor experience, and the plaque
that was eventually installed onsite on the right. The similarity is
noteworthy because neither the digital model nor its placement
were part of the original design for the plaque, which featured a
longer quote and had a taller form that was slated for the entrance
to the garden. We thus have reason to believe the final design of
the plaque installed in 2020 took direct inspiration from our digital
design, an unexpected outcome of the project.
2.2 Charleston Reconstructed
2.2.1 Context. In June 2015, a young white supremacist named Dy-
lann Roof entered Charleston’s oldest historically African American
church (Mother Emanuel), joined the congregation in prayer, and
then murdered nine of its members in an effort to start a race war.
South Carolina’s state legislature agreed that it was time to removeCHI EA ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Schroeder, Tokanel, Qian, et al.
Figure 2: Left: digital plaque from Dear Visitor in 2019 over-
laid at the garden. Right: installed plaque in 2020, whose de-
sign and placement took inspiration from Dear Visitor .
the Confederate flag from its state house, but less than a mile from
Mother Emanuel, a 115-foot statue of former Vice President John
C. Calhoun, a prominent defender of slavery, still stood in Marion
Square. It was emblematic of a problem common to many public
spaces in the United States: an outdated monument codifying and
celebrating an outdated understanding of the country’s history.
Historians Ethan J. Kytle and Blain Roberts claim that “No place
in America has spent as much time and energy selling memo-
ries—most whitewashed, others unvarnished —of its past" as Charleston,
the port city through which 40% of enslaved Africans passed in the
Transatlantic slave trade. [ 4,7] In the charged physical and histori-
cal landscape of the city’s central square, we saw an opportunity to
contextualize and re-imagine monuments both present and absent.
From a technological perspective, we saw an opportunity to bring
a physical space into dialogue with its history through AR.
2.2.2 Final design. The design of the app took the form of three
themed "chapters," meant to be experienced in situ in Marion Square.
Users were prompted to explore several sites in the square using a
tablet. Tapping on the digital objects that had been digitally overlaid
on the physical space triggered interview audio from historians
and key community stakeholders. From a content perspective, our
goal was first for users to consider the white-supremacist narrative
represented by the existing state of the park’s monuments; then to
consider a counter-narrative centering the contributions of Black
Charlestonians; and finally, to consider more broadly how and
whether design choices in public spaces can be made to represent a
community’s shared values and history– perhaps in a different form
than traditional monuments that take the form of a person. Each
of the three chapters used a different affordance of AR, allowing
for three different ways to re-imagine public spaces more equitably.
A map of the user journey from chapters 1 to 3 through Marion
Square can be seen in Figure 3.
In the first chapter, we used AR to digitally alter and contextu-
alize Marion Square’s prominent monument to Calhoun. The app
directed users to stand in front of the Calhoun statue. Users then
saw a digital plaque appear in the space. This plaque, shown in Fig-
ure 4, displayed language the city considered adding to the statue’s
base but ultimately tabled due to internal disagreements over the
language used to describe Calhoun’s role in slavery. Tapping on the
plaque triggered the voice of Charleston Mayor John Tecklenburg,
who expressed his regret at not being able to have the plaque added
to the statue. Simultaneously, we overlaid a reproduction of graffiti
Figure 3: User journey from chapters 1 to 3 in Marion Square
that was sprayed onto the monument after the 2015 shooting at
Mother Emanuel AME Church. Tapping on the recreation of the
spray-painted word, "racist," at the base of the statue triggered the
voice of Daron Lee Calhoun II, a Black Charlestonian who noted
that Calhoun had once "owned" his family. This chapter was de-
signed to use AR to instantiate small interventions to the existing
monument and interrogate its lack of context—through plaques or
other methods—in the physical world.
Figure 4: Screenshot from Chapter 1 of Charleston Recon-
structed . Digitally rendered graffiti, a proposed plaque, a sil-
houette of a young girl, and a candle glow are shown atop
the monument. When tapped, each element triggers audio
context on the space.
For the second chapter, we instantiated in the square a statue
of Denmark Vesey, a native Charlestonian who was executed forLocation-based AR for Social Justice:
Case Studies, Lessons, and Open Challenges CHI EA ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
plotting what would have been the largest slave insurrection in
American history in the early 1800s. This was a digital reconstruc-
tion of an existing monument, located elsewhere in Charleston.
A committee of historians and activists originally proposed that
the Vesey statue be installed in Marion Square in 1996, but many
Charlestonians objected, and the Vesey statue was eventually con-
structed in a park two miles away—well outside the area commonly
visited by tourists. This motivated another novel intervention with
AR: using photogrammetry to generate a 3D model of the Vesey
statue, then instantiate it at the center of Marion Square. This would
allow users to visualize what the square would look like if the statue
had been there rather than two miles away.
When users tapped on the Vesey statue in the app, we resized
the digital model of the statue so it appeared to “grow" as tall as
the real-life Calhoun statue, as seen in Figure 7. Simultaneously,
we included audio of community members discussing the need
for better representation in Charleston’s statuary and the many
African American figures from Charleston’s past who deserve their
own monuments.
For the third chapter, we designed and instantiated a digital
monument from scratch and overlaid it on the space. Conceptually,
this was intended to provide an alternative model of what statues
in public space could commemorate. Statues are usually built in
dedication to a particular person who embodies community values
or aspirations. As shown in recent years, historical figures make for
complicated subjects for monuments given the complex nature of
any one person’s legacy. We took this opportunity to imagine what
a monument to a shared set of stories, hopes, and values could look
like. From an HCI standpoint, we also designed and instantiated
this virtual monument that had features that are impossible in
the physical world, like interactive audio combined with physics-
defying visual features.
We commissioned College of Charleston architectural student
T’Leya Walker to design a virtual monument representing sen-
timents gathered in our interviews. Walker’s final design incor-
porated symbolic elements including wrought ironwork in honor
of local African American blacksmiths, palmetto trees symboliz-
ing strength and flexibility in the face of hurricane winds and the
resilience of Black Charlestonians, and fingerprints in reference
to the hands that built Charleston. The monument took the form
of a brick archway, representing the Door of No Return, through
which many West Africans left their home continent on a forced
voyage to the United States. Users could tap chains strung across
the archway’s entry to hear about issues of ongoing inequality in
Charleston. After the audio associated with each chain played, it
was animated to break and disappear. After breaking each chain,
users were instructed to walk towards the archway, at which point
the tablet screen faded to black. Users were then left with the on-
screen prompt to look back at the park as it stands and consider
how it could be different.
2.2.3 Stakeholders. We took a community-oriented journalistic
approach, conducting interviews with historians, locals and ac-
tivists, and using their expertise and lived experiences to determine
the design and narrative elements that became part of the expe-
rience. After contacting key experts who had written about the
topic of monuments and historical memory locally, we asked eachinterviewee with whom else it was essential for us to speak, and
we ultimately recorded more than 25 interviews. As non-Black re-
porters and designers, we felt it was important to build trust and
welcome as much feedback as possible, so we emphasized trans-
parency about our goals and a willingness to maintain ongoing
communication with stakeholders.
The community members included as voices in the Charleston
Reconstructed experience included professors from the College of
Charleston and local military college The Citadel; the poet laureates
of both Charleston and South Carolina; a representative of the
Charleston chapter of the NAACP; multiple local tour guides and
public historians who focused on Black history; a distant relative of
John C. Calhoun; several community members who were affected
by the shooting at Mother Emanuel; and multiple local activists
and advocates working toward the removal of the Calhoun statue
from Marion Square.
We also maintained contact with representatives from organi-
zations including the Make It Right Project and the Charleston
Activist Network, and presented iterations of our work at several
local advocacy events during the design process. We used the in-
terviews and information gathered at these events to inform an
informal participatory design process, whereby insight and feed-
back from our interviewees directly informed the interim and final
designs of the app.
A direct example of this feedback system played out in the first in-
terview conducted for the project. We initially considered digitally
"replacing" the Calhoun statue with a statue of a Black Charlesto-
nian, and intended to ask interviewees who they would like to see
replace Calhoun. But Christine King-Mitchell, a historic interpreter
at Charleston’s Old Slave Mart Museum, changed our thinking—she
told us she did not think public monuments should be about putting
"one man or woman on a pedestal." Rather, she noted that when she
walks around Charleston, she thinks about all the enslaved people
who made the bricks that built the city. For her, the fingerprints
found in those bricks today serve as a monument to "a people that
were always in the shadows, but look at the works they left behind."
This insight prompted us to consider how we could expand our
vision for the application to allow for something broader, more
inclusive, and more narratively complex than simply replacing one
historic figure with another, and it directly informed the decision to
build the the third chapter of the experience in a different way. Her
insight led to us to conceptualize the monument in the third chapter
as a non-human form made of digital bricks, where tapping a hand-
print on the bricks let users hear the perspective King-Mitchell
shared with us in that first interview. A screenshot of this final
design is seen in Figure 5.
This interplay between community insight and design decisions
carried on throughout the project. Given the sensitivity of the issues
at hand and the fact that the AR component was difficult for many
participants to understand, we also invited stakeholders to serve
as beta testers and to provide feedback prior to any public release
of the app. This is a highly unusual practice from a journalistic
perspective, but we felt it was essential to collaborate in designing
the experience with the communities to whom it was most relevant,
especially given the sensitive nature of the topic and our own
limited understanding of the Black experience.CHI EA ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Schroeder, Tokanel, Qian, et al.
Figure 5: Screenshot of Christine King-Mitchell’s narrative
in the third chapter of Charleston Reconstructed.
As we identified stakeholder voices for the design process, we
were also aware that many people in Charleston wished to pre-
serve the status quo in the park. After interviewing some people
with this view, we decided that since the existing treatment of the
monument already aligned with their values, there was no need to
use AR to represent their vision for the space. For this reason, we
did not prioritize the Calhoun monument’s defenders as key stake-
holders in our design process. In both Dear Visitor andCharleston
Reconstructed , we found that consulting as many stakeholders as
possible—and prioritizing those whose voices may be hard to find
or actively pushed aside—was critical to creating the experience
we intended.
2.2.4 Implementation. The setup for Charleston Reconstructed was
similar to that of Dear Visitor (built in Unity with ARKit and de-
ployed to iPad tablets), but the scale of the experience was much
larger and complexity of included content was much higher. De-
signing an AR experience at the scale of a whole public park made
it difficult for people to go through the experience on their own, so
we implemented guided facilitation to make sure users did not miss
visual cues. Some visual cues were built into the experience itself,
but tablet displays, while large compared to smartphones, still were
too small to consistently facilitate wayfinding for a user without
help.
In the first chapter, John C. Calhoun , we were able to use marker-
based anchoring on an existing marker on the monument: a sign
reading "Climbing Is Prohibited," (see Figure 6) which alleviated the
need for additional markers like those needed for Dear Visitor .
For the second chapter, we scanned the existing Denmark Vesey
statue, located 2 miles away from Marion Square, using drones.
We reconstructed the statue digitally using the photogrammetry
Figure 6: Screenshot of the app, where the prompt was to
align an image (bottom) of the “Climbing is Prohibited" sign
at the base of the existing statue with the sign itself (top).
software RealityCapture, which rendered a 3D model. The statue
can be seen as it appeared in the app in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Digitally reconstructed Denmark Vesey statue
placed in Marion Square, resized to match the size of the Cal-
houn statue, seen in the background.
For the third chapter, T’Leya Walker created a 3D model of a
virtual monument in SketchUp. We added interactive elements toLocation-based AR for Social Justice:
Case Studies, Lessons, and Open Challenges CHI EA ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
this model in order to trigger audio elements in the app and give
the chains the appearance of movement.
2.2.5 Beta test. In September 2019, we organized a day-long beta
test of the experience with about 20 people, most of whom had
been interviewed for the project. We scheduled walk-throughs in
groups of 2-3 people every hour so that at least one of our team
members could personally facilitate for each experience participant.
This allowed us to help with any technical difficulties participants
encountered, observe how they navigated the application, and note
any editorial concerns that arose in real time.
In keeping with the collaborative process we established during
the early phases of the project, we solicited ongoing feedback from
these participants throughout and after the experience, with the
goal of using their notes and our observations to make improve-
ments. This provided crucial insight both technically and editorially
about how people respond to and interpret AR in outdoor settings,
on which we elaborate in a later section, "Open challenges."
Most notably, we observed that to complete all three chapters and
hear all of the included audio clips, which totaled about 43 minutes,
each person took approximately an hour and 15 minutes during the
beta test. We reduced the number of audio clips and AR elements
by nearly half as a result of participant feedback. Following this
beta test and edit process, we held several smaller walk-throughs
with a few key stakeholders who had emerged as informal advisors
due to their interest in the project, all of whom found the changes
we made to be effective. We felt at this point that we were ready
for a wider public release, and in February 2020 we held our final
demo of the experience with a representative for Spoleto Festival
USA, who expressed intent to tie our public launch event in with
the festival’s programming in June 2020.
2.2.6 Aftermath. In February 2020, news of a global pandemic
halted travel plans. Our planned deployment partner, Spoleto Festi-
val USA, cancelled its in-person festival in Charleston, which was
slated for June 2020. In May 2020, George Floyd was killed by po-
lice in Minneapolis, Minnesota, launching a nation-wide reckoning
with ongoing racism, anti-Black police violence in the US, and the
legacy of racism in the US.
In response to a newly re-energized advocacy and protest cam-
paign that followed in Charleston, Mayor John Tecklenburg took a
corrective action that months earlier he said he did not have the
power to do: he ordered the John C. Calhoun statue’s removal from
Marion Square, and it was removed on June 23, 2020.
Overnight, the landmark our experience was built around had
disappeared from the park, and with it, the most tangible impetus for
theCharleston Reconstructed project. It was a celebratory outcome
and a previously unthinkable step in the right direction for a city
that has historically resisted such changes. And for our team, it
meant that doing a full, longer-term, and public launch of the project
would have required a near-total rethinking of what we had already
built. As such, the project was not launched in full.
3 DISCUSSION
3.1 Practical learnings
Designing, developing, and deploying these two projects yielded
deep insight into the unique logistical challenges of location-basedAR, particularly when dealing with social justice issues. We present
practical learnings based on technological and spatial constraints
to provide guidance for future designs.
3.1.1 Connecting content and place. A key editorial decision we
made early on was to have the content maintain focus on the phys-
ical space as much as possible. This was in an effort to spatially
connect the content with the context, justifying the use of AR at a
particular site as opposed to a non-spatial medium.
InDear Visitor , we specifically asked each student interviewee
to impart thoughts for future visitors to the garden. Some of the
most impactful moments of the Dear Visitor experience, according
to feedback we collected, were in response to this framing, such
as when one interviewee made a reference to a building "to your
right," and the user could look to the right and see the building.
Another audio letter shared the story of a student looking down at
the site from her dormitory, a building which was in view for users
participating in the Dear Visitor experience.
The technical and logistical complexities involved in working
with AR as a medium are only worthwhile if the experience’s con-
tent could not be experienced or understood another way. As such,
we cut content that did not need to be experienced in the space,
and instead hosted it on our project websites for additional contex-
tual reading. This allowed us to make editorial choices about the
experiences without totally sacrificing the voices and stories we
believed were important but less critical to hear in the space itself.
We could have had a heavier hand in doing this for the Charleston
project, which was still quite long.
We found a location-centered framing to be especially effective
in showcasing the value of AR, by not only making the content more
relevant, but by changing the relationship a user has with the space
around them. Even for a user without existing personal connections
to the content being shared, the content is made relevant to them
by virtue of the fact they are physically standing in the space being
referenced.
3.1.2 Length. The ideal length of an AR experience is much shorter
than we had anticipated. This was especially an issue for Charleston
Reconstructed , where the initial version contained 43 minutes of
content, and took each person approximately an hour and 15 min-
utes to complete during the beta test. Holding up a device even
in the heat and glaring sun (which reflected off the tablet screen)
takes physical effort, even for a few minutes at a time outdoors.
Many users found it difficult to stay engaged for the duration of
the experience, despite finding the chosen interviews and the AR
components powerful and engaging.
We ultimately cut the length and number of audio clips down
significantly based on feedback, with Dear Visitor andCharleston
Reconstructed ending up at 13 and 16.5 minutes of content respec-
tively. This was still likely longer than ideal, but ultimately we
had to balance the total length with a thorough and nuanced treat-
ment of the subject matter. We also added a counter showing how
many voices users had heard so far and how many were left in
each chapter so that users could make informed decisions about
whether they wanted to move on or keep listening. We recommend
that future creators strive to keep AR experiences short, ideally not
exceeding 5 minutes, or to break up experiences in ways that can
be understood in shorter chunks over time. This can be difficult forCHI EA ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Schroeder, Tokanel, Qian, et al.
social justice-related projects that are inherently complex since it
can feel reductive to edit down the content. This challenge must be
weighed against the risk of losing AR users entirely given natural
focus limits, especially in challenging outdoor environments.
3.1.3 Onboarding and orienting users. We found that users needed
clear, simple instructions at the beginning of the experience about
how to use the application and what they should expect. During
the beta test for Charleston Reconstructed , we often needed to pro-
vide verbal instructions or borrow the tablet from users briefly to
demonstrate what to do in order for them to begin the first chapter
successfully. We fixed this after the beta test by building in a pro-
logue that prompted users to perform all of the basic actions that
would be required of them throughout the remainder of the experi-
ence before getting to the first chapter. Subsequent walk-throughs
with smaller groups confirmed that priming users more directly at
the beginning allowed them to navigate the app more quickly and
successfully.
ForCharleston Reconstructed , users needed clear instructions to
orient themselves within the park before launching each chapter
given the large size of the site. The beta version directed users via
onscreen text and included a button to press when they had walked
to the correct location. However, many users failed to interpret
the button, which read “I am here,” as intended. We fixed this by
adding a map of the park displaying where to go, a photo of what
the viewer should be seeing when they were in the right place, and
we changed the button’s text to say “Tap here when your view
matches the photo below.”
3.1.4 Human facilitation. Despite implementing better onboarding
forCharleston Reconstructed after our first beta tests, we still found
that human facilitation was critical to the success of the user expe-
rience, especially for less tech-savvy users. Even in a small garden
like the one at Stanford in Dear Visitor , a human facilitator often
helped users get back on course in the event of a technical difficulty
or a question from a participant. This was true both in our beta
tests as well as our final launch. Having ready facilitators meant
that technical challenges or discomfort were less of a barrier to the
participant meaningfully engaging with the content of the experi-
ence. In a space as large as Marion Square in Charleston, and with
the generally less tech-savvy users we worked with there, human
facilitation in order to create a smooth experience of the content
was even more important. The level of human facilitation we found
to be crucial to the successful delivery of these experiences came at
the expense of their scalability. This finding is revisited as an open
challenge for this kind of work.
3.1.5 Closed captioning. In initial iterations of Charleston Recon-
structed , closed captioning was persistently onscreen, accompany-
ing each new piece of audio that was triggered. We found closed
captions discouraged participants from keeping their eyes on the
main AR components after tapping on them to trigger audio ele-
ments, because users would instinctively read along with the cap-
tions. We fixed this by making closed captioning optional in the
final version for those who needed it. For Charleston Reconstructed ,
we observed that the sounds of a heavily-trafficked park could be a
distraction to some users, and found that adding music and ambient
sounds actually helped users immerse themselves in the app betterthan operating it in silence. The general applicability of this finding
may depend on the nature of the site of future work.
3.1.6 Content placement. The beta version of Charleston Recon-
structed included a series of symbols running up the column of the
John C. Calhoun statue, but it was difficult to keep them anchored
properly so high above the ground. It was also not intuitive for
users to point the tablet up high at the sky to see these elements.
It was not ergonomic to hold the tablet up high for so long, and
sunlight was often a source of irritation. We eventually removed
most of these skyward visual elements and kept the AR content
closer to eye-level so it was easier for users to see and interact with.
As such, we learned that the content’s placement deeply affected
users’ interest in interacting, a finding we hope can inform future
AR design.
3.2 Open challenges
The fact that these two projects were tied to volatile social issues
introduced unique opportunities and conceptual challenges for
designing a successful AR experience at each site.
3.2.1 Timing. The timeline for creating and launching these projects
ultimately decided each project’s fate. For both projects, editorial
choices were very difficult, and the projects’ content passed through
many rounds of validation with key members of each community
before being included in the AR experience. For Charleston Recon-
structed in particular, we did not sacrifice careful judgment for
speed in these decisions. This carefulness, along with the added
constraint that we had to travel in order to deploy and receive feed-
back on it, meant the project took nearly two years to develop. In
unforeseeable strokes of fate, by the time the project was ready to
launch, the pandemic had come, and the main statue around which
it centered came down soon after. Because major world events
outpaced our development process, the project missed its moment.
On the other hand, the site of Dear Visitor was in the town
where some of us lived, and some of us were still in the commu-
nity of the university. This made prototyping onsite and meeting
spontaneously with stakeholders to receive feedback much easier.
Feedback from the varied stakeholders in the project, including
Chanel Miller herself (through a representative), still took a great
deal of time, even with the project’s much more concise scope than
Charleston Reconstructed ’s.Dear Visitor took just under a year from
conceptualization to final launch. Being able to launch the same
week as Chanel Miller’s book allowed us to synergize with existing
momentum on the issue of the plaque, and the real plaque was
installed a few months after our project launched.
In both projects, technical and social challenges related to the
work contributed to a long time horizon. It took time to understand
the problem, consult with experts, and design content to further
the goal of creating a truly meaningful AR experience, rather than
something that merely engaged with the issue at a shallow level. We
urge future creators of AR projects with storytelling on social issues
to plan for an extended timeline. If the social issue is “current" or
volatile, the timeline of the project may change in unexpected ways
and affect the project’s ability to launch. It is worth considering
how the project can live on despite potential changes to the space
that might be inherent to working on volatile social issues.Location-based AR for Social Justice:
Case Studies, Lessons, and Open Challenges CHI EA ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
3.2.2 Persistence. Several major challenges for this kind of work
deal with persistence. Creating location-based AR activations on
contested public space means that designers should expect that the
physical space could change suddenly and dramatically. As we saw
in the case of the Calhoun monument being taken down almost
overnight after many considered it a lost cause, these changes
can be extreme, and can instantly change the context for any AR
interventions on top of them. The issue of AR persistence as a
project site itself changes will continue to be a challenge for location-
specific AR.
As previously discussed, we used visual markers to make up for
AR systems’ lack of semantic understanding of space. If AR one day
achieves more generalized location-based semantic understanding,
it will need to be resilient to or account for change in a location’s
appearance in order to persistently host this kind of experience.
The question of persistence of the technology itself presents its
own set of challenges, and the technology’s lack of persistence can
affect the longevity and impact of the work. AR is changing quickly,
and the best technology today will likely be obsolete sooner than we
wish. Maintaining our projects as technology changed was difficult
even in the short time span during which we worked. Projects
working to facilitate long-term collective memory should actively
future-proof as much as possible, but as of now, there is limited
ability to effectively do so given lack of general standards across
which to port AR experiences across platforms.
The challenge of rapidly changing technology also relates to the
platforms that host AR experiences. Though any one AR experience-
hosting platform has not yet emerged as dominant as of this writing,
the private, commercial nature of app platforms to this point intro-
duces future challenges of ownership and profit over the stories
hosted in AR. Given Charleston’s massive tourism industry and the
prevalence of walking tours, we made plans to pass the finished
experience off to local Black tour guides, who could facilitate for
users post-launch. We made the decision that any profit gained
in the future from Charleston Reconstructed would go back to the
Black community in Charleston. Protecting stories like the ones
shared in these experiences from exploitation is made challenging
by the inextricable involvement of corporations in AR development
to this point.
3.2.3 Accessibility. The persistence of AR technology itself can
also affect another area we consider an open challenge: the accessi-
bility and scalability of this kind of experience. Hosting in-person
launch events showed us how powerful going through the expe-
rience with others could be. Processing difficult historical events
in community is a different experience from using an app alone.
We opted for human facilitation of Dear Visitor andCharleston Re-
constructed due to the technical challenges inherent to the medium
that could be better navigated by dedicated onsite help. Secondly,
we found there was immense power in going through the experi-
ence and offboarding in community, findings supported by work
that shows virtual experiences can significantly affect social con-
nectedness. [ 9] The decision we made to keep these experiences
facilitator-led and on large iPad screens meant keeping them off
app stores, as we did not feel the unfacilitated experience, partic-
ularly on a small smartphone, could be consistently high-quality.
Requiring human facilitation had the unfortunate consequence thatthe voices we worked hard to curate specifically for the space can
rarely be experienced in situ. Dear Visitor had a successful launch,
but is not currently accessible for viewing at the site except upon
request. Most material is available on the project website, a digital
format that is easier to maintain than AR and for which we can
guarantee a consistently high-quality experience. Wider accessibil-
ity and greater longevity of complex AR experiences could come
through facilitation partnerships with museums or local organiza-
tions, a model which would require strong coordination and more
resources. The charged and complex nature of the content we were
committed to presenting in the projects guided our distribution
decisions, but accessibility trade-offs may have been different if
we had designed simpler experiences with content of a different
nature.
Without adding in permanent physical markers to a site that refer
to the AR experience, there is also limited opportunity for a person
walking through a space to “discover" the additional knowledge
that might be gained by doing the AR experience, decreasing the
experience’s reach. On the other hand, AR applications can facilitate
an interesting design feature: people can opt in to content that all
people may not wish to (or be able) to see. The issue of sensitive
content in Dear Visitor was minimized with an explicit content alert
at the beginning of the experience, which addressed concerns for
the university and sexual assault experts about how the content
could affect survivors, students, and casual viewers. Given ongoing
societal conversations about content warnings and how to present
sensitive content in a responsible way, site-specific AR applications
provide an interesting opportunity to build in consent features
before viewing certain kinds of content. AR’s current accessibility
and discoverability challenges thus give it unique affordances that
differ from purely physical changes to challenging sites: while site-
specific AR does not currently lend itself to an easily discoverable,
accessible shared experience, the technology can allow people to
opt in to layers of additional content as they see fit.
3.2.4 Anchoring to the space. ForDear Visitor , we decided to an-
chor AR content through a printed image marker since it was the
most resilient tracking method. We prioritized reliability first and
foremost, knowing that technical difficulties would easily distract
from the content. Although we were fortunate enough to be able
to use a pre-existing marker on a statue base for Charleston Re-
constructed , in the future, all location-based AR experiences would
ideally be accessible onsite and without additional markers. In the
future, AR systems could incorporate location and surface infor-
mation with world knowledge, aligning an AR experience on the
physical landscape despite surface changes in the space without
the use of image markers.
3.2.5 Content curation. We initially considered creating an open
comment platform allowing responses from the public in reaction to
our projects, but we eventually decided to heavily curate the content
due to the sensitive nature of the topics at hand. Currently, social
reactions to digital interventions in public space are not typically
captured. Balancing a desire to seek and reflect community input
with the realities of difficult, time-intensive content moderation
is an open challenge for collaborative digital projects, including
those which may use AR as a technology and involve social justiceCHI EA ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Schroeder, Tokanel, Qian, et al.
challenges where many community members have opinions and
stories.
Related to the challenge of potentially curating comments about
the project lies another conceptual challenge: who has the right
to tell stories in public space? Narrative control over public space
has usually been dominated by those in power, and these projects
sought to add digital layers that surfaced stories at risk of being
forgotten or suppressed. It remains to be seen how adding digital
stories to physical space would play out at scale. Will digital mem-
ories in public space compete for attention by volume? Who will
curate them over time? What control will the platforms that host
them have in their curation and monetization?
In parallel, the sudden ubiquity of text-to-3D models like Google’s
DreamFusion, [ 10] which creates 3D models using a text prompt,
makes creating and distributing digital objects easier than ever. As
we saw in Dear Visitor , digital objects can easily be made manifest
in real life, pointing to an additional set of potential implications
for the real world as digital designs proliferate. These are concep-
tual open challenges with which designers of AR experiences must
engage as the technology becomes more accessible.
4 CONCLUSION
We believe that AR is best used to connect digital content with
the context in which it is presented. In our projects, we did this by
linking digital layers of AR objects and stories to a contested phys-
ical monument in public space. A generalized technical solution
for this kind of project is not yet available, but our two location-
based prototypes Dear Visitor andCharleston Reconstructed explored
the potential of AR to meaningfully engage with contested pub-
lic spaces, highlighting underheard stories and proposing visual
changes using digital objects along the way.
We found that what we build in AR has real stakes, because
virtual content facilitates real experiences, and because it can in-
fluence tangible changes to the physical world that expand impact
beyond those who witnessed the AR experience.
We intended for our projects to add value and meaning to the
world on their own terms, in addition to any changes they might
spur in physical space at their respective sites. To go beyond the
affordances of the physical world, we added interventions in AR
that are not accessible or possible in physical space alone at a monu-
ment site. Examples of the interventions specific to AR in Charleston
Reconstructed included "moving" a monument from another part
of the city, recreating an AR representation of graffiti that was
long ago removed from Marion Square, and adding a new, physics-
defying digital AR monument. As such, the virtual experiences
we designed created layers of meaning on top of what the phys-
ical space on its own could present. David Chalmers argues that
virtual objects are real objects, [ 2] and it follows that interacting
with virtual objects gives rise to real, compelling experiences—not
just simulations of experiences that then necessarily translate into
the physical world. We can attest to the power of AR experiences
that add dimension to our non-digital lives based on the reactions
we received to the launch of Dear Visitor and the soft launch of
Charleston Reconstructed .
Though we imbued the projects with meaning regardless of
changes they might inspire to physical space, by chance, we foundstrong evidence that what is designed and shown in the digital AR
world can, in fact, manifest in the physical world. This occurred
when our design and placement of the digital plaque in Dear Visitor
was used for the physical plaque installation at the garden site at
Stanford. AR’s potential to inspire a jump from a virtual design
to a real physical change is exciting. In a context as high-stakes
as the conflict over public monuments, it also comes with great
responsibility, and with implications that should be taken seriously
by those who design these kinds of digital objects and experiences.
Severe political polarization in the US and beyond is often fueled
by increasingly siloed digital echo chambers, but public space is
something we still have in common and will continue to share.
Enduring links between the digital and physical worlds are possible,
and AR is uniquely positioned to facilitate new kinds of connections
and experiences in shared space that bring people together if done
thoughtfully, and if the technology can consistently support them.
How the HCI community engages with the connection between
the design of AR and public space will have major consequences
for society on social justice issues and beyond.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We extend our thanks for the funding and support from the Brown
Institute for Media Innovation. We thank Mark Hansen, Maneesh
Agrawala, Ann Grimes, Michael Krisch, Juan Francisco Saldarriaga,
and Amy Menes. We also thank Jeremy Bailenson, Geri Migielicz,
Shelley Correll, and Alison Dahl Crossley at Stanford. We thank
Michele Dauber and Chanel Miller. We thank Matt Shimura, Chanel
Kim, Angela He, and Barna Szász for their work, feedback, and
support of this project. We thank the many scholars, artists, com-
munity members and activists whose time and insights were shared
in Charleston. We thank T’leya Walker for her contributions to
this project. We thank Gail Mazzara and Kent Coit. We thank Kali
Holloway and the Make It Right Project.
REFERENCES
[1]Ronald T. Azuma. 2017. Making Augmented Reality a Reality, In Imaging and
Applied Optics 2017 (3D, AIO, COSI, IS, MATH, pcAOP). Imaging and Applied
Optics 2017 (3D, AIO, COSI, IS, MATH, pcAOP) , JTu1F.1. https://opg.optica.org/
abstract.cfm?URI=AIO-2017-JTu1F.1
[2]David J Chalmers. 2017. The virtual and the real. Disputatio: International Journal
of Philosophy 9, 46 (2017).
[3]Persis Drell. 2018. On the contemplative garden. https://quadblog.stanford.edu/
2018/03/14/on-the-contemplative-garden/
[4]Melissa Gomez. 2018. Charleston Apologizes for City’s Role in Slave Trade. The
New York Times (2018).
[5]Hannah Knowles. 2018. University responds, students petition after proposal for
plaque quote draws scrutiny. The Stanford Daily (Jan 2018).
[6]Hannah Knowles. 2020. Miller plaque installed after over 3 years of debate, delay.
The Stanford Daily (Feb 2020).
[7]Ethan J Kytle and Blain Roberts. 2018. Denmark Vesey’s Garden: Slavery and
Memory in the Cradle of the Confederacy . The New Press.
[8]Khoi Le. 2019. Building a reality that honors Chanel Miller. The Stanford Daily
(Oct 2019).
[9]Mark Roman Miller, Hanseul Jun, Fernanda Herrera, Jacob Yu Villa, Greg Welch,
and Jeremy N Bailenson. 2019. Social interaction in augmented reality. PloS one
14, 5 (2019), e0216290.
[10] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. 2022. DreamFusion:
Text-to-3D using 2D Diffusion. arXiv (2022).
[11] Elena Shao. 2019. Another plaque with Chanel Miller’s chosen quote appears at
site of her sexual assault. The Stanford Daily (Nov 2019).