1  Battery Valuation and Management  for Battery 
Swapping Station  with an Intertemporal Framework  
Xinjiang Chen1, Yu Yang2, Jianxiao Wang3, Jie Song1, Guannan He1* 
Abstract  
Battery swapping as a business model for battery energy storage (BES) has great potential  in 
future integrated low -carbon energy and transportation systems. However, frequent batter y swapping 
will inevitably accelerate battery degradation and shorten the battery life  accordingly . To model the 
tradeoff of BES use between energy and transportation applications coupled by battery swapping, we 
develop a life -cycle decision model that coo rdinates battery charging and swapping. This model is 
derived based on an improved intertemporal decision framework, in which the optimal marginal 
degradation cost (MDC) of BES is determined to maximize the BES benefit across time and 
application. The prop osed framework and model are applied to manag e a battery swapping station 
that simultaneously provides battery swapping service s to electric vehicle customers and provides  
flexibility service to the power grid , including energy arbitrage and reserve. The case study shows 
that while the end of  the physical life of BES occurs faster with battery swapping, the economic life 
becomes considerably longer . The results also reveal that the optimal MDC depends on the bat tery 
values in each application, and we analyze how the battery swapping price affects the optimal MDC 
and battery life. The proposed framework and model can also provide decision support for on -demand 
BES service, such as battery trading, renting and seco ndary use.  
 
Keywords : battery energy storage, battery swapping, degradation, intertemporal decision 
framework, energy arbitrage  
 
 
 
 
1 Xinjiang Chen, Jie Song and Guannan He are with the College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100091, China.  
2 Yu Yang is with the Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 116595, USA.  
3 Jianxiao Wang is  with the National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analysis and Applications, Peking University, Beijing 
100091, China  
* Corresponding author: Guannan He (e -mail: gnhe@pku.edu.cn)  2 Nomenclature  
Indices and sets Variables and functions  
h indices for time periods, typically an hour  
LB  life-cycle objective function of energy storage 
system  
t indices for time periods, typically a day  
*LB  optimal life -cycle objective of energy storage 
system  
lifeT
 a set of long-term time periods, typically a 
life-cycle of a battery  
tSB short -term objective function of energy 
storage system  
Parameters  
*
tSB  optimal short -term objective of energy storage 
system  
)0,1
 self-discharge rate  
tREV  market revenue of storage in time period t, $ 
(0,1
 charging/discharging efficiency  
DEG
tC  total degradation cost of batteries in time 
period t, $ 
tq
 calendar degradation of battery  in time 
period t, MWh -throughput  
BS
tC total labor cost  of battery swapping in time 
period t, $ 
D
 total degradation/usage before the life of 
storage ends, MWh -throughput  
()t the year number for time t from the beginning 
of the battery project  
t
 time horizon of short -term scheduling  
  life-cycle marginal degradation cost (MDC) 
for storage,  $/MWh -throughput  
h
 locational marginal price (LMP) during 
time h, $/MWh  
t adjusted MDC (AMDC) for storage in time 
period t, $/MWh -throughput  
rep
t
 battery swapping price in time period t, 
$/MWh  
td degradation of storage  in time period t, MWh -
throughput  
bsc
 labor cost  of battery swapping in time 
period h, $/h 
cha
he amount of energy charged for the storage 
during time h, MWh  
maxE
 energy capacity of storage, MWh  
dis
he  amount of energy discharged for the storage 
during time h, MWh  
max
hE
 maximal amount of energy that can be 
charged /discharged in time period h, MWh  
hr amount of power discharged by replacing 
batteries during time h in storage, MWh  
rep
tE
 maximal amount of energy that can be 
swapped in time period t, MWh  
hE energy stored in storage at the end of time 
period h, MWh  
t
 discounting factor in time period t 
Pt  schedules of battery charging, discharging, and 
swapping during time t, 
r
 discounting rate  
F  feasible operating set of energy storage 
system , 
PFt  
 
1 Introduction  
A high proportion of renewable energy penetration will pose a great challenge to the safe 
operation of the power system because of its intermittency and volatility. To handle  the above 
challenge, flexible resources , such as battery energy storage (BES) , are called to integrate  renewable 
energy. As a key technology for integrat ing renewable energy, BES is expected to play a crucial role 
in shaping a clean, sustainable, and low -carbon energy and transportation system s [1][2][3]. In 
addition to renewable energy integration, BES is also widely applied  in energy arbitrage [4], peak 
shaving [5], frequency regulation [6] and voltage support [7] in power systems . 
More recently, battery swapping, an ongoing business model of BES, has received much 
attention , especially in China, because of its substantial  energy arbitrage capability and numerous 3 commercial applications (i.e., battery trading, renting and secondary use [4][8][9]). Specifically , the 
sales volume of battery swapping vehicles is more than 160,000 with a year -by-year increa se of 162% 
and a market penetration rate of 4.6% in China in 2021, while the total number of battery swapping 
stations is more than 1,600. It is expected that by 2025, the sales volume of battery swapping vehicles 
and the number of battery swapping station s in China will exceed 1.92 million and 30,000, 
respectively. Note that, compared with the charging mode, the deployment of the battery swapping 
mode is more flexible and requires less charging time (a few minutes). Additionally, the batteries 
stored in th e battery swapping stations can also be used to provide energy services  to grid s, such as  
energy arbitrage and reserve s, as a secondary application.  
Battery  degradation  has been the major concern for vehicle -to-grid (V2G) [10][11], as ha ve 
batteries at battery swapping stations . Battery degradation depends on many factors , such as the 
charge/discharge rate, depth of discharge (DOD), state of charge (SOC), and temperatu re, which  
affect the benefits of BES [12][13]. Previous studies on batt ery degradation models can be classified 
into physics -based models (PBMs) [14][15], equivalent circuit models (ECMs) [16], machine 
learning models (MLs) [17][18], empirical models (EMs ) [19], and semiempirical model s (SEMs) 
[20]. Most of the above  battery degradation models have been integrated into optimization models of 
power grid applications , and the most conventional approach is regrading battery degradation as a 
constraint  to limit the maximum amount of battery degradation during system operation [21]. 
However, we are more concerned about how to estimate the battery degradation cost and how 
battery degradation affects  the operating benefits on a life -cycle time scale. He et al.  [22][23] defined 
the battery degradation cost as an opportunity cost and developed an intertemporal decision 
framework to estimate the optimal l ife-cycle marginal degradation cost (MDC). In addition, He et al.  
[4][24] integrated the battery degradation cost into the objective function of the optimization models  
and constructed the decision models of the power system and BES that both maximize  the benefits. 
Xu et al.  [25] proposed  a dynamic evaluation framework to determine the financial worth of batteries 
based on the ir state-of-life in power grid applications  and used the proposed framework to estimate 
the v alue of second -life batteries. Note that the above decision models of BES only involve  cycle 
degradation and calendar degradation caused by battery charging /discharging.  
With regard to battery swapping, the existing studies mainly focus on the location  optimization 
of battery swapping stations  [26][27][28], battery charging [29][30][31][32] and swapping  
[33][34][35] optimization of electric vehicles (EVs). Lin et al.  [27] predicted  the spatiotemporal 4 demands of battery swapping based on the Monte Carlo algorithm and used the tabu search and 
genetic algorithm to optimize the locations of battery swapping stations. The results show that 
optimized locations of  battery swapping stations can considerably  reduce land rentals. You et al.  
proposed two scheduling methods for the centralized [33] and distributed [34] scheduling problems  
of battery swapping. In the centralized scheduling problem, the agents involving distribution grids, 
battery swapping stations, and EVs are managed centrally by the operation center , while the agents  
can make autonomous decisions in the distributed scheduling problem. To solve the above problems 
efficiently, You et al.  [33] developed an exact algorithm named generalized Benders decomposition 
to obtain the optimal centralized solutions and proposed two quasi -optimal algorithms based on 
multipliers and dual decomposition to solve the distributed scheduling problem [34]. Li et al.  [35] 
studied the day -ahead scheduling problem of EVs with battery ch arging and swapping coordination, 
proposed a bilevel model and developed a heuristic based on the alternating direction method to 
estimate the integer solution of the model. The results show that the proposed model and algorithm 
can effectively improve the  quality of battery swapping services.  
Intuitively, battery swapping would inevitably lead to frequent battery charging/ discharging , and 
thus, account for rapid battery degradation , which would further affect the life and benefits of BES. 
Additionally, the battery swapping prices also play a crucial role in the revenue of the BES operation. 
Therefore, to accurately evaluate the economics of BES with battery swapping on a life -cycle time 
scale, the cycle degradation caused by battery charging /swapping, calendar degradation, and the 
battery swapping price must be factored into the operating model of BES. To the best of our 
knowledge, no study has focused on the life -cycle MDC and batte ry swapping price optimization for 
a commercial/industrial battery swapping station.  
In this context, we improved the intertemporal decision framework for the valuation and 
management of BES with coupled energy and transportation applications. We propose a  life-cycle 
decision model for simultaneous battery charging and swapping considering battery degradation. The 
model is used to evaluate the trade -off of battery use between energy and transportation applications. 
The major contributions of this study are as follows.  
1) We propose an improved intertemporal decision framework that is suitable for battery energy 
storage systems, battery swapping stations and EVs to estimate the optimal degradation cost caused 
by battery charging, discharging and swapping and simultaneously determine the optimal battery 
swapping prices of battery swapping stations.  5 2) We develop a life -cycle decision model for battery swapping stations that integrates short -
term scheduling and long -term decisions based on the improved intertemp oral decision framework. 
The life -cycle decision model characterizes and optimizes battery charging, discharging, and 
swapping across energy and transportation applications.  
3) We use the above decision framework and model in a commercial/industrial batter y swapping 
station and reveal the effect of battery swapping on the economic and physical life of batteries and 
how the MDC, battery swapping prices, and electricity prices interact with each other.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In S ection 2, we propose the improved 
intertemporal decision framework and life -cycle decision model formulation for battery swapping 
stations . Section 3 and Section 4 are devoted to the experimental results and discussions, respectively. 
Section 5 contains so me concluding remarks.  
2 Methods  
2.1 An  improved intertemporal decision framework  
BES owners and operators should optimize battery usage given limited battery life and 
fluctuating electricity prices. For example, the operators should decide whether to use, how much  to 
use, or which batteries to use for different periods. In this sense, to more accurately evaluate and 
improve the life -cycle benefits of BES with battery charging and swapping coordination, battery 
degradation should be incorporated into th e life -cycle decision model to achieve  the trade -off between 
short -term utilization and long -term battery life of batteries . 
As shown in Fig. 1, we develop an improved intertemporal decision framework for BES from 
[22]. In the  input of the decision framework, a life -cycle decision model that integrates the short -term 
scheduling model is proposed to simulate the operation of BES and maximize the long -term (life -
cycle) benefits by aggregating the short -term benefits . Specifically , given price forecasts (e.g., 
locational marginal prices (LMPs), battery swapping prices and prices in ancillary service markets) 
and BES profiles (i.e., SOC and SOH of batteries), the daily schedules of battery charging, 
discharging, and swapping outputs  by the short -term scheduling model. Sequentially, we estimate the 
mid-term (monthly or annual) and life -cycle benefits of BES by aggregating short -term (daily) and 
mid-term benefits before the  battery life ends (the total degradation/usage of battery ). In doing so, we 
can obtain the BES life-cycle decision.  
With regard to the degradation cost of BES, we define the life -cycle MDC of BES based on the 
loss of future opportunity (i.e., MDC reflects the future/long -term use value of BES) and dynamically 6 update the short -term MDC by the adjusted MDC ( AMDC ). That is, the short -term MDC (i.e., AMDC) 
can be computed by the life -cycle MDC. Here we also use the decision framework to analyze  how 
the dynamic battery swapping prices affect the life -cycle benefits of BES. Specifically, we determine 
the optimal battery swapping price given the predictable market (i.e., the demand -price curve ). 
Meanwhile, we consider the price elasticity of demand  for battery swapping and determine the 
optimal battery swapping price and the corresponding life -cycle MDC for different demand -price 
curves in the market.  
Short -term
Mid-term
Long -termShort -term 
scheduling model 
Short -term price, SOC 
and SOH of batteries Input
Life-cycle 
decision model
Life-cycle degradation Objective Decision
Daily or Monthly  
benefit
Annual benefit
Life-cycle 
benefitAggregate Aggregate Adjusted MDCMaximize
Life-cycle MDC
Life-cycle decisions Operating
Dynamic battery 
swapping price Charging/discharging 
schedules
Battery swapping 
schedules
 
Fig. 1 An improved intertemporal decision framework for BES  
2.2 A life -cycle decision  model for BES  
Here we propose a life -cycle decision model for BES with battery swapping to evaluate the cash 
flow over its life cycle. The model integrates short -term scheduling and long -term decisions  for BES. 
The mathematic formulations of the life -cycle decision model are  as follows : 
()**max  max
lifett
tTLB LB SB

== 
 (1) 
s.t.       
()
lifet
tTdD
  (2) 
()ttd t q
 (3) 
()*max  
PFP
tt t tSB SB
=
 (4) 
where 
*LB   and 
*
tSB   represent  the optimal long -term and short -term benefits, respectively. The 7 long-term objective of the BES (
LB ) shown in Equation (1) is to maximize the benefits , and this can 
be computed by aggregating the discounting short -term benefits 
*
ttSB . 
t is a typical exponential 
discounting factor, which can be computed by 
()()1t
t r−=+ , where r is the discounting rate  and 
()t
 indicates the year number for time t from the beginning of the battery project. Equation (2) 
restricts that the degradation  and BES usage during the operation periods is no more than the total 
degradation  and usage before the battery life ends. Equation (3) guarantees that the degradation  and 
usage during the operation periods is no less than the calendar degradation of BES. Equation (4) 
presents the short -term objective o f a BES operation, which can be formulated as follows : 
()
()()()
()
 ( )
*max  
max  
max  PF
PF
PFP
P P Pt
t
tt t t
BS DEG
t t t t t t
dis cha rep bs cha dis
h h h t h h t h h h t
h t t h t t h t tSB SB
REV C C
e e r c r e e r q 

 +  +  +=
= − −
 =  − + − − + + +  
 (5) 
s.t.       
() 1 1cha dis
h h h h hE E e e r   − = − + − −  (6) 
max0hEE
 (7) 
max0hrE
 (8) 
rep
ht
h t trE
 +
 (9) 
max0cha
hheE
 (10) 
max0dis
hheE
 (11) 
 ,,Ρcha dis
t h h he e r=
 (12) 
Equations  (5) - (12) simulate short -term BES scheduling, where the short -term objective 
modeled in Equation (5) is to maximize the benefits of a BES operation, which involves market 
revenue 
tREV  , degradation cost 
DEG
tC   and battery swapping cost 
BS
tC  . Equations  (6) and (7) 
guarantee that the energy output is no more than the power capacity of the BES. The Equation (8) 
restrict ion is  that the energy generated by battery swapping is no more than the capacity of BES. H ere 
we consider the status of the demand and price for battery swapping. Specifically, Equat ion (9) 
restricts the maximal daily energy swapping for BES, where 
rep
tE  is determined by the demand -
price curve of battery swapping. Equations  (10) and (11) guarantee that the energy generated by 8 battery charging and discharging is no more than the maximal amount of energy that can be 
charged/discharged in time h. Equation (12) indicates  the decision variables involved in the model. 
t
 is the AMDC for short -term scheduling, which indicates the short -term MDC of BES and can be 
adjusted by Equation (13), where 
  is the life-cycle MDC.  
()()1t t
t r−==
+
 (13) 
Additionally, to comprehensively evaluate the benefits of BES coordinated battery charging, 
discharging and swapping, we introduce a metric named the average benefit of usage (ABU) , which 
is defined as follows : 
*LBABUD=
 (14) 
2.3 Parameter setting  
In the simulation procedures, we use the decision framework and the corresponding model to 
simulate the life -cycle operation of a battery swapping station. In addition to energy arbitrage, we 
assume that battery swapping station can provide reserve as a secondary application. Specifically, we 
use the LMPs and non -spinning reserve prices in California Independent System Operator (CAISO) 
day-ahead markets in 2018 to represent the  price scenarios  of each year  during the battery lifetime. 
As is common in the literature [36] [37], we use a price -taker assumption for battery swapping station 
in electricity markets.  This means that the actions of the battery swapping station have a negligible 
impact  on the electricity p rices in the case areas. We use the battery swapping station reported in [37], 
which has an energy capacity of 2.7  MWh and a power capacity of 2.7  MW. Without loss  of generality , 
we use SOH to evaluate the cumulative degradation of BES, which is defined as the ratio of the 
remaining energy capacity to the initial  energy capacity. We assume that after 2000 charge -discharge 
cycles at 100% DOD, the remaining energy cap acity of the BES decreases to 80% of the initial energy 
capacity [38], which means the physical life of the battery ends . The calendar degradation of BES is 
1% cap acity loss/year [39][40]. The charging/discharging efficiency is 95% , the self -discharge rate is 
set to 0 [4] and the labor  cost of battery swapping is set to $10 /h [37]. We set the discounting rate to 
7%, which is recommended in [3].  
3 Results  
3.1 L ife-cycle revenue  9 In the case study , we use the proposed framework and model to evaluate the life -cycle revenue 
of a battery swapping station and present the results in Fig. 2. Concrete ly, we present the arbitrage 
revenue, ancillary service revenue, life -cycle revenue (sum of the arbitrage revenue and ancillary 
service revenue) and the optimal MDC. In the above case, the life -cycle revenue increases drastically 
as the MDC increases from 0 to $35/MWh -throughput  and decreases sharply after $35 /MWh -
throughput. Therefore,  the battery swapping station has the highest life -cycle revenue when the MDC 
is $35/MWh -throughput . Additionally, the revenue of battery swapping station mainly comes from 
ancillary service markets when the MDC is greater than $70 /MWh -throughput, which indicates that 
it is uneconomical to use battery swapping station for energy arbitrage when the MDC is too high. 
That is, in the later part of the battery’s life, the benefits of battery swapping station are mainly derived 
from ancillary services rather than from energy arbitrage.  
 
Fig. 2 Life-cycle revenues for a battery swapping station  
 
Fig. 3 Life-cycle revenues for different operation models of BES  
                  
                                                        
                                      
                         
                  
           
                  
                                                                   
                                     
                    
                             
                                 10 We also report the life -cycle revenue for different BES operation models (with/without battery 
swapping) in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3, we can observe  that the optimal MDC of the BES without battery 
swapping is $30 /MWh -throughput, which is considerably less than that of the BES with battery 
swapping. Note that BES with batte ry swapping is substantially  more  profitable than that without 
battery swapping when the MDC is between 10 and $80 /MWh -throughput. Therefore, we can use the 
proposed decision framework and model to choose the optimal operation modes for BES given the 
price  scenarios and BES profiles.  
3.2 Battery life and SOH  
Here we analyze the battery lifetimes with different MDCs. As shown in Fig. 4, the battery life 
of the BES with battery swapping always ends earlier  than that without battery swapping when  the 
MDCs are relatively low (i.e., 0 to $70 /MWh -throughput). The above results can be accounted for by 
the battery swapping station’s  substantial arbitrage capability. Energy arbitrage requires a charge -
discharge process with a considerable LMP  difference . Without loss of generality, in the case study, 
a BES with battery charging can continue to charge and discharge for up to one hour, which would 
lead to a limited energy arbitrage capacity. However, BES with battery swapping can cope well with 
the above p roblem. Specifically, battery swapping enables a continuous charging duration for a period 
longer than the maximum charging duration (one hour in this case), which considerably increases the 
battery asset utilization efficiency.  
 
Fig. 4 Battery life for different operation models of BES  
Additionally, we report the battery SOH of BES with different MDCs in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5, we can 
observe  that the larger the MDC, the slower the SOH decreases becau se the MDC is defined as an 
opportunity cost to characterize the future long -term value of BES. That is, the future benefits of BES 
will be weighed higher if the life -cycle MDC is relatively large. The optimal life -cycle MDC achieves 
             
                                                        
                                     
                    11 a reasonable trade -off between the utilization and battery  life. 
 
Fig. 5 Battery SOH of BES with different MDCs  
3.3 Economic and physical life  
The concept of economic end of life (EOL) for BES is proposed in [23], which is defined as the 
point in time beyond which the BES is unable to earn positive net pr ofit through continued operation. 
To assess the economic and physical EOL of BES, the annual fixed O&M cost is incorporated into 
the life -cycle decision model. The annual fixed O&M cost of BES is estimated to be between 0 and 
$30/kW, depending on the regio n and project of the BES [23][41]. Here we show the cash flows of a 
commercial/industrial BES with an annual fixed O&M cost of  $16/kW [42][43] in Fig. 6. In Fig. 6, 
we can observe  that the net annual profit of BES decreases each year, and the negative profit occurs  
in the seventh year. That is, the revenue of BES cannot compensate  for the fixed O&M cost in the 
seventh year ; therefore, the economic EOL of BES is Year 6. However, the physical EOL of BES is 
Year 7, which indicates that the economic EOL of BES occurs fa ster than  the physical EOL. That is, 
although BES can continue to operate in the seventh year, it cannot earn net profit from energy 
arbitrage in power and transportation systems.  
The annual fixed O&M cost may be substantially different because of the various regions, 
markets, and BES projects. To comprehensively evaluate the economic and physical life of BES with 
different operation models, we conduct a sensitivity analysis on the annual fixed O&M cost of BES, 
which is reported in Fig. 7. As shown in Fig. 7, the physical EOL of BES with battery swapping can 
occur considerably  faster than that of BES without battery swapping , while the economic EOL of the 
former occurs notably later than that of the latter.  Note that in power and transportation systems, the 
economic life of BES depends on the arbitrage capability, which means that BES with battery 
swapping is more profitable than BES without battery swapping (although battery swapping does 
               
                   
               
            
            
      12 shorten the physical life of BES).  
 
Fig. 6 Cash flows of BES in California with a fixed O&M costs $16 /kW 
 
Fig. 7 Economic and physical EOL for different operation models of BES  
3.4 Battery swapping price  optimization  
To analyze how the battery swapping price changes  the optimal life -cycle revenue, ABU, MDC 
and the corresponding battery life and further determine the optimal battery swapping price, in this 
section, we report the life -cycle operating results of a BES wit h battery swapping prices from 0 and 
$200 in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. Fig. 8 shows the marginal revenue of the battery swapping price in the BES 
operation , where the full line with rectangle marks and the green dotted line with an arrow represent 
the life -cycle revenue and ABU of BES with battery swapping, respectively, while the full line with 
cycle marks and the yellow dotted line with an arrow indicate t he life -cycle revenue and ABU of BES 
without battery swapping.  
Fig. 8 shows  that the life -cycle revenue and ABU of BES with battery swapping increase 
considerably  when the battery swapping price increases from $80 /MWh to $160 /MWh and decrease s 
     
                   
             
        
                             
                     
   
            
       
                                             
                                                           
                               
                                  
                                  13 sharply when the battery swapping price is more than $170 /MWh. The ABUs of BES with battery 
swapping are more than that of BES without battery swapping even though in the extreme case where  
battery swapping is free (ABU of BES with battery swapping is $37 /MWh while that of BES without 
battery swapping is $36 /MWh whe n battery swapping price is 0) also effectively validates  that BES 
with battery swapping is more profitable than that without battery swapping. Note that the benefits 
of battery swapping will not increase indefinitely with an increase in the  battery swappi ng price 
because the demand for battery swapping changes in the opposite direction with the price (we use  the 
maximal amount of energy that can be swapped to characterize the demand for battery swapping in 
the decision model). That is, an increase in the  battery swapping price will inhibit the demand for 
battery swapping.  
 
Fig. 8 Optimal life -cycle revenue and the corresponding ABU of BES for different battery swapping price s 
Fig. 9 reports the optimal MDC and the correspondi ng lifetime of BES given  the battery 
swapping price. Likewise, Fig. 9 shows that the optimal MDC of BES increases from $30/MWh -
throughput to $45/MWh -throughput when the battery swapping price increases from $80 /MWh to 
$160 /MWh, while the corresponding battery lifetime tends to decrease with  an increasing battery 
swapping price. The optimal MDC decreases  from $45/MWh -throughput to $30/MWh -throughput 
when the battery swapping price increases from $160 /MWh to $200 /MWh, while the corresponding 
battery lifetime increases remarkably with increasing battery swapping price. Additionally, together 
with Fig. 8, we can observe that, within the price -taker assumption, a relatively high price would lead 
to frequent battery swapping to complete the charge -discharge  cycles quickly for energy arbitrage, 
which would inevitably accelerate the battery’s end of life. However, the above situation will not 
continue indefinitely with an increase in the  battery swapping price because of demand -price theory. 
            
                        
                           
                                
                                                                    
                                            
                    
                        14 Concretely, in the  case study, the demand for battery swapping tends to be zero when the battery 
swapping price is more than $180 /MWh. In this sense, EVs only charge or discharge in BES instead 
of swapping batteries , which would lead to an increase in battery lifetime and a decrease in the optimal 
MDC.  
 
Fig. 9 Optimal MDC and the corresponding lifetime of BES for different battery swapping price s 
Here we also consider the price elasticity of the demand for battery swapping and analyze the 
optimal battery swapping price strategy for different demand -price curves. Conventionally, a daily 
demand -price curve of battery swapping can be formulated in linear form 
rep rep
tt kE b = + , where 
rep
t
  and 
rep
tE   represent the daily battery swapping price and the amount of battery swapping , 
respectively, and k and b indicate  the slope and vertical intercept of the demand -price curve, 
respectively. Sp ecifically, we use 10 demand -price curves , which are shown in Fig. 10, where each 
demand -price curve  represents a predictable market and the combinatio ns of 
(),kb   indicate the 
sensitivity of the demand -price (the price elasticity of the demand essentially reflects the sensitivity 
of the demand to price changes) . Together with Fig. 10, the sensitivity of the demand  price varies 
dramatically in different curves.  
In this context , we also report the test results of the price elasticity of the demand for battery 
swapping in Fig. 10, where the scatter points represent the optimal  battery swapping price and the 
corresponding battery swapping demand for different demand -price curves. In Fig. 10, w e can 
observe that the optimal price and demand of battery swapping vary substantially  in markets with 
different demand -price curves. Note  that the demand for battery swapping tends to be zero or even 
negative when the battery swapping price is relatively high, which indicates that EVs only charge and 
discharge in BES instead of swapping batteries  in the current market. Without loss of gener ality, the 
       
            
                           
                                           
                                            
           15 greater the price elasticity of the demand of a market, the smaller the optimal battery swapping price. 
That is, a slight  increase  in the  battery swapping price would lead to a sharp  decrease in the demand 
for battery swapping in a market with a  relatively high price elasticity of demand, which would further 
account for the lower revenue of a battery swapping station.  
In summary , the test results of the price elasticity of the demand can provide decision support 
for the owners of battery swapping stations  to determine the optimal pricing strategy of battery 
swapping and can further estimate the corresponding life -cycle ABU and MDC by the intertemporal 
decision framework given a predictable market.  
 
Fig. 10 Optimal demand and price of battery swapping for different demand -price curves  
4 Discussion  
Although the BES with battery swapping is more profitable than the BES without battery 
swapping, the physical EOL of the BES with battery swapping occurs considerably earlier than that 
of the BES without battery swapping, which can be accounted for by the f requency of battery use 
caused by battery swapping. Intuitively, we can extend the operating life of BES with battery 
swapping by adding new battery packs. However, it may be uneconomical because additional capital 
costs for adding new battery packs are ne eded. Moreover , the net profit earned from BES with battery 
swapping compared with BES without battery swapping may not compensate for the capital costs of 
the new battery packs. Therefore, in the life -cycle operation period, we need to make a reasonable 
trade-off between benefits and battery life for a BES with battery swapping. Specifically, we can 
control the utilization and benefit of BES by adjusting the life -cycle MDC when planning a project 
with a specific business model or lifetime requirement.  
                   
                                                                           
                                                       
                        
                        
                             
     
            16 Furthermore,  although the economic EOL of BES with battery swapping usually occurs later 
than that of BES without battery swapping, the economic EOL of BES with battery swapping still 
occurs considerably  earlier than its physical EOL when the fixed O&M costs are relatively high. That 
is, BES cannot earn positive net profit through continuous operation in the above situation. In this 
context, BES is recommended for use in the second -hand market or  to provide services that require 
less cycling ca pability , such as ancillary service of power grids involving contingency reserve, back -
up and black -start sources. In some cases, the revenue earned by the second -hand and ancillary service 
markets represents a high percentage of the total revenue of BES.  
Additionally, the optimal battery swapping price determined by the improved intertemporal 
decision framework in markets with different price elasticity of demand can provide decision support 
for the planning and operation of BES. Specifically, given the pr edictable market and BES profiles, 
the owners and operators of BES can be informed by the decision framework of how to determine 
the optimal battery swapping price and estimate the corresponding life -cycle revenue, MDC and 
battery lifetime of BES.  
5 Conclu sion 
In this paper, we incorporate battery charging, discharging and swapping into the decision 
framework and BES model. Specifically, we estimate the optimal life -cycle benefits and determine 
the optimal MDC, show the economic and physical EOL of BES, and  analyze how the battery 
swapping price affects  the life -cycle revenue, optimal MDC and corresponding battery life using  the 
proposed framework and model.  
The operational decisions for a large -scale battery swapping station including multiple battery 
packs should determine  whether to use, how much, or which batteries to use for different periods. 
Additionally, factors , such as the regions of battery swapping  stations  and market fluctuations , may 
change battery swapping prices. Future work s will be focused on the decision model and economic 
evaluation framework for a large -scale BES.  
6 Acknowledgments  
This work was supported in part by  the National Key Researc h and Development Program under 
Grant 2022YFB2405600 and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under 
Grants  72271008, 72131001, T2121002, and 52277092.  
 17 References  
[1] Fares, R. L., & Webber, M. E. (2017). The impacts of storing solar ener gy in the home to reduce 
reliance on the utility. Nature Energy, 2 (2), 1 -10. 
[2] Kittner, N., Lill, F., & Kammen, D. M. (2017). Energy storage deployment and innovation for the 
clean energy transition. Nature Energy, 2 (9), 1 -6. 
[3] Braff, W. A., Mueller, J. M., & Trancik, J. E. (2016). Value of storage technologies for wind and 
solar energ y. Nature Climate Change, 6 (10), 964 -969. 
[4] He, G., Michalek, J., Kar, S., Chen, Q., Zhang, D., & Whitacre, J. F. (2021). Utility -Scale Portable 
Energy Storage Systems. Joule, 5 (2), 379 -392. 
[5] Gayme, D., & Topcu, U. (2012). Optimal power flow with large -scale storage integration. IEEE 
Transactions on Power Systems, 28 (2), 709 -717. 
[6] Zhang, Y . J. A., Zhao, C., Tang, W., & Low, S. H. (2016). Profit -maximizing planning and control 
of battery energy storage systems for primary frequency control. IEEE Transactions on Smart 
Grid, 9 (2), 712 -723. 
[7] Wang, L., Liang, D. H., Crossland, A. F., Taylor, P. C., Jones, D., & Wade, N. S. (2015). 
Coordination of multiple energy storage units in a low -voltage distribution network. IEEE 
Transactions on Smart Grid, 6 (6), 2906 -2918.  
[8] Nguy en, S., Peng, W., Sokolowski, P., Alahakoon, D., & Yu, X. (2018). Optimizing rooftop 
photovoltaic distributed generation with battery storage for peer -to-peer energy trading. Applied 
Energy, 228 (2018), 2567 -2580.  
[9] Liu, J., Yang, H., & Zhou, Y . (2021). Peer-to-peer trading optimizations on net -zero energy 
communities with energy storage of hydrogen and battery vehicles. Applied Energy, 302 (2021), 
117578.  
[10] Song, J., He, G., Wang, J., & Zhang, P. (2022). Shaping future low -carbon energy and 
transportation systems: Digital technologies and applications. iEnergy, 1 (3), 285 -305. 
[11] Singh, J., & Tiwari, R. (2020). Cost benefit analysis for v2g implementation of electric vehicles 
in distribution system.  IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, 56 (5), 5963 -5973.  
[12] Carter, R., Cruden, A., & Hall, P. J. (2012). Optimizing for efficiency or battery life in a 
battery/supercapacitor electric vehicle. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 61 (4), 1526 -
1533.  
[13] Schaltz, E., Khaligh, A., & Rasmussen, P. O. (2009). Influence of battery/ultracapacitor energy -
storage sizing on battery lifetime in a fuel cell hybrid electric vehicle. IEEE Transactions on 
Vehicular Technology, 58 (8), 3882 -3891.  
[14] Doyle, M., Fuller, T. F., & Newman, J. (1993). Modeling of galvanostatic charge and discharge 18 of the lithium/polymer/insertion cell. Journal of the Electrochemical society, 140 (6), 1526.  
[15] Northrop, P. W., Pathak, M., Rif e, D., De, S., Santhanagopalan, S., & Subramanian, V . R. (2015). 
Efficient simulation and model reformulation of two -dimensional electrochemical thermal 
behavior of lithium -ion batteries. Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 162 (6), A940 –A951.  
[16] Barré, A. , Deguilhem, B., Grolleau, S., Gérard, M., Suard, F., & Riu, D. (2013). A review on 
lithium -ion battery ageing mechanisms and estimations for automotive applications. Journal of 
Power Sources, 241 (2013), 680 -689. 
[17] Yang, D., Wang, Y ., Pan, R., Chen, R., & Ch en, Z. (2018). State -of-health estimation for the 
lithium -ion battery based on support vector regression. Applied Energy, 227 (2018), 273 -283. 
[18] Liu, K., Hu, X., Wei, Z., Li, Y ., & Jiang, Y . (2019). Modified Gaussian process regression models 
for cyclic capac ity prediction of lithium -ion batteries. IEEE Transactions on Transportation 
Electrification, 5 (4), 1225 -1236.  
[19] Vermeer, W., Mouli, G. R. C., & Bauer, P. (2021). A Comprehensive Review on the 
Characteristics and Modelling of Lithium -ion Battery Ageing. IEEE  Transactions on 
Transportation Electrification . DOI: 10.1109/TTE.2021.3138357.  
[20] Xu, B., Oudalov, A., Ulbig, A., Andersson, G., & Kirschen, D. S. (2016). Modeling of lithium -
ion battery degradation for cell life assessment. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 9(2), 1131 -
1140.  
[21] Mohsenian -Rad, H. (2015). Optimal bidding, scheduling, and deployment of battery systems in 
California day -ahead energy market. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 31 (1), 442 -453. 
[22] He, G., Chen, Q., Moutis, P., Kar, S., & Whitacre, J. F. (2018). An intertemporal decision 
framework for electrochemical energy storage management. Nature Energy, 3 (5), 404 -412. 
[23] He, G., Ciez, R., Moutis, P., Kar, S., & Whitacre, J. F. (2020). The economic end of life of 
electrochemical energy storage. Applied Energy, 273 (2020), 115151.  
[24] He, G., Kar, S., Mohammadi, J., Moutis, P., & Whitacre, J. F. (2020). Power system dispatch 
with marginal degradation cost of battery storage. IEEE Transactions on Power Syst ems, 36 (4), 
3552 -3562.  
[25] Xu, B. (2021). Dynamic valuation of battery lifetime. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 
37(3), 2177 -2186.  
[26] Zhang, H., Zhang, K., Zhou, Y ., Ma, L., & Zhang, Z. (2022). An immune algorithm for solving 
the optimization problem of locat ing the battery swapping stations. Knowledge -Based Systems, 
248(2022), 108883.  
[27] Lin, M. D., Liu, P. Y ., Yang, M. D., & Lin, Y . H. (2021). Optimized allocation of scooter battery 
swapping station under demand uncertainty. Sustainable Cities and Society, 71 (2021), 102963.  19 [28] Cao, Y ., Zhang, X., Zhou, B., Duan, X., Tian, D., & Dai, X. (2020). MEC intelligence driven 
electro -mobility management for battery switch service. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, 22 (7), 4016 -4029.  
[29] Wu, H., Pang, G. K.  H., Choy, K. L., & Lam, H. Y . (2017). An optimization model for electric 
vehicle battery charging at a battery swapping station. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular 
Technology, 67 (2), 881 -895. 
[30] Wu, H., Pang, G. K. H., Choy, K. L., & Lam, H. Y . (2017). A chargin g-scheme decision model 
for electric vehicle battery swapping station using varied population evolutionary algorithms. 
Applied Soft Computing, 61 (2017), 905 -920. 
[31] Kang, Q., Wang, J., Zhou, M., & Ammari, A. C. (2015). Centralized charging strategy and 
schedu ling algorithm for electric vehicles under a battery swapping scenario. IEEE Transactions 
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 17 (3), 659 -669. 
[32] Amiri, S. S., Jadid, S., & Saboori, H. (2018). Multi -objective optimum charging management 
of electric vehicles  through battery swapping stations. Energy, 165 (2018), 549 -562.  
[33] You, P., Low, S. H., Tushar, W., Geng, G., Yuen, C., Yang, Z., & Sun, Y . (2017). Scheduling of 
EV battery swapping —Part I: Centralized solution. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network 
System s, 5(4), 1887 -1897.  
[34] You, P., Low, S. H., Zhang, L., Deng, R., Giannakis, G. B., Sun, Y ., & Yang, Z. (2017). 
Scheduling of EV Battery Swapping –Part II: Distributed Solutions. IEEE Transactions on 
Control of Network Systems, 5 (4), 1920 -1930.  
[35] Li, B., Xie, K., Zhong, W., Huang, X ., Wu, Y ., & Xie, S. (2022). Operation Management of 
Electric Vehicle Battery Swapping and Charging Systems: A Bilevel Optimization Approach. 
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems . DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2022.3211883  
[36] Arteaga, J., & Zareipour, H. (2019). A price -maker/price -taker model for the operation of battery 
storage systems in electricity markets. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 10 (6), 6912 -6920.  
[37] He, G., Chen, X., Yang, Y ., Wang, J., & Song, J. (2022). Hybrid Por table and Stationary Energy 
Storage Systems with Battery Charging and Swapping Coordination. In 2022 IEEE/IAS 
Industrial and Commercial Power System Asia (I&CPS Asia)  (pp. 1465 -1470). IEEE.  
[38] Ecker, M., Nieto, N., Kaebitz, S., Schmalstieg, J., Blanke H., War necke, A. & Sauer, D. (2014). 
VCalendar and cycle life study of Li(NiMnCo)O2 -based 18650 lithium -ion batteries. Journal of 
Power Sources, 248 (2014), 839 -851. 
[39] Keil, P., Schuster, S. F., Wilhelm, J., Travi, J., Hauser, A., Karl, R. C., & Jossen, A. (2016). 
Calendar aging of lithium -ion batteries. Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 163 (9), A1872 - 
A1880.  20 [40] Schuster, S. F., Brand, M. J., Campestrini, C., Gleissenberger, M., & Jossen, A. (2016). 
Correlation between capacity and impedance of lithium -ion cells d uring calendar and cycle life. 
Journal of Power Sources, 305 (2016), 191 -199. 
[41] Hledik, R., Chang, J., Lueken, R., Pfeifenberger, J., Pedtke, J. I., & V ollen, J. (2018). The 
economic potential for energy storage in Nevada. The Brattle Group, prepared for Publ ic Utilities 
Commission of Nevada Governor’ s Office of Energy . 
[42] Cole, W. J., Marcy, C., Krishnan, V . K., & Margolis, R. (2016, September). Utility -scale lithium -
ion storage cost projections for use in capacity expansion models. In 2016 North American Power 
Symposium (NAPS)  (pp. 1 -6). IEEE.  
[43] Cole, W., Frazier, A. W., & Augustine, C. (2021). Cost projections for utility -scale battery 
storage. National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL) , Golden, CO (United States).  