Multi-objective near-optimal necessary conditions
for multi-sectoral planning
Antoine Duboisa,, Jonathan Dumasb, Paolo Thiranc, Gauthier Limpensc, Damien Ernsta,d
aDepartment of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, Liege University, Liege, Belgium
bResearch and Development, RTE, Paris, France
cInstitute of Mechanics, Catholic University of Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
dLTCI, Telecom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Paris, France
Abstract
This paper extends the concepts of epsilon-optimal spaces andnecessary conditions for near-optimality from single-
objective to multi-objective optimisation. These notions are ﬁrst presented for single-objective optimisation, and the
mathematical formulation is adapted to address the multi-objective framework. Afterwards, we illustrate the newly
developed methodology by conducting multi-sectoral planning of the Belgian energy system with an open-source
model called EnergyScope TD. The cost and energy invested in the system are used as objectives. Optimal and
ecient solutions for these two objectives are computed and analysed. These results are then used to obtain necessary
conditions corresponding to the minimum amount of energy from di erent sets of resources, including endogenous
and exogenous resources. This case study highlights the high dependence of Belgium on imported energy while
demonstrating that no individual resource is essential on its own.
Keywords: Multi-objective optimisation; near-optimality; necessary conditions; energy system modelling;
multi-sectoral planning
1. Introduction
Energy system planning determines the appropriate
mix of energy sources and technologies to satisfy a com-
munity’s or region’s future energy demand. The goal
of this process is to inform decision-makers to allow
them to plan an e cient and sustainable transformation
of energy systems. Energy system optimisation models
(ESOMs) are commonly used to perform energy system
planning [1]. These models rely on optimisation tech-
niques to predict how an energy system should evolve.
However, ESOMS are often used in ways that limit the
quality of their insights and, thus, their usefulness to
decision-makers. Indeed, these insights are often de-
rived from a unique cost-optimal solution. While cost
is a crucial indicator of the a ordability and viability
of an energy system, focusing solely on this objective
might negatively impact other important factors, such
as environmental sustainability and social equity. More-
Corresponding author
Email address: antoine.dubois@uliege.be (Antoine
Dubois)over, these insights might not satisfy stakeholders with
diverging interests.
1.1. The cost as leading indicator: limits and solutions
ESOMs determine the energy system conﬁgurations
that minimise or maximise a speciﬁed objective. Most
studies choose the cost as the objective, and the best
conﬁguration is the most cost-e ective [1]. This choice
is historical, as explained by Pfenninger et al. [2]. In-
deed, the ﬁrst ESOMs (from the MARKAL /TIMES [3]
and MESSAGE [4] models) were initially designed for
cost minimisation. The study of Yue et al. [5] high-
lights that by default, ESOMs ignore non-economic fac-
tors entering into energy investment decisions and how
politics, social norms, and culture shape public policies.
This claim is also supported by Pfenninger et al. [2],
who speciﬁes that energy system models focus heav-
ily on economic and technical aspects. This focus is
inadequate for energy system planning as this problem
involves multiple stakeholders with di erent policy ob-
jectives, for whom cost-optimal solutions might not be
satisfying. Moreover, several studies have demonstrated
that ignoring non-economic factors increases the uncer-
Preprint submitted to Elsevier February 27, 2023arXiv:2302.12654v1  [math.OC]  24 Feb 2023Which endogenous or exogenous 
resources are necessary in Belgium to 
ensure a transition associated with 
sufficiently good cost and EROI ?Part 2.1 Epsilon -optimality
and necessary conditions for 
single -objective optimisationPart 2.2 Epsilon -optimality
and necessary conditions for 
multi -objective optimisationPart 3 Case study Part 4 Results
Multi -objective near -optimal necessary conditions for multi -sectoral planningFigure 1: Graphical abstract showing the structure of the paper. The ﬁgures are miniatures of ﬁgures located further in the document.
tainty of the models [2, 5]. Fazlollahi et al. [6] also
states that, due to uncertainty in some parameters, it is
insucient for energy system sizing to rivet on a unique
mono-objective optimal solution. Finally, Trutnevyte
[7] shows how cost-optimal scenarios do not adequately
represent real-world problems. However, there exist
methods for going beyond cost and considering non-
economic factors.
1.1.1. Scenario analysis
The ﬁrst approach to incorporate non-economic fac-
tors is scenario analysis. Scenario analysis involves op-
timising the same model over multiple scenarios with
dierent values for some parameters. Di erences be-
tween scenarios can result from uncertainties over tech-
nological or economic parameters - e.g. future cost of
technology. However, they can also stem from politi-
cal (e.g. nuclear decommissioning) or social considera-
tions (e.g. limitation of onshore wind turbines or trans-
mission lines development). Using scenarios that di er
through those considerations allows for studying the ef-
fects of non-economic factors. For instance, the study
by Fujino et al. [8] compares a fast-growth, technology-
oriented scenario to a slow-growth, nature-oriented one.
However, using scenarios to include non-economic fac-
tors is not perfect. Indeed, Hughes and Strachan [9]
reviewed studies using scenarios for low greenhouse
gases (GHG) emission targets, and they conclude that
those modelling studies still have the weakness of sim-
plifying social and political dynamics.
1.1.2. Multi-objective optimisation
The second approach to include non-economic fac-
tors is multi-objective optimisation. This approach al-
lows for optimising several objectives simultaneously,
highlighting the trade-o sthat can be obtained.More formally, while di erent methods exist to ap-
ply multi-objective optimisation (e.g. weighted-sum
approach, integer cut constraints, -constraint method,
evolutionary algorithm), they exhibit the common goal
of obtaining solutions from a Pareto optimal set, also
called the Pareto front . This Pareto front is composed
ofecient solutions, i.e. solutions that are at least bet-
ter than any other solutions in one objective. Thus, it is
composed of the set of optimal trade-o s between the
studied objectives, i.e. any solution that is not part of
the Pareto front is worse in all objectives than at least
one solution in the Pareto front.
Using multi-objective optimisation, the cost can still
be optimised while considering other indicators. For
instance, Becerra-L ´opez and Golding [10] conducted
a study of a Texas power generation system analysing
the trade-o s between economic and exergetic costs, i.e.
the cumulative exergy - entropy-free energy - consump-
tion. They demonstrated how these trade-o s provide
insights to the decision-makers by not focusing exclu-
sively on economic cost. Other objectives, such as wa-
ter consumption, grid dependence on imports or energy
system safety, are compared to cost by Fonseca et al.
[11, 12]. They show how much the assessed criteria im-
pact the design and operation of distributed energy sys-
tems. A ﬁnal example of an alternative objective that is
often combined with the cost is the amount of carbon
emissions [13].
1.1.3. Near-optimal spaces analysis
The last methodology that allows taking social and
political factors into account is the study of near-
optimal spaces, also called sub-optimal or epsilon-
optimal spaces. The idea is to analyse solutions close
to the optimal solution to understand how the use of re-
sources and technologies varies when allowing a slight
2deviation in the objective function. This paradigm goes
further than multi-objective optimisation, as mentioned
by DeCarolis [14]. It allows incorporating unmodelled
objectives, typical of social factors, as they are unknown
or dicult to model. Indeed, the near-optimal region
might contain solutions that are worse in terms of the
main objective - e.g. the cost of the system - but bet-
ter in terms of unmodelled objectives such as risk or
social acceptance. This concept was introduced in the
1980s by Brill et al. [15]. The authors proposed the
ﬁrst method for exploring those spaces: the Hop-Skip-
Jump method. This algorithm was coined as part of a
broader exploration methodology that the authors refer
to as Modelling to Generate Alternatives (MGA). This
methodology was brought back recently and applied to
energy system modelling by DeCarolis [14] and De-
Carolis et al. [16]. They led to a renewed interest in such
methods. Authors such as Price and Keppo [17] de-
veloped new exploration algorithms while Li and Trut-
nevyte [18] combined MGA with Monte-Carlo explo-
ration to minimise parametric uncertainty.
There are several ways of extracting insights from
near-optimal spaces. Most researchers exploring near-
optimal spaces focus on computing numerous near-
optimal solutions from which they derive insights [17,
18, 19]. An alternative approach is to use methods to
obtain such insights directly without needing to com-
pute many alternative solutions [20]. The authors of
Dubois and Ernst [21] took this approach by introducing
the concept of necessary conditions for near-optimality,
i.e. conditions that are true for every solution in the
near-optimal space. For instance, this can provide in-
sight into the required capacity in a given technology to
retain a certain level of system cost-e ectiveness. More
speciﬁcally, Dubois and Ernst [21] showed how, for in-
stance, at least 200 GW of new o shore wind need to be
installed Europe-wise to not deviate by more than 10%
from the cost optimum.
1.2. Research gaps, scientiﬁc contributions and organ-
isation
The exploration of near-optimal spaces has been used
in mono-objective optimisation problems but not, ac-
cording to the best knowledge of the authors, in multi-
objective optimisation problems. However, these meth-
ods could also be valuable in multi-objective optimi-
sation setups. Indeed, while modelling and integrat-
ing more objectives, multi-objective optimisation still
leaves aside some unmodeled objectives. Analysing so-
lutions in the near-optimal space of multi-objective op-
timisation problems is a method to address this issue.
This paper thus aims to ﬁll this gap by:1. extending the concepts related to near-optimal
spaces to multi-objective optimisation;
2. computing necessary conditions in a multi-
objective context to highlight the range of insights
that can be derived from them.
The ﬁrst point is addressed in Section 2 by ﬁrst introduc-
ing the mathematical concepts of near-optimality and
necessary conditions in a single-objective framework
(see Section 2.1) and then extending them to multi-
objective optimisation (see Section 2.2). Section 3 then
translates those concepts to a real case study: the multi-
sectoral expansion of the Belgian energy system. The
results of this case study, including necessary conditions
representing the necessary amount of di erent energy
resources, are presented in Section 4 before highlight-
ing the contributions of this paper in Section 5. We can
already highlight one of those contributions: the open-
source release of the code [22] and the data [23] used to
achieve this study. The graphical representation of the
organisation of this paper is depicted in Figure 1.
2. Problem statement
The ﬁrst part of this section introduces the concepts
of epsilon-optimal space and necessary conditions for
single-objective optimisation [21]. The second part ex-
tends these concepts to multi-objective optimisation by:
1. generalising the optimisation problem to multiple
objectives,
2. presenting generic notions related to multi-
objective optimisation, including the image of the
feasible set, e cient solutions, and the Pareto
front, and
3. explaining the extension of the concepts of epsilon-
optimality and necessary conditions to multi-
objective optimisation.
2.1. Epsilon-optimality and necessary conditions for
single-objective optimisation
LetXbe a feasible space and f:X!R+an objec-
tive function in the positive reals. The single-objective
optimisation problem is
min
x2Xf(x): (1)
Letx?denote an optimal solution to this problem that
is:x?2arg min x2Xf(x).
Deﬁnition 1. An-optimal space , with0, is deﬁned
as follows
X=
x2Xj f(x)(1+)f(x?)
: (2)
30.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.80123456
f1(x1)
f1(x1)(1+1)
f1(x)Epsilon-optimal space 
Optimum x1
Figure 2: Graphical representation of an -optimal space of a mono-
objective optimisation problem in X=R+. The function f1that is
minimised is shown in blue. Its minimum is located at x?
1. Using
this value and its corresponding objective value f1(x
1) allows to eas-
ily determine an -optimal spaceXwith=1. The values of the
dierent parameters and functions used in this example are described
in Appendix A.
It is the set of the feasible solutions x2X with ob-
jective value f(x) no greater than (1 +)f(x?). The
deviation from the optimal objective value is measured
via, called the suboptimality coe cient . Figure 2 il-
lustrates those concepts. A note must be made on the
speciﬁc case f(x?)=0. In this case, Xresumes
to arg min x2Xf(x), making the analysis of near-optimal
spaces trivial.
2.1.1. Necessary conditions
The concepts of condition ,necessary condition and
non-implied necessary condition introduced in this sec-
tion allow determining features which are common to
all solutions in a given -optimal space.
Deﬁnition 2. Acondition is a function :X!f 0;1g.
A set of conditions is denoted .
We illustrate this deﬁnition and the following using an
example. LetX=R,can be the set of conditions of
the formc(x)Bxcwith x2X (thus x2R) and
c2R.
Deﬁnition 3. Anecessary condition for-optimality is
a condition which is true for any solutions in X.
For a given feasible space X, set of conditions and
suboptimality coe cient,2is a necessary condi-
tion if
8x2X:(x)=1:
The set of all necessary conditions for -optimality in 
is denoted X.In our example, let X=[0;1], then0(x)Bx0
is respected by all x2X, making0a necessary con-
dition. Moreover, the set of all necessary conditions is
X=fcjc0g. Indeed, it is straightforward to show
thatc(x)Bxcis true overX=[0;1] for any c0.
As shown in Dubois and Ernst [21], necessary con-
ditions can provide insights into features common to
many near-optimal solutions. However, depending on
how conditions are deﬁned, their study also claims the
number of necessary conditions can be inﬁnite, which
is counterproductive in providing insights. This is, for
instance, the case in our previous example. Indeed, the
setX=fcjc0gcontains an inﬁnite number of
necessary conditions. Nevertheless, the only condition
of interest is 0. Indeed, knowing that x0 is true over
[0;1] implies that xcis true when c<0. Thus, know-
ing that0is a necessary condition implies that any c
with c<0 is a necessary condition. On the opposite, it
is not possible to imply that 0is a necessary condition
from the knowledge of other necessary conditions in the
setX=fcjc0g. This deﬁnes 0as anon-implied
necessary condition. Knowing this, we can provide the
ﬁrst deﬁnition of non-implied necessary conditions.
Deﬁnition 4. A condition 2is anon-implied nec-
essary condition if it cannot be implied to be a neces-
sary condition from the sole knowledge of other neces-
sary conditions. The set of non-implied necessary con-
ditions is denoted X
.
This deﬁnition can be made more formal. In the follow-
ing, we formalise it mathematically, starting with the
notion of implication .
Deﬁnition 5. Animplication function  (1j2)2
f0;1gis a function that indicates whether condition 2
implies condition 1. When (1j2)=1, then8x2
X;  2(x)=1=)1(x)=1. When (1j2)=0,
then9x2X; 2(x)=16=)1(x)=1.
Using this function, a non-implied necessary condition
can be deﬁned in the following way.
Deﬁnition 6. Anon-implied necessary condition is a
necessary condition 2Xthat is not implied by any
other necessary condition. It is a necessary condition
2Xsuch that802Xnfg: (j0)=0.
We can reﬁne the deﬁnitions of necessary and non-
implied necessary conditions by deﬁning the space over
which a condition is true.
Deﬁnition 7. The spaceIis the subset ofXwhere a
conditionis true, that is:
I=
x2Xj(x)=1
: (3)
4Necessary conditions can then be deﬁned in the follow-
ing way.
Deﬁnition 8. A condition is anecessary condition for
-optimality ifXI.
Indeed, this implies that 8x2 X; (x)=1, which
corresponds to deﬁnition 3. Using this same notion, we
can give an implementation of the implication function.
Deﬁnition 9. Let1and2be conditions with I1and
I2the spaces over which they are respectively true,
then the implication function  (1j2)is deﬁned as:
 (1j2)=I2I1: (4)
This formulation ﬁts our deﬁnition of an implication
function because if  (1j2)=1, then it means
I2I1, which in turns implies that 1(x)=1 for any
x2Xfor which2(x)=1. Similarly, if  (1j2)=0,
it means thatI2*I1, which means9x2Xsuch that
1(x)=0 when2(x)=1. This deﬁnition of implica-
tion leads to a new deﬁnition of non-implied necessary
conditions.
Deﬁnition 10. Anon-implied necessary condition is a
necessary condition 2Xthat is true over a space
which does not include any of the spaces over which
other necessary conditions are true. It is a necessary
condition2Xsuch that802Xnfg:I0*I.
Figure 3 illustrates these concepts, where 2implies1
asI2I1. They are both necessary conditions be-
cause they are true over X. Finally, if there are no other
conditions in the set of conditions  =f1;2g, then2
is a non-implied necessary condition as no other neces-
sary condition implies it.
Figure 3: Graphical illustration of implication using spaces over
which conditions are true, adapted from Dubois and Ernst [21]. The
four spaces that are represented are the feasible space X, the-optimal
spaceX, and the spacesI1andI2where conditions 1and2are
respectively true. Both these conditions are necessary as XI1
andXI2. Moreover, 2implies1asI2I1.
2.1.2. Computation of a non-implied necessary condi-
tion
This section presents an example to provide a prac-
tical sense of these concepts. It demonstrates how tocompute a non-implied necessary condition from a set
of conditions taking the form of constrained sums of
variables. In the case studies described in Section 3, this
type of condition is used to study the minimum amount
of energy that can be driven from di erent sources.
LetX Rnbe a feasible space, f:X ! R+an
objective function to minimise over this space, and d
a set of conditions deﬁned as follows:
d=
c
d(x)=dTxc
; (5)
where x2X,d2f0;1gnandc2R. The conditions are
constrained sums of variables dTx=Pn
i=1dixi. In this
particular case, Dubois and Ernst [21] have proven that
c?
d=dTxcwith c=min x2XdTxis the only non-
implied necessary condition that can be derived from
d. The value crepresents the minimum value that
dTxcan take over the set X, that is when allowing a
deviation of from the optimal value f(x?). Algorithm
1 illustrates the computation of this value in three steps.
Algorithm 1: Computation of a non-implied
necessary condition - Single-objective case
Data:
f- objective function,
X- feasible space,
- suboptimality coe cient,
d- binary vector deﬁning the conditions dTx
Result: c
Steps:
1. Solve min x2Xf(x) to obtain x?.
2. BuildXby adding to the original problem the
constraint f(x)(1+)f(x?).
3. Solve c=min x2XdTx.
2.2. Epsilon-optimality and necessary conditions for
multi-objective optimisation
This section extends the concepts presented previ-
ously to multi-objective optimisation while introducing
notions speciﬁc to this type of optimisation problem.
Letf:=(f1;;fk;;fn) be a vector of nobjec-
tive functions such that 8k fk:X!R+. We seek to
minimise these functions over the feasible set X, which,
using the notation of Ehrgott [24], we note:
“ min
x2X”f: (6)
5LetYbe the image of the feasible set in the objective
space:
Y=f(X)=fy2Rnjy=f(x) for some x2Xg:(7)
This space is the image of Xunder the objective func-
tions f, and f(x) :=(f1(x);;fk(x);;fn(x)). There-
fore,Y2Rn
+and each of its components ykare deﬁned
byyk=fk(x) for some x2X.
2.2.1. E cient solutions and Pareto front
One way to highlight compromises between the ob-
jectives ( f1;;fk;;fn) is to compute e cient or
Pareto optimal solutions. Following the deﬁnition of
Ehrgott [24]:
Deﬁnition 11. A feasible solution x 2X is called e-
cient when there is no other ˆx2Xsuch that8k fk( ˆx)
fk(x)and f i( ˆx)<fi(x)for some i, that is, no other
ˆx2 X has a smaller or equal value in all objectives
(f1;fk;;fn)than x.
According to Ehrgott [24], multiple denominations
exist for the set of e cient points. This paper uses the
term Pareto front to indiscriminately name the set of ef-
ﬁcient points or their image in the objective space.
Deﬁnition 12. APareto frontPXis the set
PX=
x2Xj@ˆx2X; (8)
8k fk( ˆx)fk(x);9i fi( ˆx)<fi(x)
:
In the objective space, a Pareto front is deﬁned as:
PY=
y2Yj@ˆy2Y; (9)
8kˆykyk;9iˆyi<yi
:
2.2.2. Approximation of Pareto fronts
A Pareto front can be composed of an inﬁnity of
points. Thus, it is typical to compute a subset of the
ecient solutions which compose it. This set is named
approximated Pareto front and is denoted by PX;m(or
equivalentlyPY;m) where mis the number of points in
the approximation.
Deﬁnition 13. Anapproximate Pareto front PX;m, with
m2N, is a subset of m e cient solutions in the Pareto
frontPX.
Several techniques exist to obtain those e cient solu-
tions, the two most famous being the ‘ weighted-sumapproach ’ and the ‘ -constraint method ’ [24]. The
weighted-sum approach consists of solving:
min
x2XnX
k=1kfk(x); (10)
with8kk>0. The-constraint method resolves in
solving:
min
x2Xfj(x)
s.t.fk(x)kfork=1;;nandk,j;(11)
where8kk2R.
2.2.3. Multi-criteria epsilon-optimal spaces
Starting from a Pareto front PX, it is possible to
deﬁne an -optimal space, given a suboptimality co-
ecients vector of deviations in each objective: =
(1;;k;;n)2Rn
+. This space is denoted by X
in the decision space and Yin the objective space.
In the mono-objective setup, the -optimal space is
deﬁned as the set of points x2Xwhose objective value
f(x) do not deviate by more than an fraction from the
optimal objective value, i.e. f(x)(1+)f(x?). In a
multi-objective case, there is no optimum but a set of
ecient points composing the Pareto front. This leads
us to deﬁne the -optimal space as follows:
Deﬁnition 14. In a multi-objective optimisa-
tion problem, the -optimal space X, with
=(1;;k;;n)2Rn
+, is the set of points
x whose objective values f k(x)for each k do not deviate
by more than an kfraction from the objective value
fk( ˆx)of at least one solution ˆx of the Pareto front PX.
It is the space
X=
x2Xj9 ˆx2PX;
8k fk(x)(1+k)fk( ˆx)
: (12)
Alternatively, this space can be deﬁned as:
X=[
ˆx2PX
x2Xj8 k fk(x)(1+k)fk( ˆx)
:(13)
Figure 4 depicts a graphical representation of an -
optimal space in a multi-objective framework and how
it is built from e cient solutions.
Deﬁnition (12) relies on the entire Pareto front. How-
ever, practically, only a subset PX;mofmecient points
of the Pareto front is computed and used to obtain an
approximation of the -optimal space, denoted X
m.
60.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.60123456
f1(x) f2(x)
f1(x1)
f2(x2)
x1
x2
Pareto front 
Epsilon-optimal space 
(a) Full representation of X
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.500123456
f1(x) f2(x)
f1(x)
f1(x)(1+1)
f2(x)
f2(x)(1+2)
x
Pareto front 
Subset of  obtained from x
(b) Computation of a subset of Xfrom a single point ˆ xof the Pareto front PX
Figure 4: Graphical representation of an -optimal space of a multi-objective optimisation problem in X=R+. The two functions to be minimised
f1andf2are represented in blue and red, respectively, and their respective minimums are x?
1andx?
2. The Pareto front PXcontaining all e cient
solutions is represented in green. Figure 4a shows in orange the full -optimal spaceXfor a suboptimality coe cient vector =(1;2). As
shown in Equation (13), this space is the union of sub-spaces that can be computed from e cient solutions. Figure 4b shows how one of these
subspaces, corresponding to the e cient solution ˆ x, can be computed. From the value ˆ x, the corresponding objective values f1( ˆx) and f2( ˆx) are
obtained. This allows to determine all the solutions in Xwhose objective value is smaller than fk( ˆx)(1+k) for k21;2. The values of the di erent
parameters and functions used in this example are described in Appendix A.
Deﬁnition 15. An approximation X
m, with m2N, of
an-optimal spaceXis the space
X
m=
x2Xj9 ˆx2PX;m;
8k fk(x)(1+k)fk( ˆx)
: (14)
Alternatively, this space can be deﬁned as:
X
m=[
ˆx2PX;m;
x2Xj8 k fk(x)(1+k)fk( ˆx)
:(15)
The alternative formulation deﬁnes X
mas a union of
spaces, where each space is the set of points whose ob-
jective value in each fkdoes not deviate by more than
ankfraction from the objective values fk( ˆx) of one so-
lution ˆ xin the approximated Pareto front PX;m.
Figure 5 shows three examples of approximate -
optimal spacesX
min the objective space (therefore
notedY
m) using three approximated Pareto fronts PY;m,
with di erent numbers and spread of e cient solutions.
2.2.4. Necessary conditions
In the multi-objective optimisation framework, nec-
essary conditions for -optimality can be deﬁned in the
same manner as in the one-dimensional setting, i.e. con-
ditions which are true for any solutions in X.
Deﬁnition 16. Anecessary condition for-optimality
is a condition which is true for any solutions in X. LetXbe a feasible space, a set of conditions, and a
suboptimality coe cients vector, a necessary condition
2is a condition such that
8x2X:(x)=1:
The set of all necessary conditions for -optimality in 
is denoted X.
Similarly, a non-implied necessary conditions -
optimality can be deﬁned in the following way.
Deﬁnition 17. Anon-implied necessary condition is a
necessary condition 2Xthat is not implied by any
other necessary condition. It is a necessary condition
such that802Xnfg: (j0)=0.
2.2.5. Computation of a non-implied necessary condi-
tion
The computation of a non-implied necessary condi-
tion from conditions of type dTxcpresented in Sec-
tion 2.1.2 is generalised to the multi-criteria case. In the
mono-objective case, it was su cient to minimise the
sum dTxoverXto obtain the value ccorresponding
to the non-implied necessary condition dTxc. How-
ever, in a multi-objective setup, we do not have access
toXbut to its approximation X
m, which is the union
of several subsets, each corresponding to one point in
PX;m(i.e. a subset of the Pareto front). The minimum
over this space can thus be obtained by taking the min-
imum of the minima of dTxover each of these subsets.
72 4 6 8 10
f11.52.02.53.03.54.04.5f2Boundary of 
Pareto front 
Epsilon-optimal space 
Appr. epsilon-optimal space m
Points y
(a) Few well-spread points
2 4 6 8 10
f11.52.02.53.03.54.04.5f2 (b) Numerous badly-spread points
2 4 6 8 10
f11.52.02.53.03.54.04.5f2 (c) Numerous well-spread points
Figure 5: Graphical representations in the objective space of approximations Y
mof an -optimal space of a multi-objective optimisation problem
based on three di erent approximate Pareto front PY;m. The axes correspond to the two functions to minimise, i.e. f1and f2. The boundary of
the image of the feasible space Yis represented in blue in the three cases. The part of this boundary corresponding to the full Pareto front PYis
drawn in green. The full -optimal spacesYcorresponding to this Pareto front is coloured in light orange. Each graph corresponds to a di erent
approximate Pareto front PY;m. These sets of points are represented in brown. From each of these points, part of the approximate -optimal spaces
can be computed, and their union is represented in solid orange. The values of the di erent parameters and functions used in this example are
described in Appendix A.
Even with this approach, X
mbeing a subset ofX, min-
imising dTxover it will only provide an upper bound ˜ c
of the value c, i.e. ˜ cc. Algorithm 2 shows how this
value can be obtained.
Algorithm 2: Computation of a non-implied
necessary condition - Multi-objective case
Data:
f- objective functions,
X- feasible space,
m- number of points,
- vector of suboptimality coe cients,
d- binary vector deﬁning the conditions dTx
Result: ˜c
Steps:
1. Draw mpoints ˆ x1;:::ˆxi;:::ˆxmof the Pareto front
using an appropriate method.
2. For all i2[1;2;:::; m], compute ci=mindTx
over the spacefx2Xj8 k fk(x)(1+k)fk( ˆxi)g.
3. Take the minimum ˜ c=min i2[1;2;:::;m]ciof these
values to ﬁnd the appropriate condition ˜c.
There is no guarantee that the condition dTx˜cis a
(non-implied) necessary condition. Indeed, it could be
the case that for a solution x2XnX
mthatdTx<˜c. To
make the upper bound ˜ cas close as possible to the real
minimal value c, one must reduce the size of the di er-
enceXnX
m. This can be done by improving the num-
ber and spread of e cient solutions in the approximated
Pareto front. As deﬁned by Alarcon-Rodriguez et al.
[25], solutions with a good spread can be seen as hav-
ing good coverage of the actual Pareto front. The three
graphs of Figure 5 show visually how, by increasing thenumber and the spread of e cient solutions drawn from
the Pareto front, the approximated -optimal space cov-
ers a more signiﬁcant subset of the points of the entire
-optimal space.
3. Case study
In this section, a case study will illustrate the con-
cepts and methodology presented in the previous sec-
tion. First, the context of the case study and the ques-
tion to which it tries to provide an answer are presented.
The modelling tool used to implement the methodology
is then introduced, and its main features are detailed. Fi-
nally, each element introduced in Section 2 is speciﬁed
to the problem at hand.
3.1. Context
In the European Green Deal [26], the European
Commission raided the European Union’s ambition to
reduce GHG emissions to at least 55% below 1990
levels by 2030. Then by 2050, Europe aims to become
the world’s ﬁrst carbon-neutral continent. Europe still
relies massively on fossil fuels to satisfy its energy con-
sumption (75% coming from coal, natural gas and oil
according to the International Energy Agency [27]) as
well as non-energy usages (e.g. chemical feed-stocks,
lubricants and asphalt for road construction [28]).
The use of these fuels is the primary source of GHG
emissions. Carbon-neutral sources of energy must
thus be developed to curb emissions. The possibilities
are numerous, and one of the coming decade’s main
challenges will be deciding which resources to invest
in. Several criteria will motivate these choices.
8The most common criterion for discriminating be-
tween options is cost. Indeed, as highlighted by Pfen-
ninger et al. [2] and DeCarolis [14], most studies use the
cost indicator to plan the energy transition. This choice
makes sense as the cost of investment, maintenance and
operation of the energy system impacts the ﬁnal con-
sumers’ energy bill. Thus, minimising the system cost
is a social imperative to allow every citizen access to
aordable energy.
A lesser-known indicator, encompassing technical
and social challenges, is the system’s energy return
on investment (EROI). When deﬁned system-wise, the
EROI is a ratio that measures the usable energy deliv-
ered by the system ( Eout) over the amount of energy
required to obtain this energy ( Ein) [29]. When the
amount of energy required to deliver a given energy ser-
vice increases, the EROI of the system decreases. In
some sense, EROI measures the ease with which energy
is extracted to transform it into a form that beneﬁts soci-
ety. There are various manners of deﬁning EinandEout,
and incidentally, the EROI of a system. These deﬁni-
tions depend mainly on what parts of the energy cas-
cade - as presented in Brockway et al. [30] or Dumas
et al. [31] - are considered. This paper considers that in-
vested energy Einencompasses the energy used to build
the system infrastructure, ‘from the cradle to the grave’,
and to operate this system. Following the methodology
of Dumas et al. [31], Eoutwill correspond to the ﬁnal
energy consumption (FEC) of the system, as deﬁned in
the European Commission [32] standard. FEC is the to-
tal energy, measured in TWh, consumed by end-users. It
encompasses the energy directly used by the consumer
and excludes the energy used by the energy sector, e.g.
deliveries and transformation.
While cost and EROI can be linked (e.g. the trans-
port of energy resources will increase both the system
cost and invested energy), they are not fully correlated
and favouring one or the other can lead to di erent
system conﬁgurations, as illustrated later in Section 4.
Both criteria can be included in the decision process by
modelling them as objectives in optimisation problems.
These objectives can be optimised individually or co-
optimised using multi-criteria optimisation techniques.
In this case study, we will show how, using these ob-
jectives in the methodology presented in Section 2, the
following question can be addressed:
Which resources are necessary to ensure a transition
associated with su ciently good cost and EROI?
Indeed, the answer to this question can be obtained by
computing necessary conditions corresponding to theminimum amount of energy that needs to come from
these resources.
This question is, however, relatively broad, and for
the sake of conciseness, it needs to be speciﬁed. On
top of decision criteria, considerations such as energy
independence (i.e. which has been enhanced with the
Russian invasion of Ukraine) and social acceptance (i.e.
the ‘not-in-my-backyard’ phenomena) are paramount in
planning the energy transition. These considerations
will impact the type of resources that will be exploited.
Indeed, the ﬁrst consideration incentives a push for do-
mestically produced energy, while the latter favours the
opposite. The ﬁrst tends to minimise the amount of ex-
ogenous resources in the system, while the latter min-
imises the amount of energy coming from endogenous
resources. To take these elements into consideration,
the previous question can be reﬁned to:
Which endogenous or exogenous resources are
necessary to ensure a transition associated with
suciently good cost and EROI?
This study focuses on one of the European coun-
tries: Belgium. Belgium made the same commit-
ments for 2030 and 2050 as the European Union [33].
Thus, it faces the challenge of replacing its fossil-based
economy with carbon-free solutions while striking the
right balance between endogenous and exogenous re-
sources. Belgium’s population density exacerbates this
challenge. In 2019, Belgium had the second-highest
population density in Europe (excluding Malta) with
377 people per km2, behind the Netherlands (507 peo-
ple per km2) [34]. The available land for onshore en-
ergy development is thus limited, while o shore pro-
duction is limited to around 8 GW of wind potential
[35]. Other domestic resources such as solar, biomass,
waste or hydro also have limited potential. This situa-
tion entails a small local energy potential compared to
its demand. The study Limpens et al. [36] evaluates that
available local Belgian resources can only cover 42%
of the country’s primary energy consumption. This sit-
uation strongly impacts the type of resources Belgium
must rely on. Therefore, the question that will be ad-
dressed in this case study is:
Which endogenous or exogenous resources are
necessary in Belgium to ensure a transition asso-
ciated with su ciently good cost and EROI?
3.2. EnergyScope TD
To answer this question, an appropriate ESOM is
needed. The commitments set for 2035 and 2050 cover
9all sectors of the economy, not just electricity produc-
tion. To achieve net zero ambitions, carbon-neutral so-
lutions must be implemented for electricity, heat, mobil-
ity, and non-energy. These di erent sectors can be mod-
elled using an open-source whole-energy system model
called EnergyScope TD (ESTD) [37]. ESTD can be cat-
egorised as an ESOM. Using optimisation techniques, it
determines the optimal mix of technologies (e.g. wind
turbines, gas power plants, boilers, etc.) and resources
(e.g. wind, gas, diesel, etc.) which are needed to satisfy
dierent types of end-use demand (EUD) listed in Ap-
pendix B. This optimal mix depends on the user-deﬁned
objective function. Mathematically, ESTD models the
energy system as a linear programming problem. It
takes a series of parameters as input and outputs the val-
ues of investment and operational variables determined
by minimising an objective while respecting a series
of constraints. The objective is a linear function; con-
straints are linear equalities or inequalities. Parameters
and variables can be indexed temporally. The default
temporal horizon Tis one year with an hourly resolu-
tion. To reduce the computational burden of the opti-
misation, the horizon is clustered by selecting a number
of typical days, 12 by default. Thus, time-dependent
parameters and variables are indexed by a typical day
tdand an hour h. The equivalence between the origi-
nal hourly-resolution temporal horizon and the typical
days is done via a time-indexed set T HT D (t) associat-
ing each hour tof the year with a corresponding couple
(td;h)=T HT D (t). This set is essential to understand
some of the equations in the rest of this section.
ESTD has been extensively used and validated in the
Belgian case [31, 36, 38, 39, 40, 41]. More specif-
ically, in Limpens et al. [36], the authors studied the
2035 Belgian energy system using ESTD and built the
corresponding data set. This year is a trade-o between
a long-term horizon where policies can still be imple-
mented and a horizon short enough to deﬁne the future
of society with a group of known technologies. To build
on these resources, we will model the Belgian energy
system for 2035.
To ﬁnish this section, it is important to note that while
the results presented in this paper are valid for Belgium,
they could easily be extended to other countries. In-
deed, ESTD has already been used to model the energy
systems of other countries such as Switzerland [42, 43]
and Italy [44]. Moreover, adapting those models to im-
plement the methodology presented in this paper only
requires minor modiﬁcations, as presented in the fol-
lowing sections.3.3. Feasible space
In the initial optimisation problem
“ min
x2X”f; (16)
the ﬁrst element to deﬁne is the feasible space Xover
which the optimisation is performed. This study mod-
elled the feasible space using ESTD as a linear program-
ming problem. Therefore, the problem to solve has the
following form:
“ min
x”f (17)
s:t:Axb;
where xis the vector of variables of the problem, while
Aandbare a matrix and vector of parameters, respec-
tively. More information on the speciﬁc variables, pa-
rameters and constraints used in ESTD can be found in
Limpens et al. [37] and in the model’s documentation
[45].
3.3.1. Constraint on GHG emissions
A constraint that is of particular interest given the
context of this case study is the limit on GHG emissions,
i.e.
GWP tot35 [MtCO 2-eq/y]: (18)
In this section, we brieﬂy describe how this constraint
is deﬁned. The total yearly GHG emissions of the sys-
tem are computed using a life-cycle analysis (LCA) ap-
proach. Thus, they include the GHG emissions along
the whole life cycle, i.e. ‘from the cradle to the grave’ of
the technologies and resources considered in ESTD. In
ESTD, the global warming potential (GWP) expressed
in MtCO 2-eq./year is used as an indicator to aggregate
emissions of di erent GHG. Then, the yearly emissions
of the system, which are denoted GWP tot, are deﬁned as
follows:
GWP tot=X
j2T ECHGWP constr(j)
li f etime (j)+X
i2RESGWP op(i);
(19)
where T ECH and RES are the sets of technologies
and resources modelled in ESTD. GWP constr represents
the GWP for the construction of a technology, while
GWP opgives the GWP linked to the operation of a re-
source. More speciﬁcally, GWP constr(j) is the GWP
of technology jover its entire lifetime allocated to
one year based on the technology lifetime li f etime (j).
GWP op(i) is the GWP related to the use of resource i
over one year.
10The 35 MtCO 2-eq/y limit chosen in this case study
comes from the following reasoning. According to the
International Energy Agency (IEA), Belgium’s 1990
territorial GHG emissions were approximately 105
MtCO 2-eq [27]. Thus, the targets of the European
Green Deal imply reaching 47 MtCO 2-eq/y in 2030 and
0 MtCO 2-eq/y in 20501. By conducting a linear inter-
polation between these dates, the 2035 Belgian GHG
emissions should reach approximately 35 MtCO 2-eq/y.
This target is used as a hard constraint for GWP totin the
model: GWP tot35 [MtCO 2-eq/y].
3.4. Objectives
The second step in formalising the problem consists
in choosing appropriate objectives. As mentioned at the
start of this section, our interest lies in solutions with
a suciently good cost and EROI. This choice implies
optimising the system by minimising cost and maximis-
ing EROI. To better match the methodology presented
in Section 2 where functions are minimised, Ein(i.e.
the energy invested in the system) will be used as ob-
jective instead of EROI. The following sections deﬁne
precisely the two objectives used in the case study.
3.4.1. System cost
The ﬁrst objective is the total annual cost of the sys-
tem, f1=Ctot, deﬁned as:
Ctot=X
j2T ECH((j)Cinv(j)+Cmaint(j))+X
i2RESCop(i):
(20)
The yearly system cost is the sum of (j)Cinv(j), the an-
nualised investment cost of each technology with Cinv
the total investment cost and the annualisation fac-
tor,Cmaint(j), the operating and maintenance cost of
each technology and Cop(i), the operating cost of the
resources. This last variable is equal to
Cop(i)=X
t2Tjfh;tdg2T HT D (t)cop(i)Ft(i;h;td); (21)
where cop(i) is the cost of resource iin [¿/MWh fuel]
andFt(i;h;td) corresponds to the use in [MWh fuel] of
resource iat time ( h;td). The values of cop(i) for each
resource used in the study case are given in Tables 1 and
2. The study of Limpens et al. [37] or the online docu-
mentation [45] provides more detail on this indicator.2
1Practically, the 2050 target is to be climate neutral, meaning the
GHG emission can be greater than 0 but must be compensated by
carbon capture.
2In the mathematical formulation of the model, an additional fac-
tortop(h;td) is added to equation (21), (23), and (27). This parameter
is set to 1 in the implementation of the model used in this case study.
It is thus removed from equations for clarity.3.4.2. Energy invested in the system
The second objective f2isEin, the energy invested in
the system over one year:
Ein=X
j2T ECHEconstr(j)
li f etime (j)+X
i2RESEop(i); (22)
with Econstr(j), the energy invested to built technology j,
annualised by dividing it by its lifetime, and Eop(i) the
energy to operate, i.e. produce, and transport resource
iover one year. Similarly to the cost indicator, this last
variable is equal to
Eop(i)=X
t2Tjfh;tdg2T HT D (t)eop(i)Ft(i;h;td); (23)
where eop(i) is the energy invested (in [MWh /MWh fuel])
to obtain 1 MWh fuelof the resource i. The values of
eop(i) for each resource used in the study case are given
in Tables 1 and 2. More detail is provided by Dumas
et al. [31] (in which Einis referred to as Ein;tot).
Minimising Einwould be equivalent to maximising
EROI, i.e. Eout=Ein, ifEout, which in our case is the
FEC, was constant. It is not the case in ESTD. In this
model, only the values for the EUD, presented in Ta-
ble B.5, are ﬁxed. While EUD measures an energy
service, FEC measures the quantity of energy used to
deliver this service. FEC is thus always measured in
[TWh], while the unit for EUD will depend on the de-
mand. For instance, the EUD for heat will be measured
in [TWh] while [Mt-km] will be used for mobility. Us-
ing technology-dependent conversion factors, FEC can
be converted into EUD and vice-versa. For instance, in
ESTD, a FEC of 1 kWh of electricity supplies an EUD
of 5.8 passenger-km with a battery-electric car. As the
conversion factors depend on the installed technologies,
which depend on the optimisation results, FEC is an out-
put of the ESTD model and is not constant. Nonethe-
less, the constant EUD cannot be employed directly as
Eoutto compute the EROI, as it is an energy service,
not an amount of energy. Therefore, the FEC is used to
compute Eoutand, incidentally, the EROI of the system.
3.5. Pareto front
Once all the elements of the initial optimisation prob-
lem (6) are set up, one can compute e cient solutions
from the Pareto front using one of the methods de-
scribed in Section 2.2.2. This case study uses a modiﬁed
version of the -constraint method. It is applied by min-
imising Einover the feasible space with the additional
constraint Ctot(1+C?
tot) where2R+andC?
totis the
11cost-optimal value, i.e. solving
min
x2XEin
s.t.Ctot(1+)C?
tot(24)
This method is a slight modiﬁcation of the method de-
scribed in equation (11) where is a relative rather than
absolute value. It has the beneﬁt of deﬁning the con-
straint proportionally to the optimal value in the asso-
ciated objective and thus be directly interpretable. For
instance, if the optimal cost is 75 B ¿, one would use
values of 1, 5, and 10% instead of absolute values of
75.75, 78.75 and 82.5 B ¿. To obtain several points over
the Pareto front, the method was repeated for di erent
values ofin ]0;Ce
tot=C?
tot[ where Ce
totis the value of Ctot
at the Einoptimum and C?
totis the cost optimum.
3.6. Near-optimal spaces
The e cient solutions are used to deﬁne approximate
near-optimal spaces X
m, with =(Ctot;Ein) follow-
ing equation (15) of deﬁnition 15. They are unions
of spaces deﬁned around unique, e cient solutions,
ˆx2PX;m. Each space can be easily deﬁned by adding
to the original ESTD model the two linear constraints,
which are:
Ctot(x)(1+Ctot)Ctot( ˆx); (25)
Ein(x)(1+Ein)Ein( ˆx): (26)
3.7. Necessary conditions
The last concept to deﬁne is the type of necessary
conditions computed in the case study. We are inter-
ested in the necessary resources for a transition with a
suciently good cost and EROI. We will thus compute
the necessary conditions corresponding to the minimum
amount of energy that needs to come from a speciﬁc in-
dividual or group of resources. Mathematically, the set
of such conditions would be:
RES=X
i2RES;
t2Tjfh;tdg2T HT D (t)Ft(i;h;td)c
; (27)
where RESRES is a set of resources, Fi;tthe use
of resource rat time tandc2R+.RES can con-
tain any resource. However, in the context presented in
Section 3.1, we have highlighted a particular interest in
two groups of resources: endogenous and exogenous.
We will focus primarily on those two sets and give a
more detailed description of their resources. In ESTD,
endogenous resources (noted RES endo) include wood,cop eop
[¿/MWh fuel] [MWh /MWh fuel]
Endogenous resources
Hydro 0 0
Solar 0 0
Waste 23.1 0.0577
Wet biomass 5.76 0.0559
Wind 0 0
Wood 32.8 0.0491
Exogenous resources
Ammonia 76.00:174
Ammonia (Re.) 81.80:295
Diesel 79.7 0.210
Bio-diesel 1200:101
Elec. import 84.3 0.123
Gas 44.3 0.0608
Gas (Re.) 1180:147
Gasoline 82.4 0.281
Bio-ethanol 1110:101
H2 87.5 0.083
H2 (Re.) 1190:134
LFO 60.2 0.204
Methanol 82.0 0.0798
Methanol (Re.) 1110:146
Table 1: 2035 values for each resource of the input parameters: cop,
cost of the resource [ ¿/MWh fuel] and eop, energy invested in obtain-
ing 1 MWh of the resource [MWh /MWh fuel]. Most values for cop
come from [45]. Data for eoprelies on the work of Muyldermans
and N `eve [46], who used the ecoinvent database [47]. The values
preceded by a ‘’ were updated based on the work by Orban [48].
Abbreviations: Renewable (Re.), Electricity (Elec.)
c
op e
op
[¿/MWh fuel] [MWh /MWh fuel]
Hydro 53.7 0.0489
Solar 50.0 0.147
Wind 47.0 0.0350
Table 2: Estimated cost c
op[¿/MWh fuel] and estimated energy in-
vested in obtaining 1 MWh of the resource e
op[MWh /MWh fuel] for
three resources: hydro, solar and wind. The estimation is done by
computing the total cost at the Ctotoptimum and invested energy at
theEinoptimum of the technologies that use these resources (i.e. PV
for solar, onshore and o shore wind for wind and hydro river for hy-
dro) and then dividing it by the total energy used from these resources
at the corresponding optimums, indicated in Table 4.
12wet biomass, waste, wind, solar, hydro, and geother-
mal energy. Exogenous resources (noted RES exo) are
the other resources in the model: ammonia, renew-
able ammonia, imported electricity, methanol, renew-
able methanol, hydrogen, renewable hydrogen, coal,
gas, renewable gas, liquid fuel oil, gasoline, diesel, bio-
diesel, and bioethanol. Renewable fuels such as renew-
able ammonia, methanol, and gas are assumed to be pro-
duced from renewable electricity. Tables 1 and 2 list the
model’s resources and the associated input parameters
required to compute the cost and invested energy when
employing them.
4. Results
In this section, we provide the answer to the question
that was asked at the beginning of Section 3:
Which endogenous or exogenous resources are
necessary in Belgium to ensure a transition asso-
ciated with su ciently good cost and EROI?
This answer is obtained by computing necessary con-
ditions corresponding to the minimum amount of en-
ergy coming from speciﬁc resources required to ensure
a-optimality in Ctotand Ein. However, before div-
ing into the necessary conditions, we ﬁrst analyse how
the system is conﬁgured at the two optimums and show
the di erences between those conﬁgurations. Then, by
analysing e cient solutions, we determine how this sys-
tem evolves when trade-o s are made between Ctotand
Ein. Finally, knowing the Pareto front, we compute -
optimal spaces and examine necessary conditions cor-
responding to the minimum amount of energy coming
from di erent resources in Belgium.
4.1. Analysis of the system conﬁguration at the two op-
timums
The Belgian energy system is analysed when optimis-
ingCtotandEinindividually, with a maximum carbon
budget GWP totof 35 MtCO 2-eq/y. To set a baseline to
which we can compare the necessary conditions com-
puted in the following sections, we analyse the amount
of endogenous and exogenous resources used at each
optimum. Table 3 shows the value of the two objec-
tive functions at the two optimums, and Table 4 details
which energy sources are used in the system.
4.1.1. Results at the C totoptimum
The optimal cost C?
totis equal to 52.8 B e/y. At this
optimum, the total amount of primary energy used in
the system is 387 TWh /y, 48% of which comes fromCtot Ein
optimum optimum
Ctot[Be/y] 52.8 56.8
Ein[TWh /y] 74.0 61.0
Table 3: Values of CtotandEinobjectives at the optimums.
Energy Ctot Ein Max.
[TWh /y] optimum optimum potential
Endogenous 185 164 185
Hydro 0.469 0.4860:488
Solar 61.5 54.261:6
Waste 17.8 4.12 17.8
Wet Biomass 38.9 38.9 38.9
Wind 42.6 43.043:0
Wood 23.4 23.4 23.4
Exogenous 202 211 /
Ammonia (Re.) 65.6 0 /
Bio-diesel 0 3.14 /
Elec. import 27.6 27.6 27.6
Gas 28.2 34.5 /
Gas (Re.) 4.98 48.5 /
H2 (Re.) 19.4 44.8 /
Methanol (Re.) 56.4 52.8 /
Total 387 375 /
Table 4: Amount of energy used from each endogenous and exoge-
nous resource at CtotandEinoptimums. The last column shows the
maximum potential of each resource. The potentials preceded by a
‘*’ are computed from the maximum capacity and capacity factors of
the technologies using these resources. The other potentials are di-
rectly ﬁxed as parameters. The resources for which a ‘ /’ is noted have
unlimited potential.
endogenous resources and the rest from exogenous re-
sources.
For endogenous resources, the values for wet
biomass, waste and wood are equal to their maximum
potentials - set as input model parameters. This obser-
vation makes sense as the copof these resources in Ta-
ble 1 indicate they are among the cheapest resources.
The hydro, solar and wind energy quantities are also
very close to their maximum potential. For these re-
sources, the maximum is not set directly on the quantity
of energy but on the capacities of the technologies us-
ing these resources. For instance, the model can install
a maximum of 6 GW of o shore wind turbines and 10
GW of onshore wind turbines, which are the two tech-
nologies using wind as a resource. These maximum ca-
pacities can then be multiplied by the capacity factors
of the corresponding technologies to obtain a maximum
energy potential. Moreover, these resources are consid-
ered free in terms of cost and invested energy, as shown
13in Table 1. The cost of using them arises from the tech-
nologies to extract them from the environment. Table 2
shows approximated values for copandeop. They are
computed by dividing the cost or energy invested for
building and maintaining the technologies using them
by the total energy used from these resources - shown
in Table 4. These approximated values show that hydro,
solar and wind are among the cheapest resources, which
explains their extensive use.
The model has no maximum potential for exogenous
resources except for imported electricity. This poten-
tial is reached as, even though copis relatively high
for imported electricity, it does not require any conver-
sion technology to produce the ﬁnal electricity demand.
Some 65.6 TWh /y of renewable ammonia is used in the
system, 55.4 TWh /y of which is used for electricity pro-
duction and low-temperature heat generation, while the
remaining 10.2 TWh /y is used to satisfy non-energy de-
mand. Most renewable methanol is used to produce
high-value chemicals, even though 3.6 TWh /y of this
resource is used for fuelling boat freight. Finally, gas
(renewable or not) is used to produce heat and electric-
ity and fuel buses for public mobility.
4.1.2. Results at the E inoptimum
The optimal energy invested E?
inamounts to 61
TWh/y. Among the 375 TWh /y of primary energy in
the system, 164 TWh /y (44%) come from endogenous
resources and 211 TWh /y (56%) from exogenous re-
sources. A series of resources, including wet biomass,
wood, wind, hydro and imported electricity, are used
at or near their maximum potential. This is not the
case for waste and solar. In particular, for solar, eop
is about three times higher than any other endogenous
resource. This result can be explained by the higher en-
ergy needed to build 1 GW of PV combined with a low
average capacity factor compared to hydro river plants
or wind turbines. Some electricity is produced using
natural and renewable gas, while ammonia for non-
energy demand is produced from H2 using the Haber-
Bosch process. The remaining amount of gas is used
to produce heat. Finally, high-value chemicals are pro-
duced using renewable methanol, while 3.14 TWh /y of
bio-diesel is used for boat freight.
4.1.3. Comparison
Table 3 shows how the two objective functions vary
from one optimum to the other. The increase in cost
when optimising Einis limited to 7.67%. Invested en-
ergy at the Ctotoptimum is around 74 TWh /y, represent-
ing an increase of more than 20% from the Einoptimal
value.
52.8
(0.0%)53.3
(1.0%)54.1
(2.5%)55.4
(5.0%)56.8
(7.7%)
Ctot [B]
74.0
(21.4%)
71.6
(17.5%)
69.8
(14.4%)
66.1
(8.4%)
62.4
(2.3%)
61.0
(0.0%)Ein,tot [TWh/y]Figure 6: Approximated Pareto front showing trade-o s between Ctot
andEin. On the axis, the absolute values of CtotandEinare shown
and completed, in parenthesis, by the deviations from the optimal
objective values in each objective. For instance, for Ctot, the value
Ctot=C?
tot 1 is shown in parenthesis.
As shown in Table 4, the total amount of energy
needed in the system di ers only by 3%, but there are
some di erences between the two energy mixes. At
theCtotoptimum, the energy coming from endogenous
resources is 21 TWh /y higher, while energy from ex-
ogenous resources is 9 TWh /y smaller. At each opti-
mum, the share of endogenous resources in the energy
mix (48% and 44%, respectively) is close to the maxi-
mum of 42% primary energy coming from endogenous
resources computed by Limpens et al. [36]. These val-
ues conﬁrm the substantial dependence of Belgium on
imported resources to supply its energy consumption.
Looking at individual resources, solar and renewable
ammonia, used to produce electricity when optimising
Ctot, are replaced by fossil and renewable gas at the Ein
optimum. At this optimum, a percentage of the total
80 TWh /y of gas is used to produce high-temperature
heat instead of waste. The additional 35.4 TWh /y of
renewable hydrogen is used for three things: ammonia
production (which was directly imported when optimis-
ing cost), combined heat and electricity production, and
public mobility. Finally, while boat freight is fuelled us-
ing renewable methanol at the Ctotoptimum, bio-diesel
is the preferred option at the Einoptimum.
4.2. Pareto Front
Figure 6 shows the values of CtotandEinat the e -
cient solutions obtained using the method described in
Section 3.5 for values of equal to 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.5,
5.0 and 7.5%. The two additional points at the curve
extremes correspond to each objective’s optimum. The
140.0 0.25 0.5 1.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 7.67
Deviation from Ctot [%]0255075100125150175[TWh/y]Hydro
Solar
Waste
Wet biomass
Wind
Wood(a) Endogenous resources
0.00.25 0.5 1.0 2.5 5.0 7.57.67
Deviation from Ctot [%]0255075100125150175200[TWh/y]Ammonia (Re.)
Bio-diesel
Elec. import
Gas
Gas (Re.)
H2 (Re.)
Methanol (Re.) (b) Exogenous resources
Figure 7: Energy [TWh /y] coming from (a) endogenous and (b) exogenous resources at e cient solutions representing di erent trade-o s between
CtotandEin. The leftmost bars show these values at the Ctotoptimum, while the rightmost bar shows these values at the Einoptimum. The bars in
the middle are characterized by their deviation in [%] from the Ctotoptimum. Abbreviations: Renewable (Re.), Electricity (Elec.).
axes are labelled both in terms of the absolute values
of the objective functions but also - in parenthesis - in
terms of the deviations of these values from the optimal
objective value, i.e. Ctot=C?
tot 1 and Ein=E?
in 1.
This graph shows that Eindecreases quite rapidly,
saving 10 TWh /y out of 74 TWh /y (-14%) when in-
creasing Ctotby a relatively small amount of 2.5%. This
behaviour can also be interpreted as: choosing the op-
timal cost implies a considerable addition in invested
energy. Inversely, as already mentioned, Ctotis still rel-
atively low at the Einoptimum, i.e. it only increases by
7.5%.
Figure 7 shows the amount of endogenous and ex-
ogenous resources used at each e cient solution, start-
ing on the left with the cost optimum and moving to-
wards the invested energy optimum on the right. As
stated when comparing optimums, there is only a mi-
nor change for endogenous resources when going from
one optimum to the other. This change, the reduction
of solar and waste energy, appears when allowing a 5%
deviation in cost.
More change is happening for exogenous resources
(Figure 7b). As we increase cost and decrease the in-
vested energy, ammonia is gradually replaced by gas
(both natural and renewable). At a 2.5% cost increase,
the amount of renewable H2 starts increasing. Ammo-
nia is wholly removed from the system at 5%, while nat-
ural gas use reaches its maximum and starts to decline.
The same happens for renewable ammonia when reach-
ing a 7.5% cost increase, and some bio-diesel appears.
Overall, the change in the total amount of exogenous re-sources used is non-monotonic. Starting to decrease, it
then increases when reaching the 5% threshold, corre-
sponding to the drop in endogenous resources use.
4.3. Necessary conditions
Analysing e cient solutions gives a ﬁrst apprecia-
tion of the variety of system conﬁgurations, o ering a
trade-o between di erent objectives. However, using
the necessary conditions, we can go one step further
by providing features respected by all those solutions
and some slightly less e cient solutions. We use Al-
gorithm 2 to compute non-implied necessary conditions
stemming from di erent sets of conditions of the type
deﬁned by (27) in Section 3.7. The main parameter
deﬁning these conditions is RES , the set of resources
over which the constrained sum is computed. The out-
put of this algorithm is a value ˜ c, which deﬁnes a non-
implied necessary condition for this set of resources.
Practically, this value represents the minimum amount
of energy that needs to come from this set of resources
to ensure that CtotandEindo not deviate by more than
anfraction from at least one solution in the Pareto
front. We will ﬁrst compute this ˜ cvalue for conditions
deﬁned using the set of endogenous and the set of ex-
ogenous resources. We will then look at sets containing
one individual resource.
4.3.1. Endogenous vs exogenous resources
In this ﬁrst section, we compare the values ˜ cof non-
implied necessary conditions computed from the sets
RES endoandRES exo. These conditions are computed for
151 2 5 10 20 50Deviation in Ein (Ein) [%]
1
2
5
10
20
50Deviation in Ctot (Ctot) [%]
129 118 105 101 101 101
127 112 101 95 95 95
117 105 89 80 78 78
88 88 78 61 56 54
49 49 48 45 28 24
21 18 10 0 0 0
0255075100125150175200
[TWh/y](a) Endogenous resources
1 2 5 10 20 50Deviation in Ein (Ein) [%]
1
2
5
10
20
50Deviation in Ctot (Ctot) [%]
181 179 175 175 175 175
179 179 175 175 175 175
177 176 175 175 175 175
175 175 175 174 174 174
174 174 174 174 174 174
174 174 174 174 174 174
0255075100125150175200
[TWh/y] (b) Exogenous resources
1 2 5Deviation in Ein (Ein) [%]
1
2
5Deviation in Ctot (Ctot) [%]
29 17 0
27 15 0
7 6 0
0510152025303540
[TWh/y]
(c) Renewable methanol
1 2 5Deviation in Ein (Ein) [%]
1
2
5Deviation in Ctot (Ctot) [%]
11 0 0
6 0 0
0 0 0
0510152025303540
[TWh/y] (d) Gas
1 2 5Deviation in Ein (Ein) [%]
1
2
5Deviation in Ctot (Ctot) [%]
16 10 0
14 9 0
1 0 0
0510152025303540
[TWh/y] (e) Electricity import
Figure 8: Values ˜ cof necessary conditions (in [TWh /y]) for conditions of type RES. The set of resources RES corresponds to endogenous
resources RES endoand exogenous resources RES exofor graph (a) and (b), respectively, while for graphs (c), (d) and (e), this set resumes to a single
resource: renewable methanol, gas and imported electricity, respectively. The values correspond to the minimum amount of energy that needs to
come from these sets of resources to ensure a constrained deviation in CtotandEin. These deviations are deﬁned by the suboptimality coe cients
vector =(Ctot;Ein). For (a) and (b), all the combinations of the following percentages are taken as coe cients vectors: 1%, 2%, 5%, 10%, 20%,
and 50%. For (c), (d) and (e), they are limited to the combinations of 1%, 2%, and 5%.
dierent values of deviations . In this case, the tuples
=(Ctot;Ein) corresponds to all the possible combina-
tions of 1%, 2%, 5%, 10%, 20%, and 50%.
Comparing Figures 8a and 8b shows how the be-
haviours of the minima in endogenous and exogenous
resources are very di erent. For endogenous resources,
the minimum for deviations of 1% in both objectives is
already down to 130 TWh /y, representing a 42% and
26% decrease from the Ctotand Einoptima, respec-
tively. This amount is divided by more than two when
the deviation reaches 10% in both objectives, leaving
only 60 TWh /y left from endogenous resources. The ˜ c
value then reaches 0 TWh /y when allowing for an in-
crease of 50% in Ctot. These results show that energy
from endogenous resources can be reduced by a signif-
icant amount for reasonably low increases in cost and
invested energy.
For exogenous resources, there is little to no de-crease in the total energy needed. Starting from 202
and 211 TWh /y at the optimums in cost and energy in-
vested, the minimum amount of this type of energy is
still around 174 TWh /y (i.e. -20% and -15% respec-
tively) for deviations of 10%. Most of the decrease is
already present for deviations of 1% with an amount of
energy of 180 TWh /y, which is only 6 TWh /y less than
the energy used at one of the e cient solutions. The ˜ c
value of non-implied necessary conditions then plateaus
at 174 TWh /y. This result shows how, contrarily to en-
dogenous resources, exogenous resources are essential,
whatever the cost and energy invested. Indeed, to re-
spect a GWP totconstraint of 35 MtCO 2-eq/y, at least
174 TWh /y of energy needs to be imported.
4.3.2. Individual exogenous resources
We have shown that a certain amount of exogenous
resources is necessary due to limited endogenous re-
sources. However, the previous results do not show
16which speciﬁc exogenous resource is essential. This
analysis can be done by computing necessary condi-
tions for groups of conditions figwhere i2RES cor-
responds to an individual resource. We could perform
this analysis for all individual resources, but in Fig-
ure 7b, the amounts of renewable methanol, gas, and
imported electricity are quasi-constant across the Pareto
front. Therefore, it is interesting to focus on these re-
sources to see if they are essential or if we can eliminate
them by increasing the cost or the invested energy. In
this section, we compute non-implied necessary condi-
tions corresponding to the minimum energy from these
three resources.
The ˜cvalues of non-implied necessary conditions for
deviationsCtotandEinof 1%, 2% and 5% are shown in
Figures 8c, 8d, and 8e. We limit the analysis to devia-
tions of 5% as we can see that we are already equal (or
near to) 0 TWh /y for all three resources at this percent-
age. The amount of energy coming from the resources
at the CtotandEinoptimums are respectively 56.4 and
52.8 TWh /y for renewable methanol, 28.2 and 34.5 for
gas, and 27.6 (at both optima) for imported electricity.
The minimum energy from each resource is around 50%
lower than at the e cient solutions when allowing devi-
ations of 1% in each objective. For renewable methanol
and gas, the amount of necessary energy is more sensi-
tive to deviations in invested energy than to deviations
in cost. However, the conclusion is similar for the three
resources: for a relatively small increase in cost and in-
vested energy, they can be replaced by other resources.
5. Conclusion
This paper presents an extension of the concepts of
necessary conditions for epsilon-optimality introduced
by Dubois and Ernst [21] for mono-objective optimisa-
tion to multi-objective optimisation. This methodology
provides a new way of overcoming the limitation that
energy system models face when focusing on cost.
We ﬁrst highlight the limits of cost-based optimisa-
tion problems and a series of existing solutions: sce-
nario analysis, multi-objective optimisation and near-
optimal spaces analysis. To outline how this last
methodology can be combined with multi-objective op-
timisation, the concepts of epsilon-optimality and nec-
essary conditions are presented in a single-objective
setup and extended to multi-objective problems. Then,
these concepts are illustrated in a case study address-
ing the Belgian energy transition and answering the
question: “Which endogenous or exogenous resources
are necessary in Belgium to ensure a transition associ-
ated with su ciently good cost and EROI?”. The an-swer is obtained by computing non-implied necessary
conditions corresponding to the minimum amount of
energy coming from di erent sets of resources to en-
sure a constrained deviation in cost and energy invested.
The results show Belgium’s dependence on imported re-
sources but that no individual resource is essential.
This paper introduces a methodology and applies it
for the ﬁrst time to a concrete problem. There are,
therefore, limitations to overcome and work tracks to
explore. Regarding methodology, the main limitation is
that, as explained in Section 2.2, in a multi-objective op-
timisation problem, the epsilon-optimal space can only
be approximated. This approximation, in turn, removes
the guarantees of ﬁnding non-implied necessary condi-
tions. Increasing the number of e cient solutions used
is a straightforward way to improve the quality of the
results, but it comes at the expense of computational
time. More research could be done to evaluate how the
number and spread of e cient solutions a ect the re-
sults. Taking a more general viewpoint, the techniques
presented in this paper provide insights using ﬁxed fea-
sible spaces and objective functions. To reach their
full potential, they ought to be combined with methods
for ﬁghting parametric uncertainty, such as sensibility
analysis. We explored how the concept of necessary
conditions could be extended to a multi-objective set-
up. However, other methodologies were developed to
explore near-optimal spaces in a mono-objective setup
as presented, for instance, in [17, 18, 19, 49]. An in-
teresting research track would thus be to extend these
methodologies in a multi-objective setup.
To illustrate the methodology, a speciﬁc case study
with a limited scope was used. A natural extension is
thus to replicate this case study for other countries or
territories where limited resources and energy depen-
dence represent a challenge. Alternative questions re-
garding other resources or technologies could also be
addressed using this framework. Finally, going one step
further, a follow-up to this work would involve studying
near-optimal spaces for other optimisation problems in-
side or outside the energy systems ﬁeld.
Acknowledgements
Antoine Dubois is a Research Fellow of the F.R.S.-
FNRS, of which he acknowledges the ﬁnancial support.
Data Availability
Datasets related to this article can be found at https:
//zenodo.org/record/7665440#.Y_YyltLMIUE ,
hosted at Zenodo ([22]).
17References
[1] J. DeCarolis, H. Daly, P. Dodds, I. Keppo, F. Li, W. Mc-
Dowall, S. Pye, N. Strachan, E. Trutnevyte, W. Usher, M. Win-
ning, S. Yeh, M. Zeyringer, Formalizing best practice for
energy system optimization modelling, Applied Energy 194
(2017) 184–198. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0306261917302192 . doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.03.001 .
[2] S. Pfenninger, A. Hawkes, J. Keirstead, Energy sys-
tems modeling for twenty-ﬁrst century energy chal-
lenges, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 33
(2014) 74–86. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1364032114000872 .
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.02.003 .
[3] L. G. Fishbone, H. Abilock, Markal, a linear-programming
model for energy systems analysis: Technical description of the
bnl version, International journal of Energy research 5 (1981)
353–375. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/er.4440050406 .
[4] L. Schrattenholzer, The energy supply model message (1981).
URL: http://pure.iiasa.ac.at/1542 .
[5] X. Yue, S. Pye, J. DeCarolis, F. G. Li, F. Rogan, B. ´O. Gal-
lach´oir, A review of approaches to uncertainty assessment in en-
ergy system optimization models, Energy Strategy Reviews 21
(2018) 204–217. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2211467X18300543 . doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2018.06.003 .
[6] S. Fazlollahi, P. Mandel, G. Becker, F. Mar ´echal, Meth-
ods for multi-objective investment and operating op-
timization of complex energy systems, Energy 45
(2012) 12–22. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0360544212001600 .
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2012.02.046 ,
the 24th International Conference on E ciency, Cost, Opti-
mization, Simulation and Environmental Impact of Energy,
ECOS 2011.
[7] E. Trutnevyte, Does cost optimization approximate the real-
world energy transition?, Energy 106 (2016) 182–193.
[8] J. Fujino, G. Hibino, T. Ehara, Y . Matsuoka, T. Masui,
M. Kainuma, Back-casting analysis for 70% emission re-
duction in japan by 2050, Climate Policy 8 (2008) S108–
S124. URL: https://doi.org/10.3763/cpol.2007.0491 .
doi:10.3763/cpol.2007.0491 .
[9] N. Hughes, N. Strachan, Methodological review of uk
and international low carbon scenarios, Energy Policy 38
(2010) 6056–6065. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0301421510004325 .
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.05.061 ,
the socio-economic transition towards a hydrogen economy -
ﬁndings from European research, with regular papers.
[10] H. R. Becerra-L ´opez, P. Golding, Multi-objective op-
timization for capacity expansion of regional power-
generation systems: Case study of far west texas, En-
ergy Conversion and Management 49 (2008) 1433–
1445. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0196890408000058 . doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2007.12.021 .
[11] J. D. Fonseca, J.-M. Commenge, M. Camargo, L. Falk,
I. D. Gil, Multi-criteria optimization for the de-
sign and operation of distributed energy systems
considering sustainability dimensions, Energy 214
(2021) 118989. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S036054422032096X .
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.118989 .
[12] J. D. Fonseca, J.-M. Commenge, M. Camargo, L. Falk,I. D. Gil, Sustainability analysis for the design of dis-
tributed energy systems: A multi-objective optimiza-
tion approach, Applied Energy 290 (2021) 116746.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0306261921002580 . doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.116746 .
[13] R. Jing, X. Zhu, Z. Zhu, W. Wang, C. Meng, N. Shah, N. Li,
Y . Zhao, A multi-objective optimization and multi-criteria
evaluation integrated framework for distributed energy system
optimal planning, Energy Conversion and Management 166
(2018) 445–462. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0196890418304023 . doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2018.04.054 .
[14] J. F. DeCarolis, Using modeling to generate alternatives (mga)
to expand our thinking on energy futures, Energy Economics 33
(2011) 145–152. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0140988310000721 . doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2010.05.002 .
[15] E. D. Brill, S.-Y . Chang, L. D. Hopkins, Modeling to gener-
ate alternatives: The hsj approach and an illustration using a
problem in land use planning, Management Science 28 (1982)
221–235. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2630877 .
[16] J. DeCarolis, S. Babaee, B. Li, S. Kanungo, Mod-
elling to generate alternatives with an energy system opti-
mization model, Environmental Modelling & Software 79
(2016) 300–310. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1364815215301080 . doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2015.11.019 .
[17] J. Price, I. Keppo, Modelling to generate alternatives: A tech-
nique to explore uncertainty in energy-environment-economy
models, Applied Energy 195 (2017) 356–369. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.03.065 .
[18] F. G. Li, E. Trutnevyte, Investment appraisal of cost-
optimal and near-optimal pathways for the uk electric-
ity sector transition to 2050, Applied Energy 189
(2017) 89–109. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0306261916318104 . doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.12.047 .
[19] T. T. Pedersen, M. Victoria, M. G. Rasmussen, G. B. Andresen,
Modeling all alternative solutions for highly renewable energy
systems, Energy (2021) 121294.
[20] F. Neumann, T. Brown, The near-optimal feasible space of a
renewable power system model, Electric Power Systems Re-
search 190 (2021) 106690. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.epsr.2020.106690 .
[21] A. Dubois, D. Ernst, Computing necessary condi-
tions for near-optimality in capacity expansion plan-
ning problems, Electric Power Systems Research 211
(2022) 108343. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0378779622005077 .
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2022.108343 .
[22] A. Dubois, J. Dumas, G. Limpens, P. Thiran, Multi-objective
near-optimal necessary conditions for multi-sectoral planning -
code (2023). doi: 10.5281/zenodo.7665440 .
[23] A. Dubois, J. Dumas, G. Limpens, P. Thiran, Multi-objective
near-optimal necessary conditions for multi-sectoral planning -
dataset, 2023. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.7665340 .
[24] M. Ehrgott, Multicriteria optimization, volume 491, Springer
Science & Business Media, 2005.
[25] A. Alarcon-Rodriguez, G. Ault, S. Galloway, Multi-objective
planning of distributed energy resources: A review of the
state-of-the-art, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
14 (2010) 1353–1366. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1364032110000146 .
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2010.01.006 .
18[26] European Green Deal, 2021. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/
clima/eu-action/european-green-deal_en , [accessed
08-June-2022].
[27] International Energy Agency, IEA - Energy Statis-
tics Data Browser, 2022. URL: https://www.
iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-tools/
energy-statistics-data-browser , [accessed 17-June-
2022].
[28] E. Commission, D.-G. for Climate Action, D.-G. for Energy,
D.-G. for Mobility, Transport, M. Zampara, M. Obersteiner,
S. Evangelopoulou, A. De Vita, W. Winiwarter, H. Witzke,
S. Tsani, M. Kesting, L. Paroussos, L. H ¨oglund-Isaksson, D. Pa-
padopoulos, P. Capros, M. Kannavou, P. Siskos, N. Tasios,
N. Kouvaritakis, P. Karkatsoulis, P. Fragkos, A. Gomez-
Sanabria, A. Petropoulos, P. Havl ´ık, S. Frank, P. Purohit, K. Fra-
giadakis, N. Forsell, M. Gusti, C. Nakos, EU reference scenario
2016 : energy, transport and GHG emissions : trends to 2050,
Publications O ce, 2016. doi: doi/10.2833/001137 .
[29] E. Dupont, M. Germain, H. Jeanmart, Estimate of the soci-
etal energy return on investment (eroi), Biophysical Economics
and Sustainability 6 (2021) 1–14. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s41247-021-00084-9 .
[30] P. E. Brockway, A. Owen, L. I. Brand-Correa, L. Hardt, Estima-
tion of global ﬁnal-stage energy-return-on-investment for fossil
fuels with comparison to renewable energy sources, Nature En-
ergy 4 (2019) 612–621.
[31] J. Dumas, A. Dubois, P. Thiran, P. Jacques, F. Contino,
B. Corn ´elusse, G. Limpens, The energy return on investment
of whole-energy systems: Application to belgium, Biophysical
Economics and Sustainability 7 (2022) 12.
[32] European Commission - Eurostat, Glossary: Final Energy Con-
sumption, 2022. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
statistics-explained/index.php?title=Glossary:
Final_energy_consumption , [accessed 17-June-2022].
[33] Z. Khattabi, Press release - 8 Octobre 2021, 2021. URL: https:
//khattabi.belgium.be/ , [accessed 26-Jul-2022].
[34] Eurostat - Population density, 2022. URL: https:
//ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/
tps00003/default/table , [accessed 17-June-2022].
[35] Belgian O shore Platform, 2022. URL: https:
//www.belgianoffshoreplatform.be/en/ , [accessed
26-Jul-2022].
[36] G. Limpens, H. Jeanmart, F. Mar ´echal, Belgian en-
ergy transition: What are the options?, Energies 13
(2020). URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/13/1/
261. doi: 10.3390/en13010261 .
[37] G. Limpens, S. Moret, H. Jeanmart, F. Mar ´echal, En-
ergyscope td: A novel open-source model for re-
gional energy systems, Applied Energy 255 (2019)
113729. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0306261919314163 . doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113729 .
[38] G. Limpens, D. Coppitters, X. Rixhon, F. Contino, H. Jeanmart,
The impact of uncertainties on the belgian energy system: Ap-
plication of the polynomial chaos expansion to the energyscope
model, ECOS 2020 - Proceedings of the 33rd International Con-
ference on E ciency, Cost, Optimization, Simulation and En-
vironmental Impact of Energy Systems (2020) 724–733. URL:
http://hdl.handle.net/2078.1/231513 .
[39] X. Rixhon, G. Limpens, D. Coppitters, H. Jeanmart, F. Con-
tino, The role of electrofuels under uncertainties for
the belgian energy transition, Energies 14 (2021). URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/14/13/4027 . doi: 10.
3390/en14134027 .
[40] M. Colla, J. Blondeau, H. Jeanmart, Optimal useof lignocellulosic biomass for the energy transition, in-
cluding the non-energy demand: The case of the bel-
gian energy system, Frontiers in Energy Research 10
(2022). URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/
10.3389/fenrg.2022.802327 . doi: 10.3389/fenrg.2022.
802327 .
[41] G. Limpens, H. Jeanmart, System lcoe: Applying a whole-
energy system model to estimate the integration costs of photo-
voltaic, in: Proceedings of the ECOS2021—The 34th Interna-
tional Conference, Taormina, Italy, June, 2021, pp. 28–2. URL:
http://hdl.handle.net/2078.1/252944 .
[42] X. Li, T. Damartzis, Z. Stadler, S. Moret, B. Meier,
M. Friedl, F. Mar ´echal, Decarbonization in complex en-
ergy systems: A study on the feasibility of carbon neutral-
ity for switzerland in 2050, Frontiers in Energy Research
8 (2020). URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/
10.3389/fenrg.2020.549615 . doi: 10.3389/fenrg.2020.
549615 .
[43] E. Guevara, F. Babonneau, T. H. de Mello, S. Moret,
A machine learning and distributionally robust opti-
mization framework for strategic energy planning un-
der uncertainty, Applied Energy 271 (2020) 115005.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0306261920305171 . doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115005 .
[44] M. Borasio, S. Moret, Deep decarbonisation of re-
gional energy systems: A novel modelling approach
and its application to the italian energy transition,
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 153
(2022) 111730. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1364032121010030 .
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111730 .
[45] EnergyScope TD Documentation, 2022. URL: https:
//energyscope-td.readthedocs.io/en/master/ , [ac-
cessed 17-June-2022].
[46] B. Muyldermans, G. N `eve, Multi-criteria optimisation of an
energy system and application to the Belgian case, Master’s
thesis, UCL - Ecole polytechnique de Louvain, 2021. URL:
http://hdl.handle.net/2078.1/thesis:33139 .
[47] G. Wernet, C. Bauer, B. Steubing, J. Reinhard, E. Moreno-
Ruiz, B. Weidema, The ecoinvent database version 3 (part i):
overview and methodology, The International Journal of Life
Cycle Assessment 21 (2016) 1218–1230. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11367-016-1087-8 .
[48] A. Orban, Energy Return on Investment of Electrofuels, Mas-
ter’s thesis, ULi `ege, 2022.
[49] L. Nacken, F. Krebs, T. Fischer, C. Ho mann, Integrated renew-
able energy systems for Germany–A model-based exploration of
the decision space, in: 2019 16th International Conference on
the European Energy Market (EEM), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–8.
[50] G. Limpens, Generating energy transition pathways: appli-
cation to Belgium, Ph.D. thesis, UCL-Universit ´e Catholique
de Louvain, 2021. URL: http://hdl.handle.net/2078.1/
249196 .
19Appendix A. Example
The functions depicted in Figures 2, 4, and 5 are
f1(x)=10(2x 0:75)2+2 and
f2(x)=10(x 0:75)2+1:5:
The coordinates of their minimums are ( x
1;f1(x
1))=
(0:375;2) and ( x
2;f2(x
2))=(0:75;1:5), respectively.
One-dimensional epsilon-optimal space
In Figure 2, the -optimal spaceXof a one-
dimensional optimisation problem was obtained by ﬁrst
computing
(1+1)f1(x
1)=(1+0:25)2=2:5
where1=0:25. Then, the limits of Xcan be obtained
by computing the inverse image of this value, i.e. the
setf0:263;0:487g, which leads toX=[0:263;0:487].
Two-dimensional epsilon-optimal space
In Figure 4a and 4b, the Pareto front PXis repre-
sented in green. This set of points respects deﬁnition 12
of a Pareto front. Indeed, each point xin the interval
[x?
1;x?
2] is such that @ˆx2X where f1( ˆx)<f1(x) and
f2( ˆx)<f2(x).
In Figure 4b, a subset of the -optimal spaceXof
a two-dimensional optimisation problem is computed
for a suboptimality coe cients vector =(1;2)=
(0:25;0:6). This subset is computed from the point
ˆx=0:6, which is part of PX. To obtain the subset of
X, the images of ˆ x,f1( ˆx)=4:025 and f2( ˆx)=1:725,
are computed. Multiplying these values by the corre-
sponding suboptimality coe cients gives
(1+1)f1( ˆx)=(1+0:25)4:025=5:03 and
(1+2)f2( ˆx)=(1+0:6)1:725=2:76:
The inverse image of these values are f0:0997;0:65g
forf1andf0:395;1:105gforf2. The set of points re-
specting8k fk(x)(1+k)fk( ˆx) are then contained in
[0:395;0:65].
To obtain the full -optimal space depicted in Fig. 4a,
one should repeat this process with all points in PX.
However, in this simple example, one can easily com-
pute the limits of the complete space by using the two
optimums, which are the extreme points of the Pareto
front. These limits are obtained by taking the inverse
images of
(1+1)f1(x
1)=(1+0:25)2=2:5 and
(1+2)f2(x
2)=(1+0:6)1:5=2:4;which givesf0:263;0:487gandf0:45;1:05g. The lower
and upper bound of Xare then respectively given by
the lower and upper bound of those two sets, i.e. X=
[0:263;1:05].
Approximate Pareto fronts and epsilon-optimal spaces
Figures 5a, 5b, and 5c show approximate -optimal
spaces for three di erent set of e cient points. These
sets are
1. Fig. 5a: [(2.0, 2.91), (3.41, 1.85), (7.62, 1.5)];
2. Fig. 5b: [(2.9, 2.01), (2.99, 1.97), (3.09, 1.94),
(3.19, 1.91), (3.3, 1.88), (3.41, 1.85), (3.52, 1.82),
(3.64, 1.8), (3.77, 1.77), (3.9, 1.75), (4.03, 1.72)];
3. Fig. 5c: [(2.0, 2.91), (2.06, 2.64), (2.23, 2.40),
(2.51, 2.19), (2.9, 2.01), (3.41, 1.85), (4.03, 1.72),
(4.76, 1.63), (5.61, 1.56), (6.57, 1.51), (7.62, 1.5)].
Appendix B. Types of end-use demand in
EnergyScope-TD
Four main types of EUD are considered in the
model: electricity, heat, transport, and non-energy de-
mand. Electricity is further divided between lighting
and other electricity uses. Heat is subdivided into high-
temperature heat for industry, low temperature for space
heating, and low temperature for hot water. Mobility is
composed of public and private passenger mobility and
freight demands. Finally, the non-energy demand in-
cludes demand for ammonia, methanol, and high-value
chemicals (HVCs). Table B.5 lists the values for each
EUD type in 2035 based on Limpens [50].
EUD type Unit EUD
Electricity (other) TWhe 62.1
Lighting TWhe 30.0
Heat high T. TWh 50.4
Heat low T. (SH) TWh 118
Heat low T. (HW) TWh 29.2
Passenger mobility Mpass.-km 194
Freight Mt-km 98.0
Non-energy TWh 53.1
Table B.5: 2035 Belgian end-use demand (EUD) value by type based
on Limpens [50]. Abbreviations: temperature (T.), space heating (SP),
hot water (HW), passenger (pass.).
20