High threshold codes for neutral atom qubits with biased erasure errors
Kaavya Sahay,1, 2,∗Junlan Jin,3,∗Jahan Claes,1, 2Jeff D. Thompson,3and Shruti Puri1, 2
1Yale University, Department of Applied Physics, New Haven, CT 06520, USA
2Yale Quantum Institute, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA
3Princeton University, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton, NJ, 08544, USA
(Dated: October 19, 2023)
The requirements for fault-tolerant quantum error correction can be simplified by leveraging
structure in the noise of the underlying hardware. In this work, we identify a new type of structured
noise motivated by neutral atom qubits, biased erasure errors, which arises when qubit errors are
dominated by detectable leakage from only one of the computational states of the qubit. We study
the performance of this model using gate-level simulations of the XZZX surface code. Using the
predicted erasure fraction and bias of metastable171Yb qubits, we find a threshold of 8.2% for two-
qubit gate errors, which is 1.9 times higher than the threshold for unbiased erasures, and 7.5 times
higher than the threshold for depolarizing errors. Surprisingly, the improved threshold is achieved
without bias-preserving controlled-not gates, and instead results from the lower noise entropy in
this model. We also introduce an XZZX cluster state construction for measurement-based error
correction, hybrid-fusion, that is optimized for this noise model. By combining fusion operations
and deterministic entangling gates, this construction preserves the intrinsic symmetry of the XZZX
code, leading to a higher threshold of 10.3% and enabling the use of rectangular codes with fewer
qubits. We discuss a potential physical implementation using a single plane of atoms and moveable
tweezers.
Quantum error correction (QEC) is essential to pro-
tect fragile quantum states during computation [1–3].
To achieve scalable quantum computation, the rate at
which errors are introduced must be below a threshold
error rate that depends on the noise model and error
correction approach [4–7]. Recently, significant work
has focused on identifying or engineering the structure
of noise in qubits, which can lead to higher thresholds
and reduced overhead if paired with appropriate gate
operations and quantum error correction (QEC) archi-
tectures. For example, biased Pauli noise models can be
engineered in superconducting cat qubits [8–10] and cer-
tain neutral atom qubits [11]. Given the availability of
bias-preserving gates [12], this can lead to significantly
improved thresholds and lower overhead for the XZZX
surface code, which has special symmetries facilitating
decoding this type of noise [13, 14]. Another example is
qubits where errors can be converted with high probabil-
ity into erasure errors. This model has been proposed for
appropriately engineered qubit encodings and gates in
neutral atoms [15], trapped ions [16] and superconduct-
ing qubits [17, 18], and leads to significantly increased
thresholds [15–17, 19–21]
In this work, we identify a new structured error, bi-
ased erasure errors , that arises when noise is dominated
by erasures from only one computational state of the
qubit. This model is physically motivated by metastable
171Yb qubits, where erasures result from leakage out of
the|1⟩computational state into levels whose population
can be continuously monitored using cycling transitions
that do not affect the qubit levels [15, 22]. We refer to
this as a ( Z-)biased erasure model, as detecting transi-
tions outside the computational states reveals that the
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.qubit was previously in |1⟩, and can be represented as a
Zerror with 50% probability. The biased erasure model
has more structure than the conventional erasure model,
where observing an erasure yields no information about
the prior state of the qubit [15–17, 19–21, 23]. Indeed,
the error rate at which the quantum capacity of such
a channel becomes positive is twice that of the conven-
tional erasure channel, indicating that error correction
threshold for the biased-erasure channel can be much
higher than that of the conventional erasure channel [24].
In this work, we study the performance of error cor-
rection against biased erasures at the circuit level in
several contexts. We first consider the XZZX surface
code with conventional, circuit-based syndrome extrac-
tion. We find a threshold of 8.2% when biased erasures
comprise Re= 0.98 of the two-qubit gate errors, as pre-
dicted for171Yb under optimal conditions [15]. This is
nearly double the threshold of 4 .3% for a conventional
erasure model, and approximately 8 times the thresh-
old in a comparable depolarizing error model. The high
threshold, compared to depolarizing noise, highlights
the benefit of engineering qubits with this favorable er-
ror model. Remarkably, this high threshold is obtained
using only the native gate set of neutral atom qubits:
single-qubit gates and controlled-Z (CZ) gates, without
bias-preserving controlled-not (CX) gates. We attribute
the higher threshold to a lower noise entropy when era-
sures are biased compared to when they are not.
We also introduce a measurement-based QEC archi-
tecture, hybrid-fusion , that is specifically tailored for
neutral atom qubits with biased erasure noise. This
approach combines fusion operations with determinis-
tic entangling gates to construct an XZZX cluster state
while preserving the symmetry of the XZZX code un-
der biased noise, without requiring bias-preserving CX
gates. In fusion-based (FB) error correction, an errorarXiv:2302.03063v2  [quant-ph]  17 Oct 20232
Preserves 2D Avoids atom
Model Re= 0 Re= 0.98 Re= 1 symmetry? replacement?
circuit, unbiased erasures 1 .1% 4 .3% 5 .0% N N
circuit, biased erasures, native gates 1 .1% 8 .2% 10 .3% N N
circuit, biased erasures, BCX 1 .1% 9 .0% 12 .8% Y N
hybrid-fusion, native gates 1 .0% 10 .3% 14 .7%†Y Y
TABLE I. Summary of thresholds derived in this work for the XZZX surface code under various error models and QEC
architectures. Thresholds are obtained using an MWPM decoder, and are reported for several values of Re. The first three
rows give thresholds using circuit-based syndrome extraction (Sec. II), for unbiased erasures [15], and using the biased erasure
model of Section I. The latter error model is studied with and without bias-preserving CX gates, where the former case
corresponds to the native gates (single-qubit gates and CZ) of the neutral atom platform. The last line is the hybrid-fusion
error correction scheme introduced in Section III, with native gates. The final two columns indicate additional properties
discussed in detail in Section IV: whether the dominant errors produce pairs of syndromes lying in 2D planes of the decoding
graph (reducing qubit overhead in the limit of large bias), and whether mid-circuit atom replacement is necessary to recover
from erasure errors.†This numerically simulated threshold increases to 17 .7% when using an erasure decoder at large system
sizes (see text).
correcting code is built by fusing together few-body en-
tangled resource states using measurements of two-qubit
Pauli operators X⊗XandZ⊗Z. This method has been
studied in linear optical quantum computing, where non-
deterministic heralded fusions are the native entangling
operation [25–29], and has the benefit of preserving the
symmetry of the XZZX code when the fusion errors are
biased [29]. We present a bias-preserving fusion circuit
for qubits with biased erasures, and combine this op-
eration with deterministic entangling gates to develop
a measurement-based error correction architecture with
a high threshold and reduced overhead. With this ap-
proach, we find an even higher threshold of 10 .3% for
Re= 0.98. We also discuss other potential advantages
of this approach for neutral atoms including robustness
against atom loss and relaxed requirements for erasure
detection and atom replacement.
This noise model is physically motivated by
metastable171Yb qubits [15]. Recent experimental work
has demonstrated high-fidelity gates and validated the
basic concept of erasure conversion in this platform, by
performing mid-circuit detection of erasure errors with a
strong bias from one of the two qubit levels [30]. Erasure-
dominated error models may also be engineered in other
qubits with prevalent erasure errors such as metastable
trapped-ion qubits [16], superconducting qubits encoded
in the |g⟩,|f⟩levels of transmons [17], or dual-rail su-
perconducting qubits [18] (see Ref. [31, 32] for recent
experimental demonstrations). The high thresholds and
reduced requirements for bias-preserving gate operations
may encourage the development of new qubits or encod-
ings. Finally, this work may stimulate further devel-
opment of fusion-based QEC architectures for neutral
atoms.
The main results of our work are summarized in Ta-
ble I. We introduce the biased erasure error model in sec-
tion I, and study its behavior using circuit-based error
correction in section II. In section III, we introduce the
hybrid-fusion architecture and study its performance.We discuss further opportunities for optimization in sec-
tion IV, and conclude in section V.
I. BIASED ERASURE ERRORS IN NEUTRAL
ATOMS
To motivate the biased erasure model, we consider
how it arises naturally in neutral atom qubits. In this
platform, the dominant source of errors are two-qubit
gates implemented using the Rydberg blockade [33–36]
(single-qubit and idling errors are comparatively much
lower [30]). The only fundamental effect limiting the
fidelity of two-qubit gates is the finite lifetime of the
Rydberg state that is populated transiently during the
gate [37]. In the particular case of171Yb [35, 38], en-
coding the qubit in the nuclear spin sublevels of the
metastable3P0level has the property that the majority
of the decay events populate disjoint subspaces whose
occupation can be detected efficiently, which converts
these errors into erasure errors [15, 22]. Recent addi-
tional work has derived gate protocols to convert other
errors such as quasi-static laser noise and Doppler shifts
into erasure errors through a similar mechanism [39, 40].
In this work, we consider an additional property of the
physical error model of metastable171Yb qubits, which
is that excitation to the Rydberg state |r⟩only occurs
from the qubit state |1⟩, and never from |0⟩[Fig. 1(a)]
[11]. To illustrate the behavior of this model, consider a
hypothetical single qubit operation involving excitation
from|1⟩to|r⟩, where the only possible error is a decay
from|r⟩to a detectable, disjoint state |e⟩. In the absence
of an error, the qubit is coherently de-excited back to |1⟩
at the end of the gate. This results in a quantum channel
with Kraus operators:
K0=|0⟩⟨0|+p
1−2pe|1⟩⟨1|+|e⟩⟨e| (1)
Ke=p
2pe|e⟩⟨1| (2)3
H H
H H
ZI
(a) (b) (c)
H H
H H
Z
X
 Z
Figure 1. (a) Biased erasures arise when erasures (leakage to a detectable state |e⟩) occur from only one qubit state, |1⟩,
such that recovery by replacement or reinitialization in the same state results in at most a Zerror. (b) Threshold error rates
as a function of Re, under different error models: unbiased erasures (blue), biased erasures with native gates (orange) and
biased erasures with bias-preserving CX (BCX) gates (green). The stars denote Re= 0.98. (c) Illustrative circuit measuring
the two-qubit stabilizer ZXusing native gates. When an erasure is detected during a two-qubit gate (purple star, depicting
fluorescence detection of an atom in |e⟩), the affected atom is replaced in |1⟩and the resulting state is described by an error
drawn from {I, Z}⊗2, but the manner in which this error propagates depends on its space-time location in the circuit. If the
error occurs during the Zmeasurement (top), it propagates to the end of the circuit as a Z error. If the error occurs during
theXmeasurement (bottom), it propagates to the end of the circuit as an Xerror. Knowledge of the error location makes
this information available to the decoder, lowering the entropy of the noise.
The probability of an error, averaged over both compu-
tational states, is pe.
Upon detection of an atom in |e⟩, the qubit is re-
initialized into |1⟩, or replaced by a new qubit in |1⟩,
described by the recovery operator ˆR=|1⟩⟨e|. The
combined channel can be expressed by the Kraus oper-
ators:
W0=|0⟩⟨0|+p
1−2pe|1⟩⟨1| (3)
We=ˆRKe=p
2pe|1⟩⟨1| (4)
We obtain an effective Pauli channel using the identity
|1⟩⟨1|= (I−Z)/2 and the Pauli twirl approximation
(PTA), which may be achieved in practice by insert-
ing random single-qubit Pauli gates after atom replace-
ment [41–43]. The portion of the channel describing the
erasure error is:
WeρW†
e=pe
2(IρI+ZρZ) (5)
Since the resulting state has at most a Zerror, we refer
to this as a biased erasure error model.
To model a two-qubit CZ gate, we incorporate two ad-
ditional considerations. First, the leakage of one atom
can result in a dephasing error on the other atom as
well [44]. Therefore, a two-qubit gate with an average
erasure probability peis modeled by drawing an opera-
tor from the set {I, Z}⊗2with uniform probability pe/4.
Second, there is also a finite rate of non-erasure errors
such as decays from |r⟩back to the qubit subspace. We
model these as depolarizing errors with total rate ppby
drawing an operator from the set {I, X, Y, Z }⊗2\{I⊗I}
with uniform probability pp/15. The relative proba-
bility of these errors is given by the branching ratioR=pe/(pe+pp), which depends on the underlying
physics of the qubit. For metastable171Yb, we have
predicted R= 0.98 [15].
In this work, we only consider errors during two-qubit
gates, which are by far the dominant errors for neu-
tral atoms. A discussion of the role of measurement,
single-qubit gate and idling errors on the unbiased era-
sure model can be found in Ref. [15].
Lastly, we note that the no-jump error also contributes
aZ-biased Pauli error with probability Ap2
e, because of
the asymmetry in the erasure probability from the two
qubit states [11, 15]. Continuing the previous example
of a single-qubit gate, the evolution under the Kraus
operator from Eq. (3) is:
W0ρW†
0≈
1−pe−p2
e
4
IρI+p2
e
4ZρZ (6)
Here, we have applied the PTA and taken the limit pe≪
1.
We find a Pauli error rate of Ap2
ewith A= 1/4 in
Eq. (6), but for the two-qubit gate we estimate A≈
1/12 [44]. We incorporate this by increasing the Pauli
error probability to p′
p=pp+Ap2
e. In the resulting
model, erasures constitute a fraction Reof all errors,
with Regiven by:
Re=pe
p′p+pe=R
1 +AR2(pp+pe)(7)
To present a more generalizable model of biased era-
sures, we consider the error model to be defined by the
independent parameters Reandp=p′
p+pe. Far be-
low the threshold ( p≪1), the behavior of171Yb can4
be estimated by setting Re=R= 0.98. However, the
performance near the threshold will be slightly different,
since Re< R. We note that Re= 1 is not physically
attainable for any value of R, but may be achievable in
other physical models of biased erasure if both compu-
tational states leak with equal rates, but to disjoint final
states such that the Zinformation is preserved.
II. CIRCUIT-BASED QEC WITH BIASED
ERASURES
We quantify the advantage of the biased erasure model
using circuit-level simulations of the XZZX code. The
simulations use square codes with distance dup to 13,
implemented as drounds of noisy stabilizer measure-
ments followed by a final, noiseless stabilizer measure-
ment [44]. The error syndromes are decoded using a
minimum-weight perfect matching (MWPM) decoder,
adjusting edge weights in each shot to incorporate the
location of the erasure errors. The stabilizer simula-
tions and construction of the decoding graph are im-
plemented with Stim [45], while the decoding is imple-
mented with PyMatching [46]. Except where noted, the
simulations do not consider bias-preserving controlled-
not (CX) gates. Therefore, CX gates are implemented
using controlled-Z (CZ) gates, conjugated by Hadamard
(H) gates, which convert Zerrors on the target qubit
intoXerrors.
In Fig. 1(b), we show the threshold error rate pthas
a function of Re. For comparison, we show three cases:
unbiased erasures, biased erasures using only the native
gates of the Rydberg platform, and biased erasures in-
corporating hypothetical bias-preserving CX gates.
For large values of Re, biased erasures result in signifi-
cantly higher thresholds than unbiased erasures, even in
the absence of bias preserving gates. For example, at the
value Re= 0.98 projected for metastable171Yb qubits,
the threshold is 8 .2%, nearly twice the value with unbi-
ased erasures ( pth= 4.3%) and nearly eight times the
threshold with depolarizing noise ( Re= 0,pth= 1.1%).
The latter two thresholds are slightly higher than those
reported in Ref. [15], because we use the slightly more
accurate MWPM decoder, instead of a weighted Union
Find decoder.
Previous works using the XZZX surface code to cor-
rect biased Pauli noise leverage its particular symmetry
which guarantees that the pairs of error syndromes cre-
ated by Zerrors on the data and ancilla qubits lie in dis-
connected 2D planes [13, 14]. This advantage vanishes
in the absence of bias-preserving gates (see, for instance,
Ref. [8]). The fact that we observe high thresholds with
only the native gates, and relatively little additional im-
provement from incorporating bias-preserving CX gates
forRe<1 [Fig. 1(b)], suggests that other mechanisms
are responsible. This is reinforced by a separate calcu-
lation showing that the CSS and XZZX surface codes
give almost the same threshold for biased erasures with
native gates at Re= 0.98.The high threshold with native gates arises from two
mechanisms. First, the biased erasure model has a lower
error probability than the unbiased erasure model: af-
ter returning to the qubit space, the probability of an
error in the biased erasure model is 3 /4, compared to
15/16 for the unbiased model. Second, even though Z
errors can be converted into Xerrors in the absence
of bias-preserving gates, detecting erasures after every
gate allows this evolution to be tracked, lowering the
entropy of noise [Fig. 1(c)] and reducing the impact of
bias-preserving gates on the threshold.
Previous works on biased Pauli errors have also pro-
posed using a thin rectangular XZZX code with a smaller
distance for the low-rate error [8, 13], which provides an
additional reduction in qubit overhead. This is not possi-
ble in the biased erasure model, without bias-preserving
CX gates, because the dominant Zerrors get converted
toXerrors. However, we will see in the next section
that this can be overcome using an alternate approach
based on fusions.
For estimating the performance of biased erasure mod-
els in other qubit platforms that may have varying de-
grees of bias, and for including potential bias-degrading
effects in171Yb, we have parameterized a finite bias ver-
sion and computed thresholds as a function of bias in the
supplementary information [44]. We find that the rate of
erasures from the low-probability state (here, |0⟩) must
be∼100 times less than the high-probability state to
take full advantage of the bias (similar to case of bi-
ased Pauli noise [8, 13]). While these simulations do
not include errors in single-qubit gates, measurements,
or idling qubits, we believe that these will not have a
significant effect because these operations are compara-
tively higher fidelity for neutral atom qubits [30].
III. HYBRID-FUSION QEC
Measurement-based error correction (MBEC) is an al-
ternative approach to error correction based on perform-
ing local measurements on a many-body 3D entangled
state called a fault-tolerant cluster state [47–51]. In
the standard approach to realize a fault-tolerant clus-
ter state, called foliation , one dimension of the clus-
ter state effectively simulates time along which a planar
encoded state is propagated via teleportation [52–55].
Indeed, the commonly used Raussendorf-Harrington-
Goyal (RHG) or Raussendorf-Bravyi-Harrington cluster
state [52, 53, 56] teleports the standard CSS surface
code. Similarly, the recently introduced XZZX cluster
state teleports the XZZX surface code [57]. Given pla-
nar arrays with a finite number of qubits, a computation
of length scaling exponentially with the size of the ar-
ray can be performed by using as few as two of these
arrays at a time [53], and teleporting the logical state
back and forth between them. After a slice is measured,
it is re-initialized into a cluster state.
Fusion-based error correction (FBEC) is a particular
approach for MBEC in which the cluster state is grown5
Ancilla
Qubit 
Qubit 
Figure 2. (a) A unit cell of the XZZX cluster state, with two examples of stabilizers centered on X( )- and Z(⃝)- type
qubits as described in the main text. (b) The cell stabilizer obtained by multiplying the stabilizers centered at all faces of a
unit cell. (c) The 8-ring resource states used to build the cluster state. (d) Circuit to generate the resource state with171Yb
atoms. The state is postselected on the absence of detected erasure errors. We have drawn only a single erasure detection step
at the end of the circuit to reflect that the precise space-time location of the errors is not needed. In practice, a fluorescence
detection is performed after every gate. (e) Circuit for adaptive, bias-preserving fusion measurements with171Yb atoms.
Erasure detection (via fluorescence, purple lines) is performed following each gate. If any erasures occur, the measurement
basis of the fusion qubits is changed from XtoZ, ensuring that the value of Z⊗Zis preserved at the expense of X⊗X.
(f-h) Extended protocol for conceptual understanding of how the cluster state error correction is realized. For reference, in
(h) we highlight in green a planar array of qubits encoded in XZZX surface code that is being propagated in time (left to
right), generating the XZZX cluster state. Note that the entire cluster state shown does not need to be built at once, and can
be realized using a small number of such planar arrays of qubits which are reused over time (see [44]).
by fusing together few-body entangled resource states.
Fusions are entangling operations carried out by per-
forming destructive two-qubit measurements of X⊗X
andZ⊗Z. FBEC has been widely studied for linear op-
tical quantum computing because fusions are the native
entangling operations in that platform [25–29]. Recently,
a fusion-based construction of the XZZX code was pro-
posed that can maintain the symmetry of that code un-
der biased noise if the fusion errors are biased [29].
In this section, we introduce a hybrid-fusion construc-
tion of the XZZX cluster state with biased erasures that
combines fusion operations and deterministic entangling
gates, which is optimized for the error model and capa-bilities of metastable171Yb qubits. After reviewing the
XZZX cluster state, we introduce an 8-qubit resource
state (hereafter, 8-ring ) and present its construction.
Next, we design a bias-preserving fusion circuit that en-
sures that biased erasures in the physical gates only af-
fect the X⊗Xmeasurements, preserving Z⊗Z. Finally,
we present the hybrid cluster state construction protocol
that uses both fusions and direct CZ gates to entangle a
collection of 8-ring resource states. The operations and
resource states are designed to minimize the number of
CZ gates while ensuring that biased erasures at any step
maintain the two-dimensional symmetry of the XZZX
code. This simplifies the decoding problem, enabling6
higher thresholds and lower overhead [14, 29], which we
demonstrate using circuit-level simulations.
A. The XZZX cluster state
The XZZX cluster state [57] is a stabilizer state de-
fined on a graph with an X-type orZ-type qubit at each
vertex, represented by  and⃝respectively in Fig. 2(a).
There is a stabilizer centered at each vertex. The sta-
bilizer centered at a X-type qubit is the product of the
Pauli Xoperator of that qubit, the Pauli Zoperators of
all adjacent X-type qubits and the Pauli Xoperators of
all the adjacent Z-type qubits. The stabilizer centered
at aZ-type qubit is the product of the Pauli Zoperator
of that qubit and the Pauli Zoperators of all adjacent
X-type qubits. There is no edge between two Z-type
qubits in the states considered here. Multiplying the
stabilizers centered on the faces of a unit cell gives the
six-body cell stabilizer, which is a product of Pauli X
operators on the X-type qubits and Pauli Zoperators
on the Z-type qubits on the faces of the cell, as shown
in Fig. 2(b). Measuring all Z-type qubits in the Zbasis
and all X-type qubits in the Xbasis teleports the XZZX
surface code through this cluster state.
In the XZZX cluster state, a Zerror on an X-type
qubit or an Xerror on a Z-type qubit causes its neigh-
boring cell stabilizers to flip [57]. To simultaneously per-
form error correction, the value of each cell stabilizer is
constructed by adding the measurements outcomes of
qubits around the faces of the unit cells. Importantly,
Zerrors on X-type qubits only cause pairs of defects,
or error syndromes, that are confined to lie in discon-
nected 2D layers, leading to more accurate decoding of
errors and higher thresholds [13, 14, 57]. This feature
reflects the symmetry that arises within the stabilizer
group of the XZZX code under Zerrors. To take advan-
tage of this feature ( i.e., by using a rectangular code), it
is necessary to ensure that the dominant physical noise
during cluster state preparation preserves this symme-
try, by only introducing Zerrors on X-type qubits.
This property is satisfied when using CZ gates with bi-
ased erasures to directly entangle X-type qubits. How-
ever, without a bias-preserving CX gate, it is not pos-
sible to directly entangle X- and Z-type qubits with-
out converting the dominant Z-biased erasures to X-
biased erasures and thus introducing unwanted Xerrors
on the Z-type qubits. To overcome this challenge, our
approach is to isolate the generation of entanglement
between X- and Z-type qubits in the creation of 8-ring
resource states that are post-selected on the absence of
erasures. These are then joined together into layers us-
ing adaptive fusion measurements which preserves the
noise bias so that dominant Z-biased erasures do not in-
troduce errors on Z-type qubits. Finally, the layers are
joined to form the 3D cluster state using only CZ gates
onX-type qubits.B. The resource state
The cluster state is assembled out of a collection of
8-ring resource states. The 8-ring state is defined by
the graph in Fig. 2(c), and can be prepared using the
circuit in Fig. 2(d). This circuit involves 8 CZ gates
between neighboring X- and Z-type qubits on a ring.
Biased erasures can result in unwanted Xerrors on Z-
type qubits. However, postselecting completed rings on
the absence of erasures allows these errors to be removed,
while at the same time increasing the overall fidelity of
the resource state. Using the notation of Section I, in the
limit where Re≈1 and pe≪1, the success probability
is 1−8peand the error probability of successful resource
states is ≈8p′
p. Many copies of this resource state can
be prepared in parallel, and the successful ones can be
moved into the positions for cluster state construction,
described next, using movable optical tweezers [33, 58].
C. Adaptive, bias-preserving fusion measurements
A fusion measurement is a destructive two-qubit mea-
surement of X⊗XandZ⊗Z. Figure 2(e) presents an
adaptive fusion measurement circuit with the property
that biased erasures during two-qubit gates only cause
an erasure of the X⊗Xmeasurement outcome. In the
ideal evolution without errors, the ancilla qubit measures
Zi⊗Zjusing CZ gates, followed by the single-qubit mea-
surements Xi⊗IjandIi⊗Xj, from which Xi⊗Xjcan
be computed [44].
In order to concentrate dominant errors into the Xi⊗
Xjmeasurements and preserve the Zi⊗Zjinformation,
we check for erasure errors in the two CZ gates, as shown
in Fig. 2(e), and adapt the subsequent operations based
on the location of these errors. In particular, when an
erasure is detected, the protocol is aborted and each
fusion qubit is measured independently in the Zbasis
with the measurement outcomes mi(= 0 or 1) and mj
(= 0 or 1). The overall evolution is as if the atoms
i, jwere fused, with the Zi⊗Zjmeasurement outcome
=mi⊕mj, but the Xi⊗Xjmeasurement outcome is
erased. We note that the Zmeasurement only needs
to be performed on the fusion qubit that is not erased,
because observing the erasure is equivalent to measuring
the erased atom in |1⟩. Therefore, the erased qubits
also do not need to be replaced, unlike the approach in
Section II and Ref. [15].
D. Constructing the XZZX cluster state
We now present a technique to construct the full
XZZX cluster state using 8-rings, fusion measurements,
and deterministic entangling gates. We first present the
most intuitive version of the protocol (Fig. 2f-h), and
then a contracted version (Fig. 3).7
1. Intuitive protocol
Instep 1 , copies of postselected 8-ring resource states
[Fig. 2(c,d)] are arranged in a plane as shown in Fig. 2(f).
Instep 2 , an X⊗Xmeasurement is performed on
pairs of Z-type qubits at the neighboring corners. This
measurement joins the pair of measured qubits into a
single effective Z-type qubit with logical Zoperator
¯Z=Z⊗Z, giving a single 2D layer of the XZZX clus-
ter state shown in Fig. 2(g) [27, 29]. To ensure that the
post-measurement state is the stabilizer state defined by
the graph in Fig. 2(g), a Pauli Zcorrection is applied to
the two X-type qubits adjacent to one of the measured
Z-type qubits conditional on the outcome of the X⊗X
measurement [29]. In practice, this correction is tracked
in software.
Instep 3 , copies of such 2D lattices are stacked on
top of each other in a staggered manner such that the
X-type qubits in one layer align with those in the next,
while the Z-type qubits in one layer lie on top of a face in
the next layer [Fig. 2(h)]. In step 4 , a CZ gate is applied
between each X-type qubit in layer kand another X-
type qubit at the same location in layer k+ 1 as shown
in Fig. 2(h). This gives the entire 3D XZZX cluster state.
Importantly, the CZ gates commute with each other and
may be applied in any order. Here we follow a specific
order: for each X-type qubit connected to unit cells to
its left and right, the CZ gate with the X-type qubit in
the layer above it is performed before the CZ gate with
the layer below. If an erasure is detected in the first CZ
gate, the second CZ gate is omitted to avoid introducing
additional errors.
Now that we have the cluster state, we measure each
qubit to teleport the XZZX surface code through the
cluster state and to reconstruct the cell stabilizers of
Fig. 2(b) for error correction. This is divided into two
sub-steps. In step 5a , we measure each X-type qubit
inXbasis. In step 5b , we measure each effective Z-
type qubits in the effective ¯Z-basis, by measuring Z⊗Z
on the physical Z-type qubits composing the effective
qubit. This outcome is not affected by biased erasures,
since the fusion circuit ensures that the Z⊗Zresult is
preserved.
2. Contracted protocol
We now observe that these operations can be re-
grouped to shorten the protocol. First, step 5b com-
mutes with steps 5a, 4, 3, and 2, and can therefore be
performed simultaneously with step 2. Steps 5b and
2 together constitute a fusion measurement, which re-
moves Z-type qubits from the cluster state entirely. This
fusion measurement is implemented using the circuit in
Fig. 2(e). Furthermore, the staggered layer stacking and
CZ gates in steps 3 and 4, respectively, can also be per-
formed concurrent with or before the fusion measure-
ments, as they act on a different subset of the qubits.
Thus, the sequence of operations in the shortened pro-
Figure 3. Proposed shortened protocol for high-threshold
hybrid-fusion QEC with the XZZX cluster state using fusions
and CZ gates.
tocol, summarized in Fig. 3, begins by preparing several
copies of post-selected resource states and moving them
in position to form layers stacked in a staggered manner
(steps 1,3), which is followed by fusions (steps 2, 5b) and
CZ gates between layers (step 4), and finally measure-
ment of Xqubits in the Xbasis (step 5a). Note that,
in the case of a biased erasure during a fusion, we do
not obtain the X⊗Xmeasurement information, which
means we cannot determine the Pauli correction on the
two neighboring X-type qubits as discussed in section
III C. This is effectively a random Pauli Z⊗Zerror on
these qubits. This correlated two-qubit error does not
reduce the distance, as it is not oriented along a logical
operator.
We also point out that accumulation of coherent er-
rors, such as from the no-jump evolution, will be sup-
pressed because every qubit is measured frequently (at
most after 4 CZ gates). As with the circuit-based
approach, additional suppression can be realized by
twirling, inserting random Pauli gates before the CZ
gates in resource state generation, fusion circuit and in
interlayer entangling steps.8
Figure 4. Threshold error rates for the hybrid-fusion architec-
ture as a function of erasure fraction, Re. The star denotes
Re= 98%, while the green square marks the percolation
threshold corresponding to the decoding graph for Re= 1
(see text).
E. Threshold results
We evaluate the performance of our hybrid-fusion ar-
chitecture under the biased erasure noise model by es-
timating the thresholds for different Re(Fig. 4). Our
simulations account for noise in the CZ gates used in
the resource state generation circuit, the fusion circuit,
and the direct entanglement in step 4. Errors are de-
coded using the MWPM decoder and a d×d×dcluster
state, with dup to 13, which is equivalent to teleporting
ad×dplanar XZZX code while performing drounds of
stabilizer measurements in the circuit-based approach.
ForRe= 0.98, we obtain a threshold of 10 .3%, higher
than that achieved with the circuit-based approach with
or without bias-preserving CX gates. In the other ex-
treme of Re= 0 when all source of noise is depolarizing
Pauli noise, we obtain a threshold of 1%, similar to the
threshold with circuit-based error correction at the same
value of Re.
In the limit Re= 1, we achieve a threshold of 14 .7%.
This threshold can also be determined from the bond-
percolation threshold of the union-jack lattice and is ex-
pected to be ∼17.7% [44]. The observed threshold in
Fig. 4 is smaller than this because of finite size effects
that are more prominent in the extreme case of Re= 1
when the decoding graph is 2D. To confirm, we use a fast
erasure decoder [59] to simulate extremely large lattices
(d×d×5 up to d= 61), and recover the threshold
predicted by percolation theory in this limit. Since the
erasure decoder and MWPM decoder achieve the same
accuracy for erasure errors, we believe that we should
achieve the same thresholds for both decoders at Re= 1,
but simulating such large lattices with MWPM is com-
putationally prohibitive.F. Comparison to other approaches to generating
a cluster state
The benefit of the hybrid-fusion approach can be un-
derstood by comparison to alternative cluster state con-
structions. Compared to directly entangling all the
qubits in the cluster state, our hybrid-fusion approach
results in the same number of biased erasure errors on
the final cluster state, but ensures that the error syn-
dromes lie in disconnected 2D layers. However, the num-
ber of CZ gates, and thus the rough Pauli error rate on
the final cluster state, is increased by a factor of 4 /3.
Therefore, our approach should outperform direct entan-
glement except when Reis very small and Pauli errors
are more important to correct than biased erasures.
On the other hand, we can compare to an all-fusion
strategy like the 6-ring construction of Ref. [29]. Our
strategy again has the same number of biased erasure
errors on the final cluster state, but uses 2 /3 the number
of CZ gates. Therefore, our approach outperforms the
all-fusion construction except when Re≳0.99, where
the higher percolation threshold of the decoding graph
in the all-fusion approach gives a slight advantage.
IV. DISCUSSION
We now make several comparisons between the pre-
sented circuit-based and hybrid-fusion approaches. Our
hybrid-fusion protocol can be viewed as implementing
QEC on a state encoded in a planar XZZX code as it
is being teleported to another planar array of qubits.
This is an alternative to using repeated rounds of quan-
tum nondemolition stabilizer measurements as in con-
ventional circuit-based error correction, but still allows
transversal one- and two-qubit logical gate operations
available for the planar surface code. In the supplemen-
tary material, we explicitly show how our hybrid-fusion
protocol can be implemented with just a few planar ar-
rays of qubits, starting and stopping with a 2D encoded
XZZX surface code [44]. We note that neutral atoms
are ideally suited to the high degree of connectivity re-
quired to implement hybrid-fusion: dynamic rearrange-
ment of qubits is already used to postselect filled tweezer
sites [60, 61], and coherent qubit transport has also been
demonstrated [33, 58].
The hybrid-fusion approach has other advantages be-
yond the higher threshold, which we outline here but do
not quantitatively analyze. As discussed, our construc-
tion preserves the system symmetry of the XZZX code
under biased noise by ensuring that the high-probability
Zerasures run along layers in Fig. 2(h). Thus, the
same logical error rate can be achieved with fewer lay-
ers when Reis large and the erasure are highly biased.
This amounts to using a thin, rectangular XZZX surface
code, which becomes a repetition code when Re= 1 and
the erasures are infinitely biased [13]. This allows for re-
duced overhead compared to the circuit-based approach,
which requires a square XZZX code in the absence of9
bias-preserving gates. This property is summarized for
each QEC architecture in Table I.
Second, the teleportation process converts lost atoms
into Pauli errors, ensuring a finite threshold against loss
errors or undetected erasures without additional leak-
age reduction units [62–66]. We leave an analysis of the
threshold for a given loss rate to future work.
Finally, hybrid-fusion QEC relaxes the requirements
for erasure detection and subsequent atom replacement.
In the circuit-approach proposed in Ref. [15] and consid-
ered in Section II, the space-time location of each erasure
error in the circuit must be resolved, and the affected
qubits must be replaced or re-initialized as the compu-
tation proceeds. In the hybrid-fusion approach, this re-
quirement is relaxed, in a way that is slightly different for
the three steps involving two-qubit gates. For resource
state preparation (step 1 of the protocol in Sec. III D),
it is only necessary to determine if an erasure occurred
at some point during the 8-ring preparation, and if it
did, the entire state is discarded. Therefore, there is
no need to replace affected qubits, and the necessary
spatio-temporal resolution of the erasure detection is sig-
nificantly coarser. During the fusion operations (steps 2,
5b), erasures must be detected immediately as the mea-
surement basis is conditioned on this outcome, but the
affected atoms do not need to be replaced. Finally, in
the layer-joining CZ gates (step 4), atom replacement is
not necessary, as the atoms are immediately measured.
In summary, we find that conditionally replacing atoms
at precise space-time locations is never required (as in-
dicated in Table I), and in some cases erasures can be
detected with coarser resolution. These may give rise to
considerable experimental simplifications.
V. CONCLUSION
To summarize, we have introduced a new noise
model, biased erasure, that is physically motivated by
metastable171Yb qubits but may also be engineered in
other qubit platforms. We have studied two realistic
QEC architectures under this noise model. The first is
a circuit-based approach, where the improvement with
the biased erasure model arises from the reduced en-
tropy of this noise model, enabling more effective de-
coding. We obtain a threshold of 8.2% for the pre-
dicted metastable171Yb erasure fraction. The second
is a hybrid-fusion approach with a systematic code con-
struction that gives rise to system symmetries under the
biased erasure model. In this approach, we obtain a
threshold of 10.3% for the metastable171Yb noise model.
Compared to circuit-based syndrome extraction, this
approach has the additional benefits of potentially en-
abling rectangular surface codes with lower overhead (in
the limit of a large erasure fraction), robustness against
atom loss, and simplified requirements for detecting and
handling erasure errors in real-time.While in this work we have focused on thresholds
for quantum memory, we can apply Clifford gates us-
ing standard techniques such as braiding [52, 53], lattice
surgery [67, 68], or other code deformations [69]. These
can be straightforwardly adapted to our hybrid-fusion
approach by modifying the large-scale shape of our clus-
ter state, but using the same underlying resource states
and without affecting the thresholds [27, 55, 70]. In ad-
dition, we can consider entangling logical surface-code
qubits via transversal CNOT gates as proposed in [71],
thanks to the movability of neutral atom qubits [33, 58];
this may allow for significant overhead reduction com-
pared to lattice surgery. To apply non-Clifford gates, we
can inject noisy magic states and perform magic state
distillation [72]. We note that the erasure errors during
magic state injection may be removed by post-selection,
so that injected magic states are only susceptible to low-
probability Pauli errors. This will aid in reducing the
overhead cost of magic state distillation.
There are several opportunities for further simplifi-
cation and optimization of the hybrid-fusion approach
for scalable fault-tolerant quantum computing. First,
the threshold for hybrid-fusion QEC may be further im-
proved by post-selecting on larger resource states [28].
This will decrease the rate of successfully generating the
resource states, but it is still an experimentally viable
route with deterministic, high-fidelity gates. For ex-
ample, given a gate with 99.9% CZ fidelity, resource
state chunks involving 100 CZ gates could be post-
selected with 90% success probability. Second, we can
explore error correction beyond the planar surface code,
as the hybrid-fusion approach naturally allows conver-
sion of the planar surface code to a 3D surface code
with transversal non-Clifford gates [73–77], which may
lead to significant overhead reduction compared to al-
ternative protocols for non-Clifford gates that rely on
magic-state distillation.
Finally, our hybrid-fusion-based construction pro-
vided a means to preserve the symmetries of the XZZX
code without bias-preserving CX gates by using post-
selection and short-depth circuits. This approach also
provides a path for high-threshold QEC with biased-
Pauli-noise qubits without bias-preserving CX gates,
which is an open challenge so far.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge Steve Flammia for pointing out the
importance of lowered noise entropy. We are also grate-
ful to Shimon Kolkowitz, Steve Girvin, Shilin Huang,
Shuo Ma, and Yue Wu for helpful discussions. This
work was supported by the National Science Founda-
tion (QLCI grant OMA-2120757). JDT acknowledges
additional support from ARO PECASE (W911NF-
18-10215), ONR (N00014-20-1-2426), DARPA ONISQ
(W911NF-20-10021) and the Sloan Foundation.10
[1] Peter W. Shor, “Scheme for reducing decoherence in
quantum computer memory,” Phys. Rev. A 52, R2493–
R2496 (1995).
[2] P.W. Shor, “Fault-tolerant quantum computation,” in
Proceedings of 37th Conference on Foundations of Com-
puter Science (1996) pp. 56–65.
[3] A. R. Calderbank and Peter W. Shor, “Good quantum
error-correcting codes exist,” Phys. Rev. A 54, 1098–
1105 (1996).
[4] Dorit Aharonov and Michael Ben-Or, “Fault-tolerant
quantum computation with constant error,” in Proceed-
ings of the twenty-ninth annual ACM symposium on
Theory of computing (1997) pp. 176–188.
[5] Emanuel Knill, Raymond Laflamme, and Wojciech H
Zurek, “Resilient quantum computation,” Science 279,
342–345 (1998).
[6] Daniel Gottesman, “Theory of fault-tolerant quantum
computation,” Physical Review A 57, 127 (1998).
[7] John Preskill, “Reliable quantum computers,” Proceed-
ings of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Math-
ematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 454, 385–
410 (1998).
[8] Andrew S. Darmawan, Benjamin J. Brown, Arne L.
Grimsmo, David K. Tuckett, and Shruti Puri, “Prac-
tical quantum error correction with the XZZX code and
kerr-cat qubits,” PRX Quantum 2, 030345 (2021).
[9] J´ er´ emie Guillaud and Mazyar Mirrahimi, “Repetition
cat qubits for fault-tolerant quantum computation,”
Physical Review X 9, 041053 (2019).
[10] Christopher Chamberland, Kyungjoo Noh, Patricio
Arrangoiz-Arriola, Earl T Campbell, Connor T Hann,
Joseph Iverson, Harald Putterman, Thomas C Bo-
hdanowicz, Steven T Flammia, Andrew Keller, et al. ,
“Building a fault-tolerant quantum computer using con-
catenated cat codes,” PRX Quantum 3, 010329 (2022).
[11] Iris Cong, Harry Levine, Alexander Keesling, Dolev
Bluvstein, Sheng-Tao Wang, and Mikhail D. Lukin,
“Hardware-efficient, fault-tolerant quantum computa-
tion with Rydberg atoms,” Phys. Rev. X 12, 021049
(2022).
[12] Shruti Puri, Lucas St-Jean, Jonathan A Gross, Alexan-
der Grimm, Nicholas E Frattini, Pavithran S Iyer,
Anirudh Krishna, Steven Touzard, Liang Jiang, Alexan-
dre Blais, et al. , “Bias-preserving gates with stabilized
cat qubits,” Sci. Adv. 6, 5901 (2020).
[13] J Pablo Bonilla Ataides, David K Tuckett, Stephen D
Bartlett, Steven T Flammia, and Benjamin J Brown,
“The XZZX surface code,” Nature communications 12,
1–12 (2021).
[14] Benjamin J Brown, “Conservation laws and quantum er-
ror correction: towards a generalised matching decoder,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.06428 (2022).
[15] Yue Wu, Shimon Kolkowitz, Shruti Puri, and Jeff D
Thompson, “Erasure conversion for fault-tolerant quan-
tum computing in alkaline earth Rydberg atom arrays,”
Nature Communication 13, 4657 (2022).
[16] Mingyu Kang, Wesley C. Campbell, and Ken-
neth R. Brown, “Quantum error correction with
metastable states of trapped ions using erasure con-
version,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.15024 (2022),
10.48550/ARXIV.2210.15024.[17] Aleksander Kubica, Arbel Haim, Yotam Vaknin, Fer-
nando Brand˜ ao, and Alex Retzker, “Erasure qubits:
Overcoming the T1limit in superconducting circuits,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05461 (2022).
[18] James D Teoh, Patrick Winkel, Harshvardhan K Babla,
Benjamin J Chapman, Jahan Claes, Stijn J de Graaf,
John WO Garmon, William D Kalfus, Yao Lu, Aniket
Maiti, et al. , “Dual-rail encoding with superconduct-
ing cavities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.12077 (2022),
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2212.12077.
[19] Thomas M. Stace, Sean D. Barrett, and Andrew C. Do-
herty, “Thresholds for topological codes in the presence
of loss,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 200501 (2009).
[20] Sean D. Barrett and Thomas M. Stace, “Fault tolerant
quantum computation with very high threshold for loss
errors,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 200502 (2010).
[21] Adam C. Whiteside and Austin G. Fowler, “Upper
bound for loss in practical topological-cluster-state
quantum computing,” Phys. Rev. A 90, 052316 (2014).
[22] Wesley C. Campbell, “Certified quantum gates,” Phys.
Rev. A 102, 022426 (2020).
[23] M. Grassl, Th. Beth, and T. Pellizzari, “Codes for
the quantum erasure channel,” Phys. Rev. A 56, 33–38
(1997).
[24] Charles H. Bennett, David P. DiVincenzo, and John A.
Smolin, “Capacities of quantum erasure channels,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3217–3220 (1997).
[25] Daniel E. Browne and Terry Rudolph, “Resource-
efficient linear optical quantum computation,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 95, 010501 (2005).
[26] Ying Li, Peter C. Humphreys, Gabriel J. Mendoza, and
Simon C. Benjamin, “Resource costs for fault-tolerant
linear optical quantum computing,” Phys. Rev. X 5,
041007 (2015).
[27] Sara Bartolucci, Patrick Birchall, Hector Bombin, Hugo
Cable, Chris Dawson, Mercedes Gimeno-Segovia, Eric
Johnston, Konrad Kieling, Naomi Nickerson, Mihir
Pant, et al. , “Fusion-based quantum computation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.09310 (2021).
[28] Stefano Paesani and Benjamin J. Brown, “High-
threshold quantum computing by fusing one-
dimensional cluster states,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.06775 (2022).
[29] Kaavya Sahay, Jahan Claes, and Shruti Puri, “Tailor-
ing fusion-based error correction for high thresholds to
biased fusion failures,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00019
(2022).
[30] Shuo Ma, Genyue Liu, Pai Peng, Bichen Zhang, Sven
Jandura, Jahan Claes, Alex P. Burgers, Guido Pupillo,
Shruti Puri, and Jeff D. Thompson, “High-fidelity
gates with mid-circuit erasure conversion in a metastable
neutral atom qubit,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05493
(2023).
[31] Yao Lu, Aniket Maiti, John W. O. Garmon, Suhas
Ganjam, Yaxing Zhang, Jahan Claes, Luigi Frunzio,
S. M. Girvin, and Robert J. Schoelkopf, “A high-
fidelity microwave beamsplitter with a parity-protected
converter,” Nature Communications 14, 5767 (2023).
[32] Kevin S. Chou, Tali Shemma, Heather McCarrick, Tzu-
Chiao Chien, James D. Teoh, Patrick Winkel, Amos An-
derson, Jonathan Chen, Jacob Curtis, Stijn J. de Graaf,
John W. O. Garmon, Benjamin Gudlewski, William D.11
Kalfus, Trevor Keen, Nishaad Khedkar, Chan U Lei,
Gangqiang Liu, Pinlei Lu, Yao Lu, Aniket Maiti,
Luke Mastalli-Kelly, Nitish Mehta, Shantanu O. Mund-
hada, Anirudh Narla, Taewan Noh, Takahiro Tsunoda,
Sophia H. Xue, Joseph O. Yuan, Luigi Frunzio, Jose Au-
mentado, Shruti Puri, Steven M. Girvin, Jr. au2 S. Har-
vey Moseley, and Robert J. Schoelkopf, “Demonstrating
a superconducting dual-rail cavity qubit with erasure-
detected logical measurements,” (2023), arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.03169.
[33] Dolev Bluvstein, Harry Levine, Giulia Semeghini,
Tout T. Wang, Sepehr Ebadi, Marcin Kalinowski,
Alexander Keesling, Nishad Maskara, Hannes Pichler,
Markus Greiner, Vladan Vuleti´ c, and Mikhail D. Lukin,
“A quantum processor based on coherent transport of
entangled atom arrays,” Nature 604, 451–456 (2022).
[34] T. M. Graham, Y. Song, J. Scott, C. Poole, L. Phut-
titarn, K. Jooya, P. Eichler, X. Jiang, A. Marra,
B. Grinkemeyer, M. Kwon, M. Ebert, J. Cherek, M. T.
Lichtman, M. Gillette, J. Gilbert, D. Bowman, T. Bal-
lance, C. Campbell, E. D. Dahl, O. Crawford, N. S.
Blunt, B. Rogers, T. Noel, and M. Saffman, “Multi-
qubit entanglement and algorithms on a neutral-atom
quantum computer,” Nature 604, 457–462 (2022), num-
ber: 7906 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[35] Shuo Ma, Alex P. Burgers, Genyue Liu, Jack Wilson,
Bichen Zhang, and Jeff D. Thompson, “Universal gate
operations on nuclear spin qubits in an optical tweezer
array of171Yb atoms,” Phys. Rev. X 12, 021028 (2022).
[36] Nathan Schine, Aaron W. Young, William J. Eckner,
Michael J. Martin, and Adam M. Kaufman, “Long-lived
Bell states in an array of optical clock qubits,” Nature
Physics 18, 1067–1073 (2022), number: 9 Publisher: Na-
ture Publishing Group.
[37] Mark Saffman, T G Walker, and Klaus Mølmer, “Quan-
tum information with Rydberg atoms,” Reviews Of
Modern Physics 82, 2313–2363 (2010), publisher: Amer-
ican Physical Society.
[38] Alec Jenkins, Joanna W. Lis, Aruku Senoo, William F.
McGrew, and Adam M. Kaufman, “Ytterbium Nuclear-
Spin Qubits in an Optical Tweezer Array,” Physical Re-
view X 12, 021027 (2022), publisher: American Physical
Society.
[39] Sven Jandura, Jeff D Thompson, and Guido Pupillo,
“Optimizing Rydberg gates for logical qubit perfor-
mance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.06879 (2022).
[40] Charles Fromonteil, Dolev Bluvstein, and Hannes Pich-
ler, “Protocols for Rydberg entangling gates featuring
robustness against quasi-static errors,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.08824 (2022).
[41] Emanuel Knill, “Quantum computing with realistically
noisy devices,” Nature 434, 39–44 (2005).
[42] Lorenza Viola and Emanuel Knill, “Random decoupling
schemes for quantum dynamical control and error sup-
pression,” Physical review letters 94, 060502 (2005).
[43] Joel J Wallman and Joseph Emerson, “Noise tailoring
for scalable quantum computation via randomized com-
piling,” Physical Review A 94, 052325 (2016).
[44] “See supplementary material,” .
[45] Craig Gidney, “Stim: a fast stabilizer circuit simulator,”
Quantum 5, 497 (2021).
[46] Oscar Higgott, “Pymatching: A python package for
decoding quantum codes with minimum-weight perfect
matching,” ACM Transactions on Quantum Computing
3, 1–16 (2022).[47] Hans J. Briegel and Robert Raussendorf, “Persistent en-
tanglement in arrays of interacting particles,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 86, 910–913 (2001).
[48] Robert Raussendorf and Hans J Briegel, “A one-way
quantum computer,” Physical Review Letters 86, 5188
(2001).
[49] Robert Raussendorf, Daniel Browne, and Hans Briegel,
“The one-way quantum computer–a non-network model
of quantum computation,” Journal of Modern Optics 49,
1299–1306 (2002).
[50] Robert Raussendorf, Daniel E Browne, and Hans J
Briegel, “Measurement-based quantum computation on
cluster states,” Physical Review A 68, 022312 (2003).
[51] Hans J Briegel, David E Browne, Wolfgang D¨ ur,
Robert Raussendorf, and Maarten Van den Nest,
“Measurement-based quantum computation,” Nature
Physics 5, 19–26 (2009).
[52] Robert Raussendorf, Jim Harrington, and Kovid Goyal,
“A fault-tolerant one-way quantum computer,” Annals
of Physics 321, 2242–2270 (2006).
[53] Robert Raussendorf and Jim Harrington, “Fault-
tolerant quantum computation with high threshold in
two dimensions,” Physical review letters 98, 190504
(2007).
[54] A Bolt, G Duclos-Cianci, D Poulin, and TM Stace, “Fo-
liated quantum error-correcting codes,” Physical Review
Letters 117, 070501 (2016).
[55] Benjamin J Brown and Sam Roberts, “Universal fault-
tolerant measurement-based quantum computation,”
Physical Review Research 2, 033305 (2020).
[56] Robert Raussendorf, Sergey Bravyi, and Jim Harring-
ton, “Long-range quantum entanglement in noisy cluster
states,” Physical Review A 71, 062313 (2005).
[57] Jahan Claes, J Eli Bourassa, and Shruti Puri, “Tailored
cluster states with high threshold under biased noise,”
npj Quantum Information 9, 9 (2023).
[58] J´ erˆ ome Beugnon, Charles Tuchendler, Harold Marion,
Alpha Ga¨ etan, Yevhen Miroshnychenko, Yvan R P Sor-
tais, Andrew M Lance, Matthew P A Jones, Ga´ etan
Messin, Antoine Browaeys, and Philippe Grangier,
“Two-dimensional transport and transfer of a single
atomic qubit in optical tweezers,” Nature Physics 3,
696–699 (2007), publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[59] Nicolas Delfosse and Gilles Z´ emor, “Linear-time max-
imum likelihood decoding of surface codes over the
quantum erasure channel,” Physical Review Research 2,
033042 (2020).
[60] Manuel Endres, Hannes Bernien, Alexander Keesling,
Harry Levine, Eric R Anschuetz, Alexandre Krajen-
brink, Crystal Senko, Vladan Vuletic, Markus Greiner,
and Mikhail D Lukin, “Atom-by-atom assembly of
defect-free one-dimensional cold atom arrays,” Science
354, 1024–1027 (2016), publisher: American Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science.
[61] Daniel Barredo, Sylvain de L´ es´ eluc, V Lienhard, T La-
haye, and A Browaeys, “An atom-by-atom assembler
of defect-free arbitrary two-dimensional atomic arrays,”
Science 354, 1021–1023 (2016), publisher: American As-
sociation for the Advancement of Science.
[62] Emanuel Knill, “Scalable quantum computing in the
presence of large detected-error rates,” Physical Review
A71, 042322 (2005).
[63] Panos Aliferis and Barbara M Terhal, “Fault-tolerant
quantum computation for local leakage faults,” arXiv
preprint quant-ph/0511065 (2005).12
[64] Austin G Fowler, “Coping with qubit leakage in topo-
logical codes,” Physical Review A 88, 042308 (2013).
[65] Joydip Ghosh and Austin G Fowler, “Leakage-resilient
approach to fault-tolerant quantum computing with su-
perconducting elements,” Physical Review A 91, 020302
(2015).
[66] Martin Suchara, Andrew W Cross, and Jay M Gam-
betta, “Leakage suppression in the toric code,” in 2015
IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
(ISIT) (IEEE, 2015) pp. 1119–1123.
[67] Clare Horsman, Austin G Fowler, Simon Devitt, and
Rodney Van Meter, “Surface code quantum computing
by lattice surgery,” New Journal of Physics 14, 123011
(2012).
[68] Daniel Litinski, “A game of surface codes: Large-scale
quantum computing with lattice surgery,” Quantum 3,
128 (2019).
[69] Benjamin J. Brown, Katharina Laubscher, Markus S.
Kesselring, and James R. Wootton, “Poking holes and
cutting corners to achieve clifford gates with the surface
code,” Phys. Rev. X 7, 021029 (2017).
[70] Daniel Herr, Alexandru Paler, Simon J Devitt, and
Franco Nori, “Lattice surgery on the raussendorf lat-
tice,” Quantum Science and Technology 3, 035011
(2018).
[71] Eric Dennis, Alexei Kitaev, Andrew Landahl, and
John Preskill, “Topological quantum memory,” Journal
of Mathematical Physics 43, 4452–4505 (2002).
[72] Sergey Bravyi and Alexei Kitaev, “Universal quantum
computation with ideal clifford gates and noisy ancillas,”
Physical Review A 71, 022316 (2005).
[73] Hector Bombin, “2d quantum computation with 3d
topological codes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.09571
(2018), 10.48550/arXiv.1810.09571.
[74] Michael Vasmer and Dan E Browne, “Three-dimensional
surface codes: Transversal gates and fault-tolerant archi-
tectures,” Physical Review A 100, 012312 (2019).
[75] Benjamin J Brown, “A fault-tolerant non-clifford gate
for the surface code in two dimensions,” Science Ad-
vances 6(2020).
[76] TR Scruby, DE Browne, P Webster, and M Vasmer,
“Numerical implementation of just-in-time decoding in
novel lattice slices through the three-dimensional surface
code,” Quantum 6, 721 (2022).
[77] Zhenyu Cai, Adam Siegel, and Simon Benjamin,
“Looped pipelines enabling effective 3d qubit lattices in
a strictly 2d device,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13123
(2022), 10.48550/arXiv.2203.13123.
[78] Harry Levine, Alexander Keesling, Giulia Semeghini,
Ahmed Omran, Tout T. Wang, Sepehr Ebadi, Hannes
Bernien, Markus Greiner, Vladan Vuleti´ c, Hannes Pich-
ler, and Mikhail D. Lukin, “Parallel implementation of
high-fidelity multiqubit gates with neutral atoms,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 123, 170503 (2019).
[79] Alec Jenkins, Joanna W. Lis, Aruku Senoo, William F.
McGrew, and Adam M. Kaufman, “Ytterbium nuclear-
spin qubits in an optical tweezer array,” Phys. Rev. X
12, 021027 (2022).
[80] M. Saffman, T. G. Walker, and K. Mølmer, “Quantum
information with rydberg atoms,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 82,
2313–2363 (2010).
[81] Craig Gidney, Michael Newman, Austin Fowler, and
Michael Broughton, “A fault-tolerant honeycomb mem-
ory,” Quantum 5, 605 (2021).[82] Yu Tomita and Krysta M. Svore, “Low-distance surface
codes under realistic quantum noise,” Phys. Rev. A 90,
062320 (2014).
[83] Robert Parviainen, “Estimation of bond percolation
thresholds on the archimedean lattices,” Journal of
Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 40, 9253
(2007).Supplementary Material: High threshold codes for neutral atom qubits with biased
erasure errors
Kaavya Sahay,1, 2,∗Junlan Jin,3,∗Jahan Claes,1, 2Jeff D. Thompson,3and Shruti Puri1, 2
1Yale University, Department of Applied Physics, New Haven, CT 06520, USA
2Yale Quantum Institute, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA
3Princeton University, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton, NJ, 08544, USA
(Dated: October 19, 2023)
S1. ERROR CHANNEL
A. Two-qubit gate
Following the description of the single-qubit gate error channel in Section I in the main text, here we consider the
more realistic two-qubit gate. Decay of one or both atoms to |e⟩can occur during the gate, which we approximate
by the channel with Kraus operators:
K0=|00⟩⟨00|+p
1−p1(|10⟩⟨10|+|01⟩⟨01|) +p
1−p2|11⟩⟨11|+|e⟩⟨e| ⊗I+I⊗ |e⟩⟨e|+|ee⟩⟨ee| (S1a)
K1=√p1|e0⟩⟨10| (S1b)
K2=√p1|0e⟩⟨01| (S1c)
K3=p
p2/3|e1⟩⟨11| (S1d)
K4=p
p2/3|1e⟩⟨11| (S1e)
K5=p
p2/3|ee⟩⟨11| (S1f)
Here, p1is the probability of decaying to |e⟩from the states |01⟩or|10⟩, and p2is the probability for any decay to
|e⟩from|11⟩. For typical CZ gates, p1≈p2because the Rydberg blockade results in only one atom in |r⟩in either
case [15, 78]. The total erasure probability is defined by averaging over the computational states as pe= (2p1+p2)/4.
After detecting whether any atoms are in |e⟩, we apply one of the following recovery operators:
R0=I (S2a)
R1=|1⟩⟨e| ⊗I (S2b)
R2=I⊗ |1⟩⟨e| (S2c)
R3=|11⟩⟨ee| (S2d)
This results in a channel with Kraus operators:
W0=R0K0=|00⟩⟨00|+p
1−p1(|10⟩⟨10|+|01⟩⟨01|) +p
1−p2|11⟩⟨11| (S3a)
W1=R1K1=√p1|10⟩⟨10|=√p1
4(I−Z)⊗(I+Z) (S3b)
W2=R2K2=√p1|01⟩⟨01|=√p1
4(I+Z)⊗(I−Z) (S3c)
W3=R1K3=p
p2/3|11⟩⟨11|=rp2
31
4(I−Z)⊗(I−Z) (S3d)
W4=R2K4=W3 (S3e)
W5=R3K5=W3 (S3f)
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.14
(b) (a) (c)
Z
ZX XXL
Figure S1. (a) A patch of the XZZX surface code studied in this work, with the data and ancilla qubits denoted by the
green open circles and black solid circles, respectively. The red arrows denote the sequence of the stabilizer measurement. (b)
Scaling of the logical error rate with the physical error rate for code distances up to d= 13 with Re= 0.98 in the case of
unbiased erasure ( ηe= 1/2, dashed lines) and fully biased erasure ( ηe=∞, solid lines). The threshold error rate increases
from pth= 4.3% to 8 .2%. The error bars represent the 95% confidence interval of the logical error rate, determined from
the logical error count and the total number of samples. (c) Threshold error rates under different erasure bias for several Re
(from bottom to top, Re= 0.5,0.8,0.9,0.98,0.99,1)
Applying the PTA as before yields the Pauli channel:
W0ρW†
0≈NIIρII +p2
2
64(IZρIZ +ZIρZI ) +(2p1−p2)2
64ZZρZZ (S4a)
W1ρW†
1=W2ρW†
2≈p1
16(IIρII +IZρIZ +ZIρZI +ZZρZZ ) (S4b)
W3ρW†
3=W4ρW†
4=W5ρW†
5≈p2/3
16(IIρII +IZρIZ +ZIρZI +ZZρZZ ) (S4c)
where Nis a normalization factor. The resulting qubit state is the same in all of the channels corresponding to
an erasure detection ( i≥1). Therefore, we group them together and consider their sum:
X
i≥1WiρW†
i=pe
4(IIρII +IZρIZ +ZIρZI +ZZρZZ ) (S5)
which is the error model described in the main text.
The no-jump error when no erasure is detected is slightly more complicated than in the single qubit case presented
in Sec. I. The physical interpretation of this error is that the absence of a detected error reveals information about
the state, specifically, that it is less likely to be in a state from which it could have jumped to |e⟩.
We note that the last coefficient in Eq. (S4a) would vanish when the two qubits jump independently ( p2= 2p1),
indicating no correlated errors up to the second order. If p2<2p1(which is the case in practice, because of the
Rydberg blockade), then the extra weight of the ZZterm in Eq. (S4a) represents a correlated error, but we do not
consider this aspect further since these errors are already very small below threshold. Using the definition of peand
Eq. (S4a) with p1=p2, we arrive at the estimated no-jump Pauli error contribution of p2
e/12 that is referenced in
Sec. I.
B. Erasures with finite bias
The analysis above describes infinitely biased erasures arising from the decay of the Rydberg state. However,
other mechanisms can also give rise to erasure errors that need to be considered separately.
First, Refs. [39, 40] derived gate protocols that convert Doppler shifts and slow amplitude noise into leakage into
the Rydberg state, which can be detected as an erasure error. Since only atoms in |1⟩are coupled into the Rydberg
state in these protocols, as well, the erasure errors should also be strongly biased.
Second, decays out of the qubit subspace3P0from Raman scattering from the dipole trap or the finite lifetime
of this state also become erasures [15]. However, these are equally likely to occur from either qubit state, and
are therefore better represented by the depolarizing channel. The same situation is likely to arise for single-qubit
rotations driven by Raman transitions, as in Ref. [79].15
Finally, erasures in the CZ gates themselves are not infinitely biased if there is a finite probability to excite
to (and decay from) the Rydberg state from |0⟩. While this is strongly suppressed in typical hyperfine qubits in
alkali atoms because of the large splitting associated with the ground state hyperfine coupling ( ≈6.8 GHz in87Rb)
[80], it is a more significant effect in nuclear spin qubits in alkaline earth atoms because of the smaller splittings.
In171Yb, the excitation probability of |0⟩is suppressed by the Zeeman splitting in the Rydberg state [35]. For
the3S1state, the average occupation of the Rydberg state during a gate when starting from |0⟩is approximately
p0= (ℏΩ)2/(gFµBB)2, with gF= 3/2gF= 4/3 (for F= 3/2). For reasonable values of Ω ≈5 MHz, p0can be
suppressed below 10−3in a magnetic field of XX Gauss.
Due to possible erasure from state |0⟩followed by atom replacement or reinitialization using state |1⟩, the erased
qubit can also experience Pauli {X, Y}errors. To study the effect of finite erasure bias in our model, we introduce
the following phenomenological model. When an erasure error occurs during a CZ gate (with probability pe), the
state of each atom after recovery is modeled by selecting a Pauli operator from {I, Z}with probability pI=pZ≡pa,
or from {X, Y}with probability pX=pY≡pb, where 2( pa+pb) = 1. Defining the erasure bias ηe=pa/2pb, we
arrive at the thresholds summarized in Fig. S1(c). In the experimentally relevant range of Re, we see significant
improvement in the threshold already for ηe= 10, with saturation effects visible above ηe= 100.
S2. CIRCUIT-BASED QEC
Here we describe in more detail the circuit-level simulation of the XZZX surface code. We use a square unrotated
XZZX lattice with a code distance d[see Fig. S1(a) for an example of d= 4]. In step 1 , we initialize all qubits in
|+⟩and then do a round of noiseless stabilizer measurement to initialize the logical-qubit. In step 2 , we implement
drounds of noisy stabilizer measurement, considering only errors on two-qubit gates. We flip a coin after every
two-qubit gate to include an erasure error with probability pe=pRe. If an erasure error does not occur, a Pauli
error with probability pp=p(1−Re) will be introduced. In step 3 , we do a round of noiseless stabilizer measurement,
which can be considered as corresponding to readout of the logical-qubit state.
Steps 1-3 are implemented using a stabilizer simulator, Stim [45, 81]. The stabilizer measurement results give
the error syndromes. Stim can also generate a weighted decoding graph by analysing the effect of individual errors,
determining which stabilizers and which logical observables the error flips. Decoding the error syndromes using the
MWPM decoder is done with PyMatching [46].
We study three different error models: (i) unbiased erasure, (ii) biased erasure with native gates, and (iii) bi-
ased erasure with bias-preserving CX gates. In case (i) the erasure errors are drawn uniformly at random from
{I, X, Y, Z }⊗2. In case (ii), for infinitely biased erasure, the erasure errors of CZ gates are drawn uniformly at
random from {I, Z}⊗2, i.e, each qubit experiences a Pauli operator chosen uniformly at random from {I, Z}. For
CX gates, the erasure errors are drawn from {I, Z} ⊗ { I, X}since CX gates are implemented using CZ gates con-
jugated by H gates on the target qubit and are thus not bias-preserving. When considering erasure with finite bias
η, following the discussion in Sec. S1 B, the erasure error of a CZ gate is simulated by letting each qubit experience
Pauli operators {I, Z, X, Y }with probabilities pI=pZ=η/(1 + 2 η) and pX=pY= 0.5/(1 + 2 η). In case (iii), for
infinitely biased erasure, erasure errors of both CZ and CX gates are drawn uniformly at random from {I, Z}⊗2.
In all cases, the remaining Pauli errors (not erasures) are assumed to be unbiased, i.e., drawn uniformly at random
from{I, X, Y, Z }⊗2\{I⊗I}. For all cases, the threshold is determined from the intersection of the curves of the
logical error rate versus physical error rate for d= 9,13. We verify the obtained thresholds for Re= 0.98 cases in
Table I using finite size scaling for d= 9,11,13. As an aside, the intersection of the d= 9,11,13 curves is similarly
used to determine the thresholds in the hybrid-fusion protocol unless otherwise noted.
We note that since all qubits start in |+⟩, after the initialization in step 1, the logical qubit would be in an
eigenstate of the logical X operator (with the eigenvalue being +1). Therefore, the derived logical error rate is
effectively the logical Z error rate. One can also start with all qubits in state |1⟩instead of |+⟩to get the logical X
error rate, and evaluate separate thresholds for logical Pauli-X and Pauli-Z errors (similar to what was mentioned
in Ref. [13]). In cases (i) and (ii), the two thresholds should be the same since the probabilities of X and Z errors
on individual data qubits are equal. This is consistent with our simulations. In case (iii), since Z errors dominate X
errors on all qubits, we evaluate the threshold using the logical Z error rate (note that despite differing error rates,
the discrepancy between the two logical thresholds is small).
The step 2 described above, following the procedures in [15], is used when deriving thresholds corresponding to
Re= 0.98 (predicted for171Yb atom qubits) for comparison with the result in [15]. In other cases of the circuit-based
QEC studied in this work, we obtain the thresholds with a slightly modified version of introducing the errors in step
2. When adding Pauli errors to a two-qubit gate that does not have an erasure, we change the error probability
from pptopp/(1−pe) to represent conditioning on having no erasure. The corresponding effect on the threshold is
small as one can expect from 1 −pe≈1. For instance, for Re= 0.98 listed in Table 1 in the main text, in the case
of infinite erasure bias with native gates, the threshold changes from 8 .2% to 8 .1%. In the cases of unbiased erasure16
and infinite erasure bias with bias-preserving gates, the thresholds 4 .3% and 9 .0% have negligible changes.
S3. FUSION CIRCUIT
Here we provide a more detailed discussion of the fusion circuit introduced in the main text. Consider two qubits
(labelled i, j) which need to be fused and which may be entangled with other qubits (collectively labelled as R). We
cam write the state of this system as
|ψ⟩=a|0⟩i|0⟩j|A⟩R+b|1⟩i|0⟩j|B⟩R+c|0⟩i|1⟩j|C⟩R+d|1⟩i|1⟩j|D⟩R(S6)
with|a|2+|b|2+|c|2+|d|2= 1. After fusion, i, jare unentangled from the rest of the system and a new state of R
is created conditioned on the outcomes mXXandmZZof the X⊗XandZ⊗Zmeasurements respectively.
|ψ⟩R,m XX=0,mZZ=0∝a|A⟩R+d|D⟩R
|ψ⟩R,m XX=1,mZZ=0∝a|A⟩R−d|D⟩R
|ψ⟩R,m XX=0,mZZ=1∝b|B⟩R+c|C⟩R
|ψ⟩R,m XX=1,mZZ=1∝b|B⟩R−c|C⟩R(S7)
For convenience we have dropped the normalization constants from the above equations. We now explain how this
transformation is achieved with the fusion circuit.
In the fusion circuit, a CZ gate is applied between each of the two fusion qubits and the ancilla. In the absence
of erasures, which we refer to as case 1 , the ancilla is measured in the Xbasis, which projects the fusion qubits in
an eigenstate of Z⊗Zwith eigenvalue given by the outcome of the ancilla measurement ma. Thus after the ancilla
measurement, the state |ψ⟩reduces to
|ψ⟩mZZ=ma=0∝a|0⟩i|0⟩j|A⟩R+d|1⟩i|1⟩j|D⟩R
|ψ⟩mZZ=ma=1∝b|1⟩i|0⟩j|B⟩R+c|0⟩i|1⟩j|C⟩R(S8)
Next we measure X⊗I,I⊗Xwith measurement outcomes mi, mjrespectively. After this the fusion qubits are
unentangled from Rthe state of which is |ψ⟩R,m XX=mi⊕mj,mZZ=maas desired. Thus in the absence of errors, the
circuit indeed performs the correct fusion operation.
Next we consider the situation when an erasure is detected. If only the ancilla is erased then each fusion qubit is
measured independently in the Zbasis with the measurement outcomes m′
i, m′
j. This gives mZZ=m′
i⊕m′
j. In
the biased erasure model, the qubit can only be erased if it started from the |1⟩state. So if one of the fusion qubits
is erased then it is effectively measured in the Zbasis with measurement outcome 1. Thus, if only one of the fusion
qubits is erased then we measure the other qubit in Zbasis to obtain the outcome m, so that mZZ=m⊕1. If both
qubits are erased then we know that mZZ= 0.
S4. ERROR CORRECTION WITH PLANAR ARRAYS OF QUBITS
Figure S2(a) shows how a foliated repetition code can be implemented with just two linear chains of resource
states. The repetition code is teleported back-and-forth between the qubits marked in blue. We start with repetition
code and bring in post-selected resource states. Next we perform the fusion and single qubit Xmeasurements on the
two arrays marked with grey and red boxes respectively. This effectively measures all the stabilizers of the repetition
code once and teleports the repetition code to the top blue row of qubits. This process can be repeated depending
on the desired number of rounds of error correction.
A more qubit-efficient procedure is shown in Fig. S2(b). Here we use only a single array of resource state at a
given time, but the array needs to be reinitialized twice per-round of stabilizer measurement.
Figure S3 shows how the XZZX surface code can be implemented with planar arrays of resource states. The
figure focuses on a single stabilzer plaquette for clarity. The code is teleported back-and-forth between the qubits
marked in red and black that are placed at the corners of the plaquette. We start with the XZZX code and bring
in post-selected resource states. Next we perform the fusion and single qubit Xmeasurements which effectively
measures all the stabilizers of the XZZX code once and teleports it to a new plane on the right. This process can be
repeated depending on the desired number of rounds of error correction.17
/gid00506/gid00028/gid00507
/gid00506/gid00029/gid00507
Figure S2. (a) Foliated repetition code implemented with just two linear chains of resource states. Note that, due to the
structure of our resource states, each stabilizer is measured twice per cycle as shown in this figure. (b) Qubit-efficient
implementation of the foliated repetition code. Space is traded off for time/number of steps it takes to measure one round of
stabilizers.
S5. OVERHEAD COMPARISON BETWEEN THE CIRCUIT-BASED AND FUSION-BASED
APPROACHES
We present in Table S1 a resource cost estimate of the two fusion-based approaches for the repetition code, and
a comparison of the overhead between the fusion-based and circuit-based approaches for the XZZX code. In the
hybrid-fusion approach for the XZZX code, symmetry preservation allows the usage of a rectangular code with dx, dz
where dx̸=dz. Here, we use both the previously introduced 8-ring resource states along with 3-body and 5-body
states at the boundaries of the code. The estimates in the table account for the bulk of the code; dependent on the
choice of starting foliation step there are boundary effects (linear in dx, dz) that are discarded for this analysis. Note
that the circuit-based approach has to use the square surface code with dx=dz, where we examine the rotated-code
configuration for reduced qubit overhead compared to the unrotated code. We note that the threshold error rates
presented in the paper are derived using unrotated square codes.
We observe that fusion requires significantly more ancilla qubits than circuit-based QEC, ∼6.5 times more for a
square surface code. This overhead is cut in half by trading space for time with the reduced circuits ( i.e., Fig. S2b).
However, the fact that the fusion approach maintains the erasure bias allows a rectangular code with dx≪dz. This
can result in lower qubit counts: for example, if dx= 3, the reduced fusion circuit uses fewer qubits than the square
code when dz≥13.
However, we also note that the number of data qubits needed to store a logical state is the same in every approach.
In neutral atom qubits, the rate of idle errors is much lower than the rate of gate errors. Therefore, one can envision
that for many logical circuit schedules, only a fraction of the logical qubits are undergoing error correction at any18
Figure S3. XZZX cluster state implemented with planar layers of resource states19
# data # ancilla #CZ # Meas. CZ
depth
Rep. codeFusion d 5d−1 6 d−2 5 d−1 4
Fusion (reduced) d O (2.5d) 6 d−2 5 d−1 8
Surface codeCircuit (rotated) d2
z d2
z−1a4(d2
z−1) d2
z−1 4
Fusion 2 dzdx−dx−dz+ 1 O(11dzdx) O(16dzdx) O(10dzdx) 4
Fusion (reduced) 2 dzdx−dx−dz+ 1 O(6dzdx) O(16dzdx) O(10dzdx) 8
aThis assumes using different ancilla qubits for different stabilizers, and can be reduced to ( dz−1)2by reusing some ancilla qubits
near the boundary (without qubit shuttling) for different stabilizers [82].
TABLE S1. An overhead budget, up to leading order, for the discussed error correction approaches. This budget is calculated
per one round of stabilizer measurement. The estimates account for, by labeled column: (1) number of data qubits, (2) number
of ancilla qubits, (3) total number of CZ gates, (4) single-qubit measurements (# Meas.), (5) number of CZ gate layers per
round (CZ depth). The ‘#CZ’ and ‘CZ depth’ in the fusion architecture account for the CZ gates used in resource state
generation, fusions, and inter-layer CZs, and also assume successful post-selection of resource states. For the surface code,
we consider a rotated square lattice in the circuit-based approach, while in the fusion-based case, a rectangular lattice is
examined due to symmetry preservation of the XZZX code under biased noise even without bias-preserving CX gates.
point in time. In that case, ancilla qubits for QEC may not be a significant portion of the total qubit budget, and
the rectangular codes enabled by the fusion circuit may result in an overhead that is lower by a factor of dz/2dx.
Finally, we note that the number of CZ gates needed for one QEC round is also larger in the fusion-based approach,
but that their influence on the logical error rate is already accounted for in the threshold simulations (i.e, the
threshold is higher for the fusion QEC despite the larger number of CZ gates). Furthermore, these gates can be
highly parallelized, which is reflected in the small increase in the number of CZ gate rounds.
S6. DECODING GRAPH FOR FUSION-BASED CONSTRUCTION AT Re= 1
Starting from 8-ring resource states, the cluster state is built using two primary operations: fusions within 2D
planes, and CZ gates between planes. Biased erasures form the dominant error channel for both operations. In the
following discussion we set Re= 1, and so Pauli errors are absent.
Fusion failure on a Z-type qubit leads to a correlated Z⊗Zerror on its two X-type neighbours in the resource state.
This correlated error creates ( −1) stabilizer outcomes in unit cells diagonally displaced from one another within this
plane. An erasure during a CZ gate between two X-type qubits leads to a correlated Zerror on both qubits. Since
these two qubits create pairs of syndromes in unconnected planes, we consider these two errors independently. The
resultant decoding graph is shown in Fig. S4, where the former resource states have been highlighted using dashed
lines.
This graph is commonly referred to as the union-jack lattice, and is the dual of the (4 ,82) tiling of the plane. The
percolation threshold pthfor this graph is naively 0 .3232 [83], however, because errors from two gates contribute
to every edge in the decoding graph, we have 2 pth−p2
th= 0.3232, with the quadratic term appearing because we
do not perform the CZ gate on erasure detection at the first gate in both fusions and inter-layer CZs on qubits.
Consequently, we obtain a theoretical threshold of pth= 17.7% in terms of the error rate per gate. We recover this
value by performing numerical simulations in the large-size limit.20
Figure S4. (left) Possible error syndromes arising from biased erasures during CZ gates and fusions between Ztype qubits for
a single plane of the XZZX cluster state. (right) The resultant syndrome graph used for decoding, highlighted in red, forms
a union-jack lattice.