Observation of Acoustically Induced Dressed  States of  Rare -Earth Ions  
 
Ryuichi Ohta1, Grégoire Lelu1, Xuejun Xu1, Tomohiro Inaba1, Kenichi Hitachi1, 
Yoshitaka Taniyasu1, Haruki Sanada1, Atsushi Ishizawa2, Takehiko Tawara3, 
Katsuya Oguri1, Hiroshi Yamaguchi1, and Hajime Okamoto1 
 
1NTT Basic Researc h Laboratories, NTT Corporation , 3-1 Morinosato Wakamiya, Atsugi, Kanagawa 243 -0198, Japan  
2College of Industrial Technologies, Nihon University , 1-2-1 Izumi, Narashino, Chiba 275-8575, Japan  
3College of Engineering, Nihon University , 1 Tokusada Nakagawara, Tamura, Kouriyama , Fukushima, 963 -8642, Japan  
 
Acoustically induced dressed states of long -lived erbium ions in a crystal are demonstrated. 
These states are formed by rapid  modulation of two -level systems via strain induced  by 
surface acoustic waves whose frequencies exceed the optical linewidth of the ion ensemble. 
Multiple sidebands and the reduction of their intensities  appear ing near  the surface  are 
evidence of a strong interaction between the acoustic waves and  the ions. This development 
allows for on-chip control of long -lived ions and paves the way to highly coherent hybrid 
quantum systems with telecom photons , acoustic phonons , and electrons . 
 
Interact ions between two -level systems (TLSs) 
and external fields are of fundamental interest in 
various fields of physics and quantum technologies. 
Such interaction s allow the TLS s to be controlled 
through external fields, enabling optical and electrical 
excitati ons and readout of the TLS  states . Under a 
strong field, the TLSs are renormalized by the field, 
leading to hybrid states called “dressed states ”. Such 
dressed states  are a universal concept  across many 
physical platforms  [1, 2]  and can be used for controlling 
and engineering TLSs , such as  through coherent state 
manipulation [ 3, 4 ], population transfer between 
different spin states [ 5, 6], and extension of the 
coherence time  of the systems  [7].  
Dressed  states generated by rapid  modu lation of 
TLSs through an acoustic field are particularly 
interest ing as they offer the possibility of  local 
manipulation of quantum devices. Because the 
acoustic fields can be spatially confined within the 
order of their wavelengths, typically several 
micrometers  in the vertical  or horizontal  direction , this 
scheme is advantageous for enhancing the interaction 
between the field and the TLSs and also for device 
integration . So far, acoustically induced dressed states 
have been used to couple exci ted electrons with 
different spin configurations. This has a potential 
application to continuous dynamic decoupling by 
acoustic phonons and may lead to robust two -level 
systems in solid platforms [6] . Moreover, these states 
would  be useful  in the fields of  quantum acoustics [ 8] 
and optomechanics [ 9], as a way to build  hybrid 
quantum systems with photons, electrons, and 
phonons. However,  the ability to generat e optically 
accessible  dressed  states,  which are  evidenced by the 
sideband peaks in the optical spectra , has so far been limited to TLSs with short decay times (< 100 ns), such 
as in quantum dots [ 10-13] and  diamond color centers 
[6, 14 , 15]. These short decay times  hinder the 
usefulness  of the dressed states  especially  in quantum 
memories an d repeaters which require long coherence 
times (> 1 ms). If optically accessible  acoustically 
induced dressed  states could be realized in long -lived 
TLSs, it would enable great control over  quantum 
states and be a breakthrough for highly coherent 
hybrid quantum systems.  
Rare -earth ions in crystals are attractive TLSs 
whose resonances cover both optical and microwave 
frequencies with extremely long coherence time s. They  
have been incorporated in  various solid -state quantum 
devices, such as quantum m emories and repeaters [ 16-
18], spin qubits [ 19, 20], and transducers operating 
between optical and microwaves photons [ 21-23], in 
which the optical properties are externally 
manipulated  with magnetic  [24, 25] and electric fields  
[26, 27]. Acoustic modulation of rare -earth ions has 
also been demonstrated in an erbium -ion-embedded 
micromechanical resonator by using mechanical 
resonance  at 1 MHz  [28]. However, acoustically 
induced dressed  states have so far remained  
unrealized because the me chanical frequencies have 
been too low to modulate the TLSs in the resolved 
sideband regime .  
Here, we demonstrate  optically accessible dressed  
states  that are  acoustically induced by the interaction 
of erbium (Er) ions and a standing surface acoustic 
wave (SAW). In this system, the acoustic resonance 
frequency  (2.13 GHz)  exceeds the optical linewidth of 
Er ions  (500 MHz ); thus, this system  meets the 
resolved sideband conditi on. The rapid modulation of 
the optical resonance in this regime  leads to the appearance of multiple sidebands in the 
photoluminescence excitation (PLE) spectra, which 
correspond to the acoustically induced dressed  states 
of the Er ions  (Fig. 1(a)) . This f eature can be 
reproduced with a model based on frequency 
modulation of an ensemble  of two-level systems. We 
found that the maximum modulation index, which is 
proportional to  the coupling strength between 
electrons and phonons, reaches 5.0 near the crystal 
surface. This large modulation index allows the 
destructive interference and reduction of the PL 
intensities induced  by the SAW . It indicates the 
suppress ion of  the direct e lectron -photon coupling and 
thus enable s one to control the excitation of Er ions via 
acoustic waves.  These acoustically induced dressed  
states would be  useful in  the field s of quantum 
acoustics and optomechanics and may pave the way to 
on-chip hybridizati on of the telecom photons, long -
lived electrons, and acoustic phonons.  
Figure s 1(b) and 1(c)  show schematic  and 
microscope images  of the SAW device fabricated on a 
170Er: yttrium orthosilicate (YSO) crystal with an Er 
density of 50 ppm. We fabricated 800-nm-pitch 
interdigital transducers (IDTs) and Bragg reflectors 
(BRs) on YSO crystal with a 200 -nm-thick aluminum 
nitride (AlN) piezoelectric layer [ 29]. Figure s 1(d) 
shows the numerically calculated shear strain ( 𝜀𝑥𝑧) 
induced by a SAW  with the finite element method. It 
show s that the strain field of the SAW penetrates the 
substrate with a decay constant ( 𝑑𝑚) of 3.5 µm from the 
boundary of the AlN and YSO  (see also Fig. 4(b)) , while 
the strain field is widely distributed in the x -y plane 
between the two BRs . The wavelength of the SAW was 
designed to be 1.6 µm, which corresponds to a 
mechanical  resonance frequency of 2.1 GHz  [29]. 
Figure 2(a) shows the experimental setup for the optical spectroscopy (red and yellow arrows) and 
frequency  response measurements (green arrow s). For 
the optical spec troscopy , the pump laser frequency was 
stabilized with an optical frequency comb laser near 
the resonance frequency of  the Y1-Z1 transition of Er 
ions (1536.4 nm) and finely tuned with an electro -optic 
modulator [ 30]. To reduce the peak broadening induced 
by the heating effect due to the carrier and SAW 
excitation, the pulsed optical pump and acoustic drive 
were injected with duty ratios of 0.8 % and 1.6%, 
respectively. The pump laser was focused on the 
surface (3 µm waist) between the two IDTs. The PL 
intensities of the Y 1-Z2 transition (1546.4 nm) were 
measured with the detector s. For the frequency  
response measurements, the SAW was continuously 
excited  with a drive voltage of 12 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠, while the 
frequency was swept near 2.1 GHz. The frequency 
response was measured with a Sagnac optical 
interferometer and a vector network analyzer. The 
sample was  measured at 10 K  in a low -pressure 
chamber (< 10-4 Pa). 
The measured mechanical response of the SAW 
device is shown in Fig. 2 (b). The Q factor  of the 
mechanical resonance  at 2.13 GHz  (= 𝜔𝑚2𝜋⁄), as 
estimated from a Lorentzian fitting,  was 400 . The 
frequency response of the electrical transmission 
between the two IDTs  was also measured. It  showed 
acoustic resonance at 2.13 GHz [ 29]. Figure 2 (c) shows 
the PLE spectrum of Er ions without a SAW excitation. 
The full width at half maximum ( Γ2𝜋⁄) of the o ptical 
linewidth  was 500 MHz , which is lower  than the 
acoustic  resonance frequency, thereby allowing for an 
acoustic modulation of the ion  ensemble  in the 
resolved -sideband regime ( 𝜔𝑚>Γ). Figure 2 (d) shows 
the time -resolved PLE intensities without SAW 
excitation. It confirms that the relaxation lifetime  is 
 
Figure 1 : (a) Schematic image of the generation of 
acoustically induced dressed states of an Er ion 
ensemble. 𝜔𝑚 is the angular frequency of the SAW. 
(b) Schematic illustration of the SAW device 
fabricated on an 170Er:YSO crystal. Laser is focused 
at the center of  two IDT electrodes. (c) Microscope 
image of the fabricated device. Red circle indicates 
the point of the laser irradiation. (d) Numerically 
calculated shear strain induced by SA W in the x -z 
cross -section.  
 
 
Figure 2 : (a) Experimental setup. LD: laser diode, 
EOM: electro -optic modulator, AOM: acousto -optic 
modulator, OFC: optical frequency comb, BPD: 
balanced photo detector, FG: function generator, 
SG: signal generator, CCD: charge coupled device, 
SM: spectrometer, SSPD: superconducting single 
photon detector, and SI: Sagnac optical 
interferometer . (b) Frequency response of the 
displacement. (c) PLE spectrum without acoustic 
drive. The inset shows the energy levels used for the 
optical pump and luminescence measurements. (d ) 
Optical decay of the excited state of the Er ions 
measured through the PLE intensity.  
 
extremely long  (τ=10.1 ms) , which is a  remarkable 
aspect of the Er ions.  
To observe  the acoustically induced dressed  states, 
we combine d the PLE me asurement with the 
excitation of a SAW. Figure 3(a) shows the PLE spectra 
taken under  acoustic driving (𝑉𝑑) with 19.2 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠 and a 
driving frequency ( 𝑓𝑑) of 2.13 GHz (blue plots). For 
comparison, the PLE spectra without acoustic driving 
is plotted in  gray. In addition to the center peak, which 
corresponds to the direct optical transition, sideband 
peaks up to 𝑛 = 3 appear  at frequencies of 𝑛×𝑓𝑑, 
where 𝑛 is an integer. These sideband peaks 
correspond to the acoustically induced dressed  states 
of the  Er ions, which are  the renormalized states of the 
ions under the strong acoustic field.  
To quantitatively analyze the  dressed states , we 
calculated  the spectra with a model including  time-
varying strain  that modulates the  transition frequency  
of the Er ion ensemble . In the case of a single ion, the 
PLE spectrum of the dressed state ( 𝐼𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔) is described 
by multiple peaks weighted with an 𝑛-th Bessel 
function  of the first kind  (𝐽𝑛[𝜒]; Eq. (1 a)) in the same 
manner as a quantum dot  [10] or nitrogen vacancy  
center [ 6].  
𝐼𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝜔)∝∑𝐽𝑛2[𝜒]×Γ
(𝜔−𝜔𝐸𝑟−𝑛𝜔𝑚)2+Γ2
𝑛 (1a) 
𝜒=𝐺𝑉×𝑉𝑑
𝜔𝑚 (1b) 
In these systems, the modulation index, called the 
Bessel parameter, ( 𝜒) is defined by  the product of  the 
modulation coefficient of the resonance frequency of 
the ions ( 𝐺𝑉=𝑑𝜔 𝑑𝑉⁄ ) and the input voltage 
normalized by the acoustic  resonance frequency 
𝑉𝑑𝜔𝑚⁄, where 𝐺𝑉 corresponds to the overall efficiency 
of generating the acoustically induced dressed  states in this device  (Eq. (1b)) . In the case of the ion ensemble, 
where the ions are uniformly distributed in the crystal, 
these modulation effects should accumulate thr ough 
all ions within the area of the  laser spot. As shown in 
Fig. 1(d)  and Fig. 4(b) , the strain  field of the SAW , 
which is proportional to 𝜒, exponentially decreases 
along  the z-axis with 𝑑𝑚 of 3.5 µm. On the other hand , 
the optical field  (𝐸𝑜𝑝𝑡) is distributed according to a 
Gaussian beam profile with in a focal depth ( 𝑑𝑜𝑝𝑡) of 4.8 
m (see Fig. 4(b) ), which was estimated by fitt ing the 
PLE spectra [ 29].  
The observed  PLE spectra  include responses from  all 
of the optically excited  ions distributed in the z 
direction  (𝐼𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑚 (𝜔)) and are well fitted with the 
following equations:  
𝐼𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑚 (𝜔)∝∫𝐸𝑜𝑝𝑡(𝑧)×∑𝐽𝑛2[𝜒(𝑧)]×Γ(𝑧)
(𝜔−𝜔𝐸𝑟(𝑧)−𝑛𝜔𝑚)2+Γ(𝑧)2
𝑛𝑑𝑧 (2a) 
𝐸𝑜𝑝𝑡(𝑧)=𝐸0𝑑𝑜𝑝𝑡 √𝑧2+𝑑𝑜𝑝𝑡2⁄  (2b) 
𝜒(𝑧)=𝜒0exp(−𝑧𝑑𝑚⁄ ) (2c) 
𝜔𝐸𝑟(𝑧)=𝜔0+∆𝜔+δ𝜔exp(−𝑧𝑑𝑚⁄ ) (2d) 
Γ(𝑧)=Γ0+∆Γ+δΓ exp(−𝑧𝑑𝑚⁄ ) (2e) 
where 𝐸0 is the normalized optical intensity, 𝜒0 is the 
maximum Bessel parameter obtained at the boundary 
of the AlN and YSO, 𝜔0(Γ0) is the intrinsic resonance 
frequency  (linewidth)  measured without SAW 
driving.  ∆𝜔 (∆Γ) is the z -independent frequency  shift 
(linewidth broadening), and δ𝜔 (δΓ) is the coe fficient 
of the frequency shift (linewidth broadening) that  
exponentially  depends on the z position. ∆𝜔 (∆Γ) shifts 
(broadens) all peaks in equal, whose origin we consider 
is the heating effect coming from the dissipation of 
SAW energy  [6, 14, 15] . On the  other hand, the last 
term of Eq. 2d (2e) dominantly shifts (broadens) the 
 
Figure. 3: (a) PLE spectr a with (blue circles) and without (gray circles) acoustic driving of 19.2 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠. Red lines 
are fittings given by Eq. 2. (b -d) PLE spectr a for drive voltages of 19.2, 7.6, and 3.0 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠. We decomposed the 
spectra into the 0th (gray), 1st (green), 2nd (orange), and 3rd (purple) sidebands by using Eq. 2a -e. (e,f) Drive 
voltage dependence of the frequency shift (e) and linewidth (f) of the center peak (gray circles), 1st (green 
circles), 2nd (orange circles), and 3rd (purple circles) sidebands. (g) Drive voltage dependence of the peak area 
of the 1st (green circles), 2nd (orange circles), and 3rd (purple circles) sidebands. (h) Drive voltage dependence 
of 𝜒0. The red line is the linear fitting curve. (i) Drive freque ncy dependence of the Bessel parameters 
determined from the sideband peaks (circles) at a drive voltage of  12 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠. The solid line shows the frequency 
response of the mechanical displacement measured with a Sagnac interferometer.  
higher order sidebands, which originate from the 
luminescence from the strained ions located near the 
surface (i.e., at small z)  [31, 32]. The last term of Eq. 
2d leads to a differe nce in the frequency shift between 
the center peak and the sidebands. This causes the 
asymmetry in amplitude between the blue and red 
sidebands  shown in Fig. 3(b) and 3(c)  [29]. We used Eq. 
(2a-2e) to fit the PLE spectra for various drive voltages, 
where the spectra for 𝑉𝑑 = 19.2, 7.6, and 3.0 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠 are 
shown in Fig. 3(b) -3(d). Good agreement between the 
experimentally observed spectra and the fitted curves 
confirm that  our model describe s the overall behavior 
of the acoustically induced dressed  state s. 
Figure s 3(e) and 3(f) show the frequency and 
linewidth of the center peak and each sideband with 
respect to the driving voltage, which were estimated by 
fitting the experimental data with Eq. 2. They show 
that the frequency shift and linewidth broadening of 
the higher order sideband s are larger than that in the 
lower order sidebands or the center peak. This 
suggests that SAW strain, which is larger in the regime 
near the surface, is the main cause of these changes, 
because the higher order sidebands are dominated by 
excited ions loca ted near the surface (at small z). 
Figure s 3(g) and 3(h) show t he drive -voltage 
dependence of the  peak area in ea ch sideband  and 𝜒0. 
The linear dependence  of 𝜒0 on the drive voltage  leads 
to 𝐺𝑉 = 3.34 𝐺𝐻𝑧 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠⁄ , while  𝜒0 exceeds 5.0 with 
high drive voltages.  We also found that the generation 
of the sidebands strongly depends on the SAW drive 
frequency ( Fig. 3 (i)). The matching of the overall 
tendenc y of 𝜒0 with the mechanical displacement  
indicates  that the dressed states were generated by the 
strain field induced by the SAW  [29]. 
By taking into account the strain distribution 
along the z -axis (Fig. 1(d)  and Fig. 4(b) ), we can 
estimate the z-position dependence of the acoustically 
induced dressed  states and the sideband amplitude  
[29]. Here, we should  note that the optical field depth 
is deeper  than the strain depth, i.e., 𝑑𝑜𝑝𝑡>𝑑𝑚 (Fig. 
4(b)) . Therefore, the experimentally obtained PLE 
spectra include the signal from the ions  with a 
different strain -field strength . We decompose d the 
spectrum (obtained with the drive voltage of 19.2 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠) 
with respect to the z-position based on  Eq. 2 , as shown in Fig. 4 (a). The decomposition s indicate that each 
sideband originates from ions located at different 
depth s and the heights of the sidebands become higher 
than the center peak within 8 µm from the top surface.  
Owing to the large 𝜒0 near the surface, maximum and 
minimum points both appear in the intensities of the 
0th, 1st, and 2nd sidebands.  The minimum points , where 
𝐽𝑛[𝜒(𝑧)]=0 (points A, B, and B’ in Fig. 4(a)), are 
particularly interesting. They are caused  by 
destructive interference from the cascaded sidebands  
[2]. For example, the first  sidebands interfere with the 
center  peak  via their cascaded sideba nds destructively, 
leading to a minimization of the optical intensity at 
point A in Fig. 4(a). The appearance of  the interference  
reveals that the electron states are coherently 
modulated by the acoustic strain , so that t he energy 
transduction is a coherent process. The annihilation of 
the center peak at point A indicates that we can 
externally manipulate the effective dipole moment of  
the electrons and set the excited ions to be optically 
dark. Such dark states could be use d to extend  the 
relaxation rate of the excited ions and thus would be 
useful for memory applications.   
In the current device, a signature  of the 
destructive  interference  is the saturation and  the 
small reduction in the peak area of the first  sidebands 
shown in Fig. 3(g) . On the other hand, a reduction  in 
amplitude  to zero cannot be confirmed , because the 
observed intensity is the sum of the intensities along 
the z direction , which include the luminescence from 
weakly strained or unstrained io ns. In order to utilize  
the destructive interference , one should optically excite 
only the ions around the top  surface, in which the 
acoustic strain is large. In this respect, it would be 
effective to  incorporate nanophotonic waveguides and 
cavities into Er: YSO crystals [3 3], which would give 
an evanescent optical field within 1 µm from the 
surface.  The use of epitaxially grown thin films 
containing Er ions would be another way to localize 
ions within 100 nm of the surface  [34]. The 
combination of nanophotonic and acoustic devices on 
epitaxially grown Er -doped substrates would 
substantially improve the controllability of the ions 
with this acoustically induced dressed  architecture.  
In summary, this letter  examined the acoustically 
induced dressed  states of Er ions  in a YSO crystal . The 
ability to generate a n acoustically induced dressed  
state is not only important for  engineer ing long-lived 
optical state s; it is also important in terms of quantum 
acoustics and optomechanics, once the acoustic field is 
quantized. By using phonon sidebands, coherent 
energy transduction between photons, electrons, and 
phonons becomes possible  with appropriate frequency 
matching of t he laser, ions, and acoustic waves . For 
instance, Rabi oscillation s (entanglement) between 
excited electrons and acoustic phonons are driven by 
absorption of photons whose frequencies are red - 
(blue -) detuned from the resonance of the ions. Owing 
to the lo ng-lived nature of the rare -earth ions, the 
decay times  of the excited electrons , which directly 
interact  with the photons,  are much longer than those 
of the phonons. Thus , we can construct an 
optomechanical system in the so-called reversed 
dissipation reg ime [28, 35] with optical photons . In this  
Figure. 4: (a) Decomposition of the PLE spectrum 
at 𝑉𝑑 of 19.2 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠 with respect to the depth of the 
YSO crystal. Color corresponds to the normalized 
strain. A, B, and B’ indicate the po ints where the 
intensity becomes zero due to the destructive 
interference of the excitation. (b) Strain and 
optical field distribution along the z -axis.  
regime, multiple acoustic pulses can be applied to the 
ions within their  decay  times. This would allow us to 
coherently control the excited electrons by  using  
acoustic phonons and devise acoustic pump -probe 
spectroscopy and phonon -driven  echo measurements 
in an analogous way to optical pulse s. Moreover, t he 
dressed state s reflect the physical  characteristics  of Er 
ions, such as spin -selection rule in the transitions, 
magnetic field dependence  on energy levels  with 
various g -factors, and nonlinear responses due to the 
saturations of excitations . The acoustic modulation of 
these proper ties develops  the fundamental study of 
solid -state physics in rare -earth ions. The resonance 
frequencies of the Er ions are at telecom wavelength s, 
so such device s can be easily interconnected with 
optical fibers. The presented results will enable  on-
chip control of highly coherent light -matter interfaces 
and will advance the field of quantum acoustics and 
optomechanics through the development of  integrated 
hybrid q uantum architectures for large -scale quantum 
network s. 
We thank S. Sasaki, D. Hatanaka, M. Kurosu, M.  
Hiraishi, and S. Yasui for technical support and 
discussions.  This work was supported by JSPS 
KAKENHI , Grant Number JP23H01112.  
 
Reference s 
 
[1] S. Ashhab, J. R. Johansson, A. M. Zagoskin, and F. 
Nori, Two -Level systems driven by large -amplitude 
fields, Phys. Rev. A 75, 063414 (2007).  
[2] M. P . Silveri, J. A. Tuorila, E. V . Thuneberg, and G. 
S. Paraoanu, Quantum systems under frequency 
modulation, Rep . Prog. Phys. 80, 056002 (2017).  
[3] S. C. Webster, S. Weidt, K. Lake, J. J. McLoughlin, 
and W . K. Hensinger, Simple Manipulation of a 
Microwave Dressed -State Ion Qubit, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
111, 140501 (2013).  
[4] J. Kölbl, A. Barfuss, M. S. Kasperczyk, L. Th iel, A.A. 
Clerk, H. Hibeiro, and P. Maletinsky, Initialization of 
Single Spin Dressed States using Shortcuts to 
Adiabaticity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 090502 (2019).  
[5] C. Belthangady, N. Bar -Gill, L. M. Pham, K. Arai, 
D. Le Sage, P. Cappellaro, and R. L. Wa lsworth, 
Dressed -State Resonant Coupling between Bright and 
Dark Spins in Diamond Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 157601 
(2013).  
[6] H. Y. Chen, E. R. MacQuarrie, and G. D. Fuchs, 
Orbital State Manipulation of a Diamond Nitrogen -
Vacancy Center Using a Mechanical Resonator, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 120, 167401 (2018).  
[7] N. Timoney, I. Baumgart, M. Johanning, A. F. 
Varon, M. B. Plenio, A. Retzker, and Ch. Wunderlich, 
Quantum gates and memory using microwave -dressed 
states, Nature 476, 185 (2011).  
[8] A. A. Cler k, K. W. Lehnert, P. Bertet, J. R. Petta, 
and Y. Nakamura, Hybrid quantum systems with 
circuit quantum electrodynamics, Nat. Phys. 16, 257 
(2020).  
[9] M. Aspelmeyer, T. Kippenberg, F. Marquardt, 
Cavity optomechanics, Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 1391 (2014).  
[10] M. Metcalfe,  S. M. Carr, A. Muller, G. S. Solomon, 
and J. Lawall,  Resolved Sideband Emission of 
InAs/GaAs Quantum Dots Strained by Surface Acoustic Waves, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 037401 (2010).  
[11] M. Weiß, D. Wigger, M. Nägele, K. Müller, J. J. 
Finley,  T. Kuhn, P. Machnikowski, and H. J. Krenner, 
Optomechanical wave mixing by a single quantum dot, 
Optica 8, 291 (2021).  
[12] R. A. DeCrescent, Z. Wang, P. Imany, R. C. 
Boutelle, C. A. McDonald, T. Autry, J. D. Teufel, S. W. 
Nam, R. P. Mirin, and K. L. Silv erman, Large Single -
Phonon Optomechanical Coupling Between Quantum 
Dots and Tightly Confined Surface Acoustic Waves in 
the Quantum Regime, Phys. Rev. Appl. 18, 034067 
(2022).  
[13] A. S. Kuznetsov, K. Biermann, A. Reynoso, A. 
Fainstein, and P. V . Santos, Mi crocavity phonoritons a 
coherent optical -to-microwave interface, Arxiv 
2210.14331 (2022).  
[14] D. A. Golter. T. Oo, M. Amezcua, K. A. Stewart, 
and H. Wang, Optomechanical Quantum Control of a 
Nitrogen -Vacancy Center in Diamond, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
116, 143602  (2016).  
[15] S. Maity, L. Shao, S. Bogdano vić S. Meesala, Y. 
Sohn, N. Sinclair, B. Pingault, M. Chalupnik, C. Chia, 
L. Zheng, K. Lai, and M. Lončar, Coherent acoustic 
control of a single silicon vacancy spin in diamond, Nat. 
Commun. 11, 193 (2020).  
[16] I. Usmani, C. Clausen, F. Bussières, N. Sangouard, 
M. Afzelius, and N. Gisin, Heralded quantum 
entanglement between two crystals, Nat. Photon. 6, 
234 (2012).  
[17] D. L -Rivera, S. Grandi, J. V. Rakonjac, A. Seri, and 
H. de Riedmatten, Telecom -heralded entang lement 
between multimode solid -state quantum memories, 
Nature 594, 37 (2021).  
[18] X. Liu, J. Hu, Z -F. Li, X. Li, P -Y. Li, P -J Liang, Z -
Q. Zhou, C -F. Li, and G -C Guo, Heralded entanglement 
distribution between two absorptive quantum 
memories, Nature 594, 4 1 (2021).  
[19] S. Bertaina, S. Gambarelli, A. Tkachuk, I. N. 
Kurkin, B. Malkin, A. Stepanov, and B. Barbara, Rare -
earth solid -state qubits, Nat. Nanotech. 2, 39 (2007).  
[20] M. Raha, S. Chen, C. M. Phenicie, S. Ourari, A. M. 
Dibos, and J. D. Thompson, Opti cal quantum 
nondemolition measurement of a single rare earth ion 
qubit, Nat. Commun. 11, 1605 (2020).  
[21] S. Welinski, P. J. T. Woodbum, N. Lauk, R. L. Cone, 
C. Simon, P . Goldner, and C. W. Thiel, Electron Spin 
Coherence in Optically Excited States of Rar e-Earth 
Ions for Microwave to Optical Quantum Transducers, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 247401 (2019).  
[22] J. G. Bartholomew, J. Rochman, T. Xie, J. M. 
Kindem, A. Ruskuc, I. Craiciu, M. Lei, and A. Faraon , 
On-chip coherent microwave -to-optical transduction 
media ted by ytterbium in YVO 4, Nat. Commun. 11, 
3266 (2020).  
[23] P. S. Barnett and J. J. Longdell, Theory of 
microwave -optical conversion using rare -earth -ion 
dopants, Phys. Rev. A 102, 063718 (2020).  
[24] T. Böttger, C. W. Thiel, Y. Sun, and R. L. Cone, 
Optical decoherence and spectral diffusion at 1.5 µm in 
Er3+:Y2SiO 5 versus magnetic field, temperature, and 
Er3+ concentration, Phys. Rev. B 73, 075101 (2006).  
[25] M. Rančić , M. P . Hedges, R. L. Ahlefeldt , and M. J. 
Sellars, Coherence time of over a second in a telecom -
compatible quantum memory storage material, Nat. Phys. 14, 50 (201 8). 
[26] A. L. Alexander, J. J. Longdell, M. J. Sellars, and 
N. B. Manson, Photon Echoes Produced by Switching 
Electric Fiel ds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 043602 (2006).  
[27] I. Craiciu, M. Lei, J. Rochman, J. G. Bartholomew, 
and A. Faraon,  Multifunctional on -chip storage at 
telecommunication wavelength for quantum networks,  
Optica 8, 114 (2021).  
[28] R. Ohta, L. Herpin, V . M. Bastid as, T. Tawara, H. 
Yamaguchi, and H. Okamoto,  Rare -Earth -Mediated 
Optomechanical System in the Reversed Dissipation 
Regime,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 047404 (2021).  
[29] See the Supplemental Materials for the detail s of 
the design and fabrication of the sample, electrical 
transmission spectrum of the SAW  device , drive 
frequency dependence at lower voltage and the origin 
of the sidebands , estimation of the optical decay length, 
decomposed spectra and destructive interference , and 
frequency shift and linewidth broadening caused by 
the heat of the SAW.  
[30] S. Yasui, M. Hiraishi, A. Ishizawa, H. Omi, R. Kaji, 
S. Adachi, and T. Tawara, Precise spectroscopy of 
167Er:Y 2SiO 5 based on laser frequency stabilization 
using a fiber laser  comb, Opt. Express 29, 27137 (2021).  [31] N. Galland, N. Lucic, B. Fang, S. Zhang, R. Le 
Targat, A. Ferrier, P . Goldner, S. Seidelin, and Y. Le 
Coq, Mechanical Tunability of an Ultranarrow 
Spectral Feature of a Rare -Earth -Doped Crystal via 
Uniaxial Stress, Phys. Rev. Appl. 13, 044022 (2020).  
[32] A. Louchet -Chauvet, R. Ahlefeldt, T. Chanellere, 
Piezospectroscopic measurement of high -frequency 
vibrations in a pulse -tube cryostat, Rev. of Sci. Instrum. 
90, 034901 (2019).  
[33] X. Xu, T. Inaba, T. Tsuchizawa, A. Ishizawa, H. 
Sanada, T. Tawara, H .Omi, K. Oguri, and H. Gotoh, 
Low-loss erbium -incorporated rare -earth oxide 
waveguides on Si with bound states in the continuum 
and the large optical signal enhancement in them, Opt. 
Express 29, 41132 (20 21). 
[34] T. Inaba, B. Mitchell, A. Koizumi, and Y. Fujiwara, 
Emission enhancement and its mechanism of Eu -
doped GaN by strain engineering , Opt. Mat. Express 7, 
1381  (2017). 
[35] L. D. Toth, N. R. Bernier, A. Nunnenkamp, A. K. 
Feofanov, and T. J. Kippenber g, A dissipative quantum 
reservoir for microwave light using a mechanical 
oscillator, Nat. Phys. 13, 787 (2017).  
 
  Supplemental M aterial s for  
“Observation of Acoustically Induced Dressed States of Rare -Earth Ions ” 
 
 
 
DESI GN AND FABRICATION OF THE SAMPLE  
 
In this section, we describe the procedure of 
fabricati ng the SAW device. First, we sputtered 200-
nm-thick AlN thin films at 800 ℃ on 170Er:YSO 
crystals with  an ion concentration  of 50 ppm 
(Scientific Materials ). The C -axes of AlN were 
oriented along the b -axis of the crystal (z -axis of the 
device). The X -ray rocking -curve (XRC) linewidth of 
the sputtered AlN was 4.0 degree s. Next, a  20-nm-
thick gold layer was deposited on the AlN to form 
interdigital transducers ( IDTs) with an 800 -nm-
pitch and 100 periods. 200 -period -Bragg reflectors 
(BRs) with the same pitch as the IDT were set 
outside the IDTs to form a Fabry -Pérot phonon 
cavity to enhance the strain field with acoustic 
resonances. The propagation direction of  the SAW 
was along  the D2 direction of the crystal (x -axis of 
the device). The length of the IDTs and the distance 
between them  were 30 and  25 μm, respectively . 
We designed the pitch of the IDTs to stand the 
SAW around 2 GHz.  A lower frequency  would 
improve the spatial overlap between the optical and 
strain fields  because  of the larger penetration depth 
of the strain ( 𝑑𝑚). However, t o clearly observe  the 
sidebands as separable peaks, we chose a SAW 
frequency around 2 GHz.  
Figure S1 shows the strain distribution of 𝜀𝑥𝑥, 
𝜀𝑧𝑧, and 𝜀𝑥𝑧 calculated with a  finite element method 
(FEM). In this two -layer structure of AlN and YSO, 
𝜀𝑥𝑥 and 𝜀𝑧𝑧 do not penetrate in the YSO, while 𝜀𝑥𝑧 
penetrates the YSO with a decay constant of 3.5 μm. 
Thus, 𝜀𝑥𝑧 is the major component with which to 
make the dressed stat es and  the other components 
are negligibl e. 
 
 
ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION SPECTRUM OF 
THE SAW  DEVICE  
 
 We measured  the electrical transmission 
spectrum ( S21) between  the two IDT electrodes at 10 
K. Figure S 2(a) shows the S 21 spectrum, whose y-
axis is a linear scale of the transmitted power. 
Figure S 2(b) shows the square of the mechanical 
amplitude (spectral power density)  measured by  the 
Sagnac  interferometer . In both cases, a mechanical 
resonance at 2.13 GHz appears . The Q factor derived 
from S21 is about 500, which is similar to that given by the Sa gnac  interferometer . A resonance at 2.12 
GHz also appears  in the S21 spectrum (Fig. S2(a)), 
while one is not clearly observ able in the optically 
measured spectrum (Fig. S2(b)). The resonance only 
found in the S21 spectrum at 2.12 GHz might be 
caused by the reflection between the IDT and the 
Bragg reflector, whose frequency is slightly different 
from  the resonance of the cavity. We used the 
acoustic resonance at 2.13 GHz for the experiments 
in the main text.  
 
 
DRIVE FREQU ENCY DEPENDENCE AT LOWER 
VOLTAGE  AND THE ORIGIN OF THE 
SIDEBANDS  
 
The general tendencies of the Bessel parameter 
estimated from the PLE spectra and the optically 
measured mechanical displacement for the driving 
frequency are similar  (Fig. 3(i) ). However, they do 
not perfectly match at the resonance of 2.13 GHz 
and frequencies  above  it. We cannot precisely  
explain this discrepancy, but one reason may be the 
different driving scheme s for the Sagnac 
interferometry (continuous driving) and the 
sideband observation (pulse driving), as the 
agreement  is better  for the smaller drive voltage  of 
4.2 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠 in Fig. S 3(a).  
Although a small discrepancy remains, the 
overall tendenc ies of the two measurements  are 
similar . For instance, driving  at a lower frequency 
(<2.07 GHz) does not create dressed states, which 
excludes microwaves coming from the IDTs  as a  
potential origin . The PLE spectra with the resonant 
drive (2.13 GHz) was distinctly different from that 
with the slightly detuned drive (for ins tance , 2.15 
GHz) , as shown in Fig. S3(b). The difference 
between the Bessel parameter s estimated for these 
two PLE spectra is not as large as that in the 
mechanical displacement measured by Sagnac  
Fig. S1: Distribution of each strain component 
simulated by FEM calculations.   
Fig. S2: (a) Electrically measured transmission 
spectrum (S 21) between two IDT electrodes. (b) 
Spectral power density of SAW measured by 
optical interferometry.  
interferometry, but the results suggest  that the 
acoustic r esonance on the dressed states  makes a 
significant contribution . Thus, we consider that the 
dressed states were caused by SAW strain.  
 
 
 
ESTIMATION OF THE OPTICAL DECAY 
LENGTH   
 
To fit the PLE spectra  shown in Fig. 3(a)-3(d), 
we set 𝑑𝑚 and 𝑑𝑜𝑝𝑡 to 3.5 and 4.8 µm , respectively,  
and took 𝐸0, ∆𝜔, δ𝜔, ∆Γ, and δΓ to be fitting  
parameters.  Here,  𝑑𝑚 was derived  to be 3.5 µm  
from the FEM  simulation . 𝑑𝑜𝑝𝑡 was 4.8 µm ; this 
value  gives  the best fitting for the largest drive 
voltage  of 19.2 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠, where a larger drive voltage 
should lead to a more reliable 𝑑𝑜𝑝𝑡 value because of 
the appearance of a large number of s idebands 
originat ing from ions located at different depth s.  
 
 
DECOMPOSED SPECTRA AND DESTRUCTIVE 
INTERFERENCE  
 
The decomposed spectrum at each depth (Fig. 
4(a)) was derived by fitting the experimental data 
(shown in Fig. 3(a)) to the form of Eqs. 2a -e in a 
minute integration range of z as follows , 
𝐼(𝑧)
=∫ 𝐸𝑜𝑝𝑡(𝑧)×∑𝐽𝑛2[𝜒(𝑧)]×Γ(𝑧)
(𝜔−𝜔𝐸𝑟(𝑧)−𝑛𝜔𝑚)2+Γ(𝑧)2
𝑛𝑑𝑧𝑧+∆𝑧
𝑧 (S1) 
where ∆𝑧 = 200 nm.  
 In order to reduce the excitation probabilities to 
zero, the maximum modulation index should be 
higher than 2.5. This can be understood by 
examining the graph  that shows the relation 
between 𝐽𝑛2[𝜒] and the Bessel param eter (Fig. S4). 
When the modulation index is 2.5, the amplitude of 
the 0 th-order Bessel function is zero (see the red 
plots in Fig. S4). This corresponds to point A in Fig. 
4(a), where the direct transition probability of the 
ions becomes zero. The second points appear when 
the modulation index is 3.8 (see the green plots in Fig. S4). This corresponds to point B and B’ in Fig. 
4(a), wher e the amplitude of the 1st–order  
sidebands become zero.  
 
 
 
FREQUENCY SHIFT AND LINEWIDTH 
BROADENING CAUSED BY  THE HEAT OF  THE 
SAW  
 
The theoretical form , Eq. 2 , fits t he 
experimental data shown in Fig. 3(b -d). Here,  the z-
independent term including ∆𝜔 (∆Γ) in Eq. 2d (2e) 
shifts (broadens) all peaks equal ly, whose origin we 
consider is not strain but rather the heating effect 
coming from the dissipation of SAW energy. The 
heating effect can be evaluated by comparing the 
experimentally measured temperature dependence 
of the frequency shift and linewidth broad ening with 
∆𝜔 and ∆Γ estimated by the fitting. Figure s S5(a) 
and S5(b) show the temperature dependence of the 
frequency shift and linewidth broadening of the Er 
resonance measured at 10-20 K in a similar sample 
of Er -doped YSO crystal, where  a heater in t he 
cryostat  was used to increase the sample 
temperature. Figure S5(c) and S5(d) show ∆𝜔2𝜋⁄ 
and ∆Γ2𝜋⁄ estimated by making a fitting for 
different drive voltage s in the present SAW device . 
They  give ∆𝜔2𝜋⁄ < 30 MHz and ∆Γ2𝜋⁄ < 200 MHz 
for 𝑉𝑑≤ 20 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠. A comparison of these values (Figs. 
S5(c) and S5(d)) with the measured temperature 
dependence of the frequency shift and linewidth  
broadening (Figs. S5(a) and S5(b)) suggests 
that the temperature increase for 𝑉𝑑 ≤ 20 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠 is 
within 4 K. We consider  that this heating effect can 
be further reduced by optimizing the device design, 
for example, by reducing  the IDT width.  
  
Fig. S 3: (a) Drive frequency dependence of the 
Bessel parameter for pulse driving with 𝑉𝑑 = 4.2 
𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠 (red plots). The s olid line shows the 
frequency response of the mechanical 
displacement measured by continuous driving 
with  𝑉𝑑 = 12 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠 with a Sagnac inter ferometer.  
(b) PLE spectra taken with drive frequencies of 
2.13 and 2.15 GHz  and 𝑉𝑑 of 12 𝑉𝑟𝑚𝑠.  
Fig. S 4: Relation between the Bessel parameter, 
𝜒, and the square of the amplitude of the 𝑛-th 
order Bessel function.  
 
 
Fig. S 5: Temperature dependences of t he 
frequency shift (a) and linewidth broadening (b) of 
the optical resonance measured in an Er -doped 
YSO crystal  without drive voltages. (c-d) Those 
caused by SAW s, which correspond to ∆𝜔2𝜋⁄ and 
∆Γ2𝜋⁄ in Eqs. 2d and 2e.  
