FOIS 2023
Towards a conceptual model for the FAIR
Digital Object Framework
Luiz Olavo BONINO DA SILV A SANTOSa;b;1, Tiago Prince SALESa,
Claudenir M. FONSECAaand Giancarlo GUIZZARDIa
aSemantics, Cybersecurity &Services (SCS), University of Twente, The Netherlands
bBiosemantics group, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands
Abstract. The FAIR principles deﬁne a number of expected behaviours for the data
and services ecosystem with the goal of improving the ﬁndability, accessibility,
interoperability, and reusability of digital objects. A key aspiration of the principles
is that they would lead to a scenario where autonomous computational agents are
capable of performing a “self-guided exploration of the global data ecosystem,” and
act properly with the encountered variety of types, formats, access mechanisms and
protocols. The lack of support for some of these expected behaviours by current
information infrastructures such as the internet and the World Wide Web motivated
the emergence, in the last years, of initiatives such as the FAIR Digital Objects
(FDOs) movement. This movement aims at an infrastructure where digital objects
can be exposed and explored according to the FAIR principles. In this paper, we
report the current status of the work towards an ontology-driven conceptual model
for FAIR Digital Objects. The conceptual model covers aspects of digital objects
that are relevant to the FAIR principles such as the distinction between metadata
and the digital object it describes, the classiﬁcation of digital objects in terms of
both their informational value and their computational representation format, and
the relation between different types of FAIR Digital Objects.
Keywords. FAIR, ontology-driven conceptual modelling, FAIR Digital Objects,
interoperability
1. Introduction
The evolution of the informatics infrastructure has happened so far in incremental and
complementary steps. Whenever the challenges presented in one step are addressed, a
new set of possibilities emerge and, with them, new challenges. From the challenges
of interconnecting computers in a network to interconnecting different networks (the
internet) and interlinking networked resources (the World Wide Web), one new layer of
interoperability facilitation leverages from the previous one.
In the digital realm, we constantly interact with different types of entities, or objects.
The totality of bits in a computer’s storage medium is divided into different units, repre-
senting different types of objects and distinguished based on their different informational
value. For instance, the bits sequence representing a text document, which contains an
1Corresponding Author: Luiz Olavo Bonino da Silva Santos, l.o.boninodasilvasantos@utwente.nl.arXiv:2302.11894v1  [cs.CY]  23 Feb 2023FOIS 2023
essay constitutes a different informational unit than another bits sequence representing
the text editor software.
The FAIR principles [1] brought a vision of a global ecosystem of dynamically in-
teroperable objects, such as data, services and computing capacity. This vision includes
computational agents that are “ capable of autonomously and appropriately acting when
faced with the wide range of types, format, and access mechanisms/protocols that will be
encountered in their self-guided exploration of the global ecosystem ”.
This envisioned scenario requires that the exploring computational agents are pro-
vided with enough actionable information about the encountered objects so that they can
automate as much as possible the object’s discovery, access, interoperation and reuse.
The provision of information about digital objects entails not only that the information is
made available to the agents, but it is also required that the infrastructure, participating
systems and services expose a number of behaviours for the interactions involved in this
provision to be supported. Therefore, to fully realise that vision, we need an infrastruc-
ture capable of supporting the manipulation of digital objects according to the require-
ments deﬁned by the FAIR principles as well as deﬁnitions of the expected behaviours
of the participating systems, applications and services.
These challenges to apply the FAIR principles in the current digital communication
infrastructure are the main motivators of the work on the FAIR Digital Object Framework
(FDOF). The FDOF is a framework designed to support the presentation of informational
objects in a digital environment. As the name suggests, the FDOF is inspired by the
notion of Digital Objects introduced in [2] and extended it to comply with the additional
requirements derived from the FAIR principles.
The FDOF aims at deﬁning features to provide infrastructural support for the FAIR
principles. This set of features added to the underlying communication infrastructure is
concentrated in requirements for a predictable identiﬁer resolution behaviour, a retrieval
mechanism for object metadata from the object’s identiﬁer and an object typing system.
To deﬁne the entities and relations included in the framework we have deﬁned an
ontology-based conceptual model named FAIR Digital Object Framework Conceptual
Model (FDOF-CM), which is the focus of this paper. The remainder of the paper is or-
ganised as follows: Section 2 introduces the FAIR Digital Object Framework and dis-
cusses the ontological foundations used in our proposed conceptual model; Section 3
presents the FDOF Conceptual Model detailing its main entities and relations; Section 4
evaluates the FDOF-CM by deriving an OWL ontology which is validated in a set of
relevant use cases; Section 5 discusses our related work; and Section 6 presents ﬁnal
considerations and future work.
2. Research Baseline
The focus of this paper is the conceptual model deﬁning and describing the entities and
relations present in the FAIR Digital Object Framework. Below we provide a research
baseline of the work on the FDOF and the ontological notions used in the FDOF-CM.
2.1. FAIR Digital Object Framework
In an increasingly complex digital environment automation becomes a necessity and to
support increasing levels of automation, proper identiﬁcation, and classiﬁcation of dif-FOIS 2023
ferent digital objects become relevant as well as the qualiﬁcation of the relations between
them. This brings additional requirements to the digital ecosystem, which are not prop-
erly covered by the internet or the World Wide Web. The latter, for instance, is based on
a network of digital objects linked through unqualiﬁed links, the web links, i.e., the links
between web resources are not semantically deﬁned.
In the seminal paper where the FAIR principles have been introduced [1], the authors
list enabling capabilities that autonomously-acting computational data exploring agents
acquire from information provided by the underlying infrastructure when facing newly
discovered digital objects. These capabilities are: “(1) identify the type of object (with
respect to both structure and intent), (2) determine if it is useful within the context of the
agent’s current task by interrogating metadata and/or data elements, (3) determine if it
is usable, with respect to license, consent, or other accessibility or use constraints, and
(4) take appropriate action, in much the same manner that a human would. ”
These required capabilities can be converted into the following questions that the
framework should support and enable both computational agents and humans to answer:
(Q1) What type of object does this encountered identiﬁer identiﬁes? (Q2) How can I
get more information (e.g., metadata) about this object? (Q3) How can this object be
manipulated, by whom, and under which conditions?
Given their different nature, digital objects can be manipulated in different ways.
The manipulation of digital objects occurs in a combination of computational agents and
the underlying technological infrastructure. The interactions happen considering at least
two aspects of the digital objects, their representation or materialisation format and their
informational content . The former distinguishes ways of manipulating different materi-
alisation formats such as an executable program, a PDF ﬁle, or a video ﬁle. While the
executable program can be run on a given operating system, we can “open” the PDF ﬁle
for reading or editing using speciﬁc supporting software and we can play the video ﬁle
to watch the animated sequence also using a video player software. In other words, the
possibility of interacting with a given digital object depends on the ability of the compu-
tational agent or technological infrastructure to handle the object’s encoding format.
The informational aspect of the digital objects is dealt with by inspecting the content
of the bit sequences considering their different informational roles, e.g., does a given bit
sequence represent a structured dataset, a software code, a natural language text docu-
ment, or images? Many materialisation formats are directly related to speciﬁc informa-
tional roles such as the MP4 format associated with video sequences and the XML for-
mat related to structured data. But in other cases, this relation is not so clear. For instance,
we can materialise digital images, text, and structured data using PDF ﬁles. In these
cases, knowing the materialisation format is not enough to clarify the informational na-
ture of the digital object. If we want to increase the autonomy of computational agents in
their handling of digital objects, we should also provide information about each object’s
informational value besides its materialisation format.
In order to support these questions and challenges the FDOF should rely on a set of
clear and unambiguous deﬁnitions of the involved concepts and their relations as well
as determine expected behaviours from the underlying infrastructure and participating
computational agents. The proposed conceptual model discussed in section 3 aims at
providing these clear and unambiguous conceptualizations related to the FDOF. Our fo-
cus here is, therefore, the presentation, description, and discussion of the FDOF concep-FOIS 2023
tual model. For a more in-depth explanation of the framework itself, its motivation, and
historical evolution, the FDOF documentation [3] should be consulted.
2.2. Ontological Foundations
Conceptual models are artefacts developed to provide semantic clariﬁcation of a subject
domain. One approach to building conceptual models is to employ foundational ontolo-
gies that assist the modeller in consistently representing fundamental aspects of the do-
main. We refer to this approach as ontology-driven conceptual modelling (ODCM) [4].
We use in this paper an ODCM extension of UML called OntoUML. OntoUML enriches
UML’s class diagram language with constructs (e.g., classes and relations) that reﬂect the
ontological categories of the Uniﬁed Foundational Ontology (UFO) [5]. Additionally,
OntoUML deﬁnes semantically-motivated syntactical constraints designed to ensure that
valid models represent sound UFO ontologies.
OntoUML uses special labels called stereotypes to decorate classes and relations
that express certain ontological categories from UFO. The stereotyped classes, hereby re-
ferred to as types, reﬂect two orthogonal classiﬁcations criteria from UFO: (i) classiﬁca-
tions based on the ontological nature of the type’s instances (e.g., objects, individualized
properties, abstract values); and (ii) classiﬁcations based on modal characteristics of how
the type applies to its instances (e.g., necessarily or accidentally). We now summarize
the stereotypes later employed in Section 3.
The UFO ontology employs the notion of identity principle to refer to the best-suited
criteria to necessarily classify the different sorts of concrete individuals in a domain. For
example, a modeller could select the type Organization as the type providing the identity
principle of its instances within a taxonomy ranging from Entity toProfessional Limited
Liability Organization . In OntoUML, these ultimate sortals (also known as kinds ) are
represented by a set of stereotypes that identify both identity principle and the ontolog-
ical nature of their instances. The stereotype «kind» identiﬁes ultimate sortals whose
instances are objects in the domain (e.g., Organization ,Person ,Car), while«relator»
identiﬁes ultimate sortals whose instances are individualized relational properties (e.g.,
Marriage ,Employment ,Enrollment ). The stereotype «mediation» decorates the asso-
ciations between these types of relational properties and the types of objects on which
their instances are existentially dependent (i.e., their bearers ).
While ultimate sortals uniquely and necessarily classify the entities following the
identity principle it provides, other types of concrete individuals either classify indi-
viduals following a common principle or classify individuals of a variety of principles.
Classes decorated by «subkind» or«role» inherit a principle provided by an ultimate
sortal, where the former necessarily classiﬁes its instances (e.g., Limited Liability Or-
ganization ,Sports Car ), and the latter does so accidentally based on some relational
property (e.g., Hired Organization ,Rented Car ). Classes decorated with «category»
or«roleMixin» are similar to subkinds and roles in classifying instances either neces-
sarily (e.g., Agent ,Vehicle ) or accidentally (e.g., Acting Agent ,Damaged Vehicle ), but
these classify concrete individuals following different identity principles, i.e., instances
of multiple kinds.
Types decorated by «referenceStrucutre» and«referenceRegion» [6] clas-
sify abstract individuals representing structured conceptual spaces (e.g., the three-
dimensional Colour Space ) and individualized regions within these spaces (e.g., theFOIS 2023
Colour Value Crimson-H348°-S91%-B86% ) respectively. Types decorated by «type»
are higher-order types whose instances are themselves other types that are part of the sub-
ject domain [7], thus, allowing modellers to describe them and their (higher-order) prop-
erties much in the same way one describes regular individuals. Associations decorated
with«instantiation» reify the notion of instantiation in the model connecting these
higher-order types to their so-called base types , i.e., the super types of their instances,
providing information about the characteristics their instances must inherit and form-
ing the powertype pattern. Furthermore, associations decorated with «historicalDepen-
dence» indicate historical dependencies of instances of the association’s target on in-
stances of the source (e.g., in the case of creation relations). Finally, the relation of redef-
inition of association ends from UML has also been employed in Section 3. This allows
the modeller to bind association ends connected to specialised types, to the association
ends connected to their parents, expressing a reﬁnement of their parents’ association with
additional constraints.
To facilitate the readability of the ontological natures captured in OntoUML classes’
tagged values, we use a colour coding to denote the ontological nature of their instances,
with red denoting objects, green denoting relational properties, purple denoting types,
and white denoting abstracts.
3. The FAIR Digital Object Framework Conceptual Model
The goals of the FAIR Digital Object Framework Conceptual Model are to deﬁne the
main concepts of the framework and how they relate, and to provide the basis for an
ontology of these concepts and relations. This ontology should be used to semantically
annotate the elements of the framework in metadata records, semantic data and metadata
models, or whenever the representation language used in the digital object allows the
inclusion of semantic annotations, e.g., RDF, OWL.
To facilitate understanding, we have divided the FDOF-CM into three parts: object
identiﬁcation, basic typing system, and the distinction between metadata and the object
it describes.
3.1. FDO Identiﬁcation
Proper identiﬁcation of different digital objects is a central point in the FAIR principles.
Three principles explicitly mention identiﬁer, namely: “F1. (meta)data are assigned a
globally unique and persistent identiﬁer” , F3 ( “metadata clearly include the identiﬁer
of the data it describes” ) and A1 ( “(meta)data are retrievable by their identiﬁer using a
standardized communication protocol” ).
Figure 1 presents a fragment of the FDOF Conceptual Model where a FAIR Digital
Object is deﬁned as a specialisation of Identiﬁed Object . However, differently from an
Identiﬁed Object that is generically identiﬁed by an Identiﬁer ,FDOs are identiﬁed by
an specialisation of Identiﬁer that is globally unique, persistent and resolvable ( GUPRI ).
The reﬁnement from Identiﬁed Object toFAIR Digital Object and from Identiﬁer to
GUPRI is a consequence of the requirements of the FAIR principles F1 (for the globally
uniqueness and persistence) and A1 (for being resolvable) that a FAIR Digital Object
not only needs to be identiﬁed by an identiﬁer but this identiﬁer must guarantee globalFOIS 2023
uniqueness (single reference), persistence (rigid designation) and be resolvable (retriev-
able from its identiﬁer).
Figure 1. FDOF - Identiﬁcation and attribution
The model in Figure 1 deﬁnes that Identiﬁers areProperty Values within a special-
isation of Property Value Space namedIdentiﬁcation Space . TheIdentiﬁcation Space
represents all possible values (identiﬁers) of that identiﬁcation system. One example is
that the identiﬁcation space for Uniﬁed Resource Identiﬁers (URIs) is the set of possible
values for URIs as deﬁned in [8] following the pattern of a scheme, a colon (:), a single
or double forward slash (/ or //), an authority, a path, a query and a fragment.
Another aspect covered in this FDOF-CM identiﬁcation fragment is the reiﬁcation
of theIdentiﬁcation relation between Identiﬁers andIdentiﬁed Objects , and more specif-
ically the FAIR Identiﬁcation relation between GUPRIs andFDOs , that are made by
Agents . In this way, we can capture the information of who assigned an identiﬁer to a
given FDO, adding to the object’s provenance.
3.2. FDOF Basic Typing System
Types are taken here to be aggregations of properties that are used to characterise their
members. Commonly, the choice is made to fulﬁl a particular goal or use. In the realm
of digital objects, different typing systems have been used for different purposes, mainly
related to creating abstractions for the sets of bits stored in computer memory. For in-
stance, most operating systems use the abstraction of ﬁles to organise groups of bits
whereas data sets, potentially spanning over several ﬁles or as the content of database
management systems, are commonly used in data science activities.
On the internet, types of digital objects are often associated with Media Types (for-
merly known as MIME types) [9]. By looking at the hundreds of types deﬁned by the In-
ternet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) as Media Types, one cannot avoid noticing
some inconsistency in the classiﬁcation criteria when taking into consideration the nature
of the deﬁned entities. In some cases, the media type represents a given ﬁle encoding for-
mat, e.g., application/dicom ,audio/mpeg ,image/png orvideo/h264 . In other cases, the
media type represents not only a generic encoding format but how the content is organ-
ised in a particular structure, e.g., the IANA media type application/alto-directory+json
deﬁnes both the encoding format ( JSON ) and a speciﬁc structure of key-value pairs fol-
lowing the Application-Layer Trafﬁc Optimization (ALTO) protocol.
We consider that this typing system based only on the encoding format is insufﬁ-
cient to support the levels of automation envisioned by the FAIR principles. For instance,
when trying to classify a given photo as an FDO, should the type of the FDO representFOIS 2023
the image captured in the photo, the encoding format of the photo ﬁle or what is de-
picted in the photo? We argue that we should consider these three aspects as part of the
characterisation of a given FDO, namely, (i)the encoding format, (ii)the type of the ob-
ject regarding its informational content and (iii)the entity(ies) represented by the object.
The motivation for the argument is that a computational agent beneﬁts from information
in these three levels of abstraction to improve its machine-actionability as required by
the FAIR principles. The encoding format helps determine how the digital object can be
processed by the computing infrastructure (e.g., which parser or reader should be used).
The type of the object considering its informational content helps differentiate, for in-
stance, images from text, video, applications, etc. Finally, the reference to the entities
represented by the object provides more information about what the object represents.
Fig. 2 depicts a fragment of the FDOF-CM containing the main classes of the FDOF
basic typing system. In this model, a FAIR Digital Object can be either a FAIR Digital
Information Object (FDIO) or a FAIR Digital Media Object (FDMO). The FDIO class
represents FDOs as units of information. As shown in this model, InformationObject de-
ﬁnes a kind, which principle of identity is deﬁned by the identity of information content.
EveryFDIO is anInformation Object materialized by at least one FDMO . The FDMO
is bit sequence2, which (as all Media Objects ) encodes characteristics that are proper
to the media type (representing here by Encoding Format ). EveryFDMO encodes the
information content of a FDIO . In the photo example, John’s birthday party photo (an
instance of FDIO ) is materialised by an object named JohnBDayPhoto1.jpg , which is an
instance of FDMO and has the encoding format image/jpg (instance of Encoding For-
mat). We could also have the same FDIO materialised by another DFMO instance named
JohnBDayPhoto2.heic with the encoding format image/heic . In this example, we have
three FDOs involved, one FAIR Digital Information Object , John’s birthday party photo,
and twoFAIR Digital Media Objects ,JohnBDayPhoto1.jpg andJohnBDayPhoto2.heic .
Figure 2. FDOF - FAIR Characterisation
In general, a given FDO is characterised by one sub-type of FAIR Digital Object
Type (FIOT). FIOTs aggregate the set of properties that characterise information objects
of that type (see isAssociatedWith relation in Fig. 2) . For instance, if we have the photo
of John’s birthday party, we can classify this object as a FDIO having the information
object type Photo . This PhotoFIOT aggregates a number of properties that characterise
photos, e.g., the event depicts, the participants, location, date and time, etc. However, as
anyObject here, this photo can have a number of attributions referring to other Identiﬁed
Objects (e.g., an attribution participant can point to an Identiﬁed Object of the object
type Person, an attribution location can point to a property value in a geo-coordinate
space).
2The kindBit Sequence in Fig. 3 deﬁnes a self-evident principle of identity inherited by FDMOs.FOIS 2023
3.3. Metadata
One important element of the FAIR principles is the role attributed to metadata as respon-
sible for describing a given object (principle F2). Many of the FAIR principles indicate
that they apply to both metadata and other types of objects (principles F1, F4, A1, I1,
I2, I3, R1.1, R1.2 and R1.3). Because of this, the FDOF-CM deﬁnes the FAIR Metadata
Record (FMR) as a specialisation of FAIR Digital Information Object with the role of
describing FAIR Digital Objects , as depicted in Fig. 3.
Figure 3. FDOF - Metadata Core
According to our model, the FMR also specialises Dataset , which aggregates Data
Items . In this way, a FMR is a sort of dataset information object which contains a number
of data items representing the attributions of values to properties that are used to describe
a particular object. As an specialisation of FDIO , theFMR is characterised by a FAIR
Information Object Type . The FDOF-CM supports the possibility of deﬁning speciali-
sations of FAIR Information Object Type that associate the sets of properties that can
(optional) or should (mandatory) be used to characterise the metadata record. In an im-
plementation, these deﬁnitions can be realised in terms of metadata schemas associated
with given types of FDOs.
The class FDO isabstract (in the UML sense), i.e., cannot be directly instantiated.
Instances of FDO must be either instantiate FAIR Digital Information Object orFAIR
Digital Media Object . Consequently, both FDIOs andFDMOs should be described by
metadata records.
However, the requirement that an FDO must be described by a metadata record and
the fact that a FMR is an specialisation of FDO creates the possibility of an inﬁnite loop
of metadata records requiring being described by meta-metadata records. To avoid this
loop and to better reﬂect the reality, the FDOF-CM includes the following constraint rule:
FAIRDigitalObject (x)^ :FAIRMetadataRecord (x)! 9 y(FAIRMetadataRecord (y)^
isMetadataOf (y;x)). This rule redeﬁnes the zero-to-many cardinality of the isMeta-
dataOf relation between FMR andFDO to require at least one metadata record to de-
scribe the FDO unless the FDO is an instance of FMR . With this constraint rule, the
model still allows metadata records to have their own metadata records but do not man-
date it.FOIS 2023
As the model fragment depicted in Fig. 3 indicates, we make a distinction between
digital and non-digital objects. This supports the possibility of having, for instance, FAIR
Metadata Records describing physical objects. However, in this paper, we focus only on
digital objects. In fact, in the FDOF-CM we have generic elements such as Identiﬁed
Object ,Information Object ,Media Object andMetadata Record . But what makes them
FAIR? According to the FDOF, an Identiﬁed Object becomes a FDO , regarding identiﬁ-
cation, when it is identiﬁed by a GUPRI and not any other type of identiﬁer, as depicted
in Fig. 1. Similarly, a generic Metadata Record becomes a FMR when is assigned with
aGUPRI and includes the identiﬁer of the object it describes (per FAIR principle F3)
using the relation isMetadataOf (Fig. 3). Regarding metadata and characterisation, an
object becomes a FDO when it is characterised by its informational value (using FDIO ),
its materialisation format (using FDMO ) and is described by a FMR .
3.4. Ontological Considerations
The FDOF-CM has been designed with the requirement of making it as simple as possi-
ble, so that it can be understood in a wider context including all different types of web
practitioners. However, it incorporates a number of ontological ideas and design patterns.
The mechanism of type characterization in Figs. 1 and 2 embeds the elements of
theFour-Category Ontology pattern (found in Foundational Ontologies such as UFO,
DOLCE, GFO and BFO). Here we have: an Object instantiates an Object Type and is
thebearer of a quality thatexempliﬁes a givenQuality Type . Types here are deﬁned as
aggregations of Properties (as in hyperintensional type deﬁnitions). Actual quality indi-
viduals are represented by Attributions that connect the bearer (the Object at hand) with
a projection of that quality as a Property Value in a given Property Value Space . This
extends the classical Four-Category Ontology into the so-called Ontological Octagon as
proposed by [10].
The mechanism in Fig, 3 that treats FAIR Metadata Records (FMRs) asFDIOs
allows for the former to instantiate proper FAIR Digital Object Types and hence be
characterized by properties , but also be described by other FMRs , themselves FDIOs that
can instantiate FAIR Digital Object Types characterized by Properties and described
byFMRs , and so forth. This implements a minimum set of features available in more
sophisticated multi-level theories such as [11].
The relation between Information Objects andMedia Objects seem at ﬁrst to re-
ﬂect the relation of generic dependence between content entities, e.g., The Aleph by
J.L.Borges (as a particular content with ﬁctional individuals, locations and events) and a
particular physical copy of that book standing on my table, i.e., the notions of Informa-
tion Content Entity andInformation Bearing Entity in the Information Artifact Ontology
(IAO) [12]. However, notice that a Digital Media Object , e.g., the JPEG bit sequence en-
coding of a photo taken at John’s 30th birthday (an Digital Information Object ) can have
multiple concretisations as Digital Copies , i.e., actual patterns inhering in John’s laptop,
in Mary’s mobile phone, in Paul’s USB stick, etc, i.e., complex modes [5]. Thus, FDOF-
CM decouples encoding/formating entities from their possible multiple concretisations.
In summary, FDIOs are generically dependent on FDMOs (the materialization relation
in 3), which are themselves generically dependent on FAIR Digital Copies (FDCs) . Our
notion of Media Object is akin to the notion of Information Structure Entity in IAO;
our notion of FDC is akin to Information Bearing Entities in IAO.FDCs will be fully
developed in future work.FOIS 2023
4. FAIR Digital Object Framework Conceptual Model implementation in OWL
While FDOF can be applied to a variety of technology spaces, the Semantic Web is
among the most signiﬁcant ones, where OWL ontologies are extensively employed to
provide semantic annotation of both data and metadata. The FAIR Digital Object Frame-
work Ontology3(FDOF-OWL), is an OWL implementation of FDOF-CM. This imple-
mentation extends the gUFO ontology [13], a lightweight implementation of UFO for the
semantic web, representing the Digital Object andFAIR Digital Object (Figs. 1 and 2)
taxonomies as specialisations of gUFO’s classes. In this section, we demonstrate the re-
alisability of the FDOF-CM by implementing it in OWL and using one of the real use
cases4.
In FDOF-CM, one of the minimal requirements differentiating FDOs from regu-
lar digital objects is the identiﬁcation by a GUPRI. However, the object identiﬁers in
OWL are commonly used as IRIs when making statements about them. To differenti-
ate objects from GUPRIs, allowing us to make statements about both independently,
FDOF-OWL deﬁnes two distinct properties. The ﬁrst, fdof:gupri , is a datatype property
which can be assigned any data value that represents the subject’s GUPRI. The second,
fdof:isIdentiﬁedBy , is an object property whose range is an individualized fdof:Identiﬁer
object. These two uses, presented in Listing 1 through a dataset of Amazon’s top-selling
items, allow for independent statements about objects and GUPRIs, the ﬁrst supporting
coinciding GUPRIs and IRIs, and the second supporting statements about the GUPRIs
themselves.
1@preﬁx : <https://w3id.org/fdof/fois23 −paper/ex1/> .
2@preﬁx fdof: <https://w3id.org/fdof/ontology#> .
3@preﬁx fdoft: <https://w3id.org/fdof/types#> .
4@preﬁx dct: <http://purl.org/dc/terms/> .
5@preﬁx dcat: <http://www.w3.org/ns/dcat#> .
6@preﬁx schema: <https://schema.org/> .
7
8:amazonTop50 fdof:gupri "https://w3id.org/fdof/fois23 −paper/amazonTop50" ;
9fdof:isIdentiﬁedBy <https://w3id.org/fdof/fois23 −paper/amazonTop50_identiﬁer> .
Listing 1: Identiﬁcation of FDOs in OWL.
Next, FDOF-CM deﬁnes FAIR metadata records as datasets aggregating data items
(Figs. 1 and 3), information objects that record the attribution of values to digital objects.
In the Semantic Web, data items coincide with the statements (triples) of an RDF/OWL
ﬁle. To individualise and aggregate these data items, FDOF-OWL deﬁnes no data item
concept but instead makes use of RDF’s named graphs [14]. In Listing 2, named graphs
allow us to represent a set of statements about a dcat:Dataset called:amazonTop50 ,
and refer to this set as :amazonTop50Metadata . Other statements about :amazonTop50
could exist outside the named graph, but in this manner, we represent those aggregated
in this metadata record, including the fdof:isMetadataOf reference back to the metadata.
Moreover, independent statements can be made about :amazonTop50Metadata , e.g., a
statement about its license as it could also differ from the license of :amazonTop50 .
3The FDOF implementation in OWL is available at https://w3id.org/fdof/ontology .
4The complete version of all use cases used in the validation of FDOF are available at https://w3id.org/
fdof/fois23-paper .FOIS 2023
1{
2:amazonTop50Metadata rdf:type fdof:FAIRMetadataRecord ;
3fdof:gupri "https://w3id.org/fdof/fois23 −paper/ex1/amazonTop50Metadata" ;
4fdof:hasInformationObjectType fdoft:Dataset ;
5dct:license <https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/> .
6}
7
8:amazonTop50Metadata {
9:amazonTop50Metadata fdof:isMetadataOf :amazonTop50 .
10:amazonTop50 rdf:type dcat:Dataset, fdof:FAIRDigitalInformationObject ;
11fdof:gupri "https://w3id.org/fdof/fois23 −paper/ex1/amazonTop50" ;
12fdof:hasInformationObjectType fdoft:DatasetMetadaRecord ;
13dct:license <https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/> ;
14dct:issued "2020 −10−01"^^xsd:date .
15}
Listing 2: Named graphs representing FAIR metadata records.
As described in Fig. 2, FDOF includes a notion of FAIR information object types
used to prescribe the characteristics required of a FAIR information object in a par-
ticular setting. In the context of OWL, these information object types are deﬁned as
subclasses of fdof:FAIRDigitalInformationObject , andfdof:hasInformationObjectType ,
a sub-property of rdf:type , is used to connect the information object to the type
characterising it as a FAIR (enough) FDO. In Listing 2, :amazonTop50 and:ama-
zonTop50Metadata have relations to hypothetical FAIR information object types fd-
oft:Dataset andfdoft:DatasetMetadata which could set requirements beyond having
a GUPRI, such as having explicit licensing information through dct:license statements,
and to include the publication date of a dataset through dct:issued .
Finally, FDOF-OWL includes the object properties fdof:isMaterializedBy and
fdof:hasEncodingFormat , both related to objects of type fdof:FAIRDigitalMediaObject .
Thefdof:isMaterializedBy property, connects an information object to the digital media
object where it is materialized, and the fdof:hasEncodingFormat property connects the
digital media object to its characterising encoding format, much like the characterisa-
tion provided by fdof:hasInformationObjectType to digital information objects as both
instruct consumers on how to process subject digital object. In Listing 3 we highlight
statements about the media objects from our validation where :amazonTop50 is said to
be materialized in a CSV ﬁle, while :amazonTop50Metadata is materialized in the very
Trig ﬁle where all these statements were declared.
1:amazonTop50 rdf:type dcat:Dataset, fdof:FAIRDigitalInformationObject .
2fdof:isMaterializedBy :amazonTop50Csv .
3
4:amazonTop50Metadata rdf:type fdof:FAIRMetadataRecord ;
5fdof:isMaterializedBy :amazonTop50MetadataTrig .
6
7:amazonTop50Csv rdf:type dcat:Distribution, fdof:FAIRDigitalMediaObject ;
8fdof:hasEncodingFormat <https://iana.org/assignments/media −types/text/csv> .
9
10:amazonTop50MetadataTrig rdf:type dcat:Distribution, fdof:FAIRDigitalMediaObject ;
11fdof:hasEncodingFormat <https://iana.org/assignments/media −types/application/trig> .
Listing 3: FAIR Media Objects in OWL.FOIS 2023
In Fig. 4 we summarise in a graph notation all digital objects of the dataset example
used to validate the FDOF-CM. The complete case includes a real dataset, information
objects for its metadata and meta-metadata, and information objects for the media ob-
jects materialising them and their own metadata. To improve the graph’s readability, we
also employ a colour coding of the FDOF types instantiated5. FDOF-OWL has been val-
idated through the representation of real use cases involving creative works (photos with
multiple materialisations) and ontologies (including both gUFO and FDOF-OWL itself).
Figure 4. OWL dataset example in FDOF.
5. Related Work
As aforementioned, the FDOF has been inspired by the notion of Digital Objects. In [2]
the authors introduce naming conventions to identify and located digital objects, a service
to locate objects from their names and elements of a digital object access protocol. Two
key entities are introduced: the obvious digital object and a repository. A digital object is
deﬁned as an instance of an abstract data type composed of two elements, data and key-
metadata. The key-metadata includes the object’s identiﬁer and other information about
the object. The paper also introduces the initial expected behaviours of the Repository
Access Protocol (RAP), such as access and deposit digital objects.
The work on Digital Objects continued over the years, mainly under the scope of
the DONA Foundation [15]. A key result of this work is the Digital Object Architecture
(DOA) [16]. The DOA deﬁnes three core components, namely the identiﬁer/resolution
system, the repository system, and the registry system, as well as two protocols: the Dig-
ital Object Interface Protocol (DOIP)[17] and the Digital Object Identiﬁer Resolution
Protocol (DO-IRP)[18]. The identiﬁer/resolution system uses the DO-IRP to create, up-
date, delete, and resolve identiﬁers of digital objects. The repository system is responsi-
ble for supporting the management of digital objects, including the provision of access
to the stored objects through their identiﬁers. The DOIP is used by the repository system
and allows software applications to interact with digital objects. The registry system is a
specialisation of repository system which stores the metadata of the digital objects rather
5Yellow represents FAIR metadata records; white represents FAIR media objects; blue represents FAIR
information objects; red represents encoding formats (IANA media types in this case); and green represents
domain information object types.FOIS 2023
than the digital objects themselves. In recent years, part of the work on DOs has been
conducted in the context of the FAIR Digital Objects Forum [19]. The FDO Forum aims
at providing a community structure to foster the advance in the speciﬁcation and appli-
cation of FAIR Digital Objects. A number of working groups have been set to address
different aspects of FDOs. The work reported in the paper has been partially presented
and tested in the FAIR Digital Object Semantics Group (FDO-SIG) of the forum.
The major differences between the work on the FDOF and the DO are that the latter
has been designed from the ground up to follow the aspects of the FAIR principles that
can be supported by technological infrastructures and applications, and the emphasis on
semantic clarity by means of the FDOF-CM.
Regarding semantic models to describe digital objects, we relate our work with other
initiatives such as Dublin Core Terms (DCT) [20], the Data Catalog V ocabulary (DCAT)
[21], Schema.org, and the Metadata for Ontology Description and publication (MOD)
[22]. These models provide classes and relations that are used to represent entities in
metadata records and to provide semantic annotations to data. The FDOF-CM does not
aim at replacing them. Instead, as shown in the examples on Section 4, we reuse concepts
from these models. However, in FDOF-OWL we provide greater expressivity for aggre-
gating statements into well-deﬁned metadata records, and we lay a foundation for the
deﬁnition of more reﬁned types of FAIR digital objects tailored for speciﬁc applications.
6. Final Remarks and Future Work
In this paper, we reported the current state of the work on the conceptual model of the
FAIR Digital Object Framework. In particular, we describe how FAIR Digital Objects
are identiﬁed, how they can be classiﬁed through the typing system, and how the model
follows the FAIR principles also in regard to metadata.
We demonstrated the utility of the conceptual model in the context of the Semantic
Web by generating an OWL ontology and using this ontology to describe the objects in
representative real use cases. We argue that characterising objects by their informational
value, encoding format, and related entities, provides valuable information contributing
to semantic clarity. We acknowledge that this approach not only brings these beneﬁts but
also requires the existence of more instances with their consequent properties and rela-
tions, which may increase complexity. However, it is not expected that these instances,
their identiﬁers and some of their properties would be manually created. Supporting sys-
tems can be implemented to automate this process, generating automatically these in-
stances, identifying and setting some of their properties and, thus, making the adoption
of the FDOF easier.
In terms of future work, the FDOF-CM and FDOF-OWL, presented in Sections 3
and 4, lay the foundation for the systematic characterisation and representation of FAIR
Digital Objects according to FDOF. First of all, the mechanisms of representation of
information objects, their metadata, and their materialisations involve a lot of nuances
that have been left out of our scope, and enhancing this coverage also includes support
to non-digital objects, a subject of great relevance. Second, we focused this paper on
the characterisation of FDOs based on the attributions aggregated into FAIR metadata
records, leaving out the characterisation of operation types present in FDOF. FDOF’s
operation types are fundamental to explaining to both human and software agents howFOIS 2023
and when to process information objects, in a ﬁner level of detail than what is possible
through their materialisations and encoding types. For example, in the case of the Dig-
ital Object Architecture and DOIP support the existence of basic and extended opera-
tions. While basic operations deﬁne a set of operations that every DOIP service must
support, extended operations allow different services to implement extra operations that
may be offered. Third, we foresee the possibility of employing automated veriﬁcation
techniques, such as SHACL, for the deﬁnition of FAIR Information Object Types and
the veriﬁcation of their instances. This should guarantee that these instances sufﬁciently
adhere to the FAIR principles according to the requirements deﬁned by the application
extending FDOF-OWL.
Finally, the work on the FDOF conceptual model occurs in parallel with the work
on the rest of the framework. Reports on the whole framework, on the deﬁnitions of the
protocols and expected behaviours of the participant applications and services, as well
as prototypes and demonstrators, are currently underway.
References
[1] Wilkinson MD, Dumontier M, Aalbersberg IJ, Appleton G, Axton M, Baak A, et al. The FAIR Guiding
Principles for scientiﬁc data management and stewardship. Scientiﬁc Data. 2016;3(1):160018.
[2] Kahn R, Wilensky R. A framework for distributed digital object services. International Journal on
Digital Libraries. 2006;6(2):115-23.
[3] Bonino da Silva Santos LO. FAIR Digital Object Framework Documentation; 2021. https://
fairdigitalobjectframework.org .
[4] Verdonck M, Gailly F, de Cesare S, Poels G. Ontology-driven conceptual modeling: A systematic
literature mapping and review. Applied Ontology. 2015;10(3-4):197-227.
[5] Guizzardi G. Ontological foundations for structural conceptual models. Telematica Instituut; 2005.
[6] Albuquerque A, Guizzardi G. An ontological foundation for conceptual modeling datatypes based on
semantic reference spaces. In: Intl. Conf. on Research Challenges in Information Science; 2013. p. 1-12.
[7] Fonseca CM, Guizzardi G, Almeida JPA, Sales TP, Porello D. Incorporating Types of Types in Ontology-
Driven Conceptual Modeling. In: Conceptual Modeling. Springer; 2022. p. 18-34.
[8] Berners-Lee T, et al. Uniform Resource Identiﬁer (URI): Generic Syntax. RFC Editor; 2005. 66.
[9] Media Types; 2021. Available from: https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types .
[10] Guizzardi G, Wagner G. Towards a logic of the ontological dodecagon. From Philosophy to Computa-
tional Logic: Festschrift in Honour of David Pearce’s First. 2012;60:25.
[11] Fonseca CM, Almeida JPA, Guizzardi G, Carvalho V A. Multi-level conceptual modeling: Theory, lan-
guage and application. Data & Knowledge Engineering. 2021;134:101894.
[12] Smith B, Malyuta T, Rudnicki R, Mandrick W, Salmen D, Morosoff P, et al. IAO-Intel: An Ontology of
Information Artifacts in the Intelligence Domain. In: Semantic Technologies for Intelligence, Defense,
and Security; 2013. .
[13] Almeida JPA, Guizzardi G, Falbo RA, Sales TP. gUFO: A lightweight implementation of the Uniﬁed
Foundational Ontology (UFO); 2019. http://purl.org/nemo/gufo .
[14] Carroll JJ, Bizer C, Hayes P, Stickler P. Named graphs. Journal of Web Semantics. 2005;3(4):247-67.
[15] DONA Foundation;. Accessed: 2023-02-11. https://www.dona.net .
[16] Digital Object Architecture;. Accessed: 2023-02-11. https://www.dona.net/
digitalobjectarchitecture .
[17] Kahn RE, et al. Digital Object Interface Protocol Speciﬁcation, version 2.0. DONA Foundation; 2018.
[18] Kahn RE, et al. Digital Object Identiﬁer Resolution Protocol Speciﬁcation, version 3.0. DONA Foun-
dation; 2022.
[19] FAIR Digital Objects Forum;. Accessed: 2023-02-11. https://fairdo.org/ .
[20] DCMI Usage Board. DCMI Metadata Terms; 2006.
[21] Browning D, Perego A, Winstanley P, Cox S, Albertoni R, Beltran AG. Data Catalog V ocabulary
(DCAT) - Version 2. W3C; 2020. Https://www.w3.org/TR/2020/REC-vocab-dcat-2-20200204/.FOIS 2023
[22] Dutta B, Toulet A, Emonet V , Jonquet C. New Generation Metadata V ocabulary for Ontology Descrip-
tion and Publication. In: Metadata and Semantic Research. Springer; 2017. p. 173-85.