The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion
of Biological Systems
James M. Greene1, Eitan Tadmor2, Ming Zhong3
1Department of Mathematics, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY , United States
2Department of Mathematics and Institute for Physical Science & Technology, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD, United States
3Department of Applied Mathematics, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL, United
States
E-mail: tadmor@umd.edu
Abstract. The emergence of large scale structures in biological systems, and in particular the
formation of lines of hierarchy, is observed in many scales, from collections of cells to groups
of insects to herds of animals. Motivated by phenomena in chemotaxis and phototaxis, we
present a new class of alignment models which exhibit alignment into lines. The spontaneous
formation of such “fingers” can be interpreted as the emergence of leaders and followers in
a system of identically interacting agents. Various numerical examples are provided, which
demonstrate emergent behaviors similar to the “fingering” phenomenon observed in some
phototaxis and chemotaxis experiments; this phenomenon is generally known as a challenging
pattern to capture for existing models. The novel pairwise interactions provides a fundamental
mechanism by which agents may form social hierarchy across a wide range of biological
systems.
Key Words: Collective Dynamics, Emergent Behavior, Lines of Hierarchy, Active
Particles
Acknowledgments
Research of ET was supported in part by ONR grant N00014-2112773. Research of MZ was
supported in part by NSF grant CCF-AF-2225507.
Submitted to: Phys. Biol.arXiv:2302.10403v2  [nlin.AO]  3 Jun 2023The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 2
1. Introduction — emergent phenomena in
biological systems
Emergent phenomena in collective dynamics are
observed in a wide range of biological systems
and across different scales — from cells to
bacteria, from insects to fish, from humans to
mammals. Accordingly, it has been a topic of
scientific interest in a wide range of disciplines,
including biology, ecology, physics, mathematics,
and computer science [1]. In this context, one is
concerned with “active particles” which consists
of living agents (and likewise, certain types of
mechanical agents), equipped with senses and
sensors, with which they probe the environment.
These are responsible for small scale pairwise
interactions. The phenomenon ofemergence is
observed when a crowd of agents, driven by those
small scale interactions, is self-organized into
large scale formations: ants form colonies, insects
swarm, birds fly in flocks, mobile networks
coordinate a rendezvous or create traffic jams,
human opinions evolve into parties and so on.
Thus, with no apparent central control or a built-
in bias in the dynamics, the question arises —
where does this unity from within come from?
what is behind the seemingly spontaneous self-
organization?
Letϕ(xi,xi)denote the amplitude of pairwise
interaction of agents positioned at xiandxj.
Recent studies of collective dynamics identified
different classes of interaction kernels which play
a decisive role in governing the different features
of their emergent behavior, [2, 3, 4]. These
include metric kernels depending on the metric
distance between agents, [5, 6],
ϕ(xi,xj) =ϕ(|xi−xj|). (1)
Then there are topologically-based kernels de-
pending on how crowded is the region enclosed
between agents positioned at xiandxj, ratherthan their metric distance, [7, 8],
ϕ(xi,xj) =ϕ{#k:xk∈ C(xi,xj)}. (2)
Further, we distinguish between the class of long-
range heavy-tailed kernels,Z∞
0k(r)dr=∞,
expressed in terms of their radial envelope, [9, 10]
k(r) := min {ϕ(x,x′) :|x−x′|⩽r},(3)
and singular-headed kernels, k(r) = r−β, β >
0, [11, 12, 13] vs. short range, compactly
supported kernels, [14], k(r)≲1r⩽r0.
Our primary interest is in self-organization which
is independent of external forces/stimuli; for a
mathematical analysis of the latter see e.g. [15].
1.1. Attraction, repulsion, alignment
One classifies three main types of pairwise in-
teractions which govern the emergent phenomena
observed in biological systems, namely — attrac-
tion, repulsion and alignment, [16, 17, 18]. The
first two main features are attraction which acts as
a cohesion towards average position of neighbor-
ing agents, while repulsion steers to avoid colli-
sions. These are familiar from particle dynamics.
A typical first order attraction-repulsion dynam-
ics reads
˙xi(t) =−1
|Ni(t)|X
j∈Ni(t)ϕ(xi,xj)(xi−xj).(4)
Here, the agent positioned at xiinteracts with its
neighbors at Ni(t) := {j:ϕ(xi(t),xj(t))̸=
0}, of size |Ni|. Thus, with the pre-factor
normalization in (4), it can be interpreted as
a local environmental averaging of positions.
Short-range vs. long-range kernels translate into
local vs. global neighborhoods. Attraction
and repulsion are dictated by the positive,
and respectively negative, parts of ϕij=
ϕ(xi,xj). The balance between attraction and
repulsion is responsible tor the phenomenon ofThe Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 3
aggregation, where crowd of agents is self-
organized into one or more large scale stationary
clusters with observable geometric configuration.
Different kernels ϕ(·,·)lead to a great variety
of different limiting configurations. These are
observed in cell biology, with tissue formation
(mediated by cell-to-cell recognition and cell
adhesion) being the prototypical example [19];
cell aggregation also plays a fundamental role
in cellular differentiation [20], proliferation [21,
22], and viability [22, 23]. We mention on
passing the important role aggregation plays in
cellular viability, e.g., when it is utilized in
biofilms as a survival mechanism for bacterial
cells, and for cellular adhesion in chemo- and
radio-resistance [24, 25, 26, 27]. Aggregates of
cells also commonly coordinate their movement
to collectively migrate; prominent biological
processes displaying this behavior are wound
healing and cancer invasion [28], as well as
chemotaxis and phototaxis [29, 30]. Aggregation
is of course not limited to cells; thus for example,
many species of insects (e.g. monarch butterflies
overwintering) and animals forming complex
social structures for a diverse set of evolutionary
reasons [31].
A third main feature in emergent dynamics is
driven alignment — the steering towards average
heading of neighboring agents. A typical second-
order alignment dynamics reads
˙pi(t) =−τ
|Ni(t)|X
j∈Ni(t)ϕ(xi,xj)(pi−pj).(5)
Here, τ > 0is a fixed scaling parameter, and
pistands for the velocity of the agent positioned
atxi(t), [5, 6], pi(t)7→vi(t) := ˙xi(t), or
its orientation, [14, 32, 33], pi(t)7→ωi(t) :=
vi(t)/|vi(t)| ∈ Sd−1. In a typical case of
long-range interactions in a crowd of Nagents,
|Ni|=N; one can adjust to short- and long-range
interactions, replacing |Ni| 7→P
j|ϕ(xi,xj)|,
[34]. The alignment encoded in (5) describes en-vironmental averaging of velocities/orientations.
Alignment may be either local or global, depend-
ing on the heavy-tailed scale of the interaction
kernel. Alignment governs emergent phenomena
offlocking or swarming, found in animal pop-
ulations [35], in which agents attempt to align
their heading and/or speed in a large scale coor-
dinated movement. Schools of fish [36, 37, 38],
flocks of birds [39, 40, 41, 42], and herds of an-
imals [43] are some of the most well-known ex-
amples. We mention in passing the evolutionary
roles played by flocking are diverse and species
dependent: examples include reproductive effi-
ciency, predation avoidance, and route learning in
migration, [44, 45, 46]. Flocking can manifest
itself via synchronization, in which pairwise in-
teractions of agents are coordinated in time into
large scale crowd oscillations. Well-known ex-
amples include the frequency of flashing of fire-
fly lights [47], the “chorusing” behavior of some
species of crickets [48], and the firing of neuron
cells [49]. Flocking occurs in behavioral contexts
as well, with consensus building being an emer-
gent phenomenon in opinion dynamics [50]. It is
realized on many different scales, from popula-
tions of cells to populations of humans [51].
The full complexity of self organization ob-
served in biological systems is realized when
combining attraction, repulsion and alignment.
This was originally advocated in the pioneer-
ing work of Reynolds [16] for realistic simula-
tion of boids – birds like objects. Reynolds’
model remains one of the most commonly uti-
lized methods of describing collective motion,
with extensions proposed to incorporate the effect
of pheromone signaling [52] and obstacle avoid-
ance [53], as well as a motivation for develop-
ment of particle swarm optimization [54]. The in-
corporation of social hierarchy via leadership has
also been explicitly incorporated into Reynolds’
rules for boids using an additional steering force
which allows agents to change the course of theThe Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 4
flock based on the agent’s position with respect to
the flock [55]. We note that although most boids
models are presented as discrete velocity updates
rules, they typically can be translated to either de-
terministic or discrete second-order systems (see
Section 3.2).
A systematic framework for combining attraction,
repulsion and alignment mechanisms, is offered
byanticipation dynamics induced by a radial po-
tential U, and acting at the ‘anticipated positions’,
xτ
i:=xi+τvi, [56] (here we make the simplifi-
cation of long-range interactions |Ni|=N),
˙vi(t) =−1
NNX
j=1∇iU(|xτ
i−xτ
j|). (6)
Expanding at the small “anticipated time” t+
τ, τ≪1, one finds
˙vi(t) =−1
NX
jϕij(xi−xj)
+τ
NX
jΦij(vj−vi).(7)
Here, attraction and repulsion are dictated by
ϕij:=U′(|xi−xj|)/|xi−xj|, and alignment
is dictated by the Hessian, Φij=D2U(|xi−
xj|), with a scalar leading order term ψij=
U′′(|xi−xj|). Thus, for example, a standard
U-shape potential-based anticipation dictates a
3Zone dynamics in three concentric regions,
ranging from interior repulsion, U′<0, through
intermediate alignment where U′∼0and
surrounding with exterior attraction U′>0. Such
3Zone dynamics is encountered in many models
for flocking and swarming. For example, many
species of insects exhibit swarming behavior
in which their motion is self-organized into
approximately concentric trajectories, known as
milling, or vortex formation, [57]. This enables
the insects to carry out specific tasks in the form
of collective intelligence. Examples of swarming
include the marching of locust nymphs [58, 59]and lane formation and obstacle avoidance of
army ants [33]. Milling is most commonly
associated with fish populations during schooling
and mating rituals [60, 32]. It also occurs in cell
clusters [61, 62], and also less frequently in ants
during extreme conditions [63].
Finally we note that although not a focus of
the present work, understanding collective mo-
tion for biological crowds has numerous appli-
cations in the engineering sciences. Examples
include mobile sensing networks and the uti-
lization of cooperative unmanned aerial vehicles
(UA Vs) [64, 65, 66, 67, 68]. who have only re-
cently begun to develop quantitative theories of
collective motion [69].
1.2. A new collective model for fingering
Certain forms of emergent behavior can be clas-
sified as possessing degrees of social hierarchy,
where individual agents conform to distinct roles.
As with all emergent behavior, hierarchy can arise
across a vast range of scales, from small groups of
cells (e.g. in cell migration [70, 71]), to colonies
of insects [72], to extraordinarily complex sys-
tems in vertebrates [73]. A well known example
occurring in bacterial motion is that of fingering,
which serves as a primary motivation for our
mathematical model introduced in this work. Fin-
gering is a motility pattern which is often ob-
served in cell cultures, and is characterized by cel-
lular populations, initially undergoing essentially
random and independent motion, forming struc-
tured “finger-like” protrusions from their initial
homogeneous state [74, 75, 76]. These protru-
sions indicate the emergence of social hierarchy
via “leader-type” cells at the leading edge of the
protrusions; the remaining cells “follow” in the
paths determined by leading cells, often in very
straight lines [76]. Fingering is most closely as-
sociated with populations exposed to optical gra-
dients (phototaxis), but is also observed in woundThe Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 5
healing, where cellular communication is deter-
mined primarily via chemical (chemotaxis) and
mechanical signaling [77, 78, 79, 80]. The forma-
tion of leaders/followers is also observed in other
biological systems, such as in trail formation and
cooperative transport in groups of ants [81, 82,
33, 83, 84] and the marching swarms of locusts
as mentioned above [58, 59]. Many biologi-
cal mechanisms exist by which leader/follower
hierarchy emerges, including pheromone signal-
ing [82], slime formation [76], and mechanical
pressure [80], although many scientific questions
remain [85, 86].
It is the goal of this work to present a min-
imal mathematical model which describes the
emergence of social hierarchy of leaders and fol-
lowers via pairwise interactions; for a visualiza-
tion of typical simulations exhibiting line for-
mation, see Figure 2. Our proposed model can
be understood from a simple phenomenological
perspective: rather than metric-based interaction,
ϕij=ϕ(|xi−xj|), we propose projected-based
interactions
ϕij=ϕ(χijxj−xi), χ ij:=⟨xi,xj⟩
|xj|2,(8)
where the agent positioned at xiinteracts with
thetraces of neighboring agents in the forward
looking cone xj∈ N i:={β|xi|/|xj|⩽
χij⩽1}. For a geometric illustration of
the projection, see Figure 5. This leads to the
spontaneous formation of leaders and followers,
defined with respect to relative positions in a
linear aggregate. Observe that the interactions
in (8) are not symmetric; further, they are not
Galilean invariant. Accordingly, there is a need
to shift the fixed origin, and trace the dynamics
relative to center of mass, xi7→xi−x.
Such interactions can be readily understood
in many of the applications described above,
such as the sensing of pheromone trails left by
neighboring ants, and slime model deposits in
Figure 1: Initial configuration of posi-
tions/velocities of second-order system as
described in Section 3.2. We simulate N= 100
agents (blue squares), with 10agents (red dia-
monds) chosen at the initial time as the furthest
away from the center of mass (cyan star) at
t0= 0.
Figure 2: Trajectory plot of second-order
system described in Section 3.2 with the initial
configuration shown in Figure 1. The coloring of
the agents are described in the caption of Figure 1,
and the grey trailing lines indicate the path of an
agent’s trajectory. Note that agents furthest away
may not become “leaders.”
bacterial cultures. Although inspired by fingering
in phototaxis and chemotaxis, the model assumes
no external forcing, so that the emergence of lines
is intrinsic to the interactions of the agents alone.
Furthermore, the model is sufficiently generic to
describe a wide variety of phenomena, including
spatial positions and velocity, but also emotions,The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 6
frequencies, headings, opinions, etc. as described
previously.
The remainder of the paper is organized
as follows. We provide a brief discussion
of mathematical models of collective motion
and chemotaxis/phototaxis in Section 2. In
Section 3, we provide a detailed description
for the modeling framework, with details of
the first- and second-order systems provided in
Sections 3.1 and 3.2, respectively. Numerical
results for each system are provided in Section 5.1
and Section 5.5, and concluding remarks are
provided in Section 6.
2. Alignment models of collective motion and
social hierarchy
In this section we restrict our attention to align-
ment dynamics, suppressing the additional roles
of attraction and repulsion. We begin with a brief
overview of two alignment models; we refer to
[17, 18] for a thorough discussion on the biologi-
cal phenomena, and to [4] for a recent mathemat-
ically rigorous discussion of alignment models.
The first alignment model originates from the
1995 work of Vicsek [14], in which self-propelled
particle systems go through local averaging of ve-
locity orientations. Indeed, many physical and bi-
ological systems utilize one form or another of
environmental averaging [87, 88, 89, 90, 91].
A second velocity alignment model was intro-
duced in 2007 by Cucker and Smale [5, 6]. The
model presented in this manuscript is directly in-
spired by the Cucker-Smale (CS) model, so we
describe it in detail here. The system consists
ofNidentical interacting agents, each is identi-
fied by its position xiand velocity viinRd, fori= 1,2, . . . , N . Their dynamics is governed by
˙xi(t) =vi
˙vi(t) =τ
NNX
j=1ϕij(t)(vj(t)−vi(t)),(9)
with pairwise interactions driven by ϕij(t) =
ϕ(xi(t),xj(t)). The scalar communication
kernel, ϕ, quantifies the dynamic influence of
agent jon agent i. In the original CS model,
the authors advocate the class of long-range,
decreasing metric kernels
ϕij=ϕ(|xi−xj|), ϕ(r) =K
(α2+r2)β,(10)
with constants K, β > 0. We previously
discussed the other classes of singular kernels
which emphasize nearby agents over those farther
away [11, 12, 13, 92, 93], ϕ(r) =r−β, and the
class of short-range kernels, ϕ(r) =1r⩽r0. Met-
ric kernels reflect, by definition, symmetric inter-
actions, ϕij=ϕji, and we notice that the tacit as-
sumption is that the communication decays with
the distance.
Motivated by the original CS model, the gen-
eral framework of alignment based on pairwise
interactions has inspired considerable work, in-
cluding the hydrodynamic description of its large
crowd limit, [9, 94, 95, 2, 96, 97], incorpora-
tion of collision avoidance [98], steering [99],
and stochasticity [100]. The large-time behav-
ior of CS alignment dynamics (9) should lead
the crowd to aggregate into a finite-size cluster,
max|xi(t)−xj(t)|⩽Dwhich in turn leads
to flocking |xi(t)−vj(t)|t→∞−→ 0. However,
left without attraction/repulsion, dynamics driven
solely by alignment does not support the emer-
gence of any preferred spatial configuration.
As mentioned in Section 1, the goal of this
work is to provide a minimal mathematical model
which exhibits the emergence of a simple form
of social hierarchy through pairwise interactions.The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 7
The model is a direct analog of the CS align-
ment, and is inspired by the biological phenom-
ena of fingering in chemotaxis and photoaxis.
It is advocated as a simple alignment mecha-
nism by which apriori identical agents evolve
to form fingering structures with internal hierar-
chy. It should be empathized that there is no
attempt to provide our model with external en-
vironment which is of course necessary to ac-
curately describe an externally signaled process
such as phototaxis/chemotaxis; instead, we limit
ourselves to cellular communication mechanisms
which, we claim, is an essential part of the
more complicated processes. In this sense, this
work is complimentary to theoretical and exper-
imental work studying social hierarchy as well
as chemotaxis/phototaxis. For example, many
works formulate interacting agents systems simi-
lar to the Vicsek model [101], which may include
an internal excitation variable to model photo-
taxis both deterministically [102] and stochasti-
cally [103, 104, 105]. Slime deposition [106] is
also a common mechanism used to describe fin-
gering, with agent-based [30, 107] and continuum
partial differential equation [76] proposed. Sim-
ilar approaches exist in describing chemotaxis,
including modeling fingering a free boundary
value problem [108], and extensions to the classic
chemotaxis equations introduced by Keller and
Segel [109, 110, 111]. Hierarchy and leadership
has been investigated in the CS model [112] as
well as in network graphs with switching topolo-
gies [113]. Leadership arising via external signal-
ing was introduced and analyzed in [114], more-
over leadership in cells due to feedback in speed
and curvature can be formed [115, 116, 117],
which we note may be particularly relevant for
phototaxis and chemotaxis.3. Mathematical models of line alignment
Motivated by the discussion in Section 1, we pro-
pose both first- and second-order models which
describe the emergence of hierarchical structure
in interacting agent systems for active particles,
which we term generally as “line alignment mod-
els.” For both systems, we consider a total of N
interacting agents. Each agent is assigned a po-
sition xi∈Rd, and, in the case of second order
models, agents are assigned with additional ve-
locity, vi∈Rd. We utilize the projected position,
χijxj, as a way to realize the tendency of agents
‘to look ahead’. In order to avoid the discussion
of absolute origin, we also use the center of mass
position of the whole system as the reference. We
believe this assumption is physically reasonable,
as groups of bacteria/cells/animals should not uti-
lize a global coordinate system with specified
fixed origin, but rather measure positions with re-
spect to their local environment, e.g. the center of
mass of their flock, school, or other social struc-
tural unit. Coordinate systems in local environ-
ments may be species dependent; for example,
bacteria undergoing phototaxis may measure their
position relative to a dominant light source [118],
while humans in a concert may measure their
positions with respect to the main stage. In an
isotropic environment, a “natural” coordinate sys-
tem is the center of mass reference frame. That
is, we assume that the interacting agents measure
their positions relative to the agent-system itself.
For example, we consider the relative positions exi
andexjdefined with respect to the center of mass
xof the system:
exi:=xi−x,x(t) :=1
NNX
i=1xi(t).(11)
Here xiandxjdenote the positions of the agents
with respect to an arbitrary origin 0∈Rd.
For a visualization, see Figure 3. We note
that when interactions occur through symmetricThe Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 8
differences of positions, as in the Cucker-Smale
and Vicsek models, absolute versus relative
positions result in identical dynamical systems, so
that the distinction is irrelevant. However, when
considering non-symmetric interactions that arise
via projected distances as in (8), the resulting
systems possess distinct vector fields. Of course,
certain species may indeed have global coordinate
systems, such as in the mass migration of some
species of birds [119].
0𝑥𝑖ҧ𝑥෤𝑥𝑖෤𝑥𝑗
𝑥𝑗
Figure 3: Absolute versus relative position
coordinates for agents iandj. Agents are
indicated in black, the center of mass of the
system xis green, absolute positions are blue,
and relative positions (with respect to the center
of mass) are red. Positions vectors are indicated
for two representative agents only. Note that the
center of mass is calculated for the entire N-agent
system (see (11)).
3.1. First-order model
We begin by introducing a first-order model,
which governs the positions of Ninteracting
agents (cells, birds, humans, etc.). Each agent is
described by its time-dependent position xi(t)∈
Rd. Their dynamics is governed by pairwise
interactions,
˙xi(t) =1
|Ni(t)|X
j∈Ni(t)ϕij(χijexj−exi).(12)Here ϕij(t)quantifies the interactions depending
on the projected difference
ϕij:=ϕ(|χijexj−exi|), χ ij:=⟨exi,exj⟩
|exj|2.(13)
Note that in the case that |exj|= 0 (i.e. agent j
is located at the center of mass of the system),
the projection χijis defined as zero. The
neighborhood of agent positioned at xiis formed
via a forward cone, which models the asymmetric
phenomenon of “looking ahead”,
Ni:={j|β|exi||exj|⩽⟨exi,exj⟩⩽|exj|2},(14)
where 0< β⩽1is a fixed constant which
determines the angular size of the forward cones ‡
As before, ϕ(·)is acommunication kernel which
quantifies the dynamic influence of the traced
agent jon agent positioned at xi. In this work, we
limit ourselves to metric communication kernels.
To model line alignment, we specify both —
the pairwise interaction of agents at distance rij=
|χijxj−xi|, as well as the spatial neighborhoods
defining which agents influence the dynamics
of one another. The spatial neighborhoods are
necessarily non-symmetric, but rather “forward-
facing”; for example, if the agent positioned
atxiispositioned ahead and “in view” of the
agent positioned at xj, then agent jshould be
influenced by agent i, but not vice versa. The
notions of positioned ahead and inview of are
quantified via Ni— the neighborhood of agent
i, i.e. the set of agents which influence the
dynamics of agent i.
Note that we use relative coordinates exiand
exjto determine the forward cone, based at the
corresponding center of mass x. Each cone is
defined via a central angle of 2 cos−1(β)radians,
which is symmetric about the exidirection; this
is the left-hand inequality in (14). The right-
hand inequality ensures that agents are only
‡For simplicity, we assume the opening of forward
looking cones to be the same for all agents.The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 9
influenced by other agents in front of them in
relative position space, so that the cone is indeed
forward-facing. The latter can be understood
by noting that the right-hand inequality in (14)
restricts the length of the projection of exi
alongexj, i.e. |exi|cos(ϕ)⩽|exj|where ϕ
is the angle between exiandexj, so that we
require exjto be ahead of exiin relation to x.
Since all positions exiare time-varying, each Ni
changes in time t; a static visualization of the
conic spatial region is provided in Figure 4.
Geometrically, the influence of agent jon its
0𝑥𝑖
ҧ𝑥෤𝑥𝑖𝒄𝒐𝒔−𝟏(𝜷)
Figure 4: Forward cone defining a neighborhood
Nifor agent iin system (12). The green forward
conic region indicates the spatial region defining
Niin (14). Note that all positions depend on time
t, so that conic region moves with the agents in
time.
dynamics, agent imeasures its difference in
projected position relative to agent j. Thus, the
form of (12) tends to align agents along lines,
as the pairwise interactions ‘aim’ to reduce the
orthogonal distance between agents iandj. As
ϕis tacitly assumed to be decreasing, agents
are more influenced by their nearer neighbors
inside the forward-looking cone, i.e. with those
that are more aligned with their current direction.
A visualization is provided in Figure 5. To
completely specify the dynamics, a set of initial
conditions {xi(0)}N
i=1must also be prescribed.
Details on initial conditions and other parametersinvestigated are provided in Section 5.1.
ҧ𝑥෤𝑥𝑖෤𝑥𝑗
𝑟𝑖,𝑗=χ𝑖,𝑗෤𝑥𝑗-෤𝑥𝑖
Figure 5: Difference vector rijmeasuring the
difference between exiand its projection along exj.
Vector rijmeasures how aligned agent iis with
respect to agent j. Line alignment implies that
agent iacts to reduce rijfor all agents jin its
forward cone.
3.2. Second-order model
We can now introduce the second-order model,
analogous to the first-order model detailed in
Section 3.1, but in which pairwise interactions
influence the acceleration of the agents; this is in
contrast with (12), where agents directly regulate
velocity. This framework is more closely related
to a classical mechanics perspective, where the
interaction terms are precisely interaction forces.
The state-space is represented by the position and
velocity vectors of the Nagents, i.e. {xi,vi}N
i=1,
where the second-order dynamics reads
˙xi(t) =vi(t)
˙vi(t) =1
|Ni(t)|X
j∈Ni(t)
ϕ(|rij(t)|)rij(t)
+ψ(|rij(t)|)(vj(t)−vi(t))(15)
Here rij:=χijexj−exidenotes the orthogonal
component of exiprojected in the direction of
exj, so that agents interact via relative projected
directions as discussed in Section 3.1 (seeThe Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 10
equation (13)), and hence act to align “along
lines”. The functions ϕandψcharacterize the
strength of the interactions, both depend on the
projected distances, rij=|rij|, between agent
currently positioned at exi, and the agent currently
positioned at exjwhich is traced to its backward
position χijexj. Interactions are again local, and
the net effect on the dynamics of agent iis the
superposition of the interaction forces from all
“forward-looking” neighboring agents j∈ N i.
The pairwise interactions are determined by
the two function ϕandψ. We first observe that
force governed by ϕis identical to that of the
first-order attraction/repulsion in (4). The second
term, dictated by interaction kernel ψ, is an
extension of the Cucker-Smale velocity alignment
force [5, 6]. The velocity alignment in our
second-order model ensures that in equilibrium,
the emergent “finger-like” lines lead to flocking,
|vi(t)−vj(t)|t→∞−→0. Indeed, the line formation
will stay stable only when all the agents are
moving with the same velocity; otherwise the
lines formed will not be stable.
4. From alignment to the emergence of lines
The key feature of the first- and second-order
models, (12), and respectively, (15), is the
emergence of geometric structure for the trails
along which the crowd is aligned — specifically,
we observe the large-time formation of curves
turning into straight lines; consult the numerical
simulations reported in Section 5 below. A
detailed analysis of this phenomenon is beyond
the scope of this work and will be provided in a
future work. Here we quote a prototypical result.
We consider the first-order line alignment model
˙xi(t) =τ
σiX
j∈Ni(t)ϕij 
χijxj(t)−xi(t)
,
χij=⟨xi,xj⟩
|xj|2, σ i:=X
j∈Niϕij.(16)To simplify our discussion, we set the dynamics
relative to a fixed origin, so that exi7→xi. The
specifics of the projected-based communication,
given by ϕij=ϕ(χijxj−xi), are not essential;
indeed it is remarkable that our results apply
to a wide variety of communication protocols,
independent of symmetry or occupying a global
stencil. Here, we use an adaptive normalization of
the communication protocol as in [34], replacing
Ni7→σi, so that1
σiP
j∈Niϕij= 1 (so that the
dynamics does not involve ‘counting’ the number
of agents).
THEOREM 1.Consider the line alignment model
(16), dictated by a decreasing kernel ϕ(r), which
acts inside the forward-looking cones
Ni:={j|β|xi||xj|⩽⟨xixj⟩⩽|xj|2}, β > 0.
Then, there exist constants, C0depending on the
initial configuration and Cϕdepending on ϕ, such
that the following holds,
X
iX
j∈Ni
|xi(t)|2· |xj(t)|2
− |⟨xi(t),xj(t)⟩|2
⩽C0e−Cϕβ2t.
Theorem 1 precisely quantifies the emer-
gence phenomenon in the first-order model (12).
Namely — the crowd forms one of more distinct
straight trails, led by an agent xiand followed by
its neighbors {xj, j∈ N i}so that |xi| · |xj| −
⟨xi,xj⟩t→∞−→0. The remarkable aspect of the line
dynamics, reflected in Theorem 1, is that the ‘ki-
netic energy’,P
iP
j∈Ni|xi(t)|2· |xj(t)|2is eas-
ily shown to be decreasing in time. The ‘poten-
tial energy’, however,P
iP
j∈Ni|⟨xi(t),xj(t)⟩|2,
does not exhibit a time-monotone behavior and
may change with the configuration. It is their dif-
ference that is decreasing in time, reflecting the
emergent behavior. To our knowledge, it is the
first large-time, large-crowd emergence dynam-
ics based on local interactions (the neighborhoods
Ni’s).The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 11
5. Numerical results
In this section, we numerically investigate the
models of social hierarchy presented in Section 3.
Specifically, we demonstrate the emergence of
lines in both the first- and second-order models,
and study the effect of model parameters,
including the number of agents and type of
interaction kernel, on the resulting dynamics.
We also show that the formation of leader
agent is indeed emergent, and cannot be easily
extrapolated via initial conditions alone.
5.1. First-order model line formation
We begin by simulating the first-order line
alignment model(12) with parameters appearing
in Table 1. We are thus simulating N=
100 agents over a period of 50time units in
a two spatial dimensions. Here µ0denotes a
probability distribution utilized for generating the
initial positions, with U([0,5]2)representing
the uniform distribution over [0,5]2. Thus, we
assume that the agents are initially uniformly
distributed over a square region in the plane. A
fixed realization of initial positions of agents is
used for all simulations in this subsection, which
is provided in Figure 6. In this subsection,
we assume a topological interaction kernel as
discussed in Section 1:
ϕ(r) = 1r⩽1(r)or (17)
ϕ(r) =1
(1 +r2)0.25, (18)
where rdenotes the projected difference between
agents with respect to an agent’s forward cone
(see equation (13)). Recall that 1r⩽1denotes
the indicator function on the set [0,1], so that
all agents with projected distance less than one
unit inside of the forward cone equally influence
the dynamics of the agent. All simulations,
in this and other sections, are integrated usingMATLAB’s built-in adaptive integrator ode 23for
handling possible stiffness of the system.
Figure 6: Initial configuration of positions for
N= 100 agents for first-order system with
parameters as in Table 1.
µ0 dN t0tf
U([0,5]2)2100 050
Table 1: Parameters utilized to simulate the first-
order model as discussed in Section 5.1.
We begin by demonstrating that the proposed
first-order model asymptotically exhibits line
formation. Consider Figure 7, which assumes
a forward cone with central angle π/3and
interaction kernel given by (17). Blue squares
in the figurerepresent agent positions xi(t)and
the cyan star represents the center of mass
position of the system, i.e. ¯xi(t). Recall
that the center of mass is not stationary, and
that all agent measure relative coordinates with
respect to ¯xi(t). In this figure, we clearly
observe the formation of spatial lines which
originate from center of mass of the system. This
hierarchical structure emerges from the initial
uniform distribution of positions in Figure 6, and
hence can be thought of as a form of emergence
of social hierarchy. Note that the “leaders”
here correspond to the agents farthest from the
center of mass of the system. The dynamics
thus represent a rudimentary form of fingerThe Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 12
morphology as discussed in Section 1.2, which
occurs through purely inter-agent interactions,
with no reliance on external forces. It may
appear that the leader’s form from those agents
initially farthest from the center of mass of the
system, but this is not necessarily true; see
Section 5.6 for details regarding the second-order
model. We also emphasize that the system has
reached equilibrium, as simulating further in time
(not shown) produces the same spatial pattern
observed in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Trajectory plot for the first order system
with parameters taken from table 1 with β=
π
6andϕ= 1r⩽1, the initial configuration of
positions is shown Figure 6. We clearly observe
the formation of lines.
5.2. Variation of dynamics as a function of
forward cone size
We investigate the dynamics of line formation
as a function of the size of the forward cone.
Specifically, we are interested in understanding
the effect of the angular size of the cone,
defined by β(see Figure 4), on the dynamics
line formation. Questions of specific interest
are both the the number and density of lines
formed, which thus correspond to the number
of emergent leaders (equivalently, the number of
“fingers” formed). Intuitively, we expect that
the number of lines formed should increase as
the size of the forward cone decreases, as eachagent acts with a higher degree of locality. For
a demonstration, see Figure 8, which utilizes
the same initial conditions and parameters as in
Figure 7, with the exception that a central angle
corresponding to πdefines the forward cone (note
that in the case, it is really a forward plane ,
and not a cone). We observe a similar pattern
of lines compared to the smaller, and hence
more local, forward cone, but with a significantly
higher degree of clustering to points, so that the
asymptotic behavior is more similar to points , as
opposed to lines. The mechanisms that produces
this behavior is due to a combination of two
factors: 1) the dynamics are first-order, and hence
tend to exhibit aggregation, and 2) the interaction
kernel (17) assumes a uniformity of influence
with respect to all neighboring agents. To see
the resulting pattern formation, and the effect of
varying β, for the CS interaction kernel (18), see
Section 5.4.
Figure 8: Trajectory plot for the first-order system
with parameters taken from Table 1 with β=
π
2andϕ= 1r⩽1, and initial configuration of
positions is shown in Figure 6. We clearly
observe the formation of lines, with significant
clustering about the center of mass (compare to
Figure 7).The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 13
5.3. Variation of dynamics as a function of initial
conditions
In the previous section, we studied line formation
for a fixed set of initial conditions. Also
of interest is the role of initial conditions on
the distribution of lines. More precisely: is
the resulting pattern robust or highly sensitive
to the agent’s initial positions? Numerical
simulations (not provided) suggest that the final
configuration of lines (both number of lines,
and orientations) are highly dependent on the
initial conditions; resampling µ0generally results
in a different equilibrium distribution. We
note that this is not surprising, and it is
common feature of models describing collective
motion. Similarly, we investigate how the
behavior changes as a function of number of
agents ( Nin Table 1). This a natural scientific
question, as line formation occurs across a variety
of scales; for example, the number of ants
composing a trail be on the order of one hundred,
while the number of bacteria generating finger
morphology in phototaxis may be on the order
of one thousand. Furthermore, such questions
are of mathematical interest, as they may
provide insight into corresponding coarse-grained
macroscopic models, such as mean-field and
hydrodynamic limits, described by Boltzmann-
type partial differential equations. We thus
investigate to what degree the social hierarchy
model proposed in this work is dependent on the
number of agents in the system. As an example,
we repeat simulations appearing in Figures 7
and 8, with fewer agents ( N= 50 versus
N= 100 previously; new initial conditions are
provided in Figure 9); corresponding results can
be found in Figures 10 and 11. Similar qualitative
dynamics are apparent for the smaller system,
but in general we see that the distributions of
lines is quite different, even for the corresponding
forward cones.
Figure 9: Initial configuration of position for
first-order system with the parameters taken from
Table 1, except for a smaller number of agents
(N= 50 ).
Figure 10: Trajectory plot for the first-order
system with parameters taken from Table 1 with
β=π
6andϕ= 1r⩽1, and initial configuration of
positions is shown in Figure 9.
Figure 11: Trajectory plot for the first-order
system with parameters taken from table 1 with
β=π
2andϕ= 1r⩽1, and initial configuration of
positions is shown in Figure 9.The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 14
5.4. Effect of interaction function on pattern
formation
In the previous sections, we assumed a topo-
logical interaction kernel given by (17), which
weights all neighboring agents equally in a for-
ward cone with a limited support. We here in-
stead use a global interaction function, i.e. ϕ=
1
(1+r2)0.25, to demonstrate the effect of the interac-
tion function on line formation for two different
βvalues. As discussed in Section 5.2, we expect
a global kernel to exhibit a more pronounced re-
sponse to the forward cone size with respect to
angle β. Results of simulations are provided in
Figures 12 and 13. Compared to the locally sup-
ported ϕ(Figures 7 and 8), this system’s final
distribution of lines shows considerable variation:
two lines for β=π/6become one for β=π/2.
Note that the initial configuration of position is
the same as shown in Figure 6.
Figure 12: Trajectory plot for the first-order
system with parameters taken from Table 1 with
β=π
6andϕ=1
(1+r2)0.25, and initial configuration
of positions is shown in Figure 6.
5.5. Second-order model simulation results
We next simulate the second-order model (15) to
demonstrate the dynamics of line formation in
a system where interactions affect acceleration;
simulation details are provided in Table 2. Recall
from Section 3.2 that we must specify two
Figure 13: Trajectory plot for the first-order
system with parameters taken from Table 1 with
β=π
2andϕ=1
(1+r2)0.25, and initial configuration
of positions is shown in Figure 6.
interaction kernels: ϕ, which governs the inter-
agent interaction force of line alignment, and ψ,
which accounts for velocity alignment and hence
stabilization. Note that ϕis completely analogous
to the first-order model, except it more directly
corresponds to a classical Newtonian force law, as
the system is second-order. We assume the same
function dependence (17) for ϕ, and assume the
classical Cucker-Smale interaction kernel for ψ:
ψ(r) =1
(1 +r2)1/2. (19)
µx
0µv
0dN t0tf ϕ ψ
[0,5]2B22100 010 1r⩽11
(1+r2)1/2
Table 2: Parameters utilized to simulate the
second-order model as discussed in Section 5.5.
Here B2is the 2Dunit ball centered
at the origin. We simulate the models for
different values of βto investigate the effect
of the various sizes of the neighborhood, as in
Section 5.2 for the first-order model. All
tests use the same initial condition, with the
initial position xi(t0)being an independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d) sample from µx
0, and
the initial velocity being an i.i.d sample fromThe Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 15
µv
0. Figure 14 provides the realization of the
initial configuration of positions/velocities for all
the tests of different βvalues investigated in this
work. The blue dots in the figures represent
the position (i.e. xi(t)) of the agents with
the yellow arrow representing the velocity (i.e.
vi(t)), whereas the cyan dot represents the center
of mass position, and ¯xi(t)with the yellow arrow
representing the center of mass velocity ¯vi(t).
Results are provided in Figures 15-19, where we
have again considered variation in forward cone
size ( β) and number of agents ( N= 100 versus
N= 50 ). The results are qualitatively similar to
the first-order system, although the second-order
system exhibits a much richer class of dynamics,
as the system does not approach equilibrium
configurations (this is because inter-agent forces
act on accelerations and not velocities, i.e. the
system is not dissipative). Note that local groups
of agents initially form curved lines of hierarchy
(“leaders-followers”) which eventually straighten
due to the projected interaction kernel (Figure 2).
It thus appears that the competition between
line formation (induced by ϕ1) and flocking
(induced by ϕ2) has made the emergent pattern
more interesting. As shown in three of the
four examples of different β(with larger β),
the system as a whole can produce different
flocking velocities, yet social hierarchy (in this
case, lines) can emerge from the initially chaotic
configuration.
5.6. Initial conditions are not simple predictors
of leader emergence
We note that the emergence of leaders is not
a simple function of initial distance from the
initial center of mass, and thus hierarchy is
indeed emergent from the proposed inter-agent
dynamics. Consider Figure 2, which shows a
number of flocking lines (“fingers”) emerging
from an initially random distribution of positions
Figure 14: Initial configuration of positions and
velocities for second-order system of N= 100
agents with the parameters taken from Table 2.
Figure 15: Trajectory plot for the second-order
system with parameters taken from Table 2
with β=π
6, and initial configuration of
positions/velocities is shown in Figure 14.
Figure 16: Trajectory plot for the second-order
system with parameters taken from Table 2
with β=π
2, and initial configuration of
positions/velocities is shown in Figure 14.The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 16
Figure 17: Initial configuration of position for
second-order system with the parameters taken
from Table 2 for two different βvalues and N=
50.
Figure 18: Trajectory plot for the second-order
system with parameters taken from Table 2
with β=π
6, and initial configuration of
positions/velocities is shown in Figure 17.
Figure 19: Trajectory plot for the second-order
system with parameters taken from Table 2
with β=π
2, and initial configuration of
positions/velocities is shown in Figure 17.and velocities (Figure 14). In Figure 2, we have
colored red the 10initial agents farthest from the
initial center of mass. Note that some agents that
were initially farthest from the center of mass
become followers; for example, in the right-hand
side, there is a line of agents with an initially
distant agent (red) that becomes a “follower.”
Similarly, we see that some agents that were
initially near the center of mass become “leaders”
of groups of agents. Hence, we see that the
model does indeed exhibit emergence of social
hierarchy.
6. Discussion and conclusions
In this work, we have presented two collective
dynamic models, namely a first-order and a
second-order systems, where the emergence of
social hierarchy, aka line formation, is induced
from the “looking ahead” tendency of agents.
These two models are minimal in a sense
that the “look-ahead” tendency is implemented
using a projected distance together with a
forward-cone neighborhood. These models
show promising features of natural emergence
of geometric structures for various different
kinds of initial configurations. More complicated
patterns can be induced by using different types
of communication kernels ( ϕorψ). We
have presented numerous numerical simulations,
and are currently developing a mathematical
theory to rigorously understand properties of the
emergence of line formation in such models. .The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 17
[1] Julia K Parrish and William M Hamner. Animal
groups inthree dimensions: how species
aggregate. Cambridge University Press, 1997.
[2] Sebastien Motsch and Eitan Tadmor. Heterophilious
dynamics enhances consensus. SIAM review,
56(4):577–621, 2014.
[3] Roman Shvydkoy et al. Dynamics and analysis
ofalignment models ofcollective behavior.
Springer, 2021.
[4] Eitan Tadmor. On the mathematics of swarm-
ing: emergent behavior in alignment dynamics.
Notices oftheAMS, 68:493–503, 2021.
[5] Felipe Cucker and Steve Smale. Emergent behavior
in flocks. IEEE Transactions onautomatic
control, 52(5):852–862, 2007.
[6] Felipe Cucker and Steve Smale. On the mathematics
of emergence. Japanese Journal ofMathematics,
2(1):197–227, 2007.
[7] Michele Ballerini, Nicola Cabibbo, Raphael Cande-
lier, Andrea Cavagna, Evaristo Cisbani, Irene Gi-
ardina, Vivien Lecomte, Alberto Orlandi, Giorgio
Parisi, Andrea Procaccini, et al. Interaction rul-
ing animal collective behavior depends on topo-
logical rather than metric distance: Evidence from
a field study. Proceedings ofthenational academy
ofsciences, 105(4):1232–1237, 2008.
[8] Roman Shvydkoy and Eitan Tadmor. Topologically
based fractional diffusion and emergent dynamics
with short-range interactions. SIAM Journal on
Mathematical Analysis, 52(6):5792–5839, 2020.
[9] SY Ha and E Tadmor. From particle to kinetic and
hydrodynamic descriptions of flocking. Kinetic
andRelated Models, 1(3):415–435, 2008.
[10] S.Y . Ha and J.G. Liu. A simple proof of the cucker-
smale flocking dynamics and mean-field limit.
Commun. Math. Sci., 7:297–325, 2009.
[11] Jan Peszek. Discrete cucker–smale flocking model
with a weakly singular weight. SIAM Journal on
Mathematical Analysis, 47(5):3671–3686, 2015.
[12] Roman Shvydkoy and Eitan Tadmor. Eulerian dy-
namics with a commutator forcing. Transactions
ofMathematics anditsApplications, 1(1), 2017.
[13] Tam Do, Alexander Kiselev, Lenya Ryzhik, and
Changhui Tan. Global regularity for the fractional
euler alignment system. Archive forRational
Mechanics andAnalysis, 228:1–37, 2018.
[14] Tam ´as Vicsek, Andr ´as Czir ´ok, Eshel Ben-Jacob,
Inon Cohen, and Ofer Shochet. Novel type
of phase transition in a system of self-driven
particles. Physical review letters, 75(6):1226,
1995.[15] Ruiwen Shu and Eitan Tadmor. Flocking hydro-
dynamics with external potentials. Archive for
Rational Mechanics andAnalysis, 238:347–381,
2020.
[16] Craig W Reynolds. Flocks, herds and schools: A
distributed behavioral model. In Proceedings of
the14th annual conference onComputer graphics
andinteractive techniques, pages 25–34, 1987.
[17] Tam ´as Vicsek and Anna Zafeiris. Collective motion.
Physics reports, 517(3-4):71–140, 2012.
[18] M Cristina Marchetti, Jean-Franc ¸ois Joanny, Sriram
Ramaswamy, Tanniemola B Liverpool, Jacques
Prost, Madan Rao, and R Aditi Simha. Hydrody-
namics of soft active matter. Reviews ofmodern
physics, 85(3):1143, 2013.
[19] Franc ¸ois Graner and Daniel Riveline. ‘the forms
of tissues, or cell-aggregates’: D’arcy thomp-
son’s influence and its limits. Development,
144(23):4226–4237, 2017.
[20] Taro Toyoda, Shin-Ichi Mae, Hiromi Tanaka,
Yasushi Kondo, Michinori Funato, Yoshiya
Hosokawa, Tomomi Sudo, Yoshiya Kawaguchi,
and Kenji Osafune. Cell aggregation optimizes
the differentiation of human escs and ipscs into
pancreatic bud-like progenitor cells. Stem cell
research, 14(2):185–197, 2015.
[21] Xing Zhang, Li-hua Xu, and Qiang Yu. Cell
aggregation induces phosphorylation of pecam-
1 and pyk2 and promotes tumor cell anchorage-
independent growth. Molecular cancer, 9(1):1–
11, 2010.
[22] Zahia Bayoussef, James E Dixon, Snjezana Stolnik,
and Kevin M Shakesheff. Aggregation promotes
cell viability, proliferation, and differentiation in
an in vitro model of injection cell therapy. Journal
oftissue engineering andregenerative medicine,
6(10):e61–e73, 2012.
[23] Karine Glinel, Pascal Thebault, Vincent Humblot,
Claire-Marie Pradier, and Thierry Jouenne. An-
tibacterial surfaces developed from bio-inspired
approaches. Acta biomaterialia, 8(5):1670–1684,
2012.
[24] Shane K Green, Andrea Frankel, and Robert S
Kerbel. Adhesion-dependent multicellular drug
resistance. Anti-cancer drug design, 14(2):153–
168, 1999.
[25] Brad St Croix and Robert S Kerbel. Cell adhesion
and drug resistance in cancer. Current opinion in
oncology, 9(6):549–556, 1997.
[26] Joel S Brown, Jessica J Cunningham, and Robert A
Gatenby. Aggregation effects and population-The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 18
based dynamics as a source of therapy resistance
in cancer. IEEE Transactions onBiomedical
Engineering, 64(3):512–518, 2016.
[27] Orit Lavi, James M Greene, Doron Levy, and
Michael M Gottesman. The role of cell den-
sity and intratumoral heterogeneity in multidrug
resistancemodeling the intratumoral heterogene-
ity in multidrug resistance. Cancer research,
73(24):7168–7175, 2013.
[28] Peter Friedl and Darren Gilmour. Collective cell
migration in morphogenesis, regeneration and
cancer. Nature reviews Molecular cellbiology,
10(7):445–457, 2009.
[29] Eric Theveneau and Roberto Mayor. Neural
crest migration: interplay between chemore-
pellents, chemoattractants, contact inhibition,
epithelial–mesenchymal transition, and collective
cell migration. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Developmental Biology, 1(3):435–445, 2012.
[30] P Varuni, Shakti N Menon, and Gautam I
Menon. Phototaxis as a collective phenomenon
in cyanobacterial colonies. Scientific reports,
7(1):1–10, 2017.
[31] Lesley J Morrell and Richard James. Mechanisms
for aggregation in animals: rule success depends
on ecological variables. Behavioral Ecology,
19(1):193–201, 2008.
[32] Iain D Couzin, Jens Krause, Richard James,
Graeme D Ruxton, and Nigel R Franks. Collective
memory and spatial sorting in animal groups.
Journal oftheoretical biology, 218(1):1–11, 2002.
[33] Iain D Couzin and Nigel R Franks. Self-organized
lane formation and optimized traffic flow in army
ants. Proceedings oftheRoyal Society ofLondon.
Series B:Biological Sciences, 270(1511):139–
146, 2003.
[34] Sebastien Motsch and Eitan Tadmor. A new model
for self-organized dynamics and its flocking be-
havior. Journal ofStatistical Physics, 144(5):923–
947, 2011.
[35] Larissa Conradt and Timothy J Roper. Consensus
decision making in animals. Trends inecology &
evolution, 20(8):449–456, 2005.
[36] Jens Krause, Daniel J Hoare, Darren Croft, James
Lawrence, Ashley Ward, Graeme D Ruxton,
Jean-Guy J Godin, and Richard James. Fish
shoal composition: mechanisms and constraints.
Proceedings oftheRoyal Society ofLondon.
Series B:Biological Sciences, 267(1456):2011–
2017, 2000.
[37] CK Hemelrijk, DAP Reid, H Hildenbrandt, andJT Padding. The increased efficiency of fish
swimming in a school. Fish and Fisheries,
16(3):511–521, 2015.
[38] Stefano Marras, Shaun S Killen, Jan Lindstr ¨om,
David J McKenzie, John F Steffensen, and Paolo
Domenici. Fish swimming in schools save energy
regardless of their spatial position. Behavioral
ecology andsociobiology, 69(2):219–226, 2015.
[39] Andrea Cavagna, Irene Giardina, Alberto Orlandi,
Giorgio Parisi, Andrea Procaccini, Massimil-
iano Viale, and Vladimir Zdravkovic. The
starflag handbook on collective animal behaviour:
Part i, empirical methods. arXiv preprint
arXiv:0802.1668, 2008.
[40] Michele Ballerini, Nicola Cabibbo, Raphael Cande-
lier, Andrea Cavagna, Evaristo Cisbani, Irene Gi-
ardina, Alberto Orlandi, Giorgio Parisi, Andrea
Procaccini, Massimiliano Viale, et al. Empirical
investigation of starling flocks: a benchmark study
in collective animal behaviour. Animal behaviour,
76(1):201–215, 2008.
[41] Iztok Lebar Bajec and Frank H Heppner. Organized
flight in birds. Animal Behaviour, 78(4):777–789,
2009.
[42] Hangjian Ling, Guillam E Mclvor, Kasper van der
Vaart, Richard T Vaughan, Alex Thornton,
and Nicholas T Ouellette. Local interactions
and their group-level consequences in flocking
jackdaws. Proceedings oftheRoyal Society B,
286(1906):20190865, 2019.
[43] Lacey F Hughey, Andrew M Hein, Ariana
Strandburg-Peshkin, and Frants H Jensen. Chal-
lenges and solutions for studying collective animal
behaviour in the wild. Philosophical Transactions
oftheRoyal Society B:Biological Sciences,
373(1746):20170005, 2018.
[44] Anne E Goodenough, Natasha Little, William S
Carpenter, and Adam G Hart. Birds of a feather
flock together: Insights into starling murmuration
behaviour revealed using citizen science. PloS
one, 12(6):e0179277, 2017.
[45] Thomas Mueller, Robert B O’Hara, Sarah J Con-
verse, Richard P Urbanek, and William F Fa-
gan. Social learning of migratory performance.
Science, 341(6149):999–1002, 2013.
[46] Lauren V Riters, Cynthia A Kelm-Nelson, and
Jeremy A Spool. Why do birds flock? a role for
opioids in the reinforcement of gregarious social
interactions. Frontiers inPhysiology, 10:421,
2019.
[47] Rapha ¨el Sarfati, Julie C Hayes, and Orit Peleg. Self-The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 19
organization in natural swarms of photinus car-
olinus synchronous fireflies. Science Advances,
7(28):eabg9259, 2021.
[48] John Buck. Synchronous rhythmic flashing of
fireflies. ii. The Quarterly review ofbiology,
63(3):265–289, 1988.
[49] Yaron Penn, Menahem Segal, and Elisha Moses.
Network synchronization in hippocampal neurons.
Proceedings oftheNational Academy ofSciences,
113(12):3341–3346, 2016.
[50] Eli Ben-Naim. Opinion dynamics: rise and fall
of political parties. EPL (Europhysics Letters),
69(5):671, 2005.
[51] Tamas Vicsek. A question of scale. Nature,
411(6836):421–421, 2001.
[52] Carlos Delgado-Mata, Jesus Ibanez Martinez, Simon
Bee, Rocio Ruiz-Rodarte, and Ruth Aylett.
On the use of virtual animals with artificial
fear in virtual environments. New Generation
Computing, 25(2):145–169, 2007.
[53] Rafael G Braga, Roberto C Da Silva, Alexan-
dre CB Ramos, and Felix Mora-Camino. Col-
lision avoidance based on reynolds rules: A
case study using quadrotors. In Information
Technology-New Generations: 14th International
Conference onInformation Technology, pages
773–780. Springer, 2018.
[54] James Kennedy and Russell Eberhart. Parti-
cle swarm optimization. In Proceedings of
ICNN’95-international conference on neural
networks, volume 4, pages 1942–1948. IEEE,
1995.
[55] Christopher Hartman and Bedrich Benes. Au-
tonomous boids. Computer Animation andVirtual
Worlds, 17(3-4):199–206, 2006.
[56] Ruiwen Shu and Eitan Tadmor. Anticipation breeds
alignment. Archive forRational Mechanics and
Analysis, 240:203–241, 2021.
[57] Jos ´e A Carrillo, Maria R D’Orsogna, and Vladislav
Panferov. Double milling in self-propelled
swarms from kinetic theory. Kinetic andRelated
Models, 2:363–378, 2009.
[58] Gil Ariel and Amir Ayali. Locust collective motion
and its modeling. PLOS Computational Biology,
11(12):e1004522, 2015.
[59] Jerome Buhl, David JT Sumpter, Iain D Couzin,
Joe J Hale, Emma Despland, Edgar R Miller,
and Steve J Simpson. From disorder to order
in marching locusts. Science, 312(5778):1402–
1406, 2006.
[60] Steven G Wilson. Basking sharks (cetorhinusmaximus) schooling in the southern gulf of maine.
Fisheries Oceanography, 13(4):283–286, 2004.
[61] Malet-Engra Gema, Yu Weimiao, Oldani Admanda,
Rey-Barroso Javier, Gov Nir S., Scita Giorgio,
and Dupr ´e Lo¨ıc. Collective cell motility promotes
chemotactic prowess and resistance to chemore-
pulsion. Curr Biol., 25(2):242 – 250, 2015.
[62] Katherine Copenhagen, Gema Malet-Engra,
Weimiao Yu, Giorgio Scita, Nir Gov, and Ajay
Gopinathan. Frustration-induced phases in
migrating cell clusters. Science Advances,
4(9):eaar8483, 2018.
[63] Theodore Christian Schneirla et al. A unique case
of circular milling in ants, considered in relation
to trail following and the general problem of
orientation. American Museum Novitates, 1253,
1944.
[64] Pavlos Antoniou, Andreas Pitsillides, Tim Black-
well, Andries Engelbrecht, and Loizos Michael.
Congestion control in wireless sensor networks
based on bird flocking behavior. Computer
Networks, 57(5):1167–1191, 2013.
[65] M Hajihassani, D Jahed Armaghani, and R Kalateh-
jari. Applications of particle swarm optimization
in geotechnical engineering: a comprehensive re-
view. Geotechnical andGeological Engineering,
36(2):705–722, 2018.
[66] G ´abor V ´as´arhelyi, Csaba Vir ´agh, Gerg ˝o Somorjai,
Tam´as Nepusz, Agoston E Eiben, and Tam ´as
Vicsek. Optimized flocking of autonomous drones
in confined environments. Science Robotics,
3(20):eaat3536, 2018.
[67] Yongcan Cao, Wenwu Yu, Wei Ren, and Guanrong
Chen. An overview of recent progress in the study
of distributed multi-agent coordination. IEEE
Transactions onIndustrial informatics, 9(1):427–
438, 2012.
[68] Reza Olfati-Saber. Flocking for multi-agent dy-
namic systems: Algorithms and theory. IEEE
Transactions onautomatic control, 51(3):401–
420, 2006.
[69] Iain D Couzin. Collective cognition in animal
groups. Trends incognitive sciences, 13(1):36–
43, 2009.
[70] Søren Vedel, Savas ¸ Tay, Darius M Johnston, Henrik
Bruus, and Stephen R Quake. Migration of cells
in a social context. Proceedings oftheNational
Academy ofSciences, 110(1):129–134, 2013.
[71] Lei Qin, Dazhi Yang, Weihong Yi, Huiling Cao, and
Guozhi Xiao. Roles of leader and follower cells
in collective cell migration. Molecular biology ofThe Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 20
thecell, 32(14):1267–1272, 2021.
[72] Michael Vaughan Brian. Social insects: ecology
and behavioural biology. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2012.
[73] Tim Clutton-Brock. Mammal societies. John Wiley
& Sons, 2016.
[74] Gladys Alexandre. Chemotaxis control of tran-
sient cell aggregation. Journal ofbacteriology,
197(20):3230–3237, 2015.
[75] Rosanna Man Wah Chau, Devaki Bhaya, and
Kerwyn Casey Huang. Emergent phototactic
responses of cyanobacteria under complex light
regimes. MBio, 8(2):e02330–16, 2017.
[76] Tristan Ursell, Rosanna Man Wah Chau, Su-
sanne Wisen, Devaki Bhaya, and Kerwyn Casey
Huang. Motility enhancement through surface
modification is sufficient for cyanobacterial com-
munity organization during phototaxis. PLoS
computational biology, 9(9):e1003205, 2013.
[77] Mathieu Poujade, Erwan Grasland-Mongrain,
A Hertzog, J Jouanneau, Philippe Chavrier,
Beno ˆıt Ladoux, Axel Buguin, and Pascal
Silberzan. Collective migration of an epithe-
lial monolayer in response to a model wound.
Proceedings oftheNational Academy ofSciences,
104(41):15988–15993, 2007.
[78] Nir S Gov. Collective cell migration patterns: follow
the leader. Proceedings oftheNational Academy
ofSciences, 104(41):15970–15971, 2007.
[79] Ladoux Benoit and M ´ege Ren ´e-Marc. Mechanobiol-
ogy of collective cell behaviours. Nature reviews
Molecular cellbiology, 18(12):743–757, 2017.
[80] Shuvasree SenGupta, Carole A Parent, and James E
Bear. The principles of directed cell migra-
tion. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology,
22(8):529–547, 2021.
[81] Tomer J Czaczkes, Christoph Gr ¨uter, and Francis LW
Ratnieks. Trail pheromones: an integrative view
of their role in social insect colony organization.
Annual review ofentomology, 60:581–599, 2015.
[82] Andrea Perna, Boris Granovskiy, Simon Garnier,
Stamatios C Nicolis, Marjorie Lab ´edan, Guy
Theraulaz, Vincent Fourcassi ´e, and David JT
Sumpter. Individual rules for trail pattern forma-
tion in argentine ants (linepithema humile). PLoS
computational biology, 8(7):e1002592, 2012.
[83] Deborah M Gordon et al. The ecology of collective
behavior in ants. Annu. Rev. Entomol, 64:35–50,
2019.
[84] Ofer Feinerman, Itai Pinkoviezky, Aviram Gelblum,
Ehud Fonio, and Nir S Gov. The physics ofcooperative transport in groups of ants. Nature
Physics, 14(7):683–693, 2018.
[85] Eric Theveneau and Claudia Linker. Leaders in col-
lective migration: are front cells really endowed
with a particular set of skills? F1000Research, 6,
2017.
[86] Kasia Kozyrska, Giulia Pilia, Medhavi Vish-
wakarma, Laura Wagstaff, Maja Goschorska, Sil-
via Cirillo, Saad Mohamad, Kelli Gallacher,
Rafael E Carazo Salas, and Eugenia Piddini.
p53 directs leader cell behavior, migration,
and clearance during epithelial repair. Science,
375(6581):eabl8876, 2022.
[87] Francesco Bullo. Lectures onnetwork systems,
volume 1. Kindle Direct Publishing Santa
Barbara, CA, 2019.
[88] Herbert Levine, Wouter-Jan Rappel, and Inon
Cohen. Self-organization in systems of
self-propelled particles. Physical Review E,
63(1):017101, 2000.
[89] Maria R D’Orsogna, Yao-Li Chuang, Andrea L
Bertozzi, and Lincoln S Chayes. Self-propelled
particles with soft-core interactions: patterns,
stability, and collapse. Physical review letters,
96(10):104302, 2006.
[90] Hugues Chat ´e, Francesco Ginelli, Guillaume
Gr´egoire, and Franck Raynaud. Collective mo-
tion of self-propelled particles interacting without
cohesion. Physical Review E, 77(4):046113,
2008.
[91] Yao-Li Chuang, Maria R D’orsogna, Daniel
Marthaler, Andrea L Bertozzi, and Lincoln S
Chayes. State transitions and the continuum limit
for a 2d interacting, self-propelled particle system.
Physica D:Nonlinear Phenomena, 232(1):33–47,
2007.
[92] Piotr Minakowski, Piotr B Mucha, Jan Peszek,
and Ewelina Zatorska. Singular cucker–smale
dynamics. In Active Particles, V olume 2, pages
201–243. Springer, 2019.
[93] Young-Pil Choi, Dante Kalise, Jan Peszek, and
Andr ´es A Peters. A collisionless singular cucker–
smale model with decentralized formation control.
SIAM Journal onApplied Dynamical Systems,
18(4):1954–1981, 2019.
[94] Jos ´e A Carrillo, Massimo Fornasier, Jes ´us Rosado,
and Giuseppe Toscani. Asymptotic flocking dy-
namics for the kinetic cucker–smale model. SIAM
Journal onMathematical Analysis, 42(1):218–
236, 2010.
[95] Jos ´e A Carrillo, Massimo Fornasier, GiuseppeThe Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 21
Toscani, and Francesco Vecil. Particle, ki-
netic, and hydrodynamic models of swarming.
Mathematical modeling ofcollective behavior in
socio-economic andlifesciences, pages 297–336,
2010.
[96] Jos ´e Antonio Carrillo, Young-Pil Choi, and Maxime
Hauray. The derivation of swarming mod-
els: mean-field limit and wasserstein distances.
Collective dynamics from bacteria tocrowds,
553:1–46, 2014.
[97] Young-Pil Choi, Seung-Yeal Ha, and Zhuchun Li.
Emergent dynamics of the cucker–smale flocking
model and its variants. Active Particles, V olume
1:Advances inTheory, Models, andApplications,
pages 299–331, 2017.
[98] Jaemann Park, H Jin Kim, and Seung-Yeal Ha.
Cucker-smale flocking with inter-particle bonding
forces. IEEE Transactions onAutomatic Control,
55(11):2617–2623, 2010.
[99] Guy A Djokam and Muruhan Rathinam. A
generalized model of flocking with steering.
SIAM Journal onApplied Dynamical Systems,
21(2):1352–1381, 2022.
[100] K. Ha S.Y ., Lee and Levy D. A simple proof of the
cucker-smale flocking dynamics and mean-field
limit. Commun. Math. Sci., 7(2):453–469, 2009.
[101] Amanda Galante, Susanne Wisen, Devaki Bhaya,
and Doron Levy. Stochastic models and simula-
tions of phototaxis. Unifying Themes inComplex
Systems, 8:105–119, 2011.
[102] Seung-Yeal Ha and Doron Levy. Particle, kinetic and
fluid models for phototaxis. Discrete Contin. Dyn.
Syst. Ser.B, 12(1):77–108, 2009.
[103] Devaki Bhaya, Doron Levy, and Tiago Requeijo.
Group dynamics of phototaxis: Interacting
stochastic many-particle systems and their con-
tinuum limit. In Hyperbolic Problems: Theory,
Numerics, Applications, pages 145–159. Springer,
2008.
[104] Doron Levy and Tiago Requeijo. Modeling group
dynamics of phototaxis: from particle systems
to pdes. Discrete and Continuous Dynamical
Systems Series B, 9(1):103, 2008.
[105] Doron Levy and Tiago Requeijo. Stochastic models
for phototaxis. Bulletin ofMathematical Biology,
70:1684–1706, 2008.
[106] Douglas D Risser and John C Meeks. Compara-
tive transcriptomics with a motility-deficient mu-
tant leads to identification of a novel polysac-
charide secretion system in n ostoc punctiforme.
Molecular microbiology, 87(4):884–893, 2013.[107] Shakti N Menon, P Varuni, and Gautam I Menon.
Information integration and collective motility in
phototactic cyanobacteria. PLoS Computational
Biology, 16(4):e1007807, 2020.
[108] M Ben Amar. Collective chemotaxis and segregation
of active bacterial colonies. Scientific Reports,
6(1):21269, 2016.
[109] Evelyn F Keller and Lee A Segel. Model for
chemotaxis. Journal oftheoretical biology,
30(2):225–234, 1971.
[110] Evelyn F Keller and Lee A Segel. Traveling bands
of chemotactic bacteria: a theoretical analysis.
Journal oftheoretical biology, 30(2):235–248,
1971.
[111] Ricard Alert, Alejandro Mart ´ınez-Calvo, and Sujit S
Datta. Cellular sensing governs the stability
of chemotactic fronts. Physical review letters,
128(14):148101, 2022.
[112] Jackie Shen. Cucker–smale flocking under hier-
archical leadership. SIAM Journal onApplied
Mathematics, 68(3):694–719, 2008.
[113] Jinliang Shao, Wei Xing Zheng, Ting-Zhu Huang,
and Adrian N Bishop. On leader–follower
consensus with switching topologies: An analysis
inspired by pigeon hierarchies. IEEE Transactions
onAutomatic Control, 63(10):3588–3593, 2018.
[114] Matteo Aureli and Maurizio Porfiri. Coordination
of self-propelled particles through external lead-
ership. Europhysics Letters, 92(4):40004, 2010.
[115] Mark Shirley, Shlomovitz Roie, Gov Nir S.,
Roujade Mathieu, Grasland-Mongrain Erwan, and
Silberzan Pascal. Physical model of the dynamic
instability in an expanding cell culture. Biophys
J., 98(3):361 – 370, 2010.
[116] Tarle Victoria, Ravasio Andrea, Hakim Vincent, and
Gov Nir S. Modeling the finger instability in an
expanding cell monolayer. Integr Biol (Camb),
7(10):1218 – 1227, 2015.
[117] Victoria Tarle, Estelle Gauquelin, Sri Ram Krishna
Vedula, Joseph d”Alessandro, Chwee Teck Lim,
Beno ˆıt Ladoux, and Nir S. Gov. Modeling col-
lective cell migration in geometric confinement.
Physical Biology, 14, 2017.
[118] Nils Schuergers, Tchern Lenn, Ronald Kamp-
mann, Markus V Meissner, Tiago Esteves, Maja
Temerinac-Ott, Jan G Korvink, Alan R Lowe,
Conrad W Mullineaux, and Annegret Wilde.
Cyanobacteria use micro-optics to sense light di-
rection. Elife, 5:e12620, 2016.
[119] Nikita Chernetsov, Alexander Pakhomov, Dmitry
Kobylkov, Dmitry Kishkinev, Richard A Hol-The Emergence of Lines of Hierarchy in Collective Motion of Biological Systems 22
land, and Henrik Mouritsen. Migratory eurasian
reed warblers can use magnetic declination to
solve the longitude problem. Current Biology,
27(17):2647–2651, 2017.