Band structures and Z2invariants of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide
monolayers from fully-relativistic Dirac–Kohn–Sham theory using Gaussian-type
orbitals
Marius Kadek,1, 2,∗Baokai Wang,1Marc Joosten,2Wei-Chi Chiu,1Francois
Mairesse,3Michal Repisky,2, 4Kenneth Ruud,2, 5and Arun Bansil1
1Department of Physics, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA
2Hylleraas Centre for Quantum Molecular Sciences, Department of Chemistry,
UiT The Arctic University of Norway, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway
3Laboratory of Theoretical Chemistry, University of Namur, B-5000 Namur, Belgium
4Department of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry,
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia
5Norwegian Defence Research Establishment, P.O. Box 25, 2027 Kjeller, Norway
(Dated: June 19, 2023)
Two-dimensional (2D) materials exhibit a wide range of remarkable phenomena, many of which
owe their existence to the relativistic spin–orbit coupling (SOC) effects. To understand and pre-
dict properties of materials containing heavy elements, such as the transition-metal dichalcogenides
(TMDs), relativistic effects must be taken into account in first-principles calculations. We present
an all-electron method based on the four-component Dirac Hamiltonian and Gaussian-type orbitals
(GTOs) that overcomes complications associated with linear dependencies and ill-conditioned ma-
trices that arise when diffuse functions are included in the basis. Until now, there has been no
systematic study of the convergence of GTO basis sets for periodic solids either at the nonrelativis-
tic or the relativistic level. Here we provide such a study of relativistic band structures of the 2D
TMDs in the hexagonal (2H), tetragonal (1T), and distorted tetragonal (1T’) structures, along with
a discussion of their SOC-driven properties (Rashba splitting and Z2topological invariants). We
demonstrate the viability of our approach even when large basis sets with multiple basis functions in-
volving various valence orbitals (denoted triple- and quadruple- ζ) are used in the relativistic regime.
Our method does not require the use of pseudopotentials and provides access to all electronic states
within the same framework. Our study paves the way for direct studies of material properties, such
as the parameters in spin Hamiltonians, that depend heavily on the electron density near atomic
nuclei where relativistic and SOC effects are the strongest.
I. INTRODUCTION
Two-dimensional (2D) materials [1, 2] are solids in
which atoms or compounds are bound together by strong
bonds ( e.g. covalent or ionic) along two spatial dimen-
sions, confining electron transport to a plane. In the
out-of-plane dimension, weaker (van der Waals) forces
enable the synthesis of materials with thicknesses of only
a few atomic layers [3–6]. 2D materials have recently
become very attractive as they exhibit remarkable trans-
port [7, 8], topological [9–11], thermoelectric [12], and
optoelectronic [13] properties that can be exploited to de-
velop novel devices for quantum computing [14, 15], field-
effect transistors [16, 17], low-power logic devices [18],
and strain-controllable light-emitting devices [19]. Ad-
vantages of 2D materials over conventional solids stem
from their thin surfaces which enable considerable ma-
nipulation of their properties that can be controlled using
defects, adatoms, and electric-field gating [20–22]. In ad-
dition, atomically thin materials can be manually assem-
bled to form multilayered heterostructures [11, 17, 23, 24]
to combine functionalities of individual layers [25].
∗marius.kadek@uit.noMonolayers of transition-metal dichalcogenides
(TMDs) [26] are 2D materials of type MX 2, where M
is a transition-metal atom (Mo, W, . . . ), and Xis a
chalcogen atom (S, Se, Te), and constitute basic building
blocks for many heterostructures. TMDs host many ex-
otic physical phenomena, such as the quantum spin Hall
(QSH) [11] and nonlinear anomalous Hall [27] effects,
higher-order topology [28], giant Rashba spin-splittings
of valence bands [29], as well as various correlated
phases, e.g.charge density waves [30, 31], superconduc-
tivity and ferromagnetism [32]. TMDs typically contain
elements from the lower part of the periodic table, where
the relativistic theory of electrons is unavoidable. Many
interesting properties of the TMDs owe their existence
to the relativistic link between the spin and orbital
degrees of freedom, i.e.the spin–orbit coupling (SOC)
effects. The ability to control and tune SOC in TMDs
opens new possibilities for spintronics and valleytronics
devices based on non-magnetic materials, where spin is
manipulated by electrical means only [33–36]. Further-
more, SOC generates opposite effective Zeeman fields
at the KandK’ valleys of the TMDs, which enables
formation of Cooper pairs and opens the possibility of
observing topological superconductivity and Majorana
fermions [37, 38]. Recently, antisite defects in TMDs
were proposed to be suitable for hosting solid-state spinarXiv:2302.00041v3  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  16 Jun 20232
qubits, where SOC enables transitions between different
spin configurations required for qubit operations [39].
First-principles computational approaches enable sys-
tematic, parameter-free, material-specific predictions in
novel materials. However, due to the presence of heavy
elements in the TMDs, it is important that relativis-
tic and SOC effects are accounted for in the theoretical
framework. In this connection, the four-component (4c)
Dirac Hamiltonian [40–42]
ˆH=/parenleftbigg
V(r) cσ·π
cσ·πV(r)−2c2/parenrightbigg
, (1)
is the commonly accepted gold standard, which is ex-
act in the limit of noninteracting relativistic electrons.
Here, σare the Pauli matrices, π≡ −i∇+Ais the
canonical momentum operator of the electron, cis the
speed of light, and atomic units ( e=ℏ=me= 1) are
used. The scalar and vector potentials VandA, respec-
tively, describe the interaction of the electron with ex-
ternal electromagnetic fields, where Vtypically contains
interactions with the nuclear charges. The lower compo-
nents of the Dirac bispinor wave functions are associated
with the negative-energy states, and various strategies
for their elimination lead to a number of approximate
two-component (2c) schemes [43, 44].
The multiple wave-function components needed in rel-
ativistic simulations significantly increase the computa-
tional cost as larger matrix and vector dimensions are
involved. Kohn–Sham (KS) density functional theory
(DFT) [45, 46] brings relativistic calculations to an af-
fordable level and remains the method of choice for large
solid-state systems containing heavy elements. However,
we note the work of Yeh et al. [47] on the self-consistent
GW method at the relativistic 2c level of theory. In
KS theory, the potential in Eq. (1) also contains terms
that depend on the electron density and its gradient: the
mean-field Coulomb potential generated by other elec-
trons, and the exchange–correlation potential [41, 48–51].
The relativistic corrections to the instantaneous electron–
electron Coulomb interactions are here neglected. If SOC
is treated self-consistently, expensive KS Hamiltonian
matrix constructions must be carried out in the mul-
ticomponent regime. As a consequence, most internal
parts of quantum mechanical codes must be reconsidered
and adapted. A transparent theoretical formalism that
isolates the SOC terms, reduces computational cost, and
simplifies the implementation of fully relativistic theories
can be achieved using quaternion algebra [52–55].
The most commonly applied strategies incorporate
SOC in relativistic pseudopotentials and the related
projector-augmented wave methods [56–60], where the
oscillating wave function with complicated nodal struc-
ture in the core region close to the nuclei is replaced
by a smooth pseudo-wavefunction. However, all-electron
approaches are necessary to describe Rashba-like spin-
splitting induced by distortions of the wave function
close to the nucleus [61], where nuclear spins interact
with the electrons [62], or in situations where high ac-curacy is desired [63, 64]. Linearized augmented plane-
wave (LAPW) [65–67] and full-potential linear muffin-
tin orbital (LMTO) [68–70] methods enable all-electron
calculations by constructing muffin-tin spheres around
all atoms and expressing the all-electron wave functions
using orbitals inside these spheres and plane waves in
the interstitial region. In such cases, treatment of SOC
must be handled separately in the two distinct regions
and is sometimes neglected outside of the muffin-tin
spheres. An alternative all-electron approach to LAPW
and LMTO can be formulated using a finite-element ba-
sis set [71] or by expanding the Bloch wave functions
ψn(k;r) using linear combinations of atom-centered real-
space basis functions χµ(r). Techniques that employ var-
ious choices for χµ, such as the numerical [72–74], Slater-
type [75, 76], or Gaussian-type basis set [54, 77], have
been developed for periodic systems at the 4c [54, 72, 73]
as well as the approximate relativistic [74–77] levels of
the theory.
In the 4c theory, the basis functions χµ(r) need to
represent Dirac bispinors, and the basis expansion of the
4c Bloch wave functions ψn(k;r) takes the form:
ψn(k;r) =1/radicalbig
|K|/summationdisplay
R,µeik·Rχµ(r−R)cµ
n(k),(2)
where nis the band index, kis the reciprocal-space vector
(quasi-momentum), Rdenotes the Bravais lattice vector
of the respective unit cell in the translationally invari-
ant system ( R=0is the reference unit cell), index µ
runs over the scalar basis functions in the unit cell, and
the normalization constant is the inverse square root of
the volume of the primitive reciprocal unit cell |K|. The
expansion coefficients cµ
n(k) and the ground-state elec-
tronic structure are obtained by solving the matrix form
of the reciprocal-space Dirac–Kohn–Sham (DKS) gener-
alized eigenvalue equation
H(k)c(k) =S(k)c(k)ε(k), (3)
where ε(k) is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues (band
energies), and H(k) and S(k) are the reciprocal-space
DKS Hamiltonian and overlap matrices, respectively,
with the elements:
Hµµ′(k) =/summationdisplay
Reik·R/integraldisplay
R3χ†
µ(r)ˆHχµ′(r−R)d3r,(4a)
Sµµ′(k) =/summationdisplay
Reik·R/integraldisplay
R3χ†
µ(r)χµ′(r−R)d3r. (4b)
Due to the dependence of H(k) on the electron density
and its gradient that are determined from c(k), Eq. (3)
must be solved self-consistently, though the SOC terms
are often neglected in the self-consistency procedure and
only included a posteriori as a perturbation to save com-
putational cost [78].
Our goal here is to provide an all-electron approach for
modeling heavy-element-containing 2D materials based3
on the self-consistent treatment of SOC and Gaussian-
type orbitals (GTOs) commonly used in quantum chem-
istry calculations of properties, electronic structures, and
electron correlations in molecules. The use of GTOs
for solids offers several advantages. For instance, a uni-
fied representation of wave functions in a variety of sys-
tems (molecules, polymers, 2D materials, crystals) al-
lows for building on the existing quantum chemistry
approaches, such as the accurate treatment of correla-
tion [79–82], reduced cost of evaluating the exact ex-
change [83], and efficient algorithms that scale linearly
with system size [84, 85]. In 2D materials that are only
a few atomic layers thick, Bloch functions are straight-
forwardly constructed to satisfy the Bloch theorem only
across the two periodic dimensions by explicitly restrict-
ingRandkin Eq. (2) to 2D lattice vectors. As a
consequence, the system is not artificially replicated in
the nonperiodic dimension. For comparison with cal-
culations employing plane waves, this situation would
correspond to the limit of infinitely large vacuum lay-
ers (or zero hopping) between the replicated images. Fi-
nally, explicit self-consistent treatment of SOC for all
electronic states on an equal footing without adopting the
muffin-tin or pseudopotential approximations provides a
pathway for modeling x-ray absorption spectroscopy [86]
and magnetic response properties associated with nuclear
spins [87, 88].
Modelling solid-state systems with GTOs in the non-
relativistic framework was pioneered by Pisani and
Dovesi [89–91], later joined by several other groups [84,
85, 92]. However, standard GTO basis sets are con-
structed by optimizing calculations on atoms and thus
contain basis functions with small exponents to describe
the asymptotic behavior of the atomic wave functions.
These diffuse functions severely hamper the applica-
tion of GTOs to solids and cause numerical instabili-
ties [84, 93–95]. The numerical issues can be circum-
vented by removing the most diffuse basis functions at
the start of the calculation [96–98] or by constructing
system-specific basis sets using reoptimized Gaussian ex-
ponents and contraction coefficients [94, 99]. The for-
mer strategy risks producing low quality results [54, 100]
whereas the latter strategy sacrifices the transferability
of the so-constructed basis sets and requires availability
of advanced code features (basis set optimization). Pre-
optimized all-electron basis sets are also not available
for heavy elements [94]. The importance of numerical
stability is even more pronounced in relativistic theories
where the additional wave-function components increase
the variational freedom, and the restricted kinetic bal-
ance (RKB) condition [101] must be satisfied to prevent
the collapse of the spectral gap between the positive- and
negative-energy states.
In this paper, we demonstrate that accurate and con-
verged results can be obtained for 2D TMD monolay-
ers in various structural phases using commonly avail-
able all-electron valence triple- ζbasis sets in the fully
relativistic framework without the need for modifying orreoptimizing the basis functions. Our approach builds
on the quaternion algebra-based theory [54] implemented
here with careful numerical considerations to ensure ro-
bustness of the implementation and the resolution-of-the-
identity (RI) approximation for the Coulomb four-center
integrals [102–104] that reduces the computational cost
of otherwise time-consuming calculations by more than
three orders of magnitude. We show how the canonical
orthogonalization can be used to construct numerically
well-behaved orthonormal bases in momentum space in
the 4c setting and derive a criterion for assessing the
quality of the RKB condition in such bases. We discuss
a parallel algorithm for the electronic structure solver
exhibiting minimal input/output (IO) disk communica-
tion and memory overhead that is applicable to unit cells
with several thousand basis functions and thousands of
kpoints. The method presented here is implemented in
theReSpect code [55] and used to calculate the band
structures of the hexagonal (2H), tetragonal (1T), and
distorted tetragonal (1T’) phases of selected TMDs. For
the 1T’ phase, we evaluate the Z2invariant within our
real-space GTO-based scheme and confirm the findings
of Qian et al. [11] that the 1T’ phase of MX 2is topolog-
ically nontrivial.
The data presented in this study as well as the scripts
used for pre- and post-processing of the input and output
files are available in the ZENODO public repository [105].
TheReSpect code used in this study is available upon
a reasonable request free of charge, see Ref. [106].
II. METHODS
A. Construction of orthonormal momentum-space
basis
Throughout this section, we assume Einstein’s implicit
summation over doubly repeating indices.
In order to avoid variational collapse associated with
an incomplete basis representation of the lower compo-
nents of the wave function [107] and to obtain the correct
nonrelativistic limit of the kinetic energy operator in a
finite basis, we impose the RKB condition [101] for the
basis bispinors χµ(r) in real space. Hence, we require
that [43, 49, 53, 55, 108, 109]
χµ(r)≡/parenleftbiggI202
021
2cσ·p/parenrightbigg
gµ(r−Aµ), (5)
whereI2is the 2 ×2 identity matrix, p≡ −i∇is the elec-
tron momentum operator, and gµare scalar basis func-
tions centered on atomic positions Aµ. Due to the mul-
ticomponent structure of ˆHandχµ,Hµµ′andSµµ′in
Eq. (4) are 4 ×4 complex matrices for each pair µ, µ′and
for each k. For the functions gµ, we choose the primitive
spherical GTOs
gµ(r)≡ NYlm(ϑ, φ)e−αr2, (6)4
where Nis the normalization constant, αis the Gaus-
sian exponent, and Ylm(ϑ, φ) are the spherical harmon-
ics. The GTO basis is commonly implemented in many
quantum chemistry codes [91, 92, 110–114]. For compu-
tational reasons, integrals in Eqs. (4) are evaluated ana-
lytically by solving recurrence relations [115] formulated
in terms of the Cartesian GTOs [116]. The resulting in-
tegrals are then transformed to spherical GTOs.
To construct an orthonormal basis in momentum
space, let us first define a nonorthogonal basis from
χµR(r)≡χµ(r−R) as
χµ(k) =1/radicalbig
|K|/summationdisplay
Reik·RχµR. (7)
A new basis is obtained using the transformation:
φp(k) =χµ(k)Bµ
p(k). (8)
From here, for clarity, we drop the dependence of all ma-
trices on k. The matrix Bcan be chosen so that φpare
orthonormal, i.e.B†SB=I. We perform the canonical
orthogonalization,
B=Us−1/2Λ, (9)
where Uis the unitary matrix of eigenvectors and sis the
diagonal matrix of eigenvalues, both obtained by diago-
nalizing the overlap matrix S. Λ is a rectangular matrix
consisting of the square identity matrix and zero rows
that correspond to the basis functions that are projected
out. In case no projections are required, Λ is simply the
identity matrix.
In the relativistic 4c theory, χµtake the bispinor form
of Eq. (5), and the Bµ
pbecome 4 ×4 matrices for each
µ, p. However, let us now consider a general basis set of
bispinors χµwith χL
µandχS
µdenoting the 2 ×2 large
(upper) and small (lower) components of the basis, re-
spectively. Similarly, let φL
p≡χL
µXµ
pandφS
p≡χS
µYµ
p
denote the transformed ( e.g.orthonormalized) large and
small components of the basis, respectively, XandY
forming a block-diagonal matrix Bin Eq. (8). The DKS
Hamiltonian takes the matrix form:
H=/parenleftbigg
VLL cΠLS
cΠSLVSS−2c2SSS/parenrightbigg
, (10)
where VLL, VSS,ΠLS,ΠSLare the matrix representations
of their respective operators in the χµbasis, and SSSis
the overlap matrix for the small-component basis. En-
suring numerical stability requires projecting out basis
functions φL
pandφS
pcorresponding to the smallest eigen-
values of the 4c overlap matrix. At the same time, re-
moving φS
pfunctions degrades the RKB condition that
is no longer satisfied exactly in the new basis, which can
lead to the emergence of artificial in-gap states. Here, we
proceed by showing how we numerically track this basis
truncation error. First, we express the RKB condition
in the matrix form using the arbitrary basis χµ. If we
write the 4c eigenvalue problem with the Hamiltonianmatrix in Eq. (10) and eliminate the small-component
wave-function coefficients, we obtain
/bracketleftbigg
VLL+1
2ΠLSB−1
SS(ε)ΠSL/bracketrightbigg
cL=εSLLcL, (11)
where
BSS(ε) =SSS+εSSS−VSS
2c2, (12)
cLare the coefficients of the large component of the wave
function, and εis the one-electron energy. Imposing the
requirement that the nonrelativistic Hamiltonian is re-
covered in the limit c→ ∞ gives the following condition:
TLL=1
2ΠLSS−1
SSΠSL, (13)
where TLLis the nonrelativistic kinetic energy matrix in
the basis of the large component. We note that the choice
of bispinors χµ, as in Eq. (5), satisfies Eq. (13) analyti-
cally, since Π LS= Π SL=1
cTLLandSSS=1
2c2TLL. In
the transformed basis φp, Eq. (13) reads:
X†TLLX=1
2X†ΠLSY/parenleftbig
Y†SSSY/parenrightbig−1Y†ΠSLX. (14)
This RKB condition remains valid as long as two con-
ditions are met: The former basis χµsatisfies Eq. (13),
and the inverse Y−1exists, i.e.the new basis spans the
same space as the original one. By requiring that the
new basis is orthonormal ( Y†SSSY=I), this condition
simplifies to:
X†TLLX=1
2X†ΠLSY Y†ΠSLX, (15)
and the existence of Y−1implies that S−1
SS=Y Y†. How-
ever, orthonormalization procedures that involve remov-
ing eigenvectors in the orthonormal basis of φS
pby using
a rectangular Λ in Eq. (9) do not generally preserve the
RKB condition. Hence, in the 4c framework, improving
the conditioning of matrices by projecting out redundant
basis functions can sacrifice the RKB between the Land
Scomponents.
To assess the quality of the orthonormal basis for the
lower components of the wave function, we calculate how
much of the RKB condition is lost by the transforma-
tion to the reduced orthonormal basis. To this end, we
evaluate
e= max/bracketleftbigg
X†/parenleftbigg1
2c2TLLY Y†TLL−TLL/parenrightbigg
X/bracketrightbigg
,(16)
for each k. Here, max indicates the largest matrix ele-
ment. We found that large values of e(>10−5) could be
associated with the emergence of artificial states in the
band structure. To keep the error in the RKB small, for
every φS
pfunction that is projected out, we also remove
the corresponding φL
pfunction regardless of how large5
the eigenvalue of the overlap matrix SLLis for this func-
tion. This means that the φL
pmust be removed even if it
is not causing overcompleteness of the large-component
subspace. We note that these measures are necessary for
moderately sized (triple- ζand quadruple- ζ) basis sets,
but the numerical issues are not observed in case the
smaller double- ζbasis are used. Finally, the process of
orthonormalization and removal of redundant functions
heavily depends on k, so the implementation of the elec-
tronic structure solver must have the flexibility to ac-
count for matrices with different sizes for each k.
B. Parallel electronic structure solver
Construction of the ground-state one-electron wave
functions within the self-consistent field (SCF) theory
consists of two distinct steps that are iterated repeatedly
until self-consistency is reached. The DKS Hamiltonian
and overlap matrices in Eqs. (4) are first assembled in
real space using the GTO basis. These are then trans-
formed to reciprocal space, and Eq. (3) is solved in the
orthonormal basis using matrix algebra (multiplications
and diagonalizations). Large-scale or high-throughput
calculations of band structures of solids require efficient
algorithms that offer good (ideally linear) scaling with re-
spect to the number of computer cores used as well as the
size of the unit cell. This must be accomplished for both
of the SCF solver steps. The demand for efficiency is es-
pecially important for all-electron 4c calculations, where
the matrix sizes are much larger and even otherwise neg-
ligible matrix operations become time-consuming.
Evaluation of the DKS Hamiltonian matrix elements
is dominated by the electron–electron Coulomb con-
tributions for DFT simulations with pure exchange–
correlation functionals. We adopt the resolution-of-the-
identity (RI) approach [102–104] (also known as the den-
sity fitting procedure) combined with multipole expan-
sions [85, 117] to significantly reduce the overall cost of
computing the Coulomb terms. The RI method approx-
imates the electron density by a linear combination of
auxiliary basis functions centered on atoms, as opposed
to the exact treatment of the four-center Coulomb in-
tegrals where the orbital products that constitute the
density are expanded individually. Our RI implemen-
tation differs from earlier work [85, 118]. The theoreti-
cal challenges associated with the divergent terms in the
Coulomb metric matrix of periodic systems together with
details of our RI method will be presented elsewhere.
Once the real-space matrix elements are calculated, the
remaining steps – transformation to reciprocal space, or-
thonormalization procedure, matrix diagonalization – is
performed independently for each k. We exploit fac-
torization of the reciprocal-space tasks by employing
message-passing-interface (MPI) directives which allow
high level of parallelization to be achieved due to almost
no communication needed among various MPI processes.
Each process utilizes multiple OpenMP threads whencalling internally parallelized matrix libraries. However,
in order to construct the electron density,
ρ(r) =/summationdisplay
n/integraldisplay
Kfn(k)ψ†
n(k;r)ψn(k;r)d3k, (17)
where fn(k) is the occupation number of the n-th band
andψn(k;r) are the Bloch functions defined in Eq. (2).
Band energies εn(k), from which the occupations are de-
termined, must be known for all k. Hence, the evaluation
of the electron density (needed for subsequent SCF itera-
tions) occurs after all the wave-function coefficients cµ
n(k)
and energies are found. In the all-electron 4c framework,
the coefficient matrices are too large to be stored in mem-
ory for all kand storing the matrices on disk hampers
the MPI parallelization due to significantly increased I/O
communication. To this end, we partition the electron
density into two terms:
ρ(r) =ρc(r) +ρv(r), (18)
where, for ρc, we restrict the sum/summationtext
nin Eq. (17) to con-
tain only those bands that are assumed to be fully filled
(fn(k) = 1) during the entire SCF procedure. ρccontains
contributions to the electron density from the majority
of bands – these terms are evaluated on-the-fly after di-
agonalization independently for each kpoint without the
need to store the full coefficient matrices. The remaining
terms in the density are incorporated in ρvand calcu-
lated in a separate loop over kafter all εn(k) and fn(k)
are known, which allows for a small number of partially
filled bands [ fn(k) to be varied across k]. The coefficients
cµ
n(k) needed for ρvcan be stored in memory as they form
narrow rectangular matrices with only one dimension in-
creasing with the system size. In addition, each MPI
process only needs to keep the coefficients for the subset
ofkpoints that the process handles, which is advanta-
geous for multinode calculations within the distributed-
memory architectures since the coefficients do not need
to be shared or communicated among nodes. The par-
allel scheme described here enables seamless all-electron
fully relativistic 4c calculations of band structures and
density-of-states with a large number of kpoints using
thousands of cores.
C. Evaluation of Z2invariant
The QSH phase of 2D materials with time-reversal
symmetry is characterized by a nontrivial topological or-
der associated with a nonzero Z2index [119]. Identifica-
tion of topological materials from numerical simulations
is not straightforward [120]. However, for systems with
inversion symmetry, the calculation of the Z2invariant
can be simplified using Fu and Kane’s method [121] based
on the knowledge of the parity of the Bloch wave func-
tions of the bulk crystal at the time-reversal invariant
momenta (TRIM) of the Brillouin zone. In this section,6
we describe how the Z2invariant is calculated in the 4c
real-space GTO basis.
First, we discuss the construction of the momentum-
space parity operator Pµµ′(k). Let Idenote the space-
inversion operator with the inversion center at G, de-
fined by its action on a scalar function fasIf(r)≡
f(2G−r). From the requirement that the parity-
transformed bispinor wave function ψ(r, t) satisfies the
same Dirac equation, it is possible to identify the form
of the 4c parity operator ˆPas:
ˆPψ(r, t) =ηβψ(2G−r, t)≡ηβIψ(r, t), (19)
where β= diag( I2,−I2) and ηis an arbitrary phase fac-
tor (|η|= 1) that can be introduced by the parity trans-
formation. Neglecting the phase gives ˆP=βI. The 4c
matrix form of the parity operator is obtained by realiz-
ing that IpI†=−pand letting ˆPact on the RKB basis
in Eq. (5), i.e.
ˆPχµ≡ˆP/parenleftbiggI202
021
2cσ·p/parenrightbigg
gµ=/parenleftbiggI202
021
2cσ·p/parenrightbigg
Igµ.(20)
It follows that the parity matrix Pµµ′(k) can be obtained
using Eq. (4b) for the overlap matrix with an additional
application of the inversion Ion the scalar basis function
gµ′. For an orbital from Eq. (6) with angular momentum
number lthat is centered at A(which here denotes the
position of an atom Aµin a unit cell R), this inversion
gives:
Igµ(r−A) = (−1)lgµ(r+A−2G). (21)
Finally, the Z2invariant is calculated using the eigenval-
uesξ2mof the parity Pµµ′(k) as [121]:
(−1)ν=4/productdisplay
i=1N/productdisplay
m=1ξ2m(Γi), (22)
where Nis the number of occupied Kramers pairs, and
Γilabels the four TRIM points in 2D.
We conclude this section by noting a few considerations
required for a numerically stable and reliable calculation
of the parity matrix and its eigenvalues when using the
method described above. First, the sparse matrix storage
scheme outlined in Sec. II A based on the locality of basis
function products χ†
µ(r)χµ′(r−R) needs to be modified
to respect the nonlocal nature of the inversion operator.
Specifically, the list of significant elements of the inver-
sion matrix is not the same as for the overlap matrix but
it is related via a reflection. Likewise, it must be en-
sured that the atomic basis set chosen for the inversion-
equivalent atoms is the same. Finally, it is not automati-
cally guaranteed that the Bloch functions in Eq. (2) that
are solutions of the DKS equation are also eigenfunctions
of the parity operator for Bloch states with degenerate
energies. Parity eigenvalues can be obtained by diagonal-
izing the sub-blocks of the parity matrix that correspondto these degenerate energy levels. However, in numer-
ical simulations, energy values obtained from diagonal-
ization routines are not necessarily exactly degenerate,
but rather appear as near-degenerate. At the same time,
eigenvectors corresponding to these near-degenerate lev-
els are not uniquely defined, so an energy threshold must
be introduced to identify the degeneracies.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We calculated the electronic band structures of six
TMDs (MoS 2, MoSe 2, MoTe 2, WS 2, WSe 2, WTe 2) in
the 2H, 1T, and 1T’ structural phases using our 4c all-
electron GTO method. We compared our 2H and 1T re-
sults with the corresponding band structures presented
in Ref. [6] obtained from the method of Te Velde and
Baerends [122]. For the 1T’ phase, we used the Vasp
program package [123] to investigate how our all-electron
method performs compared to the pseudopotential ap-
proximation. Due to the presence of heavy atoms, all
TMDs considered exhibit significant scalar relativistic
and SOC effects. We investigated three different levels of
theory: nonrelativistic (nr) with infinite speed of light,
Dirac-based 4c scalar relativistic (sr) without SOC, and
the Dirac-based 4c fully relativistic (fr) with SOC in-
cluded. In all our calculations, we employed the nonrel-
ativistic GGA-type XC functional PBE [124]. For the 4c
calculations, the Gaussian finite nucleus model of Viss-
cher and Dyall [125] was used instead of the point nuclei
in order to regularize the singularity of the lower com-
ponents of the wave function evaluated at the atomic
centers. All electronic structure optimizations were per-
formed using the relaxed unit cell geometries taken from
Refs. [6] (2H and 1T phases) and [11] (1T’ phase). For the
momentum-space Brillouin zone integrations, we used
the Γ-centered mesh of kpoints of 11 ×11 for the 2H and
1T’ phases and 33 ×33 for the metallic 1T phase. When
comparing the band structures ε(1)
n(k) and ε(2)
n(k) ob-
tained by using two different methods or computational
settings, we evaluate the maximum difference between
the energy eigenvalues as well as the root-mean-square
deviation (“band delta”) [78],
∆b(W) =/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalbt1
NE/summationdisplay
k,n
ε(1)
n(k)∈W
ε(2)
n(k)∈W/parenleftig
ε(1)
n(k)−ε(2)
n(k)/parenrightig2
,(23)
where W= [εl, εu] is an energy window chosen for com-
parison, the summations run over all energy states along
a path of kpoints for which both ε(1)
n(k) and ε(2)
n(k) lie
inside the window W, and NEis the total number of such
states.7
A. Numerical and basis-set accuracy
Numerical instabilities in simulations involving peri-
odic systems with GTOs originate from two distinct, al-
beit related, reasons [84, 93]. First, the numerical ac-
curacy of the KS Hamiltonian matrix can be insuffi-
cient when various approximations necessary for solid-
state simulations are introduced for basis sets with diffuse
functions. Diffuse basis functions can extend over a very
large number of unit cells, and the overlaps between such
functions exhibit a much slower decay than their more lo-
calized counterparts. If these overlaps are neglected too
early in calculations, the summations in Eqs. (4) are not
converged, causing the overlap matrix Sµµ′(k) to be in-
definite, i.e.having negative eigenvalues. This problem
can be mitigated by including a large number of basis
function products χ†
µ(r)χµ′(r−R), which in turn in-
creases the memory requirements for storage of matri-
ces. To this end, in the periodic module of ReSpect ,
we implemented sparse data structures in real space in
combination with quaternion algebra to efficiently han-
dle spin–orbit-coupled wave-function components. This
versatile approach allows us to retain the accuracy neces-
sary for numerical robustness with a very small additional
memory footprint.
The second problem is associated with overcomplete-
ness (linear dependencies) of the basis that causes matri-
ces in Eq. (3) to be ill-conditioned and introduces errors
and instabilities in matrix operations. This occurs when
the eigenvalues of the momentum-space overlap matrix
drop below 10−7, which is often the case for larger basis
sets. For instance, the smallest eigenvalue of the over-
lap matrix of WTe 2in the 1T’ phase is 10−11, while the
remaining eigenvalues span over 12 orders of magnitude.
As a result, very large elements ∼108accumulate in the
density matrix, which prohibits the successful completion
of the ground-state convergence procedure. To avoid such
errors, we construct an orthonormal basis so that the re-
dundant basis functions are projected out. However, we
found that truncating the space spanned by orthonor-
mal basis functions used for describing the lower wave-
function components leads to the formation of artificial
states inside the band gap for some kpoints in the band
structure. This can be understood by realizing that the
RKB condition is violated by the truncation process. To
numerically control how much of the RKB is lost, we de-
rived the matrix form of the RKB condition in a general
basis and the expression for the truncation error. More
details on the process of constructing the orthonormal
basis in the 4c framework is described in Sec. II A.
For all atoms, we employed the relativistic triple- ζ
(TZ) basis sets developed by Dyall for d[126–128] and
pelements [129, 130]. The basis sets used were uncon-
tracted and contained high-angular momentum correlat-
ing functions for several outer shells and functions for
dipole polarization of the valence shells. Our initial tests
using the smaller double- ζ(DZ) basis from the same
family yielded results with inconsistent quality across kpoints – for instance, the band energy at the Mpoint of
2H MoS 2was improved by 20 meV when the TZ basis
was used, while for other kpoints, this difference was
only about 6 meV. Similarly, the differences in the band
structures of 2H WS 2(including the band gap) between
the DZ and TZ basis sets were 20-30 meV. Hence, to en-
sure that our results are well-converged for all kpoints
and that the target accuracy is sufficient for reliable com-
parisons with other methods, we chose the TZ basis in
all calculations reported here.
The basis sets employed contained very diffuse func-
tions with several exponents of <10−2a.u. The extent of
the most diffuse function on Mo and W was 18.2 and 17.2
˚A, respectively, causing the basis function to span more
than a hundred unit cells of the 2D film. This in turn
results in several hundred thousand charge distributions
interacting with themselves and their periodic replicas
when the four-center Coulomb integrals are evaluated.
Such calculations are currently unfeasible on common su-
percomputers as they can consume a notable portion of
allocated resources. However, within the RI approxima-
tion, the charge distributions only interact with the elec-
tron density that is expanded using an atom-centered
auxiliary basis. Since the number of the three-center
terms needed is smaller than the number of four-center
terms typically by three orders of magnitude, the evalua-
tion of the Coulomb operator becomes affordable. Tests
that we performed on various systems including selected
2H and 1T’ structures studied here in both the nr and fr
settings indicate that the maximum error introduced by
the RI approximation is very small—only a few tens of
µeV.
Our implementation allowed us to explore the validity
of removing diffuse functions from the GTO basis sets
before starting the electronic-structure optimization —
an approach that is commonly employed for accelerating
and numerically stabilizing calculations of periodic sys-
tems using GTOs [96–98]. From the TZ basis sets, we
deleted all exponents <0.1 which for most atoms meant
removing one to two functions in each of the s,p,d, and
fshells. Even though this modification reduced the com-
putational cost by a factor between five and six in case
of the nr theory and a factor of four in case of the 4c the-
ory, we observed lowered accuracy of the eigenenergies of
some bands and kpoints. For instance, the difference be-
tween the energy of the Γ point of the valence band of 2H
WTe 2obtained from the calculations using the truncated
and full basis sets was 0.1 eV. The virtual bands located
2.5 eV above the Fermi level were, in general, poorly de-
scribed with the truncated basis set. Hence, our results
indicate that removing the diffuse functions in the start
of the calculation is neither justified nor necessary.
B. Stability of phases
Before inspecting individual structural phases and val-
idating our approach, we compare the total energies of8
MoS2MoSe2MoTe2WS2WSe2WTe20.1
0.00.10.20.30.40.5E (eV)
nr
sr
fr
FIG. 1. Relative total energy of the 1T’ phase of TMD
monolayers per MX 2calculated with respect to the 2H phase.
The results were obtained for nr, sr, and fr Hamiltonians and
show the relativistic effects on the structural stability.
each phase. Our results confirm the findings of Qian et
al.[11] — for all systems except WTe 2, the 2H phase
was found to be the ground-state structure with the low-
est energy, followed by the higher-energy 1T’ phase. The
metallic 1T phase is thermodynamically unstable and the
systems undergo Jahn–Teller distortion, relaxing to the
1T’ phase [11]. In the case of WTe 2, the energy of the
1T’ phase is below the 2H phase, which makes 1T’ the
most stable phase.
Our study allows for a uniform treatment of relativis-
tic effects for all atoms and all electrons, as opposed to
the calculations employing pseudopotentials, which offer
less control over how relativity is handled for light and
heavy elements. We found that it is the inclusion of the
scalar relativistic effects that decreases the energy of the
1T’ phase with respect to the 2H phase. Including the
SOC further lowers the energy of the 1T’ phase. For the
heaviest system, WTe 2, this energy lowering becomes suf-
ficient to change the ground-state phase from 2H to 1T’.
Figure 1 summarizes our results for all systems at the nr,
sr, and fr levels of theory and shows the relative energy
differences between the 1T’ and 2H phases. Hence, with-
out relativistic effects, the ground-state structure of all
six systems would be 2H.
C. 2H and 1T phases
The 2H and 1T phases of the TMDs both contain three
atoms (one metal and two chalcogens) in the primitive
unit cell. However, the structural differences between
the two phases lead to their distinct electronic proper-
ties. Whereas the 1T phase is space-inversion-symmetric
with a metallic electronic structure, the 2H systems are
semiconductors with broken space inversion. In combina-
tion with the strong SOC, this broken inversion symme-
try leads to “giant” spin–orbit-induced Rashba splittings
in 2H MX 2[29].TABLE I. Band gaps and SOC-induced (Rashba) splitting of
the valence band at the Kpoint of TMD monolayers in the 2H
phase calculated for nr, sr, and fr Hamiltonians. The values
in the round and square brackets are taken from Refs. [6]
and [131], respectively.
Band gap (E g, eV) Rashba splitting (eV)
nr sr fr fr
MoS 2 1.820 1 .812 1 .734 0 .146
(1.82) (1 .74) [0 .147]
MoSe 2 1.560 1 .550 1 .442 0 .185
(1.56) (1 .45) [0 .186]
MoTe 2 1.171 1 .154 1 .018 0 .218
(1.15) (1 .01)
WS2 2.060 1 .984 1 .628 0 .416
(1.98) (1 .64) [0 .433]
WSe 2 1.741 1 .630 1 .300 0 .460
(1.63) (1 .33) [0 .463]
WTe 2 1.332 1 .194 0 .863 0 .479
(1.18) (0 .87)
To validate the approach presented in this work, we
calculated the band structures at the nr, sr, and fr levels
of theory using all-electron bases. The resulting band di-
agrams traversing high symmetry kpoints obtained with
and without SOC can be found in Figs. S1 (2H) and S2
(1T) in Ref. [132]. The nonrelativistic results differ sig-
nificantly from those obtained from the relativistic the-
ories and are not shown. For the 2H and 1T phases, sr
band structures are available in the 2D materials Atlas
of Mir´ o, Audiffred, and Heine [6] that we used for com-
parison. We conclude that our results agree very well at
the sr level with the Atlas results.
In the MoTe 2and WTe 2band structures of the 1T
phase shown in Fig. S2 [132], it is possible to see very
small SOC-induced “Rashba-like” spin splittings of the
order of tens of meV. However, such splittings should
not be present for the inversion-symmetric 1T phase, and
all the bands should be strictly doubly degenerate. We
found that this observation can be attributed to small
deviations (about 0.04 ˚A) in the unit cell geometry of
MoTe 2and WTe 2from the tetragonal lattice, that is, the
1T structure used does not exhibit exact inversion sym-
metry. The geometries of the other systems do not show
any deviations from 1T, and we observed exact double
degeneracy of bands. Finally, we note that including the
SOC in the computational framework lifted the degener-
acy at the intersection points of the overlapping valence
and conduction bands of the metallic 1T phase. The val-
ues of the SOC-induced vertical gaps at the Kpoint are
reported in Table SI of Ref. [132].
Table I contains the values of the nr, sr, and fr band
gaps of the 2H phase, as well as the Rashba splittings
of the valence band at the Kpoint. We attribute the
small discrepancies between the results obtained with
the method presented here and the Atlas approach to
differences in the methodologies. In the Atlas work, the
relativistic effects are treated with the zeroth-order regu-9
FIG. 2. Structure of the 1T’ phase of monolayer TMDs.
TABLE II. Root-mean-square deviation between the band
structures of TMD monolayers obtained from the ReSpect
andVasp codes at the fr level of theory (including SOC) using
Eq. (23). The valence region Wvalranges from −10 to 0 eV
(shifted to the Fermi level) and the conduction region Wcon
ranges from 0 to 5 eV.
Band delta (meV)
MoS 2MoSe 2MoTe 2WS2WSe 2WTe 2
∆b(Wval) 12 .0 8 .4 11 .7 34 .6 25 .6 20 .2
∆b(Wcon) 40 .5 28 .4 32 .8 26 .2 23 .4 42 .0
lar approximation (ZORA) [133], which is a 2c technique
that requires numerical integration schemes due to the
appearance of the potential in the denominator of the
Hamiltonian. In contrast, the Hamiltonian used here is
4c with most of the integrals evaluated analytically. The
basis sets employed should not cause any significant de-
viations, since both sets of calculations were carried out
with TZ quality bases with several polarization functions.
Finally, we note that the Atlas results included empiri-
cal D3 treatment of London dispersion interactions [134]
that we did not consider in this work. The fact that no
larger differences between the two approaches were ob-
served even when the dispersion corrections were omit-
ted indicates that the band gaps in thin monolayers are
dominated by covalent bonds, which are well described
without these corrections. However, the dispersion forces
are important when multiple layers of 2D materials are
held together by van der Waals forces as, for example, in
bilayers and heterostructures [135]. In the case of WSe 2,
for which we observed the largest difference of 30 meV
in the fr setting, we further benchmarked against a cal-
culation with a larger quadruple- ζ(QZ) basis set. The
band energies improved only marginally, i.e.by units of
meV. Hence, we believe that our band structures are well
converged with respect to the basis set as well as the rel-
ativistic Hamiltonian and should serve as the reference
results for these systems for the PBE functional.D. 1T’ phase
The 1T’ phase of MX 2is formed from the 1T struc-
ture by a spontaneous lattice distortion in which the unit
cell period is doubled along one in-plane direction, which
creates zigzag chains along the perpendicular in-plane di-
rection [137] (see Fig. 2). The TMDs were shown to host
the QSH effect in the 1T’ structure, i.e.the existence
of time-reversal-symmetry protected edge states that en-
able conduction of electrical currents on the surface of the
material [11]. From a computational viewpoint, the 1T’
phase has not been studied in the literature to the same
extent as the 2H and 1T counterparts. Here, we calcu-
lated the electronic band structures of the 1T’ MX 2using
the all-electron 4c method presented in this work as well
as the pseudopotential method as implemented in the
Vasp package [123]. For the Vasp calculations, we used
an energy cutoff of 500 eV and the Brillouin zone k-point
sampling of 11 ×15×1. We also tested a denser mesh of k
points without observing significant differences. To avoid
artificial interactions between the periodic images of the
MX 2layers that appear when 2D systems are studied
using plane waves with periodic boundary conditions, a
vacuum region of 20 ˚A was applied in the direction per-
pendicular to the 2D film.
The band structures obtained from the ReSpect and
Vasp codes with SOC are presented in Fig. 3. The val-
ues of the band delta differences between the two codes
are shown in Table II, evaluated separately for the occu-
pied (valence) and virtual (conduction) energy regions.
In general, the differences are of the order of tens of meV
and are larger in the virtual region. The biggest discrep-
ancies close to the Fermi level are seen in WS 2, while the
overall largest band delta values are found in MoS 2and
WTe 2. For comparison, we performed tests of the nu-
merical convergence of the GTO method by tuning vari-
ous parameters of the ReSpect code. In particular, we
modified the number of removed momentum-space basis
functions in the orthonormal basis (see Sec. II A), tight-
ened the lattice-sum convergence thresholds, as well as
turned off the RI approximation of the Coulomb inte-
grals. Such modifications had a negligible effect on our
GTO results; the band delta values between the higher
accuracy calculations and the results shown here reached
tens of µeV. Bigger differences were observed only when
we benchmarked the WS 2TZ calculation against the QZ
basis set. Still, the energies of the bands close to the
Fermi level changed by 1–6 meV, and the values of the
band deltas for the intervals −10 to 0 eV and 0 to 5 eV
were ∆ b(Wval)≈4 meV and ∆ b(Wcon)≈10 meV, re-
spectively. To conclude, despite the minor improvements
to the band structure that are possible when larger ba-
sis sets are employed, our TZ results can be considered
as the reference for benchmarking performance of other
approximate methods, for instance, for studying the ac-
curacy of various pseudopotentials.
We explored the topological nature of the 1T’ phase
of the MX 2systems by first verifying that the band-gap10
FIG. 3. Comparison of band structures of MX 2monolayers in the 1T’ phase obtained from the ReSpect (dashed lines)
andVasp (full lines) codes at the relativistic level of theory including SOC. From the top left to bottom right: MoS 2, MoSe 2,
MoTe 2, WS 2, WSe 2, and WTe 2. The horizontal dashed black line marks the Fermi level. The path traversing high-symmetry
k-points in the reciprocal-space unit cell was chosen according to Ref. [136].
opening is due to the SOC. Fig. S3 in Ref. [132] shows
that energy degeneracies occurring at points where the
valence band crosses the conduction band are lifted when
SOC is included. A band gap opens in all systems except
MoTe 2and WTe 2that remain metallic despite the band
inversion. The lattice distortion in the 1T’ phase of the
2D TMDs does not break the inversion symmetry. Hence,
we used the parity of the Bloch states evaluated at the
TRIM points to calculate the Z2invariant [121]. Our
results for the parities of the individual Kramers pairs
agree with those obtained by Qian [11], which yields
(−1)ν= 1 for all six TMDs and confirms the existence
of the surface edge states hallmarking the quantum spin
Hall phase.
IV. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
2D TMDs are attracting high current interest for host-
ing exotic phenomena that promise applications in spin-
tronic devices and quantum computing. Theoretical pre-
dictions and understanding of such applications relies on
accurate description of the relativistic effects driven by
the presence of heavy atoms in these materials. Accord-
ingly, we have presented here an all-electron approach
that builds on the most widely used basis sets in quan-
tum chemistry to obtain a scheme that can accurately
capture relativistic effects as well as the properties of
electron wave functions close to the nuclei within a uni-form theoretical framework applicable to both solids and
molecules.
GTOs provide a convenient link between the finite and
periodic or extended systems, yet their use for solids has
been met with many technical difficulties that sparked
skepticism in the community; it has even been suggested
that GTOs should be avoided altogether for condensed
matter calculations [100]. However, in this work, we show
how the common limitations associated with GTOs can
be overcome, and that the convergence with respect to
the basis-set limit is possible even in the fully relativis-
tic 4c setting. To mitigate numerical and performance
issues, our method is based on the quaternion algebra,
linear-scaling data structures, RI approximation of the
Coulomb integrals, orthonormal momentum-space bases
that sufficiently preserve the RKB condition, and a par-
allel electronic structure solver with minimal required IO
operations. Our in-depth analysis of the 2H, 1T, and 1T’
phases of 2D TMDs indicates that our all-electron 4c re-
sults can serve as the reference for developing pseudopo-
tentials or approximate 2c relativistic techniques. We
confirm the existence of the quantum spin Hall effect in
the 1T’ phase of MX 2by evaluating the Z2invariant
within our real-space formulation. Finally, we attribute
the origin of the lower ground-state energy of WTe 2in
the 1T’ compared to the 2H phase to (scalar) relativistic
effects.
Despite the good agreement between our band struc-
tures for the 2H and 1T phases and those obtained by11
using the 2c ZORA method [6], our 4c approach offers
several advantages. The exact Dirac Hamiltonian con-
tains the mass-velocity term that is missing in the ZORA
approximation [43], but it is important for an accurate
description of relativistic effects in heavy elements and for
evaluating properties in the presence of external magnetic
fields [138]. Also, the 4c DKS equation does not contain
the potential in the denominator, so that complicated
numerical integration of most integrals involved can be
avoided.
Our study is important for opening a pathway for
further developments that leverage quantum chemistry
methods for exploring properties that are strongly af-
fected by the relativistic effects without sacrificing access
to the core regions of the electron charge and spin den-
sities. For instance, accurate relativistic first-principles
calculations of the spin Hamiltonian parameters ( e.g.hy-
perfine coupling constants, Zeeman interactions, or zero-
field splittings) are needed for determining spin dynam-
ical properties of spin defects in semiconductors [62] to
help find viable qubit hosting materials. Our all-electron
method can also be used for generating accurate pseu-
dopotentials, particularly for systems that contain heavyelements in high oxidation states.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Research Council of
Norway through its Centres of Excellence scheme (Grant
No. 262695), a Research Grant (Grant No. 315822),
and its Mobility Grant scheme (Grant No. 301864),
as well as the use of computational resources provided
by UNINETT Sigma2 – The National Infrastructure
for High Performance Computing and Data Storage
in Norway (Grant No. NN4654K). In addition, this
project received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the
Marie Sk/suppress lodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No. 945478
(SASPRO2), and the Slovak Research and Development
Agency (Grant No. APVV-21-0497). The work at North-
eastern University was supported by the US Depart-
ment of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy
Sciences Grant No. DE-SC0022216 and benefited from
Northeastern University’s Advanced Scientific Computa-
tion Center and the Discovery Cluster and the National
Energy Research Scientific Computing Center through
DOE Grant No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
[1] S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta,
H. R. Guti´ errez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F.
Ismach, et al., Progress, challenges, and opportunities in
two-dimensional materials beyond graphene, ACS nano
7, 2898 (2013).
[2] W. Han, Perspectives for spintronics in 2D materials,
APL Mater. 4, 032401 (2016).
[3] R. Frindt, Single crystals of MoS 2several molecular lay-
ers thick, J. Appl. Phys. 37, 1928 (1966).
[4] A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, The rise of graphene,
Nat. Mater. 6, 183 (2007).
[5] S. D. Sarma, S. Adam, E. Hwang, and E. Rossi,
Electronic transport in two-dimensional graphene, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 83, 407 (2011).
[6] P. Mir´ o, M. Audiffred, and T. Heine, An atlas of
two-dimensional materials, Chem. Soc. Rev. 43, 6537
(2014).
[7] N. Tombros, C. Jozsa, M. Popinciuc, H. T. Jonkman,
and B. J. Van Wees, Electronic spin transport and spin
precession in single graphene layers at room tempera-
ture, Nature 448, 571 (2007).
[8] X. Li, J. T. Mullen, Z. Jin, K. M. Borysenko, M. B.
Nardelli, and K. W. Kim, Intrinsic electrical transport
properties of monolayer silicene and MoS 2from first
principles, Phys. Rev. B 87, 115418 (2013).
[9] C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele, Quantum spin Hall effect in
graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 226801 (2005).
[10] C.-C. Liu, W. Feng, and Y. Yao, Quantum spin
Hall effect in silicene and two-dimensional germanium,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 076802 (2011).
[11] X. Qian, J. Liu, L. Fu, and J. Li, Quantum spin
Hall effect in two-dimensional transition metal dichalco-genides, Science 346, 1344 (2014).
[12] Y. Hor, A. Richardella, P. Roushan, Y. Xia, J. Check-
elsky, A. Yazdani, M. Hasan, N. P. Ong, and R. J.
Cava, p-type Bi 2Se3for topological insulator and low-
temperature thermoelectric applications, Phys. Rev. B
79, 195208 (2009).
[13] Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Cole-
man, and M. S. Strano, Electronics and optoelectron-
ics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides,
Nat. Nanotechnol. 7, 699 (2012).
[14] J. Nilsson, A. Akhmerov, and C. Beenakker, Splitting
of a Cooper pair by a pair of Majorana bound states,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 120403 (2008).
[15] L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Josephson current and
noise at a superconductor/quantum-spin-Hall-
insulator/superconductor junction, Phys. Rev. B
79, 161408 (2009).
[16] B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Gia-
cometti, and A. Kis, Single-layer MoS 2transistors, Nat.
Nanotechnol. 6, 147 (2011).
[17] L. Britnell, R. Gorbachev, R. Jalil, B. Belle, F. Schedin,
A. Mishchenko, T. Georgiou, M. Katsnelson, L. Eaves,
S. Morozov, et al. , Field-effect tunneling transistor
based on vertical graphene heterostructures, Science
335, 947 (2012).
[18] P. Solomon, B. Bryce, M. Kuroda, R. Keech, S. Shetty,
T. Shaw, M. Copel, L.-W. Hung, A. Schrott, C. Arm-
strong, et al. , Pathway to the piezoelectronic transduc-
tion logic device, Nano Lett. 15, 2391 (2015).
[19] H. Li, A. W. Contryman, X. Qian, S. M. Ardakani,
Y. Gong, X. Wang, J. M. Weisse, C. H. Lee, J. Zhao,
P. M. Ajayan, et al. , Optoelectronic crystal of artificial12
atoms in strain-textured molybdenum disulphide, Nat.
Commun. 6, 1 (2015).
[20] V. W. Brar, R. Decker, H.-M. Solowan, Y. Wang,
L. Maserati, K. T. Chan, H. Lee, C ¸. O. Girit, A. Zettl,
S. G. Louie, et al. , Gate-controlled ionization and
screening of cobalt adatoms on a graphene surface, Nat.
Phys. 7, 43 (2011).
[21] F. D. Natterer, F. Patthey, and H. Brune, Ring state
for single transition metal atoms on boron nitride on
Rh (111), Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 066101 (2012).
[22] W.-F. Tsai, C.-Y. Huang, T.-R. Chang, H. Lin, H.-T.
Jeng, and A. Bansil, Gated silicene as a tunable source
of nearly 100% spin-polarized electrons, Nat. Commun.
4, 1 (2013).
[23] L. Ponomarenko, A. Geim, A. Zhukov, R. Jalil, S. Mo-
rozov, K. Novoselov, I. Grigorieva, E. Hill, V. Cheianov,
V. Fal’Ko, et al. , Tunable metal–insulator transition in
double-layer graphene heterostructures, Nat. Phys. 7,
958 (2011).
[24] A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Van der Waals het-
erostructures, Nature 499, 419 (2013).
[25] S. Haigh, A. Gholinia, R. Jalil, S. Romani, L. Britnell,
D. Elias, K. Novoselov, L. Ponomarenko, A. Geim, and
R. Gorbachev, Cross-sectional imaging of individual lay-
ers and buried interfaces of graphene-based heterostruc-
tures and superlattices, Nat. Mater. 11, 764 (2012).
[26] S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev,
and A. Kis, 2D transition metal dichalcogenides, Nat.
Rev. Mater. 2, 1 (2017).
[27] K. Kang, T. Li, E. Sohn, J. Shan, and K. F. Mak, Non-
linear anomalous Hall effect in few-layer WTe 2, Nat.
Mater. 18, 324 (2019).
[28] Z. Wang, B. J. Wieder, J. Li, B. Yan, and B. A.
Bernevig, Higher-Order Topology, Monopole Nodal
Lines, and the Origin of Large Fermi Arcs in Transi-
tion Metal Dichalcogenides XTe 2(X = Mo, W), Phys.
Rev. Lett. 123, 186401 (2019).
[29] Z. Zhu, Y. Cheng, and U. Schwingenschl¨ ogl, Giant
spin-orbit-induced spin splitting in two-dimensional
transition-metal dichalcogenide semiconductors,
Phys. Rev. B 84, 153402 (2011).
[30] J. Wilson, F. Di Salvo, and S. Mahajan, Charge-density
waves in metallic, layered, transition-metal dichalco-
genides, Phys. Rev. Lett. 32, 882 (1974).
[31] F. Flicker and J. Van Wezel, Charge order from orbital-
dependent coupling evidenced by NbSe 2, Nat. Commun.
6, 1 (2015).
[32] X. Zhu, Y. Guo, H. Cheng, J. Dai, X. An, J. Zhao,
K. Tian, S. Wei, X. C. Zeng, C. Wu, et al. , Signature of
coexistence of superconductivity and ferromagnetism in
two-dimensional NbSe 2triggered by surface molecular
adsorption, Nat. Commun. 7, 1 (2016).
[33] D. Xiao, G.-B. Liu, W. Feng, X. Xu, and W. Yao, Cou-
pled spin and valley physics in monolayers of MoS 2and
other group-VI dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108,
196802 (2012).
[34] K. F. Mak, K. L. McGill, J. Park, and P. L. McEuen,
The valley Hall effect in MoS 2transistors, Science 344,
1489 (2014).
[35] A. Pulkin and O. V. Yazyev, Spin-and valley-polarized
transport across line defects in monolayer MoS 2, Phys.
Rev. B 93, 041419 (2016).
[36] X. Xu, W. Yao, D. Xiao, and T. F. Heinz, Spin and
pseudospins in layered transition metal dichalcogenides,Nat. Phys. 10, 343 (2014).
[37] B. T. Zhou, N. F. Yuan, H.-L. Jiang, and K. T.
Law, Ising superconductivity and Majorana fermions
in transition-metal dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. B 93,
180501 (2016).
[38] W.-Y. He, B. T. Zhou, J. J. He, N. F. Yuan, T. Zhang,
and K. T. Law, Magnetic field driven nodal topolog-
ical superconductivity in monolayer transition metal
dichalcogenides, Commun. Phys. 1, 1 (2018).
[39] J.-Y. Tsai, J. Pan, H. Lin, A. Bansil, and Q. Yan,
Antisite defect qubits in monolayer transition metal
dichalcogenides, Nat. Commun. 13, 1 (2022).
[40] P. A. Dirac, The quantum theory of the electron, Proc.
R. Soc. A 117, 610 (1928).
[41] T. Saue and T. Helgaker, Four-component relativistic
Kohn–Sham theory, J. Comput. Chem. 23, 814 (2002).
[42] L. Belpassi, L. Storchi, H. M. Quiney, and F. Tarantelli,
Recent advances and perspectives in four-component
Dirac–Kohn–Sham calculations, Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 13, 12368 (2011).
[43] T. Saue, Relativistic Hamiltonians for chemistry: a
primer, ChemPhysChem 12, 3077 (2011).
[44] W. Liu, Advances in relativistic molecular quantum me-
chanics, Phys. Rep. 537, 59 (2014).
[45] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Inhomogeneous electron
gas, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964).
[46] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Self-consistent equations in-
cluding exchange and correlation effects, Phys. Rev.
140, A1133 (1965).
[47] C.-N. Yeh, A. Shee, Q. Sun, E. Gull, and D. Zgid,
Relativistic self-consistent GW: Exact two-component
formalism with one-electron approximation for solids,
Phys. Rev. B 106, 085121 (2022).
[48] A. Rajagopal and J. Callaway, Inhomogeneous electron
gas, Phys. Rev. B 7, 1912 (1973).
[49] S. Komorovsky, M. Repisky, O. L. Malkina, V. G.
Malkin, I. Malkin Ondik, and M. Kaupp, A fully rel-
ativistic method for calculation of nuclear magnetic
shielding tensors with a restricted magnetically bal-
anced basis in the framework of the matrix Dirac–Kohn–
Sham equation, J. Chem. Phys. 128, 104101 (2008).
[50] E. Engel, Relativistic Density Functional Theory: Foun-
dations and Basic Formalism, in Theoretical and compu-
tational chemistry , Vol. 11, edited by P. Schwerdtfeger
(Elsevier, 2002) Chap. 10, pp. 523–621.
[51] K. G. Dyall and K. Faegri, Introduction to relativis-
tic quantum chemistry (Oxford University Press, New
York, 2007) pp. 268–274.
[52] T. Saue, K. Fægri, T. Helgaker, and O. Gropen, Princi-
ples of direct 4-component relativistic SCF: application
to caesium auride, Mol. Phys. 91, 937 (1997).
[53] L. Konecny, M. Kadek, S. Komorovsky, K. Ruud,
and M. Repisky, Resolution-of-identity accelerated rela-
tivistic two-and four-component electron dynamics ap-
proach to chiroptical spectroscopies, J. Chem. Phys.
149, 204104 (2018).
[54] M. Kadek, M. Repisky, and K. Ruud, All-electron fully
relativistic Kohn-Sham theory for solids based on the
Dirac-Coulomb Hamiltonian and Gaussian-type func-
tions, Phys. Rev. B 99, 205103 (2019).
[55] M. Repisky, S. Komorovsky, M. Kadek, L. Konecny,
U. Ekstr¨ om, E. Malkin, M. Kaupp, K. Ruud, O. L.
Malkina, and V. G. Malkin, ReSpect: Relativistic spec-
troscopy DFT program package, J. Chem. Phys. 152,13
184101 (2020).
[56] L. Kleinman, Relativistic norm-conserving pseudopo-
tential, Phys. Rev. B 21, 2630 (1980).
[57] G. B. Bachelet and M. Schl¨ uter, Relativistic norm-
conserving pseudopotentials, Phys. Rev. B 25, 2103
(1982).
[58] A. Dal Corso and A. M. Conte, Spin-orbit coupling with
ultrasoft pseudopotentials: Application to Au and Pt,
Phys. Rev. B 71, 115106 (2005).
[59] P. Nichols, N. Govind, E. J. Bylaska, and W. A.
De Jong, Gaussian Basis Set and Planewave Relativis-
tic Spin-Orbit Methods in NWChem, J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 5, 491 (2009).
[60] A. Dal Corso, Projector augmented-wave method: Ap-
plication to relativistic spin-density functional theory,
Phys. Rev. B 82, 075116 (2010).
[61] G. Bihlmayer, Y. M. Koroteev, P. M. Echenique, E. V.
Chulkov, and S. Bl¨ ugel, The Rashba-effect at metallic
surfaces, Surf. Sci. 600, 3888 (2006).
[62] K. Ghosh, H. Ma, M. Onizhuk, V. Gavini, and G. Galli,
Spin–spin interactions in defects in solids from mixed
all-electron and pseudopotential first-principles calcula-
tions, Npj Comput. Mater. 7, 1 (2021).
[63] M. Gmitra, S. Konschuh, C. Ertler, C. Ambrosch-Draxl,
and J. Fabian, Band-structure topologies of graphene:
Spin-orbit coupling effects from first principles, Phys.
Rev. B 80, 235431 (2009).
[64] J. Sichau, M. Prada, T. Anlauf, T. Lyon, B. Bosn-
jak, L. Tiemann, and R. Blick, Resonance microwave
measurements of an intrinsic spin-orbit coupling gap in
graphene: A possible indication of a topological state,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 046403 (2019).
[65] O. K. Andersen, Linear methods in band theory,
Phys. Rev. B 12, 3060 (1975).
[66] A. MacDonald, W. Picket, and D. Koelling, A linearised
relativistic augmented-plane-wave method utilising ap-
proximate pure spin basis functions, J. Phys. C 13, 2675
(1980).
[67] E. Wimmer, H. Krakauer, M. Weinert, and A. Freeman,
Full-potential self-consistent linearized-augmented-
plane-wave method for calculating the electronic
structure of molecules and surfaces: O 2 molecule,
Phys. Rev. B 24, 864 (1981).
[68] N. Christensen, Spin-orbit projected d densities-of-
states of Pd, Ag, Pt, and Au, J. Phys. F 8, L51 (1978).
[69] H. Ebert, P. Strange, and B. L. Gyorffy, Spin-polarized
relativistic LMTO method, J. Appl. Phys. 63, 3052
(1988).
[70] D. A. Rehn, J. M. Wills, T. E. Battelle, and A. E.
Mattsson, Dirac’s equation and its implications for den-
sity functional theory based calculations of materials
containing heavy elements, Phys. Rev. B 101, 085114
(2020).
[71] P. Motamarri, S. Das, S. Rudraraju, K. Ghosh,
D. Davydov, and V. Gavini, DFT-FE–A massively par-
allel adaptive finite-element code for large-scale den-
sity functional theory calculations, Comput. Phys. Com-
mun. 246, 106853 (2020).
[72] S. Suzuki and K. Nakao, A fully relativistic full-
potential LCAO method for solids, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn.
68, 1982 (1999).
[73] K. Koepernik and H. Eschrig, Full-potential nonorthog-
onal local-orbital minimum-basis band-structure
scheme, Phys. Rev. B 59, 1743 (1999).[74] R. Zhao, V. W.-z. Yu, K. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhang, and
V. Blum, Quasi-four-component method with numeric
atom-centered orbitals for relativistic density functional
simulations of molecules and solids, Phys. Rev. B 103,
245144 (2021).
[75] P. Philipsen, E. Van Lenthe, J. Snijders, and
E. Baerends, Relativistic calculations on the adsorption
of CO on the (111) surfaces of Ni, Pd, and Pt within
the zeroth-order regular approximation, Phys. Rev. B
56, 13556 (1997).
[76] R. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Xiao, and W. Liu, Exact two-
component relativistic energy band theory and applica-
tion, J. Chem. Phys. 144, 044105 (2016).
[77] J. Boettger and S. Trickey, First-principles calculation
of the spin-orbit splitting in graphene, Phys. Rev. B 75,
121402 (2007).
[78] W. P. Huhn and V. Blum, One-hundred-three com-
pound band-structure benchmark of post-self-consistent
spin-orbit coupling treatments in density functional the-
ory, Phys. Rev. Mater. 1, 033803 (2017).
[79] C. Pisani, M. Sch¨ utz, S. Casassa, D. Usvyat, L. Maschio,
M. Lorenz, and A. Erba, Cryscor: a program for the
post-Hartree–Fock treatment of periodic systems, Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 14, 7615 (2012).
[80] G. H. Booth, T. Tsatsoulis, G. K.-L. Chan, and
A. Gr¨ uneis, From plane waves to local Gaussians
for the simulation of correlated periodic systems,
J. Chem. Phys. 145, 084111 (2016).
[81] J. McClain, Q. Sun, G. K.-L. Chan, and T. C. Berkel-
bach, Gaussian-based coupled-cluster theory for the
ground-state and band structure of solids, J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 13, 1209 (2017).
[82] E. Rebolini, G. Baardsen, A. S. Hansen, K. R.
Leikanger, and T. B. Pedersen, Divide–Expand–
Consolidate Second-Order Møller–Plesset Theory with
Periodic Boundary Conditions, J. Chem. Theory Com-
put.14, 2427 (2018).
[83] J. M. Crowley, J. Tahir-Kheli, and W. A. Goddard III,
Resolution of the band gap prediction problem for ma-
terials design, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 7, 1198 (2016).
[84] K. N. Kudin and G. E. Scuseria, Linear-scaling density-
functional theory with Gaussian orbitals and periodic
boundary conditions: Efficient evaluation of energy and
forces via the fast multipole method, Phys. Rev. B 61,
16440 (2000).
[85] R. /suppress Lazarski, A. M. Burow, and M. Sierka, Density func-
tional theory for molecular and periodic systems using
density fitting and continuous fast multipole methods,
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 11, 3029 (2015).
[86] M. Kadek, L. Konecny, B. Gao, M. Repisky, and
K. Ruud, X-ray absorption resonances near L2, 3-edges
from real-time propagation of the Dirac–Kohn–Sham
density matrix, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 17, 22566
(2015).
[87] S. Komorovsk` y, M. Repisk` y, O. L. Malkina, V. G.
Malkin, I. Malkin, and M. Kaupp, Resolution of iden-
tity Dirac-Kohn-Sham method using the large compo-
nent only: Calculations of g-tensor and hyperfine tensor,
J. Chem. Phys. 124, 084108 (2006).
[88] M. Repisk` y, S. Komorovsk` y, O. L. Malkina, and V. G.
Malkin, Restricted magnetically balanced basis applied
for relativistic calculations of indirect nuclear spin–
spin coupling tensors in the matrix Dirac–Kohn–Sham
framework, Chem. Phys. 356, 236 (2009).14
[89] C. Pisani and R. Dovesi, Exact-exchange Hartree–Fock
calculations for periodic systems. I. Illustration of the
method, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 17, 501 (1980).
[90] R. Dovesi, C. Pisani, C. Roetti, and V. Saunders, Treat-
ment of Coulomb interactions in Hartree-Fock calcula-
tions of periodic systems, Phys. Rev. B 28, 5781 (1983).
[91] R. Dovesi, F. Pascale, B. Civalleri, K. Doll, N. M. Har-
rison, I. Bush, P. D’arco, Y. No¨ el, M. R´ erat, P. Carbon-
niere, et al. , The CRYSTAL code, 1976–2020 and be-
yond, a long story, J. Chem. Phys. 152, 204111 (2020).
[92] Q. Sun, X. Zhang, S. Banerjee, P. Bao, M. Barbry, N. S.
Blunt, N. A. Bogdanov, G. H. Booth, J. Chen, Z.-H.
Cui, et al. , Recent developments in the PySCF program
package, J. Chem. Phys. 153, 024109 (2020).
[93] S. Suhai, P. Bagus, and J. Ladik, An error analysis for
Hartree-Fock crystal orbital calculations, Chem. Phys.
68, 467 (1982).
[94] M. F. Peintinger, D. V. Oliveira, and T. Bredow, Con-
sistent Gaussian basis sets of triple-zeta valence with
polarization quality for solid-state calculations, J. Com-
put. Chem. 34, 451 (2013).
[95] T. Zhu and G. K.-L. Chan, All-electron Gaussian-based
G 0 W 0 for valence and core excitation energies of
periodic systems, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 17, 727
(2021).
[96] J. E. Peralta, J. Uddin, and G. E. Scuseria, Scalar rel-
ativistic all-electron density functional calculations on
periodic systems, J. Chem. Phys. 122, 084108 (2005).
[97] D. Usvyat, B. Civalleri, L. Maschio, R. Dovesi,
C. Pisani, and M. Sch¨ utz, Approaching the theoretical
limit in periodic local MP2 calculations with atomic-
orbital basis sets: the case of LiH, J. Chem. Phys. 134,
214105 (2011).
[98] J. K. Perry, J. Tahir-Kheli, and W. A. Goddard III,
Antiferromagnetic band structure of La 2 CuO 4: Becke-
3–Lee-Yang-Parr calculations, Phys. Rev. B 63, 144510
(2001).
[99] L. E. Daga, B. Civalleri, and L. Maschio, Gaussian basis
sets for crystalline solids: All-purpose basis set libraries
vs system-specific optimizations, J. Chem. Theory Com-
put.16, 2192 (2020).
[100] F. Jensen, Analysis of energy-optimized gaussian basis
sets for condensed phase density functional calculations,
Theor. Chem. Acc. 132, 1 (2013).
[101] R. E. Stanton and S. Havriliak, Kinetic balance: A par-
tial solution to the problem of variational safety in Dirac
calculations, J. Chem. Phys. 81, 1910 (1984).
[102] E. J. Baerends, D. Ellis, and P. Ros, Self-consistent
molecular Hartree—Fock—Slater calculations I. The
computational procedure, Chem. Phys. 2, 41 (1973).
[103] Y. Jung, A. Sodt, P. M. Gill, and M. Head-Gordon,
Auxiliary basis expansions for large-scale electronic
structure calculations, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
102, 6692 (2005).
[104] ˇS. Varga, Long-range analysis of density fitting in ex-
tended systems, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 108, 1518
(2008).
[105] M. Kadek, B. Wang, M. Joosten, W.-C. Chiu,
F. Mairesse, M. Repisky, K. Ruud, and A. Bansil,
Dataset for ”Band structures and Z2 invariant of 2D
transition metal dichalcogenides from fully relativis-
tic Dirac–Kohn–Sham theory using Gaussian-type or-
bitals”, ZENODO (2022).
[106] The ReSpect code is available at www.respectprogram.org .
[107] W. Schwarz and H. Wallmeier, Basis set expansions of
relativistic molecular wave equations, Mol. Phys. 46,
1045 (1982).
[108] K. G. Dyall, An exact separation of the spin-free
and spin-dependent terms of the Dirac–Coulomb–Breit
Hamiltonian, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 2118 (1994).
[109] M. Repisky, L. Konecny, M. Kadek, S. Komorovsky,
O. L. Malkin, V. G. Malkin, and K. Ruud, Excita-
tion energies from real-time propagation of the four-
component Dirac–Kohn–Sham equation, J. Chem. The-
ory Comput. 11, 980 (2015).
[110] S. G. Balasubramani, G. P. Chen, S. Coriani,
M. Diedenhofen, M. S. Frank, Y. J. Franzke, F. Furche,
R. Grotjahn, M. E. Harding, C. H¨ attig, et al. , TURBO-
MOLE: Modular program suite for ab initio quantum-
chemical and condensed-matter simulations, J. Chem.
Phys. 152, 184107 (2020).
[111] E. Apra, E. J. Bylaska, W. A. De Jong, N. Govind,
K. Kowalski, T. P. Straatsma, M. Valiev, H. J. van Dam,
Y. Alexeev, J. Anchell, et al. , NWChem: Past, present,
and future, J. Chem. Phys. 152, 184102 (2020).
[112] T. Saue, R. Bast, A. S. P. Gomes, H. J. A. Jensen,
L. Visscher, I. A. Aucar, R. Di Remigio, K. G. Dyall,
E. Eliav, E. Fasshauer, et al. , The DIRAC code for rel-
ativistic molecular calculations, J. Chem. Phys. 152,
204104 (2020).
[113] J. M. H. Olsen, S. Reine, O. Vahtras, E. Kjellgren,
P. Reinholdt, K. O. Hjorth Dundas, X. Li, J. Cukras,
M. Ringholm, E. D. Hedeg˚ ard, et al. , Dalton Project: A
Python platform for molecular-and electronic-structure
simulations of complex systems, J. Chem. Phys. 152,
214115 (2020).
[114] L. Belpassi, M. De Santis, H. M. Quiney, F. Tarantelli,
and L. Storchi, BERTHA: Implementation of a four-
component Dirac–Kohn–Sham relativistic framework,
J. Chem. Phys. 152, 164118 (2020).
[115] S. Obara and A. Saika, Efficient recursive computation
of molecular integrals over Cartesian Gaussian func-
tions, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 3963 (1986).
[116] S. F. Boys, Electronic wave functions-I. A general
method of calculation for the stationary states of any
molecular system, Proc. R. Soc. A 200, 542 (1950).
[117] M. Sierka, A. Hogekamp, and R. Ahlrichs, Fast evalua-
tion of the Coulomb potential for electron densities us-
ing multipole accelerated resolution of identity approx-
imation, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 9136 (2003).
[118] Q. Sun, T. C. Berkelbach, J. D. McClain, and G. K.-
L. Chan, Gaussian and plane-wave mixed density fit-
ting for periodic systems, J. Chem. Phys. 147, 164119
(2017).
[119] C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele, Z 2topological order and the
quantum spin hall effect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 146802
(2005).
[120] D. Gresch, G. Autes, O. V. Yazyev, M. Troyer, D. Van-
derbilt, B. A. Bernevig, and A. A. Soluyanov, Z2Pack:
Numerical implementation of hybrid Wannier centers
for identifying topological materials, Phys. Rev. B 95,
075146 (2017).
[121] L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Topological insulators with in-
version symmetry, Phys. Rev. B 76, 045302 (2007).
[122] G. Te Velde and E. Baerends, Precise density-functional
method for periodic structures, Phys. Rev. B 44, 7888
(1991).15
[123] G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨ uller, Efficient iterative schemes
for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave
basis set, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996).
[124] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized
gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett.
77, 3865 (1996).
[125] L. Visscher and K. G. Dyall, Dirac–Fock atomic elec-
tronic structure calculations using different nuclear
charge distributions, At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 67,
207 (1997).
[126] K. G. Dyall, Relativistic double-zeta, triple-zeta, and
quadruple-zeta basis sets for the 4d elements Y–Cd,
Theor. Chem. Acc. 117, 483 (2007).
[127] K. G. Dyall, Relativistic double-zeta, triple-zeta, and
quadruple-zeta basis sets for the 5d elements Hf–Hg,
Theor. Chem. Acc. 112, 403 (2004).
[128] K. G. Dyall and A. S. Gomes, Revised relativistic basis
sets for the 5d elements Hf–Hg, Theor. Chem. Acc. 125,
97 (2010).
[129] K. G. Dyall, Relativistic and nonrelativistic finite nu-
cleus optimized triple-zeta basis sets for the 4p, 5p and
6p elements, Theor. Chem. Acc. 108, 335 (2002).
[130] K. G. Dyall, Relativistic quadruple-zeta and revised
triple-zeta and double-zeta basis sets for the 4p, 5p, and
6p elements, Theor. Chem. Acc. 115, 441 (2006).
[131] K. Ko´ smider, J. W. Gonz´ alez, and J. Fern´ andez-Rossier,
Large spin splitting in the conduction band of transi-
tion metal dichalcogenide monolayers, Phys. Rev. B 88,245436 (2013).
[132] See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by
publisher] for the direct SOC-induced band gaps in the
1T phase of MX 2, and band structures in the 2H, 1T,
and 1T’ phases plotted with and without the SOC.
[133] E. Van Lenthe, R. Van Leeuwen, E. Baerends, and
J. Snijders, Relativistic regular two-component Hamil-
tonians, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 57, 281 (1996).
[134] S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich, and H. Krieg, A con-
sistent and accurate ab initio parametrization of density
functional dispersion correction (DFT-D) for the 94 el-
ements H-Pu, J. Chem. Phys. 132, 154104 (2010).
[135] J. Liu, T. Shen, J.-C. Ren, S. Li, and W. Liu, Role of
van der Waals interactions on the binding energies of 2D
transition-metal dichalcogenides, Appl. Surf. Sci. 608,
155163 (2023).
[136] W. Setyawan and S. Curtarolo, High-throughput elec-
tronic band structure calculations: Challenges and
tools, Comput. Mater. Sci. 49, 299 (2010).
[137] G. Eda, T. Fujita, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, M. Chen,
and M. Chhowalla, Coherent atomic and electronic het-
erostructures of single-layer MoS2, ACS nano 6, 7311
(2012).
[138] L. Visscher, T. Enevoldsen, T. Saue, H. J. A. Jensen,
and J. Oddershede, Full four-component relativistic cal-
culations of NMR shielding and indirect spin–spin cou-
pling tensors in hydrogen halides, J. Comput. Chem.
20, 1262 (1999).Supplemental Material for
Band structures and Z2invariants of two-dimensional transition
metal dichalcogenide monolayers from fully-relativistic
Dirac–Kohn–Sham theory using Gaussian-type orbitals
Marius Kadek,1, 2, ∗Baokai Wang,1Marc Joosten,2Wei-Chi Chiu,1Francois
Mairesse,3Michal Repisky,2, 4Kenneth Ruud,2, 5and Arun Bansil1
1Department of Physics, Northeastern University,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA
2Hylleraas Centre for Quantum Molecular Sciences, Department of Chemistry,
UiT The Arctic University of Norway, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway
3Laboratory of Theoretical Chemistry,
University of Namur, B-5000 Namur, Belgium
4Department of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry,
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia
5Norwegian Defence Research Establishment,
P.O. Box 25, 2027 Kjeller, Norway
(Dated: June 19, 2023)
TABLE SI:. Direct SOC-induced band gaps between the valence and conduction bands of MX 2
in the 1T phase at the Ksymmetry point in the Brillouin zone.
K-Kgap (eV)
MoS 2 0.079
MoSe 2 0.114
MoTe 2 0.138
WS 2 0.175
WSe 2 0.205
WTe 2 0.173
1arXiv:2302.00041v3  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  16 Jun 2023M K
3
2
1
0123Band energy [eV]2H MoS2
M K
3
2
1
0123Band energy [eV]2H MoSe2
M K
3
2
1
0123Band energy [eV]2H MoTe2
M K
3
2
1
0123Band energy [eV]2H WS2
M K
3
2
1
0123Band energy [eV]2H WSe2
M K
3
2
1
0123Band energy [eV]2H WTe2FIG. S1:. Band structures of MX 2monolayers in the 2H phase obtained from the ReSpect code
at the scalar-relativistic (dashed lines, no SOC) and fully-relativistic (full lines, with SOC) levels
of the theory. The horizontal dashed-black line separates the occupied and vacant states, and is
placed on the top of the valence band for insulating systems. The unit cell-structure and lattice
parameters were taken from Ref. 1.
∗marius.kadek@uit.no
2M K
3
2
1
0123Band energy [eV]1T MoS2
M K
3
2
1
0123Band energy [eV]1T MoSe2
M K
3
2
1
0123Band energy [eV]1T MoTe2
M K
3
2
1
0123Band energy [eV]1T WS2
M K
3
2
1
0123Band energy [eV]1T WSe2
M K
3
2
1
0123Band energy [eV]1T WTe2FIG. S2:. Band structures of MX 2monolayers in the 1T phase obtained from the ReSpect code
at the scalar-relativistic (dashed lines, no SOC) and fully-relativistic (full lines, with SOC) levels
of the theory. The horizontal dashed-black line marks the Fermi level. The unit-cell structure and
lattice parameters were taken from Ref. 1.
3Y'
 Y1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00.20.40.60.81.0Band energy [eV]1T' MoS2
Y'
 Y1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00.20.40.60.81.0Band energy [eV]1T' MoSe2
Y'
 Y1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00.20.40.60.81.0Band energy [eV]1T' MoTe2
Y'
 Y1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00.20.40.60.81.0Band energy [eV]1T' WS2
Y'
 Y1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00.20.40.60.81.0Band energy [eV]1T' WSe2
Y'
 Y1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00.20.40.60.81.0Band energy [eV]1T' WTe2FIG. S3:. Band structures of MX 2monolayers in the 1T’ phase obtained from the ReSpect code
at the scalar-relativistic (dashed lines, no SOC) and fully-relativistic (full lines, with SOC) levels
of theory. The horizontal dashed-black line marks the Fermi level. The unit-cell structure and
lattice parameters were taken from Ref. 2.
4[1] P. Mir´ o, M. Audiffred, and T. Heine, An atlas of two-dimensional materials, Chem. Soc. Rev.
43, 6537 (2014).
[2] X. Qian, J. Liu, L. Fu, and J. Li, Quantum spin Hall effect in two-dimensional transition metal
dichalcogenides, Science 346, 1344 (2014).
5