Hamiltonian Cycles on Ammann-Beenker Tilings
Shobhna Singh,1,∗Jerome Lloyd,2and Felix Flicker3
1School of Physics and Astronomy, Cardiff University,
The Parade, Cardiff CF24 3AA, United Kingdom
2Department of Theoretical Physics, University of Geneva,
24 rue du G´ en´ eral-Dufour, 1211 Gen` eve 4, Switzerland
3School of Physics, Tyndall Avenue, Bristol, BS8 1TL, United Kingdom
We provide a simple algorithm for constructing Hamiltonian graph cycles (visiting every vertex
exactly once) on a set of arbitrarily large finite subgraphs of aperiodic two-dimensional Ammann-
Beenker (AB) tilings. Using this result, and the discrete scale symmetry of AB tilings, we find exact
solutions to a range of other problems which lie in the complexity class NP-complete for general
graphs. These include the equal-weight traveling salesperson problem, providing, for example the
most efficient route a scanning tunneling microscope tip could take to image the atoms of physical
quasicrystals with AB symmetries; the longest path problem, whose solution demonstrates that
collections of flexible molecules of any length can adsorb onto AB quasicrystal surfaces at density
one, with possible applications to catalysis; and the three-coloring problem, giving ground states for
theq-state Potts model ( q≥3) of magnetic interactions defined on the planar dual to AB, which
may provide useful models for protein folding.
I. INTRODUCTION
Fractal geometric loop structures are ubiquitous in
physics, appearing often as the natural degrees of free-
dom in models of critical phenomena. Examples include
the fluctuating domain walls of an Ising magnet, the com-
pact shapes of long polymer chains [1], or the space-time
trajectories of quantum particles. A special class of loops,
attracting much attention beyond physics, are the Hamil-
tonian cycles. A Hamiltonian cycle of a graph is a closed,
self-avoiding loop that visits every vertex precisely once.
Study of these objects dates at least to the ninth cen-
tury A. D., when the Indian poet Rudrat .a constructed
a poem based on a ‘Knight’s tour’ of the chessboard.
Since then they have appeared in a variety of applica-
tions in the sciences and mathematics including protein
folding [2, 3], traffic models, spin models in statistical
mechanics [4, 5], and ice-type models of geometrically
frustrated magnetism [6, 7].
Hamiltonian cycles have been used to model the statis-
tics of polymer melts [1, 8–10]: For example, the criti-
cal scaling exponents were calculated for polymer chains
in 2D using the self-avoiding walk on the honeycomb
lattice [11, 12]. They have also played a key role in
the study of protein folding [1, 2, 13–16]. The shapes
(“conformational properties”) of proteins play a signif-
icant role in their biological function. Proteins often
adopt remarkably compact and symmetrical structures
compared to the more general class of polymers [14]. A
key question is how to predict 3D conformational prop-
erties from the 1D sequences of amino acids from which
the proteins are built. One route is to study“simple ex-
act models” in which the amino acids are represented by
structureless units, each occupying the vertex of a graph.
∗shobhna862@gmail.comNeighboring units in the protein must be nearest neigh-
bors on the graph. The graphs are chosen to have spe-
cific geometrical embeddings, typically periodic lattices.
While not providing accurate geometrical models, such
approaches have the advantage of being exactly solvable.
They are also able to capture ‘nonlocal’ interactions, in
which amino acids interact when they are neighbors on
the graph but not on the 1D chain itself [1, 9, 13, 17, 18].
Remarkably, 2D graphs often give qualitatively similar
results to 3D graphs while affording a significant compu-
tational advantage [14]. Simple exact models have also
been instrumental in the development of polymer physics
more generally [8, 19–22].
TheO(n) model in statistical physics, which describes
n-component spins interacting with their nearest lattice
neighbors with isotropic couplings [4, 5], can be mapped
to a problem involving self-avoiding loops [17, 23]. The
probability of a given loop configuration is weighted ac-
cording to two fugacities: xweighting the total perime-
ter of the loops, and nthe number of loops. The O(n)
phase diagram encapsulates many well-known models in
statistical physics. For example, the ferromagnetic Ising
model arises for n= 1, where the loops represent the do-
main walls in the low temperature limit (thus the Ising
spins are defined on the planar dual lattice), while in
the high temperature limit the natural degrees of free-
dom are again loops, though their expression in terms of
the original spin variables is less intuitive. the q-state
Potts models can be related to the n=√qlimit. as
x→ ∞ every lattice site is visited by a loop and one
arrives at the so-called “fully-packed loop” (FPL) mod-
els, which additionally model crystal surface growth. and
in the x→ ∞ , n→0 limit, the system is forced into a
single macroscopic loop traversing every site of the sys-
tem, which is a Hamiltonian cycle [23, 24]. Studying
Hamiltonian cycles can thus lead to an understanding of
a variety of other models in a given system, and for this
reason a great deal of work has been put into their studyarXiv:2302.01940v4  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  30 Jun 20242
– primarily in the simplest context of periodic regular lat-
tices [5, 9, 11, 17, 18, 24–37]. Given, however, that the
complex fractal structures (e.g. polymer-protein struc-
tures) these objects aim to model often lack translational
symmetry and favor disordered growth [38], studies of
Hamiltonian cycles in settings where translational sym-
metry is absent may unearth important clues toward the
universality of these results.
In this paper we present a simple algorithm for con-
structing Hamiltonian cycles and fully packed loops on
a set of arbitrarily large finite subgraphs of infinite
graphs which do not admit periodic planar embeddings.
Specifically, we consider graphs formed from subsets of
the edges and vertices of Ammann-Beenker (AB) tilings
(Fig. 1). These are two-dimensional (2D) infinite aperi-
odic tilings [39–41] built from two tiles, a square and
a rhombus. They lack the translational symmetry of
periodic lattices but nevertheless feature long-range or-
der, evidenced by sharp spots in their diffraction pat-
terns [40, 42, 43]. The long-range order of AB enables
exact analytical results to be proven, while their infi-
nite extent allows consideration of the thermodynamic
limit of an infinite number of vertices, of interest in con-
densed matter physics where physical quasicrystals are
known with the symmetries of AB [44, 45]. Recent ex-
periments have demonstrated tunable quasicrystal ge-
ometries in twisted trilayer graphene [46], while eightfold
symmetric structures have also been created in optical
lattices [47, 48]. Quasicrystals host a broad range of ex-
citing physical phenomena from exotic criticality [49–51]
to charge order [52, 53] to topology [53–55], with the lack
of periodicity often leading to novel behaviors.
Efficient Hamiltonian cycle constructions exist for cer-
tain special classes of graph [56–58]. One example is
four-connected planar graphs, defined as requiring the
deletion of at least four vertices to disconnect them [59].
This result was recently employed in the elegant design
of “quasicrystal kirigami” [60] using a construction based
on Hamiltonian cycles defined on the planar dual to AB.
However, to our knowledge AB tilings themselves are
not covered by any such special case (they are three-
connected). The unexpectedness of (arbitrarily large fi-
nite subgraphs of) AB tilings’ admittance of Hamiltonian
cycles can be seen by comparison to rhombic Penrose
tilings, which are in many ways similar to AB. These,
too, are a set of infinite 2D tilings built from two tile
types (two shapes of rhombus); they are again aperiodic
but long-range ordered; and the resulting graphs are bi-
partite, meaning the vertices divide into two sets such
that vertices in one set connect only to vertices in the
other – another property shared with AB. Yet Penrose
tilings cannot admit Hamiltonian cycles, because they
do not admit perfect dimer matchings (sets of edges such
that each vertex meets precisely one edge) [61]. The lat-
ter is a necessary condition for the former, since deleting
every second edge along a Hamiltonian cycle results in a
perfect matching. It is difficult to think of any special
case which could cover AB tilings which would not alsocover Penrose tilings.
The difficulty of constructing Hamiltonian cycles in
arbitrary graphs can be made precise using the notion
of computational complexity. Given a graph, the ques-
tion of whether it admits a Hamiltonian cycle lies in
the complexity class “nondeterministic polynomial time
complete” (NPC) [62, 63]. These problems are pro-
hibitively hard to solve – the fastest known exact algo-
rithms scale exponentially – but a given solution can be
checked quickly, in polynomial time (P). Completeness
refers to the fact that if a polynomial-time algorithm were
found which solved any NPC problem, all problems in
the broader class NP would similarly simplify. Loosely,
all problems in NP contain a bottleneck in NPC.
We do not purport to solve an NPC problem. Rather,
we show that AB is a previously unknown special case
of the Hamiltonian cycle problem which lies in P rather
than NPC. As such, it does not follow that all NP prob-
lems can be solved in polynomial time on AB. However,
we might reasonably hope that our Hamiltonian cycles
permit new solutions to certain problems on AB, and in-
deed we find that this is the case. Using both the Hamil-
tonian cycles and the inherited discrete scale symmetry
of AB tilings, we find exact solutions on AB to a range
of other nontrivial problems which are NPC in general
graphs [63]. We present three cases which have impor-
tant applications to physics.
For example, by solving the equal-weight traveling
salesperson problem (Sec. IV A) on AB we provide a max-
imally efficient route for a scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM) tip to follow in order to scan every atom on the
surface of an AB quasicrystal in a given area. Given
that a state of the art STM measurement might take on
the order of a month, such efficient routes are highly de-
sirable. The problem of finding them is not present in
periodic crystals, where efficient routes can be found by
following crystal symmetries.
By solving the longest path problem (Sec. IV B) on
AB we identify the longest possible path visiting every
site within a given region. This shows that long, flexible
molecules, such as polymers, can adsorb onto the surface
of AB quasicrystals with maximal efficiency. Moreover,
by breaking the longest path into smaller units, our so-
lution demonstrates that collections of flexible molecules
of arbitrary lengths can also adsorb at maximal pack-
ing density. This has potential applications to cataly-
sis, in which the activation energy of a reaction between
molecules is lowered by having them adsorb onto a sur-
face. Quasicrystal surfaces are emerging as an interest-
ing material for adsorption because they provide differ-
ent local environments with a range of bond angles [64],
in contrast to the periodic surfaces of crystals. They
have potential applications in hydrogen adsorption and
storage [65, 66], low friction machine parts, and nonstick
coatings [65, 67].
The three coloring problem asks whether it is possi-
ble to color the tiles of a planar tiling with three colors
such that no two tiles sharing an edge share a color [68].3
We solve this problem on AB in Sec. IV C. The three
colors can represent the degrees of freedom in the three-
state Potts model of nearest neighbor magnetic interac-
tions. The three-colored AB tiling thereby gives an un-
frustrated ground state for the antiferromagnetic q-state
Potts model, with spins defined on the faces of AB, for
anyq≥3.
The Potts model was originally introduced to describe
interactions between magnetic ions [68, 69], gaining rele-
vance to quasicrystals with the discovery of ordered mag-
netic states in these materials [70–74]. More recently it,
too, has be used as a simple model of protein folding, with
Potts variables representing the qspecies of amino acid
comprising the protein chain [3, 75, 76]. The interaction
between amino acids can be either repulsive or attractive
depending on the solvent which surrounds the protein.
Compared to the typical approximation that the protein
folds on a square lattice [1, 9, 76], AB arguably defines a
better approximation to the real problem, in which the
amino acids have continuous spatial degrees of freedom.
This is because AB has a larger range of bond angles,
better approximating a continuous rotational symmetry
than any 2D regular lattice.
In Appendix B we solve a further three problems, on
AB, which are known to be NPC in general graphs: the
minimum dominating set problem (Sec. B 1); the do-
matic number problem (Sec. B 2); and the induced path
problem (Sec. B 3). Doubtless many more examples can
be found. The fact that many NPC problems admit
polynomial-time solutions on AB suggests that the dis-
crete scale symmetry of quasiperiodic lattices may be as
powerful a simplifying factor as the discrete translational
symmetry widely used to obtain exact results on periodic
lattices.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
We introduce the necessary background on the AB tilings
and graph theory in Sec. II. In Sec. III we prove the ex-
istence of Hamiltonian cycles on arbitrarily large finite
subgraphs of AB tilings. We prove along the way the
possibility of fully packed loops, and give details of our
algorithm. In Sec.IV we utilise the approach to present
exact solutions, on the same graphs, to three problems
which are NPC for general graphs: the equal-weight
travelling salesperson problem (Sec. IV A); the longest
path problem (Sec. IV B); and the three-coloring prob-
lem (Sec. IV C). We comment on the applications for
each. In Appendix B we provide exact solutions to three
other problems on these graphs: the minimum dominat-
ing set problem (Sec. B 1); the domatic number problem
(Sec. B 2); and the induced path problem (Sec. B 3). In
Sec. V we place these results in a broader context.II. BACKGROUND
A. Ammann Beenker Tilings
The quasicrystal stuctures represented by the
Ammann-Beenker tilings lack the translation symmetry
of periodic graphs and accordingly, mathematical results
in the thermodynamic limit are more challenging to
obtain. However, the translation symmetry of ordinary
crystals is replaced by a discrete scale symmetry which
underlies the unique features of quasicrystal systems.
We will first describe the construction of the AB tilings
in the thermodynamic limit [77], and then discuss the
scale symmetry of the tilings, which is central to our
proof of Hamiltonian cycles.
Each tiling is built from two basic building blocks,
called ‘prototiles’: a square tile and a rhombic tile with
acute angle π/4. Both tiles are taken to have unit edge
length. Starting from any ‘legal’ patch of a few tiles1,
the tiling is then built by repeatedly applying an ‘infla-
tion rule’ to the tiles: every tile is first ‘decomposed’ into
smaller copies of the two tiles, as defined in Fig. 2, and
then the new edges are rescaled (inflated) by a factor of
the silver ratio, δS= 1 +√
2, so that the tiles have unit
edge length again. The edges and vertices of the tiling
define a graph. The graph is bipartite, meaning the ver-
tices divide into two subsets where edges of the graph
only join members of one subset to the other. Since the
arguments presented in this paper only rely on the con-
nectivity of the graph, the rescaling is not important for
our purposes — hence inflation and decomposition are in-
terchangeable in what follows. Under inflation, the num-
ber of tiles grows exponentially and the infinite tiling is
recovered in the limit
T= lim
n→∞σn(T0), (1)
where Tis the infinite tiling, σthe inflation rule, and
T0the initial patch. We use “tiling” to mean the infinite
tiling, and “patch” when referring to any finite set of
connected tiles. The inverse process, termed ‘deflation’,
equivalently ‘composition’ (followed by a rescaling), is
uniquely defined and follows from the inflation rules.
The set of Ammann-Beenker tilings that can be cre-
ated by inflation has infinite cardinality. There are two
important consequences that follow from the inflation
structure [77] which will be important later.
First, taking graph edges to be of unit length:
Definition II.1 (Linear Repetitivity [77, 78]) .There is a
finite C > 0such that, for any set of vertices Vappearing
1Legal patches can be defined according to edge matching
rules [77], and simply ensure that the starting patch corresponds
to a group of tiles that can be found together within the infinite
tiling. In practice, usually a single square or rhombus tile is used
as the initial patch.4
FIG. 1: A patch of AB tiling showing the 8-fold symmetric region W1, and W0in grey. W1is the twice-inflation of
W0, formed from the double-inflated tiles shown in Fig. 2; purple lines show the boundary of these tiles (and do not
belong to the tiling itself). The thick black edges form a Hamiltonian cycle on the set of vertices they visit; this set
is termed U1.
within a disk of radius r, every disk of radius Crcontains
a copy of V.
AB is linearly repetitive [77].
Definition II.2 (Local Isomorphism [40]) .Two tilings
are locally isomorphic if any finite patch appearing in one
appears in the other.
All AB tilings are locally isomorphic to one an-
other [40, 77]. In this paper ‘AB’ refers to the set of all
AB tilings unless otherwise stated. As a result of linear
repetitivity and local isomorphism, it should be under-stood that reference to a vertex set Vin a particular AB
tiling is meant modulo translations.
Within the locally isomorphic set we will not differen-
tiate between arbitrary rescalings of the tilings. As the
simplest example of this isomorphism, the set of edges
and tiles surrounding each vertex in the tiling belongs
to one of seven unique configurations, which we call ‘ m-
vertices’ (where mlabels the vertex connectivity). In
total the vertex configurations for AB are given by the
3-, 4-, 5 A-, 5B-, 6-, 7- and 8-vertices, with each configura-
tion appearing with a frequency given by a function of the
silver ratio δS. The 3-vertex, for example, occurs most5
FIG. 2: The ‘inflation’ rule σ, in which a tile is
decomposed into smaller tiles. Typically this would be
followed by a rescaling (inflation) of all lengths by a
factor of the silver ratio δS= 1 +√
2, although as we
are only concerned with graph connectivity, inflation
and decomposition are equivalent. Vertices of once- and
twice-inflated tiles are shown in red and blue
respectively. We denote the once-inflated tiles to be
level L1/2and the twice-inflated tiles to be level L1.
frequently and makes up a fraction δS−2 (∼40%) of the
AB vertices. The two configurations with five edges are
distinguished by their behaviour under inflation.
A special role is played by the 8-vertices of the tiling,
as every vertex configuration inflates to an 8-vertex un-
der at most two inflations [39]. This means that edges
can be drawn between 8-vertices of an AB tiling so as to
generate another AB tiling. Fig. 1 highlights this sym-
metry. Similarly, some of the 8-vertices of the original
tiling sit also at 8-vertices of the composed tiling, and
therefore logically form the four-times composed tiling.
This hierarchy continues and results in the discrete scale
symmetry exhibited by the AB tiling and several other
aperiodic tilings, in turn responsible for many of the re-
markable physical properties of quasicrystals.
We call an 8-vertex an 8 0-vertex if under twice-
deflation it becomes any m-vertex with m̸= 8 (most
8-vertices of the AB tiling are of this type); similarly
we call it an 8 1-vertex if it becomes an 8 0-vertex under
twice-deflation. Generalising, an 8 n-vertex becomes an
80-vertex after 2 ndeflations. The local empire of a ver-
tex configuration is the simply connected set of tiles that
always appears around the vertex configuration wher-
ever it appears in the tiling [79]. The local empire of
the 8 0-vertex, which we call W0, is shown in Fig. 1 (also
shown is the 8 1empire, W1): it has a discrete 8-fold rota-
tional symmetry ( D8in Sch¨ onflies notation). The infla-
tion rule maps 8 n-vertices to 8 n+1-vertices (applying the
rule twice) while simultaneously growing the size of the
vertex’s local empire. The D8symmetry is preserved un-
der inflation. Therefore 8 n-vertices are accompanied by
D8-symmetric local empires Wnhaving a radius of sym-
metry growing approximately as Rn∼δ2n
S. Furthermore
theWnempire contains all W0≤m≤nempires.
It follows from linear repetitivity that any finite set of
tiles (or vertices) in AB is contained in Wnfor sufficiently
large n. On account of this, we will often focus on theWnto prove more general results. It will also prove useful
to define a modified version of the AB tiling with all 8-
vertices removed, dubbed the AB* tiling [39].
In Fig. 2 we denote the individual square and rhombus
(left) to be level L0and the twice inflated square and
rhombus (right) to be level L1; this is because any ver-
tex inflates to an 8-vertex under two inflations but not
one, and the convention follows Ref. 39. We therefore
designate the once-inflated tiles (middle) to be at level
L1/2.
B. Graph terminology and conventions
A graph G(V, E) is a set of vertices Vconnected by
a set of edges E. We consider undirected graphs, in
which no distinction is drawn between the two directions
of traversal of an edge. We also consider only bipartite
graphs, in which the vertices divide into two sets such
that edges only connect one set to the other. The cardi-
nality of a graph is the cardinality of the set of vertices
it contains (i.e. the number of vertices in the graph). We
denote this |G|[80–82].
We define a ‘path’ to be a set of edges joining a se-
quence of distinct vertices, and the length of the path
to be the number of edges it contains. Given a set of
edges E′⊂Git may be possible to find an ‘alternating
path’, which is a path in Galong which every second
edge belongs to E′but all others do not [80]. We borrow
this terminology from the theory of dimer matchings, in
which E′is a set of edges such that no two edges share a
common vertex, although we consider different structures
forE′here. An ‘augmenting path’ is an alternating path
in which the first and last edges are not in E′. In general,
‘augmenting’ an alternating path means to switch which
edges along the path are in the set E′and which are not.
In this paper, we consider graphs made from the ver-
tices and edges of Ammann-Beenker tilings. We will
use the shorthand G= AB to denote the case that G
is the graph formed from any infinite Ammann-Beenker
tiling. We will sometimes refer to graphs formed from
finite patches of AB, which should be clear from context.
III. CONSTRUCTIVE PROOF OF
HAMILTONIAN CYCLES
In this Section we prove the following.
Theorem 1. Given an AB tiling and a finite set of ver-
tices V⊂AB there exists a set Un, where V⊆Un⊂AB,
such that Uncontains a Hamiltonian cycle H.
Proof. In Section III A we identify a set of edges on the
twice-inflated AB tiles such that every 8 n<0vertex (that
is, every vertex which is not an 8-vertex) meets two such
edges. This constitutes a set of fully packed loops (FPLs),
visiting every vertex precisely once, on AB*. We then fo-
cus on finite tile sets generated by ntwice-inflations of the6
local empire of the 8 0-vertex, denoted Wn. These regions
have D8symmetry. Any finite set of vertices V⊂AB lies
within an infinite hierarchy of Wnfor sufficiently large n,
as shown in Section II. In Section III B we identify a
method of reconnecting these fully packed loops so as to
include into the loops all 8 0-vertices within Wn, and then
all 8 0<m<n vertices where the 8 m−1vertices have already
been included. The result is fully packed loops on all ver-
tices within Wnexcept the central 8 nvertex. Finally, we
show that a subset of these loops can be joined into a
single loop which additionally visits the central vertex.
We denote the set of vertices visited by this loop Un. As
the patches Ungrow exponentially with nso as to cover
arbitrarily large areas of AB, it follows from linear repet-
itivity (Definition II.1) that V∈Unfor sufficiently large
n.
Since the cycle constructed on Unvisits each of its
vertices precisely once, this proves Theorem 1.
The proof is constructive, returning Hgiven V, and is
linear in the number of vertices in Un. We place a pre-
cise bound on the necessary size of Unfor any given Vin
Section III C. Furthermore, the Hamiltonian cycle on Un
visits a simply-connected set of vertices whose cardinality
increases exponentially with n, and which therefore ad-
mits a straightforward approach to the thermodynamic
limit. We consider this limit, Un→∞, in Section III D.
A. Constructing Fully Packed Loops on AB*
FIG. 3: Twice-inflations of each of the two AB
prototiles. We denote the smaller tiles composition-level
zero, L0, and the larger tiles L1. The thick black edges
visit all but the corner vertices. We call these edges e0
edges. Since the 8-vertices at L0corresponds to the tile
vertices at L1, the union of e0constitutes fully packed
loops on AB* (AB without the 8-vertices). Augmenting
the red path (switching covered and non-covered edges)
places loop ends on the two corner vertices while still
visiting the original vertices. The red path can be
thought of as the twice-inflation of an L1edge, and we
term it e1. It has the same effect along any tile edge.
Augmenting cycles built from e1then places all visited
8-vertices onto the same loop.
In Fig. 3 we show the twice-inflations of the two pro-
totiles. We denote the smaller tiles as constituting com-
position level zero, L0, and the larger tiles L1. We workexclusively with twice-inflations, rather than single infla-
tions, as every vertex becomes an 8-vertex under twice-
inflation, but some do not do so under a single inflation.
In Fig. 3 we highlight (thick black edges) a subset of
L0edges on each L1tile. When the L1tiles join into
legitimate AB patches, every vertex in L0is visited by
precisely two thick edges, except those vertices sitting
at the corners of the L1tiles (and vertices on the patch
boundary, which are not important when we take the
thermodynamic limit since we deal only with finite sub-
graphs interior to the region). We call each of these edges
ane0edge. The corner vertices of L1tiles are exactly the
8-vertices of L0(this follows from the fact that every ver-
tex becomes an 8-vertex under at most two inflations).
Therefore this choice causes every vertex of AB* at L0
to be met by two e0edges. Since every vertex meets
precisely two edges, the sets of edges must form closed
loops2. Therefore these loops constitute a set of fully
packed loops (FPLs) on AB* as required.
While it is possible to find other sets of edges with these
properties, we designate this choice the canonical one.
With it, all closed loops respect the D8local symmetry
of AB and AB*.
B. Constructing Fully Packed Loops and
Hamiltonian Cycles on AB
We next seek to construct FPLs on AB rather than
AB* by adding the missing 8-vertices onto the loops. In
Fig. 3 we highlight in red an alternating path (with re-
spect to e0edges) which connects nearest-neighbor ver-
tices in L1. Augmenting the red path (swapping which
edges are covered by e0edges) has a number of effects.
First, it places e0edges touching the two L08-vertices
on which the alternating path terminates. Second, it in-
creases the total number of e0edges by one. Third, any
vertex which was previously visited by a pair of e0edges
is still visited by a pair of e0edges.
While other such paths are possible, this canonical
choice has advantages when combined with the canon-
ical choice of e0edges. First, it can be seen in Fig. 3
that exactly the same shape of path can be used on any
edge of either L1tile to cause the set of three effects just
listed. Second, it does so entirely within the tile itself,
and so these augmentations can be carried out without
reference to neighboring L1tiles. The augmentation can
be undone by augmenting along the same path a second
time, which turns out to be key.
The red alternating paths trace a route along L0graph
edges which follows the L1edges as closely as possible
while also alternating with reference to the e0edge place-
ment. In a natural sense, then, the red path is the twice-
2Strictly, loops can be open if they connect two points on the
boundary. However, these open paths lie entirely in the region
Wn\Unso are not relevant to our construction on Un.7
inflation of an edge of an L1tile. We therefore refer to
the red path as an e1edge. In this way, e0edges con-
nect 8 n<0-vertices (i.e. any vertices except 8-vertices at
L0), while e1edges connect 8 0-vertices (8-vertices which
can survive precisely zero deflations while remaining 8-
vertices). Further inflations can be carried out by stitch-
inge1edges together in exactly the same way that e1was
formed from e0. For example, e2edges, connecting 8 1-
vertices, can be built from e1edges, and can equivalently
be thought of as built from more e0edges. In general,
8n-vertices can be connected by en+1edges. The first
three levels are shown in Fig. 4.
In the limit n→ ∞ ,enis a fractal: under e0→e1the
initial side length of any prototile is divided into 9 seg-
ments each of length δ−2
S. The same scaling occurs for all
subsequent inflations, and so the box counting dimension
ofe∞is given as
dim(e∞) = lim
n→∞log (9n)
log (δ2n
S)=1
log3 
1 +√
2≈1.246.
(2)
This fits with the intuition that the curve is space-filling.
0
FIG. 4: The red alternating path in Fig. 3 can be
thought of as a twice-inflation of an e0edge from which
loops are constructed at level zero ( L0). It connects
nearest neighbors in the L1tiling (8-vertices in the L0
tiling) while following an alternating path in the
canonical choice of e0placements. We therefore denote
this path an e1edge. Alternating paths connecting
higher-order 8 n-vertices can be constructed by
concatenating en+1edges in the same way that e1was
formed from a concatenation of e0; levels e2ande3are
shown here. We define the orientation of enaccording
to the arrow.
To complete the proof of the existence of an FPL on
AB it remains to show that all 8-vertices can be placed
onto closed en-loops for sufficiently large n. The canon-
ical edge covering places all 8 n<0vertices of AB onto
e0-loops. To add all 8 0-vertices onto loops, we place
loops of e1edges according to the canonical edge place-
ment. This placement was defined at level L0; but note
that the twice-(de)composition of any AB tiling is an-
other AB tiling. Therefore the placement is well definedat all levels. Placing an e1edge means augmenting a
path at L0. Augmenting the closed loops of paths just
defined places all 8 0-vertices visited by that loop onto
loops of e0edges as required. We then proceed by induc-
tion, adding 8 n-vertices by connecting them with loops
ofen+1edges. After nsteps, every vertex of order 8 ≤nis
contained in a set of fully packed loops defined on those
vertices. By design, placing the enedges does not cause
problems with the existing matching of en−1edges. We
refer the reader to Fig. 5 for an illustration of the e1loop
structure (red), which clearly mirrors the smaller e0loop
structure (black) constructed in Sec. III A.
While e1edges must follow the edges of L1tiles, two
tiles meet along any edge. There is therefore a choice of
two orientations of each e1owing to the choice of which
of the two tiles e1lies within. Each e1orientation can be
chosen freely with the statements in the previous para-
graph remaining true. However, we find that there is
again a natural choice. Define the orientation of e1to
be in the direction indicated in Fig. 4. At L1, we choose
the sequence of e1edges along a loop to point alternately
into then out of the loop on which it sits (this is implicit
in the construction of e2ande3in Fig. 4). Since AB is
bipartite, all loops are of even length, and there is never
an inconsistency. When e2edges are placed, these will
cut through e1-loops. It is always possible to choose the
orientations so that wherever e1-loops and e2-loops inter-
sect, they do so along the length of one e1(recall that an
e2is built from multiple e1). Since these two e1overlap
perfectly, augmenting them both has no overall effect at
L0. We can therefore delete both e1. The effect is that
theL2loops no longer intersect the L1loops: instead,
they rewire separate L1loops so as to make them join
together. Augmenting the L1star rewires all ‘cut’ loops
into one. By induction the rewiring works at all levels.
The process is shown in detail in Appendix A, Fig. A.1
and Fig. A.2.
While it is already possible to reconnect many of these
loops together, thereby building Hamiltonian cycles on
subsets of the Wnvertices, the sets of vertices visited by
such cycles always encircle sets of vertices they do not
visit. To remedy this, it is necessary to break the D8
symmetry. To see that this is necessary, consider the
simplest D8Hamiltonian cycle, which is a star visiting
the eight vertices adjacent to any 8-vertex, and the eight
vertices immediately beyond them. To include the cen-
tral 8-vertex on a loop, one of the points of the star must
turn inwards, breaking the symmetry.
In Fig. 5 we show a simple way to include the central
region. The outermost en-loop encircling the 8 n-vertex is
the 2n-fold inflation of the smallest star loop. By folding
in a single corner of this inflated star, the loop now visits
the central 8 n-vertex. In so doing, it connects every loop
contained within it (and all those it passes through) into
a single loop. The result is therefore a Hamiltonian cycle
on the simply-connected set of vertices visited by this
deformed star. We denote this set Unto distinguish it
from the D8symmetric set Wn. The cycle on U2is shown8
FIG. 5: The canonical placements of e0edges (black) form e0-loops visiting every 8 n<0-vertex (i.e. every vertex
which is not an 8-vertex). The red lines form e1-loops, along which e1edges from Fig. 4 can be placed adding all
80-vertices onto loops. Similarly the blue star forms an e2-loop, along which e2edges from Fig. 4 can be placed
adding 8 1-vertices onto loops (see Fig. A.1). The central 8-vertex is now added onto loops by folding one corner of
the blue star inwards to break the 8-fold symmetry. Here we have shown the process explained in Sec. III B to order
n= 2, but it can be iterated to any order n. In green is the largest disk fitting within the blue loop; the disk
connects three 8-vertices with green chords.
in Fig. 6.
There is a topological reason this construction must
work. Every closed e0loop bounds a D8-symmetric re-
gion centred on an 8-vertex. Topologically we can imag-
ine deforming the e0loops however we like, provided they
cross neither 8-vertices nor other loops. Fig. 3 shows that
any path connecting two L1corners (8-vertices) along an
L1edge must cross exactly four e0loops. One of these
loops closes around one of the 8-vertices, while the three
other loops close around the other 8-vertex (as well as
other 8-vertices). This follows from Fig. 3, but a detailedproof appears in Appendix D of Ref. 39. The situation
is shown schematically in Fig. 7A. Augmenting the red
e1path along the L1edge rewires the L0loops according
to Fig. 7B. The same rewiring occurs for the blue edge
in Fig. 7C. While the augmentation illustrated in Fig. 7
leaves two string ends free, augmenting the closed L1star
loop leads to a single closed loop at L0. All subsequent
levels of inflation Lnfollow precisely the same pattern of
connectivity. Having e1orientations (arrows in Fig. 7,
defined in Fig.4) point alternately in and out of the loop
introduces a chirality that guarantees two facts. First,9
FIG. 6: The Hamiltonian cycle visiting all the vertices of a U2region (the AB tiles themselves are omitted for
clarity). The image is obtained from Fig. 5 by placing e1ande2edges in alternate orientations along the red and
blue loops respectively, as shown in Fig. A.1, and augmenting. Note the present figure has been rotated through
1/16thof a turn relative to other figures to utilise the page efficiently.
whenever an en+1-loop cuts through en-loops, the en-
loops merge. Second, the folded-corner outermost loop
connects allloops within it. While this might at first
seem miraculous, really it is no more complicated than
the (folded) 16-vertex L0star hitting all 16 vertices in
U0: the UnHamiltonian cycle simply has ninflations (of
both tiles and loops) applied according to the rules of
Fig. 3.C. Bounding the size of Un
To see that any vertex set Vmust be contained within
some Un, recall linear repetitivity: any Vlying within a
disk of radius rmust appear within alldisks of radius
Cr. Hence, any disk of radius Crmust contain all ver-
tex configurations that can be contained within a disk of
radius r.
Fig. 5 shows a green disk contained within U2. This is
the largest disk fitting within the blue loop. Larger disks
fit within U2, but the boundary of successive Unbecomes
fractal, whereas the equivalent to the blue loop maintains10
its shape at all levels of inflation, making the subsequent
statements simpler. Denoting the green chord lengths l2
(noting that these are edges of an L2rhombus) the radius
of this disk is 2−1/4δ−1/2
Sl2. The largest equivalent disk
in region Unsimilarly has radius 2−1/4δ−1/2
Sln. Denot-
inge0to be of unit length, the inflation rules of Fig. 2
imply that ln=δ2n
S, and so Uncontains a disk of radius
2−1/4δ2n−1/2
S . Hence, linear repetitivity implies that ev-
eryUncontains every vertex set contained within a disk
of radius 2−1/4δ2n−1/2
S /C. This radius grows exponen-
tially and without bound in n, and so any Vis contained
within Unfor sufficiently large n(indeed, it is contained
within all Un≥Mfor sufficiently large M).
D. Thermodynamic limit
On any Unwe can construct a Hamiltonian cycle by
the method outlined in Sec. III C. Since for any finite
vertex set Vwe can find a Unsuch that V⊆Un, the Un
admit a natural extension to the thermodynamic limit of
macroscopically large cycles, Un→∞(meaning arbitrarily
large finite patches). The algorithm is of linear complex-
ity in the number of vertices within Un.
FIG. 7: The topology underlying the Hamiltonian cycle
construction. A: every 8-vertex (grey disks) separated
from another by an L1edge (red/blue) is enclosed by e0
loops (black) as shown (see Fig. 3). Other 8-vertices are
omitted for clarity. B(C): augmenting the red (blue)
e1edge, with e1orientation indicated with arrows as in
Fig. 4, rewires the loops as shown. Hence, augmenting a
loop ofe1edges results in a single L0cycle visiting the
chosen 8-vertices. The argument holds at all levels of
inflation.
The region U∞, without any surrounding tiles, can it-
self be thought of as an infinite AB tiling, in the sense
that it is an infinite simply connected set of tiles gen-
erated by repeated inflations of a legitimate AB patch
(followed by deletion of the surrounding tiles in W∞).
It should be noted that an AB tiling can have at most
one global centre of D8symmetry (more than one would
violate the crystallographic restriction theorem [83]), and
the set of tilings with a global D8centre is measure zero
in the set of all possible AB tilings [77]. However, our
definition of the thermodynamic limit does not rely on
our tiling having a global D8centre – it only needs to
contain at least one Un→∞, and all AB tilings contain
infinitely many.IV. SOLUTIONS TO OTHER NON-TRIVIAL
PROBLEMS ON AB
The question of whether an arbitrary graph admits
a Hamiltonian cycle lies in the complexity class NPC.
Problems in NPC are decision problems, meaning they
are answered either by yes or no. The optimisation ver-
sion of these problems – to provide a solution if one exists
– is instead typically in the class NP-Hard (NPH). Find-
ing a Hamiltonian cycle on an arbitrary graph is NPH.
In this section we provide exact solutions on AB for
three problems made tractable due to discrete scale sym-
metry and/or by our construction of Hamiltonian cycles.
In each case we state the decision problem and the corre-
sponding optimisation problem. Our choice of problems
is motivated by the fact that on general graphs these de-
cision problems lie in the complexity class NPC, and the
corresponding optimisation problems lie in the complex-
ity class NPH. By solving the problems on AB we again
show that this setting provides a special, simpler case.
A. The Equal-Weight Travelling Salesperson
Problem
Problem statement [63, 84]: given a number of
cities N, unit distances between each pair of connected
cities, and an integer k, does there exist a route shorter
than kwhich visits every city exactly once and returns
back to the original city? The corresponding optimisa-
tion problem is to find such a route.
Solution on AB: if cities are the vertices of Un≥0, yes
iffk >|Un|.
Proof: from a graph theory perspective, we can con-
sider every city as a vertex and every direct route between
a pair of cities as a weighted edge, where the associated
weight denotes the distance between those cities. Find-
ing the shortest route which can be taken by the travel-
ling salesperson is equivalent to finding the lowest-weight
Hamiltonian cycle, where the weight of the cycle is the
sum of the weights of its edges.
In this paper we have considered the unweighted AB
graph, equivalent to setting all edge weights to one. In
unweighted graphs the problem reduces to the equal-
weight travelling salesperson problem. After this simplifi-
cation, the unweighted decision problem becomes equiv-
alent to the Hamiltonian cycle problem. Therefore the
Hamiltonian cycle constructed in Section III solves the
equal-weight travelling salesperson optimisation problem
onUn.
Application: scanning microscopy
One physical application of the travelling salesperson
problem is to find the most efficient route to scan an
atomically sized tip across a surface so as to visit ev-
ery atom. For example, scanning tunneling microscopy11
(STM) involves applying a voltage between an atomically
sharp tip and the surface of a material. Electrons tunnel
across the gap between the tip and the sample, giving
a current proportional to the local density of states in
the material under the tip [85, 86]. Magnetic force mi-
croscopy (MFM) uses a magnetic tip to detect the change
in the magnetic field gradient [87, 88]. The ultra-high
resolution nature of the imaging means that state of the
art measurements might take on the order of a month
to scan a 100 nm ×100 nm square region of a surface3.
While generally applied to periodic crystalline surfaces,
STM and MFM can in principle be used to image the sur-
faces of aperiodic quasicrystals, including those with the
symmetries of AB tilings [44]. Unlike in the crystalline
case, the most efficient route for the STM tip to visit each
atom is not obvious in these cases. Our solution to the
TSP optimisation problem on AB provides a maximally
efficient route for aperiodic quasicrystals with the sym-
metries of AB tilings. While the surface would need to
be scanned once in order to establish the Unregions to
study, the purpose of STM and MFM would be to detect
changes in the material under changing conditions (say,
temperature or magnetic field), and the route provides
maximum efficiency upon multiple scans.
B. The Longest Path Problem
Problem statement [63, 89]: given an unweighted
graph Gand an integer k, does Gcontain a path of length
at least k? We emphasise that the path may not revisit
vertices. The corresponding optimisation problem is to
find a maximum length path.
Solution: yes, if G=Un≥0andk≤ |Un| −1.
Proof: a Hamiltonian path can be obtained by re-
moving any edge from a Hamiltonian cycle. The results
of Section IV A imply that there exists a path of length
|Un| −1 in any region Un.
Comment: shorter paths can be found by deleting
further contiguous edges. Since any AB tiling contains
regions Un, for any n, it follows that the tiling contains
paths of any length.
Application: adsorption
The ‘dimer model’ in statistical physics seeks sets of
edges on a graph such that each vertex connects to pre-
cisely one edge. It was originally motivated by under-
standing the statistics and densities of efficient pack-
ings of short linear molecules adsorbed onto the surfaces
3State of the art STM measurements can obtain intra-unit-cell
data on crystal surfaces; for a 100 ×100 sq-nm region this would
exceed 250,000 pixels. A typical measurement takes around
100 ms, so if each pixel is scanned at 100 energies, the result
takes around 29 days. We thank J. C. S. Davis for these esti-
mates.of crystals [90–92]. Noting again that certain physical
quasicrystals have the symmetries of AB tilings on the
atomic scale, the existence of a longest path visiting ev-
ery vertex shows that a long flexible molecule such as a
polymer could wind so as to perfectly pack an appropri-
ately chosen surface of such a material. The path can be
broken into segments of any smaller length, showing that
flexible molecules of arbitrary length can pack perfectly
on to the surface. Dimers are returned as a special case.
Adsorption has major industrial applications. In catal-
ysis, for example, reacting molecules can find a reaction
pathway with a lower activation energy by first adsorbing
onto a surface. While efficient packings can be identi-
fied on periodic crystals such as the square lattice, these
feature a limited range of nearest-neighbor bond angles
(with only right angles appearing in the square lattice).
Realistic molecules, which have some degree of flexibility,
might do better on quasicrystalline surfaces which neces-
sarily contain a range of bond angles (four in AB). Other
uses could include (hydro)carbon sequestration and stor-
age, and protein adsorption [90, 92].
C. The Three-coloring Problem
Problem statement [63, 93]: can all the faces of
a planar graph Gbe colored such that no faces sharing
an edge share a color? The corresponding optimisation
problem is to find such a three-coloring.
Solution: yes, if G⊆AB.
Proof: we know that the AB tiling is a bipartite graph
which means that its vertices can be partitioned into two
disjoint sets such that none of the edges has vertices be-
longing to the same set. We associate two opposite bi-
partite ‘charges’ to the vertices depending upon which of
these two mutually exclusive sets they belong to.
We define two three-colored tiles, 1 and 2, as shown in
Figs. 8(a) and (b), and repeat them over the entire tiling
in the following manner.
•Place tile 1 over any 8-vertices having the same
bipartite charge.
•Place the mirror image of tile 1 over any 8-vertices
having the opposite bipartite charge.
•After that, place tile 2 or its mirror image such that
the three rhombuses around every ladder, shown in
Fig. 8(c), are the same color.
The consistent placement of these two tiles on the whole
tiling is ensured by the structure of the tiling itself. After
filling the whole AB tiling with these two tiles all that
remain are ladders, as shown in Fig. 9, which can be col-
ored consistently on the basis of colors of their surround-
ing rhombuses such that no two adjacent faces should
have a same color.
The 3-coloring solution for the AB tiling is shown in
Fig. A.3. Note that the three-colorings are not unique.12
(a) Tile 1
 (b) Tile 2
 (c)
FIG. 8: (a),(b) Tiles used for 3-coloring of the AB
tiling. (c) The structure with three rhombuses present
around every ladder.
FIG. 9: A small patch of AB tiling 3-colored using tile 1
and tile 2 (both outlined in gold) as mentioned in Sec
IV C. The only remaining portions of the tiling are
segments of ladders which can be 3-colored consistently
on the basis of their surrounding tiles.
Comments: this proof does not rely directly on the
existence of Hamiltonian cycles. Rather, it relies on an
intermediate step in their construction (specifically, the
existence of fully packed loops on AB*, Section III A),
as well as the discrete scale invariance of AB. This proof
demonstrates that the intermediate steps in our Hamil-
tonian cycle construction can already unblock problems
that lie in the complexity class NP in general graphs,
without necessarily needing to appeal to the finished re-
sult.
As a historical note, the five-coloring theorem, which
states that any political map requires at most five colors
in order to avoid any neighboring countries being the
same color, was proven in the 19th century [94]. The
equivalent four-coloring theorem was an infamous case
of a problem which is easy to state but difficult to solve.
The eventual proof in 1976 was the first major use oftheorem-proving software, and no simple proof has been
forthcoming [95]. The three-coloring problem is known to
be NPC [63] on general graphs. However, special cases
can again be solved. A polynomial-time algorithm for
generating a three-coloring of the rhombic Penrose tiling
was deduced in 2000, following its conjectured existence
by Conway[96]. The proof in fact covers all tilings of the
plane by rhombuses, and therefore includes AB tilings.
Our own solution to the three-coloring problem on AB
tilings takes a different approach, and generates different
three-colorings.
1. Application: the Potts model and Protein folding
The q-state Potts model, q∈N, is a generalisation
of the Ising model to spins σiwhich can take one of q
values [69]. It is defined by the Hamiltonian
H=−JX
⟨ij⟩δσi,σj (3)
where the sum is over nearest neighbors and δis the
Kronecker delta [69]. We can define the Potts model on
the AB tiling by placing one spin on the centre of each
face of the tiling, with the four nearest neighbors defined
to be the spins situated on the faces reached by crossing
one edge.
The Potts model has a broad range of applications in
statistical physics and beyond. It shows first and second
order phase transitions, and infinite order BKT transi-
tions, under different conditions of Jandq. It is used to
study the random cluster model [97], percolation prob-
lems [98] and the Tutte and chromatic polynomials [99].
Its physical applications include quark confinement [100],
interfaces, grain growth, and foams [98], and morpho-
genesis in biological systems [101]. While most exten-
sively studied on periodic lattices, there is some work on
the Potts model in Penrose tilings; this model appears
to show the universal behaviour present in the periodic
cases [102, 103].
ForJ >0 the model has a ferromagnetic ground state
with all spins aligned along one of their qdirections. The
behaviour for J < 0 is more complex. For q= 2 the
model is the Ising model; since a two-coloring of the
faces of AB is impossible (ruled out by the existence
of 3-vertices), the antiferromagnetic ground state must
be geometrically frustrated, meaning the connectivity of
sites causes spins to be unable to simultaneously min-
imise their energies.
However, the existence of a face-three-coloring proves
that for q≥3 the J < 0 state is again unfrustrated.
Three-colorings give the possible ground states of q= 3,
and a subset of ground states for q≥4.
The relationship between the Potts model and the
process of protein folding has been widely studied in
the field of polymer physics and computational biology
[75, 76, 104]. The q-state Potts model has been used13
to model the thermodynamics of protein folding [105].
In this scenario the lattice is thought of as a solvent in
which the protein exists. A protein is a chain of amino
acids [13]. When dissolved it may achieve a stable con-
figuration, typically remarkably compact, which enables
its biological functions [14]. The folding process depends
on the pair-wise interactions between amino acids, set by
the interaction with the solvent [1, 13, 75]. If the inter-
actions between similar amino acids are attractive, they
cluster together to form a compact folded structure. If
these interactions are repulsive, similar amino acids try
to spread out over the solvent sites, resulting in a protein
which is folded, but not compactly [76]. For modelling
proteins, the Hamiltonian in Eq. (3) represents interact-
ing amino acids {σi}. For J < 0 similar amino acids
will have repulsive interactions in a solvent according to
Eq. (3). For J <0 and protein chains consisting of only
three different types of amino-acids (each corresponding
to a color), our three-coloring of AB also predicts one
of the stable, minimum energy configurations in which
the protein can fold such that each of the three types of
amino acid sits on the centre of a tile of corresponding
color.
It seems reasonable to suppose that folding of long pro-
tein chains might be better modelled by approximating
the solvent with a quasicrystalline surface rather than
a simple periodic lattice. This is because quasicrystals
provide an aperiodic surface with range of bond angles,
unlike regular lattices which have restricted freedom. For
instance, square and hexagonal lattices have only one
bond angle each (90◦and 120◦respectively), and one
vertex type, whereas AB has three bond angles of 45◦,
90◦, and 135◦, and a wide range of different local en-
vironments branching out from seven vertex types. The
8-fold rotational symmetry of patches of AB is of a higher
degree than is possible in any crystal (six being the max-
imum degree permitted by crystallographic restriction),
additionally making AB a closer approximation to the
continuous rotational symmetry of space.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We provided exact solutions to a range of problems
on aperiodic long-range ordered Ammann-Beenker (AB)
tilings, with a further three problems solved in Ap-
pendix B. There are undoubtedly many more non-trivial
problems like these which can be solved on AB tilings by
taking advantage of its discrete scale invariance.
To our knowledge only one of the problems we solved
was covered by an existing result: the three-color prob-
lem was covered by a solution to the three-color problem
for Penrose tilings which applied to all tilings of rhom-
buses [96]. It is reasonable to ask whether this previ-
ously known result might similarly have been used to
solve a range of other problems on AB, in the same way
we exploited solutions to the Hamiltonian cycle prob-
lem. While we cannot rule this out, three-colorings donot obviously seem to provide an organising principle for
the tiling in the way that our hierarchically constructed
loops do.
Our construction relies on the fact that AB tilings are
long-range ordered, allowing exact results to be proven
in contrast to random structures. It is natural to wonder
whether any of our results apply more generally in other
quasicrystals. Deleting every second edge along a Hamil-
tonian cycle creates a perfect dimer matching (division of
the vertices into unique neighboring pairs). The existence
of such a matching on a graph is therefore a necessary
condition for the existence of Hamiltonian cycles. It is
not a sufficient condition, as there exist efficient methods,
such as the polynomial-time Hopcroft Karp algorithm,
for finding perfect matchings [106]. Seeking quasicrystals
which admit perfect matchings might be a good starting
point for finding other quasicrystals which admit Hamil-
tonian cycles. As a preliminary check, using the Hopcroft
Karp algorithm we found the minimum densities of un-
matched vertices on large finite patches of quasiperiodic
tilings generated using the de Bruijn grid method, with
rotational symmetries from 7-fold up to 20-fold [107]. We
found finite densities in each case, suggesting AB may be
unique among the de Bruijn tilings in admitting perfect
matchings or Hamiltonian cycles4. On the other hand, a
preliminary check of the recently discovered ‘Hat’ [108]
and ‘Spectre’ [109] aperiodic monotiles (single tiles which
tile only aperiodically) suggest that these also admit per-
fect dimer matchings, even if vertices are added so as
to make the graphs bipartite; however, the structure of
these matchings seems to indicate that a continuation to
fully packed loops is not possible.
FIG. 10: A: a Penrose tiling (grey lines) decorated by
graph edges (black) and vertices (grey disks) so as to
admit fully packed loops (purple) by construction. B:
augmenting the alternating cycle surrounding each red
cross leads to a cycle (red) which visits every graph
vertex on any Penrose tile touching a cross.
All of these examples consider the simplest case in
which the vertices and edges of the graph are those of
4We used Josh Colclough’s code for generating arbitrary de Bruijn
grids, available at github.com/joshcol9232/tiling.14
the corresponding tiling. Fig. 10A shows a Penrose tiling
(grey lines) decorated with graph vertices (grey disks)
and edges (black) such that the graph admits fully packed
loops (purple) by construction. Identical Penrose rhom-
buses are decorated identically, so that this graph has
the full symmetry of the tiling. In Fig. 10B we have aug-
mented the alternating cycle surrounding any red cross.
The result is a cycle (red) visiting every vertex on any
Penrose tile adjoining a cross. Hence, this is a Hamilto-
nian cycle on an appropriate subgraph. The construction
(based on a dimer construction in Ref. [61]) closely mir-
rors that for AB tilings: establishing fully packed loops
(in this case by construction), before connecting the loops
together. Using similar approaches we might reasonably
expect our results to generalise to a much broader class
of structures.
Our Hamiltonian cycle construction included a proof
of the existence of fully packed loops on arbitrarily large
finite subgraphs of AB, in which every vertex is vis-
ited by a loop, but these need no longer be the same
loop [110]. The FPL model is important for understand-
ing the ground states of frustrated magnetic materials
such as the spin ices [7]. Famously, loops played a key
role in Onsager’s exact solution to the Ising model in the
square lattice, one of the most important results in statis-
tical physics [111, 112]. If all loops could be enumerated
systematically, this would suggest the Ising model with
spins defined on the faces of AB might be exactly solv-
able. We note that all possible dimer matchings were
exactly enumerated on a modification of AB in which all
the 8-vertices were removed, giving the partition function
to the dimer problem [39]. The possible loop configura-
tions can similarly be enumerated in that context.
There is a deep connection between loop and dimer
models, and quantum electronic tight-binding models de-
fined on the same graphs. For example, Lieb’s theorem
states that if a bipartite graph has an excess of vertices
belonging to one bipartite sublattice, the corresponding
tight-binding model must have at least the same num-
ber of localised electronic zero modes making up a zero-
energy flat band [113]. These zero modes are topologi-
cally protected in the sense that they survive changes to
the hopping strengths provided these strengths remain
non-zero. Even if a bipartite graph has an overall bal-
ance of sublattice vertices, it can have locally defective
regions in which zero modes are similarly localised [114].
This occurs for example in the rhombic P3 Penrose tiling,
which has an overall balance between biparite sublattices,
but local imbalances lead to a finite density of localised
electronic zero modes in its tight-binding and Hubbard
models [115–117], which can be exactly calculated using
dimers [61]. Even if the bipartite sublattices balance lo-
cally, as in the AB tiling [39], it could still in principle be
the case that the graph connectivity localises electrons
to certain regions. Recent work has identified such zero
modes in the Hubbard model on AB [118]. Many, but
not all, of these appear to fit a loop-based structure first
identified in Penrose tilings [115] and subsequently moregeneral graphs [119]. The same structures have recently
been identified in the Hat aperiodic monotiles [120]. A
deeper connection between the graph connectivities lead-
ing to electronic zero modes, and the loops we identify
here, is an interesting avenue for further work.
Hamiltonian cycles and other loop models have been
widely used for modelling protein folding, by approxi-
mating the molecules as living on the sites of a periodic
lattice [1, 9, 76]. This simplification has allowed the tools
of statistical physics to be brought to bear on complex
problems [1, 15, 16]. Quasicrystals may well serve as
better models for such studies in which space is approx-
imated with a discrete structure. Quasicrystals are able
to feature higher degrees of rotational symmetry than
crystals, providing a better approximation to the contin-
uous rotational symmetry of real space [43]. They fea-
ture a wider range of nearest neighbor bond angles, and
the variety of structures at greater numbers of neighbors
increases rapidly. Quasicrystals also lack discrete trans-
lational symmetry, a feature of lattices which could cause
them to poorly approximate continuous space, although
quasicrystals such as AB do feature a discrete scale in-
variance which might lead to similar shortcomings. Ran-
dom graphs also have these benefits, but they lack the
long-range order of quasicrystals required to obtain exact
results such as those we have presented here.
In the context of NPC problems, exact solutions to
Hamiltonian cycles are useful because they serve as
bench-marking measures for new algorithms [121–123].
While the difficulty of NPC means no known algorithm is
capable of deterministically solving all instances in poly-
nomial time, several algorithms display a high success
rate on many graphs [121, 124, 125]. Finding and clas-
sifying Hamiltonian cycle instances which prove ‘hard’
for these algorithms has immediate practical applications
and can provide key insight into the full NPC problem.
A future goal would be to see how these modern Hamil-
tonian cycle algorithms perform when applied to AB re-
gions admitting Hamiltonian cycles. Since AB sits at the
borderline between regular and random graphs, it con-
tains structures not present in either. Additionally, our
Hamiltonian cycle construction is highly nonlocal, lever-
aging our understanding of the discrete scale symmetry
of the tiling. Thus, it may prove a difficult test-case:
in that scenario, understanding which structures of AB
prove hard for solvers would be a worthwhile challenge.
We provided our U1andU2graphs to the developers of
the state-of-the-art ‘snakes and ladders heuristic’ (SLH)
Hamiltonian cycle algorithm [121], who ran a prelimi-
nary test in this direction5.U1contains 464 vertices and
U2contains 14992 vertices. The SLH algorithm found
a Hamiltonian cycle on U1in modest time ( ∼1s) but
5The SLH algorithm was run on an Intel Core i7-1165G7 machine
with 4cores, 2.80 GHz clockspeed, and 32 GB RAM. We thank
Michael Haythorpe [121] for running the SLH Hamiltonian cycle
algorithm.15
failed to find cycles on U2before exceeding the allotted
memory. Given the large size of U2however, this is not
conclusive evidence that AB is hard to solve. A next
step would be a more thorough analysis, possibly identi-
fying Hamiltonian cycle regions of more reasonable size
for bench-marking purposes.
Another interesting direction might be to consider di-
rected or weighted extensions of the graphs. Directed
graphs can model non-Hermitian systems with gain and
loss [126]; weighted graphs could model, for example, the
travelling salesperson problem in which cities are con-
nected by different distances. Finding a shortest route
through a weighted graph is still an NPC problem, and
the route would be selected from among the unweighted
Hamiltonian cycles.
Our solution to the longest path problem shows that
sets of flexible molecules of arbitrary lengths (not neces-
sarily the same) can pack perfectly onto AB quasicrystals
if they register to the atomic positions. This suggests ap-
plications to adsorption, which is relevant for instance to
carbon capture [127] and catalysis: two molecules might
find a lower-energy route to reacting if they first bond to
an appropriate surface before being released after reac-
tion. Physical quasicrystals with three-dimensional point
groups – ‘icosahedral’ quasicrystals (iQCs) – are known
to have properties which make them potentially advan-
tageous as adsorbing substrates. Being brittle, they are
readily broken into particles tens of nanometres in di-
ameter, maximising their surface area to volume ratio (a
key consideration in industrial catalysis). They are sta-
ble at high temperatures, facilitating increased rates of
reactions [128]. And, as discussed above, their surface
atoms, lacking periodic arrangements, permit a wider
range of bond angles. On the other hand, iQCs have
been found to have high surface reactivities, which is un-
favorable for catalysis because adsorbing molecules will
tend to bond to the iQC substrate rather than to one
another [129, 130]. They also have low densities of states
at the Fermi level compared to metals, which is unfavor-
able [53]. However, iQC nanoparticles have been success-
fully coated with atomic monolayers which then adopt
their quasicrystallinity [131, 132]; these monolayers in-
clude silver, a widely used and efficient catalyst with
none of the quasicrystals’ shortcomings [133]. Investigat-
ing the use of quasicrystals for such applications would
therefore seem a profitable direction for future experi-
ments.
The surfaces of iQCs have not been seen to feature
the symmetries of AB; rather, they form a class of struc-
tures which includes Penrose tilings [129, 130]. Further
work is therefore needed to establish the possible pack-ing densities of realistic iQC surfaces. Alternatively, the
results presented here could potentially be put to use
in the known two-dimensional ‘axial’ quasicrystals which
feature the symmetries of AB [44, 45, 134].
While AB tilings might have appeared to be an unlikely
place to seek exact results to seemingly intractable prob-
lems, owing to their lack of periodicity, their long-range
order makes such results obtainable. While periodic lat-
tices feature a discrete translational symmetry which sim-
plifies many problems (essentially enabling fields such
as condensed matter physics, floquet theory, and lat-
tice QCD), quasicrystal lattices such as AB feature in-
stead a discrete scale invariance. While less familiar, we
would argue that this is just as powerful a simplifying
factor. For example, the study of the electronic theory
of solids is made possible by Bloch’s theorem, which al-
lows the electronic wavefunction to be calculated in infi-
nite periodic lattices. An equivalent to Bloch’s theorem
can be formulated for systems with discrete scale invari-
ance ( e.g.Eq. 1.4 in Ref. 135), suggesting a comparable
simplification in seemingly complex problems. To take
another example, conformal theories, describing for ex-
ample critical states at phase transitions, feature both
continuous scale and continuous translation invariance.
Our work opens the possibility of studying the break-
down of conformal symmetry into discrete scale invari-
ance rather than the more familiar discrete translational
invariance [50, 136]. For example, we have established the
possibility of studying fully packed loops on AB tilings;
in periodic settings these admit conformal field theory
descriptions [24]. The results presented here provide a
key example of the simplifying power of discrete scale
invariance.
Broadly, we might expect that many problems for
which crystals are special cases might now find quasicrys-
tals to also be special cases, albeit of a fundamentally
different form.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank J. C. S´ eamus Davis for providing estimates
for scanning tunneling microscopy times, Francesco
Zamponi for suggestions on Hamiltonian cycle bench-
marking, Michael Haythorpe for running the SLH Hamil-
tonian cycle finder algorithm on AB regions, Irene Gi-
ardina and Henna Koivusalo for helpful discussions,
Michael Baake, Zohar Ringel, Steven H. Simon, Michael
Sonner and Jasper van Wezel for helpful comments on
the manuscript, and Josh Colclough for the use of his
code for generating de Bruijn grids. F. F. acknowledges
support from EPSRC grant EP/X012239/1.
[1] H. S. Chan and K. A. Dill, Compact polymers, Macro-
molecules 22, 4559 (1989).[2] P.-J. Flory, Statistical thermodynamics of semi-flexible
chain molecules, Proceedings of the Royal Society of16
London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences
234, 60 (1956).
[3] H. Li, R. Helling, C. Tang, and N. Wingreen, Emergence
of preferred structures in a simple model of protein fold-
ing, Science 273, 666 (1996).
[4] H. E. Stanley, Dependence of critical properties on di-
mensionality of spins, Physical Review Letters 20, 589
(1968).
[5] H. Bl¨ ote and B. Nienhuis, Fully packed loop model on
the honeycomb lattice, Physical review letters 72, 1372
(1994).
[6] R. J. Baxter, Exactly Solved Models in Statistical Me-
chanics (Academic Press, Harcourt Brace Jovanivich
(London), 1982).
[7] L. Jaubert, M. Haque, and R. Moessner, Analysis of a
fully packed loop model arising in a magnetic coulomb
phase, Physical review letters 107, 177202 (2011).
[8] J. d. Cloizeaux and G. Jannink, Polymers in solution:
their modelling and structure (Oxford University Press,
1991).
[9] O. Bodroza-Pantic, B. Pantic, I. Pantic, and
M. Bodroza-Solarov, Enumeration of Hamiltonian cy-
cles in some grid graphs, MATCH Commun. Math.
Comput. Chem 70, 181 (2013).
[10] G. Jannink, Polymers in Solution: Their Modelling and
Structure (Clarendon Press, 1990).
[11] B. Nienhuis, Exact critical point and critical exponents
of O(n) models in two dimensions, Physical Review Let-
ters49, 1062 (1982).
[12] J. L. Jacobsen and J. Kondev, Conformal field theory
of the flory model of polymer melting, Physical Review
E69, 066108 (2004).
[13] T. E. Creighton, Protein folding, Biochemical journal
270, 1 (1990).
[14] K. A. Dill, S. Bromberg, K. Yue, H. S. Chan, K. M.
Ftebig, D. P. Yee, and P. D. Thomas, Protein science 4,
561.
[15] H. S. Chan and K. A. Dill, Intrachain loops in poly-
mers: Effects of excluded volume, The Journal of chem-
ical physics 90, 492 (1989).
[16] K. F. Lau and K. A. Dill, A lattice statistical mechan-
ics model of the conformational and sequence spaces of
proteins, Macromolecules 22, 3986 (1989).
[17] J. L. Jacobsen, Exact enumeration of Hamiltonian cir-
cuits, walks and chains in two and three dimensions,
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 40,
14667 (2007).
[18] R. Agarwala, S. Batzoglou, V. Danˇ c´ ık, S. E. Decatur,
M. Farach, S. Hannenhalli, S. Muthukrishnan, and
S. Skiena, Local rules for protein folding on a trian-
gular lattice and generalized hydrophobicity in the HP
model, in Proceedings of the first annual international
conference on Computational molecular biology (1997)
pp. 1–2.
[19] W. Orr, Statistical treatment of polymer solutions at
infinite dilution, Transactions of the Faraday Society
43, 12 (1947).
[20] M. N. Barber and B. W. Ninham, Random and re-
stricted walks: Theory and applications , Vol. 10 (CRC
Press, 1970).
[21] P.-G. De Gennes, Scaling concepts in polymer physics
(Cornell university press, 1979).
[22] K. F. Freed, Renormalization group theory of macro-
molecules, Journal of Statistical Physics 52, 521 (1988).[23] J. L. Jacobsen, On the universality of fully packed loop
models, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Gen-
eral32, 5445 (1999).
[24] J. Kondev, Liouville field theory of fluctuating loops,
Physical review letters 78, 4320 (1997).
[25] M. T. Batchelor, J. Suzuki, and C. Yung, Exact results
for Hamiltonian walks from the solution of the fully
packed loop model on the honeycomb lattice, Physical
review letters 73, 2646 (1994).
[26] E. H. Lieb, Exact solution of the problem of the entropy
of two-dimensional ice, Physical Review Letters 18, 692
(1967).
[27] J. Suzuki, Evaluation of the connectivity of Hamiltonian
paths on regular lattices, Journal of the Physical Society
of Japan 57, 687 (1988).
[28] S. Higuchi, Field theoretic approach to the counting
problem of Hamiltonian cycles of graphs, Physical Re-
view E 58, 128 (1998).
[29] J. Kondev, J. de Gier, and B. Nienhuis, Operator spec-
trum and exact exponents of the fully packed loop
model, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Gen-
eral29, 6489 (1996).
[30] M. Batchelor, H. Bl¨ ote, B. Nienhuis, and C. Yung, Crit-
ical behaviour of the fully packed loop model on the
square lattice, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
General 29, L399 (1996).
[31] O. Bodroˇ za-Panti´ c, H. Kwong, and M. Panti´ c, Some
new characterizations of Hamiltonian cycles in triangu-
lar grid graphs, Discrete Applied Mathematics 201, 1
(2016).
[32] A. Kast, Correlation length and average loop length
of the fully packed loop model, Journal of Physics A:
Mathematical and General 29, 7041 (1996).
[33] H. Orland, C. Itzykson, and C. de Dominicis, An eval-
uation of the number of Hamiltonian paths, Journal de
Physique Lettres 46, 353 (1985).
[34] J. L. Jacobsen and J. Kondev, Field theory of compact
polymers on the square lattice, Nuclear Physics B 532,
635 (1998).
[35] J. Kondev and J. L. Jacobsen, Conformational entropy
of compact polymers, Physical review letters 81, 2922
(1998).
[36] T. Schmalz, G. Hite, and D. Klein, Compact self-
avoiding circuits on two-dimensional lattices, Journal of
Physics A: Mathematical and General 17, 445 (1984).
[37] M. Peto, T. Z. Sen, R. L. Jernigan, and A. Kloczkowski,
Generation and enumeration of compact conforma-
tions on the two-dimensional triangular and three-
dimensional fcc lattices, The Journal of chemical physics
127, 07B612 (2007).
[38] A. V. Melkikh and D. K. Meijer, On a generalized
levinthal’s paradox: The role of long-and short range
interactions in complex bio-molecular reactions, includ-
ing protein and dna folding, Progress in Biophysics and
Molecular Biology 132, 57 (2018).
[39] J. Lloyd, S. Biswas, S. H. Simon, S. A. Parameswaran,
and F. Flicker, Statistical mechanics of dimers on
quasiperiodic ammann-beenker tilings, Physical Review
B106, 094202 (2022).
[40] B. Gr¨ unbaum and G. C. Shephard, Tilings and Patterns
(W. H. Freeman and Company, New York, 1986).
[41] R. Ammann, B. Gr¨ unbaum, and G. C. Shephard, Ape-
riodic tiles, Discrete & Computational Geometry 8, 1
(1992).17
[42] M. Baake and U. Grimm, Mathematical diffraction
of aperiodic structures, Chemical Society Reviews 41,
6821 (2012).
[43] M. Senechal, Quasicrystals and Geometry (Cambridge
University Press, 1995).
[44] N. Wang, H. Chen, and K. Kuo, Two-dimensional qua-
sicrystal with eightfold rotational symmetry, Physical
review letters 59, 1010 (1987).
[45] N. Wang, K. K. Fung, and K. H. Kuo, Appl. Phys. Lett.
52, 2120 (1988).
[46] A. Uri, S. C. de la Barrera, M. T. Randeria, D. Rodan-
Legrain, T. Devakul, P. J. D. Crowley, N. Paul,
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R. Lifshitz, L. Fu, R. C.
Ashoori, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Superconductivity and
strong interactions in a tunable moir´ e quasiperiodic
crystal, arXiv:2302.00686 [cond-mat.mes-hall] (2023).
[47] K. Viebahn, M. Sbroscia, E. Carter, J.-C. Yu, and
U. Schneider, Matter-wave diffraction from a quasicrys-
talline optical lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 110404
(2019).
[48] M. Sbroscia, K. Viebahn, E. Carter, J.-C. Yu, A. Gaunt,
and U. Schneider, Observing localization in a 2d
quasicrystalline optical lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125,
200604 (2020).
[49] G. M. Sommers, M. J. Gullans, and D. A. Huse, Self-
dual quasiperiodic percolation, arXiv:2206.11290 [cond-
mat.stat-mech] (2023).
[50] D. E. G¨ okmen, S. Biswas, S. D. Huber, Z. Ringel,
F. Flicker, and M. Koch-Janusz, Machine learn-
ing assisted discovery of exotic criticality in a
planar quasicrystal, arXiv:2301.11934 [cond-mat.stat-
mech] (2023).
[51] M. Ciardi, A. Angelone, F. Mezzacapo, and F. Cinti,
Quasicrystalline bose glass in the absence of disorder
and quasidisorder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 131, 173402 (2023).
[52] F. Flicker and J. van Wezel, Quasiperiodicity and 2d
topology in 1d charge-ordered materials, Europhysics
Letters 111, 37008 (2015).
[53] F. Flicker and J. van Wezel, Natural 1d quasicrystals
from incommensurate charge order, Physical Review
Letters 115, 236401 (2015).
[54] Y. E. Kraus, Y. Lahini, Z. Ringel, M. Verbin, and O. Zil-
berberg, Topological states and adiabatic pumping in
quasicrystals, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 106402 (2012).
[55] K. A. Madsen, E. J. Bergholtz, and P. W. Brouwer,
Topological equivalence of crystal and quasicrystal band
structures, Phys. Rev. B 88, 125118 (2013).
[56] M. Gardner, Mathematical games: About the remark-
able similarity between the icosian game and the towers
of Hanoi, Sci. Amer 196, 150 (1957).
[57] J. A. Bondy and V. Chv´ atal, A method in graph theory,
Discrete Mathematics 15, 111 (1976).
[58] R. W. Robinson and N. C. Wormald, Almost all cubic
graphs are Hamiltonian, Random Structures & Algo-
rithms 3, 117 (1992).
[59] W. T. Tutte, A theorem on planar graphs, Transactions
of the American Mathematical Society 82, 99 (1956).
[60] L. Liu, G. P. T. Choi, and L. Mahadevan, Quasicrystal
kirigami, Phys. Rev. Research 4, 033114 (2022).
[61] F. Flicker, S. H. Simon, and S. Parameswaran, Classical
dimers on Penrose tilings, Physical Review X 10, 011005
(2020).
[62] R. M. Karp, Reducibility among combinatorial
problems, in Complexity of computer computations(Springer, 1972) pp. 85–103.
[63] M. R. Garey, Computers and intractability: A guide to
the theory of NP-completeness/michael r. garey, david
s. johnson, Link (A series of books in the mathematical
sciences) (1979).
[64] R. McGrath, J. Smerdon, H. Sharma, W. Theis, and
J. Ledieu, The surface science of quasicrystals, Journal
of Physics: Condensed Matter 22, 084022 (2010).
[65] J.-M. Dubois, New prospects from potential applica-
tions of quasicrystalline materials, Materials Science
and Engineering: A 294, 4 (2000).
[66] J. J. Kweon, H.-I. Kim, S.-h. Lee, J. Kim, and S. K.
Lee, Quantitative probing of hydrogen environments in
quasicrystals by high-resolution nmr spectroscopy, Acta
Materialia 226, 117657 (2022).
[67] R. Diehl, W. Setyawan, and S. Curtarolo, Gas adsorp-
tion on quasicrystalline surfaces, Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter 20, 314007 (2008).
[68] R. J. Baxter, Exactly solved models in statistical me-
chanics (Elsevier, 2016).
[69] F.-Y. Wu, The Potts model, Reviews of modern physics
54, 235 (1982).
[70] Y. Hattori, A. Niikura, A. P. Tsai, A. Inoue, T. Ma-
sumoto, K. Fukamichi, H. Aruga-Katori, and T. Goto,
Spin-glass behaviour of icosahedral mg-gd-zn and mg-
tb-zn quasi-crystals, Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 7, 2313 (1995).
[71] Z. Islam, I. R. Fisher, J. Zarestky, P. C. Canfield,
C. Stassis, and A. I. Goldman, Reinvestigation of long-
range magnetic ordering in icosahedral tb-mg-zn, Phys.
Rev. B 57, R11047 (1998).
[72] T. J. Sato, H. Takakura, A. P. Tsai, K. Shibata,
K. Ohoyama, and K. H. Andersen, Antiferromagnetic
spin correlations in the zn-mg-ho icosahedral quasicrys-
tal, Phys. Rev. B 61, 476 (2000).
[73] A. Goldman, T. Kong, and A. e. a. Kreyssig, A family of
binary magnetic icosahedral quasicrystals based on rare
earths and cadmium, Nature Materials 12, 714 (2013).
[74] R. Tamura, A. Ishikawa, S. Suzuki, T. Kotajima,
Y. Tanaka, T. Seki, N. Shibata, T. Yamada, T. Fu-
jii, C.-W. Wang, M. Avdeev, K. Nawa, D. Okuyama,
and T. J. Sato, Experimental observation of long-range
magnetic order in icosahedral quasicrystals, Journal
of the American Chemical Society 143, 19938 (2021),
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c09954.
[75] T. Garel and H. Orland, Mean-field model for protein
folding, Europhysics letters 6, 307 (1988).
[76] T. N. De Silva and V. Sivised, A statistical mechanics
perspective for protein folding from q-state potts model,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.04813 (2017).
[77] M. Baake and U. Grimm, Aperiodic order , Vol. 1 (Cam-
bridge University Press, 2013).
[78] A. Haynes, H. Koivusalo, and J. Walton, A character-
ization of linearly repetitive cut and project sets, Non-
linearity 31, 515.
[79] F. Fang, S. Paduroiu, D. Hammock, and K. Irwin, Non-
local game of life in 2d quasicrystals, Crystals 8, 416
(2018).
[80] W. T. Tutte and W. T. Tutte, Graph theory , Vol. 21
(Cambridge university press, 2001).
[81] J. A. Bondy, U. S. R. Murty, et al. ,Graph theory with
applications , Vol. 290 (Macmillan London, 1976).
[82] G. Chartrand, Introductory graph theory (Courier Cor-
poration, 1977).18
[83] N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics
(Harcourt College Publishers, New York, 1976).
[84] D. B. Shmoys, J. Lenstra, A. R. Kan, and E. L. Lawler,
The traveling salesman problem , Vol. 12 (John Wiley &
Sons, Incorporated, 1985).
[85] G. Binnig and H. Rohrer, Scanning tunneling mi-
croscopy, Surface science 126, 236 (1983).
[86] P. K. Hansma and J. Tersoff, Scanning tunneling mi-
croscopy, Journal of Applied Physics 61, R1 (1987).
[87] Y. Martin and H. K. Wickramasinghe, Magnetic imag-
ing by “force microscopy” with 1000 ˚A resolution, Ap-
plied Physics Letters 50, 1455 (1987).
[88] U. Hartmann, Magnetic force microscopy, Annual re-
view of materials science 29, 53 (1999).
[89] D. Karger, R. Motwani, and G. D. Ramkumar, On ap-
proximating the longest path in a graph, Algorithmica
18, 82 (1997).
[90] J. K. Roberts, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 152 , 469
(1935).
[91] R. Fowler and G. Rushbrooke, An attempt to extend
the statistical theory of perfect solutions, Transactions
of the Faraday Society 33, 1272 (1937).
[92] O. J. Heilmann and E. H. Lieb, Theory of monomer-
dimer systems, Commun. Math. Phys. 25, 190 (1972).
[93] M. R. Garey, D. S. Johnson, and L. Stockmeyer, Some
simplified NP-complete problems, in Proceedings of the
sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing
(1974) pp. 47–63.
[94] P. J. Heawood, Map color theorems, Quant. J. Math.
24, 332 (1890).
[95] K. Appel and W. Haken, Every planar map is four col-
orable, Contemporary Mathematics 98(1989).
[96] T. Sibley and S. Wagon, Rhombic Penrose tilings can be
3-colored, The American Mathematical Monthly 107,
251 (2000).
[97] V. Beffara and H. Duminil-Copin, The self-dual point
of the two-dimensional random-cluster model is critical
forq≥1, Probability Theory and Related Fields 153,
511 (2012).
[98] W. Selke and D. A. Huse, Interfacial adsorption in pla-
nar potts models, Zeitschrift f¨ ur Physik B Condensed
Matter 50, 113 (1983).
[99] A. D. Sokal and B. Webb, The multivariate Tutte poly-
nomial (alias Potts model), Surveys in combinatorics
327, 173 (2005).
[100] M. Alford, S. Chandrasekharan, J. Cox, and U.-J.
Wiese, Solution of the complex action problem in the
Potts model for dense QCD, Nuclear Physics B 602, 61
(2001).
[101] F. Graner and J. A. Glazier, Simulation of biological cell
sorting using a two-dimensional extended Potts model,
Physical review letters 69, 2013 (1992).
[102] W. G. Wilson and C. A. Vause, Evidence for universal-
ity of the Potts model on the two-dimensional Penrose
lattice, Physics Letters A 126, 471 (1988).
[103] G. Xiong, Z.-H. Zhang, and D.-C. Tian, Real-space
renormalization group approach to the Potts model on
the two-dimensional Penrose tiling, Physica A: Statisti-
cal Mechanics and its Applications 265, 547 (1999).
[104] R. M. Levy, A. Haldane, and W. F. Flynn, Potts hamil-
tonian models of protein co-variation, free energy land-
scapes, and evolutionary fitness, Current opinion in
structural biology 43, 55 (2017).[105] R. B. Potts, Some generalized order-disorder transfor-
mations, in Mathematical proceedings of the cambridge
philosophical society , Vol. 48 (Cambridge University
Press, 1952) pp. 106–109.
[106] J. E. Hopcroft and R. M. Karp, An nˆ5/2 algorithm for
maximum matchings in bipartite graphs, SIAM Journal
on computing 2, 225 (1973).
[107] N. de Bruijn, Algebraic theory of Penrose’s non-periodic
tilings of the plane I, Indagationes Mathematicae (Pro-
ceedings) 84, 39 (1981).
[108] D. Smith, J. S. Myers, C. S. Kaplan, and
C. Goodman-Strauss, An aperiodic monotile, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.10798 (2023).
[109] D. Smith, J. S. Myers, C. S. Kaplan, and C. Goodman-
Strauss, A chiral aperiodic monotile, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.17743 (2023).
[110] J. d. Gier, Fully packed loop models on finite geometries,
inPolygons, Polyominoes and Polycubes (Springer,
2009) pp. 317–346.
[111] L. Onsager, Crystal statistics. I. a two-dimensional
model with an order-disorder transition, Physical Re-
view65, 117 (1944).
[112] R. P. Feynman, Statistical mechanics: a set of lectures
(CRC press, 2018).
[113] E. H. Lieb, Two theorems on the hubbard model, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 62, 1201 (1989).
[114] R. Bhola, S. Biswas, M. M. Islam, and K. Damle,
Dulmage-mendelsohn percolation: Geometry of maxi-
mally packed dimer models and topologically protected
zero modes on site-diluted bipartite lattices, Phys. Rev.
X12, 021058 (2022).
[115] M. Kohmoto and B. Sutherland, Electronic states on a
penrose lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 2740 (1986).
[116] A. Koga and H. Tsunetsugu, Antiferromagnetic order
in the hubbard model on the penrose lattice, Physical
Review B 96, 214402 (2017).
[117] E. Day-Roberts, R. M. Fernandes, and A. Kamenev,
Nature of protected zero-energy states in penrose qua-
sicrystals, Phys. Rev. B 102, 064210 (2020).
[118] A. Koga, Superlattice structure in the antiferromag-
netically ordered state in the hubbard model on the
ammann-beenker tiling, Phys. Rev. B 102, 115125
(2020).
[119] B. Sutherland, Localization of electronic wave functions
due to local topology, Phys. Rev. B 34, 5208 (1986).
[120] J. Schirmann, S. Franca, F. Flicker, and A. G.
Grushin, Physical properties of the hat aperiodic
monotile: Graphene-like features, chirality and zero-
modes, arXiv:2307.11054 (2023).
[121] P. Baniasadi, V. Ejov, J. A. Filar, M. Haythorpe, and
S. Rossomakhine, Deterministic “snakes and ladders”
heuristic for the hamiltonian cycle problem, Mathemat-
ical Programming Computation 6, 55 (2014).
[122] P. Baniasadi, V. Ejov, M. Haythorpe, and S. Rosso-
makhine, A new benchmark set for traveling salesman
problem and hamiltonian cycle problem, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.09285 (2018).
[123] J. Sleegers and D. van den Berg, The hardest hamilto-
nian cycle problem instances: the plateau of yes and the
cliff of no, SN Computer Science 3, 372 (2022).
[124] K. Helsgaun, An effective implementation of the lin–
kernighan traveling salesman heuristic, European jour-
nal of operational research 126, 106 (2000).19
[125] D. L. Applegate, R. E. Bixby, V. Chv´ atal, and W. J.
Cook, The traveling salesman problem, in The Traveling
Salesman Problem (Princeton university press, 2011).
[126] F. L. Metz, I. Neri, and T. Rogers, Spectral theory
of sparse non-hermitian random matrices, Journal of
Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 52, 434003
(2019).
[127] P. Webley and D. Danaci, Co2 capture by adsorption
processes, in Carbon Capture and Storage , RSC En-
ergy and Environment Series No. 26, edited by M. Bui
and N. Dowell (The Royal Society of Chemistry, United
Kingdom, 2020) pp. 106–167, 26th ed.
[128] D. Louzguine-Luzgin and A. Inoue, Formation and
properties of quasicrystals, Annual Review of Materi-
als Research 38, 403 (2008).
[129] Z. Papadopolos, G. Kasner, J. Ledieu, E. J. Cox, N. V.
Richardson, Q. Chen, R. D. Diehl, T. A. Lograsso, A. R.
Ross, and R. McGrath, Bulk termination of the qua-
sicrystalline fivefold surface of al 70pd21mn9, Phys. Rev.
B66, 184207 (2002).
[130] Z. Papadopolos, P. Pleasants, G. Kasner, V. Fourn´ ee,
C. J. Jenks, J. Ledieu, and R. McGrath, Maximum den-
sity rule for bulk terminations of quasicrystals, Phys.
Rev. B 69, 224201 (2004).
[131] R. McGrath, J. Ledieu, E. J. Cox, and R. D. Diehl, Qua-
sicrystal surfaces: structure and potential as templates,
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 14, R119 (2002).
[132] R. McGrath, J. A. Smerdon, H. R. Sharma, W. Theis,
and R. Ledieu, The surface science of quasicrystals,
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 22, 084022
(2010).
[133] M. Pagliaro, C. Della Pina, F. Mauriello, and R. Cir-
iminna, Catalysis with silver: From complexes and
nanoparticles to morals and single-atom catalysts, Cat-
alysts 10, 1343 (2020).
[134] D. A. Rabson, N. D. Mermin, D. S. Rokhsar, and D. C.
Wright, Reviews of Modern Physics 63(1991).
[135] O. Ovdat and E. Akkermans, Breaking of continuous
scale invariance to discrete scale invariance: A univer-
sal quantum phase transition, in Fractal Geometry and
Stochastics VI (Birkh¨ auser Cham), Eds. Uta Freiberg,
Ben Hambly, Michael Hinz, Steffen Winter , 209 (2021).
[136] S. Biswas and S. A. Parameswaran, Discrete scale invari-
ant fixed point in a quasiperiodic classical dimer model,arXiv:2302.07879 [cond-mat.stat-mech].
[137] E. Cockayne and S. Hedetniemi, Optimal domination in
graphs, IEEE Transactions on circuits and systems 22,
855 (1975).
[138] E. J. Cockayne and S. T. Hedetniemi, Towards a theory
of domination in graphs, Networks 7, 247 (1977).
[139] M. Yannakakis, The node deletion problem for heredi-
tary properties, Report No. TR-240, Computer Science
Laboratory, Princeton University (1978).
Appendix A: Detailed Figures
In this appendix we include detailed figures to accom-
pany the proof sections in the main text. Fig. A.1 and
Fig. A.2 show intermediate steps for obtaining the Hamil-
tonian cycle in Fig. 6. In Fig. A.1, black e0edges form
loops visiting every 8 n<0-vertex (i.e. every vertex which
is not an 8-vertex). We placed red e1edges along the
e1-loops (red loops in Fig. 5) to add 8 0-vertices onto the
loops. After this we also placed blue e2edges along the
e2-loop (blue loop in Fig. 5), with one corner folded, to
add the central vertex and 8 1-vertices onto the loops.
Note that some parts of the blue e2edges overlaps with
the red e1edges. Noting that augmentation of a set of
edges is reversed by a second augmentation of the same
set of edges, in Fig. A.2 these overlapping e2edges and
e1edges will augment to leave the L0tiling unchanged.
Hence we can remove these overlapping edges completely.
This results in a rewiring of e1-loops and the e2-loop into
a single loop as shown. Augmenting this single loop, con-
sisting of the remaining red and blue edges, will give us
the Hamiltonian cycle shown in Fig. 6.
Fig. A.3 is a bigger version of Fig. 9, showing a solution
for the 3-coloring problem on a large patch of AB tiling
resulting by placing tile 1 and tile 2 shown in Fig. 8, and
coloring the remaining ladders consistently on the basis
of colors of their surrounding rhombuses such that no two
adjacent faces share a color.20
FIG. A.1: The canonical placement of e0edges (black) form loops visiting every 8 n<0-vertex (i.e. every vertex which
is not an 8-vertex). Now e1edges (red) are placed along the e1-loops (see Fig. 5) to add 8 0-vertices onto the loops.
Further e2edges (blue) are placed along the e2-loop, with one corner folded, to add the central vertex and 8 1-vertices
onto the loops. Note that some blue e2edges overlap with the red e1edges. This process can be iterated to any order.21
FIG. A.2: The overlapping e2edges and e1edges as shown in Fig A.1 will augment to leave the L0tiling unchanged.
Hence we can remove these overlapping e2edges and e1edges completely. This results in the rewiring of e1-loops and
thee2-loop into a single loop as shown here. Finally augmenting this single loop, consisting of the remaining red and
blue edges, will gives the Hamiltonian cycle shown in Fig. 6.22
FIG. A.3: The 3-colored AB tiling using tile 1 and tile 2 (both outlined in gold) as mentioned in Sec. IV C.
Appendix B: Solutions to other non-trivial problems on AB
1. The Minimum Dominating Set Problem
A dominating set Dof a graph Gis a subset of the vertices of Gsuch that all the vertices not in Dare adjacent
to at least one vertex in D. The minimum dominating set (MDS) is a dominating set containing the fewest possible
vertices; its cardinality is called the domination number, γ(G).
Problem statement [63]: given a graph Gand integer k, is the domination number γ(G)≤k? The corresponding
optimisation problem is to find the MDS.23
Solution: ifGis built from Ncopies of L1/2tiles, yes iff N≤k.
Proof: Fig. 2 shows the single-inflation rules for the rhombus and square, level L1/2. The set of red vertices forms
an MDS for all vertices within each L1/2tile. Since these inflated tiles cover the entire tiling (owing to discrete scale
symmetry), the union of minimum dominating sets of all these inflated tiles must be a dominating set for any patch
of the AB tiling, or the tiling itself in the thermodynamic limit. That this is actually an MDS can be seen from the
fact that there is no redundancy in the placement of the red vertices in Fig. 2: no red vertex has another red as a
neighbor, which implies that the set constitutes an MDS for the whole AB tiling. A larger region of the MDS is shown
in Fig. B.1. Note that the MDS is not unique.
Comment : the proof relies only on the discrete scale symmetry of AB tilings, without reference to the Hamiltonian
cycle construction.
FIG. B.1: A portion of AB tiling showing the minimum dominating set vertices (red), which as proved in Section
B 1 are also vertices of single inflated tiles.
2. The Domatic Number Problem
The domatic number d(G) for any given graph Gwith a set of vertices Vis the maximum number of disjoint
dominating sets into which Vcan be partitioned.
Problem statement [63, 137]: for a given graph Gand integer 3 ≤k≤δ(G) + 1, where δ(G) is the minimum
degree of G, does Ghave a domatic number d(G)≥k? The corresponding optimisation problem is to find the
corresponding dominating sets.
Solution: ifG=Un>0, yes if k= 3.
Proof: we will prove the result by using our Hamiltonian cycles to explicitly construct a partition of Un>0into
three disjoint dominating sets.
To see that the domatic number cannot be greater than δ+ 1, consider the set N(v) composed of a vertex valong
with its δneighbors, such that |N(v)|=δ+ 1; then each dominating set Dicontains at least one vertex in N(v),
and each vertex in N(v) is contained in at most one Di. Thus d≤δ+ 1. The case k= 2 also trivially holds for any
graph with no isolated vertices. Hence, finding k= 3 disjoint dominating sets is the first non-trivial instance of the
problem, which is NPC on general graphs.
Before proving our statement for AB, we first anticipate the result by giving a simple proof that any Hamiltonian
graph Gof size |G|= 3n, forninteger, admits k= 3 disjoint dominating sets. We have not seen this statement made
elsewhere. To see that it is true, we begin by labelling the three sets by the colors red, blue, and yellow, denoted
R, B, Y . Starting from an arbitrary vertex v1ofG, color v1red. Then, proceeding along the Hamiltonian cycle,
color each vertex cyclically according to the three colors. Thus, v2is colored B,v3is colored Y,v4is colored R, and24
FIG. B.2: Hamiltonian cycle structure (black edges), with vertices colored cyclically by the three colors R,B,Y,
starting from the red star and proceeding clockwise around the cycle. The coloring scheme ensures that every vertex
of a given color is neighbor to at least one vertex of each of the other colors; the final vertex in the cycle to be
colored (white star), neighbors at least one vertex of each color, by construction. This proves that Hamiltonian
subgraphs of AB have a domatic number d≥3.
so on. The constraint |V|= 3nensures that the final vertex, v3n, neighboring v0, is colored Y. In this way the cyclic
structure of the coloring holds. Since ( i) the Hamiltonian cycle visits every vertex and ( ii) every vertex of a given
color neighbors at least one vertex of each of the two remaining colors, we have constructed three disjoint dominating
sets for k= 3.
The extension to the G=Un>0regions of AB, which we have proven admit Hamiltonian cycles, is similarly simple.
The cyclic coloring along the Hamiltonian cycle proceeds exactly as above. However, we do not have |Un|= 3n(for
example, |U1|= 464 |). Nevertheless, in Fig. B.2 we show a suitable starting vertex of the Hamiltonian cycle (red
star) such that the final vertex of the cycle (white star) neighbors one vertex of each color. The pictured section of
the Hamiltonian cycle appears as the central region of the U1cycle shown in Fig. 1, and every Hamiltonian cycle
constructed on Un>0according to our method follows an identical path at its centre. Therefore, every vertex of a
given color neighbors at least one vertex of each of the two remaining colors, and we have proven the case k= 3 for
Un>0. Note that U0is too small for this method to hold, and has d= 2.
Comments: given that the minimum connectivity of AB is δ= 3, the problem statement requests proof that the
domatic number of Un>0is either d= 3 or d= 4. We have constructed a d= 3 partitioning using our Hamiltonian
cycle construction. This solves the domatic number problem, which is NPC on general graphs.
The question of whether there exists a d= 4 partition remains open. We have been able to find such partitions
of large regions of AB. We have not found any noticeable decrease in the freedom to continue the patterns as they
grow. On the basis of these observations, we conjecture that a d= 4 partition is possible for arbitrarily large Wn
regions. If true, this would render these arbitrarily large finite patches of AB tilings rare examples of ‘domatically
full’ graphs [138] with d(G) =δ(G) + 1.
3. The Induced Path Problem
An induced path in an undirected graph Gis a sequence of vertices such that a pair of vertices is adjacent in the
sequence iff the vertices have an edge in G. An induced cycle is an induced path which closes.
Problem statement [63, 139]: for a graph Gand a positive integer k, does Gcontain an induced cycle of length
at least k? The corresponding optimisation problem is to find an induced cycle of length k.
Solution: yes, if G= AB.25
Proof: in this case it is convenient to consider the D8-symmetric regions Wn. Fig. B.3 shows the loops of the
FPL on AB* constructed in Sec. III A. We see that any non adjacent vertices on these loops do not have an edge in
G, while any adjacent vertices do. Hence these loops are induced cycles. The longest such loop in Wnis of length
8 (9n+ 1) (this can be proven using the inflation rules of Fig. 2). Since any AB tiling contains W∞, the answer to
the problem is ‘yes’ for any k, finite or infinite.
Comments: on general graphs the problem remains NPC if an induced path is sought rather than an induced
cycle. That problem can also be solved on AB, by deleting any pair of consecutive edges along the cycle. Longer
induced cycles than those we consider can be found in Wn, but the problem statement does not require them.
FIG. B.3: FPLs on AB* formed by the method in Section III A form induced paths on AB. The longest induced
path in region Wncreated by this method is of length 8 (9n+ 1). The total region shown here is W1, with W0
highlighted in grey. The corresponding induced paths are shown in gold.