 
 Spontaneous off -stoichiometry as the knob to control dielectric properties of gapped 
metals  
 
 
Muhammad Rizwan Khan1, Harshan Reddy Gopidi1, Hamid Reza Darabian1, Dorota A . Pawlak1, and 
Oleksandr I. Malyi1, 
 
1Centre of Excellence ENSEMBLE3 Sp. z o. o., Wolczynska Str. 133, 01 -919, Warsaw, Poland  
 
Email: oleksandrmalyi@gmail.com  (O.I.M)  
 
Abstract : 
Using the first -principles calculations and La 3Te4 as an example of an n-type gapped metal, we 
demonstrate that gapped metals can develop spontaneous defect formation resulting in off-
stoichiometr ic compounds . Importantly, these compounds have different free carrier concentrations  
and can be realized by o ptimizing synthesis conditions. The ability to manipulate the free carrier 
concentration allows to tailor intraband and interband transitions , thus controlling  the optoelectronic 
properties  of materials in general . Specifically,  by realizing different off -stochiometric La 3-xTe4 
compounds,  it is possible to reach specific crossings of the real part of the dielectric function with the 
zero line , reduce plasma frequency contribution to absorption spectra, or , more generally , induce 
metal -to-insul ator transition. This is particularly important in the context of optoelectronic, plasmonic , 
and epsilon -near -zero materials , as it enables materials design with a target functionality . While this 
work is limited to the specific gapped metal , we demonstrat e that the fundamental physics  is 
transferable to other gapped metals  and can be generally used to design  a wide class of new 
optoelectronic /plasmonic  materials.  
 
Keywords: defects, off -stoichiometry,  dielectric properties, free carriers, gapped metals, Drude 
absorption   
   
 Dielectric function as the response of a material to the electromagnetic field: Traditional solid -state 
physics books [1, 2]  teac h us that light -matter interaction is defined by the electronic and ionic 
response to the electromagnetic field and is characterized by a complex frequency (ω) -dependent 
dielectric function, ε(ω)=ε 1(ω)+ iε2(ω). The real part of the dielectric function (ε 1(ω)) describes the 
ability of a material to polarize in response to an electric field, while the imaginary part of the dielectric 
function (ε 2(ω)) is related to the absorption coefficient, measuring how much energy is absorbed per 
unit distance  traveled through a given material. These quantities are related to each other via the 
Kramers -Kronig transformation [3, 4]  and can be used to calculate other dielectric properties , such as 
the refractive index and extinction coefficient , as well as classifying different optoelectronic/plasmonic 
materials . For instance, solar cell absorber materials ( e.g., halide perovskites ) have a high imaginary 
part of the dielectric function to absorb a sufficient amount of light . In contrast,  plasmonic materials 
(e.g., gold and silver [5]) have a low real part of the dielectric function in the visible and near -infrared 
region.  Understanding the dielectric function of materials is also vital  for photonics and metamaterials, 
where the manipulation of light -matter interactions is used to achieve desired outcomes, e.g., high -
efficiency energy conversion or enhanced sensing capabilities.  
 
Critical needs for the knob to control dielectric properti es of the materials: The properties of any given 
material are defined by atomic identities, composition, and structure (ACS) [6]. This implies that the 
design  of materials for a target functionality requires identifying specific ACS accommodating specific 
material properties , and unless such materials are identified , the optimal device performance cannot  
be reached. For instance, for solar cell s, a difference in band gap energy of 0.1 eV can be essential to 
change the theoretical Shockley –Queisser limit  efficiency [7] by a few percent. Such robust  
functionality dependence  on ACS makes identifying a knob to tune given properties (e.g., dielectric 
properties  or band gap ) the crucial task of material design. Consider a wide class of plasmonic materials 
where the dielectric properties are closely related to the screened plasma frequency, defined as the 
frequency at which ε 1(ω) is equal to  zero [8]. By adjusting the knob, the screened plasma fre quency can 
be tuned to optimize the material performance for a particular application , e.g., by shifting the 
wavelength range where the material behaves as a plasmonic material . For example, in modern 
semiconductor technologies, successful tailoring of the dielectric properties can lead to the 
development of more efficient transparent conductor s[9]. In optical sensor tech nology, governing  the 
dielectric properties of plasmonic materials allows  to engineer  more sensitive and selective sensors  by 
enabling a stronger material response to  given  chemicals or biological molecules [10]. The critical need 
for such a knob becomes even stronger with the discovery of Epsilon -Near -Zero  (ENZ)  materials [11], 
offering the capability of ENZ frequency tuning under which the real part of permittivity approaches 
near zero value.  
 
Gapped metals as examples of optoelectronic  and plasmonic  materials: Due to high electron density 
and a large surface plasmon resonance, metals with a continuous electronic density of states are 
considered to be classical plasmonic materials [5, 12] . Properties of s uch compounds are typically 
difficult to control and manipulate without the use of external factors  (e.g., doping, pressure). 
However, with the development of electronic structure theory, it became clear that a continuous 
electronic structure does not always characterize metallic properties . Indeed, there is a range of so-
called  n-type gapped metals  (p-type gapped metals also exi st but are rarer [13, 14] ) that, in undoped 
form , have a finite energy gap between their principal band edges with Fermi level in the principal  
 conduction band (Fig. 1a).  The electronic structure of such pristine gapped metals  resembles  that of 
degenerate semiconductors, received by heavy doping of wide band gap compounds (e.g., Al -doped 
ZnO[15, 16] ) with the difference that gapped metals are received without any intentional doping and 
have carrier concentration significantly higher than degenerate semiconductors. The noticeable 
example s of such gapped metals include : SrVO 3 and CaVO 3 - “correlated” metals being potential 
transparent conduct ors[17, 18] , Sr 1-xNbO 3 - color metallic photocatalyst [19], Ca 6Al7O14 - metallic solid -
state electride  (material where electrons are present as anions in the crystal structure, rather than 
being asso ciated with particular atoms) [20], La3Te4 - an example of intrinsic thermoelectrics [21], and 
SrVO 3, CaNbO 3, SrNbO 3, and BaNbO 3 -  promising plasmonic materials  [22, 23] .  
 
Spontaneous off -stoichiometry in gapped metals - La3Te4 as n -type gapped metal that can be 
synthesized in different stoichiometries: What makes the case of ga pped metal special is that these 
compounds can exhibit the spontaneous formation of a point defect  inducing noticeable change 
material stoichiometry. Specifically, the formation energy of a given defect becomes  negative for a 
given chemical potential (synthesis conditions , e.g., µ = µ° + RT ln(P/P°), where µ° is the standard 
chemical potential, R is the universal gas constant, T is the temperature, and P and P° are the pressure 
of the gas and the reference press ure, respectively ). It is important to distinguish this phenomenon 
from that of regular solid compounds, where the formation of point defects is typically limited until  
high temperatures and is driven by the minimiz ation of  Gibbs's  free energy via increasi ng entropy at a 
given temperature. In contrast, the formation of an acceptor defect in n -type gapped metal ( Fig. 1a ) 
can develop off -stoichiometry due to  the decay of conduction electrons to the acceptor level  (known 
as Fermi level instability) [9, 14, 24] . Such behavior can lead to the formation of a range of non -
stoichiometric compounds due to the intrinsic non -thermal tendency of the system , even at low 
temperatures . For in stance, previous experimental works [25, 26]  and our recent first -principles 
calculations [24] showed that La 3Te4 (I4̅3d, No. 220) is the example of n -type gapped metal (Fig. 1a,b) 
that can develop such non-stoichiometry as a result of the formation of acceptor La vacancies.  
Moreover, upon reaching x= 1/3 in La 3-xTe4, all free carriers are removed from the principal conduction 
band  (i.e., the system becomes an insulator) , limiting the spontaneous defect formation – the 
formation energy of La vacancy in La 2.67Te4 is positive. The findings are consistent with experimental 
crystallographic data [27] and can be explained by removing 3e from the principal conduction band 
with the formation of each La vacancy. We emphasize that the origin of such spontaneous defect 
formation is Fermi level instability of gapped metal compound and is not driven by temper ature effect  
or stabilization of metastable phases . When all electrons from the conduction band are removed, the 
system cannot further benefit from electron -hole recombination . Hence,  an increase in off-
stoichiometry is not thermodynamically favorable. To demonstrate this, we build an energy convex 
hull[28] using  calculated formation heat s of various La -Te phases . By definition, compounds  that do 
not tend to decompose spontaneously to competing phases have 0 me V/atom energy above hull (E hull). 
In contrast,  compounds above convex hull have positive Ehull corresponding to exothermic energy of 
decomposition  with respect to competing phases  (we note that realizati on of compound <100 -150 
meV/atom is  often still  possible ).[29, 30]  All these compounds have different free carrier 
concentrations  but the same parental structure (i.e., one can be considered as La 3Te4 (I4̅3d) structure 
decorated by La vacancies), which is in line with available experimental data [25-27, 31] . Hence, tunning 
potential synthesis conditions can be used to stabilize target composition with desired electronic 
properties and free carrier  concentration . These results agree  with experimentally observed results  
 showing how controllable resistivity and even metal -to-insulator transition can be reached via 
optimized synthesis conditions .[26, 27]  
 
Figure 1: Spontaneous off -stoichiometry in La 3Te4 n-type gapped metal.  (a) Calculated projected density of 
states for La 3Te4. (b) Calculated  energy  convex hull for the La -Te systems , including all known experimentally 
reported stoichiometric compositions and generated off -stoichiometric structures (only the lowest energy 
configurations for each off -stoichiometric composition shown are visualized). (c) List of generated off -
stoichiomet ric composition and the corresponding  energy above convex hull (E hull) and free carrier 
concentration (n e). (d) Crystal structures of off -stoichiometric compositions La 2.92Te4, La 2.83Te4, La 2.75Te4, and 
La2.67Te4, with blue circles depicting the vacancies . 
 
Dielectric properties of La 3Te4 defined by superposition of band -to-band transition s and Drude 
contribution: Similar to regular metals, dielectric properties of gapped metals are defined by 
superposition of band -to-band transition and free carrier absorption (Drude term) as schematically 
shown in Fig. 2a. One should note, however, that in the case of gapped La 3Te4 metal, there are two 
band -to-band transitions in the system: (i) transition from occupied states in the principal conduction 
band to above unoccupied states and (ii) transition from an occupied state of principal valance band 
to unoccupied states in the conduction band. We note that these transitions are activated at different 
energ ies, which thus makes  gapped metals substantially different from traditional metals having 
continuous electronic structures. At frequencies comparable to plasma frequencies 𝜔𝑝, dielectric 
properties of metals have a noticeable free carrier contribution as 𝜀2(𝜔)=𝛾𝜔𝑝2/𝜔(𝜔2+𝛾2) and 
 
 𝜀1(𝜔)=1−𝜔𝑝2/(𝜔2+𝛾2), where  𝛾 is a damping coefficient characterizing the  average time interval 
between successive collisions experienced by a charged particle moving through a material [32] and 
𝜔𝑝 is unscreened plasma frequency  (see methods) . The results  shown in Fig. 2c,d  indicate that the 
Drude  contribution to the imaginary part of the dielectric function is positive and tends to decrease as 
the frequency increases, eventually approaching a zero limit in the infinite frequency range. In 
contrast, the Drude contribution to the real part of dielec tric function is negative  for 𝜔𝑝≫𝜔 and 
approaches 1 limit with increased frequency. The superposition of the Drude contribution and band -
to-band transition results in a non -monotonic profile of real and imaginary parts of dielectric functions 
(Fig. 2c,d ). For instance, a pristine La 3Te4 compound has multiple crossings of the real part of the 
dielectric function with zero line, which potentially can make this material interesting for plasmonic 
and even  ENZ materials  (Fig. 2c). The imaginary part of the dielectric function and absorption s pectra 
have noticeable Drude contribution at low frequencies , which become a non-dominant factor at high 
frequencies. Generally, the dielectric properties of La 3Te4 are very similar to that in potential intrinsic 
transparent conductors [9], with only the difference that La 3Te4 is not  transparent - i.e., it has strong 
absorption in the visible light range.  
 
Figure 2: Dielectric properties of La 3Te4 as superposition of band -to-band transitions and Drude contribution . 
(a) Schematic figure demonstrating different types of optical transition present in the gapped metal . (b) 
Absorption spectra for La 3Te4 considering only interband transitions , Drude contribution, and  superposition of 
interband and intraband transitions . (c) Real and (d) imaginary parts of dielectric function for La 3Te4.  
 
Spontaneous off -stoichiometry as a knob to tune the optoelectronic properties of La 3-xTe4 system:  As 
noted in Fig. 1c, different off -stoichiometric compounds have different numbers of free carriers. Taking 
into account that unscreened plasma frequency  (𝜔𝑝) is directly defined by free carrier concentration  
 
 (in the simplified textbook picture, 𝜔𝑝~√𝑛𝑒
𝑚, where 𝑛𝑒 and 𝑚  are free carrier density and effective 
mass, respectively) , the La deficiency directly reduces the plasma frequency via the reduction of carrier 
concentration as shown in Fig. 3a. Here, one should note that due to the distribution of vacancy sides, 
there is a small  variation of plasma frequency along different directions  (within a couple of percent  
scale) . However, this ani sotropy would most probably be overcome with an increased temperature -
driven disorder (e.g., entropy ). The illustration of this case is well seen within the absorption spectra , 
where the reduction of plasma frequency induces a reduction of free carrier absorption at low 
frequenc ies. Another important effect seen in Fig. 3b and Fib. 3d is the red shift of the absorption 
spectra with increased off -stoichiometry. These results can be understood in the language of the 
Burstein -Moss effect [33, 34] . Spec ifically, due to the gapped metal electronic structure, the internal 
band gap of La 3Te4 (1.22 eV) is smaller than the first available transition from occupied states in the 
valence band to unoccupied states in the conduction band ( i.e., 1.74 eV  for La 3Te4) as also can be 
understood from schematic Fig. 2a . However, as the degree of off -stoichiometry (x) increases, fewer 
and fewer states are occupied in the conduction band reducing thus the energy of the first available 
direct transition.  For instance, this e nergy is 1.59, 1.53, and 1.44 eV for La 2.92Te4, La 2.83Te4, and 
La2.75Te4, respectively . Eventually, at x=1/ 3, the system becomes an insulator  (all free carriers are 
removed from the conduction band)  with the band gap energy of 1.13 eV - no Burstein -Moss effect is 
present and the first possible direct transition corresponds to the lowest direct band gap energy . The 
degree of off -stoichiometry also has a noticeable effect on the real part of the dielec tric function, 
which mainly can be summarized as a gradual reduction of Drude contribution resulting in a gradual 
redshift of a low -frequency crossing point of 𝜀1(𝜔) with zero line from about 0.7 eV to its complete 
suppression when at x=1/ 3. Taking into account the similarity of electronic structures for different La 3-
xTe4 compounds, we also can understand the origin of specific 𝜀1(𝜔)=0 points. Specifically, the 
disappearing of 𝜀1(𝜔) crossing at low frequency is clearly attributed to the removal of co nductive 
electrons from the principal conduction band  as their removal lead to the disappearance of the 
crossing point . In contrast, for all La 3-xTe4 compounds, 𝜀1(𝜔)=0 at  ~4.3 eV is clearly not affected by the 
presence of free carriers, implying that it is the intrinsic tendency of the system originated from band -
to-band transitions (only one taken into account at these frequencies  for all compounds ). We note as 
well that generally t he absolute values of crossing frequency should be taken into account  with caution 
as the calculation presented here are done within the DFT framework resulting in the underestimation 
of the internal gap between principal band edges [24] or even sensitivity to scattering rate in the Drude 
model. Despite this, the demonstrated knob reflects the universal approach that can be adapted for a 
wide class of gapped metals to tailor their properties.   
  
Figure 3: Spontaneous off -stoichiometry as a knob to tune the optoelectronic properties of La 3-xTe4 system.  
(a) Plasma frequency as a function of different concentrations of La vacancies in La 3-xTe4; (b) Absorption spectra 
for La 3-xTe4 considering superposition of both interband and intraband transitions; (c) Real and (d)  imaginary 
parts of dielec tric function for different concentrations of La vacancies in La 3-xTe4. 
 
To summarize, using the example of La 3Te4, we demonstrate that the representative example of n -
type gapped metal can exhibit the spontaneous formation of a point defect (acceptor defect) due to 
the decay of conduction electrons to the acceptor level  known as Fermi level instability  even at low 
temperatures . This behavior is different from regular solid compounds, where the formation of point 
defects is typically limited u ntil high temperatures and is driven by the minimization of Gibbs's free 
energy via increasing entropy. Importantly,  spontaneous off -stoichiometry result s in the formation of 
a set of non-stoichiometric compounds with the same parental crystal structure but different 
concentrations of free carriers. The formation of these compounds can be controlled through an 
optimized choice of chemical potentials ( synthesis conditions ), resulting  in tunable  optoelectronic 
properties. Specifically, owing to the gapped metallic electronic structure, controllable growth of off -
stoichiometric La 3-xTe4 compounds can be used to tailor the Drude contribution and optimize the band -
to-band transition via controllable free carrier concentration . This is particularly important in the 
 
 context of plasmonic and epsilon -near -zero materials, as it enables the development of new materials 
with a target functionality by usi ng spontaneous off -stoichiometry as an external knob.  
 
Methods:  
First -principle calculations: We performed ab initio calculations using the Perdew -Becke -Ernzerhof 
(PBE) functional [35] as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) [36-40]. The 
cutoff energy values for the plane wave basis were set to be 550 and 500 eV for static and final volume 
relaxation, respectively. The Γ -centered Monkhorst−Pack k -grids [41] scheme were used for Brillouin 
zone sampling with approximately 3000 and 10000 per reciprocal atom for volume relaxation and final 
static calculations, respectively. The results were analyzed using  pymatgen [42] and Vesta [43].  
 
Generation of off -stoichiometric compounds  and defect calculations : To investigate the stability of 
off-stoichiometric La 3-xTe4 compounds, we employed a supercell and generated five off -stoichiometric 
compositions by creating supercells containing 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 La vacancies, respectively. We then 
conducted DFT calculations on each unique system resulting from at least 40 diffe rent randomly 
selected atomic configurations for each composition. To ensure comprehensive analysis, we also 
incorporated other theoretically known La -Te phases available in materials databases such Materials 
Project [44], Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD) [45, 46] , and Inorganic Crystal Structure 
Database (ICSD) [47]. The details on t he defect calculations are given in Ref. [24]. 
 
Calculations of the optical properties: To compute the optical properties for gapped metals, first , we 
determine the frequency -dependent  dielectric function ε(ω) based on density functional theory (DFT). 
This dielectric function consists of two terms , including direct interband transition matrix and term due 
to plasmonic effect based on Drude model [32]. The first term  is calculated by considering only the 
optical interb and transition while plasma frequency can be calculated from DFT electronic band 
structure, which is at q=0 plasmonic wave vector given as:  
 
ωp2= ne2/ π2m2(Σa∫dk<ψak|Pi|ψak><ψak|Pj|ψak>δ(Eak−EF) 
 
Here, ψak and Eak are the wave function and energy of free e lectrons with charge(mass) e(m), 
respectively of band a, at momentum k. EF is correspond to the Fermi level and Pi (Pj) are components 
of optical dipole transitions. Here, we mainly focus on the effects of direct band transition and 
intraband contributions in terms of plasma frequencies on optical properties by neglecting the small 
contributions of ions at low frequencies .  To perform the calculations for direct band transitions and 
plasma frequencies, a Γ -centered Monkhorst−Pack k -grids [41] of 20000 per reciprocal atom were used 
along with a small complex shift (η) of 0.01 in the  Kramers -Kronig transformation [48]. To include the 
Drude contribution term in the optical properties we utilized the kram code [49-51], with the plasma 
frequencies obtained from first principles calculation and the damping coefficient ( 𝛾) which is set to 
be 0.2 eV/ħ, similar as used for another transparent conducting gapped metals and traditional doped 
transparent conductors [9, 52, 53] .   
 
Acknowledgments: The authors thank the “ENSEMBLE3 - Centre of Excellence for nanophotonics , 
advanced materials and novel crystal growth -based technologies” project (GA No. MAB/2020/14)  
 carried out within the International Research Agendas programme of the Foundation for Polish Science 
co-financed by the European Union under the European Regiona l Development Fund and the 
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme Teaming for Excellence (GA. No. 
857543) for support of this work. We gratefully acknowledge Poland’s high -performance computing 
infrastructure PLGrid (HPC Centers: A CK Cyfronet AGH) for providing computer facilities and support 
within computational grant no. PLG/2022/015458.   
 
References : 
[1] M. Dressel, G. Grüner, Electrodynamics of Solids Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 
(2002).  
[2] W. Fr ederick, Optical properties of solids, 41 (1972) 939 -940. 
[3] H.A. Kramers, XCIII. On the theory of X -ray absorption and of the continuous X -ray spectrum, The 
London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 46 (1923) 836 -871. 
[4] R.d.L. Kronig, On the theory of dispersion of x -rays, Josa, 12 (1926) 547 -557. 
[5] P.B. Johnson, R. -W. Christy, Optical constants of the noble metals, Physical review B, 6 (1972) 
4370.  
[6] A. Zunger, Inverse design in search of materials with target fun ctionalities, Nature Reviews 
Chemistry, 2 (2018 ) 0121.  
[7] W. Shockley, The Shockley -Queisser limit, J. Appl. Phys, 32 (1961) 510 -519. 
[8] G. Grosso, G.P. Parravicini, Solid state physics, Academic press2013.  
[9] O.I. Malyi, M.T. Yeung, K.R. Poeppelmeier,  C. Persson, A. Zunger, Spontaneous non -
stoichiometry and ordering in degenerate but gapped transparent conductors, Matter, 1 (2019) 280 -
294. 
[10] M. Seo, H.R. Park, Terahertz biochemical molecule ‐specific sensors, Advanced Optical 
Materials, 8 (2020) 1900 662. 
[11] N. Kinsey, C. DeVault, A. Boltasseva, V.M. Shalaev, Near -zero-index materials for photonics, 
Nature Reviews Materials, 4 (2019) 742 -760. 
[12] J. Marton, B. Jordan, Optical properties of aggregated metal systems: Interband transitions, 
Physical Review B, 15 (1977) 1719.  
[13] O.I. Malyi, G.M. Dalpian, X.G. Zhao, Z. Wang, A. Zunger, Realization of predicted exotic 
materials: The burden of proof, Materials Today, 32 (2020) 35 -45. 
[14] O.I. Malyi, A. Zunger, False metals, real insulators, an d degenerate gapped metals, Applied 
Physics Reviews, 7 (2020) 041310.  
[15] A. Walsh, A. Zunger, Instilling defect tolerance in new compounds, Nature materials, 16 (2017) 
964-967. 
[16] A. Zunger, O.I. Malyi, Understanding doping of quantum materials, Chemic al Reviews, 121 
(2021) 3031 -3060.  
[17] L. Zhang, Y. Zhou, L. Guo, W. Zhao, A. Barnes, H. -T. Zhang, C. Eaton, Y. Zheng, M. Brahlek, 
H.F. Haneef, Correlated metals as transparent conductors, Nature materials, 15 (2016) 204 -210. 
[18] Z. Wang, O.I. Malyi, X. Z hao, A. Zunger, Mass enhancement in 3d and s−p perovskites from 
symmetry breaking, Physical Review B, 103 (2021) 165110.  
[19] X. Xu, C. Randorn, P. Efstathiou, J.T. Irvine, A red metallic oxide photocatalyst, Nature materials, 
11 (2012) 595 -598. 
[20] S. Ma tsuishi, Y. Toda, M. Miyakawa, K. Hayashi, T. Kamiya, M. Hirano, I. Tanaka, H. Hosono, 
High-Density Electron Anions in a Nanoporous Single Crystal:[Ca 24Al28O64] 4+(4 e -), Science, 301 
(2003) 626 -629. 
[21] A.F. May, J. -P. Fleurial, G.J. Snyder, Thermoelectr ic performance of lanthanum telluride 
produced via mechanical alloying, Phys. Rev. B, 78 (2008) 125205.  
[22] D. Wan, B. Yan, J. Chen, S. Wu, J. Hong, D. Song, X. Zhao, X. Chi, S. Zeng, Z. Huang, C. Li, K. 
Han, W. Zhou, Y. Cao, A. Rusydi, S.J. Pennycook, P.  Yang, Ariando, R. Xu, Q. -H. Xu, X.R. Wang, T. 
Venkatesan, New Family of Plasmonic Photocatalysts without Noble Metals, Chem. Mater., 31 (2019) 
2320 -2327.  
[23] C. -P. Su, K. Ruotsalainen, A. Nicolaou, M. Gatti, A. Gloter, Plasmonic Properties of SrVO3 Bulk 
and Nanostructures, Advanced Optical Materials, n/a  2202415.   
 [24] M.R. Khan, H.R. Gopidi, M. Wlazło, O.I. Malyi, Fermi Level Instability as a Way to Tailor 
Properties of La 3Te4, Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 7 (202 3) 1962.  
[25] T. Ramsey, H. Stei nfink, E. Weiss, The phase equilibria and crystal chemistry of the rare earth -
group VI systems. IV. lanthanum -tellurium, Inorganic Chemistry, 4 (1965) 1154 -1157.  
[26] O. Delaire, A.F. May, M.A. McGuire, W.D. Porter, M.S. Lucas, M.B. Stone, D.L. Abernathy, V. 
Ravi, S. Firdosy, G. Snyder, Phonon density of states and heat capacity of La 3− xTe4, Physical Review 
B, 80 (2009) 184302.  
[27] J. Li, R. Liu, Q. Song, Z. Gao, H. Huang, Q. Zhang, X. Shi, S. Bai, L. Chen, Enhanced thermal 
stability and oxidation resista nce in La 3-xTe4 by compositing metallic nickel particles, Acta Materialia, 
224 (2022) 117526.  
[28] F. Ducastelle, Order and Phase Stability in Alloys, (1991).  
[29] O.I. Malyi, J. Varignon, A. Zunger, Bulk NdNiO 2 is thermodynamically unstable with respect t o 
decomposition while hydrogenation reduces the instability and transforms it from metal to insulator, 
Physical Review B, 105 (2022) 014106.  
[30] W. Sun, S.T. Dacek, S.P. Ong, G. Hautier, A. Jain, W.D. Richards, A.C. Gamst, K.A. Persson, G. 
Ceder, The ther modynamic scale of inorganic crystalline metastability, Science Advances, 2 (2016) 
e1600225.  
[31] J.M. Ma, S.M. Clarke, W.G. Zeier, T. Vo, P. Von Allmen, G.J. Snyder, R.B. Kaner, J. -P. Fleurial, 
S.K. Bux, Mechanochemical synthesis and high temperature ther moelectric properties of calcium -
doped lanthanum telluride La 3− xCaxTe4, Journal of Materials Chemistry C, 3 (2015) 10459 -10466.  
[32] P. Drude, Zur elektronentheorie der metalle, Annalen der physik, 306 (1900) 566 -613. 
[33] T. Moss, The interpretation of t he properties of indium antimonide, Proceedings of the Physical 
Society. Section B, 67 (1954) 775.  
[34] E. Burstein, Anomalous optical absorption limit in InSb, Physical review, 93 (1954) 632.  
[35] J.P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Physical 
review letters, 77 (1996) 3865.  
[36] G. Kresse, J. Hafner, Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals, Physical review B, 47 (1993) 
558. 
[37] G. Kresse, J. Hafner, Ab initio molecular -dynamics simulation of the liqui d-metal –amorphous -
semiconductor transition in germanium, Physical Review B, 49 (1994) 14251.  
[38] G. Kresse, J. Furthmüller, Efficiency of ab -initio total energy calculations for metals and 
semiconductors using a plane -wave basis set, Computational materia ls science, 6 (1996) 15 -50. 
[39] G. Kresse, J. Furthmüller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total -energy calculations using 
a plane -wave basis set, Physical review B, 54 (1996) 11169.  
[40] G. Kresse, D. Joubert, From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to  the projector augmented -wave method, 
Physical review b, 59 (1999) 1758.  
[41] H.J. Monkhorst, J.D. Pack, Special points for Brillouin -zone integrations, Physical review B, 13 
(1976) 5188.  
[42] S.P. Ong, W.D. Richards, A. Jain, G. Hautier, M. Kocher, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, V.L. Chevrier, 
K.A. Persson, G. Ceder, Python Materials Genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open -source python 
library for materials analysis, Computational Materials Science, 68 (2013) 314 -319. 
[43] K. Momma, F. Izumi, VESTA 3 for Three -dime nsional Visualization of Crystal, Volumetric and 
Morphology Data, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 44 (2011) 1272 -1276.  
[44] A. Jain, S.P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W.D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. 
Skinner, G. Ceder, Commentary: The Materials Projec t: A materials genome approach to 
accelerating materials innovation, APL materials, 1 (2013) 011002.  
[45] J.E. Saal, S. Kirklin, M. Aykol, B. Meredig, C. Wolverton, Materials design and discovery with 
high-throughput density functional theory: the open qua ntum materials database (OQMD), Jom, 65 
(2013) 1501 -1509.  
[46] S. Kirklin, J.E. Saal, B. Meredig, A. Thompson, J.W. Doak, M. Aykol, S. Rühl, C. Wolverton, The 
Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD): assessing the accuracy of DFT formation energies, npj 
Com putational Materials, 1 (2015) 1 -15. 
[47] A. Belsky, M. Hellenbrandt, V.L. Karen, P. Luksch, New developments in the Inorganic Crystal 
Structure Database (ICSD): accessibility in support of materials research and design, Acta 
Crystallographica Section B: S tructural Science, 58 (2002) 364 -369. 
[48] M. Gajdoš, K. Hummer, G. Kresse, J. Furthmüller, F. Bechstedt, Linear optical properties in the 
projector -augmented wave methodology, Physical Review B, 73 (2006) 045112.   
 [49] P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, P. Sorantin, S.  Trickey, Full -potential, linearized augmented plane wave 
programs for crystalline systems, Computer physics communications, 59 (1990) 399 -415. 
[50] P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, F. Tran, R. Laskowski, G.K. Madsen, L.D. Marks, WIEN2k: An APW+ lo 
program for calcul ating the properties of solids, The Journal of chemical physics, 152 (2020) 074101.  
[51] P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, G.K. Madsen, D. Kvasnicka, J. Luitz, WIEN2K, An Augmented Plane 
Wave+Local Orbitals Program for Calculating Crystal Properties, edited by K, Schw arz, Vienna 
University of Technology, Austria, (2001).  
[52] G.V. Naik, J. Kim, A. Boltasseva, Oxides and nitrides as alternative plasmonic materials in the 
optical range, Optical materials express, 1 (2011) 1090 -1099.  
[53] X. Zhang, L. Zhang, J.D. Perkins,  A. Zunger, Intrinsic transparent conductors without doping, 
Physical review letters, 115 (2015) 176602.  
 