1
Improved Inner Approximation for Aggregating
Power Flexibility in Active Distribution Networks
and its Applications
Yilin Wen, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Zechun Hu, Senior Member, IEEE, Jinhua He, and
Yi Guo, Member, IEEE
Abstract —Concise and reliable modeling for aggregating power
flexibility of distributed energy resources in active distribu-
tion networks (ADNs) is a crucial technique for coordinating
transmission and distribution networks. Our recent research
has successfully derived an explicit expression for the exact
aggregation model (EAM) of power flexibility at the substation
level under linearized distribution network constraints. The
EAM, however, is impractical for decision-making purposes due
to its exponential complexity. In this paper, we propose an inner
approximation method for aggregating flexibility in ADNs that
utilizes the properties of the EAM to improve performance.
Specifically, the geometric prototype of the inner approximation
model is defined according to a subset of the coefficient vector set
of the EAM, which enhances the accuracy. On the other hand,
the computation efficiency of the inner approximation is also
significantly improved by exploiting the regularity of coefficient
vectors in the EAM in the parameter calculation process. The
inner approximated flexibility model of ADNs is further incor-
porated into the security-constrained unit commitment problem
as an application. Numerical simulations verify the effectiveness
of the proposed method.
Index Terms —Distributed energy resource, active distribution
network, flexibility aggregation, inner approximation, security-
constrained unit commitment.
I. I NTRODUCTION
VARIOUS distributed energy resources (DERs) are in-
creasingly connected to distribution networks, bringing
about a non-negligible impact on the power system’s opera-
tion. Typical DERs, such as electric vehicles (EVs), distributed
energy storage systems (DESSs), and rooftop photovoltaics
(PVs), offer flexibility in their power schedules [1]. Their
integration enables distribution networks to adjust their power
actively. Active distribution networks (ADNs) are forming,
which will become a critical dispatchable resource in future
power systems where more and more traditional generators
will be replaced by renewable energy. Since distribution and
transmission networks are interconnected and adjustments in
one can affect the other, it is imperative for power system
operators to implement coordinated dispatch of transmission
and distribution networks to ensure the safety and economics
of the entire system [2], [3].
Exploiting the power flexibility of ADNs for power system
operation scheduling poses significant technical challenges.
The primary issue is how to effectively model ADNs in the
decision-making at the transmission level. Centralized comput-
ing that considers all flexible ranges of DERs and distribution
network constraints by the dispatch center is impractical dueto the curse of dimensionality. To this end, many researchers
are exploring practical and viable methods to address DERs
and ADNs at the transmission level [4]–[25].
Decomposition techniques have been proposed to handle
the massive DERs and ADNs in the coordinated dispatch of
transmission and distribution networks [4]–[7]. These meth-
ods involve iterative computation and multiple information
exchanges, which require high computation and communi-
cation capabilities. Alternatively, a more promising approach
is to concisely model the aggregated power flexibility at the
transmission-distribution interface (physically, the substation).
Through this method, the decision-making at the transmission
level does not need to take care of details in the ADN
but only needs to consider the aggregated flexibility model
at the substation level. The scheduled power profile of the
substation is then disaggregated to each DER in the ADN. This
framework does not require iterations, thus reducing the need
for computation and communication resources and lowering
the implementation threshold.
The modeling of aggregated power flexibility has been
the subject of much recent research. The Fourier-Motzkin
Elimination method has been used in [8]–[10] to generate the
constraints on the power at the transmission-distribution in-
terface, accounting for linear distribution network constraints.
A linear scenario-based robust optimization approach is also
applied in [11] to form the adjustable range of the ADN’s
active and reactive power range. Reference [12] calculates
the approximated adjustable power range of the ADN con-
sidering nonlinear power flow constraints via interior point
method. However, all these methods mentioned above face the
challenge of high computational complexity when taking into
account the coupling among the power across multiple time
slots. The temporal coupling of power flexibility is common,
such as the energy constraints of EV and DESS. Failing to
address this coupling can lead to major discrepancies between
the calculated flexible power range and the realizable range.
Several studies have proposed aggregation methods that
can handle the temporal coupling of power flexibility. In our
prior work [13], we derived the explicit expression for the
exact aggregation model (EAM) of multiple DERs. And in
[14], we demonstrated that the EAM retains its form when
considering linearized distribution network constraints. It has
been observed that the number of constraints in the EAM
increases exponentially with the number of time slots, making
it challenging to implement in practical applications. A seriesarXiv:2303.01691v2  [eess.SY]  24 Jun 20232
of approximation models are thus proposed to reduce the
complexity at the expense of accuracy. The approximation
models in [13] and [14] are all outer approximations, which
means that there may exist some power profiles in these
models that cannot be disaggregated to each DER.
Many researchers are exploring inner approximations to
increase the reliability of the aggregate flexibility model.
Most of the existing inner approximation methods can be
summarized into two steps: first, defining the geometric proto-
type of the approximation model, and second, calculating the
parameters in the prototype. Previous literature studied many
prototypes such as box [15]–[17], ellipse [17], [18], zonotope
[19], [20], virtual battery model [21], [22], power-energy
boundary model [23], and homothetic polytope [24]. Various
parameter calculation methods have been designed based on
the characteristics of each prototype. Reference [25] does not
pre-set any prototype but forms the inner approximation model
by continuously adding feasible cuts. In the current inner
approximation methods, the prototype formulation (or initial
parameters in the case of [25]) is often based on empirical
criteria. As a result, there is a risk of over-conservatism in the
resulting models. Meanwhile, the computational complexity
of some previous parameter calculation methods limits their
practicality. For instance, reference [18] only tested up to 4
time slots in the simulation, [23] tested up to 8, and [17] tested
up to 15 for the box prototype and 6 for the ellipse prototype.
However, in practical applications such as unit commitment
(UC), at least 24 slots need to be considered. Hence, if ADNs
are to be incorporated into UC [4], these inner approximation
models may be inapplicable.
To summarize, the high complexity of exact flexibility
aggregation necessitates approximation methods, especially
inner approximation methods with higher reliability, for the
coordination of transmission and distribution networks. How-
ever, all inner approximation methods the authors have seen so
far were proposed without knowing the explicit expression of
the EAM. The accuracy and computational efficiency should
be improved to make it applicable in practice. Therefore,
this paper proposes a novel inner approximation method
that leverages properties of the EAM in both the prototype
selection and the parameter calculation processes, improving
the accuracy and reducing the complexity. Furthermore, the
proposed inner approximation method for aggregating power
flexibility of ADNs is applied to the security-constrained unit
commitment (SCUC) in the numerical tests, demonstrating the
practicality.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the proposed inner approximation method without
considering distribution network constraints. In Section III,
we introduce a double inner approximation framework to deal
with a large number of DERs and network constraints in the
ADN. Numerical simulations are carried out in Section IV .
Finally, Section V concludes this paper.
II. I NNER APPROXIMATION METHOD BASED ON THE
EXACT AGGREGATION MODEL
This section introduces the inner approximation method for
aggregating the DER flexibility without distribution networkconstraints, especially how the properties of the EAM are
utilized in the approximation process. Incorporating network
constraints will be discussed in the next section. We start the
discussion with a generalized individual flexibility model of
DERs and its exact aggregation.
A. Generalized Individual Flexibility Model of DERs and the
Exact Aggregation Model
Let us discretize the time horizon into Tslots with the
length of ∆T. Denote by tthe indices of time slots and define
[T]≜{1,2,···, T}. Then, the individual flexibility of typical
types of DERs such as EVs, DESSs, and PVs can be uniformly
described as the following power-energy boundary model:
pn,t≤pn,t≤pn,t,∀t∈[T],∀n∈ N, (1a)
en,t≤∆TXt
τ=1pn,τ≤en,t,∀t∈[T],∀n∈ N, (1b)
where, n/Ndenotes the indices/set of DERs, |N|=N;pn,t
denotes the power of DER nat time t;pn,t,pn,t,en,t, and
en,tare the power and energy boundary parameters. Equations
(1a) and (1b) constrain the power and accumulated energy
consumption of each DER, respectively. These boundary pa-
rameters are influenced by the properties of different DERs.
For example, the power of an EV is adjustable during its
connecting period, but it should be charged to an expected
level before departure. Similiarly, DESS should restore its
energy to the initial value at the end of the time horizon. The
calculation details of these parameters for each specific DER
can be found in [26].
The EAM refers to a set of constraints ensuring that
the aggregated power Pt≜P
n∈Npn,t,∀t∈[T]can be
disaggregated to each DER if and only if Pt(∀t∈[T])satisfies
these constraints. According to our previous derivations in
[13], these constraints are
ϕu≤u⊤P≤ϕu,∀u∈BT,u̸=0, (2)
where, Pdenotes the T×1vector composed of Pt(∀t∈[T]),
(·)⊤denotes the vector transposition, B≜{0,1}so that BT
is the set of all T×1vectors whose components must be 1or
0,udenotes the coefficient vector, ϕuandϕuare parameters
generated from ∆T,pn,t,pn,t,en,t, and en,t(see [13] for
details). It is observed from (2) that power variables Ptof
any non-empty subset in the time horizon are coupled. This
coupling leads to the exponential number of constraints in
the EAM with respect to the number of time slots T. Hence,
approximation models are necessary to make the aggregated
flexibility model practical.
B. Inner Approximation Method
An inner approximation is a feasible region that is fully
contained within the EAM and can be described with lower
complexity than the EAM. It guarantees that all the inside
power profiles can be disaggregated into each DER. The
fundamental idea of many existing inner approximation meth-
ods can be summarized as follows: First, define a geometric
prototype of the approximate region with some undetermined
parameters. Then, calculate these parameters to make the3
approximate region as large as possible while ensuring that
it remains fully contained within the EAM. The proposed
method is also born on this basic framework.
1) Define the Geometric Prototype for the Approxmation:
Some prototypes based on experience and intuition have
been studied in the literature. For example, references [15]
and [17] use the power boundary prototype
Pt≤Pt≤Pt,∀t∈[T] (3)
with 2Tconstraints, where parameters PtandPtare to be
determined. In [23], the power-energy boundary prototype
Pt≤Pt≤Pt,∀1≤t≤T, (4a)
Et/∆T≤Xt
τ=1Pτ≤Et/∆T,∀2≤t≤T (4b)
with4T−2constraints is studied, where parameters Pt,Pt,
EtandEtare to be determined.
A closer look reveals that the sets of coefficient vectors
in the above two prototypes are actually subsets of BT. In
principle, any shape can be used as the prototype, but selecting
the prototype with a subset of BToffers two advantages: i) it
makes the approximate model similar in shape to the EAM,
thereby improving accuacy; ii) the initial parameter values
are easy to define, which enhances computation efficiency.
However, the power boundary and power-energy boundary
prototypes correspond to very small subsets of BT. Higher
accuracy may be reached by defining the prototype with a
larger subset of BT, such as the energy-change boundary
prototype1:
ϕt1,t2≤Xt2
t=t1Pt≤ϕt1,t2,∀1≤t1≤t2≤T, (5)
withT(T+ 1) constraints, where parameters ϕt1,t2andϕt1,t2
are to be determined. This prototype constrains the energy
change between every two slots, which has been studied as an
outer approximation in [13] and achieves good accuracy.
In the following text, for convenience, the EAM (2) is
compactly represented as
Ψext≜{P|AextP≤bext}, (6)
where, Aextandbextare formed based on (2). Approximate
models are uniformly represented as
Ψapx≜{P|AapxP≤bapx}, (7)
where, Aapxis a fixed matrix of coefficient vectors and bapxis
the parameter vector to be determined. The number of rows of
Aapxis denoted by Nc, so the power boundary, power-energy
boundary, and energy-change boundary prototypes correspond
toNc= 2T,Nc= 4T−2, and Nc=T(T+ 1), respectively.
1It seems that the summation term in (5) needs to be multiplied by ∆Tto
represent the energy change, but here ∆Tis equivalently incorporated into
parameters ϕt1,t2andϕt1,t2for simplicity.2) Calculate Parameters in the Prototype:
This paper proposes an iterative method to determine the
parameter bapx. First, initialize bapx, namely b(0)
apx. Since the
coefficient vector set in Ψ(0)
apxis a subset of BT,b(0)
apxcan
be directly extracted from its corresponding part in bextof
Ψextusing the parameter calculation formula2in [13]. The
initial approximation model Ψ(0)
apxthus obtained is an outer
approximation of Ψext, and then bapxis modified iteratively
to shrink Ψapxto the interior of Ψext. The specific process for
modifying bapxis introduced as follows.
Let the superscript (k)denote the k-th iteration. Before the
iteration converges, Ψ(k−1)
apx⊈Ψext. Notice that
Ψ(k−1)
apx⊈Ψext⇔∃ a point P1∈Ψ(k−1)
apx,P1/∈Ψext,
⇔∃P1∈Ψ(k−1)
apx and a row jofAext,such
thataext,jP1> b ext,j(Prop.1 ),
where, aext,jis the j-th row of Aextandbext,jis the j-
th component of bext. According to Equation (2), the row
vector aext,jcan only be u⊤or−u⊤(∀u∈BT)and
bext,j= max P0∈Ψextaext,jP0. Therefore, Prop.1 is equivalent
to:∃u∈BTsuch that inequality (8a) or (8b) holds.
max
P1∈Ψ(k−1)
apxu⊤P1−max
P0∈Ψextu⊤P0>0 (8a)
min
P0∈Ψextu⊤P0− min
P1∈Ψ(k−1)
apxu⊤P1>0 (8b)
The left sides of Equations (8a) and (8b) reflect the gaps be-
tween Ψ(k−1)
apx andΨextin the positive and negative directions
ofu, respectively. If we can find the uthat maximizes this
gap, the corresponding P1andP0can be used to update bapx
so that shrinking Ψ(k−1)
apx to the inside of Ψextin the positive
and negative direction of u. To this end, solve problem (9) for
the positive direction and (10) for the negative direction.
d(k)
pos≜max
u
max
P1u⊤P1−max
P0u⊤P0
(9a)
s.t.u∈BT,P1∈Ψ(k−1)
apx,P0∈Ψext, (9b)
d(k)
neg≜max
u
min
P0u⊤P0−min
P1u⊤P1
s.t. (9b) ,(10)
where, d(k)
pos/d(k)
negdenotes the maximum gap in all the posi-
tive/negative directions.
The above two problems are bi-level optimization problems
and the objective functions contain bilinear terms, so they
cannot be solved directly. We transform problems (9) and (10)
into equivalent Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP)
problems which can be efficiently solved. Take problem (9) as
an example to introduce the transformation process in detail.
First, rewrite (9) as an equivalent minimization problem:
min
u,P1
−u⊤P1+ max
P0u⊤P0
s.t. (9b) . (11)
2This formula calculates the components of bextone by one through simple
comparison and summation operations. Here, we only need to calculate the
Nccomponents of bextasb(0)
apx, rather than calculating all components, so
there is no need to worry about the high complexity of Ψext.4
The inner maximum problem can be further transformed into
a minimum problem using the duality theorem. However,
direct transformation leads to unacceptable complexity since
the explicit expression of Ψextincludes 2(2T−1)constraints.
Hence, we use the equivalent form:
Ψext⇔n
P0|P0=X
n∈Npn,(1)o
, (12)
where, pnis the T×1vector composed by pn,t,∀t∈[T].
Arrange pn,∀n∈ N into an NT×1vector x, i.e. x=
[p⊤
1,p⊤
2,···,p⊤
N]⊤, then rewrite (12) as the matrix form:
Ψext⇔ {P0|Cx−P0=0,Dx≤f}, (13)
where, Cis aT×NT coefficient matrix generated by P0=P
i∈Npi,Dis a4NT×NT sparse matrix and fis a4NT×1
vector generated from (1). According to the duality theorem,
problem (11) can be equivalently transformed into
min−u⊤P1+λ⊤f (14a)
s.t.u∈BT,P1,ω∈RT,λ∈R4NT,
AapxP1≤b(k−1)
apx, (14b)
u+ω=0, (14c)
C⊤ω+D⊤λ=0, (14d)
λ≥0, (14e)
where, ωandλare dual variables, Rmdenotes the m-
dimensional Euclidean space.
There is still a bilinear term in the objective. Fortunately,
since uis a binary vector, problem (14) can be equivalently
transformed into (15) by introducing an auxiliary variable.
min1⊤y+λ⊤f (15a)
s.t.u∈BT,P1,ω,y∈RT,λ∈R4NT,
(14b)−(14e),
−Mu≤y≤Mu, (15b)
−M(1−u)≤y+P1≤M(1−u), (15c)
where, yis the introduced auxiliary variable, Mis a large-
enough constant. The above problem is an MILP with only T
binary variables. The number of binary variables does not
change with the prototype selection of Ψapx. The negative
direction problem (10) can be similarly transformed into:
min1⊤y+λ⊤f (16a)
s.t.u∈BT,P1,ω,y∈RT,λ∈R4NT,
(14b),(14d),(14e),(15b),
−u+ω=0, (16b)
−M(1−u)≤y−P1≤M(1−u). (16c)
Solving problems (15) and (16) yields the optimal P1,
denoted by P(k)
1, in the positive and negative directions,
respectively. However, the primal variable P0is lost during
the transformation. Hence, solve the following problem to find
P(k)
0—the closest point to P(k)
1inΨext:
P(k)
0= arg min
P0P0−P(k)
1,s.t.Cx−P0=0,Dx≤f,
(17)
u
()
1kP
()
0kP( 1)
apxk−Ψ
extΨ()
0kP
()
apxkΨextΨ
ModifyapxbFig. 1: The calculation process for one modification on bapx.
where, ∥ · ∥ calculates the ℓ2-norm in the T-dimensional
Euclidean space.
Next, update bapxaccording to P(k)
0andP(k)
1. We start by
defining the set of active constraints for P(k)
1inΨ(k−1)
apx , i.e.,
J(k)≜n
jaapx,jP(k)
1=b(k−1)
apx,j,1≤j≤Nco
, (18)
where, aapx,jis the j-th row of Aapxandb(k−1)
apx,jis the j-th
component of b(k−1)
apx . Then, according to [23], the boundary
parameter bapxis modified to make P(k)
0lie on the boundary
ofΨ(k)
apxby solving
{b(k)
apx,j}j∈J(k)= arg maxX
j∈J(k)bapx,j (19a)
s.t.bapx,j≤b(k−1)
apx,j,∀j∈ J(k), (19b)
aapx,jP1≤bapx,j,∀j∈ J(k), (19c)
aapx,jP(k)
0≥bapx,j−M(1−zj),∀j∈ J(k), (19d)
zj∈B,∀j∈ J(k), (19e)X
j∈J(k)zj≥T. (19f)
The objective (19a) is to maximize the size of Ψ(k)
apx. Con-
straints (19b) and (19c) guarantee Ψ(k)
apx⊆Ψ(k−1)
apx andΨ(k)
apx̸=
∅, respectively. Constraints (19d)-(19f) together ensure that at
least Tconstraints in Ψ(k)
apxare active at point P(k)
0.
Fig. 1 illustrates the calculation process for one modification
onbapx: 1) find direction uwith the largest gap between
Ψ(k−1)
apx andΨextand get P(k)
1correspondingly; 2) find P(k)
0
inΨextthat minimizes the distance between P(k)
0andP(k)
1;
3) modify bapx(k−1)tobapx(k)to put P(k)
0onto the boundary
ofΨ(k)
apx.
The above discussions on the parameter calculation are
summarized into the following algorithm:
Step 1: Initialize the Nccomponents of bapxone by one
via the parameter calculation formula in [13], set a
convergence tolerance ϵ >0,k= 1;
Step 2: Solve the positive-direction problem (15) to get
P(k)
1andd(k)
pos. Ifd(k)
pos>0, go to Step 3, otherwise
go to Step 4;
Step 3: Solve problem (17) to get P(k)
1and update b(k)
apx
according to (19), k←k+ 1;
Step 4: Solve the negative-direction problem (16) to get
P(k)
1andd(k)
neg. Ifd(k)
neg>0, go to Step 5, otherwise
go to Step 6;
Step 5: Do the same as Step 3;5
Step 6: If condition (20) holds, finish iteration and output
b(k)
apx, otherwise go to Step 2.
max{d(k)
pos, d(k)
neg}< ϵ (20)
A noteworthy detail is that the iteration alternates between
the positive and negative directions, rather than solely taking
the direction with a larger gap, which reduces the number of
optimization problems that need to be solved.
3) Convergence Discussion:
In Step 6 of the above algorithm, the convergence condition
(20) indicates that the gap between Ψ(k)
apxandΨextis sufficiently
small in both positive and negative directions. This implies that
Ψ(k)
apx⊆Ψext, which is precisely the desired outcome.
We have the following Proposition on the convergence:
Proposition 1: After a finite number of iterations, condition
(20) can always be reached.
Proof: The optimization problem (19) guarantees that
Ψ(k)
apx⊆Ψ(k−1)
apx , which directly gives d(k)
pos≤d(k−1)
pos and
d(k)
neg≤d(k−1)
neg by definition. Therefore, each modification on
bapxreduces the gap between Ψ(k)
apxandΨextto zero in the
corresponding direction uwithout increasing the gap of other
directions. In the extreme case, all u∈BTare traversed, then
d(k)
pos≤0andd(k)
neg≤0hold. So condition (20) must be reached
in a finite number of iterations. ■
III. I NCORPORATING DISTRIBUTION NETWORK
CONSTRAINTS INTO INNER APPROXIMATION
As adjustments of DERs can impact the distribution net-
work, it is necessary to consider the distribution network con-
straints when aggregating power flexibility to the transmission-
distribution interface. We employ the well-known LinDistFlow
model to describe the distribution network constraints since it
is computationally tractable and relatively accurate [27], [28].
See Appendix A for details.
Based on our findings in [14], the expression for the
aggregated power flexibility at the substation level, considering
linear distribution network constraints, can still be accurately
formulated as Equation (2) (with different ϕu-s and ϕu-s).
Therefore, in theory, one can also construct matrices C,D,
and vector faccording to the flexible ranges of all DERs in
the distribution network and network constraints, and apply the
aforementioned algorithm to compute the inner approximated
flexibility at the substation level. However, this approach may
face scalability barriers when dealing with a large amount
of DERs and a large-scale distribution network. In practice,
on the other hand, the ADN operator may not have access
to information at the device level since DERs are typically
managed by a third-party aggregator.
To address these computational complexity and data pri-
vacy concerns, we propose a double inner approximation
framework to model the power flexibility of the substation.
At the first level, the DER aggregator builds the inner ap-
proximated flexibility model of its node in the distribution
network using the algorithm described in Section II. At the
second level, the distribution network operator builds an inner
approximated flexibility model for the substation, considering
all the aggregators’ power flexibility and network constraints.The algorithm for the second level is similar to that for the
first level, with some differences in the details.
Specifically, for the calculation at the substation level, Ψext
is represented as {P0|C′x′−P0=0,E′x′=g′,D′x′≤f′},
where x′contains all variables in the distribution network;
C′x′−P0=0corresponds to the active power balance
equation (A.1) at the substation; E′x′=g′corresponds to
all the other equality constraints at the distribution level, i.e.,
(A.2)-(A.6); and D′x′≤f′corresponds to voltagle limits
(A.7) and the inner approximated power flexibility ranges
of DER aggregators. Correspondingly, the initialization of
bapxshould be changed: each component of vector b(0)
apxis
calculated by
b(0)
apx,j= max aapx,jP0
s.t.C′x′−P0=0,E′x′=g′,D′x′≤f′,
where, aapx,jrepresents the j-th row in the coefficient matrix
Aapx. Besides, the original optimization problem (15) that
calculates the maximum gap between the approximation model
and the EAM in the positive directions should be changed to
min1⊤y+λ′⊤f′+µ′⊤g′(21a)
s.t.u∈BT,P1,ω′,y∈RT,λ′∈Rm1,µ′∈Rm2,
AapxP1≤b(k−1)
apx, (21b)
u+ω′=0, (21c)
C′⊤ω′+D′⊤λ′+E′⊤µ′=0, (21d)
λ′≥0,µ′≥0, (21e)
−Mu≤y≤Mu, (21f)
−M(1−u)≤y+P1≤M(1−u), (21g)
where ω′,λ′, and µ′are dual variables of C′x′−P0=0,
D′x′≤f′, andE′x′=g′, respectively; m1andm2represent
the numbers of lines in D′x′≤f′andE′x′=g′, respectively.
Similar modifications should also be made to the optimization
problems (16) and (17) due to the change in Ψext, which are
not included here for the sake of simplicity.
By implementing the proposed double inner approximation
framework, it is ensured that the power profile of the substation
can be disaggregated into each aggregator, and that the total
power profile of each aggregator can be disaggregated into
each DER. However, a natural concern is that this framework
may sacrifice accuracy and result in excessive conservatism.
We note that this is a necessary trade-off for guaranteeing
computational tractability and data privacy. On the other hand,
this shortcoming can be mitigated by using higher precision
prototypes at both levels, such as the energy-change boundary
prototype. The efficiency of the proposed framework will be
verified in the case studies.
IV. C ASE STUDIES
We first test the inner approximated aggregation at the
aggregator level in Subsection IV-A. Next, the flexibility ag-
gregation in an ADN interconnected with multiple aggregators
is tested in Subsection IV-B. Finally, we solve an SCUC
problem that considers the inner approximated flexibility of6
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10020406080100
Power-energy boundary prototype
Energy-change boundary prototype
Fig. 2: Changes in max{d(k)
pos, d(k)
neg}during the iteration of the
proposed methods with two prototypes.
ADNs in Subsection IV-C to verify the applicability of the
proposed method.
In the simulations, the convergence tolerance ϵis set to
10−4. All simulations were performed on a desktop with a 16-
core Intel i7-10700 processor and 32 GB RAM, programmed
in MATLAB and solved by Cplex.
A. Test the Inner Approximation for Aggregating Flexibility at
the Aggregator Level
Consider the aggregation of the power flexibility from 50
EVs. Each EV has a rated charging power of 7 kW, a battery
capacity of 50 kWh, and a charging efficiency of 0.95. The
arrival and departure times and states-of-charge are generated
using Monte Carlo simulation. The proposed inner approxima-
tion method with two different prototypes: the power-energy
boundary and energy-change boundary prototypes, is tested.
We first set T= 12 and run the inner approximation
algorithm. The iteration process under two prototypes are
illustrated in Fig. 2. The maximum gap max{d(k)
pos, d(k)
neg}
reduces gradually as expected. Convergence is attained within
7 iterations for the power-energy boundary prototype and
within 10 iterations for the energy-change boundary prototype.
Taking the power-energy boundary prototype as an example,
Fig. 3 illustrates the changes in these boundary parameters
caused by the inner approximation. Both the power and energy
boundaries shrink slightly inward from the initial values,
leading to a change in the feasible region determined by the
power-energy boundary model from containing EAM to being
contained by EAM.
The proposed method is further compared with the inner
approximation methods in [15] and [23] in terms of both accu-
racy and computational efficiency. We measure the accuracy of
the inner approximation model via the following steps. First,
generate Nˆudifferent directions ˆurandomly from BT. For
each ˆu, calculate the maximum length, denoted by Lapx,ˆu, that
the approximation model can extend in direction ˆuby solving
linear program (22). The length Lapx,ˆumust not exceed the
maximum length Lext,ˆu(calculated by (23)), that the EAM
can extend in direction ˆu, because inner approximation models
must be inside the EAM. Finally, we calculate the geometrical
average of the rate Lapx,ˆu/Lext,ˆuover all Nˆuˆu-s, namely
00:00 04:00 08:00 12:00 16:00 20:00
Time050100150200250Power (kW)(a) Power boundaries
00:00 04:00 08:00 12:00 16:00 20:00
Time050010001500Energy (kWh)
(b) Energy boundaries
Fig. 3: Change in power and energy boundaries made by the
proposed inner approximation method.
relative size . A larger relative size indicates a more accurate,
i.e. less conservative model.
Lapx,ˆu≜ max
P+,P−∈Ψapxˆu⊤
∥ˆu∥(P+−P−) (22)
Lext,ˆu≜ max
P+,P−∈Ψextˆu⊤
∥ˆu∥(P+−P−) (23)
Table I lists the relative sizes of different models with
Nˆu= 50 . It can be observed that the proposed method with
the energy-change boundary prototype has the largest relative
size among all the approximation methods, indicating its high
accuracy (low conservatism). Using the same power-energy
boundary prototype, the relative size of the proposed method
is similar to that of [23]. The conservatism of the method
in [15] is the highest because its prototype, i.e., the power
boundary prototype, is far from accurate.
TABLE I
RELATIVE SIZES RESULTING FROM DIFFERENT INNER
APPROXIMATION METHODS
Method Geometric prototype Relative size
[15] Power boundary 0.2291
[23] Power-energy boundary 0.7766
Proposed
methodPower-energy boundary 0.8239
Energy-change boundary 0.9302
At the end of this subsection, we present the result of a
scalability test. When T= 12 , the computation times of the
proposed method under the power-energy boundary prototype
and the energy-change boundary prototype are 1.910 s and
3.528 s, respectively. These times are significantly lower than7
the 35.36 s required by the method in [23]. When T= 24 ,
convergence is achieved within 46.41 s under the power-
energy boundary prototype and 138.9 s under the energy-
change boundary prototype. In contrast, the method in [23]
does not converge within 1000 s. Therefore, we can conclude
that the proposed method yields a substantial improvement in
computational efficiency.
B. Test the Inner Approximation for Aggregating Flexibility at
the Substation Level
In this subsection, we set T= 24 and implement the
inner approximated flexibility aggregation for the ADN based
on a modified IEEE-33 bus distribution network. The base
loads in the 33-bus network are multiplied by three to match
the load level of later SCUC. The branch impedances are
divided by three to maintain the nodal voltages similar to the
original network. The voltage limits are set to 1.10 p.u. and
0.90 p.u. Half of the nodes in the distribution network are
connected to a DER aggregator, which consists of 40 EVs, 1
PV of 20 kW installed capacity, and 1 DESS. The maximum
output profile data of the PVs are from a southern province
in China. The DESSs have a rated charging and discharging
power of 10 kW, a capacity of 80 kWh, and an efficiency
stochastically generated between 0.92 and 0.97. The DESSs’
energy is required to be restored to the initial value at the end
of the time horizon.
In the proposed double inner approximation framework,
the prototypes at the aggregator and substation levels can be
different. We run the proposed method based on four different
prototype combinations:
Model 1: Power-energy boundary at both levels;
Model 2: Power-energy boundary at the aggregator level and
energy-change boundary at the substation level;
Model 3: Energy-change boundary at the aggregator level
and power-energy boundary at the substation level;
Model 4: Energy-change boundary at both levels.
For comparison, we also implement the approximation
model in [15]. The model in [23] is not included this time
because it has already encountered complexity barriers at the
aggregator level. The accuracy of inner approximation models
is also measured by the relative size calculated by the same
method as in Subsection IV-A.
Table II lists each model’s relative size, computation time,
and number of constraints at the substation level. Although the
model in [15] has the lowest computation time, its accuracy is
much lower than the four models generated by the proposed
method. The accuracy of Models 3 and 4 is higher than that
of Models 1 and 2, and correspondingly, the computation
time is also higher. On the other hand, the difference in
accuracy between models 1 and 2, as well as that between
models 3 and 4, is not significant. This phenomenon suggests
that using a higher-accuracy energy-change boundary model
at the substation level has a less pronounced effect than at
the aggregator level. Considering that the flexibility model at
the substation level is to be used for subsequent transmission
network scheduling, its number of constraints should not be
too large. Therefore, the most recommended combination ismodel 3, i.e., energy-change boundary at the aggregator level
and power-energy boundary at the substation level.
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT FLEXIBILITY AGGREGATION
MODELS AT THE SUBSTATION LEVEL
ModelRelative size
(Accuracy)Computation
time (s)Number of
constraints
[15] 0.2158 3.324 48
Model 1 0.3995 50.43 94
Model 2 0.4060 66.48 600
Model 3 0.5464 657.8 94
Model 4 0.5641 925.1 600
C. Test SCUC with Aggregated Flexibility of ADNs
SCUC is a widely-used decision-making tool in power
systems that schedules generators to supply load demand while
minimizing the total cost and satisfying the system security
constraints at the transmission level. ADNs hold considerable
power flexibility when they aggregate a large number of DERs,
thereby can be utilized in SCUC to enhance the coordination
between transmission and distribution networks [4]. The pro-
posed inner approximation method outputs a realizable power
range of ADNs, which is very suitable for modeling ADNs
in the SCUC problem. This subsection tests the SCUC using
an IEEE 30-bus transmission network interconnected with
13 IEEE 33-bus ADNs. Overall, the SCUC in question is a
Mixed-Integer Quadratic Programming problem. It includes
DC power flow equations of the transmission system, mod-
eling of traditional generators with reserve for uncertainty,
scenario-based uncertainty modeling for wind generation, and
modeling for power flexibility of ADNs. Detailed formulations
can be found in Appendix B.
In the SCUC problem, Tis set to 24 [29], [30]. Model
3, as recommended in the previous subsection, is used to
model the power flexibility of ADNs. The generation cost
parameters of traditional generators are the same as in [14].
The cost for scheduling reserve is fixed at $1/MWh [31]. Five
wind farms are put in the transmission network, each with
an installed capacity of 10 MW. The number of scenarios for
wind generation is set to 10, and the data comes from [32].
We solve the SCUC problem with ADNs and compare the
results to the case where distribution networks operate at the
baseline3. The total cost of the former is $116,617, while the
latter is $118,506, resulting in a cost reduction of $1,889.
This cost reduction is relatively low due to the small ratio
of flexible resources to fixed load in the system, which can be
more significant with an increase in the number of DERs.
Finally, we run the SCUC program for the 30-bus trans-
mission network with 5 to 13 ADNs. The solution time is
shown in Fig. 4, from which we can see that the number of
ADNs will not significantly affect the computation time. This
is because the proposed flexibility aggregation model is very
concise: it includes only 4T−2constraints for each ADN
from the perspective of the transmission network operator.
3The baseline power is calculated by minimizing the total distance of the
power profile from each boundary in the flexibility model.8
Hence, the proposed flexibility modeling for ADNs exhibits
high scalability in the SCUC problem, making it a desirable
choice for practical implementation.
Fig. 4: Solution time of the SCUC problem with different
numbers of ADNs.
V. C ONCLUSIONS
This paper proposes an improved inner approximation
method for the power flexibility of ADNs, which enables con-
cise and reliable modeling of ADNs in upper-level decision-
making. The main idea of the proposed method is to lever-
age the property of the EAM in the inner approximation
process. Specifically, we use the energy-change boundary
model derived from a subset of constraints in the EAM
to define the prototype of the approximation model, which
substantially enhances accuracy (or, in other words, reduces
conservatism). Also, we take advantage of the fact that the
coefficient vectors in EAM are binary vectors in designing a
parameter calculation algorithm, significantly improving the
computational efficiency.
Furthermore, we propose a double inner approximation
framework for aggregating the flexibility to the substation level
while considering network constraints in the ADN. Although
this framework sacrifices accuracy relative to the single-level
inner approximation, it is more practical because it ensures
computational tractability for a large scale of DERs and data
privacy for end-users. Case studies also show that the double
inner approximation does not lead to too much accuracy loss.
Finally, the proposed inner approximated flexibility model
of ADNs is applied to the SCUC problem in numerical
simulation, revealing the practicality of the proposed method.
APPENDIX A
THELINDISTFLOW FORMULATION
The LinDistFlow model of the distribution network is
formulated as:
P0,t=X
j∈0P0j,t+Pfix
0,t+Pflex
0,t,∀t∈[T], (A.1)
X
j∈iPij,t+Pfix
i,t+Pflex
i,t= 0,∀i∈ I+, t∈[T], (A.2)
X
j∈iQij,t+Qfix
i,t+Qflex
i,t= 0,∀i∈ I, t∈[T], (A.3)
Vi,t−Vj,t= 2(rijPij,t+xijQij,t),∀ij∈ L, t∈[T],(A.4)
Qflex
i,t=Pflex
i,ttanγi,∀i∈ I, t∈[T], (A.5)
V0,t= 1,∀t∈[T], (A.6)Vi≤Vi,t≤Vi,∀i∈ I+, t∈[T], (A.7)
Pflex
i,t=X
n∈Nipn,t,∀i∈ I, t∈[T], (A.8)
pn,t≤pn,t≤pn,t,∀n∈ N, t∈[T], (A.9)
en,t≤Xt
τ=1pn,τ∆T≤en,t,∀n∈ N, t∈[T],(A.10)
where, i/Idenotes the indices/set of nodes in the distribu-
tion network, 0represents the substation (root node), and
I+≜I\{0};Nidenotes the set of DERs located at node
i,S
i∈INi=N;Ldenotes the set of lines where ijrefers to
the line between node iand node j;j∈iindicates that node j
is connected to node i;P0,tdenotes the active power injection
of the root node at time t;Pij,t/Qij,t,Pfix
i,t/Qfix
i,tandPflex
i,t/Qflex
i,t
denote the active/reactive power flow in line ij, fixed load at
node i, and flexible power at node i, respectively; Vi,tis the
square of voltage at node i;rijandxijdenote the resistance
and reactance of branch ij, respectively; γidenotes the power
factor angle of the DER aggregator at node i;Vi,tandVi,t
denote the square of upper and lower voltage limit of node
i, respectively; pn,tis the power of DER n; and pn,t,pn,t,
en,t, and en,tare the power and energy boundaries of DER
n, respectively.
Equation (A.1) defines the power at the substation. Con-
straints (A.2)-(A.4) are the LinDistFlow equations. Constraint
(A.5) represents the relationship between the active and re-
active power of DER aggregators while assuming a constant
power factor angle. Equation (A.6) sets the voltage of the root
node to 1 p.u. and (A.7) restricts the voltage of other nodes
in the distribution network. Equation (A.8) defines the active
power of the aggregator as the sum of the active power of
each DER under its control. And constraints (A.9) and (A.10)
represent the same power and energy boundaries of each DER
as described in (1).
APPENDIX B
THESCUC F ORMULATION
The SCUC problem solved in the case studies is formulated
mainly based on reference [29]. Uncertainty of wind power is
considered using the scenario-based stochastic programming.
We do not create any specific marker to distinguish the
variables and parameters in the SCUC from those in the
LinDistFlow model in Appendix A, which will not lead to
confusion since the computation of SCUC and LinDistFlow
are separated. The SCUC problem is formulated as follows:
minX
t∈[T]
P
s∈Sprob s·P
g∈G 
agP2
g,s,t+bgPg,s,t+cg
+P
g∈GCSU
gyg,t+CSD
gzg,t
+CU
gRU
g,t+CD
gRD
g,t

(B.1)
s.t.
Pij,s,t=θi,s,t−θj,s,t
Xij,∀ij∈ L, s∈ S, t∈[T], (B.2)
θ0,s,t= 0,∀s∈ S, t∈[T], (B.3)
P
j∈iPij,s,t+P
d∈DiPd,s,t+PF
i,t−P
g∈GiPg,s,t
−P
w∈W iPw,s,t= 0,∀i∈ I, s∈ S, t∈[T],(B.4)9
−PU
ij≤Pij,s,t≤PU
ij,∀ij∈ L, s∈ S, t∈[T], (B.5)
0≤Pw,s,t≤PU
w,s,t,∀w∈ W, s∈ S, t∈[T], (B.6)
ug,t, yg,t, zg,t∈B,∀g∈ G,∀t∈[T], (B.7)
t+Ton
g−1X
τ=tug,τ≥Ton
gyg,t,∀g∈ G,∀t∈[T−Ton
g+ 1],(B.8)
t+Toff
g−1X
τ=t(1−ug,τ)≥Toff
gzg,t,∀g∈ G,∀t∈[T−Toff
g+ 1],
(B.9)
ug,t+1−ug,t=yg,t+1−zg,t+1,∀g∈ G,∀t∈[T−1],(B.10)
yg,t+zg,t≤1,∀g∈ G,∀t∈[T], (B.11)
PL
gug,t≤Pg,s,t≤PU
gug,t,∀g∈ G, s∈ S, t∈[T],(B.12)
−rD
gug,t−rSD
gzg,t+1≤Pg,s,t+1−Pg,s,t
≤rU
gug,t+rSU
gyg,t+1,∀g∈ G, s∈ S, t∈[T−1],(B.13)
−RD
g,t≤Pg,s,t−Pg,0,t≤RU
g,t,∀g∈ G, s∈ S+, t∈[T],
(B.14)
RU
g,t≥0, RD
g,t≥0,∀g∈ G, t∈[T], (B.15)
AdPd,s≤bd,∀d∈ D, s∈ S, (B.16)
where, s/Sdenotes the indices/set of scenarios of wind gen-
eration, 0represents the base scenario and S+=S\{0};i/I
denotes the indices/set of nodes in the transmission network,
node 0represents the slack node; Ldenotes the set of lines
andijrefers to the line between node iand node j;g/G,
d/D, and w/Wdenote the indices/set of generators, ADNs,
and wind farms in the transmission network, respectively, and
Gi,Di, andWidenotes the set of those located at node i,
respectively; Pij,s,t,Pg,s,t,Pd,s,t,Pw,s,t,θi,s,t denote the
active power flow in line ij, the active output power of
generator g, the active load of ADN d, the active generation
of wind farm w, and the phase angle at node iin scenario
sand time t, respectively; PF
i,tdenotes the fixed load at
node i;ug,tdenotes the ON/OFF status of generator g, while
yg,t/zg,tis the startup/shutdown indicator; RD
g,t.RU
g,tdenotes
the up/down reserves of generator g;Pd,sis the T×1vector
composed by Pd,s,t,∀t∈[T];prob sdenote the probability of
scenario s;ag,bg, and cgare the generation cost parameters
of generator g, respectively; CSU
g,CSD
g,CU
g, and CD
gdenote
the costs for startup, shutdown, up reserve, and down reserve
of generator g, respectively; Xijis the impedance of line ij,
andPU
ijis the transmission capacity of line ij;PU
w,s,t is the
maximum generation profile of wind farm win scenario s;
Ton
g/Toff
gdenotes the minimum ON/OFF time of generator g,
andPL
g/PU
gdenotes the minimum/maximum output limit of
generator g;rU
g/rD
gis the ramp up/down rate of generator g,
andrSU
g/rSD
gis the startup/shutdown ramp rate of generator
g;Adandbddenote the coefficient matrix and right-hand
vector of the inner approximated flexibility model of ADN d,
respectively.
The objective (B.1) consists of two part: the first part is the
expected generation cost over all scenarios, while the second
part contains the costs of startup, shutdown, up reserve, and
down reserve of generators. The penalty for wind curtailmentis not explicitly included, as maximizing the utilization of
wind power is already implicitly incorporated in the objective.
Besides, the cost of adjusting power within the feasible region
of ADNs is assumed to be negligible and hence not included
in the objective function. These factors can be easily added to
the objective when required.
Constraint (B.2) represents the DC power flow equation.
Equation (B.3) fixes the phase angle of the slack bus to 0,
thereby providing a reference for the other nodes. Constraint
(B.4) enforces nodal power balance. Constraints (B.5) and
(B.6) respectively limit the line power flow and wind gen-
eration. Constraints (B.8) and (B.9) impose minimum ON and
OFF time limits on generators, respectively. The startup and
shutdown logic of generators is captured via the classic ”3-bin”
form in constraints (B.10) and (B.11). Generators’ minimum
and maximum outputs are constrained by (B.12), while their
ramp up and down abilities are restricted by constraint (B.13).
Constraint (B.14) requires that the generators’ reserves cover
at least the maximum offset of their output power in each
scenario relative to the base scenario. Non-negativity restric-
tions on reserves are imposed via constraint (B.15). Finally,
the inner approximated feasible range for power adjustment of
ADNs is compactly expressed in (B.16).
REFERENCES
[1] O. Stanojev, Y . Guo, P. Aristidou, and G. Hug, “Multiple ancillary
services provision by distributed energy resources in active distribution
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09403 , 2022.
[2] L. Lind, R. Cossent, J. P. Chaves- ´Avila, and T. G ´omez San Rom ´an,
“Transmission and distribution coordination in power systems with high
shares of distributed energy resources providing balancing and conges-
tion management services,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and
Environment , vol. 8, no. 6, p. e357, 2019.
[3] A. G. Givisiez, K. Petrou, and L. F. Ochoa, “A review on TSO-DSO
coordination models and solution techniques,” Electric Power Systems
Research , vol. 189, p. 106659, 2020.
[4] A. Kargarian and Y . Fu, “System of Systems Based Security-Constrained
Unit Commitment Incorporating Active Distribution Grids,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Power Systems , vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 2489–2498, Sep. 2014.
[5] Z. Yuan and M. R. Hesamzadeh, “Hierarchical coordination of TSO-
DSO economic dispatch considering large-scale integration of dis-
tributed energy resources,” Applied Energy , vol. 195, pp. 600–615, Jun.
2017.
[6] S. Yin and J. Wang, “Distributionally Robust Decentralized Scheduling
Between the Transmission Market and Local Energy Hubs,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems , pp. 1–12, 2022.
[7] J. Zhai, Y . Jiang, Y . Shi, C. N. Jones, and X.-P. Zhang, “Distributionally
Robust Joint Chance-Constrained Dispatch for Integrated Transmission-
Distribution Systems via Distributed Optimization,” IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid , vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 2132–2147, May 2022.
[8] Y . Liu, L. Wu, Y . Chen, J. Li, and Y . Yang, “On Accurate and Compact
Model of High DER-Penetrated Sub-Transmission/Primary Distribution
Systems in ISO Energy Market,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable
Energy , vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 810–820, Apr. 2021.
[9] Y . Liu, L. Wu, Y . Chen, and J. Li, “Integrating High DER-Penetrated
Distribution Systems Into ISO Energy Market Clearing: A Feasible
Region Projection Approach,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems ,
vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 2262–2272, May 2021.
[10] A. Patig, O. Stanojev, P. Aristidou, A. Kiprakis, and G. Hug, “Fast Map-
ping of Flexibility Regions at TSO-DSO Interfaces under Uncertainty,”
in2022 IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference
Europe (ISGT-Europe) , Oct. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[11] M. Kalantar-Neyestanaki, F. Sossan, M. Bozorg, and R. Cherkaoui,
“Characterizing the Reserve Provision Capability Area of Active Dis-
tribution Networks: A Linear Robust Optimization Method,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2464–2475, May 2020.10
[12] J. Silva, J. Sumaili, R. J. Bessa, L. Seca, M. A. Matos, V . Miranda,
M. Caujolle, B. Goncer, and M. Sebastian-Viana, “Estimating the Active
and Reactive Power Flexibility Area at the TSO-DSO Interface,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 4741–4750, Sep.
2018.
[13] Y . Wen, Z. Hu, S. You, and X. Duan, “Aggregate Feasible Region of
DERs: Exact Formulation and Approximate Models,” IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid , vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 4405–4423, Nov. 2022.
[14] Y . Wen, Z. Hu, and L. Liu, “Aggregate Temporally Coupled Power Flex-
ibility of DERs Considering Distribution System Security Constraints,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, early access , pp. 1–13, 2022.
[15] X. Chen, E. Dall’Anese, C. Zhao, and N. Li, “Aggregate Power
Flexibility in Unbalanced Distribution Systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 258–269, Jan. 2020.
[16] D. Yan, C. Ma, and Y . Chen, “Distributed Coordination of Charging Sta-
tions Considering Aggregate EV Power Flexibility,” IEEE Transactions
on Sustainable Energy , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 356–370, Jan. 2023.
[17] X. Chen and N. Li, “Leveraging Two-Stage Adaptive Robust Optimiza-
tion for Power Flexibility Aggregation,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid , vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 3954–3965, Sep. 2021.
[18] B. Cui, A. Zamzam, and A. Bernstein, “Network-Cognizant Time-
Coupled Aggregate Flexibility of Distribution Systems Under Uncer-
tainties,” IEEE Control Systems Letters , vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 1723–1728,
Nov. 2021.
[19] F. L. M ¨uller, O. Sundstr ¨om, J. Szab ´o, and J. Lygeros, “Aggregation of
Energetic Flexibility Using Zonotopes,” in 2015 54th IEEE Conference
on Decision and Control (CDC) , Dec. 2015, pp. 6564–6569.
[20] F. L. M ¨uller, J. Szab ´o, O. Sundstr ¨om, and J. Lygeros, “Aggregation
and Disaggregation of Energetic Flexibility From Distributed Energy
Resources,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1205–
1214, Mar. 2019.
[21] H. Hao, B. M. Sanandaji, K. Poolla, and T. L. Vincent, “Aggregate
Flexibility of Thermostatically Controlled Loads,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems , vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 189–198, Jan. 2015.
[22] L. Zhao, W. Zhang, H. Hao, and K. Kalsi, “A Geometric Approach to
Aggregate Flexibility Modeling of Thermostatically Controlled Loads,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 4721–4731,
Nov. 2017.
[23] S. Wang and W. Wu, “Aggregate Flexibility of Virtual Power Plants With
Temporal Coupling Constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid ,
vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 5043–5051, Nov. 2021.
[24] Z. Yi, Y . Xu, W. Gu, L. Yang, and H. Sun, “Aggregate Operation
Model for Numerous Small-Capacity Distributed Energy Resources
Considering Uncertainty,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 12,
no. 5, pp. 4208–4224, Sep. 2021.
[25] T. Zhang, J. Wang, G. Li, X. Wang, and M. Zhou, “Characterizing
Temporal-Coupled Feasible Region of Active Distribution Networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications , vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 5687–
5696, Sep. 2022.
[26] Z. Xu, D. S. Callaway, Z. Hu, and Y . Song, “Hierarchical Coordina-
tion of Heterogeneous Flexible Loads,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems , vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 4206–4216, Nov. 2016.
[27] M. Baran and F. Wu, “Optimal Sizing of Capacitors Placed on a Radial
Distribution System,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 735–743, Jan. 1989.
[28] A. Hassan, R. Mieth, M. Chertkov, D. Deka, and Y . Dvorkin, “Optimal
Load Ensemble Control in Chance-Constrained Optimal Power Flow,”
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 5186–5195, Sep.
2019.
[29] Z. Tang, Y . Liu, L. Wu, J. Liu, and H. Gao, “Reserve Model of Energy
Storage in Day-Ahead Joint Energy and Reserve Markets: A Stochastic
UC Solution,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 12, no. 1, pp.
372–382, Jan. 2021.
[30] G. Guti ´errez-Alcaraz, B. D ´ıaz-L ´opez, J. M. Arroyo, and V . H. Hinojosa,
“Large-Scale Preventive Security-Constrained Unit Commitment Con-
sidering N-k Line Outages and Transmission Losses,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems , vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 2032–2041, May 2022.
[31] D. Pozo, J. Contreras, and E. E. Sauma, “Unit Commitment With
Ideal and Generic Energy Storage Units,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems , vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 2974–2984, Nov. 2014.
[32] P. Pinson, “Wind energy: Forecasting challenges for its operational
management,” Statistical Science , vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 564–585, 2013.