Monitoring m ental workload during a 3D game  IHM’23, April 03 –07, 2023, Troyes, France  
 
 1  
IHM’ 23, April  03–07, 2023, Troyes , France   
Monitoring mental workload by EEG 
during a game  in Virtual Reality  
Proceedings of the IHM’ 23 Conference  
Lina -Estelle « Linelle  » LOUIS  
Univ.  de Nantes , France  
linaestelle.louis@gmail.com   Saïd MOUSSAOUI  
École Centrale de Nantes , France   
said.moussaoui@ec -nantes.fr  
 
Vincent ROUALDES  
CHU de Nantes , France  
vincent.roualdes@chu -nantes.fr  
 
Sébastien RAVOUX  
Onepoint Nantes, France  
s.ravoux@groupeonepoint.com  Saïd Moussaoui  
École Centrale de Nantes  
said.moussaoui@ec -nantes.fr  
 
 Aurélien VAN LANGHENHOVE  
CHU de Nantes, France  
aurelien.vanlanghenhove@chu -nantes.fr  
 
Isabelle MILLEVILLE -PENNEL  
Univ. de Nantes, France  
isabelle.milleville@ls2n.fr  
 
ABSTRACT1 
During an activity, knowing the mental workload (MWL) of the user allows to improve the Human -
Machine Interactions (HMI). Indeed, the MWL has an impact on the individual and its interaction with 
the environment . Monitoring it is therefore a crucial issue. In this context, we have created the virtual 
game Back to Pizza  which is based on the N -back task  (commonly used for measur ing MWL ). In this 
more playful variant, users must  carry out orders from customers of a pizza food truck . It is an 
interactive game that involves the audience of the IHM'23 conference , choosing several parameters 
like the number of ingredients. During  this experience , the objective is to measure  MWL  in real time 
through an Electro Encephalo Graph  (EEG) and visual feedbac k on MWL level is given to the audience . 
With this demonstration, we propose to present a concept of a virtual interactive game that measures 
MWL  in real time.   
2023. This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not for redistribution. The definitive 
Version of Record was published in IHM’ 23: 34ème conf érence Francophone sur l’Interaction Homme -Machine , April  03–07, 
2023, Troyes , France, https://doi.org/10.1145/XXXXXXXXX.XXXXXXXX.  Monitoring m ental workload during a 3D game  IHM’23, April 03 –07, 2023, Troyes, France  
 
 2 CCS CONCEPTS  
(1) Human -centered computing →  Human computer 
interaction (HCI) → HCI theory, concepts,  and models  
(2) Human -centered computing → Human computer 
interaction (HCI) → Interaction paradigms → Virtual 
reality   
KEYWORDS  
Mental workload, N -back task, Gamification, Virtual Reality , ElectroEncephaloGraph y
 
RÉSUMÉ  (en Français)  
Au cours d’une activité, connaître la charge 
mentale de l’utilisateur permet d’améliorer les 
Interactions Humain -Machines (IHM). En effet, 
la charge mentale a un impact sur l’individu et 
son interaction avec l’ environnement. Pouvoir 
la surveiller  est donc un enjeu crucial. Dans ce 
contexte, nous avons créé  le jeu virtuel Back to 
Pizza  qui se base sur la tâche de N -back 
(couramment utilisée pour mesurer la charge 
mentale). Dans cette variante plus ludique, les 
utilisateurs doivent réaliser des commandes de 
clients d’un foodtruck de pizzas. C’est un jeu 
interactif qui implique  le public d e la conférence 
IHM 2023  qui choisit un certain nombre de 
paramètres comme le nombre d'ingrédients. 
Dans c ette expérience , l’objectif est de mesurer 
la charge mentale en temps réel à travers un 
ÉlectroEncéphaloGraph e (EEG) et un retour 
visuel du niveau de charge mentale est donné au 
public . Avec cette démonstration, nous 
proposons de vous présenter un concept d'un 
jeu interact if et  virtuel qui mesure la charge 
mentale en temps réel.  
 
MOTS -CLÉS (en Français)  
Charge mentale, tâche de N -back, Gamification, 
Réalité Virtuelle , ÉlectroEncéphaloGraphie  
 
INTRODUCTION  AND CONTEXT  
Mental workload ( MWL ) is the degree of 
activation of limited mental resources to respond to the performance criteria for an activity (Louis et al., 2023). Thus, being able to 
monitor MWL  in real time is therefore a crucial issue in Human -Machine Interactions (HMI ). To 
reach th is goal, two conditions are necessary: an activity that induces MWL  and a measurement 
tool that allows to measure it in real time.  
 
For the first condition, we identified the N -back task (Kirchner, 1958) commonly used in the 
literature to measure MWL . N-back task  
(Cf. Figure 1 ) requires participants to 
react when a stimulus (like a letter  or a 
drink ) is the same as the stimulus 
presented before it (if it is the case, it is a 
target).  It is a cognitive task based on 
memory that we gamified to present it as 
a game for a public demonstration. After 
several brainstorming sessions, we chose 
a 3D immersive pizza food truck  context 
for the fun, interactive aspect (with an 
audience represented by the customers) 
and an activity that can be found in real 
life (contrary to the classical N -back task).  
 
To fulfill our second condition, measuring 
MWL  in real time, we chose 
ElectroEncephaloGraph y (EEG) after a 
review of the literature. Indeed, it is a 
measurement technique with a temporal 
resolution in the millisecond range and is sensitive to MWL  (Hancock et al., 2021). For the 
demonstration, we have 16 -channel EEG/electrodes placed on the surfa ce of the players' scalp. 
Regarding the measurement of MWL , our device can detect two classes (mental overload or not) 
through frequency waves. Indeed, an increase in MWL  induces an increase in Theta waves in the 
frontal area of the brain and a decrease in  Alpha waves in the parietal area (Tao et al., 2019; 
Longo et al., 2022).  
 
Monitoring m ental workload during a 3D game  IHM’23, April 03 –07, 2023, Troyes, France  
 
 2  
 
MEAN FEATURES  
Immersed in the virtual game, the player is a 
pizza chef who must respond to customer 
orders for pizza (visual stimuli) and drinks 
(auditory stimuli). Figure 2  deve lops the main 
steps of the game, specified below : 
Figure 2: Experimental design of Back to Pizza  
1. A customer specifies her/his order with 
visual stimuli . 
2. At the same time, she /he specifies the drink 
order verbally . 
3. The player determines whether the drink is 
the same as the previous order ("Yes") or 
whether it is different ("No").  
4. The player selects the drink . 
5. The player selects  the ingredi ents for the 
pizza ordered . 
6. The order is proposed to the customer who 
gives po sitive visual feedback (if order is 
good) or negative (if error).  
7. A new customer places an order, and so on 
for 3 minute s.   
All the orders are chosen before the game by the public which follows the realization through an 
external screen ( Cf. Figure 3 ). The player orders pizzas in a time limit of 3 minutes. The 
countdown is visible to the player in the game environment (Cf. Figure 3 ).  
 
 
Figure 3: Screenshot of Back to pizza (left) and real set up  
 
The player is equipped with an EEG headset and a Virtual Reality headset,  and the interactions 
are performed through the VR headset controllers ( Cf. Figure 3 ). EEG has one main drawback, 
the sensitivity to motion artifacts , which is accentuated by wearing a VR headset . Thus,  the player 
is constantly sitting (Cf. Figure 3 ) and the disposition of the virtual elements are grouped in such 
a way that she /he makes restricted movements.  
 
Finally,  Back to pizza uses the Unity  3D application engine to develop the ap plication on Oculus 
Quest. This application communicates in real time via a C# server with a tablet application (WPF) 
that displays the results and with a Python application that collects the EEG data to visualize the 
MWL  in real time . 
 
To conclude, this demonstration aims to present a concept about the monitoring of mental 
workload by EEG during a game in VR. It served as a basis for the thesis work of the main author, 
Lina -Estelle Louis, working on the modeling of mental workload. The H ospital  of Nantes  is a 
partner of the project, because one of the aims to monitor the mental workload in real time, is to 
be able to adapt the difficulty level of a reeducative game to the mental workload of the user for 
an effective medical care.  
 
  
Monitoring m ental workload during a 3D game  IHM’23, April 03 –07, 2023, Troyes, France  
 
 3 ACKNO WLEDGMENTS  
The authors want to thank all colleagues  for 
participating  in brainstorming , testing and for 
their good humor.  Particularly to  Sébastien 
Maire that implemented the 3D game  and the 
company onepoint and ANRT which financed 
this study.  
 
 
 
 
 REFERENCES  
[1] Hancock, G. M., Longo, L., Young, M. S., & Hancock, P. A. (2021). Mental workload. Handbook of 
human factors and ergonomics,  203 -226.  
[2] Kirchner, W. K. (1958). Age differences in s hort -term retention of rapidly changing information. 
Journal of experimental psychology, 55(4),  352.  
[3] Longo, L., Wickens, C. D., Hancock, P. A., & Hancock, G. M. (2022). Human Mental Workload: A 
Survey and a Novel Inclusive Definition. Frontiers in psychology, 13.  
[4] Louis , L-E., Moussaoui, S ., Van Langhenhove, A., Ravoux, S., Le Jan, T., Roualdes, V., Milleville -
Pennel, I. (2023). Cognitive task and combined statistical methods to evaluate, model and predict 
mental workload . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience  (in progress).  
[5] Tao, D., Tan, H., Wang, H., Zhang, X., Qu, X., & Zhang, T. (2019). A systematic review of physiological 
measures of mental workload. International journal of environmental research and public health, 
16(15),  2716.
 
 
 