Tactile-Filter:
Interactive Tactile Perception for Part Mating
Kei Ota
Mitsubishi ElectricDevesh K. Jha
Mitsubishi Electric Research LabsHsiao-Yu Tung
MITJoshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT
Multi-object assembly
Collect tactile imagesfor all pegs offline
1. Initialize hypothesesby first touch
Part MatingModel 𝑓!"
𝑤!𝐼"#First touch image
Contour map for beliefs2. Infer an optimal actionusing max likelihood
𝑠"𝑠∗,&∗𝑠",&∗
𝑎∗𝑎"𝑎"𝑠",&"𝑠∗,&"
𝑠∗3. Apply the optimal action and update beliefs𝑓!"𝑤!
Updated beliefs𝑎∗,Offline data collectionTask
Multi-object assemblyOnline Inferenceinformative
,
Successfully localize the first interaction poseand its categorynon-informative0.930.01collected peg images    Peg Distance Model𝑙#=1/𝑓""(𝐼$∗,#	",𝐼$%,#	")
Fig. 1: Overview of the proposed Tactile-Filter . As shown in the figure, we consider the task of the part mating without any
prior knowledge of 3D mesh of objects and which objects fit together. We assume that the robot has access to a collection of
tactile images for the set of pegs as shown in figure (Offline data collection). During inference, the robot tries to identify which
peg would fit into a given hole by the proposed Tactile-Filter . An initial set of hypotheses (denoted by s∈ S) is generated
using the tactile image from the first touch and a trained part mating model, which predicts the correspondence between parts
that fit together. We compute an optimal action for sampling the next image on the hole surface in order to minimize the
uncertainty of the current estimate using a maximum likelihood approach. This is also illustrated in the figure, where given an
initial touch, we can select an optimal action that results in maximum reduction of uncertainty. This method allows us to find
the peg for the right fit as well as localize the hole (as we finally get the correct hypothesis) while minimizing the number of
interactions during the task. (MLTF stands for Maximum Likelihood Tactile Filter). [Best viewed in color]
Abstract —Humans rely on touch and tactile sensing for a lot
of dexterous manipulation tasks. Our tactile sensing provides us
with a lot of information regarding contact formations as well as
geometric information about objects during any interaction. With
this motivation, vision-based tactile sensors are being widely used
for various robotic perception and control tasks. In this paper,
we present a method for interactive perception using vision-
based tactile sensors for a part mating task, where a robot can
use tactile sensors and a feedback mechanism using a particle
filter to incrementally improve its estimate of objects (pegs and
holes) that fit together. To do this, we first train a deep neural
network that makes use of tactile images to predict the proba-
bilistic correspondence between arbitrarily shaped objects that
fit together. The trained model is used to design a particle filter
which is used twofold. First, given one partial (or non-unique)
observation of the hole, it incrementally improves the estimate of
the correct peg by sampling more tactile observations. Second, it
selects the next action for the robot to sample the next touch (and
thus image) which results in maximum uncertainty reduction to
minimize the number of interactions during the perception task.
We evaluate our method on several part-mating tasks with novel
objects using a robot equipped with a vision-based tactile sensor.
We also show the efficiency of the proposed action selection
method against a naive method. See supplementary video at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jMVBg e3gLw.I. I NTRODUCTION
Humans rely on tactile sensing to monitor and control
manipulation tasks during interactions with the environment.
Tactile sensing allows us to monitor and respond to contact
forces, adapt to object slip during grasping, and perform vari-
ous perception tasks to build models of the environment. Even
in situations where visual observation is not possible, tactile
sensing enables us to interpret different types of interactions
with the environment. For instance, we can locate objects in
cluttered environments even in the absence of visual cues,
identify the correct key for a lock by feeling the different
options, or determine the type of video port (e.g., HDMI)
on a monitor screen by touch alone. It has been the long-
standing goal of robotics to imitate such intelligent behavior
during manipulation tasks. Motivated by this goal, we present
an interactive perception method for robots that utilize vision-
based tactile sensors to construct reliable models for part
mating.
A lot of manufacturing tasks could be decomposed into a
sequence of insertion tasks. Object insertion is a well-studied
contact-rich manipulation task in robotics [16, 36]. However,arXiv:2303.06034v2  [cs.RO]  5 Jun 2023the task becomes extremely challenging when the geometry
of the mating objects is unknown. Also, this can make the
task of part mating significantly complex as the uncertainty
in geometry can limit the ability to understand any possible
contact formation between the parts [16]. This complexity
is further amplified in assembly tasks that require precise
geometric information, as tolerances between mating parts
become critical. Achieving the required level of precision in
manufacturing tasks can be challenging when relying solely
on vision-based algorithms.
To address these challenges, we propose leveraging vision-
based tactile sensors located at the robot’s gripper for precise
perception in these tasks. We present an interactive perception
method, Tactile-Filter , using vision-based tactile sensors for
estimating part correspondence for part mating, i.e., to estimate
which parts fit into each other using tactile sensors in the
absence of any vision sensing. We train a deep learning model
to predict correspondence between the correct mating parts,
observed using a tactile sensor. In the presence of partial obser-
vation or non-unique contact patch, we make use of a particle
filter to aggregate the information from multiple touches and
improve the estimate of the correct fit for a given hole. To
minimize the number of interactions between the robot and the
object, a maximum likelihood-based action selection method is
used during the proposed interactive perception. The proposed
method is tested on several different test environments with
objects of different shapes and sizes that are not used in
training the model to show the generalization of the proposed
approach. Figure 1 shows the abstract idea of the proposed
interactive perception method.
Contributions: This paper has the following contributions:
1) We present a part mating problem that deals with objects
of unknown shapes, aiming to identify and estimate
the pose of mating parts using minimal number of
interactions. To address this problem, we present a
novel approach called Tactile-Filter , which combines
contrastive learning, particle filter, and tactile sensing
for part mating.
2) Through our experiments conducted on novel objects,
we demonstrate that our proposed method effectively
resolves uncertainty by iteratively updating its belief dur-
ing interactions. We demonstrate the ability to generalize
to objects not encountered during training. Furthermore,
we introduce an action selection method within our
approach, which leads to significant improvements in
efficiency.
It is noted that for the sake of brevity and clarity of presenta-
tion, we will use the word pegfor the male part and hole for
the female part in our paper.
II. R ELATED WORK
Vision-based tactile sensors have attracted a lot of attention
recently [44, 22]. These sensors provide a high-resolution
capture of the contact patch during contact formation and
thus can help in localization of contacts, detection of slip,
etc [22, 29, 14]. Consequently, vision-based tactile sensorshave been used for a lot of control and perception tasks [34, 21,
16, 35, 25]. Most of these methods make use of displacement
of the contact patch to recover a signal indicating slip which
can be used for control of the manipulation task. Similarly,
there has been prior work that uses these sensors for object
classification and slip stabilization using feedback from these
sensors [6, 45], or for learning visuotactile servoing [7, 18].
Several studies have focused on estimating object pose
using tactile sensors which can be broadly categorized into
two directions. The first group of studies addresses pose
estimation from a single touch [27, 3, 17, 24], employing
regression [27, 17] and contrastive learning [3]. However,
these methods exhibit limitations when applied to large objects
or objects with non-unique contact patches. The second group
of studies focuses on pose estimation of large objects, often
utilizing particle filtering techniques to narrow down the
distribution of possible poses [28, 24, 38, 5]. However, these
methods face challenges when applied to real objects due to
factors such as low-dimensional sensors [28], the requirement
of a large number of interactions for training interaction
policies [24] or collecting samples [38], and the reliance on 3D
models of objects and/or simulators [24, 38, 5]. In contrast to
these two sets of works, we assume the shape of the objects
is not known a priori, and allow only a limited number of
interactions (a maximum of 10) by generating informative
actions that effectively reduce ambiguity. Furthermore, our
method not only estimates object pose but also identifies the
object type from multiple candidates, adding an additional
layer of complexity to the problem.
There exists another category of works that integrate vision
and tactile sensors to estimate object pose [28, 12, 7, 17]. By
leveraging the capabilities of vision sensors, these methods
can reduce the number of interactions required to estimate
object pose by narrowing down the distribution of possible
poses. While our study specifically focuses on object pose
estimation using vision-based tactile sensors, our method is not
mutually exclusive with the methods that combine vision and
tactile sensors. By integrating both modalities, we can leverage
the strengths of each sensor type and potentially improve the
accuracy and efficiency of object pose estimation.
Our problem setup is relevant to the interactive perception
literature, where the goal is also to interact with the objects and
update iteratively on the estimation of the states [4, 41, 37].
While previous work focuses mostly on state estimation from
raw visual perception [19, 4], point clouds [33, 40, 30], or 3D
states of the objects [31]. In contrast to these previous works,
we consider state estimation using tactile sensors.
Our work is also related to perception during insertion or
part mating. Vision is mostly insufficient to perform a lot
of insertion tasks due to the precision required during these
tasks [16, 26]. Consequently, there has been a lot of work
making use of tactile and/or wrench measurements on contact
formation between the mating parts. The idea behind most
of these tasks is to make use of tactile measurements and
a feedback mechanism to iteratively correct the pose error
between the mating parts [16, 13, 23]. In all these methods,geometric information is not explicitly used. Furthermore, they
do not explicitly update the uncertainty in measurements. In
contrast, we present a method where the robot can make use of
the geometric information upon contact formation using tactile
sensors to iteratively estimate the part correspondence as well
as precise localization.
III. P ROBLEM STATEMENT
In this section, we present a formal statement of the problem
which is studied in this paper. We also motivate the problem
by discussing some common scenarios where the proposed
problem could arise and the proposed method could be useful.
We consider the task of perception during part mating while
performing automated assembly. We consider scenarios where
the robot can not use a vision sensor to perceive the target
object to perform the desired mating task. Such situations
could arise in tasks where a robot has to assemble a product
where occlusions are created by other parts (e.g., consider the
assembly of an electronic board). Apart from occlusion, these
tasks could also require precision in pose estimates which
might be very difficult to obtain using vision. To formalize
the problem, we define the task for the robot as identifying
the correct peg from a known set of possible choices by
multiple observations of the hole using the vision-based tactile
sensor(s). The goal here is to design algorithms that can
identify the correct peg with minimum physical interaction
with the hole using a tactile sensor. We make the following
assumptions in the proposed study:
1) The possible number of pegs for the part mating task is
fixed and known as apriori.
2) The rough location of the target hole is known so that
the robot can establish initial contact with the part and
it does not need to perform this rough localization using
touch.
3) The robot can collect a dense set of tactile images for
all the candidate pegs by touching each of the pegs
at various different locations and orientations, prior to
experiments.
The first assumption is not restrictive as we will generally have
a limited number of parts to assemble. The second assumption
is also very easily met using common vision methods with
rough precision in localization. The third assumption would
require that the robot has access to a detailed geometric model
of the possible pegs observed using tactile sensors. This would
require that the robot performs some exploration to collect
this data. This assumption is required as the size of the tactile
sensor may be small compared to the size of the objects that
the robot is interacting with.
We focus on the setup where the target objects are larger
than the size of a tactile sensor such that the entire object
can not be observed using a single touch or a single touch
can result in non-unique observations (consider when parts of
the objects could be similar). Such problems would require
multiple touches and a method to aggregate the data from
multiple touches. For example, consider the task of inserting
pegs into the shape of alphabet letters that are larger thanthe sensor size (see Fig. 4). If the target hole is the letter ”A”,
whether we can be certain that it is indeed an ”A” with a single
touch depends on where we land our finger. For instance, if
the first touch is made on the horizontal line segment of the
letter ”A,” this feature may also be present in other alphabets
such as ”B,” ”D,” ”E,” and so on. However, by making contact
with features unique to the letter ”A,” such as the lower
left intersection, the probability of other candidates can be
reduced. So the question is how do we aggregate information
from multiple touches, and how do we select places to touch
that will maximize the information so as to reduce required
interactions?
IV. T ACTILE FILTER
We propose Tactile-Filter , an uncertainty-aware interactive
perception method to identify the correct peg from a candidate
set that fits into a given hole for assembly using tactile sensors.
At the core of the framework is a feature-matching model
that computes the probability that a peg can pair with a
hole by measuring the distance between the corresponding
tactile images in a joint feature space. Using the feature
matching model, we can construct the three critical steps in
standard particle filtering: (1) we can initialize a set of possible
hypotheses from the first touch by comparing the tactile image
on the hole with the candidate images for the pegs collected
before the experiment, (2) we then sample the most probable
hypothesis and generate an action that maximizes uncertainty
reduction, and (3) we apply the inferred action to the real
system and update beliefs about the shape and pose of the
target hole. Next, we detail each of these components.
A. Learning to find mating part
Given a pair of peg and hole images, we train a model
that maximizes the similarity score if the image for the hole
corresponds to the image for the peg. To this end, we use
a contrastive learning framework [8, 20] to learn the feature
space, similar to the work MoCo-v3 [9].
MoCo-v3 has two encoders, fqandfk, with output vectors
qandk. The goal of learning is to find the key vectors kthat
correspond to the query vectors q. In our case, we consider
the query vectors qto be the vectors from images of the holes
and learn to maximize the similarity score between qand the
vectors computed from the corresponding peg images k, while
minimizing the similarity between the query vectors and a set
of vectors from the negative peg images {k−}. In MoCo-v3,
this is formulated by minimizing the InfoNCE loss [32]:
L=−logexp (q·k+/τ)
exp (q·k+/τ) +P
k−exp (q·k−/τ),(1)
where τis the hyperparameter. More details can be found
in [9], implementations in [11], and the training procedure is
shown in Fig. 3. We denote the model used for measuring
similarities between the hole images and peg images as fHP,
and name it part mating model . Additionally, we train a model,
denoted as fPPand referred to as the peg distance model ,
to calculate the similarity between peg images. This modelwill be utilized to produce informative actions (as detailed in
Section IV-C).
B. Generating hypotheses
In cases where only a partial shape of a hole can be
observed using a tactile sensor, multiple corresponding choices
for peg may exist. Thus it might be hard or impossible to
determine the object with a deterministic approach. To address
this uncertainty, we explicitly generate and maintain a set of
hypotheses representing potential candidate choices using a
particle filter.
Since the class of the target hole and its orientation and lo-
cation is unknown (Sec. III), we generate a set of hypotheses S
where each hypothesis skis a quadruple: sk= (ck, xk, yk, θk),
where ckrepresents the possible object categories ck∈ C, and
xk, yk, θkare the SE(2) relative planar displacements from the
center of the object. An example is shown in Fig. 1 and is also
explained in Fig. 2.
One can initialize the particle set by sampling from a
uniform distribution within a reasonable range (e.g., ckfrom
candidate categories, xkfrom [−XMAX, XMAX], which is the
lower and upper limits of reasonable sizes of the peg, etc.).
However, it will be inefficient as the sampling space becomes
huge as the target object becomes larger, and/or the number of
candidate categories increases. As an alternative, we initialize
the particle set after obtaining the first tactile image of the
target hole IH
t=1(which we denote as IH
1) by utilizing the
previously collected set of peg images IPand pre-trained part
mating model fHP. Specifically, we compute the similarities,
wi, between the observed initial tactile image for the hole IH
1
and each tactile image of the peg IP
ifrom the set of peg images
IPas:
wi=fHP(IH
1, IP
i). (2)
We sample a particle proportional to this likelihood. Therefore,
the probability of a particle given the initial hole image can
be written as:
p(s=i|IH
1) =wiP
i∈{1,...,|IP|}wi(3)
where, iis the index of the set of previously collected peg
images as i∈ {1, ...,|IP|}(see Fig. 1). We then initialize the
set of hypotheses by independently sampling Kparticles with
the above distribution. It is noted that the above distribution
is a categorical distribution over all peg images.
C. Selecting informative action
In order to efficiently determine the category and pose of
the target hole, we aim to calculate an optimal action that can
maximize uncertainty reduction. While it is possible to com-
pute such an optimal action by maximizing information gain
against all possible peg images, it necessitates the integration
of all latent variables, making it computationally infeasible
within a reasonable time frame. As an alternative, we utilize
the existing hypothesis set Sto enhance the sample efficiency.
We sample the most probable hypothesis from the current
set of particles s∗= arg max
sk∈Swkand determine the optimal
𝑋𝑌𝑌𝑋𝑠!𝑠!,#𝑠$
𝑠!=("𝐴",0,12,0)
𝑠!,#=("𝐴",−4,−4,30)
𝑠$=("𝐵",0,8,90)
𝑠$,#=("𝐵",−4,−8,120)𝑎=d𝑥,d𝑦,d𝜃=−4,−16,30𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑠$,#Fig. 2: This picture defines particles and actions available to
the robot. A particle sis defined as a tuple consisting of the
class of the object and a pose in SE(2) w.r.t. a frame attached to
the center of the object. Each particle siis associated with the
corresponding image IP
siobserved via the tactile sensor at that
location. An action ais equivalent to the transform in SE(2)
applied to a particle si. The pose of a particle obtained by
applying an action acan be obtained by applying the transform
in SE(2) to the pose of the particle s, and we denote it as si,a.
Thus, an action awill result in the observation of the contact
patch IP
si,aat the new pose corresponding to the particle si,a.
[Best viewed in color]
action by simulating it on a set of previously collected peg
images IP(see Fig. 1). The action a= (d x,dy,dθ)is
represented as a transform in SE(2) to the pose of the particles,
and we denote the particle skwith the updated pose by
applying the action aassk,a. With this updated pose and
the peg images IP, we can also obtain the peg image when
applied to the action a, which we denote IP
sk,a. If there is no
corresponding pose in the collected set of images, we assign
an empty image which is a tactile image without any contact
INoContact . We visually explain the definition of particles and
actions in Fig. 2.
Given a current most-likely hypothesis, the next optimal
action can be selected by finding the most informative action.
To do that, we compute the distance between the tactile images
obtained by applying any possible action to the most probable
hypothesis and the remaining particles in set S. The action
that maximizes the sum of this distance over all the particles
is selected as the optimal action. Such an action is favored
only when the peg image of the sampled particle is close to
the hole image, while other images have a greater distance
when applying the same action to all the other particles. More
concretely, we define the likelihood of an action as
la=X
si∈S\{ s∗}1/fPP(IP
s∗,a, IP
si,a). (4)
The optimal action can be then selected by maximizing the
likelihood as:
a∗= arg max
a∈Ala, (5)
where Ais a set of actions with which the tactile sensor can
observe the peg after applying the action. This action set AAlgorithm 1 Tactile-Filter
Input Number of candidate pegs NP. A set of dense tactile images for each peg categories IP={IP
1,···,IP
NP}, number of
particles K, maximum number of interactions Nmax, pre-trained part mating model fHPand peg distance model fPP(Sec. IV-A),
threshold to stop iteration δprob
Output Mating peg category and its displacement in x, y, θ coordinate from the center of the peg
1:Touch and observe the first hole image IH
1
2:Compute similarity score wibetween the hole image IH
1and a peg image IP
i∈ IPaswi=fHP(IH
1, IP
i)
3:Initialize a particle pool S=∅
4:fork←1toKdo
5: Sample a particle from the set of the peg images according to the categorical distribution defined in Eq.(3)
6: Add the sampled particle sk= (ck, xk, yk, θk)to the particle pool: S ← S ∪ sk.
7:end for
8:fort←2toNmaxdo
9: Select the most probable particle s∗= arg max
sk∈Swk
10: Infer the optimal action a∗according to Eq. (5) using s∗andS.
11: Move the robot with the inferred action a∗and get the tactile image IH
t
12: fork←1toKdo
13: Compute importance weight for the particle wk=fHP(IH
t, IP
sk)
14: end for
15: Compute the posterior distribution defined in Eq.(6)
16: Re-sample Kparticles from Susing the posterior distribution
17: Compute updated posterior pt(c|IH
1:t)of each peg category from the particles as defined in Eq. (9)
18: ifmax j∈{1,...,NP}pt(cj)> δprobthen
19: Break the current loop
20: end if
21:end for
22:Select the most probable particle s∗= (c∗, x∗, y∗, θ∗) = arg max
sk∈Swk(to get the localization estimate, i.e., x∗, y∗, θ∗)
23:return Object category c∗and its displacement x∗, y∗, θ∗.
can be obtained by calculating the L1 pixel distance between
the tactile image of the peg after applying the action IP
s∗,aand
the peg image that does not have contact IP
NoContact , and see if
it exceeds a threshold as I(∥IP
s∗,a−INoContact ∥1< δact).
This procedure is visually depicted in Fig. 1, where the
optimal action a∗is shown to generate a more distinct contact
patch (observable through touch) when applied to all particles
(s∗ands1in the figure). On the other hand, the non-
informative action a1produces similar contact patches that
would not effectively disambiguate the current belief.
D. Update hypotheses
After obtaining the optimal action atat time step t, we
apply it on the real robot and observe the tactile image of the
holeIH
t. We then update the probability of each hypothesis
by comparing the observed hole image IH
tand the peg images
from the current hypotheses IP
sk,at:
p(st|IH
1:t, a1:t−1)∝p(IH
t|st)p(st|IH
1:t−1, a1:t−1)
≈KX
k=1wkp(st|IH
1:t−1, a1:t−1),(6)
where wk=fHP(IH
t,IP
sk,at)
PK
k=1fHP(IH
t,IPsk,at)is the likelihood (weight) for
the hole image to match with the peg image of the kthparticle.The second term can be written as:
p(st|IH
1:t−1, a1:t−1)
=X
st−1∈Sp(st|st−1, at−1)|{z }
forward dynamicsp(st−1|IH
1:t−1, a1:t−1)| {z }
obtain through recursion,
(7)
where the first term represents the deterministic forward dy-
namics. Given the particle is in state skat time step t, the
dynamics can be expressed as:
p(st+1|st, at) =1ifst+1=sk,at
0otherwise .(8)
The second term in Eq.(7) is initialized with the prior defined
in Eq. (3) and can be obtained through recursion. We update
the distribution of the particles by regenerating a new set of
particles through weighted sampling based on w. The full
algorithm is shown in Alg. 1.
E. Terminal condition
After updating the posterior of the particles with Eq. (6),
we compute the posterior probability of each peg category as
follows:
pt(c|IH
1:t) =P
sk∈SI(sk∈c)
|S|, (9)Tactile images for holes
Tactile image for pegs
Data Collection in the Real SystemTrainingPart MatingModel𝑓!"InferenceEncoderMomentumEncoder𝐼#",𝐼$", …𝑞𝑘similaritycontrastive loss
𝐼%",𝐼&",𝐼'"𝐼%![𝟎.𝟗𝟎,0.01,0.09]
similarity𝐼#!𝐼$!𝐼(!
𝐼#"𝐼$"𝐼("𝐼#!𝐼#"𝐼$"𝐼$!𝐼(!𝐼("𝐼#!,𝐼$!, …
Fig. 3: Data Collection, Training, and Inference of the Part Mating Model: The left block depicts the data collection process
using the MAZE board that features various shapes, including hole and peg shapes in the upper and lower halves, respectively.
This board is placed on the robot platform and the robot arm equipped with a tactile sensor at the tip of the wrist makes contact
with the board to collect data denoted as IHandIP, which corresponds a set of images for pegs and holes, respectively. The
middle block illustrates the training procedure for the part mating model. It is trained in a self-supervised manner using a
contrastive loss that encourages the model to produce high scores only when images corresponding to true mating parts are
provided. The right block demonstrates the model’s generalization to different shapes after training. [Best viewed in color]
where I(sk∈c)is an indicator function that returns 1only
when the category of the particle ckbelongs to the category c.
The algorithm terminates when the majority of particles belong
to a specific class, indicated by max j∈{1,...,NP}pt(cj)> δprob,
which is a user-specified parameter for termination.
V. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the Tactile-
Filter algorithm in two different test scenarios. The first
scenario, referred to as the small objects , involves a collection
of small objects that can be fully captured by a single touch
of the tactile sensor, thereby making the estimation problem
relatively simpler to solve. The second scenario, referred to as
thelarge objects , involves objects that are larger than the size
of the tactile sensor, requiring multiple touch measurements
to accurately estimate their shape. All the test objects used in
the pose estimation experiments are novel and are not used
for training the contrastive learning model.
A. Training the part mating model
Tactile sensor. We use a commercially available GelSight
Mini [2] tactile sensor, which provides 320×240compressed
RGB images through the Robot Operating System (ROS) at a
rate of approximately 25 Hz, with a field of view of 18.6×14.3
millimeters.
Robot platform. The MELFA ASSISTA robot [1], a col-
laborative robot with 6 DoF, is used in this study. The tactile
sensor is mounted on the robot’s wrist during data collection
(see Fig. 3). It is noted that we do not use the force torque
sensor mounted at the wrist of the robot as shown in the Fig. 3.
Data collection. In order to train a model that is capable of
generalizing to a diverse set of shapes, we designed a board for
data collection so that it features random polygonal shapes to
simulate pegs and holes of arbitrary shapes. The shapes were
generated through a process that involved creating a maze (we
name it MAZE board), adding random perturbations to theposition and size of the walls that make up the maze, and then
exporting the result for 3D printing. This board was designed
such that any arbitrary hole patch sampled from the upper
half has a corresponding mating peg patch in the lower half
(see Fig. 3). To collect data for training, we sampled several
different locations and orientations on the upper half MAZE
board from a high-resolution grid to collect the hole images,
and then collect the corresponding peg images from the lower
half. This resulted in a total of approximately 23,000pairs of
images of pegs and holes which perfectly fit with each other.
Preprocessing. In this study, the tactile sensor used has
RGB LEDs with different colors on each of the three sur-
faces [2]. As a result, even when the same object is in contact,
the color may differ depending on the position of the image
captured. To mitigate the potential impact on generalization
performance, we obtained an image of a non-contact situa-
tionINoContact during data collection, reducing the impact by
subtracting the image. Then, the average and variance of each
RGB channel were calculated for all images, and the images
were normalized before being input into the model.
Training. As described in Sec. IV-A, we use MoCo-v3 for
our part mating model fHPand peg distance model fPP. We
train the models with the collected images using the MAZE
board for 500epochs. To improve generalization capability, we
augment the data by using random cropping and horizontal or
vertical flips, which will be applied to the pairs of images
inputted to the model during training.
B. Small objects
We first evaluate the performance of the TactileFilter when
applied to objects that fit in the size of the sensor.
Baselines. To understand the challenges encountered when
identifying objects that might not be fully captured through
a single touch, we compare our method against two methods
that only use the initial image. The first baseline, referred to
asPixel , computes the L1 distance between the peg and hole12 mm
14.318.6
SmallobjectsLargeobjectsGelSightMini32 mmFig. 4: Alphabet boards for our experiments. The left board
contains small characters, each with a length of 12mm and a
maximum width of 16mm, to fit within the size of the sensor if
the robot makes contact with the center position. The sensor
size is shown in the middle image. The board on the right
has large characters with a length of 32mm and a maximum
width of 40mm, requiring multiple interactions with the tactile
sensor to obtain complete geometry for the object.
images and returns the index of the nearest neighbor image.
The second baseline, MoCo , utilizes the pre-trained MoCo-v3
model to calculate the distance (negative of the MoCo-v3’s
output) based solely on the first tactile image and without
incorporating any subsequent interactions. The results of our
method are denoted as Ours ( n), where nindicates the number
of interactions. It is important to note that the value of n
includes the initial contact, therefore, Ours ( n= 1)represents
the results obtained without any additional interactions.
Settings. For this experiment, we have designed an eval-
uation board consisting of 12alphabet characters (ranging
from “A” to “L”), each with a maximum width of 16mm
and height of 12mm, so the characters fit within a single
touch. Since we would like to evaluate the model in situ-
ations where the pose of the object is unknown, resulting
in only partial observation of the object and requiring mul-
tiple touches for accurate estimations, we collect data with
displacements in X, Y ∈ {− 8,−4,0,4,8}millimeter and
θ∈ {− 90,−60, ...,90}degree from their center position.
This results in 12×5×5×7 = 2100 images. Figure 4
shows examples of the characters we used for the experiment.
The hyperparameter we used for our algorithm is the number
of particles K= 100 , the maximum number of iterations
Nmax= 10 , and the threshold to stop the iteration δprob= 0.95.
Metrics. The performance of the results is assessed through
two metrics. Firstly, we evaluate the accuracy in classifying the
objects. For the baseline calculation, we calculate the distance
between a hole image and all previously gathered peg images,
select the image with the minimum distance, and consider the
prediction to be accurate when the predicted image’s class
matches the class of the inputted hole image. Additionally,
the distance between the predicted pose and the ground truth
pose is quantitatively measured.
With regard to the evaluation of the proposed method,
we utilize the likelihood used for updating the particles to
weight the prediction. The object with the highest weightedTABLE I: Quantitative evaluation of single touch experiments
with small objects on the alphabet board.
Pixel MoCoOurs
n= 3 n= 5 n= 10
Accuracy [%] 0.0 39 .6 81 .8 90 .7 95 .0
Error XY [mm] - 0.7 0 .2 0 .1 0 .1
Error θ[deg] - 5.4 0 .9 0 .3 0 .1
TABLE II: Quantitative evaluation of multiple touch experi-
ments with large objects on the alphabet board.
Pixel MoCoOurs
n= 3 n= 5 n= 10
Accuracy [%] 11.9 41 .9 58 .7 72 .3 85 .0
Error XY [mm] 6.9 4 .4 1 .3 1 .0 0 .7
Error θ[deg] 16.6 15 .5 4 .4 2 .9 1 .5
probability is then evaluated with the target object. We also
use weighted error between the particles and the ground truth
image to compute the quantitative error.
Results and Analysis. The results are presented in Table I.
A comparison between the two baselines, Pixel and MoCo ,
reveals that correspondences between parts cannot be obtained
simply by comparing pixel values. The contrastive framework
captures the features of mating parts, resulting in improved
performance. However, the results using only the first contact
are still not sufficiently accurate as the tactile sensor only
observes a partial view of the object. In contrast, our method
demonstrates a gradual improvement in performance as inter-
actions are added. Additionally, as we can see from Table I,
our method is able to achieve good localization accuracy both
in position and orientation. In particular, we are able to achieve
a submillimeter average error in localization which might be
required for industrial insertion tasks.
C. Large objects
Settings. In the next set of experiments, we evaluate the
performance of the proposed method when applied to objects
that are larger than the size of the sensor. This scenario
requires the robot to interact multiple times with the object to
gain a comprehensive understanding of its shape. To this end,
we have designed an evaluation board consisting of twelve
alphabet characters (ranging from “A” to “L”), each with a
maximum width of 40mm and height of 32mm. We tested
the method on the location and orientation of the robot from
X, Y∈ {− 20,−16, ...,20}mm and θ∈ {− 90,−60, ...,90}
with respect to the center position of each character. Figure 4
presents examples of the characters utilized in the experimental
setup. As for the baselines, we compare the method against the
same baselines as the previous experiment on small objects.
Results and Analysis. Table II shows the results on the
large objects. Similar to the results obtained in the setting
of small objects, our proposed model demonstrates improved
performance compared to the baselines. However, it is also
observed that a larger object size requires a greater number
of interactions in order to achieve comparable accuracy. InFig. 5: Classification accuracy of the pro-
posed method with a different number of
classes evaluated on the Large objects.
The result shows our method can quickly
identify the correct class if the number of
classes (shown by N) is limited.
(a)Small objects
 (b)Large objects
Fig. 6: Classification accuracy for Small andLarge objects with different action
strategies. As could be seen from these bar plots, our proposed method demon-
strates significant improvement in comparison to the random action selection with
regard to classification accuracy.
Figure 5, we show the classification accuracy with respect
to the number of interactions, and the results with randomly
sampled smaller sets of 4and8characters to evaluate the
performance with a smaller number of possible candidates.
The bar plots demonstrate that the proposed method can
quickly identify the correct class if the number of classes is
small.
D. Ablation on action selection strategy
Settings. To assess the effectiveness of the proposed action
selection strategy, we compare the proposed method with a
random action selection method (which we call Random ). We
evaluate the two methods on the Small and Large objects
settings described earlier.
Results and Analysis. The results in Fig. 6 indicate
the proposed maximum likelihood action selection approach
demonstrates significant improvement in comparison to the
method with regard to classification accuracy.
E. Evaluation on industrial connectors
Settings. To further evaluate the performance of the trained
part mating model in an industrial setting, we collect tactile
images of connectors and sockets from a Raspberry-Pi board,
as depicted in Fig. 7.
Results and Analysis. The results of the evaluation of the
Pixel baseline and our part mating model for the classification
of connectors and sockets from the Raspberry-Pi board are pre-
sented in Table III. The Pixel baseline demonstrates improved
performance in comparison to the small and large object
experiments, due to the reduced number of classes in this
setting and the unique size of each connector/socket, which
simplifies the classification through the use of only L1 pixel
distance. Although the part mating model outperforms the
Pixel baseline, it misclassifies the female HDMI connector as
the male USB-A connector. This is attributed to the significant
distribution shift between the training set and the test set,
where the pins on the surface of the male part are not present
in the training data. To address this issue, future work can
AudioHDMIMicroUSBUSB-AEthernetMaleFemale
HolesPegsFig. 7: Experimental setup for industrial connector identi-
fication on a Raspberry-Pi board. This image shows the
observations of the six pegs and holes using the GelSight Mini
sensor. Table III shows the classification results obtained by
our model. [Best viewed in color]
TABLE III: Classification accuracy on the Raspberry Pi Board.
Pixel MoCo
Accuracy [%] 50.0 83 .3
focus on enhancing the generalization capabilities of the part
mating model.
F . Application to multi-object assembly
Settings. Once Tactile-Filter localizes the hole and identifies
the corresponding peg, the robot can successfully insert the peg
into the right hole. This is facilitated by the algorithm’s ability
to estimate the pose with high precision, as demonstrated by
the submillimeter average prediction error (refer to Table I
and Table II). Consequently, we assess the proposed method
in a real multi-object assembly scenario during the final
experiment.𝐼!"𝐼#"𝐼$"(a) “M”
𝐼!"𝐼#"𝐼$" (b) “L”
𝐼!"𝐼#"𝐼$"
(c) “T”
𝐼!"𝐼#"𝐼$" (d) “F”
Fig. 8: Visualization of belief maps for holes categorized as “M”, “L”, “T”, and “F”. In each figure, the red regions in the
left column show the spatial and temporal region captured by the tactile sensor during interactions, represented as IH
t, where
tindicates the interaction number or timestep. The center image shows the hole image captured by the tactile sensor, and
the right figure illustrates the belief map generated by the current particles. Across all hole types, the results indicate a rapid
convergence of the distribution of the hole’s initial contact pose and its corresponding category.
The task involves identifying and localizing four pegs and
holes shaped like the alphabet characters “M”, “L”, “T”, and
“F” (Maximum Likelihood Tactile Filter). Each peg has a
length of 32mm and a maximum width of 28mm, as depicted
in Fig. 1 (leftmost picture). Although the algorithm achieves
accurate pose estimation for the holes, the robot still fails in
insertion due to errors during grasping. To account for this,
we design holes with a tolerance of 2 mm and treat insertion
as a simple pick-and-place operation using an impedance
controller. For more precise assembly, we can combine our
method with prior work, such as [16, 15].
Results and Analysis. The qualitative results are available
in the video accessible at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
jMVBg e3gLw. The video demonstrates the algorithm suc-
cessfully identifies the correct peg and pose of the hole,
and the robot successfully inserts the pegs. Moreover, the
visualization generated from this experiment as shown in
Fig. 8 demonstrates that our method is iteratively corrects
its belief during the interactive perception. Finally, in terms
of computational time, the most time-consuming steps of the
algorithm involve updating importance weights using the part
mating model fHPin Eq. (2) and the peg distance model fPP
in Eq. (4). However, each of these steps takes approximately
0.3 seconds on a single GPU, which is significantly shorter
than other robot operations. Thus, our algorithm is suitable
for online control.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Tactile sensing can allow robots to build reliable models
of their environment to perform precise manipulation tasks.In this paper, we presented a novel method called Tactile-
Filter . We presented an interactive perception method where
a robot can improve its estimate for the perception task using
tactile sensors while minimizing the number of interactions
required with its environment. We considered the design of the
method in the context of the task of part mating. In the absence
of any vision input, we described a method where the robot
could incrementally improve its estimate of correspondence
between parts within a fixed number of available choices. We
also proposed a maximum likelihood-based approach to select
future actions to minimize the number of interactions during
the perception task. The proposed method was verified using
a vision-based tactile sensor and a physical robot on several
tasks of part mating. The generalization of the proposed
method to previously unseen scenarios was also illustrated.
As our method was trained and evaluated on a physical
system, data collection was performed using a real robot.
However, in future work, we aim to explore the possibility of
utilizing an appropriate simulation environment [10, 43, 42,
39] to simulate contact patches for various object geometries.
This approach would enable us to reduce reliance on physical
robots for data collection and instead leverage simulations to
acquire data. By doing so, we can learn and develop complex
perception techniques with minimal usage of real-world data.
Another limitation of the proposed method is that we
assume that tactile images consist of only the peg and hole
parts. Therefore, the underlying deep learning model can get
easily confused if distractors are present in the image (such
as attachments to connectors in Fig. 7). In future research,
we can work on this limitation by localizing the mating partsfrom the tactile image to make the method more robust to such
distractors.
REFERENCES
[1] MELFA ASSISTA. https://www.mitsubishielectric.com/
fa/products/rbt/robot/items/assista/index.html. Accessed:
2023-01-16.
[2] GelSight Mini. https://www.gelsight.com/gelsightmini/.
Accessed: 2023-01-16.
[3] Maria Bauza, Antonia Bronars, and Alberto Rodriguez.
Tac2pose: Tactile object pose estimation from the first
touch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11701 , 2022.
[4] Jeannette Bohg, Karol Hausman, Bharath Sankaran,
Oliver Brock, Danica Kragic, Stefan Schaal, and Gau-
rav S. Sukhatme. Interactive perception: Leveraging
action in perception and perception in action. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics , 33(6):1273–1291, 2017. doi:
10.1109/TRO.2017.2721939.
[5] Gabriele M. Caddeo, Nicola A. Piga, Fabrizio Bottarel,
and Lorenzo Natale. Collision-aware in-hand 6d object
pose estimation using multiple vision-based tactile sen-
sors. In Proceedings of IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2023.
[6] Roberto Calandra, Andrew Owens, Dinesh Jayaraman,
Justin Lin, Wenzhen Yuan, Jitendra Malik, Edward H
Adelson, and Sergey Levine. More than a feeling:
Learning to grasp and regrasp using vision and touch.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 3(4):3300–3307,
2018.
[7] Arkadeep Narayan Chaudhury, Timothy Man, Wenzhen
Yuan, and Christopher G. Atkeson. Using collocated
vision and tactile sensors for visual servoing and local-
ization. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 7(2):
3427–3434, 2022. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2022.3146565.
[8] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and
Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for contrastive
learning of visual representations. In Hal Daum ´e III and
Aarti Singh, editors, Proceedings of the 37th Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning , volume 119 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1597–
1607. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v119/chen20j.html.
[9] X. Chen, S. Xie, and K. He. An empirical study of
training self-supervised vision transformers. In 2021
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV) , pages 9620–9629, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, oct
2021. IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.
2021.00950. URL https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/
10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00950.
[10] Alex Church, John Lloyd, Raia Hadsell, and Nathan F.
Lepora. Tactile sim-to-real policy transfer via real-to-sim
image translation. In Aleksandra Faust, David Hsu, and
Gerhard Neumann, editors, Proceedings of the 5th Con-
ference on Robot Learning , volume 164 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research . PMLR, 08–11 Nov 2022.
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v164/church22a.html.[11] MMSelfSup Contributors. MMSelfSup: Openmmlab
self-supervised learning toolbox and benchmark. https:
//github.com/open-mmlab/mmselfsup, 2021.
[12] Snehal Dikhale, Karankumar Patel, Daksh Dhingra,
Itoshi Naramura, Akinobu Hayashi, Soshi Iba, and Nawid
Jamali. Visuotactile 6d pose estimation of an in-hand
object using vision and tactile sensor data. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters , 7(2):2148–2155, 2022. doi:
10.1109/LRA.2022.3143289.
[13] Siyuan Dong and Alberto Rodriguez. Tactile-based
insertion for dense box-packing. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems (IROS) , pages 7953–7960, 2019. doi: 10.1109/
IROS40897.2019.8968204.
[14] Siyuan Dong, Daolin Ma, Elliott Donlon, and Alberto
Rodriguez. Maintaining grasps within slipping bounds
by monitoring incipient slip. In 2019 International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages
3818–3824. IEEE, 2019.
[15] Siyuan Dong, Devesh K. Jha, Diego Romeres, Sangwoon
Kim, Daniel Nikovski, and Alberto Rodriguez. Tactile-
rl for insertion: Generalization to objects of unknown
geometry. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 6437–6443,
2021. doi: 10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.9561646.
[16] Siyuan Dong, Devesh K Jha, Diego Romeres, Sangwoon
Kim, Daniel Nikovski, and Alberto Rodriguez. Tactile-
rl for insertion: Generalization to objects of unknown
geometry. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 6437–6443.
IEEE, 2021.
[17] Letian Fu, Huang Huang, Lars Berscheid, Hui Li, Ken
Goldberg, and Sachin Chitta. Safely learning visuo-
tactile feedback policies in real for industrial insertion.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01340 , 2022.
[18] Johanna Hansen, Francois Hogan, Dmitriy Rivkin,
David Meger, Michael Jenkin, and Gregory Dudek.
Visuotactile-rl: Learning multimodal manipulation poli-
cies with deep reinforcement learning. In 2022 Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,
pages 8298–8304, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ICRA46639.2022.
9812019.
[19] Karol Hausman, Scott Niekum, Sarah Osentoski, and
Gaurav S. Sukhatme. Active articulation model esti-
mation through interactive perception. In 2015 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA) , pages 3305–3312, 2015. doi: 10.1109/ICRA.
2015.7139655.
[20] Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and
Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for unsupervised
visual representation learning. In 2020 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR) , pages 9726–9735, 2020. doi: 10.1109/
CVPR42600.2020.00975.
[21] Francois R. Hogan, Jose Ballester, Siyuan Dong, and
Alberto Rodriguez. Tactile dexterity: Manipulation prim-itives with tactile feedback. In 2020 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,
pages 8863–8869, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.
9196976.
[22] S. Dong I. Taylor and A. Rodriguez. Gelslim 3.0: High-
resolution measurement of shape, force and slip in a
compact tactile-sensing finger. In ICRA , 2022.
[23] Devesh K. Jha, Diego Romeres, William Yerazunis, and
Daniel Nikovski. Imitation and supervised learning of
compliance for robotic assembly. In 2022 European
Control Conference (ECC) , pages 1882–1889, 2022. doi:
10.23919/ECC55457.2022.9838102.
[24] Tarik Kelestemur, Robert Platt, and Taskin Padir. Tactile
pose estimation and policy learning for unknown object
manipulation. In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Sys-
tems, AAMAS ’22, page 742–750, Richland, SC, 2022.
International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems. ISBN 9781450392136.
[25] Sangwoon Kim, Devesh K Jha, Diego Romeres, Parag
Patre, and Alberto Rodriguez. Simultaneous tactile
estimation and control of extrinsic contact. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.03385 , 2023.
[26] Michelle A Lee, Yuke Zhu, Krishnan Srinivasan, Parth
Shah, Silvio Savarese, Li Fei-Fei, Animesh Garg, and
Jeannette Bohg. Making sense of vision and touch:
Self-supervised learning of multimodal representations
for contact-rich tasks. In 2019 International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 8943–8950.
IEEE, 2019.
[27] Rui Li, Robert Platt, Wenzhen Yuan, Andreas ten Pas,
Nathan Roscup, Mandayam A. Srinivasan, and Edward
Adelson. Localization and manipulation of small parts
using gelsight tactile sensing. In 2014 IEEE/RSJ In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems, pages 3988–3993, 2014. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2014.
6943123.
[28] Shan Luo, Wenxuan Mou, Kaspar Althoefer, and Hong-
bin Liu. Localizing the object contact through match-
ing tactile features with visual map. In 2015 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA) , pages 3903–3908, 2015. doi: 10.1109/ICRA.
2015.7139743.
[29] Daolin Ma, Siyuan Dong, and Alberto Rodriguez. Ex-
trinsic contact sensing with relative-motion tracking from
distributed tactile measurements. In 2021 IEEE interna-
tional conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) ,
pages 11262–11268. IEEE, 2021.
[30] Kaichun Mo, Leonidas J. Guibas, Mustafa Mukadam,
Abhinav Gupta, and Shubham Tulsiani. Where2act:
From pixels to actions for articulated 3d objects. In
Proceedings of International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV) , pages 6813–6823, October 2021.
[31] Tonci Novkovic, Remi Pautrat, Fadri Furrer, Michel
Breyer, Roland Siegwart, and Juan Nieto. Object finding
in cluttered scenes using interactive perception. In2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) , pages 8338–8344, 2020. doi: 10.
1109/ICRA40945.2020.9197101.
[32] Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Rep-
resentation learning with contrastive predictive coding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 , 2018.
[33] Kei Ota, Hsiao-Yu Tung, Kevin A Smith, Anoop Cherian,
Tim K Marks, Alan Sullivan, Asako Kanezaki, and
Joshua B Tenenbaum. H-SAUR: Hypothesize, Simu-
late, Act, Update, and Repeat for Understanding Ob-
ject Articulations from Interactions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.12521 , 2022.
[34] Yu She, Shaoxiong Wang, Siyuan Dong, Neha Sunil,
Alberto Rodriguez, and Edward Adelson. Cable ma-
nipulation with a tactile-reactive gripper. The Interna-
tional Journal of Robotics Research , 40(12-14):1385–
1401, 2021.
[35] Yuki Shirai, Devesh K Jha, Arvind U Raghunathan, and
Dennis Hong. Tactile tool manipulation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.06698 , 2023.
[36] Bruno Siciliano, Oussama Khatib, and Torsten Kr ¨oger.
Springer handbook of robotics , volume 200. Springer,
2008.
[37] Sanjana Srivastava, Chengshu Li, Michael Lingelbach,
Roberto Mart ´ın-Mart ´ın, Fei Xia, Kent Elliott Vainio,
Zheng Lian, Cem Gokmen, Shyamal Buch, Karen Liu,
Silvio Savarese, Hyowon Gweon, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-
Fei. Behavior: Benchmark for everyday household ac-
tivities in virtual, interactive, and ecological environ-
ments. In Aleksandra Faust, David Hsu, and Gerhard
Neumann, editors, Proceedings of the 5th Conference
on Robot Learning , volume 164 of Proceedings of Ma-
chine Learning Research , pages 477–490. PMLR, 08–
11 Nov 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v164/
srivastava22a.html.
[38] Sudharshan Suresh, Zilin Si, Stuart Anderson, Michael
Kaess, and Mustafa Mukadam. Midastouch: Monte-carlo
inference over distributions across sliding touch. In 6th
Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2022. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=JWROnOf4w-K.
[39] Shaoxiong Wang, Mike Lambeta, Po-Wei Chou, and
Roberto Calandra. Tacto: A fast, flexible, and open-
source simulator for high-resolution vision-based tactile
sensors. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 7(2):
3930–3937, 2022. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2022.3146945.
[40] Ruihai Wu, Yan Zhao, Kaichun Mo, Zizheng Guo, Yian
Wang, Tianhao Wu, Qingnan Fan, Xuelin Chen, Leonidas
Guibas, and Hao Dong. V AT-Mart: Learning visual
action trajectory proposals for manipulating 3d articu-
lated objects. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) , 2022.
[41] Fei Xia, William B. Shen, Chengshu Li, Priya Kasimbeg,
Micael Edmond Tchapmi, Alexander Toshev, Roberto
Mart ´ın-Mart ´ın, and Silvio Savarese. Interactive gibson
benchmark: A benchmark for interactive navigation in
cluttered environments. IEEE Robotics and AutomationLetters , 5(2):713–720, 2020. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2020.
2965078.
[42] Jie Xu, Tao Chen, Lara Zlokapa, Michael Foshey, Woj-
ciech Matusik, Shinjiro Sueda, and Pulkit Agrawal. An
End-to-End Differentiable Framework for Contact-Aware
Robot Design. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and
Systems , Virtual, July 2021. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2021.
XVII.008.
[43] Jie Xu, Sangwoon Kim, Tao Chen, Alberto Rodriguez
Garcia, Pulkit Agrawal, Wojciech Matusik, and Shinjiro
Sueda. Efficient tactile simulation with differentiability
for robotic manipulation. In 6th Annual Conference
on Robot Learning , 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=6BIffCl6gsM.
[44] Wenzhen Yuan, Siyuan Dong, and Edward H. Adel-
son. Gelsight: High-resolution robot tactile sensors
for estimating geometry and force. Sensors , 17(12),
2017. ISSN 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s17122762. URL
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/17/12/2762.
[45] Wenzhen Yuan, Yuchen Mo, Shaoxiong Wang, and Ed-
ward H Adelson. Active clothing material perception
using tactile sensing and deep learning. In 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA) , pages 4842–4849. IEEE, 2018.