Waste Detection and Change Analysis based on
Multispectral Satellite Imagery
D avid Magyar1, M at e Cser ep1, Zolt an Vincell er1, and Attila D. Moln ar2
1ELTE E otv os Lor and University, Faculty of Informatics, Geoinformatics Laboratory
faoloyk,mcserep,vzoli g@inf.elte.hu
2Tisza Plastic Cup Initiative
molnar.attila.david@termeszetfilm.hu
Abstract. One of the biggest environmental problems of our time is
the increase in illegal landlls in forests, rivers, on river banks and other
secluded places. In addition, waste in rivers causes damage not only lo-
cally, but also downstream, both in the water and washed ashore. Large
islands of waste can also form at hydroelectric power stations and dams,
and if they continue to ow, they can cause further damage to the nat-
ural environment along the river. Recent studies have also proved that
rivers are the main source of plastic pollution in marine environments.
Monitoring potential sources of danger is therefore highly important for
eective waste collection for related organizations. In our research we
analyze two possible forms of waste detection: identication of hot-spots
(i.e. illegal waste dumps) and identication of water-surface river block-
ages. We used medium to high-resolution multispectral satellite imagery
as our data source, especially focusing on the Tisza river as our study
area. We found that using satellite imagery and machine learning are
viable to locate and to monitor the change of the previously detected
waste.
1 Introduction
As a result of stricter waste management regulations in the EU, the number
of reported waste-related misdemeanors is increasing every day. A signicant
amount of plastic stocks endanger both human and environmental health and can
also lead to water pollution and animal diseases [1,2,3]. Previous studies in the
past decade have identied running freshwaters like rivers as the main source of
plastic pollution in marine environments [4]. It is estimated that approximately
80% of plastic pollution is carried by rivers into the sea [5], and the annual plastic
input into marine environments from rivers is between 1.15 and 2.41 million
metric tons worldwide [6]. In our research we have focused on Hungary and the
surrounding drainage basin territory. While an overall survey on approximately
1000 rivers showed that the average plastic load of the Danube (the major river
in Hungary) is well exceeded by rivers in Asia [7], the current state of plastic
pollution is still highly problematic. The plastic transport of the Danube river
is estimated to 4.2 metric tons / day, so the yearly plastic load to the Black SeaarXiv:2303.14521v1  [cs.CV]  25 Mar 20232 D avid Magyar et al.
is 1500 tons minimum [8]. Another long term observations of Hungarian water
authorities revealed on the river Tisza the frequency of oating bottles can reach
500 bottles per minute leading to the name plastic ood and leaving river Tisza
one of the most polluted tributary of the Danube [9].
Therefore it is important that waste collection organizations are able to mon-
itor potential sources of danger. Traditional methods of identifying illegal waste
deposits usually require manual surveys, which is not well scalable due to its
high demand of human workforce. Remote sensing studies of waste management
have so far been underexplored eld, due to the spectrally variable and complex
nature of dierent materials (include plastic), and their similarity to other land
covers such as water and shadow.
Earth observation satellites equipped with medium- and high-resolution mul-
tispectral sensors have undergone great advancement in the past decade. Multi-
temporal imagery of designated areas became available on a monthly, weekly, or
even daily basis, which can also be used for change analysis. These multispectral
images can be analyzed based on both their visible and invisible spectrums, as
well as the various indices created from them, in order to better separate the
waste-covered areas from their surroundings.
Machine learning can be considered a subset of articial intelligence and con-
sists of computer algorithms which can improve automatically using experience
and data. These algorithms build a model based on sample data (so-called train-
ing data), which can be utilized to make predictions or decisions without being
explicitly programmed to do so. Machine learning algorithms are used in various
applications where it is dicult or impractical to develop traditional algorithms
to perform the required tasks. Machine learning is widely used nowadays and is
increasingly used in remote sensing.
The goal of our research is to develop an accurate classication method for
plastic waste detection to provide a viable platform for repeatable, cost-eective
and large-scale monitoring. Such a robust waste monitoring solution would speed
up the detection of illegal waste hot-spots close to water ows and oating waste
islands on rivers, as well as support waste collection actions with an automatic
monitoring system. The proposed solution is based on a machine learning ap-
proach, the random forest classication algorithm [10]. Some implementations
also provide the possibility to control the size of the trees (e.g. the maximum
height of the tree or the maximum size of the vertices), which can be used to
limit the execution time of the algorithm [11].
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces the most
important concepts related to the topic and provides an insight into waste de-
tection attempts in the literature. Section 3 presents the areas used to teach the
classication model and the detection methods developed during the project.
Then Section 4 illustrates the results obtained. Finally, a summary of the study
and our own conclusions are presented in Section 5.Waste Detection and Change Analysis based on Multispectral Satellite Img. 3
2 Background and related work
In recent decades, both remote sensing itself and Earth observation satellites
equipped with medium- and high-resolution multispectral sensors have under-
gone major technological developments. These instruments are capable of record-
ing data in both the visible and invisible range, thus providing more information
about the observed area. In our study we used two Earth observations missions
and satellite systems, Sentinel-2 and PlanetScope as data sources.
2.1 Sentinel-2
The European Union's Earth observation programme is the Copernicus1pro-
gramme [12]. Its Sentinel-2 mission is based on a constellation of two identical
satellites in the same orbit2. Each satellite carries an innovative, 13 spectral
band, high-resolution multispectral imaging instrument that continuously mon-
itors changes on the Earth's surface.
Sentinel-2's high-resolution multispectral instrument is based on the well-
established legacy of the French SPOT3and US Landsat satellites4. The multi-
spectral imager is the most advanced of its kind - in fact, it is the rst optical
earth observation instrument to include three bands in the "red edge" range,
which provide key information on the state of vegetation. It integrates two large
visible near-infrared and short-wave infrared focal planes, each equipped with 12
detectors and combining 450 000 pixels. Pixels that may fail during the mission
can be replaced with redundant pixels. The two types of detectors use high qual-
ity lters to ensure perfect separation of spectral bands. The optical-mechanical
stability of the instrument must be extremely high, which meant the use of sil-
icon carbide ceramics for the three mirrors and focal plane, as well as for the
structure of the telescope itself. The 13 spectral bands, from visible to near in-
frared and shortwave infrared (as listed in Table 1), with a spatial resolution of
10 to 60 metres, bring the observation of the Earth's surface to an unprecedented
level of resolution [13,14].
The bands we used were mostly those with a resolution of 10 and 20 meters,
with a pixel covering an area of 100 and 400 m2respectively. Hence, it was only
suitable for identifying large landlls.
2.2 PlanetScope
The PlanetScope constellation of satellites from Planet Labs Inc. in the US is
made up of a multitude of individual cube satellite clusters5. The constellation
of more than 130 satellites is capable of recording almost the entire land area of
1https://www.copernicus.eu/en
2https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-2
3https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/missions/spot
4https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/missions/landsat
5https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/missions/planetscope4 D avid Magyar et al.
Band
NumberSpatial
resolutionCentral
wavelengthDescription
B1 60 m 443 nm Coastal aerosol
B2 10 m 490 nm Blue
B3 10 m 560 nm Green
B4 10 m 665 nm Red
B5 20 m 705 nm Vegetation red edge
B6 20 m 740 nm Vegetation red edge
B7 20 m 783 nm Vegetation red edge
B8 10 m 842 nm NIR
B8a 20 m 865 nm Narrow NIR
B9 60 m 940 nm Water vapour
B10 60 m 1375 nm SWIR - Cirrus
B11 20 m 1610 nm SWIR 1
B12 20 m 2190 nm SWIR 2
Table 1: Bands and parameters of Sentinel-2 satellite [15,16].
the Earth on a daily basis. The imaging instrument used on all of these satellites
can currently capture images in four bands: Blue, Green, Red, Near Infrared (as
shown in Table 2), with the addition of a Red edge band in special cases.
These instruments were already capable of identifying small areas, as their
bands have a resolution of 3 m, i.e. a pixel contains data for an area of 9 m2.
Band
numberSpatial
resolutionWavelength Description
B1 3 m 455 - 517 nm Blue
B2 3 m 500 - 590 nm Green
B3 3 m 590 - 682 nm Red
B4 3 m 780 - 888 nm NIR
Table 2: Bands and parameters of PlaneScope satellite [17].
2.3 Spectral indices
Dierent index values can be calculated from the bands of the satellite images.
The indices shown in Table 3 were computed and used in our evaluation. Each
one highlights characteristics of dierent types of areas. Perhaps the most im-
portant index we used was the Plastic Index , to be described in detail in subsec-
tion 2.4. This index has a higher value for areas containing plastic, which feature
we used in the change analysis.Waste Detection and Change Analysis based on Multispectral Satellite Img. 5
Plastic Index (PI) =NIR
NIR +Red
Normalized Difference Water Index (NDWI ) =Green  NIR
Green +NIR
Normalized Difference V egetation Index (NDV I ) =NIR Red
NIR +Red
Reversed Normalized Difference V egetation Index (RNDV I ) =Red NIR
Red +NIR
Simple Ratio (SR) =NIR
Red
Table 3: Calculation methods for the used indices [18].
2.4 Plastic Index
We have based the theoretical background of waste segmentation on the Plas-
tic Index , as introduced by Themistocleous et al. in their work. In the article
the authors investigated whether Sentinel-2 satellite imagery could be used to
identify and track plastic litter oating on the sea surface [18]. To do this, a
pilot study was carried out. A 3 m ×10 m target consisting of plastic water
bottles was created and subsequently placed in the sea near a port in Limassol,
Cyprus (see Figures 1 and 2). An unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) was also used
to take multispectral aerial photographs of the study area in the same time as
a Sentinel-2 satellite. The spectral signature of the water and the plastic de-
bris placed in the water was recorded using an SVC HR1024 spectroradiometer
[19]. The study found that plastic debris was most easily detected in the Near
Infrared (NIR) wavelength. Seven of the indices commonly used in processing
satellite imagery were tested for their ability to identify plastic litter in water.
In addition, the authors tested two new indices: the Plastic Index (PI) and the
Reversed Normalized Dierence Vegetation Index (RNDVI) . The results are vi-
sualized in Figure 3. The newly developed Plastic Index was able to identify
plastic objects oating on the water surface and was the most eective index in
identifying plastic litter. In reality, the results may be spoiled by the fact that
the bottles are not in such a nice condition, which could change the spectral
values.
2.5 Other attempts for waste detection
Signicant amounts of tyre and plastic waste are a threat to both human and
environmental health, can lead to water pollution and animal disease, and are
potential sources of re hazards. Remote sensing studies of waste management
have so far been less explored due to the spectrally variable and complex na-
ture of tyres and plastics and their similarity to other land cover such as water
and shadows. Therefore, the overall objective of Page et al. was to develop an
accurate classication method for detecting both tire and plastic debris to pro-
vide a viable platform for repeatable, cost-eective, and large-scale monitoring
[20]. An extended land cover classication combining the thematic indices of6 D avid Magyar et al.
Fig. 1: The target made from plastic bottles by Themistocleous et al.
Fig. 2: Launching the target by Themistocleous et al.Waste Detection and Change Analysis based on Multispectral Satellite Img. 7
Fig. 3: Detection of the target. Sentinel-2 satellite image processed with indices.
Land is shown in orange, water in blue and plastic in yellow. The yellow square
inside the yellow circle is the plastic target during the satellite pass. The index
values for the plastic are shown in brackets for each index [18].8 D avid Magyar et al.
the Copernicus Sentinel-2 optical imagery and the Copernicus Sentinel-16mi-
crowave data has been developed. They used two Random Forest classication
algorithms specically trained for the detection of rubber and plastic debris
based on imagery from Scotland.
An important success and application of deep learning in recent years has
been in the eld of image processing. In their study, Youme et al. present an
automated solution for detecting hidden landlls utilizing unmanned aerial ve-
hicle (UAV) imagery in the Saint Louis area of Senegal, West Africa7, using a
convolutional neural network (CNN) [21]. The results show that the model is
good at identifying the areas concerned, but has diculties in some areas where
there are no clear ground truths.
3 Methodology
As introduced before, two waste detection methods were analyzed in our study:
1. Identication of hot-spots, i.e. illegal waste dumps on medium to high-
resolution satellite images in the upper parts of the river Tisza (Ukraine,
Romania), from which signicant amounts of waste are discharged into the
river during oods.
2. Identication of water-surface river blockages on medium to high-resolution
satellite imagery that can form at known locations on the river (e.g. hydro-
electric dams).
3.1 Identication of hot-spots
The aim was to be able to observe the changes in the extent of the polluted
areas along the river. Such areas directly on the river banks are a major hazard
during oods. In such cases, the river leaves its bed and when it recedes, it carries
the waste with it and deposits it in another, undesired location. Such hot-spots
along the river Tisza are mainly located in Ukraine and Romania. Hungarian
waste collection organizations already have experience of the hot-spots where
they have to move to after a ood. If our classication shows that the extent of
the hot-spot is signicant in the pre-ood picture, then an on-site investigation
is justied.
The landll in Pusztaz amor played a major role in teaching the model used
for this method, as the aim was to detect features very similar to this area.
No other procedure than classication was used. The results are visualized in
Figure 4.
3.2 Identication of water-surface river blockages
Water-surface river blockages can form mainly at hydroelectric power plants
or dams. Such a barrage can cover up to several thousand square metres. The
6https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-1
7Saint Louis, Senegal, West Africa { GPS coordinates (lat/long): 16.0234 / -16.4792Waste Detection and Change Analysis based on Multispectral Satellite Img. 9
(a) Before classication
 (b) After classication
Fig. 4: Classication of the teaching area in Pusztaz amor.
images of the hydropower plant in Kisk ore were a great help in detecting them,
because large areas of rubbish often get stuck there.
In addition to classication, morphological transformations were also needed
to achieve the desired results. From the classied image, we created a binary
one: waste and water classes were grouped together and everything else was left
out. We performed a morphological opening on the result in order to remove
noise (small areas that fall away from the river). This was followed by a dilation
to widen the contours of the remaining areas. For these we used a 5 ×5 matrix
as a kernel. The end result seen in Figure 5 is now mainly just the river and the
island of junk oating on it.
3.3 The model
As mentioned before, the teaching areas were the landll in Pusztaz amor8and
the hydroelectric power plant in Kisk ore9. These sites are covered with large
quantities of waste visible to the naked eye on satellite images. We used Sentinel-
2 images of the landll and PlanetScope images of the power plant.
Two dierent methods were used in the teachings. In one, we used only the
Sentinel-2 images and indices that could be calculated from the available bands
(Table 1). In the other version, we used only those bands that are possible to
obtain from both Sentinel-2 and PlanetScope images (Table 2). The reason for
this was that we wanted to embed the nal solution in our own framework, which
is able to process Sentinel-2 and PlanetScope images in a consistent way. From
these bands we calculated the indices presented in Table 3.
8Landll (Pusztaz amor) { GPS coordinates (lat/long): 47.3778 / 18.7982
9Hydroelectric power plant (Kisk ore) { GPS coordinates (lat/long): 47.4935 / 20.515010 D avid Magyar et al.
(a) Before classication
 (b) After classication
 (c) Binary image
(d) Opening
 (e) Dilation
 (f) Result
Fig. 5: Detection of the garbage barrage at the hydropower plant in Kisk ore.Waste Detection and Change Analysis based on Multispectral Satellite Img. 11
The nal model uses ve target classes: waste, water, forest/meadow, build-
ings and bare ground. We also performed cross-validation on almost 200,000
training data, which showed an accuracy of almost 96%.
4 Results
This chapter presents some of the results of the developed methods. Where
possible, several sample areas are illustrated. The classication of the autumn
and winter recordings did not give good results. The reason being that due to
bad weather conditions no recordings were made that could be meaningfully
used for teaching. The results shown below were obtained by processing spring
and summer images.
In the classied images, the most important color is red, as this indicates the
areas covered by waste according to the model. The heat maps show a subset of
the littered areas. The colors on these represent how condent the model was in
its decision (see Table 5).
Class Color
waste red
water blue
forest/meadow green
buildings gray
bare ground brown
Table 4: Classes and their coloring.Condence Color
90% - 100% red
80% - 90% yellow
70% - 80% green
Table 5: Coloring of heat maps.
4.1 Identication of hot-spots
In this method, the process consisted of only one classication. Figure 6 shows
the classication of the area of the Deponia Waste Management Centre10in
Hungary, and Figure 7 shows one of the areas identied by the Plastic Cup sta,
Lake C alines ,ti11in Romania, which is considered a potential hot-spot.
4.2 Identication of water-surface river blockages
This method gave the most promising results. The areas of detected waste (shown
in red) in the classied images are clearly separated from their surroundings, as
presented in Figures 8 and 9. We considered eliminating the red spots on the
river banks that are not in contact with water (blue), but concluded to leave
10Deponia Waste Management Centre { GPS coordinates (lat/long): 47.2399 / 18.4682
11Lake C alines ,ti { GPS coordinates (lat/long): 47.8946 / 23.294812 D avid Magyar et al.
(a) Before process
(b) After process
(c) Heatmap
Fig. 6: Deponia Waste Management Centre, Hungary - June 27, 2019Waste Detection and Change Analysis based on Multispectral Satellite Img. 13
(a) Before process
(b) After process
(c) Heatmap
Fig. 7: Lake C alines ,ti, Romania - September 16, 202014 D avid Magyar et al.
them in the nal images. The reason for this was that there have been cases
where the garbage island was in contact with other classes rather than water on
the classied image. In this case the actual waste would have been removed.
(a) Before process
 (b) After process
 (c) Heatmap
Fig. 8: Hydropower Plant in Kisk ore, Hungary - July 2, 2019
4.3 Visualizing the results
An automated evaluator for waste monitoring and change detection was also
developed as part of the research. The program provides an easy and robust so-
lution to congure territories for continuous observation. The application down-
loads satellite images from the mentioned sources on a daily basis (given that a
new image is available for the selected area) and compares the amount of waste
covered surface to previous images. In case there is a noticeable change, an alert
is sent to precongured email addresses. We also started to develop a web appli-
cation that provides information about the status of predened locations. The
goal is to visualize the extent of polluted areas in these locations. In the nal
version it will be updated on a daily basis, showing only the latest results. In
Figure 10 you can see the prototype user interface of this application.
4.4 Execution time
Table 6 shows the execution time of our waste detection methods. It should
be noted that the signicant part of these processes are the calculation of in-Waste Detection and Change Analysis based on Multispectral Satellite Img. 15
(a) Before process
 (b) After process
 (c) Heatmap
Fig. 9: Hydropower Plant in Kisk ore, Hungary - July 23, 2020
Fig. 10: User interface of web application for visualizing the results.16 D avid Magyar et al.
dices. Compared to this, the classication and morphological transformations
are computed much faster.
Process Image size Execution time
Hot-spots164312 = 51 168 2.17 sec
1194801 = 956 394 39.98 sec
45974153 = 19 091 341 12 min 42 sec
66145981 = 39 558 334 26 min 5 sec
Water-surface
river blockages164312 = 51 168 2.5 sec
1194801 = 956 394 42.45 sec
45974153 = 19 091 341 14 min 7 sec
66145981 = 39 558 334 29 min 41 sec
Table 6: Execution time of the waste detection methods.
5 Conclusion
The aim of the research was to test and develop waste detection methods that
can be used in practice and facilitate the work of waste collection organizations.
The solution developed for this purpose is compatible with any satellite image
with at least four bands, which must necessarily include the Blue, Green, Red,
Near Infrared bands.
The trained Random Forest classication model works well mainly with im-
ages taken in spring and summer, because the weather conditions are not suitable
in winter and autumn, when images are usually too cloudy and could not be used
in teaching the model.
Future work could include teaching the model using very large amounts of
data. Also, the processing of the images could be done in parallel, which could
lead to a reduction in processing time. We will continue developing the web
application to further facilitate the practical use of this project.
Acknowledgements
The research work was supported nancially by the ELTE Faculty of Informatics
and InforNess Training Ltd. The PlanetScope satellite images were provided by
Planet Labs Inc. Education and Research Program [22]. Professional support
was provided by the Lechner Knowledge Centre12and the Tisza Plastic Cup13
waste collection organization.
12https://lechnerkozpont.hu/
13https://petkupa.hu/Waste Detection and Change Analysis based on Multispectral Satellite Img. 17
References
1. G. Katona, \A tisza foly o hullad ekszennyez ese," M} uszaki Katonai K ozl ony , vol. 29,
no. 4, pp. 65{80, 2019.
2. Plastic Cup Initiative. PET palack  aradat. [Online]. Available: https://petkupa.
hu/hu HU/pet-palack-aradat
3. ||. Plastic bottle tsunami. [Online]. Available: https://petkupa.hu/eng/
?cikkId=994
4. A. Lechner, H. Keckeis, F. Lumesberger-Loisl, B. Zens, R. Krusch, M. Tritthart,
M. Glas, and E. Schludermann, \The danube so colourful: a potpourri of plas-
tic litter outnumbers sh larvae in europe's second largest river," Environmental
pollution , vol. 188, pp. 177{181, 2014.
5. C. Schmidt, T. Krauth, and S. Wagner, \Export of plastic debris by rivers into the
sea," Environmental science & technology , vol. 51, no. 21, pp. 12 246{12 253, 2017.
6. L. Lebreton, J. Van Der Zwet, J.-W. Damsteeg, B. Slat, A. Andrady, and J. Reisser,
\River plastic emissions to the world's oceans," Nature communications , vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 1{10, 2017.
7. L. J. Meijer, T. van Emmerik, R. van der Ent, C. Schmidt, and L. Lebreton,
\More than 1000 rivers account for 80% of global riverine plastic emissions into
the ocean," Science Advances , vol. 7, no. 18, p. eaaz5803, 2021.
8. A. Lechner and D. Ramler, \The discharge of certain amounts of industrial mi-
croplastic from a production plant into the River Danube is permitted by the
Austrian legislation," Environmental Pollution , vol. 200, pp. 159{160, 2015.
9. M. Gyalai-Korpos, \Plastic pollution of rivers in the Danube region," Government
of Hungary, Tech. Rep., 2019. [Online]. Available: https://dunaregiostrategia.
kormany.hu/download/3/7f/72000/EUSDR 20191.pdf
10. T. K. Ho, \Random decision forests," in Proceedings of 3rd international conference
on document analysis and recognition , vol. 1. IEEE, 1995, pp. 278{282.
11. G. Biau and E. Scornet, \A random forest guided tour," TEST , vol. 25, 11 2015.
12. J. Aschbacher, \Esa's earth observation strategy and copernicus," in Satellite earth
observations and their impact on society and policy . Springer, Singapore, 2017,
pp. 81{86.
13. F. Spoto, O. Sy, P. Laberinti, P. Martimort, V. Fernandez, O. Colin, B. Hoersch,
and A. Meygret, \Overview of sentinel-2," in 2012 IEEE international geoscience
and remote sensing symposium . IEEE, 2012, pp. 1707{1710.
14. V. Cazaubiel, V. Chorvalli, and C. Miesch, \The multispectral instrument of the
Sentinel2 program," in International Conference on Space Optics|ICSO 2008 , vol.
10566. SPIE, 2017, pp. 110{115.
15. E. O. E. S. Agency. Sentinel-2 multispectral instrument (MSI) overview. [On-
line]. Available: https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/technical-guides/
sentinel-2-msi/msi-instrument
16. GISGeography. Sentinel 2 bands and combinations. [Online]. Available:
https://gisgeography.com/sentinel-2-bands-combinations/
17. Planet, Planet Imagery Product Specications , 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//assets.planet.com/docs/combined-imagery-product-spec-nal-may-2019.pdf
18. K. Themistocleous, C. Papoutsa, S. Michaelides, and D. Hadjimitsis, \Investigating
detection of oating plastic litter from space using sentinel-2 imagery," Remote
Sensing , vol. 12, no. 16, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/
2072-4292/12/16/264818 D avid Magyar et al.
19. Field Spectroscopy Facility. SVC HR-1024i Field Spectroradiometer. [Online].
Available: https://fsf.nerc.ac.uk/instruments/svc hr-1024i.shtml
20. R. Page, S. Lavender, D. Thomas, K. Berry, S. Stevens, M. Haq, E. Udugbezi,
G. Fowler, J. Best, and I. Brockie, \Identication of tyre and plastic waste from
Combined Copernicus Sentinel-1 and -2 data," Remote Sensing , vol. 12, no. 17, p.
2824, 2020.
21. O. Youme, T. Bayet, J. M. Dembele, and C. Cambier, \Deep learning and remote
sensing: detection of dumping waste using UAV," Procedia Computer Science , vol.
185, pp. 361{369, 2021.
22. Planet Team, \Planet application program interface: In space for life on earth,"
https://api.planet.com/, 2017, san Francisco, CA.