Multiple Imputation Approaches for Epoch-level Accelerometer data
in Trials
Mia S. Tackneyy∗, Elizabeth Williamson†, Derek G. Cook‡, Elizabeth Limbz, Tess Harrisz,
James Carpentery§
March 31, 2023
Abstract
Clinical trials that investigate interventions on physical activity often use accelerometers to
measure step count at a very granular level, often in 5-second epochs. Participants typically wear
the accelerometer for a week-long period at baseline, and for one or more week-long follow-up periods
after the intervention. The data is usually aggregated to provide daily or weekly step counts for
the primary analysis. Missing data are common as participants may not wear the device as per
protocol. Approaches to handling missing data in the literature have largely dened missingness on
the day level using a threshold on daily wear time, which leads to loss of information on the time of
day when data are missing. We propose an approach to identifying and classifying missingness at
the ner epoch-level, and then present two approaches to handling missingness. Firstly, we present
a parametric approach which takes into account the number of missing epochs per day. Secondly, we
describe a non-parametric approach to Multiple Imputation (MI) where missing periods during the
day are replaced by donor data from the same person where possible, or data from a dierent person
who is matched on demographic and physical activity-related variables. Our simulation studies
comparing these approaches in a number of settings show that the non-parametric approach leads
to estimates of the eect of treatment that are least biased while maintaining small standard errors.
We illustrate the application of these dierent MI strategies to the analysis of the 2017 PACE-UP
Trial. The proposed framework of classifying missingness and applying MI at the epoch-level is
likely to be applicable to a number of dierent outcomes and data from other wearable devices.
Keywords : Missing data, Multiple imputation, Accelerometer, Physical Activity Trial, Wearables
1 Introduction
Wearable devices are increasingly becoming popular tools to measure health outcomes in clinical
trials. In trials that investigate interventions aimed to increase physical activity, accelerometers have
∗Address correspondence to Mia S. Tackney, MRC Biostatistics Unit, University of Cambridge, East Forvie Site,
Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0SR, UK; E-mail: Mia.Tackney@mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk
†Department of Medical Statistics, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, UK
‡Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of London, UK
§MRC Clinical Trials Unit at University College London, UK
1arXiv:2303.17331v1  [stat.ME]  30 Mar 2023been used in a number of studies to evaluate impact on participants' step count (Harris et al., 2015,
2017, 2018; Ismail et al., 2019). Accelerometers measure acceleration in three dimensions in very
ne intervals of time, typically in 5-second intervals or epochs, and oer a more objective measure
of physical activity with reduced participant burden compared to self-report approaches. Outputs of
interest from accelerometers include vector magnitude (VM), which summarizes the accelerations in
three dimensions, step count and time spent in dierent physical activity intensities (e.g. sedentary,
light, moderate-to vigorous physical activity) (Leeger-Aschmann et al., 2019). Missing data can occur
in a number of ways in this setting; for example, there may be device failure due to the battery running
out or water damage, or participants may remove or forget to wear the accelerometer for periods of
time during the day. Analyses should account for the missingness in a suitable way in order for results
to be unbiased and to reect the uncertainty appropriately. Multiple Imputation (MI) is a exible and
powerful approach to handling missing data, and has previously been applied to the accelerometer
setting where outcomes are aggregated at the day level (Tackney et al., 2021).
Approaches which apply MI to day-level step counts require missingness to also be determined at the
day-level. A popular approach in the literature is to dene a day as missing if a participant wore
the device for less than 540 minutes in a day (Harris et al., 2015, 2017, 2018; Ismail et al., 2019).
Other common choices of threshold include 360 minutes of wear time (De Craemer et al., 2016) and
600 minutes of wear time (Goode et al., 2015; Cameron et al., 2017). Dening missingness at the
aggregate day-level has some drawbacks. Thus participants may provide valuable data on so-called
\missing days" (e.g. days with less than 540 minutes of wear time) which would then become discarded;
for example, Figure 1 plot (a) displays VM from a day where the device was worn for 475.92 minutes,
which is slightly short of the required weartime. Equally, participants who do provide at least 540
minutes of weartime could potentially still have missing parts of days; for example, Figure 1 plots (b)
and (c) are examples of days where weartime is adequate, but there are periods during the day where
no data is recorded and could potentially be missing. Tackney et al. (2021) proposed an alternative
approach where days are classied as missing, partially observed or observed, and partially observed
days are treated as right-censored data, which retains the information from days where participants
provide some, but insucient, data. However, even with this approach, information on times of day
where missingness takes place is discarded. Examining the time of day when participants have missing
data could be valuable in trying to restore information and can lead to greater clarity. Applying MI
at the epoch-level have had limited attention in the literature so far.
Figure 1: Vector Magnitude (VM) is plotted against time for data from three days from three dierent
individuals from the PACE-UP trial.
Multiple Imputation (MI) is a exible and powerful approach to handling missing data. MI accounts
for uncertainty in the missing values, and allows for sensitivity analysis to explore departures from the
Missing at Random (MAR) assumption. Further, MI can allow for outcomes to be on an aggregate
2level (day- or week-level), while missingness is handled on the ner epoch-level. To date, there has
been limited exploration of missingness on the epoch-level data in the literature. Lee and Gill (2018)
propose a zero-inated Poisson and log-normal mixture distribution which allows for imputations at
the epoch-level. Butera et al. (2019) proposed a non-parametric (hot deck) approach to MI at the
epoch-level. When data are MAR, their simulation studies showed that the non-parametric approach
produced less bias and improved coverage compared to available case and complete case approaches.
However, neither of these epoch-level approaches to imputation fully reect the complexity of dening
missingness at the epoch-level. Lee and Gill (2018) assume a window of between 9am and 9pm in
which participants are awake, and dene missingness as intervals of at least 20 minutes of no recorded
acceleration. Limiting the window of data considered between 9am and 9pm ignores the variation
within and between people's waking and sleeping times, and does not acknowledge the possibility that
some of these periods may actually be due to the participant removing their device during sleep, which
is per-protocol and should not be imputed. In their simulation studies, Butera et al. (2019) induce
missingness in two-hour blocks of time, which simplies the complexity of missingness in genuine
datasets.
This study aims to characterize the common patterns of missing accelerometer data at the epoch-level,
and handle epoch-level missingness utilising MI using both parametric and non-parametric approaches,
illustrated by a specic trial example. We rst describe the PACE-UP trial, and then describe Multiple
Imputation and the challenges in its application in the accelerometer context. We then describe the
non-parametric and parametric approaches in Proposed Approaches. These approaches are validated
through Simulation Studies, and their performances are compared in an Application to the PACE-UP
trial.
2 PACE-UP trial
We illustrate the missing data issues in the accelerometer context using the 2017 PACE-UP trial as
a motivating example. The PACE-UP trial investigated postal and nurse-supported interventions for
increasing physical activity in patients aged 45-75 years from seven primary care practices in London.
Randomization was by household (to avoid couple contamination) and block randomization was used
within seven primary care practices. Of the 1023 patients in the trial, 338 were randomized to usual
care, 339 to postal pedometer intervention and 346 to nurse-supported intervention. The participants
were provided with an ActiGraph GT3X accelerometer (ActiGraph, FL, USA) for a period of seven
consecutive days on four separate occasions, which we refer to as time points : baseline, 3 months, 12
months, and 3 years. They were instructed to wear the accelerometer on the hip using a belt during
waking hours, except when swimming or showering. The protocol and results of the trial have been
reported previously (Harris et al., 2017, 2018), and the trial showed that physical activity increased
in both intervention groups compared to usual care.
In the reported trial results, days are dened as missing if wear time is less than 540 minutes (Harris
et al., 2017). Further, at least ve non-missing days at baseline, and at least one non-missing day
at 12 Months are required to be included in the primary analysis. Of the 1023 patients who were
randomized, 93% of participants were included in the 12-month primary analysis. The average of the
non-missing days were computed at baseline and 12 months to assess change in step count, adjusting
for day of week, and day-order-of-wear. The primary analysis assumes that the data are missing
3at random (MAR), and sensitivity analyses were conducted to assess the impact of using dierent
thresholds on weartime for dening missingness, and to assess the impact of data being missing not
at random (MNAR) (Harris et al., 2017).
3 Multiple Imputation
Multiple imputation (MI) is a exible and practical approach to the analysis of datasets with missing
values. An imputation model is specied, which is a model for the posterior predictive distribution of
the missing outcomes given the observed data (Harel and Zhou, 2007). This model is used to impute
missing data with Mplausible values, resulting in a total of Msets of complete data. The analysis
model is tted to each of the Mdatasets, and the results for inference are combined using Rubin's
rules (Rubin, 1976) to take full account of the uncertainty due to the missing values. If the imputation
model is specied appropriately, MI provides valid and ecient inference under the assumption that
the data are MAR given the observed data in the imputation model (Carpenter and Kenward, 2012,
Ch.2). Sensitivity analysis to assess the robustness of the results to missing data assumptions is
recommended (Cro et al., 2020). An attractive feature of MI in the accelerometer setting is that the
imputation model and the analysis model are separate, which allows missingness to be dened on a
dierent level than the level specied in the analysis model. For example, the analysis model may
have as the outcome the step counts averaged across the week and the imputation model may handle
missingness at the ner day- or epoch-level to achieve more precise imputations.
The imputation model is typically specied as an explicit parametric model for the predictive distribu-
tion of the missing variables given the observed data. For example, a multivariate normal model can
be specied, or Tobit regression may be used in the accelerometer setting to incorporate step counts
as right-censored observations in the imputation model if participants took an insucient number of
steps. A parametric imputation model may include additional auxiliary variables which are not in the
analysis model, but are predictive of missingness or step count. The inclusion of variables such as daily
weather variables in the accelerometer setting can help to make the MAR assumption more plausible
(Tackney et al., 2021). An alternative approach is to use non-parametric or hot-deck imputation,
which replaces missing values with donor data, which are observed data that have been identied to
be of similar characteristics to the missing data (Andridge and Little, 2010). An important advantage
of this approach is that it is compatible with complicated relationships in the dataset which do not
have to be specied via a statistical model (Carpenter and Kenward, 2012, p. 181).
Accelerometer data presents two main challenges which need to be addressed before MI can be directly
applied; rstly, the challenge of dening missingness at the epoch-level, and secondly, the challenge of
handling dicult distributions.
3.1 Complications for MI in the accelerometer context
Challenge 1: Dening missingness at the epoch-level
The rst challenge in dening missing data in the accelerometer context is identifying when partici-
pants have removed the device. Unlike more sophisticated wrist-worn devices, the GT3X+ accelerom-
eters did not measure pulse or heart rate. It is dicult to decide whether a period with no movement
4recorded is: (A) a period where the participant is wearing the device but staying still, (B) a period
where the participant has removed the device per protocol, such as during sleep, or (C) whether the
participant has removed the device during the day and is an instance of missing data. Participants'
movement is often quantied by Vector Magnitude (VM), which is the square root of the sum of the
acceleration in each component squared. Figure 1 displays plots of VM against time for three days
from dierent participants in the PACE-UP trial. In plot (c), there is a short period of no activity
in the middle of the day, which could be missing data, or perhaps could be the participant lying still.
In contrast, the longer periods of no movement in the morning and in the evening are very likely to
be the participant removing the device for sleep, as per protocol. There is a need to classify these
types of activities at the epoch-level, in order to identify the missing intervals that need to be imputed
through MI.
Challenge 2: Dicult distributions
Accelerometer data at the epoch-level are characterized by a large proportion of zeros, a heavy positive
skew, and high autocorrelation (Lee and Gill, 2018). The complexity in the distribution of epoch-level
data means that parametric approaches to imputation that assume a standard distribution, such as
the normal distribution, are likely to be inappropriate.
Further, epoch-level accelerometer data collected over the course of a week is characterized by complex
within-person patterns. There are patterns of activity that are dependent on time of day, and these
patterns are generally dierent on weekends compared to weekdays. Allowing for these patterns on
the epoch-level is a statistical and computational challenge.
4 Proposed Approaches
Classifying Missingness at the Epoch Level
Resolving the rst challenge of identifying missing periods begins by identifying zero-count periods.
Zero-count periods are intervals of time where VM is continuously zero over a specied threshold,
usually set at 20, 60 or 90 minutes, where it can be assumed that the device is removed (Evenson
and Terry, 2009). Some authors recommend allowing for a spike tolerance , that is, allowing for an
interval of up to 2 minutes of non-zero VM to account for inadvertent movements of the device, such
as the device being moved across the table (Choi et al., 2011). We adopt the denition used in the
PACE-UP trial, where a 60 minute threshold was used, allowing for a 2-minute spike tolerance. We
note that zero-count periods are sometimes referred to as non-wear in the literature, but we reserve
non-wear to refer more specically to periods where people are likely to have removed the device.
Zero-count periods include periods where participants are wearing the device, but are staying still. In
order to distinguish these periods, we note that putting on and removing the device requires a sharp
movement, which is detectable as a spike in VM. Empirically, we explored the data and conrmed
that this is the case; VM greater than 600 is typically incurred when the accelerometer is put on
or removed. We classify zero-count periods lasting between one and ve hours with VM of at least
600 in the 2-minute interval before or after the period, as non-wear periods. For example, in Figure
2 panel (a), we observe on Monday a zero-count period indicated in red where the high VM points
5Figure 2: Vector Magnitude is plotted against time for two individuals. In (a), we observe an inactive
period on Saturday and a nonwear period on Monday. In (b), we observe three days, where the rst
and third days display sucient wear-time, but on the second day, the accelerometer was not worn
for the most part of the day, resulting in a sleep-extra period.
immediately before and after indicate that the device was removed, so we classify this as non-wear.
In contrast, on Saturday, we observe a zero-count period, indicated in grey, where no high VM is
detected before or after. In this case, it is possible that the participant is still wearing the device, but
staying very still. We classify zero-count periods of up to 3 hours, where no high VM are detected, as
inactive periods, which are not treated as missing.
Missingness also occurs when people put on the device later in the day than when they are expected
to wake up, or remove the device earlier than when they are expected to go to bed. This is visible by a
very long period zero-count period which would include the time when the participant is expected to be
asleep. For example, in Figure 2 panel (b), the purple area illustrates a case where the participant has
not worn the device until late in the evening. We refer to these extended zero-count periods, lasting
longer than 15 hours, as sleep-extra periods. Based on these observations, we classify zero-count
periods into:
•Inactive : a shorter continuous zero-count period, lasting between 1 and 3 hours, where no high
VM is detected (VM does not exceed 600 in the 2 minutes just before/after the zero-count
period). This suggests that accelerometer is still worn by the individual, but they are staying
very still. During a period of 1 to 3 hours, it is plausible that a person is staying still. Inactive
periods are not missing periods.
•Non-wear : a continuous zero-count period (lasting between 1 and 5 hours) where VM exceeds
600 in the 2 minutes just before or after the period. This suggests the accelerometer has been
taken on/o. Further, any zero-count period between 3 and 5 hours is classied as non-wear. It
is less plausible that a person could stay still for an extended period of time; experience with
using the accelerometer suggests that it is very unlikely that it will register no movement for
over 3 hours if the device is being worn. Non-wear periods are missing periods.
•Sleep : A zero-count period lasting between 5 and 15 hours. Sleep periods are not missing periods.
•Sleep-extra : A zero-count period lasting longer than 15 hours. Such an extended period of sleep
suggests that a person delayed putting on the device in the morning, and/or took it o too early
6in the evening. Sleep-extra periods contain missing periods.
Examples of plots displaying Vector Magnitude (VM) against Time for the 7-day period at baseline
and 12 months for specic patients are shown in the Appendix Plots of Vector Magnitude at the
Epoch-level, with zero-count periods classied.
Using this classication, days/participants who do not have non-wear or sleep-extra periods are con-
sidered fully observed. Non-wear and sleep-extra periods lead to missing periods that need to be
accounted for in the analysis. For non-wear periods, the start and end times of the missing period
are equal to the start and end times of the non-wear period. However, for sleep-extra periods, which
include pro-protocol sleep periods which are not considered missing, the start and/or end times need
to be estimated. If the sleep-extra period for a participant falls on a weekday, the average sleep window
for weekdays is computed by taking weekdays from this participant with completely observed data,
and nding the interval between the average time at which the participant goes to sleep, and the
average time at which the participant wakes up. The missing intervals consist of sleep-extra period,
minus period which lies in the average sleep window. If the missing interval falls on a weekend, then,
if the other weekend day is fully observed, the average sleep window of that weekend day is used
to compute the missing intervals. If both weekend days have missingness, the average sleep window
is obtained from the weekdays, adding an empirically-based estimate of the average shift in waking
times at the weekend compared to weekday. Since this was approximately an hour in these data, we
rounded it to exactly one hour for convenience.
Having dened missing periods at the epoch-level, we wish to handle missingness with Multiple Im-
putation. We describe two approaches to overcoming the second challenge of epoch-level data having
complex distributions: a parametric approach, described in Parametric approach and a non-parametric
approach, described in Non-parametric approach. We introduce some notation to describe the ap-
proaches. We denote by yi;j;k;l the step count for patient i, at timepoint j, on daykand epoch l,
and we denote by yi;j;k;l p:lqthe step counts over an interval between epoch lpand epoch lq, where
lp<lq. We assume, without loss of generality, that data are recorded in 5-second epochs. We denote
byyobs
i;j;k;l p:lqan interval that is observed, and ymis
i;j;k;l p:lqan interval that is missing. We denote by yi;j;k;:
the day-level step counts for day k, and yi;j;:;:the mean of the daily-level step counts for timepoint j.
4.1 Parametric approach
In the parametric approach to MI, in order to overcome diculty of epoch-level step count data having
a high proportion of zeros and extreme positive skew, we aggregate the data to the day level. Day-level
step counts still have a positive skew, but this can be handled with a log-transformation to help make
the normality assumption plausible. A parametric approach to MI at the day-level was proposed in
Tackney et al. (2021); we make a crucial adaptation to this approach to incorporate information about
missingness at the epoch-level.
The day-level approach in Tackney et al. (2021) classied step counts as completely observed if
weartime540, partially observed if 0 <weartime<540, and missing if weartime = 0. In our
adapted approach, we move away from using a threshold based on weartime and take into account the
missing periods detected at the epoch-level. We consider a daily step count as completely observed
if there are no missing periods. A daily step count is partially observed if there are non-wear or
sleep-extra periods, and completely missing if no data was recorded.
7We consider the daily step counts as right-censored data if they are partially observed or missing, and
use Tobit regression to conduct the imputation. Tobit regression requires specication of lower and/or
upper bounds for each observation. For days that are completely observed, the lower and upper bound
are the recorded logged step counts. For days that are completely missing, the lower bound is zero,
and the upper bound is a value higher than the highest observed logged daily step count in the data
(e.g., 10.5 on the log scale). For days where some activity is observed, but which have missing periods,
the lower bound is the recorded step count, and we propose a Person-specic upper bound , calculated
as log(yi;j;k;: + 5i;j;k), wherei;j;kis the number of missing epochs for participant iat timepoint j
for dayk. This assumes that the upper bound of total step count would allow up to 1 step each
second (5 steps per epoch) in the missing period. This approach adjusts the upper bound according to
the quantity of missingness detected at the epoch-level. We compare using the person-specic upper
bound to using a Generic upper bound , which sets the upper bound as 10.5 on the log scale. This
generic upper bound was used in (Tackney et al., 2021) and serves as a comparison with previously
suggested approaches.
We assume that the logged daily step counts are jointly normally distributed, possibly dependent on
baseline characteristics such as sex, age and BMI, and further, we assume that the data are MAR.
Activity patterns across days are accounted for through adopting a joint model for the logged daily
step counts, and through the addition of covariates. We impute separately within each arm. After
imputation, the log of the daily step counts are exponentiated. The Mcomplete datasets on the step
count scale can then be analysed separately, and combined using Rubin's rules.
4.2 Non-parametric approach
Secondly, we consider a non-parametric approach to using MI at the epoch-level. Instead of specifying
a parametric statistical model for the distribution of the missing data given the observed data, a non-
parametric approach proceeds by imputing missing periods with observed periods from the same time
of day, from the same participant, but from a dierent day of the week, where possible. If this is not
possible, the interval is imputed from a dierent participant who is as similar as possible according to
demographic metrics.
We assume that imputation is within a treatment arm, and within a specic time interval j. For each
participant i, missing periods are identied and classied. If any missing period is spread between two
days, for example between epoch lpon daykand epochlqon dayk+ 1, this is split into two missing
periods, ymis
i;j;k;l p:17280andymis
i;j;k +1;1:lq. We obtain the set of missing intervals Iifor participant i. We
denote byjIijthe size of the set Ii.
Suppose ymis
i;j;k;l p:lqis thegth missing period in a non-empty set of missing periods for participant i,Ii,
whereg2f1;:::;jIijg. Imputation proceeds as follows:
•obtain the self-donor pool SDi;g, which consist of observed intervals yobs
i;j;k0;lp:lq, wherek6=k0.
•IfjSD i;gj>4, sampleMtimes with replacement from SDi;gwith equal sampling probabilities,
to obtainMimputed intervals.
•IfjSD i;gj4, we obtain a non-self donor from the pool of participants who do not have missing
periods that overlap with the gth missing period of patient i. From this pool of participants,
we match perfectly on sex, and compute the Mahalanobis distance between patient iand and
8the participants in the non-self donor pool for BMI and age. If imputing at 12 Months, the
average step count at baseline and average weartime at baseline can additionally be included in
the Mahalanobis distance. We note that imputation is conducted within a specic time point,
so even if baseline characteristics are used to compute a Mahalanobis distance, data used in
the imputation is from 12 Months. We then compute sampling weights for each participant
in the donor pool by taking the inverse of the Mahalanobis distance for that participant as a
fraction of the sum of inverses of Mahalanobis distances from all participants in the donor pool.
One donor is selected using these sampling weights. From this selected donor i0, seven observed
intervals ymis
i0;j;k;l p:lqfork2f1;:::;7gare identied. By sampling from these seven intervals with
replacement, Mimputed intervals are obtained.
At 12 Months, there may be a small number of participants with ve or more days with wear time
<300 minutes. In this case, there is insucient data to compute the participant's sleep-window and
to identify the intervals that need to be imputed. While this does not occur at baseline (for example,
in the PACE-UP trial, participants needed to provide at least ve days with wear time of at least
540 minutes at baseline to be included in the study), this can occur at 12 Months. Here, we discard
data from this participant and impute the entire week with the pool of donors who provide complete
data 12 Months. Matching perfectly on sex, we obtain sampling weights, based on inverse of the
mahalanobis distances for age, BMI, average step count at baseline and average weartime at baseline
of patientiand the participants in the donor pool. We select Mdonors using sampling weights. For
eachM, we randomly select 5 weekdays with replacement and 2 weekend days with replacement to
impute the missing week.
After all intervals in all non-empty intervals Iiare imputed, Mcomplete epoch-level datasets are
formed. Analyses can be implemented on each of these complete datasets, and the results combined
with mean daily step count and variance from Mdatasets with Rubin's rules.
A simplied schematic is shown Figure 3. RCode is for the non-parametric approach and an associated
Vignette is provided in Supplementary Materials.
5 Simulation Studies
We conducted simulation studies to establish statistical properties of the proposed approaches to
handling missing data at the epoch-level. In the rst simulation, we consider the setting where there
is data from one time point - at 12 Months only. We assess the performance of the approaches
in estimating the mean and standard error of the average step count across the week. In the second
simulation, we consider the setting where data is collected at two time points, baseline and 12 Months.
We assess the performance of the approaches in estimating the coecients of a linear model where
the average step count at 12 Months is regressed on average baseline step count and treatment arm.
We also explore the estimates of the correlation between the average step count at baseline and the
average step count at 12 Months.
5.1 Simulation for One Time Point
The rst simulation aims to compare the statistical properties of parametric and non-parametric
methods in estimating the mean and standard error of average weekly step count at one time point.
9Classify all zero -VM runs into active, inactive,  nonwear , sleep, sleep -extra.
Imputation
No missingness? 
No imputation needed
More than 5 days with 
weartime
 < 300? 
Impute entire week with 
matched non
 -
self 
donor 
Nonwear
 /sleep
 -
extra periods? 
Obtain imputation periods. 
For each imputation period, identify days 
of the week in the self -donor pool. 
Self
-
donor pool 
 >
4? 
Impute with self -donors
Self
-
donor pool 
 ≤
4 ? 
Impute with matched non -self donors PreparationFigure 3: Schematic for donor-based approach
Step count data on the epoch-level have complex distributions that are dicult to characterize using
a parametric model; devising a data generating model which adequately captures this complexity is
dicult. Therefore, in our simulations, we take the approach of using bootstrap resamples of data
from the PACE-UP trial from patients who have complete data, inducing missingness in the data, and
comparing dierent approaches to handling the missingness. There were 438 patients at 12 Months
who have completely observed data in the PACE-UP trial (150 in the control group, 150 in the
postal group and 138 in the nurse group). In each repetition of the simulation study, we obtain a
bootstrap sample where 120 patients in each treatment group is sampled without replacement. This
creates a sample of 360 patients with perfect data. Ensuring that we sample without replacement is
important, since having exact copies of patients in a dataset would put the non-parametric approach
at an advantage since it uses donor pools from other patients.
We then generate missingness under the following two scenarios:
•Scenario 1: For a randomly selected 45% of these 360 patients, sleep-extra periods and/or
nonwear periods are induced in the following way: we randomly select a patient from the PACE-
UP trial who has incomplete data at 12 Months, and induce sleep-extra and/or nonwear periods
according to the randomly selected patient's missingness pattern. This ensures that missingness
is generated in a way that is representative of what is observed in a real life setting.
•Scenario 2: In addition to inducing sleep-extra and/or nonwear periods in 45% of patients, a
randomly select 2% of patients provide no data for the entire week.
We then consider the following methods of handling the incomplete data:
•Available Case : As a benchmark, we analyse the data as if it were the observed data, making
no attempt to handle the missingness;
10•Complete Case : Participants who provide at least 1 day of at least 540 minutes of weartime at
12 Months are included. The daily step count for any day with less than 540 minutes is set to
missing. The average of the non-missing days are computed at baseline and at 12 months.
•Non-parametric Multiple Imputation , as described in Non-parametric approach, where age, sex
and BMI are used as matching variables to sample non-self donors. We set M= 10;
•Parametric Multiple Imputation , with specic and generic upper bounds, as described in Para-
metric approach. We include BMI, sex and age as covariates in the imputation model, and set
M= 10.
The estimands of interest are the mean and standard error of the average weekly step count at 12
months. We t the following regression model for each arm separately (control, postal, and nurse):
yi;1;:;:=0+i; (1)
where we assume that eiN(0;2), and obtain the estimate and standard error of 0.
The approaches to handling missing data are assessed by comparing bias in the estimate of the mean,
and increase in standard error compared to the true value.
We run 100 repetitions. Multiple Imputation using Tobit regression is conducted in STATA and all
other aspects of the simulation are conducted in R.
5.1.1 Results
Results of the simulation with Scenario 1, where 45% of participants have nonwear and/or sleep extra,
are shown in Figure 4. The top panels display the estimates of the mean within each arm. We observe
that available case leads to a downward bias of over 200 steps in all arms. This is expected as the
available case assumes that the data with induced missingness is complete. Complete case analysis
leads to a slight downward bias. The non-parametric approach leads to estimates that are closest to
the true value; they are within MC error, but it appears that there is a small downward bias. Both
parametric approaches - with the generic and specic upper bound - lead to upward bias, with the
generic upper bound in particular leading to an upward bias of over 300 steps in all arms.
The bottom panels of Figure 4 shows the estimate of the standard error. The available case approach
leads to a slight decrease in SE which is likely due to the fact that the dataset with missingness
nonwear and/or sleep extra has a lower mean, and its standard error is generally lower. The complete
case analysis also leads to a slight decrease in SE. For the non-parametric approach, we observe that
the standard error is within the MC error of the true standard error, but appears to be slightly
smaller. This is due to the slight downward bias in the estimates of the mean in the non-parametric
approach. Finally, we observe that the parametric approaches lead to comparatively larger increases
in SE, particularly when a generic upper bound is used.
11Method
True
Available Case
Complete Case
Non−parametric
Parametric Specific
Parametric GenericControl Postal Nurse
7000 7200 7400 76008000 8200 8400 86008000 8200 8400 8600
Estimate of mean step count
Control Postal Nurse
235240245250255260260 270 280 310 320 330
Estimate of standard errorFigure 4: Results for Simulation for one time point: Scenario 1. Results are shown by arm. For each
method, estimates for the mean step count are shown in the left panel, and estimates for the standard
error of the mean, are shown on the right panel. The error bars indicate 1:96MC error.
Results of the simulation with Scenario 2, where 45% of participants have nonwear and/or sleep extra
and an additional 2% of patients have no data for the entire week, are shown in Figure 5. The
conclusions are similar to those given for Scenario 1, except for one dierence. When there are entire
weeks that have no data, the available case leads to estimates of the standard error that are much
larger than in Scenario 1, since there the 2% of patients with no data lead to much greater variability.
12Method
True
Available Case
Complete Case
Non−parametric
Parametric Specific
Parametric GenericControl Postal Nurse
7000720074007600 800082008400860078008000820084008600
Estimate of mean step count
Control Postal Nurse
240 250 260 270 280 290310 320 330 340
Estimate of standard errorFigure 5: Results for Simulation for one time point: Scenario 2. Results are shown by arm. For each
method, estimates for the mean step count are shown in the left panel, and estimates for the standard
error of the mean, are shown on the right panel. The error bars indicate 1:96MC error.
In the case where there is data from one time point, we observe that the non-parametric approach to
MI leads to correlations between baseline and 12M that are closest to the true value, and the point
estimates are closest to the true value.
5.2 Simulation 2: Two Time Points
The second simulation explores the setting where there is data at baseline and 12 months, and there
is missingness at 12 months. The aim is to assess the MI approaches in estimating the regression
coecients of a model which regresses the average step count at 12 months on the average step count
at baseline and treatment arm. We also compare the MI approaches in estimating the correlation
between the average weekly step count between baseline and 12 months within each arm.
In this simulation, we obtain data from the 277 patients who have complete data at both baseline and
12 months in the PACE-UP trial (95 in the control group, 92 in the postal group and 90 in the nurse
group). Similarly to the previous simulation, in each repetition of the simulation study, we obtain a
bootstrap sample where 85 patients in each treatment group is sampled without replacement. This
creates a sample of 255 patients with perfect data for each repetition of the simulation.
We then generate missingness under the following two scenarios:
•Scenario 1: for a randomly selected 45% of these 255 patients, sleep-extra periods and/or nonwear
periods are induced in the 12-Month data only by randomly selecting a patient from the PACE-
UP trial who has incomplete data at 12 Months, and induce sleep-extra and/or nonwear periods
13according to their missingness pattern.
•Scenario 2: In addition to inducing sleep-extra and/or nonwear periods in 45% of patients, a
randomly select 2% of patients provide no data at 12 Months.
The following approaches are used to handle the missing data:
•Complete Case : Participants who provide at least 1 day of at least 540 minutes of weartime at
12 Months are included. The daily step count for any day with less than 540 minutes is set to
missing. The average of the non-missing days are computed at baseline and at 12 months.
•Non-parametric Multiple Imputation , as described in Non-parametric approach. We BMI, sex,
age, average step count at baseline and average weartime at baseline as matching variables where
a non-self donor is needed. We set M= 10;
•Parametric Multiple Imputation , with specic and generic upper bounds, as described in Para-
metric approach. We include BMI, sex, age and average step count at baseline as covariates in
the imputation model. We set M= 10.
The estimands of interest are the coecients and standard errors of the following regression model:
yi;1;:;:=0+1yi;0;:;:+2I(arm i= postal) + 3I(arm i= nurse) + i; (2)
where we assume that eiN(0;2). We assess bias in the estimates of the regression coecients and
increase in the standard error compared to the true value. An additional estimand is the correlation of
average step count across the week between Baseline and 12 months for each arm. Although Equation
(2) assumes that these correlations are equal across arms, we wish to examine how well the approaches
to missing data are able to preserve the correlation within each arm, as correlation is expected to be
attenuated.
We run 100 repetitions. Multiple Imputation using Tobit regression is conducted in STATA and all
other aspects of the simulation are conducted in R.
5.2.1 Results
Results for simulation with Scenario 1, where 45% of participants have nonwear and/or sleep-extra,
are displayed in Figures 6 and 7. In Figure 6, the correlation between the average step count between
Baseline and 12 Months are displayed for each arm. We observe that the true correlation is lower
in the treatment groups compared to the control group. Since the treatments were both eective
in increasing participants' step count at 12 months, it is unsurprising that the correlation between
baseline and 12 months is lower for the treatment groups. We observe that the correlation is attenuated
the least for the non-parametric approach. Using generic upper bound leads to greater attenuation
than the specic upper bound when using a parametric approach. The correlations for the complete
case analysis appears to be comparable to that of the parametric approach with specic upper bound.
14Control Postal Nurse
0.7800.7850.7900.7950.8000.6550.6600.6650.6700.675 0.725 0.730 0.735 0.740Parametric GenericParametric SpecificNon−parametricComplete CaseTrue
Correlation of average step counts between Baseline and 12MMethodFigure 6: Results for Simulation for two time points: Scenario 1. Results are shown by arm. For each
method, estimates for correlation between baseline and 12 month average step count is displayed for
M= 1. The error bars indicate 1:96MC error.
In Figure 7, results for estimates of the mean and standard error of the eects of the regression model in
Equation (2) are shown for Scenario 1. The estimates for the intercept produced by the non-parametric
and complete case analysis are within MC error of the true values; the non-parametric approaches
lead to slightly higher estimates. The parametric approaches result in an upward bias of the intercept.
For the eect of average stepcount at baseline, the parametric approach with specic upper bound
leads to the least biased estimate. The non-parametric approach and complete case approach are
downward biased, and the parametric approach with generic upper bound leads to a large upward
bias. Of particular interest are the eects of treatment (postal and nurse), which are both estimated
well by the non-parametric approach and the parametric approach with specic upper bound. The
complete case approach leads to a slightly lower estimate, and the parametric approach with generic
upper bound leads to a slightly larger value of estimated eect. Across all coecients, we observe
that the non-parametric approach and complete case analysis lead to the smallest standard errors,
and the parametric approach with person-specic upper bounds leads to smaller standard errors than
the generic upper bounds. Overall, we observe that the non-parametric and parametric approach with
person-specic upper bounds provide estimates of the treatment eect that are least biased, and the
non-parametric approach is additionally provides a smaller standard error.
15Method
True
Complete Case
Non−parametric
Parametric Specific
Parametric Generic
β3 (Nurse)β2 (Postal)β1 (Baseline Steps)β0 (Intercept)
880 900 920 9401010 1030 1050 1070 10900.86 0.88 0.90 0.92800 850 900
Coefficient Estimateβ3 (Nurse)β2 (Postal)β1 (Baseline Steps)β0 (Intercept)
320 330 340 350320 330 340 3500.053 0.055 0.057 0.059440 460 480
Coefficient SEFigure 7: Results for Simulation for two time points: Scenario 1. Results are shown by arm. For each
method, regression coecients and standard errors for Equation (2) are displayed. The error bars
indicate1:96MC error.
Results for simulation with Scenario 2, where 45% of participants have nonwear and/or sleep-extra at
12 Months, and an additional 2% of patients have no data at at 12 Months, are displayed in Figures
8 and 9. In Figure 8, the correlation between the average step count between Baseline and 12 Months
are displayed for each arm. We observe that the correlation for the non-parametric approach and
parametric approach with specic upper bound have a similar level of attenuation for the control and
nurse groups; the non-parametric approach leads to slightly more attenuation in the postal group. The
parametric approach with the generic approach leads to a greater amount of attenuation compared to
the other imputation approaches. The complete case analysis appears to retain the correlation better
than other approaches in this setting. Compared to Scenario 1, the non-parametric approach appears
slightly less eective at preserving the correlation between baseline and 12 months when there are
participants with the entire week missing.
16Control Postal Nurse
0.7750.7800.7850.7900.7950.800 0.6600.6650.6700.675 0.7200.7250.7300.7350.740Parametric GenericParametric SpecificNon−parametricComplete CaseTrue
Correlation of average step counts between Baseline and 12MMethodFigure 8: Results for Simulation for two time points: Scenario 2. Results are shown by arm. For each
method, estimates for correlation between baseline and 12 month average step count is displayed for
M= 1. The error bars indicate 1:96MC error.
In Figure 9, results for estimates of the mean and standard error of the eects of the regression model
in Equation (2) are shown for Scenario 2. All approaches except the complete case analysis lead to
upward bias in the estimate of the intercept; the non-parametric approach and parametric approach
with specic upper bound lead to a similar amount of bias. For the eect of average stepcount at
baseline, the parametric approach with specic upper bound leads to estimates that are closest to
the true values. The non-parametric approach and complete case analysis lead to a downward bias,
while the parametric approach with generic upper bound leads to a large upward bias. The eects of
treatment (postal and nurse) are estimated with least bias for the non-parametric approach. Complete
case analysis leads to a downward bias, while the parametric approach with generic upper bound
leads to slightly larger values of estimated eect. We again observe that the that the non-parametric
approach and complete case analysis lead to the smallest standard errors, and the parametric approach
with person-specic upper bounds leads to smaller standard errors than the generic upper bounds.
Thus, focusing specically on the eects of treatment, we observe that the non-parametric approach
leads to estimates that are least biased and with smallest standard error.
17Method
True
Complete Case
Non−parametric
Parametric Specific
Parametric Generic
β3 (Nurse)β2 (Postal)β1 (Baseline Steps)β0 (Intercept)
875 900 925 9501025 1050 10750.87 0.89 0.91750 800 850 900 950
Coefficient Estimateβ3 (Nurse)β2 (Postal)β1 (Baseline Steps)β0 (Intercept)
320 330 340 350 360320 330 340 350 3600.052 0.054 0.056 0.058 0.060440 460 480 500
Coefficient SEFigure 9: Results for Simulation for two time points: Scenario 2. Results are shown by arm. For each
method, regression coecients and standard errors for Equation (2) are displayed. The error bars
indicate1:96MC error.
In the simulations for one time point, we observed a very strong advantage for the non-parametric
approach compared to other approaches. When there is data from two time points, we still observe
that the treatment eects are estimated best by the non-parametric approach; the estimates are least
biased, and standard errors are much smaller than those produced by the parametric approach. For
the estimates of the intercept and eect of the average baseline stepcount, there is no clear advantage
of the non-parametric approach, particularly when whole-week imputation is required. Due to the
relatively small sample size used in the simulation, we note that the pool of non-self donors becomes
limited to a small number of patients for the non-parametric approach, which may hinder slightly its
performance in this setting.
6 Application to the PACE-UP trial
We now apply the proposed approaches to handling missingness to an analysis of the PACE-UP trial.
In the previous section, missingness was induced in the simulated datasets; we now demonstrate the
applicability of the proposed approaches to a genuine trial dataset with real instances of missingness.
Table 1 illustrates the breakdown of the total 1023 participants into the types of missingness observed.
We classify participants by whether they have completely observed data, non-wear periods only, sleep-
extra only, or both non-wear and sleep-extra. Participants may also have more than 5 days with
weartime<540 minutes, in which case the entire week is imputed in the non-parametric approach.
These participants are excluded in the complete case approach. We also illustrate the proportion of
18participants that have zero days with wear time <540 minutes, between 1 and 5 days (inclusive), and
greater than 5 days. There is a greater amount of missingness at 12 months compared to baseline.
Baseline 12 MonthsType of missingness
Completely observed 554 (54.2%) 473 (46.2%)
Non-wear only 361 (35.3%) 287 (28.1%)
Sleep-extra only 51 (4.99%) 104 (10.2%)
Non-wear and sleep-extra 57 (5.57%) 94 (9.19%)
Whole week imputation 0 (0%) 65 (6.35%)
Number of days with weartime <540 minutes
0696 (68.0%) 562 (54.9%)
Between 1 and 5 327 (32.0%) 396 (38.7%)
Greater than 5 0 (0%) 65 (6.35%)
Total 1023
Table 1: The number of patients with each of the missing types and their percentages are shown for
PACE-UP trial data at Baseline and 12 Months.
We analyse the data using a linear model which regresses the average step count at 12 months on the
average step count at baseline, arm, and primary care practice:
yi;2;:;:=0+1yi;0;:;:+2I(arm i= postal)
+3I(arm i= nurse) + 4P2i+5P3i+::+9P7i+i;(3)
whereP2;P3;:::;P 7 are dummy variables for the primary care practice that the participant resides
in. We assume that eiN(0;2).
We note that this is a simpler analysis compared to the primary analysis of the PACE-UP trial, where
additional covariates (sex and age group) were included, and a clustering eect was included to account
for household, since a small number of participants were in couples. For the purposes of comparing
the approaches to handling missing data, we use a simpler model to analyse the results.
The following methods of handling missing data are considered:
•Complete Case : Participants who provide at least 1 day of at least 540 minutes of weartime at
12 Months are included. The daily step count for any day with less than 540 minutes is set to
missing. The average of the non-missing days are computed at baseline and at 12 months. We
use the weartime calculated by the Actilife software.
•Non-parametric Multiple Imputation , as described in Non-parametric approach. Imputation is
conducted rstly in the baseline dataset, separately in the three treatment arms. We use BMI,
sex and age as matching variables where a non-self donor is needed. The average of the imputed
baseline average stepcounts are computed, which is then used for the imputation at 12 Months,
which is again conducted separately in the three treatment arms. At 12 Months, we use BMI,
sex, age, average step count at baseline and average weartime at baseline as matching variables
where a non-self donor is needed.
19•Parametric Multiple Imputation , with specic and generic upper bounds, as described in Para-
metric approach. The seven days at baseline, and seven days at 12 Months are modelled as
jointly normally distributed, conditional on covariates BMI, sex, age. Imputation is performed
separately in each arm.
Results for the estimated eects eects and their estimated condence intervals produced by each
method are displayed in Figure 10. The means and standard errors of the eects are displayed in
Table 2. The condence intervals across the methods overlap, but we observe noticeable dierences in
the point estimates and standard errors which reveal the potential impact that missing data assump-
tions can have on the results of the primary analysis.
Method
Complete Case
Non−parametric
Parametric Specific
Parametric Generic1000 1500 2000 2500Intercept
0.70 0.75 0.80Baseline StepsNurse 
 GroupPostal 
 Group
500 750 1000 1250
95% Confidence Interval for Regression CoefficientTreatment
Figure 10: Results for the analysis of the PACE-UP trial. For each method of handling missing data,
the 95% condence intervals for the eects for the regression model in Equation 3 is displayed. The
95% condence intervals for the eects of practices are shown in Figure 14 in the Appendix.
20CoecientEstimated Means and Standard Errors
Complete Case Non-parametric Parametric Specic Parametric Generic
Intercept 1599.65 (288.05) 2110.96 (284.29) 1804.87 (305.98) 1949.72 (362.10)
Baseline Steps 0.75 ( 0.03) 0.72 ( 0.03) 0.76 ( 0.03) 0.73 ( 0.03)
Postal Group 666.69 (166.00) 666.49 (163.12) 710.55 (169.37) 775.10 (203.06)
Nurse Group 681.35 (165.05) 678.65 (160.16) 803.41 (170.95) 878.96 (188.94)
P2 -831.83 (266.32) -658.93 (255.24) -581.28 (282.59) -422.90 (321.30)
P3 -287.51 (256.00) -446.34 (248.35) -395.47 (269.78) -312.76 (293.50)
P4 -658.03 (280.20) -511.25 (269.67) -369.16 (293.85) -348.26 (327.41)
P5 35.25 (248.72) 184.13 (240.16) 194.49 (258.25) 337.40 (299.67)
P6 78.29 (265.13) 136.54 (257.50) 165.02 (291.26) 325.56 (316.06)
P7 -65.11 (332.66) 110.05 (324.23) -18.34 (341.61) 12.28 (379.22)
Table 2: Results for the analysis of the PACE-UP trial. For each method of handling missing data,
the estimated means (with standard errors in parentheses) are shown for the eects for the regression
model in Equation 3 is displayed. Note that the Practices have been included to reect the design of
the study, but their coecients should not be the focus of the interpretation.
In the point estimates, we nd patterns that are similar to what we observed in Simulation 2: Two
Time Points. For the intercept, the complete case approach leads to the smallest estimate, and the
non-parametric approach leads to the highest estimate. When comparing the coecients for the av-
erage baseline stepcount, it should be noted that the values of the average baseline stepcounts are
computed using the imputed values at baseline for the non-parametric and parametric approaches, so
their values are dierent across approaches. In the eects for treatment, we observe that the com-
plete case and non-parametric approach leads to the smallest point estimates, and the parametric
approaches lead to the largest estimates.
Across all coecients, we nd that the standard errors are smallest for the non-parametric and com-
plete case approaches; the non-parametric approach leads to slightly smaller standard errors. The
parametric approaches produce larger standard errors; the generic upper bound, in particular, leads
to the largest standard errors. These observations are consistent with what we found in the simulation
studies.
Figure 15 in the Appendix displays boxplots comparing the raw values with the imputed values for
M= 1 for each treatment group at baseline. We display the boxplots separately by the extent of miss-
ingness, classifying participating as having zero days with weartime <540 minutes or between 1 and 5
days with weartime <540 minutes. We observe that the non-parametric approach leads to a slightly
larger values compared to the raw values, the parametric approach with specic upper bound leads to
slightly higher values than that. The parametric approach with generic upper bound, which does not
use the epoch-level information on missingness, leads to the highest imputed values. In Figure 16, we
observe the equivalent boxplots for 12 Months, where there is an additional column for participants
where the entire week is missing. These participants are excluded in the complete case analysis. In this
column, we nd that distributions have more skewness. In particular, the non-parametric approach,
which imputes the whole week with non-self donors, leads to very small variability in imputed values
compared to the parametric approaches.
21The original analysis of the PACE-UP trial reported an estimated eect of the postal intervention of
642 (with standard error 160) and eect of the nurse intervention of 677 (with standard error of 159)
when using a complete case analysis (Harris et al., 2017). Their imputation analysis which includes
participants with missing data at 12 Months uses a day-level imputation model with the following
variables: treatment group, baseline steps, gender, age, practice, and month of baseline accelerometry.
This analysis produced an estimated eect of the postal intervention of 638 (with standard error 160)
and eect of the nurse intervention of 679 (with standard error of 159). While a precise comparison
with our re-analysis cannot be made since the analysis models dier, we note that the estimates for the
eects of treatment produced by the epoch-level non-parametric approach are most similar to those
produced in the original study.
The purpose of this analysis is to compare the impact of the diering approaches to missing data on
the model results. We have therefore kept the analysis and imputation models relatively simple, and
assume that the data are MAR given the observed data. A full analysis should include sensitivity
analyses to the MAR assumption. This would involve careful consideration of appropriate departures
from the MAR assumption. For example, one might consider the following scenarios:
•If participants take the accelerometer o too early in the evening, or put it on late in the morning,
it may be because they are at home and not being particularly active. Under this assumption,
we would impute values that are lower than that assumed under MAR.
•If participants did not provide sucient wear time for more than 5 days a week (which would lead
to whole-week imputation in the non-parametric approach), this may be because the participant
is less active than usual during the week and does not feel motivated to wear the device. Under
this assumption, we would impute values that are lower than that assumed under MAR.
•Some participants may remove the device while they are exercising as they nd it uncomfortable
to wear. In this case, it is possible that values above that assumed under MAR should be
imputed. However, identifying periods where participants removed the device for this reason is
dicult to discern without information from, for example, activity reports from participants.
Further, in addition to considering departures from the MAR assumption, a full analysis should take
into account additional auxiliary variables in the imputation model, such as weather variables, which
have shown to be predictive of daily step count and also of whether daily step count is missing (Tackney
et al., 2021).
7 Discussion
This paper described the challenges of applying MI to epoch-level accelerometer data; namely, the
diculty in identifying and classifying missingness, and the complicated nature of epoch-level distri-
butions. Possible methods of overcoming these challenges are presented. Firstly, a novel approach
to classifying epoch-level zero-count periods into inactive, nonwear, sleep and sleep-extra periods is
presented, which carefully teases out dierences between per-protocol instances of no activity, short
periods of inactivity which are not missing data, and periods where missing data is incurred due to
22participants removing the device. These missing periods can be handled with either parametric and
non-parametric Multiple Imputation. In the parametric approach, step counts on the day-level are
imputed using epoch-level information on the missing periods per day to specify an informed upper
bound for Tobit regression. In the non-parametric approach, missing periods are replaced by self- or
non-self donors.
These approaches were compared using simulations where zero-count periods are generated using
missingness patterns observed in the dataset. Simulation studies conducted in the literature to date
often induce missingness in hour-long chunks, which does not reect the complexities of how missing-
ness arises in practice in the accelerometer setting. The simulations showed the merits of using the
epoch-level information in MI. In the setting where the average step count for each treatment group
is estimated for one time point, the non-parametric approach leads to estimates with the least bias
and highest precision. The parametric approach with the specic upper bound leads to less bias and
more precision than the parametric approach with the generic upper bound. Where data has been
collected over two time points and the analysis model regresses the average step count at 12 Months on
the average step count at baseline and treatment group, the non-parametric approach and parametric
approach with specic upper bound have a more comparable performance, but the non-parametric
approach leads to least biased point estimates for the treatment eects while maintaining a small
standard error. By considering settings where there is data for just one time point as well as two time
points, these ndings are relevant to cross-sectional as well as longitudinal analyses of accelerometer
data.
We performed a re-analysis of the 2017 PACE-UP trial, where the results for a simplied analysis
model using complete case, the non-parametric approach, and parametric approaches with specic
and generic upper bounds are compared. While the approach to missingness does not overall change
conclusions of the study, they point to potentially important implications for results. In particular,
we observe that estimated eects of treatment are slightly higher for the parametric approaches, and
the standard errors are larger for the parametric approaches, mirroring results from the simulations.
In the original analysis of the PACE-UP trial, Harris et al. (2017) conduct sensitivity analyses on
the impact of using dierent thresholds on weartime for dening missingness (for example, requiring
a minimum of 600 minutes of wear time for a complete day, compared to 540 minutes in the main
analyses). Our analysis additionally reveals the impact of taking an epoch-level perspective on missing
data.
There are a number of important avenues for further work. Firstly, as discussed in Application to
the PACE-UP trial, sensitivity analyses for the MAR assumption are an important consideration in
the context of these epoch-level approaches to MI. As participants may be likely to remove their
accelerometer during inactive periods, considering the implication of the data being MNAR is impor-
tant. Secondly, it is worth exploring potential adaptations to the non-parametric approach to improve
its performance in the setting where there are entire weeks of data missing. Our simulations studies
indicate that replacing entire weeks of data with non-self donors appears to reduce the performance
of this approach, potentially because the number of available donors are insucient in this setting.
A hybrid approach which imputes non-wear and sleep-extra non-parametrically and takes advantage
of the parametric approach for entire missing weeks would be a potential solution. Thirdly, we have
considered the setting where whole-week imputation occurs only at 12 Months, which was the case
23in the PACE-UP trial. In other studies, there may be participants with missing weeks at baseline
included in the study, in which case, donors for whole-week imputation at baseline may be determined
by physical activity characteristics obtained at 12 Months. For an extended analysis of the PACE-UP
trial including outcomes at 3 Months and 3 Years in addition to baseline and 12 Months, an approach
to identifying suitable donors in this more complex setting with multiple time points will need to be
identied.
While our study has focused on accelerometer studies, there is a growing need to consider missingness
at a ner epoch-level for a number of health outcomes in trials, particularly as continuous monitoring
participants through digital devices become more common (Dagher et al., 2020). For example, studies
that remotely monitor vital signs of people with dementia use a number of sensor and wearable devices
that track data in ne intervals of time (David et al., 2021). Our presented framework of classifying
missingness and applying MI at the ner epoch-level to establish conclusions about eect of treatment
at an aggregate level is likely to be applicable to data from a range of devices.
248 Appendix
8.1 Plots of Vector Magnitude at the Epoch-level
Figure 11: An example of 7 days of accelerometer data, where Vector Magnitude at the epoch-level is
plotted against time. No missing data is detected.
25Figure 12: An example of 7 days of accelerometer data, where Vector Magnitude at the epoch-level is
plotted against time. Sleep-extra is detected between Wednesday and Thursday.
26Figure 13: An example of 7 days of accelerometer data, where Vector Magnitude at the epoch-level is
plotted against time. Non-wear periods are detected on Monday and Tuesday.
278.2 PACE-UP trial analysis: Further Results
P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7
−1000 −500 0 500 1000
95% Confidence Interval for Regression CoefficientMethod
Complete Case
Non−parametric
Parametric Specific
Parametric GenericPractice
Figure 14: Results for the analysis of the PACE-UP trial. For each method of handling missing data,
the 95% condence intervals for the eects of practices are displayed.
0 Days between 1 and 5 DaysControl Postal Nurse5000100001500020000
5000100001500020000
5000100001500020000
MethodImputed ValuesMethod
Raw
Non−parametric
Parametric Generic
Parametric Specific
Figure 15: Boxplots compare the raw value with the imputed values at baseline under the non-
parametric and parametric approaches when there are zero days with weartime <540 minutes (left
panel) and between 1 and 5 days with weartime <540 minutes (right panel). Results are shown by
treatment arm.
280 Days between 1 and 5 Days >5 DaysControl Postal Nurse05000100001500020000
05000100001500020000
05000100001500020000
MethodImputed valuesMethod
Raw
Non−parametric
Parametric Generic
Parametric SpecificFigure 16: Boxplots compare the raw value with the imputed values at 12 Months under the non-
parametric and parametric approaches when there are zero days with weartime <540 minutes (left
panel) and between 1 and 5 days with weartime <540 minutes (middle panel) and more than 5 days
with weartime <540 minutes (right panel). Results are shown by treatment group.
9 Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the South-West London (UK) general practices, their practice nurses
who supported the PACE-UP trial, all the patients from these practices who participated, and the
Trial Steering Committee. Disclaimer: the views and opinions expressed therein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reect those of the Health Technology Assessment (HTA) programme,
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) National Health Service, or the Department of Health.
10 Declaration of Conicting Interests
The authors have no conicts of interest.
11 Funding
MT is supported by Health Data Research UK, which is funded by the UK Medical Research Council,
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, Economic and Social Research Council, Depart-
ment of Health and Social Care (England), Chief Scientist Oce of the Scottish Government Health
and Social Care Directorates, Health and Social Care Research and Development Division (Welsh Gov-
ernment), Public Health Agency (Northern Ireland), British Heart Foundation and Wellcome. JC is
supported by the Medical Research Council, grant numbers MC UU 12023/21 and MC UU 12023/29.
EW is supported by MRC project grants MR/S01442X/1 and MR/R013489/1. TH is supported
by the National Institute for Health and Care Research grant numbers NIHR202213, NIHR129074,
29the National Institute for Health grant number R21 AI156161-01 and Muscular Dystrophy UK grant
number 19GROE-PG24-0349-2. The PACE-UP trial was funded by the National Institute for Health
Research Health Technology Assessment (NIHR HTA) Programme (project number HTA 10/32/02
ISRCTN42122561).
30References
Andridge RR and Little RJ (2010) A review of hot deck imputation for survey non-response. Inter-
national Statistical Review 78(1): 40{64. DOI:10.1111/j.1751-5823.2010.00103.x.
Butera NM, Li S, Evenson KR, Di C, Buchner DM, LaMonte MJ, LaCroix AZ and Herring A (2019)
Hot deck multiple imputation for handling missing accelerometer data. Stat. Biosci. 11(2): 422{448.
Cameron N, Godino J, Nichols JF, Wing D, Hill L and Patrick K (2017) Associations between physical
activity and BMI, body fatness, and visceral adiposity in overweight or obese Latino and non-Latino
adults. International Journal of Obesity 41(6): 873{877.
Carpenter J and Kenward M (2012) Multiple Imputation and its Application . John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd. ISBN 9781119942283. DOI:10.1002/9781119942283.
Choi L, Liu Z, Matthews CE and Buchowski MS (2011) Validation of accelerometer wear and nonwear
time classication algorithm. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 43(2): 357{364.
Cro S, Morris TP, Kenward MG and Carpenter JR (2020) Sensitivity analysis for clinical trials with
missing continuous outcome data using controlled multiple imputation: A practical guide. Statistics
in Medicine 39(21): 2815{2842. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
sim.8569 .
Dagher L, Shi H, Zhao Y and Marrouche NF (2020) Wearables in cardiology: Here to stay. Heart
Rhythm 17(5, Part B): 889{895. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2020.02.023. URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1547527120301740 . Digital Health Special
Issue.
David M, Barnaghi P, Nilforooshan R, Rostill H, Soreq E, Sharp DJ and Scott G (2021) Home moni-
toring of vital signs and generation of alerts in a cohort of people living with dementia. Alzheimer's
& dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association 17: e055151. DOI:10.1002/alz.055151.
De Craemer M, De Decker E, Verloigne M, De Bourdeaudhuij I, Manios Y and Cardon G (2016)
The eect of a cluster randomised control trial on objectively measured sedentary time and
parental reports of time spent in sedentary activities in Belgian preschoolers: The ToyBox-
study. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 13(1): 1{17. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12966-015-0325-y .
Evenson K and Terry J (2009) Assessment of diering denitions of accelerometer nonwear time.
Research quarterly for exercise and sport 80: 355{62.
Goode AD, Winkler EAH, Reeves MM and Eakin EG (2015) Relationship between interven-
tion dose and outcomes in living well with diabetes{a randomized trial of a telephone-
delivered lifestyle-based weight loss intervention. American journal of health promotion : AJHP
30(2): 120{129. URL http://ovidsp.ovid.com/ovidweb.cgi?T=JS{&}PAGE=reference{&}D=
med11{&}NEWS=N{&}AN=25372235 .
31Harel O and Zhou XH (2007) Multiple imputation: review of theory, implementation and software.
Statistics in Medicine 26(16): 3057{3077. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1002/sim.2787 .
Harris T, Kerry SM, Limb ES, Furness C, Wahlich C, Victor CR, Ilie S, Whincup PH, Ussher M,
Ekelund U, Fox-Rushby J, Ibison J, DeWilde S, McKay C and Cook DG (2018) Physical activity
levels in adults and older adults 3-4 years after pedometer-based walking interventions: Long-term
follow-up of participants from two randomised controlled trials in UK primary care. PLoS medicine
15(3): e1002526. URL http://ovidsp.ovid.com/ovidweb.cgi?T=JS{&}PAGE=reference{&}D=
medc{&}NEWS=N{&}AN=29522529 .
Harris T, Kerry SM, Limb ES, Victor CR, Ilie S, Ussher M, Whincup PH, Ekelund U, Fox-Rushby
J, Furness C, Anokye N, Ibison J, DeWilde S, David L, Howard E, Dale R, Smith J and Cook DG
(2017) Eect of a primary care walking intervention with and without nurse support on physical
activity levels in 45- to 75-year-olds: The pedometer and consultation evaluation (PACE-UP) cluster
randomised clinical trial. PLOS Medicine 14(1): 1{19. URL https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pmed.1002210 .
Harris T, Kerry SM, Victor CR, Ekelund U, Woodcock A, Ilie S, Whincup PH, Beighton C,
Ussher M, Limb ES, David L, Brewin D, Adams F, Rogers A and Cook DG (2015) A primary
care nurse-delivered walking intervention in older adults: Pace (pedometer accelerometer con-
sultation evaluation)-lift cluster randomised controlled trial. PLOS Medicine 12(2): 1{23. URL
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001783 .
Ismail K, Stahl D, Bayley A, Twist K, Stewart K, Ridge K, Britne E, Ashworth M, de Zoysa N,
Rundle J, Cook D, Whincup P, Treasure J, McCrone P, Greenough A and Winkley K (2019)
Enhanced motivational interviewing for reducing weight and increasing physical activity in adults
with high cardiovascular risk: the move it three-arm rct. Health Technol Assess 23(69).
Lee JA and Gill J (2018) Missing value imputation for physical activity data measured by accelerom-
eter. Statistical Methods in Medical Research 27(2): 490{506.
Leeger-Aschmann CS, Schmutz EA, Zysset AE, Kakebeeke TH, Messerli-B urgy N, St ulb K, Arhab A,
Meyer AH, Munsch S, Jenni OG, Puder JJ and Kriemler S (2019) Accelerometer-derived physical
activity estimation in preschoolers { comparison of cut-point sets incorporating the vector magnitude
vs the vertical axis. BMC Public Health 19(1). DOI:10.1186/s12889-019-6837-7. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-6837-7 .
Rubin DB (1976) Inference and missing data. Biometrika 63(3): 581{592. URL http://www.jstor.
org/stable/2335739 .
Tackney MS, Cook DG, Stahl D, Ismail K, Williamson E and Carpenter J (2021) A framework for han-
dling missing accelerometer outcome data in trials. Trials 22(1). DOI:10.1186/s13063-021-05284-8.
URL https://doi.org/10.1186%2Fs13063-021-05284-8 .
32