Type-III Superconductivity
M. C. Diamantini,1C. A. Trugenberger,2Sheng-Zong Chen,3Yu-Jung Lu,4Chi-Te Liang,5and V . M. Vinokur6
1NiPS Laboratory, INFN and Dipartimento di Fisica e Geologia,
University of Perugia, via A. Pascoli, I-06100 Perugia, Italy
2SwissScientiﬁc Technologies SA, rue du Rhone 59, CH-1204 Geneva, Switzerland
3Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan
4Research Center for Applied Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115,
Taiwan and Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan
5Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106,
Taiwan and Center for Quantum Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan
6Terra Quantum AG, St. Gallerstrasse 16A, 9400 Rorschach, Switzerland
Superconductivity remains one of most fascinating quantum phenomena existing on a macroscopic scale. Its
rich phenomenology is usually described by the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory in terms of the order parameter,
representing the macroscopic wave function of the superconducting condensate. The GL theory addresses one
of the prime superconducting properties, screening of the electromagnetic ﬁeld because it becomes massive
within a superconductor, the famous Anderson-Higgs mechanism. Here we describe another widely-spread
type of superconductivity where the Anderson-Higgs mechanism does not work and must be replaced by the
Deser-Jackiw-Templeton topological mass generation and, correspondingly, the GL e ective ﬁeld theory must
be replaced by an e ective topological gauge theory. These superconductors are inherently inhomogeneous
granular superconductors, where electronic granularity is either fundamental or emerging. We show that the
corresponding superconducting transition is a three-dimensional (3D) generalization of the 2D Berezinskii-
Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) vortex binding-unbinding transition. The binding-unbinding of the line-like vortices
in 3D results in the V ogel-Fulcher-Tamman (VFT) scaling of the resistance near the superconducting transition.
We report experimental data fully conﬁrming the VFT behavior of the resistance.
INTRODUCTION
The macroscopic physics of traditional superconductors
(SC) is governed by the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) model, see
e.g., [1], describing superconductors in terms of a local order
parameter. The ground state of a macroscopic superconductor
of a size much exceeding the London penetration depth, L,
has an order parameter that is constant in the system’s bulk,
outside a boundary shell of the width L. There are, how-
ever, superconductors, for example thin ﬁlms of a thickness
dcomparable with the coherence length , which are char-
acterized by a completely di erent ground state exhibiting a
paradigmatic granularity [2, 3]. In these systems supercon-
ductivity sets in when global phase coherence is established
due to tunneling Cooper pairs percolation between droplets of
locally formed condensate. The granularity of these systems is
associated with a superconductor-to-superinsulator quantum
phase transition [4–6] which may occur via an intermediate
Bose metal [4, 7, 8] phase, see [9–11], and has been detected
experimentally [12, 13].
Two important features characterize these planar “self-
granular” superconductors. First, the gauge screening length,
the Pearl length P=2
L=ddue to the familiar Anderson-Higgs
mechanism, see e.g. [1], would become larger than the exper-
imental system size for small d. Second, near the quantum
transition, the electric ﬁelds induced by charges residing in
the system remain in-plane over the whole sample because
of the large dielectric constant [9–11]. Usually, such electric
ﬁelds are not very relevant in standard superconductors. Inour planar superconductors, however, these 2D electric ﬁelds
are much stronger than the usual 3D ones, since they decay as
1=rwith the increasing distance rfrom the charge and cannot
be neglected. When coupled to electromagnetism, the time-
dependent Ginzburg-Landau model becomes, therefore (non-
relativistic) scalar quantum electrodynamics (QED), which is
ill deﬁned in 2D because of its infrared divergences tied to
the perturbative coupling scaling as ln( L=), where Lis the
sample size [14, 15]. If one tries to derive the free energy for
a putative order parameter from the elastic interaction with a
substrate one obtains a non-local functional describing a self-
organized array of superconducting islands[16], conﬁrming
the the original GL model breaks down. Hence, for planar sys-
tems with long-range interactions, the local Ginzburg-Landau
model does not provide an adequate description of the global
superconductivity [17] and can only address local supercon-
ductivity within droplets of the typical size of order .
Notably, emergent granularity is not conﬁned to thin ﬁlms.
Recently, the same physics has been detected in bulk sam-
ples [18]. Even more importantly, the ground-state of the
high- Tccuprates is inhomogeneous, especially in the under-
doped regime and the same percolation model is thought to
be responsible for global superconductivity [19, 20]. In this
type of percolating superconductivity, electron pairs survive
above Tc, which is the case both in 2D [21] and 3D [22], and
there is a quantum transition to an insulating state, both in
2D, see [9–11], and 3D [23]. In 2D, the fragmentation into
separate condensate droplets is due to strong infrared diver-
gences near the quantum insulating transition [17]. In general,arXiv:2303.14673v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  26 Mar 20232
however, this type of behaviour seems characteristic of super-
conductors in which the pairing mechanism is not the BCS
one [1] but arises from a stronger attractive interaction leading
to the pronounced bosonic pairs of a size much smaller than
their typical separation distance and forming a Bose-Einstein
condensate (BEC). The BECs with long-range dipole inter-
actions of particles carrying magnetic moments are known to
fragment into liquid droplets due to strong quantum ﬂuctua-
tions [24].
Here we formulate the e ective long-distance gauge the-
ory of inhomogeneous superconductors in 3D and show that
superconductivity sets in via the V ogel-Fulcher-Tammann
(VFT) transition, the three dimensional counterpart of the
2D Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) topological phase
transition, and we report an experiment conﬁrming the VFT
scaling of the resistance at the transition. The crucial point
is that, contrary to type II superconductors, vortices in inho-
mogeneous superconductors are not Abrikosov vortices but,
rather, mobile vortices with no dissipative core which arise
due to non-trivial phase circulations on adjacent droplets.
Charges on the droplets and vortices between them have un-
avoidable topological mutual statistics interactions and a local
descriptions of these requires the introduction of gauge ﬁelds
[25]. Therefore, the e ective ﬁeld theory for these inhomo-
geneous superconductors must be a gauge theory. We refer to
this novel, topologically driven superconducting state (in any
dimension) as to type-III superconductivity. This choice is
dictated by the standard classiﬁcation of superconductors with
respect to penetration of the applied magnetic ﬁeld. Type I su-
perconductors expel magnetic ﬁeld Hand are referred to be
in a Meissner state at H<Hc, while at the critical ﬁeld Hc
superconductivity destroys. In type II superconductivity Hc
“splits” into the lower, Hc1, and upper, Hc2, critical ﬁelds. At
H<Hc1type II superconductors are in the Meissner state; at
Hc1<H<Hc2(mixed or vortex state) magnetic ﬁeld pene-
trates type II superconductors in a form of Abrikosov vortices
having a normal core; and at H=Hc2vortex normal cores
overlap and superconductivity gets destroyed. In type III su-
perconductors Hc1=0 and vortices, which, as mentioned
above, in this case do not possess normal core, can penetrate
at any magnetic ﬁeld (corresponding to a ﬂux at least equal
to a quantum ﬂux), and there is no true Meissner state. Su-
perconductivity is not destroyed at low temperatures because
the quantum di usion of vortices is suppressed by the large
corresponding term in the action. This behavior has been ex-
perimentally detected [26] in Josephson junction arrays, the
paradigmatic example of type III superconductors in 2D. The
response can be both diamagnetic and paramagnetic, however
since it is preferentially paramagnetic this state is sometimes
called paramagnetic Meissner state. Finally, in type III super-
conductors, vortices can proliferate even without a magnetic
ﬁeld when the temperature is high enough.BKT AND VFT TRANSITIONS
As we have established in the Introduction, the local GL
model fails to provide a consistent description of granular or
droplet-composed superconductors [20] and has thus to be re-
placed by a generalized gauge theory introduced in [27, 28]
and recently discussed in detail in 2D in [17]. One of the fun-
damental implications of the gauge theory of granular super-
conductors is that its vortices, contrary to Abrikosov vortices,
have no dissipative core, since they arise from non-trivial cir-
culations of the local phases of the condensate on adjacent
droplets. Hence, superconductivity in these materials that do
not possess a global order parameter is referred to as “Higss-
less superconductivity” [28]. Furthermore, since the ground
state of Higgsless superconductors may carry topological or-
der they are also called “superconductors with topological or-
der” [27].
Since superconductivity is realized by global phase coher-
ence establishing over all pre-existing condensate droplets, its
destruction is caused by a proliferation of vortices and not by
breaking of Cooper pairs, as in traditional superconductors.
In 2D, this is the famed BKT transition, see [29] for a review,
resulting in the BKT resistance scaling
R(T)/e q
b
jT TBKTj; (1)
where bis a constant having the dimensionality of tempera-
ture. In 3D, the phase transition is again caused by vortex
liberation, but the vortices are now 1D extended objects, mag-
netic strings. The superconducting phase transition is thus
caused by 1D strings becoming tensionless. This transition
has been studied in [30]. The corresponding behaviour of the
resistance is modiﬁed to the VFT scaling
R(T)/e b0
jT TVFTj: (2)
This same dual scaling, for vanishing conductivity and due
to electric strings becoming tensionless, see [11] for a review,
has already been detected at the superinsulating side of the
quantum transition [31] and has also been obtained in the XY
model with quenched disorder, which apparently is equivalent
to one more e ective space dimension [32, 33].
GAUGE THEORY OF TYPE-III SUPERCONDUCTORS
We model an inhomogeneous superconductor by a cubic
lattice, with the sites representing the droplets and the links
encoding possible tunneling junctions between them. The
fundamental degrees of freedom of the model are of two types.
First, there are integer (in units of 2e) charges Q0located
at the sites and currents Qion the links of lattice. Together
they constitute a four-current Q, with Greek letters stand-
ing for the space-time indices. In the absence of background
charges, this current is conserved, dQ=0 with ddenoting
the forward lattice derivative in the direction ; summation3
over equal Greek indices is implied. Conservation requires
that only closed loops Qare allowed on the lattice, repre-
senting charge-hole ﬂuctuations. The second type of excita-
tions are integer (in units 2 =2e, we use natural units c=1,
~=1,"0=1) coreless Josephson vortices that arise from
the nontrivial circulations of the local condensate phases on
the droplets. Since these circulations are 1D extended objects
they are represented by integer lattice plaquette variables M.
Since the vortices that we consider are closed loops, these are
also conserved, dM=dM=0 and describe, thus, closed
surfaces representing the nucleation and subsequent annihila-
tion of a vortex loop. Open vortices with magnetic monopoles
at their ends are also possible [34] but are not relevant for what
follows.
The infrared (IR) dominant interaction between charges
and vortices is topological, it encodes their mutual statisti-
cal interaction i.e., the Aharonov-Bohm [35] and Aharonov-
Casher [36] (ABC) phases accumulating when one type of ex-
citation encircles the other. In the Euclidean partition func-
tion, which we will consider in the rest of this paper, the ABC
topological interactions are accounted for by an imaginary
term representing the Gaussian linking of the closed loops and
surfaces in four Euclidean dimensions [37]. As pointed out by
Wilczek [25], this interaction can also be represented in lo-
cal form by introducing two ﬁctitious gauge ﬁelds interacting
with the two types of excitations and with a topological cou-
pling to each other. In the 2D this is the well known Chern-
Simons term [38]; in the 3D case, this is the three-index BF
term [11],@, coupling an e ective gauge ﬁeld afor the
charges with the two-index e ective gauge ﬁeld bfor the 1D
extended vortices. Here is the usual totally antisymmet-
ric tensor. Then the Euclidean action acquires the form
S=X
xi`4
4akb+i`aQ+i`21
2bM; (3)
where xdenotes the lattice sites, `is the link length and k
is the lattice BF term, described in detail in Methods.
The two gauge ﬁelds are invariant under the gauge transfor-
mations
a!a+d;
b!b+d d; (4)
reﬂecting the fact that the charge world-lines and vortex
world-surfaces they couple to are closed. Note that, at the
classical level, the equations of motion imply that the gauge
ﬁelds themselves encode the charge and vortex currents, re-
spectively,
Q= 1
4`3kb;
M= 1
2`2ka: (5)
Ifais a vector ﬁeld and ba pseudotensor ﬁeld, the model
is also invariant under the parity Pand time-reversal Tsym-
metries. In general, the BF action for a model deﬁned on acompact space with non-trivial topology has a ground state
degeneracy [40] reﬂecting the topology, exactly as the Chern-
Simons term in 2D. However, when the coe cient of the BF
term is 1=4, as in (3), the ground state is unique[40].
Having established that the e ective ﬁeld theory for the in-
homogeneous superconductors is a generalized gauge theory
we can proceed as usual in its construction, adding order by
order all interactions that respect the relevant symmetries. In
this case, the next-order gauge-invariant terms are the kinetic
terms for the two gauge ﬁelds. For the vector gauge ﬁeld
athis is the usual Maxwell term, constructed from the ﬁeld
strength f=da da. For the antisymmetric tensor gauge
ﬁeld b, the kinetic term is quadratic in the ﬁeld strength
h=db+db+db: (6)
It is easy to check that this is invariant under a gauge trans-
formation (4). Adding these next-order terms, we obtain the
Euclidean e ective action
S=X
x`4
4f2ff+i`4
4akb+`4
122hh+i`aQ+i`21
2bM:
(7)
The dimensionless parameter f=O(e) represents the e ec-
tive Coulomb interaction strength in the material and 1 =is
the magnetic screening length. The two dimensionless param-
eters fand`encode the strengths of the electric and mag-
netic interactions, respectively. Non-relativistic e ects can be
easily incorporated by considering a velocity of light v < 1
but are of no particular relevance for what follows.
We now integrate out the emergent gauge ﬁelds to obtain an
eective (Euclidean) action for the charges and vortices alone,
SQM=X
xf2
2`2Q
m2 r2Q
+2
8M 
m2 r2M+im2
`Qk
r2 m2 r2M:(8)
where
m=f
2; (9)
is the gauge-invariant, topological mass, analogous to the
famed Chern-Simons mass in 2D [38, 39]. This is one of
the main points of this paper: the topological mutual statistics
interaction screens both the vortex-vortex interaction and the
Coulomb interaction between charges. Approximating these
screened potentials by delta functions one can estimate the
mass (coe cient multiplying the world-line length in the ac-
tion) of charges and the string tension (coe cient multiply-
ing the world-sheet area in the action) of vortices. In this
phase of the system both charges and vortices are gapped
excitations with mass M=f2=(2m2`3) and string tension
T= 2=(8m2`2) interacting via short-range screened poten-
tials. For temperatures low enough this is thus a thermally ac-
tivated, insulating phase, for higher temperatures it is a metal.4
Let us now investigate what happens when charges con-
dense, which can be described by letting the original integer-
valued variable Qbecome a real-valued ﬁeld over which one
has to integrate (as opposed to sum) in the partition function.
Formally, this amounts to using the Poisson summation for-
mula
X
fQgf
Q
=X
fkgZ
dQf
Q
ei2Qk; (10)
and focusing only on the sector in which the dual variable
k=0. However, since the current Qis conserved and thus
constrained by the equation dQ=0, we must ﬁrst introduce
the representation Q=`kn. The new variables nare
now free but redundant, since they can be gauge transformed
as in (4). There are only three gauge-invariant degrees of free-
dom in the n, corresponding to the three unconstrained vari-
ables Q. The removal of the three redundant variables can be
taken care of by the usual gauge ﬁxing in the integration.
We consider a 4D Euclidean lattice with spacing `repre-
senting the typical distance of the superconducting droplets.
Letd,ˆd,Sand ˆSdenote forward and backward lattice
derivatives and shifts. Then the forward and backward lattice
BF terms are deﬁned by the three-index operators[4]
kSd;
hatkˆdˆS; (11)
where no summation over equal indices andis implied.
The two lattice BF operators are interchanged (no minus sign)
upon summation by parts on the lattice and are gauge invari-
ant,
kd=kd=ˆdk=0;
ˆkd=ˆdˆk=ˆdˆk=0: (12)
They also satisfy the identities
ˆkk!= 
! !
r2+
dˆd! dˆd!
+
!dˆd !dˆd
;
ˆkk!=kˆk!=2
!r2 dˆd!
;(13)
wherer2=ˆddis the lattice Laplacian.
Using (13) we write the action (8) as
SnM=X
x2
8M 
m2 r2M
+f2
2n 
 
r2+
dˆd dˆd
m2 r2n
+f2
2ndˆd dˆd
m2 r2n
 im2n 
m2 r2M
:(14)
Performing Gaussian integration over the ﬁeld n, we ob-
tainSM=X
x2
8M 
 r2M: (15)
This is the second main result of this paper. The global con-
densation in the superconducting phase turns the vortex in-
teraction into a long-range one, suppressing the topological
screening. As has been derived in [4], a 4D Coulomb poten-
tial for the elements of the world-surface of a vortex implies
that the self-energy of a circular vortex-loop of radius rscales
likerlnr, which amounts to logarithmic vortex conﬁnement
as is the case in 2D. In these inhomogeneous 3D superconduc-
tors, thus, the destruction of global superconductivity via tun-
nelling percolation also takes places by vortex liberation, sim-
ilarly to the 2D BKT transition. Since vortices are 1D objects,
this happens when the e ective string tension of the vortices,
including the entropy correction, vanishes. This transition has
been studied in [30] and leads to the VFT critical behaviour
of the resistance given by Eq. (2).
EXPERIMENT
Standard four-terminal dc resistance measurements, see the
inset in Fig. 1a, are taken on ﬁlms of the nitrides of the transi-
tion metals, NbTiN and NbN. The detailed preparation of the
20-nm-thick NbN ﬁlm on an MgO substrate can be found in
Methods. The zero-temperature coherence length of this ﬁlm
is measured to be (4 :400:05) nm, i.e., much shorter than
the ﬁlm thickness d=20 nm hence the NbN ﬁlm is a 3D su-
perconductor. The details of the preparation of the disordered
nonstoichiometric 86-nm-thick NbTiN ﬁlm can be found in
Ref. [41]. This ﬁlm is deposited on a Si (100) substrate by
radio frequency (RF) reactive magnetron co-sputtering from
two separate NbN and TiN targets. As the ﬁlm is deposited
on a Si substrate, it is fully compatible with the existing Si
CMOS technology. We beneﬁt from the fact that this NbTiN
ﬁlm has been studied before [41]. The zero-temperature co-
herence length is measured to be (9 :530:04) nm, which is
much shorter than the ﬁlm thickness 86 nm [41]. Therefore,
we also have a 3D superconductor system. Both samples are
approximately rectangular ﬁlms with the length of 4.5 mm
and the width of3.5 mm. As shown later, we see that the
VFT model ﬁts the data much better than the corresponding
BKT one does.
Figure 1a shows the four-terminal dc resistance measure-
ments of the 20-nm-thick NbN ﬁlm grown on the MgO sub-
strate as a function of temperature T. We observe a rather
broad metal-superconductor transition with decreasing T. In
order to further study this, we ﬁt our experimental results with
the BKT- (red curve) and the VFT (blue curve) scaling re-
sistivity. Note that we use the same three ﬁtting parameters,
the critical temperature, the overall normalization of the resis-
tance, and a constant bhaving the dimensionality of tempera-
ture) for the two ﬁts. The aim is to compare the two scalings
and identify the best one. Marking the six data points that5
ab
FIG. 1. Resistance measurements. a: Four-terminal dc resistance
measurements of the 20-nm-thick NbN ﬁlm at di erent temperatures.
The red and blue curves correspond to BKT ﬁtting and VFT ﬁtting
to the experimental data, respectively. The gray points mark experi-
mental data deviating from the ﬁts. The inset depicts a sketch of the
four-terminal dc resistance measurements of NbN and NbTiN ﬁlms.
Electrodes V+and V correspond to the two voltage probes for mea-
suring the voltage di erence. Electrodes I+and I are the source
and drain contacts. The symbols V and I stand the voltmeter and
ammeter measuring the voltage di erence and current, respectively.
b:Four-terminal dc resistance measurements of a 20-nm-thick NbN
ﬁlm at di erent temperatures. The red and blue curves correspond
to the BKT ﬁtting and VFT ﬁtting to the experimental data, respec-
tively. The three data points marked gray show the noticeable devia-
tion from the ﬁts.
signiﬁcantly deviate from any ﬁt in grey, we see that the VFT
dependence ﬁts the experimental results much better than the
BKT one does, see Fig. 1a. Analogous study is performed on
the much thicker NbTiN ﬁlm with a thickness of 86 nm de-
posited on a Si substrate. Figure 1b displays the same kind of
the four-terminal dc resistance measurements. Again, we ob-
serve a broad metal-superconductor transition with decreasing
temperature. The BKT scaling clearly fails to ﬁt the experi-
mental data. The VFT ﬁts describe the experimental data very
well, except for three points marked grey. While at present no
concrete model for this deviation, which could be caused by
nonstoichiometric disorder, can be o ered, one can strongly
assume that it is caused by quantum corrections to the re-
sistance which become essential in the close vicinity of the
superconducting transition temperature Tcwhich noticeably
exceeds TVFT. The fact that in thicker (86 nm thick) NbTiN
ﬁlm these deviations are much smaller than in the 20 nm thick
NbN ﬁlm excellently agrees with this assumption. However,
detailed calculations beyond the scope of the present work are
necessary to quantitatively explore this assumption.
The next step is to conﬁrm that the observed resistance be-
havior reﬂects the genuine bulk superconducting properties
rather than stems from the local superconductivity that might
arise at the surface or 1D defect ﬁlaments of the investigated
samples. To that end, we perform magnetic susceptibility
measurements. As shown in Fig. 2, the investigated systems
demonstrate strong diamagnetic response in the magnetic sus-
ceptibility, evidencing that the observed superconductivity is
the genuine bulk superconductivity for both ﬁlms. The down-
ward then upward behavior of the magnetic susceptibility in
the 86-nm-thick NbTiN ﬁlm in the FC condition indicates pos-
sible paramagnetic Meissner e ect (PME) [42]. The PME
abFIG. 2. Magnetization measurements under zero-ﬁeld-cooled
(ZFC) and ﬁeld-cooled (FC) condictions. a: Magnetization of the
20 nm-thick NbN ﬁlm. Insert: magnetic susceptibility. The measure-
ments are taken under the external ﬁeld of 20 Oe. b:Magnetization of
the 86 nm-thick NbTiN ﬁlm. The measurements are taken under the
external ﬁeld of 5 Oe.
generally appears in superconductors with strong vortex pin-
ning at low temperatures.
CONCLUSION
Our results reveal the existence of a novel type of super-
conductivity, which we call type-III superconductivity. The
standard superconductivity is well described by the local
Ginzburg-Landau theory for a homogeneous, global order pa-
rameter in which gauge ﬁelds are screened by the Anderson-
Higgs mechanism and which usually corresponds to the mi-
croscopic BCS pairing mechanism. The type III supercon-
ductivity is described by a topological gauge theory and corre-
sponds to an inhomogeneous network of condensate droplets
getting connected by tunneling pairs percolation and is de-
stroyed by vortex liberation instead of pairs breaking. The un-
derlying physics is the generalization of the BKT physics to
three dimensions. The corresponding predicted modiﬁed ex-
ponential VFT scaling of the resistance is fully conﬁrmed by
experiment. In 2D, only this second type of superconductivity
survives due to strong infrared divergences in the Ginzburg-
Landau theory, in 3D both types of superconductivity are pos-
sible. There are strong hints that the type of superconductivity
that we describe here is associated with the BEC of strongly
bound electron pairs and is realized in the high- Tcmaterials.
EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
Preparation of the NbN ﬁlm
We used the radio frequency (RF) reactive magnetron sput-
ter to deposit a 20-nm-thick NbN ﬁlm on the MgO (100) sub-
strate in an ultrahigh vacuum chamber with the base pres-
sure of 3.910 9Torr, We ﬁxed the argon /nitrogen ﬂow rate
to 12:0.5. The ﬁxed gas pressure of 3 mTorr and the ﬁxed RF
power of 120 W are used. The argon plasma (12 sccm) strikes
the NbN target and atoms or molecules are ejected from the
target surface. These atoms or molecules travel towards the6
silicon substrate with the high temperature of 800C and
deposit as the NbN ﬁlm.
Preparation of the NbTiN ﬁlm
The detailed description regarding the preparation of the
disordered nonstoichiometric 86-nm-thick NbTiN ﬁlm is
given in [41]. In short, our ﬁlm is deposited on a Si (100)
substrate by the RF reactive magnetron co-sputtering from
two separate NbN (99.5 %) and TiN (99.5 %) targets at 800
C. The base pressure in the chamber is less than 9 10 9Torr,
and the gas pressure is controlled at 3 mTorr during the de-
position. The RF sputtering powers of both targets are set as
100 W. The gas ﬂow rate ratio of argon and nitrogen is 12:0.5.
The argon plasma (12 sccm) strikes two targets, and atoms or
molecules are ejected from the target’s surface. These atoms
or molecules travel towards the silicon substrate with the high
temperature of 800C and deposit as the NbTiN ﬁlm. The
large lattice mismatch between NbTiN and Si possibly leads
to disordered and inhomogeneous nature of the NbTiN ﬁlm.
Electrical measurements
The low-temperature four-terminal resistance measure-
ments are performed in an Oxford Triton 200 cryo-free
3He/4He dilution fridge. We use the Keithley 2400 current
source meter to provide a constant dc current that ﬂows from
the source to the drain contact. On the other hand, A Keithley
2000 multimeter is used to measure the voltage drop between
the two voltage probes.
Magnetization measurements
Magnetic susceptibility measurements were carried out
using a dc superconducting quantum interference device
(SQUID) magnetometer. Both zero-ﬁeld-cooled (ZFC) and
ﬁeld-cooled (FC) regimes are used.
Acknowledgements
The work of V .M.V . was supported by the Terra Quantum
AG. Y .-J.L. and C.-T.L. would like to thank the National Sci-
ence and Technology Council (NSTC), Taiwan for ﬁnancial
support. We thank Y .C. Yeh, H.C. Yeh, and J.W. Yang for
their experimental help.
[1] M. Tinkham, Introduction to superconductivity, Dover Publica-
tions, New York 1996.
[2] D. Kowal, Z. Ovadyahu,Solid St. Comm. 1994, 90, 783.
[3] T. I. Baturina, A. Yu. Mironov, V . M. Vinokur, M. R. Baklanov,
C. Strunk,Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 99, 257003.[4] M. C. Diamantini, P. Sodano, C. A. Trugenberger,Nuclear
Physics, 1996 B474, 641.
[5] V . M. Vinokur, T. I. Baturina, M. V . Fistul, A. Yu. Mironov,
M. R. Baklanov, C. Strunk, Nature, 2008, 452, 613.
[6] M. C. Diamantini, M. C., Trugenberger, C. A. & Vinokur, V . M.
Comm. Phys. 2018, 1, 77.
[7] D. Das, S. Doniach,Phys. Rev. 1999, B 60, 1261.
[8] M. C. Diamantini, A. Yu. Mironov, S. V . Postolova,
X. Liu, Z. Hao, D. M. Silevitch, Ya. Kopelevich, P. Kim,
C. A. Trugenberger, V . M. Vinokur, Phys. Lett. 2020, 384,
126570.
[9] M. C. Diamantini, L. Gammaitoni, C. A. Trugenberger,
V . M. Vinokur, J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 2019, 32, 47.
[10] M. C. Diamantini, C. A. Trugenberger, V . M. Vinokur,in Topo-
logical Phase Transitions and New Developments, World Sci-
entiﬁc, Singapore, 197, 2022.
[11] C. A. Trugenberger, Superinsulators, Bose metals and high- Tc
superconductors: the quantum physics of emergent magnetic
monopoles. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2022.
[12] B. Sac ´ep´e, T. I. Baturina, V . M. Vinokur, M. R. Baklanov,
M. Sanquer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 101 157006.
[13] B. Sac ´ep´e, T. Dubouchet, C. Chapelier, M. Sanquer, M. Ovadia,
D. Shahar, M. Feigel’man, L. Io e, Nature Physics 2011, 7,
239.
[14] A. M. Polyakov, Phys. Lett. 1975, 59, 82.
[15] R. Jackiw, S. Templeton, Phys. Rev. D 1981, 23, 2291.
[16] A. Glatz, I. S. Aranson, T. I. Baturina, N. M. Chtchelkatchev,
V . M. Vinokur, Phys. Rev. B 2011, 84, 024508.
[17] M. C. Diamantini, C. A. Trugenberger, V . M. Vinokur, Journal
of High Energy Physics, 2022, 10, 100.
[18] C. Parra, F. Niemstemski, A. W. Contryman, P. Giraldo-Gallo,
T. H Geballe, I. R. Fisher, H. C. Manoharan, PNAS, 2021, 118,
e2017810118.
[19] D. Mihailovic, V . V . Kabanov, K. A. M ¨uller, Europhys. Lett.
2002, 57, 254.
[20] D. Pelc, M. Vuckovic, M. S. Grbic, Yu. G. Pozek, T. Sasagawa,
M. Greven, N. Barisi ´c, Nature Comm. 2018, 9 4327.
[21] K. M. Bastiaans, D. Chatzopoulos, J.-F. Ge, D. Cho,
W. O. Tromp, J. M. van Ruitenbeek, M. H. Fischer,
P. J. de Visser, D. J. Thoen, E. F. C. Driessen, T. M. Klapwijk,
M. P. Allan, Science, 2021, 374, 608.
[22] P. Zhou, L. Chen, Y . Liu, I. Sochnikov, A. T. Bollinger, M.-
G. Han, Y . Thu, I. Bozovic, D. Natelson, Nature, 2019, 572,
493.
[23] A. T. Bollinger, G. Dubuis, J. Yoon, D. Pavuna, J. Misewich,
I. Bozovic, Nature, 2011, 472, 458.
[24] Z. H. Luo, W. Pang, B. Liu, Y .-Y . Li, B. A. Malomed, Frontiers
of Physics, 2021, 16, 32201.
[25] F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1992, 69, 132.
[26] A. P. Nielsen et al. Phys. Rev . B 2000, 62, 14380.
[27] M. C. Diamantini, P. Sodano, C. A Trugenberger, Eur. Phys. J.
2016, B 53, 19.
[28] M. C. Diamantini, C. A Trugenberger, Nucl. Phys. 2015, 891,
401.
[29] P. Minnhagen, Rev. Mod. Phys. 1987, 59, 1001.
[30] M. C. Diamantini, L. Gammaitoni, C. A Trugenberger,
V . M. Vinokur, Scientiﬁc Reports, 2018, 8, 15718.
[31] M. Ovadia, D. Kalok, I. Tamir, S. Mitra, B. Sacep ´e, D. Shahar,
Scientiﬁc Reports, 2015, 5, 13503.
[32] M. G. Vasin, V . N. Ryzhov, V . M. Vinokur, arXiv:1712.00757,
2017.
[33] S. Sankar, V . M. Vinokur, V . Tripathi, Phys. Rev. B 2018, 97,
020507(R).
[34] M. C. Diamantini, C. A Trugenberger, V . M. Vinokur, Commu-7
nications Physics, 2021, 4, 25.
[35] Y . Aharonov, D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 1961, 115, 485.
[36] Y . Aharonov, A. Casher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1984, 53, 319.
[37] L. H. Kaufmann, Formal knot theory, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, 1983.
[38] S. Deser, R. Jackiw, S. Templeton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1982, 48,
975.
[39] T. J. Allen, M. J. Bowick, A. Lahiri, Mod. Phys. Lett. A, 1991,
6, 559.[40] M. Bergeron, G. W. Semeno , R. J. Szabo, Nucl. Phys. B,
1995, 437, 695.
[41] S.-Z. Chen, J.-W. Yang, T.-Y . Peng, Y .-C. Chu, C.-C. Yeh, I.-
F. Hu, S. Mhatre, Y .-J. Lu, C.-T. Liang, Supercond. Sci. Tech-
nol. 2022, 35, 064003.
[42] F. H. Chen, M. F. Tai, W. C. Horng, T. Y . Tseng, Phys. Rev. B,
1993, 48, 1258.