Towards Usable Parental Control for Voice Assistants
Peiyi Yang
University of Virginia
USAJie Fan
University of Virginia
USAZice Wei
University of Virginia
USA
Haoqian Li
University of Virginia
USATu Le∗
University of Virginia
USAYuan Tian†
University of California, Los Angeles
USA
ABSTRACT
Voice Personal Assistants (VPA) have become a common household
appliance. As one of the leading platforms for VPA technology,
Amazon created Alexa and designed Amazon Kids for children to
safely enjoy the rich functionalities of VPA and for parents to mon-
itor their kids’ activities through the Parent Dashboard. Although
this ecosystem is in place, the usage of Parent Dashboard is not
yet popularized among parents. In this paper, we conduct a parent
survey to find out what they like and dislike about the current
parental control features. We find that parents need more visuals
about their children’s activity, easier access to security features for
their children, and a better user interface. Based on the insights
from our survey, we present a new design for the Parent Dashboard
considering the parents’ expectations.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Domain-specific security and pri-
vacy architectures ;Usability in security and privacy .
KEYWORDS
Voice Assistant, Smart Speaker, Security, Privacy, Safety, Parental
Control, User Interface, Amazon Alexa, Alexa Kids
ACM Reference Format:
Peiyi Yang, Jie Fan, Zice Wei, Haoqian Li, Tu Le, and Yuan Tian. 2023.
Towards Usable Parental Control for Voice Assistants. In Cyber-Physical
Systems and Internet of Things Week 2023 (CPS-IoT Week Workshops ’23),
May 9–12, 2023, San Antonio, TX, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3576914.3587491
1 INTRODUCTION
The development of Internet of Things (IoT) technology is growing
rapidly and competition for the control hub of those IoT devices
has heated up over the last few years. There are some forerunners
in the business of providing voice personal assistant (VPA) services,
such as Amazon Alexa and Google Home.
∗Also with University of California, Los Angeles, USA.
†Also with University of Virginia.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CPS-IoT Week Workshops ’23, May 9–12, 2023, San Antonio, TX, USA
©2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0049-1/23/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3576914.3587491While VPAs can make our daily routines automated, there are
some serious risks from using VPAs that we can not ignore, es-
pecially for households that have children. The voice authentica-
tion systems on commercial VPAs are found to be not robust [ 19].
Hence, underage children could easily gain access to content that
is for adult audiences, which may contain inappropriate language
content. Amazon Alexa has been the most popular VPA platform.
Researchers have found a lot of issues with the Alexa platform and
its applications (hereinafter referred to as “skills”) in the past [ 4,6–
8,20]. Even with the dedicated Alexa kid skills with a stricter vetting
process, children users are still vulnerable to private data collection
and inappropriate content risks from such skills [7].
Luckily, Amazon Kids provides parents with an Alexa Parent
Dashboard to monitor their children’s activities. The Parent Dash-
board also has security features to protect the kids. However, it
is unclear whether the current design of the Parent Dashboard is
effective and whether the security features such as Alexa skills
allowlisting are useful to parents. Although the Parent Dashboard
provides basic functionalities, there might still be room for improve-
ments to attract more users and ensure children’s safety.
In this work, we aim to understand what limitations the current
parental control scheme of VPA has and how we can improve the
design to improve user experience. Our aim is to build a new Parent
Dashboard for parents that can replace Alexa Parent Dashboard.
This work contributes the following aspects:
•First, we design and conduct an online survey with Alexa
users who have kids at home to understand what parents
expect from Amazon Kids and how the current parental
control scheme aligns with their expectations.
•Second, we also study the parents’ awareness of the security
and privacy risks introduced by Alexa and what actions they
take to mitigate these risks.
•Finally, using the insights from our survey, we design a new
Parent Dashboard for VPA to improve the parental control
user experience while ensuring children’s safety.
2 RELATED WORK
Previous research has investigated children’s safety on the Internet
and compliance. Several user studies were conducted to provide
insights into how parents and children understand the technol-
ogy and make privacy decision [ 3,12]. Besides, many analyses
of mobile apps identified violations regarding data collection and
non-compliant privacy policies [ 15,21]. Websites made for children
users were also found to implement hidden tracking or malicious
algorithms [ 1,18]. Other studies investigated inappropriate content
and privacy issues in child-directed voice applications [ 7] and smartarXiv:2303.04957v2  [cs.HC]  24 Mar 2023CPS-IoT Week Workshops ’23, May 9–12, 2023, San Antonio, TX, USA Peiyi Yang, Jie Fan, Zice Wei, Haoqian Li, Tu Le, and Yuan Tian
toys [ 2,9–11,16,17], showing children are vulnerable to malicious
content and parents are actually concerned about such risks. Ad-
dressing such issues, several frameworks and recommendations
were proposed for ensuring children’s safety [ 5,14]. Different from
these previous studies, we investigate the usability of parental con-
trol for voice assistants and propose an improved design based on
the insights given by our participants.
3 PARENT SURVEY
In this section, we discuss our recruitment strategy, ethical consid-
erations, how we design our survey, and the results.
3.1 Recruitment
We recruited 140 participants on Prolific to participate in our study.
Participants were required to be fluent in English with at least one
child and have at least one Amazon Echo device. Our survey con-
sisted of 33 questions, and the payment was $9.54/hr rate suggested
by Prolific for completing our survey.
3.2 Survey Pretest
Pilot study is a common practice to identify design issues and
biases for surveys, including priming or confusing wording before
deployment [ 13]. We ran a pilot study with 7 participants to obtain
feedback for our survey design and payment logistics. As a result,
we improved the wording and presentation of our survey questions.
Our study results reported in this paper did not include the data
collected from the pilot study.
3.3 Ethical Considerations
Our study protocol was approved by our Institutional Review Board
(IRB). The participants were asked to read our consent form care-
fully and sign it to participate in the study. Participation in our
study was voluntary and anonymous. We did not collect any per-
sonally identifiable information. Payments were handled through
Prolific and adhered to Prolific’s policies.
3.4 Survey Design and Results
3.4.1 Demographic. We asked the participants to report their age,
gender, and comfort level with computing technology. We allowed
the “Prefer not to answer” option for these questions. The majority
of our participants were in the ranges of 25–44 years old (66.42%
of participants) and 45–64 years old (23.36% of participants). We
also had a relatively gender-balanced participant pool as 53.28% of
participants are male and 46.72% are female.
3.4.2 Overview experiences on Amazon Echo Device. We asked the
participants about how frequently they used Amazon Echo devices,
whether they had ever used parental control, and whether they
were satisfied with the parental control mode on Alex in terms of
filtering inappropriate/adult content, preventing privacy invasion,
entertaining their kids, keeping track of there kids’ activates, keep
control over their kids’ activities, and overall experience.
Our results show that around 60% of participants used Amazon
Echo devices on a daily basis (Figure 1). 50% of the participants used
parental control. 35% did not use it since they did not know aboutthese features. Figure 2 shows the level of satisfaction our partici-
pants had towards parental control mode on Alexa. Overall, around
70% were satisfied with the contents under Alexa parental control
mode such as filtering inappropriate/adult content, preventing pri-
vacy invasion, entertaining their kid, keeping track of their kids’
activities, and keeping control over their kids’ activities. However,
particularly for preventing privacy invasion, 10% of participants
were dissatisfied, which is noticeably more than the other contents.
We then asked whether they thought Amazon Echo devices could
potentially leak private information or have a bad influence on kids.
43% of participants did not think it was possible for Alexa to leak
private information. 72% of participants did not believe Alexa could
have a bad influence on their kids.
Figure 1: Participants’ responses to how frequently they
used Amazon Echo devices. The majority of participants
used their Echo devices everyday.
Figure 2: Participants’ responses to their level of satisfaction
of the contents under parental control mode on Alexa
3.4.3 User Interface of Parent Dashboard. We provided an example
of how to get access to the kid’s activity summary. 74% of partici-
pants answered easy and 18% of them thought it was neither easy
nor hard. Only 4.5% thought it was hard to find the activity summary
section. Next, we asked the participants whether the user inter-
face should contain numbers/graphics/text and description/buttons
(Figure 3). 70% of the participants preferred keeping the current
design for numbers. 40% thought that the interface should include
more graphics. 68% of participants preferred the current design of
texts/descriptions and buttons. We then asked them whether they
would like to see more bar charts, pie charts, and calendar viewsTowards Usable Parental Control for Voice Assistants CPS-IoT Week Workshops ’23, May 9–12, 2023, San Antonio, TX, USA
showing the kid’s usage. Over 95% of participants would like to see
a pie chart for daily usage. Over 70% were interested in seeing a bar
chart showing daily usage in a week. For the calendar review, the
darker color squares mean more activities, and lighter color squares
mean fewer activities. We found that the calendar component idea
did not appeal to most of the participants (66%). Only 34% said
they would like to see a calendar. Therefore, a calendar component
might not be necessary.
Figure 3: Participants’ responses to whether they think
the user interface should contain more or less num-
bers/graphics/buttons/text and description. Many partici-
pants (about 40%) preferred more graphics.
3.4.4 Parents’ Security and Privacy Behaviors. We asked our par-
ticipants whether it was difficult for them to enable Amazon Kids.
Most participants thought it was very easy for them to access and
enable Amazon Kids. Then, we asked our participants about their
satisfaction with the parental control settings in the Alexa appli-
cation in terms of aesthetics/design of the page, button placement,
and the abundance of features (Figure 4). Our participants thought
the design, button placement, and abundance of features were good.
However, they were not extremely satisfied with it. Therefore, there
is still room to revamp the aesthetics and the button placement
and add more features. We further asked if the parental dashboard
should contain more numbers/graphics/text/buttons. Many users
wanted more graphics and descriptions of their child’s activity
summary. Therefore, it is important to include more graphics and
descriptions for the activity summary feature. At the moment, the
Alexa companion app and Alexa parental dashboard are two differ-
ent apps. Thus, we asked the user whether they would like to see
them combined in one single app. The majority of the users would
like these two features to be combined. This result suggests that
central access within a single Alexa app is better.
Next, we asked our participants about the three security features
in Amazon Kids that restrict kids’ behaviors when using Alexa:
Add Content, Explicit Filter, and Web Access Restrictions.
As shown in Figure 5, Add Content allows parents to make
additional Alexa Skills, Audible Books, and Kindle Books available
to their kids. These additional contents are usually reviewed and
trusted by the parents. We showed the participants the location of
the feature and asked if they used this feature. Many participants
(65%) did not use this feature. Only 30% of the participants used it.
Out of these participants, 75% believed this feature was effective in
protecting the privacy and security of their kids. We further asked
them what actions they took when their kids used Alexa Skills,
Figure 4: Participants’ responses to their level of satisfaction
with Alexa parental control settings. There is still room for
improvement to the settings.
Audible books, and Kindle Books. We manually checked the answers
and found that almost half (47%) indicated that no action was taken.
We identified three main reasons: (1) participants believed their
kids would be mature enough to not get hurt, (2) they simply were
not concerned, and (3) they never thought about it until taking this
survey. 19% answered that they only allowed their kids to use Alexa
when they were present. 16% answered that they paid attention to
the content their kids could have access to by manually checking
their downloads. 17% answered that their kids were not allowed to
have access to these types of content at all. The next security feature,
Figure 5: Add Content allows parents to make additional
content available to their kids.
as shown in Figure 6, is the explicit language filter for filtering out
inappropriate music. 20% of participants indicated their kids did
not listen to music on Alexa devices. 39% of participants said they
enabled the filter, and 78% of them believed the filter was effective.
Still, 39% of participants reported listening to music using AlexaCPS-IoT Week Workshops ’23, May 9–12, 2023, San Antonio, TX, USA Peiyi Yang, Jie Fan, Zice Wei, Haoqian Li, Tu Le, and Yuan Tian
devices without the filter. When we asked what other actions they
took to protect their kids, more than half (63%) answered they did
not take any actions. The reasons roughly fall into 3 categories:
(1) their kids were old enough, (2) their kids were too young, (3)
there was nothing to be worried about. 30% of the participants
said that they provided direct supervision to their kids by being
present, and 6% answered that they controlled the content their
kids could have access to by manually checking downloads. The last
Figure 6: Explicit Filter can be turned on to protect children
from explicit languages and music.
security feature, Web Access Restrictions, as shown in Figure 7, is
specifically for Alexa devices that come with a screen. With a screen,
kids can use a browser to access the web and parents might want to
put a limit on web access. Amazon provides three built-in types of
web access restrictions: Pre-selected content only, filtered content
with a URL blocklist, and filtered content without the blocklist. 50%
of participants indicated their kids had access to the web, and the
number of participants for each type of restriction method was
roughly the same: 31% allowed Amazon pre-selected content, 37%
allowed filtered content with a blocklist, and 31% allowed filtered
content without a blocklist. Overall, 70% of the participants were
happy with their choice of method.
3.4.5 Final Remarks. Finally, we asked participants whether they
felt they had enough control by using Amazon Kids. The major-
ity (90%) of participants answered yes. Among those who were
not happy with the current design, one participant explained that
they did not always agree with Amazon on the definition of child-
appropriate content and suggested that Amazon should invite par-
ents from different backgrounds to share their opinions on child
safety. Two participants complained there was too much control
and that Alexa had gotten in the way of their parenting. As a side
note, two other participants complained it was difficult to navigate
the Alexa app and find what they need. One participant asked for a
new feature of screen recording their kids’ web activities.
Figure 7: 3 types of built-in Web Access Restrictions are pro-
vided by Amazon.
4 IMPROVING PARENTAL CONTROL
DASHBOARD DESIGN
In this section, we summarize the key takeaways from our survey
and present our proposed design for the Parent Dashboard.
4.1 Takeaways from Parent Survey
Based on the insights from our survey, we propose to design a new
user interface for the Parent Dashboard. In particular, the important
improvements are a straightforward user interface, visuals to rep-
resent a child’s activity summary, and easy access to many security
features to protect children.
From the aesthetics perspective, the problem is that there is a
lack of graphics and descriptions for the children’s activities. The
current design used bar charts to show the activities of a child in a
week’s time. This way of displaying activity information lacks the
percentage view of pie charts and also does not show the frequency
of usage. 95% of our participants would like to see pie charts added
to the Parent Dashboard. The bar charts still display valuable in-
formation, which is why 70% decided to keep them. However, the
calendar view of frequency charts is considered unnecessary by
the participants. Therefore, we propose a design for our Parent
Dashboard that incorporates pie charts and bar charts to visualize
children’s activity summaries.
Currently, the Alexa companion app and Parent Dashboard are
separate apps. Many parents preferred having them combined into a
single application. Additionally, many parents did not know where
to find the security features. Therefore, it is important to give easy
access to the features on the Parent Dashboard.
4.2 Parent Dashboard Prototype Design
We use Figma to design our prototype because it is a fast user
interface prototyping platform that provides the most design func-
tionalities. This helps make our design more professional right out
of the box. We have three different pages designed for the prototype.
Our design philosophy is to keep what the users like about the Alexa
Parent Dashboard and change/insert features the user would like toTowards Usable Parental Control for Voice Assistants CPS-IoT Week Workshops ’23, May 9–12, 2023, San Antonio, TX, USA
Figure 8: Parent Dashboard Homepage
have. The first page is the Parent Dashboard homepage. We can see
the new web prototype is more aesthetically designed with bigger
figures, colorful charts/graphs, and a more modern design. We have
changed how users view their children’s activities. In Alexa Parent
Dashboard, the homepage displays a list of children with hyperlinks
to view their child’s activity. Our prototype displays all children’s
activities into a line chart, so the parents can compare how much
time each child has used their Alexa and see alerting information
if one has over-used technology. We also include a bar chart that
displays combined usage in each category. This provides parents
with information about which category is used the most and the
least. Parents are able to view the features (e.g., song, video, or book)
that are used most frequently by their child in highlight, allowing
them to know what their kid is doing at a single glance. Also, on
the right-hand side, we provide the whole list of features used by
their kids so that parents can quickly learn what their kids did with
Alexa. By clicking on a child’s info box, the parents can navigate to
a particular child’s activity summary page. The second page of our
Figure 9: Single Child Activity Page
prototype is a single child’s activity summary page. This page aims
to show the summary and trends of a single child. It uses a similar
style to the homepage and uses similar navigation logic as Alexa
Parent Dashboard. On the page, we include the weekly highlightand a list of past feature usage for a single child. A new feature
is a bar chart that shows the percentage of usage for a particular
feature. This pie chart provides a better understanding of which
feature is used the most by this child. For example, if Jack used
Alexa mostly for music, his parents can learn this information at a
glance and check if Jack listened to inappropriate music. The third
Figure 10: Single Child Setting Page
page shown in Figure 10 is the setting page for a single child. We
decided to include the settings page because the users would like to
use the security features provided by Alexa Parent Dashboard. The
Alexa Parent Dashboard has amazing security features, but those
features are not easily accessible. Therefore, we create a single page
for the security settings. This setting page is a light version. We do
not include all possible settings because we want to emphasize the
security settings.
For safe content, we include the following features: age filter,
music explicit filter, calling/messaging, and parent drop-in. These
features will be enabled using check-boxes as shown on the left-
hand side of Figure 10. Alexa Parent Dashboard also has a whitelist
feature that our participants liked. We include this white list feature
on the right-hand side of the settings page. This white list allows
users to enable/disable all of their existing Alexa skills, audibles,
videos, etc.
To make our front-end prototype more convincing, we add tran-
sitions between the pages. The user is able to navigate between the
homepage, the child’s summary page, and the child’s setting page.
As shown in Figure 8, the user can click on an individual child’s
name in the bottom left corner to enter a child’s activity page in
Figure 9. Then a user in the page shown in Figure 9 can click on the
settings icon on the top left to enter a child’s setting page shown
in Figure 10. From the setting page, the user can go back to the
homepage shown in Figure 8 by clicking on the home button.
5 DISCUSSION
In this section, we first present some recommendations for future
designs of the Parent Dashboard based on our findings. We then
discuss the limitations of our study and future work.CPS-IoT Week Workshops ’23, May 9–12, 2023, San Antonio, TX, USA Peiyi Yang, Jie Fan, Zice Wei, Haoqian Li, Tu Le, and Yuan Tian
5.1 Recommendations for Parent Dashboard
The Alexa Parental Dashboard is a separate website from the Alexa
App. And it is very hard to access from the Alexa App. We propose
to combine the Alexa App and Dashboard together. A user-friendly
guide for parental control settings in the dashboard is also impor-
tant. Some features in the current Alexa Parental Dashboard are
very hard to find and set up. Additionally, a lot of the setting details
are hidden in the sub-menu. These features and settings should be
made clearer to the users. Furthermore, there are some features that
are missing from the current Alexa Parent Dashboard. For example,
we see the lack of a bar graph to identify which activity has the
most use time and a pie chart to identify which activity has the
largest percentage. In our survey, the participants would like to
have more types of data representations. Besides, some parents only
allowed their kids to use smart speakers when they were around as
an alternative method to parental control mode. However, service
providers should aim to develop more comprehensive protections
for kid users so that parents can trust smart speakers as a tool to
entertain their kids and help them grow.
5.2 Limitations and Future Work
Our survey was conducted with 140 participants, which might not
be large enough for an in-depth understanding of the problems.
Moreover, survey data are self-reported data that might not cap-
ture all the preferences that users have. Future work could use
an interview or in-lab study to further get insights into the users’
preferences.
The prototype for the Parent Dashboard we presented in this
study is only an initial design of our envisioned Parent Dashboard.
We would like to make more revisions to this design in future
work. A future user study can be conducted to evaluate the design
and the baseline. Besides, in our study, we only focus on Amazon
Alexa. However, our results can be further extended to address
other platforms such as Google Assistant.
6 CONCLUSION
In this study, we show that the current design and interaction in
Amazon’s Parent Dashboard can be improved in multiple aspects.
We propose some improvements for the Alexa App and Alexa Parent
Dashboard. Service providers may only focus on creating more
features for the parents. However, parents may not be technically
savvy, and it can become complex and time-consuming for them to
get familiar with all the functionalities. Thus, it is important to pay
attention to user experience.
REFERENCES
[1]Xiaomei Cai and Xiaoquan Zhao. 2013. Online advertising on popular children’s
websites: Structural features and privacy issues. Computers in Human Behavior
29, 4 (2013), 1510–1518. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2013.01.013
[2]Gordon Chu, Noah Apthorpe, and Nick Feamster. 2019. Security and Privacy
Analyses of Internet of Things Children’s Toys. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6,
1 (2019), 978–985. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2866423
[3]Lorrie Faith Cranor, Adam L. Durity, Abigail Marsh, and Blase Ur. 2014. Parents’
and Teens’ Perspectives on Privacy In a Technology-Filled World. In 10th Sympo-
sium On Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2014) . USENIX Association, Menlo
Park, CA, 19–35. https://www.usenix.org/conference/soups2014/proceedings/
presentation/cranor
[4]J. S. Edu, X. Ferrer-Aran, J. Such, and G. Suarez-Tangil. 2023. SkillVet: Automated
Traceability Analysis of Amazon Alexa Skills. IEEE Transactions on Dependableand Secure Computing 20, 01 (jan 2023), 161–175. https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.
2021.3129116
[5]Jeffrey Haynes, Maribette Ramirez, Thaier Hayajneh, and Md Zakirul Alam
Bhuiyan. 2017. A framework for preventing the exploitation of IoT smart toys
for reconnaissance and exfiltration. In Security, Privacy, and Anonymity in Com-
putation, Communication, and Storage: SpaCCS 2017 International Workshops,
Guangzhou, China, December 12-15, 2017, Proceedings 10 . Springer, 581–592.
[6]Deepak Kumar, Riccardo Paccagnella, Paul Murley, Eric Hennenfent, Joshua
Mason, Adam Bates, and Michael Bailey. 2018. Skill Squatting Attacks on
Amazon Alexa. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 18) .
USENIX Association, Baltimore, MD, 33–47. https://www.usenix.org/conference/
usenixsecurity18/presentation/kumar
[7]Tu Le, Danny Yuxing Huang, Noah Apthorpe, and Yuan Tian. 2022. SkillBot:
Identifying Risky Content for Children in Alexa Skills. ACM Trans. Internet
Technol. 22, 3, Article 79 (jul 2022), 31 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3539609
[8]Song Liao, Christin Wilson, Long Cheng, Hongxin Hu, and Huixing Deng. 2020.
Measuring the Effectiveness of Privacy Policies for Voice Assistant Applications.
InAnnual Computer Security Applications Conference (Austin, USA) (ACSAC ’20) .
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 856–869. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3427228.3427250
[9]Moustafa Mahmoud, Md Zakir Hossen, Hesham Barakat, Mohammad Mannan,
and Amr Youssef. 2018. Towards a Comprehensive Analytical Framework for
Smart Toy Privacy Practices. In Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Socio-Technical
Aspects in Security and Trust (Orlando, Florida, USA) (STAST ’17) . Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 64–75. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3167996.3168002
[10] Andrew Manches, Pauline Duncan, Lydia Plowman, and Shari Sabeti. 2015. Three
questions about the Internet of things and children. TechTrends 59, 1 (2015), 76–
83.
[11] Emily McReynolds, Sarah Hubbard, Timothy Lau, Aditya Saraf, Maya Cakmak,
and Franziska Roesner. 2017. Toys That Listen: A Study of Parents, Children, and
Internet-Connected Toys. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17) . Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 5197–5207. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3025453.3025735
[12] Pekka Mertala. 2020. Young children’s perceptions of ubiquitous comput-
ing and the Internet of Things. British Journal of Educational Technology
51, 1 (2020), 84–102. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12821 arXiv:https://bera-
journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/bjet.12821
[13] Stanley Presser, Mick P. Couper, Judith T. Lessler, Elizabeth Martin,
Jean Martin, Jennifer M. Rothgeb, and Eleanor Singer. 2004. Meth-
ods for Testing and Evaluating Survey Questions . John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd, Chapter 1, 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1002/0471654728.ch1
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/0471654728.ch1
[14] Laura Rafferty, Patrick CK Hung, Marcelo Fantinato, Sarajane Marques Peres,
Farkhund Iqbal, Sy-Yen Kuo, and Shih-Chia Huang. 2017. Towards a privacy rule
conceptual model for smart toys. In Computing in Smart Toys . Springer, 85–102.
[15] Irwin Reyes, Primal Wijesekera, Joel Reardon, Amit Elazari Bar On, Abbas Raza-
ghpanah, Narseo Vallina-Rodriguez, Serge Egelman, et al .2018. “Won’t somebody
think of the children?” examining COPPA compliance at scale. In The 18th Privacy
Enhancing Technologies Symposium (PETS 2018) .
[16] Joshua Streiff, Olivia Kenny, Sanchari Das, Andrew Leeth, and L. Jean Camp.
2018. Poster Abstract: Who’s Watching Your Child? Exploring Home Security
Risks with Smart Toy Bears. In 2018 IEEE/ACM Third International Conference on
Internet-of-Things Design and Implementation (IoTDI) . 285–286. https://doi.org/
10.1109/IoTDI.2018.00042
[17] Junia Valente and Alvaro A. Cardenas. 2017. Security & Privacy in Smart Toys.
InProceedings of the 2017 Workshop on Internet of Things Security and Privacy
(Dallas, Texas, USA) (IoTS&P ’17) . Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 19–24. https://doi.org/10.1145/3139937.3139947
[18] Natalija Vlajic, Marmara El Masri, Gianluigi M. Riva, Marguerite Barry, and Derek
Doran. 2018. Online Tracking of Kids and Teens by Means of Invisible Images:
COPPA vs. GDPR. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Multimedia
Privacy and Security (Toronto, Canada) (MPS ’18) . Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 96–103. https://doi.org/10.1145/3267357.3267370
[19] X. Yuan, Y. Chen, A. Wang, K. Chen, S. Zhang, H. Huang, and I. M. Molloy.
2018. All Your Alexa Are Belong to Us: A Remote Voice Control Attack against
Echo. In 2018 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM) . 1–6. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/GLOCOM.2018.8647762
[20] Nan Zhang, Xianghang Mi, Xuan Feng, XiaoFeng Wang, Yuan Tian, and Feng
Qian. 2019. Dangerous Skills: Understanding and Mitigating Security Risks of
Voice-Controlled Third-Party Functions on Virtual Personal Assistant Systems.
In2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . 1381–1396. https://doi.org/
10.1109/SP.2019.00016
[21] Sebastian Zimmeck, Ziqi Wang, Lieyong Zou, Roger Iyengar, Bin Liu, Florian
Schaub, Shomir Wilson, Norman M Sadeh, Steven M Bellovin, and Joel R Reiden-
berg. 2017. Automated Analysis of Privacy Requirements for Mobile Apps.. In
NDSS .