 1 Noise Resilient Exceptional -Point Voltmeters  based on  Neuromorphic functionalities  
Arun n Suntharalingam1, Lucas Fern ández -Alcázar2, Rodion Kononchuck1, Tsampikos Kottos1 
1Wave Transport in Complex Systems Lab, Department of Physics, Wesleyan University , 
Middletown CT, USA   
2Instituto de  Modelado e Innovación Tecnológica (CONICET -UNNE)  and Facultad de Ciencias 
Exactas, Naturales y Agrimensura,  Universidad Nacional del Nordeste, W3404AAS Corrientes,  
Argentina  
 
Abstract:  Exceptional point degeneracies (EPD) of linear non -Hermitian systems have been 
recently utilized for hypersensitive sens ing. This proposal exploits  the sublinear response that the 
degenerate frequencies experience once the system is externally perturbed. The enhanced 
sensitivity , however,  might be  offset  by excess (fundamental and/or technical) noise. Here , we 
develop ed a self-oscillating  nonlinear platform that support s transition s between two distinct 
neuromorphic functionalities  – one having  a spatially symmetric steady -state, and the other  with 
an asymmetric steady -state – and display s nonlinear EPD s (NLEPD s) that can be  employed for 
noise -resilient sensing.  The experimental setup  incorporates a nonlinear electronic dimer with 
voltage -sensitive coupling and demonstrate s two-orders  signal -to-noise enhanc ement of voltage 
variation measurements  near NLEPDs . Our results resolve  a long-standing debate  on the efficacy 
of EPD -sensing  in active systems above  self-oscillating threshold . 
 
 
The underlying mathematical structures of non -Hermit ian wave systems  [1][2][3][4] have 
inspired  the last few years  new technologies  [5][6][7][8]. Many of the se are reliant on the 
existence of exceptional point degeneracies ( EPDs ) [8]. These are non -Hermitian de generacies 
where a set of   eigenvalues and the ir corresponding eigenvectors coalesce  [1][2]. In the 
proximity of an   th order EPD  (EPD -N), the eigenvalue  detuning     |      |, due to a 
small external perturbation  , follow s a sublinear response  (SLR)     √     that can be 
utilized for enhanced  sensing [9][10][11][12][13][14][15].  
A principal  requirement for efficient  EPD sensing is the increase  of the resolution limit 
via the narrowing of the resonance linewidth . This can be achieved by  a judicious design of 
cavity amplification mechanisms . The downside  of this strategy is that it introduce s additional  
noise that, in some EPD lasing platforms , might offset the enhanced signal sensit ivity 
[13][16][17][18][19]. Furthermore, nonlinear effects might become important , requesting  the 
develo pment of  theoretical tools that treat  them on equal footing with the sensitivity 
enhancement near EPDs . Most current studies , however,  rely on linear mathematical  constructs , 
such as  the Petermann factor [20][21][22], which describes the linewidth enhancement  near 
EPDs due to the bi -orthogonal nature of the eigenmodes of the underlying linear non -Hermitian 
systems [16]. Obviously, this approach is not suitable when the response of a system is 2  
Figure 1: EPDs at the transition between OD and AD.  (a) Physical systems that 
demonstrate OD and AD os cillation quenching. (b) (Right) The parameter space of the 
circuit of the subfigure of Fig. 1.A, is partitioned in three distinct domains that host stable NS 
(fixed points of the dynamical equations associated with Jacobian eigenvalues {𝜆𝑛;𝑛=
1,2,3} with ℛ 𝜆𝑛 <0) with distinct dynamical symmetries. Transition from one domain to 
another is dictated by the relative gain 𝛾1 0 /𝛾2 0  and voltage variation 𝛿𝑉 that controls the 
capacitive coupling between the two nonlinear RLC tanks. The three domains are: (I) the 
oscillation death (OD) domain, (II) the amplitude death (AD) domain, and (III) the trivial 
steady -state solution domain. The steady -state field ampli tude of each resonator differs from 
one another in domain (I) while it is the same in domain (II). Typical examples of phase -
space trajectories in cases (I) and (II) are shown on the left subfigures. The black dots 
indicate initial conditions while the blu e dots the steady -state (fixed point). The red solid line 
indicates NLEPDs associated with the coalescence of two stable NS. The red dashed line 
indicates NLEPDs associated with the coalescence of two non -trivial unstable NS (see 
Supplementary Information ) (c) (Horizontal plane) Parametric evolution of the nonlinear 
eigenfrequencies 𝑓 versus  𝛿𝑉 for a fixed value of the relative gain corresponding to a 
transition from OD to AD via a nonlinear EPD (NLEPD), see red dot. ( Vertical plane ) The 
signal -to-noise  enhancement factor 𝑆𝑁𝐸=𝜒/𝛼𝑉𝑅𝑊 (where 𝜒 𝜕 𝛥𝑓+/𝑓0 /𝜕 𝛿𝑉  is the 
sensitivity  and 𝛼𝑉𝑅𝑊 is the noise -equivalent voltage variations ) diverges as 1/√𝛿𝑉in the 
proximity of NLEPD .  3 influenced by nonlinearities . An example case is a laser at an EPD . Fortunately, an  appropriate 
language exists from  the area of dynamical systems and bifurcation theory [23][24][25][26][27], 
which  can be adopted for the analysis of nonlinear EPDs  (NLEPD s). Examples of systems  that 
are amenable to such analysis are shown in Fig. 1A. In fact, some recent theoretical studies have 
utilized this approach  to address issues like the formation of NLEPDs  and the emulation of 
neuronal dynamic functions using  parity -time ( PT) symmetric systems  that involve gain and loss 
nonlinear channels [26][27]. Among these neuromorphic functionalities, are oscillation 
quenching mechanisms whose characteristics are determined  by the underlying dynamical 
symmetr ies of the system . Two distinct oscillation quenching mechanisms  have been singled -out 
[28][29][30]: The firs t is the so -called  oscillation  death (OD) [28], which is associated with a 
spatially asymmetric steady -state and leads  to an explicit parity -time ( PT) symmetry violation , 
see Fig. 1B.I . The other mechanism , known as amplitude  death ( AD) [29], results to a spatially 
uniform steady -state which is protected by a dynamical (self -induced) PT -symmetry, see Fig. 
1B.II . OD constitutes a well -known phenomenon in neurons, known as the ―win ner-take-all‖ 
situation, whereas AD mainly serves to suppress neuronal oscillations  [30]. The transition  from  
AD to OD might be  characterized by the formation of a NLEPD  (see Fig. 1B right and Fig. 1C) , 
and it is a generic phenomenon found in a plethora of physical systems ( e.g. see Fig. 1A) . Can 
these NLEPDs be used for sensing  and what is the signal -to-noise enhancement  (SNE) factor  in 
their proximity?  A definite answer to this question requires not only  a theoretical modeling 
[24][25][31][32][33][34][35], but most importantly the establishment of controllable 
experimental platforms where the predictions of the theory will be scrutinized  and guide the 
theoretical language as it is developing.  
Here , we address the viability of NLEPD sensing protocol s using two nonlinear  RLC 
tanks  whose capacitive coupling is used as a sensing platform  for voltage variations . The RLC 
circuits  have  anharmonic parts consisting of a complementary amplifier (gain) and a dissipative 
conductor (loss ), see Fig. 1A  and Methods . The n onlinear supermodes (NS) are the fixed points 
of the dynamical equations,  and their properties  arise  from  the underlying dynamical symmetries 
and their stability . We focus on stable NS that are experimentally accessible and are identified  
from  the (negative) real part of the eigenvalues {  } of the Jacobian matrix , which describes the 
linearized dynamics around each of these fixed points [23]. Their properties  lead to the partition 
of the parameter space in  three distinct domains  (see domains I, II, III in Fig. 1B right) : The last  4 domain III  involves trivial NS with zero amplitude at each RLC tank (see inset of right subfigure 
of Fig. 1B) and is therefo re irrelevant to our investigations. The other  two, are  separated by a 
NLEPD (see red line in right subfigure of Fig. 1B  and red point in Fig. 1C ) and contain  one 
(two) non-trivial stable hyperbolic fixed points in the OD (AD) phase , see Fig . 1C (and Fig. 1B.I 
and Fig. 1B.II respectively) . The AD stable NS s coalesce  at the  NLEPD -point  at a voltage 
variation    =0, where    controls  the capacitive coupling between the two resonators . The 
detun ed eigenfrequencies follow a characteristic SLR                 √  , leading to 
two-orders  enhancement of sensitivity  to small voltage variations  and a similar  SNE near the 
NLEPD , see Fig. 1C . Our results  challenge the validity of linear concepts (e.g. Petermann factor) 
for the noise analysis near NLEPDs  and confirm beyond doubt  that self -oscillating systems  
above threshold have an enhanced  signal -to-noise sensing performance  in the proximity of the 
NLEPDs . 
Experimental Platform:  The sensor  consists of a pair of nonlinear RLC resonators  
[36][37][38][39] (see Fig. 1A) with natural frequency  0=1
2 1
√   338    and impedance  (at 
resonance)   0=√ /  424  . One of the resonators (gain —indicated with red in Fig. 1A ) 
incorporates a  nonlinear amplifi er   1  1  characterize d by an I-V curve   1  1 =  1/ 1 0  
  13 while the other one  (loss —indicated with green in Fig. 1A) incorporates  a nonlinear loss 
 2  2  with an I -V curve   2  2 = 2/ 2 0    23 (  7 10 4 / 3, and  1 2  are the voltage s 
at the node s 1(2)).  The two resonators are coupled together via a Capacitance Voltage 
Control led (CVC) capacitor      =    where   is a dimensionless parameter representing 
the strength of the coupling. The linear conductance s 1
     > 1
      were tuned such that the system 
undergoes a transition from AD to OD  as the voltage at the coupling capacit or varies  (see Figs. 
1B,1C and Methods ). A transmission line (TL) with impedance  0=50   is weakly coupled to 
each resonator via capacitors     . The TLs were used to collect the signal generated by the 
circuit  and direct it to a VNA for further processing  (see Methods ). The NLEPD (occurring at 
  =0) can  be experimentally identified as the point for which  the voltage amplitude s  1/ 2 of 
each RLC resonator  deviates  from  unity  (AD domain) acquiring  larger values  (OD domain ), see 
Fig. 2A .   5 Theor etical Analysis  of Oscillation Quenching  and Characterization of Nonlinear 
Supermodes : The voltage dynamics    at each RLC tank  ( =1,2), is described via a temporal 
coupled mode theory ( TCMT)  (see Supplementary Information )  
  
  ( 1
 2)=(     1 
2
 
2     2) ( 1
 2);       (1)  
where    √3
   0(    1
2  ̇ 
  ),  =   0    1   |  |2   ,   =1  
2 √ 
2  
   and 
  2  0  is the rescaled time . The parameters     0  are the linear gain  ( =1  and loss ( =2) 
coefficients associated with the gain and loss RLC resonator respectively, while   1
2  
  (  
 )2
 
models the coupling of the circuit to the TLs . The global frequency shift   = 0    is 
associated with the renormalization of the natural frequency  0 of the RLC resonators due to the 
capacitive coupling between them (  term) and the coupling with the TLs  ( -term). Its  -
dependence  could be (in principle) avoided if we choose another type of coupling (e.g. inductive 
coupling). Below, w e analyze the steady -state properties of Eq. (1) in terms of the coupling 
parameter  =     , which is used as a sensing platform of  voltage variations    (see 
Methods ).  
The nonlinear ities in our system have  been chosen carefully to prevent  the system from  
evolving towards  undesirable unbounded states where  1,   /    2   . This can be easily 
realized from Eq. (1) by recognizing that whenever the field intensity of the gain resonator 
exceeds a critical value | 1|2  1 0    the gain coefficient  1 becomes negative, thus turning 
the gain  RLC tank into a lossy one . The NS of Eq. (1) may be expressed  in the  polar 
representation    =           /   and are identified as the fixed points of the dynamical 
system Eq. (1) whose evolution is  defined  in a three -dimensional phase  space  ( 1, 2,   2 
 1 . We classify  these fixed points  according to the ir underlying ( dynamical ) symmetry, and 
their stability . The latter is determined  by the eigenvalues { 1, 2, 3 } of the 3 3 Jacobian 
matrix   when it is evaluated at the fixed point (see Supplementary Information ) [23]. When 
       0    =1,2,3 , the fixed point is a hyperbolic  equilibrium  and there is a 
homeomorphi sm that  maps the phase portrait in its proximity onto solutions of its linearized  
system  described by   [40]. When  all       <0, the fixed point is stable  while it is un stable  if 
at least one        0  Hyperbolic equilibria are robust to small variations which do not  6 change (qualitatively) the p hase portrait.  The opposite scenario  of non -hyperbolic equilibria is 
associated with cases where one of the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix is zero or has zero real 
part. These are structurally unstable cases,  and one can numerically test the nature of the stability 
of these fixed points by direct dynamical simulations  with Eq. (1) . 
We have found that o ne fixed -point  of Eq. (1) is a trivial state   1, 2 = 0,0 . The 
analysis of the Jacobian eigenvalues  (see Supplementary Information ) indicates that it  is stable in 
the parametric domain III (see Fig. 1B) while it is unstable in the other two domains . Below, w e 
analy ze the stable non-trivial fixed points occurring in the domains I and II in the Fig. 1B.  In 
these cases, the real-valued amplitudes    0 take the form  (see Supplementary Information ): 
  =   1 √ 1 0      
2;          1 0   2 0             ,
 1   = 2   =√            2 
2,       1 0   2 0             ,                    (2) 
where the real-valued variable     
   0 is a solution of the quartic algebr aic equation 
Figure 2: Stability Analysis and Basins of Attraction: (A) Field amplitude 𝐴1 𝐴2  of the NS 
versus voltage variations 𝛿𝑉. The solid lines indicate stable fixed points (see Eq. (2)) while the 
dashed lines indicate unstable solutions evaluated numerically using Eq . (1) together with the 
eigenvalue analysis of the Jacobian matrix (see Supplementary Information ). The fixed 
relative gain 𝛾1 0 /𝛾2 0 =1.46 is chosen in a way that the system undergoes a transition from 
OD to AD as the voltage variation 𝛿𝑉 increases. The NLEPD occurs at 𝛿𝑉=0.  (Inset) 
Measured average logarithmic voltage ratio (red symbols) 𝑉1/𝑉2 of the NS. Each point 
represents an average of five independent measurements and the error bars have been extracted 
from error analysis of the 𝑉1 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑉2 measurements. The black line is the prediction of TCMT. 
The blue line indicates the results from N GSPICE . (B) Phase -space analysis and basins of 
attraction for the stable fixed points associated with the upper  𝑓+  (blue highlighted domain) 
and lower  𝑓   (yellow highlighted domain) branches of the NS in the AD domain. The 
voltage variation is 𝛿𝑉 2 𝑚𝑉 corresponding to a circuit configuration in the proximity of the 
NLEPD.    7 1 2 (     + 
 ) 2 3 (       
 )  4=0. The physical requirement  1,2             leads to 
the condition  1 0   2 0  2  0 ( 1 0      
2 0) which determines the boundar y between 
the domain s II and III  (domains I and III ), see Fig. 1B . Finally,  the relation        = 1 0   2 0  
defines the transition between domains I and II  and which is characterized by  the formation of a 
NLEPD associated with the coalescence of two  stable NS (see solid red line in Fig. 1B) . This is 
further confirmed by evaluating  the nonlinear eigen frequencies       associated with the 
solutions of Eq. (2) . From the TCMT we have  that (see Supplementary Information ): 
  ={  
    0
2√ 2       2,                                  
                          ,             3  
where t he square -root dependence of the eigen frequencies from  the coupling  detuning    reflects 
the presence of the NLEPD. At the range of voltage variations that have been used in our 
experiment ( 1 1    2    with resolution of 1[mV]) , the coupling is              
0 0234 1
         with         1 0   2 0  0 30 (where   1 0  0 18;  2 0  0 12 .  
The two fixed points in domain II  (         , are associated with the AD phase where 
the field amplitudes at each resonator are the same  and the two stable NS differ only by the 
relative phase    (see Supplementary Information ). In this parameter range , the system respects 
an exact parity -time symmetry i.e. , both the system and the corresponding NS are invariant under 
a joint parity (i.e. , space inversion 1 2  and time -reversal (i.e. , complex conjugation) 
symmetry.  In domain I (          , instead,  there is only one non -trivial stable NS. This 
domain  is associated with the OD phase  where the field amplitude s at each RLC resonator  differ 
from one -another . A detail ed fixed point  numerical analysis using  a MATLAB fsolve routine  
(see Fig. 2A) confirms the above theoretical predictions and provides a more general information 
about other (unstable) fixed points  as well . In the inset of Fig. 2 A, we also report some 
represented values of the measured  voltage ratios  1/ 2 versus the voltage variation   . These 
results compare nicely with the  TCMT predictions (black line ) indicating that the NLEPD  occurs 
at the transition between AD and OD phases . The deviations for large negative    are attributed 
to the limit ations  of the TCMT and/or small detunings of various components of our circuit from 
its ideal  (TCMT) parameters . At the same figure , we also report  the numerical simulations from 
NGSPICE  (blue solid line)  nicely capturing the experimental results .  8 The existence of a stable NS does not guarantee the evolution of the system to this 
specific  state.  Instea d, the system may evolve either to a stable trivial state, or to another stable  
NS in case of bistabilit ies (AD domain) . The former scenario is easily excluded by an 
appropriate choice  of the relative gain  parameter (see Fig. 1B) . The latter scenario  can be 
controlled by realizing that the final state depend s strongly  on the initial conditions 
{ 1 0 , 2 0 ,  0 }. The phase -space volume  that contains  initial condition s which  converge to 
a specific stable fixed point constitute its basin of attraction , and its size provides a measure of 
how attractive th is fixed point  is. Detailed dynamical simulations using  Eq. (1) , for various 
  values and with a fine  mesh of initial conditions { 1, 2, }, allowed us to identify the basins 
of attraction of the two fixed points in the AD domain. We find that initial excitations with a 
relative phase | |  
2 end up at the AD fixed point associated with the    mode while a n initial  
preparation with a phase | |< 
2 leads to a  + supermode. In Fig. 2B we show the basins of 
attraction for the   +     fixed points which are indicated with blue (yellow) color for the 
example case of                 5 10 5 (corresponding to    2  Volts ). In fact, 
further  analysis using both N GSPICE  and TCMT indicated that an appropriate  detuning between  
the resonant frequencies of the two RLC resonators destroys the bistability by favor ing only the 
upper fixed point  + when the system is  very close to the NLEPD . Away from the NLEPD the 
bistable nature at the AD domain persists.  Either way, the square -root scaling  of the NS 
freque ncy  + from        (see Eq. (3) ) is unaffected .   
Sensing Protocol : In Fig. 3 A we report a density -plot of the voltage power spectrum | 1   |2 
for various voltage variations     by performing a Fourier transform of the temporal field , 
evaluated via time -domain simulations of the TCMT Eq (1). To achieve the asymptotic  states  
associated with  the  +     supermodes in the AD domain , we have  prepared  the initial excitation  
at relative phase | |< 
2 (| |  
2) as discussed above. The numerical data agree nicely with the 
theoretical predictions of Eq. (3). In Fig. 3B we show a density plot of the measured power 
spectrum of the emitted signal together with the TCMT prediction s of Eq. (3)  for the  + 
frequency  (red dashed line) . The absence of    from the measure d power spectrum , is associated 
with the fact that the experimental initial preparation favors a field excitation with a small 
relativ e phase | |< 
2 . At the same figure we also report the  + frequency (versus   ) that has  9 been extracted by a Fourier transform of the voltage  1    using NGSPICE  simulations (black 
dotted line) . 
The sublinear detuning  is better appreciated by reporting    +  +        vs.    in a 
double -logarithmic  plot. The experimental data ( cyan cicrles) nicely match the results from the 
NGSPICE  (dashed black line) showing the predicted behavior   + √   from TCMT , see Fig. 
3C. This sublinear response  offers a n opportunity to develop an enhanced  sensing protocol for 
detecting  small voltage variations    using as a sensing platform the coupling capacitor        . 
At the same time, the square -root SLR extends the dynamical range (DR) of the sensing 
measurements  up to relatively large values of    . The DR is the other important metric that 
characterizes the efficiency of a sensor , and it is defined as the ratio between the  maximum and 
the minimum     variation that the sensor can measure . Furthermore, the presence of gain 
elements guarantees the narrowing of the emission p eaks and promotes an  enhanced resolution . 
To further quantify the efficiency of our sensing protocol, we have introduced the sensitivity 
      / 0 /     . In Fig. 3D we report the measured sensitivity ( violet  circles) together 
with the N GSPICE  results ( black dashed line) . We find that   1/√   in the proximity of the 
Figure 3: Experimentally measured  sublinear frequency detuning and sensitivity to applied 
voltage variations:  (a) Density plot of the normalized emitted spectrum evaluated from 
dynamical simulations of the TCMT model versus voltage variations of the coupling capacitor. 
The nonline ar frequencies for 𝛿𝑉 0 have been obtained using different initial conditions which 
belong to the basin of attraction of the corresponding stable fixed point. The dashed black line 
indicates the frequency domain for which each initial condition has been used. (b) Measured 
emitted spectrum as a function of voltage variations. The red dashed line in both (a -b) is the 
TCMT prediction Eq. (3) of the non -linear frequencies. (c) The measured relative frequency 
detunings (circles) for the stable fixed point asso ciated with the upper branch versus the applied 
voltage variations. The black dashed line is drawn to guide the eye and has a slope 1/2 
characteristic of a NLEPD of order N=2. (d) The sensitivity of the active nonlinear circuit 
demonstrating two orders enh ancement in the proximity of the NLEPD as opposed to a system 
configuration away from the NLEPD. The black dashed line in subfigures B,C,D indicates the 
numerical results using N GSPICE . Error bars in subfigures C and D indicate  1 standard 
deviation obtain ed from ten independent measurements.   10 NLEPD .  
Noise Analysis:  The sublinear  frequency detuning  Eq. ( 3) guarantees an enhanced transduction 
function  from the voltage variation to the sensitivity  . It does not, however, addresses a nother 
important characteristic  of high-performance  sensors that is related to the precision of the 
measurement s. The latter  is identified with the smallest measurable variation in the input signal  
that can be  identified by the sensor due to noise at the output signal . 
To better understand the  effects of noise in the measurement process we have  analyze d 
the Alla n deviation    ̃     of the normalized frequency detuning s   ̃+   +/ 0 as a function 
of the sampling time  .  The measured Allan deviation  is reported in Fig. 4A  for representative 
   values  – both well  within the NLEPD -enhanced sensitivity regime  and away from it . We 
observe that as    decreases , and the system  approaches towards the NLEPD , the noise 
increases. To better appreciate the effects of noise in the measured voltage variation , we report in 
Fig. 4B the normalized Allan deviation      =   ̃    /  [Volt] . Our measurements  show that 
the noise grows slower than the signal enhancement as we are approaching the NLEPD . We 
conclude , the refore, that the  proposed  NLEPD  protocol can provide an enhanced SNR  in its 
proximity . Based on the behavior of  Allan deviation , we  can distinguish different  regimes  
depending on the duration of the sampling time   . Each regime  is influenced  by a different type 
Figure 4: Noise Analysis at various voltage variations: (a) The Allan deviation 𝜎𝛥𝑓̃  𝜏  of the 
circuit readout versus the sampling time 𝜏 is measured at various voltage variations 𝛿𝑉 of the 
coupling capacitor both in the proximity (small 𝛿𝑉-values) and away (large 𝛿𝑉-values ) from the 
NLEPD.  (b) The rescaled (with respect to the sensitivity 𝜒) Allan deviation 𝜎𝛼 𝜏 =𝜎𝛥𝑓̃  𝜏 /𝜒 
decreases as we are approaching the NLEPD indica ting that the sensitivity enhancement offsets 
the noise enhancement. (c) The measured (blue circles) voltage  random walk coefficient 𝛼𝑉𝑅𝑊 
versus the voltage variations for all 𝛿𝑉 voltage variations that we have used. For some 
representative  𝛿𝑉-values we also indicate  error bars representing   1 standard deviation  
evaluated over four different measurements . The red diamonds are the results of N GSPICE  
simulations where we have considered thermal (Johnson -Nyquist) noise at the resistors, 
amplifiers and at the TLs described by an ambient temperature 𝑇=300 𝐾.   11 of noise sources . At the limiting case of long sampling times, the Allan deviation  behaves  as 
     =     . This is typical of a  drift rate r amp (DRR) noise  associated with  the presence of 
systematic (deterministic) errors.  For intermediate sampling times , the Allan deviation reaches a 
saturation value        =    0 which  is indicative of the bia s instability  (BI) noise . The value 
of     sets the smallest possible reading of our sensor . Its origin is traced to the  random 
flickering of electronics or other components  of the system . Finally,  the short -time behavior of 
Allan deviation exhibits voltage (variations ) random walk ( VRW) noise which decreases with 
the sampling time   as      =       1/2. The origin of the VRW is traced to noise sources 
such as the thermal (Johnson -Nyquist)  noise  from the circuit elements (like the resistors and the 
amplifier)  and from the attached TL, the readout noise , or other noise sources associated with 
fluctuations of the voltage applied to the coupling capacitor  or capacitance fluctuations due to 
thermal variations . Each of the m is described by a separate noise coefficient      ,   ,    ,     
respectively , and contributes to noise equivalent voltage variation  as 
    =√   2     2      2, where    2=    2    2. Since      can be actively minimized , 
the thermal noise    ,  together with      represent the best obtainable limit  for     .  
In Fig. 4C we provide a panorama of       for all   -values that we have used in our 
measurements  (blue circles) . From the  measurements  we conclude that  
     0 002   0 5           0 5 indicating a robustness to the VRW  noise , which is 
attributed to the stable hyperbolic nature of the   + supermode . Specifically, the phase -space 
around these hyperbolic fixed points is  structural ly stable [40], and the associated basin of 
attraction  is relatively broad  – even  for voltage variations that are extremely close to the NLEPD 
(see Fig. 2B) . Therefore,  the VRW  noise is not able to ―push out‖ of the basin of attraction the 
phase -space trajectories .  At the same figure we also show the noise coefficient      from 
NGSPICE  (red diamonds) where we have incorporated thermal noise at the resistors, amplifier 
and at the TLs described by a n ambient temperature  =300  . This is more than one-order of 
magnitude smaller than our experimental measurements  for       We conclude  that the 
detection noise      combined with      overwhelms the  thermal noise     . Eventually, the 
absolute bound of      will be determined  by the multiplicative noise  due to coupling 
fluctuations  originating from voltage  uncertainties  and capacitance  fluctuations due to 
temperature variations .   12 Conclusion : We have demonstrated a  SNE sensing of  an NLEPD -based  voltmeter . The 
proposed sensing protocol is based on a square -root frequency detuning from the NLEPD 
induced  by a small  voltage variation modifies the coupling between two nonlinear RLC tanks.  
The NLEPD  occur s at the transition between  two types of oscillation quenching regimes  i.e., OD 
and AD domains in the parameter space and is a consequence of  the nonlinear gain/loss channels 
assigned to each RLC tank . The nonlinearity  leads to a structurally stable phase space in the 
proximity of the stable fixed points associated with the degenerate NS,  while the corresponding 
basins of attraction are relatively broad, even for voltage variations that are extremely close to 
the NLEPD. These characteristics, shield the sensing signal from noise and lea d to a  two-order s 
enhance ment of  signal -to-noise ratio  in the proximity of the NLEPD.  Our results establish  the 
EPD -sensing from self -oscillating systems a bove threshold  as an efficient platform with 
dramatically improved SNE factor in the proximity of the NLEPD. Our scheme can guide the 
design of novel neuromorphic hypersensitive sensors with enhanced dynamical range  that can be 
utilized in electroencephalography, electrocardiography and neuroprosthetics . 
 
Acknowledgements:  We acknow ledge useful discussions with Prof. U. Kuhl on improvements 
of noise analysis , Prof. F. Ellis on circuit design  and Mr. W. Tuxbury for assisting  with the 
experimental platform . 
References  
[1] T. Kato, Perturbation Theory for Linear Operators , (Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 1995).  
[2] Y. Ma, & A. Edelman, Nongeneric eigenvalue perturbations of Jordan blocks , Linear 
Algebra Appl. 273, 45 –63 (1998).  
[3] G. N. Moiseyev, Non -Hermitian Quantum Mechanics, (Cambridge Univ . Press, 2011) . 
[4] C. M. Bender, PT Symme try in Quantum and Classical Physics, World Scientific (2018).  
[5] R. El -Ganainy, K. G. Makris, M. Khajavikhan, Z. H. Musslimani, S. Rotter, D. N. 
Christodoulides, Non -Hermitian Physics and PT symmetry, Nature Physi cs 14, 11 (2017).  
[6] L Feng, R El -Ganainy, L Ge, Non -Hermitian photonics based on parity –time symmetry , 
Nature Photonics 11 (12), 752 (2017)   
[7] S. K. Ozdemir, S . Rotter, F . Nori, L. Yang, Parity –time symmetry and exceptional points 
in photonics, Nature Materia ls 18,  783  (2019)  
[8] M-A Miri, A. Alu, Exceptional Points in optics and photonics, Science 363, 7709 (2019)   13 [9] J. Wiersig, Enhancing the sensitivity of frequency and energy splitting detection by using 
exceptional points: application to microcavity sensors for single -particle detection, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 112, 203901 (2014).  
[10] H. Hodaei, et al. Enhanced sensitivity at higher -order exceptional points , Nature 548, 
187–191 (2017).  
[11] W. Chen, Ş.  Kaya Özdemir, G. Zhao, J. Wiersig, L. Yang, Exceptional points enhance 
sensing in an optical microcavity , Nature 548, 192 (2017).  
[12] M. Hokmabadi, A. Schumer, D. Christodoulides, M. Khajavikhan, Non-Hermitian ring 
laser gyroscopes with enhanced Sagnac sensitivity, Nature 576, 70 (2019).  
[13] Y.-H. Lai, Y. -K. Lu, M.-G. Suh, & K. Vahal a, Enhanced sensitivity operation of an 
optical gyroscope near an exceptional point , Nature 576, 65  (2019).  
[14] J. Wiersig, Prospects and fundamental limits in exceptional point -based sensing, Nature 
Comm. 11, 2454 (2020).  
[15] R. Kononchuk, J. Cai, F. Ellis, R. Th evamaran, T. Kottos, Exceptional -point -based 
accelerometers with enhanced signal -to-noise ratio, Nature 607, 697 (2022).  
[16] H. Wang, Y -H Lai, Z. Yuan, M. -G. Suh, K. Vahala, Petermann -factor sensitivity limit 
near an exceptional point in a Brilluin ring laser gyroscope, Nat. Commun. 11, 1610 (2020) . 
[17] H-K Lau, A. A. Clerk, Fundamental limits and non -reciprocal approach in non -Hermitian 
quantum sensing, Nat. Comm. 9, 4320 (2018)  
[18] W. Langbein, No exceptional precision of exceptional -point sensors, Phys. Rev. A 98, 
023805 (2018).  
[19] J. Wiersig, Robustness of exceptional point -based sensors against parametric noise: The 
role of Hamiltonian and Liouvillian degeneracies, Phys. Rev. A 101, 053846 (2020).  
[20] K. Petermann, Calculated spontaneous emission factor for double -heteros tructure injection 
lasers with gain -induced waveguiding , IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 15, 566 (1979).  
[21] A. E. Siegman, Excess spontaneous emission in non -Hermitian optical systems. I. Laser 
amplifiers , Phys. Rev. A 39, 1253 (1989).  
[22] P. Goldberg, P. W. Milonni, B. Sundaram, Theory of the fundamental laser linewidth, Phys. 
Rev. A 44, 1969 (1991).  
[23] Y. A. Kuznetsov, Elements of Applied Bifurcation Theory 112, Springer (2013).   14 [24] Y. Kominis, V. Kovanis, T. Bountis, Spectral signatures of exceptional points and 
bifurcatio ns in the fundamental active photonic dimer, Phys. Rev. A 96, 053837 (2017)  
[25] Y. Zhiyenbayev, Y. Kominis, C. Valagiannopoulos, V. Kovanis, A. Bountis, Enhanced 
stability, bistability and exceptional points in saturable active photonic couplers, Phys. Rev. A 
100, 043834 (2019).  
[26] S. Yu, X. Piao, N. Park, Neuromorphic functions of light in parity -time-symmetric 
systems, Advanced Science 6, 1900771 (2019).  
[27] S. Yu, X. Piao, N. Park, Topologically protected optical signal processing using parity -
time-symmetric oscill ation quenching, Nanophotonics 10, 2883 (2021).  
[28] G. Buzs ́ki, Rhythms of the Brain, Oxford Univ. Press (2006)  
[29] G. Saxena, A. Prasad, R. Ramaswamy, Amplitude death: the emergence of stationarity in 
coupled nonlinear systems, Phys. Rep. 521, 205 (2012)  
[30] A. Koses ka, E. Volkov, J. Kurths, Oscillation quenching mechanisms: amplitude vs. 
oscillation death, Phys. Rep. 531, 173 (2013).  
[31] A. U. Hassan, H. Hodaei, M. -A. Miri, M. Khajavikhan, and D. N. Christodoulides, 
Nonlinear reversal of the PT-symmetric phase transition  in a system of coupled semiconductor 
microring resonators , Physical Review A 92, 063807 (2015).  
[32] L. Ge and R. El -Ganainy, ―Nonlinear modal interactions in parity -time (PT) symmetric 
lasers,‖ Scientific reports 6, 1 –11 (2016).   
[33] Y. Kominis, K. D. Choquette,  A. Bountis, V. Kovanis, Exceptional points in two 
dissimilar coupled diode lasers, Applied Phys. Lett. 113, 081103 (2018).  
[34] B. Zhu, Q. J. Wang, Y. D. Chong, Laser -mode bifurcations induced by PT -breaking 
exceptional points, Phys. Rev. A 99, 033829 (2019).  
[35] M. Benzaouia, A. D. Stone, S. G. Johnson, nonlinear exceptional -point lasing with ab 
initio Maxwell -Bloch theory, Applied Physics Letters Photonics 7, 121303 (2022)  
[36] Z. Lin, J. Schindler, F. M. Ellis, T. Kottos, Experimental observation of the dual behavior  
of PT -symmetric scattering , Phys. Rev. A 85, 50101 (2012).  
[37] N. Bender,  et al. Observation of asymmetric transport in structures with active 
nonlinearities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 1 (2013).  
[38] J. M. Lee et al. Reconfigurable Directional Lasing Modes in Cavities  with Generalized 
PT-Symmetry , Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 253902 (2014).   15 [39] M. Chitsazi, et al. Experimental observation of lasing shutdown via asymmetric gain. 
Phys. Rev. A 89, 43842 (2014).  
[40] P. Hartman, On the local linearization of differential equations, Proc. Am. Math. Soc. 14, 
568 (1963).  
 
 
   16 Methods : 
Circuit Design and Fabrication : The circuit schematic used for this experiment can be seen in Extended 
Data Fig. 1 below. It features two RLC resonators which are coupled to each other via voltage -controlled 
capacitors. The main elements that make up each RLC resonator are a resistor,   , an inductor,   ; and a 
pair of in -parallel grounded capacitors,    and   , where    = 1,2, denotes the gain and loss RLC units 
respectively. The inductors,    = 200   , used in both the gain and loss resonators are API Delevan 
807-1537 -90HTR . The total capacitance in each resonator is made up by a combination of a tunable 
capacitor,   , connected in parallel with a fixed capacitor,    . The tunable capacitor,    , is a Murata 81 -
LXRW19V201 -058 with a capacitance range of 100 200  . A voltage of 0 5  was applied to the 
tunable capacitor in each RLC resonator and controlled by a EG&G Instruments  7265 DSP lock -in 
amplifier, that was connected via a Bayonet Neill –Concelman (BNC) port to a resistor,   , model Yageo 
603-RC0402FR -074K99L, with a resistance of    = 4 99  . This resistor was connected to a grounded 
fixed capacitor,   1, a Murata  81-GCM32EL8EH106KA7L, with a capacitance of   1 = 10   . The fixed 
capacitors in each resonator unit,   , is a Kemet 80 -C0603C911F5G with a capacitance of 910  . This 
gives a total capacitance in each RLC resonator of 200   910   = 1,110  .  
Each RLC resonator has resistive elements that collectively provide gain and loss. The former is 
provided by an operational amplifier (op -amp) model Analog Devices 584 -ADA4862 -3YRZ -R7. The 
power supply for the op -amp was connected by a standard 3 pin conn ector, with one going to ground, and 
the other two being connected to  + = 6  and   = 6  respectively. To produce gain, the op -amp has 
a pair of internal resistances,   1 and   2, of 550 Ω each.   1 is connected in between the output of the 
op-amp and the inverting input of the op -amp.   2 is connected on one end to the inverting input of the 
op-amp and grounded on the other end. The mechanically tunable variable resistor in the gain RLC tank, 
 1, is a Vishay 71 -PHPA1206E2001BST1 component which has a resistance of  1 = 2000 .  1 is 
connected on one end to the operational amplifier‘s non -inverting input. The other end of  1 is connected 
to a capacitor,   1, model Kemet 80 -C0805C100FDTACTU where   1 = 10  , capacitively couples 
each RLC resonator to transmission lines. A mechanically tunable variable resistor,   1, is connected in 
parallel to  1 and the op -amp, is a Bourns 652 -3269W -1-102GLF with     = 720 200   The set 
value of   1= 720 , and it  is connected to a pair of grounded back -to-back of diodes, D i, Onsemi 512 -
1N914BWS – which represent the nonlinear elements of this RLC dimer. The fixed resistor in the loss 
resonator,  2, is a Vishay 71 -PCNM2512E2501BST5 component with a resis tance of  2 = 2500 .  2 
is connected in parallel to   2 = 750 . On the other end,   2 is connected to a pair of back -to-back 
grounded diodes – the same model of diodes as in the gain resonator was used.   17 The coupling between the two resonators was achieved using two parallel variable capacitors, 
   . The component used in   , a Murata 81 -LXRW19V201 -058 is the same model as the variable 
capacitors in the resonator units,     . As in the RLC tanks,     is connected to a grounded   1 which in 
turn is connected to   . The same lock -in amplifier is used to control the tuning voltage via a BNC port. 
One of the two capacitors is held fixed at 200   with a constant applied voltage of 0 5 , whereas the 
other is tuned in voltage range between 0 4 3 5 .  
 
Voltage and frequency detuning measurements  
The emitted signal from the electronic circuit was collected for different applied voltage variations of the 
Capacitance Voltage Control (    ) capacitor. These voltage variations where electronically controlled via 
an EG&G Instruments 7265 DSP lock -in amplifier . The imposed voltage variations were in the range 
between 0.4 -3.5V associated with  1 1    2    with resolution of up to 1[mV]. At each specific 
voltage variation, the emitted spectrum was collected using a network analyzer Keysight E5080A. The 
individual frequency sweeps contain 4001 points in a range of 295 -320 kHz. A single measurement was 
obtained from the collected spectrum with a n intermediate frequency bandwidth (IFBW) of 100Hz giving 
a sampling time of 40.01s. The peak frequencies of the spectrum  + were then identified from the resulted 
spectrum, which allows the calculation of the frequency detuning   +. 
 
 
Allan deviation me asurement  
The Allan deviation    ̃     of the frequency associated with the voltage power spectrum peak of the 
emitted -signal is defined as  
   ̃    =√1
2   1 ∑(〈  ̃+  +1 〉 〈  ̃+   〉)2  1
  1, (4) 
where    is the sampling time,    is the total number of frequency measurements and  〈  ̃+   〉 indicates  the 
average  rescaled  frequency  detuning  during  the sampling  time interval  [nτ, (n + 1)τ]. For the extraction  of 
Allan  deviation,  the rescaled  emitted  peak detunings    ̃+   +/ 0 were  sampled  with an IFBW  of 10 
kHz for 101 points  in a frequency  range  of 7kHz  centered  around  the expected    + for the associated    . 
20,000  consecutive  spectral  measurements  were  performed  over a period  of approximately  2700s  for each 
  . This results in a sampling  time of 0.1337s.  
 
NGSPICE simulations  
We use NGSPICE, an open -source software for electronic circuits, to simulate the dynamical behavior of 
our experimental platform. We consider two     tanks coupled by a capacitor using the same  18 characteristics as the experimental platform, where, unless specified otherwise, we use the same 
parameters of the electronic components as described in ‗Circuit Design an d Fabrication‘ section of the 
Methods . The op -amp in the gain resonator is represente d by a high impedance Norton amplifier by 
designating its constituent components – a transconductance that quantifies gain, a capacitor and diode 
clippers. Nonlinearity in the gain and loss resonators is modeled with back -to-back diodes via 1N914 
diodes - the same type as used in the experimental platform - using the appropriate parameters that 
describe its behavior. To compensate for the detuning due to the capacitor in the op -amp, the capacitor in 
the gain resonator,     1, was detuned slightly to 0 9955     1 , to fit the experimental data 
obtained. In conjunction with that   (i = 1,2) was set at 0 965  , in the simulations. Using this setup, we 
evaluate the signal generated by the circuit for a total time of  =6000
   0 017  with the time steps of 
  =1
  0    37  . In our analysis of the power spectrum, we dropped the first 0.0017s, which 
correspond to the short time transient, to consider only the steady -state behavior.  
To add noise, we modeled  Johnson -Nyquist noise – electronic noise due t o thermal fluctuations. This was 
added to our simulations by adding random voltage sources at every resistor in our circuit (including the 
TLs). The amount of noise added at each resistor using the TRNOISE function of NGSPICE at these 
resistors are dictate d by the root mean square of the voltage due to Johnson -Nyquist noise. This is given 
by     =√4      where    is Boltzmann‘s constant;   is the value of the respective resistor at which 
the random voltage source was added;   is the bandwidth of  the noise for which the natural frequency of 
the resonator  338     was assumed; and   is the temperature for which the ambient value of 300   
was chosen.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  19  
 
 
  
Extended Data Fig. 1 : Schematic of the circuit : (A) The  conceptual circuit 
(B) The actual circuit diagram. Various parts are highlighted with the same 
color as in (A).   20 Noise Resilient Exceptional -Point Voltmeters  based on  Neuromorphic functionalities  
 
Arun n Suntharalingam1, Lucas Fern ández -Alcázar2, Rodion Kononchuck1, Tsampikos Kottos1 
 
1Wave Transport in Complex Systems Lab, Department of Physics, Wesleyan University , Middletown CT, USA   
2Instituto de  Modelado e Innovación Tecnológica (CONICET -UNNE)  and Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Naturales 
y Agrimensura,  Universidad Nacional del Nordeste, W3404AAS Corrientes,  Argentina  
 
Supplementary Information  
 
Coupled Mode Theory modeling  of the electronic circuit  
The nonlinear electronic circuit of Fig. 1A of the main text can be described by the temporal  
coupled mode theory (TCMT) , see Eq. (1)  of the main te xt. Apart from the simplicity and the 
physical intuition that a TCM T mode ling can offer, it also allow s us to extrapolate our findings 
to a broad er class of systems described by such TCMT.  We start the derivation of Eq. (1) by 
expressi ng the energy stored in the LC resonator as | |2 where  the complex modal amplitude of 
a single LC resonator       is 
    =√ 
2 (      
    ̇   ) .            (S1) 
 
Above       is the node voltage and  0=2   0=1/√   the resonant frequency of the  
resonator in the absence  of dissipation (amplification). Using  is representation,  we rewrite the 
circuit equation of the LC resonator, i.e.,   
      02  =0, as a set of two (uncoupled)  first 
order differential equations  i.e.,   
  =   0   and its complex conjugate. The latter relation 
emphasizes the time dependence of the modal amplitude          and           .  
Next,  we incorporat e in our circuit, an energy dissipat ion (enhance ment ) associated  with 
a nonlinear damping (antidamping) channel . We consider  nonlinear component s that are 
characterized by the I -V curve     =   /  0     3 where  =1 ( = 1) represents loss  
(gain)  and   7 10 4  
   . The corresponding Kirchoff‘s  equation for the individual RLC 
resonator collapse to the following expression  
 ̈         0   ̇        2     ̇      02      =0,         (S2) 
where   0 =(  0   ) 1 is the relaxation rate of the individual  (linear) LRC oscillator , and 
 =3 / . Equation  (S2) can be written in terms of   and its conjugate    as 
2 ̇  2   0        0   
2 | |2         
2   3     3 =0      (S3)  21 By invoking a rotating wave approximation  and eliminating the fast-oscillating  terms , the above 
equation  can be further simplified  as 
  ̇   0       
2   0          |  |2  ,      (S4) 
where  = / 4  =3 / 4 2 .  
We proceed by develop ing a TCMT associated to the two coupled RLC tanks.  From 
Kirchoff ‘s laws we obtain the equations for the voltage    in resonator  =1,2 
 1     ̈1    ̈2  1 0   ̇1    12  ̇1   02  1=0
 1     ̈2    ̈1  2 0  ̇2     ̇22  ̇2   02  2=0 ,     (S5)  
where    0 =(   0  ) 1
is the  relaxation rate of each resonator  (below we will assume the high-
Q limit, i.e.,       
   1 ,   =    is the (voltage controlled) coupling capacitance,  with   1 
being the coupling strength coefficient.  Using the complex -mode repres entation for each  
resonator  , we rewrite the circuit equations Eq. (S5) as 
 ( ̇1 
 ̇2 )=
(   0 ( 1  
2)    1 0 
2    | 1|2  0  /2
 0  /2  0 ( 1  
2)    2 0 
2    | 2|2
)   ( 1 
 2 );     6  
where we have invoked , as in the case of single RLC resonator, the rotating wave approximation, 
together  with the weak coupling limit    1 and high-Q      
   1 approximations . We further 
simplify Eq. (S6) by defining the rescaled complex field   =√ / 0     and time  = 0  ,  
  
  ( 1
 2)=(( 1  
2)   ( 1 0  | 1|2)   /2
 /2 ( 1  
2)   ( 2 0  | 2|2)) ( 1
 2);  (S7)  
where    0 =   0 / 2 0 =1/ 2    0     0 . 
 
Coupling of the circuit to transmission lines  
The effect of a weak coupling of the RLC resonators to a transmission line (TL) via a coupling 
capacitance   =  ,   1, can be also modeled  using CMT . At the node connecting the TL 
with the coupling capacitance, the voltage and current flowing toward the   th ( =1,2) RLC  22 resonator can be written as a superposition of forward and backward propagating voltage waves,  
   ,  +  and    ,      
            , =   ,  +     ,    ;       , =   ,  +     ,    =1
  (   ,  +     ,    ),       (S8) 
where  0=50  is the TL‘s characteristic impedance. In turn, the voltages can be represented by 
complex wave amplitudes    ,    =√  
2(            
), where       =|     |      , being |     |  
a slowly varying amplitude s. For a single RLC resonator which is weakly coupled to a TL, we 
have  
            , =  ( ̇  ,   ̇ );    1
  ̇  ,   ̈     0  ̇   02  =0,       (S9) 
where    represents the voltage at the   th RLC resonator with characteristic frequency  0 and 
decay rate    0 . Under the assumptions of impedance matching  0/ 0   1  and weak coupling 
  0, we rewrite Eqs. (S 8) using the complex mode amplitude of the resonator    and the 
input/output wave amplitude       
              
    0(1 √ 
2  
  )      0     √2 0    + 
         +   √2 0    ,      (S10) 
where we also invoked the rotating wave approx imation,  and we introduced the TL -RLC 
coupling coefficient     0/ 0  2/2. Using the transformations   =√ / 0     and  = 0 , 
and c ombining Eqs. (S7) and (S10) we arrive to Eq. (1) of the main text which describe s the 
whole system of coupled RLC resonators and TLs.  Let us finally point out that w hen the input 
wave    + =0, the output power emitted from the  -th node takes a simple form  
  =|     |2
 2 0 |   |2=2  |  |2,      (S11) 
 
Equations of motion in polar form  
It is convenient for our analysis, to rewrite  Eq. ( 1) of the main text in polar representation. To 
this end , we express  the complex amplitudes  as      =                 /   where the  
magnitude s     0 and the phase s    of the field s in resonator  =1,2 are real numbers.  
Substitution of these expressions back to Eq. ( 1) leads to the following  set of coupled differential 
equations   23  ̇1 = ( 1 0   12  ) 1 ( 
2) 2     ;     ̇2= ( 2 0    22   ) 2 ( 
2) 1    
 1 ̇1 = ( 
       ) 1 ( 
2) 2     ;       2 ̇2 = ( 
       ) 2 ( 
2) 1     ,    
(S12)  
where    2  1 is the relative phase. If  1, 2 0, the last two equations ca n be combined  
in a compact  form  
 ̇  = 
2   
      
        ,     (S13)  
Finally , in this polar representation the emitted power spectrum Eq. (S10) takes the form  
     =    2(4
31
    ). 
Nonlinear supermodes  
The nonlinear supermodes correspond to the fixed points of Eqs. ( S12,S13 ). We find the fixed 
points by requiring constant magnitudes and relative phase, i.e.,   ̇1= ̇2=0,     ̇=0. The 
latter condition leads to three  possible scenarios: (1)  1= 2 0, (2)     =0, and (3) a 
variant of the first case where  1= 2=0. We refer to this last case as the t rivial scenario  and 
it is not relevant for hypersensitive sensing schemes . Therefore, we will not  analyze  it further . A 
Figure S1: Nonlinear Super -modes and effective gain/loss coefficient: (A) The structure of the 
NS in the ( 𝜅/𝛾2 0 , 𝛾1 0 /𝛾2 0   parameter space. Blue (green) surface indicates the value of the 
field amplitude in the first 𝐴1 (second 𝐴2) RLC resonator. Temporal evo lution of the effective 
gain (loss) coefficients 𝛾1 𝜏  (𝛾2 𝜏   for linear gain/loss parameter values  𝛾1 0  0 18,𝛾2 0  
0 12 𝑎𝑛𝑑 (B) 𝜅=𝜅𝑁𝐿𝐸𝑃𝐷 0 1 in the AD regime where the system is protected by a parity -time 
symmetry; (C)  𝜅=𝜅𝑁𝐿𝐸𝑃𝐷 0 1 in the OD regime where the system is explicitly violates the 
parity -time symmetry. (D) Overview of the asymptotic gain/loss coefficients versus the coupling 
variation from the NLEPD. The coupling to the TL is taken 𝜂=0 01 while 𝜅𝑁𝐿𝐸𝑃𝐷 0 3.  24 panorama of the nodal amplitudes    1, 2  is shown in Fig. S 1A versus the relative gain 
 1 0 / 2 0  and the relative capacitive coupling  / 2 0 . Below, we analyze in detail each one of 
the first two cases.  
 
AD Supermodes  
We consider first the case  of identical field amplitude in both resonators, i.e.,   1= 2= . This  
correspond s to the AD domain , characterized by a n exact parity -time symmetry . From the first 
set of Eqs. ( S12), we find that the field amplitude and the relative phase are given by the 
expressions  
  =√ 1 0   2 0  2 
2,             =  1 0   2 0 
 ,          14  
which, in turn, establish es bounds for the parameters where such a solution exists . From the 
second of these equations, we conclude that  the two supermodes differ in their relative phase  i.e. 
  =( 1 1
2)      1(     +     
 ) while the coupling between resonators is bounded by 
   1 0   2 0 . This condition determines the  boundary  between the AD and the OD domains 
(regions II and I, respectively  in Fig. 1B ). On the other hand, the physical requirement that 
  ℛ 0 which guarantees the existence of a non-trivial  steady state, leads to the c onstraint  that 
the gain must be strong enough to overcome the total loss of the system, i.e.  1 0    2 0  2 . 
This condition  determines the boundary between the AD domain and region III (see Fig. 1 B).  
The nonlinear eigenfrequencies    associated with  the NS of Eq. (S14) can be found by 
imposing  in either  of the second set of Eqs. (S12) , the fixed -point  condition  ̇1,2=0 together 
with the  expression for       = √1 (     +     
 )2
derived from the second equation  in Eq. 
(S14) . We have for the  corresponding frequencies  
  = 0     1
2√ 2 ( 1 0   2 0 )2
 ,     (S15)  
which indicate the existence of a NLEPD at       = 1 0   2 0  corresponding to  the transition 
between AD and OD domain,  where not only the eigenfrequencies but also the eigen vectors 
coalesce.   25  
OD Supermodes  
Next,  we discuss the fixed points of Eqs. ( S12,S13 ) when     =0,     =  /2. From the 
first set of Eqs. (S12), we conclude  that only the relative phase  =  
2 ensures a solution with 
 22  0. In this case the NS have an asymmetric field amplitude, i.e.,  1   2 and the 
corresponding field intensities at each resonator are  
 12= 1 0     
2   ;   22 =   2 0      
2   ,     (S16)  
where ,  = 2/ 1 0 represents the relative field amplitude a nd is a solution of  the following 
quartic equation  
0= 1   2  (     + 
 )  2 3 (        
 )   4      (S17)  
Out of the four roots of Eq. ( S17), one has to  select the ones that satisfy  (a)   ℛ 0,,     
2(       )
  such that  12 0, and (c)    
2(     + ) such that  22 0 (see Eq. (S16)).  It turns out 
from our extensive numerical analysis that t he requirement for the stability of the fixed point in 
the OD domain, results in      1 for the relative field amplitude of the nonlinear supermode  Eq. 
(S16) .  This output  is consistent with the intuition that the intensity at the lossy resonator is 
smaller than the intensity at the gain resonator at the OD domain where parity -time symmetry is 
explicitly violated.  
The corresponding nonlinear eigenfrequency   can be found by substituting in the last 
Eq. (S12) the value of the relative phase  =  
2  In this case, we get  
 = 0   .        (S18)  
 
Symmetry phases of the dimer  system  of Eq. (1)  
It is finally instructive to evaluate the effective gain and loss coefficients  1         2    as a 
function of time in the AD and OD regime s. In Fig. S 1B we show their temporal behavior  for a 
typical set of parameters  1 0  0 18,  2 0  0 12 and  =       0 1 for which the system 
of Eq. (1) is in the AD domain  (       0 3). We see that in the asymptotic time limit, 
 1   = 2   , indicating that the electronic dimer is in the exact parity -time symmetric phase. 
Similarly, in Fig. S1 C we show the temporal behavior  of  1         2    for the same  values  of  26 parameters  1 0 ,  2 0  as previously and  =       0 1 for which the system of Eq. (1) is in 
the OD domain.  In this case , the asymptotic values of the effective gain and loss parameters, 
differ from one -another, i.e.,  1     2   , indicating that the system is in an explicitly broken 
parity -time symmetric phase. A panorama of the asymptotic values  1   , 2    versus the 
coupling constant   for a fixed relative gain      
     =1 5 is shown in Fig. S1D. 
 
Jacobian matrix and s tability analysis  in the parameter space  
The system of Eq s. (S12,S13 ) can be written in the form   ⃗⃗ 
  =    ⃗  , where   ⃗ =  1 , 2,    . 
The NSs of the previous section  ⃗ 0 are obtained  by the fixed -point condition    ⃗⃗  
  =     ⃗ 0 =0. 
Linearizing the equations of motion around  ⃗ 0 we get      ⃗ 0   ⃗     ̂  ⃗ 0    ⃗ ,  where  ̂  ⃗ 0  is the 
Jacobian matrix evaluated at  ⃗ 0. Subsequently  the linearized equations o f motion read as , 
   ⃗⃗ 
  =  ̂  ⃗ 0    ⃗ ;    ̂  ⃗  =
(   1 0    3 12  
2     
2 2    
  
2     2 0    3 22  
2 1    
  
2       
    1
    
2     1
     
    
2       
     
   )  .    (S19)   
The first Lyapunov  criterion allow us to characterize the stability of each nonlinear supermode 
by analyzing the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrices evaluated at the NSs  ⃗ 0. The fixed -point 
solution  ⃗ 0 is stable if all the eigenvalues {  ; =1,2,3} of the Jacobian (evaluated at the 
supermode) have negative real part, indicating that the solution is an attractor. If, on the other 
hand, one of the eigenvalues of the Jacobian has positive real part, the solution  ⃗ 0 is unstable. In 
both cases the associated fixed points are classi fied as hyperbolic equilibria. These equilibria 
points are further classified as nodes or foci depending on if the corresponding Jacobian 
eigenvalues are purely real or have also an imaginary component. In case that one of the 
eigenvalues of the Jacobian h as a zero real part, then the fixed point is characterized as non -
hyperbolic. Non -hyperbolic equilibria are not robust to small perturbations (i.e., the system is not 
structurally stable) and their stability is determined via direct dynamical simulations w ith the 
initial dynamical equations.   27   
A panorama of the    ,     
       parameter space and its partition to various domains , 
according to the nature (stable nontriv ial versus stable trivial) and number (one, two or none) of 
stable fixed points, is shown in Fig. S 2A. This map has been created by a nalyzing the stability of 
the TCMT Eq. (1) of the main text (Eq s. (S12,S13) of the Supplementary Information ) together 
with the evaluation of the eigenmodes of the Jacobian matrix Eq. (S19).  In the inset of Fig. S2A, 
we show the results of the numerical analysis  using N GSPICE . We have simulated  the evolution 
of several  initial conditions for various   ,     
       values in the domain between AD and OD 
(dashed  square) and analyz ed the emitted power spectrum  associated with the voltage of the gain 
resonato r. The  number of extracted frequencies  peak(s) and the values of the amplitudes  1, 2 
have been used to identify  the parameter domain.   
Figure S2: Parameter space characterization and stability of fixed points.  (A) A 
characterization of the parameter space  𝜅/𝛾2 0 ,𝛾1 0 /𝛾2 0   of the  nonlinear dimer described by 
the TCMT Eq. (S12,S13 ) in terms of the nature and number of its (stable) fixed points. Domain I 
is identified with the OD phase and supports one nontrivial stable fixed point; Domain II is 
identified with the AD phase and supports two non -trivial stable fixed points; Domain II I 
supports only trivial stable fixed points (i.e., 𝐴1=𝐴2=0 . The white dashed lines indicate the 
borders of various domains (see main text). The red dashed line indicates NLEPDs associated 
with the coalescence of unstable fixed points and occur in the do main III. The red solid line 
indicates NLEPD associated with the coalescence of stable fixed points and occur at the 
transition between OD and AD. The inset indicates the parameter domain for which we have 
analyze the stability (and number) of steady -state solutions of the actual electronic circuit using 
an NGSPICE simulator. The blue highlighted area indicates the OD domain while the yellow 
highlighted area indicates the AD domain. The red line between the two domains matches with 
the one found from the an alysis of the TCMT. (B) Dynamical simulations with Eqs. (S12,S13) 
with 𝜅=𝜅𝑁𝐿𝐸𝑃𝐷  indicate that various initial conditions (black circles) in the phase space of the 
system, converge asymptotically to the corresponding fixed point (violet circle).   28 Let us discuss in more detail the stability of the NLEPD at the transition between AD and 
OD domains , see Fig . S2A. This fixed point turns out to be non -hyperbolic (i.e. one eigenvalue 
of the Jacobian matrix has zero real part ). For an analysis of its stability,  we cannot rely on the 
first Lyapunov criterion . Instead, we have performed direct dynamical simulations for a large  
ensemble of initial conditions  in the phase space of the system and analyze their long -time 
dynamics. We have found that in all cases, the trajectories are attracted to a  final state that is the 
NLEPD, see Fig. S 2B. 
For completeness of the discussi on, we would also like to comment on the unstable non -
trivial solutions that exists both in the AD domain and OD domain (see dashed lines in Fig. 2A). 
These  are fixed points of Eq. (S12) corresponding to     =0 and   1, 2   0,0  and exists 
both in the AD an d in the OD domains. The analysis of these fixed points follows the lines of the 
―OD Supermode‖ section and correspond to roots of Eq. (S17) with   1. The corresponding 
frequency of these solutions is given by the either of the second set of Eq. (S12) and  are 
         = 0     
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 