Object-based SLAM utilizing unambiguous pose parameters
considering general symmetry types
Taekbeom Leey, Youngseok Jangy, and H. Jin Kim
Abstract — Existence of symmetric objects, whose observa-
tion at different viewpoints can be identical, can deteriorate
the performance of simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM). This work proposes a system for robustly optimizing
the pose of cameras and objects even in the presence of
symmetric objects. We classify objects into three categories
depending on their symmetry characteristics, which is efﬁcient
and effective in that it allows to deal with general objects and
the objects in the same category can be associated with the
same type of ambiguity. Then we extract only the unambiguous
parameters corresponding to each category and use them in
data association and joint optimization of the camera and object
pose. The proposed approach provides signiﬁcant robustness to
the SLAM performance by removing the ambiguous parameters
and utilizing as much useful geometric information as possible.
Comparison with baseline algorithms conﬁrms the superior
performance of the proposed system in terms of object tracking
and pose estimation, even in challenging scenarios where the
baseline fails.
I. INTRODUCTION
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), one of
the core technologies for autonomous driving, is a tech-
nology that reconstructs the environment around the robot
and estimates the robot position in the reconstructed map.
Despite a signiﬁcant progress in precise localization using
geometrical information of the surrounding environment, it
is still difﬁcult for a SLAM system to achieve advanced tasks
based on human interaction and scene understanding. To
overcome the problem, semantic SLAM that uses semantic
information in SLAM has been in using deep learning
techniques such as recently developed instance segmentation
[1], [2], [3] and 3d object detection [4], [5], [6].
Object-based SLAM [7], [8] is a branch of semantic
SLAM that reconstructs an object-based map and provides
high-level information. Object-based SLAM simultaneously
estimates the location of semantic object inferred from the
network while performing feature-based localization used
in existing SLAM systems, and enables to estimate camera
poses even in featureless environments. In addition, a more
Taekbeom Lee and H. Jin Kim are with the Aerospace
Engineering Department, Seoul National University, South Korea
ltb1128@snu.ac.kr, hjinkim@snu.ac.kr
Youngseok Jang is with the Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering Department, Seoul National University, South Korea
duscjs59@gmail.com
yTaekbeom Lee and Youngseok Jang are contributed equally to this
manuscript.
This research was supported by Unmanned Vehicles Core Technology Re-
search and Development Program through the National Research Foundation
of Korea(NRF) and Unmanned Vehicle Advanced Research Center(UV ARC)
funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT, the Republic of Korea(NRF-
2020M3C1C1A01086411)
Fig. 1: Illustration of object tracking results using the data
obtained surrounding a rectangular table. Although only a
single object is observed, the symmetry-agnostic approach
in (b) may generate multiple map objects and fail object
tracking. On the other hand, the symmetry-aware approach
in (a) recognizes the discrete symmetry type of the ob-
ject and succeed in object tracking using all the reliable
measurements. Such improvement of (a) makes the object-
based SLAM robust, since a large number of constraints
obtained from long tracking of objects are useful for backend
optimization.
expressive map can be constructed by expressing the pose,
type, and shape of the semantic objects in the map.
However, if the shape of the object itself is symmetric
or if the observed shape is symmetric due to occlusion,
object-based SLAM can suffer from signiﬁcant error in the
estimation process of ego motion and pose of the object.
Since symmetric objects may have the same observation at
different viewpoints, data association or motion estimation
may fail.
We propose a system for robustly optimizing the pose
of cameras and objects even in the presence of symmetric
objects. The 3d detection module [4] is modiﬁed to obtain a
local observation that predicts multiple poses for each object,
similar to [9]. We classify object types into asymmetry,
discrete, and continuous symmetry based on the local ob-
servation of the observed objects. By extracting a parameter
corresponding to the symmetry type from the pose of object,
only the robust parameter is used as a constraint to jointly
optimize the camera pose and object pose. Therefore, the
proposed SLAM system has the advantage of robustness byarXiv:2303.07872v1  [cs.CV]  13 Mar 2023using as much useful geometric information as possible even
when symmetric objects are observed, while directly using 3d
detection networks with many existing research and dataset.
In summary, the contributions of the paper are as follows:
We design a symmetry and pose ambiguity aware object
SLAM system which fully utilizes information from
multiple pose hypotheses of objects to jointly optimize
camera pose and globally consistent object pose.
We propose a method to extract reliable information
from ambiguous pose of symmetric objects. We catego-
rize symmetry types of general objects and distinguish
pose parameters into ambiguous one and unambiguous
ones. The extracted unambiguous parameters of each
symmetry type are used in the proposed object associ-
ation and optimization modules.
We use multiple hypotheses 3d detection network as
observation module of our system, which can be easily
edited from existing networks and changed to better
networks in the future.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II reviews related literature. The overview and core
concepts of the system are provided in Section III. Detailed
methods for applying core concepts to systems are described
in Sections IV and V. In Section VI, experiments in simu-
lation and public dataset are presented. Finally, conclusions
are provided in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORK
This section reviews related studies on object-based
SLAM and symmetric-aware object pose estimation.
A. Object-based SLAM
Object-based SLAM attempts to build a robust SLAM
system by simultaneously optimizing camera poses, feature
positions, and poses of objects from semantic information. To
express the shape and pose of an object, [8], [7], and [10] use
prior object model, cuboid, and ellipsoid, respectively. And
[11], [12] represent the shape and pose of an object using
category speciﬁc embedding method. Although they showed
that joint optimization could increase the robustness of both
camera and object pose estimation, they did not consider the
presence of ambiguous detection due to symmetric objects
or occlusion.
B. Symmetry-aware object pose estimation
1) Single view: [13] proposes a network that can deter-
mine whether a shape has symmetry using an object’s CAD
model, and [14] predicts multiple candidate poses for the
detected object and analyzes ambiguity that may be caused
by occlusion as well as ambiguity by the shape of an object.
However, they estimated object pose only from a single view
and did not treat multi-view cases such as SLAM.
2) Multiple view: Recently, studies considering the pose-
ambiguity of objects have been proposed in object-based
SLAM. PoseRBPF [15] estimates the pose distribution
of asymmetric and symmetric objects using the rao-
blackwellized particle ﬁlter. However, it requires a predeﬁnedcodebook for the pose of the object model. [16] is the object-
based SLAM system that simultaneously optimizes camera
poses and object poses using the projection of reconstructed
3d keypoints as a prior. However, every time they encounter
on a new dataset, they have to label the prior. [17] expresses
geometrical primitives in an uniﬁed, decomposed quadric
form and explicitly deals with the degenerative case due to
a symmetric shape. However, the degenerative cases consid-
ered in [17] are limited to a few quadric types, so error can
be induced when ﬁtting arbitrary shapes to quadric. [9] uses
a single neural network to predict poses as multi-hypotheses
and optimizes them through a max-mixture[18] model. Since
the symmetric object has ambiguous pose parameters, such
as the rotation angle for an axis of symmetry, pose estimation
should be performed by considering only the unambiguous
elements. However, error can occur because [9] directly uses
hypotheses containing even ambiguous parameters for pose
estimation.
We propose a robust SLAM system using existing well-
developed 3d detection modules while extracting only avail-
able geometric elements from symmetric objects and using
them as optimization constraints.
III. P ROPOSED SYSTEM
A. Symmetry types
The key idea of the proposed system is to propose a
criterion that can effectively classify general objects using
only three symmetry types and to deﬁne different pose
representations suitable for each symmetry type in order
to fully utilize the geometry information available in the
symmetric object.
In general, objects can be asymmetric or symmetric. The
asymmetric object can be inferred to have a consistent object
pose in the 3d detection module, no matter which viewpoint
it is observed from, but the symmetric object cannot. In addi-
tion, we classify symmetry as discrete and continuous types.
Discrete symmetric objects refer to reﬂection symmetric
objects that can have a ﬁnite number of poses as the observed
viewpoints change, and continuous symmetric objects refer
to objects with an inﬁnite number of poses based on an
axis of symmetry, such as a circular table. Objects which
are classiﬁed into the following three types are represented
in different ways to reﬂect all possible unambiguous pose
parameters:
Asymmetry: All detection results of a asymmetric
object can be used to optimize a unique pose since
the unique pose can be determined when viewpoint
changes. Accordingly, the pose can be represented by 6
degrees of freedom (DoF) which is commonly used.
Discrete symmetry: Objects with multiple planes of
symmetry have as many poses supporting the same
shape as the number of planes of symmetry. We express
the pose assuming that the symmetrical planes of most
discrete symmetric objects present have one intersection
line. The intersection of symmetric planes is deﬁned as
the axis of symmetry, and the rotation angle based onFig. 2: The overview of the proposed object-based SLAM system.
the axis is deﬁned as a symmetric angle. Accordingly,
the position and the axis of symmetry are shared with
the reﬂected poses of a discrete symmetric object, and
only the symmetric angle can be expressed differently.
In other words, the pose of a discrete symmetric object
is deﬁned as ﬁve shared parameters for position and
axis of symmetry and unshared parameters for all the
symmetry angles.
Continuous symmetry: For objects such as round
tables, there is an inﬁnite number of symmetry planes,
so there is an inﬁnite number of object poses that
support the same shape. For continuous symmetric
objects, it is assumed that planes of symmetry have a
single intersection, as in the case of discrete symmetry.
Therefore, we express the pose of continuous symmetric
objects only by position and axis of symmetry after
removing the symmetric angle by classifying it as an
ambiguous parameter.
B. Pipeline
The entire pipeline is described in Fig. 2, and the tracking
and object mapping modules are designed based on DSP-
SLAM [12]. When a new keyframe is selected, the multi-
hypothesis detection network uses an rgb-d image to detect
objects, and the detected objects infer observable multiple
pose hypotheses (Section IV-A). The categorization module
determines the symmetry type of the detected object based on
the distribution of multiple pose hypotheses. We extract the
axis of symmetry for symmetric objects and cluster the poses
with similar symmetry angles for discrete symmetry objects
(Section IV-B). We associate the categorized detection with
map objects using the class and pose except for ambiguous
parameters. For discrete symmetric objects where a new
symmetry angle is observed, we add a non-shared parameter
(Section IV-C). The camera pose, map point, and map object
are jointly optimized at the backend. The constraint between
the camera pose and map object pose is formed differently
for each map object type during optimization (Section V).IV. CATEGORIZED DETECTION AND OBJECTS
A. Multi-hypothesis 3d object detection
We modify the 3d object detection module so that it
can infer multiple pose hypotheses. Since the distribution
of inferred multiple hypotheses inﬂuences the determination
of the object’s symmetry type, it should be modiﬁed so
that the multi-hypothesis 3d object detection module can
cover all the poses that the object can have. [19] extends
the single-loss single-output system to have multiple outputs,
calculating loss [20] using only the hypothesis that succeeded
in the most accurate inference among multiple hypotheses
in the training process. Unlike the method of using the
average loss of multiple outputs, this can increase multi-
hypothesis diversity because each hypothesis is randomly
selected and learned individually. We also modiﬁed the 3d
object detection module [4] in the same way as [19], allowing
a source for the object’s symmetry type to be inherent in
multiple hypotheses.
B. Symmetry type categorization of detection
As shown in Fig. 3, since the multi-hypothesis detection
implies the ambiguity of the object’s pose, we can classify
the object’s symmetry type and extract the type-speciﬁc
pose parameters only from the detection result without prior
information.
Unlike the symmetric object, the multiple pose hypotheses
of the asymmetric object are similar to single pose. In other
words, the distribution of pose hypotheses of the asymmetric
object is very close to unimodal, and the variance is much
smaller than that of the symmetrical object.
For discrete and continuous symmetry types, we perform
an additional classiﬁcation process because the normalized
singular values of multiple hypotheses are large in both cases.
As mentioned in Section III-A, both types have certain axis
of symmetry, and the axis of symmetry lis obtained as
follows:
l=argmax
l2R3[!o1o2;!o1o3;;!o1oN]Tl
2;(1)
where!o1oi=!o1oi
k!o1oik2; !o1oi= logso(3)(RT
co1Rcoi)2R3:Fig. 3: Multi-hypothesis results for each symmetry type.
Objects of three types are observed from different viewpoints
(a), (b), and (c).
Nand!are the number of hypotheses and rotation axis,
respectively. And, symmetry angles are computed by o1oi=
k!o1oik2. After clustering the multiple hypotheses using
the DBSCAN algorithm [21], the variance between the
representative of each cluster is compared. As illustrated
in Fig. 3, compared to the continuous symmetric object
which corresponds to a continuous set of , the variance
among clusters of discrete symmetric object is very large.
Representative values of rectangular table form two clusters
with about 180difference, while the round table has many
similar representative clusters.
Then, reliable parameters of pose can be extracted for
each classiﬁed symmetry type. First, the asymmetric object
can use 6 DoF from detection results, and the continuous
symmetric object can use position and axis of symmetry.
In discrete symmetric objects, parameters are position, axis
of symmetry, and representative symmetry angles of the
clusters.
C. Data association of objects
The categorized detection results are associated with the
previously generated map objects. First, the detection results,
which represent relative transformation between the camera
and the object, are warped in world coordinate using tracked
camera pose Twc. Then, object matching is performed by
comparing the unambiguous parameters of the detected ob-
ject and map objects considering the symmetry type. Due to
inaccurate detection or partial observation, the same object
can be categorized by different symmetry types in different
views. We address the misclassiﬁcation by following associ-
ation strategies. If there is a discrete or continuous symmetry
type in the two comparison groups, the position and axis of
symmetry (5 DoF) parameters are compared; otherwise, the
distance between the 6 DoF parameters is computed. If the
distance is small enough and the class is the same, matchingbetween the objects is successful.
After object matching is performed, the symmetric angles
of the detected discrete symmetric object are associated with
the nearest symmetric angle of the matched map object. The
unmatched angles are added to the map object as a new
symmetric angle.
Discrete symmetric object can be occasionally classiﬁed
into asymmetry type at a speciﬁc viewpoint, as can be seen
from Fig. 3 (a) and (c) of the the discrete case. There-
fore, even if 6 DoF matching between asymmetry objects
fails, if 5 DoF matching is successful, we change the map
object to the discrete symmetry type to express the pose
with position, an axis of symmetry, and symmetric angles.
Object association using unambiguous parameters for each
symmetry type alleviates mismatching caused by ambiguous
parameters. Therefore, the proposed system can track objects
for a long time, which acts as an important source in joint
optimization.
The detection result that failed to match is registered as a
new map object after the shape reconstruction using deep-sdf
[22] similar to DSP-SLAM.
V. JOINT OPTIMIZATION
We perform joint optimization by modifying the existing
SLAM optimization problem using the categorized map
objects and associated detection results.
C;O;P=argmin
C;O;PEreproj (C;P) +Eobj(C;O);(2)
where C, O, and P refer to the camera and object pose
and map point included in the optimized window size,
respectively. Ereproj denotes the reprojection error, and Eobj
denotes the pose error between the map object and the
camera. The joint optimization is solved by the Levenberg-
Marquardt method through g2o[23] solver.
Eobjis designed only with unambiguous parameters in
consideration of the symmetry type of map object, which can
produce a more robust solution than existing methods that
utilize all pose parameters with an ambiguous parameter as
a constraint.
1) Asymmetry: The results of asymmetry map object and
associated multiple hypotheses are not linked by multiple
edges but by a single edge using a max-mixture model, which
selects the hypothesis with the lowest error at each iteration
of optimization, similar to [9].
easym(Twc;Two) = min
j2[1;N]logse(3)(Tj
coT 1
woTwc);(3)
whereTwcandTwo, which mean the pose of the camera
and object on the world, are optimization variables, Tj
co
represents the j-th hypothesis, and Nis the total number
of hypotheses.
2) Discrete symmetry: Discrete symmetric map objects
have position and axis of symmetry as shared parameters
andMsymmetric angles as non-shared parameters. Each
hypothesis is associated with one of symmetry angles of the
matched map object, and edges are formed as many as theFig. 4: Simulation environment.
number of associated symmetric angles, m. Each edge is
modeled with the max-mixture like the asymmetry case.
edisc(Twc;Twoi) = min
ji2[1;Ni]logSE(3)(Tji
coT 1
woiTwc);(4)
whereTwoi=exp (woi!wo)two
013 1
; i2[1;m]:
Nirefers to the number of hypotheses associated with the
i-th symmetric angle, and Twoimeans thei-th symmetric
pose constructed by position and axis of symmetry which
are shared parameters and the i-th symmetric angle. Further-
more, for unconstrained parameterization in optimization,
the axis of symmetry is used by the following expression:
!wo=f(wo; wo), wherewo, woand f()are polar angle,
azimuth in spherical coordinates, and the transformation
function from (; )to!, respectively.
3) Continuous symmetry: The continuous symmetric map
object has only position and axis of symmetry as unambigu-
ous parameters. The axis of symmetry ( !co) extracted from
the rotation part and individual position parts of multiple
hypotheses are used to formulate the following:
ects(Twc;Two) =etrans+eaxis; (5)
whereetrans= min
j2[1;N]ktj
co RT
wc(twc two)k2;
eaxis=kf 1(Rwc!co) [wo; wo]Tk2:
etransandeaxisare max-mixture based translation error and
error related to axis of symmetry, respectively. is the
constant weight for balancing two error terms.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section presents the performance of the proposed
symmetry-aware object SLAM system compared with the
baseline. Simulation and public datasets are used to evaluate
the proposed system.
A. Setup
When a camera looks at the feature-rich scene, ego-motion
can be estimated accurately by the feature-based SLAM
backbone [24] in object-based SLAM systems. On the other
hand, object-camera constraints are dominant estimation
sources if the camera observes a featureless scene. Therefore,
in order to effectively evaluate the proposed object-based
SLAM system, we construct a simulation environment such
Fig. 5: The results of object tracking and map object
reconstruction in sim(disc) .
Fig. 6: The translation error of the estimated map object’s
pose in case study.
that one side of the environment has rich feature points
and the other side has a few feature points, as shown in
Fig. 4. Then we obtain the simulation dataset using Unreal
Engine and AirSim [25]. The camera moves surrounding a
center object in the environment so that camera observes
feature-rich and featureless scenes alternately for each spe-
ciﬁc region, as shown in Fig. 4 (a) and (b). As shown in
Fig. 4, the center object can be replaced with discrete and
continuous symmetric objects in the simulation environment.
These cases are called sim(disc) andsim(cts) . In addition, we
evaluate the proposed system in the general indoor scenes
using the popular scanNet dataset [26].
For training of the 3D detection network used in our
system, pre-training is performed using SUN RGB-D dataset
[27]. After that, to reduce the domain gap between actual
and simulation data, additional data are acquired in the
simulation, and ﬁne-tuning is performed. We only ﬁne-tune
the detection network for simulation dataset since ScanNet
dataset only provide axis-aligned bounding box. Both pre-
training and ﬁne-tuning is done in the same way as [19].
The SUN RGB-D dataset assumes that the input point clouds
are represented in the coordinates aligned with the direction
of gravity, and expresses the object’s orientation using the
rotation angle with respect to the axis of gravity (i.e. yaw).
However, ScanNet dataset has no gravity direction, so we
calculated in advance the rotation matrix that aligns the y-
axis of camera with the normal vector of the ground plane
for each frame. An additional sensor such as an inertial
measurement unit or ground detection module may help
to change the preprocessing for online implementation. We
used the number of hypotheses as 30, which was selected
empirically to categorize symmetry types of detection well.
We test using Intel i7-10700 (2.9GHz) and NVIDIA RTX
2060 GPU. DSP-SLAM using single hypothesis detection re-
sults is used as the ﬁrst baseline system ( SH), and the second
baseline ( MH) is the modiﬁed DSP-SLAM to integrate with
key idea on [9] which uses multi-hypothesis detection with
no consideration of symmetry types.Fig. 7: The qualitative results of the proposed and baseline
algorithms ( SH,MH) insim(disc) .
Fig. 8: The qualitative results of the proposed and baseline
(SH) algorithms in Scene0022 00in ScanNet.
B. Case study
To understand how the proposed system enhances the over-
all performance, we test object tracking and pose estimation
under the presence of symmetric objects with pose ambi-
guity, using the environment in Fig. 4. For fair comparison
by isolating the other sources that affect the performance
except the pose ambiguity, we construct a pose graph using
edges from the camera to objects obtained from the proposed
categorization and association module and true camera nodes
and estimated the object pose by optimization. The same
setup is employed to test the baseline algorithms.
Fig. 5 shows the result of object tracking and the re-
constructed map object using the sim(disc) dataset. The
proposed method continuously tracks the center object, and a
single map object is reconstructed accordingly. On the other
hand, the baseline algorithms ( MH,SH) fail to track, and
incorrectly recognize a single object as two or more map
objects.
The translation error of the estimated object is reported
in Fig. 6. MH andSHshow large error when establishing
the object again after the tracking failure, whereas the
proposed method maintains small error through successful
object tracking.
C. System evaluation
The performance of the entire system was compared and
evaluated with the baseline system using the simulation
environment and ScanNet. First, Fig. 7 shows the quanti-
tative results compared with the baseline system using the
simulation environment sim(disc) . The baseline and camera
trajectory are plotted on the map built by the proposed
system. In the beginning, a feature-rich scene is observed
as shown in Fig. 4 (a), so all three systems are good at
estimating pose. Such trend changes as the features that
can be used for localization disappear, since the camera
location must be estimated using only the tracked object.
Based on the good object tracking performance, the proposed
system also demonstrates good performance even in theTABLE I: The translation error of the proposed and baseline
systems using ScanNet and simulation dataset. The bold
indicates the best performance and the symbol ‘-’ means
failure of pose estimation.
datasetRMSE of translation [m]
OURS SH MH
ScanNetScene0022 00 0.161 0.237 0.179
Scene0049 00 0.137 0.137 0.152
Scene0091 00 0.079 0.101 0.091
Scene0289 00 0.125 0.144 0.153
simdisc 0.086 - -
cts 0.265 0.341 0.284
featureless region using an unambiguous pose parameter
that ﬁts the symmetry type. However, both MH and SH
systems fail to estimate the pose in the featureless region.
The baseline algorithms associate the detection with the map
object on the map using all 6 DoF parameters, and there
are cases when none of the multiple hypotheses ﬁts the
previous detection result. The data association may fail due
to such mismatch in yaw angle. Quantitative results for the
simulation environment are shown in Table I. For sim(cts) ,
the baseline algorithms also had no failure in pose estimation,
but we can see that the proposed algorithm has the highest
performance.
Fig. 8 shows qualitative results on a ScanNet
Scene0022 00. This sequence includes not only the
symmetrical objects but also the objects that do not fully
enter the camera ﬁeld of view, so the uncertainty of
detection is high. This is revealed in the result of SH.
As seen in simulation setting, the baseline system fails
data association and many objects are registered in same
position of the map. However, the proposed system robustly
recognizes as a single object and optimizes the pose even
in these cases. The quantitative results are shown in table
I. We evaluate the system performance using root mean
squared error (RMSE) error of each keyframe position. The
proposed system exhibits similar or better path estimation
performance in most sequences.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
Symmetric objects present in the scene can cause the
performance degradation or even failure of SLAM, since
their observation at different viewpoints can be identical
and cause obscurity. We proposed a method for robustly
optimizing the pose of cameras and objects even in the
presence of symmetric objects.
The proposed classiﬁcation of objects into three categories
depending on their symmetry characteristics was successfully
applied to various objects. Under the proposed method, the
objects in the same category can be associated with the same
type of ambiguity, which contributes to the efﬁciency in data
association. By extracting only the unambiguous parameters
corresponding to each category and using them in data
association and joint optimization of the camera and object
pose, the proposed approach provides signiﬁcant robustness
to the SLAM performance. Proposed system showed better
performance than baseline systems in environments with
many symmetric objects.REFERENCES
[1] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Doll ´ar, and R. Girshick, “Mask r-cnn,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision ,
2017, pp. 2961–2969.
[2] L. Du, J. Tan, X. Xue, L. Chen, H. Wen, J. Feng, J. Li, and X. Zhang,
“3dcfs: Fast and robust joint 3d semantic-instance segmentation via
coupled feature selection,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 6868–6875.
[3] B. Xu, W. Li, D. Tzoumanikas, M. Bloesch, A. Davison, and
S. Leutenegger, “Mid-fusion: Octree-based object-level multi-instance
dynamic slam,” in 2019 International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 5231–5237.
[4] D. Rukhovich, A. V orontsova, and A. Konushin, “Fcaf3d: Fully
convolutional anchor-free 3d object detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.00322 , 2021.
[5] Z. Ding, X. Han, and M. Niethammer, “V otenet: A deep learning
label fusion method for multi-atlas segmentation,” in International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention . Springer, 2019, pp. 202–210.
[6] A. D. Pon, J. Ku, C. Li, and S. L. Waslander, “Object-centric
stereo matching for 3d object detection,” in 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2020, pp.
8383–8389.
[7] S. Yang and S. Scherer, “Cubeslam: Monocular 3-d object slam,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics , vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 925–938, 2019.
[8] R. F. Salas-Moreno, R. A. Newcombe, H. Strasdat, P. H. Kelly, and
A. J. Davison, “Slam++: Simultaneous localisation and mapping at the
level of objects,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , 2013, pp. 1352–1359.
[9] J. Fu, Q. Huang, K. Doherty, Y . Wang, and J. J. Leonard, “A multi-
hypothesis approach to pose ambiguity in object-based slam,” in 2021
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 7639–7646.
[10] L. Nicholson, M. Milford, and N. S ¨underhauf, “Quadricslam: Dual
quadrics from object detections as landmarks in object-oriented slam,”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2018.
[11] E. Sucar, K. Wada, and A. Davison, “Nodeslam: Neural object
descriptors for multi-view shape reconstruction,” in 2020 International
Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 949–958.
[12] J. Wang, M. R ¨unz, and L. Agapito, “Dsp-slam: Object oriented slam
with deep shape priors,” in 2021 International Conference on 3D
Vision (3DV) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 1362–1371.
[13] E. Corona, K. Kundu, and S. Fidler, “Pose estimation for objects with
rotational symmetry,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 7215–7222.
[14] F. Manhardt, D. M. Arroyo, C. Rupprecht, B. Busam, T. Birdal,
N. Navab, and F. Tombari, “Explaining the ambiguity of object
detection and 6d pose from visual data,” in Proceedings of theIEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2019, pp.
6841–6850.
[15] X. Deng, A. Mousavian, Y . Xiang, F. Xia, T. Bretl, and D. Fox,
“Poserbpf: A rao–blackwellized particle ﬁlter for 6-d object pose
tracking,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1328–
1342, 2021.
[16] N. Merrill, Y . Guo, X. Zuo, X. Huang, S. Leutenegger, X. Peng,
L. Ren, and G. Huang, “Symmetry and uncertainty-aware object slam
for 6dof object pose estimation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2022, pp.
14 901–14 910.
[17] W. Zhen, H. Yu, Y . Hu, and S. Scherer, “Uniﬁed representation of
geometric primitives for graph-slam optimization using decomposed
quadrics,” in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automa-
tion (ICRA) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 5636–5642.
[18] E. Olson and P. Agarwal, “Inference on networks of mixtures for ro-
bust robot mapping,” The International Journal of Robotics Research ,
vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 826–840, 2013.
[19] C. Rupprecht, I. Laina, R. DiPietro, M. Baust, F. Tombari, N. Navab,
and G. D. Hager, “Learning in an uncertain world: Representing
ambiguity through multiple hypotheses,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision , 2017, pp. 3591–3600.
[20] A. Guzman-Rivera, D. Batra, and P. Kohli, “Multiple choice learning:
Learning to produce multiple structured outputs,” Advances in neural
information processing systems , vol. 25, 2012.
[21] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, X. Xu, et al. , “A density-based
algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with
noise.” in kdd, vol. 96, no. 34, 1996, pp. 226–231.
[22] J. J. Park, P. Florence, J. Straub, R. Newcombe, and S. Lovegrove,
“Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape
representation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-
puter vision and pattern recognition , 2019, pp. 165–174.
[23] G. Grisetti, R. K ¨ummerle, H. Strasdat, and K. Konolige, “g2o: A
general framework for (hyper) graph optimization,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA),
Shanghai, China , 2011, pp. 9–13.
[24] R. Mur-Artal and J. D. Tard ´os, “Orb-slam2: An open-source slam
system for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras,” IEEE transactions
on robotics , vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1255–1262, 2017.
[25] S. Shah, D. Dey, C. Lovett, and A. Kapoor, “Airsim: High-ﬁdelity
visual and physical simulation for autonomous vehicles,” in Field and
service robotics . Springer, 2018, pp. 621–635.
[26] A. Dai, A. X. Chang, M. Savva, M. Halber, T. Funkhouser, and
M. Nießner, “Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor
scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , 2017, pp. 5828–5839.
[27] S. Song, S. P. Lichtenberg, and J. Xiao, “Sun rgb-d: A rgb-d scene un-
derstanding benchmark suite,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2015, pp. 567–576.