HyScale-GNN: A Scal able Hybrid GNN Training
System on Single-Node Heterogeneous Architecture
Yi-Chien Lin, Viktor Prasanna
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California
Email:fyichienl, prasannag@usc.edu
Abstract —Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown success
in many real-world applications that involve graph-structured
data. Most of the existing single-node GNN training systems are
capable of training medium-scale graphs with tens of millions of
edges; however, scaling them to large-scale graphs with billions
of edges remains challenging. In addition, it is challenging to map
GNN training algorithms onto a computation node as state-of-
the-art machines feature heterogeneous architecture consisting of
multiple processors and a variety of accelerators.
We propose HyScale-GNN, a novel system to train GNN
models on a single-node heterogeneous architecture. HyScale-
GNN performs hybrid training which utilizes both the processors
and the accelerators to train a model collaboratively. Our system
design overcomes the memory size limitation of existing works
and is optimized for training GNNs on large-scale graphs. We
propose a two-stage data pre-fetching scheme to reduce the
communication overhead during GNN training. To improve task
mapping efﬁciency, we propose a dynamic resource management
mechanism, which adjusts the workload assignment and resource
allocation during runtime. We evaluate HyScale-GNN on a
CPU-GPU and a CPU-FPGA heterogeneous architecture. Using
several large-scale datasets and two widely-used GNN models,
we compare the performance of our design with a multi-GPU
baseline implemented in PyTorch-Geometric. The CPU-GPU
design and the CPU-FPGA design achieve up to 2:08speedup
and12:6speedup, respectively. Compared with the state-of-the-
art large-scale multi-node GNN training systems such as P3and
DistDGL, our CPU-FPGA design achieves up to 5:27speedup
using a single node.
Index Terms —GNN training, Heterogeneous architecture,
Large-scale graphs
I. I NTRODUCTION
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become state-of-the-
art models for representation learning on graphs, facilitating
many applications such as molecular property prediction [1],
[2], social recommendation system [3], [4], electronic design
automation [5], [6], etc. These domains often involve large-
scale graphs with over billion edges [7]. Scaling GNN training
systems to support such large graphs remains challenging.
Previous works [8]–[11] store the input graph in the device
memory (e.g., GPU global memory, FPGA local DDR mem-
ory) rather than the CPU memory because accessing data
from device memory via DDR channel is much faster than
accessing data from the CPU memory via PCIe. The drawback
of this setup is that the size of the device memory is limited
(usually 16 to 64 GB), so it cannot accommodate large-
scale graphs such as MAG240M [7] (202 GB); storing the
graph in the CPU memory can overcome this limitation, but
then the data needs to be fetched via PCIe which has lowermemory bandwidth. In addition to memory size limitation,
it is also challenging to map GNN training algorithms onto
a target platform because of the complex architecture of
modern machines. In particular, state-of-the-art nodes adopt
a heterogeneous architecture design to meet the performance
requirements of various applications [12], [13]. A hetero-
geneous architecture consists of multiple multi-core CPUs
connected to several accelerators; the connected accelerators
can be GPUs, FPGAs, or AI-speciﬁc accelerators [14]–[16].
Most of the existing works adopt a naive and static task
mapping [9], [17], [18] which treats the CPU as a preprocessor,
whose main purpose is to ofﬂoad GNN computations to the
accelerator; this straightforward task mapping overlooks the
potential of utilizing the CPU resources for training. For
example, on a dual-socket AMD EPYC 7763 (7.2 TFLOPS)
platform equipped with a single Nvidia RTX A5000 (27.8
TFLOPS), utilizing CPU+GPU for training can potentially
provide a (7.2+27.8) / 27.8 = 1.26 speedup compared with
GPU-only training. In addition, the speed of executing GNN
training tasks depends on both the training algorithm and
the performance of the target platform; this makes static task
mapping inefﬁcient.
Motivated by the challenges, we propose HyScale-GNN, a
hybrid GNN training system that can efﬁciently train GNN
models on a given heterogeneous architecture. We propose a
general processor-accelerator training protocol, which deﬁnes
how the processors and the accelerators should interact and
synchronize to collaboratively train a GNN model. The pro-
tocol is generic and can be adapted to various accelerators in-
cluding GPU, FPGA, or AI-speciﬁc accelerators. We propose
a dynamic resource management mechanism to efﬁciently map
GNN training tasks onto a given heterogeneous architecture.
The mechanism assigns GNN training tasks to both the CPUs
and the accelerators, and dynamically adjusts the workload
assignment during runtime. Unlike previous works that result
in CPU idling most of the time, our hybrid training system
efﬁciently utilizes both the CPUs and the accelerators to
collaboratively train a GNN model. In addition, HyScale-GNN
supports GNN training on large-scale graphs with billions
of edges. To accommodate large-scale graphs, our system
stores the input graph in the CPU memory, which can be
several terabytes on high-end nodes. To mitigate the expensive
PCIe communication overhead of reading data from the CPU
memory, we propose a two-stage feature prefetching scheme
to pre-load the required data onto the accelerator. While wearXiv:2303.00158v1  [cs.DC]  1 Mar 2023TABLE I
NOTATIONS OF GNN
Notation Description Notation Description
G(V;E) input graph topology hl
ifeature vector of viat layerl
V set of vertices al
iaggregated result of viat layerl
E set of edges L number of GNN layers
X input feature matrix flfeature length of layer l
Vlsampled vertices at layer lN(i) neighbors of vi
Elsampled edges at layer l(:) element-wise activation
X0feature matrix of sampled vertices Wlweight matrix of layer l
apply various optimizations in our system, these optimizations
do not alter the semantics of the GNN training algorithm; thus,
the convergence rate and model accuracy remain the same as
the original sequential algorithm.
We summarize the contributions of this work as follows:
We propose HyScale-GNN, a hybrid GNN training sys-
tem that efﬁciently utilizes both the CPUs and the ac-
celerators to perform GNN training collaboratively. Our
system achieves the same convergence rate and model
accuracy as existing works [19]–[21] as the proposed
optimizations do not alter the original training algorithm.
We propose a general processor-accelerator training pro-
tocol that enables HyScale-GNN to work with various
accelerators including GPUs, FPGAs, or AI-speciﬁc ac-
celerators.
To support GNN training on large-scale graphs (such as
ogbn-papers100 [22] and MAG240M [7]), we propose to
store the input graph in the CPU memory, and perform
two-stage data prefetching to hide the communication
overhead.
We propose a performance model which predicts the
training performance of our system based on algorithmic
parameters of the GNN training algorithm and platform
metadata. HyScale-GNN utilizes the predicted perfor-
mance to derive a coarse-grained task mapping onto the
target platform during the design phase.
We propose a dynamic resource management mechanism,
which performs ﬁne-grained task mapping by ﬁne-tuning
the workload assigned to the CPUs and the accelerators
during runtime.
We evaluate HyScale-GNN using several large-scale
graphs and two widely used GNN models: GraphSAGE
[2], and GCN [23]. On a dual-socket platform con-
nected to 4 high-end GPUs, and a dual-socket platform
connected to 4 high-end FPGAs, our CPU-GPU and
CPU-FPGA designs achieve up to 2:08speedup, and
12:6speedup compared with our multi-GPU baseline
implemented using PyTorch-Geometric [18], respectively.
Compared with the state-of-the-art distributed GNN train-
ing systems [19], [21] that use 16 to 64 GPUs on a multi-
node cluster, our CPU-FPGA design achieves up to 5:2
speedup using only 4 FPGAs on a single-node.II. B ACKGROUND
A. Graph Neural Networks
We deﬁned the notations related to a GNN in Table I. A
GNN learns to generate low-dimensional vector representation
(i.e., node embeddings) for a set of vertices (i.e., target vertices
VL), and the node embeddings can facilitate many downstream
applications as mentioned in Section I. A GNN model can be
expressed using the aggregate-update paradigm [24]:
al
v=AGGREGATE (hl 1
u:u2N(v)[fvg) (1)
hl
v=(UPDATE (al
v;Wl)) (2)
During feature aggregation, for each vertex v, the feature
vectorshl 1
uof the neighbor vertices u2N(v)are aggregated
intoal
vusing algorithm-speciﬁc operators such as mean, max,
or LSTM. Since graph-structured data are non-Euclidean,
accessing the feature vectors hl 1
uof the neighbor vertices
incurs a massive volume of irregular data access. The feature
update phase is a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) followed by an
element-wise activation function (e.g., ReLU), which applies
a linear transformation and a non-linear transformation to al
v,
respectively. While there exist a variety of GNN models, these
models follow the aggregate-update paradigm. We list two
representative models as an example:
GCN [23]: is one of the most widely-used GNN models.
The model can be speciﬁed as follows:
al
v=Sum(1p
D(v)D(u)hl 1
u)
hl
v=ReLU 
al
vWl+bl(3)
WhereD(v)denotes the degree of vertex v, and bl
indicates the bias of the update function.
GraphSAGE [2]: proposed a neighbor sampling algorithm
for mini-batch GNN training. The model can be speciﬁed
as follows:
al
v=hl 1
vjjMean 
hl 1
u
hl
v=ReLU 
al
vWl+bl (4)
Wherejjindicates the concatenation operation.
By adopting the aggregate-update paradigm in our system
design, our work is capable of training various GNN models.
B. Mini-batch GNN Training
We depict the workﬂow of mini-batch GNN training in
Figure 1. In each training iteration, a sampler ﬁrst extracts
a mini-batchfG(Vl;El) : 16l6Lgfrom the original
graphG(V;E). The mini-batch serves as a computational
graph to perform GNN operations, namely feature aggregation
and feature update. During the forward propagation stage, the
GNN operations are performed for Literations. The output
embeddingsfhL
i:vi2VLgare compared with the ground
truth for loss calculation. The calculated loss is then used as in-
put for backward propagation. Backward propagation performs
the same set of GNN operations as in forward propagation, but
in a reverse direction [25]; backward propagation produces theMini-batch SamplingGNN Operations2536235635𝐴!35𝑊!𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠
𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑑.Forward propagation
Backward propagation12
34Weightupdate14Fig. 1. Overview of mini-batch GNN training
Local DDRLUTDSPBRAMLUTDSPBRAMLUTDSPBRAMFPGACPULLC (Shared)CPU MemoryPCIeFPGAFPGAFPGAL2L1CoreL2L1CoreL2L1CoreCPUMemCPUMemCPUMemCPUMemAccel.Accel.Accel.Accel.Accel.Accel.Accel.Accel.PCIeProcessor InterconnectDDR
Fig. 2. Target heterogeneous architecture
gradients for the weight matrix Wlin each layer, which are
then used to update the model weights.
Our work adopts synchronous Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) [26] to train GNNs on multiple devices, which performs
a similar workﬂow as the original GNN training but with
few variations. During the ﬁrst step, multiple mini-batches are
sampled and then each device is assigned one mini-batch. Each
device then performs forward/backward propagation as in the
original GNN training algorithm. Finally, the gradients within
each device are gathered and averaged. The averaged gradients
are then broadcast to each device to perform a global weight
update. Training in synchronous SGD on multiple devices is
algorithmically equivalent to training with a larger mini-batch
on a single device. For example, training on 4 GPUs with
mini-batch size 1024 is equivalent to training on 1 GPU with
mini-batch size 4096 [27].
C. Target Heterogeneous Architecture
Figure 2 shows the target heterogeneous architecture. It
consists of multiple CPUs and multiple accelerators. The
CPU memory on the platform forms a shared address space:
each CPU is able to access the CPU memory to which it is
connected, and can also access CPU memory that is connected
to other CPUs via processor interconnection channels such as
QPI [28]. Each accelerator is connected to a processor via
PCIe, and each accelerator is connected to a device memory
via DDR channels.
Mini-batchSamplerGNN TrainerFeatureLoaderGNN TrainerGNN TrainerGNN TrainerSynchronizerGraph Topology +(-,/)Mini-batch opology+(-!,/!)Mini-batch Tology+(-!,/!)Mini-batch opology+(-!,/!)Mini-batch Topology +(-!,/!)Vertex Feature 1Mini-batch opology+(-!,/!)Mini-batch Tology+(-!,/!)Mini-batch opology+(-!,/!)Mini-batch Features 1′+(-!,/!)Gradients1
234Runtime5Fig. 3. System overview
III. S YSTEM DESIGN
In this Section, we ﬁrst introduce the logical components
of HyScale-GNN in Section III-A. Then, we show how the
logical components run on a heterogeneous platform in Section
III-B. Finally, we introduce the Processor-Accelerator Training
Protocol in Section III-C, which deﬁnes how the processors
and the accelerators should interact to perform hybrid training.
A. Hybrid GNN Training System
HyScale-GNN consists of multiple logical components. We
depict the logical components (grey rounded rectangles) and
their input/output (green rectangles) in Figure 3, and describe
each component in the following:
Mini-batch Sampler: At the beginning of a training iteration,
the Mini-batch Sampler takes the graph topology G(V;E)
as input, and produces multiple mini-batches by executing a
sampling algorithm [2], [29].
Feature Loader: Given a mini-batch, the Feature Loader
extracts a mini-batch feature matrix X0from the original
feature matrix X. The extracted feature matrix X0contains
only the vertex features of the sampled vertices instead of all
the vertices in the input graph.
GNN Trainers: The GNN Trainers perform the forward
propagation and backward propagation of GNN training. They
take the mini-batch topology and mini-batch feature matrix as
inputs, and produce gradients for model weight update.
Synchronizer: After each GNN Trainer produces a set of
gradients, the Synchronizer performs an all-reduce operation
which gathers the gradients from each Trainer, takes the
average value of the gradients, and broadcasts the averaged
gradients back to each Trainer to update their model weights.
Runtime: The Runtime system manages the interaction and
data communication between the CPUs and the accelerators
based on our Processor-Accelerator Training Protocol (Sec-
tion III-C). In addition, it also performs Dynamic Resource
Management which ﬁne-tunes the workload assignment on the
target platform during training.
B. Task mapping and Coordination
Our hybrid training system consists of a runtime thread,
several processor threads, and several accelerator threads.GNN TrainerGNN TrainerGNN TrainerGNN TrainerSynchronizer
Mini-batch Tology+(-!,/!)Mini-batch opology+(-!,/!)Mini-batch Features 1′+(-!,/!)GradientsGraph Topology +(-,/)
Graph Topology +(-,/)Mini-batch Topology +(-!,/!)Sampler
SamplerFeatureLoaderVertex Feature 1Mini-batch Features 1′
Model Weights "!Model Weights "!Processor ThreadsAccelerator Threads1. Sampling2. Feature Loading3. DataTransfer4. GNN PropagationProcessorMemory
Device MemoryRuntime ThreadRuntimeDONEACKACKDONEFig. 4. Task mapping and coordination
SamplerFeatureLoaderGNN TrainerSynchronizerApplicationLayer
PthreadMKLCUDAHLSProgramming LayerOpenCLCPUcoresCUDAcoresFPGAresourcesPhysical LayerPCIeProcessorsAccelerators11mini-batch sizeMetadata/Handshake signalData22mini-batch topology3
3mini-batch feature matrixTime
4DONE5gradients6averaged gradients4567ACKNOWLEDGE78989sampling timetraining timeSamplerRuntimeRuntimeCPU Mem.CPU Mem.Device Mem.TrainerSync.RuntimeSync.TrainerRuntime
Fig. 5. Processor-accelerator training protocol
Each logical component (Section III-A) is mapped to one or
multiple threads. We show the task mapping and coordination
of HyScale-GNN in Figure 4. HyScale-GNN decomposes
GNN Training into four pipeline stages: Sampling, Feature
Loading, Data Transfer, and GNN Propagation: (1) Sampling :
mini-batch sampling can be performed on both the CPUs and
accelerators. In each training iteration, nmini-batches are
produced, where nis the number of GNN Trainers in the
system. After each mini-batch is produced, it is stored in the
CPU memory for Feature Loading. (2) Feature Loading : after
collecting all nmini-batches, the Feature Loader reads the
feature vector of the sampled vertices from the input feature
X, and stores the loaded features in a sub-matrix X0. Feature
Loading is only performed on the CPUs. This is because an
input feature matrix Xis too large to ﬁt in the device memory
for large-scale graphs; thus, the feature matrix Xis stored
in the CPU memory, and accessed by the Feature Loader
which runs on the CPUs. (3) Data Transfer : a mini-batch
can be either executed on the CPU, or on the accelerator. If
the mini-batch is executed on the accelerator, the mini-batch
topologyfG(Vl;El) : 16l6Lgand mini-batch feature
matrix X0are transferred to the accelerator device memory
via PCIe. (4) GNN Propagation : in each training iteration,
each device (a processor or an accelerator) is assigned a mini-
batch topology and a mini-batch feature matrix; these serveas the inputs for the GNN Trainers to perform forward and
backward propagation. Initially, the workload (i.e., mini-batch
size) assignment is decided based on our performance model
(Section V) at design time. If there is a workload imbalance
among the devices at runtime, the DRM engine (Section
IV-A) adjusts the workload assignment of the next training
iteration. After the propagations, each Trainer produces a set
of gradients that are later used to update the model weights;
each Trainer then sends a “DONE” signal to the Synchronizer
when the gradients are stored/transferred to the CPU memory.
Since all the accelerators are connected to the CPUs, and the
CPUs are connected to each other (Figure 2), it is natural to
run the Synchronizer on a CPU. After receiving the “DONE”
signals from all the Trainers, the Synchronizer performs an all-
reduce operation, which averages the gathered gradients, and
broadcasts the result back to each Trainer. The Runtime system
proceeds to the next training iteration after all the Trainers
update their local model weights and send an acknowledgment
to the Runtime system.
C. Processor-Accelerator Training Protocol
To perform hybrid training on a given heterogeneous archi-
tecture, we propose a general Processor-Accelerator Training
Protocol . The protocol consists of three layers: the appli-
cation layer consists of the logical components deﬁned inSection III-A; the programming layer consists of libraries
that are used to implement the logical components on multi-
core CPUs, GPUs, FPGAs, or AI-speciﬁc accelerators; the
physical layer consists of the actual hardware. HyScale-GNN
can be ported to various heterogeneous architectures since the
process-accelerator interaction is deﬁned at the application
layer, which is not bound to a speciﬁc type of accelerator.
We show the data exchange and handshake signals in Figure
5. Note that Figure 5 does not depict the Feature Loading
stage since there is no data exchange or handshake signal in
that stage. In each pipeline stage, a barrier is set at the end
for synchronization. In addition, the Runtime system collects
the execution time of each stage to ﬁne-tune the workload
assignment in the next iteration (Section IV-A).
IV. O PTIMIZATIONS
In order to achieve high GNN training throughput, we
develop various optimizations to perform efﬁcient task map-
ping (Section IV-A) and to reduce communication overhead
(Section IV-B, IV-C). It is worth noticing that these optimiza-
tions do not alter the semantics of the original GNN training
algorithm. Thus, HyScale-GNN does not trade off the model
accuracy and convergence rate for higher training throughput.
A. Dynamic Resource Management
To efﬁciently map GNN training tasks onto a heterogeneous
architecture, we ﬁrst utilize the predicted result from our
performance model (Section V) to initialize the GNN training
task mapping during compile time. Furthermore, we propose
aDynamic Resource Management (DRM) engine that ﬁne-
tunes the resource allocation, and task mapping to improve
GNN training throughput during runtime. The DRM engine
is a bottleneck-guided optimizer, which improves training
throughput by accelerating the bottleneck stage in each iter-
ation. The DRM engine features two functions to speedup
the bottlenecked stage: balance work and balance thread .
The balance work function balances the workload between
the CPU and the accelerator by varying the mini-batch size
assigned to the Trainers. The total mini-batch size executed on
the hybrid system remains the same after the re-assignment.
Thebalance thread function explores the performance trade-
off between CPU tasks (e.g., CPU Sampler, CPU Trainer),
and is only used when the bottleneck stage is a CPU task.
It speedups the bottleneck stage by reducing the number of
threads assigned to the fastest CPU task, and re-assign those
threads to the bottleneck stage.
Algorithm 1 describes how the DRM engine works in a
high-level view. First, the DRM engine bundles the Data
Transfer time and Training on Accelerator time because the
execution time of the two is highly correlated. For example,
if the workload assigned to the accelerator is reduced, the
Data Transfer time also reduces since fewer data needs to be
communicated. The DRM engine takes the execution time of
each stage as input and identiﬁes the bottleneck stage and the
fastest stage. If the system is bottlenecked by an accelerator
task, then the DRM performs balance work to adjust theAlgorithm 1 Dynamic Resource Management
Input : execution time of Sampling on Accelerator TSA, Sam-
pling on CPU TSC, Feature Loading TLoad, Data Transfer TTran,
Training on CPU TTC, Training on Accelerator TTA
Output : thread assignment, workload assignment
1:TAccel=max(TTran;TTA)
2:Sorted all = sort(TSC;TSA;TLoad;TTC;TAccel)
3:fastest = Sorted list[4]
4:second = Sorted list[3]
5:bottleneck = Sorted list[0]
6:
7:Sorted CPU = sort(TSC;TLoad;TTC)
8:fastest CPU task = Sorted CPU[2]
9:
10:switch bottleneck do.Bottleneck-guided Optimizer
11: caseTSA:
12: balance work (TSC,TSA)
13: caseTAccel:
14: balance work (TTC,TAccel)
15: caseTLoad:
16: balance thread (fastest CPU task, bottleneck)
17: caseTSC:
18: iffastest ==TSAthen
19: balance work (TSC,TSA)
20: else if (fastest ==TAccel and second == TSA)then
21: balance work (TSC,TSA)
22: else
23: balance thread (fastest, bottleneck)
24: end if
25: caseTTC:
26: iffastest ==TAccel then
27: balance work (TTC,TAccel)
28: else if (fastest ==TSAand second == TAccel)then
29: balance work (TTC,TAccel)
30: else
31: balance thread (fastest, bottleneck)
32: end if
workload assignment between the CPUs and the accelerators
in the next iteration. If the system is bottlenecked by the
Feature Loader, the DRM engine performs balance thread
which re-allocates more threads to perform Feature Loading.
If the system is bottlenecked by the CPU Sampler, the DRM
engine can either perform balance work orbalance thread to
speedup the CPU Sampler. The decision depends on which
stage runs the fastest. If the Accelerator Sampler runs the
fastest, the DRM engine performs balance work which in-
creases the workload assigned to the accelerators; if the fastest
task is the Accelerator Trainer, followed by the Accelerator
Sampler, then the DRM engine also assigns more workload to
the accelerators; otherwise, the DRM engine performs balance
thread which explores performance trade-offs between other
CPU tasks. Finally, if the system is bottlenecked by the CPU
Trainer, the DRM engine can also improve the performanceFeature DuplicatorS -PES -PES -PES -PERoutingNetworkG -PEG -PEG -PEG -PEIntermediateresultsMACMACMACMACMACMACMACMACMACMACMACMACMACMACMACMACResultBufferIntermediateresultsIntermediateresultsIntermediateresultsWeightBufferAggregateUpdateAggregateUpdate(0,0)(0,2)(0,5)(1,2)3"Fig. 6. Hardware kernel designs and datapath
SamplingFeature LoadingData TransferGNN Training + Sync.Mini-batch 1Mini-batch 2Mini-batch 3Mini-batch 4TimeMini-batch 2Mini-batch 3Mini-batch 4Mini-batch 5Mini-batch 3Mini-batch 4Mini-batch 5Mini-batch 6…
Batch 1Batch 2Batch 3SamplingFeat. LoadingData TransferPropagationSamplingFeat. LoadingData TransferBatch 4…SamplingFeat. LoadingSampling(Accelerator)(PCIe)(CPU Memory)(CPU)Iteration1234
Fig. 7. Two-stage Feature Prefetching
by performing either balance work orbalance thread ; thus,
the improvement strategy is similar to when bottlenecked by
the CPU Sampler.
B. Two-stage Feature Prefetching
HyScale-GNN runs GNN training on both the CPUs and the
accelerators. For GNN Trainers that run on the accelerators,
the data needs to be fetched from the CPU memory and
then transferred to the accelerators via PCIe. To reduce the
expensive communication overhead, HyScale-GNN performs
Feature Prefetching. The idea is to pre-load the mini-batches
for the next training iteration onto the accelerators ﬁrst, so
the accelerators do not have to wait for data when performing
GNN operations. Observing that the Feature Prefetching stage
can still bottleneck the system, we further decompose Feature
Prefetching into two pipeline stages: Feature Loading, and
Data Transfer. The Feature Loading stage loads the Mini-batch
Feature X0from the CPU memory, and the Data Transfer
stage sends the matrix X0to the accelerator via PCIe. The
two stages can run concurrently because they utilize different
memory channels (CPU RAM channel, and PCIe channel),
and there is no data dependency between mini-batches. Figure
7 shows an example of the Two-stage Feature Prefetching:
in iteration 4, while an accelerator is executing mini-batch
1, the feature matrix of mini-batch 2 is being transferred to
the accelerator via PCIe, and the feature matrix of mini-batch
3 is being loaded from the CPU memory, simultaneously.
Thus, when the accelerator executes mini-batch 2 in the next
iteration, the mini-batch topology and mini-batch features are
ready in the accelerator’s device memory. Note that Figure 7
only shows a simpliﬁed version of the system pipeline. For
each iteration, multiple mini-batches can be sampled, loaded,
transferred, and executed. It is also worth noting that our
system pipeline efﬁciently utilizes the various resources on
the heterogeneous architecture.C. Hardware Kernel Design
GNN training incurs a massive amount of memory access,
and the expensive memory access overhead limits the training
throughput. Thus, we design dedicated hardware kernels and
datapath to reduce external memory access for the GNN
Propagation stage as shown in Figure 6. GNN propagation
consists of an aggregation stage and an update stage (Section
II-A). For the update stage, we adopt a systolic-array-based
design to perform Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP); for the
aggregation stage, we adopt a scatter-gather design [17], [30]
to process multiple edges in parallel. Figure 6 shows an
example of a kernel with four sets of scatter-gather processing
elements (PEs) which can process four edges in parallel. To
maximize data reuse, HyScale-GNN ﬁrst sorts the edges within
a mini-batch by their source vertex so that edges with the same
source vertex are executed in a back-to-back manner. When a
vertex feature is fetched from the external memory, the Feature
Duplicator broadcasts the fetched feature to all the scatter-PEs
(S-PEs). The feature is then stored in the local memory of the
S-PEs and reused Dout(v)times where Dout(v)is the out-
degree of vertex v. For example, in Figure 6, four edges are
processed. Assume Dout(v0)is 3, then the loaded feature X0
can be reused three times at most. Since the edges are sorted by
source vertex, the ﬁrst three edges have the same source vertex
v0, andX0is reused three times. The fourth S-PE remains
idle untilX1is read from memory. This design maximizes
the input data reuse since each vertex feature only needs to
be read once from memory, and the input memory trafﬁc
is reduced from O(E1)toO(V0)(notations are deﬁned in
Table I). To reduce memory footprint, we design a customized
datapath, which avoids writing the intermediate results back
to the memory during GNN Propagation. As shown in Figure
6, the output of the aggregate kernel is directly sent to the
update kernel, and the output of the update kernel is sent to
the aggregate kernel for feature aggregation in the next layer.
Therefore, only the ﬁnal output is written back to the memory.
V. P ERFORMANCE MODEL
To initialize the task mapping on a heterogeneous archi-
tecture, we propose a performance model to predict the per-
formance of HyScale-GNN. First, we deﬁne the GNN trainingthroughput as million of traversed edges per second (MTEPS):
Throughput =Pn
i=0PL
l=1jEl
ij
Texecution(5)
We usento denote the number of GNN Trainers running
on the system. Each Trainer executes one mini-batch in each
iteration. Therefore, the numerator denotes the total number
of edges traversed by all the Trainers in one iteration, and
the denominator denotes the execution time of one training
iteration (Section II-B). There are four pipeline stages in
our system (Section III-A): Sampling, Feature Loading, Data
Transfer, and GNN Propagation; thus, Texecution is modeled as:
Texecution = max(Tsamp;Tload;Ttrans;Tprop) (6)
Instead of formulating an equation, we estimate Tsamp by
running the sampling algorithm under different numbers of
threads and different mini-batch sizes, and deriving their
execution time during design phase. This is because the
computation pattern varies in different sampling algorithms
[2], [29], so it is not feasible to model the sampling time
Tsamp of various algorithms with a simple equation.
TloadandTtrancan be modeled as:
Tload=Pn
i=0jV0jf0Sfeat
BW DDR(7)
Ttrans=jV0jf0Sfeat
BW PCIe(8)
The numerator in Equation 7 denotes the size of vertex
features that need to be loaded from the CPU memory, and
the numerator in Equation 8 denotes the size of vertex features
that need to be transferred to a single accelerator. Sfeatdenotes
the data size, which is 4 bytes for a single-precision ﬂoating-
point. ForTload, the data is loaded from the CPU memory,
so the denominator is the CPU memory bandwidth; for Ttran,
the denominator is the PCIe bandwidth. We use “bandwidth”
to denote the effective bandwidth of performing burst data
transactions as opposed to the peak bandwidth.
Multiple GNN Trainers run in parallel, and Ttraincan be
modeled as:
Tprop= max
i2n(TTrainer, i) +Tsync (9)
The execution time of a single Trainer can be modeled as:
TTrainer =tforward prop+tbackward prop=
LX
l=1(tl
aggregate;tl
update)+
t1
update +LX
l=2(tl
aggregate;tl
update)(10)
which is the total time to perform forward propagation and
backward propagation. The operator depends on the kernel
design. If feature aggregation and feature update are pipelined
(e.g., Trainer on FPGA), then is the max operator; if theyare not pipelined (e.g., Trainer on CPU), then is theP
operator.tl
aggregate andtl
update can be modeled as:
tl
aggregate =jEl 1jflSfeat
BW DDR(11)
tl
update =jVljflfl+1
Nfreq:(12)
The aggregation time tl
aggregate is modeled as the trafﬁc size
of fetching the feature vector of the source vertices, divided
by the memory bandwidth. The memory bandwidth depends
on where the Trainer is located: for the CPU Trainer, it
fetches data from the CPU memory; for Accelerator Trainer,
it fetches data from the device memory. Since jEljedges are
processed during the l-th layer feature aggregation, the trafﬁc
size can be modeled as jEl 1jflSfeat. The update time
tl
update is modeled as the number of multiply-and-add (MAC)
operations that are performed during feature update, divided
by the computing power of the GNN Trainer. We model the
computing power as Nfreq: whereNis the number of
computation parallelism (e.g., MAC units) in each trainer, and
freq: is the operating frequency. Tsync can be model as:
Tsync=PL
l=1fl 1flSfeat
BW PCIe2 (13)
The numerator is the model size (i.e., total size of all of
the weight matrices). The factor of 2 comes from the all-
reduce operation where the model is ﬁrst gathered, averaged,
and then scattered back to each Trainer; thus, the data is
transferred through the PCIe twice. The denominator is the
PCIe bandwidth.
VI. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
1) Environment: We conduct our experiments on a dual-
socket server, which consists of two AMD EPYC 7763 CPUs.
We evaluate HyScale-GNN using two heterogeneous setups:
a CPU-GPU heterogeneous architecture, and a CPU-FPGA
heterogeneous architecture. For the CPU-GPU heterogeneous
architecture, the dual-socket server is connected to four Nvidia
A5000 GPUs; for the CPU-FPGA heterogeneous architecture,
the dual-socket server is connected to four Xilinx U250
FPGAs. We list the detailed speciﬁcation of the CPU, GPU,
and FPGA in Table II. We implement the multi-GPU baseline,
and CPU-GPU design using Python v3.8, PyTorch v1.11,
CUDA v11.3, and PyTorch-Geometric v2.0.3. We develop our
FPGA kernels using Xilinx Vitis HLS v2021.2 [31].
TABLE II
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE PLATFORMS
PlatformsCPU
AMD EPYC 7763GPU
Nvidia RTX A5000FPGA
Xilinx Alveo U250
Technology TSMC 7 nm+ Samsung 8 nm TSMC 16 nm
Frequency 2.45 GHz 2000 MHz 300 MHz
Peak Performance 3.6 TFLOPS 27.8 TFLOPS 0.6 TFLOPS
On-chip Memory 256 MB L3 cache 6 MB L2 Cache 54 MB
Memory Bandwidth 205 GB/s 768 GB/s 77 GB/sTABLE III
STATISTICS OF THE DATASETS AND GNN- LAYER DIMENSIONS
Dataset #Vertices #Edges f0f1f2
ogbn-products 2,449,029 61,859,140 100 256 47
ogbn-papers100M 111,059,956 1,615,685,872 128 256 172
MAG240M (homo) 121,751,666 1,297,748,926 756 256 153
TABLE IV
HARDWARE PARAMETERS AND RESOURCE UTILIZATION
Parallelism ( n,m) LUTs DSPs URAM BRAM
(8, 2048) 72% 90% 48% 40%
2) GNN Models and Datasets: We choose two widely used
GNN models: GCN [23], and GraphSAGE [2] to evaluate our
system. We adopt a commonly used model setup: a two-layer
model with a hidden feature size of 256. We choose a medium-
scale dataset, and two large-scale datasets with over billion
edges for evaluation: ogbn-products, ogbn-papers100M [22],
and MAG-240M (homo) [7]. The ogbn-products dataset is a
medium-scale graph with 60 million edges; we include this
dataset to compare our performance with previous works. The
MAG-240M (homo) is the homogeneous version of the MAG-
240M dataset, which only preserves one type of vertex and one
type of edge in the original heterogeneous graph. Note that
MAG-240M (homo) still contains 1.3 billion edges, making
it a large-scale graph. Details of the datasets and the GNN-
layer dimensions are shown in Table III. We use the Neighbor
Sampler [2] to produce mini-batches; we set the mini-batch
size as 1024, and the neighbor sampling size of each layer is
25 and 10.
B. System Implementation
We show how the Processor-Accelerator Training Protocol
is implemented using the libraries in the programming layer
(Section III-C) in Listing 1; while we use GPU and FPGA as
examples, the processor-accelerator interaction is similar if the
protocol is adapted to other AI-accelerators. We implement the
Runtime system using Pthreads. We launch multiple threads
to exchange data, handshake, or launch accelerator kernels.
Data transfer and kernel launching can be realized using APIs
provided by the programming libraries such as CUDA and
OpenCL. To implement the handshake, we utilize the condition
wait function in Pthreads. For example, the Synchronizer
needs to wait for all the Trainers to complete GNN propagation
before averaging the gradients. Each Trainer increments the
“DONE” variable upon producing the gradients and then
prompts the synchronizer. When “DONE” equals the number
of Trainers, the Synchronizer proceeds to average the gathered
gradients.
We list the hardware parameters and resource utilization
of the FPGA design in Table IV. We use nandmto
denote the parallelism of the aggregate kernel and update
kernel, respectively. In particular, nindicates the number of1//send data to the accelerator
2q.enqueueMigrateMemObjects(input, 0) //FPGA
3
4cudaMemcpy(gpu_input, input, data_size,
cudaMemcpyHostToDevice); //GPU
5
6//read data from the accelerator
7q.enqueueMigrateMemObjects(result,
CL_MIGRATE_MEM_OBJECT_HOST)); //FPGA
8
9cudaMemcpy(result, gpu_result, res_size,
cudaMemcpyDeviceToHost); //GPU
10
11//launch an accelerator kernel
12q.enqueueTask(gnn_krnl, NULL, &event)); //FPGA
13
14gnn_krnl<<<dimGrid, dimBlock>>>(input); //GPU
15
16//get execution time on the accelerator
17start = getProfilingInfo(PROFILING_COMMAND_START);
18end = getProfilingInfo(PROFILING_COMMAND_END);
19time = end - start;
20
21//handshake
22Synchronizer_thread:
23 pthread_mutex_lock(&mutex);
24 while (DONE != n) //n is the number of Trainers
25 pthread_cond_wait(&cond, &mutex);
26 gather_data();
27 average_gradients();
28 pthread_mutex_unlock(&mutex);
29
30Trainer_threads:
31 GNN_training(); //CPU function, or launch an
accelerator kernel
32 pthread_mutex_lock(&mutex);
33 DONE++
34 pthread_cond_signal(&cond);
35 pthread_mutex_unlock(&mutex);
Listing 1. System implementation
scatter-gather PEs. mindicates the number of multiply-and-
accumulate units in the systolic-array-based kernel design.
Figure 6 shows an example for n= 4 andm= 16 .
C. Evaluation of Performance Model
We evaluate our performance model by comparing the pre-
dicted epoch time with the actual experimental result. Figure 8
shows the epoch time comparison on the MAG240M (homo)
dataset under various number of FPGAs. The prediction error
ranges from 5% to 14% on average. The error comes from
extra latency that is not formulated in our model. First,
there is an initial overhead when launching the kernel on an
accelerator. Second, the overhead of pipeline ﬂushing [32] is
not included in the model. These two overheads are hard to
predict as they depend on various factors such as the target
accelerator and the version of the compiler.
D. Scalability
We evaluate the scalability of HyScale-GNN using our
performance model (Section V). We show the scalability of
HyScale-GNN in Figure 9. Using the CPU-FPGA platform as
an example, HyScale-GNN demonstrates good scalability to05101520253035
00.511.522.533.544.5Number of FPGAs圖表標題
ActualPredicted0510152025
0246Epoch Time (sec)GCN
05101520253035
0246GraphSAGEFig. 8. Predicted performance vs. actual performance on two GNN models
02468101214
GCNGraphSAGEGCNGraphSAGEGCNGraphSAGENormalized Speedup124816Number of Acceleratorsogbn-productsogbn-papers100MMAG240M (homo)
Fig. 9. Scalability of our hybrid training system
16 FPGAs. The limiting factor of scalability is the CPU mem-
ory bandwidth. As we use more accelerators, more mini-batch
feature matrices need to be loaded from the CPU memory. We
observe that the CPU memory starts to saturate when more
than 12 accelerators are used on the heterogeneous platform.
The ﬁrst set of experiments which runs a GCN model on the
ogbn-products dataset shows lower scalability than other sets
of experiments. This is because the ﬁrst set of experiments is
bottlenecked by the data transfer time (i.e., PCIe bandwidth),
which limits the amount of workload that can be assigned to
the accelerators and thus limits the achievable speedup.
E. Overall Performance
1) Performance evaluation: We evaluate the performance
of HyScale-GNN using a CPU-GPU heterogeneous archi-
tecture, and a CPU-FPGA heterogeneous architecture. We
compare the epoch time of HyScale-GNN with a state-of-the-
art multi-GPU GNN training implementation using PyTorch-
Geometric (PyG) [18]. The PyG baseline also runs on the
CPU-GPU heterogeneous architecture; however, it does not
utilize the CPU to perform hybrid training, so we regard it as
a multi-GPU baseline. We show the result in Figure 10. By
applying various optimizations and performing hybrid CPU-
GPU training, HyScale-GNN achieves up to 2:08speedup
compared with the multi-GPU baseline. We discuss the effec-
tiveness of each optimization in Section VI-F. On the CPU-
FPGA heterogeneous architecture, HyScale-GNN achieves up
to12:6speedup compared with the multi-GPU baseline, and
050GCNGraphSAGE圖表標題Multi-GPUCPU+GPUCPU+FPGA1x1x1.79x1.87x8.87x9.98x0123456
GCNGraphSAGEEpoch Time (sec)ogbn-products1x1x2.08x2.01x12.6x10.5x0510152025
GCNGraphSAGEogbn-papers100M1x1x1.45x1.48x11.5x9.46x020406080100
GCNGraphSAGEMAG240M (homo)Fig. 10. Cross platform comparison
TABLE V
PLATFORM SETUP OF STATE -OF-THE-ART
number of
compute node(s)Setup of each node Sample sizeHidden
dim.
PaGraph [20] 12 Xeon Platinum 8163
8 Nvidia V100(25, 10) 256
P3[19] 41 Xeon E5-2690
4 Nvidia P100 (2016)(25, 10) 32
DistDGLv2 [35] 896 vCPU
8 Nvidia T4(15, 10, 5) 256
This Work 12 EPYC 7763
4 Xilinx U250- -
5 6speedup compared with the CPU-GPU heterogeneous
architecture. This is because FPGAs feature customizable dat-
apath and memory organization, which allows the Accelerator
Trainer to minimize external memory access during GNN
training. In particular, all the intermediate results are stored
on-chip using the abundant on-chip memory of FPGA, and
only the ﬁnal result is written back to the memory. In contrast,
GPUs suffer from frequent memory access throughout the
training since traditional cache policies fail to capture the data
access pattern in GNN training [33].
2) Comparison with State-of-the-art: Many works [9],
[17]–[21], [34], [35] have been proposed to accelerate GNN
training. However, only a few of the works are capable of
training GNN models on large-scale graphs. We choose three
representative GNN training systems for comparison, namely
PaGraph [20], P3[19], and DistDGLv2 [35]. We list the
platform setup of each work in Table V. We use SAGE to
indicate the GraphSAGE [2] model. Among the three large-
scale GNN training systems, PaGraph is the only work that
runs on a single node; P3and DistDGLv2 run on a distributed
platform with four nodes and eight nodes, respectively.
We compare the epoch time of our work, which runs on
a single node using only 4 FPGAs, with the aforementioned
training systems. For each set of experiments, we set the same
model conﬁguration (sample size, hidden dimension) as the
work we are comparing with. As shown in Table VI, HyScale-
GNN achieves up to 6:9and5:27speedup compared with
PaGraph and P3, respectively. To provide a fair comparison,
we normalize the epoch time w.r.t. platform peak performance;
this metric shows the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the system
design itself, rather than relying on powerful hardware toTABLE VI
EPOCH TIME (SEC) COMPARISON WITH STATE -OF-THE-ART
ogbn-products ogbn-papers100M Geo. mean
speedup GCN SAGE GCN SAGE
PaGraph 1.18 0.25 4.00 1.18 1x
This Work 0.27 0.49 0.58 1.91 1.76x
P31.11 1.23 2.61 3.11 1x
This Work 0.27 0.28 0.57 0.59 4.57x
DistDGL v2 - 0.30 - 4.16 1x
This Work - 1.69 - 3.67 0.45x
deliver high performance. As shown in Table VII, HyScale-
GNN achieves 21-71speedup compared with state-of-
the-art systems after normalization. HyScale-GNN achieves
speedup for several reasons: (1) resource utilization: HyScale-
GNN utilizes both the processors and the accelerators to
train GNN models collaboratively. In particular, HyScale-GNN
utilizes both the CPU cores and the accelerators to compute;
and utilizes both the CPU memory and device memory to read
data concurrently. Our DRM engine (Section IV-A) further
ensures the tasks are efﬁciently mapped onto our platform. On
the other hand, PaGraph and P3do not take advantage of the
processors on the platform. (2) communication overhead: as
mentioned in Section VI-E1, FPGA-based solutions can efﬁ-
ciently reduce the external memory access overhead compared
with GPU-based solutions. In addition, PaGraph only caches a
portion of the vertex features in the device memory, and needs
to fetch data from the CPU memory if it encounters a cache
miss; thus, the PCIe communication overhead becomes large
when training on large-scale graphs like ogbn-papers100M
since cache miss occurs frequently. P3incurs inter-node data
communication since the graph is partitioned and distributed
on each node, which causes extra communication overhead
compared with HyScale-GNN. Compared with DistDGLv2,
which runs on eight nodes with a total of 64 GPUs, HyScale-
GNN is able to achieve 0:45of its performance using only
4 FPGAs on a single node machine. DistDGLv2 utilizes both
the processor and the accelerator to train GNN models collab-
oratively. However, DistDGLv2 adopts a static task mapping,
which can be inefﬁcient. In addition, DistDGLv2 partitions the
input graph and distributes the partitions to each node, which
incurs inter-node communication overhead like P3.
F . Ablation Study
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of the opti-
mizations applied in HyScale-GNN. We show the evaluation
on a CPU-FPGA heterogeneous architecture in Figure 11;
evaluation on the CPU-GPU heterogeneous architecture also
shows similar results. We start from a baseline design, which
adopts a traditional task mapping that ofﬂoads most of the
tasks (except tasks like sampling, synchronization, etc.) to the
FPGA. Then, we apply hybrid CPU-FPGA training with a
static task mapping; this leads to up to 1:13speedup. The
system achieves up to 1:33speedup after applying the DRMTABLE VII
NORMALIZED EPOCH TIME(SECTFLOPS) C OMPARISON WITH
STATE -OF-THE-ART
ogbn-products ogbn-papers100M Geo. mean
speedup GCN SAGE GCN SAGE
PaGraph 135.1 28.63 458.0 135.1 1x
This Work 2.59 4.70 5.55 18.34 21x
P3165.1 183.0 388.4 462.8 1x
This Work 2.59 2.69 5.47 5.66 71x
DistDGL v2 - 163.2 - 2263 1x
This Work - 16.20 - 35.23 25x
00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82
GCNGraphSAGEGCNGraphSAGEGCNGraphSAGENormalized SPeedupBaselineHybrid (Static)Hybrid+DRMHyrbird+DRM+TFPogbn-productsogbn-papers100MMAG240M (homo)
Fig. 11. Impact of optimizations
optimization (Section IV-A). With the TFP (Section IV-B)
optimization applied, HyScale-GNN achieves up to 1:79
speedup. This is because the data loading stage is often a
bottleneck in GNN training; if the training is dominated by
the GNN propagation stage (e.g., GraphSAGE model on the
ogbn-papers100M in Figure 11), then the TFP optimization
does not provide speedup.
VII. R ELATED WORK
Several works have been proposed [9], [17], [34] to accel-
erate GNN training on a single node. However, these works
focus on using a single accelerator to perform GNN training
and do not support training with multiple accelerators. In
addition, works like GraphACT [9] and HP-GNN [17] stores
the input graph in the device memory, and thus cannot support
large-scale graphs [7] that exceed the device memory size.
Recently, several works [19], [21], [36] have been proposed
to train GNN on a multi-node platform. However, these works
require graph partitioning, which leads to issues like workload
imbalance, and high inter-node communication overhead. In
addition, graph partitioning may affect the convergence rate
and model accuracy [21]. In this work, we show that it is
feasible to train large-scale GNNs on a single node and achieve
high training throughput.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed HyScale-GNN, a hybrid training
system that is optimized for training GNN models on large-
scale graphs. We proposed several optimizations to reduce thecommunication overhead and perform efﬁcient task mapping.
Our system achieved up to 12:6speedup compared with a
multi-GPU baseline. In addition, using only four FPGAs on a
single node, HyScale-GNN is able to achieve 1:76 4:57
speedup compared with state-of-the-art training systems that
employ 8 to 16 GPUs.
We also observed some limitations of HyScale-GNN. First,
HyScale-GNN did not provide an effective solution if the
performance is bottlenecked by the Data Transfer stage (i.e.,
limited by PCIe bandwidth). In this case, the DRM engine
would reduce the workload assigned to the accelerator, which
limits the achievable speedup and scalability of the system.
Second, HyScale-GNN could not be directly extended to a
distributed platform with multiple nodes. If an input graph is
partitioned and distributed to each node like in DistDGL [21],
inter-node communication and synchronization are needed.
However, our protocol deﬁnes how the processor and the
accelerator should interact on a single node. It does not
support inter-node communication. In the future, we plan to
exploit techniques like data quantization to relieve the stress
on the PCIe bandwidth, and deﬁne a more general protocol
for training GNN models on distributed and heterogeneous
architectures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the U.S. National Science
Foundation (NSF) under grants SaTC-2104264 and OAC-
2209563, and the DEVCOM Army Research Lab (ARL) under
grant W911NF2220159.
REFERENCES
[1] C.-I. Yang and Y .-P. Li, “Explainable uncertainty quantiﬁcations for deep
learning-based molecular property prediction,” Journal of Cheminfor-
matics , 2023.
[2] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Proceedings of the 31st International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017.
[3] R. Ying, R. He, K. Chen, P. Eksombatchai, W. L. Hamilton, and
J. Leskovec, “Graph convolutional neural networks for web-scale rec-
ommender systems,” in Proceedings of the 24th ACM International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , 2018.
[4] R. Zhu, K. Zhao, H. Yang, W. Lin, C. Zhou, B. Ai, Y . Li, and
J. Zhou, “Aligraph: a comprehensive graph neural network platform,”
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 2019.
[5] D. S. Lopera, L. Servadei, G. N. Kiprit, S. Hazra, R. Wille, and W. Ecker,
“A survey of graph neural networks for electronic design automation,”
inWorkshop on Machine Learning for CAD (MLCAD) . IEEE, 2021.
[6] N. Wu, H. Yang, Y . Xie, P. Li, and C. Hao, “High-level synthesis perfor-
mance prediction using gnns: Benchmarking, modeling, and advancing,”
inProceedings of the Design Automation Conference , 2022.
[7] W. Hu, M. Fey, H. Ren, M. Nakata, Y . Dong, and J. Leskovec, “Ogb-lsc:
A large-scale challenge for machine learning on graphs,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.09430 , 2021.
[8] Y .-C. Lin, B. Zhang, and V . Prasanna, “Accelerating gnn training on
cpu+multi-fpga heterogeneous platform,” in High Performance Comput-
ing. Springer International Publishing, 2022.
[9] H. Zeng and V . Prasanna, “Graphact: Accelerating gcn training on cpu-
fpga heterogeneous platforms,” in Proceedings of the 2020 ACM/SIGDA
International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays , 2020.
[10] C. Zhang et al. , “H-gcn: A graph convolutional network accelerator
on versal acap architecture.” International Conference on Field-
Programmable Logic and Applications, 2022.
[11] Y . C. Lin, B. Zhang, and V . Prasanna, “Gcn inference acceleration
using high-level synthesis,” in 2021 IEEE High Performance Extreme
Computing Conference (HPEC) , 2021.[12] “Amazon ec2 f1 [online],” https://aws.amazon.com/tw/ec2/
instance-types/f1/, accessed: 2022-06-23.
[13] “Azure np-series [online],” https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/
virtual-machines/np-series, accessed: 2022-06-23.
[14] D. Abts et al. , “A software-deﬁned tensor streaming multiprocessor
for large-scale machine learning,” ser. International Symposium on
Computer Architecture, 2022.
[15] N. P. Jouppi et al. , “In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor
processing unit,” in Proceedings of the 44th Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture , 2017.
[16] S. Rivas-Gomez et al. , “Exploring the vision processing unit as co-
processor for inference,” in International Parallel and Distributed Pro-
cessing Symposium Workshops , 2018.
[17] Y .-C. Lin, B. Zhang, and V . Prasanna, “Hp-gnn: Generating high
throughput gnn training implementation on cpu-fpga heterogeneous
platform,” in International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate
Arrays , 2022.
[18] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, “Fast graph representation learning with
PyTorch Geometric,” in ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning
on Graphs and Manifolds , 2019.
[19] S. Gandhi and A. P. Iyer, “P3: Distributed deep graph learning at
scale,” in 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 21) , 2021.
[20] Z. Lin, C. Li, Y . Miao, Y . Liu, and Y . Xu, “Pagraph: Scaling gnn training
on large graphs via computation-aware caching,” in Proceedings of the
11th ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing , 2020.
[21] D. Zheng et al. , “Distdgl: distributed graph neural network training for
billion-scale graphs,” in 2020 IEEE/ACM 10th Workshop on Irregular
Applications: Architectures and Algorithms (IA3) , 2020.
[22] W. Hu, M. Fey, M. Zitnik, Y . Dong, H. Ren, B. Liu, M. Catasta, and
J. Leskovec, “Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on
graphs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00687 , 2020.
[23] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph
convolutional networks,” in International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations , 2017.
[24] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E.
Dahl, “Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” CoRR , vol.
abs/1704.01212, 2017.
[25] H. Zhang et al. , “Understanding GNN computational graph: A coor-
dinated computation, io, and memory perspective,” in Proceedings of
Machine Learning and Systems , 2022.
[26] J. Chen, R. Monga, S. Bengio, and R. Jozefowicz, “Revisiting distributed
synchronous sgd,” in International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations Workshop , 2016.
[27] “Synchronous sgd [online],” https://caffe2.ai/docs/SynchronousSGD.
html, accessed: 2022-07-04.
[28] Intel, “An introduction to the intel® quickpath interconnect [white
paper],” 2009.
[29] H. Zeng, H. Zhou, A. Srivastava, R. Kannan, and V . Prasanna, “Graph-
SAINT: Graph sampling based inductive learning method,” in Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2020.
[30] M. Yan et al. , “Hygcn: A gcn accelerator with hybrid architecture,”
inIEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer
Architecture , 2020.
[31] V . Kathail, “Xilinx vitis uniﬁed software platform,” in Proceedings of
the 2020 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field-Programmable
Gate Arrays , 2020, pp. 173–174.
[32] H. Zhou et al. , “Model-architecture co-design for high performance tem-
poral gnn inference on fpga,” in International Parallel and Distributed
Processing Symposium , 2022.
[33] K. Huang, J. Zhai, Z. Zheng, Y . Yi, and X. Shen, “Understanding
and bridging the gaps in current gnn performance optimizations,” in
26th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel
Programming , ser. PPoPP ’21, 2021.
[34] X. Chen et al. , “Rubik: A hierarchical architecture for efﬁcient graph
neural network training,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design
of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 2021.
[35] D. Zheng et al. , “Distributed hybrid cpu and gpu training for graph neu-
ral networks on billion-scale heterogeneous graphs,” in ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 2022.
[36] Z. Cai et al. , “Dgcl: An efﬁcient communication library for distributed
gnn training,” in Proceedings of the Sixteenth European Conference on
Computer Systems , ser. EuroSys ’21, 2021.