HCI Papers Cite HCI Papers, Increasingly So
Xiang ‘Anthony’ Chen
UCLA HCI Research
xac@ucla.edu
ABSTRACT
To measure how HCI papers are cited across disciplinary bound-
aries, we collected a citation dataset of CHI, UIST, and CSCW papers
published between 2010 and 2020. Our analysis indicates that HCI
papers have been more and more likely to be cited by HCI papers
rather than by non-HCI papers.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing ;
KEYWORDS
HCI, Citation Metrics, Discipline, Impact
ACM Reference Format:
Xiang ‘Anthony’ Chen. 2024. HCI Papers Cite HCI Papers, Increasingly So.
InExtended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA ’24), May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3644070
1 INTRODUCTION
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) is often considered as one of
the most interdisciplinary research fields. Thus we can expect that
HCI papers should draw citation interests from other disciplines.
Unfortunately, conventional citation metrics, such as h-index or i-
10-index, only consider the number of citations but not the sources
of citations. To address this limit, prior work measured HCI’s impact
on the industry by analyzing patents’ citations of HCI papers [ 1].
In terms of how HCI impacts other academic fields, Wang et al.
analyzed citation diversity by breaking down what fields cite and
are cited by accesibility research [ 7]. While similar, our work differs
from [ 7] in that we focus on surfacing the trend of HCI research
drawing citations from non-HCI fields with comprehensive, multi-
fold analyses.
Our goal is to measure the proportion of HCI papers’ citations
coming from outside of HCI venues. We first compiled a list of
core HCI venues to define which fields are considered “non-HCI”:
although such a binary distinction oversimplifies the relationships
amongst disciplines, it serves as a reasonable starting point to ana-
lyze how one field’s citation influence reaches beyond its “comfort
zone”. We then collected citations data of papers from CHI, UIST,
and CSCW (hereafter referred to as HCI papers ) published be-
tween 2010 and 20201. Our analysis found that—
1Our dataset and source code can be found at https://github.com/hotnAny/x-index
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
©2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0331-7/24/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3644070•More recently-published HCI papers were cited less outside
of the core HCI venues;
•Amongst all HCI papers cited in a given year, the earlier-
published papers were cited more outside of the core HCI
venues;
•In the more recent years, HCI papers seem less likely to be
cited by papers outside of the core HCI venues.
2 DATASET
2.1 Core HCI Venues
We first need to define what is considered an HCI paper so that we
can know which are HCI vs.non-HCI citations. To the best of our
knowledge, there is no official “catalog” of all venues that publish
HCI papers. Thus we refer to two sources to compile a list of core
HCI venues: the SIGCHI-(co)sponsored conferences [ 5] and Google
Scholar’s top publications under the “Engineering & Computer
Science - Human Computer Interaction” category [4].
Table 1 shows the compiled core HCI venues For each venue, we
manually extract a subset of words from its official name to serve
as a unique identifier ( e.g., “Engineering Interactive Computing
Systems” for EICS), which we later use in keyword-matching to
determine whether a citation is from one of these core venues.
Admittedly, what is not in this list is not necessarily “non-HCI”;
it is just not included by the two sources we chose. Nonetheless,
we argue that this list approximates the “boundary” between HCI
and the non-HCI world. The more we see citations of an HCI paper
coming outside of this list, the more likely this HCI paper influences
research beyond HCI. We hereafter refer to papers published outside
of this list as non-HCI papers .
2.2 Citations of CHI, UIST, and CSCW Papers
Next, we collected DOI data of CHI, UIST and CSCW papers be-
tween 2010 to 20202from the “What The HCI” [ 6] website main-
tained by Kashyap Todi. We chose CHI, UIST and CSCW because
they are three of the most well-recognized HCI venues. It is certainly
possible to acquire DOI data of other HCI venues ( e.g., TOCHI) from
other sources ( e.g., ACM Digital Library).
Then, we port the DOI data into the Citation Chaser app [ 2]
developed by Neal Haddaway, which uses the Lens.org API [ 3] to
retrieve citations of a paper based on its DOI. All the citation data
was in the .ris format and collected in January 2023.
3 ANALYSES & FINDINGS
Going through each citation entry in our dataset, for a paper that
cites an HCI paper, we parse the name of that paper’s publising
venue using simple keyword-matching to determine whether that
paper was published in one of the core HCI venues.
2Except for CSCW 2020 papers, which the website did not provide.CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Xiang ‘Anthony’ Chen
ASSETS ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility
AutomotiveUI International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications
AVI International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces
C&C Creativity and Cognition
CHI ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
CHI PLAY The Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play
CI Collective Intelligence
COMPASS ACM SIGCAS/SIGCHI Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies
CSCW Computer Supported Cooperative Work
DIS Designing Interactive Systems
EICS ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering Interactive Computing Systems
ETRA Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications
GI Graphics Interface
GROUP ACM International Conference on Supporting Group Work
HRI ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction
ICMI ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction
IDC Interaction Design and Children
IJHCI International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction
IJHCS International Journal of Human-Computer Studies
IMWUT Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies
IMX ACM International Conference on Interactive Media Experiences
INTERACT Human-Computer Interaction – INTERACT
ISS Interactive Surfaces and Spaces
ISWC International Symposium on Wearable Computers
IUI International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces
MobileHCI International Conference on Mobile Human-Computer Interaction
NA Behaviour and Information Technology
NA International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies
NA Universal Access in the Information Society
NordiCHI Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction
OzCHI Australian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction
RecSys ACM Conference on Recommender Systems
SMC Transactions on Human-Machine Systems
SUI International Conference on Spatial User Interaction
TAC Transactions on Affective Computing
TACCESS Transactions on Accessible Computing
TEI International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction
TOCHI Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction
Ubicomp ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing
UIST ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology
UMAP ACM Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization
VR Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces
VRST ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology
Table 1: A list of core HCI venues.HCI Papers Cite HCI Papers, Increasingly So CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Figure 1: When counting all citations since publicaitons, more recently-published HCI papers were cited less outside of the
core HCI venues.
Figure 2: When counting only citations that occurred in the first five years after publicaitons, still more recently-published
HCI papers were cited less outside of the core HCI venues.
3.1 More recently-published HCI papers were
cited less outside of the core HCI venues
We analyzed each year’s published HCI papers ( e.g., 11 years of UIST
papers published between 2010 and 2020), as shown in Figure 1.
Each point in Figure 1 is the non-HCI-over-HCI ratio based on
citations of that year’s published HCI papers up to when the data
was collected (January 2023). We can see that all three HCI venues’
papers have an decreasing ratio of getting cited by non-HCI paeprs
over the years.
One might question that, since citation count is also a function
of time, the more recently-published HCI papers might be disad-
vantaged simply because they have not existed long enough toattract citations. To resolve this doubt, we further consider cita-
tions that occurred only within the first five years after an HCI
paper was published. For example, for CHI 2015 papers, we only
consider citations of them that occurred between 2016 and 2020—in
this way, CHI 2010 papers have no time advantage over CHI 2015
papers. This constraint narrows the overall analysis down to only
HCI papers published from 2010 to 2017 because, later than that,
our data (collected in January 2023) has less than five years of cita-
tion information. As shown in Figure 2, results indicate that, even
accounting for how long an HCI paper has been around, the overall
trend remains similar over the years.CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Xiang ‘Anthony’ Chen
Figure 3: Amongst all HCI papers cited in a given year, the earlier-published papers were cited more outside of the core HCI
venues.HCI Papers Cite HCI Papers, Increasingly So CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Figure 4: In the more recent years, HCI papers seem less likely to be cited by papers outside of our core HCI venue list.
3.2 Amongst all HCI papers cited in a given
year, the earlier-published papers were cited
more outside of the core HCI venues
To expand our analysis along the time dimension, we plot each
year’s published HCI papers’ citations by non-HCI venues over the
subsequent years, as shown in Figure 3.
Note that the 𝑥-axis in Figure 3 has changed: it is now citation
year, not published year. For example, when some papers in 2019
cited a CSCW 2013 paper, the citation year is 2019 whereas 2013
is the publication year. The results show that, for most years’ HCI
papers, the ratio of non-HCI citations tends to flatten or slightly
decrease over time, except for a few ‘local’ cases, e.g., UIST 2011
had an increasing trend until 2014.
Further, amongst HCI papers cited in a given citation year, the
earlier papers tend to have attracted more non-HCI citations than
the later ones. Consider the citation year 2020. For CHI, the top-3
in 2020 are papers published in 2010, 2011, and 2015 whereas the
bottom-3 are 2019, 2018, and 2017; For UIST, the top-3 in 2020 are
papers published in 2011, 2010, and 2013 whereas the bottom-3
are 2019, 2020, and 2012; For CSCW, the top-3 in 2020 are papers
published in 2012, 2010, and 2014 whereas the bottom-3 are 2019,
2018, and 2016.
3.3 In the more recent years, HCI papers seem
less likely to be cited by papers outside of
the core HCI venues
The previous analysis suggests that we can aggregate each year’s
citations of HCI papers so that we can see how the non-HCI papers’
interest in citing HCI papers changed over the years. For each
year, we consider that year’s citations of HCI papers published
in previous five years. Since we do not have citation information
before 2010, our analysis can only begin from 2015 (A 2014 paper
might cite a CHI 2009 paper but we do not have CHI 2009’s citation
information in our dataset). Figure 4 shows the results, which alsoexhibit a decreasing pattern over the years. In other words, in the
more recent years, HCI papers seem less likely to be cited by papers
outside of our core HCI venue list.
4 DISCUSSIONS
4.1 Limitations of the Analyses
Our classification of non-HCI papers is “impure” because it is based
on a non-exhaustive list of core HCI venues. Thus some citations
we count as non-HCI might actually have come from HCI venues
not included in our list. A common example of this issue is various
HCI workshops over the years. As a consequence, the resultant
non-HCI citations ratio in our analyses is actually inflated—the real
numbers should be lower if we could remove all the “noisy” HCI
venues from the currently-considered non-HCI citations.
Second, we rely on Lens.org API [ 3] that does not seem to re-
trieve all citations exhaustively. We do not believe such a limitation
invalidates our analyses unless this API acts biasedly, i.e., intention-
ally misses only HCI citations. Verifying whether such biases exist
would require “groundtruth” citation retrievals, which was unavail-
able at the time of this work. To overcome this limitation, future
work can union multiple tools and sources ( e.g., Google Scholar,
Semantic Scholar, and Microsoft Academic) to approximate a full
coverage of citations.
Third, the ratio of citations by non-HCI venues is just a number
and it would be great to perform more detailed analyses, such
as breaking down the sources that cite CHI papers. Future work
can employ a more intelligent method than our simple keyword-
matching approach to dissect the disciplinarity of citation sources
(e.g.,𝑋%HCI, 𝑌%Computer Vision, and 𝑍%Psychology).
4.2 Interpreting the Results
Does our analyses mean that HCI has a decreasing impact across
the disciplinary boundary? It seems so, at least within the academicCHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Xiang ‘Anthony’ Chen
world. Our analyses show that relatively fewer and fewer papers
outside of the core HCI venues are citing HCI papers.
One counter-argument against the above could be that HCI
venues themselves might have become more and more interdis-
ciplinary. Thus citations coming from within the more recent HCI
venues can also indicate impact across what used to be the disci-
plinary boundary.
It is also possible that publications in HCI venues are growing
much faster than those in non-HCI venues. In that case, even if more
and more non-HCI venues are citing HCI papers, the overall ratio
would still decrease if the denominator (HCI + non-HCI citations)
is increasing faster than the nominator (non-HCI citations).
It will be interesting for future work to perform the same anal-
ysis on other research fields. For example, according to Google
Scholar, as of March 2023, CVPR has the highest h-index amongst
all “Engineering & Computer Science” publications—Should we
expect citations of CVPR papers to come from the broad enginering
and computer science fields?
5 CONCLUSION
Curious to find out how much a field’s papers are cited by papers
outside of that field, our analyses of CHI, UIST, and CSCW papers
(2010–2020) show that HCI papers cite HCI papers, increasinglyso. While it seems reasonably acceptable for papers in one field to
cite each other, HCI as an interdisciplinary field should aim beyond
that. We hope our analyses can promote more awareness of HCI’s
impact beyond the disciplinary boundaries rather than remaining
complacent with validating each other’s work internally via having
more and more HCI papers cite other HCI papers.
REFERENCES
[1]Hancheng Cao, Yujie Lu, Yuting Deng, Daniel A. McFarland, and Michael S. Bern-
stein. 2023. Breaking Out of the Ivory Tower: A Large-scale Analysis of Patent Cita-
tions to HCI Research. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581108 arXiv:2301.13431
[cs].
[2]Neal Haddaway. 2023. citationchaser. https://estech.shinyapps.io/citationchaser/.
(Accessed on 02/24/2023).
[3]Lens.org. 2023. The Lens - Free & Open Patent and Scholarly Search. https:
//www.lens.org/. (Accessed on 02/24/2023).
[4]Google Scholar. 2023. Human Computer Interaction - Google Scholar Met-
rics. https://scholar.google.com/citations?view_op=top_venues&hl=en&vq=eng_
humancomputerinteraction. (Accessed on 02/24/2023).
[5]SIGCHI. 2023. Upcoming Conferences – ACM SIGCHI. https://sigchi.org/
conferences/upcoming-conferences/. (Accessed on 02/24/2023).
[6]Kashyap Todi. 2023. WhatTheHCI? https://whatthehci.com/. (Accessed on
02/24/2023).
[7]Lucy Lu Wang, Kelly Mack, Emma J McDonnell, Dhruv Jain, Leah Findlater, and
Jon E. Froehlich. 2021. A bibliometric analysis of citation diversity in accessibility
and HCI research. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451618