IRMP-CP3-23-14
Searching for Time-Dependent Axion Dark Matter Signals in Pulsars
R. A. Battye,1,∗M. J. Keith,1,†J. I. McDonald,2,‡S. Srinivasan,1,§B. W. Stappers,1,¶and P. Weltevrede1,∗∗
1Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics, School of Natural Sciences,
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, U.K.
2Centre for Cosmology, Particle Physics and Phenomenology,
Universit´ e Catholique de Louvain, Chemin du cyclotron 2, Louvain-la-Neuve B-1348, Belgium
(Dated: November 29, 2023)
Axion dark matter can be converted into photons in the magnetospheres of neutron stars leading
to a spectral line centred on the Compton wavelength of the axion. Due to the rotation of the star
and the plasma effects in the magnetosphere the signal is predicted to be periodic with significant
time variation that persists across phase but is narrow in frequency - a unique smoking gun for axion
dark matter. As a proof of principle and to develop the methodology, we carry out the first time
domain search of the signal using data from PSR J2144 −3933 taken as part of the MeerTIME project
on MeerKAT telescope. We search for specific signal templates using a matched filter technique and
discuss when a time-domain analysis (as is typically the case in pulsar observations) gives greater
sensitivity to the axion-coupling to photons in comparison to a simple time-averaged total flux
study. We do not find any candidate signals and, hence, impose an upper limit on the axion-to-
photon coupling of gaγγ<5.5×10−11(D/0.165 pc) GeV−1where Dis the pulsar distance, over the
mass range ma= 3.9−4.7µeV using this data. This limit relies on PSR J2144 −3933 not being
an extremely aligned rotator, as strongly supported by simple arguments based on the observed
pulse profile width. We discuss the possibilities of improving this limit using future observations
with MeerKAT and also SKA1-mid and the possibility of using other objects. Finally, to evade
modelling uncertainties in axion radio signals, we also carry out a generic “any periodic-signal
search” in the data, finding no evidence for an axion signal.
PACS numbers: 95.35.+d; 14.80.Mz; 97.60.Jd
Keywords: Axions; Dark matter; Neutron stars
I. INTRODUCTION
The search for dark matter in the form of axions [1–10]
is continuing to gather momentum at a dramatic pace. Of
particular interest is the mass range ma≈0.1−1000µeV
where plausible scenarios [11–18] have been proposed to
realise the Cold Dark Matter abundance Ω ch2≈0.12
that is found to be compatible with cosmological obser-
vations, for example, those of the CMB [19]. There are a
number of haloscope experiments [20] which have placed
constraints on the axion coupling to photons. These in-
clude early cavity experiments [21–23] and their mod-
ern incarnations including ADMX [24–28] and its vari-
ous upgrades and pathfinders [29–31]. This has spawned
a plethora of active and proposed experiments including
CAPP [32–35], HAYSTAC [36–38] QUAX [39, 40], OR-
GAN [41, 42], CAST-RADES [43], TASEH [44] and GrA-
Hal [45] aiming to detect axions using similar techniques.
Complementing this, there are also a number of proposed
experiments which go beyond the cavity paradigm, al-
lowing laboratory searches to achieve broad frequency
coverage across previously challenging frequency ranges.
∗richard.battye@manchester.ac.uk
†michael.keith@manchester.ac.uk
‡jamie.mcdonald@uclouvain.be
§sankarshana.srinivasan@manchester.ac.uk
¶ben.stappers@manchester.ac.uk
∗∗patrick.weltevrede@manchester.ac.ukThese include plasma haloscope designs like ALPHA [46],
broadband reflectors envisaged in the BREAD [47] col-
laboration, and dielectric haloscopes such as MADMAX
[48]. There are also novel designs which aim to de-
tect magnetic fields induced by axion sources such as
DMRadio [49], which will operate at lower frequencies
(ma≲µeV) and those seeking to using novel materials
at higher frequencies [50–52]
The largest magnetic fields currently used in labora-
tory searches for axion dark matter typically do not ex-
ceed∼105G (10 T), a limiting factor in such searches. By
contrast, astrophysical magnetic fields in neutron stars
can be as high as ∼1015G (1011T), making them ex-
cellent targets for indirect searches of axion dark matter
[53–55]. In addition, neutron stars are surrounded by a
magnetosphere whose varying plasma frequency matches
the axion mass across a broad range of masses. This de-
generacy leads to a dramatic resonant enhancement of
the signal emanating from regions with ma≃ωp, where
ωpis the plasma frequency. As a result, neutron stars
can act as broadband axion dark matter detectors.
Based on a simple but representative model for a neu-
tron star magnetosphere and the density of axions around
the star, Refs. [54–56] predicted signals that could be eas-
ily detected using current and future telescopes operat-
ing in the radio-mm waveband, which corresponds to the
Compton wavelength of the dark matter axion scenarios
referred to above. Spurred on by this, great progress has
recently been made in characterising the signal properties
using sophisticated ray-tracing methods [57–59] whicharXiv:2303.11792v2  [astro-ph.CO]  28 Nov 20232
are capable of computing the line width induced from
plasma effects and the precise time-variation and angu-
lar dependence of the signal. Early attempts have also
been made to address axion-photon mixing in 3D [60, 61],
though this remains an ongoing area of research.
Various searches have been carried out to detect radio
signals produced by axion dark matter converting into
photons in the magnetospheres of neutron stars using
the Goldreich-Julian (GJ) model [62] for the magneto-
sphere and estimates of the local density of dark mat-
ter, extrapolated to the location of the star in question.
These searches have either looked for a background ex-
cess near the Galactic centre from populations of neu-
tron stars [63, 64], or have focused on single objects such
as the Galactic centre magnetar [65–67] or isolated neu-
tron stars [68, 69], and have established bounds on the
axion-to-photon coupling, gaγγ, which are better than the
bounds from the axion helioscope CAST [70].
Now that the first wave of searches has been carried
out, a natural question to ask is what improved observa-
tional strategies are available to increase our sensitivity
to the axion photon coupling and boost our chances of
detecting dark matter axions from neutron stars. In this
vein, one might also ask how our newly attained under-
standing of precise signal properties (including time and
frequency information) might be leveraged to increase
the power of such searches. To date, all the searches for
axions using neutron stars have focused on looking for a
spectral line in the frequency domain. The goal of the
present work is twofold: (i) to establish a framework of
time-domain searches for axion dark matter signals in
radio data and (ii) to demonstrate this technique by car-
rying out time-domain observations of pulsars. Our goal
is to understand under what circumstances augmenting
these searches to include time-domain information of the
signal can improve sensitivity to gaγγand by injecting
signal templates into radio data, demonstrate a practical
route to obtaining limits on gaγγwhich out-perform a
simple line-search in the frequency domain.
The structure of the paper is organised as follows. In
sec II we review the mechanism for photon production
from axion dark matter, describe our ray-tracing proce-
dure for modelling the radio signal and discuss the time-
dependence of the expected signal. In sec. III we de-
scribe a procedure to search for time-dependent signals in
data using a matched filter, and use this to outline what
types of periodic signals lead to a strong gain from time-
domain information. In sec. IV we apply our pipeline to
MeerKAT observations of PSR J2144 −3933 to search for
axion dark matter. Our null result is used to place limits
on the axion coupling to photons. In sections V and VI
we explore possible future targets and perform a gener-
alized search for periodic signals. In section VII we offer
our conclusions.II. MODELLING THE SIGNAL DUE TO
AXIONS
The conversion between axions and photons in strong
magnetic fields was laid out in the classic reference [71].
It was pointed out in [53] that this mixing could convert
dark matter axions into radio photons1in the strongly
magnetised plasmas which surround neutron stars. In
recent years, as axions have moved to the forefront as
dark matter candidates, these ideas have been pursued
with renewed vigour [55, 73] and this programme has
lead to a variety of observations [64, 67, 74–76] searching
for radio lines from dark matter axions. These obser-
vational efforts have been accompanied by a more con-
certed effort to improve the modelling of the signal itself
[58, 59, 61, 77, 78] which consists primarily of developing
ray-tracing packages to precisely track the photons from
their point of emission to the observer, thereby allowing
one to derive signal templates which could be detected
by a radio telescope. We now briefly review the basic fea-
tures of the production mechanism and ray-tracing rou-
tine. More details can be found in [58, 59, 77, 79].
A. Ray-tracing photons in magnetised plasmas
Resonant conversion between axions and photons oc-
curs at points where kµ
γ=kµ
awhere kµ
γandkµ
aare the
photon and axion 4-momentum, respectively. An at-
tempt was made to understand the conversion probability
for axions to photons paγin [61] leading to
paγγ=π
2g2
aγγsin2θB|B|2
|kγ|ω′p·m5
a
|kγ|2+m2asin2θB2,(1)
which attempts to incorporate 3D effects into the conver-
sion probability. This characterises the ratio of the en-
ergy density between an axion wavepacket and a photon
wavepacket, the latter being subsequently transported
out of the magnetosphere along geodesics determined by
the photon dispersion relation in the strongly magnetised
plasma. Note in the present work we include simultane-
ously the effects of gravity (by incorporating the curved
spacetime metric of the neutron star) and strongly mag-
netised fields. This results in a covariant dispersion re-
lation for photons in a magnetised plasma which have a
dispersion relation [80, 81]
D(k) =gµνkµkν
−(ω2−k2
∥)X
s4πq2
sns
γ2s[µs(ω−k∥)2−c2s(ωvs−k∥)2].(2)
1See [72] for a similar mechanism with dark photons.3
Here, the sum sis over different charge carrier species,
γsis a generalised Lorentz factor, and k∥gives the 4-
momentum projected onto the magnetic field and vscor-
responds to the velocity of charge carriers and µsthe
energy per particle. The number density of each species
sis given by nsand the charge by qs. Full definitions and
detailed explanations of the various terms can be found
in [80]. We will take the non-relativistic limit, setting
vs= 0, γ= 1, cs= 0 and µs=ms. We also consider a
purely electron-positron plasma so that qs=e. Setting
D(k) = 0 then gives the dispersion relations for photons
in a non-relativistic plasma. The equations of motion for
the photon rays are then given by Hamilton’s equations
dxµ
dλ=∂D
∂kµ,dkµ
dλ=−∂D
∂xµ. (3)
To compute the power, we back-trace from the observer
to the point of emission, following the equations of mo-
tion (3). This is analogous to the procedure used in
[57, 58].
In addition, we also now include multiple axion-photon
conversions arising from multiple reflections off the crit-
ical surface, as happens within “throats” of the plasma
distribution around the neutron star. These throats are
partially enclosed regions near the charge separation gap
off whose walls the photon can be multiply-reflected due
to plasma gradients. This can enhance the power of the
signal relative to not including such effects as was done
in [57, 58]. An extensive analysis of ray-tracing tech-
niques which combines the physical effects considered
across [58] and [59] is currently underway and will ap-
pear in a companion paper [79], where the full details
of our scheme will be presented. This will include a sys-
tematic study of anisotropic plasmas. We do not consider
the effects of so-called “de-phasing” conjectured in [59]
which awaits a more robust physical description to see
if the effect persists under more mathematically rigor-
ous formulation. We do not need to consider non-linear
effects arising from very large conversion probabilities
where photons may convert back into axions. This is
safe for PSR J2144 −3933 on which we performed our
observations, which has sufficiently low magnetic fields
that the conversion probability remains small.
B. Signal templates
Having outlined the basic details of our ray-tracing
scheme. This can now be used to begin deriving sig-
nal templates. In particular, these simulations allow one
to model the radio signal as a function of pulsar and ax-
ion input parameters. In particular, one can compute the
profile of the signal in frequency and time. The frequency
dependence of the profile is determined by the mass of
the axion - which sets the central frequency of the radio
line. The width is set by a combination of the velocity
dispersion of dark matter and by line-broadening inducedby the time-dependent nature of the plasma, which mod-
ifies photon frequencies as they move through the mag-
netosphere. The time variation of the signal arises from
the fact that the plasma surrounding the neutron star is
not axisymmetric. In the present approximation we as-
sume an electron-positron plasma which co-rotates with
the star with regions of positive and negative charge sep-
arated according to the Goldreich-Julian density [62]
nGJ=B0Ω
2eR
r3h
cosα+ 3 cos αcos(2 θ)
+ 3 sin αcos(ϕ−Ωt) sin 2 θi
,(4)
with the plasma frequency given by ωp=p
4π|nGJ|/me.
Here, Ω is the frequency of the pulsar, αis the angle be-
tween the magnetic axis of the co-rotating dipole and the
rotation axis of the star, Ris the stellar radius, and B0is
the magnetic field strength on the surface at the magnetic
poles. The polar coordinate θand azimuthal angle ϕare
defined with respect to the rotational axis of the star.
It is obvious that whenever α̸= 0, the plasma is time-
dependent with respect to a non-rotating observer. This
results in time-dependent radio signals, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. For a given pulsar, the remaining input parame-
ters to determine the axion dark matter radio signal are
then the distance to the pulsar D, and the dark matter
density ρDMat the position of the pulsar.
In our analysis, we will take PandB0to be their
quoted measured values. In principle there are some ex-
tra uncertainties which would need to be taken into ac-
count. Pulsar periods Pare one of the best-measured
quantities in astronomy, while the magnetic field strength
of the pulsar at the pole is inferred from measurements
ofPand ˙Pthe spin-down rate of the pulsar combined
with model-dependent parameters including the moment
of inertia of the pulsar and its radius [82]. This calcula-
tion is standard but assumes that the energy released by
the pulsar in the form of radio emission comes from the
loss of rotational energy calculated from the spin-down
rate. The comparatively large values of P˙Pobserved for
magnetars form the basis for their large inferred values
ofB0, but it is also known that the magnetars are known
to emit large X-ray fluxes whose luminosity cannot be
explained by spin-down alone. The emission mechanism
for some magnetars may be powered magnetically in con-
trast to the rotation powered radio pulsars [83, 84]. In
particular, magnetars can have a significant toroidal com-
ponent to their field whose magnitude one can constrain
by imposing that the luminosity from magnetic dissipa-
tion exceeds that from the traditional spin-down. Based
on observations of the X-ray flares/bursts from magne-
tars, the typical ratio of the toroidal to poloidal compo-
nent of the field is of the order ∼10 [85, 86]. While it
is possible to calculate this enhancement from running
magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) simulations, the impact
on the final constraints is suppressed by√
S∝B0.4(see
sec. V) and s such, we leave a more sophisticated mod-
elling of the magnetosphere for future work.4
FIG. 1. Time-dependence of radio templates from axion dark
matter as a function of pulse phase ϕfor different values of
θwith fixed value of α= 20◦with gaγγ= 10−10GeV−1. As
expected there is little time variation for θ= 10◦, but it can
be substantial for intermediate angles. When θ= 90◦the
“throats” of the GJ model never cross the line-of-sight so, al-
though there is some emission, it is relatively weak compared
to cases where they are visible to the observer.
The distance to the pulsar, Dcan be inferred from par-
allax measurements or from the dispersion of the pulse
as a function of frequency, since the photons emitted in
the main beam of the pulsar traverse through the galac-
tic electron density along the line-of-sight. Given a model
for the galactic electron density, one can estimate the dis-
tance to a pulsar. If we use the pyGEDM code and the
galactic coordinates as measured in the catalogue we ob-
tainD≈0.29 kpc [87–92]. This illustrates that this com-
putation relies on the underlying model for the galactic
electron density distribution. A parallax measurement
for this pulsar yields D= 0.165+0.017
−0.014kpc [93]. This is a
more direct measurement and we will use it as our fidu-
cial value when establishing limits, but we note that the
limit is ∝D. Galactic dark matter profiles allow one
to predict the dark matter density at the position of the
pulsar, but these models become highly uncertain as one
gets closer to the galactic centre, where some models pre-
dict a spike in the density, while others predict a more
cored profile.
Based on these arguments, we conclude that the com-
pletely unknown quantities which parameterise the signal
templates are ( α, θ). We, therefore, generate a simulated
database2of periodic flux profiles as a function of ( α, θ).
Some of these profiles are displayed in Fig. 1 which indi-
cates the ( α, θ) dependence of the time-variability of the
signal.
2Formally we generate templates for discrete ( αi, θi) and numer-
ically interpolate to generate a template for a continuous range
ofαandθ. See appendix A for a description of this procedure
and an illustration of its accuracy.In the next section, we describe how to harness the
information and the larger time-variability of the signal
to improve the prospects of detecting axion dark matter.
III. SEARCHING FOR TIME-DEPENDENT
SIGNALS
In order to search for time dependent signals we will
employ a matched-filter template-fitting approach sim-
ilar to that used in Gravitational Wave Astronomy to
detect the waveforms of the late stages of binary black
hole inspirals [94, 95]. In that case, once a detection of
gravitational waves was made, this allows estimates of
physical parameters such as the black hole masses. For-
mally, if an axion were detected, one could use axion
radio signals to fit model parameters of the pulsar mag-
netosphere. However, our ambition at this stage is much
more conservative: we will use the signal-to-noise esti-
mate from the matched filter, ˆ q, defined below, to quan-
tify the likelihood of detection. In this sense, ˆ qacts as
a statistical test for whether the data is distinguishable
from noise. Values of ˆ qabove a threshold then consti-
tute a detection. Conversely, for values below this, by
injecting would-be signals into the data, we obtain the
expected value qexp=<ˆq >(see eq. (15)) from an axion
signal. By comparing this to the measured value ˆ q, we
can exclude regions of axion parameter space.
This procedure provides a means to derive limits on
gaγγas a function of ma, and importantly allows us to
take into account that for a fixed value of mathere are
a wide range of templates for the expected signal due to
the parameters of the particular neutron star system un-
der consideration. These are the period of the pulsar, P,
its surface magnetic field flux density, B0, the radius of
the neutron star, R, the angle αbetween the magnetic
axis and spin axis of the star, and the angle θbetween the
line of sight and the spin axis. As in previous attempts to
derive constraints on gaγγusing neutron stars [64–68] for
simplicity, as a demonstration of the filter, we do not, for
instance consider uncertainties in B0orR(the period,
Pis of course measured with tremendous accuracy). We
leave a computationally intensive parameter scan for fu-
ture work, but this would be a straightforward extension
of the existing framework.
Instead, our main focus here is on the sensitivity of
the time-dependence of the signal to pulsar parameters,
which is especially sensitive to the value of αandθ. For
each value of ma, we therefore obtain a constraint on the
value of gaγγfor every pair ( α,θ). We can then exclude
certain ranges of αandθwith further modelling and
observations of the pulsar signal, notably the pulse width.
We then use the value of ( α, θ) from this remaining subset
which gives the most conservative constraints on gaγγ.5
A. Derivation of matched filter and mathematical
properties
Matched filters are a standard technique in signal pro-
cessing and they are often used in astronomy to search
for signals with a known, or parameterizable profile. This
can be done in the spatial, frequency or time domains.
In this section, we will derive the standard matched filter
before discussing some of its properties. In section III B
we use it to quantify the pros and cons of time domain
observations and in section III C we will show how it can
be used to recover an injected signal in simulated radio
data.
There are a number of ways of formulating the matched
filter. Here, we will use a discrete matched filter in which
the data is represented by a vector of finite length. This
can be generalised to continuous functions in which the
vector inner products become convolution integrals over
functions (see [95]). The discrete formulation has the
advantage of simplifying notation.
Our starting point is the so-called “data vector”, d. We
will assume the data is the sum of a signal S=S0F(p)
and some additive noise ˆn
d=S0F(p) +ˆn. (5)
Here, we have decomposed the signal according to
|F| ≡√
F·F= 1 (6)
so that S0, gives the root mean squared flux density of
the signal
S0=√
S·S. (7)
The signal is further characterised by a “parameter vec-
tor”p. In section II we will compute a number of tem-
plates F(p) for the signal where p= (ma, α, θ). The
noise vector ˆnis assumed to be Gaussian with ⟨n⟩= 0
and⟨nnT⟩=Cwhere ⟨..⟩denotes an ensemble average of
noise realizations and Cijis the covariance matrix with
i, j= 1, .., n dwhere ndis the total number of data points.
Assuming a Gaussian likelihood, −2 logL=χ2, one
can calculate the maximum likelihood estimate ˆS0by
minimizing
χ2= (d−S0F)TC−1(d−S0F). (8)
In the above equation, we assume the data vector dcon-
tains the true signal S=Strueso that minimising χ2
above can be thought of as minimising a generalised least-
squares difference (relative to the noise in each channel -
hence the factor C−1) between the true signal and possi-
ble templates S0F. Viewing χ2as an unknown function
ofS0, we can find the minimising value, ˆS0given by
ˆS0=FTC−1d
FTC−1F. (9)
One can also deduce the “matched filter noise”
σMF=
FTC−1F−1/2
(10)and the signal-to-noise estimate ˆ qmay then be written
as
ˆq=ˆS0
σMF=FTC−1d

FTC−1F1/2. (11)
It is important to understand the difference between the
noise in the data, characterised by C, and the “matched
filter noise”, σMF. They are related, but σMFalso de-
pends on the filter. We return to this issue in the next
section.
In order to understand properties of the matched filter
we will assume diagonal covariance matrix
Cij=σ2
Nδij (12)
where δijis the Kronecker delta and σNis the noise in
each channel - all of what said here can be adapted to the
case of a general covariance matrix, but it is less simple
to see.
In general, the data has a number of dimensions, for
example, space, time and/or frequency, then dhasnd=
n1×...×nkentries where nifori= 1, ..., k are the
number of points in each of the dimensions. In our case
we will search in the frequency and time directions so the
number of entries in the data vector will be nd=nf×nt
where nfis the number of frequency channels and ntis
the number of time samples. In that case, the data vector
could be written as
d=
dω1
t1, . . . , dω1
tnt, . . . , dωnf
t1, . . . , dωnf
tnt
, (13)
where dωi
tjlabels the data vector in the ith frequency
bin and jth time-channel. The covariance matrix of the
form (12) is then nothing more than the statement that
the noise between all possible pairs of time and frequency
bins is totally uncorrelated.
Returning to our main discussion, it follows that for a
covariance matrix of the form (12), we have
ˆq=F·d
σN, (14)
that is, the dot product of the filter Fwith the data
vector. When Fmatches that in the true signal, we have
⟨ˆq⟩=S0/σN(from eq. (5)).
Now assume that ptruehas entries which are the true
parameters. The ensemble average of ˆ qfor a filter with
arbitrary parameter, pis
⟨ˆq⟩=F(p)·F(ptrue)S0
σN. (15)
Next, we note that as a trivial consequence of the
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have F(p)·F(ptrue)≤
|F(p)||F(ptrue)|with equality if and only if F(p) =
F(ptrue). Assuming that the template is non-degenerate
with respect to the values of p, this occurs only for
p=ptruefor which ˆ qis then maximal. Thus ˆ qacts
as a likelihood test for the values of p.6
In what follows, since the line width of the axion is
typically less than the width of our frequency channels,
the vector (13) is sparse for a given value of ma, with non-
vanishing entries in only one frequency channel where
ω=ma. This means filters with different values of ma
are orthogonal. More generally, with higher frequency
resolution, we would expect to be able to probe both the
time and frequency structure of the signal. By contrast,
filters with different values of αandθare not orthogonal
and will in general have overlap such that d(θ, α, m a)·
d(θ′, α′, ma)̸= 0.
In principle, this means an axion detection would al-
low us to determine likely values of the pulsar parameters
in analogy to the way in which observable gravitational
wave signals allow inference of the mass and spin of their
associated black holes. However, our present approach
will be to minimise the expected signal over a conser-
vative subset of values of ( α, θ), thereby obtaining the
most conservative constraints on gaγγfor allowed values
of angles.
In order to turn our continuous axion signals into
discrete vectors we must perform some kind of coarse-
graining. We therefore define a binning scheme for N
time-channels centered on the points ti= (i−1/2)∆t
where i= 1, .., N and ∆ t= 1/Nso that the discretized
signal is given by
Sω
ti=1
∆tZti+∆t/2
ti−∆t/2dtS(t, ω), (16)
where S(t, ω) is the flux density of the axion signal as
a function of time (and frequency) that we derive using
our radio signal models.
B. Why do a time domain analysis?
In this section we will discuss the advantages of doing a
time domain analysis in terms of increasing the chances
of detecting axions. We will also discuss the issue of
whether subtraction of the pulse-average from the time-
domain data (as is often the case in pulsar observations
and as we have done in our data) will have significant
impact.
In order to do this we will investigate some properties
of the matched filter. Consider applying the matched
filter to a given frequency channel whose signal consists
ofNtime-channels is
S= (S1, . . . , S N). (17)
Then according to Eqs (5)-(7) and (14), the matched
filter will return
⟨ˆq⟩=√
S·S
σN, (18)
where σNis the noise on each of the nt=Ntime-
channels. The noise amplitude ¯ σNaveraged across alltimes is then given by ¯ σ=σN/√
N. We can therefore
re-write (18) as
⟨ˆq⟩time= 
σ2
S+µ2
S1/2
¯σ(19)
where µS= Σ iSi/NandσS=p
ΣiS2
i/N−µ2
Sare the
average and standard deviation of S, respectively.
Now let us consider carrying out a measurement with
no time resolution. This is the case when one simply
uses the telescope to make a total flux measurement over
a long observing time. In this case the noise is again ¯ σ
given by averaging the noise over all integration time, the
signal√
S·Sis simply given by the mean µSso that
⟨ˆq⟩flux−avg.=µS
¯σ. (20)
This can be thought of as a trivial matched filter with
a single time channel, in which any fine-grained time in-
formation has been lost. This is in effect how all previ-
ous single pulsar observations for axion dark matter have
been carried out [65–67].
By comparing the cases of a time-domain analysis (19)
with a total-flux measurement (20) it becomes immedi-
ately apparent that since σ2
S≥0, the time-domain anal-
yses will always equal or outperform the time-averaged
measurement. Thus time-domain information increases
the potential to detect axions. In particular, when the
relative time-variation is large ( σS/µS≫1), the time-
domain search provides a gain in sensitivity by increasing
the signal to noise by a factor ≃p
σS/µS, i.e. the square-
root of the relative variance. This is a simple consequence
of the fact that ˆ qis proportional to the root-square of the
signal, and so it implicitly encodes information about its
variability. The same observation was also made in [57]
but the matched filter allows this to be justified from
first-principles.
Although this is in general not necessary, the observa-
tions used later in the paper have had the average of the
signal subtracted3. Thus while we retain time-domain
information, the baseline µSof the signal is essentially re-
normalised to zero. In this case, the time-domain analysis
gives a baseline subtracted (BS) value
⟨ˆq⟩time−BS=σS
¯σ. (21)
Clearly, when there is only a small time variation, ( µS≫
σS), subtracting the baseline leads to a lower value of ⟨ˆq⟩,
relative to retaining it as in eq. (19). This is for the sim-
ple reason that if the average signal is large, one loses a lot
3Observations of pulsars are often taken in this way since they are
probing the time-variable signal from the rotation of the neutron
star. Ultimately, there is nothing to prevent the use of the av-
eraged signal as well, but it can require extra work to calibrate
it. Here, we see that if the expected time variation is significant,
removing the average does not significantly affect sensitivity to
axions.7
of signal power by removing the average. Conversely, in
the regime where there is large time variation, µS≪σS
the time-domain analysis with baseline subtraction per-
forms almost as well as eq. (19). This is again the state-
ment that high peaks above the noise in the time-domain
still allow for good discrimination from noise.
C. Demonstration on simulated data
In the previous subsections we have derived the main
properties of the matched filter estimate of the signal-to-
noise ratio. This is not particularly new to those with a
background in astronomy, but may not be familiar to a
general reader. The matched filter is the optimal filter
for a Gaussian likelihood and would be the clearest way
to identify a signal in the data with ˆ qbeing a proxy for
the signal to noise of detection.
In this subsection, to aid understanding, we will
demonstrate the performance of the matched filter in a
toy example by injecting a signal for a neutron star with
the same physical characteristics as PSR J2144 −3933
into simulated data with similar noise to the observa-
tions that we have in hand, described in sections IV and
IV A.
We will inject signals with a mass of ma= 4.2µeV
which corresponds to an observing frequency fobs≃
1.0GHz and gaγγ= 10−10GeV−1. We will consider two
different choices for the angles αandθ. Case A with
(α, θ) = (0◦,60◦) is close to an aligned rotator and hence
we would expect no time variation, whereas case B with
(α, θ) = (40◦,60◦) has a very strong time variation. We
will consider two observations: one in which the pulse-
averaged signal power is retained, and another where it
is removed which is more common in pulsar observations
as we have explained earlier. We have already discussed
the pros and cons of the two approaches in section III B
and this is just an illustration of the specific point. The
full results of these test cases are shown in Fig. 2.
For a nearly aligned rotator ( α= 0◦), the pulsar is ax-
isymmetric about its rotation axis, and the signal has no
time-dependence. Therefore, in this case, if one searches
for the signal with the pulse-average removed, there is by
definition no signal present in the effective data vector,
leading to a non-detection. The filter is essentially scan-
ning a particular noise realisation with zero signal. In the
bottom panel, the input signal contains significant time-
dependence (roughly an order of magnitude). Therefore,
the input signal is detected with a SNR of the same order
of magnitude as in the total power case, in accordance
with the discussion comparing (19) and (20). In all the
cases except the baseline-subtracted α= 0 case, the filter
successfully returns the maximal SNR for the input value
ofθ.
FIG. 2. An illustration of using the matched filter SNR to
search for the signal. ˆ qis shown as function of observing angle
θreturned by the matched filter (14) with simulated Gaussian
noise similar to that expected for the observations of PSR
J2144−3933 discussed in this paper. We display the SNR for
two scenarios for the input signal, one with ( α, θ) = (0◦,60◦)
(case A, top panel) and another with ( α, θ) = (40◦,60◦) (case
B, bottom panel). In both cases we choose a noise amplitude
of∼2.5 mJy consistent with that observed in our data for
ma= 4.2µeV. We use an axion mass of 3 .7µeV and gaγγ=
10−10GeV−1. As an additional sanity check, we repeat the
analysis by inserting the signal into the real pulse-subtracted
data (see sec. IV for details on the data), represented by the
dotted lines. The fact these lines appear to agree indicates
that our noise model is representative of the situation in the
real data.
IV. OBSERVATIONS OF PSR J2144-3933 WITH
MEERKAT
In order to test this idea we selected PSR J2144 −3933.
We did this by considering the list of observed neutron
stars [96]4which provides estimates for B0,Pand the
pulsar distance D. In order to make an estimate of the
strength of the signal expected for a particular pulsar we
use an analytic formula based on the radial trajectories
approach [55]. Although this assumption has been shown
to be not sufficiently correct to provide accurate predic-
tions [58, 59] it is likely that it gives a reasonable figure
of merit since it should have the correct scaling with the
important parameters. We will discuss the issue of what
is the optimal target in more detail again in section V in
light of what we have learnt. Specifically, we have used
the figure of merit
FOM = ρDMB2/3
0P7/3
D2, (22)
4https://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/pulsar/psrcat/8
where ρDMis the density of dark matter expected in the
vicinity of the pulsar, to create a ranked list of pulsars.
This formula can be derived from results presented in
[55, 60]
We presume that all the dark matter in the Galactic
halo is in the form of axions, the standard assumption
when obtaining limits, and extrapolate the local density
ofρDM≈0.45 GeV cm−3using an NFW profile for dark
matter in the galaxy. Except in the very centre, near the
location of the Galactic Centre Magnetar (GCM) PSR
J1745−29005, this is likely to give a reasonable estimate
of the trade-off between ρDMandDin the FOM.
The PSR J2144 −3933 which has B0≈2.1×1012G
estimated from the Pand ˙Pbased on electromagnetic
spin down, P= 8.51 sec and D= 0.12 kpc came third
on the list6and seems an ideal object. This object has
a long period, and hence a strong axion signal, but is
otherwise unremarkable. The fact that it is very nearby
is also a significant advantage since it means that we can
be more sure about the local value of ρaused in our
predictions.
Within the GJ model there is a maximum axion
mass [67] given by
mmax
a≈85µeVB0
1014G1/2P
1 sec−1/2
×
1 +1
3cosα1/2
, (23)
which is ≈4.7µeV corresponding to fobs≈1.15 GHz for
this object. It is not possible to use any observations
above this frequency in obtaining a limit using the GJ
model predictions, but we do use the data in our search
for generalised periodic signals in section VI.
The specific observation of PSR J2144 −3933 used in
this work was taken at 2020-07-13 02:20:47 as part of
the MeerTime Large Survey Programme on MeerKAT.
The observation was recorded as part of the Thousand
Pulsar Array [97] census observations and hence used
the ‘full’ MeerKAT array, specifically in this instance
58 of the antennas were used to form a single tied ar-
ray beam pointed at the pulsar. For long-period pulsars
the Thousand Pulsar Array census aims to record ≳512
pulses from each pulsar, and hence the total observing
5Most attempts to constrain axions using neutron stars have used
the GCM as their target, attracted by the large magnetic field,
and indeed we re-visit using it for this type of analysis in sec-
tion V. Depending on the parameters of the NFW profile we used
it varied from around 10th in our list to 1st. A clear reason to
not use it is that there is an additional uncertainty created by
the lack of knowledge of the dark matter density in the centre of
galaxy.
6The objects PSR J0736 −6394 and PSR J1856 −3754 came first
and second on the list. The first is Rotating RAdio Transient
(RRAT) which is not monitored routinely in the radio waveband,
while the second has only been detected in the X-ray waveband.
Both these objects are unsuitable for our study here.duration was 4416 s, much longer than typical Thousand
Pulsar Array observations. The data produced by the
MeerKAT beamformer are processed in real time by the
PTUSE instrument [98], folding the data with the known
period of the pulsar. Post processing, including initial
automated cleaning of radio frequency interference and
flux calibration is carried out on the Swinburne OzS-
tar supercomputer using the MeerPipe pipeline devel-
oped by MeerTime. The calibration and cleaning pro-
cedure used for the Thousand Pulsar Array data is de-
scribed in [99]. The output data have 1024 rotational
phase bins and 928 frequency channels, each of width
0.8359375 MHz (total bandwidth 775 .75 MHz), and cen-
tred at 1283 .58203125 MHz.
A. Modelling the noise
The observed data has already been processed to re-
move the effects of Radio Frequency Interference (RFI).
This is sufficient to locate the main peak of the pulsar
pulse, which is typically much stronger than the axion
signal. The first thing we do is remove the pulsar main
beam signal from the time-domain, so that the remaining
data is in the off-phase of the pulsar. We do this by ex-
cising 20 time channels from our data. In the top panel
of Fig. 3, for the remaining data we present the average
over the pulsar phase for, µS, and the standard devia-
tion, σSof the data as a function of the frequency. It
is clear that, despite this procedure, there remains some
low amplitude RFI in certain frequency channels and it is
clear that the frequency channels affected by this must be
discarded for the purposes of locating axion signals. This
RFI is typically due to mobile phone, f∼0.95 GHz, and
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS), f∼1.2 GHz
andf∼1.6 GHz7.
This residual RFI can be removed by excising any data
with σN>3 mJy as seen Fig. 3 with the excised data
presented using a narrower flux scale. This data appears
to be relatively clean and free from obvious terrestrial
RFI since it removes the regions known to be affected
by known irreducible interference. Once this is done it
seems reasonable to try to model the noise in the data to
be an uncorrelated Gaussian random process with zero
mean within each channel and standard deviation σN(f)
which is given by that measured in a given channel. This
is a small variation - by allowing the standard deviation
to vary with frequency - to the approach we have used in
section III A. It is unlikely that the assumption of exact
7We note that Karoo site where the MeerKAT telescope is situ-
ated, is one of the cleanest radio observation sites in the world
and still there is low-level RFI in these bands which would likely
be extremely difficult to remove, meaning that there are some
ranges of axion mass that will remain unattainable to this tech-
nique, and indeed any other searching for astrophysical axion
signals.9
FIG. 3. Measurements of the mean, µSandσSstandard
deviations of the observed off-pulse flux density of PSR
J2144−3933 used in this paper. The average is over pulsar
phase for a fixed frequency. In the top panel, we show the σS
andµSfor the full data-set. In the bottom panel, we show the
equivalent after employing a cut of σN= 3.0 mJy but with a
different scale. As demonstrated in the figure this cut allows
us to excise the frequency channels that are dominated by
RFI contamination, with the remaining channels being com-
patible with µ≈0 and σN≈2.8 mJy.
Gaussianity and zero-correlations is entirely perfect, and
indeed in the subsequent sections we find some evidence
to suggest that there may be weak correlations in the
noise as a function of the pulsar phase ϕ. Nonetheless, we
will argue that this just leads to conservative constraints
and therefore, we will proceed to use this model. We note
that if we are able to accurately model the correlations
in the data, this could be handled by the match filter
approach.
In what follows we will use this noise model to obtain
limits on axion signal and, therefore, we should examine
to what extent our data resembles Gaussian noise for the
full dynamical spectrum, which is the term used to talk
about the data as a function of frequency, f, and pulsar
phase, ϕ. As a self-consistency test of this noise model,
FIG. 4. Dynamical spectra (i.e. the data as function of fre-
quency and pulsar phase) with the RFI dominated channels
excised and also the pulse (around ϕ= 0 and ϕ= 1) removed.
The top panel is our noise model described in the text, while
the bottom panel is the actual data.
we compare the real data set with that randomly gener-
ated from this distribution and this is presented in Fig. 4.
Visually, the two datasets appear to be very similar and
on that basis we conclude that the models are compatible
with each other.
B. Constraining the magnetic orientation αand
observing angle θ
We have already pointed out that the amplitude of the
time dependence of the signal depends on the values of α
andθ- this is also an issue when using the time averaged
signal (see [67], for example). In particular, we have seen
that there can be very little time variation when these
angles are small. Therefore, we will need some further in-
formation on the pulsar geometry to enforce a constraint
ongaγγ.
Obtaining precise values for the pulsar geometry re-10
FIG. 5. The constraint on the α−βplane based on the
geometry of the beam where β=θ−α. As explained in the
text, we define the likelihood to be the percentage of possible
values of Wfor which solutions exist within the range of hem
we have allowed. Improbable solutions with |β/ρ|>0.95 are
rejected. The top panel shows the vertical integration of the
bottom panel and it demonstrates that solutions with α <20◦
are very unlikely because they would require fine tuning of β.
Therefore, we rule out α < 20◦and|β|>4◦as statistically
unlikely, indicated by the red-dashed lines, when we calculate
our limit on gaγγ.
lies in general on strong assumptions on the observed
properties of the neutron star’s radio pulse (e.g. [100]).
Fortunately, from the point of view of the present discus-
sion, we only need to rule out small angles, and when one
observes a narrow pulse profile - which is the case here -
it is unlikely that the magnetic and observation axes are
aligned with the spin axis. In what follows we will de-
scribe a simple model for the pulsar beam geometry with
very conservative assumptions and use it in the case of
PSR J2144 −3933 to argue that one can ignore the region
of parameter space around θ≈α≈0.
LetWbe the pulse width corresponding to a fully illu-
minated circular radiation beam with half-opening angle
ρ. These parameters can be related to the parameters in
our misaligned rotator model for the neutron star ( α, θ)
using [101, 102]
cosρ= cos αcosθ+ sin αsinθcos(W/2). (24)
The width of the profile for PSR J2144 −3933 is measured
at 10% of the amplitude is (2 .1±0.2)◦[103]. It is possible
that the profile is asymmetric and hence assuming that
the full open field line region is active is not necessarily
true. This means that the Win (24) should be inter-
preted as the pulse width that would be observed if the
full beam is active. In rare cases, the middle of the open
field line region is centred in between one of the profile
peaks, and part of the otherwise maybe double profile is
missing. Based on these two caveats, we conservatively
takeWto be in the range 1 .5◦–5.0◦for this object.
We now turn to the estimation of ρ, whose uncertaintymainly stems from a lack of knowledge of the height hem
at which the emission occurs. The beam is bounded by
the tangents to the last open magnetic field lines. Assum-
ing that the field is dipolar, one finds that (e.g. [104])
ρ≈3
2r
hem
Rc=r
9πhem
2cP. (25)
where we have used the small angle approximation for ρ.
In the second expression we have replaced the light cylin-
der radius Rcwith the pulse period P= 2πRc/c. Esti-
mation of hemis complicated by the fact that the beam
is not necessarily filled, but across the pulsar population
hemat 1.4 GHz has been constrained to be in the range
of 200–400 km irrespective of pulse period [105]. We take
a more conservative range of 100 ≤hem≤1000 km, so as
to ensure that we are not strongly wedded to the mod-
elling assumptions in the pulse-beam simulations.
Note that, in principle, it is possible to compute the
emission height hemfrom estimates of the swing of the
polarisation angle (PA) (see for example [106]) where the-
oretical PA profile is derived assuming the rotating vec-
tor model [107]. However, the detailed applicability of
the rotating vector model is a debated topic in the litera-
ture and not all pulsars exhibit the characteristic banana
shape that the model predicts (see for example [108]).
In addition, it may not always be possible to measure
the polarisation properties of candidate pulsars, partic-
ularly magnetars that do not emit at radio frequencies.
We remark that while measuring αcan significantly im-
pact the sensitivity of our method, it remains to be seen
whether this method can be considered an guaranteed
way of breaking the α−θdegeneracy.
Since parameters for a given pulsar are uncertain, val-
ues of αall the way down to zero are allowed by (24), for
which there would be no time-variation. We, therefore,
appeal to further arguments which allow us to place a
lower bound on αby excluding implausible geometries.
A problem with very small αgeometries is that in or-
der to explain the very narrow Wthe line-of-sight needs
to graze the very outer part of the beam such that most
of the beam is invisible to us. This requires fine tun-
ing which is not only unlikely [109], but is also contrived
for two reasons. First of all, a small change in emis-
sion height as expected for different observing frequen-
cies [110] would lead to a drastic change in the observed
pulse width, which is not observed [103]. Secondly, a
narrow pulse not only requires a grazing line of sight,
but also a circular beam with a hard edge. In reality
the pulsar beam does not have a hard edge, and hence
the observed pulse shape from a grazing line of sight will
be dominated by the intrinsic smoothness of the beam
which will be much wider than predicted from the circu-
lar model.
To quantify why small αgeometries are unlikely, we
construct an effective probability distribution for αand
βwhich essentially measures the number of beam real-
isations associated to each pair ( α, β) assuming a uni-
form distribution for W. This is shown in Fig. 5. We11
constructed this distribution according to the following
algorithm (i) uniformly sample W between 1 .5◦and 5 .0◦
in 100 steps. (ii) For each given W, scan over a discrete
grid of ( α, β) values between 0 and π/2. (iii) For each
point ( α, β) calculate ρ(W, α, β ) with Eq. (24). For each
(α, β) (for the specific Wunder consideration) if the re-
sulting ρsatisfies 100 ≤hem≤1000 km and |β/ρ|<0.95
record a value of 1. Otherwise assign it 0. Note the sec-
ond constraint is designed to exclude a line-of-sight with
an impact parameter β≃ρ, which is both unlikely and
implausible for the reasons above. At the end of this
process, for each W, one has an α-βgrid with entries
that are 1 (implying an acceptable beam geometry ex-
ists) or 0. Since Wis sampled with 100 steps, there are
100 grids. (iv) Fig. 5 then shows the sum of these grids
(appropriately normalised).
The main features that stand out are that |β|needs to
be small in order for the line of sight to intersect the beam
and small αsolutions are excluded. No solutions exist
forα≲10◦. Furthermore, one can see in the top panel
that solutions α≲20◦are unlikely geometrical solutions,
which is because they require a fine tuned (large) β. It
should be stressed that α≲20◦geometries are not just
unlikely, we have also argued them to be contrived8. In
what follows we will impose α >20◦and|β|<4◦. We
would expect to be able to apply similar arguments to
a large fraction of pulsars that we might want to use to
constrain gaγγ.
C. Constraints on gaγγfrom PSR J2144 −3933
We have shown in section III how one can compute
the signal-to-noise (SNR) parameter qas a function of
the input parameters ( ma, θ, α) using the matched filter.
In order to now derive constraints, we have carried out a
parametric search for all possible profiles in our interpo-
lated library (see Fig. 1) using the pulsar data presented
in Fig. 4. This procedure then gives us a distribution of
SNR values qmeas.associated to each profile. We could
repeat this process, but this time using our noise model
which by definition has no signal present. Remember
that it assumes uncorrelated Gaussian noise which sim-
plifies the matched filter. This means that the values
ofqmeas.should be Gaussian distributed with zero mean
and unit variance.
We do find that they are compatible with a Gaussian
distribution that has zero mean. However, we find that
the standard deviation is ≈1.45 somewhat higher than
the expected value which points to the fact that the noise
model we are using is not optimal9. We find that, out of
the≈3×104templates, there are three that have q >5
8A less conservative limit on the acceptable solutions such that
|β/ρ|<0.90 would lead to α≳25◦, demonstrating that the
conclusions are relatively insensitive to the precise limits chosen.
9We have assumed that he noise is uncorrelated in phase whichwhich, if the noise model were perfect would suggest can-
didate detections, but in order to assess their statisti-
cal significance they should probably be scaled down by
1/1.45 reducing them to ≈3.5. This suggests that they
are chance alignments with the templates; a conclusion
that is further strengthened by the observation that they,
and indeed the other higher values of qmeas., appear to
be randomly distributed with ma. We are satisfied that
our data are compatible with a null detection.
In the case where the baseline has been subtracted
from the data, which is the case for the data being con-
sidered here, the constraining power of the matched filter
is determined by (21). For the pulsar we have chosen,
Fig. 1 shows the time-dependence of the profiles. Note
the relative variance vanishes at α= 0, but can be larger
than one for a range of values of ( α, θ), but that we have
argued that regions with α <20◦are unlikely and con-
trived in section IV B.
In the absence of a detection, one can derive con-
straints on gaγγby comparing the measured value of
qmeas.for a particular template, with the expected value
⟨q⟩for that same template. The measured value is de-
fined by
qmeas.(θ, α) =F(θ, α)·d
σN. (26)
This must be compared to the expected value
⟨q(gaγγ, θ, α)⟩if a signal were present in the data
⟨q(gaγγ, θ, α)⟩=p
S(gaγγ, θ, α)·S(gaγγ, θ, α)
σN.(27)
In the perturbative limit of the conversion probability,
which we have checked is always the case here, this is
∝gaγγ. Therefore, in order to impose a limit we calculate
⟨q(gfid
αγγ, θ, α)⟩forgfid
aγγ= 10−10GeV−1and exclude any
value such that
gaγγ> gfid
aγγs
2qmeas.(θ, α)
⟨q(gfidαγγ, θ, α)⟩. (28)
The factor of two in (28) corresponds to the observed
noise level being twice the equivalent signal for gaγγ
meaning that this will be a 2 ( ≈95% confidence) up-
per limit on coupling constant.
We have explained above that the typical values of
qmeas.are higher than they should be due to the noise
model not being perfect. This will mean that the upper
limits we compute using (28) are not optimal and hence
are slightly conservative.
is is unlikely to be precisely true and this could easily lead to
more structure than would be expected for a totally random
realization of the noise. It is clear that one could achieve slightly
tighter constraints by improvement of the noise model.12
We show the constraints from this procedure in the
left panel of Fig. 6 for ma= 4µeV along with the re-
gions preferred by our analysis of the orientation an-
gles. In the right panel, we quantify the advantage of
the purely time-domain analysis compared to the purely
frequency-domain analysis as a function of ( α, θ). We do
this by taking the ratio of theoretical signal-to-noise in
the case where the baseline is subtracted, qtime, with re-
spect to the case where the time profile is averaged over
the pulse-period and integrated, qfreq.. When this ratio is
larger than 1, the time-domain analysis leads to stronger
constraints on gaγγ.
We have performed the same analysis as presented in
Fig. 6 over the mass range 3 .9µeV≤ma≤4.7µeV and
then searched for the weakest upper limit in the range
α > 20◦and|β|<4◦. The results, assuming that
D= 0.165 kpc, are presented in Fig. 7 and using this, we
conclude that we can exclude dark matter axions forming
the entire Galactic halo with gaγγ>5.5×10−11GeV−1.
IfD= 0.29 kpc as suggested by electron density models,
we find a weaker constraint of gaγγ>9.6×10−11GeV−1.
We leave the detailed investigation of the impact of the
galactic electron density models and the veracity of the
models for future work.
V. FUTURE SEARCHES
In the previous section we have shown how one can de-
rive a limit on gaγγfrom baseline subtracted radio pulsar
data using the variation in the time domain calculated
by our ray-tracing algorithm. There we used a specific
pulsar and telescope. An obvious question is what can
be gained in future observations. In general, the limits
obtained will scale as
glim
aγγ∝1
(µ2
S+σ2
S)1/4Aeff
Tsys−1/2
t−1/4
obs. (29)
Hence, any improvement on glim
aγγwill come from two av-
enues. The first is better observations: lower system tem-
perature Tsys, larger collecting area Aeffand increased
observing time, tobs. The second is a better target: one
with larger mean-signal power µSor greater time vari-
ability as measured by σS. Leveraging the latter is of
course the key point of the present paper. Let us now
come to each of these factors in turn.
In terms of improved observations with the current
target, we can imagine future observations of PSR
J2144−3933 with both MeerKAT or other similar tele-
scopes in the short term and the Square Kilometre Ar-
ray (SKA) in the longer term. All other things being
equal, eq. (29) implies that an increase in observation
time from ≈1 hour, as we have now, to 100 hours would
improve the limit by a factor ∼3. Moreover, going from
MeerKAT with Aeff/Tsys≈450 to Aeff/Tsys≈1800 for
SKA1-mid will yield a limit which is a factor ∼2 better.
Combining these together one might be able to obtain a
limit of gaγγ<1.6×10−11GeV−1.PSR J2144 −3933 only allows constraints to be imposed
forma<4.7µeV within the framework of the GJ model.
It might be interesting to perform lower frequency obser-
vations of it, but perhaps it is more interesting to find a
source with a larger value of mmax
ato probe mass ranges
less accessible to terrestrial haloscopes. An interesting
point to clarify would be how the signal scales as a func-
tion of pulsar parameters, in particular the period Pand
the magnetic field B0.
The figure of merit (FOM) based on radial trajectories
is∝B2/3
0P7/3, while the maximum mass probed is ∝
(B0/P)1/2 10. At a fixed value of Pwe see that it will
always be best to increase the value of B0, while at fixed
B0the FOM will increase with P, but mmax
awill decrease
meaning that there is a trade-off between the two and the
optimal target will be a compromise between the strength
of the signal and the range of mass probed.
We have checked the scaling of the FOM using the ray-
tracing code to calculate the average signal, µS, summed
over all frequencies for a range of values of B0andP. For
B0these appear to broadly confirm that the approximate
scaling of the FOM with relatively weak dependence θ
andα, although there can be significant deviations for
extreme values. However, the dependence on Pseems to
be somewhat weaker than that predicted from the FOM
from radial trajectories. For the specific choice of α= 60◦
we find that FOM ∝B0.8
0P1.2. Given the complications
in constructing a FOM which depends on the orientation
angle, we conclude that it is reasonable to continue to use
the FOM based on radial trajectories as a rule of thumb,
but we should not expect it to give quantitatively accu-
rate predictions for the increase in constraining power.
The argument above applies to all attempts to constrain
gaγγusing neutron stars, not just a search for time de-
pendent signals.
Let us come now to the question of other targets, focus-
ing in particular on the time-dependence of their signals.
Note that in our original target selection, we used only
the mean power, however as demonstrated in Sec. III A
and as is apparent from Eq. (29), the key parameter de-
termining whether including a time-domain analysis can
add value over just using the frequency domain is σS/µS.
Clearly this will depend on the intrinsic pulsar parame-
ters,B0,Pand axion mass, maas well as ( α, θ). In Fig. 8
we show that σS/µSclearly increases with B0with the
amount being sensitive to the choice of θandα. We have
also investigated the dependence on P, but this is typi-
cally much weaker for the relevant range of parameters.
10Note that this figure-of-merit is based on the calculation of power
radiated at the poles for an aligned rotator Hook et al [55]. We
think that this choice is a conservative estimate of the FOM.
Indeed a time-varying FOM can be computed in the same ap-
proach, but we think the resultant ranking for targets from such
choices for the FOM are subject to errors arising from the ra-
dial trajectories assumption that has been superceded by the
ray-tracing approach.13
FIG. 6. In the left panel, we present the constraints on the axion-photon coupling for the average-subtracted case as a function
of (θ, α) for ma= 4µeV. As expected, the derived limit is weaker in the limit α→0 since the time-dependence of the signal is
negligibly small. In fact there is no limit for α≡0 since there is no time dependence. Fortunately, the limits from the pulsar
main beam modelling require α > 20◦and|β|<4◦which are included as red lines on the plot, so we are able to achieve a
limit gγγγ≲9.6×10−11GeV−1. On the right panel, we show the ratio of the signal-to-noise in the case where the average has
been subtracted (i.e., where only time-domain data is used) the case where the time-averaged flux is used in frequency space.
In other words, this ratio quantifies the gain in working in the time-domain.
FIG. 7. 2 upper limits on gaγγas a function of maford=
0.165 pc. This is determined by calculating the highest upper
limit in the region of the α−θplane allowed by |β|<4◦and
α > 20◦from the equivalent of Fig. 6. On the basis of this
figure we quote an upper limit of gaγγ<5.5×10−11GeV over
the mass range 3 .9µeV≤ma≤4.7µeV.
Based on this, we can expect that time-domain obser-
vations offer the greatest enhancement over a total flux
measurement for larger values of B0. Hence, objects such
as magnetars stand to gain most from a time-domain ver-
sus total flux analysis.
The GCM in particular has already been a popular
target for searching for axion signals. In Fig. 9 we present
some GCM profiles analogous to those in Fig. 1. The
first thing to notice is that the signal is quite a bit larger,
mainly due to the enhanced dark matter density assumed
FIG. 8. The relative time variance, σS/µS, of the profiles as a
function of the magnetic field B0at the surface of the neutron
star. We fix P= 4 s and ma= 1µeV and the value of gaγγ
scales out in this ratio. Despite the time-variation between the
maximum and minimum of the profiles increasing by orders of
magnitude for B0∼1014G compared to B0∼1012G,σS/µS
only goes up by a factor of a few.
in the GC, although this is mitigated somewhat by it
being further away.
Clearly, at least for some choices of the orientation an-
gles the profiles are substantially more localised in pulsar
phase - they are almost pulse-like, but they are still much
narrower than the width main peak in the radio pulse
profile for this object. The strong dependence on pulse
phase in this case is due to the effects of the “throats” in
the magnetosphere where axion production is enhanced.14
FIG. 9. Predicted pulse profiles for the GCM. In order to
generate these profiles, we fix gaγγ= 10−10GeV−1andma=
1µeV and α= 60◦while varying the observing angle. As in
Fig. 1 we have removed the average signal from the profiles.
We can see very clearly that in some cases the profiles are
very time variable - they almost look pulse-like for θ= 30◦
and 60◦. Nonetheless these only correspond to a σS/µs≈3
compatible with Fig. 8.
This is likely to also enhance the constraining power. Ob-
viously, this is a model-dependent assumption that arises
from assuming the GJ model. We emphasise the point
that the strength of this technique is directly propor-
tional to the size of the time-dependence, and by exten-
sion the presence of these throats in the charge density.
Further to these points, the GCM offers both large rel-
ative time-variance and it lies in a region of larger dark
matter density. Furthermore the axion-to-photon con-
version is enhanced due to large magnetic fields. More
specifically it has a large magnetic field B0≈1.4×1014G
and a period of P= 3.76 sec and is a distance of
D≈8.3 kpc. In fact, the ratio of the FOM Eq. (22)
from PSR J2144 −3933 relative to the GCM is given by
FOM|GCM
FOM|J2144≈1.3×10−4×ρDM|GCM
ρDM|local. (30)
If one assumes a standard NFW profile for the galaxy,
one obtains an enhancement of ∼105with respect to the
local value11which suggests that it will lead to a larger
FOM by a factor of ∼20. If the dependence on B0andP
is slightly stronger than using the radial trajectory based
FOM, as we have suggested above, we might expect a
slightly stronger improvement than given by this simple
argument. In addition, due to the larger value of B0
from Fig. 8 we would expect σS/µSto be large enough
to produce the most significant gains from a time-domain
study compared to other targets.
11Note that without this assumption, the constraints from this
pulsar are weaker than PSR J2144 −3933.Prima-facie there seems to be an argument for recon-
sidering the GCM as a target. As an indication of what
could be achieved for the GCM with similar observational
resources to those currently available, we have simulated
the equivalent of Fig. 7 using the GCM as the source as-
suming a similar noise level to the present data, that is
3 mJy, and this is presented in the top panel of Fig. 1012.
Making similar assumptions about constraints on ( α, β)
from the pulse profile, we obtain a projected upper limit
ofgaγγ<4×10−12GeV−1which is a factor ∼10 stronger
than that we obtained from PSR J2144 −3933. In addi-
tion, the GCM allows a much wider range masses with
mmax
a≈85µeV (fmax
obs≈20 GHz). While there are many
caveats to such an analysis, notably the noise levels that
one might achieve in the direction of the GC, this sug-
gests recording time domain information for this object
is well motivated. Note that above we have argued that
it might be possible to improve limit by a factor ∼6 us-
ing a 100 hour observation using SKA1-mid, which would
lead to a projected limit of gaγγ<6×10−13GeV−1.
It is worth noting that the GJ model is believed to be
a reasonable description of the pulsar magnetosphere for
typical radio pulsars with magnetic field strengths in the
range 1011G≤B0≤1013G. However, it breaks down
in pulsars with large magnetic field values, magnetars in
particular for which the emission mechanism is poorly
understood. Since a detailed analysis of the magneto-
sphere and the associated modelling uncertainties and
propagating these uncertainties through our pipeline re-
quires detailed MHD simulations, we leave such efforts to
future work. It is a well-known fact that DM density at
the galactic centre is very poorly constrained. It is our
considered opinion that the extrapolation of the NFW
profile to the position of the GCM in the galactic halo to
predict ρDM, which translates to an uncertainty of ∼2
orders of magnitude in gaγγis by far the biggest uncer-
tainty in our GCM modelling. In order to address the for-
mer problem, we will now describe a model-independent
analysis of the radio pulsar data to look for generalised
periodic signals.
In the bottom panel of Fig. 10, similar to the right
panel of Fig. 6, we show how much one can gain from
doing the time-domain analysis as a function of ( α, θ).
We see that the values of qtime/qfreqlarger, typically ≈
2−3 compared to ≈1 for PSR J2144 −3933. It seems
reasonable to conclude that the factor ≈20 improvement
in the constraining power seen in the case of the GCM
comes from the combination of the FOM based on radial
12We note that at 1.4 GHz there is a significant increase in the sky
temperature at the location of the GCM and this will dominate
Tsys. This means to achieve this noise figure one would need
to observe for ∼10 h with MeerKAT. In addition the pulsar and
the axion signal will be scattered [111]. However, as the signal
can be completely modelled using the observed pulsar profile it
can be combined with the axion templates before the matched
filtering is performed. Both these effects will fall off rapidly as a
function of increasing frequency.15
FIG. 10. In the top panel, we show the expected constraints
ongaγγfrom simulated observations of the GCM with an
r.m.s. noise level of 3 mJy for ma= 1µeV. We fix the pul-
sar parameters to be B0= 1.4×1014G,P= 3.76 s and
ρDM= 5.4×104GeV cm−3which is the value computed using
a standard NFW profile for the galaxy. Note that, depending
on the values of θandαlimits as low as gaγγ≲10−13,GeV−1
might be possible. In the bottom panel, we quantify the effect
of adding time-domain information over the parameter space
(α, θ). Note that this has a slightly different morphology to
that for PSR J2144 −3933, but also the values of qtime/qfreq
are slightly larger approaching ≈3 as it is indicated might be
the case in Fig. 8.
trajectories, a slightly stronger dependence of the signal
onB0andPthan predicted by radial trajectories and
the use of the time domain structure. Our conclusion is
that there is a strong argument for attempting to apply
this technique to the GCM.
Finally, we comment that it goes without saying that
improved knowledge of the orientation angles will lead
to improved constraints. The constraints which we have
imposed on gaγγfrom PSR J2144 −3933 are strongly de-
pendent on constraints we have placed on αandβfrom
the pulse profile. These are conservative and given the
nature of the signal - there are some regions of the α−θ
plane where the constraints are very weak and even non-existent - meaning one is always dominated by the lower
limit one imposes on α. However, if one were to know
the actual angles and, indeed, if they were in the region
where the signal is predicted to be strongest then more
optimal limits can be imposed. For example, in the case
of the GCM if the actual angles are in the region where
the strongest limit is, gaγγ≲10−13GeV−1for a 1 hour
observation with MeerKAT. This could be a factor of 6
lower for 100 hours with the SKA.
VI. SEARCH FOR GENERALIZED PERIODIC
SIGNALS
In the previous sections we have deduced limits on gaγγ
using PSR J2144-3933 and have discussed how this might
be improved in the future using the GCM. The key quali-
tative feature of the predicted signal profiles is that their
timescale is given by the pulse period P- this is what
allows us to use the pulsar data already folded at the
pulse period. One might be concerned that the precise
predictions using the GJ model might be too simplis-
tic given the complicated nature of the pulsar magneto-
sphere. However, taking the qualitative prediction that
the signal is dominated by low harmonics of the period
one might perform a generalised search for the periodic
signals in the data. Of course, without specific connec-
tion to the physics, such a search cannot yield an upper
limit on gaγγ, but does allow us to search more specif-
ically for periodic would-be axion signals which might
otherwise be missed due to modelling uncertainties.
Any time-periodic data d(t) can be written as a Fourier
series
d(t) =∞X
k=−∞ake2πikt/P, (31)
where Pis the signal period. The coefficients akare then
given by
ak=1
PZP
0dt d(t)e−2πikt/P. (32)
Reverting to the discrete case considered in this text,
where the data is defined on Ndiscrete time-bins, with
entries dq,q= 0, .., N−1, the Fourier coefficients in the
discrete limit can be written as
ak=1
NN−1X
q=0dqexp
−2πiqk
N
. (33)
Note that in what follows we do not consider the k= 0
mode associated to the time-average µSof the profiles
which, in principle, has been already removed by the
data processing. In addition, we comment that the parity
properties of the profiles we predict for the axion signal
imposes Im( ak) = 0.
In order to confirm our assumption that the profiles
are dominated by low kmodes we have computed the16
power spectrum13,|ak|2, of two profiles with varying lev-
els of time-dependence, i.e., a relatively flat profile with
(α= 10◦, θ= 10◦) and one with a relatively large time
variation with ( α= 60◦, θ= 30◦). This is presented in
the in the top panel of Fig. 11. We see that the power
spectrum for both decreases rapidly as a function of the
mode number k. The point can be further reinforced
by computing the inverse-Fourier transform from the ak
while neglecting all modes above some value of k=ncut.
We have done this for ncut= 1,3,7 and present the out-
come in the middle and bottom panels of Fig. 11. It is
clear that the profiles are reasonably well-represented by
ncut= 3 and ncut= 7 in each case. We find that this is
true for a wide range of predicted templates, but not all
e.g. some of those presented in Fig. 9.
The advantage of this approach is that we know a pe-
riodic signal search can be carried out using only the
first ncutFourier modes, reducing computational over-
head when scanning.
Furthermore, in what follows, rather than scan-
ning over every available template parametrised by
(a1,···, ancut), with say, a fixed total power (which would
be very costly from a numerical point of view) we instead
compare the expected distribution of the akthat would
follow if dwere pure Gaussian noise. In that case the
expected PDF for the values of the squared-amplitudes
|ak|2is aχ2
mdistribution
P(x;m) =1
2m/2Γ 1
2mxm/2−1exp 
−1
2x
, (34)
where Γ is the standard gamma function. For a given
mode, we have that m= 1 is the number of degrees
of freedom since the noise is real, and hence the real
and imaginary parts are correlated. Note the distribu-
tion is the same for all kmeaning the spectrum is scale-
invariant . However, if there is an axion signal in the data,
we expect this scale invariance to be broken, and, in par-
ticular, for there to be a greater portion of power con-
tained in the low Fourier modes, providing a model inde-
pendent test of periodic axion signals in the data. There-
fore, since the scale-invariance implies all |ak|2have an
identical distribution, by Fourier transforming the data
d(t) and binning the corresponding values of |ak|2across
allk, we can see to what extent they are χ2
1distributed.
This comparison is shown in the top panel of Fig. 12,
where we present histograms of the data (together with a
single noise realization) for a particular frequency chan-
nel corresponding to a value of ma= 4µeV, both of
which seem compatible with theoretical χ2
1distribution.
The sample is drawn from Fourier modes up to some kmax
13We note that akdepends on the relative phase of the main peak
of the pulsar profile and axion signal, but when one takes the
power spectrum this information, which is encoded in the com-
plex phase of ak, is removed. So our test using the power spec-
trum is independent of this assumption.
FIG. 11. In the top panel we present the power spectrum
of two profiles with with ( α= 60◦, θ= 30◦) (blue) and ( α=
10◦, θ= 10◦) (red). The power spectrum has been normalised
such that |a1|= 1. It is clear that both the power spectra are
dominated by the lowest nmodes. In the middle and bottom
panels we illustrate this point by presenting profiles obtained
from the inverse transform of the FFT of each profile with
ncut= (1,3,7) (red, green and blue, respectively) compared
to the exact profile (black). The significance of the low n
modes is further demonstrated by the fact that the blue curves
are remarkably close in shape to the black curves.17
FIG. 12. In the top panel we present a histogram of the power
spectrum computed from the data for ma= 4µeV in orange
and a single Gaussian noise realization of the same variance
and sample size. Each of the individual mode labelled by kis
binned, so this corresponds to a single mode search. We also
plot the χ2
1PDF associated expected for |ak|2and observe
that both the data, noise realization and analytic PDF are
clearly compatible with each other. This appears to suggest
that the data are compatible with being pure noise. In the
middle and bottom panels we compare the distribution of
the sum of first three modes (middle) and first seven modes
(bottom) from 300 realisations of simulated Gaussian noise
with the same standard deviation as the data. The measured
value is represented with a red line. We use the same value
maas in the top panel and have also included the theoretical
PDFs which are χ2
3andχ2
7respectively. By doing this, we
are searching for signals that have more structure than just a
single mode in the time-domain. Since the data value is not
a significant outlier, we exclude the presence of such signals
in the data.where the wavelength of the mode would be less than the
temporal bin-width, beyond which the description breaks
down owing to insufficient resolution.
Having extracted spectral information from the data,
we now want to analyse to what extent power is con-
centrated in the lower modes, as expected for an axion
signal. To do this, we look at the power contained in the
sum of the first ncutmodes, given by
Q(ncut) =ncutX
k=1|ak|2. (35)
We then want to understand if the measured values
of low-mode power are again consistent with the scale-
invariant spectrum. The PDF for Q(ncut) isχ2
ncutsince
it is the sum of ncutindependent modes each ∼χ2
1. This
distribution can clearly be seen in the bottom two panels
of Fig. 12 where for ncut= 3 and ncut= 7 we display
simulated and analytic PDFs for the frequency channel
corresponding to ma= 4µeV. Note we have also in-
cluded the measured value of Q(ncut) shown in red.
In order to make a more precise statistical statement
about the presence of a signal dominated by low-Fourier
modes, we have calculated the probability, using the ap-
propriate PDF, for there to be a larger value of Q(ncut)
than that which is measured. This gives a sense of
whether or not the measured value happens by chance
in a way consistent with our sample size, or whether it
is a sufficient outlier to indicate the presence of a pe-
riodic signal in the data. For the case of ncut= 3 we
find that there are three frequency channels where this
“probability to exceed” <0.05 and one where it is <0.02.
However, since there are 213 individual frequency chan-
nels it seems likely that this is a chance outcome in a
few frequency channels compatible with being a random
noise realization. For ncut= 7 there are none with a
probability <0.05.
VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have presented a procedure for carry-
ing out time-domain searches for radio signals produced
by axion dark matter converting into photons in the mag-
netospheres of pulsars. We have developed a matched fil-
ter formalism to define the signal-to-noise ratio of time-
dependent signals and have used this to show that time-
domain searches always improve the signal to noise ratio.
By how much the SNR is improved is determined by the
relative variance of the signal (the ratio of the standard
deviation to the mean of the signal over the pulse pe-
riod14) and the matched filter formalism provides a ro-
bust framework to understand why this is the case.
14Note that in pulsar astronomy, when applied to e.g. the main
pulse, this quantity is referred to as the modulation index.18
As a test case, we then applied the matched filter for-
malism to real data on PSR J2144 −3933 obtained using
MeerKAT, searching for expected periodic signal tem-
plates for the radio signatures produced by axion dark
matter. This was selected from a list of pulsars on the
basis of a simple figure of merit for axion detection. In
the present analysis, for a fixed axion mass, these tem-
plates form a two-parameter family for each observing
direction set by the angle θbetween the stars rotation
axis and the line of sight towards the pulsar, and αthe
angle between the stars magnetic axis and its rotation
axis. Using the morphology of the observed pulsar main-
beam signal, we were able to exclude a range of values
(α, θ), narrowing down the number of viable templates.
Scanning over the allowed set of templates we find no ev-
idence for axion dark matter and obtain an upper limit
ofgaγγ<9.6×10−11GeV−1(D/0.29 pc) over the mass
range 3 .9µeV≤ma≤4.7µeV. Given the astrophysical
uncertainties in modelling the templates, we also carried
out a generic periodic signal search independent of any
modelling. This also returned no significant signal from
axion dark matter.
In Fig. 13 we have placed the limits derived here in
context of other limits on gaγγfrom the CAST helio-
scope [70], haloscopes [24–35, 37, 38, 112, 114–118].
There are a number of other limits in the literature
from neutron stars [60, 64, 65, 68, 69, 75]. We have in-
cluded [64] as the present best limits obtained from obser-
vations that only use frequency information, but have not
included the rest. For example, when it comes to GCM
observations, the latest work by three of the present au-
thors [60], was the most up-to-date since that work in-
cludes ray-tracing, however this was based on a previ-
ous version of ray tracing-code which, unlike the present
work, did not include multiple reflections that increase
the predicted signal, leading to overly-conservative con-
straints. The GCM will be re-analysed in [79], combining
the most up-to-date account of the combined results on
modelling from [58, 59] and data [65, 67, 75]. Ref. [69]
also does not include ray-tracing so we do not include it.
Similarly [68] (which we again do not include) has been
superseded by the authors’ follow-up work [64] (shown in
Fig. 13), which uses the most up-to-date modelling. We
have tried to be fair in displaying those results which use
the most up-to-date modelling and conservative assump-
tions.
In this work, we set out with the intention of examining
to what extent detailed time-domain information could
be leveraged to increase the reach of radio searches for
axions relative to a simple radio-line search which sim-
ply averages the flux over a long-time. We were able toquantify this precisely in terms of the time-variance of
the signal which we examined both for two specific pul-
sars and a range of other pulsar magnetic field strengths.
It seems that for characteristic pulsar parameters there
is a modest enhancement to the signal to noise from in-
cluding time-domain information, however this marginal
gain could be enough to tip a tentative detection in a
total-flux measurement into a signal-to-noise level above
5 when time-domain information is included, making it
well worthwhile to extract maximum leverage from pul-
sar observations. This is especially relevant as we look to
future telescopes such as the SKA where we want to use
all possible tools at our disposal to enhance the prospects
for detection. Furthermore, given the rich variety of ever-
increasing astrophysical probes of axions [119–123] events
which are sharply peaked in time (or other detailed fea-
tures amenable to a matched filter search) could benefit
from more sophisticated search strategies.
Acknowledgements
JIM thanks Sam Witte for useful discussions and is
supported by an FSR Fellowship. SS was supported for-
merly by a George Rigg Scholarship and more recently
by the UK Science and Technology Facilities Council
(STFC). Pulsar research at the Jodrell Bank Centre for
Astrophysics is supported by a consolidated grant from
the STFC. The data used in this project was obtained
through the MeerTIME project. We would like to thank
that collaboration for making this data available to us.
Appendix A: Interpolation of the ray-tracing results
Due to the computational cost of the ray-tracing simu-
lations, that require ∼24 hours to produce a pulse-profile
when parallelized over 32 CPU cores, we require a faster
alternative to predict the time-dependence of the signal
for arbitrary input angles. Therefore, we generate a sim-
ulated database of flux profiles as a discrete function of
(θ, α), represented by the circular data points in the top
panels of Fig. 14 with ∆ θ= 10◦and ∆ α= 5◦. Based
on these datasets we generate an interpolation routine
(where we use the SciPy package scipy.interpolate )
that can then predict the signal for arbitrary values of
αandθ, the performance of which can be seen in the
bottom panels of Fig. 14, where we compare the predic-
tion of our interpolation routine with the data points.
For the purpose of our analysis, the level of agreement is
sufficient.
[1] R. D. Peccei and H. R. Quinn, Phys. Rev. D 16, 1791
(1977).
[2] J. E. Kim, Physical Review Letters 43, 103 (1979).[3] M. A. Shifman, A. I. Vainshtein, and V. I. Zakharov,
Nuclear Physics B 166, 493 (1980).19
FIG. 13. We show our limit (dark red) on the axion-photon coupling from 1 hour observations of PSR J2144-3933 ( B0≃
2×1012G, ρDM≃0.45 GeVcm−3and the projections from the 100 hours of observations from he SKA (red). We also show
projections of what can be achieved from ∼1 hour observations of the GCM ( B0≃1.6×1014G,ρDM≃6.5×104GeVcm3)
using MeerKAT at L-band (purple) presented in this paper and 100 hours with the SKA (black) assuming a frequency coverage
0.9≤fobs≤15.3 GHz. Note that our projections for the GCM are derived assuming θ=α= 20◦similar to what we assumed
for PSR J2144-3933, which is conservative since the time-dependence can be larger for larger values of α. Throughout we
assumed an NFW profile. The dark blue exclusion region is from the CAST helioscope [70]. The green and purple exclusions
are from the ADMX [24–31] and HAYSTAC [36–38] haloscopes, respectively. The yellow exclusions are from the CAPP
haloscope [32–35, 112, 113] (Note that the high-frequency constraint comes from the CAST-CAPP haloscope operating inside
the CAST dipole magnet at CERN). The orange are from the RBF/UF haloscopes [114, 115]. Finally, the dark blue limits from
the ORGAN collaboration [116, 117]. We have also included the limits of the frequency only analysis of the pulsar population
at the galactic centre using data from the Breakthrough Listen project [64] as probably the most reliable limit, using all the
known physics [58, 59] from neutron stars available prior to the analysis performed here.
[4] M. Dine, W. Fischler, and M. Srednicki, Physics Letters
B104, 199 (1981).
[5] A. R. Zhitnitsky, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 31, 260 (1980),
[Yad. Fiz.31,497(1980)].
[6] M. Dine and W. Fischler, Physics Letters B 120, 137
(1983).
[7] L. Abbott and P. Sikivie, Physics Letters B 120, 133
(1983).
[8] J. Preskill, M. B. Wise, and F. Wilczek, Physics Letters
B120, 127 (1983).
[9] A. Arvanitaki, S. Dimopoulos, S. Dubovsky, N. Kaloper,
and J. March-Russell, Phys. Rev. D 81, 123530 (2010),
arXiv:0905.4720 [hep-th].
[10] P. Svrcek and E. Witten, JHEP 06, 051 (2006),
arXiv:hep-th/0605206.
[11] R. L. Davis and E. P. S. Shellard, Nucl. Phys. B 324,
167 (1989).
[12] R. A. Battye and E. P. S. Shellard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73,
2954 (1994), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.Lett. 76, 2203–2204
(1996)], arXiv:astro-ph/9403018.
[13] R. A. Battye and E. P. S. Shellard, ArXiv Astrophysics
e-prints (1999), astro-ph/9909231.[14] O. Wantz and E. P. S. Shellard, Phys. Rev. D 82, 123508
(2010), arXiv:0910.1066 [astro-ph.CO].
[15] K. J. Bae, J.-H. Huh, and J. E. Kim, JCAP 09, 005
(2008), arXiv:0806.0497 [hep-ph].
[16] D. J. E. Marsh, Physics Reports 643, 1 (2016),
arXiv:1510.07633.
[17] S. Borsanyi etal., Nature 539, 69 (2016),
arXiv:1606.07494 [hep-lat].
[18] K. Choi, S. H. Im, and C. Sub Shin, Ann. Rev. Nucl.
Part. Sci. 71, 225 (2021), arXiv:2012.05029 [hep-ph].
[19] Planck Collaboration VI, ArXiv e-prints (2018),
arXiv:1807.06209.
[20] P. Sikivie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 1415 (1983).
[21] S. De Panfilis, A. C. Melissinos, B. E. Moskowitz, J. T.
Rogers, Y. K. Semertzidis, W. Wuensch, H. J. Halama,
A. G. Prodell, W. B. Fowler, and F. A. Nezrick, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 59, 839 (1987).
[22] W. Wuensch, S. De Panfilis-Wuensch, Y. K. Se-
mertzidis, J. T. Rogers, A. C. Melissinos, H. J. Halama,
B. E. Moskowitz, A. G. Prodell, W. B. Fowler, and
F. A. Nezrick, Phys. Rev. D 40, 3153 (1989).20
FIG. 14. Examples of the interpolated profiles in the analysis.
Each of these is for PSR J2144 −3933 using the parameters
discussed in the main text. The top panel is for ( α, θ) =
(10◦,30◦), the middle for ( α, θ) = (60◦,40◦) and the bottom
for (α, θ) = (80◦,60◦). It is clear that the interpolation is not
perfect, but it is accurate to within the level required for our
analysis.[23] C. Hagmann, P. Sikivie, N. S. Sullivan, and D. B. Tan-
ner, Phys. Rev. D 42, 1297 (1990).
[24] S. J. Asztalos etal. (ADMX), Phys. Rev. Lett. 104,
041301 (2010), arXiv:0910.5914 [astro-ph.CO].
[25] N. Du etal. (ADMX Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett.
120, 151301 (2018).
[26] N. Du etal. (ADMX), Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 151301
(2018), arXiv:1804.05750 [hep-ex].
[27] T. Braine etal. (ADMX), Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 101303
(2020), arXiv:1910.08638 [hep-ex].
[28] C. Bartram etal. (ADMX), Phys. Rev. Lett. 127,
261803 (2021), arXiv:2110.06096 [hep-ex].
[29] C. Boutan etal. (ADMX), Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 261302
(2018), arXiv:1901.00920 [hep-ex].
[30] C. Bartram etal. (ADMX), (2021), arXiv:2110.10262
[hep-ex].
[31] N. Crisosto, P. Sikivie, N. S. Sullivan, D. B. Tanner,
J. Yang, and G. Rybka, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 241101
(2020), arXiv:1911.05772 [astro-ph.CO].
[32] S. Lee, S. Ahn, J. Choi, B. R. Ko, and Y. K.
Semertzidis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 101802 (2020),
arXiv:2001.05102 [hep-ex].
[33] J. Jeong, S. Youn, S. Bae, J. Kim, T. Seong, J. E. Kim,
and Y. K. Semertzidis, Physical Review Letters 125
(2020), 10.1103/physrevlett.125.221302.
[34] Y. Lee, B. Yang, H. Yoon, M. Ahn, H. Park, B. Min,
D. Kim, and J. Yoo, Physical Review Letters 128
(2022), 10.1103/physrevlett.128.241805.
[35] J. Kim, O. Kwon, C. Kutlu, W. Chung, A. Matlashov,
S. Uchaikin, A. F. van Loo, Y. Nakamura, S. Oh,
H. Byun, D. Ahn, and Y. K. Semertzidis, “Near-
quantum-noise axion dark matter search at capp,”
(2022).
[36] B. Brubaker, L. Zhong, S. Lamoreaux, K. Lehnert,
and K. van Bibber, Physical Review D 96(2017),
10.1103/physrevd.96.123008.
[37] L. Zhong etal. (HAYSTAC), Phys. Rev. D 97, 092001
(2018), arXiv:1803.03690 [hep-ex].
[38] K. M. Backes etal. (HAYSTAC), Nature 590, 238
(2021), arXiv:2008.01853 [quant-ph].
[39] D. Alesini etal., Phys. Rev. D 99, 101101 (2019),
arXiv:1903.06547 [physics.ins-det].
[40] D. Alesini etal., Phys. Rev. D 103, 102004 (2021),
arXiv:2012.09498 [hep-ex].
[41] B. T. McAllister, G. Flower, J. Kruger, E. N.
Ivanov, M. Goryachev, J. Bourhill, and M. E. To-
bar, Phys. Dark Univ. 18, 67 (2017), arXiv:1706.00209
[physics.ins-det].
[42] A. P. Quiskamp, B. T. McAllister, P. Altin, E. N.
Ivanov, M. Goryachev, and M. E. Tobar, Sci. Adv. 8,
abq3765 (2022), arXiv:2203.12152 [hep-ex].
[43] A. A. Melc´ on etal. (CAST), JHEP 21, 075 (2020),
arXiv:2104.13798 [hep-ex].
[44] H. Chang etal. (TASEH), Phys. Rev. Lett. 129, 111802
(2022), arXiv:2205.05574 [hep-ex].
[45] T. Grenet, R. Ballou, Q. Basto, K. Martineau, P. Per-
rier, P. Pugnat, J. Quevillon, N. Roch, and C. Smith,
(2021), arXiv:2110.14406 [hep-ex].
[46] A. J. Millar etal., (2022), arXiv:2210.00017 [hep-ph].
[47] J. Liu etal. (BREAD), Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 131801
(2022), arXiv:2111.12103 [physics.ins-det].
[48] S. Beurthey etal., (2020), arXiv:2003.10894
[physics.ins-det].21
[49] L. Brouwer etal. (DMRadio), (2022), arXiv:2204.13781
[hep-ex].
[50] D. J. E. Marsh, J. I. McDonald, A. J. Millar, and
J. Sch¨ utte-Engel, Phys. Rev. D 107, 035036 (2023),
arXiv:2209.12909 [hep-ph].
[51] J. I. McDonald, Phys. Rev. D 105, 083010 (2022),
arXiv:2108.13894 [hep-ph].
[52] J. Sch¨ utte-Engel, D. J. E. Marsh, A. J. Millar,
A. Sekine, F. Chadha-Day, S. Hoof, M. N. Ali, K.-C.
Fong, E. Hardy, and L. ˇSmejkal, JCAP 08, 066 (2021),
arXiv:2102.05366 [hep-ph].
[53] M. S. Pshirkov and S. B. Popov, J. Exp. Theor. Phys.
108, 384 (2009), arXiv:0711.1264 [astro-ph].
[54] F. P. Huang, K. Kadota, T. Sekiguchi, and H. Tashiro,
Phys. Rev. D 97, 123001 (2018), arXiv:1803.08230 [hep-
ph].
[55] A. Hook, Y. Kahn, B. Safdi, and Z. Sun, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 121, 241102 (2018).
[56] M. S. Pshirkov, J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 108, 384 (2009).
[57] M. Leroy, M. Chianese, T. D. P. Edwards, and
C. Weniger, Phys. Rev. D 101, 123003 (2020),
arXiv:1912.08815 [hep-ph].
[58] R. A. Battye, B. Garbrecht, J. I. McDonald, and
S. Srinivasan, JHEP 09, 105 (2021), arXiv:2104.08290
[hep-ph].
[59] S. J. Witte, D. Noordhuis, T. D. P. Edwards,
and C. Weniger, Phys. Rev. D 104, 103030 (2021),
arXiv:2104.07670 [hep-ph].
[60] R. Battye, B. Garbrecht, J. McDonald, F. Pace,
and S. Srinivasan, Physical Review D 102 (2020),
10.1103/physrevd.102.023504.
[61] A. J. Millar, S. Baum, M. Lawson, and M. C. D. Marsh,
Journal of Cosmology and Astro-Particle Physics 2021 ,
013 (2021), arXiv:2107.07399 [hep-ph].
[62] P. Goldreich and W. H. Julian, ApJ 157, 869 (1969).
[63] B. R. Safdi, Z. Sun, and A. Y. Chen, Physical
Review D 99(2019), 10.1103/PhysRevD.99.123021,
arXiv:1811.01020.
[64] J. W. Foster, S. J. Witte, M. Lawson, T. Linden,
V. Gajjar, C. Weniger, and B. R. Safdi, arXiv
e-prints , arXiv:2202.08274 (2022), arXiv:2202.08274
[astro-ph.CO].
[65] J. Darling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 121103 (2020),
arXiv:2008.01877 [astro-ph.CO].
[66] J. Darling, Astrophys. J. Lett. 900, L28 (2020),
arXiv:2008.11188 [astro-ph.CO].
[67] R. A. Battye, J. Darling, J. I. McDonald, and
S. Srinivasan, Phys. Rev. D 105, L021305 (2022),
arXiv:2107.01225 [astro-ph.CO].
[68] J. W. Foster, Y. Kahn, O. Macias, Z. Sun, R. P.
Eatough, V. I. Kondratiev, W. M. Peters, C. Weniger,
and B. R. Safdi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 171301 (2020),
arXiv:2004.00011 [astro-ph.CO].
[69] Y.-F. Zhou etal., Phys. Rev. D 106, 083006 (2022),
arXiv:2209.09695 [astro-ph.CO].
[70] V. Anastassopoulos, S. Aune, Barth, etal., Nature
Physics 13, 584 (2017).
[71] G. Raffelt and L. Stodolsky, Phys. Rev. D37, 1237
(1988).
[72] E. Hardy and N. Song, (2022), arXiv:2212.09756 [hep-
ph].
[73] F. P. Huang, K. Kadota, T. Sekiguchi, and H. Tashiro,
Phys. Rev. D 97, 123001 (2018), arXiv:1803.08230 [hep-
ph].[74] J. Darling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 121103 (2020),
arXiv:2008.01877 [astro-ph.CO].
[75] J. Darling, The Astrophysical Journal Letters 900, L28
(2020), arXiv:2008.11188 [astro-ph.CO].
[76] J. W. Foster, Y. Kahn, O. Macias, Z. Sun, R. P.
Eatough, V. I. Kondratiev, W. M. Peters, C. Weniger,
and B. R. Safdi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 171301 (2020),
arXiv:2004.00011 [astro-ph.CO].
[77] M. Leroy, M. Chianese, T. D. P. Edwards, and
C. Weniger, Phys. Rev. D 101, 123003 (2020),
arXiv:1912.08815 [hep-ph].
[78] P. Carenza and M. C. D. Marsh, (2023),
arXiv:2302.02700 [hep-ph].
[79] J. McDonald and S. Witte, “In prepartion,”.
[80] M. Gedalin and D. B. Melrose, Phys. Rev. E 64, 027401
(2001).
[81] B. Turimov, B. Ahmedov, A. Abdujabbarov, and
C. Bambi, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 28, 2040013 (2019),
arXiv:1802.03293 [gr-qc].
[82] R. Belvedere, J. A. Rueda, and R. Ruffini, The Astro-
physical Journal 799, 23 (2015).
[83] C. Thompson and R. C. Duncan, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society 275, 255 (1995).
[84] C. Thompson and R. C. Duncan, Astrophys. J. 561,
980 (2001), arXiv:astro-ph/0110675 [astro-ph].
[85] T. Mondal, The Astrophysical Journal Letters 913, L12
(2021).
[86] J. A. Pons and R. Perna, The Astrophysical Journal
741, 123 (2011).
[87] E. Platts, J. X. Prochaska, and C. J. Law,
The Astrophysical Journal Letters 895, L49 (2020),
arXiv:2005.06256 [astro-ph.GA].
[88] S. Yamasaki and T. Totani, Astrophys. J. 888, 105
(2020), arXiv:1909.00849 [astro-ph.HE].
[89] J. M. Yao, R. N. Manchester, and N. Wang, Astrophys.
J.835, 29 (2017), arXiv:1610.09448 [astro-ph.GA].
[90] J. M. Cordes and T. J. W. Lazio, arXiv e-prints , astro-
ph/0301598 (2003), arXiv:astro-ph/0301598 [astro-ph].
[91] D. P. Finkbeiner, The Astrophysical Journal Sup-
plementary Series 146, 407 (2003), arXiv:astro-
ph/0301558 [astro-ph].
[92] J. M. Cordes and T. J. W. Lazio, arXiv e-prints , astro-
ph/0207156 (2002), arXiv:astro-ph/0207156 [astro-ph].
[93] A. T. Deller, S. J. Tingay, M. Bailes, and
J. E. Reynolds, Astrophys. J. 701, 1243 (2009),
arXiv:0906.3897 [astro-ph.SR].
[94] R. Meyer and N. Christensen,
Significance 13, 20 (2016),
https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1740-
9713.2016.00896.x.
[95] B. Allen, Phys. Rev. D 71, 062001 (2005), arXiv:gr-
qc/0405045.
[96] R. N. Manchester, G. B. Hobbs, A. Teoh, and
M. Hobbs, Astron. J. 129, 1993 (2005), arXiv:astro-
ph/0412641.
[97] S. Johnston, A. Karastergiou, M. J. Keith, X. Song,
P. Weltevrede, F. Abbate, M. Bailes, S. Buchner,
F. Camilo, M. Geyer, B. Hugo, A. Jameson, M. Kramer,
A. Parthasarathy, D. J. Reardon, A. Ridolfi, M. Serylak,
R. M. Shannon, R. Spiewak, W. van Straten, V. Venka-
traman Krishnan, F. Jankowski, B. W. Meyers, L. Os-
wald, B. Posselt, C. Sobey, A. Szary, and J. van
Leeuwen, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society 493, 3608 (2020).22
[98] M. Bailes, A. Jameson, F. Abbate, E. D. Barr, N. D. R.
Bhat, L. Bondonneau, M. Burgay, S. J. Buchner,
F. Camilo, D. J. Champion, I. Cognard, P. B. Demorest,
P. C. C. Freire, T. Gautam, M. Geyer, J. M. Griess-
meier, L. Guillemot, H. Hu, F. Jankowski, S. John-
ston, A. Karastergiou, R. Karuppusamy, D. Kaur,
M. J. Keith, M. Kramer, J. van Leeuwen, M. E.
Lower, Y. Maan, M. A. McLaughlin, B. W. Meyers,
S. Os lowski, L. S. Oswald, A. Parthasarathy, T. Pen-
nucci, B. Posselt, A. Possenti, S. M. Ransom, D. J. Rear-
don, A. Ridolfi, C. T. G. Schollar, M. Serylak, G. Shai-
fullah, M. Shamohammadi, R. M. Shannon, C. Sobey,
X. Song, R. Spiewak, I. H. Stairs, B. W. Stappers,
W. van Straten, A. Szary, G. Theureau, V. Venka-
traman Krishnan, P. Weltevrede, N. Wex, T. D. Ab-
bott, G. B. Adams, J. P. Burger, R. R. G. Gamatham,
M. Gouws, D. M. Horn, B. Hugo, A. F. Joubert, J. R.
Manley, K. McAlpine, S. S. Passmoor, A. Peens-Hough,
Z. R. Ramudzuli, A. Rust, S. Salie, L. C. Schwardt,
R. Siebrits, G. Van Tonder, V. Van Tonder, and M. G.
Welz, Publications of the Astronomical Society of Aus-
tralia 37, e028 (2020).
[99] R. A. Main, A. Parthasarathy, S. Johnston,
A. Karastergiou, A. Basu, A. D. Cameron, M. J.
Keith, L. S. Oswald, B. Posselt, D. J. Reardon,
X. Song, and P. Weltevrede, Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society 518, 1086
(2022), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/518/1/1086/47139759/stac3149.pdf.
[100] S. Johnston, M. Kramer, A. Karastergiou, M. Keith,
L. Oswald, A. Parthasarathy, and P. Weltevrede, arXiv
e-prints , arXiv:2212.03988 (2022), arXiv:2212.03988
[astro-ph.HE].
[101] D. R. Lorimer and M. Kramer,
Handbook of Pulsar Astronomy (2012).
[102] J. Gil, P. Gronkowski, and W. Rudnicki, Astronomy
and Astrophysics 132, 312 (1984).
[103] B. Posselt, A. Karastergiou, S. Johnston,
A. Parthasarathy, M. J. Keith, L. S. Oswald, X. Song,
P. Weltevrede, E. D. Barr, S. Buchner, M. Geyer,
M. Kramer, D. J. Reardon, M. Serylak, R. M. Shannon,
R. Spiewak, and V. Venkatraman Krishnan, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 508, 4249
(2021), arXiv:2109.12007 [astro-ph.HE].
[104] S. C. Rookyard, P. Weltevrede, and S. Johnston,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 446,
3367 (2015), arXiv:1410.3294 [astro-ph.HE].
[105] S. Johnston and A. Karastergiou, Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society 485, 640 (2019),
arXiv:1902.03996 [astro-ph.HE].
[106] P. Weltevrede and S. Johnston, Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society 391, 1210
(2008), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/391/3/1210/17319973/mnras391-1210.pdf.
[107] V. Radhakrishnan and D. J. Cooke, Astrophysical Let-
ters3, 225 (1969).[108] R. Yuen and D. B. Melrose, Publications of the Astro-
nomical Society of Australia 31, e039 (2014).
[109] J. Dyks and M. Pierbattista, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society 454, 2216 (2015),
arXiv:1507.08454 [astro-ph.HE].
[110] J. M. Cordes, Astrophys. J. 222, 1006 (1978).
[111] L. G. Spitler, K. J. Lee, R. P. Eatough, M. Kramer,
R. Karuppusamy, C. G. Bassa, I. Cognard, G. Desvi-
gnes, A. G. Lyne, B. W. Stappers, G. C. Bower, J. M.
Cordes, D. J. Champion, and H. Falcke, The Astrophys-
ical Journal Letters 780, L3 (2014), arXiv:1309.4673
[astro-ph.HE].
[112] S. Lee, S. Ahn, J. Choi, B. Ko, and Y. Semertzidis,
Physical Review Letters 124 (2020), 10.1103/phys-
revlett.124.101802.
[113] C. M. Adair, K. Altenm¨ uller, V. Anastassopoulos, S. A.
Cuendis, J. Baier, K. Barth, A. Belov, D. Bozicevic,
H. Br¨ auninger, G. Cantatore, F. Caspers, J. F. Castel,
S. A. C ¸etin, W. Chung, H. Choi, J. Choi, T. Dafni,
M. Davenport, A. Dermenev, K. Desch, B. D¨ obrich,
H. Fischer, W. Funk, J. Galan, A. Gardikiotis, S. Gni-
nenko, J. Golm, M. D. Hasinoff, D. H. H. Hoffmann,
D. D. Ib´ a˜ nez, I. G. Irastorza, K. Jakovˇ ci´ c, J. Kamin-
ski, M. Karuza, C. Krieger, C ¸. Kutlu, B. Laki´ c, J. M.
Laurent, J. Lee, S. Lee, G. Luz´ on, C. Malbrunot,
C. Margalejo, M. Maroudas, L. Miceli, H. Mirallas,
L. Obis, A. ¨Ozbey, K. ¨Ozbozduman, M. J. Pivovaroff,
M. Rosu, J. Ruz, E. Ruiz-Ch´ oliz, S. Schmidt, M. Schu-
mann, Y. K. Semertzidis, S. K. Solanki, L. Stewart,
I. Tsagris, T. Vafeiadis, J. K. Vogel, M. Vretenar,
S. Youn, and K. Zioutas, Nature Communications 13
(2022), 10.1038/s41467-022-33913-6.
[114] S. DePanfilis, A. C. Melissinos, B. E. Moskowitz, J. T.
Rogers, Y. K. Semertzidis, W. U. Wuensch, H. J. Ha-
lama, A. G. Prodell, W. B. Fowler, and F. A. Nezrick,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 839 (1987).
[115] C. Hagmann, P. Sikivie, N. S. Sullivan, and D. B. Tan-
ner, Phys. Rev. D 42, 1297 (1990).
[116] B. T. McAllister, G. Flower, E. N. Ivanov, M. Gory-
achev, J. Bourhill, and M. E. Tobar, Physics of the
Dark Universe 18, 67 (2017).
[117] A. Quiskamp, B. T. McAllister, P. Altin, E. N. Ivanov,
M. Goryachev, and M. E. Tobar, Science Advances 8
(2022), 10.1126/sciadv.abq3765.
[118] B. M. Brubaker and et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 061302
(2017).
[119] S. J. Witte, S. Baum, M. Lawson, M. C. D. Marsh,
A. J. Millar, and G. Salinas, (2022), arXiv:2212.08079
[hep-ph].
[120] D. Noordhuis, A. Prabhu, S. J. Witte, A. Y. Chen,
F. Cruz, and C. Weniger, (2022), arXiv:2209.09917
[hep-ph].
[121] F. Chadha-Day, B. Garbrecht, and J. McDonald, JCAP
12, 008 (2022), arXiv:2207.07662 [hep-ph].
[122] M. Escudero, C. K. Pooni, M. Fairbairn, D. Blas, X. Du,
and D. J. E. Marsh, (2023), arXiv:2302.10206 [hep-ph].
[123] F. V. Day and J. I. McDonald, JCAP 10, 051 (2019),
arXiv:1904.08341 [hep-ph].