arXiv:2303.01411v1  [physics.hist-ph]  2 Mar 2023Algorithmic Randomness and Probabilistic Laws
Jeﬀrey A. Barrett *and Eddy Keming Chen†
March 3, 2023
Abstract
We consider two ways one might use algorithmic randomness to char-
acterize a probabilistic law. The ﬁrst is a generative chance⋆law. Such
laws involve a nonstandard notion of chance. The second is a probabilistic⋆
constraining law . Such laws impose relative frequency and randomness
constraints that every physically possible world must sati sfy. While each
notion has virtues, we argue that the latter has advantages o ver the former.
It supports a uniﬁed governing account of non-Humean laws an d provides
independently motivated solutions to issues in the Humean b est-system
account. On both notions, we have a much tighter connection b etween
probabilistic laws and their corresponding sets of possibl e worlds. Certain
histories permitted by traditional probabilistic laws are ruled out as phys-
ically impossible. As a result, such laws avoid one variety o f empirical
underdetermination, but the approach reveals other variet ies of underde-
termination that are typically overlooked.
Contents
1 Introduction 2
2 Randomness constraints 4
3 Alternative algorithmic notions 6
4 Probabilities⋆, chances⋆, and laws 8
5 Discussion 11
6 Conclusion 12
*Department of Logic and Philosophy of Science, University o f California, Irvine, Irvine, CA
92697-5100. Email: j.barrett@uci.edu
†Department of Philosophy, University of California, San Di ego, 9500 Gilman Dr, La Jolla, CA
92093-0119. Email: eddykemingchen@ucsd.edu
11 Introduction
Probabilistic laws, as they are usually understood, involv e a variety of under-
determination. This is illustrated by a simple example.
Consider repeated tosses of a coin that produce an inﬁnite ω-sequence of
results/an}bracketle{tr1,r2,.../an}bracketri}ht, where riis the result of the ith coin toss. Each such possible
sequence of tosses gives the history of events of a possible w orld. LetΩLbe the
set of all such worlds that accord with a law L.
Now consider the probabilistic law L:
L:Each element in the ω-sequence of coin tosses /an}bracketle{tr1,r2,.../an}bracketri}htis determined inde-
pendently and with an unbiased probability of heads and tail s.
One might think of Las descriptive of a fundamentally random process, some-
thing like starting with a sequence of spin-1 /2 particles each in a eigenstate of
z-spin, then measuring their x-spins in turn.
As probabilistic laws are typically understood, ΩLis the set of all ω-
sequences. That is, Ldoes not rule out any world. A world compatible with L
might exhibit anylimiting relative frequency or no limiting relative freque ncy
at all. As a result, even the full history of a world will fail t o determine Lin an
continuous cardinality of cases.
And sinceΩLis compatible with every probabilistic law with heads and
tails as possible outcomes with positive probability on eac h toss, even the full
set of worlds compatible with Ldoes nothing to determine Lover any other
probabilistic law.
This sort of underdetermination is closely related to a corr esponding sort of
empirical coherence.1A physical law is empirically coherent, in the sense we
are interested in here, only if it is always in principle poss ible for one to have
empirical support for the law if the law is in fact true.2If a law is empirically
incoherent, then it may be impossible to learn that the law is true with even
complete evidence. The law Lis empirically incoherent in this sense as there
areω-sequences that might occur if Lis true that would provide no empirical
evidence whatsoever for accepting L. In such worlds one would never have
any empirical support for accepting the correct probabilis tic law even with full
evidence. Indeed, since worlds compatible with Lmight exhibit any limiting
relative frequency, there is a continuous cardinality of su ch worlds.
One might get a tighter ﬁt between probabilistic laws and emp irical evidence
by appealing to a stronger conception of probability and a co rrespondingly
stronger variety of probabilistic laws. Consider the law L⋆:
1See Barrett (1996), (1999) and (2020) for a presentation and discussions of empirical coherence.
2Throughout this paper unless speciﬁed otherwise, when we sa y “Lis the true law” or “the
law Lis true,” we mean not just Lis true but also Lis the law. This is compatible with the non-
Humean perspective where laws govern and the Humean perspec tive where laws form the optimal
description of the mosaic.
2ΩL⋆ΩLML
Figure 1:ΩL, the set of worlds compatible with law L, is the set of all ω-
sequences of coin toss results. ΩL⋆, the set of worlds compatible with law L⋆,
is a proper subset of ΩL. All members of ΩL⋆exhibit the random pattern and
relative frequencies stipulated by L⋆.ML, the relative complement of ΩL⋆inΩL,
is the set of ‘maverick worlds,’ i.e. those that are usually r egarded as compatible
with Lbut lack the random pattern or relative frequencies.
L⋆:Theω-sequence of coin tosses /an}bracketle{tr1,r2,.../an}bracketri}htisrandom with unbiased relative
frequencies of heads and tails.
Here being random or not is a property of the full ω-sequence. It remains then
to say what it might mean for a sequence to be random.
The notions of randomness we will consider here are algorith mic. They are
deﬁned in terms of statistical tests that determine whether a fullω-sequence
exhibits any speciﬁable pattern. What matters at present is that each sequence
will either pass or fail the test for being random.
While Lis compatible with all ω-sequences of results, L⋆is not. LetΩL⋆
be the set of all worlds that accord with the law L⋆. All worlds inΩL⋆exhibit
the random unbiased sequences stipulated by L⋆and hence, unlike ΩL, is a
proper subset of the set of all possible ω-sequences. Speciﬁcally, ΩL⋆contains
nomaverick worlds , worlds where the results exhibit a speciﬁable pattern or fa il
to exhibit the right relative frequencies or fail to exhibit any relative frequencies
at all. (See Figure 1.)
IfL⋆is true, then anyphysically possible world fully determines L⋆. Fur-
ther, no special probabilistic background assumptions or p riors regarding what
world one inhabits are required for successful inquiry.3A non-dogmatic in-
quirer in any physically possible world might determine the truth of L⋆by
simply conditioning on the results of coin tosses. Indeed, L⋆is empirically
coherent in the strong sense that, with complete evidence, o ne will surely
learn it up to an equivalence class of computationally indis tinguishable laws,
something we will discuss later. A probabilistic law like L⋆is much like a
3Both the Principle Principle and Cournot’s Principle are so metimes used for this purpose. See
Diaconis and Skyrms (2018, 66–7) for a brief discussion of th e latter. We return to this point in §5.
3deterministic law in that the law is fully determined by the e vidence.
In the present paper, we consider how one might understand a ⋆-law like
L⋆as a generative chance⋆lawor as a probabilistic⋆constraining law . We will then
discuss the costs and beneﬁts of such an approach. While the t wo notions are
closely related, we will argue that thinking of L⋆as a probabilistic⋆constraining
law that governs the full sequence of coin-tosses has a numbe r of salient virtues.
They are relevant to discussions about the metaphysics of la ws. As we explain
in §4, the notion of a probabilistic⋆constraining law removes a major obstacle
for developing a uniﬁed non-Humean account of governing law s, according to
which laws govern by constraining physical possibilities. Such a notion also
provides independently motivated solutions to the issues o f the Big Bad Bug
and the deﬁnition of ﬁtin the Humean best-system account of laws.
2 Randomness constraints
In order to characterize a ⋆-law, one needs a test of randomness for ω-sequences.
A random sequence of tosses with an unbiased coin should exhi bit an even
relative frequency of heads and tails in the limit. But this, of course, is not
suﬃcient. The limiting relative frequency of an alternating se quence of heads
and tails will be 1 /2 for heads and tails, but this sequence is clearly not random .
There are three further conditions that one should want an un biased random
sequence to satisfy: a random sequence should be generic, pa tternless, and not
allow for the success of a fair betting strategy.4These three conditions are closely
related. The core idea is that an ω-sequence should count as random only if
it exhibits no ﬁnitely speciﬁable regularity that characte rizes the sequence and
might consequently be used to make predictions better than c hance.
Algorithmic tests are helpful in characterizing what it mig ht mean for an
inﬁnite sequence to be patternless. As a ﬁrst try, one might t ake anω-sequence
to be patternless, and hence random, if and only if there is no ﬁnite-length
algorithm that produces the sequence.5If there is such an algorithm for an
ω-sequence of coin-tosses, then the algorithm expresses a re gularity, something
that one might even think of as a deterministic law, that char acterizes the
sequence. But that an ω-sequence cannot be represented by a ﬁnite algorithm
is again not suﬃcient for it to be random in the sense we are interested in here .
Consider an inﬁnite sequence that consists of a repeated thr ee-block pattern
4See Li and Paul Vitányi (2008) and Dasgupta (2011) for introd uctions to algorithmic complexity
and randomness. See also Barrett and Huttegger (2021) for a d iscussion of these notions and how
they relate to each other. The present section follows part o f that discussion. See Eagle (2021) for
an introduction to some of the philosophical issues involvi ng randomness.
5One might think of an algorithm as a program in a Turing-compu table language and the length
of the algorithm as the length of the program. Di ﬀerent languages will di ﬀer in the length they
assign to an abstract algorithm by no more than the length of a program that translates between
the two languages.
4of one thousand heads followed by one thousand tails followe d by one thou-
sand random and unbiased heads and tails. The relative frequ ency of heads
and tails in the full sequence is unbiased. And since there ar e an inﬁnite num-
ber of random blocks, such a sequence cannot be represented b y a ﬁnite-length
algorithm. But the sequence is clearly not random. A good Bay esian inquirer
might quickly learn to bet on heads a thousand times, then bet on tails a thou-
sand times, then bet anything at all a thousand times, then re peat the pattern.
If so, she will enjoy unbounded wealth in the limit.
One way to put the problem is that there is no bound on the amoun t that
a ﬁnite initial segment of this sequence might be compressed . One might
write a very short program that takes advantage of the regula rity of the blocks
of heads and tails, then write a program that outputs an initi al segment by
alternating that short routine with a routine that just list s each random block. In
this way, one might eventually shorten the algorithmic repr esentation of ﬁnite
initial segments of the sequence by more than any constant c. This observation
provides the key idea behind Martin-Löf randomness .
Anω-sequence is Martin-Löf random if and only if there is a const antc
such that all ﬁnite initial segments are c-incompressible by a preﬁx-free Turing
machine.6This deﬁnition also satisﬁes the two other desiderata for a s uitable
notion of randomness. If a sequence is Martin-Löf random, th en there is no
fair betting strategy that generates unbounded wealth. And since measure
one of inﬁnite-length sequences are Martin-Löf random in un biased Lebesgue
measure, it meshes well with the intuition that random seque nces are generic.
One might also deﬁne what it means for a sequence to be Martin- Löf random
by considering the set of statistical tests that such a seque nce will pass. A
Martin-Löf test is a sequence {Un}n∈ωof uniformlyΣ0
1classes such that µ(Un)≤
2−nfor all n, whereµis the unbiased Lebesgue measure over the sequences.
Being uniformlyΣ0
1means that there is a single constructive speciﬁcation of th e
sequence of classes. A constructive speciﬁcation is one tha t can be represented
by a ordinary algorithm.7The idea is that each sequence {Un}n∈ωof uniformly
Σ0
1classes corresponds to a way that a sequence might be special and thus fail
an associated statistical test of randomness. A sequence pa sses a particular
Martin-Löf test if it is not special in the speciﬁed sense.
Let 2ωbe the set of allω-length sequences (inﬁnite-length sequences indexed
byω). A class C⊂2ωis Martin-Löf null if there is a Martin-Löf test {Un}n∈ωsuch
that C⊆/intersectiontext
nUn. A sequence S∈2ωisMartin-Löf random if and only if{S}is
not Martin-Löf null. That is, a sequence Sis Martin-Löf random if and only
if it passes every Martin-Löf test. And again, a sequence has this property
6An initial segment is c-incompressible if and only if it is not representable by an a lgorithm that
iscshorter than the initial segment. A preﬁx-free Turing machi ne is a universal Turing machine that
is self-delimiting and hence can read its input in one direct ion without knowing what, if anything,
comes next. Such a machine provides an even playing ﬁeld. See Li and Paul Vitányi (2008).
7See Barrett and Huttegger (2021) for further details.
5if and only if there is a constant csuch that all ﬁnite initial segments are c-
incompressible by a preﬁx-free Turing machine.
One might use the notion of Martin-Löf randomness to specify the law L⋆
as a constraint on the set of physically possible worlds:
L⋆
ML:Theω-sequence of coin tosses /an}bracketle{tr1,r2,.../an}bracketri}htisMartin-Löf random with unbi-
ased relative frequencies of heads and tails.
Here allof the worlds inΩL⋆
MLare random with well-deﬁned unbiased relative
frequencies. As a result, a non-dogmatic inquirer will sure ly infer unbiased
relative frequencies in the limit. And inasmuch as all initi al segments of her
data will be c-incompressible, she will have as good of evidence as possib le that
the data are patternless and are hence randomly distributed .8
3 Alternative algorithmic notions
Martin-Löf randomness is not the only way that one might char acterize a prob-
abilistic coin-toss law. There are other algorithmic notio ns of randomness to
choose from. Schnorr randomness is a closely-related notio n with many of the
same virtues.
A Schnorr test is a Martin-Löf test where the measures µ(Un) are themselves
uniformly computable. A class C⊂2ωis Schnorr null if there is a Schnorr test
{Un}n∈ωsuch that C⊆/intersectiontext
nUn. And a sequence S∈2ωisSchnorr random if and
only if{S}is not Schnorr null.
Schnorr randomness has similar virtues to Martin-Löf rando mness. Initial
segments are patternless in a strong sense, there is a natura l sense in which
there is no fair betting strategy, and measure one of inﬁnite -length sequences,
including all those that are Martin-Löf random, are Schnorr random. (See
Figure 2.) And as with Martin-Löf randomness, one might use t he notion of
Schnorr randomness to specify a probabilistic constrainin g law:
L⋆
S:Theω-sequence of coin tosses /an}bracketle{tr1,r2,.../an}bracketri}htisSchnorr random with unbiased
relative frequencies of heads and tails.
One might also consider an associated notion of chance here a s well. A chance⋆
S
process behaves just like an ordinary chance process except that it can never
produce an inﬁnite sequence that fails to be Schnorr random w ith well-deﬁned
relative frequencies.
8A probabilistic⋆law need not presume a fundamental direction of time. In orde r to determine
an initial segment, the deﬁnition of Martin-Löf randomness seems to presuppose an initial time
and a temporal direction. However, one can generalize the no tion by requiring that the ordered-
sequence of coin tosses be Martin-Löf random for any speciﬁe d temporal direction and for any toss
one regards as the “initial” toss.
6ΩL⋆
ML ΩL⋆
S ΩL
Figure 2: L⋆
S, which is formulated with Schnorr randomness, is compatibl e
with more worlds than L⋆
ML, which employs Martin-Löf randomness. However,
the two are empirically indistinguishable, if one is limite d to Turing-strength
computation.
While Martin-Löf randomness provides a particularly natur al notion of
randomness, Schnorr randomness also has conceptual virtue s.9So there is a
choice to make, but it is arguably a choice without empirical consequences.
Since there are sequences that are Schnorr random but not Mar tin-Löf ran-
dom, L⋆
MLand L⋆
Sare diﬀerent laws. That said, they are in a strong sense
empirically equivalent since there is no e ﬀective procedure that would deter-
mine whether a particular sequence is Martin-Löf random or S chnorr random
but not Martin-Löf random.10Hence if one is limited to Turing-strength com-
putation, one would never be able to distinguish between L⋆
MLand L⋆
Sno matter
what empirical evidence one had.
The upshot is that moving from a standard probabilistic law t o a probabilis-
tic constraining law eliminates one variety of empirical un derdetermination,
but it reveals two others. First, insofar as one expects a seq uence of coin tosses
governed by a traditional probabilistic law Lto be such that one can detect no
discernible pattern, one should expect law L⋆to be empirically indistinguish-
able from L. And insofar as one is limited to Turing-strength computati ons, one
will be unable to distinguish between di ﬀerent versions of L⋆like L⋆
MLand L⋆
S.
Since Martin-Löf randomness has the sort of properties we wa nt and as it is ar-
guably the standard algorithmic notion (Dasgupta 2011), we shall understand
L⋆asL⋆
ML.
9See Downey and Gri ﬃths (2002) for details regarding the properties of Schnorr r andomness
and Downey and Hirschfeldt (2010) for a description and comp arison of Martin-Löf and Schnorr
randomness.
10See Barrett and Huttegger (2021) for a proof. The notion of e ﬀective procedure here, as
elsewhere in the paper when not explicitly stipulated to be o therwise, is the standard Church-
Turing one.
74 Probabilities⋆, chances⋆, and laws
What kind of physical law is L⋆? And how does it govern the world? We
suggest that one might think of L⋆as agenerative chance⋆lawor as a probabilistic⋆
constraining law . We will start with the ﬁrst.
As a generative chance⋆law,L⋆tells us that each toss is generated by unbiased
chances⋆, where a chance⋆process behaves just like an ordinary chance process
except that it can never produce an inﬁnite sequence that fails to be Martin-Löf
random or fails to exhibit well-deﬁned relative frequencie s.11As a result, a
chance⋆process involves a subtle violation of independence. The se quence of
tosses will pass every ﬁnitely speciﬁable test for statisti cal independence, but
since the full sequence must exhibit the property of being Ma rtin-Löf random
with unbiased relative frequencies, a chance⋆process is holistically constrained.
The constraint is not felt on any ﬁnite set of tosses, nor is it discoverable by
eﬀective means, but it does require that a relationship hold be tween the full
sequence of tosses that is generated by the process in the lim it. This interde-
pendence between outcomes may be incompatible with the usua l intuitions
behind wanting a generative law. It may also be incompatible with how causal
explanation works more generally.
Given this, L⋆is more naturally regarded as a law that governs by constrain -
ing the entire history of the world—in this case, the full ω-sequence of outcomes.
It tells us which sequences of outcomes are physically possi ble, namely those
that satisfy the frequency constraint and the randomness co nstraint imposed
by the law. This understanding of probabilistic laws and the ir governance also
meshes well with Chen and Goldstein’s (2022) minimal primit ivism account
(MinP), according to which laws are certain primitive facts that govern the
world by constraining the physical possibilities of the ent ire spacetime and its
contents.12
Understood this way, L⋆addresses problems encountered by both non-
Humean and Humean accounts of laws. We will start with the for mer.
On non-Humean governing accounts of laws, there is a puzzle c oncerning
11Alternatively, one might consider a similar algorithmic no tion of chance but without requiring
there be well-deﬁned relative frequencies. Here we are assu ming well-deﬁned relative frequencies
so that an agent might infer the law given full empirical evid ence by conditioning on the results of
coin tosses as she goes. The cost of this further constraint i s modest since we are already requiring
the full sequence to be Martin-Löf random.
12Three notes about the literature. (1) The present account ﬂe shes out one of the interpretive
options of probabilistic laws discussed by Chen and Goldste in (2022, §3.3.3, Option 4). (2) In one
respect, the present account is similar to John T. Roberts’s nomic frequentism (2009), as they both
employ frequency constraints. However, Roberts does not ap peal to algorithmic randomness. On
nomic frequentism, non-random sequences (such as the alter nating heads-tails sequence) are still
physically possible. Inasmuch as any non-random sequence i s regarded as evidence against the
probabilistic law and in favor of a deterministic law, it wou ld be better to exclude such sequences
from physical possibilities. (3) Adlam (2022) presents an a ccount of laws of nature as constraints
that is similar to Chen and Goldstein (2022) and contains a he lpful discussion of Roberts’s nomic
frequentism.
8precisely how probabilistic laws govern. According to the s tandard view,
probabilistic laws do not rule out any world. Instead, a prob abilistic law such
asLmerely assigns some number between zero and one to every (mea surable)
subsets in the space of all ω-sequences. This raises a puzzle: what do these
numbers between zero and one represent in physical reality?
Some non-Humeans appeal to gradable notions such as "propen sities" (Maudlin
2007, p.20) or "probabilities of necessitation" (Armstron g 1983, p.172). Suppose
a probabilistic law assigns a 0 .2 probability to the next outcome being heads.
On the propensities view, the chance setup has a 0 .2 propensity to bring about
a heads-outcome in the next toss. On the probabilities of nec essitation view,
the current state of a ﬀairs necessitates the state of a ﬀairs of a heads-outcome
to 0.2 probability. But while one might make sense of non-gradabl e notions
of physical possibility and impossibility, gradable notio ns such as propensities
and degrees of necessitation are less clear. This seems unde sirable.13
In contrast, probabilistic laws, such as L⋆, can be viewed as a special class
of constraining laws. They constrain what is physically pos sible by ruling
out certain sequences of outcomes, namely the maverick worl ds. A sequence
is physically impossible just in case it fails either the fre quency constraint or
the randomness constraint imposed by the law. This allows us to do away
with gradable notions such as propensities or probabilitie s of necessitation
altogether. In their place, we require only non-gradable no tions of physical
possibilities and impossibilities.
Consider MinP as a non-Humean example. We can now employ a sin gle
primitive relation, namely constraining , to understand how both probabilistic
laws and non-probabilistic laws relate to the world. Both ty pes of laws govern
by constraining what is physically possible, thereby rulin g out what is physi-
cally impossible. The way that L⋆constrains the world is not so di ﬀerent from
that of F=ma.L⋆constrains the physical possibilities to be all and only the
non-maverick worlds. F=maconstrains the physical possibilities to be all and
only the solutions of F=ma. In this way, L⋆removes a major obstacle to a
uniﬁed understanding of probabilistic and non-probabilis tic laws.
Humeans may also ﬁnd it useful to adopt L⋆for the sort of work we have
been discussing. First, it is relevant to the issue of the Big Bad Bug (Lewis 1986,
pp.xiv-xvi). Lewis notices that the original version of the Principal Principle and
Humean supervenience lead to a contradiction. There are cer tain histories of the
Humean mosaic, called undermining histories , that are assigned, according to the
Principal Principle, non-zero probability, conditionali zed on some probabilistic
theory Tbeing the best system. However, they are also assigned, acco rding
to Humean supervenience, zero probability, because Twould not be the best
system had any of its undermining histories been actual.
Now, consider the sort of history that would count as undermi ning. An
13See Chen and Goldstein (2022, sections 2 and 3.3.3) for discu ssions.
9undermining history either has the wrong limiting frequenc ies or no limiting
frequencies or exhibit patterns that can be summarized by a s impler system,
such as a deterministic law in the case of the alternating hea ds-tails sequence.
Undermining histories, then, are exactly the histories of m averick worlds, as
they lack the frequency or randomness patterns exempliﬁed b y typical se-
quences of the standard probabilistic law.
Understanding probabilistic laws as ⋆-laws rules out maverick worlds as
physically impossible. If maverick worlds are physically i mpossible, then there
are no physically possible undermining histories that can b e used to derive the
contradiction, and the Big Bad Bug is eliminated. Inasmuch a s restricting to⋆-
laws is also motivated by considerations of underdetermina tion and empirical
coherence, a Humean may ﬁnd this solution particularly natu ral.
While L⋆is naturally interpreted as a constraining law that is well- suited for
non-Humean governing accounts such as MinP , Humeans need no t interpret
the constraint as something that exists over and above the mo saic. They are
free to translate the present account into their preferred l anguage by regarding
L⋆as a new type of Humean best-system law. They might then use it to deﬁne
a new notion of Humean physical possibilities ( ΩL⋆
Humean) and regard both as
supervenient on the Humean mosaic.14
Second, Humeans who understand probabilistic laws as ⋆-laws can also
avoid appealing to ﬁtas a criterion in the best-system analysis of probabilis-
tic laws, which allows them to bypass di ﬃculties with how to characterize
this notion.15Given anω-sequence, there is much underdetermination among
probabilistic laws such as L, and one needs something like ﬁtto choose the
winning best system. This is because the standard way of unde rstanding in-
formativeness as the quantity of worlds being excluded does not distinguis h
among probabilistic laws like L. In contrast, there is signiﬁcantly less under-
determination among probabilistic laws like L⋆. If we consider a spectrum of
diﬀerent probabilistic statements like L⋆that diﬀer, say, in their speciﬁcations
of the relative frequencies in the ω-sequence, then at most one of them is com-
patible with theω-sequence, and thus at most one of them is an axiom in the
best system of that ω-sequence. The best system analysis of a probabilistic law,
such as L⋆, is much like that of a non-probabilistic law, such as F=Gm1m2
r2. If
we consider a spectrum of di ﬀerent versions of the Newtonian gravitational
law that diﬀer in the value of the gravitational constant G, then at most one of
them is true of the mosaic, and thus at most one of them is an axi om of the best
system of the mosaic. Given any Humean mosaic, one needs crit eria such as
simplicity and informativeness, but one does not need the st atistical criterion
14Hoefer (2019, pp.156-158) suggests that, in his preferred s olution to the Big Bad Bug, we should
conditionalize on the non-occurrence of an undermining his tory. Thinking of the probabilistic
law as L⋆provides a principled reason, namely that the undermining h istories are physically
impossible.
15For helpful discussions, see Elga (2004).
10of ﬁt, to determine the best system (if there is one). Hence, t he usual problems
associated with ﬁt would not arise for such Humeans.16
5 Discussion
We have shown how a ⋆-law may be thought of as either a generative chance⋆
law or a probabilistic⋆constraining law, where the notions of chance⋆and
probability⋆are subtly diﬀerent from traditional chance or probability. Two
diﬀerences are particularly salient.
The ﬁrst concerns independence. The results of coin tosses o nL⋆satisfy
every computable test for independence and will hence appea r to be statistically
independent. One might say that the results are probabilist ically⋆independent.
But inasmuch as some sequences are impossible, there is also a sense in which
the results of tosses in this full ω-sequence are interdependent. To understand
L⋆as a generative chance⋆law, one would need to allow for a holistic causal
structure that guarantees random sequences with unbiased r elative frequencies
in the limit. Depending on one’s commitments regarding caus al explanation,
this may lead one to favor understanding L⋆as a probabilistic⋆constraining
law. If one does decide to gives up on a generative chance⋆law, one is, as we
have just seen, left with a useful option for both proponents of governing-law
accounts and Humeans.
The second diﬀerence is that chance⋆and probability⋆depend on a choice of
a particular standard of algorithmic randomness. We saw thi s in the distinction
between Martin-Löf and Schnorr randomness. But if one is lim ited to Turing-
strength computations, there is no way to distinguish betwe enL⋆
MLand L⋆
Son
the basis of empirical evidence alone. The result is a comput ational sort of
empirical underdetermination.17Since as one can only learn a ⋆-law up to an
equivalence class of computationally indistinguishable l aws, one might take
the law L⋆to be any law in this class.
The possibility of ⋆-laws reveals a further variety of underdetermination.
Inasmuch as one expects the sequence of tosses one gets on a tr aditional prob-
abilistic law Lto be patternless, one expects Lto be computationally indis-
tinguishable from both L⋆
MLand L⋆
S. Of course, these varieties of empirical
underdetermination are not new, they have just gone unnotic ed.
That said,⋆-laws also help to eliminate some forms of empirical underde -
termination. If L⋆is true as either a generative or constraining law, then if it is
among the laws that one takes seriously, then, unlike tradit ional probabilistic
16One might wonder that there is now an analogous problem of und erdetermination associated
with the choice between, say, L⋆
MLand L⋆
S. Given this, do Humeans still need something like ﬁt? It
is not exactly analogous. The choice between them is not a pro blem for an idealized observer with
the full sequence and su ﬃcient computational power.
17See Barrett and Huttegger (2022) for a discussion of this poi nt.
11laws but very much like deterministic laws like F=maand F=Gm1m2
r2, one will
surely learn it on complete evidence in every physically possible world.
In contrast, if Lis the true law, there will be a continuous cardinality of
maverick worlds such that, if one were to inhabit any of them, one could never
learn Lfrom the results of the coin tosses. On the usual approach to t hinking
about laws, one needs special background assumptions to ove rcome this diﬃ-
culty. Speciﬁcally, one needs to argue that inhabiting a mav erick world of the
true law is suﬃciently unlikely or atypical that one has rational justiﬁca tion for
ignoring the possibility.18While such assumptions may be warranted given
one’s other commitments, they are not required for empirica l coherence if one
restricts one’s hypotheses to ⋆-laws.
In summary,⋆-laws provide a way of understanding probabilistic laws
as constraints on possible worlds. This helps to clarify how probabilistic laws
might govern. For non-Humeans, they provide a uniﬁed way of t hinking about
laws as governing by constraints. And for Humeans, they prov ide a principled
way that they might ignore undermining histories. Speciﬁca lly, the new notion
of probabilistic law provides a better and independently mo tivated way to deal
with the Big Bad Bug.
6 Conclusion
We have used algorithmic randomness to characterize two typ es of probabilistic
laws: a generative chance⋆law, and a probabilistic⋆constraining law . We have
argued that⋆-laws provide a novel way of understanding probabilities an d
chances, and help to address one variety of empirical underd etermination, but
they also reveal other varieties that have been underapprec iated. For all we
know, our world might be characterized by a traditional prob abilistic law or a
⋆-law.
In our view, the notion of a probabilistic⋆constraining law has advantages
over that of a generative chance⋆law. It meshes well with the holistic charac-
ter of the randomness and relative frequency constraints, d irectly supports a
uniﬁed governing account of non-Humean laws, and provides i ndependently
motivated solutions to issues in the Humean best-system acc ount. We suggest
that both notions are worthy of study and may lead to new ideas concerning
the nature of laws.
18Such an argument might appeal to background assumptions lik e the Principal Principle or
Cournot’s Principle. While a discussion of the status of suc h principles is a topic for another
occasion, note that in the present case every world is a maverick world according to a continuous
cardinality of traditional probabilistic laws. As a result , given sigma additivity, one needs to argue
that one is justiﬁed in simply assigning probability zero to almost all probabilistic laws since they
regard the actual world as a maverick world. This point shoul d be uncontroversial, but it is worth
emphasizing.
12Acknowledgement
We are grateful for helpful discussions with Emily Adlam, Go rdon Belot, Craig
Callender, Eugene Chua, Kenny Easwaran, Sheldon Goldstein , Alan Hájek,
Simon Saunders, Charles Sebens, Shelly Yiran Shi, Brian Sky rms, Jason Turner,
and Nino Zanghì.
Bibliography
Adlam, Emily. (2022) “Laws of Nature as Constraints,” Foundations of Physics ,
52, 28. https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.13836
Armstrong, David M. (1983) What is a Law of Nature? Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Barrett, Jeﬀrey A. (2020) The Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Mechanics , Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press.
Barrett, Jeﬀrey A. (1999) The Quantum Mechanics of Minds and Worlds , Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Barrett, Jeﬀrey A. (1996) “Empirical Adequacy and the Availability of Re liable
Records in Quantum Mechanics,” Philosophy of Science 63(1): 49–64.
Barrett, Jeﬀrey A. and Simon Huttegger (2021) “Quantum Randomness and
Underdetermination,” Philosophy of Science 87(3). https://doi.org/10.1086/708712
Chen, Eddy Keming and Sheldon Goldstein (2022) “Governing w ithout a Fun-
damental Direction of Time: Minimal Primitivism about Laws of Nature,” in
Yemima Ben-Menahem (ed.), Rethinking the Concept of Law of Nature , Springer,
pp.21-64. https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.09226
Dasgupta, Abhijit (2011) “Mathematical Foundations of Ran domness,” in Pras-
anta Bandyopadhyay and Malcolm Forster (eds.), Philosophy of Statistics (Hand-
book of the Philosophy of Science: Volume 7) , Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 641–710.
http://dasgupab.faculty.udmercy.edu /Dasgupta-JSﬁnal.pdf
Diaconis, Persi and Brian Skyrms (2018) Ten Great Ideas about Chance , Princeton
and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Eagle, Antony, (2021) “Chance versus Randomness,” The Stan ford Encyclope-
dia of Philosophy (Spring 2021 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed .),
13https://plato.stanford.edu /archives/spr2021/entries/chance-randomness
Elga, Adam (2004) “Inﬁnitesimal Chances and the Laws of Natu re,”Australasian
Journal of Philosophy , 82(1), pp.67-76.
Hoefer, Carl (2019) Chance in the World: A Humean Guide to Objective Chance ,
New York: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, David (1986) Philosophical Papers, Volume II , Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Maudlin, Tim (2007) The Metaphysics Within Physics , New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Roberts, John T. (2009) “Laws about Frequencies,” preprint , http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu /505
14