Spatial cancer systems biology resolves heterotypic interactions and identifies disruption of spatial 
hierarchy as a pathological driver event  
Fabian V. Filipp* 
* Cancer Systems Biology, Institute of Diabetes and Cancer, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter 
Landstraße 1, D -85764 München, Germany  
* School of Life Sciences Weihenstephan, Technical University München, Maximus -von-Imhof -Forum 3, D -
85354 Freising, Ge rmany  
* Institute for Advanced Study, Technical University München, Maximus -von-Imhof -Forum 3, D -85354 
Freising, Germany  
* Phone: +49 -89-3187 -43455  
* Email: fabian.filipp@helmholtz -muenchen.de  
* ORCID: orcid.org/0000 -0001 -9889 -5727  
* Twitter: twitter.com@cancersystembio  
 
Abstract  
Spatially an notated single -cell datasets 
provide unprecedented opportunities to dissect 
cell-cell communication in development and 
disease . Heterotypic signaling includes 
interactions between different cell types  and is 
well established in tissue development  and 
spatial organization . Epithelial organization 
requires several different programs that are 
tightly regulated. Planar cell polarity  is the 
organization of epithelial cells along the planar 
axis orthogonal to the apical -basal axis.  In this 
study, we investigate planar cell polarity  factors 
and explore the implications of developmental 
regulators as malignant drivers.  Utilizing  cancer 
systems biol ogy analysis, we derive gene 
expression network  for WNT -ligand s (WNT) and 
their cognate frizzled (FZD ) receptor s in skin 
cutaneous melanoma . The prof iles supported by 
unsupervised clustering of multiple -sequence alignm ents ident ify ligand -independent signaling 
and implications for metastatic progression 
based o n the underpinning developmental 
spatial program. Omics stud ies and  spatial 
biology connect developmental programs with 
oncological events and explain key spatial 
features of metastatic aggressiveness . 
Dysre gulation of prominent p lanar cell polarity  
factors such specific representative of  the WNT 
and FZD families in malignant m elanoma 
recapitulates the development program of 
normal melanocytes but in an uncontrolled and 
disorganized fashion . 
Introduction  
The emerging fields of single -cell RNA -
sequencing (scRNA -Seq) and spatial 
transcriptomics (spRNA -Seq) comb ine the 
benefits of traditional histopathology with 
single -cell gene expression profiling. The ability 
to connect the spatial organization of molecules in cells and tissues with their gene expression 
state enables the mapping of developmental 
stages as wel l as resolving specific disease 
pathologies. spRNA -Seq has the ability to decode 
molecular proximities from sequencing 
information and construct images of gene 
transcripts at sub -cellular resolution. As a result, 
tissue heterogeneity and intercellular cros stalk 
can now be charted and delineated with never -
before -seen accuracy . 
Spatially annotated single -cell datasets 
provide unprecedented opportunities to dissect 
cell-cell communication. In skin biology as well as 
in clinical dermatology, this is  particularly useful 
to advance our understanding of the epithelial 
tissue program in dermal development and 
disease (Cang, 2023). Epithelial organization 
requires several different programs that are 
tightly regulated. Planar cell polarity (PCP) is the 
organization of epithelial cells along the planar 
axis orthogonal to the apical -basal axis. Planar 
cell polarity is observed in an array of 
developmental processes that involve collective 
cell movement and tissue organization, and its 
disruption can lead to s evere developmental 
defects. Recent research in flies and vertebrates 
has discovered new functions for planar cell 
polarity, as well as new signaling components 
and mechanistic models. However, despite this 
progress, the search to simplify principles of 
understanding continues, and important 
mechanistic uncertainties still pose formidable 
challenges. Cell migration is a highly integrated 
multistep process that orchestrates embryonic 
morphogenesis, contributes to tissue repair and 
regeneration, and drives di sease progression in 
cancer, mental retardation, atherosclerosis, and 
arthritis. The migrating cell is highly polarized 
with complex regulatory pathways that spatially 
and temporally integrate its component 
processes. Neural crest cells are a well -organize d, pluripotent, yet temporary group of 
cells from the embryonic ectoderm that have the 
ability to migrate and give rise to diverse cell 
lineages, including neurons, Schwann cells, and 
melanocytes (Biermann, 2022). The 
neuroectodermal developmental program is 
attributed to the elevated propensity of 
melanoma cells for organotropism and brain 
metastases.  
Tissue homeostasis is supported by 
cellular growth and proliferation. Size is a 
fundamental attribute impacting cellular design, 
fitness, and function. Conce ntration -dependent 
cell size check points ensure that cell division is 
delayed until a critical target size has been 
achieved. Likewise, control of cell proliferation is 
a fundamental aspect of tissue formation in 
development and regeneration. Stem cells 
exhibit a low proliferation rate while maintaining 
a high proliferative capacity and are often small. 
In contrast, cancer cells do not precisely reverse 
this process yet show characteristics of loss of 
differentiation. Extracellular signals or ligand -
recept or interactions may independently induce 
growth and division. Specific driver genes have 
been linked to specific aspects of differentiation 
loss and spatial organization (Hodis, 2021).  
A molecular hierarchy in melanoma  
Melanoma is an aggressive type of skin 
cancer that partially recapitulates the 
development program of normal melanocytes 
but in an uncontrolled and disorganized fashion. 
Tissue disorganization is one of the main 
hallmarks of cancer. Polarity proteins are 
responsible for the arrangement of cells within 
epithelial tissues through the asymmetric 
organization of cellular components. Consistent 
with these findings are recent studies 
investigating control elements of melanocyte 
and skin tissue formation (Li, 2019; Dong, 2023). If we understand th e cellular hierarchy in 
melanoma, wherein growth and metastasis are 
governed by the rules of the developing 
embryonic neural crest, we can delineate 
oncological drivers disrupting tissue 
homeostasis. Spatial single -cell profiling has 
been invaluable in qua ntifying the 
unprecedented heterogeneity and plasticity of 
malignant melanoma. A systems biology analysis 
revealed distinct subpopulations representing 
lineage -specific melanocyte inducing 
transcription factor (MITF) as well as 
mesenchymal -like clones with  high proliferative 
potential (Karras, 2022; Biermann, 2022). Taken 
together, signaling and transcriptional elements 
govern a molecular hierarchy in melanoma that 
uncouples growth and metastasis.  
Results  
Recapitulation of a developmental 
program in cancer metastas is 
Early on in the history of science, the 
fields of evolutionary developmental biology and 
oncology shook hands when they created the 
portmanteau WNT from the planar cell polarity 
mutant wingless mutant drosophila and the 
mouse mammary tumor virus integration site. 
WNT -ligands are recognized by cognate frizzled 
(FZD) receptors. Today, the WNT, FZD, and beta -
catenin signaling pathways constitute an 
evolutionarily conserved cell -cell 
communication system that is important for 
stem cell renewal, cell p roliferation, and cell 
differentiation both during embryogenesis and 
during adult tissue homeostasis (Figure 1). In 
skin development, the WNT signaling pathway 
plays a critical role during melanocyte 
specification from the neural crest.  
Disruption of heterotypic signaling in 
skin cutaneous melanoma  Assisted by structu re-based modeling 
and comparative sequence alignments, cancer 
system biology can break down the highly 
conserved WNT molecular network, which 
encompasses 19 closely related WNT ligands 
(WNT1 –16 including A and B isoforms) and 10 
Frizzled receptors (FZD1 –10) that direct the self -
renewal and regeneration of many tissues during 
their development. FZDs are G protein -coupled 
receptors characterized by seven 
transmembrane -spanning domains, a cysteine -
rich N -terminal ligand binding domain, and a C -
terminal intrace llular activation domain. 
Depending on their activation, ligands, and 
intracellular binding adapter proteins, FZDs are 
capable of transmitting extracellular signals into 
diverse transcriptional program outputs that 
determine cell fate during normal and 
pathogenic development.  
 
Figure 1: WNT -ligand (WNT) and 
cognate frizzled (FZD) receptor gene expression 
network in skin cutaneous melanoma  
Meth ods 
RNA -Seq gene expression data of 302 
patien t specimens including normal, tumor , 
metastatic tissue was subjected to differential 
gene e xpression analysis. Read counts were 
scaled via  the median of the geometric means of 
fragment counts  across all libraries. Transcript 
abundance was quantified  using normalized 
single -end RNA -Seq reads in read  counts as well 
as reads per kilobase million (RPKM).  Since 
single -end reads were acquired in th e 
sequencing  protocol, quantification of reads or 
fragments yielded  similar results. Statistical 
testing for differential expres sion was based on 
read counts and performed using  EdgeR in the 
Bioconductor toolbox . Gene families  were 
further analyzed using . Clustal Omega , a multiple 
sequence alignment pro gram that uses seeded 
guide trees and Hidden Markow Model  profile -
profile techniques to generate alignments 
between sequen ce families . The study was 
carried out as part of IRB approved study dbGap 
ID 5094 “Somatic mutations in melanoma”. The 
results shown are in whole based upon data 
generated by the TCGA Research Network 
http://cancergenome.nih.gov. Restricted access 
whole -genome sequen ces and whole -exome 
sequences were obtained from the TCGA data 
portal.  
Discussion  
Planar cell polarity regulators with 
distinct roles in cancer metastasis  
FZD3 and FZD6 share high sequence 
homology and function through the 
noncanonical WNT pathway to play a critical role 
in migration and planar pattern formation. 
Structure -based sequence analysis identifies a 
distinct 100 amino acid C -terminal extension, 
exclusively found in FZD3 and FZD6. This extra 
tail makes FZD3 and FZD6 proteins special 
among their peers, enabling unique cell -cell 
signaling properties. Cancer ge nomics leverages 
a genome -wide insight and reveals that dysregulation of the WNT -FZD oncoprotein 
network is a driver of distinct spatial, 
developmental, and pathological programs   
(Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2: Spatial single -cell prof iling 
identifies disruption of cellular hierarchy in 
cancer  
FZD3  knockout revealed the underlying 
transcriptional regulators of the TWIS T and 
SNAIL  families. TWIST  and SNAIL  are commonly 
defined not only as developmental markers of 
neural crest cells in dorsolateral migration but 
also as drivers of proliferation and invasion 
during malignant transformation. While 
dysregulation of SNAIL  transcription factors is 
common to the FZD6  knockout model, 
downregulation of epithelial mesenchymal 
transition (EMT) -related ZEB homeobox 
transcription factors is specific to the FZD6  
knockout model. Knockout of FZD6  did not affect 
primary tumor formation or  cellular proliferation 
but inhibited distant metastasis and cellular 
migration of melanoma into distant tissues. 
Because of similar pivotal roles in tissue polarity, 
sequence homology, and overexpression in 
melanoma, FZD3  and FZD6  display some 
functional redundancy. However, despite such 
similarities, the oncogenes FZD3 and FZD6 play 
different roles in melanoma progression. FZD3  
promotes melanoma metastasis by stimulating 
cell cycle progression, while FZD6  regulates cell 
invasiveness.  
In cancer, the FZD3 r eceptor 
oncoprotein signals independently of the 
canonical WNT pathway, while FZD6 may also 
engage canonical WNT signaling. The data 
identifies significant functional specificity of 
spatial regulators in cancer, despite similarity in 
cell planarity and tis sue development. With the 
advent of omics approaches to spatial biology, it 
is now possible to link developmental programs 
with oncological events and explain key spatial 
features of metastatic aggressiveness.  
Conclusion  
Spatial omics to overcome the 
developmental im mune privilege in disease  
Facilitated by spatial omics insight, the 
developmental path might also have important 
implications for stem cell biology and 
oncoimmunology. Tissue aging, cellular 
senescence, and controlled cell death have an 
underappreciated im munological control 
element. Similarly, evasion of cancer cells from 
the endogenous immune repertoire can be 
attributed to an immune privilege that protected 
stem cell populations enjoy such as migrating 
precursors but foreign cells abuse as a hard -to-
over come escape pathway. T lymphocytes are 
the primary effectors of the anti -tumor 
response, but the interplay between melanoma 
and the immune system is complex, dynamic, 
and incompletely understood. Sustained 
progress in unraveling the pathogenesis of 
melanom a regression has led to the 
identification of therapeutic targets, culminating in the development of immune checkpoint 
inhibitors for the management of advanced 
disease. The first anti -FZD antibodies or 
engineered FZD -Fc fusion proteins, which are 
serving as decoy receptors for WNT ligands, are 
in clinical trials for patients with advanced solid 
tumors. Modern techniques allow for high -
resolution spatial analyses of the tumor 
microenvironment (Filipp, 2019; Reynolds, 2021; 
Schäbitz, 2022). Such spatial omic s studies may 
lead to a better understanding of the immune 
drivers of melanoma regression. As a result, they 
aid in the search for new prognostic and 
predictive biomarkers in the treatment of 
migratory metastatic cell populations (Hodis, 
2022; Cang, 2023).  Going forward, spatial omics 
will guide clinical decision -making to create 
durable anti -cancer therapy responses.  
Funding information  
F.V.F. is grateful for the support 
provided by grants CA154887 from the National  
Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, 
Machine learning and multi -omics metabolic 
health around the clock, Bavaria California 
Technology Center (BaCaTeC), Friedrich -
Alexander -University of Erlangen -Nuremberg, 
Erlangen, Germany, and the Science A lliance on 
Precision Medicine and Cancer Prevention by the 
German Federal Foreign Office, implemented by 
the Goethe -Institute, Washington, DC, USA, and 
supported by the Federation of German 
Industries (BDI), Berlin, Germany. This work is 
inspired by the cu riosity and creativity of 
Franziska Violet Filipp and Leland Volker Filipp.  
Declarations  
Availability of preprint publication  
The manuscript w as made publically 
available to the scientific community on the preprint server arXiv at https://arxiv.org/abs/  
and bioRxiv  https://biorxiv.org/ . 
Competing Interests  
There are  no conflict s of interest.  
References  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3669
0742/  
Cang Z, Zhao Y, Almet AA, Stabell A, 
Ramos R, Plikus MV, Atwood SX, Nie Q. Screening 
cell-cell communication in spatial 
transcriptomics via collective optimal transport. 
Nat Methods. 2023 Jan 23. doi: 10.1038/s41592 -
022-01728 -4. PMID: 36690742  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3580
3246/  
Biermann J, Melms  JC, Amin AD, Wang Y, 
Caprio LA, Karz A, Tagore S, Barrera I, Ibarra -
Arellano MA, Andreatta M, Fullerton BT, 
Gretarsson KH, Sahu V, Mangipudy VS, Nguyen 
TTT, Nair A, Rogava M, Ho P, Koch PD, Banu M, 
Humala N, Mahajan A, Walsh ZH, Shah SB, 
Vaccaro DH, Caldw ell B, Mu M, Wünnemann F, 
Chazotte M, Berhe S, Luoma AM, Driver J, 
Ingham M, Khan SA, Rapisuwon S, Slingluff CL Jr, 
Eigentler T, Röcken M, Carvajal R, Atkins MB, 
Davies MA, Agustinus A, Bakhoum SF, Azizi E, 
Siegelin M, Lu C, Carmona SJ, Hibshoosh H, Ribas 
A, Canoll P, Bruce JN, Bi WL, Agrawal P, Schapiro 
D, Hernando E, Macosko EZ, Chen F, Schwartz 
GK, Izar B. Dissecting the treatment -naive 
ecosystem of human melanoma brain 
metastasis. Cell. 2022 Jul 7;185(14):2591 -
2608.e30. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.06.007.  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3548
2859/  Hodis E, Torlai Triglia E, Kwon JYH, 
Biancalani T, Zakka LR, Parkar S, Hütter JC, 
Buffoni L, Delorey TM, Phillips D, Dionne D, 
Nguyen LT, Schapiro D, Mal iga Z, Jacobson CA, 
Hendel A, Rozenblatt -Rosen O, Mihm MC Jr, 
Garraway LA, Regev A. Stepwise -edited, human 
melanoma models reveal mutations' effect on 
tumor and microenvironment. Science. 2022 Apr 
29;376(6592):eabi8175. doi: 
10.1126/science.abi8175. Epub 2 022 Apr 29. 
PMID: 35482859  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3613
1018/  
Karras P, Bordeu I, Pozniak J, Nowosad A, 
Pazzi C, Van Raemdonck N, Landeloos E, Van 
Herck Y, Pedri D, Bervoets G, Makhzami S,  Khoo 
JH, Pavie B, Lamote J, Marin -Bejar O, Dewaele M, 
Liang H, Zhang X, Hua Y, Wouters J, Browaeys R, 
Bergers G, Saeys Y, Bosisio F, van den Oord J, 
Lambrechts D, Rustgi AK, Bechter O, Blanpain C, 
Simons BD, Rambow F, Marine JC. A cellular 
hierarchy in me lanoma uncouples growth and 
metastasis. Nature. 2022 Oct;610(7930):190 -
198. doi: 10.1038/s41586 -022-05242 -7. PMID: 
36131018  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3079
2348/  
Li C, Nguyen V, Clark KN, Zah ed T, 
Sharkas S, Filipp FV, et al. Down -regulation of 
FZD3 receptor suppresses growth and 
metastasis of human melanoma independently 
of canonical WNT signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA (2019) 116(10):4548 –57. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1813802116658 PMID: 30792348  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3636
8445/  
Dong B, Simonson L, Vold S, Oldham E, 
Barten L, Ahmad N, et al. Frizzled 6 promotes melanoma cell invasion but not proliferation by 
regulating canonical W nt signaling and EMT. J 
Invest Dermatol (2022) S0022 -202X(22):02660 -
4. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2022.09.658 PMID: 
36368445  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2560
0636/  
Guan J, Gupta R, Filipp FV.  Cancer 
systems biology of TCGA SKCM: efficient 
detection of genomic drivers in melanoma.  Sci 
Rep. 2015 J an 20;5:7857. doi: 
10.1038/srep07857.  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3187
1830/  
Filipp FV. Opportunities for Artificial 
Intelligence in Advancing Precision Medicine. 
Curr Genet Med Rep. 2019 Dec;7(4):208 -213. 
doi: 10.1007/s40142 -019-00177 -4. Epub 2019 
Dec 1.  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3347
9125/  
Reynolds G, Vegh P, Fletcher J, Poyner 
EFM, Stephenson E, Goh I, Botting RA, Huang N, Olabi B, Dubois A, Dixon D, Green K, Maunder D, 
Engelbert J, Efremova M, Polański K, Jardine L, 
Jones C, Ness T, Horsfall D, McGrath J, Carey C, 
Popescu DM, Webb S, Wang XN, Sayer B, Park JE, 
Negri VA, Belokhvostova D, Lynch MD, 
McDonald D, Filby A, Hagai T, Meyer KB, Husain 
A, Coxhead J, Vento -Tormo R, Behjati S, Lisgo S, 
Villani AC, Bacardit J, Jones PH,  O'Toole EA, Ogg 
GS, Rajan N, Reynolds NJ, Teichmann SA, Watt 
FM, Haniffa M. Developmental cell programs are 
co-opted in inflammatory skin disease. Science. 
2021 Jan 22;371(6527):eaba6500. doi: 
10.1126/science.aba6500. PMID: 33479125  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3651
3651/  
Schäbitz A, Hillig C, Mubarak M, Jargosch 
M, Farnoud A, Scala E, Kurzen N, Pilz AC, Bhalla 
N, Thomas J, Stahle M, Biedermann T, Schmidt -
Weber CB, Theis F, Garzorz -Stark N, Eye rich K, 
Menden MP, Eyerich S. Spatial transcriptomics 
landscape of lesions from non -communicable 
inflammatory skin diseases. Nat Commun. 2022 
Dec 13;13(1):7729. doi: 10.1038/s41467 -022-
35319 -w. PMID: 36513651  
 
 
 