Authority without Care:
Moral Values behind the Mask Mandate Response
Yelena Mejova,1Kyriaki Kalimeri,1Gianmarco De Francisci Morales2
1ISI Foundation, V . Chisola 5, Turin, Italy,2CENTAI, C. Inghilterra 3, Turin, Italy
yelenamejova@acm.org, kyriaki.kalimeri@isi.it, gdfm@acm.org
Abstract
Face masks are one of the cheapest and most effective non-
pharmaceutical interventions available against airborne dis-
eases such as COVID-19. Unfortunately, they have been met
with resistance by a substantial fraction of the populace, es-
pecially in the U.S. In this study, we uncover the latent moral
values that underpin the response to the mask mandate, and
paint them against the country’s political backdrop. We mon-
itor the discussion about masks on Twitter, which involves
almost 600k users in a time span of 7 months. By using a
combination of graph mining, natural language processing,
topic modeling, content analysis, and time series analysis, we
characterize the responses to the mask mandate of both those
in favor and against them. We base our analysis on the theoret-
ical frameworks of Moral Foundation Theory and Hofstede’s
cultural dimensions.
Our results show that, while the anti-mask stance is associ-
ated with a conservative political leaning, the moral values
expressed by its adherents diverge from the ones typically
used by conservatives. In particular, the expected emphasis
on the values of authority and purity is accompanied by an
atypical dearth of in-group loyalty. We ﬁnd that after the man-
date, both pro- and anti-mask sides decrease their emphasis on
care about others, and increase their attention on authority and
fairness, further politicizing the issue. In addition, the mask
mandate reverses the expression of Individualism-Collectivism
between the two sides, with an increase of individualism in
the anti-mask narrative, and a decrease in the pro-mask one.
We argue that monitoring the dynamics of moral positioning
is crucial for designing effective public health campaigns that
are sensitive to the underlying values of the target audience.
Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has been an unprecedented event,
which has also brought about an infodemic that makes public
health response difﬁcult. COVID denial, anti-vaccine sen-
timent, and other ﬂavors of theories (from doubts to full-
blown conspiracies) have been documented in social media
(Patwa et al. 2021). Among the many controversies, surpris-
ingly, wearing a mask has become extremely politicized and
contentious. Inconsistent messaging by public health organi-
zations has seriously undermined public compliance to this
simple measure. Initially, the WHO recommended that masks
Copyright ©2023, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.should be worn only by professionals or those taking care
of a sick person (WHO 2020), and in the U.S., the Center
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommended the
use of masks only for healthcare workers and people who
were sick. Only on April 3rd, 2020, the CDC ofﬁcially recom-
mended wearing non-medical cloth face coverings when in
public places (Landsverk 2020). Soon after, speculations that
masks do more harm than good (Gillespie 2020) and that they
foster a false sense of security (Khan 2020) started to pro-
liferate. Public health experts have acknowledged that it has
been a challenge to communicate with groups holding strong
values of freedom (Hartsoe 2020). Indeed, globally, research
has found that the value of individualism is associated with
higher COVID-19 mortality rates (Maaravi et al. 2021) and
less adherence to preventive measures (Biddlestone, Green,
and Douglas 2020). However, how personal moral values
evolve around governmental messaging concerning these
preventive measures is not yet understood.
Mask-wearing behavior and attitudes can be inﬂuenced
by multiple factors. There is extensive evidence that polit-
ical ideology and identity inﬂuences attitudes, judgments,
and behaviors (Van Bavel and Pereira 2018). At the same
time, political identity is deeply intertwined with moral val-
ues (Graham, Haidt, and Nosek 2009; Hatemi, Crabtree, and
Smith 2019). Finally, and perhaps obviously, moral values are
directly linked to moral decision making (Karandikar et al.
2019), which completes the triad. In particular, there is an
altruistic component in mask-wearing, as their main purpose
is to protect others, which is related to solidarity towards
the in-group in the face of an out-group threat (Campbell
1965). For this reason, among moral values we pay particular
attention to the individualist-collectivist angle. Finally, there
is ample literature on the division and polarization of news
and information sources in general.1As users increasingly
rely on social media to satisfy their information needs,2the
lines between professional reporting and personal opinions
begin to blur. For this reason, we contextualize the informa-
tion environment in which the mask debate takes place in
terms of information sources from peers—within the Twitter
1https://www.pewresearch.org/journalism/2020/03/04/about-
one-ﬁfth-of-democrats-and-republicans-get-political-news-in-a-
kind-of-media-bubble
2https://www.pewresearch.org/journalism/2021/11/15/news-
on-twitter-consumed-by-most-users-and-trusted-by-manyarXiv:2303.12014v2  [cs.SI]  30 Mar 2023community—and from external sources.
This work provides a ﬁne-grained analysis of the moral
values of those expressing opinions around masking by ap-
plying the Moral Foundations Theory to a dataset of Twitter
posts spanning the beginning of the pandemic, from January
to July 2020. In particular, we ask: What is the anatomy of
the collective discussion on mask wearing around the mask
mandate on Twitter? In particular, we analyze different facets
of this discussion in the U.S.:
1.How does the users’ stance relate to their political lean-
ing?
2.What moral values do adherents to pro- or anti-masking
stances hold?
3.What is the information environment around their argu-
ments?
Our ﬁndings conﬁrm the known political divisions, with
liberals supporting the pro-mask and conservatives the anti-
mask stance. The moral narrative of the two sides also differs:
those on the anti-mask side invoke the values of authority and
purity , while those promoting mask-wearing emphasize care
andloyalty . The introduction of the mask mandate shifts these
values from an emphasis on care to an increased attention on
authority andfairness , thus escalating the politicization of
the issue. Content analysis shows that the increasingly indi-
vidualistic views espoused by the anti-mask side are accom-
panied by the allegations of the dangers and ineffectiveness
of mask-wearing, supported by resources from social media
and sometimes even governmental and scientiﬁc sources. We
argue that the mask-wearing debate has a dynamic moral
landscape that should be carefully monitored to design ef-
fective public messaging campaigns that reﬂect the shifting
values of their target audience. Such studies are especially
important, given the rising prominence of social media as a
platform for public policy discussion and inﬂuence (Shapiro
and Hemphill 2017).
Related Work
Masking Behavior. Mask mandates have been shown to
be effective in decreasing COVID infection rates in the U.S.,
both in urbanized and rural areas (Krishnamachari et al.
2021). Early studies have tested the effect of mask adop-
tion, with simulations showing that even relatively ineffective
face coverings could meaningfully reduce community trans-
mission (Eikenberry et al. 2020). Unfortunately, the public
response to the masking mandates has been partial, with
only a 12% increase in mask-wearing immediately after the
CDC masking guideline on April 3, 2020 (Goldberg et al.
2020). A survey of residents of 10 states in the U.S. relates
mask-wearing to COVID cases in the state, political party in
power, and individual measures of “social capital”, as well
as some demographics (Hao, Shao, and Huang 2021). They
ﬁnd that respondents are more likely to wear a mask if there
are more COVID-related deaths in the state (Odds Ratio of
1:26), the Democratic party is in power (OR = 2:0), and if
the respondents more often speak to their friends and family
(OR= 1:16). Although misinformation has been blamed for
the resistance to mask-wearing and social distancing, a na-tionally representative survey has found that the beliefs about
the consequences of these behaviors are more predictive of
people’s compliance (Hornik et al. 2021). Especially in the
U.S., beliefs and trust in authority are often strongly related
to the people’s political afﬁliations. For instance, Republi-
cans, conservatives, and nationalists are less likely to believe
that the World Health Organization (WHO) can effectively
manage the pandemic (Bayram and Shields 2021).
Social Media & Masking. A study of tweets during the
early days of the COVID pandemic (Feb-March 2020) identi-
ﬁed methods for decreasing the spread of COVID as one of
the main themes and the wearing of masks as one of those
most associated with positive sentiment (Abd-Alrazaq et al.
2020). However, authors of a later study spanning January
to October 2020 showed that the output of automated senti-
ment analysis tools corresponds poorly with the mask-related
sentiment expressed in the tweets due to the richness of the
language used (He et al. 2021). Instead, they perform manual
coding of a sample of the tweets to identify several major cat-
egories of concerns around masking, including physical dis-
comfort, effectiveness, appropriateness, and political beliefs.
A network analysis of the mask-related tweets has shown the
pro-mask activists exist in a kind of “echo chamber” (Cinelli
et al. 2021; Garimella et al. 2018a), and that they tend to
ignore the subversive rhetoric of the anti-mask fringe (Lang,
Erickson, and Jing-Schmidt 2021). Instead, a recent Twitter
study found a focus on ongoing news (Cotfas et al. 2021).
This fringe is more likely to use toxic language, including
insults and profanity, than the pro-mask ones (Pascual-Ferr ´a
et al. 2021). The authors link this behavior to either the vocif-
erous protestations of a minority group (Miller and Morrison
2009) or potential signaling as an in-group behavior and a
marker of personal identiﬁcation. Alongside this toxicity,
other studies ﬁnd widespread misinformation and misunder-
standings in the social media discussions around mask use.
These include the beliefs that COVID19 is over-hyped by
the media, that masks are ineffective, and that they do more
harm than good (Keller, Honea, and Ollivant 2021). These
beliefs were then shown to impact the mask-wearing (and so-
cial distancing) behaviors (Hornik et al. 2021). In this study,
we introduce a dimension of moral values , which we argue
underlies some of the disagreements on the appropriate use
of masks during the epidemic, and which may shed some
light on the moral reasoning behind the rhetoric.
Theoretical Framework. Our study of the rhetoric around
masks during COVID-19 is grounded in the Moral Founda-
tions Theory (MFT), its manifestation in interpersonal and
inter-group communication, and its reﬂection at the societal
level as an individualist or collectivist cultural dimension.
According to social identity theory, members of an in-group
will look for negative aspects of an out-group, thus enhanc-
ing their self-image (Tajfel et al. 1979). Strong in-group and
out-group reasoning at a societal level determines whether
a society is individualistic or collectivist (IC), as deﬁned
by Hofstede (2001). The IC dimension considers the degree
to which societies are integrated into groups and their per-
ceived obligations and dependence on groups. Individualism
indicates there is a greater importance placed on attainingpersonal goals. Collectivism indicates there is a greater im-
portance placed on the goals and well-being of the group.
People in collectivist societies generally distinguish sharply
between in- and out-groups, while people in individualis-
tic societies treat everyone as a potential in-group member
and thus apply universal values to everyone. Cross-cultural
research has demonstrated that the United States is the pro-
totypical individualist culture based on the IC dimension
(Hofstede 1984; Kim et al. 1994). At the same time, the U.S.
show a measurable variation on this dimension (Vandello and
Cohen 1999) at state level.
The societal dimensions of collectivism and individual-
ism can be related to the individuals’ adherence to speciﬁc
moral dimensions, as postulated by the Moral Foundations
Theory (Graham et al. 2012; Samuel et al. 2016), which in-
clude: care/harm , fundamental concerns for the suffering
of others, including virtues of caring and compassion; fair-
ness/cheating , concerns about unfair treatment, inequality,
and more abstract notions of justice; loyalty/betrayal , con-
cerns related to obligations of group membership; author-
ity/subversion , concerns related to social order and the obli-
gations of hierarchical relationships such as obedience, re-
spect, and proper role fulﬁllment; and purity/degradation ,
with concerns about physical and spiritual contagion, includ-
ing virtues of chastity, wholesomeness, and control of desires.
These foundations are shown to underlie human judgements
and decision-making (Weber et al. 2015) on societal topics
ranging from vaccine hesitancy (Kalimeri et al. 2019; Beir ´o
et al. 2023), to politics (Iyer et al. 2012), religion, and social
cooperation (Haidt 2012; Curry 2016). Here, we place the
focal point on the linguistic analysis of values expressed via
Twitter, and aim to clarify peoples’ dispositions and attitudes
towards interpersonal and inter-group processes related to
persuasion and communication narratives.
The moral dimensions of MFT have also been linked to
political ideologies (Day et al. 2014; Kugler, Jost, and Noor-
baloochi 2014), with conservatives emphasizing the in-group
relationships and tradition, and liberals endorsing fairness and
equal opportunity. In the United States, the mask-wearing
measure has also been strongly associated with the parti-
san divide. Social identity is a primary reason behind peo-
ple’s decision whether to wear a mask during the pandemic
(Powdthavee et al. 2021), and surveys show that faith in Pres-
ident Trump is a strong predictor of refusal to social distance,
and its effect is largest among individuals high in binding
foundations (Graham et al. 2020). Indeed, the U.S. counties
that showed strong support for Trump in 2016 practiced sig-
niﬁcantly lower mask-wearing in 2020 (Kahane 2021). This
work illustrates the strong connection between the attitudes
expressed towards mask-wearing on Twitter and the the po-
litical leaning of those expressing them, and shows the shifts
in moral emphasis after the mask mandates are introduced.
Data
We begin by collecting tweets mentioning the keywords
“mask”, “facemask”, “ffp3”, and “n95” (the latter two re-
fer to popular kinds of masks), spanning the dates of Jan-
uary 1st to July 30th, 2020, using the GOT3 library (Mottl2021). These keywords were chosen by considering the spe-
cial Twitter Covid-19, stream3and picking the most common
English keywords related to masks. This collection results
in18 245 298 tweets from 5 935 103 users. Following recom-
mendations from existing literature, we then perform several
ﬁltering steps in order to ensure that the tweets can be used to
assess the stance of the user on masking, and that the account
is likely to belong to a human living in U.S.:
1. Relevance classiﬁer (details next).
2.Exclude users whose location cannot be mapped to one
of U.S. states or Washington DC.
3.Exclude those not having at least 1 English tweet
(Garimella et al. 2016).
4. Exclude users with only 1 tweet (Garimella et al. 2016).
5.Exclude top 0.1% of users by the number of tweets (hav-
ing higher posting rate) (des Mesnards et al. 2022).
6.Exclude users whose friends to followers ratio is >10 (Ag-
garwal, Rajadesingan, and Kumaraguru 2012).
We proceed by making sure the tweets we collect are in-
deed about mask-wearing due to the COVID-19 epidemic.
Upon manual examination, we ﬁnd several other topics cap-
tured, such as advice on masking during protests, sports-
related wear, and beauty products. To remove such content,
we use a set of distant labels to identify the non-relevant
content.4We manually annotate a balanced random selection
of 300 tweets associated with a distant label and ﬁnd 96%
accuracy in distinguishing between relevant and non-relevant
tweets (expected accuracy of a random baseline is 50%). We
use430 568 tweets with the respective distant labels to train
the relevance classiﬁer. The model is a logistic regression,
trained on tf-idf-weighted unigram counts extracted from
the tweets and with inverse-proportional class weighting to
mitigate class imbalance. As text pre-processing, we remove
URLs, numbers, handles, hashtag (the # symbols), retweet
indicators, and stopwords, keep whole words, and perform
snowball stemming. The accuracy in 5-fold cross-validation
is 99.7%. We draw another balanced sample of 300 tweets
thus classiﬁed and ﬁnd the accuracy of the classiﬁer to be
82.3% (inter-annotator agreement overlap of 90%, Cohen’s
kappa of 0.76 between 3 annotators).
Next, we geolocate the tweets identiﬁed as relevant by
mapping the user location strings to the Geonames ID by us-
ing custom string matching,5and to U.S. zip codes by using
the ‘uszipcode’ library.6We apply basic pre-processing (i.e.,
stopword and non-ASCII character removal). First, we ﬁlter
locations assigned to the U.S. territory by ‘uszipcode’ and
3https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/twitter-api/tweets/covid-
19-stream/ﬁltering-rules
4We use lists compiled by ﬁnding top bigrams (considering
the 300 most frequent) in the dataset and then manually labeling
them for non-relevance. The irrelevant list is f‘hair mask’,‘gas
mask’,‘sleeping mask’, ‘majora’s mask’,‘ski mask’,‘eye mask’,‘clay
mask’,‘tear gas’ gand the relevant list is f‘covid’,‘coronavirus’,‘sars-
cov-2’,‘sars-cov2’,‘social distanc’,‘socialdistanc’ g.
5Code available at https://sites.google.com/site/yelenamejova/
resources
6https://pypi.org/project/uszipcode/Table 1: Number of tweets and associated users at different
stages of data collection.
Dataset stage N tweets N users
Keyword-based collection 18 245 298 5 935 103
Geo-location ﬁlter 5 685 866 1 383 729
Engagement & network ﬁlter 3 614 343 598 792
Figure 1: GCC of follower network, colored by METIS score.
then the remaining ones by the Geonames library, aiming to
recover the GPS coordinates of the smallest possible admin-
istrative area. We are able to locate 1 383 729 of the users
within a U.S. state or Washington DC. Our sample is repre-
sentative of the U.S. population distribution (2019 Census
estimates) with a Pearson correlation of 0:96(n=51), which
suggests that there is little bias in the sampling of the state in
terms of number of users.
The latter four ﬁltering steps aim at excluding users with
either too little engagement on the topic or those who post
so much that they are likely to be business or automated
accounts. We do not use the popular tool Botometer, as a
recent study on mask-related tweets shows it to mostly ﬁnd
active human Twitter users (He et al. 2021). At the end of
this process, we are left with 647 730 users. Finally, we use
the Twitter API Friends call to collect the information about
whom these users follow (“followees” or “friends”), thus
resulting in the coverage of 598 792 users.
Results
Stance Classiﬁcation. Following previous work on identi-
fying controversial topics on social media (Garimella et al.
2016, 2018b), we look for a bi-partitioning of the network that
would indicate polarization. We look for two sides of the de-
bate because, ultimately, the decision whether to wear a mask
is binary. We start our analysis by considering the follower
network induced by the users captured in our data, shown
in Figure 1. In total, we are able to retrieve 509 755 293
follower-followee relationships, such that followers are all
users whose tweets relate to masks. When we constrain the
followees to the set of users in our tweet dataset, the network
containsjVj= 598 792 users andjEj= 35 763 336 edges.
We use the graph partitioning algorithm METIS (Karypis
and Kumar 1998) to partition the network into two groups,repeatedly N= 100 times with different random seeds, so to
get an ensemble of partition assignments for each node, and
use the average partition assignment for each node across
theNrepetitions as a polarity score p2[0;1](Mejova et al.
2022).7We tune the relative size of the partitions by maxi-
mizing the number of users within 95% conﬁdence interval
of either extreme, and ﬁnd the optimal proportion to be 1:1:1
of pro-mask to anti-mask users. As the algorithm does not
indicate the actual stances of the users (in fact, it uses no con-
tent information whatsoever), each partition is assigned its
stance manually by examining 10 sampled users on each side.
All users in the same partition expressed the same stance,
which suggests a good separation. The sampled users’ stance
is then propagated to all users within their partition, 0for
pro-mask and 1for anti-mask.
We also verify the robustness of our result by looking at the
community structure of the network. The top-4 communities
found by the Louvain algorithm (Blondel et al. 2008), which
include more than 90% of the nodes of the network, have me-
dian polarity scores of 0:2;1:0;0:0;1:0, which indicate clear
separation and polarization in their composition. The largest
community, which includes 18 708 users and is mainly pro-
mask, has a slightly larger spread of polarity scores, which
may indicate a larger divergence of opinions (and possibly
doubts) in the population. This result can also be seen in
Figure 4a, the histogram of polarity scores of the network,
which shows a smoother decline on the left side than on the
right side. Finally, we assign a discrete label to each node
according to its polarity score. We heuristically choose the
threshold 0:05, which allows us to assign a label to 56:4%of
users: 28:8%with 0 and 27:6%with 1, thus leaving 43:5%
of users with an unknown label.8The roughly equal shares of
pro- and anti-mask users are in line with recent other manual
annotation work on this topic (Cotfas et al. 2021).
The two sides are colored as blue and red, and unknown
as grey in Figure 1. To assess the accuracy of the approach
described so far, we sample 60 users from those assigned
a stance label by METIS and annotate them manually. To
determine the manual label, we use all captured tweets by
each user, thus considering in aggregate 1866 tweets. The
annotation was done by three authors, all knowledgeable in
the U.S. mask debate. Twelve percent of the data was used
for inter-annotator agreement, which shows perfect agree-
ment. The exercise revealed an overall precision of 86:4%
(95% conﬁdence interval [0.76, 0.94]), with perfect precision
for pro-mask class, but only 72:4%for anti-mask case, with
several users incorrectly labeled as anti-mask by the algo-
rithm. The network structure suggests some connection of
people who express doubts but are not clearly anti-mask with
more extreme positions. Indeed, it is likely that the anti-mask
stance is more diverse than the pro-mask one, and cannot
be easily represented with a single stance, similarly to the
7Out of the two possible relabeling of each partition assignment,
we choose the one that minimizes the distance from the current node
labeling to maintain the partition identity ﬁxed.
8The 95% Agresti-Coull conﬁdence interval upper bound for
binomial proportions of a polarity score of 0is0:0444 , which we
round to 0:05.2020-01 2020-02 2020-03 2020-04 2020-05 2020-06 2020-07 2020-080200040006000 pro-mask
anti-maskFigure 2: Daily time series of number of tweets by users
classiﬁed by their mask stance. Vertical line on mandate date.
vaccine hesitancy case (Cossard et al. 2020).
Figure 2 shows the daily volume of tweets by users clas-
siﬁed as either pro- or anti-mask. The two time series are
highly correlated, with a Pearson correlation of r= 0:938.
The engagement begins roughly at the time of the ﬁrst CDC
recommendation to wear masks on 2020-04-03. The increase
in volume conﬁrms a previous study which ﬁnds increased
“appetite” to share opinions after major mask-related news
(Cotfas et al. 2021). The subsequent peaks often revolve
around major news stories involving masks, such as one
when the U.S. Vice-President Pence visited a hospital with-
out wearing a mask towards the end of April,9continuous
comparisons of the masking behavior of the two contenders
for the U.S. Presidency in late May,10and subsequent adjust-
ments to the guidelines by the public health ofﬁcials who
were trying to “correct” their previous messaging in mid-
July.11Given the high correlation of the two time series, we
ask whether this effect is endogenous, i.e., if there is a causal
feedback loop whereby one of the two stances answers the
other. A Granger causality test on these two time series for
time lags from 1 to 14 days ﬁnds no strong relationship in
either direction. The likely implication of this negative result
is that the volume of both stances has a common cause that
is exogenous: external events that get discussed on Twitter.
Although we cannot exclude an effect with lag shorter than
one day, the fact that the networks of two stances are well
separated makes this hypothesis less likely.
Figure 3 shows the fraction of anti-mask users in each
state. We ﬁnd a particularly high concentration in the south,
as well as some western states. These ﬁndings largely agree
with contemporaneous studies of mask-wearing around the
U.S. (Katz, Sanger-Katz, and Quealy 2020).
Political Leaning. As outlined in the Introduction, mask-
ing regulations have been strongly politicized. According to
PEW, when surveyed in 2020, Republicans were more likely
to call masks unnecessary, ineffective, oppressive, or unfair
and were much less likely than Democrats to be concerned
9https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/pence-
meets-with-mayo-clinic-patients-staff-while-not-wearing-
face-mask/2020/04/28/57c4200c-897e-11ea-9dfd-
990f9dcc71fc story.html
10https://edition.cnn.com/2020/05/26/opinions/biden-mask-
trump-ghitis/index.html
11https://edition.cnn.com/2020/07/12/politics/jerome-adams-
surgeon-general-mask-mandate/index.html
Figure 3: Fraction of anti-mask users over the total geolocated
users in the 48 U.S. states.
0.0 0.5 1.0
Polarity score0500010000Number of users
(a) Polarity score distribution
1
 0 1
Political score050010001500Number of userspro-mask
anti-mask (b) Pol. leaning per mask stance
Figure 4: Distributions of (a) polarity scores of users (com-
puted via METIS), and (b) political leaning of users (inferred
via follower relationships on Twitter) grouped by inferred
stance on mask-wearing.
about unknowingly spreading COVID-19 to others.12
We compare the mask stance of the users we are able to
classify to their political afﬁliation, which can be glimpsed
via their Twitter social network. In particular, we consider
the Twitter accounts with known political leaning that the
users follows. In accordance to previous work, we assume
that users mostly follow accounts that are in agreement with
their political views (Golbeck and Hansen 2011), and cre-
ate a list of prominent political accounts in order to prop-
agate their leaning to their followers. The list, which we
make available to the research community,13includes 501
accounts of members of the U.S. Congress, 79 governors,
70 party entities, and 67 Attorney Generals, as well as 157
media accounts from allsides.com,14and 67 journalists from
politico.com.15In total, it has a rather balanced set of 487
right-leaning and 454 left-leaning accounts. Note that we
do not use prominent politicians such as the U.S. President,
as such accounts may be followed purely out of their pop-
ularity or importance. For each user in our mask-related
dataset, we count the number of accounts they follow in
our list: right-leaning NRand left-leaning NL. We consider
only users who follow at least 5 accounts in our list from
either side, and calculate the aggregated political leaning
12https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/10/29/both-
republicans-and-democrats-cite-masks-as-a-negative-effect-of-
covid-19-but-for-very-different-reasons/
13Available at https://tinyurl.com/poliaccounts
14https://www.allsides.com/media-bias/media-bias-ratings
15https://www.politico.com/blogs/media/2015/04/twitters-most-
inﬂuential-political-journalists-205510score as SPL= (NR NL)=(NR+NL), which results in
SPL2[ 1;1]with1the most right-leaning score. Thus, we
are able to identify the political leaning of 18 422 users.
Figure 4b presents the distribution of political leaning
scores for the two categories of users based on their stances
on masks. Pro-mask users are more likely to be following
left-leaning accounts, and anti-mask ones the right-leaning
ones, with almost no users existing in the middle political
ground. In fact, we ﬁnd a strong polarization at the extremes
of the political spectrum, especially for anti-mask users.
Moral Values. Moral values are directly linked to decision
making (Karandikar et al. 2019). Since there is an altruis-
tic component to mask wearing, we ask what are the moral
values expressed by the holders of the two stances. We as-
sess the moral narratives by employing the MoralStrength
lexicon (Araque, Gatti, and Kalimeri 2020), which holds the
state-of-the-art performance in moral text prediction. Moral-
Strength lexicon provides, along with each lemma, the Moral
Valence score , a numeric assessment that indicates both the
polarity and the intensity of the lemma in each moral foun-
dation. According to this lexicon, the Moral Valence is ex-
pressed in a Likert-scale from 1 to 9, with 5 to be consid-
ered as neutral. Scores lower than 5 reﬂect notions closer
to Harm, Cheating, Betrayal, Subversion, and Degradation,
while values higher than 5 indicate Care, Fairness, Loyalty,
Authority, and Purity. For each lemma in a tweet and for
each foundation, we obtain a moral valence score which is
then averaged for each tweet. Negation correction was not
applied, as foundation polarities do not directly translate as
opposites (e.g., “not care” is not the same as “harm”). The
MoralStrength lexicon has a limited linguistic coverage; as
a result only the 41.5% of the tweets were found to express
a moral foundation. For all the rest, we assigned the value
5, neutral point of the Likert scale. This approach pushes
the observed mean towards the center of the scale, but cap-
tures the variability of the value across all documents (we
discuss the implications of this methodological step in Dis-
cussion). To assess statistical signiﬁcance, we use a Student’s
t-test (with the Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple
hypothesis testing) on the scores obtained from tweets writ-
ten before and after the mandate date (2020-04-03) for each
moral dimension.
Figure 5 shows the mean moral value scores of each side
in the periods before and after the mandate. Before, the two
sides display comparably similar values, except for care,
which is by far higher for the pro-mask side (signiﬁcant at
p < 0:001). However, there is a clear shift in the moral
narratives expressed after the mandate by both sides of the
debate. To understand the context of these morally-charged
expressions, we examine a sample of tweets for each side
and value.
First, we ﬁnd an increase in the valence of authority for the
anti-mask side ( p <0:001), which is mostly accompanied by
criticism and mistrust of the decisions made by the authorities.
For instance, the anti-mask side associates wearing a mask
with weakness and lack of leadership ( “@JoeBiden Real lead-
ership? With that thing on you look feeble” ). Conversely, the
pro-mask side sees a lack of leadership in former President
authority care fairness loyalty purity5.005.055.105.155.205.25Moral Valence
Before Mandate Pro-mask
Before Mandate Anti-mask
After Mandate Pro-mask
After Mandate Anti-maskFigure 5: Moral valence in narratives expressed by pro-mask
and anti-mask users in the periods before (lighter points) and
after (darker points) the mandate. Dot represents the median
value while the whiskers represent 5-95% quantiles.
Trump’s refusal to wear a mask ( “Real leaders won’t mind
when the mask smears your absurd orange makeup” ). Most
of the examples we ﬁnd in this moral category are indeed
criticism of the authorities, which nevertheless signiﬁes that
authority is held in high importance, especially for the anti-
mask side (it is the value with the highest valence). The fact
that post-mandate the authority-related keywords have higher
valence on the anti-mask side suggests stronger criticism of
the authorities than the pro-mask side (for whom the increase
is signiﬁcant only at p= 0:004before the correction).
In terms of care, both sides have a downwards shift after
the mandate. For the pro-mask side, this shift is accompa-
nied by an increase in fairness andloyalty , which can be
interpreted as a shift in focus from personal choice based on
caring for others to complying with the mandate. Also, in
this case, the spotlight is often on the opposite side ( “Masks
protect others, which Trump doesn’t care about. He cares
only about himself. ” ). Conversely, anti-mask supporters ex-
press themselves by prioritizing much less the notion of care,
explicitly showing disregard for the protection of others, or
simply stating that they do not care about being criticized for
not wearing a mask ( “I’m tired of being called a murderer
because I don’t wear a mask. Cannot understand how people
are such thoughtless idiots” ).
In addition, pro-mask supporters express signiﬁcantly
more loyalty in their messaging after the mandate ( p <
0:0001 ). Upon examining a sample of posts, we ﬁnd the
increase is primarily related to criticism of those not wearing
masks as loyalists to a political afﬁliation or to Trump per-
sonally ( “People don’t wear masks because of Trump. Dear
leader doesn’t wear one, loyal followers go along” ).
After the mandate, the fairness value increases for both
sides (both at p <0:0001 ). Narratives about the fair treatment
of individuals appear to be present equally on both sides,
focusing on negotiation when wearing masks is reasonable
(pro-mask: “What if a person not wearing it understands the
risks?” ), comparison with other rights violations (pro-mask:
“The only “rights” that are violated is just not wearing a mask?
They don’t appreciate the nice life they have. ” ), or whether
the criticism is fair (anti-mask: “Colorado Governor Says
People Who Refuse to Wear Mask are “Selﬁsh Bastards” OK,
and anybody who wants others to harm their immune system2020-01 2020-02 2020-03 2020-04 2020-05 2020-06 2020-07 2020-085.05.2
authority
2020-01 2020-02 2020-03 2020-04 2020-05 2020-06 2020-07 2020-084.85.05.25.4
care
2020-01 2020-02 2020-03 2020-04 2020-05 2020-06 2020-07 2020-085.005.055.10
fairness
2020-01 2020-02 2020-03 2020-04 2020-05 2020-06 2020-07 2020-084.95.05.1
loyalty
2020-01 2020-02 2020-03 2020-04 2020-05 2020-06 2020-07 2020-085.05.1purity
pro
antiITS model pro
ITS model antiFigure 6: Time series of moral value scores of pro-mask
and anti-mask users, along with an interrupted time series
analysis model.
is a POS Marxist propagandist” ). Instead, the valence of
purity does not change substantially. We ﬁnd that the notion
of purity is not tied to religious views, but to what people
consider ‘natural’ and ‘healthy’ (e.g. “My 8 y.o. niece will be
heading back to school but will have to wear a mask! How is
it physically or emotionally healthy?” ).
We further examine the evolution of moral values ex-
pressed by the two sides in time and model it via an In-
terrupted Time Series (ITS) linear model. Figure 6 depicts
the evolution of the average moral foundation score per side,
with a vertical dashed black line indicating the date of the
ofﬁcial mask mandate. Complementing our previous analysis,
the interrupted time series model shows that for all the moral
dimensions, after the mandate, there is an evident change in
behavior by both sides. Perhaps the most interesting moral
dimension is loyalty , whose signal is evidently diverging for
two sides exactly after the mandate date and continues the
same trend until the end of our data collection. We also ob-
serve that not only does the value of care decreases, the trend
is downward over time, signaling a progressive shift in the
debate. Similarly, the value of purity has a progressively neg-
ative trend for pro-mask side over time. Thus, we ﬁnd that
the temporal dimension of the data can be instructive about
the evolution of the rhetoric in terms of divergence between
the two sides of conversation and changes in emphasis.
Collectivism vs Individualism. One of the main purposes
of mask wearing is the protection of others, an expression ofTable 2: Use of singular and plural personal pronouns in a
tweet by side, before and after the mask mandate.
Pronoun Singular Plural
Mandate before after before after
Pro-mask 0.55 0.48 0.11 0.10
Anti-mask 0.53 0.60 0.09 0.10
solidarity within the in-group against an external threat. Thus,
we turn to the Individualism-Collectivism (IC) dimension
(Hofstede 2001), which captures the standing of individu-
als as interdependent members of a collective. We opera-
tionalize it via the personal pronouns used in the tweets,
mainly ﬁrst-person singular (“I”, “me”,“mine” etc.) and ﬁrst-
person plural (“we”, “us”, “ours” etc), following existing
literature (Twenge, Campbell, and Gentile 2013).
Table 2 shows the average usage of the two sets of pro-
nouns in the tweets posted by the two sides of the debate,
separately before and after the mask mandate. In the period
before mask mandate, anti-mask supporters use Iand other
singular pronouns at 0.53, and after the prevalence increases
to 0.60 ( +0:07,p <0:0001 ), which points to an increased
focus on the individual. Instead, pro-mask supporters de-
crease their usage of singular pronouns (  0:07,p <0:0001 ).
The mention of Weand other plural pronouns by both pro-
and anti-mask supporters remain at the same levels ( 0:01),
thus indicating no signiﬁcant shifts in the focus on the self-
identiﬁed group. Thus, although having comparatively similar
usages of singular pronouns before the mandate, the debate
after the government’s messaging becomes more individual-
istic for anti-mask side and less so for advocates of masking.
Information Environment. Finally, we turn to the infor-
mation context where the debate takes place, in form of links
to external sources and information from peers. We begin by
performing basic normalization steps on the original tweet
text, including removing punctuation, accents, contractions,
and stopwords, substituting emojis with a text description,16
and ﬁnally by performing lemmatization. We then identify
the most distinguishing words used by each side by calculat-
ing the odds ratio of using particular words (lemmas) by one
side compared to the other before and after the mask mandate.
We ﬁlter these words by their total frequency since otherwise
rare terms would emerge as most distinguishing. Because the
periods before and after the mandate have signiﬁcant differ-
ences in volumes, we set the word frequency threshold to 100
and800for the two periods, respectively. Politician names
appeared in the top terms and were grouped together, hence
resulting in two-word terms. The resulting top terms are:
•Pro-mask: trumpvirus, Louie Gohmert, Putin, Herman
Cain, wearadamnmask, penny, Mayo, GOP , DeSantis, co-
vidiots
•Anti-mask: riot, micron, virtue, leftish, loot, sheeple, un-
healthy, bacterium, MSM, antifa
16Using emoji library https://pypi.org/project/emoji/.Table 3: LDA topics with the most representative words,
extracted separately from tweets for each mask debate side.
The topic prevalence is reported in parenthesis.
Topic WordsproT1
(.35)distance, wear, social, day, mandate, today, friend,
hope, state, stay
T2
(.33)wear, people, virus, covid, bad, protect, medical,
infect, spread, science
T3
(.31)wear, Trump, Cain, rally, covid, Herman, die, Tulsa,
death, killantiT1
(.46)wear, people, covid, virus, work, distance, die,
thing, protect, spread
T2
(.31)wear, mandate, people, state, store, vote, business,
leave, today, order
T3
(.22)man, Trump, rally, school, eye, fuck, kid, hope,
stupid, big
The most distinctive words by each side are highly politi-
cized: aside from references to politicians (similar to other
recent ﬁndings around masking (Sanders et al. 2021)), we ﬁnd
several words used to attack the other side. For instance, pro-
maskers often use the term ‘trumpvirus’ to refer to COVID-
19, as a political response against the term ‘chinavirus’ used
by President Trump: “@realDonaldTrump #HermanCain-
RIP one more death due to #TrumpVirus . Just think. If only
he wore a mask and NOT attended the Tulsa #Coronavirus-
Rally” . The focus on individuals is worth of notice, as in the
case of Luie Gohmert, who strongly supported the use of hy-
droxychloroquine and attended a House Judiciary Committee
hearing without wearing a mask, or in the case of Herman
Cain, a Republican politician who opposed the mask mandate
and later died of COVID-19.17Similarly, the derogative term
‘covidiots’ is used to describe anti-mask supporters.
The opposite side instead focuses on the ‘riots’ that would
happen if lockdown and mask mandates are enforced, and
on the claim that masks can stop a ‘bacterium’ but not a
‘micron’-size virus. There are also claims that masks are ‘un-
healthy’ as they impede breathing, and are instead just ‘virtue
signaling’ devices: “Virtue signaling: mask and gloves. Peo-
ple lived with coronaviruses for 100+ years. Turn off the
TV . ” A right-wing, anti-establishment sentiment can be in-
ferred from the reference to ‘sheeple’: “And the CDC telling
everyone to mask up is just another test to see how long
the sheeple will obey. #Globalists” , and from references to
supposedly derogative terms such as ‘leftish’ and ‘antifa’.
Nonetheless, what is labeled as the anti-mask side is also
more varied in its opinions, ranging from just hesitant to fully
conspiratorial, somewhat similar to the spread of opinions
around vaccines (Cossard et al. 2020).
Moving to higher-level constructs, we aim to uncover com-
mon patterns in the argumentation proposed by both sides by
applying a topic modeling approach base on latent Dirichlet
allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). Limitations
of LDA clustering of short text are known, still, it offers a
good compromise between clustering performance and com-
17https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herman Cain#Health anddeathputational cost (Qiang et al. 2020).18To derive the optimum
number of topics k, we optimize the topic coherency ( Cv
metric (R ¨oder, Both, and Hinneburg 2015)) models with
k2[2;10]. For both the pro-mask and anti-mask sides, the
model with k= 3is the best ﬁt. Table 3 presents the salient
keywords that form the corresponding topics. The topics are
ranked according to their prevalence, with T1 the most preva-
lent one, and similarly, the terms are ranked by descending
importance for the speciﬁc topic.
From the emergent topics, the most prominent one on the
pro-mask side concerns the various interventions, including
social distancing andwearing a mask. ( “COVID is not a ﬂu!
Everyone needs to wear a mask to protect others from these
germs. ” ), echoing our earlier ﬁnding of higher care value of
this side. The second topic includes references to medicine
andscience , while the third centers around (Republican)
political ﬁgures. On the anti-mask side, the most prominent
topic also concerns the interventions, but instead focuses on
whether interventions work against the spread . The second
one puts the mandate in the context of the businesses and
stores , in contrast with T1 from the pro-mask side which
speaks about other interventions such as social distancing and
staying at home. The third topic is about political rallies , and
argues that masks are not useful (since the eyes are exposed
to the virus: “Still, even with a mask, you are uncovering the
mucous membranes in your eyes” ).
Finally, the two sides of the debate have about the same
proportion of tweets with URLs (around 23%). Earlier works
have shown a polarization in terms of news sources accompa-
nying political polarization (Garimella et al. 2021), however
here we ﬁnd differences in behavior beyond sharing news me-
dia. Table 4 shows the top domains of the URLs posted by pro-
and anti-mask users, along with the counts. Pro-mask users
overwhelmingly post URLs pointing to news websites or
aggregators. YouTube and Instagram feature prominently in
both lists, though anti-mask users favor YouTube more than
twice the second most popular domain. Anti-mask tweets
also link to a variety of business platforms, including Etsy
and Ebay, and lesser-known ones such as Zazzle, a platform
for custom-designed products. In addition, anti-mask users
link to the governmental agency National Center for Biotech-
nology Information (NCBI), the New England Journal of
Medicine (NEJM), and the Association of American Physi-
cians and Surgeons (AAPS). These ﬁndings stand in contrast
to a smaller recent study of geolocated-only tweets (He et al.
2021) that ﬁnds that anti-mask tweets were less likely to
share external information from public health authorities.
An explicit comparison of the captured tweet sets would be
necessary to resolve these ﬁndings.
Discussion & Conclusions
Our analysis reveals that the government messaging about
mask wearing provoked—instead of the intended focus on the
beneﬁts to the communities and society at large—a marked
shift in the moral values towards higher politicization of
the issue, with an increased focus on authority and fairness.
We argue that interventions targeted to those resistant to
18Using the Gensim library https://radimrehurek.com/gensimTable 4: Counts of the top 30 URL domains posted by pro-
and anti-mask users. Domains colored by class: news and
news aggregators (black), social media and social media au-
tomator/aggregators (red), business platforms (blue), medical
organization (green).
Pro-mask Anti-mask
rawstory.com 2317 youtube.com 3485
cnn.com 2000 thegatewaypundit.com 1341
youtube.com 1751 etsy.me 1210
washingtonpost.com 1393 instagram.com 912
a.msn.com 935 foxnews.com 903
apple.news 872 zazzle.com 796
huffpost.com 758 breitbart.com 781
news.yahoo.com 686 nypost.com 472
ﬂip.it 630 ﬁneartamerica.com 453
nytimes.com 587 fxn.ws 393
nbcnews.com 573 westernjournal.com 362
thehill.com 527 dlvr.it 344
dailykos.com 486 pixels.com 317
instagram.com 458 buff.ly 288
businessinsider.com 449 theblaze.com 282
thedailybeast.com 402 bizpacreview.com 268
newsweek.com 371 infowars.com 250
theguardian.com 343 etsy.com 246
usatoday.com 337 ift.tt 236
yahoo.com 333 cnn.com 231
cnbc.com 307 twitchy.com 217
politico.com 301 ebay.us 202
newsbreakapp.com 295 ncbi.nlm.nih.gov 196
buff.ly 260 facebook.com 192
npr.org 252 nejm.org 191
politicususa.com 236 newsbreakapp.com 175
apnews.com 231 a.msn.com 173
nypost.com 223 google.com 162
latimes.com 209 dennismichaellynch.com 152
mol.im 208 aapsonline.org 142
mask-wearing should center around these values, instead of
appealing to those valued less as the debate goes on.
It is no surprise that we ﬁnd the mask debate captured on
Twitter to be highly politically polarized. It is well-known
that polarization in the U.S. political scene has been grow-
ing in the last decades,19and this growing polarization has
important effects on several areas, including public health.
As polarization and health behaviors intersect, it is crucial to
understand their interaction to design effective health poli-
cies. For instance, the ideological and moral facets of health
intervention perceptions are closely related to the compliance
in the population, and the resulting effectiveness, as shown
for instance in recent statistics relating vaccination uptake to
political leaning.20However, shifting established associations
between health-related beliefs and political leaning may be
challenging. For instance, the attendees of Donald Trump’s
rally in August 2021 booed him after he voiced support for
19https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2021/11/09/beyond-
red-vs-blue-the-political-typology-2/
20https://acasignups.net/21/07/20/update-us-covid19-
vaccination-levels-countythe COVID-19 vaccination drive,21thus illustrating that even
the forerunners of the Republican party may encounter chal-
lenges in connecting with their constituents. As the pandemic
develops, and more mandates are issued by the governments,
constant polling and monitoring is essential in establishing
the public response to these measures (as of mid-2021, the
attitudes toward masking are still highly polarized).22
We ﬁnd that different moral values underpin the reasoning
emphasized by the two camps. Pro-mask arguments highlight
loyalty and fairness while criticizing the opposing leadership.
The anti-mask ones, on the other hand, focus on the authori-
tarian and oppressive aspects of the mandate and show a lack
of concern for the effects of their actions on others. In accor-
dance with these results, when examining this phenomenon
through the lenses of the Collectivism-Individualism theory,
we notice a decisive shift of the anti-mask community to-
wards individualism, with more intense use of ﬁrst-person
personal pronouns. We note the lack of loyalty among the
values emphasized by the anti-mask side, which tends to hold
a conservative political view, and differs from the commonly
observed ones associated with conservatism: authority, loy-
alty, and purity (Kivikangas et al. 2021; Fulgoni et al. 2016).
This may be a response to the pro-social framing of the mask
intervention, thus leading its opponents to de-emphasize the
in-group narrative usually common to their side. This interpre-
tation may point to motivated reasoning, wherein the desired
conclusion modiﬁes the worldview usually taken. Interest-
ingly, the ITS analysis shows divergence over time between
the two groups on the value of loyalty, which is alarming
since such disagreement, if not adequately addressed, can
lead to severe societal polarization.
This polarization seems to have been accompanied by a
lively commercial activity. When examining the links posted
by the two sides of the issue, we ﬁnd a prominent existence of
commerce-related platforms including etsy.com ,ebay.us , as
well as platforms for custom creation of merchandise such as
zazzle.com . Indeed, a brief search on these websites reveals an
assortment of t-shirts, coffee mugs, face masks, and baby bibs
with political messages from both sides of the debate. Some-
times historical symbols were used to make a stance, such as
the use of the yellow star—like those forced on Jews by Nazi
Germany—which was sold by a Nashville store protesting
against the vaccination campaign. After community criticism,
the item was removed23. Our ﬁndings suggest that there is
an active development of symbolism and aesthetics of the
resistance movement, and it would be a fascinating subject
of research to uncover the non-verbal representations of the
self and the group, expressions of values, and calls to action
(McGarry et al. 2019; Awad and Wagoner 2020). Awareness
of such symbolism and self-conceptualization is vital for
crafting appropriate messages and fostering communication
between the two sides.
Despite the volume and span of the data analyzed here,
21https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/aug/22/donald-
trump-rally-alabama-covid-vaccine
22https://www.politico.com/news/2021/08/02/poll-americans-
back-return-of-masking-502144
23https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-57297902this study has some limitations as most social media studies.
Especially when concerning politically charged topics, often
a minority of vocal users dominates the conversation (Musta-
faraj et al. 2011), thus making the opinions of the “silent
majority” challenging to discern. The observed relationships
between the stances on masking, moral values, and political
stance are limited to those who choose to express themselves
vocally. In addition, we use a high-precision vocabulary to
measure moral values, which has the side effect of pushing
the average valence in our results close to the neutral point,
due to a large number of tweets for which we cannot extract
moral valence. Traditional surveys are necessary to reach
those not as comfortable expressing their opinions online;
however, even those have selection biases. The automated
tools utilized in this study are not perfect: after manual ex-
amination, we ﬁnd that the network-based classiﬁer achieved
an accuracy of 72.4% for the anti-mask class, thus intro-
ducing noise in the subsequent analysis. However, from the
experience of manually labeling the users, we postulate that
the complexities of human expression, including humor and
sarcasm, may limit the best possible performance of such a
classiﬁer. Similarly, the inference of moral values from the
text may struggle with vocabulary mismatch, sarcasm, and
self-censorship. Finally, the generalizability of this study is
limited by the unique circumstances of an unprecedented
global pandemic happening in a hyper-connected world dur-
ing a politically polarized social environment. These con-
siderations must be taken into account when comparing our
ﬁndings to new scenarios.
Ethical Considerations
The dataset presented here contains only tweets which were
publicly available at the time of the collection. We make the
dataset publicly available to the research community in com-
pliance with the Twitter Terms of Service,24that is, sharing
only the tweet IDs of the collected posts, which will have to
be re-collected. In this paper, we have rephrased all quoted
tweets to prevent re-identiﬁcation of their authors. This prac-
tice ensures that the tweets which have been removed (either
by the user or the platform) will not be available. Although
large, this dataset does not include users with particular dis-
abilities which may disallow them to interact with the plat-
form, as well as minors and those blocked by Twitter. On
the other hand, the content collected here affects not only
those who have posted it, but also those who viewed or inter-
acted with it, which may be orders of magnitude more users,
since most users are “lurkers” who consume social media
content without posting (Van Mierlo 2014). Ultimately, the
masking decisions made by people engaging in this delib-
eration may directly affect the health and life of vulnerable
people, such as those with autoimmune disorders or other
conditions making them especially vulnerable to COVID-19.
Additionally, the sometimes aggressive rhetoric in this ma-
terial may not be suitable for young Twitter users, or those
dealing with mental health issues. Also, although the focus
of this study is the moral dimension of the debate, we caution
public health communicators not to overemphasize moral or
24https://developer.twitter.com/en/developer-terms/emotional dimensions of their message (or attempt to emo-
tionally manipulate their audience), but rather provide the
clearest and most informative messaging possible. Further,
we would like to discourage the tools used in this study to be
used for targeting individuals espousing particular opinions
for harassment or undue surveillance, and to follow the AAAI
ethical guidelines25in the application of these ﬁndings.
References
Abd-Alrazaq, A.; Alhuwail, D.; Househ, M.; Hamdi, M.; and
Shah, Z. 2020. Top concerns of tweeters during the COVID-
19 pandemic: infoveillance study. Journal of medical Internet
research , 22(4): e19016.
Aggarwal, A.; Rajadesingan, A.; and Kumaraguru, P. 2012.
PhishAri: Automatic realtime phishing detection on twitter.
In2012 eCrime Researchers Summit , 1–12. IEEE.
Araque, O.; Gatti, L.; and Kalimeri, K. 2020. MoralStrength:
Exploiting a moral lexicon and embedding similarity for
moral foundations prediction. Knowledge-based systems ,
191: 105184.
Awad, S. H.; and Wagoner, B. 2020. Protest symbols. Current
Opinion in Psychology , 35: 98–102.
Bayram, A. B.; and Shields, T. 2021. Who Trusts the WHO?
Heuristics and Americans’ Trust in the World Health Orga-
nization During the COVID-19 Pandemic. Social Science
Quarterly .
Beir´o, M.; D’Ignazi, J.; Prado, M.; Bustos, V .; and Kalimeri,
K. 2023. Moral Narratives Around the Vaccination Debate
on Facebook.
Biddlestone, M.; Green, R.; and Douglas, K. M. 2020. Cul-
tural orientation, power, belief in conspiracy theories, and
intentions to reduce the spread of COVID-19. British Journal
of Social Psychology , 59(3): 663–673.
Blei, D. M.; Ng, A. Y .; and Jordan, M. I. 2003. Latent
dirichlet allocation. JMLR , 3: 993–1022.
Blondel, V . D.; Guillaume, J.-L.; Lambiotte, R.; and Lefebvre,
E. 2008. Fast unfolding of communities in large networks.
Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment ,
2008(10): P10008.
Campbell, D. T. 1965. Ethnocentric and other altruistic mo-
tives. In Nebraska symposium on motivation , volume 13,
283–311.
Cinelli, M.; De Francisci Morales, G.; Galeazzi, A.; Quattro-
ciocchi, W.; and Starnini, M. 2021. The Echo Chamber Effect
on Social Media. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences , 118(9): e2023301118.
Cossard, A.; De Francisci Morales, G.; Kalimeri, K.; Mejova,
Y .; Paolotti, D.; and Starnini, M. 2020. Falling into the
Echo Chamber: the Italian Vaccination Debate on Twitter.
InICWSM .
Cotfas, L.-A.; Delcea, C.; Gherai, R.; and Roxin, I. 2021.
Unmasking People’s Opinions behind Mask-Wearing during
COVID-19 Pandemic—A Twitter Stance Analysis. Symme-
try, 13(11): 1995.
25https://www.aaai.org/Conferences/code-of-ethics-and-
conduct.phpCurry, O. S. 2016. Morality as cooperation: A problem-
centred approach. In The evolution of morality , 27–51.
Springer.
Day, M. V .; Fiske, S. T.; Downing, E. L.; and Trail, T. E. 2014.
Shifting liberal and conservative attitudes using moral foun-
dations theory. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,
40(12): 1559–1573.
des Mesnards, N. G.; Hunter, D. S.; el Hjouji, Z.; and Zaman,
T. 2022. Detecting bots and assessing their impact in social
networks. Operations Research , 70(1): 1–22.
Eikenberry, S. E.; Mancuso, M.; Iboi, E.; Phan, T.; Eiken-
berry, K.; Kuang, Y .; Kostelich, E.; and Gumel, A. B. 2020.
To mask or not to mask: Modeling the potential for face mask
use by the general public to curtail the COVID-19 pandemic.
Infectious Disease Modelling .
Fulgoni, D.; Carpenter, J.; Ungar, L.; and Preo t ¸iuc-Pietro, D.
2016. An empirical exploration of moral foundations theory
in partisan news sources. In Proceedings of the Tenth Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’16) , 3730–3736.
Garimella, K.; De Francisci Morales, G.; Gionis, A.; and
Mathioudakis, M. 2016. Quantifying Controversy in Social
Media. In WSDM , 33–42.
Garimella, K.; De Francisci Morales, G.; Gionis, A.; and
Mathioudakis, M. 2018a. Political Discourse on Social Me-
dia: Echo Chambers, Gatekeepers, and the Price of Biparti-
sanship. In The Web Conference , WWW, 913–922.
Garimella, K.; De Francisci Morales, G.; Gionis, A.; and
Mathioudakis, M. 2018b. Quantifying Controversy on Social
Media. ACM Transactions on Social Computing , 1(1): 3.
Garimella, K.; Smith, T.; Weiss, R.; and West, R. 2021. Po-
litical polarization in online news consumption. ICWSM ,
152–162.
Gillespie, C. 2020. Does wearing a face mask reduce
oxygen— and can it increase CO2 levels? Here’s what
experts say. https://www.health.com/condition/ infectious-
diseases/coronavirus/does-wearing-face-maskincrease-co2-
levels. Health. (Accessed on April 28, 2021).
Golbeck, J.; and Hansen, D. 2011. Computing political pref-
erence among twitter followers. In SIGCHI conference on
human factors in computing systems , 1105–1108.
Goldberg, M. H.; Gustafson, A.; Maibach, E. W.; Ballew,
M. T.; Bergquist, P.; Kotcher, J. E.; Marlon, J. R.; Rosenthal,
S. A.; and Leiserowitz, A. 2020. Mask-wearing increased
after a government recommendation: A natural experiment
in the US during the COVID-19 pandemic. Frontiers in
Communication , 5: 44.
Graham, A.; Cullen, F.; Pickett, J.; Jonson, C.; Haner, M.;
and Sloan, M. 2020. Faith in Trump, Moral Foundations,
and Social Distancing Deﬁance During the Coronavirus Pan-
demic. Moral Foundations, and Social Distancing Deﬁance
During the Coronavirus Pandemic (April 22, 2020) .
Graham, J.; Haidt, J.; Koleva, S.; Motyl, M.; Iyer, R.; Wojcik,
S. P.; and Ditto, P. H. 2012. Moral foundations theory: The
pragmatic validity of moral pluralism. Advances in Experi-
mental Social Psychology, Forthcoming .Graham, J.; Haidt, J.; and Nosek, B. A. 2009. Liberals and
conservatives rely on different sets of moral foundations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 96(5): 1029.
Haidt, J. 2012. The righteous mind: Why good people are
divided by politics and religion . Vintage.
Hao, F.; Shao, W.; and Huang, W. 2021. Understanding the
inﬂuence of contextual factors and individual social capital
on American public mask wearing in response to COVID–19.
Health & Place , 68: 102537.
Hartsoe, S. 2020. Experts urge empathetic
approach when talking with anti-maskers.
https://globalhealth.duke.edu/news/experts-urge-
empathetic-approach-when-talking-anti-maskers. (Accessed
on Dec 2, 2021).
Hatemi, P. K.; Crabtree, C.; and Smith, K. B. 2019. Ideology
justiﬁes morality: Political beliefs predict moral foundations.
American Journal of Political Science , 63(4): 788–806.
He, L.; He, C.; Reynolds, T. L.; Bai, Q.; Huang, Y .; Li, C.;
Zheng, K.; and Chen, Y . 2021. Why do people oppose mask
wearing? A comprehensive analysis of US tweets during
the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association , 28(7): 1564–1573.
Hofstede, G. 1984. Culture’s consequences: International
differences in work-related values , volume 5. Sage publica-
tions.
Hofstede, G. 2001. Culture’s consequences: Comparing val-
ues, behaviors, institutions and organizations across nations .
Sage publications.
Hornik, R.; Kikut, A.; Jesch, E.; Woko, C.; Siegel, L.; and
Kim, K. 2021. Association of COVID-19 misinformation
with face mask wearing and social distancing in a nationally
representative US sample. Health communication , 36(1):
6–14.
Iyer, R.; Koleva, S.; Graham, J.; Ditto, P.; and Haidt, J. 2012.
Understanding libertarian morality: The psychological dispo-
sitions of self-identiﬁed libertarians. PloS one , 7(8): e42366.
Kahane, L. H. 2021. Politicizing the mask: Political, eco-
nomic and demographic factors affecting mask wearing be-
havior in the usa. Eastern economic journal , 47(2): 163–183.
Kalimeri, K.; G. Beir ´o, M.; Urbinati, A.; Bonanomi, A.;
Rosina, A.; and Cattuto, C. 2019. Human values and atti-
tudes towards vaccination in social media. In Companion
Proceedings of the World Wide Web Conference , 248–254.
Karandikar, S.; Kapoor, H.; Fernandes, S.; and Jonason, P. K.
2019. Predicting moral decision-making with dark personali-
ties and moral values. Personality and Individual Differences ,
140: 70–75.
Karypis, G.; and Kumar, V . 1998. A fast and high quality
multilevel scheme for partitioning irregular graphs. SIAM
Journal on scientiﬁc Computing , 20(1): 359–392.
Katz, J.; Sanger-Katz, M.; and Quealy, K. 2020. A
Detailed Map of Who Is Wearing Masks in the US.
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/07/17/upshot/
coronavirus-face-mask-map.html. (Accessed on Dec 1,
2021).Keller, S. N.; Honea, J. C.; and Ollivant, R. 2021. How
Social Media Comments Inform the Promotion of Mask-
Wearing and Other COVID-19 Prevention Strategies. Int. J.
of Environmental Research and Public Health , 18(11): 5624.
Khan, A. 2020. ‘Wearing a mask can give a false
sense of security’: What the experts say about wearing
face masks. https://news.yahoo.com/facemask-proper-use-
necessary221717984.html. (Yahoo! News, 30 March. Ac-
cessed on April 28, 2021).
Kim, U. E.; Triandis, H. C.; K ˆa˘gitc ¸ibas ¸i,C ¸. E.; Choi, S.-
C. E.; and Yoon, G. E. 1994. Individualism and collectivism:
Theory, method, and applications. Sage Publications, Inc.
Kivikangas, J. M.; Fern ´andez-Castilla, B.; J ¨arvel ¨a, S.; Ravaja,
N.; and L ¨onnqvist, J.-E. 2021. Moral foundations and polit-
ical orientation: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Psy-
chological Bulletin , 147(1): 55.
Krishnamachari, B.; Morris, A.; Zastrow, D.; Dsida, A.;
Harper, B.; and Santella, A. J. 2021. The role of mask man-
dates, stay at home orders and school closure in curbing the
COVID-19 pandemic prior to vaccination. American journal
of infection control .
Kugler, M.; Jost, J. T.; and Noorbaloochi, S. 2014. Another
look at moral foundations theory: Do authoritarianism and
social dominance orientation explain liberal-conservative dif-
ferences in “moral” intuitions? Social Justice Research , 27(4):
413–431.
Landsverk, G. 2020. The CDC says healthcare
workers who can’t get a mask should use a ban-
dana or scarf as a ’last resort’ as supplies run
short. https://www.businessinsider.com/cdc-recommends-
health-workers-use-bandanas-face-masks-crisis-2020-3. (Ac-
cessed on April 28, 2021).
Lang, J.; Erickson, W. W.; and Jing-Schmidt, Z. 2021. #
MaskOn!# MaskOff! Digital polarization of mask-wearing
in the United States during COVID-19. PloS one , 16(4):
e0250817.
Maaravi, Y .; Levy, A.; Gur, T.; Conﬁno, D.; and Segal, S.
2021. “The tragedy of the commons”: How individualism and
collectivism affected the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Frontiers in Public Health , 9: 37.
McGarry, A.; Erhart, I.; Eslen-Ziya, H.; Jenzen, O.; and Ko-
rkut, U. 2019. The aesthetics of global protest: Visual culture
and communication . Amsterdam University Press.
Mejova, Y .; An, J.; Morales, G. D. F.; and Kwak, H. 2022.
Modeling Political Activism around Gun Debate via Social
Media. ACM Transactions on Social Computing , 3532102.
Miller, D. T.; and Morrison, K. R. 2009. Expressing deviant
opinions: Believing you are in the majority helps. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology , 45(4): 740–747.
Mottl, D. 2021. GetOldTweets3. https://pypi.org/project/
GetOldTweets3/. (Accessed on April 1, 2021).
Mustafaraj, E.; Finn, S.; Whitlock, C.; and Metaxas, P. T.
2011. V ocal Minority versus Silent Majority: Discovering
the Opinions of the Long Tail. In International Conference
on Social Computing , 103–110. IEEE.Pascual-Ferr ´a, P.; Alperstein, N.; Barnett, D. J.; and Rimal,
R. N. 2021. Toxicity and verbal aggression on social me-
dia: Polarized discourse on wearing face masks during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Big Data & Society , 8(1).
Patwa, P.; Sharma, S.; Pykl, S.; Guptha, V .; Kumari, G.;
Akhtar, M. S.; Ekbal, A.; Das, A.; and Chakraborty, T. 2021.
Fighting an Infodemic: COVID-19 Fake News Dataset. In
Chakraborty, T.; Shu, K.; Bernard, H. R.; Liu, H.; and Akhtar,
M. S., eds., Combating Online Hostile Posts in Regional Lan-
guages during Emergency Situation , 21–29. Cham: Springer
International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-73696-5.
Powdthavee, N.; Riyanto, Y . E.; Wong, E. C.; Yeo, J. X.; and
Chan, Q. Y . 2021. When face masks signal social identity:
Explaining the deep face-mask divide during the COVID-19
pandemic. PloS one , 16(6): e0253195.
Qiang, J.; Qian, Z.; Li, Y .; Yuan, Y .; and Wu, X. 2020. Short
text topic modeling techniques, applications, and perfor-
mance: a survey. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering .
R¨oder, M.; Both, A.; and Hinneburg, A. 2015. Exploring the
space of topic coherence measures. In WSDM , 399–408.
Samuel, J.; et al. 2016. Authoritariansim and Collectivism:
Antecedents and Consequences Among College Students.
Honors Undergraduate Theses , (12).
Sanders, A. C.; White, R. C.; Severson, L. S.; Ma, R.; Mc-
Queen, R.; Paulo, H. C. A.; Zhang, Y .; Erickson, J. S.; and
Bennett, K. P. 2021. Unmasking the conversation on masks:
Natural language processing for topical sentiment analysis
of COVID-19 Twitter discourse. In AMIA Annual Sympo-
sium Proceedings , volume 2021, 555. American Medical
Informatics Association.
Shapiro, M. A.; and Hemphill, L. 2017. Politicians and the
policy agenda: Does use of Twitter by the US Congress direct
New York Times content? Policy & internet , 9(1): 109–132.
Tajfel, H.; Turner, J. C.; Austin, W. G.; and Worchel, S. 1979.
An integrative theory of intergroup conﬂict. Organizational
identity: A reader , 56(65): 9780203505984–16.
Twenge, J. M.; Campbell, W. K.; and Gentile, B. 2013.
Changes in pronoun use in American books and the rise
of individualism, 1960-2008. Journal of cross-cultural psy-
chology , 44(3): 406–415.
Van Bavel, J. J.; and Pereira, A. 2018. The partisan brain: An
identity-based model of political belief. Trends in cognitive
sciences , 22(3): 213–224.
Van Mierlo, T. 2014. The 1% rule in four digital health social
networks: an observational study. J Med Internet Res , 16(2):
e2966.
Vandello, J. A.; and Cohen, D. 1999. Patterns of individu-
alism and collectivism across the United States. Journal of
personality and social psychology , 77(2): 279.
Weber, R.; Eden, A.; Huskey, R.; Mangus, J. M.; and Falk,
E. 2015. Bridging Media Psychology and Cognitive Neuro-
science. Journal of Media Psychology .
WHO. 2020. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the
public: When and how to use masks. https://archive.vn/cwkJ3.
(Archived on March 31, 2020, Accessed on April 28, 2021).