Noisy intermediate-scale quantum computers
Bin Cheng,1, 2, 3Xiu-Hao Deng,1, 2, 3Xiu Gu,1, 2, 3Yu He,1, 2, 3Guangchong Hu,1, 2, 3Peihao
Huang,1, 2, 3Jun Li,1, 2, 3Ben-Chuan Lin,1, 2, 3Dawei Lu,1, 2, 3, 4Yao Lu,1, 2, 3Chudan Qiu,1, 2, 3, 4
Hui Wang,5, 6, 7Tao Xin,1, 2, 3Shi Yu,1, 2, 3Man-Hong Yung,1, 2, 3Junkai Zeng,1, 2, 3Song
Zhang,1, 2, 3Youpeng Zhong,1, 2, 3Xinhua Peng,6, 7, 8Franco Nori,9, 10and Dapeng Yu1, 2, 3, 4, ∗
1Shenzhen Institute for Quantum Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China.
2International Quantum Academy, Shenzhen 518048, China.
3Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Quantum Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China.
4Department of Physics, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
5Hefei National Research Center for Physical Sciences at the Microscale and School of Physical Sciences,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
6CAS Center for Excellence in Quantum Information and Quantum Physics,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
7Hefei National Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230088, China
8CAS Key Laboratory of Microscale Magnetic Resonance and School of Physical Sciences,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
9Quantum Computing Center and Cluster for Pioneering Research, RIKEN, Wakoshi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan
10Physics Department University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1040, USA
Quantum computers have made extraordinary progress over the past decade, and significant mile-
stones have been achieved along the path of pursuing universal fault-tolerant quantum computers.
Quantum advantage, the tipping point heralding the quantum era, has been accomplished along
with several waves of breakthroughs. Quantum hardware has become more integrated and architec-
tural compared to its toddler days. The controlling precision of various physical systems is pushed
beyond the fault-tolerant threshold. Meanwhile, quantum computation research has established a
new norm by embracing industrialization and commercialization. The joint power of governments,
private investors, and tech companies has significantly shaped a new vibrant environment that accel-
erates the development of this field, now at the beginning of the noisy intermediate-scale quantum
era. Here, we first discuss the progress achieved in the field of quantum computation by reviewing
the most important algorithms and advances in the most promising technical routes, and then sum-
marizing the next-stage challenges. Furthermore, we illustrate our confidence that solid foundations
have been built for the fault-tolerant quantum computer and our optimism that the emergence of
quantum killer applications essential for human society shall happen in the future.
CONTENTS
I. Introduction 1
II. Quantum algorithms 4
III. Superconducting qubits 7
IV. Trapped-ion qubits 11
V. Semiconductor spin qubits 15
VI. NV centers 18
VII. NMR system 21
VIII. Neutral atom arrays 24
IX. Photonic quantum computing 27
∗yudp@sustech.edu.cnX. Outlook and conclusion 30
Acknowledgments 31
XI. References 31
References 31
I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum computing exploits phenomena of quantum
nature, such as superposition, interference, and entan-
glement, to provide beyond-classical computational re-
sources. Its ultimate goal is to build a quantum com-
puter that can be significantly more powerful than clas-
sical computers in solving certain tasks. Historically,
quantum computing dates back to the early 1980s, when
Benioff developed a quantum-mechanical model of the
Turing machine [1], and Feynman [2] and Manin [3] pro-
posed the idea of harnessing the laws of quantum me-
chanics to simulate phenomena that a classical computer
could not feasibly do. In 1994, Shor devised an effi-2
cient quantum algorithm for finding the prime factors
of an integer, a very concrete and important problem for
which no efficient classical algorithm is known [4]. Shor’s
algorithm, along with a number of other quantum al-
gorithms [5], strengthened the foundations of quantum
computing, inspired the community of quantum physi-
cists and stimulated research in finding actual realiza-
tions of quantum computing. The first implementation
scheme came in 1995, when Cirac and Zoller made a
proposal for quantum logic gates with trapped ions [6].
In the following years, other physical routes to realize
quantum computing, such as nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) [7–9], spin qubits [10, 11] and superconducting
qubits [12], were proposed, and there has been substan-
tial experimental progress in the area since then. Several
hardware platforms, including cavity quantum electrody-
namics systems, ion traps, and NMR, have successfully
realized more than one qubit in experiments since the
start of this century. In the following decade, various
platforms have achieved quantum information process-
ing on small-scale quantum systems composed of several
qubits. In recent years, the field has advanced to the
point where research groups have been able to demon-
strate quantum devices at a scale around or even beyond
forty qubits, particularly in trapped ions and supercon-
ducting circuits.
Remarkable progress has been achieved toward fault-
tolerant quantum computing. In the beginning, as
Fig. 1 shows, universal quantum gates and precise read-
out have been realized in various physical qubit systems
and demonstrated the fulfillment of DiVincenzo criteria.
Hardware-level developments and the progress in fabri-
cation further enable the integration of qubits. These
achievements enable excessive trials of prototype demon-
stration of quantum computing, including analog/digital
quantum simulation, quantum error correction (QEC),
fault-tolerant quantum operations, quantum algorithms,
etc. Google achieved quantum supremacy using random-
ized circuit sampling on their 53-qubit sycamore proces-
sor [13] . Afterward, several “quantum advantage” ex-
periments, including superconducting systems [14, 15]
and photons [16–18] have been realized, and the gap
between the computational power of quantum comput-
ers and their classical counterparts was greatly widened.
Another milestone is that the realization of quantum
annealing in commercialized quantum machines triggers
the industrialization of quantum computing. Efforts
have been made to develop specialized quantum com-
puters for certain tasks, such as the D-wave annealing
machines [19] and the aforementioned photonic boson
sampling circuits [16–18]. Moreover, practical QEC has
been explored in various physical systems, such as su-
perconducting circuits [20–24], ion traps, semiconduc-
tors [25, 26], and nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers in dia-
mond [27–29]. Considering its speeding-up strides, the
breakthrough toward universal fault-tolerant quantum
computation is closely tangible. Another noteworthy
achievement is the construction of functional quantumsimulators[30,31],digitallyoranalogously,towardsprac-
tical problems in quantum chemistry [32] and condensed
matter physics [33].
With ever-increasing abilities to precisely manipulate
quantum-mechanical systems, the quantum computing
community has been shifting the focus from laboratory
curiosities to technical realities, from investigating the
underlying physics to solving the engineering problems
in building a scalable system, from searching for a well-
behaved qubit to seriously addressing the question of
how to make our near-term quantum hardware practi-
cally useful. During the first decade of the 21st century,
superconducting qubits, the leading candidate for build-
ing scalable quantum computers, were used to demon-
strate prototype algorithms with no more than two pro-
grammable qubits in most cases. Many efforts have
beenspentonproof-of-principletestsofvarioushardware
modules. In 2014, two-qubit gate fidelities, an overall
performance metric that evaluates the degree of control
of a quantum processor, greater than 99%were achieved
for the first time in a multi-qubit superconducting cir-
cuit, surpassing the error-correction threshold [34]. Since
then, the community has seen a trend of growing system
size, with 50–100qubits integrated into state-of-the-art
processors. It is remarkable that the average fidelities
across these processors are also advancing; In Google’s
53-qubit processor, an average of 99.4%two-qubit gate
fidelity was achieved with simultaneous operations across
the chip [13]; Such enhanced reproducibility indicates
immense engineering efforts in all aspects of the exper-
iment, including design, fabrication, wiring, electronics,
and software.
Along this grand trend, we have already entered the
secondstageofquantumcomputing—noisyintermediate-
scale quantum (NISQ) [35] and cloud service of quantum
computers, as shown in the left panel of Fig. 1. NISQ
for quantum computing is analogous to the early stage
of classical quantum computers, when analog/digital sig-
nals are hybrid as the exploration of the limit of infor-
mation processing and the applications of the computing
tasks are limited to several areas. During this stage, logic
qubitsandoperationmightreachthebreak-evenpointby
encoding a limited but enough number of noisy qubits in
medium-sized integrated systems. As a result, demon-
strations of quantum algorithms can be performed using
a small amount of logic qubits. And further quantum
advantage utilizing quantum computational algorithms
or quantum simulation would also be demonstrated with
applications on quantum chemistry, variational quantum
computers, quantum machine learning, or quantum opti-
mization. Eventually, it is generally believed that fault-
tolerant universal quantum computers would be realized
in large-scale and integrated quantum systems.
In addition to the advances in hardware, commercially
valuable algorithms and applications are beginning to
burgeon [36]. A typical example is the variational quan-
tum eigensolver (VQE) algorithm [37], which is shown
to be worthwhile eventually from a two-atom molecule3
calculation to bigger quantum systems. Algorithms for
general purposes, in a similar spirit to the forerunner
textbook algorithms—Shor’s algorithm and Grover’s al-
gorithm [5], were developed recently [38], such as the
Harrow-Hassidim-Lloyd (HHL) algorithm [39] and the
quantum singular value transformation (QSVT) algo-FIG. 1. Quantum computing development levels. The left panel illustrates the three development stages of quantum computing  
with some iconic progress classified as the physical and logical levels. The right panel lists some potential applications according  
to different stages. Detailed discussion about this diagram could be referred to the Sec. I.
rithm [40].
The paradigm of quantum computing research has
been revolutionized over the years from solely academic
research. Nowadays, the great impetus comes not only
from its intrinsic scientific interest, but also from compa-
nies and societies [41]. With the aforementioned tremen-
dous progress, the approach to full-stack quantum com-
puting [41–43] approach is encouraging. As commercial-
ization is becoming a trend, many large companies and
start-upsarecontributingtothisfieldjointlywiththesci-
entificcommunity. Weshallseefurthercontributionsand
incentives to the development of this field coming from
commercialization, as has already happened for classical
computers, genetic technology, and artificial intelligence.
From a broader society scope, cloud quantum comput-
ing, such as IBM’s quantum network, makes it possible
for global users around the world to explore new quan-
tum algorithms without their own hardware devices. As
quantum computing lessons and experiences in schools
and universities are becoming a routine for the next gen-
eration, more well-educated engineers and scientists are
being enrolled in the field, equipped with insights and
knowledge of quantum science. Thus, the positive feed-
back from society is creating a new norm for quantum
computing research compared to its primitive days.
In this review, we will focus on hardware platforms
that have the potential to realize the ultimate large-scale
quantum computers, including superconducting circuits,
trapped ions, semiconductors, neutral atoms, NMR, NVcenters, and photonics. In particular, we will focus more
on the important advances in these platforms over the
past decade. By following the guidelines of DiVincenzo’s
criteria [44], we will introduce how to implement the key
elements of quantum computing in each physical system
andtheirtypicalfeaturesandadvantages. Thescalability
of each platform and critical challenges in recent devel-
opments will also be discussed here. Moreover, recent
progress on quantum algorithms will also be mentioned
in this review. By combining fast-developing hardware
platforms and potential applications, we hope to shed
light on the innovations that quantum computing can
bring in the foreseeable future.
Topological quantum computation provides another
approach to tackling quantum errors by keeping the com-
putational states to the desired pure quantum states
without erroneous results. A typical type of topologi-
cal qubits is made of Majorana zero modes, which are
immune to environmental noise and thus overcome the
inevitable decoherence at the hardware level through the
Majorana non-locality and braiding operations. How-
ever, the non-topological in-gap states or trivial zero-
energy states can also mimic the typical Majorana be-
havior, making the detection and other operations of
Majorana zero modes difficult. So far, the non-locality
and braiding operations to demonstrate the non-Abelian
statistics have yet to be proved before the realization of
topological qubits. A complete discussion of topological
quantum computation is beyond the scope of this review.
The interested reader is referred to the literature for fur-
ther details [45–47].4
(a) Superconducting quantum processor:  An array of artificial atoms made of Josephson junctions and capacitors, fabricated with lithography, controlled with microwave electronics Number of qubits with individual control: ~100 Gate fidelities: Systems with 53 qubits: F1 > 99%; F2 > 99%  Pros: Fast gate speed, tailored qubits, high controllability and scalability  Cons: Crosstalk between qubits, low temperature, supporting technology for scaling up(b) Trapped ion quantum computing: Laser-cooled atomic ions held by radio-frequency electric fields in ultra-high vacuum environment Number of qubits with individual control: 20-30 Gate fidelities: Systems with dozens of ions F1 > 99.9%; F2 >99%  Pros: Extremely long coherence time and excellent gate operations on few ions; Reconfigurable connectivity between ion qubits Cons: Technically challenging in integration(c) Semiconductor spin-based quantum computing:  Electron or hole spins in semiconductor (silicon) quantum dot Number of qubits with individual control: 6 Gate fidelities: Donor  spin qubit: F1 ~ 99.99%; F2 ~ 99.5% Gate-defined qubit: F1 ~ 99.9%; F2 ~ 99.51% Pros:  Semiconductor fabrication Long coherence and fast high-fidelity gate Work at temperature > 1 K Small footprint Cons: Challenge of nanoscale fabrication(d) NV center quantum computing:  Point defects in diamond; electron and nuclear spins with long coherence time; atom-like properties and solid-state host environment Number of qubits with individual control: 10 (one electron + nine 13C nuclear spins) Gate fidelities: F1 ~ 99.995%; F2 ~ 99.2% Pros:  Work at room temperature Excellent quantum sensor Handy in quantum network Cons: Hard to scale up(e) Neutral atom array quantum computing: Neutral atom arrays trapped in optical tweezers with controlled interactions based on the Rydberg interactions Number of qubits in digital quantum processors: 24 Number of qubits in analog quantum simulators: 289 Pros:  Both digital and analog quantum simulations Scaling up beyond 100 qubits in programmable geometries Cons: Improving fidelities of two-qubit gates(f) NMR quantum computing: Nuclear spins in molecule Number of qubits with individual control: 12  Gate fidelities: F1 ~ 99.98%; F2 ~ 99.3% Pros: Work at room temperature Long coherence time Digital quantum simulator Cons: Hard to scale up(g) Photonic quantum computing:  Coherently manipulating a large number of single photons or canonically conjugate pair of variables for electromagnetic modes to process quantum information Number of qubits with individual control: 18 Number of photons with coherent control: 255 (Jiuzhang 3.0 (to be published)) Gate fidelities: F1 ~ 99.84%; F2 ~ 99.69% Pros: robust against decoherence, working at room temperature, compatible with CMOS fabrications, natural interface for distributed quantum computing Cons: Big challenge to realize deterministic photon-photon gate(h) Topological quantum computing:  Fault-tolerant quantum computation based on non-abelian braiding of anyons Number of qubits with individual control: N/A Gate fidelities: N/A Pros:  Intrinsic topological protection Few physical qubits to construct a logic qubit Promising to achieve large-scale, error-corrected computation Cons: The ideal materials or systems not found yet. Zero topological qubit so far
FIG. 2. Schematic summary of different types of quantum bits (top half) and their corresponding pros and cons. (bottom
half). F1(F2) is the one-qubit (two-qubit) gate fidelity.
II. QUANTUM ALGORITHMS
Introduction.— It is anticipated that quantum com-
puters utilizing the exotic quantum features can solve
computationalproblemsmoreefficientlythantheirclassi-
cal counterparts. For example, in the query model, given
an oracle access to a function f:{0,1}n→ {0,1}, a clas-
sical computer can only query it once at a time, whereas
a quantum computer can query the oracle once and ob-
tain all 2nvalues simultaneously, a phenomenon known
as quantum parallelism. Formally,
X
x|x⟩|0⟩ 7→X
x|x⟩|f(x)⟩ (1)canbeachievedonaquantumcomputer. However, quan-
tum parallelism alone is not useful because when one per-
forms a measurement, the quantum state collapses, and
only one bit of information can be obtained. To design
quantum algorithms, quantum parallelism needs to be
combined with other features such as interference and
entanglement.
In 1985, Deutsch combined quantum parallelism with
interference to design the first quantum algorithm that
can solve a black-box problem with fewer queries than a
classical computer [48]. Specifically, in Deutsch’s prob-
lem, one is given a function f:{0,1} → { 0,1}and asked
whether the function is constant, that is, f(0) = f(1), or
not. Classically, we would need two queries to solve this
problem; but with quantum computers, only one query
is needed. Later, it was generalized to a multi-qubit5
version called the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm, which can
achieve an exponential speedup over any classical deter-
ministic algorithms [49]. However, the quantum speed-
up vanishes in the presence of a small error probability.
In 1993, Berstein and Vazirani proposed another prob-
lem and designed a quantum algorithm for it that can
achieve polynomial speedup even over classical random-
ized algorithms [50]. After one year, Simon strengthened
their result by designing Simon’s problem and a quantum
algorithm for it that yields an exponential speedup [51].
These early-stage explorations focused mostly on the
search for problems that quantum computers can solve
more efficiently than classical computers, instead of fo-
cusing on real-world applications. But interestingly, as
it turned out later, Simon’s algorithm inspired Shor to
design quantum algorithms to solve discrete logarithmic
and integer factoring problems [4], which are widely used
in cryptography.
Quantum Fourier transform.— In the next stage of the
development of quantum algorithms, several quantum al-
gorithmic primitives emerged and appeared to be exten-
sively used in designing new quantum algorithms. One
such primitive is the quantum Fourier transform (QFT),
which implements the Fourier transform matrix
(FN)jk:=ωjk
N/√
N (2)
with a polynomial-sized quantum circuit on a quantum
computer, where N:= 2nandωN:=e2πi/Nis the N-th
root of unity. Simon’s algorithm uses a special instance
of QFT, namely the Hadamard transform, which corre-
sponds to the case N= 2andωN=−1. From a group-
theoretic point of view, FNis the Fourier transform over
ZN, the additive group of integers modulo N, consisting
of elements {0,1,···, N−1}; Simon’s Hadamard trans-
form is the Fourier transform over Zn
2[52].
There are two steps in Shor’s factoring algorithm, a
classical polynomial-time reduction from integer factor-
ing to period finding, followed by an efficient quantum
algorithm for solving the period finding problem [4],
which uses QFT over ZN. Combining these two steps,
Shor obtained a polynomial-time quantum algorithm for
solving integer factorization, which has super-polynomial
speedup over the best classical algorithm. Kitaev gave a
generalized QFT over an arbitrary finite Abelian group,
with which he designed a polynomial-time quantum algo-
rithm for finding the stabilizer of an Abelian group; the
Abelian stabilizer problem includes integer factoring and
discrete logarithm as special instances [53]. It is worth
mentioning that Kitaev also gave the phase estimation
algorithm in the same paper, which estimates the phase
ϕinU|ψ⟩=ei2πϕ|ψ⟩and can be used to solve the pe-
riod finding problem [53]. In a coherent picture, all these
problems belong to the hidden subgroup problems cate-
gory [52, 54].
Quantum search.— The second primitive starts from
Grover’ssearchalgorithm[55,56],whichconcernssearch-
ing over an unsorted database for a target. Formally,
given a function f:{0,1}n→ {0,1}and the promisethat there is exactly one x0such that f(x0) = 1, the
search problem is to find the target x0. Since there is
no structure in this problem, a classical algorithm will
need Ω(2n)times of queries to find the target x0with
sizable probability. Grover’s algorithm allows a quantum
computer to find the target with O(√
2n)queries to the
database, which achieves a quadratic speedup over clas-
sical computation. Grover’s algorithm repeatedly applies
the Grover iterate
G= (2|u⟩⟨u| −I)(I−2|x0⟩⟨x0|), (3)
which is the product of two reflections; here, |u⟩:=
1√
NP
y|y⟩is the uniform superposition and I−2|x0⟩⟨x0|
is the quantum query operator. Grover’s algorithm is
optimal in the sense that any quantum algorithm that
solves this problem will take at least Ω(√
2n)queries [57].
Grover’s algorithm can be extended to amplitude ampli-
fication, which can handle the case of multiple numbers
of targets [58–60]. More precisely, given a quantum (or
classical) algorithm Aapplied to |0n⟩that can output
a correct target when measured with probability p, it
would require running the algorithm 1/ptimes to obtain
the targeted result. But amplitude amplification can ob-
tainthetargetintime O(1/√p), whichisalsoaquadratic
speedup. The fixed-point version of Grover’s algorithm
oramplitudeamplificationcanevenhandlethecasewhen
the number of targets is unknown [61–63]. Grover’s al-
gorithm has inspired more applications than Shor’s algo-
rithm, asitcanbeusedtospeedupthesearchsubroutine
for solving many optimization problems [64–68].
One may consider the search problem in an alter-
native paradigm, namely, the Markov chains or ran-
dom walks. The quantum version of random walks in-
cludesthecontinuous-timequantumwalk[69–71]andthe
discrete-time quantum walk; we focus on the latter here.
The framework of the discrete-time quantum walk was
incrementally developed in several works [72–78]. Later,
this framework was applied to obtain a different formula-
tion of Grover’s search algorithm [79]. In a breakthrough
work, Ambainis designed a quantum walk algorithm for
element distinctness [80] that achieves better query com-
plexity than a direct application of Grover’s algorithm
and matches the theoretical lower bound [81]. Ambainis’
result was generalized subsequently [82, 83], and, in par-
ticular, Szegedy gave a general framework for quantizing
classical Markov chains [83], which was further improved
in [84]. This quantum walk-based search algorithm finds
manyapplications[85,86], includingtrianglefinding[87],
testing group commutativity [88], etc.
Hamiltonian simulation.— The third primitive that
will be discussed in this review is Hamiltonian simula-
tion, which approximates the time evolution operator
e−iHtof a Hamiltonian Hon a quantum computer. In
fact, Hamiltonian simulation is one of the initial moti-
vations for developing quantum computing [2]. The first
quantum algorithm for implementing the time evolution
operator is given by Lloyd [89], which is based on the
Lie-Trotter formula. For example, suppose that we have6
a local Hamiltonian H=H1+H2such that the time
evolution of the local terms H1andH2can be efficiently
implemented on a quantum computer. The Lie-Trotter
formula gives
e−iHt= (e−iH1t/se−iH2t/s)s+O(t2/s),(4)
which means that e−iHtcan be implemented by alternat-
ingH1andH2over an incremental time t/s. One can
also use the higher-order formula [90, 91] to approximate
the time evolution of H. The general scheme is called
the product-formula approach, or Trotterization, which
was later applied to simulate a sparse Hamiltonian [92–
94]. Later, a Hamiltonian simulation method based on
quantum walk [95, 96] was proposed, which achieved lin-
ear gate and query complexities in the evolution time t,
matching the lower bound imposed by no fast-forwarding
theorem [93].
Another important approach to simulate Hamilto-
nian dynamics is using a linear combination of unitaries
(LCU) [97], and it is shown to have the optimal depen-
dence on the simulation precision [98, 99]. The LCU
approach is combined with the quantum walk approach
to give an algorithm that has optimal dependence on all
parameters of interest, such as precision, sparsity of the
Hamiltonian, the evolution time, etc. [100]. Moreover,
there is a subroutine used in the LCU approach that was
later named block encoding, which turns out to provide
a versatile toolkit in designing quantum algorithms. In
a series of works, Low et al. gave improved Hamiltonian
simulationalgorithmsbasedonblockencodingandquan-
tum signal processing [101–104]. The idea is to encode
the Hamiltonian as a block of a unitary, and then apply
the polynomial transformation to the Hamiltonian us-
ing the quantum signal processing technique [101]. This
method was further generalized to a framework called
QSVT [105], which covers most existing quantum algo-
rithms as special cases, achieving a grand unification of
quantum algorithms [106]. However recently, an in-depth
analysis of the Trotter error showed that the product-
formula approach can achieve a competitive scaling of
gate complexity compared to other approaches [107].
Quantum linear algebra and quantum machine
learning.— The previous primitives can be combined to
design new quantum algorithms. Here, we discuss quan-
tum algorithms for linear algebra and machine learn-
ing. Quantum linear algebra starts with the HHL al-
gorithm, named after Harrow, Hassidim, and Lloyd [39].
The problem they considered is to solve linear systems of
equations; that is, given a matrix Aand a vector b, solve
Ax=bforx. Givenaquantumstate |b⟩thatencodesthe
vector bin its amplitudes, HHL uses Hamiltonian evolu-
tion and phase estimation to approximately prepare the
state|x⟩=A−1|b⟩. Provided that the whole description
of the solution xis not required and that the state |b⟩can
be prepared, the HHL algorithm can achieve exponential
speedup over any classical algorithm [39]. HHL was ap-
plied to many quantum machine learning algorithms to
obtainexponentialquantumspeedup, includingquantumk-means clustering [108], quantum principal component
analysis [109], quantum support vector machine [110],
quantum data fitting [111], etc; see Ref. [112] for a re-
view of these algorithms.
However, it is not clear whether such an exponen-
tial quantum speedup is artificial or not. Specifically,
these quantum machine learning algorithms typically
made strong input assumptions, such as quantum ran-
dom access memory (QRAM) with access to the classical
data [113]. It might be possible to derive efficient clas-
sical algorithms in an analogous setting. In 2018, the
breakthrough work by Tang [114] gave a classical algo-
rithmthatdequantizesthequantumalgorithmforrecom-
mendation systems [115], which was previously believed
to have an exponential speedup, with only a polynomial
slowdown. Tang’sresultstimulatedaseriesofsubsequent
work on dequantizing various quantum machine learning
algorithms, such as those for principle component analy-
sis [116], solving low-rank linear systems [117, 118], solv-
ing low-rank semidefinite programming [119], etc. The
sample and query access model [116] to the input data is
assumed in those works, which is a classical analogue to
the input assumptions in many quantum machine learn-
ing algorithms. Since the QSVT provides a primitive for
unifying quantum algorithms, especially quantum linear
algebra, these dequantization results were later extended
to a unifying framework by dequantizing the QSVT [40].
Therefore, whether exponential quantum speedup can be
achieved in machine learning is still under debate.
Variational quantum algorithms.— Apart from quan-
tizing machine learning algorithms with HHL, another
exploration is inspired by neural networks, which are
variational quantum algorithms. Variational quantum
algorithms are hybrid quantum algorithms that prepare
parameterized quantum states on a quantum computer
and use classical computers to optimize the parameters.
The first variational quantum algorithm is the VQE [37],
designed to tackle quantum chemistry problems. Its goal
is to find the ground state and ground energy of local
Hamiltonians. Before VQE, a common approach was
to use quantum phase estimation [120, 121]. However,
such an approach, just like other quantum algorithms,
imposes a stringent coherence requirement on the quan-
tum devices, which is challenging in the current NISQ
era [35].
Since VQE, more works have been done in this direc-
tion. Inspired by quantum adiabatic algorithm [122],
Farhi et al. proposed the quantum approximate op-
timization algorithm (QAOA) for solving combinato-
rial optimization problems such as the max-cut prob-
lem [123]. The third family of variational quantum al-
gorithms is the quantum neural networks, which aims
to solve machine learning problems such as classifica-
tion [124, 125] and generative modeling [126, 127].
In the current NISQ era, although we have demon-
strated quantum computational supremacy in various
models [13, 15, 128, 129], these problems are not de-
signed to be of practical relevance. Variational quan-7
tum algorithms are regarded as promising approaches
for demonstrating “killer applications” on quantum com-
puters. Such applications might appear in various areas
including quantum chemistry, material science and bi-
ological science. For example, in quantum chemistry,
VQE can be used to compute the low-energy eigen-
states of electronic Hamiltonians, which helps under-
stand chemical reactions and design new catalysts [130].
As for biological science, optimization is often involved
in many fields like sequence analysis and functional ge-
nomics [131]. This opens opportunities for potential
quantum speedup by using quantum neural networks,
and quantum variational auto-encoders [132], etc. How-
ever, there is a long way to go along this path and con-
tinuous efforts should be put into the study of variational
quantum algorithms. Moreover, to make it practical for
the neat-term quantum devices, perhaps error mitigation
techniques are also required [133–137].
III. SUPERCONDUCTING QUBITS
Introduction.— Superconducting qubits are nonlinear
superconducting circuits based on Josephson junctions,
with quantized electromagnetic fields in the microwave
frequency domain (typically 0.1–12GHz). They oper-
ate at cryogenic temperatures ( ∼10mK; equivalent to
kBT/h∼0.2GHz) provided by dilution refrigerators in
order to suppress thermal fluctuations. Superconducting
qubits recently emerge as a leading platform for scalable
quantuminformationprocessing. Somerecentmilestones
include the demonstration of quantum supremacy us-
ing a 53-qubit superconducting quantum processor [13],
which is further strengthened with a 66-qubit proces-
sor [128]. Offering scalable high-fidelity control and con-
figurable interactions, superconducting circuits have be-
come a versatile playground for quantum computational
tasks [125, 128, 138–141], quantum simulation [142–150],
quantum annealing [19, 151], quantum chemistry [152–
155], exotic many-body physics [156–161], new regimes
for light-matter interaction [162–165], quantum sensing
[166, 167] and studying biological processes [168].
Some facts about superconducting qubits are summa-
rized in Fig. 2(a), and a list of excellent reviews on super-
conducting qubits can be found in Refs. [169, 173–190].
Thechargecarriersinsuperconductors, knownasCooper
pairs, can flow without dissipation, a desirable feature
for preserving quantum coherence of a macroscopic sys-
tem. More importantly, non-trivial quantum properties
emerge from the integration of a special superconducting
circuit element, the Josephson junction, which is usually
in the form of a sandwich structure consisting of two
superconducting electrodes separated by a nanometer-
thick insulating layer (Fig. 3a); Cooper pairs can tun-
nel through the insulating barrier with a supercurrent no
larger than the critical current Icof the junction which
depends on the material, thickness, and size [191, 192].
From a circuit point of view, a Josephson junction canbe modeled as a native capacitor CJin parallel with a
nonlinear inductor LJ= Φ 0/2πIccosϕ, where Φ0=h/2e
is the superconducting flux quantum and ϕis the su-
perconducting phase difference across the junction. Two
characteristic parameters of a Josephson junction are its
Josephson energy EJ= Φ 0Ic/2πand the charging energy
EC=e2/2CJ.
Qubit construction.— There have been numerous ex-
plorations of how to construct a superconducting qubit
using Josephson junctions. Traditionally, supercon-
ducting qubit designs are categorized into charge [193],
flux [194, 195] and phase qubits [196]; all are successful
in many early demonstrations [12, 197–208]. In recent
years, thetransmonqubit[209]andamodifiedversionfor
implementing scalability, i.e., the Xmon qubit [171] have
become popular. These modified designs of the charge
qubit shunt a Josephson junction with a large capacitor
CSto strongly suppress their sensitivity to the charge
fluctutaions [210]. Typically, this shunt capacitor lowers
the effective charging energy EC=e2/2(CS+CJ)to the
regime of EJ/EC>50(Fig. 3b); as a result, the sensi-
tivity to charge fluctuations is strongly suppressed. The
fact that the transmon design has the simplest possible
circuit geometry makes it more tolerant of fabrication
variations and excellent at reproducibility. The Hamilto-
nian of the transmon qubit is the same one for the charge
qubit and can be expressed as
H= 4ECn2−EJcosϕ, (5)
where nis the number of Cooper pairs that traverse
the junction; nandϕsatisfy the commutation rela-
tion [ϕ, n] =i. Note that the Hamiltonian is identical
to the one that describes a quantum particle in a one-
dimensional potential (Fig. 3c). In the CS≫CJlimit,
the low-energy eigenstates are, to a good approximation,
localized states in the potential well, and the supercon-
ducting phase ϕis small. We can therefore expand the
potential term into a power series:
−EJcosϕ=1
2EJϕ2−1
24EJϕ4+O(ϕ6).(6)
The first quadratic potential term leads to a quantum
harmonic oscillator with equidistant energy levels ℏω10,
whereas the second quartic potential arising from the
Josephson nonlinearity introduces anharmonicity to the
level structure, allowing the transition energy ℏω21be-
tween first-excited state |1⟩and second excited state |2⟩
to be different from that between the ground state |0⟩
and first-excited state |1⟩. This nonlinearity allows one
to define a qubit in the computational subspace consist-
ing of the lowest two energy levels |0⟩and|1⟩only. The
designmaybefurthermodifiedbyreplacingasinglejunc-
tion with a pair of junctions so that the effective Joseph-
son energy, and consequently the qubit frequency, can
be tuned by adjusting the magnetic flux threading the
two-junction loop.
The transmon design can be implemented with a qubit
circuit embedded in a three dimensional cavity (Fig. 3d)8
SQUID
10 mm
(a) (c)
(f) (g)
Insulator
Superconductor Superconductor
Cooper pair
50 mmnode A node B
(b)(d) (e)
(h)XY
controlself cap.
bus
Z
controlreadout
resonator
FIG. 3. (a) Schematic of a Josephson junction composed of two superconductors separated by a thin insulating layer through
which Cooper pairs can tunnel. Adapted from Ref. [169], Springer Nature Limited. (b) Circuit diagram of a transmon qubit
consisting of a Josephson junction (Josephson inductance LJ, self-capacitance CJ) and a shunt capacitor CS(CS≫CJ). (c)
Potential profile and level diagram of the transmon qubit, a quantum anharmonic oscillator. (d) Image of a transmon qubit
embedded in a three dimensional cavity. Adapted from Ref. [170]. (e) Image of a planar transmon qubit. Adapted from
Ref. [171]. (f) Photograph of the Sycamore quantum processor. Adapted from Ref. [13], Springer Nature Limited. (g) Device
schematic of the Zuchongzhi quantum processor. Adapted from Ref. [128]. (h) Photograph of a modular quantum processor
consisting of two nodes. Adapted from Ref. [172], Springer Nature Limited.
and in the form of lithographically defined circuits based
on superconducting materials such as aluminum and nio-
bium (Fig. 3e) and many other variants [170, 171, 211–
213]. Qubit designs with alternative topology such as ca-
pacitively shunted flux qubit [210, 214–217], fluxonium
[218–221], and 0- πqubit [222] have also been under ac-
tive development and shown promising progresses. By
engineeringtheenergy-levelspectraandthecouplingma-
trix elements, some of these designs have a better-defined
two-level system and intrinsic protection against external
perturbations at the cost of increased circuit complexity.
The remarkable flexibility in configuring the Hamiltonian
offers a rich parameter space to search for desired qubit
propertiesandthereforegivessuperconductingqubitsthe
name “artificial atoms”.
Readout and initialization.— Having a well-defined
two-level system is not enough for quantum computing;
the ability to faithfully measure and initialize the qubit
is also indispensable. The prevailing technique for dis-
cerning the qubit state is the dispersive readout scheme.
Utilizing the cavity or circuit quantum electrodynamics
(cQED) architecture, a qubit is strongly coupled to but
sufficiently detuned from a readout resonator [223, 224];
the qubit induces a state-dependent shift in the resonator
frequency from which the qubit state can be inferred by
interrogating the resonator. The cQED scheme has been
successful in achieving fast, high-fidelity, non-demolition
readout, assisted by a list of technologies that have been
invented around this approach. To avoid extra decoher-ence introduced by the readout resonator, a Purcell fil-
ter can be placed between the resonator and the exter-
nal circuitry to reshape the environmental mode density
seen by the qubit and the resonator [225–228]; in this
way, one may enhance the readout speed while inhibit-
ing qubit relaxation. In addition, the use of Josephson
parametric amplifiers (JPA) [229–237] at the beginning
stage of the readout signal amplification can also bring
an immediate improvement to the measurement fidelity.
It is noteworthy that other techniques including multi-
plexed readout [238], multilevel encoding [239], and pho-
ton counting method [240] also help improve the mea-
surement efficiency and scalability. Between consecutive
measurements, superconducting qubits are typically ini-
tialized by simply waiting for the qubit to relax to its
ground state. Various conditional and unconditional re-
set techniques have been developed for superconducting
qubits to accelerate this process [241–245].
Gates.— Controlling superconducting qubits is chal-
lenging because performing a quantum logic or unitary
operationisfundamentallyananalogprocessgovernedby
the Schrodinger equation and the realistic Hamiltonian
is often far from ideal. A single qubit XY operation,
rotation around an axis in the XY plane in the Bloch
sphere, is commonly implemented by driving the qubit
witharesonantmicrowavepulse. Forweaklyanharmonic
qubits such as the transmon, the resonant drive can in-
duce unwanted leakage to higher excited states and addi-
tional phase errors; the derivative-removal-by-adiabatic-9
gate (DRAG) scheme, which adds additional quadrature
components to the pulse, has become a routine in pulse
calibration to combat these coherent errors at no addi-
tional hardware cost [246, 247]. The single-qubit phase
gate or Z gate, rotation around the Z axis, can be re-
alized either by combining XY rotations or by adding a
physical Z pulse provided that the qubit frequency is ad-
justableorbyperformingthemoreefficientvirtualZgate
through shifting the phases of XY rotations [248]. Heat
dissipation is another important concern for cryogenic
experiments when scaling to a large number of qubits;
a more energy-efficient approach for single-qubit opera-
tions using single-flux-quantum (SFQ) circuits has been
demonstrated recently [249].
Entangling operations are currently the performance
bottleneck for existing quantum processors. Among the
numerous entangling gate schemes, most of them are
between two qubits and they generally belong to two
families. One general approach is to frequency-tune the
relevant energy levels into resonance to initiate interac-
tions; relateddemonstrationsincludetheimplementation
ofiSWAPor√
iSWAPgate[250,251]andthecontrolled-Z
gate [252–257]. The other method is to apply microwave
pulses at certain non-local transitions; for example, the
cross-resonance gate [258, 259], resonator-induced phase
gate [260] and parametrically driven gate [261, 262]. The
gist for obtaining high-fidelity two-qubit gates is to engi-
neeraneffectiveinteractionstrengthsuchthatitisstrong
during gate operation for achieving short gate time while
as weak as possible outside of the gate window for avoid-
ing unwanted interactions, in another word, a high on/off
ratio. In a fixed-coupling architecture where the qubit-
qubit coupling strength gis almost constant, a straight-
forward way to turn the interaction on or off is to tune
the qubit frequencies into or away from resonance. How-
ever, asthequbit-qubitconnectivityincreases, eachqubit
sees more transitions in its surroundings; it becomes in-
creasingly difficult to manipulate the whole system in a
clean fashion. This is known as the frequency-crowding
problem, one of the main challenges in scaling up quan-
tum processors. The problem also exists for alternative
coupling schemes such as the all-to-all connection via a
bus resonator [263]. It may be resolved by the tunable-
coupling schemes in which the coupling strength gcan
be independently controlled over a large dynamic range
[264–271]. In recent years, a tunable-coupling architec-
ture based on native capacitive coupling and interference
effect [272] has become a trending solution; many re-
search groups have made tremendous progress in gate
fidelities, including some results approaching the 99.9%
mark[273–280]. Typicalperformanceofsuperconducting
processors is summarized in Table I.
Decoherence.— Quantum information can be quickly
destroyed by decoherence. The bad news is that super-
conducting qubits are extremely susceptible to external
fluctuations due to their macroscopic nature. One im-
mediate solution is, of course, to make the qubit lifetime
longer. Ever since the first observation of quantum co-herenceinsuperconductingqubits[12], thelifetimeofthe
qubit has been improved by six orders of magnitude from
nanoseconds to milliseconds [282–284] in about 20years.
This remarkable progress is attributed to a combination
of advances in design, material, fabrication quality, and
testing environment. The current common belief is that
spurious two-level systems (TLS) that reside in the vicin-
ity of the qubits are a major source of decoherence [285]
and unpredictable fluctuations in coherence and qubit
frequencies, which can be troublesome in large-scale im-
plementations [286–290].
Besides coherence improvement on the hardware side,
another way to combat noise and decoherence is through
quantum control methods. A particularly useful tech-
nique is dynamical decoupling (DD) [291] which uses tai-
lored pulse sequences to correct for coherent noise, in
particular, the notorious 1/fnoise [292] that is ubiqui-
tous in these solid-state devices. Designing an optimal
sequence requires detailed knowledge of the noise such as
its spectral properties which may be extracted using var-
ious techniques at different frequency ranges [251, 293–
298].
Given the limited coherence, the performance of a
quantum processor may also be enhanced through op-
timized quantum compiling, i.e., to translate high-level
operations into a shorter sequence of native gates [299].
Compiling on a superconducting quantum processor can
be exceptionally challenging due to the planar geometry
and limited connectivity; often, the final sequence to ex-
ecute is too time-consuming. An effective strategy is to
fully explore the hardware capabilities and diversify the
available gate alphabets to optimize compilation. Re-
cent progress on continuous gate set, multi-qubit gates,
and qudit operations have shown considerable potential
in this respect [275, 300–304].
Quantum error correction.— Since the state-of-the-art
gateerrorrate( 10−3)ismanyordersofmagnitudehigher
than that a logical qubit would require ( 10−12–10−15),
QEC is necessary for building a universal quantum com-
puter. Surface codes [305, 306], which encode logical
qubits into a square lattice of physical qubits, are appeal-
ing for planar architectures. Recently, we have observed
a surge of exciting experimental developments in this re-
spect [21, 22, 24, 307–309]. In some of these experiments
the performance is getting close to or partially exceeds
the QEC threshold. Still, it is challenging to achieve
substantial error-correction gain and most importantly,
to have the performance reproducible at an even larger
scale. In the near future, a logical qubit made of a few
hundreds to a thousand physical qubits is highly antici-
pated; in the next five to ten years, we may have an idea
about whether a fault-tolerant quantum computer is fea-
sible and how powerful it can be. A relevant issue with
increasing attention is the presence of cosmic rays which
can cause chip-wide failure and is catastrophic to surface
codes [310–312].
Another promising route to QEC is bosonic codes,
where logical qubits are encoded in microwave photon10
TABLE I. Typical performance reported in superconducting qubits.
No. of qubits T1(µs)T∗
2(µs )t1q(ns) Err1q(10−3)t2q(ns) Err2q(10−3)tr(µs )Errr(10−2)Fridge Size
53,66[13, 128] 16−30.6∼5.3∼25 ∼1.4 ∼12 ∼5∼1[281]∼3.1[281] ∼20 mK ∼1 mm2
<10 [273–280] 15−7612−105∼30 ∼1 10−200 ∼1.5
t1q(t2q) is the duration of one-qubit (two-qubit) gate.
tr(Errr) stands for the duration (error rate) of the readout.
statesofthree-dimensionalsuperconductingcavities. De-
pending on how a logical qubit is encoded into harmonic
oscillatorstates, therearedifferentkindsofbosoniccodes
[313–315]. The cat codes and associated variants utilize
a superposition of two photonic cats of the same parity
as logical qubit [316–320]; the binomial codes instead use
definite photon number parity as code words [321, 322];
the Gottesman-Kitaev-Preskill (GKP) codes implement
a coherent state lattice in phase space [323–327] with the
advantage that errors, measurements, and gates are sim-
pledisplacementsoftheoscillators. Todate, onlybosonic
codes have reached the break-even point in QEC exper-
iments, which means that the error-corrected qubit has
longer lifetime than the otherwise. This is due to the fact
that microwave photons have fewer error syndromes and
three-dimensional cavities usually have higher quality.
Scalability.— Lastly, we would like to touch upon the
most concerning question: how to make the supercon-
ducting quantum processor more scalable. With the con-
tinuousimprovementinplanarcircuitdesignandfabrica-
tion and the development of flip-chip packaging, dozens
of superconducting qubits have been integrated on a sin-
gle processor so far, allowing for the demonstration of
quantum supremacy [13] (Fig. 3f) or quantum computa-
tional advantage [128] (Fig. 3g). It is worth emphasizing
that simply printing thousands of qubits is straightfor-
ward, but the real challenge is to achieve high-fidelity
operations for all qubits, simultaneously. For this pur-
pose, many existing architectures may need to be rein-
vented. First of all, hosting more qubits in a limited
space requires reducing the qubit footprint. Recent de-
velopments show that the shunt capacitor can be minia-
turized by 100folds or more using two-dimensional mate-
rials while maintaining coherence [328–330]. Even if the
qubits can be densely packed up on a chip (size: L×L),
it is nevertheless extremely difficult to route all the con-
trol wires from the perimeter (length ∝L) to individ-
ual qubits (density ∝L2) due to the unmatched scaling
law; let alone to avoid crosstalk between wires. In recent
years, there have been substantial efforts to exploit the
third dimension to relieve this pain with various tech-
nologies borrowed from the semiconductor chip packag-
ing, such as flip-chip bonding and through-silicon vias
[331–338]. Aside from expanding the space for wiring,
a different approach is to reuse the wire for multiple
targets. Signal multiplexing and control line sharing
schemes can alleviate the problem for future large-scale
devices [304, 339, 340]. They also help reduce the cable
density inside and out of the dilution refrigerator.In the future, we may end up with insurmountable
engineering challenges, including available wafer size, de-
vice yield, and crosstalk, all constraining the scalabil-
ity of monolithic quantum processor designs. This sug-
gests the desirability of developing alternative modular
approaches, where smaller-scale quantum modules are
individually constructed and calibrated, then assembled
into a larger architecture using high-quality quantum co-
herent interconnects [341–345]. Several recent experi-
ments have demonstrated deterministic quantum state
transfers (QSTs) between two superconducting quan-
tum modules, with interconnects provided by commer-
cial niobium-titanium (NbTi) superconducting coaxial
cables [346–348], copper coaxial cables [349], and alu-
minum waveguides [350], showing fidelities up to ∼80%,
primarily limited by lossy components including connec-
tors, circulators, and printed circuit board traces. More
recent efforts using wirebond [172] or clamped [351] con-
nections between the quantum modules and the super-
conducting cables have eliminated the need for normal-
metal components, improving cable quality factors to
∼5×104and inter-module QST fidelities to ∼90%
(Fig. 3h). Flip-chip modular approaches have also been
pursued [352], where the qubits on separate chips are
closely spaced and directly coupled, achieving high fi-
delities while retaining many of the benefits of a modular
architecture.
In addition to the architectural design of quantum pro-
cessors, supportingtechnologiesarealsocrucialforscaled
implementations. As a result of non-ideal fabrication
conditions, the critical current of a Josephson junction
usually varies by a few percent, equivalent to a few hun-
dred megahertz in terms of qubit frequency; such unpre-
dictable variation severely affects the quality of qubit op-
erations. Techniques for improving junction uniformity
during and after fabrication may open up new possibil-
ities in hardware and software design [353–356]. More-
over, thecapacityofadilutionrefrigeratorwillultimately
be limited by its cooling power. Promising solutions in-
cludeacarefulwiringplan[357]andenergy-efficientcryo-
genic electronics [358–360]. Simultaneous high-fidelity
operations require low crosstalk. Crosstalk mitigation
is a must-do. Besides optimization through design and
packaging [216, 272, 361–365], various control techniques
have been developed to reduce different kinds of crosstalk
such as microwave signal crosstalk [279, 366], spectator
effect [367–369], and residual ZZinteractions [370, 371].
In the future, by integrating together various technolo-
gies in a large system, more powerful quantum processors11
based on superconducting qubits can be anticipated.
IV. TRAPPED-ION QUBITS
Introduction.— Trapped-ion systems are the leading
physical platform in pursuit of fault-tolerant quantum
computing. Laser-cooled atomic ions confined in an
ultra-high vacuum environment are well isolated from
noises, being able to encode high-quality qubits into a
stable pair of electronic energy levels in each ion, as
shown in Fig. 2(b). Ion qubits hold the longest coher-
ence time beyond any other systems [372–374], and can
be initialized and measured with extremely high fidelity
[372, 375, 376]. Quantum logical operations are typically
performed through tailored laser or microwave-ion inter-
actions, and gate fidelities achieved experimentally on a
few ion qubits have gone well beyond the fault-tolerant
threshold [372, 377–379]. Ion-based quantum proces-
sors can already primely manipulate dozens of qubits
[380, 381], and quantum algorithms such as Shor’s algo-
rithm and Grover’s search algorithm have been exempli-
fied in small-scale systems [382, 383]. Meanwhile, quan-
tum simulators with up to 53 qubits have been demon-
strated to study various novel features of complex many-
body systems represented by quantum spin models [384–
392]. The above progress illustrates the great potential
of utilizing large-scale trapped-ion systems for ultimate
quantum computing.
Ion qubit.— Despite hundreds of atomic species that
exist in nature, hydrogen-like ions are preferred for
trapped-ion quantum computing due to their relatively
simple atomic structures. Alkaline-earth ions like Be+
[377], Mg+[393], Ca+[378, 379, 381, 394], Sr+[395],
Ba+[396, 397], and rare-earth ions like Yb+[380, 398–
400] are the most frequently utilized in current research.
A qubit can be encoded into a pair of energy levels of a
single ion, and a representative encoding scheme employs
a combination of levels belonging to the ground manifold
2S1/2and the long-live metastable manifold2D5/2. This
scheme is the prior choice for even-mass isotopes, such as
40Ca+[381] and88Sr+[395], and these qubits have en-
ergy gaps on the order of optical frequencies; therefore,
they are denoted as optical qubits. Although the typi-
cal lifetimes of metastable levels can reach a few seconds
or so, they would ultimately limit the coherence time of
optical qubits.
For odd-mass isotopes, the encoding scheme is to
utilize the hyperfine splittings of the ground manifold
2S1/2induced by non-zero nuclear spins. The lifetime of
ground-state hyperfine levels can approach the age of the
universe, resulting in an extremely long relaxation time
(T1) compared to that of the optical qubits. Meanwhile,
a certain pair of hyperfine levels can form the so-called
"clock state" under a suitable external magnetic field,
and its energy gap is insensitive to the static magnetic
field to the first order, thus having a relatively long co-
herence time ( T2). It is experimentally observed that theT2time of a single43Ca+ion can reach 50 s [372]. This
record is then extended to 10 minutes in a171Yb+ion
qubit by using DD pulses and sympathetic cooling as-
sisted by a138Ba+ion [373]. Most recently, the one-hour
coherence time has even been approached by further re-
ducing the potential noise from the external magnetic
field and the leakage from microwave sources [374]. Such
a long coherence time allows systems to execute millions
of gate operations before losing quantum features.
The cycle transition of2S1/2↔2P1/2facilitates
the realization of extremely low state-preparation-and-
measurement (SPAM) errors on ion qubits. Qubit state
initialization is achieved by optical pumping techniques.
By choosing proper polarizations and frequencies of
pumping lasers, a certain energy level of the qubit can be
a dark state, and then the ion state would be pumped to
this level with high probability and high speed. A typ-
ical initialization process can take a few microseconds,
and infidelity can be suppressed close to 10−4[372].
State measurement is implemented by resonating one
of the qubit levels to a short-live manifold and collecting
the corresponding fluorescent photons simultaneously.
Projected qubit states in a single shot can be distin-
guished by determining whether the number of collected
photons reaches a certain threshold. Depending on the
photon collection rate, the measurement duration could
vary from several microseconds to milliseconds, while the
error can reach below 10−3[372, 375, 376]. This error
can be suppressed to around 10−4for ions with long-
live levels for state shelving [401]. Several other meth-
ods, such as adaptive analysis or time-stamping of arriv-
ing photons [375, 401, 402], are employed to further re-
duce measurement infidelity or increase detection speed,
and meanwhile, machine learning methods can be uti-
lized for multiple-qubit detection to reduce crosstalk er-
rors [403, 404].
Quantum gates.— Quantum gates on ion qubits are
typically performed by interacting ions with external
laser or microwave fields, depending on the qubit en-
coding schemes. For example, single-qubit rotations on
optical qubits can be applied through optical quadrupole
transitions induced by a narrow linewidth laser, and that
on hyperfine qubits can be realized by using microwaves
or stimulated two-photon Raman transitions. Error rates
below 10−4havebeenreachedforeitherquadrupoletran-
sitions on optical qubits or Raman transitions on hy-
perfine qubits [377, 378]. Error rate of 10−6was even
achieved on microwave-driven hyperfine qubits [372].
Although high-fidelity single-qubit rotations are read-
ily accessible experimentally, the qualities of current
quantum processors are mainly limited by the perfor-
mance of entangling operations. The first proposal of
the two-qubit gate on ion qubits, the Cirac-Zoller gate
[6], is challenging to scale up due to the stringent re-
quirements for ground-state cooling and sensitivity to
thermal excitation on motional modes. However, this
proposal inspired the idea of using collective motional
modes of ion-chain to engineer effective qubit-qubit cou-12
(d)
)c( )b( )a(
(e)
 (f)
FIG. 4. (a) Three-dimensional Paul trap and captured long ion chain. Compared to the conventional four-rod trap, electrodes
shown here are transformed into blade-shape to enhance optical accessibility. A one-dimensional chain of ions is trapped along
the null line of the radiofrequency field, and a tightly focused laser beam array individually controls ion qubits. (b) QCCD
architecture, adapted from Ref. [405]. Large numbers of ions are distributed in large chip-type traps with multiple trapping
zones. Ions can be manipulated independently in different functional zones to realize logical operations, storage, or readout.
Quantum information can be interchanged by transporting ions between zones. (c) Remote-ion entanglement, adapted from
Ref. [405]. Ions in different traps can be heraldedly entangled by generating ion-photon entanglements and then applying Bell
measurement on photons. It paves the way for large-scale distributed systems. (d) Surface trap fabricated by Sandia National
lab, adapted from Ref. [405]. (e) Integrated photonic system to deliver laser beams to ions position. Here we show the surface
trap with multi-wavelength integration done by the MIT group, which is adapted with permission from Ref. [406], Springer
Nature Limited. (f) On-chip detection of ion qubit. Several groups have been successfully demonstrated integrated single
photon detector on the fabricated surface traps [407–409].
TABLE II. Selected state-of-the-art performance on ion qubitsa.
Qubit type Hyperfine qubit Optical qubit
T250 s [372]
5500 s [374]b0.2 s [410]
SPAM error 6.9×10−4[376] 8.7×10−5[401]
1Q gateDuration 1-10µs typical 1-10µs typical
Fidelity 0.99996 [377] 0.99995 [410]
2Q gateDuration 10-100 µs typical 10-100 µs typical
Fidelityc 0.9991 [377]
0.999 [378]0.9994 [379]
Maximally entangled qubits 24 [381]
Environment Ultra-high vacuum <10−11Torr
aHere we only include data from peer-reviewed publications.
bWith dynamical decoupling.
cTwo-qubit gate fidelities are estimated from the fidelities of
the prepared Bell states.
plings. The entangling schemes used today can be cate-
gorized into Mølmer-Sørensen gates [411, 412] and light-
shift gates [413, 414], which both rely on the notion of
state-dependent forces. These schemes show excellent
performance in experimental demonstrations. The er-
ror rate of the Mølmer-Sørensen gate below 8×10−4isachieved with two9Be+ions [377], and that of the light-
shift gate below 9×10−4is realized on two43Ca+ions
[378]. Recently, light-shiftgatesonopticalqubitsarethe-
oretically investigated and then experimentally demon-
strated in a two40Ca+ions system [379, 415]. The gate
infidelity, as low as 6×10−4, is approached, representing13
the best entangling gate achieved ever.
Laser fields are mostly utilized to drive entangling
gates on ion qubits due to their large spatial gradient
of electric fields to provide efficient ion-motion couplings.
However, microwave-drivenentanglinggatesarealsopur-
sued due to the extreme stability of long-wavelength mi-
crowaves [416, 417]. Ion-motion coupling induced by mi-
crowave fields can be achieved by placing magnetic field-
sensitive qubits into static magnetic fields with large spa-
tial gradients or by exploiting near-field oscillating mi-
crowaves. The former scheme suffers from short coher-
ence times induced by fluctuating magnetic fields, which
can be overcome by utilizing microwave-dressed qubits
[418,419], whilethelatteronerequiresmicrowavesources
closetotheions; therefore, thecrosstalksshouldbetaken
care of. Experiments have demonstrated gate fidelities of
about 98.5%[398] and 99.7%for each scheme [420, 421]
respectively. Moreover, a recent experimental work has
shown that with the microwave-driven laser-free gate, an
almost perfect symmetric Bell state has been generated
[393]. These advances promise a scalable way to achieve
ion-based quantum computing with full microwave con-
trol [422].
However, mostexperimentallyimplementedentangling
operations so far are relatively slow, usually on the order
of tens to hundreds of microseconds, thus limiting the
core speed of ion-based quantum processors. Therefore,
fast gate implementation becomes one important topic
of research in recent studies. The straightforward way to
speed up entangling gates is to increase the laser power
to enhance the laser-ion coupling strength. Along this
routine, an entangling gate with a duration of 1.6 µs is
achieved while the fidelity is still maintained at 99.8%
[423]. However, the gate fidelity drastically drops to
around 60%when the gate duration further reduces to
480 ns, due to the breakdown of the Lamb-Dicke (L-
D) approximation. It might be solved by considering
high-order qubit-motion couplings [424]. Another way to
achieve fast gates is employing a sequence of ultrafast
laser pulses to impose ultrafast state-dependent kicks on
ion qubits [425–427], which does not require the ions to
remain in the L-D regime. A Bell state with 76%fi-
delity is prepared within 1.96 µs in a recent experimental
demonstration, and the main infidelities come from the
imperfect kick control and off-resonant coupling to un-
desired energy levels [428]. High repetition-rate pulsed
lasers can be helpful to further improve the gate speed
[429]. Although recent implementations of fast gates still
have limited fidelities, these schemes all show well scala-
bility.
Scalability.— A straightforward way to scale up ion-
based quantum processors is to trap multiple ions in a
linear array, as illustrated in Fig. 4 (a). By exploiting the
collective motional modes of the entire ion chain, entan-
gling gates can be applied to any two ion qubits by cou-
pling to single or multiple motional modes. For the latter
case, time-modulated state-dependent forces are required
to decouple multiple motional modes from ion qubits si-multaneously to guarantee high-fidelity operations [430–
436]. Along this route, up to 1440Ca+ion qubits were
first used to generate the Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger
(GHZ) states [437], and then the qubit number was in-
creased to 24 in a recent report [381]. Meanwhile, a
programmable trapped-ion quantum processor was im-
plemented in 2016 [438], consisting of 5 individually con-
trolled171Yb+ion qubits, and later this system was ex-
tended to 11 qubits in 2019 [380]. So far, multiple re-
search groups around the world have realized their quan-
tum processors with long ion chains [395, 399].
One distinct advantage of using an ion chain is the
so-called full connectivity [439], which, as already men-
tioned, allowsionqubitsconfinedinthesamepotentialto
be directly entangled even if they are not spatially adja-
cent. This feature makes the decomposition of quantum
circuits more efficient and makes it possible to realize
multi-qubit entangling gates. Several theoretical works
havepointedoutthatmulti-qubitgatesmightbringpoly-
nomialorevenexponentialspeedupstorunningquantum
tasks [440–443]. Therefore, researchers have been eager
to explore scalable ways to achieve multi-qubit gates in
recent years [399, 444, 445]. However, this linear-chain
architecture also has several drawbacks, making it hard
to reach a large scale. For example, the laser power re-
quiredtoentangletheionqubitsinachainwouldincrease
as the size of the chain enlarges. The long chain’s cool-
ingalsobecomesimperfect, whilegateoperationsbecome
more sensitive to external noises.
To further scale up to larger numbers of qubits, we can
trap multiple ion chains in several independent poten-
tials and construct some link channels for interconnec-
tions. One representative architecture is the quantum
charged-couple device (QCCD) proposed in 2002 [445]
(see in Fig. 4 (b)). Links between chains are achieved
by modifying local electric potentials to redistribute ions
between trap regions physically. To achieve this goal,
shuttling operations [446] like linear transport, splitting
or merging of ion-chain, and position swap should be in-
cluded together with quantum gates in local chains as
the basic operations of quantum processors. These oper-
ations must be performed fast enough so that they do not
become processing speed bottlenecks. Several fast shut-
tling methods have been fully investigated and demon-
strated to simultaneously satisfy these two requirements
[447, 448], promising to construct a reliable highway of
ion qubits to enable a large-scale QCCD architecture.
However, the complexity of the ion trap is signifi-
cantly increased compared to that used for a single lin-
ear chain. An ion trap with numerous independent con-
trol electrodes is required to realize multiple trap re-
gions and precise control of the ion shuttle. Microfabri-
cated chip traps are a satisfactory solution to these com-
plexities [449, 450]. Recently, a series of 1D chip traps
and 2D traps with X-type [451], Y-type [452], or T-type
[453] junctions have been presented. Utilizing these well-
controlled traps, 4 qubits GHZ state has been prepared
in a shuttling-based way [394], and quantum gate tele-14
portation has also been demonstrated [454]. Moreover,
high-quality quantum processors based on QCCD archi-
tecture have shown excellent performance according to
quantum volume measurement [455]. However, towards
large-scale surface traps, there are still several challeng-
ing issues that should be addressed. One critical problem
istheanomalousheatingonmotionalmodesofionchains
[456–458]. Itwoulddestabilizeionchainsandbecomeone
of the main error sources for quantum gates and ion shut-
tling. Although many efforts have been made to reveal
the origins of this heating effect, the problem is still not
well solved. Other issues such as radio frequency (RF)
potential barrier [459] in the junction transport and rela-
tively low trap depth would also plague the development
of scalable QCCD-based quantum processors. Neverthe-
less, QCCD architecture is still an outstanding approach
for large-scale trapped-ion quantum computing.
Another natural choice to link ion qubits in different
regions is utilizing photons [460]. By exciting ion qubits
to a short-live ancilla atomic level, the polarization of
the spontaneously emitted photon would entangle with
a decayed ion state. By applying Bell measurement to
the photon pair from different ions, a heralded entan-
glement can be generated between ion qubits depending
on the measurement outcomes, as shown in Fig. 4 (c).
This remote-ion entangling method enables the feasibil-
ity of entangling ion qubits in different vacuum systems
even if they are far away, leading to the paradigm of
distributed quantum computing. The generating rate of
the remote entanglement should be fundamentally deter-
mined by the scattering rate of the ancilla level. How-
ever, in practice, this rate is mainly limited by the col-
lecting rate of the emission photons. In recent experi-
mental demonstrations, a generation rate of 4.5 Hz [461]
is first realized and then improved to 182 Hz [462], while
the best fidelity of the heralded qubit entangling state
is94%. This value is much slower than the gate speed
of directly entangling qubits in the same trap. Several
methods have been proposed to further increase the gen-
eration rate, such as enlarging the numerical aperture of
the photon collecting system and increasing the quan-
tum efficiency of the single photon counter. Significant
improvement might be achieved if we place ion qubits
into a high finesse micro-cavity, enhancing the sponta-
neous emission through the Purcell effect [463]. More-
over, theconversionofasinglephotonfromvisibleregime
to telecom-wavelength has been demonstrated recently
[464], although with quite low converting efficiency, mak-
ing it possible to build distributed quantum systems with
ultra-low optical loss. Practical remote-ion entanglement
would facilitate the construction of large-scale quantum
computing platforms and also quantum networks.
Here we briefly talk about hybrid-ion systems. When
we generate remote entanglement of two traps or apply
mid-circuits measurement to certain ion qubits belonging
to an ion register, we want to only excite targeted ion
qubits without disturbing others resonantly. One solu-
tion is that the measured ion and others belong to differ-ent species, so the resonance frequency is quite different,
significantly suppressing crosstalk. Consequently, entan-
gling gates on ion qubits of mixed species are required in
hybrid-ion systems. High-fidelity entangling operations
on mixed-species ion qubits are well displayed on such
as9Be+–25Mg+[454],40Ca+–43Ca+[465],43Ca+–88Sr+
[466],171Yb+–138Ba+[467, 468] and even a long chain of
9Be+–9Be+–40Ca+[469]. Meanwhile, mixed-species sys-
temsmakeitfeasibletoapplysympatheticcooling,allow-
ing to cool down ion register without destroying stored
quantum information [470–472]. It is valuable for sup-
pressing motional excitation during ion shuttling in the
QCCD architecture. Meanwhile, proposals for hybrid en-
coding, by utilizing multiple energy levels of a single ion
to encode different qubit types, have been made recently
to construct hybrid systems with single ion species [473].
The interconversion of different qubit encoding on a sin-
gle ion has been experimentally demonstrated [474]. It
might open a new way for scalable trapped-ion quantum
computing.
System integration.— System integration is inevitable
inbuildingscalablelarge-scaletrappedionquantumcom-
puters. One typical example is the microfabricated sur-
face traps mentioned above. In the past decade, re-
searchers have done several important works to promote
the integration of trapped ion systems further, and on-
chip integrated optics is one of them. Laser beams can be
deliveredandtightlyfocusedatthelocationoftheionsby
embedding optical waveguides beneath the surface traps
and fabricating properly designed gratings coupler at the
end of each waveguide. Optical integration from sin-
gle to multiple wavelengths has been well-demonstrated
[406, 475]. Single qubit rotations and two-qubit entan-
gling gates have been implemented using laser beams de-
livered through waveguides [475, 476], showing extreme
robustness against vibrational noises. Furthermore, the
integration of single photon detectors on chip traps has
been successfully demonstrated recently [407–409], show-
ingascalablewayforhigh-fidelityreadoutofmultipleion
qubits on large-scale quantum processors. Conventional
analoguevoltagesourcesarealsointegratedon-chip[477],
enabling an expandable approach to control numerous
ion trap electrodes and laying the technical foundation
for circuit integration in large-scale QCCD architectures.
Outlook.— This section briefly reviews the significant
advancements in trapped ion quantum computing over
the past decades, from excellent control of several ion
qubits to demonstrations of scalable architectures. With
fully controllable trapped-ion processors, several great
advanceshavebeenmaderecentlyinQEC[410,469,478–
481]. However, we still strive to explore specific scalable
ways to achieve a truly fault-tolerant logical qubit encod-
ing and ultimately build an applicable ion-based quan-
tum processor. One of the fundamental requirements is
that the size of the system increases without compro-
mising the quality of the control [482–484]. Therefore,
developing system integration-related technologies would
be critical for scaling-up ion quantum processors in the15
followingdecades. Meanwhile, bymergingthetechniques
developed for trapped-ion quantum computing, we might
also gain better performance in ion-based precision mea-
surement. With continuous development, trapped-ion
systems would remain an important platform and tool
for future quantum information applications.
V. SEMICONDUCTOR SPIN QUBITS
Introduction.— Spin qubits in semiconductors have
madetremendousprogressoverthepastfewdecades. Al-
though most toolboxes have been built based on GaAs
quantum dots [491], this field had a revival after the host
material steered to silicon. Further momentum is gained
after some recent vital breakthroughs, such as fault-
tolerant quantum gates [492–494], rf-reflectometry spin
readout [495–498], spin-photon strong coupling [499–
503], hot qubits [504–506], and cryo-CMOS controlling
chip [507, 508]. Combined with its inherent scalabil-
ity from the semiconductor industry and its small foot-
print, spin qubits are now well poised for the following
milestones—quantum advantages over classical super-
computers, prototype machines of fault-tolerant quan-
tum computing and QEC, and hybridization between
classical and quantum electronics.
Qubit construction.— Semiconductor qubits are de-
fined on the charge and spin degrees of freedom of the
carriers trapped in quantum dots or dopants. There
are several types of qubits, such as spin qubits [10,
11, 509, 510], charge qubits [511, 512], exchange-only
qubits [44, 513, 514], hybrid qubits [515], and singlet-
triplet qubits [516, 517]. A spin qubit is usually defined
by the spin states of a single electron or hole trapped in
a semiconductor quantum dot or a dopant in silicon (see
Fig. 5) [10, 11], as |0⟩=|↓⟩and|1⟩=|↑⟩, where |↓⟩and
|↑⟩denote spin down and spin up, respectively. Chosen
states of an interacting multi-spin system can also be de-
fined as a qubit, such as the singlet-triplet qubit (i.e., the
singlet state |S⟩= (|↑↓⟩ − |↓↑⟩ )/√
2and the unpolarized
triplet state |T0⟩= (|↑↓⟩+|↓↑⟩)/√
2of two exchange-
coupled spins). Here we will focus on the spin qubits in
this review, as they are becoming the central topic in the
field in recent years. We will also briefly introduce other
types of qubits. Interested readers can find more infor-
mationintherelevantreferences[491,509,510,518–520].
Decoherence.— The development of semiconductor
host materials and related fabrication technologies un-
derpins progress in this field. GaAs/AlGaAs heterostruc-
ture quantum well has been the key substrate for gate-
defined quantum dots [529], where this field has accumu-
lated many of its foundational building blocks, such as
single charge sensing, single-shot spin readout, qubit op-
erations, and interactions, to mention only a few. Never-
theless, the nucleus of the host GaAs forms a fluctuating
magnetic field, namely the Overhauser field, which limits
the spin dephasing time T∗
2in GaAs to around the range
of tens of nanoseconds [491, 510, 529]. Although GaAsquantum dots still stand out nicely as a demonstration
platform for quantum simulation [530, 531] and quantum
physics research [532, 533], the limited spin dephasing
time hinders the development of high-fidelity quantum
gates for quantum computing.
A host material consisting of zero nuclear spin iso-
topes is necessary to embrace a long dephasing time.
In his seminal paper 20 years ago, Bruce Kane empha-
sized that group IV materials are ideal options as they
feature stable zero-nuclear spin isotopes with high nat-
ural abundance [10]. The nuclear-spin free isotope28Si,
for example, could be accessed via purifying the natu-
ral silicon. Another advantage of the silicon substrate
is the long spin T1times, which comes from the differ-
ent spin relaxation behavior compared with the group
III-V materials [510]. Since T1sets an upper bound
onT2for a spin system via the relation 2T1≥T2, a
longT1is the prerequisite for having a long T2. There-
fore, silicon spin qubits have become the working horse
in this field, and the mainly explored platforms include
silicon metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) [489, 523, 525],
silicon-on-insulator (SOI) [488, 534], the dopant in sili-
con [490, 525, 535], silicon-germanium heterostructures
based Si/SiGe [492, 524, 536, 537], and Ge/SiGe [538–
541]. After extensive studies, competitive T2andT∗
2
compared to the other major quantum computing plat-
forms are demonstrated in silicon spin qubits. Up to
now, T1values ranging from 160 milliseconds [522] to
30 seconds [542] and THahn
2values ranging from 99 mi-
croseconds [524] to ∼1 second [489] are observed in sil-
icon dopant devices, Si/SiGe gate-defined systems, and
Si-MOS systems (for detailed comparison, please refer to
Table III). Other silicon spin systems also exhibit typi-
cal long coherence times, such as hole spins in SOI [488]
and Ge/SiGe gate-defined quantum dots [539]. Long co-
herence sustains even at 1.1 K ∼4.2 K in MOS [504, 505]
and SOI devices [506].
Gates.— Over the past years, prominent progress
has been made for quantum gate fidelities in semicon-
ductor qubits. A single-qubit operation could be per-
formed utilizing a few different mechanisms for different
qubits. For singlet-triplet qubits [517, 543], exchange-
only qubits [44, 513, 514], and hybrid qubits [515], ex-
change coupling plays the key role. In comparison, elec-
tron spin resonance (ESR) [525, 544, 545] and electrical
dipole spin resonance (EDSR)[524, 538, 546, 547] are the
main driving mechanisms for a spin qubit. They con-
trol the spin rotation by either oscillating magnetic or
electrical fields. After years of persistent quest for fault-
tolerant operations, single-qubit gate fidelities well be-
yond 99%have all been demonstrated in the donor [489],
Si-MOS [485], and Si/SiGe [486, 514, 524, 548] (see Ta-
ble III).
Compared to single-qubit gate operations, two-qubit
gates are more daunting. Exchange coupling, capacitive
coupling, or hyperfine coupling can be utilized to realize
atwo-qubitgate. Inthesinglet-tripletqubit, capacitively
coupled two-qubit gates have been shown [549, 550].16
SiGe
SiSi
SiGeLMR
(e)
RGG3G2
SiO2
28SiG4 G1CBST
BOXSi channel
Source DrainG2 G1
Si
natSi
Donor planeNative SiO2
Si encapsulation
SiGe
Ge
SiGeP1BCP2 B1 B2
Antenna DG
SiO2
28Si
natSiSET
(b) (c)
(d)(a)
(f)
FIG. 5. Representative semiconductor qubit systems. All the devices are presented with two panels, where a top panel shows
the top view of the device, and a bottom panel shows the lateral structure corresponding to a white line cut of the active region
in the top panel. Heterostructure quantum dots include (a) Si-MOS [485], (b) Si/SiGe [486], and (c) Ge/SiGe [487] systems,
where Si-MOS and Si/SiGe are mainly used for electron qubits, and Ge/SiGe is a hole qubit platform. System (a-c)belong
to the gate-defined quantum dot category. In (a) Si-MOS, quantum dots are formed close to the silicon-oxide interface, with
fabricated top gates providing lateral Coulomb confining potentials. On this device, an electron spin driving ESR antenna and
a spin readout single electron transistor are integrated as well. (b) Si/SiGe quantum dots are formed in the middle silicon
quantum well layer and sandwiched between SiGe layers on both sides. (c) Ge/SiGe is a hole spin platform, using a Ge well
to form a two-dimensional hole gas and combined with top gates to form hole quantum dots. (d) CMOS nanowire field-effect
transistor [488], where quantum dots are formed in the silicon nanowire sitting on a buried silicon oxide layer (BOX), and the
surrounding gates are fabricated using industrial microelectronics technology. It is a hole-spin system, and the dot potential
well is formed at the valance band top. (e) and (f) are the donor qubits in silicon. They are electron spin systems, where
the host donor nuclear spin is also a key resource to encode qubits. (e) represents a donor in MOS [489] system, where a
phosphorus atom is implanted in a fabricated MOS device which has a28Si layer to prolong electron spin coherent time. (f)
Donor device with STM lithography technique [490], where the donors can be placed with atomic precision and in-plane gates
are formed by dense conducting phosphorus atoms in a lithographical manner. Top panel of (a) is adapted with permission
from Ref. [485], Springer Nature Limited. Top panel of (b) is adapted with permission from Ref. [486], American Association
for the Advancement of Science. Top panel of (c) is adapted with permission from Ref. [487], Springer Nature Limited. Top
panel of (e) is adapted with permission from Ref. [489], Springer Nature Limited.17
TABLE III. Comparison of reported values of different qubits in silicon.
Qubit type Si-MOS Si-SiGe P donor n P donor e
T1 2.6s [521] 160ms [522] 39min [489] 30s [489]
T∗
2 120µs [523] 20µs [524] 600ms [489] 268µs [489]
THahn
2 1.2ms [523] 100µs [524] 1.75s [489] 0.95ms[489]
Tsingle 2.4µs [523] 20ns [524] 24µs [493] 150ns [525]
Ttwo 1.4µs [485] 103ns [492] 1.89µs [493] 0.8ns [490]
F1RB(%) 99.957(4)[526] 99.861(5)[524] 99.99[527] 99.95[527]
F2RB(%) 98.0(3)[485] 99.51(2)[492] 99.37(11)a[493] 86.7(2)b[490]
Q1c50 1000 25000 1800
Q2c86 194 302d3.4×105
NQe2 [485] 6 [528] 2 [493] 2 [490]
NEf2 [485] 3 [528] 2 [493] 2 [490]
EnvB∼1.4T
T < 1.5KB∼0.5T
T < 1.5KB∼1T
T < 1.5KB∼1T
T < 1.5K
Flying qubit N/A N/A N/A N/A
Footprint size ∼100nm ∼100nm ∼3nm ∼100nm
aCZ gate.
b√
SWAPgate.
cQ1≡T∗
2/TsingleandQ2≡T∗
2/Ttwo, where TsingleandTtwoare the time
for the single-qubit and the two-qubit operations.
dT∗
2=570 µs[489]isusedhereforaPnuclearspinwithaboundedelectron.
eNQis the demonstrated number of qubits with individual control.
fNEis the number of entangled qubits.
Capacitively coupled two-qubit gates have been real-
ized in charge qubits as well [512]. In spin qubits,
the well-established two-qubit gate protocols, such as
SWAP [490, 516], C-Phase [523], and C-ROT [486], all
need the existence of exchange coupling. Since either the
capacitive or exchange coupling hinges on the charge de-
greesoffreedom,chargenoisecouplesintothesystemand
renders a challenge for high-fidelity gate operations. Dif-
ferent methods have been pursued to realize high-fidelity
two-qubit gates. A fixed exchange coupling was used for
Si/SiGe quantum dots [492], where the unwanted rota-
tion of the off-resonant states was removed by carefully
matching the Rabi frequency fRand the exchange J re-
lation, and a 99.8%fidelity two-qubit gate was realized.
The other two teams both utilized the tunability of the
exchange coupling to perform CZ gates in the Si/SiGe
platform. After detailed calibration and pulse optimiza-
tion, two-qubit gate fidelities of FCZ= 99.65%[494] and
FCZ= 99.81%[551] were demonstrated. In the silicon
donor system, a two-qubit CZ gate with FCZ= 99.37%
is shown on two donor nuclei with a shared electron [493]
using a geometric gate and hyperfine coupling.
Despite of the milestone breakthroughs in the fault-
tolerant qubit gates, the semiconductor qubits still have
much room to improve the qubit operation fidelities. Es-
pecially for the charge noise issue [524, 526, 552, 553],
qubit host material engineering is necessary to have a
purer environment, such as fewer nuclear spins, charge
traps, and defects. Moreover, more sophisticated control
methods or encoding could be combined, such as dressed
qubits [554], global control [555], and profile optimized
pulses [556]. Besides, the sweet spot in the qubit en-ergy [552, 557] and composite pulse sequences [558] could
also help against the charge noise. We stay optimistic
about further improvements in gate fidelities from opti-
mized device fabrication and control-level engineering.
Readout and initialization.— Reducing SPAM errors
is as important as improving gate fidelities for pushing
the fault-tolerant quantum computing. Single-shot spin
readout is vital, as some state initialization protocols can
be performed by just performing a readout. The key is to
find a suitable state-to-charge conversion process, where
Pauli spin blockade [534, 559], hence the related latch-
ing mechanism [560], and Elzerman type spin-dependent
tunneling process [561] are explored. Hyperfine coupling
is a key anchor for the nuclear spin readout in the dopant
system where the state information can be converted to
a spin ESR signal [562]. Next, the corresponding charge
signal shall be correlated to the capacitive difference,
picked up by a single-electron transistor (SET) or quan-
tum point contact (QPC), and amplified further [563]. In
singlet-triplet qubits [559], a readout fidelity of 98.4%is
reported. For single spins, the readout fidelity is pushed
toFM= 99.8%, beyond the fault-tolerant level [542].
Single-lead rf-reflectometry spin readout [564] is a piv-
otal technology to reduce the gate density for spin read-
out and is compatible with surface code scalable architec-
tures for the fan-out issue. It was demonstrated nearly
simultaneouslybyfourgroups[495–498]. Usingthistech-
nique, readoutfidelitiesabove 98%wereshown[497,498],
and a readout time of 6 µs was proved [498], comparable
tothegateoperationspeed. Toremedythebroadeningof
the Fermi surface and related obstacles for the Elzerman
protocol at high temperatures (1 K–4 K), the Pauli spin18
blockade, latchingmechanism[539,560], anddoubleSET
readout [565] are valuable approaches. Also, to improve
the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), quantum noise-limited
JPA [566] and other amplification methods were com-
bined. Multiple spin readout has been shown with a sin-
gle electron box [567] and done by frequency multiplex-
ing [568]. Several teams have already demonstrated en-
hancedreadoutfidelitiesforS-Tqubitsandspinqubitsin
anon-demolitionmethod[569,570], whichshallfindtheir
importance in fault-tolerant computing and in studying
spin state collapse problems for fundamental quantum
mechanics. Moreover, cascade readout [571], dispersive
spin readout [499, 534], triple-dot cavity dispersive read-
out [572], and ramped spin measurement [573] have been
shown. In general, the spin readout techniques are more
mature and ready for the future scaling-up stage. Fur-
ther progress will focus on high-level multiplexing and
integrating with the qubit design in a scalable manner.
Potential readout signal crosstalk also needs further in-
vestigation and engineering design. To facilitate spin
initialization, except the usual applied readout-assisted
state initialization, a hot spot on the energy level due to
valley mixing [521, 574] and spin-orbital coupling could
also be used to enhance the T1relaxation rate.
Scalability.— An unique advantage for silicon qubits
comes from its industry backbone, very large-scale in-
tegration (VLSI) technology. This advantage becomes
more significant as integrated cryo-CMOS and hot qubits
techniques emerge. An industry-level CMOS-compatible
hybrid quantum computing chip with classical control
unit and quantum processing unit is becoming possible.
Along with this spirit, progress has been made in re-
cent years, such as Intel’s horse-ridge cryo-CMOS chip
demonstrating qubit control fidelities rivaling room tem-
perature bulky control instruments [507]. A proof-of-
principle experiment shows a low-temperature classical
control unit bonded to a quantum unit [508]. Also, on
the quantum side, CMOS compatible “hot” qubits op-
erated at increased temperature ( T > 1.5K) for the
electron spin [504, 505] and hole spin systems [506] are
realized nearly simultaneously. On the industry side,
advanced fabrication technologies are touching down on
qubit physics with the industrial foundry’s massive pro-
duction process [575]. CEA-Leti [576], Imec [577], and
Intel all processed silicon qubits with 300 mm technol-
ogy [578], and Intel has shown promising quantum dot
uniformity and basic spin qubit operations.
In the quest for fault-tolerant computing, scaling up
would be an inevitable technological hurdle to over-
come [579]. Several scaling architectures have been de-
signed for phosphorus donor qubits [557, 580], Si/SiGe
gate-defined dots [581], and MOS quantum dots [582,
583]. Also, research teams have realized multi-qubit de-
vices and few-qubit algorithms, such as three qubits [584]
and six qubits in the Si/SiGe systems [528], where en-
tanglement states were shown. Similarly, a four-qubit
in the Ge/SiGe hole spin system also made its debut,
where a four-qubit GHZ state was demonstrated [539].Meanwhile, methods for multiple quantum dots tuning
using virtual gates [585] and automated machine learn-
ing were developed [586, 587] and multiplexed quantum
dots readout was realized [568, 588]. Toward QEC, a
three-qubit phase error correction algorithm was car-
ried out by two groups [25, 26]. Moreover, qubit net-
works could be a remedy for the dense packaging prob-
lem and could reduce the fan-out overhead [579]. There-
fore, the coupling of spin qubits at a distance is nec-
essary. The effective spin-spin coupling could be real-
ized by using microwave cavities [502, 503], mediated big
quantum dot [589], spin array state transfer [532], and
surface acoustic waves [590]. For the cavity approach,
strong coupling [591] and photon-mediated spin-spin in-
teractions are demonstrated [502, 503]. The next step
would be to realize cavity-mediated two-qubit gates for
spins at a distance and hence spin networks in a dis-
tributed manner.
Conclusion.— High-quality materials and advanced
fabrication technologies are the cornerstones of semi-
conductor qubits. To realize a higher gate fidelity, in-
terfaces with low charge noise are critical, which could
be achieved by importing industrial techniques of in-
tegrated circuits and encouraging a transfer from lab-
level engineering to foundry-level fabrication. The typ-
ical overheads for scalable quantum computing, such as
crosstalk, gate heating, and frequency crowding, should
also be carefully considered. Subsequently, semiconduc-
tor spin qubits will join the other sophisticated quan-
tum computing platforms for next-level applications,
such as fault-tolerant operations and quantum simula-
tions on intermediate-scale multi-qubit devices. In sum-
mary, semiconductor qubits, especially the silicon spin
qubits, are well-positioned for scaling up with all those
above-mentioned breakthroughs and technological im-
provements. We are confident that by embracing its
industrial advantages, silicon spin systems will speedily
scaleuptheirqubitnumbersandjointhenext-levelquan-
tum computing endeavor together with superconducting
and ion trap platforms.
VI. NV CENTERS
Introduction.— NV center is a point defect in the di-
amond, where a vacancy and a nitrogen atom substitute
for two carbon atoms along the quantization axis (as-
sumed to be the ˆzaxis), as shown in Fig. 6 (a). The neg-
ativechargestateNV−isofgreatestinterest, wherethere
are five unpaired electrons originating from the nitrogen
atom and three carbon atoms, respectively, together with
an additional electron captured from the environment.
This six-electron system is equivalent to an electron with
spin projection S= 1, whose spin state can thus be em-
ployed as a qutrit, or a qubit if only the |ms= 0⟩and
|ms=−1⟩energy levels are considered. The NV center
is a promising candidate for the quantum computer by
virtue of the following merits. First, a single NV center19
can be optically resolved and located, and the polariza-
tion and measurement can also be achieved with a laser
pulse. Second, the NV center has an excellent coherence
propertyevenatroomtemperature. Atlowtemperature,
it can be resonantly excited to enable efficient single-shot
readout. Third, the nuclear spins near NV centers serve
well as abundant available memory qubits for solid-state
quantum information processors.
Qubits and coherence.— The exceptional lifetime of
NV electron spins even under ambient conditions is ex-
perimentally favorable for quantum computation. The
inhomogeneousmagneticfluctuationsduetothe13Cspin
bath are the main noise source responsible for the de-
phasing of NV electron spins. However, with the widely
used DD technique, the dephasing time can be extended
from the order of microseconds ( T∗
2) to milliseconds ( T2),
where the quasi-static noise is mostly suppressed.
In addition to the central electron spin, nearby nu-
clear spins are a rich resource for memory qubits. The
relatively low gyromagnetic ratio (around three orders
of magnitude less than that of electron spin) of nuclear
spins is mainly responsible for their extraordinarily long
coherencetime,upto T2= 2satroomtemperature[592].
In addition to the14N and13C nuclear spins [593] (up
to 27 spins nowadays [594]), researchers have been en-
deavoring to explore more available qubits in diamond,
including P1 centers [595–597] and long-lived carbon nu-
clear spin pairs [598] ( T2= 1min and T1>6min at 4 K
[599]). Further improving the coherence time of NV elec-
tron spins compared to the timescale of these memory
qubits is desired. Since T2∼ms at room temperature is
limited by the spin relaxation time T1, a straightforward
solution is to lower the temperature, where T2has been
extended to 0.6s at 77K [600]. At 4K, however, T2
has reached 1.5s with carefully-designed sequences de-
coupling unwanted interactions, and T1has exceeded 1h
[598].
Initialization and readout.— NV center can be opti-
cally initialized and readout due to the spin-dependent
inter-system crossing (ISC) [601, 602] (see Fig. 6 (a), il-
lustrated by grey dashed lines). Thus, the electron spin
can be initialized to |ms= 0⟩under continuous optical
pumping. On the other hand, ISC leads to a nonradia-
tive transition through singlet states, which enables the
discrimination of the spin states according to the fluores-
cence difference. Furthermore, at low temperature, the
resonant opticalexcitation allows high-fidelity singleshot
readout of NV electron spins [603]. The preparation and
readout fidelity have achieved 99.9%[604] and 98%[605],
respectively.
The approach to initializing nuclear spins is less
straightforward and varies with the different coupling
strengths. Specifically, for14N and some strongly-
coupled13C nuclear spins ( ≥1/T∗
2∼102kHz) [606, 607],
applying a well-aligned magnetic field ∼500Gauss leads
to the excited state level anti-crossing (esLAC) and the
polarization of nuclear spins [608]. However, esLAC fails
toenabletheefficientpolarizationifthequantizationaxisof the hyperfine interaction in the excited state differs
from that in the ground state, or if the nuclei-electron
quantization axis differs from that of the NV itself [607].
Ontheotherhand, thestrongly-couplednuclearspinsare
less abundant than the weakly-coupled ones, and hence
researchers have focused more on weakly-coupled13C nu-
clear spins. The initialization of the weakly-coupled13C
nuclearspinsemploysaswap-likegateconstructedbythe
DD sequences (see below) [28].
In addition to the approaches discussed above, sev-
eral strategies exist for different purposes. For exam-
ple, dynamic nuclear spin polarization (DNP) is de-
signed to polarize the whole13C spin bath by impos-
ing the Hartmann-Hahn double resonance [609], and
has been improved to be more robust [610]. Projec-
tive measurement-based initialization is also preferred,
especially in the case of simultaneous multiqubit or
multidegree-of-freedom initialization with high fidelity
[597, 611]. The single-shot readout associated with pro-
jective measurements not only provides an efficient way
to polarize nuclear spins, but also enables the direct
test of non-classical correlations and active feedback in
QEC protocols. Single-shot readout of14N [612], weakly-
coupled nuclear spins [613], nuclear spin pairs [599], and
P1 centers [597] have been realized, respectively.
Gates.— The control techniques have been well devel-
oped to implement quantum logic gates with high pre-
cision as well as narrow pulse widths, where quantum
optimization algorithms have been exploited. Combin-
ing the composite pulses with a modified gradient ascent
pulse engineering (GRAPE) algorithm has yielded the
records of the fidelity of single-qubit gate and two-qubit
gate being 0.99995and0.992[617], respectively, which
almost hits the threshold value required by QEC. Re-
markably, this highly accurate two-qubit gate has a dura-
tion of 700ns, which is three orders of magnitude smaller
than the coherence time. Meanwhile, typical single-qubit
gates are in the order of ∼10ns, and gigahertz Rabi os-
cillations are also possible with proper design [618, 619].
Moreover, optimized ultra-fast single-qubit gates beyond
the rotating wave approximation have been realized with
the application of chopped random basis (CRAB) quan-
tum optimization algorithm, with fidelity for π/2andπ
pulses being 0.95±0.01and0.99±0.016, respectively
[620].
Manipulating multiple qubits while maintaining coher-
ence is a crucial task for quantum computing. In par-
ticular, in hybrid systems, where the timescale of each
component may differ, it is desirable to implement all
the control sequences before any of the components de-
cohere. Instead of counting on the isotopically purified
samples[621], anactivewaytoextendthecoherencetime
isthewell-knownDDtechniques, duringwhichthequasi-
static noise is flipped and canceled, and hence can also be
construed as a frequency filter [622]. In this sense, the
DD sequence applied to NV electron spins enables the
detection of the resonant frequencies corresponding to
surrounding interactions [623–625]. Consequently, con-20
2
FIG. 1.Programmable spin-based quantum simulator.(A) We program an e↵ective 1D chain of 9 spins in an interactingcluster of 2713C nuclear spins (orange) close to a single NV center. Connections indicate nuclear-nuclear couplings|Jjk|>1.5 Hz, and blue (red) lines represent negative (positive) nearest-neighbor couplings within the chain [23]. Magnetic ﬁeld:Bz⇠403 G. (B) Experimental sequence: The spins are initialized by applying the PulsePol sequence [24], followed by rotations of theformR(#,')=e x p⇥ i#2(sin(') x+c o s (') y)⇤. After evolution under the Floquet sequenceUF=[Uint(⌧)·Ux(✓)·Uint(⌧)]N,the spins are sequentially read out through the NV electronic spin using electron-nuclear and nuclear-nuclear two-qubit gates(see text). Colored boxes with ‘I’ denote re-initialization into the given state. (C) Coupling matrix for the 9-spin chain. (D)Average coupling magnitude as a function of site distance across the chain. Orange line: least-squares ﬁt to a power-lawfunctionJ0/|j k|↵,g i v i n gJ0=6.7(1) Hz and↵=2.5(1). (E) Measured expectation valuesh zjiafter initializing the state|"""""""""i. The data is corrected for measurement errors [25].Here  j, =x, y, zare the Pauli matrices for spinj,B= cBz/2 is the magnetic ﬁeld splitting, cis the13C gyromagnetic ratio,Jjkis thezzcomponent of thedipole-dipole interaction between spinsjandk,⌦(t)i sthe applied time-dependent rf ﬁeld and we set~= 1. Thesystem has previously been characterized in detail [23,25]; for 2713Cs p i n st h eh y p e r ﬁ n es h i f t shj, the spatialcoordinates, and the 351 interaction termsJjkare known.To investigate the DTC phase, we apply a periodicFloquet sequence consisting of free evolutionUint(⌧)=exp( iHint⌧), interleaved with global spin rotationsUx(✓)=e x p⇣ i✓PLj xj/2⌘. To realize the global rota-tions, we develop multi-frequency rf pulses that simulta-neously rotate a chosen subset of spins (Hrfin Eq.1)[25]. We symmetrize the Floquet sequence such thatUF=[Uint(⌧)·Ux(✓)·Uint(⌧)]N,w h e r eNis the numberof Floquet cycles (Fig. 1B). For✓⇠⇡, this decouples thetargeted spins from their environment, while preservingthe internal interactions [25].To stabilize MBL under periodic driving, the Hamil-tonian must satisfy two requirements [5,6,19]. First,the spin-spin interactionsJjkmust be su ciently short-ranged. For power-law interactions that fall o↵as 1/r↵,
RESEARCH ARTICLE/uni25E5QUANTUM NETWORKSRealization of a multinode quantum network ofremote solid-state qubitsM. Pompili1,2†, S. L. N. Hermans1,2†, S. Baier1,2†‡, H. K. C. Beukers1,2, P. C. Humphreys1,2§,R. N. Schouten1,2, R. F. L. Vermeulen1,2, M. J. Tiggelman1,2¶, L. dos Santos Martins1,2, B. Dirkse1,2,S. Wehner1,2, R. Hanson1,2*The distribution of entangled states across the nodes of a future quantum internet will unlockfundamentally new technologies. Here, we report on the realization of a three-node entanglement-basedquantum network. We combine remote quantum nodes based on diamond communication qubitsinto a scalable phase-stabilized architecture, supplemented with a robust memory qubit and localquantum logic. In addition, we achieve real-time communication and feed-forward gate operations acrossthe network. We demonstrate two quantum network protocols without postselection: the distributionof genuine multipartite entangled states across the three nodes and entanglement swapping through anintermediary node. Our work establishes a key platform for exploring, testing, and developing multinodequantum network protocols and a quantum network control stack.Future quantum networks sharing entan-glement across multiple nodes (1,2)w i l lenable a range of applications such assecure communication, distributed quan-tum computing, enhanced sensing, andfundamental tests of quantum mechanics (3–8).Efforts in the past decade have focused onrealizing the building blocks of such a net-work: quantum nodes capable of establish-ing remote entangled links as well as locallystoring, processing, and reading out quantuminformation.Entanglement generationthrough optical chan-nels between a pair of individually controlledqubits has been demonstrated with trappedions and atoms (9–12), diamond nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers (13,14), and quantumdots (15,16). In addition, a number of quan-tum network primitives have been exploredon these elementary two-node links, includingnonlocal quantum gates (17,18)a n de n t a n g l e -ment distillation (19). Moving these qubit plat-forms beyond two-node experiments has so farremained an outstanding challenge owing tothe combination of several demanding require-ments. Multiple high-performance quantumnodes are needed thatinclude a communica-tion qubit with an optical interface as well asan efficient memory qubit for storage andprocessing. Additionally, the individual en-tanglement links need to be embedded intoa multinode quantum network, requiring ascalable architecture and multinode controlprotocols.Here, we report on the realization and in-tegration of all elements of a multinode quan-tum network: optically mediated entanglementlinks connected through an extensible archi-tecture, local memory qubit and quantum logic,and real-time heralding and feed-forward oper-ations. We demonstrate the full operation ofthe multinode network by running two keyquantum network protocols. First, we establishGreenberger-Horne-Zeilinger (GHZ) entangledstates across the three nodes. Such distributedgenuine multipartite entangled states are a keyingredient for many network applications (2)such as anonymous transmission (20), secretsharing (21), leader election (22), and clockstabilization (8). Second, we perform entan-glement swapping through an intermediarynode, which is the central protocol for entan-glement routing on a quantum network en-abling any-to-any connectivity (23,24). Owingto efficient coherence protection on all qubits,combined with real-time feed-forward opera-tions, these protocols are realized in a heraldedfashion, delivering the final states ready forfurther use. This capability of heralding suc-cessful completion of quantum protocols iscritical for scalability; its demonstration herepresents a key advance from earlier experi-mentsusing photons (25)a n dq u a n t u mm e m -ories (26).Our network is composed of three spatiallyseparated quantum nodes (Fig. 1, A and B),labeled Alice, Bob, and Charlie. Each nodeconsists of an NV center electronic spin as acommunication qubit. In addition, the mid-dle node Bob uses a carbon-13 nuclear spinas a memory qubit. Initialization and single-shot readout of the communication qubitsare performed through resonant optical exci-tation and measurement of state-dependentRESEARCH
Pompiliet al.,Science372, 259–264 (2021) 16 April 20211 of 6
1QuTech, Delft University of Technology, 2628 CJ Delft,Netherlands.2Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Delft Universityof Technology, 2628 CJ Delft, Netherlands.*Corresponding author. Email: r.hanson@tudelft.nl†These authors contributed equally to this work.‡Present address: Institut für Experimentalphysik, UniversitätInnsbruck, Technikerstraße 25, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.§Present address: DeepMind, London, UK.¶Present address: QBlox, 2628 CJ Delft, Netherlands.
2 m30 mCharlieBobAliceAMemory qubit
Optical fiber connectionCommunication qubit
Long-distance entanglementLab 2Lab 1
Entanglement channel
Readout channelλ/2λ/44KBeam splitterPhotondetectorDichroicmirrorObjectivePolarizerEntanglingEx/yE1/2MWResetVDCBC0−205254565860Photon frequency (GHz, w.r.t 470.4 THz)Alice020Bias voltageVDC(V)Bob−1010Charlie
Fig. 1. The three-node quantum network.(A) Layout of the network. Three nodes, labeled Alice, Bob,and Charlie, are located in two separate labs. Each node contains an NV center communication qubit (purple).At Bob, an additional nuclear spin qubit (orange) is used in the presented experiments. Fiber connectionsbetween the nodes (lengths indicated) enable remote entanglement generation on the links Alice-Bob andBob-Charlie, which, combined with local quantum logic, allow for entanglement to be shared between all nodes(wiggly lines). (B) On the left is a simplified schematic of the optical setup at each node [see fig. S1, table S1,and (27) for additional details]. On the right is a diagram of the relevant levels of the electronic spin qubit,showing optical transitions for remote entanglement generation and readout (“entangling”), qubit reset(“reset”), and resonant microwaves (“MW”) for qubit control (see figs. S2 and S3 for additional details).The memory qubit at Bob is initialized, controlled, and read out via the electronic qubit (fig. S4). Optical transitionfrequencies are tuned via the dc bias voltages (VDC).l/2 (l/4) is a half-waveplate (quarter-waveplate); Ex/yandE1/2are electronic excited states. (C)T u n i n go ft h eo p t i c a l“entangling”transition at each of the three nodes.The solid line is the working point, 470.45555 THz; the dashed line is a guide to the eye. w.r.t., with respect to.on June 14, 2021 http://science.sciencemag.org/Downloaded from 
𝑧̂CHIN. PHYS. LETT.Vol. 36, No. 8 (2019) 086201Express Lettertra of diamond NV centers have been measured underhigh pressures,[12,18 20]providing static magnetic ﬁeldinformation inside DACs.To fully exploit the quantum nature of diamondNV-based probes, their spin dynamics and the quan-tum control of the spin states under high pressure areurgently needed. In this work, we demonstrate coher-ent driving, spin relaxation, and spin dephasing mea-surements for ensemble NV centers up to 32.8 GPa.With this well-controlledin situquantum sensor, weinvestigate the pressure-induced magnetic phase tran-sition of a micron-size permanent magnet Nd2Fe14Bsample inside a diamond anvil cell, with a spatial res-olution of⇠2µm, and a sensitivity of⇠20µT/pHz.Our results show that NV-based quantum sensingis a promising technique to study both the staticand dynamic magnetic phenomena under high pres-sures. This scheme can be generalized to measureother physical parameters such as temperature andpressure,[12,21,22]and will therefore be beneﬁcial forfrontier research of condensed matter physics and geo-physics.We start by introducing the working principle ofODMR. This technique is similar to nuclear magneticresonance and electron paramagnetic resonance, butwithout the need for a large external magnetic ﬁeld(polarization) or for pickup coils (readout). NV centeris a spin-1 system, with a spin triplet ground state.[23]As shown in Fig.1,ag r e e nl a s e rp u l s eo fs e v e r a lm i -croseconds is used to polarize NV electron spin to themS=0state with high ﬁdelity, and the following res-onant microwave pulse prepares the spin probe to thedesigned quantum state, e.g., a superposition state ofthemS=0andmS=1states. Then, the inter-action between the probe and the sample (and theenvironment) alters the NV spin states, which couldbe read out by measuring the NV ﬂuorescence in-tensity under a second green laser excitation. Notethat both the static magnetic ﬁeld and the dynamicmagnetic noise could be detected with this spin sen-sor (Fig.1(b)), and a large number of sensing schemeshave been developed to meet the challenges of sensingweak signals and to improve the spatial and spectrumresolutions.[24 28]To carry out the ODMR measurement under highpressure, a DAC with a low ﬂuorescence backgroundand an assembled microwave antenna have been used,as shown in Fig.1(a). The high-pressure sample cham-ber is enclosed by two diamond anvils and a rheniummetal gasket. The microwave transmission line is apiece of thin platinum wire, placed at the center of thesample chamber, which is further connected to the ex-ternal microwave cable. We usec-BN powder mixedwith epoxy to insulate the platinum wire from the rhe-nium gasket. KBr is used as the pressure medium, andar u b yb a l l(⇠5µm) is used as the pressure marker.[29]Diamond particles with ensemble NV centers are ran-domly dispersed on the DAC culet. The diamond par-ticles (typically in diameter of 1µm with an NV centerdensity of⇠2p p m ) a r e p u r c h a s e d f r o m A d a m a s N a n -otechnologies. A long working distance objective isused to focus the green laser beams onto the DACculet, and to collect the NV center ﬂuorescence sig-nals there. All experiments are carried out at roomtemperature.
2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.80.900.951.00
MW frequency (GHz)10 20 30 403.03.23.43.6Pressure (GPa)(a)
(b)(c)Pt wires
NVs
N
DiamondGasketLaserFluorescence
Sample
ObjectiveSample ruby
2p2p2pp2pbdcbacttNormalized PL(arb. units)
D (GHz)17.9 GPa43.0 GPa9.5 GPa6.3 GPa
Fig. 1.The principle of quantum sensing under pressures.Diamond nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers are quantum sen-sors sensitive to local perturbations. The magnetic ﬁeldfrom the sample alters the spin state of nearby NV cen-ters, which can also be polarized, manipulated and readout remotely, using optical and microwave pulse trains. (a)Experimental setup. A diamond anvil cell (DAC) providesthe high-pressure environment. A long working distanceobjective focuses the excitation laser (532 nm) onto the di-amond culet, and collects NV ﬂuorescence there. A plat-inum wire in diameter of severalµm delivers microwavepulses to the sample position, and a nearby ruby parti-cle is used to calibrate pressures. (b) Sensing schemes fordc (top) and ac (bottom) magnetic ﬁelds. (c) Opticallydetected magnetic resonance (ODMR) spectra of NV cen-ters under pressure, with no external magnetic ﬁeld. Inset:ODMR zero-ﬁeld splittingDas a function of the appliedpressure. The solid line is a linear ﬁtting, with a slope ofdD/dP=1 4.9±0.5MHz/GPa.Figure1(c) shows the zero-ﬁeld ODMR spectra forensemble NV centers under diﬀerent pressures. Un-der the ambient condition, the ODMR spectrum res-onant dip is at 2.87 GHz, which equals the value ofthe zero-ﬁeld splittingDof the NV center in dia-mond. The width of the resonant dip and the Lorentzshape of the spectra are mainly determined by the mi-crowave power broadening eﬀect (weaker microwavedriving gives smaller width and less contrast). Asthe pressure increases, the ODMR spectra shift tothe high frequency side. The inset in Fig.1(c) showsthe dependence of the resonant frequency on the ap-plied pressure, a linear function ﬁtting gives a slopeofdD/dP= 14.9±0.5MHz, which agrees well withthe results reported previously.[12]As the pressure isgreater than 20 GPa, a larger broadening and an extrasplitting could be observed. We attribute this extrasplitting to the non-hydrostatic pressure, which de-stroys theC3Vsymmetry of the NV Hamiltonian andgives the non-degenerated eigen values of the spin = 1086201-2|𝒎𝐬=±𝟏⟩|𝒎𝐬=𝟎⟩𝟑𝐀2𝟑𝐄𝟏𝐀1𝟏𝐄𝐙𝐏𝐋(a)(b)(c)
(d)
FIG. 6. (a) Physical system and level structure of the NV center. (b) NV center and the nuclear spins nearby form a multi-qubit
quantum information processor [614]. (c) NV center with the nuclear spins as memory qubits form a node in the quantum
network [615]. (d) NV center as a quantum sensor [616].
ditional two-qubit gates have been designed based on
DD sequences to control14N [626], where an RF pulse
acts equivalently as a transverse hyperfine coupling to
drive the nuclear spin flip conditioned on the state of the
electron spin. Similarly and subsequently, universal DD-
based gates on weakly-coupled nuclear spins have been
achieved [28, 627], through which the nuclear spins can
beinitializedandmeasuredviaswap-likegates. Recently,
an active phase compensation scheme named DDrf has
freed the dependence of interpulse delay on hyperfine pa-
rameters and enabled the optimization of the interpulse
delaytoprotectelectroncoherence, eventuallyentangling
up to seven nuclear spins in a ten-qubit register [628].
An alternative is to utilize decoherence-protected sub-
spaces, wheretheevolutionsofquantumstatesarepurely
unitary [629, 630]. Moreover, geometric gates are also
intrinsically noise-resilient, where the dynamical phase
vanishes. Both non-adiabatic [631–633] and adiabatic
[634] universal (non-Abelian) [633] geometric gates have
been demonstrated. Nevertheless, towards large-scale
quantum technologies, QEC is expected to be a more
essential strategy, with respect to encoding the physical
qubits subjected to the deleterious noise from the envi-
ronment into reliable logical qubits. Armed with state-
of-the-art multi-qubit control techniques, QEC protocols
[27, 28] and a related work deploying a robust coherentfeedback control [635] have been realized. Most recently,
fault-tolerant operations on the logical-qubit level have
been achieved on a seven-qubit NV quantum processor,
indicating a major step toward fault-tolerant quantum
information processing [636].
Quantum simulation and quantum algorithm.— So-
phisticated control of spins in diamond promises rich
applications in diverse fields. Various exotic physical
phenomena have been simulated, such as the emula-
tions of tensor monopoles [638] and quantum heat en-
gines [639], opening avenues for the exploration of fun-
damental physics. NV center quantum simulator also ex-
pands the scope of experimental investigations on quan-
tum topological phases [640, 641]. Ref. [642] proposed
a feasible and universal approach to investigate the non-
Hermitian Hamiltonian in Hermitian quantum systems
and observed parity-time symmetry breaking in an NV
quantum simulator [637, 643]. Besides, simulations of
non-Markovian dynamics of open systems [644], many-
body localized discrete time crystals [614] and emergent
hydrodynamics [645] are distinguished from other artifi-
cial platforms due to the real quantum nature and shed
light on condensed-matter physics.
On the other hand, many quantum algorithms have
also been demonstrated, including the Deutsch-Jozsa
algorithm [646], adiabatic quantum factorization [647],21
Property Parameter Qubit ValueCondition Reference
CoherenceT⋆
2e 36µs506 G, 300 K Ref. [637]
N 25.1 ms
403 G, 3.7 KRef. [628]
13C17.2 ms
13C-13C pair1.9 min Ref. [599]
T2(echo)e 1.8 ms690 G, 300 K Ref. [621]
N 2.3 s403 G, 3.7 K Ref. [628]
13C770 ms
T1e >1h403 G, 3.7 KRef. [598]
13C >6min Ref. [628]
Gate timeSingle-qubit e <10ns850 G, 300 K Ref. [618]
Two-qubit e-N 700 ns513 G, 300 K Ref. [617]
Gate fidelitySingle-qubit e99.995%513 G, 300 K Ref. [617]
Two-qubit e-N 99.2%
TABLE IV. Reported values on the NV center quantum platform.
Grover’s search algorithm with very high efficiency [648],
quantum-enhanced machine learning [649], and resonant
quantum principal component analysis [650].
Quantum network.— With the help of flying pho-
tons, two remote NV nodes ( >1km) with memory
qubits can be entangled [605, 651, 652]. Combining en-
tanglement distillation [653] and deterministic entangle-
ment delivery with more experimentally-favorable single-
photonscheme[654], athree-nodequantumnetworkwith
more than one long-lived memory qubits has been real-
ized [615, 655].
Quantum sensing.— Owing to the robustness and
micro-ornanoscalefeaturesofdiamond, NVcentershave
demonstrated the potential for high-sensitivity magnetic
sensing in condensed-matter physics [656–661] and bio-
physics [662–664]. Moreover, NV sensors are also ca-
pable of detecting electric field [665–668], temperature
[669, 670] and pressure [671]. Recently, the boundaries of
NV quantum sensing have been pushed into some special
or extreme-condition areas, such as at zero or low mag-
netic field [619, 672, 673], under high pressure [616, 674–
678], and at high temperatures [679]. In parallel, quan-
tum optimization algorithms [680] and QEC [681–683]
have also been incorporated into quantum metrology so
as to improve the sensitivity in the presence of noise.
Outlook.— Scalability is an inescapable question to
which every candidate physical system for quantum com-
puters should give an answer. There are two main
challenges for the NV center-based quantum comput-
ing, namely device fabrications and multi-qubit control
techniques. On the one hand, the deterministic schemes
yielding NV centers with satisfactory precision are de-
sired to produce large-scale functional devices [684, 685].
Meanwhile, since the underlying destruction and noises
induced by the implantation may affect the coherence ofthe spin qubits [686], a trade-off solution for controllable
production of NVs while preserving the coherence time
should be developed. Accordingly, the demands in the
fabrication arrays of nanostructures, such as nanopillars
[687] and parabolic reflectors [688], which significantly
enhance the collection efficiency, are also stringent. Ad-
ditionally, it is also inspiring to explore the photocurrent-
based electric readout of NV signals [689, 690]. On the
other hand, with the growth of qubit number, the mech-
anism of noises in the system becomes more and more
complicated. There is a need for techniques that inte-
grate high-precision multi-qubit control techniques with
decoupling techniques that suppress errors and crosstalk
between multiple qubits.
VII. NMR SYSTEM
Introduction.— NMR spectroscopy is a powerful and
widely used analytical tool for the structural charac-
terization of various organic matter. For nearly eighty
years, it has spawned numerous scientific and technolog-
ical applications in diverse areas of physics, chemistry,
and life science. At the end of the twentieth century,
motivated by a strong interest in quantum information
science, there arose the idea of using liquid-state NMR to
construct a quantum computer [7–9]. It was found that
NMR is capable of emulating many of the capabilities
of quantum computers, including unitary evolution and
coherent superpositions. Actually, NMR quantum com-
puting soon became one of the most mature technolo-
gies for implementing quantum computation [691, 692].
For instance, as early as 2001, researchers at IBM re-
ported the first successful implementation of Shor’s algo-
rithm on a 7-qubit liquid-state NMR quantum computer22
[693]. Based on its well-established experimental tech-
nologies, NMR has now achieved universal control of up
to 12 qubits [694–696], and allows investigation of a wide
range of quantum information processing tasks, such as
quantum simulation, quantum control, quantum tomog-
raphy, and quantum machine learning. In the following,
we briefly introduce the basics of NMR quantum compu-
tation and its impressive achievements.
Basic Principle.— In order to physically realize quan-
tum information, it is necessary to find ways of repre-
senting, manipulating, and coupling qubits to implement
non-trivial quantum gates, prepare a useful initial state,
and readout the answer.
Qubit.— NMR quantum computation uses spin-1/2
nuclei in molecules to encode qubits. Due to the Zee-
man effect, a spin-1/2 placed in an external magnetic
field has two possible orientations, spin up |↑⟩and spin
down |↓⟩, which naturally offers a two-level system, or
a qubit. In choosing a sample to be a quantum regis-
ter, one property must be satisfied, that is, the spins
should be distinguishable in frequency to allow individ-
ual qubit addressability. For heteronuclear molecules,
because different types of nuclei have different gyromag-
netic ratios, they can be easily distinguished. In the case
of homo-nuclear molecules, although the nuclei have the
same Zeeman splitting, they may stay in different elec-
tron environments, and the resulting nuclear shielding
effect could induce different amounts of frequency shifts.
In reality, precession frequencies for the nuclear spins can
vary substantially, so it is best to choose such nuclei to
form the quantum register. Fig. 7 shows the schematic of
theNMRspectrometerandthecommonlyusedmolecules
to encode qubits.
Initialization.— Conventionally, quantum computation
starts from a pure state with all qubits initialized to the
computational basis vector |0⟩. However, due to the low
polarization of the NMR spin ensemble at room tempera-
ture, it is practically rather difficult to get a genuine pure
state. Alternatively, one can use the concept of pseudo-
pure state (PPS) as a substitute [7]. PPS is a mixture of
the maximally mixed state and a pure state, thus having
similar behavior to that pure state under quantum gates
and quantum measurements. To prepare PPS from the
thermal equilibrium state, it would be necessary to in-
volve non-unitary operations, which can be realized by
applying gradient field pulses or utilizing relaxation ef-
fects. Currently, there exist a number of methods for
PPS preparation, such as spatial averaging [698], line se-
lective [699], and labeled-PPS [694, 700], etc. Ref. [701]
analyzed and compared the efficiencies of these methods
based on the theory of optimal bounds on state transfer
under quantum channels. Overall, PPS has proven to be
a convenient and useful tool for small-scale NMR quan-
tum computation, yet when the number of qubits grows,
there is a significant scalability challenge, i.e., the achiev-
able purity of PPS scales very unfavorably. Approaches
that attempt to address the scalability issue include al-
gorithmic cooling [702] and parahydrogen-induced polar-ization [703], which have demonstrated the ability to pre-
pare NMR spin systems with purities even above the en-
tanglement threshold.
Operation.— One-qubit gates are just rotations on the
Bloch sphere, which can be easily implemented in NMR
with soft radio-frequency pulses. Soft pulses are usu-
ally of predefined shapes, such as the Gaussian waveform
[704]. They contain energy only within a limited fre-
quency range, and thus can selectively excite those spins
that locate in this range. Therefore, a natural way to
implement a single-qubit gate is to use a resonant, ro-
tating Gaussian pulse with sufficient selectivity. But one
should be careful that, when going back to the lab frame,
there may be some phase errors that must be compen-
sated to get the genuine target gate [705]. In NMR, a
two-qubit gate is realized by making use of the natu-
ralJ-coupling between the nuclei. In the case of multi-
qubit gates, since all the J-couplings between the spins
are evolving, one has to design refocusing schemes that
are composed of a sequence of πpulses to effectively turn
off the unwanted J-coupling terms [706]. The usual way
to quantify the level of coherent control is the random-
ized benchmarking protocol. Using randomized bench-
marking, an average error rate for one- and two-qubit
gates of 4.7±0.3×10−3on a three-qubit system was re-
ported [707]. Another work has used a unitary 2-design
and twirling protocol to estimate the average fidelities of
Clifford gates on a seven-qubit NMR processor, finding
anaverageexperimentalfidelityof 55.1%[708]. NMRhas
also explored other types of quantum gate implementa-
tion such as geometric quantum computation [709, 710].
Finally, we remark that NMR also provides non-unitary
control means such as gradient field pulse and phase cy-
cling, which are modeled as random unitary channels and
can be used to destroy unwanted coherences.
Measurement.— NMR measurement is implemented by
observing the free induction decay (FID) of the transver-
sal magnetization of the spins by a detection coil wound
around the sample. The recorded time-domain FID sig-
nal is Fourier transformed to obtain a frequency-domain
spectrum, which is then fitted to obtain information
about the spin state. Unlike projective measurements
in other quantum systems, we can directly measure the
expectation value of a single coherent Pauli observable
in NMR, which is, in fact, an ensemble system. In order
to measure the Pauli operators other than the directly
observable single quantum coherences, it is necessary to
apply an appropriate readout pulse to the spin state be-
fore acquiring the FID signal. To estimate an unknown
quantum state, that is, to perform quantum state to-
mography, one needs to measure a complete set of basis
operators. However, this is generally a challenging task
since the number of degrees of freedom to be determined
grows exponentially with system size.
NMR quantum control.— Over 50 years of develop-
ment, researchers have developed abundant pulse control
techniques in the NMR spin system, such as frequency
selective pulses, composite pulses, refocusing schemes,23
FIG. 7. (a) Schematic of a high-field liquid-state NMR spectrometer [697], which can be used for quantum computation. (b)
A list of some commonly used molecules for nuclear spin quantum registers, ranging from two-qubit to twelve-qubit samples.
The labels indicate nuclei13C,1H, or19F (all having spin number 1/2) that are chosen as qubits candidates.
and multiple pulse sequences, to name a few. These
pulse techniques originated in demand for precise spec-
troscopy of complex molecules, and continue to be use-
ful for NMR quantum information processing experi-
ments [706]. Despite this, it is still desirable to fur-
ther improve NMR control techniques to realize suffi-
ciently high-fidelity gates that fulfill the fault-tolerant
quantum computation requirement. Therefore, the in-
terdisciplinary field of NMR and quantum control the-
ory naturally arose, resulting in novel and more efficient
pulse design and optimization techniques. For small-
sized systems, one can employ time optimal control the-
orytoreducegatetimesoastoreducedecoherenceeffects
[711,712]. Forrelativelylargersystems, itisusuallyhard
to derive analytical control solutions, and then one needs
to resort to numerical means. One of the most successful
approaches in this regard is the GRAPE technique de-
veloped in Ref. [713], which is flexible, easy to use, and
can produce smooth, optimal, and robust shaped pulses.
GRAPE and its many variants have found broad appli-
cations not just in NMR but also in other experimen-
tal platforms. However, these numerical approaches are
intrinsically unscalable. It would be a rather resource-
consuming task to simulate controlled quantum evolu-
tion with a classical computer, even for a system with
over tens of qubits. One possible approach to overcome
this problem is to use subsystem-based quantum optimal
control [705]. Another promising strategy is the hybrid-
classical version of GRAPE, which employs a quantum
simulator to efficiently simulate the controlled evolution
[714]. This is essentially a closed-loop strategy, and has
been experimentally tested first on a seven-spin system[714] and later on a twelve-spin system [696] to create
multiple-correlated spin states. Besides scalability, noise
is another major obstacle for high-fidelity quantum con-
trol, which could be addressed by robust control or open
quantum system control. For example, more advanced
DD sequences were put forward on solid-state NMR,
resulting in much-improved robustness against different
types of experimental errors while retaining good decou-
pling efficiency [715, 716]. It is worth mentioning that,
the above mentioned control methods, such as compos-
ite pulse, GRAPE, spin echo, and DD, though developed
from NMR firstly, are not at all restricted to NMR. Ac-
tually, many of these methods have already been success-
fully applied to other physical systems. Therefore, it is
fair to say that NMR is an excellent platform and testbed
for developing quantum control methods [705].
NMR quantum processor.— The NMR field has well-
established quantum control methods and experimen-
tal technologies, enabling a series of influential funda-
mental or applicative researches in quantum computing,
quantum simulation, quantum cloning [717–719], QEC
[720, 721], quantum thermodynamics [722–725], quan-
tum contextuality [726], etc. In the following, for short,
we only review a few developments related to quantum
algorithms, quantum simulation, and quantum learning.
Quantum algorithm.— Since the early stage of NMR-
based quantum computing, there have been reported ex-
perimental realizations of some of the well-known quan-
tum algorithms, such as Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm [727]
on a two-qubit carbon-13 labeled chloroform molecule,
Grover’s search algorithm [728] on another two-qubit
sample partially deuterated cytosine, QFT algorithm on24
a three-qubit sample [729], and Shor’s quantum factoring
algorithm [693] on a seven-qubit system.
Quantum simulation.— NMR has been used as a quan-
tumsimulatortoexploreavarietyofinterestingquantum
phenomena, ranging from quantum many-body physics,
quantum chemistry, biology, and even cosmology. Simu-
lating the equilibrium and non-equilibrium dynamics of
quantum many-body systems is one of the most fascinat-
ing topics in the field of quantum simulation, and NMR
seems to be very suitable for this task. For example, a
three-spin frustrated magnet was simulated with NMR,
in which the phase of the system as a function of the
magnetic field and temperature was explored [730]. The
phase diagram of the ground state of the Hamiltonian
with three-body interactions was simulated [731] and the
phase transition of the long-range coupling model was
first observed by monitoring Lee-Yang zeros [732]. In an-
other research, the authors employed a four-qubit NMR
simulator to explore the use of out-of-time order corre-
lators to probe quantum information scrambling [733]
and equilibrium or dynamical quantum phase transitions
[734] in a chaotic Ising chain model. NMR has also found
applications in various chemistry problems by directly
simulating molecules or chemical reactions, such as com-
puting the ground-state energy of a hydrogen molecule
[735], finding the energy spectrum of a water molecule
[736], and exploring the prototype laser-driven isomeriza-
tion chemical reaction dynamics[737]. Besides, the NMR
quantum simulator can also be used to investigate topo-
logical orders by simulating the ground state of a topo-
logical Hamiltonian [738–741].
Quantum machine learning.— NMR has been one of
the experimental platforms where quantum machine
learning algorithms can be demonstrated, and it is in
the initial stages of exploring the use of quantum ma-
chine learning to directly process classical image infor-
mation. For instance, a hand-written image recognition
task to discriminate between 9and6is realized by im-
plementing a quantum support vector machine on a four-
qubitNMRprocessor[742]. Theboundarythatseparates
different regions of an image is detected experimentally
by implementing a quantum image processing algorithm
[743]. Quantum principal component analysis, an impor-
tant tool for pre-processing data in machine learning, has
also been experimentally implemented on NMR for the
first time for small-scale human face recognition tasks
[744].
Outlook.— Primary challenges for liquid-state NMR
quantum computation include a lack of appropriate
molecules to serve as quantum registers, unavailability of
high-purity quantum states and quantum resources such
as entanglement, and difficulty in achieving scalable and
high-fidelity control on large spin systems. One approach
that may overcome some of these limitations is to shift
to solid-state NMR. Solid-state NMR has already been
used in demonstrating quantum heat engine [745], ex-
ploring many-body localization [746, 747], and observing
prethermalization [748, 749]. Some other promising ap-proaches that are closely related to NMR are the silicon-
based nuclear spin quantum computer, which is a hybrid
between the quantum dot and the NMR [10], and the
recent technology of nuclear electric resonance [750]. Fi-
nally, while NMR has certain intrinsic difficulty in be-
coming a scalable route to large-scale quantum compu-
tation, the many lessons learned in the past decades’ re-
search are very likely to be relevant for advancing the
development of other quantum technologies.
VIII. NEUTRAL ATOM ARRAYS
Over the past two decades, deterministically prepared
neutral atom arrays have emerged as a promising plat-
form for quantum computing and quantum simulation
[751–755]. Controlled interactions between atomic qubits
are mediated by the long-range dipole-dipole interactions
via Rydberg states. These long-range Rydberg interac-
tions allow creating specific quantum Hamiltonians and
easy analog quantum simulations. They are also the
workhorse for constructing digital gates and realizing any
physicalmodels. Mostexperimentstodatefocusonalkali
atomsRbandCs, whichhavesinglevalenceelectronsand
can be simply laser-cooled and manipulated. In recent
years, with two valence electrons, alkaline-earth(-like) el-
ements Sr and Yb have attracted growing attention due
to their appealing features, such as narrow and ultra-
narrow optical transitions and magic-wavelength optical
traps for Rydberg states [756–759]. The schematic dia-
gram of atomic qubits and their pros and cons are sum-
marized in Fig. 2(e).
Scalability.— A neutral atom quantum computer is
based on an array of single atoms localized in optical
tweezers, as depicted in Fig. 8. Quantum information is
encoded in electronic spin states of alkali atoms or nu-
clear spin states of alkaline-earth(-like) atoms. Neutral
atom platforms have a notable advantage for scalabil-
ity. It is relatively easy to expand the number of atomic
qubits. In a microscopic optical tweezer, either one atom
or zero atoms can be trapped each with a probability
of roughly 50% due to light-assisted collisions [760, 761].
The stochastic loading efficiencies have been enhanced to
80%–90%for alkali species and 96% for alkaline-earth(-
like) species by accurately tuning parameters under blue-
detuning lasers and using artful cooling techniques [762–
766]. Afterprobabilisticloadingintweezers, singleatoms
can be rearranged into defect-free arbitrary patterns us-
ing a real-time control system and dynamically moving
tweezers[767–769]. Uptodate, large-scaleplatformscon-
sisting of more than 100 neutral atoms have been cre-
ated, such as an array with an average number of 110
133Cs atoms [770], defect-free square and triangular ar-
rays of 196 and 14787Rb atoms [771], and a defect-free
programmable array of up to 25687Rb atoms [772]. The
rearrangement process takes a total time of hundreds of
milliseconds and results in a high filling fraction of up to
99% [771, 772]. In the rearrangement of larger arrays,25
01rQuantum register 
Neutral atom array Rydberg state 
Ground states  
EMCCD  
2D AOD Laser 
(local gate) 
Laser 
(global gate) Microwave  
(global gate) 
SLM  Dichroic   
mirror 
Dichroic   
mirror 
Moving tweezer Static tweezer Fluorescence  Microscope  
objective  Microscope  
objective  
Vacuum chamber 
Lens  
FIG. 8. Schematic of a neutral atom quantum computer.
In a microscopic tweezer array, single atoms are rearranged
into defect-free arbitrary patterns. Atomic qubits can be en-
coded in electronic spin states or nuclear spin states. Single-
qubit operations are performed through microwave or opti-
cal spectroscopy. Two-qubit gates and entanglement are re-
alized based on long-range Rydberg interactions. EMCCD,
Electron Multiplying Charge-Coupled Device. SLM, Spatial
Light Modulator. 2D AOD, Two-Dimensional Acousto-Optic
Deflector.
atom losses from tweezers will limit filling fractions, as
therearrangementtimewillincreasewiththesystemsize.
The typical trap lifetime is about tens of seconds due to
collisions with background gas in a vacuum chamber. In
ordertoreducetheresidualgaspressure, opticaltweezers
can be placed in a cryogenic environment at a tempera-
ture of a few kelvins. The trapping of single Rb atoms
in cryogenic arrays of optical tweezers has been demon-
strated with a measured lifetime up to 6000s, a 300-fold
improvement compared to the room-temperature setup
[773]. In this cryogenic experimental setup, large arrays
consisting of more than 30087Rb atoms have been real-
ized with an unprecedented probability of ∼37%to pre-
paredefect-freearrays[774]. Weanticipatethatthenum-
ber of atomic qubits in a neutral atom processor will be
increasedfromhundredstothousands. Furthermore,sev-
eral individual processors will be coupled together with
atom-photon interconnects.
Initialization and readout.— Atomic qubits encoded inthe internal states can be initialized using optical pump-
ing techniques. The estimated preparation fidelity for
singlealkalisis F > 99.5%[775]. Awidelyusedtechnique
for qubit readout relies on the state-selective ejection of
neutral atoms. When illuminating with a resonant laser
pulse, any atoms in one state are pushed out of the op-
tical tweezers, whereas atoms in the other state are not
influenced and remain trapped. Subsequently, trapped
atoms are detected by collecting laser-induced fluores-
cence which is not state-selective. The typical measure-
ment fidelity is F > 98%[775]. Atom losses in this tech-
nique prevent from measuring qubits in the middle of
quantum circuit execution. As an alternative, for a loss-
less fluorescent state detection, only a small number of
photons should be scattered to minimize the atom heat-
ing. This approach has been demonstrated for one qubit
and multiple qubits in optical tweezers [776–779]. In the
future, atom losses due to heating will be reduced to a
level that allows implementing repetitive QEC for quan-
tum computation.
Gates.— We summarize the state-of-the-art gates im-
plemented in Table V. Single-qubit operations are per-
formed through microwave or optical spectroscopy. In
large atom arrays, a universal approach for single-site
addressing is the focused laser beam scanning or the ap-
plication of static field gradients. The gate operation
time is t1= 0.1−10µs. Single-qubit gate errors are
caused by the fluctuations of the pulse amplitude and
detuning [775, 780]. An average fidelity of F1= 99.83%
was measured in the133Cs experiment using random-
ized benchmarking [781]. Recently, the gate fidelities for
87Rbatomshavebeenenhancedbyusingcompositepulse
sequences, which make gate errors highly insensitive to
pulse errors [782]. The estimated gate errors are about
3×10−4. In the platform of alkaline-earth(-like) atoms,
the average single-qubit gate error of 5.2×10−3has been
extracted [766].
Controlled interactions between neutral atoms are a
fundamental requirement for entangling particles. One
strategy is to implement local entangling operations
via ultracold spin-exchange interactions, which has been
demonstrated with two individual atoms in movable
tweezers [783]. However, it is a great challenge to
overlap the atomic wavefunctions in neutral atom ar-
rays. Another strategy is based on the strong and long-
range dipole-dipole interactions between Rydberg atoms.
When two atoms are in close proximity to each other,
two-qubit gates and entanglement have been realized via
the Rydberg blockade effect [784, 785]. Most researchers
give attention to the latter one owing to its feasibil-
ity. The corresponding gate time is t2= 0.4–2µs. For
two-qubit gates via Rydberg interactions, the dominant
sources of gate errors are the ground-Rydberg Doppler
dephasing, the spontaneous emission from the interme-
diate state in the two-photon excitation process, and the
excitation laser phase noise [775]. In the87Rb atom ar-
rays, the fidelities of the two-qubit entanglement oper-
ations have been extracted to be F2≥97.4%by sup-26
pressing Rydberg laser phase noise via a reference cavity
[786, 787]. In an array of171Yb atoms, a two-qubit gate
with the fidelity of F2= 83%has been firstly demon-
strated in [788]. In this experiment, the gate error is
attributed to Raman scattering from the gate beam and
autoionizationfromasmallRydbergpopulation. Fortwo
individually trapped88Sr atoms, a Bell state has been
created with a high fidelity of >99.5%, in which qubits
are encoded in a metastable state and a Rydberg state
[789].
In the Rydberg excitation process, we must consider
the effect of the different trapping potentials for both
ground and Rydberg levels. In the experiments with sin-
gle87Rb or133Cs atoms, the tweezers are turned off for a
short duration to mitigate anti-trapping of the Rydberg
states. Atom losses and heating limit the Rydberg exci-
tation time and the number of excitation loops. When
using 0.5 µs drops for each two-qubit gate, hundreds of
drops can be made before atom loss becomes significant
[782]. It should be noted that the ion core polarizability
of the alkaline-earth(-like) atoms can be used to trap Ry-
dberg states in conventional, red-detuned optical tweez-
ers. The Rydberg states of single174Yb atoms have been
stably trapped by the same red-detuned optical tweezer
that also confines the ground state [790]. Therefore, the
interaction time of Rydberg states for alkaline-earth(-
like) atoms can be extended.
Coherence.— Neutral atoms are well isolated from the
environment and exhibit long coherence times. For Rb
and Cs atoms [782, 791], the hyperfine qubit relaxation
time is about T1∼4s, which is limited by the spon-
taneous Raman scattering of photons from the trapping
laser. The inhomogeneous dephasing originates from the
energy distribution of trapped atoms. The typical de-
phasing time is T∗
2∼4ms. For the homogeneous de-
phasing, common mechanisms are the intensity fluctua-
tions of the trapping laser, magnetic field fluctuations,
and heating of atoms. The homogeneous dephasing time
ofT′
2∼1s has been observed using XY8 and XY16
DD sequences [716, 792]. By analyzing these mecha-
nisms, we observe that the differential light shift of qubit
states is the root of the dephasing. A magic-intensity
trapping technique allows mitigating the differential light
shift. The coherence time has been enhanced to 225ms,
where the extracted inhomogeneous dephasing time is
T∗
2∼1.5s [793]. In comparison with the electronic
spin qubits, nuclear spin qubits in alkaline-earth(-like)
atoms are robust to perturbation by the optical tweez-
ers. The estimated coherence time of single87Sr atoms
areT1≫10s,T∗
2= 21s, and T′
2= 40s in the spin echo
process [794]. In addition, coherence properties of single
171Yb atoms have been measured [766, 788], as listed in
Table V.
Digital quantum operations.— Digital gate-based cir-
cuits on programmable neutral atom processors were
demonstrated by two experimental groups. In Ref. [791],
researchers at Wisconsin employed an architecture based
on individual addressing of single atoms with tightly fo-cused beams. Quantum circuits were decomposed into
global microwave rotations, local phase rotations and lo-
cal two-qubit CZ gates. Scanning Rydberg excitation
beams enabled coherent and simultaneous addressing of
pairs of atoms. In this platform, researchers demon-
strated the preparation of GHZ states with up to 6
qubits, quantum phase estimation algorithm for a chem-
istry problem, and QAOA for the maximum cut graph
problem. In Ref. [782], researchers at Harvard employed
another architecture based on the coherent transport of
entangled neutral atoms. Two-qubit CZ gates were im-
plemented in parallel by two global Rydberg laser beams.
Subsequently, entangled qubits were coherently trans-
ported to change the connectivity and perform the next
layer of quantum operations. This architecture was used
togeneratea12-qubitclusterstate, a7-qubitSteanecode
state, topological surface, and toric code states. Finally,
researchers realized a hybrid analogue-digital evolution
and measured the entanglement entropy. These results
represent a key step toward realizing a quantum com-
puter with neutral atoms.
Analog quantum operations.— Combined with the
wide tunability of array geometry, Rydberg atom arrays
are suitable to implement various Hamiltonians [753–
755]. When the spin states are encoded in the ground
level and the Rydberg level, the quantum Ising-like mod-
els are obtained. In a one-dimensional chain with up
to 30 atoms and a 7×7atoms array, the excitation
dynamics and the pair correlation functions of quan-
tum Ising models were explored after suddenly switch-
ing on the Rydberg excitation pulse [796, 797]. The
similar quench dynamics were also studied in the lin-
ear and zigzag chains [798]. For three-dimensional ar-
rangements of Rydberg atoms, quantum Ising Hamil-
tonians mapped on various connected graphs were con-
structed with tens of spins [799, 800]. Sweeping the Ry-
dberg excitation detunings allows probing more abun-
dant many-body dynamics. Quantum phase transitions
intoZnordered phases and the critical dynamics were
demonstrated in a one-dimensional chain with tunable
interactions [801, 802]. Antiferromagnetically ordered
states were further explored in two-dimensional arrays
with up to hundreds of atoms [771, 772, 803]. Although
the Rydberg interactions generally lead to thermaliza-
tion in many-body systems, it was realized that quan-
tum many-body scars avoided rapid thermalization when
preparing the two-dimensional atoms array in the anti-
ferromagnetic initial state [804]. Besides the Ising-like
models mentioned above, recent works include observ-
ing topological phases in a quantum dimer model and
a Su-Schrieffer-Heeger model [805, 806], engineering the
XXZ spin model using a periodic external microwave
field [807], and investigating quantum optimization algo-
rithmsforsolvingthemaximumindependentsetproblem
[795].
Outlook.— Recent breakthroughs in Rydberg atom ar-
rays exhibit the ability to study many-body physics and
realize highly programmable and scalable quantum com-27
TABLE V. Reported state-of-the-art performance of neutral-atom qubits. T1is the spin relaxation
time. T∗
2andT′
2refer to the inhomogeneous and homogeneous dephasing time. F1(F2) and t1(t2)
are the gate fidelity and the operation time of single(two)-qubit manipulation. NdandNarefer
to qubit numbers in digital quantum processors and analog quantum simulators, respectively.
PropertyAlkali atom Alkaline-earth(-like) atom
Electronic spin Nuclear spin
85,87Rb/133Cs87Sr171Yb
CoherenceT1 4s [782, 791] ≫10s [794] 10−100s [766]
T∗
2 4ms [782, 791] 21s [794] 3.7 s [766]
T′
2 ∼1sa[782, 791] 40sb[794] 7.9 sb[766]
Gate timet1 0.1−10µs 0.7µs [766]
t2 0.4−2µs 0.9µs [788]
Gate fidelityF1 ∼99.97%c[782] 99.48%d[766]
F2 97.4%e[787] 83%e[788]
Qubit numberNd 6f[791], 24g[782]
Na 289 [795]
Environment Ultra-high vacuum P∼10−11Torr, magnetic field B∼10G
aXY8 and XY16 dynamical decoupling sequences.
bSpin echo process.
cThis is estimated from the scattering limit which is consistent with an accumulated error.
Randomized benchmarking will be applied in the future.
dRandomized benchmarking.
eBell state fidelity.
fGHZ state based on individual addressing of single atoms.
gToric code state based on coherent transport of entangled atoms.
puting. Primary challenges for this platform are higher
fidelity of two-qubit gates, quantum nondemolition mea-
surements, and low crosstalk between individual qubits
in a large array. Two-qubit gate fidelity can be improved
by further cooling alkali atoms via Raman sideband cool-
ing [808, 809] or using alkaline-earth(-like) elements that
have exhibited excellent gate performance. Combined
with lossless fluorescent state detection, introducing a
second atomic element allows monitoring quantum pro-
cessors via quantum nondemolition couplings to auxil-
iary qubits [810]. In addition, a dual-element platform
enables low crosstalk manipulations of the homonuclear
and heteronuclear interactions when increasing system
size [811].
IX. PHOTONIC QUANTUM COMPUTING
Introduction.— Amongst all platforms for quantum
computing, photon has several unparalleled advantages:
i) one of the best candidates for room-temperature quan-
tum computing, owing to the inherent advantage that it
weakly couples with the surrounding environment, and
ii) natural interface for distributed quantum comput-
ing, which acts as a flying qubit to connect many quan-
tum nodes, and iii) compatible with CMOS technologies,
bringing optical quantum computing to a new cutting-
edge stage.
Optical quantum computing can be dated back to2001, when Knill, Laflamme and Milburn (KLM) pointed
out that it is possible to create universal quantum com-
puting solely with linear optical elements [812]. This
landmark work opens a way for linear optical quantum
computing. However, the daunting resource overhead
makes the KLM scheme extremely hard to implement.
In 2010, a much more feasible and intermediate model—
boson sampling—was proposed and analyzed by Aaron-
son and Arkhipov [813]. Compared to the KLM scheme,
boson sampling is a much easier linear optical quantum
computing model which can beat all classical comput-
ers with only 50–100 photons, but at a cost that it’s no
longer universal. In 2017, a variant called Gaussian bo-
son sampling (GBS) was developed by Hamilton et al.,
in which the input is replaced as single-mode squeezed
states rather than single photons [814]. It is a new
paradigm that not only can provide a highly efficient
approach to large-scale implementations but also can of-
fer potential applications in graph-based problems and
quantum chemistry.
In the past two decades, we have witnessed great
progress in linear optical quantum computing [815, 816],
especially on single-photon sources, linear optical net-
works, and single-photon detectors. These achievements
have enabled a series of essential experimental results in
the preparation of large-scale entangled states [817–819],
and quantum computational advantage through boson
sampling [16, 18, 820].
Photon qubit.— Photon has the richest degrees of free-28
domtoencodeasaqubit. Inthefollowing, wesummarize
several frequently-used bases for photonic qubits.
•Polarization : The qubit can be encoded on the two
orthogonal geometrical orientations of electromagnetic
field. It is widely used in linear optical quantum com-
puting.
•Path: Two transmission paths of single photons can
be a qubit. Usually, the phase of the path in free space
is unstable, while it’s perfect for integrated photonics.
•Time bin : Theformerandlatterarrivaltimeofsingle
photons is encoded as a qubit.
•Frequency bin : Frequency-bin qubit refers to the su-
perposition state of a photon with two different frequen-
cies (colors).
•Photon number : Vaccum and single-photon states
encode qubit’s 0 and 1, respectively.
•Orbital angular momentum (OAM) : OAM describes
the spatial distribution of light. In quantum theory,
OAMofaphotonhasavalueof Lz=mℏ. AnytwoOAM
states with different mvalues form a photonic qubit.
Quantum light sources.— Single-photon source is one
kind of quantum light source that emits one and only
one photon at a certain time, in a well-defined polariza-
tion and spatial-temporal mode. Specifically, the single
photons should possess the same polarization, spatial-
temporal mode and transform-limited spectral profile for
ahigh-visibilityHong-Ou-Mandel-typequantuminterfer-
ence [821].
Spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC)
sources [822, 823] play a vital role in many fundamen-
tal quantum optics experiments. Notably, this year’s
physics Nobel prize is partially “for experiments with en-
tangled photons”. However, SPDC is intrinsically prob-
abilistic and unavoidably mixed with multiphoton com-
ponents. The single-photon efficiency is typically as low
as∼1% to suppress unwanted two-photon emission. To
overcome this issue, an alternative way is to multiplex
many SPDC sources to boost the efficiency of single-
photon sources [824]. Another approach is directly gen-
erating high-quality single photons from a two-level sys-
tem. Amongst all platforms [825–832], semiconductor
quantumdots[833]providestate-of-the-artsingle-photon
sources with an overall efficiency of 57% [834]. This
mainly benefits from a polarized microcavity developed
by Wang et al.[835], which has a polarization-dependent
Purcell enhancement of single-photon emission so that
the overall efficiency can surpass the 50%. In near fu-
ture, the single-photon efficiency can be improved over
70% by better sample growth and boosted collection ef-
ficiency, which should surpass the efficiency required for
universal quantum computing [836].
In quantum optics, another quantum light source is
squeezed state, which refers to a quantum state that the
uncertainty of the electric field strength for some phases
is smaller than that of a coherent state. Such a state
is commonly generated by strongly pumping nonlinear
mediums [837]. It was shown that continuous-variable
(CV) quantum computing can be constructed [838] byusing squeezed states and simple linear optical elements,
such as beam splitters and phase shifters. Then, Gottes-
man, Kitaev, andPreskill(GKP)proposedarobustQEC
code over CVs to protect against diffusive errors [839].
Until now, the record squeezing is 15 dB from type I
optical parametric amplifier [840], and many quantum
experiments were executed towards large-scale CV quan-
tumcomputing[841–843]. Comparedtodiscrete-variable
(DV) quantum computing, CV has a valuable feature
that the entanglement can deterministically emerge by
mixing two squeezed states with a simple beam splitter,
while it is hard to obtain in DV case since such a non-
linear interaction is so weak that we have to generate
entanglement by a conditional fashion, namely as post
selection. Nevertheless, CV quantum information pro-
cessing can never be perfect, because the quality of en-
tanglement strongly depends on the amount of squeezing
that it’s extremely sensitive to the loss.
Linear optical networks.— The interferometer acts as a
unitary transformation on the single-photon Fock state
or the single-mode squeezed state. In 1994, Reck et al.
showed that a universal unitary transformation can be
realized by beam splitters and phase shifters arranged in
a triangular configuration [844]. In this scheme, the op-
tical depth is 2(n−1)−1, the number of beam splitters
isn(n−1)
2, where nis the number of modes. In 2016,
Clements et al.demonstrated that an interferometer
with a rectangular configuration is equivalent to a trian-
gular one [845]. Moreover, the optical depth is reduced
ton−1, and the number of beam splitters is reduced to
n2−2n+2
2. This is a more compact and robust design with
a symmetry configuration.
For boson sampling, the linear optical network should
combine high transmission, Haar randomness, high
spatial and temporal overlap simultaneously. There
are many different implementation approaches, such as
micro-optics [16, 820, 846, 847], time-bin loops [18, 848],
and integrated photonic circuits [849–851]. For uni-
versal quantum computing, it should further be pro-
grammable. Micro-optics possesses the highest trans-
mission efficiency, while it lacks the demonstration of
programmability. Time-bin loops and integrated on-chip
circuits are programmable but suffer from serious losses.
How to reduce the losses meanwhile programmable is a
long-sought goal in the future.
Boson sampling.— In 2011, Aaronson and Arkihpov
argued that a passive linear optics interferometer with
single-photon state inputs cannot be efficiently simulated
[813]. This model is so-called boson sampling, a non-
universalquantumcomputingmodelmucheasiertobuild
than universal quantum computing. In boson sampling,
nidenticalbosonsaresentintoan m-mode( m≫n)Haar-
random interferometer and sampling the output distribu-
tion in the photon number basis. Because of the bosonic
statistics, the probability amplitudes of the final state
are related to the permanent of submatrices, a problem
known to be in the complexity class of #P-complete. It
is strongly believed that a moderate-size boson sampling29
FIG. 9. Experimental setup of Jiuzhang . It is mainly composed of five parts. At the upper left region, high-intensity transform-
limited pulse laser with wavelength of 775 nm are prepared to pump 25 two-mode squeezed state (TMSS) sources (at the left
region, labeled in orange). Meanwhile, continuous-wave 1450-nm laser are guided and co-propagates with the 25 TMSS sources.
The 1550-nm two-mode squeezed light is collected into temperature-insensitive single-mode fiber, of which 5-m bare fiber is
winded around a piezo-electric cylinder to control the source phase (at the center region). In the center-right region, by using
optical collimators and mirrors, 25 TMSSs are injected into a photonic network and 25 corresponding light beams (colored in
yellow) with wavelength of 1450 nm and intensity power of about 0.5 µW are collected for phase locking. The 144 output
modes are distributed into four parts using arrays of tunable periscopes and mirrors. Finally, the output modes are detected by
144 superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors and registered by a 144-channel ultra-fast electronics coincidence unit.
machine, even an approximate one with a multiplicative
error, will be intractable to be simulated with state-of-
the-art classical computers [813]. More importantly. bo-
son sampling is a strong candidate to demonstrate quan-
tum computational supremacy [852], an important mile-
stone in the quantum computing field.
In 2013, simultaneously, four groups reported the
small-scale proof-of-principle boson sampling experi-
ments [849–851, 853]. Indeed, the final photon distri-
bution is proportional to the square of permanent mod-
ulus. However, all these experiments are based on SPDC
sources, which were intrinsically probabilistic and mixed
with multi-photon components. In an attempt to solve
the intrinsic probabilistic problem of SPDC, scattershot
bosonsamplingwasproposedin2014byLund et al.[854]
and was first demonstrated in 2015 by Bentivegna et al.
[855]. Then, Zhong et al.improved the photon num-
ber to five [817]. Though scattershot Boson sampling is
theoretically beautiful, it is hard to realize quantum ad-
vantage experimentally due to the extensive challenges of
ultra-high heralding efficiency, fast optical switches, and
an excess of SPDC sources required.
A direct way to solve the problems of SPDC is di-
rectly using on-demand single photon sources based on
coherently driving a quantum two-level system. In 2017,
Wanget al.successfully performed the first five-photon
boson sampling experiment using an actively demulti-
plexed quantum-dot single-photon source and an ultra-
low loss photonic circuit, and showed a high samplingrate that is 24,000 times faster than all previous experi-
ments, beating early classical computers — ENIAC and
TRADIC [846]. In 2019, Wang et al.demonstrated a
boson sampling with 20 input photons and a 60-mode
interferometer [847]. Finally, at most 14 photons are de-
tected at the output, and the output state Hilbert space
reaches up to 3.7 ×1014dimensions, which is over 10 or-
ders of magnitude larger than the previous works.
A more efficient way to demonstrate quantum compu-
tational advantage is through GBS, thanks to the single-
mode squeezed state inputs, of which more than one-
photon components are allowed while its computational
complexity is as hard as original boson sampling. In
2020, a landmark experiment was executed by Zhong et
al.[16] and successfully demonstrated quantum compu-
tational advantage. Then, GBS was improved with 50
single-mode squeezed-state inputs and a 144-mode inter-
ferometer, and up to 113-click coincidences are detected
[820] (see Fig. 9). These rudimentary photonic quantum
computers, named as Jiuzhang , in honor of an ancient
Chinese mathematical classic — “The Nine Chapters on
the Mathematical Art”, yield an output state space di-
mension of 1043and a sampling rate that is 1010faster
than using the state-of-the-art simulation strategy and
supercomputers.
Technically, Jiuzhang is partially programmable owing
to the precisely controlling the phases of input TMSSs.
To make boson sampling fully programmable, a notable
way is to encode photonic modes to time bins [856]. In30
this approach, the splitting ratio and phase of every time
bin can be changed as will in real time. In 2017, He et al.
reported the first time-bin-encoded boson sampling com-
bining a on-demand quantum dot single photon source
[848]. It is worth noting that this time-bin multimode
network is fully electrically programmable, and fully con-
nected (without zero elemments). Recently, combining
the aforementioned GBS approach, Madsen et al.re-
ported quantum advantage by building a GBS machine
with time-bin loops, where 216 single-mode squeezed
state inputs and 16 photon-number-resolving detectors
are used, and finally up to 219 photons are detected [18].
Noting that this machine is partially programmable, and
most of the matrix elements are zeros, namely partially
connected.
Because the output probability of GBS is related to
hafnian, which corresponds to the number of perfect
matching of a graph, it links to several potentially prac-
tical applications [857–860]. Next, GBS will naturally be
developed as a special-purpose photonic platform to in-
vestigate these real-world applications, as a step toward
NISQ processing [861].
Scalability.— For large-scale quantum information pro-
cessing, the photonic platform faces two major hurdles
in the current stage — the loss and the ultra-weak inter-
action between independent photons. In principle, the
loss is both locatable and detectable, it should be much
easier to be solved than computational errors (such as
X, Z errors). For DV quantum computing, theoretical
analysis [862, 863] suggests that at most 50% loss is al-
lowed for scalable quantum computing, which is much
less stringent and restrictive than a threshold of ∼1% for
surface code to address computational errors. In one-way
quantum computing, some works pointed out that for m-
photon cluster state, at least a fusion success probability
of1/(m−1)is required for universal quantum computa-
tion [864], while the upper bond needs further works in
the future. For instance, the upper percolation thresh-
old of the 3-photon clusters is bonded by 0.5898 [864].
For CV quantum computing, loss will cause the squeezed
states to move closer to the vacuum state, meanwhile los-
ing their quantum feature. The exciting thing is that the
fault-tolerant quantum computing with GKP qubits only
requires a squeezing level of ∼10 dB [865], which allows
a high loss threshold for scalable quantum computing.
In summary, losses in both DV and CV photonic quan-
tum computing can be handled with a relatively large
threshold.
Photon-photon interaction at a single-photon level is a
fundamentalquestionbothinphotonicquantumcomput-
ing and quantum optics. It is strongly believed that non-
linear interactions are needed to deterministically gen-
erate entanglement between photons [866]. Over the
last two decades, several approaches were developed to
address this issue, such as electromagnetically induced
transparency [867], atom-cavity interaction [868], atom-
atom interaction [869] and atoms in chiral waveguide
[870], etc. In 2016, Hacker et al.reported a photon-photon gate with an efficiency of 4.8% and a fidelity of
76.2% [871], which suffers from inefficient photon storage
and retrieval during the whole process, and the gate fi-
delity is limited by the precision of spin characterization.
The same issues happen to several recent experiments
utilizing Rydberg blockade [872–874]. By storing single
photons in a long-lived Rydberg state, the efficiency of
single-photon storage and retrieval has been improved to
39% [873]. In the future, by harnessing the strong non-
linearity in χ(2)mediums and cQED systems, photon-
photon gates can be realized with both high fidelity and
efficiency which surpass the thresholds required for fault-
tolerant quantum computing. In this case, the photonic
platform will provide a perfect stage and a potential
leading platform working at room temperature for fault-
tolerant quantum computing.
X. OUTLOOK AND CONCLUSION
Wehavereviewedprominentquantumcomputingplat-
forms that have seen significant advances over the last
decade. Currently, these quantum platforms are in dif-
ferent stages of maturity, where each system exhibits
both advantages and limitations. To achieve better con-
trol fidelity and scalability of the various quantum plat-
forms, challenges must be addressed to match the re-
quirements for large-scale quantum computing on differ-
ent platforms. For solid-state quantum systems, high-
quality materials and advanced fabrication technologies
are essential for the quality of qubits. For example,
low-charge noise interfaces are critical for semiconduc-
tor qubits, which could be improved by importing indus-
trial techniques of IC and encouraging a transfer from
laboratory-level engineering to foundry-level fabrication.
For photonic atom-based qubit systems, fundamentals
and advanced techniques in precise control of individual
atoms and atom-photon interconnectors between multi-
ple processors could be developed. In the cases of NMR
systems, one approach that may overcome difficulty in
achieving scalable and high-fidelity control on large spin
systems in liquid NMR quantum computation is to shift
to solid-state NMR. While for qubits based on NV cen-
ters, the deterministic and controllable production of NV
centers while preserving the coherence time needs to be
further developed.
Forallquantumcomputingplatforms, thetypicalover-
heads for scalable quantum computing, such as crosstalk,
gateheating, andfrequencycrowding, shouldalsobecon-
sidered carefully. The techniques that integrate high-
fidelity control techniques, such as DD schemes that sup-
press errors and crosstalk between multiple qubits, are
necessary for high-fidelity multi-qubit control with the
growing number of qubits, where system size should in-
crease without compromising control quality. By merg-
ing the techniques developed for quantum computing, we
might also gain better performance in quantum metrol-
ogy and quantum simulations. In addition to techno-31
logical advances to address the challenges, efforts in inte-
gratingmultiplequantumplatformsmayalsobeessential
for utilizing the advantages of different platforms for fu-
ture applications. For instance, tasks for computation,
communication, and storage, may be allocated to differ-
ent units. Moreover, developments of hybrid quantum-
classical algorithms are also critical for developing “killer
applications” for near-term quantum computers. Proper
integration of different quantum platforms and hybrid
classical and quantum computing may provide significant
advantages in real-world applications.
In the future, significant breakthroughs, such as fault-
tolerant quantum operations, and quantum algorithms,
will be achieved in medium-sized quantum systems. It
is also desirable to achieve quantum advantage for appli-
cations in quantum chemistry, quantum machine learn-
ing, etc. Further developments could include specialized
quantum machines, quantum clouds, and applications
of quantum computing systems in quantum sensing and
simulations. Finally, as quantum platforms develop to-
wardfullyscalablefault-tolerantquantumcomputing, we
anticipate the emergence of broad real-world applications
of quantum computing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Fei Yan for his contributions to the
superconducting qubits section, and thank valuable
discussions with Xiaodong He, we thank Chao-Yang
Lu, Andrea Morello and Lieven M. K. Vandersypen for
valuable comments, and we also thank Jiasheng Mai for
figure polishing. This work was supported by the Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants No.
U1801661, 12174178, 11905098, 12204228, 12004165,
11875159, 12075110, 92065111, 12275117, 11905099,
11975117, 12004164, 62174076, 92165210, 11904157,
11661161018, 11927811, 12004371), National Key Re-
search and Development Program of China (Grant
No. 2019YFA0308100 and No. 2018YFA0306600),
the Key-Area Research and Development Program of
Guangdong Province (2018B030326001), the Guang-
dong Innovative and Entrepreneurial Research Team
Program (2016ZT06D348, 2019ZT08C044), the Guang-
dong Provincial Key Laboratory (2019B121203002),
the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research
Foundation (Grant No. 2021B1515020070 and No.
2022B1515020074), the Natural Science Founda-tion of Guangdong Province (2017B030308003),
the Science, Technology and Innovation Commis-
sion of Shenzhen, Municipality (Grants No. KYT-
DPT20181011104202253, KQTD20210811090049034,
K21547502, ZDSYS20190902092905285,
KQTD20190929173815000, KQTD20200820113010023,
JCYJ20200109140803865, JCYJ20170412152620376),
Shenzhen Science and Technology Program
(RCBS20200714114820298, RCYX20200714114522109),
the Shenzhen-Hong Kong Cooperation Zone for Tech-
nology and Innovation (HZQB-KCZYB-2020050), the
Anhui Initiative in Quantum Information Technologies
(Grant No. AHY050000), the Innovation Program
for Quantum Science and Technology (Grant No.
2021ZD0303205), Research Grants Council of Hong
Kong (GRF No. 14308019), the Research Strategic
Funding Scheme of The Chinese University of Hong
Kong (No. 3133234). F.N. is supported in part by:
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation (NTT)
Research, the Japan Science and Technology Agency
(JST) [via the Quantum Leap Flagship Program
(Q-LEAP), and the Moonshot R&D Grant Number
JPMJMS2061], the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) [via the Grants-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (KAKENHI) Grant No. JP20H00134], the
Asian Office of Aerospace Research and Development
(AOARD) (via Grant No. FA2386-20-1-4069), and
the Foundational Questions Institute Fund (FQXi) via
Grant No. FQXi-IAF19-06.
Author Contributions M.-H.Y., Y.H., X.-H.D., J.L.,
D.L., B.-C.L., P.H., and Y.L. wrote the abstract and in-
troduction. M.-H.Y. and B.C. wrote the quantum algo-
rithms section. X.G., Y.Z., and F.N. wrote the super-
conducting qubits section. Y.L. wrote the trapped-ion
qubits section. Y.H., P.H., and G.H. wrote the semicon-
ductor spin qubits section. D.L. and C.Q. wrote the NV
centers section. J.L., T.X., and X.-H.P. wrote the NMR
system section. S.Y. wrote the neutral atom arrays sec-
tion. H.W. wrote the photonic quantum computing sec-
tion. X.-H.D.,P.H., Y.H., andM.-H.Y.wrotetheoutlook
and conclusion. The manuscript was revised by X.-H.D.,
P.H., J.Z., S.Z., F.N. and D.Y. with input from all other
authors. D.Y. supervised the review project.
XI. REFERENCES
[1] P. Benioff, J. Stat. Phys. 22, 563 (1980).
[2] R. P. Feynman, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 467 (1982).
[3] Y. I. Manin, Sov.Radio. , 13 (1980).
[4] P. Shor, in Proceedings 35th Annual Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science (IEEE Comput. Soc.
Press, Santa Fe, NM, USA, 1994) pp. 124–134.[5] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computa-
tion and Quantum Information (Cambridge University
Press, 2000).
[6] J. I. Cirac and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 4091
(1995).
[7] D. G. Cory, A. F. Fahmy, and T. F. Havel, Proc. Natl.32
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 1634 (1997).
[8] N. A. Gershenfeld and I. L. Chuang, Science 275, 350
(1997).
[9] D. G.Cory, M. D.Price, and T. F.Havel, Phys. D: Non-
linear Phenom. 120, 82 (1998).
[10] B. E. Kane, Nature 393, 133 (1998).
[11] D. Loss and D. P. DiVincenzo, Phys. Rev. A 57, 120
(1998).
[12] Y. Nakamura, Y. A. Pashkin, and J. S. Tsai, Nature
398, 786 (1999).
[13] F. Arute, K. Arya, R. Babbush, D. Bacon, J. C. Bardin,
R. Barends, R. Biswas, S. Boixo, F. G. S. L. Brandao,
et al., Nature574, 505 (2019).
[14] Y. Wu, W.-S. Bao, S. Cao, F. Chen, M.-C. Chen,
X. Chen, T.-H. Chung, H. Deng, Y. Du, et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 127, 180501 (2021).
[15] Q. Zhu, S. Cao, F. Chen, M.-C. Chen, X. Chen, T.-H.
Chung, H. Deng, Y. Du, D. Fan, et al., Sci. Bull. 67,
240 (2022).
[16] H.-S. Zhong, H. Wang, Y.-H. Deng, M.-C. Chen, L.-C.
Peng, Y.-H. Luo, J. Qin, D. Wu, X. Ding, et al., Science
370, 1460 (2020).
[17] H.-S. Zhong, Y.-H. Deng, J. Qin, H. Wang, M.-C. Chen,
L.-C. Peng, Y.-H. Luo, D. Wu, S.-Q. Gong, et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 127, 180502 (2021).
[18] L. S. Madsen, F. Laudenbach, M. F. Askarani,
F. Rortais, T. Vincent, J. F. Bulmer, F. M. Miatto,
L. Neuhaus, L. G. Helt, et al., Nature606, 75 (2022).
[19] M. W. Johnson, M. H. Amin, S. Gildert, T. Lanting,
F. Hamze, N. Dickson, R. Harris, A. J. Berkley, J. Jo-
hansson, et al., Nature473, 194 (2011).
[20] S. Krinner, N. Lacroix, A. Remm, A. Di Paolo,
E. Genois, C. Leroux, C. Hellings, S. Lazar, F. Swiadek,
et al., Nature605, 669 (2022).
[21] Z. Chen, K. J. Satzinger, J. Atalaya, A. N. Korotkov,
A. Dunsworth, D. Sank, C. Quintana, M. McEwen,
R. Barends, et al., Nature595, 383 (2021).
[22] C. K. Andersen, A. Remm, S. Lazar, S. Krinner,
N. Lacroix, G. J. Norris, M. Gabureac, C. Eichler, and
A. Wallraff, Nat. Phys. 16, 875 (2020).
[23] Y. Zhao, Y. Ye, H.-L. Huang, Y. Zhang, D. Wu,
H. Guan, Q. Zhu, Z. Wei, T. He, et al., Phys. Rev.
Lett.129, 030501 (2022).
[24] J. F. Marques, B. M. Varbanov, M. S. Moreira, H. Ali,
N. Muthusubramanian, C. Zachariadis, F. Battistel,
M.Beekman, N.Haider, et al.,Nat.Phys. 18,80(2022).
[25] F. van Riggelen, W. I. L. Lawrie, M. Russ, N. W. Hen-
drickx, A. Sammak, M. Rispler, B. M. Terhal, G. Scap-
pucci, and M. Veldhorst, “Phase flip code with semi-
conductor spin qubits,” arXiv: 2202.11530 (2022).
[26] K. Takeda, A. Noiri, T. Nakajima, T. Kobayashi, and
S. Tarucha, Nature 608, 682 (2022).
[27] G.Waldherr, Y.Wang, S.Zaiser, M.Jamali, T.Schulte-
Herbrüggen, H. Abe, T. Ohshima, J. Isoya, J. F. Du,
et al., Nature506, 204 (2014).
[28] T. H. Taminiau, J. Cramer, T. van der Sar, V. V. Do-
brovitski, and R. Hanson, Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 171
(2014).
[29] M. Abobeih, Y. Wang, J. Randall, S. Loenen,
C. Bradley, M. Markham, D. Twitchen, B. Terhal, and
T. Taminiau, Nature 606, 884 (2022).
[30] I. Buluta and F. Nori, Science 326, 108 (2009).
[31] I. M. Georgescu, S. Ashhab, and F. Nori, Rev. Mod.
Phys.86, 153 (2014).[32] J. Argüello-Luengo, A. González-Tudela, T. Shi,
P. Zoller, and J. I. Cirac, Nature 574, 215 (2019).
[33] W. Hofstetter and T. Qin, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.
Phys.51, 082001 (2018).
[34] R. Barends, J. Kelly, A. Megrant, A. Veitia, D. Sank,
E. Jeffrey, T. C. White, J. Mutus, A. G. Fowler, et al.,
Nature508, 500 (2014).
[35] J. Preskill, Quantum 2, 79 (2018).
[36] K. Bharti, A. Cervera-Lierta, T. H. Kyaw, T. Haug,
S. Alperin-Lea, A. Anand, M. Degroote, H. Heimonen,
J. S. Kottmann, T. Menke, W.-K. Mok, S. Sim, L.-
C. Kwek, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Rev. Mod. Phys. 94,
015004 (2022).
[37] A. Peruzzo, J. McClean, P. Shadbolt, M.-H. Yung, X.-
Q. Zhou, P. J. Love, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and J. L.
O’Brien, Nat. Commun. 5, 4213 (2014).
[38] K. Bharti, A. Cervera-Lierta, T. H. Kyaw, T. Haug,
S. Alperin-Lea, A. Anand, M. Degroote, H. Heimonen,
J. S. Kottmann, T. Menke, W.-K. Mok, S. Sim, L.-
C. Kwek, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Rev. Mod. Phys. 94,
015004 (2022).
[39] A. W. Harrow, A. Hassidim, and S. Lloyd, Phys. Rev.
Lett.103, 150502 (2009).
[40] N.-H. Chia, A. Gilyén, T. Li, H.-H. Lin, E. Tang,
and C. Wang, in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM
SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing , STOC
2020 (Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 2020) p. 387–400.
[41] E. R. MacQuarrie, C. Simon, S. Simmons, and
E. Maine, Nat. Rev. Phys. 2, 596 (2020).
[42] G. Donati, Nat. Rev. Phys. 3, 226 (2021).
[43] Y. Alexeev, D. Bacon, K. R. Brown, R. Calderbank,
L. D. Carr, F. T. Chong, B. DeMarco, D. Englund,
E. Farhi, et al., PRX Quantum 2, 017001 (2021).
[44] D. P. DiVincenzo, D. Bacon, J. Kempe, G. Burkard,
and K. B. Whaley, Nature 408, 339 (2000).
[45] A. Das and B. K. Chakrabarti, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80,
1061 (2008).
[46] S. R. Elliott and M. Franz, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 137
(2015).
[47] E. Prada, P. San-Jose, M. W. A. de Moor, A. Geresdi,
E. J. H. Lee, J. Klinovaja, D. Loss, J. Nygård,
R. Aguado, and L. P. Kouwenhoven, Nat. Rev. Phys.
2, 575 (2020).
[48] D. Deutsch, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 400, 97 (1985).
[49] D. Deutsch and R. Jozsa, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 439,
553 (1992).
[50] E. Bernstein and U. Vazirani, in Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing , STOC ’93 (Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 1993) p. 11–20.
[51] D. Simon, in Proceedings 35th Annual Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science (IEEE Comput. Soc.
Press, Santa Fe, NM, USA, 1994) pp. 116–123.
[52] R. Cleve, A. Ekert, C. Macchiavello, and M. Mosca,
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 454, 339 (1998).
[53] A. Y. Kitaev, “Quantum measurements and the Abelian
stabilizer problem,” arXiv: quant-ph/9511026 (1995).
[54] R. Jozsa, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 454, 323 (1998).
[55] L. K. Grover, in Proceedings of the twenty-eighth annual
ACM symposium on Theory of computing (1996) pp.
212–219.
[56] L. K. Grover, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 325 (1997).
[57] C. H. Bennett, E. Bernstein, G. Brassard, and U. Vazi-33
rani, SIAM J. Comput. 26, 1510 (1997).
[58] G. Brassard and P. Hoyer, in Proceedings of the Fifth Is-
raeli Symposium on Theory of Computing and Systems
(IEEE Comput. Soc, Ramat-Gan, Israel, 1997) pp. 12–
23.
[59] M. Boyer, G. Brassard, P. Hoeyer, and A. Tapp,
Fortschr. Phys. 46, 493 (1998).
[60] G. Brassard, P. Høyer, M. Mosca, and A. Tapp, in
Contemporary Mathematics , Vol. 305, edited by S. J.
Lomonaco and H. E. Brandt (American Mathematical
Society, Providence, Rhode Island, 2002) pp. 53–74.
[61] L. K. Grover, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 150501 (2005).
[62] L. K. Grover, A. Patel, and T. Tulsi, “Quantum algo-
rithms with fixed points: The case of databas search,”
arXiv: quant-ph/0603132 (2006).
[63] T. J. Yoder, G. H. Low, and I. L. Chuang, Phys. Rev.
Lett.113, 210501 (2014).
[64] C.DurrandP.Hoyer,“Aquantumalgorithmforfinding
the minimum,” arXiv: quant-ph/9607014 (1996).
[65] E. Novak, J. Complex. 17, 2 (2001).
[66] G. Brassard, P. Høyer, and A. Tapp, in International
Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming
(Springer, 1998) pp. 820–831.
[67] C. Dürr, M. Heiligman, P. HOyer, and M. Mhalla,
SIAM J. Comput. 35, 1310 (2006).
[68] A. Ambainis and R. Špalek, in Annual Symposium
on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (Springer,
2006) pp. 172–183.
[69] E. Farhi and S. Gutmann, Phys. Rev. A 58, 915 (1998).
[70] A. M. Childs, E. Farhi, and S. Gutmann, Quantum Inf.
Process.1, 35 (2002).
[71] A. M. Childs, R. Cleve, E. Deotto, E. Farhi, S. Gut-
mann, and D. A. Spielman, in Proceedings of the thirty-
fifth ACM symposium on Theory of computing - STOC
’03(ACM Press, San Diego, CA, USA, 2003) p. 59.
[72] Y.Aharonov, L.Davidovich, andN.Zagury,Phys.Rev.
A48, 1687 (1993).
[73] D. A. Meyer, J. Stat. Phys. 85, 551 (1996).
[74] D. A. Meyer, Phys. Lett. A 223, 337 (1996).
[75] J. Watrous, in Proceedings. Fourteenth Annual IEEE
Conference on Computational Complexity (For-
merly: Structure in Complexity Theory Conference)
(Cat.No.99CB36317) (IEEE Comput. Soc, Atlanta,
GA, USA, 1999) pp. 180–187.
[76] N. Ashwin and V. Ashvin, “Quantum walk on the line,”
arXiv: quant-ph/0010117 (2000).
[77] A. Ambainis, E. Bach, A. Nayak, A. Vishwanath, and
J. Watrous, in Proceedings of the thirty-third annual
ACM symposium on Theory of computing - STOC ’01
(ACM Press, Hersonissos, Greece, 2001) pp. 37–49.
[78] D. Aharonov, A. Ambainis, J. Kempe, and U. Vazirani,
inProceedings of the thirty-third annual ACM sympo-
sium on Theory of computing - STOC ’01 (ACM Press,
Hersonissos, Greece, 2001) pp. 50–59.
[79] N. Shenvi, J. Kempe, and K. B. Whaley, Phys. Rev. A
67, 052307 (2003).
[80] A. Ambainis, in 45th Annual IEEE Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science (IEEE, Rome, Italy,
2004) pp. 22–31.
[81] S. Yaoyun, in The 43rd Annual IEEE Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science, 2002. Proceedings.
(IEEEComput.Soc,Vancouver, BC,Canada,2002)pp.
513–519.
[82] A. Ambainis, J. Kempe, and A. Rivosh, in Proceedingsof the Sixteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Dis-
crete Algorithms , SODA ’05 (Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics, Vancouver, British Columbia,
2005) pp. 1099–1108.
[83] M. Szegedy, in 45th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foun-
dations of Computer Science (IEEE, Rome, Italy, 2004)
pp. 32–41.
[84] F. Magniez, A. Nayak, J. Roland, and M. Santha, in
Proceedings of the thirty-ninth annual ACM symposium
on Theory of computing - STOC ’07 (ACM Press, San
Diego, California, USA, 2007) p. 575.
[85] A. Ambainis, Int. J. Quantum Inf. 1, 507 (2003).
[86] M. Santha, in Proceedings of the 5th International Con-
ference on Theory and Applications of Models of Com-
putation, TAMC’08 (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidel-
berg, 2008) pp. 31–46.
[87] F. Magniez, M. Santha, and M. Szegedy, in Proceedings
of the Sixteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Dis-
crete Algorithms , SODA ’05 (Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics, USA, 2005) pp. 1109–1117.
[88] F. Magniez and A. Nayak, in Proceedings of the 32nd
International Conference on Automata, Languages and
Programming , ICALP’05 (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Hei-
delberg, 2005) pp. 1312–1324.
[89] S. Lloyd, Science 273, 1073 (1996).
[90] M. Suzuki, Phys. Lett. A 146, 319 (1990).
[91] M. Suzuki, J. Math. Phys. 32, 400 (1991).
[92] D. Aharonov and A. Ta-Shma, in Proceedings of the
thirty-fifth ACM symposium on Theory of computing -
STOC ’03 (ACM Press, San Diego, CA, USA, 2003)
p. 20.
[93] D. W. Berry, G. Ahokas, R. Cleve, and B. C. Sanders,
Commun. Math. Phys. 270, 359 (2007).
[94] A. M. Childs and R. Kothari, in Theory of Quantum
Computation, Communication, and Cryptography , Vol.
6519 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011) pp. 94–103.
[95] A. M. Childs, Commun. Math. Phys. 294, 581 (2010).
[96] A. M. Childs and D. W. Berry, Quantum Inf. Comput.
12, 29 (2012).
[97] A. M. Childs and N. Wiebe, Quantum Inf. Comput. 12,
901 (2012).
[98] D. W. Berry, A. M. Childs, R. Cleve, R. Kothari, and
R. D. Somma, in Proceedings of the 46th Annual ACM
Symposium on Theory of Computing - STOC ’14 (ACM
Press, 2014) pp. 283–292.
[99] D. W. Berry, A. M. Childs, R. Cleve, R. Kothari, and
R. D. Somma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114(2015).
[100] D. W. Berry, A. M. Childs, and R. Kothari, in 2015
IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Com-
puter Science (IEEE, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2015) pp.
792–809.
[101] G. H. Low, T. J. Yoder, and I. L. Chuang, Phys. Rev.
X6, 041067 (2016).
[102] G. H. Low and I. L. Chuang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118,
010501 (2017).
[103] G. H. Low and I. L. Chuang, Quantum 3, 163 (2019).
[104] G. H. Low and I. L. Chuang, “Hamiltonian simulation
by uniform spectral amplification,” arXiv: 1707.05391
(2017).
[105] A. Gilyén, Y. Su, G. H. Low, and N. Wiebe, in Pro-
ceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium
on Theory of Computing (2019) pp. 193–204.
[106] J.M.Martyn, Z.M.Rossi, A.K.Tan, andI.L.Chuang,
PRX Quantum 2, 040203 (2021).34
[107] A. M. Childs, Y. Su, M. C. Tran, N. Wiebe, and S. Zhu,
Phys. Rev. X 11, 011020 (2021).
[108] S. Lloyd, M. Mohseni, and P. Rebentrost, “Quantum
algorithms for supervised and unsupervised machine
learning,” arXiv: 1307.0411 (2013).
[109] S. Lloyd, M. Mohseni, and P. Rebentrost, Nat. Phys.
10, 631 (2014).
[110] P. Rebentrost, M. Mohseni, and S. Lloyd, Phys. Rev.
Lett.113, 130503 (2014).
[111] N. Wiebe, D. Braun, and S. Lloyd, Phys. Rev. Lett.
109, 050505 (2012).
[112] J. Biamonte, P. Wittek, N. Pancotti, P. Rebentrost,
N. Wiebe, and S. Lloyd, Nature 549, 195 (2017).
[113] S. Aaronson, Nat. Phys. 11, 291 (2015).
[114] E. Tang, in Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM
SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (ACM,
Phoenix AZ USA, 2019) pp. 217–228.
[115] I. Kerenidis and A. Prakash, in 8th Innovations
in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS
2017)(Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Infor-
matik, 2017).
[116] E. Tang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 060503 (2021).
[117] A. Gilyén, S. Lloyd, and E. Tang, “Quantum-inspired
low-rank stochastic regression with logarithmic depen-
dence on the dimension,” arXiv: 1811.04909 (2018).
[118] N.-H. Chia, H.-H. Lin, and C. Wang, “Quantum-
inspired sublinear classical algorithms for solving low-
rank linear systems,” arXiv: 1811.04852 (2018).
[119] N.-H. Chia, T. Li, H.-H. Lin, and C. Wang, “Quantum-
inspired classical sublinear-time algorithm for solving
low-rank semidefinite programming via sampling ap-
proaches,” arXiv: 1901.03254 (2019).
[120] D. S. Abrams and S. Lloyd, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2586
(1997).
[121] D. S. Abrams and S. Lloyd, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 5162
(1999).
[122] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, S. Gutmann, and M. Sipser,
“Quantum computation by adiabatic evolution,” arXiv:
quant-ph/0001106 (2000).
[123] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, and S. Gutmann, “A quantum
approximate optimization algorithm,” arXiv: 1411.4028
(2014).
[124] E. Farhi and H. Neven, “Classification with quan-
tum neural networks on near term processors,” arXiv:
1802.06002 (2018).
[125] V. Havlíček, A. D. Córcoles, K. Temme, A. W. Harrow,
A. Kandala, J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gambetta, Nature
567, 209 (2019).
[126] S. Lloyd and C. Weedbrook, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121,
040502 (2018).
[127] P.-L.Dallaire-DemersandN.Killoran,Phys.Rev.A 98,
012324 (2018).
[128] Y. Wu, W.-S. Bao, S. Cao, F. Chen, M.-C. Chen,
X. Chen, T.-H. Chung, H. Deng, Y. Du, et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 127, 180501 (2021).
[129] H.-S. Zhong, H. Wang, Y.-H. Deng, M.-C. Chen, L.-C.
Peng, Y.-H. Luo, J. Qin, D. Wu, X. Ding, et al., Science
370, 1460 (2020).
[130] B. Bauer, S. Bravyi, M. Motta, and G. K.-L. Chan,
Chem. Rev. 120, 12685 (2020).
[131] P. S. Emani, J. Warrell, A. Anticevic, S. Bekiranov,
M. Gandal, M. J. McConnell, G. Sapiro, A. Aspuru-
Guzik, J. T. Baker, et al., Nat. Methods 18, 701 (2021).
[132] A. Khoshaman, W. Vinci, B. Denis, E. Andriyash,H. Sadeghi, and M. H. Amin, Quantum Sci. Technol.
4, 014001 (2018).
[133] K. Temme, S. Bravyi, and J. M. Gambetta, Phys. Rev.
Lett.119, 180509 (2017).
[134] Y. Li and S. C. Benjamin, Phys. Rev. X 7, 021050
(2017).
[135] S. Endo, Z. Cai, S. C. Benjamin, and X. Yuan, J. Phys.
Soc. Jpn. 90, 032001 (2021).
[136] S. Endo, S. C. Benjamin, and Y. Li, Phys. Rev. X 8,
031027 (2018).
[137] A. Strikis, D. Qin, Y. Chen, S. C. Benjamin, and Y. Li,
PRX Quantum 2, 040330 (2021).
[138] I. Buluta, S. Ashhab, and F. Nori, Reports Prog. Phys.
74, 104401 (2011).
[139] L. Hu, S.-H. Wu, W. Cai, Y. Ma, X. Mu, Y. Xu,
H. Wang, Y. Song, D.-L. Deng, et al., Sci. Adv. 5, 2761
(2019).
[140] M. P. Harrigan, K. J. Sung, M. Neeley, K. J. Satzinger,
F. Arute, K. Arya, J. Atalaya, J. C. Bardin, R. Barends,
et al., Nat. Phys. 17, 332 (2021).
[141] B. Yan, Z. Tan, S. Wei, H. Jiang, W. Wang, H. Wang,
L. Luo, Q. Duan, Y. Liu, W. Shi, Y. Fei, X. Meng,
Y. Han, Z. Shan, J. Chen, X. Zhu, C. Zhang, F. Jin,
H. Li, C. Song, Z. Wang, Z. Ma, H. Wang, and G.-L.
Long, arXiv: 2212.12372 (2022), 2212.12372.
[142] A. A. Houck, H. E. Türeci, and J. Koch, Nat. Phys. 8,
292 (2012).
[143] P. D. Nation, J. R. Johansson, M. P. Blencowe, and
F. Nori, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1 (2012).
[144] R. Barends, L. Lamata, J. Kelly, L. García-Álvarez,
A. G. Fowler, A. Megrant, E. Jeffrey, T. C. White,
D. Sank, et al., Nat. Commun. 6, 7654 (2015).
[145] Y. Salathé, M. Mondal, M. Oppliger, J. Heinsoo,
P. Kurpiers, A. Potočnik, A. Mezzacapo, U. Las Heras,
L. Lamata, et al., Phys. Rev. X 5, 021027 (2015).
[146] N. K. Langford, R. Sagastizabal, M. Kounalakis,
C. Dickel, A. Bruno, F. Luthi, D. J. Thoen, A. Endo,
and L. DiCarlo, Nat. Commun. 8, 1715 (2017).
[147] D.W.Wang, C.Song, W.Feng, H.Cai, D.Xu, H.Deng,
H. Li, D. Zheng, X. Zhu, et al., Nat. Phys. 15, 382
(2019).
[148] A. J. Kollár, M. Fitzpatrick, and A. A. Houck, Nature
571, 45 (2019).
[149] C. S. Wang, J. C. Curtis, B. J. Lester, Y. Zhang, Y. Y.
Gao, J. Freeze, V. S. Batista, P. H. Vaccaro, I. L.
Chuang, et al., Phys. Rev. X 10, 021060 (2020).
[150] M. Gong, S. Wang, C. Zha, M.-C. Chen, H.-L. Huang,
Y. Wu, Q. Zhu, Y. Zhao, S. Li, et al., Science372, 948
(2021).
[151] A. D. King, S. Suzuki, J. Raymond, A. Zucca, T. Lant-
ing, F. Altomare, A. J. Berkley, S. Ejtemaee, E. Hoskin-
son, S. Huang, E. Ladizinsky, A. J. R. MacDonald,
G. Marsden, T. Oh, G. Poulin-Lamarre, M. Reis,
C. Rich, Y. Sato, J. D. Whittaker, J. Yao, R. Harris,
D. A. Lidar, H. Nishimori, and M. H. Amin, Nat. Phys.
18, 1324 (2022).
[152] P. J. J. O’Malley, R. Babbush, I. D. Kivlichan,
J. Romero, J. R. McClean, R. Barends, J. Kelly,
P. Roushan, A. Tranter, et al., Phys. Rev. X 6, 031007
(2016).
[153] A. Kandala, A. Mezzacapo, K. Temme, M. Takita,
M. Brink, J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gambetta, Nature
549, 242 (2017).
[154] J. I. Colless, V. V. Ramasesh, D. Dahlen, M. S. Blok,35
M.E.Kimchi-Schwartz,J.R.McClean,J.Carter,W.A.
De Jong, and I. Siddiqi, Phys. Rev. X 8, 11021 (2018).
[155] AI Quantum Google, Science 369, 1084 (2020).
[156] P.Roushan, C.Neill, J.Tangpanitanon, V.M.Bastidas,
A. Megrant, R. Barends, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro,
et al., Science358, 1175 (2017).
[157] R. Ma, B. Saxberg, C. Owens, N. Leung, Y. Lu, J. Si-
mon, and D. I. Schuster, Nature 566, 51 (2019).
[158] K. Xu, Z.-H. Sun, W. Liu, Y.-R. Zhang, H. Li, H. Dong,
W. Ren, P. Zhang, F. Nori, et al., Sci. Adv. 6, eaba4935
(2020).
[159] Q. Guo, C. Cheng, Z.-H. Sun, Z. Song, H. Li, Z. Wang,
W. Ren, H. Dong, D. Zheng, et al., Nat. Phys. 17, 234
(2021).
[160] X. Mi, M. Ippoliti, C. Quintana, A. Greene, Z. Chen,
J. Gross, F. Arute, K. Arya, J. Atalaya, et al., Nature
601, 531 (2022).
[161] X. Zhang, W. Jiang, J. Deng, K. Wang, J. Chen,
P. Zhang, W. Ren, H. Dong, S. Xu, et al., Nature607,
468 (2022).
[162] P. Forn-Díaz, J. J. García-Ripoll, B. Peropadre, J. L.
Orgiazzi, M. A. Yurtalan, R. Belyansky, C. M. Wilson,
and A. Lupascu, Nat. Phys. 13, 39 (2017).
[163] F. Yoshihara, T. Fuse, S. Ashhab, K. Kakuyanagi,
S. Saito, and K. Semba, Nat. Phys. 13, 44 (2017).
[164] S. J. Bosman, M. F. Gely, V. Singh, A. Bruno, D. Both-
ner, and G. A. Steele, npj Quantum Inf. 3, 46 (2017).
[165] A. Frisk Kockum, A. Miranowicz, S. De Liberato,
S. Savasta, and F. Nori, Nat. Rev. Phys. 1, 19 (2019).
[166] W. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Ma, W. Cai, L. Hu, X. Mu, Y. Xu,
Z.-J. Chen, H. Wang, et al., Nat. Commun. 10, 4382
(2019).
[167] K. Xu, Y.-R. Zhang, Z.-H. Sun, H. Li, P. Song, Z. Xi-
ang, K. Huang, H. Li, Y.-H. Shi, C.-T. Chen, X. Song,
D. Zheng, F. Nori, H. Wang, and H. Fan, Phys. Rev.
Lett.128, 150501 (2022).
[168] A. Potočnik, A. Bargerbos, F. A. Y. N. Schröder, S. A.
Khan, M. C. Collodo, S. Gasparinetti, Y. Salathé,
C. Creatore, C. Eichler, et al., Nat. Commun. 9, 904
(2018).
[169] J. Q. You and F. Nori, Nature 474, 589 (2011).
[170] H. Paik, D. I. Schuster, L. S. Bishop, G. Kirchmair,
G. Catelani, A. P. Sears, B. R. Johnson, M. J. Reagor,
L. Frunzio, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 240501 (2011).
[171] R. Barends, J. Kelly, A. Megrant, D. Sank, E. Jeffrey,
Y. Chen, Y. Yin, B. Chiaro, J. Mutus, et al., Phys. Rev.
Lett.111, 080502 (2013).
[172] Y. Zhong, H.-S. Chang, A. Bienfait, É. Dumur, M.-H.
Chou, C. R. Conner, J. Grebel, R. G. Povey, H. Yan,
et al., Nature590, 571 (2021).
[173] M. H. devoret and J. M. Martinis, Quantum Inf. Pro-
cess.3, 163 (2004).
[174] J. Q. You and F. Nori, Phys. Today 58, 42 (2005).
[175] J. Clarke and F. K. Wilhelm, Nature 453, 1031 (2008).
[176] R. J. Schoelkopf and S. M. Girvin, Nature 451, 664
(2008).
[177] Z.-L. Xiang, S. Ashhab, J. Q. You, and F. Nori, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 85, 623 (2012), arXiv:1204.2137.
[178] S. M. Girvin, Circuit QED: superconducting qubits cou-
pled to microwave photons (Oxford University Press,
2014).
[179] U. Vool and M. Devoret, Int. J. Circuit Theory Appl.
45, 897 (2017).
[180] X. Gu, A. F. Kockum, A. Miranowicz, Y.-x. Liu, andF. Nori, Phys. Rep. 718-719 , 1 (2017).
[181] J. M. Gambetta, J. M. Chow, and M. Steffen, npj
Quantum Inf. 3, 2 (2017).
[182] G. Wendin, Rep. Prog. Phys. 80, 106001 (2017).
[183] P. Krantz, M. Kjaergaard, F. Yan, T. P. Orlando,
S. Gustavsson, and W. D. Oliver, Appl. Phys. Rev.
6, 021318 (2019).
[184] A. F. Kockum and F. Nori, “Quantum bits with joseph-
son junctions,” in Fundamentals and Frontiers of the
Josephson Effect (Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 2019) pp. 703–741.
[185] M. Kjaergaard, M. E. Schwartz, J. Braumüller,
P. Krantz, J. I.-J. Wang, S. Gustavsson, and W. D.
Oliver, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 11, 369
(2020).
[186] H.-L. Huang, D. Wu, D. Fan, and X. Zhu, Sci. China
Inf. Sci.63, 180501 (2020).
[187] A. Blais, A. L. Grimsmo, S. Girvin, and A. Wallraff,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 93, 025005 (2021).
[188] S. Rasmussen, K. Christensen, S. Pedersen, L. Kris-
tensen, T. Bækkegaard, N. Loft, and N. Zinner, PRX
Quantum 2, 040204 (2021), arXiv:2103.01225.
[189] N. P. de Leon, K. M. Itoh, D. Kim, K. K. Mehta,
T. E. Northup, H. Paik, B. S. Palmer, N. Samarth,
S. Sangtawesin, and D. W. Steuerman, Science 372,
eabb2823 (2021).
[190] S. Kwon, A. Tomonaga, G. Lakshmi Bhai, S. J. Devitt,
and J.-S. Tsai, J. Appl. Phys. 129, 041102 (2021).
[191] M. H. Devoret, Quantum fluctuations in electrical cir-
cuits, Les Houches Session LXIII (Oxford University
Press, 1997).
[192] M.Tinkham, Introduction to superconductivity (Courier
Corporation, 2004).
[193] V. Bouchiat, D. Vion, P. Joyez, D. Esteve, and M. H.
Devoret, Phys. Scr. 1998, 165 (1998).
[194] T. P. Orlando, J. E. Mooij, L. Tian, C. H. van der Wal,
L. S. Levitov, S. Lloyd, and J. J. Mazo, Phys. Rev. B
60, 15398 (1999).
[195] J. E. Mooij, T. P. Orlando, L. Levitov, L. Tian, C. H.
van der Wal, and S. Lloyd, Science 285, 1036 (1999).
[196] J. M. Martinis, Quantum Inf. Process. 8, 81 (2009).
[197] C. H. van der Wal, A. C. J. ter Haar, F. K. Wilhelm,
R. N. Schouten, C. J. P. M. Harmans, T. P. Orlando,
S. Lloyd, and J. E. Mooij, Science 290, 773 (2000).
[198] J. R. Friedman, V. Patel, W. Chen, S. K. Tolpygo, and
J. E. Lukens, Nature 406, 43 (2000).
[199] J. M. Martinis, S. Nam, J. Aumentado, and C. Urbina,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 117901 (2002).
[200] Y. Yu, S. Han, X. Chu, S.-I. Chu, and Z. Wang, Science
296, 889 (2002).
[201] T. Yamamoto, Y. A. Pashkin, O. Astafiev, Y. Naka-
mura, and J. S. Tsai, Nature 425, 941 (2003).
[202] I. Chiorescu, Y. Nakamura, C. J. P. M. Harmans, and
J. E. Mooij, Science 299, 1869 (2003).
[203] A. J. Berkley, H. Xu, R. C. Ramos, M. A. Gubrud,
F. W. Strauch, P. R. Johnson, J. R. Anderson, A. J.
Dragt, C. J. Lobb, et al., Science300, 1548 (2003).
[204] A. Wallraff, D. I. Schuster, A. Blais, L. Frunzio, R.-S.
Huang, J. Majer, S. Kumar, S. M. Girvin, and R. J.
Schoelkopf, Nature 431, 162 (2004).
[205] W. D. Oliver, Y. Yu, J. C. Lee, K. K. Berggren, L. S.
Levitov, and T. P. Orlando, Science 310, 1653 (2005).
[206] M. Steffen, M. Ansmann, R. C. Bialczak, N. Katz,
E. Lucero, R. McDermott, M. Neeley, E. M. Weig, A. N.36
Cleland, and J. M. Martinis, Science 313, 1423 (2006).
[207] D. I. Schuster, A. A. Houck, J. A. Schreier, A. Wall-
raff, J. M. Gambetta, A. Blais, L. Frunzio, J. Majer,
B. Johnson, et al., Nature445, 515 (2007).
[208] M. A. Sillanpää, J. I. Park, and R. W. Simmonds, Na-
ture449, 438 (2007).
[209] J. Koch, T. M. Yu, J. Gambetta, A. A. Houck, D. I.
Schuster, J. Majer, A. Blais, M. H. Devoret, S. M.
Girvin,et al., Phys. Rev. A 76, 042319 (2007).
[210] J. Q. You, X. Hu, S. Ashhab, and F. Nori, Phys. Rev.
B.75, 140515 (2007).
[211] J. A. Schreier, A. A. Houck, J. Koch, D. I. Schuster,
B. R. Johnson, J. M. Chow, J. M. Gambetta, J. Majer,
L. Frunzio, et al., Phys. Rev. B 77, 180502 (2008).
[212] J. Braumüller, M. Sandberg, M. R. Vissers, A. Schnei-
der, S. Schlör, L. Grünhaupt, H. Rotzinger,
M. Marthaler, A. Lukashenko, et al., Appl. Phys.
Lett.108, 032601 (2016).
[213] M.Hutchings, J.Hertzberg, Y.Liu, N.Bronn, G.Keefe,
M. Brink, J. M. Chow, and B. Plourde, Phys. Rev.
Appl.8, 044003 (2017).
[214] M. Steffen, S. Kumar, D. P. DiVincenzo, J. R. Rozen,
G. A. Keefe, M. B. Rothwell, and M. B. Ketchen, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 105, 100502 (2010).
[215] F. Yan, S. Gustavsson, A. Kamal, J. Birenbaum, A. P.
Sears, D. Hover, T. J. Gudmundsen, D. Rosenberg,
G. Samach, et al., Nat. Commun. 7, 12964 (2016).
[216] J. Ku, X. Xu, M. Brink, D. C. McKay, J. B. Hertzberg,
M. H. Ansari, and B. Plourde, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125,
200504 (2020).
[217] F. Yan, Y. Sung, P. Krantz, A. Kamal, D. K. Kim, J. L.
Yoder, T. P. Orlando, S. Gustavsson, and W. D. Oliver,
“Engineeringframeworkforoptimizingsuperconducting
qubit designs,” arXiv: 2006.04130 (2020).
[218] V. E. Manucharyan, J. Koch, L. I. Glazman, and M. H.
Devoret, Science 326, 113 (2009).
[219] L. B. Nguyen, Y.-H. Lin, A. Somoroff, R. Mencia,
N. Grabon, and V. E. Manucharyan, Phys. Rev. X 9,
041041 (2019).
[220] H. Zhang, S. Chakram, T. Roy, N. Earnest, Y. Lu,
Z. Huang, D. Weiss, J. Koch, and D. I. Schuster, Phys.
Rev. X11, 011010 (2021).
[221] F. Bao, H. Deng, D. Ding, R. Gao, X. Gao, C. Huang,
X. Jiang, H.-S. Ku, Z. Li, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 129,
010502 (2022).
[222] A. Gyenis, P. S. Mundada, A. Di Paolo, T. M. Hazard,
X. You, D. I. Schuster, J. Koch, A. Blais, and A. A.
Houck, PRX Quantum 2, 010339 (2021).
[223] J. Q. You and F. Nori, Phys. Rev. B 68, 064509 (2003),
arXiv:0306207 [cond-mat].
[224] A. Blais, R.-S. Huang, A. Wallraff, S. M. Girvin, and
R. J. Schoelkopf, Phys. Rev. A 69, 062320 (2004).
[225] M. D. Reed, B. R. Johnson, A. A. Houck, L. DiCarlo,
J. M. Chow, D. I. Schuster, L. Frunzio, and R. J.
Schoelkopf, Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 203110 (2010).
[226] E. Jeffrey, D. Sank, J. Mutus, T. White, J. Kelly,
R. Barends, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 112, 190504 (2014).
[227] N. T. Bronn, Y. Liu, J. B. Hertzberg, A. D. Córcoles,
A. A. Houck, J. M. Gambetta, and J. M. Chow, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 107, 172601 (2015).
[228] T. Walter, P. Kurpiers, S. Gasparinetti, P. Mag-
nard, A. Potočnik, Y. Salathé, M. Pechal, M. Mondal,
M. Oppliger, C. Eichler, and A. Wallraff, Phys. Rev.Appl.7, 054020 (2017).
[229] B. Yurke, L. R. Corruccini, P. G. Kaminsky, L. W.
Rupp, A. D. Smith, A. H. Silver, R. W. Simon, and
E. A. Whittaker, Phys. Rev. A 39, 2519 (1989).
[230] R. Vijay, M. H. Devoret, and I. Siddiqi, Rev. Sci. In-
strum.80, 111101 (2009).
[231] A. Roy and M. Devoret, C. R. Phys 17, 740 (2016).
[232] I. Siddiqi, R. Vijay, F. Pierre, C. M. Wilson, M. Met-
calfe, C. Rigetti, L. Frunzio, and M. H. Devoret, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 93, 207002 (2004).
[233] M. A. Castellanos-Beltran, K. D. Irwin, G. C. Hilton,
L. R. Vale, and K. W. Lehnert, Nat. Phys. 4, 929
(2008).
[234] T. Yamamoto, K. Inomata, M. Watanabe, K. Matsuba,
T. Miyazaki, W. D. Oliver, Y. Nakamura, and J. S.
Tsai, Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 042510 (2008).
[235] J. R. Johansson, G. Johansson, C. M. Wilson, and
F. Nori, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 147003 (2009).
[236] N. Bergeal, F. Schackert, M. Metcalfe, R. Vijay,
V. E. Manucharyan, L. Frunzio, D. E. Prober, R. J.
Schoelkopf, S. M. Girvin, and M. H. Devoret, Nature
465, 64 (2010).
[237] C. Macklin, K. O’Brien, D. Hover, M. E. Schwartz,
V. Bolkhovsky, X. Zhang, W. D. Oliver, and I. Sid-
diqi, Science 350, 307 (2015).
[238] Y. Chen, D. Sank, P. O’Malley, T. White, R. Barends,
B. Chiaro, J. Kelly, E. Lucero, M. Mariantoni, et al.,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, 182601 (2012).
[239] S. S. Elder, C. S. Wang, P. Reinhold, C. T. Hann, K. S.
Chou, B. J. Lester, S. Rosenblum, L. Frunzio, et al.,
Phys. Rev. X 10, 011001 (2020).
[240] A. Opremcak, I. V. Pechenezhskiy, C. Howington,
B. G. Christensen, M. A. Beck, E. Leonard, J. Sut-
tle, C. Wilen, K. N. Nesterov, et al., Science361, 1239
(2018).
[241] D. Ristè, J. G. van Leeuwen, H.-S. Ku, K. W. Lehnert,
and L. DiCarlo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 050507 (2012).
[242] K.Geerlings, Z.Leghtas, I.M.Pop, S.Shankar, L.Frun-
zio, R.J.Schoelkopf, M.Mirrahimi, andM.H.Devoret,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 120501 (2013).
[243] P. Magnard, P. Kurpiers, B. Royer, T. Walter, J.-C.
Besse, S. Gasparinetti, M. Pechal, J. Heinsoo, S. Storz,
et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 060502 (2018).
[244] M. McEwen, D. Kafri, Z. Chen, J. Atalaya,
K. Satzinger, C. Quintana, P. V. Klimov, D. Sank,
C. Gidney, A. Fowler, et al., Nat. Commun. 12, 1
(2021).
[245] Y. Zhou, Z. Zhang, Z. Yin, S. Huai, X. Gu, X. Xu,
J. Allcock, F. Liu, G. Xi, et al., Nat. Commun. 12,
5924 (2021).
[246] F. Motzoi, J. M. Gambetta, P. Rebentrost, and F. K.
Wilhelm, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 110501 (2009).
[247] J. M. Gambetta, F. Motzoi, S. T. Merkel, and F. K.
Wilhelm, Phys. Rev. A 83, 012308 (2011).
[248] D. C. McKay, C. J. Wood, S. Sheldon, J. M. Chow, and
J. M. Gambetta, Phys. Rev. A 96, 022330 (2017).
[249] E. Leonard, M. A. Beck, J. Nelson, B. Christensen,
T. Thorbeck, C. Howington, A. Opremcak, I. Pech-
enezhskiy, K.Dodge, et al.,Phys.Rev.Appl. 11,014009
(2019).
[250] J. Majer, J. M. Chow, J. M. Gambetta, J. Koch, B. R.
Johnson, J.A.Schreier, L.Frunzio, D.I.Schuster, A.A.
Houck,et al., Nature449, 443 (2007).
[251] R. C. Bialczak, M. Ansmann, M. Hofheinz, E. Lucero,37
M. Neeley, A. D. O’Connell, D. Sank, H. Wang, J. Wen-
ner,et al., Nat. Phys. 6, 409 (2010).
[252] F. W. Strauch, P. R. Johnson, A. J. Dragt, C. J. Lobb,
J. R. Anderson, and F. C. Wellstood, Phys. Rev. Lett.
91, 167005 (2003).
[253] L. DiCarlo, J. M. Chow, J. M. Gambetta, L. S. Bishop,
B. R. Johnson, D. I. Schuster, J. Majer, A. Blais,
L. Frunzio, et al., Nature460, 240 (2009).
[254] J. M. Martinis and M. R. Geller, Phys. Rev. A 90,
022307 (2014).
[255] R. Barends, C. Quintana, A. Petukhov, Y. Chen,
D. Kafri, K. Kechedzhi, R. Collins, O. Naaman,
S. Boixo, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 210501 (2019).
[256] S. Li, A. D. Castellano, S. Wang, Y. Wu, M. Gong,
Z. Yan, H. Rong, H. Deng, et al., npj Quantum Inf. 5,
1 (2019).
[257] M. Rol, F. Battistel, F. Malinowski, C. Bultink,
B. Tarasinski, R. Vollmer, N. Haider, N. Muthusubra-
manian, A. Bruno, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 120502
(2019).
[258] J.M.Chow, A.D.Córcoles, J.M.Gambetta, C.Rigetti,
B. R. Johnson, J. A. Smolin, J. R. Rozen, G. A. Keefe,
M. B. Rothwell, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 080502
(2011).
[259] S. Sheldon, E. Magesan, J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gam-
betta, Phys. Rev. A 93, 060302 (2016).
[260] H. Paik, A. Mezzacapo, M. Sandberg, D. McClure,
B. Abdo, A. Córcoles, O. Dial, D. Bogorin, B. Plourde,
et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 250502 (2016).
[261] D. C. McKay, S. Filipp, A. Mezzacapo, E. Magesan,
J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gambetta, Phys. Rev. Appl. 6,
064007 (2016).
[262] S. A. Caldwell, N. Didier, C. A. Ryan, E. A. Sete,
A. Hudson, P. Karalekas, R. Manenti, M. P. da Silva,
R. Sinclair, et al., Phys. Rev. Appl. 10, 034050 (2018).
[263] C. Song, K. Xu, H. Li, Y.-R. Zhang, X. Zhang, W. Liu,
Q. Guo, Z. Wang, W. Ren, et al., Science 365, 574
(2019).
[264] T. Hime, P. A. Reichardt, B. L. T. Plourde, T. L.
Robertson, C.-E. Wu, A. V. Ustinov, and J. Clarke,
Science314, 1427 (2006).
[265] A. O. Niskanen, K. Harrabi, F. Yoshihara, Y. Naka-
mura, S. Lloyd, and J. S. Tsai, Science 316, 723 (2007).
[266] S. H. W. van der Ploeg, A. Izmalkov, A. M. van den
Brink, U. Hübner, M. Grajcar, E. Il’ichev, H.-G. Meyer,
andA.M.Zagoskin,Phys.Rev.Lett. 98,057004(2007).
[267] R. Harris, A. J. Berkley, M. W. Johnson, P. Bunyk,
S. Govorkov, M. C. Thom, S. Uchaikin, A. B. Wilson,
J. Chung, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 177001 (2007).
[268] T. Yamamoto, M. Watanabe, J. Q. You, Y. A. Pashkin,
O. Astafiev, Y. Nakamura, F. Nori, and J. S. Tsai,
Phys. Rev. B 77, 64505 (2008), arXiv:0802.0353.
[269] Y. Chen, C. Neill, P. Roushan, N. Leung, M. Fang,
R.Barends, J.Kelly, B.Campbell, Z.Chen, et al.,Phys.
Rev. Lett. 113, 220502 (2014).
[270] S. J. Weber, G. O. Samach, D. Hover, S. Gustavsson,
D. K. Kim, A. Melville, D. Rosenberg, A. P. Sears,
F. Yan,et al., Phys. Rev. Appl. 8, 014004 (2017).
[271] Y. Lu, S. Chakram, N. Leung, N. Earnest, R. Naik,
Z. Huang, P. Groszkowski, E. Kapit, J. Koch, and D. I.
Schuster, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 150502 (2017).
[272] F. Yan, P. Krantz, Y. Sung, M. Kjaergaard, D. L.
Campbell, T. P. Orlando, S. Gustavsson, and W. D.
Oliver, Phys. Rev. Appl. 10, 054062 (2018).[273] P. Mundada, G. Zhang, T. Hazard, and A. Houck,
Phys. Rev. Appl. 12, 054023 (2019).
[274] V. Negîrneac, H. Ali, N. Muthusubramanian, F. Battis-
tel, R.Sagastizabal, M.S.Moreira, J.F.Marques, W.J.
Vlothuizen, M. Beekman, C. Zachariadis, N. Haider,
A.Bruno, andL.DiCarlo,Phys.Rev.Lett. 126,220502
(2021).
[275] B. Foxen, C. Neill, A. Dunsworth, P. Roushan,
B. Chiaro, A. Megrant, J. Kelly, Z. Chen, K. Satzinger,
et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 120504 (2020).
[276] X. Li, T. Cai, H. Yan, Z. Wang, X. Pan, Y. Ma, W. Cai,
J. Han, Z. Hua, et al., Phys. Rev. Appl. 14, 024070
(2020).
[277] M. C. Collodo, J. Herrmann, N. Lacroix, C. K. An-
dersen, A. Remm, S. Lazar, J.-C. Besse, T. Walter,
A. Wallraff, and C. Eichler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125,
240502 (2020).
[278] Y. Xu, J. Chu, J. Yuan, J. Qiu, Y. Zhou, L. Zhang,
X. Tan, Y. Yu, S. Liu, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 125,
240503 (2020).
[279] Y. Sung, L. Ding, J. Braumüller, A. Vepsäläinen,
B. Kannan, M. Kjaergaard, A. Greene, G. O. Samach,
C. McNally, et al., Phys. Rev. X 11, 021058 (2021).
[280] J. Stehlik, D. Zajac, D. Underwood, T. Phung, J. Blair,
S. Carnevale, D. Klaus, G. Keefe, A. Carniol, et al.,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 080505 (2021).
[281] C. C. Bultink, B. Tarasinski, N. Haandbæk, S. Poletto,
N. Haider, D. J. Michalak, A. Bruno, and L. DiCarlo,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 112, 092601 (2018).
[282] A. P. M. Place, L. V. H. Rodgers, P. Mundada, B. M.
Smitham, M. Fitzpatrick, Z. Leng, A. Premkumar,
J. Bryon, A. Vrajitoarea, et al., Nat. Commun. 12, 1779
(2021).
[283] A. Somoroff, Q. Ficheux, R. A. Mencia, H. Xiong, R. V.
Kuzmin, and V. E. Manucharyan, arXiv: 2103.08578
(2021).
[284] C. Wang, X. Li, H. Xu, Z. Li, J. Wang, Z. Yang, Z. Mi,
X. Liang, T. Su, et al., npj Quantum Inf. 8, 1 (2022).
[285] C.Müller, J.H.Cole, andJ.Lisenfeld,Rep.Prog.Phys.
82, 124501 (2019).
[286] P. Klimov, J. Kelly, Z. Chen, M. Neeley, A. Megrant,
B.Burkett,R.Barends,K.Arya,B.Chiaro, et al.,Phys.
Rev. Lett. 121, 090502 (2018).
[287] S. Schlör, J. Lisenfeld, C. Müller, A. Bilmes, A. Schnei-
der, D. P. Pappas, A. V. Ustinov, and M. Weides, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 123, 190502 (2019).
[288] J. J. Burnett, A. Bengtsson, M. Scigliuzzo, D. Niepce,
M. Kudra, P. Delsing, and J. Bylander, npj Quantum
Inf.5, 1 (2019).
[289] T.Proctor,M.Revelle,E.Nielsen,K.Rudinger,D.Lob-
ser, P. Maunz, R. Blume-Kohout, and K. Young, Nat.
Commun. 11, 5396 (2020).
[290] S. E. de Graaf, L. Faoro, L. B. Ioffe, S. Mahashabde,
J. J. Burnett, T. Lindström, S. E. Kubatkin, A. V.
Danilov, and A. Y. Tzalenchuk, Sci. Adv. 6, eabc5055
(2020).
[291] D.SuterandG.A.Álvarez,Rev.Mod.Phys. 88,041001
(2016).
[292] E. Paladino, Y. Galperin, G. Falci, and B. Altshuler,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 361 (2014).
[293] J. Bylander, S. Gustavsson, F. Yan, F. Yoshihara,
K. Harrabi, G. Fitch, D. G. Cory, Y. Nakamura, J.-S.
Tsai, and W. D. Oliver, Nat. Phys. 7, 565 (2011).
[294] F. Yan, J. Bylander, S. Gustavsson, F. Yoshihara,38
K. Harrabi, D. G. Cory, T. P. Orlando, Y. Nakamura,
J.-S. Tsai, and W. D. Oliver, Phys. Rev. B 85, 174521
(2012).
[295] F. Yan, S. Gustavsson, J. Bylander, X. Jin, F. Yoshi-
hara, D. G. Cory, Y. Nakamura, T. P. Orlando, and
W. D. Oliver, Nat. Commun. 4, 2337 (2013).
[296] F. Yoshihara, Y. Nakamura, F. Yan, S. Gustavsson,
J. Bylander, W. D. Oliver, and J.-S. Tsai, Phys. Rev.
B89, 020503 (2014).
[297] C.Quintana, Y.Chen, D.Sank, A.Petukhov, T.White,
D. Kafri, B. Chiaro, A. Megrant, R. Barends, et al.,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 057702 (2017).
[298] Y. Sung, F. Beaudoin, L. M. Norris, F. Yan, D. K. Kim,
J. Y. Qiu, U. von Lüpke, J. L. Yoder, T. P. Orlando,
et al., Nat. Commun. 10, 3715 (2019).
[299] F. T. Chong, D. Franklin, and M. Martonosi, Nature
549, 180 (2017).
[300] D. M. Abrams, N. Didier, B. R. Johnson, M. P. d. Silva,
and C. A. Ryan, Nat. Electron. 3, 744 (2020).
[301] X. Gu, J. Fernández-Pendás, P. Vikstål, T. Abad,
C. Warren, A. Bengtsson, G. Tancredi, V. Shumeiko,
J. Bylander, et al., PRX Quantum 2, 040348 (2021).
[302] C. Song, S.-B. Zheng, P. Zhang, K. Xu, L. Zhang,
Q. Guo, W. Liu, D. Xu, H. Deng, et al., Nat. Commun.
8, 1061 (2017).
[303] Y. Kim, A. Morvan, L. B. Nguyen, R. K. Naik,
C. Jünger, L. Chen, J. M. Kreikebaum, D. I. Santiago,
and I. Siddiqi, Nat. Phys. 18, 783 (2022).
[304] J. Chu, X. He, Y. Zhou, J. Yuan, L. Zhang, Q. Guo,
Y. Hai, Z. Han, C.-K. Hu, et al., arXiv: 2112.14922
(2021).
[305] A. G. Fowler, M. Mariantoni, J. M. Martinis, and A. N.
Cleland, Phys. Rev. A 86, 032324 (2012).
[306] A. Cleland, SciPost Phys. Lect. Notes 49, 49 (2022).
[307] S. Krinner, N. Lacroix, A. Remm, A. Di Paolo,
E. Genois, C. Leroux, C. Hellings, S. Lazar, F. Swiadek,
et al., Nature605, 669 (2022).
[308] Y. Zhao, Y. Ye, H.-L. Huang, Y. Zhang, D. Wu,
H. Guan, Q. Zhu, Z. Wei, T. He, et al., Phys. Rev.
Lett.129, 030501 (2022).
[309] R.Acharya,I.Aleiner,R.Allen,T.I.Andersen,M.Ans-
mann, F. Arute, K. Arya, A. Asfaw, J. Atalaya, R. Bab-
bush,et al., arXiv: 2207.06431 (2022).
[310] A. P. Vepsäläinen, A. H. Karamlou, J. L. Orrell, A. S.
Dogra, B. Loer, F. Vasconcelos, D. K. Kim, A. J.
Melville, B. M. Niedzielski, J. L. Yoder, et al., Nature
584, 551 (2020).
[311] M. McEwen, L. Faoro, K. Arya, A. Dunsworth,
T. Huang, S. Kim, B. Burkett, A. Fowler, F. Arute,
et al., Nat. Phys. 18, 107 (2022).
[312] C. D. Wilen, S. Abdullah, N. A. Kurinsky, C. Stanford,
L. Cardani, G. D’Imperio, C. Tomei, L. Faoro, L. B.
Ioffe, C. H. Liu, et al., Nature594, 369 (2021).
[313] B. M. Terhal, J. Conrad, and C. Vuillot, Quantum Sci.
Technol.5, 043001 (2020).
[314] A. Joshi, K. Noh, and Y. Y. Gao, Quantum Sci. Tech-
nol.6, 033001 (2021).
[315] W. Cai, Y. Ma, W. Wang, C.-L. Zou, and L. Sun,
Fundam. Res. 1, 50 (2021).
[316] C. Wang, Y. Y. Gao, P. Reinhold, R. W. Heeres,
N. Ofek, K. Chou, C. Axline, M. Reagor, J. Blumoff,
et al., Science352, 1087 (2016).
[317] N. Ofek, A. Petrenko, R. Heeres, P. Reinhold, Z. Legh-
tas, B.Vlastakis, Y.Liu, L.Frunzio, S.M.Girvin, et al.,Nature536, 441 (2016).
[318] S. Puri, L. St-Jean, J. A. Gross, A. Grimm, N. E. Frat-
tini, P. S. Iyer, A. Krishna, S. Touzard, L. Jiang, et al.,
Sci. Adv.6, 1 (2020).
[319] A. Grimm, N. E. Frattini, S. Puri, S. O. Mundhada,
S. Touzard, M. Mirrahimi, S. M. Girvin, S. Shankar,
and M. H. Devoret, Nature 584, 205 (2020).
[320] J. M. Gertler, B. Baker, J. Li, S. Shirol, J. Koch, and
C. Wang, Nature 590, 243 (2021).
[321] M. H. Michael, M. Silveri, R. T. Brierley, V. V. Albert,
J. Salmilehto, L. Jiang, and S. M. Girvin, Phys. Rev.
X6, 031006 (2016).
[322] L. Hu, Y. Ma, W. Cai, X. Mu, Y. Xu, W. Wang, Y. Wu,
H. Wang, Y. P. Song, et al., Nat. Phys. 15, 503 (2019).
[323] D. Gottesman, A. Kitaev, and J. Preskill, Phys. Rev.
A64, 12310 (2001).
[324] A. L. Grimsmo and S. Puri, PRX Quantum 2, 1 (2021).
[325] P. Campagne-Ibarcq, A. Eickbusch, S. Touzard,
E.Zalys-Geller, N.E.Frattini, V.V.Sivak, P.Reinhold,
S. Puri, S. Shankar, et al., Nature584, 368 (2020).
[326] B. de Neeve, T.-L. Nguyen, T. Behrle, and J. P. Home,
Nat. Phys. 18, 296 (2022).
[327] B. Royer, S. Singh, and S. M. Girvin, Phys. Rev. Lett.
125, 260509 (2020).
[328] J. I.-J. Wang, M. A. Yamoah, Q. Li, A. H. Karam-
lou, T. Dinh, B. Kannan, J. Braumüller, D. Kim, A. J.
Melville, et al., Nat. Mater. 21, 398 (2022).
[329] H. Mamin, E. Huang, S. Carnevale, C. Rettner, N. Arel-
lano, M. Sherwood, C. Kurter, B. Trimm, M. Sandberg,
et al., Phys. Rev. Appl. 16, 024023 (2021).
[330] R. Zhao, S. Park, T. Zhao, M. Bal, C. McRae, J. Long,
and D. Pappas, Phys. Rev. Appl. 14, 064006 (2020).
[331] D. Rosenberg, D. Kim, R. Das, D. Yost, S. Gustavsson,
D. Hover, P. Krantz, A. Melville, L. Racz, et al., npj
Quantum Inf. 3, 1 (2017).
[332] B. Foxen, J. Y. Mutus, E. Lucero, R. Graff, A. Megrant,
Y.Chen,C.Quintana,B.Burkett,J.Kelly, et al.,Quan-
tum Sci. Technol. 3, 014005 (2017).
[333] J. Rahamim, T. Behrle, M. J. Peterer, A. Patterson,
P. A. Spring, T. Tsunoda, R. Manenti, G. Tancredi,
and P. J. Leek, Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 222602 (2017).
[334] C. R. Conner, A. Bienfait, H.-S. Chang, M.-H. Chou,
É. Dumur, J. Grebel, G. A. Peairs, R. G. Povey, H. Yan,
et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 232602 (2021).
[335] S. Kosen, H.-X. Li, M. Rommel, D. Shiri, C. Warren,
L. Grönberg, J. Salonen, T. Abad, J. Biznárová, et al.,
Quantum Sci. Technol. 7, 035018 (2022).
[336] M. Vahidpour, W. O’Brien, J. T. Whyland, J. Ange-
les, J. Marshall, D. Scarabelli, G. Crossman, K. Yadav,
Y. Mohan, C. Bui, et al., arXiv: 1708.02226 (2017).
[337] D.R.W.Yost,M.E.Schwartz,J.Mallek,D.Rosenberg,
C. Stull, J. L. Yoder, G. Calusine, M. Cook, R. Das,
et al., npj Quantum Inf. 6, 1 (2020).
[338] K.Grigoras, N.Yurttagül, J.-P.Kaikkonen, E.Mannila,
P. Eskelinen, D. Lozano, H.-X. Li, M. Rommel, D. Shiri,
N. Tiencken, et al., arXiv: 2201.10425 (2022).
[339] S. Asaad, C. Dickel, N. K. Langford, S. Poletto,
A. Bruno, M. A. Rol, D. Deurloo, and L. DiCarlo, npj
Quantum Inf. 2, 1 (2016).
[340] R. Manenti, E. A. Sete, A. Q. Chen, S. Kulshreshtha,
J.-H. Yeh, F. Oruc, A. Bestwick, M. Field, K. Jackson,
and S. Poletto, Appl. Phys. Lett. 119, 144001 (2021).
[341] D. Awschalom, K. K. Berggren, H. Bernien, S. Bhave,
L. D. Carr, P. Davids, S. E. Economou, D. Englund,39
A. Faraon, et al., PRX Quantum 2, 017002 (2021).
[342] L.Jiang, J.M.Taylor, A.S.Sørensen, andM.D.Lukin,
Phys. Rev. A 76, 062323 (2007).
[343] H. J. Kimble, Nature 453, 1023 (2008).
[344] K. S. Chou, J. Z. Blumoff, C. S. Wang, P. C. Reinhold,
C. J. Axline, Y. Y. Gao, L. Frunzio, M. H. Devoret,
L. Jiang, and R. J. Schoelkopf, Nature 561, 368 (2018).
[345] N.LaRacuente, K.N.Smith, P.Imany, K.L.Silverman,
and F. T. Chong, arXiv: 2201.08825 (2022).
[346] P. Kurpiers, P. Magnard, T. Walter, B. Royer,
M. Pechal, J. Heinsoo, Y. Salathé, A. Akin, S. Storz,
et al., Nature558, 264 (2018).
[347] C. J. Axline, L. D. Burkhart, W. Pfaff, M. Zhang,
K. Chou, P. Campagne-Ibarcq, P. Reinhold, L. Frun-
zio, S. M. Girvin, et al., Nat. Phys. 14, 705 (2018).
[348] P. Campagne-Ibarcq, E. Zalys-Geller, A. Narla,
S. Shankar, P. Reinhold, L. Burkhart, C. Axline,
W.Pfaff,L.Frunzio, et al.,Phys.Rev.Lett. 120,200501
(2018).
[349] N. Leung, Y. Lu, S. Chakram, R. K. Naik, N. Earnest,
R. Ma, K. Jacobs, A. N. Cleland, and D. I. Schuster,
npj Quantum Inf. 5, 1 (2019).
[350] P. Magnard, S. Storz, P. Kurpiers, J. Schär, F. Marxer,
J. Lütolf, T. Walter, J.-C. Besse, M. Gabureac, et al.,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 260502 (2020).
[351] L. D. Burkhart, J. D. Teoh, Y. Zhang, C. J. Axline,
L. Frunzio, M. Devoret, L. Jiang, S. Girvin, and
R. Schoelkopf, PRX Quantum 2, 030321 (2021).
[352] A. Gold, J. P. Paquette, A. Stockklauser, M. J. Reagor,
M. S. Alam, A. Bestwick, N. Didier, A. Nersisyan,
F. Oruc, et al., npj Quantum Inf. 7, 1 (2021).
[353] J. M. Kreikebaum, K. P. O’Brien, A. Morvan, and
I. Siddiqi, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 33, 06LT02 (2020).
[354] J.B.Hertzberg,E.J.Zhang,S.Rosenblatt,E.Magesan,
J. A. Smolin, J.-B. Yau, V. P. Adiga, M. Sandberg,
M. Brink, et al., npj Quantum Inf. 7, 1 (2021).
[355] E. J. Zhang, S. Srinivasan, N. Sundaresan, D. F. Bo-
gorin, Y. Martin, J. B. Hertzberg, J. Timmerwilke, E. J.
Pritchett, J.-B. Yau, et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabi6690 (2022).
[356] H. Kim, C. Jünger, A. Morvan, E. S. Barnard, W. P.
Livingston, M. Altoé, Y. Kim, C. Song, L. Chen, J. M.
Kreikebaum, et al., arXiv: 2206.03099 (2022).
[357] S. Krinner, S. Storz, P. Kurpiers, P. Magnard, J. Hein-
soo, R. Keller, J. Lütolf, C. Eichler, and A. Wallraff,
EPJ Quantum Technol. 6, 1 (2019).
[358] J. C. Bardin, E. Jeffrey, E. Lucero, T. Huang, S. Das,
D. T. Sank, O. Naaman, A. E. Megrant, R. Barends,
et al., IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 54, 3043 (2019).
[359] B. Patra, J. P. G. van Dijk, S. Subramanian, A. Corna,
X. Xue, C. Jeon, F. Sheikh, E. Juarez-Hernandez, B. P.
Esparza, et al., inIEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf.
(2020) pp. 304–306.
[360] S. J. Pauka, K. Das, R. Kalra, A. Moini, Y. Yang,
M. Trainer, A. Bousquet, C. Cantaloube, N. Dick, et al.,
Nat. Electron. 4, 64 (2021).
[361] E. A. Sete, A. Q. Chen, R. Manenti, S. Kulshreshtha,
and S. Poletto, Phys. Rev. Appl. 15, 064063 (2021).
[362] A. Dunsworth, R. Barends, Y. Chen, Z. Chen,
B. Chiaro, A. Fowler, B. Foxen, E. Jeffrey, J. Kelly,
et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 112, 063502 (2018).
[363] P. Zhao, P. Xu, D. Lan, J. Chu, X. Tan, H. Yu, and
Y. Yu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 200503 (2020).
[364] A. Kandala, K. Wei, S. Srinivasan, E. Magesan,
S. Carnevale, G. Keefe, D. Klaus, O. Dial, andD. McKay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 130501 (2021).
[365] S. Huang, B. Lienhard, G. Calusine, A. Vepsäläinen,
J.Braumüller,D.K.Kim,A.J.Melville,B.M.Niedziel-
ski, J. L. Yoder, et al., PRX Quantum 2, 020306 (2021).
[366] W. Nuerbolati, Z. Han, J. Chu, Y. Zhou, X. Tan, Y. Yu,
S. Liu, and F. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 120, 174001
(2022).
[367] B.K.Mitchell,R.K.Naik,A.Morvan,A.Hashim,J.M.
Kreikebaum, B. Marinelli, W. Lavrijsen, K. Nowrouzi,
D. I. Santiago, and I. Siddiqi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127,
200502 (2021).
[368] T.-Q. Cai, X.-Y. Han, Y.-K. Wu, Y.-L. Ma, J.-H. Wang,
Z.-L. Wang, H.-Y. Zhang, H.-Y. Wang, Y.-P. Song, and
L.-M. Duan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 060505 (2021).
[369] D. Zajac, J. Stehlik, D. Underwood, T. Phung,
J. Blair, S. Carnevale, D. Klaus, G. Keefe, A. Carniol,
M. Kumph, et al., arXiv: 2108.11221 (2021).
[370] K.Wei, E.Magesan, I.Lauer, S.Srinivasan, D.Bogorin,
S. Carnevale, G. Keefe, Y. Kim, D. Klaus, et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 129, 060501 (2022).
[371] Z. Ni, S. Li, L. Zhang, J. Chu, J. Niu, T. Yan, X. Deng,
L. Hu, J. Li, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 129, 040502 (2022).
[372] T. Harty, D. Allcock, C. J. Ballance, L. Guidoni,
H. Janacek, N. Linke, D. Stacey, and D. Lucas, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 113, 220501 (2014).
[373] Y.Wang, M.Um, J.Zhang, S.An, M.Lyu, J.-N.Zhang,
L.-M. Duan, D. Yum, and K. Kim, Nature Photonics
11, 646 (2017).
[374] P. Wang, C.-Y. Luan, M. Qiao, M. Um, J. Zhang,
Y. Wang, X. Yuan, M. Gu, J. Zhang, and K. Kim,
Nat. Commun. 12, 1 (2021).
[375] R. Noek, G. Vrijsen, D. Gaultney, E. Mount, T. Kim,
P. Maunz, and J. Kim, Opt. Lett. 38, 4735 (2013).
[376] S. Crain, C. Cahall, G. Vrijsen, E. E. Wollman, M. D.
Shaw, V. B. Verma, S. W. Nam, and J. Kim, Commun.
Phys.2, 1 (2019).
[377] J. P. Gaebler, T. R. Tan, Y. Lin, Y. Wan, R. Bowler,
A. C. Keith, S. Glancy, K. Coakley, E. Knill,
D.Leibfried, et al.,Phys.Rev.Lett. 117,060505(2016).
[378] C. Ballance, T. Harty, N. Linke, M. Sepiol, and D. Lu-
cas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 060504 (2016).
[379] C. R. Clark, H. N. Tinkey, B. C. Sawyer, A. M. Meier,
K. A. Burkhardt, C. M. Seck, C. M. Shappert, N. D.
Guise, C. E. Volin, S. D. Fallek, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.
127, 130505 (2021).
[380] K. Wright, K. M. Beck, S. Debnath, J. Amini, Y. Nam,
N. Grzesiak, J.-S. Chen, N. Pisenti, M. Chmielewski,
C. Collins, et al., Nat. Commun. 10, 1 (2019).
[381] I. Pogorelov, T. Feldker, C. D. Marciniak, L. Postler,
G. Jacob, O. Krieglsteiner, V. Podlesnic, M. Meth,
V. Negnevitsky, M. Stadler, et al., PRX Quantum 2,
020343 (2021).
[382] T. Monz, D. Nigg, E. A. Martinez, M. F. Brandl,
P. Schindler, R. Rines, S. X. Wang, I. L. Chuang, and
R. Blatt, Science 351, 1068 (2016).
[383] C. Figgatt, D. Maslov, K. A. Landsman, N. M. Linke,
S.Debnath, andC.Monroe,Nat.Commun. 8,1(2017).
[384] K. Kim, M.-S. Chang, S. Korenblit, R. Islam, E. E.
Edwards, J. K. Freericks, G.-D. Lin, L.-M. Duan, and
C. Monroe, Nature 465, 590 (2010).
[385] P. Jurcevic, B. P. Lanyon, P. Hauke, C. Hempel,
P. Zoller, R. Blatt, and C. F. Roos, Nature 511, 202
(2014).
[386] P. Richerme, Z.-X. Gong, A. Lee, C. Senko, J. Smith,40
M. Foss-Feig, S. Michalakis, A. V. Gorshkov, and
C. Monroe, Nature 511, 198 (2014).
[387] C. Senko, J. Smith, P. Richerme, A. Lee, W. Campbell,
and C. Monroe, Science 345, 430 (2014).
[388] M. Gärttner, J. G. Bohnet, A. Safavi-Naini, M. L. Wall,
J. J. Bollinger, and A. M. Rey, Nat. Phys. 13, 781
(2017).
[389] J. Zhang, P. W. Hess, A. Kyprianidis, P. Becker, A. Lee,
J. Smith, G. Pagano, I.-D. Potirniche, A. C. Potter,
A. Vishwanath, et al., Nature543, 217 (2017).
[390] T. Brydges, A. Elben, P. Jurcevic, B. Vermersch,
C. Maier, B. P. Lanyon, P. Zoller, R. Blatt, and C. F.
Roos, Science 364, 260 (2019).
[391] C. Maier, T. Brydges, P. Jurcevic, N. Trautmann,
C. Hempel, B. P. Lanyon, P. Hauke, R. Blatt, and
C. F. Roos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 050501 (2019).
[392] C. Monroe, W. C. Campbell, L.-M. Duan, Z.-X. Gong,
A.V.Gorshkov, P.Hess, R.Islam, K.Kim, N.M.Linke,
G. Pagano, et al., Rev. Mod. Phys. 93, 025001 (2021).
[393] R. Srinivas, S. Burd, H. Knaack, R. Sutherland,
A. Kwiatkowski, S. Glancy, E. Knill, D. Wineland,
D. Leibfried, A. C. Wilson, et al., Nature 597, 209
(2021).
[394] H. Kaufmann, T. Ruster, C. T. Schmiegelow, M. A.
Luda, V. Kaushal, J. Schulz, D. Von Lindenfels,
F. Schmidt-Kaler, and U. Poschinger, Phys. Rev. Lett.
119, 150503 (2017).
[395] T. Manovitz, Y. Shapira, L. Gazit, N. Akerman, and
R. Ozeri, PRX quantum 3, 010347 (2022).
[396] M. Dietrich, N. Kurz, T. Noel, G. Shu, and B. Blinov,
Phys. Rev. A 81, 052328 (2010).
[397] D. Hucul, J. E. Christensen, E. R. Hudson, and W. C.
Campbell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 100501 (2017).
[398] S. Weidt, J. Randall, S. Webster, K. Lake, A. Webb,
I. Cohen, T. Navickas, B. Lekitsch, A. Retzker, and
W. Hensinger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 220501 (2016).
[399] Y.Lu, S.Zhang, K.Zhang, W.Chen, Y.Shen, J.Zhang,
J.-N. Zhang, and K. Kim, Nature 572, 363 (2019).
[400] Y. Wang, S. Crain, C. Fang, B. Zhang, S. Huang,
Q. Liang, P. H. Leung, K. R. Brown, and J. Kim, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 125, 150505 (2020).
[401] A. Myerson, D. Szwer, S. Webster, D. Allcock, M. Cur-
tis, G. Imreh, J. Sherman, D. Stacey, A. Steane, and
D. Lucas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 200502 (2008).
[402] S. Wölk, C. Piltz, T. Sriarunothai, and C. Wunderlich,
J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 48, 075101 (2015).
[403] A. Seif, K. A. Landsman, N. M. Linke, C. Figgatt,
C. Monroe, and M. Hafezi, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.
Phys.51, 174006 (2018).
[404] Z.-H. Ding, J.-M. Cui, Y.-F. Huang, C.-F. Li, T. Tu,
and G.-C. Guo, Phys. Rev. Appl. 12, 014038 (2019).
[405] K. R. Brown, J. Kim, and C. Monroe, npj Quantum
Inf.2, 1 (2016).
[406] R. J. Niffenegger, J. Stuart, C. Sorace-Agaskar, D. Kha-
ras, S. Bramhavar, C. D. Bruzewicz, W. Loh, R. T.
Maxson, R. McConnell, D. Reens, et al., Nature586,
538 (2020).
[407] S. L. Todaro, V. Verma, K. C. McCormick, D. Allcock,
R. Mirin, D. J. Wineland, S. W. Nam, A. C. Wilson,
D. Leibfried, and D. Slichter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 126,
010501 (2021).
[408] W. Setzer, M. Ivory, O. Slobodyan, J. Van Der Wall,
L. Parazzoli, D. Stick, M. Gehl, M. Blain, R. Kay, et al.,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 119, 154002 (2021).[409] D. Reens, M. Collins, J. Ciampi, D. Kharas, B. F. Aull,
K. Donlon, C. D. Bruzewicz, B. Felton, J. Stuart, et al.,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 129, 100502 (2022).
[410] A. Bermudez, X. Xu, R. Nigmatullin, J. O’Gorman,
V. Negnevitsky, P. Schindler, T. Monz, U. Poschinger,
C. Hempel, J. Home, et al., Phys. Rev. X 7, 041061
(2017).
[411] A. Sørensen and K. Mølmer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1971
(1999).
[412] A. Sørensen and K. Mølmer, Phys. Rev. A 62, 022311
(2000).
[413] D. Jonathan and M. B. Plenio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87,
127901 (2001).
[414] D. Leibfried, B. DeMarco, V. Meyer, D. Lucas, M. Bar-
rett, J. Britton, W. M. Itano, B. Jelenković, C. Langer,
T. Rosenband, et al., Nature422, 412 (2003).
[415] B. C. Sawyer and K. R. Brown, Phys. Rev. A 103,
022427 (2021).
[416] F. Mintert and C. Wunderlich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87,
257904 (2001).
[417] C. Ospelkaus, C. E. Langer, J. M. Amini, K. R. Brown,
D.Leibfried, andD.J.Wineland,Phys.Rev.Lett. 101,
090502 (2008).
[418] N. Timoney, I. Baumgart, M. Johanning, A. Varón,
M. B. Plenio, A. Retzker, and C. Wunderlich, Nature
476, 185 (2011).
[419] S. Webster, S. Weidt, K. Lake, J. McLoughlin, and
W. Hensinger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 140501 (2013).
[420] T. Harty, M. Sepiol, D. Allcock, C. Ballance, J. Tarlton,
and D. Lucas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 140501 (2016).
[421] G. Zarantonello, H. Hahn, J. Morgner, M. Schulte,
A. Bautista-Salvador, R. Werner, K. Hammerer, and
C. Ospelkaus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 260503 (2019).
[422] B. Lekitsch, S. Weidt, A. G. Fowler, K. Mølmer, S. J.
Devitt, C. Wunderlich, and W. K. Hensinger, Sci. Adv.
3, e1601540 (2017).
[423] V. Schäfer, C. Ballance, K. Thirumalai, L. Stephenson,
T. Ballance, A. Steane, and D. Lucas, Nature 555, 75
(2018).
[424] M. Sameti, J. Lishman, and F. Mintert, Phys. Rev. A
103, 052603 (2021).
[425] J. J. García-Ripoll, P. Zoller, and J. I. Cirac, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 91, 157901 (2003).
[426] L.-M. Duan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 100502 (2004).
[427] J. Mizrahi, C. Senko, B. Neyenhuis, K. Johnson,
W. Campbell, C. Conover, and C. Monroe, Phys. Rev.
Lett.110, 203001 (2013).
[428] J. Wong-Campos, S. Moses, K. Johnson, and C. Mon-
roe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 230501 (2017).
[429] M.I.Hussain, D.Heinrich, M.Guevara-Bertsch, E.Tor-
rontegui, J. J. García-Ripoll, C. F. Roos, and R. Blatt,
Phys. Rev. Appl. 15, 024054 (2021).
[430] S.-L. Zhu, C. Monroe, and L.-M. Duan, EPL 73, 485
(2006).
[431] S.-L. Zhu, C. Monroe, and L.-M. Duan, Phys. Rev.
Lett.97, 050505 (2006).
[432] T. Choi, S. Debnath, T. Manning, C. Figgatt, Z.-X.
Gong, L.-M. Duan, and C. Monroe, Phys. Rev. Lett.
112, 190502 (2014).
[433] P. H. Leung, K. A. Landsman, C. Figgatt, N. M. Linke,
C. Monroe, and K. R. Brown, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120,
020501 (2018).
[434] T. J. Green and M. J. Biercuk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114,
120502 (2015).41
[435] K. A. Landsman, Y. Wu, P. H. Leung, D. Zhu, N. M.
Linke, K. R. Brown, L. Duan, and C. Monroe, Phys.
Rev. A100, 022332 (2019).
[436] A. R. Milne, C. L. Edmunds, C. Hempel, F. Roy,
S. Mavadia, and M. J. Biercuk, Phys. Rev. Appl. 13,
024022 (2020).
[437] T. Monz, P. Schindler, J. T. Barreiro, M. Chwalla,
D. Nigg, W. A. Coish, M. Harlander, W. Hänsel,
M. Hennrich, and R. Blatt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106,
130506 (2011).
[438] S. Debnath, N. M. Linke, C. Figgatt, K. A. Landsman,
K. Wright, and C. Monroe, Nature 536, 63 (2016).
[439] N. M. Linke, D. Maslov, M. Roetteler, S. Debnath,
C. Figgatt, K. A. Landsman, K. Wright, and C. Mon-
roe, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, 3305 (2017).
[440] S. S. Ivanov, P. A. Ivanov, and N. V. Vitanov, Phys.
Rev. A91, 032311 (2015).
[441] E. A. Martinez, T. Monz, D. Nigg, P. Schindler, and
R. Blatt, New J. Phys. 18, 063029 (2016).
[442] D.MaslovandY.Nam,NewJ.Phys. 20,033018(2018).
[443] D. Schwerdt, Y. Shapira, T. Manovitz, and R. Ozeri,
Phys. Rev. A 105, 022612 (2022).
[444] C.Figgatt, A.Ostrander, N.M.Linke, K.A.Landsman,
D. Zhu, D. Maslov, and C. Monroe, Nature 572, 368
(2019).
[445] D. Kielpinski, C. Monroe, and D. J. Wineland, Nature
417, 709 (2002).
[446] V. Kaushal, B. Lekitsch, A. Stahl, J. Hilder, D. Pijn,
C. Schmiegelow, A. Bermudez, M. Müller, F. Schmidt-
Kaler, and U. Poschinger, AVS Quantum Science 2,
014101 (2020).
[447] R. Bowler, J. Gaebler, Y. Lin, T. R. Tan, D. Hanneke,
J. D. Jost, J. Home, D. Leibfried, and D. J. Wineland,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 080502 (2012).
[448] A. Walther, F. Ziesel, T. Ruster, S. T. Dawkins,
K. Ott, M. Hettrich, K. Singer, F. Schmidt-Kaler, and
U. Poschinger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 080501 (2012).
[449] D. Stick, W. Hensinger, S. Olmschenk, M. Madsen,
K. Schwab, and C. Monroe, Nat. Phys. 2, 36 (2006).
[450] S. Seidelin, J. Chiaverini, R. Reichle, J. J. Bollinger,
D. Leibfried, J. Britton, J. Wesenberg, R. Blakestad,
R. Epstein, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 253003 (2006).
[451] K. Wright, J. M. Amini, D. L. Faircloth, C. Volin, S. C.
Doret, H. Hayden, C. Pai, D. W. Landgren, D. Denison,
et al., New J. Phys. 15, 033004 (2013).
[452] J. M. Amini, H. Uys, J. H. Wesenberg, S. Seidelin,
J. Britton, J. J. Bollinger, D. Leibfried, C. Ospelkaus,
A. P. VanDevender, et al., New J. Phys. 12, 033031
(2010).
[453] W. Hensinger, S. Olmschenk, D. Stick, D. Hucul,
M. Yeo, M. Acton, L. Deslauriers, C. Monroe, and
J. Rabchuk, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 034101 (2006).
[454] Y. Wan, D. Kienzler, S. D. Erickson, K. H. Mayer, T. R.
Tan, J. J. Wu, H. M. Vasconcelos, S. Glancy, E. Knill,
D.J.Wineland, A.C.Wilson, andD.Leibfried,Science
364, 875 (2019).
[455] J. M. Pino, J. M. Dreiling, C. Figgatt, J. P. Gaebler,
S. A. Moses, M. Allman, C. Baldwin, M. Foss-Feig,
D. Hayes, et al., Nature592, 209 (2021).
[456] Q. A. Turchette, D. Kielpinski, B. King, D. Leibfried,
D. Meekhof, C. Myatt, M. Rowe, C. Sackett, C. Wood,
W. Itano, et al., Phys. Rev. A 61, 063418 (2000).
[457] L. Deslauriers, S. Olmschenk, D. Stick, W. Hensinger,
J. Sterk, and C. Monroe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 103007(2006).
[458] I. A. Boldin, A. Kraft, and C. Wunderlich, Phys. Rev.
Lett.120, 023201 (2018).
[459] J. H. Wesenberg, Phys. Rev. A 78, 063410 (2008).
[460] C. Monroe, R. Raussendorf, A. Ruthven, K. Brown,
P. Maunz, L.-M. Duan, and J. Kim, Phys. Rev. A 89,
022317 (2014).
[461] D. Hucul, I. V. Inlek, G. Vittorini, C. Crocker, S. Deb-
nath, S. M. Clark, and C. Monroe, Nat. Phys. 11, 37
(2015).
[462] L. Stephenson, D. Nadlinger, B. Nichol, S. An, P. Dr-
mota, T. Ballance, K. Thirumalai, J. Goodwin, D. Lu-
cas,et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 110501 (2020).
[463] T. Kim, P. Maunz, and J. Kim, Phys. Rev. A 84,
063423 (2011).
[464] J.Hannegan,U.Saha,J.D.Siverns,J.Cassell,E.Waks,
and Q. Quraishi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 119, 084001 (2021).
[465] C. Ballance, V. Schäfer, J. P. Home, D. Szwer,
S. C. Webster, D. Allcock, N. M. Linke, T. Harty,
D. Aude Craik, et al., Nature528, 384 (2015).
[466] A. Hughes, V. Schäfer, K. Thirumalai, D. Nadlinger,
S. Woodrow, D. Lucas, and C. Ballance, Phys. Rev.
Lett.125, 080504 (2020).
[467] I. V. Inlek, C. Crocker, M. Lichtman, K. Sosnova, and
C. Monroe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 250502 (2017).
[468] P. Wang, J. Zhang, C.-Y. Luan, M. Um, Y. Wang,
M. Qiao, T. Xie, J.-N. Zhang, A. Cabello, et al., Sci.
Adv.8, eabk1660 (2022).
[469] V. Negnevitsky, M. Marinelli, K. K. Mehta, H.-Y. Lo,
C. Flühmann, and J. P. Home, Nature 563, 527 (2018).
[470] D. Kielpinski, B. King, C. Myatt, C. A. Sackett,
Q. Turchette, W. M. Itano, C. Monroe, D. J. Wineland,
and W. H. Zurek, Phys. Rev. A 61, 032310 (2000).
[471] M. D. Barrett, B. DeMarco, T. Schaetz, V. Meyer,
D. Leibfried, J. Britton, J. Chiaverini, W. Itano, B. Je-
lenković, et al., Phys. Rev. A 68, 042302 (2003).
[472] Z.-C. Mao, Y.-Z. Xu, Q.-X. Mei, W.-D. Zhao, Y. Jiang,
Y. Wang, X.-Y. Chang, L. He, L. Yao, et al., Phys. Rev.
Lett.127, 143201 (2021).
[473] D. Allcock, W. Campbell, J. Chiaverini, I. Chuang,
E. Hudson, I. Moore, A. Ransford, C. Roman, J. Sage,
et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 119, 214002 (2021).
[474] H.-X. Yang, J.-Y. Ma, Y.-K. Wu, Y. Wang, M.-M. Cao,
W.-X. Guo, Y.-Y. Huang, L. Feng, Z.-C. Zhou, et al.,
Nat. Phys. 18, 1058 (2022).
[475] K. K. Mehta, C. D. Bruzewicz, R. McConnell, R. J.
Ram, J. M. Sage, and J. Chiaverini, Nat. Nanotechnol.
11, 1066 (2016).
[476] K. K. Mehta, C. Zhang, M. Malinowski, T.-L. Nguyen,
M. Stadler, and J. P. Home, Nature 586, 533 (2020).
[477] J. Stuart, R. Panock, C. Bruzewicz, J. Sedlacek, R. Mc-
Connell, I. Chuang, J. Sage, and J. Chiaverini, Phys.
Rev. Appl. 11, 024010 (2019).
[478] C. Flühmann, T. L. Nguyen, M. Marinelli, V. Negnevit-
sky, K. Mehta, and J. Home, Nature 566, 513 (2019).
[479] A. Erhard, H. Poulsen Nautrup, M. Meth, L. Postler,
R. Stricker, M. Stadler, V. Negnevitsky, M. Ringbauer,
P. Schindler, et al., Nature589, 220 (2021).
[480] L. Egan, D. M. Debroy, C. Noel, A. Risinger, D. Zhu,
D. Biswas, M. Newman, M. Li, K. R. Brown, et al.,
Nature598, 281 (2021).
[481] L. Postler, S. Heu βen, I. Pogorelov, M. Rispler, T. Feld-
ker, M. Meth, C. D. Marciniak, R. Stricker, M. Ring-
bauer,et al., Nature605, 675 (2022).42
[482] C. D. Bruzewicz, J. Chiaverini, R. McConnell, and
J. M. Sage, Appl. Phys. Lett. 6, 021314 (2019).
[483] Z.D.Romaszko,S.Hong,M.Siegele,R.K.Puddy,F.R.
Lebrun-Gallagher, S.Weidt, andW.K.Hensinger,Nat.
Rev. Phys. 2, 285 (2020).
[484] K. R. Brown, J. Chiaverini, J. M. Sage, and H. Häffner,
Nat. Rev. Phys. 6, 892 (2021).
[485] W. Huang, C. H. Yang, K. W. Chan, T. Tanttu,
B. Hensen, R. C. C. Leon, M. A. Fogarty, J. C. C.
Hwang, F. E. Hudson, et al., Nature569, 532 (2019).
[486] D. M. Zajac, A. J. Sigillito, M. Russ, F. Borjans, J. M.
Taylor, G. Burkard, and J. R. Petta, Science 359, 439
(2018).
[487] N. W. Hendrickx, D. P. Franke, A. Sammak, G. Scap-
pucci, and M. Veldhorst, Nature 577, 487 (2020).
[488] R. Maurand, X. Jehl, D. Kotekar-Patil, A. Corna,
H. Bohuslavskyi, R. Laviéville, L. Hutin, S. Barraud,
M. Vinet, et al., Nat. Commun. 7, 13575 (2016).
[489] J. T. Muhonen, J. P. Dehollain, A. Laucht, F. E. Hud-
son, R.Kalra, T.Sekiguchi, K.M.Itoh, D.N.Jamieson,
J. C. McCallum, et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 986 (2014).
[490] Y. He, S. K. Gorman, D. Keith, L. Kranz, J. G. Keizer,
and M. Y. Simmons, Nature 571, 371 (2019).
[491] L. M. K. Vandersypen and M. A. Eriksson, Phys. Today
72, 38 (2019).
[492] A. Noiri, K. Takeda, T. Nakajima, T. Kobayashi,
A. Sammak, G. Scappucci, and S. Tarucha, Nature
601, 338 (2022).
[493] M. T. Madzik, S. Asaad, A. Youssry, B. Joecker, K. M.
Rudinger, E. Nielsen, K. C. Young, T. J. Proctor, A. D.
Baczewski, et al., Nature601, 348 (2022).
[494] X.Xue, M.Russ, N.Samkharadze, B.Undseth, A.Sam-
mak, G. Scappucci, and L. M. K. Vandersypen, Nature
601, 343 (2022).
[495] A. West, B. Hensen, A. Jouan, T. Tanttu, C.-H. Yang,
A. Rossi, M. F. Gonzalez-Zalba, F. Hudson, A. Morello,
et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 437 (2019).
[496] P. Pakkiam, A. V. Timofeev, M. G. House, M. R. Hogg,
T. Kobayashi, M. Koch, S. Rogge, and M. Y. Simmons,
Phys. Rev. X 8, 041032 (2018).
[497] M. Urdampilleta, D. J. Niegemann, E. Chanrion,
B. Jadot, C. Spence, P.-A. Mortemousque, C. Bäuerle,
L. Hutin, B. Bertrand, et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 737
(2019).
[498] G. Zheng, N. Samkharadze, M. L. Noordam, N. Kalhor,
D. Brousse, A. Sammak, G. Scappucci, and L. M. K.
Vandersypen, Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 742 (2019).
[499] X. Mi, M. Benito, S. Putz, D. M. Zajac, J. M. Taylor,
G. Burkard, and J. R. Petta, Nature 555, 599 (2018).
[500] N. Samkharadze, G. Zheng, N. Kalhor, D. Brousse,
A. Sammak, U. C. Mendes, A. Blais, G. Scappucci, and
L. M. K. Vandersypen, Science 359, 1123 (2018).
[501] A. J. Landig, J. V. Koski, P. Scarlino, U. C. Mendes,
A.Blais, C.Reichl, W.Wegscheider, A.Wallraff, K.En-
sslin,et al., Nature560, 179 (2018).
[502] F. Borjans, X. G. Croot, X. Mi, M. J. Gullans, and
J. R. Petta, Nature 577, 195 (2020).
[503] P. Harvey-Collard, J. Dijkema, G. Zheng, A. Sammak,
G. Scappucci, and L. M. K. Vandersypen, Phys. Rev.
X12, 021026 (2022).
[504] L. Petit, H. G. J. Eenink, M. Russ, W. I. L. Lawrie,
N. W. Hendrickx, S. G. J. Philips, J. S. Clarke, L. M. K.
Vandersypen, and M. Veldhorst, Nature 580, 355
(2020).[505] C. H. Yang, R. C. C. Leon, J. C. C. Hwang, A. Saraiva,
T. Tanttu, W. Huang, J. Camirand Lemyre, K. W.
Chan, K. Y. Tan, et al., Nature580, 350 (2020).
[506] L.C.Camenzind, S.Geyer, A.Fuhrer, R.J.Warburton,
D. M. Zumbühl, and A. V. Kuhlmann, Nat. Electron.
5, 178 (2022).
[507] X. Xue, B. Patra, J. P. G. van Dijk, N. Samkharadze,
S. Subramanian, A. Corna, B. Paquelet Wuetz, C. Jeon,
F. Sheikh, et al., Nature593, 205 (2021).
[508] S. J. Pauka, K. Das, R. Kalra, A. Moini, Y. Yang,
M. Trainer, A. Bousquet, C. Cantaloube, N. Dick, et al.,
Nat. Electron. 4, 64 (2021).
[509] G. Burkard, T. T. Ladd, J. M. Nichol, A. Pan,
and J. R. Petta, “Semiconductor spin qubits,” arXiv:
2112.08863v1 (2022).
[510] F. A. Zwanenburg, A. S. Dzurak, A. Morello, M. Y.
Simmons, L. C. L. Hollenberg, G. Klimeck, S. Rogge,
S. N. Coppersmith, and M. A. Eriksson, Rev. Mod.
Phys.85, 961 (2013).
[511] D. Kim, D. R. Ward, C. B. Simmons, J. K. Gamble,
R. Blume-Kohout, E. Nielsen, D. E. Savage, M. G.
Lagally, M. Friesen, et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 243
(2015).
[512] E. R. MacQuarrie, S. F. Neyens, J. P. Dodson, J. Cor-
rigan, B. Thorgrimsson, N. Holman, M. Palma, L. F.
Edge, M. Friesen, et al., npj Quantum Inf. 6, 81 (2020).
[513] J. Medford, J. Beil, J. M. Taylor, S. D. Bartlett, A. C.
Doherty, E. I. Rashba, D. P. DiVincenzo, H. Lu, A. C.
Gossard, et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 654 (2013).
[514] A. J. Weinstein, M. D. Reed, A. M. Jones, R. W. An-
drews, D. Barnes, J. Z. Blumoff, L. E. Euliss, K. Eng,
B.Fong, et al.,“Universallogicwithencodedspinqubits
in silicon,” arXiv: 2202.03605 (2022).
[515] D. Kim, Z. Shi, C. B. Simmons, D. R. Ward, J. R.
Prance, T. S. Koh, J. K. Gamble, D. E. Savage, M. G.
Lagally,et al., Nature511, 70 (2014).
[516] J. R. Petta, A. C. Johnson, J. M. Taylor, E. A. Laird,
A. Yacoby, M. D. Lukin, C. M. Marcus, M. P. Hanson,
and A. C. Gossard, Science 309, 2180 (2005).
[517] X. Wu, D. Ward, J. Prance, D. Kim, J. K. Gamble,
R. Mohr, Z. Shi, D. Savage, M. Lagally, et al., Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 11938 (2014).
[518] A. Chatterjee, P. Stevenson, S. De Franceschi,
A. Morello, N. P. de Leon, and F. Kuemmeth, Nat.
Rev. Phys. 3, 157 (2021).
[519] A. J. Heinrich, W. D. Oliver, L. M. K. Vander-
sypen, A. Ardavan, R. Sessoli, D. Loss, A. B. Jayich,
J. Fernandez-Rossier, A. Laucht, et al., Nat. Nanotech-
nol.16, 1318 (2021).
[520] X. Zhang, H.-O. Li, G. Cao, M. Xiao, G.-C. Guo, and
G.-P. Guo, Natl. Sci. Rev. 6, 32 (2018).
[521] C. H. Yang, A. Rossi, R. Ruskov, N. S. Lai, F. A. Mo-
hiyaddin, S. Lee, C. Tahan, G. Klimeck, A. Morello,
et al., Nat. Commun. 4, 2069 (2013).
[522] F. Borjans, D. Zajac, T. Hazard, and J. Petta, Phys.
Rev. Appl. 11, 044063 (2019).
[523] M. Veldhorst, C. H. Yang, J. C. C. Hwang, W. Huang,
J. P. Dehollain, J. T. Muhonen, S. Simmons, A. Laucht,
F. E. Hudson, et al., Nature526, 410 (2015).
[524] J. Yoneda, K. Takeda, T. Otsuka, T. Nakajima, M. R.
Delbecq, G. Allison, T. Honda, T. Kodera, S. Oda,
et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 102 (2018).
[525] J. J. Pla, K. Y. Tan, J. P. Dehollain, W. H. Lim, J. J. L.
Morton, D. N. Jamieson, A. S. Dzurak, and A. Morello,43
Nature489, 541 (2012).
[526] C. H. Yang, K. W. Chan, R. Harper, W. Huang,
T. Evans, J. C. C. Hwang, B. Hensen, A. Laucht,
T. Tanttu, et al., Nat. Electron. 2, 151 (2019).
[527] J. T. Muhonen, A. Laucht, S. Simmons, J. P. Dehollain,
R. Kalra, F. E. Hudson, S. Freer, K. M. Itoh, D. N.
Jamieson, et al., J. Phys. Condens. Matter 27, 154205
(2015).
[528] S. G. J. Philips, M. T. Mądzik, S. V. Amitonov, S. L.
de Snoo, M. Russ, N. Kalhor, C. Volk, W. I. L. Lawrie,
D. Brousse, et al., Nature609, 919 (2022).
[529] R. Hanson, L. P. Kouwenhoven, J. R. Petta, S. Tarucha,
and L. M. K. Vandersypen, Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 1217
(2007).
[530] T. Hensgens, T. Fujita, L. Janssen, X. Li, C. J.
Van Diepen, C. Reichl, W. Wegscheider, S. Das Sarma,
and L. M. K. Vandersypen, Nature 548, 70 (2017).
[531] J. P. Dehollain, U. Mukhopadhyay, V. P. Michal,
Y. Wang, B. Wunsch, C. Reichl, W. Wegscheider, M. S.
Rudner, E. Demler, et al., Nature579, 528 (2020).
[532] Y. P. Kandel, H. Qiao, S. Fallahi, G. C. Gardner, M. J.
Manfra, and J. M. Nichol, Nature 573, 553 (2019).
[533] H. Qiao, Y. P. Kandel, K. Deng, S. Fallahi, G. C. Gard-
ner, M. J. Manfra, E. Barnes, and J. M. Nichol, Phys.
Rev. X10, 031006 (2020).
[534] A. Crippa, R. Ezzouch, A. Aprá, A. Amisse, R. Lav-
iéville, L. Hutin, B. Bertrand, M. Vinet, M. Urdampil-
leta,et al., Nat. Commun. 10, 2776 (2019).
[535] L. Fricke, S. J. Hile, L. Kranz, Y. Chung, Y. He,
P. Pakkiam, M. G. House, J. G. Keizer, and M. Y.
Simmons, Nat. Commun. 12, 3323 (2021).
[536] T. F. Watson, S. G. J. Philips, E. Kawakami, D. R.
Ward, P. Scarlino, M. Veldhorst, D. E. Savage, M. G.
Lagally, M. Friesen, et al., Nature555, 633 (2018).
[537] X. Zhang, R.-Z. Hu, H.-O. Li, F.-M. Jing, Y. Zhou, R.-
L. Ma, M. Ni, G. Luo, G. Cao, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.
124, 257701 (2020).
[538] N. W. Hendrickx, W. I. L. Lawrie, L. Petit, A. Sammak,
G. Scappucci, and M. Veldhorst, Nat. Commun. 11,
3478 (2020).
[539] N. W. Hendrickx, W. I. L. Lawrie, M. Russ, F. van
Riggelen, S. L. de Snoo, R. N. Schouten, A. Sammak,
G. Scappucci, and M. Veldhorst, Nature 591, 580
(2021).
[540] K. Wang, G. Xu, F. Gao, H. Liu, R.-L. Ma, X. Zhang,
Z. Wang, G. Cao, T. Wang, et al., Nat. Commun. 13,
206 (2022).
[541] D. Jirovec, P. M. Mutter, A. Hofmann, A. Crippa,
M. Rychetsky, D. L. Craig, J. Kukucka, F. Martins,
A. Ballabio, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 126803 (2022).
[542] T. F. Watson, B. Weber, Y. L. Hsueh, L. L. C. Hollen-
berg, R. Rahman, and M. Y. Simmons, Sci. Adv. 3,
e1602811 (2017).
[543] K. Takeda, A. Noiri, J. Yoneda, T. Nakajima, and
S. Tarucha, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 117701 (2020).
[544] F. H. L. Koppens, C. Buizert, K. J. Tielrooij, I. T. Vink,
K. C. Nowack, T. Meunier, L. P. Kouwenhoven, and
L. M. K. Vandersypen, Nature 442, 766 (2006).
[545] M. Veldhorst, J. C. C. Hwang, C. H. Yang, A. W. Leen-
stra, B. de Ronde, J. P. Dehollain, J. T. Muhonen, F. E.
Hudson, K. M. Itoh, et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 981
(2014).
[546] K. C. Nowack, F. H. Koppens, Y. V. Nazarov, and
L. M. Vandersypen, Science 318, 1430 (2007).[547] Y. Tokura, W. G. van der Wiel, T. Obata, and
S. Tarucha, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 047202 (2006).
[548] X.Xue, T.F.Watson, J.Helsen, D.R.Ward, D.E.Sav-
age, M. G. Lagally, S. N. Coppersmith, M. A. Eriksson,
S. Wehner, et al., Phys. Rev. X 9, 021011 (2019).
[549] M. D. Shulman, O. E. Dial, S. P. Harvey, H. Bluhm,
V. Umansky, and A. Yacoby, Science 336, 202 (2012).
[550] J.M.Nichol, L.A.Orona, S.P.Harvey, S.Fallahi, G.C.
Gardner, M. J. Manfra, and A. Yacoby, npj Quantum
Inf.3, 3 (2017).
[551] A. R. Mills, C. R. Guinn, M. J. Gullans, A. J. Sigillito,
M. M. Feldman, E. Nielsen, and J. R. Petta, Sci. Adv.
8, eabn5130 (2022).
[552] X. Hu and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 100501
(2006).
[553] L. Kranz, S. K. Gorman, B. Thorgrimsson, Y. He,
D. Keith, J. G. Keizer, and M. Y. Simmons, Adv.
Mater.32, e2003361 (2020).
[554] A. Laucht, R. Kalra, S. Simmons, J. P. Dehollain, J. T.
Muhonen, F. A. Mohiyaddin, S. Freer, F. E. Hudson,
K. M. Itoh, et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 12, 61 (2017).
[555] A. E. Seedhouse, I. Hansen, A. Laucht, C. H. Yang,
A.S.Dzurak, andA.Saraiva,Phys.Rev.B 104,235411
(2021).
[556] I. Hansen, A. E. Seedhouse, A. Saraiva, A. Laucht, A. S.
Dzurak, and C. H. Yang, Phys. Rev. A 104, 062415
(2021).
[557] G. Tosi, F. A. Mohiyaddin, V. Schmitt, S. Tenberg,
R. Rahman, G. Klimeck, and A. Morello, Nat. Com-
mun.8, 450 (2017).
[558] X.Wang, L.S.Bishop, J.P.Kestner, E.Barnes, K.Sun,
and S. Das Sarma, Nat. Commun. 3, 997 (2012).
[559] M. A. Broome, T. F. Watson, D. Keith, S. K. Gorman,
M. G. House, J. G. Keizer, S. J. Hile, W. Baker, and
M. Y. Simmons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 046802 (2017).
[560] P. Harvey-Collard, B. D’Anjou, M. Rudolph, N. T. Ja-
cobson, J. Dominguez, G. A. Ten Eyck, J. R. Wendt,
T. Pluym, M. P. Lilly, et al., Phys. Rev. X 8, 021046
(2018).
[561] J. M. Elzerman, R. Hanson, L. H. Willems van Bev-
eren, B. Witkamp, L. M. K. Vandersypen, and L. P.
Kouwenhoven, Nature 430, 431 (2004).
[562] J. J. Pla, K. Y. Tan, J. P. Dehollain, W. H. Lim, J. J. L.
Morton, F. A. Zwanenburg, D. N. Jamieson, A. S. Dzu-
rak, and A. Morello, Nature 496, 334 (2013).
[563] D. Keith, S. K. Gorman, L. Kranz, Y. He, J. G. Keizer,
M. A. Broome, and M. Y. Simmons, New J. Phys. 21,
063011 (2019).
[564] F. Vigneau, F. Fedele, A. Chatterjee, D. Reilly,
F. Kuemmeth, F. Gonzalez-Zalba, E. Laird, and
N. Ares, “Probing quantum devices with radio-
frequency reflectometry,” arXiv: 2202.10516 (2022).
[565] J. Y. Huang, W. H. Lim, R. C. C. Leon, C. H. Yang,
F. E. Hudson, C. C. Escott, A. Saraiva, A. S. Dzurak,
and A. Laucht, Nano Lett. 21, 6328 (2021).
[566] S.Schaal, I.Ahmed, J.A.Haigh, L.Hutin, B.Bertrand,
S. Barraud, M. Vinet, C.-M. Lee, N. Stelmashenko,
et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 067701 (2020).
[567] M. R. Hogg, P. Pakkiam, S. K. Gorman, A. V. Timo-
feev, Y. Chung, G. K. Gulati, M. G. House, and M. Y.
Simmons, “Single-shot readout of multiple donor elec-
tron spins with a gate-based sensor,” arXiv: 2203.09248
(2022).
[568] A. Ruffino, T.-Y. Yang, J. Michniewicz, Y. Peng,44
E. Charbon, and M. F. Gonzalez-Zalba, Nat. Electron.
5, 53 (2022).
[569] X. Xue, B. D’Anjou, T. F. Watson, D. R. Ward, D. E.
Savage, M. G. Lagally, M. Friesen, S. N. Coppersmith,
M. A. Eriksson, et al., Phys. Rev. X 10, 021006 (2020).
[570] T. Nakajima, A. Noiri, J. Yoneda, M. R. Delbecq,
P. Stano, T. Otsuka, K. Takeda, S. Amaha, G. Allison,
et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 555 (2019).
[571] C. J. van Diepen, T.-K. Hsiao, U. Mukhopadhyay,
C. Reichl, W. Wegscheider, and L. M. K. Vandersypen,
Nat. Commun. 12, 77 (2021).
[572] F. Borjans, X. Mi, and J. Petta, Phys. Rev. Appl. 15,
044052 (2021).
[573] D. Keith, Y. Chung, L. Kranz, B. Thorgrimsson, S. K.
Gorman, and M. Y. Simmons, Sci. Adv. 8, eabq0455
(2022).
[574] P. Huang and X. Hu, Phys. Rev. B 90, 235315 (2014).
[575] M. F. Gonzalez-Zalba, S. de Franceschi, E. Charbon,
T. Meunier, M. Vinet, and A. S. Dzurak, Nat. Electron.
4, 872 (2021).
[576] F. Ansaloni, A. Chatterjee, H. Bohuslavskyi,
B. Bertrand, L. Hutin, M. Vinet, and F. Kuem-
meth, Nat. Commun. 11, 6399 (2020).
[577] R.Li, N.I.D.Stuyck, S.Kubicek, J.Jussot, B.T.Chan,
F. A. Mohiyaddin, A. Elsayed, M. Shehata, G. Simion,
et al., inProc. IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting
(IEDM) (2020) p. 38.3.1.
[578] A. M. J. Zwerver, T. Krähenmann, T. F. Watson,
L. Lampert, H. C. George, R. Pillarisetty, S. A. Bo-
jarski, P. Amin, S. V. Amitonov, et al., Nat. Electron.
5, 184 (2022).
[579] L. M. K. Vandersypen, H. Bluhm, J. S. Clarke, A. S.
Dzurak, R. Ishihara, A. Morello, D. J. Reilly, L. R.
Schreiber, and M. Veldhorst, npj Quantum Inf. 3, 34
(2017).
[580] C. D. Hill, E. Peretz, S. J. Hile, M. G. House, M. Fuech-
sle, S. Rogge, M. Y. Simmons, and L. C. L. Hollenberg,
Sci. adv.1, e1500707 (2015).
[581] J. M. Boter, J. P. Dehollain, J. P. G. van Dijk, Y. Xu,
T. Hensgens, R. Versluis, H. W. L. Naus, J. S. Clarke,
M. Veldhorst, et al., “The spider-web array–a sparse
spin qubit array,” arXiv: 2110.00189 (2021).
[582] M. Veldhorst, H. G. J. Eenink, C. H. Yang, and A. S.
Dzurak, Nat. Commun. 8, 1766 (2017).
[583] R. Li, L. Petit, D. P. Franke, J. P. Dehollain, J. Helsen,
M. Steudtner, N. K. Thomas, Z. R. Yoscovits, K. J.
Singh,et al., Sci. Adv. 4, eaar3960 (2018).
[584] K. Takeda, A. Noiri, T. Nakajima, J. Yoneda,
T. Kobayashi, and S. Tarucha, Nat. Nanotechnol. 16,
965 (2021).
[585] A. R. Mills, D. M. Zajac, M. J. Gullans, F. J. Schupp,
T. M. Hazard, and J. R. Petta, Nat. Commun. 10, 1063
(2019).
[586] J. P. Zwolak and J. M. Taylor, “Colloquium: Advances
in automation of quantum dot devices control,” arXiv:
2112.09362 (2021).
[587] J. P. Zwolak, T. McJunkin, S. S. Kalantre, J. Dodson,
E. MacQuarrie, D. Savage, M. Lagally, S. Coppersmith,
M. A. Eriksson, et al., Phys. Rev. Appl. 13, 034075
(2020).
[588] S. Schaal, A. Rossi, V. N. Ciriano-Tejel, T.-Y. Yang,
S. Barraud, J. J. L. Morton, and M. F. Gonzalez-Zalba,
Nat. Electron. 2, 236 (2019).
[589] F. K. Malinowski, F. Martins, T. B. Smith, S. D.Bartlett, A. C. Doherty, P. D. Nissen, S. Fallahi, G. C.
Gardner, M. J. Manfra, et al., Nat. Commun. 10, 1196
(2019).
[590] B. Bertrand, S. Hermelin, S. Takada, M. Yamamoto,
S. Tarucha, A. Ludwig, A. D. Wieck, C. Bäuerle, and
T. Meunier, Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 672 (2016).
[591] X. Mi, J. V. Cady, D. M. Zajac, P. W. Deelman, and
J. R. Petta, Science 355, 156 (2017).
[592] P. C. Maurer, G. Kucsko, C. Latta, L. Jiang, N. Y. Yao,
S. D. Bennett, F. Pastawski, D. Hunger, N. Chisholm,
et al., Science336, 1283 (2012).
[593] K. S. Cujia, K. Herb, J. Zopes, J. M. Abendroth, and
C. L. Degen, Nat. Commun. 13, 1260 (2022).
[594] M. H. Abobeih, J. Randall, C. E. Bradley, H. P.
Bartling, M. A. Bakker, M. J. Degen, M. Markham,
D. J. Twitchen, et al., Nature576, 411 (2019).
[595] G. de Lange, T. van der Sar, M. Blok, Z.-H. Wang,
V. Dobrovitski, and R. Hanson, Sci. Rep. 2, 382 (2012).
[596] H. S.Knowles, D. M.Kara, andM. Atatüre, Phys. Rev.
Lett.117, 100802 (2016).
[597] M. J. Degen, S. J. H. Loenen, H. P. Bartling, C. E.
Bradley, A. L. Meinsma, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen,
and T. H. Taminiau, Nat. Commun. 12, 3470 (2021).
[598] M. H. Abobeih, J. Cramer, M. A. Bakker, N. Kalb,
M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, and T. H. Taminiau,
Nat. Commun. 9, 2552 (2018).
[599] H. P. Bartling, M. H. Abobeih, B. Pingault, M. J.
Degen, S. J. H. Loenen, C. E. Bradley, J. Randall,
M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, et al., Phys. Rev. X 12,
011048 (2022).
[600] N. Bar-Gill, L. M. Pham, A. Jarmola, D. Budker, and
R. L. Walsworth, Nat. Commun. 4, 1743 (2013).
[601] M.L.Goldman, A.Sipahigil, M.W.Doherty, N.Y.Yao,
S.D.Bennett, M.Markham, D.J.Twitchen,N.B.Man-
son, A. Kubanek, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 145502
(2015).
[602] G. Thiering and A. Gali, Phys. Rev. B 98, 085207
(2018).
[603] L. Robledo, L. Childress, H. Bernien, B. Hensen,
P. F. A. Alkemade, and R. Hanson, Nature 477, 574
(2011).
[604] N. Kalb, P. C. Humphreys, J. J. Slim, and R. Hanson,
Phys. Rev. A 97, 062330 (2018).
[605] B. Hensen, H. Bernien, A. E. Dréau, A. Reiserer,
N. Kalb, M. S. Blok, J. Ruitenberg, R. F. L. Vermeulen,
R. N. Schouten, et al., Nature526, 682 (2015).
[606] B. Smeltzer, L. Childress, and A. Gali, New J. Phys.
13, 025021 (2011).
[607] A. Dréau, J.-R. Maze, M. Lesik, J.-F. Roch, and
V. Jacques, Phys. Rev. B 85, 134107 (2012).
[608] V. Jacques, P. Neumann, J. Beck, M. Markham,
D. Twitchen, J. Meijer, F. Kaiser, G. Balasubramanian,
F. Jelezko, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 057403 (2009).
[609] P. London, J. Scheuer, J.-M. Cai, I. Schwarz, A. Ret-
zker, M. B. Plenio, M. Katagiri, T. Teraji, S. Koizumi,
et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 067601 (2013).
[610] I. Schwartz, J. Scheuer, B. Tratzmiller, S. Müller,
Q. Chen, I. Dhand, Z.-Y. Wang, C. Müller, B. Nay-
denov,et al., Sci. Adv. 4, eaat8978 (2018).
[611] T. Xie, Z. Zhao, X. Kong, W. Ma, M. Wang, X. Ye,
P. Yu, Z. Yang, S. Xu, et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabg9204
(2021).
[612] P. Neumann, J. Beck, M. Steiner, F. Rempp, H. Fedder,
P. R. Hemmer, J. Wrachtrup, and F. Jelezko, Science45
329, 542 (2010).
[613] G.-Q. Liu, J. Xing, W.-L. Ma, P. Wang, C.-H. Li, H. C.
Po, Y.-R. Zhang, H. Fan, R.-B. Liu, et al., Phys. Rev.
Lett.118, 150504 (2017).
[614] J. Randall, C. E. Bradley, F. V. van der Gron-
den, A. Galicia, M. H. Abobeih, M. Markham, D. J.
Twitchen, F. Machado, N. Y. Yao, et al., Science374,
1474 (2021).
[615] M. Pompili, S. L. N. Hermans, S. Baier, H. K. C. Beuk-
ers, P. C. Humphreys, R. N. Schouten, R. F. L. Ver-
meulen, M. J. Tiggelman, L. d. S. Martins, et al., Sci-
ence372, 259 (2021).
[616] Y.-X. Shang, F. Hong, J.-H. Dai, Hui-Yu, Y.-N. Lu,
E.-K. Liu, X.-H. Yu, G.-Q. Liu, and X.-Y. Pan, Chin.
Phys. Lett. 36, 086201 (2019).
[617] X. Rong, J. Geng, F. Shi, Y. Liu, K. Xu, W. Ma,
F. Kong, Z. Jiang, Y. Wu, et al., Nat. Commun. 6, 8748
(2015).
[618] G. D. Fuchs, V. V. Dobrovitski, D. M. Toyli, F. J. Here-
mans, and D. D. Awschalom, Science 326, 1520 (2009).
[619] F. Kong, P. Zhao, X. Ye, Z. Wang, Z. Qin, P. Yu, J. Su,
F. Shi, and J. Du, Nat. Commun. 9, 1563 (2018).
[620] J. Scheuer, X. Kong, R. S. Said, J. Chen, A. Kurz,
L. Marseglia, J. Du, P. R. Hemmer, S. Montangero,
et al., New J. Phys. 16, 093022 (2014).
[621] G. Balasubramanian, P. Neumann, D. Twitchen,
M. Markham, R. Kolesov, N. Mizuochi, J. Isoya,
J. Achard, J. Beck, et al., Nat. Mater. 8, 383 (2009).
[622] N. Zhao, S.-W. Ho, and R.-B. Liu, Phys. Rev. B 85,
115303 (2012).
[623] S.Kolkowitz, Q.P.Unterreithmeier, S.D.Bennett, and
M. D. Lukin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 137601 (2012).
[624] T. H. Taminiau, J. J. T. Wagenaar, T. van der Sar,
F. Jelezko, V. V. Dobrovitski, and R. Hanson, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 109, 137602 (2012).
[625] N. Zhao, J. Honert, B. Schmid, M. Klas, J. Isoya,
M. Markham, D. Twitchen, F. Jelezko, R.-B. Liu, et al.,
Nat. Nanotechnol. 7, 657 (2012).
[626] T. van der Sar, Z. H. Wang, M. S. Blok, H. Bernien,
T. H. Taminiau, D. M. Toyli, D. A. Lidar, D. D.
Awschalom, R. Hanson, et al., Nature484, 82 (2012).
[627] G.-Q. Liu, H. C. Po, J. Du, R.-B. Liu, and X.-Y. Pan,
Nat. Commun. 4, 2254 (2013).
[628] C. E. Bradley, J. Randall, M. H. Abobeih, R. C.
Berrevoets, M. J. Degen, M. A. Bakker, M. Markham,
D. J. Twitchen, and T. H. Taminiau, Phys. Rev. X 9,
031045 (2019).
[629] A. Reiserer, N. Kalb, M. S. Blok, K. J. M. van Bemme-
len, T. H. Taminiau, R. Hanson, D. J. Twitchen, and
M. Markham, Phys. Rev. X 6, 021040 (2016).
[630] F. Wang, Y.-Y. Huang, Z.-Y. Zhang, C. Zu, P.-Y. Hou,
X.-X. Yuan, W.-B. Wang, W.-G. Zhang, L. He, et al.,
Phys. Rev. B 96, 134314 (2017).
[631] C. Zu, W.-B. Wang, L. He, W.-G. Zhang, C.-Y. Dai,
F. Wang, and L.-M. Duan, Nature 514, 72 (2014).
[632] S. Arroyo-Camejo, A. Lazariev, S. W. Hell, and G. Bal-
asubramanian, Nat. Commun. 5, 4870 (2014).
[633] K. Arai, J. Lee, C. Belthangady, D. R. Glenn, H. Zhang,
and R. L. Walsworth, Nat. Commun. 9, 4996 (2018).
[634] Y.-Y. Huang, Y.-K. Wu, F. Wang, P.-Y. Hou, W.-B.
Wang, W.-G. Zhang, W.-Q. Lian, Y.-Q. Liu, H.-Y.
Wang,et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 010503 (2019).
[635] M. Hirose and P. Cappellaro, Nature 532, 77 (2016).
[636] I. Rojkov, D. Layden, P. Cappellaro, J. Home, andF. Reiter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 140503 (2022).
[637] W. Liu, Y. Wu, C.-K. Duan, X. Rong, and J. Du, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 126, 170506 (2021).
[638] M. Chen, C. Li, G. Palumbo, Y.-Q. Zhu, N. Goldman,
and P. Cappellaro, Science 375, 1017 (2022).
[639] W. Ji, Z. Chai, M. Wang, Y. Guo, X. Rong, F. Shi,
C. Ren, Y. Wang, and J. Du, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128,
090602 (2022).
[640] F. Kong, C. Ju, Y. Liu, C. Lei, M. Wang, X. Kong,
P. Wang, P. Huang, Z. Li, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 117,
060503 (2016).
[641] W. Ji, L. Zhang, M. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Guo, Z. Chai,
X. Rong, F. Shi, X.-J. Liu, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 125,
020504 (2020).
[642] Y. Wu, W. Liu, J. Geng, X. Song, X. Ye, C.-K. Duan,
X. Rong, and J. Du, Science 364, 878 (2019).
[643] W. Zhang, X. Ouyang, X. Huang, X. Wang, H. Zhang,
Y. Yu, X. Chang, Y. Liu, D.-L. Deng, et al., Phys. Rev.
Lett.127, 090501 (2021).
[644] Y.-N. Lu, Y.-R. Zhang, G.-Q. Liu, F. Nori, H. Fan, and
X.-Y. Pan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 210502 (2020).
[645] C. Zu, F. Machado, B. Ye, S. Choi, B. Kobrin, T. Mit-
tiga, S. Hsieh, P. Bhattacharyya, M. Markham, et al.,
Nature597, 45 (2021).
[646] F. Shi, X. Rong, N. Xu, Y. Wang, J. Wu, B. Chong,
X. Peng, J. Kniepert, R.-S. Schoenfeld, et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 105, 040504 (2010).
[647] K. Xu, T. Xie, Z. Li, X. Xu, M. Wang, X. Ye, F. Kong,
J. Geng, C. Duan, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 130504
(2017).
[648] J. Zhang, S. S. Hegde, and D. Suter, Phys. Rev. Lett.
125, 030501 (2020).
[649] X.-L. Ouyang, X.-Z. Huang, Y.-K. Wu, W.-G. Zhang,
X. Wang, H.-L. Zhang, L. He, X.-Y. Chang, and L.-M.
Duan, Phys. Rev. A 101, 012307 (2020).
[650] Z. Li, Z. Chai, Y. Guo, W. Ji, M. Wang, F. Shi,
Y. Wang, S. Lloyd, and J. Du, Sci. Adv. 7, eabg2589
(2021).
[651] H. Bernien, B. Hensen, W. Pfaff, G. Koolstra, M. S.
Blok, L. Robledo, T. H. Taminiau, M. Markham, D. J.
Twitchen, et al., Nature497, 86 (2013).
[652] W. Pfaff, B. J. Hensen, H. Bernien, S. B. van Dam,
M. S. Blok, T. H. Taminiau, M. J. Tiggelman, R. N.
Schouten, M. Markham, et al., Science345, 532 (2014).
[653] N. Kalb, A. A. Reiserer, P. C. Humphreys, J. J. W.
Bakermans, S. J. Kamerling, N. H. Nickerson, S. C.
Benjamin, D. J. Twitchen, M. Markham, et al., Science
356, 928 (2017).
[654] P. C. Humphreys, N. Kalb, J. P. J. Morits, R. N.
Schouten, R. F. L. Vermeulen, D. J. Twitchen,
M. Markham, and R. Hanson, Nature 558, 268 (2018).
[655] S. L. N. Hermans, M. Pompili, H. K. C. Beukers,
S. Baier, J. Borregaard, and R. Hanson, Nature 605,
663 (2022).
[656] F. Shi, X. Kong, P. Wang, F. Kong, N. Zhao, R.-B. Liu,
and J. Du, Nat. Phys. 10, 21 (2014).
[657] K. Arai, C. Belthangady, H. Zhang, N. Bar-Gill, S. J.
DeVience, P. Cappellaro, A. Yacoby, and R. L.
Walsworth, Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 859 (2015).
[658] S. Schmitt, T. Gefen, F. M. Stürner, T. Unden,
G. Wolff, C. Müller, J. Scheuer, B. Naydenov,
M. Markham, et al., Science356, 832 (2017).
[659] I. Lovchinsky, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, E. K. Ur-
bach, S. Choi, S. Fang, T. I. Andersen, K. Watan-46
abe, T. Taniguchi, A. Bylinskii, et al., Science355, 503
(2017).
[660] F. Casola, T. van der Sar, and A. Yacoby, Nat. Rev.
Mater.3, 1 (2018).
[661] Q. Jin, Z. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Yu, S. Lin, S. Chen,
M. Qi, H. Bai, A. Huon, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 128,
017202 (2022).
[662] L. P. McGuinness, Y. Yan, A. Stacey, D. A. Simp-
son, L. T. Hall, D. Maclaurin, S. Prawer, P. Mulvaney,
J. Wrachtrup, et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 6, 358 (2011).
[663] F. Shi, Q. Zhang, P. Wang, H. Sun, J. Wang, X. Rong,
M. Chen, C. Ju, F. Reinhard, et al., Science347, 1135
(2015).
[664] Y. Wu, F. Jelezko, M. B. Plenio, and T. Weil, Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. 55, 6586 (2016).
[665] F. Dolde, H. Fedder, M. W. Doherty, T. Nöbauer,
F. Rempp, G. Balasubramanian, T. Wolf, F. Reinhard,
L. C. L. Hollenberg, et al., Nat. Phys. 7, 459 (2011).
[666] F. Dolde, M. W. Doherty, J. Michl, I. Jakobi, B. Nay-
denov, S. Pezzagna, J. Meijer, P. Neumann, F. Jelezko,
N. B. Manson, and J. Wrachtrup, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112,
097603 (2014).
[667] T. Mittiga, S. Hsieh, C. Zu, B. Kobrin, F. Machado,
P. Bhattacharyya, N. Z. Rui, A. Jarmola, S. Choi, et al.,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 246402 (2018).
[668] R. Li, F. Kong, P. Zhao, Z. Cheng, Z. Qin, M. Wang,
Q. Zhang, P. Wang, Y. Wang, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.
124, 247701 (2020).
[669] G. Kucsko, P. C. Maurer, N. Y. Yao, M. Kubo, H. J.
Noh, P. K. Lo, H. Park, and M. D. Lukin, Nature 500,
54 (2013).
[670] P. Neumann, I. Jakobi, F. Dolde, C. Burk, R. Reuter,
G. Waldherr, J. Honert, T. Wolf, A. Brunner, et al.,
Nano Lett. 13, 2738 (2013).
[671] M. W. Doherty, V. V. Struzhkin, D. A. Simpson, L. P.
McGuinness, Y. Meng, A. Stacey, T. J. Karle, R. J.
Hemley, N. B. Manson, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 112,
047601 (2014).
[672] H. Zheng, J. Xu, G. Z. Iwata, T. Lenz, J. Michl,
B.Yavkin,K.Nakamura, H.Sumiya,T.Ohshima, et al.,
Phys. Rev. Appl. 11, 064068 (2019).
[673] P. J. Vetter, A. Marshall, G. T. Genov, T. F. Weiss,
N.Striegler, E.F.Großmann, S.Oviedo-Casado, J.Cer-
rillo, J.Prior, et al.,Phys.Rev.Appl. 17,044028(2022).
[674] S. Hsieh, P. Bhattacharyya, C. Zu, T. Mittiga, T. J.
Smart, F. Machado, B. Kobrin, T. O. Höhn, N. Z. Rui,
et al., Science366, 1349 (2019).
[675] M. Lesik, T. Plisson, L. Toraille, J. Renaud, F. Occelli,
M. Schmidt, O. Salord, A. Delobbe, T. Debuisschert,
et al., Science366, 1359 (2019).
[676] K. Y. Yip, K. O. Ho, K. Y. Yu, Y. Chen, W. Zhang,
S. Kasahara, Y. Mizukami, T. Shibauchi, Y. Matsuda,
et al., Science366, 1355 (2019).
[677] Z. Wang, C. McPherson, R. Kadado, N. Brandt, S. Ed-
wards, W. Casey, and N. Curro, Phys. Rev. Appl. 16,
054014 (2021).
[678] J.-H. Dai, Y.-X. Shang, Y.-H. Yu, Y. Xu, H. Yu,
F. Hong, X.-H. Yu, X.-Y. Pan, and G.-Q. Liu, arXiv:
2204.05064 (2022).
[679] G.-Q. Liu, X. Feng, N. Wang, Q. Li, and R.-B. Liu,
Nat. Commun. 10, 1344 (2019).
[680] Y. Chen, S. Stearn, S. Vella, A. Horsley, and M. W.
Doherty, New J. Phys. 22, 093068 (2020).
[681] E. M. Kessler, I. Lovchinsky, A. O. Sushkov, and M. D.Lukin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 150802 (2014).
[682] D. Layden, S. Zhou, P. Cappellaro, and L. Jiang, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 122, 040502 (2019).
[683] J. F. Barry, J. M. Schloss, E. Bauch, M. J. Turner, C. A.
Hart, L. M. Pham, and R. L. Walsworth, Rev. Mod.
Phys.92, 015004 (2020).
[684] K.Groot-Berning,T.Kornher,G.Jacob,F.Stopp,S.T.
Dawkins, R. Kolesov, J. Wrachtrup, K. Singer, and
F. Schmidt-Kaler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 106802 (2019).
[685] T. Lühmann, R. John, R. Wunderlich, J. Meijer, and
S. Pezzagna, Nat. Commun. 10, 4956 (2019).
[686] Y.Chu, N.deLeon, B.Shields, B.Hausmann, R.Evans,
E. Togan, M. J. Burek, M. Markham, A. Stacey, et al.,
Nano Lett. 14, 1982 (2014).
[687] M. Wang, H. Sun, X. Ye, P. Yu, H. Liu, J. Zhou,
P. Wang, F. Shi, Y. Wang, et al., arXiv: 2203.09320
(2022).
[688] N. H. Wan, B. J. Shields, D. Kim, S. Mouradian,
B. Lienhard, M. Walsh, H. Bakhru, T. Schröder, and
D. Englund, Nano Lett. 18, 2787 (2018).
[689] F. M. Hrubesch, G. Braunbeck, M. Stutzmann, F. Rein-
hard, and M. S. Brandt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 037601
(2017).
[690] P. Siyushev, M. Nesladek, E. Bourgeois, M. Gulka,
J. Hruby, T. Yamamoto, M. Trupke, T. Teraji, J. Isoya,
et al., Science363, 728 (2019).
[691] R. Laflamme, E. Knill, D. G. Cory, E. M. Fortunato,
T. F. Havel, C. Miquel, R. Martinez, C. J. Negrevergne,
G. Ortiz, et al., Los Alamos Science 27, 344 (2002).
[692] D. G. Cory, M. D. Price, and T. F. Havel, Prog. Nucl.
Magn. Reson. Spectrosc. 59, 91 (2011).
[693] L. M. K. Vandersypen, M. Steffen, G. Breyta, C. S.
Yannoni, M. H. Sherwood, and I. L. Chuang, Nature
414, 883 (2001).
[694] C. Negrevergne, T. S. Mahesh, C. A. Ryan, M. Ditty,
F. Cyr-Racine, W. Power, N. Boulant, T. Havel, D. G.
Cory,et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 170501 (2006).
[695] J.Li,Z.Luo,T.Xin,H.Wang,D.Kribs,D.Lu,B.Zeng,
and R. Laflamme, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 030502 (2019).
[696] D. Lu, K. Li, J. Li, H. Katiyar, A. J. Park, G. Feng,
T. Xin, H. Li, G. Long, et al., npj Quantum Inf. 3, 45
(2017).
[697] R. Laflamme, E. Knill, D. Cory, E. Fortunato, T. Havel,
C. Miquel, R. Martinez, C. Negrevergne, G. Ortiz,
M. Pravia, et al., arXiv preprint quant-ph/0207172
(2002).
[698] M. Pravia, E. Fortunato, Y. Weinstein, M. D. Price,
G. Teklemariam, R. J. Nelson, Y. Sharf, S. Somaroo,
C. H. Tseng, et al., Concept. Magn. Reson. 11, 225
(1999).
[699] X. Peng, X. Zhu, X. Fang, M. Feng, K. Gao, X. Yang,
and M. Liu, Chem. Phys. Lett. 340, 509 (2001).
[700] E. Knill, R. Laflamme, R. Martinez, and C.-H. Tseng,
Nature404, 368 (2000).
[701] W. Zheng, H. Wang, T. Xin, X. Nie, D. Lu, and J. Li,
Phys. Rev. A 100, 022313 (2019).
[702] P. O. Boykin, T. Mor, V. Roychowdhury, F. Vatan, and
R.Vrijen,Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A. 99,3388(2002).
[703] M. S. Anwar, D. Blazina, H. A. Carteret, S. B. Duckett,
T. K. Halstead, J. A. Jones, C. M. Kozak, and R. J. K.
Taylor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 040501 (2004).
[704] R. Freeman, Chem. Rev. 91, 1397 (1991).
[705] C. A. Ryan, C. Negrevergne, M. Laforest, E. Knill, and
R. Laflamme, Phys. Rev. A 78, 012328 (2008).47
[706] L. M. K. Vandersypen and I. L. Chuang, Rev. Mod.
Phys.76, 1037 (2005).
[707] C. A. Ryan, M. Laforest, and R. Laflamme, New J.
Phys.11, 013034 (2009).
[708] D. Lu, H. Li, D.-A. Trottier, J. Li, A. Brodutch, A. P.
Krismanich, A. Ghavami, G. I. Dmitrienko, G. Long,
et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 140505 (2015).
[709] J. A. Jones, V. Vedral, A. Ekert, and G. Castagnoli,
Nature403, 869 (2000).
[710] G. Feng, G. Xu, and G. Long, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110,
190501 (2013).
[711] N. Khaneja, R. Brockett, and S. J. Glaser, Phys. Rev.
A63, 032308 (2001).
[712] D. D’Alessandro, Introduction to Quantum Control and
Dynamics (CRC Press, 2021).
[713] N. Khaneja, T. Reiss, C. Kehlet, T. Schulte-
Herbrüggen, and S. J. Glaser, J. Magn. Reson. 172,
296 (2005).
[714] J. Li, X. Yang, X. Peng, and C.-P. Sun, Phys. Rev.
Lett.118, 150503 (2017).
[715] A. M. Souza, G. A. Alvarez, and D. Suter, Phys. Rev.
Lett.106, 240501 (2011).
[716] A. M. Souza, G. A. Álvarez, and D. Suter, Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. A 370, 4748 (2012).
[717] H. K. Cummins, C. Jones, A. Furze, N. F. Soffe,
M. Mosca, J. M. Peach, and J. A. Jones, Phys. Rev.
Lett.88, 187901 (2002).
[718] J. Du, T. Durt, P. Zou, H. Li, L. C. Kwek, C. H. Lai,
C. H. Oh, and A. Ekert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 040505
(2005).
[719] H. Chen, D. Lu, B. Chong, G. Qin, X. Zhou, X. Peng,
and J. Du, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 180404 (2011).
[720] D. G. Cory, M. D. Price, W. Maas, E. Knill,
R. Laflamme, W. H. Zurek, T. F. Havel, and S. S.
Somaroo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2152 (1998).
[721] J. Zhang, R. Laflamme, and D. Suter, Phys. Rev. Lett.
109, 100503 (2012).
[722] T. B. Batalhão, A. M. Souza, L. Mazzola, R. Auccaise,
R. S. Sarthour, I. S. Oliveira, J. Goold, G. De Chiara,
M. Paternostro, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 140601
(2014).
[723] P. A. Camati, J. P. Peterson, T. B. Batalhão, K. Mi-
cadei, A. M. Souza, R. S. Sarthour, I. S. Oliveira, and
R. M. Serra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 240502 (2016).
[724] K. Micadei, J. P. Peterson, A. M. Souza, R. S. Sarthour,
I. S. Oliveira, G. T. Landi, T. B. Batalhão, R. M. Serra,
and E. Lutz, Nat. Commun. 10, 1 (2019).
[725] X. Nie, X. Zhu, K. Huang, K. Tang, X. Long, Z. Lin,
Y. Tian, C. Qiu, C. Xi, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 129,
100603 (2022).
[726] O. Moussa, C. A. Ryan, D. G. Cory, and R. Laflamme,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 160501 (2010).
[727] I. L. Chuang, L. M. K. Vandersypen, X. Zhou, D. W.
Leung, and S. Lloyd, Nature 393, 143 (1998).
[728] J. A. Jones, M. Mosca, and R. H. Hansen, Nature 393,
344 (1998).
[729] Y. S. Weinstein, M. A. Pravia, E. M. Fortunato,
S. Lloyd, and D. G. Cory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1889
(2001).
[730] J. Zhang, M.-H. Yung, R. Laflamme, A. Aspuru-Guzik,
and J. Baugh, Nat. Commun. 3, 1 (2012).
[731] X. Peng, J. Zhang, J. Du, and D. Suter, Phys. Rev.
Lett.103, 140501 (2009).
[732] X. Peng, H. Zhou, B.-B. Wei, J. Cui, J. Du, and R.-B.Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 010601 (2015).
[733] J. Li, R. Fan, H. Wang, B. Ye, B. Zeng, H. Zhai,
X. Peng, and J. Du, Phys. Rev. X 7, 031011 (2017).
[734] X. Nie, B.-B. Wei, X. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Zhao, C. Qiu,
Y. Tian, Y. Ji, T. Xin, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 124,
250601 (2020).
[735] J. Du, N. Xu, X. Peng, P. Wang, S. Wu, and D. Lu,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 030502 (2010).
[736] Z. Li, X. Liu, H. Wang, S. Ashhab, J. Cui, H. Chen,
X. Peng, and J. Du, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 090504
(2019).
[737] D. Lu, N. Xu, R. Xu, H. Chen, J. Gong, X. Peng, and
J. Du, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 020501 (2011).
[738] Z. Luo, J. Li, Z. Li, L.-Y. Hung, Y. Wan, X. Peng, and
J. Du, Nat. Phys. 14, 160 (2018).
[739] K. Li, Y. Wan, L.-Y. Hung, T. Lan, G. Long, D. Lu,
B. Zeng, and R. Laflamme, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118,
080502 (2017).
[740] Z. Lin, L. Zhang, X. Long, Y.-a. Fan, Y. Li, K. Tang,
J. Li, X. Nie, T. Xin, et al., npj Quantum Inf. 8, 1
(2022).
[741] Z. Zhang, X. Long, X. Zhao, Z. Lin, K. Tang, H. Liu,
X. Yang, X. Nie, J. Wu, et al., Phys. Rev. A 105,
L030402 (2022).
[742] Z. Li, X. Liu, N. Xu, and J. Du, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114,
140504 (2015).
[743] X.-W.Yao, H.Wang, Z.Liao, M.-C.Chen, J.Pan, J.Li,
K. Zhang, X. Lin, Z. Wang, et al., Phys. Rev. X 7,
031041 (2017).
[744] T. Xin, L. Che, C. Xi, A. Singh, X. Nie, J. Li, Y. Dong,
and D. Lu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 110502 (2021).
[745] C. A. Ryan, O. Moussa, J. Baugh, and R. Laflamme,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 140501 (2008).
[746] G. A. Álvarez, D. Suter, and R. Kaiser, Science 349,
846 (2015).
[747] K. X. Wei, C. Ramanathan, and P. Cappellaro, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 120, 070501 (2018).
[748] K. X. Wei, P. Peng, O. Shtanko, I. Marvian, S. Lloyd,
C. Ramanathan, and P. Cappellaro, Phys. Rev. Lett.
123, 090605 (2019).
[749] P. Peng, C. Yin, X. Huang, C. Ramanathan, and
P. Cappellaro, Nat. Phys. 17, 444 (2021).
[750] S.Asaad,V.Mourik,B.Joecker,M.A.I.Johnson,A.D.
Baczewski, H. R. Firgau, M. T. Madzik, V. Schmitt,
J. J. Pla, et al., Nature579, 205 (2020).
[751] M. Saffman, T. G. Walker, and K. Mølmer, Rev. Mod.
Phys.82, 2313 (2010).
[752] M. Saffman, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 49, 202001
(2016).
[753] A. Browaeys and T. Lahaye, Nat. Phys. 16, 132 (2020).
[754] L. Henriet, L. Beguin, A. Signoles, T. Lahaye,
A. Browaeys, G.-O. Reymond, and C. Jurczak, Quan-
tum4, 327 (2020).
[755] M. Morgado and S. Whitlock, AVS Quantum Science 3,
023501 (2021).
[756] A. Cooper, J. P. Covey, I. S. Madjarov, S. G. Por-
sev, M. S. Safronova, and M. Endres, Phys. Rev. X
8, 041055 (2018).
[757] M. A. Norcia, A. W. Young, and A. M. Kaufman, Phys.
Rev. X8, 041054 (2018).
[758] S. Saskin, J. T. Wilson, B. Grinkemeyer, and J. D.
Thompson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 143002 (2019).
[759] A. M. Kaufman and K.-K. Ni, Nat. Phys. 17, 1324
(2021).48
[760] N. Schlosser, G. Reymond, I. Protsenko, and P. Grang-
ier, Nature 411, 1024 (2001).
[761] N. Schlosser, G. Reymond, and P. Grangier, Phys. Rev.
Lett.89, 023005 (2002).
[762] T. Grünzweig, A. Hilliard, M. McGovern, and M. F.
Andersen, Nat. Phys. 6, 951 (2010).
[763] B. J. Lester, N. Luick, A. M. Kaufman, C. M. Reynolds,
and C. A. Regal, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 073003 (2015).
[764] M. O. Brown, T. Thiele, C. Kiehl, T.-W. Hsu, and
C. A. Regal, Phys. Rev. X 9, 011057 (2019).
[765] M. M. Aliyu, L. Zhao, X. Q. Quek, K. C. Yellapragada,
and H. Loh, Phys. Rev. Res. 3, 043059 (2021).
[766] A. Jenkins, J. W. Lis, A. Senoo, W. F. McGrew, and
A. M. Kaufman, Phys. Rev. X 12, 021027 (2022).
[767] D. Barredo, S. de Léséleuc, V. Lienhard, T. Lahaye,
and A. Browaeys, Science 354, 1021 (2016).
[768] M. Endres, H. Bernien, A. Keesling, H. Levine, E. R.
Anschuetz, A. Krajenbrink, C. Senko, V. Vuletic,
M. Greiner, et al., Science354, 1024 (2016).
[769] D. Barredo, V. Lienhard, S. De Leseleuc, T. Lahaye,
and A. Browaeys, Nature 561, 79 (2018).
[770] T. M. Graham, M. Kwon, B. Grinkemeyer, Z. Marra,
X. Jiang, M. T. Lichtman, Y. Sun, M. Ebert, and
M. Saffman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 230501 (2019).
[771] P. Scholl, M. Schuler, H. J. Williams, A. A. Eberharter,
D. Barredo, K.-N. Schymik, V. Lienhard, L.-P. Henry,
T. C. Lang, et al., Nature595, 233 (2021).
[772] S. Ebadi, T. T. Wang, H. Levine, A. Keesling,
G. Semeghini, A. Omran, D. Bluvstein, R. Samajdar,
H. Pichler, et al., Nature595, 227 (2021).
[773] K.-N. Schymik, S. Pancaldi, F. Nogrette, D. Barredo,
J. Paris, A. Browaeys, and T. Lahaye, Phys. Rev. Appl.
16, 034013 (2021).
[774] K.-N. Schymik, B. Ximenez, E. Bloch, D. Dreon, A. Sig-
noles,F.Nogrette,D.Barredo,A.Browaeys, andT.La-
haye, Phys. Rev. A 106, 022611 (2022).
[775] S. De Léséleuc, D. Barredo, V. Lienhard, A. Browaeys,
and T. Lahaye, Phys. Rev. A 97, 053803 (2018).
[776] M. J. Gibbons, C. D. Hamley, C.-Y. Shih, and M. S.
Chapman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 133002 (2011).
[777] A. Fuhrmanek, R. Bourgain, Y. R. P. Sortais, and
A. Browaeys, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 133003 (2011).
[778] Y.-Y. Jau, A. M. Hankin, T. Keating, I. H. Deutsch,
and G. W. Biedermann, Nat. Phys. 12, 71 (2016).
[779] M. Kwon, M. F. Ebert, T. G. Walker, and M. Saffman,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 180504 (2017).
[780] S. Yu, P. Xu, M. Liu, X. He, J. Wang, and M. Zhan,
Phys. Rev. A 90, 062335 (2014).
[781] T. Xia, M. Lichtman, K. Maller, A. W. Carr, M. J.
Piotrowicz, L. Isenhower, and M. Saffman, Phys. Rev.
Lett.114, 100503 (2015).
[782] D. Bluvstein, H. Levine, G. Semeghini, T. T. Wang,
S. Ebadi, M. Kalinowski, A. Keesling, N. Maskara,
H. Pichler, et al., Nature604, 451 (2022).
[783] A. M. Kaufman, B. J. Lester, M. Foss-Feig, M. L. Wall,
A. M. Rey, and C. A. Regal, Nature 527, 208 (2015).
[784] T. Wilk, A. Gaëtan, C. Evellin, J. Wolters, Y. Mirosh-
nychenko, P. Grangier, and A. Browaeys, Phys. Rev.
Lett.104, 010502 (2010).
[785] L. Isenhower, E. Urban, X. L. Zhang, A. T. Gill,
T. Henage, T. A. Johnson, T. G. Walker, and
M. Saffman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 010503 (2010).
[786] H. Levine, A. Keesling, A. Omran, H. Bernien,
S. Schwartz, A. S. Zibrov, M. Endres, M. Greiner,V. Vuletić, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 123603 (2018).
[787] H. Levine, A. Keesling, G. Semeghini, A. Omran, T. T.
Wang, S. Ebadi, H. Bernien, M. Greiner, V. Vuletić,
et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 170503 (2019).
[788] S. Ma, A. P. Burgers, G. Liu, J. Wilson, B. Zhang, and
J. D. Thompson, Phys. Rev. X 12, 021028 (2022).
[789] I. S. Madjarov, J. P. Covey, A. L. Shaw, J. Choi,
A. Kale, A. Cooper, H. Pichler, V. Schkolnik, J. R.
Williams, et al., Nat. Phys. 16, 857 (2020).
[790] J. T. Wilson, S. Saskin, Y. Meng, S. Ma, R. Dilip, A. P.
Burgers, and J. D. Thompson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128,
033201 (2022).
[791] T. M. Graham, Y. Song, J. Scott, C. Poole, L. Phutti-
tarn, K. Jooya, P. Eichler, X. Jiang, A. Marra, et al.,
Nature604, 457 (2022).
[792] T. Gullion, D. B. Baker, and M. S. Conradi, J. Magn.
Reson.89, 479 (1990).
[793] J. Yang, X. He, R. Guo, P. Xu, K. Wang, C. Sheng,
M. Liu, J. Wang, A. Derevianko, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.
117, 123201 (2016).
[794] K. Barnes, P. Battaglino, B. J. Bloom, K. Cassella,
R. Coxe, N. Crisosto, J. P. King, S. S. Kondov,
K. Kotru, et al., Nat. Commun. 13, 1 (2022).
[795] S. Ebadi, A. Keesling, M. Cain, T. T. Wang, H. Levine,
D. Bluvstein, G. Semeghini, A. Omran, J.-G. Liu, et al.,
Science376, 1209 (2022).
[796] H. Labuhn, D. Barredo, S. Ravets, S. De Léséleuc,
T. Macrì, T. Lahaye, and A. Browaeys, Nature 534,
667 (2016).
[797] S.DeLéséleuc,S.Weber,V.Lienhard,D.Barredo,H.P.
Büchler, T. Lahaye, and A. Browaeys, Phys. Rev. Lett.
120, 113602 (2018).
[798] H. Kim, Y. Park, K. Kim, H.-S. Sim, and J. Ahn, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 120, 180502 (2018).
[799] M. Kim, Y. Song, J. Kim, and J. Ahn, PRX Quantum
1, 020323 (2020).
[800] Y.Song, M.Kim, H.Hwang, W.Lee, andJ.Ahn,Phys.
Rev. Res. 3, 013286 (2021).
[801] H.Bernien, S.Schwartz, A.Keesling, H.Levine, A.Om-
ran, H. Pichler, S. Choi, A. S. Zibrov, M. Endres, et al.,
Nature551, 579 (2017).
[802] A. Keesling, A. Omran, H. Levine, H. Bernien, H. Pich-
ler, S. Choi, R. Samajdar, S. Schwartz, P. Silvi, et al.,
Nature568, 207 (2019).
[803] V. Lienhard, S. de Léséleuc, D. Barredo, T. Lahaye,
A. Browaeys, M. Schuler, L.-P. Henry, and A. M.
Läuchli, Phys. Rev. X 8, 021070 (2018).
[804] D. Bluvstein, A. Omran, H. Levine, A. Keesling, G. Se-
meghini, S. Ebadi, T. T. Wang, A. A. Michailidis,
N. Maskara, et al., Science371, 1355 (2021).
[805] G. Semeghini, H. Levine, A. Keesling, S. Ebadi, T. T.
Wang, D. Bluvstein, R. Verresen, H. Pichler, M. Kali-
nowski,et al., Science374, 1242 (2021).
[806] S. de Léséleuc, V. Lienhard, P. Scholl, D. Barredo,
S. Weber, N. Lang, H. P. Büchler, T. Lahaye, and
A. Browaeys, Science 365, 775 (2019).
[807] P. Scholl, H. J. Williams, G. Bornet, F. Wallner,
D. Barredo, L. Henriet, A. Signoles, C. Hainaut,
T. Franz, et al., PRX Quantum 3, 020303 (2022).
[808] A. M. Kaufman, B. J. Lester, and C. A. Regal, Phys.
Rev. X2, 041014 (2012).
[809] J. D. Thompson, T. G. Tiecke, A. S. Zibrov, V. Vuletić,
and M. D. Lukin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 133001 (2013).
[810] D. V. Vasilyev, A. Grankin, M. A. Baranov, L. M.49
Sieberer, and P. Zoller, PRX Quantum 1, 020302
(2020).
[811] K. Singh, S. Anand, A. Pocklington, J. T. Kemp, and
H. Bernien, Phys. Rev. X 12, 011040 (2022).
[812] E. Knill, R. Laflamme, and G. J. Milburn, Nature 409,
46 (2001).
[813] S. Aaronson and A. Arkhipov, in Proceedings of the
forty-third annual ACM symposium on Theory of com-
puting(2011) pp. 333–342.
[814] C. S. Hamilton, R. Kruse, L. Sansoni, S. Barkhofen,
C. Silberhorn, and I. Jex, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 170501
(2017).
[815] P. Kok, W. J. Munro, K. Nemoto, T. C. Ralph, J. P.
Dowling, and G. J. Milburn, Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 135
(2007).
[816] J.-W. Pan, Z.-B. Chen, C.-Y. Lu, H. Weinfurter,
A. Zeilinger, and M. Żukowski, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84,
777 (2012).
[817] H.-S. Zhong, Y. Li, W. Li, L.-C. Peng, Z.-E. Su, Y. Hu,
Y.-M. He, X. Ding, W. Zhang, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.
121, 250505 (2018).
[818] X.-L. Wang, Y.-H. Luo, H.-L. Huang, M.-C. Chen, Z.-
E. Su, C. Liu, C. Chen, W. Li, Y.-Q. Fang, et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 120, 260502 (2018).
[819] P.Thomas, L.Ruscio, O.Morin, andG.Rempe,Nature
608, 677 (2022).
[820] H.-S. Zhong, Y.-H. Deng, J. Qin, H. Wang, M.-C. Chen,
L.-C. Peng, Y.-H. Luo, D. Wu, S.-Q. Gong, et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 127, 180502 (2021).
[821] C. K. Hong, Z. Y. Ou, and L. Mandel, Phys. Rev. Lett.
59, 2044 (1987).
[822] R. Ghosh and L. Mandel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 1903
(1987).
[823] P. G. Kwiat, K. Mattle, H. Weinfurter, A. Zeilinger,
A. V. Sergienko, and Y. Shih, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75,
4337 (1995).
[824] F. Kaneda, B. G. Christensen, J. J. Wong, H. S. Park,
K. T. McCusker, and P. G. Kwiat, Optica 2, 1010
(2015).
[825] J. F. Clauser, Phys. Rev. D 9, 853 (1974).
[826] H. J. Kimble, M. Dagenais, and L. Mandel, Phys. Rev.
Lett.39, 691 (1977).
[827] F. Diedrich and H. Walther, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 203
(1987).
[828] W. E. Moerner and L. Kador, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2535
(1989).
[829] P. Michler, A. Kiraz, C. Becher, W. V. Schoenfeld,
P. Petroff, L. Zhang, E. L. Hu, and A. Imamoglu, Sci-
ence290, 2282 (2000).
[830] C. Kurtsiefer, S. Mayer, P. Zarda, and H. Weinfurter,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 290 (2000).
[831] S. Castelletto, B. C. Johnson, V. Ivady, N. Stavrias,
T. Umeda, A. Gali, and T. Ohshima, Nat. Mater. 13,
151 (2013).
[832] T. T. Tran, K. Bray, M. J. Ford, M. Toth, and
I. Aharonovich, Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 37 (2016).
[833] P. Senellart, G. Solomon, and A. White, Nat. Nan-
otechnol.12, 1026 (2017).
[834] N. Tomm, A. Javadi, N. O. Antoniadis, D. Najer, M. C.
Löbl, A. R. Korsch, R. Schott, S. R. Valentin, A. D.
Wieck,et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 16, 399 (2021).
[835] H. Wang, Y.-M. He, T.-H. Chung, H. Hu, Y. Yu,
S. Chen, X. Ding, M.-C. Chen, J. Qin, et al., Nat. Pho-
tonics13, 770 (2019).[836] M.Varnava, D.E.Browne, andT.Rudolph,Phys.Rev.
Lett.100, 060502 (2008).
[837] S. L. Braunstein and P. Van Loock, Rev. Mod. phys.
77, 513 (2005).
[838] S. Lloyd and S. L. Braunstein, in Quantum information
with continuous variables (Springer, 1999) pp. 9–17.
[839] D. Gottesman, A. Kitaev, and J. Preskill, Phys. Rev.
A64, 012310 (2001).
[840] H.Vahlbruch, M.Mehmet, K.Danzmann, andR.Schn-
abel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 110801 (2016).
[841] A. Furusawa, J. L. Sørensen, S. L. Braunstein, C. A.
Fuchs, H. J. Kimble, and E. S. Polzik, Science 282,
706 (1998).
[842] M. V. Larsen, X. Guo, C. R. Breum, J. S. Neergaard-
Nielsen, and U. L. Andersen, Science 366, 369 (2019).
[843] W. Asavanant, Y. Shiozawa, S. Yokoyama, B. Charoen-
sombutamon, H. Emura, R. N. Alexander, S. Takeda,
J.-i. Yoshikawa, N. C. Menicucci, et al., Science 366,
373 (2019).
[844] M. Reck, A. Zeilinger, H. J. Bernstein, and P. Bertani,
Physical review letters 73, 58 (1994).
[845] W. R. Clements, P. C. Humphreys, B. J. Metcalf, W. S.
Kolthammer, and I. A. Walmsley, Optica 3, 1460
(2016).
[846] H. Wang, Y. He, Y.-H. Li, Z.-E. Su, B. Li, H.-L. Huang,
X. Ding, M.-C. Chen, C. Liu, J. Qin, et al., Nat. Pho-
tonics11, 361 (2017).
[847] H. Wang, J. Qin, X. Ding, M. Chen, S. Chen, X. You,
Y. He, L. You, Z. M. Wang, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 123,
250503 (2019).
[848] Y.He, X.Ding, Z.-E.Su, H.-L.Huang, J.Qin, C.Wang,
S. Unsleber, C. Chen, H. Wang, et al., Phys. Rev. lett.
118, 190501 (2017).
[849] J. B. Spring, B. J. Metcalf, P. C. Humphreys,
W. S. Kolthammer, X. Jin, M. Barbieri, A. Datta,
N. Thomaspeter, N. K. Langford, et al., Science339,
798 (2013).
[850] M. Tillmann, B. Dakic, R. Heilmann, S. Nolte, A. Sza-
meit, and P. Walther, Nat. Photonics 7, 540 (2013).
[851] A. Crespi, R. Osellame, R. Ramponi, D. J. Brod, E. F.
Galvao, N. Spagnolo, C. Vitelli, E. Maiorino, P. Mat-
aloni,et al., Nat. Photonics 7, 545 (2013).
[852] J. Preskill, arXiv: 1203.5813 (2012).
[853] M. A. Broome, A. Fedrizzi, S. Rahimikeshari, J. Dove,
S. Aaronson, T. C. Ralph, and A. White, Science 339,
794 (2013).
[854] A. P. Lund, A. Laing, S. Rahimikeshari, T. Rudolph,
J. L. Obrien, and T. C. Ralph, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,
100502 (2014).
[855] M. Bentivegna, N. Spagnolo, C. Vitelli, F. Flamini,
N. Viggianiello, L. Latmiral, P. Mataloni, D. J. Brod,
E. F. Galvao, et al., Sci. Adv. 1, e1400255 (2015).
[856] K. R. Motes, A. Gilchrist, J. P. Dowling, and P. P.
Rohde, Physical review letters 113, 120501 (2014).
[857] J. Huh, G. G. Guerreschi, B. Peropadre, J. R. McClean,
and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Nat. Photonics 9, 615 (2015).
[858] J.M.ArrazolaandT.R.Bromley,Phys.Rev.Lett. 121,
030503 (2018).
[859] C. Sparrow, E. Martín-López, N. Maraviglia, A. Neville,
C. Harrold, J. Carolan, Y. N. Joglekar, T. Hashimoto,
N. Matsuda, et al., Nature557, 660 (2018).
[860] L. Banchi, M. Fingerhuth, T. Babej, C. Ing, and J. M.
Arrazola, Sci. Adv. 6, eaax1950 (2020).
[861] J. Preskill, Quantum 2, 79 (2018).50
[862] T. M. Stace, S. D. Barrett, and A. C. Doherty, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 102, 200501 (2009).
[863] B. M. Terhal, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 307 (2015).
[864] M. Pant, D. Towsley, D. Englund, and S. Guha, Nat.
Commun. 10, 1 (2019).
[865] K. Fukui, A. Tomita, A. Okamoto, and K. Fujii, Phys-
ical review X 8, 021054 (2018).
[866] D. E. Chang, V. Vuletić, and M. D. Lukin, Nat. Pho-
tonics8, 685 (2014).
[867] M. Fleischhauer, A. Imamoglu, and J. P. Marangos,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 633 (2005).
[868] L.-M. Duan and H. Kimble, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 127902
(2004).[869] A.V.Gorshkov, J.Otterbach, M.Fleischhauer, T.Pohl,
and M. D. Lukin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 133602 (2011).
[870] Z. Chen, Y. Zhou, J.-T. Shen, P.-C. Ku, and D. Steel,
Phy. Rev. A 103, 052610 (2021).
[871] B. Hacker, S. Welte, G. Rempe, and S. Ritter, Nature
536, 193 (2016).
[872] D. Tiarks, S. Schmidt-Eberle, T. Stolz, G. Rempe, and
S. Dürr, Nat. Phys. 15, 124 (2019).
[873] T. Stolz, H. Hegels, M. Winter, B. Röhr, Y.-F. Hsiao,
L. Husel, G. Rempe, and S. Dürr, Phys. Rev. X 12,
021035 (2022).
[874] J. Vaneecloo, S. Garcia, and A. Ourjoumtsev, Phys.
Rev. X12, 021034 (2022).