1
Pilot-Free Unsourced Random Access Via
Dictionary Learning and Error-Correcting Codes
Zhentian Zhang, Student Member, IEEE, Jian Dang, Senior Member, IEEE, Zaichen Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE,
Liang Wu, Senior Member, IEEE, Bingcheng Zhu, Member, IEEE, and Lei Wang
Abstract —Massive machine-type communications (mMTC) or
massive access is a critical scenario in the ﬁfth generation (5G)
and the future cellular network. With the surging density of
devices from millions to billions, unique pilot allocation becomes
inapplicable in the user ID-incorporated grant-free random
access protocol. Unsourced random access (URA) manifests itself
by focusing only on unwrapping the received signals via a
common codebook. In this paper, we propose a URA protocol for
a massive access cellular system equipped with multiple antennas
at the base station. The proposed scheme encompasses a codebook
enabling construction of sparse transmission frame, a receiver
equipped with dictionary learning and error-correcting codes
and a collision resolution strategy for the collided codeword.
Discrepant to the existing schemes with necessary overhead for
preamble signals, no overhead or pre-deﬁned pilot sequences are
needed in the proposed scheme, which is favorable for energy-
efﬁcient transmission and latency reduction. Numerical results
verify the viability of the proposed scheme in practical massive
access scenario.
Index Terms —Unsourced random access, mMTC, MIMO,
dictionary learning, error-correcting codes.
I. I NTRODUCTION
MASSIVE machine-type communications (mMTC), also
known as massive connectivity or massive access,
aims at ensuring efﬁcient, robust and ubiquitous wireless
communications for billions of energy-constrained devices [1].
A typical application of mMTC is the Internet of Things
(IoT). Different from the traditional communications mainly
designed for human-type interaction, such as Long Term
Evolution (LTE), there are several notable features in mMTC
scenario. For example, 1) Uplink-driven sporadic trafﬁc: only
a fraction of devices are active at a certain transmission instant
and others retain silent 2) Short-packet transmission: normally,
only a small volume of bits is transmitted by a device and for
the concern of resource efﬁciency, short-packet transmission is
more preferable 3) Energy-efﬁcient communication protocol:
to prolong the life span of battery, ingenious strategy has to
be employed to reduce the power consumption. Thus, under
the background of mMTC, new transmission protocols are in
demand to support the massive connectivity.
Zhentian Zhang, J. Dang, Zaichen Zhang, L. Wu, B. Zhu and L.
Wang are with the National Mobile Communications Research Lab-
oratory, Frontiers Science Center for Mobile Information Communi-
cation and Security, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, China.
J. Dang, Zaichen Zhang, L. Wu, B. Zhu and L. Wang are also
with the Purple Mountain Laboratory, Nanjing 211111, China (e-mail:
zhangzhentian@seu.edu.cn; dangjian@seu.edu.cn; zczhang@seu.edu.cn; wu-
liang@seu.edu.cn; zbc@seu.edu.cn; wang leiseu@seu.edu.cn).
Corresponding author: J. Dang (dangjian@seu.edu.cn)In a cellular system, such as LTE, a grant-based random
access protocol has been widely adopted, in which an active
device has to send request and obtain permission from the
base station (BS) to access the network. However, with the
density of active users strikingly ascending, lack of orthogonal
preamble sequences and the consequent high level of collision
give rise to high latency or access failure between devices
and BS [2], [3]. To mitigate the problems above, grant-free
random access protocol has been identiﬁed as an enabler for
mMTC [4]. In grant-free access, active devices transmit sig-
nals without preceding requesting and approval from the BS.
Speciﬁcally, active devices send information appended with
unique non-orthogonal preamble sequences directly without
getting conﬁrmation from the BS. Thus, the access latency
and the transmission overhead are signiﬁcantly decreased. In
general, the receiver aims to conduct active user detection from
all codewords and achieve information restoration. Owing to
the sporadic trafﬁc, those problems can be formulated into a
compressed sensing (CS)-based sparse recovery framework [5]
or a covariance-based problem [6]. However, due to the non-
orthogonality, the transmitted preamble signals suffer from
severe co-channel interference, which raise higher demands
on the activity detection algorithms. Compared with the grant-
based protocol, the access latency in grant-free paradigm
is reduced at the cost of higher computational complexity.
Nonetheless, as the number of device surges, larger codebook
needs to be designed to support preamble allocation. How-
ever, the continuing codebook extension eventually produces
unbearable computational complexity.
Recently, another kind of grant-free random access called
unsourced random access (URA) has been proposed and
received great interests [7]. In URA, instead of being assigned
with preambles individually, active devices share a common
codebook and if the devices wish to send signals for identiﬁca-
tion or authorizations, they can add these into frames as extra
payloads. Devices send signals directly to the BS and the task
at the BS is to restore the information without prescheduling
and identifying devices, leading to the so-called unsourced
property, i.e, the unsourced random access casts off the need
of coordination center [9]. Having been proven by Polyanskiy,
URA can robustly support substantial active devices in man-
ner of per-user error probability. Practically, how to provide
desirable reliability for single user remains an open discuss.
How to avoid severe interferences between users in uplink
transmission and how to design practical coding structure
are two key factors for URA. Interferences mitigation among
active devices and resource multiplexing directly inﬂuence thearXiv:2303.05070v1  [cs.IT]  9 Mar 20232
total volume of the system. SCMA [8] is a classic resource
multiplexing enhancement for physical layer in time domain.
In SCMA, the transmission patterns are arranged sparsely by
allocating codebook individually and then the system capacity
is enhanced. However, this is inapplicable in URA for the
concern of the shared common codebook. Furthermore, after
receiving the transmitted signals, detection and estimation
tasks need to be carried out to restore information. Normally,
preambles are used as extra payload to achieve estimation
tasks, whereas tolerance for extra payload are limited for the
short-packet transmission concern in mMTC. The structure for
these tasks correlates with the coding design in URA. A novel
solution with practical codebook and feasible coding scheme
with less payload is demanded to harness URA to enhance
the massive connectivity. In this paper, we consider an uplink
transmission in the URA scenario with multiple input multiple
output (MIMO) where a massive number of single antenna
devices access the BS with multiple antennas.
A. Related Works
From the universal view of uplink transmission, the trans-
mission structure design is crucial for enhancing the overall
transmission capacity. Speciﬁcally, direct spreading transmis-
sion and its intermediate variants [12], [13] are widely used.
Direct spreading can be modeled as the Gaussian multiple
access channel (GMAC) of Kausers withk-bit input and
n-length overlapped codeword output. For T-Fold ALOHA
[12], “T-Fold” means the total amount of users collided on
any slots is constrained under a threshold T. It means the
receiver only needs to have the processing capability to support
certain amount of user in one slot. T-Fold repetition slotted
ALOHA (T-Fold RSA) [13] designates a subset of users or all
users to repeat packets for certain or random times. This can
generate diversity gain by packet coding and enable packet-
level successive interference cancellation at the receiver. On
this ground, sparsity in transmission pattern is a key factor for
capacity enhancement.
The other line of work in URA is coding scheme design
incorporating the work of activity detection and informa-
tion restoration. A coded compressed sensing (CCS) scheme
[14] adopts the divide-and-conquer strategy for detection
and restoration. The frame to be transmitted is divided into
small segments which are transmitted in sequential order.
And redundant parity bits are added to stitch the segments
together afterwards. This segmentation reduces the need of
larger sensing matrix for compressed sensing (CS) procedure.
Small sensing matrix leads to a relaxation on computational
complexity at the receiver. Yet, the parity bits aiming at stitch-
ing all segments deplete the transmission efﬁciency. Different
to CCS, interleave division multiple-access (IDMA) [15] only
divides message frame into two segments. The ﬁrst segment
enables activity detection from codebook and the detected
codewords also correspond to the interleaving patterns in
second segment. In other words, the interleaving pattern of the
second part of the frame is embedded into the ﬁrst segment.
Besides, interleaving is conducted after zero-padding in the
second segment. Through zero-padding and interleaving, theinterferences between users is depleted. Thus, the transmission
capacity is enhanced. [16], [29] design their structure with
different channel codings and all consider GMAC with perfect
channel state information (CSI). [16] adopts the structure of
low density parity check (LDPC) code and [29] selects polar
code as the basic multiple access code. However, perfect CSI
cannot be an established assumption under MIMO scenario.
In [27], estimation of MIMO channel is done by utilizing
dictionary learning (DL)-based sensing matrix update method.
[28] allocates user-discrepant pilot-like priors to assist the
adoption of DL method, especially the ambiguity problems
encountered after decomposition of the observations which
will be explained in Section II. This scheme achieves good
performances in user-ID based grant-free MIMO system. How-
ever, its use of giant codebook to achieve activity detection
lacks efﬁciency and due to the limited priors in URA, similar
approaches need further researches.
B. Contributions and Organization
This paper introduces a URA protocol for massive access in
a MIMO cellular system where single antenna devices interact
with a base station with multiple antenna. The proposed
scheme consists of a sparse transmission pattern-oriented
codebook, a DL and error-correcting codes (ECC)-based re-
ceiver and a collision resolution procedure. The active devices
initially choose codewords from the common codebook and
then generate a sparse frame into which the modulated sym-
bols are spread in accordance with the selected codewords.
The symbols’ sparsity pattern is directly correlated with the
latter activity detection and information restoration. For the
receiver, the BS restores the sparse frame and modiﬁes the
estimated channel matrix by DL and ECC. The sparsity in the
frame promotes the realization of DL. The combination with
DL and ECC achieves the proposed pilot-free URA protocol.
Especially, discrepant to the existing work of arts, the need of
preambles signal for various uses, such as channel estimation,
activity detection and so on, is essentially not required, which
is favorable in terms of short-packet transmission for power-
limited devices in mMTC.
With the proposed DL-ECC-based protocol, a BS with
multiple antennas can support a massive amount of devices
without pre-coordination in URA manner. And a collision
resolution procedure designed by feature of DL and ECC is
explained. Numerical results illustrate this proposed protocol’s
viability and compare its performance with other DL-based
method. The organization of this paper is as following: Section
II describes the system model and gives a brief background
introduction on DL and ECC. The ambiguity problems in
DL are also elaborated. In Section III, the proposed receiver
structure is elaborated and, Section IV illustrates the numerical
results of system performances. Finally, Section V draws the
conclusions.
Notations : For a matrix A,A 1denotes the inverse if Ais
invertible, AandATdenote the complex conjugate and the
transpose of A, and [A]i;jrepresents the element at the i-th
row andj-th column of the matrix A.[A]i;:means thei-th
row of the matrix and [A]:;jis thej-th column. zeros (n;m)3
BS
BS
BSIdleActiveActive
Fig. 1. Illustration of sporadic uplink transmission in mMTC system with a
MIMO base station.
creats a all zero matrix with nmsize. For a vector, adenotes
a column vector and aT, a row vector. Semicolon is used to
isolate row vectors in a matrix A=
aT
1;aT
2;:::;aT
n
and
comma is used to isolate column vectors A= [a1;a2;:::;an].
[a]imeans thei-th element.kakpstands forp-norm, where
kak0means the number of none-zero elements in the vector.
diag(a)is a square matrix whose diagonal elements are a.
For a setA,jAjis the cardinality of AandkAk0means the
number of nonezero elements in the set. (A1 a)means a
new set by popping out the element a. For a scalar a,jajis
the absolute value of a.CN(;)represents the multivariate
complex Gaussian distribution with mean and covariance
matrix .
II. S YSTEM MODEL
A. Uplink Transmission Model
As showed in Fig. 1, consider the uplink of a single-cell cel-
lular network consisting of Ktotsingle-antenna devices, which
are being served by a BS equipped with Mantennas. Sporadic
activity is assumed, i.e., Af 1;2;:::;K totgdenotes a set of
active users within a coherence time and the set cardinality is
jAj=KaKtot. Each device has Bbits of information to
be coded and embedded into a frame transmitted in each of
Lchannel uses. xk2f0;1gB1denotesk-th active device’s
binary message. f()is an encoding function in the proposed
scheme, representing error-correcting codes (ECC) encoding
and selecting codeword from common codebook and symbol
modulation. This encoding procedure will be elaborated in
Section III. By assuming the synchronized transmission among
devices, the received signal can be represented as
Y=X
u2Apuhuf(xT
u) +N (1)
whereuis the received power per-symbol, hu2CM1is
theu-th active device’s channel vector and huCN (0;I)
the Rayleigh fading model is considered, xT
u2f0;1g1Bis
the binary messages row vector and f(xT
u)2C1Lis the xT
u
output from the encoder, denoting the codeword of the active
deviceu2A ,N2CMLis the additive white Gaussian
noise matrix whose elements are independently distributed as
CN(0;1).B. Dictionary Learning
In this section, the relationship between sparse representa-
tion of signals and dictionary learning is brieﬂy introduced.
Typical recovery from noisy measurements [17] can be for-
mulated into the estimation of ~ x2Cn1from
y=D~ x+n (2)
where y2Cm1is a measurement vector and D2Cmn
is a known sensing matrix or dictionary matrix, and nis
the noise vector. In CS, the sensing matrix is often a fat
matrix, i.e.mn, it becomes an under-determined scenario
that a unique solution hardly exits, and inﬁnite solutions are
often the case. However, by exploiting the sparsity feature
of~ x, the sparsest solution can be found [18]. By the sparse
attribute of ~ x, this NP-hard, yet soluble problem can be well-
settled by various methods. For example, in [19], orthogonal
matching pursuit (OMP) algorithm is a greedy and easily
implemented algorithm that can recover and also control the
sparsity of ~ x. Nevertheless, other solutions [20]–[24] have
been well discussed, amenable to achieving various goals by
exploiting sparsity feature in mMTC, such as activity detection
and channel estimation.
While CS uses linear measurements and under-determined
sensing matrix to carry out sparse recovery, dictionary learning
(DL) generates dictionary or sensing matrix from received
signals. Generally, dictionary learning can be deemed as the
factorization of Y=~D~X+N, where Nis the noise matrix,
Y= [y1;y2;:::;yL],X= [~ x1;~ x2;:::;~ xL]. The very basic
idea is to decompose observation Ywith a prespeciﬁed
or primitive dictionary ~Dto produce coefﬁcients, i.e., the
observation is approximated to the linear combination of
dictionary’s column vectors. Then, by updating dictionary
or coefﬁcients or both, the deviation is further reduced. For
examples, initially, OMP is taken to decompose Yinto the
product of a primitive dictionary ~Dand~X. Subsequently,
method of optimal direction (MOD) algorithm [25] modiﬁes
dictionary to make the approximation more accurate with ﬁxed
coefﬁcients or K-SVD [26] algorithm iteratively updates both
the dictionary and coefﬁcients together in column-wise order,
via singular value decomposition. Speciﬁcally, the above can
be formulated as
arg min
~D;f~ xigLX
i=1k~ xik0;
s.t.LX
i=1yi ~D~ xi
2(3)
whereis the acceptable error, with which the equation yields
the~Xwith desired sparsity. Equivalently, another formulation
is
arg min
~D;f~ xigLX
i=1yi ~D~ xi
2;
s.t.LX
i=1k~ xik0C0(4)
which sets a constant C0to constrain the sparsity of ~X.
Notably, There are two inherent ambiguities in DL, supposing4
Binary Vector. . .. . .. . .ECC Encoder Modulation Mapping Sparse SpreadingMIMO Channel
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3. . .
. . .. . .. . .. . .
Step 1~3 is denoted by . . .. . .
. . .. . .
. . .. . .
T
1x
T
ux
T
Kax
T
1x
T
ux
T
Kax
1p
up
Kap
1S
uS
KaS
T()ufx
()f
()f
Fig. 2. All coding procedures of the proposed scheme before transmission are
illustrated, incorporating ECC encoding, modulation mapping and codeword-
oriented sparse spreading.
DandXare the original matrix. 1) Permutation ambiguity:
it implies that the rows and columns of the solution ~Dand
~Xpermute at random, i.e., DX =~DT~X,is a
square permutation matrix with only one element valued 1
in each column and row. ~D is the column-permuted version
ofDandT~Xis the row-permuted version of X. 2) Scalar
ambiguity: it means when the dictionary matrix and coefﬁ-
cients matrix are multiplied with a constant and its inverse, the
product is identical to the original, i.e., DX=~D 1~X,
is a diagonal constant matrix. These two are inherent
problems in DL and need to be cautiously dealt with when
the permutation and the scalar of the solution are crucial.
In Section III, how to tackle with these ambiguities in the
proposed scheme will be elaborated. In the proposed scheme
of this paper, how to mingle DL and ECC together to achieve
activity detection and information restoration at the BS is ﬁrst
proposed and will be further discussed in Section III.
III. DL-ECC- BASED RECEIVER DESIGN
In this section, a practical UMA scheme consisting of DL
and ECC is introduced in accordance with the model in (1).
Initially, a sparse frame construction is elaborated to insert
symbols into the frame. Next, a receiver processing scheme,
incorporating both DL and ECC, is designed to fulﬁll activity
detection and information recovery from the received signals.
Eventually, to conquer the low potential codeword collision in
URA, a collision resolution is designed by the feature of ECC
activity detection.
A. Frame Structure and Sparsity Construction
This subsection elaborates the compositions of the frame
and the transmission strategy. The sparse frame structure
enables active codeword identiﬁcation and information restora-
tion via the dictionary learning and ECC. Supposing an active
useru2A is to transmit a binary vector xT
uwithin a frame
ofLchannel uses. Fig. 2 illustrates the whole procedures
before transmission. The vector xT
uis coded into f(xT
u)by
the following procedures, namely ECC encoding, modulation
mapping and sparse spreading by codeword pattern. Without
loss of generality, Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) code
represents the ECC encoding for the following description.
For the ease of description, f()represents the aggregation of
three maneuvers the binary vector undergoes.Initially, LDPC encoding is conducted. The parity check
binary vector puwithpbits is constructed in accordance
with the prescribed parity check matrix Hwhich can be
modiﬁed to satisfy different bit rate. Once the LDPC encoding
stage ﬁnishes, the parity check bits are appended to the rear
part of the preliminary messages. Next, vector
xT
u;pu
with
(B+p)bits is mapped into complex-valued symbol vector Su
by modulation method. In this paper, Quadrature Phase Shift
Keying (QPSK) is considered. Lastly, the frame is constructed
by spreading symbols in accordance with the sparsity pattern
from the selected codeword. In our schemes, codewords the
active users choose also control the sparsity pattern of the
transmission. However, discrepant to the work of art, the
proposed scheme casts the prior setting of pilot sequence
or pilot-like bits, and to follow the nature of the UMA, no
codeword is uniquely assigned to users. cT
u2f0;1g1Lis the
u-th active user’s codeword. It contains S=B+p
2nonezero
elements valued one and L Szeros.Sequals the number
of the modulated symbols and Lequals the length of the
frame. Besides, SL, i.e., very few elements in cT
uare
nonezero and L=S quantiﬁes how sparse the vector is. The
zeros denote the silent slots which means no signal is sent, and
the symbols awaiting transmission are scattered on the position
of nonezero elements. This sparse spreading procedure is
illustrated in Fig. 2-Step 3, where dark compartment is the
spread symbol and the shallow areas are silent slots. For
example, symbol vector [S1;S2;:::;S k]is inserted into frame
[S1;0;0;S2;0;:::;0;0;Sk;0]by the sparsity pattern of the
selected codeword [1;0;0;1;0;:::;0;0;1;0]. When the slot is
a silent one, no signals are transmitted. This sparsity of frame
is later utilized to achieve activity detection and information
restoration.
Note that the total amount of permutations of nonezero ele-
ments in a single codeword is obedient to L
S
, where the L
S
represents the combination number formula, which signiﬁes a
tremendous amount of various codewords and reveals a rather
low likelihood that the collision between active users would
happen when codewords are chosen at random, meanwhile,
LSmakes the sparsity of transmission vectors feasibly
controllable and thus conducive to the later DL procedure.
B. Joint Active Device And information Detection
In this subsection, a receiver designed to jointly perform
active device and information detection is described. The
following covers the content on how to correlate UMA with
DL, and how to solve the ambiguity problems in DL by ECC.
1) DL problem formulation: During a frame of time, (1) can
be rewritten as
Y=GX+N (5)
where G=p1h1;p2h2;:::;pKtothKtot
2CMKtot
is the channel matrix and Mis the number Of antenna. Row-
wisly, X=
f(xT
1);f(xT
2);:::;f(xT
Ktot)
2CKtotL,Xis a
row-sparse matrix. As referred in Section III-A, the signals are
transmitted by following a speciﬁc sparse pattern determined
by the selected codeword, i.e., the row vectors of Xcomplies
with a highly sparse pattern owing to the codeword’s feature5
ofS=L1. This also makes X= [x1;x2;:::;xL]KtotL
a column-sparse matrix. The nonezero elements in xl;l
f1;2;;Lgabides by the Binomial distribution. Speciﬁcally,
looking at the l-th channel use, the received signals can be
written as:
yl=Gxl+n (6)
wherel2[1;L], and ylis thelth column of Y.ylis
represented sparsely as the linear combination of the columns
inGandxlis the coefﬁcient vector. Recalling (4) and (6),
(5) can be formulated into a DL problem referred in Section
II-B:
(~G;~X) = arg min
(G;X)LX
l=1kyl Gxlk2;
s.t.LX
l=1kxlk0K(7)
However, direct application of DL algorithms cannot solve
the problems in this URA system. The thing is that information
lays in the sparse pattern of rows In X. Yet, rows are
arbitrarily permuted after DL decomposition. It needs to be
further detected to ensure which row is active and to match
the row with its codeword to extract desired information,
i.e., ambiguity problems needs to be settled, leading to the
following tasks.
Algorithm 1 Sparse frame-based active codeword detection
1:INPUT 
,C,~A=zeros (1;1 :Ktot)
2: Inner Product P=
C
3: Fori= 1 :Kado
4: (k;n) =ﬁnd(P=max[P] )
5:h
~Ai
k=n
6: [P]k;:=zeros (1;Ktot)
7: end for
8:OUTPUT ~A
2) Active codeword detection: Assuming the successful
decomposition of the received signals Y~G~X, compared
with the desired X,~Xcan be deemed to be a row-permuted
and a scalar-multiplied version due to the permutation and
scalar ambiguities. However, the row-wise permutation has
no impact on the messages’ sequential order. As referred in
Section III-A, all active devices randomly choose a sparse
codeword from the common codebook and the symbols are
transmitted by the order of nonezero elements of the selected
codeword, which means ~Xinherits the sparsity feature of
the codeword. Since the column-wise order and the sparsity
pattern of Xare well-preserved in ~X, we can use the sparsity
pattern to detect and distinguish the potential active devices.
Speciﬁcally, after decomposition, we now suppose ~xT
uis
restored perfectly. It indicates the ~xT
u’s nonezero elements
only exist at the corresponding nonezero elements’ position
of the selected codeword, i.e., ~xT
uandcuincorporate the
same sparsity pattern. Furthermore, owing to S=L1, the
inner product between xT
uand codeword is cT
u~xu=Sa
andcT
~u~xuSa, whereais a complex constant, and~u2(A u). This means cT
uis the most compatible codeword
to~xT
urather than others. Thus, the sparse structure of the frame
can be leveraged to achieve active codeword detection and
make preparations for the following procedures.
To detect every potential active codeword is to pair ev-
ery rows of ~X2CKtotLwith all columns of codebook,
C= [c1;c2;:::;cKtot]2f0;1gLKtot, which is equivalent
to make inner product between each row of ~Xand each
column of C. First, we extract the sparsity pattern of ~Xby
deﬁning:
[
]i;j=1;~Xi;j6= 0
0;~Xi:j= 0;1iKtot;1jL (8)
and by this way, 
=

T
1;
T
2;:::;
T
Ktot
2f0;1gKtotL
and have identical sparsity pattern to ~X. The row vectors 
T
i
andxT
ihave the exact amount and sequential order of nonezero
elements. We deﬁne P=
C=
pT
1;pT
2;:::;pT
Ktot
2
RKtotKtot, where row vector pT
idenotes the inner product
between 
T
iand all codewords. Optimally, 
T
ucu=Sand

T
uc~uS, indicating sparsity pattern matching. However,
due to the outer disruptions, the decomposition may not be as
smooth as expected, i.e., when Yis decomposed, the nonezero
elements’ amount and sequential order of the rows in ~X,
become relatively uncertain because of the noise, and the inner
product may not reveal itself as strong as anticipated. To tackle
this, we deem the largest element in Pto be the indicator of
the potential active codeword.
The above is described in Algorithm 1, where the output
~A’sk-th element stores the detected codeword numerical tag
n.kis the row numerical tag of ~X. The operation of line 6
assigns all elements in a row into zero and thus guarantees
each row is matched with only one codeword. It has to be
clariﬁed that the elements of restored ~Xis the transmitted
symbols at each channel uses, yet remained to be demodulated
and the rows in the matrix contain both potential active devices
and other redundant vectors. Algorithm 1 successfully resolves
the permutation ambiguity during the dictionary learning by
matching each row of restored information ~Xor the column
of the channel matrix with a possible codeword. Thus, the
preliminarily desired information can be extracted, but the
scalar ambiguity remains to be eliminated.
3) Dictionary matrix reﬁned by ECC and DL: Fig. 3 illus-
trates the overall structure of the receiver, including activity
detection where the predeﬁned sparse frame construction is
utilized to extract information by Algorithm 1. The following
will elaborate the rest procedures at length, especially on
how to adopt ECC to eliminate the ambiguities encountered
in DL algorithm. Generally, observations decomposition and
approximation improvement are two majors procedures for
DL. The latter can be achieved by conducting dictionary
or coefﬁcients matrix reﬁnement strategies simultaneously or
solely to achieve more accurate approximation, such as MOD
and K-SVD. This reveals the spirit of DL is to form a desired
linear combination by a set of basis vector. Yet, algorithm
cannot guarantee fully correct sparse recovery and the later
perfect reﬁnement, especially at the presence of outer noisy
deviations, which puts impetus on further procedures in this
proposed scheme.6
 MIMO Channel
Signals DecompositionActivity Detection 
By Sparse Codeword
Symbol Selection
ECC Rectification
Dictionary Refinement
Output Information List
Y G X
Fig. 3. Illustration of the procedures at the receiver via DL and ECC methods.
After decomposition and active codeword detection, the
dictionary reﬁnement stage aims to conquer the scalar am-
biguity and recover the desired information. Recalling that
the recovered information row vectors ~xT
uwas matched with
the most compatible codeword ~cT
uby the inherent the sparsity
pattern. The zero elements in codeword indicate that ~xT
ushould
have the same zero elements at the corresponding location.
This can be summarized as following:
arg min
~G;~XY ~G~X2
2;
s.t.
xT
u
i= 0; if [cu]i= 0(9)
It’s natural that the approximation becomes more accurate
when the dictionary and the coefﬁcients matrices are restored
more correctly. (9) can be deemed as ﬁrst reﬁnement on the
information matrix. Besides, If the errors in ~Xcan be detected
and corrected, rendering the matrix into a more desired infor-
mation matrix ^X, i.e., ^Xresembles the preliminary Xmuch
more than ~X. Then, conducting dictionary reﬁnement based
on^Xwould make ~Gevolve towards the actual channel matrix.
Thus, the approximation is made more accurate.
Algorithm 2 Dictionary reﬁned by ECC and MOD
1:INPUT ~X;~G;~A;C;H
2:Deﬁnefff=EX[cu]as pattern extracting matrix
3: Fori= 1 :Kado
4:k=ﬁnd(~Ai-th6= 0)
5: fff=EX
c[A]k
6:h
^Xi
i;:=h
~Xi
k;:fff
7:h
^Gi
:;i=h
~Gi
:;k
8: end for
9:Demodulation ^Xllr=DM[^X]
10:ECC-Decoder ^Xbinary =LDPC 1[^Xllr;H]
11:Encode ^Xbinary intof(^Xbinary), the state during transmis-
sion, to modify the channel matrix
12:Dictionary reﬁnement ^G=MOD [f(^Xbinary);Y]
13:OUTPUT ^GAssuming successful active codeword detection, Algorithm
2 elaborates the reﬁnement made by ECC and dictionary
learning. In line 2, fffis a matrix generated by the pattern of
nonezero elements in a vector, aiming to extract the nonezero
elements out of the original vector. Its column number equals
to the total amount of nonezero elements in the vector and
if them-th nonezero element is located at the n-th sequen-
tial order, then [fff]n;m = 1 , e.g., for a row vector v=
[1;0;1;1],fff= [1;0;0;0; 0;0;1;0; 0;0;0;1]T2 f0;1g43
andvnonezero =vfff= [1;1;1]. Line 4 means ﬁnd the i-
th nonezero element in the set. Line 6-7 reduce the redundant
rows (columns) in ~X(~G) and line 6 extracts potential symbols
by the selected codeword. In line 9-11, ^Xis ﬁrstly demodu-
lated from symbols to LLR (Log-likelihood Ratio)-expressed
value. Then, ^Xbecomes the input of ECC-decoder, where we
use LDPC soft decoding with belief propagation algorithm and
His the check matrix. After the correction in ECC, to conduct
dictionary reﬁnement, every row of ^Xbinary2f0;1gKaBis
encoded into f(^Xbinary)2CKaLbecause of the constraint
subordinated to (5) and f()aims at encoding the row vectors
of the matrix. The ﬁnal move in line 12 is to make dictionary
reﬁnement, MOD algorithm is adopted to make dictionary
modiﬁcation for its easy implementation and guaranteed con-
vergence.
Note that the scalar ambiguity are implicitly solved during
line 9-12, because after demodulation and ECC-decoding
and encoding f(), the scalar matrix is no longer an
arbitrary complex scalar matrix but just a matrix I=
diag([a1;a2;:::;a K])whose element is none-complex, i.e.,
DX =^D 1^Xwhere used to be arbitrary and
unpredictable during DL decomposition stage, whereas now
its inﬂuence is negligible because its elements are either
positive or negative constants. In terms of the amplitude of
information, it barely cripples the mapping demodulation and
ECC-decoding due to the uniﬁed scalar multiplication, i.e., the
whole message vector multiplied with a scalar won’t affect the
information outcomes in the decoding stages, e.g., when QPSK
is adopted, the demodulated symbols vector can be expressed
in the form of approximate LLR counteracting the amplitude
scalar multiplication and thus solve the scalar ambiguity.
Speaking of impact on phase, the worst case is the phase
reversal of the whole vector, which can be feasibly resolved
using Differential encoding method, such as Manchester code.
C. Collision Resolution
It’s possible that two or more devices select the same
codeword, ~c, when all users share a common codebook, which,
as referred in Section III-A, may occur in a small probability in
this scheme. When a codeword is selected by multiple devices
to control the transmission pattern, subsequently, the resulted
received signals at receiver can be expressed as
Ycollide =X
i2ChixT
i+N
= (X
i2Chii)~cT+N(10)7
where ~cTis the codeword in collision and i~cT=xT
i,iis a
diagonal complex matrix, xT
i2f0;1gis the binary messages
andNis the disturbances and Cis a set containing devices in
collision. Under the proposed scheme, it means the constraints

T
ucu=Sand
T
uc~uSin Section III-B are invalid,
which results in failures of active user identiﬁcation and the
later stages. Collision may happen when one codeword is
detected as active to multiple devices by Algorithm 1. This
can be the result of overlapping in (10) or outer disturbances.
And whether it’s the cause of outer noises or there is indeed
collision happening needs to be determined. Even though the
chances of collision are trivial due to the abundant amount
of potential codewords as referred in Section III-A, it can
happen anyway and a collision resolution protocol aiming to
prevent such thing is described in Algorithm 3. In line 4, fffi
is the pattern extracting matrix deﬁned in Algorithm 2 and is
generated by codeword ci. Line 6 stands for the error detection
procedure where the parity check is utilized for instance.
Algorithm 3 Collision resolution protocol
1:When one codeword is detected as active to dmultiple
device and d > m , collision may happen. mis the
tolerable codeword repetition number.
2:dothe following protocol
3: Traverse codewords to extract information
4: ^xT
i=^xTfffi
5: Demodulation ^xT
i;binary =DM[^xT
i]
6: ECC-Error-Number ei=PARITY [^xT
i;binary]
7: Selectciwith mineiandmax inner product ^xT
ici
8:end
9:UPDATEA
D. Atom Number Optimization
Recalling (2) and (4), the sparse approximation via dic-
tionary learning generates coefﬁcients or atoms, ~ x, from
measurements y, by a set of basis vectors in dictionary.
Normally, by the nature of sparse approximation, the size
of nonezero elements in ~ xis much smaller compared with
whole measurements and the demand for reliable recovery
and acceptable computational complexity differs with the
atom number, for instance, [19] demonstrates theoretically and
empirically that the OMP algorithm requires at least O(mlnd)
measurements of the signal and O(mNd )computational cost
for a column vector xinddimension with mnone-zero atoms
and a row-wise Ndimension dictionary matrix equaling the
size of measurements.
Thus, when adopting the dictionary learning algorithm in
massive access, how to properly initialize a reasonable amount
of atoms or the row-wise sparsity level of xneeds to be
contemplated. The below elaborates how to bridge the statistic
feature of codebook and the sparsity level of the recovered
information in order to achieve relatively low computational
complexity and a reduced antenna size at the BS. In (5),
X2CKtotLandG2CMKtot,Mis the number of
antennas at the BS, Lis the frame length. Only KaKtot
rows denoting active devices at random permutations in X
have none-zero entries, leading to a basic idea that the upperbound of the row-wise atom number mmax=Kaby which
the atom number of dictionary learning can be simply set.
However, an upper bound barely reﬂects the row-wise sparsity
level. To obtain the appropriate atom number, a new train
of thought is provided. Provided that the common codebook
is generated at solely random, speciﬁcally, it means every
element in a single codeword has a =S=L1likelihood
to be none-zero and the distribution of elements in a column
is also random and irrelevant to that of rows, which is also
the case in Xsince the randomly active devices transmit the
messages by the corresponding sparse codeword. Thus, overall
speaking, the elements in Xmatrix are i.i.d., by which the
average number of none-zero elements mof column vectors
is(KaS)=L=KaKa, whereKaSis the total none-
zero entries in the matrix and is determined by the design
of codebook.
In this regard, for example, when OMP is adopted, the
computational complexity (CC) for a matrix is proportionate
toO(mMK totL) =O(mK a), where= (MK totL)=Ka
is assumed to remain as a constant. If the atom number is set
as the upper bound m=Kaorm=Ka, then the CC
isO(K2
a)andO(Ka)respectively, where =Ka.
Conspicuously, CC is reduced greatly away from Exponential
Growth. Similarly, the least request on the size of measure-
ments for robust recovery is reduced with fewer number of
atoms. Numerical results in Section IV validates the conducive
effect on the outcomes by utilizing the statistic feature of
codebook to offer guidance on choosing the number of atoms.
The above is illuminating for the extension to the scenario
where the row of codebook follows various distributions and
where the impact from row vectors on the statistic features of
column vectors needs to be considered.
E. Resolving The Unknown Ka
The previous parts deem the number of active devices as a
known setting which in practice often needs to be estimated.
Since the massive MIMO is equipped at the BS, by the Law
of Large Numbers, an upper bound of the potential devices
can be obtained from the power estimation
^K=1
S 
kYk2
F
M L!
(11)
where is the least received symbol power for the receiver.
A soluble method for remedy is to initialize the dictionary
learning with an estimated upper bound active device number
^Kestimated by (11) from the lower symbol power bound
value and then ﬁlter out the unqualiﬁed potential rows in the
outcomes of dictionary learning stage by considering both the
power of the atoms and the inner product value to determine
the ﬁnal estimation Kest. The Algorithm 4 elaborates the
matrix trimming process with the initialized value ^Kand the
active codeword detection in Algorithm 1.8
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Atom Number0.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Ratio of Successful Active Codeword DetectionMeasurements
Curve Fitting
Fixed Point
Optimized Point
(a)
0 20 40 60 80 100 12000.511.5Relative Computational ComplexityFixed
Optimized
Benchmark (b)
Fig. 4. The impact of atom number selection on activity detection and computational complexity. (a) Ratio of successful active codeword detection versus
atom number with Ktot=1000, Ka=100, M=64,L=1600, S=L/40, SNR=10dB. (b) Computational complexity versus atom number with Ktot=1000, M=64,
L=1600, S=L/40.
Algorithm 4 Matrix trimmed by pattern and power
1:INPUT ^K,Y,~X,~G,~A
2:Initialization with ^K
3:whilei~A
0do
4:k=ﬁnd(~Ai-th6= 0)
5:xT
i=h
~Xi
k;:fi,hi=h
~Gi
:;k
6:ifxT
i2
2ci<threshold
7: ^K=^K 1
8: exclude xT
iandhifrom ~Xand~G
9:end if
10:end while
11:Kest=^K
12:OUTPUTKest
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, simulation results demonstrate the viability
of the proposed scheme under unsourced massive access
with a massive MIMO BS scenario. In the simulation, all
devices share a randomly generated common codebook and
encode binary messages by ECC method. Then, the ECC-
coded messages are mapped into symbols via the quadrature
phase shift keying (QPSK) and transmitted by the sparse
frame pattern of the selected codewords. The L-length frame
consists of Snone-zeros and (L S)silent compartments,
whose permutations are determined by the codebook. Perfect
synchronization between devices and receiver is assumed. No
pilot preambles or pilot-like bits were utilized and the i.i.d.
Rayleigh fading channel by drawing channel vector hkfrom
CN(0;I)was assumed to be constant during a frame time.
The binary messages were LDPC-encoded at 0.5 code rate
and decoded by BP algorithm [10] in ECC procedure and
the dictionary learning stage was carried out by OMP and
MOD algorithms. Unless otherwise noted, no collision takes
place between devices and the number of active devices Kais
assumed to be known and the power of symbols is identical.A. Active Codeword Identiﬁcation
The system performance is denoted in terms of per-user
probabilities of error (PUPEs) [7], including per-user prob-
ability of misdetection pmdand per-user probability of false
alarmpfa. The former is deﬁned as
pmd=E[nmd]
Ka(12)
where the expectation is taken due to the randomly generated
codebook, the fading, and the noise and nmdstands for the
number of the transmitted, yet eventually omitted messages.
Empirically, since we assume all devices transmit same length
messages,nmdequals the amount of omitted active codewords.
The latter is deﬁned as
pfa=Enfa
jLj
(13)
which is correlated to the estimated number of active code-
words, denoted by
jLj=nfa+Ka nmd (14)
nfais the number of false alarms, i.e., the detected messages
were actually never transmitted by any devices. Noting that
when the number of active devices Kais known at the BS,
jLj=Kaand consequently the error probability is equivalent
pfa=pmd, denoted as peif the active number is a known. The
zeros in codewords mean the silent slots where no signals are
transmitted, but is the averaged received power per symbol
of each device and noise variance 2is set to 1 without loss
of generality. To this end, the energy-per-bit is deﬁned as
Eb=n0,S
2L2(15)
1) Choices of Atom Number: Fig. 4(a) shows the ratio of
successful active codeword detection under different choices
of atom number when adopting dictionary learning algorithm.
Ka=100 active devices out of Ktot=1000 potential single-
antenna devices transmit L-length frames embedded with S9
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Frame Sparsity0.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Ratio of Successful Active Codeword DetectionM=32
M=64
M=128
(a)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Frame Sparsity0.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Ratio of Successful Active Codeword Detection (b)
Fig. 5. (a) Ratio of successful active codeword detection versus frame sparsity with Ktot=1000, Ka=100, L=1600, SNR=10dB under different antennas
number at BS . (b) Ratio of successful active codeword detection versus frame sparsity with Ktot=1000, M=64,L=1600, SNR=10dB under different atom
number selection.
symbols with SNR=10dB to the BS with M=64 antennas. No
preambles are assigned. The doted line is ﬁtted from discrete
measurements to illustrate the viability of the selection of atom
number based on the codebook statistic features. The ﬁxed
point in the diagram is the upper bound of the atom number.
The results tell the fact that too large the number of atom
number selected may cause redundancy in dictionary learn-
ing procedure, depleting the robustness in identifying active
codeword. Fig. 4(b) compares the computational complexity
between the optimized selection and the upper bound atom
number in decomposing the received signal Yusing OMP
algorithm. The relative value of complexity is uniﬁed by the
value of red curve at Ka= 100 . The red curve depicts the
computational complexity with atom number equal to Ka,
the upper bound. And the blue curve depicts the counterpart
with optimized atom number. The surging speed is comparably
slower with optimized atom number choices.
As the compressed sensing theory implies, the least required
measurements size for sparse recovery increases with more
atom number selected. In this paper, the measurements size
is equivalent to the number of antennas at the BS. Fig. 5(a)
shows how the identiﬁcation performance alters under different
antenna number equipped at the BS with frame sparsity
(L=S) changing. A modest frame sparsity guarantees favorable
identiﬁcation outcomes after L=S = 20 for less redundancy
and a relatively sufﬁcient information provided. All curves
hold a decreasing tendency after L=S = 40 due to increasingly
insufﬁcient information. However, similar performance after
frame sparsity 20 when the antenna size is chosen as M= 64
andM= 128 indicate that fewer antennas are needed to
support certain size users by ﬂexibly choosing atom number in
the algorithm, which above all offers a guidance on the antenna
options concerning different size of potential users. Fig. 5(b)
illustrates how frame sparsity affects successful identiﬁcation
ratio under different number of active devices and the choices
of atom number. The doted lines set atom number by the
upper bound and the solid lines otherwise by the statistically
optimized atom number. When the number of active devices
400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
Frame Length0.511.522.533.544.555.510-3Fig. 6. PUPEs versus frame length with Ka=100, M=64,L=S =40,
SNR=10dB
is small, both atom number selections identify all the active
codeword without mistakes, whereas as Kaincreases larger,
the upper bound selection performances reveal themselves
much inferior. The above validates the viability of optimized
atom number choices, the following simulations are conducted
on this basis.
2) Per-User Probabilities Of Errors: In Fig. 6, under dif-
ferent setting of potential devices Ktotand a ﬁxed amount
of active devices Ka=100, the simulation shows the change
of per-user detection errors pewhile adopting longer frame
length with ﬁxed frame sparsity L=S=40. The curve may
ﬂuctuate for a while but eventually decrease to a favorable
level, given the fact that as the frame length becomes longer,
combined with a modest selection of atom number in algo-
rithm, the increased information promotes the identiﬁcation
precision of active codeword. It’s notable that the pewill
drop with longer frame no matter what the size of Ktotis,
i.e., the degradation in the successful codeword detection is
insigniﬁcant with the size of codebook, which is conducive
to the massive access scenario because the overall size of10
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 2010-310-2L=1000
L=1600
L=2400
Fig. 7. PUPEs versus Eb=n0withKtot=1000 , Ka=100, M=64,L=S =100
active userKais often considerably small in comparison with
codebook size. The combination with Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 offers
ﬂexibility on choosing suitable parameters to control trade off
during practical applications, since the frame sparsity directly
determines how many symbols there are. Fig. 7 illustrates
the correlation between peand energy-per bit under different
frame length settings with ﬁxed frame sparsity L=S=100. The
degradation of PUPE by increased Eb=n0can be observed
with any frame length and augmenting the information volume
with a ﬁxed sparsity is conducive to the active codeword
detection. Combined with observations with ﬁxed frame length
and various sparsity in Fig. 5, frame length also takes crucial
part in detection performance improvement. As explained in
[9], the frame length can be assumed up to 120,000. In
occasions where the total frame length or frame sparsity is
limited, ﬂexible setting on modestly low frame sparsity or
relatively longer frame length can increase the information
volume while maintaining favorable detection outcomes.
3) Information Restoration: In codeword detection proce-
dure, the decomposition generates matrix ~Xcarrying infor-
mation to be restored. Via correction from ECC decoder and
further decomposition with new matrix ~Gfrom dictionary
reﬁnement, the information is restored. Noting that only with
the right codeword detection can the information embedded
in the rows be restored, thus the following results will be the
estimation from the correctly detected devices and the stop
criterion is denoted by the total number of parity check, i.e.,
when the overall number of parity check error retains to certain
level, the information restoration stage stops.
The symbol error rate(SER) in Fig. 8 shows the informa-
tion restoration under different amount of active devices and
the transmitted symbols with an identical bits ﬂow in total.
Meanwhile, comparison is made between the proposed scheme
and the scheme in [28] whose frame structure incorporates
unique user IDs in which several symbols act like pilots and
are assumed to be priorly known information at the BS, and
the receiver is also designed in the spirit of dictionary learning.
The scheme with unique ID has a faster SER drop during a
relative low Eb=n0due to the blessing of the pilot-like bits
and unique ID and shows similar performances with proposed
scheme after Eb=n0= 18 . However, it’s intolerable to restore
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 7010-710-610-510-410-310-2Symbol Error RateFig. 8. Symbol error rate versus Eb=n0withKtot=1000, M=64 under
different Kaand symbol number S.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 400.050.10.150.20.250.30.350.4
Fig. 9. Comparison of pebetween different collision ratio( CR) with or
without collision resolution protocol(CRP) and no collision circumstance
versus Eb=n0when Ktot= 1000 ,Ka= 100 ,M= 64 ,L= 1000 ,
S= 20 ,m= 2.
all the priors of at the BS when the amount of potential devices
is huge. A decreasing SER can be observed with larger Eb=n0
and when the number of active user becomes larger, shorter bit
package outcomes favorable SER which ﬁts the short package
feature in mMTC. As the length of bits to be transmitted
becomes shorter, the required energy-per-bit to reach certain
SER level becomes smaller. It shows the advantage of small-
packet by large sparse frame which decreases interferences
among active devices greatly. The fewer symbols sent from
the massive crowd, the easier the co-interference can be sort
out.
B. Collision Resolution Protocol
This part demonstrates the viability of the proposed collision
resolution whose center idea is to diminish the false codeword
detection caused by inaccurate decomposition in the existence
of outer disturbances and to identify the collided codeword
to continue the following procedures as much as possible by
taking both the parity check error number and the value of
inner product into consideration. Besides, since the collision
likelihood is exceptionally trivial, the following renders the11
0 5 10 15 20 250.0150.020.0250.030.0350.040.0450.050.0550.06
10-510-410-310-210-1
(a)
0 5 10 15 20 2510-310-210-1
10-610-510-410-310-2 (b)
Fig. 10. Per-user probability of misdetection pmdand per-user probability of false alarm pfaunder Kaestimation. (a) pmdandpfaversus Eb=n0under active
number estimation with actual active devices number of 100 and 300 when Ktot= 1000 ,M= 64 ,L= 1600 ,S= 20 . (b)pmdandpfaversus Eb=n0
under active number estimation with different frame length L= 1600 andL= 3200 when Ktot= 1000 ,Ka= 100 ,M= 64 ,L=S = 80 .
possibility of collision as a small ratio constant, and denotes
the value of collision ratio by CR and the abbreviation of
collision resolution protocol as CRP. Meanwhile, the maxi-
mum number of codeword selection repetition is assumed to
be a ﬁxed constant m, i.e., every single codeword can only
be chosen no more than mtimes before transmission, which
is a reasonable assumption due to the extremely low collision
possibility.
Fig. 9 illustrates the effectiveness of the proposed collision
resolution protocol where the upper bound of codeword repe-
titionm= 2 and theCR is set as 0.01 and 0.1 respectively,
under which the protocol are adopted. After the adoption of
the protocol, the pein active codeword detection approaches
the circumstance where no collision is assumed. Besides, the
gap between the curve of CRP adopted and the curve with
no collision gets bigger with larger CR, yet, usually, the
possibility of collision is much lower.
C. Estimation Of The Unknown Ka
The above makes assumption that the amount of the active
devices is a known constant which in actual practice is barely
the case. By considering the impact from the atoms’ power
and the value of the inner product, the redundant rows in the
estimation from (11) are eliminated to improve the estimation
accuracy of Kestmaking preparations for the following pro-
cedures. When the number of active devices is an estimated
value, the activity detection is divided into two performance
indicators, per-user probability of misdetection pmdand per-
user probability of false alarm pfa.
In Fig. 10, the left vertical axis represents pmdby solid
curve and the right vertical axis represents pfaby doted lines.
Fig. 10(a) illustrates the conducive impact from Eb=n0to
PUPEs under different actual number of active devices and
thus demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed active
numberKestestimation in Algorithm 4. The performances
underKa= 300 are inferior to their counterparts under
Ka= 100 . However, due to the sporadic trafﬁc in URA, theactivity ratio normally is much less than 0.3. Fig. 10(b) extends
the frame length to twice as much as that in Fig. 10(a) with
Ka= 100 and contains the same sparsity level. A comparable
increase in estimation accuracy of devices number can be
observed, owing to the growth of the information provided
with a desirable sparsity level. These outcomes comply with
Fig. 7 and validate the viability of the proposed estimation
method.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a DL and ECC-based unsourced random
access scheme is proposed as a potential solution for a URA
MIMO scenario. The scheme incorporates active codeword
detection, information restoration, collision resolution and
active device number estimation. The foundation is built on
common codebook controlling sparsity pattern of frame and
the utilization of DL with ECC. No pilot signal overhead is
an appealing feature inaccurate. The numerical results validate
the effectiveness of the scheme and illustrate the per-user
possibility of errors (PUPEs) with certain vital parameters
such as atom numbers, frame length and sparsity and energy-
per-bit. Due to the difﬁculty in the analysis of DL, the
performance of the proposed scheme was only numerically
analyzed. Theoretical analysis would be crucial to the trade-
offs between different parameters for system optimization.
Besides, sparse common codebook design and research on
asynchronous transmission scenario would be an important
research branches in terms of practical URA system design.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Chen, D. W. K. Ng, W. Yu, E. G. Larsson, N. Al-Dhahir, and R.
Schober, “Massive access for 5G and beyond,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications , vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 615-637, Mar. 2021.
[2] C. Bockelmann et al., “Massive machine-type communications in 5g:
Physical and MAC-layer solutions,” IEEE Communications Magazine ,
vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 59-65, Sep. 2016.
[3] M. Hasan, E. Hossain, and D. Niyato, “Random access for machineto-
machine communication in LTE-advanced networks: Issues and ap-
proaches,” IEEE Communications Magazine , vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 86-93,
Jun. 2013.12
[4] A. C. Cirik, N. M. Balasubramanya, L. Lampe, G. V os, and S. Bennett,
“Toward the standardization of grant-free operation and the associated
NOMA strategies in 3GPP,” IEEE Communications Standards Magazine ,
vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 60-66, Dec. 2019.
[5] K. Senel and E. G. Larsson, “Grant-free massive MTC-enabled massive
MIMO: A compressive sensing approach,” IEEE Transactions on Com-
munications , vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 6164-6175, Dec. 2018.
[6] S. Haghighatshoar, P. Jung, and G. Caire, “Improved scaling law for activ-
ity detection in massive MIMO systems,” in Proc. of IEEE International
Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) , Vail, CO, USA, Jun. 17-22,
2018, pp. 381-385.
[7] Y . Polyanskiy, “A perspective on massive random access,” in Proc. of
IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) , Aachen,
Germany, Jun. 25-30, 2017, pp. 2523-2527.
[8] H. Nikopour and H. Baligh, “Sparse code multiple access,” in Proc. of
IEEE 24th Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and
Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC) , London, UK, Sep. 8-11, 2013,
pp. 332-336.
[9] Y . Li et al., “Unsourced multiple access for 6G massive machine type
communications,” China Communications , vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 70-87, Mar.
2022.
[10] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse
matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 45, no. 2, pp.
399-431, Mar. 1999.
[11] T. Venugopal and S. Radhika, “A Survey on Channel Coding in Wireless
Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Communication
and Signal Processing (ICCSP) , Chennai, India, Jul. 28-30, 2020, pp.
0784-0789.
[12] O. Ordentlich and Y . Polyanskiy, “Low complexity schemes for the ran-
dom access Gaussian channel,” in Proc. of IEEE International Symposium
on Information Theory(ISIT) , Aachen, Germany, Jun. 25-30, 2017, pp.
2528–2532.
[13] E. Paolini, G. Liva, et al., “Coded Slotted ALOHA: A Graph-Based
Method for Uncoordinated Multiple Access,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory , vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 6815-6832, Dec. 2015.
[14] V . K. Amalladinne, J. -F. Chamberland, and K. R. Narayanan, “A Coded
Compressed Sensing Scheme for Unsourced Multiple Access,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 66, no. 10, pp. 6509-6533, Oct.
2020.
[15] Li Ping, Lihai Liu, Keying Wu, and W. K. Leung, “Interleave division
multiple-access,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol.
5, no. 4, pp. 938-947, Apr. 2006.
[16] A. Vem, K. R. Narayanan, J.-F. Chamberland, and J. Cheng, “A user
independent successive interference cancellation based coding scheme for
the unsourced random access Gaussian channel,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications , vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 8258-8272, Dec. 2019.
[17] J. W. Choi, B. Shim, Y . Ding, B. Rao, and D. I. Kim, “Compressed
sensing for wireless communications: Useful tips and tricks,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1527-1550, 3rd
Quart.,2017.
[18] E. J. Candes and M. B. Wakin, “An Introduction To Compressive
Sampling,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 21-
30, Mar. 2008.
[19] J. A. Tropp and A. C. Gilbert, “Signal Recovery From Random
Measurements Via Orthogonal Matching Pursuit,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory , vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4655-4666, Dec. 2007.
[20] J. A. Tropp and A. C. Gilbert, “Signal recovery from random measure-
ments via orthogonal matching pursuit,” IEEE Transactions on Informa-
tion Theory , vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4655-4666, Dec. 2007.
[21] M. Bayati and A. Montanari, “The dynamics of message passing on
dense graphs, with applications to compressed sensing,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Theory , vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 764-785, Feb. 2011.
[22] M. A. T. Figueiredo, “Adaptive sparseness using Jeffreys prior,” in Proc.
of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems(NIPS) , Vancouver,
BC, Canada, Dec. 9-14, 2002, pp. 697-704.
[23] G. Lim, H. Ji and B. Shim, “Hybrid Active User Detection for Massive
Machine-type Communications in IoT,” in Proc. of IEEE International
Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence
(ICTC) , Jeju Island, Korea, Oct. 17-19, 2018, pp. 1049-1052.
[24] H. Djelouat, M. Leinonen, L. Ribeiro, and M. Juntti, “Joint User
Identiﬁcation and Channel Estimation via Exploiting Spatial Channel
Covariance in mMTC,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters , vol. 10,
no. 4, pp. 887-891, Apr. 2021.
[25] K. Engan, S. O. Aase, and J. H. Hakon-Husoy, “Method of optimal
directions for frame design,” in Proc. of IEEE International Conference
on Acoutics, Speech, and Signal Processing(ICASSP). , Phoenix, AZ,
USA, Mar. 15-19, 1999, vol. 5, pp. 2443-2446.[26] M. Aharon, M. Elad, and A. Bruckstein, “K-SVD: An algorithm for
designing overcomplete dictionaries for sparse representation,” IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing , vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4311-4322, Nov.
2006.
[27] Y . Ding and B. D. Rao, “Dictionary Learning-Based Sparse Channel
Representation and Estimation for FDD Massive MIMO Systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5437-5451,
Aug. 2018.
[28] Y . Han, B. D. Rao, and J. Lee, “Massive Uncoordinated Access With
Massive MIMO: A Dictionary Learning Approach,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications , vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1320-1332, Feb. 2020.
[29] M. Zheng, Y . Wu and W. Zhang, “Polar Coding and Sparse Spreading
for Massive Unsourced Random Access,” in Pro. of IEEE 92nd Vehicular
Technology Conference (VTC2020-Fall) , Victoria, BC Canada, Nov. 18-
Dec. 16, 2020, pp. 1-5.