Tainted Love: A Systematic Review  of 
Online Romance Fraud  
 
Alexander Bilz[0000 -0002 -0692 -2482 ], Lynsay A. Shepherd[0000 -0002 -1082 -1174 ], Graham  I. Johnson[0000 -0002 -
7610 -862X ] 
School of Design and Informatics  
Division of Cyber Security  
Abertay University  
Dundee, United Kingdom  
{a.bilz, lynsay.shepherd, g.johnson}@abertay.ac .uk 
Abstract  
Romance fraud involves cybercriminals engineering a romantic relationship on online dating 
platforms. It is a cruel form of cybercrime whereby victims are left heartbroken, often facing 
financial ruin. We characterise the literary landscape on  romance fraud, advancing the 
understanding of researchers and practitioners by systematically reviewing and synthesising 
contemporary qualitative and quantitative evidence. The systematic review provides an overview 
of the field by establishing influencing  factors  of victimhood and  exploring countermeasures for 
mitigating romance scams. We searched ten scholarly databases and websites using terms related 
to romance fraud. Studies identified were screened, and high -level metadata and findings were  
extracted, synthesised, and contrasted. The methodology followed the PRISMA guidelines: a 
total of 232 papers were screened. Eighty -two papers were assessed for eligibility, and 44 were 
included in the final analysis. Three main contributions were identif ied: profiles of romance 
scams, countermeasures for mitigating romance scams, and factors that predispose an individual 
to become a scammer or a victim. Despite a growing corpus of literature, the total number of 
empirical or experimental examinations rema ined limited. The paper concludes  with avenues for 
future research and victimhood intervention strategies  for practitioners, law enforcement, and 
industry.  
 
Keywords : Online Dating , Romance Fraud, Romance Scams, Cybercrime , Human -Computer 
Interaction , Systematic Review .  
1 Introduction  and Background  
Romance fraud is a form of social engineering which emerged in the early 2000s, whereby 
fraudsters create a fake profile on dating platforms and strike up a relationship with their 
potential victims, with the end goal of conning individuals out of money. T he resulting damage 
to victims of romance fraud can be devastating; in addition to monetary loss, there is a huge 
emotional impact for users desperate for companionship. Romance fraud has become a growing problem , exacerbated by the COVID -19 pandemic, alon gside other cybercrimes ( Kemp et al., 
2021; Lallie et al., 2021) . 
 
The execution of romance scams typically follows a multi -stage d model  (Whitty, 2013b) . 
Generally , the scam involves the following steps: It start s with the  scammer s etting up an 
attractive profile on a dating site or social media network that either replicates  a celebrity or 
figure of authority  or portrays  an entir ely fic titious  identity  (Sorell and Whitty, 2019) . Once the 
profile has been created, the scammer reaches out to  potential victims and lures the prey into a n 
online  conversation (Rege, 2009) . Soon after  communication  has been established, the 
conversation between the perpetrator and the target is moved to another  channel , such as instant 
messag ing, text messaging or email , outside the dating platform ’s control  (Whitty, 2013a) . This 
measure , a precaution to evade the detection mechanisms of dating sites , is commonly justified 
by appealing  to intense emotions and  exclusivity . The grooming phase follows , in which a 
strong , well-trusted , emotional  relationship is established before  the victim is asked for financial 
support to overcome a tragic or desperate situation  (Whitty, 2013b) . According to Whitty 
(2013a) , monetary requests can take various for ms, such as a  small initia l request to probe the 
victim ’s willingness to part with their money or an immediate large amount that ’s later 
negotiated down . Reasons for the monetary requests  may include inheritance fees, plane tickets, 
visa fees, family emergencies or presents  (Cross and Holt, 2021; Whitty, 2013a) . The scam 
usually ends several  months or years  after the initial contact, either when  the targets  run out of 
money or realise they have been victimised  (Cross, 2016a; Cross and Blackshaw, 2015) . 
 
A key difference between romance fraud  and other  financia l dating scams  lies in the scam ’s 
modus operandi . Romance scammers , as opposed to  gold digger s, never  seek to establish the 
relationship  even temporarily , but merely use  the perception of a relationship to take advantage  
of the victim  (Thompson, 2016; Whitty, 2013b) . 
 
Victims of romance scams typically experience a  “double hit ” as they  simultaneously  lose 
significant  financial means  and are emotionally wounded due to the loss of the relationship  
(Whitty and Buchanan, 2012) . Even  though individual financial losses can be substantial,  with 
recent reports as high as £300,000 in one case  (BBC, 2021) , emotional consequences have been  
estimated to be  even  more impactful than the perceived consequences of the financial losses  
(Modic and Anderson, 2015) . 
 
Despite the impact  of romance fraud on  society and the damage caused to individuals , no 
comprehensive systematic review has been conducted that coherently synthesises and then 
reflects o n the literature in the field. Therefore, the objective was to answer three research 
questions that are pertinent to understanding romance  scam s: 
 • RQ1:  What is the state -of-the-art approach for profiling, describing and characterising 
romance scams?  
• RQ2:  What underlying socio -demographic and psychological factors enable and foster 
the execution of a scam?  
• RQ3:  What countermeasures and mitigation techniqu es have been proposed to help 
identify romance fraud , thus limiting the risk of victimisation?  
 
This research  starts by analysing existing literature based on meta -level information, such as the 
type of literature  (journal articles, conference proc eedings or theses ), the main  contributions in 
line with three research questions , and authors hip to establish an overview of the current litera ry 
landscape . Subsequently , the individual papers  and their findings are presented , critically 
appraised,  and contrasted  to identify commonalities and discrepancies . This paper  closes with a n 
extensive  discussion of gaps in the current knowledge  and direction s for future research.  
2 Method ology  
The following section presents  the methodology used within this  systematic review  on romance 
fraud . 
 
2.1 Protocol and Reg istration  
We adopted the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta -
Analyses) technique and protocol  to search, collect, and analyse  relevant liter ature  (Page et al., 
2021) . PRISMA provides a well -structured approach for reporting the work conducted and the 
findings of systematic reviews. This study aimed to provide a state -of-the-art view of the 
published literature on romance fraud and include contributions from different fi elds; thus, 
advanced statistical data processing was not feasible. Therefore, the following sections present 
our adaption of the PRISMA technique while closely adhering to the relevant checklist ’s items, 
such as the specification of the eligibility criteri a, search  strategy,  and data collection process . 
 
2.2 Eligibility Criteria  
The primary inclusion criterion was that papers had to involve empirical research or 
experimental examinations that profile romance scams (including demographics), characterise 
the psyc hological aspects involved, or examine countermeasures and mitigations. Additionally,  
literature considered acceptable were peer -reviewed journal articles  and book  chapters , 
conference proceedings , theses,  and dissertations . The choice to include grey literatur e (defined 
as electronic and print literature  that i nstitutions produce  outside of the control of  commercial 
publishers  (Auger, 1998) ) was deliberate , as it allowed to collect a more recent  and 
comprehensive picture of the current research on romance fraud.  The search was limited to 
English language papers available through the University ’s subscriptions.  
 Several articles were omitted as they featured unclear research methodologies or focus ed on 
other types of online dating fraud (e.g., identity fraud or e -whoring), which lack the double -hit 
effect unique to romance fraud. Also excluded were articles whose primary research was only 
weakly related to romance scams. In cases where the same  findings were published twice (e.g., 
as a conference paper and journal article ) as separately standing  works, t he less extensive paper  
was excluded . 
 
2.3 Information S ources  
Existing romance fraud research has seen contributions from various domains  using  varied  
research methods . To reflect  the diverse and disparate nature of the contributions in this review, 
a wide range of information sources  were searched for articles, including journal articles, 
conference proceedings, theses and dissertations and book  chapters. The bibliographic search, 
conducted in October 2021, explored the following  reputable and renowned publication 
databases : Scopus , PsycInf o, Psyc Article s, Medline , Web of Science , ProQuest , ACM Digital 
Library , IEEE Digital Library , ScienceDirect  and PubMed . Two additional sources were also 
utilised . Firstly , the reference lists  of publications included in  the full-text review were screened 
for relevant  inclusions . Secondly, a Google Scholar alert was created  using the search query 
detailed in section 2.4 to cover literature newly released within the month of the systematic 
literature review.  
 
2.4 Search Strategy  and Selection  Process  
The first step consisted  of constructing a search string  and querying  the information sources for 
articles capable of  answering the research questions outlined in Section 1. Due to the research 
questions ’ breadth and the methodology ’s exploratory nature , the search query was designed to 
capture the largest possible body of relevant literature. Therefore, the sea rch query included an 
extensiv e range of euphemisms and synonyms commonly associated with romance fraud  and 
refrained from using Boolean conditions to narrow down the number of articles at the time of the 
search . While it is acknowledged that this can lead to a larger number of  irrelevant articles being 
returned , it was considered preferable  over prematurely excluding articles from the overall scarce 
corpus of literature. The  construction of the search query also meant it could be used across all 
databases without considering  the unique technical limitations  of the individual database 
searches, such as their capabilities of processing nested conditions  and the number of suppor ted 
search terms . 
 
The final search query was as follows:  "romance fraud" OR "romance scam" OR "sweetheart 
swindle" OR "dating scam" OR "love scam" OR "relationship fraud" OR "relationship scam" . 
 
The selection process was d esigned with scientific scrutiny  and reproducibility in mind . 
Therefore,  all process steps were distinguished into separate tasks , and all intermediates and 
outcomes were documented. At first,  the publication databases were searched  using the final search query . Identified articles were imported into Covidence  (2022) , where the two -staged 
study selection was  performed . In the first stage , the article ’s title and abstracts were screened 
according to the inclusion and exclusion  criteria . Articles that were found to be eligible were 
subsequently screened once more based on their  full text.  
 
2.5 Data Collection Process and Data Extraction  
A custom data extraction template  was created within Covidence  to ensure consistent and 
reliable data extraction from selected articles.  The data items assessed by the data extraction 
form can be grouped into two distinct categories : high-level metadata  relevant for characterising 
the field of the literature  and in-depth findings that capture  study -specific  data pertinent to 
answering the research questions . All extracted data was validated a second time within 
Covidence to ensure the accuracy of the extraction. A complete list of all the variables captured 
by the data extraction process can be found in Table 1. 
 
Metadata  Information on the article : title, year, literature type ( e.g., journal, conference paper, 
thesis ), venue (name of the journal and conference), research field (e.g., computer science, 
linguistic, psychology, criminology), and Google Scholar citations  
Information on the authors: full name, affiliation (typical the uni versity or research 
institute), location (country), and profession ( e.g., academic, law enforcement, industry 
professional  
Funding information  
Contribution type: exploring/proposing profiles, methodologies, countermeasures, legal 
aspects, or discussion of open issues  
Study set -up: study objectives, research methodology (e.g., qualitative study, quantitative 
study, mixed study design, experimental), sample size, sample characteristics, country of 
research and approaches for gathering data (e. g., interviews, questionnaires, online forums, 
social media sites)  
Findings  The p erspective of the study (e.g., victims, scammers, website operators)  
Applied theories and frameworks  
Main Findings: approaches for profil ing romance scam s and their progression , 
demography and psychological characteristics of scammers and victims, and 
countermeasures and mitigations  
Contributions of the article  
Table 1 Data i tems collected from the selected studies  
3 Results  
The following section presents  the main findings of the systematic review. At first, the study 
selection and study characteristics are introduced. Afterwards, the main findings  are presented, 
grouped by their primary research contribution . 
 3.1 Study Selection  
A total of 270 studies were identified  across 10 databases and secondary sources  (Table 2). Of 
these, 38 were remove d as duplicates and 142 were excluded based on the title and abstract 
screening  as they did not meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria  (Figure 1). The remaining 90 
articles  were assessed in full text . Twelve  were excluded because they not only referred to 
romance scam s but failed to cover them  coherently . Nine articles had research methodologies  
which were outwith the scope of our study  (i.e., the papers utilised  non-empirical research  
methods  such as  literature reviews  and scoping reviews ). An additional nine were removed as 
their full text s were not in English , and eight were not available in full  text. Furthermore, another 
five articles were excluded because  they had unclear research methodologies and three 
duplicated findings of a study by the same author, leaving  44 studies to be  included  in this 
review  (Table 3). 
 
Search Source  Number of items  before deduplication  
Scopus  69 
PsycInfo  0 
Psycarticle  0 
Medline  0 
Web of Science  44 
ProQuest  39 
ACM Digital Library  8 
IEEE Digital Library  2 
ScienceDirect  59 
PubMed  12 
Manually Included  37 
Total number of articles  270 
 
Table 2 Search results by source   
Figure 1 PRISMA flow diagram for identifying articles related to romance fraud  
 
 
Authors  Location  Research design  Methodology  Sample  
Al-
Rousan et 
al. 
(2020a)  USA  
Saudia 
Arabia  Quantitative  Machine learning  Not mentioned  
Anesa 
(2020)  Italy Qualitative  Linguistic Profiling  26 online messages and 
43 template messages  
Barnor et 
al. (2020)  Ghana  Qualitative  Semi -structured 
interviews  10 individuals engaged 
in romance fraud  
Buchanan 
and 
Whitty 
(2014)  UK Quantitative  Questionnaire  Study 1: 853 members 
of an online dating site  
Study 2: 397 members 
of a website to support  
romance scam victims  
Buil-Gil 
and Zeng 
(2021)  UK Quantitative  ARIMA modelling  Average of 4,166  
respondents per month  
Button et 
al. (2014)  UK Qualitative  Interviews/Focus 
Groups  Study 1: 15 online fraud 
victims  
Study 2: 6 focus groups 
with a further 48 online 
fraud victims  
Study 3: 9 professional 
stakeholders.  
Carter 
(2021)  UK Qualitative  Discourse analysis  1 conversation between 
a scammer and the 
victim  
Cross  et 
al. (2018)  Australia  Qualitative  Semi structured 
interviews  21 victims of romance 
fraud  
Cross 
(2019)  Australia  Qualitative  Semi -Structured 
interviews  First Round: 6 victims 
of romance fraud  
Second Round: 7 
victims of romance 
fraud  
Cross and 
Holt 
(2021)  Australia  
USA  Mixed  Content analysis  2478 complaints to 
Action Fraud  
Cross and 
Layt 
(2021)  Australia  Qualitative  Content analysis  509 victim reports to 
Scamwatch  
De Jong 
(2019)  Netherlands  Quantitative  Machine learning  4,154 profile images  
Dickerson 
et al. 
(2020)  UK Mixed  Pre-test and post-test 
experiment  12 participants with 
who had used online 
dating platforms  
Dreijers 
and 
Rudziša 
(2020)  Latvia  Qualitative  Linguistic Profiling  7 letter sets  
Edwards 
et al. 
(2018)  UK Quantitative  Geocoding of IP 
addresses  5,194 profiles of known 
scammers  
Garrett 
(2014)  USA  Quantitative  Questionnaire  110 Internet user s 
Graham 
(2021)  UK Quantitative  Reverse image search  240 ordinary profiles 
images, and 240 
scammer profiles  
He et al. 
(2021)  China  
Germany  Quantitative  Machine learning  240 million posts, 320 
million comments, and 
33 million user profiles  Huang  et 
al. (2015)  UK Mixed  Content analysis  500,000 profiles of 
known scammers  
Koon and 
Yoong 
(2017)  Malaysia  Qualitative  Linguistic Profiling  21 email conversations  
Kopp et 
al. (2015)  Australia  Qualitative  Content analysis  37 profiles of known 
scammers  
Kopp et 
al. 
(2016a)  Australia  Qualitative  Content analysis  17 reports on an internet 
help forum  
Kopp et 
al. 
(2016b)  Australia  Descriptive  Theory  No participants  
Li et al. 
(2019)  Norway  Quantitative  Machine learning  45 participants  
Luu et al. 
(2017)  Australia  Quantitative  Questionnaire  399 victims of romance 
fraud  
Modic 
and 
Anderson 
(2015)  UK Quantitative  Questionnaire  6,609 individuals from 
the public  
Obada -
Obieh 
(2017)  Canada  Qualitative  Semi -Structured 
interviews  10 general online daters  
Offei et 
al. (2020)  Ghana  
USA  Quantitative  Questionnaire  320 individuals engaged 
in romance fraud  
Pan et al. 
(2010)  Australia  Mixed  Data mining  5,481 profiles of known 
scammers  
Pizzato et 
al. (2012)  Australia  Quantitative  Probabilistic modelling  2,000,000 Expressions 
of interests from a 
dating site  
Rege 
(2009)  USA  Qualitative  Document meta -
analysis  170 documents  
Saad et 
al. (2018)  Malaysia  Quantitative  Study 1: Questionnaire  
Study 2: Association 
Learning  Study 1: 280 romance 
scam victims  
Study 2: 2,274 victim 
reporting to CCID  
Shaari et 
al. (2019)  Malaysia  Qualitative  Content analysis  60 online chats  
Smeitink 
(2021)  Netherlands  Qualitative  Semi structured 
interview  9 victims of romance 
fraud  Sorell and 
Whitty 
(2019)  Australia  Qualitative  Semi -structured 
interviews  3 romance scam victims  
Suarez -
Tangil et 
al. (2019)  UK 
USA  
Australia  Quantitative  Machine learning  14,720 ordinary 
profiles, and 5,402 
scammer profiles  
Webster 
and Drew 
(2017)  Australia  Qualitative  Semi -Structured 
interviews  9 police officers  
Whitty 
and 
Buchanan 
(2012)  UK Quantitative  Questionnaire  2028 individuals from 
the general public  
Whitty 
(2013 a) UK Qualitative  Study 1: Content 
analysis  
Study 2 + 3: Semi 
structured interview  Study 1: 200 posts from 
a public online support 
group;  
Study 2: 20 victims of 
romance fraud; Study 3: 
1 SOCA officer  
Whitty 
(2013b)  UK Qualitative  Semi structured 
interview  20 victims of romance 
fraud  
Whitty 
and 
Buchanan 
(2016)  UK Qualitative  Semi -structured 
interviews  20 victims of romance 
scams or individuals 
who feel that they have 
been scammed  
Whitty 
(2018)  Australia  Quantitative  Questionnaire  11,780 Victims and 
non-victims  
Whitty 
(2019)  UK Quantitative  Questionnaire  261 dating site and 
social media users  
Whitty 
(2020)  Australia  Quantitative  Questionnaire  Study 1: 11,780  
participants (10,723 
non-victims, 1057 
victims)  
Study 2: 531  
participants (sub -set of 
study 1)  
Table 3 Full list of articles included in the study  
 
 
3.2 Study Characteristics  
This section provides an overview of the descriptive characte ristics  derived  from  the included 
articles. The final selection consisted of 30 journal articles, nine conference proceedings, four theses and dissertation s, and a single book  chapter.  All studies were published between 2009 and 
2021, with the majority of publications (n=25) being issued between 2018 -2021 ( Figure 2).  
 
 
 
Figure 2 Types of publications each year  
 
 
The contributor s were distributed across thirteen different countries , based on the institution al 
affiliation listed ( Figure 3). 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Contributions by country  
 
In our analysis of the  type of contribution present in the  articles,  we identified that  the majority 
contributed to the profiling  of romance scam s and their manifestations (n=2 0), by the exploration 
of countermeasures  for mitigating romance scam s (n=1 4) and related  factors of becoming  a 
scammer or a victims  (n=10). 
 
The studies included in this review utilised a range of different research designs . Most  preval ent 
were qualitative studies (n=2 1), primari ly through semi -structured interviews , followed by 
quantitative research (n=19), frequently utilising online surveys .  
 
 
3.3 Excluded Work  
Articles were excluded if duplicate records found or there was no access to the full -text. Papers 
were also excluded if they were not written in English, or if they contain ed no relevance or a 
weak link to romance fraud. Furthermore, several papers were excluded if they did not feature a 
methodology of relevance to our review . 
 
This incorporated  papers with limited detail in the methodology in terms of participants and 
materials evaluated (Annadorai et al., 2018; Gregory and Nikiforova, 2012; Jimoh and Stephen, 
2018) . Several papers were also position -like pieces, featuring no empirical research  (Gillespie, 
2017, 2021; Steyerl, 2011; M. Whitty et al., 2017). Other papers featured  a short review of 
existing literature , e.g., providing an overview of  romance fraud, or linking to established 
theories  (Cross, 2016b, 2020; Eseadi et al., 2021; Khader and Yun, 2017; Rege, 2013) . Coluccia 
et al. (2020) conducted a scoping review of romance fraud ’s relational dynamics and 
psychological characteristics and  identified twelve relevant studies. While such review s 
contribute to the basic understanding of romance fraud, they do  not deliver a detailed picture  of 
the currently existing body of literature on the subject.  
 
 
3.4 Profiling Romance Scams: Models, Taxonomies , Characteristics  and Tac tics 
The following section pr esents the findings of studies that contributed to the profiling of romance 
scams through process models, taxonomies as well as discussions of characteristics and tactics 
prevalent in romance fraud.  
 
3.4.1 Process  Models  of Romance Fraud  
Explaining  the progression of romance scams has been at the centre of academic interest. An 
early examination by Rege (2009) is one of the most referenced articles on this topic. Rege 
(2009 ) describes  three distinct stages commonly found in romance scams. The scam begins with 
the creation of a fake profile and continues with the contact phase, which aims to establish trust 
and a strong bond between the scammer and the victim over a more extended period. The third and final stage entails one or multiple requ ests for money by describing a terrible or desperate 
situation.  
 
The most frequently referenced model, however , was developed by Whitty (2013a) , who 
identified  five stages involved in the scam: being presented with an  ideal profile, the grooming 
process  (establishing the trust), the sting ( request for money ), sexual abuse and  revelation . 
Subsequently, Wh itty (2013b)  proposed the  Scammers Persuasive Model , a refined and extended 
version of her initial model , adding the motivation to find an ideal partner  and a re-victimisation 
stage to the process flow. The work also acknowledges  that not all victims experience all stages. 
In particular, the sexual abuse stage depends  on the individual and the s cam’s setup and is  no 
longer part of the immedia te flow . 
 
Smeitink (2021)  developed a model  based on romance fraud research in the Netherlands . The 
steps include:  an individual being open to find ing an ideal partner online,  and the individual is 
presented with the ideal partner, the crisis, the continuation of the scam, confrontation, and the 
recovery phase  as the chronological stages . Furthermore, Smeitink added the grooming phase as 
a dimension and the postmodern explanations of simulation, commodification and consumption 
as central to romance fraud.  This change has been proposed to represent the nonlinear flow and 
highly dynamic nature of the grooming subprocess.  
 
In contrast , Kopp et al. (2016b)  argue d that scammers engage a victim in two mutually 
supportive storylines : a relationship scam  and a fund scam . While the former  aimed at 
establish ing a romantic relationship to develop  commitment an d trust , the latter s ought  to 
engineer the victim into transferring funds to the perpetrator.  
 
In subsequent research, Kopp et al. (2016a)  explain ed the transition between the story lines using  
the Transtheoretical Model ’s stages of change. They describe  that the victim ’s interes t is initially 
established by resonating with the personal love story . In the subsequent phase (action phase) , 
gifts are exchanged,  and communication is deepened by sharing personal similarities. Next  
follows the maintenance phase, a stage where victims experience strong romantic  and happiness  
through regular  communication . The relationship storyline  ends with the termination of the 
relationship by the victim.  Kopp et al. (2016a) explain that the fund story  typically starts by 
introducing an  uninvolved  happening or a character . Subsequently , the story is expand ed along 
with the relationship story  until the money is requeste d. Money transfer becomes habitual during 
the maintenance phase , and tra nsfers are seen as contributing  to the relationship . The fund scam 
also ends with the victim terminating  the relationship.  
 
3.4.2 Characteristics of Romance Fraud  
It is challenging to determine the actual number of occurrences of romance fraud due to the high 
likelihood of underreporting  (Cross et al., 2018) . Whitty and Buch anan (2012)  estimated , based on survey  data from 2 ,028 British adults , that 0.65% of all adults  in the UK  had already been 
scammed , and 2.28% know someone who had been victimised . The study by Modic and 
Anderson (2015)  found similar numbers , as 1.6% of the survey participants indicated  that they 
find lone ly-hearts swindles plausible , and 1.5% indicat ed that they were likely to  lose utility in 
the scam.  
 
Whitty and Buchanan (2012)  and Buchanan and Whitty (2014)  indicate  losses between £50 and 
£800,000 and  median financial damages  of £1 ,001 and £10,000  per victim. Similarly,  Rege 
(2009)  quotes  losses of more than $3,000 for average victims.  
 
Early q ualitative research on romance fraud suggested  that most scams originate from western 
parts of Africa , such as Nigeria , which were infamous for running  fraud ulent  schemes  (Rege, 
2009 ; Whitty , 2013a) . Later research  conducted by Pan et  al. (2010)  confirmed these findings by 
highlighting that scammer profiles were frequently associated with IP address  blocks  assigned to  
the Lagos Region . Subsequent  research by Edwards et  al. (2018) , which  decoded IP addresses on 
a country level , identified that scams originated from Nigeria  (30%) , Ghana  (13%) , and Malaysia  
(11%), followed by  South Africa  (9%) . 
 
Furthermore, Rege (2009)  established a typology of romance scammers , by describing the 
organisation and roles of the criminal networks operating romance scams . Rege points out that  
romance  scammers ’ operations range from  single  individuals  over close -tied small groups , to 
large -scale, loosely  coupled  networks . The six roles commonly found  amongst scammers  are: the 
organisers deciding on the nature and extent of the activities, the extenders in charge of 
expanding the network, and the executors who perform the fraudulent engagement with the 
victim. Additionally, there are also enforcers who compel victims to com ply, money movers 
responsible for collecting and wiring funds and crossovers that are part of the scammer network 
and legitimate governmental, financial, or commercial entities.  
 
3.4.3 Persuasive Tactics and Tricks  
Researchers have explored various tactics that scammers use  to lure victims into the scam and 
keep them engaged . Studies have performed linguistic profiling  (Anesa, 2020; Dreijers and 
Rudziša, 2020; Koon and Yoong, 2017; Shaari et al., 2019) , researched  persuasion and 
repression tactics  (Button et al., 2014; Carter, 2021; Cross et al., 2018; Kopp et al., 2015 ; Whitty , 
2013b) , and the usage of military identities  to convey authority  (Cross and Holt, 2021) . 
 
3.4.3.1  Linguistic Profiling  
Shaari  et al. (2019) analysed written scam communications ’ structure and linguistic patterns , and 
identified three distinct stages: initial, pre -attraction , and hooked.  
 During the initial stage , the relationship is established . This phase is dominated by formal and 
polite  communication , where scammers disclose details about their personality and successful 
career  to gain the victim ’s trust . Similarly, Koon and Yoong  (2017)  confirm  the prevalence of 
pseudo -self-disclosure  to evoke trust, empathy, and sympathy by displaying the scammer as a 
successful, educated, affluent and elite individual . Anesa (2020)  corroborates these findings and 
then adds that the self-presentation  also attempts  to evoke  empathy and sympathy  of the victim 
by sharing  details about previous difficult experiences . 
 
The second stage (pre-attraction) , according to Shaari et al. (2019) , aims at strengthening the 
online relationship. Common phrases during this stage include discussions about religion , 
expressions of attraction  and phrases that prioriti se the victim  (Shaari et al., 2019) . Again, Koon 
and Yoong (2017)  confirm  these findings  and explain that scammers p ortray themselves as good, 
morally upright persons by using  words and phrases with religious connotations . Koon and 
Young describe that the reasoning for the relationship is often stated as ‘divine providence ’. 
Other  tricks used to underline a scammer ’s trust and credibility  were expressions  highlighting 
their online dating expertise , and the ir use of adjectives such as "honest" and "sincere".  
 
Anesa (2020)  notes that the appeal to strong emotions is used to establish  a strong emotional 
bond. Extensive compliment s regarding physical appearance and personality  and messages , with 
flowery , cliché and hyperbolic elements  that express the scammers ’ attraction and prioritisation 
of the victim , are also common (Anesa, 2020; Koon and Yoong, 2017) . The expressions of 
strong attraction typically also contained requests to change to an alternative  communication 
channel, a necessary  step for evading the detection algorithms of  online dating platforms  (Anesa, 
2020; Koon and Yoong, 2017) . 
 
The final phase (known as the hooked -phase) occurs from the mid-stage of the relationship until 
the money is requested.  Shaari et al. (2019)  and Koon and Yoong (2017)  identified expressions 
that suggest feelings of indebtedness and gratitude for the received companionship. The 
monetary requests are constructed to e voke visceral responses from the victim while deflecting 
the deceptive nature of the message (Anesa, 2020) . However , scammer writing styles could also  
be more  aggressive, assertive, and occasionally offensive  if victims fail to cooperate  with 
monetary requests  (Shaari et al., 2019) . 
 
Across all stages of the scam,  Dreijers and Rudziša (2020)  identified common micro -linguistic 
elements, including direct questions, flattering  to keep the victim engaged , lyrical expressions  
and pet names to facilitate intimacy and bonding . Furthermore, elements appealing to core 
human drives to bond and feel were also used: buzzwords with romantic connotations, non -
native English spelling and expressions, and sign-offs indicating a longing for the partner . On a 
macro level , Dreijers and Rudziša (2020) found four common stages : an initial situation, the 
reconnoit re (observation) , delivery and the trickery stage. Similar  to Shaari et al. ’s (2019) model, the initial stage is about establishing communication and open ing up, and the reconnoitre  stage is 
concerned  with collecting and requesting additional  private information . In the third stage, the 
scammer fabricates an autobiography that is either full of integrity and success , or fu ll of 
personal sorrow.  Their model closes with obtaining personal details and /or requesting the money 
from the victim.  
 
3.4.3.2  Persuasion and Repression Tactics  
Button et al. (2014)  researched reason s why victims fall for  a range of  online  scams , including 
romance fraud . They discovered a variety of factors, such as  fraud diversity, requests for modest 
sums of money  from a large number of victims , authority and legitimacy, visceral  appeals, 
embarrassing frauds, pressure and coercion, grooming, fra ud conducted from afar , and different 
approaches . In particular, Whitty ’s (2013b) examination of romance fraud  corroborates the usage 
of authority , highlighted  through dating partners  in authority , fast-moving relationships  and 
visceral triggers , such as  predicting  future experiences and emotions experience d together , as 
contributing factors for motivational and cognitive errors . Additionally, Whitty identified appeals 
to urgen cy, reciprocation,  norm activation,  Cialdini ’s (2007)  principle s of commitment and 
consistency and love, liking and similarity , and a ddictive relationship s. 
 
Similarly, Carter (2021)  establishes the practice  of visceral responses and urgency  through 
discourse analysis . Carter explains that a t the start, the victim is  provided with a false sense of 
power through visceral responses  that indicate an emotional vulnerability of the scammer. 
Furthermore, Carter identified that scammers typically drop innocuous information about their 
financial and personal situation and revi sit it throughout the communication to establish trust and 
believability.  For the monetary request, Carter found that these were  initially  issued implicitly  
and later explicitly repeated , accompanied by  stories  of physical trauma and urgency  to evoke 
the victim ’s visceral responses . 
 
Kopp et al. (2015) introduce s the concept of personal love stories as an integral factor for the 
success of the romance scam . The work indicates that scammers establish a relationship story 
that reflects the victim ’s perception of love and relationship s, and tailor it throughout the s cam to 
get the victim to believe  that they have found their soulmate.  
 
Carter (2021)  adds the usage of isolation techniques , used to deflect the victim ’s suspicions 
about the fraudulent nature of the relationship , to discourage  the victim from  disclosing to family 
and friends . Scammers isolate the victim by implying loneliness  and permanent loss of happiness  
if the victim attempts to end the relationship .  
 
A study  by Cross et al.  (2018)  considered the dynamics of romance fraud in comparison to 
concepts traditionally found in domestic violence research . The work highlights the creation of 
fear, isolation  and monopolisation of the victim. Additionally, Cross states that scammers mistreat their victims through economic abuse,  degradation, psychological destabilisation , 
Emotional or interpersonal withdrawal  and contingent expressions of love. The economic abuse 
occurs through the request of money, while degradation manifests in verb al attacks. 
Psychological destabilisation is a technique, where victims are deliberately tricked into doubting 
their own decision -making  skills  and reality . Emotional or interpersonal withdrawal  is a passive 
tactic that aims at increasing a victim ’s anxiety through temporal ly ceasing conversation , while 
contingent expressions of love build upon positive reinforcement  to encourage  the victim to 
comply . 
 
3.4.3.3  Military Themes  
In recent years , personas involving a military context  have frequently been mentioned  as distinct  
theme s employed by scammers  (Rege, 2009; Whitty, 2013b; Whitty and Buchanan, 2012) . In 
military -themed  scams , the perpetrators use profile photos of army or peacekeeping personnel  
and utilise a military context  for creating the persona and storyline  that projects  authority (Anesa, 
2020; Cross and Holt, 2021) .  
 
Based on the victims ’ reports from the Australian Consumer and Competition Commission, 
Cross and Holt (2021) identified  that significant predictors for reporting a military theme were 
being  female, younger in age , primary  English speaker, and not living within  Australia.  Their 
work also identified  that military scams typically start on social  media platforms and are likely to 
involve the los s of personal details . However, it was found these types of scams  show ed typically 
did not show  signs of abuse  (e.g., threats or blackmail ). These variables, however, were not 
found to be significant for indicating financial losses  in the scam . Instead , males and victims 
with who already faced financial hardship were more at risk of monetary loss.  
 
Cross and Holt (2021) explain that t he usage of a military identity  could  either be incidental  or 
central for requesting money from the victim. In cases where the army context was used to set up 
the profile, but not for the monetary demand , requests  were excused  as 
consignments/inheritances  fees, health emergencies , criminal justice emergencies , assistance for 
family members , and a combination of these reasons . However, in cases where the whole  
military narrative was harnessed, money was requested for leave requests  and resources , such as 
food and medicine. Cross and Holt stress that military -themed requests  were commonly justif ied 
by the lack of access to personal financial means and the inability  to communicate through voice 
or vide o for security and secrecy reasons . 
 
3.4.4 Fraudulent Online  Dating  Profiles  
Online dating profile s play a vital role in romance scams . It is typically the first point of contact 
that lures a victim into the scam and plays  a crucial role in successfully executing the subsequent 
scam stages (Kopp et al., 2016a; Whitty, 2013a) . Thus, the profiles and self-presentation  of 
scammers have been subject to extensive resea rch.  
Pan et al. (2010)  highlight s that the majority (61%) of  scammer profiles misrepresent their origin 
by claiming to be  from  the US. Follow -up studies  confirm this e.g., Edwards  (2018)  notes that 
most scammers claimed to be from the US (63%), the UK (11%), or Germany (3%) , as these are 
typically also the countries where their victims are located.  
 
Differences between male and female scammer profiles have been characterised by  average age 
and professions . Whitty (2013a)  states that female profiles  targeting heterosexual male victims in 
their later years typically portray themselves as no older than 30 years of age, and working in 
low-paying or non -professional job s. For profiles targeting heterosexual females, the profiles 
were typically claiming to be as old as 50 but mostly  younger than the victim.  Occupations 
include  professional jobs, entrepreneurial activities , or army ranks . For fake male homosexual 
profiles, Whitty (2013a) elaborates that these incorporate age ranges which are usually younger 
than 30 years of age and claim mixed professional status.  Edwards et al. (2018)  support these 
finding s by indicating  an average age of 30 for females and 50 for  males . Similarly, Pan et al. 
(2010)  identified that most  females  claimed to be between 20 and 29 , and males stated  ages 
between 40 and  49.  
 
Disagreement exists on the prevalence of a particular gender  linked to scammer profiles . While 
Pan et al. (2010)  argues  the predominance  of young females (64.93%) , Huang et al. ’s (2015)  
analysis of flagged profiles from a Chinese dating site presents the majority (close to 80%) of 
romance swindlers  as males. S imilarly, Edwards et al. (2018)  found that 64 % of all profiles 
were males.  
 
Different findings also exist for the marital status indicated by the profiles. While Edwards et al. 
(2018) produce a convincing account for the existence  (50%) of single status across all profiles, 
Huang et al. (2015) found a prevalence of widows (50%), followed by divorcees (33%), with 
single people only accounting for 15%.  Whitty (2013a)  indicates that the marital status is again 
dependent on the target characteristics , with male  profiles typically posing as widower s with a 
child , whereas females commonly  pose as singles.  
 
Edwards et al. (2018)  extended  these perspective s and reason that the gender , ethnicity , marital 
status , and profession misrepresented  in the profile can show unique characteristics based on the 
origin of the scam. Profile s originating  from Nigeria, Malaysia, and South Africa primarily posed 
as males, while profiles from  the Philippines, Ukraine,  and Senegal presented themselves as 
females. Furthermore, some countries displayed occupations other than the predominant military 
and engineering themes. Purported Italia n profiles often indicated real estate  as an occupation , 
Philippines indicated sales, and Côte d ’Ivoire  identified primarily  as a student. A similar 
tendency could be noted for countries that state ethnicities other than white. Profiles originating from Se negal and Côte d ’Ivoire  self-identified as black, while profiles from the Philippines 
stated mixed.  
 
Kopp et al. (2015) , performed a qualitative analysis of the profile descriptions of 37 fraudulent 
profiles , identified that the profile descriptions  typically consist of a self -presentation , 
explanations  of hobbies, motivation s and the ideal partner . The study  argue s that male profiles 
describ e themselves as masculine, wealth y, humorous,  and God-fearing , while females portray 
confiden ce, financial independence,  and occasionally sexually provocative suggestions. Men also 
frequently included  personal tragedies  in the profile , such as the loss of a loved on e, suggesting 
their need for a caring, sympathising partner . 
 
Additionally, two rather curious findings about  scammer profiles were reported by Pan et al.  
(2010) , who postulated that the fraudulent profiles were frequently associated with  Yahoo ’s 
email service and descriptions that suggested a bisexual  sexual orientation . One aspect both 
female and male profiles have in common is their use of attractive profile pictures  commonly 
stolen from social media sites or model ling agencies (Cross and Layt, 2021; Rege, 2009; Whitty, 
2013b) . 
 
3.4.5 Consequences of Romance Fraud  
Romance fraud typically consists of  a double hit, consisting of a financial and emotional impact, 
can be noted among victims  (Rege, 2009; Whitty, 2013a) . Buchanan and Whitty (2014) analysed 
the effects on the victim and showed  that financial  victims report higher emotional impact than 
non-financial victims, with 40% signifying  they were ‘very distressed over a long period ’. Modic 
and Anderson (2015)  add support to the ir findings . They determined  lonely heart swindles as the 
fraud category with the highest emotional impact on the victim  combined with reasonab ly high 
financial losses . Women were not just found to experience higher emotional impact , but also 
suffer higher financial losses than their male counterparts (Buchanan and Whitty, 2014) . 
 
The emotions that victims experience post -scam include shame, embarrassment, shock, anger, 
worry and stress , fear, and the feeling of being mentally raped  (Whitty and Buchanan, 2016) . In 
cases where sexual acts were performed on camera, victims also reported feeling s akin to 
suffering sexual abuse . Cross (2019)  states  that victimisation also caters  to other negative aspects 
of well-being , including physical and mental health problems, relationship problems, 
unemployment, homelessness , and suicidal thoughts.  Other consequences  are a diminished sense 
of self -worth and confidence , loss of trust in others  and cutting social ties  with former 
acquaintances (Whitty and Buchanan, 2016) . Whitty and Buchanan (2016)  further explain that 
for some victims, the perceived loss of their ‘ideal partner ’ weigh ed heavier than the financial 
loss, as they perceived the fraudulent relationship as therapeutic and superior  to any other 
relationship.  
 Whitty and Buchanan (2016)  found  that most victims struggle to cope with the experiences as 
they feel they cannot disclose to  family, friends, or work colleagues  out of fear of rejection and 
anger . This consequence  leaves most victims in a stage of denial, where they are at particular risk 
of re-victimisation . Those victims who disclosed to peers  frequently did not get the necessary  
support  but experienced increased  negative  feelings of  self-blame . 
 
The notion of self -blame is common among romance scam victims, especially when victims 
cannot recognise the fraudulent nature of the relationship despite being warned by others (Sorell 
and Whitty, 2019). The work reasoned that the more victims disregard available 
counterevidence, such as warnings by third -party authorities, the more often they are victimised, 
and the more responsible they become for their losses. They emphasise that victims  are generally 
prudent but  fail to apply caut ion in their online relationships due to believing they are in love. 
Thus, they relax belief ethics and hyper -personal tendencies that make them vulnerable to 
pressure.  
 
3.5 Influential  Factors: Socio -Demographic , Exper iential and Dispositional 
Characteristics of Scammers and Victims  
Several articles (n=10) tended to  focus on influential  factors, such as scammers and victims ’ 
socio -demographic, experiential and dispositional characteristics  which may increase the 
likelihood of them being involved in a romance fraud . These are discussed based on the 
typologies to which they contribute.  
 
 
3.5.1 Typology  of Victims  
Garett (2014)  indicates that active engagement finding a partner yields a higher likelihood of 
falling for a romance scam . Those who  want a partner but do not actively engage  in the search 
process  showed higher monetary losses  than other online daters . Another factor  that significantly 
increases both the likelihood and severity is a focus on finding an international partner . 
Furthermore, the years of inter net usage affect the probability  and average losses. Garett (2014)  
demonstrates that respondents  with one to five years of internet experience were particularly 
exposed.  
 
Similarly, Saad et al. (2018)  compared the influencing  factors of victimi sation among Malaysian 
romance scam victims. They found  a moderate positive correlation between the level of cyber -
fraud awareness and the risk of victimisation and a weak positive correlation for computer skills.  
These findings align with Garret ’s (2014)  indications  that a lack of scam  awareness  increases a 
victim ’s vulnerability and losses . Saad et al. (2018) identified age, education level and computer 
skills as additional influencing  factors. Interestingly, using an Apriori al gorithm, they found  that 
well-educated, married  wom en of Chinese and Malay ethnicity between the age of 25 and 45 
have a high likelihood  of victimisation.  The authors did not elaborate on their finding  that married people were more likely to experience victimhood than individuals who were not in a 
relation ship. 
 
A study by Whitty (2018) , which  compared socio -demographic and psychological characteristics 
of romance scam victims and non -victims  in the UK , partly  confirms these findings . Similar  to 
Saad et al. (2018) , Whitty suggests that well-educated women  in the age group of 35 –54 are at 
particular risk of victimisation , as this group is most likely to engage in online dating  and have 
higher levels of disposable income . Additionally, psychological characteristics, including 
impulsivity, lack of self -control , addiction disposition, more trustworthiness  and less kindness , 
were indicative of  romance scam victimhood . In subsequent research, Whitty (2020) also 
analysed the psychological characteristics and socio -demographic differences across different 
cyber scams . Her study found that gender, education, impulsivity, locus of control , and 
neuroticism were sign ificant predictors  of cyber  scam victimhood. Further analysis  of personal 
characteristics by scam type identified that romance scam victims have higher impulsivity , 
education , and neuroticism  scores compared to victims of other scams.  
 
In assessing the effects of personality and psychological variables on the risk of being scammed 
and the emotional distress experienced after a scam, Buchanan and Whitty (2014) only identified 
idealisation, a sub -element of romantic beliefs, as the only si gnificant  factor  but in practice, a 
limited predictor for victimhood.  Ideali sation is an individual ’s belie f in the fulfilment  of a 
perfect  relationship . Other psychological characteristics, such as loneliness, personality and 
sensation , did not reach  statistical s ignificance.  
 
3.5.2 Typology of  Scammers  
In contrast  to the well-studied  influencing  factors for victims, research on perpetrators is still 
scarce . The following section presents two studies  that primarily analysed the psychometric 
aspects  of indivi duals conducting o nline romance fraud.   
 
Barnor et al. (2020)  rely on the Motivation Opportunity Ability (MOA) f ramework and the 
Rationali sation dimension of the Fraud Triangle Theory to explain male  Ghanaian scammer ’s 
socio -economic drivers. They discorvered  that the  main drivers of romance fraud are  peer 
recruitment, poverty, unemployment, and low  education and income.  For the opportunity 
dimension, the conditions that allow or make it possible for people to engage in a behaviour , the 
study suggests that flaws in current law , its enforcement  and lack of law enforcement capabilities  
are the primary enabler s for committin g romance fraud . The third and final dimension of the 
MOA framework, a bility, can be described as necessary skills and proficiencies for completing a 
set task.  
 
Based on their qualitative interviews, Barnor et al. (2020) ascertained  the need for social 
abilities, such as team work and interactional skills, and technology -related capabilities to remain anonymous,  like knowing how to use VPNs  (Virtual Private Networks) . However, no formal  IT 
training or higher education was present  among the interviewees . Similarly, Rege (2009) lists 
basic computing skills as required technical skills, alongside patience, social skills, and the 
ability to follow routines , as non -technical skills.  
 
Most of the offenders interviewed by Barnor  et al. (2020) rationalised their behaviour by stating 
that cybercrime is less severe than physical crimes like murder because their ‘wealthy ’ victims 
are supposedly less affected by the loss of money. Others also justif ied their behaviour as 
retaliation  for the harm caused to their forefathers during the coloni sation times.  
 
In a similar study , Offei et al.  (2020)  analysed  Ghanaian individuals ’ justification s who execute 
online romance scams using Neutrali sation and Denial of Risk Theory . They found  that 
scammers only use the denial of victim aspect of the Neutrali sation Theory to justify their 
deviant behaviour . Scammers  alleviate the sole responsibility for the deception by reasoning that 
their extensive investments contribute to a romantic relationship with mutual responsibilities . 
Findings for the denial of risk theory were consistent with Barnor et al. ’s (2020)  findings on 
ability and ra tionalisation. Scammers are self -assured in their ability to avoid prosecution and 
rationalise their behaviour as less aggressive and dangerous than physical crimes.  Rege ’s (2009)  
work  aligns  with these finding s by explaining that scammers frequently resort ed to denial of 
victim and denial of injury techniques and that anonymity is a  crucial evasion technique for 
scammer organisations of all sizes.  
 
3.6 Countermeasures and Mitigations  
This systematic review identified two broad groups targeted by the research on countermeasures 
and mitigations:  technology -centred and human -centred approaches. The technology -centred 
approaches can further be divided by whether a system seeks to detect fraudulent profiles 
actively or if the primary goal is to create a robust people recommender system. Similarly, the 
human -centred approaches can be grouped into two subfields. The first group entails research 
focusing on inherent safeguarding approaches, while the second group concentrates on externally 
provided intervention and coping strategies.  
 
 
3.6.1 Research on Detection Mechanisms  
The six papers focussing on detecting fraudulent online dating profiles and scammer behaviour 
using machine learning approaches can be grouped based on the input features used to 
distinguish between bogus and genuine  profiles.  
 
Al-Rousan et al. (2020b)  proposed Social -Guard, an online application that checks  if a given  
profile image  portrays  a celebrity and whether the photo could be located  on another website.  
They emplyed  Amazon ’s Rekognition API (Amazon, 2023) to identify celebrities and the Google  Vision API (Google, 2023) to reverse -search the images . In their study set -up, the 
authors validated their development  by creating  fake profiles  on OkCupid  (2023) and populating 
these with  unseen and known  profile photos of celebrities and non-celebrities . The authors claim 
that their tool achieves "satisfactory " effectiveness  and established that  the Google Vision API  
can be used to locate similar images.  
 
De Jong (2019)  utilised the reverse search  capabilities of Google and Yandex  to locate a labelled 
image on the internet and then extracted the text of th e webpage s, normalised it  and created a 
feature  set for the given images. The feature sets were subsequently used to train and  evaluate 
multiple machine -learning classifiers. The author explained  that his random forest classifier 
reached a  maximum accuracy of 92.4 %  at the expense of a high  false -negative rate of 19.7 %. 
These results indicate d that the proposed model is mo re likely to falsely classify a scammer ’s 
image as benign  than classify a regular online dater as fraudulent . 
 
Graham  (2021)  also employed reverse image search and text  extraction of websites for 
identifying scammer profiles. Unlike De Jong  (2019) , however,  the author did not train a 
machine -learning model . Instead, he  developed a browser add -on communicating with a client -
side Python application  that reverse searches  Google  (2023) , Yandex (2023) and TinEye  (2023)  
and evaluates the identified web pages based on keywords  in near real-time. This algorithm 
mimics a common safeguarding strateg y of validating an online identity  through reverse 
searches,  outlined in section 3.6.3 . By searching the retrieved websites for scam -related terms  
and the name displayed on the dating  site, the add-on can identify fraudulent profiles and 
validate  benign users ’ profiles based on other online presences. In an evaluation, the author 
tested the FaceCheck add -on on 40 profiles from OkCupid (2023) and Match.com  (2023)  and 
returned  35 inconclusive results, two name  matches and three name  mismatch es. The name 
matches could be attributed to the profile owner upon manual validation . For the name 
mismatches , one profile  could be identified as a false positive, one could not be validated , and 
the third was a potentially suspicious  profile.  
 
Suarez -Tangil e t al. (2019)  extended the number of factors and included static profile 
information, such as  demographical  data and profile descriptions  in their evaluation.  The authors 
utilised various  machine learning classifiers based on the input variables and their completeness.  
For complete demographical data , such as age , occupation and gender , the team used a random 
forest classifier, while for incomplete profiles , a Naïve Bayes approach was used. The image 
classifier was implemented as a n SVM  (support vector machine ) with a radial kernel  and worked 
based on image captions detected based on the image . The authors used LibShortText ’s (Yu et. 
al, 2013) implementation of an SVM with a linear kernel to process the profile descriptors . The 
final prediction , of whether  a profile was a scam or benign, was made by combining the votes of 
the three classifiers using an RBF  (radial basis function)  Ensemble Classifier. The authors 
elaborated  that the best single  classifier was the  description -based  SVM classifier followed by the demographic classifier. As for the demographic features, the occupation area stated in the 
profile was the  most  important feature. This finding is in line with observations p resented in the 
discussion of profiling romance sc ams (see section 3.4.4 ). Overall, the authors proclaim an 
accuracy of 97 %  for the ensemble classifier . 
 
In a recent study , He et al. (2021)  extended t he static profile features utili sed by Suarez -Tangil  et 
al. (2019) . They used dynamic features, such  as user behaviours , to detect fraudulent profiles on 
a Chinese social media and dating app called Momo  (陌陌 ) (2023) . Their proposed content -
based attention network, dubbed “DatingSec ”, consists of three layers: input, pattern extraction, 
and prediction.  The input layer takes five types of features:  profile features , community features , 
behavioural  features , and  topic distributions of  posts and comments.  The extraction layer utili ses 
an MLP  (Multi -Level Perceptron) for processing static information and multiple Bilateral -long 
short -term memory  (Bi-LSTM)  processing dynamic information. He et al. (2021)  indicate d that 
their combined  approach reache d a precision of 90 .5 %, an F1 of 0.857 and an AUC  (area under 
curve) score  of 0.940. The optimal  features  identified in this study  for detecting scammers  were 
the static profile information  (e.g., posts and comments) , followed by behavioural features  (e.g., 
posts per day, comments received, photos used in posts) . 
 
A different approach for validating a n internet acquaintance was proposed by  Li et al . (2019) , 
who developed  a Random Forest -based classifier  that predicted the gender  - based on stylometry 
and keystroke dynamics  gathered through chat applications . The stylometry analysed  four 
features: the average thinking time, the ratio of key deletions, the average number of letters in a 
word,  and the average number of words within a message. Keystroke dynamics focused  on the 
latency between keypresses and the duration of key presses. Using these six keystroke dynamics 
features, a person ’s gender could be predicted via a 15 -minute chat conversation with an 
accuracy of 72 % . An evaluation based solely on the four stylometry features reached a 
prediction accuracy of 64 %. The authors explained that a  combination of both approaches 
through a score -level fusion approach yielded a lower accuracy of 64 % and that feature -level 
fusions were not feasible . A significant limitation of this work is that detecting  key dynamics, 
such as the latency between releasing the first and pressing the second key, required the 
installation of  a custom -developed keylogger called Be LT (Mondal et al., 2017) , as traditional 
chat clients do not record and transmit these.  Therefore, these detection mechanisms must  be 
integrated into applications where keystroke dynamics can be  accurately  recorded . 
 
3.6.2 Research o n Susceptibility  of People Recommenders  to Fraudulent Profiles  
Pizzato et al. (2012)  researched the sensitivity of recommender algorithms to scammer  profil es. 
In an experiment , they assessed the recommendations  of collaborative filtering, a hybrid 
(content -collaborative reciprocal plus content filter ) and content -based “RECON ” recommender 
algorithms . The y identified that collaborative filtering and hybrid recommenders more often than regular recommend highly suspicious profiles,  favouring  popular and active profiles and 
candidates  with high interaction and  high reply rates . 
 
3.6.3 Research on Intrinsically Motivated  Safeguarding  Strategies  
Several pieces  of literature  (n=4)  covering countermeasures and mitigation strategies focus ed on 
intrinsic ally motivated  safeguarding approaches  used by online daters , and their effectiveness  at 
detecting online deceit . 
 
Cross and Layts’ (2021)  large -scale survey showed that the most common action taken in 
response to suspicious profiles was to conduct an internet search of the online persona. Most 
frequent  were  reverse image search es or online searches based  on addresses, phone numbers, 
personal details, and message content. In most cases, t hese created  suspicion  of communicating 
with a scammer  due to warnings on scammer awareness sites , image reuse  and identity 
mismatches . However, even in cases without search hits , participants were still suspicious due to 
the lack of a digital footprint , such as  a social media profile . 
 
In contrast, similar research  by Obada -Obieh et al . (2017)  indicated that only three out of ten 
participants searched for online social media presence as a precautionary method . Most 
frequently ( six out of ten time s), online daters looked for inconsistency in the dating profiles, 
overly attractive profiles,  or complete duplicates to identify scammers, followed by rel iance  on 
their ‘gut feelings ’. Interviewees were particularly suspicious of profiles with profile picture s 
that were ‘too cute ’ and descriptions that appeared to be hoax es. This discrepancy in 
safeguarding strategies  can potentially be explained based on  the characteristics of the sample 
groups and the data sources. While Cross and Layt (2021)  drew on reports from scam victims  to 
Action Fraud  (2023) , Obada -Obieh et al. (2017)  interviewed  general online daters  without the 
precondition of being  involved in a scam.  
 
Whitty (2019) examined the predictors of human accuracy in identifying fake and real profiles. 
The response time was identified as a critical  predictor for accuracy , followed by the 
participants ’ previous experience with identifying fraudulent profiles. Lo nger response time and 
previous exposition to romance fraud significantly improved the ability to spot dece ption . In 
terms of personality and behavioural traits, the author found that strong romantic beliefs and low 
consideration of future consequences neg atively affect  predictors of accuracy, while high 
impulsivity improved accuracy. Whitty reasoned the  positive effect of high  impulsivity as the 
reliance on ‘gut instincts ’, a safeguarding strategy also identified by Obada -Obieh et al. (2017) . 
Overall, Whitty warn ed that distinguishing fake from genuine profiles remains a nontrivial  task: 
on average, participants only classified 13.51 out of 40 profiles correctly.  
 
While the former research covered the safeguarding techniques utili sed by individuals, Luu et al. 
(2017)  examined the factors and processes influe ncing the adoption of protection mechanisms , such as checks of identities or reporting of users,  using the Protection Motivation Theory  
(Rogers, 1983) . They identified that adopting pr otection mechanisms was mainly influenced by 
an individual’s coping appraisal, response efficacy, and self -efficacy factors. In contrast, 
response cost played a minor role. The authors discovered that perceived vulnerability and 
perceived severity were mos t influential for the threat appraisal . In particular, thorough  
knowledge of the harm caused by romance fraud  motivated individuals to use protection 
mechanisms.  
 
3.6.4 Research on  External ly Stimulated  Intervention and Coping Strategies  
The externally stimulated  intervention and coping strategies can be distinguished  based on the  
scam phase  in which they intervene , either from the grooming phase onwards or after the scam . 
Dickerson et al. (2020) proposed targeted and dynamic warning messages displayed to potential 
victims when a trigger situation, such as a request for money by a potential scammer, occurs . 
Their study identified that contextualised warning messages helped increase user awareness a nd 
decrease risky behaviour . Furthermore, warning messages contextualised advice on how to spot 
scammers  made available by dating sites and public entities . While none of the participants in the 
control group inter acted with the educational information, all the participants in the experimental 
group engaged with the training material referenced by the warning messages.  
 
Proactive  policing strategies were another target of research. Webster and Drew (2017)  explored 
the experiences of law enforcement officers involved in an early intervention model  by the 
Queensland Police Service. They identified that proactive policing yielded the first promising 
results through qualitative interview s, particularly  when victims were already questioning their 
relationship . However, the collected data also highlighted challenges, such as low success rates, 
lack of appropriate training to cope with emotional victims , and the need for a victim selection 
process that considers the correct timing of interventions.  
 
Research by Cross (2019)  examined the motivations, expectations , and actual experiences of 
individuals who joined police -run peer support groups after being  targeted by scammers. 
Significant  reasons  for joining a peer support group were the interactions with like-minded , a 
sense of community, the expected release of the burden suffered by the victim, the prospect of 
giving and receiving help , and  the sheer absence of other means of support, such as family and 
friends.  Unlike the motivations, which were largely optimistic, the actual experiences were 
mixed. Most  participant s valued sharing  their own story with others and subsequent gain of 
solidarity and acknowledgement , the ability to  learn how they have been victimi sed or build a 
friendship . However, others  acknowledged  diverse  challenges, such as lack of engagement in the 
group,  logistic al problems,  high participant fluctuation rates  of the group members , expectation 
mismatches , and perceived tension between financial and non -financial victims.  4 Discussion  
This section discuss es the main findings and limitations of existing studies , and future research 
directions  will be presented.  
 
4.1 Study Characteristics  
After applying a s et of selection criteria, 44 studies were included in this review . The majority 
(n=20)  primarily focused on  profiling romance scams and their manifestations, followed by 14 
exploring countermeasures for mitigating them , and ten evaluating influencing factors of 
becoming scammers or victims . Contributions employed  a wide range of research me thodologies  
and frameworks , which made direct comparisons  of individual findings and exploration of the 
field more challenging  due to the limited  homogeneity between the se studies . Furthermore, many 
studies focused primarily on online crime research rather than  romance fraud  specifically , 
requiring a degree of caution when comparing and contrasting findings.  
 
Evaluation of the research methodologies  showed that qualitative and quantitative methods were 
almost similarly prevalent . Most qualitative studies contributed to the profiling of romance 
scams, while quantitative studies primarily shaped  the understanding of countermeasures and 
influencing  factors. Unsurpri singly , the sample size between both methods greatly varied . 
 
Across all studies, the complexity  of acquiring novel, accurate and complete primary data on the 
subject were acknowledged . Multiple authors , from different fields , voiced the challenge  of 
collecting reliable data due to the underreporting of the crime,  ethical and  legal challenges,  and 
the sensi tive nature of the crime  (e.g., de Jong, 2019; Rege, 2009) . In particular , the collecti on of  
long-ranging  dynamic information, such as complete chat logs covering  all stages of the scam , 
starting from the message of interest on the dating site to the money transfer negotiated off -
platform, was acknowledged as challenging  (Carter, 2021) . This  challenge  might also explain the 
frequent usage of questionnaires and surveys  for collecting relevant data .  
Additionally, multiple studies were based on the same data , while others did not fully disclose 
their data sources.  Pairs of s tudies that were bas ed on the same  initial  data collection are  Cross 
and Holt (2021)  and Cross and Layt (2021) , as well as Whitty (2018)  and Whitty (2020) . 
 
Even when datasets  differed , commonalities coul d be iden tified based on the origin of the data . 
Multiple studies r elied on data from datingnmore.com  (2021) , a self-proclaimed  scammer -free 
online dating site , when analysing known genuine  profiles . Others relied on data from 
scamdigger.com  (2021) , when examining scammers profiles  (de Jong, 2019; Edwards et al., 
2018; Graham, 2021; Pan et al., 2010; Suarez -Tangil et al., 2019) . As both  sites are publicly 
accessible and allow for easy access  to a large pool of data , it is no surprise that three out of five 
studies that incorporated  machine learning utilised at leas t one of the se sites (de Jong, 2019; 
Graham, 2021; Suarez -Tangil et al., 2019) . However, t he firm reliance  on these two data sources  might lead to incorrect assumptions , as datingnmore.com primarily caters to an older audience  
and, therefore, might not represent  the general dating population . 
 
One way of furthering work on spotting scammers is  through an extended collaboration between  
academics , online -dating providers,  and law enforcement to identify legal and ethical ways  to 
access  the relevant data. Existing  studies  that utilise corporations with dating sites , such as those 
conducted by Huang  et al.  (2015)  on an unnamed Chinese dating site and by He et al. (2021)  on 
the Momo  (2023)  app, indicate promising findings.  
 
4.2 Profiling Romance Scam s 
Considerable research  contributions have been made in characterising the prevalence and impact  
of romance  scams . In terms of experienced financial losses, studies have found losses  between 
£50 and £800,000 and medians of £1,001 to £10,000 per victim  (Buchanan and Whitty, 2014) . 
As these numbers are frequently based o n reports to anti -fraud agencies such as Action Fraud, 
the actual numbers are likely to be higher due to many  unrecorded cases.  
 
Origins of the scam have also been explored in several papers . Studies by Pan et al. (2010)  and 
Edwards et al.  (2018)  confirmed that most romance fraud originates from  the West African  
countries  of Nigeria and Ghana. How ever, Edwards et al. also showed that a considerable 
number of scams  also originate in Malaysia  (11%) , Turkey (3%) , the Philippines  (2%)  and 
Russia (1.5%) . Research on the scams originating f rom these parts of the world is still scarce, 
despite initial indications of differences in the scam ’s execution , and the groups  they target  
(Edwards et al., 2018; Garrett, 2014) . Thus , more research is needed that addresses  romance 
scams by region  to identify unique characteristics , commonalities  and differences in the 
execution of the fraud . 
 
Studies concerned with the persuasive tactics used by scammers achieve  a general consensus 
among those in this review. Scammers utilise a range of persuasive tactics and linguistic devices 
to evoke the desired emotion in a particular scam stage. Tactics in clude visceral appeals, the 
creation of urgency, fast -moving relationships, appeals to strong emotions, and even isolation 
and monopolisation. Anesa (2020) argued that most tactics are particularly effective as these 
scam victims into processing clues peri pherally, according to the Elaboration Likelihood Model 
by Petty and Cacioppo (1984). An improved understanding of how individuals  process messages 
from scammers could provide an insight as to why individuals fall for such deceit and how it can 
be prevente d. 
 
The literature  on the creation  of fraudulent profiles  has once again  identified both similarities and 
discrepancies. While the frequent use of high -quality, stolen photos has been supported by  the 
literature, the prevalence of specific scammer profiles is  under debate. Recent  findings suggest 
that significant differences in the proclaimed demographics and personality traits  exist based on the target population and on the origin of the profile  (Edwa rds et al., 2018 ; Whitty , 2013a) . On 
average, m ale profiles stated higher age ranges and more prestigious professions than their 
female counterparts.  
 
Finally, research on the consequences experienced confirmed the preconceived  idea of a double 
hit that affects victims both financially and emotionally. Victims have reported feelings , 
including shame, embarrassment, shock, anger, worry , and physical - and mental health problems 
(Cross, 2019 ; Whitty  and Buchanan, 2016) . Other  casualties  also stated losing  an “ideal ”, almost  
therapeutic , relationship (Whitty and Buchanan, 2016) . Common themes were the struggle to 
cope with their experiences , due to a lack of support from peers , and a strong notion of  self-
blame.  
 
4.3 Influencing  Factors  
Despite frequent contributions (n=8) to establishing  influencing  factors  that increase the 
likelihood of victimhood, few factors are statistically sign ificant  (Garrett, 2014 ; Whitty , 2018) . 
The indicative ones , such as gender, education,  age, active engagement in online dating, desire to 
find an international partner,  impulsivity, locus of control, and neuroticism , are not free from 
contradiction . In particular, g ender  has been highly controversial. While the studies by Whitty 
(2018)  and Shaari et al. (2019)  suggest that wom en are more at risk, Rege (2009)  reasons that a 
romance scam is gender agnostic . Although , Whitty (2020) later suggests that men are more 
prone to fall for romance scams than women.  
 
A better understanding of the influencing  factors is needed, as it could help to tailor law 
enforcement efforts and improve intervention success (Webster and Drew, 2017) . Hence, w e 
suggest that future research disaggregate s the available data by influencing  factors  to identify 
vulnerable groups  to a particular scam type . Factors that should be considered are pre-
dispositional f actors, such as previous experiences in relationships,  sexual  orientation,  physical - 
and mental health  problems , and the financial situation prior to the  scam.  Additionally, such 
high-level data means it can be difficult to establish links  between victim characteristics and the 
type of  scammer profile  they find engaging.  
 
Saad et al. (2018)  conducted a stu dy based on  association rule learning  which  identif ied four 
specific profile  categories  of victims in Malaysia. Despite these novel finding s, the work  has 
multiple shortcomings . Firstly, it is unclear why the type of fraud was defined as parcel scams  in 
the associative learning rules , even though  the document was concerned with romance scam s. 
Secondly, the authors did not discuss  their finding that married people are at particular risk of 
victimisation , which is seemingly counterintuitive . 
 
Regarding profiling fraudsters , commonalities in the motivation and neutralisation techniques 
were  identified , as scammers are primari ly driven by the prospect of financial gain  and neutralise their responsibility through the existence of the victim  (Barnor et al., 2020; Offei et al., 2020) . 
However, beyond that , very little is known about the demographics and psychological insights of 
the offenders.  
 
4.4 Countermeasures  and Mitigations  
Regarding technical countermeasures , six studies were  identified. The features considered were - 
profile images  (Al-Rousan et al., 2020b; de Jong, 2019; Graham, 2021; Suarez -Tangil et al., 
2019) , the profile descriptio ns and demographics (He et al., 2021; Suarez -Tangil et al., 2019) , 
keystroke patterns  (Li et al., 2019) , as well as the  behaviour showcased by a scammer  (He et al., 
2021) . Different data sets utilised in the study may influence the performance of the proposed 
countermeasure . A possible solution is the publication of a standardised dataset with known 
scammers and benign profiles . The publication of structured, machine -legible d ata could also 
enable a streamlined development of technical countermeasures , as current research (Graham, 
2021; Suarez -Tangil et al., 2019)  scraped  unstructured and semi -structured data from websites 
like datingnmore.com and scamdi gger.com.  The publication  of structured data  on fraudulent 
profiles  through an API , similar to existing solutions for managing phishing submissions, would 
also support the rapid integration into end-user-facing solutions, like browsers and chat clients . 
 
It was noted that ensemble classifiers outperformed singular classifiers.  Works by Suarez -Tangil 
et al. (2019)  and He et al. (2021)  indep endently confirmed the benefit of using an ensemble 
classifier that combines predictions of the single classifiers that  make up  the fraud detection 
system.  
 
One limitation  that all studies had in common is that they , the countermeasures,  are rarely viable  
for end -users to utilise during  online dating. The closest work to an  integrated solution , a 
browser add -on proposed  by Graham (2021) , still required a locally running Python server  to 
perform the reverse image search.  Different applications that must  run simultaneously might 
severely inhibit the adoption among online daters , and would be most unsuitable for non -
technical users.  
 
The analysis surrounding intrinsically motivated safeguarding strategies by Luu  et al. (2017) 
showed that an individual’s coping appraisal and the factors of response efficacy and self -
efficacy significantly influence the adoption of safeguarding techniques when online dating 
(even more than threat appraisal). Similarly, Whitty (2019 ) reported  that previous experience in 
online dating deception  improves the ability to spot deceit. Therefore, training and awareness 
resources must be well disseminated on online dating sites  and strengthen the individuals ’ belief  
that they can protect themselves from  financial losses and emotional harm.  Current guidance 
around online dating  often  focuses on listing risk y behaviours , rather than persuading  individuals 
to consider negative outcomes associated with romance fraud, and the individual ’s ability to 
cope.  Therefore, we endorse  Whitty ’s (2019)  call to develop interactive awareness and training material that teaches potential victims how to detect and prevent romance scams . Similar 
methods utilised to educate employees about phishing have indicated  improved confidence levels 
among partic ipants (Cj et al., 2018) . 
 
As romance fraud is still a heavily stigmatised crime, few victims have been able to disclose 
their experiences and receive  support (Cross, 2019 ; Whitty  and Buchanan, 2016) . While the 
research concerned with externally stimulated intervention approaches , such as peer support 
groups and active policing,  has displayed some success , more work is needed to support victims  
(Cross, 2019; Webster and Drew, 2017) . In particular, law enforcement plays a key role , as they 
are typically the first point of contact after a victim realised that they have been defrauded  or 
even while victims  are still caught in the scam  in the case of active policing (Webster and Drew, 
2017 ; Whitty  and Buchanan, 2016) . Hence , law enforcement personnel working with romance 
fraud victims  need to be well trained in handling the traumatised , potentially disbelieving,  and 
vulnerable  victims , and inform  victims about professional counselling and support . 
 
4.5 Further Considerations  
When looking at the current proposed technical countermeasures,  it is clear that these primarily 
target the dating platform. However, based on the profiling of romance scams and the analysis of 
persuasive tactics, we have explained that scammers swiftly move the communication away from 
the first contact poin t to minimise their risk of getting blocked . This action , however, reduces the 
amount of behavioural data , such as exchange chat message s, that can be collected from the 
platform where the initial contact occurred . Therefore, we recommend  that future research be 
conducted agnostically to changes in communication platforms . 
 
Dating and relationships  are highly  delicate  aspects of people’s  lives. Thus,  we see a strong need 
for ethical and legal consideration s when conducting research that might infringe  upon  the 
privacy of unsuspicious  online daters. For f uture work in this space, it will  be necessary to 
establish stringent policies that govern the secure collection, handling,  storage, and deletion of 
data. 
 
This review  was able to identify contributions from a range of backgrounds, disciplines, utilising  
various frameworks and approaches. In order to harness the full power of the different research 
fields, such as psychology, linguistic s and computer science, more interdisciplinary work is 
required, as has already been called for by Sorell and Whitty (2019) . In particular, t he 
development of  advanced  technical counter measures , such as machine learning models, needs to 
be well grounded in established theory . Factors that come into play are the characteristics and 
processes of romance fraud , persuasive tact ics, linguistic patterns,  and influencing  and 
propensity factors of becoming a victim. As th is state of the art of  review  on romance fraud has 
demonstrated , this field offers ample opportunity  for nurturing interdisciplinary research.  
 Ultimately, improved countermeasures and mitigation strategies can help prevent romance fraud. 
However, as reasoned by Barnor et al. (2020) and Offei et al. (2020) , more effective law 
enforcement is also needed to apprehend perpetrators in countries where scams originate . 
 
 
5 Conclusion  
Romance fraud constitutes  an ever -increasing challenge for online daters, dating platform 
providers , and law  enforcement . In particular, the COVID -19 pandemic  with its lockdown 
restrictions  may have  contributed to increase s in victimisation . This systematic review  has 
examined the  major findings  of studies in the field . It assessed the approaches for profiling 
romance fraud, the socio -demographic and psychological factors of persons involved in the 
scam , and countermeasures and mitigation techniques.  
 
Our comprehensive analysis of the salient study characteristics showed that  the field has received 
considerable interest , especially during the last three year s, but the total number of relevant 
studies remained small (n= 44). Most studies in our review contributed to the  profiling of 
romance fraud by establishing process models to describe the progression of the scam , or 
analysing linguistic patterns and persuasion techniques employed by the scammers when 
interacting with their victims.  Additionally, studies  examined scammers ’ online dating profiles 
for commonalities, such as occupations, marital  status , and age . These findings can a id in 
developing improved detection and mitigation techniques and  seed  the development of practical 
training and awareness programmes.  
 
Countermeasures  and mitigation techniques  have also received much attention . Various s tudies 
proposed  that machine learning  classifiers  can effectively detect fraudulent profiles on online 
dating sites by considering features, such as the profile characteristics, the profile image and 
behaviour.  However, as indicated in section 4.4, the absence of common datasets  for training and 
testing  and reporting standards severely limit s development and assessment .  
 
Less common ly found within the review  were contributions on the socio -demographic and 
psychological factors, including age, gender,  and education of victims and  scammers. Whilst 
diverse  characteristics attributing to victimisation  have been considered,  few were  statistical ly 
significant . As romance fraud is still a relatively new and multifaceted research field , it is not 
surprising that there is limited attention to  the factors that increase the risk of victimisation . 
 
Whilst valuable contributions have already been made in the field, an additional cross -
organisational collaboration between researchers, platform providers and law enforcement will 
be required to address current issues.   
 Romance fraud will remain an arms race between cybercriminals and bona fide  online daters. As 
new attacks emerge and existing ones evolve, future research will have to keep pace with the 
perpetrators and develop new ways to prevent attacks and to  provide engaging training and 
awareness programs and effective incident detection an d response.  
 
Funding 
This research was funded by the Scottish Funding Council.  
Conflict of Interest  
The authors report there are no competing interests to declare . The funder s had no involvement 
in the study ’s design, data collection, analysis, interpretation, manuscript writing, or publication 
of the findings.   
 
Acknowledgements  
The authors would like to thank the Scottish Funding Council  and Abertay University Graduate 
School.  
 
 
 
  References  
Action fraud (2023) . Action Fraud - National Fraud and Cyber Crime Reporting Centre. Action 
Fraud . Available at: https://www.actionfraud.police.uk/ (Accessed: January 21, 2023).  
Al-Rousan, S., Abuhussein, A., Alsubaei, F., Kahveci, O., Farra, H., and Shiva, S. ( 2020a). 
Social -Guard: Detecting Scammers in Online Dating. 2020 IEEE International 
Conference on Electro Information Technology (EIT) , 2020 -July, 416 –422. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/EIT48999.2020.9208268  
Al-Rousan, S., Abuhussein, A., Alsubaei, F., Kahveci, O ., Farra, H., and Shiva, S. (2020b). 
Social -Guard: Detecting Scammers in Online Dating. 2020 IEEE International 
Conference on Electro Information Technology (EIT) , 2020 -July, 416 –422. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/EIT48999.2020.9208268  
Amazon Rekognition Documen tation. (2023). Amazon . Available at:  
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/rekognition/ (Accessed: January 21, 2023).  
Anesa, P. (2020). Lovextortion: Persuasion strategies in romance cybercrime. Discourse, Context 
and Media , 35, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcm.2020.100398  
Annadorai, K., Krish, P., Shaari, A. H., and Kamaluddin, M. R. (2018). Mapping Computer 
Mediated Communication Theories and Persuasive Strategies in Analysing Online Dating 
Romance Scam. Journal of Xi’an Shiyou Uni versity ISSN No , 1673 . 
Auger, P. (1998). Information Sources in Grey Literature . 
Barnor, J. N. B., Boateng, R., Kolog, E. A., and Afful -Dadzie, A. (2020). Rationalizing Online 
Romance Fraud: In the Eyes of the Offender. 2020 Americas Conference on Informat ion 
Systems (AMCIS) , 1–10. 
BBC. (2021, November 8). Romance fraud: ‘I wish I hadn’t given £300k to a man I met online’ . 
BBC News. https://www.bbc.com/news/newsbeat -59135689  
Buchanan, T., and Whitty,  (2014). The online dating romance scam: Causes and conse quences 
of victimhood. Psychology, Crime and Law, 20(3), 261 –283. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1068316X.2013.772180  
Buil-Gil, D., and Zeng, Y. (2021). Meeting you was a fake: Investigating the increase in romance 
fraud during COVID -19. Journal of Financial Crim e, ahead -of-print (ahead -of-print), 1 –
16. https://doi.org/10.1108/JFC -02-2021 -0042  Button, M., Nicholls, C. M., Kerr, J., and Owen, R. (2014). Online frauds: Learning from victims 
why they fall for these scams. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology , 
47(3), 391 –408. https://doi.org/10.1177/0004865814521224  
Carter, E. (2021). Distort, Extort, Deceive and Exploit: Explo ring the Inner Workings of a 
Romance Fraud. The British Journal of Criminology , 61(2), 283 –302. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azaa072  
Cialdini, R. B. (2007). Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion . HarperCollins.  
Cj, G., Pandit, S., Vaddepalli, S., Tupsamud re, H., Banahatti, V., and Lodha, S. (2018). PHISHY 
- A Serious Game to Train Enterprise Users on Phishing Awareness. Proceedings of the 
2018 Annual Symposium on Computer -Human Interaction in Play Companion Extended 
Abstracts , 169 –181. https://doi.org/10.1 145/3270316.3273042  
Coluccia, A., Pozza, A., Ferretti, F., Carabellese, F., Masti, A., and Gualtieri, G. (2020). Online 
Romance Scams: Relational Dynamics and Psychological Characteristics of the Victims 
and Scammers. A Scoping Review. Clinical Practice and Epidemiology in Mental 
Health , 16(1), 24 –35. https://doi.org/10.2174/1745017902016010024  
Covidence —Better systematic review management. (2022). Covidence . 
https://www.covidence.org/  (Accessed: December 21, 2022).  
Cross, C. (2016a). ‘They’re Very Lonely’ : Understanding the Fraud Victimisation of Seniors. 
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy , 5(4), 60 –75. Publicly 
Available Content Database. https://doi.org/10.5204/ijcjsd.v5i4.268  
Cross, C. (2016b). Using financial intelligence to target online fraud victimisation: Applying a 
tertiary prevention perspective. Criminal Justice Studies , 29(2), Article 2. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1478601X.2016.1170278  
Cross, C. (2019). “You’re not alone” : The use of peer support groups for fraud victims. Journal 
of Human Behavior in the Social Environment , 29(5), 672 –691. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10911359.2019.1590279  
Cross, C. (2020). Romance fraud . Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319-
78440-3_41  
Cross, C., and Blackshaw, D. (2015). Improving the Police Response to Online Fraud. Policing , 
9(2), 119 –128. https://doi.org/10.1093/police/pau044  Cross, C., Dragiewicz, M., and Richards, K. (2018). Understanding Romance Fraud: Insights 
From Domes tic Violence Research. The British Journal of Criminology , 58(6), 1303 –
1322. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azy005  
Cross, C., and Holt, T. J. (2021). The Use of Military Profiles in Romance Fraud Schemes. 
Victims and Offenders , 16(3), 385 –406. https://doi.org /10.1080/15564886.2020.1850582  
Cross, C., and Layt, R. (2021). “I Suspect That the Pictures Are Stolen”: Romance Fraud, 
Identity Crime, and Responding to Suspicions of Inauthentic Identities. Social Science 
Computer Review , 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1177/08 94439321999311  
Dating ’n More. (2021). Dating ’n More . https://datingnmore.com/  (Accessed: December 2, 
2021).  
de Jong, K. (2019). Detecting the online romance scam: Recognising imag es used in fraudulent 
dating proﬁles . University of Twente.  
Dickerson, S., Apeh, E., and Ollis, G. (2020). Contextualised Cyber Security Awareness 
Approach for Online Romance Fraud. 7th International Conference on Behavioural and 
Social Computing (BESC) , 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/BESC51023.2020.9348307  
Dreijers, G., and Rudziša, V. (2020). Devices of Textual Illusion: Victimization in Romance 
Scam E -Letters. Research in Language , 18(1), 1 –13. https://doi.org/10.18778/1731 -
7533.18.1.01  
Edwards, M., Suarez -Tangil, G., Peersman, C., Stringhini, G., Rashid, A., and Whitty, M. 
(2018). The Geography of Online Dating Fraud. Workshop on Technology and Consumer 
Protection (ConPro) , 1–7. 
Eseadi, C., Ogbonna, C. S., Otu, M. S., and Ede, M. O. (2021). Hello Pretty, H ello Handsome!: 
Exploring the Menace of Online Dating and Romance Scam in Africa. In H. C. (Oliver) 
Chan and S. Adjorlolo (Eds.), Crime, Mental Health  and the Criminal Justice System in 
Africa: A Psycho -Criminological Perspective  (pp. 63 –87). Springer International 
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030-71024 -8_4 
Garrett, E. V. (2014). Exploring internet users’ vulnerability to online dating frau d: Analysis of 
routine activities theory factors  (1656449717) [M.S., The University of Texas at Dallas]. 
Publicly Available Content Database. http://hdl.handle.net/20.500.11990/2034  
Gillespie, A. A. (2017). The Electronic Spanish Prisoner: Romance Frauds o n the Internet. The 
Journal of Criminal Law , 81(3), Article 3. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022018317702803  Gillespie, A. A. (2021). Just the money? Does the criminal law appropriately tackle romance 
frauds? Journal of International and Comparative Law , 8(1), Article 1.  
Vision AI  |  Cloud Vision API  |  Google Cloud (2023) Google . Google. Available at:  
https://cloud.google.com/vision (Accessed: January 21, 2023).  
Graham, A. (2021). Automatic detection of fraudulent dating site proﬁles through use of reverse 
image searching  [M.S., University of Bristol]. http://xn --bta-
yla.net/students/graham2021automatic.pdf  
Gregory, D., and Nikiforova , B. (2012). A sweetheart of a deal: How people get hooked and 
reeled in by financial scams. The Journal of Behavioural Finance and Economics , 2(2), 
96–122. 
He, X., Gong, Q., Chen, Y., Zhang, Y., Wang, X., and Fu, X. (2021). DatingSec: Detecting 
Malicious Accounts in Dating Apps Using a Content -Based Attention Network. IEEE 
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing , 1–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2021.3068307  
Huang, J., Stringhini, G., and Yong, P. (2015). Quit Playing Games with My Heart: 
Underst anding Online Dating Scams. In M. Almgren, V. Gulisano, and F. Maggi (Eds.), 
Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and Vulnerability Assessment  (Vol. 9148, pp. 216 –
236). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319-20550 -2_12  
Jimoh, I., and Stephen, K. (2018). Is this Love? A Study of Deception in Online Romance in 
Nigeria. Covenant Journal of Communication , 5(1), 40 –61. 
Kemp, S., Buil -Gil, D., Moneva, A., Miró -Llinares, F., and Díaz -Castaño, N. (2021). Empty 
Streets, Busy Internet: A  Time -Series Analysis of Cybercrime and Fraud Trends During 
COVID -19. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice , 1–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/10439862211027986  
Khader, M., and Yun, P. S. (2017). A multidisciplinary approach to understanding internet love 
scams:Implications for law enforcement . Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978 -0-12-
809287 -3.00018 -3 
Koon, T. H., and Yoong, D. (2017). Preying on Lonely Hearts: A Systematic Deconstruction of 
an Internet Romance Scammer’s Online Lover Persona. Journal of Modern Languages , 
23(1), 28 –40. Kopp, C., Layton, R., Sillitoe, J., and Gondal, I. (2015). The Role Of Love Stories In Romance 
Scams: A Qualitative Analysis Of Fraudulent Profiles. International Journal of Cyber 
Criminology , 9(2), 205 –217. https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.56227  
Kopp, C., Sillitoe, J., Gondal, I., and Layton, R. (2016a). Online romance scam: Expensive e -
living for romantic happiness. BLED 2016 , 175 –189. 
Kopp, C., Sillitoe, J., Gondal, I., and Layton, R. (2016b). The online roma nce scam: A complex 
two-layer scam. Journal of Psychological and Educational Research , 24(2), 144 –161. 
Lallie, H. S., Shepherd, L. A., Nurse, J. R. C., Erola, A., Epiphaniou, G., Maple, C., and 
Bellekens, X. (2021). Cyber security in the age of COVID -19: A  timeline and analysis of 
cyber -crime and cyber -attacks during the pandemic. Computers and Security , 105, 1–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102248  
Li, G., Borj, P. R., Bergeron, L., and Bours, P. (2019). Exploring keystroke dynamics and 
stylometry features for gender prediction on chat data. 42nd International Convention on 
Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics 
(MIPRO) , 1049 –1054. https://doi.org/10.23919/MIPRO.2019.8756740  
Luu, V., Land, L., and Chin, W. W. (201 7). Safeguarding against romance scams – Using 
protection motivation theory. 25th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS) , 
2429 –2444.  
Modic, D., and Anderson, R. (2015). It’s All Over but the Crying: The Emotional and Financial 
Impact of Internet  Fraud. IEEE Security and Privacy , 13(5), 99 –103. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2015.107  
Momo (2023) Momo . Momo Technology Co., Ltd . Available at: https://www. immomo .com/ 
(Accessed: January 21, 2023).  
Mondal, S., Bours, P., Johansen, L., Stenvi, R. and Øver bø, M. (2017 ). Importance of a Versatile  
Logging Tool for Behavioural Biometrics and Continuous Authentication Research. In 
Developing Next -Generation Countermeasures for Homeland Security Threat Prevention  
(pp. 282 -305). IGI Global.  https://doi.org/10.4018/978 -1-5225 -0703 -1.ch013  
Obada -Obieh, B., Chiasson, S., and Somayaji, A. (2017). “Don’t Break My Heart!”: User 
Security Strategies for Online Dating. Workshop on Usable Security (USEC) , 1–6. Offei, M., And oh-Baidoo, F. K., Ayaburi, E. W., and Asamoah, D. (2020). How Do Individuals 
Justify and Rationalize their Criminal Behaviors in Online Romance Fraud? Information 
Systems Frontiers , 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796 -020-10051 -2 
Okcupid (2023) OkCupid . Match Group. Available at: https://www.okcupid.com/ (Accessed:  
January 21, 2023).  
Page, M. J., McKenzie, J. E., Bossuyt, P. M., Boutron, I., Hoffmann, T. C., Mulrow, C. D., 
Shamseer, L., Tetzlaff, J. M., Akl, E. A., Brennan, S. E., Chou, R., Glanville, J. , 
Grimshaw, J. M., Hróbjartsson, A., Lalu, M. M., Li, T., Loder, E. W., Mayo -Wilson, E., 
McDonald, S., … Moher, D. (2021). The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline 
for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n71  
Pan, J. A ., Winchester, D., Land, L., and Watters, P. (2010). Descriptive data mining on 
fraudulent online dating profiles. 18th European Conference on Information Systems 
(ECIS) , 1–11. https://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2010/145  
Pizzato, L. A., Akehurst, J., Silvestrini , C., Yacef, K., Koprinska, I., and Kay, J. (2012). The 
Effect of Suspicious Profiles on People Recommenders. 20th International Conference 
on User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization , 225 –236. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-642-31454 -4_19  
Rege, A. (2 009). What’s Love Got to Do with It? Exploring Online Dating Scams and Identity 
Fraud. International Journal of Cyber Criminology (IJCC) , 3(2), 494 –512. 
Rege, A. (2013). 10v3.c0ns: A criminological investigation of online dating crimes . 
https://doi.org/10.1109/eCRS.2013.6805773  
Rogers, R.W. (1983). Cognitive and physiological processes in fear appeals and attitude change:  
A Revised theory of protection motivation. In J. Cacioppo & R. Petty (Eds.), Social 
Psychophysiology. New York: Guilf ord Press.  
Saad, M. E., Norul, S., and Zamri, M. (2018). Cyber Romance Scam Victimization Analysis 
using Routine Activity Theory Versus Apriori Algorithm. International Journal of 
Advanced Computer Science and Applications (IJACSA) , 9(12), 479 –485. 
https://doi.org/10.14569/IJACSA.2018.091267  
ScamDigger. (2021). ScamDigger . https://scamdigger.com/  
Shaari, A. H., Kamaluddin, M. R., Paizi@Fauzi, W. F., and Mohd, M. (2019). Online -Dating 
Romance Scam in Malaysia: An Analysis of Online Conversations betwe en Scammers and Victims. GEMA Online® Journal of Language Studies , 19(1), 97 –115. 
https://doi.org/10.17576/gema -2019 -1901 -06 
Smeitink, H. (2021). A Postmodern Love Story  [Utrecht University]. 
https://www.fraudehelpdesk.nl/wp -content/uploads/2021/02/Thesis -Hester -Smeitink.pdf  
Sorell, T., and Whitty, M. (2019). Online romance scams and victimhood. Security Journal , 
32(3), 342 –361. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41284 -019-00166 -w 
Steyerl, H. (2011). Epistolary affect and romance scams: Letter from an unknown woman*.  
October , 138, 57–69. https://doi.org/10.1162/OCTO_a_00066  
Suarez -Tangil, G., Edwards, M., Peersman, C., Stringhini, G., Rashid, A., and Whitty, M. 
(2019). Automatically Dismantling Online Dating Fraud. IEEE Transactions on 
Information Forensics and Securi ty, 15, 1128 –1137. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2019.2930479  
Thompson, S. (2016). In Defence of the ‘Gold -Digger’ . 6(6), 24.  
TinEye. (2023). Reverse Image Search . TinEye . Available at: https://tineye.com/  (Accessed: 
January 21, 2023).  
Webster, J., and Drew, J. M. (2017). Policing advance fee fraud (AFF): Experiences of fraud 
detectives using a victim -focused approach. International Journal of Police Science and 
Management , 19(1), 39 –53. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461355716681810  
Whitty, M., Edwards, M., Levi , M., Peersman, C., Rashid, A., Sasse, A., Sorell, T., and 
Stringhini, G. (2017). Ethical and Social Challenges with Developing Automated 
Methods to Detect and Warn Potential Victims of Mass -Marketing Fraud (MMF). WWW 
’17 Companion , 1311 –1314. https://doi. org/10.1145/3041021.3053891  
Whitty, M. (2013a). Anatomy of the online dating romance scam. Security Journal , 28(4), 443 –
455. https://doi.org/10.1057/sj.2012.57  
Whitty, M. (2013b). The Scammers Persuasive Techniques Model: Development of a Stage 
Model to Explain the Online Dating Romance Scam. British Journal of Criminology , 
53(4), 665 –684. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azt009  
Whitty, M. (2018). Do You Love Me? Psychological Characteristics of Romance Scam Victims. 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking , 21(2), 105 –109. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2016.0729  Whitty, M. (2019). Who can spot an online romance scam? Journal of Financial Crime , 26(2), 
623–633. https://d oi.org/10.1108/JFC -06-2018 -0053  
Whitty, M. (2020). Is There a Scam for Everyone? Psychologically Profiling Cyberscam 
Victims. European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research , 26(3), 399 –409. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10610 -020-09458 -z 
Whitty, M., and Bucha nan, T. (2012). The online romance scam: A serious cybercrime. 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking , 15(3), 181 –183. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2011.0352  
Whitty, M., and Buchanan, T. (2016). The online dating romance scam: The psychological 
impact on victims – both financial and non -financial. Criminology and Criminal Justice , 
16(2), 176 –194. https://doi.org/10.1177/1748895815603773  
Yandex Search. (2023). Yandex . Yandex . Available at: https://yandex.com/  (Accessed: January 
21, 2023).  
Yu, H. -F., Ho, C. -H., Juan, Y. -C. and Lin, C. -J. (2013) LibShortText: A library for short -text  
classification and Analysis . Available at: https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libshorttext/ 
(Accessed: January 21, 2023).  