Seq2Seq Imitation Learning
for Tactile Feedback-based Manipulation
Wenyan Yang1, Alexandre Angleraud1, Roel S. Pieters1, Joni Pajarinen2, and Joni-Kristian K ¨am¨ar¨ainen1
Abstract — Robot control for tactile feedback based manip-
ulation can be difﬁcult due to modeling of physical contacts,
partial observability of the environment, and noise in perception
and control. This work focuses on solving partial observability
of contact-rich manipulation tasks as a Sequence-to-Sequence
(Seq2Seq) Imitation Learning (IL) problem. The proposed
Seq2Seq model ﬁrst produces a robot-environment interaction
sequence to estimate the partially observable environment
state variables, and then, the observed interaction sequence
is transformed to a control sequence for the task itself. The
proposed Seq2Seq IL for tactile feedback based manipulation
is experimentally validated on a door-open task in a simulated
environment and a snap-on insertion task with a real robot.
The model is able to learn both tasks from only 50 expert
demonstrations while state-of-the-art reinforcement learning
and imitation learning methods fail.
I. INTRODUCTION
The sense of touch is a key sensory modality for many
robot manipulation tasks such as grasping [1] and precision-
insertion [2], [3], [4]. Tactile sensing is an instrumental
modality of robotic manipulation, as it provides information
that is not accessible via remote sensors such as cameras or
lidars. The key challenges in tactile sensing based control
are the difﬁculty to accurately model physical contacts,
partial observability of the environment from touch only,
and noise in perception and control. Tactile feedback based
manipulation controllers have been proposed, but they often
use heuristic search patterns [5] or are tailored for a speciﬁc
task [3]. In such case, the learning-based approaches are
more promising to learn generic solutions for contract-rich
manipulation control tasks.
Reinforcement learning (RL) is one of the promising areas
of machine learning for robotics. The goal of RL is to learn
an optimal policy which maximizes the long-term cumulative
rewards. In the case of contact-rich manipulation, RL learn-
ing becomes challenging due to sparse reward and partial
observability. That often results to an excessive amount of
environment interactions needed, which is not doable with
real robots. An alternative option is to use simulations for
teaching, but the difﬁculty to accurately model physical
contacts becomes the bottleneck. Therefore, instead of pure
RL, a more feasible solution is imitation learning (IL). In IL
instead of trying to learn from the sparse rewards or manually
specifying a reward function, an expert (typically a human)
provides a set of demonstrations. The agent then tries to
learn the optimal policy by following, imitating the expert’s
decisions. A number of imitation learning methods have been
1Tampere University, Finland;2Aalto University, Finland.
2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)proposed [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], but these do not particularly
address the partial-observability problem that is inherent in
tactile sensing.
In this work, we focus on solving contact-rich manipula-
tion tasks with tactile-only sensing and in partially observ-
able environments. Motivated by the above discussion, we
aim to design a method that safely and sample-efﬁciently
learns contact-rich tasks with minimal manual engineering.
Safety in our case means that IL following expert demon-
strations better avoids generating dangerous actions than RL.
To address the partial observability, we take the common
approach of RL for Partially-observable Markov Decision
Processes (POMDPs): history data is used to aggregate belief
of the partially observable environment states. We combine it
with IL framework to achieve sample efﬁciency. Two types of
expert demonstration are used in this work: exploration and
manipulation. The robot ﬁrst imitates the expert’s exploration
for hidden state discovery, and use the exploration observa-
tions to produce a goal-directed trajectory that imitates the
expert’s manipulation. The main contributions are:
A novel Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) model to
perform exploration-to-manipulation imitation learning.
The model learns to translate the exploration trajectory
into a manipulation trajectory. Generation of both types
of trajectories is learned from expert demonstrations.
We show that a Transformer based Seq2Seq IL archi-
tecture is able to aggregate belief of hidden environ-
ment states during exploration. Besides, enforcing the
Seq2Seq encoded feature to be similar to the hidden
environment states contributes to task performance.
The Proposed Seq2Seq IL is sample efﬁcient. Sample
efﬁciency is investigated and compared to strong base-
lines in the both simulated and real manipulation tasks.
Seq2Seq IL learns successful control policies from only
50 expert demonstrations.
II. R ELATED WORK
The existing controllers for tactile feedback manipulation
often use control heuristics and need a model for the contact
dynamics [3], [5], [11]. Recently, a number of methods com-
bining force kinematics with compliant control and machine
learning have been proposed to overcome the need of man-
ual tuning [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]. Moreover, Imitation
Learning (IL), also known as Learning from Demonstration
(LfD), allows more ﬂexible “programming” of a robot as
it learns from expert demonstrations. Various computational
models, including Gaussian Mixture Models, Hidden MarkovarXiv:2303.02646v1  [cs.RO]  5 Mar 2023Models, Deep Neural Networks and Dynamic Motion Primi-
tives, have been proposed for IL [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. These
approaches differ from our work rather strongly in the sense
that they assume a fully observable environment or a model
for the contact physics or are task speciﬁc (”Peg-in-Hole”
or ”goal reaching”). We seek for a generic method that does
not need to model the contact physics.
A number of generic RL and RL-based IL methods
exist [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24]. However,
they as well assume a fully observable environment that
can be modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), and
require a large number of interaction steps to converge. The
partial-observability problem (POMDP) has been addressed
in a number of works [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30],
[31], [32], [33]. We adopt the common approach in these
works, and use the observation history to aggregate belief
of the partially observable state variables. The aggregation
can be done by sequential learning using recurrent neural
networks [34], [35], [36], [30], [37]. The main shortcoming
of the above RL approaches for POMDPs is that they need
a massive amount of environment interactions which makes
them unsuitable for real robot tasks.
From the imitation learning perspective, a numerous work
have proposed to learn a model-free policy for expert
demonstrations tasks [38], [39], [40], [41], [42]. However,
these methods still requiures online data sampling and is
not practically sample-efﬁcient for real applications. Some
ofﬂine imitation learning methods such as implicit behaviour
cloning (IBC) [43], DemoDice [44], etc., but they are not
designed for solving POMDP problems.
III. B ACKGROUND
A. Tactile feedback in manipulation
Fig. 1: Illustration of the physical wrench (torques and
forces) during robot manipulation: (a) the interaction frames
involved in Eq. 1 and (b) an example where the observed
wrench is the same for two distinct surface (task) points.
In this work, the contact sensory feedback refers to the
external wrench Fextobserved at the robot end-effector.
Tactile feedback provides only partial observation of the
environments, the object pose in our example. This can be
analytically studied via the contact kinematics investigated
in mechanical engineering and robotics [45], [46], [47].
Consider a robot-environment interaction model, where
the robot interacts with a target surface directly with its
end-effector or through an object in its gripper. Suppose the
environment is deﬁned by its stiffness, and the end-effectoris treated as a rigid object. For rigid objects the roles can
be interchanged. Denote bas the Cartesian base frame, d
is the target object frame, eis the end-effector frame, and
ois the task frame located on the target object surface. In
this setting, the surface provides resistance to the robot end-
effector’s attempts to penetrate the target. This resistance can
be modeled as the external wrench [48]
oFext= (oKe+KP;cart ) 1oKeKP;cart dpo;d;(1)
where the overall stiffness matrix consists of a Cartesian
controller stiffness matrix KP;cart and the environment’s
resistance-to-penetration stiffness matrixoKe.oKeis com-
posed by the translational and rotational components, but
here we omit the rotation component and assume purely
translational stiffness matrices for simplicity.
The translational interaction is given by d po;dthat is the
displacement of the task frame owith respect to the target
frame d(Figure 1(a)). The two terms for the analysis are
oKethat depends on the target object’s material and dpo;d
that depends on the normal of the object’s surface at the task
frame o. These terms verify that the observable wrench in
Eq. 1 depends on the surface stiffness matrix (end-effector
assumed rigid) and on the surface normals with respect to
the end-effector frame eas illustrated in Fig. 1(a). If we
assume homogeneous stiffness properties for the target object
that means that the observed wrench is the same for all task
frames, surface points ofor which the end-effector-surface
normals are equal. This is illustrated for a solid object in
Fig. 1(b). To summarize, it is not possible to infer the object
pose from a single touch sensor measurement.
B. Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
If the underlying environment state cannot be fully
ascertain, the problem can be formulated as POMDP
[49]. Formally, a POMDP can be described as a 6-tuple
(S;A;P;R;
;O)whereS,A,P,R, are the states, actions,
transitions and rewards. At time t, the environment is in
some state st2S, and agent generates action at2A.
The environment produces a new state st+12Sbased on
dynamicsT(st+1jst;at)and the agent receives a reward rt=
R(st;at;st+1). However, the agent cannot directly observe
the underlying state Sin a POMDP. Instead, the agent
receives an observation ot2Ovia the indirect observation
functionO(st+1;at;ot) =P(otjst+1;at). In general, this
implies that the agent must take the entire history of observa-
tions and actions ht= ((a0;o0);(a1;o1);:::; (at 1;ot 1))
into account to make the current state more observable [50].
Based on our analysis of the tactile feedback, the uncer-
tainty of the target object pose from touch sensing makes
the task environment only partially observable for a force-
feedback controller. However, the history of tactile feedback
helps to estimate the pose which eventually helps to solve
the manipulation task.
C. Tactile-only manipulation tasks
In this work, two high-precision manipulation tasks are
studied as representations of tactile-only manipulation tasks.Fig. 2: The proposed Seq2Seq Imitation Learning pipeline. Step 0 : initialize the datasets. Step 1-2 : the robot ﬁrst samples
and executes one of the given expert exploration trajectories to collect an observation trajectory Te.Step 3-4 : the encoder
infers an underlying environment state zfromTe, and then the decoder plans and execute a skill trajectory Ts. If the task
fails, Step 4-1 : the robot returns to initial pose and expert guides the robot to complete the task, meanwhile record expert
skill trajectoryTexp
s.Step 6-7 :. the sequence pair fTe;Ts;egare incrementally added to dataset and are used to ﬁne-tune
the imitation model. The pipeline stops if the imitation model successfully accomplish the task with 10 continuous tests.
Fig. 3: The real (a) and simulated (b) test environments. The
relative pose of the installed socket and the assembly rail
(a) and the robot-end effector and the cabin door (b) are
randomized in the experiments.
The two test environments, as shown in Figure 3, consist of
a simulated door-opening task and a real snap-on insertion
task:
a) Simulated door-open task: This task is a customized
version of the ”Opening” task in the MiniTouch benchmark
in [51] and implemented in PyBullet. In our task the cabin
is randomly placed in the front of a virtual Franka Emika
Panda. The task is to open the cabin door using external
wrench feedback and robot’s states (pose and velocity of the
Emika end-effector).
b) Snap-on mounting task: The real snap-on mount-
ing is a high-precision assembly task where Panda Emika
needs to mount an electronic socket into an assempy rail
(see Fig. 3). Similar to the above simulated task the robot
uses only end-effector’s external wrench feedback and end-
effector’s pose and velocity.
To complete these tasks, the robot must accurately estimate
the relative pose of the end-effector with respect to the
manipulated object (such as the door edge or assembly rail).
The tasks are particularly challenging for tactile-only sensing
for two reasons: ﬁrst, these tasks require high precision,with the snap-on task requiring rotations smaller than one
degree and distances smaller than ﬁve millimeters, and the
door-opening task requiring a relative distance smaller than
one centimeter. Second, the relative poses cannot be directly
measured by a tactile sensor (as outlined in Section ??).
To successfully complete the manipulation tasks, the robot
must explore the environment in order to observe and better
understand its state.
IV. S EQ2SEQIMITATION LEARNING
Imagine manipulating objects in a dark room. For exam-
ple, ﬁnd and pick up your coffee cup. After ﬁnding the
cup, but before grasping it, you do ”tactile exploration” to
ﬁnd its handle and to adjust your grip. Inspired by this
strategy, we introduce a model and learning procedures for
Sequence-to-Sequence imitation learning (Seq2Seq IL). The
robot ﬁrst executes an exploration trajectory to collect and
infer the hidden information of the environment, then it plans
a trajectory according to the aggregation of the collected
information.
Sequence-to-sequence is a common approach to solve
sequential problems [52]. The problem can be deﬁned as
sequential mapping of one T-length input sequence X=
fx1;x2;:::;xTgto anM-length output sequence Y=
fy1;y2;:::;yMg. The overall structure of our Seq2Seq model
is illustrated in Fig. 4. The model contains two memory
modules which are linked by an encoder-decoder structure.
The encoder sequentially receives inputs which are encoded
to an internal representation zt. In our terminology, the
encoder performs the environment exploration and produces
ztas a state estimate of partially observable environment.
The skill planning is performed by the decoder that auto-
regressively generates the target sequence after receiving
the encoder’s state estimate zt. The Seq2Seq model can be
implemented as an LSTM network [52], or more recently, as
a Transformer network [53].
As a distinct feature to other similar works, our Seq2Seq
model breaks the tactile feedback manipulation tasks into twoFig. 4: The overall Seq2Seq architecture used in our model.
The input sequence is an exploration trajectory Te=
f(ot;at)gand the output sequence is a skill execution
trajectoryTs=fpmg. The encoder performs feature aggre-
gation to infer the current state zTof a partially observable
environment.
stages: 1) exploration stage and 2) skill planning stage . In
the exploration stage the robot follows the encoder trajectory
to explore the environment and encode its state into the
internal representation zt. In the skill planning stage, the
decoder produces a goal-directed control trajectory for the
low level robot controller to complete the main manipulation
task. The both encoder and decoder trajectories are learned
via imitation learning, i.e. from expert demonstrations.
A. Sequence modeling
For the exploration stage, a recorded expert exploration
control trajectory (via-points) are given to the robot. The
robot follows the expert trajectory to collect tactile feedback
from the environment. The usage of expert trajectories and
the robot in impedance control mode allows safe exploration.
Teis the observed T-length exploration trajectory,
Te=f(o1;a1);(o2;a2);:::;(oN;aT)g; (2)
whereoiis an observation containing 18 attributes: end-
effector external wrenchoFext(translational and rotational
components), end-effector pose (3D translation and orienta-
tion), and its velocity (translational and rotational). ais a6-
dimensional action vector of the end-effector’s displacement.
The skill planning trajectory (via-points) Tsis
Ts=fp1;p2;:::;pMg; (3)
wherepiis a 6-dimensional end-effector pose.
Given the above deﬁnitions of the exploration and skill
planning trajectories, the problem can be cast as a Seq2Seq
problem. A Seq2Seq controller provides the robot low level
controller a task-directed trajectory (a via-point sequence) Ts
from the exploration (and observation) sequence Te.
B. Seq2Seq encoder-decoder
1) Exploration encoder: In our encoder-decoder structure,
the Seq2Seq encoder gradually observes Teand encodes the
observations into an internal representation zT. In our for-
malism we assume that the encoder representation includes
the state variables that are only partially observable, but for
which belief is aggregated through history data. The encoder
is depicted in the left-hand-side of Fig. 4 and is formally
zT=Enc(Te) (4)wherezTis the encoded representation and approximates
belief state of the POMDP.
2) Skill planning decoder: The Seq2Seq decoder receives
zTfrom the encoder and produces the skill plan trajectory
Ts. The history of the previous planned poses is t 1=
fp0;:::;pt 1g. The probability of the next skill planning
pose isP(ptjzT;t 1), and is modeled as a mixture of K
Gaussians. The Gaussian mixture probability of planned pose
ptat the steptis deﬁned as
P(ptjzT;t 1) =KX
i=1wi
N(i
;2
i;) (5)
wherewi
is the weight of the i-th Gaussian, i
and
2
i;are the mean and variance of the i-th Gaussian. The
parameterdenotes that these are estimated by a Mixture
Density Network (MDN) layer applied at the decoder’s head
(Fig. 4). The Seq2Seq learning objective is to maximize the
probability of a target sequence, or respectively, minimize
the negative log-likelihood. The loss can be formulated as:
Lseq2seq= logP(TsjTe) = MX
t=1logP(ptjzT;t 1):
(6)
3) Supervised Seq2Seq: If the partially observable state
variables are known; let’s denote them by e; then these can be
embedded to the encoder output zTand learned supervised
manner. A suitable loss is, for example, the standard mean-
squared error (MSE) loss. The supervised Seq2Seq loss is
Lsupervised =Lseq2seq+jjzT ejj2: (7)
The supervised Seq2Seq IL and Seq2Seq IL are two variants
used in our experiments. We denote the supervised version
as ”Seq2Seq-oracle” as, in general, the partially observable
variables are not known.
V. E XPERIMENTS
A. Settings
1) Demonstrations collection and imitation pipeline:
Since our model consists of two kind of trajectories, explo-
ration and skill planning, a small number of initial demon-
strations of the exploration are ﬁrst provided, and then the
actual expert skill execution demonstrations are demonstrated
in the human-in-the-loop manner. Figure 2 illustrates the
complete training procedure.
For exploration, a human expert provides a small number
(ﬁve in our case) exploration trajectories. The experts were
instructed to move the robot hand in the kinesthetic teaching
mode such that they ”feel” that the socket is in the correct
position with respect to the rail. See Algorithm 1 for details.
After the initial exploration demonstrations the target
(rail/door) pose is randomized. The robot produces and
executes an exploration trajectory and given the exploration
feedback (Te) produces and executes a skill planning trajec-
tory (Ts). If the task is successful, the both trajectories ( Te
andTs) are added to the training data. If the task fails, therobot position is reversed back to the position just before
the skill execution, and an expert provides a successful
skill executionTexp
s. Then (Te,Texp
s) will be added to
training data. The most important expert demonstrations for
our method are these human-in-the-loop failure correction
demonstrations. We apply DAgger-like style learning [54]
to incrementally collect data to learn from the experts (see
Fig. 2). Our supplementary material contains video clips
about training and testing.
For the real snap-on task all demonstrations are provided
manually by a human expert. For the simulated door-open
task the exploration trajectories are provided manually by an
expert (mouse is used to move the end-effector to the door
and then move it on the door surface), and the skill execution
demonstrations are provided by a SAC trained controller that
fully observes the environment (the cabin 3D pose).
Algorithm 1 Expert exploration trajectories collection
1:Initialize expert exploration set Dexp. skill set Ds.
Denote the robot end-effector pose as o.
2:fori= 1 tondo
3: Initialize robot to its starting pose
4: Set robot to the kinesthetic teaching mode
5: Randomize target object pose
6: Let expert guide end-effector to explore
7: Record and store expert trajectory explore =
fo0;o1;:::; oTg, whereotis the end-effector pose
8: Addexplore toDexp
9:end for
2) Baseline methods and metrics: We use the following
criteria to select the baseline methods: 1) the baseline shall be
learning-based methods and 2) the baseline shall be designed
to solve the POMDP problems. Based on these criteria, we
chose the following baseline methods from multiple method
categories. POMDP Reinforcement Learning (POMDP-
RL):
Recurrent model-free RL using SAC or TD3 [55]:
RMF-RL(sac) and RMF-RL(td3)
RMF-RL modiﬁed by adding the Behavior Cloning
(BC) [56]: RMF-RL-IL(sac) and RMF-RL-IL(td3)
Soft-Actor-Critic [57] that observes the full environment
(with ”oracle”): SAC-MDP
Imitation Learning (IL):
Soft-Q Imitation Learning is a RL-based IL which
assigns sparse rewards to expert demonstrations [58]
(due to the POMDP setting, the RL part is RMF-
RL(sac)): SQIL
A classical behavior cloning (BC) [59] where an LSTM
network is used to modernize it: BC-LSTM
Our Seq2Seq IL variants:
Seq2Seq - a Transformer Seq2Seq IL that learns the
partially observable state variables through exploration
(Lseq2seqin Eq. 6)
Seq2Seq-oracle - a Transformer Seq2Seq IL that is
trained supervised manner ( Lsupervised in Eq. 7)
Fig. 5: Sample efﬁciency experiment (simulated door-open
task): success rates as the function of interaction steps. Our
methods were trained only for 50 demonstrations (approx.
67k interactions).
Seq2Seq-LSTM - Otherwise similar to Seq2Seq IL, but
the Transfomer is replaced by LSTM from [34]
In all experiments, the length of the encoder output zTis
set to 3 as it corresponds to the number of actual partially
observable task variables, the xy-place location of the target
and its rotation.
3) Success rate: Success rate is used as the performance
metric. Success rate reports the proportion of test runs where
the agent reached the goal state (door opened / socket
mounted).
B. Results
1) Sample efﬁciency: Since sample efﬁciency is one of the
main limiting factor in using machine learning techniques
in real robot learning tasks, the ﬁrst experiment evaluates
sample efﬁciency of the proposed model and compares it
to the POMDP RL and IL baselines. The experiment was
conducted using the simulated door-open task to allow a large
number of samples and to avoid failures that would damage
the real robot. 50 expert demonstrations were given to RMF-
RL-IL and SQIL. Seq2Seq and Seq2Seq-Oracle were trained
using DAgger style and stopped after 50 demonstrations.
Figure 5 presents the results.
We used an oracle trained soft-actor-critic (SAC-MDP)
as the expert. The oracle SAC-MDP agent observes the
door pose, robot’s end-effector external wrench, pose, and
velocity. SAC-MDP successfully learns the task, but requires
more than 400k interactions. It is worth noting that none of
the POMDP RL baselines (RMF-RL(sac/td3)) was able to
solve the problem even after 500k interactions. The imitation
RL methods (SQIL and RMF-RL-IL(sac/td3)) achieved 20%
success rate, while their performance was unstable. Us-
ing DAgger-style incremental learning, our proposed model
(Seq2Seq) achieved 76% success rate.
Our Seq2Seq models were the only to learn the task with-
out oracle (POMDP setting) and required only 50 demon-
strations that corresponds to approximately 67k interaction
steps. This is clearly better than the oracle SAC-MDP that
had fully observable environment. The supervised variant of
our method, Seq2Seq-Oracle, obtained 16% higher success
rate (82%) than the POMDP Seq2Seq. This indicates that themodel can effectively discover the partially observable state
variables even without supervision.
2) Performance evaluation: We further evaluated IL
methods’ performance (success rates). 50 demonstrations
were used to train each of them. The results are in Table I
(100 random tests for each).
Fig. 6: Examples of the poses used in the robustness and
repeatability experiment (the real setup)
SQIL failed on the snap-on task with the real robot and
achieved only 20% success rate in the simulated door-open
task. BC-LSTM also had poor performance on the both tasks.
Seq2Seq-LSTM performed better than the plain BC-LSTM
on the simulated door-open task, but completely failed on the
real snap-on task. The Seq2Seq model has the second-best
performance, 76% success rate on the simulated and 84%
on the real snap-on task. This veriﬁes that 1) the Seq2Seq
imitation model can learn POMDP tasks effectively, and
2) the Transfomer-based Seq2Seq imitation model is more
robust across the tasks than LSTM-based. Our proposed
Seq2Seq-Oracle obtained the best performance in both tasks.
3) Detailed analysis on the real robot: We selected the
Seq2Seq-Oracle to conduct a more detailed experiments on
the snap-on task with a real robot.
a) Robustness to partially observable state variables:
To evaluate the robustness of the proposed model we con-
ducted repeatability and robustness experiments. For the
repeatability test we executed the learned model 20 times
for the rail in a ﬁxed position (Pose-1, Pose-2 and Pose-
3, see Fig. 6). To evaluate robustness of the estimation of
the partially observable state variables (pose of the rail), we
executed the model 102 times for random poses.
The results for the repeatability and robustness experi-
ments are in Table II. The Seq2Seq IL model succeeded
84 out of the 102 attempts with the random rail poses. This
indicates fairly good robustness of the method to estimate
the non-directly observable state variables. For the two ﬁxed
poses, Pose-1 and Pose-2, the repeatability was 100% and
90% (18/20) for Pose-3. These results indicate that the model
learns to complete the task, is robust to environment changes
and insensitive to observation noise.
TABLE I: Imitation learning method comparison.
Env. Exp.?SQIL BC- Seq2Seq- Seq2Seq Seq2Seq-
LSTM LSTM Oracle
Door-open 95% 20% 11% 56% 76% 89%
Snap-on 100% - 5% 0% 84% 88%
?500k trained SAC for door-open and a human expert for snap-onTABLE II: Repeatability/robustness results for the real robot
task (snap-on)
Randomized Pose-1 Pose-2 Pose-3
Success 84=102 20 =20 20 =20 18 =20
Fig. 7: (a) number of successful test attempts for the model
trained with different number of expert demonstrations and
(b) Online error in the partially observable state variable
estimation (pose) for the same models.
b) Number of expert demonstrations: In order to test
how effectively the model learns from new expert demonstra-
tions, we recorded 200 expert demonstrations and randomly
formed training sets of 5 to 200 demonstrations. These
training sets were used to train the model and then the model
was tested 45 times. The results are shown in Fig. 7(a).
The results verify that the performance rapidly improves and
converges after 50 expert demonstrations.
c) Online state estimation: In the ﬁnal experiment we
investigated the exploration part of the Seq2Seq model.
Using Seq2Seq-oracle we can obtain current estimates of the
partially observable state variables during exploration. In the
snap-on task, the variables are the pose of the rail deﬁned by
xy-plane coordinates and the rotation angle. We normalized
translations and angles to the approximately same scale and
computed the error (MSE) online after each exploration
step. The results are in Fig. 7(b) and verify that only 4
exploration steps are needed to obtain an accurate estimate
of the state variables. This result holds if at least 50 expert
demonstrations ( D50) are used to train the model.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
This work investigated the partial observability problem
in learning control policy for tactile-feedback based manip-
ulation. We proposed a transformer-based Seq2Seq imitation
learning (IL) which imitates expert exploration trajectories,
and from them plans a suitable skill trajectory to complete
the task. The two stages of Seq2Seq, exploration and skill
planning, are learned from expert demonstrations. The pro-
posed model is sample efﬁcient and learns to solve a real
snap-on task from only 50 expert demonstrations while the
other POMDP RL and IL methods failed. For our future
work, we will adapt Seq2Seq IL for closed-loop control,
which can lead to better online adaptation. Although we
needed to introduce human-in-the-loop learning from expert
demonstrations, it also produced substantial boost in sampleefﬁciency, and that opens an intriguing research direction of
multi-stage imitation learning.
REFERENCES
[1] Y . Bekiroglu, J. Laaksonen, J. Jorgensen, V . Kyrki, and D. Kragic,
“Assessing grasp stability based on learning and haptic data,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics , vol. 27, no. 3.
[2] H. Nakagaki, K. Kitagaki, and H. Tsukune, “Study of insertion task
of a ﬂexible beam into a hole,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) , 1999.
[3] Y . Yamamoto, T. Yoneyama, T. Hashimoto, T. Okubo, and T. Itoh,
“Sensor-based analysis of high-precision insertion tasks,” in IROS ,
2002.
[4] Y . Ma, D. Xu, and F. Qin, “Efﬁcient insertion control for precision as-
sembly based on demonstration learning and reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Trans. on Industrial Informatics , 2021.
[5] F. Su ´arez-Ruiz and Q.-C. Pham, “A framework for ﬁne robotic
assembly,” in 2016 IEEE international conference on robotics and
automation (ICRA) , pp. 421–426, IEEE, 2016.
[6] B. D. Argall, S. Chernova, M. Veloso, and B. Browning, “A survey
of robot learning from demonstration,” Robotics and autonomous
systems , vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 469–483, 2009.
[7] S. Calinon and A. G. Billard, “What is the teacher’s role in robot
programming by demonstration?: Toward benchmarks for improved
learning,” Interaction Studies , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 441–464, 2007.
[8] S. Calinon and A. Billard, “Incremental learning of gestures by
imitation in a humanoid robot,” in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE
international conference on Human-robot interaction , pp. 255–262,
2007.
[9] A. G. Billard, S. Calinon, and R. Dillmann, “Learning from humans,”
Springer handbook of robotics , pp. 1995–2014, 2016.
[10] M. Racca, J. Pajarinen, A. Montebelli, and V . Kyrki, “Learning in-
contact control strategies from demonstration,” in IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 688–
695, IEEE, 2016.
[11] L. Johannsmeier, M. Gerchow, and S. Haddadin, “A framework for
robot manipulation: Skill formalism, meta learning and adaptive con-
trol,” in 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA) , pp. 5844–5850, IEEE, 2019.
[12] A. Ranjbar, N. A. Vien, H. Ziesche, J. Boedecker, and G. Neumann,
“Residual feedback learning for contact-rich manipulation tasks with
uncertainty,” in 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 2383–2390, IEEE, 2021.
[13] N. Vuong, H. Pham, and Q.-C. Pham, “Learning sequences of manip-
ulation primitives for robotic assembly,” in 2021 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 4086–4092,
IEEE, 2021.
[14] Y . Dong, T. Ren, D. Wu, and K. Chen, “Compliance control for robot
manipulation in contact with a varied environment based on a new joint
torque controller,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems , vol. 99,
no. 1, pp. 79–90, 2020.
[15] K. Kutsuzawa, S. Sakaino, and T. Tsuji, “Sequence-to-sequence model
for trajectory planning of nonprehensile manipulation including con-
tact model,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 3, no. 4,
pp. 3606–3613, 2018.
[16] W. Si, Y . Guan, and N. Wang, “Adaptive compliant skill learning for
contact-rich manipulation with human in the loop,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 5834–5841, 2022.
[17] J. Xu, Z. Hou, W. Wang, B. Xu, K. Zhang, and K. Chen, “Feedback
deep deterministic policy gradient with fuzzy reward for robotic
multiple peg-in-hole assembly tasks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics , vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1658–1667, 2018.
[18] T. Z. Zhao, J. Luo, O. Sushkov, R. Pevceviciute, N. Heess, J. Scholz,
S. Schaal, and S. Levine, “Ofﬂine meta-reinforcement learning for
industrial insertion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04276 , 2021.
[19] O. Spector and M. Zacksenhouse, “Learning contact-rich assembly
skills using residual admittance policy,” in 2021 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 6023–
6030, IEEE.
[20] S. A. Khader, H. Yin, P. Falco, and D. Kragic, “Stability-guaranteed
reinforcement learning for contact-rich manipulation,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2020.
[21] S. Levine and P. Abbeel, “Learning neural network policies with
guided policy search under unknown dynamics,” Advances in neural
information processing systems , vol. 27, 2014.[22] A. A. Apolinarska, M. Pacher, H. Li, N. Cote, R. Pastrana, F. Gra-
mazio, and M. Kohler, “Robotic assembly of timber joints using rein-
forcement learning,” Automation in Construction , vol. 125, p. 103569,
2021.
[23] O. Spector and M. Zacksenhouse, “Deep reinforcement learning
for contact-rich skills using compliant movement primitives,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2008.13223 , 2020.
[24] J. Luo, E. Solowjow, C. Wen, J. A. Ojea, and A. M. Agogino, “Deep
reinforcement learning for robotic assembly of mixed deformable
and rigid objects,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 2062–2069, IEEE, 2018.
[25] J. A. Bagnell, A. Y . Ng, and J. G. Schneider, “Solving uncertain
markov decision processes,” 2001.
[26] M. Kwon, S. Daptardar, P. R. Schrater, and X. Pitkow, “Inverse rational
control with partially observable continuous nonlinear dynamics,”
Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 7898–
7909, 2020.
[27] T. Gangwani, J. Lehman, Q. Liu, and J. Peng, “Learning belief
representations for imitation learning in pomdps,” in Uncertainty in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pp. 1061–1071, PMLR, 2020.
[28] J. A. Arjona-Medina, M. Gillhofer, M. Widrich, T. Unterthiner,
J. Brandstetter, and S. Hochreiter, “Rudder: Return decomposition
for delayed rewards,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , vol. 32, 2019.
[29] Z. Ren, R. Guo, Y . Zhou, and J. Peng, “Learning long-term reward
redistribution via randomized return decomposition,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2111.13485 , 2021.
[30] L. Meng, R. Gorbet, and D. Kuli ´c, “Memory-based deep reinforcement
learning for pomdps,” in 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 5619–5626, IEEE, 2021.
[31] Z. Yang and H. Nguyen, “Recurrent off-policy baselines for memory-
based continuous control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.12628 , 2021.
[32] D. Han, K. Doya, and J. Tani, “Variational recurrent models for solving
partially observable control tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.10703 ,
2019.
[33] G. Singh, S. Peri, J. Kim, H. Kim, and S. Ahn, “Structured world belief
for reinforcement learning in pomdp,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning , pp. 9744–9755, PMLR, 2021.
[34] M. Hausknecht and P. Stone, “Deep recurrent Q-learning for partially
observable MDPs,” in AAAI Fall Symposium , 2015.
[35] M. Igl, L. Zintgraf, T. Le, F. Wood, and S. Whiteson, “Deep variational
reinforcement learning for POMDPs,” in Int. Conf. on Machine
Learning (ICML) , 2018.
[36] A. Lee, A. Nagabandi, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Stochastic latent
actor-critic: Deep reinforcement learning with a latent variable model,”
inConf. on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020.
[37] M. Igl, L. Zintgraf, T. A. Le, F. Wood, and S. Whiteson, “Deep varia-
tional reinforcement learning for pomdps,” in International Conference
on Machine Learning , pp. 2117–2126, PMLR, 2018.
[38] J. Ho and S. Ermon, “Generative adversarial imitation learning,”
Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 29, 2016.
[39] S. Desai, I. Durugkar, H. Karnan, G. Warnell, J. Hanna, and P. Stone,
“An imitation from observation approach to transfer learning with
dynamics mismatch,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , vol. 33, pp. 3917–3929, 2020.
[40] G.-H. Kim, S. Seo, J. Lee, W. Jeon, H. Hwang, H. Yang, and K.-
E. Kim, “Demodice: Ofﬂine imitation learning with supplementary
imperfect demonstrations,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2022.
[41] R. Dadashi, L. Hussenot, M. Geist, and O. Pietquin, “Primal wasser-
stein imitation learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04678 , 2020.
[42] W. Yang, N. Strokina, J. Pajarinen, and J.-k. Kamarainen, “Constrained
imitation q-learning with earth mover’s distance reward,” in Deep
Reinforcement Learning Workshop NeurIPS 2022 , 2022.
[43] P. Florence, C. Lynch, A. Zeng, O. A. Ramirez, A. Wahid, L. Downs,
A. Wong, J. Lee, I. Mordatch, and J. Tompson, “Implicit behavioral
cloning,” in Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 158–168, PMLR,
2022.
[44] G.-H. Kim, S. Seo, J. Lee, W. Jeon, H. Hwang, H. Yang, and K.-
E. Kim, “Demodice: Ofﬂine imitation learning with supplementary
imperfect demonstrations,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2022.
[45] N. P. Garg, D. Hsu, and W. S. Lee, “Learning to grasp under
uncertainty using POMDPs,” in International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 2751–2757, IEEE, 2019.[46] D. Montana, “The kinematics of contact and grasp,” The International
Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 7, no. 3, 1988.
[47] S. Howard, M. Zefran, and V . Kumar, “On the 66cartesian stiff-
ness matrix for three-dimensional motions,” Mechanism and Machine
Theory , vol. 33, no. 4, 1998.
[48] T. Gold, A. V olz, and K. Graichen, “Model Predictive Position and
Force Trajectory Tracking Control for Robot-Environment Interac-
tion,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS) , 2020.
[49] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. R. Cassandra, “Planning and
acting in partially observable stochastic domains,” Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence , vol. 101, no. 1-2, pp. 99–134, 1998.
[50] H. Nguyen, B. Daley, X. Song, C. Amato, and R. Platt, “Belief-
grounded networks for accelerated robot learning under partial ob-
servability,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09170 , 2020.
[51] S. Rajeswar, C. Ibrahim, N. Surya, F. Golemo, D. Vazquez,
A. Courville, and P. O. Pinheiro, “Haptics-based curiosity for sparse-
reward tasks,” in Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 395–405, PMLR,
2022.
[52] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V . Le, “Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks,” Advances in neural information processing
systems , vol. 27, 2014.
[53] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal,
A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, et al. , “Language
models are few-shot learners,” Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems , vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
[54] S. Ross, G. Gordon, and D. Bagnell, “A reduction of imitation learning
and structured prediction to no-regret online learning,” in Proceedings
of the fourteenth international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and
statistics , pp. 627–635, JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
2011.
[55] T. Ni, B. Eysenbach, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Recurrent model-free rl
can be a strong baseline for many pomdps,” in Int. Conf. on Machine
Learning (ICML) , 2022.
[56] A. Nair, B. McGrew, M. Andrychowicz, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel,
“Overcoming exploration in reinforcement learning with demonstra-
tions,” in 2018 IEEE international conference on robotics and automa-
tion (ICRA) , pp. 6292–6299, IEEE, 2018.
[57] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Off-
policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic
actor,” in International conference on machine learning , pp. 1861–
1870, PMLR, 2018.
[58] S. Reddy, A. D. Dragan, and S. Levine, “Sqil: Imitation learn-
ing via reinforcement learning with sparse rewards,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.11108 , 2019.
[59] M. Bain and C. Sammut, “A framework for behavioural cloning.,” in
Machine Intelligence 15 , pp. 103–129, 1995.