Eur. Phys. J. C manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Searches for new physics with boosted top quarks in the
MadAnalysis 5 and Rivet frameworks
Jack Y. Araza,1, Andy Buckleyb,2, Benjamin Fuksc,3
1Institute for Particle Physics Phenomenology, Durham University, Durham, UK
2School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
3Laboratoire de Physique Th´ eorique et Hautes ´Energies (LPTHE), UMR 7589, Sorbonne Universit´ e et CNRS, 4 place
Jussieu, 75252 Paris Cedex 05, France
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract High-momentum top quarks are a natural
physical system in collider experiments for testing mod-
els of new physics, and jet substructure methods are
key both to exploiting their largest decay mode and
to assuaging resolution difficulties as the boosted sys-
tem becomes increasingly collimated in the detector. To
be used in new-physics interpretation studies, it is cru-
cial that related methods get implemented in analysis
frameworks allowing for the reinterpretation of the re-
sults of the LHC such as MadAnalysis 5 andRivet .
We describe the implementation of the HEPTopTag-
ger algorithm in these two frameworks, and we exem-
plify the usage of the resulting functionalities to ex-
plore the sensitivity of boosted top reconstruction per-
formance to new physics contributions from the Stan-
dard Model Effective Field Theory. The results of this
study lead to important conclusions about the implicit
assumption of Standard-Model-like top-quark decays
in associated collider analyses, and for the prospects
to constrain the Standard Model Effective Field The-
ory via kinematic observables built from boosted semi-
leptonic t¯tevents selected using HEPTopTagger .
1 Introduction
Since the resurrection of jet-substructure methods as
probes for new particles at the LHC [1, 2], boosted
topologies in which multiple decay products from
heavy intermediate states fall into a single large-radius
(large- R) jet have seen wide application in searches
for new physics [3–8]. While not initially considered
aE-mail: jack.araz@durham.ac.uk
bE-mail: andy.buckley@glasgow.ac.uk
cE-mail: fuks@lpthe.jussieu.frin the early days of the LHC, these jet substructure
techniques are now indeed largely used to extend
the sensitivity of searches for new physics. This is
particularly the case as the currently null results
of those searches indicate that any relevant physics
beyond the Standard Model (BSM) is most-likely
located at a large mass scale, featuring heavy particles
whose production and decay would naturally yield
highly-boosted lighter Standard Model (SM) objects.
Many collider signatures can benefit from the usage
of jet substructure methods, as they can be generally
applied to tag many SM and BSM particles when they
are produced with a high Lorentz boost. Among these,
the top quark is an important target, for two reasons.
First, the top quark is the highest-mass fermion in the
SM, featuring a Yukawa coupling value close to 1. This
makes it a natural candidate to provide an explanation
for the hierarchy problem, and to play the role of a me-
diator that couples to new-physics sectors ( e.g.through
the Higgs field). Second, boosted methods can provide
better background-rejection power than a classic ‘re-
solved’ reconstruction of the top-quark kinematics. As
a high-mass, colour-charged and non-hadronising parti-
cle, the top quark is the most complex SM resonance to
reconstruct from fully resolved decay components. This
not only requires highly performant b-tagging, but also
suffers from either a complicated lepton and missing-
momentum reconstruction or the resolution difficulties
inherent to reconstructing a fully hadronic b¯qq′final
state.
Jet-substructure methods offer a way to bypass
many of the difficulties related to the reconstruction
and identification of hadronically-decaying top quarks
by relying on one single large-radius jet in place of
three small-radius ones. In addition, such an optionarXiv:2303.03427v2  [hep-ph]  7 Jul 20232
generally exploits the presence of two heavy SM
particles’ decay hierarchies within the large- Rjet (the
top quark itself and the Wboson originating from
its decay), together with information on the internal
momentum and angular structure of all jet constituents
(with or without b-tagging requirements) to disam-
biguate boosted top quarks from jets originating from
pure QCD background processes. A prominent tool in
such studies is the HEPTopTagger method [9, 10],
which pioneered this approach and has since gone
through several rounds of enhancement such as use
of variable-radius jet clustering. In the meantime
more sophisticated and efficient top tagging methods
have been developed. Typical examples are based on a
classification of jets making use of the radiation pattern
within a jet (also known as shower deconstruction) [11],
on advanced machine learning techniques (we refer to
Ref. [12] for an overview) relying on observables like
the jet transverse momentum and mass, the dispersion
of its constituents estimated through N-subjettiness
variables [13, 14], splitting scales [15], energy correla-
tion functions [16, 17], as well as on jet image analysis
by means of neutral networks [18–20] and image or
language recognition techniques [21–24]. More recently,
a series of machine-learning methods embedding
Lorentz invariance [25, 26] have additionally been pro-
posed and explored. The HEPTopTagger method,
however, still plays the role of being an important
benchmark in the top-tagging landscape, especially in
the context of use by the LHC experiments [27, 28].
On the other hand, the related code has historically
been unavailable for use in analysis prototyping and
preservation within the two public analysis frameworks
MadAnalysis 5 [29–31] and Rivet [32, 33], that are
widely used across the high-energy physics community.
The goal of the present work is to fill this gap, and
to document, through a few examples, its addition
to both frameworks. It also therefore serves as a
prototype interface for integration of C++ versions
of machine-learning taggers into these public analysis
toolkits.
While most applications of boosted top-quark re-
construction have been aimed at direct searches for
new physics, the lack of tangible evidence for new high-
mass resonances urges complementary studies of indi-
rect routes through which BSM physics can manifest. A
leading approach in this is that of the Standard Model
Effective Field Theory (SMEFT), in which the explicit
microscopic physics of a particular BSM model is re-
placed by an infinite set of higher-dimensional opera-
tors involving the SM fields and compatible with the
SM symmetries [34–36]. The SMEFT is then an ex-
pansion in an energy scale Λabove which the effectivetheory breaks down and real new physics resides, so
that new fields with masses comparable with Λmust
be explicitly added to the model’s Lagrangian. Details
about the UV theory are encoded in the Wilson coeffi-
cients multiplying each operator, and the relevance of
a specific new interaction is dictated ( a priori ) by the
dimension of the corresponding operator (that is thus
suppressed by some power of the effective scale). At di-
mension six, 84 (3045) parameters encode the leading
BSM effects, assuming a flavour-blind (flavour-general)
setup [37, 38]. Constraints are typically made primar-
ily in the model-independent space of the correspond-
ing Wilson coefficients by investigating the possibility
of small and often subtle deviations from the SM ex-
pectation. Among all operators, about twenty of them
impact top physics under the simplifying assumption
that new physics couples dominantly to bosons and to
the left-handed doublet and right-handed up-type sin-
glet of third generation quarks [39].
Global SMEFT interpretations of measurements at
the LHC in the top sector have recently been achieved
by several groups [40–45]. These studies demonstrated
in particular that dozens of SMEFT operators could be
constrained (and therefore determined) simultaneously,
correlating sometimes information originating from dif-
ferent sectors. It is nevertheless well known that signa-
tures of processes involving boosted top quarks could
be crucially relevant [46]. These indeed involve large
momentum transfers, so that they are expected to ex-
hibit the largest sensitivity to new physics effects in
the SMEFT, and subsequently show the most sensitiv-
ity to BSM phenomena. It is therefore natural to focus
on high-momentum collider event categories involving
the production of boosted top quarks, and to consider
them as a promising avenue to statistically constrain
the viable space of Wilson coefficients associated with
top quark operators.
In the present study, we make use of the HEP-
TopTagger functionalities that we implemented in
theRivet andMadAnalysis 5 frameworks (together
the possibility of computing emulated reconstruction-
level observables) to study the sensitivity of the LHC
to top-related SMEFT operators, focusing on the pro-
duction of a pair of boosted top quarks. However, the
HEPTopTagger algorithm is designed to exploit as
much as possible the kinematics of the SM decay of
a boosted top quark. This leads to the open question
about how new physics effects arising from the intro-
duction of non-zero top-quark SMEFT operators could
modify these kinematics, and hence impact the perfor-
mance of HEPTopTagger and, by inference, of any
similar reconstruction method based on the topology
arising from an SM top quark decay. As a straightfor-3
ward application and keeping this in mind, we highlight
important resulting issues for BSM interpretations.
In Section 2, we detail our technical developments in
Rivet (Section 2.2) and MadAnalysis 5 (Section 2.3),
and briefly explain how to use the codes for physics
studies. In Section 3, we exemplify the usage of these
developments to estimate the impact of new physics via
effective SMEFT operators on HEPTopTagger per-
formance, and how this affects the sensitivity of the
present and future runs of the LHC (assuming an inte-
grated luminosity of 300 fb−1and 3000 fb−1and varied
levels of systematic errors) to these operators. We sum-
marise our work in Section 4.
2 HEPTopTagger implementation in the Rivet
and MadAnalysis 5 frameworks
2.1 Generalities
In its initial proposal [9], the HEPTopTagger
algorithm is a purely deterministic top-tagging method
in which boosted top reconstruction is solely achieved
from the geometrical structure and properties of
the constituents of a fat jet. It first defines a fat
jet collection from an event final state by using the
Cambridge-Aachen jet algorithm [47–49]. A procedure
is next applied to all jets included in this collection, in
order to decide whether they should be top-tagged.
In practice, each reconstructed fat jet is decom-
posed into several subjets by applying a mass drop
criterion [50]. More precisely, jet clustering is iteratively
undone so that each fat jet is split in two subjets, and
the subjet with the smallest invariant mass is kept only
if its invariant mass is large enough. Each resulting
subjet is further decomposed in the same manner
provided that its invariant mass is larger than some
threshold. All possible triplets of jets belonging to the
subjet collection obtained in this way are then filtered,
and the five hardest filtered subjets are selected for
boosted top quark reconstruction.
These five subjets are reclustered into three subjets,
that are thus assumed to originate from a top quark de-
cay. Events are at this stage rejected if they do not in-
clude any resulting triplet with an invariant mass that is
compatible with the top mass. Top tagging stems from
several requirements that are imposed on the invariant
masses of the different dijet pairs that could be formed
from the three subjects of any boosted top quark candi-
date, in particular in order to ensure the compatibility
with the presence of an intermediate Wboson. More-over the transverse momentum of the top candidate is
required to be at least 200 GeV.
We refer to the original documentation [9, 10] for
a more comprehensive and quantitative presentation of
theHEPTopTagger algorithm.
The performance of any top-quark tagger can be im-
proved by using an increased set of input variables (as
in most multi-variate methods), for which the explicit
choices are made through a tuning process relative to
a given reference. To this end, the HEPTopTagger
method has been updated and now includes a variety
of features that enhance the tagging efficiency and re-
duce the associated mistagging rates: it uses substruc-
ture mass-drop conditions [50], jet trimming [51] and
pruning [4,52] algorithms, and filtering steps [2], in ad-
dition to the core requirement that the large-radius jet
demonstrates the three-pronged structure characteris-
tic of a boosted top-quark’s hadronic decay. In the cur-
rent version of the HEPTopTagger package, all these
methods are used together in a multi-variate classifi-
cation [53, 54] which maximises the expected tagging
performance.
Access to this tool and all its embedded features
within public frameworks like MadAnalysis 5 or
Rivet is thus crucial for prototyping and reproduc-
ing collider-event data analyses, a key activity in
collider phenomenology. In the rest of this section,
we discuss technical details about the embedding
ofHEPTopTagger in these two software tools,
and describe how they could practically be used.
In practice, we rely on the latest public version of
HEPTopTagger (i.e.its version 2 available from the
webpage https://www.thphys.uni-heidelberg.de/
~plehn/index.php?show=heptoptagger ). Moreover,
we have validated our implementations by confronting
the results of a few test calculations obtained by using
the two interfaced versions of HEPTopTagger to
those returned by HEPTopTagger when used in a
standalone mode.
2.2 Jet substructure tools in Rivet
The implementation of HEPTopTagger within
Rivet has been designed on top of its existing
jet-analysis toolkit, using the ‘smearing projection’
machinery that simulates kinematic and particle-
identification misreconstruction through transfer
functions, while preserving links between particle-level
and reconstruction-level physics objects. When jet
substructure methods are involved, dedicated smearing
methods are required, as many observables ( e.g.N-
subjettinesses) are sensitive to angular correlations4
between the jet constituents. It is therefore necessary
to model the detector’s finite angular resolution to get
a realistic detector response, including the inefficiencies
related to the hadronic calorimeter. This is achieved, as
detailed in Ref. [55], through the directional smearing
of the pseudo-rapidity ηand azimuthal angle φvari-
ables defining the direction of every jet constituent. As
angular deflections are more significant for constituents
with a low transverse momentum pT, this smearing
is made pT-dependent with greater angular stability
at higher momentum. The specific form used, known
to describe jet-substructure effects well on the public
data, is angular smearing by a Gaussian with a mean
of zero and a standard deviation given by
σang=α
1 +eβ(pi
T−γ). (1)
Here α, β andγare free parameters, set to 0 .045,0.013
and 31 .15, respectively, from the fit detailed in
Ref. [55]. Additionally, energy-resolution smearing was
performed, using relative scaling by a Gaussian with
mean of 1, and width σE∼10%.
Our implementation of the HEPTopTagger
method in Rivet relies on an object of the HTTclass,
normally to be declared as a member variable of an
analysis (or projection) class,
HTT _tagger ;
The HTTclass is defined in the header file "Rivet/Tools
/RivetHTT.hh" . All available parameters for this wrapper
are initialised through an HTT::InputParameters object, that
can be used for any further modification relevant for the
needs of the user. A simple example is
HTT :: InputParameters parameters ;
parameters . mass_drop = 0.8; // mass drop rate
parameters . filt_N = 5; // nr of filtered subjets
_tagger . setParams ( parameters );
The list of available parameters can be found in the def-
inition of the C++ structure HTT::InputParameters in the
file "Rivet/Tools/RivetHTT.hh" . All parameters that are not
explicitly initialised by the user keep their default val-
ues which have been chosen according to Refs. [9, 10].
During the execution of a Rivet analysis, a reclustered
jet, instantiated as a Jetobject, can be processed by the
methods of the _tagger object, for example in
_tagger . calc ( fatjets [0]) ;
Here, fatjets[0] refers to the leading ( i.e.highest- pT) jet
included in a vector of clustered jets called fatjets (the
object fatjets being thus of type Jets). The computation
yields the creation of various accessors that returns a
variety of information into native Rivet objects. This
list of accessors is shown in Table 1.For a practical example, we refer to the illustrative
analysis that can be found in Rivet ’s"analyses/examples/
EXAMPLE_HTT.cc" file.
2.3 Jet substructure tools in MadAnalysis 5
Since 2021, MadAnalysis 5 and its SFS framework
for fast simulation of detector effects [56] have been
equipped with jet substructure tools and methods.1In
particular, the smearing functionality implemented in
the SFS framework allows for modifications of the prop-
erties of the jets’ constituents, so that the SFS is suit-
able for the embedding of HEPTopTagger in a way
similar to what was achieved for Rivet in Section 2.2.
As the substructure branch is so far largely undocu-
mented, we take benefit from the present work to pro-
vide some details on its functioning and how to make
use of the code to embed top tagging in a generic anal-
ysis.
When a jet reconstruction algorithm is turned on in
MadAnalysis 5 , a so-called ‘ primary ’ jet collection is
built from a hadronised event. This primary jet collec-
tion is equivalent to the sole jet collection that used to
be built in versions 1.X.Y of the code, which was doc-
umented in [31, 56]. In practice, the code makes use of
its interface with FastJet [57], that can be turned on
from the MadAnalysis 5 command line interface by
typing
set main . fastsim . package = fastjet
A specific jet algorithm is then activated through the
commands
set main . fastsim . algorithm = <algorithm >
set main . fastsim .< property > = <value >
The list of supported algorithms, together with the
available properties, is provided in [56]. By default, the
anti-kTjet algorithm [58] is considered, with a radius
parameter R= 0.4 (radius ) and a minimum pTvalue of
5 GeV ( ptmin). The primary jet collection is identified
by its jet identifier (or JetID), that is fixed to Ma5Jet by
default. This identifier can be further modified through
the command
set main . fastsim . JetID = <new JetID >
Additional jet collections can be instantiated
through
define jet_algorithm <JetID > <algo > [< parameters >]
1See the GitHub branch https://github.com/MadAnalysis/
madanalysis5/tree/substructure , as well as the beta versions
ofMadAnalysis 5 v2.0.Z (available at https://github.com/
MadAnalysis/madanalysis5/releases ).5
Accessor Functionality
const Jet topJet() top-quark candidate (returned as a Jetobject)
const Jet bJet() b-jet candidate (returned as a Jetobject)
const Jet wJet() combined subjets compatible with a W-boson candidate (returned as a Jetobject)
const Jet w1Jet() leading subjet constituting a W-boson candidate (returned as a Jetobject)
const Jet w2Jet() sub-leading subjet constituting a W-boson candidate (returned as a Jetobject)
const PseudoJet topJet() top-quark candidate (returned as a PseudoJet object)
const PseudoJet bJet() b-jet candidate (returned as a PseudoJet object)
const PseudoJet wJet() combined subjets compatible with a W-boson candidate (returned as a PseudoJet
object)
const PseudoJet w1Jet() leading subjet constituting a W-boson candidate (returned as a PseudoJet object)
const PseudoJet w2Jet() sub-leading subjet constituting a W-boson candidate (returned as a PseudoJet ob-
ject)
Jets subjets() pT-ordered subjets
double prunedMass() pruned top-quark mass
double unfilteredMass() mass of the triplet of subjets after unclustering, and before filtering
double deltaTopMass() difference between the reconstructed top mass and the true top mass |mrec−mt|
bool isTopTagged() Boolean indicating if the top jet has a mass compatible with the top mass, satisfies
two-dimensional mass plane requirements, and has a pTabove some threshold
bool passedMassCutTop() Boolean indicating if the top jet has a mass compatible with the top mass
bool passedMassCut2D() Boolean indicating if the top jet satisfies two-dimensional mass plane requirements
Table 1 Accessors equipping the HEPTopTagger wrapper implemented in Rivet .
where <JetID> refers to the identifier of the collection,
<algo> to the associated clustering algorithm, and where
any algorithm-specific parameter can be optionally
fixed through comma-separated or space-separated
equalities (otherwise default values are used). For
instance, typing
define jet_algorithm CA08 cambridge radius =0.8 \
ptmin =200
defines a jet collection coined CA08, in which jets are re-
constructed by means of the Cambridge-Aachen jet al-
gorithm [47–49], with a radius parameter set to 0.8 and
a minimum pTvalue of 200 GeV. Parameters can also
be altered through specific commands, like for instance
in
set CA08 . radius = 0.8
set CA08 . ptmin = 200
Once multiple jet collections are defined, constituent-
based smearing is always applied to the properties of
all final-state hadrons before the different reconstruc-
tions are performed. This contrasts with the setup in
which a single collection is defined, as here users can de-
cide to smear reconstructed objects instead of their con-
stituents. Reconstruction efficiencies can also be pro-
vided from the command line interface (see [56]), but
they will only be applied to the primary jet collection.
This limiting behaviour can however be bypassed by
employing the expert mode of the code, in which users
implement their analysis directly in C++ (and are thusfree to do whatever they want). We therefore focus only
on this expert mode from now on.2
At the level of the C++ code generated by Mad-
Analysis 5 (or implemented from scratch by expert
users), the primary jet collection can be accessed
through the standard accessor event.rec()->jets() (as
described in [30, 31]), and all jet collections (including
the primary one) can be accessed through the accessor
event.rec()->jets(<JetID>) (with <JetID> being the identifier
referring to the collection). These accessors return a
vector of pointers to constant RecJetFormat objects (or
RecJet objects for short), the entire vector being also of
the shorthand type RecJets .
In the version 2.0.X of MadAnalysis 5 , a
Substructure namespace has been implemented and
includes wrappers to a large set of FastJet and
FastJet Contrib functionalities. This substructure
module allows for three standard infrared and collinear
safe jet-clustering algorithms, that can be initialised as
for instance through
Substructure :: Cluster cluster ;
cluster . Initialize ( Substructure :: antikt , 0.4 , 20. ,
isExclusive = false );
This initialises a Cluster object named cluster in which
jet reconstruction relies on the anti- kTalgorithm with
parameter R= 0.4, and that selects reconstructed jets
featuring pT>20 GeV. In order to make use of the
Cambridge-Aachen or the generalised kT[57] algo-
rithm, the first argument of the Initialize method needs
2The command line interface of MadAnalysis 5 can be used
for the generation of a skeleton C++ code, that can then be
modified in a second step according to the wishes of the user.6
Accessor Functionality
const RecJet top() top-quark candidate (returned as a RecJet object)
const RecJet b() b-jet candidate (returned as a RecJet object)
const RecJet W() combined subjets compatible with a W-boson candidate (returned as a RecJet ob-
ject)
const RecJet W1() leading subjet constituting a W-boson candidate (returned as a RecJet object)
const RecJet W2() sub-leading subjet constituting a W-boson candidate (returned as a RecJet object)
RecJets subjets() pT-ordered subjets (returned as a vector of RecJet objects, also known as a RecJets
object)
MAfloat32 pruned_mass() pruned top-quark mass
MAfloat32 unfiltered_mass() mass of the triplet of subjets after unclustering, and before filtering
MAfloat32 delta_top() difference between the reconstructed top mass and the true top mass |mrec−mt|
MAbool is_tagged() Boolean indicating if the top jet has a mass compatible with the top mass, satisfies
two-dimensional mass plane requirements, and has a pTabove some threshold
MAbool is_maybe_top() Boolean indicating if the top jet has a mass compatible with the top mass
MAbool is_masscut_passed() Boolean indicating if the top jet satisfies two-dimensional mass plane requirements
Table 2 Accessors equipping the HEPTopTagger wrapper implemented in MadAnalysis 5 .
to be set to Substructure::cambridge and Substructure::kt
respectively. The next arguments are related to the two
options available for the three supported algorithms
(namely the radius parameter Rand the minimum pT
requirement applied on the reconstructed jets), and the
last optional argument ( isExclusive ) indicates whether
leptons and photons originating from hadron decays
have to be included in their respective collections in
addition to be considered as jet constituents ( isExclusive
= false ), or not ( isExclusive = true ). Next, clustering is
executed through the command
cluster . Execute (<event >, <JetID >);
where <JetID> is the identifier of the jet collection to use
to store the output of the clustering, and <event> is an
EventFormat object pointing to the whole event. Smear-
ing and reconstruction efficiencies are automatically in-
cluded, if provided by the user (see Ref. [56]).
Clustered jets can be further manipulated, either
one by one or all together. For instance, the first of the
following commands defines a new collection FilteredJets
as a sub-selection of all reconstructed (primary) jets
satisfying pT>20 GeV and |η|<2.5. The next two
lines are dedicated to the initialisation of a new clus-
tering method (the Cambridge-Aachen algorithm with
a radius parameter R= 0.5, that is the sole parameter
that can be specified here), with which those jets will
be reclustered,
RecJets FilteredJets = filter ( event . rec () ->jets () ,
20.0 , 2.5) ;
Substructure :: Recluster recluster ;
recluster . Initialize ( Substructure :: cambridge , 0.5) ;
Here, we assume that the primary jets have been clus-
tered through some (unspecified) algorithm. Next, we
make use of the Recluster object, a first time on the whole
jet collection, and a second time specifically on the lead-
ing jet,RecJets ReclusteredJets = recluster . Execute (
FilteredJets );
const RecJet ReclusteredLeadingJet = recluster .
Execute ( FilteredJets [0]) ;
As another example, we now discuss jet reconstruc-
tion in which the radius parameter Ris variable [59].3
Such a method can be used from the Substructure wrap-
per as follows,
Substructure :: VariableR variableR ;
MAfloat32 rho =2000. , minR =0. , maxR =2. , ptmin =0.0;
Substructure :: VariableR :: ClusterType clusterType =
Substructure :: VariableR :: AKTLIKE ;
Substructure :: VariableR :: Strategy strategy =
Substructure :: VariableR :: Best ;
MAbool isExclusive = false ;
variableR . Initialize (rho , minR , maxR , clusterType ,
strategy , ptmin , isExclusive );
The clustering type must be CALIKE (Cambridge-
Aachen), KTLIKE (kTalgorithm) or AKTLIKE (anti- kT
algorithm), the parameters minRand maxRstand for the
minimum and maximum radius values allowed, and
the internal clustering strategy to be used by FastJet
has to be among Best,N2Tiled ,N2Plain ,NNHorNative . We
refer to Ref. [59] for more information. Reclustering is
then proceeded as above,
RecJets variableRJets = variableR . Execute (
FilteredJets );
RecJets variableRLeadingJet = variableR . Execute (
FilteredJets [0]) ;
In order to enable the usage of HEPTopTagger
within MadAnalysis 5 , the package must first be
downloaded and linked to the code. This is achieved by
typing in the MadAnalysis 5 command line interface
install HEPTopTagger
3See the webpage https://phab.hepforge.org/source/
fastjetsvn/browse/contrib/contribs/VariableR/tags/1.2.1/
for more information.7
onceFastJet andFastJet Contrib are installed and
available (which is achieved by typing in the interpreter
the command install fastjet ). When implementing an
analysis in C++, the execution of HEPTopTagger is
controlled from a dedicated structure called Substructure
::HTT::InputParameters . The latter is defined in the file
"tools/SampleAnalyzer/Interfaces/HEPTopTagger/HTT.h" , together
with all associated parameters and methods, and it
is documented in the file "tools/SampleAnalyzer/Interfaces
/HEPTopTagger/README.md" . Taking the example introduced
in Section 2.2, a simple example of initialisation would
read
Substructure :: HTT :: InputParameters parameters ;
parameters . mass_drop = 0.8;
parameters . filt_N = 5;
Substructure :: HTT tagger ;
tagger . Initialize ( parameters );
HEPTopTagger is then executed as
tagger . Execute ( filteredJets [0]) ;
As for the embedding into Rivet , this method leads
to the generation of a variety of accessors that allows
for the exploration of the properties of the would be
top-jet. Their list is given in Table 2. For more de-
tailed practical examples on the usage of jet substruc-
ture techniques and HEPTopTagger within Mad-
Analysis 5 , we refer to the tutorial available from
https://github.com/MadAnalysis/tutorial_osu .
3 Exploring new physics effects with boosted
top quarks in the SMEFT
In this section, we demonstrate the use of HEPTop-
Tagger (version 2) within the Rivet andMadAnal-
ysis 5 frameworks, and we study the potential impact
of SMEFT operators on boosted top quark decays. The
set of relevant operators that we consider is introduced
in Section 3.1. In Section 3.2, we focus on the pro-
duction of a semi-leptonically decaying t¯tpair to in-
vestigate how SMEFT deviations in the properties of
boosted top quarks affect the performance of top tag-
gers (through deviations from the taggers’ expectations
of SM-like top-quark decay properties). Next, we make
use of our findings to derive in Section 3.3 the sensitivity
of a typical analysis of boosted top-pair production and
decay to various SMEFT operators poorly constrained
by other means.
3.1 Theoretical framework
In the absence of any explicit evidence for new fields
and interactions beyond the SM, effective field theo-ries provide a natural path to scrutinising the impact
of hypothetical BSM physics at the electroweak scale
ΛEW. In this context, the SMEFT paradigm offers a
very promising framework allowing for the exploration
of heavy new physics. The SMEFT is an effective field
theory expansion in an energy scale Λthat is assumed
to satisfy Λ≫ΛEW. The model Lagrangian is defined
via a set {O1,O2, ...}of higher-dimensional ( i.e.non-
renormalisable) operators in the SM fields. Assuming
that the leading new-physics effects arise at dimension
six, this Lagrangian reads
LSMEFT =LSM+X
jCj
Λ2Oj+O 
1/Λ3
, (2)
where LSMis the SM Lagrangian, and the Wilson coeffi-
cients Cjencode the BSM details of the theory. Among
the 3045 free parameters in this general SMEFT La-
grangian of eq. (2) [37, 38], only a few are relevant for
top-quark physics.
We consider a scenario in which CPis conserved,
and we next assume that new physics only couples to
the weak doublet of left-handed top and bottom quarks
(Q) and the right-handed weak singlets ( tandb) of
third-generation quarks (as well as to SM bosons).
Moreover, bosonic operators leading to flavour-
universal effects are discarded, we approximate the
CKM matrix by the identity matrix, and all Yukawa
couplings but those of the top and bottom quarks are
neglected. In order to further reduce the number of
free parameters, we consider a U(2)q×U(2)u×U(2)d
flavour symmetry among the quarks of the first and
second generations, in agreement with the principle of
minimal flavour violation [60–62]. Differences between
the first and second-generation quarks are thus ignored,
and we subsequently introduce the generic notation q
for a left-handed weak doublet of first-generation or
second-generation quark fields, and uanddfor the
corresponding right-handed weak singlets of up-type
and down-type quark fields.
In our analysis, we aim to leverage the detector-
simulation capabilities of the MadAnalysis 5 and
Rivet frameworks (including our implementation
ofHEPTopTagger ) to realistically explore the
effects of effective operators on the reconstruction
performance of boosted top quarks. Among the full
set of potentially impactful SMEFT operators [39],
only eight of them are not too strongly constrained
by other means [40–45], so that an investigation of
pair-production and decay of boosted top quarks could
offer new handles on them. They read, in the notation8
of Ref. [42],
O1,8
Qq=(¯QγµTAQ) (¯qγµTAq),
O3,8
Qq=(¯QγµTAσIQ) (¯qγµTAσIq),
O3,1
Qq=(¯QγµσIQ) (¯qγµσIq),
O8
tu=(¯tγµTAt) (¯uγµTAu),
O8
td=(¯tγµTAt) (¯dγµTAd),
O8
Qu=(¯QγµTAQ) (¯uγµTAu),
O8
Qd=(¯QγµTAQ) (¯dγµTAd),
O8
tq=(¯qγµTAq) (¯tγµTAt),(3)
where the matrices TAstand for the generators of
SU(3)cin the fundamental representation, and the
matrices σIare the usual Pauli matrices.
3.2 Top tagging performance in the presence of
non-vanishing SMEFT operators
In order to assess how non-zero values for the Wilson
coefficients associated with the SMEFT operators of
eq. (3) affect top-quark tagging performance, we make
use of MadGraph5 aMC@NLO version 3.0.3 [63]
to generate parton-level events describing top-antitop
production and their semi-leptonic decay at the LHC
(operating at a centre-of-mass energy of 13 TeV). We
rely on leading-order matrix elements convolved with
the leading-order set of NNPDF3.0 parton distribu-
tion functions [64] provided through the Lhapdf6
library [65]. For efficiency reasons, the Monte Carlo
event generation was kinematically biased to high
scales, and we required that the invariant mass of the
produced t¯tsystem satisfies mtruth
t¯t>950 GeV. These
fixed-order events are matched with parton showering
and hadronisation as modelled by Pythia version
8.2 [66]. Background events are generated with the
same toolchain, but by considering the production of
a leptonically-decaying Wboson in association with a
pair of bjets (and two additional jets), pp→Wb¯b+jets.
Our canonical analysis was implemented in Rivet
version 3 [33].4It employs FastJet version 3.3.3 [57]
for event reconstruction, and HEPTopTagger version
2 [10] in its default configuration. We remind that the
latter has been tuned on boosted top quarks with prop-
erties as expected from their SM production and decay,
which may thus not be the best for scenarios in which
SMEFT effects change the properties of the produced
tops. In our usage of HEPTopTagger , we turn on the
‘optimal R’ option. This allows the tagging algorithm
4An equivalent implementation in MadAnalysis 5 produced
similar results.to determine the minimum choice for the fat jet recon-
struction radius to ensure that the reconstructed top
jet includes a three-prong structure (as expected from
standard top-quark decays).
Our event reconstruction is achieved by first
defining a collection of ‘small jets’ through the clus-
tering of all visible hadron-level final-state objects
with a pseudo-rapidity |η|<4.5, muons excepted.
We use the anti- kTjet algorithm [58] with radius
parameter R= 0.4, and then impose a minimum
transverse-momentum requirement of pT>30 GeV
on the reconstructed small jets. Next, we define a
collection of ‘fat jets’ from the same hadron-level
objects. This collection is constructed by using the
Cambridge-Aachen algorithm [47–49] with a radius
parameter R= 1.5. We impose a minimum transverse
momentum requirement of pT>200 GeV on the
reconstructed fat jets.
Lepton candidates ( i.e.electrons and muons) are re-
quired to satisfy basic momentum and pseudo-rapidity
criteria, pT>10 GeV and |η|<2.5. At this stage, ∆R-
based isolation is enforced in order to remove the over-
lap between the lepton collection and the two jet col-
lections. We remove from the small-jet collection any
small jet jlying in the vicinity of a lepton ℓby an an-
gular distance ∆R(ℓ, j)<0.1, and we then discard any
lepton lying at a distance ∆R(ℓ, j)<0.4 of any of the
remaining small jets. Moreover, we define bjets as small
jets with pT>30 GeV and with a ghost-associated b-
hadron with pT>5 GeV [67,68].
After reconstruction, we select events whose topol-
ogy is compatible with that expected from the produc-
tion of a pair of boosted top quarks that decays semi-
leptonically. We require that each selected event fea-
tures one lepton with at least 50 GeV of transverse mo-
mentum, a minimum missing transverse energy /ET>
30 GeV, as well as at least two small bjets and two
small light jets. Next, we reconstruct the leptonically-
decaying Wboson that we consider on-shell. This as-
sumption implies that the invariant mass of the system
comprising the lepton and the missing momentum is
equal to the mass mWof the Wboson, which allows
us to determine the longitudinal component /pzof the
missing momentum,
m2
W= (pℓ+/p)2
=
Eℓ+q
/p2
T+/p2
z2
−X
i
pℓ,i+/pi2
with i∈ {x, y, z }.(4)
In the above expression, pℓ= (pℓ,x, pℓ,y, pℓ,z) denotes
the three-momentum of the lepton, /p= (/px,/py,/pz) is9
the missing three-momentum, and Eℓstands for the en-
ergy of the lepton. From the solution to eq. (4), we can
define the four-momentum of the leptonically-decaying
Wboson Wrec
L. In the case where this equation has two
solutions, we arbitrarily choose the smallest value for
/pz. Moreover, when it has no solution, we set the asso-
ciated discriminant to 0 and use the resulting solution.
In order to reconstruct the leptonically-decaying top
quark, we match this reconstructed Wboson with one
of the bjets by minimising the difference between the
top mass mtand the invariant mass m[Wrec
L⊕b] of
the system constituted of the reconstructed Wboson
Wrec
Land the bjet. This is achieved through a ∆χ2
minimisation,
∆χ2=|mt−m[Wrec
L⊕b]|2
σ2≡|mt−m(trec
L)|2
σ2, (5)
with a mass-resolution parameter σ= 40 GeV. The b-jet
matched in this leptonic-top reconstruction is denoted
bybLin the following text.
Figure 1 illustrates the features of the reconstruc-
tion of the leptonic branch of the process. It shows the
distribution in the invariant mass m(Wrec
L) of the re-
constructed Wboson (upper panel) and that in the
invariant mass m(trec
L) of the reconstructed top quark
(lower panel). Predictions are displayed both for the
t¯tsignal (red) and the associated background (blue).
These results demonstrate that most signal events ex-
hibit an on-shell leptonically-decaying W-boson and an
on-shell associated top quark. However, the tails of the
distributions extend quite significantly away from the
peak values for the two spectra. This originates from
the inefficiencies inherent to the kinematic fit performed
in eq. (4), which could lead to zero, one, or two solu-
tions for /pz. Consequently, the reconstructed mass of
theWrec
Lboson (upper panel of Figure 1) exhibits a
plateau at values lower than the true Wmass. This
impacted our choice for the numerical value of the res-
olution parameter used in the χ2fit of eq. (5), which
then leads to a quite broad peak around the true top
mass for the distribution in the reconstructed top mass
(lower panel of Figure 1).
In the next step of our analysis, we study to which
extent a hadronically-decaying top quark can be recon-
structed from the event’s final state. We start from the
fat-jet collection and discard any fat jet Jthat lies at
angular distance ∆R(J, trec
L)≤1.5 of the reconstructed
leptonically-decaying top quark trec
L. Next, we discard
all fat jets found near the bLjet,i.e.lying within a an-
gular distance ∆R(J, bL)≤1.5. Finally, we reject events
that do not comprise at least one fat jet that includes a
(small) b-jet. This condition is implemented by requir-
ing that there is a fat jet Jsuch that a b-jet different
0 50 100 150 200
mrec
WL[GeV]0.00.10.20.30.40.5dσ
dm[pb/GeV]SMt¯t
W+b¯b+ jets
0 100 200 300 400 500
mrec
tL[GeV]0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.6dσ
dm[pb/GeV]SMt¯t
W+b¯b+ jetsFig. 1 Invariant mass spectra relevant to the reconstruction
of the leptonically decaying top quark. We display the in-
variant mass m(Wrec
L) of the reconstructed Wboson (up-
per panel), as well as that ( m(trec
L)) of the reconstructed top
quark (lower panel). Predictions are shown for both the t¯t
signal (red) and the associated background (blue).
from the bLjet lies at a distance ∆R(J, b)<1.5 from
it. We then test whether the hardest of the remaining
fat jet is top-tagged by HEPTopTagger .
We now introduce a few useful quantities in order to
assess the performance of HEPTopTagger . First, we
classify a truth-level top quark as “on-shell” when its in-
variant mass is in the range [ mt−15 GeV , mt+15 GeV],
and define the quantity Tt¯tas the number of t¯tevents
featuring two such on-shell top quarks. Next, we de-
note by CtHthe number of events for which the re-
constructed hadronic top quark lies within an angu-
lar distance ∆R < 1.2 from the corresponding truth-10
SMO13
QqO18
QqO38
QqO8
QdO8
QuO8
tqO8
tdO8
tu0.450.500.550.600.65CtH∧CtL
Tt¯tBasecuts mtruth
t¯t>1TeV mtruth
t¯t>1.5TeV
Fig. 2 Efficiency associated with the reconstruction of one leptonic and one hadronic top quark, estimated relatively to the
number of events containing two on-shell top quarks. Results are shown after the analysis baseline cuts (red), an additional
mtruth
t¯t>1 TeV cut (blue), and an extra mtruth
t¯t>1.5 TeV cut (green). We consider the case of the SM (first column), as well
as when eight different SMEFT operators are turned on (next columns).
level object when the latter is on-shell.5Similarly, Ctrec
L
stands for the number of events for which the recon-
structed leptonically-decaying top quark lies at a dis-
tance ∆R < 1.2 of its truth-level counterpart when it
is on-shell. The quantities CtHandCtrec
Lhence refer to
the number of events for which the reconstructed top
quarks are matched with the corresponding truth-level
objects so that reconstruction is deemed correct.
With the first set of three coloured columns dis-
played on the left of Figure 2, we show the resulting
reconstruction efficiency defined as the ratio of the num-
ber of events featuring correctly reconstructed hadronic
and leptonic top quarks to the number of events includ-
ing two truth-level on-shell top quarks, i.e.the self-
explanatory quantity
ε=CtH∧Ctrec
L
Tt¯t≡ 
CtHandCtrec
L
Tt¯t. (6)
This efficiency is given when the baseline cuts de-
scribed above are imposed (red), when an additional
selection of mtruth
t¯t>1 TeV is enforced (blue), and
finally, when we require mtruth
t¯t>1.5 TeV (green).
The error bars represent the related Monte Carlo
statistical uncertainty. We observe that about 50% of
the SM events with on-shell t¯tproduction are correctly
reconstructed, this number slightly increasing when we
focus more deeply on the boosted regime ( i.e.with a
larger mtruth
t¯tcut).
The efficiency, however, increases once one of
the SMEFT operators of eq. (3) is turned on, as
shown in the rest of Figure 2 (the dashed lines being
5In our notation, Tis related to ‘true’ and Cto ‘correspond-
ing’.guidelines for the comparison with the case of the
SM). Here, the signal is simulated by implementing
the Lagrangian and operators of eqs. (2) and (3) in
FeynRules as specified in Refs. [69, 70]. This is then
used to generate a UFO [71] model to be used within
MadGraph5 aMC@NLO so that events could be
generated through the same toolchain as that described
at the beginning of this section. However, whereas we
include the interference of dimension-six contributions
with SM diagrams, squared SMEFT contributions
(thus formally of dimension-eight) are truncated away.
The increase in efficiency observed in Figure 2 can
be traced back not only to a slight increase in the
signal cross section, but also to a change in the event
topology enhancing HEPTopTagger ’s ability to
correctly tag the boosted, hadronically-decaying top
quark. To prove this statement, we display in Figure 3
the efficiency ε′of correctly tagging the leptonic top
trec
Lregardless of the hadronic branch of the events,
ε′=Ctrec
L
Tt¯t. (7)
As can be seen in this figure, the efficiency ε′is al-
most 100% for all considered scenarios (both in terms
of new-physics setup and the parton-level mtruth
t¯tcut).
This confirms that the global suppression of the effi-
ciency εshown in Figure 2 (relative to ε′) originates
solely from the tagging of the hadronic top quark, and is
therefore related to the performance of HEPTopTag-
ger. The latter can thus directly be assessed from the
quantity ε, and it is different between SM t¯tevents and
those including the interference of top-related SMEFT
operators with the SM.11
SMO13
QqO18
QqO38
QqO8
QdO8
QuO8
tqO8
tdO8
tu0.800.850.900.951.001.05CtL
Tt¯tBasecuts mtruth
t¯t>1TeV mtruth
t¯t>1.5TeV
Fig. 3 Same as in Figure 2 but for the efficiency associated with the reconstruction of one leptonic top quark, estimated
relatively to the number of events containing two on-shell top quarks.
Our results demonstrate that the performance of
HEPTopTagger could be strongly impacted by the
physics model that is used as a reference during its
tuning. Including effective operators such as those in
eq. (3) favours the production of a boosted top-antitop
pair more than in the SM, as expected from operators
sensitive to the event’s energy scale. While in this case
the presence of operators not included in the HEPTop-
Tagger tuning enhances the reconstruction efficiency,
this is not generally true, and a tuning based on po-
tential EFT contributions could find different optimal
tagging parameters.
Importantly, analyses assuming SM-like HEPTop-
Tagger reconstruction efficiencies would underesti-
mate the reconstruction and tagging efficiency for any
data t¯tevents involving these operators, and would
hence systematically overestimate the magnitude of
the corresponding Wilson coefficient. This observation
reinforces the importance of using operator-dependent
reconstruction efficiencies in SMEFT fits to boosted
top-quark data.
The presented efficiencies are, however, normalised
to the number of events featuring an on-shell t¯tpair.
The obtained increase in the tagging efficiency εin
the presence of SMEFT operators may, therefore, also
be related to a different probability of getting at least
one off-shell top quark in the events. This problem
is addressed by the Dalitz-plot heat-maps shown in
Figure 4, which depict the on-shellness of the produced
hadronic top quark. In these figures, we display the
correlations between two ratios of invariant masses,
m13/m123andm23/m123. The three integers 1, 2 and
3 denote the three ( pT-ordered) subjets comprised in
the hadronically-decaying boosted top quark, so that
m123stands for the invariant mass of the three-subjetsystem, m13for the invariant mass the system made
of the leading and third subjets, and m23for that of
the system made of the second and third subjets. We
present results by restricting the events to those events
featuring on-shell top quarks (left column) and for the
entire generated samples (right column). Moreover, we
explore the difference between the SM (top row), a
scenario in which the O3,1
Qqoperator of eq. (3) is turned
on (middle row), and a scenario in which the O3,8
Qq
operator of eq. (3) is turned on (bottom row).
As can be seen, the jet combinatorics are correctly
resolved in most events in the case of the SM. The lead-
ing jet is most often that originating from the two-body
t→Wbdecay (with the b-tagging information being ig-
nored), and the next two jets are those stemming from
the hadronic W-boson decay. The distribution of the
m23/m123ratio is indeed concentrated around mW/mt
for the two subfigures of the upper row of Figure 4. The
spread around this value is more pronounced when no
restriction is enforced on the invariant mass of the top
quarks at parton level, as observed from a comparison
of the predictions shown in the top-left and top-right
figures. This can be easily explained by the inefficiency
ofHEPTopTagger to correctly tag off-shell top jets,
as, by default, the algorithm has been tuned on events
featuring on-shell top quarks.
This situation changes slightly when EFT opera-
tors are enabled (middle and lower rows of Figure 4).
First, although the associated amplitude does not fea-
ture any intermediate Wboson (as the decay of the
top quark proceeds via a single four-fermion opera-
tor), the interference with the SM diagrams (our pre-
dictions being truncated at dimension-six) is sufficient
to keep the properties that the leading jet is the b-
jet, and that the next two jets can be paired to recon-12
Fig. 4 Dalitz plots depicting the invariant mass ratios m13/m123andm23/m123where the indices refer to a specific jet among
those comprising the reconstructed hadronically-decaying top quark. We show predictions when the on-shellness of the top
quark is enforced (left column) and when there is no restriction on the invariant mass of the top quarks at parton level (right
column). We consider the case of the SM (top row) and that of scenarios with one SMEFT operator turned on, namely O3,1
Qq
(middle row) and O3,8
Qq(bottom row).13
struct a hadronically-decaying Wboson. It is addition-
ally noticeable that the effective operators considered
affect the reconstructed top quark so that the latter is
naturally more often on-shell (and more boosted due
to the energy growth inherent to the effective-theory
paradigm). Consequently, we can expect better perfor-
mance of HEPTopTagger , which confirms what was
already found in Figure 2.
3.3 Boosted tops as a probe to new physics in the
SMEFT
In this section, we explore how the findings of Sec-
tion 3.2 affect the sensitivity of the LHC to SMEFT
effects originating from the operators of eq. (3). We
begin by providing, in Table 3, the numbers of events
surviving each of the selection cuts introduced in the
previous section, both for the t¯tsignal and the Wb¯b
+ jets background. Our results are normalised to an
integrated luminosity of 300 fb−1, and we additionally
estimate the efficiencies associated with each cut, which
we define as the ratio of the number of events surviving
a given cut to the number of events surviving the pre-
vious cut. Whereas the last cut on the invariant mass
of the reconstructed t¯tsystem ( i.e.the ninth one in the
table, mrec
t¯t>950 GeV) is not necessary for physics-
analysis purposes, it is required to match the Monte
Carlo signal-generation cut implemented in Section 3.2
(to enable a more efficient event-generation process in
the boosted regime).
As already noticeable from the results introduced
earlier in this manuscript, for instance from the
invariant-mass spectra displayed in Figure 1, the
events surviving the entire selection are primarily
dominated by signal events, which hence have large
expected event-counts. This is further reflected in
theS/B andS/√
Bratios provided as significance
estimators in the lower rows of Table 3, these two
metrics being evaluated in terms of the number of
signal events Sand background events Bpassing
all the analysis cuts. The background is thus fully
under control in our study, so a shape analysis can
be implemented to study how kinematic distributions
can be best used to constrain the SMEFT-operators’
Wilson coefficients.
To do this, we first increase the final selection cut
to maximise sensitivity by probing more deeply boosted
top-antitop production. In the following, we hence con-
sider either mrec
t¯t>1 TeV or mrec
t¯t>1.5 TeV. The sen-
sitivity of the LHC to a given SMEFT operator is de-
rived through the evaluation of a χ2test-statistic in an
asymptotic scheme that involves deviations of SMEFTpredictions relative to the associated SM predictions for
a given set of observables. Our analysis explores simul-
taneously the distributions of the following observables:
–the invariant mass mrec
t¯tof the di-top system;
–the transverse momentum pT(jR=1.5) of the leading
fat-jet;
–the transverse momenta pT(jR=0.4
1 ),pT(jR=0.4
2 ) and
pT(jR=0.4
3 ) of the three leading small- Rjets;
–the transverse-momentum spectrum pT(tH) of the
reconstructed hadronic top quark;
–the transverse-momentum spectrum pT(trec
L) of the
reconstructed leptonic top quark;
–the rapidity difference ∆y(trec
L, tH) between the two
reconstructed top quarks;
–and the azimuthal-angle difference ∆φ(trec
L, tH) be-
tween the two reconstructed top quarks.
In order to estimate the χ2value associated with a
specific SMEFT scenario, each of the nine histograms
considered was divided into 25 bins (20 and 16 for
the∆y(trec
L, tH) and ∆φ(trec
L, tH) distributions respec-
tively), and we calculated the quantity
χ2=X
i 
Nexp
i−Nobs
i2
q
Nobs
i+ 
∆sysNobs
i2, (8)
in which we sum over all bins and all histograms. The
SM predictions are taken as the null hypothesis, Nexp
i
denoting hence the expected number of events in the
SM for a given observable and bin i,Nobs
istanding for
the corresponding SMEFT predictions, and ∆sysNobs
i
referring to the error on the SMEFT predictions. In
other words, we enforce that the pseudo-data corre-
sponding to the SM scenario ( i.e.the origin of the
Wilson coefficient parameter space) corresponds to the
background expectation with suppressed statistical and
systematical fluctuations, which consists, therefore, of
an Asimov dataset. The above χ2test is thus asymp-
totically equivalent to a profile likelihood ratio ∆χ2=
χ2
SMEFT −χ2
bestfor a given SMEFT scenario with an
implicit best-fit reference model evaluated in the case
of the SM (therefore with χ2
best= 0). Without explicitly
performing any profiling, we thus estimate the sensitiv-
ity of a profile-likelihood fit by comparing the obtained
χ2values with that expected from a χ2distribution
with one degree of freedom. In practice, however, pro-
filed constraints could be slightly weaker due to a less
perfect fit of observed data to the background model.
In Table 4, we provide information on the observ-
able found to provide the strongest sensitivity to each
SMEFT operator. The results are shown for the two
cuts on the invariant mass considered, mrec
t¯t>1 TeV
(upper panel of Table 4) and mrec
t¯t>1.5 TeV (lower14
Background SM signal
Selections Events ε Events ε
1. Initial 124 000 – 346 000 –
2. Nℓ= 1 85 500 0.69 227 000 0.66
3. pT(ℓ1)>30 GeV 46 700 0.55 134 000 0.59
4. Nb≥2 23 500 0.50 85 300 0.64
5. Nlight jets >2 21 100 0.90 75 800 0.89
6. /ET>30 GeV 18 000 0.85 66 800 0.88
7. Nfat-jet >0 5230 0.29 53 400 0.80
8. Ntrec
H>0 275 0.05 24 500 0.46
9. mrec
t¯t>950 GeV 164 0.60 23 300 0.95
S/B 142
S/√
B 1810
Table 3 Number of t¯tandWb¯b+jets SM events surviving each step of our analysis, presented together with their respective
selection efficiency ε. The results are normalised to an integrated luminosity of 300 fb−1. In the last row of the table, we
provide two alternative means to assess the analysis significance, namely the S/B andS/√
Bratios where SandBare the
number of t¯tand background events passing all cuts.
Mass req. mrec
t¯t>1 TeV
Lumi. [ab−1] 0 .3 3
∆sys[%] 0 10 0 10
O1,8
QqpT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L)
O3,8
QqpT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L)
O3,1
QqpT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L)
O8
tu pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1)
O8
tdpT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1)
O8
QupT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L)
O8
QdpT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L)
O8
tq pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1)
Mass req. mrec
t¯t>1.5 TeV
Lumi. [ab−1] 0 .3 3
∆sys[%] 0 10 0 10
O1,8
QqpT(tH) pT(trec
L) pT(tH) ∆yt¯t
O3,8
QqpT(tH) pT(jR=1.5
1 ) pT(tH) pT(trec
L)
O3,1
QqpT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) ∆yt¯t
O8
tu pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1)
O8
tdpT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1)
O8
QupT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L) pT(trec
L)
O8
QdpT(tH) pT(trec
L) pT(tH) ∆yt¯t
O8
tq pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1) pT(ℓ1)
Table 4 Observable driving the sensitivity of the LHC (at 68% confidence level) to a given SMEFT operator from eq. (3)
(first column). We consider both a perfect situation without systematics ( ∆sys= 0, second and fourth columns), and one with
10% of systematics ( ∆sys= 10%, third and fifth columns). Moreover, we present results for 300 fb−1and 3 ab−1, and for an
invariant mass cut of mrec
t¯t>1 TeV (upper panel) and mrec
t¯t>1.5 TeV (lower panel).15
panel of Table 4). Moreover, we consider LHC lumi-
nosities of 300 fb−1and 3000 fb−1, and two different
options for the amount of systematics ∆sysused in
eq. (8). We take as a reference the ideal situation in
which there are no systematic uncertainties ( ∆sys=
0), as well as a more realistic situation in which we
set∆sys= 10%. In our procedure to extract this in-
formation, we define the sensitivity on the basis of a
68% confidence level. When we consider a moderate
definition of the boosted regime with mrec
t¯t>1 TeV,
the sensitivity is always driven by the distribution in
the transverse momentum of either the leptonically-
decaying top quark ( pT(trec
L)) or of the lepton originat-
ing from the decay of this top quark ( pT(ℓ1)). The in-
formation brought by the hadronic branch of the event
is found to be sub-leading for all SMEFT operators and
systematic-uncertainty assumptions. However, the situ-
ation changes when the boosted regime is probed more
deeply through the tighter cut mrec
t¯t>1.5 TeV. Here,
both top quarks are reconstructed and tagged more ac-
curately (in particular through the better performance
ofHEPTopTagger in a SMEFT scenario, see Sec-
tion 3.2). This leads to an increased discovery potential
through use of a larger set of contributing observables.
This statement is illustrated in the lower panel of the
table, which displays a greater variability in the leading
observable driving the sensitivity of the LHC to a given
SMEFT operator, with the O1,8
Qq,O3,8
Qq,O3,1
Qq, andO8
Qd
operators now most sensitive to either hadronic-top or
t¯t-system observables.
Our final projections of SMEFT Wilson-coefficient
expected limits, assuming the SM, are shown in Fig-
ure 5. We derive the sensitivity of the LHC to each of
the operators considered, making use of the procedure
described above. We present bounds on the associated
Wilson coefficients, both for an integrated luminosity
of 300 fb−1(blue) and 3000 fb−1(red), and for the two
options explored for the level of systematics, namely
∆sys= 0 (shaded bars) and 10% (solid bars). In ad-
dition, we distinguish the case in which we pre-select
at parton-level on-shell t¯tevents (left subfigures) and
that in which we analyse the full event sample gener-
ated (right subfigures). As for the previous discussion,
we first implement a relatively inclusive requirement
of 1 TeV on the invariant mass of the reconstructed t¯t
system (upper row) and as well as a more stringent
mrec
t¯t>1.5 TeV cut (bottom row).
We find limits on |C/Λ|that lie in the 0.1–1 TeV−1
range. This means that for Wilson coefficients satisfy-
ingC∼1, effective scales in the 1–5 TeV range can
be probed. Conversely, for TeV-scale new physics, cou-
plings of O(0.1) can be reached. The bounds are found
to be mildly more constraining with the increase inluminosity as well as with a harder cut on mrec
t¯t, as
expected, and the impact of off-shell top-antitop pro-
duction is additionally found to be sub-leading. Such a
sensitivity is of comparable size with that estimated
on the basis of global fits (see e.g.predictions from
Ref. [42]), which demonstrates the potential of includ-
ing dedicated analyses of boosted top-quark pair pro-
duction and decay in SMEFT global fits. Global fits
of LHC Run 2 data indeed indicate that |C/Λ|has
to be smaller than about 0 .1–1 TeV−1too. Our results
should however additionally be compared with individ-
ual limits extracted from fits of a large set of observ-
ables when one SMEFT operator is considered at a time
(for a fairer comparison). Such fits lead to bounds on
|C/Λ|ofO(0.1)TeV−1[44], which are thus compara-
ble with the findings of Figure 5. Whereas exploiting
boosted top quark production is already known to have
a strong constraining power on individual operators (for
instance in the context of top dipole moments, where it
has been shown to significantly improve the bounds by
a factor of a few [72]), a detailed quantitative analysis
of its impact lies beyond the scope of this paper. Here,
we have only investigated how using a specific boosted-
top quark channel could lead to a better assessment of
the sensitivity of the LHC to top-quark-related SMEFT
operators, thanks to a joint usage of a variety of po-
tentially relevant observables and improved top-tagging
capabilities in the SMEFT.
4 Conclusion and outlook
Jet substructure methods are known to be among the
key players in the search for new phenomena beyond
the Standard Model of particle physics. Among these,
a set of dedicated techniques are related to the identi-
fication of jets originating from the hadronic decay of
a boosted top quark. In this paper, we have reported
the development of an interface between the HEPTop-
Tagger package and two software tools widely used in
the high-energy physics community, namely the Mad-
Analysis 5 andRivet frameworks. Thanks to this de-
velopment, the many users of these platforms now have
the possibility to exploit boosted hadronically-decaying
top quarks and their properties in analyses of high-
energy physics events for the Large Hadron Collider
and beyond.
We have briefly described these two imple-
mentations and how to use them. Our devel-
opments equip the Rivet toolkit from ver-
sion 3.1.7, which is available from HepForge
(see https://rivet.hepforge.org/ ), as well as
theMadAnalysis 5 framework from version 2.0.4,16
Fig. 5 Sensitivity of the LHC to the various SMEFT operators of eq. (3). We present predictions for 300 fb−1(blue) and
3000 fb−1(red), ∆sys= 0 (shaded bars) and 10% (solid bars), and we distinguish an analysis of the full t¯tevent sample
generated (right column) and after enforcing on-shell top-antitop production (left column). Two analysis cuts on the invariant
mass of the reconstructed top pair are imposed, mrec
t¯t>1 TeV (upper panel) and mrec
t¯t>1.5 TeV (lower panel).
available from GitHub (see https://github.com/
MadAnalysis/madanalysis5/releases ). Moreover,
detailed tutorials exploiting all the possibilities
can be found in the "analyses/examples/EXAMPLE_HTT.
cc"analysis file shipped with Rivet , as well as
in the MadAnalysis 5 tutorial available from
https://github.com/MadAnalysis/tutorial_osu .To illustrate the power of these developments,
we have considered the SMEFT framework in which
new physics manifests through non-renormalisable
operators in the Standard Model fields. We have
focused on eight dimension-six, four-fermion operators
relevant to the top-quark sector, chosen as they are
not stringently constrained by current SMEFT global
fits. The analysis of the production of pairs of boosted17
top quarks could therefore provide new handles on
associated heavy BSM physics. We have explored
this option by first investigating the performance
of the HEPTopTagger algorithm in the presence
of non-vanishing SMEFT operators. Whereas the
algorithm is tuned on SM top-pair production and
decay, we have observed that its performance improves
further in the presence of the considered additional
SMEFT operators in the model’s Lagrangian. The
energy dependence of the SMEFT operators considered
indeed favours the production of very energetic boosted
top quarks, with properties enhancing their tagging
possibility by the HEPTopTagger method. This
observation highlights the importance of considering
new-physics effects upon reconstruction performance
when attempting SMEFT parameter fits.
Secondly, we have investigated differential observ-
ables in boosted top-antitop production following
HEPTopTagger tagging, to study how deviations
from the Standard Model can best be used to isolate
SMEFT effects emerging from the new operators.
We have shown that a simple analysis based on
HEPTopTagger could lead to bounds comparable
with those stemming from other means to constrain
SMEFT operators. We hope that this demonstrates
the potential of the developments presented in this
work and that they will serve the community well in
the future.
Acknowledgements
This work has been partly supported by the French
ANR (grant ANR-21-CE31-0013, ‘DMwithLL-
PatLHC’), by the UK Royal Society (grant UF160548)
and STFC (grant ST/S000887/1), and by a short-term
studentship funded by the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme as part of the
Marie Sklodowska-Curie Innovative Training Network
MCnetITN3 (grant agreement no. 722104).
References
1. M. H. Seymour, Searches for new particles using cone and
cluster jet algorithms: A Comparative study ,Z. Phys. C
62(1994) 127–138.
2. J. M. Butterworth, A. R. Davison, M. Rubin and G. P.
Salam, Jet substructure as a new Higgs search channel at
the LHC ,Phys. Rev. Lett. 100(2008) 242001, [ 0802.2470 ].
3. D. E. Kaplan, K. Rehermann, M. D. Schwartz and
B. Tweedie, Top Tagging: A Method for Identifying
Boosted Hadronically Decaying Top Quarks ,Phys. Rev.
Lett.101(2008) 142001, [ 0806.0848 ].4. S. D. Ellis, C. K. Vermilion and J. R. Walsh, Techniques
for improved heavy particle searches with jet substructure ,
Phys. Rev. D 80(2009) 051501, [ 0903.5081 ].
5. A. Abdesselam et al., Boosted Objects: A Probe of Beyond
the Standard Model Physics ,Eur. Phys. J. C 71(2011)
1661, [ 1012.5412 ].
6. A. J. Larkoski, I. Moult and B. Nachman, Jet
Substructure at the Large Hadron Collider: A Review of
Recent Advances in Theory and Machine Learning ,Phys.
Rept. 841(2020) 1–63, [ 1709.04464 ].
7. R. Kogler et al., Jet Substructure at the Large Hadron
Collider: Experimental Review ,Rev. Mod. Phys. 91(2019)
045003, [ 1803.06991 ].
8. S. Marzani, G. Soyez and M. Spannowsky, Looking
inside jets: an introduction to jet substructure and
boosted-object phenomenology , vol. 958. Springer, 2019,
10.1007/978-3-030-15709-8.
9. T. Plehn, M. Spannowsky, M. Takeuchi and D. Zerwas,
Stop Reconstruction with Tagged Tops ,JHEP 10(2010)
078, [ 1006.2833 ].
10. G. Kasieczka, T. Plehn, T. Schell, T. Strebler and G. P.
Salam, Resonance Searches with an Updated Top Tagger ,
JHEP 06(2015) 203, [ 1503.05921 ].
11. D. E. Soper and M. Spannowsky, Finding top quarks with
shower deconstruction ,Phys. Rev. D 87(2013) 054012,
[1211.3140 ].
12. A. Butter et al., The Machine Learning landscape of top
taggers ,SciPost Phys. 7(2019) 014, [ 1902.09914 ].
13. J. Thaler and K. Van Tilburg, Identifying Boosted Objects
with N-subjettiness ,JHEP 03(2011) 015, [ 1011.2268 ].
14. J. Thaler and K. Van Tilburg, Maximizing Boosted Top
Identification by Minimizing N-subjettiness ,JHEP 02
(2012) 093, [ 1108.2701 ].
15. J. Thaler and L.-T. Wang, Strategies to Identify Boosted
Tops,JHEP 07(2008) 092, [ 0806.0023 ].
16. A. J. Larkoski, G. P. Salam and J. Thaler, Energy
Correlation Functions for Jet Substructure ,JHEP 06
(2013) 108, [ 1305.0007 ].
17. A. J. Larkoski, I. Moult and D. Neill, Power Counting to
Better Jet Observables ,JHEP 12(2014) 009, [ 1409.6298 ].
18. J. Cogan, M. Kagan, E. Strauss and A. Schwarztman,
Jet-Images: Computer Vision Inspired Techniques for Jet
Tagging ,JHEP 02(2015) 118, [ 1407.5675 ].
19. L. de Oliveira, M. Kagan, L. Mackey, B. Nachman and
A. Schwartzman, Jet-images — deep learning edition ,
JHEP 07(2016) 069, [ 1511.05190 ].
20. P. Baldi, K. Bauer, C. Eng, P. Sadowski and
D. Whiteson, Jet Substructure Classification in
High-Energy Physics with Deep Neural Networks ,Phys.
Rev. D 93(2016) 094034, [ 1603.09349 ].
21. L. G. Almeida, M. Backovi´ c, M. Cliche, S. J. Lee and
M. Perelstein, Playing Tag with ANN: Boosted Top
Identification with Pattern Recognition ,JHEP 07(2015)
086, [ 1501.05968 ].
22. G. Kasieczka, T. Plehn, M. Russell and T. Schell,
Deep-learning Top Taggers or The End of QCD? ,JHEP
05(2017) 006, [ 1701.08784 ].
23. S. Macaluso and D. Shih, Pulling Out All the Tops with
Computer Vision and Deep Learning ,JHEP 10(2018)
121, [ 1803.00107 ].
24. J. Y. Araz and M. Spannowsky, Combine and Conquer:
Event Reconstruction with Bayesian Ensemble Neural
Networks ,JHEP 04(2021) 296, [ 2102.01078 ].
25. S. Gong, Q. Meng, J. Zhang, H. Qu, C. Li, S. Qian
et al., An efficient Lorentz equivariant graph neural
network for jet tagging ,JHEP 07(2022) 030,
[2201.08187 ].18
26. A. Bogatskiy, T. Hoffman, D. W. Miller and J. T.
Offermann, PELICAN: Permutation Equivariant and
Lorentz Invariant or Covariant Aggregator Network for
Particle Physics ,2211.00454 .
27.ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., Performance of
top-quark and W-boson tagging with ATLAS in Run 2 of
the LHC ,Eur. Phys. J. C 79(2019) 375, [ 1808.07858 ].
28.CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Identification
of heavy, energetic, hadronically decaying particles using
machine-learning techniques ,JINST 15(2020) P06005,
[2004.08262 ].
29. E. Conte, B. Fuks and G. Serret, MadAnalysis 5, A
User-Friendly Framework for Collider Phenomenology ,
Comput. Phys. Commun. 184(2013) 222–256,
[1206.1599 ].
30. E. Conte, B. Dumont, B. Fuks and C. Wymant,
Designing and recasting LHC analyses with MadAnalysis 5 ,
Eur. Phys. J. C 74(2014) 3103, [ 1405.3982 ].
31. E. Conte and B. Fuks, Confronting new physics theories
to LHC data with MADANALYSIS 5 ,Int. J. Mod. Phys.
A33(2018) 1830027, [ 1808.00480 ].
32. A. Buckley, J. Butterworth, D. Grellscheid, H. Hoeth,
L. Lonnblad, J. Monk et al., Rivet user manual ,Comput.
Phys. Commun. 184(2013) 2803–2819, [ 1003.0694 ].
33. C. Bierlich et al., Robust Independent Validation of
Experiment and Theory: Rivet version 3 ,SciPost Phys. 8
(2020) 026, [ 1912.05451 ].
34. S. Weinberg, Phenomenological Lagrangians ,Physica A
96(1979) 327–340.
35. C. N. Leung, S. T. Love and S. Rao, Low-Energy
Manifestations of a New Interaction Scale: Operator
Analysis ,Z. Phys. C 31(1986) 433.
36. W. Buchmuller and D. Wyler, Effective Lagrangian
Analysis of New Interactions and Flavor Conservation ,
Nucl. Phys. B 268(1986) 621–653.
37. B. Grzadkowski, M. Iskrzynski, M. Misiak and
J. Rosiek, Dimension-Six Terms in the Standard Model
Lagrangian ,JHEP 10(2010) 085, [ 1008.4884 ].
38. B. Henning, X. Lu, T. Melia and H. Murayama, 2, 84,
30, 993, 560, 15456, 11962, 261485, ...: Higher dimension
operators in the SM EFT ,JHEP 08(2017) 016,
[1512.03433 ].
39. D. Barducci et al., Interpreting top-quark LHC
measurements in the standard-model effective field theory ,
1802.07237 .
40. A. Buckley, C. Englert, J. Ferrando, D. J. Miller,
L. Moore, M. Russell et al., Constraining top quark
effective theory in the LHC Run II era ,JHEP 04(2016)
015, [ 1512.03360 ].
41. N. P. Hartland, F. Maltoni, E. R. Nocera, J. Rojo,
E. Slade, E. Vryonidou et al., A Monte Carlo global
analysis of the Standard Model Effective Field Theory: the
top quark sector ,JHEP 04(2019) 100, [ 1901.05965 ].
42. I. Brivio, S. Bruggisser, F. Maltoni, R. Moutafis,
T. Plehn, E. Vryonidou et al., O new physics, where art
thou? A global search in the top sector ,JHEP 02(2020)
131, [ 1910.03606 ].
43. J. Ellis, M. Madigan, K. Mimasu, V. Sanz and T. You,
Top, Higgs, Diboson and Electroweak Fit to the Standard
Model Effective Field Theory ,JHEP 04(2021) 279,
[2012.02779 ].
44.SMEFiT collaboration, J. J. Ethier, G. Magni,
F. Maltoni, L. Mantani, E. R. Nocera, J. Rojo et al.,
Combined SMEFT interpretation of Higgs, diboson, and
top quark data from the LHC ,JHEP 11(2021) 089,
[2105.00006 ].45. T. Giani, G. Magni and J. Rojo, SMEFiT: a flexible
toolbox for global interpretations of particle physics data
with effective field theories ,2302.06660 .
46. C. Englert, L. Moore, K. Nordstr¨ om and M. Russell,
Giving top quark effective operators a boost ,Phys. Lett. B
763(2016) 9–15, [ 1607.04304 ].
47. Y. L. Dokshitzer, G. D. Leder, S. Moretti and B. R.
Webber, Better jet clustering algorithms ,JHEP 08(1997)
001, [ hep-ph/9707323 ].
48. S. Bentvelsen and I. Meyer, The Cambridge jet algorithm:
Features and applications ,Eur. Phys. J. C 4(1998)
623–629, [ hep-ph/9803322 ].
49. M. Wobisch and T. Wengler, Hadronization corrections to
jet cross-sections in deep inelastic scattering , inWorkshop
on Monte Carlo Generators for HERA Physics (Plenary
Starting Meeting) , pp. 270–279, 4, 1998. hep-ph/9907280 .
50. M. Dasgupta, A. Fregoso, S. Marzani and G. P. Salam,
Towards an understanding of jet substructure ,JHEP 09
(2013) 029, [ 1307.0007 ].
51. D. Krohn, J. Thaler and L.-T. Wang, Jet Trimming ,
JHEP 02(2010) 084, [ 0912.1342 ].
52. S. D. Ellis, C. K. Vermilion and J. R. Walsh,
Recombination Algorithms and Jet Substructure: Pruning
as a Tool for Heavy Particle Searches ,Phys. Rev. D 81
(2010) 094023, [ 0912.0033 ].
53. Y.-T. Chien, Telescoping jets: Probing hadronic event
structure with multiple R ’s ,Phys. Rev. D 90(2014)
054008, [ 1304.5240 ].
54. S. D. Ellis, A. Hornig, D. Krohn and T. S. Roy, On
Statistical Aspects of Qjets ,JHEP 01(2015) 022,
[1409.6785 ].
55. A. Buckley, D. Kar and K. Nordstr¨ om, Fast simulation
of detector effects in Rivet ,SciPost Phys. 8(2020) 025,
[1910.01637 ].
56. J. Y. Araz, B. Fuks and G. Polykratis, Simplified fast
detector simulation in MADANALYSIS 5 ,Eur. Phys. J. C
81(2021) 329, [ 2006.09387 ].
57. M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam and G. Soyez, FastJet User
Manual ,Eur. Phys. J. C 72(2012) 1896, [ 1111.6097 ].
58. M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam and G. Soyez, The anti- ktjet
clustering algorithm ,JHEP 04(2008) 063, [ 0802.1189 ].
59. D. Krohn, J. Thaler and L.-T. Wang, Jets with Variable
R,JHEP 06(2009) 059, [ 0903.0392 ].
60. R. S. Chivukula and H. Georgi, Composite Technicolor
Standard Model ,Phys. Lett. B 188(1987) 99–104.
61. L. J. Hall and L. Randall, Weak scale effective
supersymmetry ,Phys. Rev. Lett. 65(1990) 2939–2942.
62. G. D’Ambrosio, G. F. Giudice, G. Isidori and
A. Strumia, Minimal flavor violation: An Effective field
theory approach ,Nucl. Phys. B 645(2002) 155–187,
[hep-ph/0207036 ].
63. J. Alwall, R. Frederix, S. Frixione, V. Hirschi,
F. Maltoni, O. Mattelaer et al., The automated
computation of tree-level and next-to-leading order
differential cross sections, and their matching to parton
shower simulations ,JHEP 07(2014) 079, [ 1405.0301 ].
64.NNPDF collaboration, R. D. Ball et al., Parton
distributions for the LHC Run II ,JHEP 04(2015) 040,
[1410.8849 ].
65. A. Buckley, J. Ferrando, S. Lloyd, K. Nordstr¨ om,
B. Page, M. R¨ ufenacht et al., LHAPDF6: parton density
access in the LHC precision era ,Eur. Phys. J. C 75
(2015) 132, [ 1412.7420 ].
66. T. Sj¨ ostrand, S. Ask, J. R. Christiansen, R. Corke,
N. Desai, P. Ilten et al., An introduction to PYTHIA 8.2 ,
Comput. Phys. Commun. 191(2015) 159–177,
[1410.3012 ].19
67. M. Cacciari and G. P. Salam, Pileup subtraction using jet
areas ,Phys. Lett. B 659(2008) 119–126, [ 0707.1378 ].
68. M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam and G. Soyez, The Catchment
Area of Jets ,JHEP 04(2008) 005, [ 0802.1188 ].
69. N. D. Christensen, P. de Aquino, C. Degrande, C. Duhr,
B. Fuks, M. Herquet et al., A Comprehensive approach to
new physics simulations ,Eur. Phys. J. C 71(2011) 1541,
[0906.2474 ].
70. A. Alloul, N. D. Christensen, C. Degrande, C. Duhr and
B. Fuks, FeynRules 2.0 - A complete toolbox for tree-level
phenomenology ,Comput. Phys. Commun. 185(2014)
2250–2300, [ 1310.1921 ].
71. C. Degrande, C. Duhr, B. Fuks, D. Grellscheid,
O. Mattelaer and T. Reiter, UFO - The Universal
FeynRules Output ,Comput. Phys. Commun. 183(2012)
1201–1214, [ 1108.2040 ].
72. J. A. Aguilar-Saavedra, B. Fuks and M. L. Mangano,
Pinning down top dipole moments with ultra-boosted tops ,
Phys. Rev. D 91(2015) 094021, [ 1412.6654 ].