Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game
Vocabulary
Nicolas Grelier
Focus Entertainment, France
nicolas.grelier@focusent.com
Stéphane Kaufmann
Focus Entertainment, France
stephane.kaufmann@focusent.com
Abstract
As a novel and fast-changing ﬁeld, the video game industry does not have a ﬁxed and well-deﬁned
vocabulary. In particular, game genres are of interest: No two experts seem to agree on what they
are and how they relate to each other. We use the user-generated tags of the video game digital
distribution service Steam to better understand how players think about games. We investigate
what they consider to be genres, what comes ﬁrst to their minds when describing a game, and
more generally what words do they use and how those words relate to each other. Our method is
data-driven as we consider for each game on Steam how many players assigned each tag to it. We
introduce a new metric, the priority of a Steam tag, that we ﬁnd interesting in itself. This allows
us to create taxonomies and meronomies of some of the Steam tags. In particular, in addition to
providing a list of game genres, we distinguish what tags are essential or not for describing games
according to players. Furthermore, we provide a small group of tags that summarise all information
contained in the Steam tags.
2012 ACM Subject Classiﬁcation Applied computing →Publishing
Keywords and phrases taxonomy, meronomy, video game genres, Steam tags, game analytics
1 Introduction
In the last two decades, game analytics has gained a lot of interest [ 28]. According to Su,
Backlund and Engström, “game analytics is the process of identifying and communicating
meaningful patterns that can be used for game decision making” [ 28]. They present a
classiﬁcationofgameanalyticsintofourgroups: gamedevelopmentanalytics, gamepublishing
analytics, game distribution channel analytics and game player analytics. In this paper, we
focus on game player analytics. Our aim is to understand the vocabulary used by players to
speak about video games. More precisely, we are interested in how players describe games:
what are the most important words, what are the most used words, and so on.
In our study, we rely exclusively on Steam tags: groups of words that players can freely
assign to games. Some examples are Strategy,Card Battler ,Agriculture ,Ninja,Diﬃcult and
Free to Play . In total, there exist 427Steam tags. For a more comprehensive explanation of
Steam tags, please refer to Subsection 1.4.
1.1 From beliefs to facts
In [6], Drachen et al.observe that game analytics “is in its infancy and the available
knowledge is heavily fragmented, not the least due to Game Analytics interdisciplinary
nature and the lack of knowledge sharing between academia and industry”. As industry
researchers, the goal of our paper is to build bridges with academia. Drachen et al.add that
“the root cause of these problems is the lack of a framework for organizing current knowledge
and prioritising interesting problems” [ 6]. They introduce the concept of stylised facts forarXiv:2303.07179v1  [cs.HC]  13 Mar 20232 Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game Vocabulary
mobile game analytics (although we believe that the concept is essential to game analytics in
general) in order to better connect industry and academia.
However, they argue that the available knowledge and data are too fragmented and
incomplete to establish stylised fact. Thus, they introduce two “proto-stylised fact concepts
which describe situations where less empirical validation is available: beliefsandhypothetical
stylised facts ” [6]. The aim is to “provide a roadmap for structuring current knowledge and
building towards a situation where stylised facts can be generated and validated”. Beliefs
are statements supported by virtually no empirical evidence, whereas hypothetical stylised
facts are supported by some empirical evidence. However, they are still not stylised facts,
since “while there maybe some available empirical evidence supporting these hypothetical
stylised facts, it is clearly not enough to rigorously, generally, support them”. Establishing
hypothetical stylised facts help in obtaining stylised fact, which is essential for the research
ﬁeld (see [6] for a detailed argumentation).
In this paper, we provide empirical evidence for several hypothetical stylised facts. Some
of which we introduce, while others were already beliefs in the industry, for instance that
genre is one of the most crucial pieces of information when describing a video game. We aim
at presenting our ﬁndings in a quantitative manner, and to provide an interpretation of the
metrics we introduce.
1.2 Taxonomies and meronomies
In Section 3, we present a data-driven taxonomy of all Steam tags. This consists in doing a
hierarchical classiﬁcation, where we divide the tags into categories and subcategories. Those
are referred to as “taxa”. Each tag is put into one of the taxa of lower rank, which are
themselves grouped into taxa of higher rank. Our taxonomy has a tree-like structure, but
others may be more network-like, with one child having several parents.
WealsoprovideinSection4twodata-drivenmeronomiesofsomeSteamtags. Ameronomy
diﬀers from a taxonomy as it deals with part-whole relationships, whereas a taxonomy is
a classiﬁcation of discrete elements. Using mathematical notation, a meronomy can be
thought of as a partially ordered set where the elements are sets and the relation considered
is inclusion (we have A≤BifAis a subset of B). Here, our aim is to better understand
how some tags relate to each other. Using a data-driven approach, we establish some relation
between tags, for instance that 2D Platformer is a subtag of Platformer , and that Sailingis
a subtag of Naval.
1.3 A focus on game genres
A part of our study concerns game genres. In particular, we are interested in ﬁnding a
complete list of game genres, and to understand how much genre matters to players. Arsenault
observes that many websites allow the user to search through video games while ﬁltering by
genre [3]. However, no two websites seem to agree on what the list of genres is. For instance,
he mentions GameSpot’s system (at the time of his writing) that does a taxonomy of the
genres: genres are subdivided into subgenres, thus creating 157categories. He gives some
examples:
Action→Shooter→First-Person→Fantasy,
Miscellaneous→Puzzle→Action,
Strategy→Real-Time→Fantasy.
Arsenault notes that “while every category is unique and independent in principle, some
of the lower-tiered descriptors appear as sub-branches of multiple genres” [ 3]. He adds thatN. Grelier, S. Kaufmann 3
“the levels or branches themselves are not named, which means there is no basis on which to
compare them”, and “comparing all 2nd-level classes would probably amount to comparing
apples to oranges to shoes to faith”. He concludes: “One thing that these diﬀerent taxonomies
highlight is the ﬂuidity and impreciseness of the concept of genre itself, and how it is used in
actually describing games”. The same issues are noted by Heintz and Law [10]:
Genres are not clearly or consistently deﬁned,
The relation between genres is unknown,
Deﬁnitions are based on completely diﬀerent aspects,
Diﬀerent sources use diﬀerent sets of genres.
Steam provides a set of tools for developers and publishers named Steamworks. They
provide a taxonomy of Steam tags [ 27]. Tags are divided into several taxa: Genres, Visual
Properties, Themes & Moods, Features, Players, Other Tags, Software, Assessments, Ratings
etc, Hardware/Input and Funding etc. The taxon Genres, which is our main focus here, is
split into three taxa: Super-Genre, Genre and Sub-Genre. This taxonomy is to be understood
with the broad deﬁnition of a taxonomy, in which a child may have several parents. For
instance, Heistis a sub-genre and also a theme. Flightis a sub-genre and also a feature.
Experimental is a super-genre and a genre. One objective of this paper is to challenge Steam’s
taxonomy and investigate whether players concur with it.
Classifying video games into genres is valuable for studying and comparing meaningful
categories. For instance, in the literature we can ﬁnd studies on what genres are the most
successful [ 8,22] (and also [ 24] although the study is about board games instead of video
games), how considering games from the same genre is important for deciding on a release
date [7,9], how genre relates to players motivations, gender and localisation [ 16,23,29,30],
or what are their usability proﬁles [ 20]. All these studies use a list of genres, but do not
discuss much (or not at all) whether it makes sense to discuss about genres, whether the list
is comprehensive, and so on.
A more industry-oriented reason for establishing a comprehensive list of game genres,
along with deﬁnitions and relationships between the genres, comes from trailer making.
Lieu, who was involved in the creation of the trailers of Half-Life: Alyx ,Among Us andThe
Long Dark among others, asserts that a trailer of a video game must ﬁrst clearly establish
its genre [ 14]. Therefore, it is crucial to have an exact understanding of what a genre is.
Moreover, Lieu details what a trailer should show according to the game genre [ 13]. Similarly,
Carless, who is the founder of GameDiscoverCo, a video game discoverability consultancy
ﬁrm, believes that game genre is “what [their] users want to see information about”. In a
database meant for people working in the video game industry, Carless “care[s] most that the
main genres are in Genreand are easy to see and sort” ([Carless, personal communication]).
1.4 The Steam tags
In this paper, we rely solely on Steam data. More precisely, we study the user-generated tags
on Steam. There exists a total of 427tags that players have assigned to the 50757games in
Steam. Those tags, consisting of groups of words or acronyms like Action RPG ,MOBAor
Open World , are freely assigned to games by players, who can also invent new ones.
There exist many papers relying on Steam data, for instance Steam players reviews [ 15,
19,21,26,33] or Steam user accounts [ 4,5,17,25]. Some of these studies use Steam tags,
but there are only used as tools for ﬁltering games, and are not the topic of study. To
the best of our knowledge, there are only three papers that truly study Steam tags per se.
First, Windleharth et al.do in [32] a conceptual analysis of Steam tags. They discuss and4 Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game Vocabulary
classify Steam tags into categories, some containing many elements like Gameplay genre, and
some containing only one elements like Relationships which contains only the tag Remake.
Windleharth et al.rely on their own expertise to determine what tags are genre tags. In
this paper, we use a data-driven approach with the same goal in mind. A second paper that
studies Steam tags is [ 12], in which Li and Zhang examine how genre tags are related to
each other. Finally, in [ 11], Li uses correlation between Steam tags related to gameplay to
obtain a list of 29“factors”. Those factors are not necessarily Steam tags but rather groups
of highly correlated Steam tags. For instance, the factor Roguecontains the Steam tags
Dungeon Crawler ,Rogue-like andRogue-lite . We compare our method to theirs in Section 2,
and argue why ours is more reliable. We also compare our results with theirs in Sections 3
and 4.
All players are free to assign to games some of the already-existing Steam tags, or even to
add new ones. For a game, Steam shows “tags that were applied to the product by the most
users”. Steam shows at most 20tags for any game, sorted by decreasing order of number of
players who assigned the tag. The exact number of players who assigned a tag is not directly
shown on Steam, but can be found in the source code of the page. To obtain the data of how
many players assigned a tag to a game, we used SteamSpy’s API. There are 13848games
with 20tags shown on Steam, and therefore 50757−13848 = 36909 games with fewer than
20tags. One can make the experience of adding a new tag to a game with fewer than 20
tags, and have the surprise of not having their newly added tag shown in Steam. The reason
for that is that Steam only shows tags that were assigned by at least 5players. Steam does
not explicitly mention this, but we could check it by going over all games. Since anyone can
add any set of nonsensical words as a tag, this is probably for the best.
It is important to note that Steam does not oﬀer a deﬁnition of the tags, one suﬃcient
reason being that tags are freely added and invented by players (as can been seen in the
inconsistent capitalisation and hyphenation of the tags). Therefore, players interpret by
themselves the meanings of the tags. For our study, this comes with pros and cons. Since
“genres are not clearly or consistently deﬁned” [ 10], we may, thanks to Steam tags, ﬁnd
consensuses about what a given genre is. We believe that there exists some common
understanding of what, say, an adventure game is. By an equivalent of the law of large
numbers, Steam tags can help decipher what the deﬁnition is. However, there are also cases
when players are clearly referring to distinct things while using the same tag, which perturbs
our analysis. One easily spotted example is the tag Football, which sometimes refers to soccer,
and sometimes to American football. An another example is the tag Fighting. For some
games, it seems that the tag is used to state the genre of the games, whereas in other games
it may be used to merely inform that there is some ﬁghting in the game. This motivates why
some tags have several parents in Steamworks’ taxonomy [27].
Several of our results rely on computing the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient between tags.
We point out another diﬃculty we face, that stems from the nature of the database. One
would expect some pairs of tags to have an extremely low correlation (around −1), for
instance: 2Dand3D,First-Person andThird Person1,Singleplayer andMultiplayer , and so
on. Indeed, a priori, a game is either in 2D or 3D, either has a ﬁrst-person or third person
viewpoint, and is either a singleplayer or a multiplayer game. To compute the correlation,
we create a matrix with one entry per game, and one column per tag. There is a value of 1if
the tag is assigned to the corresponding game, and 0otherwise. We compute a correlation
of−0.17for2Dand3D,0.04forFirst-Person andThird Person , and 0.10forSingleplayer
1We follow Steam spelling with a hyphen in First-Person but none in Third Person .N. Grelier, S. Kaufmann 5
andMultiplayer . We investigated what was the cause of these surprisingly high correlation
coeﬃcients. There are games that use 2.5D or isometric representations. Those are mixes
of 2D and 3D features. We found that generally, whenever the tag 2.5DorIsometric is
assigned to a game, the tags 2Dand3Dare also (wrongly) assigned to the game by players.
This is why the correlation is closer to 0than to−1. Concerning the viewpoint, there are
many shooter games using the third person view that change for a ﬁrst-person view when the
player is aiming. In those games, we found that both tags First-Person andThird Person
are assigned. Similarly, if a game contains a singleplayer campaign and a multiplayer mode,
then both tags Singleplayer andMultiplayer are usually assigned. In conclusion, one has to
be very careful when exploiting pairs of tags with low correlation, since one might miss a few
relevant pairs.
Steam does not provide the information of how many players assigned tags to a given
game. However, the number of players who assigned the most given tag of a game Ggives
us a lower bound on the number of players who assigned tags to G. Using this method, we
know that there are at least 15843games for which at least 100players assigned some tags.
We said that Steam shows at most 20tags for a game. This is not exactly true in the
source code. Indeed, there are a few games, 235to be exact, with 21tags. They all share a
common property: The 21st tag is VR Only , and is assigned by precisely one player. This
is probably a feature added by Steam. We make the choice of removing this tag from the
database, since it was not added by real players.
1.5 Our contributions
In Section 2 we present a new concept: the priority of a tag for a game. We show that this is
a useful notion, for we establish as a hypothetical stylised fact that tags with the highest
priority are what players think about ﬁrst when describing the game (see Section 2 for a
formal deﬁnition of priority and a formal statement of the hypothetical stylised fact). On
the other hand, tags with low priority are what players deem interesting about the game,
but which only come later to their minds. Using this concept of priority, we give empirical
evidence in Section 3 for the following hypothetical stylised fact:
IHypothetical stylised fact 1. Game genre is what players think about ﬁrst when describing
a game.
Consequently, we believe that this is also what they want to hear about ﬁrst when
discovering a new game, conﬁrming the soundness of Lieu’s practices in trailer making [14].
On a related note, using a data-driven approach we establish a list, as comprehensive as
possible, of game genres. Our aim here is to encompass all words that players may consider
as game genres. The list can be found in Appendix A.
We provide in Section 4 a meronomy of the tags (not necessarily about genre) with
broadest meanings. In particular, we ﬁnd a set of seven tags with broadest meanings, that
we name the “capital tags”. There are four properties that we want the capital tags to satisfy.
First, they should form a rather short list. As we have 7capital tags out of the 427Steam
tags, this is clearly satisﬁed. Secondly, for any game, at least one of these tags should be
assignable to the game. Thirdly, those tags should not be redundant. Finally, any other tag
should be a more reﬁned version of some of the capital tags. We show in Section 4 that the
capital tags satisfy this three last properties. This implies that the capital tags summarise
all information contained in Steam tags.
We provide a second meronomy in Section 4, that aims at reducing the number of Steam
tags without loosing information, by merging synonymous tags together. We propose a6 Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game Vocabulary
tag number of players priority
Adventure 1000 1
Puzzle 750 0.75
2D 500 0.5
Atmospheric 100 0.1
3D 0 0
Table 1A ﬁctional example of tags assigned to a game with their priorities
method for doing so as well as ﬁnding a representing tag for each group of merged tags.
2 The priority of Steam tags
In [12], Li and Zhang deﬁnes a graph that aims to accurately represent the Steam tags. There
is one vertex per tag, and two tags are connected by an edge if they are both assigned to a
same game. The edges are weighted according to how many games have both tags assigned
to them. The authors discard some edges by using the “Narrow by tag” feature in Steam.
We ﬁnd the authors’ results diﬃcult to interpret due to their chosen methodology. First, it
is not clear what the Steam “Narrow by tag” feature does. Additionally, the authors connect
two tags TandT/primewith an edge even if for the game Gto which they are both assigned, the
tagTis the most assigned tag to GandT/primeis the least assigned tag to G, without discussing
the rationale behind this decision. It seems wrong to us to connect the two tags with an
edge since Tis apparently essential for describing Gwhereas T/primeis not so much relevant.
In [11], Li computes correlation between tags. The analysis is more precise than in [ 12]
since when a tag Tis assigned to a game, a weight is associated to T. If for a given game G,
the tag Tis the tag most assigned to G, then Tobtains a weight of 20. IfGhas20tags and
Tis the least assigned, it obtains a weight of 1. More generally, the n-th most assigned tag
obtains a weight of 20−n+ 1. We point out two issues. First, Li does not discuss whether it
makes sense to use these weights, and how to interpret them. Secondly, the distributions of
the number of players who assigned tag varies greatly over all games. For instance, the two
most assigned tags to the game HITMAN 2 areStealth(10373players) and Assassin (819
players). The ratios of the number of players for these tags is therefore 819/10373≈0.08. If
we do the same with the same with the game Golf It!, we ﬁnd that the most assigned tag is
Multiplayer (249players) and the second most assigned is Mini Golf (243players). This
time, the ratio is 243/249≈0.98. With Li’s method, those ratios would be 19/20 = 0 .95for
both games [11].
In this section, we deﬁne, interpret and study a new metric, that will be used in all
later sections for the taxonomies and meronomies. It is a more reﬁned version of what was
proposed by Li [ 11]. For each Steam tag, we deﬁne what we call its priorityfor a given game.
IDeﬁnition 2. The priority of a tag Tfor a given game Gis a score that ranges from 0to
1. Let tTdenote the number of players who assigned to the game Gthe tag T. Similarly, let
tmaxdenote the maximum over all tags assigned to Gof the number of players who assigned
the tag. The priority of TforGis equal to tT/tmax. A ﬁctional example is shown in Table 1.
In particular, any game with at least one tag has a tag with priority 1: the tag that was
assigned to it by the largest number of players. If a tag was not among the 20most assigned
tags to a given game, then its priority is 0(recall that Steam only shows the 20most assigned
tags). We choose this metric as we are interested in identifying how players think aboutN. Grelier, S. Kaufmann 7
games. Let us consider all positive priorities over all games and tags. We compute a mean
of0.60, a median of 0.61and a standard deviation of 0.28. This shows that the priority
contains some information, as the standard deviation is quite high. There are two compatible
reasons as to why not all tags have the same priority for a given game G. First, it may be
that some players assign much fewer tags than other players. This would imply that the tags
with highest priority correspond to what players think about ﬁrst when describing G. The
second reason would be that players do not perfectly agree on what tags are best suited to
describe G. This second reason would imply that the tags with highest priority are what
players agree upon for describing G, and that their opinions diverge on the tags with low
(but non-zero) priority. We argue that the ﬁrst reason is the most important, and present
the following hypothetical stylised fact:
IHypothetical stylised fact 3. For a given game G, the tags with highest priority correspond
to what players think about ﬁrst when describing G.
We provide empirical evidence supporting Hypothetical Stylised Fact 3. The fact is
hypothetical as deﬁned in [ 6] because our methods for supporting it cannot establish it for
good. This could be done if we had access to a database of the tags assignment per player,
but this is not publicly available.
(a)Histogram of the ratios of the priority of FPSandShooterfor the 1867games whose FPSpriority is
higher than the one of Shooter.
(b)Histogram of the ratios of the priority of Online Co-Op andCo-opfor the 1171games whose Online
Co-Oppriority is higher than the one of Co-op.
Figure 1 Some empirical evidence for Hypothetical Stylised Fact 3.
We consider two tags: ShooterandFPS. “FPS” stands for “ﬁrst-person shooter”, and is
a subgenre of shooter game [ 1,31]. Therefore, anyone who thinks that a given game Gis an
FPS would also agree that it is a shooter game. We consider all of the 1867games to which
both tags ShooterandFPSare assigned, with FPShaving the highest number of players. If8 Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game Vocabulary
Figure 2 Histogram of the ratios of the priority of RPGandMultiplayer for the 1124games
whoseRPGpriority is higher than the one of Multiplayer .
Hypothetical Stylised Fact 3 were wrong, for each game we should have very similar priorities
for both tags. Indeed all players who assigned the tag FPSwould also assign the tag Shooter.
In contrast, we believe that some players assign only a few tags, corresponding to what comes
ﬁrst to their mind. Under this hypothesis, we would expect some players to only assign the
tagFPS, but not the tag Shooteras it is less important to them, or because they consider
it to be already implied by the tag FPS. The histogram in Figure 1a illustrates the ratios
between the priority of FPSandShooter. We observe a long tail phenomenon; also the mean
is equal to 0.76and the median to 0.83. This implies that for half of the considered games,
less than 83%of those players who assigned the tag FPSalso assigned the tag Shooter.
We apply the same method for the tags Online Co-Op andCo-op2. Obviously, a game
with an online co-op mode thereby contains a co-op mode. However, when we consider the
1171games to which both tags Online Co-Op andCo-opare assigned, with Online Co-Op
having the highest number of players, we observe again a long tail phenomenon in Figure 1b.
The mean is equal to 0.73and the median 0.80. The natural explanation to this long tail
phenomenon and to these low means and medians is Hypothetical Stylised Fact 3: Many
players only assign a few tags to a game, the ones that come ﬁrst to their mind. We have
shown here the results for only two pairs of tags, for which the numbers of corresponding
games were important ( 1867and 1171, respectively). We tested other pairs, and for all of
them we obtained similar results, but due to lack of space we do not show them here. Also,
the number of games was signiﬁcantly lower. Some examples of those pairs are Top-Down
ShooterandTop-Down (655games),Football andSports(165games),Traditional Roguelike
andRogue-like3(102games).
In Figure 1, we observed histograms with a peak around a priority of 0.9and a long
tail. Recall that we were considering pairs of tags where the ﬁrst tag implies the second.
We argued that causality was not perfectly reﬂected in the tag distributions, because of the
long tail phenomenon. However, the position of the peak still indicates that there is a high
correlation. As a comparison, let us do the same for two tags which are a priori not correlated.
In Figure 2, we applied the same method as before on the tags RPGandMultiplayer . Those
are intuitively not correlated since there are multiplayer RPGs (for instance MMORPGs),
but also many singleplayer RPGs. We observe that the histogram is rather constant; there is
no strong peak around 1. This is a ﬁrst hint that useful information might be contained in
2Steam tags are case sensitive. We follow the Steam capitalisation which may diﬀer from tag to tag.
3Once again we follow the spelling of Steam, where rogue-like is not always written with a hyphen.N. Grelier, S. Kaufmann 9
the correlation between tag priorities. We use this idea of considering the correlation for our
meronomies in Section 4.
We point out an issue that we discovered concerning the priority. Although we still
believe the notion to be of interest, and that it brings useful information, we think that the
notion could be reﬁned and improved in future work. It seems that for some reason unknown
to us, the priority of some tags behave erratically. Let us consider for instance the tag Free
to Play. We consider three free to play games: Dota 2,Team Fortress 2 andCounter-Strike:
Global Oﬀensive . For the ﬁrst two games, Free to Play has a priority of 1. However, the
second tag with highest priority for Dota 2isMOBAwith a priority of 0.33, whereas for
Team Fortress 2 it isHero Shooter with a priority of 0.99. It is quite intriguing to us how
the priorities of the second tags with highest priorities can be so diﬀerent. This phenomenon
occur regularly with the tag Free to Play . We do not understand why the priority of the
second most assigned tag can diﬀer so much, when both games are equally free to play.
We fear that for Dota 2, the tag Free to Play pushes all other priorities to very low values,
thereby introducing noise in the data. Concerning Counter-Strike: Global Oﬀensive , the
priority of Free to Play is0. The reason for this can be easily understood: The game was
released in 2012and made free to play only in 2018. We believe that the tags were mostly
assigned soon after the release of the game, and that is why Free to Play is not amongst
the20most assigned tags. This motivates even further the fact that the method should be
reﬁned, with a particular emphasis on the tag Free to Play .
3 A taxonomy of Steam tags
In this section, we categorise all of the Steam tags through a taxonomy. In Section 2, we
deﬁned the notion of priority of a tag for a game, and established that it contained some
information. In particular, we gave empirical evidence for Hypothetical Stylised Fact 3,
stating that for a given game G, tags with high priorities correspond to what players think
about ﬁrst when describing G. In this section, we consider tags one by one, and for each tag
we look at its priority distribution over all games for which the priority is non-zero. This
allows us to deﬁne the taxa of higher rank into which we classify the Steam tags.
3.1 The taxa of higher rank
At the highest level, we have three taxa: High priority tags, Medium priority tags and Low
priority tags. Let us start with the taxon Low priority tags.
3.1.1 Low priority tags
According to Hypothetical Stylised Fact 3, those tags correspond to what few players deem
interesting for describing a game, and that is not what they think about ﬁrst. We deﬁne
this taxon as the set of tags whose priority median is at most 0.45. There are 80tags in this
taxon. We chose this threshold using our own expertise of the video game industry. Tags
with higher priority medians seem to us to come signiﬁcantly faster in players’ minds when
describing a game.
We present in Table 2 the tags with the lowest priority median, along with the number
of games to which they are assigned. One could argue that we do not have enough data to
deal with tags that are assigned to very few games. However, for the taxon of Low priority
tags, we think that if a tag was seldomly assigned, it supports even more the claim that this
tag is not what players think about ﬁrst when describing a game. Nonetheless, among the10 Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game Vocabulary
tag priority median number of games
Masterpiece 0.18 6
Epic 0.20 106
TrackIR 0.20 31
Vikings 0.22 45
Reboot 0.23 11
Mod 0.24 62
Addictive 0.24 409
Cult Classic 0.25 305
Kickstarter 0.26 181
Table 2Tags with the lowest priority medians.
tag priority median number of games
Singleplayer 0.36 23376
Multiplayer 0.42 6371
Retro 0.43 4748
VR 0.44 4696
Diﬃcult 0.39 4404
Great Soundtrack 0.31 4245
Co-op 0.39 3153
Controller 0.40 2469
Combat 0.40 2135
Table 3Low priority tags that are most assigned to games.
Low priority tags, there are some that are assigned to thousands of games. We show them
in Table 3. We ﬁnd those tags especially interesting. Players do not use those tags as their
primary descriptors for a game, yet they are still assigned to many games. This gives us
an interesting learning: Having a low priority does not mean that the tag is not important.
Indeed, it is important for players to know whether a game has singleplayer or multiplayer
modes. It is just not what is the most essential to describe a game. In Subsection 4.2, we
delve deeper into the tags Singleplayer andMultiplayer .
3.1.2 High priority tags
Before deﬁning the taxon of High priority tags, let us ﬁrst consider priority histograms of
tags that clearly should be in that taxon. Three are depicted in Figure 3. We observe
that these histograms roughly look like Dirac functions centred at 1. We want to deﬁne
our High priority tags taxon as the set of tags whose histograms look similarly to those
three. To allow for some wiggle room, we decided to deﬁne the taxon as the set of tags
Figure 3 Histograms of the priorities of RPG,RacingandRoguelike Deckbuilder .N. Grelier, S. Kaufmann 11
Figure 4 Histograms of the priorities of 2D,Open World andPvE.
Figure 5 Histograms of the priorities of 1990’s,Military andRobots.
whose priority median is suﬃciently high, at least 0.574803, and whose maximum value in
the histogram is obtained for a priority of at least 0.765644. Both thresholds were decided
using our own expertise of video games. The median threshold was chosen so that the tag
Twin Stick Shooter would be in that taxon, as its priority median is exactly that value, but
notUnderground andConversation that were following. The maximum value threshold was
chosen such that Tabletop would be a High priority tag, but not 2.5DandLore-Rich that
were following. With this deﬁnition, we have 155High priority tags. By looking at these
tags, it seems that nearly all of them are about genre. We discuss this in further detail in
Subsection 3.2.
3.1.3 Medium priority tags
We have one last taxon of higher rank for all of the remaining 192tags. When looking at the
histograms, we distinguish three types of shapes. Figure 4 depicts them. We have curves
that look like Gaussian curves, as with 2D, curves that look rather constant, like the one of
Open World , and curves with two peaks, like the one of PvE. However, it seems that these
types of shapes do not procure any insightful meaning. Indeed, one can see in Figure 5 three
histograms of other Medium priority tags. Observe that they are all similar to the one of 2D.
However, we do not see any similarity between 2D,1990’s,Military andRobotsbeyond the
fact that they are Medium priority tags. It seems to us that in this case, the shape of the
histogram does not bring us any further insight.
3.2 The taxa of lower rank
In this subsection, we divide taxa of higher rank into several taxa. Our most interesting
comments concerns High priority tags, thus we focus on their study.
3.2.1 The taxon of High priority tags
Interestingly, all High priority tags related to gameplay are genre names: Adventure ,RPG,
Farming Sim and so on. Furthermore, nearly all tags commonly understood as genre tags are
in the High priority tags taxon. We consider this ﬁnding to be one of the main contributions12 Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game Vocabulary
of this paper. We can now deﬁne “genre tags” as “gameplay related tags with high priority”.
Also, it provides empirical evidence for Hypothetical Stylised Fact 1: Genre is indeed what
players think about ﬁrst when describing a game.
Some tags are assigned to fewer than 100games. We believe that this is too few
games for qualifying those tags as “genres”. We create a taxon for those tags that have
high priority median, but that are assigned to too few games. Those are: BMX,Cycling,
Motocross ,Skateboarding ,Tennis,Baseball,Lemmings ,Wrestling ,Mini Golf ,Social Deduction ,
Warhammer 40K ,Roguevania ,Medical Sim ,LEGO,Outbreak Sim ,Pinball,Spelling,Golf,
JetandAction RTS .
Steam products are not limited to video games, strictly deﬁned. Other products are
also available, and their corresponding tags are all in the High priority tags taxon. This
is unsurprising, as if these products were deemed to be games, then the following High
priority tags would undoubtedly qualify as game genres: Utilities,Audio Production ,Video
Production ,Animation & Modeling ,Design & Illustration ,Photo Editing ,Software Training
andWeb Publishing . On a related note, we also have the tags Game Development and
Programming which are more about making than playing video games. Those tags we put
on a separate taxon. In Subsection 4.3, we provide further evidence to support our decision
to treat those tags as an independent taxon.
In total, we divide the taxon of High priority games into four taxa: game genres (which
are gameplay related tags), tags assigned to too few games, tags related to products that are
not video games, and the miscellaneous tags. In this last taxon we ﬁnd: Free to Play ,Indie,
Early Access ,Massively Multiplayer ,e-sports,Sexual Content ,Nudity,LGBTQ+ ,Dinosaurs ,
Mechs,Cats,Experimental ,Noir,Lovecraftian andWestern.
We list the learnings we obtain from these tags being High priority tags. Unsurprisingly,
players care about whether the game is free. We indeed expect players to mind how much
they have to pay for a game, which is why Free to Play is a High priority tag. Secondly, the
tagsIndie,Early Access ,Massively Multiplayer ande-sports provide a lot of information
about the type of game, even though those are not genres. Players know better how much
money was invested into the game, whether the game is entirely ﬁnished, whether it involves
a lot of interactions with other players, and whether it is made for e-sports. This tag in itself
is full of information. It implies that the game is hard to master, that it has a multiplayer
mode, and that it is competitive. The presence of the tags Sexual Content andNudityis also
not surprising, as they can be important ﬁlters for players to know whether they want to play
a game. Next, we have the tags LGBTQ+ ,Dinosaurs ,MechsandCats4which are themes
that players think to be so important that they are worth mentioning right away when
describing a game. Similarly, Experimental ,Noir,Lovecraftian andWestern are ambiances
of high importance for players when describing a game. We believe that game developers
can beneﬁt from knowing that these themes and ambiances matter particularly to players.
3.2.2 The taxon of Medium priority tags
As we said, our most interesting comments are for High priority tags. In particular, we
showed in Figure 5 that the priority histogram was not suﬃcient for classifying the Medium
priority tags into meaningful taxa. Thus, for the rest of the section, we only discuss why a few
tags widely regarded as genres were put into the Medium priority tags taxon. Those tags are:
4Interestingly, players are more interested in cats than in dogs. Indeed Catshas a median priority of
0.60with a maximum value in the histogram at 0.96, whereas for the tag Dogthose values are 0.56and
0.45, respectively.N. Grelier, S. Kaufmann 13
FPS,Shooter,Fighting,Stealth,Hack and Slash ,Survival,Survival Horror ,Horror,MOBA,
4X,RTS,Grand Strategy ,Trading Card Game ,Match 3,Hidden Object andMMORPG .
We still believe that those tags should be considered as genre, and explain why they were
misclassiﬁed. Concerning FPS,Shooter,Fighting,Stealth,Hack and Slash ,Survival,Survival
HorrorandHorror, they have relatively low priority medians because they are often used by
players to say that some elements from these genres appear in a game. For instance, if it is
possible to ﬁght in a game, then the tag Fighting will surely appear with medium priority.
Fighting is not the genre of the game, but it corresponds here to a gameplay element. Let us
take another example with FPSandShooter. The most assigned tags to the game Fallout 4
areOpen World ,Post-apocalyptic ,Exploration andRPG. In our opinion, those tags indeed
describe well this game. With a lower priority, we ﬁnd also the tags ShooterandFPS. It
is true that there are FPS elements in the game, which occur for instance when the player
is aiming, therefore it is understandable that the tag appears with a medium priority. The
takeaway is that tags may have diﬀerent purposes and connotations. There are tags that
might be used as genres, but also sometimes used to merely describe some gameplay elements.
If it were a common practice to distinguish the two things and have a tag FPS - genre and a
tagFPS - gameplay , we believe that the former would be put into the High priority tags
taxon while the latter would be rightly classiﬁed as a Medium priority tag. It was most
surprising to us to discover that MOBAis in that taxon. We expected it to only appear as a
High priority tag. However, its priority median is quite low, with a value of 0.48, making
it even closer to Low priority tags than High priority tags. After investigation, it appears
that the tag is often assigned with a medium priority to team-based multiplayer games, even
when they do not belong to the MOBA genre. It seems that players and the industry have a
diﬀerent understanding of the tag.
Concerning the remaining tags, 4X,RTS,Grand Strategy ,Trading Card Game ,Match 3,
Hidden Object andMMORPG , they seem to be overshadowed by other tags preferred by
players. For instance 4X,RTSandGrand Strategy are overshadowed by Strategy,Turn-Based
andReal-Time .Trading Card Game often appears after Card Game andCard Battler .Match
3andHidden Object are overshadowed by Puzzle. Likewise, MMORPG is regularly chosen
only after RPG,Multiplayer andMassively Multiplayer . This is why, although they have a
high priority median, their occurrence peak in the histogram is not close to a priority value
of1.
3.3 List of genres comparison
Using our data-driven approach, we have now obtained a list of genre tags. It can be
found in Appendix A. Those are mainly in the High priority taxon, and we presented in
Paragraph 3.2.2 a list of tags that should still be considered as genre tags, although they
were classed as Medium priority tags. We compare our list to Li’s [ 11] and to the one in
Steamworks [ 27] as they are both made from Steam tags. It would be interesting to compare
ours to all genre lists. However, for the sake of brevity, we concentrate solely on those two
lists.
Li’s list, although also being made from a data-driven approach, serves a diﬀerent role
than ours [ 11]. His aim was to extract from Steam tags a reasonably small list of genre tags
that would allow one to characterise all games, whereas our goal is to ﬁnd an extensive list
of genres. Consequently, Li’s list contains 29genres, and ours contains 127tags. Still, the
comparison is interesting as there are a few tags which are in Li’s list but not in ours. Those
are:Soccer,Resource Management ,MusicandClassic. For each genre, Li associates a group
of correlated gameplay tags. Concerning Soccer, the group contains Soccer,Football and14 Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game Vocabulary
Sports. This choice seems strange to us, for then according to Li’s list all sports game would
be considered as soccer games. In our genre list, we have the tag Sportsinstead of Soccer,
which seems more reasonable. The same happens with Resource Management that we would
replace by Management andMusicthat we would replace by Rhythm. Concerning Classicin
Li’s list, its presence follows from the fact that Li considers ClassicandCult Classic to be
related to gameplay. We disagree with that statement, although we cannot substantiate our
belief with data.
Similar to ours, Steamworks’ list of genre tags strives for comprehensiveness [ 27]. Our
list contains 127tags whereas theirs contains 140. The two lists share 112tags in common,
which indicates that they mostly agree with each other. Let us start with the 15tags that
are in our list but not in Steamworks’. It is worth noting that despite Steamworks appearing
to have all of the Steam tags (whether genre-related or not), some tags are actually absent.
The genre tags in our list that do not even appear on Steamworks are: Cooking,Creature
Collector ,Party Game ,Puzzle-Platformer andRoguelike Deckbuilder . More interestingly,
there are a few tags that are High priority tags related to gameplay (which we thus consider
as genre tags), which are not considered as genre tags by Steamworks. We provide the list
here:Archery,Automation ,Boxing,Deckbuilding ,Fishing,Hunting,Naval Combat ,Vehicular
Combat,OtomeandParkour. All those tags were classed as Features in Steamworks instead
of genres, except for OtomeandParkour which are classed as Themes & Moods. We think
that the fact that those are High priority tags supports the idea of considering them as genre
tags.
We present the 28tags that are in Steamworks’ list of genre tags but not in ours. Some
are High priority tags about gameplay that we removed in Paragraph 3.2.1 because they were
assigned to fewer than 100games. Indeed, it seems to us that tags assigned to too few games
cannot really deﬁne a genre. Those tags are: BMX,Baseball,Cycling,Golf,Medical Sim ,
Mini Golf ,Motocross ,Outbreak Sim ,Roguevania ,Pinball,Skateboarding ,Spelling,Tennis
andWrestling . There are also a few High priority tags that we did not put into our list of
genre tags because we deem that they are not clearly enough related to gameplay. Those
areProgramming ,e-sports andExperimental . The remaining tags are all Medium priority
tags, and are therefore not part of our genre lists. Our ﬁndings indicate that those are not
words that ﬁrst come to players mind when describing a game, and supports the idea of not
considering them as genres. The tags are: Basketball ,Bowling,Football,Hacking,Hockey,
Open World ,Skating,Skiing,Snowboarding ,SoccerandInvestigation .
4 Two meronomies of Steam tags
In this section, we propose two meronomies of some Steam tags. In Section 3, we classiﬁed
the tags into taxa, where two tags in the same taxa share some properties (related to their
priority distributions). In Section 4, we use totally diﬀerent methodologies, for diﬀerent
goals. In the resulting meronomies, we say that a tag Ais a part of a broader tag B, or
equivalently that Ais a meronym of B.
The ﬁrst meronomy we present focuses on the tags with the broadest meanings. We aim
at ﬁnding the most general tags, and to see how they relate to each other. In particular, we
focus on the tags at the top of the meronomy, the ones that are parts of no others, but all
others tags are parts of them. We name them the “capital tags”. We claim that the capital
tags are interesting because they form the smallest set of words that one needs to describe
all video games (without going into detail).
The second meronomy aims at ﬁnding synonymous tags. We believe that one can reduceN. Grelier, S. Kaufmann 15
the number of Steam tags without loosing too much information, as many tags share similar
meanings. Our aim is to ﬁnd those groups of tags, and for each one to ﬁnd one representative.
4.1 The method
The method starts the same for both meronomies. The idea is to look at pairs of tags A
andBthat are correlated enough, and then check whether AorBappears more often. If B
appears more often, we declare that Ais a meronym of B. Intuitively, Ashould indeed be a
part of B, as they are correlated and Bappears more often, ergo has a broader meaning.
For each game G, we have an entry with 427values (the number of Steam tags), where
the value is the priority of the corresponding tag for the game G. As there are at most 20
tags with positive priority for any given game, it implies that at least 407values are equal
to0. We compute the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient for all pairs of tags. A natural idea
would be to take all pairs with correlation above some threshold and be done with it. The
issue is that many tags are assigned to very few games. Thus, their priority is 0for virtually
all games. This induces a bias, and two of such tags will have a strong correlation even
though they are hardly related. To tackle this issue, we consider all pairs of tags AandB
with correlation above 0.1, and then compute what we call their local Pearson correlation
coeﬃcient . It is equal to the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient, but it is computed only on games
to which at least one of AorBis assigned.
For the ﬁrst meronomy, we keep only the pairs with local Pearson correlation coeﬃcient
above−0.7, over all pairs with (global) Pearson correlation above 0.1. For the second
meronomy, we take all pairs with local Pearson coeﬃcient above −0.6, while keeping a global
Pearson correlation threshold of 0.1. Let us motivate the choice of these thresholds. For the
global threshold, the lower it is, the better for the soundness of the results. However, getting
it lower increases a lot the number of pairs of tags for which we have to compute the local
Pearson correlation. As we have 428tags, there are/parenleftbig428
2/parenrightbig
= 91378 pairs to consider. This
is computationally quite expensive, which is why we only consider pairs with correlation
above 0.1. There are 2197of those pairs. As mentioned earlier, we have concerns with the
global correlation approach in that it may produce some false positives (pairs with high
correlation that are not closely related). However, we do not anticipate the occurrence of a
false negative, that is a pair of tags with similar meanings but low correlation.
For the local threshold of the ﬁrst meronomy, the value −0.7may seem extremely low.
However, as we do the computation only on the games to which at least one of the tags is
assigned, this diminishes drastically the correlation value. Indeed, there are proportionally
much more games to which only one tag is assigned, since we removed all games to which
none are assigned. Thus, with a local threshold of −0.7, we are actually considering only 652
pairs of tags out of the 2196that have global correlation above 0.1. Getting the threshold
even lower would make us consider pairs that are actually not so much related, according to
our own video game expertise. We present the result in Subsection 4.2.
We study what happens when we set the local threshold to −0.6in Subsection 4.3. There
are only 361pairs with local correlation above this threshold. The choice of the value was
again made using our own video game expertise. We chose the lowest value such that the
pairs were indeed synonymous in our opinion.
4.2 The capital tags
Now that we have a list of 652pairs of tags with high correlation, we compute for each pair
A,Bwhether AorBappears more. We construct an oriented graph with the tags as vertices16 Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game Vocabulary
Singleplayer, 55
Casual, 9
Adventure, 10
Action, 20
Multiplayer, 18
Anime, 11
Strategy, 30
Simulation, 12
Sports, 9
Shooter, 13
RPG, 16
2D, 39
Fantasy, 10
Puzzle, 17
Atmospheric, 20
Story Rich, 23
Figure 6 The oriented subgraph induced by the tags with at least 9 incoming edges. For each
tag, we write its name and the number of incoming edges in the original graph.
and an edge from tag Ato tag BifBoccurs more often than A. This graph is unreadable
as there are too many vertices and edges. However, we are mainly interested in the vertices
that have the most incoming edges, as they correspond to tags with the broadest meanings.
Figure 6 shows the subgraph induced by the vertices Vwith at least 9incoming edges (that
is the subgraph where the vertex set is V, and we show only edges between vertices in V).
We observe that there are seven vertices with no outgoing edges, that we name the capital
tags. One might observe that the graph shown in Figure 6 does not perfectly correspond to a
meronomy. We tackle this issue at the end of the subsection, as we want ﬁrst to focus on the
capital tags.
IDeﬁnition 4. The seven capital tags are Multiplayer ,Singleplayer ,Action,Casual,Adven-
ture,Strategy andAnime. They correspond to tags that are correlated with a lot of other
tags, and that occur more than them.
The name is a reference to the seven capital sins from Christian teachings. Thomas
Aquinas uses the word “capital” for the following reason: Accordingly a capital vice is so
called, in the ﬁrst place, from “head” taken in the proper sense, and thus the name “capital”
is given to a sin for which capital punishment is inﬂicted. It is not in this sense that we are
now speaking of capital sins, but in another sense, in which the term “capital” is derived
from head, taken metaphorically for a principle or director of others. In this way a capital
vice is one from which other vices arise, chieﬂy by being their ﬁnal cause [2].
We posit that a similar phenomenon exists with tags, where the capital tags serve as the
directors of the other Steam tags, much like how the capital vices act as the head of other
vices. The seven capital tags encompass all others, as stated in the following hypothetical
stylised fact:
IHypothetical stylised fact 5. All tags are parts of the capital tags.
By construction, our seven capital tags are tags that are correlated with a lot of other tags,
and that occur more often than them. This is already some justiﬁcation for Hypothetical
Stylised Fact 5. We add some more evidence at the end of the subsection when we deﬁne aN. Grelier, S. Kaufmann 17
percentage of covered games percentage of covered games by this tag and the ones above
tag over all games over games with exactly 20tagsover all games over games with exactly 20tags
Singleplayer 46 67 46 67
Action 45 54 70 85
Casual 43 42 84 92
Adventure 42 51 90 95
Strategy 21 26 93 98
Multiplayer 13 22 93 98
Anime 9 14 94 98
Table 4How the capital tags cover nearly all games
meronomy of the tags in Figure 6. Before that, we state and establish another hypothetical
stylised fact. First, we need to deﬁne the following concept:
IDeﬁnition 6. We say that a game Gis covered by a set of tags Tif at least one of the
tags inTis assigned to G.
IHypothetical stylised fact 7. The capital tags form a very small group of tags such that
nearly all games are covered by this set.
Hypothetical Stylised Fact 7, although being quantitative in essence, is not perfectly
mathematically deﬁned. One reason for this is that the Steam tag are assigned by players. So
all rules and observations should suﬀer from a few counterexamples, as the data is signiﬁcantly
noisy. On another note, it is computationally too hard to check Hypothetical Stylised Fact 7.
If one wanted to check all sets of seven tags for instance, that would be/parenleftbig428
7/parenrightbig
≈4.97·1014
sets of tags to test.
One can see in Table 4 that our choice of capital tags does cover nearly all games. We
show the percentage of games covered by each of the capital tag. We also show the percentage
for the set consisting of the tag of the line and all the ones above. The tags are sorted by
decreasing percentage of games covered. We also do the same when considering only games
with 20tags. Games with fewer tags can be misleading, as it may simply be that not enough
players assigned tags, and if more players did, then surely some of them would have assigned
a capital tag. We observe that Table 4 strongly supports Hypothetical Stylised Fact 7.
As argued, it is not computationally possible to test all sets of seven games. Still, we
present another set that could have been a ﬁtting candidate: 2D,3D,2.5D,Isometric ,Third
Person,First-Person andTop-Down . All games are either in 2D, in 3D, or in some mix of
the two: 2.5D or isometric. We even add Third Person andFirst-Person which imply that
the game is in 3D, but give more information about the representation. The same holds with
Top-Down and2D. Therefore, one might expect to cover all games with these seven tags.
This is not the case, as only 47% of the games are covered, and only 85% of the games with
20tags are covered. This again supports Hypothetical Stylised Fact 7, as it substantiates
the claim that the capital tags are very few while covering essentially all games.
For the sake of curiosity, we extended the capital tags with as few tags as possible in
order to cover even more games. This was done by hand by looking at which games were
not covered yet, and ﬁnding what tags were assigned to most of them. By adding the tags
Arcade,RPG,Simulation ,Survival,PuzzleandHorrorto the capital tags, we cover 96.73%
percent of games, and 99.78% percent of games with 20tags. Unsurprisingly, several of those
new tags can be found in Figure 6: Puzzle,RPGandSimulation .
We make a few side-remarks that we deem interesting. First, we observe that for six
of the capital tags, the percentage of games covered is less than the one of games with 20
tags covered. The only one for which it decreases is Casual, which goes from 43% to 42%.18 Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game Vocabulary
Moreover, the increase for the six others is quite diﬀerent from tag to tag. The biggest
increase in terms of scale factor happens with Multiplayer (scale factor of 1.69). Intuitively,
the games with 20tags are the most mainstream. This supports the idea that mainstream
games on Steam more often oﬀer multiplayer modes, and that they tend to be less casual.
We also note that the second biggest increase is with Singleplayer (scale factor of 1.46). This
tells us that even though Multiplayer andSingleplayer are classiﬁed in the Low Priority
taxon (see Subsection 3.1), they are actually assigned to many games, and would perhaps be
assigned to all games if all games had 20tags assigned to them. Therefore, low priority tags
should not be thought of as of less importance. They are not what players think about ﬁrst
when describing a game, but may still be a feature that should be mentioned at a later step.
Recall that a meronomy deals with part-whole relationships. Mathematically, a meronomy
can be seen as a partially ordered set (poset). A partial order, denoted by ≤, must satisfy
three properties:
1.Transitivity: if A≤BandB≤Cthen A≤C,
2.Reﬂexivity: we have A≤A,
3.Antisymmetry: if A≤BandB≤A, then A=B.
We can see in Figure 6 that the relation depicted is not perfectly a partial order. Indeed,
let us say that Ais a part of B, denoted by A≤B, if there is an arrow from AtoB. The
graph in Figure 6 looks a lot like a Hasse diagram. A Hasse diagram of a poset ≤is a
representation where there is an edge from AtoBifA≤Band there is no Csuch that
A≤C≤B. This is a useful and concise way of representing posets. For the graph in
Figure 6 to be a Hasse diagram, one simply has to remove the edges from Puzzle,Atmospheric ,
Story Rich andFantasy toSingleplayer . Thus, we are implying that we consider Sportsto
be a part of Simulation , which itself is a part of Strategy. Likewise, we say that Fantasy is a
part ofRPG, which itself is a part of Adventure .
Let us mention some other relationships, not depicted in Figure 6, but that are present
in the larger graph (which we did not represent as there are too many edges to be readable).
We have arrows from Co-optoMultiplayer andAction. There is an arrow from Cuteto
Colorful, itself being connected to 2DandCasual.Management is connected to Singleplayer
andSimulation . Finally, we want to mention PvPbeing connected to Multiplayer . As all
these relations are quite sensible, this supports our idea of looking at that graph as the Hasse
diagram of some poset, or equivalently to establish a meronomy of those tags.
We now have evidence for Hypothetical Stylised Fact 5: All tags are parts of the capital
tags. By only adding or removing a few edges, we have obtained a meronomy for the tags of
Figure 6 that could be extended further to the other tags. In this meronomy, we have seen
that the capital tags are the ones at the top: All other tags are meronyms of the capital tags.
Finally, we make a concluding remark about the capital tags. Four of them are game
genres:Action,Adventure ,Strategy andCasual(although it is debatable whether it is a
genre, this is how it is considered in Steamworks’ and our genre list [ 27]). Two other tags
give important information about the game, even though they are not genres: Singleplayer
andMultiplayer . We suspect that the remaining tag, Anime, is actually an error. First, it is
the tag among the capital tags that covers the smallest number of games. Secondly, the 11
tags that have an edge directed to it in the graph are: JRPG,Visual Novel ,Otome,Dating
Sim,Romance ,Female Protagonist ,Sexual Content ,NSFW,Hentai,NudityandMature.
We observe that the ﬁve latter tags refer to sexual content, and share a similar meaning.
This might induce a bias, giving to much weight to tags related to sexual content, therefore
wrongly putting Animeas a tag with many incoming edges in the graph.N. Grelier, S. Kaufmann 19
4.3 The synonymous tags
As detailed in Subsection 4.1, we now use a local correlation threshold of −0.6. We deem the
pairs of tags that have a local correlation that high to be synonymous. In Subsection 4, all
edges were oriented from a tag to another: there was an arrow from AtoBifBappears
much more often than A. In this subsection, we are also interested in knowing when tags
appear mostly together. Indeed, this would be the best examples of tags being synonymous.
When tags appear mostly together, we draw a mutualedge: an arrow that points towards
both ends. To decide what kind of edge to draw, we do the following: For the tags AandB,
we compute XA,XB,XA∪BandXA∩Bwhich denote how many times Awas assigned to a
game but not B, how many times Bwas assigned to a game but not A, how many times at
least one of AorBwas assigned, and how many times both were assigned, respectively. We
deﬁne rA:=XA/XA∪B,rB:=XB/XA∪BandrA∩B:=XA∩B/XA∪B. If the maximum of
these three ratios is rA, then we draw an arrow from BtoA. If it is rB, then we draw an
arrow from AtoB. If it is rA∩B, then we draw a mutual arrow between AandB.
Before running the program on the tags, we remove a few of them. The reason for this is
that there are tags which are correlated with a lot of other tags, and that are assigned to
many games. Those are the ones we mentioned in Subsection 4.2. We remove the capital
tags in addition to 2D,Shooter,Puzzle,Atmospheric ,Simulation ,Story Rich andFantasy
(which are amongst the other tags with the highest number of edges oriented towards them
in Figure 6). Keeping those tags would distort the result and show only correlation between
those tags and few others.
Also, we use the information we obtained in Subsection 3.1. Recall that we classiﬁed
the tags into three taxa of higher rank: High priority tags, Medium priority tags and Low
priority tags. In the oriented graph of this subsection, we draw dotted red arrows for edges
where the two involved tags are not from the same taxon. Indeed, not being in the same
taxon may be a hint that these tags are not synonymous after all, since they are not used in
the same way by players, although being highly correlated.
Some synonymous tags are shown in Figure 7. Due to lack of space, we only depict
the examples we ﬁnd most meaningful. As a ﬁrst simple example, we have an edge from
Crowdfunded toKickstarter . As wanted, the meanings of those two tags are very close. Let
us consider the subgraph induced by Naval Combat ,NavalandSailing. The arrow from
SailingtoNavalis natural, as the meanings are close and SailingimpliesNaval. However,
Naval Combat andNavalare not so much synonymous. Indeed, one is understood as a
game genre, whereas the other merely indicates that a game involves ships. This is why the
information from Subsection 3.1, depicted by the dotted red arrow, does matter. Although it
is inevitable that Naval Combat andNavalbe correlated, it seems wrong to treat them as
synonyms. Likewise, the arrow from Turn-Based toTurn-Based Strategy is treacherous, as
one is a gameplay element, and the other is a game genre. More generally, we believe that no
red arrow should be taken into account. We make one exception for the edge from Trading
Card Game toCard Game . Indeed, we argued in Subsection 3.2 that Trading Card Game
was one of the few tags that are misclassiﬁed by our method, and that it should actually be
treated as a genre. On another note, we have a group of tags related to non-games, that we
mentioned in Subsection 3.2. All those tags can be considered as one group of tags related
to products oﬀered by Steam that are not games.
When looking at Figure 7, a natural idea is to give a name for all these groups of
synonymous tags. This name would be a representative of the group, the one that is
most general. For instance, the group ( Crowfunded ,Kickstarter ) would be represented by
Kickstarter . Similarly, the group of platformer tags would be represented by Platformer .20 Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game Vocabulary
Crowdfunded
Kickstarter
Utilities
Audio Production
Video Production
Animation & Modeling
Design & Illustration
Photo Editing
Software Training
Education
Web Publishing
Software
Platformer
2D Platformer
Precision Platformer
Puzzle-Platformer
Metroidvania
Side Scroller
Naval
Naval Combat
Sailing
Card Game
Trading Card Game
Roguelike Deckbuilder
Deckbuilding
Card Battler
Rogue-lite
Rogue-like
Action Roguelike
Roguevania
Traditional Roguelike
Turn-Based
Turn-based Strategy
Turn-Based Tactics
Turn-Based Combat
Figure 7 Some synonymous tags. Arrows are dotted red if the tags belong to diﬀerent taxa of
higher rank.
But how would one deal with the group that contains card game tags and rogue-like tags?
Intuitively, this group should be split in two. Likewise, what about the group of tags not
related to games? It would seem natural to have most of those tags represented by Utilities,
but it is no clear what should happen to Education , as the only edge incident to it is incoming,
and not outgoing. We detail in the next paragraph a formal explanation on how to deal with
these situations, which results in a grouping that is in accordance with our intuition.
LetGbe a directed graph with labeled vertices. First merge all mutual edges of G. For a
mutual edge e={u, v}, keep arbitrarily one of the two labels uorv. Let Hdenote the same
graph as Gwith the orientations of the edges removed, resulting in an unoriented graph. Let
us denote by W1, . . . , W kthe vertex sets of the kconnected components of H. We denote
byV1, . . . , V kthe same vertex sets considered in G. Let us consider the subgraph GiofG
induced by Vi, for some 1≤i≤k. We say that Giiswell-oriented if there exists a unique
vertex v∈Visuch that for each u/negationslash=vinVi, there exists a directed path from utovinGi.
Making an abuse of notation, we say that Giswell-oriented if each Giis well-oriented.
Going back to the example in Figure 7, we see that most connected components are
well-oriented. Moreover, for the group of platformer tags, Platformer is the unique tag
that can be reached via directed paths from all other tags in the group. However, the
group with card game tags and rogue-like tags is not well-oriented. Now, what we suggest
for splitting into well-oriented groups is the following: Given the graph G, remove as few
edges as possible to make it well-oriented. To the best of our knowledge, this problem has
not been previously studied. However, we believe it is interesting from both a theoretical
perspective and for practical applications: an eﬃcient algorithm would be needed for naming
the synonym groups. We do not know of any fast algorithm for solving the problem, and
wonder whether it is NP-hard. Nonetheless, on the small example we are considering now,N. Grelier, S. Kaufmann 21
we solve the problem by hand. In Figure 7, it suﬃces to remove the edges from Roguelike
Deckbuilder toRogue-lite andRogue-like to obtain a well-oriented graph. We therefore obtain
the group ( Card Battler ,Deckbuilding ,Trading Card Game ,Roguelike Deckbuilder ,Card
Game) represented by Card Game , and the group ( Roguevania ,Action Roguelike ,Traditional
Roguelike ,Rogue-lite ,Rogue-like ) represented by either Rogue-lite orRogue-like . Similarly,
the group of tags not related to video games is not well-oriented. To make it well oriented, one
has to remove the edge from Software Training to either Education orUtilities. Although in
this case we solved the problem by hand, it would be very useful to have eﬃcient algorithms
for solving this problem for general directed graphs. This would allow us to deal with the
synonymous tags on a larger scale.
Finally, we observe that the graph is very similar to the graph of a poset, as was the
case in Figure 6. One could remove the dotted red edges, merge the vertices connected by a
mutual edge, and remove the edges we mentioned to make the graph well-oriented. Now it
suﬃces to remove a few edges that give only redundant information, like the one from Photo
EditingtoUtilitiesor the one from Roguevania toRogue-lite /Rogue-like . Our approach yields
a meronomy of synonymous tags, with the topmost tags serving as representatives of their
respective groups.
5 Conclusion
We proposed several hypothetical facts, such as the notion that players primarily associate
games with their genre. To support this claim, we introduced the concept of priority of
Steam tags and demonstrated its relationship to players’ perceptions of games. Moreover,
our approach enabled us to create a data-driven taxonomy that provides a comprehensive
list of genres. We found a set of seven tags, the capital tags, which roughly summarise all
information contained in the Steam tags. Those are Multiplayer ,Singleplayer ,Action,Casual,
Adventure ,Strategy andAnime, although we argued why the presence of this last tag in the
list is dubious at best. We found the tags Multiplayer andSingleplayer extremely interesting
as they are capital tags, assigned to thousands of games, but are Low priority tags. We
showed how some tags can be merged without loosing too much information. We proposed
a criterion for ﬁnding a representative of a merged group, and ask whether there exists an
eﬃcient algorithm for applying this method.
We list some further improvements that can be made to our study. We stated that the
notion of priority might need to be reﬁned in order to be more consistent, by taking the
example of the tag Free to Play . Although considering priority histograms allowed us to
deﬁne an interesting taxonomy, this method has some limit. In particular for Medium priority
tags, we could not ﬁnd a meaningful way of subdividing this taxon into taxa (see Figure 5).
Maybe some other ideas could allow one to establish a meaningful data-driven classiﬁcation of
Medium Priority tags. Secondly, our method is biased towards games available on Steam, and
we acknowledge that this may limit the generalisability of our ﬁndings. Also, we note that
our computations assume an equal impact for all games. However, according to Orland [ 18],
in 2014, over a quarter of registered games on Steam had never been played. Thus, we
believe it would be beneﬁcial to consider player engagement metrics, such as the number of
players or total hours played, and to weight games accordingly in our computations. We
noticed that some Low priority tags are assigned to thousands of games, like Multiplayer
andSingleplayer . We believe that they should be investigated further, to better understand
how players think about them. Using the knowledge of capital tags, we developed a method
for identifying synonymous tags. It would be intriguing to apply this method in a database22 Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game Vocabulary
where synonymous tags are intelligently merged. Our expectation is that, in such a scenario,
Animewould no longer be considered a capital tag.
References
1Ernest Adams and Andrew Rollings. Fundamentals of game design (game design and develop-
ment series) . Prentice-Hall, Inc., 2006.
2Thomas Aquinas. Summa Theologica: Translated by Fathers of the English Dominican
Province. Burns Oates & Washbourne, 1920. URL: https://www.newadvent.org/summa/2084.
htm#article4 .
3Dominic Arsenault. Video game genre, evolution and innovation. Eludamos: Journal for
computer game culture , 3(2):149–176, 2009.
4Florian Baumann, Dominik Emmert, Hermann Baumgartl, and Ricardo Buettner. Hardcore
gamer proﬁling: Results from an unsupervised learning approach to playing behavior on the
Steam platform. Procedia Computer Science , 126:1289–1297, 2018.
5Roi Becker, Yifat Chernihov, Yuval Shavitt, and Noa Zilberman. An analysis of the Steam
community network evolution. In 2012 IEEE 27th Convention of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers in Israel , pages 1–5. IEEE, 2012.
6Anders Drachen, Nicholas Ross, Julian Runge, and Rafet Sifa. Stylized facts for mobile game
analytics. In 2016 IEEE conference on computational intelligence and games (CIG) , pages
1–8. IEEE, 2016.
7Benjamin Engelstätter and Michael R Ward. Strategic timing of entry: evidence from video
games.Journal of Cultural Economics , 42(1):1–22, 2018.
8Maxwell Foxman, Alex P Leith, David Beyea, Brian Klebig, Vivian Hsueh Hua Chen, and
Rabindra Ratan. Virtual reality genres: Comparing preferences in immersive experiences and
games. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction
in Play, pages 237–241, 2020.
9Balreet Grewal, Dayi Lin, Lars Doucet, and Cor-Paul Bezemer. An empirical study of delayed
games on Steam. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11191 , 2022.
10Stephanie Heintz and Eﬃe Lai-Chong Law. The game genre map: A revised game classiﬁcation.
InProceedings of the 2015 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play , pages
175–184, 2015.
11Xiaozhou Li. Towards factor-oriented understanding of video game genres using exploratory
factor analysis on Steam game tags. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Progress in
Informatics and Computing (PIC) , pages 207–213. IEEE, 2020.
12Xiaozhou Li and Boyang Zhang. A preliminary network analysis on Steam game tags: another
way of understanding game genres. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Academic Mindtrek , pages 65–73, 2020.
13Derek Lieu. Game trailer outline based on genre, 2021. URL: https://www.derek-lieu.com/
blog/2021/2/28/game-trailer-outline-based-on-genre .
14Derek Lieu. Game trailer structure - genre, hook, content, 2021. URL: https:
//www.derek-lieu.com/blog/2021/4/12/game-trailer-structure-genre-hook-content?
utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email .
15Dayi Lin, Cor-Paul Bezemer, and Ahmed E Hassan. An empirical study of early access games
on the Steam platform. Empirical Software Engineering , 23(2):771–799, 2018.
16Kristen Lucas and John L Sherry. Sex diﬀerences in video game play: A communication-based
explanation. Communication research , 31(5):499–523, 2004.
17Mark O’Neill, Elham Vaziripour, Justin Wu, and Daniel Zappala. Condensing steam: Distilling
the diversity of gamer behavior. In Proceedings of the 2016 internet measurement conference ,
pages 81–95, 2016.
18Kyle Orland. Steam tags, 2014. URL: https://arstechnica.com/gaming/2014/04/
steam-gauge-addressing-your-questions-and-concerns/ .N. Grelier, S. Kaufmann 23
19Simone Petrosino, Enrica Loria, Alexander Kainz, and Johanna Pirker. The panorama of
Steam multiplayer games (2018-2020): A player reviews analysis. In FDG’22: Proceedings of
the 17th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games , pages 1–7, 2022.
20DavidPinelle, NelsonWong, andTadeuszStach. Usinggenrestocustomizeusabilityevaluations
of video games. In Proceedings of the 2008 conference on future play: Research, play, share ,
pages 129–136, 2008.
21Johanna Pirker, Enrica Loria, Alexander Kainz, Johannes Kopf, and Andreas Dengel. Virtual
reality and education–the Steam panorama. In FDG’22: Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games , pages 1–11, 2022.
22Alaa Qaﬀas. An operational study of video games’ genres. 2020.
23Rabindra Ratan, Vivian Hsueh Hua Chen, Frederik De Grove, Johannes Breuer, Thorsten
Quandt, and J Patrick Williams. Gender, gaming motives, and genre: Comparing singaporean,
german, and american players. IEEE Transactions on Games , 14(3):456–465, 2021.
24Dilini Samarasinghe, Michael Barlow, Erandi Lakshika, Timothy Lynar, Nour Moustafa,
Thomas Townsend, and Benjamin Turnbull. A data driven review of board game design and
interactions of their mechanics. IEEE Access , 9:114051–114069, 2021.
25Rafet Sifa, Anders Drachen, and Christian Bauckhage. Large-scale cross-game player behavior
analysis on Steam. In Eleventh Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment
Conference , 2015.
26Antoni Sobkowicz and Wojciech Stokowiec. Steam review dataset-new, large scale sentiment
dataset. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016) Workshop Emotion and Sentiment Analysis , pages 55–58, 2016.
27Steamworks. Steam tags, 2021. URL: https://partner.steamgames.com/doc/store/tags#
13.
28Yanhui Su, Per Backlund, and Henrik Engström. Comprehensive review and classiﬁcation of
game analytics. Service Oriented Computing and Applications , 15(2):141–156, 2021.
29Shoshannah Tekofsky, Paul Miller, Pieter Spronck, and Kevin Slavin. The eﬀect of gender,
native english speaking, and age on game genre preference and gaming motivations. In
International Conference on Intelligent Technologies for Interactive Entertainment , pages
178–183. Springer, 2016.
30Lotte Vermeulen and Jan Van Looy. “I play so I am?” a gender study into stereotype
perception and genre choice of digital game players. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic
Media, 60(2):286–304, 2016.
31Gerald Voorhees. Chapter 31: Shooting. In Mark JP Wolf and Bernard Perron, editors, The
Routledge companion to video game studies , chapter 31, pages 251–258. 2014.
32Travis W Windleharth, Jacob Jett, Marc Schmalz, and Jin Ha Lee. Full Steam ahead: A
conceptual analysis of user-supplied tags on Steam. Cataloging & Classiﬁcation Quarterly ,
54(7):418–441, 2016.
33Zhen Zuo. Sentiment analysis of steam review datasets using naive bayes and decision tree
classiﬁer. 2018.24 Data-Driven Classiﬁcations of Video Game Vocabulary
A List of video game genres
2D Fighter, 2D Platformer, 3D Fighter, 3D Platformer, 4X
Action, Action RPG, Action Roguelike, Action-Adventure, Adventure, Arcade, Archery,
Arena Shooter, Auto Battler, Automation, Automobile Sim
Base-Building, Battle Royale, Beat ’em up, Board Game, Boxing, Building, Bullet Hell
CRPG, Card Battler, Card Game, Casual, Character Action Game, Chess, Choose
Your Own Adventure, City Builder, Clicker, Collectathon, Colony Sim, Combat Racing,
Cooking, Creature Collector
Dating Sim, Deckbuilding, Diplomacy, Dungeon Crawler
Education, Exploration
Farming Sim, Fighting, Fishing, Flight, FPS
God Game, Grand Strategy
Hack and Slash, Heist, Hero Shooter, Hidden Object, Horror, Hunting
Idler, Immersive Sim, Interactive Fiction
JRPG
Life Sim, Looter Shooter
Management, Match 3, Metroidvania, Mining, MMORPG, MOBA, Mystery Dungeon
Naval Combat
On-Rails Shooter, Open World Survival Craft, Otome
Parkour, Party Game, Party-Based RPG, Platformer, Point & Click, Political Sim,
Precision Platformer, Programming, Puzzle, Puzzle-Platformer
RPG, Racing, Real Time Tactics, Rhythm, Rogue-like, Rogue-lite, Roguelike Deckbuilder,
RTS, Runner
Sandbox, Shoot ’Em Up, Shooter, Side Scroller, Simulation, Sokoban, Solitaire, Souls-like,
Space Sim, Spectacle ﬁghter, Sports, Stealth, Strategy, Strategy RPG, Survival, Survival
Horror
Tabletop, Tactical RPG, Third-Person Shooter, Time Management, Top-Down Shooter,
Tower Defense, Trading, Trading Card Game, Traditional Roguelike, Trivia, Turn-Based
Strategy, Turn-Based Tactics, Twin Stick Shooter, Typing
Vehicular Combat, Visual Novel
Walking Simulator, Wargame, Word Game