RT-DBSCAN: Accelerating DBSCAN using Ray
Tracing Hardware
Vani Nagarajan
Purdue University, USA
nagara16@purdue.eduMilind Kulkarni
Purdue University, USA
milind@purdue.edu
Abstract —General Purpose computing on Graphical Process-
ing Units (GPGPU) has resulted in unprecedented levels of
speedup over its CPU counterparts, allowing programmers to
harness the computational power of GPU shader cores to acceler-
ate other computing applications. But this style of acceleration is
best suited for regular computations (e.g., linear algebra). Recent
GPUs feature new Ray Tracing (RT) cores that instead speed
up the irregular process of ray tracing using Bounding Volume
Hierarchies. While these cores seem limited in functionality, they
can be used to accelerate n-body problems by leveraging RT cores
to accelerate the required distance computations. In this work,
we propose RT-DBSCAN, the ﬁrst RT-accelerated DBSCAN
implementation. We use RT cores to accelerate Density-Based
Clustering of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN) by translating
ﬁxed-radius nearest neighbor queries to ray tracing queries.
We show that leveraging the RT hardware results in speedups
between 1.3x to 4x over current state-of-the-art, GPU-based
DBSCAN implementations.
Index Terms —DBSCAN, clustering, ray tracing
I. I NTRODUCTION
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) were created to service
graphics applications and accelerate parts of the rasterization
pipeline. The acceleration was due to optimized ﬂoating
point arithmetic using a large number of arithmetic cores.
Researchers wanted to harness this massive computational
capability to accelerate non-rendering applications. However,
this was not straightforward as it required re-formulating
problems as 3D rendering problems. Over time, the emergence
of platforms such as CUDA [1] and OpenCL [2] provided
a programming model for general-purpose computations on
GPUs. The General-purpose GPU (GPGPU) programming
model lets users ofﬂoad parallelizable and compute-intensive
components ( e.g.,, training a neural network) to the GPU
by leveraging the programmable shader cores. Unfortunately,
GPGPU acceleration using shader cores remains largely the
province of regular applications that rely on dense loops over
dense structures, such as matrix operations, convolutions, etc.
a) GPU acceleration of ray tracing: Interestingly, while
GPU shader cores are well-suited for one style of graphics
rendering—rasterizing—they are not at all well suited to a
We thank the anonymous IPDPS reviewers for their valuable feedback. We
thank Dr. Eleazar Leal for providing the G-DBSCAN code and Dr. Andrey
Prokopenko for answering our questions about FDBSCAN. We are grateful
to Kirshanthan Sundararajah for his insightful comments that helped improve
the paper. This work was funded by NSF grants CCF-1908504, CCF-1919197
and CCF-2216978.different, more accurate, rendering algorithm, ray tracing . Ray
tracing (or, more accurately, ray casting ) ﬂips the approach of
rasterizing. Rather than considering each object and how it
affects one or more pixels on the screen (e.g., whether the
object is visible or occluded by other objects), ray tracing
considers each pixel in the scene and determines what color
it should be based on the objects and lights it interacts with
[3]. In ray tracing, a ray is cast from the source, which is
typically a pinhole camera, for every pixel in the image plane.
These primary rays pass through the image plane and their
interactions with objects in the scene determine the color of the
pixel. The ray could intersect an object in the scene, creating
new reﬂected, refracted and/or shadow secondary rays. This
hierarchy of rays is represented as a ray tree, with the primary
ray as the root and the spawned secondary rays as internal
nodes (secondary ray intersections can spawn tertiary rays) or
leaf nodes.
Ray-object intersection tests are the biggest bottleneck in
the ray tracing pipeline due to their computational intensity. As
each ray has to be tested for intersection against every object
in the scene, performance suffers greatly. However, it is not
always necessary to test for intersection against every object.
We can represent the objects in the scene using a Bounding
V olume Hierarchy (BVH), a type of spatial acceleration tree
[4]. A BVH, like other spatial trees, captures the relationship
of objects to each other in space by recursively subdividing the
space into smaller cells until the leaf cells contain bounding
volumes that contain single objects. Ray-object intersection
can thus be performed hierarchically: if a ray does not intersect
a bounding volume, then it cannot intersect any of the subordi-
nate bounding volumes in the tree, eliminating large numbers
of intersection tests. (Section II-A describes this process in
more detail.)
Unfortunately, BVH-based ray-tracing is highly irregular:
each ray performs a tree traversal whose extent is highly input-
dependent. While prior work has shown that tree traversals can
be performed reasonably well on GPGPUs [5], shader cores
are simply not the best-suited accelerator for BVH traversals.
Hence, recent GPUs from NVIDIA and AMD have added ray
tracing (RT) cores . These cores provide specialized hardware
for building and traversing bounding volume hierarchies, sig-
niﬁcantly accelerating the process of ray tracing [6].
b) Re-purposing RT cores: In the same way that early
GPU programmers looked to re-purpose shader cores toarXiv:2303.09655v1  [cs.DC]  16 Mar 2023perform non-rasterization tasks, a natural question to ask
is whether RT cores can be leveraged to accelerate non-
raytracing algorithms. Recent work has suggested the answer
might be “yes.” Wald et. al. [7] accelerate the task of locating
which tetrahedron of a solid a query point lies in by treating
the query point as the source of a ray and seeing if it intersects
a tetrahedron. While this is perhaps an obvious adaptation of
ray-tracing, as it is effectively ray tracing itself, later work
has pushed the boundaries further. Zellman et. al. [8] and
Evangelou et. al. [9] showed how to reduce the problem of
ﬁnding the set of points in a ﬁxed-radius neighborhood of a
query point to ray tracing to build force-directed graphs and
to do photon mapping, respectively.1
These papers use this reduction to write custom ray-tracing
kernels that solve these problems. The algorithms essentially
use one-shot invocations of ray-tracing hardware to perform
the necessary distance computations and solve the problems.
However, some distance-based algorithms require integrating
repeated distance queries into larger programs, and hence
require more careful use of the reduction.
In particular, DBSCAN [10] is a clustering algorithm that
groups nearby points in space into clusters based on the
distance points within the cluster are from other points in the
cluster. Solving this problem requires repeatedly updating clus-
ter deﬁnitions by repeatedly identifying nearby points, a more
complex task than the “single shot” distance computations
of prior RT-acceleration work. In this paper, we investigate
whether RT cores can be used to accelerate this algorithm.
The contributions of our paper are as follows:
This paper introduces RT-DBSCAN, the ﬁrst RT-
accelerated clustering algorithm. As DBSCAN uses
distance-based queries to identify neighboring points, we
are able to leverage the reduction of Zellman et. al. [8]
and Evangelou et. al. [9] to accelerate neighbor searches,
which are a major computational bottleneck.
We create a primitive RT-FindNeighbor (Details in
Section 2), allowing us to easily negotiate with the ray
tracing hardware and its associated programming model
(the Optix Wrapper Library (OWL) [11]).
We use RT-FindNeighbor to implement a
UNION-FIND -based DBSCAN algorithm (Details
in Section 3) that minimizes memory consumption. We
proceed to show that RT-DBSCAN outperforms current
state-of-the-art DBSCAN algorithms that have been
optimized to run on GPUs.
II. B ACKGROUND
A. Spatial Trees
n-body problems encompass all problems where every data
point needs to interact with all other ndata points to calculate
some result. Examples of n-body problems include (1) force-
directed graph drawing algorithms such as Spring Embedders
[12], where repulsive forces between all pairs of vertices are
used to ﬁnd stable graph layouts, (2) cosmology simulations,
1This reduction is described in more detail in Section III.where the gravitational force exerted by stars in a galaxy is
modeled, and (3) k-nearest neighbors [13], where the distance
between all points in the dataset is calculated to identify the
k-nearest neighbors, to name a few. The naive approach to
solving n-body problems is to loop over the ndata points and
compute the effects of interaction with the other n 1data
points in a doubly nested loop, leading to an algorithm with
O(n2)time complexity.
Barnes-Hut [14] improved the complexity by introducing
a tree representation of input data points called Spatial Index
Tree. They built the tree by recursively grouping nearby points
using spatial subdivision. The individual points formed the
leaves of the tree and internal nodes represented groupings that
estimated the effect of the points contained in them. With this
representation, instead of computing the effect of each point
onallother points, we compute the effect of a group of points
on other individual points. Using this spatial tree optimization,
the time complexity of n-body problems reduced from O(n2)
toO(n log n) .
1) Bounding Volume Hierarchy: The grouping of points can
be done by either spatial (R-Trees, Oct-trees) or object-based
subdivision of the dataset (Bounding V olume Hierarchies).
Ray tracing applications rely on Bounding V olume Hierarchies
(BVH) to reduce the number of ray-object intersection tests
performed to determine the coloration of a pixel. Analysis
of ray tracing execution times shows that about 70% of the
total time is spent testing for intersections for simple scenes,
and upto 95% for complex scenes [15]. The authors also state
that the main reason for these percentages is the number of
intersection tests that need to be performed.
2) BVH Build: In the initial stage of the ray tracing
algorithm, all objects in the scene are enclosed in bounding
volumes. It is possible for the bounding volumes to overlap
if the objects are sufﬁciently close. A bounding volume is a
closed volume that completely encompasses one or more ob-
jects. We use Axis-Aligned Bounding Boxes (AABBs) as the
bounding volumes. The BVH is built bottom-up, starting with
the leaves. Bounding volumes containing individual objects in
the scene are the leaf nodes of the tree. Fig 1a shows objects
A, B, G, H, D andEenclosed in rectangular (shown in 2D)
bounding boxes and Fig 1b shows the corresponding bounding
boxes as leaves of the tree. The bounding volumes containing
individual objects are then recursively grouped together to
create larger bounding volumes, forming internal tree nodes
C, J, F andK. This process continues until a single bounding
box, M, encloses every intermediate and individual bounding
volume. In Fig 1a, intermediate bounding volume Cencloses
bounding volumes Aand B, and Jencloses Gand H.C
is combined with bounding volume Jto create K, which is
further combined with Fto create M, which encloses the entire
scene. The corresponding hierarchical relationship is captured
in Fig 1b, with Cas the parent of AandB,Jas the parent of
GandH,Kas the parent of CandJ, and Mbeing the parent
ofKandF.
2(a) 2D rectangular bounding boxes for the objects and interme-
diate bounding volumes
(b) Bounding V olume Hierarchy built from the bounding boxes
in (a)
Figure 1: Bounding V olume Hierarchy Construction
B. Ray Tracing Cores
The addition of Ray Tracing (RT) cores to GPUs has
enabled hardware-accelerated real-time ray tracing in gaming
applications. These accelerators co-exist with the traditional
Streaming Multi-processors (SMs), and the Optix API (Sec-
tion II-B2) allows us to write code that can leverage both RT
and shader cores of the GPU. The RT cores [6] accelerate
Bounding V olume Hierarchy traversal and ray-triangle inter-
section tests, which are crucial and expensive elements of the
ray tracing pipeline.
1) BVH Traversal: Given objects in the scene, the RT cores
intelligently2build a Bounding V olume Hierarchy, similar to
the description in Section II-A. The reduction in the number of
intersection tests performed comes from pruning large parts of
the search space by performing intersection tests on bounding
volumes rather than individual objects. During BVH traversal,
if a ray does not intersect a bounding volume, it cannot
intersect any of the volumes contained in it and traversal does
not continue down that subtree. In Fig 1, if a ray does not
intersect bounding volume K, we need not test for intersection
against C,J,A,B,GorH.
2Details of the actual hardware internals are not publicly available
Figure 2: Optix pipeline. The components shaded in blue
are performed in hardware and are not programmable. The
unshaded components can be deﬁned by the user. In the
case where objects are triangles, the Intersection Test is also
performed in hardware
2) Optix Programming Model: The Optix API [16] allows
users to write custom shader programs in CUDA (processed as
a single CUDA kernel), in addition to ofﬂoading BVH build
and traversal to RT cores. Both the shader and RT cores in
GPUs use the same device memory and work can be done in
parallel on the two cores. If the GPU does not have an RT
core, Optix programs can still be run, with BVH build and
traversal being performed in software.
Optix3allows users to set up their scene by providing sup-
port for triangles, spheres and other user-deﬁned geometries.
Once the scene is set up, the user can deﬁne a bounding vol-
ume program to enclose objects in the scene. For geometries
such as spheres, axis-aligned bounding boxes are typically
used. The bounding volumes are recursively combined by the
RT cores to build the BVH, as explained in Section II-A. With
the BVH constructed, we can now create rays and trace their
interactions with objects in the scene by traversing the BVH
and performing intersection tests.
As ray tracing is an embarrassingly parallel problem where
the color of each pixel can be computed independently, Optix
allows multiple rays to be launched in parallel as separate
CUDA threads. The components of the Optix pipeline are
shown in Fig 2 and each ray executes the various stages in
parallel. The RayGen program generates parallel rays with
the given origin ( ~ o) and direction ( ~d). The user also needs
to specify the ray interval [tmin; tmax], which determines the
extent of the ray:
~ r=~ o+t~d; t2[tmin; tmax]
The generated rays both traverse the BVH and test for
intersection with bounding volumes in hardware (shown in
blue in Fig 2). When the ray reaches a leaf bounding vol-
ume enclosing an object, the ray- object intersection test is
performed in software or hardware, depending on the object.
If the object is a triangle, the test is performed in hardware.
3All Optix kernels are also present in OWL [11]
3Otherwise, the user speciﬁes the Intersection program
to be used for ray-object intersection testing. The user can
optionally specify an AnyHit program to record information
about all the intersected objects and to determine whether to
continue or terminate BVH traversal. Once the BVH traversal
has completed, the user can optionally call the ClosestHit
program to identify the object closest to the ray along its
path or the Miss program to handle cases with no ray-object
intersections.
C. Density-Based Clustering of Applications with Noise
Cluster analysis is an unsupervised learning technique used
to identify patterns in a dataset. Clustering techniques are
widely used to provide targeted advertising to customers with
similar purchase histories, identify faulty machines, detect
anomalous ﬁnancial transactions, and so on. k-means [17], a
popular clustering technique due to its simplicity and scalabil-
ity, picks kcentroids and forms clusters based on whether other
points in the dataset are within a permissible distance to the
centroids. However, it requires that the user specify the number
of clusters ( k) to be formed and performs poorly when the
dataset is noisy. Density-Based Clustering of Applications with
Noise (DBSCAN) addresses the disadvantages of k-means, as
it does not require the user to specify the number of clusters
to be formed [10]. It has the added advantages of being able
to form clusters of varying shapes and being unperturbed by
noisy datasets.
The DBSCAN algorithm takes two parameters as inputs:
"andminPts , where "is the maximum permissible distance
between any two points in a cluster and minPts is the minimum
number of points within the "-neighborhood required to form
a cluster. A point is said to be a Core Point if it has minPts
neighbors within "distance. A Border Point is not a core point
but is reachable from a core point and is a part of a cluster.
Reachability comes in two forms: (1) directly reachable , where
point y is within a distance "from core point x, and (2)
reachable , where y is connected to core point x through one
or more core points. A Noise Point is neither a core nor a
border point.
Algorithm 1 shows the original DBSCAN algorithm. Ini-
tially, all points are considered UNASSIGNED as they have
not been assigned to a cluster yet. The FindNeighbors(p)
function in Line 2 identiﬁes all points within "distance of p. In
lines 3-6, we classify the point as a Core point or a Noise point
based on whether the "neighborhood of phasminPts points. If
the point is a Core point, we examine each neighbor and assign
it the same Cluster ID as the core point, as shown in Lines
9-11. If the neighbor has already been assigned a Cluster ID,
we ignore the point and move on to the next neighbor. In lines
13-16, we call the FindNeighbors function on the neighbors
of point p. If the neighbor is a Core point, we add it to the
set of neighbors and repeat the process until all points have
either been assigned to a cluster or classiﬁed as noise.Algorithm 1: Original DBSCAN
1forUNASSIGNED point p do
2 Neighbors FindNeighbors (p)
3 ifNeighbors:length < minPts then
4 p NOISE
5 else
6 p CLUSTER ID
7 NeighborSet Neighbors fpg
8 forneighbor2NeighborSet do
9 ifneighbor == UNASSIGNED k
10 neighbor == NOISE then
11 neighbor CLUSTER ID
NewNeighbors 
FindNeighbors (neighbor )
12 ifNewNeighbors:length minPts
then
13 NeighborSet 
NeighborSetSNewNeighbors
14 end
15 end
16 end
17 end
18end
III. D ESIGN
A. Neighbor Search
In Section II-C, we introduced an algorithm that performed
density-based clustering. Algorithm 1 includes two references
to a FindNeighbors() function that identiﬁes all points within
"distance of a point. We generalize the query as follows:
Deﬁnition III.1. ndNeighborhood (p; S; " ): Given a dataset
S, point pand distance ", ﬁnd all points fx2
Sjdistance (p; x)"g
The distance (x;y)function calculates the Euclidean dis-
tance between points xandy. The answer to this question
is used to establish the "-neighborhood to detect core points
in DBSCAN. In Section II-B, we discussed how RT cores
are used to determine the color of a pixel by answering the
ray-object intersection query:
Deﬁnition III.2. intersect (~ r; S)Given a set of objects Sin
a scene and ray, ~ r, ﬁnd all objectsfo2Sj~ rintersects og
The key question, then, is to ﬁnd a way to implement
ndNeighborhood in terms of intersect . If we can do this,
then algorithms such as DBSCAN can be readily written in
terms of intersect and can use the RT cores to accelerate their
execution. We describe this process next, adapting a reduction
proposed by prior work [8], [9].
B. Input Transformation
The key insight to the transformation is that points within
a distance "of a query point p(within p’s"-neighborhood)
are the same points that would be contained inside a sphere
4Figure 3: We expand spheres of radius ( ") around all points.
We launch an inﬁnitesimally small ray originating at query
point qand see that it intersects Cp,CqandCr, since the
origin is contained within all 3 spheres. Hence, p, q andrare
q’s neighbors
with origin pand radius ". This intuitively makes sense for 3D
datasets, since expanding a sphere over the query point would
span across the three dimensions and accumulate allpoints
within a particular query radius. However, Zellmann et. al. [8]
propose an alternate approach where, instead of expanding a
sphere only around the query point p, they expand spheres of
radius "around allpoints in the dataset. Fig 3 shows how
spheres Cp,CqandCrare expanded over points p,qandr.
We notice that the spheres overlap if their centers are in each
other’s "neighborhood.
C. Putting it all together: RT-accelerated ndNeighborhood
Now that we have a way of representing our points as
spheres in a scene, we need to formulate our ray tracing query
such that we can identify all neighbors of a point. Algorithm 2
presents a high-level overview of the process.
The algorithm takes a query point q, query radius "and the
dataset Das inputs. In lines 1-3, for each point pi, we add a
sphere primitive with origin piand radius "to the scene. This
is the input transformation process described in Section III-B
and shown in Fig 3.
Using the user-speciﬁed axis-aligned bounding box pro-
gram, a Bounding V olume Hierarchy is constructed in hard-
ware to create the scene. In Line 4, we launch an inﬁnitesi-
mally small ray ~ rwith origin ~ q, direction ~dand[tmin; tmax]
as[0;1e 16]to ﬁnd all the spheres that are intersected by the
ray. For example, from Fig 3, we see that such a ray launched
from origin ~ qintersects Cp; CqandCr. Recall that these are
solid 3D spheres and a ray of inﬁnitesimal length is sufﬁcient
to ﬁnd intersections with overlapping spheres. The overlap of
spheres in Fig 3 indicates that the centers of the spheres Cp
andCrare within "distance of ~ q.
In Lines 5-9, we record all the spheres intersected by the
ray and pass it through a ﬁlter to remove self-intersections ( Cq
in this case). When the ray traverses the BVH in hardware, it
returns all the intersected bounding volumes in the BVH tree.
As the hardware tests for intersection with bounding volumes
and not objects , it is possible that the intersection test results
are incorrect. Though bounding volumes completely encloseobjects, they are not an exact ﬁt. It is possible for the ray to
intersect the bounding volume but completely miss the object
contained in it. In Line 6, we perform an additional check to
conﬁrm that we intersect the object . Since it is also possible
for bounding volumes to overlap if the dataset is dense, this
ﬁlter removes any erroneous bounding volume intersections.
The ﬁltered list of intersected spheres ( NeighborList ) contains
the nearest neighbors of point q.
Algorithm 2: RT-FindNeighborhood
Input : Query point q, Query radius ", Dataset D
Output: NeighborList
1forp2Ddo
2 S SScreateSphere (p; ")
3end
4traceRay( ~ q;~d;[tmin; tmax])
5ifIntersect(q, s2S)then
6 if(dist(q; s)")^(q6=s)then
7 NeighborList NeighborListSs
8 end
9end
Algorithm 3: RT-DBSCAN
1forpoint p do
2 neighborCount RT-
FindNeighbors (p):length
3 ifneighborCountminPts then
4 p CORE POINT
5 end
6end
7forpoint p do
8 forn: RT-FindNeighbors(p) do
9 ifn == CORE POINT then
10 Union (p,n)
11 else
12 ifn == UNCLASSIFIED then
13 critical section:
14 UNION (p,n)
15 end
16 end
17 end
18end
D. RT-DBSCAN
We base our RT-DBSCAN algorithm on the parallel Union-
Find FDBSCAN algorithm proposed by Prokopenko et. al.
[18]. Algorithm 3 has two stages: (1) identifying Core points,
and (2) updating cluster information using union-find . For
the ﬁrst stage, we use Algorithm 2 to identify each point’s
neighbors . For each point in the dataset, we launch a ray
tracing query to check if the ray intersects more than minPts
spheres. If the ray does intersect more than minPts spheres,
the query point is marked as a Core point as shown in Lines
3-5.
5In the second stage, we begin to form the clusters. As we did
not save information about the neighbors of each point, we re-
compute the Euclidean distance between points in the dataset
using Algorithm 2. Though this computation is redundant and
may seem inefﬁcient, the hardware-accelerated BVH traversal
prevents performance degradation. In fact, Prokopenko et. al.
show that performance does not suffer even without hardware
acceleration [18]. Additionally, this approach scales well to
larger datasets as we do not run out of memory.
In Lines 7-9, we check whether the point and its neighbor
are core points. If both are core points, they can be merged
to form a larger cluster using the UNION operation. If the
neighbor is not a core point, it must be a border point and
we merge the border point into the core point’s cluster. It is
necessary to perform Line 14 atomically as border points can
belong to more than one cluster. If not, the border point could
be incorrectly assigned to two clusters, causing the erroneous
merging of two different clusters. We use a DisjointSet [19]
structure to store the rank and parent of the point. At the end
of the second stage, all points that share the same parent are
a part of the same cluster and all other points are noise.
IV. I MPLEMENTATION
We implemented RT-DBSCAN using the Optix Wrapper
Library (OWL), which is built on top of Optix 7. The tests
were run on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2060 GPU (with RT
cores) with 6 GB device memory, CUDA version 10.1 and
Optix 7.1.
OWL has separate programs for different components of the
ray tracing pipeline: bounding box construction, intersection
test, closest hit and any hit. We implemented the ﬁxed-radius
nearest neighbors search and the DBSCAN clustering phases
within the Intersection program, saving the cost of calling the
AnyHit orClosestHit program.
As Optix only accepts 3D inputs, we set the z-dimension
to 0 for 2D datasets and set the z-dimension of the ray
direction as 1. We also explicitly disabled the AnyHit and
ClosestHit programs to avoid overhead costs.
V. E VALUATION
A. Datasets
We use four real-world datasets to evaluate RT-DBSCAN.
As RT cores can only handle datasets with at most 3 dimen-
sions, we chose these 2D and 3D datasets that have been
widely used to evaluate DBSCAN performance( [18], [20],
[21]).
3DRoad The 3DRoad dataset was constructed using the road
network information of North Jutland, Denmark [22].
The dataset consists of 435K points and we use it as
a 2D dataset, considering only the latitude and longitude
coordinates.
NGSIM The Next Generation Simulation (NGSIM) Vehicle
Trajectories dataset provides precise vehicle locations
along three US highways [23]. The dataset has more than
11M points and we use the local coordinates to construct
a 2D dataset.Porto The Taxi Service Trajectory-Prediction Challenge
dataset collected trajectory data of 442 taxis in the city of
Porto, Portugal [24]. The dataset has just over 1Mpoints
and we use the 2D GPS coordinates to identify clusters.
3DIono The 3D Ionosphere dataset describes the behavior of
weather in the ionosphere [25]. The dataset has just over
1Mpoints and we construct the 3D dataset using latitude,
longitude and total electron count parameters.
B. Performance Evaluation
We compare RT-DBSCAN against three GPU-based DB-
SCAN implementations (though none of these use RT cores).
FDBSCAN FDBSCAN uses a parallel DisjointSet algorithm
to compute clusters [18]. It has minimal memory footprint
and uses Bounding V olume Hierarchies to minimize the
number of distance computations.
G-DBSCAN G-DBSCAN stores "-neighborhood information
for all points in a graph and uses BFS to ﬁnd connected
components [26].
CUDA-DClust+ CUDA-DClust+ [27] uses the idea of incre-
mentally growing clusters in parallel using chains from
CUDA-DClust [20] but reduces memory footprint and
index structure build time. As CUDA-DClust+ is strictly
better than CUDA-DClust, we only evaluate the former.
For all cases, we used the authors’ original source code,
with the only modiﬁcations being those necessary to get the
code to run on our GPU system and to handle our inputs (with
the exception of FDBSCAN, which uses an early traversal
termination optimization to improve execution time for single
runs. In this work, we focus on typical DBSCAN use cases
where the user is expected to run DBSCAN multiple times
with different parameter values. We go into more detail in
Section VI-B).
We do not compare against Densebox approaches such as
FDBSCAN-Densebox [18], HDBSCAN-Densebox algorithms
[28], [29], as they are specialized to improve performance in
datasets with very high density regions. In the absence of such
regions, performance remains the same or is worse. We also
do not compare our performance with Mr.Scan [30] and BPS-
HDBSCAN [28] as they are designed to cluster very large
datasets (billion-point scale) and the incurred overhead is not
amortized for smaller (thousand/million-point scale) datasets.
We also do not report results against cuML’s DBSCAN
implementation as we were more than 3 orders of magnitude
faster in all cases.
We vary the "parameter (deﬁned in Section II-C) and
dataset size such that we include a wide range of clusters:
a few large clusters, and many small clusters. We also look
at a case where no clusters are formed in a dense dataset
in Section V-C. We do not report results from varying minPts
(deﬁned in Section II-C) as it did not provide any new insights.
We report execution times averaged over 10 runs.
Overall, we ﬁnd that RT-DBSCAN is consistently faster
in almost all cases. In particular, RT-DBSCAN is more than
2.5x faster on larger datasets. For smaller dataset sizes (Sec-
tion V-B1), the performance difference between RT-DBSCAN
6εSpeedupFigure 4: Speedup over CUDA-DClust+ on varying search
radius ( ") for 16K 3DRoad points
and FDBSCAN is not as pronounced due to the non-negligible
BVH build time of RT-DBSCAN. We elaborate on the impact
of BVH build time in Section V-D.
1) RT-DBSCAN Performance on Small Dataset Sizes: This
section evaluates the four DBSCAN implementations on a
small dataset ( 16K points). We found that both G-DBSCAN
and CUDA-DClust+ ran out of memory on our GPU for more
than 100K points. For this reason, subsequent sections will
only compare against FDBSCAN.
Overall, we found that RT-DBSCAN outperformed other
approaches in most cases for 16K points. As we kept decreas-
ing the number of points in the dataset, we found that RT-
DBSCAN was between 1.5x and 2x slower than FDBSCAN
when the dataset size was less than 500.
We used 16K points from the 3DRoad dataset and set
minPts as 100. In Fig 4, we compare the speedup of different
approaches over CUDA-DClust+. It is evident that though
RT-DBSCAN is faster in most cases, speedup is minimal
compared to FDBSCAN, as the overhead of setting up the ray
tracing framework was not amortized by the computations.
We found that the poor performance of G-DBSCAN and
CUDA-DClust+4was due to the time taken to traverse the
adjacency list and the time needed to build and traverse the
index structure, respectively.
2) Impact of ":We now turn to larger datasets, on which
only FDBSCAN and RT-DBSCAN can run. We investigate
clustering performance for different "values. We vary "while
ﬁxing minPts as 100 and dataset size as 1M. We chose the
ﬁrst1Mpoints in the datasets for clustering and averaged our
results over 10 runs.
We observe from Fig 5 that RT-DBSCAN outperforms
FDBSCAN in all cases. We attribute the speedup entirely to
our ability to leverage hardware acceleration of BVH traversal,
as FDBSCAN is also a BVH-based DBSCAN implementation,
though it does not utilize RT cores.
We see a maximum speedup of 1.5x on the 3DRoad dataset
as shown in Fig 5a. As we will see in Section V-D, DBSCAN
4We found that CUDA-DClust+ ran into memory issues on our 6GB GPU
and also showed variability in clustering results between runsexecution time for small dataset sizes and small search radii
is dominated by BVH build time.
In the cases of Porto and 3DIono, BVH build time of RT-
DBSCAN was only 2.5x slower than FDBSCAN, allowing us
to leverage the speedup in BVH traversal for fast clustering.
For the Porto dataset in Fig 5b, we see a maximum speedup
of 2.3x and our speedup tended to increase with increasing "
values.
For the 3DIono dataset in Fig 5c, we achieve a maximum
speedup of 3.6x. As the neighborhood search radius "becomes
larger, the number of BVH traversals and intersection tests
performed also increases, allowing us to realize the full
potential of RT acceleration.
3) Impact of Dataset Size: Fig 6 shows how performance of
RT-DBSCAN and FDBSCAN varies with the size of the input
dataset. We ﬁx the ( ",minPts ) values as (0.05,100), (0.5,10)
and (0.5,1000) for the 3DRoad, 3DIono and Porto datasets
respectively. For different dataset sizes ( n), we choose the ﬁrst
npoints for clustering.
We ﬁnd that RT-DBSCAN outperforms FDBSCAN on all
datasets and the performance disparity is especially evident
for larger dataset sizes. For the 3DRoad dataset, we see from
Fig 6a that our maximum speedup is 1.37x. As 3DRoad is
relatively small with a maximum of 400K points, it is not
surprising that we face issues similar to those discussed in
Section V-B2, where BVH build time is not amortized by
the time taken to complete the two stages of the DBSCAN
algorithm.
For the Porto (Fig 6b) and 3DIono (Fig 6c) datasets, we
ﬁnd that we achieve maximum speedups of 2.9x and 4.1x,
respectively for the maximum dataset sizes. We report the raw
execution time for Porto, the largest dataset we examined, in
Table I. We examine the growth rate of the execution times of
Dataset size FDBSCAN(s) RT-DBSCAN(s)
500K 539.85 200.82
1M 2868.1 1347.2
2M 14859.02 6264.6
4M 65935.14 23486.15
8M 282047.12 96333.7
Table I: Execution time (in seconds) for Porto dataset on
varying dataset size
RT-DBSCAN and FDBSCAN on the 3DIono dataset in Fig 7.
We ﬁnd that the growth rate of RT-DBSCAN’s execution time
is signiﬁcantly slower than that of FDBSCAN as we are able
to leverage hardware acceleration, showing that our approach
is scalable. In general, increasing the dataset size widens the
performance gap between RT-DBSCAN and FDBSCAN, as
the RT hardware is designed to handle a large number of rays.
C. RT-DBSCAN Performance on a Dense Dataset
Finally, we evaluated RT-DBSCAN on NGSIM, a very
dense dataset where the number of clusters formed is 0, using
the same criteria as in Sections V-B2 and V-B3.
When we varied the dataset size, we found that RT-
DBSCAN outperformed FDBSCAN by large margins, with
7εSpeedup(a) 3DRoad
εSpeedup (b) Porto
εSpeedup (c) 3DIono
Figure 5: Speedup over FDBSCAN on varying search radius ( ")
Dataset SizeSpeedup
(a) 3DRoad
Dataset SizeSpeedup (b) Porto
Dataset SizeSpeedup (c) 3DIono
Figure 6: Speedup over FDBSCAN on varying dataset size
Dataset SizeExecution Time (sec)
Figure 7: Scalability of execution time for 3DIono dataset
a maximum of 5500x, as shown in Fig 8b. Table III shows
the raw execution times.
Search radius ( ") FDBSCAN(s) RT-DBSCAN(s)
0.0001 64.72 0.0257
0.00025 64.77 0.0259
0.0005 64.74 0.0259
0.00075 64.71 0.026
0.001 64.74 0.0259
Table II: Execution time (in seconds) for NGSIM dataset on
varying search radius ( ")
On varying "with minPts as 100 and dataset size as 1M,
we found that RT-DBSCAN was nearly 2500x faster thanFDBSCAN, as shown in Fig 8a. Table II shows raw execution
times for different "values. The execution times of both
FDBSCAN and RT-DBSCAN did not signiﬁcantly change for
different "as the dataset was still dense for these different
radii.
Dataset size FDBSCAN(s) RT-DBSCAN(s)
500K 12.7 0.03
1M 72.8 0.06
2M 364.6 0.13
4M 1631.4 0.3
8M 6964.1 1.26
Table III: Execution time (in seconds) for NGSIM dataset on
varying dataset size
On analyzing the output, we found that the RT hardware
made relatively few calls to the intersection program. As the
speciﬁcs of BVH construction and traversal in RT hardware are
unclear, we speculate that the hardware was able to construct
the BVH such that we were able to prune large parts of the
search space and minimize the number of intersection tests
required. As we will discuss in Section VI-C, having access
to the workings of the hardware internals would help explain
our results a lot better.
D. Runtime Analysis of RT-DBSCAN
In Section III-B, we discussed how data points are converted
to spheres so that RT cores can build and traverse the BVH in
hardware. Though this helps attain our objective of converting
the nearest neighbor problem to a ray tracing query, it comes
at a cost. Building a BVH from spheres for a ray tracing
8εSpeedup(a) Speedup on varying search radius ( ")
Dataset SizeSpeedup (b) Speedup on varying dataset size
Figure 8: Speedup over FDBSCAN on varying "and dataset size for NGSIM
application is much more complex and time-consuming than
building a spatial tree for data points. The Optix builder
performs memory compaction, invokes bounding box routines
and other ray-tracing-speciﬁc operations that add to the BVH
build time.
The general trend we observed was that BVH build time
dominated the total execution time for smaller datasets and
cases where "was small, as fewer BVH traversals and
intersection tests needed to be performed. For example, we
consider the ﬁrst 1 million points from 3DIono dataset with "
= 0.25, and minPts = 100, similar to Section V-B2. We found
that RT-DBSCAN was 3.6x faster than FDBSCAN overall.
Breaking down the execution time, we found that the time
taken by RT-DBSCAN to perform clustering operations after
BVH build was 6.4 ms for the Core point identiﬁcation phase
and 6.6 ms for the cluster formation phase. In total, RT-
DBSCAN only spent 48% of total execution time) on actual
clustering operations. On the other hand, FDBSCAN spent
0.118 seconds (94% of total execution time) on clustering
operations. This shows us that, on average, RT-DBSCAN is
more than 9x faster than FDBSCAN in performing the actual
clustering operations!
VI. D ISCUSSION
A. Hardware Limitations
A major disadvantage of using RT cores to accelerate dis-
tance computations is that the dimensionality of the dataset can
be at most three. Indeed, the RT cores themselves expect the
dataset to be exactly three dimensions. Despite this limitation,
we note that there are many important real-world 2D and 3D
datasets such as Geospatial data, point clouds, and object ge-
ometries, and important distance algorithms such as DBSCAN,
computing normals, and ﬁltering point cloud noise that use
distance searches over these datasets. Indeed, we note that
most of the prior DBSCAN works evaluate their approaches on
2D geospatial datasets [18], [20], [21]. It is possible to reduce
the number of dimensions in the dataset using dimensional-
ity reduction techniques such Principal Component Analysis,
though this introduces approximation.B. Impact of early traversal termination
FDBSCAN uses an optimization where it stops BVH traver-
sal when minPts neighbors are found in the FindNeighbors
function [18]. However, the Optix API, based on which OWL
is built, does not allow BVH traversal termination unless
theIntersection kernel makes an additional call to the
AnyHit kernel. As this can incur signiﬁcant overhead, RT-
DBSCAN does not attempt to perform early traversal termi-
nation.
Though the early exit optimization works very well for cases
where the user is only expected to run DBSCAN once , it is,
in practice, more useful to record the number of neighbors of
every point by allowing the BVH traversal to run its course.
By saving the number of neighbors of each point, we do
not have to re-run core point identiﬁcation phase (Stage-1 of
Algorithm 3) for any subsequent DBSCAN runs where the
user changes the minPts parameter.
In Figs 9, we compare RT-DBSCAN to FDBSCAN with
early termination, as well as FDBSCAN without while varying
dataset size for ﬁxed ( minPts ,") values. As expected, using
early termination guarantees better performance as it often
performs orders of magnitude fewer distance computations.
This is especially true when minPts is very small and BVH
traversal can stop very early. From our experiments, it is
evident from Fig 9a that for the Porto dataset, using early
exit improves performance of FDBSCAN-EarlyExit by 3x
compared to FDBSCAN without and by 1.5x compared to
RT-DBSCAN for larger dataset sizes.
However, in other cases, even the early-exit optimization is
not enough to overcome RT-DBSCAN’s superior performance.
For example, note that RT-DBSCAN outperforms FDBSCAN-
EarlyExit on the 3DRoad dataset (Fig 9b) and vastly out-
performs it on the NGSIM dataset (Fig 9c). We explain our
ﬁndings by noting that the cost of additional intersection tests
is hidden by the acceleration from RT cores. We especially
note that even though the early exit optimization is able
to leverage the density of the NGSIM dataset to improve
performance substantially, RT-DBSCAN’s ability to massively
prune the search space is even more useful.
9Dataset SizeExecution Time (sec)(a) 3DRoad
Dataset SizeExecution Time (sec) (b) Porto
Dataset SizeExecution Time (sec) (c) NGSIM
Figure 9: Impact of early traversal termination on execution time
C. Extensions to the Ray Tracing API
We believe that it would be advantageous to have a certain
degree of control over the hardware BVH traversal. For
applications such as Barnes-Hut [14], it is necessary to access
and update the intermediate nodes of the BVH to estimate the
effect of the enclosed volumes and this is not possible with
the current setup of the Optix API. We leave the Barnes Hut
implementation as future work.
In this work, we leveraged the acceleration from the
hardware BVH build and traversal. However, from Sec-
tion II-B, we know that the RT cores can also accelerate
ray-triangle intersection tests. Indeed, Wald et. al. ﬁnd that
using hardware-accelerated intersection tests in addition to
hardware-accelerated BVH traversal can produce substantial
performance gains [7].
In our nearest neighbors algorithm (Algorithm 2), we ex-
pand spheres around the points in the dataset and designate all
points that fall within the sphere as neighbors of that point. We
performed some experiments to see if we could approximate
the spheres using triangles to leverage the hardware accel-
eration. As the ray-triangle intersection tests were done in
hardware, we had to call the AnyHit kernel to collect the
intersected points. We found that using triangles resulted in
2x to 5x performance degradation due to the overhead cost
associated with calls to the AnyHit kernel. If there was an
extension to the hardware such that the intersected points can
be returned without using the costly AnyHit kernel, there is
massive potential for performance improvement from leverag-
ing hardware-accelerated ray-triangle intersection testing.
VII. R ELATED WORK
a) Using RT cores for non-Ray-Tracing Applications:
Wald et. al. ﬁrst used RT cores to accelerate non-ray-tracing
programs [7]. They formulated the problem of identifying
a point’s location in a tetrahedral mesh as a ray tracing
problem by declaring the meshes as 3D objects in a scene
and tracing rays originating at the query point. They show
how leveraging both hardware BVH traversal and ray-triangle
intersections resulted in upto 6.5x speedup over other CUDA
implementations. Morrical et. al. used RT cores to successfully
accelerate the unstructured mesh point location problem [31].
Zellmann et. al. proposed a mapping of the ﬁxed-radius nearestneighbor query to a ray tracing query for the Spring Embed-
ders force-directed graph drawing algorithm [8]. Evangelou et.
al.used the nearest neighbor mapping to solve the k-nearest
neighbors problem [9]. Zhu proposed query re-ordering and
partitioning algorithms to improve ray coherence and minimize
the number of intersection tests performed [32]. We note
that adding these optimizations to RT-DBSCAN would further
improve performance.
b) DBSCAN: Ester et. al. introduced the DBSCAN al-
gorithm in 1996 to identify clusters of arbitrary shapes based
on dense regions in the dataset [10]. Although DBSCAN is an
inherently sequential algorithm (Algorithm1), researchers have
exploited GPU parallelism to accelerate DBSCAN. Thapa et.
al.exploited parallelism by having multiple CPU threads
perform "-neighbor distance computations in parallel [33].
Andrade et. al. proposed G-DBSCAN, where they built a
graph over the dataset and performed parallel Breadth First
Searches to mark reachable points as belonging to the same
cluster [26]. However, the memory required to store and main-
tain the graph structure affects the scalability of G-DBSCAN.
B¨ohm et. al. introduced CUDA-DClust, which used a spatial
index structure to incrementally grow clusters in parallel [20].
Poudel et. al. proposed CUDA-DClust+ which improved on
CUDA-DClust by building the index structure on the GPU
instead of CPU and reducing communication overhead [27].
However, CUDA-DClust+ requires a signiﬁcant amount of
time for index construction and suffers when the size of GPU
memory is small. Prokopenko et. al. proposed FDBSCAN and
FDBSCAN-DenseBox that use Bounding V olume Hierarchy
with UNION-FIND for clustering [18]. Both FDBSCAN and
FDBSCAN-DenseBox avoid memory issues as they do not
store any neighbor information. FDBSCAN-DenseBox, similar
to [28], [30], superimposes a Cartesian grid-based indexing
to identify dense regions and reduce the number of distance
computations in dense boxes.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we implemented RT-DBSCAN, where we ac-
celerated the nearest neighbor searches in DBSCAN using Ray
Tracing cores. We found that the hardware acceleration led to
performance improvements by as much as 4.5x over current
state-of-the-art GPU-based DBSCAN implementations. Future
work entails removing the ﬁxed-radius constraint for neighbor
10searches to accelerate a wider range of applications. It would
also be interesting to see if RT cores can be used to accelerate
more general tree traversal algorithms.
REFERENCES
[1] NVIDIA, “Cuda,” 2007. [Online]. Available: https://developer.nvidia.
com/cuda-zone
[2] K. Group, “Opencl,” 2009. [Online]. Available: https://www.khronos.
org/opencl/
[3] T. Whitted, “An improved illumination model for shaded display,”
Commun. ACM , vol. 23, no. 6, p. 343–349, jun 1980.
[4] I. Wald, “On fast construction of sah-based bounding volume hierar-
chies,” in 2007 IEEE Symposium on Interactive Ray Tracing , 2007, pp.
33–40.
[5] M. Goldfarb, Y . Jo, and M. Kulkarni, “General transformations for
gpu execution of tree traversals,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis , ser. SC ’13. New York, NY , USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2013.
[6] NVIDIA, “Nvidia turing architecture whitepaper,” 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://gpltech.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/
NVIDIA-Turing-Architecture-Whitepaper.pdf
[7] I. Wald, W. Usher, N. Morrical, L. Lediaev, and V . Pascucci, “RTX
Beyond Ray Tracing: Exploring the Use of Hardware Ray Tracing Cores
for Tet-Mesh Point Location,” in High-Performance Graphics - Short
Papers . The Eurographics Association, 2019.
[8] S. Zellmann, M. Weier, and I. Wald, “Accelerating force-directed graph
drawing with rt cores,” in 2020 IEEE Visualization Conference (VIS) ,
2020, pp. 96–100.
[9] I. Evangelou, G. Papaioannou, K. Vardis, and A. A. Vasilakis, “Fast
radius search exploiting ray tracing frameworks,” Journal of Computer
Graphics Techniques (JCGT) , vol. 10, February 2021.
[10] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based algorithm
for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise.” AAAI
Press, 1996, pp. 226–231.
[11] I. Wald, N. Morrical, and H. E, “Owl-the optix 7 wrapper library,” 2020.
[12] P. Eades, “A heuristic for graph drawing,” 1984.
[13] N. S. Altman, “An introduction to kernel and nearest-neighbor non-
parametric regression,” The American Statistician , vol. 46, pp. 175–185,
1992.
[14] J. E. Barnes and P. Hut, “A hierarchical O(n-log-n) force calculation
algorithm,” Nature , vol. 324, p. 446, 1986.
[15] A. Fujimoto, T. Tanaka, and K. Iwata, “Arts: Accelerated ray-tracing
system,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications , vol. 6, no. 4, pp.
16–26, 1986.
[16] NVIDIA, “Nvidia optix 7.4 programming guide,” 2021.
[17] Y . Li and H. Wu, “A clustering method based on k-means algorithm,”
Physics Procedia , vol. 25, pp. 1104–1109, 2012, international Confer-
ence on Solid State Devices and Materials Science, April 1-2, 2012,
Macao.
[18] A. Prokopenko, D. Lebrun-Grandi ´e, and D. Arndt, “Fast tree-based
algorithms for DBSCAN on gpus,” CoRR , vol. abs/2103.05162, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.05162[19] J. E. Hopcroft and J. D. Ullman, “Set merging algorithms,” SIAM J.
Comput. , vol. 2, pp. 294–303, 1973.
[20] C. B ¨ohm, R. Noll, C. Plant, and B. Wackersreuther, “Density-based
clustering using graphics processors,” in Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management , ser. CIKM ’09.
New York, NY , USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2009, p.
661–670.
[21] H. Mustafa, E. Leal, and L. Gruenwald, “An experimental comparison
of gpu techniques for dbscan clustering,” in 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data (Big Data) , 2019, pp. 3701–3710.
[22] M. Kaul, B. Yang, and C. S. Jensen, “Building accurate 3d spatial
networks to enable next generation intelligent transportation systems,” in
2013 IEEE 14th International Conference on Mobile Data Management ,
vol. 1, 2013, pp. 137–146.
[23] transport.gov, “Next generation simulation (ngsim) vehicle
trajectories and supporting data,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.opendatanetwork.com/dataset/data.transportation.gov/8ect-6jqj
[24] L. Moreira-Matias, J. Gama, M. Ferreira, J. Mendes-Moreira, and
L. Damas, “Predicting taxi–passenger demand using streaming data,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 1393–1402, 2013.
[25] V . Pankratius, A. Coster, J. Vierinen, P. Erickson, and B. Rideout, “Gps
data processing for scientiﬁc studies of the earth’s atmosphere and near-
space environment,” pp. 1–12, 01 2015.
[26] G. Andrade, G. Ramos, D. Madeira, R. Sachetto, R. Ferreira, and
L. Rocha, “G-dbscan: A gpu accelerated algorithm for density-based
clustering,” Procedia Computer Science , vol. 18, pp. 369–378, 2013,
2013 International Conference on Computational Science.
[27] M. Poudel and M. Gowanlock, “Cuda-dclust+: Revisiting early gpu-
accelerated dbscan clustering designs,” in 2021 IEEE 28th International
Conference on High Performance Computing, Data, and Analytics
(HiPC) , 2021, pp. 354–363.
[28] M. Gowanlock, “Hybrid cpu/gpu clustering in shared memory on the
billion point scale,” in Proceedings of the ACM International Conference
on Supercomputing , ser. ICS ’19. New York, NY , USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2019, p. 35–45.
[29] M. Gowanlock, C. M. Rude, D. M. Blair, J. D. Li, and V . Pankratius, “A
hybrid approach for optimizing parallel clustering throughput using the
gpu,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems , vol. 30,
no. 4, pp. 766–777, 2019.
[30] B. Welton, E. Samanas, and B. P. Miller, “Mr. scan: Extreme scale
density-based clustering using a tree-based network of gpgpu nodes,” in
SC ’13: Proceedings of the International Conference on High Perfor-
mance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , 2013, pp. 1–11.
[31] N. Morrical, W. Usher, I. Wald, and V . Pascucci, “Efﬁcient space
skipping and adaptive sampling of unstructured volumes using hardware
accelerated ray tracing,” 2019 IEEE Visualization Conference (VIS) , pp.
256–260, 2019.
[32] Y . Zhu, “Rtnn: Accelerating neighbor search using hardware ray trac-
ing,” in Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Princi-
ples and Practice of Parallel Programming , ser. PPoPP ’22. New York,
NY , USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, p. 76–89.
[33] R. J. Thapa, C. Trefftz, and G. Wolffe, “Memory-efﬁcient implemen-
tation of a graphics processor-based cluster detection algorithm for
large spatial databases,” in 2010 IEEE International Conference on
Electro/Information Technology , 2010, pp. 1–5.
11