SciPost Physics Submission
Dipole symmetries from the topology of the phase space
and the constraints on the low-energy spectrum
Tomáš Brauner1⋆, Naoki Yamamoto2and Ryo Yokokura3
1Department of Mathematics and Physics, University of Stavanger, 4021 Stavanger, Norway
2Department of Physics, Keio University, Yokohama 223-8522, Japan
3Department of Physics & Research and Education Center for Natural Sciences,
Keio University, Hiyoshi 4-1-1, Yokohama, Kanagawa 223-8521, Japan
⋆tomas.brauner@uis.no
January 26, 2024
Abstract
We demonstrate the general existence of a local dipole conservation law in bosonic field
theory. The scalar charge density arises from the symplectic form of the system, whereas
the tensor current descends from its stress tensor. The algebra of spatial translations be-
comes centrally extended in presence of field configurations with a finite nonzero charge.
Furthermore, when the symplectic form is closed but not exact, the system may, surpris-
ingly, lack a well-defined momentum density. This leads to a theorem for the presence of
additional light modes in the system whenever the short-distance physics is governed by
a translationally invariant local field theory. We also illustrate this mechanism for axion
electrodynamics as an example of a system with Nambu–Goldstone modes of higher-form
symmetries.
Contents
1 Introduction and summary 2
2 Dipole conservation laws from translation invariance 4
3 Symplectic approach to the dipole algebra in d=2dimensions 6
4 Examples 8
4.1 Ferromagnets 8
4.2 Quantum crystals 9
4.3 Superfluids 10
5 Generalization to higher dimensions 11
6 Linear momentum problem 12
7 Implications for the spectrum of Nambu–Goldstone bosons 13
7.1 Forbidden patterns of symmetry breaking 13
7.2 Completing the low-energy effective theory 14
8 Nambu–Goldstone bosons of higher-form symmetries 16
9 Discussion and conclusions 18
1arXiv:2303.04479v3  [hep-th]  25 Jan 2024SciPost Physics Submission
A Avoiding the linear momentum problem in ferromagnets 21
B Linear momentum problem in axion electrodynamics 22
C Coordinate-free formulation of dipole conservation laws 23
D Gauging dipole symmetry: volume-preserving diffeomorphisms 25
References 27
1 Introduction and summary
Multipole symmetries have played an important role for understanding the restricted mobility
of elementary excitations in fracton phases of matter [1–4]. The simplest example, a dipole-
type symmetry, amounts to a local conservation law
∂0J0+∂i∂jJi j=0, (1)
where J0is a charge density and Ji ja symmetric spatial tensor current. On field configurations
such that Ji jdecays sufficiently rapidly at spatial infinity, (1) implies the conservation of the
following quantities,1
Q≡Z
ddxJ0(x,t), Di≡Z
ddxxiJ0(x,t). (2)
If in addition the spatial tensor current is traceless, δi jJi j=0, then
X≡Z
ddx x2J0(x,t) (3)
is also conserved. Clearly, DiandXcan be interpreted respectively as the dipole moment
and trace of the quadrupole moment of the charge density J0. The most striking consequence
of dipole-type conservation laws is the restriction on motion of any localized field configura-
tion with finite nonzero Q. Namely, for such excitations, Di/Qplays the role of a center of
charge. Conservation of both QandDiimplies that the mean position of the excitation cannot
change, even though its detailed spatial profile may vary with time. It has been known that
apart from as yet hypothetical fracton phases of matter, a dipole-type conservation law also
restricts the mobility of skyrmions in ferromagnets [5]and vortices in superfluids [6]. A simi-
lar mobility constraint also appears in relativistic physics when so-called Carrollian symmetry
is present [7].
Physical systems featuring a given multipole symmetry can be constructed using standard
symmetry-based techniques of effective field theory (EFT) [8, 9]. However, the question in
what kind of systems one may actually expect a multipole symmetry does not seem to have
a clear answer. In this paper, we show that a dipole-type conservation law appears in nearly
any local bosonic field theory with continuous translation invariance; the only mild technical
assumption we make is that the Lagrangian of the system does not contain higher than first
1Unless explicitly stated otherwise, we will have implicitly in mind physical systems living in a d-dimensional
Euclidean space, Rd, throughout the paper.
2SciPost Physics Submission
time derivatives or mixed spatial-temporal derivatives. This is the subject of Sec. 2. The main
takeaway point is that J0is the density of a topological charge, associated with the symplectic
form of the system. The tensor current Ji jdescends from the system’s stress tensor.
The origin of the dipole conservation law in the symplectic form of the system suggests
that one may gain further insight by switching to the Hamiltonian (symplectic) formalism.
Restricting the discussion temporarily to d=2 spatial dimensions, we thus show in Sec. 3 that
DiandXare essentially the generators of (two-dimensional) spatial translations and rotations.
The precise relation to the operators of momentum Piand angular momentum Lis
Pi=−εi jDj, L=1
2X. (4)
Moreover, the algebra of spatial momentum is centrally extended,
{Pi,Pj}=−εi jQ. (5)
This kind of central extension was previously shown to be present in EFTs for Nambu–Goldstone
(NG) bosons of spontaneously broken internal symmetry, and in EFTs with fields taking val-
ues from a Kähler manifold [10]. The present derivation generalizes this result to all bosonic
field theories satisfying our mild technical assumption on the dependence of the Lagrangian
on time derivatives of the fields.
The above general results are illustrated by examples in Sec. 4. We revisit skyrmions in
ferromagnets and vortices in superfluids, pointing out the essential difference in how topo-
logical textures and defects fit into the framework developed in this paper. We also discuss a
dipole-type conservation law in quantum Wigner crystals.
Ind≥2 spatial dimensions, the symplectic 2-form generates a (d−2)-form symmetry
(see[11–13 ]for recent reviews of generalized symmetries). For d>2, one therefore cannot
expect the corresponding topological charge to appear in the Poisson bracket (or commutator)
of momentum components as in (5). This is in accord with the fact that in rotationally invariant
systems in d>2 dimensions, any central extension of the Euclidean algebra of momentum
and angular momentum is forbidden by the Jacobi identities. A proper generalization of (5)
is presented in Sec. 5.
The presence of a central extension in the momentum algebra is not innocuous. Namely,
it may indicate that one cannot define a consistent momentum density, a feature sometimes
referred to as the linear momentum problem (LMP). In Sec. 6 we interpret this as a “classical
anomaly” [14]and show how it restricts the low-energy spectrum of the system. The constraint
is particularly strong for gapless modes, that is NG bosons. Here it ultimately leads to a no-go
theorem for certain types of symmetry-breaking patterns unless additional gapless degrees of
freedom are present; see Sec. 7 for details. In Sec. 8 we show on a concrete example that
the prediction of additional gapless modes also applies to NG bosons of spontaneously broken
higher-form symmetry.
Some additional comments on the material presented in the paper are offered in Sec. 9.
Several technical details that we omit in the main text are relegated to appendices. In Ap-
pendix A, we show explicitly how the LMP is avoided in ferromagnetic insulators. Appendix B
demonstrates the absence of a well-defined momentum density in axion electrodynamics. Ap-
pendices C and D further extend the general results of this paper. First, it is common to express
local conservation laws in a coordinate-free form as the statement of closedness of the Hodge
dual of the symmetry current. It is not immediately obvious how the dipole conservation
law (1) could be cast in such a coordinate-free form as well. This is the subject of Appendix C,
where we also mention possible applications to systems living on curved spatial manifolds.
Finally, the consequences of global symmetry are oftentimes conveniently expressed in terms
of invariance of the generating functional of the theory under gauge transformations of a set
3SciPost Physics Submission
of background fields. The background gauge invariance corresponding to the class of dipole-
type symmetries considered here is worked out in Appendix D. This provides a natural link
between the present paper and the recent work of Du et al. [15]on invariance of systems with
fracton-like mobility constraints under volume-preserving diffeomorphisms.
2 Dipole conservation laws from translation invariance
To motivate our general framework, consider a theory of a set of bosonic (but not necessarily
scalar) fieldsχataking values from a manifold N, defined by the Lagrangian density L[χ].
We assume that the Lagrangian does not contain any higher than first time derivatives, or
mixed spatial-temporal derivatives, of χa. The set of corresponding conjugate momenta Πais
then defined in the usual way, Πa≡∂L/∂(∂0χa). Under our assumption on the Lagrangian,
this is a local algebraic relation between the generalized velocities ∂0χaand the conjugate
momenta Πa. We assume furthermore the absence of constraints so that this relation can be
inverted to uniquely give ∂0χaas a function of Πa,χaand the spatial derivatives of χa. The
Hamiltonian density H≡Πa∂0χa−L can then be likewise expressed in terms of Πaandχa
and their spatial derivatives. Locally, one may view the pairing Πa∂0χaas defining the action
of a 1-form on tangent vectors to N. The phase space of the theory then consists of maps from
RdtoT∗N, the cotangent bundle of N.
It is not always convenient to explicitly separate generalized coordinates from their con-
jugate momenta. Moreover, there are systems where the Lagrangian dynamics is naturally
first-order, in which case the set of variables χa,Πacannot be treated as independent, or un-
constrained. In order to allow for such possibility, we will now formulate the class of theories
we shall be concerned with directly in terms of a Hamiltonian action principle. We label all
the independent canonical variables jointly as φaand assume that they take values from a
manifold M. To distinguish the finite-dimensional manifold Mfrom the actual phase space,
which is the infinite-dimensional set of maps φa: Rd→M, we will refer to Mas the target
space of the theory. The action of the theory is then defined as
S=Z
ddxdt{ωa(φ)∂0φa−H [φ]}; (6)
the Hamiltonian density H[φ]is a local function of the fields φaand their spatial deriva-
tives. The 1-form ω(φ)≡ωa(φ)dφaonMdefines the symplectic potential of the theory.
The absence of further constraints is embodied in the assumption that the symplectic 2-form,
Ω≡dω, is nondegenerate on the entire target space M.2
Suppose that the theory possesses global translation invariance, that is, neither the Hamil-
tonian nor the symplectic potential depends explicitly on the spacetime coordinates xµ= (x,t).
Let us now subject the action to an infinitesimal spatial, possibly time-dependent, diffeomor-
phism, xi→xi+ξi(x,t). Thenωµ≡ωa∂µφatransforms as a spacetime 1-form, whereas the
variation of the Hamiltonian, H=R
ddxH, defines the symmetric stress tensor σi j,
δξωµ=−ξi∂iωµ−ωi∂µξi,δξH≡Z
ddx1
2(∂iξj+∂jξi)σi j=Z
ddx∂iξjσi
j. (7)
Inserting this into the action and integrating by parts, we get
δξS=Z
ddxdtξi(∂0ωi−∂iω0+∂jσj
i). (8)
2This is a slight abuse of terminology. Usually, the symplectic potential and symplectic form are defined directly
as differential forms on the phase space rather than on the target space M. We will however only work with
differential forms on Mand their pull-back to the space(time), so there is no danger of confusion.
4SciPost Physics Submission
Qtopological
(off-shell)Di,Xmultipole
(on-shell)
Figure 1: Nested conservation laws. The topological charge Qis conserved off-shell.
Imposing the equation of motion leads to two additional conserved quantities: the
dipole moment Diand the trace of the quadrupole moment X.
For fields that satisfy the equation of motion (that is, are on-shell ), this implies the relation
∂0ωi−∂iω0=−∂jσj
i. (9)
For the sake of simplicity, let us next initially assume d=2 spatial dimensions. The sym-
plectic potential can then be used to construct the current
Jµ≡εµνλ∂νωλ. (10)
This gives a topological conservation law in the sense that the current is conserved identically
(off-shell ). The corresponding charge density essentially equals the pull-back of the symplectic
2-form on M,Ω=dω, to R2,
J0=εi j∂iωj. (11)
On-shell, the spatial part of the topological current can be related to the stress tensor via (9),
Ji=εi j(∂jω0−∂0ωj) =∂j(εikσj
k). (12)
Upon introducing the symmetric tensor current,
Ji j≡1
2 
εikσj
k+εjkσi
k
, (13)
the conservation of the topological current Jµturns into the dipole conservation law (1).3The
tensor current Ji jis traceless as a consequence of the symmetry of σi j.
Let us stress that what we have here are two different conservation laws that are nested ;
see Fig. 1 for a sketch. The current Jµ, and hence the integral charge Q, is conserved off-shell.
If we now on top of that impose the equation of motion, we get the on-shell relation (12). This
guarantees via (1) the conservation of DiandXas defined by (2) and (3).
Translation invariance is usually associated with conservation of momentum. In order
for (1) to have any additional content, there must be field configurations for which Qactually
is nonzero. There are two generic options how to ensure this. First, it is often useful to impose
a boundary condition on the fields that effectively compactifies the domain R2to a manifold
without boundary such as the sphere S2or torus T2. The image of the fields φathus becomes
a 2-cycle in the target space M. The integral charge Qcan then be nonzero only if this 2-
cycle belongs to a nontrivial homology class in M, and at the same time the symplectic form
Ω=dωis closed but not exact.4The second option is that the fields φasatisfy a nontrivial
3The same identification of J0with a topological charge density and Ji jwith the stress tensor appeared previ-
ously in the specific contexts of ferromagnetism [5]and chiral topological elasticity [16].
4The latter condition is satisfied in particular whenever Mis a compact manifold without boundary.
5SciPost Physics Submission
boundary condition, whereby they map R2to a 2-chain in Mwith a nonvanishing boundary.
The topological charge Qmay then be nonzero even if the symplectic form Ωis exact, as we
will see on a concrete example in Sec. 4.
While we have initially restricted the discussion to d=2 spatial dimensions, the general-
ization to higher dimensions is easy. The on-shell relation (9) remains valid for any d. What
changes is only the definition of the topological current descending from the symplectic form,
Jµ1···µd−1≡εµ1···µd−1νλ∂νωλ, (14)
giving rise to a (d−2)-form topological conservation law. Following the same steps as above
then leads to the generalized dipole-type conservation law,
∂0ρi1···id−2+∂j∂kJi1···id−2jk=0. (15)
Here the charge density ρi1···id−2and the spatial tensor current Ji1···id−2jk, antisymmetric in its
firstd−2 indices and symmetric in the last two indices, are defined by
ρi1···id−2≡εi1···id−2jk∂jωk, Ji1···id−2jk≡1
2 
εi1···id−2jℓσk
ℓ+εi1···id−2kℓσj
ℓ
. (16)
In other words, the conservation law (1) augmented with the definitions (11) and (13) is
modified trivially by adding an antisymmetrized set of extra spatial indices i1, . . . , id−2on the
currents and the Levi-Civita tensor. We stress that the result (15) is still a dipole-type conser-
vation law; it is not to be confused with a multipole-type conservation law, which would be
symmetric in all its indices.
3 Symplectic approach to the dipole algebra in d=2dimensions
The local conservation law (1) was easy to generalize to any number of dimensions. However,
the corresponding global conservation laws turn out to be qualitatively different for d=2 and
d>2. We will therefore for the time being again restrict to d=2 dimensions, and return to
the general case in Sec. 5.
In this section, we will study the global symmetry algebra using the Poisson bracket, de-
fined for any two functionals F,Gon the phase space by
{F,G}≡Z
ddxΩab(φ(x))δF
δφa(x)δG
δφb(x). (17)
HereΩabis the matrix inverse of Ωab, collecting the matrix elements of the symplectic form,
defined by the usual prescription Ω≡dω≡(1/2)Ωabdφa∧dφbwhere Ωab=∂aωb−∂bωa,
with the shorthand notation ∂a≡∂/∂φa. The key step is to introduce a deformation of the
topological charge Qin (2) with the charge density defined by (11),
Qλ≡Z
d2xλ(x)εi j∂iωj(φ(x)) =1
2Z
d2xλ(x)εi jΩab(φ(x))∂iφa(x)∂jφb(x), (18)
whereλ(x)is an arbitrary (smooth) function on R2. The topological nature of the charge
Q=Qλ=1is reflected in the fact that all its Poisson brackets vanish. That is however no longer
the case for Qλ, whose Lie algebra reproduces that of functions on R2,
{Qλ,Q¯λ}=−Qεi j∂iλ∂j¯λ≡−Q{λ,¯λ}, (19)
6SciPost Physics Submission
where we have used that the symplectic form is closed, ∂aΩbc+∂bΩca+∂cΩab=0. This is the
so-called classical w∞algebra [17]. Its local version [18],
{J0(x),J0(y)}=−1
2εi j∂x
i∂y
j
[J0(x) +J0(y)]δ(x−y)	
, (20)
is the coordinate-space formulation of the long-wavelength limit of the Girvin–MacDonald–
Platzman algebra [19].
The functionals Qλgenerate a nontrivial flow on the phase space,
δλφa(x)≡{φa(x),Qλ}=Ωab(φ(x))δQλ
δφb(x)=−εi j∂iλ(x)∂jφa(x). (21)
Now settingλ(x)→−εi jxjgivesδλφa(x)→−∂iφa(x). Likewise,λ(x)→(1/2)x2leads to
δλφa(x)→−εi jxi∂jφa(x). Recognizing these respectively as an infinitesimal spatial transla-
tion and rotation, we can identify the total momentum and angular momentum as
Pi=Q−εi jxj=−εi jDj, L=Q(1/2)x2=1
2X. (22)
Upon substituting the appropriate functions for λ(x)and¯λ(x)in (19), we find that
{L,Pi}=εj
iPj,{Pi,Pj}=−εi jQ. (23)
While the first relation copies the known properties of Euclidean symmetry transformations,
the second one is a surprise. In presence of field configurations with a nonzero value of the
topological charge Q, the algebra of spatial translations is centrally extended.
Before we illustrate this result on several examples, let us append a few comments. First,
suppose that our classical action (6) constitutes a leading-order approximation to a quantum
theory. The central extension of the classical Lie algebra of spatial translations can then be
promoted to a commutator of the corresponding quantum operators,
[Pi,Pj] =−iεi jQ. (24)
This leads in turn to a projective representation of the group of finite spatial translations,
eiu·Peiv·P=eiv·Peiu·Pei(u×v)Q, (25)
where u,v∈ R2are arbitrary translation vectors. Another, more general way to express this
projective realization of translations is through a path-ordered exponential of the momentum
operator, integrated around a closed curve Γin R2. The result measures the (oriented) area
SΓof the domain, bounded by the curve Γ,
Pexp
iI
Γdx·P
=e−iSΓQ. (26)
The existence of such a phase accumulated upon transporting a topological soliton around a
closed curve was predicted previously for skyrmions in ferromagnets [20].
Second, the general multipole algebra includes independent generators of spatial trans-
lations and rotations, alongside the multipole moments of the scalar charge Q[21]. Our Lie
algebra, generated by {Q,Pi,L}, is formally a contraction of a multipole algebra where the
operators of momentum Piand angular momentum Lare identified with the dipole moment
Diand trace of quadrupole moment Xvia (22).
7SciPost Physics Submission
Finally, note that we have not obtained the integral momentum Pivia Noether’s theorem,
but rather from (18) as a particular moment of the topological charge density. At first sight,
one might therefore suspect that the central extension in (23) is a consequence of a specific
choice of the momentum operator. Indeed, the question how to properly define the momentum
of a ferromagnetic soliton has a long history with contributions spanning three decades; see
for instance [5, 22–26 ]. We therefore stress that all Poisson brackets of a functional on the
phase space are uniquely determined by the flow it generates, cf. (21). Poisson brackets of
momentum are thus fixed by its definition as a generator of spatial translations. In other
words, any two realizations of momentum can differ at most by a functional whose Poisson
brackets identically vanish, that is a topological invariant on the phase space.
4 Examples
Below, we outline three different examples that represent three qualitatively different realiza-
tions of the centrally extended momentum algebra (5). In the first two, the topological charge
Qis realized through a cohomologically nontrivial symplectic form and field configurations
that compactify the Euclidean plane R2respectively to the sphere S2and the torus T2. In
the last example, the topological charge appears in spite of the symplectic form being exact,
through field configurations satisfying a nontrivial boundary condition.
4.1 Ferromagnets
In ferromagnets, the SU (2)spin symmetry is spontaneously broken down to a U (1)subgroup.
Accordingly, the long-distance physics of ferromagnets is captured by an EFT with fields taking
values from the target space M≃SU(2)/U(1)≃S2. The phase space of two-dimensional
ferromagnets consists of maps n(x): R2→S2, where n={nA}3
A=1is a unit vector satisfying
n2=1.5The symplectic structure is fixed by the local angular momentum algebra,
{nA(x),nB(y)}=1
MεAB
CnC(x)δ(x−y), (27)
where Mis the spin density in the ferromagnetic ground state. The Poisson bracket (27) in
turn determines the symplectic 2-form on S2,
Ω=−M
2εABCnAdnB∧dnC. (28)
From (18), we infer that the topological charge Qis given by
Q=−M
2Z
d2xεi jn·(∂in×∂jn) =−4πMw[n], (29)
where w[n]∈ Zis the Brouwer degree of the map n. It follows from (23) that momentum in
ferromagnets satisfies the Poisson bracket
{Pi,Pj}=4πεi jMw[n]. (30)
5All the following expressions are valid regardless of the choice of local coordinates φaonS2. One particularly
useful choice of coordinates, stressing the complex structure of the sphere, is (Z,¯Z), where Z∈ Cis a complex
variable that maps to the unit vector nvian1=Z+¯Z
1+|Z|2,n2=1
iZ−¯Z
1+|Z|2, and n3=1−|Z|2
1+|Z|2. In terms of (Z,¯Z), the
symplectic 2-form (28) reads Ω=−2iM
(1+|Z|2)2dZ∧d¯Z. Accordingly, the Poisson bracket of any functionals F,Gon
the phase space of the ferromagnet is {F,G}=−i
2MR
d2x(1+|Z|2)2 δF
δZδG
δ¯Z−δG
δZδF
δ¯Z
.
8SciPost Physics Submission
What are the field configurations for which w[n]is nonzero? The target space M≃S2is
compact and possesses a unique generator of second de Rham cohomology. This is exactly the
symplectic 2-form, which equals up to normalization the area form on S2. As a consequence,
nonzero values of Qcan be achieved for smooth fields n(x)that map R2to a homologically
nontrivial 2-cycle on S2. These are maps that effectively compactify R2to a sphere, whose
image winds around the target space once or multiple times. It is indeed known that ferromag-
netic skyrmions have nonzero w[n]and satisfy the correct boundary condition, approaching
a constant with a 1 /|x|2convergence at spatial infinity [27].
Before moving to the next example, it is instructive to contrast the case of ferromagnets to
that of antiferromagnets. In the latter, the pattern of breaking global symmetry, SU (2)→U(1),
is the same as in the former, but the set of maps n(x): R2→S2is now just the configura-
tion space. The phase space consists of maps from R2to the four-dimensional noncompact
manifold M≃T∗S2, the cotangent bundle of the sphere. Resorting for the moment to local
coordinates (NG fields) πaonS2, the symplectic form on Mcan be defined likewise locally
asΩ=dΠa∧dπa, where Πaare the conjugate momenta to πa. Consider now a set of fields
(πa,Πa)satisfying a trivial boundary condition at infinity, thus mapping R2to a 2-cycle in
M≃T∗S2. We can deform the map smoothly by scaling the conjugate momenta uniformly
down to zero. Its image is therefore homologically equivalent to a 2-cycle in the base space
ofM, that is the sphere S2itself. However, when projected to the base space, our symplec-
tic form on Mvanishes. We conclude that in antiferromagnets, our would-be topological
charge Qvanishes for any field configuration that satisfies a trivial boundary condition at spa-
tial infinity. The same is obviously true for any theory defined by second-order dynamics on a
manifold N, whose phase space consists of maps R2→T∗N. The conclusion that Qvanishes
also follows directly from the fact that the symplectic form on any cotangent bundle T∗Nis
necessarily exact.
The above of course does not imply that there are no topological solitons in antiferro-
magnets. One can construct antiferromagnetic skyrmion configurations that carry nonzero
Brouwer degree as maps R2→S2just like in ferromagnets. The physics of ferro- and an-
tiferromagnetic skyrmions is however very different. The momentum of the latter does not
correspond to the dipole moment of the skyrmion charge. By the same token, their mobility
is not restricted by a dipole-type conservation law. Last but not least, the algebra of spatial
momentum in antiferromagnets is not centrally extended in the presence of a skyrmion.
4.2 Quantum crystals
As the next example, consider a quantum Wigner crystal, expected to be realized for instance
in a two-dimensional electron gas subjected to a strong magnetic field B. The low-energy EFT
of a Wigner crystal is given by the action [15]
S=n0
2ℓ2Z
d2xdtεabXa∂0Xb+···. (31)
Here n0is the average particle number density in the ground state, and ℓ≡1/p
eBthe mag-
netic length. Finally, Xa(x,t)are the Lagrangian coordinates describing the local displacement
of the crystal from equilibrium. Shifting the crystal by any lattice vector brings it to the same
quantum state, hence the target space is the torus, M≃T2. In order to avoid divergences
arising from spatial integration, we restrict to field configurations defined on a single unit cell
of the crystal with an implicit periodic boundary condition. This is equivalent to compactifying
the domain of the fields Xato a torus. The phase space then consists of maps Xa:T2→T2
and the symplectic 2-form can be extracted from the action (31),
Ω=n0
2ℓ2εabdXa∧dXb. (32)
9SciPost Physics Submission
In accord with (18), the topological charge Qis given by
Q=n0
2ℓ2Z
T2d2xεi jεab∂iXa∂jXb=n0S
ℓ2=n0SeB, (33)
where Sis the area of the unit cell of the crystal; we used the fact that up to the factor of
n0/ℓ2,Ωis just the area form on T2. It follows that the components of momentum in a Wigner
crystal satisfy the Poisson bracket
{Pi,Pj}=−εi jn0SeB. (34)
This agrees with the standard centrally extended algebra of magnetic translations.
Note that in this case, the “topological charge” Qdoes not actually arise from a specially
designed soliton configuration. Rather, the Lagrangian map Xa(x,t)is required to be a smooth
invertible deformation of the ground state, 〈Xa(x,t)〉=xa, and thus necessarily belongs to
the same homotopy class as the latter, which winds around the target space once. The same
reasoning as above applies to any quantum crystal whose action includes a Berry term such
as (31). A concrete example might be for instance the Abrikosov vortex lattice in rotating
superfluids; see [28]for a recent discussion of this system from the fracton point of view.
4.3 Superfluids
It has been known for a long time that the components of momentum of a superfluid do not
commute in the presence of a vortex [29, 30 ]. Let us see how to understand this within our
framework. First of all, unlike the two-dimensional magnetic skyrmion, the superfluid vortex
cannot be realized by a smooth configuration of fields taking values from the coset space of
broken symmetry, in this case U (1). This underlines the difference between topological defects
(such as vortices) and textures (such as skyrmions). To have a hope for a smooth description
of a vortex, we have to take a step back and use a Gross–Pitaevskii-like theory for the complex
superfluid condensate ψ(x,t). Its action reads, schematically,
S=Z
d2xdtiψ†∂0ψ+···. (35)
In this case, the target space is M≃ C. The symplectic potential is now ω=iψ†dψand the
symplectic 2-form reads
Ω=i dψ†∧dψ. (36)
Using (18), we then define the topological charge Qas
Q=iZ
d2xεi j∂iψ†∂jψ. (37)
The symplectic 2-form (36) is obviously exact, so how can Qever be nonzero? To that end,
recall that a vortex is a topologically nontrivial state such that at spatial infinity, |ψ(x,t)|2≡n0
is fixed and lies on the vacuum manifold, U (1)≃S1. Near spatial infinity, we can then param-
eterize the condensate function by its phase θ(x,t)asψ(x,t)→pn0eiθ(x,t). Consequently,
Q=iI
∂ R2dx·(ψ†∇ψ) =−n0I
∂ R2dx·∇θ, (38)
where∂ R2denotes a large oriented circle at spatial infinity. In other words, the vortex maps
the coordinate space R2into a disk Din C, whereby the spatial boundary ∂ R2is mapped to
the boundary∂D. While the symplectic 2-form Ωitself is exact, its potential ωprojects down
10SciPost Physics Submission
to a nontrivial generator of the first de Rham cohomology group of ∂D≃S1. It is therefore
the nontrivial boundary condition, satisfied by the vortex, that makes nonzero Qpossible.
From (38) we conclude that Q=−2πνn0, whereν∈ Zis the winding number of the
superfluid phase. Accordingly, the components of momentum then satisfy
{Pi,Pj}=2πεi jνn0. (39)
This explains the origin of the dipole symmetry, underlying the fracton-like behavior of super-
fluid vortices [6].
5 Generalization to higher dimensions
Ind>2 spatial dimensions, the closed 2-form Ωon the target space gives rise to a (d−2)-form
symmetry. The corresponding integral charge is defined by integrating (the pullback of) Ωover
a two-dimensional surface Σin Rd. Our analysis of the algebraic structure of the moments of
the topological charge therefore requires modification.
In order to keep the discussion elementary, we restrict the choice of Σto two-dimensio-
nal planes spanned by two chosen Cartesian coordinates, xIandxJ. Accordingly, within this
section, spatial indices i,jwill run over the set {I,J}. We will now consider a natural subset
of Euclidean translations and the Poisson brackets of the corresponding generators. We divide
all the Cartesian coordinates in Rdasx= (y,z), where z= (xI,xJ)andycollects all the
remaining coordinates. The class of functionals (18) then extends to arbitrary das
Qλ(y)≡Z
d2zλ(x)εi j∂iωj(φ(x)) =1
2Z
d2zλ(x)εi jΩab(φ(x))∂iφa(x)∂jφb(x). (40)
These are functions on Rd−2, generating transformations of local fields φa(x)in the plane
defined by fixed y,
δλ,y′φa(x)≡{φa(x),Qλ(y′)}=−εi j∂iλ(x)∂jφa(x)δ(y−y′). (41)
Similarly, the Poisson bracket of two different charges, Qλ(y)andQ¯λ(y′), generalizes straight-
forwardly (19),
{Qλ(y),Q¯λ(y′)}=−Q{λ,¯λ}(y)δ(y−y′). (42)
Following the analogy, we next define the generators of in-plane translations and rotations,
Pi(y)≡Q−εi jzj(y), L(y)≡Q(1/2)z2(y). (43)
These satisfy the local Poisson brackets, generalizing (23),
{L(y),Pi(y′)}=εj
iPj(y)δ(y−y′),{Pi(y),Pj(y′)}=−εi jQ1(y)δ(y−y′). (44)
Of course, in-plane translations and rotations are generally not symmetries of the dynamics,
so that Pi(y)andL(y)are generally not conserved. However, if we merely want to focus on
the consequences of the central extension of the algebra of infinitesimal translations, then a
good starting point is to integrate the second relation in (44) over Rd−2to get
{Pi,Pj(y)}=−εi jQ1(y). (45)
Here Piis the generator of global translations, that is momentum, and (45) is the physically
appropriate generalization of (5). Its right-hand side is determined by the integral charge
Q1(y)of the (d−2)-form symmetry generated by Ω, measured in the xIxJplane.
11SciPost Physics Submission
Let us quickly summarize what we have done until now. We have shown the general
existence of a local dipole-type conservation law in bosonic field theory, as summarized by (15)
and (16). The corresponding charge density is given directly by the symplectic 2-form of the
theory, whereas the tensor current descends from the stress tensor. The existence of this local
conservation law is reflected by the central extension of the algebra of spatial translations,
see (5) and (45). Put all together, these constitute the first main result of our paper. We
stress that specific examples of the structure revealed here, including all those discussed in
Sec. 4, were known previously in the literature. What is new here is the demonstration of the
universality of the dipole conservation law (1) and the central extension of the momentum
algebra (5), including their higher-dimensional generalizations (15) and (45), which only
relies on translation invariance and the basic symplectic structure of the given theory.
6 Linear momentum problem
Suppose that the theory of interest possesses a well-defined momentum density, pi(x,t). After
all, this is expected from translation invariance via Noether’s theorem. By the defining property
of momentum Pias the generator of translations, the momentum density must satisfy
δipj(x)≡{pj(x),Pi}=−∂ipj(x). (46)
For a localized, smooth field configuration that decreases sufficiently rapidly at infinity, inte-
gration over space then necessarily leads to {Pi,Pj}=0. In d≥3 spatial dimensions, one can
integrate just over a two-dimensional subspace and still conclude that {Pi,Pj(y)}=0 for i,j
that label coordinates on the integration subspace. The conditions underlying the vanishing of
the integral of the right-hand side of (46) offer two possibilities how {Pi,Pj}could actually be
nonzero: for fields that either have a singularity or satisfy a nontrivial boundary condition at
spatial infinity. One can to some extent switch between these two options by choosing different
representations of momentum density [10].
The above said, there are theories where a nonzero value of the charge Qin (5) or Q1(y)
in (45) can be realized by fields that are both smooth and sufficiently fast-convergent. The fer-
romagnetic skyrmion is but one example. In such cases, only one logical possibility remains: a
well-defined momentum density pi(x,t)does not exist. This is the linear momentum problem.
It has been known to exist in ferromagnets [31,32 ]and superfluid3He for several decades.
Before further developing this idea, let us first see why some obvious candidates for the
momentum density cannot do the job. First, naively applying Noether’s theorem would suggest
thatpi=−ωa∂iφa=−ωi. But this may not be globally well-defined on the target space M,
since otherwise the symplectic 2-form Ωwould necessarily be exact, leading to vanishing Q.
Concretely, this “canonical” momentum density may be ill-defined for field configurations that
map R2, or the two-dimensional plane in Rdon which Pi(y)acts, to a homologically nontrivial
2-cycle in M. Second, guided by (18) and (22), we might instead think of ˜pi=−εi jxjεkl∂kωl
as a good candidate. The two would-be momentum densities differ by a mere surface term,
as is easily seen from the fact that the tensor current Kµν≡xνJµ+εµνλωλ=∂κ(xνεµκλωλ)
is conserved off-shell. However, ˜piviolates the property {φa(x),˜pi(y)}=−∂iφa(x)δ(x−y)
one would expect from the generator of local translations, due to its explicit dependence on
spatial coordinates. Likewise, it violates (46); a short calculation shows that
{˜pj(x),Pi}=−∂i˜pj(x) +εi jJ0(x). (47)
This is another way to understand the origin of the central extension (5). In a certain sense,
the central extension of the momentum algebra by the topological charge Qacts as a “classical
anomaly” [14]that obstructs a consistent definition of momentum density.
12SciPost Physics Submission
Now why exactly should that be a problem? Suppose that our action (6) defines a low-
energy EFT of some underlying, local continuous microscopic theory. Such a microscopic the-
ory can presumably be coupled to a spacetime background in a way that manifests diffeo-
morphism invariance. This is certainly true for the atomic-scale description of any condensed-
matter system such as those discussed in Sec. 4. A momentum density can then be generated by
taking the variation of the action with respect to the appropriate component of the spacetime
vielbein. The presence of LMP in the EFT indicates that the EFT cannot be coupled consistently
to the same spacetime background as the microscopic theory. The logical conclusion is that
the EFT is incomplete: within the energy scale accessible to it, the system must possess further
degrees of freedom whose addition to the EFT cures the LMP .
This is our second main result: some bosonic theories cannot be realized as the low-energy
EFT of any microscopic, translationally invariant local field theory. The presence of LMP de-
pends only on the topology of the target space Mand the choice of the symplectic 2-form Ω
on it, regardless of the number dof spatial dimensions.
7 Implications for the spectrum of Nambu–Goldstone bosons
The prediction of additional degrees of freedom is particularly striking for EFTs of systems
with a spontaneously broken symmetry, whose degrees of freedom are the corresponding NG
bosons. Here we can in principle make the cutoff of the EFT arbitrarily small. It then follows
that the missing degrees of freedom that must be present to cure the LMP must be gapless
as well. However, the mechanism guaranteeing the existence of additional light degrees of
freedom is robust due to its topological nature. It will therefore survive even in presence of
small perturbations breaking the symmetry that give the NG bosons a gap. This is important
since, for instance, in real ferromagnetic materials, the SU (2)symmetry under spin rotations
is explicitly broken by crystal anisotropy and spin-orbit coupling.
7.1 Forbidden patterns of symmetry breaking
We will now specify more concretely a class of EFTs that feature LMP and thus are, by the above
argument, incomplete. We will focus on EFTs for NG bosons of spontaneously broken internal
symmetry, whose structure is well-understood [33–35 ]. Spontaneous breakdown of an internal
symmetry group Gto a subgroup Hgives rise to a set of NG fields, πa(x,t), parameterizing the
coset space G/H. Assuming spacetime translation invariance and spatial rotation invariance,
the relevant part of the effective Lagrangian for the NG fields is
L=ca(π)∂0πa+···, (48)
where the ellipsis stands for operators with more than one (spatial or temporal) derivative. The
locally defined 1-form c(π)≡ca(π)dπaonG/His constrained by the conditions that d c(π)
is closed and G-invariant. This allows for the possibility that the Lagrangian itself is invariant
only up to a total derivative. It was shown in [10]that whenever G/His compact and d c(π)is
cohomologically nontrivial, the central extension in (5) can be realized by smooth fields that
map R2to a 2-cycle in G/H. The presence or absence of the LMP can therefore be checked
by studying the second de Rham cohomology of G/H. Vanishing of the second cohomology
group guarantees the absence of LMP . Otherwise, it is necessary to check explicitly whether or
not d c(π)is exact.
To be even more concrete, we need some further assumptions on the symmetry. Let Gbe
compact, semisimple and simply connected, and let Hbe connected. Denote as U(π)∈Gthe
13SciPost Physics Submission
representative of the coset in G/Hwith coordinates πa. Then the 1-form c(π)becomes [33]
c(π) =σA[iU(π)−1dU(π)]A, (49)
where Alabels the generators TAofGandσAis the expectation value of the density of TAin
the ground state. The set of constants σAestablishes a vector in the adjoint representation
ofG. By the H-invariance of the ground state, this vector carries a trivial one-dimensional
representation (singlet) of H. It is however only those singlets that lie entirely in the Lie
algebra of Hthat can make d c(π)cohomologically nontrivial. Mathematically, the generators
of the second de Rham cohomology of G/Hare in a one-to-one correspondence with the U (1)
factors of H[36].
In plain terms, under our assumptions that Gis compact, semisimple and simply connected
andHis connected, the EFT for NG bosons exhibits LMP if and only if some unbroken gener-
ators of Ghave a nonzero density in the ground state. A prominent example of such a system
is, of course, the ferromagnet. Here, G/H≃SU(2)/U(1)and the ground state carries nonzero
density of the unbroken U (1)generator. The spin density itself acts as the order parameter for
symmetry breaking.
The situation where the ground state is an eigenstate of an order parameter commuting
with the Hamiltonian is very special (see [37]for some further details) and has an interesting
history. Three decades ago, Anderson [38]argued that ferromagnets are not an example of
spontaneous symmetry breaking, not of the type seen in particle physics at least. He proposed
that in the latter, there are no theories with spontaneously broken symmetry of the “conserved
type.” We can now see why: no consistent Lorentz-invariant field theory can have a low-energy
EFT description in terms of the ferromagnetic SU (2)/U(1)coset space, without any additional
gapless degrees of freedom. This observation extends to the whole class of symmetry-breaking
patterns satisfying our assumptions on GandHwhere some generator of Hhas a nonzero
vacuum expectation value.
7.2 Completing the low-energy effective theory
Suppose we are given a low-energy EFT that exhibits the LMP , but we do not know the details
of the underlying microscopic theory. Then there is one logical possibility that we have not
mentioned until now: that the microscopic theory simply does not possess a local momentum
conservation law. In such cases, the translation invariance of the EFT is an emergent property,
only valid at sufficiently long distances. Should we on the other hand know that the micro-
scopic theory has continuous translation invariance, we can deduce the existence of additional
gapless degrees of freedom. These can be fermionic; a natural possibility is the presence of a
gapless Fermi sea. For bosons, the only robust mechanism guaranteeing the absence of a gap
is via spontaneous symmetry breaking. The additional NG bosons then belong to an enlarged
coset space G′/H′, where either G′⊋GorH′⊊H, or both. For the reader’s convenience, we
display the various possibilities graphically in Fig. 2.
Intriguingly, all the different possibilities can be realized in ferromagnets. First, there are
lattice models of ferromagnetism that are exactly solvable so that one can explicitly demon-
strate that ferromagnetic spin waves (magnons) are the only gapless modes in the spectrum.
It was shown already in mid-1980s by Haldane [31]that in the continuous low-energy EFT of
such models, the integral momentum has a topological ambiguity. This ambiguity leaves only
operators of certain discrete translations well-defined, namely those corresponding exactly to
the translation symmetry of the underlying lattice. In this case, the absence of a well-defined
momentum density is not a problem, but rather should be expected.
Real ferromagnets, however, should have a continuous translationally invariant descrip-
tion at the atomic scale. We are thus led to the prediction of additional gapless modes in any
14SciPost Physics Submission
incomplete EFT
with LMP
missing gapless
deg. of freedom
additional
NG bosonsfermions on a
Fermi surface
smaller unbroken
subgroup Hno translations
in UV theory
larger symmetry
group G
Figure 2: Visualization of the different possibilities implied by the presence of the
LMP in a low-energy EFT for NG bosons. Unless the microscopic (UV) theory does
not have continuous translation invariance, further gapless degrees of freedom must
be present. Generically, these can be either gapless fermions or additional NG bosons,
stemming from an enlarged coset space.
ferromagnetic material. Now most natural ferromagnets are metallic, hence include gapless
itinerant electrons. Volovik [32]showed that while the momentum density is ill-defined sepa-
rately for the magnon and electron subsystems, the LMP disappears when the two subsystems
are put together. Moreover, there is another, related reason why the EFT for spin waves alone
is unsatisfactory. Galilei invariance requires that momentum transfer in uniform metallic fer-
romagnets is accompanied by en electric current. This requires in turn a nonlocal coupling of
magnons to the electromagnetic field [39]. The problem is again cured by adding the elec-
tron degrees of freedom. This is an example of a completion of the EFT by gapless fermions.
Another example of this type is the A-phase of superfluid3He. Here the NG sector features a
LMP , which is cured by the presence of gapless nodes on the Fermi surface [40].
Ferromagnetic insulators are arguably not as common as ferromagnetic metals, but do exist
in nature as well. Here the resolution of the LMP must arise from additional gapless bosons. It
appears that the only possible candidates are the phonons arising from spontaneous breaking
of translations by the underlying crystal lattice. This is an example of curing the LMP by
enlarging the symmetry group G. It is not immediately obvious why phonons should cure a
problem that arises from the topology of the spin coset space. We therefore demonstrate this
explicitly in Appendix A. As far as we know, the prediction of a particular magnon–phonon
coupling, required to eliminate the LMP in the magnon sector, is new. Our proposal is close
in spirit to [41], which argued that the phase structure of ferromagnets is very similar to
that of incompressible fluids, and that the LMP can be compensated by adding hydrodynamic
variables that allow for density variations.
Finally, there is one simple possibility, corresponding to breaking the residual H≃U(1)
symmetry. The resulting coset space is G′/H′≃SU(2)/{e}; there are no unbroken generators
at all, and hence no LMP . This symmetry-breaking pattern is realized in canted ferromagnets.
This last example is a representative of a class of EFT completions that occur naturally in
systems with nonrelativistic NG bosons, whenever the internal symmetry group Gis compact
and semisimple. Suppose that out of all the order parameters needed to break Gdown to H, we
15SciPost Physics Submission
only keep the charge densities in the ground state. It is possible to choose a basis of the Lie al-
gebra of Gso that only mutually commuting generators have a nonzero expectation value [42].
The charge density order parameters then generate certain Abelian subgroup (torus) T⊂G. At
the same time, they break the symmetry under Gdown to K={g∈G|gh=hg∀h∈T}, that
is the centralizer of TinG. The coset space G/Kaccommodates all the type-B NG bosons [43]
of the EFT . This provides an extreme example of LMP , since all charge densities in the ground
state are by construction unbroken. The 2-form ΩG/K=dcG/K(π)onG/Kdefines a symplectic
structure, which ensures that the number of independent type-B NG modes is (1/2)dimG/K.
Now we add whatever other order parameters are needed to break Kfurther down to H.
This results in additional dim K/H type-A NG bosons in the spectrum. The coset spaces G/K
andK/Hare geometrically collated, giving rise to a fiber bundle structure on G/H[33],
K/H→G/Hπ− →G/K. (50)
The projection π:G/H→G/Kamounts to neglecting the type-A modes. In canted ferro-
magnets, one has respectively K/H≃U(1)/{e},G/H≃SU(2)/{e}andG/K≃SU(2)/U(1).
Embedding the base space G/Kin the larger manifold G/Hwill typically reduce the second de
Rham cohomology group. In physics terms, this means that the LMP present in the type-B NG
sector is partially or completely compensated by adding the type-A NG degrees of freedom.
The above discussion of LMP in EFTs for NG bosons was based on the geometry of the
coset space G/H. This is in contrast to the rest of our paper, where the target space Mof the
phase-space field variables plays the key role. The apparent discrepancy can be addressed by
extending the fiber bundle structure (50) to
T∗(K/H)→M˜π− →G/K, (51)
where the projection ˜πnow amounts to ignoring the type-A NG fields as well as their conjugate
momenta. Applying the same reasoning we used in Sec. 4.1 to deal with antiferromagnets,
we can now deform any 2-cycle in Mto a 2-cycle in G/H. When projected to the latter, the
symplectic form on Mreduces toπ∗ΩG/K=dcG/H. This explains why the possible presence of
the LMP in EFTs of NG bosons can be inspected by looking at the second de Rham cohomology
group of G/Hand the properties of the 2-form d c(π), defined by (48).
8 Nambu–Goldstone bosons of higher-form symmetries
The main conclusion of Sec. 7 that the LMP requires the presence of additional gapless de-
grees of freedom, extends to EFTs for NG bosons of spontaneously broken higher-form sym-
metry [44–46 ]. While we leave a more detailed and general analysis to future work, we wish
to give here at least one concrete, physically relevant example.
Consider Maxwell’s electrodynamics in d=3 spatial dimensions, coupled to a background
axion-like field θ. Its Lagrangian is given in terms of the electric and magnetic fields E,Bas
L=1
2(E2−B2) +CθE·B. (52)
For the time being, we treat θas an arbitrary but fixed background that is static but may
depend on the spatial coordinates x. The coupling Ccan then be treated as a continuously
tunable parameter. For C=0, the theory (52) is just free electrodynamics. It describes the
photon as the NG boson of a spontaneously broken 1-form symmetry [44]. The case of C̸=0
(which we henceforth assume without explicitly saying so) is more interesting, as it features a
dramatically modified low-energy spectrum. To demonstrate this, we switch to the temporal
16SciPost Physics Submission
gauge in which the scalar potential is set to zero. This leaves us with a residual invariance
under time-independent gauge transformations of the vector potential A. Upon integration by
parts at the level of the action, the Lagrangian (52) can be rewritten as
L=1
2(∂0A)2−1
2(∇×A)2+C
2∇θ·(A×∂0A). (53)
Of particular interest is the special case where ∇θis a periodic function of coordinates with
nonzero spatial average. The spectrum of photon excitations then has a band structure simi-
larly to crystalline solids. Due to the presence of the term with a single time derivative, one
of the photon helicity eigenstates acquires a gap. The other helicity eigenstate is softened, its
energy being proportional to squared momentum [47–49 ]. This is an example of a type-B NG
boson of higher-form symmetry [50].
The axion electrodynamics (52) is known to have an intricate symmetry structure [51,52 ].
However, here we focus solely on the interplay of gauge invariance and spatial translations.
This is nontrivial, as follows by inspection of (52) and (53). While (52) is manifestly gauge-
invariant, it breaks translations for any non-constant θ. Likewise, (53) may preserve trans-
lations ifθhas a constant gradient at the cost of sacrificing manifest gauge invariance. The
same dichotomy appears if we try to define a momentum density. The naive momentum den-
sity given by the Poynting vector, p0=E×B, is gauge-invariant but no longer satisfies a local
conservation law. The axion background θ(x)exerts a force on the electromagnetic field with
density C∇θ(E·B). In the special case that ∇θis constant, one can absorb this force into a
redefinition of momentum density,
pθ=E×B+C
2∇θ(A·B). (54)
Its spatial integral, Pθ=R
d3x pθ(x,t), is then conserved. The price to pay is that pθis
no longer gauge-invariant although Pθitself is, at least under transformations A→A+∇λ
such that the gauge parameter λ(x)vanishes sufficiently rapidly at spatial infinity. This is
not a consequence of mere bad choice. In presence of the axion background, there is no
gauge-invariant momentum density whose spatial integral could serve as a generator of spatial
translations. We provide a detailed proof of this claim in Appendix B.
This is the essence of the LMP in axion electrodynamics. Its resolution can follow all the
three qualitatively different paths suggested in Sec. 7.2 and summarized in Fig. 2. First, we
may insist that the background θ(x)is given externally, in which case the theory (52) simply is
not translationally invariant in the direction of ∇θ. The absence of a well-defined momentum
density is then hardly surprising.
Alternatively, we may want to realize θ(x)dynamically as a condensate of some dynamical
pseudoscalar degree of freedom. One explicit realization of such a condensate appears in
quantum chromodynamics (QCD) as the so-called chiral soliton lattice state [53,54 ]. Hereθ
represents the neutral pion, which in presence of a baryon chemical potential and a uniform
magnetic field Bdevelops a condensate that is quasi-periodic in the direction of B. Uniform
∇θrequires taking the chiral limit of vanishing quark, and hence pion, masses. By the same
token, the spectrum of pseudoscalar excitations above such a background is then gapless. The
neutral pion itself therefore supplies the additional NG mode required by the LMP .
Another realization of the axion-like background with nonzero ∇θis through the so-called
meson supercurrent phase [55, 56 ], which may appear in dense QCD due to Fermi surface
splitting induced by the relatively large strange quark mass. The spatially-varying meson con-
densate is accompanied by gapless fermions [57, 58 ]. In fact, the fermions carry a current
that completely compensates the meson supercurrent. This is required by the Bloch theorem
for relativistic systems [59], which forbids any current in the ground state in the thermody-
namic limit. This is yet another mechanism how the LMP can be resolved by the presence of
additional gapless degrees of freedom.
17SciPost Physics Submission
Before we close the discussion of axion electrodynamics, we remark that it also possesses
a natural dipole-type conservation law where both the charge density and the tensor current
are gauge-invariant. Start by noting that the closed 3-form d θ∧dAis the Hodge dual of a
topological current whose temporal and spatial components are, up to arbitrary normalization,
J0=−CB·∇θ, J=−CE×∇θ. (55)
These are respectively the electric charge density and current, carried by the axion background,
as follows from the modified Maxwell equations
∇·E=−CB·∇θ,∇×B=∂0E−CE×∇θ. (56)
While these equations of motion are valid for any function θ(x)of spatial coordinates, suppose
now that ∇θis constant, and represent its direction by a unit vector, n. By projecting the
modified Ampère law in (56) to nand taking another derivative, we get
∂0(∇·E∥)−(n·∇)[n·(∇×B)] =0, (57)
where E∥≡(n·E)nis the component of Eparallel to ∇θ. In the low-energy limit where only
the nonrelativistic type-B photon mode is active, the Ampère law dictates that the part of E
perpendicular to ∇θscales as a derivative of Band is small. We then expect the divergence
∇·Eto be dominated by the longitudinal component E∥. By the modified Gauss law in (56), the
first term in (57) is then well approximated by −∂0(CB·∇θ). We thus arrive at a dipole-type
conservation law for the magnetic field, valid in the low-energy limit,
∂0(CB·∇θ) + (n·∇)[n·(∇×B)]≈0. (58)
The corresponding scalar charge density matches the topological charge in (55).
9 Discussion and conclusions
In this paper we have pointed out the general existence of a local dipole conservation law, the
only assumption being continuous translation invariance and absence of higher time deriva-
tives in the Lagrangian. The two main ingredients entering the dipole conservation law are the
density of a topological charge and the stress tensor. The topological charge, descending from
the symplectic form of the system, gives rise to a central extension of the algebra of spatial
momentum. This seems to be a particular realization of a more general phenomenon pointed
out recently by Nair [60], whereby certain topologically nontrivial (Wess–Zumino) terms in
the action may lead to anomalous commutators of the energy–momentum tensor.
When the symplectic form is cohomologically nontrivial, nonzero topological charge may
be generated by smooth field configurations that converge to a constant at spatial infinity.
This implies the presence of LMP: the theory does not possess a well-defined momentum den-
sity. We argued that in case the short-distance physics of the system is captured by a local,
translationally invariant microscopic theory, a would-be low-energy EFT featuring the LMP is
necessarily incomplete, indicating the presence of additional degrees of freedom. This is rem-
iniscent of the Berry phase [61], which arises in quantum mechanics upon integrating out a
set of heavy degrees of freedom. However, the additional modes compensating for the LMP
must appear at an energy scale accessible to the EFT . This resembles more the constraints on
the low-energy spectrum, imposed by ’t Hooft anomalies [62].
The consequences of the LMP are particularly striking when it appears in a low-energy
EFT for NG bosons of a spontaneously broken global symmetry. Namely, the missing degrees
18SciPost Physics Submission
of freedom must then be gapless just like the NG bosons themselves. This gives rise to a no-go
theorem, forbidding certain symmetry-breaking patterns in any microscopic, translationally
invariant local field theory. Two generic options for the additional gapless modes required
by the LMP are fermions on a gapless Fermi surface, and further NG modes. The intimate
relation between the LMP and the presence of additional gapless modes in the spectrum seems
to extend beyond the class of systems with scalar NG bosons. As we showed on a concrete
example, the same happens in theories of NG bosons of higher-form symmetries.
Let us close the paper with some concluding remarks. First, suppose that the action (6) is
merely an approximation to a more complete theory, singled out for instance by the classical
limit or as the leading order in a derivative expansion. How are the results of this paper going
to change when higher-order corrections are added to the action? Should the correction consist
solely of operators without time derivatives, it can always be absorbed into the Hamiltonian
H. This implies a redefinition of the stress tensor σi jand the spatial tensor current Ji1···id−2jk
but no further changes. Suppose now that we add to the action a generic operator of higher
order in derivatives. We can still write the action in the form (6), except that the “Hamiltonian
density”H[φ]can now also contain operators with time derivatives. It turns out that the
argument proving the existence of a dipole-type conservation law still goes through with just
a minor modification. Namely, the argument of the last integral in (7) has to be replaced with
∂µξjσµ
j. Likewise, the right-hand side of (9) becomes −∂µσµ
i. The part herein containing a
time derivative can eventually be absorbed into a redefinition of the charge density ρi1···id−2,
and one again ends up with a conservation law of the type (15). This makes it clear that the
assumption of absence of higher-order time derivatives is in fact not essential for the derivation
of the local dipole conservation law. It is only needed in Sec. 3 when we analyze the algebra
of conserved charges using the symplectic formalism. All we need for the dipole conservation
law itself is that the theory is translationally invariant and that the charge density and current
in (15) are well-defined on the target space of the theory. The latter assumption may be
violated for instance in theories with a gauge redundancy, as we demonstrate in Sec. 8.
For a concrete illustration of the effects due to perturbations of the Lagrangian, let us
consider the presumably dominant correction with time derivatives, which is of the form
δS=R
ddxdt(1/2)gab(φ)∂0φa∂0φb. In order that the energy of the theory remains bounded
from below and mathematically consistent, gab(φ)should correspond to a Riemannian metric,
globally well-defined on M. Repeating the steps in Sec. 2, one finds that (9) changes to
∂0ωi−∂iω0=−∂jσj
i+1
2∂i(gab∂0φa∂0φb)−∂0(gab∂0φa∂iφb). (59)
The form of the dipole conservation law (1) is then preserved if one replaces J0=εi j∂iωjby
˜J0=εi j∂i(ωj+gab∂0φa∂jφb) =−εi j∂ipj, (60)
where piis the canonical (Noether) momentum density derived from the perturbed action.
This points to a simpler way to understand the origin of the dipole conservation law (1).
In any translationally invariant field theory, local momentum conservation will take the form
∂0pi=∂jσj
i, where piandσi jare momentum density and stress tensor obtained via Noether’s
theorem. Upon taking the curl, we get immediately (1), where J0=−εi j∂ipjandJi jis given
by (13). A natural question then arises as to whether the class of dipole symmetries discussed
in this paper is a trivial consequence of translation invariance without any further content.
However, as we point out in Sec. 6, there are theories where a consistent momentum density
does not exist, namely those featuring LMP . The dipole conservation law (1) is then more
fundamental than local momentum conservation, and its shortcut derivation by taking the
curl of the latter should be viewed as a mere mnemonic. What the argument leading to (60)
19SciPost Physics Submission
does for us is show that the value of the integral charge Qand the identification (4) of integral
momentum Piwith the dipole moment Diof the topological charge density are robust and
unaffected by perturbations of the action that are globally well-defined on M. This also applies
to theories without LMP where a nonzero value of Qarises from field configurations satisfying
a nontrivial boundary condition, as we saw in Sec. 4.3 on the example of superfluids. Finally,
there are theories where a consistent local momentum density exists and the scalar charge
Q, whenever well-defined and finite, vanishes. In this (arguably “default”) case, the local
conservation of momentum is primary and the dipole conservation law (15) its descendant,
without additional content.
Our second remark is that in contrast to everything we have written so far, there is in fact a
class of perturbations that can break the local dipole-type conservation law explicitly. Namely,
the conservation of the topological charge Qcan be violated by coupling the system to a gauge
field that serves as a source for the defects carrying the charge. (See, e.g., [63]for a related
discussion.) For concreteness, we consider the superfluid discussed in Sec. 4.3, where the
topological charge Qis the winding number of the superfluid phase. Here the conservation of
the topological charge Qcan be violated by gauging the U (1)0-form symmetry dynamically.
We introduce a 1-form gauge field A=Aµdxµ, and couple the complex superfluid field ψto
it by replacing ordinary derivatives ∂µψwith covariant derivatives Dµψ≡∂µψ−iAµψ. The
gauge transformation laws are given by ψ→eiΛψandAµ→Aµ+∂µΛwith the gauge pa-
rameter Λ. This covariant derivative gives in turn the Stückelberg couplingpn0(∂µθ−Aµ)of
the phaseθto the gauge field, at low energies where the fluctuations of the absolute value
ofψcan be neglected. We remark that in the presence of the U (1)gauge field, the phase θ
should be understood as a superconducting rather than superfluid phase. We will now show
that in presence of the gauge field, the dipole symmetry of the superfluid is explicitly bro-
ken. There are at least two ways to see this. One is that the topological charge is not gauge
invariant. Alternatively, the charge can be modified in a gauge invariant way, but the modi-
fied charge is not conserved. For the former case, the topological charge defined by (38) is
gauge-transformed as Q→Q−n0H
∂ R2dx·∇Λ, and the deviation is nonzero if Λhas a wind-
ing number. Therefore, the charge Qis not physical. For the latter case, we can modify the
charge (38) as Qcov≡iR
R2d2xεi j(Diψ)†Djψ=iH
∂ R2dx·ψ†(∇−iA)ψ+1
2R
R2d2xεi jFi jψ†ψ.
The first term iH
∂ R2dx·ψ†(∇−iA)ψvanishes by the boundary condition on the vortex so-
lution, (∇−iA)ψ=0, at∂ R2. But the second termR
R2d2xεi jFi jψ†ψdoes not vanish in
general. The time derivative of the modified charge may be nonzero, depending on the time
evolution of the magnetic field Fi jand the electric charge ψ†ψ, which are nonzero in general.
Third, it is known that in EFTs for NG bosons of a spontaneously broken internal symmetry,
nonzero density of an unbroken generator of Gresults in the 1-form c(π)in (48) not being
invariant under G[64]. Specifically, a global transformation from Gacts on c(π)effectively
as an H-valued gauge transformation. Accordingly, the Lagrangian density of the EFT as well
as its canonical momentum density are not G-invariant as well, but merely quasi-invariant
(invariant up to a surface term). The fact that momentum density should not be invariant
under an internal symmetry of the system is certainly unexpected. We therefore stress that the
LMP means more than that, indicating absence of any momentum density, G-invariant or not.
For further insight, note that quasi-invariant 1-forms c(π)are classified by the second Lie
algebra cohomology of Grelative to H. When Gis compact and connected and His closed and
connected, this relative Lie algebra cohomology is isomorphic to the second de Rham coho-
mology of G/H[65]. In this case, the quasi-invariance property of c(π)is therefore equivalent
to the presence of LMP . For an example where the two properties do not coincide, consider the
coset spaces G/{e}with Geither U (1)×U(1)or R× R. In both cases, the second Lie alge-
bra cohomology is one-dimensional, and the corresponding 1-form c(π) = ( 1/2)εabπadπbis
quasi-invariant under G, which acts on πaby mere translations. However, the second de Rham
20SciPost Physics Submission
cohomology is nontrivial only in the case of U (1)×U(1)≃T2. Here d c(π)is not exact, being
proportional to the area form on T2. The theory exhibits LMP , since πaare mere local coordi-
nates on the torus. In case of R× R≃ R2, on the other hand, πaare globally defined and so
is therefore the momentum density. Here the LMP is absent even if the momentum density is
notG-invariant. This latter case is similar to superfluid vortices, discussed in Sec. 4.3, where
the target space within a Gross–Pitaevskii-like approach is M≃ C≃ R2.
The generality of some of the results reported in this paper raises a number of questions.
Are there other examples of nested conservation laws than those sketched in Fig. 1? Is it pos-
sible to recover in a similar way higher-order multipole conservation laws? Another natural
avenue for future work would be to explore the general physical consequences of the LMP .
We have predicted a very specific coupling between certain NG bosons and additional degrees
of freedom, required to make momentum density mathematically consistent. This coupling
can be interpreted in terms of a mutual force between the two subsystems, known in metallic
ferromagnets as the spin-motive force. The existence of a similar force between the electro-
magnetic field and the axion background in axion electrodynamics was pointed out in Sec. 8.
Finding other examples of the same phenomenon would be extremely interesting.
Acknowledgments
We are indebted to Grigory Volovik who informed us, years ago, about the linear momentum
problem, and to Sergej Moroz for collaboration in an early stage of this project. We would also
like to thank Sergej Moroz, Helge Ruddat, Eirik Eik Svanes and Jasper van Wezel for helpful
discussions.
Funding information The work of T . B. has been supported in part by the grant no. PR-
10614 within the ToppForsk-UiS program of the University of Stavanger and the University
Fund. The work of N. Y. has been supported in part by the Keio Institute of Pure and Applied
Sciences (KiPAS) project at Keio University and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers JP19K03852
and JP22H01216. The work of R. Y. has been supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grants Numbers
JP21J00480 and JP21K13928.
A Avoiding the linear momentum problem in ferromagnets
Here we illustrate how the LMP is cured by the presence of additional gapless degrees of
freedom, using ferromagnetic insulators as an example. Suppose that the ferromagnetic order
is carried by a medium whose collective motion contributes additional gapless modes to the
spectrum. In order to have a well-defined local low-energy EFT , these collective degrees of
freedom should be considered alongside magnons. The local displacement of the medium is
described by the Lagrangian coordinates Xa(x,t)where a=1, . . . , d. Its motion is captured
by the following current [66],
Jµ
X≡n(X)
d!εµν1···νdεa1···ad∂ν1Xa1···∂νdXad. (61)
The function n(X)is the density of the medium in the comoving frame. It is fixed by the ground
state, and is constant in case the equilibrium state of the medium is uniform. The current (61)
is conserved off-shell for any choice of n(X). Its temporal part, J0
X=n(X)det{∂iXa}d
i,a=1, is the
density of the medium in the “laboratory” frame as defined by the coordinates x. The spatial
part then carries information about the local (Eulerian) velocity vof the medium, Ji
X=J0
Xvi.
21SciPost Physics Submission
The crystalline order of ferromagnetic insulators gives rise to the additional NG modes,
needed to cure the LMP: the phonons. An EFT describing the interacting magnon–phonon sys-
tem in (anti)ferromagnetic and ferrimagnetic insulators has been developed only recently [67].
Since we assumed the ferromagnetic ground state to be uniform, we set n(X) =n0, where n0
is the particle number density in equilibrium. The relevant part of the magnon action is then
affected by the coupling to phonons as follows,
S=Z
ddxdtωa(φ)∂0φa+···→Z
ddxdt(det{∂iXa}d
i,a=1)ωa(φ)(∂0+v·∇)φa+···
=1
n0Z
ddxdtωa(φ)Jµ
X[X]∂µφa+···=1
d!Z
εa1···adω(φ)∧dXa1∧···∧ dXad+···.(62)
Why does this eliminate the LMP? A quick calculation shows that the canonical momentum
density arising from this term in the action is now well-defined. Namely, it is identically zero.
This is most obvious from the last expression in (62), which is a strictly topological term,
independent of whatever spacetime background might be present. The momentum of the EFT
comes entirely from the phonon sector, and is thus unaffected by the nontrivial topology of
the ferromagnetic coset space. This makes perfect sense: it is the phonon rather than magnon
fields that are responsible for transport of matter.
In deriving (62), we have not used any properties of the symplectic potential ω(φ), specific
to ferromagnets. Therefore, the same mechanism may in principle be used to eliminate the
LMP from any EFT , only subject to the assumption that the gapless collective modes parameter-
ized by the fields Xa(x,t)are actually present. While the symplectic potential itself may not be
globally well-defined on the target space M, the action can be recovered by Witten’s construc-
tion[68], that is by integrating the closed (d+2)-form (1/d!)εa1···adΩ(φ)∧dXa1∧···∧ dXad
over a spacetime with an extra dimension.
B Linear momentum problem in axion electrodynamics
Here we demonstrate explicitly that axion electrodynamics as defined by (52) does not possess
a well-defined momentum density for any nonuniform axion background θ(x). We use the
temporal gauge in order to avoid having to deal with the degeneracy of the symplectic structure
of the theory due to gauge invariance [69]. Accordingly, we treat the three components of the
vector potential Aas independent canonical coordinates. The full set of canonical Poisson
brackets then is
{Ai(x),Aj(y)}={Πi(x),Πj(y)}=0,{Ai(x),Πj(y)}=δi jδ(x−y), (63)
where Π≡−E−CθBis the vector of conjugate momentum. These imply the following Poisson
brackets between the gauge-invariant field variables,
{Ei(x),Ej(y)}=−Cεk
i j[θ(x)∂x
k+θ(y)∂y
k]δ(x−y),
{Ei(x),Bj(y)}=εk
i j∂y
kδ(x−y),{Bi(x),Bj(y)}=0.(64)
The twisted Poisson bracket for the electric field is responsible for the modification of Maxwell’s
equations in presence of the axion background since in the temporal gauge, the Hamiltonian
density itself remains unchanged by the axion coupling, H= (E2+B2)/2.
Next, we introduce two scaling parameters α,β. The first of these, α, will count powers
ofEorBin any local gauge-invariant operator. The second, β, will count the number of
any additional derivatives the operator may possess. Thus, for instance, both of the modified
22SciPost Physics Submission
Maxwell equations in (56) are homogeneous of order α1β1. We note that the Poisson brackets
in (64) reduce the power of αby 2 and increase the power of βby 1.
Suppose now for the sake of contradiction that the theory does possess a gauge-invariant
local momentum density p(x). Apart from gauge invariance itself, we demand that the corre-
sponding integral operator P≡R
d3x p(x)satisfies{Pi,φ(x)}=∂iφ(x)for any local gauge-
invariant operator φ, that is any local function of E,Band a finite number of their derivatives.6
It then follows that pmust be of order α2β0. This requires in turn that pis a quadratic function
ofE,Bwithout any derivatives. Since it should also be a vector, the only possibility is
p(x) =ζ(θ(x),x)E(x)×B(x), (65)
whereζis an a priori arbitrary function of θ, possibly also depending explicitly on the coor-
dinates. An explicit calculation using (64) now gives
{Pi,Bj}=ζ∂iBj+Bk(δjk∂iζ−δi j∂kζ). (66)
This satisfies our requirements if and only if ζ=1, which reduces pto the usual Poynting
vector. However, it is then easy to show that as a consequence of the twisted Poisson bracket
for the electric field, the expected property {Pi,Ej}=∂iEjcannot be satisfied for any nonzero C
and nonuniform θ(x). This proves that a gauge-invariant momentum density whose integral
serves as a generator of spatial translations does not exist.
C Coordinate-free formulation of dipole conservation laws
In this and the next appendix, we address dipole conservation laws in a coordinate-free lan-
guage, first form the point of view of global symmetry and then that of background gauge
invariance. This requires an appropriate geometric structure on the spacetime. We gener-
ally assume invariance under spacetime translations. For simplicity, we augment this with the
assumption of invariance under continuous spatial rotations, although this is not strictly nec-
essary, and in most condensed-matter systems clearly is just a convenient approximation. The
kind of spacetime geometry that implements these symmetries locally is sometimes referred to
asAristotelian . See [70,71 ]for some early work on coupling matter to Aristotelian spacetime
background, [72–74 ]for more recent work in the context of fractons, and finally the recent
review [75]of non-Lorentzian geometry for the bigger picture.
A(d+1)-dimensional manifold is said to be endowed with Aristotelian geometry if it carries
a 1-form nand a rank- dpositive-semidefinite symmetric tensor field h,
n≡nµdxµ, h≡hµνdxµ⊗dxν. (67)
Intuitively, ncan be thought of as defining a foliation of the spacetime, and hµνas giving a
Riemannian metric on the spatial slices. A dual structure to that of (67) is established by a
vector field vand a rank- dpositive-semidefinite symmetric tensor field ˜h,
v≡vµ∂µ, ˜h≡˜hµν∂µ⊗∂ν, (68)
satisfying the constraints
vµnµ=1, hµνvν=0, ˜hµνnν=0, ˜hµλhλν=δµ
ν−vµnν. (69)
6The Poisson bracket is to be evaluated in the temporal gauge and the equality is to hold up to terms that vanish
when the modified Gauss law is imposed. The reason for this provision is that in the temporal gauge, the Gauss
law is no longer satisfied automatically, but rather selects a set of admissible trajectories in the phase space. Given
that the Gauss law is homogeneous in α,β, this subtlety does not affect the validity of our argument.
23SciPost Physics Submission
The structure of the Aristotelian spacetime defines an auxiliary Riemannian metric γvia
γ≡h+n⊗n,γµν=hµν+nµnν. (70)
It follows from (69) that the inverse of γµνisγµν=˜hµν+vµvν. The 1-form nand vector v, as
well as the tensors hand˜h, are then related by raising or lowering indices with γµνandγµν.
Let us now rerun the argument of Sec. 2 using the coordinate-free language of differential
geometry. We generalize the action (6) to
S=Z
(ω∧⋆n−H vol), (71)
where the Hodge dual is taken with respect to the Riemannian metric (70),7and vol≡⋆1 is
the spacetime volume form. We will assume that the 1-form nsatisfies
dn=d⋆n=0. (72)
The first of these properties is a sufficient, though not necessary, condition for the Aristotelian
spacetime to have a foliation in terms of spatial slices. The physical origin of the second
condition will be clarified in greater detail in Appendix D. Geometrically, it ensures that the
spatial slices have vanishing mean extrinsic curvature K=∇µvµ=−d†n=⋆d⋆n, where
d†is the codifferential. Finally, we need to introduce the notion of translation invariance
in the coordinate-free language. We will assume that the spacetime is homogeneous under
translations generated by a set of vector fields, eµ
A, where A=1, . . . , d+1. Our previous ansatz
for the variation of the Hamiltonian part of the action, that is the second relation in (7), then
generalizes to
δξZ
Hvol≡Z
dξA∧⋆σA, (73)
whereξAare the components of a vector field ξin the basis eµ
A. This defines a set of 1-forms
σAthat can be identified with the stress tensor of the Hamiltonian H.
Next we need to evaluate the variation of the first term in (71) under the diffeomorphism ξ.
Importantly, we are only transforming the dynamical fields φa, not the Aristotelian spacetime
background. Hence δξR
ω∧⋆n=R
(Lξω)∧⋆n, whence
Lξω∧⋆n≃−ω∧(Lξ⋆n) =−ω∧d(ιξ⋆n) =ω∧d(ιn♯⋆ξ♭)≃(dω)∧(ιn♯⋆ξ♭)
≃−(ιn♯dω)∧⋆ξ♭=−ξA(ιn♯dω)Avol .(74)
Here≃denotes equality up to a total derivative. Also, we used the assumption that d ⋆n=0
and the differential-geometric identity
ιX⋆Y♭=−ιY⋆X♭, (75)
valid for any vectors fields X,Y. Finally, the operators♯and♭indicate the so-called musical
isomorphisms, raising and lowering indices respectively with γµνandγµν. Putting all the bits
together, we find that
δξS=Z
ξA[−(ιn♯dω)Avol+d⋆σA]. (76)
Upon using the equation of motion, we then obtain the on-shell relation
ιn♯dω=eA⋆d⋆σA=−eAd†σA, (77)
7This choice is a matter of convenience. In non-Riemannian or non-Lorentzian geometries, there are multiple
consistent definitions of the Hodge dual [76,77 ].
24SciPost Physics Submission
where eAis the basis of 1-forms, dual to eA. This is the coordinate-free generalization of (9).
It remains to combine this with the off-shell conservation of the current (10), which now
reads simply d (dω) =0. Here we use the projection–rejection decomposition of d ω,
dω=ιn♯(n∧dω) +n∧(ιn♯dω). (78)
Taking the exterior derivative and using the assumption d n=0 along with (77) leads to our
final result for the dipole-type conservation law in the coordinate-free language,
Ln♯(n∧dω) +n∧d(eAd†σA) =0. (79)
In a flat Aristotelian spacetime, this reduces to our previous results (1) and (15). The ad-
vantage of the form (79) is that it is manifestly independent of the number of spatial dimen-
sions. Moreover, it generalizes the global dipole conservation law (15) in a flat Aristotelian
spacetime to any Aristotelian spacetime subject to the conditions (72) and (73). The con-
dition (72) is manifestly satisfied for instance for spacetimes of the type R×Mwhere Mis
ad-dimensional spatial manifold, provided we set n=dt, where tis the global time vari-
able. In this case, ⋆nis just the volume form on M. Perhaps even more interestingly, our
derivation may be readily further generalized to manifolds that do not possess any translation
invariance whatsoever. All we have to do is to replace (73) with δξR
Hvol=R
ξA∧⋆τA,
where eµ
Ais now an arbitrary local frame and τAa set of functions defining the variation of
the Hamiltonian along eµ
A. The only change to (79) is that d†σAhas to be replaced with τA.
The resulting local differential law does not lead to conservation of multipole moments of the
topological charge (2). It may however be useful for constraining the motion of topological
solitons on curved surfaces, which has been studied in the mathematical physics literature, see
for instance [78–80 ].
Let us conclude with the remark that the generalization of multipole conservation laws
to curved spacetime backgrounds has recently been investigated in [73, 74 ]. It is therefore
worthwhile to clarify the difference of the setups used therein and here. Namely, in the lit-
erature, fracton theories typically come, either explicitly or implicitly, equipped with complex
fields, carrying the scalar charge Q. Moreover, it is most common to treat the dipole moment
of this charge separately from the operator of spatial momentum. On the contrary, here the
two vector opeartors are identified via (4). In addition, the charge Qis topological and there-
fore does not act on the elementary fields φa. Finally, the general class of conservation laws
of the type (15) does not seem to have been studied elsewhere at all. Another, more oper-
ational difference is that in the high-energy physics literature, symmetries are often studied
via background gauging, whereas we have so far used solely the physical, global translation
invariance. We shall elaborate on the role of background gauge invariance of the action in the
context of the present paper in the following appendix.
D Gauging dipole symmetry: volume-preserving diffeomorphisms
Suppose we would like to encode the global symmetries of an EFT in terms of background
gauge invariance of its generating functional. Putting aside temporal translations, the global
symmetries of interest to us are all displayed in Fig. 1.8All the generators are various moments
of the topological charge Q. It therefore appears to be possible to gauge all the symmetries
simultaneously by considering the action of the generic moment Qλdefined by (18). But
8The figure was designed with the special case of d=2 spatial dimensions in mind. However, the analysis
below applies without change to any d.
25SciPost Physics Submission
according to (21), the transformation of the canonical fields φagenerated by Qλcorresponds
to a translation xi→xi+ξi(x,t)withξi=−εi j∂jλ. This is an example of a volume-preserving
diffeomorphism (VPD), since ∇·ξ=0. We therefore expect that gauging the dipole symmetry
will lead to invariance of the classical action of the theory under spatial VPDs [15].
Let us now formalize the above intuitive argument. The topological current J=⋆Ω=⋆dω,
generalizing (10), can be coupled to a (d−1)-form background gauge field, A. This extends
the action (71) to
S=Z
(ω∧⋆n+A∧⋆J−H vol) =Z
(ω∧⋆n+A∧dω−H vol). (80)
The Hamiltonian density Hcontains by construction only spatial derivatives of φa. The Hamil-
tonian term in the action can accordingly be made invariant under spatial diffeomorphisms in
the usual way by coupling in the spatial metrics hµνand˜hµν. We shall therefore focus on the
first two terms in (80).
The term A∧dωis obviously invariant under the gauge transformation δA=dλ, whereλis
a(d−2)-form gauge parameter. At the same time, the term is also manifestly diffeomorphism-
invariant. The same is however not true for the ω∧⋆nterm, as long as we wish to keep the
1-form background nfixed. As pointed out in [15], the invariance under spatial VPDs can be
recovered thanks to cancellation between the transformations of ω∧⋆nandA∧dω. With this
in mind, we consider the following ansatz,
δω=Lξω,δA=LξA+Λ, (81)
where ξ≡ξµ∂µis an as yet unspecified vector field, and Λan as yet unspecified (d−1)-form.
Assuming, as mentioned above, the invariance of the Hamiltonian term, the variation of the
action becomes
δξS=Z
ω∧[dΛ−Lξ(⋆n)]. (82)
At this point, we need the assumption d ⋆n=0, which we made rather casually in Appendix C.
This is, in fact, essential in case Ω=dωis cohomologically nontrivial, and thus ωis not
globally well-defined on the target space M. Namely, it guarantees that the ω∧⋆nterm in
the action can be recovered by integration of the closed form Ω∧⋆nover a spacetime with
one extra dimension à la Witten [68]. The fact that for cohomologically nontrivial Ωthe EFT
cannot be coupled to an arbitrary Aristotelian background reflects the LMP , as explained in
Sec. 7.
With the assumption d ⋆n=0, we now use the Cartan magic formula along with (75) to
rewrite (82) as
δξS=Z
ω∧d(Λ+ιn♯⋆ξ♭). (83)
It might appear that we can choose any ξand then simply set Λ=−ιn♯⋆ξ♭to keep the action
unchanged. But this may spoil the assumed invariance of the Hamiltonian term. A suitable
coordinate-free formulation of the expected VPDs is
ξ♭=⋆(n∧dλ),Λ= (−1)dn∧(ιn♯dλ), (84)
whereλis again an arbitrary (d−2)-form gauge parameter. By applying the projection–
rejection decomposition (78) to d λinstead of dω, we readily find that Λ+ιn♯⋆ξ♭= (−1)ddλ,
which guarantees the invariance of the action. Note that we have not used anywhere the
assumption that d n=0. This is only needed to ensure that the diffeomorphism generated by
the vector field ξactually is a VPD, thanks to ∇·ξ=−d†ξ♭=⋆d⋆ξ♭= (−1)d⋆(dn∧dλ).
26SciPost Physics Submission
Let us unpack the meaning of the generalized VPD (84) in a simple, familiar setting. We
restrict to a trivial Aristotelian background in d=2 spatial dimensions. Here n=dtand the
action (80) becomes
S=Z
d2xdt(ω0+AµJµ−H ), (85)
where Jµis defined by (10). This extends our original action (6) by adding a source term for
the topological current. The transformation parameters (84) reduce to
ξi=−εi j∂jλ,Λ=∂0λdt. (86)
The corresponding transformations (81) translate to
δω0=ξi∂iω0+ωi∂0ξi,δA0=ξi∂iA0+Ai∂0ξi+∂0λ,δAi=ξj∂jAi+Aj∂iξj. (87)
Up to an overall rescaling of ξiandλ, this agrees with the “nonlinear higher-rank symmetry”
put forward in [15]. The symmetry corresponds to a simultaneous spatial VPD and a gauge
transformation of the temporal component of the background gauge field Aµ.
This completes the argument demonstrating how the global dipole-type symmetry ana-
lyzed in this paper can be embedded in a background-gauge-invariant setting. For the sake
of completeness, let us add that that the background gauge transformations (84) can be used
to obtain a Ward–Takahashi identity for the generating functional of the theory, which in turn
recovers the local conservation law (15). See [15]for further details.
References
[1]R. M. Nandkishore and M. Hermele, Fractons , Ann. Rev. Cond. Matt. Phys. 10, 295
(2019), doi:10.1146 /annurev-conmatphys-031218-013604, 1803.11196 .
[2]M. Pretko, X. Chen and Y. You, Fracton Phases of Matter , Int. J. Mod. Phys. A35, 2030003
(2020), doi:10.1142 /S0217751X20300033, 2001.01722 .
[3]K. T . Grosvenor, C. Hoyos, F . Peña-Benítez and P . Surówka, Space-Dependent Symmetries
and Fractons , Front. Phys. 9, 792621 (2022), doi:10.3389 /fphy.2021.792621, 2112.
00531 .
[4]A. Gromov and L. Radzihovsky, Colloquium: Fracton matter , Rev. Mod. Phys. 96, 011001
(2024), doi:10.1103 /RevModPhys.96.011001, 2211.05130 .
[5]N. Papanicolaou and T . N. Tomaras, Dynamics of magnetic vortices , Nucl. Phys. B360 ,
425 (1991), doi:10.1016 /0550-3213(91)90410-Y.
[6]D. Doshi and A. Gromov, Vortices as fractons , Commun. Phys. 4, 44 (2021), 2005.03015 .
[7]L. Marsot, P .-M. Zhang, M. Chernodub and P . A. Horvathy, Hall effects in Carroll dynamics ,
Phys. Rept. 1028 , 1 (2023), doi:10.1016 /j.physrep.2023.07.007, 2212.02360 .
[8]Y. Hirono and Y.-H. Qi, Effective field theories for gapless phases with fractons via a coset
construction , Phys. Rev. B105 , 205109 (2022), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevB.105.205109,
2110.13066 .
[9]Y. Hirono, M. You, S. Angus and G. Y. Cho, A symmetry principle for gauge theories with
fractons (2022), 2207.00854 .
27SciPost Physics Submission
[10]H. Watanabe and H. Murayama, Noncommuting Momenta of Topological Solitons , Phys.
Rev. Lett. 112, 191804 (2014), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevLett.112.191804, 1401.8139 .
[11]J. McGreevy, Generalized symmetries in condensed matter , Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter
Phys. 14, 57 (2023), doi:10.1146 /annurev-conmatphys-040721-021029.
[12]P . R. S. Gomes, An introduction to higher-form symmetries , SciPost Phys. Lect. Notes 74,
1 (2023), doi:10.21468 /SciPostPhysLectNotes.74, 2303.01817 .
[13]T . D. Brennan and S. Hong, Introduction to Generalized Global Symmetries in QFT and
Particle Physics (2023), 2306.00912 .
[14]F . Toppan, On anomalies in classical dynamical systems , J. Nonlin. Math. Phys. 8, 518
(2001), doi:10.2991 /jnmp.2001.8.4.6, math-ph/0105051 .
[15]Y.-H. Du, U. Mehta, D. X. Nguyen and D. T . Son, Volume-preserving diffeomor-
phism as nonabelian higher-rank gauge symmetry , SciPost Phys. 12, 050 (2022),
doi:10.21468 /SciPostPhys.12.2.050, 2103.09826 .
[16]A. Gromov, Chiral Topological Elasticity and Fracton Order , Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 076403
(2019), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevLett.122.076403, 1712.06600 .
[17]S. Iso, D. Karabali and B. Sakita, Fermions in the lowest Landau level. Bosonization,
W∞algebra, droplets, chiral bosons , Phys. Lett. B296 , 143 (1992), doi:10.1016 /0370-
2693(92)90816-M, hep-th/9209003 .
[18]P . Wiegmann and A. G. Abanov, Anomalous Hydrodynamics of Two-Dimensional Vortex
Fluids , Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 034501 (2014), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevLett.113.034501,
1311.4479 .
[19]S. M. Girvin, A. H. MacDonald and P . M. Platzman, Magneto-roton theory of collec-
tive excitations in the fractional quantum Hall effect , Phys. Rev. B33, 2481 (1986),
doi:10.1103 /PhysRevB.33.2481.
[20]M. Stone, Magnus force on skyrmions in ferromagnets and quantum Hall systems , Phys.
Rev.B53, 16573 (1996), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevB.53.16573.
[21]A. Gromov, Towards classification of Fracton phases: the multipole algebra , Phys. Rev. X9,
031035 (2019), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevX.9.031035, 1812.05104 .
[22]E. G. Floratos, A Lagrangian resolution of the momentum problem for two-dimensional
ferromagnets , Phys. Lett. B279 , 117 (1992), doi:10.1016 /0370-2693(92)91850-9.
[23]R. Banerjee and B. Chakraborty, Formulation of the Landau-Lifshitz model of fer-
romagnetism as a constrained dynamical system , Nucl. Phys. B449 , 317 (1995),
doi:10.1016 /0550-3213(95)00202-4.
[24]C. Schütte and M. Garst, Magnon-skyrmion scattering in chiral magnets , Phys. Rev. B90,
094423 (2014), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevB.90.094423, 1405.1568 .
[25]O. Tchernyshyov, Conserved momenta of a ferromagnetic soliton , Ann. Phys. 363, 98
(2015), doi:https: //doi.org /10.1016 /j.aop.2015.09.004.
[26]X. Di and O. Tchernyshyov, Conserved momenta of ferromagnetic solitons
through the prism of differential geometry , SciPost Phys. 11, 108 (2021),
doi:10.21468 /SciPostPhys.11.6.108, 2105.03553 .
28SciPost Physics Submission
[27]A. Altland and B. Simons, Condensed matter field theory , Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK (2010).
[28]D. X. Nguyen, A. Gromov and S. Moroz, Fracton-elasticity duality of two-dimensional
superfluid vortex crystals: defect interactions and quantum melting , SciPost Phys. 9, 076
(2020), doi:10.21468 /SciPostPhys.9.5.076, 2005.12317 .
[29]G. E. Volovik and V . S. Dotsenko, Hydrodynamics of defects in condensed media, using as
examples vortices in rotating He II and disclinations in a planar magnet , Sov. Phys. JETP
51, 65 (1980).
[30]D. J. Thouless, P . Ao and Q. Niu, Transverse force on a quantized vortex in a super-
fluid, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 3758 (1996), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevLett.76.3758, cond-mat/
9603196 .
[31]F . D. M. Haldane, Geometrical Interpretation of Momentum and Crystal Momentum of Clas-
sical and Quantum Ferromagnetic Heisenberg Chains , Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 1488 (1986),
doi:10.1103 /PhysRevLett.57.1488.
[32]G. E. Volovik, Linear momentum in ferromagnets , J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 20, L83
(1987).
[33]H. Watanabe and H. Murayama, Effective Lagrangian for Nonrelativistic Systems , Phys.
Rev.X4, 031057 (2014), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevX.4.031057, 1402.7066 .
[34]T . Brauner and S. Moroz, Topological interactions of Nambu-Goldstone bosons in quantum
many-body systems , Phys. Rev. D90, 121701 (2014), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevD.90.121701,
1405.2670 .
[35]J. O. Andersen, T . Brauner, C. P . Hofmann and A. Vuorinen, Effective Lagrangians for
quantum many-body systems , JHEP 08, 088 (2014), doi:10.1007 /JHEP08(2014)088,
1406.3439 .
[36]E. D’Hoker, Invariant effective actions, cohomology of homogeneous spaces and anomalies ,
Nucl. Phys. B451 , 725 (1995), doi:10.1016 /0550-3213(95)00265-T, hep-th/9502162 .
[37]A. J. Beekman, L. Rademaker and J. van Wezel, An Introduction to Spontaneous Symmetry
Breaking , SciPost Phys. Lect. Notes 11(2019), 1909.01820 .
[38]R. Peierls, T . A. Kaplan and P . W . Anderson, Reflections on broken symmetry , Phys. Today
44, 13 (1991), doi:10.1063 /1.2809982.
[39]C. Nayak, K. Shtengel, D. Orgad, M. P . A. Fisher and S. M. Girvin, Electri-
cal current carried by neutral quasiparticles , Phys. Rev. B64, 235113 (2001),
doi:10.1103 /PhysRevB.64.235113.
[40]W . E. Goff, F . Gaitan and M. Stone, Berry’s phase and the Wess-Zumino effective action in
3He-A, Phys. Lett. A136 , 433 (1989), doi:10.1016 /0375-9601(89)90429-5.
[41]V . P . Nair and R. Ray, Some topological issues for ferromagnets and fluids , Nucl. Phys.
B676 , 659 (2004), doi:10.1016 /j.nuclphysb.2003.10.032, hep-th/0309087 .
[42]H. Watanabe and T . Brauner, On the number of Nambu-Goldstone bosons and its relation
to charge densities , Phys. Rev. D84, 125013 (2011), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevD.84.125013,
1109.6327 .
29SciPost Physics Submission
[43]H. Watanabe, Counting Rules of Nambu-Goldstone Modes , Ann. Rev. Cond. Mat. Phys. 11,
169 (2020), doi:10.1146 /annurev-conmatphys-031119-050644, 1904.00569 .
[44]D. Gaiotto, A. Kapustin, N. Seiberg and B. Willett, Generalized global symmetries , JHEP
02, 172 (2015), doi:10.1007 /JHEP02(2015)172, 1412.5148 .
[45]E. Lake, Higher-form symmetries and spontaneous symmetry breaking (2018), 1802.
07747 .
[46]D. M. Hofman and N. Iqbal, Goldstone modes and photonization for higher form symme-
tries, SciPost Phys. 6, 006 (2019), doi:10.21468 /SciPostPhys.6.1.006, 1802.09512 .
[47]N. Yamamoto, Axion electrodynamics and nonrelativistic photons in nuclear and quark
matter , Phys. Rev. D93, 085036 (2016), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevD.93.085036, 1512.
05668 .
[48]S. Ozaki and N. Yamamoto, Axion crystals , JHEP 08, 098 (2017),
doi:10.1007 /JHEP08(2017)098, 1610.07835 .
[49]T . Brauner and S. Kadam, Anomalous electrodynamics of neutral pion matter in strong
magnetic fields , JHEP 03, 015 (2017), doi:10.1007 /JHEP03(2017)015, 1701.06793 .
[50]Y. Hidaka, Y. Hirono and R. Yokokura, Counting Nambu-Goldstone modes
of higher-form global symmetries , Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 071601 (2021),
doi:10.1103 /PhysRevLett.126.071601, 2007.15901 .
[51]Y. Hidaka, M. Nitta and R. Yokokura, Higher-form symmetries and 3-group in axion elec-
trodynamics , Phys. Lett. B808 , 135672 (2020), doi:10.1016 /j.physletb.2020.135672,
2006.12532 .
[52]Y. Hidaka, M. Nitta and R. Yokokura, Global 3-group symmetry and ’t Hooft anomalies
in axion electrodynamics , JHEP 01, 173 (2021), doi:10.1007 /JHEP01(2021)173, 2009.
14368 .
[53]D. T . Son and M. A. Stephanov, Axial anomaly and magnetism of nuclear and quark matter ,
Phys. Rev. D77, 014021 (2008), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevD.77.014021, 0710.1084 .
[54]T . Brauner and N. Yamamoto, Chiral Soliton Lattice and Charged Pion Condensation in
Strong Magnetic Fields , JHEP 04, 132 (2017), doi:10.1007 /JHEP04(2017)132, 1609.
05213 .
[55]A. Kryjevski, Spontaneous superfluid current generation in the kaon condensed color
flavor locked phase at nonzero strange quark mass , Phys. Rev. D77, 014018 (2008),
doi:10.1103 /PhysRevD.77.014018, hep-ph/0508180 .
[56]T . Schäfer, Meson supercurrent state in high density QCD , Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 012305
(2006), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevLett.96.012305, hep-ph/0508190 .
[57]A. Gerhold and T . Schäfer, Meson current in the CFL phase , Phys. Rev. D73, 125022
(2006), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevD.73.125022, hep-ph/0603257 .
[58]A. Gerhold, T . Schäfer and A. Kryjevski, Goldstone boson currents in a kaon condensed CFL
phase , Phys. Rev. D75, 054012 (2007), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevD.75.054012, hep-ph/
0612181 .
[59]N. Yamamoto, Generalized Bloch theorem and chiral transport phenomena , Phys. Rev.
D92, 085011 (2015), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevD.92.085011, 1502.01547 .
30SciPost Physics Submission
[60]V . P . Nair, Topological terms and diffeomorphism anomalies in fluid dynamics and sigma
models , Phys. Rev. D103 , 085017 (2021), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevD.103.085017, 2008.
11260 .
[61]M. V . Berry, Quantal phase factors accompanying adiabatic changes , Proc. Roy. Soc. London
A392 , 45 (1984), doi:10.1098 /rspa.1984.0023.
[62]G. ’t Hooft, Naturalness, chiral symmetry, and spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking ,
NATO Sci. Ser. B59, 135 (1980), doi:10.1007 /978-1-4684-7571-5_9.
[63]J. Armas and A. Jain, Approximate higher-form symmetries, topological defects, and dy-
namical phase transitions (2023), 2301.09628 .
[64]H. Leutwyler, Nonrelativistic effective Lagrangians , Phys. Rev. D49, 3033 (1994),
doi:10.1103 /PhysRevD.49.3033, hep-ph/9311264 .
[65]J. A. de Azcárraga, J. M. Izquierdo and J. C. Pérez Bueno, An introduction to some novel
applications of Lie algebra cohomology in mathematics and physics , Rev. R. Acad. Cien.
Exactas Fis. Nat. Ser. A Mat. 95, 225 (2001), physics/9803046 .
[66]D. E. Soper, Classical Field Theory , Dover Publications (2008).
[67]S. Pavaskar, R. Penco and I. Z. Rothstein, An effective field theory of magneto-elasticity ,
SciPost Phys. 12, 155 (2022), doi:10.21468 /SciPostPhys.12.5.155, 2112.13873 .
[68]E. Witten, Global aspects of current algebra , Nucl. Phys. B223 , 422 (1983),
doi:10.1016 /0550-3213(83)90063-9.
[69]L. D. Faddeev and R. Jackiw, Hamiltonian Reduction of Unconstrained and Constrained
Systems , Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 1692 (1988), doi:10.1103 /PhysRevLett.60.1692.
[70]J. de Boer, J. Hartong, E. Have, N. A. Obers and W . Sybesma, Non-Boost Invariant Fluid
Dynamics , SciPost Phys. 9, 018 (2020), doi:10.21468 /SciPostPhys.9.2.018, 2004.10759 .
[71]J. Armas and A. Jain, Effective field theory for hydrodynamics without boosts , SciPost Phys.
11, 054 (2021), doi:10.21468 /SciPostPhys.11.3.054, 2010.15782 .
[72]L. Bidussi, J. Hartong, E. Have, J. Musaeus and S. Prohazka, Fractons, dipole symmetries
and curved spacetime , SciPost Phys. 12, 205 (2022), doi:10.21468 /SciPostPhys.12.6.205,
2111.03668 .
[73]A. Jain and K. Jensen, Fractons in curved space , SciPost Phys. 12, 142 (2022),
doi:10.21468 /SciPostPhys.12.4.142, 2111.03973 .
[74]J. Armas and E. Have, Ideal fracton superfluids (2023), 2304.09596 .
[75]E. Bergshoeff, J. Figueroa-O’Farrill and J. Gomis, A non-lorentzian primer , SciPost Phys.
Lect. Notes 69, 1 (2023), doi:10.21468 /SciPostPhysLectNotes.69, 2206.12177 .
[76]M. Fecko, Galilean and Carrollian invariant Hodge star operators (2022), 2206.09788 .
[77]M. Fecko, Some Useful Operators on Differential Forms on Galilean and Carrollian Space-
times , SIGMA 19, 024 (2023), doi:10.3842 /SIGMA.2023.024, 2206.11138 .
[78]Y. Kimura, Vortex motion on surfaces with constant curvature , Proc. Roy. Soc. A455 , 245
(1999), doi:10.1098 /rspa.1999.0311.
31SciPost Physics Submission
[79]D. G. Dritschel and S. Boatto, The motion of point vortices on closed surfaces , Proc. Roy.
Soc.A471 , 20140890 (2015), doi:10.1098 /rspa.2014.0890.
[80]A. Bogatskiy, Vortex flows on closed surfaces , J. Phys. A52, 475501 (2019),
doi:10.1088 /1751-8121 /ab4e6a.
32