Draft version March 8, 2023
Typeset using L ATEXpreprint style in AASTeX631
Tuning the Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) Observing Strategy for Solar
System Science
Megan E. Schwamb,1R. Lynne Jones,2, 3Peter Yoachim,4Kathryn Volk,5, 6
Rosemary C. Dorsey,7Cyrielle Opitom,8Sarah Greenstreet,9Tim Lister,10
Colin Snodgrass,8Bryce T. Bolin,11, 12, 13,Laura Inno,14, 15Michele T. Bannister,7
Siegfried Eggl,16, 17, 18, 19Michael Solontoi,20Michael S. P. Kelley,21Mario Juri c,9
Hsing Wen Lin ( 林省文),22Darin Ragozzine,23Pedro H. Bernardinelli,9
Steven R. Chesley,24Tansu Daylan,25, 26Josef Durech,27Wesley C. Fraser,28
Mikael Granvik,29, 30Matthew M. Knight,31Carey M. Lisse,32Renu Malhotra,5
William J. Oldroyd,33Audrey Thirouin,34and Quanzhi Ye ( 叶泉志)21, 35
1Astrophysics Research Centre, School of Mathematics and Physics, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast BT7 1NN, UK
2Rubin Observatory, 950 N. Cherry Ave., Tucson, AZ 85719, USA
3Aerotek, Suite 150, 4321 Still Creek Drive, Burnaby, BC V5C6S, Canada
4Department of Astronomy, University of Washington, 3910 15th Ave NE, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
5Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, The University of Arizona, 1629 E University Blvd, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA
6Planetary Science Institute, 11700 East Fort Lowell, Suite 106, Tucson, AZ 85719, USA
7School of Physical and Chemical Sciences | Te Kura Mat u, University of Canterbury, Private Bag 4800,
Christchurch 8140, New Zealand
8Institute for Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, EH9 3HJ, UK
9DiRAC Institute and the Department of Astronomy, University of Washington, 3910 15th Ave NE, Seattle, WA
98195, USA
10Las Cumbres Observatory, 6740 Cortona Drive Suite 102, Goleta, CA 93117, USA
11Goddard Space Flight Center, 8800 Greenbelt Road, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA
12Division of Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
13Infrared Processing and Analysis Center, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
14Science and Technology Department, Parthenope University of Naples, CDN IC4, 80143, Naples, Italy
15INAF-Osservatorio Astronomico di Capodimonte, Salita Moraliello, 16, 80131, Naples, Italy
16Department of Aerospace Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
17Department of Astronomy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
18National Center for Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801,
USA
19IMCCE, Paris Observatory, 77 Avenue Denfert-Rochereau, 75014 Paris, France
20Department of Physics and Engineering, Monmouth College, 700 E Broadway, Monmouth, IL 61462, USA
21Department of Astronomy, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742-0001, USA
22Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
23Brigham Young University, Department of Physics and Astronomy, N283 ESC, Provo, UT 84602, USA
24Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Dr., Pasadena, CA 91109, USA
25Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, 4 Ivy Lane, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
26LSSTC Catalyst Fellow
Corresponding author: Megan E. Schwamb
m.schwamb@qub.ac.ukarXiv:2303.02355v2  [astro-ph.EP]  7 Mar 20232 Schwamb et al.
27Astronomical Institute, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, V Hole sovi ck ach 2, 180 00, Prague
8,Czech Republic
28Herzberg Astronomy and Astrophysics Research Centre, National Research Council, 5071 W. Saanich Rd. Victoria
BC, V9E 2E7, Canada
29Department of Physics, P.O. Box 64, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland
30Asteroid Engineering Laboratory, Lule  a University of Technology, Box 848, SE-981 28 Kiruna, Sweden
31Physics Department, United States Naval Academy, 572C Holloway Rd, Annapolis, MD 21402, USA
32Space Exploration Sector, Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, 11100 Johns Hopkins Road,
Laurel, MD 20723, USA
33Department of Astronomy & Planetary Science, Northern Arizona University, P.O. Box 6010, Flagsta, AZ 86011,
USA
34Lowell Observatory, 1400 W. Mars Hill Road, Flagsta, AZ 86001, USA
35Center for Space Physics, Boston University, 725 Commonwealth Ave, Boston, MA 02215, USA
ABSTRACT
The Vera C. Rubin Observatory is expected to start the Legacy Survey of Space and
Time (LSST) in early to mid-2025. This multi-band wide-eld synoptic survey will
transform our view of the solar system, with the discovery and monitoring of over 5
million small bodies. The nal survey strategy chosen for LSST has direct implications
on the discoverability and characterization of solar system minor planets and passing
interstellar objects. Creating an inventory of the solar system is one of the four main
LSST science drivers. The LSST observing cadence is a complex optimization problem
that must balance the priorities and needs of all the key LSST science areas. To de-
sign the best LSST survey strategy, a series of operation simulations using the Rubin
Observatory scheduler have been generated to explore the various options for tuning
observing parameters and prioritizations. We explore the impact of the various simu-
lated LSST observing strategies on studying the solar system's small body reservoirs.
We examine what are the best observing scenarios and review what are the important
considerations for maximizing LSST solar system science. In general, most of the LSST
cadence simulations produce 5% or less variations in our chosen key metrics, but a
subset of the simulations signicantly hinder science returns with much larger losses in
the discovery and light curve metrics.
1.INTRODUCTION
The Vera C. Rubin Observatory is currently under construction on Cerro Pach on in Chile. When
completed, the observatory will house the 8.36-m Simonyi Survey Telescope equipped with the Rubin
Observatory LSST Camera (LSSTCam) which covers a 9.6 deg2circular eld-of-view (FOV). This
provides the unique depth and temporal sky coverage that will enable Rubin Observatory's planned
10-year Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST; Ivezi c et al. 2019; Bianco et al. 2022) to be an
unprecedented discovery machine for solar system small bodies. With survey operations currently
expected to begin in early to mid-2025, current predictions estimate that Rubin Observatory will
detect over 5 million new solar system objects. In each of the solar system's small body reservoirs,
NASA Postdoctoral Program FellowTuning LSST for Solar System Science 3
an order of magnitude more objects will be discovered during the LSST than cataloged to date in the
Minor Planet Center (MPC)1(Jones et al. 2009; LSST Science Collaboration et al. 2009; Solontoi
et al. 2010; Shannon et al. 2015; Silsbee & Tremaine 2016; Grav et al. 2016; Vere s & Chesley 2017;
Jones et al. 2018; Schwamb et al. 2018a; Ivezi c et al. 2019; Fedorets et al. 2020a). In addition,
the survey is expected to discover at least several interstellar objects (ISOs) passing through the
solar system (Moro-Mart n et al. 2009; Cook et al. 2016; Engelhardt et al. 2017; Trilling et al.
2017; Seligman & Laughlin 2018; Levine et al. 2021; Hoover et al. 2022). Beyond discovery, the
dawn of Rubin Observatory will also usher in a revolution for time domain planetary astronomy.
The LSST will monitor most of its 5+ million small body discoveries over a ten-year period, with
likely hundreds of observations per object split across 6 broad-band ( ugrizy ) lters (LSST Science
Collaboration et al. 2009; Ivezi c et al. 2019). This will enable an unparalleled probe of activity within
various regions of the solar system, including cometary outgassing/sublimation, cometary outbursts,
rotational breakup events, and asteroid collisions (Jones et al. 2009; LSST Science Collaboration
et al. 2009; Schwamb et al. 2018a, 2021). The large number of observations per object will also
provide opportunities to study rotational light curves, phase curves, and photometric colors which
probe the shape, size, rotation rate, and surface composition of these small bodies (Jones et al. 2009;
LSST Science Collaboration et al. 2009; Schwamb et al. 2018a).
The LSST will be a collection of surveys operating in tandem. The main component of the LSST
is the Wide-Fast-Deep (WFD), a wide-eld survey covering 18,000 deg2of the sky with a universal
observing strategy. Although there is tuning to the implementation of the WFD that is possible, the
main requirements for the WFD are outlined in the LSST Science Requirements Document (SRD;
Ivezi c & the LSST Science Collaboration 2013). The SRD denes the WFD as 18,000 deg2of
sky uniformly covered to a median total of 825 30 s exposures divided across the six lters over a
ten year period. Approximately 80-90% of the LSST's on-sky observing time will be devoted to the
WFD. The remaining time is expected to be used for non-WFD observing and will likely be split
between observing other portions of the sky in mini-surveys (taking up more than a few percent of the
observing time) with dierent cadences, micro-surveys (observing strategies that require 1% of the
observing time), and approximately 5% of the on-sky time dedicated to Deep Drilling Fields (DDFs;
a small number of dedicated pointings that will receive intensive observing at a higher cadence than
the WFD). For a full description of the various components of the LSST and the requirements set
by the SRD, readers are directed to Ivezi c & the LSST Science Collaboration (2013), Ivezi c et al.
(2019), Bianco et al. (2022), and references therein.
How exactly Rubin Observatory will scan the night sky is not fully settled. The Rubin Observatory
Project and Operations teams have engaged with the wider user community to optimize the LSST
observing strategy in order to maximize the future science returns from the resulting dataset and
facilitate the best science with the survey (Bianco et al. 2022). Partitioning out the non-WFD LSST
observing time and ne tuning the WFD observing cadence can be likened to cutting a cake and
dividing it out to attendees at a birthday party. There are many ways to cut and serve the slices
of cake, but the various slicing/serving options may result in very dierent outcomes. For example,
cutting even slices such that everyone gets the same portion size of cake is much more equitable and
will likely result in a much happier crowd than cutting half the cake for the rst person served and
1https://www.minorplanetcenter.net/4 Schwamb et al.
dividing the other half of the cake amongst the rest of the attendees. LSST has four key science
drivers: probing dark energy and dark matter, exploring the transient optical sky, inventorying the
solar system, and mapping the Milky Way (LSST Science Collaboration et al. 2009; Ivezi c et al.
2019). What may be benecial for one science driver in a proposed LSST observing cadence may
negatively impact the returns from another. Optimizing the LSST strategy is thus a ne balance to
tune the cadence parameters to obtain the best science from each of the LSST's key drivers while
evenly distributing the \unhappiness" such that no science area is overly impacted by the nalized
cadence decisions.
As highlighted in Bianco et al. (2022), optimizing the LSST cadence is a multivariate problem. In
order to facilitate exploring the various options for modifying the LSST survey strategy and the result-
ing impacts on the survey's main science drivers, the Rubin Observatory LSST Scheduler Team has
developed a suite of cadence simulations (Connolly et al. 2014; Delgado et al. 2014; LSST Science Col-
laboration et al. 2017; Jones et al. 2020) using the Rubin Observatory scheduler ( rubin sim/OpSim;
Naghib et al. 2019) and the python-based LSST Metrics Analysis Framework (MAF, Jones et al.
2014). The Rubin Observatory Survey Cadence Optimization Committee (SCOC) has been synthe-
sizing the feedback from the LSST user community and the output from the MAF metrics to produce
a formal recommendation on how to optimize the LSST survey strategy (Ivezi c & the SCOC 2021;
Bianco & the SCOC 2022). The SCOC is expected to nish its main deliberations by the end of
2023. The SCOC may request some additional ne-tuning of the observatory strategy and recom-
mend changes for the rst year of the survey based on the knowledge gained during commissioning
and benchmarking of the telescope-camera system (Bianco et al. 2022). Once Rubin Observatory
science operations start, it is expected that the SCOC will periodically review the performance of
the LSST observing cadence and subsequently recommend modications as needed.
This paper is a contribution to the Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series focus issue on Ru-
bin LSST Survey Strategy Optimization2. The focus issue aims to capture the knowledge learned
during the process of selecting and nalizing the LSST initial cadence and identifying what observ-
ing strategies are or are not suitable for each of the key LSST science areas. We refer the reader
to the opening paper by Bianco et al. (2022) for a more detailed introduction to the focus issue.
The work presented in this paper stems from the Rubin Observatory LSST Solar System Science
Collaboration's (SSSC) eorts to provide feedback to the SCOC. The LSST SRD does not set perfor-
mance requirements based on detecting a certain number of solar system objects in the various small
body populations. Instead, the SRD outlines the minimum requirements and stretch goals for the
observing specications of the LSST such as single exposure depth, sky coverage, number of visits,
astrometric precision, and co-added 10-year depths that would enable science in all the four main
survey science drivers. What it means to maximize the returns on LSST Solar System science in
the context of survey cadence decisions is up for interpretation by the Rubin data rights community
and the SCOC. The baseline survey strategy that was being simulated at the start of the cadence
optimization process, showed an order of magnitude increase in Solar System discoveries across each
of the minor planet populations (LSST Science Collaboration et al. 2009; Vere s & Chesley 2017;
Jones et al. 2018). Determining that the LSST needs to discover N objects of class X to measure Y
at the Z condence level in order provide the next leap forward in our understanding of the Solar
2https://iopscience.iop.org/journal/0067-0049/page/rubin cadenceTuning LSST for Solar System Science 5
System is extremely challening to do. Many of the science questions that the LSST will address are
not necessarily well understood (or even formulated) yet. In most cases, it is very dicult to take
existing models of the solar system, its formation and evolution, and transform that into the the total
number of particular kinds of objects needed and the photometric precision required to distinguish
between the available models. The analysis presented in this work is the SSSC's attempt based on
the collaboration's science priorities (Schwamb et al. 2018a) to nd quantitative proxies that can be
calculated within MAF and use these outputted metrics to identify which potential LSST observing
strategies are the best and worst at enabling solar system science.
In this paper, we review the LSST cadence simulations and MAF metrics focusing on the impact
on the detection and monitoring of solar system minor planets and ISOs. In Section 2, we provide an
overview of how LSST moving object discoveries are simulated and how the relevant MAF metrics
are calculated. Section 3 briey describes the LSST cadence simulations utilized in this work. In
Section 4, we examine the impact of various survey strategy choices and identify tension points
with moving object detection and characterization. In Section 5, we discuss additional factors that
are currently not explored in the cadence simulations which have the potential for hindering or
enhancing solar system science with the LSST. Finally, we draw together in Section 6 conclusions
and recommendations for tuning the LSST survey strategy in order to maximize solar system science
as well as identify areas for future work. Given the length of this paper, we have included a table of
acronyms and their expansions in Appendix A.
2.SIMULATING LSST SOLAR SYSTEM DETECTIONS
Simulating observations of solar system objects requires considerations beyond those commonly
used for most other astrophysical sources. Of foremost importance are their non-sidereal motions
and the fact that a common rest frame cannot simultaneously approximate all of them. Solar system
object proper motions range from .100hr 1for distant trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs) to &1hr 1
for closely approaching and impacting near-Earth objects (NEOs). Next, their brightnesses may
greatly vary depending on their orbits around the Sun and how closely they approach the Earth.
Furthermore, cometary activity (i.e., sublimation-driven mass loss) can enhance or even dominate
the intrinsic brightness of active objects in response to solar insolation, and make them extended
objects. Finally, their brightnesses also vary with the phase (Sun-target-observer) angle. Other
brightness variations, e.g., due to the rotational light curve, or outbursts of activity, can be treated
in ways similar to any other astrophysical source.
To partially illustrate the added complexities of modeling solar system objects, take, for example,
a 1-km radius object in a parabolic orbit observed at solar opposition. Such an object would have
an apparent magnitude of
m=H(1;1;0) + 5 log10(rh) + 5 log10() + 2:5 log10(); (1)
whereH(1;1;0) (or more simply, H) is the absolute magnitude3,rhis the heliocentric distance in
units of au,  is the observer-target distance in units of au, and  is the phase function evaluated
at phase angle . Let the 1-km object have a geometric albedo4of 4%, then H'17:6 mag. The
apparent brightness of this target would range from 25th magnitude at 6 au to 17th magnitude at
3Dened as the apparent magnitude of the target as seen by the Sun at a distance of 1 au (i.e., rh=1 au, =1 au,
=0)
4Ratio of the brightness at 0phase to that of a white disk with the same geometric cross section.6 Schwamb et al.
1.5 au from the Sun, within Rubin Observatory's nominal capabilities. If the 1-km object was active,
the coma contribution to small-aperture photometry may be estimated as
mc=Hy+ 2:5(2 k) log10(rh) + 2:5 log10() + 2:5 log10(c); (2)
whereHyis the cometary absolute magnitude, kis the heliocentric distance power-law slope for
activity, and  cis the phase function of the coma. Here, the apparent magnitude varies as , rather
than 2in order to account for the spatial extendedness of the coma and xed-angular photometric
apertures where the aperture is smaller than the apparent size of the coma. Let k= 4 and the
comet with m=25 mag at 6 au may brighten to m=13 mag at 1.5 au. Move our hypothetical 1 km
object to an inner-Earth orbit, and the LSST may not even observe it if survey operations never allow
for low solar elongation (low-SE) observations. Thus, solar system objects have the potential to be
undetected at some epochs during LSST operations, saturate during others, or be missed altogether.
In order to address the above challenges when simulating observations of individual objects, a
survey simulator must have knowledge of a target's orbit and its activity state (e.g., cometary or
inactive). Furthermore, to assess a survey's ability to detect, discover, and characterize solar system
object populations, distributions of representative orbits that account for the variety of orbits are
also needed. Model distributions of solar system small bodies' orbits (and their physical properties)
are desirable. Such models are generally derived from the known solar system populations but
debiased to account for discovery eciencies. The survey simulator and solar system object orbital
distributions are described in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, respectively. The metrics used to analyze the
simulated observations are described in Section 2.3.
2.1. Rubin Observatory Scheduler and Operations Simulator
Various aspects of the current and previous iterations of the Rubin Observatory scheduler and
operations simulator (OpSim) are described in Connolly et al. (2014), Delgado et al. (2014), Delgado
& Reuter (2016), Yoachim et al. (2016), LSST Science Collaboration et al. (2017), Jones et al. (2018),
Naghib et al. (2019), Jones et al. (2020), Bianco et al. (2022) and references therein. We provide
a brief overview here. The Rubin Observatory scheduling software is part of rubin sim(Yoachim
et al. 2022), an open-source Rubin-developed python package. The rubin simpackage contains the
primary LSST scheduling algorithm that will be used to choose pointings for the telescope based
on real-time telemetry, goal target maps, and congurable survey parameters. At the top level, the
scheduler uses a decision tree to generate observations in real-time. The decision tree steps through
the potential observing modes of 1) DDFs, 2) Paired observations in a large contiguous area 3) Paired
observations in twilight and 4) single observations selected using a greedy algorithm. The DDFs are
pre-scheduled for optimal times, all the other observing modes use a modied Markov Decision
Process (MDP) similar to the one presented in Naghib et al. (2019) to generate lists of desired
observations. The MDP typically considers slew time, image depth, and desired footprint coverage
when selecting potential observations. The scheduling algorithm is paired with a model observatory to
simulate the full 10-year LSST for these investigations. The model observatory includes a kinematic
model of the telescope along with realistic weather logs, scheduled and unscheduled downtime, and
a sky brightness model (Yoachim et al. 2016). Various survey strategy experiments are performed
by either modifying the scheduler decision tree (e.g., inserting a new observing mode for taking
high airmass observations in twilight), or by altering the MDP algorithm (e.g., adding a new basis
function).Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 7
2.2. Simulating Small Body Populations
The movingObjects module in rubin simgenerates the observations of a model small body popu-
lation as the objects would be seen in a particular simulated survey, taking into account their motion
and expected changes in brightness. As a rst step, ephemerides are generated from the sample or-
bits using OpenOrb (Granvik et al. 2009); the precise camera footprint is applied to determine which
detections could be acquired based on their positions. Then trailing losses and color terms between
the reference band and the observed lter are added to each record, to be used later when combined
with a (potentially modied) H value to calculate apparent magnitudes for each observation.
We use a typical sample size of 5,000 orbits per population. This generally provides enough sta-
tistical accuracy across the orbital distribution to reach accuracies of a few percent at the 50%
completeness level for discovery and characterization metrics, while keeping compute requirements
for a few hundred simulations reasonable. We then clone the potential observations of these orbits
over a range of H values (a simple linear array, chosen with appropriate values for each individual
population), in order to be able to measure discovery and characterization metrics across the expected
range of observable values for each population. The cloning takes place as part of metric calculation,
within the MAF(Metrics Analysis Framework) module of rubin sim. At the metric calculation stage,
the measured apparent magnitude is generated for each observation provided by the movingObjects
module, taking into account each individual H value within the range used for cloning, as well as the
eects of phase angle, distance from Earth and Sun, trailing losses and lter color terms. Using this
apparent magnitude and the expected 5 depth of each visit, the signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio of the
object in each visit is reported. In addition, the probability of detection is also reported; this is close
to requiring a SNR=5 for detection, but adds statistical scatter which has the eect of smoothing the
cuto at 5, allowing occasional detection of fainter objects or occasional losses of slightly brighter
objects.
The process of generating simulated small body populations is described in more detail, specically
for an NEO population, in Jones et al. (2018). For survey strategy evaluations, we include a range of
sample populations from inner solar system objects like NEOs, through mid-system objects like main
belt asteroids and Jovian Trojans, all the way to outer solar system bodies like TNOs and comets.
These include:
•NEOs based on a sample of orbits from Granvik et al. (2018). A random set of 5,000 orbits
are drawn from the full 802,000 synthetic NEO sample instantiated by Granvik5and used for
general NEO evaluation. In addition, Earth MOID (Minimum Orbit Intersection Distance)
values were calculated for the full Granvik sample, and a subset of 5,000 orbits with MOID
values<0:05 au were randomly selected to represent the Potentially Hazardous Asteroid (PHA)
population.
•An'Ayl o 'chaxnim population6, consisting of 10,000 objects with orbits inside the orbit of Venus,
was created via rejection sampling of the probability distribution for orbital elements given in
the Granvik NEO model (Granvik et al. 2018). Orbital elements were drawn from the Granvik
5The full 802,000 object Granvik sample is available for download from https://www.mv.helsinki./home/mgranvik/
data/Granvik+ 2018 Icarus/; the subset is selected as described in detail at https://github.com/lsst-sssc/SSSC test
populations gitlfs/blob/master/MAF TEST/granvik/Granvik%20NEO%20Model.ipynb.
6Previously this population was referred to as the Vatira population or Vatiras (Greenstreet et al. 2012) before the
discovery of the rst known object 'Ayl o 'chaxnim (Bolin et al. 2020a; Greenstreet 2020; de la Fuente Marcos & de la
Fuente Marcos 2020a; Popescu et al. 2020; Ip et al. 2022; Bolin et al. 2022).8 Schwamb et al.
distribution and rejected unless they were compatible with the denition of Vatiras given in the
same reference, i.e. objects between the the apocenter distance of Mercury ( QM= 0:307 au)
and the pericenter distance of Venus ( qV= 0:718 au). Angular orbital elements not provided
through the Granvik model were sampled from uniform distributions. To achieve reasonable
statistical signal, this population is simulated with a larger sample size as each individual orbit
is inherently unlikely to be observed.
•Main Belt Asteroids (MBAs) and Jupiter Trojans, based on a random sample of 5,000 main
belt asteroids and 5,000 Jupiter Trojan asteroids (respectively) from the Panoramic Survey
Telescope and Rapid Response System (Pan-STARRS) Synthetic Solar System Model (S3M)
(Grav et al. 2011).
•Trans-Neptunian Objects (TNOs), based on a random sample of 5,000 objects from the L7
model from CFEPS (Canada-France Ecliptic Plane Survey) (Petit et al. 2011).
•Oort Cloud Comet (OCC) populations, created from the long period comet model of Vokrouh-
lick y et al. (2019). Two dierent samples of 5,000 comets are created, one with a maximum
perihelion distance of 5 au and another with a maximum perihelion distance of 20 au.
For the comet populations, we include a cometary brightening function, based on the Af quantity of
A'Hearn et al. (1984), using a translation from Hto cometary nuclei radii, and parameters appropriate
for long-period comets. Intrinsic light curves due to variations in shape of the objects or surface
albedo or color variations are not included for any population but would be useful to include in
the future. These populations do not include every population across the Solar System but serve
as a representative sample covering a wide range of apparent velocities, sky coverage, and orbital
parameters for the purposes of evaluating the impacts of changes in survey strategy.
A variety of solar system reectance spectra are assigned to the members of these populations, in
order to determine color terms for the LSST lters. The general simple rule of thumb is that Bus-
DeMeo (DeMeo et al. 2009) SEDs (spectral energy distributions) are assigned to objects depending
on their semimajor axes; orbits with semimajor axes smaller than 2 au are assigned to S types,
orbits with semimajor axes larger than 4 au are assigned to C types, and between 2{4 au orbits are
assigned randomly to S vs. C with a linear increase in probability as a function of semimajor axis, in
accordance with Ivezi c et al. (2001). This means 'Ayl o 'chaxnims are entirely S type, the Trojans are
entirely C types, while PHAs, NEOs, and MBAs are a mix of S and C types. The TNOs are assigned
a signicantly redder, TNO-specic SED, appropriate for the typical colors of a red dynamically
excited TNO or a bluer object from the red cold classicals. The OCC populations are assigned D
type SEDs, as a reasonable approximation for the colors of the cometary nuclei. Colors for these
populations are shown in Table 1. In reality, objects in each of these populations show a range of
colors, so this is a simplication but is sucient for survey strategy evaluation purposes as the same
H-orbit-color distributions are applied to all the LSST cadence simulations used in this work.
To illustrate this process more concretely, for each orbit in the test population:
1. The rough positions of the object at each night throughout the survey lifetime are calculated
using OpenOrb.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 9
Table 1. Rubin colors for these model
SEDs. LSST catalogs will contain measure-
ments reported as `top-of-atmosphere' AB
magnitudes.
Color (mag) S D C TNO
u r 2.13 1.90 1.72 2.55
g r 0.65 0.58 0.48 0.92
i r -0.19 -0.21 -0.11 -0.38
z r -0.14 -0.30 -0.12 -0.59
y r -0.14 -0.39 -0.12 -0.70
2. If the rough positions are within a tolerance value of any visit in a simulated survey, a more
precise position at the time of that visit is calculated, along with the expected Vband magni-
tude as calculated by OpenOrb for the Hvalue recorded with the database (typically a ducial
placeholder value of H=20 mag).
3. If the position at that time lands within the camera footprint aligned with the boresight and
rotation angle of the visit, the position is recorded as a potential observation.
4. The trailing loss and color term for that particular visit are recorded (depending on the seeing
of the visit, velocity of the object, the color of the object, and the lter used for the visit).
Solar system objects will be moving during LSSTCam exposures. Depending on the object's
velocity and the observation's exposure time, a solar system object's point spread function
(PSF) can appear extended along the direction of motion. Compared to a point source of
the same apparent magnitude, a trailed source will have a lower SNR because the photons
are spread across more pixels on the detector. As a result, the Rubin Observatory's detection
algorithm is not as sensitive to trailed sources. The algorithm uses a stellar PSF-like matched
lter to nd sources in the LSST images that are at or above the 5 SNR detection limit. The
trailing loss calculated in this step accounts for both the decrease in SNR and drop in detection
eciency compared to stationary point sources. We refer the reader to Section 5.1.4 of Jones
et al. (2018) for further details.
5. The series of potential observations are evaluated for an array of Hvalues. For example, the
NEO population is evaluated for Hvalues ranging from 16 to 28 magnitudes, at steps of 0.2
magnitudes. At H=16 mag, the apparent magnitude of the object that will be measured by
the Rubin Observatory source detection pipeline in each visit is calculated by combining the
ephemerisVmagnitude, the trailing losses, the color terms, and an oset between the ducial
Hvalue and the current `clone' value of H=16 mag (for cometary populations, there is also
a calculation of the cometary brightening). At H=22 mag, the same process is repeated but
more of the potential observations of the object will fall below the 5 SNR limit, so fewer10 Schwamb et al.
observations will be considered (and at a lower SNR) for the calculation of each metric for each
object.
6. The result is a series of values for each metric, corresponding to the combination of the positions
resulting from each orbit with the apparent magnitudes resulting from a range of Hvalues.
This is repeated over all of the orbits in the test population.
2.3. LSST Solar System Science Metrics
With the movingObjects andMAFmodules of rubin sim, the calculation of any arbitrary quantity
per object is straightforward. The MAF software identies the observations of a given object (or
more specically, orbit and Hvalue, in the case of cloning) and passes these to the MAF Metric ,
where the value can be calculated based on the acquired observations, and then saved. Summary
values across the entire population, such as fraction of objects with light curve inversion potential or
\discoverable" objects, can be calculated from the results.
Generally speaking, our current solar system science metrics can be split into two categories: dis-
covery metrics and characterization metrics. Discovery metrics relate to which objects could be
discovered in the survey, while characterization metrics cover a broad range of science areas such as
likelihood of detecting activity on the surface of an object or likelihood of acquiring a color measure-
ment. For each metric, the value per orbit- Hmagnitude combination is calculated and recorded,
and then a `summary value' is evaluated across the entire population. For discovery metrics, this
summary value is the fraction of the population that can be linked by Rubin Observatory's Solar
System Processing (SSP) pipelines (Myers et al. 2013; Juri c et al. 2020) { the discovery complete-
ness. For characterization metrics, the summary value is typically the fraction of the population that
meets a given threshold { the fraction of the population which is likely to meet light curve inversion
requirements, for example { although it can also be the mean or median or maximum (etc.) value of
the metric across the population. These summary values are reported at either a particular Hvalue
or cumulatively, for objects with Hless than or equal to a given Hvalue. These summary values
at both a bright H(large size) and a fainter H(smaller size) are pulled out for each population for
comparison of multiple simulations. The particular Hvalues used are dependent on the population;
typically the bright Hvalue is where the metric results reach their highest value and then remain
constant with decreasing H. The fainter Hvalues are typically set close to where the baseline survey
strategy reaches about 50% for that metric result. The discovery and characterization metrics used
in this paper are listed in Tables 2 and 3. The details of how these metrics are calculated is described
below in Sections 2.3.1, 2.3.2, and 2.3.3.
2.3.1. Discovery Metrics
The SSP pipelines (Myers et al. 2013; Juri c et al. 2020) will link transient sources from the nightly
visits into \tracklets" (potential linkages in the same night using linear extrapolation). SSP will
identify new moving objects by attempting to link together 3 tracklets from within a 15 day window
onto a heliocentric orbit. The current baseline LSST object discovery guidelines require pairs of
observations on three separate nights, within a window of 15 days as the design goal and 30 days as
the stretch goal; the 15 day requirement is a condent lower limit, but a 30 day window is a reasonableTuning LSST for Solar System Science 11
Table 2. Key solar system MAF metrics used in this analysis.
Population Main Metrics
Discovery Metrics
'Ayl o 'chaxnimsa;b 3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H16.0
3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H20.5
4 detections in 1 night discovery completeness for H16.0d
4 detections in 1 night discovery completeness for H20.5d
PHAs3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H16.0
3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H22.0
NEOs3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H16.0
3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H22.0
MBAs3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H16.0
3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H21.0
Jupiter Trojans3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H14.0
3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H18.0
TNOs3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H6.0
3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H8.0
OCCscwithq5 au3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H8.0
3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H17.0
OCCscwithq20 au3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H8.0
3 nightly pairs in 15 nights discovery completeness for H12.0
Light Curve Metrics
PHAsFraction of H= 16.0 with sucient observations for light curve inversion
Fraction of H= 19.0 with sucient observations for light curve inversion
NEOsFraction of H= 16.0 with sucient observations for light curve inversion
Fraction of H= 19.0 with sucient observations for light curve inversion
MBAsFraction of H= 16.0 with sucient observations for light curve inversion
Fraction of H= 18.0 with sucient observations for light curve inversion
Jupiter TrojansFraction of H= 14.0 with sucient observations for light curve inversion
Fraction of H= 15.0 with sucient observations for light curve inversion
aPreviously referred to in the literature as Vatiras.
bMetrics for the 'Ayl o 'chaxnims are only analyzed for simulation families that include low solar elon-
gation (low-SE) twilight observations.
cMetrics for OCCs are only calculated since the v2.0 simulations.
dOnly assessed for simulations that take 4 observations per pointing during twilight.
Note |In the gures presented in this work, these metrics are normalized and compared to the baseline
simulation for a range of cadence simulation families by varying a dierent survey strategy parameter.
extension that is useful to also consider. Thus the basic discovery metric searches for precisely this:
pairs of observations on at least three dierent nights within 15 or 30 days, using the probabilistic
detection value to determine what is visible or not7. The metric allows for setting the minimum and
maximum time separation between the individual visits in each pair; in the default conguration, the
minimum time separation was set to 0 minutes8, and the maximum time separation was set to 90
7The probabilistic detection likelihood depends on the expected 5 point source depth, determined by sky brightness,
airmass, and seeing alone; it does not take into account potential crowding in the eld.
8The minimum time separation for pairs of visits was set to 0 minutes during the metric runs analyzed in this paper.
In the future, we will be using 5 minutes as the minimum separation time. However, we do not anticipate there being
a signicant drop in metric performance, as the overwhelming number of pairs of visits are acquired at very close to
the goal time separation, around 33 minutes.12 Schwamb et al.
Table 3. Secondary solar system MAF metrics used in this analysis.
Population Secondary Metrics
Color-Light Curve Metrics
PHAsFraction of H= 16.0 with the equivalent of 40 SNR=5 detections or 10 SNR=20 detections per lter in grizy
Fraction of H= 19.0 with the equivalent of 40 SNR=5 detections or 10 SNR=20 detections per lter in grizy
NEOsFraction of H= 16.0 with the equivalent of 40 SNR=5 detections or 10 SNR=20 detections per lter in grizy
Fraction of H= 19.0 with the equivalent of 40 SNR=5 detections or 10 SNR=20 detections per lter in grizy
MBAsFraction of H= 16.0 with the equivalent of 40 SNR=5 detections or 10 SNR=20 detections per lter in grizy
Fraction of H= 18.0 with the equivalent of 40 SNR=5 detections or 10 SNR=20 detections per lter in grizy
Jupiter TrojansFraction of H= 14.0 with the equivalent of 40 SNR=5 detections or 10 SNR=20 detections per lter in grizy
Fraction of H= 15.0 with the equivalent of 40 SNR=5 detections or 10 SNR=20 detections per lter in grizy
TNOsFraction of H= 6.0 with at least 30 SNR >5 observations in 1 lter and 20 observations in 3 other lters
Fraction of H= 8.0 with at least 30 SNR >5 observations in 1 lter and 20 observations in 3 other lters
OCCsawithq5 auFraction of H= 8.0 with at least 30 SNR >5 observations in 1 lter and 20 observations in 3 other lters
Fraction of H= 17.0 with at least 30 SNR >5 observations in 1 lter and 20 observations in 3 other lters
OCCsawithq20 auFraction of H= 8.0 with at least 30 SNR >5 observations in 1 lter and 20 observations in 3 other lters
Fraction of H= 12.0 with at least 30 SNR >5 observations in 1 lter and 20 observations in 3 other lters
aMetrics for OCCs are only calculated since the v2.0 simulations.
Note |In the gures presented in this work, these metrics are normalized and compared to the baseline simulation for a range of cadence
simulation families by varying a dierent survey strategy parameter.
minutes, corresponding to the approximate limits suggested by early expectations for conguration
for the solar system processing pipelines and very widely bracketing the typical expected separation
of visits. The overwhelming majority of visits in the survey are acquired in pairs with a separation of
22 to 30 minutes (depending on the details of the survey conguration), the pairs of visits are usually
acquired in `adjoining' lters (i.e. gandrorrandivisits for a pair), and coupled with the large
eld of view of Rubin, most although not all observations of an object are followed up by a second
observation in the same night. It is also helpful to consider objects that could be discovered via
more traditional methods of identifying four observations on the same night (i.e. `quad detections`).
This is particularly useful when considering observations of near or interior to Earth asteroids within
the special near-sun twilight micro-survey, where observations are purposefully obtained in quads in
order to secure identications of these rapidly disappearing asteroids. If the observations of a given
orbit-Hcombination meet the required criteria at least once, the object is considered `discovered';
to compare the results across dierent simulations of survey strategy, the discovery completeness is
reported at both a bright and faint Hvalue for each population. More details about the discovery
metrics are presented in Jones et al. (2018), including more background about the potential for false
positive discoveries. In short, we do not expect a signicant number of false positive detections,
regardless of survey strategy choices, with the criteria of 3 pairs of detections over a window of either
15 or 30 nights; this is due to a range of factors, including the low fraction of false positive detections
coming from dierence imaging and the low likelihood of pairs of detections on three separate nights
aligning within expected residuals for initial orbit determination.
The various survey strategy simulations and populations expose some basic trends:
•Discovery completeness for slow moving populations, such as TNOs, depends strongly on the
total area included in the survey. Because these objects move so slowly year over year and areTuning LSST for Solar System Science 13
relatively `easy' to discover via linking, the footprint itself is the most important consideration
of the survey strategy, particularly for the brighter TNOs. The completeness for the fainter
TNOs can also vary slightly depending on which lters are paired together in visits and whether
the most sensitive lters are used often enough within the window.
•Discovery completeness for fast-moving populations, such as NEOs, depends more strongly on
the number of visits per pointing. Since NEOs travel across much more of the sky on the
timescale of the survey, the footprint isn't as much of a constraint as for TNOs. However, the
total number of visits in the survey is relatively constant with dierent survey strategies, and
so the footprint inuences the number of visits per pointing and thus the typical cadence of
those visits. Fainter NEOs in particular may only be visible for a short period of time, thus
more visits per pointing results in a higher likelihood of an object having observations suitable
for discovery, and so a higher discovery completeness. For the brightest NEOs, the footprint
weighs in as well, as covering more sky results in discovering more NEOs.
•Intermediate populations, such as MBAs, fall in between these extremes. In general, we nd
a threshold number of visits per pointing results in good completeness for a given population,
and this threshold increases as the Hvalue being evaluated gets larger and/or the population
includes more small semimajor axis or high inclination or high eccentricity orbits.
•The Jupiter Trojans show stronger variability with some kinds of survey strategy changes that
include changes in the timing of observations. Some survey strategies focus visits on particular
regions of the sky in particular years, such as in the rolling cadence. These variations can
result in a higher or lower sampling of the Jupiter Trojan population depending on the timing
of visits, as these asteroids are both more spatially constrained and moving across the sky.
•More relaxed discovery criteria result in more discoveries, but with similar trends. For example,
30 day windows perform about 2{5% better than 15 day windows for fainter objects, depending
on the population (brighter objects show little dierence). However, these dierent criteria
follow similar trends between survey strategies, meaning that evaluating 15 day windows shows
similar preferences in survey strategy as evaluating 30 day windows.
2.3.2. Light Curve Metrics
Inner solar system objects have the potential to be subjects for sparse light curve inversion, inferring
the shape of the asteroid from photometric measurements over a wide range of viewing geometries
as suggested in LSST Science Collaboration et al. (2009) ( e.g.Muinonen et al. (2020); Durech et al.
(2016); Hanu s et al. (2011)). The Light Curve Inversion Metric evaluates the suitability of a set
of observations for this process. The evaluation is based on the phase curve and ecliptic longitude
coverage provided by the observations, as well as the overall number and SNR of each observation,
considering observations in a single lter at a time. The ecliptic longitude range of the observations
must be more than 90ecliptic longitude and cover more than 5of phase angle, as a proxy of the
required range of viewing geometries. Further, there must be more than a threshold value of SNR-
weighted observations, equivalent to about 50 SNR=100 observations or 250 SNR=20 observations,
all in the same lter, in order to provide enough photometric measurements. Like all other metrics
within MAF, the rotation of the asteroid and its impact on the photometric measurements is not
considered; presumably this would be part of the light curve inversion process. If all conditions14 Schwamb et al.
are met, then light curve inversion is at least potentially likely, thus this metric provides a likely
upper limit on the fraction of the population for which light curve inversion may be possible. This
is evaluated per orbit- Hcombination, and then the fraction of the population (at a bright and
fainterHvalue) is reported. Outer solar system objects never achieve the required range of viewing
geometries, and objects where the nuclei is shrouded with coma such as active comets are also not
good candidates; this metric is not evaluated for these populations.
This metric is very sensitive to the number of observations per pointing, but also to the cadence of
those observations. Generally, we nd a trend across the simulations that the light curve inversion
results track in a similar sense for all of the inner solar system populations, with NEOs being least
sensitive to survey strategy variations, followed by PHAs, then MBAs, and nally Trojan asteroids
showing the most variation in metric results as survey strategies change.
2.3.3. Color-Light Curve Metrics
There are several metrics relating to determining colors for the small body population members, tai-
lored for inner solar system or outer solar system objects. As the LSST will not obtain instantaneous
colors, each of these metrics also includes some requirement on measuring a light curve.
For the inner solar system, the Color-Light Curve metric evaluates the number of SNR-weighted
observations per bandpass to evaluate if the color could be determined in that bandpass. Essentially,
this could be translated to tting the light curve in each bandpass alone, then combining these light
curves to evaluate the color. The equivalent of 40 SNR=5 detections or 10 SNR=20 detections per
lter are required, but the more extensive requirements that relate to achieving a range of viewing
geometries for light curve inversion are not, and no limitation is set on when the observations are
acquired. The specic number of detections needed is based on an estimate of the amount of data that
would be sucient to measure basic light curve, color, and phase-curve parameters with scientically
meaningful uncertainties. Although work is still needed to use the sparse LSST-like cadence to
determine these parameters, a preliminary assessment suggests that 20-40 observations per color
should be sucient. While phase curves are also necessary for this analysis, we elected to keep the
metric simple by not requiring a particular spread in phase angles. In practice, almost any cadence
will produce sucient constraint on the phase curve to allow for colors to be determined for the vast
majority of objects. The summary values reported are the fraction of the population (at a given H
value) for which either 2 specic colors ( g rorg iplusg zorg y), 3 specic colors ( g r,
r i,i zorr i,i z,z y), 4 colors ( g r,r i,i z,z y), or all 5 colors (adding u gto
the 4 color set) are potentially determined.
For the outer solar system, a slightly dierent Color-Light Curve metric evaluates the number of
observations reaching a minimum threshold (SNR 5). This metric requires at least 30 observations
in a `primary' bandpass and then 20 observations in the additional bandpass(es). This is equivalent
to assuming a light curve t in the primary bandpass with additional observations in the secondary
bandpass serving to help t the light curve and color, possibly simultaneously (such as would be
possible with multi-band Lomb-Scargle tting). The summary values reported are the fraction of the
population (at a given Hvalue) for which 1, 2 or more colors can be tted, without restrictions on
which bandpasses are used.
2.3.4. Metric LimitationsTuning LSST for Solar System Science 15
As described above in Section 2.2, the most accessible and up to date orbital and absolute magnitude
distributions have been used to model the expected LSST solar system detections. The physical and
orbital properties of the modeled synthetic small bodies are driven by observational data, but the
LSST cadence simulations do have to make some assumptions about these small body populations.
This is particularly true on the smallest size scales that have not been very well probed by past
wide-eld surveys. The distribution of dierent surface types applied to the various simulated small
body reservoirs will also impact the apparent magnitude of the synthetic objects in the various
optical lters. Additionally, we have to make simplifying assumptions about active objects. We
assume all comets will generate dust coma with the same relation applied to calculate the observed
apparent magnitude, and the eects of cometary outbursts are ignored. Also, rotational brightness
variations due to shape or uneven surface albedo are not accounted for in these simulations. Thus,
the exact number of solar system minor planets found by LSST will dier from that \discovered" in
the simulations explored in this paper because of these choices.
The smaller Solar System minor planet populations, such as the Main Belt Comets (MBCs), Jupiter
Family Comets (JFCs), sungrazing comets, Neptune Trojans, and Centaurs, have not been simulated
for this work. For the MBCs, sungrazing comets, and JFCs this is partly due to having to develop a
representative activity model. We can instead use the populations that are simulated in the rubin sim
simulations as proxies to help inform what the impact of various cadences might be. Simulated
survey strategies that will improve the metrics for MBAs and NEOs will also likely enhance the
discovery and monitoring of MBCs and JFCs. Cadences that improve the chances of nding near
Sun'Ayl o 'chaxnims will likely increase the LSST discovery rate of sungrazing comets, like the Kruetz
family. As the Centaurs reside in the middle Solar System, the impacts on the Centaurs can be
extrapolated using the TNO and MBA simulation metrics.
No ISOs were simulated for this work. With only two ISOs known to date (Meech et al. 2017;
Borisov 2019), the characteristics of this population are currently unconstrained. Long period comets
are distributed across the sky with a much larger range of ecliptic latitudes compared to the MBAs
and TNOs, due to the eects of passing stars and galactic tides that shape the Oort Cloud into a
shell rather than a ared disk shape (Everhart 1967; Fern andez 1997; Francis 2005; Higuchi et al.
2007; Brasser et al. 2010; Dones et al. 2015; Vokrouhlick y et al. 2019; Higuchi 2020, and references
therein). Recent predictions by Engelhardt et al. (2017), Seligman & Laughlin (2018), and Hoover
et al. (2022) suggest that LSST ISO discoveries will cover a wide range of ecliptic latitudes and
heliocentric distances similar to long period comets. Thus, we assume that the trends seen for the
simulated LSST OCC discoveries can provide some broad guidance for how the cadence decisions will
impact LSST ISO discoveries. Like 1I/`Oumuamua which was discovered at 0.22 au (Meech et al.
2017) moving at 6.2per day, a subset of ISOs discovered close to Earth will on short-timescales ( .10
days) look similar to NEOs (e.g., Cook et al. 2016). Therefore, the NEO metrics are also insightful
for gauging the potential impacts to the ISO discovery rate.
The solar system MAF metrics assume equal detection eciency across all areas of the survey foot-
print (even near the plane of the Galaxy where stellar crowding may be a factor). Rubin Observatory's
data pipelines will detect solar system bodies using dierence imaging. Templates representing the
static sky will be subtracted from the nightly images and what remains will be a variable, transient,
or moving source. This will help signicantly in detecting solar system objects in regions of high
stellar density, but stellar crowding will likely cause some decrease in the eciency of Rubin Ob-16 Schwamb et al.
servatory's Dierence Image Analysis (DIA) and SSP pipelines. The MAF solar system metrics are
likely overly optimistic near and in the Galactic plane where stellar crowding is the highest. This
should be kept in mind when examining the cadence simulations modifying the LSST Galactic plane
observing strategy.
The Rubin scheduler aims to take image pairs, each night per pointing, to facilitate the identication
of moving solar system objects (Ivezi c & the LSST Science Collaboration 2013). The time between
these repeat observations is a tunable survey parameter. The Rubin SSP pipelines (Myers et al. 2013;
Juri c et al. 2020) require motion within a single night for initial discovery. Transient sources that
appear stationary between the two images taken on the same night will not be included in the daily
tracklets that the SSP algorithm will try to link with tracklets from previous nights. The Rubin SSP
pipelines as currently planned will not be able to detect objects bodies beyond 100-150 au (see
Section 4.4.1 for a detailed estimate), but other search algorithms will likely be developed by the
wider community to search for very slow moving objects in the LSST data. The MAF solar system
discovery metric does not account for SSP's slow motion limit. The only metrics really impacted by
this are the estimated TNO discoveries. As long as the median separation between the observations is
similar for a set of cadence simulations, then the output from the discovery metrics can be compared.
We note that some care must be taken when considering the impact of varying the time separation
between repeat observations, and we refer the reader to Section 4.4.1 for further discussion.
There are currently no MAF metrics that measure how precise small body orbital predictions
and characterization will be based on Rubin Observatory observations. The accuracy of the orbits
of moving objects is primarily driven by the observational arc length. There were no reasons to
consider the observational arc length separately with a dedicated MAF metric, because all of the
observing strategy options currently being considered as part of the LSST cadence optimization
exercise (see Section 3) have repeat coverage of the entire LSST footprint over several years. This
should be sucient for the needs of the majority of astrometric and dynamical solar system science
cases. We also note that, if a cadence option not covering the entire sky over the majority of the 10-
year time span was evaluated, it would be undesirable for other science cases such as proper motion
measurements.
The likelihood of having satellite streaks and glints present in LSST images is increasing with every
satellite constellation launch (e.g. Starlink, Project Kuiper and OneWeb). The impact of future
satellite constellations is not currently taken into account by the metrics. We discuss the potential
impacts of the ongoing industrialization of the near-Earth environment in Section 5.4.
Keeping these caveats in mind, the LSST cadence simulations and the MAF metrics can be used
to explore the impact of various changes to the LSST observing strategy. Some care is required
in examining certain families of simulations. Overall, by adopting the same synthetic small body
populations for each of the cadence simulations and focusing on the relative change in the MAF
metrics compared to the baseline survey, we can still gain a good understanding of the impact caused
by tuning various LSST observing parameters.
3.OVERVIEW OF THE LSST CADENCE SIMULATIONS (VERSIONS 1.5-2.2)
Over the past several years, a variety of LSST cadence simulations have been generated (e.g., LSST
Science Collaboration et al. 2009, 2017; Ivezi c et al. 2019; Jones et al. 2020; Yoachim 2022) exploring
various avenues for optimizing the WFD survey and exploring dierent scenarios for what to do with
the remaining10 20% of survey time. We examine the LSST cadence simulations produced afterTuning LSST for Solar System Science 17
the implementation of the Feature Based Scheduler system (Naghib et al. 2019), as this iteration of
the Rubin scheduler is closest to the version that will be in place during survey operations, starting
with the version 1.5 simulation release. At the time of this paper's submission, additional families of
simulations have been released up to version 2.2. The v1.5 simulations were released in May 2020,
version 1.6 in August 2020, v1.7 in January 2021, and v1.7.1 in April 2021. These simulations cover
a wide range of variations of the survey strategy that informed the rst round of the SCOC's review.
After assessing the feedback from the Rubin user community, the SCOC recommended a new round
of simulations (v2.0) to inform their nal deliberations (Ivezi c & the SCOC 2021; Bianco et al. 2022).
The v2.0 cadence simulations were made available in November 2021. Two additional smaller sets of
simulations were released in April and June 2022 (v2.1 and v2.2) that clarify/explore some limited
options identied after community review of the 2.0 cadence simulations, including DDF observing
options, new parameters for implementing the twilight low-SE solar system observations, and revised
scenarios for Galactic plane observing. The v2.2 simulation runs were redone with an update in the
scheduler conguration after the submission of this paper due to an issue with the sky distribution
ofu-band observations. We use the updated v2.2 simulations in our analysis. The v1.5-v2.2 cadence
simulations are described in detail in Jones et al. (2020), and Yoachim (2022). Short descriptions of
the simulations are also available in online Jupyter notebooks9. The resulting MAF metrics derived
from these simulations are available in online CSV (comma-separated values) les10.
We focus in this paper on the key survey strategy parameters that drive signicant changes in
the detectability and characterization of solar system objects or would lead to unique planetary
astronomy datasets that only Rubin Observatory could provide. Several of the simulation families
were repeated in later versions with improvements to the Rubin scheduler, changes to the prescription
used in the scheduler, or modications to the planned survey footprint. For this work, if a simulation
family was repeated in later releases, we only review the latest version. We also note that the OCC
orbital distributions were only incorporated as MAF metrics in release 2.0 and onward. We include
the OCC metrics when available. The v2.1 simulations include a range of families that explore the
nal details of the DDF observing strategy. No solar system metrics were run against these v2.1 DDF
families as very small numbers of solar system objects will be discovered in these elds compared
to the rest of the survey footprint due to the fact that the DDFs take 5% of the observing time at
locations high o the ecliptic. The main lever arm for solar system science in relation to the DDFs is
the fraction of total observing time spent on the DDFs which is explored in Section 4.6. Simulations
covering rotational and positional dithers between repeat survey pointings are also not explored here
because of the negligible impact on the solar system metrics.
Appendix B gives a brief overview of the LSST cadence simulations evaluated in this paper. The
LSST cadence simulations can be divided into several broad categories or families exploring dierent
modications to the survey footprint, lter distribution, intra-night visits, DDF observing strategy,
visit exposure times, rolling cadence strategies, and micro-surveys. Each simulation family explores
changing one parameter in the LSST observing strategy. The footprint families explore the shape
and location of the WFD on-sky footprint as well as the possible adoption of a variety of mini-
surveys, strategies surveying the sky outside the WFD footprint or with a dierent cadence to
9https://github.com/lsst-pst/survey strategy/blob/main/fbs 1.7/SummaryInfo.ipynb and https://github.com/
lsst-pst/survey strategy/blob/main/fbs 2.0/SummaryInfo v2.1.ipynb
10https://github.com/lsst-pst/survey strategy/tree/main/fbs 1.7 and https://github.com/lsst-pst/survey strategy/
tree/main/fbs 2.018 Schwamb et al.
the WFD that require a few percent or more of the total available LSST observing time. One
such example of a mini-survey is observing the northern ecliptic region. Micro-surveys are small
observing campaigns requesting 0.3%- 3% of the total observing budget. Rolling cadence in this
context focuses on prioritizing observing some parts of the sky over others in order to acquire more
photometric data points in a given observing season. This enables faster and better identication of
supernovae, kilonovae, and other astrophysical transients (LSST Science Collaboration et al. 2017;
Yoachim 2021).
4.IMPACT OF SURVEY STRATEGY CHOICES
How to evaluate whether a specic LSST survey strategy is \good" or \bad" for solar system science
has a complex answer. How does one weigh a signicant improvement in NEO discoveries to a large
loss in the number of TNOs found? It depends on which population one is interested in studying and
on the science goals one wants to achieve. We choose a unied approach when evaluating the various
LSST cadence simulations. We equally consider the impact on the main solar system populations
probed by LSST: NEOs, PHAs, TNOs, MBAs, ISOs, and OCCs. Secondary consideration is given
to the smaller populations such as giant planet Trojans and Inner-Earth objects (IEOs; objects on
orbits interior to Earth's orbit). Although an ISO population is not simulated for this work, we use
the OCCs and NEOs metrics where appropriate to examine the impact on the ISOs in the various
cadence simulations (see Section 2.3.4). The SSSC Science Roadmap (Schwamb et al. 2018a) sets
out the collaboration's science priorities with LSST data. The document was designed specically
to guide future cadence decisions and ranks the key solar system research themes for investigation
with LSST. Based on the SSSC Science Roadmap, for each LSST cadence simulation, we evaluate
in priority order the impact on 1) discovery/orbital characterization, 2) color measurements, and 3)
rotational light curves.
We have found that per small body population, the light curve inversion and discovery metrics suf-
ciently encapsulate the requirements for obtaining reliable broadband colors, such that the majority
of cadence simulation families are evaluated using these two metrics alone. The main metrics used
in our analysis and the parameters used in their calculation are listed in Table 2. We focus our anal-
ysis on the discovery metric that best matches the SSP discovery requirements (3 tracklets detected
within 15 nights) as other variations of the discovery metrics require bespoke community-developed
software tools. In a small number of instances reviewing the color-light curve metrics calculated for
4 colors was also useful for interpretation (see Table 3 for input parameters), but we will primarily
focus on the discovery and light curve inversions for this work. When examining a given cadence
experiment, we normalize all the metric values calculated to the relevant baseline cadence or reference
simulation that we consider the default scheduler parameter setting or conguration for this cadence
experiment. See Figure 4 for an example where the resulting solar system metrics for discovery (top)
and light curve inversion (bottom) are presented. We note that the Jupiter Trojans have the most
variable metrics due to their smaller numbers and constrained positions on the sky. Metric results
for the most recent baseline survey simulation at the time of submission ( baseline v2.1 10yrs ) are
shown in Figure 1 and listed in Appendix C.
We deem reductions in the relevant metrics larger than 5% unsuitable. The small body science
goals set out in the SSSC Science Roadmap (Schwamb et al. 2018a) are derived from increasing
sample sizes by an order of magnitude. This 5% threshold prevents a \death by a thousand cuts"
scenario where all the tuned cadence parameters produce individually small impacts on the metricsTuning LSST for Solar System Science 19
Figure 1. Metric values for the primary metrics under consideration for baseline v2.1 10yrs from the
latest version of rubin sim. These values represent the fraction of the simulated population which would
"pass" the metric requirements. `Completeness' refers to the discovery completeness for each sample pop-
ulation at the indicated Hvalue, while `Fraction LC Inversion' refers to the fraction of each population
which would have observations which meet the metric requirements implying that object would be a good
subject for lightcurve inversion. Likewise for 'Fraction 4 lters', showing the fraction of each population
which would be likely to obtain colors in four lters. Full descriptions of the metrics are listed in Tables 2
and 3. Numerical values are provided in Appendix C.
but when combined cause a signicant reduction in solar system science. This constraint also buers
against any future unexpected small observing time losses. We have provided written feedback to
the SCOC identifying which cadence simulations pass or fail our criteria (are \good" or \bad" for
solar system science). In this paper, we will not identify every simulation that fails our thresholds
as this can be readily identied using the relevant gures within the following sections and the MAF
output. Instead, we focus on examining the trends in the solar system metrics as each knob is turned
and providing recommendations based on this analysis.
4.1. Survey Footprint
The LSST footprint determines what sky is observed over the ten year survey and how the total
number of on-sky visits gets apportioned across the major components of the LSST. Examples can be
seen in Figure 2 which depicts a representative set of footprints explored in the v2.0-v2.1 simulations.
In this section, we focus on the arguments for incorporating the northern ecliptic region into the LSST
with the Northern Ecliptic Spur (NES) mini-survey. We also examine the amount of observing time
that should be divided between the Galactic plane and NES mini-surveys and options for the shape
and extent of the WFD footprint. Later sections will discuss variations on how these visits are
executed such as how they are distributed over time (Sections 4.4 and 4.5) and by lter (Section 4.3).20 Schwamb et al.
Small modications to the footprint using much less than a few percent of the observing time are
presented in the micro-surveys discussion in Section 4.7.
4.1.1. Northern Ecliptic Spur (NES)
The WFD by its design requirements is meant to cover the majority of the sky in the southern
celestial hemisphere below 0declination (Ivezi c & the LSST Science Collaboration 2013), but the
Simonyi Survey Telescope is capable of observing the entire ecliptic. The extent of the WFD has
evolved over time (as shown in Figure 2 and later discussed in Section 4.1.2), but no matter what
the proposed variations to the WFD sky coverage are, the full extent of the ecliptic plane will not
be incorporated into the WFD footprint. The NES mini-survey aims to remedy this situation by
ensuring higher airmass observations of the northern ecliptic are taken as part of the LSST (LSST
Science Collaboration et al. 2009, 2017; Schwamb et al. 2018b; Ivezi c et al. 2019; Bianco et al. 2022).
The NES region, shown in Figure 3, is comprised of 604 pointings covering in total 5800 deg2
spanning from 0declination to +10ecliptic latitude. In order to make this goal achievable with the
non-WFD time, the NES mini-survey has typically been implemented in the cadence simulations to
receive a smaller number of visits per eld ( 250; as shown in Figure 2) compared to the WFD. The
NES mini-survey includes observations taken in a combination of the griz lters only, where solar
system objects are typically the brightest. The observing time dedicated to the NES is explored in
Section 4.1.3; here we focus on the impact of including or excluding the NES mini-survey from the
LSST.
The NES mini-survey is crucial for inventorying the outer Solar System. About half of the ecliptic
plane is covered within the WFD footprint. Over the 10 year span of the LSST, inner solar system
populations like the MBAs will complete full orbits. This means that MBAs in the northern hemi-
sphere at the start of the survey will be in favorable positions to be detected within the WFD during
the later years of the survey. This is not true for outer solar system objects whose orbital periods
are well beyond10 years. Outer solar system bodies will only have a small fraction of their orbital
periods covered by the LSST. Thus, the vast majority of TNOs located in the NES at the start of
the survey will remain in the northern hemisphere, missing the WFD footprint. This is reected in
Figure 4, where the rst two simulations plotted are baseline v1.5 10yrs , which includes the NES
mini-survey, and filterdist indx2 v1.5 10yrs which excludes the NES. TNO discoveries suer
nearly a 30% loss with the exclusion of the NES mini-survey while there is only a very small drop for
the inner solar system populations. Although not simulated at the time in this cadence experiment,
populations that are more uniformly distributed on the sky (such as OCCs and ISOs) also benet
from the inclusion of the NES which provides additional sky coverage and therefore more chances for
discovery.
Figure 4 also shows that the light curve metrics for small MBAs suer a bit more than a 15%
loss when the NES mini-survey is not executed. Discovery relies on the object being above the 5 
limiting magnitude on 3 nights, but to perform light curve inversion requires many more observations.
The NES provides additional opportunities to observe those faint objects close to the LSST limiting
magnitude, giving additional chances for the small MBAs to be observed in conditions where they
might have sucient SNR to contribute to shape modeling. The opposite eect is observed for the
small PHAs and NEOs which benet in simulations without the NES mini-survey (about a 6-10%
increase in the light curve inversion metrics). These objects are typically detected close to Earth and
so quickly become too faint to be detected. Thus, pushing the time used for the NES mini-survey intoTuning LSST for Solar System Science 21
Figure 2. The total number of visits in all lters after 10 years for a representative sample of LSST
simulations. In several of these scenarios the eective on-sky footprint of the Wide-Fast-Deep (WFD)
survey and other observing areas, including the NES (Northern Ecliptic Spur), Galactic Plane (GP), and
South Celestial Pole (SCP) regions, change depending on how the observing time on-sky is divided. The
Deep Drilling Fields (DDFs) are also visible as a collection of single elds receiving a higher number of
observations than a WFD pointing, with each DDF receiving approximately 1% of the total LSST observing
time. The plots are centered on =0 and=0. Right ascension and declination lines are marked every 30.22 Schwamb et al.
Figure 3. The footprint of the Northern Ecliptic Spur (NES) in equatorial coordinates. The light blue
represents the pointings requested as part of the NES. The solid black line represents the ecliptic. The
dashed black lines represent 10ecliptic latitude. The solid blue line plots the center of the Galactic
plane. The dashed blue lines mark 10galactic latitude. The plot is centered on =0 and=0. Right
ascension is marked every 30and declination lines are visible every 15up to and including 75.
additional WFD visits enables more observations where these small PHAs and NEOs are detectable
and can have light curves measured. The opposite eect can be seen for the larger PHAs and NEOs.
The larger PHAs and NEOs suer a 10% drop in the light curve metrics when the NES elds are
excluded. Because large PHAs/NEOs are more likely to be above the limiting magnitude in a LSST
image, surveying the NES creates new opportunities to monitor the brightness of large PHAs/NEOs
as they pass by Earth. The Jupiter Trojans also take a signicant hit when the NES is not included.
This is likely due to their constrained positions on the sky.
Not captured in the MAF metrics are the benets that the NES mini-survey provides to small
body populations that are distributed asymmetrically across the sky. They would only be partially
sampled without the NES observations, as discussed in Schwamb et al. (2018b). Two such cases are
the Neptune Trojans and the resonant TNO populations. Over the ten-year period, the vast majority
of the leading Neptune Trojan L4 cloud is accessible only via observations of the NES as shown in
Figure 5. Lin et al. (2019) nd evidence for potential dierences in the color distributions of the L4
(leading) and L5 (trailing) Neptune Trojans. The WFD and NES mini-survey combined are capable
of sampling both clouds with suciently large numbers to test this further. Including the NES region
in the LSST footprint enables characterization of the libration islands for the various mean motion
resonances (MMR) with Neptune (Schwamb et al. 2018b). Only observing half the ecliptic with just
the WFD and Galactic plane mini-survey would impact the study of the resonant TNO populations
which preferentially come to perihelion at certain locations on the sky (e.g., Gladman et al. 2012;
Gladman & Volk 2021).
The NES mini-survey is crucially important for searching for additional distant planets in the
Solar System and testing the apparent orbital clustering of Sedna-like Inner Oort Cloud objects
(IOCs;q > 50 au and a >250 au) and extreme TNOs (ETNOs; objects on orbits with q > 42
au anda >150 au). It has been proposed that a giant planet (\Planet Nine") is gravitationally
shepherding the distant planetesimals onto similar orbits with aligned orbital poles and longitudes
of perihelion (Trujillo & Sheppard 2014; Batygin & Brown 2016; Sheppard & Trujillo 2016; BrownTuning LSST for Solar System Science 23
baseline_v1.5_10yrs
No NES 
 (filterdist_indx2_v1.5_10yrs)
Add Magellanic Cloud 
 (footprint_add_mag_cloudsv1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky footprint, dust-no GP 
 (footprint_big_sky_dustv1.5_10yrs)
Big sky footprint  no GP no uiy 
 (footprint_big_sky_nouiyv1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky footprint no GP
 (footprint_big_skyv1.5_10yrs)
Big WFD
 (footprint_big_wfdv1.5_10yrs)
Bluer filters
 (footprint_bluer_footprintv1.5_10yrs)
GP @ WFD level
 (footprint_gp_smoothv1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky + GP1 + NES
 (footprint_newAv1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky + GP2 + NES
 (footprint_newBv1.5_10yrs)
No GP Northern extension
 (footprint_no_gp_northv1.5_10yrs)
Big sky Footprint + GP bulge
 (bulges_bs_v1.5_10yrs)
Big sky Footprint + GP bulge @ WFD
 (bulges_bulge_wfd_v1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky Footprint + GP i heavy cadenced
 (bulges_cadence_i_heavy_v1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky Footprint + GP bulge cadenced
 (bulges_cadence_bs_v1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky Footprint + GP bulge @WFD cadenced
 (bulges_cadence_bulge_wfd_v1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky Footprint + GP i heavy
 (bulges_i_heavy_v1.5_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.700.750.800.850.900.951.001.05Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0
baseline_v1.5_10yrs
No NES 
 (filterdist_indx2_v1.5_10yrs)
Add Magellanic Cloud 
 (footprint_add_mag_cloudsv1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky footprint, dust-no GP 
 (footprint_big_sky_dustv1.5_10yrs)
Big sky footprint  no GP no uiy 
 (footprint_big_sky_nouiyv1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky footprint no GP
 (footprint_big_skyv1.5_10yrs)
Big WFD
 (footprint_big_wfdv1.5_10yrs)
Bluer filters
 (footprint_bluer_footprintv1.5_10yrs)
GP @ WFD level
 (footprint_gp_smoothv1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky + GP1 + NES
 (footprint_newAv1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky + GP2 + NES
 (footprint_newBv1.5_10yrs)
No GP Northern extension
 (footprint_no_gp_northv1.5_10yrs)
Big sky Footprint + GP bulge
 (bulges_bs_v1.5_10yrs)
Big sky Footprint + GP bulge @ WFD
 (bulges_bulge_wfd_v1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky Footprint + GP i heavy cadenced
 (bulges_cadence_i_heavy_v1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky Footprint + GP bulge cadenced
 (bulges_cadence_bs_v1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky Footprint + GP bulge @WFD cadenced
 (bulges_cadence_bulge_wfd_v1.5_10yrs)
Big Sky Footprint + GP i heavy
 (bulges_i_heavy_v1.5_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 4. Possible tuning options for the LSST footprint from the v1.5 experiments. The baseline (refer-
ence) simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on
the left. All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes
that are within5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion
Metrics. We have truncated the bottom plot's y-axis for visibility. The change in the H=15 Jupiter Trojan
detections in some of the runs extends well above 1.2.24 Schwamb et al.
& Batygin 2019; Batygin et al. 2019; Brown & Batygin 2021; Oldroyd & Trujillo 2021). Recent
modeling by Brown & Batygin (2021) combined with constraints from the Zwicky Transient Facility
(ZTF) (Brown & Batygin 2022) and the Dark Energy Survey (DES) (Bernardinelli et al. 2022;
Belyakov et al. 2022) predict Planet Nine to be residing at a semimajor axis of 700 au or higher.
Although the current predictions made available in Brown (2022) do have Planet Nine distributed
over a wide range of ecliptic longitudes, the most likely location of Planet Nine is close to the region
where the Galactic plane intersects the northern ecliptic (see Figure 6). The bulk of the predicted
Planet Nine sky locations are within the LSST footprint as implemented in the baseline v2.1 10yrs
simulation which includes the NES mini-survey. Figure 7 presents the estimated on-sky V-band
apparent magnitude distribution for Planet Nine from Brown (2022) and the predicted LSST r-band
limiting magnitudes from the baseline v2.1 10yrs run. Over a wide range of possible V rcolors,
Planet Nine could potentially be bright enough to be visible with LSST images. If Planet Nine is
bright enough to be imaged in single LSST exposures, the length of the survey in combination with
the repeated coverage of the survey footprint eectively eliminates the possibility of missing Planet
Nine in high galactic latitude elds due to coincidental overlap with another source. Closer to the
galactic plane, stellar crowding will be signicant and identifying sources will be dicult. This may
require community-optimized search algorithms to look for Planet Nine in these observations. Rubin
Observatory is also exploring additional options to enhance source extraction near the Galactic plane
(see Bosch et al. (2019)). If current searches fail to nd Planet Nine, Rubin Observatory will put the
best observational constraints on the existence of Planet Nine over the next decade, and will be the
facility with the best chance of directly imaging it (Trilling et al. 2018b). As noted in Section 2.3.4,
Rubin Observatory's SSP pipelines are only sensitive to moving objects at heliocentric distances
.100-150 au. We fully expect that there will be several community-led eorts to nd very slow
moving distant objects in the LSST transient catalogs to search for Planet Nine and explore the
IOCs and ETNOs. Therefore, it is still important to consider this science case for LSST footprint
considerations.
Even if Planet Nine is not visible in the LSST images, the LSST would potentially be able to reveal
its presence if the orbital alignment holds with the increased LSST sample of ETNOs and IOCs
and matches the Planet Nine predictions. Whether or not the Planet Nine theory is correct, the
distant IOCs and ETNOs are an important probe for studying the origin and evolution of the very
distant outer solar system and testing alternatives to the Planet Nine theory (Morbidelli & Levison
2004; Brasser et al. 2006; Gladman & Chan 2006; Kaib et al. 2011; Brasser et al. 2012; Zderic &
Madigan 2020; Emel'yanenko 2022; Huang et al. 2022). Observing across the ecliptic will be crucial
for creating a large enough sample to alleviate the challenging observational biases currently dealt
with when combining the multiple datasets previously used to identify and test the apparent orbital
clustering (Brown & Batygin 2016, 2019; Shankman et al. 2017; Bernardinelli et al. 2020; Napier
et al. 2021).
4.1.2. Extending the Wide-Fast-Deep (WFD) Footprint Northward
The NES mini-survey (as described in Section 4.1.1) was proposed when the northern limit of the
WFD footprint was initially set to be +2declination (see the baseline retrofoot simulation in
Figure 2). The originally planned WFD sky coverage used a simple cut in Galactic coordinates to
identify the boundary of the WFD with the Galactic plane/bulge observing region (LSST Science
Collaboration et al. 2017; Ivezi c et al. 2019; Jones et al. 2020). Combining this boundary with theTuning LSST for Solar System Science 25
150 120 90 60 30 0 -30 -60 -90 -120 -150
-75°-60°-45°-30°-15°0°15°30°45°60°75°
Jun 22, 2025
Jun 22, 2033
Figure 5. The sky positions of the Neptune Trojan population from the Lin et al. (2021) model on
2025 June 22 (gold) and 2033 June 22 (gray). The two epochs represent early and late times in the LSST,
respectively. The leading L4 cloud is at north, left-hand side of the plot. The dashed black lines represent
10ecliptic latitude. The solid blue line plots the center of the Galactic plane. The dashed blue lines
delineate10galactic latitude. Probing the low inclination L4 Neptune Trojans requires the inclusion of
the NES into the LSST footprint.
sky coverage requirements and visit constraints for the WFD set the original northern declination
limit. What sky is included within the WFD is a changeable LSST survey parameter, as long as
the SRD requirements for the WFD survey area are met; at least 18,000 deg2with a median of 825
visits per eld (Ivezi c & the LSST Science Collaboration 2013). For extragalactic science, including
cosmology and galaxy studies, and galactic science, such as the study of the Milky Way's structure,
there have been proposals from the community requesting more of the WFD to be shifted to low-
extinction and less crowded sky (Lochner et al. 2018; Olsen et al. 2018; Lochner et al. 2022). Other
arguments have also been raised for shifting the WFD footprint further northward, including overlap
with future DESI (Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument; Abareshi et al. 2022) and Nancy Grace
Roman Space Telescope observations (Olsen et al. 2018; Capak et al. 2019a). As this is a zero-sum
game, visits are taken from near the Galactic plane with high stellar crowding and dust extinction
and redistributed northward above 0declination. This results in a fraction of the WFD survey
now covering the NES region as seen in the Baseline v2.0 andv2.1 footprints shown in Figure 2.
The SCOC has made the recommendation to use this new footprint as shown in Figure 2 extending
the WFD northward although the nal declination limits of the WFD and the exact boundary
of the galactic/high dust extinction region can still be ne-tuned (Ivezi c & the SCOC 2021). As
implemented in baseline v2.0 10yrs simulation, the revised WFD footprint has two declination
boundaries spanning from -72to +12declination with an interstellar dust extinction cuto at
approximately E(B V) = 0.2 mag or A(V) = 0:6 mag (Ivezi c & the SCOC 2021; Yoachim 2022),
whereE(B V) is the dust reddening in magnitudes and A(V) is the total V-band extinction. The
northern boundary of the WFD varies with right ascension in this revised northward footprint; this26 Schwamb et al.
Relative Probability of Detecting Planet Nine in the LSST
Figure 6. The simulated probability of Planet Nine (top) compared to the possible number of visits in the
LSST footprint from the baseline v2.1 10yrs simulation (bottom). The Planet Nine probability density is
taken from Brown (2022) which is based on 100,000 synthetic orbits and physical properties of Planet Nine
(including on-sky locations and V-band apparent magnitudes) drawn from the distributions developed in
Brown & Batygin (2021), where we have removed the ones that are agged as being ruled out by constraints
from the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) (Brown & Batygin 2022) and the Dark Energy Survey (DES)
(Bernardinelli et al. 2022; Belyakov et al. 2022). The top gure has the LSST footprint shaded by the
number of observations that reach 5 limiting magnitude of 24 in any lter. The most probable locations
of Planet Nine are within the NES region, but the full LSST footprint is required to search and probe the
majority of the Brown & Batygin (2021) predicted Planet Nine parameter space. The plots are centered on
=0 and=0. Right ascension and declination lines are marked every 30.
is partly due to other additional constraints with the scheduler. We note that baseline v2.1 10yrs
simulation uses the same footprint as v2.0 but incorporates the Virgo cluster ( =12 hrs,=+12)into
the WFD (Yoachim 2022).
Expanding the WFD footprint northward will cover part of the NES for \free" with the time charged
to the WFD time allocation, but part of the redistributed pointings in the 2to 12declination band is
at high ecliptic latitude because part of the ecliptic plane crosses the Galactic plane in the southern
hemisphere. Transferring WFD visits from the Galactic bulge region will reduce the number ofTuning LSST for Solar System Science 27
Planet Nine median expected V-band apparent magnitudes
 Planet Nine max expected V-band apparent magnitudes
LSST v2.1 baseline expected co-added 5-sigma r-band depth
 LSST v2.1 baseline median expected 5-sigma r-band depth
Figure 7. The sky-magnitude parameter space for a simulated Planet Nine (bottom) compared to the
possible LSST sky coverage and limiting magnitudes from the baseline v2.1 10yrs simulation (top). The
bottom left shows the median expected V-band apparent magnitude, and the bottom right has the maximum
expected V-band magnitude from the distribution of Planet Nines, as described in Figure 6. The LSST
individual exposure median (top left) and 10-year coadded (top right) rmagnitude depths per pointing in
the survey footprint. Since the optical color of the potential Planet Nine is not constrained, we do not
apply anyV rcolor to allow for multiple comparisons depending on the reectance model preferred by
the reader. Observing the NES with Rubin Observatory is crucial for testing and constraining the Planet
Nine parameter space. The plots are centered on =0 and=0. Right ascension and declination lines are
marked every 30.
photometric data points available for generating rotational light curves for some MBAs within the
bulge, but how signicant the impact will depend on the exact shape of the footprint. The OCCs,
NEOs, and PHAs are distributed across a wide range of ecliptic latitudes, so observations at higher
ecliptic latitudes will still nd small bodies in these populations. The same arguments that hold for
outer solar system objects in Section 4.1.1 also apply in this case. Assuming a 14 February 2025
start date, Neptune's on-sky position will have changed by about 1 hr in right ascension and 8in
declination by the end of LSST observations. Objects beyond 30 au will be moving slower than
Neptune. Most of the TNOs and IOCs located in the NES at the start of the survey will remain in
the NES throughout the duration of the LSST. As these distant objects do not move very far on-sky28 Schwamb et al.
during the 10-year survey, any observations of the NES are benecial for discovery as long as not too
much time is taken away from near ecliptic pointings in the southern hemisphere.
In Figure 8, we evaluate the impact of the new northward WFD sky coverage, comparing
baseline v2.0 10yrs and baseline retrofoot v2.0 10yrs simulations. All simulations predat-
ing the v2.0 simulations start from a variation of WFD with the old +2declination limit. The
v2.0 baseline also has additional changes to the observing cadence including tweaks to the rolling
cadence implemented and the exposure time for u-band visits. For an apples to apples comparison,
the v2.0 release includes baseline retrofoot v2.0 10yrs which uses the original v1.5-1.7 baseline
WFD+NES footprint leaving the other cadence parameters the same as the v2.0 simulation. The
northward WFD footprint produces a slight increase in discovery metrics (all less than 5% change)
for all populations except for the large Jupiter Trojans. There are also slight improvements in the
light curve metrics, with the smallest MBAs seeing more than a 10% increase with the extended
WFD footprint. These increases may be more signicant than represented in the MAF metrics if
stellar crowding was taken into account. Although this comparison is to the v2.0 baseline, it will still
hold true for the v2.1 baseline ( baseline v2.1 10yrs ) that goes slightly more northward. We note
that the addition of the Virgo Cluster is a minuscule change in area, and there are negligible impacts
to any of the solar system metrics compared to baseline v2.0 10yrs (as discussed in Section 4.7.2).
For completeness, we briey discuss the footprint experiments performed in the v1.5 and v1.7 re-
leases that led to the revised northward WFD incorporated into the v2.0 and onward LSST cadence
simulations. The discovery and light curve metrics are shown in Figures 4 and 9. The v1.5 footprint
simulations are set up with dierent overheads than the v1.7/2.0/2.1 WFD footprint simulations
that allow for a larger number of visits to be distributed across the sky. The v1.5 footprint family
uses these additional visits to explore the impact of typically adding more northern visits in various
congurations, modifying the number of visits in the Galactic plane and NES (sometimes in diering
lters), and some changes to the extent of the WFD footprint. The sky map showing the total num-
bers of visits per pointing in these v1.5 simulations is shown in Figure 10. In general, adding visits
northward enhances TNO discovery statistics and in most cases, there are only small impacts on
the ability to obtain light curves and produce shape inversion models of inner solar system objects.
Instead of adding a small number of visits, the v1.7 WFD footprint experiments explore WFD
variations on a dust-extinction limited footprint with variable North/South declination limits. The
total numbers of visits in these v1.7 WFD footprint experiments are shown in Figure 11. Overall,
TNOs and outer solar system discoveries benet the most, with the inner solar system object dis-
coveries taking only a few percent loss in discoveries. The light curve metrics for the most part see
5-10% boosts in the various congurations of the more dust-free WFD, but they start to decrease
more signicantly for the smaller sized MBAs, NEOs, and PHAs as less of the ecliptic that intersects
with the Galactic plane in the southern hemisphere is included in the WFD and the number of visits
to those regions drops. Some caution needs to be taken in interpreting this result as this loss may
be less than what is shown by the metrics as detection eciency of solar system objects (by exten-
sion the ability to measure their light curves) decreases in crowded elds. The Jupiter Trojans are
constrained in set locations on the sky; with small numbers of detections in the simulations, this is
likely contributing to the variation observed in the light curve metrics. Overall, these v1.5 and 1.7
footprint experiments show that moving visits northward is an improvement and paved the way for
the optimized v2.0/v2.1 WFD footprint and full LSST footprint.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 29
Baseline Revised Nothward 
 WFD Footprint
 (baseline_v2.0_10yrs)
Retro footprint
 (baseline_retrofoot_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
Baseline Revised Footprint 
 (baseline_v2.0_10yrs)
Retro Footprint 
 (baseline_retrofoot_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion PHA H=16.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion PHA H=19.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion NEO H=16.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion NEO H=19.0FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion MBA H=16.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion MBA H=18.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion Trojan H=14.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion Trojan H=15.0
Figure 8. Impact of the revised v2.0 LSST footprint with the northward and dust-extinction limited WFD.
The baseline (reference) simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is
the rst entry on the left. All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading
outlines changes that are within 5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light
Curve Inversion Metrics.30 Schwamb et al.
Traditional footprint 
 (baseline_nexp2_v1.7_10yrs)
WFD -70.2<dec<7.8 
 + north ring 
 (footprint_0_v1.710yrs)
WFD -70.2<dec<7.8 
 (footprint_1_v1.710yrs)
WFD -67.4<dec<8 
 (footprint_2_v1.710yrs)
WFD -67.4<dec8 
 + 20deg bridge 
 (footprint_3_v1.710yrs)
WFD -62.5<dec<3.6 
 +33deg bridge 
 (footprint_4_v1.710yrs)
WFD -67.4<dec<8 
 + 20deg bridge (like 3) 
 (footprint_5_v1.710yrs)
WFD -67.4<dec<8 
 + 20deg bridge (south) 
 (footprint_6_v1.710yrs)
WFD -70.2<dec<7.8 
 no ecliptic in galaxy 
 (footprint_7_v1.710yrs)
WFD -70.2<dec<7.8 
 no galactic 
 (footprint_8_v1.710yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0
Traditional footprint 
 (baseline_nexp2_v1.7_10yrs)
WFD -70.2<dec<7.8 
 + north ring 
 (footprint_0_v1.710yrs)
WFD -70.2<dec<7.8 
 (footprint_1_v1.710yrs)
WFD -67.4<dec<8 
 (footprint_2_v1.710yrs)
WFD -67.4<dec8 
 + 20deg bridge 
 (footprint_3_v1.710yrs)
WFD -62.5<dec<3.6 
 +33deg bridge 
 (footprint_4_v1.710yrs)
WFD -67.4<dec<8 
 + 20deg bridge (like 3) 
 (footprint_5_v1.710yrs)
WFD -67.4<dec<8 
 + 20deg bridge (south) 
 (footprint_6_v1.710yrs)
WFD -70.2<dec<7.8 
 no ecliptic in galaxy 
 (footprint_7_v1.710yrs)
WFD -70.2<dec<7.8 
 no galactic 
 (footprint_8_v1.710yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 9. Possible tuning options for the WFD (Wide-Fast-Deep) Survey footprint from the v1.7 experi-
ments. As visits are taken away from the Galactic plane and bulge region, they are redistributed northward
and southward to less dust extinction and less stellar crowded regions. The baseline (reference) simulation
with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left. All values
have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes that are within 5%
of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 31
Figure 10. The total number of visits in all lters after 10 years for the v1.5 footprint experiment simu-
lations. The Deep Drilling Fields (DDFs) are also visible as a collection of single elds receiving a higher
number of observations than a WFD pointing. Each DDF receives approximately 1% of the total LSST
observing time. The filterdist indx2 v1.5 10yrs run does not include DDFs. The plots are centered on
=0 and=0. Right ascension and declination lines are marked every 30.32 Schwamb et al.
Figure 11. The total number of visits in all lters after 10 years for the v1.7 Wide-Fast-Deep (WFD) survey
footprint exploration simulations. As visits are taken away from the Galactic plane and bulge region, they
are redistributed northward to pointings with less stellar crowding and dust extinction. The Deep Drilling
Fields (DDFs) are also visible as a collection of single elds receiving a higher number of observations than
a WFD pointing, with each DDF receiving approximately 1% of the total LSST observing time. The plots
are centered on =0 and=0. Right ascension and declination lines are marked every 30.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 33
4.1.3. Varying the Fraction of Time Spent in the Non-WFD Regions
Three sets of simulations were done in which the visits to the NES and the Galactic plane were
varied relative to the WFD coverage. In these simulations, varying numbers of extra visits to the
NES or the galactic plane are added at the expense of removing that observing time from the WFD.
The simulations discussed below show how covering these specic areas with visits ranging from 1%
to 100% of the WFD cadence aect metrics for solar system populations.
The vary NESfamily of simulations included coverage of the elds in the NES at 1% of the WFD
level, at 5-55% of the WFD level in 5% increments, and at 75% and 100% of the WFD level; the
baseline simulation has the NES elds at 30% of the WFD. The top panel of Figure 12 shows the
discovery metrics for various solar system populations for these simulations. At low coverage levels
for the NES ( <10%), the discovery metrics for the TNO populations are reduced by more than 5%
relative to baseline, and most populations show increasing discoveries as the NES coverage increases.
Figure 13 shows the fraction of each solar system population (relative to baseline) that is observed
in at least four of the grizy lters as a function of the NES coverage. If the NES is covered at .
15% of the WFD, the fraction of TNOs (down to H= 6) that are observed in at least four lters is
reduced by more than 20% compared to baseline; the NES must cover at least 25% of WFD to not
reduce this metric by more than 5%. The TNO populations are the most aected in both discovery
and color-light curve metrics when the NES is not covered to at least 25% of the WFD level because
they move slowly on-sky compared to closer-in solar system populations. Most of them will not move
enough over the 10 year LSST time span to move from NES elds to WFD elds. Covering the NES
at<25% of WFD also signicantly decreases the number of faint MBAs and faint Jupiter Trojans
that are expected to have light curve measurements (bottom panel of Figure 12); all the populations
generally improve in both the color-light curve and light curve metrics as NES coverage increases.
The vary GPfamily of simulations included coverage of the elds in the Galactic plane at 1% of
the WFD level, at 5-55% of the WFD level in 5% increments, and at 75% and 100% of the WFD
level. Figure 14 shows the resulting solar system metrics for discovery and light curve inversion.
The discovery metrics for dierent solar system populations are all within 5% of baseline for these
simulations, and the fraction of each population that has observations in multiple lters is also
relatively unaected. However, when the Galactic plane is covered at >30% of the WFD level, the
fraction of faint MBAs, Jupiter Trojans, and PHAs with light curve inversions all drop by 5% or
more (increasing losses with increasing Galactic plane coverage) compared to the baseline simulations.
This is likely simply a result of shifting time away from the WFD elds, decreasing the odds that the
fainter solar system objects are above detection thresholds multiple times in the reduced number of
visits to their elds.
The plane priority family of simulations varies how dierent regions of the Galactic plane are
covered based on a priority map of the Galactic plane from the Rubin Observatory LSST SMLV (Stars,
Milky Way, and Local Volume) and TVS (Transients and Variable Stars) science collaborations. Some
of these simulations also have pencil beam elds in areas of the Galactic plane that the WFD is not
planned to cover. These targeted pencil beam elds would be visited at the same level as the WFD.
The GP plane priority simulations were completed with and without pencil beam elds, and two
additional simulations were done with just four larger or 20 smaller GP pencil beam elds (the
pencil fssimulations). The discovery metrics for dierent solar system populations are almost all
within 5% of baseline for these simulations, with only faint MBAs and faint Jupiter Trojans dropping34 Schwamb et al.
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
NES at 1% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.01_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 5% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.05_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 10% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.10_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 15% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.15_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 20% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.20_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 25% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.25_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 30% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.30_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 35% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.35_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 40% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.40_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 45% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.45_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 50% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.50_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 55% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.55_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 75% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.75_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 100% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac1.00_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
NES at 1% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.01_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 5% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.05_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 10% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.10_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 15% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.15_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 20% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.20_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 25% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.25_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 30% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.30_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 35% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.35_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 40% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.40_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 45% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.45_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 50% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.50_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 55% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.55_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 75% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.75_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 100% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac1.00_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.81.01.21.4Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 12. Varying the time spent on the Northern Ecliptic Spur (NES). The baseline (reference) simulation
with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left. All values
have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes that are within 5%
of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics Note: The light
curve inversion plot has been truncated for clarity. The MBAs and Jupiter Trojans extend beyond the plot
for the 1.0 NES. fraction.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 35
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
NES at 1% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.01_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 5% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.05_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 10% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.10_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 15% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.15_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 20% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.20_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 25% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.25_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 30% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.30_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 35% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.35_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 40% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.40_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 45% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.45_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 50% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.50_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 55% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.55_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 75% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac0.75_v2.0_10yrs)
NES at 100% WFD level 
 (vary_nes_nesfrac1.00_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.70.80.91.01.11.2Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationFraction 4 of grizy PHA H=16.0
Fraction 4 of grizy PHA H=19.0
Fraction 4 of grizy NEO H=16.0
Fraction 4 of grizy NEO H=19.0
Fraction 4 of grizy MBA H=16.0
Fraction 4 of grizy MBA H=18.0
Fraction 4 of grizy Jupiter Trojan H=14.0Fraction 4 of grizy Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Fraction 4 filters TNO H=6.0
Fraction 4 filters TNO H=7.0
Fraction 4 filters OCC_r5 H=8.0
Fraction 4 filters OCC_r5 H=14.0
Fraction 4 filters OCC_r20 H=8.0
Fraction 4 filters OCC_r20 H=11.0
Figure 13. Color-light curve metrics with varying time spent on the Northern Ecliptic Spur (NES) from
the v2.0 simulations. The baseline (reference) simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this
cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left. All values have been normalized by this simulation's
output.The gray shading outlines changes that are within 5% of the baseline simulation.
slightly below those thresholds for the priority threshold at 0.1-0.2 (top panel of Figure 15). The
color-light curve metrics (see Figure 16) are also generally similar across the family of simulations,
with losses in the fraction of faint populations observed in four of the grizy lters that hover around
5% for the simulations with higher threshold values (above 0.4), with or without pencil beams;
the simulations with the lowest thresholds show an enhancement in the color-light curve metric.
However for this entire family of simulations, the fraction of faint MBAs, Jupiter Trojans, NEOs,
and PHAs with light curve inversions all suer >5% losses compared to the baseline simulation
(bottom panel of Figure 15); again, this is likely due to additional time shifted away from the WFD
elds. The set of simulations that cover the priority map at >0.6-1.2 threshold with or without
pencil beams generally keep the light curve inversion losses for these populations to between 10%
and 20% compared to baseline. The simulations with 4 larger or 20 smaller Galactic plane pencil
beam elds added in addition to the plane priority maps have worse light curve inversion metrics for
all solar system populations than simulations with just the priority maps.
4.2. Exposure Times and Snaps
In this section we explore the various options for the total exposure time per visit and the number
of observations (\snaps") taken at each visit. Both parameters directly impact the amount of open
shutter time available and therefore how many exposures can be taken on any given night and in total36 Schwamb et al.
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
GP at 1% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.01_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 5% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.05_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 10% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.10_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 15% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.15_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 20% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.20_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 25% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.25_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 30% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.30_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 35% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.35_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 40% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.40_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 45% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.45_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 50% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.50_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 55% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.55_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 75% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.75_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 100% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac1.00_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
GP at 1% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.01_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 5% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.05_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 10% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.10_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 15% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.15_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 20% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.20_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 25% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.25_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 30% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.30_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 35% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.35_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 40% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.40_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 45% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.45_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 50% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.50_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 55% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.55_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 75% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac0.75_v2.0_10yrs)
GP at 100% WFD level 
 (vary_gp_gpfrac1.00_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 14. Varying the time spent on the Galactic plane (v2.0 simulations). The baseline (reference)
simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left.
All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes that are
within5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 37
baseline_v2.1_10yrs
GP priority map > 0.1 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.1_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.1 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.1_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.2 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.2_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.2 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.2_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.3 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.3_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.3 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.3_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.4 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.4_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.4 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.4_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.6 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.6_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.6 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.6_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.9 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.9_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.9 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.9_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 1.2 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority1.2_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 1.2 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority1.2_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
Add 20 small galactic plane pencil beam fields
 (pencil_fs1_v2.1_10yrs)
Add 4 larger galactic plane pencil beam fields
 (pencil_fs2_v2.1_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.1_10yrs
GP priority map > 0.1 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.1_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.1 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.1_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.2 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.2_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.2 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.2_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.3 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.3_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.3 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.3_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.4 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.4_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.4 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.4_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.6 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.6_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.6 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.6_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.9 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.9_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.9 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.9_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 1.2 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority1.2_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 1.2 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority1.2_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
Add 20 small galactic plane pencil beam fields
 (pencil_fs1_v2.1_10yrs)
Add 4 larger galactic plane pencil beam fields
 (pencil_fs2_v2.1_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.40.60.81.01.2Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 15. Varying the time spent on the Galactic plane (v2.1 simulations). The baseline (reference)
simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left.
All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes that are
within5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics.38 Schwamb et al.
baseline_v2.1_10yrs
GP priority map > 0.1 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.1_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.1 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.1_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.2 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.2_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.2 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.2_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.3 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.3_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.3 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.3_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.4 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.4_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.4 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.4_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.6 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.6_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.6 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.6_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.9 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.9_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 0.9 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority0.9_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 1.2 threshold no pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority1.2_pbf_v2.1_10yrs)
GP priority map > 1.2 threshold + pencilbeams 
 (plane_priority_priority1.2_pbt_v2.1_10yrs)
Add 20 small galactic plane pencil beam fields
 (pencil_fs1_v2.1_10yrs)
Add 4 larger galactic plane pencil beam fields
 (pencil_fs2_v2.1_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.70.80.91.01.11.2Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationFraction 4 of grizy PHA H=16.0
Fraction 4 of grizy PHA H=19.0
Fraction 4 of grizy NEO H=16.0
Fraction 4 of grizy NEO H=19.0
Fraction 4 of grizy MBA H=16.0Fraction 4 of grizy MBA H=18.0
Fraction 4 of grizy Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction 4 of grizy Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Fraction 4 filters TNO H=6.0
Fraction 4 filters TNO H=7.0Fraction 4 filters OCC_r5 H=8.0
Fraction 4 filters OCC_r5 H=14.0
Fraction 4 filters OCC_r20 H=8.0
Fraction 4 filters OCC_r20 H=11.0
Figure 16. Color-light curve metrics with varying time spent on the Galactic plane (v2.1 simulations).
The baseline (reference) simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is
the rst entry on the left. All values have been normalized by this simulation's output.The gray shading
outlines changes that are within 5% of the baseline simulation.
by the survey per lter. The visit exposure time also impacts the individual image depth, increasing
or decreasing the resulting image's 5 limiting magnitude.
4.2.1. Snaps
The LSST cadence is currently planned with two exposures of equal length dubbed \snaps", nom-
inally 15 s each, to be taken back-to-back at each visit to an on-sky pointing, except in the case of
u-band observing (see Section 4.2.2). The original plan was for the Rubin Observatory data manage-
ment pipelines to compare the two snaps in order to identify and ag pixel-level artifacts (e.g. cosmic
rays). Source detection would be performed on the image resulting from coadding the two exposures
(Ivezi c & the LSST Science Collaboration 2013; Ivezi c et al. 2019). We note that the Rubin SSP
pipelines' discovery algorithm is agnostic to the number of snaps per visit, as it uses the transient
sources detected in the coadded snaps image as input (Myers et al. 2013; Juri c et al. 2020).
There now exist many algorithms published in the literature for identifying cosmic rays in single
astronomical images (e.g. Rhoads 2000; van Dokkum 2001; Shamir 2005; McCully et al. 2018). If
these algorithms work well on LSSTCam images, there may be no strong reason for taking two snaps
at each visit. The decision on whether to implement one snap or two snaps per visit will be made
during commissioning of the LSSTCam and the Rubin data management pipelines (Ivezi c et al. 2019)
when the feasibility of single exposure cosmic ray rejection can be tested and the impact from satelliteTuning LSST for Solar System Science 39
constellation steaks can be properly assessed (see Section 5.4). With two snaps, each planned visit
has two camera readouts and two camera shutter openings and closings. Although the readout time
and the movement of the camera shutter are relatively quick (well less than a minute), the summed
time lost to these overheads over the entire 10-year survey is non-negligible in the case of the two
snaps observing cadence. As can be seen in Table 4 for the v1.7 family of simulations (the most
recent LSST cadence simulations exploring the number of snaps), switching to one snap generates an
8% gain in on-sky visits and an increase in the sky coverage reaching the WFD goal of 825 visits
per pointing.
The impact of switching to a single snap cadence will depend on what the added exposures are
used for. The SCOC has not yet made any decision about snaps and how to partition out the
extra visits. If a signicant portion of the gained visits can be distributed across the entire LSST
footprint or WFD and NES, the increase in exposures will add either sky coverage and/or temporal
coverage that will help with detection and monitoring of small bodies while enabling other science.
In the v1.7 simulations, the extra visits gained in the one snap case were divided out evenly between
the WFD and other parts of the simulation's survey footprint. This produces an increase in both
the detection and the light curve metrics (see Figure 17). The detection metrics for the small size
end increase by a few percent. The extra visits provide additional chances for those objects near
the survey brightness limit to get above the image 5 limiting magnitude and be detected. The
largest bodies see only a very slight increase because the majority of times when they land within an
exposure, they are already brighter than the limiting magnitude. The largest enhancement is seen
with the light curve inversion metrics, especially for the small end of the size distribution where we
nd a>20% boost across the MBAs, PHAs, NEOs, and Jupiter Trojans. Like the case for discovery,
the extra observations provide more opportunities for better temporal coverage to probe rotations
and perform shape inversion. Since only 6 detections are required for discovery, it is the light curve
inversion metric that shows the true benets for color and light curve measurements from the extra
on-sky observing.
As noted in Schwamb et al. (2018b), there is some extra information that is potentially gained with
two snaps per visit. Although the SSP pipelines are not currently planned to use any information
from the individual snaps, bespoke community software could be developed to take advantage of the
two exposures per visit. For those small body populations moving fast enough to be signicantly
trailed in the LSST images, such as NEOs and PHAs, the sequential snaps allow for 1) the on-sky
direction of motion to be measured from the two streaks and 2) brightness variations (on the order
of seconds) to be extracted from the streaks for ultra-fast rotators. Only a very tiny fraction of the
asteroids discovered will be rotating fast enough that sub-30 s resolution will be useful (Pravec &
Harris 2000; Warner et al. 2009; Masiero et al. 2009; Hergenrother & Whiteley 2011; Chang et al.
2014, 2019; Warner et al. 2021; Chang et al. 2021, 2022). These are very limited benets compared
to the gains to all solar system populations from an extra 8% of on-sky observing time. Therefore,
we recommend incorporating single snap visits into the LSST cadence, if feasible.
4.2.2. Long u-band Observations
The long uXandulong simulations explore the impact of using a single longer u-band exposure
versus two shorter (15 s) exposures in the baseline. This was investigated as, because of the low
level of sky background in u-band, read-out noise has a larger impact than in redder bands, and a40 Schwamb et al.
baseline 2x15s exposures 
 per visit (all filters) 
 (baseline_nexp2_v1.7_10yrs)
baseline 1x30s exposures 
 per visit (all filters) 
 (baseline_nexp1_v1.7_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0Completeness MBA H<=16.0
Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0
baseline 2x15s exposures 
 per visit (all filters) 
 (baseline_nexp2_v1.7_10yrs)
baseline 1x30s exposures 
 per visit (all filters) 
 (baseline_nexp1_v1.7_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.0Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 17. Varying the number of snaps per visit (v1.7 simulations). The reference simulation with 2 snaps
case is the rst entry on the left. All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray
shading outlines changes that are within 5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom:
Light Curve Inversion Metrics.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 41
baseline 2x15s u exposures 
 (baseline_nexp2_v1.7_10yrs)
baseline 1x30s u exposures 
 (u_long_ms_30_v1.7_10yrs)
baseline 1x40s u exposures 
 (u_long_ms_40_v1.7_10yrs)
baseline 1x50s u exposures 
 (u_long_ms_50_v1.7_10yrs)
baseline 1x60s u exposures 
 (u_long_ms_60_v1.7_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0Completeness MBA H<=16.0
Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0
baseline 2x15s u exposures 
 (baseline_nexp2_v1.7_10yrs)
baseline 1x30s u exposures 
 (u_long_ms_30_v1.7_10yrs)
baseline 1x40s u exposures 
 (u_long_ms_40_v1.7_10yrs)
baseline 1x50s u exposures 
 (u_long_ms_50_v1.7_10yrs)
baseline 1x60s u exposures 
 (u_long_ms_60_v1.7_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 18. Changing the length of the u-band exposures in the v1.7 simulations. The baseline (reference)
simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left.
All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes that are
within5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics.42 Schwamb et al.
Table 4. Varying Snaps
Exposures LSST Cadence Total # Area with
Per Visit Simulation Name of On-Sky >825 visits
Visits (degrees2)
215 s (current SRD requirement) baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 2045493 17982.71
130 s baseline nexp1 v1.7 10yrs 2208619 18190.85
single longer exposure allows to signicantly improve the u-band depth, see e.g. Jones et al. (2020).
The ulong family varies the duration of the single u-band exposure (30, 40, 50, or 60 s). It is
expected that longer u-band exposures (40 or 50 s) will be advantageous for the detection of faint
activity around solar system objects. Since the u-band also encompasses emission from the CN
radical around 388 nm (and to a lesser extent from the NH radical), there might be slight gains
for active comets inside 3 au, increasing with decreasing heliocentric distances, but this hasn't been
modeled in detail yet. However, longer u-band exposure times (starting marginally with 50 s but
more strongly for 60 s) result in a lower number of observations being performed in other lters and
thus decrease the number of faint Jupiter Trojans and PHAs detected as well as the number of faint
objects for which we can perform light curve inversion, as illustrated in Figure 18. The long uXuses
a 50 s exposure, either keeping the same number of visits ( long u1) or reducing it ( long u2). Both of
these tend to be worse than the baseline for solar system objects in terms of light curve inversion in
particular for faint objects, as illustrated in Figures 19 and 18. This results from the fact that light
curve inversion requires a certain number of observations above a certain SNR threshold, which might
not be met for some objects in bluer lters where most solar system bodies are fainter. The long u2
family performs better for both detection and light curve inversion metrics and was identied as a
good compromise as long as it is not done together with any of the bluer indxXX options mentioned
in Section 4.3, which is shifting more visits to blue lters over redder lters.
4.2.3. Other Variations of Exposure Times
The visits in the v 2.0 survey simulations are typically set to 2 15 s exposures in the grizy
lters while the uband has 130 s exposures. A series of simulations (v2.1 shave ) has been run
to explore the impact of dierent exposure times on the survey metrics compared to the family's
baseline simulation. As seen in the top panel of Figure 20, the relative eect on the discovery rate
of TNOs and faint OCCs, and MBAs diminishes signicantly with shorter exposure times compared
to the baseline exposure time conguration as the 5 limiting magnitude decreases with exposure
time. Shorter exposure times have a greater eect on fainter absolute magnitude TNOs dropping the
discovery metrics by more than 5% for TNOs with 6 <H < 8 compared to TNOs with H < 6. The
eect is similar for OCCs with the discovery metrics decreasing by 5% for OCCs with 8 <H < 12
compared to OCCs with H < 8. The discovery of NEOs and PHAs does see a small improvement with
the shorter exposure cadences owing to increased sky coverage resulting from the shorter exposure
times allowing for more exposures to be taken (e.g., Jedicke et al. 2016). This improvement in
the discovery metrics is greater for fainter PHA and NEOs with 16 <H < 22 than for bodies with
H < 16. The enhanced discovery caused by the greater coverage is due to the fact that these closer-inTuning LSST for Solar System Science 43
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
more g 
 (bluer_indx0_v2.0_10yrs)
more u + g 
 (bluer_indx1_v2.0_10yrs)
1x50s u visits 
 (long_u1_v2.0_10yrs)
1x50s u visits + less u vists 
 (long_u2_v2.0_10yrs)
Vary the exposure times 
 (20-100s) to make the 
 image depth consistent 
 (vary_expt_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
more g 
 (bluer_indx0_v2.0_10yrs)
more u + g 
 (bluer_indx1_v2.0_10yrs)
1x50s u visits 
 (long_u1_v2.0_10yrs)
1x50s u visits + less u vists 
 (long_u2_v2.0_10yrs)
Vary the exposure times 
 (20-100s) to make the 
 image depth consistent 
 (vary_expt_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 19. The impact of skewing the lter distribution bluer, increasing the exposure time of the u-band
observations, and the eect of varying exposure time per visit ( vary expt v2.0 10yrs ). All the simulations
presented in this gure are from the v2.0 runs. The baseline (reference) simulation with the default scheduler
conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left. All values have been normalized by
this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes that are within 5% of the baseline simulation.
Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics.44 Schwamb et al.
objects tend to be detected at viewing geometries when they are closer to the Earth and are thus
brighter to compensate for their smaller size. Examples of faint, close in asteroids whose discoveries
are favored by the shorter cadence when they approach the Earth include asteroids on Earth-similar
orbits and meteoroids (e.g., Kwiatkowski et al. 2009; Granvik et al. 2012; Bolin et al. 2014; Jedicke
et al. 2018; Shober et al. 2019; de la Fuente Marcos & de la Fuente Marcos 2020b; Bolin et al. 2020b;
Fedorets et al. 2020b; Naidu et al. 2021; de la Fuente Marcos & de la Fuente Marcos 2022).
When exposure times are increased to more than 30 s, more distant objects have improved discov-
eries but the discovery of PHAs and NEOs diminishes. The decreased discovery of PHAs could be
due to the decreased sky coverage in the longer exposure scheme compared to the shorter exposure
scheme. The degradation in the number of PHAs and NEOs in the longer exposures could also be
due to trailing losses from their higher rate of motion (e.g., Shao et al. 2014; Ye et al. 2019). One
additional factor to consider in the longer exposure times is that they will be more susceptible to
images being compromised from satellite trails which is more likely in longer exposures (Tyson et al.
2020), see Section 5.4 for a detailed discussion.
The eect of shortening the exposure time improves the light curve inversion metrics for all dy-
namical groups of objects included in the v2.1 cadence simulations as seen in the bottom panel of
Figure 20. Shorter exposure times generally improve the light curve inversion metrics due to the
improved coverage and improved density of detections enabled by shorter exposure cadences. The
magnitude of improvement varies by dynamical class. For faint PHAs and NEOs with H= 19, the
light curve metric is almost doubled with a 20 and 22 s exposures compared to the baseline cadence.
Larger PHAs and NEOs with H= 16 see a moderate improvement as well with the shorter expo-
sures. The higher density of coverage will also be useful for the study of the rotation states of Jupiter
Trojans and asteroid family members in the Main Belt (Hanu s et al. 2018, e.g., ) as shown by the
increase in the light curve metrics for Trojans and MBAs. The benets of wider and more frequent
coverage of the sky to light curve inversion may also extend to the monitoring and detection of ac-
tivity within the asteroid belt (e.g., Moreno et al. 2017). The improvement for more close in objects
may be explained by their higher sky-plane motion placing this in a wider range of possible areas of
sky positions that is more easily covered with a shorter cadence. A good compromise exposure time
for obtaining favorable discoveries for inner and outer Solar System objects as well as dense light
curves seems to be the 30 s exposure cadence.
An additional simulation, vary expt v2.0 10yrs , was designed to test the results of varying the
exposure times between 20-100 s in the ugrizy lters to provide consistency in the image depth in
dierent lters. As seen in the top panel of Fig. 19, varying the exposure time between 20-100 s
results in poorer discovery metrics relative to the baseline simulation for all classes of solar system
objects used in the simulations. This is due to the fact that the longer exposures result in an overall
decrease in survey coverage and a decreased chance to detect moving objects. As seen in the bottom
panel of Fig. 19, the eect on light curve inversion metric is also worse for all classes of solar system
objects. Therefore, varying the exposure times to achieve uniform visit depth is not recommended.
4.3. Filter Cadence and Filter Distribution
This section explores decisions focused around the choice of lter i.e. changing the distribution of
observations across lters (to increase the total number of observations in bluer lters, for example)
or modifying how observations in dierent lters are interspersed within a night or throughout a
lunation. First we examine the eects of increasing the number of observations in uandgbandsTuning LSST for Solar System Science 45
baseline_v2.1_10yrs
20s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_20_v2.1_10yrs)
22s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_22_v2.1_10yrs)
25s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_25_v2.1_10yrs)
28s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_28_v2.1_10yrs)
30s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_30_v2.1_10yrs)
32s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_32_v2.1_10yrs)
35s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_35_v2.1_10yrs)
38s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_38_v2.1_10yrs)
40s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_40_v2.1_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.900.951.001.051.10Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.1_10yrs
20s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_20_v2.1_10yrs)
22s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_22_v2.1_10yrs)
25s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_25_v2.1_10yrs)
28s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_28_v2.1_10yrs)
30s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_30_v2.1_10yrs)
32s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_32_v2.1_10yrs)
35s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_35_v2.1_10yrs)
38s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_38_v2.1_10yrs)
40s exposures in all filters 
 (shave_40_v2.1_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.8Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 20. Variations on the eective exposure time per visit in the v2.1 cadence simulations. The baseline
(reference) simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry
on the left. All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes
that are within5% of the baseline simulation. Except for the baseline simulation which has 2 15 s vists
ingrizy and 130sinu, all other simulations in this run had single exposure visits per pointing. Top:
Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics.46 Schwamb et al.
compared to the baseline. Next we explore the consequence of imposing that a certain number
of observations are performed in various combinations of lters each year. Lastly we investigate
changing the cadence of observations in gband, taking advantage of bright time to schedule extra
visits and reduce the gap between successive observations of a given eld in g-band.
The bluer indxXX family of simulations have a bluer lter distribution, increasing the number of
exposures in g, oruandglters compared to the baseline (the lter balance in the baseline is ` u':
0.07, `g': 0.09, `r': 0.22, `i': 0.22, `z': 0.20, `y': 0.20). This is done by removing visits in redder
lters to redistribute them between uandg. Similarly to the families discussed above, increasing
the number of exposures in uorg-band results in a severe decrease of the number of faint objects
for which light curve inversion is possible. Even though this hasn't been modelled yet, active objects
close to the Sun might benet from increased uandgcoverage, as these lter encompass emissions
from CN and C 2radicals respectively. As discussed above and illustrated in Figure 21, a u-heavy
distribution induces a signicant decrease in the detection of faint solar system objects that are
fainter inu-band, as illustrated in Table 1.
Figure 22 presents a set of simulations where emphasis is put on obtaining a handful of exposures
with a seeing <0.800each year, varying the weight put on that constraint and the combinations
of lters for which it has to be met (whether iandyare included or not). These simulations
come as a request for extragalactic science cases. Ensuring there are yearly good seeing images in
several lters enhances strong lensing detection (Verma et al. 2019) and galaxy studies Ferguson
et al. (2021). In general, requirements of having a minimum number of good seeing images per year
in various bandpasses do not impact strongly our discovery or light curve metrics (except for the
good seeing gsw1.0 v2.1 10yrs andgood seeing ugsw0.0 v2.1 10yrs ).
The cadence drive family of simulations investigates reducing long gaps between g-band visits
over a month by requiring a certain number of ll-in visits each night during bright time. Adding
g-band visits during full moon time (and consequently reducing the number of visits in redder bands)
is generally detrimental for solar system objects, and in particular for light curve inversion of faint
Jupiter Trojans as illustrated in Figure 23. A small number (30) of contiguous visits might be
acceptable but in general the lowest possible number of g-band ll-in visits is preferable.
4.4. Visits Within a Night
The Rubin SSP pipelines will search nightly image pairs for new moving sources. Once the orbit
of a solar system object is known suciently well, SSP will be able to predict the orbit and identify
previously known small bodies in single LSST observations, but throughout the entire ten years new
solar system discoveries will be made (Myers et al. 2013; Juri c et al. 2020). The majority of the
TNOs and MBAs will be picked up within the rst two years of the survey, but new comets, NEOs,
and ISOs will continue to be discovered across the duration of the LSST (Eggl et al. 2019). Thus, it
is important that nightly pairs be taken over the full span of the LSST.
The LSST SRD (Ivezi c & the LSST Science Collaboration 2013) requires at least two observations
per night at each observed pointing in order to facilitate accurate removal of the solar system \cruft"
that will pollute the millions of transient astrophysical LSST alerts sent out. A transient only seen
in one but not in a repeat observation on the same night will most likely be due to a previously
undiscovered moving small body. Multiple observations in the same night also help dierentiate
inner solar system objects from outer solar system bodies. Additionally, these repeat visits provide
temporal and color information that can be used to probe the evolution of astrophysical transientsTuning LSST for Solar System Science 47
Uniform
 (filterdist_indx1_v1.5_10yrs)
Baseline-like
 (filterdist_indx2_v1.5_10yrs)
g heavy
 (filterdist_indx3_v1.5_10yrs)
u heavy
 (filterdist_indx4_v1.5_10yrs)
z and y heavy
 (filterdist_indx5_v1.5_10yrs)
i heavy
 (filterdist_indx6_v1.5_10yrs)
bluer
 (filterdist_indx7_v1.5_10yrs)
redder
 (filterdist_indx8_v1.5_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.850.900.951.001.051.10Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0
Uniform
 (filterdist_indx1_v1.5_10yrs)
Baseline-like
 (filterdist_indx2_v1.5_10yrs)
g heavy
 (filterdist_indx3_v1.5_10yrs)
u heavy
 (filterdist_indx4_v1.5_10yrs)
z and y heavy
 (filterdist_indx5_v1.5_10yrs)
i heavy
 (filterdist_indx6_v1.5_10yrs)
bluer
 (filterdist_indx7_v1.5_10yrs)
redder
 (filterdist_indx8_v1.5_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.6Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 21. Additional options for tuning the lter distribution (v1.5 simulations). The baseline (reference)
simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left.
All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes that are
within5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics.48 Schwamb et al.
baseline_v2.1_10yrs
Good seeing priority 
 weight 0, grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw0.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 1, grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw1.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 3, grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw3.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 6, grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw6.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 10, grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw10.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 20, grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw20.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 50 grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw50.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 0 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw0.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 1 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw1.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 3 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw3.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 6 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw6.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 10 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw10.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 20 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw20.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 50 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw50.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.1_10yrs
Good seeing priority 
 weight 0, grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw0.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 1, grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw1.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 3, grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw3.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 6, grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw6.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 10, grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw10.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 20, grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw20.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 50 grizy only 
 (good_seeing_gsw50.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 0 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw0.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 1 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw1.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 3 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw3.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 6 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw6.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 10 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw10.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 20 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw20.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Good seeing priority 
 weight 50 ugri only 
 (good_seeing_u_gsw50.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 22. The impact of adding a requirement for 3 \good seeing" (seeing <0.800) images per year
in various bandpasses (v2.0 simulations). The baseline (reference) simulation with the default scheduler
conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left. All values have been normalized by
this simulation's output. The baseline v2.1 10yrs includes the good seeing requirement for randibands
as the default. The gray shading outlines changes that are within 5% of the baseline simulation. Top:
Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 49
baseline_nexp2_v1.7_10yrs
Add g, limit 30/night, contiguous 
 (cadence_drive_gl30_gcbv1.7_10yrs)
Add g, limit 100/night, contiguous 
 (cadence_drive_gl100_gcbv1.7_10yrs)
Add g, limit 200/night, contiguous 
 (cadence_drive_gl200_gcbv1.7_10yrs)
Add g, limit 30/night, non-contiguous 
 (cadence_drive_gl30v1.7_10yrs)
Add g, limit 100/night, non-contiguous
 (cadence_drive_gl100v1.7_10yrs)
Add g, limit 200/night, non-contiguous 
 (cadence_drive_gl200v1.7_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0Completeness MBA H<=16.0
Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0
baseline_nexp2_v1.7_10yrs
Add g, limit 30/night, contiguous 
 (cadence_drive_gl30_gcbv1.7_10yrs)
Add g, limit 100/night, contiguous 
 (cadence_drive_gl100_gcbv1.7_10yrs)
Add g, limit 200/night, contiguous 
 (cadence_drive_gl200_gcbv1.7_10yrs)
Add g, limit 30/night, non-contiguous 
 (cadence_drive_gl30v1.7_10yrs)
Add g, limit 100/night, non-contiguous
 (cadence_drive_gl100v1.7_10yrs)
Add g, limit 200/night, non-contiguous 
 (cadence_drive_gl200v1.7_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.50.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 23. Investigating ways of reducing the gaps between gband visits over a month (v1.7 simulations).
The baseline (reference) simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is
the rst entry on the left. All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading
outlines changes that are within 5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light
Curve Inversion Metrics.50 Schwamb et al.
Nightly Pair Separation (Minutes)Nightly Pair Separation (Minutes)pair_times_33_v1.7_10yrs pair_times_55_v1.7_10yrs33 minute ideal pair separations
Nightly Pair Separation (Minutes) Nightly Pair Separation (Minutes)pair_times_55_v1.7_10yrs55 minute ideal pair separations
pair_times_22_v1.7_10yrs22 minute ideal pair separations# of pairs in WFD+NES
# of pairs in WFD+NES
# of pairs in WFD+NES
Figure 24. Distribution of nightly pair separations across the Wide-Fast-Deep (WFD) and the Northern
Ecliptic Spur (NES) from three simulations that make up the v1.7 pair times family. The histograms are
truncated at 120 minutes.
(e.g., Setzer et al. 2019; Bianco et al. 2019; Li et al. 2022; Andreoni et al. 2022; Lochner et al. 2022)
and minor planets. Below we explore several proposed options on the number, time separation, and
lter choices of these intra-night visits.
4.4.1. Separation Between Nightly Pairs
Nightly pairs in combinations of the g,r, andilters are the most conducive to nding solar
system objects. We explore the intra-night separations in these combinations of lters. As discussed
in Section 2.3.4, the SSP pipelines require that motion be seen between the two exposures (Myers
et al. 2013; Juri c et al. 2020). If a solar system body has not moved suciently for it to be identied
as a new transient source in the next visit, SSP will not be able to spot that moving object. The
separation between nightly pairs sets the furthest distance at which SSP can detect moving sources.
The time between repeat visits also directly impacts the number of pairs observed per night, and thus
the total area searchable for solar system objects. We aim to nd the best pair time separation that
increases the distances that SSP is sensitive to without making a signicant trade o in observing
eciency. This would allow the Rubin SSP to detect more distant TNOs while not compromising
the discovery and characterization of the more inward solar system populations. We note that the
tunable parameter here is the Rubin scheduler's goal for spacing the repeat visits in a given night.
In reality, this will be a distribution centered about the ideal value the Rubin scheduler is aiming
for. This is shown in Figure 24 for three examples from the v1.7 pair times simulations which take
mixed lters with ideal separations between 11, 22, 33, 44, and 55 minutes.
Solar system objects appear to move fastest on-sky when they are at opposition, where the apparent
motion is dominated by the parallax induced by the Earth's movement. The on-sky rate of motion
at opposition for a body exterior to Earth's orbit on a circular and coplanar orbit can be dened as:
d
dt= 1481 r 0:5
h
rh 1
(3)
whererhis the body's heliocentric distance in au andd
dtis the apparent motion at opposition in
arcseconds per hour (Luu & Jewitt 1988). We assume 140 mas as a conservative estimate for the
astrometric uncertainty for sources near the LSST detection limit and a 3 positional shift for theTuning LSST for Solar System Science 51
50 100 150 200 250
Heliocentric Distance (au)0.51.01.52.02.53.03.5On-Sky Opposition Motion (arcseconds/hr)11 min pair separation
15 min pair separation
18 min pair separation
22 min pair separation
33 min pair separation
44 min pair separation
55 min pair separation
Figure 25. The opposition on-sky motion observed on Earth as a function of dierent heliocentric distance
(solid line). The colored points represent the calculated slowest motion/distance detectable by the Rubin
solar system Processing (SSP) pipeline for a range of nightly pair spacings.
SSP pipelines to successfully identify the moving object as a new source in the second observation
(Private Communication, Mario Juri c 2022). This translates to solar system bodies having to move
at least 0.5 arcseconds between the visits in order to become detectable by SSP, setting a minimum
speed limit. In Figure 25, we estimate SSP's motion limit for the range of pair separations including
those explored in the pair times simulations. The solid line represents the opposition on-sky rate
of motion as calculated from Equation 3.
The bulk of the classical Kuiper belt extends from 42 au to 47.7 au, the 2:1 Mean Motion
Resonance (MMR) with Neptune, but the Kuiper belt's scattered/scattering disk and detached/high-
perihelion TNO population (with perihelion at 50-80 au) do extend well beyond that (Trujillo &
Brown 2001; Petit et al. 2011; Adams et al. 2014; Bannister et al. 2018; Bernardinelli et al. 2022).
Separations longer than 18 minutes are needed to search for objects beyond 80 au. Separations longer
than 33 minutes start to slightly negatively aect the discovery metrics and signicantly enhance the
light curve metrics, as plotted in Figure 26. The loss of discovery at fainter absolute magnitudes is
less than 5% even at 55 minute spacings. As the time gap gets longer, the pairs are more vulnerable
to interruptions, mostly from weather. The fraction of gripairs peaks at 22 minutes, but the total
visits and the on-sky area reaching 850 visits both increase with longer pair separations. The light
curve inversion metrics go up with longer gaps between intra-night visits, due to the increase in
the total number of visits, with a larger number of singleton images that are spread out across the
observable sky (see Table 5). Having the Rubin scheduler aim for the two visits to be separated by
33 minutes is the best compromise between optimizing the number of nightly pairs completed and
heliocentric distance probed. We note that the SCOC moved the LSST baseline strategy from aiming
for 22 minutes nightly pair separations to 33 minutes from the v2.0 simulations onward (Ivezi c & the
SCOC 2021).52 Schwamb et al.
Baseline
 (baseline_nexp2_v1.7_10yrs)
11 min
 (pair_times_11_v1.7_10yrs)
22 min
 (pair_times_22_v1.7_10yrs)
33 min
 (pair_times_33_v1.7_10yrs)
44 min
 (pair_times_44_v1.7_10yrs)
55 min
 (pair_times_55_v1.7_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0Completeness MBA H<=16.0
Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0
Baseline
 (baseline_nexp2_v1.7_10yrs)
11 min
 (pair_times_11_v1.7_10yrs)
22 min
 (pair_times_22_v1.7_10yrs)
33 min
 (pair_times_33_v1.7_10yrs)
44 min
 (pair_times_44_v1.7_10yrs)
55 min
 (pair_times_55_v1.7_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 26. Changing the ideal nightly pair separation (v1.7 simulations). The baseline (reference) simula-
tion with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left. All
values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes that are within
5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 53
Table 5. Diagnostics for the LSST Cadence Simulations Changing the Desired Separation Between
Nightly Pairs
LSST Cadence Simulation Name Ideal Separation Total # of Area with Mean Fraction (RMS)
Separation of On-Sky >825 visits of WFD+NES visits
Between Visits (degrees2) in 15-60 min
Nightly Pairs separated pairs
(min) g,r, orilters only
pair times 11v1.7 10yrs 11 1947985 14356.96 0.240 (0.061)
baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs /pair times 22v1.7 10yrs 22 2045493 17982.71 0.586 (0.055)
pair times 33v1.7 10yrs 33 2075493 18076.71 0.546 (0.057)
pair times 44v1.7 10yrs 44 2089977 18104.40 0.475 (0.061)
pair times 55v1.7 10yrs 55 2100189 18108.60 0.398 (0.061)
15 minute separations cover the full classical Kuiper belt. 60 minutes was chosen as the upper limit because the bulk of the nightly
pairs in these runs are separated by less than this value (See Figure 24).
Note |These simulations used 2 15 s snaps per visit.
The v2.0 long gaps np(long gaps no pairs) simulations extend the time between nightly repeat
exposures to 2-7 hours in various combinations. These simulations either begin the extended pair
separation in Year 1 ( delayed-1 ) or after Year 5 ( delayed1827 ). This simulation family explores
the impact of executing the long gaps strategy every night and less frequently, where the nightsoff
parameter (the number of sequential nights with no long gap sequences) is varied. On the nights
when the long gap observing is not active, the scheduler aims for 33 minute nightly pair simulations
like the v2.0 baseline survey. These simulations are one option explored to potentially better capture
fast evolving astrophysical phenomena, as suggested by Bellm et al. (2022); additional strategies
for addressing the temporal coverage of fast transients are explored in Section 4.4.4. As seen in
Table 5, the fraction of gripairs is largest when the Rubin scheduler is tasked with 33 minute
pair spacings. Therefore these hours long separations are not going to be ecient in generating
nightly pairs conducive for the moving object search. This can be seen in the discovery and light
curve metrics displayed in Figure 27. Across all populations, the light curve metrics and detections
decreases. The increased sensitivity to objects beyond 150 au is not worth the tradeo purely from
a planetary astronomy perspective, but the simulations that do not have the long gaps in intra-night
visits occurring every night have less impact. The less time devoted to the large time gap pair
observing, the less severe the hit to the discovery and light curve metrics. Nonetheless, 33 minute
pair separations are better optimized for outer solar system discoveries and the completion of repeat
visits within the night.
4.4.2. Filter Choices for Repeat Visits in a Night
In the v1.5 simulations, cases were run with nightly pairs of visits performed in either matching
lters ( baseline samefilt v1.5 10yrs ) or in mixed lters ( baseline v1.5 10yrs ). The discovery
metrics for solar system populations are largely unaected by the choice (top panel of Figure 28).
This is because the mixed-lter pairs in the cadence simulations contain lter pairs such as g-rand
r-iwhere the colors of solar system objects allow detections in both lters (we note that r-ipairings54 Schwamb et al.
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
Long gap pairs every night
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff0_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every night starting after year 5
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff0_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every other night
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff1_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every other night starting after year 5
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff1_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 2 nights 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff2_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 2 nights starting after year 5 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff2_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 3 nights 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff3_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 3 nights starting after year 5 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff3_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 4 nights 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff4_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 4 nights starting after year 5  
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff4_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 5 nights 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff5_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 5 nights starting after year 5 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff5_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 6 nights 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff6_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 6 nights starting after year 5  
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff6_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 7 nights 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff7_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 7 nights starting after year 5  
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff7_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.900.951.001.051.10Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
Long gap pairs every night
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff0_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every night starting after year 5
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff0_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every other night
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff1_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every other night starting after year 5
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff1_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 2 nights 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff2_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 2 nights starting after year 5 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff2_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 3 nights 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff3_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 3 nights starting after year 5 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff3_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 4 nights 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff4_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 4 nights starting after year 5  
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff4_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 5 nights 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff5_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 5 nights starting after year 5 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff5_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 6 nights 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff6_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 6 nights starting after year 5  
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff6_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 7 nights 
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff7_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs)
Long gap pairs every 7 nights starting after year 5  
 (long_gaps_np_nightsoff7_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.40.50.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 27. Impact of various scenarios for lengthening the gap between pairs to be variable in the range of
2-7 hours (v2.0 simulations). The baseline (reference) simulation with the default scheduler conguration for
this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left. All values have been normalized by this simulation's
output. The gray shading outlines changes that are within 5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery
Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics. The y-axis is truncated in the Light Curve Inversion plot.
The Jupiter Trojans extend below the y-axis range for long gaps npnightsoff0 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs .
The baseline simulation has an ideal separation of 33 minutes.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 55
are better than g-rpairings for the reddest objects like TNOs). Similarly as shown in Figure 29,
the color-light curve metrics for dierent populations are not signicantly aected by the choice of
same or mixed lters; there is likely an advantage to having mixed lters within the same night in
that it could provide a single-night color estimate for objects that rotate slowly compared to the visit
separation. For faint NEOs and MBAs, nightly pairs in the same lter does boost the light curve
inversion metric by 15-20% (bottom panel of Figure 28). This is likely due to nightly pairs of faint
objects that are only detectable in a small number of lters. However, faint Jupiter Trojans suer a
30% loss in the light curves metric for the same-lter pairs. This is likely related to the light curve
metric requirement than observations in a lter span at least 90in ecliptic longitude. The Jupiter
Trojans move more slowly on-sky compared to the other populations this metric is calculated for, and
having same-lter nightly pairs reduces the number of dierent nights (and thus dierent longitudes)
an object might be observed in that lter; for faint Jupiter Trojans, this appears to reduce the odds
that successful detections in a given lter span the required range of longitudes.
4.4.3. Suppressing Extra Visits
In the baseline cadence ( baseline v2.1 10yrs ), up to 20% of the pointings are visited more than
twice per night. By adding an additional basis function to suppress these repeat visits to the Rubin
scheduler algorithm, the additional visits can be distributed to dierent nights, thus changing the
inter-night cadence or season length for a given eld. The suppress repeats ( norepeat rpw) family of
simulations explores these changes by considering six dierent values for the weight of the suppression
factor, indicated as rpw, namely: 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, and 100. This number basically reects how strongly
the suppress-revisits basis function inuences the scheduler: the higher the number, the lower the
number of revisits per night will be. Note that some regions of the sky will still be observed more
than two times within a night if they are included in overlapping pointings.
An immediate consequence of redistributing the visits over dierent nights is a decreased total
area with more than 825 visits per pointings, from a negligible eect ( .0.1% at rpw=1) to a more
signicant eect of .5% at rpw=20. However, because of the extended timeline, the discovery
metrics are generally improved with respect to the WFD: a suppressing factor between 2 and 10
will increase the discovery rate for all the dierent families, while for rpw=1, 20 or 100, there is
only a marginal decrease ( .0.005%) in the discovery rate of faint TNOs and bright comets from the
Oort Cloud. A suppressing factor equal or larger than 10 will also impact the metrics of light curve
inversion, reducing up to 10% the number of faint MBAs and Jupiter Trojans for which inversion
will be feasible. Summarizing, the \suppress visit" family cadence produce negligible eects on solar
system science, with a marginal improvement on the discovery rates for rpw=2 and 5, and a marginal
decrement of the number of faint objects for which we will be able to perform light curve inversion
forrpw=10, 20, or 100.
4.4.4. Third Visits in a Night
There is a strong desire among other Rubin Observatory LSST Science Collaborations to add a
third visit in a dierent lter to aid in capturing and identifying fast ( <1 d) transients by adding
more color information (see Bianco et al. 2019) to the base survey of nightly pairs of visits which are
separated by20{30 minutes. The presto gapfamily of simulations explores the eects of adding
a third visit to the night's visits after a time period of 1.5{4 hours. Within the presto family of
simulations, there are two signicant subfamilies. The presto half simulations explore the eect of56 Schwamb et al.
1x30s visits mixed filters 
 (baseline_v1.5_10yrs)
1x30s visits same filter 
 (baseline_samefilt_v1.5_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0Completeness MBA H<=16.0
Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0
1x30s visits mixed filters 
 (baseline_v1.5_10yrs)
1x30s visits same filter 
 (baseline_samefilt_v1.5_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 28. Nightly pairs in the same versus dierent lters (v1.5 simulations). The baseline (reference)
simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left.
All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes that are
within5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 57
1x30s visits mixed filters 
 (baseline_v1.5_10yrs)
1x30s visits same filter 
 (baseline_samefilt_v1.5_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.70.80.91.01.11.2Value Relative to the Baseline Simulation
Fraction 4 of grizy PHA H=16.0
Fraction 4 of grizy PHA H=19.0
Fraction 4 of grizy NEO H=16.0
Fraction 4 of grizy NEO H=19.0
Fraction 4 of grizy MBA H=16.0Fraction 4 of grizy MBA H=18.0
Fraction 4 of grizy Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction 4 of grizy Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Fraction 4 filters TNO H=6.0
Fraction 4 filters TNO H=7.0
Figure 29. Color-light curve metrics for observing strategies with nightly pairs in the same versus dierent
lters (v1.5 simulations). The baseline (reference) simulation with the default scheduler conguration for
this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left. All values have been normalized by this simulation's
output.The gray shading outlines changes that are within 5% of the baseline simulation.
adding the third image/triplet every other night rather than every night of the cadence while the
presto gapmixhas a wider separation and dierence in colors between the initial pair and the third
visit (e.g.,g+i,r+z,i+yrather than g+r,r+i,i+zinitial pairs).
The main impact of adding this third visit is to dramatically decrease the amount of well-covered
survey area (see Figure 31). This would have a large negative impact on science cases where the
objects are sparse on the sky such as discovering rare objects (e.g. ISOs) or the onset of activity
on solar system objects. The other large eect of adding the third visit is seen in the solar system
object detection and light curve inversion metrics and illustrated in Figure 32. Although there is
some improvement in the detection of the brighter solar system objects at the shorter gap lengths in
the 1.5{2.0 hour regime (see e.g., the presto gap1.5 mixsimulation in Figure 32), this is not a high
priority for the large aperture capabilities of Rubin Observatory. For the vast majority of the other
simulations and solar system populations, this family of simulations produces a 20{75% decrease in
the light curve inversion metrics, well beyond our threshold for agging these simulation families as
bad for solar system science. The impacts are less dramatic for the presto half subfamily, as might
be expected, since the third visit is only carried out 50% of the time. The impact of the mixversion
of a simulation (with the wider spread of observed colors in the third visit) is always worse than the
corresponding \non-mixed" simulation run.58 Schwamb et al.
baseline_v2.1_10yrs
Baseline but suppress repeats of 
 pointings within the night by rpw 1.0
 (no_repeat_rpw-1.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Baseline but suppress repeats of 
 pointings within the night by rpw 2.0
 (no_repeat_rpw-2.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Baseline but suppress repeats of 
 pointings within the night by rpw 5.0
 (no_repeat_rpw-5.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Baseline but suppress repeats of 
 pointings within the night by rpw 10.0
 (no_repeat_rpw-10.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Baseline but suppress repeats of 
 pointings within the night by rpw 20.0
 (no_repeat_rpw-20.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Baseline but suppress repeats of 
 pointings within the night by rpw 100.0
 (no_repeat_rpw-100.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.1_10yrs
Baseline but suppress repeats of 
 pointings within the night by rpw 1.0
 (no_repeat_rpw-1.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Baseline but suppress repeats of 
 pointings within the night by rpw 2.0
 (no_repeat_rpw-2.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Baseline but suppress repeats of 
 pointings within the night by rpw 5.0
 (no_repeat_rpw-5.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Baseline but suppress repeats of 
 pointings within the night by rpw 10.0
 (no_repeat_rpw-10.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Baseline but suppress repeats of 
 pointings within the night by rpw 20.0
 (no_repeat_rpw-20.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Baseline but suppress repeats of 
 pointings within the night by rpw 100.0
 (no_repeat_rpw-100.0_v2.1_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 30. Investigating ways of reducing extra repeat visits and redistributing (v2.1 simulations). The
baseline (reference) simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the
rst entry on the left. All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading
outlines changes that are within 5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light
Curve Inversion Metrics.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 59
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap1.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap1.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap2.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap2.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap2.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap2.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap3.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap3.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap3.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap3.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap4.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap4.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap1.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap1.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap2.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap2.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap2.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap2.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap3.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap3.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap3.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap3.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap4.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap4.0_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff0_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff0_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff1_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff1_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff2_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff2_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff3_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff3_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff4_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff4_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff5_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff5_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff6_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff6_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff7_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff7_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
Simulation Run25005000750010000125001500017500Area (square degrees)
With > 825 visits
With > 750 visits
Figure 31. Comparison of the sky coverage with greater than 825 deg2(in cyan) and 750 deg2in black
for v2.0 cadence simulations with various options for third repeat visits. The baseline (reference) simulation
with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left.
As an alternative to the presto families discussed above, the long gaps nightsoffN family (not
to be confused with the long gaps npfamily of simulations considered in Section 4.4.1) also adds
a third visit in the same lter as one of the pairs (like the presto family). However unlike the
presto families, 1) the third visit forming the triplet is in one of the same lters as the earlier pair,
2) only occurs if the rst pair is in the griz lters and 3) occurs after a longer 2{7 hour gap from
the initial pair than the standard 33 minute gap. This is done every Nnights (N= 0:::7) e.g.,
long gaps nightsoff7 has the long gaps every 7 nights and long gaps nightsoff0 has \zero nights
o" and the long gap third visit/triplets are done every night. These families additionally come in 2
avors, delayed-1 anddelayed1827 where the third visit/triplets either starts immediately before
the start of the survey (night -1) or in survey year 5 (night 1827) respectively.
Overall this family of simulations has much smaller detrimental eects ( <10%) on the area covered
(nal third of Figure 31) and most solar system metrics, except for where this is done every or almost
every night (the nightsoff0 and nightsoff1 simulations) which hit the area and light curve inver-
sion metrics hard (20-60%; see nal third of Figure 32). These families of survey strategy simulations
with longer gaps for the potential third visit in the night, could constitute a path forward towards
satisfying the desires of other science goals without unduly compromising solar system science. The
impact of the loss of sky area covered in all of these third visit simulations on the detectability of
rare but high value targets which are sparse on the sky such as ISOs or very distant extreme TNOs60 Schwamb et al.
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap1.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap1.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap2.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap2.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap2.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap2.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap3.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap3.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap3.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap3.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap4.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap4.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap1.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap1.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap2.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap2.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap2.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap2.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap3.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap3.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap3.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap3.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap4.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap4.0_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff0_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff0_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff1_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff1_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff2_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff2_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff3_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff3_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff4_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff4_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff5_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff5_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff6_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff6_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff7_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff7_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
Simulation Run0.750.800.850.900.951.001.051.10Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap1.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap1.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap2.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap2.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap2.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap2.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap3.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap3.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap3.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap3.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap4.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_gap4.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap1.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap1.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap2.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap2.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap2.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap2.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap3.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap3.0_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap3.5_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap3.5_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap4.0_mix_v2.0_10yrs
presto_half_gap4.0_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff0_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff0_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff1_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff1_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff2_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff2_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff3_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff3_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff4_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff4_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff5_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff5_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff6_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff6_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff7_delayed-1_v2.0_10yrs
long_gaps_nightsoff7_delayed1827_v2.0_10yrs
Simulation Run0.40.50.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion PHA H=16.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion PHA H=19.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion NEO H=16.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion NEO H=19.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion MBA H=16.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion MBA H=18.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion Trojan H=14.0
FractionPop Lightcurve Inversion Trojan H=15.0
Figure 32. Impact of various third visit scenarios (v2.0 simulations). The baseline (reference) simulation
with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left. All values
have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes that are within 5%
of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics. We have
truncated the y-axis for visibility in the Light Curve Inversion Metrics plot. The fraction of the Jupiter
Trojan detections in some of these runs compared to the baseline is lower than 0.4 and o the bottom edge.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 61
(ETNOs and IOCs), needs additional simulations with these populations added. The addition of the
OCCs to the later versions of the simulations, which are more much numerous on the sky than either
ISOs and Sedna-like objects, and the corresponding drop in OCC discovery when adding the third
visit, shows the downside of adding the third visit on discovering the rarer solar system populations.
4.5. Rolling Cadence
Spreading the 825 observations of each eld in the WFD evenly over the periods that they are
observable, over ten years, corresponds to an observation of each eld every three to four nights, on
average. As this is a relatively low cadence for some science topics (notably transients), a proposed
pattern of observations increases the frequency in certain areas of the sky in some years, at the cost
of a lower cadence elsewhere, and then reverses the pattern the following year. This is referred to
as a rolling cadence. There are a variety of avors of this approach, depending on how many stripes
each half of the sky (North/South) is divided into, and the `strength' of the rolling, i.e., the fraction
of the time spent in the `on' stripes compared to the `o' ones (see Figure 33 for an illustration of
these patterns). No rolling cadence entirely neglects the `o' stripes, but in some cases these areas
see only a few observations in the entire year, to support template building. Over the 10 years of the
survey, the pattern of on/o stripes balances out to give uniform coverage across the whole WFD
area. For the majority of simulations rolling cadence is only applied to the WFD area (not the bulge,
NES, or other `extended' survey areas) and is not used in the rst and last 1.5 years of the survey.
Video animations of three example rolling cadence scenarios are available (via the online version of
the paper) in Figures 34, 35, and 36.
The eect of rolling cadence is generally seen as positive for most science cases, e.g. having a denser
coverage of light curves in the `on' stripes enhances transient science, and rolling cadence is included
in the baseline v2.0 simulations. However, there are positive and negative eects that vary with the
pattern and strength of the rolling cadence. There is little dierence between patterns that split
the WFD into two or three stripes North and South of Cerro Pach on, but a more extreme 6-stripe
pattern, especially at high rolling strength, has more signicant eects on both discovery and light
curve metrics (Figure 37). Such a pattern is also vulnerable to extended periods of bad weather in
one season, resulting in uneven nal co-added survey depth, so is not favored for many areas of LSST
science. The largest variability in the metrics shown in Figure 37 is for faint Jupiter Trojans, which
is not surprising, as the Trojan clouds have a limited spatial extent that is in an approximately xed
direction in a given season, relative to where the corresponding planet is. As the cloud may fall into
either an on or o stripe in a given season, Jupiter Trojans experience feast or famine in terms of
observations, which may not even out over the years in the same way that more distant populations
(TNOs) will { this will depend on the precise timing and choice of band patterns in the nal survey.
A remaining concern with rolling cadence is the possibility that individual objects of interest may
be missed, or more likely be discovered later than they could have been if they rst brighten above
LSST detection limits in an o-stripe. This could potentially aect follow-up of rare objects like ISOs,
or impact target choice for the European Space Agency's (ESA's) Comet Interceptor (expected to
launch in 2029; Snodgrass & Jones 2019), in the unlucky case that a suitable long-period comet is
missed for a year. In general, discovery metrics for OCCs are not strongly aected by rolling cadence,
so this is not seen as a major risk for the mission. Further study of the eect of rolling cadence on
how early we might discover ISO and OCC targets is ongoing.62 Schwamb et al.
No roll
Baseline Rolling Cadence Rolling half-sky (2 regions) 50% strength
Rolling1/6th sky (6 regions) 50% strength Rolling1/3rd sky (3 regions) 50% strength
Figure 33. Snapshot of the cumulative number of on-sky visits in all lters as a function of a subset of
rolling cadence scenarios simulated at Year 3.5 (v2.0 simulations). The plots are centered on =0 and=0.
Right ascension and declination lines are marked every 30.
4.6. Deep Drilling Field (DDF) Observing
The Deep Drilling Fields (DDF) are a key component of LSST's structure, currently allocated
5% of the total survey time in the latest survey simulation baselines. There are ve conrmed DDF
pointings (Table 6), which will be observed with a completely dierent cadence from the WFD: a
higher sampling rate, as well as a dierent sampling of lters (Jones et al. 2020). The locations of the
DDF pointings were largely motivated by both galactic and extragalactic science goals (Brandt et al.
2018; Bell & Hermes 2018; Capak et al. 2019b; Holwerda et al. 2018; Scolnic et al. 2018). However,
the ability to stack the denser sampling means that these elds also provide a small, deeper dataset
than the WFD (LSST Science Collaboration et al. 2009).
The DDFs provide a limited but strategic improvement to the solar system science expected from
LSST (Fig. 38). The extra depth of the stacked DDF data will improve the detectability of objects
that are fainter than the WFD limits (e.g. Smotherman et al. 2021), and thus either smaller or more
distant. Four out of ve of the DDFs are at ecliptic latitudes >15(Table 6), which means they
can only contain solar system objects on moderate to high inclination orbits. These objects areTuning LSST for Solar System Science 63
Figure 34. Snapshot from a video animation of the baseline v2.0 10yrs to demonstrate how the two band
rolling cadence observing strategy is implemented over a 10-year simulated LSST survey. The animation of
this gure is available in the online version of the paper. The animation steps through in 30 day intervals
over 10 years displaying the cumulative number of on-sky visits in all lters (left) and presenting the total
number of on-sky visits in all lters accumulated during the time step (right). The animation has a real-time
duration of 25 s. The plots are centered on =0 and=0. Right ascension and declination lines are marked
every 30.
(An animation of this gure is available.)
Figure 35. Snapshot from a video animation of the rolling ns3rw0.9 v2.0 10yrs to demonstrate how
the three band rolling cadence observing strategy is implemented over a 10-year simulated LSST survey.
The animation of this gure is available in the online version of the paper. The animation steps through
in 30 day intervals over 10 years displaying the cumulative number of on-sky visits in all lters (left) and
presenting the total number of on-sky visits in all lters accumulated during the time step (right). The
animation has a real-time duration of 25 s. The plots are centered on =0 and=0. Right ascension and
declination lines are marked every 30.
(An animation of this gure is available.)64 Schwamb et al.
Figure 36. Snapshot from a video animation of the sixrolling ns6rw0.9 v2.0 10yrs to demonstrate
how the three band rolling cadence observing strategy is implemented over a 10-year simulated LSST survey.
The animation of this gure is available in the online version of the paper. The animation steps through
in 30 day intervals over 10 years displaying the cumulative number of on-sky visits in all lters (left) and
presenting the total number of on-sky visits in all lters accumulated during the time step (right). The
animation has a real-time duration of 25 s. The plots are centered on =0 and=0. Right ascension and
declination lines are marked every 30.
(An animation of this gure is available.)
Table 6. Planned LSST Deep Drilling Fields (DDFs)
Deep Drilling Field Right Ascension Declination Ecliptic
(deg) (deg) Latitude
(J2000) (J2000) (deg)
ELAISS1 (European Large-Area ISO Survey-S1) Field 9.450 -44.00 -43.18
XMM-LSS ( X-ray Multi-Mirror Mission-Newton Large Scale Structure) Field 35.71 -4.75 -17.90
ECDFS (Extended Chandra Deep Field-South) 53.13 -28.10 -45.47
EDF-S ( Euclid Deep Field South) 61.24 -48.42 -66.60
COSMOS (Cosmological Evolution Survey) Field 150.10 2.18 -9.40
comparatively rare (Gladman & Volk 2021; Raymond & Nesvorn y 2022), which will result in few
observations of solar system objects in these four DDFs. The fth eld, COSMOS, is centred 9
from the ecliptic plane (Table 6): this lower latitude makes it sensitive to the mildly dynamically
excited small body populations, so it is the DDF most likely to be directly benecial for solar system
science.
4.6.1. Fraction of Time Devoted to DDFs
The time balancing of DDF and WFD observations within the LSST has a noticeable impact on
overall Solar System detections and light curve inversion capability. Simulations with a larger portion
of survey time for DDFs were previously trialed in the v1.6 sims ( ddfheavy ), but were rejected asTuning LSST for Solar System Science 65
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
No roll 
 (noroll_v2.0_10yrs)
Roll on all parts of the sky 
 (rolling_all_sky_ns2_rw0.9_v2.0_10yrs)
Roll the bulge in 6 stripes  
 (low-dust WFD in 2 regions)
 (rolling_bulge_6_v2.0_10yrs)
Roll in the bulge with 2 regions, 
 50% strength 
 (rolling_bulge_ns2_rw0.5_v2.0_10yrs)
Roll in the bulge with 2 regions, 
 80% strength 
 (rolling_bulge_ns2_rw0.8_v2.0_10yrs)
Roll in the bulge with 2 regions, 
 90% strength 
 (rolling_bulge_ns2_rw0.9_v2.0_10yrs)
Rolling half-sky (2 regions), 
 50% strength 
 (rolling_ns2_rw0.5_v2.0_10yrs)
Rolling half-sky (2 regions), 
 90%, strength 
 (rolling_ns2_rw0.9_v2.0_10yrs)
Rolling in one-third sky (3 regions) 
 50% strength 
 (rolling_ns3_rw0.5_v2.0_10yrs)
Rolling in one-third sky (3 regions) 
  90% strength 
 (rolling_ns3_rw0.9_v2.0_10yrs)
Rolling in one-sixth sky (6 regions) 
 50% strength 
 (six_rolling_ns6_rw0.5_v2.0_10yrs)
Rolling in one-sixth sky (6 regions) 
 90% strength 
 (six_rolling_ns6_rw0.9_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
No roll 
 (noroll_v2.0_10yrs)
Roll on all parts of the sky 
 (rolling_all_sky_ns2_rw0.9_v2.0_10yrs)
Roll the bulge in 6 stripes  
 (low-dust WFD in 2 regions)
 (rolling_bulge_6_v2.0_10yrs)
Roll in the bulge with 2 regions, 
 50% strength 
 (rolling_bulge_ns2_rw0.5_v2.0_10yrs)
Roll in the bulge with 2 regions, 
 80% strength 
 (rolling_bulge_ns2_rw0.8_v2.0_10yrs)
Roll in the bulge with 2 regions, 
 90% strength 
 (rolling_bulge_ns2_rw0.9_v2.0_10yrs)
Rolling half-sky (2 regions), 
 50% strength 
 (rolling_ns2_rw0.5_v2.0_10yrs)
Rolling half-sky (2 regions), 
 90%, strength 
 (rolling_ns2_rw0.9_v2.0_10yrs)
Rolling in one-third sky (3 regions) 
 50% strength 
 (rolling_ns3_rw0.5_v2.0_10yrs)
Rolling in one-third sky (3 regions) 
  90% strength 
 (rolling_ns3_rw0.9_v2.0_10yrs)
Rolling in one-sixth sky (6 regions) 
 50% strength 
 (six_rolling_ns6_rw0.5_v2.0_10yrs)
Rolling in one-sixth sky (6 regions) 
 90% strength 
 (six_rolling_ns6_rw0.9_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 37. Impact of various rolling cadence scenarios (v2.0 simulations). The baseline (reference) sim-
ulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left.
The baseline simulation has a two band rolling cadence implemented with no rolling in the Galactic plane
and Northern Ecliptic Spur (NES). All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray
shading outlines changes that are within 5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom:
Light Curve Inversion Metrics. Note: The light curve inversion plot has been truncated for clarity. The
Jupiter Trojans extend beyond the plot for the sixrolling ns6rw0.9 v2.0 10yrs .66 Schwamb et al.
they produced signicant negative impacts on all Solar System populations and their metrics, as well
as failing to meet some of the key science requirements for the WFD.
The v2.0 simulations are the latest set of simulations which explore varying the fraction of total
survey time allocated to DDFs. They test a more conservative variation of 3% survey time spent
on DDFs from the baseline value of 5%. In these simulations, any extra observing time is evenly
distributed across the remaining components of the LSST. Both options are satisfactory for the
discovery and light curve inversion of solar system objects, for most or all populations (Figure 38).
The simulation with 8% of time allocated to the DDFs ( ddffrac ddfper1.611) provides slightly
worse results for discovery and light curve inversion metrics compared to the simulation with 3%
survey time ( ddffrac ddfper0.612), as WFD revisits are particularly important for light curve
inll and for linking the motion of solar system objects. However, both options are still within a
negligible loss margin ( <5%) on both metrics when compared to the baseline.
4.6.2. \Rolling" DDFs
From the eld population sensitivities, the key aspect of solar system science interest is the choice
of rolling cadence for the COSMOS eld and how it aects the small body metrics. The suggested
types of DDF rolling cadences explored in the v2.1 cadence simulations are unique to the DDFs:
in contrast to the `stripes' of WFD discussed in Section 4.5, these simulations instead alter the
frequency of observation for each individual DDF and the relative weighting of time between DDFs.
They include cases where specic DDFs are observed only in certain years (e.g. only in the rst 3 years
of LSST). Between v2.1 and v2.2, a large number of DDF strategy variations were considered, but in
general solar system metrics have not been produced for these runs. The impacts of variations of DDF
strategy while keeping the overall envelope of allocated DDF time and eld location approximately
constant are expected to produce negligible changes. Once a narrower range of DDF strategies
are under consideration, solar system metrics will be produced and checked for potential impacts.
Therefore, we consider how DDF \rolling" cadences would probably aect solar system science, with
a specic focus on the highest-yield COSMOS DDF.
The Jupiter Trojans will complete approximately one full orbit during the span of the LSST. The
slightly asymmetric populations lead and trail the giant planet in its orbit by 60, with a mean
libration amplitude of 33from the center of their respective Trojan clouds (Marzari et al. 2002). The
more populous L4 cloud's inclination distribution is centred around the ecliptic latitude of COSMOS,
while the atter L5 inclination distribution still encompasses COSMOS (Slyusarev & Belskaya 2014).
The broad Jupiter Trojan libration distribution produces an on-sky distribution that has wide wings
of consistent density around the libration centres. These orbital properties mean that Jupiter Trojans
will be visible in the COSMOS DDF during distinct several-hundred-day observation periods within
LSST (Figure 39). This will permit smaller-diameter Jupiter Trojans to be discovered than can be
achieved by the WFD. Therefore, it is essential that the COSMOS DDF is observed at times when
the Jupiter Trojans are passing through the eld.
Throughout the LSST, the COSMOS and other DDFs will provide a constantly refreshing sample
of shift-and-stack-detectable TNOs smaller than can be seen in single frames of the WFD. As TNOs
move slowly ( <500=hr forrh>30 au; cf. Fig. 25), they will remain in the sidereally static DDF
11`1.6' indicates that the time allocated to DDFs is 1.6 times the baseline value
12`0.6' indicates that the time allocated to DDFs is 0.6 times the baseline valueTuning LSST for Solar System Science 67
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
DDF fraction of visits 
 reduced to 3% of total
 (ddf_frac_ddf_per0.6_v2.0_10yrs)
DDF fraction of visits 
 increased to 8%
 (ddf_frac_ddf_per1.6_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
DDF fraction of visits 
 reduced to 3% of total
 (ddf_frac_ddf_per0.6_v2.0_10yrs)
DDF fraction of visits 
 increased to 8%
 (ddf_frac_ddf_per1.6_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 38. Impact of varying the time allocated to the DDFs (v2.0 simulations). The baseline (reference)
simulation with the default scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left.
All values have been normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes that are
within5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics.68 Schwamb et al.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Days From the Start of the Survey0100020003000400050006000# of Jupiter Trojan Detections
Figure 39. The number of Jupiter Trojan detections (of a simulated sample population of 5000 objects)
in the COSMOS DDF (Deep Drilling Field) over the course of the baseline v2.2 10yrs simulation. This
simulation starts the LSST in October 2023. By 7 years into the survey, both Jupiter Trojan clouds have
traversed across the COSMOS DDF.
pointings for extended periods of time, longer than other solar system populations. For the LSSTCam
eld of view, the time in years for a TNO to pass through the eld is given by:
t=3:5
24hr=d365:25d=yr
360000==3:5
2:4351:437
(4)
whereis the opposition on-sky rate of motion in arcseconds per hour. For distances of 40{60 au, a
TNO traverses the eld in 5{8 months. In comparison, more distant TNOs ( rh200 au) remain
in the eld for2 yrs. This means that the population of rh30 au TNOs observed in a DDF
is refreshed30 times during LSST as a result of (primarily Earth's) orbital motion, compared to
rh= 300 au TNOs, which would take a third of the full survey to pass through the eld. COSMOS,
and at lower yield, the other DDFs thus provide multi-month TNO orbital arcs that would determine
parameters rhandito a precision useful for population studies. However, these arcs are generally
too short to reduce uncertainties on aandeto levels sucient for Neptune resonance classication
(Volk et al. 2016). Deep revisits by LSST around the DDFs in later years to recover the DDF-sourced
TNOs would be necessary for this additional improvement for outer solar system science. Therefore,
TNO science is exible relative to the DDF \rolling cadence" decision, as long as COSMOS and other
DDFs are visited for approximately two years at some point within LSST.
4.7. Micro-surveys
A wide variety of special small observing programs have been proposed by the Rubin Observatory
user community that have been grouped together under the micro-surveys category. Smaller than
the mini-surveys that have been incorporated into the LSST footprint, each micro-survey consumesTuning LSST for Solar System Science 69
40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
Solar Elongation (degrees)01000020000300004000050000600007000080000# of VisitsBaseline simulation
T wilight microsurvey added
Figure 40. Comparison of the number of visits as a function of solar elongation (at the center of the FOV)
with and without a low solar elongation (low-SE) solar system twilight micro-survey. The binsize is 2. The
baseline simulation is baseline v2.2 10yrs and the selected low solar elongation (low-SE) solar system
twilight micro-survey simulation is twineorepeat4 iznp1v2.2 10yrs . We note that part of the orange
histogram for the simulation that includes the low-SE twilight micro-survey is plotted underneath the blue
histogram for the baseline simulation.
between approximately 0.3% and 3% of the total available observing time. The micro-surveys com-
pliment the other components of the LSST (WFD, DDFs, NES, and Galactic Plane observing) and
provide unique benets not obtained from the larger components of the LSST observing strategy.
Some of these proposed micro-surveys plan to observe new regions of sky not covered within the
survey footprint, while others re-observe regions of the sky already covered in the LSST footprint
with a separate observing strategy. Of all the proposed micro-surveys, the one that is most relevant
to the discovery and follow-up of minor planets and ISOs is the low-SE twilight survey which aims
to take short exposures closer to the Sun in order to search for small bodies in an orbital phase space
that the rest of the LSST is not sensitive to.
4.7.1. Low Solar Elongation (Low-SE) Solar System Twilight Micro-survey
The twineofamily of simulations use 50% of the available observing time during morning and
evening twilight to perform a micro-survey of the low-SE (40o.SE.60o) sky, which would
otherwise not be observed during the WFD observing cadence (see Figure 40). The opportunity for
LSST to observe the low-SE sky during twilight is the only time when viewing solar system objects
inward to Earth is possible. Although surveys similar in nature have been carried out in the past,
Rubin Observatory's large aperture size would put it in a unique position to provide a more sensitive
search for several populations of solar system objects such as IEOs, Earth Trojans, and sungrazing
comets than has been performed previously (Seaman et al. 2018). NEOs in the region of the solar
system interior to Earth's orbit (including Atiras with orbits interior to the orbit of Earth and70 Schwamb et al.
baseline_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
Simulation Run0.00000.00250.00500.00750.01000.01250.01500.01750.0200Metric ValueDiscovery
Completeness 'Ayló'chaxnim H<=16.0 Completeness 'Ayló'chaxnim H<=20.5
baseline_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
Simulation Run0.000.020.040.060.08Metric ValueDiscovery
Quad Completeness 'Ayló'chaxnim H<=16.0 Quad Completeness 'Ayló'chaxnim H<=20.5
Figure 41. 'Ayl o 'chaxnim (previously known in the literature as Vatira) population discovery completeness
comparisons for cadences that include a possible low solar elongation (low-SE) solar system twilight micro-
survey (v2.2 simulations). The baseline (reference) simulation with the default scheduler conguration for
this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left. These metric values have not been normalized to
the baseline's simulation output since the baseline simulation, which does not include the low-SE twilight
microsurvey, nds no Ayl o 'chaxnims with 3 nightly pairs over 14 days. Top: Discovery Completeness
for 3 nightly pairs in 14 days (the Rubin SSP discovery criteria). Bottom: Discovery Completeness for
4 detections in a single night for twilight simulations that take 4 visits per pointing. Simulation legend:
twineorepeatX YnpZv2.2 10yrs for a micro-survey with Xrepeat visits in Ylter(s) per pointing per
twilight observed where Z= 1 (on every night), 2 (1 night on/1 night o), 3 (1 night on/2 nights o), 4 (1
night on/3 nights o), 5 (4 nights on/4 nights o), 6 (3 nights on/4 nights o), 7 (2 nights on/4 nights o).Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 71
baseline_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
Simulation Run0.9000.9250.9500.9751.0001.0251.0501.0751.100Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat3_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat3_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_repeat4_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_iz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_riz_np7_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np1_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np2_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np3_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np4_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np5_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np6_v2.2_10yrs
twi_neo_brightest_repeat4_z_np7_v2.2_10yrs
Simulation Run0.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.02.2Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 42. Impact on other solar system metrics due to the inclusion of a low solar elongation (low-SE)
solar system twilight micro-survey(v2.2 simulations). The baseline (reference) simulation with the default
scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left. The baseline simulation
does not include twilight low-SE observations. All values have been normalized by this simulation's output.
The gray shading outlines changes that are within 5% of the baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics.
Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics. Simulation legend: twineorepeatX YnpZv2.2 10yrs for micro-
survey with Xrepeat visits in Ylter(s) per pointing per twilight observed where Z= 1 (on every night), 2
(1 night on/1 night o), 3 (1 night on/2 nights o), 4 (1 night/3 nights o), 5 (4 nights on/4 nights o), 6
(3 nights on/4 nights o), 7 (2 nights on/4 nights o).72 Schwamb et al.
'Ayl o 'chaxnims with orbits interior to Venus' orbit13) are the least constrained portion of currently
available NEO models due to observational limitations of objects at low-SE (Greenstreet et al. 2012;
Granvik et al. 2018). In addition, recent observational evidence and dynamical studies suggest there
are possible meta-stable regions in the innermost portion of the solar system where more objects on
orbits similar to that of 'Ayl o 'chaxnim may be lurking and awaiting discovery (Greenstreet 2020; de
la Fuente Marcos & de la Fuente Marcos 2020a; Popescu et al. 2020; Ip et al. 2022; Bolin et al. 2022;
Sheppard et al. 2022; Bolin et al. 2023).
In addition to the discovery of IEOs, a LSST low-SE twilight micro-survey could enhance the
discovery of ISOs; ISO 2I/Borisov was discovered during twilight by an amateur astronomer in
2019 (Borisov 2019). Routine observations at low-SE could also provide pre-discovery images of
ISOs, enabling additional astrometric measurements for improved orbit determination of the often
short-lived visitors (Ye et al. 2020; Bolin et al. 2020c). Low-SE observations of LSST-discovered
ISOs would provide further opportunities beyond what the WFD observing cadence would oer for
observing possible mass-shedding, outbursting, or breakup events of these interstellar interlopers,
as well as extend the amount of time these short-lived visitors can be observed. Monitoring the
sky in the near-Sun region could also provide the opportunity to observe cometary outbursting or
breakup events as non-interstellar near-Sun comets reach heliocentric distances <1 au, which may
otherwise not be characterized. Observing comets (either with origins from within our solar system
or interstellar space) as they reach the near-Sun region will better inform us of how insolation can
process cometary surfaces and connect the near-Sun comet population to comets as a whole (Seaman
et al. 2018).
Discoveries of PHAs can also be enhanced with the inclusion of a low-SE twilight micro-survey,
improving our knowledge of and increasing warning times for potential asteroid impacts. In addition,
the possible discovery of more Earth Trojans, which librate at the Earth-Sun L4 and L5 Lagrange
points, would improve our knowledge of planetary impactor sources for both recent and ancient cra-
tering events on the Earth and Moon (Seaman et al. 2018; Malhotra 2019; Markwardt et al. 2020).
Earth Trojans also make attractive spacecraft mission targets due to their low relative velocity with
Earth. Lastly, observing asteroids in the near-Sun region with LSST can provide the opportunity
to probe mechanisms responsible for the supercatastrophic disruption of asteroids with small peri-
helia (closest orbital distance to the Sun) (Granvik et al. 2016) and test the extent to which this
phenomenon occurs for asteroids that reach very small solar distances.
Due to the large amount of science for a wide variety of small body populations that would be made
possible with a low-SE twilight micro-survey, a family of runs executing a variety of low-SE observing
cadences during twilight have been included in the last few rounds of cadence simulations, the most
recent of which are the v2.2 simulations. The v2.2 family is split into twineoandtwineobrightest
which execute the mini-survey when the Sun is above -17.8and -14elevation, respectively. The
twineoandtwineobrightest simulations consist of 15 s exposures per visit and explore a variety
of repeat visits, lters, and nightly twilight on-o cadences. The twineorepeatX YnpZv2.2 10yrs
andtwineobrightest repeatX YnpZv2.2 10yrs family consist of Xrepeat visits (i.e., triplets or
quads; all separated by 3 minutes) in Ylter(s) per pointing per twilight observed where Z= 1 (on
13Objects on orbits entirely within the orbit of Venus have been previously referred to in the literature as Vatiras
(Greenstreet et al. 2012). This name has acted as a placeholder until the rst object in this population is discovered
and named. With the recent discovery and naming of the rst inner-Venus object, 'Ayl o 'chaxnim, (Bolin et al. 2020a;
Ip et al. 2022; Bolin et al. 2022), we adopt the name of this population after its rst known member, as is tradition.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 73
every night), 2 (1 night on/1 night o), 3 (1 night on/2 nights o), 4 (1 night on/3 nights o), 5 (4
nights on/4 nights o), 6 (3 nights on/4 nights o), 7 (2 nights on/4 nights o). Figures 41 and 42
show the impact of these low-SE twilight micro-survey cadence options on the discovery and light
curve inversion solar system MAF metrics. We note that Figure 41 provides discovery completeness
values that are not normalized to the baseline simulation's output since there are no 'Ayl o 'chaxnims
discovered with the baseline survey cadence; this is the only gure that shows the outcomes of the
MAF metrics analysis that is not normalized to the baseline simulation's output.
The discovery completeness for the 'Ayl o 'chaxnim population (NEOs with orbits interior to the
orbit of Venus) for a variety of cadence options for this micro-survey are compared to that for the
baseline survey (with no low-SE twilight micro-survey) in Figure 41. Each of the micro-survey
cadence options provides a (sometimes much) higher discovery completeness than the baseline sur-
vey, which does not include any 'Ayl o 'chaxnim discoveries since 'Ayl o 'chaxnims are only visible at
solar elongations smaller than the WFD cadence reaches. In the top panel of Figure 41, which
uses the Rubin SSP discovery criteria of 3 nightly pairs in 14 days, the highest 'Ayl o 'chaxnim dis-
covery completeness is reached when the low-SE twilight micro-survey is run every night with 3
repeat visits per pointing in either izorrizlters (i.e., twineorepeat3 iznp1v2.2 10yrs and
twineorepeat3 riznp1v2.2 10yrs ). These micro-survey cadences would result in the complete-
ness of the H20:5 and theH16:0'Ayl o 'chaxnims increasing to 1.5% and2%, respectively,
providing the potential for a signicant increase in the discovery of inner-Venus asteroids. Running
the micro-survey with either 3 or 4 repeat visits during either the brightest twilight time (i.e., when
the Sun is above -14elevation) or full twilight time (i.e., when the Sun is above -17.8elevation)
produces similar results in 'Ayl o 'chaxnim discovery completeness across the various nightly `on'/`o'
cadences. The largest discovery completeness increases for these options occur when the micro-survey
is run every night using either izorrizlters, which result in increases of 1% to1.5%. Simply
using the zlter does not get as large of a discovery boost as using either izorrizlters. Unsurpris-
ingly, the less often the micro-survey is run (fewer number of `on' nights), the lower the 'Ayl o 'chaxnim
discovery completeness drops.
If, unlike the Rubin SSP requirement of 3 nightly pairs in 14 days, 4 detections in a single night
with 4 repeat visits per pointing are required, the discovery completeness improves further. This
is more typical of observing cadences used for NEO discovery by current surveys (e.g., Gehrels &
Jedicke 1996; Larson et al. 2003; Tonry et al. 2018) Such a cadence would require the develop-
ment and implementation of code outside SSP, which is designed only to use image pairs to make
tracklets. Under this alternative cadence, running the micro-survey every night during the bright-
est part of twilight in either izorriz(i.e., twineobrightest repeat4 iznp1v2.2 10yrs and
twineobrightest repeat4 riznp1v2.2 10yrs in the bottom panel of Figure 41), the discovery
completeness increases to 8% and9.5% for the H20:5 and theH16:0'Ayl o 'chaxnims,
respectively. Given that the baseline 'Ayl o 'chaxnim discovery completeness is zero, a low-SE twilight
micro-survey thus has the potential for a dramatic shift in the discovery of asteroids interior to the
orbit of Venus.
In contrast, Figure 42 (top panel) shows that for nearly all other solar system small body popu-
lations, running the low-SE twilight micro-survey every night produces the largest drops ( 3.5%)
in discovery completeness, in particular for the fainter objects. This is because the low-SE twi-
light micro-survey takes time away from the WFD observing that would otherwise be performed74 Schwamb et al.
during those twilight hours. This produces a drop in the discovery completeness for faint objects
that would otherwise be discovered at larger solar elongations; faint objects are also harder to see
than brighter objects when looking near the Sun. This drop is also increased when the micro-survey
observations are only made with the zlter. On the other hand, bright ( H16) NEOs and
PHAs get the strongest discovery boost when the micro-survey is run every night since more of the
easily visible objects are picked up in the additional sky coverage. Of all the twineofamily simu-
lations, the two best options for discovery completeness for all included small body populations are
twineorepeat3 riznp6v2.2 10yrs , which includes 3 repeat visits (i.e., triplets) per pointing in
rizlters where the low-SE twilight micro-survey is run with a 3 nights on/4 nights o cadence and
twineorepeat4 riznp4v2.2 10yrs , which includes 4 repeat visits (i.e., quads) per pointing in riz
lters with a 1 night on/3 nights o cadence. In these simulations, the only population to see a drop
in discovery completeness are the H12 OCCs with a maximum perihelia of 20 au, which get a
0.5% discovery drop; all other populations either match the baseline or gain an increased discovery
completeness (up to 3.5% and2%, respectively).
When considering the ability to perform light curve inversions for PHAs, NEOs, MBAs, and Jupiter
Trojans (bottom panel of Figure 42), running the low-SE twilight micro-survey every night is com-
pletely detrimental with up to 40% drops for H15 Jupiter Trojans and 20% drops for H18
MBAs compared to the baseline survey that does not include any low-SE twilight micro-survey. Of
the micro-survey options discussed above, the only option that does not drop the fraction of objects
for which light curve inversions can be obtained by >5% from that of the baseline survey (the level
considered acceptable) is twineorepeat4 riznp4v2.2 10yrs , which includes 4 repeat visits (i.e.,
quads) per pointing in rizlters where the low-SE twilight micro-survey is run with a 1 night on/3
nights o cadence. This simulation keeps light curve inversion at baseline level or above with up
to a 30% increase above baseline levels for H16 PHAs. As described above, this option also
performs well for discovery completeness, which provides baseline-level performance or higher (up to
2%) for all included small body populations except the H12 OCCs with a maximum perihelia
of 20 au, which again get a 0.5% discovery completeness drop. An additional benet to having 4
repeat visits instead of 3 repeat visits is better resiliency to contamination by satellites streaks (for
additional discussion, see Section 5.4).
In general, running the low-SE twilight micro-survey less frequently proves better for both discovery
completeness and light curve inversion when all solar system small body populations are considered.
Furthermore, running the low-SE twilight micro-survey at an infrequent cadence boosts discovery
completeness overall, including for the 'Ayl o 'chaxnims, which also see a signicant discovery com-
pleteness enhancement in both discussed simulations (to 0.5-0.75% for 3 repeat visits in rizwith
a 3 nights on/4 nights o cadence or 0.15-0.25% for 4 repeat visits in rizwith 1 night on/3 nights
o). Light curve inversions are also enhanced when the low-SE twilight micro-survey is run infre-
quently (once every 3 days with 4 repeat visits per pointing in rizlters) compared to the baseline
survey cadence. Given these enhancements and the large amount of science for a wide variety of
small body populations that would be made possible with a low-SE twilight micro-survey, we thus
strongly encourage an infrequently run low-SE twilight micro-survey to be included in the LSST
survey cadence from the start of the survey. We note for the reader, that the signicant increases
shown here from the discovery metrics when the twilight low-SE micro-survey is included will not
translate into the exact same gains in the actual LSST 'Ayl o 'chaxnim,H16 NEO, and H16Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 75
PHA discovery yields. It depends on the size and albedo distribution of these populations which is
not included in the calculation of our discovery metrics (see Section 2.3.1). The signicant increase
in our metrics does show that including the micro-survey will signicantly enhance LSST's chances
of nding new 'Ayl o 'chaxnims and other IEOs, but the actual number of new discoveries may be very
small.
Given the numerous scientic benets and enhancements in solar system discoveries and light
curve inversions that will come from running the low-SE twilight micro-survey, as described above,
we recommend avoiding waiting to start this micro-survey until Year 2 or later in the 10-year survey.
One additional reason for starting this micro-survey in Year 1 is the increasing number of satellite
constellations being sent into low Earth orbit. These satellite constellations are most problematic
for astronomic observations during twilight hours, when the numerous satellites are brightest in the
sky. (For further discussion of the impact of satellite constellations on solar system science, see
Section 5.4.) With the number of satellite constellations continuing to increase, and plans for that
increase to continue for years to come, the problem of contamination will only get worse during the
later years of the 10-year LSST survey. We thus recommend starting the low-SE twilight micro-survey
in Year 1 of operations in order to reduce the level of satellite contamination as much as possible and
enable the most solar system science.The SCOC has recently made a recommendation for a low-SE
NEO twilight micro-survey to be included in the survey strategy starting in Year 1 of LSST with
further opportunities to explore the nal details of the implementation Bianco & the SCOC (2022).
Finally, we look at possible further cadence enhancements and/or software improvements. All
presently analyzed cadences assume either three or four repeat visits (i.e., triplets or quads), but
the discovery criteria are the same as used for WFD observations (linking three tracklets over a
14-day period). Under such assumptions, the standard observing strategy of requiring pairs should
be examined as well. Hints that it may perform better are in Figure 41: note how repeat3 cadences
systematically produce more discoveries than repeat4 ; a hypothetical repeat2 cadence may even
further increase our sensitivity to 'Ayl o 'chaxnims. We recommend such cadences are simulated and
analyzed.
Should the analysis conclude 3- or 4-tracklet cadences are still preferred, we would recommend the
Rubin Observatory consider reporting such tracklets to the MPC immediately (within 24 hours).
This would allow for 3rd-party follow-up of such objects, which may be few enough and interesting
enough that it's feasible that they may be followed within days of discovery and not require explicit
self-follow-up by Rubin. It would then be interesting to examine this scenario in further detail (since
it would not follow the traditional SSP detection method), and quantify the number and purity of
high digest 2 tracklets (i.e., short-arc moving object detections likely to be solar system objects)
Rubin would identify and report on a nightly basis, as well as the typical apparent magnitude of
reported tracklets (i.e., assess whether the broader community's NEO follow-up system would be
able to keep up with this modied reporting method).
4.7.2. Other Micro-surveys
A number of additional micro-surveys requiring 0.3{3% of overall survey time were submitted in
response to the 2018 white paper call on survey strategy14. These micro-surveys include:
14https://www.lsst.org/submitted-whitepaper-201876 Schwamb et al.
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
Add the virgo cluster 
 to WFD footprint 
 (virgo_cluster_v2.0_10yrs)
One week per year 
 observing Carina 
 (carina_v2.0_10yrs)
Two nights of observing 
 the SMC in movie mode 
 (smc_movie_v2.0_10yrs)
Microsurvey of the 
 Roman bulge field 
 (roman_v2.0_10yrs)
Increase local galaxy coverage  
 {g: 0.5, r: 0.2, i: 0.1} 
 (local_gal_bindx0_v2.0_10yrs)
Increase local galaxy coverage  
 {g: 1.0, r: 0.3, i: 0.1} 
 (local_gal_bindx1_v2.0_10yrs)
Increase local galaxy coverage  
 {g: 1.5, r: 0.35, i: 0.2} 
 (local_gal_bindx2_v2.0_10yrs)
Follow up ToO alerts,
 10 events per year 
 (too_rate10_v2.0_10yrs)
Follow up ToO alerts,
 50 events per year 
 (too_rate50_v2.0_10yrs)
Add a north stripe to Dec +30 
 (north_stripe_v2.0_10yrs)
Take up to 3 short (5s) visits per filter 
 in year 1; achieved ~42 per pointing 
 (short_exp_v2.0_10yrs)
Take 4 short (5s) visits per filter in a row, 
 stop after 12 short visits per filter 
  in a year; achieved ~700 per pointing
 (multi_short_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.700.750.800.850.900.951.001.051.10Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationDiscovery
Completeness PHA H<=16.0
Completeness PHA H<=22.0
Completeness NEO H<=16.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0
Completeness MBA H<=16.0Completeness MBA H<=21.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0
Completeness TNO H<=6.0
Completeness TNO H<=8.0Completeness OCC_r5 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r5 H<=17.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=8.0
Completeness OCC_r20 H<=12.0
baseline_v2.0_10yrs
Add the virgo cluster 
 to WFD footprint 
 (virgo_cluster_v2.0_10yrs)
One week per year 
 observing Carina 
 (carina_v2.0_10yrs)
Two nights of observing 
 the SMC in movie mode 
 (smc_movie_v2.0_10yrs)
Microsurvey of the 
 Roman bulge field 
 (roman_v2.0_10yrs)
Increase local galaxy coverage  
 {g: 0.5, r: 0.2, i: 0.1} 
 (local_gal_bindx0_v2.0_10yrs)
Increase local galaxy coverage  
 {g: 1.0, r: 0.3, i: 0.1} 
 (local_gal_bindx1_v2.0_10yrs)
Increase local galaxy coverage  
 {g: 1.5, r: 0.35, i: 0.2} 
 (local_gal_bindx2_v2.0_10yrs)
Follow up ToO alerts,
 10 events per year 
 (too_rate10_v2.0_10yrs)
Follow up ToO alerts,
 50 events per year 
 (too_rate50_v2.0_10yrs)
Add a north stripe to Dec +30 
 (north_stripe_v2.0_10yrs)
Take up to 3 short (5s) visits per filter 
 in year 1; achieved ~42 per pointing 
 (short_exp_v2.0_10yrs)
Take 4 short (5s) visits per filter in a row, 
 stop after 12 short visits per filter 
  in a year; achieved ~700 per pointing
 (multi_short_v2.0_10yrs)
Simulation Run0.60.81.01.21.41.6Value Relative to the Baseline SimulationLight Curve Inversion
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0
Figure 43. Impact of various micro-survey scenarios. The baseline (reference) simulation with the default
scheduler conguration for this cadence experiment is the rst entry on the left. All values have been
normalized by this simulation's output. The gray shading outlines changes that are within 5% of the
baseline simulation. Top: Discovery Metrics. Bottom: Light Curve Inversion Metrics. The y-axis is
truncated in the bottom plot at 1.6 for readability. The light curve inversion NEO H=19.0 and light
curve inversion PHA H=19.0 extend to nearly 2.5 for the multi short v2.0 10yrs run.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 77
•Adding extra elds: virgo (adds the Virgo Cluster to WFD), carina (1 week/yr in Carina
Nebula), smcmovie (shortgexposures in SMC for 2 nights), roman (covering the Roman bulge
eld twice per year),
•local galbindx<I > : Covers 12 Local Group galaxies with extra griexposures,
•toorate<X > : Follow Targets of Opportunity, where Xis the number per year,
•north stripe : Adds northern extension stripe up to Dec. +30 (illustrated in the nal panel
of Figure 2),
•short exp: Take up to 35 s exposures in year 1 of the survey,
•multi short : Takes sequences of 4 5 s exposures in each lter, with the aim of obtaining 12
total sequences of short exposures per year, achieving 700 exposures per pointing.
As shown in Figure 43, the eects of the majority of these micro-surveys on the discovery and
light curve metrics that are of most concern for Solar System science are minimal ( .5%) since this
involves a very small fraction of the overall LSST survey time. The exception to these generally
minimal eects is seen in the multi short simulation (nal column in Figure 43). This survey
strategy causes a 5{25% drop in the number of objects detected, particularly for the fainter solar
system object populations (This outcome is to be expected with the switch of 12 of the 82 exposures
per pointing per year to much shorter exposures). While the vast majority of the additional micro-
surveys have little to no eect on the metrics of most interest to solar system researchers, there
remains the possibility that the combination of several of these micro-surveys could \constructively
interfere" in such a way as to cause a large impact later. However these micro-surveys also only
impact a very small amount of the survey time and the overall survey strategy, and so the decision
on the details of micro-surveys may well also be delayed until later in the cadence decision process.
A combined set of micro-surveys will likely be the subject of further simulation runs later when the
larger and more inuential parts of the cadence strategy is decided upon.
5.ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS NOT EXPLORED IN THE CADENCE SIMULATIONS
The LSST cadence simulations are incredible tools for exploring the wide range of scenarios for how
Rubin Observatory can survey the sky, but there are a few additional potential factors that could
enhance or impact the LSST science returns that are not yet captured in these simulations. The
survey cadence simulations do not account for the dierence in Rubin Observatory operations in the
rst year of the survey compared to later years. The growth of low Earth orbit satellite constellations
and their future impact on LSSTCam observations is not yet quantied. Targeted small observing
programs that take much less than 1% of the LSST observing time are not included in the cadence
simulations, and opportunities to propose to Rubin Observatory with these very small observing
requests will be considered closer to the start of the survey (Ivezi c & the SCOC 2021). Additionally,
the combined benets of the LSST data with future wide-eld surveys cannot be derived from the
cadence simulations alone. Some of these considerations require analysis of test observations during
commissioning of LSSTCam and the Simonyi Survey Telescope.
5.1. Incremental Template Generation in Year 178 Schwamb et al.
The LSST cadence simulations and the MAF metrics assume that the rst year of the survey
will run exactly like later years, but this is not quite the case. The data management pipelines
use dierence imaging to identify transient sources within the LSST exposures by subtracting o a
template representing the static sky. The Rubin SSP pipelines use these catalogs nightly to identify
moving sources as part of the prompt products data processing (Juri c et al. 2021). In order for new
solar system objects to be discovered in real time during the survey, a template for the observed
eld must exist in the given lter of the observation. Templates are expected to be produced during
the data processing of the yearly data release. A brief overview of how templates are likely going to
be made from coadded observations is available in the summary paper describing the LSST DESC
DC2 (Dark Energy Science Collaboration second data challenge) simulated sky survey (LSST Dark
Energy Science Collaboration (LSST DESC) et al. 2021). Some elds will have enough observations
in commissioning to generate templates at the start of the survey, but this will not be true for the
vast majority of the sky. Year 1 of the LSST will have to be treated dierently if solar system bodies
are to be detected nightly. Otherwise these discoveries will only be made during the data release
processing to make the yearly detections catalogs from LSST only data.
Within MAF there are no solar system metrics focused on the Rubin prompt data products.
Whether or not a dierent template generation strategy is used in Year 1 of the LSST, the total
number of discoveries and the number of objects with a sucient observations for shape inversion
will remain the same. These metrics only probe what would be available in the yearly data release
catalogs at the end of the 10 year span of the LSST. They do not quantify the impact on the study of
transient phenomena. If no templates are produced in the LSST's rst year, all time domain-related
events (such as ISO apparitions, NEO/PHA close y-bys, and cometary outbursts) present in the
rst year of survey observations would be discovered six months to a year after they occurred. The
duration of these events is on the scale of days to weeks, discovering these events at the time of
the rst and second LSST data release would be too late to perform any additional observational
follow-up (such as obtaining spectra) with other facilities. Schwamb et al. (2021) highlight in further
detail some of the unique opportunities for solar system science enabled in the rst year of the LSST
if templates are generated and implemented into Rubin Observatory's data management pipelines.
The Rubin Observatory Operations Team has committed to producing templates incrementally
during the rst year of the LSST (Guy et al. 2021), but the exact requirements for producing these
Year 1 templates has not yet been decided. The specic strategy used will impact which observations
SSP can search before the data release 1 processing and to what limiting magnitude. It will also
impact the productivity of the low-SE solar system twilight micro-survey (described in Section 4.7.1),
if the SCOC recommends the micro-survey to be included in the LSST year 1 observing strategy.
The micro-survey gains most benet if astrometric follow-up observations can be performed by other
observing facilities in tandem to the LSST observations. Exploring the implications of various incre-
mental template generation strategies is beyond the scope of this paper, but this analysis should be
carried out before the end of Rubin Observatory's commissioning period.
5.2. Solar System Deep Fields
Trilling et al. (2018a) proposed dedicated solar system \DDFs" in response to the 2018 LSST
Cadence Optimization White Paper Call. This observing program was dierent in scope than the
typical DDFs currently imagined as part of LSST and described in Section 4.6. Thus we will refer
to these pointings as solar system Deep Fields instead. This proposed program would consist of veTuning LSST for Solar System Science 79
dierent pointings at a range of ecliptic latitudes, including coverage of parts of the leading and
trailing Neptune Trojan clouds. Each solar system deep eld would be observed for 2.1 continuous
hours in a single lter to reach the image depth ( r= 27.5 mag; 3 magnitudes deeper than the WFD
+ NES observations) required to observe TNOs as small as 25 km in diameter through shifting and
stacking the images on model orbits (Trilling et al. 2018a). Objects at these size ranges in the outer
regions of the solar system are particularly under-observed by current surveys due to their faint
apparent magnitudes, and new constraints from Rubin Observatory would provide vital information
on planetary formation and collisional processes that have occurred and still occur in our solar system.
An additional set of four return visits to these deep elds over a two year period is proposed that
would enable dynamical classication and color measurements (if one of the later visits was taken in
a dierent lter). In addition to exploring the nature of the observed TNO size distribution and the
physical properties of the TNOs on both sides of the broken power law, the proposed solar system
deep drilling elds would also provide further characterization of other solar system objects. Densely
sampled light curves of MBAs, Centaurs, and Jupiter Trojans can reveal any temporal variability in
color and brightness within the two hour observation period. From this, physical properties such as
color, size, and shape can be constrained.
The total program requires 40 hours of observing time over the 10 years of the LSST (totaling
0:3% of total survey time); the equivalent of four winter observing nights. This request is well
below the threshold for cadence variations to be evaluated by the SCOC, and therefore has not been
included in the LSST cadence simulation runs. We highlight this proposed program here as it would
deliver unique science not achieved with the TNO sample found in the WFD, NES, or DDFs. The
SCOC has recommended to the Rubin Observatory Operations Team that a very small amount of
survey time be allocated in a call for proposals for observing requests at this scale once the survey
performance has been evaluated (Ivezi c & the SCOC 2021).
5.3. Euclid Synergies
The Euclid Deep Field South is the fth DDF to be adopted into the LSST after it was proposed
in a written response to the 2018 LSST Cadence Optimization White Paper Call (Capak et al.
2019b). This DDF will overlap with the southern deep eld observed as part of the upcoming ESA
Euclid mission (Laureijs et al. 2011; Amiaux et al. 2012). Euclid aims to map the geometry of the
dark Universe during its 6 year visible and near-infrared photometric and spectroscopic survey, and
will provide complementary observations to LSST's wide-eld visible ground survey for a number of
the LSST science goals. While only solar system objects with ecliptic latitudes beyond 15will be
observed by Euclid , the science returns from its near-infrared capabilities, high angular resolution and
densely sampled light curves will still be signicant (Carry 2018). Previous studies suggest that the
entire combined Rubin- Euclid data set would allow for the spectral classication of roughly 150,000
solar system objects largely unknown to date, and provide constraints on shape, rotation, activity
and binarity for a signicant number of asteroids, Centaurs, and TNOs (Snodgrass et al. 2018; Carry
2018; Guy et al. 2022). In particular, contemporaneous observations from both Euclid and LSST will
allow rapid determination of orbits, which is vital for the recovery and follow-up of rare solar system
objects (Snodgrass et al. 2018). For more details on proposed Rubin- Euclid derived data products see
Guy et al. (2022). While LSST can and will adapt its nightly observation schedule to local weather
conditions, the cadence and pointings of Euclid are xed and, therefore, known well in advance.
As such, it would fall to LSST to optimize its nightly schedule to maximize the number of near-80 Schwamb et al.
simultaneous pointings with Euclid . Although an initial assessment of the simultaneous astrometry
between LSST and Euclid has been performed and presented at the Rubin Project and Community
Workshop in 2019, no simulations currently exist that would quantify the impact of newer LSST
cadences simulations with respect to joint Euclid -Rubin solar system science.
5.4. Unquantied Considerations: Satellite Constellations
It is now certain that the accelerating industrialisation of near-Earth space will have major adverse
eects on astronomical observation (Walker et al. 2020a,b; Hall et al. 2021; Walker et al. 2021; Halferty
et al. 2022). The future density of global satellite constellations is as yet uncertain, as it depends on
commercial and regulatory decisions. However, regulatory approval has been granted by the United
States for at least thirty thousand satellites (Walker et al. 2021); >2;500 of these launched in the
last three years, with 212 Starlinks in May 2022 alone15. This means Rubin Observatory will have
to observe into a hyper-industrialized sky. The rst few years of LSST will contain the eects of the
iterative passes of at least six thousand low Earth orbit satellites | and as constellation build-out
continues, satellite density will only increase throughout the Survey.
For LSSTCam, there are notable streak eects when illuminated satellites cross the focal plane
during an LSST exposure (Tyson et al. 2020). The level to which a streak could be partly or fully
saturated in the LSST images depends on each satellite's orbit, morphology, reectance properties
and orientation; the severity can vary through time, such as when a single launch's `train' of co-
released satellites are on its orbit raise and are brighter than when on nal orbit. In these cases, and
also when the satellite is fainter and so the streaks are not saturated, the impacted pixels will not
be suitable for photometry: each satellite streak decreases the eective sky coverage of the exposure.
Satellites at mg'7, with brightnesses below saturation though at SNR '100, are also anticipated
to create substantial multi-order cross-talk. These highly correlated linear `ghost' streaks centre on
cores surrounded by wings several hundred pixels in extent. The degree to which Rubin Observatory's
processing pipelines will be able to mask is yet to be determined. Even if algorithms can be developed
for adequate cross-talk removal, spatially correlated noise will still generate systematics throughout
the entire LSST dataset (Tyson et al. 2020). Additionally, there is an increase in global sky brightness
from the ensemble of the size distribution of space debris and satellites | which has already raised
the diuse zenith luminance by 10% as of 2021 (Kocifaj et al. 2021). While the community focus
to date has been on the direct solar illumination of Earth-orbiting objects, satellites also reect
moonlight. Moonshine, and potential additional sources of illumination (e.g., Earthshine, mutual
reectance among illuminated space objects) have yet to be modeled in published studies. The
industrially caused loss of global darkness will continue as more anthropogenic material is added to
Earth's orbital environment. For solar system science, satellites and associated debris will thus have
three main eects. They obliterate, or modify in unquantied ways, the photometry of individual
object detections that are blazed over by streak footprints; they introduce systematic errors at low
surface brightness into sky that may later be the source of detections when images are stacked; and
they reduce the dynamic range available for the lower SNR solar system detections.
A recent study by Hu et al. (2022) nd that 10% of all LSST images will have a streak from a
launched or planned-to-be-launched Starlink (Generation 1 or 2) or OneWeb satellite, with observa-
tions in twilight more frequently impacted. If signicantly more satellites are launched over the next
15https://www.planet4589.org/space/stats/star/starstats.htmlTuning LSST for Solar System Science 81
several years, more LSST observations could have streaks. The eects of satellite constellations have
not yet been comprehensively quantied for Rubin Observatory's solar system science, and we do
not attempt to do so here, as no cadence simulations yet include impacts from these satellite streaks
on LSSTCam: we merely highlight a number of potential projected loss eects. First, the shallowing
of LSST will decrease the detected solar system populations across any and all cadences. Across all
populations, detection loss for individual objects will deplete the sparse light curves LSST generates;
for instance, limiting the ability to detect small-body activity (Section 2.3.2). Second, there will be
population-dependent losses in solar system science from satellite eects. In particular, for detections
of NEOs, which individually only become visible for a small subset of time within the span of LSST,
the steep size distribution means the majority of detections are made toward the Rubin magnitude
limit. NEO discovery by the SSP pipelines requires a pair of detections (cf. tracklets) and is thus
fragile to satellite eects: losing single detections from a pair has a disproportionate impact on the
detectability of this population, as for intra-night cadence outcomes (see Sections 4.4.1, 4.4.3 and
4.4.4). Similarly, satellite-generated detection loss will also acutely aect solar system populations
that are only visible for week-to-month time periods, such as ISOs and newly active comets. The
seasonality of satellite density | more satellites are illuminated, and for longer, in summer | will
have a seasonal impact on solar system object detectability (McDowell 2020; Hainaut & Williams
2020; Lawler et al. 2022). Seasonality detection biases adversely aect all solar system populations
that cluster on parts of the sky (for instance, Trojan populations, resonant TNOs, potentially the
high-q, high-a TNOs, NEOs, and ISOs); they require careful debiasing to generate accurate pop-
ulation models (e.g., Kavelaars et al. 2020). While not quantied for satellites, general outcomes
of inducing this type of eect can be considered in the vary NEScadence family (Section 4.1.3).
Additionally, twilight-bright satellites will be abundant in the low-SE sky that is being targeted for
detection of PHAs, IEOs, gravitationally focused ISOs, and comet comae. Illuminated satellites are
most numerous near the horizon close to dawn and dusk; the low-SE twilight micro-survey runs in
-12solar elevation and darker. For the low-SE twilight micro-survey (Section 4.7.1), the eects
of satellite constellations will be particularly pronounced, with some 90% of images expected to be
impacted with at least one streak per image (Hu et al. 2022).
It may be possible for the Rubin Observatory scheduler to selectively observe specic pointings on
the sky, which could decrease the number of WFD images with satellite streaks by a factor of two.
However, this would come at the substantive cost of 10% of the LSST observing time (Hu et al.
2022). The tradeos of implementing this algorithm would depend on the impact of the satellite
streaks on LSSTCam, which as noted above has yet to be fully characterized, and the number,
sky distribution, and apparent magnitude of satellites at the start of Rubin science operations.
Overall, the characterisation of the impacts of satellite constellations on the LSST cadences, given
the ever-changing parameters of constellation design, replenishment, and dynamic operation, will
prove challenging. It will require major eort to model and incorporate into future LSST survey
simulations.
6.CONCLUSIONS
By analyzing the LSST cadence simulations and the outputs for a suite of MAF metrics, we have
explored the impact on solar system science for a wide range of potential LSST cadences. Our
resulting analysis highlights the importance of simulating the expected small body detections for
future multipurpose wide-eld surveys. This allows for tensions between main science drivers to be82 Schwamb et al.
identied in order to optimize the on-sky observing and maximize the output from next generation
astronomical surveys and facilities. We hope that this paper and the entire Focus Issue that this
paper contributes to may serve as resources for future SCOC reviews of the LSST cadence as well as
for future wide-eld survey design.
In general, we nd that a wide range of LSST survey strategies provide satisfactory temporal and
spatial coverage to achieve the goals for solar system science outlined in the SSSC Science Roadmap
(Schwamb et al. 2018a). Below, we summarize our key ndings and recommendations based on the
versions 1.5-2.2 LSST cadence simulations:
•Observing the northern regions of the ecliptic up to +10ecliptic latitude (the NES) is crucial
for outer solar system science and probing the solar system small body populations that are
asymmetrically distributed on the sky.
•Covering the NES to at least 25% of the WFD level is critical for discovering and characterizing
slowly moving objects (e.g., TNOs) and faint inner solar system objects.
•Shifting time away from the WFD to the Galactic plane can negatively impact light curve
measurements of faint solar system objects.
•Shifting the WFD footprint northward from high extinction regions to low extinction sky,
such that part of the NES region obtains visits at WFD cadence, is a welcome change. The
new expanded northern WFD + NES footprint used in the v2.0-v2.2 cadence simulations is
conducive to solar system science.
•We advocate for moving from 2 15 s snaps to a single 1 30 s exposure per visit due to the
resulting8% boost in on-sky visits.
•Aiming for 33 minute separations between nightly pairs is an ideal compromise between achiev-
ing a high pair completion rate per night and for the Rubin SSP pipelines to be sensitive to
moving objects at distances up to 150 au.
•Shorter exposure times are benecial for the discovery of PHAs and NEOs while longer expo-
sures are better for the discovery of more distant objects. Shorter exposures also increase the
total number of on-sky visits per pointing, providing denser sampling for light curve inversion.
A compromise between discovery and color/light curve characterization is to use 30 s exposures
per visit when possible.
•Longeru-band exposures (50 s and above) tend to reduce discoveries at small sizes (fainter H)
and are detrimental to light curve inversions.
•Similarly, increasing the number of exposures in bluer lters ( uandg), decreases the number
of faint objects for which light curve inversion is possible.
•Restricting repeat nightly visits to the same lter does not signicantly improve solar system
metrics over mixed lter pairs.
•Including a third visit of a eld in the same night can have a very serious eect on the coverage
area and other solar system metrics, particularly if the \Presto-Color" (rapid color; Bianco
et al. 2019) strategy is implemented. Adding the third visit in the same color as the earlier
pair and increasing the gap from the initial pair is shown to have a much lower impact.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 83
•Having the Rubin scheduler better balance extra nightly visits beyond pairs in a given night
by redistributing them across the sky has some benet to small body discovery with typically
small hits to light curve characterization.
•Rolling cadence strategies are generally positive for solar system metrics, although the most
extreme rolling patterns (many stripes or very strong rolling) should be avoided. A rolling
pattern that ensures a minimum coverage to enable discovery of rare types of objects in the
`o' stripes should be considered.
•Spending 3-8% of the survey time on DDF observations produces only minimal losses for solar
system science. If some DDFs are observed only in certain years, observing the COSMOS DDF
for at least two years would be the most benecial for the detection and orbit characterization
of small bodies discovered by shift-and-stack algorithms.
•The COSMOS DDF should be observed when the Jupiter Trojans are passing through the eld,
which occurs in discrete windows during LSST.
•Starting a low-SE twilight micro-survey in Year 1 of operations would make Rubin Observa-
tory uniquely sensitive to several populations of solar system small bodies such as IEOs, Earth
Trojans, and sungrazing comets and give the LSST the potential to improve asteroid models,
test the theory of asteroid supercatastrophic disruption at small perihelion distances, and im-
prove asteroid impact warning times. An infrequently run (e.g., every 3 nights) low-SE twilight
micro-survey would also enhance small body discovery and light curve inversion and enable the
discovery of 'Ayl o 'chaxnims, which are only visible during twilight.
•The vast majority of the additional micro-surveys for specic regions of sky have little to no
eect on the solar system metrics, but there remains the possibility that combining several of
these micro-surveys could produce a result that causes a large impact later. This will likely
need to be the subject of further simulation runs later when the larger and more inuential
parts of the cadence strategy is decided upon and actual operational overheads are measured
from commissioning activities.
•The production of incremental templates in the rst year of the LSST is particularly important
for the timely follow-up of ISO apparitions and other transient solar system phenomena. Further
work is needed to explore the impact on Year 1 discovery rates for the dierent potential options
for creating the incremental templates.
•A 40-hour program as described in Trilling et al. (2018a) to observe a set of solar system Deep
Fields would probe the small size end distribution of the TNO and Neptune Trojan populations
that cannot be achieved with the currently planned LSST.
•Creating joint data products with other contemporaneous surveys such as ESA's Euclid would
be of great scientic benet to the solar system science community. Apart from overlapping
DDFs, which are already planned, we suggest synchronizing observations of survey elds where
possible when choosing LSST nightly cadences.
•The impact of rapidly increasing industrial activity in near-Earth space is not modeled here,
but the projected adverse eects are substantial. We advocate for careful characterization of
the anthropogenic impacts on the LSST.84 Schwamb et al.
Our analysis has focused on the individual impact of changing at the same time one or two ob-
serving constraints or parameters within the Rubin scheduler. We have not explored the impact of
changing all these parameters simultaneously. We note that although tuning individual knobs for
the LSST survey strategy by themselves may have little eect, the combination of several of them
may not. This should be carefully considered by the SCOC when they nalize their recommendation
for the initial LSST observing cadence. The analysis presented here should be repeated with the
nalized LSST SCOC recommended observing strategy when it becomes publicly available. Future
cadence simulations should be generated and studied to examine additional options for the low-SE
twilight micro-survey. Further investigation is also needed explore the various options for incremental
template generation impact the ability for real-time discovery and follow-up of our Solar System's
minor planets and ISOs in the rst year of the LSST. This will be particularly important for assessing
whether the low-SE twilight survey should be included as part of the Year 1 LSST observing strategy.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 85
The authors wish to acknowledge all of the essential workers who put their health at risk since the
start of the COVID-19 global pandemic and the researchers who worked tirelessly to rapidly develop
COVID-19 vaccines. Without all their eorts, we would not have been able to pursue this work.
We thank the LSST Solar System Science Collaboration for manuscript feedback. The authors
thank Mike Brown for useful discussions. We thank the anonymous referee for reading and reviewing
this very long manuscript and providing constructive feedback. The authors also acknowledge the
SCOC for their service to the Rubin user community. We thank Federica Bianco and the AAS
(American Astronomical Society) Journals editorial team for facilitating the Rubin LSST Survey
Strategy Optimization ApJS focus issue.
This research has made use of NASA's Astrophysics Data System Bibliographic Services.
This work was supported in part by the LSSTC Enabling Science grants program, the B612 Foun-
dation, the University of Washington's DiRAC (Data-intensive Research in Astrophysics and Cosmol-
ogy) Institute, the Planetary Society, and Adler Planetarium through generous support of the LSST
Solar System Readiness Sprints. MES was supported by the UK Science Technology Facilities Coun-
cil (STFC) grant ST/V000691/1, and she acknowledges travel support provided by STFC for UK
participation in LSST through grant ST/N002512/1. KV acknowledges support from the Preparing
for Astrophysics with LSST Program funded by the Heising Simons Foundation (grant 2021-2975),
from NSF (grant AST-1824869), and from NASA (grants 80NSSC19K0785, 80NSSC21K0376, and
80NSSC22K0512). MTB appreciates support by the Rutherford Discovery Fellowships from New
Zealand Government funding, administered by the Royal Society Te Ap arangi. MSK was supported
by the NASA Solar System Observations program (80NSSC20K0673). HWL is supported by NASA
grant NNX17AF21G and by NSF grant AST-2009096. TD acknowledges support from the LSSTC
Catalyst Fellowship awarded by LSST Corporation with funding from the John Templeton Founda-
tion grant ID # 62192. SG acknowledges support from the DIRAC Institute in the Department of
Astronomy at the University of Washington. The DIRAC Institute is supported through generous
gifts from the Charles and Lisa Simonyi Fund for Arts and Sciences, and the Washington Research
Foundation. SG also acknowledges support from the Preparing for Astrophysics with LSST Pro-
gram funded by the Heising Simons Foundation (grant 2021-2975), from NSF (grant OAC-1934752),
and from NASA (grant 80NSSC22K0978). The work of SRC was conducted at the Jet Propul-
sion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronau-
tics and Space Administration. RCD acknowledges support from the UC Doctoral Scholarship and
Canterbury Scholarship administered by the University of Canterbury, a PhD research scholarship
awarded through MTB's Rutherford Discovery Fellowship grant and an LSSTC Enabling Science
grant awarded by LSST Corporation. RM acknowledges support from NSF (AST-1824869) and
NASA (80NSSC19K0785). LI acknowledges support from the Italian Space Agency (ASI) within the
ASI-INAF agreements I/024/12/0 and 2020-4-HH.0.
This material or work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation through Cooperative
Agreement AST-1258333 and Cooperative Support Agreement AST1836783 managed by the Asso-
ciation of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), and the Department of Energy under
Contract No. DE-AC02-76SF00515 with the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory managed by
Stanford University.
For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY)
licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission.
Data Access: Data used in this paper are openly available from the Vera C. Rubin Observatory Con-
struction Project and Operations Teams via https://github.com/lsst-pst/survey strategy/tree/main/
fbs1.7 and https://github.com/lsst-pst/survey strategy/tree/main/fbs 2.0. The rubin sim/OpSim
LSST cadence simulation databases are available at https://s3df.slac.stanford.edu/data/rubin/
sim-data/.86 Schwamb et al.
Facility: Rubin
Software: LSST Metrics Analysis Framework (MAF, Jones et al. 2014), Astropy (Astropy Collabo-
ration et al. 2013, 2018, 2022), Numpy (van der Walt et al. 2011; Harris et al. 2020), Matplotlib (Hunter
2007), Pandas (pandas development team 2020), rubin sim=OpSim (Naghib et al. 2019; Jones et al.
2020; Yoachim et al. 2022), sbpy (Mommert et al. 2019), JupyterHub (https://jupyterhub.readthedocs.
io/en/latest), Jupyter Notebook (Kluyver et al. 2016), python (https://www.python.org), OpenOrb
(Granvik et al. 2009), scipy (Virtanen et al. 2020), healpy (G orski et al. 2005; Zonca et al. 2019), seaborn
(Waskom 2021)
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MES organized and coordinated the paper writing eort as well as the review of the LSST cadence
simulations and drafting of formal SSSC feedback to the SCOC that this work is derived from. She
wrote the abstract, Sections 1, 2.3.4, 3, 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.2.1, 4.4.1, 5.1, and the preambles to Sections
4, 4.1, 4.2, 4.4, 4.7, 5. She also cowrote Sections 6 and 5.2. She generated the gures showing the
footprints, discovery and light curve metrics, and color-light curve metrics based on software utilities
and jupyter notebooks developed by RLJ and PY. She also contributed to the Planet Nine gures
(Figures 6 and 7). She also created Tables 2, 3 4, 5, and 6. She also provided feedback on the entire
manuscript. RLJ and PY provided guidance on the jupyter notebook templates used to develop
the paper gures. They provided expert feedback on the performance and behavior of the Rubin
scheduler and metrics. They also contributed to the discussions about the MAF metric outputs for
all the cadence simulation families. They also contributed to Figure 24. RLJ wrote Sections 2.2,
2.3, and subsections within. RLJ created Tables 1 and 9 and produced the key plots for Figures 1,
6 and 7. PY wrote Section 2.1 and generated Figure 39. KV wrote Sections 4.1.3 and 4.4.2, created
Table 7, and provided feedback on the whole manuscript. RCD wrote Section 4.6 and co-wrote
Sections 5.2 and 5.3. CO wrote the Section 4.3 and Section 4.2.2 and provided feedback on the
overall manuscript. SG aided in reviewing the LSST cadence simulations and drafting the formal
SSSC feedback to the SCOC. In particular, she led the review and formal feedback for the low-SE
twilight NEO micro-survey, soliciting and organizing discussion and feedback from the NEOs and
ISOs SSSC working group. She wrote Section 4.7.1, co-wrote Section 6, and provided feedback on
the overall manuscript. TL wrote Sections 4.4.4 (Third Visits in a Night) and 4.7.2 (Other Micro-
surveys), contributed to Section 6 (Conclusions) and provided feedback on the overall manuscript.
CS wrote Section 4.5 and provided feedback on the overall manuscript. B.T.B wrote Section 4.2.3
(Other Variations of Exposure Times) and provided feedback on Sections 4.4.4 (Third Visits in a
Night) and 4.7.1 (Low-SE Solar System Twilight micro-survey). LI wrote Section 4.4.3, contributed
to the discussion presented in Section 4.2.2 and provided feedback on the overall manuscript. MTB
wrote Section 5.4 and cowrote Section 4.6. SE led the writing of Section 5.3, provided input on
Section 5.4, and contributed the description of the simulated 'Ayl o 'chaxnim population in Section
2.2. MS provided feedback discussion and maintained the list of simulations across the manuscript
and gures. MSK wrote the introduction to Section 2, developed the cometary brightening function
implemented in the OCC metric, provided input on the OCC simulations, created the orbit OCC
les, and provided feedback on the overall manuscript. MJ contributed text to the 4.7.1 section
and provided feedback on the overall manuscript. HWL created Figure 5. AT, DR, MMK, RM,
TD, and QY provided feedback on the overall manuscript. MG contributed to the discussions aboutTuning LSST for Solar System Science 87
astrometric precision and orbital characterization for Section 2.3.4 and provided feedback on the
overall manuscript. CL provided feedback on Section 2. PHB and WJO contributed to discussions
about the Planet Nine discoverability. SRC, JD, DR, WCF, and AT contributed to the development
of light curve metrics. WCF also provided the TNO SED. MES with contributions from RLJ, MJ,
SG, PY, SE, MS, and MTB drafted the response to the referee report and revised the manuscript
based on the referee's feedback.
APPENDIX
A.LIST OF ACRONYMS88 Schwamb et al.
Table 7. List of acronyms used in this paper.
Acronym Expansion
CFEPS Canada-France Ecliptic Plane Survey
COSMOS Cosmic Evolution Survey
CSV comma-separated values
DDF Deep Drilling Fields
DES Dark Energy Survey
DESC DC2 Dark Energy Science Collaboration second data challenge
DESI Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument
DIA dierence imaging analysis
ECDFS Extended Chandra Deep Field-South
EDF-S Euclid Deep Field South
ELAISS1 European Large-Area Infrared Space Observatory Survey-S1
ETNO extreme trans-Neptunian object
FOV eld-of-view
GP Galactic plane (used in gures)
IEO inner-Earth object
IOC inner Oort cloud object
ISO interstellar object
JFC Jupiter family comet
LC light curve (used in gures)
low-SE low solar elongation
LSST Legacy Survey of Space and Time
LSSTCam Legacy Survey of Space and Time Camera
MAF metrics analysis framework
MBA main belt asteroid
MBC main belt comet
MDP Markov decision process
MMR mean motion resonance
MOID minimum orbit intersection distance
MPC Minor Planet Center
NEO near-Earth object
NES Northern Ecliptic Spur
OCC Oort cloud comet
OpSim operations simulation
Pan-STARRS Panoramic Survey Telescope and Rapid Response System
PHA potentially hazardous asteroid
PSF point spread function
S3M Synthetic Solar System Model
SCOC Survey Cadence Optimization Committee
SCP south celestial pole (used in gures)
SED spectral energy distribution
SE solar elongation
SMLV Stars, Milky Way, and Local Volume
SNR signal-to-noise ratio
SRD Science Requirements Document
SSP solar system processing
SSSC Solar System Science Collaboration
TNO trans-Neptunian object
TVS Transients and Variable Stars
WFD Wide Fast Deep
XMM-LSS X-ray Multi-Mirror Mission-Newton Large Scale Structure
ZTF Zwicky Transient FacilityTuning LSST for Solar System Science 89
B.LIST OF LSST CADENCE SIMULATIONS90 Schwamb et al.
Table 8 . Table of all simulations referenced in this work, its family of simulations, the baseline simulation that it should be compared
against, and which gures in the paper reference the simulation. A detailed summary of each of the simulations and families may
be found at https://github.com/lsst-pst/survey strategy/blob/main/fbs 1.7/SummaryInfo.ipynb (v1.5 and v1.7 simulations) or at
https://github.com/lsst-pst/survey strategy/blob/main/fbs 2.0/SummaryInfo v2.1.ipynb (v2.0-v2.2 v simulations)
Simulation Name Family Comparison Baseline Included in which gures
baseline nexp1 v1.7 10yrs Baseline N/A 17
baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs Baseline N/A 9, 11, 17, 18, 23, 26
baseline retrofoot v2.0 10yrs Baseline N/A 2, 8
baseline samefilt v1.5 10yrs intranight baseline v1.5 10yrs 28, 29
baseline v1.5 10yrs Baseline N/A 4, 10, 28, 29
baseline v2.0 10yrs Baseline N/A 2, 8, 12, 13, 14, 19, 27, 31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 38, 43
baseline v2.1 10yrs Baseline N/A 1,2, 6, 7, 15, 16, 20, 22, 30
baseline v2.2 10yrs Baseline N/A 41, 42,39
bluer indx0 v2.0 10yrs bluer balance baseline v2.0 10yrs 19
bluer indx1 v2.0 10yrs bluer balance baseline v2.0 10yrs 19
bulges bsv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
bulges bulge wfdv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
bulges cadence bsv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
bulges cadence bulge wfdv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
bulges cadence iheavy v1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
bulges iheavy v1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
cadence drive gl100 gcbv1.7 10yrs lter cadence baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 23
cadence drive gl100v1.7 10yrs lter cadence baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 23
cadence drive gl200 gcbv1.7 10yrs lter cadence baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 23
cadence drive gl200v1.7 10yrs lter cadence baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 23
cadence drive gl30 gcbv1.7 10yrs lter cadence baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 23
cadence drive gl30v1.7 10yrs lter cadence baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 23
carina v2.0 10yrs micro-surveys baseline v2.0 10yrs 43
ddffrac ddfper0.6 v2.0 10yrs ddf percent baseline v2.0 10yrs 38
ddffrac ddfper1.6 v2.0 10yrs ddf percent baseline v2.0 10yrs 38
filterdist indx1 v1.5 10yrs lter dist filterdist indx2 v1.5 10yrs 21,
filterdist indx2 v1.5 10yrs Baseline N/A 4, 10, 21
filterdist indx3 v1.5 10yrs lter dist filterdist indx2 v1.5 10yrs 21
filterdist indx4 v1.5 10yrs lter dist filterdist indx2 v1.5 10yrs 21
filterdist indx5 v1.5 10yrs lter dist filterdist indx2 v1.5 10yrs 21
filterdist indx6 v1.5 10yrs lter dist filterdist indx2 v1.5 10yrs 21
filterdist indx7 v1.5 10yrs lter dist filterdist indx2 v1.5 10yrs 21
filterdist indx8 v1.5 10yrs lter dist filterdist indx2 v1.5 10yrs 21
footprint 0v1.710yrs footprint tune baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 9, 11
footprint 1v1.710yrs footprint tune baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 9, 11
footprint 2v1.710yrs footprint tune baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 9, 11
footprint 3v1.710yrs footprint tune baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 9, 11
footprint 4v1.710yrs footprint tune baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 9, 11
footprint 5v1.710yrs footprint tune baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 9, 11
footprint 6v1.710yrs footprint tune baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 9, 11
Table 8 continued on next pageTuning LSST for Solar System Science 91
Table 8 (continued)
Simulation Name Family Comparison Baseline Included in which gures
footprint 7v1.710yrs footprint tune baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 9, 11
footprint 8v1.710yrs footprint tune baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 9, 11
footprint addmagcloudsv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
footprint bigskydustv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
footprint bigskynouiyv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
footprint bigskyv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
footprint bigwfdv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
footprint bluer footprintv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
footprint gpsmoothv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
footprint newAv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
footprint newBv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
footprint nogpnorthv1.5 10yrs footprint baseline v1.5 10yrs 4, 10
good seeing gsw0.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing gsw1.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing gsw10.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing gsw20.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing gsw3.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing gsw50.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing gsw6.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing ugsw0.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing ugsw1.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing ugsw10.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing ugsw20.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing ugsw3.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing ugsw50.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
good seeing ugsw6.0 v2.1 10yrs good seeing baseline v2.1 10yrs 22
local galbindx0 v2.0 10yrs micro-surveys baseline v2.0 10yrs 43
local galbindx1 v2.0 10yrs micro-surveys baseline v2.0 10yrs 43
local galbindx2 v2.0 10yrs micro-surveys baseline v2.0 10yrs 43
long gaps nightsoff0 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
longgaps nightsoff0 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 31
long gaps nightsoff1 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff1 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff2 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff2 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff3 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff3 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff4 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff4 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff5 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff5 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff6 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff6 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff7 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps nightsoff7 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
long gaps npnightsoff0 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff0 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
Table 8 continued on next page92 Schwamb et al.
Table 8 (continued)
Simulation Name Family Comparison Baseline Included in which gures
long gaps npnightsoff1 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff1 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff2 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff2 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff3 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff3 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff4 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff4 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff5 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff5 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff6 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff6 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff7 delayed-1 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long gaps npnightsoff7 delayed1827 v2.0 10yrs long gaps no pairs baseline v2.0 10yrs 27
long u1v2.0 10yrs longer u visits baseline v2.0 10yrs 19
long u2v2.0 10yrs longer u visits baseline v2.0 10yrs 19
multi short v2.0 10yrs micro-surveys baseline v2.0 10yrs 43
norepeat rpw-1.0 v2.1 10yrs suppress repeats baseline v2.1 10yrs 30
norepeat rpw-10.0 v2.1 10yrs suppress repeats baseline v2.1 10yrs 30
norepeat rpw-100.0 v2.1 10yrs suppress repeats baseline v2.1 10yrs 30
norepeat rpw-2.0 v2.1 10yrs suppress repeats baseline v2.1 10yrs 30
norepeat rpw-20.0 v2.1 10yrs suppress repeats baseline v2.1 10yrs 30
norepeat rpw-5.0 v2.1 10yrs suppress repeats baseline v2.1 10yrs 30
noroll v2.0 10yrs rolling baseline v2.0 10yrs 33, 37
north stripe v2.0 10yrs micro-surveys baseline v2.0 10yrs 2, 43
pair times 11v1.7 10yrs pair times baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 26
pair times 22v1.7 10yrs pair times baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 24,26
pair times 33v1.7 10yrs pair times baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 24,26
pair times 44v1.7 10yrs pair times baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 26
pair times 55v1.7 10yrs pair times baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 24,26
pencil fs1v2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
pencil fs2v2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 2, 15, 16
plane priority priority0.1 pbfv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
plane priority priority0.1 pbtv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
plane priority priority0.2 pbfv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
plane priority priority0.2 pbtv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
plane priority priority0.3 pbfv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
plane priority priority0.3 pbtv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
plane priority priority0.4 pbfv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
plane priority priority0.4 pbtv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
plane priority priority0.6 pbfv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
plane priority priority0.6 pbtv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 2, 15, 16
plane priority priority0.9 pbfv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
plane priority priority0.9 pbtv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
plane priority priority1.2 pbfv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
plane priority priority1.2 pbtv2.1 10yrs galactic plane footprint baseline v2.1 10yrs 15, 16
presto gap1.5 mixv2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 2, 31, 32
Table 8 continued on next pageTuning LSST for Solar System Science 93
Table 8 (continued)
Simulation Name Family Comparison Baseline Included in which gures
presto gap1.5 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto gap2.0 mixv2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto gap2.0 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto gap2.5 mixv2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto gap2.5 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto gap3.0 mixv2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto gap3.0 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto gap3.5 mixv2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto gap3.5 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto gap4.0 mixv2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto gap4.0 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto half gap1.5 mixv2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto half gap1.5 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto half gap2.0 mixv2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto half gap2.0 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto half gap2.5 mixv2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto half gap2.5 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto half gap3.0 mixv2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto half gap3.0 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto half gap3.5 mixv2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto half gap3.5 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto half gap4.0 mixv2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
presto half gap4.0 v2.0 10yrs triplets baseline v2.0 10yrs 31, 32
rolling allskyns2rw0.9 v2.0 10yrs rolling baseline v2.0 10yrs 37
rolling bulge 6v2.0 10yrs rolling baseline v2.0 10yrs 37
rolling bulge ns2rw0.5 v2.0 10yrs rolling baseline v2.0 10yrs 37
rolling bulge ns2rw0.8 v2.0 10yrs rolling baseline v2.0 10yrs 37
rolling bulge ns2rw0.9 v2.0 10yrs rolling baseline v2.0 10yrs 37
rolling ns2rw0.5 v2.0 10yrs rolling baseline v2.0 10yrs 33, 37
rolling ns2rw0.9 v2.0 10yrs rolling baseline v2.0 10yrs 37
rolling ns3rw0.5 v2.0 10yrs rolling baseline v2.0 10yrs 33, 37
rolling ns3rw0.9 v2.0 10yrs rolling baseline v2.0 10yrs 35, 37
roman v2.0 10yrs micro-surveys baseline v2.0 10yrs 43
shave 20v2.1 10yrs vary expt baseline v2.1 10yrs 20
shave 22v2.1 10yrs vary expt baseline v2.1 10yrs 20
shave 25v2.1 10yrs vary expt baseline v2.1 10yrs 20
shave 28v2.1 10yrs vary expt baseline v2.1 10yrs 20
shave 30v2.1 10yrs vary expt baseline v2.1 10yrs 20
shave 32v2.1 10yrs vary expt baseline v2.1 10yrs 20
shave 35v2.1 10yrs vary expt baseline v2.1 10yrs 20
shave 38v2.1 10yrs vary expt baseline v2.1 10yrs 20
shave 40v2.1 10yrs vary expt baseline v2.1 10yrs 20
short expv2.0 10yrs micro-surveys baseline v2.0 10yrs 43
sixrolling ns6rw0.5 v2.0 10yrs rolling baseline v2.0 10yrs 33, 37
sixrolling ns6rw0.9 v2.0 10yrs rolling baseline v2.0 10yrs 36, 37
smcmovie v2.0 10yrs micro-surveys baseline v2.0 10yrs 43
toorate10 v2.0 10yrs micro-surveys baseline v2.0 10yrs 43
Table 8 continued on next page94 Schwamb et al.
Table 8 (continued)
Simulation Name Family Comparison Baseline Included in which gures
toorate50 v2.0 10yrs micro-surveys baseline v2.0 10yrs 43
twineobrightest repeat3 iznp1v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 iznp2v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 iznp3v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 iznp4v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 iznp5v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 iznp6v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 iznp7v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 riznp1v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 riznp2v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 riznp3v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 riznp4v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 riznp5v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 riznp6v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 riznp7v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 znp1v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 znp2v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 znp3v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 znp4v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 znp5v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 znp6v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat3 znp7v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 iznp1v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 iznp2v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 iznp3v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 iznp4v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 iznp5v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 iznp6v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 iznp7v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 riznp1v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 riznp2v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 riznp3v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 riznp4v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 riznp5v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 riznp6v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 riznp7v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 znp1v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 znp2v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 znp3v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 znp4v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 znp5v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 znp6v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineobrightest repeat4 znp7v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 iznp1v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 iznp2v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 iznp3v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 iznp4v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
Table 8 continued on next pageTuning LSST for Solar System Science 95
Table 8 (continued)
Simulation Name Family Comparison Baseline Included in which gures
twineorepeat3 iznp5v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 iznp6v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 iznp7v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 riznp1v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 riznp2v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 riznp3v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 riznp4v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 riznp5v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 riznp6v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 riznp7v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 znp1v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 znp2v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 znp3v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 znp4v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 znp5v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 znp6v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat3 znp7v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 iznp1v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 40, 41, 42
twineorepeat4 iznp2v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 iznp3v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 iznp4v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 iznp5v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 iznp6v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 iznp7v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 riznp1v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 40, 41, 42
twineorepeat4 riznp2v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 riznp3v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 riznp4v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 riznp5v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 riznp6v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 riznp7v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 znp1v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 znp2v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 znp3v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 znp4v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 znp5v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 znp6v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
twineorepeat4 znp7v2.2 10yrs twilight neo 15s baseline v2.2 10yrs 41, 42
ulong ms30v1.7 10yrs ulong baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 18
ulong ms40v1.7 10yrs ulong baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 18
ulong ms50v1.7 10yrs ulong baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 18
ulong ms60v1.7 10yrs ulong baseline nexp2 v1.7 10yrs 18
vary expt v2.0 10yrs vary expt baseline v2.0 10yrs 19
vary gpgpfrac0.01 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary gpgpfrac0.05 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary gpgpfrac0.10 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary gpgpfrac0.15 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
Table 8 continued on next page96 Schwamb et al.
Table 8 (continued)
Simulation Name Family Comparison Baseline Included in which gures
vary gpgpfrac0.20 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary gpgpfrac0.25 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary gpgpfrac0.30 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary gpgpfrac0.35 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary gpgpfrac0.40 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary gpgpfrac0.45 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary gpgpfrac0.50 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary gpgpfrac0.55 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary gpgpfrac0.75 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary gpgpfrac1.00 v2.0 10yrs vary gp baseline v2.0 10yrs 14
vary nesnesfrac0.01 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac0.05 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac0.10 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac0.15 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac0.20 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac0.25 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac0.30 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac0.35 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac0.40 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac0.45 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac0.50 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac0.55 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac0.75 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 2, 12, 13
vary nesnesfrac1.00 v2.0 10yrs vary nes baseline v2.0 10yrs 12, 13
virgo cluster v2.0 10yrs micro-surveys baseline v2.0 10yrs 43Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 97
C.METRICS VALUES FOR THE V2.1 BASELINE CADENCE SIMULATION
REFERENCES
Abareshi, B., Aguilar, J., Ahlen, S., et al. 2022,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2205.10939.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.10939
Adams, E. R., Gulbis, A. A. S., Elliot, J. L., et al.
2014, AJ, 148, 55,
doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/148/3/55
A'Hearn, M. F., Schleicher, D. G., Millis, R. L.,
Feldman, P. D., & Thompson, D. T. 1984, AJ,
89, 579, doi: 10.1086/113552
Amiaux, J., Scaramella, R., Mellier, Y., et al.
2012, in Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series, Vol. 8442, Space Telescopes and
Instrumentation 2012: Optical, Infrared, and
Millimeter Wave, ed. M. C. Clampin, G. G.
Fazio, H. A. MacEwen, & J. Oschmann,
Jacobus M., 84420Z, doi: 10.1117/12.926513
Andreoni, I., Coughlin, M. W., Almualla, M.,
et al. 2022, ApJS, 258, 5,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac3bae
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud,
E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, 558, A33,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M.,
Sip} ocz, B. M., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Lian
Lim, P., et al. 2022, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2206.14220.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.14220
Bannister, M. T., Gladman, B. J., Kavelaars,
J. J., et al. 2018, ApJS, 236, 18,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/aab77a
Batygin, K., Adams, F. C., Brown, M. E., &
Becker, J. C. 2019, PhR, 805, 1,
doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2019.01.009
Batygin, K., & Brown, M. E. 2016, AJ, 151, 22,
doi: 10.3847/0004-6256/151/2/22
Bell, K. J., & Hermes, J. J. 2018, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1812.03143.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.03143
Bellm, E. C., Burke, C. J., Coughlin, M. W., et al.
2022, ApJS, 258, 13,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac4602Belyakov, M., Bernardinelli, P. H., & Brown,
M. E. 2022, AJ, 163, 216,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac5c56
Bernardinelli, P. H., Bernstein, G. M., Sako, M.,
et al. 2020, PSJ, 1, 28, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ab9d80
|. 2022, ApJS, 258, 41,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac3914
Bianco, F., & the SCOC. 2022, Survey Cadence
Optimization Committee's Phase 2
Recommendations. https://pstn-055.lsst.io/
Bianco, F. B., Drout, M. R., Graham, M. L., et al.
2019, PASP, 131, 068002,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab121a
Bianco, F. B., Ivezi c, Z., Jones, R. L., et al. 2022,
ApJS, 258, 1, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac3e72
Bolin, B., Jedicke, R., Granvik, M., et al. 2014,
Icarus, 241, 280,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2014.05.026
Bolin, B. T., Masci, F. J., Ye, Q. Z., et al. 2020a,
Minor Planet Electronic Circulars, 2020-A99
Bolin, B. T., Fremling, C., Holt, T. R., et al.
2020b, ApJL, 900, L45,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abae69
Bolin, B. T., Lisse, C. M., Kasliwal, M. M., et al.
2020c, The Astronomical Journal, 160, 26,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab9305
Bolin, B. T., Ahumada, T., van Dokkum, P., et al.
2022, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society: Letters,
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slac089
Bolin, B. T. B., Ahumada, T., van Dokkum, P.,
et al. 2023, Icarus, accepted
Borisov, G. 2019, Minor Planet Electronic
Circular No. 2019-R106 (September 11).
https://www.minorplanetcenter.net/mpec/
K19/K19RA6.html
Bosch, J., Lupton, R., & Slater, C. 2019, Crowded
Field Photometry in LSST Data Release
Production. https://dmtn-129.lsst.io/
Brandt, W. N., Ni, Q., Yang, G., et al. 2018,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1811.06542.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.06542
Brasser, R., Duncan, M. J., & Levison, H. F. 2006,
Icarus, 184, 59, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2006.04.01098 Schwamb et al.
Table 9. Metric values for baseline v2.1 10yrs
from the latest version of rubin sim. These values
all represent the percent of the expected popula-
tion which would \pass" the metric requirements.
Metric Value (%)
Completeness PHA H<=6.0 93.9
Completeness PHA H<=22.0 59.6
Completeness NEO H<=16.0 93.0
Completeness NEO H<=22.0 58.2
Completeness MBA H<=16.0 100.0
Completeness MBA H<=21.0 54.3
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=14.0 100.0
Completeness Jupiter Trojan H<=18.0 43.8
Completeness TNO H<=6.0 69.9
Completeness TNO H<=8.0 48.0
Completeness OCC r5H<=8.0 93.8
Completeness OCC r5H<=17.0 64.0
Completeness OCC r20H<=8.0 85.5
Completeness OCC r20H<=12.0 60.5
Completeness 'Ayl o 'chaxnimH <=16.0 0.04
Completeness 'Ayl o 'chaxnimH <=20.5 0.02
Completeness (quads) 'Ayl o 'chaxnimH <=16.0 0.17
Completeness (quads) 'Ayl o 'chaxnimH <=20.5 0.13
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=16.0 46.6
Fraction LC Inversion PHA H=19.0 5.5
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=16.0 48.1
Fraction LC Inversion NEO H=19.0 5.5
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=16.0 94.7
Fraction LC Inversion MBA H=18.0 15.5
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=14.0 94.3
Fraction LC Inversion Jupiter Trojan H=15.0 11.9
Fraction 4 of grizy PHA H=16.0 84.0
Fraction 4 of grizy PHA H=19.0 52.3
Fraction 4 of grizy NEO H=16.0 85.4
Fraction 4 of grizy NEO H=19.0 52.4
Fraction 4 of grizy MBA H=16.0 100.0
Fraction 4 of grizy MBA H=18.0 89.6
Fraction 4 of grizy Jupiter Trojan H=14.0 100.0
Fraction 4 of grizy Jupiter Trojan H=15.0 100.0
Fraction 4 lters TNO H=6.0 59.8
Fraction 4 lters TNO H=7.0 41.5
Fraction 4 lters OCC r5H=8.0 82.9
Fraction 4 lters OCC r5H=14.0 33.4
Fraction 4 lters OCC r20H=8.0 76.3
Fraction 4 lters OCC r20H=11.0 38.4
Note |`Completeness' refers to the discovery completeness for
each sample population at the indicated Hvalue, while `Frac-
tion LC Inversion'refers to the fraction of each population which
would have observations which meet the metric requirements
implying that object would be a good subject for lightcurve in-
version. Likewise for `Fraction 4 lters', showing the fraction of
each population which would be likely to obtain colors in four
lters. Full descriptions of the metrics are listed in Tables 2
and 3.
Note |Values for other cadence simulations can be found
at via https://github.com/lsst-pst/survey strategy/tree/main/
fbs1.7 and https://github.com/lsst-pst/survey strategy/tree/
main/fbs 2.0.Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 99
Brasser, R., Duncan, M. J., Levison, H. F.,
Schwamb, M. E., & Brown, M. E. 2012, Icarus,
217, 1, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2011.10.012
Brasser, R., Higuchi, A., & Kaib, N. 2010, A&A,
516, A72, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014275
Brown, M. 2022, Planet Nine reference
population, Version 2.0, CaltechDATA,
doi: 10.22002/D1.11545
Brown, M. E., & Batygin, K. 2016, ApJL, 824,
L23, doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/824/2/L23
|. 2019, AJ, 157, 62,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aaf051
|. 2021, AJ, 162, 219,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac2056
|. 2022, AJ, 163, 102,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac32dd
Capak, P., Sconlic, D., Cuillandre, J.-C., et al.
2019a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1904.10438.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.10438
Capak, P., Cuillandre, J.-C., Bernardeau, F., et al.
2019b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1904.10439.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.10439
Carry, B. 2018, A&A, 609, A113,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201730386
Chang, C.-K., Ip, W.-H., Lin, H.-W., et al. 2014,
ApJ, 788, 17, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/788/1/17
Chang, C.-K., Lin, H.-W., Ip, W.-H., et al. 2019,
ApJS, 241, 6, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab01fe
Chang, C.-K., Chen, Y.-T., Fraser, W. C., et al.
2021, PSJ, 2, 191, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ac13a4
Chang, C.-K., Yeh, T.-S., Tan, H., et al. 2022,
ApJL, 932, L5, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac6e5e
Connolly, A. J., Angeli, G. Z., Chandrasekharan,
S., et al. 2014, in Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series, Vol. 9150, Modeling, Systems
Engineering, and Project Management for
Astronomy VI, ed. G. Z. Angeli & P. Dierickx,
915014, doi: 10.1117/12.2054953
Cook, N. V., Ragozzine, D., Granvik, M., &
Stephens, D. C. 2016, ApJ, 825, 51,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/825/1/51
de la Fuente Marcos, C., & de la Fuente Marcos,
R. 2020a, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society Letters, 494, L6,
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slaa027
|. 2020b, MNRAS, 494, 1089,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa809|. 2022, Research Notes of the American
Astronomical Society, 6, 160,
doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/ac8809
Delgado, F., & Reuter, M. A. 2016, in Society of
Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 9910,
Observatory Operations: Strategies, Processes,
and Systems VI, ed. A. B. Peck, R. L. Seaman,
& C. R. Benn, 991013, doi: 10.1117/12.2233630
Delgado, F., Saha, A., Chandrasekharan, S., et al.
2014, in Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series, Vol. 9150, Modeling, Systems
Engineering, and Project Management for
Astronomy VI, ed. G. Z. Angeli & P. Dierickx,
915015, doi: 10.1117/12.2056898
DeMeo, F. E., Binzel, R. P., Slivan, S. M., & Bus,
S. J. 2009, Icarus, 202, 160,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2009.02.005
Dones, L., Brasser, R., Kaib, N., & Rickman, H.
2015, SSRv, 197, 191,
doi: 10.1007/s11214-015-0223-2
Eggl, S., Jones, L., & Juri c, M. 2019, LSST
Asteroid Discovery Rates.
https://dmtn-109.lsst.io/
Emel'yanenko, V. V. 2022, A&A, 662, L4,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202243324
Engelhardt, T., Jedicke, R., Vere s, P., et al. 2017,
AJ, 153, 133, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa5c8a
Everhart, E. 1967, AJ, 72, 716,
doi: 10.1086/110299
Fedorets, G., Granvik, M., Jones, R. L., Juri c, M.,
& Jedicke, R. 2020a, Icarus, 338, 113517,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2019.113517
Fedorets, G., Micheli, M., Jedicke, R., et al. 2020b,
AJ, 160, 277, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abc3bc
Ferguson, H. C., Banerji, M., Brough, S., et al.
2021, The LSST Galaxies Science Collaboration
Response to the Survey Cadence Optimization
Committee Call.
https://docushare.lsst.org/docushare/dsweb/
Get/Document-37637/Galaxies Summary.pdf
Fern andez, J. A. 1997, Icarus, 129, 106,
doi: 10.1006/icar.1997.5754
Francis, P. J. 2005, ApJ, 635, 1348,
doi: 10.1086/497684
Gehrels, T., & Jedicke, R. 1996, Earth Moon and
Planets, 72, 233, doi: 10.1007/BF00117523
Gladman, B., & Chan, C. 2006, ApJL, 643, L135,
doi: 10.1086/505214100 Schwamb et al.
Gladman, B., & Volk, K. 2021, ARA&A, 59, 203,
doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-120920-010005
Gladman, B., Lawler, S. M., Petit, J. M., et al.
2012, AJ, 144, 23,
doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/144/1/23
G orski, K. M., Hivon, E., Banday, A. J., et al.
2005, ApJ, 622, 759, doi: 10.1086/427976
Granvik, M., Vaubaillon, J., & Jedicke, R. 2012,
Icarus, 218, 262,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2011.12.003
Granvik, M., Virtanen, J., Oszkiewicz, D., &
Muinonen, K. 2009, M&PS, 44, 1853,
doi: 10.1111/j.1945-5100.2009.tb01994.x
Granvik, M., Morbidelli, A., Jedicke, R., et al.
2016, Nature, 530, 303,
doi: 10.1038/nature16934
|. 2018, Icarus, 312, 181,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2018.04.018
Grav, T., Jedicke, R., Denneau, L., et al. 2011,
PASP, 123, 423, doi: 10.1086/659833
Grav, T., Mainzer, A. K., & Spahr, T. 2016, AJ,
151, 172, doi: 10.3847/0004-6256/151/6/172
Greenstreet, S. 2020, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society Letters, 493, L129,
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slaa025
Greenstreet, S., Ngo, H., & Gladman, B. 2012,
Icarus, 217, 355,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2011.11.010
Guy, L. P., Bellm, E., Blum, B., et al. 2021, Rubin
Observatory Plans for an Early Science
Program. https://rtn-011.lsst.io/
Guy, L. P., Cuillandre, J.-C., Bachelet, E., et al.
2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03862
Hainaut, O. R., & Williams, A. P. 2020, A&A,
636, A121, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202037501
Halferty, G., Reddy, V., Campbell, T., Battle, A.,
& Furfaro, R. 2022, MNRAS,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac2080
Hall, J., Walker, C., Rawls, M., et al. 2021, in
Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society,
2.205, doi: 10.3847/25c2cfeb.4554c01f
Hanu s, J., Durech, J., Bro z, M., et al. 2011, A&A,
530, A134, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201116738
Hanu s, J., Delbo', M., Al -Lagoa, V., et al. 2018,
Icarus, 299, 84, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2017.07.007
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J.,
et al. 2020, Nature, 585, 357,
doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2Hergenrother, C. W., & Whiteley, R. J. 2011,
Icarus, 214, 194,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2011.03.023
Higuchi, A. 2020, AJ, 160, 134,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aba94d
Higuchi, A., Kokubo, E., Kinoshita, H., & Mukai,
T. 2007, AJ, 134, 1693, doi: 10.1086/521815
Holwerda, B. W., Baker, A., Blyth, S., et al. 2018,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1812.03144.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.03144
Hoover, D. J., Seligman, D. Z., & Payne, M. J.
2022, PSJ, 3, 71, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ac58fe
Hu, J. A., Rawls, M. L., Yoachim, P., & Ivezi c, Z.
2022, ApJL, 941, L15,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aca592
Huang, Y., Gladman, B., Beaudoin, M., & Zhang,
K. 2022, ApJL, 938, L23,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac9480
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science &
Engineering, 9, 90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Ip, W.-H., Masci, F. J., Ye, Q., et al. 2022, The
Astrophysical Journal Letters, 935, L6,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac8470
Ivezi c, Z.., & the LSST Science Collaboration.
2013, LSST Science Requirements Document.
http://ls.st/LPM-17
Ivezi c, Z.., & the SCOC. 2021, Survey Cadence
Optimization Committee's Phase 1
Recommendation. https://pstn-053.lsst.io/
Ivezi c, Z., Tabachnik, S., Rakov, R., et al. 2001,
AJ, 122, 2749, doi: 10.1086/323452
Ivezi c, Z., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019,
ApJ, 873, 111, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c
Jedicke, R., Bolin, B., Granvik, M., & Beshore, E.
2016, Icarus, 266, 173,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2015.10.021
Jedicke, R., Bolin, B. T., Bottke, W. F., et al.
2018, Frontiers in Astronomy and Space
Sciences, 5, 13, doi: 10.3389/fspas.2018.00013
Jones, R. L., Yoachim, P., Ivezic, Z., Neilsen,
E. H., & Ribeiro, T. 2020, Survey Strategy and
Cadence Choices for the Vera C. Rubin
Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time
(LSST), v1.2, Zenodo,
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.4048838
Jones, R. L., Chesley, S. R., Connolly, A. J., et al.
2009, Earth Moon and Planets, 105, 101,
doi: 10.1007/s11038-009-9305-zTuning LSST for Solar System Science 101
Jones, R. L., Yoachim, P., Chandrasekharan, S.,
et al. 2014, in Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series, Vol. 9149, Observatory Operations:
Strategies, Processes, and Systems V, ed. A. B.
Peck, C. R. Benn, & R. L. Seaman, 91490B,
doi: 10.1117/12.2056835
Jones, R. L., Slater, C. T., Moeyens, J., et al.
2018, Icarus, 303, 181,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2017.11.033
Juri c, M., Eggl, S., Moeyens, J., & Jones, L. 2020,
Proposed Modications to Solar System
Processing and Data Products.
https://dmtn-087.lsst.io/
Juri c, M., Axelrod, T., Becker, A., et al. 2021,
Data Products Denition Document.
https://lse-163.lsst.io/
Kaib, N. A., Ro skar, R., & Quinn, T. 2011, Icarus,
215, 491, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2011.07.037
Kavelaars, J. J., Lawler, S. M., Bannister, M. T.,
& Shankman, C. 2020, in The Trans-Neptunian
Solar System, ed. D. Prialnik, M. A. Barucci, &
L. Young (Elsevier), 61{77,
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-816490-7.00003-5
Kluyver, T., Ragan-Kelley, B., P erez, F., et al.
2016, in Positioning and Power in Academic
Publishing: Players, Agents and Agendas, ed.
F. Loizides & B. Scmidt (IOS Press), 87{90.
https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/403913/
Kocifaj, M., Kundracik, F., Barentine, J. C., &
Bar a, S. 2021, MNRAS, 504, L40,
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slab030
Kwiatkowski, T., Kryszczy nska, A., Poli nska, M.,
et al. 2009, A&A, 495, 967,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:200810965
Larson, S., Beshore, E., Hill, R., et al. 2003, in
AAS/Division for Planetary Sciences Meeting
Abstracts, Vol. 35, AAS/Division for Planetary
Sciences Meeting Abstracts #35, 36.04
Laureijs, R., Amiaux, J., Arduini, S., et al. 2011,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1110.3193.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1110.3193
Lawler, S. M., Boley, A. C., & Rein, H. 2022, AJ,
163, 21, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac341b
Levine, W. G., Cabot, S. H. C., Seligman, D., &
Laughlin, G. 2021, ApJ, 922, 39,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac1fe6
Li, X., Ragosta, F., Clarkson, W. I., & Bianco,
F. B. 2022, ApJS, 258, 2,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac3bcaLin, H. W., Gerdes, D. W., Hamilton, S. J., et al.
2019, Icarus, 321, 426,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2018.12.006
Lin, H. W., Chen, Y.-T., Volk, K., et al. 2021,
Icarus, 361, 114391,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2021.114391
Lochner, M., Scolnic, D. M., Awan, H., et al.
2018, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1812.00515.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.00515
Lochner, M., Scolnic, D., Almoubayyed, H., et al.
2022, ApJS, 259, 58,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac5033
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration (LSST
DESC), Abolfathi, B., Alonso, D., et al. 2021,
ApJS, 253, 31, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/abd62c
LSST Science Collaboration, Abell, P. A., Allison,
J., et al. 2009, ArXiv e-prints.
https://arxiv.org/abs/0912.0201
LSST Science Collaboration, Marshall, P.,
Anguita, T., et al. 2017, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1708.04058.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.04058
Luu, J. X., & Jewitt, D. 1988, AJ, 95, 1256,
doi: 10.1086/114721
Malhotra, R. 2019, Nature Astronomy, 3, 193,
doi: 10.1038/s41550-019-0697-z
Markwardt, L., Gerdes, D. W., Malhotra, R.,
et al. 2020, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 492, 6105,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa232
Marzari, F., Scholl, H., Murray, C., & Lagerkvist,
C. 2002, in Asteroids III (The University of
Arizona Press), 725{738
Masiero, J., Jedicke, R., Durech, J., et al. 2009,
Icarus, 204, 145,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2009.06.012
McCully, C., Crawford, S., Kovacs, G., et al. 2018,
Astropy/Astroscrappy: V1.0.5 Zenodo Release,
v1.0.5, Zenodo, Zenodo,
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.1482019
McDowell, J. C. 2020, ApJL, 892, L36,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab8016
Meech, K. J., Weryk, R., Micheli, M., et al. 2017,
Nature, 552, 378, doi: 10.1038/nature25020
Mommert, M., Kelley, M., de Val-Borro, M., et al.
2019, The Journal of Open Source Software, 4,
1426, doi: 10.21105/joss.01426
Morbidelli, A., & Levison, H. F. 2004, AJ, 128,
2564, doi: 10.1086/424617102 Schwamb et al.
Moreno, F., Pozuelos, F. J., Novakovi c, B., et al.
2017, ApJL, 837, L3,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa6036
Moro-Mart n, A., Turner, E. L., & Loeb, A. 2009,
ApJ, 704, 733,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/704/1/733
Muinonen, K., Torppa, J., Wang, X. B., Cellino,
A., & Penttil a, A. 2020, A&A, 642, A138,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038036
Myers, J., Jones, L., & Axelrod, T. 2013, Moving
Object Pipeline System Design.
https://docushare.lsst.org/docushare/dsweb/
Get/LDM-156/LDM-156.pdf
Naghib, E., Yoachim, P., Vanderbei, R. J.,
Connolly, A. J., & Jones, R. L. 2019, AJ, 157,
151, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aafece
Naidu, S. P., Micheli, M., Farnocchia, D., et al.
2021, ApJL, 913, L6,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abf836
Napier, K. J., Gerdes, D. W., Lin, H. W., et al.
2021, PSJ, 2, 59, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/abe53e
Oldroyd, W. J., & Trujillo, C. A. 2021, AJ, 162,
39, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abfb6f
Olsen, K., Di Criscienzo, M., Jones, R. L., et al.
2018, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1812.02204.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02204
pandas development team, T. 2020,
pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas, latest, Zenodo,
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134
Petit, J. M., Kavelaars, J. J., Gladman, B. J.,
et al. 2011, AJ, 142, 131,
doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/142/4/131
Popescu, M., de Leo, J., de la Fuente Marcos, C.,
et al. 2020, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 496, 3572,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1728
Pravec, P., & Harris, A. W. 2000, Icarus, 148, 12,
doi: 10.1006/icar.2000.6482
Raymond, S. N., & Nesvorn y, D. 2022, in Vesta
and Ceres. Insights from the Dawn Mission for
the Origin of the Solar System (Cambridge
University Press), 227,
doi: 10.1017/9781108856324.019
Rhoads, J. E. 2000, PASP, 112, 703,
doi: 10.1086/316559
Schwamb, M. E., Jones, R. L., Chesley, S. R.,
et al. 2018a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1802.01783.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.01783Schwamb, M. E., Volk, K., Wen, H., et al. 2018b,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1812.01149.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.01149
Schwamb, M. E., Juri c, M., Bolin, B. T., et al.
2021, Research Notes of the American
Astronomical Society, 5, 143,
doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/ac090f
Scolnic, D. M., Lochner, M., Gris, P., et al. 2018,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1812.00516.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.00516
Seaman, R., Abell, P., Christensen, E., et al. 2018,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1812.00466.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.00466
Seligman, D., & Laughlin, G. 2018, AJ, 155, 217,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabd37
Setzer, C. N., Biswas, R., Peiris, H. V., et al. 2019,
MNRAS, 485, 4260, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz506
Shamir, L. 2005, Astronomische Nachrichten, 326,
428, doi: 10.1002/asna.200510364
Shankman, C., Kavelaars, J. J., Bannister, M. T.,
et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 50,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa7aed
Shannon, A., Jackson, A. P., Veras, D., & Wyatt,
M. 2015, MNRAS, 446, 2059,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu2267
Shao, M., Nemati, B., Zhai, C., et al. 2014, ApJ,
782, 1, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/782/1/1
Sheppard, S. S., & Trujillo, C. 2016, AJ, 152, 221,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/152/6/221
Sheppard, S. S., Tholen, D., Pokorny, P., et al.
2022, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2209.06245.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.06245
Shober, P. M., Jansen-Sturgeon, T., Sansom,
E. K., et al. 2019, AJ, 158, 183,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab3f2d
Silsbee, K., & Tremaine, S. 2016, AJ, 152, 103,
doi: 10.3847/0004-6256/152/4/103
Slyusarev, I. G., & Belskaya, I. N. 2014, Solar
System Research, 48, 139,
doi: 10.1134/S0038094614020063
Smotherman, H., Connolly, A. J., Kalmbach,
J. B., et al. 2021, AJ, 162, 245,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac22
Snodgrass, C., & Jones, G. H. 2019, Nature
Communications, 10, 5418,
doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-13470-1
Snodgrass, C., Carry, B., Berthier, J., et al. 2018,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1812.00607.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.00607Tuning LSST for Solar System Science 103
Solontoi, M., Ivezi c, Z., West, A. A., et al. 2010,
Icarus, 205, 605,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2009.07.042
Tonry, J. L., Denneau, L., Heinze, A. N., et al.
2018, PASP, 130, 064505,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aabadf
Trilling, D. E., Bannister, M., Fuentes, C., et al.
2018a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1812.09705.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.09705
Trilling, D. E., Bellm, E. C., & Malhotra, R.
2018b, AJ, 155, 243,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabfc0
Trilling, D. E., Robinson, T., Roegge, A., et al.
2017, ApJL, 850, L38,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa9989
Trujillo, C. A., & Brown, M. E. 2001, ApJL, 554,
L95, doi: 10.1086/320917
Trujillo, C. A., & Sheppard, S. S. 2014, Nature,
507, 471, doi: 10.1038/nature13156
Tyson, J. A., Ivezi c, Z., Bradshaw, A., et al. 2020,
AJ, 160, 226, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abba3e
van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G.
2011, Computing in Science and Engineering,
13, 22, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2011.37
van Dokkum, P. G. 2001, PASP, 113, 1420,
doi: 10.1086/323894
Durech, J., Hanu s, J., Oszkiewicz, D., & Van co,
R. 2016, A&A, 587, A48,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201527573
Vere s, P., & Chesley, S. R. 2017, AJ, 154, 13,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa73d0
Verma, A., Collett, T., Smith, G. P., Strong
Lensing Science Collaboration, & the DESC
Strong Lensing Science Working Group. 2019,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1902.05141.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.05141
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al.
2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261,
doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2
Vokrouhlick y, D., Nesvorn y, D., & Dones, L. 2019,
AJ, 157, 181, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab13aa
Volk, K., Murray-Clay, R., Gladman, B., et al.
2016, AJ, 152, 23,
doi: 10.3847/0004-6256/152/1/23
Walker, C., Hall, J., Allen, L., et al. 2020a, in
Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society,
Vol. 52, 0206, doi: 10.3847/25c2cfeb.346793b8Walker, C., Di Pippo, S., Aub e, M., et al. 2020b,
Dark & Quiet Skies I (2020), Dark & Quiet
Skies I (2020), Report of the conference held 5-9
October, 2020., doi: 10.5281/zenodo.5898785
|. 2021, Dark & Quiet Skies II (2021), Dark &
Quiet Skies II (2021), Report of the conference
held 3-7 October, 2021.,
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.5874725
Warner, B. D., Harris, A. W., & Pravec, P. 2009,
Icarus, 202, 134,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2009.02.003
|. 2021, NASA Planetary Data System, 10,
doi: 10.26033/j3xc-3359
Waskom, M. 2021, The Journal of Open Source
Software, 6, 3021, doi: 10.21105/joss.03021
Ye, Q., Masci, F. J., Lin, H. W., et al. 2019,
PASP, 131, 078002,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab1b18
Ye, Q., Kelley, M. S. P., Bolin, B. T., et al. 2020,
The Astronomical Journal, 159, 77,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab659b
Yoachim, P. 2021, Survey Strategy: Rolling
Cadence. https://pstn-052.lsst.io/
|. 2022, Survey Strategy Simulation v2.x Results.
https://smtn-017.lsst.io/
Yoachim, P., Coughlin, M., Angeli, G. Z., et al.
2016, in Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series, Vol. 9910, Observatory Operations:
Strategies, Processes, and Systems VI, ed. A. B.
Peck, R. L. Seaman, & C. R. Benn, 99101A,
doi: 10.1117/12.2232947
Yoachim, P., Jones, L., Eric H. Neilsen, J., et al.
2022, lsst/rubin sim: Version 1.0, v1.0.0,
Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.7374619
Zderic, A., & Madigan, A.-M. 2020, AJ, 160, 50,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab962f
Zonca, A., Singer, L., Lenz, D., et al. 2019, The
Journal of Open Source Software, 4, 1298,
doi: 10.21105/joss.01298