arXiv:2303.06608v1  [eess.SP]  12 Mar 2023TOWARDS BANDWIDTH ESTIMATION FOR GRAPH SIGNAL RECONSTRUCT ION
Ajinkya Jayawant, Antonio Ortega
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Univer sity of Southern California
ABSTRACT
In numerous graph signal processing applications, data is o f-
ten missing for a variety of reasons, and predicting the miss -
ing data is essential. In this paper, we consider data on grap hs
modeled as bandlimited graph signals. Predicting or recon-
structing the unknown signal values for such a model require s
an estimate of the signal bandwidth. In this paper, we addres s
the problem of estimating the reconstruction errors, minim iz-
ing which would thereby provide an estimate of the signal
bandwidth. In doing so, we design a cross-validation ap-
proach needed for stable graph signal reconstruction and pr o-
pose a method for estimating the reconstruction errors for d if-
ferent choices of signal bandwidth. Using this technique, w e
are able to estimate the reconstruction error on a variety of
real-world graphs.
Index Terms —Graph, signal, bandwidth, reconstruction,
estimation.
1. INTRODUCTION
Graphs naturally arise in a number of applications such as
data analysis in various types of networks (e.g., sensor, tr afﬁc
or social networks). Information related to the nodes in the
network constitutes a graph signal [1]. Graph signals in pra c-
tical scenarios are often incomplete due to a variety of rea-
sons – sensor failure [2], occlusions [3], measurements out -
side range of sensors [4]. As a result, the values of a graph
signal on certain nodes may be unknown to us. In theory, we
can predict missing data on the graph provided that the sig-
nal is smooth. This prediction is perfect if signal values ar e
known on enough nodes and the underlying graph signal is
bandlimited [5], [6]. Given the bandwidth of the graph sig-
nal, the original signal can be predicted or reconstructed b y
solving an inverse problem [7], [8].
Note that reconstructing the signal using the bandlimited
signal model requires knowledge of the bandwidth of the sig-
nal. Most papers in the graph signal processing literature
[5, 9, 7, 8] simply assume that this bandwidth is known. How-
ever, in many real scenarios, only the signal values on a lim-
ited number of nodes are known, while the bandwidth of the
signal is unknown. To add to this difﬁculty, in reality signa ls
are not bandlimited to a certain maximum frequency because
of either (i) noise in the signal, or (ii) a mismatch between t hechosen graph construction and a hypothetical graph constru c-
tion for which observed signals would be bandlimited.
Even if the exact signal bandwidth is unknown (or if the
signal is not exactly bandlimited), reconstruction using t he
bandlimited model of the signal remains useful because it
signiﬁes signal smoothness which is a reasonable assump-
tion for many real-life signals like temperature. This mean s
that it is important to optimize the choice of the bandwidth o f
the signal for reconstruction, regardless of whether the or igi-
nal signal is bandlimited or not. Since the reconstruction e r-
ror of the signal usually varies with the choice of the recon-
struction bandwidth, the bandwidth which gives us the small -
est error over a choice of different bandwidths would be the
right choice for reconstruction. To select a bandwidth in su ch
a way, we need the know reconstruction error for different
choices of bandwidth. However, we cannot calculate the over -
all reconstruction error since there are missing signal val ues.
Thus, we need an estimate of the actual reconstruction error .
Our main contribution is to formulate the problem of se-
lecting a reconstruction bandwidth from data, without know l-
edge of the actual graph signal bandwidth, a problem as yet
not considered in the graph signal sampling and reconstruc-
tion literature (see [6] for a review). We propose a solu-
tion that uses a novel cross-validation methodology based o n
graph signal sampling concepts. Speciﬁcally, we solve the
problem of estimating the reconstruction error which is es-
sential to select a reconstruction bandwidth.
In a standard cross-validation setting, multiple random
subsets are used to validate parameter choices. We show
that using random subsets for our problem can result in ill-
conditioned reconstruction operators and propose a techni que
that mitigates the effects of ill-conditioning by giving di f-
ferent importance to each random subset. This approach
signiﬁcantly improves the error estimation, and our propos ed
method estimates the squared reconstruction error with goo d
accuracy for a wide variety of both synthetic and real-life
graphs and signals.
2. PROBLEM FORMULATION
2.1. Notation
For a graph with nnodes, the ijentrywijof then×n
weighted adjacency matrix Ais edge weight between the ithTable 1 : Notation
Notation Description
AXY Submatrix of Aindexed by X(rows)
andY(columns)
AX A:,X, columns of Aindexed by X
xXorx(X) Subset of xindexed by X
andjthnodes, with wii= 0. The degree matrix Dis a di-
agonal matrix with entries dii=/summationtext
jwij. The combinatorial
Laplacian is given by L=D−A, with its corresponding
eigendecomposition deﬁned as L=UΣUTsince the Lapla-
cian matrix is symmetric and positive semideﬁnite.
The column vectors of Uprovide a basis with frequency
interpretation for graph signals [10], and the operator UTis
usually called the graph Fourier transform (GFT). The eigen -
vectorsuiofLassociated with larger eigenvalues λicor-
respond to higher frequencies, and the ones associated with
lower eigenvalues correspond to lower frequencies [1], wit h
the following convention for the indexing of the eigenvalue s:
λ1≤λ2≤ ··· ≤λn. We denote xa vector,Xa matrix, and
Xa set. We also follow conventions from Table 1.
2.2. Graph signals and reconstruction
We consider n-dimensional scalar real-valued signal xon the
vertex set V. In line with the problem of missing data, we
assume that only a part of this signal is known, correspond-
ing to a subset of vertices, S ⊆ V . We denote xSandxSc
the known and unknown signals, respectively, where Scis the
complement of S. Estimating xScfromxSis the graph signal
reconstruction problem [11]. We denote the reconstructed u n-
known signal as ˆxSc, and quantify its closeness with the orig-
inal signal, xSc, using the ℓ2norm/bardblxSc−ˆxSc/bardbl2
2. However,
for signal reconstruction a signal model needs to be chosen.
A popular choice for a smooth graph signal is the bandlimited
signal model [7].
2.3. Signal model
In this paper we consider bandlimited signals deﬁned as
f=URα, whereRis the set {1,···,r}, andαis anr-
dimensional vector. We call rthe bandwidth of the signal.
However, graph signals are rarely exactly bandlimited, so i n
this paper we consider the following more realistic model of
a bandlimited signal with added noise:
x=URα+n, (1)
wherenis ann-dimensional noise vector.2.4. Model selection for reconstruction
With the signal model in (1) and known signal values xS, the
signal on Sccan be reconstructed as:
ˆxSc=UScR(UT
SRUSR)−1UT
SRxS.
This is a least squares reconstruction and is typical [7] whe n
the size of the known signal set is larger than the signal band -
width used for reconstruction, |S|> r, which is the setting we
consider in this paper. Note that this reconstruction requi res
the signal bandwidth rto be known, regardless of whether
the signal is bandlimited or bandlimited with additional no ise.
Most reconstruction algorithms assume that this bandwidth is
known [5, 9, 12]. However, fundamentally this is a model
selection problem where an appropriate bandlimited signal
model with a ﬁxed bandwidth rneeds to be chosen.
2.5. Bandwidth selection through reconstruction errors
Although the goal of model selection for signal reconstruct ion
is to choose r, the signal itself might not be bandlimited. As a
result, there may not be any prior for signal bandwidth. How-
ever, our primary goal is to minimize the reconstruction err or:
ESc=/bardblxSc−ˆxSc/bardbl2, where the estimate ˆxScis a function
ofr, and so is ESc. To select rwe propose a minimization
of/bardblˆxSc−xSc/bardbl2over a set of possible values of r, so that
whichever bandwidth rminimized the error will be used as
the reconstruction bandwidth, r∗= min rESc.
However, minimizing /bardblˆxSc−xSc/bardbl2is impossible with-
out knowing xSc. For that reason, we propose estimating the
error/bardblˆxSc−xSc/bardbl2for different values of rusing the known
signal values, xS. We limit the scope of this paper to estimat-
ing this reconstruction error and leave the bandwidth selec tion
for future work. Towards that end, we want an estimate, ˆESc,
of the reconstruction error EScfor different values of r, with
|ESc−ˆESc|as small as possible.
3. CROSS-V ALIDATION THEORY FOR GRAPH
SIGNALS
In order to accurately estimate the reconstruction error as a
function of the signal bandwidth r, it is essential to analyze
in more detail the error with respect to subset selection on t he
set of graph vertices.
3.1. Conventional error estimation and shortcomings
The reconstruction error, e(Sc), measured over the unknown
nodes is the following:
e(Sc) =xSc−ˆxSc=xSc−UScR(UT
SRUSR)−1UT
SRxS.
To estimate this error we could split the set Sfurther into
the sets{S1,Sc
1},···,{Sk,Sc
k}such that Si∪ Sc
i=SforFig. 1 : Ill-conditioning scenario for a cross-validation subset .
i∈ {1,···,k}and estimate
e(Sc
i) =xSc
i−USc
iR(UT
SiRUSiR)−1UT
SiRxSi
and use the estimate ˆESc=/summationtext
i∈{1,···,k}/bardble(Sc
i)/bardbl2/k. This
would be equivalent to using the standard cross-validation ap-
proach that is typical in linear model selection [13].
The bandlimited component of the signal has no effect
on either e(Sc)ore(Sc
i). Suppose that the noise vector has
some representation, n=URγ+URcβ, we can conve-
niently separate the bandlimited and non-bandlimited com-
ponents of the signal using the following representation: x=
URα′+URcβ, whereα′=α+γ.
Using the new representation of the signal, with the fol-
lowing simpliﬁcation of notation,
M=UScRc−UScR(UT
SRUSR)−1UT
SRUSRc
Mi=USc
iRc−USc
iR(UT
SiRUSiR)−1UT
SiRUSiRc
our errors are
e(Sc) =Mβ,e(Sc
i) =Miβi∈ {1,···,k}.
The matrices MandMiare what mainly differentiate the er-
rorse(Sc)ande(Sc
i). Because the subsets Siare selected
randomly, Mican be ill-conditioned although Mis well-
conditioned. This ill-conditioning often causes the estim ate
of the cross-validation error to be orders of magnitude high er
than the actual error.
Intuitively, this can happen in cases where Sis well con-
nected to ScbutSiis poorly connected to Sc
i. See Fig. 1 for
a toy example where all vertices in the graph are within one
hop ofS, butSiis disconnected from Sc
i. Trying to recon-
struct the signal on Sc
iusing the known signal values on Siis
impossible, and that would be reﬂected as an ill-conditione d
Mi. Although this is a corner case example, it can be general-
ized to similar situations, either less or more extreme, ari sing
when using random graphs subsets for reconstruction.
3.2. Proposed error estimation
As we noted in Section 3.1, averaging of the error over ran-
dom subsets may lead to blowing up of the error estimate due
to ill-conditioning of the reconstruction matrices. To mit i-
gate this, we want to assign different importance to the erro rsover different random subsets. Consider the following sing u-
lar value decomposition and the resulting expression for th e
reconstruction error on the set Sc
i:
Mi=ViΣiWT
i,e(Sc
i) =ViΣiWT
iβ.
SinceViandWiare orthogonal matrices, the primary scal-
ing of the magnitude of βis due toΣi.
To control the scaling of magnitude due to Σiwe would
like to replace the singular values σinΣiwithσ, ifσ <1,
and1, ifσ≥1. This is essentially an operation that clips the
singular values to 1from above. Although we decomposed
Mi, it is worth keeping in mind that we only have access to
e(Sc
i), and in order to control the magnitude of this error, we
can pre-multiply with a matrix. To achieve the transformati on
in the singular values, we multiply e(Sc
i)as follows to get a
new error
enew(Sc
i) =Σ′
iVT
ie(Sc
i), (2)
whereΣ′
iis a|Sc
i|×|Sc
i|diagonal matrix with diagonal entries
1, ifσ <1, and1/σ, ifσ≥1. The subset speciﬁc weighting
in (2) can be seen as giving more importance to certain ver-
tices while ignoring others. Although the weights in Σ′
ido not
directly correspond to the weights on individual vertices, the
weights on individual vertices can be seen as combinations o f
weights on multiplying by the matrix ViΣ′
iVT
i. Finally, we
estimate the error using
ˆESc=/summationtext
i∈{1,···,k}/bardblenew(Sc
i)/bardbl2
k. (3)
4. EXPERIMENTS
4.1. Graph construction
For the initial veriﬁcation of our error estimation approac h,
we construct random regular graphs with 1000 vertices ac-
cording to the model RandomRegular from [14]. We de-
ﬁne noisy bandlimited signals with bandwidths {20,50,120}
and power 1and noise power levels 0.1and0.2according to
the model in (1). We call these graphs and signals as syntheti c
graphs and signals for our experiments.
For the next experimental validation, we use publicly
available climate data from National Oceanic and Atmo-
spheric Administration [15] which has been measured by
sensors throughout the United States. The sensor data con-
sists of different weather measurements like average daily
temperature, daily precipitation along with the latitudes , lon-
gitudes, and altitudes of the corresponding sensors.
Using the locations, we construct graphs by connect-
ing the 5 nearest sensor locations to each sensor. The edge
weights of the graph are given by e−d2/2σ2where we experi-
mentally choose σ= 50 . We calculate the distance dbetween
the measurement locations using the latitude, longitude, a nd
altitude of the measuring station using/radicalBig
d2
f+d2a.dfis the20 40 60 800.51·10−3
(a) Bandwidth 20 noise power 0.220 40 60 8000.51·10−3
(b) Bandwidth 50 noise power 0.120 40 60 800.811.21.4·10−3
(c) Bandwidth 120 noise power 0.2
20 40 60 802025
(d) California, day average temperature0 50 100152025
(e) West and west northcentral climate re-
gions, day average temperature0 50 100204060 ESc
ˆESc
(f) US average temperature, monthly normal
Fig. 2 : Squared reconstruction errors vs bandwidth for bandlimit ed signal model. Legend is common for all the plots.
ﬂat distance computed using the distance package from
geopy library, and dais the altitude. While constructing
the graph we drop sensors whose measurements are missing,
because there is no way to verify our predictions for those
sensors. The measurements that we include as signals are day
averages measured on 3rdJan 2020, and monthly normals
[16], which are average measurements for January 2010.
4.2. Set selection
In Section 2, we assume that the signal values on a ver-
tex setSare known. To select this set for the constructed
graphs on which we assume signal values are known, we
use the A VM algorithm [8] to sample 200 vertices from
each graph, and observe the reconstruction errors on the fre -
quencies {10,20,···,110}. The only exception is the Cal-
ifornia sensor network graph where we sample 100vertices
and observe the reconstruction errors over the frequencies
{10,20,···,80}, because the graph itself contains only 300
vertices.
To estimate the reconstruction error using cross-validati on,
we partition each sampling set Sinto 10 subsets using
RepeatedKFold function from modelselection
package of sklearn . We measure the squared reconstruc-
tion error on each subset of the partition repeated 50 times,
and average over the squared reconstruction errors as per (3 ).4.3. Results
We can see the results of our estimation in Fig. 2. The es-
timated cross-validation error tracks the actual error in t he
wide variety of the graphs and graph signals that we exper-
iment with. We note that in Fig. 2a the actual error increases
slightly, however the estimated error does not increase wit h
it. This is due to the error weighting strategy proposed in
(2). Since for the problem of choosing the bandwidth we are
interested in correctly locating the lowest value of the act ual
error, the ability of the error estimate to track the actual e rror
as it increases should be of lesser importance than its abili ty
to track the actual error as it decreases. A more accurate err or
estimation could be achieved with different set selection o r er-
ror weighting strategies for cross-validation which we res erve
for future work.
5. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a way to minimize graph signal re-
construction error without assuming the knowledge of the si g-
nal bandwidth. In the process, we tailored the cross-valida tion
method for the problem of reconstruction error estimation.
Our technique estimated the error accurately as a function o f
the signal bandwidth on a variety of bandlimited signals wit h
noise and also for sensor networks measuring weather.6. REFERENCES
[1] Antonio Ortega, Introduction to Graph Signal Process-
ing, Cambridge University Press, 2022.
[2] Vitor V Lopes and Jos´ e C Menezes, “Inferential sensor
design in the presence of missing data: a case study,”
Chemometrics and intelligent laboratory systems , vol.
78, no. 1-2, pp. 1–10, 2005.
[3] Rui FC Guerreiro and Pedro MQ Aguiar, “Factoriza-
tion with missing data for 3d structure recovery,” in
2002 IEEE Workshop on Multimedia Signal Processing.
IEEE, 2002, pp. 105–108.
[4] P Mott, TW Sammis, and GM Southward, “Climate data
estimation using climate information from surrounding
climate stations,” Applied Engineering in Agriculture ,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 41–44, 1994.
[5] Siheng Chen, Rohan Varma, Aliaksei Sandryhaila, and
Jelena Kovaˇ cevi´ c, “Discrete signal processing on
graphs: Sampling theory,” IEEE Transactions on Sig-
nal Processing , vol. 63, no. 24, pp. 6510–6523, 2015.
[6] Yuichi Tanaka, Yonina C Eldar, Antonio Ortega, and
Gene Cheung, “Sampling signals on graphs: From the-
ory to applications,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine ,
vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 14–30, 2020.
[7] Aamir Anis, Akshay Gadde, and Antonio Ortega, “Ef-
ﬁcient sampling set selection for bandlimited graph sig-
nals using graph spectral proxies,” IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing , vol. 64, no. 14, pp. 3775–3789,
2015.
[8] Ajinkya Jayawant and Antonio Ortega, “Practical graph
signal sampling with log-linear size scaling,” Signal
Processing , vol. 194, pp. 108436, 2022.
[9] Gilles Puy, Nicolas Tremblay, R´ emi Gribonval, and
Pierre Vandergheynst, “Random sampling of bandlim-
ited signals on graphs,” Applied and Computational
Harmonic Analysis , 2016.
[10] David I Shuman, Sunil K Narang, Pascal Frossard, An-
tonio Ortega, and Pierre Vandergheynst, “The emerging
ﬁeld of signal processing on graphs: Extending high-
dimensional data analysis to networks and other irreg-
ular domains,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , vol.
30, no. 3, pp. 83–98, 2013.
[11] Isaac Pesenson, “Sampling in paley-wiener spaces on
combinatorial graphs,” Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society , vol. 360, no. 10, pp. 5603–5627,
2008.[12] Xiaohan Wang, Pengfei Liu, and Yuantao Gu, “Local-
set-based graph signal reconstruction,” IEEE transac-
tions on signal processing , vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 2432–
2444, 2015.
[13] Jun Shao, “Linear model selection by cross-validation ,”
Journal of the American statistical Association , vol. 88,
no. 422, pp. 486–494, 1993.
[14] Micha¨ el Defferrard, Lionel Martin, Rodrigo Pena, and
Nathana¨ el Perraudin, “Pygsp: Graph signal processing
in python,” .
[15] Russell S. V ose, Scott Applequist, Mike Squires, Imke
Durre, Matthew J. Menne, Claude N. Williams, Chris
Fenimore, Karin Gleason, and Derek Arndt, “Improved
historical temperature and precipitation time series for
u.s. climate divisions,” Journal of Applied Meteorology
and Climatology , vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1232 – 1251, 2014.
[16] Storm Dunlop, A dictionary of weather , OUP Oxford,
2008.