arXiv:2303.00265v1  [cs.NI]  1 Mar 20231
Security of RPL based 6LoWPAN Networks in the
Internet of Things: A Review
Abhishek Verma*, Student Member, IEEE , and Virender Ranga, Member, IEEE
Abstract —Internet of Things (IoT) is one of the fastest
emerging networking paradigms enabling a large number of
applications for the beneﬁt of mankind. Advancements in em-
bedded system technology and compressed IPv6 have enabled t he
support of IP stack in resource constrained heterogeneous s mart
devices. However, global connectivity and resource constr ained
characteristics of smart devices have exposed them to diffe rent
insider and outsider attacks, which put users’ security and
privacy at risk. Various risks associated with IoT slow down its
growth and become an obstruction in the worldwide adoption o f
its applications. In RFC 6550, the IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low
Power and Lossy Network (RPL) is speciﬁed by IETF’s ROLL
working group for facilitating efﬁcient routing in 6LoWPAN
networks, while considering its limitations. Due to resour ce
constrained nature of nodes in the IoT, RPL is vulnerable to
many attacks that consume the node’s resources and degrade
the network’s performance. In this paper, we present a study on
various attacks and their existing defense solutions, part icularly
to RPL. Open research issues, challenges, and future direct ions
speciﬁc to RPL security are also discussed. A taxonomy of
RPL attacks, considering the essential attributes like res ources,
topology, and trafﬁc, is shown for better understanding. In
addition, a study of existing cross-layered and RPL speciﬁc
network layer based defense solutions suggested in the lite rature
is also carried out.
Index Terms —Internet of Things, RPL, 6LoWPAN, LLN,
Network Security.
I. I NTRODUCTION
INTERNET of Things[1] is realized by a large scale
deployment of Low power and Lossy Networks (LLNs)
which are characterized by communication links that have
high packet loss and low throughput [2], [3]. LLNs restrict t he
use of traditional computers and communication technologi es
due to their strict resource constraints. Also, these netwo rks
use resource constrained devices (nodes) that operate on lo w
power, require less energy, have small on-board memory, and
low computational capabilities [4]. Moreover, characteri stics
like resource constraints, high packet loss, and low networ k
throughput make state-of-the-art routing protocols like A dhoc
On-Demand Distance Vector, Dynamic Source Routing, and
Open Shortest Path First unsuitable for LLNs [5], [6]. To
handle this issue, a set of standardized protocols has been
developed [7], [8]. These protocols include IEEE 802.15.4
PHY/MAC for Physical and Data link layer, IPv 6over Low
Power Wireless Personal Area Networks protocol ( 6LoWPAN)
for Adaptation layer, Routing Protocol for Low-Power and
* Corresponding Author
A. Verma and V . Ranga are with the Department of Computer Engi neering,
National Institute of Technology Kurukshetra, Haryana, In dia, 136119.
E-mail: abhiverma866@gmail.com, virender.ranga@nitkkr .ac.inLossy Networks protocol (RPL) for Network layer, and Con-
strained Application Protocol (CoAP) for Application laye r.
In transport, layer the standard User Datagram Protocol [9]
is used. RPL has been standardized in 2012 as RFC6550
by Routing Over Low power and Lossy networks (ROLL)
working group of Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) [3] .
RPL has been standardized as a network layer protocol
for LLNs [10]. It is recommended for facilitating efﬁcient
routing in LLNs like 6LoWPAN [11]. RPL has gained much
popularity in the industry as well as in academia. The reason
is its capability to provide efﬁcient routing among resourc e
constrained smart IP enabled IoT nodes, ﬂexibility in adapt ing
to different network topologies, and Quality of service (Qo S)
support [8], [12]–[14]. RPL constructs a Destination Orien ted
Directed Acyclic Graph (DODAG) from the physical network
topology, in which a gateway node is set as a root (destinatio n)
of DODAG. All other nodes perform sensing and data routing.
RPL uses low energy consuming mechanisms to support
self-organization and self-healing for handling frequent node
failures [15]. It consumes very few resources while providi ng
efﬁcient routing of IPv 6packets. These capabilities of RPL fa-
vor its usage in IoT applications that run on LLN infrastruct ure
[16]. In Section III, a detailed description of RPL is presen ted.
RPL protocol based networks inherit vulnerabilities from i ts
core technologies like IPv 6and Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSN). Also, Self-organization, self-healing, open natur e,
and resource constrained characteristics of RPL expose it t o
various threats that target it for compromising users’ secu rity
and privacy [17]. Also, RPL is exposed to external threats fr om
the Internet [18], [19]. Traditional cryptography based se curity
solutions are not suitable for securing RPL based networks
(e.g., LLNs). This is because the effectiveness of traditio nal
cryptography based security solutions (e.g. symmetric and
asymmetric) relies on the secure distribution of keys. The
resource constrained nature of LLNs pose many challenges to
key management [20], [21]. Also, if a single legitimate node
is compromised, an attacker may gain access to a large pool
of pre-loaded keys [22]. This means, once pre-loaded keys ar e
compromised, all network nodes are also compromised. The
challenges related to secure key establishment, storage, d istri-
bution, revocation, and replacement in LLNs make tradition al
cryptography based security solutions unsuitable for LLNs
[23]. The limitations of LLNs pose a severe threat to RPL
security. RPL is vulnerable to various routing attacks, whi ch
can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories, i.e., attacks
inherited from WSN, and RPL speciﬁc attacks. The cryptog-
raphy based security mechanisms can only prevent RPL from
external attacks (i.e., attack performed using a node which2
is not a part of the existing network) [24], [25]. Traditiona l
security mechanisms are also incapable of detecting inside r
attacks (i.e., attack performed on the devices that are alre ady
part of the existing network), which are performed by the
compromised nodes of the network [26]. Thus, from RPL’s
security point of view, it is crucial to explore the possibil ities
of developing energy efﬁcient security solutions.
A. Related surveys
In the literature, some research works particular to RPL, an d
IoT security are present. Airehrour et al. [27] surveyed various
attacks and defense mechanisms speciﬁc to RPL. Their study
primarily focused on the utilization of trust based defense
methods in RPL security. Most of the defense mechanisms,
they discussed are used in WSN security and cannot be directl y
applied to IoT networks. Alaba et al. [28] presented a detailed
review of IoT security issues. However, they did not focus on
the RPL protocol. A detailed survey on protocols available f or
facilitating secure communications in IoT is done by Granja l
et al. [12]. The authors discussed research challenges for dif-
ferent protocols, including RPL. However, they did not disc uss
attacks and defense mechanisms speciﬁc to RPL. Wallgren et
al.[29] did a detailed study on RPL security by implementing
some routing attacks and analyzing the network’s performan ce.
Also, they suggested the possible mitigation methods of suc h
attacks. However, they only considered WSN based attacks.
Mayzaud et al. [30] provided a survey on RPL based attacks
and their countermeasures. They proposed a detailed taxono my
of attacks. However, their study did not include the latest
proposed attacks and defense solutions. Moreover, the auth ors
did not propose any taxonomy of defense solutions. Pongle
et al. [31] performed a short study on attacks against RPL
and6LoWPAN layer. The authors only provided a short
description of defense solutions and did not propose any
suitable taxonomy of attacks and defense solutions speciﬁc to
RPL. In our opinion, all the mentioned surveys lack effectiv e
future research directions and recent proposals. Moreover ,
these surveys have neglected cross-layered security solut ions,
which can be utilized for securing RPL as well. The key
points that lacked in the previous literature are addressed in our
study. The existing surveys related to RPL protocol securit y
are summarized in Table I.
B. Motivation and contributions
With an increase in the number of resource constrained
devices (LLNs nodes) and their integration with the Interne t
has led to severe cybersecurity risks. These risks involve u sers’
security and privacy getting exposed to various threats. Cr itical
applications like healthcare and smart grid, when exposed t o
such threats, may cause life-threatening incidents to the w orld
population. This motivated us to explore and perform an in-
depth analysis of various security issues and their availab le
solutions speciﬁc to the RPL protocol. Since RPL is one of
the most popular routing protocols for resource constraine d
networks hence its security aspect must be studied carefull y.
In this research paper, we present a comprehensive study of
different attacks speciﬁc to RPL protocol and their defensesolutions suggested in the literature. Our objectives incl ude:
(1) to propose a taxonomy for classifying different attacks
and defense solutions speciﬁc to RPL protocol, ( 2) to identify
open research issues, and state-of-the-art challenges rel ated to
RPL based IoT network security. The main contributions of
this paper are summarized below:
•We provide a comprehensive overview of RPL protocol
while focusing on its security issues.
•We present an extensive survey on RPL speciﬁc attacks
and their countermeasures present in the recent literature .
•We represent the RPL security solutions into two broad
categories (i.e., Secure Protocol and Intrusion Detection
System) and compare their performance based on differ-
ent evaluation metrics.
•We discuss cross-layered security solutions present in the
literature, which can be used to leverage RPL security.
•We provide open issues, research challenges, future re-
search directions, and potential areas for future research
to promote the contribution of state-of-the-art defense
solutions.
Security of RPL based 6LoWPAN Networks in the
Internet of Things: A Review
Section II. Overview of IoT
Architecture
Section III.Overview of RPL
protocol
Section IV. Attacks on RPL
protocol
Section V. Taxonomy of RPL
attack defense mechanisms
Section VI. Cross-layered security
solutions for RPL
Section VII. Open issues, research
challenges and future directions
Section VIII. ConclusionA. Secure Protocol based
defense mechanisms
B. Intrusion Detection Systems
(IDS)Section I. Introduction
A. Related surveys
B. Motivation and contributions
C. Organization of the survey
A. Potential Areas for Future
Research
Figure 1: Organization of the survey3
Table I: Comparison with related survey papers
Related survey Brief summary Topics Scope Common points
with our survey
Airehrour et al.
[27]A survey on existing rout-
ing protocols and mech-
anisms to secure routing
communications in IoTSecurity and energy consumption in IoT,
Routing protocols, Vulnerabilities to rout-
ing, Secure routing protocols, Trust in
secure routingVulnerabilities in RPL, WSN
based defense methods, research
challengesOverview of RPL
Alaba et al. [28] A detailed discussion on
the IoT security scenario
and analysis of the possible
attacksIoT overview, Classiﬁcation of IoT,
Threats and vulnerabilities, IoT security
taxonomy, Possible attacks on IoTState-of-the-art security threats
and vulnerabilities, future direc-
tionsIoT architecture
Granjal et al. [12] A detailed survey on proto-
cols available for facilitat-
ing secure communications
in IoTIoT communication protocols, Security
requirements of IoT, Security of various
layers (Physical (PHY), MAC, network,
application layers), Security for routingIoT communication protocols
and their security issues, proto-
col speciﬁc research challengesOverview of RPL
Wallgren et al.
[29]A detailed study on RPL
security by implementing
and analyzing various rout-
ing attacksIoT technologies and IDS, IoT proto-
cols overview, Attacks against RPL (in-
herited from WSN), IDS and the IoT
(lightweight heartbeat protocol)Theoretical impact analysis of
attacks inherited from WSN, de-
fense mechanism to detect selec-
tive forwarding attack.Overview of RPL,
Attacks against
RPL (inherited
from WSN)
Mayzaud et al.
[30]A survey on RPL based at-
tacks and their countermea-
sures·RPL concepts and security concerns, At-
tacks against RPL protocol, Exploitation
for risk managementAttacks against RPL protocol,
risk management for RPL secu-
rityRPL overview and
attacks
Pongle et al. [31] A short study on attacks
against RPL and 6LoW-
PAN layerOverview of RPL and 6LoWPAN, At-
tacks on RPL topology, IoT and IDS,
Attacks on 6LoPWAN layerRPL and 6LoWPAN adaptation
layer securityOverview of RPL,
Attacks on RPL
topology
Verma et al. (Our
survey)A detailed survey on secu-
rity of RPL based 6LoW-
PAN NetworksIoT architectures, Overview of RPL, RPL
speciﬁc attacks, Taxonomy of RPL attack
defense mechanisms, Secure protocol ap-
proaches, IDS, Cross-layered security so-
lutionsRPL speciﬁc attacks and their
countermeasures , research chal-
lenges, future directions-
C. Organization of the survey
The rest of this paper is consequently organized as follows.
Section II describes the overview of IoT architectures. Sec tion
III presents a brief overview of the RPL protocol. Section IV
presents a taxonomy of attacks speciﬁc to the RPL protocol.
In Section V, the proposed taxonomy related to different
defense solutions against RPL attacks present in the litera ture
is discussed. In Section VI, cross-layered security soluti ons
speciﬁc to RPL protocol security are discussed. Open issues ,
research challenges, and future directions are addressed i n
Section VII. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section VIII .
The list of abbreviations and deﬁnitions used throughout th e
paper are presented in Table II. The organization of the surv ey
is illustrated in Fig. 1.
II. O VERVIEW OF IOT A RCHITECTURE
Various architectures applicable to IoT have been proposed
in the literature. Most popular architectures include mid-
dleware based, service-oriented based, three-layer and ﬁv e-
layer based [32]. Any standard IoT architecture is not yet
recognized in the literature. However, the most commonly
referred IoT architecture is three-layer-based architect ure [33],
which is shown in Fig. 2. It gains popularity because of
simple nature and abstract representation of IoT that makes
the implementation of applications easier. It comprises th ree
layers, namely perception, network, and application. Thes e
layers are highlighted below.
1) Perception Layer: The perception layer is the lowest
layer in three-layer IoT architecture. The main purpose of t he
perception layer is to collect data from the physical enviro n-
ment (temperature, pressure, humidity, etc.) of IoT device s.
The process of perception is supported by prominent sensinghp://www.meruspower./es/applicaons/Application Layer
Network Layer
Perception Layer
RFID Sensor CameraWired/Wireless Networks
Internet2G,3G,4G, 5G 
etc.WLAN,WPAN, 
LoWPAN etc.
Smart Home  Smart Farming  Smart Grid
Gateway
Middleware
Figure 2: Three-layer architecture of IoT
technology like WSN. Besides, this layer is responsible for
converting analog input to digital form and making sensed
data suitable for transmission.
2) Network Layer: The network layer is dedicated to
the processing of sensed data and performing secure data
transmission between the perception and application layer . It
uses various wired and wireless networking technologies li ke
WLAN, WPAN, LoWPAN, and GSM. It integrates various4
Table II: List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation Stands For
IoT Internet of Things
IP Internet Protocol
IPv6 Internet Protocol version 6
RPL IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low Power and Lossy Network
IETF Internet Engineering Task Force
ROLL Routing Over Low power and Lossy Networks
6LoWPAN IPv6 over Low Power Wireless Personal Area Networks
LLNs Low power and Lossy Networks
CoAP Constrained Application Protocol
UDP User Datagram Protocol
QoS Quality of Service
DODAG Destination Oriented Directed Acyclic Graph
WSN Wireless Sensor Networks
ML Machine Learning
WLAN Wireless Local Area Network
WPAN Wireless Personal Area Networks
LoWPAN Low-Power Wireless Personal Area Networks
GSM Global System for Mobile Communications
NFC Near-ﬁeld communication
LTE Long-Term Evolution
OF Objective Function
ETX Expected Transmission Count
MRHOF Minimum Rank with Hysteresis Objective Function
OF0 Objective Function Zero
OF-EC OF based on combined metrics using Fuzzy Logic
DIO DODAG Information Object
DIS DODAG Information Solicitation
DAO Destination Advertisement Object
DAO-ACK Destination Advertisement Object Acknowledgment
DoS Denial-of-Service
PDR Packet Delivery Ratio
6BR 6LoWPAN Border Router
IDS Intrusion Detection System
VERA Version Number and Rank Authentication
TRAIL Trust Anchor Interconnection Loop
SRPL Secure-RPL
TCA Trusted Computing Architecture
TPM Trusted Platform Module
MRTS Metric based RPL Trustworthiness Scheme
ERNT Extended RPL Node Trustworthiness
TIDS Trust based Security System
TOF Trust Objective Function
TRU Trust Information
AT Adaptive Threshold
DT Dynamic Threshold
FAM Frequency Agility Manager
LR Logistic Regression
MLP Multi-layer Perceptron
NB Naive Bayes
RF Random Forest
SVM Support Vector Machine
SOMIDS Self Organizing Map Intrusion Detection System
SOM Self Organizing Map
RSSI Received Signal Strength Indicator
TN True Negative
FP False Positive
FN False Negative
TPR True Positive Rate
FPR False Positive Rate
SPRT Sequential Probability Ratio Test
InDRes Intrusion detection and response system for IoT
FSM Finite State Machine
EFSM Extended Finite State Machine
SBIDS Sink-based Intrusion Detection System
NCR Node’s current rank
NPR Node’s parent rank
NPVR Node’s previous rank
RIDES Robust Intrusion Detection System
CUSUM Cumulative Sum Control charts
OPFC Unsupervised Optimum-Path Forest Clustering
NAC Network Access Control
ETA Encrypted Trafﬁc Analytics
6TiSCH IPv6 over the TSCH mode of IEEE 802.15.4e
TSCH Time-Slotted Channel Hoppingtransmission technologies like NFC, LTE, and Bluetooth. It
promises unique addressing and routing of sensed data from a
large number of devices, which are a part of the IoT network.
6LoWPAN is standardized for achieving unique addressing
through IPv 6networking.
3) Application Layer: The main purpose of the application
layer is to provide personalized services or interface (fro nt
end) to the IoT application users. It uses processed data fro m
the network layer and delivers it as per the user’s need. It ﬁl ls
the gap between users and IoT applications. The application
layer provides tools to the application developers in order
to realize IoT insights. It speciﬁes various applications i n
which IoT can be exploited, e.g., smart homes, smart power
grid, industrial monitoring, surveillance systems, healt hcare
monitoring, and logistics management [32], [34], [35]
Cloud Layer (Smart Application)
Fog Layer (Fog Node)
Edge Layer (Edge Gateway)
Physical Layer (Edge Devices)
Figure 3: Fog computing based four-layer IoT architecture
Currently, IoT devices generate a large volume of data that
needs to be processed at cloud servers for various purposes
like business insights and security monitoring. However, t he
rate at which data is generated by IoT devices, requires
good bandwidth connections for data transmission to the
cloud servers. The limited bandwidth connections cause a
signiﬁcant delay in data transmission and processing, whic h
affects the overall performance of smart applications. Thr ee-
Layer based architecture is not capable enough to solve such
issues [32]. To address these issues, Edge and Fog computing
paradigms [36] are emerged as possible solutions and are bei ng
used nowadays. The four-layered Fog computing based IoT
architecture is shown in Fig. 3. The physical layer includes
IoT devices or edge devices which sense and send data to edge
gateways. The edge layer consists of edge gateways (border
routers), which either perform real-time data preprocessi ng
at source/on-premises or forward the received data to the
fog node. The fog layer consists of powerful servers that
collect data from edge gateways and perform the task of data
preprocessing, and transmission to the cloud servers. At th e
cloud layer, smart applications are deployed, which perfor m
critical tasks like business insights and security monitor ing.
Fog nodes can process and act on a large volume of data,
reduce bandwidth and latency, and can perform security mon-
itoring. Whereas edge nodes can apply local security polici es
and make real-time decisions locally to control and monitor
many IoT devices at a time. With fog and edge layer, the
security of IoT application and involved protocols can be
improved signiﬁcantly [37]–[39].5
III. O VERVIEW OF RPL PROTOCOL
RPL is IPv6 based Distance Vector and Source Routing
protocol that speciﬁes how to build a DODAG using a
Objective Function (OF) , set of metrics and constraints. In
RPL, the IoT devices are interconnected using mesh and tree
topology in order to build a DODAG graph starting from a
root (sink or gateway) node that acts as an interface between
LLN nodes and the Internet. A network may contain more than
one DODAG, which collectively form an RPL Instance. In a
network, more than one RPL Instance can run in parallel, and
every RPL Instance is identiﬁed by a unique RPLInstanceID .
An RPL node can belong to only one DODAG of every RPL
Instance running in the network. Each node in DODAG is
assigned a rank (16-bit value), which represents “the node’ s
individual position relative to other nodes with respect to a
DODAG root” [3]. The rank stringently increases in DODAG’s
downward direction (root to leaves) and decreases in the
upward direction (leaf nodes to root). The rank concept is
used: (1) to detect and avoid routing loops, (2) to build pare nt-
child relationship, (3) to provide a mechanism for nodes to
differentiate between parent and siblings, and (4) to enabl e
nodes to store a list of preferred parents and siblings which
can be used in case a node loses its link with the parent
node. DODAG is built during the network topology setup
phase, where each node uses RPL control messages to ﬁnd
the optimal set of parents towards the root and link itself
with the preferred parent, i.e., parent on the most optimal
path. The selection of preferred parent is based on a OFthat
deﬁnes how to compute a rank based on routing metrics while
considering routing constraints and optimization objecti ves.
RPL may use different OF[40] which includes ETX Objec-
tive function [41], Minimum Rank with Hysteresis Objective
Function (MRHOF) [42], Objective Function Zero (OF0) [43],
and objective function based on combined metrics using fuzz y
logic (OF-EC) [44] . RPL control messages include DODAG
Information Object (DIO), DODAG Information Solicitation
(DIS), Destination Advertisement Object (DAO), and Desti-
nation Advertisement Object Acknowledgment (DAO-ACK).
RPL uses an adaptive timer mechanism called as “Trickle
timer” in order to limit the control trafﬁc in the network [45 ].
IV. A TTACKS ON RPL PROTOCOL
RPL protocol is susceptible to a wide range of insider
and outsider attacks. These attacks are difﬁcult to detect a nd
mitigate because of the vulnerable nature of nodes and wirel ess
network, easily tamperable nature of nodes, mobility of nod es,
and resource constraints. Many authors have proposed vario us
security mechanisms speciﬁc to RPL, which include control
message encryption and security modes [46]. However, most
of the RPL implementations do not consider the security
measures due to incomplete speciﬁcation of mechanisms, and
implementation overheads [47]. These security mechanisms
are effective in defending against outsider attacks. Howev er,
they fail in case of insider attacks. An insider attacker may
bypass the applied RPL security mechanisms and disrupt
network functionality. A taxonomy of attacks, is shown in Fi g.
4, where attacks are classiﬁed on the basis of their primarytarget. We have extended the taxonomy presented in [30]
by adding recently proposed attacks, and categorizing some
similar kind of attacks for better understanding. RPL contr ol
messages can be illegitimately manipulated to disrupt rout ing
operations. Similarly, fault tolerance mechanisms can be e x-
ploited to target network resources by performing a Denial o f
Services attack (DoS). In this section, attacks speciﬁc to t he
RPL protocol are listed and brieﬂy discussed.
Rank attacks : The rank ﬁeld or rules can be exploited
for performing various rank based attacks [48]. In RPL,
there is no speciﬁc mechanism to monitor the integrity of
control messages and routing metric values received from th e
parent node. In fact, a child node receives all the routing
information through control messages without verifying it s
parent trustworthiness. Thus, if the parent node is malicio us,
the child node still believes that all the information comin g
from its parent is genuine. Hence, this condition may lead to
the formation of unoptimized routes and show poor network
performance. An attacker node performs the Rank attack by
illegitimately changing its rank value, thus, attracting n eighbor
nodes to select it as their parent, assuming that the malicio us
node leads to the root node in the shortest path cost. Differe nt
variants of Rank attack have been proposed in the literature
by the researchers, which include increased rank, decrease d
rank, worst parent attacks.
Neighbor or replay attack : In neighbor attack [49], an
attacker node duplicates and multicast all DIO messages
received from its parent. In such a case, all the neighbor
nodes which receive replayed DIO messages may think that
the message is received from a new neighbor. Further, if the
replayed DIO message contains favorable routing informati on
like rank, the victim neighbor node may add out of range
node as its preferred parent. Another variant of this attack
is proposed in [30] and termed as DIO replay attack. In this
variant, an attacker nodes multicast the outdated DIO messa ges
containing old routing information. This attack forces a vi ctim
node to follow the stale and unoptimized paths.
DAO attacks : An adversary can exploit the storing mode
of the RPL protocol. It can manipulate the DAO messages to
perform DAO related attacks. These types of attacks include
DAO inconsistency and routing table falsiﬁcation. Both of
these are highlighted below.
DAO inconsistency : RPL uses some ﬂags which are carried
out in IPv6 hop-by-hop option to manage important topo-
logical mechanisms. Down ‘O’ ﬂag represents the expected
direction of packet, Rank-Error ‘R’ ﬂag indicates rank erro r
in topology, and Forwarding-Error ‘F’ ﬂag represents that t he
node is not capable of forwarding packet to the set destinati on
[3]. DAO inconsistency is reported by a node when its child
node is unable to forward the data to a speciﬁed destination,
due to unavailability of a route that is learned from fake DAO
message (DAO with fake routing information) during topolog y
creation. The attacker exploits this mechanism to perform a n
attack by setting ‘F’ ﬂag to 1in the packets and sending it back
to its parent. This forces the parent node to discard legitim ate
available downward routes. DAO inconsistency attack leads
to an increase in end-to-end delay, unoptimized topology, a nd
isolation of nodes.6
Attacks on RPL
protocolR        	 
 Topology Traffic
Indirect Sub optimization Isolation Eavesdropping Impersonation
DIS flooding
DIO flooding
Routing table falsificationSinkhole
Wormhole
Worst Parent
Neighbour or replay attackBlackhole
DAO inconsistencyIncreased rank attack
DAG inconsistencyVersion number attackDirect
HELLO flooding
Selective forwardingRouting choice intrusion
DIO suppressionETX manipulationSniffing
Traffic  
Analysis
Clone IDSybilIdentity Attack Decreased  
rank attack
Local repair attack
Figure 4: Detailed taxonomy of attacks speciﬁc to RPL protoc ol
Routing table falsiﬁcation : Mayzaud et al. [30] proposed
a methodology to perform the attacks that lead the nodes to
learn fake routes which do not exist. Such attacks can create
unoptimized topology due to increased end-to-end packet
delay and decreased packet delivery ratio ( PDR ). An attacker
may perform the attack by forging the routing information
contained in DAO messages, which forces the legitimate node s
to build false downward routes, i.e., non-existing routes. Thus,
when legitimate nodes try to forward the data to non-existin g
nodes, this situation leads to DAO inconsistency, unnecess ary
packet delay, and increased control overhead. In a variant
of routing table falsiﬁcation attack termed as routing tabl e
overload, the attacker forges a DAO message with false routi ng
information and sends it to the parent node. It leads to the
victim node’s routing table buffer getting full. Thus, furt her
creation of legitimate optimized routes is entirely blocke d.
Routing choice intrusion : Zhang et al. [50] proposed a new
internal routing attack known as Routing choice intrusion.
The main idea is to learn the current routing conditions used
by the nodes for choosing optimal paths. Then capturing the
DIO messages, and later multicast the forged DIO messages
by its legitimate identity. This attack requires a node to be
reprogrammed in such a manner that it ignores the internal
misbehavior detection and operates normally, thus, makes i t
hard to be detected. This attack may involve one or more
compromised nodes. Routing choice intrusion attack leads
to an increase in end-to-end delay, routing loops, energy
consumption, and creation of unoptimized paths.
DIS attack : In DIS attack, an attacker node periodically
sends DIS messages to neighbors within its transmission ran ge.
In return, the victim node resets its trickle timer and repli es
with DIO messages (RPL speciﬁc mechanism for allowing
new nodes to join DODAG) [51], [52]. This attack can be
performed either by sending unicast DIS messages to a single
node or by multicasting DIS messages in order to target
multiple nodes at a time. DIS attacks can be termed as
ﬂooding attack as it involves the ﬂooding of DIS messages
in the network [30]. It leads to an increase in control packet
overhead, node energy exhaustion, and routing disruption.Version number attack : In RPL, only border router ( 6BR)
is responsible for initiating the propagation and updation
(increase) of version number [3]. Whenever a border router o r
gateway (6BR) needs to rebuild the whole DODAG, it initiates
a global repair process by incrementing the version number
value present in the version number ﬁeld of DIO message
and sends it to child nodes. Upon receiving a DIO with a
different version number than it has, the child node starts
the process for updating its routing state (preferred paren t,
preferred parent, and links) by resetting its trickle timer . This
process iterates until all the nodes update their routing st ate.
RPL deﬁnes no mechanism to prevent nodes (other than 6BR)
from illegitimate modiﬁcation of version number [53]–[55] .
Hence, an attacker can modify the version number ﬁeld of the
DIO message and forwards it to the neighbors. This leads to
the unnecessary rebuilding of complete DODAG. It results in
an increase in control packet overhead, end-to-end delay, r ank
inconsistencies, routing loops, and energy consumption.
Local repair attack : In RPL, a local repair mechanism is
triggered by a node after it loses the link with its preferred
parent [3]. A node can initiate a local repair mechanism eith er
by changing the value in the DODAG ID ﬁeld of DIO or
by updating its rank to inﬁnite and multicast the DIO to
all its neighbors. Both the methods force neighbor nodes to
search for a new preferred parent. Local repair enables an
RPL network to converge once again in minimum time. This
mechanism is supposed to be called only when a node does
not have any connection with its parent. However, an attacke r
may deliberately use both the methods to trigger unnecessar y
local repairs even if it is still connected to its parent [56] –[58].
This is possible because RPL does not deﬁne any method that
can be used by a node to verify the authenticity of local repai r
initiated by their neighbor nodes [23]. Wherever a local rep air
is triggered, the network topology is forced to be restructu red.
This leads to an increase in energy consumption of victim
nodes as well as disruption of the routing process.
DODAG inconsistency : RPL speciﬁes the data path valida-
tion method to detect and repair rank related inconsistenci es
(loops) in DODAG. RPL uses different ﬂags of RPL IPv67
header options of multi-hop data packets [59] for tracking
inconsistencies (routing loops) in the network. As per [3],
DODAG is inconsistent if the direction ﬂag of the data packet
represented by the ‘O’ does not follow the strict rank relati on
with the node that has sent/forwarded the packet. When such
a situation is encountered, the ‘R’ ﬂag is used to perform
topology repair, i.e., ‘R’ ﬂag is set to 1by the node which
encountered forwarding error, and the packet is forwarded.
Further, when another node receives a packet with ‘R’ ﬂag
set (detects inconsistency), it discards the packet and res ets
its trickle timer to perform local repair [45]. An attacker
can exploit these ﬂags to perform various attacks that are
collectively termed as a DODAG inconsistency attack, which
includes Direct and Forced blackhole attack [60], [61].
DIO suppression : In [62], a novel attack against RPL pro-
tocol was proposed and termed as a DIO suppression attack.
The idea behind this attack is to suppress the transmission
of fresh DIO control messages required by the IoT nodes for
exploring new optimized routing paths and removal of stale
paths. This leads to the creation of unoptimized routes, whi ch
further leads to a partition problem in the network. An attac ker
only needs to sniff DIO message from any legitimate node and
then, multicast that message for at least ktimes (suppression
threshold) periodically. This makes victim node believe th at
the consistent DIOs [45] are received from its parent node
irrespective of any legitimate change in network’s current state.
Thus, there won’t be any change in victim’s current state, i. e.,
preferred parent set, parent, and relative distance from th e root.
In Fig. 5, Iminrepresents the starting time period set by trickle
algorithm, which is doubled every time kconsistent DIO’s are
received. Imin is initiated again when DIO’s less than kare
received or when any inconsistent DIO is received.
Imin2*Imin 4*Imin 8*IminTime (t)Inconsistent DIO received
4thperiod
2nd 3rd
1stconsistent DIOs  
DIO suppressionDIO  DIO  
Figure 5: DIO suppression with suppression threshold ( k=
5)[62]
ETX manipulation : In RPL, the Expected transmission count
(ETX) objective function uses the ETX parameter as a metric
for selecting the optimal routing path between two nodes. RP L
follows a simple thumb rule, i.e., the ETX value of any parent
node must be lower than that of a child node. This rule must be
followed throughout the network. An attacker exploits this rule
by deliberately manipulating nodes ETX value in order to gai n
a better position in the network [63]. This allows the attack er
to attract a large part of network trafﬁc and then launch othe r
attacks like Blackhole and Grayhole attacks.
Table III presents a classiﬁcation of attacks based on their
type (insider or outsider), prerequisites, and their impac t on
the network’s performance. RPL is also vulnerable to attack s
inherited from WSN. These attacks include HELLO ﬂood orDIO ﬂood, Sinkhole, Wormhole [64], Blackhole, Selective
forwarding, Sybil, Clone ID, etc. These attacks disrupt the
network’s performance drastically, which decreases the ne t-
work’s lifetime. Since many surveys are already available i n
the literature that present WSN based attacks hence we do not
discuss them in this paper [65], [66].
V. T AXONOMY OF RPL ATTACK DEFENSE MECHANISMS
In this section, different solutions proposed for the detec tion
and mitigation of RPL attacks are discussed. The solutions
present in the literature are divided into two categories: S e-
cure Protocol and Intrusion Detection System (IDS). Secure
Protocol based solutions refer to defense mechanisms that
are incorporated in the RPL protocol itself, thus, making it
secure against various attacks. These mechanisms are furth er
categorized into Cryptography, Trust, and Threshold based
solutions. Cryptography mechanisms make the use of tradi-
tional cryptography methods to provide security and defens e
against various attacks, whereas trust based mechanisms in -
volve computation of trustworthiness of nodes for facilita ting
routing decisions. Threshold based defense solutions expl oit
the inbuilt feature of RPL and provide an enhancement in orde r
to decide the way trickle timer is reset. These mechanisms ar e
embedded into RPL protocol, making it more robust in terms
of defensive behavior while maintaining desirable network
performance. Traditional IDS solutions cannot be directly
applied to IoT [90]. It is because of resource constrained
nodes used in the network, different network topologies, an d
IP based connectivity, which makes traditional IDS solutio ns
infeasible. This demands for lightweight IDS solutions in
terms of computational, communication, memory and energy
overhead. In particular to RPL protocol, IDS refers to the
second line of defense, which is responsible for the detecti on
of anomalies in RPL operation. These defense solutions can
be further classiﬁed into Signature, Anomaly, Speciﬁcatio n,
and Hybrid.
In this section, a brief review of security solutions availa ble
in the literature for detecting various attacks in IoT (i.e. ,
typically DoS and RPL based attacks) is presented. Fig. 6
shows the taxonomy of various defense solutions, in particu lar
to the RPL protocol.
A. Secure Protocol Based Defense Mechanisms
This section presents various secure protocol based defens e
solutions for defending the RPL protocol against routing
attacks.
1) Cryptography Based Solutions:
Version Number and Rank Authentication (VeRA): In [53],
a security scheme called VeRA is proposed. The proposed
scheme provides defense solutions against attacks related to
illegitimate version number and rank change. The key idea
is to use hash chains for authenticating those nodes whose
rank or version number is changed. VeRa incorporates an
authentication mechanism based on hash operations having
small time complexity. The main drawback of VeRA is that it
can be bypassed using rank forgery and replay attacks.8
Table III: Classiﬁcation of attacks on RPL and their impact o n network’s performance
Attack Type Prerequisites Description Impact on network performance
Rank Insider - Rank ﬁeld and strict rank rules are exploited. Generates routing loops. Increases end-to-end de-
lay, PDR , control packet overhead, congestion,
and energy consumption. Introduces unoptimized
routes.
Neighbor /re-
playInsider - Attacker node eavesdrops the DIO messages of le-
gitimate neighbors and later send it to its neighborsIncreases packet loss (low PDR ), disrupted routes,
network congestion, and unwanted interference.
DAO
inconsistencyInsider Storing
mode,
Option
HeaderDAO loop recovery mechanism is exploited by the
attacker.Increases end-to-end delay. Leads to unoptimized
topology and isolation of nodes.
Routing table
falsiﬁcationInsider Storing
mode,
Option
HeaderAttacker overloads the routing table of legitimate
nodes with false routing information.Routing table buffer of victim nodes gets ﬁlled,
which further blocks the building of legitimate
optimized routes.
Routing
choice
intrusionInsider - Attacker node learns the current routing rules.
Then, it captures real DIO messages and multicast
the forged DIO messages.Increases end-to-end delay and energy consump-
tion. Generates routing loops and introduces unop-
timized paths.
DIS Insider
/Outsider- Legitimate nodes are ﬂooded with DIS messages,
which forces them to reset their trickle timer and
reply with new DIO messages.Increases control packet overhead and energy con-
sumption, and causes routing disruption.
Version num-
berInsider - Attacker node deliberately increments the version
number, which triggers global repair of the net-
work.Increases control packet overhead, end-to-end de-
lay, and energy consumption. Introduces rank in-
consistencies and routing loops.
Local repair Insider - Local repair mechanism is exploited, i.e., by chang-
ing the rank value to inﬁnite or changing DODAG
ID value to trigger unnecessary local repairs.Disrupts the routing process and increases energy
consumption.
Direct
DODAG
inconsistencyInsider
/OutsiderOption
HeaderLocal repair mechanism is exploited, i.e., attacker
multicast the packets after setting ‘O’ and ‘R’ ﬂags.Trafﬁc congestion. Increases packet loss ratio, con-
trol packet overhead and energy consumption.
Forced black-
holeInsider Option
HeaderAttacker node sets ‘O’ and ‘R’ ﬂags of received
data packets and forwards them to its neighbors.Increases control packet overhead and energy con-
sumption. Decreases PDR .
DIO suppres-
sionInsider
/Outsider- Previously eavesdropped DIO messages are sent,
which leads to suppression of new DIO transmis-
sion.Introduces unoptimized routing paths, which leads
to network partition.
ETX manipu-
lationInsider ETX objec-
tive functionManipulation of ETX value in order to gain a better
position in the network and attract network trafﬁc.Introduces unoptimized routing paths.
HELLO/DIO
ﬂoodInsider
/Outsider- DIO messages with favorable routing metrics are
multicast with strong signal strength.Leads to network congestion and saturation of
RPL nodes. Increases packet loss ratio and control
packet overhead.
Sinkhole Insider - Malicious node decreases its rank in order to
become the preferred parent of its neighbors.Degrades the overall network performance due to
unoptimized routes.
Blackhole Insider - Malicious node drops all the packets it receives
from its children nodes.Decreases PDR , increases end-to-end delay, unsta-
bilizes topology.
Selective
forward-
ing/grayholeInsider - Malicious node selectively drops packets, i.e., for-
wards control packets and drops data packets.Negatively affects topology construction, which
leads to disrupted routing. Decreases PDR .
Wormhole Insider Minimum
two
malicious
nodes.Two or more nodes create a high bandwidth tunnel
between them in order to transmit data in long
range.Creates unoptimized paths.
Sybil Insider - Single node posses multiple logical identity. Overcomes voting schemes, compromises trans-
mission routes by taking control of network.
Clone ID Insider
/Outsider- Single logical identity is copied to multiple nodes. Compromises transmission routes by taking control
of the network, eavesdrop on transmission links.
Jamming Outsider - Attacker transmit with high power radio signals to
introduce heavy interference.Decreases PDR and increases energy consumption.
Snifﬁng Insider
/Outsider- Network trafﬁc is eavesdropped for obtaining rout-
ing information from packets.Introduces privacy concerns.
Trafﬁc analy-
sisInsider
/Outsider- Radio transmissions are eavesdropped to analyze
trafﬁc patterns for obtaining routing/topology in-
formation.Introduces privacy concerns.9
Defense mechanisms for RPL
Secure Protocol
Cryptography
based
Dvir et al. [53]
Landsmann et al. [54]
Glissa et al. [67]Trust
based
Seeber et al. [68]
Iuchi et al. [69]
Airehrour et al. [70]
Airehrour et al. [71]
Djedjig et al. [72]
Airehrour et al. [73]
Nygaard et al. [74]Threshold
based
Sehgal et al. [60]
Mayzaud et al. [61]
Ghaleb et al. [75]Intrusion Detection System
Signature
based
Napiah et al. [76]
Kasinathan et al. [77]
Ioulianou et al. [78]
Kfoury et al. [79]Anomaly
based
Raza et al. [80]
Pongle et al. [31]
Mayzaud et al. [81]
Mayzaud et al. [55]
Shreenivas et al. [63]
Mayzaud et al. [82]
Gara et al. [83]
Gara et al. [84]Speciﬁcation
based
Leet al. [57]
Zhang et al. [50]
Surender et al. [85]
Leet al. [58]
Shaﬁque et al. [86]
Laiet al. [87]Hybrid
Amin et al. [88]
Bostani et al. [89]
Figure 6: Taxonomy of defense mechanisms for RPL protocol
Enhanced VeRA and Trust Anchor Interconnection Loop
(TRAIL): To counter Decreased rank attack, Landsmann et
al.[54] proposed a novel security mechanism that uses a
nested encryption chain to prevent an attacker from multi-
casting altered hash chains and maintains rank integrity. T he
encryption chain links both version number hash chain with
rank hash chain. The proposed security mechanism does not
provide defense against rank-replay attack. Perrey et al. [91]
proposed an extension to [54] for detecting and preventing
topological inconsistencies. A generic security scheme ca lled
Trust Anchor Interconnection Loop (TRAIL) is proposed to
facilitate topology authentication in RPL. In TRAIL, each
node can validate its upward routing path towards the root
and can detect any rank spooﬁng without relying on encryptio n
chains. TRAIL can search and remove illegitimate nodes from
the network topology. Both VeRA and TRAIL maintain the
node’s states which incurs memory overhead on resource
constrained nodes.
Secure-RPL (SRPL): Glissa et al. [67] proposed a secure
version of the RPL known as SRPL. The main aim of SRPL is
to stop compromised nodes from illegitimately manipulatin g
control message information, which may lead to network
disruption, i.e., rank manipulation for gaining a better po sition
in the DODAG. SRPL incorporates a security mechanism to
maintain a suitable rank threshold such that any change in th e
rate of rank change leads to the detection of the attack. The
rank threshold is implemented with a hash chain authenticat ion
of every node in the network. The main advantage of using
the proposed solution is that it does not put any limit on
node movement from one DODAG to another. When a node
moves from one DODAG to another or changing rank, it
needs to be validated using secured hashed values at ﬁrst.
SRPL mainly aims to defend Sinkhole, Blackhole, Selective
forwarding, and Rank attacks. SRPL involves three phases,
namely the initiation phase, the veriﬁcation phase, and the
rank update phase. In the initiation phase, all the nodes in t he
network compute their rank, threshold values, and respecti ve
hashed values. In the veriﬁcation phase, parents of a respec tive
child node, other nodes check, or verify the hashed rank andthresholds. The rank update is triggered when any node wants
to change its rank, and this change is veriﬁed against old
information and acceptable rank change. The major limitati on
of SRPL is that it uses computationally expensive operation s
that consume a lot of node’s resources.
Summary and Insights: This section discussed the various
cryptography based defense solutions for securing RPL prot o-
col. It has been observed that the proposed approaches are no t
sufﬁcient enough to provide the desired security in 6LoWPAN
networks. The proposed solutions face many challenges that
need to be addressed. For example, the solution proposed in
[53] is vulnerable to rank forgery and replay attacks. Simil arly,
[54], [67], [91], [92] introduce resource overhead (memory ,
processing), which inhibits their usage in real 6LoWPAN
networks. The approach proposed in [93] introduces signiﬁc ant
communication overhead. In order to leverage the use of
cryptography based solutions, further investigation into IoT
constraints is needed. Lightweight cryptography solution s can
also be explored for developing IoT based security solution s.
2) Trust Based Solutions:
Trusted Computing Architecture (TCA): In [68], a TCA is
proposed for establishing trust and facilitating secure ke y ex-
change among nodes using a trusted platform module (TPM).
Authors have focused on making the use of low-cost TPM
module to incorporate security in resource constrained nod es.
The proposed architecture is capable of defending against
node tampering, DoS, and routing attacks targeting availab ility
and integrity. TPM plays a signiﬁcant role in the proposed
architecture as it is responsible for providing keys among
authenticated nodes for establishing secure communicatio n.
TPM acts as a single point of failure, and if it is tampered or
fails, it leads to network performance degradation and secu rity
breaches. No extensive evaluation and simulation results h ave
been discussed for validating the effectiveness of TCA.
Secure Parent Selection: Iuchi et al. [69] proposed a Trust
based threshold mechanism for securely selecting a legitim ate
node as a preferred parent and defending against Rank attack s.
In the proposed mechanism, every node in the network selects
its preferred parent by assuming the fact that illegitimate node10
claims a much lower rank than legitimate nodes. All the
nodes in the network are capable of ﬁnding the illegitimate
ranked node by computing the maximum and average rank
of its neighbor nodes. A legitimate node then selects its
parent node by excluding the node that shows a deﬁcient
rank and avoids forwarding packets to illegitimate nodes. T he
proposed mechanism shows two major limitations. First, it
may sometime lead to the creation of unoptimized routes
because the legitimate nodes are not selected as a parent in
some cases. Second, the proposed approach is vulnerable to
Sybil and Blackhole attacks.
Lightweight Trust-Aware RPL: Ariehrour et al. [70] pro-
posed a Trust-Aware RPL routing protocol to detect Blackhol e
and Selective forwarding attacks. The primary idea behind t he
proposed work is that the packet drop rate of malicious nodes
is higher compared to non-malicious nodes when an attacker i s
performing a Blackhole or Selective forwarding attack. Thi s
behavior of nodes is used to evaluate their trustworthiness .
The proposed RPL enhancement uses trust values to evaluate
the trustworthiness of nodes for facilitating optimal rout ing
decisions. In Trust-Aware RPL initially, all the nodes perf orm
normal path selection operations, i.e., computing route qu ality
over different neighbors based on MRHOF. Trust-Aware RPL
shows better performance as compared to MRHOF-RPL in
terms of attacks detected, the frequency of node rank change s,
throughput, and packet loss. Several drawbacks of the pro-
posed protocol are: (1) promiscuous mode operation increas es
energy consumption; (2) a legitimate node may begin to drop
packets due to unintentional errors that would resemble it a s
a blackhole attacker.
SecTrust-RPL: In [73], a time based trust aware variant
of RPL protocol known as SecTrust -RPL is proposed. The
proposed RPL variant incorporates a secure trust system
that promotes secure communication, detection, and isolat ion
of malicious nodes performing rank and Sybil attacks. The
proposed trust mechanism deﬁnes a way so that each node
in the network computes the trustworthiness of its neighbor s
by using direct and recommended trust values. SecTrust -
RPL incorporates ﬁve modules. Trust calculation module is
responsible for calculating the trust values of nodes. Trus t
monitoring module is responsible for updating the trust val ues
of nodes in a periodic and reactive manner. The trust rating
process is responsible for sorting trust values in descendi ng
order. Detection and isolation of attacks process responsi ble
for selecting high-quality routes and detecting malicious and
misbehaving nodes using trust values for ensuring the CIA as
well as authenticity. Trust backup and recuperation proces s
take care of the selﬁsh nodes, i.e., nodes which aim to
preserve their resources and considered malicious. SecTrust -
RPL is compared with MRHOF-RPL, and it is shown that
the proposed mechanism performs better in terms of attack
detected, packet loss, throughput, and frequency of node
rank changes. SecTrust -RPL requires nodes to operate in a
promiscuous mode, which consequently leads to heavy energy
consumption and decreased network lifetime.
Metric based RPL Trustworthiness Scheme (MRTS): A trust
based security scheme named as MRTS is proposed in [72] for
setting up secure routing paths. It works during RPL topolog yconstruction and management by incorporating trustworthi ness
among nodes. In order to perform a secure operation, MRTS
deﬁnes a new trust based metric named as Extended RPL
Node Trustworthiness (ERNT) and a new trust based objective
function named as Trust Objective Function (TOF). ERNT is
incorporated in DIO messages and exchanged with neighbor
nodes. It is responsible for evaluating the trust value of ea ch
node and then quantiﬁes the cost of routing paths. TOF deﬁnes
a way for nodes to use ERNT and constraints for selecting
the preferred parent, and compute their own rank. TOF ﬁnds
the best routing paths while avoiding the paths with less
trustable nodes. MRTS requires TPM for securing RPL control
messages and performs all the security-related computatio ns.
MRTS shows better performance as compared to traditional
RPL. However, the main limitations of MRTS are that it uses
TPM, which introduces a single point of failure in the networ k
and adds extra hardware cost to the network.
Trust based Security System (TIDS): Nygaard et al. [74]
proposed a novel trust-based security system named as TIDS
for detecting Sinkhole and Selective forwarding attacks. T IDS
enables the normal node to monitor and evaluate its neighbor s
in order to ﬁnd anomalies in the normal RPL operation. The
observed data by the node is sent to root (gateway) using
Trust Information (TRU) messages for further analysis. The
main functionality of TIDS is based on computing trust value s
using subjective logic. These values are categorized into b elief,
disbelief, and uncertainty. The trust values are used to ana lyze
the monitored data received from nodes. TIDS is able to
detect all the attackers in the network on the cost of heavy
energy consumption by the root node and false positives. TID S
requires approximately 5Kb-6.4Kb of ROM and 0.7Kb-1Kb
of RAM. The main advantage of the TIDS scheme is that the
normal nodes with IDS implemented on it consume very little
energy while showing approximately 100% detection rate.
Summary and Insights: It is observed that some solutions
present in the literature face a single point of failure issu e
[68], [72]. The solution proposed in [69] is vulnerable to
frequent attacks like Sinkhole and Blackhole. Several work s
[70], [73], [74] require nodes to operate in a promiscuous
mode which leads to substantial energy consumption. The
energy consumption parameter must be considered as the most
critical metric while designing any security algorithm for RPL.
Also, the assumption of static networks also adds to one of
the essential limitations of work proposed in the literatur e.
These challenges must be addressed before the utilization o f
proposed solutions in the real network.
3) Threshold Based Solutions:
Adaptive Threshold (AT): In [60], a mechanism named as
Adaptive Threshold (AT) is presented for countering DODAG
inconsistency attacks in RPL. The default mechanism (Fixed
Threshold) embedded in RPL has a threshold value of 20.
After receiving a packet with ‘O’ and ‘R’ ﬂags set, a node
drops the packet and resets the trickle timer. When this numb er
reaches up to a threshold limit of 20, all such incoming packets
are dropped, but the trickle timer is not reset in order to lim it
the effect of an attack. This counter is reset after every hou r,
and in this way, RPL counters the DODAG inconsistency
attack. However, a smart attacker can send 20malformed11
packets every hour and affect the network performance grad-
ually. An attacker can also use different attack patterns to
degrade network’s performance without getting detected. A T
mechanism considers the current network state to update the
threshold based on the rate of receiving packets. The value o f
threshold decreases when an attacker sends malformed packe ts
very quickly, and increases when an attacker stops sending
malformed packets. AT requires prior calculation of optima l
conﬁguration parameter values in the arbitrary way (i.e., α,β
andγ) and does not consider the node mobility.
Dynamic Threshold (DT): Mayzaud et al. [61] proposed
an improvement to their previous DODAG inconsistency mit-
igation mechanism [60]. The proposed defense mechanism is
known as Dynamic Threshold (DT). It is a fully dynamic
threshold mechanism that takes into account the dynamic
characteristics of the network to set a threshold for mitiga ting
the DODAG inconsistency attack efﬁciently. DT does not
require any prior calculation of optimal value of conﬁgurat ion
parameters like that of AT mechanism because all required
information is gathered from network characteristics itse lf.
It takes into account the convergence time of the network,
i.e., the time required by the RPL network to converge.
DT approach avoids unnecessary resetting of trickle timer,
which consequently suppresses extra DIO transmissions. DT
mechanism outperforms AT mechanism in terms of energy
consumption, PDR , and end-to-end delay. In addition, the
DT mechanism is capable of mitigating the Forced blackhole
problem efﬁciently.
SecRPL: Ghaleb et al. [75] proposed SecRPL to address the
DAO falsiﬁcation attack. The proposed defense mechanism is
based on putting a threshold on the number of DAO packets
forwarded to each destination. In SecRPL, each parent node
maintains a table that contains a counter, speciﬁc to every
child node in its sub-DODAG. Once the number of DAOs
from any child node exceeds the ﬁxed threshold, then that
child is marked as malicious. The parent node drops any
further DAO containing the preﬁx of that malicious child. In
order to avoid the situation where any child is permanently
blocked, the counter table is reset on every DIO multicast.
SecRPL shows signiﬁcantly good results in terms of the
number of DAOs forwarded, control packet overhead, average
power consumption, upward, and downward latency. SecRPL
requires the selection of optimal threshold limit for efﬁci ent
operation, which incurs overhead to the security scheme.
Summary and Insights : As far as the literature is con-
cerned, only a few works [60], [61], [75] focus on using
threshold based solutions are available. Moreover, the pro -
posed solutions address only DODAG inconsistency, Forced
blackhole, and DAO falsiﬁcation attacks, which leaves a big
gap to be ﬁlled in this ﬁeld. In addition, the proposed soluti ons
do not consider node mobility, which may hinder the overall
system’s performance. The key to threshold based solutions
lies in the optimal selection of thresholds, i.e., paramete rs
while considering the network environment. This assumptio n
makes such solutions challenging to be developed for other
routing attacks. The standard RPL parameters can be used
in the optimal selection of thresholds for the development o f
lightweight threshold based defense solutions [51], [52].B. Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
This section discusses various IDS based defense solutions
for detecting routing attacks against RPL protocol. IDS bas ed
RPL defense mechanisms are summarized in Table V.
1) Signature Based IDS:
Intrusion Detection System for 6LoWPAN networks: Kasi-
nathan et al. [77] proposed an IDS to detect DoS attacks in
6LoWPAN network . An open-source IDS Suricata is used
for pattern matching and attack detection. An IDS probe node
is used to sniff all the packet transmissions in the network,
and transfer information to Suricata IDS (Open source IDS)
for further analysis and attack detection. To prevent commu -
nication overhead, the IDS probe node is connected directly
to Suricata IDS using a wired link. In addition, a Frequency
Agility Manager (FAM) is incorporated to make the network
aware of channel occupancy in real-time and operates when th e
interference level exceeds the set threshold. In this situa tion,
FAM changes the operating channel to the best available
one, thus, providing uninterpreted network operations. No
simulation study is done in support of IDS performance and
its usability.
Compression Header Analyzer Intrusion Detection System
(CHA-IDS): Napiah et al. [76] proposed a centralized IDS
named CHA-IDS for detecting HELLO ﬂood, Sinkhole and
Wormhole attacks. It uses compression header data to extrac t
certain important network features that are used for detect ing
individual and combined attacks. The proposed IDS uses the
best ﬁrst and greedy stepwise strategy with correlation-ba sed
feature selection to determine the signiﬁcant features. Th en the
selected features are evaluated using six Machine Learning
(ML) algorithms (Decision Trees (J48), Logistic Regressio n
(LR), Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP), Naive Bayes (NB), Ran-
dom Forest (RF), and Support Vector Machine (SVM)) which
are used to perform classiﬁcation of normal and benign trafﬁ c.
CHA-IDS outperforms SVELTE and the IDS proposed in [31].
The main limitations of CHA-IDS include high memory and
energy consumption. Moreover, it is incapable of identifyi ng
the attacker.
Signature-based Intrusion Detection System: A framework
for a signature-based IDS to detect DIS and Version number
attack is proposed in [78]. The proposed IDS requires detec-
tion and monitoring modules to be placed on nodes itself,
as in the case of hybrid detection schemes. However, the
authors consider two types of additional nodes in the propos ed
scheme. The ﬁrst type of nodes are IDS routers, which carry
detection and ﬁrewall modules. The second type of nodes are
sensors or IDS detectors which are responsible for monitori ng
and sending malicious trafﬁc information to the router node s.
IDS router checks all the passing trafﬁc to decide whether
the packet source is malicious or not. The job of the IDS
detector is to monitor sensor trafﬁc and calculate the metri c
of interest , i.e., Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSS I),
packet drop rate, and packet sending rate. The ﬁnal decision
of classifying a node as malicious or not is taken by detectio n
module running on 6BR, based on the data received from each
node. The proposed framework is not validated, which is its
major limitation.12Table IV: Summary of Secure Protocol based defense mechanis ms
Reference Defense Mechanism Relevant Attack Limitations Mobility Validation Tools/Motes Performance metrics
Dvir et al. [53] VeRA Version number and Decreasedrank Vulnerable to Rank-replay attack, Hashchain forgery attack, adds memory andcomputational overhead. No - - -
Landsmann et al.
[54]Enhanced VeRA Version number and Decreasedrank Vulnerable to Rank-replay attack, addsmemory overhead, child node mightselect attacker as a parent. No - - -
Perrey et al. [91] TRAIL Version number, Decreasedrank, Rank-replay Adds memory overhead. No Testbed DESMesh/RIOTOS Routing convergence time, Av-erage message size
Seeber et al. [68] Trusted ComputingArchitecture RPL routing attacks targetingavailability and integrity, nodetampering TPM is a single point of failure, addscomputational overhead due to cryp-tography processing. No - - -
Sehgal et al. [60] AdaptiveThreshold DODAG inconsistency Requires prior calculation of conﬁgu-ration parameters (optimal values). No Simulation ContikiOS/Cooja PDR , Energy consumption and
Control packet overhead
Mayzaud et al.
[61]DynamicThreshold DODAG inconsistency Increases energy consumption. No Simulation Control packet overhead, PDR ,
Energy consumption
Ghaleb et al.
[75]SecRPL DAO falsiﬁcation Increases Average power consumption,Control packet Overhead and Latency.Decreases PDR and degrades network
reliability.No Simulation ContikiOS/Cooja Control Packet Overhead,PDR , Energy consumption,
DAO forwarding overhead,Upward and downwardLatency
Iuchi et al. [69] Secure Parent Se-lection Rank Susceptible to Sybil and Blackhole at-tacks, may result in longer paths (un-optimized). No Simulation ContikiOS/Cooja Total number of child nodesattached to attacker nodes.
Glissa et al. [67] Secure-RPL(SRPL) Rank, Sinkhole and Selectiveforwarding attacks Computationally expensive. No Simulation Contiki
OS/CoojaAverage power consumption,Control message overhead, andPacket reception rate
Djedjig et al.
[72]Metric-based RPLTrustworthinessScheme (MRTS). Insider attacks Adds computation and communicateoverhead and increases energy con-sumption. No - - -
Ariehrour et al.
[70]Trust-Aware RPL Blackhole and Selective for-warding Nodes need to operate in promiscuousmode to overhear neighbor transmis-sions which adds energy overhead. No Simulation ContikiOS/Cooja Detection rate, Throughput,Packet loss and Frequency ofnode rank changes.
Ariehrour et al.
[71]Trust-Aware RPLfor detectingBlackhole Blackhole Nodes need to operate in promiscuousmode which adds energy overhead. No Testbed Contiki/XM1000motes Detection rate, Throughput,Packet loss and Frequency ofnode rank changes.
Ariehrour et al.
[73]SecTrust-RPL Rank and Sybil Considers static network topology,nodes need to operate in promiscu-ous mode which increases energy con-sumption. No SimulationandTestbed Contiki/XM1000motes Detection rate, Throughput,Packet loss and Frequency ofnode rank changes.
Nygaard et al.
[74]TIDS Sinkhole and Selective for-warding Considers static network topology, re-quires6BR (root) to remain constantly
ON which consequently increases en-ergy consumption, high FPR.No Simulation ContikiOS/Cooja Detection rate, FN, FP , Energy
consumption13
Self Organizing Map Intrusion Detection System (SOMIDS):
Kfoury et al. [79] proposed SOMIDS for detecting Sinkhole,
Version number, and HELLO ﬂooding attacks. SOMIDS uses
Self Organizing Maps (SOM) for clustering attacks and nor-
mal trafﬁc. SOMIDS uses a Pcap ﬁle from a cooja simu-
lator for extracting data and performing clustering of traf ﬁc
classes. SOMIDS consists of three major components. The
ﬁrst component is an aggregator module that is responsible
for aggregating the data (ICMPv 6code, IPv6 destination, IPv 6
source, ICMPv 6DIO version, ICMPv 6DIO rank, Timestamp)
contained in captured PCAP ﬁle. Trafﬁc data is aggregated
into six variables, i.e., number of DIS, DIO, DAO messages,
the ratio of version number changes, the ratio of rank change s,
and average mote power. The second component is normalizer,
which performs the task of normalizing the aggregated data.
Third component is a trainer module which is responsible
for training SOM. The result of the IDS is a matrix that is
converted into a 2D image for better visualization of clusters.
SOMIDS is not evaluated in terms of the implementation
overhead and does not consider node mobility.
Summary and Insights: It is analyzed that some of the
proposed approaches [77], [94] rely on the outdated signatu res
(trafﬁc patterns) for classiﬁer training which makes these
approach ineffective for securing RPL networks. The soluti ons
proposed in [76], [79], [95] used signatures collected from the
simulated attacks. These approaches show promising result s
in terms of prominent metrics. However, signatures collect ed
from the real network can be more effective in classiﬁer
training. The development of RPL based real trafﬁc dataset
containing traces of common routing attacks needs to be done
[96], [97]. The signature based IDS proposed in [76] can be
improved in terms of energy consumption.
2) Anomaly Based IDS:
SVELTE: Raza et al. [80] proposed a real-time IDS
named SVELTE for 6LoWPAN. The proposed IDS consists of
anomaly based detection engine which uses RPL speciﬁcation s
for detecting spoofed information, Sinkhole, and Selectiv e
forwarding attacks. It consists of three centralized modul es
that are placed on 6BR: Mapper, Analyzer and Detector, and a
Mini-ﬁrewall. Every child node sends RPL information to 6BR
for illegitimate trafﬁc ﬁltering. Intrusion detection in S VELTE
involves network graph inconsistency detection, node avai l-
ability detection, and routing graph validation. SVELTE im -
poses very less memory, computational, and energy overhead
on the resource constrained nodes. Moreover, it shows a good
performance in terms of PDR and control packet overhead.
The limitations of SVELTE include strategic placement of ID S
modules, timing inconsistency in rank measurements, which
consequently leads to inaccurate topology creation at 6BR, and
high false positive rate ( FPR). In addition, SVELTE does not
provide defense against coordinated attacks.
Real Time Intrusion and Wormhole Detection: A novel IDS
for the detection of Wormhole attack in IoT is proposed in
[31]. It detects the packet relay and encapsulation types of
Wormhole attack. The proposed IDS uses the node’s location
and neighbor information to identify the attack and receive d
signal strength indicator (RSSI) to identify attacker node s. A
hybrid deployment strategy on a static network is considere dfor placing IDS modules, where a centralized module is place d
on 6BR, and distributed modules are placed on resource con-
strained nodes. Distributed modules are responsible for se nd-
ing and monitoring RSSI values, sending neighbor informati on
to 6BR, and packet forwarding. Centralized modules collect
RSSI values, compute the distance from the node’s RSSI value ,
and perform validation of neighbors from collected informa -
tion and detect attack with its location. The main drawback
of the proposed IDS is that it puts much communication and
computational burden on resource constrained nodes.
Distributed Monitoring Architecture: Mayzaud et al. [81]
proposed a distributed monitoring architecture for detect ing
DODAG inconsistency attacks. The proposed architecture
makes the use of RPL multi-instance feature and dedicated
monitoring nodes for facilitating energy efﬁcient network
events observation (passively). Two types of nodes are cons id-
ered in the network, i.e., regular (monitored) and monitori ng
nodes. The multi-instance feature of RPL is used for creatin g
regular (the network of regular nodes) and monitoring netwo rk
(the network of monitoring nodes). The monitoring nodes con -
tain local anomaly detection (algorithm) modules that anal yze
the collected data and detect possible attacks in a distribu ted
manner. The main limitations of the proposed architecture a re:
it assumes a single attacker case and fails in case of multi-
ple attackers which are operating in a collaborative manner ,
monitoring nodes need to operate in promiscuous modes for
anomaly detection, depends on the coverage of regular nodes
by monitoring nodes (strategic placement), relies on high o rder
devices for monitoring which adds cost overhead, architect ure
relies on local detection.
Extension to Distributed Monitoring Architecture: Mayzaud
et al. extended their previous proposed approach [81] in [55]
to detect Version number attacks. Authors considered the fa ct
that an incremented version number is propagated in the enti re
graph, and a monitoring node cannot decide by itself if this i s
the result of an attack or not, and they must share monitoring
information to identify the malicious node more efﬁciently .
Thus, they extended the distributed monitoring architectu re
such that monitoring nodes can collaborate together using a
multi-instance network and facilitate global detection. O nly
one attacker case is assumed, and mobility is not considered
in this defense architecture. An extension to [55] is presen ted
in [82]. In this work, detection and localization algorithm s
are presented. The “LOCAL ASSESSMENT” algorithm is
deployed on monitoring nodes except the root, which allows
monitoring nodes to report to the root the sender of an
incremented version number in their neighborhood. The “DIS-
TRIBUTED DETECTION” algorithm is deployed on the sink
to detect the attack and gather all monitoring node informat ion
into tables. The “LOCALIZATION” algorithm is deployed
on the sink node and performs attacker identiﬁcation by
analyzing the collected information. This framework inher its
the limitations of Mayzaud et al. [81].
Extended SVELTE based on ETX metric: An extension
to SVELTE is proposed in [63]. In addition to SVELTE
IDS modules, an extra intrusion detection module which uses
the ETX metric is incorporated for the detection of ETX
manipulation attacks in ETX metric based RPL networks.14
The authors have also proposed an intrusion detection metho d
which uses geographical parameters (node’s location and
transmission limits) for handling a case when both rank and
ETX based detection methods fail. The main idea behind ETX
based intrusion detection method is that ETX value of the
parent node must be lower than that of its children node,
and if any node’s ETX value is found to be inappropriate
or unusual, then the node reported as malicious. The main
advantage associated with the proposed solution is that the
ETX based IDS can defend against ETX and rank based
attacks. In contrast, the geographical parameter based met hod
can locate the nodes and test their authenticity. The propos ed
IDS solutions consume less power when nodes operate in duty
cycling mode and require only 5,570and6Bytes of RAM and
ROM, respectively. A high true positive rate ( TPR) is achieved
when both the proposed solutions are combined together. The
proposed solution does not consider node mobility in the
network.
Hybrid IDS based on the Sequential Probability Ratio Test
with an Adaptive Threshold: A hybrid IDS that combines the
Sequential Probability Ratio Test (SPRT) with an Adaptive
Threshold to detect Selective forwarding attack is propose d
in [83]. It uses two types of modules, a centralized module
deployed on the gateway node and a distributed module
deployed on resource constrained nodes. The proposed IDS in -
volves three steps, i.e., data gathering, data analysis, de cision,
and elimination of compromised node. The data gathering
step involves each routing node to collect the neighbor’s
information, storing it in the form of a table, and then send
it to the centralized node using HELLO messages. The data
analysis step involves the computation of the number of
dropped packets and the probability of dropped packet for
each node using data gathered from HELLO messages. The
decision step is responsible for detecting malicious nodes and
minimizing FAR by utilizing SPRT. The elimination of the
compromised node step involves informing legitimate nodes
about the compromised nodes by initiating a global repair
and sending the compromised node’s identiﬁer in fresh DIO
messages to all other legitimate nodes in the network. The
proposed IDS achieves 100% detection rate. However, the
communication overhead of the network increases with the
increase in node mobility.
Summary and Insights: Many of the anomaly based IDS
solutions present in the literature show acceptable perfor -
mance, which favors their utility in IoT applications. Howe ver,
it is observed that the proposed solutions achieve high perf or-
mance (accuracy, TRP , FPR , etc.) while imposing an additional
cost to the nodes in terms of communication, computation,
memory, and energy consumption. The solutions proposed in
[31], [55], [81], [83], [84], [98], [99] impose extra networ k
deployment cost which is undesirable for resource constrai ned
networks. Similarly, the security approach proposed in [80 ]
requires the strategic placement of IDS monitoring modules ,
which add an implementation complexity to the network.
Moreover, it is also observed that the proposed anomaly
based IDS are still vulnerable to the coordinated attacks.
These critical challenges must be addressed for the advance d
development of anomaly based IDS for IoT.3) Speciﬁcation Based IDS:
Intrusion detection and response system for Internet of
things (InDReS): In [85], a distributed IDS named InDReS
to detect Sinkhole attack in RPL is proposed. The proposed
IDS is based on cluster tree topology, where cluster head act s
as a monitoring node that observes packet drop count of its
adjacent nodes. The monitoring nodes compute the rank of
every adjacent node to it and compare that rank with the
threshold value for ﬁnding a malicious node. InDReS is imple -
mented on NS- 2, and performance results are compared with
that of INTI. The results show that the proposed IDS performs
well compared to INTI in terms of packet drop ratio, PDR ,
control packet overhead, and average energy consumption. T he
limitations of InDReS include: only homogeneous nodes are
considered, the dynamic network is not considered, and it ma y
fail if the leader node itself gets compromised.
Speciﬁcation-Based IDS for Detecting Topology Attacks:
Leet al. in their previous work [57] proposed a speciﬁcation
based IDS architecture which lacks implementation and per-
formance analysis. In [58], the authors extended the previo us
architecture and evaluated it in terms of prominent evaluat ion
metrics. They proposed a speciﬁcation based IDS consisting of
Extended Finite State Machine (EFSM) that is generated from
a semi-auto proﬁling technique. Firstly, EFSM is created fr om
RPL speciﬁcation using ILP (Integer Linear Programming)
technique to deﬁne stable states and transitions among them .
Secondly, RPL knowledge of the RPL proﬁle of detection
algorithms is translated to form more concrete states and
transitions, i.e., utilizing trace ﬁles generated from RPL normal
operation in the Cooja simulator. This speciﬁcation deﬁnes all
the legitimate states and transitions which a node must foll ow
while operating in a normal manner. EFSM is implemented
as a set of rules on intrusion detection agents for detecting
various attacks, including Rank, Local Repair, Neighbor, D IS,
and Sinkhole. The proposed IDS is shown to achieve TPR of
100% with FPR up to6.78%. The proposed IDS introduces
communication overhead, requires a good network trace for
the creation of effective speciﬁcation, and shows less accu racy
when it works for a long time.
RPL-Based Wormhole Detection: Laiet al. [87] proposed
a distributed wormhole detection method which applies the
rank information to estimate the relative distance from the
root node. The proposed method uses the hop count metric
for rank calculation. To detect malicious nodes, the propos ed
detection method checks for the nodes with unreasonable ran k
values. It deﬁnes Rank Threshold andRank Diff attributes for
the detection of illegitimate DIO messages. Rank Threshold is
deﬁned as the difference between the rank values of parent an d
node itself, whereas Rank Diff is the difference between the
rank values of the source node and node itself. DIO message
is considered as abnormal, when Rank Diff>Rank Threshold
condition is not met. The proposed wormhole detection
method shows a 100% output in terms of precision, recall, and
accuracy. The main advantages of this approach are its easy
implementation and no additional requirement for Wormhole
attack detection. However, node mobility is node considere d,
which can severely affect the detection results. In additio n,
critical parameters like PDR , end-to-end delay, and energy15
consumption are not analyzed.
Speciﬁcation based IDS based on Finite State Machine: In
[57], a speciﬁcation based IDS is proposed for detecting ran k
and local repair attacks. The proposed IDS uses a ﬁnite state
machine (FSM) for monitoring the node’s state, i.e., normal
or malicious. A backbone architecture is used for placing
monitoring nodes containing FSM modules. Monitoring nodes
sniff neighbor transmissions, including its parent and chi ld
nodes. The parameters like node id, the preferred parent wit h
their respective rank, state changes in a speciﬁc period are
monitored and extracted from sniffed DIO messages in order t o
analyze the node’s behavior. Monitoring nodes collaborate and
share information for detecting attacker nodes. FSM speciﬁ es
normal and malicious states. FSM state speciﬁes the strict r ank
rule which nodes must follow, i.e., parent-child relations hip,
and an acceptable threshold for the number of times a topolog y
can be set up or updated. Any deviation from the speciﬁed
rules and threshold consequently changes the node’s state f rom
normal to suspicious and detects the possible attacker node .
IDS to defense Routing choice intrusion Intrusion: An IDS
to defend against Routing choice intrusion (ETX metric) is
proposed in [50]. The proposed IDS is based on speciﬁca-
tion methodology that uses a stand alone architecture with
distributed monitoring nodes. Authors consider attack def ense
only against a single intruder case. The proposed IDS requir es
monitoring nodes containing FSM with normal and malicious
states. Network behaviors are matched with FSM states, and
any deviation from normal state leads to attack detection.
Routing choice intrusion is detected in the case when any
malicious node multicast the DIO with lower ETX value,
which consequently leads to a large ﬂuctuation in the number
of its child nodes than a set threshold, this node is marked as
an attacker node. The authors consider certain assumptions like
secure network initialization, homogeneous nodes, monito ring
nodes with more resources, and static environment, which
limits the practicality of the proposed IDS.
Sink-based Intrusion Detection System (SBIDS): In [86],
a centralized speciﬁcation based IDS known as SBIDS is
proposed to address rank attacks in RPL based IoT networks.
SBIDS uses information contained in the DAO message re-
ceived from child nodes in its sub-DODAG. SBIDS utilizes
RPL parameters, including node’s current rank (NCR), node’ s
parent rank (NPR), node’s previous rank (NPVR), and parent
switching threshold (PST) for detecting whether a node is
malicious or not. SBIDS achieves 100% accuracy in case of
a static network. The accuracy decreases in the presence of
mobile nodes in the network. SBIDS adds a communication
overhead to RPL protocol as it requires an extra 48-bit infor-
mation to be added by the nodes in the DAO packets they send.
SBIDS shows better results for a static network as compared
to the mobile network. The average power consumption of
nodes increases in the case of SBIDS.
Summary and Insights: The effectiveness of speciﬁcation
based IDS solutions can be observed from their performance.
The only key challenge in the development of speciﬁcation
based IDS is the availability of quality trafﬁc trace requir ed
for generating adequate speciﬁcations [58]. It is observed
that several approaches [86], [87] have not performed powerconsumption analysis, hence there exists an open research g ap
to be considered for future research. Moreover, the integra tion
of mobility support in the proposed solutions is a challengi ng
task and needs further investigation.
4) Hybrid IDS:
Robust Intrusion Detection System (RIDES): Amin et al.
[88] proposed a novel IDS named RIDES for detecting DoS
attacks in IP based WSN. It is a hybrid of signature and
anomaly based IDS. The signature based intrusion detection
component uses a distributed pattern matching using bloom
ﬁlters to match signature codes. To reduce the overhead to
long signature codes, a coding scheme is used which converts
signatures into short attack identiﬁers. The anomaly based
intrusion detection component uses Cumulative Sum Control
charts (CUSUM) with upper and lower threshold limits to
detect anomalies in the network pattern. A distributed ap-
proach is used to place the intrusion detection components
for decreasing the communication, memory, and computation al
overhead on nodes. The main limitation of this work is inter-
packet delay that leads to delayed intrusion detection by
RIDES. In addition to it, energy consumption by the resource
constrained nodes is not studied.
Hybrid of Anomaly and Speciﬁcation based on optimum-
path forest clustering: A novel real-time hybrid IDS frame-
work is proposed in [89] to detect Sinkhole, Selective forwa rd-
ing, and Wormhole attacks. Speciﬁcation based IDS modules
are deployed on router nodes which perform analysis of their
child nodes and forward their local results to the gateway
node through data packets. The gateway node is equipped
with anomaly based IDS module which employs Unsuper-
vised Optimum-Path Forest Clustering (OPFC) algorithm for
projecting clusters by using incoming data packets. The sim u-
lation results show that the proposed IDS framework achieve s
the maximum TPR of96.02% with2.08% ofFPR. The main
features of the proposed hybrid IDS include high scalabilit y
and attacker identiﬁcation. There are several drawbacks as so-
ciated with this hybrid IDS. It does not consider the energy
constrained nature of nodes, assumes one-way communicatio n
(node to gateway), and considers only a static network.
Summary and Insights: Similar to signature and anomaly
based IDS, hybrid based IDS solutions also face several
challenges that need to be addressed. Delayed attack detec-
tion makes IDS solutions inefﬁcient when deployed in real
networks. The IDS proposed in [88] is affected by the inter-
packet delay that causes delayed attack detection. Such iss ues
need to be carefully addressed while designing IDS for IoT
applications. Hybrid IDS proposed by Bostani et al. [89]
utilized MapReduce architecture to manage a large amount of
data from motes and perform attack detection efﬁciently. Ot her
such algorithms available in the literature need to be explo red
for building scalable and effective IDS solutions correspo nding
to IoT.
Table VI presents a comparative study of discussed secu-
rity solutions (Secure Protocol and IDS) based on different
evaluation metrics. The performance is compared based on
the maximum improvements achieved in percentages (%), and
maximum or minimum values (val) achieved.16Table V: Summary of Intrusion Detection System based defens e mechanisms
Reference Defense Mecha-nism Type Placementstrategy Relevant Attack Limitations Mobility Validation Tools/Motes Performancemetrics
Amin et
al.[88]RIDES Hybrid Distributed DoS Inter packet delay affects the detectiontime. No Simulation ns-2 TPR, FPR,ROC
Leet al. [57] Speciﬁcationbased IDS Speciﬁcation Distributed Rank, Local re-pair No simulation study has been done for theproposed IDS. No - - -
Raza et
al.[80]SVELTE Anomaly Hybrid Sinkhole,Selectiveforwarding,spoofed or alteredinformation Synchronization issue, requires strategicplacement of IDS modules, high FPR, vul-nerable to coordinated attacks. No Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja Energyconsumption,TPR
Kasinathan et
al.[94]DoS detectionIDS Architecture Signature Centralized DoS The centralized nature of the IDS archi-tecture makes it difﬁcult to detect inter-nal attacks and introduces communicationoverhead over resource constrained nodes. No Testbed PenTest/Contiki OS TP
Kasinathan et
al.[77]Intrusion Detec-tion System for6LoWPAN net-works Signature Centralized DoS The centralized nature of the IDS archi-tecture makes it difﬁcult to detect inter-nal attacks and introduces communicationoverhead over resource constrained nodes. No Testbed PenTest/Contiki OS -
Zhang et
al.[50]IDS to defenseRouting choiceIntrusion Speciﬁcation Distributed Routing choiceintrusion Assumes secure network initialization andhomogeneous devices. Monitoring nodesneed to operate in promiscuous mode. No Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja -
Pongle et
al.[31]Real Time In-trusion DetectionSystem Anomaly Hybrid Wormhole Introduces communication and computa-tional overhead. No Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja TPR, Energy
consumption,Control packetoverhead
Mayzaud et
al.[81]Distributed Mon-itoring Architec-ture Anomaly Distributed DODAGinconsistency It assumes a single attacker case and failsin case of multiple attackers operating ina collaborative manner. Monitoring nodesneed to operate in promiscuous modesfor anomaly detection. Depends on thecoverage of regular nodes by monitoringnodes (strategic placement). Relies on highorder devices for monitoring, which addscost overhead. Architecture relies on localdetection. No Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja -
Mayzaud et
al.[55]Distributed Mon-itoring Architec-ture Anomaly Hybrid Version number It considers only a single attacker case,monitoring nodes need to operate inpromiscuous modes for anomaly detection,relies on high order devices for monitoring,which adds cost overhead. Do not considernode mobility and depends on the coverageof regular nodes by the monitoring nodes(strategic placement). No Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja FPR17Table V: Summary of Intrusion Detection System based defens e mechanisms
Reference Defense Mecha-nism Type Placementstrategy Relevant Attack Limitations Mobility Validation Tools/Motes Performancemetrics
Mayzaud et
al.[82]Distributed Mon-itoring Architec-ture Anomaly Hybrid Version number It considers only a single attacker case,monitoring nodes need to operate inpromiscuous modes for anomaly detection,relies on high order devices for monitoring,which adds cost overhead. Do not considernode mobility and depends on the coverageof regular nodes by the monitoring nodes(strategic placement). No Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja FPR
Surender et
al.[85]InDReS Speciﬁcation Distributed Sinkhole It considers only homogeneous nodes anddo not consider network dynamicity. Thisapproach may fail if leader node itself getscompromised. No Simulation ns-2 Packet dropratio, PDR ,
Throughput,Energyconsumption,Control packetoverhead
Leet al. [58] Speciﬁcationbased IDS Speciﬁcation Hybrid Rank, Sinkhole,Local repair,Neighbor, DIS Introduces communication overhead, re-quires a good network trace for the creationof effective speciﬁcation, and shows lessaccuracy when it works for a long time. No Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja TPR, FPR , En-
ergy consump-tion
Laiet al. [87] RPL-BasedWormholeDetection Speciﬁcation Distributed Wormhole Node mobility is not considered which canseverely affect detection results. Criticalparameters like PDR , end-to-end delay and
energy consumption are not analyzed.No Simulation - Precision, Re-call and Accu-racy
Shreenivas et
al.[63]ExtendedSVELTE basedon ETX metric Anomaly Hybrid ETXmanipulation,Rank Do not consider mobility. Parameters likeend-to-end delay, PDR are not not ana-
lyzed.No Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja Average powerconsumption,TPR
Chen et
al.[99]Intrusion Detec-tion System forDetecting Worm-hole and Flood-ing Attacks Anomaly - Wormhole,Flooding Overhead of maintaining blacklist in large-scale networks affects overall network per-formance. Placement strategy for IDS mod-ules is not discussed. No Simulation - Precision, Re-call, Accuracyand Miss rate
Ahsan et
al.[100]ABR-SAR basedIDS for Worm-hole detection Anomaly Hybrid Wormhole Increases implementation complexity.Strategic placement of SAN is needed sothat every node must be in range of atleast one another SAN. No Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja Detection rate,Average powerconsumption
Gara et
al.[83]Hybrid IntrusionDetectionSystem basedon SequentialProbabilityRatio Test withan AdaptiveThreshold Anomaly Hybrid Selectiveforwarding Exchange of HELLO messages increasesnetwork overhead. Yes Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja Detection rate,Control packetoverhead18Table V: Summary of Intrusion Detection System based defens e mechanisms
Reference Defense Mecha-nism Type Placementstrategy Relevant Attack Limitations Mobility Validation Tools/Motes Performancemetrics
Gara et
al.[84]Hybrid IntrusionDetectionSystem basedon SequentialProbabilityRatio Test withan AdaptiveThreshold Anomaly Hybrid Selectiveforwardingand Clone ID Exchange of HELLO messages increasesnetwork overhead. Yes Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja Detection rate,Control packetoverhead
Napiah et
al.[76]CompressionHeader AnalyzerIntrusionDetectionSystem (CHA-IDS) Signature Centralized HELLO ﬂooding,Sinkhole andWormhole Introduces memory and energy consump-tion. It cannot identify the attacker. No Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja/ Weka TPR, FPR , Ac-
curacy, EnergyConsumption
Bostani et
al.[89]Hybrid ofAnomaly andSpeciﬁcationbased IDS Hybrid Distributed Sinkhole andSelectiveforwarding Assumes one way communication. Energyoverhead analysis is not done. No Simulation MATLAB TPR, FPR , Ac-
curacy
Shaﬁque et
al.[86]SBIDS Speciﬁcation Centralized Rank Introduces communication overhead andincreases Average power consumption. Yes Simulation Contiki OS/Cooja TP , FP , FN,FP, Accuracy,
Average powerconsumption
Ioulianou et
al.[78]Framework ofSignature-basedIDS Signature Hybrid HELLO ﬂoodingand Version num-ber No validation is performed in support ofthe framework. No - - -
Kfoury et
al.[79]SOMIDS Signature Centralized HELLO ﬂooding,Sinkhole, andVersion number No evaluation in terms of prominent per-formance metrics is done. Energy con-sumption of 6BR is not studied. No Simulation ContikiOS /Cooja/Python -
Shukla et
al.[95]ML-IDS (KM-IDS, DT-IDSand Hybrid-IDS) Signature Centralized Wormhole FPvalue is not reported. Energy con-
sumption and deployment strategy are notdiscussed.No Simulation C++ Detection rate19Table VI: Performance comparison of security solutions in t erms of different evaluation metrics
Reference
Throughput (%)
Routing convergence time (%)
Extra messages per node (val)
Packet delivery ratio (%)
Energy consumption (%)
Control packet overhead (%)
DAO forwarding overhead (%)
Upward latency (%)
Downward latency (%)
Average power consumption (%)
Packet reception ratio (%)
Packet loss (%)
Node rank changes (%)
True negatives (%)
False negatives (%)
False positives (%)
False positive rate (val)
Receiver operating characteristic (val)
Packet drop ratio (%)
Precision (val)
Recall (val)
Accuracy (val)
Miss rate (val)
Detection rate or TPR (val)
Affected child nodes (%)
True positives (%)
Dvir et al. [53] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Landsmann et al. [54] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Perrey et al. [91] 20 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Seeber et al. [68] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Sehgal et al. [60] - - - 99 40 55 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Mayzaud et al. [61] - - - 99 50 50 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Ghaleb et al. [75] - - - 99 - - 90 70 55 30 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Iuchi et al. [69] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 99 -
Glissa et al. [67] - - - 93 - 35 - - - 35 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Djedjig et al. [72] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Ariehrour et al. [70] 63 - - - - - - - - - 30 80 - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Ariehrour et al. [71] 66 - - - - - - - - - - 28 66 - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Ariehrour et al. [73] - - - - - - - - - - - 15 62 - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Nygaard et al. [74] - - - - 99 - - - - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - 100 - 100 - -
Amin et al. [88] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 5 98 - - - - - 90 - -
Leet al. [57] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Raza et al. [80] - - - - 99 - - - - 99 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 100 - -
Kasinathan et al. [94] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 100
Kasinathan et al. [77] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Zhang et al. [50] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Pongle et al. [31] - - - - 0 86 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 94 - -
Mayzaud et al. [55] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - - - -
Mayzaud et al. [82] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - - - -
Surender et al. [85] 8 - - 8 11 17 - - - - - - - - - - - - 38 - - - - - - -
Leet al. [58] - - - - 0 - - - - - - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - 100 - -
Laiet al. [87] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 100 100 100 - - - -
Shreenivas et al. [63] - - - - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 100 - -
Chen et al. [99] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 100 100 100 0 - - -
Ahsan et al. [100] - - - - - - - - - 0 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 95 - -
Gara et al. [83] - - - - - 0 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 100 - -
Gara et al. [84] - - - - - 0 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 100 - -
Napiah et al. [76] - - - - 0 - - - - - - - - - - - 0 - - - - 99 - 99 - -
Bostani et al. [89] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 - - - - 97 - 96 - -
Shaﬁque et al. [86] - - - - - - - - - 0 - - - 3 0 0 - - - - - 100 - - - 99
Ioulianou et al. [78] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Kfoury et al. [79] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Shukla et al. [95] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 93 - -20
VI. C ROSS -LAYERED SECURITY SOLUTIONS FOR RPL
RPL security is not restricted to network layer speciﬁc de-
fense solutions. IEEE 802.15.4MAC layer implements several
features to provide security services such as conﬁdentiali ty, in-
tegrity, and replay protection. Data conﬁdentiality is ach ieved
through symmetric key cryptography techniques based on
Advanced Encryption Standard in Counter with CBC-MAC
(AES-CCM) algorithm, message integrity through Message
Authentication Code (MAC), and replay protection through
monotonically increasing sequence numbers [62], [101], [1 02].
IEEE802.15.4MAC layer deﬁnes eight different security
levels, which can be chosen as per the security requirements of
the application. Oliveira et al. [103] proposed a network access
control (NAC) security framework for 6LoWPAN networks.
The proposed framework aims to control the access of nodes to
the existing network using prior administrative authoriza tion,
and later applies security compliance on the authorized nod es
for security management. The security mechanism of the
framework is capable of defending the network from unknown
attacks. The major limitations of the NAC security frame-
work include the requirement of Lightweight Secure Neighbo r
Discovery for LLNs, secure reprogramming mechanism, and
message authentication mechanism for implementing the pro -
posed framework in a real network. The resource constrained
nature of LLN nodes may limit some of these requirements.
Moreover, the proposed framework is not implemented and
analyzed for validation. Further, the authors extended the ir
previous work [103] and proposed a network admission contro l
solution in [104], [105]. The proposed solution has three ma in
tasks, i.e., node detection and authentication, node autho riza-
tion, and data ﬁltering. The main limitations of the propose d
solution include: (1) inherits attacks from neighbor disco very
and RPL protocols; (2) it uses symmetric encryption, which i n-
creases resource consumption of nodes. The authors suggest ed
using data ﬁltering on RPL control messages, and elliptic cu rve
mechanisms for minimizing resource consumption of nodes.
VII. O PEN ISSUES ,RESEARCH CHALLENGES AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
In this section, we have discussed some open issues and
research challenges that need to be studied and addressed.
Security Against Newly Developed Routing Attacks : One
of the most concerning issues in IoT security is defense
against newly developed attacks. DIO suppression [62], Rou t-
ing choice intrusion [50], and ETX manipulation [63] are
three such attacks which target the RPL network by degrading
networks performance silently. Many other attacks speciﬁc
to RPL are yet to be found and will require robust defense
mechanisms. Very few efforts towards the development of
defense mechanisms against such attacks have been carried
out. Hence, several defense techniques for defending again st
newly discovered attacks need to be proposed.
Scalability : Most of the existing defense solutions have been
tested on small network scenarios, but in the practical worl d,
IoT is enabled by a large network of heterogeneous resource
constrained nodes [50], [53], [87], [93]. The performance o f
existing solutions may degrade in the case of large networkwhich puts IoT applications open to attackers. In addition t o it,
most of the critical IoT applications require a minimum dela y
in information forwarding, hence the demand of fast-reacti ng
and lightweight defense solutions is increasing in order to
carry out seamless network operations. These solutions mus t
not degrade the QoS of the network while supporting high
scalability. Hence, research can be carried out towards the
development of highly scalable lightweight defense soluti ons.
Mobility : Lamaazi et al. [106] showed that the performance
of RPL is severely inﬂuenced by mobile nodes. The standard
speciﬁcation of RPL [3] does not deﬁne any mechanism to
support mobility. Thus, the overall network performance is
degraded in the presence of mobile nodes. Some types of IoT
nodes have dynamic characteristics (mobility), which lead to
an increase in the number of link disconnections, collision s,
and packet loss. When these mobile nodes perform malicious
activities, the network performance drastically degrades . This
leads to a rise in the number of problems that need to be
addressed for securing RPL networks. In [107]–[109] impact
of the Version number and Sybil attack, respectively under
mobility is analyzed. However, the impact of other attacks o n
RPL under mobility needs to be studied. Most of the existing
secure protocol and IDS based defense solutions for RPL
consider the only static environment and may not be applicab le
for the mobile environment.
Cryptography Challenges : The key management is one of
the signiﬁcant challenges for resource constrained networ ks,
which requires attention. Several defense solutions [53], [54],
[67], [92], [93] use cryptography techniques like Hash Chai n
Authentication, Merkle Tree Authentication, and Dynamic
Keying impose computational, memory, and energy overhead
on resource constrained devices. These overheads affect no de
lifetime, which is an essential criterion for critical IoT a p-
plications, e.g., industrial, forest, and landslide monit oring.
The development of lightweight cryptography based securit y
solutions for RPL that are suitable for resource constraine d
devices is still a big challenge and needs to be addressed.
Resource Limitations for Machine Learning : Utilization of
ML for the development of RPL speciﬁc security solutions
is still a big task because of resource constraints. ML is
proven to be effective in securing various wireless and wire d
networks with abundant resources. Thus, the customization of
ML algorithms needs to be done in order to be used in resource
constrained IoT. The efforts to address this challenge will lead
to the development of lightweight signature and anomaly bas ed
IDS solutions which may be very useful in providing quick
detection and facilitation of fast mitigation procedures.
Issues with Trust Based Secure RPL Protocols : Defense
solutions proposed in [70], [73] require every node in the ne t-
work to operate in a promiscuous mode, in order to overhear
neighbor packet transmissions. Such requirements make the se
solutions unsuitable for resource constrained IoT nodes. T hus,
improvements in existing trust based solutions without rel ying
on such strict requirements must be carried out.
Hardware Security : Node tampering is one of the widely
used methods for compromising a node and reprogramming
it to perform malicious activities [49] in the network. All
the insider attacks are performed by compromising a legiti-21
mate node, which is already a part of the IoT network. An
attacker can reprogram a node with malicious functions like
decreasing rank and increasing rank. In addition, a node can
be reprogrammed in such a way that it skips checking rank
function. Moreover, node tampering may lead to shared secre t
keys getting exposed. Thus, the development of tamper-proo f
node design is an open research area. It may also affect many
factors involved in IoT security, and most importantly in th e
prevention from insider attacks. Some authors have suggest ed
using TPM [68], [72] for securing IoT devices against inside r
attacks. However, TPM adds an extra cost to IoT networks
and maybe infeasible for some IoT applications.
Network Security Monitoring over Encrypted Trafﬁc : The
rapid growth in encrypted trafﬁc is creating challenges for
security monitoring and intrusion detection. Encryption i s
being used by digital business organizations as a primary to ol
for securing information. Encryption not only brings secur ity
to businesses, but it also beneﬁts the attacker to evade dete ction
[110]. IoT speciﬁc IDS solutions present in the literature a re
developed based on the assumption of non-encrypted trafﬁc.
However, in the present scenario, IoT applications are usin g
encryption due to the availability of resource-rich hardwa re.
Hence this issue needs to be considered while developing
IDS for current IoT applications. Encrypted Trafﬁc Analyti cs
(ETA) is one of the possible solutions that can be studied to
address this issue.
A. Potential Areas for Future Research
In addition to previously discussed issues and challenges,
we list potential research areas for upcoming researchers i n
this ﬁeld.
Moving target IPv 6defense : By continually changing the
IPv6 address of a device, the attacks including eavesdroppi ng,
denial-of-service, or man-in-the-middle attack can be de-
fended. Moving target IPv 6defense mechanisms provide such
capability to devices. Lightweight moving target based def ense
mechanisms for securing resource constrained devices agai nst
targeted attacks can be explored in-depth. Also, research o n
achieving resilience using temporary-private IPv 6addresses
[111] can be carried out.
Collaborative IDS : These types of IDS leverage collabo-
ration among sensor nodes and 6BR for efﬁcient and quick
detection of attackers. Very few research works present in t he
literature that focuses on the development of collaborativ e IDS
and can be explored further.
Defense against coordinated attacks : In the present sce-
nario, the attackers are now targeting IoT networks using
coordinated attack strategy. These attacks severely degra de
the network’s performance without being detected. Popular
IDS like SVELTE [80] are vulnerable to coordinated attacks.
Thus, an efﬁcient attack detection and mitigation solution to
defend RPL against coordinated routing attacks needs to be
developed.
Active Learning : Data insufﬁciency is of the signiﬁcant
problems for ML-based IDS. This problem can be solved by
active learning, which optimizes the model learning during
the training phase. This research area has recently gained t heattention of security researchers. This needs a more in-dep th
study for leveraging its use in the development of IoT based
IDSs.
Encrypted Trafﬁc Analytics : ETA utilizes network traf-
ﬁc information that is independent of protocol details, e.g .,
lengths and arrival times of ﬂows. These details can be used
irrespective of encrypted and encrypted trafﬁc for securit y
monitoring of networks. ETA is an emerging topic in the ﬁeld
of network security and can be applied to IoT security as well .
Key management : Most of the IoT applications involve unat-
tended device operation in an untrusted environment, where
nodes may quickly become the target of attackers. In the secu re
mode of RPL, the nodes are pre-loaded with security keys,
which can be considered as a signiﬁcant security vulnerabil ity
due to a single point of failure. The development of scalable
and efﬁcient key management mechanisms like generation,
management, and storage are the growing research areas
in RPL security. The exiting WSN based key management
solutions present in the literature can be improved and appl ied
in RPL.
Energy efﬁcient cryptography : Traditional cryptography al-
gorithms are capable of achieving a higher level of security .
However, these algorithms are computation-intensive. Hen ce,
they consume many resources. Such algorithms cannot be
directly used in IoT applications because energy resources are
limited. Thus, the development of energy-efﬁcient cryptog ra-
phy algorithms to achieve the required level of security wit h
minimum energy consumption is an essential concern for IoT
security in the present scenario.
Security of IPv 6over the TSCH mode of IEEE 802.15.4e
(6TiSCH) networks : Recently, 6TiSCH protocol [112] has been
standardized to attain low-power, scalable, and highly rel i-
able operations in industrial applications. 6TiSCH uses time-
slotted channel hopping (TSCH) MAC with IPv 6addressing
to achieve industrial-grade performance. It is integrated with
6LoWPAN, RPL, and CoAP protocols. One of the important
considerations of 6TiSCH is the requirement of node-to-node
synchronization to prevent synchronization loops in the ne t-
work. The attacks particular to RPL may disrupt node-to-nod e
synchronization, which decreases throughput and increase s
communication latency. The research on the security of RPL
and6TiSCH combination is still in its early stage and is a
potential research area for security researchers.
Addressing RPL speciﬁc ﬂooding attacks : There is no efﬁ-
cient and suitable solution specially designed for defendi ng
ﬂooding attack against RPL protocol [30]. To defend the
DIS attack, RPL parameters can be used for setting safety
thresholds in the RPL protocol. For example, DIS interval ca n
be used to block the neighbors who are sending DIS messages
very frequently, i.e., DIS messages are received before the
expiry of DIS interval. Outlier Detection (OD) methods can b e
used to detect the neighbors (attacker) with abnormal behav ior.
DIS and DIO ﬂooding attacks can be detected using OD based
IDS. The main advantage of using OD is that these methods
impose signiﬁcantly less overhead on resource constrained
nodes.
Security solutions for dynamic networks : To provide RPL
with the ability to work efﬁciently in a dynamic network (i.e .,22
mobility scenario), many enhancements have been proposed i n
the literature. Several RPL mobility enhancements are EMA-
RPL, MoMoRo , mRPL, Co-RPL, and ME-RPL. Most of
the existing RPL security solutions like SVELTE, SecRPL,
SecTrust-RPL, and SRPL assume static network topology
and may not be suitable for dynamic scenarios. However, at
present, there are many use-cases in which RPL is deployed
in dynamic networks. Thus, the existing solutions must be
improved to make them suitable for dynamic networks. Also,
this requirement must be fulﬁlled by the defense solutions
which may be developed in the future.
Fog computing for RPL security : Resource constrained
nature of LLNs limits the usage of existing state-of-the-ar t
security mechanisms. However, in the present scenario, thi s
limitation may be handled by currently emerging computing
paradigms. One such emerging computing paradigm is Fog
computing, which can be leveraged for securing IoT applica-
tions. To develop security solutions based on the combinati on
of Edge, Fog Computing, RPL, and 6LoWPAN is a potential
research area. The resource constrained nature of LLN nodes
must also be taken care of beforehand as they demand low
complexity authentication, and low message overhead based
security solutions.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
Self-organization, self-healing, global connectivity, r esource
constrained, and open nature characteristics of IoT make it
the best choice for the development of applications that mak e
human life easier. However, these characteristics also exp ose
IoT to attackers targeting users’ security and privacy. The
network layer is one of the most favorite targets of attacker s
in the case of wireless networks, and because most of the
IoT devices communicate using wireless medium IoT is more
prone to attackers. To support efﬁcient routing in LLNs,
the RPL protocol has been standardized. RPL protocol is
vulnerable to different attacks, which include attacks inh erited
from WSN and attacks speciﬁc to RPL. In this paper, we
presented an exhaustive study on various attacks and defens e
solutions, in particular to the RPL protocol. First, we disc ussed
a taxonomy of attacks on RPL in which attacks are classiﬁed
based on their primary targets, including resources, topol ogy,
and trafﬁc. Then, a taxonomy of different RPL speciﬁc de-
fense solutions present in the literature is proposed. Vari ous
research challenges, open issues, and future research dire ctions
observed from the literature survey are also discussed. We
observed that the research related to defense solutions spe ciﬁc
to secure RPL protocol and RPL speciﬁc IDS methods is still
in the early phase and requires more attention for providing
full-ﬂedged security to IoT applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the Ministry of Human
Resource Development, Government of India.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Ashton, “That ‘Internet of things’ Thing,” RFID journal , vol. 22,
no. 7, pp. 97–114, 2009.[2] A. ˇColakovi´ c and M. Hadˇ ziali´ c, “Internet of things (iot): A review of
enabling technologies, challenges, and open research issu es,”Computer
Networks , vol. 144, pp. 17 – 39, 2018.
[3] T. Winter, P. Thubert, A. Brandt, J. Hui, R. Kelsey, P. Lev is, K. Pister,
R. Struik, J.-P. Vasseur, and R. Alexander, “RPL: IPv6 routi ng protocol
for low-power and lossy networks,” Tech. Rep., 2012.
[4] A. Musaddiq, Y . B. Zikria, O. Hahm, H. Yu, A. K. Bashir, and S. W.
Kim, “A Survey on Resource Management in IoT Operating Syste ms,”
IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp. 8459–8482, 2018.
[5] J. Tripathi, On Design, Evaluation and Enhancement of IP-Based
Routing Solutions for Low Power and Lossy Networks . Drexel
University, 2014, PhD dissertation.
[6] I. E. Radoi, “Performance Evaluation of Routing Protoco ls in Lossy
Links for Smart Building Networks,” Master’s thesis, Schoo l of Infor-
matics University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 2011.
[7] A. Al-Fuqaha, M. Guizani, M. Mohammadi, M. Aledhari, and
M. Ayyash, “Internet of Things: A Survey on Enabling Technol ogies,
Protocols, and Applications,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials ,
vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2347–2376, Fourthquarter 2015.
[8] M. R. Palattella, N. Accettura, X. Vilajosana, T. Wattey ne, L. A.
Grieco, G. Boggia, and M. Dohler, “Standardized Protocol St ack for
the Internet of (Important) Things,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials , vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1389–1406, 2013.
[9] J. Postel, “User datagram protocol,” Tech. Rep., 1980.
[10] O. Iova, P. Picco, T. Istomin, and C. Kiraly, “RPL: The Ro uting
Standard for the Internet of Things... Or Is It?” IEEE Communications
Magazine , vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 16–22, December 2016.
[11] O. Gaddour and A. Koubaa, “RPL in a nutshell: A survey,” Computer
Networks , vol. 56, no. 14, pp. 3163 – 3178, 2012.
[12] J. Granjal, E. Monteiro, and J. S. Silva, “Security for t he Internet of
Things: A Survey of Existing Protocols and Open Research Iss ues,”
IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials , vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1294–
1312, thirdquarter 2015.
[13] I. Tomi´ c and J. A. McCann, “A Survey of Potential Securi ty Issues in
Existing Wireless Sensor Network Protocols,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal , vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 1910–1923, Dec 2017.
[14] A. Oliveira and T. Vaz˜ ao, “Low-power and lossy network s under
mobility: A survey,” Computer Networks , vol. 107, pp. 339 – 352,
2016.
[15] B. Ghaleb, A. Y . Al-Dubai, E. Ekonomou, A. Alsarhan, Y . N asser,
L. M. Mackenzie, and A. Boukerche, “A Survey of Limitations
and Enhancements of the IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low-power and
Lossy Networks: A Focus on Core Operations,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1607–1635, 2018.
[16] H. Kharrufa, H. A. Al-Kashoash, and A. H. Kemp, “RPL-bas ed routing
protocols in IoT applications: A Review,” IEEE Sensors Journal ,
vol. 19, no. 15, pp. 5952–5967, 2019.
[17] A. R. Sfar, E. Natalizio, Y . Challal, and Z. Chtourou, “A roadmap for
security challenges in the internet of things,” Digital Communications
and Networks , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 118 – 137, 2018.
[18] D. M. Mendez, I. Papapanagiotou, and B. Yang, “Internet of things:
Survey on security and privacy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.01879 ,
2017.
[19] K. Grgi´ c, V . Kriˇ zanovi´ c ˇCik, and V . Mandri´ c Radivojevi´ c, “Security
Aspects of IPv6-based Wireless Sensor Networks,” International jour-
nal of electrical and computer engineering systems , vol. 7, no. 1., pp.
29–37, 2016.
[20] A. El Hajjar, G. Roussos, and M. Paterson, “On the perfor mance of
key pre-distribution for RPL-based IoT Networks,” in Interoperability,
Safety and Security in IoT . Springer, 2016, pp. 67–78.
[21] P. Ilia, G. Oikonomou, and T. Tryfonas, “Cryptographic key exchange
in IPv6-based low power, lossy networks,” in IFIP International
Workshop on Information Security Theory and Practices . Springer,
2013, pp. 34–49.
[22] W. Bechkit, Y . Challal, A. Bouabdallah, and V . Tarokh, “ A highly
scalable key pre-distribution scheme for wireless sensor n etworks,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 12, no. 2, pp.
948–959, 2013.
[23] T. Tsao, R. Alexander, M. Dohler, V . Daza, A. Lozano, and M. Richard-
son, “A Security Threat Analysis for the Routing Protocol fo r Low-
Power and Lossy Networks (RPLs),” Tech. Rep., 2015.
[24] M. Abomhara and G. M. Køien, “Cyber security and the inte rnet of
things: vulnerabilities, threats, intruders and attacks, ”Journal of Cyber
Security , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 65–88.
[25] N. Kulkarni, S. S. Chikkaraddi, and N. Sushmitha, “Surv ey on the Var-
ious Security Issues Associated with the Internet of Things ,”Wireless
Communication , vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 99–103, 2018.23
[26] I. Homoliak, F. Toffalini, J. Guarnizo, Y . Elovici, and M. Ochoa, “In-
sight into Insiders: A Survey of Insider Threat Taxonomies, Analysis,
Modeling, and Countermeasures,” CoRR , vol. abs/1805.01612, 2018.
[27] D. Airehrour, J. Gutierrez, and S. K. Ray, “Secure routi ng for internet
of things: A survey,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications ,
vol. 66, pp. 198–213, 2016.
[28] F. A. Alaba, M. Othman, I. A. T. Hashem, and F. Alotaibi, “ Internet
of things security: A survey,” Journal of Network and Computer
Applications , vol. 88, pp. 10–28, 2017.
[29] L. Wallgren, S. Raza, and T. V oigt, “Routing Attacks and Countermea-
sures in the RPL-based Internet of Things,” International Journal of
Distributed Sensor Networks , vol. 9, no. 8, p. 794326, 2013.
[30] A. Mayzaud, R. Badonnel, I. Chrisment, and I. Grand Est - Nancy, “A
Taxonomy of Attacks in RPL-based Internet of Things,” International
Journal of Network Security , vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 459–473, 2016.
[31] P. Pongle and G. Chavan, “Real Time Intrusion and Wormho le Attack
Detection in Internet of Things,” International Journal of Computer
Applications , vol. 121, no. 9, pp. 1–9, 2015.
[32] P. Sethi and S. R. Sarangi, “Internet of things: archite ctures, protocols,
and applications,” Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering ,
vol. 2017, pp. 1–27, January 2017.
[33] M. R. Abdmeziem, D. Tandjaoui, and I. Romdhani, Architecting the
Internet of Things: State of the Art . Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2016, pp. 55–75.
[34] L. D. Xu, W. He, and S. Li, “Internet of Things in Industri es: A Survey,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 2233–
2243, Nov 2014.
[35] D. Miorandi, S. Sicari, F. D. Pellegrini, and I. Chlamta c, “Internet of
things: Vision, applications and research challenges,” Ad Hoc Networks ,
vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 1497 – 1516, 2012.
[36] A. V . Dastjerdi and R. Buyya, “Fog computing: Helping th e internet
of things realize its potential,” Computer , vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 112–116,
2016.
[37] M. Mukherjee, R. Matam, L. Shu, L. Maglaras, M. A. Ferrag ,
N. Choudhury, and V . Kumar, “Security and privacy in fog comp uting:
Challenges,” IEEE Access , vol. 5, pp. 19 293–19 304, 2017.
[38] S. Yi, Z. Qin, and Q. Li, “Security and privacy issues of f og computing:
A survey,” in International conference on wireless algorithms, systems ,
and applications . Springer, 2015, pp. 685–695.
[39] S. Prabavathy, K. Sundarakantham, and S. M. Shalinie, “ Design of
cognitive fog computing for intrusion detection in Interne t of Things,”
Journal of Communications and Networks , vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 291–298,
2018.
[40] H. Lamaazi and N. Benamar, “A comprehensive survey on en hance-
ments and limitations of the RPL protocol: A focus on the obje ctive
function,” Ad Hoc Networks , vol. 96, p. 102001, 2020.
[41] O. Gnawali and P. Levis, “The etx objective function for rpl,” draft-
gnawali-roll-etxof-01,” 2010.
[42] ——, “The minimum rank with hysteresis objective functi on,” Tech.
Rep., 2012.
[43] P. Thubert, “Objective function zero for the routing pr otocol for low-
power and lossy networks (RPL),” Tech. Rep., 2012.
[44] H. Lamaazi and N. Benamar, “OF-EC: A novel energy consum ption
aware objective function for RPL based on fuzzy logic.” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications , vol. 117, pp. 42–58, 2018.
[45] P. Levis, T. Clausen, J. Hui, O. Gnawali, and J. Ko, “The t rickle
algorithm,” Tech. Rep., 2011.
[46] P. Perazzo, C. Vallati, A. Arena, G. Anastasi, and G. Din i, “An
implementation and evaluation of the security features of r pl,” in
International Conference on Ad-Hoc Networks and Wireless . Springer,
2017, pp. 63–76.
[47] P. O. Kamgueu, E. Nataf, and T. D. Ndie, “Survey on RPL en-
hancements: A focus on topology, security and mobility,” Computer
Communications , vol. 120, pp. 10 – 21, 2018.
[48] W. Xie, M. Goyal, H. Hosseini, J. Martocci, Y . Bashir, E. Baccelli,
and A. Durresi, “Routing loops in dag-based low power and los sy
networks,” in 24th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Infor-
mation Networking and Applications (AINA) . IEEE, 2010, pp. 888–
895.
[49] A. Le, J. Loo, Y . Luo, and A. Lasebae, “The impacts of inte rnal
threats towards Routing Protocol for Low power and lossy net work
performance,” in IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications
(ISCC) , July 2013, pp. 789–794.
[50] L. Zhang, G. Feng, and S. Qin, “Intrusion detection syst em for RPL
from routing choice intrusion,” in 2015 IEEE International Conference
on Communication Workshop (ICCW) . IEEE, June 2015, pp. 2652–
2658.[51] A. Verma and V . Ranga, “Mitigation of DIS ﬂooding attack s in RPL-
based 6LoWPAN networks,” Transactions on Emerging Telecommuni-
cations Technologies , p. e3802, Early Access.
[52] A. Verma and V . Ranga, “Addressing Flooding Attacks in I Pv6-based
Low Power and Lossy Networks,” in TENCON 2019 - 2019 IEEE
Region 10 Conference (TENCON) , Oct 2019, pp. 552–557.
[53] A. Dvir, T. Holczer, and L. Buttyan, “VeRA - Version numb er and
rank authentication in RPL,” in Proceedings of 8th IEEE International
Conference on Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS) . IEEE,
oct 2011, pp. 709–714.
[54] M. Landsmann, M. Wahlisch, and T. C. Schmidt, “Topology authen-
tication in RPL,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Communications
Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS) . IEEE, 2013, pp. 73–74.
[55] A. Mayzaud, R. Badonnel, and I. Chrisment, “Detecting v ersion
number attacks in RPL-based networks using a distributed mo nitoring
architecture,” in Proceedings of 12th IEEE/IFIP/In Assoc. with ACM
SIGCOMM International Conference on Network and Service Ma nage-
ment (CNSM 2016) . IEEE, 2016, pp. 127–135.
[56] A. Le, J. Loo, A. Lasebae, M. Aiash, and Y . Luo, “6LoWPAN: a study
on QoS security threats and countermeasures using intrusio n detection
system approach,” International Journal of Communication Systems ,
vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 1189–1212, 2012.
[57] A. Le, J. Loo, Y . Luo, and A. Lasebae, “Speciﬁcation-bas ed IDS for
securing RPL from topology attacks,” IFIP Wireless Days , vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 4–6, 2011.
[58] A. Le, J. Loo, K. Chai, and M. Aiash, “A speciﬁcation-bas ed IDS for
detecting attacks on RPL-based network topology,” Information , vol. 7,
no. 2, p. 25, 2016.
[59] J. Hui and J. Vasseur, “The routing protocol for low-pow er and
lossy networks (rpl) option for carrying rpl information in data-plane
datagrams,” Tech. Rep., 2012.
[60] A. Sehgal, A. Mayzaud, R. Badonnel, I. Chrisment, and J. Sch¨ onw¨ alder,
“Addressing DODAG inconsistency attacks in RPL networks,” in
Global Information Infrastructure and Networking Symposi um, GIIS .
IEEE, sep 2014, pp. 1–8.
[61] A. Mayzaud, A. Sehgal, R. Badonnel, I. Chrisment, and J. Sch¨ onw¨ alder,
“Mitigation of topological inconsistency attacks in RPL-b ased low-
power lossy networks,” International Journal of Network Management ,
vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 320–339, sep 2015.
[62] P. Perazzo, C. Vallati, G. Anastasi, and G. Dini, “DIO Su ppression At-
tack Against Routing in the Internet of Things,” IEEE Communications
Letters , vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 2524–2527, Nov 2017.
[63] D. Shreenivas, S. Raza, and T. V oigt, “Intrusion Detect ion in the
RPL-connected 6LoWPAN Networks,” in Proceedings of the 3rd
International Workshop on IoT Privacy, Trust, and Security - IoTPTS
’17. ACM, 2017, pp. 31–38.
[64] S. Deshmukh-Bhosale and S. S. Sonavane, “A Real-Time In trusion
Detection System for Wormhole Attack in the RPL based Intern et of
Things,” Procedia Manufacturing , vol. 32, pp. 840–847, 2019.
[65] C. Karlof and D. Wagner, “Secure routing in wireless sen sor networks:
Attacks and countermeasures,” in Proceedings of the First IEEE
International Workshop on Sensor Network Protocols and App lications,
2003. IEEE, 2003, pp. 113–127.
[66] B. Bhushan and G. Sahoo, “Recent advances in attacks, te chnical
challenges, vulnerabilities and their countermeasures in wireless sensor
networks,” Wireless Personal Communications , vol. 98, no. 2, pp.
2037–2077, 2018.
[67] G. Glissa, A. Rachedi, and A. Meddeb, “A Secure Routing P rotocol
Based on RPL for Internet of Things,” in 2016 IEEE Global Commu-
nications Conference (GLOBECOM) , Dec 2016, pp. 1–7.
[68] S. Seeber, A. Sehgal, B. Stelte, G. D. Rodosek, and J. Sch onwalder,
“Towards a trust computing architecture for RPL in Cyber Phy sical
Systems,” in Proceedings of 9th International Conference on Network
and Service Management (CNSM) . IEEE, 2013, pp. 134–137.
[69] K. Iuchi, T. Matsunaga, K. Toyoda, and I. Sasase, “Secur e parent
node selection scheme in route construction to exclude atta cking nodes
from RPL network,” in Proceedings of 21st Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on
Communications (APCC) . IEEE, 2015, pp. 299–303.
[70] D. Airehrour, J. A. Gutierrez, and S. K. Ray, “A Trust-Aw are RPL
Routing Protocol to Detect Blackhole and Selective Forward ing At-
tacks,” Australian Journal of Telecommunications and the Digital
Economy , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 50–69, 2017.
[71] D. Airehrour, J. Gutierrez, and S. K. Ray, “A testbed imp lementation
of a trust-aware RPL routing protocol,” in 27th International Telecom-
munication Networks and Applications Conference (ITNAC) . IEEE,
2017, pp. 1–6.24
[72] N. Djedjig, D. Tandjaoui, F. Medjek, and I. Romdhani, “N ew trust
metric for the RPL routing protocol,” in Proceedings of 8th In-
ternational Conference on Information and Communication S ystems
(ICICS) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 328–335.
[73] D. Airehrour, J. A. Gutierrez, and S. K. Ray, “SecTrust- RPL:A secure
trust-aware RPL routing protocol for Internet of Things,” Future
Generation Computer Systems , vol. 93, pp. 860 – 876, 2019.
[74] F. Nygaard, “Intrusion Detection System In IoT,” Maste r’s thesis,
NTNU, 2017.
[75] B. Ghaleb, A. Al-Dubai, E. Ekonomou, M. Qasem, I. Romdha ni, and
L. Mackenzie, “Addressing the DAO Insider Attack in RPL’s In ternet
of Things Networks,” IEEE Communications Letters , vol. 23, no. 1,
pp. 68–71, Jan 2019.
[76] M. N. Napiah, M. Y . I. B. Idris, R. Ramli, and I. Ahmedy, “C om-
pression header analyzer intrusion detection system (CHA- IDS) for
6LoWPAN communication protocol,” IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp. 16 623–
16 638, 2018.
[77] P. Kasinathan, G. Costamagna, H. Khaleel, C. Pastrone, and M. A.
Spirito, “DEMO: An IDS framework for internet of things empo wered
by 6LoWPAN,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC conference on
Computer & communications security , ser. CCS ’13. New York, NY ,
USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 1337–1340.
[78] P. Ioulianou, V . Vasilakis, I. Moscholios, and M. Logot hetis, “A
Signature-based Intrusion Detection System for the Intern et of Things,”
inInformation and Communication Technology Form , June 2018, In
press.
[79] E. Kfoury, J. Saab, P. Younes, and R. Achkar, “A Self Orga nizing
Map Intrusion Detection System for RPL Protocol Attacks,” Interna-
tional Journal of Interdisciplinary Telecommunications a nd Networking
(IJITN) , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 30–43, 2019.
[80] S. Raza, L. Wallgren, and T. V oigt, “Svelte: Real-time i ntrusion
detection in the internet of things,” Ad Hoc Networks , vol. 11, no. 8,
pp. 2661 – 2674, 2013.
[81] A. Mayzaud, A. Sehgal, R. Badonnel, I. Chrisment, and J. Sch¨ onw¨ alder,
“Using the RPL protocol for supporting passive monitoring i n the
Internet of Things,” Proceedings of the NOMS 2016 - 2016 IEEE/IFIP
Network Operations and Management Symposium , pp. 366–374, 2016.
[82] A. Mayzaud, R. Badonnel, and I. Chrisment, “A distribut ed monitoring
strategy for detecting version number attacks in RPL-based networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management , vol. 14, no. 2,
pp. 472–486, June 2017.
[83] F. Gara, L. B. Saad, and R. B. Ayed, “An intrusion detecti on system for
selective forwarding attack in IPv6-based mobile WSNs,” in Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), 2 017
13th International . IEEE, 2017, pp. 276–281.
[84] ——, “An Efﬁcient Intrusion Detection System for Select ive Forward-
ing and Clone Attackers in IPv6-based Wireless Sensor Netwo rks under
Mobility,” International Journal on Semantic Web and Information
Systems (IJSWIS) , vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 22–47, 2017.
[85] M. Surendar and A. Umamakeswari, “InDReS: An Intrusion Detection
and response system for Internet of Things with 6LoWPAN,” in
Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Wi re-
less Communications, Signal Processing and Networking (Wi SPNET) .
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1903–1908.
[86] U. Shaﬁque, A. Khan, A. Rehman, F. Bashir, and M. Alam, “D etection
of rank attack in routing protocol for Low Power and Lossy Net works,”
Annals of Telecommunications , vol. 73, no. 7-8, pp. 429–438, 2018.
[87] G.-H. Lai, “Detection of wormhole attacks on IPv6 mobil ity-based
wireless sensor network,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communica-
tions and Networking , vol. 2016, no. 1, p. 274, 2016.
[88] S. O. Amin, M. S. Siddiqui, C. S. Hong, and S. Lee, “RIDES: Robust
intrusion detection system for IP-based ubiquitous sensor networks,”
Sensors , vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 3447–3468, 2009.
[89] H. Bostani and M. Sheikhan, “Hybrid of anomaly-based an d
speciﬁcation-based IDS for Internet of Things using unsupe rvised OPF
based on MapReduce approach,” Computer Communications , vol. 98,
pp. 52–71, 2017.
[90] B. B. Zarpel˜ ao, R. S. Miani, C. T. Kawakani, and S. C. de A lvarenga,
“A survey of intrusion detection in Internet of Things,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications , vol. 84, pp. 25–37, apr 2017.
[91] H. Perrey, M. Landsmann, O. Ugus, T. C. Schmidt, and M. W¨ ahlisch,
“TRAIL: Topology Authentication in RPL,” CoRR , vol. abs/1312.0984,
2013.
[92] C. Taylor and T. Johnson, “Strong authentication count ermeasures
using dynamic keying for sinkhole and distance spooﬁng atta cks in
smart grid networks,” in 2015 IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference (WCNC) , March 2015, pp. 1835–1840.[93] F. Idris Khan, T. Shon, T. Lee, and K.-H. Kim, “Merkle tre e-based
wormhole attack avoidance mechanism in low power and lossy n etwork
based networks,” Security and Communication Networks , vol. 7, no. 8,
pp. 1292–1309, 2014.
[94] P. Kasinathan, C. Pastrone, M. A. Spirito, and M. Vinkov its, “Denial-
of-Service detection in 6LoWPAN based Internet of Things,” inPro-
ceedings of 2013 IEEE 9th international conference on wirel ess and
mobile computing, networking and communications (WiMob) . IEEE,
2013, pp. 600–607.
[95] P. Shukla, “ML-IDS: A machine learning approach to dete ct worm-
hole attacks in Internet of Things,” in Intelligent Systems Conference
(IntelliSys) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 234–240.
[96] A. Verma and V . Ranga, “Evaluation of Network Intrusion Detection
Systems for RPL Based 6LoWPAN Networks in IoT,” Wireless Per-
sonal Communications , vol. 108, no. 3, pp. 1571–1594, 2019.
[97] ——, “ELNIDS: Ensemble Learning based Network Intrusio n De-
tection System for RPL based Internet of Things,” in 2019 4th
International Conference on Internet of Things: Smart Inno vation and
Usages (IoT-SIU) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[98] C. Cervantes, D. Poplade, M. Nogueira, and A. Santos, “D etection
of sinkhole attacks for supporting secure routing on 6LoWPA N for
Internet of Things,” Proceedings of the 2015 IFIP/IEEE International
Symposium on Integrated Network Management, IM 2015 , pp. 606–
611, 2015.
[99] C.-M. Chen, S.-C. Hsu, and G.-H. Lai, “Defense denial-o f service
attacks on IPv6 wireless sensor networks,” in Genetic and Evolutionary
Computing . Springer, 2016, pp. 319–326.
[100] M. S. Ahsan, M. N. M. Bhutta, and M. Maqsood, “Wormhole a ttack
detection in routing protocol for low power lossy networks, ” in Inter-
national Conference on Information and Communication Tech nologies
(ICICT) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 58–67.
[101] N. Sastry and D. Wagner, “Security considerations for IEEE 802.15.
4 networks,” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM workshop on Wireless
security . ACM, 2004, pp. 32–42.
[102] Y . M. Amin and A. T. Abdel-Hamid, “A comprehensive taxo nomy
and analysis of IEEE 802.15. 4 attacks,” Journal of Electrical and
Computer Engineering , vol. 2016, p. 4, 2016.
[103] L. Oliveira, J. Rodrigues, A. de Sousa, and J. Lloret, “ A network access
control framework for 6LoWPAN networks,” Sensors , vol. 13, no. 1,
pp. 1210–1230, 2013.
[104] L. M. Oliveira, J. J. Rodrigues, C. Neto, and A. F. de Sou sa, “Network
admission control solution for 6LoWPAN networks,” in 2013 Seventh
International Conference on Innovative Mobile and Interne t Services
in Ubiquitous Computing . IEEE, 2013, pp. 472–477.
[105] L. M. L. Oliveira, J. J. Rodrigues, A. F. de Sousa, and V . M.
Denisov, “Network admission control solution for 6LoWPAN n etworks
based on symmetric key mechanisms,” IEEE transactions on industrial
informatics , vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 2186–2195, 2016.
[106] H. Lamaazi, N. Benamar, and A. J. Jara, “RPL-based netw orks in static
and mobile environment: A performance assessment analysis ,”Journal
of King Saud University - Computer and Information Sciences , pp.
1–14, 2016.
[107] A. Aris, S. F. Oktug, and S. B. O. Yalcin, “RPL version nu mber attacks:
In-depth study,” in Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE/IFIP Network
Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS 2016) . IEEE, 2016,
pp. 776–779.
[108] F. Medjek, D. Tandjaoui, M. R. Abdmeziem, and N. Djedji g, “Ana-
lytical evaluation of the impacts of Sybil attacks against R PL under
mobility,” in 12th International Symposium on Programming and
Systems (ISPS) . IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–9.
[109] F. Medjek, D. Tandjaoui, I. Romdhani, and N. Djedjig, “ Performance
evaluation of RPL protocol under mobile sybil attacks,” IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Compu ting and
Communications (TrustCom) , pp. 1049–1055, 2017.
[110] N. Apthorpe, D. Reisman, S. Sundaresan, A. Narayanan, and N. Feam-
ster, “Spying on the smart home: Privacy attacks and defense s on
encrypted iot trafﬁc,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.05044 , 2017.
[111] M. Mavani and K. Asawa, “Resilient against spooﬁng in 6 LoWPAN
networks by temporary-private IPv6 addresses,” Peer-to-Peer Network-
ing and Applications , pp. 1–15, 2019.
[112] X. Vilajosana, T. Watteyne, T. Chang, M. Vuˇ cini´ c, S. Duquennoy, and
P. Thubert, “IETF 6TiSCH: A Tutorial,” IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials , 2019, In Early access.