On a class of conformal E-models and
their chiral Poisson algebras
Sylvain Lacroix
Institute for Theoretical Studies, ETH Z¨ urich
Clausiusstrasse 47, 8092 Z¨ urich, Switzerland
sylvain.lacroix@eth-its.ethz.ch
Abstract
In this paper, we study conformal points among the class of E-models. The latter are σ-models
formulated in terms of a current Poisson algebra, whose Lie-theoretic definition allows for a purely
algebraic description of their dynamics and their 1-loop RG-flow. We use these results to formulate a
simple algebraic condition on the defining data of such a model which ensures its 1-loop conformal
invariance and the decoupling of its observables into two chiral Poisson algebras, describing the
classical left- and right-moving fields of the theory. In the case of so-called non-degenerate E-
models, these chiral sectors form two current algebras and the model takes the form of a WZW
theory once realised as a σ-model. The case of degenerate E-models, in which a subalgebra of
the current algebra is gauged, is more involved: the conformal condition yields a wider class of
theories, which includes gauged WZW models but also other examples, seemingly different, which
however sometimes turn out to be related to gauged WZW models based on other Lie algebras.
For this class, we build non-local chiral fields of parafermionic-type as well as higher-spin local
ones, forming classical W-algebras. In particular, we find an explicit and efficient algorithm to
build these local chiral fields. These results (and their potential generalisations discussed at the
end of the paper) open the way for the quantisation of a large class of conformal E-models using
the standard operator formalism of two-dimensional CFT.
1arXiv:2304.04790v3  [hep-th]  30 Aug 2023Contents
1 Introduction 3
2 Conformal non-degenerate E-models 7
2.1 Reminder about non-degenerate E-models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.1.1 Hamiltonian formulation in terms of a current Poisson algebra . . . . . . . . . 7
2.1.2 Lagrangian formulation and σ-models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2 Conformal non-degenerate E-models and their chiral Poisson algebras . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3 The WZW model and the λ-deformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3 Conformal degenerate E-models 22
3.1 Reminder about degenerate E-models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.1.1 Hamiltonian formulation in terms of a reduced current Poisson algebra . . . . . 23
3.1.2 Lagrangian formulation and gauged σ-models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.2 Conformal degenerate E-models and their chiral Poisson algebras . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.2.1 Strong conformal condition and vanishing of the 1-loop β-functions . . . . . . . 34
3.2.2 Non-local chiral fields and their parafermionic Poisson algebras . . . . . . . . . 35
3.2.3 Local chiral fields and W-algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.2.4 Coset CFTs and the Goddard-Kent-Olive construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4 Examples of conformal degenerate E-models 45
4.1 Gauged Wess-Zumino-Witten models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.2 The SU(2)/U(1) gauged WZW model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.3 An example based on a solvable Lie group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.4 The conformal point of the SL(2,R) Klimˇ c´ ık model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5 Conclusion and perspectives 64
5.1 More general conformal E-models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5.2 Open questions on the conformal limits of E-models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.3 Quantisation of conformal degenerate E-models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.4 Quantum corrections to conformal E-models geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.5 Integrable σ-models, affine Gaudin models and their quantisation . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A Dirac bracket of the parafermionic fields 69
21 Introduction
σ-models form an important class of two-dimensional field theories, with applications in various do-
mains, including high-energy physics, string theory and condensed matter physics. Among this class,
a particular role is played by conformal σ-models, for which various exact results can be derived,
exploiting the powerful constraints imposed by the conformal symmetry [1]. Given a classical σ-model
characterised by the choice of its target space manifold, equipped with a pseudo-Riemannian metric
and a torsion tensor, a natural starting point for the study of its quantisation and its potential confor-
mal invariance is to look at its Renormalisation Group (RG) flow. The latter can be studied through
a perturbative expansion in the Planck constant and translates to a geometric flow of the metric and
torsion [2–4]. In this language, a conformal σ-model then corresponds to a fixed-point of the RG-flow,
encoding the quantum scale invariance of the theory.
The next step towards the quantisation of such a model in the language of two-dimensional CFT
is the identification of its algebras of extended conformal symmetry. These structures can already
be traced back at the classical level, where they take the form of two decoupled chiral sectors in the
dynamics of the theory. To be more explicit, let ( t, x) be the space-time coordinates of the σ-model and
Abe its algebra of classical observables, equipped with the canonical Poisson bracket. The classical
algebras of extended conformal symmetry will then correspond to two subalgebras A(L)andA(R)inA,
formed respectively by local left-moving fields and local right-moving fields, i.e.fields whose dynamics
depends only on the light-cone coordinates t+xort−x.1These subalgebras are closed under Poisson
brackets and mutually Poisson-commuting. They contain at least the chiral components of the energy-
momentum tensor, generating the classical Virasoro symmetry of the model, but often consists of a
larger set of fields, hence the name of “extended” conformal symmetry. Typical examples of such
structures are affine Lie algebras (appearing in Wess-Zumino-Witten models [5, 6]) and higher-spin
W-algebras (initially introduced in [7]). In addition to the local chiral fields in A(L)andA(R), we note
that the theory can also possess non-local ones, which are slightly more complicated to manipulate
but still play a useful role in the study of the model. These non-local chiral degrees of freedom can for
instance take the form of parafermionic fields [8–14], which appear in gauged Wess-Zumino-Witten
models and which will be relevant for the present paper.
The setup described in the previous paragraph paves the way for an exact operator quantisation
of the theory. Indeed, in many cases, the chiral Poisson algebras A(L)andA(R)can be quantised
into so-called Vertex Operator Algebras, formed by non-commutative chiral fields and describing the
extended conformal symmetry of the quantum model. This framework provides a powerful organising
principle for the systematic analysis of the model and the exact derivation of some of its quantum
properties (for instance, the Hilbert space describing the states of the model can be studied using the
representation theory of these operator algebras).
The main goal of this paper is to initiate such a “conformal quantisation programme” for a class of
theories called conformal E-models . The concept of E-model (not necessarily conformal) was initially
introduced by Klimˇ c´ ık and ˇSevera in [15–18]. It essentially describes σ-models whose Hamiltonian
degrees of freedom can be gathered into a Lie-algebra valued field satisfying a current Poisson bracket
and whose dynamics is governed by a Hamiltonian quadratic in this current. In particular, this for-
malism makes manifest certain properties of duality of these σ-models (more precisely the so-called
Poisson-Lie T-duality), which represented the main motivation for their introduction. In this paper,
we will argue that this Lie-theoretic formulation also provides a powerful tool to identify conformal
occurrences among the class of E-models and to describe their chiral algebras at the classical level,
thus opening the way for a quantisation of these theories in the standard operator formalism of two-
dimensional CFT. To keep the length of the paper contained, we will not address these quantum
aspects here: we hope to return to these questions in future works.
1Here and throughout the article, we consider relativistic σ-models based on a Lorentzian worldsheet. In the Euclidean
case, the left- and right-moving degrees of freedom would be replaced by holomorphic and anti-holomorphic fields.
3There exist two different types of E-models, called non-degenerate and degenerate. Although we
will ultimately be interested in the degenerate ones, which give rise to a richer class of conformal
theories, let us first consider the non-degenerate case, which is simpler to study. A non-degenerate
E-model [15–17] is more easily described using the Hamiltonian formalism. In this context, the main
protagonist of the theory is a field J(t, x), valued in a certain Lie algebra d. The latter is referred to as
the double algebra and is equipped with a split ad-invariant symmetric bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩. The main
property satisfied by this field is its Poisson bracket, taking the form of a so-called Poisson current
algebra. To describe it, we decompose the d-valued field J(t, x) into components {JA(t, x)}dim d
A=1,
corresponding to a basis {TA}dim d
A=1ofd. The current Poisson algebra obeyed by JA(t, x) then reads

JA(t, x),JB(t, y)	
=FABC
ABJC(t, x)δ(x−y)−ηAB∂xδ(x−y), (1.1)
where δ(x−y) is the Dirac-distribution, FABC
AB are the structure constants of the Lie algebra d
andηAB=⟨TA, TB⟩are the entries of the bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩in the basis {TA}dim d
A=1. The dynamics
∂t={H,·}of the theory is defined by the choice of a quadratic local Hamiltonian
H=1
2Z
J(t, x),E 
J(t, x)
dx , (1.2)
characterised by the choice of a symmetric operator E:d→d, giving its name to the E-model.
To ensure the relativistic invariance of the theory, this operator is required to be an involution, i.e.
to satisfy E2= Id. The choice of Eis then equivalent to the data of its eigenspaces decomposition
d=V+⊕V−, with V±= Ker( E∓Id). The eigenspaces V+andV−are naturally associated with the two
light-cone directions t+xandt−xof the σ-model worldsheet: this decomposition is thus particularly
suited to describe the chiral properties of non-degenerate E-models. Moreover, it turns out to also
allow a remarkably simple and purely Lie-algebraic formulation [19–22] of the 1-loop RG-flow of these
theories, in terms of the operator Eor equivalently of the eigenspaces V±.
The approach that we wish to advertise in the present paper is to use this algebraic formulation for
the identification and the study of conformal E-models and their operator quantisation. We illustrate
this idea by considering the case where the eigenspaces V±are themselves subalgebras of d,i.e.are
closed under the Lie bracket. Such a condition was previously considered in the reference [23]: here, we
will refer to it as the strong conformal condition . We will show that it ensures the following properties:
(i) the 1-loop RG-flow [19–22] of the model is trivial, i.e.we have 1-loop conformal invariance ;
(ii) the dynamics of the theory is such that the field Jdecomposes into a left-moving component
valued in V+and a right-moving component valued in V−;
(iii) these chiral components satisfy two decoupled current Poisson algebras.
Through this condition, we thus succeeded in identifying conformal non-degenerate E-models and de-
scribing their chiral Poisson algebras. This is reminiscent of the structure of the Wess-Zumino-Witten
(WZW) conformal field theory [5,6], whose chiral fields are famously described by two current algebras.
In fact, it was argued in [23] that non-degenerate E-models satisfying the strong conformal condition
essentially take the form of WZW theories once realised as σ-models in the Lagrangian formulation.
This condition thus lead to a rather limited class of conformal theories and is presented in this paper
mainly as a proof of concept and as a warm-up for more general investigations. Indeed, we expect
that it is in fact not the most general condition ensuring the conformal invariance of the model (which
is why we call it “strong”): we will mention some preliminary results and perspectives on these more
general cases in the concluding section 5 and hope to return to a more thorough analysis of this ques-
tion in the future. In the present article, we mostly explore another direction for generalisations, in
the context of degenerate E-models, which has been less explored. As we will see, this leads to a seem-
ingly wider class of conformal theories and to richer structures in the description of their chiral sectors.
Degenerate E-models, sometimes also referred to as dressing cosets in the literature, were intro-
duced by Klimˇ c´ ık and ˇSevera in the article [18] (see also [24,25] for related constructions) – here, we
will mainly follow the presentation of the more recent works [26–28]. Similarly to the non-degenerate
4E-models, they are defined in terms of a d-valued current J(t, x), satisfying the Poisson bracket (1.1).
The main difference in the degenerate case is that the components of Jare not all physical fields of the
model: indeed, the theory possesses a gauge symmetry, eliminating some of these degrees of freedom.
This symmetry is encoded in the choice of a gauge group H, whose Lie algebra is a subalgebra hof
d, which is required to be isotropic with respect to the bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩. The physical observables
of the degenerate E-model are then obtained from the Hamiltonian reduction of the current algebra
ofJwith respect to the subalgebra corresponding to h(as explained in the main text, this is done
through the imposition of a first-class constraint, which generates the H-gauge symmetry).
The Hamiltonian of the theory also takes a quadratic form (1.2), but with Ereplaced by a “de-
generate” operator bE:d→d, satisfying slightly different properties. In particular, one requires that
bE(h) ={0}(i.e.bEis degenerate and its kernel contains h) and that bEcommutes with the adjoint action
ofHond: these properties ensure that the Hamiltonian is invariant under the H-gauge symmetry of
the model, as expected. Together with the relativistic invariance of the theory, this setup induces a
natural decomposition d=h⊕h′⊕V+⊕V−of the double algebra. Here, similarly to the non-degenerate
case, V±= Ker( bE ∓Id) are the eigenspaces of bEwith eigenvalues ±1, which are naturally associated
with the light-cone directions t±xof the model. The difference comes with the additional presence,
in the decomposition d=h⊕h′⊕V+⊕V−, of the gauge subalgebra h= Ker( bE) and the space h′, which
can be interpreted as the dual space of h. Although these additional features make the degenerate
E-models slightly more complicated than their non-degenerate cousins, this Lie-theoretic formulation
still allows a simple characterisation of their dynamics and their 1-loop RG-flow [29].
The main subject of the paper is to study the characteristics of these degenerate E-models when
one imposes what we call the strong conformal condition , namely that d±=V±⊕h⊕h′are subalgebras
ofd. In the absence of a gauge symmetry, i.e.when hand h′are trivial, this condition reduces to the
one considered above for non-degenerate models. In the main text of this paper, we will prove that it
ensures the 1-loop conformal invariance of the theory and the presence of chiral fields in its classical
dynamics. More precisely, we will find that the components of the current Jin the subspaces V±are
not chiral, as in the non-degenerate case, but in fact are chiral “up to a H-gauge transformation”.
We will then obtain a V+–valued left-moving field and a V−–valued right-moving field by dressing
these components with the adjoint action of a well-chosen non-local field in H. We thus get non-local
gauge-invariant chiral degrees of freedom, which take the form of so-called parafermionic fields [8–14].
In particular, we show that these fields satisfy two decoupled parafermionic Poisson algebras, which
can be interpreted as the Hamiltonian reduction of the d±–current algebras with respect to the H-
gauge symmetry. In addition to these non-local quantities, we also construct local chiral fields, by
considering well-chosen gauge-invariant combinations of the current components (alternatively, these
can be thought of as particular combinations of the chiral parafermions which turn out to be local
quantities). These fields form the classical algebras of extended conformal symmetry of the model,
which we show take the form of higher-spin W-algebras. Moreover, we propose an efficient algorithm
for the systematic construction of these local chiral fields. Finally, we show that under additional
technical assumptions on the decomposition d=h⊕h′⊕V+⊕V−, the conformal σ-models built from
the above formalism are realisations of the celebrated Goddard-Kent-Olive (GKO) construction of
coset CFTs [30,31].
Another part of the article is dedicated to the study of explicit examples of degenerate E-models
satisfying this strong conformal condition. As one can expect, a prototypical familly of such theories
is given by the gauged Wess-Zumino-Witten models, which are σ-models whose target space is a Lie
group Gquotiented by the adjoint action of a certain subgroup H0. These theories were reinterpreted
as degenerate E-models in [32]: here, we show that they satisfy the strong conformal condition and
thus fit into the above framework (for any choice of GandH0). We further provide a thorough
analysis of the SU(2)/U(1) case, for which we give a very explicit description of the parafermionic
fields and the first few local fields in the W-algebra. We recover this way various results established
in the literature and illustrate on a simple example the general construction sketched above.
A natural question is whether this construction also goes beyond the class of gauged WZW theo-
5ries. As a second example, we build a conformal E-model based on a solvable Lie group, leading to a
σ-model with a simple two-dimensional target space and which in particular does not fit into the GKO
scheme. To the the best of our knowledge, this target space is not obtainable directly from a gauged
WZW theory. Finally, we consider the conformal point of the Klimˇ c´ ık (or Bi-Yang-Baxter) model:
this is a σ-model with target space a Lie group G[33,34], whose conformal limit was studied recently
in [35–37]2, in particular for G=SU(2). Here, we will focus on the analogous case G=SL(2), to
avoid certain issues with reality conditions. This example will allow us to raise some interesting open
questions, subtleties and potential limitations of the construction. We also consider a one-parameter
deformation of this theory, which defines a more complicated but still conformal σ-model. Surpris-
ingly, although this conformal theory initially takes a form which seems quite distinct from that of
a gauged WZW model, the target space we obtain is in the end related to an axially gauged WZW
theory on ( SL(2,R)×R)/R[38,39]. In particular, the gauge algebra of this WZW theory is different
from the one initially considered to obtain the Klimˇ c´ ık model. It is not clear to us whether this is an
accidental low-dimensional isomorphism or the sign of a deeper connection.
The motivation behind this paper is two-folds. On the one-side, we want to argue that the for-
malism of E-models allows for a natural and systematic construction of a large class of conformal
σ-models and the study of their properties, mainly based on Lie-theoretic considerations. On the
other hand, we hope that this approach will also be beneficial for the study of the E-models them-
selves and their applications. For instance, these models play a growing role in the investigation
of dualities, symmetries and integrable structures in σ-models, exploiting their underlying algebraic
formulation. These aspects have been extensively studied at the classical level, where they are now
well understood. In contrast, these questions are still relatively unexplored at the quantum level
(except for instance in relation to perturbative RG-flow approaches). We hope that the powerful tech-
niques of two-dimensional CFT and the rigorous and well-controlled framework it provides will offer
a natural and useful entry point for the investigation of these subjects. We will come back on these
perspectives in the concluding section 5 (and refer to this part for further explanations and references).
The plan of the article is the following. Section 2 is devoted to non-degenerate E-models. We
start with a review of their construction and properties in Subsection 2.1. We then introduce the
strong conformal condition in Subsection 2.2 and show that it implies the 1-loop conformal invariance
of these models and the decomposition of their current algebra into two decoupled chiral subalgebras.
Finally, we explain the relation between this construction and WZW models in Subsection 2.3.
The main body of the paper is the Section 3, which deals with degenerate E-models and their
conformal occurrences. We first review the general theory of degenerate E-models in Subsection 3.1
and later study the strong conformal condition and its consequences in Subsection 3.2. More precisely,
we prove that it implies the 1-loop conformal invariance in Subsubsection 3.2.1. We then study the
classical non-local chiral fields of these theories and their parafermionic Poisson algebras in Subsubsec-
tion 3.2.2, as well as their local chiral fields, forming higher-spin W-algebras, in Subsubsection 3.2.3.
Finally, we explain the relation with the GKO coset construction in Subsubsection 3.2.4.
Section 4 concerns the study of explicit examples of degenerate E-models satisfying the strong
conformal condition. We start with general gauged WZW models in Subsection 4.1 and further
specialise to the SU(2)/U(1) case, which we explore in detail in Subsection 4.2. We then study an
example based on a solvable Lie group in Subsection 4.3 and finish with the conformal point of the
SL(2) Klimˇ c´ ık model in Subsection 4.4.
We conclude and discuss various perspectives in Section 5. Finally, some technical results and
computations are gathered in Appendix A.
2These works were parts of the motivation for the present article. In particular, the construction of the W-algebra
for conformal E-models presented here can be seen as a generalisation of a result obtained in [37] for the Klimˇ c´ ık model.
62 Conformal non-degenerate E-models
2.1 Reminder about non-degenerate E-models
The goal of this subsection is to recall the definition and main properties of non-degenerate E-models,
which form a class of two-dimensional Hamiltonian field theories closely related to σ-models, intro-
duced by Klimˇ c´ ık and ˇSevera in [15–17]. The first half of the subsection concerns the formulation
of these models in terms of current Poisson algebras, while the second half reviews their concrete
realisations as σ-models.
2.1.1 Hamiltonian formulation in terms of a current Poisson algebra
The double Lie algebra. One of the key ingredient defining a non-degenerate E-model is the double
algebra d, which is a real Lie algebra of even dimension 2 d, with Lie bracket [ ·,·] and a non-degenerate
ad-invariant split symmetric bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩. The ad-invariance property is the requirement that
⟨[X, Y], Z⟩=⟨X,[Y, Z]⟩,∀X, Y, Z ∈d, (2.1)
whereas the splitness condition means that ⟨·,·⟩has signature ( d, d).
Throughout this paper, {TA}2d
A=1will denote a basis of d, while FABC
AB andηABwill denote the
structure constants and bilinear form entries in this basis, defined by

TA, TB
=FABC
ABTC and ⟨TA, TB⟩=ηAB, (2.2)
where we used the Einstein convention of summation over repeated indices in the first equation. Since
⟨·,·⟩is non-degenerate, the matrix 
ηAB2d
A,B=1is invertible: we will denote its inverse by 
ηAB2d
A,B=1.
From now on, we will use ηABandηABto lower and raise indices in d. In particular, we introduce
the dual basis
TA=ηABTB, (2.3)
which then satisfies
TA, TB
=δA
B.
The current Poisson algebra. Another crucial ingredient in the definition of the non-degenerate
E-model is the current J(x). It is a field valued in the double algebra d, which depends on the space
variable xof the two-dimensional Hamiltonian theory under construction. The main property of this
field is its Poisson bracket, which takes the form of a current Poisson algebra . To describe it, let us
first decompose J(x) =JA(x)TAalong the dual basis {TA}2d
A=1introduced in the previous paragraph.
The Poisson bracket of the components JAthen reads

JA(x),JB(y)	
=FABC
ABJC(x)δ(x−y)−ηAB∂xδ(x−y), (2.4)
where δ(x−y) denotes the Dirac distribution. Although we have written the bracket of Jin terms
of its components JAfor explicitness, let us note that this bracket can be rewritten in a manifestly
basis-independent way. For that, we will use the standard tensorial notations: for X∈d, we introduce
the elements X1=X⊗Id and X2= Id⊗Xof the tensor product algebra U(d)⊗U(d). Moreover,
we define
J(x)1,J(y)2	
=
JA(x),JB(y)	
TA⊗TB, (2.5)
which is valued in U(d)⊗U(d) and encodes the Poisson brackets of all the components of Jinto one
unique object. The equation (2.4) can then be rewritten in the following basis-independent way:

J(x)1,J(y)2	
=
Cd
12,J(x)1
δ(x−y)−Cd
12∂xδ(x−y), (2.6)
where Cd
12∈d⊗dis the split quadratic Casimir of the algebra d, defined as
Cd
12=ηABTA⊗TB. (2.7)
7The skew-symmetry of the bracket (2.6) is ensured by the identity

Cd
12, X1+X2
= 0,∀X∈d, (2.8)
which follows from the ad-invariance of d. Let us also note that the Casimir satisfies the following
additional property:
Cd
12, X1
1=X , ∀X∈d, (2.9)
which follows from the definition (2.7) of Cd
12in terms of the bilinear form.
Let us end this paragraph with a brief comment. Above, we have introduced the current J(x) as
a field depending on the space variable xof the theory. In the following, we will see xas belonging
to the circle S1≃R/2πZand will require the field J(x) to satisfy the periodic boundary condition
J(x+ 2π) =J(x). We note however that most of the results discussed in this paper are independent
of this choice: one could formally replace the circle by the real line R= (−∞,+∞) and define
a meaningful consistent E-model in this setup (typically, one would then require the field J(x) to
decrease sufficiently fast at spatial infinity).
The momentum. Let us introduce the quantity
P=1
2Z2π
0⟨J(x),J(x)⟩dx=1
2Z2π
0ηABJA(x)JB(x) dx . (2.10)
Starting from the Poisson bracket (2.6) and using the ad-invariance of ⟨·,·⟩and the identity (2.9), one
easily checks that
P,J(x)	
=∂xJ(x). (2.11)
The Poisson bracket of the observable Ptherefore generates the spatial derivative on the current J(x).
We thus identify Pas the momentum of the E-model.
The Hamiltonian and E-operator. The final ingredient necessary to define the non-degenerate
E-model is the choice of a Hamiltonian H, which determines the dynamics of any observable Oof the
theory by the time-evolution equation
∂tO={H,O}. (2.12)
In analogy with the momentum (2.10), we will build this Hamiltonian as a quadratic combination of
the current components:
H=1
2Z2π
0
J(x),E(J(x))
dx=1
2Z2π
0EABJA(x)JB(x) dx . (2.13)
Here, E:d→ddenotes a linear operator on the double algebra dandEAB=
TA,E 
TB
. With-
out loss of generality, we can always take Eto be symmetric with respect to the bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩
(or equivalently require that EAB=EBA): under this condition, the operator Eis uniquely determined.
As we have now defined the dynamics ∂tof the theory, we can investigate its space-time symmetries.
It is clear by construction that the model is invariant under space-time translations of the coordinates
(t, x), with the Hamiltonian Hand the momentum Pbeing the associated conserved generators (which
Poisson-commute). A natural further requirement is to ask that the resulting two-dimensional theory
is relativistic, i.e.invariant under infinitesimal Lorentz boosts of ( t, x). This is not the case for a
generic Hamiltonian of the form (2.13) but in fact translates into a quite simple condition on the
operator E, namely that it is an involution, i.e.
E2= Id. (2.14)
8In the rest of this section, we will restrict ourselves to the study of relativistic non-degenerate E-models
and will thus assume E2= Id. Note in particular that this implies the orthogonal decomposition
d=V+⊥⊕V−, where V±= Ker( E ∓Id) (2.15)
are the eigenspaces of E. From now on we will suppose that V+andV−have the same dimension,
which is then equal to dim V±=1
2dim d=d. We also introduce
π±=1
2 
Id± E
:d−→V±, (2.16)
which are the orthogonal projectors corresponding to the decomposition d=V+⊕V−.
Let us finally note that the operator E:d→dis often required in the literature to be such that
the symmetric bilinear form ⟨·,E·⟩ondis definite positive, in contrast with the initial bilinear form
⟨·,·⟩which has split signature. This simply ensures that the Hamiltonian (2.13) takes positive values
on all configurations of the field J(x) and thus is bounded from below. Although this is a natural
requirement, we will in general not impose this additional condition as it will not be necessary from a
technical point of view and as it will for instance allow us to also include σ-models with non-euclidian
target spaces in the construction. Let us finally note for completeness that in terms of the eigenspaces
V±ofEintroduced above, this positivity condition is equivalent to ⟨·,·⟩being definite positive when
restricted to V+and definite negative when restricted to V−.
Equations of motion. Having defined the Hamiltonian Hof the theory, let us now describe its
dynamics by writing down the equations of motion of the current J. This is easily done by computing
the Poisson bracket of HwithJ, using the current algebra (2.6) and the identity (2.9). In the end,
one finds
∂tJ=∂xE(J) +
J,E(J)
. (2.17)
Note that this dynamics takes the form of the zero curvature equation

∂x+J, ∂t+E(J)
= 0 (2.18)
for a 2-dimensional connection with spatial component Jand temporal component E(J).
It will be important for later investigations to rewrite the equations of motion of the theory using
light-cone coordinates x±and their derivatives ∂±, defined by
x±=t±x and ∂±=1
2(∂t±∂x). (2.19)
Let us also recall the direct sum (2.15) of the double algebra in terms of the eigenspaces of Eand the
corresponding projectors π±:d→V±. We then decompose the current as
J=J+− J−, with J±=±π±J ∈V±. (2.20)
The minus sign in J−has been introduced so that the equation (2.18) becomes [ ∂++J+, ∂−+J−] = 0.
Using the fact that J±∈V±, one can separate this equation of motion into two independent parts:
∂−J+= +π+
J+,J−
, (2.21a)
∂+J−=−π−
J+,J−
. (2.21b)
Light-cone Hamiltonian. For completeness, let us finally point out that the light-cone Hamil-
tonians P±=1
2(H ± P ), which generate the light-cone derivatives ∂±={P±,·}, take the simple
form
P±=±1
2Z2π
0dx⟨J±(x),J±(x)⟩ (2.22)
in terms of the V±-valued components J±of the current J.
92.1.2 Lagrangian formulation and σ-models
Isotropic subalgebra. So far, we have seen the non-degenerate E-model as a Hamiltonian field
theory defined in terms of the d-valued current J(x). Importantly, there exists a closely related
theory, taking the form of a σ-model, that shares the same first order equations of motion and Poisson
structure when written in terms of this current. In addition to the data ( d,⟨·,·⟩,E) used above, this
σ-model depends on the choice of a maximally isotropic Lie subalgebra kofd. Concretely, this amounts
to choosing a subspace k⊂dsuch that
[X, Y]∈k and ⟨X, Y⟩= 0,∀X, Y∈k, (2.23)
and, corresponding to the maximality property,
dim k=1
2dim d=d . (2.24)
σ-model action. To describe the σ-model corresponding to this data, we introduce the double
group D, defined as a connected Lie group with Lie algebra Lie( D) = d, and its subgroup K⊂D
with Lie( K) = k. As we will see, the target space of the σ-model will then be the left quotient K\D.
Rather than describing the theory directly in terms of a field valued in this target space, it will in fact
be more natural to use a formulation in terms of a D-valued field possessing a local gauge symmetry
by the subgroup K, which effectively reduces the physical degrees of freedom of the model to the
quotient K\D. We will denote this D-valued field as ℓ(t, x), depending on the space-time coordinates
(t, x)∈R×S1. In these terms, the action of the theory then takes the form
S[ℓ] =ZZ
R×S1dtdx
W+
ℓℓ−1∂+ℓ, ℓ−1∂−ℓ
−
ℓ−1∂+ℓ, W−
ℓℓ−1∂−ℓ
−IWZ,D[ℓ]. (2.25)
Let us explain the different ingredients entering this formula. The linear operators W±
ℓ:d→dare
projectors on the double algebra characterised by the following kernels and images:3
Ker 
W±
ℓ) = Ad−1
ℓk and Im 
W±
ℓ) =V±. (2.26)
In particular, the definition of W±
ℓdepends on the choice of the operator Ethrough its eigenspaces
V±= Ker( E ∓Id). We note for completeness thatTW±
ℓ= 1−W∓
ℓ, whereTW±
ℓis the transpose of
W±
ℓwith respect to the bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩.
The last part of the action (2.25) involves the Wess-Zumino term IWZ,D[ℓ] of the D-valued field ℓ.
To define it, we first introduce a 3-dimensional manifold Bwith boundary ∂B=R×S1coinciding with
the 2-dimensional space-time of the σ-model. We then consider an extension of the field ℓ:R×S1→D
toB, which coincides with ℓon the boundary ∂Band that we will still denote as ℓfor simplicity. The
Wess-Zumino term is then defined as
IWZ,D[ℓ] =1
12ZZZ
B
ℓ−1dℓ∧,
ℓ−1dℓ∧, ℓ−1dℓ
. (2.27)
Here d is the de Rham differential on B, so that ℓ−1dℓis a d-valued 1-form on B,i.e.an element of
d⊗Ω1(B). The integrand in the above formula should then be understood as a 3-form in Ω3(B), built
from ℓ−1dℓusing the commutator [ ·,·] and bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩on the Lie algebra factor dand exterior
products on the factor Ω1(B). It is a standard result that this 3-form is closed, so that the expression
(2.27) is locally equivalent to a 2-dimensional term involving the boundary field ℓ:R×S1→D. It is
however not exact in general, meaning that the Wess-Zumino term cannot be written as a 2-dimensional
integral globally and usually depends on the choice of extension of ℓtoB. This dependence is classified
by the 3rdhomology group of Dand crucially does not change the contribution of the Wess-Zumino
term to the classical equation of motion derived from extremizing the σ-model action (2.25).
3We note that the subspaces Ad−1
ℓkandV±are both of dimensions d=1
2dim d. The projector W±
ℓthus exists if
and only if these subspaces have trivial intersection. In the following, we will assume that this holds, at least for generic
values of ℓ(in the general case, we allow for the existence of specific non-generic values of ℓ∈Dfor which these subspaces
intersect non-trivially: these points then correspond to singularities in the target space of the resulting σ-model). We
finally note that this trivial intersection property always holds when the bilinear form ⟨·,E·⟩is definite positive [88].
10K-gauge symmetry. As mentioned above, one of the crucial property of the action (2.25) is that
it possesses a gauge symmetry with respect to the subgroup K. More precisely, let us consider the
local transformation
ℓ(t, x)7−→k(t, x)ℓ(t, x), with k(t, x)∈K (2.28)
an arbitrary K-valued function. One then checks that the action (2.25) is invariant under this action.
The physical target space of the σ-model is thus the quotient K\D, which is of dimension1
2dim d=d.
If this quotient admits a section s:K\D→D, which smoothly assigns a unique choice of repre-
sentative in Dto each equivalence class in K\D, then one can explicitly eliminate the non-physical
degrees of freedom of the theory by imposing that the field ℓis valued in the image of s. This amounts
to a gauge-fixing of the theory and allows to concretely describe it as a σ-model with a ( K\D)-valued
field, through the isomorphism between K\Dand Im( s)⊂Dprovided by the section.
For completeness, let us briefly point out the key steps of the proof of the K-gauge invariance. We
first note that, as Kis a subgroup of D, one has Ad−1
kk=k. Thus, using equation (2.26), the kernels
and images of the projectors W±
kℓexactly coincide with that of W±
ℓ, hence W±
kℓ=W±
ℓ. In other words,
the projectors W±
ℓare gauge invariant. Moreover, we note that under the gauge transformation, the
currents ℓ−1∂±ℓtransform as
ℓ−1∂±ℓ7−→ℓ−1∂±ℓ+ Ad−1
ℓ 
k−1∂±k
. (2.29)
In particular, we see that the second term in this transformed current belongs to Ad−1
ℓk= Ker( W±
ℓ)
and thus is annihilated by the projectors W±
ℓ. We then find that the quantities W±
ℓℓ−1∂±ℓare gauge
invariant. This result, together with the propertyTW±
ℓ= 1−W∓
ℓdiscussed earlier, allows one to
easily determine the gauge transformation of the first two terms in the action (2.25).
There is thus left to describe the gauge transformation of the Wess-Zumino term IWZ,D[ℓ]. To do
so, it is useful to recall the Polyakov-Wiegmann formula [40], which states that for any two D-valued
fields ℓandℓ′, one has
IWZ,D
ℓ′ℓ
=IWZ,D[ℓ]+IWZ,D
ℓ′
+ZZ
R×S1dtdx
∂+ℓ ℓ−1, ℓ′ −1∂−ℓ′
−
ℓ′ −1∂+ℓ′, ∂−ℓ ℓ−1
.(2.30)
To compute the gauge transformed Wess-Zumino term IWZ,D[kℓ], we apply this formula and use the
fact that IWZ,D[k] = 0 due to the isotropy of k. Combining this with the results obtained above, one
then finally finds that the action (2.25) is gauge invariant, as claimed.
Canonical analysis and current J.So far, we have not explained how the σ-model on K\Dbuilt
in this subsubsection is related to the E-model described in the previous one as a Hamiltonian field
theory with a current Poisson algebra. To do so, let us consider the canonical analysis of the σ-model,
thus passing to the Hamiltonian formulation. We will not enter into the details of this analysis here
and will simply describe the main features that we shall need later. The most important ones concern
the d-valued current
J=W+
ℓℓ−1∂+ℓ−W−
ℓℓ−1∂−ℓ . (2.31)
Passing to the Hamiltonian formulation and computing the Poisson bracket of this quantity, one finds
that it satisfies the current algebra (2.6). Moreover, performing the Legendre transform to derive the
Hamiltonian of the theory, one observes that the latter exactly takes the form (2.13) once rewritten
in terms of J. Thus, we find that the Hamiltonian formulation of the σ-model considered here, when
expressed in terms of the current J, is nothing but the non-degenerate E-model introduced in the
previous subsubsection. In particular, the second order equations of motion obeyed by the σ-model
fieldℓcan be recast as the first order equation (2.17) in terms of J.
Let us also note that the current Jis gauge invariant under the local K-action (2.28). Indeed,
we have observed in the previous paragraph that the quantities W±
ℓℓ−1∂±ℓare left unchanged under
this transformation. In practice, it means that all the computations involving Jcan be performed
independently of how we treat the K-gauge symmetry. For instance, we can keep Jexpressed in terms
11of the whole D-valued field ℓas in equation (2.31) or in contrast impose a gauge-fixing condition as
sketched in the previous paragraph and work with an expression of Jexplicitly in terms of physical
fields of the model. In particular, the current algebra (2.6) obeyed by Jdoes not depend on whether
we work with a gauged formulation or a gauge-fixed one.
Recall finally from equation (2.26) that the image of the projector W±
ℓisV±. Thus it is clear that
the two terms in the expression (2.31) of Jare respectively valued in V+andV−. In other words, the
decomposition J=J+− J−of the current is simply given by
J+=W+
ℓℓ−1∂+ℓ and J−=W−
ℓℓ−1∂−ℓ . (2.32)
Summary. Let us briefly summarise the construction of this subsection. The σ-model that we built
is characterised by the following defining data:
(i) a real connected Lie group Dof even dimension, with Lie algebra d= Lie( D) ;
(ii) a non-degenerate ad-invariant split symmetric bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩ond;
(iii) a symmetric operator E:d→dsuch that E2= Id and V±= Ker( E ∓Id) have equal dimension ;
(iv) a subgroup K⊂Dsuch that k= Lie( K) is a maximally isotropic subalgebra of d.
From this data, the σ-model is built as follows. One first considers a D-valued field ℓ(t, x) onR×S1
and constructs the projectors W±
ℓaccording to equation (2.26). The action of the σ-model is then
defined by the formula (2.25) and is invariant under the K-gauge symmetry ℓ7→kℓ,k∈K, making the
physical target space of the model the quotient K\D. An important observable in this theory is the
d-valued field J, built from ℓas in (2.31). In particular, it satisfies the current Poisson algebra (2.6).
Moreover, the momentum, Hamiltonian and equations of motion of the model take the simple forms
(2.10), (2.13) and (2.17) in terms of J, or equivalently (2.21) and (2.22) in light-cone coordinates.
Let us note that although the construction of the σ-model and the current Jin terms of the field ℓ
depends on the choice of the maximally isotropic Lie algebra k, the first order Hamiltonian formulation
in terms of the current Jis independent of this choice. In practice, this means that many aspects
of the theory can be studied using only the data of ( d,⟨·,·⟩,E). This includes the investigation of
conformal and chiral structures in these theories, which is the main subject of this article. The choice
ofkwill then only appear in the parts of the paper where we treat explicit examples, as it will allow
us to identify concretely the σ-models that we are considering.
We note that, given a double algebra ( d,⟨·,·⟩), there can be in general several choices of maximally
isotropic subalgebras k. These will correspond to different σ-models which however share the same
underlying first order formulation when written in terms of the current J. The typical example of such
a situation occurs when the double group possesses a decomposition D=K·eK=eK·Kin terms of
two subgroups KandeKwhose Lie algebras are complementary maximally isotropic subalgebras of d.
In this case, one can build two σ-models based on the same underlying E-model, with respective target
spaces K\D≃eKandeK\D≃K, which are then said to be Poisson-Lie T-duals to each other [15–17].
The study of this duality, which generalises the standard notions of abelian and non-abelian T-duality,
was one of the main motivation behind the introduction of E-models.
2.2 Conformal non-degenerate E-models and their chiral Poisson algebras
In the reference [23], Klimˇ c´ ık and ˇSevera considered a simple condition on the defining data of a non-
degenerate E-model ensuring that the associated σ-model is conformal. In fact, it was argued in [23]
that this σ-model then essentially takes the form of a well-known conformal theory, the Wess-Zumino-
Witten model (at least under certain technical assumptions). In this subsection, we consider a very
similar configuration, which we will call the strong conformal condition, and revisit the results of [23],
although in a slightly different approach. This will serve as a warm-up for Subsection 3.2, where we
introduce a similar condition for degenerate E-models, leading to the construction of conformal gauged
σ-models. Although this degenerate case will share some similarities with the present one, it will also
exhibit more involved structures and will lead to a richer variety of conformal theories.
12Our approach below will be the following. We will first introduce the aforementioned strong
conformal condition and will show that it implies the conformal invariance of the theory at the 1-
loop quantum level. Moreover, we will explain that this condition also has important structural
consequences at the classical level, namely the decomposition of the degrees of freedom of the theory
into left-moving and right-moving fields. Furthermore, we will prove that the sets of left-moving and
right-moving fields form two closed Poisson current algebras which mutually Poisson commute, thus
showing that this chiral decomposition also occurs in the Hamiltonian structure of the theory. Such
a feature is one of the hallmarks of 2-dimensional conformal field theories and paves the way for the
quantisation of these models using the language of Vertex Operator Algebras, which describe the
quantum chiral fields. To keep the length of the paper contained, we will not discuss these quantum
aspects here but hope to return to these questions in the future. Finally, in the next subsection, we
will explain the relation between this conformal non-degenerate E-model and the Wess-Zumino-Witten
theory, as stated in [23].
The strong conformal condition. Let us consider a non-degenerate E-model associated with the
data ( d,⟨·,·⟩,E), following the notations of the previous subsection. In particular, recall that the
eigenspaces V±= Ker( E ∓Id) of the operator Eallows us to write an orthogonal decomposition
d=V+⊕V−. We will say that the model satisfies the strong conformal condition if the following two
assumptions, which are equivalent, are verified:
(C1) the subspaces V±are subalgebras of d;
(C2) we have [ V+, V−] ={0}.
As mentioned earlier, the condition (C1) is quite similar to the setup considered in the reference [23].4
Let us briefly mention that we do not expect this condition to be the most general one ensuring
the 1-loop conformal invariance of the E-model (in other words this is a sufficient but not necessary
condition), which is why we used the adjective strong to characterise it. We refer to the concluding
subection 5.1 for a brief discussion of why we expect the existence of more general conformal condi-
tions: a more thorough analysis of theses aspects is beyond the scope of this article and is a natural
future perspective for further developments.
Before analysing the consequences of this condition, let us first prove the equivalence of the two
assertions (C1) and (C2). For instance, let us suppose that (C1) is true and consider ( X+, X−)∈
V+×V−. We then want to prove that [ X+, X−] = 0. For any element Y=Y++Y−ind, we find
⟨[X+, X−], Y⟩=⟨[X+, X−], Y+⟩+⟨[X+, X−], Y−⟩=−⟨X−,[X+, Y+]⟩+⟨X+,[X−, Y−]⟩= 0.
Here, we have used the ad-invariance of ⟨·,·⟩to get the second equality and the assumption (C1)
to obtain the last one. Indeed, (C1) implies that [ X±, Y±] belongs to V±and thus is orthogonal to
X∓∈V∓. We therefore find that ⟨[X+, X−], Y⟩= 0 for all Y∈d. Since ⟨·,·⟩is non-degenerate, we
get [X+, X−] = 0, hence proving that (C1) implies (C2).
Conversely, let us assume (C2) and consider X+, Y+∈V+. For any X−∈V−, using the ad-
invariance of ⟨·,·⟩and (C2), we get
⟨[X+, Y+], X−⟩=⟨X+,[Y+, X−]⟩= 0.
Since this is true for all X−∈V−, we find that [ X+, Y+] belongs to V⊥
−=V+, hence proving that V+
is a subalgebra. A similar reasoning shows that V−is also a subalgebra: thus, (C2) implies (C1).
For completeness, let us mention that there are two other conditions which are equivalent to (C1)
and (C2). The first one is that Eis an intertwiner of the adjoint representation of d,i.e.it commutes
with the adjoint action of don itself. The second one is that the bilinear form ⟨·,E·⟩ondis ad-invariant.
4One of the main difference is that [23] assumed only V+orV−to be a subalgebra and not necessarily both as
we do here: in that case, the property (C2) in fact does not hold. As we will see later in this subsection, this more
restricted setup will play an important role in the description of the chiral fields of the theory and its decomposition into
a left-moving and a right-moving sectors. Another small difference is that we do not necessarily assume here that V±
are the Lie algebras of compact groups, as done in [23].
13Vanishing of the 1-loop β-functions. One of the advantages of the E-model formulation of a
σ-model is that it allows a remarkably simple characterisation of the 1-loop Renormalisation Group
(RG) flow of the theory [19–22]. There are several equivalent ways to formulate this RG flow: here we
will use a rather compact one in terms of the quadratic form ⟨·,E·⟩, which will be the most adapted
for our purposes. In particular, it will provide us with a very simple proof of the fact that the strong
conformal condition introduced above implies the vanishing of the 1-loop β-functions of the theory.
Let us then consider the non-degenerate E-model associated with the data ( d,⟨·,·⟩,E). In particular,
the Hamiltonian (2.13) of this model is characterised by the quadratic form ⟨·,E·⟩. After quantisation
and treatment of the UV divergences that might appear, we expect the theory to depend on the energy
scale µof the RG flow. At the 1-loop level, this dependence can be expressed in terms of ⟨·,E·⟩as
d
dτ⟨X,EX⟩=−4ℏTrd 
SX
+O(ℏ2),∀X∈d. (2.33)
Here τ=1
2πlogµis the RG parameter and SX:d→dis a linear operator defined by
SX=π−adπ−Xπ+adπ+X, (2.34)
where we recall that π±:d→V±are the projectors associated with the decomposition d=V+⊕V−.
The equation (2.33) can be understood as the RG-flow of the family of all E-models with double
algebra ( d,⟨·,·⟩), whose defining parameters are seen as the entries of the quadratic form ⟨·,E·⟩, subject
to the constraint that this form defines a relativistic model (we note that this property is preserved
by the flow (2.33)). In practice, we will often be interested in specific families of E-models, which
correspond to a particular choice of ⟨·,E·⟩in terms of parameters (coupling constants) λ= (λk)k=1,...,n.
In such a setup, we find that the theory is 1-loop renormalisable if the equation (2.33) is consistent
with the functional dependence of ⟨·,E·⟩in terms of λ. More concretely, this happens if we have
−4 Tr 
SX
=nX
k=1β(1)
k(λ)∂
∂λk⟨X,EX⟩,∀X, Y∈d, (2.35)
for some functions ( β(1)
k)k=1,...,nof the coupling constants λ. In that case, the equation (2.33) simply
induces the flowd
dτλk=ℏβ(1)
k(λ) +O(ℏ2) (2.36)
of the coupling constants and β(1)
kis then identified as the 1-loop β-function of λk.
Having at hand these general results, let us now suppose that the E-model we are considering
satisfies the strong conformal condition introduced in the previous paragraph. In particular, the
formulation (C2) of this condition, namely [ V+, V−] ={0}, implies that the operator ad π−Xπ+vanishes
for all X∈d. We thus conclude from equation (2.34) that SX= 0 for all X∈d. The RG flow (2.33)
is therefore trivial, showing the 1-loop conformal invariance of the model, as claimed.
Classical chiral fields. One of the key features of 2-dimensional conformal field theories is the
presence of chiral degrees of freedom in the dynamics, i.e.left-moving and right-moving fields. In
the case at hand, these chiral fields are easily identified at the classical level. Indeed, recall that the
components J±∈V±of the current Jsatisfy the equations of motion (2.21). If we assume the strong
conformal condition [ V+, V−] ={0}, it is then clear that
∂−J+=∂+J−= 0. (2.37)
The field J+is thus left-moving, while J−is right-moving. Since the equations of motion of J+and
J−encode the dynamics of all the degrees of freedom of the E-model, this shows that the theory
completely decouples into two chiralities.
In the rest of this paper, we will indicate left-moving and right-moving quantities with the labels
(L) and (R). In particular, in the case of a non-degenerate E-model satisfying the strong conformal
condition, we will use the notation J(L)=J+andJ(R)=J−to designate the left- and right-moving
components of the current J.
14Chiral Poisson algebras. An important characteristic of 2-dimensional conformal field theories is
their algebras of extended conformal symmetry. At the classical level, these take the form of two chiral
Poisson algebras, formed by the left-moving and right-moving fields of the model respectively. Indeed,
we recall that the Poisson bracket of two left-moving observables is itself left-moving, meaning that
the set of left-moving fields is closed under Poisson bracket (and similarly for right-moving ones). The
study of these chiral Poisson algebras is an important step towards the quantisation of the theory,
which can be expressed in terms of Vertex Operator Algebras, describing the quantum chiral fields
and their commutation relations.
For the conformal E-model under consideration here, the chiral Poisson algebras admit a simple
description. Indeed, we have shown above that the left-moving and right-moving fields of the theory
are encoded respectively in J(L)andJ(R), which are the components in V+andV−ofJ. The latter
satisfies the current Poisson algebra (2.6) associated with d. Yet, under the strong conformal condition,
the decomposition d=V+⊕V−becomes a direct sum of quadratic Lie algebras: V+andV−are closed
under the Lie bracket by (C1), commute one with another by (C2) and are orthogonal with respect to
the invariant bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩. One easily checks that the current Poisson algebra for Jthen splits
into two decoupled Poisson subalgebras for J(L)andJ(R). More concretely, we find

J(L)(x)1,J(L)(y)2	
=
C+
12,J(L)(x)1
δ(x−y)−C+
12∂xδ(x−y), (2.38a)

J(R)(x)1,J(R)(y)2	
=
C−
12,J(R)(x)1
δ(x−y) +C−
12∂xδ(x−y), (2.38b)

J(L)(x)1,J(R)(y)2	
= 0, (2.38c)
where C±
12=±(π±⊗π±)Cd
12∈V±⊗V±is the split quadratic Casimir of the Lie algebra5V±. In
other words, the left-moving (resp. right-moving) degrees of freedom of the theory form the current
Poisson algebra of V+(resp. V−).
Important elements of these chiral algebras are the left and right-moving components of the energy-
momentum tensor of the theory. In the present case, these are simply given by
T(L)=1
2
J(L),J(L)
and T(R)=−1
2
J(R),J(R)
. (2.39)
This expression for T(L/R)is the classical equivalent of the Segal-Sugawara construction, which gives
the energy-momentum tensor of a quantum current algebra.
As expected, the fields T(L)andT(R)satisfy the classical Virasoro algebra. More concretely,
starting from the bracket (2.38a), one finds (with a minus sign for T(L)and a plus sign for T(R))

T(L/R)(x), T(L/R)(y)	
=∓ 
T(L/R)(x) +T(L/R)(y)
∂xδ(x−y). (2.40)
Chiral affine symmetries. We will end this subsection with a discussion of the chiral affine sym-
metries of the conformal E-model under consideration and the relation of the present article to the
recent work [41]. To do so, let us for the moment consider a generic non-degenerate E-model, which
does not necessarily satisfy the strong conformal condition. The affine symmetries of this theory are
discussed in the section 7 of reference [41]. More precisely, it studies under which conditions the
action6(2.25) is invariant under a transformation ℓ(t, x)7→ℓ(t, x)v(t, x), where vis valued in Dand
can depend on the space-time coordinates ( t, x). We note that such a transformation should not be
interpreted as a gauge symmetry of the theory: indeed, we do not require that ℓ(t, x)7→ℓ(t, x)v(t, x)
leaves the model invariant for all functions v(t, x) but rather search for specific conditions on the way
5Recall that a split quadratic Casimir is associated with a Lie algebra equipped with a non-degenerate invariant
bilinear form. Here, C±
12is then more precisely the quadratic Casimir of the Lie algebra V±equipped with ±⟨·,·⟩|V±.
The plus/minus sign in this bilinear form has been introduced so that it is definite positive if the σ-model realising the
conformal E-model under investigation has a target space metric with positive signature ( i.e.if⟨·,E·⟩is definite positive
ond).
6Technically, the article [41] considers the action of a model before “gauging” the isotropic subgroup K, rather than
the action (2.25) on K\D: however, this will not impact the discussion and results of this paragraph.
15vdepends on ( t, x) which ensure that the action is left unchanged under the transformation. These
conditions were explicitly derived in [41, Equation (7.7)]: in our conventions, they read
E= Ad v◦ E ◦ Ad−1
v and ( ∂±v)v−1∈V±= Ker( E ∓Id). (2.41)
Let us introduce the “commutant” subgroup C(E) =
v0∈D,Adv0◦ E ◦ Ad−1
v0=E	
inD(here, v0
denotes constant elements of Dand not functions of ( t, x) valued in D). One can then distinguish
between several cases, depending on the choice of the double group Dand of the operator E. For a
completely generic choice, one can expect that the subgroup C(E) is trivial, i.e.that the condition
E= Ad v0◦ E ◦ Ad−1
v0does not have any solutions other than the identity of D: the model then does
not possess any non-trivial symmetries of the form ℓ7→ℓv. More specific choices of DandEcan
lead to a non-trivial commutant subgroup C(E). In that case, one can then find symmetries ℓ7→ℓv
by searching for functions v(t, x) valued in C(E) which further satisfy the condition ( ∂±v)v−1∈V±.
For many choices of DandE, the only solutions will be the constant functions v(t, x) =v0, with
v0∈C(E): in that case, the model is only invariant under rigid global symmetries ℓ7→ℓv0, which do
not allow for any dependence on the space-time coordinates ( t, x) – these symmetries then correspond
to global isometries of the σ-model (2.25). However, very specific choices of DandEcan allow for
non-constant solutions where vdepends on specific combinations of ( t, x).
The typical example of such a case, which will be relevant for the study of E-models satisfying the
strong conformal condition, arises in the following setup. Suppose that the commutant C(E) contains a
non-trivial subgroup D(L)whose Lie algebra is a subspace of V+,i.e.LieD(L)⊂V+. Then any function
v(t, x) =v(L)(t+x), where v(L)is valued in D(L), satisfies ( ∂+v)v−1∈V+and ( ∂−v)v−1= 0∈V−,
thus defining a symmetry ℓ7→ℓvof the model. This symmetry is not a constant one, in the sense
that it contains an arbitrary function of the light-cone coordinate t+x.7Obviously, one can similarly
consider symmetries depending on arbitrary functions of the other light-cone coordinate t−x, valued
in a subgroup D(R)ofC(E) whose Lie algebra is contained in V−. If they exist, these ( D(L)×D(R))–
transformations are called chiral affine symmetries of the model.
In this language, the strong conformal condition considered in the present paper exactly cor-
responds to the case with “maximal chiral symmetries”. More precisely, let us suppose that the
commutant subgroup C(E) is maximal, in the sense that it coincides with the whole double group D.
This amounts to requiring that the operator Ecommutes with the adjoint action of d: as observed
at the beginning of this subsection, this is one of the equivalent formulation of the strong conformal
condition. Moreover, in that case, we know that V+andV−become commuting subalgebras of d: they
thus correspond to subgroups D(L)andD(R)ofD, such that8D=D(L)×D(R), with Lie D(L)=V+
and Lie D(R)=V−. We thus obtain chiral affine ( D(L)×D(R))–symmetries taking the form
ℓ(t, x)7−→ℓ(t, x)v(L)(t+x)v(R)(t−x), v(L)∈D(L), v(R)∈D(R). (2.42)
These symmetries are maximal, in the sense that D(L)andD(R)generate the whole group D. They
can in fact be reinterpreted as the transformations generated by the chiral currents J(L)andJ(R)
considered in the previous paragraphs. This setup was discussed in [41] for the example of the WZW
model: this theory and its interpretation as a conformal E-model will be the subject of the next sub-
section (in fact, we will argue there that any non-degenerate E-model satisfying the strong conformal
condition, and thus having maximal chiral symmetries, essentially takes the form of a WZW model).
2.3 The WZW model and its λ-deformation
The conformal E-models considered in the previous subsection possess two commuting chiral current
algebras. This setup is reminiscent of a well-known conformal field theory called the Wess-Zumino-
Witten (WZW) model [5, 6]. As already mentioned earlier, the results of [23] show that a non-
degenerate E-model satisfying the strong conformal condition in fact essentially takes the form of such
7However, as noted above, this is not a gauge symmetry, as vis a function of only t+xand does not depend on t−x.
8Here, we will ignore any potential global or topological obstruction in extending the Lie algebra decomposition
d=V+⊕V−to a group decomposition.
16a WZW model once realised as a σ-model. In this subsection, we will revisit this result and the
interpretation of the WZW model in terms of E-models.
We will in fact make a small detour, by considering not only the WZW model but also its so-called
λ-deformation. The latter was introduced in [42] as an integrable deformation of the former: it is
a non-conformal σ-model, which depends on a coupling constant λand which gives back the WZW
model when λ→0 (corresponding to the UV limit of the theory). It was proven in [43] that the
λ-model can be reformulated as a non-degenerate E-model. In this subsection, we will recall this
formulation and will use it to illustrate the results of this section. In particular, we will show that
the conformal limit λ→0 exactly coincides with the point in parameter space where the underlying
E-model satisfies the strong conformal condition. This detour through the non-conformal λ-model will
allow us to illustrate more concretely the role played by this strong conformal condition, for instance on
the chirality properties of the theory. Moreover, we include it as it represents a prototypical example
of integrable deformations of conformal E-models, which were part of the main motivations behind
the present work. We will end this subsection by coming back to the results of [23]: namely, we will
argue that all the non-degenerate E-models satisfying the strong conformal condition can in fact be
brought back to the form of a WZW model.
The double algebra. Let us first describe the data defining the non-degenerate E-model that we
will consider, starting with the double algebra d. We will suppose that we are given a real connected
simple Lie group G, whose Lie algebra g= Lie( G) is then equipped with a non-degenerate invariant
bilinear form9κ(·,·) (the construction below can be essentially generalised to any group Gwhose Lie
algebra possesses a bilinear form with these properties, but we will focus on the case of Gsimple for
convenience). We define the double group as the direct product D=G×G, with Lie algebra d=g×g,
whose bracket reads
(X1, X2),(Y1, Y2)
= 
[X1, Y1],[X2, Y2]
, (2.44)
for all X1, X2, Y1, Y2∈g. Moreover, we equip dwith the symmetric bilinear form
D
(X1, X2),(Y1, Y2)E
=𝓀κ(X1, Y1)−𝓀κ(X2, Y2), (2.45)
where 𝓀is an external positive parameter. One easily checks that this bilinear form is invariant and
of split signature, making dan appropriate choice for the double algebra underlying an E-model.
The operator E.The next ingredient needed to define the non-degenerate E-model is the operator
E:d→d. In the case at hand, since d=g×g,Ecan be conveniently seen as a 2 ×2 matrix whose
entries are operators on g. We will choose it to be
E=
1 +λ2
1−λ2Id−2λ
1−λ2Id
2λ
1−λ2Id−1 +λ2
1−λ2Id
, (2.46)
where λ∈[ 0,1) is an external parameter and Id stands here for the identity operator on g. A straight-
forward computation shows that Eis an involution, i.e.E2= Id, and is symmetric with respect to the
bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩introduced in equation (2.45). This operator Ethus satisfies the right conditions to
define a non-degenerate E-model.
9We fix the normalisation of κ(·,·) so that it coincides with the opposite of the “minimal” bilinear form on g, with
respect to which the longest roots of gChave length 2. For instance, κ(·,·) coincides with the opposite of the trace form
in the fundamental representation for g=su(n). The minus sign was introduced so that the bilinear form is positive
definite if Gis compact. The main property of κ(·,·) that we shall need is its relation with the Killing form, which reads
κ(X, Y) =−1
2h∨Tr 
adXadY
,∀X, Y∈g, (2.43)
where h∨is the dual Coxeter number of g.
17Let us quickly describe some of the properties of E. Since it is an involution, it has eigenvalues +1
and−1. The corresponding eigenspaces are given explicitly by
V+=
(X, λ X ), X∈g	
and V−=
(λ X, X ), X∈g	
(2.47)
and have equal dimension dim V±= dim gas required in the previous subsections. One also checks
that V+andV−are orthogonal with respect to ⟨·,·⟩, as expected. Moreover, a direct computation
shows that the quadratic form ⟨·,E·⟩reads
D
(X1, X2),E(X1, X2)E
=𝓀
1−λ2
κ(X1−λ X2, X1−λ X2) +κ(X2−λ X1, X2−λ X1)
.(2.48)
In particular, since 𝓀>0 and 0 ≤λ <1, we see that ⟨·,E·⟩is positive definite if and only if the group
Gis compact (in which case κ(·,·) is itself definite positive – see footnote 9). For Gcompact, the
E-model under consideration thus possesses a positive Hamiltonian.
Isotropic subalgebra and σ-model action. Before we discuss the conformal limit of the E-model
we are constructing, let us describe the σ-model it corresponds to. For that, we will follow the
procedure recalled in Subsection 2.1.2 and will first choose a maximally isotropic subalgebra kofd.
To obtain the λ-model, we will take it to be
k=gdiag=
(X, X ), X∈g	
, (2.49)
which is clearly maximally isotropic with respect to the bilinear form (2.45). According to Subsection
2.1.2, the associated σ-model has then for target space the quotient K\D=Gdiag\(G×G) and
is described by a field ℓ(t, x) valued in G×Gwith a left gauge symmetry ℓ7→kℓ,k∈Gdiag. For
simplicity, we will fix this gauge symmetry from the start by taking ℓto be of the form
ℓ(t, x) = 
g(t, x),Id
, g (t, x)∈G . (2.50)
Indeed, it is clear that such a form can always be attained by a gauge transformation ℓ7→kℓ,k∈Gdiag.
In practice, we are thus identifying the quotient target space Gdiag\(G×G) with the subspace G×{Id},
therefore describing the model in terms of a G-valued field g(t, x).
To derive the σ-model action, the next step is to compute the projectors W±
ℓ, defined by their
kernels and images (2.26). In the present case, the images Im( W±
ℓ) =V±have been described explicitly
in equation (2.47). Moreover, for the choice of isotropic subalgebra k=gdiagand the gauge-fixing
ℓ= (g,Id), the kernel of these operators is given by
Ker(W±
ℓ) = Ad−1
ℓk= 
Ad−1
gX, X
, X∈g	
. (2.51)
It is then a simple algebraic exercise to determine the explicit expressions of the projectors W±
ℓ,
yielding
W+
ℓ=
Adg
Adg−λ−1
Adg−λ
λAdg
Adg−λ−λ
Adg−λ
and W−
ℓ=
−λAdg
1−λAdgλ
1−λAdg
−Adg
1−λAdg1
1−λAdg
. (2.52)
We now have all the ingredients necessary to compute the action (2.25) of the model. We recall
that ℓ= (g,Id) and thus that ℓ−1dℓ= (g−1dg,0). Taking this into account and using the expression
(2.45) of the form ⟨·,·⟩in the case at hand, we find that the last term −IWZ,D[ℓ] in the action (2.25)
becomes −𝓀IWZ,G[g], where
IWZ,G[g] =1
12ZZZ
Bκ 
g−1dg∧,
g−1dg∧, g−1dg
(2.53)
18is the Wess-Zumino term of the G-valued field g, defined in terms of the bilinear form κ(·,·) on g. Using
the expression (2.52) of W±
ℓ, one also determines the two first terms in equation (2.25). Combining
all these results together, we finally get the action of the theory:
S𝓀,λ[g] =SWZW ,𝓀[g] + 2λ𝓀ZZ
R×S1dtdx κ
g−1∂+g,1
1−λAdg∂−gg−1
, (2.54)
where
SWZW ,𝓀[g] =𝓀ZZ
R×S1dtdx κ 
g−1∂+g, g−1∂−g
−𝓀IWZ,G[g] (2.55)
is the Wess-Zumino-Witten action with level 𝓀[5,6]. One recognises in the equation (2.54) the action
of the λ-model first introduced in [42].
RG-flow and conformal limit. The 1-loop RG-flow of the λ-model can be derived using the
general formula (2.33). The operator SXappearing in this formula is defined in equation (2.34) and
in particular depends on the eigenspaces V±of the operator E. In the present case, the latter are
explicitly given by (2.47). After a few manipulations, we find that for any X= (X1, X2) in d=g×g:
Tr 
SX
=λ2
(1−λ2)2(1 +λ)2
(1 +λ2)Tr 
adX1adX2
−λTr 
adX1adX1+ ad X2adX2
.
Using the relation Tr(ad XadY) =−2h∨κ(X, Y) (see footnote 9), the flow (2.33) then takes the form
d
dτ⟨X,EX⟩=8ℏh∨λ2
(1−λ2)2(1 +λ)2
(1 +λ2)κ(X1, X2)−λ κ(X1, X1)−λ κ(X2, X2)
+O(ℏ2).
From the expression (2.48) of ⟨X,EX⟩for the case at hand, we find that this induces the following
flow on the parameters of the model:
dλ
dτ=−2ℏh∨
𝓀λ2
(1 +λ)2+O(ℏ2) andd𝓀
dτ=O(ℏ2). (2.56)
In particular, we find that the Wess-Zumino level 𝓀is not renormalised (at least at 1-loop): this is to
be expected due to the 3-dimensional origin of the Wess-Zumino term. Moreover, we recover in this
way the already known 1-loop β-function of the λ-model [44].
Given this RG-flow, one can look at the high-energy / UV limit of the model, corresponding to
τ→+∞. A standard analysis of the ODE (2.56) shows that this limit simply gives
λτ→+∞− − − − → 0. (2.57)
In particular, the UV limit of the action (2.54) yields the WZW model action SWZW ,𝓀[g], which defines
a well-known conformal theory (as one should expect).
Let us now reinterpret this in view of the results of Subsection 2.2. There, we have formulated a
strong conformal condition in terms of the eigenspaces V±and showed that this condition ensures the
1-loop conformal invariance of non-degenerate E-models. In the present case, these eigenspaces are
given in equation (2.47). The commutator between generic elements X+= (λ X, X ) and Y−= (Y, λ Y )
ofV+andV−(with X, Y∈g) then reads [ X+, Y−] =λ 
[X, Y],[X, Y]
. In particular, we see that the
locus in parameter space where the strong conformal condition [ V+, V−] ={0}holds exactly coincides
with the UV fixed-point λ= 0 (one easily sees that V+andV−also become subalgebras of dat this
point, as expected from the analysis of Subsection 2.2). This illustrates concretely how this strong
conformal condition leads to conformal E-models.
19Kac-Moody currents of the λ-model. We have explained in Subsection 2.1 that the Hamiltonian
degrees of freedom of a non-degenerate E-model naturally form a d-valued field Jsatisfying a Poisson
current algebra. For the example of the λ-model considered in this subsection, the double algebra d
is given by the direct product g×g: the corresponding current Poisson algebra then splits into two
decoupled subalgebras. To describe this explicitly, let us introduce g-valued fields K1andK2through
J=1
𝓀 
K1,−K2
, (2.58)
where the prefactor and the minus sign have been introduced for future convenience, to cancel contribu-
tions coming from the bilinear form (2.45). We then find that K1andK2are commuting g-Kac-Moody
currents with levels ℓ1= +𝓀andℓ2=−𝓀,i.e.fields satisfying two decoupled current Poisson algebras
ofg. Explicitly, the bracket (2.6) with the parametrisation (2.58) implies

Kr(x)1,Ks(y)2	
=δrs 
Cg
12,Kr(x)1
δ(x−y)−ℓrCg
12∂xδ(x−y)
, r, s ∈ {1,2}. (2.59)
HereCg
12∈g⊗gis the split quadratic Casimir of g, defined as Cg
12=κabta⊗tbin terms of a basis
{ta}a=1,...,dim gofgand the inverse κabofκ(ta,tb).
In general, the expression of the current Jin terms of the field of the σ-model is given by the
formula (2.31). In the present case, using equation (2.52), this yields
K1=𝓀 
1
1−λAd−1
gg−1∂+g+λ
1−λAdg∂−gg−1!
, (2.60a)
K2=−𝓀 
λ
1−λAd−1
gg−1∂+g+1
1−λAdg∂−gg−1!
. (2.60b)
Chiral Kac-Moody currents in the conformal limit. Rather than using the decomposition
d=g×gto describe the current Jin terms of K1andK2, as we did in the previous paragraph,
one can also use the components J±∈V±, following the decomposition d=V+⊕V−. In particular,
we know from Subsections 2.1 and 2.2 that this description is the most adapted one to reflect the
light-cone structure of the model and study its conformal limit. For the λ-model under consideration,
we find that the currents J±are given by
J+= (1, λ)⊗1
1−λAd−1
gg−1∂+g and J−=−(λ,1)⊗1
1−λAdg∂−gg−1, (2.61)
where we used the tensorial notation ( a, b)⊗X= (aX, bX ) to describe pure products in d≃R2⊗g.
One of the main advantage of the currents J±is that they become chiral when the strong conformal
condition is satisfied (see Subsection 2.2). Here, this corresponds to taking the UV limit λ= 0, in
which case we get
J(L)=J+
λ=0= (g−1∂+g,0) and J(R)=J−
λ=0=−(0, ∂−gg−1). (2.62)
In the above equation, we used the notations (L) and (R) to label left-moving and right-moving fields
at the conformal point, as in Subsection 2.2. We recover this way standard results on the WZW model
(2.55): indeed, it is well-known that the dynamics of this theory is such that the fields g−1∂+gand
∂−gg−1are respectively left-moving and right-moving. In other words, the equations of motion at the
conformal point λ= 0 take the form
∂− 
g−1∂+g
= 0, or equivalently ∂+ 
∂−gg−1
= 0. (2.63)
As explained in Subsection 2.2, the chiral fields J(L/R)at the conformal point also form two
decoupled closed Poisson algebras. More precisely, in the present case, J(L)satisfies the current
bracket associated with the Lie algebra V+=g× {0}andJ(R)the one associated with V−={0} ×g.
20In fact, we see that, at the conformal point λ= 0, the left-moving field J(L)essentially corresponds
to the Kac-Moody current K1introduced above, while the right-moving field J(R)corresponds to K2.
More precisely:
J(L)=1
𝓀 
K1|λ=0,0
and J(R)=1
𝓀 
0,K2|λ=0
. (2.64)
The current algebra obeyed by J(L)andJ(R)is then equivalent to the Kac-Moody bracket (2.59).
To summarise, we have seen that the λ-model is always described by two commuting Kac-Moody
currents K1andK2, even for the non-conformal model, and that these currents become chiral in the
conformal limit, giving back the standard chiral Kac-Moody algebras underlying the WZW model.
This illustrates the general ideas of this section, namely that all non-degenerate E-models are described
by a current algebra and that the strong conformal condition further ensures that this current algebra
splits into two chiral components.
Chiral symmetries of the WZW model. The conformal structure of the WZW model is also
reflected in the presence of chiral symmetries in its dynamics, which can be recovered from the general
discussion at the end of Subsection 2.2 – see also [41]. There, it was argued that a non-degenerate
E-model satisfying the strong conformal condition is invariant under chiral symmetries (2.42). In
the present case, recall that the subgroups of D=G×Gwhose Lie algebras are V+andV−are
respectively D(L)=G× {Id}andD(R)={Id} ×G. The chiral symmetries (2.42) then act on ℓ(t, x)
by multiplications ℓ(t, x)(v(L)(t+x), v(R)(t−x)), where v(L)andv(R)are arbitrary functions valued
inG. Recall moreover that in this subsection, we fixed the left Gdiag–gauge symmetry of the model
by setting ℓ(t, x) = (g(t, x),Id). This gauge is not preserved by the above chiral action on ℓand one
thus have to perform a left multiplication by 
v(R)(t−x), v(R)(t−x)−1∈Gdiagto bring ℓback to
the right form. In the end, we thus obtain the following transformation of the physical field g:
g(t, x)7−→v(R)(t−x)−1g(t, x)v(L)(t+x). (2.65)
One easily checks that this transformation preserves the equations of motion (2.63) and thus defines
a chiral symmetry of the WZW model, as expected from [41] and the general discussion in Subsection
2.2, and as already well-established in the literature.
From the strong conformal condition to the WZW structure. We end this subsection by
arguing that, under mild technical assumptions, any non-degenerate E-model satisfying the strong
conformal condition in fact takes the form of a WZW model, as pointed out in [23].10The main idea
will be to show that the double algebra dof this model always have the structure of a direct product
g×g, as considered earlier in this subsection.
Let us then start with a general non-degenerate E-model satisfying the strong conformal condition,
so that d=V+⊕V−where V+andV−are orthogonal commuting subalgebras of dimension d=1
2dim d
(see Subsection 2.2). In order to obtain a conformal σ-model from it, one has to follow the recipe
of Subsubsection 2.1.2. In particular, one has to find a maximally isotropic subalgebra kindand
construct the projector W±
ℓ, with kernel and image as in equation (2.26). For this projector to
exist, one has to assume that these kernel and image have trivial intersection and thus in particular
that k∩V±={0}.11We are thus in a situation where we have the vector spaces decompositions
d=V+⊕V−=k⊕V±, with dim V±= dim k=d. With a little bit of linear algebra, one shows that in
this configuration, there always exist bases {Ua}d
a=1and{Ua}d
a=1ofV+andV−such that
Ka=Ua+Ua, a = 1, . . . , d , (2.66)
10As explained in footnote 4, the setup considered in the present section is very similar to the one of reference [23],
although there are a few minor differences. The approach that we will follow here to establish the relation with WZW
models will be a bit different from the one of [23] but will rely on the same crucial property, namely the complementarity
ofkandV±ind.
11As mentioned in footnote 3, one can in principle ask for the property Ad−1
ℓk∩V±={0}to hold only for generic
values of ℓ∈D. In that more general setup, the point ℓ= Id could be one of the non-generic values where this property
fails and kandV±would thus have a non-trivial intersection. The reasoning of this paragraph then fails and one could
in principle get other types of theories than WZW models. It is however not clear whether such a case exists in practice.
21form a basis of k. Using the fact that V+,V−and kare closed under the Lie bracket and that
[V+, V−] ={0}, one further find that
[Ua, Ub] =fc
abUc, [Ua,Ub] =fc
abUc, [Ka, Kb] =fc
abKc, (2.67)
for some structure constants fc
ab, which crucially are the same for the three subalgebras. To prove
this, one starts with different structure constants for UaandUaand write down the commutation
relations of Ka=Ua+Ua, using the fact that [ Ua,Ub] = 0: requiring that these commutators close in
k, we then find that the structure constants of Ua,UaandKaall coincide. In particular, this means
that the three subalgebras V+,V−and kare all isomorphic. To make the relation with the language
of this subsection, we denote by gthe abstract Lie algebra defined by their common commutation
relations. It is then easy to see that we have an isomorphism d≃g×g, identifying the double algebra
dwith the direct product g×g, in such a way that
V+≃g× {0}, V −≃ {0} × g and k≃gdiag=
(X, X ), X∈g	
. (2.68)
We recognise here the structure of the E-model underlying the WZW model on G, as described earlier
in this subsection. To complete this identification, we finally have to study the image of the bilinear
form⟨·,·⟩through this isomorphism. Using the fact that V+andV−are orthogonal with respect to
⟨·,·⟩while kis isotropic, one easily checks that the restriction of ⟨·,·⟩onV+≃g× {0}induces a
non-degenerate invariant bilinear form on gwhile the restriction on V−≃ {0} × gyields the opposite
of this form. Through the identification d≃g×g, the bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩is then sent to the form (2.45)
considered earlier in this subsection. This achieves the identification of the conformal E-model under
consideration with the WZW model on G. We note that, in general, this group Gis not necessarily
semi-simple (it only needs to have a Lie algebra with a non-degenerate invariant bilinear form).
3 Conformal degenerate E-models
This section is the main component of the article and concerns the study of conformal and chiral
structures in degenerate E-models. The latter [18] resemble the non-degenerate E-models considered
in the previous section but admit an additional gauge symmetry, generated by a subalgebra of the
current Poisson bracket underlying the theory. At the Hamiltonian level, the physical observables of
the theory are thus described by the Poisson reduction of a current algebra.
At the Lagrangian level, the degenerate E-models are naturally related to σ-models, as was the case
for the non-degenerate ones. More precisely, recall from the previous section that a non-degenerate
E-model with double group Dcan be realised as a σ-model with target space K\D, where K⊂Dis
a subgroup whose Lie algebra is maximally isotropic. In the degenerate setup, the target space of the
σ-model becomes a double quotient K\D/H , where H⊂Dis a subgroup encoding the additional
gauge symmetry and whose Lie algebra is isotropic (but not maximal).
The first subsection below is a review of the construction of degenerate E-models and of the related
σ-models. The rest of the section is devoted to the study of conformal occurrences of such theories
and the description of their chiral fields and Poisson algebras, generalising the results of the previous
section to the degenerate case. Explicit examples of such conformal degenerate E-models are discussed
in the next section 4.
3.1 Reminder about degenerate E-models
The degenerate E-models and their associated σ-models were first introduced in [18] (see also [24,25]
for related constructions). Below, we review the definition and main properties of these theories,
following mostly the more recent references [26–28] (in the literature, these models are also sometimes
referred to as dressing cosets: for simplicity, we will only use the denomination degenerate E-models
in this article). Since they consist of a gauged version of the non-degenerate E-models discussed in
Subsection 2.1, we will use the notations and results already introduced there to avoid repetition and
will mainly focus on the new aspects related to the additional gauge symmetry.
223.1.1 Hamiltonian formulation in terms of a reduced current Poisson algebra
Double Lie algebra and gauge subalgebra. As in the non-degenerate setup, one of the main data
defining a degenerate E-model is a double Lie algebra dof dimension 2 d, equipped with an invariant
symmetric bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩with split signature ( d, d) (see Subsection 2.1 for details and conventions).
The key additional ingredient in the degenerate case is the choice of an isotropic subalgebra h⊂d,
which thus satisfies [ h,h]⊂hand⟨h,h⟩= 0. Note that his not required to be maximally isotropic
and thus can have any dimension smaller than d: we let p=d−dim h, which is then a positive integer
(as we will see later, this integer will correspond to the dimension of the target space of the σ-models
associated to this degenerate E-model).
We denote by h⊥the orthogonal subspace of hindwith respect to ⟨·,·⟩. Since his isotropic, we
have h⊂h⊥. Moreover, this orthogonal subspace has dimension 2 d−dim h=d+p. The ad-invariance
of⟨·,·⟩implies that h⊥is stable under the adjoint action of h,i.e.that [ h,h⊥]⊂h⊥.
Current algebra and gauge symmetry. As in the non-degenerate case, the degenerate E-model
is a Hamiltonian field theory described in terms of a d-valued field J(x) =JA(x)TA, satisfying the
current Poisson algebra (2.4), which we recall here for the reader’s convenience:

JA(x),JB(y)	
=FABC
ABJC(x)δ(x−y)−ηAB∂xδ(x−y). (3.1)
However, for degenerate models, not all degrees of freedom in Jare physical, due to the presence
of a gauge symmetry, which we now describe. We choose the basis {TA}2d
A=1ofdsuch that the first
d−pelements {Tα}d−p
α=1form a basis of the subalgebra hintroduced earlier. In what follows, we will
use greek indices α, β, . . . to label basis elements of h, while we keep upper-case latin letters A, B, . . .
for basis elements of the full double algebra d, as before. Let us then consider the components
Jα(x) =⟨Tα,J(x)⟩, α ∈ {1, . . . , d −p}, (3.2)
of the current J(x). They form a Poisson subalgebra of (3.1), namely

Jα(x),Jβ(y)	
=Fαβγ
αβJγ(x)δ(x−y). (3.3)
Here, the labels α, β, γ run only over {1, . . . , d −p}due to the closedness of h: in particular, the
coefficients Fαβγ
αβare the structure constants of h. Moreover, we see that there is no term proportional
to∂xδ(x−y) in the bracket (3.3): this is due to the isotropy of hwith respect to ⟨·,·⟩.
We will interpret the components Jα(x) as the generators of a local gauge symmetry. The corre-
sponding infinitesimal action on any observable Obuilt from Jis given by
δϵO=Z2π
0ϵα(x)
Jα(x),O	
dx , (3.4)
where ϵ(x) =ϵα(x)Tαis the infinitesimal local parameter of the symmetry, which is an arbitrary
h-valued function. Since the generators Jα(x) satisfy the current algebra (3.3), one sees that this
transformation defines a local action of the Lie algebra h, in the sense that [ δϵ, δϵ′] =δ[ϵ,ϵ′]. In
particular, it is straightforward to compute the action of this symmetry on the current Jusing the
bracket (3.1), yielding
δϵJ(x) =
J(x), ϵ(x)
+∂xϵ(x). (3.5)
This infinitesimal h-transformation can be easily lifted to a local action of a group Hwith Lie( H) = h:
J(x)7−→ Jh(x) =h(x)−1J(x)h(x) +h(x)−1∂xh(x), (3.6)
where h(x) is an arbitrary function valued in H.
The physical observables of the degenerate E-model are obtained by the Hamiltonian reduction of
the current Poisson algebra with respect to this local H-action. This means that we are treating the
23generators of the action as constraints that we set to zero, following the approach of Dirac [45] (see
also [46] for a standard textbook on the subject):
Jα(x)≈0,∀α∈ {1, . . . , d −p}. (3.7)
Here, we use the notation ‘ ≈’ to designate weak equalities, which are true when the constraints are
imposed. In contrast, the standard equality sign ‘=’ will be reserved for strong equalities, which
hold even when the constraints are not imposed. The reduced algebra is then obtained from the
initial current algebra in two steps: we first consider the observables up to the constraints Jα≈0
(which mathematically corresponds to taking a quotient of the current algebra) and then restrict to
observables which are invariant under the gauge transformation (3.6) generated by these constraints.
An important property ensuring the consistency of this procedure is the fact that the constraints
are first-class, meaning that their Poisson brackets weakly vanish:

Jα(x),Jβ(y)	
≈0,∀α, β∈ {1,···, d−p}. (3.8)
This is a direct consequence of the equation (3.3), which ensures that the local h-transformation (3.4)
generated by Jαpreserves the constraints Jβ≈0. We note that this first-class property reflects
the fact that his an isotropic subalgebra of d. Indeed, the isotropy of hensures that there are no
components proportional to ∂xδ(x−y) in the Poisson brackets of the generators {Jα}d−p
α=1, while the
closedness of hunder the Lie bracket ensures that the component proportional to δ(x−y) is expressed
in terms of the generators themselves and thus vanishes weakly.
Let us quickly discuss the number of physical degrees of freedom obtained by this reduction. The
initial current algebra is described by dim d= 2dfields (namely the components of the current J).
Imposing the constraints Jα≈0 eliminates dim h=d−pof these degrees of freedom. Moreover, the
local symmetry with gauge group Hremoves dim h=d−padditional ones. We thus end up with
2pdegrees of freedom. This means that the reduced algebra can be thought of as a Poisson algebra
generated by 2 pfields. In practice, these fields can be difficult to describe and manipulate explicitly.
It is thus often easier to work with the unreduced current J, keeping in mind that physical observables
are subject to the constraints Jα≈0 and the gauge symmetry (3.6).
We note that imposing the constraints Jα=⟨Tα,J ⟩ ≈ 0 does not correspond to putting the
h-valued component of Jto zero12. Rather, it corresponds to killing the component of Jalong any
subspace dual to hwith respect to the bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩. In particular, the constraint can be expressed
as the following orthogonality condition:
Jweakly belongs to h⊥. (3.9)
Recall from above that h⊥is stable under the adjoint action of hand thus under the lifted adjoint
action of the group H: in other words, h−1X h∈h⊥for all h∈HandX∈h⊥. Moreover, by
isotropy of h, we have h⊂h⊥, showing that h−1∂xhbelongs to h⊥ifhis aH-valued function. We
thus conclude that the gauge transformed current h−1Jh+h−1∂xhalso weakly belongs to h⊥. This
is another way of stating the preservation of the constraints under the gauge transformation (3.6).
Hamiltonian and operator bE.Let us now define the Hamiltonian Hof the theory. As in the
non-degenerate case, we will choose the density of Hto be quadratic in the components of the current
J. However, in the degenerate case, the presence of a constraint and a gauge symmetry requires
two additional important considerations. Firstly, the only physically relevant information in the
Hamiltonian is its weak definition, i.e.its expression when the constraint is imposed. In particular,
different choices for the Hamiltonian that weakly coincide will give rise to the same theory. Recall from
equation (3.9) that imposing the constraint amounts to restricting Jto the subspace h⊥. Defining
12In fact, defining the h-valued component of Jwould first require choosing a complement of hind, which is arbitrary.
24a weak quadratic Hamiltonian then exactly becomes specifying a choice of symmetric bilinear form
E(·,·) on h⊥and letting
H ≈1
2Z2π
0E 
J(x),J(x)
dx . (3.10)
The second additional consideration to take into account in the degenerate case is that this Hamilto-
nian should be invariant under the gauge transformation (3.6) of J(which we recall weakly preserves
the fact that Jbelongs to h⊥). This condition is equivalent to the bilinear form E(·,·) being invariant
under the adjoint action of Honh⊥and having a kernel containing h(i.e.E(h,·) = 0). In particular,
this shows that E(·,·) is degenerate as a bilinear form: this is a manifestation of the “degenerate”
nature of the E-model under construction here.
In analogy with the non-degenerate case, it is useful to represent the bilinear form E(·,·) as⟨·,bE·⟩,
withbE:h⊥→h⊥a linear operator. This is always possible but in fact does not uniquely define bE.
From a practical perspective, it is often useful to give a strong definition of the Hamiltonian Hrather
than just the weak one (3.10). This can be done in practice by extending the operator bEfrom h⊥to
the full double algebra dand defining
H=1
2Z2π
0
J(x),bE(J(x))
dx=1
2Z2π
0bEABJA(x)JB(x) dx , (3.11)
where bEAB=
TA,bE(TB)
, in the dual basis {TA}2d
A=1ofd. The non-unicity in defining such an
extended operator bE:d→dencodes the freedom of adding to the strong expression of the Hamiltonian
any term proportional to the constraints Jα(indeed, such a term will not change the weak expression
(3.10) of H). In the following, we suppose that the operator bE:d→dsatisfies:
(i)bEis symmetric with respect to ⟨·,·⟩;
(ii) Ker bE
h⊥
=h;
(iii)bE
h⊥commutes with the adjoint action of H;
(iv)bE3
h⊥=bE
h⊥.
The second of these properties means that the bilinear form ⟨·,bE ·⟩ondis degenerate and that the
gauge subalgebra his contained in its kernel, extending to the full algebra dthe result stated above
for the restriction ⟨·,bE ·⟩|h⊥=E(·,·) on h⊥. This can be traced back to the degenerate nature of
theE-model under consideration and thus to the presence of a gauge symmetry. The latter is also
reflected in the condition (iii), which translates the invariance of ⟨·,bE ·⟩|h⊥under the adjoint action of
H. The property (iv) essentially corresponds to the requirement that the field theory defined by this
choice of Hamiltonian is relativistic and is the degenerate equivalent of the requirement that E2= Id
in the non-degenerate case (see the next paragraph for more details).
Decomposing d.The above conditions (ii) and (iv) obeyed by bEimply that
h⊥=h⊕V+⊕V−, with V±= Ker bE
h⊥∓Id
. (3.12)
In particular, bEis an involution ( i.e.it squares to the identity) when restricted to V+⊕V−. Similarly
to the non-degenerate case, this property is the condition ensuring the relativistic invariance of the
theory. The particularity of the degenerate setup is that it only holds on a subspace which is a
complement of hinh⊥, while it held on the full double algebra din the non-degenerate one. In the
rest of this section, we will make the additional assumption that the two subspaces V±have the same
dimension, which is then equal to dim V±=1
2(dim h⊥−dim h) =p. Since bEis symmetric, we also find
thatV+andV−are orthogonal with respect to ⟨·,·⟩and that ⟨·,·⟩is non-degenerate on V±.13
13Let us note that the Hamiltonian Hof the theory is positive, and thus bounded below, if and only if ⟨·,·⟩|V+and
⟨·,·⟩|V−are respectively positive definite and negative definite. At the Lagrangian level, this setup will correspond to
σ-models whose target space is of euclidean signature. Although this condition is often taken as an additional assumption
in the literature, we will not impose it here to also include σ-models with non-euclidean signature.
25It will be useful to complete the above decomposition of h⊥to one for the full double algebra. For
that, we observe that there exists a unique subspace h′⊂dwhich is of dimension dim h′= dim h,
isotropic with respect to ⟨·,·⟩and orthogonal to V+⊕V−. Since ⟨·,·⟩is non-degenerate, this subspace
has to pair non-degenerately with hand thus should be a complement of h⊥, hence d=h⊕h′⊕V+⊕V−.
Using the symmetry of bEand the fact bE(h) ={0}, we find that bE(h′)⊂h. The condition (iii) obeyed
bybE,i.e.the fact that bE
h⊥commutes with the adjoint action of H, also has consequences on this
decomposition. Indeed, it implies that V+,V−and h′are all stable under this adjoint action. Finally,
one checks that [ V+, V−]⊂h⊥.
Let us summarise the results of this paragraph. We have the decomposition
d=h⊕h′⊕V+⊕V−, (3.13)
with dim h= dim h′=d−pand dim V+= dim V−=p. Moreover, we have
⟨h,h⟩=⟨h′,h′⟩= 0 ⟨h, V±⟩=⟨h′, V±⟩= 0,⟨V+, V−⟩= 0, (3.14)
while ⟨·,·⟩pairs non-degenerately hwith h′,V+with itself and V−with itself. In particular, the
subspace h′is naturally identified with the dual h∗ofhthrough this pairing. The action of the
operator bEon this decomposition satisfies
bE|h= 0,bE(h′)⊂h and bE|V±=±Id. (3.15)
Similarly, the adjoint action of His such that, for any h∈H,
Adhh=h, Adhh′=h′and Ad hV±=V±. (3.16)
Finally, we have
[V+, V−]⊂h⊥=h⊕V+⊕V−. (3.17)
We will denote by πh,πh′andπ±the projections on h,h′andV±along the decomposition (3.13).
Decomposing J.Let us now consider the decomposition of the d-valued current Jalong the direct
sum (3.13):
J(x) =Jh(x) +J′(x) +J+(x)− J−(x), (3.18)
withJh=πh(J)∈h,J′=πh′(J)∈h′andJ±=±π±(J)∈V±(the minus sign in J−has been
introduced for further convenience). Since his orthogonal to h⊕V+⊕V−with respect to ⟨·,·⟩, we
find that Jα=⟨Tα,J ⟩=⟨Tα,J′⟩, where we recall that {Tα}d−p
α=1is a basis of h. Thus, imposing the
constraints Jα≈0 amounts to requiring
J′(x)≈0. (3.19)
The field J′(x) valued in h′≃h∗can be understood as the generator/moment-map of the h-gauge
symmetry, which is put to zero when we perform the corresponding Hamiltonian reduction. In par-
ticular, the gauge-transformation (3.4) of an observable Owith local infinitesimal parameter ϵ(x)∈h
can be rewritten in a basis-independent way in terms of J′(x), as
δϵO=Z2π
0
ϵ(x),
J′(x),O	
dx , (3.20)
using the fact that ⟨·,·⟩defines a non-degenerate pairing on h×h′. We note that, weakly,
J(x)≈ J h(x) +J+(x)− J−(x). (3.21)
This expression belongs to h⊕V+⊕V−=h⊥, in agreement with equation (3.9).
26Let us consider the gauge transformation (3.6) of the current J(x) by a local H-valued parameter
h(x). Using the fact that h−1∂xhis valued in hand the property (3.16) of the adjoint action of H, we
find that the components of the current transform as
Jh7−→ Jh
h=h−1Jhh+h−1∂xh , J±7−→ Jh
±=h−1J±h , and J′7−→h−1J′h .(3.22)
In particular, this confirms that the constraint J′≈0 is preserved under gauge transformations, as
previously observed. Moreover, we see that the component Jhbehaves as the spatial part of a h-valued
gauge-field while the components J±transform covariantly.
Dynamics and Lagrange multiplier. We now come to the description of the dynamics of the
degenerate E-model. It is prescribed by the choice of Hamiltonian Hmade in equation (3.11). If O
is a gauge-invariant observable, its time evolution is given by the standard formula ∂tO ≈ {H ,O},
where the equality should be considered weakly. The gauge-invariance of HandOmeans that they
weakly Poisson-commute with the constraints Jαand thus that {H,O}is insensible to adding to Hor
Oany term proportional to the constraints. This is natural, since the physical observables are defined
only up to the constraints. In other words, {H,·}defines a consistent dynamics on the reduced algebra.
The above discussion defines the time-evolution of gauge-invariant observables. However, it is
often useful to also consider the dynamics of non-gauge-invariant quantities. For instance, in the
present case, it will be quite simpler to write the time-evolution of the model in terms of the current
J, which is not gauge-invariant, since the physical degrees of freedom contained in Jare not easily
identifiable in general. It is tempting to define the time evolution of any non-gauge-invariant observable
Oby the standard formula {H,O}. This however poses two problems. Firstly, as Ois non-gauge-
invariant, it does not Poisson commute with the constraints and the bracket {H,O}is thus sensitive
to adding a term proportional to the constraints to the Hamiltonian, which is incompatible with the
construction. Secondly, Ocontains non-physical degrees of freedom whose time-evolution should thus
involve arbitrary functions of the time coordinate: such functions do not seem to appear in the bracket
{H,O}. Following the standard approach of Dirac [45,46], the solution to both these problems is given
by introducing a new ingredient in the theory, the so-called Lagrange multiplier. The latter is a field
µvalued in the gauge subalgebra h. It is a new degree of freedom of the theory, independent of the
ones contained in the current J, whose physical interpretation we will discuss below.
Given this new field, we introduce the so-called total Hamiltonian of the model as
HT=H+Z2π
0
µ,J′
dx , (3.23)
where we recall that the field J′, valued in h′≃h∗, is the generator of the gauge-symmetry. Since the
constraint amounts to setting J′≈0, we see that HTreduces to our initial choice of Hamiltonian H
weakly. We then define the time evolution of any (potentially non-gauge-invariant) quantity Oas
∂tO ≈ {H T,O} ≈ {H ,O}+Z2π
0
µ,
J′,O	
dx . (3.24)
The key point here is that the dynamics is given by the flow of the total Hamiltonian HT, which
contains the Lagrange multiplier µ, and not the initial Hamiltonian Hbuilt only in terms of J. In
particular, the presence of the new field µinHTencodes the freedom of adding to the generator
of time-evolution an arbitrary term proportional to the constraint: such a transformation simply
amounts to a redefinition of µ. This solves the first problem raised above in defining the dynamics of
a non-gauge-invariant quantity.
To understand the physical interpretation of the Lagrange multiplier, let us compare the last term
in the time evolution (3.24) with the equation (3.20). We then see that this term exactly takes the form
of a gauge transformation with infinitesimal parameter µ∈h. We thus conclude that the presence of
the Lagrange multiplier in the dynamics (3.24) represents the freedom of performing arbitrary gauge
27transformations along the time evolution of the model. Once the differential equation (3.24) with re-
spect to tis integrated, this will lead to the presence of arbitrary functions in the time dependence of
non-gauge-invariant quantities, reflecting the non-physicality of these degrees of freedom. This solves
the second problem raised earlier when discussing the dynamics of non-gauge-invariant quantities. If
Ois a gauge-invariant observable, which then Poisson-commutes with the constraint J′, the last term
in equation (3.24) disappears and we recover the temporal flow ∂tO ≈ {H ,O}considered earlier for
gauge-invariant quantities. In that case, the Lagrange multiplier drops out of the time dependence of
O, as expected since we are now dealing with purely physical degrees of freedom.
Having defined the dynamics of the theory, we can now see all its fields, i.e. the current J
and the Lagrange multiplier µ, as being dependent on the time coordinate tas well, making them
functions of ( t, x). In particular, we can now check that the equation of motion (3.24) of the model
is gauge-invariant, as one should expect. Although so far we were working on a fixed time-slice and
thus considered gauge transformations with a local parameter h(x)∈Hdepending only on the space
variable x, we now want to include gauge transformations which are also time-dependent. For instance,
we now consider the following transformation of the current J:
J(t, x)7−→h(t, x)−1J(t, x)h(t, x) +h(t, x)−1∂xh(t, x), (3.25)
where h(t, x) is an arbitrary function on space-time valued in the group H. The equation of motion
(3.24) is invariant under this gauge symmetry if we also take into account the fact that the Lagrange
multiplier µ(t, x) transforms as well under the symmetry, in the following way [45,46]:
µ(t, x)7−→h(t, x)−1µ(t, x)h(t, x) +h(t, x)−1∂th(t, x). (3.26)
In particular, we see that the presence of µin the dynamics is necessary to recover the gauge-invariance
under local transformations which are explicitly time-dependent. This is consistent with the above
interpretation of µas encoding the arbitrary time-dependence of non-gauge-invariant fields.
Equation of motion of the current. Now that we have defined the dynamics of the degenerate
E-model, let us write down the equation of motion of the current J(t, x). Applying equation (3.24)
and using the current Poisson bracket, we find
∂tJ ≈ ∂x 
EJ+µ
+ [J,EJ+µ]. (3.27)
We note that this takes the form of a zero curvature equation

∂x+J, ∂t+EJ+µ
≈0. (3.28)
It will be useful to decompose the d-valued equation (3.27) along the direct sum d=h′⊕h⊕V+⊕V−.
The operator bEacts on this decomposition according to equation (3.15). Moreover recall that imposing
the constraint amounts to setting J′≈0 inJ=J′+Jh+J+− J−. Using these properties, we can
rewrite the commutator in equation (3.27) as
[J,EJ+µ]≈[Jh, µ]−[µ− J h,J+] + [µ+Jh,J−] + 2[J+,J−].
From the equations (3.16) and (3.17), we deduce that the four commutators in the above equation are
respectively valued in h,V+,V−and h⊥=h⊕V+⊕V−. We can now easily decompose the equation
(3.27). Let us start with its component along h′: it is clear that it simply reads
∂tJ′≈0. (3.29)
This shows that the definition of the dynamics (3.24) is compatible with the constraint J′≈0, as one
should expect. Let us now turn to the h-valued component: we find
∂tJh≈∂xµ+ [Jh, µ] + 2πh[J+,J−], (3.30)
28where we recall that πhis the projector along h. Finally, for the components in V±, we get
∂tJ±=±∂xJ±−[µ∓ J h,J±]±2π±[J+,J−]. (3.31)
It is instructive to rewrite the above equations using light-cone coordinates x±=t±xand their
derivatives ∂±=1
2(∂t±∂x), as well as the fields
A±=1
2(µ± J h). (3.32)
Indeed, we then get
∂+A−−∂−A++ [A+,A−] =−πh[J+,J−], (3.33a)
∂−J++ [A−,J+] = + π+[J+,J−], (3.33b)
∂+J−+ [A+,J−] =−π−[J+,J−]. (3.33c)
We note that the index ±inA±does not mean that these fields are valued in V±: in fact, they belong
to the gauge subalgebra h. Rather, we interpret them as the light-cone components of a h-valued
connection ( ∂++A+, ∂−+A−). The equation of motion (3.33a) then concerns the curvature of this
connection, while the equations (3.33b) and (3.33c) describe the covariant light-cone derivatives of J+
andJ−with respect to this connection. We observe moreover that the zero-curvature equation (3.28)
can be rephrased in light-cone terms as the flatness of the connection ∂±+A±+J±.
Let us finally discuss the gauge-invariance of the light-cone field equations (3.33). Recall the form
of the gauge transformation (3.22) of the currents JhandJ±as well as the one (3.26) of the Lagrange
multiplier µ. The gauge symmetry then acts on ( A±,J±) as
A±7−→ Ah
±=h−1A±h+h−1∂±h and J±7−→ Jh
±=h−1J±h . (3.34)
The h-valued current A±can thus be interpreted as a gauge field while the currents J±are covariant
fields valued in the representations V±ofH. The left-hand sides of the light-cone field equations
(3.33) involve the curvature of the gauge field A±and the covariant derivatives of J±: they thus
transform covariantly, i.e.by conjugation by h. The right-hand sides of these equations share the
same transformation rule since the adjoint action of hcommutes with the projectors πhandπ±by
equation (3.16). This shows that the equations of motion in light-cone form (3.33) are manifestly
gauge-invariant, as expected.14
3.1.2 Lagrangian formulation and gauged σ-models
Setup. Let us now describe the σ-models associated with the degenerate E-model constructed above.
The starting point will be quite similar to the one discussed in Subsubsection 2.1.2 for the non-
degenerate case: there, we considered σ-models on quotients K\D, where Dis the double group with
Lie algebra Lie( D) = dandKis a subgroup of Dwhose Lie algebra Lie( K) = kis maximally isotropic
with respect to ⟨·,·⟩. In the degenerate case, we also start with a similar setup: the main difference
will be that the resulting σ-model will have an additional local symmetry with gauge group Hand
thus that the physical target space of the theory will be the double quotient K\D/H .
14For completeness, let us compare this discussion to the one around [28, Equation (3.21)]. The fields ( A±, j±) in this
reference essentially correspond to the ones ( A±,J±) in the present paper, up to signs and factors of 2 due to differences
in conventions. However, we note that in [28], the time component of the gauge field At=A++A−vanishes, while here
it coincides with the Lagrange multiplier µ. This is due to the fact that such a Lagrange multiplier was not included
in the definition of the dynamics in [28]. As observed there, this corresponds to working in a gauge where At= 0: this
is always possible but in fact only fixes the gauge partially. Indeed, it is preserved by gauge transformations where the
local parameter h∈His time-independent, i.e.depends on xbut not on t. The field equations in [28] are then only
invariant under these restricted transformations. This is consistent with the interpretation of the Lagrange multiplier as
encoding the time-dependence in gauge transformations, as explained below equation (3.24).
29Below, we will use the definitions, notations and conventions of Subsubsection 2.1.2: in particular,
k= Lie( K) is a maximally isotropic subalgebra of d, which is then of dimension1
2dim d=d. Moreover,
we will describe the σ-model in terms of a field ℓ(t, x) onR×S1, valued in the double Lie group D.
As in the previous subsubsection, we will not recall in details the points which are common to the
degenerate and non-degenerate cases and will instead focus on the additional considerations that arise
in the degenerate case, in particular the presence of the H-gauge symmetry.
Projectors W±
ℓ.Let us recall from the previous subsection that his a subalgebra of dof dimension
dim h=d−pand that V±is a subspace of dimension dim V±=p. We introduce projectors W±
ℓond
characterised by their kernels and images
Ker 
W±
ℓ) = Ad−1
ℓk and Im 
W±
ℓ) = h⊕V±. (3.35)
In particular, we note that dim(Ad−1
ℓk) = dim k=dand dim( h⊕V±) = dim h+ dim V±=d, so that
these dimensions sum to dim d= 2d, as required for the projectors W±
ℓto exist15. These projectors are
the analogues of the ones defined in equation (2.26) for non-degenerate E-models: the main difference
in the present case is that the image of W±
ℓis not composed only by the subspace V±but also contains
the gauge subalgebra h. This image is contained in h⊥, so that we have the property

W±
ℓX, Y
= 0,∀X∈d, Y∈h. (3.36)
One can determine the transpose of W±
ℓwith respect to ⟨·,·⟩using the isotropy of kand the
orthogonality properties (3.14) of handV±. We findTW±
ℓ= 1−W∓
ℓ, as in the non-degenerate case.
Theσ-model action. In terms of the D-valued field ℓ(t, x), the action of the σ-model associated
with the degenerate E-model is given by
S[ℓ] =ZZ
R×S1dtdx
W+
ℓℓ−1∂+ℓ, ℓ−1∂−ℓ
−
ℓ−1∂+ℓ, W−
ℓℓ−1∂−ℓ
−IWZ,D[ℓ], (3.37)
where we recall that IWZ,D[ℓ] is the Wess-Zumino term (2.27) of the field ℓ. This action takes the
exact same form as in the non-degenerate case (2.25). The only difference here is in the construction
of the projectors W±
ℓ: as explained above, the latter indeed possess slightly different properties in
the degenerate case. This will in the end be responsible for the presence of the additional H-gauge
symmetry in the theory (see next paragraph).
K- and H-gauge symmetries. Let us now discuss the gauge symmetries of the σ-model (3.37).
It is invariant under the local transformations
ℓ(t, x)7−→k(t, x)ℓ(t, x)h(t, x), with k(t, x)∈Kand h(t, x)∈H . (3.38)
It thus possesses a left K-gauge symmetry and a right H-gauge symmetry. The first one is exactly
the same as in the non-degenerate case, see equation (2.28). In particular, it can be proven in a very
analogous way: we thus refer to the discussion below equation (2.28) for the proof. In contrast, the
H-gauge symmetry is a new feature of the degenerate case, which reflects, at the Lagrangian level,
the Hamiltonian reduction of the current Poisson algebra. Let us quickly prove it: we thus consider
the transformation ℓ7→ℓhwith haH-valued field. We first note that
(ℓh)−1∂±(ℓh) = Ad−1
h 
ℓ−1∂+ℓ) +h−1∂±h . (3.39)
15This is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the existence of W±
ℓ. In addition, we have to assume that the
subspaces Ad−1
ℓkand h⊕V±have trivial intersection. Here, we will suppose that this holds, at least for generic values of
the field ℓ∈D. The points in Dwhere this fails (if they exist) will correspond to singularities in the resulting σ-model’s
target space.
30Using the fact that Ad hpreserves handV±– see equation (3.16), one sees that W±
ℓhis a projector with
kernel Ad−1
hKer(W±
ℓ) and image Ad−1
hIm(W±
ℓ), thus proving that W±
ℓh= Ad−1
h◦W±
ℓ◦Adh. Since h
is contained in the image of W±
ℓand Ad h(h−1∂±h) belongs to h, we thus get
W±
ℓh(ℓh)−1∂±(ℓh) = Ad−1
h 
W±
ℓℓ−1∂±ℓ
+h−1∂±h . (3.40)
Combining these results with the property (3.36), the invariance of ⟨·,·⟩under Ad h, the Polyakov-
Wiegmann formula (2.30) and the isotropy of h, a straightforward computation shows that the action
(3.37) is indeed invariant under the transformation ℓ7→ℓh.
As a result of the gauge symmetries (3.38), the σ-model (3.37) has for physical target space the
double quotient K\D/H . We note that this space has dimension
dimK\D/H = dim d−dim k−dim h=p . (3.41)
This echoes the discussion below equation (3.8), concerning the reduced current algebra: indeed, we
observed that the latter is described by 2 pphysical degrees of freedom, which matches the number of
canonical fields in the Hamiltonian formulation of a σ-model with a target space of dimension p.
Rather than treating this target space as an abstract quotient, it is often practical to realise it
concretely as a p-dimensional submanifold s(K\D/H ) of the double group D, by choosing a unique
representative in Dfor each equivalence class in the quotient, supposing that we can do so smoothly
(mathematically, this corresponds to building a section s:K\D/H →Dof the quotient). In that
case, the functional (3.37) can be made into the action of a σ-model on K\D/H by imposing a gauge-
fixing condition, namely that the field ℓ(t, x) belongs to the subspace s(K\D/H ): by definition, this
condition is always attainable and leaves no residual gauge symmetry. We are thus left with a theory
where all the degrees of freedom, valued in s(K\D/H )≃K\D/H , are physical. Such a procedure is
purely geometric, in the sense that it involves a gauge-fixing written directly in terms of the D-valued
fieldℓ(t, x) and not its derivatives. In particular, this ensures that many of the natural observables of
the model, such as the currents ℓ−1∂±ℓandW±
ℓℓ−1∂±ℓ, are expressed in a purely local way in terms
of the s(K\D/H )-valued physical degrees of freedom, once gauge-fixed.
Sometimes, it is also useful to consider only a partial gauge-fixing. For instance, one can work
with a formulation of the theory where we gauge-fixed the K-symmetry while keeping the other one
untouched. This means that the model is now described by a field valued in the left quotient K\D
(or an embedding thereof in D) and possesses a residual H-gauge symmetry.
Canonical analysis and current J.As in the non-degenerate case, the σ-model (3.37) is a
Lagrangian realisation of the degenerate E-model considered in the previous subsubsection. The key
step to make this relation explicit is the identification of the E-model current Jin terms of the σ-model
fieldℓ. This is given by
J ≈ W+
ℓℓ−1∂+ℓ−W−
ℓℓ−1∂−ℓ . (3.42)
We note that this relation only holds weakly, i.e.when the constraints are imposed. When we start
from the Lagrangian point of view, these constraints arise when we perform the canonical analysis of
the action. They take the form of relations among the momentum fields of the theory, defined as the
canonical conjugate of the coordinate fields contained in ℓ. These relations simply follow from the
expression of the conjugate momenta as derivatives of the Lagrangian density and reflect the local
invariance of the action under the H-gauge symmetry. In the Lagrangian formulation, the constraints
then always hold and should be seen as identities relating together some of the conjugate momenta
associated with the action. It is only when we go to the Hamiltonian formulation of the model that
it is useful to consider these momenta as purely independent fields: in that case, we then see the
constraints as additional relations to be imposed by hand on these fields.
The main reason why we have to consider this extended “strong” formulation, where all the mo-
mentum fields are treated as independent, is to make sense of the canonical Poisson bracket. In
particular, this allows us to compute the Poisson bracket of the current Jdefined above, once ex-
tended strongly in an appropriate way. Doing so, one finds that Jsatisfies the current Poisson algebra
31(3.1), making the link with the E-model construction described earlier. Moreover, one checks that the
constraints obtained above from the canonical analysis of the action coincide with the constraints
Jα=⟨Tα,J ⟩ ≈ 0 of the degenerate E-model. In particular, the Poisson bracket of these constraints
with the field ℓtakes the form of an infinitesimal version of the gauge symmetry ℓ7→ℓh, confirming the
interpretation of the constraints as the Hamiltonian generators of the gauge symmetry. Finally, one
can determine the Hamiltonian of the model by performing a Legendre transform of the Lagrangian
and write it in terms of the current J: one then finds that it agrees with the Hamiltonian (3.11) of
the degenerate E-model. This achieves the relation between the σ-model constructed above and the
degenerate E-model built in terms of the current Jin the previous subsubsection.
TheH-gauge symmetry and its associated constraints played a somehow important role in the
discussion above. In contrast, we did not mention the K-gauge symmetry: let us briefly comment
on this. As already observed in the non-degenerate case, the current J, defined in terms of ℓby
equation (3.42), is in fact gauge-invariant under the transformations ℓ7→kℓ,k∈K. Since Jis the
main ingredient used to relate the σ-model (3.37) to the degenerate E-model, the K-gauge symmetry
then plays a quite minimal role in this relation. For instance, the current Poisson algebra of Jand
the expression of the Hamiltonian in terms of Jare not affected by K-gauge transformations. In
particular, this means that we could have started the discussion of this paragraph with the model in
which we gauge-fixed this K-gauge symmetry, i.e.with a theory on K\Dwith a residual H-gauge
symmetry. The above relation with the current algebra and the degenerate E-model in the Hamiltonian
formulation will then stay the same. Instead, if one considers the Hamiltonian formulation of the fully
gauged model on D, then additional constraints will arise due to the K-gauge symmetry: however,
the presence of this symmetry and these constraints will not affect the construction of the current J
and the relation to the degenerate E-model formulation. For this reason, we will mainly ignore the
details of how we treat this symmetry in the rest of this section.
In contrast, the H-gauge symmetry has a non-trivial interplay with J. In particular, Jis not
invariant under the transformations ℓ7→ℓh,h∈H. In fact, using the identity (3.40), one finds that
the Lagrangian expression (3.42) for Jis mapped to h−1Jh+h−1∂xh. This is consistent with the
equation (3.6) derived earlier in the Hamiltonian formulation. In particular, since Jis not H-gauge-
invariant, fixing this gauge would modify the current Poisson bracket of J, potentially in a rather
complicated way. The relation with the degenerate E-model is then technically made through the
unreduced formulation of the theory and not the completely gauge-fixed σ-model on K\D/H .
Lagrange multiplier. Recall from the equation (3.24) and the discussion below that to completely
describe the dynamics of the degenerate E-model in the Hamiltonian setup, we had to introduce
a Lagrange multiplier µto encode the time evolution of non-gauge-invariant degrees of freedom.
This Lagrange multiplier also has an interpretation when we start with the σ-model action (3.37)
and perform a canonical analysis, as considered above. Indeed, recall that the H-gauge symmetry
of the model implied the presence of constraints, in the form of relations between the canonical
conjugate momenta derived from the Lagrangian density. In particular, this has for consequence that
the relation between the momentum fields and the time derivatives of coordinate fields is not invertible:
schematically, the momentum fields fail to capture the time derivative of the degrees of freedom in ℓ
which are non-physical due to the presence of the H-gauge symmetry. In this context, the Lagrange
multiplier µ∈hcan then be seen as encoding these missing time derivatives. In the present case, one
finds that the Lagrangian expression of µis given by
µ=πh 
W+
ℓℓ−1∂+ℓ+W−
ℓℓ−1∂−ℓ
=1
2πh(W+
ℓ+W−
ℓ)ℓ−1∂tℓ+1
2πh(W+
ℓ−W−
ℓ)ℓ−1∂xℓ . (3.43)
Using the identity (3.40), one checks that under an H-gauge transformation ℓ7→ℓh, this Lagrangian
expression for µis mapped to h−1µ h+h−1∂th, which is consistent with the transformation rule (3.26)
discussed earlier in the Hamiltonian formulation.
32Lagrangian expression of A±andJ±.Since we have determined the realisation of Jandµ
in terms of the σ-model field ℓ, we can derive the Lagrangian expression of the currents A±andJ±,
using the relations (3.21) and (3.32) and the fact that W±
ℓare projectors with image h⊕V±. We get
A±=πh 
W±
ℓℓ−1∂±ℓ
and J±=π± 
W±
ℓℓ−1∂±ℓ
. (3.44)
Alternatively, we can write this equation as
W+
ℓℓ−1∂+ℓ=A++J+ and W−
ℓℓ−1∂−ℓ=A−+J−. (3.45)
This is to be compared with equation (2.32) in the non-degenerate case: the main difference here
is that W±
ℓℓ−1∂±ℓdoes not entirely coincides with the V±-valued current J±but also contains the
h-valued gauge field A±.
Summary. We end this subsection with a brief summary, gathering the main results that we will
need in the rest of the paper. The gauged σ-model that we built above is characterised by the following
defining data:
(i) a real connected Lie group Dof even dimension, with Lie algebra d= Lie( D) ;
(ii) a non-degenerate ad-invariant split symmetric bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩ond;
(iii) a subgroup H⊂Dsuch that h= Lie( H) is an isotropic subalgebra of d;
(iv) a symmetric operator bE:d→dsuch that bE|3
h⊥=bE|h⊥, Ker(bE|h⊥) = h,V±= Ker( bE|h⊥∓Id) have
equal dimension and bE|h⊥commutes with the adjoint action of H;
(v) a subgroup K⊂Dsuch that k= Lie( K) is a maximally isotropic subalgebra of d.
From this data, the σ-model is built as follows. One first considers a D-valued field ℓ(t, x) onR×S1
and constructs the projectors W±
ℓaccording to equation (3.35). We then define the action of the σ-
model as the functional (3.37) of ℓ(t, x). This action is invariant under the gauge symmetries ℓ7→kℓh,
with k∈Kandh∈H, making the physical target space of the model the double quotient K\D/H .
Alternatively, it is often useful to see the theory as a gauged σ-model on K\D, with an H-gauge
symmetry. A key role in this model is played by the fields A±andJ±, defined in terms of ℓby
equation (3.44), and valued respectively in handV±. In particular, in terms of these, the equations
of motion take the simple first-order form (3.33). In this formulation, A±plays the role of a gauge
field, while J±are covariant currents.
This gauged σ-model is the Lagrangian realisation of a degenerate E-model, obtained by passing
to the Hamiltonian formulation. The presence of the H-gauge symmetry implies the apparition of
constraints when we perform the canonical analysis of the model: in the Hamiltonian formulation,
these are interpreted as the generators of the symmetry. In this setup, one can construct a d-valued
fieldJwhich satisfies the current algebra (3.1), given by J ≈ A +− A−+J+− J−weakly ( i.e.up
to the constraints). Moreover, the Hamiltonian of the theory is given by the formula (3.11), in terms
ofJand the operator bE, making the relation with the degenerate E-model.
As in the non-degenerate case, the first-order equations of motion and the degenerate E-model
formulation of the theory are independent of the choice of K, and are thus characterised solely by
the data (i) to (iv) above. The datum (v) of the subgroup Kintervenes only when we look for a
concrete σ-model realisation of this theory. Different σ-models can correspond to the same underlying
degenerate E-model, but with different choices of K, leading in particular to the notion of Poisson-Lie
T-duality (see the non-degenerate discussion at the end of Subsubsection 2.1.2 for more details). The
rest of this section, which concerns the study of conformal and chiral structures in degenerate E-models
will rely only on the data (i) to (iv), independently of the choice of K. We will come back to the latter
in the next section, when studying explicit examples in their σ-model form.
333.2 Conformal degenerate E-models and their chiral Poisson algebras
We now come to the main part of the paper, namely the discussion of conformal and chiral structures
in degenerate E-models. We will discuss a simple condition on the data defining such a model which
ensures its 1-loop conformal invariance. Moreover, we will show that this condition is also reflected at
the classical level through the apparition of chiral observables in the dynamics of the theory, i.e.left-
and right-moving fields. Finally, we will study the Poisson algebras formed by these chiral fields: we
will find that left-moving observables commute with right-moving ones and that the fields of a given
chirality satisfy a gauged Poisson current algebra. This paves the way for an exact quantisation of
the model as a 2-dimensional gauged CFT (a more thorough discussion of these aspects is out of the
scope of the present paper but constitutes a natural perspective for further developments).
There are two main differences with the case of conformal non-degenerate E-models treated earlier
in Subsection 2.2. The first one is that we obtain gauged current algebras rather than ungauged ones:
this is a direct consequence of the presence of a gauge symmetry in degenerate E-models. The second
difference is that the chiral fields of the theory are in general non-local objects when written in terms
of the E-model current (or the σ-model fields). This non-locality is also visible in the chiral Poisson
algebra formed by these fields, which generally (although not necessarily) contains ϵ-functions: more
precisely, we argue in this subsection that these non-local chiral fields satisfy a parafermionic-like
Poisson algebra, which arises as a natural gauge-fixing of the gauged current algebra.
A natural question in this situation is whether there exist well-chosen combinations of the non-
local chiral fields which are local. The answer to this question is positive. A typical example of such
a local chiral field is given by the left- or right-moving component of the energy-momentum tensor
of the model, which can be seen as a particular quadratic combination of the parafermionic fields
that turns out to be local. This is the first element in a whole family of local chiral fields which we
will describe in this subsection. This family is closed under Poisson bracket and thus forms a local
Poisson subalgebra of the parafermionic chiral algebra. More precisely, it takes the form of a classical
higher-spin W-algebra. In this subsection, we will develop a systematic procedure to build elements
of this W-algebra. As we shall see in Section 4, this gives a concrete and efficient way to find local
chiral fields in various explicit examples of conformal σ-models.
3.2.1 Strong conformal condition and vanishing of the 1-loop β-functions
Strong conformal condition. Consider the degenerate E-model defined in the previous subsection
and, in particular, recall the decomposition d=h⊕h′⊕V+⊕V−of the double algebra. We will say
that this model satisfies the strong conformal condition if the following equivalent properties hold:
(C1) the subspaces d±=h⊕h′⊕V±are subalgebras of d;
(C2) we have [ V+, V−] ={0}and h⊕h′is a subalgebra of d.
As in the non-degenerate case treated in Subsection 2.2, we use the terminology strong conformal
condition as we expect that it is not the most general one ensuring the 1-loop conformal invariance
of the model, i.e.it is sufficient but not necessary. We restrict to this more constraining case in this
paper as it allows a simple characterisation of the chiral Poisson algebras of the model, as we shall
see below. We refer to the concluding subsection 5.1 for additional details and perspectives on more
general conformal conditions.
The claimed equivalence of the above conditions (C1) and (C2) can be proven in an elementary way
using the ad-invariance of ⟨·,·⟩and the property (3.14) of the decomposition d=h⊕h′⊕V+⊕V−. We
will not enter into the details of this proof, as it is similar to the one for non-degenerate models detailed
in Subsection 2.2. The main difference in the present degenerate case is the additional treatment of
the subspace h⊕h′. When proving the statement, one actually derives more precise results on the
structure of the subalgebras d±=h⊕h′⊕V±, namely
[h,h]⊂h, [h,h′]⊂h′, [h′,h′]⊂h and [ h⊕h′, V±]⊂V±. (3.46)
34Vanishing of the 1-loop β-functions. Let us now prove that the strong conformal condition
introduced above implies the vanishing of the 1-loop β-functions of the degenerate E-model, as we did
in the non-degenerate case in Subsection 2.2. For that, we first need to describe the 1-loop RG flow of
a generic degenerate E-model, which was initially determined in [29]. In this reference, it was written
in the form of a flow of the subspace V+(see also [26, Subsection 6.2]). Here, we will use an alternative
but equivalent formulation, in terms of the quadratic form E(·,·) =⟨·,bE ·⟩|h⊥which characterises the
Hamiltonian of the theory (see previous subsection). Namely, we have
d
dτ⟨X,bEX⟩=−4ℏTrh⊥ 
SX
+O(ℏ2),∀X∈h⊥, (3.47)
where τ=1
2πlogµis the RG parameter and SX:h⊥→h⊥is a linear operator defined by
SX=π−adπ−Xπ+adπ+X+ ad π−Xadπ+Xπh. (3.48)
(We recall that the operators πhandπ±are the projectors along handV±in the decomposition
h⊥=h⊕V+⊕V−.) The above formulae for the RG-flow and the operator SXare the degenerate
equivalents of the equations (2.33) and (2.34) discussed in Subsection 2.2 for non-degenerate E-models.
The main difference here is the second term in the definition of SX, involving πh, and the fact that
we consider the quadratic form ⟨·,bE ·⟩|h⊥and the operator SXon the subspace h⊥rather than the full
double algebra d. One easily checks that the flow (3.47) preserves the fact that ⟨·,bE ·⟩|h⊥has kernel
hand is invariant under the adjoint action of honh⊥: this ensures that the gauge symmetry of the
degenerate E-model stays the same along the RG-flow, as one should expect.
When treating concrete examples, one typically considers a specific degenerate E-model with a
given choice of Hamiltonian, characterised by a quadratic form ⟨·,bE ·⟩|h⊥defined in terms of certain
parameters (coupling constants) λ= (λk)k=1,...,n. In that case, we say that this model is 1-loop renor-
malisable if the flow (3.47) is compatible with the functional dependence of ⟨·,bE ·⟩|h⊥onλ,i.e.if it can
be completely reabsorbed into a running of the coupling constants λ(for more details, see equation
(2.35) and the associated discussion in the non-degenerate case).
We now consider the case of a degenerate E-model satisfying the strong conformal condition in-
troduced in the previous paragraph and show that this implies that the model is a fixed-point of the
1-loop RG flow (3.47). Let X∈h⊥. Recall that [ V+, V−] ={0}(by the formulation (C2) of the
strong conformal condition): thus, the operator ad π−Xπ+vanishes. Similarly, since [ V+,h]⊂V+, the
operator ad π−Xadπ+Xπhmaps to [ V−, V+] and hence vanishes by (C2). We thus have SX= 0 for all
X∈h⊥. This ensures that the right-hand side of the RG-flow (3.47) vanishes, proving our claim that
the model possesses 1-loop conformal invariance.
3.2.2 Non-local chiral fields and their parafermionic Poisson algebras
Non-local chiral fields. We now come to the description of the chiral fields of the theory. For that
it will be useful to recall the light-cone formulation (3.33) of the equations of motion, in terms of the
h-valued gauge field A±and the covariant currents J±valued in V±. As we suppose in this subsection
that the model satisfies the strong conformal condition and thus that [ V+, V−] ={0}, it is clear that
these equations of motion now take the form
∂+A−−∂−A++ [A+,A−] = 0 , (3.49a)
∂−J++ [A−,J+] = 0 , (3.49b)
∂+J−+ [A+,J−] = 0 . (3.49c)
In particular, the first of these equations ensures that A±is on-shell flat. Therefore, there exists a
H-valued field η(t, x) such that
A±=−∂±η η−1. (3.50)
35Recall from the previous subsection that the spatial part of this gauge field is Jh=A+−A−,i.e.the
h-valued component of the current J. The field ηis thus related to a path-ordered exponential of Jh
and more precisely takes the form
η(t, x) = P← −exp
−Zx
0Jh(t, y) dy
η0(t), (3.51)
where η0(t) =η(t,0) is a H-valued observable independent of the space coordinate xbut which can
however still be a dynamical quantity.
Recall that the fields A±andJ±transform under H-gauge transformations according to the
formula (3.34). In particular, this means that the quantity η(t, x) can alternatively be characterised
as the H-valued field such that the gauge transformation with local parameter η(t, x) brings the gauge
fieldA±to zero, i.e.
Aη
±=η−1A±η+η−1∂±η= 0. (3.52)
We now introduce fields Ψ(L)and Ψ(R), defined as the image of the currents J+andJ−after a gauge
transformation by η. More concretely, we then have
Ψ(L)=Jη
+=η−1J+η and Ψ(R)=Jη
−=η−1J−η , (3.53)
which are respectively valued in V+andV−. Since the equations of motion (3.49) of the model are
gauge-invariant, they hold with ( A±,J+,J−) replaced by ( Aη
±,Jη
+,Jη
−) = (0 ,Ψ(L),Ψ(R)). We thus
conclude that
∂−Ψ(L)= 0 and ∂+Ψ(R)= 0, (3.54)
i.e.Ψ(L)is a left-moving field and Ψ(R)is a right-moving field.
Since ηis expressed in terms of a path-ordered exponential of Jh– see equation (3.51), the chiral
fields Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)are non-local observables of the theory. This non-locality can be traced back to
the degenerate nature of the E-model under consideration: indeed, contrarily to the non-degenerate
case discussed in Subsection 2.2, the components J±of the current are not chiral here but are rather
chiral up to a gauge transformation by a non-local field. Since A±=−∂±η η−1, we note that under a
gauge transformation A±7→h−1A±h+h−1∂±h,ηis sent to h−1η. In particular, this means that the
fields Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)defined in equation (3.53) are gauge-invariant, as the transformation of ηcancels
the one of J±by conjugation. These chiral fields are thus physical observables of the model.
Let us quickly comment on the number of these chiral fields. Recall from the previous subsection
that the subspaces V+andV−, in which Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)are valued, are both of dimension p. We
thus extract pleft-moving fields from Ψ(L)andpright-moving fields from Ψ(R). Combining these
together, we then obtain 2 pdegrees of freedom. This coincides with the number of physical fields of
the degenerate E-model (see previous subsection). We thus conclude that the dynamics of this theory
is completely decoupled into a left-moving sector and a right-moving sector.
Boundary conditions. At this point, a comment is in order regarding boundary conditions. Recall
that we are considering our 2d field theory on the cylinder R×S1, assuming that the fields A±
andJ±are periodic with respect to the space variable, i.e. thatA±(t, x+ 2π) =A±(t, x) and
J±(t, x+2π) =J±(t, x). In particular, when performing gauge transformations ( A±,J±)7→(Ah
±,Jh
±),
we should restrict to parameters h(t, x) which are themselves periodic, in order to preserve the space
of physically allowed field configurations. However, the field η(t, x) introduced by equation (3.50) is
not periodic: in fact, the zero curvature equation (3.49a) of A±does not ensure the existence of a field
ηsatisfying (3.50) on the cylinder R×S1, since the latter is not simply connected, but rather on its
coverR2, where the spatial coordinate xhas been “decompactified” and is now seen as a variable in
R. As fields on R2,η(t, x) and η(t, x+ 2π) satisfy the same partial differential equation (3.50), using
the periodicity of A±: this means that η(t, x+2π) =η(t, x)γ, for some matrix γwhich is independent
oftandx. This matrix is in general non-trivial, showing that ηis not a periodic field.
36The transformation from ( A±,J+,J−) to (Aη
±,Jη
+,Jη
−) = (0 ,Ψ(L),Ψ(R)) is thus not a physically
allowed gauge transformation. In particular, one finds that the chiral fields Ψ(L/R)are not periodic
but rather quasi-periodic, in the sense that Ψ(L/R)(t, x+ 2π) =γ−1Ψ(L/R)(t, x)γ. In other words,
they are not single-valued fields on the cylinder: they have a non-trivial monodromy along the spatial
circle and are thus defined only on the cover R2.16Technically, this means that the configuration
(0,Ψ(L/R)) should not be understood as a physically allowed gauge choice for the fields ( A±,J±).
However, we stress that the way we build Ψ(L/R)fromJ±still takes the same symbolic form as a
gauge transformation: this ensures that the reasoning proposed above works. In particular, one can
formally replace the fields ( A±,J±) by ( Aη
±,Jη
±) = (0 ,Ψ(L/R)) in the equations of motion to find
∂−Ψ(L)=∂+Ψ(R)= 0, even though ηis not a physical gauge parameter: indeed, one easily checks
that the equations of motion (3.49) are also invariant under transformations ( A±,J±)7→(Ah
±,Jh
±)
with hnon-periodic. Similarly, the other properties of Ψ(L/R)that we will derive in the rest of this
section will rely on the idea that many statements about gauge transformations in fact still hold for
non-periodic gauge parameters.17For this reason and by a slight abuse of terminology, we will still
refer to ( A±,J±)7→(0,Ψ(L/R)) as a gauge transformation in the rest of the article.
Parafermionic chiral Poisson algebras. We now want to determine the Poisson brackets of the
chiral fields Ψ(L)and Ψ(R). This can in principle seems like a difficult task since they are defined in
terms of the complicated non-local field η, given by equation (3.51). In particular, the quantity η0
appearing in this equation is in general a dynamical field and can have non-trivial Poisson bracket
with other observables, making the computation rather involved. However, there is a simple and
powerful way to overcome these difficulties, using the notion of Dirac bracket. Recall that Ψ(L)and
Ψ(R)are obtained as the image of J+andJ−under the gauge transformation with local parameter
η. As explained above, this gauge transformation is the one that brings the gauge field A±to zero.
Going back to the temporal and spatial components of this field – see equation (3.32), we see that
this transformation thus sends the Lagrange multiplier µand the field Jhto zero. In terms of the
current Poisson algebra underlying the degenerate E-model, the chiral observables Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)thus
coincide with the fields J+andJ−under the gauge-fixing condition setting Jhto zero.
The Poisson brackets of gauge-fixed observables can be conveniently computed using the so-called
Dirac bracket: this formalism can thus be used here to determine the Poisson algebra formed by the
chiral fields Ψ(L)and Ψ(R). We describe the main steps of this computation in the appendix A and
summarise the outcome here. The first result that one obtains is that the left-moving fields Poisson
commute with the right-moving ones, i.e.

Ψ(L)(x)1,Ψ(R)(y)2	
= 0. (3.55)
Here, we used the tensorial notations ito conveniently write down the Poisson brackets between the
different components of Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)(see the discussion around equation (2.6) for conventions and
more details on these notations). The above equation shows that the decoupling of the theory into
the two chiral sectors is also visible at the level of the Poisson structure.
There is thus left to describe the Poisson brackets of Ψ(L)with itself and Ψ(R)with itself. To do
so, it will be useful to introduce a few notations. We define
Dh=h⊕h′, (3.56)
16This is a common feature in 2-dimensional coset CFTs such as gauged WZW models, which possess multivalued
parafermionic fields. At the quantum level, this property is reflected in the presence of non-integer powers in the
correlation functions and operator product expansions of these fields – see for instance [8–11].
17This is clearly the case for the results of Subsubsection 3.2.3, where we will use gauge-invariant local fields to build
theW-algebra of the theory: indeed, these fields are also invariant under non-periodic transformations. That it holds for
the computations of the next paragraph, which concern the Dirac bracket of Ψ(L/R), is a bit more subtle: however, we
do expect the reasoning to go through. In particular, we note that the bracket (3.58) that we will obtain there should be
understood only as a result for 0 < x, y < 2π. Extending it to x, yin the whole cover Rwould require defining carefully
the extended distributions δ(x−y),∂xδ(x−y) and ϵ(x−y) and how they act on non-periodic test functions, in a way
that makes the bracket consistent with the quasi-periodicity of Ψ(L/R)(taking into account that the matrix γcan itself
have non-trivial Poisson brackets). A thorough analysis of these aspects is however beyond the scope of this paper.
37which we recall is a subalgebra of dby the strong conformal condition (see beginning of this subsection).
The projector on this subalgebra, according to the orthogonal decomposition d=Dh⊕V+⊕V−, is
then given by πDh=πh+πh′. Recall also that Cd
12is the ( d⊗d)-valued split quadratic Casimir of the
double Lie algebra d. We introduce its projections
CDh
12= (πDh⊗πDh)Cd
12 and C±
12=±(π±⊗π±)Cd
12, (3.57)
respectively valued in h⊗h′+h′⊗h⊂Dh⊗DhandV±⊗V±(the minus sign in C−
12has been
introduced for future convenience). We now have enough notations to write down the Poisson algebra
of the non-local chiral fields Ψ(L)and Ψ(R), as obtained from the Dirac bracket computation detailed
in appendix A. Namely, we have

Ψ(L)(x)1,Ψ(L)(y)2	
=
C+
12,Ψ(L)(x)1
+
CDh
12,Ψ(L)(x)2
δ(x−y) (3.58a)
−C+
12∂xδ(x−y)−1
2h
CDh
12,Ψ(L)(x)1
,Ψ(L)(y)2i
ϵ(x−y),

Ψ(R)(x)1,Ψ(R)(y)2	
=
C−
12,Ψ(R)(x)1
−
CDh
12,Ψ(R)(x)2
δ(x−y) (3.58b)
+C−
12∂xδ(x−y)−1
2h
CDh
12,Ψ(R)(x)1
,Ψ(R)(y)2i
ϵ(x−y),
where ϵ(x−y) is the sign function, defined by ϵ(x) =−1 if−2π < x < 0 and ϵ(x) = +1 if 0 < x < 2π,
such that ∂xϵ(x) = 2 δ(x). One checks that these brackets are valued in V+⊗V+andV−⊗V−re-
spectively, as expected since Ψ(L)∈V+and Ψ(R)∈V−. The non-locality of the fields Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)
is reflected in their Poisson algebra through the presence of the sign function: indeed, the Poisson
bracket of Ψ(L/R)(x) with Ψ(L/R)(y) is not a distribution localised at x=ybut also contains non-local
terms which have support on the regions x < y andx > y .
Recall that d±=Dh⊕V±is a subalgebra of dby the strong conformal condition. The restricted
bilinear form ±⟨·,·⟩|d±on this subalgebra is invariant and non-degenerate. We can thus consider the
current algebras associated with d+and d−: the Poisson brackets (3.58) of the chiral fields Ψ(L)and
Ψ(R)can then be seen as the Hamiltonian reduction of these current algebras with respect to h. Thus,
the left- and right-moving sectors of the theory are described by reduced / gauged current algebras.
Such algebras, their description in terms of non-local fields with brackets of the form (3.58) and their
quantisation have been the subjects of many works in the literature, at least for a number of important
cases18: see for instance [8–14]. In this context, Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)are generally called parafermionic fields,
which is the terminology that we will use in the rest of this paper.19
Decomposition in a basis. For concreteness, it can be helpful to write down the parafermionic
Poisson algebras using an explicit decomposition of Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)along bases of V+andV−. To
do so, let us introduce a few notations. Recall that {Tα}d−p
α=1is a basis of h. Since h′is paired non-
degenerately with h, there exists a basis {Tα}d−p
α=1ofh′, which is dual to {Tα}d−p
α=1. Moreover, we let
{Ua}p
a=1and{U¯a}p
¯a=1be bases of V+andV−respectively (recall from subsection 3.2 that these are
both of dimension p). Here and in what follows, we use greek indices α, β, . . . ∈ {1, . . . , d −p}to
label the basis of hand its dual h′, lower-case latin indices a, b, . . . ∈ {1, . . . , p }to label the basis
ofV+and lower-case latin barred indices ¯ a,¯b, . . .∈ {1, . . . , p }to label the basis of V−. The family
{Tα, Tα}d−p
α=1⊔{Ua}p
a=1⊔{U¯a}p
¯a=1then forms a basis of the full double algebra d. The non-zero entries
18For instance when d±and hare simple Lie algebras, or more generally reductive ones. Many of these works were
motivated by the study of gauged Wess-Zumino-Witten models, which are specific conformal σ-models described by chiral
reduced current algebras: as we shall see in Subsection 4.1, these theories belong to the class of conformal degenerate
E-models studied in this paper.
19Let us also note that parafermionic-like Poisson algebras already appeared in the study of degenerate E-models in
the work [24]. The main difference with the case studied here is that the E-model considered in this reference was in
general not conformal and the parafermionic fields not chiral.
38of the bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩in this basis read
⟨Tα, Tβ⟩=δα
β,⟨Ua, Ub⟩=ρab and
U¯a,U¯b
=−ρ¯a¯b, (3.59)
for some p×psymmetric matrices ρandρ(the sign in the third equation has been introduced so that
the matrices ρandρare both positive definite if the Hamiltonian of the E-model is positive). We will
denote by ρabandρ¯a¯bthe entries of the inverse of these matrices. The projections of the quadratic
Casimir introduced in equation (3.57) can then be written as
CDh
12=Tα⊗Tα+Tα⊗Tα, C+
12=ρabUa⊗Ub, C−
12=ρ¯a¯bU¯a⊗U¯b, (3.60)
where we sum over repeated indices.
Recall that [ V±, V±]⊂V±⊕h⊕h′and [ V±,h⊕h′]⊂V±. We will need the following commutation
relations written in the basis introduced above:
[Ua, Ub] =Fab c
abUc+Fab α
abTα+Fabα
abαTα, [U¯a,U¯b] =F¯a¯b¯c
¯a¯bU¯c+F¯a¯b α
¯a¯bTα+F¯a¯bα
¯a¯bαTα, (3.61)
[Ua, Tα] =Faα b
aαUb, [Ua, Tα] =Faαb
aUb [U¯a, Tα] =F¯aα¯b
¯aαU¯b and [ U¯a, Tα] =F¯aα¯b
¯aU¯b.
The structures constants appearing in these commutation relations and the coefficients ρabandρ¯a¯b
obey certain identities due to the ad-invariance of ⟨·,·⟩.
Let us finally introduce the parametrisation of the parafermionic fields Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)along these
bases. We define
ψ(L)
a(x) =
Ua,Ψ(L)(x)
and ψ(R)
¯a(x) =−
U¯a,Ψ(R)(x)
, (3.62)
such that Ψ(L)(x) =ρabψ(L)
a(x)Uband Ψ(R)(x) =ρ¯a¯bψ(R)
¯a(x)U¯b. Using the various results above,
we can then extract the Poisson brackets of the fields ψ(L)
aandψ(R)
afrom the parafermionic algebra
(3.58). This gives

ψ(L)
a(x), ψ(L)
b(y)	
=Fab c
abψ(L)
c(x)δ(x−y)−ρab∂xδ(x−y) (3.63a)
−1
2 
Faα c
aαFbαd
b+Faαc
aFbα d
bα
ψ(L)
c(x)ψ(L)
d(y)ϵ(x−y),

ψ(R)
¯a(x), ψ(R)
¯b(y)	
=F¯a¯b¯c
¯a¯bψ(R)
¯c(x)δ(x−y) +ρ¯a¯b∂xδ(x−y) (3.63b)
−1
2 
F¯aα¯c
¯aαF¯bα¯d¯b+F¯aα¯c
¯aF¯bα¯d¯bα
ψ(R)
¯c(x)ψ(R)
¯d(y)ϵ(x−y).
3.2.3 Local chiral fields and W-algebra
In the previous subsubsection, we have studied the parafermionic chiral fields of the model, which in
particular are non-local observables. This raises the natural question of whether there also exist local
chiral fields, which we answer positively in this subsubsection. These fields can be seen as specific
combinations of the parafermions which turn out to be local and form a closed Poisson algebra that
is called the W-algebra. Below, we will characterise the latter in terms of the initial current algebra
and will describe an efficient way of building its elements. These results were inspired by the analysis
of [37, Subsection 6.3], which can be seen as a particular case of the present construction.
Energy-momentum tensor. We start by describing the simplest examples of local chiral fields,
namely the components of the energy-momentum tensor. In the present case, they are given in terms
of the current Jby the expression
T(L)(x) =1
2⟨J+(x),J+(x)⟩ and T(R)(x) =−1
2⟨J−(x),J−(x)⟩. (3.64)
39One easily checks that T(L)is left-moving and T(R)right-moving (in fact, this is always the case
classically, even for a E-model which does not satisfy the strong conformal condition). Recall from
equation (3.22) that J±transforms by conjugation under the H-gauge symmetry: this ensures that
the fields T(L)andT(R)are gauge-invariant observables.
We can compute the Poisson brackets of T(L)andT(R)starting from the current bracket for J.
We then find that they satisfy two decoupled classical Virasoro algebras:

T(L)(x), T(L)(y)	
=− 
T(L)(x) +T(L)(y)
∂xδ(x−y), (3.65a)

T(R)(x), T(R)(y)	
= + 
T(R)(x) +T(R)(y)
∂xδ(x−y), (3.65b)

T(L)(x), T(R)(y)	
= 0. (3.65c)
Let us also note that, with respect to the relativistic symmetry of the model, the fields T(L)andT(R)
have spin +2 and −2 respectively.
Since T(L)andT(R)are gauge-invariant, we can evaluate their expression (3.64) in any gauge. In
particular, recall from the previous subsubsection that in the gauge where we set Jhto zero, the fields
J+andJ−become the parafermionic fields Ψ(L)and Ψ(R). We can thus rewrite the chiral components
of the energy-momentum tensor as
T(L)(x) =1
2
Ψ(L)(x),Ψ(L)(x)
and T(R)(x) =−1
2
Ψ(R)(x),Ψ(R)(x)
. (3.66)
This expression makes the chirality of T(L)andT(R)manifest, since Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)are themselves
left- and right-moving. In contrast, it makes the locality of T(L/R)less apparent, as the parafermions
are non-local fields: we can thus see T(L/R)as a particular combination of these non-local fields which
turn out to be local20.
TheW-algebra from the gauged current algebra. Our goal now is to generalise the construc-
tion of the previous paragraph to find more general local chiral fields than T(L)andT(R). For instance,
letFbe a polynomial on V+which is invariant under the adjoint action of Hand consider the field
F(J+). This is obviously a local field of the degenerate E-model. Moreover, since J+is transformed
by conjugation under the H-gauge symmetry and Fis assumed to be invariant under such transfor-
mations, the field F(J+) is by construction gauge-invariant. In particular, we can evaluate it after a
gauge transformation by η,i.e.in the gauge where Jhis set to zero and J+becomes the parafermionic
field Ψ(L): we then find F(J+) =F(Ψ(L)). Therefore, F(J+) is a left-moving local field, as we were
aiming to build. This construction is a clear generalisation of the one of T(L)in the previous para-
graph, which corresponds to the case where Fis the second degree invariant polynomial on V+defined
by the invariant bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩|V+.
The above construction can be further generalised. Let us consider a field W(L)(x) which is built
as a differential polynomial in the components of Jh(x) and J+(x). To be more explicit, let us
introduce the decompositions Jh(x) =Jα
h(x)TαandJ+(x) =Ja
+(x)Uaalong the bases {Tα}d−p
α=1and
{Ua}p
a=1ofhandV+introduced earlier. The differential polynomial W(L)(x) is then defined as a
linear combination of monomials of the form
∂p1xJα1
h(x)···∂pmxJαm
h(x)∂q1xJa1
+(x)···∂qnxJan
+(x), (3.67)
where p1, . . . , p m, q1, . . . , q n∈Z≥0are non-negative integers, α1, . . . , α mare labels in {1, . . . , d −p}
anda1, . . . , a nare labels in {1, . . . , p }. We further assume that W(L)(x) is invariant under the H-
gauge transformation (3.22). By construction, this is a local field of the degenerate E-model, directly
20This can be seen directly from the expression (3.66). Indeed, the parafermions Ψ(L/R)are non-local due to the
conjugacy by the field ηin their definition (3.53). Yet the bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩is conjugacy invariant, ensuring that this
non-local contribution cancels in equation (3.66).
40expressed from the current and its derivatives. Moreover, since it is gauge-invariant, we can evaluate
it after a gauge transformation by η, which sends Jh(x) to zero and J+(x) to Ψ(L)(x). Since the latter
is left-moving, so is W(L)(x). We thus conclude that W(L)(x) is a gauge-invariant left-moving local
field, as wanted. We will denote by W(L)the space of such fields. The construction of the previous
paragraph can be seen as a special case of this one, where W(L)(x) is built as a polynomial of only
J+(x) and not its derivatives nor Jh(x).
There is of course a similar construction of a set W(R)of right-moving local fields, built as gauge-
invariant differential polynomials in the components of Jh(x) and J−(x). Since the fields in W(L)
andW(R)can be expressed in terms of Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)respectively and the latter Poisson-commute by
equation (3.55), we see that the sets W(L)andW(R)are mutually Poisson-commuting. Moreover, the
Poisson bracket of two fields in W(L)(resp. W(R)) can be computed starting from the bracket (3.58)
of the parafermions or the initial current bracket of J(using the different expressions of these fields
in different gauges): one checks that this bracket takes the form of a linear combination of derivatives
of the Dirac distribution whose coefficients are themselves elements of W(L)(resp. W(R)). The sets
W(L)andW(R)thus form closed local Poisson algebras, which we call the W-algebras or algebras of
extended conformal symmetry of the model (they always contain the Virasoro subalgebra formed by
the conformal generators T(L)(x) and T(R)(x), but are in general bigger, hence the name).
The definition of the W-algebra W(L/R)can also be interpreted in terms of the Hamiltonian re-
duction of the current algebra associated with d±. Recall that d±=h⊕h′⊕V±is a subalgebra of d
equipped with the invariant non-degenerate restricted bilinear form ±⟨·,·⟩|d±: we can thus consider
the associated current algebra, which is realised here as the Poisson subalgebra of the initial one for
Jgenerated by the component J±± J h± J′valued in d±. Under the Hamiltonian reduction by the
h-gauge symmetry, J′is set to zero as a first-class constraint and the reduced d±-current algebra is
further obtained by considering the gauge-invariant observables built from the remaining components
J±andJh. In this context, the W-algebra W(L/R)then corresponds to restricting ourselves to the
gauge-invariant observables which are built only as local differential polynomials in J±andJh. In
contrast, we can obtain a bigger reduced algebra by also allowing non-local gauge-invariant combina-
tions: this way, we find the parafermionic fields Ψ(L/R)and the corresponding brackets (3.58).
Our goal in the rest of this subsection is to give a concrete procedure to find the gauge-invariant
differential polynomials forming the W-algebras W(L/R). In order to describe this general construction,
it will be useful to first introduce a few additional ingredients, such as the covariant derivative.
Covariant derivative. We say that a d-valued field K(x) is covariant if it transforms by conjugation
K 7→ h−1Khunder a gauge transformation with parameter h∈H. For instance, the components J+
andJ−ofJare covariant fields. We define the covariant derivative of K(x) as
∇xK(x) =∂xK(x) +
Jh(x),K(x)
. (3.68)
It takes its name from the property that ∇xKis covariant if the field Kwe start with is itself covariant.
This can be checked explicitly from the transformation rules K 7→ h−1KhandJh7→h−1Jhh+h−1∂xh.
We note that the covariant derivative can be rephrased using the H-valued field ηgiven by equation
(3.51). Indeed, it satisfies ∂xη η−1=−J h, from which we find
∇xK= Ad η∂x 
Ad−1
ηK
. (3.69)
The covariance property of ∇xKcan then be alternatively derived from the transformation rules
K 7→ h−1Khandη7→h−1η.
As observed above, the V±-valued current J±(x) is covariant. By construction, ∇p
xJ±(x) is thus
also covariant for any non-negative integer p∈Z≥0. Since Jh(x) is valued in h, whose adjoint action
preserves V±, the pth-covariant derivative ∇p
xJ±is also valued in V±. This object will play a crucial
role in the construction of the W-algebra below.
41Building fields in the W-algebra. Letm∈Z>0be a positive integer and F:Vm
+→Rbe a
multilinear m-form on V+(not necessarily symmetric), which is invariant under the adjoint action of
HonV+. Concretely, the last condition means that
F 
h−1X1h, . . . , h−1Xmh
=F(X1, . . . , X m)∀X1, . . . , X m∈V+,∀h∈H . (3.70)
Choosing in addition a collection of mnon-negative integers p1, . . . , p m∈Z≥0, we define the field
W(L)
F;p1,...,pm(x) =F 
∇p1xJ+(x), . . . , ∇pmxJ+(x)
. (3.71)
By construction, this is a differential polynomial in the components of Jh(x) and J+(x). Since all
the fields ∇m
xJ+are covariant (see previous paragraph) and the form Fis invariant under the adjoint
action of H, we see that the field W(L)
F;p1,...,pm(x) is gauge-invariant. It is thus an element of the W-
algebra W(L)and in particular is a local left-moving field of the theory. With respect to the relativistic
symmetry of the theory, this field has Lorentz spin
m+mX
k=1pk (3.72)
(intuitively, each current J+and each covariant derivative ∇xappearing in the definition (3.71) of the
field contributes to a unit of spin).
Since it is gauge-invariant, we can express the field W(L)
F;p1,...,pmas in equation (3.71) but replacing
(Jh,J+) by (Jη
h,Jη
+) = (0 ,Ψ(L)). By construction, in this gauge, the pth-covariant derivative ∇p
xJ+
simply becomes the standard pth-derivative ∂p
xΨ(L)of the parafermionic field. Reinstating the time
dependence of the fields and recalling that ∂x=∂+−∂−acts as ∂+on the left-moving field Ψ(L), we
can rewrite W(L)
F;p1,...,pmas21
W(L)
F;p1,...,pm(t, x) =F 
∂p1
+Ψ(L)(x+), . . . , ∂pm
+Ψ(L)(x+)
. (3.73)
This makes manifest the left-moving dynamics of this field, but hides its locality (the latter being
apparent in the initial gauge).
The procedure described in this paragraph produces many higher-spin fields in the W-algebra W(L).
We conjecture that they in fact form the whole W-algebra, i.e.that any gauge-invariant differential
polynomial in JhandJ+is of the form W(L)
F;p1,...,pmfor some invariant m-form Fand some integers
p1, . . . , p m. This gives a quite efficient way to build the local chiral fields of the theory, translating
the problem to a purely algebraic one, namely finding multilinear forms on V+invariant under the
adjoint action of H. There is of course a similar construction for the right-moving W-algebra W(R),
using invariant multilinear forms on V−.
We will see direct applications of this procedure in explicit examples of conformal σ-models in
Section 4. We note however that, although we expect it to produce all the chiral fields which are
local when written in terms of the components of the current J, this might in general not give all
the chiral fields which are local when written in terms of the σ-model fields. This will in particular
depend on the specific way we realise the degenerate E-model as a σ-model, i.e.on the choice of the
maximally isotropic subalgebra kofd(see Subsection 3.1). For instance, we expect that two conformal
σ-models which share the same underlying degenerate E-model do not necessarily have equivalent sets
of chiral fields local in the σ-model fields: more precisely, they will both have at least the ones coming
from the above construction but might also admit other ones which are not visible from the E-model
perspective. The study of such fields then requires a case by case analysis.
21Let us make a quick comment on boundary conditions. It was explained in Subsubsection 3.2.2 that the parafermionic
field Ψ(L)(t, x) is not periodic but rather quasi-periodic, in the sense that Ψ(L)(t, x+ 2π) =γ−1Ψ(L)(t, x)γfor some
matrix γindependent of tandx. Despite this, we note that the local chiral field (3.73) is properly periodic, since the
conjugations by γare “cancelled” by the ad-invariance of F.
423.2.4 Coset CFTs and the Goddard-Kent-Olive construction
In the previous subsubsections, we have described the chiral fields of the conformal degenerate E-
model in terms of the Hamiltonian reduction of the current Poisson algebra associated with d±. This
is reminiscent of a class of conformal models called coset CFTs, described by the so-called Goddard-
Kent-Olive (GKO) construction [30,31]. In this subsubsection, we explain how the two constructions
are related, at least under certain technical assumptions.
The coset setup. In order to relate our construction to the GKO one, we will have to restrict to
a particular configuration for the structure of the double Lie algebra dand the gauge subalgebra h
underlying the degenerate E-model. More precisely, we will suppose that
(i)d=g+⊕g−, where g±are orthogonal mutually-commuting subalgebras ;
(ii) there exist subalgebras h±⊂g±such that ⟨·,·⟩|h±is non-degenerate ;
(iii) there exists a Lie algebra isomorphism λ:h+→h−which sends ⟨·,·⟩|h+to−⟨·,·⟩|h−.
In this case, we then define
h={X+λ(X), X∈h+} and h′={X−λ(X), X∈h+}. (3.74)
One easily checks that his an isotropic subalgebra of d, which can then serve as the gauge subalgebra
of a degenerate E-model (note that, as Lie algebras, h,h+and h−are all isomorphic). Moreover, we
find that h′is an isotropic subspace, pairing non-degenerately with hthrough the bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩.
We finally let V±be the orthogonal complement of h±ing±(which has trivial intersection with h±
since⟨·,·⟩|h±is non-degenerate). We then have the decomposition
d=h+⊕V+⊕h−⊕V−=h⊕h′⊕V+⊕V−, (3.75)
which satisfies the strong conformal condition introduced at the beginning of this subsection. This
setup thus defines a conformal degenerate E-model. The corresponding operator bE:d→dreads
bE|V±=±IdV±,bE|h+=1
2 
Idh++λ
and bE|h−=−1
2 
Idh−+λ−1
. (3.76)
In the notations of this section, the subalgebras d±are then given by
d±=V±⊕h+⊕h−=g±⊕h∓. (3.77)
Decomposition of the current and constraint. Consider the current Jof the degenerate E-
model. In the rest of this section, we have used its decomposition J=J+− J−+Jh+J′, along the
direct sum d=V+⊕V−⊕h⊕h′. The setup described in the previous paragraph suggests to consider
another decomposition, reading
J=J++Jh+− J−− J h−, with J±∈V±,Jh±∈h±, (3.78)
along the direct sum d=V+⊕h+⊕V−⊕h−. The V±-valued components J±are the same in the two
decompositions, while the others are related by
Jh=IdV++λ
2 
Jh+−λ−1(Jh−)
and J′=IdV+−λ
2 
Jh++λ−1(Jh−)
. (3.79)
The advantage of the coset setup is that we can identify many closed subalgebras of the current Poisson
algebra of J. For instance, the fields
Jg±=J±+Jh± (3.80)
satisfy two Poisson-commuting current algebras associated with g±=V±⊕h±. Moreover, the fields
Jh±alone form current subalgebras22associated with h±.
22Written in a basis, these two current subalgebras for h+and h−share the same δ(x−y) component (expressed in
terms of the structure constants of h≃h±) but have opposite ∂xδ(x−y) components.
43Recall that the physical observables of the degenerate E-model are obtained by a Hamiltonian
reduction. The latter is performed by imposing the first-class constraint J′≈0 and further restricting
to observables which are invariant under the gauge symmetry it generates. In the language of this
subsubsection, we see from equation (3.79) that in terms of the fields Jh±, the constraint now reads
Jh++λ−1(Jh−)≈0. (3.81)
Chiral Poisson algebras as classical GKO cosets. Let us now consider the left-moving Poisson
algebra of the theory. As explained in the previous subsubsections, it can be seen as a subsector
of the aforementioned Hamiltonian reduction where we start with the current Poisson subalgebra
corresponding to d+⊂d(more precisely, we obtain the left-moving W-algebra W(L)if we restrict to
gauge-invariant local fields or the left-moving parafermionic algebra of Ψ(L)if we allow for non-local
fields). In the present setup, this d+-subalgebra is generated by the g+-valued field Jg+=J++Jh+
and the h−-valued field Jh−. Imposing the constraint (3.81), we see that we can eliminate the latter
by imposing Jh−≈ −λ(Jh+), so that we are left with observables built only from the g+-current
Jg+. To obtain the reduced algebra, we further need to restrict to gauge-invariant quantities, which
Poisson-commute with the generator Jh++λ−1(Jh−): however, since we have used the constraint to
only get observables built from Jg+, their Poisson bracket with Jh++λ−1(Jh−) is the same as their
bracket with Jh+alone. To summarise, the reduced left-moving algebra can thus be seen as the set of
observables built from the g+-current Jg+and which Poisson-commute with the h+-component Jh+.
More precisely, we obtain the W-algebra W(L)if we focus on local observables built as differential
polynomials in Jg+or the parafermionic algebra if we also allow for non-local observables.
This is a classical equivalent of the GKO construction [30, 31] for the g+/h+coset algebra. The
advantage compared with the previously used formulation is that we now start with the g+-current
algebra and simply look at observables commuting with the h+-current subalgebra: we do not have to
pass through the bigger algebra d+, the imposition of the constraint and the Hamiltonian reduction.
There is of course an analogue construction for the right-moving chiral Poisson algebra, which starts
with the algebra d−. In that case, we end up with a g−/h−GKO coset algebra.
The GKO energy-momentum tensor. The GKO coset construction also gives a natural expres-
sion of the chiral components of the energy-momentum tensor. Focusing on the left-moving sector,
which corresponds to a g+/h+coset, the GKO prescription is
T(L)=Tg+−Th+, (3.82)
where Tg+is the energy-momentum tensor of the “quotiented” g+-current algebra while Th+is the
energy-momentum tensor of the “quotient” h+-current algebra. These two quantities are given by the
(classical) Segal-Sugawara construction and we thus find
T(L)=1
2
Jg+,Jg+
−1
2
Jh+,Jh+
. (3.83)
This is a local field built from the g+-current and one easily checks that it Poisson-commutes with the
component Jh+: it thus belongs to the g+/h+cosetW-algebra introduced in the previous paragraph.
Recalling the decomposition Jg+=Jh++J+along the orthogonal direct sum g+=h+⊕V+, we see
that the above expression reduces to1
2⟨J+,J+⟩: we thus recover the definition of T(L)considered
previously in equation (3.64).
Comments. Let us end this subsubsection with two brief comments. The GKO construction and
the coset CFTs have been extensively studied in the literature, including at the quantum level. The
results described above thus pave the way for the quantisation of a large class of conformal degenerate
E-models using these approaches. A natural question at this point is whether all the degenerate E-
models which satisfy the strong conformal condition fall into the GKO scheme. This is in fact not the
44case: indeed, we will study in Subsection 4.3 an explicit example of such a model, where the underly-
ing double algebra does not have the “coset” structure described at the beginning of this subsubsection.
For our final comment, let us consider the linear map E:d→ddefined by E|g±=±Idg±. This is
a symmetric operator satisfying E2= Id: it can thus be taken as the E-operator of a non-degenerate
E-model, as considered in Section 2. Moreover, the eigenspaces Ker( E ∓Id) of Eare identified with
g±, which are orthogonal mutually-commuting subalgebras of d. This means that the non-degenerate
E-model built from Esatisfies the strong conformal condition discussed in Subsection 2.2 and is thus
conformal. The conformal degenerate E-model that we considered in this subsubsection is obtained
from this non-degenerate one by a procedure introduced in [26], which “gauges away” the subalgebra h.
As explained in [26], this procedure amounts to defining a reduced operator bEfromE, which satisfies the
right properties to be the bE-operator of a degenerate E-model. More precisely, the reduced operator bE
is defined as Eitself on V±⊕h′but acts trivially on h. In the present case, this procedure gives back the
operator bEconsidered in equation (3.76). We thus see that the conformal degenerate E-models which
fall into the GKO coset construction correspond to the gauging of conformal non-degenerate E-models.
This is reminiscent of the construction of gauged Wess-Zumino-Witten models from ungauged ones:
as we shall see in Subsection 4.1, these theories are specific examples among the class of conformal
degenerate E-models studied here.
4 Examples of conformal degenerate E-models
We now come to the description of explicit examples of degenerate E-models satisfying the strong
conformal condition, thus illustrating the general formalism described in the previous section.
4.1 Gauged Wess-Zumino-Witten models
Let us start with the G/H 0gauged Wess-Zumino-Witten (WZW) model [5,6], whose interpretation as
a degenerate E-model was first established in [32]. It is the degenerate equivalent of the WZW model
onG, whose interpretation as a conformal non-degenerate E-model was recalled in Subsection 2.3.
There, we saw the WZW model as the UV fixed-point of an integrable but non-conformal E-model
called the λ-deformation. Such integrable deformations exist in the gauged case as well, at least for
appropriate choice of gauged subgroup H0[42, 47–49]. However, for conciseness, we will restrict the
analysis below to the conformal point only. For simplicity, we also restrict to the case of a vectorially
gauged G/H 0WZW model with Ga simple Lie group and H0a subgroup of Gwhose Lie algebra is
non-degenerate with respect to the Killing form of Lie( G).
Double Lie algebra and gauged subalgebra. Let us now describe the degenerate E-model un-
derlying the G/H 0gauged WZW model. We let Gbe a real simple connected Lie group with Lie
algebra g= Lie( G). We denote by κ(·,·) the “minimal” invariant bilinear form on g, which is equal
to the Killing form multiplied by an appropriate normalisation prefactor (see Subsection 2.3 and the
footnote 9 for details). In particular, this form is definite positive if Gis compact. Similarly to
the non-degenerate case discussed in Subsection 2.3, we take the double group of the E-model to be
D=G×Gand we equip its Lie algebra d=g×gwith the bilinear form (2.45), which we recall here
for convenience:
(X1, X2),(Y1, Y2)
=𝓀κ(X1, Y1)−𝓀κ(X2, Y2). (4.1)
Here,𝓀is a real positive parameter. This bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩is then invariant, non-degenerate and of
split signature, as wanted.
The additional ingredient in the degenerate case is the choice of the gauge subalgebra h⊂d. To
define it, we will suppose that we are given a subgroup H0⊂G, with Lie algebra h0⊂g, such that
κ(·,·) is non-degenerate on h0. We then define
h=h0,diag=
(X, X ), X∈h0	
, (4.2)
45i.e.the diagonal embedding of h0ind=g×g. It is clear that this is a subalgebra of d, isotropic with
respect to the bilinear form (4.1). It thus possesses the right properties to be the gauge subalgebra of
a degenerate E-model.
We also introduce the orthogonal subspace Wofh0ing. Since we supposed that κ(·,·) is non-
degenerate on h0, this subspace has trivial intersection with h0and we thus have the decomposition
g=h0⊕W. We will denote by π0andπWthe corresponding projectors. From the ad-invariance of
κ(·,·), one finds that Wis stable under the adjoint action of h0. We thus have
[h0,h0]⊂h0 and [ h0, W]⊂W . (4.3)
We also note that, in the double algebra d=g×g, the subspace orthogonal to his given by
h⊥=h⊕(W×W). (4.4)
ThebE-operator. Let us now define the operator bE:d→dcharacterising the degenerate E-model.
Since d=g×g, we can conveniently see the operators on this space as 2 ×2 matrices whose entries
are operators on g. Using this convention, we will define bEas:
bE=1
2π0+πW −1
2π0
1
2π0 −1
2π0−πW
. (4.5)
One easily checks that bEis symmetric, bE|3
h⊥=bE|h⊥, Ker(bE) = handbEcommutes with the adjoint
action of h(using equation (4.3)). It thus possesses the right properties to be the bE-operator of a
degenerate E-model with gauge subalgebra h.
With respect to this choice of operator bE, the eigenspaces V±= Ker( bE|h⊥∓Id) appearing in the
decomposition h⊥=h⊕V+⊕V−are simply given by
V+=W× {0} and V−={0} ×W . (4.6)
Recall from Subsection 3.1 that h′is defined as the unique subspace of dwhich is isotropic, orthogonal
toV±and pairing non-degenerately with h. In the present case, we find
h′=
(X,−X), X∈h0	
. (4.7)
It is clear that
h⊕h′=h0×h0 (4.8)
is a subalgebra of d=g×gand that [ V+, V−] ={0}. The degenerate E-model under consideration
thus satisfies the strong conformal condition introduced at the beginning of Subsection 3.2: it should
therefore define a conformal theory.
Maximally isotropic subalgebra and gauge symmetries. In order to find a Lagrangian reali-
sation of this conformal theory as a σ-model, we follow the construction described in Subsubsection
3.1.2. The starting point is to choose a maximally isotropic subalgebra kof the double d. Here, we
will take the same choice that gave us the non-gauged WZW model in the non-degenerate Subsection
2.3, namely
k=gdiag=
(X, X ), X∈g	
. (4.9)
According to Subsection 3.1.2, the associated σ-model has then for target space the double quotient
K\D/H =Gdiag\(G×G)/H0,diagand is described by a field ℓ(t, x) valued in G×G, with a left gauge
symmetry ℓ7→kℓ,k∈Gdiag, and a right one ℓ7→ℓh,h∈H0,diag. As in the non-degenerate subsection
2.3, we will fix the left Gdiag-gauge symmetry from the start. More precisely, we use this symmetry
to bring ℓto the form
ℓ(t, x) = 
g(t, x),Id
, g (t, x)∈G , (4.10)
46hence describing the theory in terms of a G-valued field g(t, x).
This formulation will possess a residual H0-gauge symmetry. On the initial field ℓ, it acts by
the right multiplication ℓ7→ℓ(h, h), where his valued in H0, so that ( h, h)∈H0,diag. However, this
transformation does not preserve the gauge-fixing ℓ= (g,Id) considered above, as it sends it to ( gh, h).
This issue is solved by performing an appropriate left Gdiag-gauge transformation to bring back the
field in the right gauge: more precisely, multiplying on the left by ( h−1, h−1)∈Gdiag, we obtain
(h−1gh,Id), which respects the chosen gauge-fixing condition. To summarise, the residual H0-gauge
symmetry then acts on the G-valued field g(t, x) by the local conjugation
g(t, x)7−→h(t, x)−1g(t, x)h(t, x), with h(t, x)∈H0. (4.11)
σ-model action. In order to derive the action of the σ-model, the next step is to determine the
expression of the projectors W±
ℓ, whose kernel and image are defined by equation (3.35). In the present
case, this means that
Ker(W±
ℓ) = Ad−1
ℓk= Ad−1
(g,Id)gdiag=
(g−1Xg, X ), X∈g	
, (4.12)
together with
Im(W+
ℓ) = h⊕V+=h0,diag⊕(W× {0}) =
(X, π 0X), X∈g	
, (4.13a)
Im(W−
ℓ) = h⊕V−=h0,diag⊕({0} ×W) =
(π0X, X ), X∈g	
. (4.13b)
With a little bit of algebra, this leads us to
W+
ℓ=
1
1−Ad−1
gπ0−1
1−Ad−1
gπ0Ad−1
g
π01
1−Ad−1
gπ0−π01
1−Ad−1
gπ0Ad−1
g
, W−
ℓ=
−π01
1−Adgπ0Adgπ01
1−Adgπ0
−1
1−Adgπ0Adg1
1−Adgπ0
.
(4.14)
Using this and ℓ−1∂±ℓ= (g−1∂±g,0), we can compute the σ-model action (3.37). We then find
SgWZW ,𝓀[g] =SWZW ,𝓀[g] + 2𝓀ZZ
R×S1dtdx κ
g−1∂+g, π01
1−Adgπ0∂−gg−1
, (4.15)
where we recall that SWZW ,𝓀[g] is the non-gauged WZW action with level 𝓀, as defined in equation
(2.55). We recognize in the above formula the G/H 0vectorially gauged WZW model [5, 6], which
is a well-known conformal σ-model. One can check that this action is invariant under the gauge
transformation (4.11), as expected from the construction. As a consequence, the target space of this
σ-model can be seen as the group Gquotiented by the adjoint action of the subgroup H0.
Currents A±andJ±.Using the expression (4.14) of the projectors W±
ℓand the fact that ℓ−1∂±ℓ=
(g−1∂±g,0), we can compute the currents A±andJ±, following the equation (3.44). For the gauge
fieldA±, we find
A+= (1,1)⊗π01
1−Ad−1
gπ0g−1∂+g and A−=−(1,1)⊗π01
1−Adgπ0∂−gg−1,(4.16)
where we used the notation ( a, b)⊗X= (aX, bX ) to denote pure factors in d=g×g≃R2⊗g. The
above fields are valued in h=h0,diag= (1,1)⊗h0, as expected. Similarly, the currents J±read
J+= (1,0)⊗πW1
1−Ad−1
gπ0g−1∂+g and J−=−(0,1)⊗πW1
1−Adgπ0∂−gg−1.(4.17)
As wanted, these fields are valued in V+=W× {0}andV−={0} ×W.
47Chiral algebras. The currents A±andJ±computed above satisfy the equations of motion (3.49).
As explained in Subsection 3.2, this ensures the existence of chiral fields in the theory, either non-local
(forming the parafermionic Poisson algebra) or local (forming the W-algebra). We recover this way
various well established results in the literature. For instance, the presence of parafermionic fields in
the gauged WZW model was discussed in the references [12–14]. We note moreover that the conformal
degenerate E-model considered here falls into the GKO coset scheme discussed in Subsubsection 3.2.4.
The left- and right-moving sectors of the theory can thus be seen as cosets of a g-current algebra by its
h0-current subalgebra. This is compatible with the results of [50,51], which showed (at the quantum
level) that gauged WZW models form a Lagrangian realisation of the GKO coset construction.
For simplicity, we will not discuss these chiral algebras in more detail for the general G/H 0gauged
WZW model. Instead, we will illustrate how this construction works concretely for a simple example,
namely the SU(2)/U(1) case. This will be the subject of the following subsection.
4.2 The SU(2)/U(1) gauged WZW model
We now specialise the setup of the previous subsection to the case where G=SU(2) and H0=U(1).
As we will see, in that case, it will be possible to give a very concrete description of the general objects
introduced in Subsection 3.2, such as the parafermionic fields and the W-algebra. For completeness,
we note that there exists a whole panorama of interesting variants of this setup, obtained by changing
the group GtoSL(2,R), the subgroup H0toR, the gauging from vectorial to axial or various
combinations thereof. Of particular interest are the axially gauged WZW models on SL(2,R)/U(1)
andSL(2,R)/R, which describe bosonic strings propagating in the 2d Euclidean and Lorentzian black
holes geometry respectively [38] (in the Euclidean case, the target space of the model then takes the
form of the Hamilton cigar [52]). These theories have been studied in great detail in the literature
and many things are known about their structure, including their parafermions [12,13] and their W-
algebra [53].23Here, we will recover these results classically – in the compact SU(2)/U(1) case – from
theE-model construction. For future reference, we will also briefly discuss the case of the Lorentzian
black hole σ-model, i.e.the axially gauged SL(2,R)/RWZW theory, at the end of this subsection.
Lie algebra conventions. Let us consider the Lie algebra g=su(2) with basis
t1=i 0
0−i
, t2=0 1
−1 0
, t3=0 i
i 0
, (4.18)
written in the fundamental representation. With respect to this basis, the commutation relations and
the bilinear form24κ(·,·) read
[ta,tb] = 23X
c=1ϵabctc and κ(ta,tb) = 2 δab, (4.19)
where ϵabcis the totally antisymmetric Levi-Civita tensor. In the notations of the the previous sub-
section, we choose the subalgebra h0⊂gand its orthogonal subspace Wto be
h0=Rt1≃u(1) and W=Rt2⊕Rt3. (4.20)
We will visualise elements of the double group D=SU(2)×SU(2) and its Lie algebra das block-
diagonal 4 ×4 matrices, with 2 ×2 entries in SU(2) and su(2) respectively. For instance, the gauged
subalgebra h=h0,diagindcan be seen as
h=RT1 with T1=
i 0 0 0
0−i 0 0
0 0 i 0
0 0 0 −i
, (4.21)
23For a recent and detailed discussion of the parafermionic fields and the W-algebra of the cigar σ-model, we refer to
the section 6 of the lecture notes of Lukyanov and Zamolodchikov, published in [54].
24For g=su(2), this form is given by κ(X, Y) =, with the trace taken in the fundamental representation.
48while the subspaces V+andV−are given by
V+=


0a0 0
−a0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
, a∈C

and V−=


0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 a
0 0 −a0
, a∈C

. (4.22)
Parametrisation of the field. We will parametrise the SU(2)-valued field gas
g=eiαsin(θ)e−iβcos(θ)
−eiβcos(θ)e−iαsin(θ)
= expα−β
2t1
expπ
2−θ
t2
expα+β
2t1
, (4.23)
in terms of three coordinate fields θ,αandβ, which are essentially Euler angles on SU(2). The use
of linear combinations α±βon the left and right exponentials is related to the H0≃U(1) gauge
symmetry of the theory. Indeed, recall from the general formula (4.11) that this local symmetry acts
ongby conjugation by a U(1)-valued field h. The latter can be parametrised as h= exp(η
2t1). One
easily checks that the transformation g7→h−1ghthen simply acts on the coordinate fields ( θ, α, β ) by
θ7−→θ , α 7−→α , β 7−→β+η . (4.24)
The fields ( θ, α) are thus physical degrees of freedom of the model, while βcan be gauged away.
Action and target space geometry. Inserting the parametrisation (4.23) of ginto the action
(4.15), we can express the latter in terms of the coordinate fields. As expected from the discussion
above, the field βcompletely disappears throughout the computation and the action depends in the
end only on the physical fields ( θ, α). More precisely, we find
S[θ, α] = 2𝓀ZZ
R×S1dtdx 
∂+θ ∂−θ+ tan2(θ)∂+α ∂−α
. (4.25)
Let us briefly describe the geometry of the target space of this σ-model. In terms of the coordinates
(θ, α), the metric reads
ds2=𝓀 
dθ2+ tan2(θ) dα2
. (4.26)
One can check explicitly that the metric (4.26) defines a conformal σ-model, by computing the corre-
sponding Ricci tensor Rµν, where µ, νare target space indices labelling the coordinates ( θ, α). Doing
so, we find
Rµν+ 2∇µ∇νΦ = 0 , (4.27)
where ∇µdenotes the covariant derivative and
Φ =−1
2log 
cos2(θ)
+ constant (4.28)
is the dilaton. This property of Rµνensures that the 1-loop RG-flow [2–4] of the σ-model (4.25) is
trivial, as expected (in mathematical terms, we say that the metric (4.26) is a steady Ricci soliton).
Isometry and dual field. The metric (4.26) possesses a U(1) isometry, which acts on the angle α
as shifts α7→α+ξ. In terms of the σ-model, this means that the action (4.25) is invariant under the
global symmetry α(t, x)7→α(t, x) +ξ(where ξhere is a constant parameter, as the symmetry is only
global). This symmetry is associated with a conservation equation
∂+Π−+∂−Π+= 0, (4.29)
with conserved current
Π±= tan2(θ)∂±α . (4.30)
49This conservation equation has an important consequence, which will be useful later. Namely, it
implies the (on-shell) existence of a function α(D)(t, x), which we will call the dual field, such that
∂±α(D)=±Π±. (4.31)
Integrating the spatial component of the above equation, we can realise α(D)(t, x) as a non-local field
α(D)(t, x) =Zx
tan2 
θ(t, y)
∂tα(t, y) dy . (4.32)
Gauge field and η.Recall the general expression (4.16) of the gauge field A±. For the SU(2)/U(1)
case considered here, a direct computation shows that
A±=1
2 
∂±β±Π±
T1, (4.33)
where T1is the generator (4.21) of hand Π ±is the conserved current (4.30) associated with the α-
isometry of the model. From the general considerations of Subsection 3.2, we expect this gauge field
A±to satisfy the flatness condition (3.49a) on-shell. Here, the gauged subalgebra h≃u(1) is abelian
and this equation thus simply becomes
∂+A−−∂−A+= 0. (4.34)
It is clear that the field (4.33) satisfies this property, due to the conservation equation (4.29) of Π ±.
An important role in the construction of chiral observables in the general Subsection 3.2 was played
by the H-valued field η, which is introduced by A±=−(∂±η)η−1. In the present case, we easily find
η= exp 
−α(D)+β
2T1!
, (4.35)
where α(D)is the dual field (4.32), characterised by the property ∂±α(D)=±Π±. In equation (3.51),
we explained that ηis in general expressed in terms of a path-ordered exponential: in the present case,
His abelian, so the ordering does not matter, and ηcan thus be written as a simple exponential. The
non-locality of the field ηis now encoded in its relation to the dual field α(D), which is itself defined as
a non-local integral (4.32). All the non-locality that will arise in the rest of this subsection will always
come from the presence of this dual field only. This is the main advantage of the SU(2)/U(1) case,
which is simple enough so that we can express quite explicitly all the relevant observables in terms of
the coordinate fields of the σ-model and this dual field.
Parafermions. Using the equation (4.17) and the parametrisation (4.23) of the field g, we can
express the covariant currents J±in terms of the coordinate fields ( θ, α, β ). An additional straight-
forward computation allows one to determine the parafermionic fields Ψ(L)and Ψ(R), defined from J±
andηby the equation (3.53). More precisely, we find
Ψ(L)=
0−ψ(L)0 0
ψ(L)0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
and Ψ(R)=
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 ψ(R)
0 0 −ψ(R)0
, (4.36a)
where
ψ(L)=ei(α−α(D)) 
∂+θ+ i tan( θ)∂+α), ψ(L)=e−i(α−α(D)) 
∂+θ−i tan( θ)∂+α), (4.36b)
ψ(R)=ei(α+α(D)) 
∂−θ+ i tan( θ)∂−α), ψ(L)=e−i(α+α(D)) 
∂−θ−i tan( θ)∂−α). (4.36c)
50Here, rather than parametrising the V±-valued parafermions Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)in terms of four real fields,
we used the complex fields ψ(L)andψ(R)and their complex conjugates ψ(L)andψ(R). These quan-
tities are non-local, due to the presence of the dual field α(D). We also see that although the initial
currents J±contain the field β, the latter does not appear in the expression of the parafermionic fields:
this is expected since these fields are gauge-invariant and should thus be expressed purely in terms
of the physical degrees of freedom ( θ, α). The expression (4.36) of the parafermionic fields, obtained
here from the E-model construction, coincides with the one initially derived in [13].
One checks that ψ(L/R)are chiral under the equations of motion derived from the action (4.25),
i.e.that ∂−ψ(L)=∂+ψ(R)= 0, as expected. Performing the canonical analysis of the model, one
can also compute the Poisson algebra formed by these chiral fields: we will not give the details of
this analysis here but will summarise the main results. In agreement with the general expectations
of Subsubsection 3.2.2, we find that the left-moving fields ψ(L)andψ(L)Poisson-commute with the
right-moving ones ψ(R)andψ(R). Moreover, the left-moving Poisson algebra reads

ψ(L)(x), ψ(L)(y)	
=1
𝓀ψ(L)(x)ψ(L)(y)ϵ(x−y),
ψ(L)(x),ψ(L)(y)	
=1
𝓀ψ(L)(x)ψ(L)(y)ϵ(x−y),

ψ(L)(x),ψ(L)(y)	
=−1
𝓀∂xδ(x−y)−1
𝓀ψ(L)(x)ψ(L)(y)ϵ(x−y). (4.37)
We recover here the parafermionic Poisson algebra initially derived in [13]. The right-moving one is
similar, up to a few changes in signs. The presence of the non-local distribution ϵ(x−y) in the above
brackets is due to the appearance of the dual field α(D)in the expression (4.36) of the parafermions.
One can check that these Poisson brackets agree with the parafermionic Poisson algebra (3.63) derived
in the general case.
TheW-algebra. We now turn to the study of the W-algebras of the theory25, which are composed
by left- or right-moving local fields and which were discussed in Subsubsection 3.2.3 for a general
conformal degenerate E-model. As explained there, the simplest elements in these W-algebras are the
chiral components of the energy-momentum tensor, which are related to the parafermionic fields Ψ(L)
and Ψ(R)by equation (3.66). For the SU(2)/U(1) gauged WZW model, the latter are explicitly given
by (4.36). We then find
T(L)=𝓀ψ(L)ψ(L)=𝓀 
(∂+θ)2+ tan2(θ) (∂+α)2
, (4.38a)
T(R)=𝓀ψ(R)ψ(R)=𝓀 
(∂−θ)2+ tan2(θ) (∂−α)2
. (4.38b)
These fields satisfy ∂−T(L)=∂+T(R)= 0, as expected. Moreover, they are clearly local when written
in terms of the σ-model fields ( θ, α). In contrast, recall that the parafermionic fields are non-local,
due to the terms e±iα(D)in the equation (4.36). The quantity T(L)=𝓀ψ(L)ψ(L)is a particular com-
bination of these non-local fields which turns out to be local, since these exponential terms cancel.
This illustrates on a simple example the general principles discussed in Subsubsection 3.2.3.
In that subsubsection, we presented a general and systematic procedure to build more complicated
elements of the W-algebras than the energy-momentum tensor. Let us now illustrate how this pro-
cedure works in practice for the example of the SU(2)/U(1) gauged WZW model. We will focus on
the left-moving W-algebra W(L), the study of the right-moving one being very similar. As explained
in Subsubsection 3.2.3, the key ingredients of the construction are the multilinear forms on V+which
are invariant under the adjoint action of H. In the present case, the subspaces h= Lie( H) and V+
are given explicitly by equations (4.21) and (4.22). We can thus search for such invariant forms by
a brute-force approach, at least for the first degrees. For the degree 1, we find that there are in fact
25This is the SU(2)/U(1) analogue of the SL(2,R)/U(1) coset W-algebra underlying the cigar σ-model [53] (see also
the lecture notes [54] for a detailed discussion of this W-algebra).
51no invariant linear forms on V+. For the degree 2, we obtain one symmetric invariant bilinear form,
namely the restriction ⟨·,·⟩|V+, and one skew-symmetric one, defined by
ω:V+×V+−→ R
(X, Y)7−→ ⟨ T1,[X, Y]⟩, (4.39)
where we recall that T1is the generator of hdefined in equation (4.21). It is clear that ωis a skew-
symmetric bilinear form on V+. Its invariance under the adjoint action of His proven as follows: for
allX, Y∈V+and all h∈H, we have
ω(Ad hX,AdhY) =⟨T1,Adh[X, Y]⟩=
Ad−1
hT1,[X, Y]
=⟨T1,[X, Y]⟩=ω(X, Y). (4.40)
Here, we have used successively the property that Ad his an automorphism, the ad-invariance of ⟨·,·⟩
and the fact that His abelian (we note in passing that a similar construction will hold more generally
for cases where hpossesses a non-trivial center).
We now follow the equation (3.73) to build elements of the W-algebra W(L)from these invariant
mutlinear forms and the parafermionic field Ψ(L), using the expression (4.36) of the latter. We find that
there is only one spin-2 field in W(L), namely the energy-momentum tensor W(L)
2=T(L)considered
above. We further build two independent spin-3 fields. The first one is given by

Ψ(L), ∂+Ψ(L)
=1
2∂+
Ψ(L),Ψ(L)
=∂+T(L)(4.41)
and its thus a descendant of the energy-momentum tensor T(L). The second one is not obtained from
T(L)and its derivatives and is built using the skew-symmetric form ω. It reads
W(L)
3=1
4ω 
Ψ(L), ∂+Ψ(L)) =𝓀
2i 
ψ(L)∂+ψ(L)−ψ(L)∂+ψ(L)
=𝓀Im 
ψ(L)∂+ψ(L)
. (4.42)
It is clear that this is a real combination of the parafermionic fields ψ(L)andψ(L)and one can moreover
check that the non-local contributions e±iα(D)in these fields cancel in this particular combination,
making W(L)
3local, as expected. When written in terms of the σ-model fields ( θ, α), we find
𝓀−1W(L)
3= tan2(θ) 
tan2(θ)−1
(∂+α)3+ tan( θ) 
∂2
+θ ∂+α−∂+θ ∂2
+α
−2 (∂+θ)2∂+α . (4.43)
As a consistency check, one can verify that ∂−W(L)
3= 0 using the equations of motion of the fields
(θ, α) derived from the action (4.25).
Similarly, one finds four independent spin-4 fields. Three of them are descendants of lower-spin
ones, namely T(L) 2,∂2
+T(L)and∂+W(L)
3. The last one cannot be expressed as a polynomial of T(L),
W(L)
3and their derivatives and can be chosen to be
W(L)
4=
Ψ(L), ∂2
+Ψ(L)
=𝓀 
ψ(L)∂2
+ψ(L)+ψ(L)∂2
+ψ(L)
. (4.44)
The explicit local expression of W(L)
4in terms of the σ-model fields ( θ, α) can be easily derived, but
for conciseness, we will not give it here.
Let us point out an important fact. As we said above, W(L)
4cannot be expressed as a differential
polynomial of T(L)andW(L)
3. However, it is not functionally independent of these two fields, as it
satisfies the very simple relation
2T(L)W(L)
4−2T(L)∂2
+T(L)+ 
∂+T(L)2+ 4W(L)
32= 0. (4.45)
This is in fact to be expected. Indeed, since all the densities in the W-algebra are expressed in terms
of the parafermion ψ(L)and its conjugate ψ(L), they depend in the end only on two independent
real-valued fields. Thus, we expect any three of these densities to be functionally related. However,
this relation can in general be rather complicated, as it will involve product, derivatives and powers of
52these densities. We thus make the choice of working with fields like W(L)
4, which allows us to always
deal with differential polynomials only (for instance, replacing W(L)
4by its expression in terms of T(L)
andW(L)
3would introduce quotients by T(L)in the construction).
One can easily go on with the procedure initiated above, at least for the first few spins. We expect
that for any s≥2, it produces one spin- slocal field W(L)
swhich is not expressed as a differential
polynomial in the lower-spin ones, generalising the construction of W(L)
2=T(L),W(L)
3andW(L)
4above.
We stress that this scheme is somehow quite efficient to find the chiral local fields of the theory, as it
relates this problem to a quite simpler purely algebraic question, namely the determination of invariant
multilinear forms on V+. As a matter of comparison, a brute force search for a spin-3 chiral local field
such as W(L)
3, starting from a general ansatz built from ( θ, α) and their derivatives, is already a quite
complicated and tedious task, while the derivation of W(L)
3above can be easily done in a few lines.
In addition, the procedure also provides a rather efficient way of computing the Poisson bracket
between elements of W(L). Indeed, rather than performing a canonical analysis, in terms of the
coordinate fields ( θ, α) and their conjugate momenta, we can use the expression of the fields W(L)
sin
terms of the parafermions Ψ(L), or alternatively the currents J+andJh(see Subsubsection 3.2.3).
The latter satisfy rather simple closed Poisson algebras, which can be used to compute the Poisson
structure of W(L). We expect that the Poisson bracket of W(L)
s(x) and W(L)
s′(y) takes the form of
a linear combination of derived Dirac distributions ∂k
xδ(x−y), with k∈ {0, . . . , s +s′−1}, whose
coefficients are differential polynomials in the fields W(L)
r(x), for r∈ {2, . . . , s +s′−2}. The typical
example of such a bracket is the one of W(L)
2=T(L)with itself, which takes the form of the classical
Virasoro algebra (3.65a).
The Lorentzian black hole σ-model. For future reference, we end this subsection with a brief
discussion of a close cousin of the SU(2)/U(1) gauged WZW theory, namely the Lorentzian black
holeσ-model, which corresponds to an axially gauged SL(2,R)/RWZW model [38]. The degenerate
E-model interpretation of this theory is based on the double algebra d=sl(2,R)×sl(2,R) and the
gauge subalgebra h=RT1=R(t1,−t1), where t1= diag(1 ,−1) is the Cartan generator of sl(2,R).
Compared to the SU(2)/U(1) case considered earlier, we first note that this generator differs by a
factor i from its compact analogue defined in equation (4.18), as one can expect. The other difference
is the minus sign in the second entry of T1= (t1,−t1), which encodes the fact that we are now gauging
an axial symmetry rather than a vectorial one. One easily checks that this definition of hyields an
isotropic subalgebra of d, as required. This model can be analysed following the exact same method
as for the vector SU(2)/U(1) theory above: we will skip all the details of this analysis and simply give
the main end results, using the parallel with the compact case.
We find that the target space of the σ-model is still described by two physical fields ( θ, α), which,
compared to the SU(2)/U(1) case, are now valued in Rrather than being angles. The metric and
dilaton of this target space read
ds2=𝓀 
dθ2−tanh2(θ) dα2
and Φ = −1
2log 
cosh2(θ)
. (4.46)
The model possesses an isometry, acting as translations of the coordinate α. The corresponding
conserved current Π ±and dual field α(D)(t, x) are given by
Π±=−tanh2(θ)∂±α=±∂±α(D)and α(D)(t, x) =−Zx
tanh2 
θ(t, y)
∂tα(t, y) dy .(4.47)
Moreover, we find non-local left-moving parafermions
ψ(L)=eα−α(D) 
∂+θ+ tanh( θ)∂+α), eψ(L)=eα(D)−α 
∂+θ−tanh( θ)∂+α), (4.48)
as well as right-moving ones which we will not describe for conciseness. These are the analogues of
theSU(2)/U(1) parafermions (4.36): note that here, these fields are real and eψ(L)is not the complex
53conjugate of ψ(L)(contrarily to ψ(L)in the compact case). As expected, the model also possesses local
chiral fields, forming a SL(2,R)/RcosetW-algebra. The first few of these fields read
𝓀−1W(L)
2=ψ(L)eψ(L)= (∂+θ)2−tanh2(θ) (∂+α)2, (4.49a)
𝓀−1W(L)
3= 
ψ(L)∂+eψ(L)−eψ(L)∂+ψ(L)
/2 (4.49b)
= tanh2(θ) 
tanh2(θ) + 1
(∂+α)3+ tanh( θ) 
∂2
+θ ∂+α−∂+θ ∂2
+α
−2 (∂+θ)2∂+α ,
𝓀−1W(L)
4=ψ(L)∂2
+eψ(L)+eψ(L)∂2
+ψ(L). (4.49c)
Finally, it will be useful for future reference to write the metric (4.46) in so-called conformal
coordinates, i.e.to bring it to the form of the flat Minkowski metric multiplied by a unique (non-
constant) factor. This is done by introducing the new coordinate r=−log 
sinh(θ)
and performing
the change of variables ( θ, α)7→(r, α) in the metric (4.46). We then simply find
ds2=𝓀dr2−dα2
1 +e2r. (4.50)
4.3 An example based on a solvable Lie group
Up to a few exceptions, many of the conformal σ-models that are studied in the literature are based
on simple or semi-simple Lie groups. Our goal in this subsection is to describe a conformal degenerate
E-model which, in contrast, is built from a solvable Lie group.
Double group and gauge subgroup. Consider 6 ×6 matrices of the form
M(ξi) =
1eiξ1(ξ3+ iξ4)eiξ1(ξ5+ iξ6) 0 0 i ξ2+1
2(ξ2
3+ξ2
4−ξ2
5−ξ2
6)
0 eiξ1 0 0 0 ξ3−iξ4
0 0 eiξ1 0 0 −ξ5+ iξ6
0 0 0 e−iξ10 ξ3+ iξ4
0 0 0 0 e−iξ1 ξ5+ iξ6
0 0 0 0 0 1
,(4.51)
parametrised by 6 numbers ξ1∈[0,2π] and ξ2, . . . , ξ 6∈R. We then define
D=
M(ξi), ξ1∈[0,2π], ξ2, . . . , ξ 6∈R	
, (4.52)
i.e.the set formed by all these matrices. One checks that Dis stable under matrix inversion and
multiplication and thus form a 6-dimensional Lie subgroup of SL(6,C). We will take Dto be our
E-model double group in this subsection. The main difference with the other examples considered in
this article is that this group is not semi-simple, but instead is solvable (this follows directly from the
fact that it has a representation formed by triangular matrices).
The identity of the group Dcorresponds to the point ξi= 0, i.e.M(0) = Id. To obtain the Lie
algebra d= Lie( D), one thus has to look at the matrices M(ξi) for infinitesimal ξi’s. We find
M(ξi) = Id +6X
i=1Tiξi+o(ξi), (4.53)
where T1, . . . , T 6are 6×6 triangular matrices whose explicit expression we will not give here for con-
ciseness. The family {TA}6
A=1forms a basis of the Lie algebra dofD. The non-vanishing commutation
relations in this basis read
[T1, T3] =−T4,[T1, T4] =T3,[T1, T5] =−T6,[T1, T6] =T5,[T3, T4] =−2T2,[T5, T6] = 2T2.
(4.54)
54In particular, we note that the element T2∈dis central, i.e.commutes with all the other elements.
In order to see das the double Lie algebra of an E-model, we have to equip it with a non-
degenerate invariant bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩, with split signature. Here we will define this form by its
entries ηAB=⟨TA, TB⟩in the basis {TA}6
A=1. Namely, we let
 
ηAB
A,B=1,...,6=𝓀
0 1 0 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 2 0 0 0
0 0 0 2 0 0
0 0 0 0 −2 0
0 0 0 0 0 −2
. (4.55)
One shows that this choice indeed defines an invariant bilinear form of split signature (3 ,3).
Let us now discuss our choice of gauge subgroup H⊂D. We will take it to be the 1-parameter
subgroup generated by T1. Concretely, His then composed of the matrices M(ξ1,0,0,0,0,0) with
ξ1∈[0,2π],i.e.the matrices of the form (4.51) where all the parameters ξiare set to zero except ξ1.
The corresponding Lie algebra h= Lie( H) is then trivially given by
h=RT1, with T1=
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 i 0 0 0 0
0 0 i 0 0 0
0 0 0 −i 0 0
0 0 0 0 −i 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
. (4.56)
Since the entry η11in the bilinear form (4.55) is vanishing, we see that the subalgebra his isotropic.
It thus possesses the right properties to be chosen as the gauge subalgebra of a degenerate E-model.
E-operator. We will define the operator bE:d→dof the degenerate E-model by its action
bE(T1) = 0 ,bE(T2) =T1,bE(T3) =T3,bE(T4) =T4,bE(T5) =−T5,bE(T6) =−T6 (4.57)
on the basis {TA}6
A=1. One easily checks that bE|3
h⊥=bE|h⊥, Ker(bE) = handbEcommutes with the
adjoint action of h, ensuring that bEis an appropriate choice of bE-operator.
In that case, the eigenspace decomposition h⊥=h⊕V+⊕V−with h= Ker( bE) and V±= Ker( bE∓Id)
is given by V+=RT3⊕RT4andV−=RT5⊕RT6. In matrix terms, this gives
V+=


0a0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 a
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 a
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
, a∈C

and V−=


0 0 a0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 −a
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 a
0 0 0 0 0 0
, a∈C

.(4.58)
The subspace h′, defined in Subsection 3.1 as the subspace of dwhich is isotropic, orthogonal to
V±and pairing non-degenerately with h, is given in the present case by h′=RT2. One easily checks
that h⊕h′is a subalgebra of dand that [ V+, V−] ={0}. Thus, the degenerate E-model considered
here satisfies the strong conformal condition introduced in Subsection 3.2.
Maximally isotroptic subalgebra and gauge symmetries. To relate this degenerate E-model
to aσ-model, we have to choose a maximally isotropic subalgebra kind. In terms of the basis {TA}6
A=1,
we will take it to be
k=RT1⊕R(T3+T5)⊕R(T4+T6). (4.59)
55One easily checks that kis stable under commutation and is isotropic with respect to the bilinear form
(4.55). The corresponding subgroup K⊂Dcan be seen as
K=


1eiζa eiζa 0 0 0
0eiζ0 0 0 a
0 0 eiζ0 0 −a
0 0 0 e−iζ0 a
0 0 0 0 e−iζa
0 0 0 0 0 1
, ζ∈[0,2π], a∈C

. (4.60)
The resulting σ-model is described by a D-valued field ℓ(t, x), subject to a K-left and a H-right
gauge symmetries, acting as ℓ7→kℓh, where k∈Kandh∈Hare arbitrary fields. Let us first treat
the left symmetry. As explained above, elements of the double group Dcan be seen as matrices M(ξi),
parametrised by 6 numbers ξias in equation (4.51). Consider now the left multiplication k M(ξi),
where kis valued in the group Kdefined above. One shows that kcan be uniquely chosen so that it
“eliminates” the parameters ( ξ1, ξ5, ξ6),i.e.such that k M(ξi) takes the form M(0, ξ′
2, ξ′
3, ξ′
4,0,0). In
other words, any equivalence class in the left quotient K\Dcontains a unique representative of the
form M(0, ξ′
2, ξ′
3, ξ′
4,0,0). We will use this to fix the K-left gauge symmetry of the model by choosing
the field ℓ(t, x) to be of this form. More precisely, we will parametrise it as
ℓ(t, x) =M 
0, α(t, x), r(t, x) cos( β(t, x)), r(t, x) sin(β(t, x)),0,0
(4.61)
in terms of three coordinate fields ( r, α, β ), valued in R≥0×R×[0,2π].
In the above equation, we have parametrised the third and fourth entries of Musing polar co-
ordinates ( r, β), rather than Cartesian ones. This has to do with the right gauge symmetry of the
model, with gauge group H= exp( RT1). Indeed, a straightforward analysis shows that the gauge
transformation with parameter h= exp( η T1) acts on the fields ( r, α, β ) by
r7−→r, α 7−→α, β 7−→β+η . (4.62)
Thus, the fields ( r, α) are physical degrees of freedom, while βcan be gauged away.
Action and target space geometry. We now have all the data necessary to derive the σ-model
realising the conformal degenerate E-model considered above. We will not give the details of this
computation here, as it is quite similar to the one presented in the previous subsections for gauged
WZW models. The main intermediate step is the computation of the projectors W±
ℓ, characterised
by equation (3.35). In the end, we find that the action of the σ-model is given by
S[r, α] = 2𝓀ZZ
R×S1dtdx 
∂+r ∂−r+r−2∂+α ∂−α
, (4.63)
in terms of the fields ( r, α) introduced earlier in the parametrisation (4.61). As expected, the third
field βappearing in this equation does not enter the action in the end, as it is not gauge-invariant,
contrarily to ( r, α).
Let us quickly describe the target space of the model. It is 2-dimensional and has metric
ds2=𝓀
dr2+dα2
r2
, (4.64)
with a singularity at r= 0. One checks that this geometry defines a 1-loop conformal σ-model by
showing that its Ricci tensor satisfies the equation (4.27), with the dilaton defined as
Φ =−log(r) + constant . (4.65)
To the best of our knowledge, this conformal target space cannot be obtained from a gauged WZW
model. The metric (4.64) possesses an R-isometry, acting by translation of the coordinate α. This
corresponds to a global symmetry of the σ-model (4.63), with conserved current
Π±=∂±α
r2, satisfying ∂+Π−+∂−Π+= 0. (4.66)
56This conservation equation ensures the existence of the so-called dual field
α(D)(t, x) =Zx∂tα(t, y)
r(t, y)2dy , such that ∂±α(D)=±Π±. (4.67)
For more details and explanations, we refer to the similar discussion around equation (4.32), in the
context of the SU(2)/U(1) gauged WZW model.
Parafermions and W-algebra. The fact that the σ-model (4.63) was constructed as a degenerate
E-model satisfying the strong conformal condition allows a simple description of its chiral fields. More
precisely, we have non-local parafermionic chiral fields, as well as local ones, forming the W-algebra
of the theory. Their construction is very similar to the ones of the SU(2)/U(1) gauged WZW model
in the previous subsection. For this reason, we will not detail it here and will simply summarise the
end results. For simplicity, we will also focus only on the left-moving sector.
The parafermionic field Ψ(L)is valued in the subspace V+, defined as in equation (4.58). In terms
of the σ-model fields, it takes the form
Ψ(L)=
0ψ(L)0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 ψ(L)
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 ψ(L)
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
, where ψ(L)=eiα(D) 
∂+r+ ir−1∂+α
(4.68)
andψ(L)is the complex conjugate of ψ(L). In this formula, α(D)is the dual field, introduced in
equation (4.67). The non-local field ψ(L)is left-moving, i.e.satisfy ∂−ψ(L)= 0 under the equations
of motion derived from the action (4.63). Moreover, it satisfies a very simple Poisson algebra:

ψ(L)(x), ψ(L)(y)	
= 0 and
ψ(L)(x),ψ(L)(y)	
=−1
𝓀∂xδ(x−y). (4.69)
This Poisson algebra is a special case of the general one (3.63a), for the particular choice of h,h′and
V+considered here. We note that, contrarily to the parafermionic algebra (4.37) of the SU(2)/U(1)
gauged WZW model, the present one does not contain any sign function ϵ(x−y), even if the field ψ(L)
is non-local. This has to do with the rather simple algebraic structure underlying the theory: more
precisely, the fact that the subspace h′=RT2is central in densures that the ϵ(x−y) terms in the
bracket (3.63a) vanish in the present case.
The construction of the W-algebra is completely analogous to the one of the SU(2)/U(1) gauged
WZW model in Subsection 4.2. Indeed, recall that the key ingredients in this construction are the
multilinear forms on V+invariant under the adjoint action of H: as it turns out, the group H≃U(1)
and its action on V+for the present case are isomorphic to the ones for the SU(2)/U(1) gauged
WZW model. We will thus obtain the same expressions for the local chiral fields W(L)
sin terms of
the parafermions ψ(L)andψ(L): the only difference will then come from the explicit relation of these
parafermions with the σ-model fields. The first two elements that we obtain by this construction are
W(L)
2=T(L)=𝓀ψ(L)ψ(L)=𝓀 
 
∂+r2+ 
∂+α2
r2!
, (4.70)
W(L)
3=𝓀
2i 
ψ(L)∂+ψ(L)−ψ(L)∂+ψ(L)
=𝓀(∂+α)3
r4+∂+r ∂2
+α−∂2
+r ∂+α
r
. (4.71)
For consistency, one easily checks that ∂−W(L)
2=∂−W(L)
3= 0.
57Following the general discussion of Subsection 3.2, the left-moving parafermions and W-algebra
described above are obtained respectively as the non-local and local observables in the Hamiltonian
reduction of the d+–current algebra with respect to the subalgebra h, where d+=h⊕h′⊕V+. In the
present case, we find that d+is a 4-dimensional Lie algebra, generated by T1, . . . , T 4. It is isomorphic
to the so-called diamond algebra, or equivalently to a centrally extended 2d Poincar´ e algebra, which is
a well-known example of a non-semi-simple Lie algebra admiting a non-degenerate invariant bilinear
form (this Lie algebra also plays a crucial role in the Nappi-Witten model [55]). Similarly, the right-
moving sector of the theory is described by the Hamiltonian reduction of a d−–current algebra by h,
where d−=h⊕h′⊕V−is also isomorphic to the diamond algebra.
We note that, contrarily to the gauged WZW theory, the conformal E-model described in this
subsection does not fit into the GKO coset construction of Subsubsection 3.2.4. More precisely,
the double algebra dis not the direct sum of two orthogonal subalgebras and the decomposition
d=h⊕h′⊕V+⊕V−underlying the model is not of the form considered in this construction – see
equations (3.74) and (3.75) and the discussion around. This means that the chiral Poisson algebras
of the model are obtained as Hamiltonian reductions of a current algebra but not as coset algebras.
The structure underlying this theory then takes a form which is technically slightly different from
the standard coset CFTs and in particular gauged WZW models. It could however happen that the
target space (4.51) of the theory still arises from a gauged WZW model, based on another degenerate
E-model (we will see such phenomema happening in the next subsection, for other examples): to the
best of our knowledge, this is not the case here.
4.4 The conformal point of the SL(2,R) Klimˇ c´ ık model
Our final example will be the conformal point of the SL(2,R) Klimˇ c´ ık (or Bi-Yang-Baxter) model.
The general Klimˇ c´ ık model was introduced in [33,34] and is an integrable double deformation of the
Principal Chiral Model on a simple group G, generalising a construction of Fateev [35] for G=SU(2).
The conformal limit of this theory has been studied in details in [35–37], especially for G=SU(2). In
this subsection, we revisit the conformal point for G=SL(2,R), using the formalism of degenerate
E-models26and the general approach developed in this article, guided by the results of [36, 37]27. In
addition to providing another explicit illustration of this approach, this will also allow us to point
out some of its subtleties and open questions, such as the existence of different target space domains
in conformal limits of E-models or the fact that the E-model W-algebra introduced in Subsection 3.2
does not always encode all the local chiral fields of the corresponding σ-model. To keep the length of
the subsection contained, we will mostly focus on these aspects and will not give many details on the
construction of the theory as a conformal E-model or the structure of its chiral Poisson algebras.
Moreover, we will end this subsection by considering a one-parameter deformation of this theory,
which is based on the same underlying degenerate E-model but with a deformed choice of maximally
isotropic subalgebra (corresponding to a so-called TsT transformation). This will lead to a more
complicated target space, defining a non-trivial conformal σ-model with two parameters. As we will
see, although the theories considered in this subsection initially arise from a quite distinct construction,
the target spaces that we will obtain will in fact be related to gauged WZW models on SL(2,R)/R
and 
SL(2,R)×R
/R. Using Subsection 4.1, the latter can also be obtained from degenerate E-
models, which are however different from the one initially considered for the Klimˇ c´ ık model (including
a different choice of double algebra and of gauged subalgebra). This shows that various, seemingly
unrelated, conformal E-models can in fact lead to the same theory.
26The Klimˇ c´ ık model was reinterpreted as a non-degenerate E-model in [56]. However, in this subsection, we will use
a different formulation, this time as a degenerate E-model, which is better suited for our purpose. Up to differences in
reality conditions, we expect this formulation to be related to a particular limit of the one considered in [26].
27The references [36, 37] were mostly considering the SU(2) case and were motivated by the study of integrable
structures at the conformal point. In particular, the formalism of affine Gaudin models used in [37] is closely related to
the one of E-models and provided strong inspirations for the present work. Here, we will consider G=SL(2,R) rather
than G=SU(2), to avoid certain issues with reality conditions (however, most of the results of [36, 37] can be readily
transposed to this case).
58The degenerate E-model. We denote by κ(·,·) =−Tr(··) the minimal bilinear form on sl(2,R)
(where the trace is taken in the fundamental representation). We will define a degenerate E-model
with double group D=SL(2,R)×4. We equip the Lie algebra d=sl(2,R)×4with the bilinear form

(X1, . . . , X 4),(Y1, . . . , Y 4)
=𝓀
1 +ν2
ν2κ(X1, Y1) +κ(X2, Y2)−ν2κ(X3, Y3)−κ(X4, Y4)
,(4.72)
defined in terms of parameters 𝓀>0 and ν >0. It is non-degenerate, invariant and of split signature.
We will denote pure tensor products in d≃R4⊗sl(2,R) by ( a1, a2, a3, a4)⊗X, with ai∈Rand
X∈sl(2,R) (for instance, in these notations, the element ( X,0,2X,0) in sl(2,R)×4corresponds to
(1,0,2,0)⊗X). We then let
h=sl(2,R)diag= (1,1,1,1)⊗sl(2,R), h′= (1,1,−1,−1)⊗sl(2,R), (4.73)
V+= (1,−ν2,0,0)⊗sl(2,R) and V−= (0,0,1,−ν2)⊗sl(2,R). (4.74)
This specifies the decomposition d=h⊕h′⊕V+⊕V−underlying the degenerate E-model, where his
the gauge isotropic subalgebra, h′its dual space and V±the eigenspaces of the bE-operator (we refer
to Section 3 for details). One checks that this decomposition satisfies the strong conformal condition
introduced in Subsection 3.2, ensuring that the degenerate E-model will be conformal.
Maximally isotropic subalgebra and physical fields. To build a σ-model corresponding to this
E-model, the next step is to pick a maximally isotropic subalgebra kinside of d. For the general Klimˇ c´ ık
model on a group G, it is built from the choice of an R-matrix, i.e.a skew-symmetric endomorphism
of Lie( G) satisfying the classical Yang-Baxter equation. In the case at hand, our choice for kcan be
written explicitly as
k=
(a1, a2,−a1,−a2)⊗1 0
0−1
+ (a3, a4,0,0)⊗0 1
0 0
+ (0,0, a5, a6)⊗0 0
1 0
, ai∈R
.
(4.75)
This is clearly a 6-dimensional subspace of dand one easily checks that it is isotropic and stable under
the commutation relations of d≃R4⊗sl(2,R).
We denote by KandH=SL(2,R)diagthe subgroups of D=SL(2,R)×4with Lie algebras kand h.
Following the general construction recalled in Subsubsection 3.1.2, the σ-model that we are building
is described by a D-valued field ℓ(t, x), with gauge symmetries ℓ7→kℓh, (k, h)∈K×H, so that the
target space is the double quotient K\D/H . In what follows, we will focus on a particular domain in
this target space. At the level of the Lie algebra, the above choice of kand hinduces a decomposition
d=k⊕ 
(1,0,1,0)⊗sl(2,R)
⊕h. (4.76)
“Exponentiating” this result, we find that there is a neighbourhood of the identity in the group D
which takes the factorised form
K· 
(g,Id, g,Id), g∈SL(2,R)	
·H , (4.77)
which we will call the main cell of D. Taking the left and right quotients by KandHrespectively,
we obtain a subdomain of the target space described by the choice of g∈SL(2,R). In terms of the
σ-model, focusing on this domain amounts to requiring the D-valued field ℓ(t, x) to take the form
ℓ(t, x) = 
g(t, x),Id, g(t, x),Id
, (4.78)
where g(t, x) is valued in SL(2,R). This corresponds to starting from ℓin the main cell of Dand
imposing a complete gauge-fixing of both the K- and H-gauge symmetries. All the degrees of freedom
ing(t, x) are thus physical ones and the resulting theory can be seen as a σ-model on SL(2,R).
To further extract these degrees of freedom, we have to parametrise g(t, x) by making a choice of
coordinates on SL(2,R). Here, we will pick some which are adapted to our model and in particular
59will make its symmetries manifest. The price to pay for this choice is that these coordinates will not
be global ones: to cover the whole SL(2,R) manifold, one would have to consider different sets of such
coordinates on various patches. For simplicity, we will not describe all of them in this article and will
focus only on one patch, thus restricting to a specific subdomain in the target space of the σ-model.
In this domain, we will parametrise the SL(2,R)-valued field g(t, x) as
g(t, x) =1p
1 +e2r(t,x)
e−α(t,x)+1
2(ν−ν−1)χ(t,x)−er(t,x)−1
2(ν+ν−1)χ(t,x)
er(t,x)+1
2(ν+ν−1)χ(t,x)eα(t,x)−1
2(ν−ν−1)χ(t,x)
, (4.79)
in terms of three scalar fields 
r(t, x), α(t, x), χ(t, x)
valued in R(the dependence on ν, which is one
of the constant parameter entering the bilinear form (4.72), was introduced for later convenience).
One easily checks that the above matrix is of determinant 1 and thus belongs to SL(2,R).
Action and target space geometry. Given the setup described in the previous paragraphs, one
can derive the action of the σ-model following the construction of Subsubsection 3.1.2. We will skip
all the details of this computation and give only the end result, written in terms of the three fields 
r(t, x), α(t, x), χ(t, x)
introduced above. We find that the action reads
S[r, α, χ ] = 2𝓀ZZ
R×S1dtdx∂+r ∂−r−∂+α ∂−α
1 +e2r−∂+χ ∂−χ
. (4.80)
We note that in the derivation of this formula, we discarded a total derivative B-field. From the action
(4.80), one directly reads off the metric of the corresponding 3-dimensional target space:
ds2=𝓀dr2−dα2
1 +e2r−dχ2
. (4.81)
We see in particular that χcompletely decouples, so that the theory in fact becomes a free field χplus
aσ-model with 2-dimensional target space, described by the coordinate fields ( r, α). We recognise
in this target space the 2d Lorentzian black hole geometry (4.50), which can be obtained from a
SL(2,R)/Raxially gauged WZW model [38], as reviewed at the end of Subsection 4.2.
Chiral fields. The fact that the theory (4.80) was built as a degenerate E-model satisfying the
strong conformal condition means that it possesses many chiral fields, following the results of Subsec-
tion 3.2. We will not describe these fields and their Poisson algebras in details but will comment on
some related aspects, as they illustrate some of the natural limits, open questions and perspectives of
the conformal E-model formalism. For simplicity, we will focus on left-moving fields.
The first type of left-moving fields that one can obtain from the E-model approach are non-local
parafermions. In the present case, applying the general construction of Subsubsection 3.2.2 in fact
leads to complicated parafermions, whose expression in terms of the σ-model fields ( r, α, χ ) is quite
involved. This does not reflect the simple form of the action (4.80). In particular, since the boson
χcompletely decouples in this action, the most obvious left-moving field of the theory is simply the
derivative ∂+χ. In addition, more complicated but still rather simple left-moving fields are given by
the parafermions of the Lorentzian black hole σ-model in terms of ( r, α) – see the end of Subsection
4.2 and more precisely equation (4.48), up to the change of coordinate ( θ, α)7→(r, α). These are not
the chiral fields that naturally arise from the construction of Subsubsection 3.2.2. However, this does
not mean that they are not describable from the E-model perspective, as we now explain.
Recall that the approach of Subsubsection 3.2.2 relied on a simple choice of gauge-fixing, in which
the components of the E-model current J+became the left-moving parafermions. For the present
model, there exists in fact another type of gauge-fixing condition, in which J+simply yields the free
boson ∂+χand the black hole parafermions. This gauge-fixing condition, which we will not write
down here, can be readily obtained from the results of [37, Subsection 6.2], replacing the group SU(2)
60considered there with the one SL(2,R) considered here. We expect it to be mostly adapted to the
particular choice of maximally isotropic subalgebra kconsidered here28, but not necessarily to other
potential choices. In contrast, the general approach of Subsubsection 3.2.2 did not rely at all on the
choice of k. This suggests that there might exist a more refined construction than this general one,
which could take into account some specificity of the choice of kand thus the particular form of the
σ-model realising the underlying conformal E-model. A more thorough analysis of these aspects is out
of the scope of this paper but constitutes a natural perspective for future developments.
In addition to non-local parafermions, the other left-moving fields obtained from the E-model
formalism are the local ones, forming the W-algebra of the theory. Applying the general construction
of Subsubsection 3.2.3 in the present case, we obtain the sl(2,R)×sl(2,R)/sl(2,R)diagcosetW-algebra
(see [58] for a detailed description of this W-algebra at the quantum level). The first few fields obtained
this way (which have spins 2, 4 and 6) can be easily written explicitly and are the analogues of those
discussed in [37, Subsections 5.3 and 6.2], replacing the group SU(2) by SL(2,R). Here also, this
construction coming from the E-model formalism does not capture completely the simplicity of the
σ-model (4.80). For instance, the derivative ∂+χis an obvious spin-1 local left-moving field of the
theory, which however does not appear in the coset W-algebra. Moreover, the latter also does not
describe all the left-moving local densities (4.49) built from the Lorentzian black hole fields, which
form a SL(2,R)/RcosetW-algebra (see the end of Subsection 4.2). In other words, the complete set
of local left-moving fields of the theory (4.80) is composed by the Heinsenberg algebra of ∂+χand the
SL(2,R)/RcosetW-algebra built from the fields ( r, α), but the E-model construction only yields a
subalgebra thereof, corresponding to a sl(2,R)×sl(2,R)/sl(2,R)diagcoset (we refer to [37, Subsections
5.3 and 6.2] for a detailed discussion of the SU(2) analogue of this statement).
This is again a specificity that comes with the particular choice of isotropic subalgebra kmade
here. Another choice for this subalgebra should lead to the SL(2,R)×SL(2,R)/SL(2,R)diaggauged
WZW model (following the construction of Subsection 2.3). For that case, we expect the E-model
formalism to capture all the local chiral fields. It would be interesting to explore these aspects in more
details in the future and in particular see if the W-algebra construction of Subsection 3.2.3 can be
refined to take into account the specificity of the choice of k.
Non-conformal Klimˇ c´ ık model and its conformal limit. As mentioned earlier, the σ-model
(4.80) can be thought of as the UV limit of a non-conformal theory, the Klimˇ c´ ık model on SL(2,R).
Similarly to the conformal point, this theory can be realised as a degenerate E-model: more precisely,
it shares the same double Lie algebra dand isotropic subalgebras hand kas the conformal point but
differs in the choice of subspaces V±(or equivalently of bE-operator). The resulting σ-model can be
described in terms of three coupling constants ( 𝓀, ν, λ): the first two are the same parameters ( 𝓀, ν)
as in the conformal theory above, while λ≥0 is a new parameter encoding the perturbation away
from the conformal point. Letting µ= (1−ν2)/(1+ν2) and using the coordinates ( r, α, χ ) introduced
earlier, this non-conformal σ-model corresponds to the metric
ds2=𝓀1−λ2
1−λ2µ21/21−λ2µ2
(1 +e2r)(1 + λ2e−2r)(dr2−dα2)−1 +λ2µ2e−2r
1 +λ2e−2rdχ2(4.82)
−4λ2e−2r
1 +λ2e−2rν2
(1 +ν2)2dα2
1 +e2r+µ ν
1 +ν2dαdχ
.
As expected, one shows that this theory admits a non-trivial RG-flow. The above parametrisation has
been chosen so that the coupling constants ( 𝓀, ν) are in fact RG-invariants, while the new one λruns.
More precisely, we find the following expressions for the RG-flow of λand the dilaton of the model:
dλ
dτ=−2ℏλ
𝓀1−λ2
1−λ2µ21/2
and Φ = r−1
2log1 +e2r
1 +λ2e−2r
+ constant . (4.83)
28More concretely, the gauge-fixing condition of [37, Subsection 6.2] can be naturally expressed in terms of the R-matrix
underlying the Klimˇ c´ ık model, which is the main ingredient used to construct the subalgebra k.
61In particular, one sees that the UV limit τ→+∞of the theory corresponds to λ→0. This is
consistent with the previous results of this subsection. Indeed, it is clear that setting λ= 0 into the
equation (4.82) yields the metric (4.81) of the conformal model introduced earlier. The latter thus
arises in the UV limit of the full non-conformal Klimˇ c´ ık model.
The main goal of this paragraph is to explain that this UV limit is in fact a bit more subtle than
that.29To understand why, let us quickly describe the geometry of the non-conformal target space
(4.82). Its submanifolds corresponding to fixed values of the coordinate rare infinitely-extended flat
2-dimensional planes, described by the two coordinates ( α, χ)∈R2. In contrast, let us consider a
curveCin this target space corresponding to fixed values of the coordinates ( α, χ) and rvarying from
−∞to +∞. The length of this curve with respect to the metric (4.82) can be computed by integratingp
ds2|Coverr∈R. We find that it is finite for λstrictly positive, but behaves as ∝ |log(λ)|when λ
approaches 0. The length of Cthus diverges logarithmically in the UV-limit λ→0. Schematically,
this means that the target space of the theory “decompactifies” along the r-direction in this limit.
This introduces some subtleties in the way we take the UV-limit of the metric (4.82). Indeed, one
can consider various such limits focusing on different “domains” along the r-direction. Earlier, we
simply took the limit λ→0 while keeping the coordinate rfixed and in particular finite: we then
recovered the metric (4.81) of the Lorentzian black hole times a decoupled line. Alternatively, one can
consider a shifted coordinate ˜ r=r−alog(λ) and take the limit keeping ˜ rfinite: schematically, when
λapproaches 0, this new coordinate ˜ rwill probe different domains along the decompactifying curve
C, depending on the value of the parameter a. For instance, for a <0<1, we find that the limit
λ→0, ˜rfixed, of the metric (4.82) simply yields the flat metric
ds2
as=𝓀(d˜r2−dα2−dχ2). (4.84)
This corresponds to staying in a region away from the tips of the curve Cwhile taking the limit. In
this region, which we call the asymptotic domain of the theory, the geometry approaches the flat one
when λ→0 (the corresponding σ-model is thus asymptotically free in this domain).
Another interesting case is to take a= 1. Doing so, we find that the limit of the metric (4.82)
when λ→0 and ˜ rstays fixed takes the form
ds2
II=𝓀
1 +e−2˜r
d˜r2−
1 +4ν2e−2˜r
(1 +ν2)2
dα2−
1 +(1−ν2)2e−2˜r
(1 +ν2)2
dχ2−4ν(1−ν2)e−2˜r
(1 +ν2)2dαdχ
.
Performing a well-chosen rotation of ( α, χ) to new coordinates (˜ α,˜χ), one brings this metric to
ds2
II=𝓀d˜r2−d˜α2
1 +e−2˜r−d˜χ2
. (4.85)
We thus find a second domain in which the target space flows to a Lorentzian black hole times a line.
It is natural to wonder what is the interpretation of these different domains in the formalism
of conformal degenerate E-models. The conformal theory in the first domain (corresponding to the
limit with rfixed) was initially introduced in this subsection as a specific conformal E-model. The
latter can in fact be seen as the naive λ→0 limit of the E-model underlying the non-conformal
theory (in particular, this limit does not change the double algebra d, its bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩or the
isotropic subalgebra k, but only the subspaces V±). It would be interesting to understand, if it
exists, the E-model interpretation of the other two domains (4.84) and (4.85). Some elements in the
analysis of [36, 37], which concerned the SU(2) analogue of the present story, could suggest that the
E-model current Jwill have a non-degenerate limit in these domains only if one performs a well-chosen
conjugation before we take λ→0. This offers a potential approach to explore these questions.
29This is inspired by various already established results in the literature. We refer for instance to the lecture notes [54]
and to [37,57] for a more detailed discussion of similar ideas.
62Deformed conformal σ-model. We end this subsection by describing a deformation of the theory
(4.80) which still defines a conformal σ-model but which corresponds to a more complicated target
space. It is obtained by considering the exact same underlying degenerate E-model, but deforming
the maximally isotropic subalgebra k, initially chosen as in equation (4.75). We now take it to be
kρ=
a1(1,0,−cos 2ρ,−νsin 2ρ)⊗1 0
0−1
+a2(0,1, ν−1sin 2ρ,−cos 2ρ)⊗1 0
0−1
(4.86)
+ (a3, a4,0,0)⊗0 1
0 0
+ (0,0, a5, a6)⊗0 0
1 0
, ai∈R
,
where ρis a constant deformation parameter. It is clear that kρreduces to the subalgebra kdefined
in equation (4.75) when ρ= 0. Moreover, one checks that it still defines a subalgebra of d, maximally
isotropic with respect to the bilinear form (4.72). We expect that this deformation corresponds to
applying a so-called TsT transformation [59] to the undeformed model.30
The explicit σ-model corresponding to the deformed isotropic subalgebra kρcan be obtained from
the same procedure as the undeformed one (4.80), which we do not detail here. In order to present
the end result in the simplest form, we first have to redefine the coordinate fields ( α, χ) appearing in
the parametrisation (4.79) of the field g(t, x). More precisely, we perform the following rescaling and
r–dependent shift
α7−→α
cosρ+νtanρ
1 +ν2 
2r−log(1 + e2r)
, χ 7−→χ
cosρ+(1−ν2) tanρ
2(1 + ν2) 
2r−log(1 + e2r)
.(4.87)
As one should expect, these new coordinates ( α, χ) coincide with the initial ones in the undeformed
caseρ= 0. In these terms, the deformed metric then takes the form
ds2=𝓀dr2
1 +e2r−dα2
1 + cos2(ρ)e2r−(1 +e2r) dχ2
1 + cos2(ρ)e2r
. (4.88)
It reduces to the metric (4.81) when ρ= 0 and corresponds to a non-trivial deformation of the model.
In particular, the field χis not a decoupled free field when ρ̸= 0, so that the target space is a genuine
3-dimensional manifold and not the direct product of lower-dimensional ones as is the undeformed
caseρ= 0. Moreover, it is important to note that this deformed model also comes with a non-trivial
B-field, which takes the form
B=2𝓀tan(ρ)
1 + cos2(ρ)e2rdχ∧dα . (4.89)
As expected, it vanishes when ρ= 0.31This B-field is essential to obtain a conformal σ-model. Indeed,
one checks that the 1-loop RG-flow of the theory is trivial once we include the non-trivial contribution
of the torsion deriving from Bin the β-functions of the model (using the general results of [2–4]), as
well as the contribution coming from the dilaton
Φ =r−1
2log 
1 + cos2(ρ)e2r
+ constant . (4.90)
The metric (4.88) and B-field (4.89) in fact coincide with the ones of an axially gauged WZW
model on ( SL(2,R)×R)/R, similar to the 3-dimensional black hole geometry considered in [39]. This
30The deformed theory would then correspond to a specific conformal point among the very general class of integrable
models built in the reference [60], which describe deformations of the Klimˇ c´ ık model for any group G, including a
Wess-Zumino term and TsT transformations. In the case of G=SU(2), which is the compact analogue of the setup
G=SL(2,R) considered here, this deformed model becomes equivalent to the integrable σ-model introduced by Lukyanov
in [61]. We finally note that the general class of models of [60] (including TsT transformations) has been realised in the
language of degenerate E-models in [26], at least for the case of compact groups (the E-model considered here should
thus be a special case of this construction, up to differences in reality conditions).
31Note that, along the procedure that we followed to obtain the σ-model, we have in fact discarded a part of the
B-field which is exact and which thus contributes a total derivative to the Lagrangian.
63is analogous to the relation described earlier in this subsection between the undeformed conformal
model and the SL(2,R)/Rgauged WZW theory with an additional free boson. In particular, we see
from this relation that the conformal degenerate E-model considered here will not directly capture all
the details of the chiral structure of the theory, as was the case already for the undeformed model. For
instance, the gauged WZW formulation makes obvious the existence of local spin-( ±1) chiral fields
W(L/R)
1 =(1 +e2r)∂±χ±tan(ρ)∂±α
1 + cos2(ρ)e2r, (4.91)
satisfying ∂−W(L)
1=∂+W(R)
1= 0 and reducing to the chiral free bosons ∂±χin the undeformed case
ρ= 0. These particularly simple chiral densities are not contained in the sl(2,R)×sl(2,R)/sl(2,R)diag
cosetW-algebra arising from the E-model. Similarly, the gauged WZW formulation leads to the
construction of rather simple chiral parafermionic fields, which are not staightforwardly obtained from
theE-model under consideration here. This gives another example where the general constructions of
Subsection 3.2 fail to capture the finer details of the chiral structures that arise from specific choices
of maximally isotropic subalgebra.
The above results illustrate that different, seemingly unrelated, conformal E-models can in fact
produce the same theory, in particular with one of these E-models taking the form of a gauged WZW
model (as in Subsection 4.1). It is not clear to us whether such a phenomenon is an accidental low-
dimensional isomorphism or the sign of a deeper connection. It would be interesting to explore these
aspects further and in particular to develop a more systematic approach to determine whether two
conformal E-models correspond to the same σ-model.
5 Conclusion and perspectives
We conclude by discussing some natural perspectives and potential extensions of the results presented
in this paper.
5.1 More general conformal E-models
A degenerate E-model is characterised by the decomposition d=h⊕h′⊕V+⊕V−of its double algebra.
The main result of this article is that a simple algebraic hypothesis on the commutation relations of the
subspaces V±and h⊕h′ensures the 1-loop conformal invariance of the model as well as the decoupling
of its classical observables into two chiral sectors. We called this hypothesis the strong conformal
condition (see Subsection 3.2 for details). The use of the adjective “strong” to qualify this condition
is due to our expectation that it is not the most general one ensuring the above-mentioned properties
of conformality and chirality. The goal of this subsection is to discuss briefly some perspectives about
these more general cases. We present it in the context of degenerate E-models: however, the discussion
also applies directly to the non-degenerate case by setting h=h′={0}.
Recall the general form (3.47)–(3.48) of the 1-loop RG-flow of E-models [19–22,29]. The triviality
of this flow translates into a collection of complicated algebraic constraints, involving adjoint operators
and projectors on the subspaces V±and h. The strong conformal condition was introduced in the main
text as an easy way to satisfy those. A thorough analysis of the general solutions to these constraints
is beyond the scope of this paper and constitutes a natural perspective for future work. As a first
illustration, we exhibit one such solution here, which generalises the strong conformal condition but
still takes a rather simple form. Namely, let us suppose that the subspaces V±admit an orthogonal
decomposition
V±=V′
±⊕V′′
± (5.1a)
such that
V′
+, V′
−
=
V′′
+, V′′
−
={0} and
V′
±, V′′
∓
⊂V′′
∓. (5.1b)
It is a straightforward algebraic exercise to show that this configuration ensures the vanishing of the
RG-flow (3.47)–(3.48), as required. Moreover, if one considers the subcase V′′
±={0}and further
requires that h⊕h′forms a subalgebra, this condition reduces to the strong conformal one.
64In addition to the triviality of the RG-flow, the strong conformal condition was also useful in the
main text to study the classical chiral fields of the theory. Similarly, the more general configuration
(5.1) also ensures the existence of such fields. This is shown by projecting the equations of motion
(3.33) on V′
±andV′′
±. For instance, we find that the V′
±–valued component J′
±of the current J±is
annihilated by ∂∓up to the adjoint action of the h-valued gauge field A∓. This is the exact analogue
of the situation studied in Subsubsection 3.2.2 for the strong conformal condition. In particular, as
explained there, it ensures the existence of non-local gauge-invariant chiral fields obtained by dressing
J′
±by the adjoint action of a well-chosen H-valued quantity, namely the path-ordered exponential
of the gauge field. The case of the V′′
±–valued component J′′
±is slightly more subtle: we find that
it is annihilated by ∂∓up to the adjoint action of A∓+J′
∓∈h⊕V′
∓. One then also obtains non-
local chiral fields by taking appropriate conjugations of J′′
±, but this time by quantities which are not
directly built from the gauge field only. Moreover, there should exist a procedure similar to the one
of Subsubsection 3.2.3 which also allows the construction of local chiral fields from this setup.32
Let us finally mention that the strong conformal condition also allowed us in the main text to
determine the Poisson brackets obeyed by the chiral fields of the conformal theory, taking the form
of parafermionic algebras and coset-type W-algebras. For the more general case considered here, this
question seems to not be as straightforward to study and would require a more in-depth analysis (in
particular for the chiral fields built from J′′
±). It would be interesting to explore this in the future.
The condition (5.1) discussed above provides a first example of more general configurations useful
to study conformal degenerate E-models. It is a quite natural perspective of the present work to study
further these more general cases and explore the panorama of conformal σ-models obtained by such
constructions. We hope that this panorama will cover a large class of theories, including interesting
examples beyond the class of gauged WZW models. For instance, based on some preliminary results
that we will not discuss here, we expect the condition (5.1) to be relevant for the description of the
Guadagnini-Martellini-Mintchev conformal theory [62] as a degenerate E-model.
5.2 Open questions on the conformal limits of E-models
The Subsection 4.4 was devoted to the conformal limit of the SL(2,R) Klimˇ c´ ık/bi-Yang-Baxter
model [33] and its interpretation in the language of conformal E-models, based on the works [36,37].
This raised various subtleties and open questions in the treatment of E-models satisfying the strong
conformal condition. We briefly summarise these points in this conclusion, as they form natural
subjects for future investigations.
For instance, this theory gives an example of conformal degenerate E-model where the parafermionic
algebra built in Subsubsection 3.2.2 does not entirely reflect the simple chiral structure of the σ-model
and the coset W-algebra of Subsubsection 3.2.3 fails to capture all of its local chiral fields (we refer to
Subsection 4.4 for more details about these statements). We stress here that this property depends
on the choice of maximally isotropic subalgebra k⊂dnecessary to built the σ-model from the under-
lyingE-model. Indeed, the constructions of Subsubsections 3.2.2 and 3.2.3 rely only on the E-model
current, independently of the choice of k. Different choices for the latter lead to various realisations
of the current in terms of the σ-model fields: for certain specific choices, there can exist additional
structures in the chiral algebras of the σ-model which are not directly detectable from the current
formulation. It would be interesting to explore these aspects further and understand whether one can
also take into account the specificity of the choice of kin our description of conformal E-models.
Another subtlety discussed in Subsection 4.4 is the potential existence of several target space
domains in the conformal limit of the SL(2,R) Klimˇ c´ ık model. The target space of this σ-model
possesses a bounded direction which is decompactified in the conformal limit, i.e.whose length with
respect to the target space metric becomes infinite. Schematically, depending on which region of this
decompactifying direction we probe while taking the limit, one obtains different domains in the target
32More precisely, the construction of local chiral fields from the component J′
±follows exactly the W-algebra procedure
developed in Subsubsection 3.2.3. In contrast, the construction of local fields involving the other component J′′
±would
require a more involved analysis.
65space of the conformal model, which become separated by an infinite distance one from another.
In the case of the SL(2,R) Klimˇ c´ ık model, we more precisely obtain three such domains: two of
them form regions in which the target space stays curved in the conformal limit while the last one
is a region where the metric becomes flat. In this so-called asymptotic domain, the σ-model then
essentially flows to a free theory. As mentioned in Subsection 4.4, taking the naive conformal limit
of the degenerate E-model describing the Klimˇ c´ ık theory yields a conformal E-model which captures
only one of the (non-asymptotic) domains. A natural question here is thus whether there exists an
E-model interpretation of the other ones: we refer to the paragraphs around equation (4.85) for more
details and a preliminary discussion of potential directions to answer this question. More generally, it
would be interesting to investigate this phenomenom for a broader class of E-models.
5.3 Quantisation of conformal degenerate E-models
The most natural perspective of the present work is the quantisation of degenerate E-models satis-
fying the strong conformal condition. Indeed, the results presented here on the chiral structure of
these models pave the way for their exact quantisation using standard operator techniques of two-
dimensional conformal field theory. For instance, the classical W-algebra built in Subsubsection 3.2.3
is expected to quantise in the form of a vertex operator algebra, describing the quantum local chiral
fields of the theory. In many cases, for instance when the Lie algebras d±and hare semi-simple (or
more generally reductive), these quantum W-algebras have been studied in great detail in the liter-
ature (see e.g. [30, 31, 63] for a non-exhaustive list of references). Similarly, it is natural to consider
the quantisation of the non-local parafermionic fields of Subsubsection 3.2.2. For semi-simple and
reductive Lie algebras, this has been studied in [8–12]. It would be interesting to apply these various
results to the models considered in this paper as well as extend them to more exotic choices for the
Lie algebras d±and h, which have been less explored so far.
The construction of these algebras of quantum chiral fields is the starting point for the quantisation
of the model. Further steps include for instance the study of representations and characters of these
algebras, the determination of the spectrum of states/fields of the model, the computation of its
correlation functions and the study of its modular invariance. We hope that many of these aspects
can be investigated exploiting the Lie-theoretic formulation underlying conformal degenerate E-models.
5.4 Quantum corrections to conformal E-models geometry
The conformal invariance of the E-models considered in this article was only established at 1-loop, i.e.
at first order in the quantum perturbative expansion of the model. It would be natural to extend these
results to higher-loops. As already established in a variety of cases, this generally requires the addition
of quantum α′-corrections to the geometry of the model, i.e.to its metric and B-field33. It would
be particularly interesting to understand whether such corrections can be understood in a systematic
way for conformal E-models and can be phrased in the Lie-theoretic language used above. Relevant
for these questions is the work [64], which studies the 2-loop RG-flow of non-degenerate E-models,
generalising the 1-loop results of [19–22].
In this context, it might be useful to develop a “target space approach”, by seeing the requirement
of conformal invariance of the σ-models as gravity equations for their target space geometry, subject
toα′-corrections. Of particular interest here is the formulation of gravity in the language of double
field theory [65–68], especially on group manifolds [69–72], which is closely related to E-models.
In another direction, it also seems worthwhile to follow approaches based on the worldsheet theory
rather than that of the target space. For instance, in the work [73], it was argued that the all-
loop quantum corrections to the euclidean black hole σ-model can be inferred using conformal field
theory techniques and in particular the determination and the geometric interpretation of the vertex
operators of the underlying SL(2,R)/U(1) gauged WZW model. A similar approach was applied
33Note that the full treatment of the conformal invariance of these models would also require the description of
diffeomorphism/dilaton terms in their RG-flow. For simplicity, we did not address this subject in the present paper. It
should however be kept in mind for future investigations.
66to general G/H gauged WZW models in [74].34It is quite remarkable that such methods, which
essentially start with the (quotiented) current algebras underlying the theory, allows one to extract
exact results on the quantum geometry of the target space. Since the gauged WZW theories belong
to the class of conformal E-models studied in this paper (see [32] and Subsections 4.1 and 4.2) and in
light of the algebraic nature of the works [73, 74], it is very appealing to explore similar approaches
for more general conformal E-models.
5.5 Integrable σ-models, affine Gaudin models and their quantisation
One of the main long-term motivation for the present paper, which we develop in this subsection, is the
study of integrable σ-models and their quantisation. These models are characterised by the existence,
at least at the classical level, of an infinite number of conserved Poisson-commuting charges. The latter
are often built from a Lax connection, formed by a pair of matrices Lt(z;t, x) and Lx(z;t, x) valued
in a complex Lie algebra gC, built from the fields of the model and depending meromorphically on an
auxiliary complex variable z, called the spectral parameter. The main property of this Lax connection
is that the equations of motion of the theory are equivalent to its flatness [ ∂t+Lt(z), ∂x+Lx(z)] = 0,
ensuring the construction of an infinite number of (non-local) conserved charges from the monodromy
ofLx(z). Moreover, if Lx(z) satisfies a certain Poisson algebra called the Maillet bracket [76,77], these
charges are pairwise Poisson-commuting, thus proving the integrability of the theory.
In the last decades, it was shown that many examples of integrable σ-models can be recast as E-
models [26–28,43,56,78–91]. In particular, a systematic approach to the question of the integrability
of non-degenerate E-models was initiated in [81]. The main proposal of this reference is to consider
Lax matrices Lx(z) built from the E-model current as Lx(z) =pz(J), where pz:d→gCis a linear
operator depending meromorphically on z. The time-evolution of J, and thus of Lx(z), is dictated by
the choice of Hamiltonian of the theory, characterised by the operator E:d→d. The work [81] derived
a purely algebraic compatibility condition on Eandpzwhich ensures that this time-evolution takes
the form of a flatness equation, thus guaranteeing the existence of an infinite number of conserved
charges. An extension of this result for degenerate E-models as well as a further algebraic condition
onpzensuring the existence of a Maillet bracket for Lx(z) were recently established in [27,28].
To summarise, given a degenerate E-model with double algebra ( d,⟨·,·⟩), current J ∈ dand
degenerate E-operator bE:d→d, [27,28,81] provide simple conditions on a linear operator pz:d→gC
which ensure that the model is integrable with Lax matrix Lx(z) =pz(J). A natural question at this
point is whether there exist a systematic way of constructing ( d,⟨·,·⟩,bE, pz) such that these conditions
are automatically satisfied. The recent results of [88,91] indicate that such a construction is provided
by the formalisms of 4d Chern-Simons theory [92] and affine Gaudin models [93–95], which are known
to be deeply connected one to another [96,97]. Here, we will use the language of affine Gaudin models
(AGM), which is more directly related to the one used in this paper. The main defining data of an
AGM is the choice of a real simple Lie algebra gand a rational function φ(z) of the spectral parameter,
called the twist function. To this data is associated a double algebra ( d,⟨·,·⟩), naturally built from the
poles of φ(z)dzinCP1. For instance, if φ(z)dzhas only Nsimple real poles, then d=g×Nand the
invariant non-degenerate bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩is defined on each copy of gas a multiple of the Killing
form, with the proportionality factor being the residue of φ(z)dzat the corresponding pole. If we
promote one of these simple poles to a singularity of order m∈Z≥1, then we replace the corresponding
copy of gindby the so-called Takiff algebra Tmg=g⊗R[ϵ]/ϵmR[ϵ]. Finally, for a pair of complex
conjugate poles, one considers the corresponding complexified Takiff algebra TmgC.
The main result of the AGM formalism can be seen as the construction of a degenerate E-model
with this double algebra ( d,⟨·,·⟩) which is automatically integrable. This model is described in terms
of a d-valued current Jand a Hamiltonian density quadratic in J, with coefficients explicitly built as
rational functions of the poles and zeroes of the twist function φ(z)dz[95,98,99]. This specific choice
ensures the integrability of the theory: more precisely, the AGM construction also naturally provides
an explicit linear operator pz:d→gCsuch that Lx(z) =pz(J) satisfies a flatness equation and a
34See also [75] for another derivation of these results, based on the quantum effective action of the worldsheet theory.
67Maillet bracket.35As explained above, this ensures the existence of an infinite number of non-local
Poisson-commuting conserved charges. In addition, the AGM formalism also guarantees the existence
of an infinite family of local higher-spin conserved charges [100], which Poisson-commute pairwise and
with the non-local ones, forming another manifestation of the integrability of this theory.
One of the main open challenge in the study of integrable σ-models is the question of their “first-
principle” quantum integrability. By that, we mean essentially the following two steps: (i) define the
non-commutative algebra of observables of the quantum theory and (ii) construct an infinite family of
observables in this algebra which are pairwise commuting (and which reduce to the Poisson-commuting
charges of the classical model in the classical limit). For a generic classically integrable σ-model, both
of these steps are in general quite challenging questions. A potential simplification of the step (i),
inspired by the works [101–105] and which makes the link with the present paper, is to consider the
conformal limit of the theory. In this limit, the integrable structure is expected to decouple according
to the chiral decomposition of the conformal model: at the classical level, we more precisely expect
half of the Poisson-commuting charges to be built from left-moving fields and the other half from right-
moving ones. As sketched in Subsection 5.3, the operator formalism of two-dimensional CFTs offers
a rigorous and powerful handle on the quantisation of these chiral fields, for instance by constructing
the quantum algebra of local chiral observables of the theory in the form of a vertex operator algebra
(as well as, in some cases, non-local chiral algebras such as parafermionic ones). In this context, we
can now pass to the step (ii) in the investigation of “first-principle” quantum integrability, namely the
construction of an infinite family of commuting operators in these chiral algebras. This is a hard but
well-defined mathematical question.
The study of integrable structures in CFTs was initiated in [101–105] for the case of the quantum
KdV theory, where the underlying vertex operator algebra is the Virasoro one. It has since been
extended to various other theories and W-algebras. In the case of integrable σ-models, first progresses
on the explicit construction of quantum integrable structures in their conformal limit were obtained in
various cases in [36,37,54,57,106–110].36The first important step in these works is the identification of
the quantum chiral algebras underlying these conformal limits. One of the motivation for the present
paper was to initiate a systematic analysis of this question, based on the formalism of E-models.
Indeed, as explained above, a very large class of classical integrable σ-models can be interpreted as
affine Gaudin models and thus as E-models: based on the results of this paper and their potential
extensions, we expect that the chiral sectors of their conformal limits will be reinterpreted as so-called
“chiral AGMs”, built from chiral current algebras and their quotients.37Such a construction would
then provide an appropriate and rigorous starting point for a systematic investigation of the quantum
integrability of these CFTs. Indeed, although a complete answer to this question is still open at the
moment, first progresses concerning the construction and the diagonalisation of commuting charges
in quantised chiral AGMs were obtained in [94,117–124]. The application of these ideas to a specific
integrable σ-model (the Klimˇ c´ ık model [33, 34]) was the subject of the recent work [37]: the present
paper can thus be seen as a first step towards a more systematic application of this quantisation
programme to a larger class of theories.
35These flatness equation and Maillet bracket are built-in in the AGM construction and are thus not checked using the
general integrability conditions for E-models derived in [27, 28, 81]. However, we expect that the operators pzobtained
from AGMs automatically satisfy these conditions. This has been partially checked in [88].
36The study of these integrable structures is often done using the notion of asymptotic domain. As explained in
Subsection 5.2, this is a region of the target space which becomes flat in the conformal limit and where the σ-model
thus flows to a free theory. This allows the construction of a free-field realisation of the W-algebra and an algebraic
characterisation of the local commuting operators using the so-called Wakimoto/bosonic screening charges [36, 37, 54,
57, 58, 106–110], which schematically encode the perturbation from the free theory in the asymptotic domain to an
interacting σ-model. The perspectives discussed in Subsection 5.2 might thus also play a role in the study of integrable
structures. Let us finally note that the W-algebras and commuting local charges that arise in these conformal σ-models
can often be studied from the alternative points of view of Toda-like dual theories (see for instance [35,106,111,112] and
references therein) and integrable models of boundary interactions [113,114].
37As explained above, the currents appearing in AGMs are generally based on Takiff Lie algebras, which do not belong
to the class of semi-simple Lie algebras. In view of the general perspectives discussed here, we note that the quantisation
of such currents was studied in [115,116].
68In addition to integrability, let us note that the formalism of E-models has also been quite fruitful
for the study of Poisson-Lie symmetries and dualities at the classical level [15–18]. Similarly to the
discussion above for integrability, we hope that the chiral operators approach advocated in this paper
can help to shed some light on the quantum nature of these properties, which have been so far less
explored. For conciseness, we will not discuss these perspectives further in this conclusion.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank F. Delduc, S. Driezen, M. Gaberdiel, F. Hassler, O. Hul´ ık, C. Klimˇ c´ ık,
M. Magro, D. Thompson and B. Vicedo for useful and interesting discussions as well as F. Delduc
for valuable comments on the draft. This work is supported by Dr. Max R¨ ossler, the Walter Haefner
Foundation and the ETH Z¨ urich Foundation.
A Dirac bracket of the parafermionic fields
Setup. In this appendix, we explain the main steps in the computation of the Dirac bracket of the
fields Ψ(L)(x) and Ψ(R)(x). Let us briefly recall the situation. We start with the d-valued current
J(x), which we decompose as J=Jh+J′+J+−J−, along the direct sum d=h⊕h′⊕V+⊕V−. In
particular, the component J′∈h′is identified as the generator of the H-gauge symmetry, so that the
corresponding first-class constraint is J′≈0. We are interested in the Poisson brackets of the fields
Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)built from J±as in equation (3.53). As observed in the main text, this construction is
such that Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)coincide with the fields J+andJ−in the gauge where the current Jhis set
to zero. We will denote equalities valid in this gauge using the symbol ‘ ≡’, in a similar way that we
used the weak symbol ‘ ≈’ for equalities that hold under the first-class constraints. By construction,
in this gauge, we then have
Jh≡0,J′≡0,J+≡Ψ(L)and J−≡Ψ(R). (A.1)
The second equality above simply encodes the initial dim hconstraints associated with the gauge
symmetry, while the first one encodes the additional dim hgauge-fixing conditions that we impose
to reach the specific gauge we are interested in. In this language, our goal can now be rephrased as
determining the Poisson brackets of the components J+andJ−in this gauge.
Second-class constraints. It will be useful to slightly rephrase the above discussion. Recall that
under the strong conformal condition discussed in Subsection 3.2, the subspace Dh=h⊕h′is a
subalgebra of d. We denote by JDh=Jh+J′the component of the current Jalong this subalgebra.
By construction, the initial first-class constraints combined with the gauge-fixing conditions imposed
above amount to
JDh≡0. (A.2)
This can be seen as a system of dim Dh= 2 dim hconstraints, which crucially satisfies the so-called
second-class property, as we will now explain.
The restricted bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩|Dhis invariant and non-degenerate on the subalgebra Dh: the
corresponding split quadratic Casimir CDh
12was defined in equation (3.57). The Dh-valued field JDh
then satisfies the Poisson bracket

JDh(x)1,JDh(y)2	
=
CDh
12,JDh(x)1
δ(x−y)−CDh
12∂xδ(x−y)≡ −CDh
12∂xδ(x−y). (A.3)
In particular, we find that the Poisson bracket of the 2 dim hconstraints contained in JDh≡0 does
not vanish: in fact, it even defines an invertible kernel −CDh
12∂xδ(x−y). This is the aforementioned
second-class property. In contrast, recall that the constraints contained in J′≈0 and generating
the gauge symmetry were first-class, meaning that they had vanishing Poisson brackets. The fact
69that the system of constraints becomes second-class when adding Jh≡0 is what characterises this
equality as an appropriate choice of gauge-fixing condition: more explicitly, the invertibility of the
above Poisson brackets translates at the infinitesimal level the property that the condition Jh≡0 is
always attainable by a gauge transformation and furthermore that it completely fixes the symmetry.
The Dirac bracket. Following Dirac’s theory of constrained Hamiltonian systems [45, 46], the
Poisson bracket of observables in the gauge JDh≡0 can be computed using the so-called Dirac
bracket. The latter is built from the initial current bracket {·,·}by the following construction:
{O,O′}∗≡ {O ,O′}+Z2π
0Z2π
0D
JDh(x)1,O	
JDh(y)2,O′	
,K(x, y)12E
12dxdy . (A.4)
Here,OandO′are any two observables of the model, {·,·}∗denotes the Dirac bracket and K(x, y)12is
a (Dh⊗Dh)-valued distribution, depending on the space coordinates x, y∈[0,2π]. This distribution
is built as the “inverse” of the kernel defined by the Poisson bracket
JDh(x)1,JDh(y)2	
of the
constraints (this is where the second-class property of these constraints plays a crucial role). This
construction ensures that the Dirac bracket is compatible with JDh≡0,i.e.that
{O,JDh}∗≡0 (A.5)
for any observable O. It is a standard result [45, 46] that the Dirac bracket (A.4) is skew-symmetric
and satisfies the Leibniz and Jacobi identities, making it a well-defined Poisson bracket. Moreover, the
above property (A.5) ensures that this is the appropriate Poisson structure induced on observables in
the gauge where we imposed JDh≡0, as wanted.
This property (A.5) is in fact enough to concretely determine the inverse kernel K(x, y)12. Indeed,
using equation (A.3), we get
{O,JDh(z)}∗≡ {O ,JDh(z)}+Z2π
0Z2π
0D
JDh(x)1,O	
JDh(y)2,JDh(z)3	
,K(x, y)12E
12dxdy
≡ {O ,JDh(z)} −Z2π
0Z2π
0D
JDh(x)1,O	
CDh
23,K(x, y)12E
12∂yδ(y−z) dxdy
≡ {O ,JDh(z)} −Z2π
0D
O,JDh(x)1	
, ∂zK(x, z)13E
1dx ,
where to obtain the last equality we performed the integral over yusing the derived Dirac distribution,
applied the identity ⟨CDh
23, X2⟩2=X3forX∈Dhand used the skew-symmetry of the Poisson bracket
{·,·}. For the above expression to vanish for all O, as required by the construction of the Dirac bracket,
we thus need the ( Dh⊗Dh)-valued kernel K(x, y) to satisfy
Z2π
0
F(x)1, ∂yK(x, y)12
1dx=F(y) (A.6)
for all Dh-valued function F. The solution to this condition is given by
K(x, y)12=−1
2CDh
12ϵ(x−y), (A.7)
where ϵ(x−y) is the sign function, defined by ϵ(z) =−1 if−2π < z < 0 and ϵ(z) = +1 if 0 < z < 2π,
such that ∂zϵ(z) = 2 δ(z). Given this expression for K, and using the identity ⟨X1Y2,CDh
12⟩12=⟨X, Y⟩
forX, Y∈Dh, we thus find that the Dirac bracket (A.4) explicitly reads
{O,O′}∗≡ {O ,O′} −1
2Z2π
0Z2π
0D
JDh(x),O	
,
JDh(y),O′	E
ϵ(x−y) dxdy . (A.8)
This is the expression that we will use in the rest of this appendix.
70Dirac bracket of J+withJ−.Let us now compute the Dirac bracket of J+withJ−. Applying
the formula (A.8), we get

J+(x)1,J−(y)2	∗≡
J+(x)1,J−(y)2	
(A.9)
−1
2Z2π
0Z2π
0D
JDh(x′)3,J+(x)1	
,
JDh(y′)3,J−(y)2	E
3ϵ(x′−y′) dx′dy′.
To compute this, we will need two main ingredients. The first one is the bracket of J+withJ−
with respect to the initial current Poisson structure {·,·}. This is obtained by projecting the current
Poisson algebra (2.6) of Jonto V+⊗V−. Using the fact that V+andV−are orthogonal and pair
non-degenerately with themselves with respect to the bilinear form ⟨·,·⟩, combined with [ V+, V−] ={0}
by the strong conformal condition, we find that this projection in fact vanishes. Thus, we have

J+(x)1,J−(y)2	
= 0. (A.10)
The second ingredient that we need is the bracket of J±with the second-class constraint JDh.
This is obtained from the current algebra (2.6) by projecting onto Dh⊗V±. Using in particular that
⟨Dh, V±⟩= 0, [ Dh, Dh]⊂Dhand [ Dh, V±]⊂V±– see equation (3.46), we simply find

JDh(x)1,J±(y)2	
=−
CDh
12,J±(x)2
δ(x−y). (A.11)
Reinserting the equations (A.10) and (A.11) in the formula (A.9) and performing the integrals
overx′andy′using the Dirac distributions, we obtain

J+(x)1,J−(y)2	∗≡ −1
2D
CDh
31,J+(x)1
,
CDh
32,J−(y)2E
3ϵ(x−y)
≡ −1
2h
CDh
12,J+(x)1
,J−(y)2i
ϵ(x−y). (A.12)
This expression is valued in [ Dh, V+]⊗[Dh, V−]⊂V+⊗V−, as expected. In fact, it turns out to
identically vanish. To prove it, let us consider two arbitrary elements Z+∈V+andZ−∈V−. Using
the ad-invariance of ⟨·,·⟩and the property ⟨CDh
12, X1Y2⟩12=⟨πDhX, Y⟩forX, Y∈d, we find


J+(x)1,J−(y)2	∗, Z+⊗Z−
12≡ −1
2
πDh
Z+,J+(x)
,
Z−,J−(y)
ϵ(x−y). (A.13)
Recall that under the strong conformal condition, [ V±, V±]⊂Dh⊕V±. Since ⟨V+, Dh⊕V−⟩= 0, we
see that the projector πDhcan be removed in the above equation as the component of [ Z+,J+(x)]
which is not in Dhis valued in V+and is thus orthogonal to [ Z−,J−(x)]. We then get


J+(x)1,J−(y)2	∗, Z+⊗Z−
12≡ −1
2

Z+,J+(x)
,
Z−,J−(y)
ϵ(x−y)
≡ −1
2

Z+,J+(x)
, Z−
,J−(y)
ϵ(x−y),
where we used the ad-invariance of ⟨·,·⟩in the last equality. Using the Jacobi identity and the fact
that [ V+, V−] ={0}, we then find that the above quantity vanishes. Since this is true for all Z+∈V+
andZ−∈V−and⟨·,·⟩is non-degenerate on V+andV−, this simply means that

J+(x)1,J−(y)2	∗≡0. (A.14)
Since the gauge-fixing of J+andJ−coincides with the fields Ψ(L)and Ψ(R), this can equivalently be
written
Ψ(L)(x)1,Ψ(R)(y)2	
= 0. (A.15)
Here, we have used the standard bracket and a strong equality, since the fields Ψ(L)and Ψ(R)are
gauge-invariant (see the discussion below equation (3.53)): indeed, the Dirac bracket coincides with
the initial one for gauge-invariant observables.
71Dirac bracket of J±with itself. We now turn to the computation of the Dirac bracket of J±with
itself. Using the equation (A.11) and following a computation similar to the derivation of equation
(A.12) in the previous paragraph, we get

J±(x)1,J±(y)2	∗≡
J±(x)1,J±(y)2	
−1
2h
CDh
12,J±(x)1
,J±(y)2i
ϵ(x−y). (A.16)
We now need to compute the first term in the right-hand side of this equation. This is done by
extracting the V±⊗V±component of the current Poisson algebra (2.6), yielding38

J±(x)1,J±(y)2	
≡
C±
12,J±(x)1
±
CDh
12,J±(x)2
δ(x−y)∓C±
12∂xδ(x−y). (A.17)
Reinserting this expression in the Dirac bracket (A.16) and translating the result in terms of the
gauge-invariant field Ψ(L/R)coinciding with J±in the considered gauge, we finally obtain

Ψ(L)(x)1,Ψ(L)(y)1	
=
C+
12,Ψ(L)(x)1
+
CDh
12,Ψ(L)(x)2
δ(x−y) (A.18)
−C+
12∂xδ(x−y)−1
2h
CDh
12,Ψ(L)(x)1
,Ψ(L)(y)2i
ϵ(x−y),

Ψ(R)(x)1,Ψ(R)(y)1	
=
C−
12,Ψ(R)(x)1
−
CDh
12,Ψ(R)(x)2
δ(x−y) (A.19)
+C−
12∂xδ(x−y)−1
2h
CDh
12,Ψ(R)(x)1
,Ψ(R)(y)2i
ϵ(x−y).
References
[1] A. A. Belavin, A. M. Polyakov and A. B. Zamolodchikov, “ Infinite Conformal Symmetry in
Two-Dimensional Quantum Field Theory ”, Nucl. Phys. B 241(1984) 333-3807.
[2] D. Friedan, “ Nonlinear models in 2 +ϵdimensions ”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45(1980) 1057 ; Annals
Phys. 163(1985) 318.
[3] E. S. Fradkin and A. A. Tseytlin, “ Quantum string theory effective action ”, Nucl. Phys. B261
(1985) 1.
[4] C. G. Callan, Jr., E. J. Martinec, M. J. Perry and D. Friedan, “ Strings in background fields ”,
Nucl. Phys. B262 (1985) 593.
[5] E. Witten, “ Nonabelian Bosonization in Two-Dimensions ”, Commun. Math. Phys. 92(1984)
455-472.
[6] E. Witten, “ Global Aspects of Current Algebra ”, Nucl. Phys. B 223(1983) 422-432.
[7] A. B. Zamolodchikov, “ Infinite Additional Symmetries in Two-Dimensional Conformal
Quantum Field Theory ”, Theor. Math. Phys. 65(1985) 1205-1213.
[8] J. Lepowsky and R. L. Wilson, “ The structure of standard modules, I: Universal algebras and
the Rogers-Ramanujan identities ”, Invent. Math. 77(1984) 199.
[9] V. A. Fateev and A. B. Zamolodchikov, “ Parafermionic Currents in the Two-Dimensional
Conformal Quantum Field Theory and Selfdual Critical Points in Z(n) Invariant Statistical
Systems ”, Sov. Phys. JETP 62(1985) 215.
38An efficient way to do this computation is as follows. First recall that d±=Dh⊕V±is a subalgebra of dand that
±⟨·,·⟩|d±is a non-degenerate invariant bilinear form on d±. The component J±± JDhofJalong d±thus satisfies the
closed current Poisson algebra of d±. From there, it is easy to extract the bracket of J±with itself since we already
know all the brackets involving JDh.
72[10] M. Ninomiya and K. Yamagishi, “ Nonlocal SU(3) current algebra ”, Phys. Lett. B183 (1987)
323.
[11] D. Gepner, “ New Conformal Field Theories Associated with Lie Algebras and their Partition
Functions ”, Nucl. Phys. B290 (1987) 10.
[12] D. Karabali and H. J. Schnitzer, “ BRST Quantization of the Gauged WZW Action and Coset
Conformal Field Theories ”, Nucl. Phys. B329 (1990) 649.
[13] K. Bardakci, M. J. Crescimanno and E. Rabinovici, “ Parafermions From Coset Models ”, Nucl.
Phys. B344 (1990) 344.
[14] K. Bardakci, M. J. Crescimanno and S. Hotes, “ Parafermions from nonabelian coset models ”,
Nucl. Phys. B349 (1991) 439.
[15] C. Klimˇ c´ ık and P. ˇSevera, “ Dual non-Abelian duality and the Drinfeld double ”, Phys. Lett. B
351(1995) 455–462 [ hep-th/9502122 ].
[16] C. Klimˇ c´ ık and P. ˇSevera, “ Poisson-Lie T duality and loop groups of Drinfeld doubles ”, Phys.
Lett. B 372(1996) 65–71 [ hep-th/9512040 ].
[17] C. Klimˇ c´ ık and P. ˇSevera, “ Non-Abelian momentum winding exchange ”, Phys. Lett. B 383
(1996) 281–286 [ hep-th/9605212 ].
[18] C. Klimˇ c´ ık and P. ˇSevera, “ Dressing cosets ”, Phys. Lett. B 381(1996) 56–61 [ hep-th/9602162 ].
[19] G. Valent, C. Klimcik and R. Squellari, “ One loop renormalizability of the Poisson-Lie sigma
models ”, Phys. Lett. B678 (2009) 143 [ arXiv:0902.1459 ].
[20] K. Sfetsos and K. Siampos, “ Quantum equivalence in Poisson-Lie T-duality ”, JHEP 06(2009)
082 [ arXiv:0904.4248 ].
[21] S. D. Avramis, J. P. Derendinger and N. Prezas, “ Conformal chiral boson models on twisted
doubled tori and non-geometric string vacua ”, Nucl. Phys. B 827(2010) 281-310 [ 0910.0431 ].
[22] K. Sfetsos, K. Siampos and D. C. Thompson, “ Renormalization of Lorentz non-invariant
actions and manifest T-duality ”, Nucl. Phys. B 827(2010) 545-564 [ 0910.1345 ].
[23] C. Klimcik and P. Severa, “ Open strings and D-branes in WZNW model ”, Nucl. Phys. B 488
(1997) 653-676 [ hep-th/9609112 ].
[24] K. Sfetsos, “ Duality invariant class of two-dimensional field theories ”, Nucl. Phys. B 561(1999)
316–340 [ hep-th/9904188 ].
[25] R. Squellari, “ Dressing cosets revisited ”, Nucl. Phys. B 853(2011) 379-403 [ 1105.0162 ].
[26] C. Klimˇ c´ ık, “ Dressing cosets and multi-parametric integrable deformations ”, JHEP 07(2019)
176 [ 1903.00439 ].
[27] C. Klimˇ c´ ık, “ Brief lectures on duality, integrability and deformations ”, Rev. Math. Phys. 33
(2021) no.06, 2130004 [ 2101.05230 ].
[28] C. Klimcik, “ On Strong Integrability of the Dressing Cosets ”, Annales Henri Poincare 23(2022)
no.7, 2545-2578 [ 2107.05607 ].
[29] P. ˇSevera and F. Valach, “ Courant Algebroids, Poisson–Lie T-Duality, and Type II
Supergravities ”, Commun. Math. Phys. 375(2020) no.1, 307-344 [ 1810.07763 ].
[30] P. Goddard, A. Kent and D. I. Olive, “ Virasoro Algebras and Coset Space Models ”, Phys. Lett.
B152 (1985) 88.
73[31] P. Goddard, A. Kent and D. I. Olive, “ Unitary Representations of the Virasoro and
Supervirasoro Algebras ”, Commun. Math. Phys. 103(1986) 105.
[32] C. Klimcik and S. Parkhomenko, “ Supersymmetric gauged WZNW models as dressing cosets ”,
Phys. Lett. B 463(1999) 195-200 [ hep-th/9906163 ].
[33] C. Klimˇ c´ ık, “ On integrability of the Yang-Baxter sigma-model ”, J. Math. Phys. 50(2009)
043508 [ arXiv:0802.3518 ].
[34] C. Klimˇ c´ ık, “ Integrability of the bi-Yang-Baxter sigma-model ”, Lett. Math. Phys. 104(2014)
1095 [ arXiv:1402.2105 ].
[35] V. A. Fateev, “ The sigma model (dual) representation for a two-parameter family of integrable
quantum field theories ”, Nucl. Phys. B473 (1996) 509.
[36] V. V. Bazhanov, G. A. Kotousov and S. L. Lukyanov, “ On the Yang–Baxter Poisson algebra in
non-ultralocal integrable systems ”, Nucl. Phys. B 934(2018) 529 [ arXiv:1805.07417 ].
[37] G. A. Kotousov, S. Lacroix and J. Teschner, “ Integrable sigma models at RG fixed points:
quantisation as affine Gaudin models ”, Ann. Henri Poincar´ e (2022) [ arXiv:2204.06554 ].
[38] E. Witten, “ On string theory and black holes ”, Phys. Rev. D 44(1991) 314-324.
[39] J. H. Horne and G. T. Horowitz, “ Exact black string solutions in three-dimensions ”, Nucl. Phys.
B368(1992) 444-462 [ arXiv:hep-th/9108001 ].
[40] A. M. Polyakov and P. B. Wiegmann, “ Theory of nonabelian Goldstone bosons in two
dimensions ”, Phys. Lett. B131 (1983) 121.
[41] A. S. Arvanitakis, L. T. Cole, O. Hulik, A. Sevrin and D. C. Thompson, “ Unifying Approaches
to Chiral Bosons ”, [2212.11412 ].
[42] K. Sfetsos, “ Integrable interpolations: From exact CFTs to non-Abelian T-duals ”, Nucl. Phys. B
880(2014) 225–246 [ 1312.4560 ].
[43] C. Klimˇ c´ ık, “ ηandλdeformations as E-models ”, Nucl. Phys. B 900(2015) 259–272,
[1508.05832 ].
[44] G. Itsios, K. Sfetsos and K. Siampos, “ The all-loop non-Abelian Thirring model and its RG
flow”, Phys. Lett. B733 (2014) 265-269 [ 1404.3748 ].
[45] P. A. M. Dirac, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics . Belfer Graduate School of Science, Yeshiva
University, 1964.
[46] M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim, Quantization of gauge systems . Princeton University Press,
1992.
[47] T. J. Hollowood, J. L. Miramontes and D. M. Schmidtt, “ Integrable Deformations of Strings on
Symmetric Spaces ”, JHEP 11(2014) 009 [ 1407.2840 ].
[48] T. J. Hollowood, J. L. Miramontes and D. M. Schmidtt, “ An Integrable Deformation of the
AdS 5×S5Superstring ”, J. Phys. A 47(2014) no.49, 495402 [ 1409.1538 ].
[49] B. Hoare, “ Integrable deformations of sigma models ”, J. Phys. A 55(2022) no.9, 093001
[2109.14284 ].
[50] D. Karabali, Q. H. Park, H. J. Schnitzer and Z. Yang, “ A GKO Construction Based on a Path
Integral Formulation of Gauged Wess-Zumino-Witten Actions ”, Phys. Lett. B 216(1989)
307-312.
74[51] K. Gawedzki and A. Kupiainen, “ G/H Conformal Field Theory from Gauged WZW Model ”,
Phys. Lett. B 215(1988) 119-123.
[52] R. S. Hamilton, “ The Ricci flow on surfaces ”, in Mathematics and general relativity , Contemp.
Math. 71(1988) 237.
[53] I. Bakas and E. Kiritsis, “ Beyond the large N limit: Non-linear W∞as symmetry of the
SL(2,R)/U(1) coset model ”, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A7(1992) 55 [ arXiv:hep-th/9109029 ].
[54] S. L. Lukyanov and A. B. Zamolodchikov, “ Integrability in 2D fields theory/sigma-models ”, in
P. Dorey, G. Korchemsky, N. Nekrasov, V. Schomerus, D. Serban and L. Cugliandolo (editors),
“Integrability: From Statistical Systems to Gauge Theory ”, Oxford University Press (2019)
ISBN: 9780198828150.
[55] C. R. Nappi and E. Witten, “ A WZW model based on a nonsemisimple group ”, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 71(1993) 3751-3753 [ hep-th/9310112 ].
[56] C. Klimˇ c´ ık, “ Poisson–Lie T-duals of the bi-Yang–Baxter models ”, Phys. Lett. B 760(2016)
345-349 [ arXiv:1606.03016 ].
[57] V. V. Bazhanov, G. A. Kotousov and S. L. Lukyanov, “ Quantum transfer-matrices for the
sausage model ”, JHEP 01(2018) 021 [ arXiv:1706.09941 ].
[58] B. L. Feigin and A. M. Semikhatov, “ The sl(2) + sl(2)/sl(2) coset theory as a Hamiltonian
reduction of D(2 |1 alpha) superalgebra ”, JETP Lett. 74(2001) 59 [ arXiv:hep-th/0102078 ].
[59] O. Lunin and J. M. Maldacena, “ Deforming field theories with U(1) x U(1) global symmetry and
their gravity duals ”, JHEP 05(2005) 033 [ arXiv:hep-th/0502086 ].
[60] F. Delduc, B. Hoare, T. Kameyama and M. Magro, “ Combining the bi-Yang-Baxter
deformation, the Wess-Zumino term and TsT transformations in one integrable σ-model ”,
JHEP 10(2017) 212 [ arXiv:1707.08371 ].
[61] S. L. Lukyanov, “ The integrable harmonic map problem versus Ricci flow ”, Nucl. Phys. B 865
(2012) 308-329 [ arXiv:1205.3201 ].
[62] E. Guadagnini, M. Martellini and M. Mintchev, “ Scale invariant sigma models on homogeneous
spaces ”, Phys. Lett. B 194(1987) 69.
[63] P. Bouwknegt and K. Schoutens, “ W-symmetry in conformal field theory ”, Phys. Rept. 223
(1993) 183-276 [ hep-th/9210010 ].
[64] F. Hassler and T. B. Rochais, “ O(D,D)-covariant two-loop β-functions and Poisson-Lie
T-duality ”, JHEP 10(2021) 210 [ 2011.15130 ].
[65] W. Siegel, “ Superspace duality in low-energy superstrings ”, Phys. Rev. D 48(1993) 2826-2837
[hep-th/9305073 ].
[66] C. Hull and B. Zwiebach, “ Double Field Theory ”, JHEP 09(2009) 099 [ 0904.4664 ].
[67] O. Hohm, C. Hull and B. Zwiebach, “ Background independent action for double field theory ”,
JHEP 07(2010) 016 [ 1003.5027 ].
[68] O. Hohm, C. Hull and B. Zwiebach, “ Generalized metric formulation of double field theory ”,
JHEP 08(2010) 008 [ 1006.4823 ].
[69] R. Blumenhagen, F. Hassler and D. L¨ ust, “ Double Field Theory on Group Manifolds ”, JHEP
02(2015) 001 [ 1410.6374 ].
75[70] R. Blumenhagen, P. du Bosque, F. Hassler and D. Lust, “ Generalized Metric Formulation of
Double Field Theory on Group Manifolds ”, JHEP 08(2015) 056 [ 1502.02428 ].
[71] F. Hassler, “ The Topology of Double Field Theory ”, JHEP 04(2018) 128 [ 1611.07978 ].
[72] F. Hassler, “ Poisson-Lie T-Duality in Double Field Theory ”, Phys. Lett. B 807(2020) 135455
[1707.08624 ].
[73] R. Dijkgraaf, H. L. Verlinde and E. P. Verlinde, “ String propagation in a black hole geometry ”,
Nucl. Phys. B 371(1992) 269-314.
[74] I. Bars and K. Sfetsos, “ Conformally exact metric and dilaton in string theory on curved
space-time ”, Phys. Rev. D 46(1992) 4510-4519 [ hep-th/9206006 ].
[75] A. A. Tseytlin, “ Effective action of gauged WZW model and exact string solutions ”, Nucl. Phys.
B399(1993) 601-622 [ hep-th/9301015 ].
[76] J. M. Maillet, “ Kac-Moody algebra and extended Yang-Baxter relations in the O(N)non-linear
sigma model ”, Phys. Lett. B162 (1985) 137.
[77] J. M. Maillet, “ New integrable canonical structures in two-dimensional models ”, Nucl. Phys.
B269 (1986) 54.
[78] K. Sfetsos, K. Siampos and D. C. Thompson, “ Generalised integrable λ- and η-deformations
and their relation ”, Nucl. Phys. B 899(2015) 489-512 [ 1506.05784 ].
[79] C. Klimcik, “ Yang-Baxter σ-model with WZNW term as E-model ”, Phys. Lett. B 772(2017)
725-730 [ 1706.08912 ].
[80] B. Hoare and F. K. Seibold, “ Poisson-Lie duals of the ηdeformed symmetric space sigma
model ”, JHEP 11(2017) 014 [ 1709.01448 ].
[81] P. ˇSevera, “ On integrability of 2-dimensional σ-models of Poisson-Lie type ”, JHEP 11(2017)
015 [ 1709.02213 ].
[82] S. Demulder, S. Driezen, A. Sevrin and D. C. Thompson, “ Classical and Quantum Aspects of
Yang-Baxter Wess-Zumino Models ”, JHEP 03(2018) 041 [ 1711.00084 ].
[83] S. Demulder, F. Hassler and D. C. Thompson, “ An invitation to Poisson-Lie T-duality in
Double Field Theory and its applications ”, PoS CORFU2018 (2019) 113 [ 1904.09992 ].
[84] S. Demulder, F. Hassler, G. Piccinini and D. C. Thompson, “ Generalised Cosets ”, JHEP 09
(2020) 044 [ 1912.11036 ].
[85] C. Klimˇ c´ ık, “ Strong integrability of the bi-YB–WZ model ”, Lett. Math. Phys. 110(2020) no.9,
2397-2416 [ 2001.05466 ].
[86] S. Demulder, F. Hassler, G. Piccinini and D. C. Thompson, “ Integrable deformation of CPnand
generalised K¨ ahler geometry ”, JHEP 10(2020) 086 [ 2002.11144 ].
[87] B. Hoare and S. Lacroix, “ Yang–Baxter deformations of the principal chiral model plus
Wess–Zumino term ”, J. Phys. A 53(2020) no.50, 505401 [ 2009.00341 ].
[88] S. Lacroix and B. Vicedo, “ Integrable E-Models, 4d Chern-Simons Theory and Affine Gaudin
Models. I. Lagrangian Aspects ”, SIGMA 17(2021) 058 [ 2011.13809 ].
[89] P. Shah, “ Double field theory for generalized λdeformation ”, Phys. Rev. D 105(2022) no.12,
126023 [ 2112.02739 ].
76[90] B. Hoare, N. Levine and F. K. Seibold, “ Bi-ηand bi- λdeformations of Z4permutation
supercosets ”, JHEP 04(2023), 024 [ 2212.08625 ].
[91] J. Liniado and B. Vicedo, “ Integrable degenerate E-models from 4d Chern-Simons theory ”,
[2301.09583 ].
[92] K. Costello and M. Yamazaki, “ Gauge Theory And Integrability, III ”, [1908.02289 ].
[93] A. M. Levin, M. A. Olshanetsky and A. Zotov, “ Hitchin systems–symplectic hecke
correspondence and two-dimensional version ”, Commun. Math. Phys. 236(2003) 93
[arXiv:nlin/0110045 ].
[94] B. Feigin and E. Frenkel, “ Quantization of soliton systems and Langlands duality ”, in
Exploration of New Structures and Natural Constructions in Mathematical Physics , Adv. Stud.
Pure Math. 61 (2011) 185–274 [ arXiv:0705.2486 ].
[95] B. Vicedo, “ On integrable field theories as dihedral affine Gaudin models ”,Int. Math. Res. Not.
2020 (2020) 15 [ arXiv:1701.04856 ].
[96] B. Vicedo, “ 4D Chern–Simons theory and affine Gaudin models ”, Lett. Math. Phys. 111(2021)
24 [1908.07511 ].
[97] A. Levin, M. Olshanetsky and A. Zotov, “ 2D Integrable systems, 4D Chern–Simons theory and
affine Higgs bundles ”, Eur. Phys. J. C 82(2022) no.7, 635 [ arXiv:2202.10106 ].
[98] F. Delduc, S. Lacroix, M. Magro and B. Vicedo, “ Assembling integrable σ-models as affine
Gaudin models ”, JHEP 06(2019) 017 [ arXiv:1903.00368 ].
[99] G. Arutyunov, C. Bassi and S. Lacroix, “ New integrable coset sigma models ”, JHEP 03(2021)
062 [ arXiv:2010.05573 ].
[100] S. Lacroix, M. Magro and B. Vicedo, “ Local charges in involution and hierarchies in integrable
sigma-models ”, JHEP 1709 (2017) 117 [ arXiv:1703.01951 ].
[101] A. B. Zamolodchikov, “ Integrable field theory from conformal field theory ”, Adv. Stud. Pure
Math. 19(1989) 641.
[102] R. Sasaki and I. Yamanaka, “ Virasoro Algebra, Vertex Operators, Quantum Sine-Gordon and
Solvable Quantum Field Theories ”, Adv. Stud. Pure Math. 16(1988) 271-296.
[103] V. V. Bazhanov, S. L. Lukyanov and A. B. Zamolodchikov, “ Integrable structure of conformal
field theory, quantum KdV theory and thermodynamic Bethe ansatz ”, Commun. Math. Phys.
177(1996) 381 [ arXiv:hep-th/9412229 ].
[104] V. V. Bazhanov, S. L. Lukyanov and A. B. Zamolodchikov, “ Integrable structure of conformal
field theory. 2. Q operator and DDV equation ”, Commun. Math. Phys. 190(1997) 247
[arXiv:hep-th/9604044 ].
[105] V. V. Bazhanov, S. L. Lukyanov and A. B. Zamolodchikov, “ Integrable structure of conformal
field theory. 3. The Yang-Baxter relation ”, Commun. Math. Phys. 200(1999) 297
[arXiv:hep-th/9805008 ].
[106] V. V. Bazhanov and S. L. Lukyanov, “ Integrable structure of quantum field theory: Classical
flat connections versus quantum stationary states ”, JHEP 09(2014) 147 [ arXiv:1310.4390 ].
[107] A. Litvinov and L. Spodyneiko, “ On W-algebras commuting with a set of screenings ”, JHEP
11(2016) 138 [ arXiv:1609.06271 ].
77[108] A. V. Litvinov and L. A. Spodyneiko, “ On dual description of the deformed O(N)sigma
model ”, JHEP 11(2018) 139 [ arXiv:1804.07084 ].
[109] A. V. Litvinov, “ Integrable gl(n|n)Toda field theory and its sigma-model dual ”, Pisma Zh.
Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 110(2019) no.11, 723-726 [ arXiv:1901.04799 ].
[110] M. Alfimov, B. Feigin, B. Hoare and A. Litvinov, “ Dual description of η-deformed OSP sigma
models ”, JHEP 12(2020) 040 [ arXiv:2010.11927 ].
[111] V. A. Fateev and A. V. Litvinov, “ Integrability, duality and sigma models ”, JHEP 11(2018)
204 [ arXiv:1804.03399 ].
[112] V. Fateev, “ Classical and Quantum Integrable Sigma Models. Ricci Flow, “Nice Duality” and
Perturbed Rational Conformal Field Theories ”, J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 129(2019) no.4, 566-590
[arXiv:1902.02811 ].
[113] S. L. Lukyanov, E. S. Vitchev and A. B. Zamolodchikov, “ Integrable model of boundary
interaction: The Paperclip ”, Nucl. Phys. B 683(2004) 423-454 [ arXiv:hep-th/0312168 ].
[114] S. L. Lukyanov and A. B. Zamolodchikov, “ Integrable boundary interaction in 3D target space:
the ’pillow-brane’ model ”, Nucl. Phys. B873 (2013) 585 [ arXiv:1208.5259 ].
[115] A. Babichenko and D. Ridout, “ Takiff superalgebras and Conformal Field Theory ”, J. Phys. A
46(2013) 125204 [ arXiv:1210.7094 ].
[116] T. Quella, “ On conformal field theories based on Takiff superalgebras ”, J. Phys. Comm. 4
(2020) 075013 [ arXiv:2004.06456 ].
[117] E. Frenkel and D. Hernandez, “ Spectra of quantum KdV Hamiltonians, Langlands duality, and
affine opers ”, Commun. Math. Phys. 362(2018) 361 [ arXiv:1606.05301 ].
[118] S. Lacroix, B. Vicedo and C. A. S. Young, “ Affine Gaudin models and hypergeometric
functions on affine opers ”, Adv. Math. 350(2019) 486 [ arXiv:1804.01480 ].
[119] S. Lacroix, B. Vicedo and C. A. S. Young, “ Cubic hypergeometric integrals of motion in affine
Gaudin models ”, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 24(2020) 155 [ arXiv:1804.06751 ].
[120] D. Gaiotto, J. H. Lee and J. Wu, “ Integrable Kondo problems ”, JHEP 04(2021) 268
[arXiv:2003.06694 ].
[121] D. Gaiotto, J. H. Lee, B. Vicedo and J. Wu, “ Kondo line defects and affine Gaudin models ”,
JHEP 01(2022) 175 [ arXiv:2010.07325 ].
[122] G. A. Kotousov and S. L. Lukyanov, “ ODE/IQFT correspondence for the generalized affine
sl(2) Gaudin model ”, JHEP 09(2021) 201 [ arXiv:2106.01238 ].
[123] J. Wu, “ Anisotropic Kondo line defect and ODE/IM correspondence ”, [arXiv:2106.07792 ].
[124] T. Franzini and C. A. S. Young, “ Quartic Hamiltonians, and higher Hamiltonians at
next-to-leading order, for the affine sl2Gaudin model ”, J. Phys. A 56(2023) no.10, 105201
[arXiv:2205.15815 ].
78