Cascaded Multiparameter Quantum Metrology
Gregory Krueper,1Lior Cohen,2and Juliet T. Gopinath1, 2, 3
1Department of Physics, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder CO 80309, USA
2Department of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering,
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder CO 80309, USA
3Materials Science and Engineering Program, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder CO 80309, USA∗
We present an innovative, platform-independent concept for multiparameter sensing where the
measurable parameters are in series, or cascaded, enabling measurements as a function of position.
With temporally resolved detection, we show that squeezing can give a quantum enhancement in
sensitivity over that of classical states by a factor of e2r, where r≈1 is the squeezing parameter.
As an example, we have modeled an interferometer that senses multiple phase shifts along the same
path, demonstrating a maximal quantum advantage by combining a coherent state with squeezed
vacuum. Further classical modeling with up to 100 phases shows linear scaling potential for adding
nodes to the sensor. The approach can be applied to remote sensing, geophysical surveying, and
infrastructure monitoring.
I. INTRODUCTION
Precision measurement from a sensor is often limited
by an intrinsic uncertainty from quantum fluctuations.
Non-classical resources such as entanglement or squeez-
ing can reduce these uncertainties for higher sensitivity
[1–6]. This enhancement can be modeled in the frame-
work of quantum metrology, which finds the optimal
quantum state and measurement for estimating a given
parameter. A common quantum state to consider is the
squeezed state, which has non-Poissonian photon statis-
tics that give lower measurement uncertainty in one of
its quadrature operators [1]. Measurements beyond the
classical limit were shown in both atomic systems with
spin squeezing [7] and in optical systems with electric
field quadrature squeezing [1, 5]. With state-of-the-art
squeezed sources, the sensitivity enhancement can be
around an order of magnitude [8, 9].
While quantum-enhanced sensing is well understood
for estimating a single parameter, simultaneous estima-
tion of multiple parameters is far more complex [10–12].
Many sensing problems are inherently multidimensional,
such as magnetic or gravitational field sensing [13–15],
process tomography [16, 17], localization microscopy [18],
and optical imaging [19, 20]. Many studies analyze es-
timation of different types of parameters simultaneously
[19–23], such as both a phase shift and optical loss [10],
or both phase and phase diffusion [12]. Others focus on
massively parallelized estimation of parameters, all of the
same type [24–26]. Since a real sensor will estimate any
number of parameters in any configuration, it is critical
to develop multiparameter sensing to handle the many
variants and geometries of precision sensors.
An established example of multiparameter estimation
is phase imaging, which splits an input state across many
parallel spatial modes, as shown in Fig. 1(a) [15, 21, 24–
29]. Each mode modifies the state with phase ϕi. Af-
∗julietg@colorado.eduter a mixing circuit interferes these modes together, a
joint multimode measurement estimates each parameter.
There are two sensitivity enhancements to consider. The
first is an enhancement from a joint measurement of N
parameters, when compared to Nseparate measurements
(advantage A). The second is an enhancement from us-
ing quantum states and measurements, when compared
to using classical methods (advantage B). For advantage
A, without N-mode entanglement, the parallelized mul-
tiparameter sensor shows a constant-factor improvement
because the reference arm uses fewer resources [24–26]. It
is predicted that N-mode entanglement can yield a fac-
tor of Nimprovement in variance [27], but this method
seems to require contradictory assumptions for saturat-
ing the quantum Fisher information [26]. The factor of N
advantage is more easily demonstrated when the archi-
tecture instead functions as a distributed sensor, which
estimates a linear combination of parameters [30–36].
For advantage B, the Heisenberg limit in sensitivity im-
plies that the measurement variance on any one parame-
ter can at most scale as ¯ n−2, where ¯ nis the average pho-
ton number of the state. Heisenberg scaling is a factor of
¯nbetter than what is achievable with classical resources
[3]. With entangled states, the enhancement is achieved
by the state changing ¯ ntimes faster than a classical state
of the same energy. Alternatively, squeezed states can re-
duce the inherent variance in a measured quadrature by
a factor of e2r(at the cost of larger noise in the orthogo-
nal, antisqueezed quadrature) [1]. More specifically, with
a squeezed vacuum + coherent state used in LIGO, the
squeezing parameter rsets the maximum quantum ad-
vantage in variance to e2r. These scaling terms remain
when moving to multiparameter estimation [24, 27]. The
parallelized architecture demonstrates both advantage A
and advantage Bbecause each parameter is isolated to a
unique mode so that the parameters are individually ad-
dressable. Consequently, a single measurement can opti-
mally estimate all parameters.
However, if multiple parameters of the same type are
along the same path, the sensor will not be able to dis-
tinguish between them. Consider Fig. 1(a), in whicharXiv:2304.08545v3  [quant-ph]  17 Jan 20252
FIG. 1. (a) Conceptual layout of a parallelized multiparame-
ter sensor. A probe is split into several parallel modes, each
with one parameter. If multiple parameters lie on the same
mode, like ϕ4andϕ5, then the detectors are unable to dis-
tinguish between them. Instead, they can only estimate their
sum. (b) Conceptual layout of our multiparameter sensor
time-bin multiplexed along a single path. Cascaded measur-
able parameters ϕ1...Nare separated by N−1 reflectors of
reflectivity Rin the sensing arm. Both reflected and trans-
mitted light is detected. Output modes are distinguished by
their time of arrival at a detector.
a sensor has four parallel paths but five parameters to
sense. The sensor can resolve ϕ1through ϕ3, but can
only estimate a linear combination of ϕ4andϕ5instead
ofϕ4andϕ5separately. Such a situation may arise in
remote sensing, in which an object of interest is phys-
ically behind another. For example, with LIDAR, an
oncoming vehicle can be obscured by fog. Alternatively,
an optical fiber sensor can obtain environmental informa-
tion (stress, strain, sound, or temperature) as a function
of length along a single fiber. This information is useful
in monitoring oil and gas pipelines and similarly sensi-
tive pieces of infrastructure. In both cases, there are
sensors with only one spatial path, but multiple parame-
ters cascaded along that path. Existing multiparameter
estimation protocols do not fully explore our cascaded
scenario, and both advantage AandBmust be verified
in this architecture.
To solve this issue, we borrow the concept of time-
bin multiplexing from optical communications [37]. In
there, independent signals are sent over the same path
as sequential pulses with no overlap. The detector can
then demultiplex signals based on their time of arrival.
For a quantum metrological application, consider a state
propagating down a single path, and some fraction of
that mode is split or reflected after each parameter. The
state’s time of arrival at the output can help distin-
guish between each parameter. This process bears re-
semblance to a technique with optical fiber sensors called
phase-sensitive optical time domain reflectometry [38–
41]. There, an optical fiber has Nweak Bragg reflec-
tors along its length, dividing the sensor into discrete
regions. An environmental variable, such as temperature
or strain, changes the local refractive index of the fiber
and gives a local phase shift in those regions. After a
pulse of light enters the fiber, the reflected light is com-
pared to a reference for a phase measurement, and thetime of arrival is mapped to distance along the fiber. Here
we analyze a similar situation in the context of quantum
metrology.
In this work, we formulate the theory of cascaded mul-
tiparameter estimation within the framework of quan-
tum metrology. In contrast with the multimode sensors
[15, 25, 26, 28, 29, 32], our concept can resolve multi-
ple parameters that are inherently mixed along a single
path through time-bin multiplexing. In our sensor, we
only have two input and output points, but will esti-
mate Nphase shifts. The enabling idea is that squeezing
enhances all information from the sensor, including the
correlations between parameters. Since these correlations
exist for both classical and quantum measurements, the
correlations do not inhibit quantum resources from show-
ing a maximal quantum enhancement. As an example,
we model a Mach-Zehnder interferometer with multiple,
cascaded phase shifts and a quantum enhancement factor
of approximately 7 (or 1.76 given 3 dB of loss). Moreover,
we find that using a coherent state with squeezed vacuum
gives a unique advantage in obtaining distinguishing in-
formation on the phases while still preserving squeezing
in the detected modes. These states have an inherent
advantage of high power and sensitivity for making a
practical sensor, as demonstrated by gravitational wave
interferometers [5]. Further classical modeling suggests
how the sensor could scale linearly to 100 or more phase
shifts. Our approach to multiparameter quantum metrol-
ogy leverages time-bin multiplexing to resolve parameters
along a single path, enabling applications in remote and
fiber-based sensing of temperature, strain, acoustics, or
seismic activity with greater precision.
II. QUANTUM ESTIMATION FORMALISM
In this section, we describe the challenges in multi-
parameter estimation. We explore how current litera-
ture overcomes these challenges, and how our cascaded
scheme takes a different approach.
Quantum metrology commonly uses the quantum
Fisher information, F, to quantify the sensitivity of the
output state of a sensor. For a single parameter, a lower
bound on the variance for measuring the parameter ϕis
determined by the quantum Cram´ er-Rao bound [42]:
∆2˜ϕ≥1
F, (1)
where ˜ϕis an unbiased estimator of ϕ. More generally,
with multiple parameters, the quantum Fisher informa-
tion matrix represents the amount of information obtain-
able on each parameter with diagonal elements, Fii. The
off-diagonal elements, Fij, instead represent the degree
of correlation between parameters iandj. Because Fis
now a matrix for a vector of parameters ⃗ϕ, the Cram´ er-
Rao bound also generalizes to [21]3
Cov(˜ϕ)≥F−1, (2)
(F−1)ii≥1
Fii, (3)
where Cov(˜ϕ) is the covariance matrix for the parameters
in⃗ϕ. In other words, the diagonal elements of the inverse
of the Fisher information matrix gives a lower bound on
the measurement variances of ˜ϕ. Equation (2) is the
direct analog of Eq. (1) in the multiparameter framework
[42]. The added subtlety is in Eq. (3), which considers the
correlation between parameters [10]. Taking the inverse
ofFmeans that off-diagonal elements in Fwill increase
the measurement variances of each estimator.
If one wishes to measure cascaded parameters that
would otherwise be indistinguishable [e.g. ϕ4andϕ5in
Fig. 1(a)], one must introduce a non-commuting opera-
tor in between them. The partial reflectors in Fig. 1(b)
serve this purpose through time-bin multiplexing. Al-
though some correlations between parameters remain, we
will show that these correlations do not prohibit a sen-
sor from demonstrating a quantum advantage in sensitiv-
ity. Because these correlations are classical, an optimal
choice of squeezed quadratures could enhance the phase-
sensitivity of every mode. This application of squeezing
would multiply every term in the Fisher information by
the same squeezing factor, resulting in a quantum advan-
tage. The equal enhancement is true for the examples we
have investigated, but even after our analysis it remains
an open question whether or not it holds more gener-
ally. Overall, despite the measurement being unable to
saturate Eq. (3), there is still potential for a quantum en-
hancement in sensitivity. Therefore, our goal is to show
a quantum advantage in sensitivity by a factor of e2r≈7
(or 1.76 given 3 dB of loss) for multiparameter estima-
tion, despite the remaining correlations.
In principle, one could diagonalize the Fisher infor-
mation matrix to remove these correlations with a ma-
trixD, but one would then have a measurement basis of
D·˜ϕ. A mixed measurement basis is undesirable for a
cascaded sensor; see Appendix G for a simple example.
Moreover, Appendix G shows that our figure of merit
for sensitivity, Tr(F−1), remains constant under trans-
formation. Therefore, diagonalization offers no overall
improvement in sensitivity.
There are some differences between analyzing the
quantum Fisher information and the classical Fisher in-
formation. Given an input state and a sesnor layout,
one can calculate the quantum Fisher information re-
gardless of how one would detect the output state and
estimate the parameter. The classical Fisher information
instead analyzes a physical signal from an assumed detec-
tion method. If the classical Fisher information matches
the quantum Fisher information, then the chosen detec-
tion method is optimal. This paper considers the use
of a pure Gaussian state with no losses and with large
displacement [ |α| ≫sinh(r)]. With these assumptions,phase sensing with homodyne detection indeed saturates
the quantum Fisher information [43]. This equality re-
mains true even in our sensor because of the linearity in
Fisher information from separate detection events (i.e.
separate reflections). Each homodyne detector must still
measure the squeezed quadrature of the output state.
Therefore, in our model, the classical Fisher information
is equal to the quantum Fisher information.
As with any phase estimation procedure, losses will ad-
versely affect the sensor performance. A squeezed mea-
surement with total system efficiency ηwill add noise into
the state so that the original quadrature noise ∆2X0be-
comes [44]
⟨∆2X⟩=η⟨∆2X0⟩+ (1−η), (4)
where vacuum noise is normalized to 1. In the limit of
infinite squeezing, the achievable quantum enhancement
becomes (1 −η)−1. An advantage of this state is that
losses cannot eliminate squeezing completely. See Ap-
pendix B for more details.
III. TIME-MULTIPLEXING SOLUTION
A simplified schematic of the time-bin multiplexing de-
tection process is illustrated in Fig. 1(b). A pulsed state
is sent down a path with Nparameters, each separated
by an element of power reflectivity Rand transmission
T= 1−R. Detectors resolve the parameters ⃗ϕusing
the time of arrival of each reflection back at the input.
The first reflection of the state arrives first, giving an
estimate on ϕ1. The second reflection gives an estimate
onϕ2, and the process continues to ϕN−1. A detector
also sees the final transmitted mode, giving an estimate
onϕN. The reflectors do not represent a lossy operation
because each reflector is effectively a beamsplitter where
both of the output modes are detected. Thus a single
input mode is split into many different temporal modes
along the same path and time-resolved detection of each
reflection enables separate estimates on each parameter.
The single pulsed coherent (or displaced) state is the
optimal classical probe for this system. Any additional
light would only add ambiguity on which reflection in-
teracted with which phase, which increases uncertainty.
The ambiguities also appeared for various quantum states
with no displacement. Thus the optimal quantum state
must also include a displacement, with added squeezing
to include quantum resources. Therefore, in determin-
ing a quantum enhancement in sensitivity, we compare
performance between a displaced (classical) state and a
squeezed state with the same displacement.
We outline a statistical approach to time-multiplexed
cascaded sensing, including the effect of squeezed (and
antisqueezed) quadratures. The homodyne detectors give
a series of orthogonal quadrature measurements ⃗X(k|⃗ϕ)
and⃗Y(k|⃗ϕ) for each time bin k. These measurements
are used in a series of estimators ˜ϕ(⃗X,⃗Y), which give an4
unbiased estimate on the parameters ⃗ϕ. Because light is
reflected multiple times, an estimator ˜ϕimay depend on
all quadrature measurements k= 0 through n. More im-
portantly, the estimator variance ∆2˜ϕis determined by
a linear combination of quadrature measurement uncer-
tainties through error propagation:
∆2˜ϕi=length (ˆX)X
j=0bj∆2ˆXj
(∂ˆXj/∂ϕi)2+cj∆2ˆYj
(∂ˆYj/∂ϕi)2.(5)
The weights bjandcjwill depend on the exact sensor
configuration and on which quadratures are squeezed.
The initial vector of squeezing angles ⃗ χcan be opti-
mized so that the antisqueezed quadratures have zero
weight. Thus, if the quadratures with nonzero weights
are squeezed by a factor of e−2r, then each measurement
variance ∆2˜ϕiwill also be reduced by a factor of e−2r.
While the procedure is complicated by correlated param-
eters, the core principle of squeezing-enhanced phase es-
timation remains unchanged.
For an optical implementation, the parameters are
phase shifts within a Mach-Zehnder interferometer with
sensing and reference arm, as shown in Fig. 2(a). A
coherent pulse and squeezed vacuum are combined on
a beamsplitter, forming a displaced squeezed state inside
the interferometer. Both sensing and reference arms have
evenly spaced reflectors of power transmission Tor re-
flectivity R= 1−T, separating the arms into Nregions.
We associate a phase shift ϕiwith each region between
reflectors in the sensing arm. The reference phases ϕri
are adjusted to maximize phase sensitivity in measuring
each phase shift. Circulators reroute the reflections to
homodyne detectors. Our modeling uses a bidirectional
sensor shown in Fig. 3, where input states, circulators,
and detectors are on both sides of the sensor. The extra
input offers greater flexibility in optimization.
The core physics of the sensor is illustrated in Fig.
2(b), which shows the timing dynamics of how a sin-
gle input pulse maps to multiple (colored) output modes
in the sensing arm of the interferometer. Distance is
plotted on the horizontal axis, while time is plotted on
the vertical. Each reflected mode arrives at a different
time on the detector, and contains information on the
listed combination of phases. In the statistical descrip-
tion, these labels indicate which components of ⃗X(k|⃗ϕ)
and⃗Y(k|⃗ϕ) the estimator ˆAnuses to measure ϕn. The
hollow arrows indicate secondary reflections, which can
be neglected if R≪1. This is a valid assumption if
N≫1, since we have indications that an optimal design
will have R∝N−1.
An intuitive explanation for how the squeezed state
in our proposed sensing scheme can enhance sensitivity
can be described by the simple Mach-Zehnder interfer-
ometer with squeezed light. The non-Poissonian photon
statistics of squeezed light gives reduced vacuum phase
noise, which results in a lower measurement variance.
The same argument is true for multiparameter sensors,
provided the sensor is able to distinguish between thoseparameters. The proposed cascaded sensor provides dis-
tinguishability by measuring multiple temporal modes
from the partial reflectors, each giving a squeezed mea-
surement. There are two conditions here for a quan-
tum enhancement. First, the same input state must be
able to give a quantum advantage to all parameters si-
multaneously. Given the degrees of freedom available in
the input state, a global optimization can engineer a si-
multaneous quantum enhancement. Secondly, all output
modes must have the same squeezing strength as the in-
put state, which ensures that each measurement on each
mode has reduced vacuum noise.
Maintaining the squeezing strength of all output modes
is challenging because any squeezing in the input is
spread out, or diluted, across all output modes. Each
reflection operation is functionally a beam splitter with
one of its inputs as vacuum. The vacuum noise propa-
gates into the output modes and so only a fraction of the
original squeezing strength would be observed. In con-
trast, if both input modes are squeezed, the squeezing
strength can be preserved.
Thus a countermeasure to the squeezing dilution is to
input multiple squeezed pulses so that the other input
port on each beam splitter operation is no longer vac-
uum. With a few starting vacuum modes and an in-
creasing number of squeezed pulses, the output squeez-
ing strength of each mode will asymptotically approach
the input squeezing strength. To synchronize with the
cascaded sensor’s reflections, these pulses can be timed
sequentially with a repetition period τ. To consistently
match this repetition period, the reflectors must be uni-
formly spaced within the sensor. The end result is a sys-
tem where any initial vacuum noise is suppressed along
a squeezed quadrature through constructive interference
of many squeezed vacuum pulses.
IV. MULTIPARAMETER SENSING MODEL
We will show that the quantum enhancement in our
schematic holds for continuous-variable Gaussian states,
beginning by showing quantum-limited sensitivity in a
model interferometer with cascaded phase shifts as the
parameters. We compare the optimal sensitivity of a
squeezed vacuum + coherent state input to that of a co-
herent state of the same energy, for both two- and three-
phase interferometers. The results of the three-phase in-
terferometer suggest that the sensing procedure can scale
to interferometers with many more phases.
Our sensor model uses a matrix formulation of Gaus-
sian states and Fisher information commonly used in
continuous-variable quantum information [45, 46]. The
relevant matrix definitions and equations for Fisher in-
formation are listed in Appendix A. The supporting code
is accessible at the GitHub repository [47]. In our no-
tation, ˆBi,j(T) represents a beam-splitter operation be-
tween modes iandjwith a splitting ratio of Tand ˆPi(ϕ)
represents a phase shift operation on mode iwith param-5
FIG. 2. Interferometer for cascaded phase shifts following the time-bin multiplexed concept. With an added reference arm and
a 50:50 beamsplitter, the sensor is sensitive to ϕi−ϕr,i. It operates bidirectionally, with input and output on both sides. We
choose to input a pulsed coherent state (laser) with pulsed squeezed vacuum in order to show a quantum enhancement in phase
sensitivity in a practical setting. Local oscillator modes for each homodyne detector are implied and not shown. (b) Temporal
dynamics of the sensing arm of such a sensor, with space on the horizontal axis and time on the vertical. One input (gray)
is split into several output modes (colored arrows), each containing information on the listed parameters. The hollow arrows
indicate secondary reflections, which can be neglected for R≪1.
eterϕ. These matrix definitions are used to propagate a
multimode Gaussian state through the sensor with a uni-
tary matrix ˆUand to calculate and optimize the Fisher
information. In Appendix A, we also use the notation
to re-prove the quantum advantage in sensitivity in an
example (single-phase) Mach-Zehnder interferometer.
For the current sensor, the relevant figure of merit is
the ratio of total phase variancesP
i∆2˜ϕiwith classical
light and with quantum light:
Q=P
i∆2˜ϕi,classicalP
i∆2˜ϕi,squeezed, (6)
where we call Q the quantum advantage in measure-
ment variance. We consider the “classical” case where
the squeezing parameter r= 0 and the quantum case
where r= 1. Because we make the approximation that
|α2≫sinh2(r), any added energy from squeezing is neg-
ligible in comparison to the coherent state. Thus, the
classical and quantum cases have approximately equal
energy for a fair comparison in sensitivity.
Given the use of squeezed light, Qwill ideally be equal
to the degree of squeezing of the input light, e2r, where
ris the squeezing parameter. State-of-the-art squeez-ing sources can achieve about an order of magnitude of
quadrature squeezing, so we choose r= 1 for our sim-
ulations [48–50]. Given r= 1, we expect a maximum
sensitivity improvement of e2= 7.39. We also verified
in Appendix C that our numerical results scale exponen-
tially with r, meaning that any r >0 will result in the
expected quantum advantage of e2r.
A known issue with the Fisher information is the free-
dom in the definition of a phase shift. One can consider
imparting a phase ϕon a single mode, ˆP(ϕ), or symmet-
rically imparting −ϕ/2 and ϕ/2 onto two modes, ˆPs(ϕ).
The two representations give different prefactors [51],
which are not important since they cancel out when com-
paring the performance of classical and quantum states.
A phase can only be measured relative to a reference,
and there is no such thing as an absolute (single-mode)
phase shift in a two-mode interferometer [51]. Because
the Mach-Zehnder interferometer has a reference arm,
ˆPs(ϕ) is the correct operator to use there.
While the formalism of Gaussian states and Fisher
information remain largely the same for multiparame-
ter estimation, its increased complexity requires some
simplification. A major reduction in complexity comes
from using the single-mode phase shift operator. In the6
simple, single-phase Mach-Zehnder interferometer, one
can obtain the same expressions for Fisher information
(with a different prefactor) by simply replacing the Mach-
Zehnder unitary matrix with the single-mode phase shift
ˆP(ϕ). This situation has a single spatial mode where the
input is a displaced squeezed state and represents prop-
agation only through the sensing arm of the interferom-
eter. Strictly speaking, these phase shifts are relative to
the local oscillator in homodyne detection instead of the
reference arm.
To understand this simplification, consider the full in-
terferometer with the reference arm, yielding two spatial
modes but with single-mode phase shifts. The order of
operations between these spatial modes is only important
at and after the point of interference. Thus, despite re-
flections, one can order the phase shifts in separate arms
sequentially, and multiply those matrices. The result is a
set of diagonal matrices of eiϕiandeiϕr,ifor each section
iin the arms of the interferometer. Taking out a global
phase exp(i
2(ϕi−ϕr,i)) yields the symmetric phase repre-
sentation. The global phase commutes with all matrices
and can be neglected. Thus, in the multi-phase inter-
ferometer analysis to follow, it is sufficient to consider
propagation only in the sensing arm, which halves the
required number of simulated modes.
Modeling an interferometer with multiple phases sep-
arated by partial reflectors requires careful accounting of
the number of spatiotemporal modes Min the system
and when these modes interact. These modes include
both reflection and transmission through partial reflec-
tors, which can form weak cavities. While closed-form
expressions exist for the phase accumulation and trans-
mission through a cavity [52], these are time-averaged
and do not capture the timing dynamics needed for our
sensor. For modeling a single-sided sensor with a perfect
mirror, the total number of modes will be
M=k(N−2) + 2 , (7)
where N > 2 is the number of phases; k > 0 is the
number of reflections each temporal mode can undergo.
For a bidirectional sensor with input and output on both
sides,
M= (k+ 1)( N−2) + 1 (8)
In principle kshould be infinite for any sensor with
more than one partial reflector, since they form a cavity.
For computational purposes, we restrict k= 1 for the
classical analysis with many phases, and k= 7 for mod-
eling two- or three-phase interferometers with squeezed
light.
A series of beam-splitter (reflector) and phase-shift op-
erations map Minput modes onto Moutput modes in
a 2M×2Munitary matrix. Fig. 3 helps visualize this
map for an example with three phases, six reflections,
and eight modes in discrete time steps. Again, the hori-
zontal axis is distance, while the vertical axis is time. For
stepτ1, we apply ϕ1to mode 1, ϕ2to mode 2, and mix
FIG. 3. (Top) Schematic of a three-phase sensor with multiple
inputs. (Bottom) A visualization of the timing dynamics for
probing a three-phase sensor with multiple inputs, as used
for the construction of the unitary matrix of the three-phase
sensor. In this example, a sensing arm has each temporal
mode tracked through each of its phase shift and reflection
operations, shown as a function of time. By tracking k= 6
reflections from the first input, the input temporal modes
(colored arrows) are mapped to eight output modes (black
arrows). Five input pulses are considered, with the remaining
input modes (hollow arrows) as vacuum.
modes 1 and 2 on a beam-splitter. For step τ2, we apply
ϕ1to mode 2, ϕ2to mode 1, and ϕ3to mode 3, then mix
modes 1 and 3 on a beam-splitter. Since the modes are
reflected here, the beam-splitter operation is ˆB1,3(1−T)
instead of ˆB1,3(T). Mode 1 continues to reflect inside
the interferometer until the end, when the set number of
reflections kis reached. Thus, we obtain the final unitary
as a multiplication of phase shifts and beamsplitter op-
erations for each active mode at each time, where phase
shifts act before beamsplitters.
Because we track a finite number of reflections, there
is some truncation loss on the final output mode(s) of
the sensor. In the present example, mode 1 undergoes
a loss transformation instead of the last reflection. The
truncation operation is equivalent to placing a fictitious
beam splitter in that mode’s path before detection and
tracing over the reflected mode [53]. See Appendix B
for specific implementation, and on how loss and noise
generally affect the sensor performance.
Having obtained the output state, the quantum Fisher
information matrix for a Gaussian state ⃗R,σwith respect
to parameters ϕiandϕjis [54]
Fij= 2∂⃗RT
∂ϕi·σ−1·∂⃗R
∂ϕj+1
4Tr[σ−1·∂σ
∂ϕi·σ−1·∂σ
∂ϕj].(9)
From the Fisher information matrix, we can get a lower
bound on the sensitivity of measuring N phases with our7
sensor, which is the main result of this work. The sensi-
tivity of each phase is constrained by the multiparameter
Cram´ er-Rao bound with the inverse of the Fisher infor-
mation matrix in Eq. (2). For a scalar value to optimize,
we take Tr(Cov(⃗ϕ))
Given the need to maximize distinguishing informa-
tion, it is nontrivial to perform a squeezing-enhanced
measurement on N parameters simultaneously. With no
prior phase information, one is equally likely to anti-
squeeze the necessary quadrature as one is to squeeze
it, which on average would give increased noise. A global
optimization over all system variables ensures that ev-
ery mode is squeezed in the correct quadrature such that
all parameters are measured with reduced noise, yielding
an enhanced sensitivity. Interpreting Eq. (9), maximum
phase information requires the derivative of the output
state’s mean vector to be in the direction of the output
state’s squeezed quadrature.
Equation (2) is the total phase variance for a measure-
ment in the sensor and is the figure of merit by which we
optimize the sensor’s sensitivity. With squeezed light, the
sensitivity depends on each input pulse’s relative phase
θi, squeezing angle χi, and the value of each phase in the
sensing arm ϕi. We assume that the coherent state en-
ergy|αi|2is identical in every instance and much larger
than the squeezed vacuum energy. The reflector trans-
mission Tis also a free variable, but the results are shown
as a function of Tin order to demonstrate the physics of
how transmission affects measurement variance. With
the data of variance versus T, one can choose an optimal
value of Tfor a given sensor. Due to the many degrees of
freedom in the sensor, a differential evolution algorithm
was used to optimize its sensitivity [55]. Unless otherwise
stated, the cost function is Tr(F−1).
The simplest multiparameter case is with two phases
and two possible input directions. The unitary matrix
for the sensor is
U=ˆP1(ϕ2)·ˆP2(ϕ1)·ˆB1,2(T)·ˆP2(ϕ2)·ˆP1(ϕ1),(10)
where the subscripts refer to the mode on which the ma-
trix operates. Given squeezed vacuum inputs in each
mode of strength r, we find the quantum Fisher informa-
tion matrix to be
F= 4 sinh2(2r)
2−T T
T 2−T
, (11)
(forϕ1=ϕ2= 0). The term 4 sinh2(2r) is factored
out, leaving only the effect of the reflector transmission
inside the matrix. The factorable term scales as the
square of the average photon number of the input states,
¯n= sinh2(r), indicating Heisenberg scaling of the phase
sensitivity. Note that this state has no displaced compo-
nent, and so homodyne detection will not be optimal in
this case. Moreover, the output covariance matrix underthe same optimized conditions is
σout=
e2r0 0 0
0e−2r0 0
0 0 e2r0
0 0 0 e−2r
. (12)
Now, if mode 1 is instead a displaced coherent state with
amplitude |α≫1 and mode 2 is still squeezed vacuum,
we can neglect the second term in Eq. (9). In this case,
the optimized Fisher information is approximately
F= 4α2e2r
4−3T T
T T
. (13)
Now the term α2e2rfactors out, showing that the mea-
surement scales with the coherent state photon num-
ber|α|2and is further enhanced by squeezing with the
term e2r. This is achieved with the same output co-
variance matrix. In summary, both squeezed vacuum
and displaced squeezed states show their maximum po-
tential quantum enhancement in sensitivity for the two-
phase interferometer, provided that both input modes
are squeezed.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
For more complicated interferometers, we found
no consistent analytic method that demonstrates a
quantum-enhanced phase sensitivity. Such a solution re-
quires the assumption that an input state exists that
maximally squeezes all optimal output quadratures si-
multaneously. Instead, we use numerical methods to
prove the existence of the optimal input state for some
- but not all - values of T. Our simulations focus on
interferometers with N= 2 or N= 3 phases due to
the difficulty in performing a global optimization over
many (15+) free variables in a basis with many (12+)
spatiotemporal modes. Despite the complexity, one can
implement the maximal quantum enhancement in sensi-
tivity of e2r.
We start by modeling a two-phase, bidirectional inter-
ferometer with displaced squeezed states. We compare
the total measurement variance as a function of reflec-
tor transmission for four different iterations: one input
(passing through ϕ1first) or two inputs (from both di-
rections), and with squeezing turned on and off to repre-
sent the quantum and classical case, respectively. Results
are shown in Fig. 4. First, compare the two cases with
one input. With both classical and quantum input, the
total measurement variance diverges at T= 0 and at
T= 1. Near T= 0, the divergence is due to very little
light transmitting through the reflector. Since the sig-
nal for ϕ2decreases and noise (from the electromagnetic
vacuum) is constant, the signal-to-noise ratio decreases.
Near T= 1, distinguishing information on each phase
diminishes to zero due to an ambiguity in which either8
FIG. 4. Modeling results of measurements in a two-phase
bidirectional interferometer with coherent + squeezed vac-
uum states. Input parameters were set to α= 105andr= 1.
Bidirectional input instead used α= 2−1/2×105to keep
total energy constant. (a) Total phase variance of the mea-
surements is plotted as a function of reflector transmission
Tfor one or bidirectional input and for classical or squeezed
light. (b) Quantum advantage Qis plotted from the data in
(a), showing a substantial advantage from using bidrectional
input.
ϕ1orϕ2caused a phase shift. Moreover, in Fig. 4(b),
the quantum advantage from a single input is at most
17% near T= 0.63. The reflector introduces vacuum
noise into the state, effectively reducing the squeezing
strength for the measurement.
The two-input or bidirectional input case shows sub-
stantially more promise. While the measurement vari-
ances still diverge near T= 1 for the same reason as
before, they do not near T= 0. At that point, the
system is essentially two separate interferometers, each
independently measuring ϕ1orϕ2. The quantum advan-
tage correspondingly starts at its limit near T= 0. In-
terestingly, the quantum advantage remains high for all
Tbecause squeezed light is interfering with additional
squeezed light at the reflector, instead of vacuum noise.
Thus there is no effective loss of squeezing. The quan-
tum advantage for intermediate values of Tis slightly
lower because the optimal points for measuring ϕ1and
ϕ2are different. Thus the chosen measurement makes
some compromise between the two. See Appendix F for
more details. Despite the two phases being nearly in-
separable in the output state when T≈1, one can still
measure both simultaneously with a substantial quan-
tum advantage. The general key here is to avoid any
interaction with vacuum noise by introducing additional
squeezed light at every reflector such that squeezed light
from two directions interfere.
A three-phase bidirectional interferometer is more rep-
resentative of the general N-phase system due to the
use of multiple synchronized pulses and multiple reflec-
tions. To handle these multiple reflections, we tracked
at least k= 7 reflections for each temporal mode. We
consider a “downsampled” case where pulsed squeezed
FIG. 5. Numerical results for a three-phase interferometer,
where a single displaced squeezed state ( |α|= 105) is in-
put into an interferometer with all other modes as squeezed
vacuum. The phase variance is plotted for each phase as a
function of reflector transmission T. The lines with hollow
markers represent the performance without squeezed vacuum
and only a coherent state, while the lines with solid mark-
ers represent the performance with squeezed vacuum and a
squeezed coherent state input. Inset is a plot of each phase’s
quantum advantage Q, defined as the ratio of classical vari-
ance and quantum-enhanced variance. Further scaling with
both classical and quantum photon number can be found in
Appendix C.
.
vacuum is input in every mode and some subset of the
time a displaced squeezed state enters the interferometer
instead. The time between displaced squeezed states is
long enough that each fully exits the interferometer be-
fore the next one enters, avoiding any ambiguity on when
the state entered. The squeezed vacuum keeps the in-
terferometer modes squeezed, while the displaced input
gives the detectors distinguishing information between
the phase shifts.
Results of the “downsampled” case are shown in Fig.
5 for a displacement amplitude |α|= 105and a squeezing
parameter r= 1. It shows the phase variance for each
phase as a function of Tboth with and without squeez-
ing. Summing all variances, we find that the lowest total
phase variance occurs at T= 0.62. Taking the ratio of
these cases for each phase with and without squeezing,
the net quantum advantage is within 5% of the maxi-
mal value of e2forT < 0.62 and exactly the maximal
value for T≥0.62. As was the case in the two-phase
sensor, a maximal quantum advantage is achievable for
the optimal value of T. These results confirm that a full
quantum advantage is possible in a time-multiplexed cas-
caded phase sensor. While the time multiplexing tends
to dilute any single squeezed state across many output
modes, many squeezed states can maintain the maximum
level of squeezing inside the interferometer. Moreover, to
maximize distinguishing information, the downsampled
displaced squeezed state provides the needed timing in-
formation for the detectors. The additional degree of
freedom provided by the displaced squeezed state probe9
drives this dynamic and gives a unique advantage to us-
ing this state for such time-multiplexed sensors.
We also analyzed a different case where only displaced
squeezed states are used, and the states are input se-
quentially as shown in Fig. 3. See Appendixes D and E
for details, and for how such a multiparameter scheme
compares with measuring phases individually.
VI. EXTENSION TO MANY PHASES
Here we extend our analysis to the case where a sensor
hasNphases, with some simplifications. The results en-
able us to discuss the viability of a quantum enhancement
with many phases, as well as discuss the multiparameter
enhancement - advantage A- in the context of a cascaded
sensor.
To analyze a sensor with many phases, we make two
key simplifications to avoid the computational complex-
ity of a >100-parameter global optimization. First, we
use only a coherent state so that the covariance matrix
of the state will always be the identity matrix. Conse-
quently, the first term in Eq. (9) will be phase indepen-
dent and second term will always be zero, and so the
calculation will not require any optimization over each
phase. Second, we take k= 1 so that we track only the
first reflections from each reflector. Any reflected light
that hits another reflector instead transmits with loss
1−T.
Let us walk through the simple case of N= 2, detect-
ing both reflected and transmitted modes. The unitary
matrix that describes this sensor is
U=ˆP1(ϕ2)·ˆP2(ϕ1)·ˆB1,2(T)·ˆP1(ϕ1). (14)
Given an input mean vector ⃗Rin= (α,0,0,0), the output
vector is
⃗Rout=√
2α
√
Tcos(ϕ1+ϕ2)√
Tsin(ϕ1+ϕ2)
−√
1−Tcos(2 ϕ1)
−√
1−Tsin(2ϕ1)
. (15)
The resulting Fisher information matrix is
F(T, α) = 4 α2
(4−3T)T
T T
. (16)
Optimal phase sensitivity is obtained when the trace of
the inverse of Fis minimized. This occurs at T= 0.586
and gives a total phase variance of 0 .73/α2.
For more complex sensors, there is actually no need
to compute the unitary matrix and output state because
the Fisher information matrix has the following pattern:
Fn,n= 4Tn−1α2, (17)
Fi,i=Fi+1,i+1+α2(16T2i−2−16T2i−1), i= 1 : n,
(18)
Fi,j=Fj,i=Fi,i, j = 1 : i−1, i= 1 : n . (19)Similar patterns exist for other sensor configurations. For
instance, if the layout in Fig. 2(a) ended in a perfect
mirror instead of a second beamsplitter, Fn,nchanges to
16T2n−2α2. This simple and elegant result shows how
similar sensors can be analyzed with the same methods.
We repeated this procedure again in a different sce-
nario where the sensor operates bidirectionally. That is,
a measurement from one side of the sensor is followed by
another pulse from the opposite side. The Fisher infor-
mation changes by averaging itself with a copy that has
both columns and rows reversed:
Fbidirectional (T, α) =F(T, α) +J·F(T, α)·J
2.(20)
The exchange matrix Jis the identity matrix with its
rows reversed. Functionally, the reversed Fisher infor-
mation matrix swaps definitions between ϕiandϕn−i+1,
as if the input state started on the other side of the sen-
sor.
With these patterns, Fisher information matrices were
constructed for up to N= 100 phases. In order to study
how the sensor scales with more measurable phases, we
found the optimal reflector transmission Toptfor each N
that minimizes the total phase variance. Fig. 6(a) plots
Topt(N) for both single and bidirectional cases. In each
case, the optimal transmission shows clear 1 /Ndepen-
dence. Consequently, the normalized transmitted power
TNasymptotically approaches 0.45 and 0.24 for the sin-
gle and bidirectional cases, respectively. We then used
Topt(N) to determine what power (photon number) in
the sensor is required to reach an average phase variance
of 1 mrad2. Fig. 6(b) shows that this power require-
ment remains linear in Nfor both cases, with slopes of
7.72×105and 2 .81×105photons per added phase for
each case. Fig. 6(c) also shows the distribution of phase
variances for the 100-phase sensor. In both cases, the
measurement variance is highest where the sensor has
the lowest circulating power. For the single-sided case,
this point is at its opposite end, while it is in the middle
for the bidirectional case. Overall, the linear scaling of
this sensor to 100 phases shows that there are no fun-
damental limits to this architecture extending to many
phases.
In this analysis, some light was lost by the assumption
thatk= 1 so that we track only the first reflections from
each reflector. Given reflector transmission Tand total
number of phases N, this loss L(T, N) is
L(T, N) = 1−TN−1−N−2X
k=0T2k(1−T).(21)
Assuming T(N) =x/N for some proportionality con-
stant x, we can take an infinite limit:
lim
N→∞L(T, N) =1
2e−2x(ex−1)2. (22)
Given the constants of proportionality fitted in Fig. 6(a)
for optimal reflectivity, we find that the loss is 16.4%10
FIG. 6. Results of modeling a sensor with up to 100 phases and classical light with two scenarios. The single input uses a single
pulse from one side for measurement, while the bidirectional case uses two pulses, one from each side. (a) Plot of the optimal
reflectivity Ropt= 1−Toptof the partial reflectors as a function of the number of phases Nin that sensor. (b) The required
power, or photon number, required to reach an average phase variance of 1 mrad2, as a function of the number of phases in the
sensor. (c) Distribution of the standard deviation of a phase measurement for each phase in the sensor ( N= 100)
and 28.5% for the single-input and bidirectional cases,
respectively. While these losses are rather high, including
more reflections would add higher-order terms to T(N)
and show increased sensitivity per measurement. How-
ever, the measurement interval will take ktimes longer
for measuring the kthorder reflection, with diminishing
returns on sensitivity. Measuring all reflections will be
optimal for extracting the maximum amount of informa-
tion per photon.
However, if one instead wants to obtain the most in-
formation per unit time, the optimal strategy is to only
track reflections up to order kbefore sending the next
pulse. This method will be significantly faster than wait-
ing for all detectable reflections, depending on the error
tolerance in the end application.
The remaining reflections will interfere with the next
measurement, giving small errors that can be mitigated.
Ifk= 1, then the total relative error will be propor-
tional to Eq. 21. Tracking more reflections with a longer
measurement will lower this error to be proportional to
L(T, N)k. At sufficiently high k, these errors will be
lower than shot noise. Additionally, the estimation al-
gorithm can be tuned to accommodate leftover reflec-
tions because they are still correlated with the measur-
able phases. Lastly, one could slightly delay the next
probe pulse so that it no longer overlaps with the re-
maining reflections, and ignore them because they are
now outside the detectors’ expected timing window.
VII. DISCUSSION
With these results, we find that a multiparameter en-
hancement - advantage A- is clearly present, but also
paradoxical because these parameters are not individu-
ally addressable. Suppose one wanted to estimate a sin-
gle parameter, ϕi, given all other phases in ⃗ϕare known.
Given the sensor layout, one would have to probe ϕiin asimilar way to the multiparameter measurement. For in-
stance, light must pass through ϕ1...i−1to reach ϕi. One
may estimate ϕimarginally better in a single-parameter
measurement, but one could estimate all of ⃗ϕwith the
same probe and detectors simply by processing data dif-
ferently. Comparing Nsingle-parameter measurements
to one multiparameter measurement of comparable aver-
age sensitivity, advantage Ashould be linear in N. The
disclaimer is that the single-parameter estimation used
in the comparison is unrealistic, and the concept of a
multiparameter advantage was meant for other situations
where parameters are individually addressable.
Advantage B, the quantum enhancement, is also
present in the system. The expected squeezing factor of
e2rappears in both our analytic results for the two-phase
interferometer, and in the three-phase interferometer for
T≥0.62. A likely explanation is that the Fisher infor-
mation matrix for an optimized cascaded measurement
will factor out into two terms:
F(T, α, r ) =f(α, r)G(T). (23)
Here, f(α, r) is a global factor representing the power
and squeezing factor of the input state. The remaining
matrix G(T) contains the remaining information on the
geometry of the sensor and the measurement. Equation
(23) assumes that the input modes are static, so that
the structure of ⃗Rinis unchanged. The values of αand
rmay change, so long as |α|2≫sinh2(r). Given this
factorability, the measurement variance for all parame-
ters will scale as f(α, r)−1. Since f(α, r) scales as |α|2
for a classical coherent state |α⟩, and|α|2e2rfor a coher-
ent + squeezed vacuum state, the factor of e2ris again
the quantum advantage in sensitivity. Moreover, the fac-
torability shows that our results are independent of the
specific value of |α|andr. See Appendix C for further
tests with varying |α|andr.
Our results demonstrate the potential for a quantum11
advantage in a cascaded system, but relied on some opti-
mistic assumptions. First and foremost is not having op-
tical loss. While Appendix B illustrates how loss should
effectively reduce the squeezing factor, there is another
consequence. Depending on the platform of choice, losses
will constrain the number of phases one can probe. The
advantage of optical fiber is the ultralow propagation loss
(0.2 dB / km). Moreover, point-inscribed Bragg reflec-
tors can serve as the partial reflectors and have extremely
low loss [56]. In an extreme case, 100 reflectors intro-
duced 0.01 dB of additional loss [38]. Other platforms
such as free-space optics will have higher losses ( 1%),
restricting them to probing a few dozen phases for the
same system efficiency. Therefore, this method is best
suited for optical fiber sensors.
Another consequence of these ideal assumptions is the
rate at which a measurement would saturate the quan-
tum Cramer-Rao bound. A lossless pure state is known
to saturate its Holevo Cramer-Rao bound in a single shot
[57]. With no fundamental incompatibility between our
parameters (only classical correlations), we infer that a
single-shot measurement is also sufficient to achieve the
quantum Cramer-Rao bound that we report. More realis-
tically, mixed states will take multiple copies to saturate
these bounds. This fact creates some tradeoff between
measurement bandwidth and precision not seen in clas-
sical sensors.
A. Practical Considerations
Synchronizing many squeezed pulses for constructive
interference will be challenging, but feasible. For this
purpose, the ratio of timing jitter to pulse duration de-
termines how well successive pulses will overlap. Similar
to optical loss, any pulse mismatch will reduce the ob-
served squeezing strength at the output. Therefore, pulse
mismatch only needs to be a negligible effect compared
to the system’s total loss. For example, given a very op-
timistic 20% loss, pulse mismatch should be below 2%.
Borrowing from classical fiber sensors, one can avoid dis-
persive effects and significantly relax timing requirements
by using ns-long pulses [38, 40]. If using a mode-locked
fiber laser, filtered down into a ns pulse, one inherits the
exquisite timing jitter of these systems, often less than
1 ps rms [58], which gives ¡ 0.1% mismatch. Alterna-
tively, one can carve out a pulse from amplitude modu-
lation in an EOM or AOM. In this case, timing jitter is
mostly determined by the radio-frequency driving elec-
tronics, typically about 10 ps [59], giving 1% mismatch.
Either method is sufficient for a first demonstration.
Further modulation is necessary to ensure optimal con-
trol of these pulses. Phase drifts inside the interferometer
would alter the interference conditions but can be com-
pensated by phase-modulating the squeezing pump and
local oscillator. This way, each pulse can have freely vary-
ing coherent state phase and squeezing angle. Choosing
these angles can be determined from prior interferometermeasurements.
Implementing the multiphase MZI will have three key
challenges: obtaining a pulsed squeezed light source,
maintaining uniform reflector separation, and imple-
menting sufficiently fast feedback to the reference arm.
For the squeezed source, a suitable pulsed source has been
implemented in [60] for Gaussian boson sampling. To en-
sure high interference visibility, spacing between reflec-
tors should be uniform within 1% of the pulse length.
This constraint is significantly relaxed by using long,
nanosecond pulses, giving a pulse length of around 1 m
and a spacing tolerance for the reflectors of about 1 cm.
The feedback circuit to the reference arm must also be
fast enough to track drifts in the signals, which typically
occur at sub-kHz frequencies. Feedback into the refer-
ence arm can be as fast as several kHz [61–63], which is
sufficient. The authors in [60] also implemented multiple,
independently stabilized fiber loops, which is a function-
ally similar task to phase estimation. Therefore, such
feedback can also be implemented in parallel to account
for our multiple parameters, and a full experiment is fea-
sible.
We predict that our sensor can be implemented as a
quasi-distributed temperature sensor in optical fiber with
unparalleled sensitivity. Given the thermo-optic coeffi-
cient of silica of 4 ×10−6K−1, a measurement variance of
1 mrad, and sensing regions 10 m long, the shot-noise lim-
ited temperature sensitivity will be approximately 10 µK.
The quasi-distributed nature again comes from the mul-
tiplexing reflectors, which divide the sensor into discrete
regions, and each region can be monitored independently.
While microkelvin-sensitive sensors already exist, they
typically have sub-Hz measurement bandwidths [64] and
measure at only one location. In contrast, the fiber-based
sensor can have kHz measurement bandwidth, compara-
ble sensitivity, and the capability to measure many re-
gions simultaneously. Its distributed nature allows it to
infer temperature gradients, which has its own set of ap-
plications in locating hot spots or thermal leakages. Such
a sensor could provide additional stability to highly sen-
sitive space-based experiments such as the LISA gravita-
tional wave observatory [65]. The sensor could also mon-
itor other transient material properties, such as strain
or vibration, that would also induce a change in optical
path length in a material. Cascaded phase sensing lays
a foundation for many remote sensors with its technique
of precision interferometry.
VIII. CONCLUSION
We have developed the framework for a branch of quan-
tum metrology we call cascaded phase sensing. Through
time-bin multiplexing, a single sensor can resolve multi-
ple parameters along its length. Regardless of the cor-
relations between parameters in the Fisher information,
squeezed states can be used to achieve a quantum advan-
tage of e2r, where ris the squeezing parameter. There-12
fore, statistical correlations between parameters due to a
chosen sensor layout do not prohibit a multiparameter
sensor from achieving a quantum enhancement.
We present an example structure featuring evenly
spaced reflectors on the sensing path for defining phase
sensing regions, and time-bin multiplexing for effective
use of multiple pulses of squeezed light. Despite the
cascaded phases sharing an optical path, we show that
squeezed light can give a full quantum enhancement in
sensitivity of e2rin phase sensing. With a state-of-the-
art squeezed source, this enhancement can be about a
factor of 7 (or 1.76 given 3 dB of loss). While we show
this enhancement for two and three phases, we antici-
pate that the same physics applies to sensors with many
more phases, limited by propagation loss. The classical
analysis of an N-phase sensor demonstrates a simple and
elegant way to optimize the transmission value of reflec-
tors in these sensors. Through further development, opti-
cal time-domain reflectometry and similar remote sensing
technologies can directly benefit from the optimization
procedure.
Our sensing protocol offers a rich branch of quantum-
enhanced sensing to explore, combining multiparameter
quantum metrology with remote sensing. This method-
ology applies to any quasi-distributed sensing of parame-
ters that can be mapped to an optical phase shift. Appli-
cations include calibration of networks in quantum com-
munications, monitoring of structural integrity, geophys-
ical surveying, and in free-space remote sensing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge useful technical discussions with J.
Combes, K. Shalm, M. Mazurek, M. Messerly, S. Libby,
R. Mellors, M. Zohrabi, T. Shanavas, D. Wilkerson, S.
Diddams, M. Nicotra, and I. Novikova. We gratefully
acknowledge funding from ARPA-E, Grant No. DE-
AR0001152, NSF CCF Grant No. 1838435, Q-SEnSE:
Quantum Systems through Entangled Science and Engi-
neering (NSF QLCI Award OSI-2016244), and the Uni-
versity of Colorado Boulder Cubit initiative.
Appendix A: Matrix Definitions
Here we define our Gaussian state basis, the matrix
definition of operators, and the calculation for Fisher in-
formation. A thorough treatment for continuous-variable
quantum information can be found in [45, 46]. As a sim-
ple example, we benchmark this formulation with the
classic example of a (single-phase) Mach-Zehnder inter-
ferometer. A Gaussian state can be represented by a
mean vector ⃗R={x, y}and a covariance matrix σ. The
vector ⃗Rrepresents the amplitude of the state in terms of
the quadrature operators ˆXandˆY, which are analogous
to ˆxand ˆpof the quantum harmonic oscillator, and areaccessible by homodyne detection. The matrix σrepre-
sents the quantum noise of that state, normalized to 1.
For example, a coherent state of amplitude αand phase
θwill have:
⃗R= (|√
2α|cos(θ),|√
2α|sin(θ)), (A1)
σc=I2,
where I2is the 2 ×2 identity matrix. The noise matrix
is in natural units, ℏ=c= 1, so that vacuum noise has
an amplitude of 1 [45]. In contrast, a squeezed coherent
state may have the same amplitude but a different noise
matrix:
σsq=ˆS(r, χ)ˆS†(r, χ), (A2)
ˆS(r, χ) =
cosh( r) + cos( χ) sinh( r) sin( χ) sinh( r)
sin(χ) sinh( r) cosh( r)−cos(χ) sinh( r)
.
Here, ˆS(r, χ) is the single-mode squeezing operator with
squeezing strength rand squeezing angle χ.
These states can also be multimode, representing ev-
ery spatial or temporal mode in a system. In this case,
the mean vector and covariance matrix will be of size
2MforMmodes. All single-mode expressions can grow
to the appropriate matrix size by direct sum with the
identity. For example, an M-mode covariance matrix in
which the first mode is squeezed and the rest are vacuum
is expressed as:
σmultimode =ˆS1(r, χ)ˆS1†(r, χ)⊕I2M−2. (A3)
Gaussian states can propagate through any linear op-
tics, represented with a unitary matrix. To demonstrate
how this formalism can show a quantum enhancement
in sensitivity, we go through the example of a Mach-
Zehnder interferometer (MZI). Any interferometers mod-
eled here are a combination of beamsplitters and phase
shifters. When the beamsplitter and phase-shifter ma-
trices are multiplied together, the resulting unitary rep-
resents propagation through the entire sensor. The two-
mode beamsplitter operator with transmission T= 1−R
we use is ˆB(T):
ˆB(T) =
√
T 0√
1−T 0
0√
T 0√
1−T
−√
1−T 0√
T 0
0 −√
1−T 0√
T
.
(A4)
The single-mode phase-shift operator for a phase ϕacting
on a single mode is ˆP(ϕ)[46]:
ˆP(ϕ) =
cos(ϕ)−sin(ϕ)
sin(ϕ) cos( ϕ)
. (A5)13
One may also consider a symmetric, two-mode phase-
shift operator, ˆPs(ϕ) operating on the sensing arm and
the reference arm:
ˆPs(ϕ) =
cos(ϕ/2)−sin(ϕ/2) 0 0
sin(ϕ/2) cos( ϕ/2) 0 0
0 0 cos( ϕ/2) sin( ϕ/2)
0 0 −sin(ϕ/2) cos( ϕ/2)

(A6)
Given that a Mach-Zehnder interferometer is sensitive
to the phase difference between its two arms, these two
phase-shift operations are physically equivalent. Thus
the Mach-Zehnder interferometer can be expressed as the
unitary:
UMZI=ˆB(1/2)·ˆPs(ϕ)·ˆB(1/2). (A7)
For a state {R, σ}, the output state is, in general:
⃗Rout=UMZI·⃗Rin+⃗d , (A8)
σout=UMZI·σin·U†
MZI+Y,
where ⃗dis an added displacement and Yrepresents any
added noise [66]. No displacements or additional noise
are present inside our sensor; thus we set ⃗d=⃗0 and
Y=0.
Given an output state, we obtain a lower bound on
the measurement sensitivity by calculating the quantum
Fisher information of the state [54, 67]:
F(ϕ) = 2∂⃗RT
out
∂ϕ·σ−1
out·∂⃗Rout
∂ϕ+1
4Tr[(∂σout
∂ϕ·σ−1
out)2].
(A9)
Consider the classical case, where the input is a coherent
state of amplitude |α|:
⃗Rin=
√
2α
0
0
0
, (A10)
⃗Rout=
0√
2αsin(ϕ/2)√
2αcos(ϕ/2)
0
, (A11)
σin=I4=σout.
The Fisher information we obtain from this is F=|α|2.
The information is linear in the photon number of the
state ¯ n=|α|2. In the quantum case, squeezed vacuum is
also injected into the unused port with χ= 0. The mean
vector ⃗Routremains the same, but
σin=
1 0 0 0
0 1 0 0
0 0 e2r0
0 0 0 e−2r
, (A12)Fsqueezed =|α|2e2r+ sinh r2. (A13)
This expression agrees with other methods of calculating
the Fisher information for the same scenario [53, 68]. In
the limit where |α| ≫1, the second term in Fsqueezed is
negligible, and we can express the quantum advantage Q
in phase sensitivity from injecting squeezed light as:
Q=∆2ϕclassical
∆2ϕsqueezed=Fsqueezed
Fclassical=e2r. (A14)
The term e−2ris the shot-noise reduction factor of a
squeezed state along its squeezed quadrature. Thus, the
maximal improvement of sensitivity given by this state is
e2r. State-of-the-art squeezing sources can achieve about
an order of magnitude of quadrature squeezing, so we
choose r= 1 for our simulations [48–50].
Appendix B: Loss and Noise
FIG. 7. Results showing the degradation in quantum advan-
tage of the sensor as one adds optical loss (blue, dotted),
or thermal noise (black, diamond), described by an average
number of thermal photons nth. Loss effectively reduces the
squeezing strength. Added thermal noise ruins the condition
of having a shot-noise limited system, without which squeez-
ing is ineffective.
The sensor does not infinitely scale to an arbitrar-
ily high number of phases. For a meaningful quantum
advantage, the number of input phase-locked squeezed
pulses scales alongside N, which may become experimen-
tally challenging. Additionally, dispersion, optical loss,
and limited coherence will all set an upper limit on the
number of optical elements that the squeezed pulses pass
through. Dispersion and coherence can be engineered,
but optical loss sets a harder limit.
By applying optical loss to all modes in the interfer-
ometer, we analyzed the extent to which the sensor can
maintain a quantum advantage under lossy conditions.
We implemented this with Eq. (A8) in which U=√ϵI,
where Iis the identity matrix and ϵis the efficiency,14
⃗d=⃗0, and Y= (1−ϵ)I. Results are in Fig. 7, which
shows the same expected behavior from single-parameter
sensing. A non-unity efficiency introduces added noise
into the state, effectively reducing the squeezing strength
and the resulting quantum advantage Q[53].
Similarly, we analyzed how added thermal noise or
phase noise affects Q. To implement added thermal noise,
we directly added the matrix nthIwith nthphotons to
the output covariance matrix. Mixing the output state
with a thermal state of average photon number nthre-
duces Q. As expected, when the sensor is no longer shot
noise limited ( nth>¯nsqueezed ), a large quantum advan-
tage is no longer possible.
Appendix C: Numeric Scaling with Photon Number
FIG. 8. Simulation data verifying the scaling of the total
phase sensitivity with respect to classical photon number (lin-
ear) and squeezing parameter (exponential). The fitted nu-
merical constants are inset.
Fig. 8 verifies that our simulation results scale as ex-
pected with respect to classical photon number and the
squeezing parameter. Data was acquired from the three-
phase interferometer configuration as used in Fig. 5. In
Fig. 8(a), the squeezing parameter rwas set to 1 while
|α|2varied from 10 −108. In Fig. 8(b), |α|2was set to
104while rvaried from 0 −2.
Appendix D: Three-Phase Interferometer with
Sequential Inputs
Another situation to consider in the same interferom-
eter is sequential inputs of multiple displaced squeezed
states, as in Fig. 3. Since continuous input of these
states would wash out any timing information, we must
assume that the sensor is initially unsqueezed. The ad-
ditional power of many displaced inputs may provide an
overall better sensitivity than the “downsampled” case.
Results are shown in Fig. 9. Similar to the analysis of
the two-phase interferometer, we show the total phase
FIG. 9. (a) Plot of the total phase sensitivity in a three-
phase, bidirectional interferometer with up to five sequential
displaced squeezed state inputs. The magnitude of |α|re-
duces with each added pulse to keep the total input photon
number constant at 103. (b) Plot of the quantum advantage
Qobtained from sequentially inputting up to five displaced
squeezed states. The quantum advantage is shown to increase
with more input pulses, asymptotically approaching the limit
set by the amount of vacuum noise in the system.
variance and quantum advantage from using a varying
number of inputs. A single input gives a Qof at most
9.5% at T= 0.62. However, with a second input, the
light has one fewer interaction with vacuum noise, and
so the sensor shows a stronger quantum advantage as
well as a lower phase variance. A third pulse adds a
smaller enhancement and more inputs show more di-
minishing returns on the sensitivity and quantum ad-
vantage. With more pulses comes greater ambiguity in
which phase caused which output mode to have a phase
shift, leading to relatively lower distinguishing informa-
tion. Also, more pulses would require a longer measure-
ment period, which is not accounted for in this analysis.
Therefore, for simplicity in measurement, it may be more
practical to maintain the squeezing inside the interferom-
eter with the downsampled case. The phases can then be
probed with maximal squeezing enhancement with either
one or two displaced squeezed pulses.
Appendix E: Multiparameter estimation advantage
Another figure of merit for a multiparameter sensor is
its enhanced precision over simply measuring each pa-
rameter individually. Therefore, the multiparameter es-
timation from Fig. 9 may also be compared with that
of individual phase estimation in a series of three sepa-
rate measurements. Fig. 10 shows three traces of the15
optimal variance for measuring each phase individually
using five pulses, multiplied by three because each phase
is measured one-third as often. The sum of these vari-
ances is also plotted and compared to that of multipa-
rameter estimation, where the total phase variance was
optimized collectively. The total variance of the multipa-
rameter measurement is between 1 .7 and 2 .8 times lower
than the sum of individual measurements. This lower
variance shows a separate advantage of using multipa-
rameter estimation techniques, on top of using squeezed
light. Other works predict a factor of Nimprovement
for using multiparameter estimation with Nparameters
[21, 27], or a flat factor between 2 and 4 [24, 25], and
so our maximum observed quantum advantage of 2.8 for
three parameters is reasonable. A similar analysis on in-
terferometers with more phases would be necessary to
determine if the enhancement scales with N.
FIG. 10. Comparison of measurement sensitivities from differ-
ent methods in the three-phase interferometer, as a function of
reflector transmission. The same sequential pulse procedure
from Fig. 9 is done here. Traces for phases 1, 2, and 3 refer to
single-parameter estimation and optimization of those phases,
assuming the others are known. The sum of those traces as
three separate measurements is compared with the total vari-
ance from measuring all phases at once in a multiparameter
approach. The total phase variance from a multiparameter es-
timation is shown to be between 1.7 and 2.8 lower than that
of sensing individual phases, showing the efficacy of sensing
all parameters at once.
Appendix F: Optimization
Optimization plays a key role in the physics of the sen-
sor because it is not guaranteed that squeezing will re-
duce the shot noise in a homodyne-based measurement.
A squeezed state of random squeezing angle would be
equally likely to anti-squeeze the correct quadrature as
it would to squeeze it. Thus, it is non-trivial that a si-
multaneous measurement on Ncascaded phases would
have the correct squeezing angle for each output mode
simultaneously. Our optimization algorithm ensures this
as best it can given the geometry of the system. For an
N-phase interferometer with minput pulses, there will
beN+ 2m−1 variables for the optimization (minus onebecause of a global phase). As an example, we return to
the two-phase interferometer with two inputs. This has
five variables: the measurable phases ϕ1, ϕ2, the input
coherent state phase for each side θ1= 0, θ2, and the
squeezing angles for each side χ1, χ2.
FIG. 11. Comparison of optimized measurements with
squeezing in the two-phase interferometer example and re-
sulting phase variances as a function of ϕ1. As before, input
coherent state amplitude |α|= 105and squeezing strength
r= 1. We examined the point T= 0.9, where in Fig. 3 the
full quantum advantage is relatively low. (a) A measurement
optimized for ϕ1, where the input values were θ1= 0, ϕ2=
2.89, θ2= 3.39, χ1= 1.91, χ2= 3.63. A full quantum advan-
tage of e2ris achieved for measuring ϕ1atϕ1= 1.9, but mea-
suring ϕ2at the same time only gives a quantum advantage
of 1.27. (b) A measurement optimized for measuring ϕ2, at
the point θ1= 0, ϕ2= 2.78, θ2= 3.94, χ1= 3.14, χ2= 3.51,
showing the opposite effect where a measurement on ϕ2gives
a full e2rquantum advantage at ϕ1= 1.68, at the expense of
the sensitivity of the ϕ1measurement. In (c), a compromise
is reached at the point θ1= 0, ϕ2= 2.65, θ2= 3.93, χ1=
1.87, χ2= 3.44. Measuring at this point with ϕ1= 1.88 gives
an equal, although slightly lower, quantum advantage for both
phases.
Fig. 11 shows the results of three different optimiza-
tions on all but one variable, ϕ1, with the phase vari-
ances for each measurement plotted separately. In (a),
∆2ϕ1is exclusively optimized, at the expense of the sen-
sitivity of the ϕ2measurement. In (b), ∆2ϕ2is exclu-
sively optimized, giving reversed results. In (c), the total
phase variance from both measurements is optimized (as
in Fig. 4), resulting in a compromise point where each
measurement is close to optimal. The above comparison
shows that it is indeed nontrivial to have multiple mea-
surements simultaneously enhanced by squeezing, given
the geometric limitations of the system.
Appendix G: Appendix G: Fisher Information
Diagonalization
The Fisher information matrices presented throughout
this work have off-diagonal terms. It is possible to diag-
onalize these matrices, transforming into the eigenbasis16
of the Fisher information. Here we argue through ex-
ample why diagonalization is not useful for a cascaded
sensor. Let us take the Fisher information matrix from
the two-phase sensor:
F(T) =
4−3T T
T T
. (G1)
Scaling with |α|2andris implied, and not shown. Di-
agonalizing this Fisher information requires the matrix:
D=ϵ+
TA+ϵ−
TA−
A−1
−A−1
+
, (G2)where:
ϵ±= 2−2T±p
5T2−8T+ 4, (G3)
A±=r
1 +ϵ±
T2
.
The diagonalized Fisher information is:
F′=
λ−0
0λ+
, (G4)
λ±= 2−T±p
5T2−8T+ 4. (G5)
The basis of F′is no longer ϕ1andϕ2but instead D11ϕ1+
D12ϕ2andD21ϕ1+D22ϕ2. Despite the basis change, we
find that:
Tr(F−1) =Tr(F′−1) =1
T+1
2−2T, (G6)
so there is no change in the total measurement variance.
More importantly, F′−1represents covariance in a mea-
surement basis that is not accessible or useful in a cas-
caded sensor. The entire point of this sensor layout is
to have individually resolvable elements along a common
path and matrix diagonalization destroys that premise
by mixing parameters again.
[1] C. M. Caves, Phys. Rev. D 23, 1693 (1981).
[2] V. Giovannetti, S. Lloyd, and L. Maccone, Science 306,
1330 (2004).
[3] J. P. Dowling and K. P. Seshadreesan, Journal of Light-
wave Technology 33, 2359 (2015), arXiv:1412.7578.
[4] R. S. Bondurant and J. H. Shapiro, Phys. Rev. D 30,
2548 (1984).
[5] J. Aasi, J. Abadie, B. Abbott, et al. (The LIGO Sci-
entific Collaboration), Nature Photonics 7, 613 (2013),
arXiv:1310.0383.
[6] M. A. Taylor, J. Janousek, V. Daria, J. Knittel, B. Hage,
H.-A. Bachor, and W. P. Bowen, Nature Photonics 7, 229
(2013), arXiv:1206.6928.
[7] J. Ma, X. Wang, C. Sun, and F. Nori, Physics Reports
509, 89 (2011).
[8] M. Mehmet, S. Ast, T. Eberle, S. Steinlechner,
H. Vahlbruch, and R. Schnabel, Optics Express 19, 25763
(2011), arXiv:1110.3737.
[9] K. C. Cox, G. P. Greve, J. M. Weiner, and J. K. Thomp-
son, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 093602 (2016).
[10] P. J. D. Crowley, A. Datta, M. Barbieri, and I. A.
Walmsley, Physical Review A 89, 023845 (2014),
arXiv:1206.0043.
[11] M. G. Genoni, S. Olivares, and M. G. A. Paris, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 106, 153603 (2011).
[12] M. D. Vidrighin, G. Donati, M. G. Genoni, X.-M. Jin,
W. S. Kolthammer, M. Kim, A. Datta, M. Barbieri, and
I. A. Walmsley, Nature Communications 5, 3532 (2014),
arXiv:1410.5353.
[13] B.-B. Li, J. B´ ılek, U. B. Hoff, L. S. Madsen, S. Forstner,
V. Prakash, C. Sch¨ afermeier, T. Gehring, W. P. Bowen,and U. L. Andersen, Optica 5, 850 (2018).
[14] J. Friel, P. Palittapongarnpim, F. Albarelli, and
A. Datta, Attainability of the holevo-cram´ er-rao bound
for two-qubit 3d magnetometry (2020), arXiv:2008.01502
[quant-ph].
[15] Z. Hou, Z. Zhang, G.-Y. Xiang, C.-F. Li, G.-C. Guo,
H. Chen, L. Liu, and H. Yuan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125,
020501 (2020).
[16] P. K´ om´ ar, E. M. Kessler, M. Bishof, L. Jiang, A. S.
Sørensen, J. Ye, and M. D. Lukin, Nature Physics 10,
582 (2014), arXiv:1310.6045.
[17] J. Suzuki, Y. Yang, and M. Hayashi, Journal of Physics
A: Mathematical and Theoretical 53, 453001 (2020),
arXiv:1911.02790.
[18] E. Bisketzi, D. Branford, and A. Datta, New Journal of
Physics 21, 123032 (2019), arXiv:1907.11657.
[19] F. Albarelli, M. Barbieri, M. Genoni, and I. Gianani,
Physics Letters A 384, 126311 (2020), arXiv:1911.12067.
[20] L. J. Fiderer, T. Tufarelli, S. Piano, and G. Adesso, PRX
Quantum 2, 020308 (2021), arXiv:2012.01572.
[21] S. Ragy, M. Jarzyna, and R. Demkowicz-Dobrza´ nski,
Phys. Rev. A 94, 052108 (2016).
[22] M. Szczykulska, T. Baumgratz, and A. Datta, Advances
in Physics: X 1, 621 (2016), arXiv:1604.02615.
[23] F. Albarelli and R. Demkowicz-Dobrza´ nski, Physical Re-
view X 12, 011039 (2022).
[24] C. N. Gagatsos, D. Branford, and A. Datta, Physical
Review A 94, 042342 (2016), arXiv:1605.04819.
[25] C. You, S. Adhikari, Y. Chi, M. L. LaBorde, C. T.
Matyas, C. Zhang, Z. Su, T. Byrnes, C. Lu, J. P. Dowling,
and J. P. Olson, Journal of Optics 19, 124002 (2017).17
[26] W. G´ orecki and R. Demkowicz-Dobrza´ nski, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 128, 040504 (2022).
[27] P. C. Humphreys, M. Barbieri, A. Datta, and I. A.
Walmsley, Physical Review Letters 111, 070403 (2013),
arXiv:1307.7653.
[28] E. Polino, M. Riva, M. Valeri, R. Silvestri, G. Corrielli,
A. Crespi, N. Spagnolo, R. Osellame, and F. Sciarrino,
Optica 6, 288 (2019).
[29] L. Zhang and K. W. C. Chan, Physical Review A 95,
032321 (2017), arXiv:1703.00063.
[30] M. Malitesta, A. Smerzi, and L. Pezz` e, Physical Review
A108, 032621 (2023), arXiv:2109.09178.
[31] M. Valeri, V. Cimini, S. Piacentini, F. Ceccarelli,
E. Polino, F. Hoch, G. Bizzarri, G. Corrielli, N. Spagnolo,
R. Osellame, and F. Sciarrino, Physical Review Research
5, 013138 (2023), arXiv:2208.14473.
[32] T. J. Proctor, P. A. Knott, and J. A. Dunningham, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 120, 080501 (2018).
[33] C. Oh, C. Lee, S. H. Lie, and H. Jeong, Physical Review
Research 2, 023030 (2020), arXiv:1910.00823.
[34] X. Guo, C. R. Breum, J. Borregaard, S. Izumi, M. V.
Larsen, T. Gehring, M. Christandl, J. S. Neergaard-
Nielsen, and U. L. Andersen, Nature Physics 16, 281
(2020), arXiv:1905.09408.
[35] D. Gatto, P. Facchi, F. A. Narducci, and V. Tamma,
Phys. Rev. Research 1, 032024(R) (2019).
[36] W. Ge, K. Jacobs, Z. Eldredge, A. V. Gorshkov, and
M. Foss-Feig, Physical Review Letters 121, 043604
(2018).
[37] R. Tucker, G. Eisenstein, and S. Korotky, Journal of
Lightwave Technology 6, 1737 (1988).
[38] B. Redding, M. J. Murray, A. Donko, M. Beresna,
A. Masoudi, and G. Brambilla, Optics Express 28, 14638
(2020).
[39] C. K. Kirkendall and A. Dandridge, Journal of Physics
D: Applied Physics 37, R197 (2004).
[40] P. Lu, N. Lalam, M. Badar, B. Liu, B. T. Chorpening,
M. P. Buric, and P. R. Ohodnicki, Applied Physics Re-
views 6, 041302 (2019).
[41] M. Wu, X. Fan, Q. Liu, and Z. He, Optics Letters 44,
5969 (2019).
[42] C. W. Helstrom, Journal of Statistical Physics 1, 231
(1969).
[43] S. Ataman, Physical Review A 100, 063821 (2019),
arXiv:1912.04018.
[44] A. I. Lvovsky, Squeezed light, in Photonics (John Wiley
and Sons, Ltd, 2015) Chap. 5, pp. 121–163.
[45] G. Adesso, S. Ragy, and A. R. Lee, Open Systems and
Information Dynamics 21, 1440001 (2014).
[46] A. Serafini, Quantum Continuous Variables (CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL : CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group,
[2017] —, 2017).
[47] G. Krueper, L. Cohen, and J. T. Gopinath, Cas-
cadedSensing, https://github.com/g-krueper/CascadedSensing (2024).
[48] M. Mehmet, T. Eberle, S. Steinlechner, H. Vahlbruch,
and R. Schnabel, Optics Letters 35, 1665 (2010).
[49] Z. Vernon, N. Quesada, M. Liscidini, B. Morrison,
M. Menotti, K. Tan, and J. Sipe, Physical Review Ap-
plied 12, 064024 (2019), arXiv:1807.00044.
[50] T. Eberle, V. H¨ andchen, J. Duhme, T. Franz, R. F.
Werner, and R. Schnabel, Physical Review A 83, 052329
(2011), arXiv:1103.1817.
[51] M. Jarzyna and R. Demkowicz-Dobrza´ nski, Physical Re-
view A 85, 011801(R) (2012), arXiv:1108.3844.
[52] E. Hecht, in Optics (Addison-Wesley, 2002) pp. 416–425.
[53] T. Ono and H. F. Hofmann, Physical Review A 81,
033819 (2010), arXiv:0910.3727.
[54] D. ˇSafr´ anek, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
Theoretical 52, 035304 (2019), arXiv:1801.00299.
[55] R. Storn and K. Price, Journal of Global Optimization
11, 341 (1997).
[56] R. J. Williams, N. Jovanovic, G. D. Marshall, G. N.
Smith, M. J. Steel, and M. J. Withford, Optics Express
20, 13451 (2012).
[57] R. Demkowicz-Dobrza´ nski, W. G´ orecki, and M. Gut ¸˘ a,
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 53,
363001 (2020), arXiv:2001.11742.
[58] J. Kim and Y. Song, Adv. Opt. Photon. 8, 465 (2016).
[59] Model 745-oem (2024).
[60] L. S. Madsen, F. Laudenbach, M. F. Askarani, F. Rortais,
T. Vincent, J. F. F. Bulmer, F. M. Miatto, L. Neuhaus,
L. G. Helt, M. J. Collins, A. E. Lita, T. Gerrits, S. W.
Nam, V. D. Vaidya, M. Menotti, I. Dhand, Z. Vernon,
N. Quesada, and J. Lavoie, Nature 606, 75 (2022).
[61] P. Lundin, Z. Guan, and S. Svanberg, Applied Optics 50,
373 (2011).
[62] F. Xie, Z. Chen, and J. Ren, Measurement 42, 1335
(2009).
[63] K. Fritsch and G. Adamovsky, Review of Scientific In-
struments 52, 996 (1981).
[64] S. Tan, S. Wang, S. Saraf, and J. A. Lipa, Optics Express
25, 3578 (2017), 1203.3914.
[65] F. Gibert, M. Nofrarias, N. Karnesis, L. Gesa,
V. Mart´ ın, I. Mateos, A. Lobo, R. Flatscher, D. Ger-
ardi, J. Burkhardt, R. Gerndt, D. I. Robertson, H. Ward,
P. W. McNamara, F. Guzm´ an, M. Hewitson, I. Diepholz,
J. Reiche, G. Heinzel, and K. Danzmann, Classical and
Quantum Gravity 32, 045014 (2015).
[66] K. Sharma, B. C. Sanders, and M. M. Wilde, Physical
Review Research 4, 023066 (2022).
[67] C. Oh, C. Lee, C. Rockstuhl, H. Jeong, J. Kim, H. Nha,
and S.-Y. Lee, npj Quantum Information 5, 10 (2019),
arXiv:1805.08495.
[68] L. Pezz´ e and A. Smerzi, Physical Review Letters 100,
073601 (2008), arXiv:0705.4631.