73rd International Astronautical Congress  (IAC), Paris, France, 18-22 September 2022 . Copyright ©2022 by the International Astronautical Federation  (IAF). All rights reserved.
IAC-22-C2.6.x68465
Pourable and Destroyable Cosmic Ray Radiation Shield for Spacecraft
Jarred C Novak
Physic  Department,  Wichita  State  University,  1845  Fairmount  St.,  Wichita,  Kansas,  United  States  67212,
jcnovak@shockers.wichita.edu
Abstract
Historically, materials such as lead, tungsten, and iron have been used in spacecraft to shield scientific detectors 
from Cosmic Rays. These materials work well when re-entry to Earth is not an issue. The typical strategy is to have a
controlled descent of the spacecraft or to have extremely limited shielding, if any, due to NASA’s requirement that 
all impacting parts must impact with no greater than 15J of energy. Given the nature of this mission neither a 
controlled descent nor having no shielding was not an option. This is the issue Wichita State University (WSU) 
nuSOL (Neutrino Solar Orbiting Laboratory) team is facing for its 3U CubeSat demonstrator. 
The CubeSat will be equipped with scientific equipment with the purpose of detecting solar neutrinos, and the
less background noise from Cosmic Rays the better the study will be. Through simulations, density tests, and burn
tests, WSU was able to develop an epoxy-based shield doped with either iron or tungsten powder. The simulations
were conducted by firing electrons, protons, alpha particles, and oxygen and iron nuclei  into the shield material with
energies ranging from 1MeV until consistent failure rate using Geant4 (Geometry and Tracking). The standards for
these simulations are the base epoxy at 1.15g/cm3 to solid steel at 8g/cm3 . Mixing tests have determined for iron, a
density of 4g/cm3 is achievable, which is 53% iron by volume. tungsten epoxy with a density of 7.5g/cm3 is more
easily  achieved,  and  results  in  40%  tungsten  by  volume.  These  ratios  are  concrete  in  texture,  pourable,  and
homogeneous. 
With the data collected, several prototypes of varying densities were made by pouring the mixture into molds. 
The results indicate that the 4g/cm3 iron doped epoxy does not have a 90% punch-through until 40MeV for electrons 
and 74MeV for protons. The tungsten fared better at 1GeV and 90MeV respectively, with the proton never exceeding
94% punch-through at 1GeV. The steel 90% fail are 250MeV for electron and 125MeV for proton. Due to the 
current requirements of the mission, the densities of iron 4g/cm3 and tungsten 7.5g/cm3 have been determined to be 
the best fit for the nuSOL project. Both materials have been tested to determine if they burn upon re-entry and 
neither shield survived past 425°C. A vibration test is planned to ensure survival of launch along with a test to 
measure the science package and shielding capabilities for accelerator particles to ensure efficiency.
Keywords: (maximum 6 keywords) Radiation Shield, Materials, Spacecraft, Destroyable, Re-entry
Acronyms/Abbreviations
Wichita State University (WSU)
Neutrino Solar Orbiting Laboratory (nuSOL)
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA)
Geometry and Tracking (Geant4)
Polyethylene Terephthalate Glycol (PETG)
Computer Aided Design (CAD)
1.Introduction
The nuSOL project is developing a space probe that 
is to detect neutrinos near Sun solar orbit [1]. As with 
all new experiments it is the responsibility of the 
experimental team to determine that the new innovative 
technologies will work. One way to accomplish that is 
to have test flights of the equipment. The nuSOL team 
has proven that the technologies work on Earth, so the 
next step is to accomplish a test space mission. This 
mission will be conducted by sending the neutrino 
detector to space in the form of a 3U CubeSat to orbit 
the Earth for approximately 2 years to insure it collects data correctly and efficiently [2]. To ensure that this 
happens a radiation shield was needed to block out as 
many Cosmic Rays as possible to reduce the 
background noise on the detector. 
1.1 Major Requirements
Major obstacles for this test mission include how to 
protect the equipment from high energy particles and 
ensure NASA requirements are met. While these issues 
are not new, the process and the approach to the shield 
design and materials are. Initially the WSU team 
thought that an solid iron shield would be the best way 
to achieve this goal. iron has a density of 7.874g/cm3 
and has an initial melting temperature of 1538 . The ℃
only problem is that anything we send into Earth orbit 
needs to be able to burn up in the atmosphere when the 
detector returns to Earth. The average re-entry 
temperature 1871 , and while that is above the initial ℃
melting temperature for iron, other factors such as the 
size and speed of the object need to be considered.  
With the dimensions of the 3U CubeSat and the need of 
IAC-22- C2.6.x68465                  Page 1 of 873rd International Astronautical Congress  (IAC), Paris, France, 18-22 September 2022 . Copyright ©2022 by the International Astronautical Federation  (IAF). All rights reserved.
iron shielding to be no less than 1.5cm in thickness for 
effective shielding, it was determined that upon re-entry
that a solid iron shield would not completely melt. It 
was also determined that there was a high probability of 
the iron shield falling to Earth at greater than 15J of 
energy. Since this spacecraft has no re-entry engine or 
control system for its descent, a different type of 
shielding material is required. After evaluating different 
types of materials, it was determined that an epoxy-
based shield doped with either tungsten or iron would 
be the best fit for this mission.
1.2 Shield Attachment
Not only was the material and shield design new, but
also the way the shield interfaces and attaches to the 
CubeSat needed to be an innovative design. This 
process has many moving parts given that multiple 
organizations make up the nuSOL team and are 
responsible for individual components. These 
organizations include WSU, NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory and Marshall Space Flight Center, and 
Nanoavionics. It is the responsibility WSU to design the
shield, the shield attachment system, and to incorporate 
all other components to fit within the 3U CubeSat made 
by Nanoavionics. The main driving force behind the 
complete CubeSat design is for WSU to have the ability 
to attach the shield in a manner compliant with all other 
mechanical and science packages while keeping the 
integrity and efficiency of the CubeSat mission. With an
innovative design the nuSOL team at WSU believes this
has been accomplished, but further tests including a 
vibration test, G-force test, and stress/strain test are 
scheduled to confirm this. Also, high energy particle test
will be conducted to test the science package and shield 
efficiency at Fermi National Laboratory and is 
scheduled for January 2023.
 
2. Materials
     The materials for this CubeSat mission are a critical 
obstacle that needed to be addressed early on. The 
nuSOL team has created a new science package for 
neutrino detection, but as with most experiments a test 
mission must be accomplished to assure the science can 
be achieved. The CubeSat flight is the test for the final 
satellite mission that will be headed towards the Sun. 
Unlike the mission to the Sun, which will have 
extensive shielding and will not be coming back to 
Earth, the CubeSat does not have this luxury. So, the 
project team needed to create a way to shield the 
detector while still meeting NASA guidelines on 
returning spacecraft. This led the WSU team to design 
and create a innovative way to shield the science 
package from radiation.
  
2.1 Shield MaterialFor this project we need something that is durable, 
able to be molded, and can adhere easily. The obvious 
choice was to use a polyester resin. It was decided to 
use 3M 2216 translucent epoxy adhesive resin. This 
resin has resilient material properties to the point where 
it is often used in equipment when normal mechanical 
fittings will not suffice or have been broken. The design
that we are using for the science package includes 
specialized and fragile equipment and electronics 
(Figure 1), so the durability and flexibility of the resin 
was the driving force.
Figure 1:  Block diagram of science package and 
electronics [2]
This is a two-part resin that consist of a base and 
accelerator that we were able to mix in the iron or 
tungsten filler and with the help of a 3D mold, create the
desired shape of a shield prototype. It also helped that 
the resin has a relatively long work life at 120 minutes. 
Other material properties that went into determining this
resin was the overlap shear test which at lower 
temperatures was 3000 psi and the shear modulus which
ranged from 342Mpa to 2745Mpa when tested at a 
range of temperatures with the lower end being at 
higher temperatures, and viscosity of 5000-9000CPS 
[2]. These properties are important due to the 
temperatures the CubeSat will encounter in space and 
with the shielding having to be attached to a metal 
frame for the ejection out of a rocket to enter orbit and 
for pourability respectfully. 
2.1.1 iron and tungsten 
For the initial study, iron filler was used to 
determine the maximum density and ratio achievable. 
iron was originally determined based on the standard 
use of solid steel as a radiation shield, and since iron 
does not become activated with exposure to radiation, it 
seemed like a promising candidate. Through the process
of the experiment elaborated in section 3, it was 
determined that a density of 4/cm3 was obtainable and 
consisted of a ratio that is 53% iron by volume. This 
achievement was ground-breaking for the nuSOL 
project and solidified that it is possible to have some 
radiation protection during the CubeSat mission. While 
IAC-22- C2.6.x68465                  Page 2 of 873rd International Astronautical Congress  (IAC), Paris, France, 18-22 September 2022 . Copyright ©2022 by the International Astronautical Federation  (IAF). All rights reserved.
the iron doped epoxy gives a significant increase in 
radiation protection, the original goal of the radiation 
shield design was to get as close to the 8g/cm3 density 
of steel, it left much to be desired.
After some deliberation, it was decided that tungsten
filler should also be studied. With tungsten having a 
higher density than iron, the ability to create a doped 
epoxy with similar densities to steel seemed more 
achievable. This turned out to be true, with samples and 
prototypes ranging from 3.5g/cm3 to 7.5g/cm3 and a 
volume ratio of 10% to 40% tungsten. The limitations of
a tungsten doped epoxy shield were confined to the 
payload weight, rather that the structural integrity of the 
shield itself. The only downfall to using tungsten filler 
is that after a period of approximately 2 years the metal 
will become activated with constant radiation exposure. 
Given that the nuSOL CubeSat mission will collect data
and orbit less than this mark it makes a great shield and 
performs not only better than the iron doped epoxy, but 
also the solid steel in blocking Cosmic Ray radiation.
2.2 Shield Attachment
     The final piece was to design a way to attach the 
tungsten doped epoxy shield to the Nanoavionics 
provided CubeSat bus. The design itself is expanded 
upon in section 3.3, but the materials need to be 
lightweight yet structurally strong. This is to ensure 
minimal movement of the shield during launch 
operations while staying under the payload weight limit 
of 8kg. Aircraft structural Aluminum alloy 2024 was 
chosen for much of the attachment assembly for these 
reasons. It is lighter than steel counterparts and still can 
be fabricated at WSU to the custom design. The other 
portion of the assembly are steel axle keys to ensure 
little to no gaps are present between the shield and the 
CubeSat bus. 
3. Methods
     For this study there were several methods that were 
used to determine the effectiveness of the shielding and 
its ability to be created easily. For the CubeSat we need 
to stop most high energy particles up to the 50 MeV 
range. This does not mean everything below that level 
will be stopped but for the detector to work properly and
get the most accurate data the vast majority cannot enter
the device. To accomplish this, we ran simulations at 
various densities and energy levels. To ensure that we 
were able to achieve the corresponding density in real 
life we needed to design and create experimental test. 
These tests consisted of mixing ratios to understand 
what could be achieved, height test to ensure the density
was homogeneous, and finally prototypes. This was not 
only to make sure we could create such a shield but to understand the manufacturing process and create a 
method to re-create such a shield with high precision.
3.1 Simulations
The team at WSU have studied how to properly 
construct the CubeSat shielding, which was done in the 
summer of 2021. To determine the effectiveness of both
the iron and tungsten doped epoxies, the initial step of 
this process was to conduct simulations using Geant4. 
Geant4 is an C++ extension library for particle physics 
simulation. These simulations consisted of shooting 
electrons, protons, alpha particles, and oxygen and iron 
nuclei at 1.5cm thick doped epoxy at energy levels 
ranging from 1MeV and up until a consistent failure rate
was reached.  An event was considered a failure if the 
particle punched through, i.e. if the particle or shower 
deposited any energy in the volume beyond the shield 
(Figure 2). The data of interest was the percent of 
particles that were getting through the shield at these 
energy levels. We used a steel plate and non-doped 
epoxy as standards for reference, then changed the 
doped epoxy density ranging from 1g/cm3 to 5g/cm3 for 
iron and 3.5g/cm3 to 7.5g/cm3 for tungsten. The results 
of these simulations are discussed in section 4.1.
Figure 2: Geant4 simulation model of iron doped epoxy,
red is 1.5cm iron shield, white is a plastic volume to 
capture energy and to serve as an indicator in punch-
through events.
3.2 Experimental
The second portion of this study was to understand 
our ability to create a prototype of the shielding and that
it not only meets the NASA re-entry requirements, but 
also the densities proposed in the simulations. This was 
accomplished by performing a series of experiment to 
ensure consistence in the manufacturing process along 
with repeatability. For these initial test only iron filler 
was used due to the cost of tungsten filler, then the 
prototype were fabricated out of both materials to 
IAC-22- C2.6.x68465                  Page 3 of 873rd International Astronautical Congress  (IAC), Paris, France, 18-22 September 2022 . Copyright ©2022 by the International Astronautical Federation  (IAF). All rights reserved.
determine if the methods were repeatable and achieved 
the same level of precision.    
3.2.1 Mixing Ratio
To start we made small rectangular samples of both 
the base epoxy and iron doped epoxy to analyze. 
Calculations were made based on weight to ensure we 
were getting the correct epoxy to iron ratio that would 
result in the correct density desired. The epoxy is a two 
part resin that is mixed to equal amounts. For this test 
the total weight of epoxy was 10g to test the ease of 
mixing of the iron filler and to test the pouring 
capabilities. These samples were mixed in small 
cylindrical plastic containers that were cut away after 
full cure. The iron filler was added based on mass to 
give a ratio of parts iron/1 part epoxy. The cure time for 
the epoxy is 7 day work and 30 day full hardened, so to 
speed up this process the samples were placed with in a 
heating closet at a temperature of approximately 110°F. 
Once the samples were created, hardened, and cut into 
rectangular samples (Figure 3), we calculated the 
density by using a water displacement test using a 
graduated cylinder.
 
Figure 3: Picture of small iron doped epoxy samples 
increasing in densities with 1 being base epoxy and 8 
being the highest density .
3.2.2 Height Density
     The next area we studied was how the density of the 
iron doped epoxy would change with a factor of height. 
To accomplish this, we created iron doped epoxy at 
three separate densities with the target ratios at 
approximately 1:4, 1:4.5, and 1:5.5 respectively and 
then filled graduated cylinders. We then cut the doped 
epoxy into small sections with corresponding 
numbering (with 1 being the base of the graduated 
cylinder) and tested each section individually (Figure 4).
These test results are discussed in section 4.2.2, but they
shows that the expected results and experimental result 
differed significantly. We concluded that the 
discrepancies in the densities were attributed to the 
presence of air bubbles in the iron doped epoxy.
Figure 4: Picture of sectioned graduated cylinder test 
(Top Row- 1:3.765 ratio, Middle Row- 1:4.619 ratio, 
Bottom Row- 1:5.425 ratio)
3.2.3 Prototypes
     For the final phase of the density study, we created 
several prototype shields. The first 3 shield prototypes 
consisted of a 1:8 ratio of epoxy to iron, with the only 
significant differences being the method in which we 
filled the molds along with the mold material itself. This
was to ensure that we understood the fabrication and the
techniques that are required to produce precision results.
In the first prototype the iron doped epoxy was mixed in
a metal container and poured into a thin cylindrical 
PETG mold. As expected, the density was less than 
what was calculated due to the formation of air bubbles.
It proved to be difficult to remove due to adhesion to the
PETG. The second prototype that we constructed was 
done so by compacting the iron doped epoxy by hand 
within a glass container to try and reduce air pocket. 
This shield has fewer air bubbles then the first but were 
still visible once the shield was removed from the 
container. This also proved difficult to extract from the 
mold and the shield needed to be machined out. The 
third shield prototype was made using a 3D mold 
(Figure 5), in the hopes that it would be easier to break 
free. During the iron doped epoxy pouring stage, we 
filled the mold a third of the way and using a negative 
of the mold, compacted it and then used a vacuum 
chamber to release the air bubbles. This step was 
repeated three times until the mold was full, with the 
low vacuum being applied until the epoxy reached the 
top of the mold then quickly releasing the pressure to 
cause compression at each of the three changes. This 
method showed a significant decrease in the number of 
air bubbles. A small portion of all three shields were 
used to determine if the density had changed with 
gravity as in the prior test, which held true for all 
prototypes.
Figure 5: 3D printed shield prototype mold and 
negative
IAC-22- C2.6.x68465                  Page 4 of 873rd International Astronautical Congress  (IAC), Paris, France, 18-22 September 2022 . Copyright ©2022 by the International Astronautical Federation  (IAF). All rights reserved.
     After the success of the iron doped epoxy shields, the
WSU team was confident to test the process with 
tungsten filler. A 3D printed mold of the correct size 
and dimensions was created, and low vacuum 
techniques were repeated. Since less filler was needed 
to achieve the same density, creating this prototype 
proved easier. Issues still arose when trying to remove 
the hardened shield from the plastic printed mold. This 
led the team at WSU to try and find a new material that 
would allow us to easily accomplish this. The team 
chose to use a silicon base mold that not only allows us 
to remove the shield with little effort, but it also allows 
for reuse. The final mold (Figures 6 and 7) was made of 
this material and included not only the exact parameters 
of the shield, but also parts of the shield attachment 
assembly as discussed in section 3.3.
      
Figure 6: Silicone shield mold with assembly 
attachment components
Figure 7: Silicone shield end-cap mold
3.3 Computer Aided Design and Shield Attachment 
Assembly
     Now that a shield was designed, tested, and 
fabricated, a way to attach it to the CubeSat bus was needed. This was achieved by creating a CAD model of 
the shield and attachment assembly (Figure 8) to ensure 
that it could securely fit within the CubeSat bus (Figure 
9). The design consists of three major components, 
angle brackets, axle keys, and metal plates. The angle 
brackets are a custom design that attach directly to the 
shield itself. This is accomplished by inserting the 
brackets into the silicone mold and pouring the doped 
epoxy, creating a strong bond between the materials. 
The metal plates are mounted on opposites sides and 
attach to the CubeSat bus directly through tapped holes. 
The fabricated design is intended to decrease the weight
while still being structurally sound. By doing this the 
plates prohibit movement and provide lateral strength to
the shield. To prevent axial movement and to secure the 
shield, axle keys are added in between the angle 
brackets and the metal plates. Two of these keys will be 
joined by a layer of epoxy and all four will be attached 
through tapped bolts. The final fabrication of the 
tungsten doped epoxy shield and attachment assembly 
started in September 2022 and will be completed by 
December 2022 with the full CubeSat construction 
being completed in fall of 2023.
Figure 8: Isometric Shield Attachment CAD Model
 Figure 9: Isometric CubeSat and Shield CAD Model
4. Results and Discussion  
IAC-22- C2.6.x68465                  Page 5 of 873rd International Astronautical Congress  (IAC), Paris, France, 18-22 September 2022 . Copyright ©2022 by the International Astronautical Federation  (IAF). All rights reserved.
     By recognizing the need to protect the science 
package from Cosmic Rays, the nuSOL team was able 
to simulate, design, and test a new innovative type of 
radiation shield. The results of this study demonstrate 
that an effective shield is achievable and gives the 
advancement of scientific research not only to the 
nuSOL project but to future projects as well.
4.1 Simulation results
     During this phase of the study, WSU team conducted
separate simulations. The first consisted of shooting 
both electrons and protons at energies ranging from 
1MeV to 1GeV. These particles were fired at a 1.5cm 
thick shield that consisted of iron doped epoxy ranging 
in densities from 2g/cm3 to 5g/cm3 or tungsten doped 
epoxy ranging from 3.5g/cm3 to 7.5g/cm3. This 
simulation was to determine the characteristics of the 
doped epoxy and to analyze the radiation shielding 
capabilities when compared to the standards of the base 
epoxy and solid steel. At the lowest simulated density 
the iron doped epoxy has the ability to completely stop 
6MeV electrons and 52MeV protons. Also at this 
density a 90% punch-through rate did not occur until 
14MeV and 54MeV for electrons and protons, 
respectively. The upper limit on iron doping has the 
ability to completely stop electrons and protons at 
12MeV electrons and 94MeV protons. With a 90% 
punch-through rate of  28MeV electrons and 102MeV 
protons. For tungsten doped epoxy the results increased 
significantly when compared to the iron doped epoxy. 
With the lower density having a complete stopping 
power up to 12MeV electrons and 60MeV protons, and 
a 90% punch-through rate of 74MeV and 64MeV 
respectively. On the higher density of 7.5g/cm3 the 
complete stopping power resulted in 20MeV electrons 
and 85MeV protons. With a 90% punch-through rate of 
1GeV electrons and 90 MeV protons. While the iron 
doped epoxy at the density of 5g/cm3 does perform 
better than the tungsten for higher energy protons, as 
discussed in section 4.2, the highest density for an iron 
doped epoxy shield to be structurally achievable is 
4g/cm3. The consisted of one million individual particle 
events and resulted in a statistical error of less than 
0.1% at the 5-sigma level.
     As expected, the simulations show an increase in 
stopping power as we trend towards the density of steel 
with the differences decreasing between each increase 
in density. Given thw weight requirements for the 3U 
Cube-sat this gave us an understanding for the 
optimization needed to meet not only the weight 
requirement but also the shielding capabilities. These 
results when compared to the standard of a solid steel 
plate (Figures 10 and 11) show that not only does the 
tungsten shield out-perform the iron shield, but also out-
preforms the solid steel shield in regards to electrons. 
These simulations show that it is possible to have some Cosmic Ray radiation shielding, with the nuSol team 
considering a 10% reduction in Cosmic Ray noise a 
success, and that meets weight and re-entry 
requirements.
Figure 10: Graph of Simulated electron Punch-through 
Rates
Figure 11: Graph of Simulated proton Punch-through 
Rates
     The second portion of the simulations was to see 
how the final 7.5g/cm3 tungsten doped epoxy shield 
would handle other particles such as alpha, and oxygen 
and iron nuclei. This study shows that at high energies 
the alpha particles tend to plateau at approximately 90%
punch-through rate and that the nuclei never exceed the 
10% noise reduction point(Figure 12). Indicating that 
even at high energies the tungsten doped epoxy shield is
a success.
IAC-22- C2.6.x68465                  Page 6 of 873rd International Astronautical Congress  (IAC), Paris, France, 18-22 September 2022 . Copyright ©2022 by the International Astronautical Federation  (IAF). All rights reserved.
Figure 12: alpha Particle, and oxygen and iron nuclei 
Punch-through rates
4.2 Experimental Results
     After completion of simulations, the WSU team 
needed to ensure that actual construction of a shield was
achievable. In following the methods outline in section 
3, we were able to create test samples of the iron doped 
epoxy to have physical evidence of the fabrication and 
manufacturing process. This resulted eventual 
manufacturing of both an iron and tungsten doped 
epoxy shield prototypes. This was to understand if the 
simulated densities were possible and to also test the 
structural capabilities of the shield itself. While an iron 
doped epoxy of 5g/cm3 simulated performs best, the 
mixture becomes supersaturated and never fully hardens
making it fail structurally. As higher densities of iron 
were tested, the mixture becomes concrete in nature and
proves harder to pour and manipulate. The highest 
achievable mixture results in a density of 4g/cm3 for 
iron. The issue does not arise with tungsten doped 
epoxy at tested densities. This is due to the weight limits
of the CubeSat, so further samples were not tested 
beyond that limit.
4.2.1 Mixing Ratio
     The initial step to understand, was how the iron filler
would mix with the epoxy and how easily it could be 
manipulated. To accomplish this the WSU team, created
small samples to test if the calculated densities 
coincided with real life manufacturing. Calculations 
were made based on weight to ensure we were getting 
the correct epoxy to iron ratio that would result in the 
correct density desired. Once the samples were created, 
we calculated the density by using a water displacement
test using a graduated cylinder. The results show that 
the lower densities are more easily achieved, the higher 
ones had a significant error (Figure 13). This is due to 
the creation of air bubbles during the mixing process 
and later indicated that low vacuum techniques were 
required. 
Figure 13: Graph of Expected and Obtained iron Doped
Epoxy in Small Samples
4.2.2 Height Density Study     The next test not only included the ability to mix the 
iron filler with epoxy, but also test if a change in density
occurred with a height. This test is important given that 
the final shield is 12.5cm tall and if the density was not 
homogeneous the shield would be ineffective and  
create Cosmic Ray noise discrepancies based on 
positioning of the CubeSat. After full cure the samples 
were cut into smaller sample sizes and the densities 
were tested using water displacement. With the sections 
not being completely uniformed and the error of 10% 
between the scale used to weigh the sections and the 
graduated cylinder, we concluded the density was not 
changing with height significantly (Table 1). This 
resulted in average overall densities resulting in 3.133 
g/cm3 for a 1:3.765 ratio, 3.3383 g/cm3 for a 1:4.619 
ratio, and 3.183 g/cm3 for a 1:5.425 ratio. As mentioned 
previously mixing accurately was still a concern, and as 
before the lower densities proved more accurate then 
higher samples (Figure 14). This indicated that the 
formation of air bubbles was still an issue.
Table 1:  Sample Data Table for Graduated Cylinder 
Test (3.765 Parts iron to 1 Part Epoxy)
Figure 14: Graph of Expected and Obtained iron Doped
Epoxy in Height Density Samples
4.2.3 Prototypes
      After completing the initial experiments, the nuSOL 
team created a prototype of the radiation shield. During 
this process four prototypes were created, three made of 
iron doped epoxy and one tungsten doped epoxy. The 
first iron prototype was created in the same manner of 
the previous samples. With an expected density of 
3.6g/cm3 and an actual of 2.8. this indicated to the WSU
IAC-22- C2.6.x68465                  Page 7 of 873rd International Astronautical Congress  (IAC), Paris, France, 18-22 September 2022 . Copyright ©2022 by the International Astronautical Federation  (IAF). All rights reserved.
team that low vacuum techniques needed to be tested to 
reduce the formation of air bubbles. These techniques 
were used on the following two iron doped epoxy 
prototypes. By doing so the expected densities and 
actual lined up more accurately (Figure 15). After 
studying the iron doped epoxy prototypes the WSU 
team was confident in their ability to create a precision 
shield, a tungsten doped epoxy shield was made with 
correct dimensions (Figure 16). This resulted in a 
structurally strong shield with a density of 3.48g/cm3 
and has an accuracy of 99.4% of the expected value of 
3.5g/cm3. the last requirement that needed to be tested 
was a what would happen when the shield re-entered 
Earth's atmosphere and if any piece would hit with more
than 15J of energy. To do this, small samples were 
made during prototype pouring process, hardened, and 
burned with a torch. The iron doped epoxy sample 
started burning at approximately 260°C, with full 
destruction at 700°C. The tungsten doped epoxy sample 
started burning at 315°C and was destroyed at 424°C. 
Both of this are well below the average re-entry 
temperature of 1800°C.
Figure 15: Graph of Expected and Obtained iron Doped
Epoxy in Prototypes
Figure 16: Picture of tungsten Doped Epoxy Prototype
5. Conclusions 
     The nuSol project 3U CubeSat mission is vitally 
important to the further advancement in the study of 
neutrinos. If the CubeSat mission is successful, then a 
satellite mission orbiting close to the Sun will be within reach. To ensure the success of the CubeSat, new and 
innovative technologies are required. One such obstacle 
was to create a Cosmic Rays radiation shield to reduce 
the potential of noise within the science package. The 
team at WSU was tasked with accomplishing this feat. 
By not only understand the science behind the mission, 
but the engineering, the team was able to accomplish 
this, through simulations, experimental data, and finally 
working prototypes. Further testing is scheduled to 
ensure the shield performs as expected, but the ability to
stop or reduce Cosmic Rays radiation noise with several
never reaching the 90% punch-through rates is ground-
breaking for the science community. Not only does the 
shield meet all requirements for the CubeSat mission, 
but also that of NASA. This will be the first mission 
flown with this type of shielding and by showing that it 
is possible, the advancement of capabilities of other 
missions will greatly enhance, furthering scientific 
research  
Acknowledgments 
I would like to thank Dr. Nick Solomey for leading 
the nuSOL project and giving me the opportunity not 
only to excel in physics but also in engineering. I would 
also like to thank PhD candidate Jonathan Folkerts for 
helping lead the research team at WSU and for his 
immense contributions to the nuSOL project and for 
spearheading the research for the Sun orbiting satellite. 
Thanks to Trent English for his contributions that led to 
the success of the shield design. 
References
[1] N. Solomey, J.Folkerts, H. Meyer, C. Gimar, J.       
Novak, B. Doty, T. English, L. Buchele, A. Nelsen, 
R. McTaggart, M. Christl, Design of a Space-based 
Near-Solar Neutrino Detector for nuSOL 
experiment, Arxiv (2022)
 https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.220600703
    
[2] N.solomey, A. Dutta, H. Meyer, J. Folkerts, T. 
English, K. Messick, J. Novak, J. Chee, M. Christl, 
R. McTaggart, and et al., Niac phase-2 final report 
for astrophysics and technical lab studies of a solar 
neutrino spacecraft detector, NASA Technical 
Report Server, Apr 2022
[3] 3M™ Scotch-Weld™ Epoxy Adhesive 2216 B/A 
Translucent Material Properties 
https://www.alliedelec.com/m/d/
badcaf2fd3816d3706fc411c0bf6ab8c.pdf#page=6&z
oom=auto,-267,559/, (accessed 20.07.2021)  
IAC-22- C2.6.x68465                  Page 8 of 8