Understanding People’s Needs in Viewing Diverse Social Opinions
about Controversial Topics
Hayeong Song *
Georgia Institute of T echnologyZhengyang Qi†
Carnegie Mellon UniversityJohn Stasko‡
Georgia Institute of T echnologyDiyi Y ang§
Stanford University
ABSTRACT
Social media (i.e., Reddit) users are overloaded with people’s opin-
ions when viewing discourses about divisive topics. Traditional user
interfaces in such media present those opinions in a linear structure,
which can limit users in viewing diverse social opinions at scale.
Prior work has recognized this limitation, that the linear structure can
reinforce biases, where a certain point of view becomes widespread
simply because many viewers seem to believe it. This limitation
can make it difﬁcult for users to have a truly conversational modeof mediated discussion. Thus, when designing a user interface for
viewing people’s opinions, we should consider ways to mitigate
selective exposure to information and polarization of opinions. We
conducted a needs-ﬁnding study with 11 Reddit users, who follow
climate change threads and make posts and comments regularly. In
the study, we aimed to understand key limitations in people viewing
online controversial discourses and to extract design implications
to address these problems. Our ﬁndings discuss potential future
directions to address these problems.
Index T erms: Human-centered computing—Visualization—Online
communities—Discourse analysis; Human-centered computing—
Visualization—Formative study
1I NTRODUCTION
Internet forums such as Reddit and Twitter provide millions ofpeople access to online conversations and discussions. But a fewlimitations exist in viewing online discourses such as their large-
scale, polarization, and their linear structure. For example, online
discussions on Reddit are represented in a linear structure that does
not provide an overview of the comments, which makes it difﬁcult
for people to capture a high-level synthesis of the discussions. Prior
works on discourse architecture studies have recognized this limi-
tation of linear online comment structure (list) [27, 31] in viewing
data at scale. This limitation can make it difﬁcult for users to navi-
gate to insightful comments, which reduces learning effects between
discussants by viewing others’ opinions [31]. Users also suffer
from lacking moderation between discussants [27] which makes it
difﬁcult for users to have a truly conversational mode of mediated
discussion.
Along those lines for a controversial topic, the incoherent struc-
ture can reinforce biases, “cyberpolarization”, in which a certainpoint of view becomes widespread, simply because many view-
ers seem to believe it [5]. Thus, when we design a user interface
for viewing people’s opinions we should consider ways to miti-gate selective exposure to information and polarization of opin-
ions [11, 19, 23, 24]. To address these problems, prior research
showed that system designs and structures can assist people to view
*e-mail: hsong300@gatech.edu
†e-mail: zqi2@andrew.cmu.edu
‡e-mail: stasko@cc.gatech.edu
§e-mail: diyiy@cs.stanford.eduopposing views and highlight different aspects of the issues that can
mitigate the problem of selective exposures [19, 25]. For example,
Considerit [18] is a platform that helps users to deliberate on diverse
perspectives about difﬁcult decisions such as U.S. state elections.
The system provides a workﬂow to reﬂect the perspectives of oth-
ers by framing interactions around pro/con points that participants
create, adopt, and share.
Up to this point, prior research has focused on assisting people to
view online conversations at scale, such as providing summarization
workﬂow [33], showing an overview of the discussion space, or
showing evolving topics [15, 16]. But less work has been done on
assisting users to view online discourses about a controversial topic
such as climate change, to mitigate people’s opinion polarization.
To address these problems, we conducted a needs-ﬁndings study
with 11 Reddit users who follow climate change threads and actively
make posts and comments on the climate change subreddit. We
conducted semi-structured interviews and surveys. The interview
themes were the difﬁculties people face in viewing controversialonline discourses and what people look for in viewing discussion
space. Based on these ﬁndings we discuss design implications to
address these problems.
We provide the following contributions to the visualization re-
search community:
• Needs-ﬁnding study results and their analysis
• Design implications derived from the study analysis
2R ELATED WORK
We build our research on two major areas of related work (1) dis-
course analysis and (2) visualizing diverse perspectives.
2.1 Discourse analysis
In this section, we describe challenges that people encounter while
viewing and analyzing online discourses, and we discuss prior ap-
proaches that aimed to alleviate these issues. Some of the challenges
that exist in viewing online discourses are large-scale, polarization,
and linear structure. Dahlgren [8] acknowledged this limitation of a
linear discourse architecture, where inherent bias is caused by the
fragmentation of participants. Here, fragmentation of participantsmeans that people lean toward viewing only like-minded views,
which can deter mutual understanding between discussants about a
polarized topic. Thus, political discussion and public opinions are
susceptible to inherent bias [4].
To alleviate this issue, visualization tools such as Opinion
space [11] were designed in a way that assists users to reﬂect on
other people’s opinions [12]. For example, in the system, people’s
opinions are presented in a two-dimensional scatter plot view. Then
each data point represents a comment and the proximity of data
points indicates the similarity of opinions. If two people’s opinions
are similar, their distance is close to each other and vice versa. Also,
highly-rated opinions are highlighted in green whereas low-rated
comments are highlighted in red. With this view, people can reﬂect
on other people’s opinions asynchronously by browsing a range of
perspectives.
62023 IEEE 16th Pacific Visualization Symposium (PacificVis)
2165-8773/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/PacificVis56936.2023.000082.2 Visualizing diverse perspectives
To visually represent diverse perspectives, prior work tightly coupled
visualizations with natural language processing techniques to pro-
cess and extract data such as topics, public sentiments, and people’s
opinions [7, 20 –22, 29, 30]. For example, some of the prior work
leveraged different ways of supporting interactive topic model views
to help people to capture high-level synthesis of the discussion space.
These include supporting interactive views that show a hierarchy of
topics [10], showings trend (over time) of topics being discussed [6],
or dynamically presenting merging and splitting topics [9].
Some of the existing visualization tools, such as MulticonVis [16],
a text analytics system for exploring a collection of online conversa-
tions, use topic modeling and sentiment analysis with information
visualizations to support users in viewing large-scale blog conversa-
tions. To help users to explore conversations and give more contextabout the conversations, the system supports a view that shows sen-
timent distribution in a stacked graph next to a conversation. Gao’s
intelligent system [13] exposes users to view diverse perspectives by
showing people’s sentiments about controversial topics such as U.S.
presidential candidates. The goal of the system is to expose users to
other people’s opinions and appreciate people with different stances
in online forums. This is done by using interactive visualization and
categorizing original posts based on crowd workers’ reactions and
emotions from different stances.
Although their approach took steps to encourage users to view
diverse perspectives and public reﬂection on people’s opinions, it is
more curated to the scenario that they were using (i.e., conﬁned to
showing emotions [13]). This can make it difﬁcult to generalize for
designing a system that helps people to view online discourses on a
divisive topic because of online forums (e.g., Reddit).
3D ISCUSSION SPACE
In this section, we discuss our approach to understanding the online
discussion space, which studies people’s posting and commenting
patterns for three controversial topics. To understand the online
discussion space about a polarized topic on Reddit and understand
the relevant data, we explained people’s posting patterns (e.g., how
many posts were made). For our analysis, we analyzed three differ-
ent topics: climate change, gun control, and abortion. We selected
these topics based on Beel et al’s work on divisive online topics [3].
Dataset. For the analysis, we collected data for the time frame
01/01/2022 to 08/30/2022 using PushShift API. For each topic,
we collected data from subreddits r/climatechange, r/guncontrol,
and r/abortion. We selected these subreddits because each wasone of the threads where people posted regularly and had active
discussions. Each subreddit thread had about r/climatechange: 61.3k,
r/guncontrol: 11k, r/abortion: 33.7k number of members.
Analysis. We conducted this analysis to understand how many
posts and comments are made during a certain duration of time. Wealso aimed to understand, how many posts or comments users make
on average, and the maximum number of posts or comments a unique
user makes. We also wanted to observe if there are differences in
posting and commenting patterns across topics. Here, a post starts a
new topic and a comment is a reply to a post.
Post. For posting patterns on topic climate change , 2913 posts
were made over the period of time, and each user made 0.5 posts on
average (see Table 1). The maximum number of posts a unique user
made was 112. For topic gun control , 897 posts were made over
the period of time, and each user made 0.6 posts on average. The
maximum number of posts a unique user made was 44. For topic
abortion, 8102 posts were made over the period of time, and each
user made 0.8 posts on average. The maximum number of posts a
unique user made was 33.
Comment. For commenting patterns on the topic climate change,
27811 posts were made over the period of time, and each user made
5 posts on average (see Table 2). The maximum number of postsPost Climate change Gun control Abortion
Count 2913 897 8102
Per user M=0.5,SD=2.1 M=0.6,SD=2 M=0.8,SD=1.2
Max 112 44 33
T able 1: Summary of the people’s posting patterns for three divisive
online topics on Reddit. M refers to mean and SD refers to standard
deviation.
Comment Climate change Gun control Abortion
Count 27811 10325 57437
Per user M=5,SD=37 M=7,SD=105 M=6,SD=110
Max 2232 3655 8303
T able 2: Summary of the people’s commenting patterns for three
divisive online topics on Reddit. M refers to mean and SD refers to
standard deviation.
a unique user made was 2232. For the topic gun control , 10325
posts were made over the period of time, and each user made 7
posts on average. The maximum number of posts a unique user
made was 3655. For the topic abortion, 57437 posts were made
over the period of time, and each user made 6 posts on average. The
maximum number of posts a unique user made was 8303.
In our observations, we did not see a large difference in posting
or commenting patterns between the topics climate change and gun
control. But we noticed that post and comment numbers on topicabortion were higher compared to the other topics. We speculate
that posting and commenting patterns on abortion were more active
compared to other topics due to recent discussions about abortion
legislation (US abortion debate).
4F ORMATIVE STUDY
After learning about people’s posting and commenting patterns, we
wanted to better understand what are the difﬁculties that people
face in following online discourses and what argumentation people
desired to better understand the discussion space. To discover this,
we designed and conducted a needs ﬁnding [32] study with active
Reddit users. For the study, we used the scenario of following cli-
mate change discussions because it was a topic that is controversial
and subject to polarization. We conducted a formative study with
11 participants who follow climate change discussion threads on
Reddit. We conducted surveys and semi-structured interviews that
asked about their experience in following climate change discussion
threads on Reddit, what they look for in the discussion space, and
how visualization can potentially help.
4.1 Study design
Participants. We recruited 11 active Reddit users (8 male, 3 fe-
male), with backgrounds that included engineering, research, and
development. Here we deﬁne active users as participants who fol-
low climate change threads on Reddit and regularly visit and make
posts and comments on the thread. In a Likert scale survey, they
reported that on average they visit climate change threads on Reddit
and make comments multiple times a week (M = 9.73 and SD =
0.62) (1 - never, 10 - multiple times a week). All of the participants
reported being very familiar with current climate change discourses.
We recruited participants from a local university via word-of-mouth
and ﬂyers.
Procedure. Each session was about 30-40 minutes long. The
study was conducted remotely via Microsoft Teams. When a par-
ticipant joined a study session, we asked the participant to ﬁll outa survey. The survey included questions such as what were the
difﬁculties in following climate change discussions with the current
interface, what could be improved in the current interface, and what
7climate-related topics they are interested in understanding. We also
collected demographic information in the survey.
After participants ﬁlled out the survey, we transitioned into a
semi-structured interview session. In the interview, we asked ques-
tions that had similar themes to the survey, which asked about their
experience in following climate change discussions on Reddit, what
they look for in the discussion space, and improvement points they
desired in making sense of climate change discussions. We also in-
quired about their experience with visualization and potential points
where they see visualization could help them make sense of climate
change discussions. In this session, we often followed up with ques-
tions to capture more details and insights to clarify some of the
participants’ points.
Data analysis. We conducted an exploratory qualitative analysis
of the recordings using an open-coding approach. We looked for
themes, such as when participants encountered difﬁculties in follow-
ing climate change discussion threads on Reddit, what they desired
to make sense of the discussion space, and improvement points of
the current interface that could make navigation of the discussion
space easier. We also looked into when and how visualization could
potentially help people make sense of climate change discussions.
One researcher coded all eleven interviews and a second researcher
independently coded all the interviews for validation. Coders noted
similar themes in the interviews and were able to further concretize
similarities and differences.
4.2 Results & Key Findings
In this section, we discuss our study results and key ﬁndings. We
discuss speciﬁc topics that interested participants, some of the dif-
ﬁculties that participants faced, and what they desired to better un-
derstand the discussion space. Our major emergent ﬁnding was that
participants desired an expansion of information about authors in
the discussion thread and desired ways to view diverse perspectives
more easily. They also desired visual hints of the climate change
discussion thread that can help with the navigation of the discussion
space. We coded our participants as P1-11. We call out individual
support for each point based on these participant codes.4.2.1 Current Practices
In this section, we describe participants’ current practices in view-
ing online discourses on Reddit. We discuss the topics that they
were most interested in the discussion space and the difﬁculties that
participants faced in following online discourses.
•Interested topics. 9 out of 11 participants reported their spe-
ciﬁc interest in topics such as climate consequences, climate
policies, and solutions. For example, these participants were
interested in climate consequences and their effects on human
lives. They also wanted to view climate solutions and poli-
cies to reduce climate consequences. The other two reported
that they were interested in viewing event information (e.g.,
hurricanes) and calling for climate action. P3 stated that “I
am mainly interested in understanding climate policies and
climate solutions, such as climate policies across countries. ”
•Difﬁculties. All of our participants pointed out a current lim-
itation in the list like structure in viewing online discourses
at scale [27, 31], such as when threads get extremely long it
becomes difﬁcult to ﬁnd insightful comments quickly and view
diverse perspectives. Here, we refer to insightful comments
that can provide an in-depth understanding of the topic being
discussed. P3 stated “It can be difﬁcult to ﬁnd insightful com-
ments sometimes when the thread gets too long. The comments
easily pile up and can be hard to navigate those comments.
Also, they acknowledged the problem of selective exposure to
opinions, when the discussion space seemed to have mostly
like-minded views [19, 25]. P10 stated “I remember when Iwas trying to understand the topic, I wished to see an oppos-
ing view which was so difﬁcult to do because the thread was
dominated by so many people who had like-minded opinions. ”
4.2.2 Improvement points
In this section, we discuss what participants seek to help them better
understand the discussion space.
•Expansion of information. 6 out of 11 participants desired
expansion of information about authors’ background (e.g.,country of residence (location), the threads they follow on
Reddit, and their political stance) [P1, P4, P5-7, P11]. They
desired this information because it would give them more
context when navigating and following the discussion thread.
For example, they were curious about understanding publicsentiment towards a climate policy per country or based on
people’s political stance (e.g., Republican vs Democrat). P11
stated that “If it annotates the comment based on where the
person is located, that would help me understand the context
of the discussion based on their location as different countries
have different climate policies. ”
•Desired visual hints of the discussion structure. 10 out of 11
participants desired visual hints (e.g., annotation with labels)
of the discussion structure to capture a high level-synthesis of
the discussion space [P1-10]. They desired this information
because it was often difﬁcult to follow the list-like structure
because of the scale and because the topic changes sponta-neously. Thus, they desired ways to navigate the discussion
space more effectively such as by being able to ﬁnd insightful
comments quickly. P3 stated “Actually, I wish we can have
some kind of ﬁlter that automatically ﬁlters important opinions
and important comments, I would like to ﬁnd that quickly with
annotations or highlights [visual hints]. Maybe the comment
that got the most reactions. ” P8 stated that “Actually, I wished
that there is some way to see an overview [discussion structure]
of the discussion because the topic changes so spontaneously
it’s hard to follow sometimes. ”
Also, they desired to see opinions in groups, such as supporting
or against, to see dominating opinions about a certain discus-
sion topic. P1 stated that “So if it somehow [visual hints]
shows an overview of some of the [pro/con] discussion points
that would be helpful. ” P6 stated “If I want to make compar-
isons with other people’s opinions, I wanted to see them in
clusters. If I am against [this policy] I wanted to see people’s
opinions who support them, but see them in groups with some
indication [visual hint]”.
•View diverse perspectives. 7 out of 11 participants desired
ways to view diverse perspectives and desired to have a bal-
anced view of the topic [P1, P3-7, P9-11]. Participants stated
that they particularly like the community vibe that Reddit pro-
vides compared to other social media platforms such as Twitter
and Facebook. They stated that with the community vibe,
they can view a range of people’s different opinions and learn
from each other. Thus, they desired ways to see other people’s
opinions more efﬁciently.
For example, P9 stated “In my opinion, [when I navigate the
discussions space] I look for diverse opinions, not just my
opinion. I look for ways to see diverse opinions, so I can learn
more so and have more ideas about others’ perspectives. ” P5
also stated “When it comes to reading it, I love to see other
people’s opinions about climate change, so I’ll compare it with
my own to get more information and have a balanced view”.
85D ESIGN IMPLICATIONS
We further coded the interviews to extract design implications for
developing an augmented user interface that can assist people to
follow climate change discussions. Based on our key ﬁndings and
design implications extracted from the formative study, we propose
the following design goals. Our goals leverage insights from prior
work and study ﬁndings. We refer to the four design goals as G1-G4.
•G1. Provide high-level synthesis. We propose to visually
represent a structure (e.g., reply structure) of the discussion
space to provide an overview. We propose this goal to design
an “overview + detail” type of interface to assist people to
view the discussion space at scale. This way users can drill
down to speciﬁcs after getting an overview. For example, an
interface can visualize the distribution of both sides (pro/con)
of the debated issue to provide an “overview” of the discussion
and users can retrieve individual opinion that falls under that
category (“detail”).
•G2. Assist in viewing diverse perspectives. Online dis-
courses are susceptible to “cyberpolarization”, where some
of the opinions get attention simply because they seem to be
prevalent in the discussion space. This takes away an op-
portunity of learning from other participants by viewing their
opinions. This goal focuses on leveraging ways to assist people
in viewing a range of diverse perspectives including minority
opinions.
•G3. Provide context in the discussion space. Participants
desired expansions of information and contextualized infor-
mation about users, such as an author’s political stance or
reputation of the author in the community. We seek methods
to provide that information in a practical way in the system.
•G4. Allow easier discovery of insightful comments. We seek
ways to help people navigate to insightful comments quickly.
We propose to provide visual hints (visual guidance), with
annotation on the view to help people ﬁnd those comments,
such as providing ways to ﬁlter or recommend comments based
on user scores (e.g., upvotes) by the reputation of the author
in the discussion community. We propose this design goal to
help users to move through the content easily by providing
navigational affordances [14, 28] in the discussion space.
6D ISCUSSION
Our formative study revealed that users desired:
• Expansion of information
• Visual hints of the discussion structure• Assistance in viewing diverse perspectives
Based on these ﬁndings, we wanted to further investigate design-
ing augmented reading interfaces to speciﬁcally assist readers in
viewing online discourses about a divisive topic.
6.1 Expansion of information
Some of the prior work focused on presenting metadata such as an
author and when the comment or opinion was created. While these
can be informative, presenting metadata alone could be insufﬁcient
to engage the public effectively in discussions. For example, users
may want to know more about authors, such as their background,
political stance, and their interests. By providing expansion ofinformation it can help people draw attention to political aspects
or questions depending on who is performing that interpretation.
To provide such capabilities, we discuss what information can be
provided additionally in the discussion space.
Stances (Opposing vs Supporting). In a visual analytics system,
people’s comments can be annotated based on their stances so thatusers can see comments in clusters and infer the ratio of support and
against opinion on a certain topic. For example, Procon.org [1], a
non-proﬁt organization, presents this kind of view, where perspec-
tives from both proponents and opponents are shown in a table with
color-codings about controversial issues. To extract people’s stances,
one could potentially use the method described by Hosseinia [17].
Political stances (Republican vs Democrat). Participants de-
sired information about users’ political stances to contextualize their
comments and posts when viewing the discussion. Thus, one could
consider providing such information in the system. To extract peo-
ple’s political stance, one could potentially use method and heuristics
by Rajadesingan’s [26] work.
6.2 Author’s background and reputation
Participants desired information about people’s backgrounds and
interests to unpack the reasoning behind their opinions. For example,
providing the location of the authors will help users get more context
in viewing climate policies in a discussion space because different
countries have different legislation. Providing subreddits that users
follow can be useful in knowing what other users are interested in to
get recommendations.
Another recommendation is to suggest comments or posts worth
checking based on the author’s reputation in the community (e.g.
karma score, upvote score), as they are known for making higher-
quality posts and comments. This can help users to navigate toinsightful comments and post quickly. This can potentially help
users to see a range of diverse perspectives and be informed about
other people’s opinions.
This information can also impact people’s openness to new opin-
ions. Having access to authors’ backgrounds and reputations can
impact how people perceive other people’s opinions (e.g., trustwor-
thiness or quality). For example, Reddit supports a feature where
users can request a user ﬂair (e.g., types of labels such as Ph.D.
Climate Science) for their accounts. Then these labels show next to
their post or comments. This additional information can put more
weight on their opinions compared to others who don’t have those
titles. We envision that providing an additional layer of information
can do a similar job, which can encourage users to read and be open
to accepting new opinions.
6.3 Aggregating people’s opinions
Although prior work (e.g., multiConvis [16], Wikum [33]) showed
aggregations of data such as an overview, clusters of opinions, and
sentiment, may simply lead to showing dominant opinions, where
this can lead to marginalizing some of the less dominant opinions.
But this might be a type of information that a policymaker, a potential
user of a visualization system, would want to know to well represent
unpopular opinions or minority groups. Thus, when aggregating
data we should think about granularity for visualization to ﬁnd the
right balance so that minority opinions do not get missed. This
can translate to system designs to leverage the interplay between
visualization decisions and how it can lead to people’s interpretation
of data for controversial or political topics [2].
7C ONCLUSION
The goal of our work has been to understand user needs and extract
design implications for a system that can assist people in viewing
online discourses about a divisive topic. To this end, we conducted a
needs-ﬁnding study with 11 Reddit users who follow climate change
threads. Our ﬁndings showed that participants desired expansion
of information, and visual assistance to view diverse perspectives
and capture high-level synthesis of the discussion space. Based on
these identiﬁcations of user needs we discuss design goals that can
potentially be used in other system design that deals with divisive
online topics.
9REFERENCES
[1] Procon.org, howpublished = https://www.procon.org/ , note = Ac-
cessed: 2022-03-30.
[2] E. P . Baumer, M. Jasim, A. Sarvghad, and N. Mahyar. Of course it’s
political! a critical inquiry into underemphasized dimensions in civic
text visualization. In Computer Graphics F orum, vol. 41, pp. 1–14.
Wiley Online Library, 2022.
[3] J. Beel, T. Xiang, S. Soni, and D. Yang. Linguistic characterization
of divisive topics online: Case studies on contentiousness in abortion,
climate change, and gun control. In Proceedings of the International
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, vol. 16, pp. 32–42, 2022.
[4] A. J. Berinsky. The two faces of public opinion. American Journal of
Political Science, pp. 1209–1230, 1999.
[5] R. Cass. Republic. com 2, o, 2007.
[6] W. Cui, S. Liu, L. Tan, C. Shi, Y . Song, Z. Gao, H. Qu, and X. Tong.
Textﬂow: Towards better understanding of evolving topics in text. IEEE
transactions on visualization and computer graphics , 17(12):2412–
2421, 2011.
[7] W. Cui, S. Liu, Z. Wu, and H. Wei. How hierarchical topics evolve in
large text corpora. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer
graphics, 20(12):2281–2290, 2014.
[8] P . Dahlgren. The internet, public spheres, and political communication:
Dispersion and deliberation. Political communication, 22(2):147–162,
2005.
[9] M. D ¨ork, D. Gruen, C. Williamson, and S. Carpendale. A visual
backchannel for large-scale events. IEEE transactions on visualization
and computer graphics, 16(6):1129–1138, 2010.
[10] W. Dou, L. Y u, X. Wang, Z. Ma, and W. Ribarsky. Hierarchicaltopics:
Visually exploring large text collections using topic hierarchies. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 19(12):2002–
2011, 2013.
[11] S. Faridani, E. Bitton, K. Ryokai, and K. Goldberg. Opinion space:a scalable tool for browsing online comments. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp.
1175–1184, 2010.
[12] J. S. Fishkin and R. C. Luskin. Experimenting with a democratic ideal:
Deliberative polling and public opinion. Acta politica, 40(3):284–298,
2005.
[13] M. Gao, H. J. Do, and W.-T. Fu. An intelligent interface for organizing
online opinions on controversial topics. In Proceedings of the 22nd
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, pp. 119–123,
2017.
[14] J. Graham. The reader’s helper: a personalized document reading
environment. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human
factors in computing systems, pp. 481–488, 1999.
[15] E. Hoque and G. Carenini. Convisit: Interactive topic modeling for
exploring asynchronous online conversations. In Proceedings of the
20th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , pp. 169–
180, 2015.
[16] E. Hoque and G. Carenini. Multiconvis: A visual text analytics system
for exploring a collection of online conversations. In Proceedings of
the 21st international conference on intelligent user interfaces , pp.
96–107, 2016.
[17] M. Hosseinia, E. Dragut, and A. Mukherjee. Stance predictionfor contemporary issues: Data and experiments. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.00052, 2020.
[18] T. Kriplean, J. Morgan, D. Freelon, A. Borning, and L. Bennett. Sup-
porting reﬂective public thought with considerit. In Proceedings of the
ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, pp.
265–274, 2012.
[19] Q. V . Liao, W.-T. Fu, and S. S. Mamidi. It is all about perspective: An
exploration of mitigating selective exposure with aspect indicators. In
Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on Human factors in
computing systems, pp. 1439–1448, 2015.
[20] S. Liu, W. Cui, Y . Wu, and M. Liu. A survey on information vi-
sualization: recent advances and challenges. The Visual Computer,
30(12):1373–1393, 2014.
[21] S. Liu, Y . Wu, E. Wei, M. Liu, and Y . Liu. Storyﬂow: Tracking the
evolution of stories. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and ComputerGraphics, 19(12):2436–2445, 2013.
[22] D. Luo, J. Yang, M. Krstajic, W. Ribarsky, and D. Keim. Eventriver:
Visually exploring text collections with temporal references. IEEE
transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 18(1):93–105,
2010.
[23] S. Munson, S. Lee, and P . Resnick. Encouraging reading of diverse
political viewpoints with a browser widget. In Proceedings of The
International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, vol. 7, pp.
419–428, 2013.
[24] S. A. Munson and P . Resnick. Presenting diverse political opinions:how and how much. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
human factors in computing systems, pp. 1457–1466, 2010.
[25] S. Park, S. Kang, S. Chung, and J. Song. Newscube: delivering multiple
aspects of news to mitigate media bias. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on human factors in computing systems , pp. 443–452, 2009.
[26] A. Rajadesingan, C. Budak, and P . Resnick. Political discussion is
abundant in non-political subreddits (and less toxic). In Proceedings of
the Fifteenth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media,
vol. 15, 2021.
[27] L. Rourke and H. Kanuka. Barriers to online critical discourse. In-
ternational Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,
2(1):105–126, 2007.
[28] B. N. Schilit, G. Golovchinsky, and M. N. Price. Beyond paper: sup-
porting active reading with free form digital ink annotations. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems, pp. 249–256, 1998.
[29] G. Sun, Y . Wu, S. Liu, T.-Q. Peng, J. J. Zhu, and R. Liang. Evoriver:
Visual analysis of topic coopetition on social media. IEEE transactions
on visualization and computer graphics, 20(12):1753–1762, 2014.
[30] G.-D. Sun, Y .-C. Wu, R.-H. Liang, and S.-X. Liu. A survey of vi-sual analytics techniques and applications: State-of-the-art research
and future challenges. Journal of Computer Science and Technology,
28(5):852–867, 2013.
[31] M. J. Thomas. Learning within incoherent structures: The space ofonline discussion forums. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning,
18(3):351–366, 2002.
[32] A. X. Zhang and J. Cranshaw. Making sense of group chat through
collaborative tagging and summarization. Proceedings of the ACM on
Human-Computer Interaction, 2(CSCW):1–27, 2018.
[33] A. X. Zhang, L. V erou, and D. Karger. Wikum: Bridging discussionforums and wikis using recursive summarization. In Proceedings of
the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
and Social Computing, pp. 2082–2096, 2017.
10