Interface-dominated plasticity and kink bands in metallic
nanolaminates
Abhishek Arora∗Rajat Arora†Amit Acharya‡
Abstract
The theoretical and computational framework of nite deformation mesoscale eld dislocation
mechanics (MFDM) is used to understand the salient aspects of kink-band formation in Cu-
Nb nano-metallic laminates (NMLs). A conceptually minimal, plane-strain idealization of the
three-dimensional geometry, including crystalline orientation, of additively manufactured NML
is used to model NMLs. Importantly, the natural jump/interface condition of MFDM imposing
continuity of (certain components) of plastic strain rates across interfaces allows theory-driven
`communication' of plastic ow across the laminate boundaries in our nite element implemen-
tation. Kink bands under layer parallel compression of NMLs in accord with experimental
observations arise in our numerical simulations. The possible mechanisms for the formation and
orientation of kink bands are discussed, within the scope of our idealized framework. We also
report results corresponding to various parametric studies that provide preliminary insights and
clear questions for future work on understanding the intricate underlying mechanisms for the
formation of kink bands.
1 Introduction
A fundamental challenge in the development of ecient engineering materials is to design a material
that has both high strength and high toughness, as most materials have exclusively either of these
properties. Kinking in nano-metallic laminates is a deformation mechanism that may circumvent
this challenge, as it leads to enhanced plasticity (ductility) at an almost constant level of stress
after yielding [BLM22]. Kink bands, in the present context of a material with an intrinsic layered
structure, refer to a thin band of localized deformation that is transverse - and most commonly
not normal - to the intrinsic layering, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Shear band formation has been the
predominantly observed form of localization in NMLs as reported in [MBD+08, BMC+13]. In these
studies, NMLs are compressed perpendicular to the layer direction in micropillar congurations,
meaning the compression loading direction is parallel to the layer normal direction. While this is a
somewhat physically intuitive mode of deformation localization through rotation of the layers to-
wards the loading axis and slipping along softer layers, kink band formation in NMLs for suciently
small layer thickness under layer parallel compression has also been demonstrated [NMB+15]. In
layer parallel compression of NML, the compression loading direction is perpendicular to the layer
normal direction as shown in Fig. 1 (a). The formation of such kink bands and its dependence
on the size of layers is quite non-intuitive, and it is the study of this phenomenon that forms the
∗Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
†Advanced Micro Devices, Austin, TX 78735
‡Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering, and Center for Nonlinear Analysis, Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, email: acharyaamit@cmu.edu.
1arXiv:2304.02464v3  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  9 May 2023subject of this paper; the modeling of the development of shear bands in NMLs in micropillar con-
gurations under layer perpendicular compression is a subject worthy of study on its own merits,
a challenge that has not been successfully solved as yet [ZLC23].
In general, the formation of shear or kink bands, due to strain localization, is detrimental as it
produces sites of narrow planes under intense shear or lattice rotations, which acts as a source for
crack initiation and leads to eventual material failure. For instance, it was reported in [JRM03] that
for grain sizes smaller than 300 nm in iron (Fe), shear bands are formed leading to strain-softening
and failure at low values of plastic strain. Similarly, graphite-ber-reinforced epoxy composites fail
under compression loading due to the formation of kink bands [NS99]. However, for layer parallel
compression of NMLs with suciently small laminate widths, a large amount of plastic deformation
is observed before failure without much reduction in the strength of the material in the experimental
work of Thomas et al. [NMB+15] in Cu-Nb nanolaminates. It was reported there that the samples
with layer thickness greater than 250 nm deform homogeneously, while the deformation behavior of
samples with thicknesses 65 or 30 nm was inhomogeneous, and enhanced plastic deformation was
observed after yield at a more-or-less constant load [NMB+15]. Recently, Zhang et al. [ZLS+22]
investigated the kink band formation process in Cu/Nb NMLs via in situ micropillar compression
along the layer-parallel direction in a scanning electron microscope (SEM). It was reported that
after the onset of kinking, dislocations active on the slip systems nearly parallel to the interface in
NMLs are responsible for the band evolution. Cahn [Cah50] showed the formation of kink bands
in aluminum single crystals, and it was suggested that these bands are composed of dipolar arrays
of edge dislocations aligned perpendicular to the primary slip direction.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 1: (a) Schematic of an idealized kink band in layer parallel compression of NML, (b) geometry
of the kink band at jeNj= 25% engineering strain in the experimental work of compression of Cu/Nb
NMLs. (Figure in (b) reprinted from [ZLS+22] with permission from Elsevier. )
With respect to modeling, Zecevic et al. [ZLC23] used Gurtin's [Gur02] strain gradient crystal
plasticity model augmented with various choices of the defect energy function within a large strain
2elasto-viscoplastic Fast Fourier transform-based computational technique to model the compression
of Cu/Nb NMLs. Arora and Acharya [AA20a] modeled a 2-D single crystal under simple shearing
using the mesoscale eld dislocation mechanics (MFDM) framework in a nite deformation setting.
In a special single slip study, kink bands were observed in the form of dipolar dislocation walls
perpendicular to the single slip plane [AA20a]. Kink band formation in a polycrystalline Mg alloy
under compression was computationally studied using a strain-gradient crystal plasticity framework
[US15]. Asaro and Rice [AR77] described the onset of a shear and kink band from a bifurcation
analysis of the classical, nite deformation, single slip constitutive behavior. Forest [For98] used
small deformation generalized crystal plasticity (Cosserat theory of crystal plasticity) to separate
bifurcation modes (slip and kink bands), i.e. kink bands occur later than slip bands, and this is
unlike the prediction of classical plasticity.
In this work, we model the compression of composite nanolaminates within a plane strain
idealization, using the theoretical and computational framework of MFDM. The interface conditions
in MFDM impose continuity of certain components of the total plastic strain rate, which models
continuous plastic ow across the laminate interfaces. We consider a `minimal' model setup in
considering 3 co-planar slip systems for each material in the bi-metallic laminate structure and show
that kink bands are formed in qualitative accord with the experimental observations of [NMB+15,
ZLS+22]. We also report on other studies within this idealized setup and discuss whether kink
bands form or not for dierent cases.
The outline of the paper is as follows: after presenting some notational details used in this
paper in the following paragraph, Section 2 provides a brief review of the theory of MFDM. For
more details on the theoretical and computational framework of MFDM, the interested reader is
referred to [AA20a, AZA20, AA20b, Aro19]. Section 3 discusses the various successes of the MFDM
framework with correspondence with experimental studies in many instances. Section 4 shows the
numerical results of kink-band formation in composite nanolaminates within our idealization using
the computational framework of MFDM. We also discuss various parametric studies of our model
characterizing this complicated problem of kink band formations in NMLs. Section 5 presents
some concluding remarks and the scope of future work for modeling compression of NMLs using
our framework.
Vectors and tensors are represented by boldface lower and upper-case letters, respectively. The
action of a second-order tensor Aon a vectorbis denoted by Ab. The inner product of two
vectors is denoted by ab, while the inner product of two second-order tensors is denoted by
A:B. A rectangular Cartesian coordinate system is invoked for the ambient space and all vector
and tensor components are expressed with respect to the basis of this coordinate system. The
partial derivative of the quantity ( ) w.r.t. the xicoordinate of this coordinate system is denoted
by ();i, andeidenotes the unit vector in the xidirection. The time derivative of a quantity ( ) is
denoted by_(). Einstein's summation convention is always implied unless mentioned otherwise. The
symbols grad, div, and curl denote the gradient, divergence, and curl on the current conguration,
respectively. For a second order tensor A, vectorsv,a, andc, and a spatially constant vector eld
b, the operations of div, curl, and the cross-product of a tensor ( ) with a vector are dened as
follows:
(divA)b= div 
ATb
;8b
b(curlA)c=
curl 
ATb
c;8b;c
c(Av)a= 
ATc
v
a;8a;c:
3In rectangular Cartesian coordinates, these are denoted by
(divA)i=Aij;j;(curlA)ri="ijkArk;j;(Av)ri="ijkArjvk;
where"ijkare the components of the third order alternating tensor X.
When we refer to dierent slip systems with respect to their slip vector orientation, we mean
that those orientations were in the initial unstretched lattice, and do not represent the orientations
of the corresponding slip vectors in the deformed lattice, unless mentioned otherwise.
2 Review of MFDM theory
The governing equations for MFDM [AZA20] are as follows:
curlW= ; (3a)
_W+WL =V; (3b)
div [T(W)] =0;quasistatic
_v;dynamic:(3c)
In Eq. (3),Wis the inverse of the elastic distortion tensor ( Fe),denotes the dislocation density
tensor (Nye's tensor), vdenotes the material velocity, L= gradvis the velocity gradient, Tis the
(symmetric) Cauchy stress tensor, and Vdenotes the dislocation velocity eld with respect to the
material. Eq. (3a) is the incompatibility equation for the inverse elastic distortion tensor, while
Eq. (3b) is derived from the statement of conservation of the Burgers vector content of an arbitrary
area patch in the current conguration [Ach11]. Eq. (3c) is the linear momentum balance for both
quasistatic and dynamic cases.
Eq. (3b) is a system of coupled Hamilton-Jacobi equations for which, to our knowledge, no
rigorous mathematical theory or numerical schemes exist in the literature. To computationally
approximate the governing equations, a Stokes-Helmholtz decomposition of the eld Wis intro-
duced, expressing it as a sum of a gradient (grad f) and a divergence-free part ( ) [AA20a]. This
decomposition replaces the tensor eld Wwith a tensor and a vector eld in our computations,
but it is relatively easier to develop numerical schemes for this larger set of governing equations
[AZA20].
The extended set of governing equations for MFDM [AZA20] are shown below:
(div(v))+_ LT= curl(V+Lp); (4a)
W=+ gradf;Fe=W 1;
curl= ;
div=0;)
(4b)
div
grad _f
= div (V+Lp _ L); (4c)
div [T(W)] =0;quasistatic
_v;dynamic:(4d)
Here, (4a) is the evolution equation for the dislocation density tensor, and (4b) is the incompatibility
equation in terms of with a condition that div =0, whilefdenotes the plastic position
vector, and the evolution equation for fis given by (4c). Lpis the additional mesoscale eld which
represents the averaged rate of plastic straining due to all dislocations that cannot be represented by
V, where both elds in the product represent space-time running averages of the corresponding
4microscopic elds. This is due to the fact that the average of products is not the same as the product
of averages, in general. Hence, all elds in the MFDM framework are running space-time averages
of the corresponding elds of the eld dislocation mechanics (FDM) theory; except for Lp, as there
is no corresponding eld in FDM theory to Lp.
To close the above set of equations in (4), constitutive statements for V;Lp;Tare used, con-
sistent with the mechanical dissipation being non-negative [AA20a].
Initial conditions for ;fand boundary conditions for ;f;, andvare specied, for a well-set
evolution in MFDM.
2.1 Boundary conditions
•Theevolution equation (shown in Eq. (4a)) has a convective boundary condition of the
form (V+Lp)n=, whereis a second order tensor valued function of position
and time on the boundary, characterizing the ux of dislocations at the surface satisfying the
constraintn=0. Here,nisThe outward unit normal eld on the boundary.
The boundary condition is specied in two ways: (a) Plastically constrained :(x;t) =0is
specied at a point xon the boundary for all times, which ensures that there is no outow
of dislocations at that point of the boundary, and only parallel motion along the boundary is
allowed. (b) Plastically unconstrained : A less restrictive boundary condition where ^Lpnis
simply evaluated at the boundary (akin to an outow condition), along with the specication
of dislocation ux (Vn) on the inow part of the boundary. Additionally, for all calculations
presented in this paper (curl n) =0is imposed, a particular specication of a boundary
condition that arises from simple mathematical modeling of the manifestation of dislocation
core energy at the mesoscale.
•For the incompatibility equation, n=0is applied on the outer boundary of the domain,
which along with the system (4b) ensures that vanishes when is zero in the entire domain.
•Thefevolution equation requires a Neumann boundary condition i.e., (grad _f)n= (V+
Lp _ L)non the outer boundary of the domain.
•The material velocity boundary conditions are applied based on the loading type, which is
discussed later in Section 4.
2.2 Initial conditions
•The initial condition (x;0) =0is assumed for all simulations here.
•In general, the initial condition for fis obtained by solving for from the incompatibility
equation and solving for ffrom the equilibrium equation, for prescribed on the given
initial conguration. We refer to this scheme as the elastic theory of continuously distributed
dislocations (ECDD). For the initial conditions on considered above, this step is trivial,
withf=X, whereXis the position eld on the initial conguration.
•The model admits an arbitrary specication of _fat a point to uniquely evolve fusing (4c)
in time, and this rate is prescribed to vanish.
Interface conditions for plastic distortion rate : The interface jump condition for the solve is
[[V+^Lp+l2^curl]]n=0, and this gets imposed in the nite element formulation.
5Here, [[()]] denotes the jump in ( ) across the interface. This interface condition allows for the
discontinuity of certain components of plastic strain rate across the interface [Ach07].
Traction continuity and natural interface conditions consistent with the PDE for ;_fare also
enforced by our nite element formulation.
2.3 Constitutive relations
Constitutive relations in MFDM are required for the stress T, the plastic distortion rate Lp, and the
dislocation velocity V. The details of the thermodynamically consistent constitutive formulations
can be found in Sec. 3.1 of [AA20a].
Table 1 presents the constitutive relation for Cauchy stress and mesoscopic core energy density
for the material. Here, denotes the mass density of the pure, un-stretched elastic lattice, and
Cis the fourth-order elasticity tensor, while Eeis the elastic Lagrangian strain tensor. () is
a heuristic representation of the averaged microscopic core energy at the mesoscale, and is a
constant that has physical dimensions of stresslength2.
Saint-Venant-Kirchho Material (W) =1
2Ee:C:Ee;T=Fe[C:Ee]FeT
Core energy density () =1
2:
Table 1: Constitutive relations for Cauchy stress and core energy density.
Table 2 shows the constitutive relations for plastic distortion rate. Classical crystal plasticity is
assumed here and the plastic distortion Lpis given by the sum of slipping distortions on prescribed
slip systems [AA20a]. In Table 2, ( )symdenotes the symmetric part of ( ), ^k
0is a reference strain
rate, ^kis the slipping rate due to statistically stored dislocations on the kthslip system, nslis the
total number of slip system, sgn(k) denotes the sign of the scalar k,gis the material strength, m
is the material rate sensitivity. mkandnkrepresents the slip direction and slip plane normal for
thekthslip system, in the current conguration. The resolved shear stress on the kthslip system
is given as k=mkTnk. The slip direction and slip plane normal in the current conguration
are related to the unstretched slip direction ( mk
0) and the slip plane normal ( nk
0) bymk=Femk
0,
andnk=Fe Tnk
0. The classical plastic distortion rate ^Lpfrom crystal plasticity, is augmented
with an additive term in curl , motivated from the mechanical dissipation expression in [AA20a,
Eq. (8)], with a mobility coecient given by l2multiplied by the average slipping rate of the total
slip systems [AA20a]. Here, lis a material length related to the gross modeling of mesoscale eects
of dislocation core energy and is dened as l2==g 0, withg0being the initial strength (initial yield
stress in shear).
Crystal
plasticity^Lp=W nslX
k^kmk
nk!
sym; ^k=sgn(k)^k
0jkj
g1
m
Lp=^Lp+l2
nslnslX
kj^kjcurl
Table 2: Constitutive relations for plastic strain rate Lp.
Table 3 shows the constitutive relations for dislocation velocity. Here, ddenotes the direction
of dislocation velocity, and its magnitude is given by ,T0denotes the deviatoric stress tensor, X
6is the third-order alternating unit tensor, is the shear modulus, gis the material strength, is
a non-dimensional material constant in the empirical Taylor relationship for macroscopic strength
vs dislocation density, and bis the Burgers vector magnitude of a full dislocation in the crystalline
material. For motivation behind the constitutive statement for V, the interested reader is referred
to [AR06, AC12].
T0=T tr(T)
3I;a=1
3X(tr(T)Fe);c=X(T0Fe)
d=c 
c a
jaja
jaj;V=d
jdj;=22b
g2nslnslX
kj^kj
Table 3: Constitutive relations for dislocation velocity V.
Table 4 shows the evolution equation for material strength ( g). Here,gsdenotes the saturation
strength,his the total hardening rate, 0is the Stage II hardening rate, k0(non-dimensional)
characterizes the hardening rate due to geometrically necessary dislocations (GNDs) [AB00].
_g=h(;g) 
jFeVj+nslX
kj^kj!
;h(;g) =22b
2(g g0)k0jj+0gs g
gs g0
Table 4: Constitutive relations for material strength g.
All parameters in our model, except k0andl, are part of the constitutive structure of well-
accepted models of classical crystal plasticity theory. The parameter k0was introduced in [AB00].
The length scale lsimply controls the renement of the GND microstructure and does not play a
physically signicant role in our results.
3 Review of results from MFDM
The MFDM framework is based on the space-time averaging of microscopic dislocation mechan-
ics, and the obtained governing PDEs shown in (4) are closed by the phenomenological speci-
cation ofLp,V,Tandg. This approach has been quite successful in addressing some chal-
lenging problems in modern plasticity theory related to the computation of patterning [AA20a],
dislocation internal stress [AZA20], size eects in micropillar conned thin metal lms [AAA22],
polygonization [AA20b], and slip transmission at grain boundaries [PAR11, PDA11] among others
[AR06, Ach07, PRAD10, MBA10, FAB10, Ach11, DAS16, FBE+09, TVC+07, TBFB10, RWF11,
TVFB08, DTBF15, VBF09, DBTL20, BTL20, GBG+20], including long-standing and recent fun-
damental challenges in the prediction of large-deformation, dislocation mediated elastic and elastic-
plastic response [AA20a, AZA20, AA20b, AAA22]. The benets of using such a framework are:
•It is dicult to deduce a physical connection between the plastic strain/distortion in classical
plasticity theory to the mechanics of dislocation, beyond modeling in 1-D. The MFDM frame-
work brings out an explicit connection between the plastic strain rate and the motion and
geometry of an evolving microscopic array of dislocations. Obviously, this has many benets,
even for a phenomenological specication of the macroscopic plastic strain rate. Moreover,
the MFDM framework has allowed for a rst unication between phenomenological J2and
crystal plasticity theories and quantitative dislocation mechanics.
7•With a single extra material tting parameter beyond a classical plasticity model (and two
in the nite deformation setting), the MFDM framework has enabled a signicant variety of
phenomena to be modeled, in qualitative and quantitative accord with experimental results.
4 Results and Discussion
The initial conguration of NMLs, as shown in Fig. 2 (a), is such that there are 12 alternating
layers of Cu and Nb. Each layer has a thickness of l= 80nmwith the width of the composite
beingW= 960nm. The aspect ratio of the NML composite is 1:2, with an undeformed height of
the sample being L= 1920nm. The nominal compression loading rate is j^ej= 0:001s 1, and at
any timet, the nominal compressive strain is jej=j^ejt. The corresponding true compressive strain
is denoted asjeTj. The average true compressive stress is denoted by , while the average nominal
compressive stress is denoted by N. Plastically unconstrained boundary conditions are applied to
all four (external) boundaries of the domain, for all results shown in this work. Quasi-static force
equilibrium is solved for all simulations reported here.
The boundary conditions for the material velocity for the simulations of compression of NMLs
are as follows:
•v2= 0 at the bottom boundary of the domain.
•v2= j^ejLat the top boundary of the domain, where Lis the length of the laminate in the
(undeformed) initial conguration at t= 0.
•The applied traction in the horizontal direction is zero on both the top and the bottom
boundary of the domain.
•v1= 0 at a single node of the bottom boundary. This along with the above conditions suces
to constrain rigid motion.
As discussed earlier, we assume 3 slip systems for both Cu and Nb. One of the reference slip
directions is aligned along the layer parallel direction, while the other two are dened to initially
accommodate symmetric double slip with respect to the loading axis. With reference to Fig. 2
(a),1and2are both assumed to be 30for Cu, while for Nb, both are 45, unless mentioned
otherwise.
Table 5 shows the material parameters used for the numerical simulations of NMLs under
compression in this study. The g0values for Cu and Nb are taken from [ZLC23], and the saturation
strength is assumed to be gs= 9g0. We use these material properties for all of our simulations
unless otherwise stated, although these values of initial and saturation yield strength for single
crystal materials seem somewhat out of the norm. Accordingly, we also perform simulations with
more commonly used values without a qualitative change in results.
Parameter^0m  b g 0gs0k0l E 
(s 1) ( A) (MPa) (MPa) (MPa) ( m) (GPa)
Cu 0.001 0.031
32.556 210 1890 273 20p
30:1 144.58 0.324
Nb 0.001 0.031
32.86 262.5 2362.5 198 20p
30:1 110.25 0.392
Table 5: Material parameters for Cu and Nb.
8(a)
 (b)
(c)
Figure 2: (a) Schematic of NML under compression with Cu layers shown in grey color and Nb
layers in black color, (b) stress-strain curves (both true and engineering) from our simulation,
(c) Experimental stress-strain curve (Figure in (c) reprinted from [ZLS+22] with permission from
Elsevier ).
94.1 Kink band formation
Fig. 2 (b,c) shows the true and engineering stress-strain curve obtained from our simulation and
the experimentally obtained stress-strain curve from [ZLS+22], and it is clear that the numerically
obtained stress-strain curves do not match with the experimental ones. The yield strength obtained
from our simulations is between 0.45 - 0.5 GPa, while in the experimental results from [ZLS+22],
it is close to 1.0 GPa. The strain-hardening response is more prominent in our numerical result as
compared to the experimental observation, where after yielding it stays at a more-or-less constant
level of stress. However, in the current work or our past works like [AA20b, AAA22], we have not
employed any tting of material parameters to obtain the numerical results that are in qualitative
or quantitative agreement with experimental observations. This is discussed in a broader context
in Section 4.6, where we compare strain gradient plasticity (SGP) based models and MFDM for
modeling problems in mesoscale plasticity.
Fig. 3 shows the eld plot of geometrically necessary dislocation (GND) density ( g=jj=b(m 2))
and the norm of logarithmic strain tensor jlnVj. Here,Vis obtained from the polar decomposition
of the deformation gradient tensor ( F=VR), andFis dened with respect to the initial con-
guration at t= 0. GNDs get generated in the domain due to the inhomogeneity in the material
response after yielding from the material inhomogeneity of the laminate structure in NMLs, and
the imposition of jump condition on plastic strain rate at the interfaces.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 3: (a) Field plot of GND density g=jj=b(m 2) (b)jlnVjeld plot, both at jeTj= 23%
andjeNj= 25:9%. The dashed black lines in both Figures show the deformed lines of the interface
between Cu and Nb layers in the current conguration.
It is evident from Fig. 3 that kink-band forms in accordance with the experimental observations
in [NMB+15, ZLS+22]. It is evident that the deformation eld localizes within the band, and the
kink band is inclined (not perpendicular) to the layering in NML as shown in Fig. 1. Also, as per
Fig. 3 (b) that the principal stretches of Vare maximum within the kink band formed, due to
intense deformation in the band region.
10Figure 4: Comparison of true stress-strain curve for dierent g0, and withgs= 9g0in both cases.
The inclination of the kink band shown in Fig. 3 with respect to the layer normal (in the initial
conguration) i.e. (shown in Fig. 1 (a)) is estimated roughly to be 32, and curiously it is close
to= 35reported in the experimental work in [ZLS+22]. The angle of the inclination of the
kink band is calculated based on the actual deformed coordinates of the kink band boundary (note
that the aspect ratio of the plot box shown in Fig. 3 is close to 1 : 1).
Fig. 4 shows the comparison of the stress-strain response with dierent values of g0(initial
yield), but with the same ratio between the saturation yield strength and initial yield i.e. gs= 9g0.
As expected, the initial yield strength for the NML is less, with reduced values of g0, as compared
to the experimentally observed yield limit [ZLS+22], but the ultimate strength, in this case, is
closer to the experimental value. Importantly, we observe the formation of kink bands with similar
shapes in our numerical simulations for smaller values of g0andgs, as well.
The orientation of the kink band depends on the Schmid factors of the 3 slip systems considered,
which is the largest for the 2 oblique slip systems. Based on the deformed shape of the NML as
shown in Fig. 5, the slip direction that is inclined ( 1) w.r.t. to the layer parallel slip direction
becomes the most active slip system based on the Schmid factors in the deformed lattice. However,
it is not so clear what breaks the initial symmetry between the double-symmetric slip systems to
make the average resolved shear stress on the 1oriented slip plane larger than the 2oriented
plane. The absolute value of the averaged Schmid factor (over the whole domain) for the 3 slip
systems in the initial conguration is 0 (layer-parallel slip vector) and 0.4665 ( 1and2oriented slip
vectors), while the absolute values of the averaged Schmid factors over the domain at jeTj= 3:21%
are 0:0021 (layer parallel slip vector), 0 :4739 (1oriented slip vector), and 0 :4731 (2oriented slip
vector). AtjeTj= 23%, the absolute values of the averaged Schmid factors for the 3 slip systems
are 0:1407 (layer-parallel slip vector), 0 :42246 (1oriented slip vector), and 0 :3357 (2oriented slip
vector).
The rotation of the deformed slip vectors w.r.t. their respective initial orientations is shown in
Fig. 5 atjeTj= 23%, and it can be deduced that near the kink band region, the rotation of slip
vectors is relatively large. The average rotation for the 3 slip vectors is 9 :99(layer parallel slip
vector), 10:27(1oriented slip vector), and 9 :64(2oriented slip vector). The negative curl of the
11(a)
 (b)
(c)
Figure 5: Rotation eld of slip vectors ( in degrees) in the current conguration w.r.t. their
initial orientation at jeTj= 23% for (a) layer parallel slip vector, (b) 1oriented slip vector, (c) 2
oriented slip vector. The dashed black lines in all Figures show the deformed lines of the interface
between Cu and Nb layers in the current conguration.
12inverse elastic distortion tensor is the GND density, and the rotation of lattice vectors is a direct
function of the (inverse) elastic distortion tensor. As can be observed from Fig. 5, there are large
gradients in the rotation eld of slip vectors near the kinked region, which results in relatively large
magnitudes of GND density in the kink band (refer to Fig. 3 (a)).
4.2 Eect of dierent slip systems, ordering of metallic layers, and slip systems
orientations
We report various numerical studies with respect to changing the ordering of metallic layers, the
eect of removal of slip vectors, and the slip vector orientations on the kink band formation.
•Flipping the order of Cu and Nb layers in the nano-laminate structure resulted in a change
in the orientation of the band as shown in Fig. 6 (a), due to a geometrical asymmetry in the
initial conguration.
•Removal of 1inclined slip system, and just considering layer parallel slip system and 2
inclined slip system, resulted in the orientation of the band as shown in Fig. 6 (b).
•Removal of the 2oriented slip plane did not change the orientation of the kink band formed,
and it is similar to as shown in Fig. 3.
•Removal of the layer parallel slip system and just considering the double symmetric slip
system with the same orientations, as before, did not change the orientation of the kink band
formed, as shown in Fig. 8.
•We consider dierent orientations of slip vectors ( 1=2) from 20to 45for Cu, and keep
the slip vector orientation for Nb to be the same i.e. 1=2= 45. Kink bands form for slip
vector orientations from 20to 30, but for 35to 45kink bands do not form, and NMLs
undergo more uniform compression.
The stress-strain response with just 2 slip systems is relatively stronger as compared to the
3-slip system case, as shown in Fig. 7. As concerns, the at experimental stress-strain response
beyond yielding, the availability of more slip systems in realistic modeling of the NML would lead
to more plastic straining, but it would be accompanied by more gain in strength as well. So, in
general, it is dicult to say with certainty that the availability of more slip systems will result in
less strain-hardening, but that is what we observe in our limited simulations reported here.
We further compare the eld plots of GND density ( g) with/without the layer parallel slip
system as shown in Fig. 8 at jeTj= 23% strain. It is evident that the shape of the kink band and
the GND density are similar in the two cases. This is a departure from the results reported in
the experimental work by Zecevic et al. [ZLC23], where it was reported that the layer-parallel slip
system is responsible for the evolution of the shape of the kink band. We leave a more realistic
investigation of the eects of layer parallel slip systems for future work, where we will be modeling
the 3-D geometry of NML and considering all the slip systems in Cu (FCC) and Nb (BCC).
Another interesting observation is that the domain-averaged rotation, with respect to the initial
orientation, decreases with an increase in the initial orientation angle of the slip vectors from the
loading axis, in the range of initial orientations where kink bands form. This shows that in order
to accommodate the same level of plastic deformation, slip vectors with smaller angular deviation
from the loading axis rotate more on average during plastic deformation.
13(a)
 (b)
Figure 6: Field plot of GND density g=jj=b(m 2) (a) after ipping the order of Cu and Nb
layers atjeTj= 23%, (b) after removal of 1oriented slip plane, and at jeTj= 20:5%, but the order
of metallic layers is the same as shown in Fig. 2 (a). The dashed black lines in both Figures show
the deformed lines of the interface between Cu and Nb layers in the current conguration.
Figure 7: True stress-strain curve with/without accounting for layer-parallel slip system.
14(a)geld plot (2-slip)
 (b)geld plot (3-slip)
Figure 8: (a) geld plot for 2-slip system only (b) geld plot for all 3-slip systems, both at
jeTj= 23%. The dashed black lines in both Figures show the deformed lines of the interface between
Cu and Nb layers in the current conguration.
4.3 Eect of layer thickness length scale on the formation of kink band
We investigate the eect of layer thickness on the formation of kink bands in NMLs. It was
experimentally observed in the work by Nizolek et al. [NMB+15] that kink bands do not form
and homogeneous deformation is observed for layer thickness greater than 250 nm. We run our
simulation with the same parameters as stated in Table 5, and take the layer thickness l= 500nm,
and the NML is composed of a total of 12 layers. Hence, the width of the NML composite is
W= 6m, and keeping the same aspect ratio of 1:2, the length of the NML composite is L= 12m.
It can be deduced from the deformed shape of NML (shown in Fig. 9 (b)) that kink bands do not
form with larger layer thickness, and it is getting compressed homogeneously without the formation
of any kink bands.
4.4 Conventional plasticity within our model
In this section, we investigate the response of NML in three cases. For case (i), we take the usual
parameters ( k0= 20;l= 0:01732;V6=0), while for case (ii) the parameters are ( k0= 0;l=
0;V6=0), and for case (iii) the parameters taken are ( k0= 0;l= 0;V=0). Physically, case (ii)
corresponds to just Voce's law-based hardening (without the eects of GND hardening) and no
plastic strain rate due to mesoscopic core energy. For case (iii), in addition to case (ii), there is
no plastic straining due to the motion of GNDs, and this case is closest to conventional plasticity
within our unied crystal plasticity and dislocation mechanics framework. As expected, with no
hardening from GNDs accounted for in case (ii) and case (iii), we obtain a weaker strain-hardening
response, as compared to case (i). It was observed in numerical simulations that kink bands do not
form for case (ii) and case (iii), as shown in Fig. 10 (b), which shows the GNDs density eld plot
15(a)
 (b)
Figure 9: (a) True stress-strain curve comparison for layer thickness h= 80nmandh= 500nm,
(b)geld plot atjeTj= 13:63% for layer thickness h= 500nm. The dashed black lines in Figure
(b) show the deformed lines of the interface between Cu and Nb layers in the current conguration.
for case (ii) atjeTj= 12% true strain.
4.5 NML subjected to layer-perpendicular compression
In this section, the layer direction of NML is aligned perpendicular to the compression loading di-
rection. As observed in the experiments [BMC+13], kink bands do not form for layer perpendicular
compression and the deformation of the NML is shear-driven parallel to the layer direction. This
results in material ow under shearing within the individual layers as shown in Fig. 12. For the
layer perpendicular micropillar compression of NMLs in [BMC+13], it was reported that diagonally
inclined shear bands are formed, from the left or right boundary to the right/left boundary. We
leave such studies for future work where we model the slender micropillar shape of the NML using
a plane strain idealization with the undulating interfaces. Up to the rotation of the layers towards
the loading axis, similar behavior is observed in the work [AAA22].
4.6 Comparison of strain gradient plasticity (SGP) models and MFDM
•The numerical results that we have obtained are with continuous plastic ow across the in-
terfaces, imposing continuity of certain components of plastic strain rate across the interface.
Moreover, we see the accumulation of GND density across the interface (refer to Fig. 3 (a)),
without having to do constrained plastic ow across the interface, which models the impen-
etrable interfaces in MFDM framework, as discussed in [PDA11]. This is unlike the recent
work by Zecevic et al. [ZLC23], where `micro-hard' boundary conditions are implemented
on the interfaces for their numerical study. From the current state-of-the-art of SGP mod-
16(a) Stress-strain curve
 (b)geld plot
Figure 10: (a) True stress-strain curve comparison for the 3 cases considered, (b) geld plot at
jeTj= 11:3% for case (ii): k0= 0; l= 0;V6=0. The dashed black lines in Figure (b) show the
deformed lines of the interface between Cu and Nb layers in the current conguration.
Figure 11: True stress-strain curve when the layer direction is aligned perpendicular or parallel to
the compression loading direction.
17Figure 12: geld plot atjeTj= 18:23% strain, when the layer direction is aligned perpendicular
to the compression loading direction. The dashed black lines in the Figure show the deformed lines
of the interface between Cu and Nb layers in the current conguration.
els [KTN21, ZLC23] there appears to be a high degree of indeterminacy in the nature of
boundary/interface conditions to be imposed, with a signicant impact on model predictions.
Using `micro-hard' boundary conditions within SGP models would make it dicult to repro-
duce drastically dierent scalings in the micropillar compression experiments for two dierent
congurations (90and 45oriented metal thin lm with respect to compression loading axis),
as experimentally observed in [MZHM16]. In the work of Kuroda et al. [KTN21], the plas-
tic constraints on the metal-ceramic interface are relaxed beyond a certain level of plastic
strain gradient on the interface/boundary, in order to obtain the same scalings as experi-
mentally observed. However, our model is able to reproduce similar scalings as compared to
experimental ones, without any ad-hoc modications to the boundary conditions, as shown
in [AAA22]. Moreover, our model also predicts the formation of kink bands in the compres-
sion of NMLs, as shown in this current (rst) simplied study, again with no special tting
of material parameters or changes to the structure of the theory (which, of course, includes
the nature of boundary and interface conditions). The jump conditions of our model have
also been shown to be successful in studies of texture evolution and recrystallization, among
others [MBA10, FU20, SHEC21].
•Our model is not able to reproduce size dependence on the initial yield strength, as observed in
the micropillar compression experiments of single crystal pure Ni [UDFN04]; to our knowledge,
SGP-based theories have not modeled these experiments either. Most SGP theories are able
to predict a signicant size eect at initial yield in the presence of boundary constraints or in
the presence of inhomogeneous deformation, without being able to fundamentally distinguish
boundary constraints arising from the kinematics of dislocation slip [AA20b, AAA22].
•SGP studies of micropillar conned thin lm plasticity and kink banding [KN19, KTN21,
ZLC23], usually employ a 0 value of work hardening to reproduce experimental behav-
ior, raising the question of accurate representation of macroscopic behavior by the models.
Moreover, the SGP studies of [ZLC23, NVdGG05] employ several variants of the core energy
18function and show a sensitive and signicant dependence on stress-strain response to such a
choice. In our work, no such choices are required, and the work hardening rates we use in
our strength evolution ensure, at least in the conned thin lm problem and for modeling
macroscopic response, that a physically appropriate mechanical response is obtained. For
the present kink-band problem, the obtained stress-strain response (without any tting) is
unsatisfactory compared to the experiment (but no worse than the SGP result of [ZLC23]),
and this is an issue that requires further work.
5 Conclusion
This work reports a preliminary study of the modeling of kink-banding in NML within the MFDM
framework. We report reasonable success, which further strengthens the ability of the MFDM
framework to model important and challenging problems in the eld of modern plasticity. Our
simulations of a minimalistic model recover important experimental results in the compression of
NMLs such as:
•dependence of kink-band formation on the layer thickness.
•kink bands do not form when the layer direction is aligned perpendicular to the compression
loading direction, and there is shear-driven deformation within the layers of NML.
At this time we are unable to provide a detailed analysis of the location of the kink bands in
our numerical simulations. Rough speculation in this regard is as follows: the bands cannot cross
the top and bottom boundaries because of the applied velocity boundary conditions. The corners
of the sample result in stress concentrations due to geometric and changes in velocity boundary
conditions on intersecting external boundaries. These stress concentrations may be the source of
the location of the bands with the orientation governed by the most active slip systems. Of course,
there are subtle details of the eects of the GND evolution that denitely aect the localization of
the band and the layer length scale eects. Such a detailed understanding of the localization of the
kink band is a fundamental challenge for future work as is the modeling of the full 3-D geometry
of NML samples and the crystallography of actual slip systems present in Cu and Nb.
The prediction of experimentally observed kink bands in NMLs [NMB+15, ZLS+22] along with
the micropillar conned thin lm plasticity [MCM14, MZHM16] form a discerning, critical set of
key experimental tests of mesoscale plasticity theories, to be accomplished without ad-hoc model
modications on a case-by-case basis. The MFDM model has been shown to be in qualitative
accord with these experimental tests, building condence in its adequacy as a model for the intricate
phenomena involved in mesoscale plasticity.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the grant NSF OIA-DMR #2021019.
References
[AA20a] Rajat Arora and Amit Acharya. Dislocation pattern formation in nite deformation
crystal plasticity. International Journal of Solids and Structures , 184:114{135, 2020.
19[AA20b] Rajat Arora and Amit Acharya. A unication of nite deformation J2 Von-Mises plas-
ticity and quantitative dislocation mechanics. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics
of Solids , 143:104050, 2020.
[AAA22] Abhishek Arora, Rajat Arora, and Amit Acharya. Mechanics of micropillar conned
thin lm plasticity. Acta Materialia , 238:118192, 2022.
[AB00] Amit Acharya and A. J. Beaudoin. Grain-size eect in viscoplastic polycrystals at
moderate strains. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 48(10):2213{2230,
2000.
[AC12] Amit Acharya and S Jonathan Chapman. Elementary observations on the averaging
of dislocation mechanics: dislocation origin of aspects of anisotropic yield and plastic
spin. Procedia IUTAM , 3:301{313, 2012.
[Ach07] Amit Acharya. Jump condition for gnd evolution as a constraint on slip transmission
at grain boundaries. Philosophical magazine , 87(8-9):1349{1359, 2007.
[Ach11] Amit Acharya. Microcanonical entropy and mesoscale dislocation mechanics and plas-
ticity. Journal of Elasticity , 104(1-2):23{44, 2011.
[AR77] R. J. Asaro and J. R. Rice. Strain localization in ductile single crystals. Journal of
the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 25(5):309{338, 1977.
[AR06] Amit Acharya and A. Roy. Size eects and idealized dislocation microstructure at
small scales: predictions of a phenomenological model of mesoscopic eld dislocation
mechanics: Part I. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 54(8):1687{1710,
2006.
[Aro19] Rajat Arora. Computational Approximation of Mesoscale Field Dislocation Mechanics
at Finite Deformation . PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 2019.
[AZA20] Rajat Arora, X. Zhang, and Amit Acharya. Finite element approximation of nite
deformation dislocation mechanics. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering , 367:113076, 2020.
[BLM22] I. J. Beyerlein, Z. Li, and N. A. Mara. Mechanical properties of metal nanolaminates.
Annual Review of Materials Research , 52:281{304, 2022.
[BMC+13] I. J. Beyerlein, N. A. Mara, J. S. Carpenter, T. Nizolek, W. M. Mook, T. A. Wynn,
R. J. McCabe, J. R. Mayeur, K. Kang, S. Zheng, et al. Interface-driven microstructure
development and ultra high strength of bulk nanostructured cu-nb multilayers fabri-
cated by severe plastic deformation. Journal of materials research , 28(13):1799{1812,
2013.
[BTL20] S. Berbenni, V. Taupin, and R. A. Lebensohn. A fast fourier transform-based
mesoscale eld dislocation mechanics study of grain size eects and reversible plas-
ticity in polycrystals. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 135:103808,
2020.
[Cah50] R. W. Cahn. Slip and polygonization in aluminum. Technical report, Atomic Energy
Research Establishment, 1950.
20[DAS16] A. Das, Amit Acharya, and P. Suquet. Microstructure in plasticity without noncon-
vexity. Computational Mechanics , 57:387{403, 2016.
[DBTL20] K. S. Djaka, S. Berbenni, V. Taupin, and R. A. Lebensohn. A t-based numerical
implementation of mesoscale eld dislocation mechanics: application to two-phase
laminates. International Journal of Solids and Structures , 184:136{152, 2020.
[DTBF15] K. S. Djaka, V. Taupin, S. Berbenni, and C. Fressengeas. A numerical spectral ap-
proach to solve the dislocation density transport equation. Modelling and Simulation
in Materials Science and Engineering , 23(6):065008, 2015.
[FAB10] C. Fressengeas, Amit Acharya, and A. J. Beaudoin. Dislocation mediated continuum
plasticity: Case studies on modeling scale dependence, scale-invariance, and direc-
tionality of sharp yield-point. In Computational methods for microstructure-property
relationships , pages 277{309. Springer, 2010.
[FBE+09] C. Fressengeas, A. J. Beaudoin, D. Entemeyer, T. Lebedkina, M. Lebyodkin, and
V. Taupin. Dislocation transport and intermittency in the plasticity of crystalline
solids. Physical Review B , 79(1):014108, 2009.
[For98] S. Forest. Modeling slip, kink, and shear banding in classical and generalized single
crystal plasticity. Acta materialia , 46(9):3265{3281, 1998.
[FU20] C. Fressengeas and M. V. Upadhyay. A continuum model for slip transfer at grain
boundaries. Advanced Modeling and Simulation in Engineering Sciences , 7(1):1{19,
2020.
[GBG+20] J. Genee, S. Berbenni, N. Gey, R. A. Lebensohn, and F. Bonnet. Particle interspacing
eects on the mechanical behavior of a fe{tib2 metal matrix composite using t-
based mesoscopic eld dislocation mechanics. Advanced Modeling and Simulation in
Engineering Sciences , 7(1):1{23, 2020.
[Gur02] M. E. Gurtin. A gradient theory of single-crystal viscoplasticity that accounts for
geometrically necessary dislocations. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids ,
50(1):5{32, 2002.
[JRM03] D. Jia, K. T. Ramesh, and E. Ma. Eects of nanocrystalline and ultrane grain sizes
on constitutive behavior and shear bands in iron. Acta materialia , 51(12):3495{3509,
2003.
[KN19] M. Kuroda and A. Needleman. A simple model for size eects in constrained shear.
Extreme Mechanics Letters , 33:100581, 2019.
[KTN21] M. Kuroda, V. Tvergaard, and A. Needleman. Constraint and size eects in conned
layer plasticity. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 149:104328, 2021.
[MBA10] J. C. Mach, A. J. Beaudoin, and Amit Acharya. Continuity in the plastic strain rate
and its inuence on texture evolution. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids ,
58(2):105{128, 2010.
[MBD+08] N. A. Mara, D. Bhattacharyya, P. Dickerson, R. G. Hoagland, and A. Misra. Deforma-
bility of ultrahigh strength 5 nm cu/ nb nanolayered composites. Applied Physics
Letters , 92(23):231901, 2008.
21[MCM14] Y. Mu, K. Chen, and W. J. Meng. Thickness dependence of ow stress of Cu thin
lms in conned shear plastic ow. MRS Communications , 4(3):129{133, 2014.
[MZHM16] Y. Mu, X. Zhang, J. W. Hutchinson, and W. J. Meng. Dependence of conned
plastic ow of polycrystalline Cu thin lms on microstructure. MRS Communications ,
6(3):289{294, 2016.
[NMB+15] T. Nizolek, N. A. Mara, I. J. Beyerlein, J. T. Avallone, and T. M. Pollock. En-
hanced plasticity via kinking in cubic metallic nanolaminates. Advanced Engineering
Materials , 17(6):781{785, 2015.
[NS99] S. Narayanan and L. S. Schadler. Mechanisms of kink-band formation in
graphite/epoxy composites: a micromechanical experimental study. Composites Sci-
ence and Technology , 59(15):2201{2213, 1999.
[NVdGG05] L. Nicola, E. Van der Giessen, and M. E. Gurtin. Eect of defect energy on strain-
gradient predictions of conned single-crystal plasticity. Journal of the Mechanics and
Physics of Solids , 53(6):1280{1294, 2005.
[PAR11] S. Puri, Amit Acharya, and A. D. Rollett. Controlling plastic ow across grain bound-
aries in a continuum model. Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A , 42:669{675,
2011.
[PDA11] S. Puri, A. Das, and Amit Acharya. Mechanical response of multicrystalline thin lms
in mesoscale eld dislocation mechanics. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of
Solids , 59(11):2400{2417, 2011.
[PRAD10] S. Puri, A. Roy, Amit Acharya, and D. Dimiduk. Modeling dislocation sources and
size eects at initial yield in continuum plasticity. Journal of Mechanics of Materials
and Structures , 4(9):1603{1618, 2010.
[RWF11] T. Richeton, G. F. Wang, and C. Fressengeas. Continuity constraints at interfaces
and their consequences on the work hardening of metal{matrix composites. Journal
of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 59(10):2023{2043, 2011.
[SHEC21] Y. Su, S. Han, P. Eisenlohr, and M. A. Crimp. Predicting shear transmission across
grain boundaries with an iterative stress relief model. Acta Materialia , 215:116992,
2021.
[TBFB10] V. Taupin, S. Berbenni, C. Fressengeas, and O. Bouaziz. On particle size eects: An
internal length mean eld approach using eld dislocation mechanics. Acta Materialia ,
58(16):5532{5544, 2010.
[TVC+07] V. Taupin, S. Varadhan, J. Chevy, C. Fressengeas, A. J. Beaudoin, M. Montagnat,
and P. Duval. Eects of size on the dynamics of dislocations in ice single crystals.
Physical review letters , 99(15):155507, 2007.
[TVFB08] V. Taupin, S. Varadhan, C. Fressengeas, and A. J. Beaudoin. Directionality of yield
point in strain-aged steels: the role of polar dislocations. Acta materialia , 56(13):3002{
3010, 2008.
[UDFN04] M. D. Uchic, D. M. Dimiduk, J. N. Florando, and W. D. Nix. Sample dimensions
inuence strength and crystal plasticity. Science , 305(5686):986{989, 2004.
22[US15] R. Ueta and K. Shizawa. A dislocation-based crystal plasticity simulation on kink
band formation and evolution in polycrystalline mg alloy with lpso phase. In Key
Engineering Materials , volume 626, pages 281{286. Trans Tech Publ, 2015.
[VBF09] S. Varadhan, A. J. Beaudoin, and C. Fressengeas. Lattice incompatibility and strain-
aging in single crystals. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 57(10):1733{
1748, 2009.
[ZLC23] M. Zecevic, R. A. Lebensohn, and L. Capolungo. Non-local large-strain t-based for-
mulation and its application to interface-dominated plasticity of nano-metallic lami-
nates. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 173:105187, 2023.
[ZLS+22] Y. Zhang, N. Li, M. M. Schneider, T. J. Nizolek, L. Capolungo, and R. J. McCabe.
Kink mechanism in cu/nb nanolaminates explored by in situ pillar compression. Acta
Materialia , 237:118150, 2022.
23