arXiv:2304.08572v1  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  17 Apr 2023Strong-randomness renormalization groups
David A. Huse1
1Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, N ew Jersey 08544, USA
(Dated: April 19, 2023)
This is a very brief review article, written for a book (in pre paration) in memory of Michael
E. Fisher and to celebrate 50+ years since the Wilson-Fisher renormalization group. Strong-
randomness renormalization groups were ﬁrst developed to t reat various quantum critical ground
states, especially in one-dimensional systems. After brie ﬂy reviewing some of the earlier work with
these methods, the recent application of this approach to th e many-body localization (MBL) phase
transition is reviewed.
I. INTRODUCTION
Renormalization group approaches to systems in criti-
cal states have been developed for a wide variety of dif-
ferent types of systems. As a consequence of this variety,
there are many very diﬀerent types of renormalization
group (RG) calculations. What do they all have in com-
mon? Almost all RGs coarse-grain a system of many
degrees of freedom by some type of “integrating out” of
the highest-energy or in some sense “stiﬀest” degrees of
freedom. Good analytical control of the RG usually re-
quires some level of simplicity of the couplings between
the degrees of freedom that are integrated out and the
remaining degrees of freedom.
For many translationally-invariant systems the RG
is implemented in momentum space, as in the seminal
Wilson-Fisher paper [ 1,2]. In many cases, the highest-
energy (or stiﬀest) degrees of freedom are the remaining
modes with the highest momenta, and these are inte-
grated out, thus decreasing the ultraviolet momentum
cutoﬀ. For systems of many degenerate fermions “high-
est momenta” may be replaced with momenta farthest in
energy from the Fermi energy (see, e.g., Ref. [ 3]).
Someotherrenormalizationgroupsworkinsteadinreal
space, onenotableexamplebeingthe Kosterlitz-Thouless
RG for two-dimensional superﬂuids, which can be formu-
lated with a real-space cutoﬀ on the distance between a
vortex and an antivortex [ 4,5]. Vortex-antivortex pairs
at this cutoﬀ distance are integrated out, thus increas-
ing the cutoﬀ distance. The good analytic control of the
Kosterlitz-Thouless RG is due to the ﬁxed line governing
the superﬂuid phase and its critical point being at zero
density of vortices and antivortices, so the pairs that are
beingintegratedoutaredilute whenweareneartheﬁxed
line. A similar real-space RG for some one-dimensional
spin systems, where one integrates out pairs of domain
walls at the cutoﬀ distance, was developed earlier, in
Ref. [6].
For systems with strong quenched spatial randomness,
thehighest-energy(orstiﬀest)degreesoffreedomaretyp-
ically at some particular location in real space where the
couplings are the strongest. This naturally leads to a
real-space RG, as is discussed below, and as has been
reviewed thoroughly by Igl´ oi and Monthus [ 7,8], and
more brieﬂy by Refael and Altman [ 9]. Such strong-randomness renormalization groups are the focus of this
very brief review, which begins with some discussion of
their use for quantum critical ground states, and ﬁnishes
with more recent generalizations that address the many-
body localization (MBL) phase transition that can occur
in highly excited quantum states.
II. RANDOM-SINGLET GROUND STATE
The ﬁrst strong-randomnessRG wasdeveloped by Ma,
Dasgupta and Hu (1979) for the low temperature prop-
erties of random quantum antiferromagnets [ 10–13]. The
system they considered is an antiferromagnetic Heisen-
berg spin-1/2 chain, with quenched random nearest-
neighbor spin interactions. The Hamiltonian is:
H=/summationdisplay
nJnσn·σn+1, (1)
where the couplings Jn>0 are drawn from a probability
distribution P(logJ) that is broad, and σnis the vec-
tor of Pauli operators for the spin-1/2 at site n. The
ground state of this spin chain is a so-called random-
singlet state [ 10–13]. This random-singlet ground state
consists, to ﬁrst approximation, of pairs of spins that are
in their total spin zero singlet state, with the two spins in
each such pair being at various distances along the chain
determined by localdetails ofthat sample’sHamiltonian.
The strong-randomness renormalization group treat-
ment of this random-singlet ground state proceeds as fol-
lows: Each coarse-graining step of the RG “integrates
out” the two spins, nand (n+ 1), that are coupled by
the strongest remaining renormalized coupling Jn. The
order in which the spins are integrated out is dictated by
energy, so proceeds in a sequence that is speciﬁc to each
particular sample. Since these pairs of strongly-coupled
spins are each located at some position in real space, this
RGisoftencalledareal-spaceRG.Butreallyitmorefun-
damentally works in “energy space”. The two spins to
be integrated out are also coupled to their other neigh-
bors via the couplings Jn−1andJn+1, which are both
weaker than Jn. The small parameters that allow good
analytic control of this RG are the ratios Jn−1/Jnand
Jn+1/Jn. When the distribution P(logJ) is broad, this
makes these ratios typically small, so this RG approach2
is a controlled approximation. Assuming that these two
ratios are small, those weaker couplings can be treated
in low-order perturbation theory.
Thus wehavethe three terms in the local Hamiltonian:
H=...+Jn−1σn−1·σn+Jnσn·σn+1+Jn+1σn+1·σn+2+...,
(2)
with the middle term the strongest. The lowest order ap-
proximation to the ground state is: spins nand (n+1)
areintheir totalspin zerosinglet state. Ifwestop atthat
very lowest perturbative order, the chain is cut, so this
does not address what are the ground-state correlations
between, for example, spins ( n−1) and ( n+ 2). The
leading term that produces an interaction across the two
spins that we are “integrating out” is produced at sec-
ondorderin perturbationtheoryinthe weakercouplings,
resulting in the renormalized Hamiltonian:
H′=...+δE0+J′σn−1·σn+2+..., (3)
with renormalized coupling J′=Jn−1Jn+1/(2Jn)+...as
well as a contribution δE0=−3Jn+...to the ground
state energy. The ...’s refer to higher-order perturbative
eﬀects, which are asymptotically RG-irrelevant. So this
RGstepputsspins nand(n+1)inthelocalgroundstate,
thus removing those degrees of freedom, and introduces
a new renormalized coupling between spins ( n−1) and
(n+2), producing a renormalized spin chain that is two
spins shorter in length.
As the initial authors understood [ 10–12], and as was
analysed in much more detail by Daniel Fisher [ 13], this
approach results in a functional renormalization group
for the probability distribution P(logJ) of the nearest-
neighbor couplings. Under the RG ﬂow, this distribu-
tion broadens without limit due to the very weak new
renormalizedcouplingsthatareproduced. Thisproduces
a RG ﬂow to an inﬁnite-randomness ﬁxed point , where
the approximations Jn±1≪Jnused in the RG become
asymptotically exact, so this RG gives the correct low-
energy description of this system. Because the three cou-
plings that entered in setting the renormalized coupling
J′are all removed from the renormalized Hamiltonian
H′, no correlations between diﬀerent couplings Jmare
generated by the leading-order RG. Thus although one
could have a joint probability distribution P({Jm}) with
short-range correlations between the couplings on diﬀer-
ent bonds, such correlations are RG-irrelevant: the RG
ﬂow reduces these correlations and the ﬁxed point distri-
bution is asymptotically uncorrelated, which facilitates
the analysis [ 13].
This random-singlet ground state is a quantum criti-
cal state. Any spin-1/2 chain of this form, with random
nearest-neighbor-onlyantiferromagneticcouplingsdrawn
fromacontinuousjointprobabilitydistributionwith only
short-range correlations in the couplings, has a ground
state governed by this same inﬁnite-randomness ﬁxed
point. Asymptotically, when the remaining spins are at
typical distance rbare lattice spacings, the typical renor-
malized couplings Jscale as: −logJ∼r1/2for large r.Thus there is an exponential dynamical scaling (dynam-
ical critical exponent z→ ∞), with the energy scales
decreasing as the exponential of a power of the length
scale. Such exponential dynamical scaling is typical of
inﬁnite-randomness quantum critical points. The equal-
time spin-spin correlations in this ground state are very
broadly distributed, with the mean correlation falling oﬀ
with distance as ∼r−2due to rare strongly-correlated
spins, while the typical correlations fall oﬀ with distance
exponentially in r1/2, as do the renormalized couplings
[13].
III. OTHER INFINITE-RANDOMNESS FIXED
POINTS
There are (inﬁnitely) many other one-dimensional
models, both quantum and classical, whose asymptotic
ground state and/or low-frequency properties can be
systematically and correctly obtained with a strong-
randomness RG approach [ 7–9]. One notable exam-
ple is the quantum critical point of the transverse-ﬁeld
Ising spin chain, whose inﬁnite-randomness ﬁxed point is
very closely related to that of the random-singlet state
[14,15]. An inﬁnite series of discretely diﬀerent inﬁnite-
randomness ﬁxed points was also found. These govern
the quantum critical ground states of certain spin chains
with larger spin S, as well as chains of interacting non-
Abelian anyons [ 7,8,16,17].
For many of these one-dimensional models, the strong-
randomness RG can be solved analytically. When the
methodisgeneralizedtosystemsinmorethanonedimen-
sion(d >1), partsofthecalculationsmustinsteadbeim-
plemented numerically. It is found that, unlike in one di-
mension, for d >1 and most models the RG ﬂow near in-
ﬁnite randomness is instead towards weaker randomness,
so such systems are not governed by inﬁnite-randomness
ﬁxed points. The principal exception to this is the quan-
tum critical point of the random transverse-ﬁeld Ising
model, which appears to remain governed by inﬁnite-
randomness ﬁxed points for all dimensions d[7,8].
IV. MANY-BODY LOCALIZATION
One recent development in the use of strong-
randomness renormalization groups is in the study of
many-body localization (MBL). Some of this RG work
was reviewed in Refs. [ 8,9], so here I will focus on the
more recent work.
Many-body localization (MBL) is Anderson localiza-
tion for many interacting particles or spins in highly-
excited states at thermodynamic conditions that corre-
spondtononzeroentropydensity. Thesystemisassumed
to be isolated from and not interacting with any other
system or environment. The key question that is asked
is whether or not this isolated many-body system “ther-
malizes”: does it successfully serve as a thermal “bath”3
for itself and, under its own unitary quantum dynamics,
bring all of its subsystems to thermal equilibrium with
each other. The MBL (localized) phase is the part of
this system’s phase diagram where the system remains
(Anderson) localized near any nonthermal initial state,
so it fails to bring itself to thermal equilibrium: it fails
to thermalize. Some recent reviews about MBL include
[18–21].
Mostusesofthestrong-randomnessRGformany-body
quantumsystemsareforthestudyofthesystem’sground
state and low-lying excited states. In the study of MBL,
on the other hand, the focus is on highly-excited states,
often typical states that at thermal equilibrium would
correspond to inﬁnite temperature. One main question
that we want to address for MBL systems is whether or
not the eigenstates of the system’s dynamics, as well as
its long-time dynamical states, are at thermal equilib-
rium. The MBL phase is the regime where the system
doesnotgotothermalequilibriumnoraretheeigenstates
of its dynamics at thermal equilibrium, even in the lim-
its of large systems and long times. It appears that a
true MBL phase that remains localized in the standard
thermodynamic limit and in the inﬁnite-time limit is a
possibility only for one-dimensional systems with short
enough range interactions [ 22,23], so those are the sys-
tems the remainder of this review considers.
The dynamics of a MBL system may be due to a time-
independent Hamiltonian, or due to a Floquet unitary
operator that produces the dynamics for one period of
a Hamiltonian that is periodic in time. Many-body lo-
calization does not require randomness, for example it
may occur due to nonrandom quasiperiodicity of the sys-
tem [24], but hereweonlyconsiderMBLdue toquenched
randomness. An example Hamiltonian is a Heisenberg
spin-1/2 chain with a random ﬁeld:
H=/summationdisplay
n[hnSn,z+Sn·Sn+1], (4)
with the quenched random ﬁelds {hn}at each site n
drawn independently and uniformly from [ −W,+W].
This is one of the most studied MBL models [ 25]; it is
sometimes called the “standard model” for MBL, but
only because it is highly studied and not because it is
the best choice for a model in which to study MBL. The
MBL phase is at large W(strong random ﬁelds) for this
model. The preciselocationofthe phaseboundaryis still
not clear, but it appears to be at Wc>15. [26,27]
The MBL phase is a gapless quantum-critical dynamic
phase, and the strong-randomness RG has been used
within the MBL phase by various authors; much of this
work is reviewed in [ 8]. Here I instead review some of
the RG studies of the dynamic quantum phase transi-
tion between the MBL phase, where the system does
not thermalize, and the thermal phase, where the sys-
tem does thermalize in the long time and large system
limits. Early numerical work on this MBL phase tran-
sition in one-dimensional systems found behavior consis-
tentwithexponentialdynamicalscaling(dynamiccriticalexponent z→ ∞), suggesting that it might be governed
by an inﬁnite-randomness ﬁxed point [ 25]. Since then,
there has been a series of publications steadily explor-
ing and developing strong-randomness RG treatments of
this MBL phase transition in one-dimensional systems
with short-range interactions and/or hoppings [ 28–38].
When one uses a strong-randomness RG to study a
many-body quantum ground state, this is usually done
working directly with the microscopic degrees of freedom
of the system, and the highest-energy remaining local ex-
citations are usually integrated out, leaving a renormal-
ized system with fewer degrees of freedom, as in most
renormalization groups. For the MBL phase transition,
on the other hand, a direct fully controlled RG calcu-
lation has not been found, so the RG is instead phe-
nomenological and/or approximate, and in most cases
both. The number of degrees of freedom sets the density
ofstates(many-bodystatesperunit energy)andthusthe
thermodynamic entropy, which is a key ingredient in the
physicsoftheMBLphasetransition,sonotrue“integrat-
ing out” that removes degrees of freedom is done. Thus
the RG renormalizes (coarse-grains) the dynamics, scal-
ing to longer times and larger length scales, but without
the usual reduction of the number of degrees of freedom.
As a result, the RG in most cases does not work directly
withthemicroscopicdegreesoffreedom, butinsteadwith
more coarse-grained measures of the local dynamics.
In strong-randomness RG treatments of the MBL
phase transition, the one-dimensional system is to some
extent coarse-grained in to “blocks”, which are segments
of the chain with certain coarse-grained properties [ 28–
38]. In many of these works, the blocks are assumed to
be of only two types: locally thermalizing blocks that
are locally less random and/or more interacting, so these
thermalblocksdobecome stronglyentangled; andlocally
MBL blocks that are locally more random and/or less
interacting, so these locally MBL blocks have localized
states that remain area-lawentangled unless thermalized
by a nearbythermal block. Such a “binary”classiﬁcation
of the local properties is only approximate when applied
at small length scales. However, since the resulting RG
does exhibit a ﬂow to inﬁnite randomness in the MBL
phase and at the phase transition, this binary descrip-
tion then becomes self-consistent and thus potentially
asymptotically correct. Multiple assumptions are used
in developing these RGs, so there certainly remains the
possibility that some important and relevant physics has
been left out.
Near the ﬁxed point governing the MBL phase transi-
tion, the locally thermalizing blocks are rare, occupying
an asymptotically vanishing fraction of the length of the
one-dimensional system as one renormalizes to the limit
of low energy scales. These widely-spaced thermal blocks
are randomly placed, and their lengths have a probabil-
ity distribution. This strong-randomnessRG is, asusual,
afunctional RG, with this distribution of thermal block
lengths the function that is being renormalized.
Each thermal block is locally thermalizing the nearby4
locally MBL regions. As we renormalize to lower en-
ergy scales in this RG the locally thermal blocks ther-
malize the spins in the adjacent MBL blocks out to a
distance that growslogarithmicallywith the (inverse)en-
ergy scale. There are two “events” that happen as this
RG ﬂow runs: (i) A single thermal block may reach the
limit of how many spins in the nearby MBL regions it
can thermalize. Once we renormalize below that energy
scale, that thermal block is found to instead be local-
ized (no longer able to spread more thermalization), so it
is removed and that region is instead localized at this
lower energy scale. (ii) If two nearby thermal blocks
manage to thermalize the entire MBL region that lies
in between them, then they merge with each other and
with this intermediate region that they have thermal-
ized to make a new, much longer renormalized thermal
block [35,36]. The latter process broadens the distribu-
tion of the lengths of the thermal blocks. The energy
scale of a thermal block is set by its many-body energy-
level spacingwhich is exponentially small in its length, so
this length distribution becoming broader means a ﬂow
to inﬁnite randomness.
A nice analogy with the Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) RG
and transition has been found and developed [ 32–36]: In
Kosterlitz-Thouless, if vortices and antivortices are for-
bidden, then the two-dimensional superﬂuid remains sta-
ble. This critical KT superﬂuid phase is governed by a
RG ﬁxed line, with the superﬂuid stiﬀness divided by
the temperature being the dimensionless parameter that
varies along this ﬁxed line. The KT phase transition oc-
curs where the RG ﬂow near this ﬁxed line changes from
being stable to being unstable to allowing vortices and
antivortices [ 4,5].
For the MBL transition in one-dimensional systems
with quenched randomness, the role of vortices and an-
tivortices is instead played by locally thermalizing rare
regions (thermal blocks) [ 18,22,35,36]. In this ap-
proach, the MBL phase is governed by a ﬁxed line of the
RG, with the dimensionless parameter that varies along
the ﬁxed line being the ratio of two lengths: one being
the length per bit of thermodynamic entropy, and the
other length being a decay length for the exponential de-
pendence of the relaxation rate of spins on their distance
from the nearest thermal block [ 22,35,36]. The MBL
phase is governed by the part of this ﬁxed line that is
stable to allowing locally thermalizing rare regions (ther-
mal blocks); in the MBL phase these rare regions are
RG-irrelevant, so the RG ﬂow goes to this ﬁxed line. In
the MBL phase these thermal blocks only manage to lo-
callythermalize alimited number ofspinsin the adjacent
MBL blocks before the energy scale is reached where this
thermalization stops and the thermal block becomes in-
stead localized. The MBL-to-thermal phase transition
is then governed by the point on this ﬁxed line where
these locally thermalizing rare regions (added thermal
blocks) become RG-relevant, so the ﬁxed line becomes
unstable in the thermal phase and the RG ﬂow heads oﬀ
towardsthermalization. Thisoccurswhen, underthe RGﬂow, enough of the thermal blocks can merge and pro-
duce much longer thermal blocks, so the fraction of the
system occupied by the thermal blocks instead increases
under the RG ﬂow.
Although there is this strong qualitative analogy to
theKosterlitz-Thouless(KT)RG,thestrong-randomness
RG ﬂow for the MBL transition is mathematically dis-
tinct [36]. For KT, the RG is a two-parameter ﬂow, with
the vortex fugacity and the reduced superﬂuid stiﬀness
being the two parameters. For MBL, on the other hand,
it is instead a functional RG, with the function being
the probability distribution of the lengths of the locally
thermalizing rare regions. When two of these rare re-
gions (thermal blocks) are close enough together to ther-
malize the locally MBL typical region in between them,
then, under the RG ﬂow, they merge in to a much longer
rare region, extending the distribution function to those
longer lengths [ 35,36]. This produces a rather direct
connection within the functional RG ﬂow between two
very diﬀerent length scales, a feature that is not present
in the simpler Kosterlitz-Thouless RG ﬂow.
Recent numerical work to quantitatively estimate
where this asymptotic MBL-to-thermal phase transition
occurs in the phase diagram of microscopically-deﬁned
spin-chain models has shown that it is actually very deep
in the regime where the behavior of those models ap-
pears to be strongly localized for sample sizes and times
accessible to standard numerical and experimental meth-
ods [26,27]. Thus it currently appears that the physics
of the asymptotic MBL phase transition as found in the
strong-randomness RG may only apply on rather large
length scales and thus only for extremely low energy
scales (equivalently, extremely long times). One way
to put a “positive spin” on our present understanding
of this situation is to note that the strong-randomness
RG method allows one to develop what appears to be
a controlled asymptotic low-energy theory of this phase
transition, eventhoughotherapproachestostudyingthis
novel and theoretically challenging phase transition have
not been able to reach those very low energy scales.
V. CONCLUSION
The strong-randomness renormalization group meth-
ods are versions of the renormalization group (RG) that
are useful for treating certain systems with quenched
randomness, particularly those whose low-energy behav-
ior is governed by an inﬁnite-randomness ﬁxed point.
These methods have wide applicability in certain one-
dimensional quantum systems, as well as in various other
systems, as reviewed in Refs. [ 7–9]. More recently, such
strong-randomnessRG methods havebeen generalizedto
study the dynamic phase transition between many-body
localization (MBL) and thermalization, as I have brieﬂy
reviewed here.5
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I thank Michael Fisher for being a wonderful teacher,
graduate adviser, and collaborator, and for all that hetaughtmeaboutcriticalphenomena, therenormalization
group, and many other things. I am deeply indebted to
him for his contributions to my education and develop-
ment as a scientist.
[1]K.G. Wilson andM. E. Fisher, Critical exponents in 3.99
dimensions , Phys. Rev. Lett. 28, 240 (1972).
[2]M. E. Fisher, The renormalization group in the theory of
critical behavior , Rev. Mod. Phys. 46, 597 (1974).
[3]R. Shankar, Renormalization-group approach to interact-
ing fermions , Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 129 (1994).
[4]J. M. Kosterlitz and D. J. Thouless, Ordering, metasta-
bility and phase transitions in two-dimensional systems ,
J. Phys. C 6, 1181 (1973).
[5]J. M. Kosterlitz, The critical properties of the two-
dimensional XY model , J. Phys. C 7, 1046 (1974).
[6]P. W. Anderson, G. Yuval and D. R. Hamann, Exact
results in the Kondo problem: II. Scaling theory, quali-
tatively correct solution, and some new results on one-
dimensional classical statistical models , Phys. Rev. B 1,
4464 (1970).
[7]F. Igl´ oi and C. Monthus, Strong disorder RG approach of
random systems , Physics Reports 412, 277 (2005).
[8]F. Igl´ oi and C. Monthus, Strong disorder RG approach
– a short review of recent developments , Eur. Phys. J. B
91, 290 (2018).
[9]G. Refael and E. Altman, Strong disorder renormaliza-
tion group primer and the superﬂuid-insulator transition ,
Comptes Rendus Physique 14, 725-739 (2013).
[10]S.-k. Ma, C. Dasgupta and C.-k. Hu, Random antiferro-
magnetic chain , Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1434 (1979).
[11]C. Dasgupta and S.-k. Ma, Low-temperature properties
of the random Heisenberg antiferromagnetic chain , Phys.
Rev. B22, 1305 (1980).
[12]R. N. Bhatt and P. A. Lee, Scaling studies of highly dis-
ordered spin-1/2 antiferromagnetic systems , Phys. Rev.
Lett.48, 344 (1982).
[13]D. S. Fisher, Random antiferromagnetic quantum spin
chains, Phys. Rev. B 50, 3799 (1994).
[14]D. S. Fisher, Random transverse ﬁeld Ising spin chains ,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 534 (1992).
[15]D. S. Fisher, Critical behavior of random transverse-ﬁeld
Ising spin chains , Phys. Rev. B 51, 6411 (1995).
[16]K. Damle and D. A. Huse, Permutation-symmetric mul-
ticritical points in random antiferromagnetic spin chains ,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 277203 (2002).
[17]L. Fidkowski, H.-H. Lin, P. Titum, and G. Re-
fael,Permutation-symmetric critical phases in disordered
non-Abelian anyonic chains , Phys. Rev. B 79, 155120
(2009).
[18]W. De Roeck and J. Z. Imbrie, Many-body localization:
stability and instability , Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 375,
20160422 (2017).
[19]F.AletandN.Laﬂorencie, Many-body localization: an in-
troduction and selected topics , Comptes RendusPhysique
19, 498 (2018).
[20]D. A. Abanin, E. Altman, I. Bloch and M. Serbyn, Col-
loquium: Many-body localization, thermalization, and en-
tanglement , Rev. Mod. Phys. 91, 021001 (2019).[21]S. Gopalakrishnan and S. A. Parameswaran, Dynamics
and transport at the threshold of many-body localization ,
Physics Reports 862, 1 (2020).
[22]W. De Roeck and F. Huveneers, Stability and instability
towards delocalization in many-body localization systems ,
Phys. Rev. B 95, 155129 (2017).
[23]S. Gopalakrishnan and D. A. Huse, Instability of many-
body localized systems as a phase transition in a non-
standard thermodynamic limit , Phys. Rev. B 99, 134305
(2019).
[24]S. Iyer, V. Oganesyan, G. Refael and D. A. Huse, Many-
body localization in a quasiperiodic system , Phys. Rev. B
87, 134202 (2013).
[25]A. Pal and D. A. Huse, The many-body localization phase
transition , Phys. Rev. B 82, 174411 (2010).
[26]A. Morningstar, L. Colmenarez, V. Khemani, D. J. Luitz
andD.A.Huse, Avalanches and many-body resonances in
many-body localized systems , Phys. Rev. B 105, 174205
(2022).
[27]D. Sels, Bath-induced delocalization in interacting disor-
dered spin chains , Phys. Rev. B 106, L020202 (2022).
[28]R. Vosk, D. A. Huse and E. Altman, Theory of the many-
body localization transition in one dimensional systems ,
Phys. Rev. X 5, 031032 (2015).
[29]A. C. Potter, R. Vasseur and S. A. Parameswaran, Uni-
versal properties of many-body delocalization transition s,
Phys. Rev. X 5, 031033 (2015).
[30]L. Zhang, B. Zhao, T. Devakul and D. A. Huse, Many-
body localization phase transition: A simpliﬁed strong-
randomness approximate renormalization group , Phys.
Rev. B93, 224201 (2016).
[31]P. T. Dumitrescu, R. Vasseur and A. C. Potter, Scal-
ing theory of entanglement at the many-body localization
transition , Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 110604 (2017).
[32]T. Thiery, F. Huveneers, M. M¨ uller and W. De Roeck
Many-body delocalization as a quantum avalanche , Phys.
Rev. Lett. 121, 140601 (2018).
[33]A. Goremykina, R. Vasseur and M. Serbyn, Analytically
solvable renormalization group for the many-body local-
ization transition , Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 040601 (2019).
[34]P. T. Dumitrescu, A. Goremykina, S. A. Parameswaran,
M. Serbyn and R. Vasseur, Kosterlitz-Thouless scaling at
many-body localization phase transitions , Phys. Rev. B
99, 094205 (2019).
[35]A. Morningstar and D. A. Huse, Renormalization-group
study of the many-body localization transition in one di-
mension, Phys. Rev. B 99, 224205 (2019).
[36]A. Morningstar, D. A. Huse and J. Z. Imbrie, Many-body
localization near the critical point , Phys. Rev. B 102,
125134 (2020).
[37]U. Agrawal, S. Gopalakrishnan and R. Vasseur, Uni-
versality and quantum criticality in quasiperiodic spin
chains, Nature Comm. 11, 2225 (2020).
[38]Z. D. Shi, V. Khemani, R. Vasseur and S. Gopalakr-
ishnan,Many-body localization transition with correlated6
disorder, Phys. Rev. B 106, 144201 (2022).