UniCal: a Single-Branch Transformer-Based Model for
Camera-to-LiDAR Calibration and Validation
Mathieu Cocheteux1y, Aaron Low2y, Marius Br ¨uhlmeier1
Abstract — We introduce a novel architecture, UniCal, for
Camera-to-LiDAR (C2L) extrinsic calibration which leverages
self-attention mechanisms through a Transformer-based back-
bone network to infer the 6-degree of freedom (DoF) relative
transformation between the sensors. Unlike previous methods,
UniCal performs an early fusion of the input camera and
LiDAR data by aggregating camera image channels and LiDAR
mappings into a multi-channel uniﬁed representation before
extracting their features jointly with a single-branch architec-
ture. This single-branch architecture makes UniCal lightweight,
which is desirable in applications with restrained resources such
as autonomous driving. Through experiments, we show that
UniCal achieves state-of-the-art results compared to existing
methods. We also show that through transfer learning, weights
learned on the calibration task can be applied to a calibration
validation task without re-training the backbone.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Autonomous vehicles, as well as other robotic systems,
rely on sensors to perceive their environment. Most systems
use a variety of sensors, including cameras, LiDARs, as
well as radars. Fusing data from multiple sensors is a
common practice to leverage the advantages of each sensor.
This requires having the precise value of their extrinsic
calibration, which is a transformation in the Lie group SE(3)
represented by a 6-degree of freedom (DoF) transformation
consisting of the relative translation and rotation between the
two sensor poses. Camera-to-LiDAR (C2L) calibration is one
of the most common sensor fusion strategies as it is valuable
to combine the visual information obtained by cameras with
the spatial and occupancy information obtained by LiDARs.
With this information, downstream tasks such as mapping,
localization, and planning can be carried out.
Traditionally, C2L calibration is performed with ofﬂine
methods [1][2][3]. This usually involves pre-collecting a
series of frame in a controlled environment to carry out
iterative optimization. However, this does not consider the
scenario where sensor position changes during the normal
operation of a robot, by weather conditions, mechanical
vibrations, or collision. This implies the need for online
methods that can perform calibration in real-time. Existing
solutions have already been introduced to tackle this prob-
lem [4]. These solutions tend to rely on geometric feature
detection and optimization as in [5]. Deep learning methods
were ﬁrst introduced with RegNet [6] which proposed a dual-
branch architecture that processed the camera and LiDAR
1Mathieu Cocheteux mathieu@cocheteux.eu and Marius
Br¨uhlmeier were with Motional at the time of this work.
2Aaron Low aaron.low@motional.com is with Motional
yContributed to the work equally
Fig. 1. Projection of LiDAR points with color-mapped depth onto the
corresponding camera image. Frame from the Kitti [11] raw dataset. ( Top)
De-calibrated on rotation and translation parameters. ( Bottom ) Re-calibrated
with UniCal.
features separately before passing the features through a
matching layer before regressing the output transformation.
Following [6] various methods build upon a dual-branch
architecture and manage to improve upon the results [7][8].
For the deep learning methods, experiments focus on scenes
collected by a single camera located at the front of the
vehicle.
Our work, UniCal, differs by its novel architecture that
can be used as a baseline for future works. Unlike the dual-
branch architecture used in other works [1][2][3], it merges
the raw inputs directly and relies on a single backbone to
perform the task. Its single-branch architecture enables our
network to be more lightweight. It is also extensible as it is
not required to build a new feature encoder should we want
to modify the input. This architecture is also the ﬁrst to use
a Transformer-based backbone, MobileViT [9] to leverage
self-attention mechanisms and identify areas with the most
signiﬁcant features. Similar to previous works [6][7][8][10],
we evaluate on the Kitti [11] dataset. We also evaluate Uni-
Cal on our own dataset collected from multiple autonomous
vehicle logs which we refer to as Motional drivelog data
which we elaborate further in Section IV-B.2. Unlike Kitti,
this dataset consists of varying vehicles and features a suite
of cameras surrounding the vehicle which provides various
points of view. From our experiments, we achieved on par
or better compared to the current state-of-the-art for both
datasets.
Furthermore, we extend UniCal to perform the task of C2L
calibration validation. The task is to determine the validity
of a given set of calibration parameters for a pair of sensors.
This is relevant for autonomous vehicle use cases as it canarXiv:2304.09715v1  [cs.CV]  19 Apr 2023be used to determine instantly if a vehicle is well-calibrated
before allowing it to operate. This problem can be reduced to
a binary classiﬁcation task (calibrated/de-calibrated), where
the calibrated class is deﬁned as having a de-calibration
smaller than a chosen sensitivity margin. We determined by
experimentation that training UniCal for a calibration task
and then using transfer learning with a classiﬁcation head to
solve this issue delivered better results than directly learning
this task with UniCal architecture and outperforming existing
calibration architectures.
To summarize, our main contributions are:
A lightweight single-branch architecture which has up
to 3 to 10 times less parameters than the state-of-the-art
architectures;
Our model achieves up to 7 times lower mean average
error compared to RegNet [6];
An early fusion of all inputs in a uniﬁed representation;
Leveraging Transformers and self-attention to learn
meaningful features from unstructured environments;
A transfer learning technique that improves camera-to-
LiDAR calibration validation by training a classiﬁcation
head on top of frozen calibration network weights,
achieving 98% accuracy.
II. R ELATED WORKS
Sensor calibration is a well-deﬁned and broad research
topic including diverse tasks. We decided to focus our
work on camera-to-LiDAR (C2L) extrinsic calibration. This
section will give a brief overview of the ﬁeld.
1) Target-based methods: This task has most often been
solved with ofﬂine, target-based methods. [1] proposes to use
a common checkerboard target, which can be seen both as
a 3D object by the LiDAR and as a pattern by the camera.
Other works explore different target shapes. For example, [2]
proposes a target with a circle and a hole to improve visibility
by sensors in outdoor scenes. Finally, [3] introduces an au-
tomated calibration process that uses multiple checkerboard
targets in an indoor setting to converge toward a solution
with one shot in under one minute. Traditional target-based
methods are accurate but require speciﬁc equipment and
environment. Moreover, they require users to gain experience
for optimal target positioning. These methods require tuning
a lot of parameters, which introduces heuristics and requires
iterative optimization which takes time to converge. These
methods can thus be slow and costly to use regularly on a
vehicle.
2) Targetless methods: More recent works have achieved
automated, targetless methods. [4] proposes to use structure
from motion and semantic information to treat the task as
a point cloud registration problem. [5] explores detecting
natural edge features in both modalities to align them. These
methods are automated, targetless, and can be computed
online. However, they still rely on computation-heavy op-
timization and require a feature rich environment to provide
a correct distribution of the selected features.3) Machine Learning methods: Considering the recent
success of neural networks in performing computer vision
tasks, some works explored their use to perform camera-to-
LiDAR calibration. This was ﬁrst introduced by RegNet [6],
a seminal work that proposed numerous ideas that have since
then been commonly reused in other works:
A training method that consists in generating artiﬁcially
de-calibrated samples from the ground truth;
A dual-branch architecture, using one branch for camera
feature extraction from RGB image and a separate
branch for LiDAR feature extraction from projected
depth. Features are then merged at a later stage before
being matched by a third backbone and ﬁnally regressed
by the head;
Multi-scale reﬁnement. By training several networks on
different de-calibration ranges, then passing the input
successively through these different networks at the time
of inference to reﬁne the output from a gross estimation
to a more accurate value;
A well-thought split of Kitti [11], with a challenging
testing set.
Another signiﬁcant contribution to the ﬁeld, CalibNet [8]
introduced the use of new losses comparing the ground truth
point cloud with the re-calibrated point cloud to take spatial
information into account. NetCalib [10][12] introduces the
idea of computing a depth map from stereo cameras to match
with the LiDAR-based depth map. Using the same modalities
achieves more accurate results. Finally, one of the most
recent publications, LCCNet [7], achieves the best results
yet. It uses the common architecture previously introduced,
as well as scale reﬁnement and iterative reﬁnement, and relies
on a cost-volume [13] as its backbone. To our knowledge, no
prior work to UniCal has yet used Transformers-based net-
works for the task of camera-to-LiDAR calibration. However,
some works have used Transformer-based vision backbones
for tasks relying on data from LiDAR and camera, such
as [14], which relies on a pre-calibrated system to perform
fusion-based object detection.
These previous works achieve accurate calibration but
leave room for improvement in accuracy, performance, and
reliability in unstructured environments. The networks used
are typically large as they follow a dual-branch architecture
which requires two separate feature encoders for the camera
branch and the LiDAR branch. As previous publications
evaluate their results on different splits of the Kitti dataset,
we show in our experiments (see Table I and Table II) that the
results can vary signiﬁcantly depending on the dataset split
chosen. We thus also evaluate UniCal on the different splits
used in previous references to compare the results faithfully.
III. M ETHOD
A. Data Representation
To perform the calibration task, we focus on the space
of autonomous vehicles consisting of driving scenes. Each
scene sample is a synchronized capture of a camera image
and a LiDAR point cloud. For training, we need the corre-
sponding sensor input pair and the “ground truth” extrinsicFig. 2. UniCal macro-architecture. The network receives data from the camera and LiDAR, merges them in a unique branch, and processes them through
its backbone. In our case, we chose MobileViT [9], but another model could work as well.
calibration between them. Note that it is impossible to obtain
the perfect extrinsic calibration outside of simulation. We
assume that the intrinsic parameters are already calibrated.
1) Sample generation: Our dataset consists of calibrated
scenes, we generate de-calibrated samples to feed as input
to the network by following the method introduced by
RegNet [6]. In short, we generate a random de-calibration on
all 6 DoF transformation parameters according to a uniform
distribution on a chosen de-calibration range. We choose the
range10cmfor translation and 1for rotation which is
an estimate of the levels of perturbation experienced by the
sensors during vehicle operation. We note Ta transformation
with three rotation parameters and three translation parame-
ters. This de-calibration Tdecal is then applied to the ground
truthTgtto get the de-calibrated initial transformation Tinit,
as explained in Eq. 1. We then project the LiDAR points into
the camera frame using these de-calibrated parameters. Using
Tinitas the initial calibration value, UniCal estimates the
transformation Tdecal asTpred, such that applying T 1
predto
Tinitshould result in the ground truth value Tgtas described
in Eq. 2.
Tinit=TdecalTgt (1)
TgtT 1
predTinit (2)
2) Uniﬁed representation: Unlike previous works in this
ﬁeld [6][8][10][15], UniCal uses a uniﬁed representation
of all data sources as the input of the network. We then
extract features directly from this representation. This uniﬁed
representation is an N-channel pseudo-image. Each channel
corresponds to a different input source from a sensor (at least
one channel per sensor). An advantage of this representation
is that it requires fewer parameters than a dual-branch
architecture, hence UniCal would require less computational
resources. Moreover, it also makes UniCal more modular and
extensible. The model can easily be extended to experiment
with new input sources, whether they are from a differentsensor (to try to solve a different calibration task) or a
processed input from the same sensor (for example adding
edge extractions on the camera image). In this work, we
use grayscale from the camera, and depth and intensity from
the LiDAR: we feed to the network a pseudo-image with 3
channels.
B. Network Architecture
We introduce a novel architecture, illustrated in Fig. 2.
It is created to be a lightweight, modular, and efﬁcient
baseline that can easily be extended. Our early uniﬁed
data representation allows us to replace the dual-branch
architecture used in other works with a novel single-branch
architecture. UniCal directly learns to match the different
modalities with a single backbone network as opposed to
the dual-branch architecture found in [6] [7] [8] [10] which
requires three separate backbones for feature extraction and
feature matching. This makes UniCal lighter in comparison.
Moreover, the architecture of UniCal and its backbone is
not customized for the input type. The use of our uniﬁed
input representation means that changing the inputs does
not require other changes in the backbone than its channel
number.
1) Backbone: Recently, Transformer-based architectures
have been successful in bringing the beneﬁts of self-attention
mechanisms to vision tasks. However, to learn jointly on
all modalities, convolutional operations are still required.
We use MobileViT [9] as the backbone. It implements
a convolutional operation in which the local matrix mul-
tiplication is replaced by a global operation through a
stack of Transformer [16] layers. It combines advantages
from both convolutional networks (such as spatial bias)
and Transformers (self-attention). Moreover, it was designed
to be lightweight and to run on embedded systems with
constrained resources. As a result, UniCal counts only 5.7
million trainable parameters. In comparison, a ResNet18 [17]
backbone has around 11 million trainable parameters. Anetwork using a ResNet18-based backbone in a 2-branch
architecture, such as CalibNet [8], we estimate could have
up to 33 million parameters for its backbone alone. For
our experiments, we use the MobileViT [9] implementation
proposed by Hugging Face [18].
2) Head: We use a simple regression head represented by
fully connected layers to regress the calibration parameters
which are 3 translation parameters (x, y, z) and 3 rotation
parameters (roll, pitch, yaw). Our regression head consists of
a common ﬁrst layer which then splits into two branches to
separately regress the translation and rotation components.
This head is similar to the one used in [7].
C. Loss Functions
1) Regression loss: UniCal is trained using supervised
learning. We use Mean Square Error regression losses for
rotation as in Eq. 3 and translation as in Eq. 4 to compare
the prediction and the ground truth de-calibration. In Eq. 3
and Eq. 4,randtare respectively the rotation and translation
parameters of the transformation. Both losses in Eq. 3 and
Eq. 4 must then be averaged for the batch.
Lr= (rgt rpred)2(3)
Lt= (tgt tpred)2(4)
2) Spatial losses.: Similarly to [8][12], we use spatially-
aware losses to improve convergence during training. We use
two such losses to compare the correct point cloud and the
point cloud after re-calibration:
Center loss : the distance between the center of those
two point clouds as in Eq. 5 where Cpclis the center
of the point cloud. This loss must then be averaged for
the batch;
LC=
TgtCpcl T 1
predTinitCpcl2
(5)
Point cloud loss : the distance between the correspond-
ing points in those two point clouds (there is no need
for matching as the data remains ordered) as in Eq. 6
wherepkis a point from the point cloud with index k,
andKthe number of points in the point cloud. This
loss must then be averaged for the batch.
Lpcl=1
KKX
1
Tgtpk T 1
predTinitpk2
(6)
D. Self-Attention
As detailed in III-B, we selected MobileViT [9] as our
backbone because it is adapted to embedded applications and
brings beneﬁts of both convolutional networks and Trans-
formers. Self-attention mechanisms used in Transformers
allow UniCal to give more weight to features deemed more
relevant by the network. Attention also brings some form of
explainability as it can be displayed as a heatmap for us to
see the areas the network found most relevant to solve the
calibration task. The heatmaps generated by UniCal during
testing are illustrated in Fig. 3.
(a) Kitti image
 (b) Motional image
Fig. 3. Attention heatmaps overlayed on images from our datasets. Images
are converted to grayscale and resized.
We observed that UniCal weights its attention in different
zones depending on the dataset on which it was trained. On
Kitti, it tends to give more attention weight to roads and
cars. On Motional drivelog data, it tends to highlight various
salient objects in the image, especially objects that offer
clear lines visible with both sensors. Those zones with high
attention closely resemble those that humans experimented
with calibrating would look at to spot de-calibration. We
suppose that the network can often rely on elements found
on the road with Kitti data as it is less challenging than the
Motional data and only uses the front camera where the road
is always visible.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Dataset
1) Kitti: We decided to work mostly with Kitti [11], a
reference dataset on the autonomous driving scene. Kitti has
been used in all relevant works on this topic. It provides
enough samples and an accurate calibration ground truth.
Using the same dataset as previous works will help us
compare our results. However, those previous publications
used different splits of the Kitti dataset. We present those
splits in Table I and will refer to them as ,,, and.
From the splits presented in Table I, we choose as
our reference. Proposed by RegNet [6], it is the ﬁrst Kitti
split introduced for this task, and as shown by our results
in Table II it remains the most challenging. This is because
it uses samples from separate days for training/validation
and testing, with different camera intrinsics. In comparison,
splits,, andused in other publications include in their
testing sets samples recorded the same day and with the
same camera intrinsics as their training sets. even uses
spatially redundant samples (some scenes are captured in the
same location in training and testing sets) as acknowledged
in [7]. The split and dataset choice are not trivial as results
in Table II show that the same network (here UniCal)
trained and tested on different splits will perform differently.
The splits with more similarities between the training and
testing sets will get seemingly better results, whether those
similarities are mostly in the camera intrinsics as in , or
even in the location where the samples were collected, as in
.TABLE I
KITTI [11] SPLITS USED IN STATE -OF-THE-ART WORKS
Split Publication Dataset Training Validation Testing
 RegNet [6] Raw 26 09: all logs not used in other sets 26 09: 5, 70 30 09: 28
 NetCalib [12] Raw 26 09: all logs not used in other sets 26 09: 13, 20, 79 26 09: 5, 70
 CalibNet [8] Raw 2609: unspeciﬁed logs 26 09: unspeciﬁed logs 2609, 30 09: unspeciﬁed logs
 LCCNet [7] Odometry logs 1 – 20: unspeciﬁed distribution logs 1 – 20: unspeciﬁed distribution log 0
N.B.: In each split, sets are mutually exclusive. While logs from a same day can be used in different sets, each log can only belong to one set. Here ”26 09:
5” identiﬁes log 5 of day 26/09.
2) Motional drive log data: To further assess our method,
we also generated our own dataset collected from 89 au-
tonomous vehicle driving logs across 4 cities (Las Vegas,
Santa Monica, Pittsburgh, Boston) consisting of 28 unique
vehicles. We use data from one main LiDAR and 8 different
cameras surrounding the vehicle. We split our dataset into
21995 training data, 3299 validation data, and 2173 testing
data. Our training and validation data consists of logs taken
from only Las Vegas and Santa Monica whereas our testing
data has logs from all 4 locations. We also made sure our
testing data has no overlapping vehicles with the training set.
3) Data augmentation: Our best results are obtained with
soft augmentation parameters to ﬁt real-life situations as
much as possible. We can expect that the vehicle will always
lie ﬂat on the road and the ground will be approximately
horizontal or rotated with a limited angle. We thus augmented
with random rotations of up to 2, translation of 0.01 %of
the image dimensions.
B. Results
1) Kitti: We compare in Table II the results obtained
on the different splits presented in Table I. The models
compared have been trained to solve the task on different
de-calibration ranges. However, they rely on multi-scale
reﬁnement to bring the ﬁnal task to the same de-calibration
range: a cascade of networks are trained on different ranges
of de-calibration with each step reﬁning the parameters to
a range suitable for the next network. The ﬁnal network,
trained on the smallest de-calibration range, receives param-
eters that are already in its range. This last network can
thus be considered independently as operations happening
beforehand are transparent to it. It is then possible to compare
results from this ﬁnal network with results from a network
trained on the same de-calibration range.
TABLE II
RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OTHER WORKS ON KITTI
Model SplitRotation () Translation (cm)
MAE1STD2MAE STD
UniCal (ours)0.04 0.03 0.89 0.85
RegNet [6] 0.28 - 6 -
UniCal (ours)0.03 0.03 0.33 0.30
NetCalib [12] 0.11 0.11 1.13 0.97
CalibNet [8]  0.41 - 4.34 -
UniCal (ours)0.04 0.03 0.80 0.80
LCCNet [7] 0.017 - 0.30 -On Kitti, we observe that UniCal outperforms most net-
works from the state of the art, notably RegNet [6], Calib-
Net [8], and NetCalib [12]. However, as expected it comes
short of LCCNet [7], which relies on multiple scenes for
each prediction to reﬁne its results. By contrast, we chose to
estimate the calibration parameters with a single shot.
2) Motional proprietary data: We experimented on the
proprietary data described in IV-A.2. This dataset is chal-
lenging for a calibration network: the data is from multiple
vehicles, captured in different conditions and locations, and
intrinsic calibration, as well as extrinsic ground truth, can be
imperfect. Most importantly, we made the task more difﬁcult
by using data from all available cameras on the vehicle
compared to only one camera in our Kitti experiments and
state-of-the-art works. UniCal is to our knowledge the ﬁrst
model that has been shown able to calibrate a lidar with
multiple cameras. Those cameras have wildly different points
of view and positions on the vehicle (front, back, sides, etc.).
We achieved a mean average error of 0:13on rotation and
1:9cmon translation. To better understand those results, this
is still at least twice more accurate than the 0:28and 6cm
achieved by RegNet [6] on Kitti for a single camera, despite
our task and dataset being more challenging.
C. Execution time
By proﬁling UniCal on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2070
SUPER, we get an inference time of around 11:67msfor a
batch size of 1. This means UniCal can perform calibration
about 85 times per second, which is enough for real-time
applications. The calibration can thus be performed in mil-
liseconds while the vehicle is operating. A traditional vision
method such as [5] is much slower, with data acquisition
taking about 20s[5] during which the vehicle must not move,
and the processing pipeline takes another 60s[5]. Com-
pared to other deep learning-based methods, it is difﬁcult
to establish any signiﬁcant inference time difference. [10]
reports an inference time of 16ms, while [12] reports 4:7ms
for a similar network. Moreover, measurement methods and
equipment can vary, making it difﬁcult to compare results.
We can thus infer that deep learning methods should all have
a relatively low inference time, measured in milliseconds
compared to traditional vision methods for which execution
time is most often in the scale of seconds such as [5].
1MAE: Mean Average Error
2STD: Standard DeviationTABLE III
ABLATION STUDY RESULTS ON KITTI [11]
Experiment Rotation (°) Translation (cm)
Augmentation Intensity Attention Grayscale MAE1STD2MAE STD
X X X 0.04 0.04 1.06 1.16
X X X X 0.04 0.03 0.89 0.85
X X 0.04 0.04 0.96 0.96
X X 0.05 0.06 1.37 1.24
X X 0.05 0.05 1.26 1.13
D. Ablation study
We ran additional experiments to study the inﬂuence of
different choices on our model. The results are reported in
Table III. Those experiments were conducted on Kitti, using
the splitpresented in Table I.
1) Augmentation: Results in Table III show that applying
a soft data augmentation improves results in rotation and
translation. We can infer that data augmentation helps the
network to learn more features and generalize better.
2) LiDAR intensity: Intuitively, adding more information
should help the network learn new features. Some datasets,
like Kitti, provide intensity information from the LiDAR
sensor. As shown in Fig. 4, intensity can be helpful in
perceiving two-dimensional visual features and patterns that
are not perceived in the depth map. This is the case in
Fig. 4 where road surface markings, which are visible in
the intensity map, are not visible in the depth map since
they are two-dimensional. However, our experiments in III
showed that this information is not always helpful for our
task. This is probably because it makes visible to the network
some elements that are noisy or not meaningful for our task.
Fig. 4. Crop from a Kitti image. The lines from the road marking can be
seen on the grayscale image ( A) and the intensity projection ( C), but not
on the depth projection ( B).
3) Self-attention: To try and determine the contribution
of attention mechanisms in UniCal, we ran an experiment
in which we replaced the MobileViT [9] backbone with a
ResNet [17] backbone. ResNet is a popular CNN architecture
for vision tasks that does not use attention mechanisms. As
expected, the results in Table III show about 25% higher
Mean Average Error (MAE) and Standard Deviation (STD)
on rotation and translation parameters compared to our
reference. This shows that the selected MobileViT backbone
outperforms traditional architectures in UniCal. Considering
that relevant features are correctly found by attention mech-
anisms in our heatmap visualizations in 3, this is additional
evidence of the relevance of attention for this task. However,
results obtained with ResNet are still satisfactory and close
to the state-of-the-art, showing that the uniﬁed representation
will work with different network backbones.TABLE IV
CALIBRATION VALIDATION RESULTS ON MOTIONAL DATA
Model TL1Accuracy F1 Precision Recall
RegNet-based 0.52 0 0 0
UniVal 0.97 0.97 0.98 0.95
UniVal X 0.98 0.98 0.99 0.97
E. Calibration Validation
Besides calibration, we also looked into the task of cal-
ibration validation. Given a corresponding pair of camera
image and LiDAR point cloud, the task is to detect if the
calibration is correct (within an acceptable tolerance range).
We pose this problem as a binary classiﬁcation task. A
positive classiﬁcation would be a correct calibration within
the tolerance range, and a negative classiﬁcation indicates
a de-calibration. We perturb the calibration by up to 1on
each rotation axis and up to 10cmon each translation axis.
Initially, we switch out our network heads for classiﬁca-
tion heads and trained on Kitti. We aptly named this new
network UniVal. From our results in Table IV, we found
that the RegNet model severely overﬁts during training while
our UniVal model fairs signiﬁcantly better. We then tried
a transfer learning method that involves pre-training the
network weights on the calibration task, freezing the network
layers, and ﬁne-tuning with a validation (classiﬁcation) head.
The motivation is that the backbone weights trained on
calibration should be expressive enough to be used in the
validation task. Our results show that the performance using
this method improves from simply training UniVal without
transfer learning.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we showed that self-attention-based vision
can be leveraged to improve learning on driving scenes and
proposed a single-branch architecture that outperforms the
standard dual-branch architecture introduced by RegNet [6].
Besides that, we also show that we are able to use transfer
learning from the calibration task to outperform regular
training on the calibration validation task without retraining
the calibration network weights. For future work, we
propose the following:
1) Reﬁnement and re-calibration ranges.: We focused on
single-shot calibration for the small ranges of de-calibration
most often occurring while operating an autonomous
vehicle. Moreover, we aimed to develop a new architecture
that could be used as a baseline and extended in future
works. However, one could further improve results by
adding some form of reﬁnements such as the multi-frame
iteration introduced in RegNet [6] as temporal ﬁltering or
the LSTM-based reﬁnement introduced by CalibRCNN [15].
Similarly, we could handle large de-calibration by using
scale-iterative reﬁnement as in RegNet [6] and others.
1TL: Transfer Learning2) Extension to other modalities.: As a future work,
we believe that our model can be extended to other tasks
by simply modifying the modality of input used in the
uniﬁed representation. This would enable calibration of other
modalities such as Camera-to-Camera calibration or LiDAR-
to-LiDAR calibration. We could also try to regress camera
intrinsic parameters (focal length, principal point, distortion
coefﬁcients) to perform intrinsic calibration as well.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank our colleagues Huy Nguyen,
Venice Erin Liong, Billy Saputra for their insightful advice
and help in reviewing this work.
REFERENCES
[1] Q. Zhang and R. Pless, “Extrinsic calibration of a camera and
laser range ﬁnder (improves camera calibration),” in 2004 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)
(IEEE Cat. No.04CH37566) , vol. 3, Sept. 2004, pp. 2301–2306 vol.3.
[2] S. A. Rodriguez F., V . Fremont, and P. Bonnifait, “Extrinsic calibration
between a multi-layer lidar and a camera,” in 2008 IEEE International
Conference on Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent
Systems . Seoul, Korea (South): IEEE, Aug. 2008, pp. 214–219.
[3] A. Geiger, F. Moosmann, O. Car, and B. Schuster, “Automatic camera
and range sensor calibration using a single shot,” in 2012 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation , May 2012, pp.
3936–3943.
[4] B. Nagy, L. Kov ´acs, and C. Benedek, “SFM And Semantic Information
Based Online Targetless Camera-LIDAR Self-Calibration,” in 2019
IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) , Sept.
2019, pp. 1317–1321.
[5] C. Yuan, X. Liu, X. Hong, and F. Zhang, “Pixel-level extrinsic
self calibration of high resolution lidar and camera in targetless
environments,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 6, no. 4,
pp. 7517–7524, 2021.
[6] N. Schneider, F. Piewak, C. Stiller, and U. Franke, “Regnet: Multi-
modal sensor registration using deep neural networks,” in 2017 IEEE
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) , 2017, pp. 1803–1810.
[7] X. Lv, B. Wang, Z. Dou, D. Ye, and S. Wang, “Lccnet: Lidar
and camera self-calibration using cost volume network,” in 2021
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops (CVPRW) , 2021, pp. 2888–2895.[8] G. Iyer, R. K. Ram., J. K. Murthy, and K. M. Krishna, “Calib-
Net: Geometrically Supervised Extrinsic Calibration using 3D Spatial
Transformer Networks,” 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 1110–1117, Oct. 2018.
[9] S. Mehta and M. Rastegari, “MobileViT: Light-weight, General-
purpose, and Mobile-friendly Vision Transformer,” Mar. 2022.
[10] S. Wu, A. Hadachi, D. Vivet, and Y . Prabhakar, “NetCalib: A Novel
Approach for LiDAR-Camera Auto-calibration Based on Deep Learn-
ing,” in 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition
(ICPR) , Jan. 2021, pp. 6648–6655.
[11] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, C. Stiller, and R. Urtasun, “Vision meets robotics:
The KITTI dataset,” The International Journal of Robotics Research ,
vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1231–1237, Sept. 2013.
[12] S. Wu, A. Hadachi, D. Vivet, and Y . Prabhakar, “This is The Way:
Sensors Auto-calibration Approach Based on Deep Learning for Self-
driving Cars,” IEEE Sensors Journal , pp. 1–1, 2021.
[13] D. Sun, X. Yang, M.-Y . Liu, and J. Kautz, “Pwc-net: Cnns for optical
ﬂow using pyramid, warping, and cost volume,” in 2018 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2018, pp.
8934–8943.
[14] X. Bai, Z. Hu, X. Zhu, Q. Huang, Y . Chen, H. Fu, and C.-L. Tai,
“Transfusion: Robust lidar-camera fusion for 3d object detection with
transformers,” in 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022, pp. 1080–1089.
[15] J. Shi, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang, R. Liu, Z. Wang, S. Chen, and H. Liu,
“CalibRCNN: Calibrating Camera and LiDAR by Recurrent Convo-
lutional Neural Network and Geometric Constraints,” 2020 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) ,
2020.
[16] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, L. u. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,”
inAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017.
[17] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep Residual Learning for
Image Recognition,” Dec. 2015.
[18] T. Wolf, L. Debut, V . Sanh, J. Chaumond, C. Delangue, A. Moi,
P. Cistac, T. Rault, R. Louf, M. Funtowicz, J. Davison, S. Shleifer,
P. von Platen, C. Ma, Y . Jernite, J. Plu, C. Xu, T. Le Scao, S. Gugger,
M. Drame, Q. Lhoest, and A. Rush, “Transformers: State-of-the-Art
Natural Language Processing,” in Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System
Demonstrations . Online: Association for Computational Linguistics,
Oct. 2020, pp. 38–45.