All-microwave Lamb shift engineering for a fixed frequency multi-level
superconducting qubit
Byoung-moo Ann1, 2,∗and Gary A. Steele1
1Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Delft University of Technology, 2628 CJ Delft, The Netherlands
2Quantum Technology Institute, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science, 34113 Daejeon, South Korea
(Dated: January 8, 2025)
It is known that the electromagnetic vacuum is responsible for the Lamb shift, which is a crucial
phenomenon in quantum electrodynamics (QED). In circuit QED, the readout or bus resonators
that are dispersively coupled can result in a significant Lamb shift of the qubit. However, previous
approaches or proposals for controlling the Lamb shift in circuit QED demand overheads in circuit
designs or non-perturbative renormalization of the system’s eigenbases, which can impose formidable
limitations. In this work, we propose and demonstrate an all-microwave method for controlling
the Lamb shift of fixed-frequency transmons. We employ the drive-induced longitudinal coupling
between the transmon and resonator. By simply using an off-resonant monochromatic drive near the
resonator frequency, we can control the net Lamb shift up to ±30 MHz and engineer it to zero with
the drive-induced longitudinal coupling without facing the aforementioned challenges. Our work
establishes an efficient way of engineering the fundamental effects of the electromagnetic vacuum
and provides greater flexibility in non-parametric frequency controls of multilevel systems.
INTRODUCTION
The rise of modern quantum electrodynamics (QED)
was motivated by the need to comprehend the effects of
vacuum [1, 2]. One representative phenomenon that ac-
companied the development of QED is the Lamb shift,
which refers to the renormalization of energy levels in-
duced by the electromagnetic fluctuations of the vacuum.
Originally, the Lamb shift concerned systems placed in
free space. However, the advent of cavity and circuit-
QED [3–5] inspired studies of engineered vacuum. In
particular, in circuit-QED, qubits are almost always ac-
companied by microwave modes in the strong dispersive
regime, and Lamb shifts induced by these resonators take
significant portions of the bare transition frequency of the
qubits [6–12].
Thus, controlling the Lamb shift could provide more
flexibility in engineering the transition frequencies of su-
perconducting qubits. In circuit-QED, however, Lamb
shift control requires daunting overheads such as flux-
tunability [6–9], voltage biasing [13], or collective states
[14]. Lamb shift can also be controlled without the afore-
mentioned costs using external drivings, as proposed in
[16–18]. Unfortunately, one cannot avoid mixing among
the eigenstates in this manner. Consequently, the prop-
erties of the systems will undergo unwanted renormaliza-
tion [19].
In this work, we propose and demonstrate an all-
microwave approach for Lamb shift control in a typi-
cal circuit-QED configuration comprising a transmon [15]
dispersively coupled to a single resonator mode. We in-
troduce strong drive fields off-resonant to both the trans-
mon and resonator, inducing drive-induced longitudinal
coupling (DLC).
∗byoungmoo.ann@gmail.comThis results in state-dependent frequency shifts of the
transmon which exist only when the resonator mode is
dispersively coupled and therefore can be used to con-
trol the Lamb-shift, representing the core-principle of our
Lamb shift engineering scheme. We demonstrate large
tuning of the Lamb shift ∼30 MHz while minimizing
undesired renormalization of the other properties of the
transmon-resonator system.
RESULTS
Theoretical descriptions
For a dispersively coupled transmon and resonator sys-
tem, the renormalized interaction in the strong drive
limit has been experimentally verified in our previous
work [19]. Unfortuately, the renormalized interaction sig-
nificantly changes not only the Lamb shift of the trans-
mon, but also other properties such as lifetime, Rabi fre-
quency, and cross-nonlinearity. In this work, we sub-
stantially engineer the Lamb shift while avoiding these
unwanted renormalization, which was not dealt with in
[19].
Fig. 1(a) describes an experimental configuration used
in this work. We consider a dispersively coupled trans-
mon and resonator. The drive is inductively applied to
the resonator. In the lab frame, the system Hamiltonian
reads
ˆH(lab)= 4EC(ˆN−Ng)2−EJcosˆϕ| {z }
ˆHq+ωrˆa†ˆa|{z}
ˆHr
+iℊˆN(ˆa−ˆa†)|{z}
ˆHI+ Ω(lab)
d(ˆa+ ˆa†) sinωdt| {z }
ˆH(lab)
d.(1)
ˆN,ˆϕ, and ˆ arefer to cooper-pair number, superconduct-
ing phase, and resonator field operator. EC,EJ, and NgarXiv:2304.11782v3  [quant-ph]  7 Jan 20252
FIG. 1. Description of drive-induced Lamb shift engineer-
ing. (a) Simplified diagram of circuitry. A transmon is ca-
pacitively coupled to a resonator mode. In the experiment,
a drive field is inductively applied to the resonator (wavy
arrow). (b) Transformed circuitry effectively identical with
(a). (c-d) Energy diagram of the effective static Hamiltoni-
ansˆKqandˆK. (e-f) Calculated renormalized coupling matrix
elements eℊge,eℊgg,eℊeefor several transmon–drive field detun-
ings ∆ qd(red, blue, and green). For a two-state (TS) system
(black), eℊnmare nearly independent of ∆ qd. Drive ampli-
tudes Ω din x-axis is normalized by ∆ qd. The transmon and
resonator’s parameters used in the calculation are the same
as the experimental values.
are the charging, Josephson energies, and offset cooper-
pair numbers of the trasmon. Ω(lab)
dandωrmean the
resonator drive amplitude and frequency. ℊis the cou-
pling strength between the transmon and resonator.
To efficiently capture renormalization of the trans-
mon–resonator interaction ˆHI, we apply a displacement
operator ˆU(dis)=eξ(t)ˆa†−ξ∗(t)ˆaonˆH(lab). Here, ξ(t) =
iΩd
2∆rde−iωdt−iΩd
2Σrdeiωdt. ∆ rdand Σ rdareωr−ωdand
ωr+ωd, respectively. Note that this transformation is
only valid when ∆ rdis much larger than the linewidth of
the resonator. Then, the transformed Hamiltonian reads
ˆH=ˆU(dis)[ˆH(lab)−i∂t]ˆU(dis)†
=ˆHq+ˆHI+ˆHr+ ΩdˆNcosωdt|{z}
ˆHd. (2)
While eliminating ˆH(lab)
d, we obtain a transmon drive
ˆHd, and Ω dtherein is ℊ(Ω(lab)
d
∆rd−Ω(lab)
d
Σrd). An equivalentcircuit configuration is given in Fig. 1(b).
We introduce unitary transformations ˆUqandˆU, which
transform ˆHq+ˆHdand ˆHto effective static Hamiltonian
ˆKqand ˆKrespectively [19]. We depict the energy levels
ofˆKqandˆKin Fig. 1(c–d). We define eωnmthe transition
frequency between n-th and m-th states of ˆKq. We also
defineeωk
nm(eωl
r), which refers to the transmon (resonator)
transition frequency when the resonator (transmon) is
in the k-th (l-th) state. To efficiently distinguish the
transmon and resonator states, we label the lowest four
states of the transmon by g,e,f, and d, respectively.
The difference between ˆKqand ˆKis originated from
the interaction between the transmon and resonator.
Particularly, the discrepancy between eω0
nmandeωnmcan
be interpreted as a transmon frequency shift when the
resonator is in vacuum. Therefore, we can define renor-
malized Lamb shift eLnm=eω0
nm−eωnm, and resonator
frequency pulling eP=eωg
r−ωr. Alleωnm,eωk
nm,eLnm,
andePare adiabatically connected to ωnm,ωk
nm,Lnm,
andPwith Ω d→0. We further define AC Stark shift
of the transmon δωnm=eωnm−ωnm. We also de-
fineδωk
nm=eωk
nm−ωk
nm. For far off-resonant drives,
δωnm≈δωk
nmis satisfied since the interplay between AC
Stark and Lamb shift is negligible.
To gain an intuition of how the transmon–resonator
interaction accounts for the difference in eωnmandeω0
nm,
it is useful to define the renormalized interaction Hamil-
tonian [19]
ˆeHI=iℊ[ˆUqˆNˆU†
q](ˆa−ˆa†)
∼=iX
n,meℊnm(ei(n−m+1)ωdt−ei(n−m−1)ωdt)|n⟩⟨m|(ˆa−ˆa†).
(3)
Here,|n⟩is the eigenstate of ˆHq. For the discussion later,
we defineˆeHDLC, the renormalized interaction Hamilto-
nian containing only drive-induced longitudinal coupling
(DLC)
ˆeHDLC=iX
neℊnn(eiωdt−e−iωdt)|n⟩⟨n|(ˆa−ˆa†).(4)
For far off-resonant drives, the magnitudes of static
components ( n−m=±1) in Eq. 3 remain nearly in-
variant. Also, the magnitudes of off-diagonal dynamical
components ( n̸=mandn−m̸=±1) are much smaller
compared to those of the static components. In this work,
we focus on the DLC terms in Eq. 4, which in turn sig-
nificantly contribute to eLnm.
In Fig.1(e-f), we theoretically calculate some elements
of static ( eℊge) and DLC terms ( eℊgg,ee) for several ∆ qd=
ωge−ωdand Ω dBased on [19]. These mainly deter-
mineeLge. The parameters used in the calculation are the
same as the experimental values. In Fig.1(e), we observe
the discrepancy between |eℊgg|and|eℊee|for both far-off-
resonant (red and blue) and near-resonant (green) drive3
fields. For two-state (TS) systems, |eℊgg|=|eℊee|always
holds. Fig.1(f) presents |eℊge|(=|eℊeg|). As we can confirm
in Fig.1(f), near-resonant driving significantly renormal-
izeseℊge. For far-off-resonant driving, the static compo-
nents remain nearly the same. In addition, the magni-
tude of other off-diagonal dynamical terms are negligible
(not present in Fig.1(f)). Therefore, the transverse part
in the renormalized interaction Hamiltonian can be ap-
proximated to ˆHI.
Eventually, taking only the static and DLC compo-
nents into consideration, we can approximate eLn,n+1by
eLn,n+1≈|eℊn,n+1|2
eωn,n+1−ωr+|eℊnn|2− |eℊn+1,n+1|2
ωd−ωr.(5)
Eq. 5 provides a rough estimation of eLn,n+1when
|eℊn,n+1| ≪ |eωge−ωr|and|eℊnn|,|eℊn+1,n+1| ≪ |ωd−ωr|are
satisfied. The first term describes the Lamb shift induced
by the static components in Eq. 3. The second term cor-
responds to the Lamb shift induced by DLC. When ωdis
closed to ωr, the DLC-induced Lamb shift can contribute
significantly to eLn,n+1keeping eℊn,n+1≈ℊn,n+1.
This scheme is not possible for two-state system for
|eℊgg|=|eℊee|. InSupplementary Note 2 , we generalize
the theoretical description in this subsection to arbitrary
multi-level systems coupled to resonator modes based on
Floquet formalism.
Experimental conditions
We obtain the experimental data from two cooldowns
due to an accidental interruption in the experiment
caused by a technical issue. The circuit parameters for
each round are distinguished by unbracketed (1st) and
bracketed values (2nd). The data in Fig. 2 is obtained
in the first round. Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 are obtained from
the data in the second round. From the pulsed qubit
spectroscopy, we obtain ω0
ge/2π≈5.901(5 .867)GHz,
ω0
ef/2π≈5.749(5 .715)GHz, ω0
fd/2π≈5.587(5 .553)GHz,
andωg
r/2π≈4.290(4 .289)GHz. We also obtain ωr/2π≈
4.335(4 .335)GHz by driving the transmon to unconfined
states [21]. Based on these, we extract bare qubit
parameters and coupling, ωge/2π≈5.869(5 .835)GHz,
ωef/2π≈5.708(5 .676)GHz, ωfd/2π≈5.539(5 .510)GHz,
andℊ/2π≈248(245)MHz. The extracted parameters are
consistent with the observed self and cross-nonlinearity,
A=ω0
ge−ω0
ef≈2π×152(150)MHz and χ=ωg
r−ωe
r≈
2π×5.8(6.0)MHz, respectively. Please see Supplemen-
tary Note 1, Supplementary Table 1 and 2 for de-
tailed information on system parameters and variables.
Resolving drive-induced longitudinal coupling
Experimentally verifying the existence of drive-induced
longitudinal coupling (DLC) is non-trivial. Both DLC
18
 12
 6
 0
0
gf/2 (MHz)
12
10
8
6
4
2
00
ge/2 (MHz)
  fd =
 4.24 GHz(a)full model
expKq+HI+HDLC+Hr
Kq+HI+Hr
10
 5
 0
0
gf/2 (MHz)
8
6
4
2
00
ge/2 (MHz)
4.14 GHz(b)full model
expKq+HI+HDLC+Hr
Kq+HI+Hr
3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2
d/2 (GHz)
1.21.31.41.50
ef
(c)
3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2
d/2 (GHz)
1.31.72.12.50
ed
(d)FIG. 2. Identifying drive-induced longitudinal coupling
(DLC) from multi-level spectroscopy. We investigate drive
frequency ωdnear ωg
r. Circles denote experimental data.
Lines indicate theoretical calculation based on the corre-
sponding Hamiltonian models in legend. (a-b) We plot the
frequency shifts in getransition ( δω0
ge) with respect to that
ofgftransition ( δω0
gf) for ωd/2π=fd= 4.24 GHz and
ωd/2π=fd= 4.14 GHz, respectively. (c-d) We plot di-
mensionless quantities η0
ef=1
2δωn
gf/δωn
ge|Ωd→0andη0
ed=
1
2δωn
gd/δωn
ge|Ωd→0, while sweeping ωd. Errors are less than
the size of symbols, and thus not presented in the plots. The
errors are statistical and originated when extracting δω0from
data.
and AC Stark shifts yields δω0
nm∼O(Ω2
d), and thus,
one cannot distinguish them just simply measuring the
changes in ω0
nmwithout independent calibration of Ω d.
Instead, we investigate the ratios among δω0
nmto iden-
tify the DLC. We introduce the following dimensionless
quantities.
ηn
ef=1
2δωn
gf/δωn
ge|Ωd→0,
ηn
ed=1
3δωn
gd/δωn
ge|Ωd→0.(6)
We will compare experimentally obtained ηto the theory
with and without considering DLC, and thereby verify
the effects of the DLC. Note that finding experimental η
does not demand calibrating Ω dsince it is independent
of Ω d.
In Fig. 2, we measure both η0
efandη0
edfrom multi-level
spectroscopy [22]. Please see Supplementary Note 3
for details on the experimental methods. In Fig. 2(a-
b), we present the observed δω0
gewith respect to δω0
gf
(circles) for two different drive frequencies near ωg
r, 4.24
GHz (a) and 4.14 GHz (b), respectively. We choose ωdto4
be close enough to ωrsince the effects of the DLC scale
linearly with 1 /(ωd−ωr) as shown in Eq. 5. We con-
firm linear correlations among experimentally observed
δω0
ge,gf,gd forδω0
ge,gf,gd /2π<∼10MHz as seen in Fig. 2(a-
b). In Fig. 2(c-d), we sweep ωdfrom 3.55 GHz to 4.25
GHz and present corresponding η0
efandη0
edfrom the ex-
periments (circles).
The solid, single-dashed, and dot-dashed lines refer to
the theoretical calculations based on ˆKq+ˆeHI+ˆHr,ˆKq+
ˆHI+ˆeHDLC+ˆHr, and ˆKq+ˆHI+ˆHr, respectively. We
apply Floquet theory [23, 24] to the above Hamiltonians
and calculate the theoretical values. The calculations are
numerically done by QuTip [25, 26].
The first model presents a full description of the driven
system, which excellently explains the experimental data.
The second and third models differs only by a term
ˆeHDLC. Therefore, the disagreements between these mod-
els can be interpreted as the effects from the DLC. The
breakdown of the dot-dashed lines in Fig. 2(a-d), and the
excellent consistency among the experiment, the solid
and single-dashed lines indicate clear evidences for the
DLC. As expected from Eq. 5, we can confirm that the
DLC effect is larger with smaller |ωd−ωr|in Fig. 2(a-b).
Such tendency is also clearly confirmed in Fig. 2(c-d).
From the investigation of this section, we conclude that
calibrating Ω dcannot be precisely achieved only using
AC Stark shift theory since the DLC should take a sig-
nificant portion of the frequency shifts. In the following
section, we use a more rigorous approach to find Ω d, and
thereby extract the Lamb shifts at arbitrary drives.
Lamb shift renormalization at arbitrary drive
strengths
In the previous section, we have proven the existence
of DLC effects, and thereby learned employing AC Stark
shift theory alone is an inappropriate approach to cali-
brate Ω d. From now on, we use Eq. 2, including the res-
onator and interaction terms, to obtain Ω din the exper-
iment. We then quantify the renormalized Lamb shift at
arbitrary Ω d. We cross-check our quantification from the
shifts in the resonator frequency and cross-nonlinearity.
Note that the AC Stark shift alone cannot explain these
shifts simultaneously.
Fig. 3 present experimentally observed eω0
ge,eωg
r, andeχ
(circles) for ωd/2π= 4.2 GHz. We first obtain the con-
version factor µ(ωd) that satisfies µ(ωd)√Pd= Ω d, where
Pdindicates the driving power measured at the signal
generator. We set µ= 138 .9, with which all quantities
are simultaneously explained by the theories.
In Fig. 3(a), we compare experimentally observed eω0
ge
to theoretical expectation (solid line). For a comparison,
we plot the eωge(dot-dashed line) theoretically calculated
based on ˆKq. An arrow indicates eLge=eω0
ge−eωge. There
is a crossing between the data and dot-dashed line, which
means the sign of eLgeis flipped at that drive amplitude.
0.0 0.4 0.8 1.25.705.755.805.850
ge/2 (GHz)
(a)
theory (ge)
theory (0
ge)
experiment
0.0 0.4 0.8 1.240
20
02040Lge/2 (MHz)
(b)
theory
experiment
0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2
d/2 (GHz)
4.2874.2884.2894.290g
r/2 (GHz)
(c)
theory
experiment
0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2
d/2 (GHz)
024681012/2 (MHz)
(d)
theory (analytical)
theory (numerical)
experimentFIG. 3. Lamb shift and other renormalized quantities with
respect to drive amplitude Ω d. Drive frequency ωd/2πis 4.2
GHz for all cases. Circles and lines denote experimental data
and theoretical calculation, respectively. We plot the renor-
malized transmon transition frequency ( eω0
geandeωge) in (a),
Lamb shift ( eLge) in (b), resonator frequency ( eωg
r) in (c), and
cross-nonlinearity ( eχ) in (d). Errors are less than the size of
symbols, and thus not presented in the plots. Errors are sta-
tistical and originated when extracting δω0from data.
In Fig. 3(b–c), we plot experimentally observed eLgeand
eωg
rwith the theoretical expectation (lines). eLgevaries
from 32 to −30 MHz. The changes in the resonator fre-
quency pulling eP=eωg
r−ωris relatively less than those
ofeLge. All the theoretical calculations in (a–c) are based
on Floquet theory and numerically performed by QuTiP
[25, 26].
We present the renormalized cross-nonlinearities ( eχ)
of the driven transmon–resonator system in Fig. 3(d).
The circles and lines indicate the experimental and the-
oretical calculation, respectively. We investigate the
origin of Ω ddependence of eχ. In the analytical the-
ory (dashed line), we use the perturbative calculation
eχ≈eℊ2
geeA/(eω0
ge−eω0
r−eA) [15], and use the approximation
eℊge≈ℊge. Here, eAis the renormalized self-nonlinearity,
eω0
ge−eω0
ef. We do not make any approximation on eAin the
analytical calculation. The analytical theory is consis-
tent with the experimental data as well as the numerical
calculation based on Floquet theory (solid line). There-
fore, we can conclude that the approximation eℊge≈ℊge
is satisfied. The disagreement between solid and dashed
lines at large Ω din Fig. 3(d) can be attributed to un-
desired sideband transitions between the transmon and
resonator. See Supplementary Note 3 for more de-
tailed discussion.5
30
 15
 0 15 30
(p0
ge)/2 (MHz)
Lge=32 (2 MHz)
        19.3
         6.6
        -1.5
        -13.1d=0 (2 GHz)
       0.70
       0.88
       0.98
       1.10(a)
0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2
d/2 (GHz)
0.81.01.2Linewidth (MHz)
(b)
FIG. 4. Linewidth broadening by the drive-induced dephas-
ing. Drive frequency ωd/2πis set by 4.2 GHz. (a) The trans-
mon’s two-tone spectroscopy data with respect to various Ω d.
ωprefers to probe frequency. Corresponding renormalized
Lamb shift eLgeare also presented. Circles and lines denote
data and Lorentzian fits. (b) Extracted linewidths with re-
spect to Ω d. Line is obtained by theoretical model. The
linewidth broadening is originated by the finite lifetime of the
resonator. Errors are less than the size of symbols, and thus
not presented in the plots. The errors in (b) are statistical
and originated when extracting the linewidth from (a).
Drive-induced dephasing
In Fig. 4, we investigate how the transmon’s linewidth
varies while engineering eLgefrom 32 to −30 MHz.
Fig. 4(a) shows two-tone spectroscopy of g→etransi-
tion for various Ω d. Corresponding eLgeis also presented
beside. We obtain Γq
1≈1 MHz and Γq
ϕ≈2 MHz from
time-domain measurement, where Γq
1and Γq
ϕare energy
relaxation and pure dephasing rates of the transmon.
Corresponding linewidth in two-tone spectroscopy is ap-
proximately 830 kHz without probe power broadening
and measurement-induced dephasing [27, 28]. We also
obtain the similar linewidth from two-tone spectroscopy
in the experiment, when the calibrated pump strength is
approximately 110 kHz, and measurement photon num-
ber is far less than unity. There are almost no qualitative
changes in the spectrum presented in Fig. 4(a) with in-
creasing Ω d. However, we notice the linewidth increases
by a significant amount. Fig. 4(b) shows the extracted
linewidth from Lorentzian fitting (circles). We name such
effect drive-induced dephasing (DID) in this paper.
We reveal that the cooperative effects from the driving
and finite resonator lifetime can explain the linewidth
broadening. The amount of DID is defined by Γq
ϕ,DID.
The same phenomenon is also theoretically predicted in
[29], but has been rarely demonstrated experimentally.
Based on Eq.33 of [29], we obtain the approximated form
of Γq
ϕ,DID
Γq
ϕ,DID≈q
eAeχ
2e∆rdΩd
2e∆qd×Γr
1(ωd). (7)
e∆qdande∆rdare given by eω0
ge−ωdandeωg
r−ωd, re-spectively. Γr
1(ω) is the resonator–bath coupling. We
have Γr
1(ωg
r) = 13 .47 MHz from the resonator decay rate,
which is mainly accounted for by the external coupling
to the feedline. The theory curve in Fig. 4(b) is based
on Eq. 7. Γr
1(ωd) is determined by some unknown fac-
tors such as the cable resonances of feedlines, and em-
pirically known slowly varying over a few hundreds MHz
frequency scale. Thus, we set Γr
1(ωd) as a free-fitting pa-
rameter and obtain the value of (0 .83±0.05)×Γr
1(ωg
r)
from the least chi-square method. See also extended data
inSupplementary Note 5, Supplementary Figure
6 and 7 .
If we directly drive the transmon using a separate
charge-line, instead indirectly drive through the res-
onator, the DID can be suppressed approximately by a
factor of ℊ/∆qr[29]. For the system in the dispersive cou-
pling regime, ℊ/∆gr≪1 is satisfied. Hence, the DID can
be significantly reduced. Since Γq
ϕ,DIDscale linearly with
Γr
1(ωd), the DID becomes negligible for high-coherence
resonators when Γr
1(ω) is negligible around ω∼ωd. For
readout resonators that need sufficient external couplings
to the feedlines for high readout efficiencies, one can engi-
neer the interface between resonators and feedlines sup-
pressing Γr
1(ωd) while keep large enough Γr
1(ωg
r), as a sim-
ilar strategy is used for Purcell filters.
The magnitude of the DID when we tune the Lamb
shift to zero is approximately 1 MHz. We can suppress
this to 1 kHz with ℊ/∆gr= 0.1 and Γr
1(ωd) = 10 kHz,
which are achievable values in typical circuit QED ex-
periments. Nonetheless, it is undeniable that the sug-
gested measures do not thoroughly eliminate the DID
and complicate the circuit design. Therefore, our scheme
might not be practical when a superconducting qubit of
extremely low pure dephasing rate less than 1 kHz is re-
quired. However, our approach is still available for the
other applications where moderate coherence times are
acceptable.
CONCLUSION
To summarize, we experimentally realize a large tun-
ing of the Lamb shift ∼30 MHz with drive strength while
minimizing undesired renormalization of the other prop-
erties of the transmon-resonator system. We show that
the Lamb shift can be engineered even to zero. Our ob-
servation is consistent with multi-level transmon spec-
troscopy as well as other renormalized quantities such as
cross-nonlinearities and resonator frequency pulling. The
observation also agrees excellently with Floquet theory.
Controlling the Lamb shift could provide more flexi-
bilities in engineering the transition frequencies of super-
conducting qubits. The feasibility of tuning the Lamb
shift to zero possesses other practical implications. Our
approach can also be implemented to multi-qubit device
without substantial complexities. We provide specific ap-
plication examples using the above merits in Supple-
mentary Note 4 .6
METHODS
Eigenenergy calculation
In this work, we utilize QuTiP to apply Floquet theory
to the driven Hamiltonian models presented in the main
text. Our goal is to find the quasi-eigenenergies of the
driven Hamiltonians ( eEn,αn) that are adiabatically con-
nected to the eigenenergies of the undriven Hamiltonians
(En) when the drive amplitudes are turned off (Ω ge→0).
We use the ‘floquet modes’ method of QuTiP, which re-
turns the quasi-eigenenergies in the first Floquet Bril-
louin zone of the given Hamiltonian, i.e., eEn,0for all n.
However, these values are not sequentially arranged with
respect to n, and the sequence even changes as Ω gevaries.
Therefore, we need to take additional steps to find the
proper Floquet mode number αnand quasi-eigenenergies.
We gradually increase Ω gewith a sufficiently small step
size and, at every step, find the proper eEn,0and corre-
sponding αnsuch that they are adiabatically connected
to the values obtained in the previous step. At the be-
ginning, when Ω ge= 0 is satisfied, we can find Enusing
the ‘eigenenergies’ method without Floquet theory, and
therefore finding the proper mode numbers is unneces-
sary. We properly adjust the step size when increasing
Ωgeto balance accuracy and computation time.
Device fabrication and measurement
The device and cryogenic setup used in this work are
identical to those in our previous work [19]. The device
consists of a transmon coupled to two coplanar waveg-
uide resonators, but only one of the resonators is used in
this work because the other one is weakly coupled with
a cross-nonlinearity of less than 100 kHz, and therefore
not effective in the experiments. The transmon and res-
onators are defined on a 100 nm niobium titanium nitride
(NbTiN) film on a 525 µmthick silicon substrate [35].
The Al-AlOx-Al Josephson junction of the transmon is
fabricated by typical double-angle shadow evaporation.
The device is mounted on the mixing chamber plate of a
dilution fridge (LD-400) and shielded from radiation and
magnetic field using Cooper and Aluminum cans. The
optical microscope image of the device is presented in
[19].AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
B.A conceived the study, made the theoretical descrip-
tion, and fabricated the device. B.A also performed the
numerical and experimental study. The measurement in-
frastructure is constructed by G.A.S. B.A. and G.A.S
analyzed data. B.A. wrote the manuscript with input
from G.A.S.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
DATA AVAILABILITY
Data supporting the plots within the main text
of this paper are available through Zenodo at
http://10.5281/zenodo.7847837. Further information is
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request.
CODE AVAILABILITY
Code used to produce the plots within this paper is
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank David Thoen and Jochem Baselmans for
providing us with NbTiN films. Byoung-moo Ann ac-
knowledges support from the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation program under the Marie
Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 722923 (OMT).
This work was supported by the National Research
Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea
government(MSIT)(RS-2023-00213037). This work was
also supported by Korea Research Institute of Standards
and Science (KRISS-GP2024-0013-06).
REFERENCES
[1] Willis E. Lamb, Jr. and Robert C. Retherford, Fine Struc-
ture of the Hydrogen Atom by a Microwave Method , Phys.
Rev.72, 241 (1947).
[2] D. J. Heinzen and M. S. Feld, Vacuum Radiative Level
Shift and Spontaneous-Emission Linewidth of an Atom in
an Optical Resonator , Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2623 (1987).
[3] S. Haroche, M. Brune, and J. M. Raimond, Cavity to cir-
cuit quantum electrodynamics , Nat. Phys 16, 243 (2020).[4] A. Blais, A. Grimson, S. M. Girvin, and A. Wallraf, Circuit
quantum electrodynamics , Rev. Mod. Phys. 93, 025005
(2021).
[5] A. Blais et al. Quantum-information Processing with Cir-
cuit Quantum Electrodynamics , Phys. Rev. A 75, 032329
(2007).
[6] A. Franger, M. Goppl, J. M. Fink, M. Baur, R. Bianchetti,
P. J. Leek, A. Blais, and A. Wallraf, Resolving Vacuum7
Fluctuations in an Electrical Circuit by Measuring the
Lamb Shift , Science 322, 1357 (2008).
[7] Z. Ao, S. Ashhab, F. Yoshihara, T. Fuse, K. Kakuyanagi,
S. Saito, T. Aoki, and K. Semba Extremely Large Lamb
Shift in a Deep-strongly Coupled Circuit QED System with
a Multimode Resonator , Sci. Rep. 13, 11340 (2023).
[8] Mohammad Mirhosseini, Eunjong Kim, Vinicius S. Fer-
reira, Mahmoud Kalaee, Alp Sipahigil, Andrew J. Keller,
and Oskar Painter, Superconducting metamaterials for
waveguide quantum electrodynamics , Nat. Comm 9, 3706
(2018).
[9] S´ ebastien L´ eger et al. Observation of quantum many-body
effects due to zero point fluctuations in superconducting
circuits , Nat. Comm 10, 5259 (2019).
[10] Moein Malekakhlagh, Alexandru Petrescu, and Hakan
E. T¨ ureci, Cutoff-Free Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 073601 (2017).
[11] M. F. Gely, A. Parra-Rodriguez, D. Bothner, Ya. M.
Blanter, S. J. Bosman, E. Solano, and G. A. Steele, Con-
vergence of the multimode quantum Rabi model of circuit
quantum electrodynamics , Phys. Rev. B 95, 245115 (2017).
[12] M. F. Gely, G. A. Steele, D. Bothner, The nature of
the Lamb shift in weakly-anharmonic atoms: from nor-
mal mode splitting to quantum fluctuations , Phys. Rev. A
98, 053808 (2018).
[13] M. Silveri, S. Masuda, V. Sevriuk, K. Y. Tan, M. Jenei,
E. Hyypp¨ a, F. Hassler, M. Partanen, J. Goetz, R. E. Lake,
L. Gr¨ onberg, and M. M¨ ott¨ onen, Broadband Lamb shift in
an engineered quantum system , Nat. Phys 15, 533 (2019).
[14] P. Y. Wen, K.-T. Lin, A. F. Kockum, B. Suri, H. Ian, J.C.
Chen, S. Y. Mao, C. C. Chiu, P. Delsing, F. Nori, G.-D.
Lin, and I.-C. Hoi, Large Collective Lamb Shift of Two Dis-
tant Superconducting Artificial Atoms , Phys. Rev. Lett.
123, 233602 (2019).
[15] J. Koch et al. Charge-insensitive Qubit Design Derived
from the Cooper Pair Box , Phys. Rev. A 76, 042319
(2007).
[16] U. D. Jentschura, J. Evers, M. Haas, and C. H. Keitel
Lamb-Shift of Laser-Dressed Atomic States , Phys. Rev.
Lett. 91, 253601 (2003).
[17] S. Yang, H. Zheng, R. Hong, S. Zhu, and M. S. Zubairy
Control of the Lamb shift by a driving field , Phys. Rev. A
81, 052501 (2010).
[18] V. Gramich, S. Gasparinetti, P. Solinas, and J. Anker-
hold Lamb-Shift Enhancement and Detection in Strongly
Driven Superconducting Circuits , Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,
027001 (2014).
[19] B. Ann, S. Deve, G. A. Steele Resolving Nonperturbative
Renormalization of a Microwave-Dressed Weakly Anhar-
monic Superconducting Qubit Coupled to a Single Quan-
tized Mode , Phys. Rev. Lett. 131, 193605 (2023).
[20] L.-A. Wu, D. A. Lidar Dressed Qubits , Phys. Rev. Lett.
91, 097904 (2003).
[21] R. Lescanne, L. Verney, Q. Ficheux, M. H. Devoret, B.
Huard, M. Mirrahimi, and Z. Leghtas, Escape of a DrivenQuantum Josephson Circuit into Unconfined States , Phys.
Rev. Appl. 11, 014030 (2019).
[22] A. Schneider, J. Braum¨ uller, L. Guo, P. Stehle, H.
Rotzinger, M. Marthaler, A. V. Ustinov, and M. Weides,
Local sensing with the multilevel ac Stark effect , Phys. Rev.
A97, 062334 (2018).
[23] Jon H. Shirley, Solution of the Schr¨ odinger Equation with
a Hamiltonian Periodic in Time , Phys. Rev. B97, 138
(1965).
[24] Hideo Sambe, Steady States and Quasienergies of a
Quantum-Mechanical System in an Oscillating Field ,
Phys. Rev. A 7, 2203 (1973).
[25] J. R. Johansson, P. D. Nation, and F. Nori, QuTiP: An
open-source Python framework for the dynamics of open
quantum systems , Comp. Phys. Comm. 183, 1760 (2012).
[26] J. R. Johansson, P. D. Nation, and F. Nori, QuTiP 2:
A Python framework for the dynamics of open quantum
systems , Comp. Phys. Comm. 184, 1234 (2013).
[27] J. Gambetta, A. Blais, D. I. Schuster, A. Wallraff, L.
Frunzio, J. Majer, M. H. Devoret, S. M. Girvin, and
R. J. Schoelkopf Qubit-photon interactions in a cavity:
Measurement-induced dephasing and number splitting ,
Phys. Rev. A 74, 042318 (2006).
[28] D. I. Schuster, A. Wallraff, A. Blais, L. Frunzio, R.-
S. Huang, J. Majer, S. M. Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf
ac Stark Shift and Dephasing of a Superconducting Qubit
Strongly Coupled to a Cavity Field , Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,
123602 (2005).
[29] Alexandru Petrescu, Moein Malekakhlagh, and Hakan E
T¨ ureci Lifetime renormalization of driven weakly anhar-
monic superconducting qubits. II. The readout problem ,
Phys. Rev. B 129, 134510 (2020).
[30] A. A. Clerk, K. W. Lehnert, P. Bertet, J. R. Petta, and Y.
Nakamura, Hybrid quantum systems with circuit quantum
electrodynamics , Nat. Phys 16, 257 (2020).
[31] M. Kristen et al. Amplitude and frequency sensing of mi-
crowave fields with a superconducting transmon qudit , npj
Quantum Inf. 6, 57 (2020).
[32] T. H¨ onigl-Decrinis, R. Shaikhaidarov, S. E. De Graaf, V.
N. Antonov, and O. V. Astafiev, Two-Level System as a
Quantum Sensor for Absolute Calibration of Power , Phys.
Rev. Appl. 13, 024066 (2020).
[33] J. Preskill, Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and
beyond Quantum 2, 79 (2018).
[34] R. E. Sagastizabal, Experimental Quantum Simulation
with noisy intermediate-scale superconducting processors
Dissertation, Delft University of Technology (2023).
[35] D. J. Thoen, B. G. C. Bos, E. A. F. Haalebos, T. M. Klap-
wijk, J. J. A. Baselmans, Akira Endo, Superconducting
NbTiN Thin Films with Highly Uniform Properties Over
a Ø 100 mm Wafer , IEEE Transactions on Applied Su-
perconductivity, 27, (2017).S8
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
Supplementary Note 1 : System parameters and descriptions
Please see Tab. S1 for essential system parameters and descriptions used in the main text. The values of some
system parameters invariable during each cooldown are presented in Tab. S2.
Supplementary Note 2 : Theoretical descriptions
Renormalized interaction – general multi-level systems
The Hamiltonian of a general driven multi-level system is expressed by
ˆH0(t) =X
nωn|n⟩⟨n|q+X
n,mΩnm|n⟩⟨m|cos(ωdt).(S.1)
Here, |n⟩refers to the eigenstates of the generalized undriven multi-level system. For both multi- and two-level
systems, the dynamics under far off-resonant drives cannot be properly described by the rotating wave approximation
(RWA) [1, 2]. For time periodical drives, however, we are allow to apply the Floquet theory to calculate the dynamics
for arbitrary drive amplitudes Ω nmwithout the RWA. In Floquet formalism, quasi-eigenstates and corresponding
quasi-eigenenergies for ˆH0(t) can be expressed byg|n, α⟩=eiαωdtg|n,0⟩andeωn,α=eωn,0+αωd, respectively. Here,
g|n, α⟩is a Floquet mode with an order of α. We also definef|n⟩ ∈ng|n, α⟩o
andeωn∈ {eωn,α}that is adiabatically
connected to |n⟩andωnwith Ω nm→0. The selected Floquet modef|n⟩can be decomposed like
f|n⟩=X
k|n⟩(k)e−ikωdt,(S.2)
and here |n⟩(k)is a Fourier component off|n⟩at frequency kωd, which also can be decomposed into eigenbases of the
undriven system |j⟩like
|n⟩(k)=X
jc(k)
n,j|j⟩.(S.3)
Here, c(k)
n,jare time-independent complex numbers. Let us introduce a time-dependent unitary operator ˆU(t) satisfying
f|n⟩=ˆU(t)|n⟩. Under this transformation, ˆH0is transformed to
ˆeH0=ˆU(t)[ˆH0−i∂/∂t ]ˆU†(t) =X
neωn|n⟩⟨n|. (S.4)
In addition, the interaction between the general multi-level system and a single mode resonator is given by
ˆHI=iX
n,mℊnm|n⟩⟨m|(ˆa−ˆa†).(S.5)
On the transformed basis, the interaction Hamiltonian ˆHIcan be given by replacing |n⟩withf|n⟩. Then, we can
express the interaction term by
ˆeHI=iX
j,j′X
n,m,k,k′ℊnmc(k′)∗
m,j′c(k)
n,jei(k′−k)ωdt|j⟩⟨j′|(ˆa−ˆa†).(S.6)
Exchanging n→jandm→j′, we can define the time-dependent renormalized interaction matrix eℊnm(t) given by
eℊnm(t) =X
k,k′,j,j′ℊjj′c(k′)∗
j′,mc(k)
j,nei(k′−k)ωdt.(S.7)
Longitudinal coupling terms appear when n=mis satisfied. Lamb shift control scheme applied to transmons can
be also available for the cases where these terms dominate the interaction Hamiltonian. Thus, we do not need to
confine ourselves to a transmon case specifically. Generally, |k′−k|does not need to be a unity. Specifically for the
longitudinal coupling parts ( n=m) of transmons, however, the terms with |k′−k|= 1 have negligible magnitudes in
our parameter regime. Hence we only take |k′−k|= 1 terms into consideration in DLC.S9
Symbols Descriptions
ωd drive frequency
ωr resonator bare frequency
eωnm(ωnm) transition frequency of driven (undriven) bare transmon
eωk
nm(ωk
nm)transition frequency of driven (undriven) transmon coupled to resonator
eωl
r(ωl
r)transition frequency of driven (undriven) resonator coupled to transmon
ℊ transmon–resonator coupling strength
eℊnm(ℊnm) renormalized (bare) transmon–resonator coupling matrix
eLnm(Lnm) Lamb shift of driven (undriven) transmon
eP(P) resonator frequency pulling of driven (undriven) resonator
eA(A) self-nonlinearity of driven (undriven) transmon
eχ(χ) cross-nonlinearity of driven (undriven) transmon–resonator system
TABLE S1. Symbols and descriptions.
Symbols Values (1st, 2nd)
ωr/2π4.335,4.335 GHz.
ω0
ge/2π5.901,5.867 GHz.
ω0
ef/2π5.749,5.715 GHz.
ω0
fd/2π5.587,5.553 GHz.
ωge/2π5.869,5.835 GHz.
ωef/2π5.708,5.676 GHz.
ωfd/2π5.539,5.510 GHz.
ℊ/2π 248,245 MHz.
A 152,150 MHz.
χ 5.8,6.0 MHz.
TABLE S2. Values of some system parameters fixed during each cooldown. The values observed or extracted from 1st and
2nd cooldowns are separately presented.
Renormalized transmon–resonator interaction
A driven transmon is a specific case of Eq. S.1, where ℊnmand Ω nmsatisfy the below relation.
ℊnn±1≈ℊ√
n+ 1,
ℊnn±l≈0,
Ωnn±1≈Ωd√
n±1,
Ωnn±l≈0,(S.8)
with l >1. For transmons under monochromatic transverse drive fields with sufficient detunings and moderate drive
amplitudes as in our case, we have
c(k)
n,j≈0 (S.9)
fork±n̸=j. Therefore, only the components that meet k′−k=n−m±1 in Eq. S.7 are dominant for transmons,
and then the eℊnm(t) can be simplified by
eℊnm(t) =X
j,j′X
k′−k=
n−m±1ℊjj′c(k′)∗
n,jc(k)
m,j′ei(n−m±1)ωdt.(S.10)S10
5.65 5.70 5.75 5.80 5.85 5.90 5.95
Probe frec (GHz)Spec signal (arb. units)ge
gf
gd
FIG. S1. Wideband multi-level spectroscopy of the undriven transmon used in this work. Here, we identify the resonance
frequency of g→e,g→f, and g→dtransitions of the transmon.
This simplification can also be justified without using Floquet formalism as presented in our previous works [3].
Dropping oscillating terms, we define the time-independent renormalized interaction matrix eℊnm
eℊnm=X
j,j′X
k′−k=
n−m±1ℊjj′c(k′)∗
n,jc(k)
m,j′.(S.11)
c(k)
n,jcan be found using Floquet theory in general. For weakly anharmonic systems, however, we can bypass using
Floquet theory while not confining ourselves in the conventional approximation regimes. We can calculate eℊnm
without Floquet theory as presented in our previous work [3]. For the calculation presented in Fig.1 of the main text,
therefore, we use the approach in [3], not using Floquet theory to avoid the hardships of finding the proper Floquet
mode numbers.
Supplementary Note 3 : Experimental descriptions
Measurement
Two types of experiments are performed in this work: two-tone spectroscopy using a 4-port vector network analyzer
(Keysight N5222A) and pulsed spectroscopy using a Quantum Machines OPX. A signal generator (Keysight N5183B)
is used to apply drive fields to the transmon. For pulsed spectroscopy, a 20 µstransmon excitation pulse is followed
by a 2 µsreadout pulse. The transmon excitation pulse is up-converted to RF band using IQ modulation mode of a
Rohde-Schwarz SGS100A. The readout pulses are up/down-converted to RF/IF band by IQ mixers. Local oscillator
signals of IQ mixers are provided by Rohde-Schwarz SGS100A and Keysight E8257D.
The data in Fig.2, Fig.S1, and Fig.S3 are obtained through pulsed spectroscopy, while the others are acquired
through two-tone spectroscopy using the 4-port vector network analyzer. Pulsed spectroscopy is preferred for multi-
photon transitions as it generally gives signals with better contrasts, but there is a risk of imperfect mixer calibrations.
To avoid this, mixer calibration is performed from time to time during the experiments.
Multi-level transmon spectroscopy
Fig. S1 shows the experimental result of wideband multi-level spectroscopy to find the transmon’s undriven energy
levels. We probe the transmon’s second and third excited energy levels by inducing two-photon g→fand three-
photon g→dtransitions, respectively. Once we find the peaks without driving as in Fig. S1, we trace the resonant
frequencies as increasing the power of the driving field. In this step, we sweep the probe around expected transition
frequencies with much narrower scanning ranges down to a few MHz. The calibrated probe field amplitudes in the
frequency Ω pforg→e,g→f, and g→dtransitions are 2 π×155 kHz, 2 π×6.92 MHz, and 2 π×13.86 MHz,
respectively. We determine the proper probe field amplitudes for the multi-photon transitions by compromising the
efficiency of the measurement and avoiding undesired sideband transitions between the transmon and resonator.S11
5.70 5.72 5.74 5.76 5.78 5.80
probe frec (GHz)103
102
101
100Spec signal30 MHz
20 MHz
15 MHz
10 MHz
 5 MHz
FIG. S2. Numerical simulation of probe power effect in g→dtransition spectroscopy. We sweep the probe amplitude from 5 to
30 MHz in the simulation while sweeping the probe frequency near the g→dtransition. The locations of the peaks are nearly
invariant. The changes in the backgrounds are the effect of g→ftransition. The effect of undesired sideband transitions
between the resonator and transmon is not considered in the simulation.
The probe field alone has negligible impacts on the experiment unless the frequency is very close to the matching
conditions for the sideband transitions between the resonator and transmon. The frequency of the probe field is close
to the resonant frequency ωqof the transmon, and therefore typically far from the matching frequencies for sideband
transitions. See Fig. S2 for the numerical simulation that supports our statement. We simulate the probe power effect
ong→dtransition spectroscopy when only a transmon is presented.
We should also steer clear of scenarios in which certain combinations of the probe and drive frequencies satisfy
undesired frequency matching conditions for sideband transitions. Such situations can cause discrepancies between
theoretical predictions and experimental results. Fortunately, our experimental parameters are far away from such
conditions.
Discussion on theory–experiment mismatches
One can identify irregular fluctuations of the experimental data in Fig. 2(c-d) of the main text. We attribute
these to the slow drift of the transmon’s frequencies during the measurement. We cannot use high probe powers
for spectroscopy to minimize the undesired couplings induced by probe and drive tones. The poor contrast in the
spectrum due to the small probe tone forces us to take averaging for many hours.
For the disagreement between solid and dashed lines at large Ω din Fig 3(d), we strongly suspect that three-photon
sideband transition |d⟩q|0⟩r↔ |g⟩q|1⟩raccounts. ωd= 2π×4.2 GHz is very closed to the matching condition of
that transition. Here, |. . .⟩qand|. . .⟩rare quantum states of the transmon and resonator, respectively. The solid and
dashed lines show better agreements for ωd/2π= 4.0 and 4 .1 GHz in Fig S6. We can also see disagreement between the
experimental data and theories with Ω ge/2πlarger than 0.8 GHz. This can be attributed to renormalized couplings
among the higher levels of the transmon and resonator, or our model’s missing frequency shifts of higher levels due
to the unexpected drive-induced couplings to stray modes. These are, however, the matter outside of computational
subspace,n
|g⟩q,|e⟩qo
, and therefore should not be taken into account in the calculation.
Supplementary Note 4 : Possible applications
In addition to the fundamental interests, our findings enable the efficient tuning of both AC Stark and Lamb shifts
simultaneously, which is particularly important for non-parametric frequency control of multi-level systems. TheS12
FIG. S3. Schematic of qubit frequency tuning with a global charge line . Multiple superconducting qubits ( ωq,n, n= 0,1, ...)
coupled to a global charge-line (horizontal straight arrow). The qubits are also dispersively coupled to resonator modes (LC
circuits), and we use Lamb shift between qubits and resonator modes as additional degree of freedoms for qubit frequency
tuning. Only the frequencies of the fundamental mode are presented ( ωr,n, n= 0,1, ...). We assume that ωq,nare confined
within a finite frequency band. Individual charge-lines to each qubit, couplers among qubits, readout resonators and readout-
lines are not presented for simplicity. A rectangular box represents a filter blocking quantum noise near frequency ωf. We
assume ωf≈ωq,n.
ability to control both AC Stark and Lamb shifts offers greater flexibility. In this section, we will introduce specific
examples of possible applications.
Qubit frequency tuning with a global charge line
Standard quantum processors based on fixed-frequency superconducting qubits are accompanied by individually
assigned charge-lines to each qubit to implement single qubit gates, and readout resonators coupled to readout
lines. The most trivial approach of tuning qubit frequencies is inducing AC Stark shift through each charge-lines.
However, the couplings to these charge-lines should be small enough not to induce significant energy loss of the qubits.
Furthermore, to avoid undesired renormalization in the strong drive limit, sufficient detunings between the qubits and
Stark tones are needed. Introducing additional charge-lines to each qubit with sufficiently large couplings and noise
filters around qubit frequencies can be a solution, but this approach requires significant overheads. Applying different
AC Stark shifts to each qubit using additional global charge-lines, or readout lines is also not easy since normally
the frequencies of qubits and resonators are confined within finite band for hardware efficiency. If some of qubits or
readout resonators have similar frequencies, then differently inducing AC Stark shift becomes extremely challenging.
The situation becomes more difficult if one wants to have sufficient detunings between the qubits and Stark tones to
avoid undesired renormalization.
Our Lamb shift engineering scheme can solve these challenges readily. The proposed circuit design is presented in
Fig. S3. An array of qubits is coupled to a global charge-line (horizontal arrow). A filter blocking quantum noise near
frequency ωfis installed. At the same time, qubits are dispersively coupled to the additional resonator modes depicted
by LC circuits. We label the frequency of the fundamental modes by ωr,n(n= 0,1, ...). We also denote the coupling
between the qubit and fundamental modes by ℊqr,n(n= 0,1, ...). Here, readout resonators, readout-lines, couplers
among the qubits, and individual charge-lines are omitted in the schematic. Let us assume that the fundamental
transmon frequencies ωq,n(n= 0,1, ...) are similar. By setting ωf≈ωq,n, we can protect qubits from the noise
channel made by the global charge-line. Thus, we can have sufficient coupling between the qubits and charge-line.
There is almost no constrain in choosing ωr,nandℊqr,nas long as they are in the dispersive regime. If we set ωd
close to ωr,i, but far-off resonant with ωr,n, n̸=i. Then, only qubit iwill undergo different frequency shift due to the
renormalization of Lamb shift. One can have more options to choose ωdif using the other higher-order modes (LCS13
circuits without mentioning frequencies beside).
Based on this approach, one can individually regulate the frequencies of multiple qubits using a single drive line,
reducing the design complexities of multi-qubit devices and thereby improving the integrity of superconducting qubits.
One of the greatest merits of this approach is that all the additional resonators do not need to have couplings to the
global charge-line and any of other feedlines. Thus, the global charge-line and additional resonator modes can be easily
designed without considering Purcell effect and undesired coupling. This dramatically simplifies the realization of
circuits. Furthermore, for ordinary circuit QED systems, implementing more resonators does not make any fabrication
overhead.
Usage with qubit–resonator tunable couplers
Currently, tunable couplers are actively being investigated to enable more efficient on-demand Hamiltonian engineer-
ing [6]. The dispersive coupling between qubits and resonators, currently achieved through static capacitance, could
potentially be replaced by tunable couplers in the future. This would allow for complete turning off of the coupling
when it is not desired, which would be useful in minimizing unwanted cross-talk among qubits and resonators.
However, this plan will encounter challenges due to the back-action on the qubit frequencies that occur when the
interaction is turned on. Turning on the coupling not only produces the desired effects but also leads to changes in the
qubit frequencies, even when the resonators are empty due to Lamb shift. Avoiding such back-action solely through
controlling the AC Stark shift requires updating the microwave tones for the AC Stark shift whenever the coupling is
turned on and off. Furthermore, if the back-action shifts the qubit frequency downward, then a compensating Stark
tone should be placed in the straddling regime [5], which introduces issues of eigenstate mixing and multi-photon
transitions in the strong drive limit.
Obviously, our Lamb shift engineering scheme can overcome all the hurdles mentioned above. If one applies a
drive tone with the proper power and frequency, as outlined in our paper, it is possible to keep the qubit frequency
unchanged when turning the coupling on and off.
Efficient engineering transition frequencies of higher energy levels
Due to the weakly anharmonic nature, a transmon’s each transition frequencies undergo simuilar shifts under
far-off resonant drive fields. Consequently, the anharmonicities of transmons is relatively more difficult to engineer
than fundamental transition frequencies [4]. To overcome this, one should use the drive frequency near resonance
of transmons. However in this manner, the drive fields can induce undesired effects such as eigenstate mixing and
multi-photon transitions in the strong drive limit.
By utilizing our Lamb shift engineering scheme, it becomes possible to more efficiently tune the higher energy levels
of the transmon, even with far-off resonant drive fields. As shown in figure 3d, the anharmonicity of the transmon
undergoes a dramatic change, almost doubling in value. This significant tuning of the anharmonicity is primarily
caused by the DLC. The underlying principle behind this lies in the fact that the magnitudes of the DLC terms,
denoted as |˜ℊnn|, increase with nfor transmons. As a result, each energy level of the transmon experiences a different
amount of frequency shift induced by the DLC terms. Therefore, our scheme can also be useful for efficient controls
of the higher energy levels of transmons.
Supplementary Note 5 : Extended data
Extended data sets to reinforce our arguments given in main text are presented in this section. Please see Fig. S4,
Fig. S5, Fig. S6, and Fig. S7.
Supplementary References
[1] B. Ann, W. Kessels, and G. A. Steele, Sideband interactions in a two-mode Josephson circuit driven beyond the rotating-wave
approximation , Phys. Rev. Research. 3, 033004 (2021).S14
3456789101101234
(a)0
ef data
0
ef theory
ef theory
34567891011
d/2 (GHz)
012345
(b)0
ed data
0
ed theory
ed theory
FIG. S4. Extended data for figure 2 in the main text. The g→fandg→dtransitions are shown in (a) and (b), respectively.
The drive frequency ωd/2πis swept from 3.5 to 11 GHz. We compare the experimental data (circles) with the theoretical
calculation (triangles and crosses, respectively). The theory without the vacuum effect (crosses) fails to capture the data
around ωd≈ωr, clearly indicating the Lamb effect. See the main text for the definition of η.
[2] B. Ann, W. Kessels, and G. A. Steele, Two-photon sideband interaction in a driven quantum Rabi model: Quantitative
discussions with derived longitudinal drives and beyond the rotating wave approximation , Phys. Rev. Research. 3, 013005
(2022).
[3] B. Ann, S. Deve, G. A. Steele Resolving Nonperturbative Renormalization of a Microwave-Dressed Weakly Anharmonic
Superconducting Qubit Coupled to a Single Quantized Mode , Phys. Rev. Lett. 131, 193605 (2023).
[4] Jayameenakshi Venkatraman, Xu Xiao, Rodrigo G. Corti˜ nas, Alec Eickbusch, and Michel H. Devoret, Static Effective
Hamiltonian of a Rapidly Driven Nonlinear System , Phys. Rev. Lett. 129, 100601 (2022).
[5] J. Koch et al. ,Charge-insensitive Qubit Design Derived from the Cooper Pair Box , Phys. Rev. A 76, 042319 (2007).
[6] D. L. Campbell, A. Kamal, L. Ranzani, M. Senatore, M. LaHaye Modular tunable coupler for superconducting qubits , Phys.
Rev. Appl. 19, 064043 (2023)
[7] Mario F. Gely, Gary A. Steele, Daniel Bothner, The nature of the Lamb shift in weakly-anharmonic atoms: from normal
mode splitting to quantum fluctuations , Phys. Rev. A 98, 053808 (2018).
[8] S. Touzard, A. Kou, N. E. Frattini, V. V. Sivak, S. Puri, A. Grimm, L. Frunzio, S. Shankar, and M.H. Devoret, Gated
Conditional Displacement Readout of Superconducting Qubits , Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 080502 (2019).
[9] Joni Ikonen et al. ,Qubit Measurement by Multichannel Driving , Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 080503 (2019).S15
0.0 0.6 1.2 1.85.705.755.805.850
ge (GHz)
Lge
(a)
Lge
theory (ge
theory (0
ge)
experiment
0.0 0.6 1.2 1.857911/2 (MHz)
(b)theory (analytical)
theory (numerical)
experimental
0.0 0.6 1.2 1.8
d/2 (2 GHz)
5.705.755.805.850
ge (GHz)
Lge
 (c) Lge
0.0 0.6 1.2 1.8
d/2 (2 GHz)
57911/2 (MHz)
(d)
FIG. S5. Extended data to figure 3 in main text. We present two cases: ωd/2π= 4.0 GHz (a,b) and ωd/2π= 4.1 GHz (c,d).
In (a,b) and (c,d), one can clearly identify the changes in the Lamb shift and cross-nonlinearity, respectively. The agreements
between the solid and dashed lines in (b) and (d) suggest that the renormalization of the transmon-resonator coupling strength
is negligible.
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
d/2 (GHz)
0.80.91.0Linewidth (MHz)
(a)
fd=4.0 GHz
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
d/2 (GHz)
0.80.91.0
(b)
fd=4.1 GHz
FIG. S6. Extended data to figure 4 in main text. We present the cases of ωd/2π=fd= 4.0 GHz (a) and ωd/2π=fd= 4.1
GHz (b). The observed linewidth of the transmon is shown with respect to Ω ge(circles). The theory plots (lines) are based on
Eq.3 in the main text, which show good agreement with the experimental data. The proper values of Γr
1(ωd) to quantify other
data set with ωd/2π= 4.0 and 4.1 GHz seems not dramatically different.S16
0 1 2
d/2 (GHz)
5.75.85.9transmon frec (GHz)(a)
fd =7.5 GHz
0 1 2
d/2 (GHz)
(b)
fd =7.2 GHzge
0
ge
FIG. S7. Floquet-based calculation for the case of a transmon coupled with a blue-detuned resonator. In the main text, we only
investigated the case of a red-detuned resonator. In this figure, we present numerical studies based on the other configuration.
The parameters used for the calculation are identical to the experimental values, except that the resonator frequency is replaced
with 7.344 GHz. Depending on the transmon-drive detuning, the Lamb shift varies differently with respect to Ω d. The drive
frequency is 7.5 GHz in (a) and 7.2 GHz in (b).