 
 
 
 
 
 So, I Can Feel Normal: Participatory Design for Accessible Social Media Sites for 
Individuals with Traumatic Brain Injury  
Hajin Lim * 
Department of Computer Sciences,  University of Wisconsin -Madison,  United States , hajin@snu.ac.kr  
Lisa Kakonge  
Rehabilitation Science, McMaster  University, Canada , kakongel@mcmaster.ca  
Yaxin Hu  
Department of Computer Sciences,  University of Wisconsin -Madison,  United States , yaxin.hu@wisc.edu  
Lyn S. Turkstra  
Rehabilitation Science, McMaster  University, Canada , turkstrl @mcmaster.ca  
Melissa C. Duff  
Department of Hearing and Speech  Sciences, Vanderbilt University  Medical Center, United States , 
melissa.c.duff@vanderbilt.edu  
Catalina L. Toma  
Department of Communication Arts,  University of Wisconsin -Madison,  United States , ctoma@wisc.edu  
Bilge Mutlu  
Department of Computer Sciences,  University of Wisconsin -Madison,  United States , bilge@cs.wisc.edu  
Traumatic brain injury  (TBI) can result in chronic sensorimotor , cognitive, psychosocial, and communication challenges that can limit 
social participation. Social media can be a useful outlet for social participation for individuals with TBI, but there are ba rriers to ac cess. 
While research has drawn attention to the nature of access barriers, few studies have investigated technological solutions to  address these 
barriers, particularly considering the perspectives of individuals with TBI. To address this gap in knowledge,  we used a participatory 
approach to engage 10 adults with TBI in conceptualizing tools to address their challenges accessing Facebook. Participants d escribed 
multifaceted challenges in using social media, including interface overload, social comparisons, and anxiety over self -presentation and 
communication after injury. They discussed their needs and preferences and generated ideas for design solutions. Our work con tributes to 
designing assistive and accessibility technology  to facilitate an equal access to the benefits of social media  for individuals with TBI .   
CCS CONCEPTS • Human -centered computing → • Accessibility → • Accessibility design and evaluation methods  
Additional Keywords and Phrases: Traumatic brain injury, TBI, social media, social participation, participatory design, 
accessibility, cognitive accessibility , assistive technology  
ACM Reference Format:  
Hajin Lim, Lisa Kakonge, Yaxin Hu, Lyn S. Turkstra, Melissa C. Duff, Catalina  L. Toma, and Bilge Mutlu.  2023. So, I Can Feel Normal: 
Participatory Design for Accessible Social Media Sites for Individuals with Traumatic Brain Injury . In CHI Conference on Human Factors  
in Computing Systems (CHI ’2 3). ACM, New York, NY, USA . https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581222  
 
* Current Affiliation: Department of Communication, Seoul National University, South  Korea  2 1 INTRODUCTION  
Traumatic brain injury (TB I) is brain damage caused by external force that results in altered brain function [15,27] . The 
incidence of TBI in adults is estimated at nearly 1.5 million per year in the U.S alone, with 80,000 to 90,000 people 
experiencing long -term, chronic di sability after their injuries [27]. Effects of TBI can include chronic physical, sensory, 
cognitive, and communication impairments [15]. Challenges in social communication are particularly common, including 
difficulty initiating social interact ions and conversing with others [61,67] . These challenges contribute to the loss of 
significant relationships and friendships that is the hallmark of moderate -severe TBI and is often accompanied by feelings 
of isolation and depression [36,42,97] . Changes in maintaining and building social networks [97] and limited opportunities 
for socialization [29] may negatively affect not only face -to-face interactions of  individuals with TBI, but also social media 
interactions [18,54] . 
Research on uninjured  populations has identified many social benefits stemming from social media use. In general, 
communicating with “friends” or followers on social media has been associated with increased social capital [41,108]  and 
civic engagement [116] , reduced loneliness [35], and increased enactment of relationship maintenance behaviors [41]. 
Additionall y, broadcasting information about oneself on social media can produce self -affirmation [98] and boost self -
esteem [46], as well as increase positive affect among users [29]. These functions and benefits of social media for people 
with TBI are wel l documented [8,18,22,72]  as well   For example, people with TBI report using social  media to connect 
with others who share similar experiences [18], maintain relationships with close friends and family  , and make new friends 
[72], gather health information [18,72] , and advocate for TBI-related causes  [19]. Successful social media use for these 
varied functions may help reduce feelings of isolation and improve overall well -being [3].  For example, one study of 
adults with TBI found that social media use was related to higher levels of self -reported life satisfaction [42]. 
While social media can offer opportunities for social participation  and psychological well -being , social media use also 
comes with general drawbacks, such as excessive and compulsive use [57], negative feelings and social comparisons 
[96,104,111] , or fatigue  [16]. Social media use, and computer mediated communication more broadly, can be particularly 
challenging for  individuals with TBI, due to their sens ory and cognitive impairments [45]. In particular , the sheer volume 
of content, complexity of the interface, and information overload and the necessity to multitask [45] may contribute to 
exacerbated cognitive fatigue [22,92] . Also, b ecause of their social communication challenges, people with TBI also might 
be at risk for Internet scams, cyberbullying, misinformation, and privacy violations [18]. These TBI -related challenges 
may explain, in part, report s of reduced social media us e after injury  [8,72]  and may prevent individuals with TBI from 
deriving the full benefits of social media participation . Considering  the general drawbacks of using social media can be 
more pronounced with  TBI-related challenges, it is important to ensure  that individuals with TBI have the same access to 
the benefits of social media as those without TBI , while minimizing the disadvantag es and challenges associated with TBI .  
However, there is still a lack of consideration for supporting the social and communication needs that individuals  with 
TBI may have using social media . Until now, research has focused on identifying challenges that individuals with TBI face 
using social media rather than identifying solutions  for their challenges . Further, s ocial media sites have primarily offered 
accessibility options to support people with auditory and visual limitations, such as alt -text, video captions and color 
contrast adjustments [45,110] . By contrast, there has been relatively little attention to improving social media accessibility 
for individuals with cognitive disabili ties, including those with TBI [14,23,72] . 
The purpose of this study was to learn how adults with TBI used social media and elicit their ideas and feedback about 
technological tools that would help them use social media as wished. We conducted remote participatory design (PD) 
sessions with 10 individuals in the chronic stage after TBI. We first conducted the exploration activity that involved 
interviews and think -aloud sessions to better understand participants’ challenges with social media site s, focusing primarily 3 on their live d experiences with Facebook, one of the social media sites most commonly used by individuals with TBI [72]. 
Next, we conducted ideation and sketch activities in which participants engaged in ideating solutions to address the 
challenges they identified. Through PD sessions, we identify four main themes of TBI that include: “interface, feature, and 
information overload”, “Facebook as a source of negativity and social comparisons”, “self -presentation concerns around 
TBI”, and “reduced perceived confidence in communication.” We share the solution  ideas that  participants came up with 
to address these cha llenges.  
The primary contributions of our work include: (1) expanding the research body on challenges to social media usage 
after TBI and (2) presenting solutions envisioned by individuals with TBI, shedding light on the future design of social 
media site s and assistive and accessibility tools for individuals with TBI. Not only do these solutions provide insight into 
individuals with TBIs’ visions for themselves, but also have implications for the improvemen ts to accessibility for broader 
populations that face similar challenges.  Additionally, the considerations and procedures we designed and implemented 
into our remote PD method can be applied to  future studies that actively  engage  individuals with TBI in their PD process.  
2 RELATED WORK  
We focus our related work on three  major categories: (1) understanding general TBI symptoms and their impact on social 
media uses, (2) examining assistive and accessibility technology for individual s with TBI, and (3) discussing the value and 
consideration for running PD sessions with people with cognitive challenges including those with TBI.  
2.1 Living with TBI  
TBI can result in chronic deficits in cognitive and communication functions that are critical  for accessing social media. 
These include impairments in learning and recall of previously learned information ; selecting, and focusing attention ; 
social cognition, and executive functions [9,25,68] . All of  these cognitive functions are critical for navigating social media. 
In particular, s ocial cognition includes the ability to “read” others’ emotions and thoughts [25], including social cues in 
emojis and written text. Executive functions play a cruc ial role in task -oriented behaviors, including organizing, planning, 
prioritizing, and monitoring tasks [94], and navigating and using social media sites [100] . Cognitive impairments in turn 
contribute to deficits in aspects of interpersonal co mmunication such as difficulty understanding information , problems 
finding words or being unable to understand what others are saying,  inability to express thoughts and feelings clearly , and, 
poor organization of thoughts, ideas, and words [25,61] . Effects of TBI on social communication also may include 
problems initiating social interactions or conversing with others  [61] and using context -appropriate language [25]. Further, 
impairments in basic sensory processes [2], including blurred vision and sensitivity to light [60] also can result in 
discomfort when using digital screens [62].  
TBI can also have profound effects on mental health, from depression and anxiety [73,85]  to post -traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) [103] , which further presents  challenges to social participation. Anxiety and depression can have a 
reciprocal relationship with decreased opportunities for friendships and social support or establishing new social contacts 
[73], so that the person becomes more socially withdrawn  over time. Changes in personal abilities, decreased social contact, 
and reduced vocational options can lead to an altered sense of identity [113] .  These challenges can translate into changes 
in online communication following TBI [42], ultimat ely limiting the ability of individuals  with TBI to capitalize on the 
opportunities for connection offered by social media . Despite these TBI -related challenges, previous research suggests that 
individuals with TBI maintain  social media accounts to the same extent as healthy comparisons [72,100]  and are highly 
interested in  using social media for social connection [20,22]. The literature also highlights the importance of using social 4 media as a tool for social participation [19,23,24,86] , which supports the goal of increasing social media access for 
individuals  with TBI. [72] 
2.2 Assistive Technology and Accessibility Options for individuals with TBI   
Research in Human -computer Interaction (HCI)  and rehabilitation has focused on providing training tools to people with 
TBI to enhance their cognitive, sensorimotor , and related living skills. One category of assistive tools provides  cognitive 
support for the memory and attention deficits that tend t o follow TBI, which include in -vehicle assistive tools that promote 
safe driving  [80], mobile applications that support meal preparation  [84], and tools that provide support in carrying out 
multi -step tasks  [56]. These assistive tools were designed to help individuals with TBI plan and carry out multi -step tasks 
by prompting them to take the necessary actions.  Another category of assistive tools has focused on supporting motor 
recovery through motion games. For instance, Chen g and  colleagues [28] proposed game design patterns for integrating 
motion -based game s into TBI therapy to enhance patients' motor abilities, including balance and weight shifting.  Many of 
these existing tools, however, tended to only involve individuals with TBI in evaluation of developed prototypes by 
researchers (e.g., [56,80,84] ). As such , it is relatively rare to involve individuals with TBI in the early ideation stage  in the 
user-centered design  cycle , which may limit the possibilities for identifying and addressing a variety of challenges and 
needs that they may face in their everyday lives [44,50] . 
A gap also exists in the accessibili ty options  for supporting the social and communication needs of individuals with 
TBI [19,53] . For example, although  social media sites have been striving to include more accessibility features in their 
platforms, those have mostly been geared towards people with hearing and vision impairments [45,110] . In contrast, there 
has been relatively little attention paid to improving accessibility for individuals with cognitive disabilities, including those 
with TBI [14,72] . While Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) do include the requirements for cognitive 
accessibility [106]  and some research offers general guidelines on interface design for individuals with TBI   [30,77] , many 
social media platforms have not yet fully integrated these principles and do not offer accessibility options tailored to the 
wide array of challenges faced by in dividuals with TBI.  The lack of assistive technology and accessibility options for social 
media platforms may negatively impact their ability to capitalize on the opportunities for connection offered by these media.  
2.3 Participatory Design and Individuals wi th Cognitive Impairment  
Participatory design (PD) is a research methodology that involves participants as an essential part of the design process 
and bridges the tacit knowledge of participants with lived experience with theoretical knowledge of researchers [95]. PD 
views users as experts who are knowledgeable about their experiences and the context in which they live  [89]. The goal of 
PD is to fully engage people in finding solutions to personally relevant problems. A large body of literature adopted  PD 
approach to articulate their understandings and opinions about possible solutions to problems facing communities or groups 
(e.g., [75,88,89] ).  
However, r esearch and design challenges can arise when using PD with people with cognitive or sensory impairments  
[44,50] . PD techniques often require higher -order cognitive skills, such as creative thinking, problem solving, and decision 
making [44], which could be challenging for individuals with TBI -related cognitive impairments  [52]. The nature and 
severity of participants' individual cognitive impairments also may necessitate modifications to the PD procedure. 
Participants who live with cognitive or sensory impairments, for example, might need  more time to consider their options 
or respond to a design challenge before they can act on it, which may require adaptations in how the researchers approach 
a task  [71]. Accordingly, several researchers have proposed gu idelines to make PD processes more accessible for people 
with cognitive impairments to accommodate their cognitive, communication, and environmental needs. To provide  5 cognitive and  communication support to participants with cognitive impairments, Mohatt an d colleagues [71] emphasized 
the importance of providing instructions in a clear manner; repeating information as necessary and requested; using 
multiple modalities; and documenting the discussion in real time to facilitate participant recall. They also note that having 
necessary materials available to review before the study session help them "get in the right mindset" (p. 4). Furthermore, 
they discuss the importance of environmental considerations that include adequate spac e for PD sessions, ambulation, and 
natural lighting. Along with these considerations, as PD has been conducted in remote settings with the COVID -19 
pandemic, the importance of technical support and rapport building processes among remote participants and r esearchers 
have also been emphasized  [31,63] . In this study, we iteratively desi gned  our PD sessions  for participants with TBI  based 
on these considerations,  as described next in the Methods section.   
3 METHODS  
We conducted remote PD sessions to better understand the challenges that individuals with TBI face using social media 
(particularly Facebook) and to learn their design solutions for assistive and accessibility tools that can better suppor t their 
social media use.  
We do recognize that the vital components of PD include face -to-face group interactions, trust building, and 
collaborative group thinking [93]. Therefore, following the conventional PD process, we initially considered running the 
sessions in person, grouping two or three participants together. However, difficulties in recruiting local participants durin g 
the COVID pandemic lockdown made this consideration almost impossible. After we decided  to run the sessions virtually , 
we revised the original study protocol to accommodate the remote PD setting on the basis of best practices for remote PD 
sessions [31,63]  (see Table 2 ). Through  multiple pilots and review sessions  over the revised protocol , we came  to conclude 
that one -on-one PD sessions would be more appropriate for our study population. Previous research suggested that 
individuals with TBI often exhibit impaired self -regulation of behavior  [53], which can contribute to shifts in group 
dynamics in PD activities [26] (e.g., one individual dominates group discussion; or , conversely, demonstrates a lack of 
initiative to contribute, both of which are common behaviors among adults with TBI ). Therefo re, we saw that a one -on-
one setting would be more ideal for providing personalized assistance  and accommodation  to participants while addressing 
their possible cognitive and communication challenges. As we turned to one-on-one PD sessions, we further envi sioned 
the ways to build trust and rapport between individual participants and the facilitator as compensation for the group process. 
In addition, while running PD sessions with our participants, we adjusted our protocol iteratively as we encountered 
unexp ected issues. We describe the finalized protocol in detail in the following procedure sections.  
3.1 Research Team and Stance  
Our study team was composed  of HCI researchers interested in developing interactive technologies to facilitate inclusive 
online communication, and researchers with extensive clinical experience providing rehabilitation services to indivi duals 
with TBI. Though we have different backgrounds, we share a common belief that individuals  with TBI were entitled to 
and could also have an equal access to the benefit of social media . Also, a s a group, we strongly believed that individuals  
with TBI could actively collaborate with researchers to create knowledge about social media experiences and ideas for 
technical aid s that could help their own online social participation. It was also advantageous to us to have different expertise 
in each field in order to compensate for each other's knowledge gaps in our respective fields of study. Researchers from 
the HCI field had k nowledge of the PD method itself and translating outcomes from PD sessions into design implications 
but had little experience interacting with and accommodating individuals with TBI appropriately. Thus, our researchers 6 from the rehabilitation field  ran the PD sessions using their expert knowledge and experience in brain injury rehabilitation 
to build rappor t and trust with individuals with TBI.  
While we believe that this combination of expertise provides a solid foundation for developing supports to make social 
media accessible to individuals  with TBI, we acknowledge that our shared characteristics ( e.g., non-TBI individuals, 
educated, high technology literate, have had access to new technology) may prevent us from truly understanding and 
capturing their unique experiences . 
3.2 Participants  
For re cruitment of participants, we  distribut ed a recruitment poster to TBI rehabilitation service providers , posted it on a 
Facebook -group page of TBI service providers, and Reddit (r/TBI)  and contacted one of the brain injury patient registr ies 
in the U.S.  Individuals who expressed interest were invited to a pre -screening phone call to assess their eligibility for 
participation. Participants were required to have a diagnosis of TBI, be age 18 years or older, have a Facebook account, 
and be their own legal guardian for the purpose of consenting to research participation.   
A total of ten adults with TBI (5 males, 5 females)  participated in this study.  Median participant age was 42 (range  = 
31-60 years ). Despite efforts to recruit a racially diverse sample, all participants were white. The most common cause of 
TBI was a motor vehicle accident, foll owed by falls and sports injuries. At the time of PD sessions, a median of 7.5 years 
had elapsed since participants' first TBI (range = 3 -42 years). Participants reported a variety of self -reported impairments 
related to their TBI, as noted in Table 1 . 
Table  1: Participant demographic and background information  
P Age Sex Years post 
TBI Sensory /physical  
challenges  
(e.g., vision , fatigue ) Cognitive challenges  
(e.g., memory, 
attention)  Psychosocial 
challenges  
(e.g., anxiety, mood 
swing, depression ) Language  challenges  
(e.g., speech 
comprehension and 
production)  
1 37 M 7 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
2 50 F 42 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
3 60 F 5 ✓ ✓ ✓  
4 32 M 6  ✓ ✓  
5 32 M 3 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
6 37 F 17 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
7 53 M 18  ✓ ✓  
8 32 M 10  ✓ ✓  
9 31 F 5 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
10 56 F 8 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
3.3 Procedures  
Before the scheduled session, we provided participants  with a detailed overview of the PD activities and session reminders 
through phone calls, texts, and emails. We also inquired about participant s’ specific needs, preferences, and technological 
skills so that we could prepare adequate accommodations and supp orts ahead of time for each participant.   
PD sessions were conducted individually with the researchers remotely over Zoom and were divided into three central 
activities : 1) exploration, 2) ideation, and 3) sketching, which all together took about 2 hours.  Throughout the session and 
for each activity, we provided diverse strategies and accommodations that included  communication, cognition, technology 
and input support outlined by literature  [31,63,71] , as presented  in Table 2.  All procedures were approved by ethics 
institutional review boards from  the two universities where this study was hosted.  7 Table  2: Types of Accommodations provided in the PD Session   
PD Stage Types of Accommodations  (communication1; cognition2; technology3; input4) 
Pre-PD - (In p re-screening interview ) Provided detailed introduction about activities and procedures in the session and 
introduced kinds of accommodations participants may want  for virtual PD session2 
- (Before scheduled PD session ) Inquired about their specific needs, preferences, and technolo gical skills to prepare 
adequate accommodations tailored for each participant1,2,3,4 
- (Before scheduled PD session ) Emailed and texted reminders multiple times before scheduled session of both the 
session time/date and required study materials2 
Througho ut 
the PD 
session  - An experienced TBI rehabilitation professional leading the session focusing on providing communication and 
cognitive supports, and  other members offering (primarily) technological and input support1,2,3,4 
- Provid ed sufficient time for tasks  and i ncreased frequency  and length  of breaks2 
- Provided clear and r epeat ed instructions2 
- Provided m ultiple modalities for information (e.g., via images, text, verbal explanations)1,4 
- Provided documentation of participants’ responses in real time (e.g., digital sticky notes)1,2 
- Provide d example of a response to study prompts  when necessary2 
- Provided s tep-by-step tutorial on using Zoom features (e.g., screenshar e) when necessary3 
- Provided r emote technical support  via Zoom remote control when necessary3 
Introduction 
and 
Exploration  - Rapport building: detailed introduction of the research team and sharing TBI story1,2 
- Used digital sticky notes to keep track of and organize participant’s thoughts1,2 
Ideation  - Prepared brainstorming activity of a familiar event to simulate rapid ideation (e.g., What are the different uses of 
a toothbrush?)2 
- Took turns generating ideas  or shared random images to spark thinking  when necessary2 
- Provid ed multiple ways to input responses for ideation (e.g., writing  on paper, verbal, online board)4 
- Used digital sticky notes to keep track of and organize participant’s ideas1,2 
Sketching  - Showed examples of design ideas or t ook turns discussing solutions to sketch  when necessary2 
- Provided m ultiple modalities for sketching (e.g., drawing on paper, verbal, online board )4 
 
3.3.1  Introduction  
Before each participatory design session, one participant and two researchers joined the Zoom meeting room. One of the 
researchers with more than ten years of experience as a speech -language pathologist working with individuals with TBI 
was the facilitator  for the session. Another researcher was primarily responsible for taking notes  (documentation and 
digitization of participants’ responses in real time ) and providing technology and input support for participants whe n 
necessary. Once participants entered the meeting room, the facilitator explained the goal and procedures of the study. The 
facilitator described the participant as “expert” in designing the social media sites for people with TBI and the researchers  
as “s tudents” in this session . After  obtain ing consent for recording the Zoom meeting, the facilitator  informed participants 
that they could take a break or stop the session at any time. Then, we introduced ourselves to them in detail, in p articular, 
noting the facilitator had experience working with the TBI community for many years and another researcher would be 
responsible for providing various kinds of support as needed. Through this we sought to ensure that participants felt 
comfortable  sharing their TBI experiences and engaging in PD activities. We then asked participants to share freely about 
their own TBI story (e.g., when, and how their injury happened, post -injury challenges, life changes post -TBI) as much as 
they wanted to disclose, so that researchers could start establishi ng rapport with them and gain a better understanding of 
their Facebook experiences in relation to their TBI.    8 3.3.2  Exploration Stage  
In the exploration stage, the participant engaged in an in -depth interview regarding their Facebook use and specific 
challenges they encountered on Facebook. Additionally, we asked if and how their Facebook use had changed after their 
injury. Participants then engaged in a think -aloud activity, sharing their Facebook screen via Zoom screen share while 
navigating  the site and describing their thoughts in real time. While participants freely shared their experiences and 
challenges in using social media with the facilitator, another researcher  digitally captured and grouped the main points they 
addressed in real time as sticky notes ( Figure 1 ). After the think -aloud activity was complete, researchers shared the sticky 
notes with participants to confirm that they accurately reflected participant s’ comments.   
 
 
Figure 1: Digital Sticky Notes from the Exploration Stage (from P6’s PD session)  
3.3.3  Ideation Stage  
From the sticky notes from the Exploration stage, the facilitator guided participants to reflect and choose the most critical  
challenges th ey wanted to address in this PD session. In the first two sessions, participants were initially asked to generate 
"How might we " questions, a tool that is widely used to define design goals for ideation [51,79] . The first  two participants 
stated that those questions were too abstract and difficult to address . Thus, we changed the goal identification activity to a 
“fill-in-the-blanks” format (i.e., “I want Facebook to (be) ______ so that I can ________”), which was well -received by 
the remainder of the participants. Once participants created one or two design goals based on their challenges, the facilitat or 
introduced general brainstorming rules such as ‘defer judgment’ and ‘go for quantity .’ For each design goal, the resea rcher 
asked participants to generate 4 -5 ideas. For those who were unfamiliar with brainstorming activities, we provided timed 
pre-brainstorming activities (e.g., ‘imagine alternative uses of a toothbrush’ ). Participants could also choose from various 
meth ods of response, such as handwriting, typing, or just verbalizing  ideas with the notetaker taking notes. After 
brainstorming, the note -taker digitally captured and shared participants’ ideas with them so that they could explain their 
ideas one by on e. 
3.3.4  Sketching Stage  
After participants generated ideas, the facilitator asked participants to choose a couple of their favorite ideas and further  
develop and sketch them. We explained that sketches could be anything from conceptual drawings to a textual de scription 
of the system's key features and provided examples to make the sketching activity less burdensome. Participants could 
complete their drawings with paper and pen or using an online drawing board (Jamboard [117] ) or have the researcher 
draw i t out for them with the participant’s verbal guidance. The note -taker digitally captured each completed sketch, and 
the facilitator prompted participants to elaborate on their ideas.   
9 3.3.5  Wrap -up  
As a final step, the researcher asked participants to evaluate their design solutions and provide feedback for the design 
session. Participants then filled out a post -session questionnaire with demographic information, TBI -related information 
and symptoms, social media use, and feedback on the participatory d esign workshop. Participants were compensated with 
$50 gift cards.  
3.4 Data Analysis  
All PD sessions were screen -recorded using Zoom and recordings were transcribed by graduate student research assistants. 
All participants’ brainstormed ideas and sk etches were digitally captured during the session and integrated into the 
transcription of each participant . Based on the structure of our PD procedure, transcripts were divided into two parts: 1) 
challenges faced by social media users with TBI (mai nly from the Introduction and Explor ation stage ), and 2) design ideas 
for users with TBI (primarily from Ideation and Sketch stages). Using the thematic analysis method [82] , three researchers 
read each transcript multiple times and generated initi al codes individually, focusing on how each solution idea related to 
the different types of TBI -related challenges and barriers to Facebook use. Next, we iteratively created common themes 
by identifying frequently occurring codes across researchers, which allowed us to develop higher -level themes. Higher -
level themes were then divided into the four groups that we describe in the next section.  
4 FINDINGS  
All participants completed all the procedures. While some required multiple breaks due to fatigue, our PD process was 
well received by our participants overall. Participants said the process was accommodating and encouraging: “ I felt heard 
and supported and encouraged to participate ” (P9). Others also said they felt empowered and proud of helping envision 
technology to improve social media experiences for other individuals  with TBI  and themselves: “ I want to say our reality 
is still valid in this world even though it's not necessarily perfect. [...] I'm fascinated by the fact that we can still con tribute 
to society ” (P10). In the following sections, we first report participants ’ comments on their overall Facebook experiences 
and current usage patterns, as a context for the main results. We then present four sets of challenges that individuals with 
TBI report ed in the PD sessions, followed by solution ideas proposed by participants.  
4.1 Returning to Facebook after Injuries  
Nine of the 10 participants had a Facebook account prior to their injury. Most of those with preinjury accounts said they 
significantly reduced  their Facebook use in their early days after injury. In particular, participants said that their sensory 
(e.g., light sensitivity) and co gnitive symptoms made it difficult for them to be on digital screens for an extended period of 
time. P 10 shared, “Due to physical pain, cognitive, emotional difficulties, I limited my use of social media. ”  They 
mentioned therapy and rehabilitation training they received at the time of diagnosis helped them to regain basic sensory 
and cognitive functions (e.g., vision, reading, speaking) to some extent. However, as presented in Table 1, participants 
reported  sustained  sensory, cognitive, and psychological symptoms related to their TBI, but most mentioned that they could 
not afford extra therapy: “ I can't even get targeted therapy, because all the therapy out there is so expensive .” (P2).  
Two participants state d that they had deactivated or deleted their Facebook accounts for a while after their injuries. P8 
explained: “ I got rid of [my account] because it was a time suck, right? ” P1 said he deactivated his Facebook because he 
had felt humiliated due to his life  changes brought about by TBI and wanted to withdraw from any kinds of social 
interactions: “ I deactivated it and kept it that way for a long time. I didn't want to have any contact with people. I wanted 
to just hide everything about TBI. I was probably em barrassed. ”  10 At the time of the study, all participants reported that they had returned to Facebook and logged on at least a few times 
a week. A few of them even reported browsing it several times a day: “ I'm checking it every hour; I'd say at least every 2 
hours ” (P5). In the think -aloud session, all participants appeared familiar with Facebook and used it competently. As a 
whole, participants generally  agreed that social media had been  a valuable resource for maintaining social connections and 
searching f or information, which was why they still maintained Facebook accounts in spite of challenges described below. 
For example, s ome recognized social media's unique benefits for helping them cope with memory impairments, by 
allowing  them to retrieve  information about others (e.g., birthdays) and also themselves. P9 stated, “ Most of the time, I'm 
using it almost like a reference poi nt.” Several participants mentioned using Facebook to search information about TBI. 
P3, who had not been very active on social media before injury, said that she gradually came to accept that social media 
could be helpful for accessing TBI -related resource s: “[Facebook] didn't even occur to me as a resource  [before injury] . 
I've explored all kinds of stuff about TBI via Facebook. I think a lot of people with TBIs end up doing a lot of research via  
Facebook. ” Some participants also appreciated that they coul d connect with other TBI survivors in support groups on 
Facebook: “ I'm in a number of groups, which has been very helpful. It's nice to have a support network with people who 
understand what you're going through. ” (P2).  
Most participants reported experienc ing changes in their Facebook usage following TBI . Many participants mentioned 
that they reduced the amount of time spent on social media after injury mostly due to sustained sensory and cognitive 
symptoms. For example, P9 mentioned  “Definitely my Facebook usage has changed [since injury]. I had a really hard 
time looking at screens --because of the light. I mean even just a few minutes , it costs a lot of discomfort .” On the other 
hand, a few reported increased uses of social media afte r injury as a result of boredom caused by reduced social 
participation: “ I find I am on it more especially when recovering from a TBI because I get bored as I am not doing anything .” 
(P2).   
Besides the changes in the amount of time they spent on Facebook, they also reported changes in other areas. Several 
participants said they were attempting to limit Facebook connections to those who were closest to them  after injury : 
“[When creating a new Facebook account after deleting their pre -TBI account], we decided to have a really private social 
media presence”  (P8).  Also, some reported preferring maintaining limited social presence on Facebook  by using it  more 
passively than a ctively (e.g., consuming  rather than posting). P5 shared, “ I don't have any intentional posting on my wall. 
I don't think I'll ever do that. ”  In addition , a number of participants  reported limiting their  Facebook  uses only for a specific 
purpose (e.g., marketplace, business networking), as P4 stated: “ I do only short things  on Facebook. I have tried my best 
not to be on it anymore. I used Facebook for a specific reason. ” As such, while all participants reported frequen tly being 
on Facebook and acknowledge d its value, they experienced some level of changes and limitations in their social media use 
after injuries . 
4.2 Interface, Feature, and Information Overload  
Participants reported lingering physical and sensory symptoms as sociated with TBI  including  vision problems (e.g., 
sensitivity to light, blurred vision), headache, and intense fatigue, which made using digital screens difficult for them. P9  
stated, “ I had a lot of headaches and light sensitivity. I had a really hard ti me focusing , mostly ongoing, ” indicating that 
symptoms continued years after the injury. Participants also reported symptoms related to cognitive impairment, such as 
poor short -term memory, lack of attention, and difficulty sequencing and understanding inf ormation.    
TBI-related symptoms negatively impacted participants’ Facebook use. Over half of the participants reported feeling 
“overloaded” when using Facebook. Some participants complained about "interface overload," saying the current 
Facebook interface  was too confusing and complicated. For example, P8 expressed his frustration with the Facebook 11 interface: “ It's pretty busy, right? It would be really tempting to get super distracted. ” P9 shared her struggles with digesting 
the interface elements and switching and maintaining her focus on each part of the interface: “ My b iggest barriers is to 
reintegrate all the things on the [screen]. I don't know how much I was trying to intently foc us on something small. I don't 
know who I'm looking at when I'm on it. And I don't even remember  why I'm trying to use it. ” There was a greater overload 
in navigating interface structures on Facebook when participants returned to Facebook post -TBI. P1, for  example, shared 
that when he reactivated Facebook after a while post -injury: “ I couldn't find [messenger]. I just wanted to send a quick 
chat to someone. But I didn't want it up after because I could never find out how to do it”.  
Participants also mentio ned "feature overload", reporting difficulty navigating different features  on Facebook . P10 
explained that being on Facebook required her to do “ multitasking ”, as she was constantly distracted by different features 
on Facebook: “ I could do one thing, but s omething comes up  that I need to do later. I couldn't do multitasking .” P9 also 
expressed frustration with relating how different parts of the features are linked together: “It feels somewhat disconnected. 
You have to mentally follow a lot of steps to get to understand why you are looking at the thing you're looking at .”  
In particular, s everal participants reported feeling extremely uncomfortable and confused whenever Facebook updated 
its interface and features. After TBI, they said they had tried hard to  rebuild a new “mental model” and routine of how to 
access and use Facebook's features, repeatedly trying each feature to re -learn how it worked. P4 said, “ By tapping on my 
own profile picture [icon], I can find [the search box]at the top left, and that's where I can find out where that is ”, showing 
how they recognized the location of certain features and accessed them. However, when those interface s and feature s 
updated, as was often the case, participants reported feeling helpless as they felt forced to a dapt:  “There’s often annoying 
things. Like when they make changes, you just need to learn to live with them, right?” (P3). P2 expressed frustration with 
the unexpected feature changes and lack of response from Facebook: “ When I report the issue, I get no response. This 
makes me feel angry, frustrated, unvalued, not heard, downright mad. I feel like being left in the dark .” 
Some participants reported experiencing "information overload" due to the amount of information they were exposed 
to through Facebook. P1 pointed out that, “ it might be difficult to figure out stuff intuitively especially for people with brain 
injuries. The easiest way to put it is just ‘information overload. ’ Like for people with a TBI, there's just too much 
information .” Several partici pants also reported experiencing extra burdens when dealing with notifications, due to their 
tendency to miss them as well as to become distracted by them. Therefore, P3 said she deliberately tried to limit  her 
notifications because she “wanted to reduce  [cognitive] intake. ” 
Overall, there was a general feeling of overload when it came to the interface, features, and amount of  information on 
Facebook, making it difficult for participants to search for information or locate certain features they wa nted.   Many 
individuals with TBI reported having difficulty with tracking, switching, and maintaining attention, and often felt lost: “I 
have had lots of difficulties with tracking, like ‘where am I?’ and understanding and processing. So, I had to go back and 
read again and forget it.   I assume other TBI survivors also [experience similar things] ” (P10).  Some responded very 
emotionally when they faced these challenges, as reflected in P1’s account : “What definitely bothers  people with TBIs is 
that there's so much stuff and hard to find what you want . [For me]  it’s hard to manage anger when we can't find something .”  
4.2.1  Solution s 
During the ideation and sketch stages, five participants chose to develop their ideas for addressing challenges with the 
interface and features, and information overload. For instance, a design goal set by P1 was “ I want to minimize Facebook 
so that I can use it more confidently and efficiently .” P9’s goal was “ I want Facebook to be easier so that I can understand 
what is happening .”  Participants expressed a strong desire to make Facebook simpler, more customizable, and more 
intuitive so they cou ld easily locate features and information they were seeking.  12 Some participants, particularly those who found Facebook's current interface confusing and overwhelming, proposed 
an interactive guide as a way to  help them identify what to look at and where to focus their attention . P4 shared his idea of 
an interactive guide that could detect users’ point of gaze and help them switch focus to the feature they  want to access : 
“It would be nice if there were somethi ng that would interact with me and say ‘hey, check this out right off to the side 
here’, and you will get something.”   Similarly, P1 envisioned an avatar -like interactive guide: “ [The avatar can say] start 
here, then go here. It would like a guide to make it clearer to indicate ‘things you ’re looking at’ and ‘things you should 
look at. ’” 
Aside from wanting to better navigate the current Facebook  interface as it is , participants also wanted an interface that 
could be customized to make it simpler and more pe rsonalized. P4 suggested customization options for resizing and 
rearranging different sections of the interface: “ I want  some customizable options, where I can dictate where all my stuff 
is. I would like to have my own changes  as in World of Warcraft  (WoW)  where I can direct  and drag the chat log and put 
it anywhere, any size I want. ” Similarly, P1 suggested a customizable interface that only included features and menus he 
frequently used. In his sketch ( Figure  2), he restructured the Facebook interface to contain only the big buttons to features 
he frequently used (e.g., chat, news, search bar). Additionally, P10 proposed an option to customize  the color, contrast, 
size, and spacing of fonts, because many TBI survivors, including P10, had vision limitations  and trouble processing texts 
on social media: “ I want Facebook to allow me to choose the right font, color, and size to communicate my message more 
effectively. ” 
 
 
Figure 2: Customizable interface that contains only frequently used features and menus (P1)  
Some  requested information prioritization mechanism s for their newsfeed , so that they could allocate their limited 
cognitive resource to more relevant and important  information to deal with information overload. For example , P3 
emphasized that as many TBI survivors “ got limited [cognitive] bandwidth ” so Facebook needed to “ figure out to prioritize 
[information] ”. Similarly, P4, who wanted to see posts related to his i nterests (e.g., paintball), suggested a "ranking system " 
that displayed posts with high relevance at the top . Also, P1 suggested a separate feed for "best friends " that would show 
only the posts  from  his close friends . 
4.3 Facebook as a source of negativity and social comparisons  
Participants reported a range of emotional symptoms after TBI, including difficulty controlling their emotions. For example, 
P3 described her emotions as “ all over the place .” Some participants experienced amplified emotio ns, as they unpredictably 
became irritable or anxious: “ I'm extremely irritable. Like I'll cry or yell for absolutely no reason ” (P2).  
13 Emotional lability was manifested in the way participants used Facebook, particularly when browsing the newsfeed, 
where d iverse topics and opinions of posts were displayed. Participants stated that being exposed to unanticipated and 
unwanted types of posts often triggered an emotional reaction. P8 even referred to the overall Facebook experience as a 
“triggering activity. ” Such triggering events usually referred to participants’ negative reactions to being exposed to certain 
types of posts. For instance, P3 expressed discomfort after viewing a horror story post in one of her groups, saying: “ It's 
just too much for people with  brain injury.” Several participants also mentioned that posts about political, proactive, or 
polarizing topics often triggered negative feelings. Thus, they wished to avoid being exposed to such posts as much as 
possible, as reflected in P8’s account: “ Anything political, racially provocative. I don't go to Facebook to read that stuff. 
[...] Facebook is not where I go for that .”  
A few participants reported being offended and annoyed by algorithmic recommendations for sponsored posts and 
friends. P8 expres sed frustration when he encountered a sponsored ad while browsing his feed: “I don't know why it's there. 
I want to mute crap like this. It’s offensive to me and makes me so uncomfortable. ” Additionally, he added his thoughts on 
friends' suggestions: “ Even  though our focus is on really close friends and family, we still get these suggestions for just, 
frankly, random people. I'll tell [Facebook] when I want to add somebody. [Facebook] is not smarter than me.” 
Interestingly, P3 expressed ambivalence about al gorithmic suggestions. When she repeatedly received  suggestions for TBI 
groups, she felt it was too "freaky " that Facebook algorithm knew she had a TBI. At the same time, she saw value in the 
Facebook algorithm knowing about her injury, because it could pr ovide useful resources: “ When I see [TBI group 
recommendation]  appear, I felt that it was just too freaky. But I don't know, maybe there needs to be some way that that 
information can reach survivors more. ” 
Many participants also mentioned that negative fe elings were triggered by posts  from their Facebook connections. Some 
participants believed  that people typically post only sugary representations of themselves and their lives on social media  
and h eld very negative opinions  about that . For example, P5 shar ed: “ I just think of Facebook as being pretty superficial 
and fake, or [presenting] inaccurate depiction s of people’s life.” They pointed out that such embellished  descriptions left 
many people feeling inadequate and ashamed of their own lives, as in P1’s account: “ Everyone puts their best stuff to make 
themselves look good, which kind of makes everyone simultaneously think they're worse than other people, too. ”  
As reflected in P1’s account  above, m any participants stated  that they often compared themselve s with non -injured and 
pre-injury peers  through posts about  their life achievements, such as marriage, children, and career success, which made 
them feel even more inadequate, because their own lives had been ravaged by the injury.  For example, P6 stated that 
looking at the posts from her pre -injury friends caused her to compare herself to them and ultimately made her see herself 
as ‘not normal’: “ A lot of times, there's just so much going on in other people's lives. I think to mysel f: ‘if I didn't have my 
brain injury, I could be experiencing all these things too.’ I don't really think Facebook is healthy. I mean that's gonna 
overwhelm you with sadness. I hope I can see more accurate representations of life so I can feel normal. ” 
Many participants tried to control what they would be exposed to and notified about on Facebook, to reduce their 
chances of seeing "trigger" posts. As an example, P8 said that he actively hid posts that were " triggering " and unfollowed 
pages and people who fr equently posted unpleasant content: “I hide all of their posts . At least 700 are hidden. ” However, 
exercising such control was a challenge for many participants, because it was not intuitive for them to figure out how to 
do it. For example, P3 described th e challenges she faced when configuring her notification settings to only receive 
notifications she wanted: “ It’s not necessarily easy  to remove some  and only get [certain] notifications .” Thus, instead of 
systematically curating Facebook settings, some participants tended to skim their feeds: “ A lot of people are really bothered 
by the drama and the negativity, but I just don't let that [happen]. If I don't like it, I just keep scrolling ” (P7).  14 4.3.1  Solutions  
In the ideation and sketch stages , four participants chose to develop ideas to reduce emotionally triggering experiences 
while on Facebook. Overall, these participants envisioned the interface giving them more control over the content to which 
they would be  exposed. For example, P9 set her desig n goal as, “ I want Facebook [to] allow me to determine what you are 
presented with .” As a result, P9 desired a completely configurable and self -directed feed system instead of algorithmically 
curated feeds. According to his design ( Figure 3), the user can control the type of source and posts they would be shown 
in their newsfeed: “ I want something that feels really centralized around [ my choice ]. Like when I am clicking, this is what 
I am choosing and seeing .” 
 
 
Figure 3: Configurable feed system that user s narrow down to the kinds of information they want to see in their feed (P9)  
Other participants suggested feed filters, such as systems that allow them to specify and eliminate emotionally triggering 
posts. P5 envisioned a system that would let him skip p osts related to potentially triggering topics: “ Let's skip pandemic -
related posts and election -related posts. So, it's kinda dependent on the current time we're in. I'd probably be annoyed 
right now about posts related to inflation .” Similarly, P8’s sugges tion was to add a " safe filter " (Figure 4) to Facebook 
feeds so users would be able to filter out emotionally triggering and negative posts: “ [In the] welcome screen, the first one 
would set a filter [for] offensive, garbage posts. [Initiall y on the feed,] there are skulls and crossbones and some good 
stuff and maybe some sad faces there. All of that goes in [the filter] and what comes out is something good. ” 
 
 
15 Figure 4: Safe filter to remove unwanted posts on user’s feed on Facebook (P8)  
4.4 Self-presentation Concerns Related to  TBI  
As a result of their brain injury, participants reported feeling forced to make some undesirable life decisions such as quitt ing 
their jobs or chang ing careers. For example, P8 said he had been laid off for two mo nths after his TBI, and P2 and P3 said 
that they had to quit their teaching and editorial jobs , respectively . P3 recalled how disappointed she was when she was 
told that she could not return to work: “ My number one goal was to get back to work.   So, I star ted working with [an 
occupational therapist], and she said, ‘forget about the work conditioning right now.’ And then, it was clear I'm not going 
back to work yet .” In addition, some  participants felt that their personalities had changed as a result of thei r TBI. P2 
expressed her feelings of helplessness: “ I want to know what part of my brain is being impacted. But I'm not going to know, 
and it just makes it so frustrating, I'm not the same person I used to be. I noticed a huge personality change.”   
As a res ult of changes in jobs, capacities, and personalities following TBI, participants’ social identities had changed 
dramatically. Many participants speculated that accepting "who I am" compared to “who I used to be” was extremely 
painful and challenging, and an ongoing process. P10's story shows the difficulty in reconciling her past and present 
identities: “ I imagined the mirror . The person that I used to be was not there anymore. I was someone new, but I didn't like 
this new me, because I wanted to go back t o be the person that I was. ”  
By the same token, participants who had used Facebook before their injury had difficulty reconciling their pre - and 
post-TBI Facebook identities. Seeing their pre -TBI Facebook identities often led participants to feel ashamed and compare 
their present selves to their past selves. This comparison was illustrated by P6: “ You need to have good self -control, so you 
don't become obsessed with comparing yourself to what you used to be, because that's what you would do on Facebook. ” 
P1 shared his reflection while showing us his old Facebook posts before his injury: “ To go back on my Facebook, I was a 
very successful person. But then I had a brain injury. Well, people are probably [thinking] ‘damn, he is doing pretty well 
for himself’. And then probably it'd be a little embarrassing [to let them know] that I was the kid who also had to hit rock 
bottom .” Then, he added “ If I put my new identity, which is actually like a dramatic, much different identity than before. 
There could be a time when I'd want people to know about my story, I suppose. I'm just not there yet. ” 
As reflected in P1’s account, many participants believed that their identity reconstruction process was still ongoing, so 
they were not ready to disclose their TBI and new ide ntity on social media. Therefore, these participants were still reluctant 
to publicly share their TBI or new identity on Facebook. Even though many participants proudly shared their TBI story 
and new achievements post -TBI with the research team (e.g., obta ining a master’s degree, finding a new job path), most 
expressed reluctance to do so on Facebook. This reluctance was illustrated by P5, who said: “I'd be more hesitant to post 
about my brain injury just because I'm self -conscious and a little more insecur e. Like, if I post, what will people 
think?”  Overall, self -acceptance was seen as more of a personal journey than a public one, so it was something participants 
felt they had to do on their own, not on social media: “ Everybody's journey is in getting to se lf-acceptance. You're going 
through your TBI journey trying to understand who you are because your inner and outer self aren't really in sync. [...] 
It's a personal issue that you have to deal with. I mean if you don't share any of it [on social media], it  is not even really 
there, right? ” (P3).   
Instead of updating their profiles, most participants chose to maintain their Facebook profile information as it was 
before their injuries, or to reveal as little information as possible. P3 explained why she had been reluctant to change her 
work information on Facebook: “ I still haven't changed my profile just because I feel like as soon as I do say I'm not 
working where I was, I'm gonna have to answer questions. ” Similarly, P1, who put almost no personal info rmation on his 
Facebook profile, said: “ I don't want my information there on Facebook. I don't want that many people to know at all. I 16 don't want that much attention .” As such, they felt it would be burdensome to publicly share their life changes on social  
media, as they thought they also had to share their TBI with others to explain their reasons for those changes.   
Participants’ reluctance to disclose their TBI and new identity was mainly due to a fear that others on Facebook would 
not fully understand TB I and their experiences. As reflected in P10’s account, s ome did not expect that they could receive 
much support or understanding from uninjured peers , as they no longer had interests in common: “There was nothing in 
common [with others on Facebook] anymor e, because I could not do social activities while I was mostly living at home 
and [experiencing] physical and emotional pain. ”  
In contrast, p articipants expressed a strong desire to closely connect with other individuals with TBI who might be able 
to und erstand each other. Therefore, m any mentioned that they had tried searching  for and joining TBI support groups on 
Facebook when they came back to Facebook after TBI. Although they found TBI support groups somewhat helpful and 
useful, some participants poin ted out that those groups did not facilitate meaningful relationships or authentic 
communication among individuals with TBI. For example, P6 stated that many of the Facebook TBI groups were " too 
cheesy " and “ superficial ” because most of the shared content was inspirational quotes, which she did not find were actually 
helpful or relatable. Further, P9 shared that attending TBI support groups was “contributing to the feeling of isolation 
because I can't find anyone that has a similar experience as me ”, mainly because the groups were  too large .  
Interestingly, P3 expressed concern that networking with other individuals with TBI and joining TBI groups on 
Facebook could put their privacy and identities at risk, given that she had not publicly disclosed her T BI. She became 
aware of this risk when she discovered that an acquaintance was also a member of the same Facebook TBI support group 
to which she belonged: “ I mean that's privacy issues, [because of] overlaps of people in different groups. You also don't 
want people to necessarily know that you're in a group. So, then you might want to actually run back to the safety of your 
own feed, and screw that. And sometimes it feels like you're invading someone else's privacy by seeing where they are. ” 
As she did not disclose her TBI on Facebook and she was also not sure whether her acquaintance wanted her to know, she 
questioned whether connecting with other individuals with TBI and joining TBI support groups on Facebook was a safe 
option.   
Some participants explored social media outlets other than Facebook, such as Instagram. In setting up their new 
Instagram accounts after TBI, these participants said that they felt more in control of who they could talk to and what they 
could say about their TBI. Because they set it  up after having TBI, they could choose to be friends only with people who 
understood them or others with TBI who were already on Instagram. Therefore, they were more comfortable sharing their 
TBI stories on Instagram rather than on Facebook, where so many  of their pre -injury connections were included. P10 
described her Instagram experience as, “ It opens different doors. I find that through Instagram, I make better connections . 
[...] I post about brain injuries, so now I connect with people who live in Engl and and Australia [who also had TBI].”    
4.4.1  Solutions  
Overall, three participants suggested solutions  related to the challenges in accepting and rebuilding their new social identity. 
One idea  from P3 focused on creating a private and secure place where she could explore TBI -related information and 
connect with others who had TBI without risking their priv acy or boundaries. P3 created her design goal as “ I want 
Facebook to have a secure and private place where I can explore TBI stories and connect with other TBI survivors .” She 
envisioned a subset of Facebook that she called " TBI world ," where she could com municate with other individuals with 
TBI more comfortably and explore and organize TBI -related stuff separately from her other Facebook presence. She 
acknowledged that social media would be a powerful tool for connecting with other people who had TBI and s upporting 
one another. However, she was reluctant to seek help from Facebook because it would eventually lead to revealing her TBI 17 to a broader audience: “ What their biggest issues are is finding help and people who know what we're going through. I 
would l ike to share what I want with my feed, but if I do that, I’m  gonna step outside of [my boundaries]. ” Thus, she 
imagined a private and secure Facebook environment where she could stay private: “ It would be like a little separate 
universe  that I knew I could  go into where the TBI stuff is.   That's like a place where you're still on Facebook, but it's like 
a smaller Facebook. ” Her sketch ( Figure 5) included a separate space  where she could easily talk to other individuals with 
TBI and access and share TBI reso urces with them: “ It's like people sharing their stories and the other resources such as 
webinars and local place(s). It’s almost like a portal to your world .” 
  
Figure 5. TBI World  as a private and secure place to explore TBI -related information and connect with other individuals with TBI (P3)  
P6 wished for a dedicated group for people with TBI where she could feel safe and empowered by making meaningful 
relationships with other ind ividuals with TBI. Her design goal was “I want a new version of Facebook where I can feel 
normal while connecting with others who also have TBI. ” She came up with the new concept of a TBI support group on 
Facebook ( Figure 6): “It would be neat if there wer e one dedicated group for people that had brain injuries where we 
could just get on and share the things that have happened and [ensure] we are still doing well in our life. [In that group] 
we will be with one another and can support each other in that sen se, as ways of coping with life.” She emphasized the 
importance of interpersonal relationships among individuals with TBI, which she could not easily achieve through the 
Facebook support groups she had joined:  “It needs to be more personal where you actual ly got to know one another. ” For 
her, most TBI groups on Facebook felt like a “ big town ” while she preferred one that felt “ more like a small town ”: “This 
is not a good comparison, but I think it should be more like a small -town vibe instead of a big city vibe. ” 
 
 
18 Figure 6: Smaller support groups on Facebook to connect with others with TBI more closely (P6)  
To develop close interpersonal relationships, she thought the group size needed to be “manageable .” In that way, she 
believed that members could share their little daily moments to develop a lasting relationship and support each other . She 
also indicated tha t some level of group moderation would be necessary, such as scheduling regular meetups, encouraging 
discussion, and ensuring a safe and positive environment.   
4.5 Reduced Perceived Confidence in Communication   
TBI results in cognitive impairments, such as dif ficulty concentrating  and organizing thoughts, all of which can affect 
language comprehension and production capabilities. Several participants reported difficulties understanding meanings in 
sentences while listening to others and reading texts , while  some noted gradual improvements over time. P9 expressed her 
frustration when she realized she could no longer read as effectively as before: “ I almost got lost in focusing and figuring 
out how this [sentence] ties back to others. I felt like I couldn't read. It’s like living in a cloud.” Also, when participants 
communicated verbally or wrote text, some  still found it hard to come up with and connect words and formulate coherent 
sentences: “ I felt these words aren't mine anymore. I do find myself kinda  being at a loss for not knowing what and how to 
say.” (P4).  
Because of their communication challenges, some participants stated that they became  very self-conscious when 
engaging in social situations, as indicated in P5's account: “ Being self -conscious ab out making mistakes and caring about 
what other people think about me can result in keeping you from doing what I'm looking to do. ” In particular, s everal 
participants reported feeling overly conscious about behaving inappropriately in social settings. P9 shared that “Right after 
the accident, I remember feeling ashamed because I didn't think what I said was inappropriate. To me, I was telling the 
truth, or I was just saying something honestly, but it hurt people's feelings.”  
Participants’ communication cha llenges could lead to  reduced  confidence in communicating with others on social media. 
For example, P5, who decided to use Facebook for career networking, had met many new people on that platform, and 
sometimes he had to ask them something through messagin g. He noted that  he had become overly self-conscious whenever 
he tried to message someone: “ There's a feeling of anxiety of wondering what that person thinks of me such as ‘am I asking 
too much? ’ or ‘is this something that most people would do? ’” Especiall y on Facebook, which is still heavily text -based, 
some participants found it difficult to convey their intentions accurately via text messages. P5 explained: “ I mean it's 
challenging over text. I’m concerned about how the messages are being perceived by th e receiver. ”  
While all participants were technically capable of reading and viewing text, some  noted the challenge of understanding 
others' intentions in text messages: “ For any sort of text communication, you don't have the advantage of seeing somebody's  
face and hearing the inflection in their voice. So, things are easily misinterpreted. So, I have to remind myself of that 
constantly ” (P7). Further, P9 mentioned that it was especially challenging for her to understand the “ nuances ” of others' 
messages: “ I have a hard time understanding. Like, I might miss the joke and I have a hard time understanding sarcasm. ” 
4.5.1  Solutions  
Five participants chose to create ideas for regaining their confidence in communication. One line of ideas  focused on 
supports for language comprehension and production. They wished  for ways to identify the meanings of certain words or 
some portions of sentences that did not come to them clearly. P9, for instance, hoped for a built -in feature that would read 
out parts of texts that were unclear to her. She thought the option of hearing unclear words would help her " reaffirm " what 
she saw. P4 suggested that displaying word meanings visually would be helpful for when he occasionally ran into words 19 whose meanings he could not recall: “Without a doubt, [I hope] something that you just click it and then visually tell you 
what it is. ”  
Some participants wished for more direct help composing messages, particularly tools that could help them articulate 
their thoughts an d then find and connect words to make their messages more organized. For example, P10 envisioned a 
writing aid that could automatically compose messages using a few keywords: “ So you have a vague idea, but  not sure 
how to transpose that into sentenc es that communicate properly or efficiently. So, you toss out some topics that you want 
to address, just word levels. And the system compresses and connects, and then it makes a coherent sentence. And then 
you can just accept or dismiss or redo it .” P4’s i dea was a text -prediction -like system that could help find the words to fill 
in the gaps between words that he had already typed: “ In case you have a word that you're struggling with, you can put a 
little Asterix mark [as a placeholder] then something tell s me these are all the words [you can include]. ” 
P9 proposed a " pre-loaded comments " feature designed to respond to others' posts in a relevant and appropriate way 
using auto -generated responses. In her design sketch ( Figure 7), the system first describes what the post is abou t and show s 
what the typical response types would be ( “respond”, “question”, and “compliment” ). Then, users  can choose between 
pre-loaded comments categorized by different purposes (e.g ., "Did you take this picture?” "Looks beautiful,"  “You are 
adventurous" ). She came up with this idea thinking back to a time when she had unintentionally offended a friend with her 
reply to the friend’s  post: “I accidentally insulted a friend's baby, but I didn't know [at that time]. I was trying to say that 
your baby is really cute, but I think I described it in some way that was actually not that great. I said, ‘it looked like a 
squirrel.’ You're not supposed to say that.”   
 
 
Figure 7: Pre-loaded comments to help users appropriately respond to others’ posts (P9)  
P5 came up with an idea to help him be more confident in communication, rather than worrying about how to compose 
messages and how others perceived him.  His proposed solution was  automatic prompts that would constantly remind him 
about t he positive and proactive attitude he would like to have. He created lists of sentences that would cue him during 
social interactions, for example “recipient does not have bad intentions. ” Also , he created checklists for “ conveying good 
intentions through messaging. ” Finally, he added the Bible verse “ Not letting any unwholesome talk come out of your 
mouth, but only what is helpful for building others up.”, to use as a reminder whenever he felt he was “ being  less inhibited 
with my mouth .” To internalize the se attitudes , he believed it would be important to repeat them, so he came up with the 
20 idea of an automated reminder system: “ If I just have something that is gonna come across my screen regardless of whether 
I remembered to look at it or not, that'd be he lpful.”   
5 DISCUSSION  
In our findings, we first discovered that participants did recognize the benefits that social media provided , which had been 
examined in prior studies in terms of information access [1,18,100,114] , memory aids  [109] , and network and relationship 
building  [1,18,32,55,72,100] . Initially after injury, participants  restricted their use of social media due to basic sensory and 
cognitive problems, but after a while, they resumed accessing Facebook regularly, which corroborated  the previous 
findings [42,72] . The majority of them, however, continued to experience various TBI symptoms which had changed the 
way they used and perceived social media after injury. The changes they reported in their Facebook usage did not just 
includ e (primarily reduced) time spent on Facebook, but also voluntary limiting of their social connections, presence, and 
self-presentation activity in their Facebook use. In fact, many reported  limiting their Facebook presence and social 
interaction and being reluctant to actively connect with a wide range of people and sharing personal updates, particularly 
about sustaining, and living with TBI. Previous literature has highlighted  that individuals  with TBI used social media as a 
convenient method for compensating for their social isolation and reduced social opportunities  [1,32,55,100] . Our findings, 
however, suggest that individuals with TBI could  not fully capitalize on the opportunities for  connection offered by social 
media . This also echo es Morrow and colleagues’ recent findings that people with TBI use social media as much as their 
uninjured peers and see its value for social participation, but they might not be able to fully take advantage of its social 
benefits [72].  
We further  charact erized the challenges associated with the changes in Facebook use after injury.  Four major challenges 
were identified from participants ’ lived social media experience : (1) interface, feature , and information overload, (2) 
triggering experience , (3) self -presentation and priv acy concerns related to TBI, and (4) reduced perceived confidence in 
communication in a social media context. Some of these challenges (1,2) are often seen as universal drawbacks  of social 
media use among uninjured populations. For instance, as many social media sites constantly update and add new features, 
the interfaces can become more complex and overwhelming, which can lead to information overload and discontinued use 
of socia l media [43,115] . Also, negative emotions triggered by being exposed to a constant stream of negative news and 
content and social comparison to peers have been commonly reported across many prior studies [96,99,104,105] . As such , 
participants ’ general perceptions of social media as a source of negativity and social comparison are remarkably similar to 
the feelings and descriptions reported by non -injured individuals in the literatur e [4,70] . This suggests  that general 
drawbacks of social media can aff ect anyone on social media, but individuals with TBI can be particularly vulnerable since 
these challenges can be amplified with their TBI -related symptoms , including  their impaired self -regulation and emotional 
regulation capacities [53,73,74] .  
Moreover , other kinds of challenges (3,4) have been documented in the literature on TBI. For example, avoidance of 
disclosing TBI to others due to fear of being judged or treated d ifferently [87]; altered sense of identity [10,112] ; and 
reduced communication competence [67] and confidence in social interaction [91,101]  have been documented in the 
literature on TBI. Additionally, in studies of people with other cognitive impairments, such as dementia or stroke, similar 
challenges have been reported [38,40,74] . However, the focus of these studies did not directly addres s how these tendencies 
may be reflected in social media use by individuals with TBI.  
As a whole, our  findings suggest that even TBI survivors with relatively high technology literacy, such as our participant 
group, could be affected by many of the universal consequences of social media use , with challenges likely exacerbated 
by sustained TBI-related symp toms (e.g., sensory, cognitive, and emotional ). Moreover, this study extends prior TBI 21 literature by showing how self -presentation and self -disclosure concerns, as well as reduced confidence in communication 
affected their perception and use of social medi a.  
Over all, these results point to the important design direction for future social media accessibility and assistive tools for 
individuals with TBI. Currently, social media accessibility tools primarily focus on sensory level support (primarily vision)  
[45,110] . However, we found that cognitive, emotional, communication impairments and altered sense of identity also 
posed great barriers, which need to be addressed to allow individuals with TBI to fully  take advantage of potential benefits 
of social media.  
To address multifaceted challenges identified from their lived social media experience, participants actively generated 
novel and important solutions . The types of their solutions ideas are mapped in Figure 8  with associated TBI symptoms 
and challenges . Based on the ideas and ske tches for addressing their own challenges, we present design implications to 
reduce barriers for people  with TBI  to capitalize the potential benefits of social media . We do not intend to represent the 
general views of all individuals with TBI especially as TBI symptoms experienced by individuals vary significantly based 
on the type, severity, and location of the injury in the brain [78]. However, we believe that  participants’ ideas offer a useful 
lens for contemplating what is currently lacking and where improvements can be made. Finally, we hope that the design 
implications of our findings could  inform the accessibility improvements for broa der populations that face similar 
challenge.  
 
 
Figure 8: Thematic analysis map of findings  
5.1 Support for Adjusting to Social Media Platforms after Brain Injuries  
A common chronic symptom of TBI is limitations in sensorimotor function  [60], particularly in vision (e.g., light sensitivity, 
blurred vision)  [90]. A variety of technological aids exist to address these symptoms. Many mobile and PC operating 
systems and social media platforms allow users to adjust screen bri ghtness, contrast, and blue light filter settings (e.g., 
[64,69] ) in addition to providing screen readers  [65]. However, w e observed that many participants did not use such options 
during the think -aloud sessions, which was consistent with e vidence that individuals  with TBI might lack training in 
locating and using appropriate assistive technologies for vision and sensorimotor function [21,109] . Therefore, it will be 
necessary that rehabilitation professionals introduce existi ng tools for sensory support and guide to individuals with TBI  
22 on how to use them. In particular, many participants indicated that they could not receive additional therapy outside of the 
time of their diagnosis, which highlights the critical role rehabili tation professionals play in early stages of adjusting to 
social media by recommending appropriate tools based on each survivor’s symptoms and needs.  
More common than sensorimotor challenges were challenges related to cognitive impairments. Many participan ts 
reported cognitive overload when attempting to navigate the complex Facebook interface, including challenges finding 
and focusing on desired content, and ignoring irrelevant information and distractions. These challenges were not a function 
of lack of e xperience: most of our participants had used social media platforms for many years before their injuries, so they 
were already familiar with their functions. However, most TBI training programs focus on teaching basic social media 
features  themselves  [23,56] . 
Instead, when trying to readjust to social media sites , participants requested assistance to compensate for impairments 
in executive functions such as effective switching of attention, and planning and monitoring of social media acti vities. An 
idea from several participants was to create an interactive guide where users can tell the system what they are looking for 
and the system will show them where it is located. As this idea came f rom participants’ challenges in  direct ing or shift ing 
attention to necessary interface components and navigate complex interface features , gaze-based interaction  techniques  
(e.g., [11,37] ) can be useful  in designing guide and training  tools  for social media navigatio n. Further, the combination of 
gaze and speech interaction would be an effective approach for them  because of its resemblance to face -to-face guidance 
sessions [39] that current social media training programs do not offer much yet . 
Our results also suggest that social media sites should be cautious when updating their interfaces. Upon returning to 
social media, many participants reported that they tried  hard to re -adjust to the interface and updates of social media 
platforms through trial and error. Some reported feeling undervalued, helpless and under pressure to adapt to platform 
changes. Therefore, social media designers will need to pay attention to the potential effects of even the smallest changes 
on people with impaired cognitive functioning and provide proper notice to those changes or options to skip an update.  
5.2 Gaining Control over Interface and Information on Social Media  
In addition to accepting and trying to re-adjust  to existing social media sites as -is, participants imagined alternative social 
media platforms that were simpler, more flexible, and customizable. Increasing flexibility and supporting simplification 
and personalization have been core principles of the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) to cognitive 
accessibility for several years [107] . Participants' experiences and ideas for solutions, however, suggest that th ese principles 
have not been adequately addressed on Facebook, and potentially on other current social media platforms.  
While participants' preferences regarding further customization varied, they generally expressed a desire to customize 
font styles as w ell as the size and location of interface components.   Some participants wanted Facebook to have a more 
personalized look where only features they used most frequently remained. These findings suggest that customization and 
simplification support should be  provided both at the interface and feature levels .  
Further, m any of the design solutions participants proposed revolved around gaining control over the amount and type 
of information displayed. Participants reported experiencing information overload due to the sheer amount of information 
to which they were exposed. Thus, some wished for a better priority mechanism for curating their feed to show posts of 
high relevance and interest. In addition, some participants reported being emotionally triggered and negatively influenced 
by posts about certain topics, as well as from certain connections. Overall, most of their ideas were focused on gaining 
‘control’ so that they could filter out unwanted information from their feeds. One idea suggested a configurable and self -
directed feed system that would allow users to narrow d own or filter out posts they want to block, rather than content being 23 dictated by algorithmically curated feeds . Other solutions suggested the ideas to allow users to specify keywords, topics, 
and emotions for posts to be filtered.   
Facebook has already im plemented some of the design ideas participants proposed. Facebook allows users to select up 
to 30 friends as their "Favorites" [66], so that their posts will be shown more frequently and in higher priority. In addition, 
users can unfollow someone or  snooze their posts, which were the features  that several participants  reported using 
frequently. Interestingly, Facebook experimented with "Keyword snooze" in 2018 [76], which allowed users to temporarily 
hide posts based on keywords across the enti re newsfeed. It appears they did not design this feature with enhanced 
accessibility in mind as they  rather introduced it as an effective way to block spoilers from movies and TV shows. As of 
now (2022), it appears Facebook decided to integrate this into the "Hide" feature rather than implement it as a separate 
feature [76]. However, Facebook's Hid e option might be somewhat confusing or ineffective for people with TBI who want 
more control over their feed, as this option is described as allowing users to "see fewer posts like this." Facebook might 
conclude that estimating the characteristics of post s based on their large dataset of user activities and word -embedding 
structures of keywords would be more efficient. Nevertheless, at least from some  participants' perspective, having more  
control over characteristics of posts  to filter content,  as in Twitter’s advanced muting options for words and hashtags [78], 
may enhance their social media experience.  
Overall, our findings suggest that providing greater control over the configuration of social media interface and type 
and source of information needs to be understood as a crucial component for reducing negative feelings associated with 
social media browsing and ultimately reducing cognitive and psychological barriers to so cial media.  As social media users, 
even those without injuries , also frequently experience cognitive fatigue  [43,115]  and simulation s of negative emotions  on 
social media  [96,104,111] , allowing  users more control over interfaces and information would improve overall social media 
experience  for broader user groups and help them to reap the benefit s of social media .  
5.3 Securing  Boundaries between Pre and Post TBI Identities   
One of the interesting findings was the tension between pre - and post -TBI social media identities, and how that affected 
participants’ current social media use. Prior studies emphasized that social media can be beneficial for people with chronic 
health con ditions in seeking information and support [18,42] . However, individuals must be able to actively discuss and 
seek information and support on their health conditions without jeopardizing their privacy and boundaries. Most of our 
participants, howe ver, were still reluctant to disclose their TBI on social media or share their post -injury identity with their 
pre-injury connections.  
 Participants highlighted the difficulties in accepting their post -TBI selves, a finding frequently reported in the TBI 
literature [10,49,112] . Some of them wanted to come up with ideas around this issue, but none of them could directly 
address it during the ideation and sketch sessions. This indicates that the fundamental support on establishing new self -
identity  cannot be solely resolved by technological solutions but  should be combined with counseling and community 
engagement in collaboration with rehabilitation professionals [23,24,48,81] .  
Yet, social media platforms still can offer support for individuals who are undergoing identity reconstruction after a 
TBI. Above all, it is important to prevent individuals with TBI from unintentionally revealing their condition on social 
media. Even when they do not publicly disclose their TBI on their feed o r profile, there are still various ways to 
unintentionally reveal this by joining TBI support groups, following TBI advocacy pages, liking or commenting on TBI -
related content. While such activities should be highly encouraged in the interest of gaining mo re information and support 
on TBI  [18,42] , they could result in a privacy and boundary breach. Therefore, as reflected in the “TBI world” idea (4.4.1), 
allowing to maintain  a secure place separated from users’ Facebook presence  will be a critical element so that individuals 24 with TBI can fully take advantage of potential benefit that social media can offer . A possible feasible  solution may involve 
encouraging individuals with TBI to (temporarily) open and maintain a new social media account so that they can feely 
explore TBI information and connect with others who also  have TBI. In this way, individuals with TBI may be able to 
access social media sites with less anxiety concerning self -disclosure and privacy  for a while . 
Further, as a result of group size and the nature of posts frequently shared within TBI social suppo rt groups on social 
media, several participants found it difficult to establish meaningful  and supportive relationships. To facilitate collaborative 
navigation of the ongoing process to self -acceptance, online support group organizers may consider establishing subgroups 
within their groups  and allocate subgroup facilitators , so that TBI survivors  could build mutually supportive interpersonal 
relationships and share their day -to-day experience.  
5.4 Providing both Language and Social Communication Help  
Reduced confidence in communication abilities is one of the main reasons that many participants choose to be passive on 
social media after TBI. Participants with difficulty retrieving words imagined wa ys where the Facebook interface could 
read words  out loud or visually illustrate them. Some suggested tools that automatically compose messages from a few 
keywords. One participant who was conscious of her social communication skills proposed "pre -loaded c omments" that 
could be used to respond to others' posts. Upon  these ideas, i t was evident that both aids for language and social 
communication support would be necessary to promote active social interaction on social media. Furthermore, it may 
indicate  that many individuals  with TBI  might  be open to using automated communication aids.  
In fact, some  of the language aids envisioned by participants are readily available to some extent. For example, for 
word retrieval, there are numerous pop -up dictionary plug -ins that read out loud and provide word meanings and synonyms 
(e.g., [47]). Also, predic tive text techniques (e.g., [5]) and AI -toolkits that generate sentences based on keywords (e.g., 
[17]) are also available. While most of them are not directly applicable to social media contexts yet , we can foresee that 
AI-powered reading and w riting aids may be able to  address immediate language challenges.   
In contrast, t here are fewer existing solutions to assist with deficits in social communication. In fact, social 
communication requires a complex set of cognitive, psychological , and social  skills such as self -monitoring, emotional 
regulation, inference and expressions of social intentions as well as knowledge and understanding of communication 
contexts and cultural norms [13,33] . Therefore, it is crucial for individuals with TBI to  work with rehabilitation 
professionals to regain various skills and knowledge associated with social communication.  
Among the areas in which technological tools can contribute is monitoring pragmatic forces in messages such as 
sentiment  [59], politeness [6,58]   and formality [83] using text mining models. Additionally, crowdsourcing aids for 
figuring out other people's intentions and writing appropriate responses (e.g., [12]) could also be a viable option. Finally, 
as suggest ed by one participant, systems for reminding and tracking social goals would be useful along with the social 
communication skill development goals that individuals  with TBI  have at different stages of their recovery.    
6 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS  
Our study had several limitations. First, while  our sample included a range of ages ( 31 to 60 years old) and years post -TBI 
(3 to 42 years), a ll participants identified as white . Future studies should include individuals of diverse backgrounds, to 
include diverse social media users with TBI. In addition, remote participation necessitates that participants have 
technological infrastructure in pla ce (e.g., computer, high -speed internet, computer knowledge). As a result, participation 
is limited to those with the proper infrastructure, which may amount to exclusion of other key perspectives. Future studies 
may consider additional strategies for recr uitment of diverse perspectives (e.g., local community group).  25 Second , we also note the potential influence of TBI -related symptoms on active participation. For example, the “Zoom 
fatigue” experienced by many users of video conferencing platforms [7]  appeared to exacerbate several participants’ TBI -
related cognitive fatigue in response to interview questions and specific PD tasks. Future studies should continue to explore  
accessible participatory design for individuals with TBI.  
Finally, as our study focus was to generate solutions to address social media challenges, participant response bias is a 
potential limitation [34]. Participants may have been influenced by the interview questions and PD activities to focus more 
on th e negative aspects of social media use. While we acknowledge this limitation, we believe that the ideas generated 
offer important design considerations to be explored in future studies.    
7 CONCLUSION  
Our study examined the challenges individuals with TBI f ace in accessing and using social media, as well as their ideas 
for solutions. Using remot e participatory design methodology, we engaged 10 adults with TBI to design solutions based 
on Facebook, which is commonly used by people with TBI. Based on  participa nts' challenges and solution ideas, we outline 
implications for facilitating an equal access to the benefits of social media  for people with TBI. As computer -mediated 
communication has become the dominant method for social participation, our findings would inform the technology for 
supporting social participation for people with TBI, and potentially for people with other cogniti ve and communication 
disorders.  
REFERENCES  
[1] Osman Ahmed, S John Sullivan, Anthony Schneiders, Sam Moon, and Paul McCrory. 2013. Exploring the opinions and perspectives o f general 
practitioners towards the use of social networking sites for concussion manage ment. Journal of primary health care  5, 1: 36 –42. 
[2] Dasuni S. Alwis, Edwin B. Yan, Maria Cristina Morganti -Kossmann, and Ramesh Rajan. 2012. Sensory Cortex Underpinnings of Traumatic Brain 
Injury Deficits. PLOS ONE  7, 12: e52169. https://doi.org/10.1371/JOUR NAL.PONE.0052169  
[3] Viviana Amati, Silvia Meggiolaro, Giulia Rivellini, and Susanna Zaccarin. 2018. Social relations and life satisfaction: the r ole of friends. Genus  74, 1: 
7. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41118 -018-0032 -z 
[4] Helmut Appel, Alexander L Gerlach, and J an Crusius. 2016. The interplay between Facebook use, social comparison, envy, and depression. Current 
opinion in psychology  9: 44 –49. 
[5] Apple. 2022. Use predictive text on iPhone. Apple Inc. Retrieved September 9, 2022 from https://support.apple.com/en -
ca/guide/iphone/iphd4ea90231/ios  
[6] Malika Aubakirova and Mohit Bansal. 2016. Interpreting Neural Networks to Improve Politeness Comprehension.  
[7] Jeremy N. Bailenson . 2021. Nonverbal overload: A theoretical argument for the causes of Zoom fatigue. Technology, Mind, and Behavior  2, 1. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/tmb0000030  
[8] Christina Baker -Sparr, Tessa Hart, Thomas Bergquist, Jennifer Bogner, Laura Dreer, Shannon Juengst, D avid Mellick, Therese M. O’Neil -Pirozzi, 
Angelle M. Sander, and Gale G. Whiteneck. 2018. Internet and Social Media Use After Traumatic Brain Injury: A Traumatic Brain  Injury Model 
Systems Study. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation  33, 1: E9 –E17. https:// doi.org/10.1097/HTR.0000000000000305  
[9] Mark Theodore Bayley, Robyn Tate, Jacinta Mary Douglas, Lyn S. Turkstra, Jennie Ponsford, Mary Stergiou -Kita, Ailene Kua, and Peter Bragge. 
2014. INCOG Guidelines for Cognitive Rehabilitation Following Traumatic Brain I njury. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation  29, 4: 290 –306. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/HTR.0000000000000070  
[10] Elizabeth Jane Beadle, Tamara Ownsworth, Jennifer Fleming, and David Shum. 2016. The Impact of Traumatic Brain Injury on Self -Identity. Journal 
of Hea d Trauma Rehabilitation  31, 2: E12 –E25. https://doi.org/10.1097/HTR.0000000000000158  
[11] Roman Bednarik, Hana Vrzakova, and Michal Hradis. 2012. What do you want to do next: a novel approach for intent prediction i n gaze -based 
interaction . In Proceedings of th e symposium on eye tracking research and applications , 83–90. 
[12] Michael S. Bernstein, Greg Little, Robert C. Miller, Björn Hartmann, Mark S. Ackerman, David R. Karger, David Crowell, and Ka trina Panovich. 
2010. Soylent: A Word Processor with a Crowd Inside . In Proceedings of the 23rd annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology , 
313–322. https://doi.org/10.1145/1866029.1866078  
[13] Cristina Bornhofen and Skye McDonald. 2008. Comparing Strategies for Treating Emotion Perception Deficits in  Traumatic Brain Injury. Journal of 
Head Trauma Rehabilitation  23, 2: 103 –115. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.HTR.0000314529.22777.43  
[14] Fernando H. F. Botelho. 2021. Accessibility to digital technology: Virtual barriers, real opportunities. Assistive Technology  33, sup1: 27 –34. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10400435.2021.1945705  26 [15] Brain Injury Association of America. 2022. About Brain Injury: Brain Injury Overview. Brain Injury Association of America. Re trieved September 4, 
2022 from https://www.biausa.org/brain -injury/a bout-brain -injury/basics/overview  
[16] Laura F Bright, Susan Bardi Kleiser, and Stacy Landreth Grau. 2015. Too much Facebook? An exploratory examination of social m edia fatigue. 
Computers in Human Behavior  44: 148 –155. 
[17] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, M elanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, 
Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert -Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey 
Wu, Clemens Winter , Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam 
McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language Models are Few -Shot Learners.  
[18] Melissa Brunner, Bronwyn Hemsley, Stuart Palmer, Stephen Dann, and Leanne Togher. 2015. Review of the literature on the use of social media by 
people with traumatic brain injury (TBI). Disability and Rehabilitation  37, 17: 1511 –1521. https://doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2015.1045992  
[19] Melissa Brunner, Bronwyn Hemsley, Leanne Togher, and Stuart Palmer. 2017. Technology and its role in rehabilitation for people  with cognitive -
communication disability following a traumatic brain injury (TBI). Brain Injury  31, 8: 1028 –1043. https://doi.org/1 0.1080/02699052.2017.1292429  
[20] Melissa Brunner, Stuart Palmer, Leanne Togher, Stephen Dann, and Bronwyn Hemsley. 2019. Content Analysis of Tweets by People with Traumatic 
Brain Injury (TBI): Implications for Rehabilitation and Social Media Goals. https://doi .org/10.24251/HICSS.2019.523  
[21] Melissa Brunner, Stuart Palmer, Leanne Togher, Stephen Dann, and Bronwyn Hemsley. 2020. “If I knew what I was doing on Twitte r then I would 
use it more”: Twitter experiences and networks of people with traumatic brain injury (T BI). Brain Impairment  21, 1: 1 –18. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/BrImp.2019.12  
[22] Melissa Brunner, Stuart Palmer, Leanne Togher, and Bronwyn Hemsley. 2019. ‘I kind of figured it out’: the views and experienc es of people with 
traumatic brain injury (TBI) in using so cial media -self-determination for participation and inclusion online. International Journal of Language & 
Communication Disorders  54, 2: 221 –233. https://doi.org/10.1111/1460 -6984.12405  
[23] Melissa Brunner, Rachael Rietdijk, and Leanne Togher. 2022. Training R esources Targeting Social Media Skills to Inform Rehabilitation for People 
Who Have an Acquired Brain Injury: Scoping Review . Journal of Medical Internet Research  24, 4: e35595. https://doi.org/10.2196/35595  
[24] Melissa Brunner, Leanne Togher, Stuart Palmer, S tephen Dann, and Bronwyn Hemsley. 2021. Rehabilitation professionals’ views on social media use 
in traumatic brain injury rehabilitation: gatekeepers to participation. Disability and Rehabilitation  43, 14: 1955 –1964. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09638288.2019.1 685604  
[25] Lindsey Byom and Lyn S. Turkstra. 2017. Cognitive task demands and discourse performance after traumatic brain injury. International Journal of 
Language & Communication Disorders  52, 4: 501 –513. https://doi.org/10.1111/1460 -6984.12289  
[26] Anneli Cassel,  Skye McDonald, Michelle Kelly, and Leanne Togher. 2019. Learning from the minds of others: A review of social cognition treat ments 
and their relevance to traumatic brain injury. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation  29, 1: 22 –55. https://doi.org/10.1080/09602 011.2016.1257435  
[27] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2021. Getting Better After a Mild TBI or Concussion. Retrieved September 9, 2022 from 
https://www.cdc.gov/traumaticbraininjury/concussion/getting -better.html  
[28] Jinghui Cheng, Dorian Anderson, Cynth ia Putnam, and Jin Guo. 2017. Leveraging Design Patterns to Support Designer -Therapist Collaboration When 
Ideating Brain Injury Therapy Games. In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer -Human Interaction in Play , 291 –303. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/31 16595.3116600  
[29] Mina Choi and Catalina L Toma. 2014. Social sharing through interpersonal media: Patterns and effects on emotional well -being. Computers in Human 
Behavior  36: 530 –541. 
[30] Elliot Cole and Parto Dehdashti. 1990. Interface design as a prosthesis fo r an individual with a brain injury. ACM SIGCHI Bulletin  22, 1: 28 –32. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/101288.101293  
[31] Aurora Constantin, Cristina Alexandru, Jessica Korte, Cara Wilson, Jerry Alan Fails, Gavin Sim, Janet C. Read, and Eva Erikss on. 2021. Distributing  
participation in design: Addressing challenges of a global pandemic. International Journal of Child -Computer Interaction  28: 100255. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2021.100255  
[32] J. Conway, T. Flamini, S. Harton, and L. Gower. 2012. Staying connected throug h social media: connections for compassionate caring. In 10th Annual 
Conference on Brain Injury of the North American Brain Injury Society’s, NABIS, E14 -15. 
[33] Cynthia A. Dahlberg, Christopher P. Cusick, Lenore A. Hawley, Jody K. Newman, Clare E. Morey, Cynth ia L. Harrison -Felix, and Gale G. Whiteneck. 
2007. Treatment Efficacy of Social Communication Skills Training After Traumatic Brain Injury: A Randomized Treatment and Def erred Treatment 
Controlled Trial. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation  88, 12: 1561 –1573. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2007.07.033  
[34] Nicola Dell, Vidya Vaidyanathan, Indrani Medhi, Edward Cutrell, and William Thies. 2012. “Yours is better!”: participant resp onse bias in HCI. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Facto rs in Computing Systems , 1321 –1330. https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208589  
[35] Fenne große Deters and Matthias R. Mehl . 2013. Does Posting Facebook Status Updates Increase or Decrease Loneliness? An Online Social 
Networking Experiment. Social Psychological and Personality Science  4, 5: 579 –586. https://doi.org/10.1177/1948550612469233  
[36] Jacinta Douglas. 2020. Loss of friend ship following traumatic brain injury: A model grounded in the experience of adults with severe injury. 
Neuropsychological Rehabilitation  30, 7: 1277 –1302. https://doi.org/10.1080/09602011.2019.1574589  
[37] Andrew T Duchowski . 2018. Gaze -based interaction: A 30 year retrospective. Computers & Graphics  73: 59 –69. 
[38] Eva Eggenberger, Katharina Heimerl, and Michael I. Bennett. 2013. Communication skills training in dementia care: a systemati c review of 
effectiveness, training conten t, and didactic methods in different care settings. International Psychogeriatrics  25, 3: 345 –358. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1041610212001664  
[39] M. Elepfandt and M. Grund. 2012. Move it there, or not? The design of voice commands for gaze with speech. In Proce edings of the 4th workshop on 
eye gaze in intelligent human machine interaction , 1–3. 27 [40] Caroline S Ellis -Hill and Sandra Horn. 2000. Change in identity and self -concept: a new theoretical approach to recovery following a stroke. Clinical 
Rehabilitation  14, 3 : 279 –287. https://doi.org/10.1191/026921500671231410  
[41] Nicole B. Ellison, Jessica Vitak, Rebecca Gray, and Cliff Lampe. 2014. Cultivating Social Resources on Social Network Sites: Facebook Relationship 
Maintenance Behaviors and Their Role in Social Capital Processes. Journal of Computer -Mediated Communication  19, 4: 855 –870. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12078  
[42] Margaret A. Flynn, Arianna Rigon, Rachel Kornfield, Bilge Mutlu, Melissa C. Duff, and Lyn S. Turkstra. 2019. Characterizing c omputer -mediated 
communica tion, friendship, and social participation in adults with traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury  33, 8: 1097 –1104. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02699052.2019.1616112  
[43] Shaoxiong Fu, Hongxiu Li, Yong Liu, Henri Pirkkalainen, and Markus Salo. 2020. Social media overl oad, exhaustion, and use discontinuance: 
Examining the effects of information overload, system feature overload, and social overload . Information Processing & Management  57, 6: 102307. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2020.102307  
[44] Ryan Colin Gibson, Mark D. Du nlop, and Matt -Mouley Bouamrane. 2020. Lessons from Expert Focus Groups on how to Better Support Adults with 
Mild Intellectual Disabilities to Engage in Co -Design. In The 22nd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility , 1–
12. htt ps://doi.org/10.1145/3373625.3417008  
[45] Cole Gleason, Patrick Carrington, Lydia B. Chilton, Benjamin M. Gorman, Hernisa Kacorri, Andrés Monroy -Hernández, Meredith Ringel Morris, 
Garreth W. Tigwell, and Shaomei Wu. 2019. Addressing the Accessibility of Social Media. In Conference Companion Publication of the 2019 on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing , 474 –479. https://doi.org/10.1145/3311957.3359439  
[46] Amy L Gonzales and Jeffrey T Hancock. 2008. Identity shift in computer -mediated environment s. Media Psychology  11, 2: 167 –185. 
[47] Good Word Guide. 2021. Instant Dictionary by GoodWordGuide.com. Good Word Guide. Retrieved September 9, 2022 from 
https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/instant -dictionary -by-goo/mfembjnmeainjncdflaoclcjadfhpoim?hl=en  
[48] Fergus Gracey, Jonathan J. Evans, and Donna Malley. 2009. Capturing process and outcome in complex rehabilitation interventio ns: A “Y -shaped” 
model. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation  19, 6: 867 –890. https://doi.org/10.1080/09602010903027763  
[49] Fergus Gracey,  Katrina Vicentijevic, and Abigail Methley. 2021. The Y -Shaped model of psychological adaptation after brain injury: An acceptance 
and commitment perspective. In Acceptance and Commitment Therapy and Brain Injury: A Practical Guide for Clinicians (1st ed.) , Willis Curvis and 
Abigail Methley (eds.). Routledge, 16 –25. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003024408 -4 
[50] Niels Hendriks, Karin Slegers, and Pieter Duysburgh. 2015. Codesign with people living with cognitive or sensory impairments:  a case for method 
stories an d uniqueness. CoDesign 11, 1: 70 –82. https://doi.org/10.1080/15710882.2015.1020316  
[51] IDEO. Design Kit. Retrieved September 12, 2022 from https://www.designkit.org/methods/3  
[52] Walter D Johnson and Dylan P Griswold. 2017. Traumatic brain injury: a global challen ge. The Lancet Neurology  16, 12: 949 –950. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474 -4422(17)30362 -9 
[53] Mary R.T Kennedy and Carl Coelho. 2005. Self -Regulation after Traumatic Brain Injury: A Framework for Intervention of Memory and Problem 
Solving . Seminars in Speech and  Language  26, 04: 242 –255. https://doi.org/10.1055/s -2005 -922103  
[54] Jessica M. Ketchum, Mitch Sevigny, Tessa Hart, Therese M. O’Neil -Pirozzi, Angelle M. Sander, Shannon B. Juengst, Thomas F. Bergquist, Laura E. 
Dreer, and Gale G. Whiteneck. 2020. The Associat ion Between Community Participation and Social Internet Use Among Adults With Traumatic Brain 
Injury. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation  35, 4: 254 –261. https://doi.org/10.1097/HTR.0000000000000566  
[55] Andrea M. Kilov, Leanne Togher, Emma Power, and Lyn Tur kstra. 2010. Can teenagers with traumatic brain injury use Internet chatrooms? A 
systematic review of the literature and the Internet . Brain Injury  24, 10: 1135 –1172. https://doi.org/10.3109/02699052.2010.490511  
[56] Giulio Lancioni, Lorenzo Desideri, Nirbhay S ingh, Mark O’Reilly, and Jeff Sigafoos. 2021. Technology options to help people with dementia or 
acquired cognitive impairment perform multistep daily tasks: a scoping review. Journal of Enabling Technologies  15, 3: 208 –223. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/JET -11-2020 -0048  
[57] Edmund W J Lee, Shirley S Ho, and May O Lwin. 2017. Explicating problematic social network sites use: A review of concepts, t heoretical frameworks, 
and future directions for communication theorizing . New Media & Society  19, 2: 308 –326. 
[58] Hajin Lim.  2021. Designing to support sense making in cross -lingual computer -mediated communication using NLP techniques. Cornell University.  
[59] Hajin Lim, Dan Cosley, and Susan R Fussell. 2018. Beyond Translation: Design and Evaluation of an Emotional and Contextual K nowledge Interface 
for Foreign Language Social Media Posts. Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574  
[60] Li-Fong Lin, Tsan -Hon Liou, Chaur -Jong Hu, Hon -Ping Ma, Ju -Chi Ou, Yung -Hsiao Chiang, Wen -Ta Chiu, Shin -Han Tsai, and Woei -Chyn Chu. 
2015. Balance function and sensory integration after mild traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury  29, 1: 41 –46. 
https://doi.org/10.3109/02699052.2014.955881  
[61] Sheila MacDonald. 2017. Introducing the model of cognitive -communication competence: A model to guide evidence -based communication 
interventions after brain injury. Brain Injury  31, 13 –14: 1760 –1780. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699052.2017.1379613  
[62] Theodore Mac now, Tess Curran, Courtney Tolliday, Kirsti Martin, Madeline McCarthy, Didem Ayturk, Kavita M. Babu, and Rebekah Mannix. 2021 . 
Effect of Screen Time on Recovery From Concussion . JAMA Pediatrics  175, 11: 1124. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2021.278 2 
[63] Angela Mastrianni, Leah Kulp, and Aleksandra Sarcevic. 2021. Transitioning to Remote User -Centered Design Activities in the Emergency Medical 
Field During a Pandemic. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3443444  
[64] Meta. 2022. How do I adjust the text contrast of the Facebook? Meta. Retrieved September 9, 2022 from 
https://www.facebook.com/help/1091929780828042  28 [65] Meta. 2022. Which screen reader should I use for Facebook? Meta. Retrieved September 9, 2022 from 
https://www.facebook.com/help/485531161504971  
[66] Meta. 2022. See and manage Favorites on your Facebook Feed. Meta. Retrieved September 9, 2022 from 
https://www.f acebook.com/help/1634545223376778  
[67] Peter Meulenbroek, Bryan Ness, Rik Lemoncello, Lindsey Byom, Sheila MacDonald, Therese M. O’Neil -Pirozzi, and McKay Moore Sohlberg. 2019. 
Social communication following traumatic brain injury part 2: Identifying effective treatment ingredients. International Journal of Speech -Language 
Pathology  21, 2: 128 –142. https://doi.org/10.1080/17549507.2019.1583281  
[68] Peter Meulenbroek and Lyn S. Turkstra. 2018. Response to text -based social cues in the formation of causal attributions in adults with traumatic brain 
injury. Brain Injury  32, 13 –14: 1720 –1724. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699052.2018.1532531  
[69] Microsoft. 2022. Make Windows easier to see . Microsoft. Retrieved September 9, 2022 from https://support.microsoft.com/en -us/windows/ma ke-
windows -easier -to-see-c97c2b0d -cadb -93f0-5fd1-59ccfe19345d  
[70] Claire Midgley, Sabrina Thai, Penelope Lockwood, Chloe Kovacheff, and Elizabeth Page -Gould. 2021. When every day is a high school reunion: 
Social media comparisons and self -esteem. Journal of Pe rsonality and Social Psychology  121, 2: 285.  
[71] Nathaniel v Mohatt, Carlee J Kreisel, and Lisa A Brenner. 2021. Engaging Those Living With Moderate to Severe TBI and Their C aregivers in Research. 
Journal of Patient Experience  8: 237437352199885. https://doi.o rg/10.1177/2374373521998852  
[72] Emily L Morrow, Fangyun Zhao, Lyn Turkstra, Catalina Toma, Bilge Mutlu, and Melissa C Duff. 2021. Computer -Mediated Communication in Adults 
With and Without Moderate -to-Severe Traumatic Brain Injury: Survey of Social Media Use. JMIR Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies  8, 3: 
e26586. https://doi.org/10.2196/26586  
[73] M. v. Morton and P. Wehman. 1995. Psychosocial and emotional sequelae of individuals with traumatic brain injury: a literatur e review and 
recommendations . Brain Inju ry 9, 1: 81 –92. https://doi.org/10.3109/02699059509004574  
[74] Debjani Mukherjee, Rebecca L. Levin, and Wendy Heller. 2006. The Cognitive, Emotional, and Social Sequelae of Stroke: Psychol ogical and Ethical 
Concerns in Post -Stroke Adaptation. Topics in Stroke R ehabilitation  13, 4: 26 –35. https://doi.org/10.1310/tsr1304 -26 
[75] Michael Muller and Allison Druin. 2002. Participatory Design: The Third Space in HCI. Handbook of HCI.  
[76] Shruthi Muraleedharan. 2018. Keyword Snooze: A New Way to Help Control Your News Feed. Met a. Retrieved September 9, 2022 from 
https://about.fb.com/news/2018/06/keyword -snooze -a-new-way-to-help-control -your-news -feed/  
[77] David Nandigam, Judith Symonds, Nicola Kayes, and Kathryn McPherson. 2010. Mobile phone user interface design for patients wi th traumatic brain 
injury . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference of the NZ Chapter of the ACM Special Interest Group on Human -Computer Interaction  on 
ZZZ - CHINZ ’10, 69 –72. https://doi.org/10.1145/1832838.1832850  
[78] NICHD - Eunice Kennedy Shriver N ational Institute of Child Health and Human Development. What are common symptoms of traumatic brain injury 
(TBI)? . Retrieved September 12, 2022 from https://www.nichd.nih.gov/health/topics/tbi/conditioninfo/symptoms  
[79] Nielson Norman Group. Using “How Might  We” Questions to Ideate on the Right Problems. Retrieved September 12, 2022 from 
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how -might -we-questions/  
[80] Julia DeBlasio Olsheski, Bruce N. Walker, and Jeff McCloud. 2011. In -vehicle assistive technology (IVAT) for drivers who have survived a traumatic 
brain injury . In The proceedings of the 13th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and accessibility - ASSETS ’11 , 257. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2049536.2049595  
[81] Tamara Ownsworth and Catherine Haslam. 2016. Impact of rehabilitation on self -concept following traumatic brain injury: An exploratory systematic 
review of intervention methodology and efficacy. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation  26, 1: 1 –35. https://doi.org/10.1080/09602011.2014.977924  
[82] Michael Quinn Patton.  2014. Qualitative research & evaluation methods: Integrating theory and practice. Sage publications.  
[83] Ellie Pavlick and Joel Tetreault. 2016. An Empirical Analysis of Formality in Online Communication. Transactions of the Assoc iation for 
Computational Ling uistics  4: 61 –74. https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00083  
[84] Stéphanie Pinard, Carolina Bottari, Catherine Laliberté, Hélène Pigot, Marisnel Olivares, Mélanie Couture, Sylvain Giroux, an d Nathalie Bier. 2021. 
Design and usability evaluation of COOK, an assistive  technology for meal preparation for persons with severe TBI. Disability and Rehabilitation: 
Assistive Technology  16, 7: 687 –701. https://doi.org/10.1080/17483107.2019.1696898  
[85] Cecile J. Proctor and Lisa A. Best. 2019. Social and psychological influences on  satisfaction with life after brain injury. Disability and Health Journal  
12, 3: 387 –393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dhjo.2019.01.001  
[86] Megan Reynolds, Simon Driver, and Monica Bennett. 2018. The social network – using social media to support individuals with  traumatic brain injury 
participating in a pilot study weight -loss program . Brain Injury  32, 12: 1450 –1454. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699052.2018.1496480  
[87] Gerard A. Riley and Barbara F. Hagger. 2015. Disclosure of a stigmatized identity: A qualitative study  of the reasons why people choose to tell or not 
tell others about their traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury  29, 12: 1480 –1489. https://doi.org/10.3109/02699052.2015.1071427  
[88] Elizabeth B. -N. Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers. 2008. Co -creation and the new la ndscapes of design. CoDesign 4, 1: 5 –18. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15710880701875068  
[89] D. Schuler and A. Namioka. 2017. Participatory Design  Principles and Practices. CRC Press.  
[90] Nilkantha Sen. 2017. An insight into the vision impairment following traumatic br ain injury. Neurochemistry International  111: 103 –107. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuint.2017.01.019  
[91] Joanna Shorland and Jacinta M. Douglas. 2010. Understanding the role of communication in maintaining and forming friendships following traumatic 
brain injur y. Brain Injury  24, 4: 569 –580. https://doi.org/10.3109/02699051003610441  
[92] Carmit -Noa Shpigelman and Carol J. Gill. 2014. Facebook Use by Persons with Disabilities. Journal of Computer -Mediated Communication  19, 3: 29 610–624. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.1205 9 
[93] Geertje Slingerland, Maria Murray, Stephan Lukosch , John McCarthy, and Frances Brazier. 2022. Participatory Design Going Digital: Challenges and 
Opportunities for Distributed Place -Making. Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) . https://doi.org/10.1007/s10606 -022-09438 -3 
[94] McKay Moore Sohlberg and Cathe rine A. Mateer. 2001. Improving Attention and Managing Attentional Problems. Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences 931, 1: 359 –375. https://doi.org/10.1111/J.1749 -6632.2001.TB05790.X  
[95] C. Spinuzzi. 2005. The Methodology of Participatory Design. Technica l Communication  52, 2: 163 –174. 
[96] Stefan Stieglitz and Linh Dang -Xuan. 2013. Emotions and Information Diffusion in Social Media —Sentiment of Microblogs and Sharing Behavior. 
Journal of Management Information Systems  29, 4: 217 –248. https://doi.org/10.2753/MI S0742 -1222290408  
[97] Nino Stocchetti and Elisa R. Zanier. 2016. Chronic impact of traumatic brain injury on outcome and quality of life: a narrati ve review. Critical Care  
20, 1: 148. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054 -016-1318 -1 
[98] Catalina L Toma and Jeffrey T Hanco ck. 2013. Self -affirmation underlies Facebook use. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin  39, 3: 321 –331. 
[99] Madeline Toubiana and Charlene Zietsma. 2017. The Message is on the Wall? Emotions, Social Media  and the Dynamics of Institutional Complexity. 
Academy of Management Journal  60, 3: 922 –953. https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2014.0208  
[100]  Theodore Tsaousides, Yuka Matsuzawa, and Matthew Lebowitz. 2011. Familiarity and prevalence of Facebook use for social networ king among 
individuals with traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury  25, 12: 1155 –1162. https://doi.org/10.3109/02699052.2011.613086  
[101]  L.S. Turkstra, R.S. Norman, B. Mutlu, and M.C. Duff. 2018. Impaired theory of mind in adults with traumatic brain injury: A r eplication and extension 
of findings. Neuropsychologia  111: 117 –122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.01.016  
[102]  Monica Vaccaro, Tessa Hart, John Whyte, and Regina Buchhofer. 2007. Internet use and interest among individuals with traumati c brain i njury: A 
consumer survey. Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology  2, 2: 85 –95. https://doi.org/10.1080/17483100601167586  
[103]  Jennifer J. Vasterling, Shawna N. Jacob, and Ann Rasmusson. 2018. Traumatic Brain Injury and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder:  Conceptual, Diagnostic, 
and Therapeutic Considerations in the Context of Co -Occurrence. The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences  30, 2: 91 –100. 
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.neuropsych.17090180  
[104]  Erin A. Vogel, Jason P. Rose, Lindsay R. Robe rts, and Katheryn Eckles. 2014. Social comparison, social media, and self -esteem. Psychology of Popular 
Media Culture  3, 4: 206 –222. https://doi.org/10.1037/ppm0000047  
[105]  Dian A. de Vries, A. Marthe Möller, Marieke S. Wieringa, Anniek W. Eigenraam, and Kirste n Hamelink. 2018. Social Comparison as the Thief of Joy: 
Emotional Consequences of Viewing Strangers’ Instagram Posts. Media Psychology  21, 2: 222 –245. https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2016.1267647  
[106]  W3C Web Accessibility Initiative. 2022. Cognitive Accessib ility at W3C. W3C Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI). Retrieved September 4, 2022 from 
https://www.w3.org/WAI/cognitive/  
[107]  W3C Web Accessibility Initiative. 2022. All Supplemental Guidance. Supplemental Guidance to WCAG 2. Retrieved September 9, 20 22 from 
https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG2/supplemental/#cognitiveaccessibilityguidance  
[108]  Joshua R Williams. 2019. The use of online social networking sites to nurture and cultivate bonding social capital: A systema tic review of the literature 
from 1997 to 2018. New Media &  Society  21, 11 –12: 2710 –2729.  
[109]  Dana Wong, Kelly Sinclair, Elizabeth Seabrook, Adam McKay, and Jennie Ponsford. 2017. Smartphones as assistive technology fol lowing traumatic 
brain injury: a preliminary study of what helps and what hinders. Disability and Re habilitation  39, 23: 2387 –2394. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09638288.2016.1226434  
[110]  Yale University. 2022. Usability & Web Accessibility: Social Media.  Accessibility at Yale University. Retrieved September 4, 2022 from 
https://usability.yale.edu/web -accessibilit y/articles/social -media  
[111]  Chia‐chen Yang, Sean M. Holden, Mollie D.K. Carter, and Jessica J. Webb. 2018. Social media social comparison and identity di stress at the college 
transition: A dual‐path model . Journal of Adolescence  69, 1: 92 –102. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.adolescence.2018.09.007  
[112]  Mark Ylvisaker and Timothy Feeney. 2000. Reconstruction of Identity After Brain Injury. Brain Impairment  1, 1: 12 –28. 
https://doi.org/10.1375/brim.1.1.12  
[113]  Mark Ylvisaker, Kathryn Mcpherson, Nicola Kayes, and Ellen Pellett. 2008. Metaphoric identity mapping: Facilitating goal setting and engagement in 
rehabilitation after traumatic brain injury. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation  18, 5 –6: 713 –741. https://doi.org/10.1080/09602010802201832  
[114]  V. Youcha. 2010. Education and outreac h in the 21st century: using friends, tweets, and peeps to build an online community. International Brain Injury 
Association’s Eighth World Congress on Brain Injury . Brain Injury  24: 391 –392. 
[115]  Shuwei Zhang, Ling Zhao, Yaobin Lu, and Jun Yang. 2016. Do you g et tired of socializing? An empirical explanation of discontinuous usage behaviour 
in social network services. Information & Management  53, 7: 904 –914. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2016.03.006  
[116]  Homero Gil de Zúñiga, Matthew Barnidge, and Andrés Scherman. 20 17. Social Media Social Capital, Offline Social Capital, and Citizenship: Exploring 
Asymmetrical Social Capital Effects. Political Communication  34, 1: 44 –68. https://doi.org/10.1080/10584609.2016.1227000   
[117]  Google Jamboard . Retrieved September 12, 2022 from https://jamboard.google.com  
 
 