1
Estimating ensemble likelihoods for the Sentinel-1
based Global Flood Monitoring product of the
Copernicus Emergency Management Service
Christian Krullikowski, Candace Chow, Marc Wieland, Sandro Martinis, Bernhard Bauer-Marschallinger,
Florian Roth, Patrick Matgen, Marco Chini Senior Member, IEEE , Renaud Hostache, Yu Li, Peter
Salamon
Abstract |The Global Flood Monitoring (GFM) sys-
tem of the Copernicus Emergency Management Service
(CEMS) addresses the challenges and impacts that
are caused by ooding. The GFM system provides
global, near-real time ood extent masks for each
newly acquired Sentinel-1 Interferometric Wide Swath
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) image, as well as
ood information from the whole Sentinel-1 archive
from 2015 on. The GFM ood extent is an ensemble
product based on a combination of three independently
developed ood mapping algorithms that individually
derive the ood information from Sentinel-1 data. Each
ood algorithm also provides classication uncertainty
information that is aggregated into the GFM ensemble
likelihood product as the mean of the individual classi-
cation likelihoods. As the ood detection algorithms
derive uncertainty information with dierent methods,
the value range of the three input likelihoods must
be harmonized to a range from low [0] to high [100]
ood likelihood. The ensemble likelihood is evaluated
on two test sites in Myanmar and Somalia, showcasing
the performance during an actual ood event and an
area with challenging conditions for SAR-based ood
detection. The Myanmar use case demonstrates the
robustness if ood detections in the ensemble step
disagree and how that information is communicated
to the end-user. The Somalia use case demonstrates
a setting where misclassications are likely, how the
ensemble process mitigates false detections and how the
ood likelihoods can be interpreted to use such results
with adequate caution.
This work was supported by the European Commission
through the project "Provision of an Automated, Global,
Satellite-based Flood Monitoring Product for the Copernicus
Emergency Management Service" (GFM) under Grant
JRC/IPR/2020/OP/0551. Corresponding author: Christian
Krullikowski. The authors Christian Krullikowski, Marc Wieland
and Sandro Martinis are and the author Candace Chow was
with the German Remote Sensing Data Center (DFD), German
Aerospace Center (DLR), D-82234 Oberpfaenhofen, Germany
(email: christian.krullikowski@dlr.de; marc.wieland@dlr.de;
sandro.martinis@dlr.de; c.chow@alumni.utoronto.ca).
The authors Bernhard Bauer-Marschallinger and Florian Roth
are with the Remote Sensing Research Group, Department of
Geodesy and Geoinformation, TU Wien, 1040 Vienna, Austria
(email: bbm@geo.tuwien.ac.at; orian.roth@geo.tuwien.ac.at). The
authors Patrick Matgen, Marco Chini and Yu Li are and Re-
naud Hostache was with the Environmental Research and Inno-
vation Department, Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technol-
ogy, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg (email: patrick.matgen@list.lu;
marco.chini@list.lu; yu.li@list.lu). The author Peter Salamon is with
the Joint Research Centre (JRC) of the European Commission, Ispra,
Italy (email: peter.salamon@ec.europa.eu).Index Terms |CEMS, ensemble classication, Earth
Observation, ood monitoring, likelihoods, radar,
Sentinel-1, uncertainties.
I. Introduction
WITH an amount of 44 % [1] of all occurring dis-
asters and produced economic losses of about 651
billion dollars, oods are among the most severe disasters
worldwide. Although not the deadliest natural disaster,
oods are aecting the largest number of people worldwide
every year. With globally rising temperatures, Dottori et
al. (2018) [2] predict an increase in human losses due to
ooding by up to 70 to 83 % and additional direct ood
damages upwards of 160 to 240 %. Botzen et al. (2019)
[3] identify population and economic growth in disaster-
prone regions as key causes leading to this increase. Apart
from human losses, oods may cause damages to (critical)
infrastructure [4] and may lead to further cascading eects
such as the spread of infectious diseases [5].
Mitigating these eects requires coordinated action on
multiple levels, including but not limited to the imple-
mentation of accurate early warning systems, constant
monitoring of disaster-prone regions and well implemented
risk management procedures [6]. Arguably, the monitoring
requirement, especially at large scale, is currently best
fullled through the utilization of Earth Observation data.
Grimaldi et al. (2016) [7] present a review of dierent ood
data sources and compare optical with synthetic aperture
radar (SAR) sensors. Optical imagery mainly relies on
cloud-free and illuminated data, whereas radar remote
sensing satellites can operate day and night due to their
ability to emit cloud penetrating microwave.
Past studies already highlighted the potential of a syner-
getic use of optical and SAR data in ood mapping [8] and
[9]. However, most studies focus on a single technology,
most frequently microwave remote sensing [10], [11], [12]
and [13]. A comprehensive overview of advantages and
limitations of dierent methods is found in [14].
It can be noted that the aforementioned studies either
focus on specic regions or were not implemented as op-
erational services. Furthermore, a majority of the studies
do not provide any information on the ood classication
uncertainties. Clement et al. (2018) [10] highlight several
sources of uncertainty aecting SAR-based ood extentarXiv:2304.12488v1  [physics.geo-ph]  24 Apr 20232
mapping, for example the ambiguities related to similar
backscatter return over water look-alikes and dry soil, as
well as areas with fuzzy backscatter response, e. g. dense
vegetation, and areas with higher backscatter return over
urban areas. In general, cases where SAR-based ood map-
ping may be hampered and the detection may become less
condent, the classication necessitates and benets from
the inclusion of a dedicated uncertainty analysis [15]. This
complementary output also supports the interpretation
and use of SAR-based ood map products, where end-
users can be alerted to ood features associated with lower
condence, which should be treated with more caution
with respect to risk assessment.
The absence of a fully operational ood service that
also returns condence information culminated in the
request of the Copernicus Emergency Management Service
(CEMS) to integrate technically mature and scientically
validated ood detection algorithms into the Global Flood
Awareness System (GloFAS)1and the European Flood
Awareness System (EFAS)2. Instead of utilizing an ap-
proach based on a single retrieval algorithm, the Joint Re-
search Centre (JRC) as the contracting authority adopted
an ensemble approach, which merges the results of three
matured and independently developed ood algorithms.
A. Conceptual basis of GFM ensemble
The Global Flood Monitoring (GFM) product of the
CEMS continuously processes and analyzes all incoming
Sentinel-1 Ground Range Detected (GRD) Interferometric
Wide swath (IW) data, aiming to detect and monitor ood
events in nearreal time at global scale.
The GFM product builds on an ensemble approach
that combines three mature and independently devel-
oped ood detection algorithms provided by the German
Aerospace Center (DLR), Luxembourg Institute of Science
and Technology (LIST) and Vienna University of Technol-
ogy (TUW). The ood ensemble is computed pixel-wise
and based on a majority voting system, where at least
two algorithms must classify a pixel as ooded or non-
ooded. Further insight into the ood ensemble algorithm
is described by [16].
Besides a pixel-based ood classication, each ood
detection algorithm generates classication uncertainty
information in the form of likelihoods. The GFM ensemble
algorithm then combines the three individual layers of un-
certainty information into a single layer termed ensemble
likelihood. Although, an uncertainty analysis is performed,
the term likelihood is used instead of uncertainty; most
users have an a-priori understanding about likelihoods,
whereas uncertainties describe a negation which may not
be understood as intuitively.
The GFM product is composed of dierent layers sup-
porting the interpretation of ood situations using remote
sensing data. Besides the actual ood extent layer, users
can also download the likelihood data from GloFAS and
1https://www.globaloods.eu/
2https://www.efas.eu/EFAS. In addition, a downloadable exclusion layer informs
about regions where no ood delineation was possible.
These areas correspond to nodata values in both of the
ood and likelihood products.
B. Objectives of ensemble ood detection and interpreta-
tion of ensemble likelihoods
Two sets of objectives drive the ensemble-based ood
detection and the manner in which ensemble likelihoods
are intended to be interpreted and applied by two user
communities: 1) integrating results into further processes
or studies and 2) utilizing results for decision-making
processes.
The rst objective addresses the rst community, con-
sisting of algorithm developers. Ensemble likelihoods may
be used by them to identify subsets of pixels associated
with low condence values as a way to gain insights about
opportunities for improving algorithms so that they return
more accurate predictions. The individual and combined
likelihoods may also serve as a basis for inter-comparing
the results obtained by dierent approaches, thereby po-
tentially improving our understanding of their strengths
and weaknesses.
The second community are data (end-)users. They may
use ensemble likelihoods to minimize adverse consequences
of making potentially costly decisions based on highly
uncertain information. Results of this study may thus
provide a basis on how the two aforementioned use cases
can be used to support decision-making for ood and non-
ood events.
In particular, to evaluate the impact of dierential
decisions made based on ood classications with and
without consideration of ensemble likelihood values, we
examine two land cover types (i. e. agricultural lands,
built environments) of particularly high economic impor-
tance and social consequences. In eect, mean likelihoods
serve as a heuristic indication of overall condence in
the ood prediction, based on an average of available
ood and respective uncertainty outputs from contributing
individual ood algorithms. The values also function as an
indicator of the current capacities/condence of ensemble
algorithms to detect water over certain types of land covers
and uses.
This study focuses on gaining insights on scenarios
that result in regular and over-detections with respect
to dominant land covers. Based on the results, benets
and limitations of the ensemble likelihood approach are
highlighted and provide a starting point to guide further
developments and applications in the two communities.
The application of ensemble likelihoods is evaluated
with two use cases exemplifying ood (Myanmar use case)
and non-ood (Somalia use case) events, respectively. In
particular, the objectives are to accurately delineate ood
extent, while minimizing over- and under-detection. Ex-
tension of case-based assessments provide useful insights
on the generalizability of the ood monitoring algorithm
on a global scale with respect to a more comprehensive
range of land covers/ uses.3
Fig. 1. Condence distribution of likelihood values. Likelihood values
towards 0 correspond to higher condence in non-ood classications,
whereas values towards 100 correspond to higher condence in ood
classications. Low condence in both classications is indicated by
likelihood values towards 50.
Subsequent sections provide detailed descriptions about
how each individual ood algorithm generates uncertainty
information (Section 2), the generation and evaluation of
ensemble likelihoods (Section 3). Data used to conduct the
study is described in Section 4, followed by results (Section
5), discussion (Section 6), conclusions and recommenda-
tions (Section 7).
II. Generation of algorithm likelihoods
The GFM ood ensemble likelihood product attributes to
each valid pixel a likelihood of being ooded given its
recorded Sentinel-1 backscatter value and ancillary data
inputs. The term valid refers to pixels that are considered
to be potentially ooded and included in the compu-
tation. Invalid pixels are excluded through an exclusion
mask. This mask excluded areas blocked by radar shadow,
regions of no Sentinel-1 SAR sensitivity towards ood
dynamics, or areas that are considered non-oodable as
they are located too far away from the next drainage [17].
Ensemble likelihoods are dened in the interval [0, 100].
Likelihood values towards 0 represent lowest condence in
the ensemble ood classication, whereas values towards
100 represent highest condence. Ensemble likelihoods are
used to convert the set of ensemble classications into a
single binary ood classication, representing non-ood
pixels as 0 and ood pixels as 1, respectively. In this
binarization step, a likelihood value of 50 is dened as the
threshold value that separates the two classes (i. e., non-
ood pixels from the interval [0, 49] and ood pixels from
the interval [50, 100]). Condence about the detection
of each respective class increases with likelihood values
towards the lower or higher class boundaries (see Fig. 1).
The ensemble likelihood value is computed pixel-wise
as the mean of the likelihood values attributed to each
valid pixel by the three algorithms. The following sections
describe the independent generation of each set of values.
In general, all likelihoods are in reference to a ood
classication. If the likelihood is low over a certain pixel
or feature, the classication condence that the pixel or
feature is ooded is also low. The specic terms that
are further evaluated in the next sections are dened as
follows:
individual likelihood values: refer to pixel-wise likeli-
hood information generated by each of the three ood
algorithms (i. e., DLR, LIST, TUW)initial mean likelihood values: are computed pixel-
wise based on the average of all available individual
likelihood information, ideally generated by all three
ood algorithms, prior to the application of the en-
semble algorithm
ensemble likelihood values: are updated likelihood
values based on the initial mean likelihood after the
ensemble algorithm is applied
The ensemble algorithm combines the ood detection
and likelihood outputs of the individual ood algorithms.
Although a majority voting system is implemented, split
situations, i. e., cases of classication disagreement occur
where a majority cannot be achieved, e. g. when one out
of three algorithms yields a nodata pixel.
Post-processing steps involve the exclusion of sub-areas
within a given Sentinel-1 scene that overlap with the
reference water and exclusion masks. Clusters with a size
less than a dened threshold of ood pixels are assumed to
be unlikely ooded and re-labeled as non-ood pixels. This
action is termed a blob removal step and eliminates small
fragmented patches. Results following these steps are then
referred to as ensemble classications, see [16]. Likelihood
values corresponding to formerly ooded but excluded
pixels are set to a likelihood value of 0. Likelihood values
corresponding to formerly ooded but blob-removed pixels
are set to a likelihood value of 49, i. e., expressing the
lowest condence in the non-ood regime.
The ensemble algorithm can be applied based on two
approaches: split and consensus. The split approach con-
siders the likelihood values associated with the respec-
tive classication of each ood algorithm and favors the
classication with the highest condence. The consensus
approach is based on majority voting, which sets all
split situations to non-ooded classications, since only
2/3 ood algorithms generate valid but conicting pixel-
wise classications. In eect, a ood classication is only
returned when there is an agreement. The following sub-
sections describe the individual likelihood layers produced
by the individual ood detection algorithms.
A. Computation of DLR fuzzy values
The ood detection algorithm by DLR is a single scene
approach, i. e., the main data input for ood inundation
is a single Sentinel-1 observation. The DLR algorithm ap-
plies fuzzy logic post-processing to measure and to reduce
the uncertainty associated with the water classication,
originally described by [18] and [19]. Three cases inuence
classication uncertainty. In particular, the likelihood of a
pixel being classied as water is low:
if it's radar backscatter is close to the automatically
derived threshold , separating water and non-water;
if the slope at that location is high, since steeper
surfaces are unlikely to retain water; and
if that pixel is connected to other neighboring water
pixels and the resulting area is relatively small. On
the contrary, the uncertainty is low if the pixel is4
Fig. 2. Fuzzy logic approach for discriminating between water and
non-water classes based on SAR backscatter values, denoted as 0
Sentinel-1 backscatter [dB].
connected to other neighboring water pixels and the
resulting area is relatively large.
The three cases or parameters, namely backscatter of
the normalized radar cross section (NRCS), slope and
minimum mapping unit are evaluated separately, resulting
in the generation of three fuzzy layers. The concept of the
fuzzy logic step is exemplied with the consideration of
SAR backscatter values.
Fig. 2 illustrates the application of the fuzzy logic
approach to address the rst case where SAR backscatter
is uncertain. In Fig. 2a, the water/non-water separating
thresholdis dened as the upper fuzzy value x2. This
value represents the boundary between both classes, where
the likelihood of a correct classication is the lowest.
The mean backscatter value of the class water water
is associated with a minimum fuzzy value x1. Pal and
Rosenfeld (1988) [20] describe the negative S-function that
maps numeric to fuzzy values which is also depicted in Fig.
2b.
As the majority of water pixels have backscatter values
around the mean backscatter value, the uncertainty of a
correct classication of these water pixels is low. The fuzzy
logic approach maps high uncertainties to low degrees
of membership to a particular class. For instance, high
uncertainty of a correct pixel-wise classication to the
water class corresponds to a low degree of membership to
that class. The pixel is, therefore, assigned a lower fuzzy
value. The converse is also true, where a low uncertainty
corresponds to a high degree of membership of a givenpixel to the water class; it is assigned a high fuzzy value.
The three individual fuzzy membership functions are in
the range [0, 1]. For easier interpretation and lower storage
requirements, oat values were rescaled to the range [0,
100]. The resulting fuzzy layer is computed as the mean
of all three individual fuzzy layers. A defuzzication value
of 60 is dened as the threshold to mark the distinction
between water and non-water classes.
Pixels classied as water with a fuzzy value of 60 are
treated as water detections of high condence.
B. Computation of LIST probabilities
The ood detection algorithm by LIST applies a change-
detection approach [21], i. e. the ood inundation is per-
formed by detecting backscatter changes of two consecu-
tive Sentinel-1 observations, the most recent SAR scene,
IS1
t 1with the overlapping SAR scene acquired from the
same orbit called reference SAR scene, IS1
t0. As it is a
change detection algorithm, it aims at detecting and map-
ping all decreases of backscattering values with respect to
a reference one. A change detection approach is adopted
because it allows to dierentiate oodwater from perma-
nent water bodies and, at the same time, lter out classes
having water-like backscattering values such as shadows
or smooth surfaces. The oodwater extent for the actual
event is described with IS1
t0and the image dierence to
the pre-event situation is described with IS1
D=IS1
t 1 IS1
t0.
The likelihood of oodwater classication is characterized
by ood probability.
BothIS1
t0andIS1
Dare used for likelihood estimation, the
pixels that have high posterior probability of both water
class and change class are likely to be real ooded pixels.
The probability of being ooded for a given pixel (1) is
dened as the minimum value between the conditional
probability of the water class p(Wj0) and the conditional
probability of the changed class p(Cj0) with regards to
the Sentinel-1 backscatter 0:
p(Fj0;0) =min(p(Wj0);p(Cj0)) (1)
wherep(0) is the marginal distribution of backscatter
values inIS1
t0andp(0) is the marginal distribution of
backscatter dierence values in IS1
D. In case a pixel is also
ooded in the reference image, only IS1
t0is considered for
likelihood estimation of ood classication, see (2).
p(Fj0) =p(Wj0) (2)
As in this case, the likelihood is only calculated from
the backscatter value in IS1
t0, false high ood probability
can be caused by permanent water and other water look-
alike dark areas, these false alarms in binary map has been
removed by comparing the resulting ood map with the
previous ood map. To reduce these false high probabili-
ties in current likelihood map, for non-ood pixels in the
new ood map, their ood probability is the minimum
value between p(Wj0) and the value in the latest previous
likelihood map.5
C. Computation of TUW uncertainties
The ood algorithm by TUW is based on a data cube
approach as introduced by [22] and builds upon a-priori
probability parameters for ood and non-ood conditions
generated from Sentinel-1 time series. Incoming Sentinel-
1 scenes that are subject to ood mapping are classied
by means of Bayesian inference, which is not only com-
putationally slim and NRT-suitable, but also intrinsically
yields likelihood values in terms of posterior probabilities
of the class allocation. For each pixel in a new Sentinel-1
backscatter measurement, the probability of belonging to
either the ood or the non-ood class is inferred.
Based on the Bayes decision rule, higher ("winning")
posterior probabilities dene then the class allocation.
Additionally, the conditional error p(errorj0) can be
dened by the lower posterior probability, see (3),
p(errorj0) =min[p(Fjsigma0);p(NFj0)] (3)
wherep(Fjsigma0) describes the probability of the ood
class andp(NFj0) the probability of the non-ood class
with respect to the Sentinel-1 backscatter 0.
The conditional error as direct measure for uncertainty
enables direct quantication of the lack of condence with
respect to a given decision. Since posterior probabilities
sum up to 1, a higher posterior probability for one class
results in a lower posterior probability for the other class
in the binary classications. Uncertainty is thus dened
between 0.0 and 0.5. A value close to zero represents high
condence, since the probabilities for both classes (ood
and non-ood) indicate a clear decision. High conditional
errors (i. e. close to 0.5) indicate uncertain decisions, as
the new observation is falling into the overlap of the local
ood/no-ood distributions and hence no class is much
more probable than the other one. In such a situation, the
Bayes decision is very uncertain and the classication is
not meaningful.
For all pixels of the incoming Sentinel-1 image, the
conditional errors p(errorj0) are forwarded to the ensem-
ble algorithm, which represent the pixel-wise uncertainties
associated with the ood map of TUW's algorithm. For
easier interpretation and lower storage requirements, the
uncertainties are scaled to values between 0 and 100.
The TUW ood mapping algorithm features some in-
ternal masking of conditions not well represented by the
a-priori probability parameters. This includes an inter-
nal uncertainty mask based on the statistical Sentinel-1
backscatter model of TUW is applied in this algorithm to
exclude poorly-based decisions (i. e., with low reliability),
dened by an upper limit of 0.2 for the conditional error,
reecting a 4:1 probability that the assigned class is
correct.
D. Fusion of likelihoods
In the context of this study, likelihood values of dierent
origins are fused to a single quantity. Probability and
fuzziness can be considered equal in terms of the numerical
expression of the likelihood that is represented in the unitinterval [0, 1]. However, they have to be dierentiated
in the manner in which the two measures handle the
semantic classes water and non-water [23]. Given the
same probability and fuzzy values of for example 0.8, the
representation of likelihood is claried as follows:
A probability of 0.8 represents an 80 % chance of pixel-
wise water detection, where the value is determined based
on pixel frequencies. The likelihood about the chance of a
water or a non-water detection can be maximized as more
observations become available and the pixel-wise water
detection is built on a broader data base.
A fuzzy value of 0.8 represents a pixel that is 80 % water,
describing the degree of membership belonging to that
class, based on its properties. Such properties are dened
through the uncertainty analysis, e. g. the DLR algorithm
attributes a pixel with Sentinel-1 backscatter, slope and
size information that declare its membership to the class
water. The fuzzy value expresses the degree to which it can
be considered to be a (pure) water pixel. The uncertainty
about class ambiguity persists even if more observations
become available. Maximizing the likelihood is however
possible by introducing additional auxiliary datasets that
add to the pixel properties.
This study acknowledges the mathematical and onto-
logical complexities that characterize the formulation of
the two aforementioned types of likelihood generation.
However, in order to return actionable and interpretable
information, the GFM likelihood product simplies the
fusion of likelihood values by computing the average value
of the three algorithm likelihood outputs. While more
advanced approaches have been proposed to bring the two
measures of likelihoods together, e. g. by [24], [23] and [25],
this approach addresses the need for practicality in crisis
information management. This objective is characterized
by the need to make time-critical decisions with informa-
tive and also more easily interpretable products to sup-
port decision-making. Furthermore, the harmonized GFM
likelihood product summarizes the likelihood inputs from
the three water detection algorithms, thereby minimizing
cognitive overload for end-users.
III. Generation of ensemble likelihoods
Combining the likelihood information generated by each
ood algorithm requires value harmonization. TABLE I
outlines each of the three outputs with respective value
ranges. The value ranges indicate the lowest and highest
classication condences as well as the threshold distin-
guishing ood from non-ood. Since the TUW algorithm
outputs uncertainties, a pixel value of 100 represents a
maximum uncertainty value that is comparable to a LIST
probability or a DLR fuzzy value of 0.
The DLR and LIST ood algorithms produce uncertain-
ties that are numerically similar to likelihoods, with low
values indicating low ood classication condence and
vice versa. The uncertainty analysis of TUW produces
an inverse value range, where low values indicate high
likelihood or high ood classication condence and vice
versa.6
TABLE I
Likelihood quantifications of the three individual flood
algorithms
Algorithm Value ranges Type of
[low, threshold, high] likelihood
DLR [0, 60, 100] Fuzzy value
LIST [0, 50, 100] Probability
TUW [100, 50, 0] Uncertainty
By denition, a threshold value of 50 separates the
ood and non-ood pixels in the ensemble likelihood layer.
Fuzzy values F generated from the DLR algorithm are
adapted to this scheme, based on (4).
likelihood DLR =(
100 1:25(100 F); F60
F
1:2; F < 60(4)
The TUW uncertainties U are inverted, following (5).
likelihood TUW =(
100 U; flood TUW = 1
U; flood TUW = 0(5)
Once likelihood values from all three algorithms are
represented in the same range, the ensemble likelihood is
computed as the mean of the individual likelihood layers,
irrespective of nodata values.
The ensemble algorithm computes the result on pixel
level and requires two sets of three input layers each for
ood and likelihood computations, respectively. If two
ood algorithms fail to output data, the required ood
and likelihood layers are generated automatically with the
same geometry as the input Sentinel-1 scene and lled
with zero values stating no ood for the entire scene,
accompanied with zero values stating low likelihoods.
A valid ood or a non-ood pixel is always connected
to a valid likelihood pixel. If a ood pixel holds a nodata
value, the corresponding likelihood pixel also stores a
nodata value.
This behavior has implications for the statistical robust-
ness of the ensemble results. For instance, a ood pixel
that is based on three valid individual classications is
considered to be statistically more robust compared to
a ood pixel that is based on only two valid individual
classications (and one nodata classication). The latter
is a so-called split situation that is resolved through a
consensus approach, i. e., the ensemble algorithm marks
that pixel as not ooded.
Fig. 3 illustrates three dierent cases (C1, C2, C3) to
demonstrate the ensemble classication scheme. In the
rst case C1, 3 out of 3 of the individual algorithms return
a ood classication which is a full consent. In case C2, 2
out of 3 of the individual algorithms return a classication
that disagrees with the third algorithm. This is a major
consent and the pixel is classied as ood or non-ooded
respectively, depending on the majority vote, e. g. [ood,
ood, non-ood] or [non-ood, non-ood, ood]. In case
Fig. 3. Sample inputs generated by each of the three individual ood
algorithms with (a): available ood and likelihood data per algorithm
on pixel level and (b): possible changes in the nal classication. The
cases C1 and C2 handle full and majority agreement respectively.
The case C3 demonstrates a split situation that is resolved through
a conservative agreement with a non-ood result.
C3, one algorithm returns a nodata value and the remain-
ing algorithms disagree on the classication, e. g. [nodata,
ood, non-ood]. The ensemble algorithm resolves the
split situation through a conservative approach and marks
the pixel as non-ooded.
The steps described in this section dene initial ood
mapping likelihoods that are to be corrected with auxiliary
data masking out error-prone regions and excluding areas
of no interest, e. g. reference water that is not ooded
per denition. If these pixels are to be excluded and
were classied as non-ooded, the initial likelihood value
remains unchanged. If pixels to be excluded were classied
as ooded, the respective likelihood value is changed to the
value 49, i. e. the most uncondent likelihood value for the
non-ood class.
IV. Datasets
This section gives an overview on the used datasets and
how they were processed within this study. Two use cases
are presented that showcase a ood event in Myanmar
and a non-ood situation in the semi-arid climate-zone of
Somalia (see Fig. 4). The preprocessing of the Sentinel-1
IW GRDH datasets is described by the overview given in
[26].
The individual ood algorithms exploit Sentinel-1 GRD
IW data which are shown in Fig. 4 (a) and (c). Sentinel-1
data over Myanmar was acquired on 2019-07-16 11:39:44.
Sentinel-1 data over Somalia was acquired on 2019-03-16
02:46:06. The fuzzy logic step of the DLR ood algorithm
uses slope information derived from Copernicus DEM data
[27]. All input datasets were resampled to a common pixel
spacing of 20 x 20 m in the Equi7Grid projection [28].
Land cover information for this study is based on the
global Copernicus Land Cover product from 2019 [29] with
an original pixel spacing of 100 x 100 m that has been
resampled to 20 x 20 m. As for this study, it was decided
to focus on selected pre-dominant land cover types that
are either of particular socio-economic interest or likely to7
Fig. 4. Location of the study areas in Myanmar and Somalia.
The Sentinel-1 scene over Myanmar (a) was acquired on 201907-16
11:39:44. The Sentinel-1 scene over Somalia was acquired on 2019-
03-16 02:46:06. Both study areas are accompanied with an overview
of pre-dominant land cover maps (b) and (d). An exclusion mask
is applied and shows areas where ood computation is performed.
This information is in line with the pixel-wise distribution of land
cover classes for Somalia (e) and Myanmar (f), valid for non-excluded
regions.
be aected from ooding. Fig. 4 (b) and (d) depict the
spatial distribution of predominant land cover types for
the study areas, followed by the class frequencies in Fig.
4 (e) and (f). An exclusion mask is applied, leaving land
cover types that are part of this analysis.
For the Myanmar use case, the land cover type agri-
culture dominates the study area with a pixel coverage
of approx. 90 % followed by the classes of built-up and
permanent water , sharing less than 5 % coverage each.
Land cover types depicting forests and similar classes are
not considered, although shown in green colors in the map,
as they represent a state of dense vegetation that is mostly
excluded from the ood computation.
For the Somalia use case, the land cover type shrubs
dominates the study area with a pixel coverage of approx.
90 % followed by the class agriculture with a pixel coverage
of approx. 10 %.
A crucial part of the presented data relies on a consistent
and robust reference water dataset that was computed
prior to the release of the GFM products. The GFM
reference water dataset exploits a two-years' time series
of Sentinel-1 median backscatter images that were aggre-
gated for each month. Thus, the reference water reects
permanent water which is stable over the reference period
Fig. 5. Quantile-quantile plot comparing predicted probabilities (en-
semble likelihood values) with empirical probabilities from validation
data. Each marker plots into the respective bin range, e. g. [0.0, 0.1].
The marker size denotes the relative number of samples.
of two years and seasonal water bodies that are periodi-
cally ooded over the duration of the reference period.
An exclusion layer denes pixels that are not included
into the nal ensemble output, as examined by [30]. As al-
ready mentioned in section 2, the exclusion layer contains
information about radar shadows, dense vegetation and
permanent low backscatter, i. e., regions where the ood
inundation is hampered, as well as topographic regions
that are not prone to ooding.
In order to evaluate the ensemble likelihood values
validation data covering the Myanmar study area is in-
troduced. The data consists of a binary ood extent map
derived from Sentinel-2 data, which was acquired on 2019-
07-15 with a one-day delay to the acquisition of the
Sentinel-1 data over Myanmar.
V. Results
In relation to the validation data, this study further exam-
ines a quantile-quantile plot supporting the evaluation of
the ensemble likelihoods (see Fig. 5). The quantile-quantile
plot shows the agreement of the computed ensemble likeli-
hood values with the empirical probabilities. The majority
(>80 %) of the pixels fall into the rst and last bins while
the remaining pixels show higher empirical probabilities
compared to the predicted samples.
To address the objectives dened in Section 1.2, sce-
narios are examined to identify specic likelihood regimes
reecting the number of algorithms that were used to
compute the pixel-wise likelihood.
The Myanmar use case represents a known ood event
on July 16, 2019, see Fig. 6 (a) (d).
The likelihoods in subgure (c) represent the initial
mean likelihood values that were computed as the average
of all available pixel-wise ood algorithm likelihood values,
prior to the application of the ensemble algorithm.8
Fig. 6. Series of image chips sampled from the Myanmar (a) (d) and Somalia (e) (h)use case: Sentinel-1A image with backscatter values
(a) and (e), reference water and exclusion mask (b) and (f), likelihoods prior to ensemble (c) and (g) and spatial distribution of ood
classications prior to ensemble (d) and (h).
The classication subgure (d) illustrates the initial
ood classication prior to the application of the ensemble
algorithm. Full consent marks pixels where 3 out of 3
algorithms agree on a ood and non-ood classication, re-
spectively. Major ood and major non-ood indicate pixels
where 2 out of 3 algorithms agree on the classication
of ood or non-ood, respectively, i. e. [ood, ood, non-
ood], and vice versa with [non-ood, non-ood, ood].
It should be noted that [ood, ood, nodata] also results
in a major ood decision; the same applies to major non-
ood decisions with [non-ood, non-ood, nodata]. Split
situations mark pixels where one algorithm cannot classify
a pixel and thus outputs nodata, while the remaining
algorithms disagree on the classication, i. e. [ood, non-
ood, nodata].
Very low initial mean likelihood values are observed over
permanent water features (b). These values primarily cor-
respond to areas that are excluded in the post-processing
step and with initial full non-ood classications (d).
Much higher likelihood values are observed over image
features that correspond to full or major ood classi-
cations. Pixels with medium likelihood values around 50correspond to split situations located along and within
seasonal water bodies. The consensus approach resolves
these split situations to non-ood decisions.
Fig. 7 illustrates split situations in green colors with
likelihoods <50 that are remapped to non-ood decisions.
Thus, 100 % of the split pixels are re-classied to non-
ood, thereby increasing the share of non-ood pixels for
that particular likelihood value. Fig. 7a also shows major
ood pixels in the likelihood range [50, 80] and full ood
pixels with likelihoods >80. A small number of major
ood pixels with likelihoods >50 are excluded from the
nal ensemble results and therefore marked as superior
non-ood with re-assigned likelihood values of 49. As can
be seen in the top right bar plot of Fig. 7b, the count of
initial ood pixels that are remapped to non-ood pixels is
very low, as indicated through the small size of the green
bar. Also, the full non-ood class clearly dominates the
classication types, followed by major non-ood decisions.
In the Myanmar study area, about 10 % of all pixels are
classied as ooded.
The Somalia use case represents a regular monitoring
observation (i. e. non-ood event) on March 16, 2019,9
Fig. 7. Histograms of likelihood distributions for the Myanmar
(a) and (b) and Somalia (c) and (d) use case. Each box contains
a histogram pair prior to the ensemble (a) and (c) and after the
ensemble algorithm was applied (b) and (d). Pixels that were initially
marked as ooded and have been overwritten by the exclusion layer
to non-ooded are marked as superior non-ood. Depending on
the distribution of the likelihood in the initial ood classication,
ensemble ood likelihoods <50 can occur, e. g. a classication with
[ood, ood, non-ood] has the likelihoods [50, 50, 40] with a mean
likelihood of 47. Each colored group sums up to 100 %, i. e., the bar
widths are not comparable but give an indication about the likelihood
distribution within that group. The share of each group on the total
pixel count is given with a bar plot for each of the histograms.
where over-detections are likely to be observed as the
environmental setting mostly covers dry soil, see Fig. 6 (e)
(h). In eect, the use case contains a very limited number
of water pixels in general, which is also reected in the
reference water mask (f). Very low initial mean likelihoods(g) highlight the fact that the majority of the pixels are
initially classied as non-ooded (h). A substantial num-
ber of split situations are observed along meandering river
channels. These split situations represent potential over-
detections that appear as fragmented clusters and do not
follow morphological shapes, e. g.depression boundaries,
and generally correspond to dark Sentinel-1 backscatter
features, i. e. potential water look-alikes.
Fig. 7 (c) and (d) show medium to low likelihood values
for split pixels that are remapped to major non-ood
pixels and therefore increase the amount of major non-
ood pixels, as depicted by the top right bar plot of (d).
It is also clear that very few ood pixels are removed at the
end of the ensemble algorithm with re-assigned likelihood
values. Any initial ood pixel with a likelihood >50 is
re-assigned with a likelihood value of 49 which is depicted
in (d). However, the amount of these remapped pixels is
still low and the majority of pixels belongs to non-ood
classes.
The next set of results supports the identication of land
cover classes that are associated with dierent likelihood
values (see Fig. 8). This analysis is performed with both
use cases and aims to focus on land covers with relatively
high economic and social impacts to end-users, e. g. agri-
culture and built-up.
Fig. 7 already depicts low likelihood values for non-ood
classications for both use cases, which also dominate the
amount of considered pixels for these classes. In congru-
ence to that, Fig. 8 shows low variance in likelihood values
for full non-ood decisions across all land cover types and
for both use cases. The situation diers for major non-
ood decisions where the Myanmar use case shows greater
likelihood variance across all land cover classes (Fig. 8a),
in contrast to the Somalia use case (Fig. 8b).
As stated in Section 4, the land cover type agriculture
dominates the valid pixels in the Myanmar study area and
attributes to the majority of full non-ood classications
that are depicted with likelihoods of 20 and less (Fig.
7b). This is also shown in Fig. 8a where full non-ood
classications over the land cover type agriculture show
very low variance.
Major non-ood classications show greater likelihood
variance that originates from split situations, which are
remapped to major non-ood in the ensemble algorithm.
For the Myanmar use case, the less dominant ood
pixels show low variance for full ood and greater variance
for major ood decisions across all land cover types.
Superior non-ood decisions are depicted with extremely
low variance across all land cover types.
As stated in Section 4, the land cover type shrubs
dominates the Somalia study area and attributes to the
majority of full non-ood classications that are depicted
with likelihoods of approx. 20, and less (Fig. 7d). This is
also shown in Fig. 8b, where full non-ood classications
over the land cover type shrubs show very low variance.
Major non-ood classications of greater variance are
depicted for the land cover types agriculture, of which
approx. 10 % of pixels build the study area, and permanent10
Fig. 8. Boxplots of ensemble likelihood distributions with respect
to land cover/ uses in the Myanmar (a) and Somalia (b) use case.
The sample count for each box is indicated through the box height.
Boxplots of extreme low variance are located along likelihoods of 50
and mark superior non-ood pixels. The legend in plot (b) applies
for both plots.
water, that is almost not present in the region. However,
both major non-ood clusters are rather small.
As shown in Fig. 7d and Fig. 8b, superior non-ood
classications occur and remap any potential ood classi-
cation prior to the application of the ensemble algorithm
if they were masked out by the exclusion layer. Although
only given with a very low number of pixels, their majority
plots into the dominating land cover class shrubs and
shows a likelihood cluster of low variances.
VI. Discussion
The results provide a basis to obtain insights about the
correlation of results prior to and after the application of
the ensemble algorithm. In particular, the evaluations aim
to link majority-based classications and their statistical
robustness to an explanatory variable, namely dominant
land cover types.A. Quantile-quantile plot
The quantile-quantile plot reects the statistical reliability
of the probabilistic prediction as the majority of predicted
data is in close proximity to the one-to-one line.
The part of the data showing high predicted proba-
bility marks a ood over-detection with reference to the
validation data. At this point, it should be noted that
the validation data is not real ground truth data but
relies on the ood extent derived from Sentinel-2 data.
Furthermore, the validation data shows a oneday delay to
the acquisition of Sentinel-1 data, reecting a probable
change of the ood situation. Therefore, ood patches
missing in the validation data can be considered as possible
sources of ood over-detection in the prediction data.
The parts of the data showing higher empirical proba-
bilities with medium predicted probabilities mark ood
underdetections with reference to the validation data.
These regions mostly locate along the edges of detected
ood patches and along river channels. It is likely that the
exclusion layer does not cover these regions although they
are likely to introduce misclassications.
B. Map subgures
Examining the series of subgures for both use cases
supports an initial assessment of the scenarios under
which majority ood/non-ood classications are identi-
ed, prior to the application of the ensemble algorithm.
These results contain a signicant number of split pixels
where 1 out of 3 algorithms return a nodata value and 2
out of 3 disagree on the ood classication. This behavior
does not indicate a failure of the system and is not to be
mistaken as an inaccurate result. Nodata classications
occur if an algorithm is unable to classify a pixel with a
robust likelihood, i. e. if the result shows a signicantly
low classication condence. Such an output is observed
over challenging SAR image features that could not be ex-
cluded from the ensemble result. The ensemble algorithm
translates these uncondent results to non-ood with a
likelihood value of 49, i. e. the most uncondent likelihood
of the non-ood class.
In the Myanmar ood event use case, the relatively high
number of split situations coincide with the location of
seasonal reference water bodies and with the presence of
dense vegetation. Flood waters, including those classied
based on majority decisions, also correspond with seasonal
water bodies. Flood classications over these areas rep-
resent a degree of disagreement among the contributing
ood algorithms. The resulting mean likelihoods may be
used to caution users to consider verifying these ood
hotspots with additional data prior to making decisions
e. g. on resource allocation. Permanent water features, on
the other hand, are classied as non-ooded despite 1
out of 3 algorithms classifying these features as ooded.
It should be noted that the application of the reference
water mask in the ensemble post-processing step reassigns
the likelihood values of the permanent water features to 0
to indicate high condence of being non-ooded. In these11
instances, the ensemble likelihood makes the non-ood
classication explicit, regardless of the number of individ-
ually contributing ood algorithms over these pixels.
In the Somalia use case, the relatively high number of
split situations, in addition to major non-ood classi-
cations, are located along former meandering river chan-
nels that seemed to have dried out and share the same
SAR signal responses as bare soils. Herbaceous vegetation,
shrubs and agriculture on dry soil are well-known chal-
lenges for ood detection based on Sentinel-1 backscatter,
where the low radar backscatter tends to often result in
over-detections. The consensus approach of the ensemble
algorithm, although being a conservative measure, reduces
these over-detections signicantly and demonstrates the
advantage of the ensemble algorithm over the application
of a single measure alone.
C. Histograms
For the Myanmar use case, ood classications are as-
sociated with ensemble likelihoods between 50 and 100;
major oods detected with a certain degree of disagree-
ment are associated with a wider range of lower ensemble
likelihoods, while full oods are associated with a narrower
range of higher condence ensemble likelihoods between
80 and 100. The expression of agreement, as a form of
condence in ood detections, is useful information that
can be consulted to support any decision making by end
users during the onset of reported ood events. It should
be noted that a major ood decision originates from 1 out
of 3 algorithms classifying nodata or non-ood. Regardless
of the scenario, such a likelihood value is rather low and
clearly indicates lower condence for the ensemble ood
classication compared to a full ood agreement, which
builds on a broader data basis.
For the Somalia use case, no ood was classied, which
is also a result of resolving split situations with the con-
sensus approach. A dierent approach would have been to
resolve split situations by favoring the ood or non-ood
classication with the highest condence in the respective
class. Although less conservative, it would have been more
likely to miss critical over-detections.
D. Boxplots
The pair of boxplots compare ensemble likelihood distri-
butions with respect to land cover/uses in the Myanmar
and Somalia use cases.
In the Myanmar use case, ensemble likelihoods of ood
detection increase from the lower-mid ranges correspond-
ing to the initial mean likelihoods for all dominant land
cover classes to notably higher ranges and demonstrate a
medium spread of classication condence.
In the Somalia use case, no oods could be observed
but in comparison to the Myanmar use case, the like-
lihood variances are rather low and demonstrate higher
condence of the nonood classications.
At this stage, it should be noted that the exclusion
layer also masks out regions that are likely to hamperthe ood classication. It cannot be ruled out that for
the Somalia use case, as a representative for challenging
SAR-based ood detection conditions, a greater range of
likelihood variance would be possible if another exclusion
mask would have been applied to the data. However, this
set demonstrates the advantage of including auxiliary data
like an exclusion mask to focus on ood-prone regions.
In comparison with the utilized land cover data, the
permanent water class reveals regions of disagreement with
the GFM ood product. Although the GFM ood and
likelihood products are not relevant for permanent water
features, an intersection of these datasets shows dierent
results due to the signicantly enhanced spatial resolution
of 20 m in the GFM dataset compared to the spatial
resolution of 100 m in the land cover dataset.
Furthermore, the land cover class built-up is to be
excluded with the exclusion layer. However, the same
diversity in spatial resolution applies to this case as well
as the denition of built-up areas that are not meant to be
included in the computation. Apart from a small number
of towns, both study areas also contain light settlements
that are not covered by the exclusion mask. Having the
likelihood values for these built-ups is useful information
for the end-users as this land cover type is of high socio-
economic interest.
VII. Conclusion
Within this paper, we describe a methodology to combine
ood ensemble likelihoods of the Sentinel-1 GFM product.
We further highlight the importance of interpretable and
robust likelihood values to guide end-users and decision-
makers in their processes.
The computation of likelihoods informs on the robust-
ness of ood classications. While various methods have
been proposed in the literature to combine dierent types
of uncertainty information origins, e. g. probabilities and
fuzzy values, their computation and fusion is rather com-
plex and arguably hampers their interpretability and a
straight-forward crisis response. In contrast, the method
presented here is easy to interpret and its application is
straight forward, as it is solely based on the computation
of the arithmetic mean of the individual ood algorithm
likelihoods. Considering the value range, the classication
of a ood pixel with an associated likelihood close to
100 is considered to be more condent than a ood pixel
with a likelihood of close to 50, and is based on a wider
range of input data. Furthermore, ood classications
with low likelihood values, i. e. values in the range [50,
60], originate from an ensemble conguration with one
algorithm classifying a pixel as non-ooded or nodata.
Consequently, the ensemble likelihood product alerts end-
users to the presence of non-consent ood classications,
which should be treated with care in decision making.
The rst results show how ensemble likelihoods function
as a heuristic to identify and provide a rst indication of
the performance, as well as the agreement among the three
algorithms contributing to the nal ood classication.
These aggregated likelihood values capture cumulative12
uncertainties from data, model architecture, algorithmic
level and interpretation. Further reduction of uncertainties
requires more dedicated investigative methods. Once gen-
erated, this kind of uncertainty information can be used
by both of the aforementioned communities. In particular,
researchers or algorithm developers are oered guidance to
investigate how to minimize uncertainties with respect to
certain explanatory variables, e. g. land cover types. End
users may consult likelihood information that supports
cautioning against the direct use of ood classication
product in areas with low likelihoods of ood classication,
or where classications are based on majority, rather than
full detections. For resource allocation, it may be sucient
to identify areas of certain extents as potential hotspots,
even if likelihoods associated with individual pixels in the
vicinity of the areas of interest are lower.
Based on the preliminary results, the benets and limi-
tations of the ensemble likelihood approach are highlighted
and provide a starting point for further developments and
applications in the two research and end-user communities.
Further assessments may be conducted to include addi-
tional variables, in addition to extending the number and
variety of use cases.
References
[1] United Nations Oce for Disarmament Aairs. Hu-
man Cost of Disasters . United Nations, 2020. url:
https : / / www . un - ilibrary. org / content / books /
9789210054478.
[2] Francesco Dottori et al. \Increased human and eco-
nomic losses from river ooding with anthropogenic
warming". In: Nature Climate Change 8.9 (2018),
pp. 781{786. issn: 1758-6798. url: https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41558-018-0257-z.
[3] W J Wouter Botzen, Olivier Deschenes, and Mark
Sanders. \The Economic Impacts of Natural Disas-
ters: A Review of Models and Empirical Studies".
In:Review of Environmental Economics and Policy
13.2 (June 2019), pp. 167{188. issn: 1750-6816. doi:
10.1093/reep/rez004. eprint: https://academic.oup.
com/reep/article-pdf/13/2/167/29105777/rez004.
pdf.url: https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/rez004.
[4] Farid Kadri, Babiga Birregah, and Eric Ch^ atelet.
\The Impact of Natural Disasters on Critical In-
frastructures: A Domino Eect-based Study". In:
Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Man-
agement 11.2 (2014), pp. 217{241. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1515/jhsem-2012-0077. url: https://www.
degruyter.com/view/journals/jhsem/11/2/article-
p217.xml.
[5] Jonathan E Suk et al. \Natural disasters and infec-
tious disease in Europe: a literature review to iden-
tify cascading risk pathways". In: European Journal
of Public Health (June 2019). ckz111. issn: 1101-
1262. doi: 10.1093/eurpub/ckz111. eprint: https:
//academic.oup.com/eurpub/article-pdf/doi/10.
1093/eurpub/ckz111/28771958/ckz111.pdf. url:
https://doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/ckz111.[6] Sendai Framework. \Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015-2030". In: (2015), 24 p. url:
http://digitallibrary.un.org/record/793460.
[7] Stefania Grimaldi et al. \Remote Sensing-Derived
Water Extent and Level to Constrain Hydraulic
Flood Forecasting Models: Opportunities and Chal-
lenges". English. In: Surveys in Geophysics 37.5
(2016), pp. 977{1034. doi: 10 . 1007 / s10712 - 016 -
9378-y.
[8] Naira Chaouch et al. \A synergetic use of satellite
imagery from SAR and optical sensors to improve
coastal ood mapping in the Gulf of Mexico". In:
Hydrological Processes 26.11 (2012), pp. 1617{1628.
doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / hyp . 8268. eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/
hyp.8268. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1002/hyp.8268.
[9] Temenuzhka Spasova and Roumen Nedkov. \On the
use of SAR and optical data in assessment of ooded
areas". In: Seventh International Conference on Re-
mote Sensing and Geoinformation of the Environ-
ment (RSCy2019) . Ed. by Kyriacos Themistocleous
et al. Vol. 11174. International Society for Optics
and Photonics. SPIE, 2019, p. 111740V. doi: 10 .
1117/12.2533660. url: https://doi.org/10.1117/12.
2533660.
[10] M.A. Clement, C.G. Kilsby, and P. Moore. \Multi-
temporal synthetic aperture radar ood mapping
using change detection". In: Journal of Flood Risk
Management 11.2 (2018), pp. 152{168. doi: https:
/ / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / jfr3 . 12303. eprint: https : / /
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/jfr3.12303.
url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1111/jfr3.12303.
[11] M. -J. Jo et al. \Flood Extent Mapping Using
Dual-Polarimetric SENTINEL-1 Synthetic Aperture
Radar Imagery". In: ISPRS - International Archives
of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial
Information Sciences 42.3 (Apr. 2018), pp. 711{713.
doi: 10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-3-711-2018.
[12] L. Pulvirenti et al. \An algorithm for operational
ood mapping from Synthetic Aperture Radar
(SAR) data using fuzzy logic". In: Natural Hazards
and Earth System Sciences 11.2 (2011), pp. 529{540.
doi: 10.5194/nhess- 11- 529- 2011. url: https://
nhess.copernicus.org/articles/11/529/2011/.
[13] Chang Huang et al. \Detecting, Extracting, and
Monitoring Surface Water From Space Using Optical
Sensors: A Review". In: Reviews of Geophysics 56.2
(2018), pp. 333{360. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1029 / 2018RG000598. eprint: https : / / agupubs .
onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1029 /
2018RG000598. url: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2018RG000598.
[14] Guy J.-P. Schumann and Delwyn K. Moller. \Mi-
crowave remote sensing of ood inundation". In:
Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Parts A/B/C
83-84 (2015). Emerging science and applications13
with microwave remote sensing data, pp. 84{95.
issn: 1474-7065. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pce.2015.05.002. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1474706515000406.
[15] Victor Hertel et al. \Probabilistic SAR-based water
segmentation with adapted Bayesian convolutional
neural network". In: Remote Sensing of Environment
285 (2023), p. 113388. issn: 0034-4257. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2022.113388. url: https:
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0034425722004941.
[16] M. Chini et al. \The Sentinel-1 Global Flood Mon-
itoring system of the Copernicus Emergency Man-
agement Service: Introducing an ensemble approach
based on three independent retrieval algorithms". In:
(In preparation).
[17] A.D. Nobre et al. \Height Above the Nearest
Drainage { a hydrologically relevant new terrain
model". In: Journal of Hydrology 404.1 (2011),
pp. 13{29. issn: 0022-1694. doi: https : / / doi .
org / 10 . 1016 / j . jhydrol . 2011 . 03 . 051. url: http :
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0022169411002599.
[18] Sandro Martinis, Jens Kersten, and Andr e Twele.
\A fully automated TerraSAR-X based ood ser-
vice". In: ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and
Remote Sensing 104 (2015), pp. 203{212. issn: 0924-
2716. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . isprsjprs .
2014.07.014. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0924271614001981.
[19] Andr e Twele et al. \Sentinel-1-based ood map-
ping: a fully automated processing chain". In: Inter-
national Journal of Remote Sensing 37.13 (2016),
pp. 2990{3004. doi: 10 . 1080 / 01431161 . 2016 .
1192304. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/01431161.
2016 . 1192304. url: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 /
01431161.2016.1192304.
[20] Sankar K. Pal and Azriel Rosenfeld. \Image en-
hancement and thresholding by optimization of
fuzzy compactness". In: Pattern Recognit. Lett. 7
(1988), pp. 77{86.
[21] M. Chini et al. \A Hierarchical Split-Based Ap-
proach for Parametric Thresholding of SAR Images:
Flood Inundation as a Test Case". In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 55.12
(2017), pp. 6975{6988. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2017.
2737664.
[22] Bernhard Bauer-Marschallinger et al. \Satellite-
Based Flood Mapping through Bayesian Inference
from a Sentinel-1 SAR Datacube". In: Remote Sens-
ing14.15 (2022). issn: 2072-4292. doi: 10 . 3390 /
rs14153673. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-
4292/14/15/3673.
[23] Bart Kosko. \Fuzziness vs. probability". In: Inter-
national Journal of General Systems 17.2-3 (1990),
pp. 211{240. doi: 10 . 1080 / 03081079008935108.
eprint: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 /03081079008935108. url: https://doi.org/10.1080/
03081079008935108.
[24] Yanyan He, Mahsa Mirzargar, and Robert M. Kirby.
\Mixed aleatory and epistemic uncertainty quan-
tication using fuzzy set theory". In: International
Journal of Approximate Reasoning 66 (2015), pp. 1{
15.issn: 0888-613X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijar.2015.07.002. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0888613X15001012.
[25] Ulrich Hillenbrand. \On the relation between proba-
bilistic inference and fuzzy sets in visual scene anal-
ysis". In: Pattern Recognition Letters 25.15 (2004),
pp. 1691{1699. issn: 0167-8655. doi: https://doi.
org / 10 . 1016 / j . patrec . 2004 . 06 . 013. url: https :
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0167865504001564.
[26] Wolfgang Wagner et al. \A Sentinel-1 Backscat-
ter Datacube for Global Land Monitoring Applica-
tions". In: Remote Sensing 13.22 (2021). issn: 2072-
4292. doi: 10.3390/rs13224622. url: https://www.
mdpi.com/2072-4292/13/22/4622.
[27] Copernicus DEM - Global and European Digital El-
evation Model (COP-DEM) .doi: https://doi.org/
10.5270/ESA-c5d3d65.
[28] Bernhard Bauer-Marschallinger, Daniel Sabel, and
Wolfgang Wagner. \Optimisation of global grids for
high-resolution remote sensing data". In: Computers
and Geosciences 72 (2014), pp. 84{93. issn: 0098-
3004. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2014.07.
005.url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0098300414001629.
[29] Marcel Buchhorn et al. Copernicus Global Land
Service: Land Cover 100m: collection 3: epoch 2019:
Globe . Version V3.0.1. Zenodo, 2020. doi: 10.5281/
zenodo.3939050. url: https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.3939050.
[30] J. Zhao et al. \A Preliminary Comparison of two Ex-
clusion Maps for Large-Scale Flood Mapping using
Sentinel-1 Data". In: ISPRS Geospatial Week . 2023
(submitted).
Christian Krullikowski received the BSc
degree in Geological Sciences at the Freie Uni-
versit at Berlin, Germany, in 2013 and his MSc
degree in Geological Sciences with a special-
ization in Hydrogeology at the Freie Univer-
sit at Berlin, Germany, in 2016. In 2017, he
joined the German Remote Sensing Data Cen-
ter (DFD) of the German Aerospace Center
(DLR) in the department Geo-Risks and Civil
Security. His research activities focus on the-
matic processing with rule-based and machine
learning methods for ecient disaster response.14
Candace Chow completed studies at the
Universit at Bern and participated in an Eras-
mus Mundus program specializing in ood risk
management. In 2020, she joined the Ger-
man Remote Sensing Data Center (DFD) of
the German Aerospace Center (DLR) in the
Geo-Risks and Civil Security department. She
worked at the interface of research and oper-
ations, focusing on uncertainty quantication
and communicating time-sensitive information
to end users, particularly within the context of
the International Charter "Space and Major Disasters".
Marc Wieland received the Diploma degree
in Geography from the RuprechtKarls Univer-
sit at Heidelberg, Germany, in 2009 and the
PhD degree from the Technical University of
Berlin in 2013. In 2010 he joined the German
Research Centre for Geoscience in Potsdam.
In 2015 he moved to Chiba University, Japan
to work on statistical pattern recognition in
SAR timeseries. In 2016 he joined the Uni-
versity of Oxford as postdoctoral researcher.
He is currently based at the German Remote
Sensing Data Center (DFD) of the German Aerospace Center (DLR)
where his research activities focus on machine learning techniques for
emergency response.
Sandro Martinis received the Diploma de-
gree in Geography, Physics, and Remote Sens-
ing from the University of Munich, Germany,
in 2006. He received the PhD degree from the
University of Munich in 2010 working on auto-
matic ood detection using high resolution X-
band SAR satellite data at DLR. From 2006-
2007, he was a research associate with the
University of Munich working on the develop-
ment of remote sensing-based methods for the
monitoring of glacier motions and subglacial
volcanic eruptions. Since 2013, he is head of the research group
"Natural Hazards" within the department Georisks and Civil Se-
curity of DLR. Since 2016 he is leading the operational activities
of Germany's contribution to the International Charter "Space and
Major Disasters".
Bernhard Bauer-Marschallinger received
his doctoral degree in Geodesy and Geoinfor-
mation from the TU Wien in 2018. As part
of the TU Wien Remote Sensing group of the
Department of Geodesy and Geoinformation,
he has been involved i.a. in projects from
ESA, EU, Copernicus Global Land Services
(CGLS), Copernicus Emergency Management
Services (CEMS), and Austrian Research Pro-
motion Agency (FFG). His focus is on the
exploitation of satellite data and the devel-
opment of operational processing software for Synthetic Aperture
Radar (SAR) observations, aiming for algorithms that operate glob-
ally and in near-real-time. With his team, he pursues the enhance-
ment of the Sentinel-1 SAR processing and of scalable and ecient
spatial reference systems. His scientic interest is in the retrieval
of geophysical variables like soil moisture, water bodies and ood
dynamics, employing signal and image analysis methods driven by
mathematics and physics.
Florian Roth completed his Bachelor and
Master studies in Geodesy and Geoinforma-
tion at the Technische Universit at Wien (TU
Wien) while putting the focus on remote sens-
ing and geoinformation. He joined the Remote
Sensing group of TU Wien's Department of
Geodesy and Geoinformation in 2020. His re-
search interest lies in retrieving and evaluat-
ing ood information from SAR-based satellite
data.
Patrick Matgen earned his M.Sc. in En-
vironmental Engineering at the Ecole Poly-
technique F ed erale de Lausanne in 2002. In
2011 he nalized his PhD dissertation at the
Technical University in Delft. Since January
2020 he is leading the group "remote sensing
and natural resources modelling" at the the
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Tech-
nology. The group's aim is to develop the
synergistic use, processing and interpretation
of data from multiple complementary active
and passive sensors installed on both space and airborne platforms
and to provide deeper insights into the relations between spectral
features and properties of Earth's natural resources. His personal
research interests include the assimilation of remote sensing-derived
observations into hydrodynamic models and the assessment of ood
hazard and risk at large scale.
Marco Chini (M'09{SM'11) earned his
M.Sc. in Environmental Engineering at the
Ecole Polytechnique F ed erale de Lausanne in
2002. In 2011 he nalized his PhD dissertation
at the Technical University in Delft. Since
January 2020 he is leading the group "remote
sensing and natural resources modelling" at
the the Luxembourg Institute of Science and
Technology. The group's aim is to develop the
synergistic use, processing and interpretation
of data from multiple complementary active
and passive sensors installed on both space and airborne platforms
and to provide deeper insights into the relations between spectral
features and properties of Earth's natural resources. His personal
research interests include the assimilation of remote sensing-derived
observations into hydrodynamic models and the assessment of ood
hazard and risk at large scale.
Yu Li received the BSc degree in geoinfor-
mation science and technology and the MSc
degree in mathematical geology from China
University of Geosciences (Wuhan), in 2012
and 2015, respectively, and the PhD degree in
physical geography from LMU Munich, Ger-
many, in 2020. From 2016 to 2019, he worked
as a PhD student at the German Aerospace
Center (DLR), Oberpfaenhofen, Germany.
He is currently a Junior Research and Tech-
nology Associate at the "Remote Sensing and
Natural Resources Modeling" group, Luxembourg Institute of Sci-
ence and Technology (LIST), his research interests include ma-
chine/deep learning, multi-temporal image analysis, and natural
disaster monitoring with SAR data.15
Peter Salamon is a scientic project man-
ager at the Joint Research Center of the Euro-
pean Commission where he is coordinating the
Copernicus Emergency Management Service
and its components the European and Global
Flood Awareness Systems. He holds an M.Sc.
in Applied Environmental Geoscience from the
Eberhard-Karls University in T ubingen (Ger-
many) and a PhD in Hydraulic and Envi-
ronmental Engineering from the Polytechnic
University of Valencia (Spain). During his re-
search activities and professional career, he has gained experience in
policy support in the area of disaster risk management at European
and global level. His technical background is in hydrology, numerical
modeling, hazard and risk mapping, climate change impacts, uncer-
tainty assessment and operational ood forecasting. He is author and
co-author of more than 50 peer-reviewed articles.