arXiv:2304.03725v1  [math.CT]  7 Apr 2023An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic
Calculus in Unbiased Monoidal
Categories
Vihaan Dheer
Abstract
Properties of morphisms represented by so-called ‘string d ia-
grams’ of monoidal categories (andtheirbraided andsymmet ric
derivatives), mainly their resistance in value to isotopic defor-
mation, have made the usage of graphical calculi commonplac e
in category theory ever since the correspondence between di a-
grams and tensor categories was rigorously established by
Joyal and Street in 1991. However, we ﬁnd it important to
make certain additions to the existing theory of monoidal
categories and their diagrams, with the goal of extending to
so-called ‘inﬁnitary monoidal categories’. Most cruciall y, we
employ a structure inherently resistant to isotopic deform a-
tion, thus replacing topological details with categorical ones. In
the process, we coherently introduce inﬁnitary tensor prod uct
and transﬁnite composition into the diagrammatic formalis m.
Keywords: string diagram, tensor category, transﬁnite composition,
inﬁnitary monoidal product, unbiased monoidal category, i sotopy
Contents
1 Introduction 2
1.1 Motivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2 Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2 Inﬁnitary Monoidal Categories 3
2.1 Transﬁnite Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2 Unbiased Monoidal Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.3 Colimit-expanded Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
12An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus
3 Monoidal Diagrams 14
3.1 Deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2 Unresolved Edges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3 Readouts & Validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4 Conclusion 22
4.1 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2 Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
1 Introduction
1.1 Motivations
The ﬁrst successful design and application of the concept of string diagrams
similar to those employed by monoidal category theorists wa s likely due to
Roger Penrose in 1971, coining Penrose notation for tensors, in a series of
works beginning with Ref. 1, featuring various others including Ref. 2. In
1991, the celebrated work of Joyal and Street “The Geometry o f Tensor
Calculus, I” [ 3] formally introduced this concept into the scope of monoida l
category theory. Ever since MacLane’s deﬁnition of the mono idal (tensor)
category [ 4], much eﬀort had been placed in the study of the coherence
theorem [ 5], as well as the reformulation of the axioms [ 6]. Upon Joyal and
Street’s application of string diagrams to the theory, addr essing not only
standard monoids but braided and symmetric categories as we ll, attention
was diverted towards studyingand re-purposingthese diagr ams tomake use
of in related categories. Twenty years from then, it had beco me common-
place in monoidal category theory to such a degree as to promp t expository
works like Ref. 7.
More recently, as monoidal categories have begun to gain app licability
to external ﬁelds such as quantum information theory [ 8] and topological
ﬁeld theory [ 9], and their diagrams as a result have become more widely
applied, the graphical theory may require modiﬁcations to s tay in use. In
reference speciﬁcally to the proof for Theorem 1.2 of Ref. 3, we aim to make
a few major updates, from which a new diagrammatic theory sup portive of
more general kinds of diagram will arise.
The mentioned theorem states that isotopic deformation of progressive
plane(string) diagrams does not change its ‘value’, i.e. the morp hism which
it depicts. Clearly this makes checking validity of equatio ns in these cate-
gories mucheasier, butit is only half of the full picture: on e may not only be
interested in isotopy-equivalence implying equality, but also whether equal-
ity of morphisms implies that their diagrams can be isotopic ally deformed
into one another. Subtleties in this question, related to th e various rep-
resentations of a single morphism, are valuable to consider to the goal of
furthering the theory.
Furthermore, Joyal and Street’s notion of progressive plan e diagrams do
not allow for so-called ‘inﬁnitary diagrams’, a concept whi ch the author has
yet to see mentioned in the relevant literature, but feels it has potential for
later use. The reason is likely as follows: string diagrams h ave historicallyAn Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus 3
been primarily for the purpose of humancomputation, thus the diﬃculties
in visualizing inﬁnite diagrams (in either dimension) may h ave swayed most
away from the concept. However, the monoidal diagrams we introduce in
this work refer not just to the visual concept, but are a new ty pe of math-
ematical structure, which have use in their own right, not ju st as visual
aids.
Our method for making these adjustments in some ways categoriﬁes the
original proof; in other words, at least initially, diagram s are not topological
entities, and in fact are by design inherently resistant to isotopic deforma-
tion, a concept which will be made formal in later sections. I nstead, they
are mathematical structures which shall become members of a ‘category of
diagrams’ induced by some monoidal category; in the ﬁnitary case, the two
formulations are of course equivalent.
To support inﬁnite arity of diagrams, we will rely heavily on Tom Lein-
ster’s [10]unbiased deﬁnition of monoidal categories, and alter it to deﬁne
the notion of α-ary monoidal categories, allowing us to work with inﬁnite
monoidal products. Finally, we shall employ the standard no tion of trans-
ﬁnite composition in categories, eﬀectively permitting ca tegories to be of
inﬁnite length in both the horizontal and vertical directio ns.
1.2 Outline
This paper will be structured as follows: in Sec. 2, we will review transﬁnite
composition, introduce our generalized deﬁnition of monoi dal categories,
and discuss a novel construction called the ‘colimit expans ion’. Sec. 3ﬁrstly
deﬁnesmonoidal diagrams , and then focuses on extracting from such dia-
grams the morphisms in the underlying category that they enc ode. Finally,
we conclude with a discussion of applications and future wor k in Sec. 4.
2 Inﬁnitary Monoidal Categories
This section will develop the categorical formalism necess ary to extend
standard monoidal categories to their ‘inﬁnitary counterp arts’, in which
inﬁnite products and compositions exist. This is important both to study
the monoidal diagrams that will be discussed in the next sect ion, but also
because these categories are interesting in their own right . After reviewing
transﬁnite composition, we deﬁne these inﬁnitary categori es by converting
the axioms for a standard monoidal category into their unbia sed form, and
thenextendingviaordinals. Finally, we conclude with adis cussion of the so-
called “colimit-expansion”, which provides a systematic m ethod to extend
standard monoidal categories to inﬁnitary ones under certa in conditions.
2.1 Transﬁnite Composition
Extending monoidal categories “horizontally” will involv e considering com-
positions of inﬁnite sequences. Such ‘transﬁnite composit ions’ appear all
over mathematics, perhaps most commonly in the study of mode l categories
(see e.g. Ref. 11). We brieﬂy deﬁne transﬁnite composition and discuss some
basic results relevant here.4An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus
Deﬁnition 2.1 (transﬁnite composition) In a category C, for some ordinal
α(taken as the corresponding thin category), an α-transﬁnite sequence is
a functor
X•:α→C (2.1)
such that Xβ= lim− →γ<βXγfor each non-zero limit ordinal β < α. The
transﬁnite composition of such a sequence is the unique morphism
X0−→lim− →γ<αXγ (2.2)
induced by the colimit. The existence of this colimit is guar anteed by
transﬁnite induction.
Themostintuitiveexampleisgivenbysuccessive inclusion s inaconcrete
category ( C,F:C→Set), forFfaithful. A sequence
X0 X1 X2 ··· (2.3)
of inclusions under Fhas a transﬁnite composition that is the obvious
inclusion X0⊆lim− →X•of underlying sets.
A basic but useful result is that two transﬁnite composition s are
compatible (i.e. rearrangeable) with each other:
Proposition 2.1 LetX•,X′•beα,α′-transﬁnite sequences respectively
such that X′
0= lim− →X. Letβ,β′be ordinals such that α+α′=β+β′;
then we may form β,β′-transﬁnite sequences Y,Y′respectively which are
segments/concatenations of X,X′. Then Y0=X0,Y′
0= lim− →Y, and
lim− →Y′= lim− →X′.
Under certain conditions, a class of morphisms in a category may be
closed under transﬁnite composition; in other words the the composition
of any transﬁnite sequence with contained morphisms exists and is as well
contained. We call such a class saturated . As standard compositions are 2-
transﬁnite, a saturated class is necessarily a subcategory . One example is
that of monomorphisms.
Proposition 2.2 The wide subcategory of monomorphisms Mono( C)is
saturated.
ProofWe must show that for any transﬁnite sequence of monomorphis ms
X•:α ֒→C, (2.4)
the canonical map X0−→lim− →γXγis monic. Suppose it weren’t; by trans-
ﬁnite induction, no leg of the limiting cocone is monic. But t his contradicts
the uniqueness given by the universal property of lim− →γXγ. /squareAn Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus 5
In fact, this is a special case of a more general result statin g that the
morphism class with the ‘left lifting property’ with respec t to any class of
morphisms is saturated [ 12]. This ofcourse has various corollaries; for exam-
ple, the classes of coﬁbrations and trivial coﬁbrations in a model category
are saturated.
In the following discussion, when making categories compos itionally
inﬁnitary, we will use sequential cocompleteness to ensure a category has all
transﬁnite compositions. These saturated subcategories a re especially well-
behaved because transﬁnite compositions in the subcategor y coincide with
those in the category itself.
2.2 Unbiased Monoidal Categories
The contrast betweenbiased andunbiased deﬁnitions is ubiq uitous inmath-
ematics. In short, we are often given an operation intended t o be of arity n,
that is presented solely in the nullary and binary cases. In t his case the def-
inition is called biased, contrary to an unbiased deﬁnition which constructs
ann-ary operation at the outset.
In no way is the term meant to suggest some superiority of unbi ased
deﬁnition: many cases, for example the monoidal categories at hand, require
much shorter and more eﬃcient deﬁnitions, as well as auxilia ry coherence
conditions. However, generalization with ordinal numbers is much easier
with an unbiased deﬁnition, which is the motivation for usin g one here.
We ﬁrst formally deﬁne partitions of ordinal numbers, which greatly
shrinks the coherence conditions necessary for unbiased mo noidal cate-
gories, which shall be introduced thereafter. Finally, we w ill redevelop some
of the relevant theory of standard monoidal categories for t heir unbiased
variants.
Deﬁnition 2.2 (ordinal partitions) A γ-partition of an ordinal αis aγ-
sequence which sums to alpha. Explicitly, it is a function p•:γ→αsuch
that /summationdisplay
i<γpi=α. (2.5)
The set of all γ-partitions of αis written αγ
Σ, while the set of all parti-
tions in general of αisα<
Σ.A(δ•,p•)-double partition of αis an indexed
familyp•,•={pi,•∈(pi)δi
Σ:i < γ}, forγ-partitions δ•,p•of ordinals δ,α
respectively. For each such double partition there is an inducedδ-partition
ofα(p•,•)∪
•:δ→α, or simply ( p∪)•, deﬁned in the obvious fashion. When
the domain and range of a partition are clear, then an ordinal βacts as a
constant partition β:γ→δsuch that i/m⊣psto→β.
Deﬁnition 2.3 (α-ary unbiased monoidal category) An α-ary unbiased
monoidal category for some ordinal α≮ω(whereα=Ordis permissable)
is a tuple ( C,T•,ι,η), with an ordinary category C, a formal family of
functors
T•:α→/uniondisplay
β<αHom/parenleftBig
Cβ,C/parenrightBig
s.t.Tβ:Cβ→C, (2.6)6An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus
a natural isomorphism ι: idC∼−→ T 1, and a family of natural isomorphisms
η=/braceleftbig
ηp•:Tγ◦/productdisplay
i<γTpi∼−→ T β/vextendsingle/vextendsinglep•∈βγ
Σ∀γ,β < α/bracerightbig
,(2.7)
such that for any γ-partition p•ofβ < α, and any ( δ•,p•)-double partition,
the following diagram commutes,
Tγ◦/producttext
i<γ/parenleftBig
Tδi◦/producttext
j<δiTpi,j/parenrightBig
Tγ◦/producttext
i<γTpi
Tδ◦/producttext
k<δT(p∪)kTβTγ(/producttext
i<γη(pi,•))
η(p•)
η/parenleftBig
(p∪)•/parenrightBig(2.8)
as does the following:
Tβ Tβ◦/producttext
i<γT1
T1◦Tβ TβidTβιTβTβ(/producttext
i<γι)
η(1•)
η(β•)(2.9)
Deﬁnition 2.4 (inﬁnitary, ﬁnitary, strict) An α-ary unbiased monoidal
category is called ﬁnitaryifα=ω, andinﬁnitary otherwise. If α=Ord,
it isfully inﬁnitary . Anα-ary unbiased monoidal category is strictif each
component ιof each element of ηin Deﬁnition 2.3is an identity.
From any unbiased monoidal category we can build a biased mon oidal
category by extracting the associator/unitors from the fam ilyη(see the
proof of Thm. 2.4). Likewise, given a biased monoidal category, we can build
a ﬁnitary unbiased monoidal category; the two notions are th us equivalent
in the ﬁnitary case.
Remark 1 In the deﬁnition, we have made implicit reference to the cate -
gories Cβfor an ordinal β. To make this notion complete, we wrap these
objects in a power category of Cwhich includes all ordinal powers of Cand
the functors between them as morphisms. This category becom es the pro-
totypical example of an unbiased strict (skeletal) monoida l category when
endowed with the Cartesian product, producing objects for g eneral ordinal
sequences. The strictness derives from the fact that we do notdistinguish
between Cβ×CγandCβ+γ.An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus 7
The most obvious example is given by generalizing (co)carte sian cate-
gories. Any category Cwith all small (co)products will be fully inﬁnitary
if eachTγis taken to be the generalized (co)product. A less trivial ex ample
is provided by the category of endofunctors (that of which a m onad is an
object).
Example 2.1 Suppose that, for a small category C, the full subcategory
{C} ⊆Catis cocomplete (or, in principle, sequentially cocomplete) . Then
transﬁnite compositions of endofunctors in the sense of Def .2.1form a fully
inﬁnitary product on the strict monoidal category (End( C),◦,Id).
As is well-observed in the literature [ 3,4,8], standard monoidal cat-
egories satisfy a ‘strictiﬁcation theorem’ stating that ea ch such category
is monoidally equivalent to a strict monoidal category. α-ary unbiased
monoidal categories follow a similar law; the proofs are ver y similar (see e.g.
Ref.8), but it is necessary to deﬁne the notions relevant to the the orem.
Deﬁnition 2.5 (unbiasedmonoidal functor) Let ( C,T•,ι,η), (C′,T′
•,ι′,η′)
be unbiased monoidal categories of arity α. Anunbiased monoidal functor
between them is a pair ( F,χ•) consisting of a functor F:C→C′, and a
family of natural isomorphisms
χ•:α→/uniondisplay
β<αmor([Cβ,C′]) s.t. χβ:T′
β◦Fβ∼−→F◦Tβ,(2.10)
such that the following diagram commutes for each ordinal pa rtition
p•:γ→α,
T′
γ◦/producttext
i<γ(Tpi◦Fpi) T′
γ◦Fγ◦/producttext
i<γTpi
T′
β◦FβF◦Tβ F◦Tγ◦/producttext
i<γTpiη′(p•)FT′
γ/producttext
i<γχi
χγ/producttext
i<γTpi
χβ Fη(p•)
(2.11)
called the pentagon equation , as does the following,
F
T′
1◦F F ◦Tι′F Fι
χ1(2.12)
called the triangle equation .8An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus
As is usually done for monoidal categories, unbiased monoid al functors
can be used to deﬁne weak and strong equivalences. Similarly to the stan-
dard case, we can promote the former to the latter using the ax iom of choice
[4].
Deﬁnition 2.6 (unbiased monoidal equivalence) An unbiased monoidal
functorF:C→C′is aweak equivalence if it is fully faithful and essentially
surjective. It is a strong equivalence if there is a speciﬁed unbiased monoidal
functorG:C′→Csuch that G◦F≃idCandF◦G≃idC′.
Proposition 2.3 A weak unbiased monoidal equivalence induces a strong
equivalence given the axiom of choice ( AC).
ProofLet (F:C→C′,χ•) be a unbiased weak monoidal equivalence. For
objectsA,B∈C, deﬁne the equivalence relation A∼B⇐⇒FA≃FB.
ByACthere is a function f:C/∼→ Cs.t.F(f([A]))≃FA; essential
surjectivity determines a function g:C′→C/∼, and thus for each A′∈C′
letGA′=f(g(A′)). LetGtake morphisms A′→B′to morphisms GA′→
GB′pre and post-composed by isomorphisms (chosen again by AC). Then
FGandGFare both naturally isomorphic to their respective identiti es
(say by maps ζandξ, respectively). It remains to show that G:C′→Cis
unbiased monoidal; consider ∀β < αthe natural isomorphism
Gχ−1
βGβ:GF◦Tβ◦Gβ∼−→G◦T′
β◦FβGβ. (2.13)
Noting this we can deﬁne a natural isomorphism χ′
βby the commutativity
of the following diagram,
GF◦Tβ◦GβG◦T′
β◦FβGβ
Tβ◦GβG◦T′
βGχ−1
βGβ
ξ(Tβ◦Gβ) (G◦T′
β)ζβ
χ′
β(2.14)
which clearly satisﬁes Eqs. 2.11and2.12for allβ. /square
Theorem 2.4 (Unbiased Strictiﬁcation) Everyα-ary unbiased monoidal
category is monoidally equivalent to a strict α-ary unbiased monoidal
category. With ACit is strongly equivalent to one.
ProofAs discussed, the proof is almost identical the standard cas e given,
e.g., in Ref. 8. The key observation is that we may recover the unit object,
unitors, and associator from the unbiased axioms as follows : the unit is
T0(∗), the left unitor is the composite
T2◦(T0×id) T2◦(T0×T1) T1 id,T2(id×ι) η(0,1) ι−1
and the associator is deﬁned in the obvious fashion by noting that each
way of “bracketing” the two-fold product is naturally isomo rphic by ηtoAn Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus 9
T3. The right unitor is obtained similarly to the left one with t he ordinal
partition (0 ,1). /square
Because of this result, studying α-ary categories is no diﬀerent from
studying their strict variants (at least regarding categorical properties that
respect the equivalence principle); we therefore choose th e latter as to avoid
handling the ηmorphisms.
This framework gives rise to an expected but interesting for mula-
tion with inﬁnitary Lawvere Theories (see e.g. Ref. 13). LetOrdbe the
Setskeleton of von Neumann ordinals with inclusion functor IOrd. Let
F:Mon→Setbe the forgetful functor; this admits a left adjoint L ⊣ F
sending sets to their corresponding free monoids. Since L◦IOrdis injective
on objects, its image forms a full subcategory T⊆Mon. Then, ignoring
size issues, any functor
M:Top→Cat (2.15)
that preserves small products is identiﬁed with a strict Ord-ary unbiased
monoidal category. The α-ary version can be recovered by replacing Ord
with the subcategory α⊆Setin the previous paragraph.
One can show with some diﬃculty that each free monoid MinTcan
be written distinctly as the sequential limit of a constant f unctor
M∼=lim− →(∆M:β→T;γ/m⊣psto→1) (2.16)
for some β < αand the free monoid over a single element 1, which is just a
β-fold product in Top. ThenM(1) is an unbiased α-ary monoidal category
with product functors
Tβ=M(1→β; (0)/m⊣psto→(012...β)) (2.17)
for allβ < α. As is intuitive, the image of Mis the full subcategory of Cat
that is the aforementioned power category of M(1).
A basic conclusion from the axioms of a standard monoidal cat egory—
yet the one that gives rise to most of its diagrammatic theory —is the
interchange law , stating that, for properly composable morphisms,
(g◦f)⊗(j◦h) = (g⊗j)◦(f⊗h). (2.18)
This is a direct consequence of bifunctoriality of ⊗. In the inﬁnitary case,
however, while we can perform inﬁnitary interchange internally to the argu-
ments of the tensor functors, we need additional assumption s to do so on
the outside.
Deﬁnition 2.7 (smooth unbiased category) An α-ary unbiased monoidal
category Cissmoothif for each object Xthe functor
T2(X,−):C→C (2.19)10An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus
is sequentially cocontinuous (i.e. preserves sequential c olimits). It is cos-
moothif it preserves cosequentially cocontinuous (i.e. preserv es colimits of
diagrams αop→C).
It is not diﬃcult to see that this condition implies that ever y tensor
functor is sequentially cocontinuous in the last argument. If the condition
of smoothness holds, we have the following obvious corollar y.
Theorem 2.5 (Inﬁnitary Interchange Law) IfCis a smooth α-ary
monoidal category with products T•, then the following two conditions hold:
1. Consider two sequences of morphisms in C, i.e. functors F,G:β→C
for the thin category of β < αsuch that both F,Gadmit transﬁnite
compositions f:F0→lim− →Fandg:G0→lim− →Grespectively. Then
T2(f,g) =h:T2(F0,G0)−→lim− →/parenleftbig
T2◦(F×G)/parenrightbig
(2.20)
2. If(a0,a1),(b0,b1),...is a morphism sequence of length γsuch that
the composition of each pair exists, then
Tγ/parenleftbig
a0◦a1,b0◦b1,.../parenrightbig
=Tγ/parenleftbig
a0,a1,.../parenrightbig
◦Tγ/parenleftbig
b0,b1,.../parenrightbig
(2.21)
Whensuch asmooth category is in addition cocomplete, it is a verywell-
behavedsetting for inﬁnitaryoperations byvirtue ofthe in ﬁniteinterchange
law because all transﬁnite compositions exist and are compa tible with the
product. If furthermore the category in question is a satura ted subcategory,
then all possible inﬁnitary manipulations of bracketings a re equalities. This
condition, however, is too diﬃcult to satisfy in practice fo r any category,
perhaps other than the thin category α⊆Orditself.
2.3 Colimit-expanded Categories
Beyond the standard examples of categories with all small (c o)products, it
is rare to naturally encounter inﬁnitary monoidal categori es. In addition,
the axioms are relatively diﬃcult to show in practice. There is, however,
a general process by which one can construct a (smooth) fully inﬁnitary
category from a standard one under certain conditions. This construction
and its derivatives will not only provide many examples, but also will also
give ratherprofound resultsabout variousexistingconstr uctions incategory
theory.
The general idea is to take a monoidal category and use colimi ts of
the ﬁnite tensor products to deﬁne the functors Tβ. Although we will not
write it out explicitly, whenever we refer to sequential col imits (i.e. those
of diagrams α→Cfor an ordinal α), we just as well may use cosequential
colimits taken over diagrams out of αop.
Now, let ( C,⊗,I)beanordinary monoidal category. Seemingly themost
general case depends on achoice ofa cone from Itothe identityId: C→C,
sayε: ∆I→Id. We proceed with transﬁnite recursion. Suppose we have a
sequence ( Xγ)γ<α∈Cα; to deﬁne the inﬁnitary tensor product Tα, we ﬁrstAn Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus 11
recursively let F(0) =IandF(γ+1) =F(γ)⊗Xγ. UnderFlet successor
mapsγ→γ+1 go to the composite
F(γ)ρ−1
− −−−− →F(γ)⊗I1⊗ε− −−−− →F(γ)⊗Xγ, (2.22)
and ﬁnally extend Fto a functor α→Cby taking
F(β) = lim− →
γ<βFγ (2.23)
for any limit ordinal β. Because of the associator and unitors of the underly-
ing category C, the axioms of a fully inﬁnitary category are almost satisﬁe d,
save for the fact that the coherence conditions cannot be pro ven in the limit
ordinal case. To resolve this, we must impose the additional requirement
that for any F:α→C, there is an is an isomomorphism
X⊗lim− →γ<αF(γ)∼=lim− →γ<α/parenleftbig
X⊗F(γ)/parenrightbig
, (2.24)
i.e.Cis smooth. Moreover, smoothness guarantees that each colim it of the
form inEq. 2.23exists. Notably,theaboveconstructionis justanexampleo f
transﬁnite compositions of the maps ε, which serve to ‘glue’ the full product
together by partial products. This gives rise to the followi ng deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 2.8 (colimitexpansion) Let Cbeamonoidal categoryequipped
with a cone εfromIto Id. Ciscolimit-expandable if for each object X
ofCthe functor X⊗ −:C→Cis sequentially cocontinuous. The result-
ing smooth, fully inﬁnitary category as constructed above i s thecolimit
expansion ofC, and the pair ( C,ε) is termed a colimit-expanded category.
The obvious examples are Set,Rel,Cat, etc. all equipped with their
coproducts and initial objects as units. Recall that we just as easily may use
the product if instead a cone from Id to Iis employed. Topis an interesting
non-example: sums of topological spaces do not extend canon ically to the
inﬁnitary case. As we will see later, however, the “convenie nt category of
topological spaces” is(dually) colimit-expandable.
Proposition 2.6 A colimit-expanded category (C,ε)is necessarily semic-
ocartesian (i.e. Iis initial). Thus the legs of εare trivially the unique maps
out ofI.
ProofFirst notice that from the deﬁnition of a fully inﬁnitary cat egory,
in particular Eq. 2.9, it follows that for any αthere is an isomorphism
Tα(I,I,...)∼=Iinduced by ηandι. Now suppose that the leg εI:I→I
was not an isomorphism and let αbe a limit ordinal; since the product
functorTαis constructed via transﬁnite compositions of ǫwhich reﬂect
isomorphisms, we must have I≇Tα(I,I,...), a contradiction.12An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus
Then since εI:I∼=I, the commutativity condition of εguarantees that
any two morphisms f,g:I→Xare equal. Of course each I→Xexists by
deﬁnition of ε, soIis initial in C. /square
Because of this, there is not, in fact, freedom to choose vari ous cones
I→Id, and thus we need not mention εhereafter. The following state-
ment, though a direct consequence of the limit preservation properties of
adjunctions, creates many of the rest of the examples of smoo th monoidal
categories. We recall that a closed monoidal category is a sy mmetric one
in which, for each object X, the functor − ⊗Xhas a right adjoint
[X,−]:C→Ccalled the ‘internal hom’.
Theorem 2.7 Any semicocartesian closed category is colimit-expandabl e.
In particular, any cocartesian closed category is colimit- expandable. By the
same argument with cosequential colimits, semicartesian c losed categories,
and thus cartesian closed categories, are as well colimit-e xpandable.
Firstly, this gives an interesting result about closed mono idal categories;
it implies a rather unintuitive underlyingrelationship be tween the existence
of an internal hom and the possibility and uniqueness of an in ﬁnitary exten-
sion. These semicocartesian closed categories havevariou s special properties
that might give rise to such a relationship (e.g., by the adju nction formula,
T∼=[X,I]); the author believes that a study of these categories in th eir
own right would be worthwhile.
Secondly, it provides us with many obvious examples, circum venting the
tedious axioms. For instance, we can remedy the earlier non- example of
Topby taking the cartesian closed subcategory CGHaus of compactly-
generated Hausdorﬀ spaces [ 4]. In addition, we immediately have that all
topoi are colimit-expandable and thus uniquely smooth inﬁn itary cate-
gories, giving yet another useful characteristic of topoi t hat may have future
application.
There are some examples of semi(co)cartesian closed catego ries that are
not cartesian closed; although most of these perhaps are sli ghtly artiﬁcial,
such examples show that the colimit-expansion is versatile , and need not
deal only with the categorical product. The primary example , thought, that
the author has found in usage is that of nominal sets (see Andr ew Pitts’
Nominal Sets [14]; we follow his work here).
Example 2.2 For any set A, by Perm( A) we denote the subgroup of Sym( A)
containing only those permutations that leave only ﬁnitely many elements
ofAchanged. Fix a countably inﬁnite A, and let Xbe a Perm( A)-set (i.e.
an object in the Perm( A)Settopos). We say that a subset A⊆Asupports
anx∈Xif∀π∈Perm(A), we have π|A= 1A=⇒π·x. Anyxisﬁnitely
supported if there is a ﬁnite subset of Awhich supports it. If it is so, then
we write the intersection of all ﬁnite supports as suppXxThenNomisAn Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus 13
deﬁned as the full subcategory of Perm( A)Setconsisting of Perm( A)-sets
in which each element is ﬁnitely supported (Ref. 14, Ch. 2.1).
Nominherits a cartesian closed structure from the topos Perm( A)
with the categorical product, so it is colimit-expandable u nder thereun-
der. However it is also as such under the separated product (Ref.14, Ch.
3.4): we deﬁne the ‘freshness relation’ # X,Y⊆X×Ybyx#X,Yy⇐⇒
suppXx∩suppYy=∅. The relation is itself a nominal set, giving a bifunc-
tor (X,Y)/m⊣psto→#X,Ycalled the separated product, under which Nomis
made monoidal with the terminal object as the unit. Finally b y Ref.14,
Thm. 3.12, it is semicartesian closed.
We conclude with a general demonstration of obtaining semi( co)carte-
sian closed categories, and thus colimit-expandable ones, from monoidally
closed ones via the (co)slice category.
Proposition 2.8 LetCbe closed closed monoidal with unit I. Both the
slice category C/Iand the coslice category I/Care colimit-expandable.
ProofIt is suﬃcient to consider the slice case. Observe that there is a
natural monoidal structure inherited from Con the slice category given by
(X,f)⊗(Y,g) = (X⊗Y,f⊗g:X⊗Y→I⊗I∼=I),(2.25)
in which ( I,1I) is terminal, implying that C/Iis semicartesian. Next, since
Cis closed, it has a unique internal hom
[−,−]:Cop×C→C, (2.26)
so we may deﬁne a similar bifunctor for the slice category by
(X,f),(Y,g)/m⊣psto→/parenleftbig
[X,Y],[f,g]/parenrightbig
. (2.27)
We wish to show that the pair
−⊗(X,f)⊣/bracketleftbig
(X,f),−/bracketrightbig
(2.28)
is an adjunction for each ( X,f) inC/I. Quite simply, given a morphism of
C/Ifrom (X⊗Y,f⊗g) to some ( Z,h), we get a unique corresponding map
given by the adjunct. This is a valid morphism in the slice cat egory as it
makes the diagram
X [Y,Z]
I I ⊗Ifu
[g,h]
λ−1(2.29)
commute by the naturality of the relevant adjunction in C, which also gives
the naturality of this bijection. /square
It is interesting that even though a general closed monoidal category is
not colimit-expandable, the corresponding (co)slice is. T his suggests that
‘in spirit’ all categories that are closed monoidal have the structure to be
inﬁnitary monoidal, but rather it is a technicality of our de ﬁnition that they
are not so. Future work, perhaps, could amend the axioms to re solve this.14An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus
3 Monoidal Diagrams
As discussed, the use of diagrams similar to those employed i n monoidal
category theory dates back to the work of Penrose [ 1,2]. When applied
speciﬁcally tomonoidal categories, theybecome veryusefu l because isotopic
deformations preserve represented morphisms.
In general, each diagram represents a morphism constructed by compo-
sitions and tensor products of other morphisms; these morph isms are the
nodes of the diagram, while the edges are the objects. Compos ition takes
place vertically while the product acts horizontally. Cons tructing the dia-
gram for two morphisms and seeing if they are isotopic to one a nother
provides an eﬃcient way to determine the equivalence of two m orphisms,
which is often non-trivial given the monoidal product [ 7].
In reality, the use of these ‘string diagrams’ in category th eory is not
restricted to monoidal categories. In general, any weak 2-c ategory operates
in a manner respectful of string diagrams [ 15] with 0-cells represented by
areas, 1-cells by lines, and 2-cells by points. Since monoid al categories are
weak 2-categories with one object, the formalism simpliﬁes considerably.
These string diagrams are usually topological entities whi ch map to cat-
egories [3]. While this framework is certainly the most natural and sim ple
to prove soundness/correctness within, it makes it diﬃcult to generalize to
the strictly categorical notions we wish to consider, i.e. t ransﬁnite compo-
sition and inﬁnitary monoidal product. To remedy this, we sh all use deﬁne
a diagram purely algebraically. This not only strengthens i ts categorical
properties, but permits for its use as a mathematical object in its own right
outside of calculational purposes.
The next few sections will look at, in detail, our upgraded de ﬁnition for
monoidal diagrams. Sec. 3.1focuses on deﬁning diagrams on a monoidal
category, exemplifying this concept, and proving some prel iminary results
therefor. Secs. 3.2and3.3will both be devoted to understanding the mor-
phism which a given diagram represents; the ultimate goal wi ll be to deﬁne
a category of diagrams, and then establish a functorial corr espondence
between it and the underlying category.
3.1 Deﬁnitions
We shall construct monoidal diagrams as algebraic structur es equippedwith
two relations; we begin with the necessary deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 3.1 (diagrammatic relation) A homogeneous relation R⊆X×
Xis diagrammatic if the following conditions hold ∀x,y∈X:
1.(weak totality) ∃z∈X/parenleftbig
xRz∨zRx/parenrightbig
2.(antisymmetry) xRy=⇒ ¬yRx
3.(irreﬂexivity) ¬xRx
Notethatthelast twoconditions couldbereplaced withthat ofasymme-
try; a diagrammatic relation is equivalently an asymmetric relation where
each element is comparable to another.An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus 15
Deﬁnition 3.2 (induced ﬁrst-order relation) We call a homogeneous rela-
tionRon a set Xaﬁrst-order relation , a homogeneous relation S⊆R×R
onRasecond-order relation , ad inﬁnitum. For a second-order relation, we
deﬁne the induced ﬁrst-order relation ofSas
S∗=/uniondisplay
i=1,2π2
i[S], (3.1)
whereπiis theith projection map of the Cartesian product R×R,f2:A×
A→B×Brepresents the Cartesian square of a function, and the notat ion
f[X] for a function f:A→Brefers to the set {f(x) :x∈X⊆A}.
Intuitively, if the relation Sin the above orders the edges of a digraph,
thenS∗orders the nodes based on their membership of an edge; this is the
case in which we will employ the deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 3.3 (conditional construction) Suppose that a second order-
relation Son a set Xis a homogeneous relation on R. ThenSsatisﬁes the
axiom of conditional construction if
∀P∈R2
/logicalordisplay
i,j≤2(πi×πj)(P)∈S∗=⇒P∈S
 (3.2)
holds; in this case, Sisconditionally constructed .
We will use the axiom of conditional construction simply to e nsure the
coherence of a relation used to order the edges of a digraph as discussed
above. With this setup, we can introduce monoidal diagrams. For what
follows, ﬁx a strict unbiased monoidal category C.
Deﬁnition 3.4 (monoidal diagram) A (monoidal C-diagram ( D,E,H,µ)
consists of a set D, a diagrammatic relation EonDcalled the vertical
comparator , a partial ordering HonEcalled the horizontal comparator
(or edge set), and a function µ:D →mor(C). These data are required to
satisfy the following conditions:
1.E,Hare well-founded relations
2. Each E-triangle (set of two E-elements which take the same value on
π1orπ2) isH-comparable
3. Any two E-minimal elements are H⋆-comparable
4.His conditionally constructed
There is much to be said about this deﬁnition. The four condit ions are
non-trivial, and it is not immediately clear that this deﬁni tion, taken as
an axiomatic system, is consistent, complete, or independe nt, the ﬁrst two
being quite important in this context. As we develop the theo ry further,
however, the three conditions will hold apparently.16An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus
Separately, Def. 3.4is not entirely useful until we prescribe a method for
actually ‘viewing’ such a diagram, in the literal sense. To d o so one begins
by laying out the nodes in Dvertically by E, and then connecting with a
segment any E-related nodes. Next, these segments are ordered horizonta lly
byH; it is not diﬃcult to see why this algebraic structure is resi stant to
isotopic deformations.
Deﬁnition 3.5 (isomorphism of monoidal diagrams) Let ( D,E,H,µ),
(D′,E′,H′,µ′) be monoidal C-diagrams. An isomorphism of diagrams is a
bijection δ:D → D′such that
δ: (D,E)→(D′,E′) (3.3)
is a digraph isomorphism, the induced bijection δ′:E→E′makes
δ′: (E,H)→(E′,H′) (3.4)
an order isomorphism, and ﬁnally µ′◦δ=µ. These conditions can be
summarized by the commutative diagram below.
H D22E D2D
mor(C)
H′D′22E′D′2D′δµ
µ′
Here, the arrows ⇀,֒→,/axisshort/axisshort/arrowaxisrightrepresent projections, inclusions, and induced
bijections respectively.
We acknowledge that isomorphism of diagrams is an extremely strong
condition: diagrams are isomorphic if and only if they are exactlythe same
aside from their nodes being labeled diﬀerently.
Diagrams may be adjoined to one another using the coproduct o n the
underlying set and relations and the product functors in the underlying
monoidal category. Speciﬁcally, for an α-sequence {(Dγ,Eγ,Hγ,µγ) :γ <
α}, we set
/coproductdisplay
γ<α(Dγ,Eγ,Hγ,µγ) =/parenleftBigg/unionsqdisplay
γ<αDγ,/coproductdisplay
γ<αEγ,/coproductdisplay
γ<αHγ,/⊣\}br⊣cketle{tµγ/⊣\}br⊣cketri}htγ<α/parenrightBigg
,(3.5)
where the fourth component on the right-hand side is the uniq ue map
induced by the coproduct. We call this process attachment . It is worth not-
ing that the attachment of diagrams coincides with the true c oproduct in
the category
Set×Rel×Pos×(Set/mor(C)). (3.6)An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus 17
This construction will be useful later in setting up a catego ry of all dia-
grams. Hereafter, we will turn our attention to understandi ng the internal
structure of monoidal diagrams. For what follows, ﬁxa C-monoidal diagram
(D,E,H,µ).
Proposition 3.1 Given a well-founded diagrammatic relation EonD, the
reﬂexive transitive closure E+ris a well-founded partial order.
ProofE+ris trivially a partial order since Eis already antisymmetric. Let
A⊆D, and let a∈Abe aE-minimal element (which exists by well-
foundedness). We wish to show that aisE+r-minimal (and thus E+ris
well-founded); if it weren’t, then ∃b/\e}⊣tio\sl⊣sh=a∈As.t.bE+ra. Since¬bEa,∃c∈A
s.t.bEcandcEa, but then ais notE-minimal, a contradiction. /square
Deﬁnition 3.6 (ordinal rank of a diagram) Let E+
rbe the reﬂexive transi-
tive closure of E, andCm(E+
r) be the set of ⊆-maximal chains therein. Each
C∈Cm(E+
r) is well-ordered, and thus isomorphic to a unique ordinal, i ts
ordinal rank, denoted rank( C). The rank of Dis then the largest such rank:
rank(D) = max {rank(C) :C∈Cm(E+
r)}. (3.7)
Deﬁnition 3.7 (segmentation, layering) Let α= rank(D). Thesegmenta-
tionofDis the function
S•:α→ P(D) (3.8)
deﬁned by transﬁnite recursion as follows: S0=∅, and∀β < α
Sβ=/braceleftbig
m∈ D:mis minimal in D \/parenleftBig/uniondisplay
γ<βSγ/parenrightBig/bracerightbig
, (3.9)
which always exists by well-foundedness. We deﬁne the close ly related
concept of the layering ofD, which is the map
S:α→ P(D).
β/m⊣psto→/uniondisplay
γ<βSγ(3.10)
Then we may more simply write Sβas the set of minimal elements of the
set diﬀerence D \S(β).
Proposition 3.2 The segmentation of Dpartitions its nodes.
ProofSuppose S•wasn’t a disjoint family; then ∃β/\e}⊣tio\sl⊣sh=γsuch that Sβ∩
Sγ/\e}⊣tio\sl⊣sh=∅, and∃x∈Sβ∩Sγ. Without loss of generality, assume γ < β;
x∈Sγ=⇒x∈ S(β), which contradicts x∈Sβ. We next must show that
the extension S(α+ 1) =D. If this was false, then for m∈Sβ,mwould
not be a minimal element, giving the required contradiction . /square18An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus
Remark 2 At present, ‘lone’ nodes (those not connected by an edge to
any other node) are notpermissible in these diagrams, as they break the
weak totality condition on E. We do not consider this a large problem for
multiple reasons. Firstly, they could relatively easily be integrated into the
theory, however the formalism would lose a certain elegance it has, that
of the actual tuples storing only necessary information to r econstruct the
original morphisms. More importantly, this condition is im posed without
loss of any generality because, given a diagram that does notsatisfy this
weak totality condition, we could add a layer below all of the others and
aﬃx identity morphisms to the lone nodes, promoting it to a pe rmissible
monoidal diagram.
3.2 Unresolved Edges
The idea of ‘unresolved edges’ presents an initial problem i n this diagram-
matic theory. When deﬁning how to reada diagram, we shall break it down
into its segmentation. But, for morphisms to compose proper ly, we must
insert an identity edge to make uniform the width of each each layer. The
following construction will ﬁx this issue; once again, ﬁx a m onoidal diagram
(D,E,H,µ).
Deﬁnition 3.8 (γ-unresolved edge) An edge e∈Eisγ-unresolved if
π1(e)∈ S(β) andπ2(e)∈ D \S(β).
Deﬁnition 3.9 (e-incision, cohesion map) Suppose Dhas an unresolved
edgee(at any γ). LetI={(π1(e),1e),(1e,π2,e)}be ane-incision , and
E′=E\{e}∪Ibe thee-incision of E. We then deﬁne the cohesion map
c:E′→Eas the function such that c|E′\Iis the identity, and c[I] ={e}.
Proposition 3.3 Given the cohesion map c:E′→Eas in Def. 3.9, there
is a unique partial ordering H′such that the extension c: (E′,H′
st)→
(E,Hst)is order-reﬂecting (where Astis the corresponding strict partial
order of A).
ProofThis immediately follows from the deﬁnition of an order-reﬂ ecting
map. Uniqueness is also preserved by the strictness, since t he mapA/m⊣psto→Ast
is bijective on partial orders. /square
Proposition 3.4 Proceeding with the language of Def. 3.9and Prop. 3.3,
letD′=D ∪{1e}andµ′:D′→mor(C)such that µ′|D=µandµ′(1e) =
(cod◦µ◦π1)(e). Then(D′,E′,H′,µ′)forms a monoidal diagram.
ProofThis is an obvious consequence of the fact that ( D,E,H,µ) is itself
a monoidal diagram. /square
Deﬁnition 3.10 (e-resolution, local resolver) Let Dbe the class of all C-
diagrams, and for each diagram DletUγ
Dbe the set of γ-unresolved edgesAn Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus 19
inD, and let UD=/uniontext
γ<rank(D)Uγ
Dbe the set of allunresolved edges in
D. Following Prop. 3.4, we call the diagram res( D,e) = (D′,E′,H′,µ′) the
e-resolution ofD. We thus have a well-deﬁned class function
res:/unionsqdisplay
D∈DUD→D (3.11)
called the local resolver ofC-diagrams.
Proposition 3.5 For a monoidal diagram D, the set UDcan be well-
ordered without invoking AC.
ProofWe construct a well-ordering on UDas follows: take the lexicographic
ordering E×EonD2; sinceUD⊆E⊆ D2, there is a well-founded poset
uniquely deﬁned through E×Ewhich exists and satisﬁes the preceding
condition on UD. /square
Because of the existence of this well-ordering, we can well- deﬁne the
following piecewise function:
res∗:D→D
D /m⊣psto→/braceleftBigg
res(D,min(UD))UD/\e}⊣tio\sl⊣sh=∅
D U D=∅(3.12)
This map allows us to, edge-by-edge, resolve all unresolved edges, until it
becomes idempotent (i.e. the entire diagram has been resolv ed).
Deﬁnition 3.11 (resistivity, global resolver, resolution) The resistivity ,
r:D→Ord, of a diagram r(D) is the smallest ordinal αsuch that
res(α+1)
∗(D) = res(α)
∗(D). (3.13)
We deﬁne the global resolver as
res:D→D
D /m⊣psto→res(r(D))
∗(D).(3.14)
We call res( D) theresolution of the diagram D, and deﬁne the subclass D
as the image of res, elements of which are resolved diagrams.
Having resolved these edges, each diagram can be deconstruc ted into
layers properly; this will be demonstrated in the following section.20An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus
3.3 Readouts & Validity
We may move towards extracting the morphism encoded by a diag ram,
which will be termed its readout. Before doing so, however, there is an
important subtlety to note: as we have not strongly restrict ed the map µ,
it is possible that the morphisms dictated to compose by the s tructure of a
diagram are simply unable to do so due to their domains and cod omains;
we would like to think of such diagrams as invalid. To rigorously address
this, we will ﬁrst determine the potential readout of a diagr am, and then
formalize its validity. To do so, the following result will b e useful.
Proposition 3.6 Let(D,E,H,µ)be a monoidal diagram such that D ∈¯D.
For any β <rank(D), let
H∗
β=H∗∩/parenleftbig
Sβ×Sβ/parenrightbig
. (3.15)
Then(Sβ,H∗
β)is a well-ordered set.
ProofSuppose H∗was not well-founded; then there is a non-empty subset
U⊆ Dwith no minimal element. Let U′={e∈E:/logicalortext
i=1,2πi(e)∈U}. By
condition 1 of monoidal diagrams, ( E,H) is a well-founded set, and thus
U′has a minimal element, say ( c,d). Choose x∈ {c,d} ∩U; sinceUhas
no minimal element, ∃distinct y∈Usuch that yH∗x. By weak totality,
ymust be part of at least one pair in U′, say (a,b)∈U′that is unique
from (c,d). But since His well-constructed as a second-order relation, this
implies that ( a,b)H(c,d), which contradicts ( c,d) being a minimal element,
showing the well-foundedness of H∗.
SinceH∗
β⊆H∗and is therefore well-founded itself, it remains to show
thatSβis totally ordered. We will proceed with transﬁnite inducti on on
β; thus ﬁrst assume ( Sβ,H∗
β) is totally ordered. For the successor ordinal
case, let x,y∈Sβ+1. Note that there must exist a∈Sβsuch that aEx; if
not, then xwould have been minimal in D \ S(β) and thus a member of
Sβwhich it cannot be since S•partitions D. Similarly, there is a b∈Sβ
such that bEy. By supposition either aH∗
βborbH∗
βa, or identically aH∗b
orbH∗a. But well-constructedness then implies either that ( a,x)H(b,y) or
(b,y)H(a,x), which by deﬁnition means that xandyareH∗comparable
and thus obviously H∗
β+1comparable.
For the limit ordinal case, suppose x,y∈βfor some limit ordinal β,
and that ( Sδ,H∗
δ) is totally ordered for all δ < β. By the same argument
as above, ∃a,b∈ S(β) such that aExandbEy. Furthermore, a∈Sδ1and
b∈Sδ2forδ1,δ2< β; ifδ1/\e}⊣tio\sl⊣sh=δ2, say without loss of generality that
δ1> δ2, then the diagram would contain a δ1-unresolved edge, which is
a contradiction since D ∈¯D. Thusδ1=δ2=δ, and so xandyareH∗
β
comparable bythesame logic as above. Finally, thebase case β= 1 is trivial
sinceS1consists of all E-minimal elements, but by condition three of a
monoidal diagram, these must be H∗comparable (and thus H∗
βcomparable
as well). Sβis therefore well-ordered. /square
Remark 3 Actually, for the above result, we need not restrict ourselv es to
the subclass ¯Dofresolved diagrams; doingso does greatly simplify thepro ofAn Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus 21
however, especially since we will only need this well-order ing for resolved
diagrams. The more general form can be proved by noting that a ny two
nodes in a segment either trace back to an E-triangle at some point in the
diagram by chain, or they lead to E-minimal elements; thus their compa-
rability recurses back up through the diagram by means of the axiom of
conditional construction.
As discussed, the segments of this diagram indicate where to apply com-
position and monoidal product. The segmentation is already constructed
to be well-ordered, in part, by the vertical comparator. Giv en now that the
horizontal comparator well-orders each segment, we are awa re in what order
to carry out monoidal product when constructing the readout .
Deﬁnition 3.12 (reading) Let ( D,E,H,µ) be a monoidal diagram such
thatD ∈¯D. Letℓβ= rank(Sβ) for allβ. Let
S•
β:ℓβ∼−→Sβ (3.16)
be the unique order-isomorphism between the well-ordering and its ordinal
rank, by means of Prop. 3.6. Using the notation of Sec. 2.2, thereadingof
Dis the ordinal sequence
read(D)•: rank(D)→mor(C)
β/m⊣psto→ Tℓβ◦/productdisplay
γ<ℓβµ/parenleftbig
Sγ
β/parenrightbig
.(3.17)
Since we now have a sequence of morphisms in the category whic h are
to be composed, we must impose the validity requirement befo re doing so.
Deﬁnition 3.13 (valid diagram) Let ( D,E,H,µ) be a monoidal diagram
such that D ∈¯D. Then let
inv(D) ={γ <rank(D) : dom(read( D)γ+1)/\e}⊣tio\sl⊣sh= cod(read( D)γ)}(3.18)
We shall write val( D) for the preimage of ∅under inv ◦res:D→ P(Ord).
An element of val( D) is avaliddiagram.
It is not in general true that val( D)⊆¯D; the res map allows us to con-
sider diagrams valid even if they contain unresolved edges. With this, we
intuitively would like to deﬁne the readout map as the transﬁ nite compo-
sition (as in Def. 2.1) of the reading. To do so, consider for the diagram
D ∈val(D) a functor
D•: rank(D)→C, (3.19)
such that D•= dom◦read(D)•on objects. On the morphism β→β+1,
letD•take the value read( D)β. The composition law is satisﬁed since Dis
a valid diagram.22An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus
Deﬁnition 3.14 (readout) The readout is the function R: val(D)→
mor(C) which maps a diagram Dto the unique morphism induced by the
colimit:
D0 lim− →D•R(D)(3.20)
Under this formalism, we can deﬁne an unbiased monoidal cate gory of
diagrams with a product structure given by attachment. The r eadout map
will get promoted to a functor, and compositions of diagrams are given by
gluing of transﬁnite compositions.
Deﬁnition 3.15 (category of diagrams) For any α-ary unbiased monoidal
category C, there is a category of diagrams dgm(C) that shares the same
objects as C, and has morphisms that are equivalence classes of valid dia -
grams under the equivalence relation of isomorphism of diag rams. dgm( C)
is given a strict unbiased monoidal structure via unbiased a ttachment of
diagrams, written/coproducttext.
Since isomorphisms of diagrams preserve the readout, we can treat it as
an identity-on-objects functor
R: dgm( C)→C[D]≃/m⊣psto→ R(D). (3.21)
Moreover, it is easy to see that Ris an unbiased monoidal functor, since
R(/coproductdisplay
γ<βDγ) =Tβ/parenleftbig
R(Dβ)γ<β/parenrightbig
(3.22)
and thus the data required therefor are just identities. Thi s concludes our
study of monoidal diagrams.
4 Conclusion
4.1 Summary
Overall, we have provided a coherent theory in which inﬁnita ry monoidal
diagrams can be evaluated, in the process fully constructin g and exploring
the notion of unbiased monoidal categories.
InSec.2, we introduce thelatter, startingbydeﬁningunbiasedmono idal
categories similarly toRef. 10,andthenextendingthedeﬁnitiontoanyordi-
nal arity. In addition, we discuss transﬁnite composition a nd prove that it
commutes properly with our notion of inﬁnitary product. Fin ally, we deﬁne
thecolimit expansion , which both provides various examples of inﬁnitary
monoidal categories and gives rather unintuitive results r egarding them.
Sec.3deﬁnes the monoidal diagram, a novel algebraic structure wh ich
resembles agraphstructureoveradirectedgraph.Afterﬁxi ngtheissue of γ-
unresolved edges in these diagrams, we construct the readou t functor which
evaluates monoidal diagrams identifying them uniquely wit h morphismsAn Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus 23
in the underlying inﬁnitary monoidal category. This theory is presented
in such a way to respect the inﬁnitary structure of the catego ry; for this
reason inﬁnitary monoidal diagrams satisfy much of the same properties
one derives from isotopic deformations. We conclude by prom oting the class
of diagrams to a category itself, making the readout an unbia sed monoidal
identity-on-objects functor.
4.2 Future Work
There are many directions in which to build upon our theory. F irstly, as has
beennotedin therelevantliterature [ 10], thereis nocanonical oneextension
from ﬁnitary to inﬁnitary monoidal categories. Thus, diagr ams presented
here could potentially have diﬀerent evaluations and satis fy diﬀerent prop-
erties if a diﬀerent extension is chosen. The author believe s, however, that
the use of unbiased monoidal categories is most natural due t o the inﬁnitary
Lawvere Theory formulation discussed at the end of Sec. 2.2.
Another important choice made here was that between an algeb raic
theory of diagrams and a graphical theory (as it is, after all , a graphical
calculus). As we chose an algebraic theory, the resultant di agrams were
naturally resistant to isotopic deformation, and the diﬃcu lty in proving
coherence was shunted to category theory. In contrast, work ing early on
in atopological formalism simplify the details of the proof. Thus, one way
to generalize could be by making Joyal and Street’s topologi cal progres-
sive plane diagrams inﬁnitary. An important and interestin g step would be
proving the direct equivalence of the topological and categ orical methods,
thus demonstrating the true ‘naturality’ of string diagram s for monoidal
categories of unrestricted arity.
A study of the colimit-expansion presented here, the author believes,
would be very fruitful. It is possible, and very likely, that many cate-
gories beyond just the semicocartesian closed ones discuss ed are colimit-
expandable. Speciﬁcally, here we only considered satisfyi ng the smoothness
necessary for the expansion with right adjoint. But, of cour se, sequential
cocontinuity is a much weaker condition than general cocont inuity—
therefore, classifying this would provide much insight int o the colimit
expansion and inﬁnitary monoidal categories.
Finally, and most apparently, one could generalize our noti on of unbi-
ased monoidal categories to the braided (and even symmetric ) variants, and
thereafter the diagrams that stem from it. This presents an a dditional chal-
lenge because of the lack of commutativity in ordinal additi on. Considering
our Lawvere theory approach, the isomorphism established b y the braiding
is mapped to by non-commutative ordinals, make it diﬃcult to deﬁne. Fur-
thermore, even Setwith products would not form an example. Improving
the formalism to support such notions wouldbe an important advancement,
though, and will therefore be the future focus of the author.24An Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus
References
[1] Penrose, R.: Applications of negative dimensional tens ors. Combinato-
rial Mathematics and its Applications (1971)
[2] Penrose, R., Rindler, W.: Spinors and Space-Time. Cambr idge Mono-
graphs on Mathematical Physics, vol. 1. Cambridge Universi ty Press,
??? (1984). https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511564048
[3] Joyal, A., Street, R.: The geometry of tensor calcu-
lus, i. Advances in Mathematics 88(1), 55–112 (1991).
https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-8708(91)90003-P
[4] Mac Lane, S.: Categories for the Working Mathematician. Gradu-
ate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 5. Springer, New York, NY (197 8).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-4721-8
[5] MacLane, S.: Natural associativity and commutativity. Rice Institute
Pamphlet - Rice University Studies 49(4), 28–46 (1963)
[6] Kelly, G.M.: On maclane’s conditions for coherence of na tural associa-
tivities, commutativities, etc. Journal of Algebra 1(4), 397–402 (1964).
https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-8693(64)90018-3
[7] Selinger, P.: In: Coecke, B. (ed.) A Survey of Graphical L anguages for
Monoidal Categories, pp. 289–355. Springer, Berlin, Heide lberg (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-12821-9 4
[8] Heunen, C., Vicary, J.: Categories for Quantum Theory. O xford Grad-
uate Texts in Mathematics. Oxford University Press, London , England
(2019)
[9] Lurie, J.: On the Classiﬁcation of Topological Field The o-
ries. arXiv (2009). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.0905.0465 .
https://arxiv.org/abs/0905.0465
[10] Leinster, T.: Higher Operads, Higher Categories. Lond on Mathemat-
ical Society Lecture Note Series. Cambridge University Pre ss, ???
(2004).https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511525896
[11] Dwyer, W., Hirschhorn, P., Kan, D., Smith, J.: Summary o f part II. In:
Homotopy Limit Functors on Model Categories and Homotopica l Cat-
egories. Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, pp. 77–87. A merican
Mathematical Society, Providence, Rhode Island (2005)
[12] Cisinski, D.-C.: Higher Categories and Homotopical Al gebra. Cam-
bridge Studies in AdvancedMathematics. Cambridge Univers ity Press,
??? (2019). https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108588737
[13] Hyland, M., Power, J.: The category theoretic understa ndingAn Inﬁnitary Model of Diagrammatic Calculus 25
of universal algebra: Lawvere theories and monads. Electro nic
Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 172, 437–458 (2007).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.entcs.2007.02.019 . Computation, Meaning,
and Logic: Articles dedicated to Gordon Plotkin
[14] Pitts, A.M.: Nominal Sets: Names and Symmetry in
Computer Science. Cambridge Tracts in Theoretical Com-
puter Science. Cambridge University Press, ??? (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139084673
[15] Street, R.: In: Hazewinkel, M. (ed.) Categorical Struc tures, pp. 529–
574. Elsevier, North Holland, The Netherlands (1995)