1
K. Alex Müller and his important role in ferroelectricity
Annette Bussmann-Holder1 and Hugo Keller2
1Max-Planck-Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstr. 1, D-70569 Stuttgart,
Germany
2Physik-Institut der Universität Zürich, Winterthurerstr. 190, CH-8057 Zürich,
Switzerland
Abstract: In this review we concentrate on the work of K. Alex Müller in connection with
his activities on oxide perovskites and ferroelectrics which were central to his research
career long before he successfully discovered the first high temperature superconductor
(HTSC) together with J. G. Bednorz in 1986. Not accidentally, but taking his long
experience in perovskite ferroelectrics into account, the first HTSC was an oxide
perovskite which had never been considered before to be superconducting.
My (ABH) first encounter with K. Alex Müller (Alex) was in 1979 in Portoroz, former
Yugoslavia, on the occasion of the Fourth European Meeting on Ferroelectricity. At that
time Alex was already a superstar in the ferroelectrics community and well-known for his
sharp mind and quick comprehension. Compared to all following meetings the
ferroelectrics community was of a manageable size and could be considered almost as a
family - everyone knew everyone and conflicts and controversies between the different
participants were well-known. As a result, fervid discussion rounds occurred after
speeches, and for those who were not involved in those heated disputes, an amusing
scenario was presented. K. Alex Müller was often involved in such discussions and
redoubtable for his punctured responses. Actually, I was extremely impressed by him and
looked up to him like to a diva.
The first time I (HK) heard the name of “K. Alex Müller” was 1971 when I was a student
of physics at ETH Zurich. I was attending a lecture of Prof. W. Känzig on “Phase
Transitions and Critical Phenomena”, where the pioneering work of Alex and Walter
Berlinger on the experimental determination of the static critical exponents β of the order
parameter of the second-order structural phase transitions in SrTiO 3 (STO) and LaAlO 3
was presented (see below). Then, I first met Alex at the University of Zurich, when, as a
PhD student I attended a lecture of Alex on “Group Theory”. Since my PhD thesis at the
University of Zurich on the critical behavior of quasi two-dimensional magnetic systems
with perovskite structure was related to a similar topic Alex was working on, he invited me
to give a seminar at the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory. I was very proud to present my
work in such a famous laboratory, and Alex at that time was already a world famous
expert in the field of phase transitions and critical phenomena. A true scientific2
collaboration with Alex started shortly after his discovery of high-temperature
superconductivity in the cuprates in 1987. Subsequently, I had the great privilege to
collaborate with him on different aspects of cuprates, including:  isotope effects, symmetry
of the order parameter, intrinsic inhomogeneity, for over a period of almost 30 years.
Figure 1 (left) Annette and Alex in front of the Tertianum (Zurich, 2019); (right) Alex and
Hugo in the cafeteria of the Tertianum (Zurich, 2022).
I would like to start by elucidating how he became involved in the physics of perovskites
and his career paths in the field. Alex studied physics at ETH Zürich where he was
intensely influenced and impressed by the lectures of Prof. Wolfgang Pauli. His diploma
work was on the Hall effect in grey tin which was supervised by Prof. G. Busch, who was
also the supervisor of his PhD thesis in 1958 which dealt with the paramagnetic
resonance in the newly synthesized double perovskite SrTiO 3 (STO) [1].
After finalizing his PhD thesis, Alex started his professional life as head of the magnetic
resonance group at the Battelle Memorial Institute in Geneva. Upon the recommendation
of Prof. E. Brun he did his habilitation at the University of Zurich in 1962. In view of his
high impact in the scientific research in perovskites, the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory
in Rüschlikon offered him in 1963 the position of a researcher where he was subsequently
promoted to a group leader of the physics department in 1971, a position which he held
until 1985. His research focused on STO and related perovskites with emphasis on their
chemical binding, their ferroelectric and soft-mode properties, and later on their critical
and multicritical phenomena at their phase transitions. In 1970 he was appointed as titular
professor of the University of Zurich and a decisive moment in his career occurred in 1982
when he was nominated as IBM fellow. This enabled him to decide freely and
independently about his further research areas – a milestone on his way to the Nobel
prize.
The favorite experimental tool of Alex was Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR),
which had been discovered by the end of the Second World War. This methodology is
rather cheap in comparison with related probes and allows testing of the local
environment, crystalline surroundings and structural properties of specific ions. His first
paper (his PhD thesis) was published in 1958 [1] entitled “Paramagnetic resonance of
3
Fe3+ in single crystals of SrTiO 3”. In this work he demonstrated unambiguously and for
the first time that a cubic to tetragonal structural phase transition occurs in SrTiO 3. He
used EPR in a Fe3+ doped STO single crystal with a doping concentration of 1017/cm3.
The spectra were taken at 3.2 cm wavelength at room temperature and 80K. At room
temperature where STO is cubic, the splitting ꞁ3aꞁ at zero magnetic field is (5.95 ±0.30)10-
4cm-1. The magnitude of ꞁ3aꞁ admits the conclusion that Fe3+occupies the Ti4+lattice
position. At 80K, i.e. in the tetragonal phase, the lines ±5/2⇆±3/2  and ±3/2⇆±1/2
split if the magnetic field is along the [100] direction whereas this splitting is absent if the
field is directed along [111]. This demonstrates that the STO single crystal consists of
tetragonal domains below the phase transition temperature at T S=105K. Note, that this
finding is different for the one observed for the ferroelectric phase in other perovskites
(see below).
These results together with EPR studies of manganese and Cr3+ions in STO, which also
confirm the tetragonal phase of the STO, were published in [2, 3]. From there on he
focused on this zone boundary related instability in oxide perovskites and showed that
these are driven by the tetragonal rotation of TiO 6 octahedra in STO and the trigonal
rotation of AlO 6 octahedra in LaAlO 3 below their respective phase transitions. The
normalized rotation angles φ vary quantitatively in the same way as a function of reduced
temperature. Thus φ is the order parameter in such structural phase transitions, which
are characteristic for perovskite compounds and is defined as the rotation angle φ of the
oxygen octahedra around the tetragonal c-axis in STO (LaAlO 3) below the transition
temperature T s [4].
Related to this topic is a pioneering work of Alex and Walter Berlinger [5] on the
experimental determination of the static critical exponent β of the order parameter φ of
the second-order structural phase transition in STO and LaAlO 3. Just below T s t h e
temperature dependence of φ follows the power law: φ(t)⁓ (1-t)β , where t=T/ Tsis the
reduced temperature. In this study it is clearly shown that for temperatures very close to
Ts (t > 0.9) the order parameter is well described by a critical exponent β=0.33(2),
demonstrating that the critical behavior of the order parameter φ isuniversal .  However,
outside the critical temperature region (0.7 < t < 0.9) the order parameter follows the
classical mean-field Landau behavior with β =0.5. This impressive work is a real landmark
in the field of phase transitions and critical phenomena.
Early on Alex was also interested in the Jahn-Teller (JT) effect which had been predicted
by Jahn and Teller in 1937. Notably, using EPR its existence could be proven for
paramagnetic impurities in crystals with orbital degenerate ground states. By investigating
Ni3+, Cu2+, Pt3+ impurities in STO and other oxides, the static as well as the dynamic JT
effect were substantiated [6].
Aside from the zone boundary related instability in perovskites he was also working on
the instability related to the zone center which is accompanied with a soft transverse optic
mode. This was intensely investigated, especially in STO, since inelastic neutron
scattering (INS) results clearly showed its existence and thereby the possibility of a polar4
instability towards ferroelectricity. Together with H. Burkard he measured the related
dielectric constant down to 4K, much lower than had been done with INS and observed
that the dielectric constant achieved huge values, however, started saturating towards a
high constant value below ⁓30K. This finding led to his most cited paper (except those
related to high temperature superconductivity) “SrTiO 3: An intrinsic quantum paraelectric
below 4K” [7] where the authors proved that quantum fluctuations grow in size with
decreasing temperature and become larger than the soft mode displacement. Since the
citation to this work keeps on growing with time (Figure 2), even nowadays, it was named
a “sleeping beauty”.
1980 1990 2000 2010 20200255075100125 Number of citations
Year Müller, Burkhard PRB 1979
 Müller, Takashige, Bednorz PRL 1987
 Deutscher, Müller PRL 1987
Figure 2 Number of citations with time of the most important papers of K. Alex Müller
excluding the most cited one [8]. The red line shows the citations to Ref. 7. (Taken and
modified from Ref. 9)
Together with J. Georg Bednorz he continued his research on this topic by looking into
possible ferroelectric order in Ca doped STO [10]. Here Ca occupies the Sr position. Since
its radius is much smaller than the one of Sr, ferroelectricity appears in the AO plane in
ABO 3 due to off-centering of the Ca ion. With increasing doping a transition from an XY
(planar) quantum ferroelectric to randomness occurs which vanishes completely with
further Ca content. These results were a hint to a method to achieve ferroelectricity in an
otherwise quantum paraelectric.
Another interesting observation of Alex, which suggests a possible origin of ferroelectricity
in oxide perovskites, was based on the EPR analysis of Fe3+ in various systems for which
he used a superposition model [11]. In the model compound it was found that Fe3+ in
ferroelectric BaTiO 3 does not have ionic coordinates identical to Ti4+. However, it remains
always in the center of the oxygen octahedron, i.e. it does not move out of the inversion
symmetric position as the Ti4+ does and thus does not take part in the phase transitions
of the host lattice. This makes it a very useful tool to probe the bulk oxygen lattice alone.
This behavior of Fe3+ in BaTiO 3 is not a single example, but rather appears to be a general
feature in ferroelectric oxide perovskites, since a related behavior was also observed by
him in PbTiO 3 and KNbO 3. This might explain why Fe3+ doping in these perovskites5
always suppresses T c. In addition, it supports the viewpoint that the spontaneous
polarization of these materials stems from the shift of the Ti4+, Nb5+ ions from the center
of the oxygen octahedra. The small differences in the mass of Ti versus Fe or their
effective charge are thus not responsible for the different behavior. However, the d0
configuration is crucial apart from the anisotropic nonlinear polarizability of the oxygen
ions (absent for S2-, F-, C1-, etc.). If the latter p electron charge can move onto empty d
cation orbital, the oxygen shell polarizability is enhanced and ferroelectricity occurs.
For a while, Alex considered himself to be a single ion man, but Prof. Harry Thomas
introduced him to many particle physics. From EPR experiments he concluded that the
dynamics of the phase transitions of perovskites change in the vicinity of the transition.
The critical properties of systems are on one hand characterized by the system’s
dimensionality, meaning linear in one dimension, two dimensional in planes, or three and
hypothetical four dimensions, on the other hand by its symmetry class of interactions. It
turned out that uniaxial pressure modifies the symmetry class of the phase transition in
STO and consequently its critical behavior. These experiments enabled him to classify
the transformation as Ising type, bicritical or cubic. It was thus possible to identify a critical
end point as a function of temperature and pressure. His measurements were the first
ones evidencing a three dimensional Potts behavior [12] whereby the system approaches
in a jump like manner the transformation. The measured order-parameter discontinuity at
the transition depends on the trigonal order parameter with exponent δ=0.62(10) (mean-
field theory predicts δ=1). This agrees with renormalization-group predictions, and proves
that the model has a first-order transition even in the quantum fluctuation dominated
region.
BaTiO 3 attracted increased interest by him, since it exhibits three successive phase
transitions, which have been classified as order/disorder in the US whereas W. Cochran
[13] attributed perfect mode softening to them, i.e. a displacive character. This latter
description was generally accepted and the order/disorder aspects discarded. In 1985/86
Alex very successfully demonstrated that the transition from orthorhombic to
rhombohedral is of order/disorder character by replacing the four valued titanium in part
by the isovalent manganese [14]. This work is even today – 30 years later – considered
as pioneering. Collaborations with Prof. G. Völkel [15] of the University of Leipzig and in
more recent work with him on the same samples as used in 1985 highlighted these
aspects and contributed to a further understanding of the order/disorder aspect.
When he was only 53 he had attained an enormous scientific reputation which could have
been the end of his career as a researcher. However, as is well known, he continued with
science with much greater success than ever before. Interestingly, his work on perovskite
oxides together with his intimate knowledge of the JT effect gave rise to the discovery of
high-temperature superconductivity [8] as is shown in the Fig. 3 below where the clear
connection between both is apparent.6
Figure 3. a) Crystal structure of STO. Figure taken from the PhD thesis of Alex [1]. b)
Crystal structure of the cuprate superconductor La 2CuO 4.From [16]. c) The schematic
concept of JT polarons. From [17]
Alex was a truly devoted teacher and kept contact with the Physik-Institut of the University
of Zurich. This contact was not only on a scientific basis, but also for social means. He
was not only interested in the research progress of the students but also in their lives and
supported them financially through the K. Alex Müller Foundation .
Alex married his wife Inge in 1956, and a year later his son Erich was born, followed in
1960 by his daughter Sylvia. Three grandchildren stem from both. He was extremely
devoted to his family and Inge always supported him, giving structure to his life. They
enjoyed travelling together and she joined him on his numerous journeys.
b)
c)7
Besides his family, Alex was very enthusiastic about old cars and especially Jaguars. In
order to do repairs himself, his garage was equipped with a lower level from which he
managed to work on the underside of the vehicles. In addition to his passion for exact
natural sciences, he also showed broad interest in natural philosophy and in the depth
psychology of C.G. Jung, as well as in classical music, literature, art, and history.
Another of Alex’s lifelong hobbies was skiing which he had learned during his time in the
Boarding School in Schiers (located in the Swiss alps). He became an excellent skier,
constantly practiced and was mostly happy when he could stay in the mountains with his
skis. Almost up to the age of 87 he continued with this sport and then only gave up
because his muscles weakened with age. His children as well as theirs learned skiing
from him until he confessed that they were doing better than him.
In addition to skiing, he also practiced swimming close to his house in Hedingen in a small
lake regularly in the summer.
Alex has inspired the world and initiated the work on ferroelectricity. He was one of the
greatest scientists we ever met, but in addition, he was a true friend of not only to us, but
also our families as he took enormous interest in their development. We have lost a
scientific father, a very good friend, an inspiring scientist, an everlasting teacher who was
warm-hearted, friendly, open minded, sharp-witted, and had a large portion of black
humor. Good bye, and take care!
His words to us: “Macht’s gut, Euer Alex!” (which translates to, “Take it easy, yours Alex!”)
Figure 4 Alex in the Tertianum (Zurich, 2022)
8
References
1. K. A. Müller, Doctoral Thesis, ETH Zürich, Prom. Nr. 2791 (1958); Helv. Phys. Acta
31, 173 (1958).
2. K. A. Müller, Archives des Science 11 (1958).
3. K. A. Müller, Phys. Rev. Lett.  2, 341 (1959).
4. K. A. Müller, W. Berlinger, and F. Waldner, Phys. Rev. Lett.  21, 814 (1968).
5. K. A. Müller and W. Berlinger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 26, 13 (1971).
6. U. Höchli and K. A. Müller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 12, 730 (1964).
7. K. A. Müller and H. Burkard, Phys. Rev. B 19, 3593 (1979).
8. J. G. Bednorz and K. A. Müller, Z. Physik B - Cond. Mat. 64, 189 –193 (1986)
9. R. K. Kremer, A. Bussmann-Holder, H. Keller, and R. Haunschild, Condens. Matter
5, 43 (2020).
10. J. G. Bednorz and K. A. Müller, Phys. Rev. Lett.  52, 2289 (1984).
11. E. Siegel and K. A. Müller, J. Phys. Colloques 41, C6-203-C6-206 (1980).
12. Amnon Aharony, K. A. Müller, and W. Berlinger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 33 (1977).
13. W. Cochran, Ferroelectrics 35, 3 (1981).
14. K. A. Müller and W. Berlinger, Phys. Rev. B  34, 6130 (1986).
15. G. Völkel and K. A. Müller, Phys. Rev. B 76, 094105 (2007).
16. J. G. Bednorz and K. A. Müller, Science, 237, 1133 (1987).
17. J. G. Bednorz and K. A. Müller Nobel lecture, December 8, 1987.