Auditory distraction in open-plan ofﬁce environments:
The effect of multi-talker acoustics
Manuj Yadav⇑, Jungsoo Kim, Densil Cabrera, Richard de Dear
School of Architecture, Design and Planning, The University of Sydney, Australia
article info
Article history:
Received 11 January 2017Received in revised form 27 April 2017Accepted 8 May 2017
Keywords:
Open-plan ofﬁce acousticsIrrelevant sound effect
Multi-talker simulation
PsychoacousticsIndoor environmental qualityabstract
Within the soundscapes of open-plan ofﬁces, irrelevant speech has consistently been reported as the
most distracting, and causing performance decrements for workers. Notwithstanding this generalization,
the ‘babble’ created by multiple simultaneously active talkers can sometimes provide beneﬁcial soundmasking, but due to spatial release from masking (SRM), speech may still be sufﬁciently intelligible up
to a certain number of talkers (estimated to be about four). This was explored within a highly-realistic
ofﬁce simulation, where the cognitive performance, and subjective distraction of participants weretested. The experimental design was a 4 /C22 factorial (4 talker numbers, 2 levels of broadband sound
masking, as the factors). The results indicated that within lower sound pressure level (SPL) of broadband
sound masking, multi-talker sound environments degraded cognitive tasks performance more than those
with a single talker, suggesting SRM effects. For higher SPL broadband sound masking, the cognitive testscores were similar within the different talker numbers. The subjective distraction increased monotoni-
cally with the number of talkers, with higher distraction within lower SPL broadband sound masking.
Overall, the results call into question the single talker assumption (being the most distracting) withinthe international standard for measuring open-plan ofﬁce acoustic environments (ISO 3382-3:2012).
Soundscapes with 4 simultaneous talkers were still not adequately providing beneﬁcial ‘babble’ masking,
and were more distracting than 1 active talker. In conclusion, it is suggested that the acoustics environ-ment of open-plan ofﬁces needs better characterization by incorporating some of the complexity andpsychoacoustics of multi-talker scenarios.
Crown Copyright /C2112017 Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
1.1. Background
When compared to cellular or private ofﬁce conﬁgurations,
there is mounting evidence against open-plan ofﬁces, in the form
of demonstrable dissatisfaction amongst its occupants, and a
decline in the task-based performance [1–4] . Overall, one of the
main attractions of the open-plan layout – the presumed increase
in productivity due to increased ease of interaction between the
workers, has been shown to be substantially offset by a numberof factors such as distraction due to noise and privacy issues (see
reviews in [5–7] ). From the perspective of a worker engaged in
cognitively intensive tasks, it seems ironic that this major beneﬁtof the shared work environment and ease of interaction, in fact,
becomes the root of the problem. Intelligible speech-based com-
munication affects both the talker and the listener (active or pas-
sive) as it has the potential to distract a listener who may need to
concentrate on a task, and make a talker anxious about lack of
speech privacy. This reﬂects in the ﬁndings of studies showing that,
of all the indoor environmental quality (IEQ) factors, perceived
quality of acoustics scores lowest in open-plan ofﬁces, where both
intelligible speech and non-speech stimuli [7–12] have been
reported as the contributing factors.
Given the signiﬁcance of acoustics in the overall perception of
IEQ within open-plan ofﬁces, the standardisation of some
speech-related room acoustics measures in ISO 3382-3 (based lar-
gely on [13]) represents a useful development. Brieﬂy, ISO 3382-3
considers the acoustic environment in the form of speech intelligi-
bility and background noise distribution around workstations [14].
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2017.05.011
0003-682X/Crown Copyright /C2112017 Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Abbreviations: IEQ, Indoor environmental quality; ISE, Irrelevant sound effect;
SNR, Signal-to-noise ratio; SRM, Spatial release from masking; SRT, Speechreception threshold; STI, Speech transmission index; SI, Speech intelligibility; mr-
sEPSM, Multi-resolution speech based envelope power spectrum model; SPL, Sound
pressure level; NC, Noise criterion; RNC, Room noise criterion.
⇑Corresponding author at: Room 589, 148, City Road, The University of Sydney,
2006 NSW, Australia.
E-mail address: manuj.yadav@sydney.edu.au (M. Yadav).Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–80
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Acoustics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/lo cate/apacoust
However, there appear to be a few fundamental issues with ISO
3382-3, arising mainly from certain simpliﬁcations and assump-
tions, which may limit its applicability. Speciﬁcally, the parameters
in ISO 3382-3 are based around the assumption that the most dis-
tracting scenario in an open-plan ofﬁce is one active talker, com-
pared to when more than one talker is simultaneously active.
This assumption seems to contradict extant literature regarding
the psychoacoustics of auditory distraction in multi-talker envi-
ronments (see reviews in [15,16] ) such as an open-plan ofﬁce.
Studies have shown that a combination of few voices that are spa-
tially seperated can be similarly distracting (in terms of subjective
ratings and cognitive performance) as a single voice [17–19] . This
paper explores the validity of single talker assumption within ISO
3382-3, by ﬁrst presenting a literature review of multi-talker psy-
choacoustics, as it applies to open-plan ofﬁces. This is followed byreporting an experiment in which hypotheses that address the
assumptions of ISO 3382-3 were tested within an open-plan ofﬁce
simulation that had a realistic multi-talker sound environment.
1.2. Auditory distraction due to the irrelevant sound effect
The degree of auditory distraction and the associated decline in
cognitive performance within an open-plan ofﬁce sound environ-
ment has been shown to be affected by the degree of uncontrolled
(or, to-be-ignored) audition of irrelevant sounds: the so-called
irrelevant sound effect (ISE; ﬁrst studied by [20], see review in
[21]). In this regard, what makes an irrelevant sound stream dis-
tracting, consistently over time, has been encapsulated within
the so-called changing-state hypothesis (ﬁrst advanced in [22]).
Within the changing-state hypothesis, the sound stream can be
thought in terms of segments, which vary in their acoustic-
perceptual properties over time (speech being a prime example).
For such segments, the extent or the degree of distraction increases
with the extent to which the segments change state within the
sound stream [23]. As an often cited illustration of the changing-
state hypothesis, a sound stream that is composed of segments ‘a
bcbcab ...’ has been shown to be more distractive than
steady-state sound streams ‘a a a a a a’ (e.g., a repeating tone, or
steady-state broadband noise proﬁles). Taking this example fur-
ther, it can be argued, as was done by Macken et al. [18] (p. 45),
that segments from individual voices in a multi-talker environ-
ment (each voice registering certain acoustic-perceptual attri-
butes) can exhibit a changing-state to elicit the ISE.
It is interesting that in the presence of an irrelevant sound
stream, the auditory system does not habituate to selectively limit
the distraction. This is presumably due to evolutionary reasons, as
a shift in relevance of the ambient sounds may sometimes require
an immediate response. This applies not only in cases where thereis an imminent danger, but also in more benign cases where the
shift implies that the hitherto unwanted sounds begin carrying
task-speciﬁc or important information. This has been typiﬁed
within the duplex theory for the irrelevant sound effect. The
duplex theory highlights the important differences between the
functional mechanisms by which the irrelevant changing-state
sound stream is assumed to cause distraction: either by
interference-by-process ,o r attention capture (details in [24]). The
latter relates to a momentary shift in attention from the focal task
due to an unexpected change in the sound environment, which
could contain either speciﬁc (e.g., their name being called) or gen-
eric cues (e.g., phone ringing) to the listeners. The former
(interference-by-process) has been shown to occur when the irrel-
evant sounds, or segments, compete for the same cognitive pro-
cessing resources as those required by the voluntary task within
a certain cognitive domain, e.g., serial short-term memory [25],
semantic processing [26,27] ; or more typically, a combination of
cognitive domains.Since the focus in this paper is on speech-based distraction, it is
worthwhile to brieﬂy describe speech as a signal within the con-
text of duplex theory of ISE; how its changing-state nature varies
with the number of talkers; and the psychoacoustical literature
relating to multi-talker environments. To begin with, speech can
be considered as a ‘special’ signal with a high degree of redundancy
in its information coding, which renders it robust against many
types of system and environmental distortions, at least from the
point of view of
speech intelligibility ([15], pp. 1467). Let us consider
a simple example of speech from one talker, where the energy is
generally concentrated in discrete speech tokens, or segments.
Such segments exhibit natural envelope modulations (or, rhythms)
in the temporal and spectral domains. These spectrotemporal
envelope modulations, along with the gaps between these seg-
ments typify the changing-state nature of a stream of speech,which, of course, incorporates the audition of both relevant and
irrelevant speech.
Moving on from the simple case of one talker, adding more
voices to the signal can have the effect of ‘ﬁlling in’ (or, energetic
masking [28]) these aforementioned gaps [29]. Depending on the
extent of such ﬁlling in, adding more voices can reduce the
advantage (alternatively, reduce the disadvantage) of ‘listening
in the gaps’, which, in effect, may reduce the changing-state
effect. This is similar to adding spectrally shaped broadband
noise, which has also been shown to be effective in reducing
the ‘listening in the gaps’, or changing-state effect of speech
[23]. Such broadband noise treatment with different kinds of
spectral manipulations is generally also referred to as ‘sound
masking’ in many commercial and scientiﬁc applications [30].
The effect of adding such ‘sound masking’ was also explored in
this paper, as seen in Section 1.4. Another perspective in terms
of adding more voices to the one talker signal can be seen as
the averaging out of the modulations in individual voices, e.g.,
speech-on-speech masking over time (example of energetic mask-
ing), leading to reduced signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and hence,
reduced speech intelligibility. Other types of masking may
include informational (i.e., semantic) [28] and, perhaps, perceptual
masking ( [31] p. 119), and collectively, a mixture of many voices
essentially leads to the condition of speech ‘babble’ in the form of
multi-talker speech where the streams from individual talkers
may not be segmented enough to be considered distracting, and
are in fact beneﬁcial [17]. In other words, speech ‘babble’ has
the potential to, in fact, reduce the ISE. In the context of the cur-
rent experiment design, primarily the interference-by-process
aspect of the ISE was more relevant, compared to the attention
capture mechanism. This will be further explained in Section 2.2.
However, what is important to consider here is that the concep-
tualisation of speech babble, thus far, has been from a largely sig-nal perspective, while ignoring several environmental and
psychoacoustical factors; for instance, the spatial arrangement
of talkers in the multi-talker babble, familiarity with voices in a
real scenario that could aid segmentation, etc.
Within real listening environments, such as an open-plan ofﬁce,
the aforementioned speech-on-speech, or babble masking, and the
purported decline in the changing-state nature of the sound stream
leading to babble needs careful qualiﬁcation (the following ignores
any contextual issues such workplace dynamics and cultural fac-
tors, which are also likely to be quite important). One of the main
reasons being that, due to the spatial separation of talkers, speech-
on-speech masking is still subject to spatial release from masking
(SRM) (see review in [31] pp. 120–124) before the sound reaches
the ears (i.e., peripheral masking) [15,32] . SRM, which is essentially
a monaural effect, generally means that the extent of masking
decreases with a spatial separation between speech sources. The
binaural advantage (or, disadvantage in relation to distraction),
and head movements can further enhance the signal-to-noise ratio,M. Yadav et al. / Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–80 69and hence, intelligibility of this spatially unmasked speech for the
listener [33].
Overall, the spatial separation of talkers and the binaural advan-
tage can result in the restoration of, to a degree, the changing-state
nature (in a sense, a ‘pre-babble’ state) of the combined speech sig-
nal from multiple talkers and the associated distraction due to the
irrelevant sound effect. Bronkhorst noted that up to four spatially
dispersed and active talkers still lead to conditions that were dis-
similar to the steady-state speech-babble, albeit with a monotonic
decrease in the speech reception threshold (SRT: signal-to-noise
ratio required for 50% speech intelligibility) implying less beneﬁt
from any spatial release from masking, as the talker number
increases [34]. However, it was also reported that there is some
spread in the results of several laboratory-based studies, when
they considered the effect of the number of talkers and their spatialconﬁguration leading to masking release, with SRT increasing
between 2 and 11 dB with each additional talker, which further
decreased with the spatial separation of the talkers [31,32,34] .
Zaglauer et al. [19] used a headphone-based open-plan ofﬁce sim-
ulation to investigate the effect of voice babble on serial recall and
subjective annoyance ratings [19]. Their experiment design
included babble (using the same voice mixed up to six times) that
was simulated from a ﬁxed position but spatially separated from a
single talker (assumed to be the most distracting, as per ISO 3382-
3), which was located closer to the simulated listening position.
The single talker closer to the listening position (within the distrac-
tion distance, r
D, as per ISO 3382-3) was simulated using the same
voice as the babble voices, which, although a somewhat unrealistic
scenario, represented a controlled experiment design. They found
that the subjective annoyance ratings did not change with an
increase in the number of voices in the babble (simulated from
outside the distraction distance, rD), and was not signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent from annoyance due to a single talker. The improvement in
the serial recall scores also did not show a strictly linear trend,
which would be expected if the assumption of a single talker being
the most distracting was true [19]. This indicates that even without
spatial separation of the babble voices that leads to unmasking of
individual voice, and including different voices to create a more
ecologically valid babble, multi-talker scenarios nevertheless show
a changing-state nature. In real ofﬁce environments, hearing (or,
‘glimpsing’) speech segments from several spatially separated talk-
ers within a close-range (e.g., within the distraction distance, rD)
may, in effect, constitute an additional factor in terms of spatial
segmentation/modulations, which exhibit a changing-state nature
to cause distraction, beyond the spectrotemporal modulations.
There is, however, no research yet that has directly studied the
changing-state nature due to spatial segmentation/modulations.
1.3. Speech-based distraction in ISO 3382-3: limitations and
alternatives
Bearing in mind the complexity of open-plan ofﬁce sound envi-
ronments, and the wide range of tasks that could potentially be
affected by the irrelevant sound effect (or, more appropriately
here, the irrelevant speech effect), we note again that the calcula-
tions in ISO 3382-3 are speciﬁcally designed for the scenario of a
single ,active talker at any given point in time [14]. In terms of
practicality, such an approach has many advantages, not the least
of which is the fact that a single active talker simpliﬁes the mea-
surements and calculations involved. This is especially relevant
for the metrics based on the speech transmission index (STI) in
ISO 3382-3, as multi-talker STI measurement is still a relatively
undeveloped concept (see Table 1 in[15], and the associated
review). In particular, STI measurement does not consider the
modulations of the multi-talker speech signal, which largely
encapsulates its spectrotemporal changing-state nature, and theSTI standard is yet to incorporate the binaural advantage [15].I n
this regard, there are alternatives and improvements to STI that
characterise the speech intelligibility (or, alternatively, speech pri-
vacy) in multi-talker scenario more comprehensively (see Table 1
in[15]), and provide better prediction of the ISE [35]. However,
as noted by Bronkhorst in an extensive review of this ﬁeld [15],
there remains no single binaural model that sufﬁciently addresses
the complexities of multi-talker environments, including relevance
of semanticity [27]. Amongst the existing models, the speech intel-
ligibility prediction from the speech-based envelope power spec-
trum model (mr-sEPSM [36]) was reported by Bronkhorst [15] as
being the most comprehensive model in its consideration of the
complexities, while requiring only a few input parameters. The lat-
ter was used in this paper to characterise the signal-to-noise (or
SNR envafter [36]) in multi-talker environments (details in Sec-
tion 2.2.3 ), as it considers modulations in the spectrotemporal
envelope of multi-talker speech environments, which affects its
changing-state nature, and consequently the irrelevant sound (or,
speech) effect (ISE). The measurement method involves a single
channel recording, which is simpler than a STI-based measurement
and can be done in-situ with full-occupancy in ofﬁces (or similar
multi-talker environments), which is currently not possible with
the ISO 3382-3 method. Compared to the traditional way of under-
standing the ISE as the change in cognitive performance in the
presence vs absence of irrelevant speech (or sound), the present
paper will largely consider the ISE for single vs multi-talker speech.
This is further elaborated in Sections 2.2 and 2.4 .
Returning to ISO 3382-3 parameters, the main limitation is not
that STI is currently inadequate for multi-talker environments, but
rather the assumption of the single active talker scenario as the
most distracting, which is inconsistent with evidence cited in Sec-
tion 1.2relating to SRM, the binaural advantage, the characterisa-
tion of speech babble, etc. Moreover, the only study cited in ISO
3382-3 ( [17]; Ref. [10] therein) to justify the one-talker scenario
being the most distracting, seems to be equivocal. Jones and
Macken [17] addressed the role of the number of voices (one, two,
or babble of six voices) and their spatial location on cognitive efﬁ-
ciency (i.e., SRM). Within the abstract, while it was stated that
‘‘...with monaural presentation, 1 and 2 voices produced roughly
the same degree of disruption, but babble of 6 voices reduced errors
signiﬁcantly ”, it was also stated that ‘‘ ...allocating each voice to a
different spatial location restored its disruptive capacity ” (p. 216),
which highlights SRM in this context, and was explored in a
laboratory-based experiment 4 in the paper. While addressing
practical scenarios, Jones and Macken cautioned against consider-
ing the number of voices as a ‘‘ ...ﬁxed inviolable numerical threshold
above which efﬁciency would not decline ” (p. 224), and instead sug-
gested that ‘‘ ...a range of factors would qualify the effect of number
of voices ” (p. 224) which would include voice distinctiveness, task
characteristics (memory vs. reading), acoustics settings, and sta-
tionary vs. moving sources (a voice directivity issue) [17]. Further-
more, while conjecturing on the applicability of speech-on-speech,
or noise-on-speech masking to decrease the ISE in ofﬁce spaces,
they mentioned that, ‘‘ ...where conditions are such that spatial sep-
aration of the sound sources is enhanced, this advantage arising from
increasing the number of voices in the signal will not be obtained ” (p.
225). In summary, Jones and Macken [17] foreshadowed the issues
raised in Section 1.2above. The ﬁndings in Zaglauer et al., as pre-
sented in Section 1.2, provided further impetus to a more system-
atic consideration of the distraction due to talkers in the viscinity
of a listener, as is the case in most ofﬁce environments [19].
1.4. Aims of the study
Based on the issues raised in Sections 1.2 and 1.3 , this paper
investigates speech-based distraction within a realistically70 M. Yadav et al. / Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–80simulated open-plan ofﬁce, where spatially separated talkers
(potentially exhibiting SRM) were represented by calibrated loud-
speaker channels. The impact of the number of simultaneous talk-
ers, and two proﬁles of broadband masking noise was assessed on
the cognitive performance, and subjective distraction for a group of
participants. Broadband noise, which can be seen as ‘ﬁlling in the
gaps’ that are naturally present in the spectrotemporal envelope
of speech, was used to simulate masking similar to speech-on-speech masking. There is evidence, however, that such broadband
masking, while effective in providing beneﬁts against the ISE as
evidenced in higher cognitive scores, was also reported as subjec-
tively more annoying; when compared to similar maskers such as
running water stream, actual speech babble, etc [37–39] . Overall,
the following was hypotheses were tested:
1.In lower SPL background noise conditions, cognitive performance
would decrease with increasing number of talkers (to the maxi-
mum of four talkers tested in this paper).
Based on the ﬁndings of studies (see Sections 1.2 and 1.3 ) that
showed restoration of the changing-state nature of sound stream
in multi-talker environments with a spatial separation of talkers,
and other factors that can lead to unmasking (binaural, semantic
effects, etc.), it was expected that the cognitive performance
would, ﬁrstly, not improve in multi-talker environments, com-
pared to the single-talker environments. Zaglauer et al. reported
that even with low STI values, listeners were able to extract con-
tent from multi-voice babble [19]. With more than one active voice
in the current experiment design, there would be a higher likeli-
hood of the listeners tuning-in and -out of the respective 1-way
conversations that were simulated (details follow in Section 2.2.1 ),
which is consistent with the changing-state hypothesis for the
multi-talker scenario. Furthermore, due to the curiosity-inducing
nature of such a changing-state sound stream with a high degree
of semantic validity (which has been shown to affect ofﬁce tasks
such as proofreading [40,41] ), it was expected that in some
multi-talker cases, the cognitive performance, in effect, would be
worse than a single-talker scenario.
2.In higher SPL background noise conditions, cognitive performance
would be similar to that observed in the single-talker or multi-talker sound environments .
This relates to the notion of beneﬁcial broadband masking
reducing the changing-state nature, and hence, the ISE due to mul-
tiple talkers, which has been shown in previous studies [37–39] .
3.The degree of subjective distraction would increase as the number
of talkers increased .
This hypothesis mirrors the point 1 above; from the cognitive
performance domain to subjective perception. Although Zaglauer
et al. [19] showed similar subjective distraction due to one and
many voices, the voices in their babble mix was not spatiallyseparated, and moreover, a single speech source was used for the
babble mix. It was expected that the spatial separation of voices
and the use of a unique voice per talker would result in an increase
in the degree of subjective distraction with an increase in the num-
ber of talkers.
4.The degree of subjective distraction would be higher in the lower
SPL background noise condition, compared to the higher SPLconditions .
This was expected due to the reduction in the changing-state
nature due to the higher SPL broadband sound masking, compared
to lower SPL sound masking.
2. Methods2.1. Laboratory simulation of an open-plan ofﬁce: visual and Climactic
considerations
The experiment was conducted in a climate-controlled chamber
(described in [42]) that was set-up as a medium-sized open-plan
ofﬁce (60.6 m
3; 0.7 s mid-frequency reverberation time). The cli-
mate in the chamber was maintained well within the acceptable
thresholds prescribed by the relevant thermal comfort/ventilation
standards [43,44] through under-ﬂoor air distribution (air temper-
ature: 22.3 ± 0.3 /C176C; RH: 65.4 ± 4.5%; CO 2: 516.9 ± 42.2 ppm).
There were two prime objectives for the design of the chamber’s
ﬁt-out – that the workstation for the participant should look and
feel like a typical workstation in open ofﬁce settings, and that
the loudspeakers used to simulate talkers (details in Section 2.2)
should not be visible to the participant at any stage. In order to
achieve the ﬁrst objective, the workstations were partially
enclosed with medium-height partitions (1.5 m /C21.5 m each), in
the form of cubicles with desks, chairs, indoor plants, and desktop
computers, as seen in Fig. 1 (a and b). Additionally, ‘‘skyline”/C210sound
diffusers (RPG, Upper Marlboro, USA) were attached to the walls in
order to make the sound ﬁeld more diffuse and reduce any ﬂutter
echoes that normally affect rooms with parallel hard walls. The
participant was seated at the location marked ‘‘ P”i nFig. 1 (a). There
was no discernible or measureable air draft at the participant’s
workstation and illuminance on the desk surface was ﬁxed at a
typical ofﬁce value of 500 lx. In order to achieve the second objec-
tive for the visual presentation, the participant was brought in the
room through the door marked D1 in Fig. 1 (a), limiting any visual
access to the loudspeakers, which, along with the sufﬁciently high
partitions, was further enforced by the participant not being
allowed to move around freely in the rest of the ofﬁce.
2.2. Laboratory-based simulation of an open-plan ofﬁce: acoustical
considerations
There were two distinct components in simulating the acoustics
of a medium-sized open-plan ofﬁce at the listening position of the
participant: simulated talkers, and the spectrally shapedTable 1
Details of the sound environments that were simulated. The acoustic descriptor were: A-weighted equivalent SPL ( LA,eq); room noise criterion (RNC), where the parenthetical
letter denoted the presence of low-frequency ﬂuctuations (F) or not (N); and SNR in envelope-power domain (SNR env).
Number of active talkers (T) Masking noise status Sound environment label LA,eq(dBA) RNC SNR env(dB)
0 Off T0_M0 31 26(F) –
1 Off T1_M0 36.3 31(F) 25.92 Off T2_M0 38.7 33(F) 43.44 Off T4_M0 40.6 35(F) 00 On T0_M1 42.0 44(N) –1 On T1_M1 43.0 43(N) 18.52 On T2_M1 43.6 41(N) 19.4
4 On T4_M1 44.4 38(F) 20.9M. Yadav et al. / Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–80 71broadband noise for speech masking. These two components are
described in Sections 2.2.1,2.2.1 , respectively, leading to the cre-
ation of eight sound environments for the experiment trials, pre-
sented in Section 2.2.3 .
2.2.1. Multi-talker simulation system
A 4-channel sound system was used to simulate four talkers
with loudspeakers at the locations depicted in Fig. 1 (a), where
the 2 male and 2 female talkers that were simulated are labelled
M1,M2, and F1,F2respectively. The loudspeakers were connected
through a RME Fireface UFX interface (Haimhausen, Germany) to a
computer running a bespoke application created using Max
(Cycling ’74, Walnut, USA) for signal processing. The loudspeakers
used were Genelec 8010A (Iisalmi, Finland), which were placed at a
height of 1.2 m from the ﬂoor, to represent seated talkers. These
loudspeakers were similar to those used by Haapakangas et al.
[30], and have mouth-like directivity, with dimensions comparable
to a human head.
For each of these simulated talkers, the corresponding loud-
speaker channel was calibrated in an anechoic room, so that its
output matched the spectrum of normal speech at a distance of
1 m, as per Table 1 in ISO 3382-3 [14]. The values in this table
are based on the spectrum in ANSI S3.5-1997 (R2007) [45] repre-
senting the averaged spectra of male and female voices speaking
with normal effort. After the calibration, the deviations in the
125 Hz–8 kHz octave-band spectra of the loudspeaker channels
were within ±1.5 dB of the spectra in Table 1 in ISO 3382-3. Essen-
tially, calibrating each loudspeaker channel ensured that its long-
term spectral output matched that of a person speaking with nor-
mal effort from that location. Note that the loudspeaker-based
talkers represent a ﬁxed system in space, which does not simulate
the time-varying features that accompany actual human conversa-
tion (e.g., directivity, etc.). Nevertheless, the loudspeaker-based
talker system facilitated a highly realistic multi-talker environ-
ment for testing participants within a factorial design.
The speech material that was used consisted of scripted two-
and three-way conversations of Australian-accented English talk-
ers (two males and females, each). These conversations were
recorded over individual channels for each talker in an anechoic
room (details in [46]), with omnidirectional headset microphones
(DPA d:ﬁne 66; Gydevand, Denmark) that were placed close tothe talkers’ mouth. The aim of recording these conversations was
to simulate multi-talker speech environments that test real-
world listening abilities [46]. As such, the talkers were instructed
to maintain a natural mode of interaction while acting out the
scripts, and rigorous quality control was maintained. The conversa-
tion scripts were deliberately quotidian, in order to maximise eco-
logical validity. After signal processing to remove crosstalk
between microphone channels, the average duration of these
recordings were 3.42 ± 0.85, and 3.63 ± 0.73 min for the two-,
and three-talker passages, respectively.
Sound recordings were subsequently edited to create four con-
ﬁgurations of multi-talker environments (three with talkers, and
one with no talkers – the quiet conﬁguration); while ensuring no
repetition of the speech content. Complete passages for each talker
in the unedited conversations (from [46]) were manually isolated
from the sound recordings, while maintaining the natural cadence,
pauses, variations in speed, and interjections in these passages.
Examples of complete passages (or, segments) can be seen in
Fig. 2 (a), which, for each talker, were one of the many isolated from
their respective recordings. These passages were arranged to create
4-channel sound ﬁles (wav format, 44.1 kHz, 32 bit) of 20 min
duration each, one for each talker conﬁguration (three in total,
except quiet). Only one talker from each originally recorded con-versation (two- or three-way) was included in the sound ﬁle of a
particular multi-talker conﬁguration. This was done to ensure that
the participant was always listening to only one part of the two- or
three-way conversation recordings, which is similar to listening to
one side of a telephone conversation; reported as one the most dis-tracting speech/sound stimuli in open-plan ofﬁces ( [47]; refer to
[48]) for an extensive review). The four conﬁgurations of the sound
environments, according to the number of talkers in their respec-
tive 4-channel sound recording used in the experiment were:
1.0-Talker conﬁguration (T0): No active talkers. This quiet sound
environment still had small ﬂuctuations in the background
noise level due to some trafﬁc noise ingress (from one of the
room’s walls, which interfaced with the building façade), and
the more stationary underﬂoor air distribution noise. A typical
SPL during experiment hours at the participant’s listening posi-
tion was measured as 31.0 dB ( L
A,eq: A-weighted equivalent
sound pressure level).
M2 M1
PF2 F1
D1D28.85 x 6.85 x 2.6; 60.6 m2(a) (b)
P
Fig. 1. (a) Layout and some details of the simulated open-plan ofﬁce, including the representative locations of the participant ( P), four loudspeakers that were used to
simulate the talkers (two female voices: F1,F2; and two male voices: M1,M2), partitions, desks and doors (D1, D2). (b) Depicts the actual room where the participant’s ( P)
desk.72 M. Yadav et al. / Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–802.1-Talker conﬁguration (T1): One active talker at any time,
with the active talker shifting between the loudspeaker
channels, depending on the length of each talking passage.
The order of appearance of the talkers in the 4-channel sound
ﬁle was organised in a quasi-random manner, with no over-
laps in the talkers (see Fig. 2 (a) for an example). Note that
the 1-Talker conﬁguration has been assumed to be the most
distracting by ISO 3382-3, and several studies that cite the
standard.
3.2-Talker conﬁguration (T2): Same as the 1-talker conﬁguration
in all manners, except that the sound recordings were edited
to ensure that 2 talkers were active simultaneously at any point
in time. Fig. 2 (b) shows a typical arrangement, where talkers
became active in a quasi-random order, with the sole aim of
maintaining two active talkers.
4.4-Talker conﬁguration (T4): As seen in Fig. 2 (c), 4 talkers were
active simultaneously throughout, with the talker order being
quasi-random. The rest was the same as the 2-Talker
conﬁguration.
2.2.2. Broadband noise system for providing masking from speech
To investigate the effect of broadband noise presentation
(providing beneﬁcial speech masking ) on the performance of the
participants, an overhead 13-channel sound system was used. This
included 12 independently controlled ﬂush-mounted ceiling
loudspeakers (Quest QTC-2-80BC, Melbourne, Australia) and onechannel that controlled 4 custom-built subwoofers (installed close
to each other), which were hidden above the suspended ceiling in
the simulated ofﬁce. The presence of masking noise was not
explained as part of the experimental design to the participants.
Instead, due to the unobtrusive placement of the loudspeakers,
and the actual underﬂoor air-conditioning system being relatively
quiet and steady (31 dBA), it was assumed that the noise would be
attributed to typical overhead HVAC operation by the participants.
In this regard, Max/MSP was used to generate spectrally balanced
noise (approximately /C05 dB per octave slope, as per [30]) from
these loudspeaker channels (incoherent between channels), which
was recorded during daytime at the participant position as 42 dBA,
which included noise from the underﬂoor air distribution systemand any external trafﬁc noise.
The increase in the voice level of the talkers in the presence of
increased background noise levels, known as the Lombard effect
(see [49] for a review), was not implemented for the simulated
talkers in this experiment.
2.2.3. Sound environments for the experiment trials
As seen in Sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 , there were four talker con-
ﬁgurations, which were labelled T0, T1, T2 and T4, based on the
number of active talkers; and two masking noise conﬁgurations,
which were labelled M0 and M1 (off, or on, respectively). This
led to eight sound environments in a factorial format, which
Talker 1
Talker 3(a)
(b)
(c)Talker 4
(b)(b)
(c)()
Fig. 2. (a) A representative arrangement of speech passages per talker (labelled Talker 1–4), where only one talker is active at any time. (b) & (c) Show two, an d four
simultaneously active talkers, respectively, at all times. Note that the natural pauses and interjections in the individual speech passages were ma intained.M. Yadav et al. / Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–80 73constituted the eight experiment trials (details in Table 1 ). Besides
LA,eq, the other acoustic parameters used to characterise these envi-
ronments, all derived from long recordings (up to 5 min) at the lis-
tening position of participant (1.2 m from the ﬂoor; representing a
seated height), included the following:
1.Room noise criterion (RNC), which is a method of noise assess-
ment based on the more common Noise Criterion (NC) method,
but with a psychoacoustically more precise approach, especially
in detecting low-frequency ﬂuctuations NC, NCB, etc.) [50]. The
parenthetical letter represents whether or not the RNC algo-
rithm detected substantial random ﬂuctuations (F) or surging
within the low-frequency octave bands (N: for neutral). Note
that these low-frequency ﬂuctuations cannot be represented
within A-weighting.
2. Since an STI-based method for multi-talker environments is not
yet viable, a more valid objective method: the speech-based
multi-resolution envelope-power based model (mr-sEPSM
[36]), was used. While the aim of mr-sEPSM is predicting
speech intelligibility (SI) [51], it remains informative in the cur-
rent scenario where the effect opposite to SI (i.e., speech pri-
vacy) would be desirable (in the open-plan ofﬁce
environments).
Brieﬂy, the model requires signals representing noise , and
speech +noise , to output the SNR in the envelope-power domain,
or SNR env, following stages of peripheral ﬁltering (to represent
basilar membrane processing), envelope extraction, and further ﬁl-
tering (speciﬁc to speech audition) in modulation bands (1–64 Hz;
octave-spaced) and carrier-frequency bands (63–8000 Hz center-
frequencies; 1/3 octave-spaced). The key feature of this approach
is that the model accounts for time-varying auditory effects of both
noise and speech , within the envelope and frequency bands. Here,
the noise signal could include irrelevant speech (if so designed),
and the speech signal could include speech from multiple sources,
which makes the mr-sEPSM approach especially attractive for
open-plan ofﬁce environments. In comparison, STI currently only
accounts for ﬂuctuations in frequency bands (not within the
time-domain signal), and only for speech . SNR envalso accounts
for room reverberation (as does STI), spectral subtraction (STI does
not), speech-on-speech unmasking (STI does not). While it was not
presented in the current paper, the SNR envcan be converted, using
simple parameters, into percentage of correctly recognised speech
for a statistically ‘ideal observer’ (which implicitly models the psy-
chometric function), while accounting for the performance
increase due to the reduction of the number of response
alternatives.
In the current paper, the noise input to the mr-EPSM model was
recordings T0_M0 and T0_M1 (i.e., no speech), which were com-
pared with corresponding speech +noise recordings (i.e., SNR env
derived for T0_M0 compared with T[1 or 2 or 4]_M0; and T0_M1
compared to T[1 or 2 or 4]_M1). These SNR envvalues (in dB) are
listed in Table 1 .
Note that the sound recorded at the listener’s position for the
different number of talkers (T1, T2, T4) was not equalised to have
the same SPL. This was done in order to maintain ecological valid-
ity, as increased sound levels would be expected when there are
more active talkers in the sound environment (but the Lombard
effect was not incorporated). A similar approach was taken in
[39]. Moreover, numerous studies have shown that the SPL
changes within a reasonable range do not affect the ISE ( [29,52] ;
review in [53]). The combined SPL (masking noise and multi-
talker speech) was also maintained close to, but under /C2445 dBA
(Table 1 ), which has been reported as sufﬁciently effective for
masking, while not being perceived as ‘annoying’ by the partici-
pants [54,55] .2.3. Participants
Thirty participants (15 Female; Age range 18–39 years, mean:
23 years, and standard deviation: 6 years) volunteered for the
experiment1. None of the participants reported any hearing impair-
ment. The participants were native English speakers (with an Aus-
tralian accent); students in ﬁelds of Architecture, Design and
Planning; had some experience of working in open-plan ofﬁces or
studios; and were paid for their time. The participants were asked
to adhere to a formal dress code, typical for ofﬁce work during the
late summer/early autumn period in Sydney, Australia, corre-
sponded to an insulation value (clo) of approximately 0.6, plus
another 0.1 clo for the insulation of the chair on which they were
seated during the experiments. Only one participant was tested at
a time, with the entire duration of the experiment being four hoursper participant including orientation, practice of the experiment
tasks, and structured breaks.
2.4. Experimental tasks
For the eight experiment trails (simulated sound environments
inTable 1 ), the subjective assessments and cognitive tests per-
formed by the participants were as follows.
2.4.1. Subjective assessments
1.Noise questionnaire : This has been used in previous studies as
a reliable method to determine the noise sensitivity of a person
overall; and also within the domains of leisure, work, habita-
tion, communication, and sleep [10,30] . The noise question-
naire, which was translated from German (NoiSeQ; [56]),
included thirty-ﬁve items, each rated on a seven-point scale
(Completely Disagree through to Completely agree ). This ques-
tionnaire was administered before the experiment trails in
quiet ambiance (T0_M0 in Table 1 ).
2. NASA Task Load Index ( NASA-TLX ): This questionnaire was
administered after each experiment trail (i.e., eight times in
total) on a bespoke iPad application, was used for a subjective
assessment of the workload that the participants experienced
after performing the cognitive tasks within a particular sound
environment, (represented by each experiment trial). The
meaning of workload, and how it was encapsulated in the
NASA-TLX was explained to the participants, as described in
[57]. Brieﬂy, NASA-TLX involves the participants providing
an assessment of their perceived workload for a particular
task, measured across six dimensions (mental, physical and
temporal demand, performance, effort and frustration). The
participants assigned relative weightings to the six
dimensions.
3.Sound Environment questionnaire : The participants ﬁlled
out a sound environment questionnaire on a bespoke iPad
application after each experimental trial (eight times in total).
The perceived disturbance due to each sound environment
was rated with four items, each presented on a seven-point
scale, based on the ﬁndings of Haapakangas et al. [30] who
reported them as the most reliable out of several items that
were rated. The items were: ‘The sound environment was
pleasant’; ‘The sound environment impeded my ability to
concentrate’; ‘It was easy to get used to the sound environ-ment over time’; ‘My attention was drawn towards the sound
environment’.
1This research protocol was approved by the University of Sydney’s Human
Research Ethics Committee (approval # 2016/488).74 M. Yadav et al. / Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–802.4.2. Cognitive tests
While typical ofﬁce workers may perform diverse activities,
varying in their cognitive load, studying the ISE on each of these
activities was not feasible. A more pragmatic approach involved
studying the variation of a range of cognitive skills generally
required in ofﬁce tasks. Hence, the cognitive test chosen encom-
passed language comprehension, active learning, problem solving,
reasoning, planning, etc. The tests were administered through the
Cambridge Brain Science (CBS; www.cambridgebrainsciences.com )
website, with each test representing an interactive algorithmic
implementation of a certain cognitive psychology paradigm. In
total, the participants performed seven short tests within each trial
(each trial being a simulated sound environment), which
quantiﬁed their cognitive problem solving skills within generic
categories of memory ,reasoning ,concentration , and planning .
Within each of these categories (as used by CBS), the selected tests
varied in their durations, and are brieﬂy described as follows
(details in [58]):
1. Memory: The Digit Span (DS M) test involved a forward recall
task, which assessed short-term information storage. The
design of this test differs slightly from the serial recall tests that
have previously been used in studies of ISE (summary in [48]).
For each recall problem, the participants recalled a certain num-
ber of digits that were presented on a computer screen in the
order of appearance. If the participants recalled the sequence
correctly, the number of digits in the subsequent problem
increased by one; otherwise it decreased by one. For this test,
there was no time limit on the recall, but the test ﬁnished when
the participant failed for a total of three times in recalling the
correct sequence of digits. The ﬁnal score was the number of
digits that the participant successfully recalled. This differs
from the design of serial recall tests that have previously been
used in studies of ISE, which generally include a time bound
recall of a ﬁxed number of digits (summary in [48]).
2. Reasoning: Two tests were selected that incorporated decision-
making, based on deductive reasoning for visual information.
The tests are designed to invoke verbal processing for reason-
ing, which can be assumed to be important within the ISE
framework. The Grammatical Reasoning (GR R) test involved the
participant participants choosing whether a statement involv-
ing a visual comparison was ‘true’ or ‘false’. The other test in
this category was called Double Trouble (DT R), where the partic-
ipants had to select the correct ink colour of a word that was
presented, out of two words that were presented.
3. Concentration: Two tests were selected that assessed the par-
ticipants’ skills relating to visuospatial perception and mental
processing of complex objects. In the Rotations (Rot C) test, the
task was to assess whether one of the two boxes ﬁlled with
varying number of coloured squares, if rotated in space, could
match the other box. The cognitive abilities required in this test
have been shown to be highly correlated with tasks such as
‘route planning’ [59]. The other test in this category was called
Feature Match (FM C), where the participants were presented
with two separate boxes, each with an array of abstract shapes,
varying in complexity for each problem. The task was to ascer-
tain whether the two boxes were identical.
4. Planning: Two tests were selected that assessed the partici-
pants’ skills in complex decision making that is generally
involved in planning ahead to reach a certain goal, using the
least number of tries. The Hampshire Tree Task (HT P) required
the participants to use least possible number of tries to rear-
range numbered balls presented in a jumbled format, to match
a predetermined sequence. The Spatial Slider (SS P) test involved
the participant being presented a certain arrangement of a grid
of numbers for a short duration, which was then jumbled. Thetask then required the participants to rearrange the jumbled
grid to its original form, in the least possible tries.
2.5. Procedure
The experiments were conducted in two blocks: one morning
and one afternoon session ; each being four hours in duration. Each
of these sessions was attended by a single participant (i.e., four
hours per participant, over either the morning or the afternoon ses-
sion). Before the experiment trial, the participants ﬁlled out the
noise questionnaire (item 1; Section 2.4.1 ), and were given an orien-
tation of all the task, as detailed in Section 2.4. This was followed
by a practice run in which the participants performed all the exper-
iment tasks in a certain sequence, within the T0_M0 sound envi-
ronment; the quietest sound environment. Note that it was notassumed here that the quietest sound environment represented
the optimum ambiance for cognitive tasks. In the practice run,
the participants familiarised themselves with all the cognitive
tests; to the point where their scores were stable over retests to
minimise any learning effect. As depicted in Fig. 3 , each simulated
sound environment comprised of a certain masking noise state.
The masking noise was offfor the ﬁrst half of each session to enable
a smooth transition from practice (done with no masking noise) to
trials. The second half of each session was preceded by a short
break, during which the participant left the simulation to an adja-
cent room. The experimenter turned the masking noise onfor the
second half of each session, while the participant was not present
in the simulation. After their break, the participant returned to the
simulation that had the masking noise turned on, which was con-
sidered to be a smoother transition than the alternative of having
an abrupt change in the state of masking noise (from offtoon) with
the participant present in the simulation. As mentioned in Sec-
tion 2.2.2 , the reproduction of the masking noise was designed
so that the participant were most likely to attribute it to HVAC
operation. Each masking noise state ( onand off) had a certain num-
ber of simulated talkers (0, 1, 2, or 4), where the presentation order
of the number of simulated talkers was randomised.
Within the simulated sound environments, the participants
performed the sequence of tasks depicted in the box with the dot-
ted boundaries in Fig. 3 . They consisted of the seven cognitive test
(order randomised; each test performed once per trial) performed
online on an iMac computer, followed by subjective assessments
that included the NASA-TLX questionnaire and the sound environ-
ment questionnaire, both presented on an iPad. The duration of
each simulated sound environment was 20 min, which included
approximately 15 min for performing the cognitive tests, and
5 min for ﬁlling the NASA-TLX and sound environment question-
naire (items 2 and 3, respectively; Section 2.4.1 ).
After the eight experiment trials, the participants ﬁlled out the
IEQ questionnaire (item 4; Section 2.4.1 ) indicating the degree of
distraction from each of the simulated talkers.
2.6. Data analysis
Due to the hierarchical and repeated-measurement nature of
the experiment (leading to autocorrelation), linear mixed-effects
models with varying complexities, in terms of the hierarchy of ﬁxed
and random effects, were ﬁt to the data. In the context of the cur-
rent experiment, mixed-effects models allowed estimation of the
average intercepts and slopes of the independent variables as
ﬁxed-effects , while the random-effects accounted for the deviation
of each participant from the average intercept and slope. Note that
the modelling stages involve ﬁrst ﬁtting a general linear model
(GLM) to the data, and comparing it to a mixed-effects model,
and only using the latter if it represents a better model than the
former. In this regard, a statistical model without the random-M. Yadav et al. / Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–80 75effects depicts the classical linear regression model (i.e., GLM),
whereas modelling the random-effects accounts for the natural
heterogeneity in the participants across the following independent
variables (which are also assigned labels, as seen below) in the
experiment:
/C15Gender. 2/C2groups (M and F).
/C15NoiseSens. 2/C2groups, representing the noise sensitive (NS1)
and non-sensitive (NS0) groups. The group allocation was based
on a median split of the participants’ cumulative rating for the
noise questionnaire items.
/C15Session. 2/C2groups, representing whether the participant
attended the morning (SesM; 0900–1300 h.), or the afternoon
(SesA; 1300–1700 h.) session.
/C15MaskingNoise. 2/C2groups, representing whether the overhead
masking noise was on (M1) or off (M0).
/C15NumTalk. 4/C2groups, representing the number of talkers that
were simulated in the sound environment.
/C15SoundEnv. 8/C2groups, which resulted from combining the
respective groups of the MaskingNoise and NumTalk variables,
as seen above.
All the analyses were done within the R software, using the
function lme() for the mixed-effects modelling, which is included
in the nlme package [60], with the maximum likelihood method
for estimating the model parameters in the analysis. The ggplot2
package [61] was used for plotting and exploring relationships
between the variables, and the dplyr package [62] was used for
data management.
Two sets of statistical analyses were performed, each set mod-
elling a different dependent variable, as follows:
1.Cognitive test scores: Here, the scores of each cognitive test was
used as the dependent variable, representing an objective vari-
ation in the cognitive performance due to variation in the sound
environments. As such, the performance of separate cognitive
abilities (represented by the corresponding CBS tests) was mod-
elled separately, e.g., the scores of the grammatical reasoning
test (GR R;Fig. 3 ) modelled as a function of the independent
variables.
2.Subjective auditory distraction: Here, the subjective auditory dis-
traction, calculated as the mean rating of the items of the soundenvironment questionnaire (item 3, Section 2.4.1 ; and Fig. 3 ) was
used as the dependent variable. This questionnaire, as men-
tioned in Sections 2.4.1 and 2.5 , was answered once per sound
environment, after all the cognitive tests had been performed,
and can be seen to represent the participants’ overall subjective
auditory distraction due to the sound environment.
Each statistical analysis started with a model with just the inter-
cept, followed by introducing additional independent variables,
both as ﬁxed-effects, and random-effects within a nested hierarchy.
The performance of the models after introducing each independent
variable (ﬁxed-effects, their interactions, and random-effects) was
compared using the Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC) [63]. AIC
is a measure that allows comparing the goodness-of-ﬁt of compet-
ing models against the number of variables used per model (in
other words, the models’ complexity, or degrees of freedom). Sim-
ply, if introducing an independent variable in a model did not sta-
tistically reduce the AIC measure from the previous model(without the independent variable), this additional variable was
not included in the model, and vice versa. Orthogonal contrasts
were designed for the variables with more than two levels, to test
the hypotheses of this paper (Section 1.4). In addition, the workload
calculated for each sound environment, based on the NASA-TLX rat-
ings, was used as a covariate in the analyses.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Mixed-effects models
In the following, due to the large number of ﬁxed-effects and
their interactions, the results for only the highest-order interac-
tions are presented, which always include the lower-order interac-
tions. The focus is on discussing the results in terms of the
expectation presented in Section 1.4, which was deemed more
practical here than a detailed account of the mixed-modelling
steps (which were brieﬂy described in Section 2.6).
3.1.1. Cognitive test scores
The scores for the grammatical reasoning (GR
R) cognitive test,
as the response variable, showed a signiﬁcant variation in its inter-
cepts for the random-effects, which were modelled as a nesting of
On   
Masking noise GR DT Rot FM HT SS DS
Reasoning Concentration Planning Memory
Cognitive tests (order randomised)RR C CP P M
NASA-TLX
Sound Environment Questionnaire0   1    2    4       
Number of Talkers
(order randomised)Sequence of tasks within each sound environment
Off
Simulated Sound Environment
Yes   No
Noise
SensitivityAfternoon   MorningSession
Male   Female
Gender
Fig. 3. The experiment plan. Each simulated sound environment (broken rectangle on the left) is depicted as varying due to the interaction of the independent variables
(Session, Gender, etc.). The sequence of tasks within each sound environment is depicted within the broken rectangle on the right.76 M. Yadav et al. / Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–80Session within SoundEnv, within NoiseSens, within Participants
(v2(6) = 136.4, p < 0.0001).
For the ﬁxed-effects, Table 2 A shows the independent variables
in the ﬁnal model along with their interactions that reached signif-
icance ( v2(37) = 85.5, p< 0.0001), with no other variable or inter-
actions reaching signiﬁcance, or improving the AIC. For the
Rotations (Rot C) cognitive test as the response variable, the test
scores showed a signiﬁcant variation in its intercepts for the
random-effects, which were modelled as a nesting of Session
within SoundEnv , within NoiseSens , within Participants (v2(6)
= 52.9, p< 0.0001). For the ﬁxed-effects, Table 2 B shows the inde-
pendent variables in the ﬁnal model along with their interactionsthat reached signiﬁcance (
v2(21) = 24.1, p< 0.05), with no other
variable or interactions reaching signiﬁcance, or improving the
AIC. Note that, for brevity, v2statistics for the inclusion of each
variable as ﬁxed-effects in the model, and their interactions, is
not provided here. Contrasts were used to compare the ﬁxed-
effects parameter groups, which are depicted in Table 2 . Although
there were signiﬁcant lower-order interactions and ﬁxed-effects
variations, they are not interpreted here due to the presence of
higher-order interactions that included them, which were:
1. Interaction 1 and 2 in Table 2 shows that the GR Rscores were
signiﬁcantly lower for the sound environment T2_M0 (two
active talkers with masking noise off; small-sized effect) and
T4_M0 ( medium-sized effect) compared to T1_M0, for noise-
sensitive (NS1) compared to noise-insensitive (NS0) partici-
pants, and for male (M) participants compared to females (F).
2. Interaction 3 shows that GR Rscores were signiﬁcantly lower (a
medium-sized effect) for T4_M0 compared to T2_M0, for noise-
sensitive (NS1) compared to noise-insensitive (NS0) partici-
pants, and for male (M) participants compared to females (F).
3. Interactions 4–6 show that GR Rscores for the T2_M1, T4_M1
sound environments were not signiﬁcantly different than
T1_M1.
4. Interaction 7 and 8 show that the Rot Cscores were signiﬁcantly
lower for T2_M0 and T4_M0 (both small-sized effects) compared
to T1_M0, and for noise-sensitive (NS1) compared to noise-
insensitive (NS0) participants.
5. Interaction 9 shows that the Rot Cscores were signiﬁcantly
lower (a small-sized effect) for T4_M0 compared to T2_M0,
and for noise-sensitive (NS1) compared to noise-insensitive
(NS0) participants.
6. Interaction 10 shows that the Rot Cscores were signiﬁcantly
lower (a small-sized effect) for T2_M1 compared to T1_M1,and for noise-sensitive (NS1) compared to noise-insensitive
(NS0) participants.
7. Interactions 11, 12 show that Rot Cscores for T1_M1, T2_M1
sound environments were not signiﬁcantly different than
T4_M1.
Collectively, points 1,2,4,5 suggest that, with the masking noise
turned off, there was a signiﬁcant decline in the cognitive test
scores from the one-talker environment to the two- and four-
talker sound environments. This is in direct disagreement with
the assumption in ISO 3382-3 listing the one-talker scenario as
the most distracting (as far as decline in cognitive performance isconcerned). Not only did the cognitive performance not increase
with the increase in the number of talkers, it showed the opposite
trend, which has not been shown in previous studies, but was
mentioned as a likely scenario in hypothesis 1 in Section 1.4. While
the interpretations of the interactions in Table 2 may seem some-
what subtle (characteristic of interpreting higher-order interac-
tions), overall, the results support hypothesis 1 in Section 1.4
within two cognitive tasks (GR
Rand Rot c). The signiﬁcant results
for the GR Rand Rot ctasks, which were listed under the generic cat-
egories of reasoning and concentration , respectively, point towards
the interference-by-process affecting these tasks; though this
needs to be explored further.
Spatial release from masking (or, SRM) is expected in the multi-
talker sound environments, due to the sparse talker placement in
the simulated ofﬁce space. Since SRM is incorporated within mr-
EPSM, it is not straightforward to explain why T4_M0 had the
worst cognitive performance, despite having relatively poorer
SNR env(Table 1 ). This, while highlighting limitations currently in
the mr-EPSM approach to characterise multi-talker environments,
also suggests the contribution from other factors. In this regard,
future inquiry is suggested for the relative contribution of unmask-
ing from various factors such as SRM, semantic context of the ISE,
perceptual masking/unmasking, etc.; and indeed other environ-
mental factors (acoustic, or otherwise) not considered in this
paper. There may also be a need for soundﬁeld analyses that focus
on quantifying the changing-state nature of distracting speech
from spatially spread multiple sources, similar to [65] and [66].
Another area of research would be exploring the threshold
beyond which the changing-state (or segmented) nature disap-
pears towards a uniform babble that can mask irrelevant speech.
The relevant dimension for such a threshold may include the num-
ber or talkers, their spatial arrangement, spectrum, and relative or
overall levels. Although Zaglauer et al. [19] had explored the effectTable 2
Contrasts of the ﬁxed-effects groups and their interactions; showing the bcoefﬁcients, standard errors (SE) of b,t-statistics (degrees of freedom in parentheses), p-values (2-
tailed; signiﬁcance at p< 0.05 highlighted in a bold font), and effect size ( r; where r= 0.5 shows a large effect accounting for 25% of the total variance, r= 0.3 shows a medium effect
accounting for 9% of the total variance, and r= 0.1 shows a small effect accounting for 1% of the total variance [64]).
bS E (b) t(175) pr
(A) GR R/C24SoundEnv *NoiseSens *Gender
1. (T1_M0 vs. T2_M0) /C2(NS0 vs. NS1) /C2(F vs. M) 3.9 2.0 1.9 <0 .05 0.1
2. (T1_M0 vs. T4_M0) /C2(NS0 vs. NS1) /C2(F vs. M) 7.3 2.0 3.6 <0 .01 0.3
3. (T2_M0 vs. T4_M0) /C2(NS0 vs. NS1) /C2(F vs. M) 5.6 1.8 3.2 <0 .01 0.2
4. (T1_M1 vs. T2_M1) /C2(NS0 vs. NS1) /C2(F vs. M) 0.9 2.0 0.4 0.67
5. (T1_M1 vs. T4_M1) /C2(NS0 vs. NS1) /C2(F vs. M) 1.4 2.0 0.7 0.48
6. (T2_M1 vs. T4_M1) /C2(NS0 vs. NS1) /C2(F vs. M) 0.3 1.8 0.2 0.87
bS E (b) t(189) pr
(B) Rot C/C24SoundEnv *NoiseSens
7. (T1_M0 vs.T2_M0) /C2(NS0 vs. NS1) 20.1 10.7 1.9 <0 .05 0.1
8. (T1_M0 vs. T4_M0) /C2(NS0 vs. NS1) 20.7 10.7 1.9 <0 .05 0.1
9. (T2_M0 vs. T4_M0) /C2(NS0 vs. NS1) 20.4 9.3 2.2 <0 .05 0.1
10. (T1_M1 vs.T2_M1) /C2(NS0 vs. NS1) 18.9 10.7 1.8 <0 .05 0.1
11. (T1_M1 vs.T4_M1) /C2(NS0 vs. NS1) /C013.7 10.7 /C01.2 0.2
12. (T2_M1 vs. T4_M1) /C2(NS0 vs. NS1) /C016.3 9.3 /C01.7 0.08M. Yadav et al. / Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–80 77on cognitive performance due to an increase in the number of
voices that constituted babble, the babble voices in their study
were not spatially separated. Moreover, the babble was created
by mixing the same voice to increase the number of voices. The
current results show that the spatial location and a semantically
valid presentation of voices needs to be considered when exploring
the babble effect. Such an approach, while representing a more
intensive experimental design for a laboratory based study, is obvi-
ously closer to the natural occurrence of voices and semantic con-
texts in real ofﬁce environments.
With the noise masking turned on, points 3 and 7 indicate that
the scores of the cognitive task were not signiﬁcantly different
across the various talker conﬁgurations. This is consistent with
previous research, where similar broadband noise sources have
been shown to be effective in masking speech from one or multiplesources, and leading, somewhat, to improved cognitive perfor-
mance [30][38] . However, point 6 indicates that there was a signif-
icant decline in the cognitive scores from the one-talker to two-
talker conﬁgurations. This suggests that, even with additional
broadband masking, the effect of a multi-talker sound environ-
ment should not be ignored. It is likely that speech from two talk-
ers may still be segmented enough to cause performance decline,
though this number of talkers is not suggested as a threshold here,
beyond which noise masking is effective (also see Section 3.1.2 ,
with respect to point 3 in Section 1.4). However, apart from point
6, the results within two cognitive tasks (GR
Rand Rot c) are in
agreement with hypothesis 2 presented in Section 1.4, where
masking noise was posited (based on extant research) to remove
the detrimental effect of multiple talkers on cognitive perfor-
mances. Note that while broadband noise maskers (such as pink
noise) have been shown to have positive effect on cognitive perfor-
mance, they are generally not reported as subjectively pleasant, or
increasing the preference of the resulting sound environment [37–
39]. This highlights the need to consider both task performances
and subjective opinions (see 3.1.2 ) in characterising a complex
sound environment, such as an open-plan ofﬁce.
For the other cognitive tests in this experiment (besides GR R
and Rot c), the analyses showed a more-or-less similar trend, with
multi-talker environments generally showing lower scores than
one-talker environment, with the disparity diminishing with addi-
tional masking noise. These trends, however, were not statistically
signiﬁcant at 95% conﬁdence. Most notably, the DS Mtest, which is
a modiﬁed version of the serial recall task that has consistently
been shown to be affected by the ISE in previous studies (Sec-
tion 2.4.2 ), did not reach statistical signiﬁcance. This is attributed
here to the difference in the designs of the DS Mand the more clas-
sic serial recall task.
3.1.2. Subjective auditory distraction
The subjective auditory distraction ratings showed a signiﬁcant
variation in its intercepts for the random-effects, which were mod-
elled as a nesting of Session within SoundEnv , within NoiseSens ,
within Participants (v2(6) = 50.17, p< 0.0001). For the ﬁxed-
effects, Table 3 shows the ﬁnal model that reached signiﬁcance
(v2(13) = 41.1, p< 0.0001), with no other variable or interactions
reaching signiﬁcance, or improving the AIC. Contrasts were usedto compare the ﬁxed-effects parameter groups, of which the con-
trasts that reached signiﬁcance are depicted in Table 3 .
It must be noted here that the auditory distraction scores used
in the analysis above represented subjective ratings for the entire
duration of the simulated sound environment (approximately
20 min). Hence, these ratings encapsulated an overall sense of
subjective distraction that the participants experienced while
doing the cognitive tasks within a particular sound environment.
Contrasts 2 and 3 show that four simultaneously active talkers
were signiﬁcantly more distracting than the one talker environ-
ments, for both the masking noise off (T4_M0; small-sized effect)
and on (T4_M1; medium-sized effect) sound environments, which
is also depicted in Fig. 4 . These ﬁndings partially support hypoth-
esis 3 (Section 1.4) in that the subjective distraction increases
with the number of talkers, as the talker number increases fromone to four, but not from one to two, or two to four. This is inter-
esting, as an increase in subjective distraction from one to four
talkers here is consistent with the lowest cognitive scores for
T4_M0 ( Table 2 ), which was not explained directly with the
SNR
envbeing the lowest (value of 0) for this case. Furthermore,
it reinforces previous ﬁndings that both subjective and objective
scores are critical in studying the effects of open-plan ofﬁce
sound environments, as while the cognitive scores underscore
performance decline for speciﬁc tasks, they are, at best, only pre-
senting an incomplete view of the complex psychophysical state
of a participant, which is better represented though subjective
ratings [67].
The effect of spatially separating the talkers, and the more eco-
logically valid experiment design may account for why the subjec-
tive ratings in Zaglauer et al. [19] did not vary with an increase in
the number of voices in the babble speech, but did show a decline
in the current study. However, even with similar distraction rat-
ings for scenarios with one voice compared to multi-voice babble,
they suggested further research that address reduction of distrac-
tion (through babble masking, etc.) and improving worker comfort
with more realistic experiment designs [19]. This is also the main
recommendation of the current study, albeit the current ﬁndings
suggest a more reﬁned focus on the psychoacoustics of multi-
talker environments.
As per contrast 1, support for hypothesis 4 (Section 1.4) was
more straightforward, with the sound environments with lower
level of background sound masking that do not sufﬁciently mask
the irrelevant speech (from one, or multiple talkers), being
reported as subjectively more distracting. The support for hypothe-
ses 3 and 4 (Section 1.4) here that addressed subjective assess-
ments, combined with the support for points 1 and 2 that
addressed cognitive performance, further call into question the
single-talker assumption of ISO 3382-3.
3.2. Limitations and general discussion
Similar to some previous studies ( [16][30][68] , the variable
workload resulting from the NASA-TLX questionnaire did not con-
tribute as a variable in any of the statistical models, suggesting lim-
ited applicability in assessing open-plan ofﬁce environments.
However, it may be possible to adapt the NASA-TLX style
Table 3
Contrasts of the ﬁxed-effects groups and their interactions; showing the bcoefﬁcients, standard errors (SE) of b,t-statistics (degrees of freedom in parentheses), p-values (2-
tailed), and effect size ( r; where r= 0.5 shows a large effect accounting for 25% of the total variance, r= 0.3 shows a medium effect accounting for 9% of the total variance, and
r= 0.1 shows a small effect accounting for 1% of the total variance [64]).
Auditory distraction /C24SoundEnv bS E (b) t(196) pr
1. M0 vs. M1 0.2 0.1 3.2 < 0.01 0.2
2. T1_M0 vs. T4_M0 /C00.2 0.1 /C01.7 < 0.05 0.1
3. T1_M1 vs. T4_M1 /C00.3 0.1 /C02.5 < 0.01 0.278 M. Yadav et al. / Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–80questionnaire, by substituting (perhaps) certain factors such as
‘physical effort’ that may not be that critical in ofﬁce settings.
Since the aim of the experiment design was to achieve a high
degree of realism, it was not possible to partial out the relative con-
tribution of several factors that may have contributed to the cogni-
tive scores and subjective ratings. Such factors, including the
degree of spatial separation of talkers, the effect of semanticity,
the threshold for the babble effect, etc., are suggested as experi-
ment variables in future studies.
The current open-plan ofﬁce simulation was constrained by the
physical size of the laboratory room, and, as such, the context
would be limited to small to medium sized ofﬁce ﬂoors. No gener-
alisation to include larger ofﬁce ﬂoors is intended here, which
might be subject to further considerations. Due to time limitations,
the experiment design did not feature other important ofﬁce
soundscape elements that could contribute towards the ISE, such
as telephones ringing, or in general, the attention capture mecha-
nism though which ISE operates. This could be included in future
implementations, along with cognitive tasks such as writing (asin[69]) and proof-reading that could be affected more strongly
due to the interference-by-process aspects of the ISE.
4. Conclusions
The aim of the paper was to compare, within a realistic open-
plan ofﬁce simulation, the effect of having more than one talker
in the sound environment, on both the cognitive performance
and auditory distraction perceived by participants.
The results, in particular the subjective auditory assessments by
participants, showed that multi-talker environments were per-
ceived as more distracting, and had lower cognitive performance,
when compared to the one-talker environments. This is pointing
towards reconsideration of crucial assumptions within ISO 3382-
3[14], and research conducted within the open-plan ofﬁce para-
digm, where the psychoacoustics of multi-talker environments
has been (incorrectly, given the current results) more-or-less
ignored, or oversimpliﬁed. Speech intelligibility (and privacy)
within multi-talker environments is an inherently complicated
issue, affected by factors such as the spatial location of talkers,
the spectrotemporal modulations, etc. However, comprehensive
binaural models such as those suggested by [15] may, in the long
run, be better suited to study and characterise the irrelevant sound
effect in multi-talker environments, especially due to the fact that
they can be run in-situ with or without the ofﬁce occupants. This
would be subject, of course, to ﬁeld testing in real open-plan ofﬁce
environments.Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Australian Research Coun-
cil’s Discovery Projects funding scheme (project DP160103978).
References
[1] Brennan A, Chugh JS, Kline T. Traditional versus open ofﬁce design: a
longitudinal ﬁeld study. Environ Behav 2002;34:279–99. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/0013916502034003001 .
[2] Kaarlela-Tuomaala A, Helenius R, Keskinen E, Hongisto V. Effects of acoustic
environment on work in private ofﬁce rooms and open-plan ofﬁces –
longitudinal study during relocation. Ergonomics 2009;52:1423–44. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/00140130903154579 .
[3] Lee YS. Ofﬁce layout affecting privacy, interaction, and acoustic quality in
LEED-certiﬁed buildings. Build Environ 2010;45:1594–600. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.buildenv.2010.01.007 .
[4] Jahncke H, Hygge S, Halin N, Green AM, Dimberg K. Open-plan ofﬁce noise:
cognitive performance and restoration. J Environ Psychol 2011;31:373–82.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2011.07.002 .
[5] Rashid M, Zimring C. A review of the Empirical Literature on the relationships
between indoor environment and stress in health care and ofﬁce settings:
problems and prospects of sharing evidence. Environ Behav 2008;40:151–90.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0013916507311550 .
[6] De Croon E, Sluiter J, Kuijer PP, Frings-Dresen M. The effect of ofﬁce concepts
on worker health and performance: a systematic review of the literature.
Ergonomics 2005;48:119–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
00140130512331319409 .
[7] Al Horr Y, Arif M, Kaushik A, Mazroei A, Katafygiotou M, Elsarrag E. Occupant
productivity and ofﬁce indoor environment quality: a review of the literature.
Build Environ 2016;105:369–89. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
buildenv.2016.06.001 .
[8] Sundstrom E, Herbert RK, Brown DW. Privacy and communication in an open-
plan ofﬁce: a case study. Environ Behav 1982;14:379–92. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/0013916582143007 .
[9] Kim J, de Dear R. Workspace satisfaction: the privacy-communication trade-off
in open-plan ofﬁces. J Environ Psychol 2013;36:18–26. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.jenvp.2013.06.007 .
[10] Pierrette M, Parizet E, Chevret P, Chatillon J. Noise effect on comfort in
open-space ofﬁces: development of an assessment questionnaire.
Ergonomics 2015;58:96–106. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00140139.2014.
961972 .
[11] Banbury S, Berry D. Ofﬁce noise and employee concentration: identifying
causes of disruption and potential improvements. Ergonomics 2005;48:25–37.http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00140130412331311390
.
[12] Huang L, Zhu Y, Ouyang Q, Cao B. A study on the effects of thermal,
luminous, and acoustic environments on indoor environmental comfort in
ofﬁces. Build Environ 2012;49:304–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
buildenv.2011.07.022 .
[13] Virjonen P, Keränen J, Hongisto V. Determination of acoustical conditions in
open-plan ofﬁces: proposal for new measurement method and target values.
Acta Acust United Acust 2009;95:279–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.3813/
AAA.918150 .
[14] ISO 3382–3 Acoustics – measurement of room acoustic parameters – Part 3:
Open plan ofﬁces. 2012.
[15] Bronkhorst AW. The cocktail-party problem revisited: early processing and
selection of multi-talker speech. Atten Percept Psychophys 2015;77:1465–87.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/s13414-015-0882-9 .Off On
4.04.5
3.54.04.5
NoTalker OneTalker TwoTalker FourTalker NoTalker OneTalker TwoTalker FourTalker
Number of TalkersAuditory Distraction
Fig. 4. The left panel shows the subjective auditory distraction ratings plotted for the different number of talkers while the masking noise was turned ‘off’, and the right panel
showing the corresponding ratings with the masking noise turned ‘on’. The points on the graphs show the mean values, with the error-bars depicting the 95% conﬁdence
interval (calculated using bootstrapping).M. Yadav et al. / Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–80 79[16] Brocolini L, Parizet E, Chevret P. Effect of masking noise on cognitive
performance and annoyance in open plan ofﬁces. Appl Acoust
2016;114:44–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2016.07.012 .
[17] Jones D, Macken W. Auditory babble and cognitive efﬁciency: role of number
of voices and their location. J Exp Psychol Appl 1995;1(3):216–26 .
[18] Macken WJ, Tremblay S, Houghton RJ, Nicholls AP, Jones DM. Does auditory
streaming require attention? Evidence from attentional selectivity in short-
term memory. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 2003;29:43–51. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.29.1.43 .
[19] Zaglauer M, Drotleff H, Liebl A. Background babble in open-plan ofﬁces: a
natural masker of disruptive speech? Appl Acoust 2017;118:1–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2016.11.004 .
[20] Colle HA, Welsh A. Acoustic masking in primary memory. J Verbal Learn
Verbal Behav 1976;15:17–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(76)
90003-7 .
[21] Page MPA, Norris DG. The irrelevant sound effect: what needs modelling, and a
tentative model. Q J Exp Psychol Sect A 2003;56:1289–300. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/02724980343000233 .
[22] Jones D, Madden C, Miles C. Privileged access by irrelevant speech to short-
term memory: the role of Changing State. Q J Exp Psychol Sect A
1992;44:645–69. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14640749208401304 .
[23] Jones DM, Alford D, Macken WJ, Banbury SP, Tremblay S. Interference from
degraded auditory stimuli: linear effects of changing-state in the irrelevantsequence. J Acoust Soc Am 2000;108:1082. http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/
1.1288412 .
[24] Hughes RW. Auditory distraction: a duplex-mechanism account: duplex-
mechanism account of auditory distraction. PsyCh J 2014;3:30–41. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1002/pchj.44 .
[25] Jones DM, Macken WJ, Murray AC. Disruption of visual short-term memory by
changing-state auditory stimuli: the role of segmentation. Mem Cognit
1993;21:318–28. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03208264 .
[26] Jones DM, Marsh JE, Hughes RW. Retrieval from memory: vulnerable or
inviolable? J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 2012;38:905–22. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/a0026781 .
[27] Liebl A, Assfalg A, Schlittmeier SJ. The effects of speech intelligibility
and temporal–spectral variability on performance and annoyance
ratings. Appl Acoust 2016;110:170–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
apacoust.2016.03.019 .
[28] Brungart DS. Informational and energetic masking effects in the perception of
two simultaneous talkers. J Acoust Soc Am 2001;109:1101–9. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1121/1.1345696 .
[29] Ellermeier W, Hellbrück J. Is level irrelevant in ‘‘irrelevant speech”? Effects of
loudness, signal-to-noise ratio, and binaural unmasking. J Exp Psychol Hum
Percept Perform 1998;24:1406–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0096-
1523.24.5.1406 .
[30] Haapakangas A, Hongisto V, Hyönä J, Kokko J, Keränen J. Effects of unattended
speech on performance and subjective distraction: the role of acoustic designin open-plan ofﬁces. Appl Acoust 2014;86:1–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
apacoust.2014.04.018 .
[31] Bronkhorst AW. The cocktail party phenomenon: a review of research on
speech intelligibility in multiple-talker conditions. Acta Acust United Acust
2000;86:117–28 .
[32] Jones GL, Litovsky RY. A cocktail party model of spatial release from masking
by both noise and speech interferers. J Acoust Soc Am 2011;130:1463. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.3613928 .
[33] Grange JA, Culling JF. The beneﬁt of head orientation to speech intelligibility in
noise. J Acoust Soc Am 2016;139:703–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/
1.4941655 .
[34] Bronkhorst AW, Plomp R. Effect of multiple speechlike maskers on binaural
speech recognition in normal and impaired hearing. J Acoust Soc Am
1992;92:3132. http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.404209 .
[35] Park M, Kohlrausch A, van Leest A. Irrelevant speech effect under stationary
and adaptive masking conditions. J Acoust Soc Am 2013;134:1970. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1121/1.4816939 .
[36] Jørgensen S, Ewert SD, Dau T. A multi-resolution envelope-power based model
for speech intelligibility. J Acoust Soc Am 2013;134:436. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1121/1.4807563 .
[37] Schlittmeier SJ, Hellbrück J. Background music as noise abatement in open-
plan ofﬁces: a laboratory study on performance effects and subjective
preferences. Appl Cogn Psychol 2009;23:684–97. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
acp.1498 .
[38] Haapakangas A, Kankkunen E, Hongisto V, Virjonen P, Oliva D, Keskinen E.
Effects of ﬁve speech masking sounds on performance and acoustic
satisfaction. Implications for open-plan ofﬁces. Acta Acust United Acust
2011;97:641–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.3813/AAA.91844 .
[39] Keus van de Poll M, Carlsson J, Marsh JE, Ljung R, Odelius J, Schlittmeier SJ,
et al. Unmasking the effects of masking on performance: the potential of
multiple-voice masking in the ofﬁce environment. J Acoust Soc Am
2015;138:807–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.4926904 .[40] Smith-Jackson TL, Klein KW. Open-plan ofﬁces: task performance and mental
workload. J Environ Psychol 2009;29:279–89. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jenvp.2008.09.002 .
[41] Halin N, Marsh JE, Haga A, Holmgren M, Sörqvist P. Effects of speech on
proofreading: can task-engagement manipulations shield against distraction?
J Exp Psychol Appl 2014;20:69–80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/xap0000002 .
[42] de Dear R, Nathwani A, Cândido C, Cabrera D. The next generation of
experientially realistic lab-based research: the University of Sydney’s indoor
environmental quality laboratory. Archit Sci Rev 2013;56:83–92. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/00038628.2012.745807 .
[43] ASHRAE. ASHRAE Standard 55–2013: Thermal environmental conditions for
human occupancy 2013.
[44] ASHRAE. ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2010: ventilation for acceptable indoor
air quality 2010.
[45] ANSI 3.5-1997 (R2012). American National Standard – methods for calculation
of the speech intelligibility index n.d.
[46] Best V, Keidser G, Freeston K, Buchholz JM. A dynamic speech comprehension
test for assessing real-world listening ability. J Am Acad Audiol2016;27:515–26. http://dx.doi.org/10.3766/jaaa.15089
.
[47] Jensen K, Arens E. Acoustical quality in ofﬁce workstations, as assessed by
occupant surveys. Indoor Air 2005 Beijing, China 2005.
[48] Schlittmeier SJ, Liebl A. The effects of intelligible irrelevant background speech
in ofﬁces – cognitive disturbance, annoyance, and solutions. Facilities2015;33:61–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/F-05-2013-0036
.
[49] Yadav M, Cabrera D. Autophonic loudness of singers in simulated room
acoustic environments. J Voice 2016 [in press] .
[50] ANSI. ANSI S12.2-2008. American National Standard – criteria for evaluating
room noise 2008.
[51] Jørgensen S, Decorsière R, Dau T. Effects of manipulating the signal-to-noise
envelope power ratio on speech intelligibility. J Acoust Soc Am
2015;137:1401–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.4908240 .
[52] Tremblay S, Jones DM. Change of intensity fails to produce an irrelevant sound
effect: implications for the representation of unattended sound. J Exp Psychol
Hum Percept Perform 1999;25:1005–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0096-
1523.25.4.1005 .
[53] Ellermeier W, Zimmer K. The psychoacoustics of the irrelevant sound effect.
Acoust Sci Technol 2014;35:10–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1250/ast.35.10 .
[54] Veitch JA, Bradley JS, Legault LM, Norcross S, Svec JM. Masking speech in open-
plan ofﬁces with simulated ventilation noise: noise level and spectral
composition effects on acoustic satisfaction. Inst Res Constr Intern Rep IRC-IR-846 2002
.
[55] Venetjoki N, Kaarlela-Tuomaala A, Keskinen E, Hongisto V. The effect of speech
and speech intelligibility on task performance. Ergonomics 2006;49:1068–91 .
[56] Schutte M, Marks A, Wenning E, Griefahn B. The development of the noise
sensitivity questionnaire. Noise Health 2007;9:15–24. http://dx.doi.org/
10.4103/1463-1741.34700 .
[57] Hart SG, Staveland LE. Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): results ofempirical and theoretical research. Adv Psychol 1988;52:139–83
.
[58] Hampshire A, Highﬁeld RR, Parkin BL, Owen AM. Fractionating human
intelligence. Neuron 2012;76:1225–37. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuron.2012.06.022 .
[59] Silverman I, Choi J, Mackewn A, Fisher M, Moro J, Olshansky E. Evolvedmechanisms underlying wayﬁnding: further studies on the hunter-gatherer
theory of spatial sex differences. Evol Hum Behav 2000;21:201–13
.
[60] Pinheiro J, Bates D, DebRoy S, Sarkar D. (2007) nlme: linear and nonlinear
mixed effects models. R package version 3.52.
[61] Wickham H. A layered grammar of graphics. J Comput Graph Stat
2010;19:3–28 .
[62] Wickham H, Francois R. dplyr: A grammar of data manipulation. R Package
Version 0.4, 2015, 20.
[63] Akaike H. Information theory and an extension of the maximum likelihood
principle Sel. Pap. Hirotugu Akaike. Springer; 1998. p. 199–213 .
[64] Cohen J. A power primer. Psychol Bull 1992;112:155 .
[65] Schlittmeier SJ, Weißgerber T, Kerber S, Fastl H, Hellbrück J. Algorithmic
modeling of the irrelevant sound effect (ISE) by the hearing sensation
ﬂuctuation strength. Atten Percept Psychophys 2012;74:194–203. http://dx.
doi.org/10.3758/s13414-011-0230-7 .
[66] Chevret P. Release from masking of speech intelligibility due to ﬂuctuating
ambient noise in open-plan ofﬁces. Appl Acoust 2016;101:156–67. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2015.08.010 .
[67] Sörqvist P. On interpretation and task selection in studies on the effects of
noise on cognitive performance. Front Psychol 2014;5. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3389/fpsyg.2014.0124 .
[68] Hongisto V, Varjo J, Leppämäki H, Oliva D, Hyönä J. Work performance in
private ofﬁce rooms: the effects of sound insulation and sound masking. Build
Environ 2016;104:263–74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2016.04.022 .
[69] Keus van de Poll M, Ljung R, Odelius J, Sörqvist P. Disruption of writing by
background speech: the role of speech transmission index. Appl Acoust
2014;81:15–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2014.02.00 .80 M. Yadav et al. / Applied Acoustics 126 (2017) 68–80