DRAFT VERSION SEPTEMBER 18, 2023
Typeset using L ATEXtwocolumn style in AASTeX63
The influence of cold Jupiters in the formation of close-in planets. I. planetesimal transport
MARCY BEST,1, 2ANTRANIK A. S EFILIAN ,3 ,∗AND CRISTOBAL PETROVICH1, 4
1Instituto de Astrofísica, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Av. Vicuña Mackenna 4860, 782-0436 Macul, Santiago, Chile
2Millennium Institute of Astrophysics MAS, Nuncio Monsenor Sotero Sanz 100, Of. 104, Providencia, Santiago, Chile
3Astrophysikalisches Institut und Universitätssternwarte, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Schillergäßchen 2–3, D-07745 Jena, Germany
4Millennium Institute for Astrophysics, Chile
(Received XXX; Accepted YYY)
ABSTRACT
The formation of a cold Jupiter (CJ) is expected to quench the influx of pebbles and the migration of cores
interior to its orbit, thus limiting the efficiency of rocky planet formation either by pebble accretion and/or orbital
migration. Observations, however, show that the presence of outer CJs ( >1au and≳0.3MJup) correlates with
the presence of inner Super Earths (at <1au). This observation may simply be a result of an enhanced
initial reservoir of solids in the nebula required to form a CJ or a yet-to-be-determined mechanism assisted
by the presence of the CJ. In this work, we focus on the latter alternative and study the orbital transport of
planetesimals interior to a slightly eccentric ( ∼0.05) CJ subject to the gravity and drag from a viscously-
evolving gaseous disk. We find that a secular resonance sweeping inwards through the disk gradually transports
rings of planetesimals when their drag-assisted orbital decay is faster than the speed of the resonance scanning.
This snowplow-like process leads to large concentration (boosted by a factor of ∼10−100) of size-segregated
planetesimal rings with aligned apsidal lines, making their expected collisions less destructive due to their
reduced velocity dispersion. This process is efficient for a wide range of α−disk models (and thus disk lifetimes)
and Jovian masses, peaking for ∼1−5MJup, typical of observed CJs in radial velocity surveys. Overall, our
work highlights the major role that the disk’s gravity may have on the orbital redistribution of planetesimals,
depicting a novel avenue by which CJs may enhance the formation of inner planetary systems, including super-
Earths and perhaps even warm and hot Jupiters.
Keywords: planets and satellites: formation — protoplanetary disks — planet-disk interactions
1.INTRODUCTION
1.1. Motivation
Recent exoplanet observations show that the presence of
cold giant planets may increase the probability of finding
an inner super-Earth in the same system (Zhu & Wu 2018;
Bryan et al. 2019). These works estimate that the probabil-
ity of having at least one super-Earth given a cold giant in
the exoplanetary system is ∼50−100% (within 1 σ; more
recently Rosenthal et al. 2022 also found such a correlation,
albeit less significant). Nevertheless, this trend is a subject
of current debate, with other works claiming the contrary,
i.e., an anti-correlation (e.g. Bonomo et al. 2023). Thus, un-
derstanding the role that cold Jovians have at promoting (or
Corresponding author: Marcy Best
sabest@uc.cl
∗Alexander von Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellow.inhibiting) the formation of inner super-Earths is a key step
forward in building a complete picture of planet formation.
According to some formation models the presence of a
cold Jupiter is seen as an obstacle to super-Earth formation.
These models generally rely on the transport of rocky mate-
rial (e.g., pebbles or cores) from the outer regions of the disk
to the inner regions to form super-Earths. This is why, usu-
ally, an anti-correlation is predicted (e.g. Schlecker, M. et al.
2021) between super-Earths and Cold Jupiters.
Indeed, in the pebble accretion model, planets form from
planetesimals that accrete pebbles until they become suffi-
ciently large (Johansen & Lacerda 2010; Ormel & Klahr
2010). However, if a giant planet is formed early on in the
outer regions of the protoplanetary disk, it would quench
the flux of pebbles to the inner system. This is because the
typical core of the Jovian reaches the pebble isolation mass
(Lambrechts et al. 2014). This blockage should halt the ac-
cretion of pebbles by the inner planetesimals, limiting the
formation of other planets interior to the initial gas giant as
the remaining pebbles would just drift towards the star too
quickly. Also, the same pressure bump aiding the formationarXiv:2304.02045v2  [astro-ph.EP]  15 Sep 20232 M. B EST, A. S EFILIAN , & C. P ETROVICH
Figure 1. Schematic cartoon describing the basic setup of our simulations. A giant planet carves a gap in a depleting gaseous disk with a
planetesimal disk interior to its orbit. As the disk disperses, a secular resonance that excites the planetesimals’ eccentricities moves inwards
carrying them along due to gas drag, accumulating material in the form of size-segregated planetesimal rings. The final surface density of
planetesimals inside ∼0.2au is then largely enhanced.
of the gas giant would quench the pebble flux (Izidoro et al.
2021).
Instead of pebbles, the influx of solids may be dominated
by cores undergoing type-I migration that park into super-
Earth orbits. However, the formation of a giant planet would
also prevent their migration, giving rise to an anti-correlation
between the two populations (Izidoro et al. 2015).
Finally, another possible explanation for the observed cor-
relation is that the presence of the cold Jupiter has no signifi-
cant effect on the formation of a super-Earth. Instead, the po-
tential correlation simply emerges as a consequence of birth
disk conditions: disks with more solid material inside ∼10
au may promote the formation of both populations (see e.g.
the discussion in Zhu et al. 2018). This can happen either
by having a more massive disk or having a higher dust-to-
gas ratio (i.e. more solid material to form planets). Although
there is still debate about the exact distribution of material in
the protoplanetary disk (Chiang & Laughlin 2013), the dis-
tribution of solids in multiple planet systems seems to be sig-
nificantly different from what models of gaseous disks can
explain. This points towards a rearrangement of the solid
material (Raymond & Cossou 2014).
In this work, we explore yet another possibility where the
same giant planet blocking the pebbles or inwardly migrating
planetary cores could transport copious amounts of planetesi-
mals from ≳1au to the inner regions. This would imply that
terrestrial planets in such a scenario grow by accreting plan-etesimals, possibly assisted by the higher density of solids
required to form the Jovian.
1.2. Sweeping secular resonances
The mechanism that we invoke to transport planetesimals
inwards is based on the sweeping of secular resonances to
drive eccentricity excitation and gas drag to damp them,
causing orbital decay. The sweeping arises from the com-
mensurability between the apsidal precession rates of the
Jovian planet and that of the planetesimals (Heppenheimer
1980; Ward 1981a), a process that has been studied in vari-
ous contexts, including the dynamics of asteroids in the So-
lar System (Lemaitre & Dubru 1991; Nagasawa et al. 2000;
Zheng et al. 2017a,b; Gong et al. 2019) and the excitation of
planetary eccentricities and/or inclinations (Hahn & Malho-
tra 1999; Nagasawa et al. 2003; Petrovich et al. 2019; Toliou
et al. 2019).
This process can be understood as follows (see also Fig-
ure 1 for an illustration). The gap-opening Jovian planet will
undergo apsidal precession with a positive frequency due to
the disk’s gravity (Ward 1981a). On the other hand, non-
gap-opening planets/planetesimals will precess (generally) at
a negative rate due to the disk (Ward 1981a) or positively
due an external perturber like in the case of planetesimals af-
fected by the Jovian(s). The depletion of the disk can lead
to instances when the frequencies match at a given orbital
radius, driving the excitation of the planetesimals’ eccen-
tricities when a slightly eccentric giant planet is consideredPLANETESIMAL TRANSPORT 3
(see Figure 2 for an illustration). These eccentricities are
damped by the drag from the gas, pushing the planetesimals
inwards, plowing them through the inner system as the res-
onance moves inward as the disk disperses. This can effec-
tively transport a large percentage of solid material available
in the region.
A major goal of our work is to understand these dynam-
ics for realistic disks by accounting for gaps, inner cavities,
and different disk viscosities; expanding previous treatments
which typically use uniform power-law disks.
1.3. Structure
Our work is organized as follows. In Section 2 we de-
scribe the general setup of our model, and present equations
governing the dynamics of planetesimals. In Section 3 we
then present results showing the transport of material due to
our proposed mechanism, while the impact the alignment of
planetesimals has on their velocity dispersion is presented in
in Section 4. Finally we discuss some of the implications our
findings may have for planet formation in Section 5 before
giving our conclusions in Section 6.
2.METHODS
In this section, we describe a semi-analytic model to an-
alyze the long-term dynamical evolution of planetesimals
that are embedded within a viscously evolving protoplane-
tary disk and perturbed by a single planet.
The planet, the disk, and the planetesimals within it are
assumed to be coplanar orbiting a central star of mass Mc=
1M⊙. We characterize the orbit of a given planetesimal by its
semimajor axis ap, eccentricity ep, and longitude of pericen-
terϖp. Similarly, orbital elements subscripted with J refer to
the accompanying giant planet.
In order to follow the evolution of the planetesimals we
need to model their interaction with the giant planet. Addi-
tionally, we need to include the effects of the gaseous disk
component. This component produces gas drag onto the
planetesimals, and drives apsidal precession of the planetesi-
mals and the giant. The following equations describe all the
interactions considered:
dep
dt=dep
dt
drag+dep
dt
CJ, (1)
d∆ϖ
dt=dϖp
dt
disk+dϖp
dt
CJ−dϖJ
dt
disk,(2)
dap
dt=dap
dt
drag, (3)
where ∆ϖ=ϖp−ϖJ.
In subsequent subsections, we describe in detail each of
these interactions, as well as the evolution of the gaseous
component of the disk and the initial distribution of planetes-
imals.
2.1. Disk evolutionWe consider a gaseous protoplanetary disk that evolves as
anαaccretion disk, without considering the influence of any
other physical effects (e.g. due the giant planet, photoevap-
oration winds, etc). In our most general case, two different
viscosities are considered (to the inner and outer side of the
giant planet), which is further described in Section 2.1.2. We
compute the time evolution of the gas surface density Σgas
using the classical 1D diffusion equation (Pringle 1981):
∂Σgas
∂t=1
r∂
∂r
3r1/2∂
∂r(νΣgasr1/2)
, (4)
ν=αcsH, (5)
and account for a gap profile produced by the giant planet a
posteriori; see Section 2.1.3 for details. Here, αis the viscos-
ity parameter, csis the sound speed, and H is the scale height,
which in our case of a locally isothermal disk, correspond to
cs∝r−1/4andH∝r5/4(with H≈0.04au at 1au).
2.1.1. Initial profile
We consider a gas surface density which initially has a
power-law profile with a cutoff at some outer radius:
Σgas(r) = Σ gas,0r
1au−γ
exp
−(r/rcut)2−γ
,(6)
where Σgas,0is chosen so that the total mass of gas is 1%
of the stellar mass. Motivated by observations, we adopt
aγindex of 1 here and rcutto be 25 au, although our re-
sults depend only slightly on this parameter. Here, we note
that variations in these parameters do not affect the evolu-
tion of planetesimals significantly as the shape of the profile
reaches a steady state irrespective of the initial value of γ(see
Appendix A). Additionally, the planetesimals/planet’s orbital
precession depends more on the total mass of the outer disk
and not so much on its outer edge (see Appendix C).
2.1.2. Viscosity
The evolution of the disk’s surface density depends on the
gas viscosity; see e.g. Eq. (4). This directly impacts the
rate of depletion of a region; namely, the higher the viscos-
ity, the quicker the region depletes its gas. At an iceline or
the boundary of a dead zone, it is generally thought that the
gas viscosity changes1, serving as a dust trap where a giant
planet can form early on (Guilera et al. 2020). Following this
line of reasoning, we use the same position for both the vis-
cosity transition and the position of the giant planet (namely,
aJ= 3au, unless stated otherwise). In this work we will re-
fer to these viscosities as αinandαout(inside and outside the
boundary, respectively). This gives us the freedom of sepa-
rating the depletion of the inner and outer disks which, as we
shall see, has important consequences for the evolution of the
secular resonance location (Appendix C).
1In Fig. 12 we see a surface density transition at this location.4 M. B EST, A. S EFILIAN , & C. P ETROVICH
2.1.3. Density gap opened by the Jovian
As the planet accretes the surrounding gas, it will open a
gap in the gas disk if it is sufficiently massive (see the red re-
gion of panels B1 to B3 in Fig. 3). We need to keep track of
this effect, as the drag force and precession rate of the plan-
etesimals depend on the gas surface density. In principle,
this can be done self-consistently by adding a torque at the
position of the giant planet to the viscous evolution equation
(Eq. (4)). For simplicity, however, we model the gap using
the profile and code provided in Duffell (2020) for each time
step independently. For reference, an approximate expres-
sion for the gap width ∆gapis provided by Equation (4) of
Kanagawa et al. (2016):
∆gap
aJ= 0.41MJ
Mc1/2
h−3/4α−1/4, (7)
where MJis the mass of the giant, his the disk’s aspect ratio
at the position of the Jovian, and the viscosity of the inner
disk ( αin) is considered for the gap. We use this simplified
expression for our model in Appendix C.
2.2. Drag force
The planetesimals embedded in the disk feel a drag force
when the gas in their vicinity moves at a non-Keplerian
speed. We can quantify this difference in velocity with the
factor η(r). From hydrostatic equilibrium, a disk with volu-
metric gas density ρ∝r−Γand temperature T∝r−βhas
an azimuthal velocity given by (e.g. Adachi et al. 1976):
vgas(r) =vK(r) [1−2η(r)]1/2≃vK(r) [1−η(r)],(8)
with
η(r) =π(Γ + β)
16c2
m
v2
K=(Γ + β)
2h2, (9)
where vKis the Keplerian velocity, and we have used the fact
thatcs/vKis equal to the aspect ratio of the disk h, and the
mean thermal speed is c2
m=8
πc2
s.
In our models, we use β= 1/2and we can obtain Γ(r)
locally2by calculating:
Γ(r) =−r
ρdρ
dr. (10)
By averaging the drag force over one orbit, Adachi et al.
(1976) find the following approximate expressions for the
migration of the planetesimals:
dap
dt
drag=−2ap
τ0r
5
8e2p+η2
η+Γ
4+5
16
e2
p
,
(11)
dep
dt
drag=−ep
τ0r
5
8e2p+η2, (12)
2Computing Γ(r) locally is important because the surface density quickly
deviates from a power law due to the disk evolution, especially near the
edges of the disk, the gap of the planet, and the viscosity transition.where
τ0=πCD
2ms2ρvK−1
.
where sis the radius of the planetesimal, CDthe drag coeffi-
cient, and ρthe density of planetesimals which we take to be
1 g/cm3. Note that we are not considering the inclinations of
the planetesimals in our work, as these should be suppressed
due to the Jovian’s inclination being close to zero.
2.3. Apsidal precession due to the disk gravity
Next, we consider the gravitational effects of the proto-
planetary disk on both the planetesimals embedded within
and the planet. Given that the disk is taken to be axisymmet-
ric, it simply causes the longitudes of periapsis of the plane-
tary and planetesimal orbits to precess.
Since these objects are surrounded by the disk, the gas can
be infinitely close, leading to a numerical (not physical) prob-
lem which causes a divergence in the gravitational force (see
Sefilian & Rafikov 2019, for a detailed discussion). To over-
come this problem, we soften the gravitational potential us-
ing the softening prescription of Hahn (2003) so that (Sefilian
& Rafikov 2019):
1
|r−r’|=
r2+r′2−2rr′cos(θ) +h2(r2+r′2)−1/2,
(13)
Accordingly, the usual Laplace coefficients,
b(m)
s(α) =2
πZπ
0cos(mθ)dθ 
1 +α2−2αcosθs, (14)
are modified which now read as follows:
B(m)
s(α) =2
πZπ
0cos(mθ)dθ 
1 +α2−2αcosθ+ (1 + α2)h2s.
(15)
Here, we note that the aspect ratio is taken to be a distance-
independent constant in Hahn (2003). In our model, however,
we assume that hvaries with semimajor axis. As a conse-
quence, we use its value at the position of the object. This
approximation should be valid since the smoothening only
affects the potential in the neighbourhood of the object.
Then, we can calculate the precession due to an axisym-
metric disk using the following equation from Sefilian &
Rafikov (2019):
dϖi
dt
disk=2G
nia3
iZai
rinµ(r)ϕr
ai
dr
+Zroutbox
aiai
rµ(r)ϕai
r
dr
,(16)
where
ϕ(x) =1
8xh
B(1)
3/2(x)−3xh2(2 +h2)B(0)
5/2(x)i
,(17)PLANETESIMAL TRANSPORT 5
where i = {p, J}, ni=p
G(Mc+mi)/a3
iits mean motion,
rout,boxthe outer limit of the simulation box (1000 au) and
µ(r)is the gas mass density per unit semimajor axes, µ(r) =
2πrΣgas. Equation (16) generally gives a negative value for
the planetesimals (subscript p) because they are embedded in
the gas, but a positive value for the giant planet (subscript
J) because of the gap the latter opens (see e.g. Ward 1981b;
Sefilian & Rafikov 2019).
It is worth noting that the singularity discussed above does
not arise when considering objects orbiting outside the disk,
i.e., where Σgas(r) = 0 , such as the planet in our model. We
also point out that there are analytic frameworks that allow
for the computation of the disk-induced precession without
introducing any softening parameter (see e.g. Davydenkova
& Rafikov (2018)). Despite this, however, we opted to adopt
the softening prescription of Hahn (2003), as the resulting
softening parameter his the same as the disk’s aspect ratio.
This has the added effect of accounting for the gaseous disk
not being razor-thin, which is a more realistic representation.
2.4. Planetesimal-Jupiter interaction
We now consider the orbital evolution of the planetesimals
due to the Jovian. Making use of the classical disturbing
function Rexpanded to second order in eccentricities (e.g.
Eq. (7.8) in Murray & Dermott (2000)), one can write:
dep
dt
CJ=1
npa2pep∂R
∂ϖp=ApJeJsin(ϖp−ϖJ),
(18)d∆ϖ
dt
CJ=1
npa2pep∂R
∂ep=App+ApJeJ
epcos(ϖp−ϖJ),
(19)
where npis the planetesimal’s mean motion. In Equations
(18) and (19), the coefficients AppandApJare given by:
App=np
4MJ
Mc+mpap
aJ2
b(1)
3/2(ap/aJ), (20)
ApJ=−np
4MJ
Mc+mpap
aJ2
b(2)
3/2(ap/aJ),(21)
see e.g. Murray & Dermott (2000). It is worth noting, that
in the case of a circular orbit, the Jovian would not be able
to secularly excite any eccentricity onto the planetesimals.
Thus, the eccentricity of the giant is an important parameter
in our simulations, and so, we have tested different values in
Section 3.4.3.
2.5. Secular Resonance
Now that all the sources for the apsidal precession of the
Jovian and planetesimals are defined, we proceed to describe
when a secular resonance takes place. Loosely speaking, this
kind of resonance occurs when we have a matching of the
apsidal precession rates (in our case between the planet and
some planetesimals). This would mean that Eq. (2) is closeto zero in the absence of the gas drag which aligns (or anti-
aligns) the orbits. A planetesimal in this secular resonance
will increase its eccentricity up to a maximum value (see Eq.
(B2) for an estimate). Once the planetesimal acquires enough
eccentricity, its migration will be significant (Eq. (11)). For
illustrative purposes, in Fig. 2 we plot the precession rate of
the planetesimals in the fiducial case evolving in time as a
function of semimajor axis. Also, overlapping, is the preces-
sion rate of the Jovian (in green) which decreases in time as
the disk depletes. We show the matching of the frequencies
as a circle at each time. As one can see, the resonance starts
close to 1.5au and moves inwards towards the inner edge at
0.1au. In the next section (Section 3), we shall demonstrate
how this sweeping of the resonance could transport material.
2.6. Planetesimal distribution
Finally, with the basic elements of the model in place, we
describe how the planetesimals themselves are distributed
throughout the disk. To allocate the number of planetesimals
at the beginning of the simulation, we consider 200 logarith-
mically spaced rings spanning from 0.1 au to 1.5 au. Each
ring contains planetesimals such that their combined mass is
1% of the corresponding gas mass for the ring. In turn, the
size distribution for planetesimals follows a power law:
dN
dM∝M−p, (22)
where N is the number of planetesimals in each of the 50 log-
arithmically spaced mass bins M (from 1 km to 100 km with
a density of 1 g/cm3). Looking at Eq. (22), it can be easily
seen that with p= 2, all sizes of planetesimals contribute to
the mass budget with the same total mass. Values below 2
are top heavy (meaning, the bigger planetesimals contribute
more to the mass budget), while values above 2 are weighted
towards the smaller planetesimals. In what follows we use
p= 2 as to not prioritize any size of planetesimals. The ex-
act distribution of planetesimals will not significantly affect
our results as we will discuss the evolution of each size of
planetesimals in what follows.
Our choice for the distribution in semimajor axis of the
planetesimals is 0.1 au to 1.5 au. The lower limit is simply
the inner edge of the disk and the upper limit is introduced
because planetesimals close to the planet would be evactu-
ated by the mean motion resonances (MMRs). We discuss
this further in Section 5.3.4.
3.RESULTS: TRANSPORT
3.1. Fiducial case
We simulate the evolution of planetesimals ranging from
1 km to 100 km, keeping track of their semi major axes, ec-
centricities, and apsidal angles (with respect to the Jovian)
for10Myrs; see Equations (1)–(3). All parameters consid-
ered for the fiducial case are listed in Table 1 and in text form
here. In the fiducial case, we invoke a giant planet of 3 Jupiter
masses (a typical cold giant planet) at 3 au (the same position
as the snowline), and eJ= 0.05(which is reasonable as the6 M. B EST, A. S EFILIAN , & C. P ETROVICH
Figure 2. Precession rate of the planetesimals due to both the disk
and planet gravity as a function of semimajor axis. The different
lines are for different times as described by the colorbar. The green
lines represent the precession rate of the giant planet which de-
creases in time as the disk depletes. For reference, the resonance
position as a function of time is marked with a circle symbol corre-
sponding to the same colorbar. The resonance position moves from
approximately 1.5au to 0.2au at the end of the 10 Myrs. A second
resonance can also be seen at the inner edge, but this one spans a
narrow range from 0.1 au to 0.15 au. The resonance position as a
function of time can be found in Fig. 9.
Table 1. Initial conditions of the disk and planet for our simulations.
Parameter Fiducial value Other values
MJ[MJup] 3 [0.1 – 7]
aJ[au] 3 5
eJ 0.05 0.01
αin 10−3[10−4–10−2], [3×10−3]
αout 10−4[10−5–10−3],[3×10−3]
NOTE—In each simulation, unless stated otherwise, (i) the surface
density slope is set to γ= 1(Eq. (6)); (ii) the initial gas mass is set
to 1% of solar mass; (iii) the planetesimal size distribution slope is
set to p= 2 (Eq. (22)); (iv) the total solid mass in the inner disk is
set to 1% of the gas mass; and (v) the simulation time is 10 Myr.
planet’s eccentricity can grow up to the order of the local as-
pect ratio (Papaloizou & Larwood 2000; Duffell & Chiang
2015)). The inner and outer viscosity parameters for the disk
areαin= 10−3andαout= 10−4. We start the simulation
with a gas disk mass of 1% of a solar mass and a solid sur-
face density of 1% of the gas disk mass. As planetesimals do
not interact among themselves, the amount of available solidmaterial can be easily scaled up or down later and we shall
express our results in fraction of transported mass.
The results of our fiducial simulation are summarized in
Figure 3, where we plot the radial profiles of the planetesi-
mal eccentricities (row A), surface densities of the gas and
planetesimals (row B), and planetesimal apsidal angles (rel-
ative to the precessing planet; row C). Results are shown at
three different times: from left to right, t= 0.01,t= 0.5,
andt= 10 Myr, respectively. For clarity purposes, only a
sub-sample of three planetesimal sizes are shown: namely,
1, 10, and 100 km. Starting from panel A1 we see the plan-
etesimals oscillating around the forced eccentricity profiles
(dashed lines). These forced eccentricities are calculated by
simultaneously solving Eq. (1) and (2) looking for a steady
state (which is different for each planetesimal size). The
different terms for these equations are described throughout
Section 2. We consider each time step to be independent, us-
ing the previously calculated gas surface density as described
in Section 2.1. As the resonance location moves towards the
star, it carries the planetesimals with it (panels A1 to A3),
thus sweeping up the solid material. Whether the planetesi-
mals move with the resonance or not is explored in Section
3.2. Note the corresponding increase in solid surface density
(black line) in panels B1 to B3. We will quantify this increase
in surface density in Section 3.3.
Some things to further note. First, the largest planetesi-
mals of 100 km depend on the resonance position to migrate,
while the smaller ones of 1 km migrate almost irrespective of
the resonance position, as the planet’s perturbation already
excites eccentricities that are large enough to drive their mi-
gration (see Section 3.2).
Second, in panels C1 to C3, we see planetesimals close to
the planet tend to become aligned with the orbit of the planet
(i.e.,∆ϖ= 0), while planetesimals further away tend to be-
come anti aligned (i.e., ∆ϖ=π). This means that there is
a transition between these two alignments which coincides
with the resonance position. As a consequence, planetesi-
mals near the resonance point are not well aligned with each
other, especially for smaller sizes, thus increasing their ve-
locity dispersion (as we will further discuss in Section 4).
Finally, we also note the occurrence of a second secular
resonance near the inner edge of the disk. This is due to the
sharp positive slope of the surface density at this edge which
contributes a positive component to the precession rate of the
planetesimals; see Fig. 2. This additional resonance is not
important for our purposes as it transports very little material
(see the black line at the inner edge of panels B1 and B2).
The fiducial case was chosen because the timescale for
the migration of its planetesimals remains shorter than the
timescale for the movement of its resonance (for the first 10
Myrs). As such, the planetesimals can ride the wave of the
secular resonance which results in a very efficient transport
of material. Despite this, the fiducial case is not the case that
transports the most material in our simulations as some of
the bigger planetesimals are left behind the wave ( ∼100 km)
(see Fig. 3 A3). To better understand why this happens, nextPLANETESIMAL TRANSPORT 7
Figure 3. Evolution of the planetesimals and the gaseous disk. Row A shows the eccentricity of planetesimals as a function of semimajor
axis for a sub-sample of sizes ( s= 1 km,10km, and 100 km respectively, shown in black circles of increasing size). For reference, the
corresponding forced eccentricity solutions obtained by solving Equations (1) and (2)) are also shown in red, green, and blue dashed lines,
respectively. Row B shows the gas surface density in blue with the gap carved by the planet in red. The entirety of the gap is not shown here
for aesthetic reasons, as the surface density at apgoes down to Σgas∼10−5g.cm−2att= 0. The solid black line represents the surface
density of planetesimals, and for reference the initial profile is shown with a dashed black line. Row C shows the cosine of the relative apsidal
angle of planetesimals with respect to the precessing giant planet. For reference, the forced apsidal angles are also shown using the same color
scheme as Row A. Each column corresponds to a different time: from left to right, t= 0.01,0.5, and 10Myrs. See Section 3.1 for further
details. An animated version of this figure is available in the electronic edition of the journal and in Figshare: 10.6084/m9.figshare.24132339.
The animation runs from t = 0 to t = 10 Myrs with a duration of 13 s.
we will explore the condition for transporting planetesimals
in more detail.
3.2. Condition for transport
We can obtain an approximate condition for the effective
transport of material. For a planetesimal to remain ahead
of the wave, its migration timescale τmig, at the peak of the
eccentricity ( epeak), must be shorter than the timescale for
the movement of the resonance position τres. As we show in
Appendix B, this translates into the following criterion:
τres≳τmig≈1
2τ−1/2
0 (ApJeJ)−3/2
≈40MyrMc
1M⊙3MJup
MJ3/2Σgas
10g/cm21/20.1
h1/2
s
100km−1/2aJ
3au6ap
0.25au−9/2eJ
0.05−3/2
.(23)
where s is the radius of the planetesimal. In order to illustrate
the use of this expression, in Fig. 4 we observe the trans-
port of material and pay attention to the time at which the
transport stops working. Panel 4A shows that the large plan-
etesimals (30 - 100 km) need the resonance to move inwards,while stopping their migration if at any moment the reso-
nance runs past them (i.e. they no longer fulfill Eq. (23)),
leaving the planetesimals behind as can be seen for the 15
Myrs snapshot. At 10 Myrs, the migration rate of the 100
km planetesimals is around 40 Myrs according to Eq. (23),
which is above the timescale for the resonance movement
(∼∆t×a/∆a∼5Myrs ×0.2au/(0.05au) ∼20Myrs ).
On the other hand, the small planetesimals (1 - 5 km) all
migrate regardless of the position of the resonance because
a forced eccentricity below the peak value suffices to drive
efficient migration (see Fig. 4B). Because of our choice of
p in Eq. (22), all sizes contribute the same amount of mass
to the surface density, and so we still see migration of mate-
rial even when the resonance moves too quickly (albeit, less
efficiently), as can be seen in Fig. 4C.
The difference in the migration timescales for different
sizes translates into a segregation of planetesimals. This seg-
regation helps to keep the planetesimals better aligned, as
when comparing two planetesimals identical in size, their rel-
ative velocity would be zero.
3.3. Amount of transported material8 M. B EST, A. S EFILIAN , & C. P ETROVICH
Figure 4. Radial profiles of the surface density distribution of plan-
etesimals. In each panel, results are shown relative to the initial
profile for different times: 0.1, 0.5, 3, 10, and 15 Myrs. The vertical
dashed lines correspond to the positions of the secular resonance
at each considered timestep. Panel A shows only the big planetes-
imals from 30 to 100 km. These planetesimals need to be near the
resonance to migrate and when the resonance moves too quickly,
the wave cannot catch up on time. Panel B shows only the smaller
planetesimals from 1 to 5 km. Note that their migration happens
more or less irrespective of the resonance position. Panel C shows
all considered sizes, i.e., from 1 to 100 km.
We now quantify the amount of material transported by the
sweeping secular resonance. We do this by simply integrat-
ing the surface density of solid material in places where there
is an excess compared to the starting density, i.e.:Mt=Zrtrans
rin(Σp−Σ0)dA=Zrout
rtrans(Σ0−Σp)dA,
(24)
withrinandroutthe limits for the planetesimal distribution,
andrtrans (the transition point at Σp= Σ 0) where we go
from having an excess of planetesimals to a deficit, compared
to the initial distribution (see Fig. 4). An approximation to
this equation can be made, where we assume Σp= 0for the
rightmost expression of Eq. (24). In other words, we assume
all the region depleted of material (swept by the resonance)
has no solid material left and set rtrans =ares. By doing
this, we find the following approximation for the fraction of
transported mass:
f≡Mt
M0≈Zmin(1 .5,ai)
max(0 .1,af)Σ0dAZ1.5au
0.1auΣ0dA
≈min(1 .5au,ai)−max(0 .1au,af)
1.5au−0.1au,(25)
where aiandafrepresent the initial and final positions of
the resonance, respectively, and M0is the initial solid mass
in the disk. In the fiducial case, this fraction is about 0.73
after 10 Myrs.
Next we use Eq. (24) to compare the amount of transported
material for different simulations with parameters different
from the fiducial.
3.4. Dependence on different parameters
For consistency, we initiate all disks with the same
gas/solid surface density and planetesimal distribution so we
can report the efficiency of each simulation as simply the
fraction of transported mass. To begin with, we note that the
amount of transported mass depends on the movement of the
resonance location (Equation 25). In Appendix C we derive
a simple equation for the position of the resonance, finding
that to a good approximation one can write:
ares
aJ3/2
=0.02Mout∆3+ 3Min∆−3/2
MJ, (26)
where MinandMoutare the masses of the inner and outer
disks, respectively, and ∆is the gap width as defined in Eq.
C13. Looking at Equation (26), we can see the resonance po-
sition depends on the Jovian’s mass, as well as the inner and
outer disk masses. In what follows we will explore how these
parameters affect the transported mass. The inner and outer
disk mass evolution will be parameterized by the αviscosity
parameters. We will also briefly discuss the dependence of
the transported mass on the Jovian’s position and its orbital
eccentricity.
In Fig. 5 we vary 2 of these parameters (panel A varying
disk viscosities and panel B varying the mass of the Jovian).
We will discuss each panel in its corresponding subsections.
Also, note that much more material is transported comparedPLANETESIMAL TRANSPORT 9
Figure 5. Fraction of transported material as a function of time. The
total initial mass of planetesimals is 1.8 earth masses, equivalent to
1% of the gas mass in the inner disk. Different coloured curves in
panel A correspond to different values of αinas highlighted therein;
namely, 1 ×10−4, 1×10−3, 2.2×10−3, and 4.6 ×10−3. Results in
panel B correspond to different planetary masses, namely, 0.7, 1, 3,
5, and 7 MJup, and are shown using purple, red, orange, green, and
blue curves, respectively. In both panels, the black curves represent
the case where the gravitational effects of the disk is not taken into
account. The colored circle symbols correspond to r trans as defined
in Eq. (24); see the colorbar. All other planet–disk parameters are
set equal to their fiducial values (see Table 1).
to the case in which disk gravity is not accounted for (in Fig.
5, for both panels, compare the orange and black lines, with
and without disk gravity respectively, for the fiducial param-
eters). Next, we will explore the dependence of the fraction
of transported mass on each parameter.
3.4.1. Dependence on disk viscosities
Figure 6. Transported mass fraction at the end of the 10 Myr sim-
ulation for different combinations of αinandαoutin simulations
which are otherwise identical to the fiducial case (Table 1). The
red lines mark the contours of constant αout/αin; with a ratio of 1,
0.1 and 0.01 (top to bottom). The diamond symbols correspond to
the same simulations that are depicted in Fig. 5(A) with the same
color coding: i.e., with αin= 1×10−4, 1×10−3, 2.2×10−3, and
4.6×10−3(shown in red, orange, green, and blue, respectively).
In Fig. 5A we can see that higher than fiducial αinvalues
result in less efficient transport as the resonance moves too
quickly (see Eq. (23)) compared with the fiducial case. On
the other hand, for the lower than fiducial αin, we would ex-
pect the transported mass to catch up if we let the disk evolve
for the same number of viscous times as the fiducial. In fact,
our results depend on the time we let the disk evolve (10
Myrs in all simulations used for Fig. 5), so the values stated
here would actually be a lower limit. If the disk would de-
plete more slowly (quickly), the resonance would also move
slower (faster), thus transporting material more (less) effi-
ciently.
A more exhaustive search of the parameter space for vis-
cosities (following the quoted values for αviscosity parame-
ters listed in Table 1) only showing the final fraction of trans-
ported mass can be found on Fig. 6 (some simulations from
Fig. 5A have been marked on this plot). The peak of trans-
ported material in Fig. 6 depends on the Jovian mass and
in the case of 3 MJupthe simulations transporting the most
material are the ones with a ratio αout/αin∼0.1 - 1. Con-
sistently, these models with αout< α inthought to be more
realistic3. As we had mentioned previously, if αinis too high,
then very little material is transported as the resonance loca-
3Because of the higher irradiation of the star in the inner disk, more ionized
material couples with the magnetic field of the star promoting the Magne-
torotational Instability and hence higher turbulence which translates into a
higher viscosity (Gammie 1996; Armitage 2022).10 M. B EST, A. S EFILIAN , & C. P ETROVICH
tion moves too quickly (which also explains the lower values
offin the right part of the parameter space of Figure 6). In
other cases, similar ratios of viscosities give similar fractions
of transported material because the inner and outer masses
remain proportional.
3.4.2. Dependence on mass of the giant planet
We now turn our attention to the dependence of transported
mass on planetary mass. To this end, we consider the evolu-
tion of planetesimals in otherwise identical disk–planet sys-
tems but differing in the value of the planetary mass within
the range [0.1−7]MJup; see Table 1. The results are sum-
marized in Figure 5(B). We generally find that simulations
adopting the fiducial planetary mass of 3 MJuptransport the
highest fraction of solid material. This can be understood as
follows. Increasing the planet’s mass results in the resonance
condition being established closer to the star, while mak-
ing the planet smaller makes the resonance location move
closer to the planet where there is no solid material in our
simulations (see Section 5.3.4). Both of these effects reduce
the transported mass by reducing the range of solid material
swept by the resonance.
Given the strong dependence of the fraction of transported
mass on the planet’s mass, we provide a more detailed picture
in Figure 7(B). It is evident that the transported mass peaks at
about 2 or 3 Jupiter masses. To explain this we need to look
at the range that the resonance sweeps over.
We approximate the position of the resonance from the
simulations (blue and green solid curves for initial and fi-
nal positions, respectively) using Eq. (26) (blue and green
dashed lines) and the transported material with Eq. (25)
(purple line on panel B). The result is shown as the red
dashed line in panel B and provides a rough description of
the the transported mass. Three regions can be distinguished
in both panels. (i) MJ≲0.5MJup: the final resonance
location is outside the region with material ( 0.1−1.5au)
and an insignificant amount of material is transported; (ii)
0.5MJup≲MJ≲2MJup: the fraction increases as the res-
onance sweeping region gets in until it peaks when the start-
ing resonance position enters the region with material, (iii)
MJ≳2MJup: as the initial resonance location approaches
the inner edge of the disk, the material transported goes down
again. This simple model we describe in detail in Appendix
C together with Eq. (25) gives us the same qualitative behav-
ior as full simulations. This includes the upward and down-
ward slope and the peak in the Jovian’s mass at around 3
MJupas can be seen in Fig. 7B.
Furthermore, we can see in Fig. 8 that this shape, includ-
ing the peak at around ∼1−3Jupiter masses, is very similar
for many combinations of inner and outer viscosities. This is
appealing, especially given that the typical measured masses
of cold Jupiters in exoplanet systems fall within this range
(e.g. Fulton et al. (2021)). Finally, to explain the slight dif-
ference in shape for the green and red curves shown in Fig.
8 at low Jupiter masses, we note that the final position of the
resonance for these cases are already inside the region with
solid material (because the outer region gets depleted faster
Figure 7. The relationship between the radial range over which the
resonance sweeps and the fraction of transported mass of planetesi-
mals. Panel A shows the range covered by the resonance as a func-
tion of MJ, starting at the blue solid line and ending at the green
solid one. The approximate initial and final resonance positions
as obtained using Eq. (26) are shown with blue and green dashed
curves, respectively. Panel B shows the amount of transported ma-
terial, both as measured from the simulations (purple curve) and as
estimated using Eq. (25) and (26) (shown using red dashed curve).
See the text (Section 3.4.2) for details.
Figure 8. Fraction of transported mass of planetesimals at the end
of the 10 Myr simulation as a function of Jupiter masses for different
combinations of inner and outer viscosities as shown in the legend.
The blue curve corresponds to the fiducial viscosities (Table 1).
in these cases), so we do not see a first change in slope as
with the blue and orange curves.
3.4.3. Dependence on other parameters
As mentioned before, other parameters can affect the trans-
port of material. The most important ones, besides thePLANETESIMAL TRANSPORT 11
parameters mentioned in the previous subsections, are the
Jupiter’s eccentricity and position.
According to our simple model described in Appendix C,
the position of the resonance scales with the Jovian’s position
(Equation 26). In this sense, we would expect the system
to just scale with the position of the Jupiter. However, the
available solid material reservoir would be different. Also,
the resonance position movement timescale will be affected.
Namely, if the resonance starts with the Jovian further away,
it will travel faster through the inner disk.
In the case of the eccentricity, from Eq. (B2), one can see
that the eccentricity peak of the resonance scales with the Jo-
vian’s eccentricity. This will directly impact the migration
timescale as can be seen from Eq. (23). A lower Jovian’s
eccentricity makes the migration timescale longer, hindering
the transport. In fact, in the limit of a circular orbit, the Jo-
vian would stop secularly exciting eccentricity onto the plan-
etesimals. We have tested this by lowering eJto 0.01 and
observed little transport, and only of the smallest planetes-
imals. However, we expect that gap-opening Jovians may
retain some eccentricity due to disk-planet interactions with
values around 0.07 to 0.09 according to simulations by Duf-
fell & Chiang (2015).
We further discuss the effect of other parameters not men-
tioned here such as the disk evolution time in Section 5.
4.RESULTS: VELOCITY DISPERSION
In the previous section, we demonstrated that a signifi-
cant amount of solid material can be transported from regions
close to the giant planet to the inner regions of the disk. In
order to asses whether this may result in planet formation
we need to calculate the velocity dispersion ( σv), which is
a function of eccentricity and ∆ϖ, for the planetesimals in
each individual ring. This will help us estimate the collisional
velocity of this planetesimals once we include collisions in
our simulations.
To this end, we first introduce the planetesimal eccentricity
vector as follows:
e= (ecosϖ, esinϖ), (27)
and an analog to a center of mass velocity
eCM=Σieimi
Σimi, (28)
where i = 1, ..., N for all the planetesimals that fall into a
specific ring. Then we compare each individual eccentricity
vector of the planetesimals with this center of mass eccen-
tricity using the following relation:
⟨e2⟩=Σi(ei−eCM)2mi
Σimi. (29)
Finally, the dispersion in velocity would be proportional to
the dispersion of these eccentricity vectors, such that,
σv=vKσe=vKp
⟨e2⟩. (30)In Fig. 9A we show the velocity dispersion for our fidu-
cial case as a function of time and semimajor axis. We ob-
serve that in regions near the resonance, σvincreases as the
eccentricity becomes larger when they approach epeak. Ad-
ditionally, there is a region of misalignment surrounding this
position (see Fig. 3c). Inner to this region, the velocities can
get as low as ∼10−100m/s (which is lower than if the ef-
fect of the disk gravity was not included; see e.g. Fig. 10).
This lower velocity dispersion is also due to the segregation
in sizes of the planetesimals (as seen in Fig. 4), because plan-
etesimals of similar size tend to be more aligned. It is worth
noting that even if these higher velocity dispersion near the
resonance result in destructive collisions, the smaller frag-
mented planetesimals would migrate faster and accumulate
in the region with a lower velocity dispersion. We also in-
clude the surface density of solids in Fig. 9B as a function
of time and semimajor axis compared to the initial distribu-
tion of solids. Here we can see that most of the material
concentrates around the resonance, the region swept by the
resonance gets depleted and accumulated ahead.
In general, Fig. 9 shows that relative collisional velocities
are around 10-100 m/s where material is being accumulated
ahead of the resonance. This implies collisions might lead to
accretion and not fragmentation in these regions for strong
basalt rocks and even weaker rocks (see Stewart & Lein-
hardt (2009)). These values are generally lower than those
obtained in the case of a non-self-gravitating disk by about a
factor of ∼10(see Fig. 10), further demonstrating the role
of disk gravity for the transport of solid material to the inner
disk.
5.DISCUSSION
We have shown that, by including the effect of disk gravity
for an evolving gaseous disk, a large fraction of the solid ma-
terial can be transported. This transporting effect seems to be
very robust, as it works with a wide range of typical Jovian
masses and disk viscosities. This effect is also robust against
different choices for the planetesimal distribution.
In the following, we first discuss the relevance of includ-
ing the disk gravity in an evolving disk in Section 5.1. Then,
what implications our mechanism has on inner planet forma-
tion in Section 5.2. We mention some caveats in Section 5.3
and finally, some future work we hope to include for the next
paper in Section 5.4.
5.1. The importance of disk gravity in an evolving disk
One crucial ingredient in our model is the inclusion of the
disk gravity. To highlight its importance, we now compare
our fiducial results with the case where disk gravity is not
included which, from hereon, we refer to as the NDG case.
In this case there is no secular resonance, and so, only the
smaller planetesimals would migrate. In Fig. 10A we com-
pare the velocity dispersion of planetesimals (according to
Eq. (30)) in the fiducial case to that in the NDG case. We
can see the peak in eccentricity promotes higher dispersion
velocities near the resonance, but away from it, lower veloc-
ity dispersions of planetesimals can be achieved compared to12 M. B EST, A. S EFILIAN , & C. P ETROVICH
Figure 9. Panel A shows the velocity dispersion of planetesimals
computed according to Eq. (30) as a function of time and semimajor
axis, using results of the fiducial simulation (Table 1). The red line
marks the position of the resonance. Note that the velocity disper-
sion increases near the resonance due to eccentricities being higher
there and also the apsidal angle alignment varies quickly near the
peak as can be seen in Fig 3c. Panel B shows the corresponding
surface density of solids compared to the initial solid distribution.
Note that most of the material is near the resonance and the surface
density interior to the resonance increases with time.
the NDG case. This is appealing, because previous works
which did not include disk gravity in their calculations (e.g.
Kortenkamp et al. (2001), Guo & Kokubo (2021, 2023)) do
already report on the planet-formation-friendly environment
that the Jovian, together with the gas drag, could produce.
In this context, the inclusion of disk gravity, which further
reduces the velocity dispersion, would further enhance the
possibility of planet formation.
The effects of this disk-induced secular resonance have
also been studied in the shake-up model for the Solar System
(Nagasawa et al. 2005), as well as in the context of planet for-
mation in and around binaries (Rafikov & Silsbee 2015a,b;
Silsbee & Rafikov 2021). It is worth noting that these studies
Figure 10. Same as Fig. 9 but comparing the fiducial case with
the case where no disk gravity (NDG) was considered. Both in log
scale.
concentrate more on the coupled eccentricity–apsidal angle
evolution of planetesimal orbits, but not on their transport.
Additionally, these works either do not include the evolution
of the disk or use a simplistic model (e.g., a uniformly- de-
caying power-law disk). Instead, our work shows that the
evolution of the disk is crucial to predict the evolution of the
position of the secular resonance and the subsequent trans-
port of material. There are also works which use N-body
simulations to reproduce the cold Jupiter - super Earth corre-
lation (e.g. Bitsch & Izidoro (2023)), but which neglect the
effect of disk gravity.
5.2. Relevance to inner planet formation
Coming back to what we set off to explore, namely an ex-
planation for the correlation observed between cold giants
and super-Earths. We have proven that, thanks to the effect
of planetesimal transport by the sweeping of the secular res-
onance, a significant amount of material with small velocity
dispersion is accumulated in the inner region of the disk ( ≲
0.3au). Additionally, the transported solid mass is segregated
in rings by size. All of this occurs by the time the surface
density of gas is largely depleted ( ≤10g/cm2, Fig. 3) which
could promote the formation of planets as seen in MorbidelliPLANETESIMAL TRANSPORT 13
(2020). This environment would be ideal for planetesimals
to assemble into super-Earths (Lee & Chiang 2016). An-
other possibility would be to form warm or hot Jupiters, if
the transported solid material is sufficient and there is still
enough gas to accrete (Batygin et al. 2016; Boley et al. 2016).
This may be the case as the population of hot Jupiters gener-
ally have external companions (Bryan et al. 2016), similar to
the close-in Super-Earths.
It is also possible that the material transported results in
a cascade of collisions (especially for planetesimals at and
around the resonance where the eccentricites are relatively
large). This could have the effect of grinding the material
down which then would migrate faster producing a ring of
dust or a recycled flux of pebbles that would affect subse-
quent planet formation by forming planetesimals via stream-
ing instability (Dr ˛ a ˙zkowska et al. 2016).
We defer a detailed anaylisis of these possibilities to a fu-
ture work and next discuss the implications of our mecha-
nism for exoplanet systems and the Solar System.
5.2.1. Implications to exo-planetary systems
Once we implement collisional evolution of planetesimals,
we could start making more specific predictions about the
correlation between inner planets and outer giants. For ex-
ample, the California Legacy Survey (Rosenthal et al. 2022)
found that this correlation breaks down if they consider outer
giants more massive than about 0.38 M Jand closer to the
star (0.3–3 au). Similar studies, including the Kepler Gi-
ant Planet Survey (Weiss et al. 2023) will shed light on the
various trends (if any) between the gas giant properties and
thoose of inner sub-Neptunes that will allow us to compare
with our models.
Eventually, we hope to have a more complete panorama
with observations from TESS and GAIA ( ∼100 systems
with super-Earths coexisting with outer Jovians with abso-
lute masses in the range 1−5au (Espinoza, Zhu & Petrovich
2023, in prep). Furthermore, with future observations from
JWST on atmospheric compositions, we could better deter-
mine where the material that forms the inner planets came
from (as the planetesimal composition varies with its posi-
tion relative to the icelines), providing us again with more
constraints for our model.
5.2.2. Implications to the Solar System
This mechanism is also relevant for the Solar System as it
also has cold giant planets. Our results indicate that, during
the gas disk depletion, Jupiter would have transported copi-
ous amounts of solid material as it falls within the transported
mass peak observed in Fig. 8 (albeit, somewhat to the lower
end of the peak). However, we have further checked that ac-
counting for the effects of a second giant planet (i.e. Saturn),
puts a constraint on the minimum value the precession rate
of Jupiter’s orbit can have (see Fig. 2), reducing the range of
sweeping for the secular resonance, which reduces the trans-
ported mass.
We plan on expanding our analysis by including the effects
of a second giant planet in a future paper. This kind of sim-ulation has already been performed by Bromley & Kenyon
(2017) to explain the low mass of Mars and the asteroid belt
by focusing on the depletion of material that is swept by the
secular resonance. This work, however, makes few remarks
on the material that is swept to the inner regions. In our work
we also see this effect of depletion left behind after the sec-
ular resonance has swept. Nonetheless, we care more about
the accumulation of material at and interior to the resonance
position.
There is an alternative besides the possibility of this trans-
ported solid material forming planets. The planetesimals mi-
grating inwards away from Jupiter into the inner region of
the disk could have plowed through earlier formed planets in
our Solar System, which could be an explanation of why we
do not have a multi-planet compact system of super-Earths as
many of the other exoplanetary systems do. This plowing of
material moved by Jupiter is very similar to the one described
in the Grand Tack model (Batygin & Laughlin 2015), but
without fine tuned positions and migration histories of Jupiter
and Saturn. Also this effect may still work after considering
collisional evolution unlike Batygin & Laughlin (2015) (see
Deienno et al. (2022)).
5.3. Caveats
We now discuss some of our model assumptions and
caveats and how we expect these to impact our results.
5.3.1. Planetary migration
Throughout our work, we ignored the potential effects of
planetary migration, which, in principle, could be induced
by interactions with the gas (Goldreich & Tremaine 1980;
Lin & Papaloizou 1986). Within the framework of our orbit-
averaged model, planetary migration could introduce a time
dependence for the position of the secular resonance. In or-
der to test this effect, we repeated the fiducial case simu-
lation by forcing the Jovian to migrate from 5 au to 3 au
exponentially with various migration timescales defined as
τa≡ |˙aJ/aJ|−1. The gap produced by the giant planet is also
evolved accordingly following the prescription described in
Section 2.1.3. Our results are presented in Fig. 11, where we
plot the time evolution of the fraction of transported mass for
different values of τa. Fig. 11 shows that, when compared
with the fiducial simulation with fixed ap(i.e.,τa= 0), the
fraction of transported mass in planetesimals is very similar,
irrespective of the migration timescale: the only difference
being a delay in the onset of transported material of about
0.1 Myrs.
We also tested the effect that the planetary migration alone
can have considering only the gravitational effects of the
planet, i.e., without considering the precession induced by
the disk. In this case, the efficiency for transport remains
very low, comparable to the fiducial case without disk grav-
ity (as shown in Fig. 5). This further highlights the role of
the disk gravity in our proposed mechanism.
The above discussion is based on the secular dynamics of
the system. In principle, there can be some material trapped
in mean motion resonances (MMRs) – which, we remind,14 M. B EST, A. S EFILIAN , & C. P ETROVICH
Figure 11. Fraction of transported mass in planetesimals as a func-
tion of time in systems that are identical to our fiducial model, ex-
cept in that they assume a migrating giant planet. Different colours
correspond to different migration timescales, as indicated in the leg-
end. For further details, see Section 5.3.1.
were ignored in this work (Section 5.3.4)– and which would
migrate along with the planet. These planetesimals would
have their eccentricities resonantly excited as a result of an
adiabatic resonance capture (Murray & Dermott (2000)), re-
gardless of the secular resonance. Considering the m:m-1
internal MMRs with the planet (with m≥2), the migration
from aJ,iandaJ,fleads to an eccentricity excitation of the
planetesimal given by (Murray & Dermott 2000):
ep≃vuut2
m−1"aJ,i
aJ,f1/2
−1#
, (31)
where the planetesimal started from a circular orbit. This
would be the maximum reachable eccentricity as it assumes
that the capture occurred exactly when the migration started
ataJ=aJ,i, while in reality most planetesimals will be
swept at a later stage in the course of the Jovian’s migration.
For 2:1 and 3:2 MMRs, Eq. 31 implies a maximum eccen-
tricity of ∼0.7and∼0.5, respectively. Plugging these val-
ues into Equations (11) and (12), we then estimate that these
planetesimals would spiral in due to drag down to ∼1.2au
and∼1.8au for 2:1 and 3:2 MMRs, respectively. Accord-
ingly, this process could bring some new material to the in-
ner region which is not being considered in our simulations
as presented in Section 3. Therefore, the coupled effects of
MMRs and a migrating planet, could enhance the fraction of
transported material, but this would still be dominated by the
planetesimals that are migrating due to the secular resonance.
This is simply because the secular resonance travels further
in, close to 0.2 au, transporting more material.5.3.2. Jovian’s growth
A more realistic simulation would have the Jovian begin
as a core and undergo runaway accretion. The timescale for
the formation of the core is a few Myrs (Pollack et al. 1996;
Guilera et al. 2020). During this time, the resonance will
remain close to the planet so no sweeping will take place.
On the other hand, the runaway accretion is too quick ( ∼
105yrs) for the system to react, so the planetesimals just align
themselves with the Jovian once it stops growing. We have
checked that including the Jovian’s growth in our simulations
is equivalent to starting with a partially depleted disk.
5.3.3. Outside the giant planet
In our study, we focused on the inner region of the disk,
ignoring the outer region, because of the correlation seen be-
tween giant cold planets and inner super-Earths. However,
there could also be a traveling secular resonance and an ac-
cumulation of material in the outer region that could create
a second giant planet external to the first one as explored in
Guo & Kokubo (2021). This could work together with the
dust traps that are known to be created at the edges of gi-
ant planets (Eriksson et al. 2022) to form planetesimals and
subsequently a second planet outside.
5.3.4. Beyond the Lagrange-Laplace approximation: MMRs and
higher-order terms
We have neglected the effect of higher-order terms in ec-
centricity ( O[e4]), and all terms which included inclinations.
In general, the eccentricity rarely increases above ≃0.3and
it only does so at early times when the resonance is clos-
est to the planet (e.g., panel A1 of Fig. 3). Furthermore,
this eccentricity is already large enough to promote migra-
tion of the larger planetesimals. Thus, the Laplace-Lagrange
(LL) approximation is often a reasonably good approxima-
tion. Adding small inclinations (up to second order) would
effectively replicate the effect from the eccentricities as it en-
ters in the gas drag with a similar dependence (Eq. (11) -
(12)) (Adachi et al. 1976), while remaining decoupled from
the eccentricities in the LL approximation.
We have to keep in mind, that as the eccentricity of the
planetesimals increase substantially near the secular reso-
nance, it may be different at this position, which would af-
fect our condition for transport. As seen in Guo & Kokubo
(2021, 2023), planetesimals in regions close to an MMR do
not align well in eccentricity nor apsidal angle. So the other
resonances could actually grind down material closer to the
Jovian, which would then align better and migrate faster (be-
cause of its smaller size), so it could help with the transport
of material, or the material could get stuck in an MMR reso-
nance. For the fiducial distance chosen of 3 au, we avoid the
major MMRs when considering planetesimals interior to 1.5
au.
5.3.5. Other disk dispersal effects
We presented a very simple model for the evolution of
the gas disk. At the end of our simulations, although thePLANETESIMAL TRANSPORT 15
inner disk has been almost completely dispersed, we still
have a massive outer disk with Mout∼5MJ(initially 8M J),
which would need to be dissipated by other means like photo-
evaporation or winds once an inner cavity has been formed.
In this context, other dissipative effects which mainly affect
the inner or outer disk separately (e.g. external irradiation),
might have a significant effect on the evolution of the posi-
tion of the secular resonance. Indeed, as shown in Appendix
C the position and movement of the secular resonance de-
pend significantly on the masses of the inner and outer gas
disks.
5.4. Future work
In this work, we have assumed that planetesimals do not
interact with each other (neither gravitationally nor collision-
ally), even within regions of the disk with high surface den-
sities of solids. If we want to actually form the inner plan-
ets, it will be necessary to implement the collisions between
planetesimals and follow on the collisional outcome aided
by the relative velocity of the encounter, focusing mainly on
their evolution in size as they accumulate in the inner disk.
This will help to separate the cases where we could get super-
Earth formation inner to the Jovian’s orbit.
Also, throughout this paper we considered all planetesi-
mals to be in the same plane along with the giant planet and
the gas disk. A similar term to Eq. (11) can be added to ac-
count for inclinations in their evolution and we would need
to generalize the velocity dispersion to include inclinations.
On another note, as was already mentioned, the first Jo-
vian might help with the formation of a second giant planet
exterior to its orbit. In this sense, including a second Jovian
might be interesting, not least for applicability to the Solar
System.
6.CONCLUSION
In this work, we have studied the secular orbital dynamics
of planetesimals interior to a cold Jupiter (semi-major axes
≳3au) affected by the gravitational and drag forces from a
viscously-evolving gaseous disk.
We find that the planetesimals are efficiently transported
from∼1au to the inner regions ∼0.1−0.3au owing to the
sweeping of secular resonances and drag for a wide range
of disk and cold Jupiter parameters. As a result, most plan-
etesimals interior to the cold Jupiter end up in a high surface
density ring (density boosted by ∼1−2orders of magni-
tude) in these regions. In contrast, ignoring the disk gravity
yields only a modest fraction of transported mass (limited to
the smaller size planetesimals). Our main findings can be
summarized as follows:• The inward motion of the planetesimals is most promi-
nent for those which can remain ahead of the inwardly-
moving resonance. This favors smaller planetesimals
and sets a limit for the migration given by comparing
the timescales from the motion of the resonance and
the migration of planetesimals (condition given by Eq.
[23]).
• The transport efficiency peaks at cold Jupiter masses of
1−5MJupfor a wide range of disk viscosities. Below
this range, the transport efficiency decreases as the res-
onance only sweeps near the planet, while very mas-
sive Jovians start the sweeping already close to the star
so almost no material is transported.
• The planetesimals move inwards in size-segregated
rings with aligned eccentricity vectors, thus lowering
their, otherwise catastrophically large, velocity disper-
sion. Although the velocity dispersion remains large
near the peak in eccentricity, their values interior to the
resonance are lower compared to the simulations that
ignore the disk’s gravity.
These results point to the possibility of a region of the disk
well suited for planet formation. The amount of transported
material is so enhanced in some cases that it may even lead
to the formation of massive cores before the disk has dissi-
pated, triggering runaway accretion (possible formation path
for hot and warm Jupiters). Overall, our work establishes the
major role of the disk’s gravity in the redistribution of plan-
etesimals. Future work including the collisional evolution of
these stirred and size-segregated rings is needed to quantify
whether the formation of cores is indeed promoted.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
M.B. acknowledges additional support from the National
Agency for Research and Development (ANID) / Scholarship
Program / Doctorado Nacional grant 2021 - 21211921 and
CASSACA grant CCJRF2105. A.A.S. acknowledges sup-
port by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation through a
Humboldt Research Fellowship for postdoctoral researchers.
A.A.S. also thanks Jihad Touma and the America University
of Beirut, Lebanon, for hospitality during the early stages
of this work. C.P. acknowledges support from ANID Mil-
lennium Science Initiative-ICN12_009, CATA-Basal AFB-
170002, ANID BASAL project FB210003, FONDECYT
Regular grant 1210425, CASSACA grant CCJRF2105, and
ANID+REC Convocatoria Nacional subvencion a la instala-
cion en la Academia convocatoria 2020 PAI77200076.
APPENDIX
A.DISK EVOLUTION
Throughout our work, following the work of Guilera & Sándor (2017), we used a full implicit Crank-Nicholson method to
evolve the density profile, solving Eq. (4) considering zero torques at the boundaries. As an example, we show in Figure 12 the16 M. B EST, A. S EFILIAN , & C. P ETROVICH
Figure 12. Viscous evolution of the gaseous surface density for 10 Myr for our fiducial case (see Section 3.1). Main features are the inner region
depleting much faster than the outer disk due to viscosity ( αin= 10−3, αout= 10−4). We also see a transient behaviour at the beginning of
the simulation located at the boundary of the two regions which depends on the width of the viscosity transition.
evolution of the surface density for our fiducial two-alpha model (Table 1). We note the development of a peak in the density at
the location where the viscosity transition occurs (between αin= 10−3toαout= 10−4). This shape can be more pronounced
depending on the sharpness of the transition between the viscosities.4We have also checked that, regardless of the initial slope
in the inner disk, the slope of the distribution tends to converge to the same value of about γ= 0.5within the first 1 Myr. This
observation will become important for our calculations in Appendix C where we estimate the precession rate of the planetesimals.
B.MIGRATION TIMESCALE
To derive a lower limit for the migration timescale of planetesimals, we need to consider planetesimals at the peak of the
forced eccentricity, right at the secular resonance. To begin with, we note that planetesimal orbits exactly at the resonance are
perpendicularly aligned with the giant (Fig. 3). We thus set cos ∆ ϖ= 0in Equation (19) which accounts for perturbations due
to the gas drag and the Jovian, finding that the peak eccentricity epeak is given by:
dep
dt=ApJeJ−e2
p
τ0s
5
8+η2
e2p= 0 (B1)
Asη∼1
2h2∼10−4it is safe to assume that e2
pis bigger than η2, thus:
epeak=s
ApJeJτ0r
8
5. (B2)
Replacing Eq. (B2) into Eq. (11) gives us the migration timescale:
1
τmig=1
apdap
dt=2
τ0r
5
8e2
peak+η2
η+Γ
4+5
16
e2
peak
≈2
τ0r
5
8e2
peak
η+1
2e2
peak
. (B3)
Again, assuming, e2
pis bigger than η2we get
1
τmig=r
ApJeJ
τ0(ApJeJτ0+h2). (B4)
4Because no planetesimals go through the transition and the precession rate
of the giant planet depends much more on the amount of material outside
its orbit (because at its position, gas is severely depleted), this transition is
not relevant to our simulations.PLANETESIMAL TRANSPORT 17
Assuming a planetesimal density of 1 g/cm3andh2∼epeak, we get the following equation considering the parameters of the
fiducial case:
τres> τmig≈1
2τ−1/2
0 (ApJeJ)−3/2,
≈40MyrMc
1M⊙MJ
3MJup−3/2Σg
10g/cm21/2h
0.1−1/2s
100km−1/2aJ
3au6ap
0.25au−9/2eJ
0.05−3/2
.(B5)
where, we remind, sis the radius of the planetesimal.
C.RESONANCE LOCATION: APPROXIMATE TREATMENT
To understand how the resonance position aresdepends on the parameters of our simulations, we will approximate the two- α
disk model by two profiles with total masses of MinandMout, respectively and slope of γfor both disks. We also denote by rin
androutthe inner and outer edges of the gap carved by the planet, respectively. We assume that rcut, the cutoff radius for the
disk, is sufficiently far away from the gap ( rcut/rout≫1).
Let us first consider the giant planet. Since it opens a gap around its orbit, its apsidal precession rate ˙ϖJcan be computed
by accounting for the gravity of the inner and outer disks. Since the latter is more massive, i..e, Mout≫Min, it is expected
to dominate ˙ϖJ. Accordingly, we can employ the disturbing function due to the outer disk, with the latter being the dominant
(simply because ). Accordingly, we approximate ˙ϖJusing the disturbing function:
Rout=Zrcut
rout1
4a2
Jn2
J(2−γ)Moutr1−γ
r2
outMcaJ
r2
b(1)
3/2(aJ/r)du1
2e2
J+cst.
, (C6)
to arrive at (see e.g. Petrovich et al. 2019; Sefilian et al. 2021):
˙ϖJ=3nJ
4Mout
McaJ
rout3
B(γ, rout, rcut). (C7)
Here,Bis a correction term that accounts for approximating the Laplace coefficient b(1)
3/2(α)as≈3α; it is a weak function of the
ratiorcut/routand the surface density slope γ. For our fiducial parameters, we find that B ≈0.02.
Let us now consider a planetesimal embedded in the inner disk. Its orbit will undergo apsidal precession at a rate ˙ϖpdetermined
by the inner and outer disks, as well as the planet. We find that by and large, the contribution the planet dominates over that of
the outer disk, and so we neglect the effects of the latter in the following. Accordingly, we can write
˙ϖp=App+ApJeJ
epcos(ϖp−ϖJ)−Min
Mc
1−γ
2rin
apγ−2
npF(γ, rin), (C8)
which can be further simplified by noting that, at the resonance, the cosine of the apsidal angles is zero (Row C of Fig. 3). Here,
the factor Fis proportional to ξ(1 +η2), where ξis a normalization factor and η2is a correction for a finite disk; see appendix B
of Tamayo et al. (2015). For our fiducial parameters, we have F ≈ 3. Finally, taking the limit of ap/aJ≪1, we arrive at:
˙ϖp=3np
4MJ
Mcap
aJ3
−Min
Mc
1−γ
2rin
apγ−2
npF (C9)
A secular resonance occurs at the radial location where the precession rates of the planet and the planetesimals match, i.e.,
˙ϖp= ˙ϖJ, which yields the following relation:
3
4Mout
McaJ
rout3
nJB=3
4MJ
Mcares
aJ3
np−Min
Mc
1−γ
2rin
aresγ−2
npF (C10)
Assuming that the gap around the planet is of similar width on either side of the orbit such that ∆ = aJ/rout≈rin/aJ, and
noting that np/nJ= (ares/aJ)−3/2, Equation (C10) can be simplified to read:
Mout∆3B="
MJares
aJ3
−(4−2γ)∆γ−2ares
aJ2−γ
Min#ares
aJ−3/2
, (C11)18 M. B EST, A. S EFILIAN , & C. P ETROVICH
In Fig. 12, we can see that the slope of the surface density becomes shallower as time goes on. When the slope approaches
γ= 0.5at late times, Equation (C11) is easy to solve, which yields:
ares
aJ3/2
=0.02Mout∆3+ 3Min∆−3/2
MJ. (C12)
We note that a better approximation of the position of the resonance can be obtained if we account for the exact surface density
of the inner disk (rather than approximating it as a simple power-law). Indeed, at around r≈1−1.5au, the index γincreases
due to the giant planet’s gap, and in the range ≈0.1−0.2au,γbecomes negative as the slope inverts (see Fig. 3). Additionally,
we can use the approximation for the gap width in Eq. (7) from Kanagawa et al. (2016) to define a more accurate value for ∆,
such that:
∆ = 1 −∆gap
2aJ≈0.85. (C13)
This completes our derivation of an approximate expression for ares.
REFERENCES
Adachi, I., Hayashi, C., & Nakazawa, K. 1976, Progress of
Theoretical Physics, 56, 1756, doi: 10.1143/PTP.56.1756
Armitage, P. J. 2022, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2201.07262,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2201.07262
Batygin, K., Bodenheimer, P. H., & Laughlin, G. P. 2016, ApJ,
829, 114, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/829/2/114
Batygin, K., & Laughlin, G. 2015, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science, 112, 4214, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1423252112
Bitsch, B., & Izidoro, A. 2023, A&A, 674, A178,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202245040
Boley, A. C., Granados Contreras, A. P., & Gladman, B. 2016,
ApJL, 817, L17, doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/817/2/L17
Bonomo, A. S., Dumusque, X., Massa, A., et al. 2023, A&A, 677,
A33, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346211
Bromley, B. C., & Kenyon, S. J. 2017, AJ, 153, 216,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa6aaa
Bryan, M. L., Knutson, H. A., Lee, E. J., et al. 2019, The
Astronomical Journal, 157, 52, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aaf57f
Bryan, M. L., Knutson, H. A., Howard, A. W., et al. 2016, ApJ,
821, 89, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/821/2/89
Chiang, E., & Laughlin, G. 2013, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 431, 3444–3455,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt424
Davydenkova, I., & Rafikov, R. R. 2018, ApJ, 864, 74,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aad3ba
Deienno, R., Izidoro, A., Morbidelli, A., Nesvorný, D., & Bottke,
W. F. 2022, ApJL, 936, L24, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac865c
Dr ˛ a˙zkowska, J., Alibert, Y ., & Moore, B. 2016, A&A, 594, A105,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201628983
Duffell, P. C. 2020, The Astrophysical Journal, 889, 16,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab5b0fDuffell, P. C., & Chiang, E. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 812,
94, doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/812/2/94
Eriksson, L. E. J., Ronnet, T., Johansen, A., et al. 2022, A&A, 661,
A73, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202142391
Fulton, B. J., Rosenthal, L. J., Hirsch, L. A., et al. 2021, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 255, 14,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/abfcc1
Gammie, C. F. 1996, ApJ, 457, 355, doi: 10.1086/176735
Goldreich, P., & Tremaine, S. 1980, ApJ, 241, 425,
doi: 10.1086/158356
Gong, M., Zheng, X., Lin, D. N. C., et al. 2019, ApJ, 883, 164,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab3e70
Guilera, O. M., & Sándor, Z. 2017, A&A, 604, A10,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201629843
Guilera, O. M., Sándor, Z., Ronco, M. P., Venturini, J., & Miller
Bertolami, M. M. 2020, A&A, 642, A140,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038458
Guo, K., & Kokubo, E. 2021, The Astronomical Journal, 162, 115,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac0895
—. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2308.14347,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2308.14347
Hahn, J. M. 2003, The Astrophysical Journal, 595, 531–549,
doi: 10.1086/377195
Hahn, J. M., & Malhotra, R. 1999, The Astronomical Journal, 117,
3041, doi: 10.1086/300891
Heppenheimer, T. A. 1980, Icarus, 41, 76,
doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(80)90160-8
Izidoro, A., Bitsch, B., & Dasgupta, R. 2021, ApJ, 915, 62,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abfe0b
Izidoro, A., Raymond, S. N., Morbidelli, A., Hersant, F., &
Pierens, A. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 800, L22,
doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/800/2/l22PLANETESIMAL TRANSPORT 19
Johansen, A., & Lacerda, P. 2010, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.16309.x
Kanagawa, K. D., Muto, T., Tanaka, H., et al. 2016, PASJ, 68, 43,
doi: 10.1093/pasj/psw037
Kortenkamp, S. J., Wetherill, G. W., & Inaba, S. 2001, Science,
293, 1127, doi: 10.1126/science.1062391
Lambrechts, M., Johansen, A., & Morbidelli, A. 2014, A&A, 572,
A35, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201423814
Lee, E. J., & Chiang, E. 2016, ApJ, 817, 90,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/817/2/90
Lemaitre, A., & Dubru, P. 1991, Celestial Mechanics and
Dynamical Astronomy, 52, 57, doi: 10.1007/BF00048587
Lin, D. N. C., & Papaloizou, J. 1986, ApJ, 309, 846,
doi: 10.1086/164653
Morbidelli, A. 2020, A&A, 638, A1,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202037983
Murray, C. D., & Dermott, S. F. 2000, Solar System Dynamics
(Cambridge University Press)
Nagasawa, M., Lin, D. N. C., & Ida, S. 2003, ApJ, 586, 1374,
doi: 10.1086/367884
Nagasawa, M., Lin, D. N. C., & Thommes, E. 2005, The
Astrophysical Journal, 635, 578, doi: 10.1086/497386
Nagasawa, M., Tanaka, H., & Ida, S. 2000, AJ, 119, 1480,
doi: 10.1086/301246
Ormel, C. W., & Klahr, H. H. 2010, Astronomy and Astrophysics,
520, A43, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014903
Papaloizou, J. C. B., & Larwood, J. D. 2000, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 315, 823,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2000.03466.x
Petrovich, C., Wu, Y ., & Ali-Dib, M. 2019, AJ, 157, 5,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aaeed9
Pollack, J. B., Hubickyj, O., Bodenheimer, P., et al. 1996, Icarus,
124, 62, doi: 10.1006/icar.1996.0190
Pringle, J. E. 1981, ARA&A, 19, 137,
doi: 10.1146/annurev.aa.19.090181.001033
Rafikov, R. R., & Silsbee, K. 2015a, ApJ, 798, 69,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/798/2/69—. 2015b, ApJ, 798, 70, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/798/2/70
Raymond, S. N., & Cossou, C. 2014, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society: Letters, 440, L11–L15,
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slu011
Rosenthal, L. J., Knutson, H. A., Chachan, Y ., et al. 2022, ApJS,
262, 1, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac7230
Schlecker, M., Mordasini, C., Emsenhuber, A., et al. 2021, A&A,
656, A71, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038554
Sefilian, A. A., & Rafikov, R. R. 2019, MNRAS, 489, 4176,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2412
Sefilian, A. A., Rafikov, R. R., & Wyatt, M. C. 2021, ApJ, 910, 13,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abda46
Silsbee, K., & Rafikov, R. R. 2021, A&A, 652, A104,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202141139
Stewart, S. T., & Leinhardt, Z. M. 2009, ApJL, 691, L133,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/691/2/L133
Tamayo, D., Triaud, A. H. M. J., Menou, K., & Rein, H. 2015,
ApJ, 805, 100, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/805/2/100
Toliou, A., Tsiganis, K., & Tsirvoulis, G. 2019, Celestial
Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 132, 1,
doi: 10.1007/s10569-019-9942-0
Ward, W. R. 1981a, Icarus, 47, 234,
doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(81)90169-X
—. 1981b, Icarus, 47, 234, doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(81)90169-X
Weiss, L. M., Isaacson, H., Marcy, G. W., et al. 2023, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2304.00071, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2304.00071
Zheng, X., Lin, D. N. C., & Kouwenhoven, M. B. N. 2017a, ApJ,
836, 207, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/836/2/207
Zheng, X., Lin, D. N. C., Kouwenhoven, M. B. N., Mao, S., &
Zhang, X. 2017b, ApJ, 849, 98, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa8ef3
Zhu, W., Petrovich, C., Wu, Y ., Dong, S., & Xie, J. 2018, ApJ, 860,
101, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aac6d5
Zhu, W., & Wu, Y . 2018, The Astronomical Journal, 156, 92,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aad22a