Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–??(2016) Printed 6 December 2023 (MN L ATEX style file v2.2)
How to form compact & other longer-lived planet-induced vortices:
VSI, planet migration, or re-triggers, but not feedback
Michael Hammer1⋆, Min-Kai Lin1,2
1Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Academia Sinica, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
2Physics Division, National Center for Theoretical Sciences, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ
ABSTRACT
Past computational studies of planet-induced vortices have shown that the dust asymmetries
associated with these vortices can be long-lived enough that they should be much more com-
mon in mm/sub-mm observations of protoplanetary discs, even though they are quite rare.
Observed asymmetries also have a range of azimuthal extents from compact to elongated
even though computational studies have shown planet-induced vortices should be preferen-
tially elongated. In this study, we use 2-D and 3-D hydrodynamic simulations to test whether
those dust asymmetries should really be so long-lived or so elongated. With higher resolution
(29 cells radially per scale height) than our previous work, we find that vortices can be more
compact by developing compact cores when higher-mass planets cause them to re-form, or
if they are seeded by tiny compact vortices from the vertical shear instability (VSI), but not
through dust feedback in 3-D as was previously expected in general. Any case with a compact
vortex or core(s) also has a longer lifetime. Even elongated vortices can have longer lifetimes
with higher-mass planets or if the associated planet is allowed to migrate, the latter of which
can cause the dust asymmetry to stop decaying as the planet migrates away from the vortex.
These longer dust asymmetry lifetimes are even more inconsistent with observations, perhaps
suggesting that discs still have an intermediate amount of effective viscosity.
Key words: transition discs – instability, hydrodynamics, methods:numerical, protoplanetary
discs
1 INTRODUCTION
Even before there were any well-resolved observations of proto-
planetary discs, it was already known that the Rossby Wave in-
stability (RWI) could generate a long-lived vortex (Li et al. 2000,
2001) capable of trapping dust (Barge & Sommeria 1995) located
in the immediate vicinity of a radial pressure bump in the disc
(Lovelace et al. 1999). The activation of the Atacama Large Mil-
limeter Array (ALMA) in 2011 quickly seemed to confirm that
such vortices could actually occur in protoplanetary discs with the
discovery of a large-scale asymmetric dust trap as the only promi-
nent mm-dust feature in the disc around Oph IRS 48 (van der Marel
et al. 2013).
There are various ways to create such dust asymmetries in pro-
toplanetary discs. The mechanism that has been studied the most
in-depth is gap-opening planets. More specifically, a planet in a
low-viscosity disc can generate a vortex through the RWI at one or
both of the pressure bumps that arise as the planet opens up a gap
(e.g. Koller et al. 2003; Li et al. 2005; de Val-Borro et al. 2007;
Lin & Papaloizou 2010; Lin 2014). In discs with very low viscos-
⋆E-mail: mhammer@email.arizona.eduity, it has been shown that the dust asymmetries corresponding to
planet-induced vortices can be very long-lived, including for a wide
range of low-mass planets, very high-mass planets more massive
than Jupiter, and in thicker regions of a disc with high aspect ratios
regardless of the planet mass (Fu et al. 2014; Hammer et al. 2021).
Despite that expected longevity, ALMA observations have found
that dust asymmetries in protoplanetary discs are quite rare (van
der Marel et al. 2021). Various mechanisms for shortening vortex
lifetimes have been suggested; however, the requirements for these
mechanisms to take effect may either limit their applicability to a
narrow range of conditions or even prevent them from having any
effect at all (see Section 8.2 for an in-depth discussion). As such, it
remains an open question as to why there are so few dust asymme-
tries in observations of protoplanetary discs.
Beyond the low occurrence rate, another characteristic of the
population of dust asymmetries is the wide degree to which their
appearances can vary. They can be very compact like the origi-
nal dust asymmetry in Oph IRS 48 or the two dust asymmetries in
MWC 758 (Boehler et al. 2018). They can also be more elongated
like in HD 135344 B (van der Marel et al. 2016; Cazzoletti et al.
2018) or HD 142527 (Boehler et al. 2017, 2021). These varying
appearances may suggest that at least a few, if not many of these
© 2016 RASarXiv:2304.01674v2  [astro-ph.EP]  5 Dec 20232 Hammer & Lin
features are not planet-induced vortices, or possibly not even vor-
tices at all. Computational studies on planet-induced vortices that
took into account the planet’s growth have shown that these vor-
tices should preferentially be elongated, in terms of the vortex’s
azimuthal extent in both the gas and dust (Hammer et al. 2017,
2019). This finding was a big departure from previous work that
found planet-induced vortices to be compact when the introduction
of the planet was not self-consistent with the evolution of the gap
(e.g. Fu et al. 2014). The difference between elongated and compact
vortices is not just their azimuthal extent, but also their minimum
Rossby number being less negative or more negative respectively
than the critical value of Ro = −0.15(Surville & Barge 2015;
Hammer et al. 2021), where Rois the normalized local vorticity.
Since actual observed asymmetries are not necessarily elongated,
it remains of interest to see if planet-induced vortices can still be
compact even if the planet’s growth is taken into account.
In this work, we seek to improve on our previous studies by
using a more realistic planetary accretion scheme and by incorpo-
rating several different physical effects into our simulations that we
had previously neglected. Our two primary goals are to see if such
effects may shorten dust asymmetry lifetimes to be more consistent
with observations or if they can produce vortices that are more com-
pact like what happens when the planet’s growth is neglected. The
effects we add separately are letting the planet migrate, the feed-
back of the dust on the gas, and extending the simulations from 2-D
to 3-D – which at high resolution allows the vertical shear instabil-
ity (VSI) to manifest (Nelson et al. 2013; Flores-Rivera et al. 2020).
The VSI naturally occurs because of the expected radial tempera-
ture gradient in protoplanetary discs, which in turn results in verti-
cal shear. We also improve the planet’s accretion scheme compared
to our previous work (Hammer et al. 2021, hereafter H21) and have
the planet grow to a range of different masses by varying the disc
mass in our parameter studies instead of the planet’s dimensionless
accretion rate. Lastly, we conduct our simulations at higher resolu-
tion than before.
Each of these effects has significant potential to affect the evo-
lution, properties, and lifetimes of the resulting planet-induced vor-
tices. Planet migration can drastically alter the gap structure in low-
viscosity discs in particular where gap-opening planets are capable
of leaving the outer edge of the gap behind as they migrate inwards
(Lega et al. 2021; Kanagawa et al. 2021). Meanwhile, 3-D simu-
lations have been shown to be able to counteract the major effects
of dust feedback (Lyra et al. 2018) that would otherwise greatly
shorten vortex lifetimes in 2-D (Fu et al. 2014), and they may do
the same to stop cooling from killing the vortex as well (Rometsch
et al. 2021). The VSI can generate tiny vortices of its own (Richard
et al. 2016; Pfeil & Klahr 2019; Manger et al. 2020) that may even
grow to large-scale (Manger & Klahr 2018). It is unclear how any of
these effects will affect planet-induced vortices, particularly when
incorporating the planet’s growth time.
We organize the paper as follows: In Section 2, we describe the
setups for our 2-D and 3-D hydrodynamical simulations in which
we incorporate both the gas and dust components of the discs, and
also outline the different parameter studies. In Section 3, we present
the results from our high-resolution 2-D simulations, including the
dependence of dust asymmetry lifetimes on disc mass and planet
mass, and the dust morphology of the vortex in simulations and
synthetic images. In Section 4, we discuss the effects of migration.
In Section 5, we present our results from our 3-D simulations, both
at low resolution with a comparison to low-resolution 2-D, and later
at high resolution featuring the VSI. In Section 6, we present our
results with dust feedback. In Section 7, we show the synthetic im-ages calculated from our simulations. In Section 8, we discuss the
answers to our two main questions in connection to observational
implications and applicable observed discs. In Section 9, we con-
clude our results.
2 METHODS
We use the FARGO3D hydrodynamic code (Ben ´ıtez-Llambay &
Masset 2016; Ben ´ıtez-Llambay et al. 2019) to run 2-D and 3-D
simulations of a planetary core that interacts with the protoplane-
tary disc in which it is embedded by carving out a gap and accreting
gas from its surroundings. Every simulation includes both a gas and
a dust component, the latter of which is used to assess how the disc
appears in observations of mm-sized dust and to determine vortex
lifetimes.
2.1 Hydrodynamic code
2.1.1 2-D Two-Fluid Hydrodynamics
FARGO3D (Ben ´ıtez-Llambay & Masset 2016) is a 3-D magneto-
hydrodynamic grid-based code. Like its predecessor FARGO (Mas-
set 2000), one of its main functions is to conduct global simulations
of protoplanetary discs. These codes speed up computational time
by subtracting out the average azimuthal velocity when using the
Courant-Friedrich-Levy (CFL) condition to calculate the timestep.
This method, known as the FARGO (Fast Advection in Rotating
Gaseous Objects) algorithm, makes the code well-suited for simu-
lating various types of discs.
We begin our study with 2-D hydrodynamic simulations. In
these simulations, FARGO3D solves the Navier-Stokes equations
in cylindrical polar coordinates ( r,ϕ), namely the continuity equa-
tion and the momentum equations. The gas continuity equation is
∂Σ
∂t+⃗∇ ·(Σ⃗ v) = 0 , (1)
where Σis the surface density, ⃗ vis the velocity vector, and tis
time. The momentum equations are
Σ∂⃗ v
∂t+⃗ v·⃗∇⃗ v
=−⃗∇P−Σ⃗∇Φ +⃗∇ ·↔
T (2)
−Σ[2⃗Ωf×⃗ v+⃗Ωf× ⃗Ωf×⃗ r
+˙⃗Ωf×⃗ r]
where Pis the pressure, Φis the gravitational potential, ⃗Ωfis the
angular frequency vector of the reference frame, and Tis the stress
tensor. The gravitational potential Φ = Φ ⋆+ Φ p+ Φ icomprises
the star’s potential, the planet’s potential, and the indirect poten-
tial arising from the non-inertial reference frame. The stress tensor
itself is defined as
↔
T= Σνh
⃗ v+ (Σ⃗ v)T−2
3(⃗∇ ·⃗ v)⃗Ii
, (3)
where νis the kinematic viscosity of the disk and ⃗Iis the iden-
tity tensor. For simplicity, we use a locally isothermal setup to
avoid needing to solve an energy equation. Neglecting cooling in
this manner may be acceptable for the outer disc where cooling
times are faster, and which is also the region where asymmetric
features have been observed (van der Marel et al. 2021). Assuming
fast cooling times is also optimal for the few 3-D simulations we
present with the VSI, which would otherwise be easily suppressed
by slower cooling times (Lin & Youdin 2015; Manger et al. 2020).
The dust is implemented as a fluid in a similar manner to the
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 3
gas, as is appropriate for small dust grains. It does behave differ-
ently, however, because it does not experience pressure or viscous
stress in the momentum equation. Unlike the gas, it does addition-
ally experience radial and azimuthal drag forces resulting from the
dust being coupled to the gas as well as turbulence from the gas
viscosity that leads to diffusion. The drag forces added to the mo-
mentum equation are defined as
∂vr,d
∂t
drag=−vr,d−vr
ts, (4)
∂vϕ,d
∂t
drag=−vϕ,d−vϕ
ts, (5)
where vrandvθare the radial and azimuthal velocity components
andvdandvare the dust and gas components respectively. Since
we focus on grains that around millimeter-sized, the stopping time
falls in the Epstein regime (Weidenschilling 1977) and is defined in
the midplane as
ts=St
Ω=π
2ρds
Σ1
Ω, (6)
where ρdis the physical density of each dust grain, which we take
to be 1 g / cm3, and sis the size of each grain. The dimensionless
form of the stopping time is the Stokes number St, which is nor-
malized to the orbital frequency Ω. The dust diffusion is added to
the continuity equation and defined as
∂Σd
∂t
diff=∇ ·
DΣtot∇Σd
Σtot
, (7)
where Σdis the dust surface density, Σtot= Σ + Σ dis the to-
tal surface density, the diffusion coefficient is D=ˆDr2
pΩpand
ˆD≈ˆνsince the dust grains in this study are small enough such
that St ≪1(Youdin & Lithwick 2007). With the low viscosity
in our study, however, dust diffusion has little to no effect on our
simulations.
Lastly, in some of our simulations, we also incorporate the
feedback of the dust on the gas. This feedback is added to the mo-
mentum equations and defined as:
∂⃗ v
∂t
feedback=−ϵ
ts
⃗ v−⃗ vd
, (8)
where ϵ= Σ d/Σis the dust-to-gas ratio.
2.1.2 3-D Two-Fluid Hydrodynamics
We extend our simulations from 2-D to 3-D using spherical polar
coordinates ( r,ϕ,θ). The Navier-Stokes equations for these sim-
ulations are largely the same in 3-D as in 2-D. The only key dif-
ferences are that the 2-D surface density Σis replaced by the 3-D
spatial density ρand the velocities ⃗ vinclude a vertical component
vθ. The vertically-integrated 2-D pressure Pis also replaced in 3-D
by the actual pressure.
When plotting the 2-D surface density from the 3-D simula-
tions, we integrate the spatial density over the latitudinal direction
following Σ =R
dzρ. We note that this summation slightly un-
derestimates Σin the outer disc because the coordinates are not
perfectly cylindrical.
2.2 Planet setup
We initialize each simulation with a 0.05MJupplanetary core on
a circular orbit at r=rpaccreting material from a disc of gasand dust around a star with mass M⋆= 1. In our main parame-
ter studies, the planet is on a fixed orbit at rp= 1. The planet’s
mass is introduced over Tgrowth = 5 Tpfollowing mp(t) =
sin2(πt/2Tgrowth ). Its orbital period of Tp= 2πcorresponds to
its Keplerian angular frequency of Ωp=p
GM⋆/r3p= 1.
The planet is incorporated as a gravitational potential that fol-
lows
Φp(r, t) =−Gm p(t)p
(r−rp)2+r2s, (9)
where G= 1 is the gravitational constant, mp(t)is the planet’s
mass over time, rsis the planet’s smoothing length. The other terms
in the overall potential are the stellar potential Φ⋆(r) =−GM⋆/r
and the indirect potential between the star and the planet that is
given by Φi(r, t) =−Gm p(t) [r·rp]/r3
p.
2.2.1 Accretion scheme
We use the same general accretion scheme for the planet’s growth
as in our previous work (H21, where the scheme is described in
more detail) in which we remove mass from the disc in the vicin-
ity of the planet at each timestep and add it to the planet’s mass.
Rather than varying the dimensionless accretion rate, we simulate
different planet masses by using a range of disc masses as the main
variable in our parameter studies. We note that the primary goal of
our accretion scheme is to simulate a wide range of planet masses
in a manner where the gap structure and planet growth develop self-
consistently, and not to properly resolve the accretion process. Ul-
timately, we explore a similar range of final planet masses to our
last study from about 0.1MJupto1.5MJup.
Our accretion scheme is based on the one used in Kley (1999)
that was implemented for the original FARGO code (although see
Bergez-Casalou et al. (2020, 2022) for a more detailed implemen-
tation). In this scheme, we remove a fraction of mass fafter each
timestep from any cell within a distance of Kfrom the planet. The
operation we perform in each cell is
Σij→(1−f)Σijin 2-D, and (10)
ρijk→(1−f)ρijkin 3-D, (11)
where i,j, andkare indices for the simulation domain. The amount
of mass δmcorresponding to that reduced density,
δmij=fΣij×dAijin 2-D, and (12)
δmij=fρijk×dVijkin 3-D, (13)
is added to the planet, where dAis the cell area, dVis the cell vol-
ume, and the fraction fis set to be f=A×Ωpdt. The parameter
Ais the dimensionless accretion rate and the parameter Kis the ac-
cretion radius. The inclusion of the timestep allows the fraction of
accreted mass Ato be effectively removed from the disc over a time
δt= 1 rather than instantaneously, which also gives the disc time
to fill the accretion zone where mass is being removed with more
mass. One key difference compared to that implementation and
our previous work is that we only use one accretion zone instead
of two with different accretion parameters. Although we suspect
at least part of the reason two zones were originally used in Kley
(1999) to smooth the transition between the regions where material
is or is not removed, we do not expect that to be necessary because
the fraction fis not removed instantaneously.
We choose the fixed parameters to be K= 0.6RHand
A= 0.4, which with the base surface density Σbasecorresponds to
an accretion rate of a little more than 10−4MJupper orbit over the
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??4 Hammer & Lin
first 1000 orbits. The accretion radius is larger than the expected
value of about 0.25RHfrom Lissauer et al. (2009) because we
wanted to use the same Kin all of our simulations and the latter
value is small enough to prevent the planet from accreting any ma-
terial at all in our low-resolution parameter studies. Meanwhile, the
value of Ais chosen to closely match the planet’s growth track in
our high-resolution simulation with the VSI, which uses the proper
accretion radius of K= 0.25RH. We discuss these choices in
more detail in Appendix A.
2.3 Disc setup
2.3.1 2-D setup
The gas disc starts out with a smooth power-law radial surface den-
sity profile following Σ = Σ 0(r/rp)−1, where Σ0is the main
variable in our parameter studies. We choose the disc to have a
flat aspect ratio of h≡H/r = 0.06, where His the gas scale
height, to avoid the possibility of our results depending on the lo-
cal aspect ratio. The dust density follows an identical profile to the
gas except with the surface density reduced to Σ0,dust= 0.01 Σ 0.
This level of dust, however, has no effect on the gas except in the
few simulations with dust feedback and only has a minor impact
on the planet’s growth. The size of the dust grains is St = 0 .023
to match what we used in H21. The disc extends across a do-
main of r∈[0.4,2.5]rpin radius and a full 2πin azimuth
ϕ. In our main 2-D parameter study, this domain is resolved by
Nr×Nϕ= 1024 ×2048 grid cells with arithmetic spacing in r
and uniform spacing in ϕ. The radial resolution with an aspect ratio
ofh= 0.06resolves a disc scale height Hatr= 1 by 29 grid
cells, almost twice as many as the 16-grid-cell resolution used in
H21. The azimuthal resolution is a bit lower at a little less than 20
grid cells per scale height.
Like all of our previous works, we use wave-killing zones,
also called evanescent or Stockholm boundary conditions (e.g. de
Val-Borro et al. 2006), at the inner edge ( 0.4rp< r < 0.5rp)
and at the outer edge ( 2.1rp< r < 2.5rp) of the domain. These
conditions weaken any waves that may arise by damping changes
to the density or velocity in these zones back towards the initial
values. We use a stronger damping timescale of τ= Ω−1/500at
the outer boundary compared to τ= Ω−1/3at the inner boundary.
As is already standard in the code, these timescales are reduced by
a parabolic ramp based on the distance a given location in the zone
is away from its respective boundary.
We neglect self-gravity since none of the discs in our study
are anywhere close to being massive enough to be affected by self-
gravity. Lovelace & Hohlfeld (2013) showed analytically that the
RWI can be damped by self-gravity if Q <(π/2)(H/r)−1in discs
with a uniform background density, where Q=csΩ/πGΣis the
Toomre Q (Toomre 1964). Although our most massive simulations
can get close to if not reach that critical analytic value at the loca-
tion of the vortex in our simulations, our previous tests had shown
that value to be an overestimate in actual simulations with a planet
and a non-uniform background profile (Hammer et al. 2021).
2.3.2 3-D setup
We lower the resolution in the midplane for our 3-D simulations so
that it is still feasible to simulate the disc evolution for thousands
of orbits. The domain for these simulations is extended into 3-D
through the colatitude θ∈[π−2.5h, π+ 2.5h]and is resolved
overall by Nr×Nϕ×Nθ= 256 ×256×32grid cells. This gridTable 1. 2-D and 3-D parameter study varying the disc mass. The final
masses Mpare in units of MJand are recorded at the end of the vortex
lifetime. The base density is Σbase= 1.157×10−4, indicated in bold .
Σ0/10−4/Σbase Mp[2-D] [2-D low] [3-D low]
5.787 5.0 0.91 1.19 1.47
4.629 4.0 0.77 0.94 1.13
3.472 3.0 0.65 0.71 0.80
2.315 2.0 0.51 0.50 0.51
1.736 1.5 0.42 0.39 0.40
1.157 1.0 0.29 0.28 0.26
.9259 0.8 0.21 0.23 0.20
.6944 0.6 0.17 0.17 0.17
.5787 0.5 0.15 0.15 0.15
.3472 0.3 0.10
resolves the radial direction with an aspect ratio of h= 0.06by 7.3
cells at r= 1, while the colatitude is resolved by 6.4 grid cells. For
comparison to 2-D, we also run a parameter study of low-resolution
simulations with the same resolution of Nr×Nϕ= 256 ×256in
the midplane.
Our 3-D simulations have slightly different initial conditions
than our 2-D simulations. We initialize the gas density to ρ(r, z) =
ρ0(r) exph
α
St(ϵ(z)−ϵ0)−1
2z2
H2i
, where α=ν/csHis the di-
mensionless alpha viscosity (Shakura & Sunyaev 1973). The dust-
to-gas ratio is ϵ(z) =ϵ0exp
−β
2αz2
H2
, where β=1
2St−1
1−
p
1−4St2
. These initial conditions follow those from Equations
19 through 22 in Lin (2021). We chose to use gas initial condi-
tions that depend on the dust for the 3-D simulations with feedback,
which we had issues running with initial conditions based on a sim-
ple hydrostatic equilibrium. Although the main motivation was to
address this issue in the cases with feedback, we used such initial
conditions for all of our 3-D simulations even though the major-
ity did not have feedback. These initial conditions are only slightly
different from the usual hydrostatic equilibrium, especially for the
gas. For that reason, we do not expect our results to have a strong
dependence on the precise initial conditions. We use fixed bound-
ary conditions in the vertical direction.
2.4 Suite of Simulations
2.4.1 Disc mass parameter study
We test the dependence of the lifetimes and morphologies of vor-
tices on different disc masses with nine different disc surface den-
sities presented in Table 1. These surface densities range from 0.3
to5.0 Σbase, where Σbase= 1.157×10−4. That base surface den-
sity corresponds to a total disc mass of 1.6MJupand a Toomre
Q= 165 atr=r0. It yields a planet that grows to 0.29MJup.
As such, the total disc masses cover a range of 0.5 to 8.0MJupand
correspond to a range of Toomre Q values from 550 to33at the
location of the planet. The planets in these discs reach masses of
0.10 to 0.91MJup.
2.4.2 2-D and 3-D low resolution parameter studies
For our 3-D parameter study, we run a 3-D set of simulations across
a similar range of disc masses, only removing the case with the
lowest surface density. To avoid comparing to 2-D only with dif-
ferent resolutions, we also run another 2-D set of simulations at the
same low resolution that we use in 3-D. The planet masses in both
low-resolution studies start at 0.15MJup, extending to 1.19MJup
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 5
Figure 1. Planet mass ( top panels ) and planet mass accretion rate ( bottom
panels ) as a function of time over a range of disc masses. A circle denotes
the start of the vortex lifetime; a hexagon denotes the end. The vortex life-
time is highlighted in bold. The start and end of the dust asymmetry lifetime
are marked on each side of the bold line with a circle and a hexagon respec-
tively. The accretion rates are measured as the increase in planet mass over
each orbit divided by one orbit.
in 2-D and to 1.47MJupin 3-D. The larger discrepancies for the
higher-mass cases are discussed in Appendix B.
3 DEPENDENCE ON DISC MASS
When the final planet masses are set by varying the disc mass,
we find that higher-mass planets (in higher-mass discs) generate
longer-lived dust asymmetries than lower-mass planets (in lower-
mass discs), as shown in Figure 2. We expect to see this largely-
monotonic trend at any resolution. High resolution in particular,
however, greatly augments the trend for higher-mass planets, facil-
itating them to re-trigger vortices that allow the dust asymmetries to
survive more than twice as long as those generated by lower-mass
planets, if they even decay at all. This is the complete opposite
outcome to what we found with a fixed disc mass in H21, which
instead resulted in the low-mass planets as the ones that could re-
trigger vortices and in turn generate longer-lived dust asymmetries.
Our results differ in this work because the higher resolution al-
lows our simulations to better resolve the RWI critical function, the
decay of the elongated vortices, and the flow of vorticity through
the vortex. As a result, the initial vortices decay and re-form much
earlier on compared to our previous work. And also unlike our pre-
vious work, the re-triggered vortices can develop compact cores.
To show the results for high-mass planets in particular, we high-
light the case with Σ0/Σbase= 3 as our featured simulation for
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
Planet Mass [Jupiter masses]0100020003000400050006000700080009000Lifetime [planet orbits]h=0.06
α=3×10−5Total Lifetimes of Dust Asymmetry
2-D
2-D w/ dust cutoff
2-D low res
3-D low-res
Figure 2. Total dust asymmetry lifetimes as a function of planet mass for
four different parameter studies. In our fiducial 2-D parameter study, the
lifetimes increase monotonically with planet mass until they become indef-
inite and survive past the end of a simulation, as indicated by an up arrow.
The lifetimes in the other three parameter studies – 2-D w/ a dust cutoff, 2-D
low-resolution, and 3-D low-resolution – follow a similar dependence, ex-
cept that the lifetimes do not become indefinite until a much higher planet
mass. Like in H21, the end of a dust asymmetry is indicated by when the
normalized azimuthal variance of the dust drops below 10% .
many of the figures, typically to present facets of the results that
were found across a range of simulations.
3.1 Background
Discs can become unstable to the non-axisymmetric Rossby Wave
instability if they develop a maximum in the radial profile of the
Rossby Wave instability critical function. In a locally isothermal
disc, this function is given in Lin (2012) as
Liso=c2
sΣ
ω, (14)
and represents the temperature-scaled inverse vortensity, that is, the
density Σdivided by the vorticity ω≡(⃗∇×⃗ v)z. A planet can cre-
ate a maximum in this function if it opens up a gap, one maximum
on each side of the gap. These maxima are located slightly offset
from the pressure bump at each gap edge. When incorporating the
planet’s growth, the initial dominant azimuthal mode of the RWI
that is triggered in an h= 0.06disc is typically m= 3, albeit
higher or lower-numbered modes are possible with higher or lower-
mass planets respectively. A mode myields mco-orbital vortices
that continue to grow until the vortices become large enough to in-
teract with each other. At that point, they then slowly merge into
fewer vortices until just one big vortex is left. These vortices are
typically elongated in shape with aspect ratios exceeding 20. Their
minimum Rossby number, the normalized local vorticity of the vor-
texRo≡ω/2Ω, has a low amplitude that falls in the Ro>−0.15
range expected for elongated vortices (Surville & Barge 2015),
just like the minimum Rossby number of the smaller vortices that
seeded it. Eventually, shocks from the planet’s spiral waves disrupt
that one big vortex – which we label as the “first-generation vortex”
– and cause it to spread into a ring in the gas.
After the first-generation vortex decays into a ring, the planet
may induce another vortex if it can create another maximum in the
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??6 Hammer & Lin
RWI critical function. Such a maximum arises due to shocks from
the planet’s spiral waves as part of the gap-opening process (Cimer-
man & Rafikov 2021, 2023). We found empirically in H21 that in
order for the planet to re-trigger a vortex, the separation between
the pressure bump and the maximum in the critical function must
stay less than three scale heights. That does not necessarily hap-
pen because the pressure bump migrates outward over time as the
planet opens up a gap, while the location where the maximum in
the critical function develops stays in roughly the same location
throughout the gap-opening process.1The pressure bump migrates
away from the planet faster for higher-mass planets. In our previous
work, the only planets that could re-trigger vortices were the lower-
mass ones. The higher-mass planets could not because by the time
the first-generation vortex decayed, the pressure bump had already
migrated too far away. After a later-generation vortex decays, the
planet can re-trigger another later-generation vortex as long as the
pressure bump is still close enough to the maximum in the crit-
ical function. Although the gas asymmetry decays and re-forms,
the dust asymmetry persists throughout and survives even beyond
when the final later-generation vortex decays.
3.2 New high-resolution vortex evolutionary track
With the higher resolution adopted in this work, we find that the
first-generation vortices only survive a few hundred orbits in the
gas for planets of any mass up to near that of Jupiter. That is about
five times shorter than the 1000 to 1500 orbits they lasted in our
previous work with lower resolution. Because those vortices are
much shorter-lived, however, the pressure bump is still close to the
location where the maximum in the critical function develops. As
a result, the planet is capable of re-triggering a vortex across this
entire range of planet masses, including the high-mass planets that
in our previous work could not.
Not only are the planets that can re-trigger vortices different,
but the morphology of the resulting re-triggered vortices can be
different as well. When a later-generation vortex forms, the over-
all vortex is still elongated. Within the vortex, though, the structure
can be more complex. The negative vorticity gas that accumulates
inside the gap just interior to the vortex and near the location of
the critical function maximum gets advected into the vortex and
begins to circulate along its perimeter, as shown in Figure 3 for
our featured simulation. This excess vorticity has a Rossby number
Ro<−0.15, in the more negative range expected for a compact
vortex. When this excess negative vorticity reaches the long exte-
rior side of the vortex, it detaches itself outwards from the overall
structure and forms a small compact vortex core with Ro<−0.15,
a “vortex-in-a-vortex”. Rather than settle at the center, this core
continues to circulate around in the interior of the bigger elongated
vortex.
Like the first-generation vortex, a second-generation vortex
and subsequent later-generation vortices only last a few hundred
orbits in the gas, or even less, as some do not even survive one hun-
dred or even fifty orbits. With such short lifetimes, planets are prone
to re-triggering more later-generation vortices within a few hundred
orbits after the previous one decays, as depicted in Figure 4. These
additional later-generation vortices may also form compact cores
in the same manner as the second-generation vortex. It is possible
for re-triggering to yield more than one compact core or none at
1There is no analytic expression for the location of this maximum, but it
could be estimated from Equation 40 of Cimerman & Rafikov (2021).all. The amount of time these compact cores survive varies. With
higher-mass planets, one or more compact cores typically outlive
the larger elongated vortex in which they were embedded. When a
new later-generation vortex arises, it can harbor both new compact
cores as well as those that remain from the previous generation,
typically just one such core, if any at all. If the dominant core from
a previous generation makes it to the next generation, it tends to
dissipate after a new core arises, but not right away.
Because the compact cores can greatly outlive the elongated
vortices in which they reside, they can greatly prolong the life-
time of the asymmetry signature in the vorticity. The final later-
generation vortex tends to decay at around t= 1500 Tpin the
gas surface density. In the vorticity, however, one or more com-
pact cores can still remain at this time. One by one, these cores get
sheared by shocks from the planet’s spiral waves and fade away.
The strongest core by vorticity lasts much longer than the others.
Although it only keeps its Rossby number in the compact range for
a few hundred orbits, the core is still clearly visible with a Rossby
number in the weaker elongated range for over a thousand orbits
and remnants can still be seen until about t= 4000 Tp, around
2500 orbits later. That lifetime of the vorticity signature of the last
compact core is also more than twice as long as the elongated vor-
tices survived in the gas from the start of the first to the end of the
last. With no vortex in the gas during this late stage, the evolution
of the compact cores in the vorticity play an even more dominant
role in governing the appearance of the dust asymmetry.
Even more important than extending the vorticity lifetime,
the compact cores also extend the lifetime of the dust asymme-
try, which survives long after the vorticity signature fades away.
Towards the beginning when the first-generation vortex first arises,
the dust has a very elongated extent typically between 90 to 180 de-
grees as it circulates around the vortex, as expected from our previ-
ous work. When the compact cores arise in the later-generation vor-
tices, the core slowly traps a significant clump of dust that follows
the circulating core even though the rest of the dust is still spread
across the vortex. When that core starts to disappear after the next-
generation vortex forms, the dust slowly moves to the new domi-
nant compact core. Towards the end after the final later-generation
vortex decays, the dust becomes very compact and is trapped in the
compact cores that remain.
Once each core’s Rossby number weakens into the elongated
range, its dust slowly becomes more spread out and no longer fol-
lows the compact shape of the core in its vorticity signature. But
because the dust began this phase of evolution as very compact, the
dust in the strongest core takes significantly longer to decay than
the dust signatures left over by elongated vortices from our previ-
ous work. Eventually, after the dust has already spread out around
the full 360◦ring, we find that it stops decaying altogether, but still
maintains a significant asymmetry in a steady state.
In Appendix C, we tested in various ways if this outcome
of an asymmetric steady state was unphysical. We found that the
dust asymmetries eventually decay if we cut off the dust supply to
the vortices. Even with this decay, the resulting lifetimes are still
among the longest in our study, as shown in Figure 2. With an un-
limited dust supply though, we could not find any way to refute our
finding that the steady state should still be asymmetric. With this
kind of a steady state, the dust asymmetry lifetimes are incompara-
bly longer than those in cases without compact cores.
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 7
Figure 3. High-cadence snapshots of the formation of a “vortex-in-a-vortex” showing the evolution of the gas density ( top panels ) and Rossby number ( bottom
panels ) in the presence of a super-thermal mass planet ( Mp= 0.65MJup) grown from a very massive disc with Σ0/Σbase= 3.0, the featured simulation.
Density contours (at Σ/Σ0= 0.8,0.9,1.0,etc.) are overlaid on the density panels. Column 1 : The elongated m= 1 vortex has just re-formed. At the front
end of the vortex in azimuth, the lower vorticity from the inner side of the vortex is beginning to advect towards the far side of the vortex. Column 2 : As the
lower vorticity reaches the far side of the vortex, it begins to partially detach from the rest of the vortex. Column 3 : As the lower vorticity partially detaches,
it forms a compact core. Column 4 : The core spirals in to the interior of the elongated vortex, forming a “vortex-within-a-vortex” while the larger elongated
vortex also remains intact.
3.2.1 Planet mass dependence
The evolutionary track described in the preceding part of this sec-
tion applies more for higher-mass planets ranging from a final mass
ofMp= 0.42MJupto0.77MJup(1.5⩽Σ0/Σbase⩽4).
These higher-mass planets are needed to generate compact cores
during the re-triggering process because those cores rely on the
gas just interior to the elongated vortex having a large amount of
negative vorticity. This gas interior to the vortex only has a very
negative vorticity if it is supplied through shocks from the planet’s
spiral waves. Only higher-mass planets have strong enough shocks
to generate a sufficient amount of negative vorticity. This pattern
can be gleaned from the Mp= 0.45MJupcase, which does not
develop any compact cores in its second-generation vortex but still
manages to produce a compact core by the final-generation vortex
when the planet is much more massive.
Not only can the lower-mass planets not generate sustained
compact cores, but the closer proximity of the pressure bump max-
imum to the location of the critical function maximum no longer
helps them re-trigger vortices in a way that can extend the over-
all lifetimes either. When the lower planet masses are the result
of lower disc masses, the planets carve out much deeper caps com-
pared to our previous work. The gap depletion competes against the
proximity between the two maxima, weakening the maximum inthe critical function enough so that these planets can only re-trigger
vortices early on just like the higher-mass planets. The lower-mass
planets may still be massive enough to form compact cores, but they
are not massive enough to sustain them. As a result, those cores are
weaker and too short-lived to sustain any asymmetry in the vortic-
ity or the dust much past the end of the last-generation gas vortex.
The lowest-mass planet we simulate does not trigger the RWI at
all, thereby setting Mp= 0.10MJup, as about the minimum re-
quired mass for a static planet in an h= 0.06disc to generate a
vortex. Overall, the vortices with short finite lifetimes from 1000 to
3000 orbits are generated by planets with low final masses between
Mp= 0.15MJupto0.29MJup(0.5⩽Σ0/Σbase⩽1.5). Their
short lifetimes are due to the gap being depleted and the compact
cores in re-triggered vortices either never forming or disappearing
too quickly.
The highest-mass planet we simulate that grows to Mp=
0.91MJupfrom Σ0/Σbase= 5 is the most different and does not
follow the standard evolutionary track. Much more simple than that
standard track, we find that the first elongated vortex survives indef-
initely in the gas and therefore does not lead to any later-generation
vortices or compact cores, nor does it need to survive that long. The
gas and dust are both in the process of decaying, but very slowly.
Although the vortex does appear elongated in both its azimuthal
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??8 Hammer & Lin
Figure 4. Low-cadence snapshots of the formation of the second and third-generation vortices, each with a “vortex-in-a-vortex”, showing the evolution of
the gas density ( top panels ), dust density ( middle panels ), and Rossby number ( bottom panels ) for the featured simulation. Density contours (at Σ/Σ0=
0.8,0.9,1.0,etc.) are overlaid on the density panels. Column 1 : The initial m= 1 vortex already decayed, leaving behind a ring in the gas while the
asymmetry persists in the dust. Column 2 : The elongated m= 1 vortex has been re-triggered. During this process, a compact “vortex-within-a-vortex” with
Ro<−0.15arose — see Figure 3 for how this compact core formed. Column 3 : Although the elongated vortex has again spread out into a ring in the gas, the
compact core is still intact. Column 4 : A third-generation elongated m= 1 vortex has formed, and the compact core from the previous vortex is still present.
extent and minimum Rossby number, it still has a more compact
structure. More specifically, it has much steeper density contours, a
big difference from usual elongated vortices in the other cases that
have a mostly flat density plateau across the nearly the entire vortex.
We suspect this structure is responsible for the vortex’s longevity.
3.2.2 Role of RWI critical function
With the higher resolution in this study, it is much clearer to see
the RWI critical function set up the conditions for generating all ofthe later-generation vortices. Right before each re-triggered vortex
arises, a new bump in the critical function appears, several exam-
ples of which are shown in Figure 5. When the same thing hap-
pened at lower resolution in H21, it was barely discernible in any
isolated snapshot of the radial profile and could only easily be seen
in a time evolution. The bumps were so difficult to discern that we
did not include an example for any of the h= 0.06cases and in-
stead resorted to displaying an h= 0.04case (see Figure 4 from
that work). In this work, however, it is straightforward to see the
bumps grow before each re-triggering, as would be expected from
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 9
Figure 5. For the featured simulation, the RWI critical function Liso(solid
lines ) and the associated pressure bump locations ( dashed lines ) over time,
in particular when the initial vortex is triggered ( thin black line ) and when
the later-generation vortices are triggered ( thick coloured lines ). Compared
to the lower-resolution studies in H21, the new spikes in Lisointerior to
the pressure bump that result in the later-generation vortices are much more
prominent.
Figure 6. With a low-mass planet, the RWI critical function Liso(solid
lines ) and the associated pressure bump locations ( dashed lines ) at the be-
ginning and end of a critical function bump that does not form a vortex
(thick coloured lines ), in comparison to when the initial vortex is triggered
(thin black line ). The critical function bump later on does not form a vortex
because it is closer-in than usual due to the depletion of the gap.
the conditions for triggering the RWI. This difference suggests that
the low resolution in our previous work was not sufficient to resolve
the development of the bumps in the critical function. Moreover,
it is the additional negative vorticity that produces these stronger
bumps that is also responsible for creating the compact cores that
can ultimately control the dynamics of the dust asymmetry and ex-
tend its lifetime.
The bumps induced by low-mass planets in particular eventu-
ally do not yield any more later-generation vortices. Figure 6 shows
an example of such a bump that does not re-trigger the RWI. With
a more depleted gap, the bump arises just interior to r= 1.2rp.
That is a bit closer-in than where it usually arises, just exterior to
r= 1.2rp(see the thick coloured lines of Figure 5, or the or-
0 1 2 3 4 5
Disc Mass [Σ0 / Σbase]0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4Planet Mass [Jupiter masses]Σbase=1.157×10−4h=0.06          α=3×10−5
2-D
2-D migrating
2-D low-res
3-D low-res
Figure 7. Planet mass versus disc mass for four different parameter studies.
In less massive discs ( Σbase/Σ0⩽2.0), there is good agreement in all
of the parameter studies except the migrating one, which is expected to
yield more massive planets. In more massive discs, 3-D yields more massive
planets than 2-D and low-resolution yields more massive planets than our
higher fiducial resolution, also due to the different smoothing lengths used.
ange line from the middle panel of Figure 5 in H21). We suspect
the bump is closer inward because of the gap depletion. This dif-
ference in location is the main reason the planet stops re-triggering
vortices much earlier than the similar-mass planets with less gap
depletion from our previous work.
3.2.3 Other aspect ratios
Like in our fiducial h= 0.06parameter study, we find that higher
resolution also facilitates a disc with h= 0.04to produce com-
pact cores. We tested this with planets that grow to Mp= 0.36
and0.52MJup(from discs with Σ0/Σbase= 3 and5), using a
higher resolution to match the radial grid cells per scale height in
our fiducial h= 0.06cases. Following the pattern in those cases,
both of these simulations result in later-generation vortices with
compact cores, but only the compact cores in the higher-mass case
outlast the last-generation gas vortex. They extend the dust asym-
metry lifetime to about 3700 orbits, longer than any of the life-
times of the h= 0.04cases with lower resolution from H21 and
more than triple the lifetime of the case with a similar-mass planet.
Unlike our fiducial parameter study though, the lingering compact
core does not make the dust asymmetry survive indefinitely. We in-
terpret this difference as further evidence that the gas structure at
the outer pressure bump in the h= 0.06cases is partially respon-
sible for sustaining the dust asymmetry after the gas vortices have
decayed.
The higher resolution in this study does not help planets in
discs with h= 0.08produce compact cores in later-generation
vortices because the first-generation vortices already survive indef-
initely, just like in our previous work.
4 EFFECTS OF PLANET MIGRATION
To build off our findings related to later-generation vortices, com-
pact cores, and dust asymmetry lifetimes increasing with planet
mass and disc mass, we now test if such results still hold if we
allow the planet to migrate, as that would be more realistic. We ran
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??10 Hammer & Lin
Figure 8. Planet mass ( top panels ), planet mass accretion rate ( bottom pan-
els), and planet radii ( bottom panels ) as a function of time for cases with a
migrating planet. More details in caption for Figure 1.
a smaller parameter study for a migrating planet in which we re-
peated four different disc masses: Σ0/Σbase= 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and
3.0. We initialised the planet further out at r= 1.25rpso that it
would end up near its usual location of r= 1.0rpand the vortex
would end up near r= 1.5rp, about where it is located with a
static planet. The more distant starting location of the planet also
limits each planet’s growth, preventing them from becoming muchmore massive than their static counterparts, as shown in Figure 7
and the top panel of Figure 8.2
4.1 Planet migration track
Overall, we find that the planets initially migrate inwards rapidly
before slowly settling on a near-fixed and near-circular orbit. The
rapid migration lasts until the planet opens a significant gap, as
expected in the Type I regime. Because the Type I migration rate
increases proportionally to both the planet mass and disc mass (e.g.
Lin & Papaloizou 1979), each more massive planet migrates much
faster than the next most massive one. When the planet migrates,
it leaves the outer gap edge behind, a typical outcome found by
Kanagawa et al. (2021) in their study of migrating planets in low-
viscosity discs. Once the planet is sufficiently far from the outer
gap edge, it creates a double gap exterior to the planet, as shown in
Figure 9. A new weaker pressure bump arises that is located interior
to the original one. With the planet so far from the original outer
gap edge, it mostly stops migrating, settling at around r= 0.88rp
in all but the lowest-mass case, as shown in the bottom panel of
Figure 8.
4.2 Vortex evolution with planet migration
Because the planet stops migrating and due to the low viscosity
in the disc, the original gap edge is maintained and the general
evolution of the generations of vortices is not that different than
from the static planet cases. A new series of vortices also forms
at the new weaker gap edge, but there is little to no dust to pop-
ulate them because any dust from the outer disc that might drift
inwards gets trapped at the original pressure bump. Only the case
with the highest-mass planet can form compact cores. Even though
they form in the vortices at both pressure bumps, the cores at the
new pressure bump with no mm dust tend to be sustained longer
while the cores at the original bump barely last at all. Eventually,
the double gap merges into a single gap, leaving only the vortex at
the original bump. In all but the lowest-mass case, we find that the
dust asymmetry stops decaying and never goes away. Unlike with
a fixed planet, these indefinite lifetimes do not directly arise from
compact cores and even cutting off the dust supply does not shorten
the dust asymmetry lifetime.
Each gas vortex that forms tends to be even shorter-lived than
those in from our parameter study with a static planet. Those short
lifetimes have little effect on the overall dust asymmetry lifetime,
however, because the gas vortex quickly re-forms and the dust
never decays in-between, just like without planet migration en-
abled. The planet continues to re-trigger vortices at the original
outer bump until about t= 1000 to1500 Tpeven though the planet
has migrated more than three scale heights away from the bump
in the critical function. The higher-mass planets stop re-triggering
vortices at this bump earlier than the low-mass ones because the
higher-mass planets migrate inwards and away from the original
bump much faster.
2We do not include the torque correction from Baruteau & Masset (2008)
for simulations that neglect self-gravity because it primarily affects the Type
I migration phase before there are vortices.
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 11
Figure 9. Azimuthally-averaged gas density profiles ( left panel ) and the RWI critical function Liso(right panel ) over time for a migrating high-mass planet
(Mp= 0.84MJup) grown from a very massive disc with Σ0/Σbase= 3.0, the migrating analogue to the featured simulation. At t= 100 Tp(thin black
line), the RWI is first triggered. At t= 620 Tp(red line ), the planet has migrated inwards, leaving the pressure bump at the outer gap edge behind. At
t= 1240 Tp(thick orange line ) is the final instance of a bump in Lisoforming near r= 1.1rpinterior to the original pressure bump, giving rise to the final
later-generation vortex. At t= 3000 Tp(brown line ), there is still another bump at about the same location, but it is too far interior to the inner pressure bump
in the outer disc to form another vortex.
4.2.1 Dust signature with planet migration
The dust signature can be more chaotic than with a static planet be-
cause the gas vortex keeps decaying and re-forming. It settles down
after the last-generation vortex decays. Unlike with a static planet,
only the dust in the highest-mass planet case ( Σ0/Σbase= 3) be-
comes more compact at this point, albeit there is no clear sign of
a compact core and the signature isn’t nearly as compact as it is
with a static planet. The dust asymmetries in the other cases do not
even become more compact. Nevertheless, they still do not decay.
Another reason this outcome is unexpected is that the vorticity sig-
nature at this pressure bump appears largely axisymmetric.
We suspect the longevity of the dust asymmetry may be re-
lated to the planet migrating away from the original pressure bump.
With a much bigger distance in-between as well an entirely new
pressure bump forming in-between, the shocks from the planet’s
spiral waves may not affect the asymmetry as much as they do with
a static planet.
4.2.2 New pressure bump
Although the new inner bump is not populated by any mm-sized
dust, it does yield a new series of later-generation vortices. The evo-
lution of these vortices is also similar to those with a static planet.
These vortices typically form after the last-generation vortex at the
original bump decays, or even earlier in the case with the highest-
mass planet.
That latter case is also the only one to develop compact cores.
Although they have no direct impact on the prominent dust signa-
ture at the other pressure bump, the last compact core breaks away
from the vortex, as depicted in the left panel of Figure 10. As ex-
pected for a vortex that is not at a pressure bump, it ends up migrat-
ing towards the original pressure bump (Paardekooper et al. 2010).
In-between the two pressure bumps, the vortex develops more sig-
nificant spiral waves that may affect both pressure bumps. At thispoint, the vorticity signature at the original bump becomes more
asymmetric even though there is no sign the vortex there ever re-
formed.
Towards the end of the simulation, that asymmetry in the vor-
ticity becomes stronger, as shown in the right panel of Figure 10.
The dust that remains somewhat follows this asymmetric signature,
albeit with a narrow signature. Although this behavior may help
sustain the dust asymmetry in this case, the dust asymmetry in the
other migrating cases can still be sustained even without any un-
usual behavior or compact cores at all.
Lastly, even though the two pressure bumps merge into a
single gap structure in the density, the vorticity signatures of the
bumps remain separate beyond the end of the simulation.
4.2.3 Lowest-mass migrating planet
The lowest-mass migrating case ( Σ0/Σbase= 0.6) differs the most
because of how slowly the planet migrates. It is the only case in
which the dust asymmetry does not survive indefinitely. Despite the
behavior starting out similar to the static planet simulation with a
similar planet mass, the dust develops a very different configuration
around t= 1500 Tpwhen an m= 2mode with two co-orbital vor-
tices becomes dominant, as depicted in Figure 11. The dust stays
separate in these vortices even though the vorticity signatures of
these vortices have some overlap. This pattern eventually decays as
dust escapes the vortices and settles at the actual peak of the pres-
sure bump, a phenomenon we also see in the low-mass static planet
simulations as well as in H21 with a ten-times higher viscosity.
This low-mass simulation is also the only migrating case that
doesn’t have a clear double gap in the density and in turn no new
pressure bump with another vortex. Even without another new pres-
sure bump, the outer region of the gap still has two separate rings
of lower vorticity just like all of the higher-mass planet cases with
double pressure bumps. In observations, the resulting gap associ-
ated with this kind of low-mass migrating planet should still be
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??12 Hammer & Lin
Figure 10. Dust density ( top panels ) and Rossby number evolution ( bottom
panels ) for the migrating analogue to the featured simulation. Contours be-
gin at 0.4. Column 1 : Att= 1655 Tp, the gas vortex at the initial pressure
bump has spread into a ring, albeit the dust there is still asymmetric. At the
interior outer pressure bump, a later-generation vortex-in-a-vortex is present
in the gas and it has trapped a small amount of dust at a concentrated point.
The compact core from an earlier later-generation vortex has ended up in-
between the two pressure bumps and its spiral waves affect both bumps.
Column 2 : Att= 4535 Tp, even though vortices at both outer pressure
bumps have long disappeared, the dust from the original vortex persists and
has reached a steady state with no sign of decay. The vorticity signature at
the corresponding location is not entirely symmetric.
much wider than that of a static planet of comparable mass, hosting
an outer dust ring at r≈1.6rpcompared to r≈1.4rpwith the
static planet.
5 3-D SIMULATIONS
Beyond testing if our 2-D results were applicable with a migrating
planet, we also explore if the 2-D simulations are a good approx-
imation for actual 3-D protoplanetary discs. In general, 3-D simu-
lations are only used when necessary because 2-D simulations are
much less computationally expensive. With isothermal simulations,
however, an additional complication is that 3-D simulations with a
high resolution yield the vertical shear instability (VSI: e.g. Nelson
et al. 2013), which affects any vortices that form through the RWI.
To avoid the VSI and do a more direct comparison to 2-D
simulations, we instead looked for differences at lower resolution.
We ran a suite of 3-D simulations with a low resolution of 256
×256×32, which we compared to another new low-resolution
2-D parameter study with the same midplane resolution of 256 ×
256 used in 3-D. Beyond comparing 2-D with 3-D, we also ran
a few high-resolution simulations in 3-D primarily to investigate
what happens when the VSI interacts with the RWI.
Figure 11. Dust density ( top panels ) and Rossby number evolution ( bottom
panels ) in the presence of a low-mass planet ( Mp= 0.25MJup) grown
from a low-mass disc with Σ0/Σbase= 0.6.Column 1 : Att= 1645 Tp,
the last later-generation set of vortices has yielded a long-lived m= 2
mode. Column 2 : Att= 2130 Tp, them= 2 mode is decaying into a ring
and the dust is collecting at the center of the pressure bump just exterior to
the location of the vortices.
5.1 Reproducing disc mass dependence
5.1.1 Low-resolution 2-D
With a low resolution, we find the same general pattern for the dust
asymmetry lifetimes as in our main parameter study. As shown
in Figure 2, the lifetimes just increase monotonically with planet
mass. Even though the trend is the same, the vortex evolution is
quite different. We do not see any later-generation vortices form,
suggesting that this resolution is not sufficient for resolving how
the shocks from the planet’s spiral waves shape the vortensity pro-
file during the re-triggering process. In spite of that limitation, the
initial gas vortices survive much longer because this resolution also
is not sufficient for the shocks to kill the vortex as quickly either.
Since neither of the shock effects that lengthen or shorten the vortex
lifetimes are properly resolved, the same trend emerges.
All of the vortices that form in these low-resolution simula-
tions are elongated in terms of their Rossby number. Their shapes
in the gas are also generally elongated, although that is not as clear
as it is with higher resolution. The corresponding dust asymme-
tries have extents of about 120◦with no noticeable peak offset or
dust circulation once the m= 1vortex has formed. One major dif-
ference is that without the later-generation vortices, only the dust
asymmetry in the highest-mass case survives 10000 orbits and is
still alive at the end of the simulation. None of the other dust asym-
metries reach 6000 orbits.
Beyond this resolution, we also tried some cases with a
medium resolution of 512 ×512. We found that this doubled reso-
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 13
lution still is not sufficient for allowing later-generation vortices to
form in the h= 0.06cases either. That same limitation along with
such simulations being more computationally expensive in 3-D are
why we did not use such higher resolution for the comparison be-
tween 2-D and 3-D. We also considered it valuable to be able to re-
produce the trend with such a low resolution. This agreement shows
the trend does not rely on re-triggered vortices and is more funda-
mentally related to the gap structure and the vortex’s proximity to
the planet. It also shows the usefulness of running low-resolution
simulations that are not computationally expensive in order to look
for trends.
Additionally, we tested if we could reproduce the “U-shaped”
lifetime trend from H21 in which low-mass planets also induced
longer-lived vortices with a fixed-value very massive disc. As pre-
sented in Appendix D, we did indeed find the same trend at low
resolution in both 2-D and 3-D.
5.1.2 Low-resolution 3-D
Like our main 2-D parameter study and the low-resolution 2-D
study, we find that the dust asymmetry lifetimes for the most part
monotonically increase with the disc mass and planet mass in 3-D,
as shown in Figure 2. In particular, the lifetimes are rather short at
under 2000 orbits for planets with masses less than 0.25MJup. The
gas and dust asymmetries in the highest-mass case above 1.0MJup
are still not close to decaying by the end of our simulations at
5000 Tp. For intermediate-mass planets between 0.25MJupand
0.80MJup, there is a slight difference in the trend in that all of
these cases have close to the same lifetime at about 3000 orbits.
Near 0.50MJup, there is even a slight drop in the lifetimes. Over-
all though, we consider the results with 3-D low resolution to be
very similar to those with 2-D low resolution, including the lack of
re-triggered vortices and the general vortex evolution in the gas and
dust.
5.2 High-resolution 3-D
Beyond the low resolution 3-D parameter study, we also present
one 3-D simulation with a very high resolution in the midplane of
1024×1024 , which is the same radial resolution we used in our
fiducial 2-D parameter study and half the azimuthal resolution. De-
spite the low vertical resolution of 6 cells per scale height, we re-
solve the VSI enough to slightly exceed the levels of vertical kinetic
energy and accretion stress found by Ziampras et al. (2023) with 16
cells. With the higher radial resolution, we are able to use a smaller
accretion radius of K= 0.25RHwhile setting A= 1. This case
has the base surface density ( Σ0/Σbase= 1) and the planet grows
to0.27MJupby the end of the simulation at t= 2900 Tp. Al-
though we had found that planets with this low of a mass do not
typically induce long-lived dust asymmetries in low-mass discs, we
find that they can in this case because the VSI is present.
5.2.1 VSI background
The interaction between planets and the VSI and any associated
vortices has previously been explored by Stoll et al. (2017). They
found that the resulting RWI vortex appears stronger and has a
much longer lifetime in the presence of the VSI than without, albeit
they are comparing the VSI case to a viscous case with a ten times
higher viscosity than in our study. In their simulations, the VSI issuppressed in the outer disc from 1.2to2.0rp, which they attribute
to the vortex.
We posit that the region of suppression may be connected to
the nature of the VSI itself. A much more recent work by Svan-
berg et al. (2022) demonstrated that even when the VSI operates
throughout the vast majority of the simulation domain, they can
identify discrete modes of the VSI. More specifically, they show
analytically that each mode of the VSI is expected to operate across
a finite range of radii beginning from the radius at which the mode’s
fastest growth should occur (see their Equation 18) and extending
to the radius at which the mode frequency ωmatches the near-
Keplerian orbital frequency Ω. They isolate the modes of the VSI in
their simulations by taking a Fourier transform of the azimuthally-
averaged vertical velocity over time across the entire range of radii
in the simulation. With a much larger simulation than our study,
they found four discrete VSI modes operate and there are no more
than two at any given location in the disc.
We build on these past works by determining which type of
vortex forms when taking into account the planet’s growth track,
incorporating dust, testing whether the vortex is indeed responsible
for the suppression of the VSI, and investigating how that suppres-
sion relates to the discrete modes of the VSI.
5.2.2 Vortex evolutionary track with the VSI
With the VSI active, we find that the vortex that arises from the
RWI is compact throughout, a striking difference between this case
and all our other simulations without the VSI. The RWI vortex be-
comes compact because the VSI produces bunches of really small
micro-vortices across wide ranges of the disc before the RWI vortex
forms, as shown in the left column of Figure 12. With such a low-
mass planet, the RWI develops rather slowly at the gap edge once
the Rossby waves become unstable. As a result, the very small vor-
tices produced by the VSI are able to seed the much larger vortices
that develop through the RWI, as shown in the middle columns of
Figure 12. Since the VSI vortices start out as compact with Rossby
numbers Ro <−0.15, the resulting RWI vortices also end up com-
pact. In turn, after those vortices merge, the final vortex is also
compact, as shown in the final column of Figure 12. When there
is no VSI and the growth of the planet has been incorporated, that
pathway to a compact vortex does not typically occur because the
initial small vortices that seed the final vortex are almost always
elongated.
Because the disc already has vortices from the VSI, it is diffi-
cult to tell when exactly the RWI starts to develop. Although the
planet is not very massive, the first clear mode that emerges is
m= 4 at about t= 550 Tp, a stark contrast from most low-
mass planets that typically only trigger m= 1 orm= 2 modes
of the RWI at the onset. The m= 4 mode reduces to m= 3 by
t= 600 Tpand then m= 2byt= 650 Tp. Finally at t= 750 Tp,
it has settled into a single compact vortex with a width of only about
30◦. The 250 orbits it takes the initial set of vortices to merge into
a single vortex is much longer than the less than 100 or so orbits it
normally takes. By about t= 1000 Tp, all of the rest of the dust at
the pressure bump settles in the vortex. From there, the vortex re-
mains relatively unchanged until the end of the simulation around
t= 2900 Tpand shows little to no signs of decay.
5.2.3 Where the VSI operates
Besides the VSI affecting the RWI, the planet also affects the VSI.
The effect of the VSI on the disc can be seen in the vertical veloc-
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??14 Hammer & Lin
Figure 12. Gas density ( top panels ) and Rossby number evolution ( bottom panels ) from a high-resolution 3-D simulation with an embedded low-mass planet
(Mp= 0.27MJup) grown from an intermediate-mass disc with Σ0/Σbase= 1.0and the VSI in operation. Density contours (at Σ/Σ0= 0.6,0.7,0.8,
etc.) are overlaid on the density panels. Column 1 : With just the VSI and no RWI, many tiny compact dust-trapping vortices arise across a wide range of the
disc, in particular near the pressure bump at the outer gap edge. Column 2 : With the VSI vortices already present, the RWI also arises, resulting an m= 4
mode series of larger co-orbital vortices that also have compact Rossby numbers. Column 3 : Less than 100 orbits later, mergers have turned the m= 4 mode
into an m= 2 mode. Column 4 : The last two large vortices have merged, forming a single compact vortex larger than the VSI vortices, but not too much
larger than the initial RWI series of vortices. Some dust is still present outside of the vortex, albeit it will be consumed within a few hundred orbits, leaving
behind only the vortex as the predominant signature at the pressure bump.
Figure 13. Azimuthally-averaged vertical velocity ( vθ) over time. The VSI
takes about 200 orbits to develop. It operates everywhere (from a bit exte-
rior the inner boundary to the outer Stockholm boundary) until the planet
becomes massive enough to suppress it. The region of suppression for the
VSI is roughly the outer edge of the horseshoe region to the location of the
pressure bump (black line).ity, which only attains significant non-zero values after the VSI is
present. Figure 13 shows the evolution of the azimuthally-averaged
vertical velocity over time across the entire disc. It takes about 200
orbits for the VSI to develop, at which point it operates everywhere
except both boundaries where the damping condition is applied and
some of the inner region of the disc adjacent to the inner boundary.
Not until a bit after the m= 1 vortex arises when the planet
has already grown past 0.15MJupdoes the VSI start to fade in part
of the region exterior to the planet. Specifically, we find that the
VSI is suppressed from the exterior edge of the planet’s horseshoe
region at around r= 1.15rpto the peak of the pressure bump,
which migrates outwards from around r= 1.25to1.40rpover
the course of the simulation. That inner edge is about the same as
what was found by Stoll et al. (2017), but the outer edge near the
pressure bump is noticeably closer-in than their work. One major
difference is that our compact vortex is much smaller than their
vortex, which appears elongated and much larger (see the “ 100M⊕
VSI” panel of their Figure 4). That larger vortex also coincides bet-
ter with their region of suppression (see the same panel of their
Figure 2). In contrast, our much smaller vortex only barely extends
into the region of suppression in radius and covers a much, much
smaller azimuth even though the VSI is affected across the entire
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 15
Figure 14. Fourier amplitudes of the azimuthally-averaged vertical velocity with no planet ( left panel ) and with a planet ( right panel ). Without a planet, there
are two distinct modes. The inner mode occupies a thicker range of frequencies. Both modes approximately propagate from ω= (√
109−10)Ω/3, the
location with the fastest growth ( dashed line ), to the location resonant to the Keplerian orbital frequency ( solid line ). The former line follows from Eq. 17 in
Svanberg et al. 2022 with the values adapted to our parameters. With a planet, the outer mode is still present, but further out and with a lower frequency. It is
less clear if the inner mode is still present, but there is some signature present. Both modes are cut off in the region where the VSI is observed to be suppressed
in the outer disc near r∼1.2rp.
azimuth throughout the region of suppression. As a result of these
differences, we do not suspect the vortex is responsible for the VSI
suppression in our work like in theirs. Because the VSI can still be
suppressed even with a much smaller vortex, we suspect the planet
itself also plays a role in suppressing the VSI beyond just through
the RWI vortex.3
Exterior to the pressure bump, the VSI operates largely the
same as it does before the growth of the planet. Interior to the planet
and inside the horseshoe region; however, the VSI shows more sig-
nificant changes. It does fade somewhat at times, in particular for a
few hundred orbits around t= 1500 Tp. Overall, the signature of
the VSI is affected interior to the outer pressure bump only when a
planet is present, but not always.
5.2.4 VSI modes
To test the planet’s effect on the modes of the VSI, we also ran a
comparison 3-D run for a few hundred orbits that was identical to
the other VSI simulation, except without a planet. As illustrated in
the left panel of Figure 14, we found two separate modes, both of
which operate roughly across the expected analytic range derived
by Svanberg et al. (2022), albeit across a bit wider range of fre-
quencies compared to the narrower modes in their work.
With the planet, however, the VSI modes display a noticeable
change, as shown in the right panel of Figure 14. Whereas the outer
mode begins at about r= 1.2rpwith a corresponding frequency
nearω= 0.12 Ω 0without the planet, the same mode moves fur-
ther out to beyond r= 1.3rpand consequently drops in frequency
to around ω= 0.08 Ω 0. As a result of the frequency drop, the
outer mode still begins approximately at the expected radius for the
fastest growth. On the other hand, the inner mode is much less rec-
ognizable. The strongest amplitude for the inner mode is located at
about r= 0.7to0.9rp, which is not too much further out than
3A parallel study by Ziampras et al. (2023) likewise found that the planet
was directly suppressing the VSI and attributed that suppression to the
shocks from the planet’s spiral waves.where the mode normally begins without a planet. The main dif-
ference, however, is that its frequency dropped all the way down to
ω= 0.15 Ω 0. It is much narrower than the wide frequency range
ofω= 0.20to0.40 Ω 0it had without a planet and and twice as
slow as the average across that range. Moreover, this peak ampli-
tude only appears just a bit too far interior to the expected radial
range. The only strong part of the inner mode that does appear in
the expected range is a less prominent at about ω= 0.20 Ω 0lo-
cated more co-orbital with the planet.
Beyond the two strongest signatures with no planet, there is a
non-zero amplitude across the entire frequency range at these radii.
With a planet, on the other hand, there is almost no signature of any
mode interior to the start of the inner mode and the signature in the
small radial range in-between the inner and outer modes is much
fainter. Both of those regions had signatures of the VSI when there
was no planet in the disc. Overall, adding the planet to the simu-
lations weakens and constricts the spatial range of the inner mode
while having little effect on the outer mode except for reducing its
frequency so it can begin further out in the disc.
6 PLANET-INDUCED VORTICES WITH DUST
FEEDBACK
With the high concentrations of dust easily greater than order unity
that can naturally be trapped in vortices, we were interested in
whether this amount of dust would affect the lifetimes or appear-
ances of the encompassing vortices through feedback, an effect we
neglected in our other simulations. With dust feedback, we find that
the dust configurations and dust asymmetry lifetimes can be qual-
itatively different depending on whether the simulation is 2-D or
3-D, and also the resolution in the vertical direction.
We ran two sets of simulations: a fixed-mass case with
Mp= 0.30MJup, and a growing case that reaches about Mp=
0.50MJup(from Σ0/Σbase= 1.5andA= 0.6). The fixed-mass
case reaches its final planet mass after Tgrowth = 200 Tpand
follows a growth track of mp(t) =Mpsin2(πt/2Tgrowth ). We
needed the fixed-mass case to compare the lifetimes in 2-D and 3-
D because the growing case already has different dust asymmetry
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??16 Hammer & Lin
Figure 15. Low-resolution 2-D comparison of the dust density distribu-
tion in a vortex without ( top panel ) and with dust feedback ( bottom panel ).
Without dust feedback, the dust is more spread out and circulates around
the vortex. With dust feedback, the dust forms a very compact clump that
stays in a fixed Keplerian orbit and is unaffected by the gas motion.
lifetimes in 2-D and 3-D even without feedback due to the planet’s
slightly different growth tracks. We also increase the dust size from
St = 0 .023to0.07to induce more dust to drift into the vortex and
thereby strengthen the effects of feedback. The 2-D and 3-D simu-
lations have a low midplane resolution of 256×256like our 3-D
simulations without feedback or the VSI, and the 3-D simulations
have either 32 or 64 grid cells in the vertical direction.
6.1 Base cases in 2-D
In 2-D, feedback causes nearly all of the dust in the vortex to clump
together across a very narrow azimuthal extent <30◦, consistent
with expectations from previous work (Fu et al. 2014). Figure 15
compares the dust configurations with and without feedback. The
clumping has the opposite effects of shortening the gas lifetime of
the vortex while preventing the dust asymmetry from decaying. The
clump also generates a pair of waves on both sides that are easiest
to see in the vorticity (see Figure 2 from Fu et al. 2014) and seem
like they could be a numerical artifact.
The initial clump can break up into multiple clumps, but the
feedback prevents these individual clumps from ever spreading out
towards a ring. The clumps never decay because they are massive
enough to be unaffected by the gas motion, leaving them on fixed
Keplerian orbits. The gas vortex only survives until about 1000 or-
bits with feedback compared to 2100 orbits without feedback, also
as expected from Fu et al. (2014). Despite that shorter lifetime in
the gas, the lifetime of the dust asymmetry is still indefinite and
Figure 16. 3-D comparison of the dust density distribution at lower vertical
resolution ( Nθ= 32 ;top panel ) and higher vertical resolution ( Nθ= 64 ;
bottom panel ). At low resolution, the dust all ends up in a single clump like
in 2-D. At high resolution, some of the dust ends up in a clump, but the
overall structure is still elongated like when there is no feedback.
Figure 17. Comparison of the Rossby number in the midplane ( θ=π/2)
and out of the midplane ( 0.63Habove). The vortex signature is visible at
both latitudes, albeit with a more positive signature from the dust in the
midplane and a more negative signature from the dust at altitude.
thus longer with feedback compared to a lifetime of just 2500 or-
bits without feedback.
6.2 3-D behavior with feedback
In 3-D, dust feedback can have a similar effect compared to 2-D if
the vertical resolution is low. Like in 2-D, the vortex still forms a
singular clump that itself does not decay and may eventually split
into multiple clumps that also do no decay. Meanwhile, feedback
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 17
likewise shortens the gas vortex lifetime, albeit not by as much as
in 2-D. Although the gas vortex lifetimes are nearly identical in 2-
D and 3-D without feedback regardless of the vertical resolution,
the gas vortex only survives until about 1500 orbits with feedback.
That is about twice as long as it survives with feedback in 2-D, but
still a 30% reduction from the gas vortex lifetime without feedback.
We suspect feedback may have less of an effect in 3-D because
feedback should only be important in the midplane where the dust
has settled.
With double the vertical resolution, however, we find that the
dust no longer completely gathers into a single clump and feedback
no longer reduces the lifetime of the gas vortex at all. Although
there is still typically one dominant clump, the rest of the dust in
the vortex is more spread out in such a way that that the vortex still
has a significant azimuthal extent much larger than the clump itself.
The clump is rarely if ever centered, and instead is typically located
at the very back of the dust configuration. Figure 16 compares how
the dust configurations typically appear in 3-D simulations with
low and high vertical resolution. Both ends of the vortex can have
peaks, and occasionally there are two significant peaks. The front
peak can also be more dominant than the back peak.
The effect of dust feedback also imprints itself on the vorticity,
as shown in Figure 17, even if the clumps do not produce their own
waves. There is a small region of more positive vorticity near where
the dust clumps in the midplane, and a more negative region of vor-
ticity at the same location away from the midplane. Both of these
results differ from that of Lyra et al. (2018), who instead found
that the vortex was unrecognizable in the midplane vorticity and
unaffected at altitude, neither of which we see in our simulations.
We suspect this difference is due to our vortices having both gas
density and vorticity signatures because they were produced by the
RWI while their vortices lack a gas density signature because they
were produced by a different instability, the convective overstabil-
ity (COV: Klahr & Hubbard 2014; Lyra 2014; Latter 2016).
7 SYNTHETIC IMAGES
We calculate synthetic images to more directly show how the new
behavior of the dust should influence the types of asymmetries ob-
served in actual protoplanetary discs. The most dramatic difference
from our previous results is how compact a compact vortex appears
with the VSI compared to an elongated vortex without the VSI in
a case with a planet of similarly-low mass. We also find that be-
fore the last gas vortex decays, it is much more likely to have an
asymmetry with multiple peaks in the azimuthal direction, a fea-
ture that was quite rare in H21. Relatedly, the offset between the
peak and the azimuthal center of the asymmetry can also be much
larger in that early chaotic stage. Later on after the last gas vortex,
the azimuthal peak of the dust asymmetry is barely off-center at all.
7.1 Method
The synthetic images are derived primarily using the surface den-
sity distribution as input and a beam convolution for the final out-
put. We largely follow the same method for generating the synthetic
images as in H21. The flux in the image is calculated from the in-
tensity as
Fλ(r, ϕ) =Iλ(r, ϕ)rδrδϕ
d2, (15)where λis the wavelength and δrandδϕare the radial and az-
imuthal dimensions of the cell such that dA=rδrδϕ . The inten-
sityIλitself is calculated from the optical depth as
Iλ(r, ϕ) =Bλ(T)[1−e−τλ], (16)
where Bλ(T)is Planck’s law for the spectral radiance. All of the
images are presented normalized to the maximum intensity. The
optical depth itself is calculated from the density as
τλ= Σ dust(r, ϕ;s)κλ, (17)
where κλis the dust opacity at the observed wavelength based on
the grain size s. We still use Σdust when calculating images from
the 3-D simulations because the dust mostly all settles in the mid-
plane. The opacity values are retrieved from the Jena database4,
assuming the grain size is similar enough to the wavelength for
Mie theory to apply ( 2πs≈λ, see Bohren & Huffman 1983) and
a dust composition of magnesium-iron silicates (Jaeger et al. 1994;
Dorschner et al. 1995).
Like in H21, we calculate all of the synthetic images at λ=
0.87mm, which corresponds to Band 7 of ALMA, albeit with this
method the images would appear largely the same regardless of
the band choice. We set a physical scale by defining the planet’s
separation of rp= 1.0to be 20 AU and assuming a distance to the
system of d= 140 pc. With the physical scale defined, the base sur-
face density of Σbase= 1.157×10−4corresponds to 2.57g/cm2
and the Stokes number St = 0 .023corresponds to a grain size of
s= (2/π)(Σ/ρd)×St = 1 .64cm at the location of the planet with
that surface density. The temperature profile of T=T0(r/rp)−1
is consistent with the lack of flaring in our simulations. The star’s
temperature is assumed to be the Sun’s temperature of T⊙= 5770
K, albeit normalizing the final images takes away any effect of this
parameter. We use the simplest viewing inclination angle of i= 0◦
so that it is easiest to identify any features in the image.
We focus on a beam diameter of 0.043′′, which corresponds
to a scale of 6 AU, to convolve the flux image because we see that
much larger beam sizes may not resolve features within the vortex.
We filter out the dust from the inner disc ( r <0.90rp), but unlike
in H21, we leave in the dust co-orbital to the planet, which primar-
ily resides at the Lagrange points. Keeping that dust in the image
allows it to overlap with dust from the vortex when a larger beam
diameter is used.
7.2 Background
In our previous work, we had found that vortices in observations
should appear rather simple, characterized by just two measurable
properties: their azimuthal extents and their peak offset, the latter of
which is the angle between the azimuthal location of an asymme-
try’s peak intensity and its perceived azimuthal center.5Azimuthal
extents were usually elongated and could vary greatly, particularly
if the dust supply was cut off, but typically did not exceed 180◦.
Another much rarer feature we only found with the dust cut off was
that the vortex peak could split into two as it circulated around the
vortex.
4http://www.astro.uni-jena.de/Laboratory/Database/databases.html
5Like in Hammer et al. (2019), the center itself is determined using an
appropriate threshold intensity Icut/Imax to identify the edges and only
weakly depends on the choice of threshold.
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??18 Hammer & Lin
Figure 18. Synthetic image comparison between the fiducial high-resolution 3-D simulation with VSI ( left panel ) and the corresponding case with the same
disc mass ( right panel ) at about the same time and planet mass ( t≈2750 Tp,mp= 0.27MJup). The vortex in the case is compact and in a steady state,
whereas the vortex in the case with no VSI has already decayed in the gas and the dust is in the midst of spreading into a ring.
7.3 High-resolution 3-D with VSI
The striking impact of the VSI on the vortex morphology may be
easiest to see in the synthetic images. Figure 18 compares our high-
resolution 3-D simulation with the VSI to the high-resolution 2-D
simulation with the same disc mass. Around the selected timestep,
the gas vortex with the VSI is still very compact in both the gas and
dust. Meanwhile, the vortex without the VSI has already decayed in
the gas and the dust is already spread out. It is several hundred or-
bits away from completely spreading into a ring with no remaining
asymmetry. This snapshot is characteristic of how the vortex with
the VSI appears for a very long timescale on the order of thousands
of orbits, whereas the vortex without the VSI changes its appear-
ance on the timescale of a few hundred orbits, if not less or much
less early on.
7.4 High-resolution 2-D with a static planet
With better resolution in our hydrodynamic simulations, we find
that the appearance of the vortex in observations can be much more
intricate, particularly in the high-mass planet cases with Mp=
0.45to0.77MJup(i.e.1.5⩽Σ0/Σbase⩽4) in which the vor-
tex develops compact cores and the dust asymmetry may survive
indefinitely. The azimuthal extent of the dust asymmetry can be
much more elongated than our previous work, commonly exceed-
ing180◦and on occasion even approaching a full 360◦, which we
present in more detail in Appendix E. The azimuthal extents can
also vary on much quicker timescales on the order of tens of orbits.
With larger azimuthal extents, the peak offsets can in turn also be
much larger, as illustrated in Figure 19. It is also much more com-
mon for the dust asymmetry to exhibit multiple peaks, as shown in
Figure 20. These more intricate patterns occur in the early chaotic
Figure 19. Peak shifts for the featured simulation. In the early stage, the
peak shifts are not preferentially centered or off-center are largely random
in the early stage, and typically range between −60◦to60◦off-center most
of the time. In the later stage when the vortex becomes compact, the peak
is much more centered, albeit the shift slowly grows over time as the dust
spreads out and becomes more elongated.
phase of the dust asymmetry lifetime, up to and a little bit past
when the last-generation gas vortex decays, as shown in the top
two rows of Figure 21. Once the asymmetry in the gas is gone, the
dust asymmetry reverts to a more simplistic appearance, as shown
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 19
5 10 15 20 25 30
Beam Diameters [AU]0.00.20.40.60.81.0Peak Count Fractionh=0.06
3×105
0 / base=3.0    (Mp=0.57 MJup)
How many peaks?
rp=20 AU
d=140 pc[/prime/prime]t=100 to 1600 orbits
One
Multiple0.036 0.071 0.107 0.143 0.179 0.214
Figure 20. Whether there is one peak or multiple peaks depending on the
beam diameter for the featured simulation. Multiple peaks are very com-
mon with high resolution, but the fraction steadily decreases as the beam
diameter increases.
in the bottom row of Figure 21, once again only characterized by
slowly-varying azimuthal extents and peak offsets like in our pre-
vious work.
There are several different reasons for these larger azimuthal
extents, larger peak offsets, and the more frequent appearance
of multiple peaks. The dust develops its most elongated extents
around when the gas vortex decays or re-forms, including (i) a lit-
tle bit before a vortex decays, (ii) a little bit after a vortex re-forms,
and (iii) most times in-between when there is no gas vortex. Any
time the asymmetry becomes more elongated also tends to coin-
cide with the appearance of more peaks. We did not see either of
these outcomes in our previous work because the gas vortex did not
decay and re-form early in the simulation like with the high reso-
lution in this work. Another factor that can be responsible for more
elongated extents is the compact cores. When a compact core de-
velops, some of the dust tends to circulate with the compact core
while the rest circulates with the broader elongated vortex. Nat-
urally, these multiple circulation paths create more elongated ex-
tents, larger peak offsets, and multiple peaks in the synthetic im-
ages.
Figure 19 shows how much the peak offsets can vary over
time, in particular during the early chaotic phase. They can reach as
high as about 120◦. More typically though, they lie between −30◦
and45◦a little over half the time. Peak shifts towards the front of
the vortex ( >0◦) are only slightly more common. The peak offset
drops to zero when all the dust collects in a compact vortex at the
end of the chaotic phase. From then on, it slowly increases over
time. By t= 4000 Tpthough, the offset still does not exceed 10◦,
leaving the peak only somewhat off-center. As such, a very large
peak offset in an observed asymmetry could be a signature that the
gas vortex is still present.
In the early chaotic phase, we find that it is more common for
the dust asymmetry to exhibit multiple peaks than just a single peak
for any size beam diameters up to even larger than the planet’s sep-
aration from its star. Multiple peaks are more common with smaller
beam sizes, but it is not until a beam diameter one-and-a-half times
the planet’s separation that a single peak becomes more common,
as illustrated by Figure 20. Whereas the multiple peaks with a high-resolution beam are only due to the dust dynamics associated with
the vortex, the multiple peaks with a low-resolution beam can also
be due to dust from the vortex overlapping with dust at the La-
grange points that smears further out because of the large beam
diameter. With this prevalence of multiple peaks at any beam size,
we do not think it would be unusual to find an asymmetry with
multiple peaks in observations.
8 DISCUSSION
8.1 When are planet-induced vortices compact?
Mechanisms for vortices that appear compact :
(i) Compact cores from elongated re-triggers (this work)
(ii) Elongated vortices from high-mass planets (this work)
(iii) Compact vortices from low-mass planets in the presence of
the VSI (this work)
(iv) Compact vortices in thin discs with h= 0.04(Hammer
et al. 2021)
(v) Elongated vortices that become compact in high-mass thick
discs with h= 0.08(Hammer et al. 2021)
(vi) Cooling times of order unity (Fung & Ono 2021)
Mechanisms for vortices that appear elongated :
(i) Elongated vortices w/ dust feedback (this work)
(ii) Typical elongated planet-induced vortices (Hammer et al.
2021)
Despite our previous finding that the RWI preferentially gen-
erates elongated planet-induced vortices, there are a few different
ways to produce vortices that appear compact in observations as
well.6We had previously found in H21 that vortices in the thinnest
discs ( h= 0.04) can still be compact, albeit these vortices are also
the shortest-lived. In this work, we find that elongated vortices with
compact cores can sometimes appear compact, in particular when
the encompassing elongated vortex has decayed and all the trapped
dust has enough time to be trapped in a single remaining core. Be-
sides that mechanism, planets around Jupiter-mass and above in a
h= 0.06disc are massive enough to generate a vortex with sharp
enough contours to appear compact even though it may still have a
weaker Rossby number in the elongated range. Lastly, lower-mass
planets around the mass of Saturn can produce a compact vortex in
ah= 0.06disc if the vortex is seeded by tiny vortices from the
VSI. Although we had expected dust feedback to produce compact
vortices, we find that the compact clumps that form through feed-
back in 3-D simulations with sufficient vertical resolution do not
trap all of the dust in the vortex like they do in previous 2-D work
(Fu et al. 2014) and in less-resolved 3-D simulations.
Along the lines of compact cores or the VSI’s tiny seed vor-
tices, other mechanisms that yield compact Rossby numbers may
also be able to produce compact vortices. In our previous work,
we found that planets in thicker regions of a disc with high aspect
ratios ( h= 0.08) are capable of lowering the vorticity in a vor-
tex from elongated to compact even after a single m= 1 vortex
6Beyond the mechanisms listed for planet-induced vortices at gap edges,
another way that has been proposed to generate a compact vortex is through
the accretion luminosity from the planet, which yields such a vortex co-
orbital with the planet itself (Owen & Kollmeier 2017; Cummins et al.
2022).
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??20 Hammer & Lin
Figure 21. Synthetic images for the featured simulation that harbours a super-thermal mass planet ( Mp= 0.65MJup) grown from a very massive disc with
Σ0/Σbase= 3.0, including various configurations with the later-generation vortices ( top panels ), the formation of the last later-generation vortices with three
peaks ( middle panels ), and the final stage when only a single compact core remains and the dust slowly spreads out and becomes more elongated ( bottom
panels ). The top two rows provide some examples of how the dust asymmetry can display multiple peaks, except for the top right snapshot at t= 1000 that
illustrates the dust collecting in a compact core not at the center of the vortex or the observed asymmetry.
arises (Hammer et al. 2021), an outcome we can only see in thin-
ner discs ( h= 0.06) if the vortex decays and re-forms like in this
work. Future work should test if this mechanism is still feasible
if the planet is migrating or if the disc is not isothermal. Beyond
that mechanism, Fung & Ono (2021) found that cooling timescales
of order unity are also capable of lowering the vorticity in a vortexfrom elongated to compact in 2-D shearing box simulations of non-
isothermal discs. Cooling may still not be prone to producing ob-
servable compact vortices because they find such vortices disappear
relatively quickly with this mechanism. Besides that limitation, fu-
ture work should test the efficacy of this cooling pathway with more
of a focus on global simulations like those of Lobo Gomes et al.
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 21
(2015) or Les & Lin (2015). It also should be tested in 3-D since
an initial exploration of cooling in 3-D by Rometsch et al. (2021)
hinted that its effects on vortices may not be the same as in 2-D.
Overall, the most robust mechanism for producing vortices
that appear compact may still be more-massive planets. Although
there might be more potential mechanisms for vortices that appear
compact, the simplest setups or conditions still tend to result in vor-
tices that typically appear elongated.
8.2 Why are there so few dust asymmetries in observations of
protoplanetary discs?
There are relatively few dust asymmetries in observed in protoplan-
etary discs in mm/sub-mm, the wavelength at which they should be
easiest to detect, given the high numbers of gaps in observed discs
and the presumed young ages of these systems (see H21 for a quan-
titative demonstration with a sample from Taurus).
The results from our previous work suggested it was already
strange to see so few vortices if observed gaps are indeed prefer-
entially created by low-mass gap-opening planets between about
half a Saturn to two Saturns in mass and the corresponding dust
asymmetries survive at least one or two thousand orbits.
Our current work exacerbates this issue in two different ways.
First, it is no longer just those planets that can create long-lived
vortex, but any planet above about half a Saturn-mass, including
the ones around Jupiter-mass. Second, the cases where the dust
asymmetry stops decaying altogether, particularly those with mi-
grating planets, would suggest an even higher occurrence rate of
dust asymmetries than what we had calculated from assuming the
dust asymmetry lifetimes were just a few thousand orbits.
8.2.1 Types of observed morphologies
Among the discs with observed dust asymmetries, only three clear
asymmetries appear to be located at the edge of a two-sided gap:
one in HD 135344 B (van der Marel et al. 2016; Cazzoletti et al.
2018), another in V 1247 Ori (Kraus et al. 2017), and an only
recently-resolved one in SR 21 (Yang et al. 2023). Almost all of the
rest of the observed asymmetries are located just outside of an inner
cavity, including those in Oph IRS 48 (van der Marel et al. 2013),
HD 142527 (Boehler et al. 2017, 2021), RY Lupus (Ansdell et al.
2016), and T4 (Pascucci et al. 2016). Each of these asymmetries
is also the sole prominent dust feature in the entire disc. Similarly,
MWC 758 (Boehler et al. 2018) and ISO-Oph 2 (Gonz ´alez-Ruilova
et al. 2020) also both have an asymmetry at the outer edge of a cav-
ity as well as a second asymmetry at the outer edge of the dust disc
itself, and the two asymmetries in ISO-Oph 2 are likewise the only
dust features in the disc.
While it is certainly possible for a planet-induced vortex to be
the only dust feature(s) in a disc, it would be much more natural
to expect a planet-induced vortex to be one of many features in
a disc. Many observed discs have multiple sets of rings and gaps,
yet none of those discs have a clear vortex candidate asymmetry at
the edge of any of those gaps. It would also be more likely to see
such a multi-gap structure in discs with planet-induced vortices if
such vortices are only triggered by gap-opening planets that only
recently made it to the gap-opening stage, as our work tends to
suggest.8.2.2 Alternate mechanisms for dust asymmetries
Even with the dearth of observed dust asymmetries, it is still possi-
ble that these asymmetries are not vortices or are vortices not pro-
duced by planets. Recent work has shown the an inner binary can
also yield an asymmetry that is not a vortex as the disc develops
eccentricity at the outer edge of the cavity (Ragusa et al. 2017;
Calcino et al. 2019). This explanation may be favorable for discs
where the only feature or innermost feature is an asymmetry, in
particular for HD 142527 which is already known to have an in-
ner binary. More recently, Kuznetsova et al. (2022) demonstrated
that infall from a disc’s external star-forming environment can also
create radial pressure bumps that trigger vortices through the RWI
if the infall is focused in a limited radial range of the disc. Such a
configuration could mimic a two-sided planetary gap if the range
of infall has the right radial width. Another mechanism for creating
RWI vortices that has been studied in-depth is the edge of a dead
zone because of the pressure bumps expected to develop at these lo-
cations (e.g. Lyra & Mac Low 2012). More recent work, however,
has suggested such pressure bumps are not necessarily sustained
unless they have a sufficient amount of small dust grains to domi-
nate the recombination process in the ionization chemistry (Delage
et al. 2022, 2023).
8.2.3 Limiting lifetimes of dust asymmetries
There have been various mechanisms proposed to shorten vortex
lifetimes or inhibit their formation altogether.
(i)Dust feedback has been shown to limit gas vortex lifetimes
in 2-D to around 1000 orbits or less (Fu et al. 2014), but both
our work and Lyra et al. (2018) show that feedback has little
to no effect on vortex lifetimes in 3-D simulations that better
resemble actual discs.
(ii)Self-gravity can theoretically inhibit the RWI in general for
disc masses as low as Q < h−1(Lovelace & Hohlfeld 2013),
but in simulated discs close to that mass limit with more re-
alistic gap profiles it may only marginally weaken the vor-
tices after they form (Hammer et al. 2021). Only very mas-
sive discs with Q < 4can severely alter vortices or the RWI
(Lin & Papaloizou 2011). Most if not all observed discs with
asymmetries have too low of a local surface density to be sig-
nificantly limited by self-gravity (van der Marel et al. 2021).
If self-gravity were to play a strong role of inhibiting vortex
formation for many observed gaps, it could be a sign that the
associated planets formed very early on in the disc lifetime.
(iii) Cooling , specifically non-zero cooling times of order unity,
has been shown in 2-D simulations to yield vortices that
spin up and shrink until they fade (Fung & Ono 2021), but
Rometsch et al. (2021) find that such an effect may not nec-
essarily occur in 3-D.
(iv) Migration increases the planet mass needed to trigger a vor-
tex because the gap-opening mass is also a bit higher (Kana-
gawa et al. 2021). As we show in this work though, migra-
tion does not shorten dust asymmetry lifetimes and only helps
sustain vortices. As such, migration would only inhibit a nar-
row range of low-mass planets from triggering vortices.
(v)Aspect ratios of a disc that are too thin ( h < 0.06) could
leave any planet-induced vortices that form too short-lived
to be observed. Because of flaring and the outer disc being
the preferred location for most observed vortex candidates
though, these candidates are more likely located in a thicker
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??22 Hammer & Lin
region of the disc with a higher aspect ratio that helps sustain
the dust asymmetry.
(vi) Viscosity is the most straightforward way to shorten vortex
lifetimes, as even a relatively low α∼10−4is already strong
enough to limit the lifetime of the dust asymmetry to around
1000 orbits or less. Modern expectations for the disc viscos-
ity are that discs no longer require high values of αbecause
angular momentum transport can instead be driven by mag-
netic disc winds (e.g. Bai & Stone 2013; Bai et al. 2016).
Nonetheless, these magnetic effects may still drive a small α
(e.g. B ´ethune et al. 2017) that could still be large enough to
inhibit or weaken planet-induced vortices.
Overall, viscosity may still be the best physical explanation for
why there are so few observed dust asymmetries and why there are
so few at two-sided gaps in particular. Dust feedback and cooling
may not necessarily limit vortices, while migration and self-gravity
may only weaken planet-induced vortices for very low mass planets
or very high mass discs respectively. Furthermore, actual observed
discs may not have the very wide gaps we find in our simulations
of migrating planets with a low disc viscosity of ν= 10−7. That
discrepancy, if it holds, could also be evidence that actual discs
indeed have a higher viscosity than the value used in this work.
As dust feedback and cooling may not necessarily limit vor-
tices while migration and self-gravity may only weaken planet-
induced vortices for very low mass planets or very high mass discs
respectively, viscosity may still be the best physical explanation for
why there are so few observed dust asymmetries and why there are
so few at two-sided gaps in particular. Furthermore, if gaps too wide
to be consistent with observations are a preferential outcome of mi-
grating planets inducing vortices with the disc viscosity ν= 10−7,
then even the actual discs with observed asymmetries may still have
a higher viscosity than the value we use in this work or else the
asymmetries may not be planet-induced vortices.
8.3 Applications to observed dust asymmetries
Our findings have prospects to be able to fit a set of multiple fea-
tures in a few different discs. We focus on four discs in particular:
MWC 758, V 1247 Ori, SR 21, and Oph IRS 48.
The presence of a compact core in an encompassing elongated
vortex frequently creates dust configurations in which some of the
dust is trapped in the core as the core circulates, while the rest of
the dust also circulates around the elongated vortex but separately.
Even with good image resolution, these two distinct dust signatures
can frequently appear to overlap. One example of the type of com-
bined signature it can create is the top right panel of Figure 21,
which resembles the inner dust asymmetry in MWC 758 (Boehler
et al. 2018). That feature of the real disc has a concentrated clump
with a tail of dust in one direction. It has been suggested that the
asymmetry coincides with both a vortex (Baruteau et al. 2019) and
a spiral wave from an unseen planet, where evidence for the latter
comes from the scattered light (Ren et al. 2020). Such a spiral likely
would not explain the dust tail at mm wavelengths if it originated
from the vortex itself (Huang et al. 2019). Although a planet’s spi-
ral may also explain the dust tail, our results show a vortex could
have such a tail even without any dust from the spiral.
The outer dust asymmetry in V 1247 Ori with an azimuthal ex-
tent of about 120◦appears like it may be divided into two equally-
elongated components with a narrow deficit in-between (Kraus
et al. 2017). The inner dust asymmetry, which includes a full back-
ground ring, more clearly has two separate components. Althoughit was suggested that the deficit itself in the outer asymmetry could
be an artifact of the image, the propensity to find vortices with mul-
tiple peaks in our study suggests it may be possible that the deficit
is real. It could be the case that both of the asymmetries in the disc
have two components, supporting our finding that multiple peaks
could be more common than just a single peak for some system
properties.
The primary ring in SR 21 was already known to be asymmet-
ric (P ´erez et al. 2014) and there was some hint of an inner ring
in the system (Muro-Arena et al. 2020), but only recently were
the features well-resolved into two clear partially-asymmetric rings
that resemble opposite sides of a planetary gap (Yang et al. 2023).
The inner ring itself is finely split radially into a full ring and an
asymmetry. It is possible that the two radial structures are a ring of
dust that collected at a pressure bump and a closely-adjacent vor-
tex, analogous to the pattern shown in the right panels of Figure 11,
which is common in other types of cases as well. The outer ring is a
full circle, but also contains a clear asymmetry spanning about 60◦
on one side and a more compact clump on the complete opposite
side, as well as a few other candidate clumps that may be observa-
tional artifacts. Such a complete ring with multiple clumps could
be produced by a decayed or decaying elongated vortex with multi-
ple compact cores, analogous to what is shown in the middle-right
panel of Figure 21.
The dust asymmetry in Oph IRS 48 is located at 61 AU van
der Marel et al. (2015), much further out than the suspected loca-
tion of the planet at around 20 AU based on CO observations (van
der Marel et al. 2013; Bruderer et al. 2014). Lobo Gomes et al.
(2015) had suggested this discrepancy could be explained by the
planet triggering a secondary vortex, a phenomenon they found in
non-isothermal simulations. We had previously suggested the large
gap between the planet and the asymmetry could be explained by
the original vortex migrating outwards away from the planet, as
we found could happen in discs with very thick aspect ratios of
h⩾0.08(Hammer et al. 2021), like Oph IRS 48. In this work,
we find that the opposite is also possible and the planet may have
migrated inwards away from the vortex, leaving the vortex behind.
9 CONCLUSIONS
Building off our previous work on planet-induced vortices (Ham-
mer et al. 2021), we again studied vortices in hydrodynamic sim-
ulations with a planetary core accreting the bulk of its mass from
the disc, except this time at higher resolution, in 3-D, with the VSI,
with feedback, or with more than one of those facets. We also study
a range of planet masses by varying the disc mass instead of the
dimensionless accretion rate. While our hope was to address the
discrepancy between the longevity of dust asymmetries associated
with planet-induced vortices in simulations and the paucity of dust
asymmetries in observations of actual protoplanetary discs, we in-
stead found various other ways to prolong vortex lifetimes not seen
in our past work, suggesting that planet-induced vortices should
be even more likely to appear in observations. We also found new
ways to make planet-induced vortices compact and clarified what
they should look like in such situations. These new results show the
importance of using a very high resolution ( ≈29 cells / H in the
radial direction) to study planet-induced vortices in simulations.
Contrary to expectation from all our previous works, we found
that slowly-growing planets can still generate compact vortices, or
in other cases elongated vortices with compact cores. The most
straightforward way we found to form compact planet-induced vor-
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 23
tices with stronger Rossby numbers in the compact range was with
the help of the VSI, using the countless tiny compact vortices from
the VSI. These tiny vortices seed larger compact vortices that arise
later on when a low-mass planet triggers the RWI. Without the VSI,
high-mass planets can form vortices with compact cores when they
re-trigger later-generation vortices. The lower vorticity in these
compact cores originates from the lower vorticity just interior to the
vortex circulating into the vortex as it re-forms. These cores make it
much more common for the associated asymmetry to exhibit multi-
ple co-orbital peaks in observations. The overall vortices, however,
are still elongated, and our synthetic images show that the dust they
trap should still typically appear elongated in observations. On the
other hand, very high-mass planets around Jupiter-mass and above
can still generate vortices that appear compact, even if the vor-
tex itself may still have a weaker Rossby number in the elongated
range. Another surprising outcome was that dust feedback, which
always causes both compact and elongated vortices to appear com-
pact in 2-D, does not make elongated vortices appear compact in
3-D with sufficient vertical resolution. These vortices still appear
elongated because even though clumps still arise due to feedback,
these clumps do not collect all the dust trapped in the vortex. The
rest of it still spreads around almost the whole azimuthal extent,
similar to what happens without feedback.
Beyond the finding from our previous work that low-mass
planets can generate very long-lived dust asymmetries, in this work,
we find that high-mass planets can also generate long-lived vor-
tices with longer lifetimes that make them even more likely to be
observed. In a few cases, the dust asymmetry stops decaying alto-
gether. These longer lifetimes result from the same factors that can
make the vortices appear compact. Moreover, we find that allowing
the planet to migrate like it should in a real disc not only extends
dust asymmetry lifetimes, but also makes them even more prone to
reach a steady state with an asymmetry that no longer decays. Such
a steady state may be caused by the planet migrating away from the
asymmetry. In the non-migrating cases, this steady state may be in-
hibited by cutting off the dust supply to the asymmetry. One set of
cases we did find that actually shortens dust asymmetry lifetimes
compared to our last work is low-mass planets in low-mass discs.
Nonetheless, such planets in those discs can still yield long-lived
dust asymmetries if the VSI is present.
It is difficult to test if our results in 2-D at high resolution still
hold in 3-D because the high resolution needed to allow vortices
to decay and re-form are also high enough to allow the VSI to be
active in our locally isothermal discs. Since the VSI only occurs
in 3-D, it is difficult to do a direct comparison at high resolution.
At low resolution though, the same general trends we find in 2-D
for the dust asymmetry lifetimes vs. planet mass still hold in 3-D
for both the parameter study in which we vary the disc mass as
well as the parameter study in which we vary the dimensionless
accretion rate. To do a proper comparison of 2-D vs. 3-D at high
resolution, it may be more interesting to suppress the VSI in 3-D,
such as by incorporating a sufficiently slow cooling rate. We are
already carrying out this kind of comparison for a future work.
The longevity of vortices in our simulations is inconsistent
with the lack of vortex candidates in observed protoplanetary discs,
particularly the lack of those located at the edge of a two-sided gap
that could harbour a planet. This discrepancy may just be due to
these discs having too high of an effective viscosity, although the
source of that viscosity would still be unclear. If viscosity is in-
deed the reason there are so few vortex candidates, that may be a
sign that the mechanism for angular momentum transport may beassociated with at least a mildly significant viscosity, even if the
mechanism is primarily laminar like with disc winds.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Marcelo Alfaro-Barraza, Phil Armitage,
Can Cui, He-Feng Hsieh, Lizxandra Flores-Rivera, Hubert Klahr,
Marius Lehmann, Hui Li, Yaping Li, Mordecai-Mark Mac Low,
and Chiara Scardoni for helpful discussions, and the referee for
helpful comments. MH and MKL are supported by the National
Science and Technology Council (grants 107-2112-M-001-043-
MY3, 110-2112-M-001-034-, 111-2112-M-001-062-, 110-2124-
M-002-012-, 111-2124-M-002-013-, 112-2112-M-001-064-, 112-
2124-M-002-003-) and an Academia Sinica Career Development
Award (AS-CDA-110-M06). Computations were performed on the
xl cluster at ASIAA and the TWCC cluster at the National Center
for High-performance Computing (NCHC). We thank NCHC for
providing computational and storage resources.
DATA A V AILABILITY
The data underlying this article will be shared on reasonable re-
quest to the corresponding author.
REFERENCES
Ansdell M., Williams J. P., van der Marel N., Carpenter J. M.,
Guidi G., Hogerheijde M., Mathews G. S., Manara C. F.,
Miotello A., Natta A., Oliveira I., Tazzari M., Testi L., van
Dishoeck E. F., van Terwisga S. E., 2016, ApJ, 828, 46
Bai X.-N., Stone J. M., 2013, ApJ, 769, 76
Bai X.-N., Ye J., Goodman J., Yuan F., 2016, ApJ, 818, 152
Barge P., Sommeria J., 1995, A & A, 295, L1
Baruteau C., Barraza M., P ´erez S., Casassus S., Dong R., Lyra
W., Marino S., Christiaens V ., Zhu Z., Carmona A., Debras F.,
Alarcon F., 2019, MNRAS, 486, 304
Baruteau C., Masset F., 2008, ApJ, 678, 483
Ben´ıtez-Llambay P., Krapp L., Pessah M. E., 2019, ApJS, 241, 25
Ben´ıtez-Llambay P., Masset F. S., 2016, ApJS, 223, 11
Bergez-Casalou C., Bitsch B., Pierens A., Crida A., Raymond
S. N., 2020, A & A, 643, A133
Bergez-Casalou C., Bitsch B., Raymond S. N., 2022, arXiv e-
prints, p. arXiv:2211.16239
B´ethune W., Lesur G., Ferreira J., 2017, A & A, 600, A75
Boehler Y ., M ´enard F., Robert C. M. T., Isella A., Pinte C., Gonza-
lez J. F., van der Plas G., Weaver E., Teague R., Garg H., M ´eheut
H., 2021, A & A, 650, A59
Boehler Y ., Ricci L., Weaver E., Isella A., Benisty M., Carpenter
J., Grady C., Shen B.-T., Tang Y .-W., Perez L., 2018, ApJ, 853,
162
Boehler Y ., Weaver E., Isella A., Ricci L., Grady C., Carpenter J.,
Perez L., 2017, ApJ, 840, 60
Bohren C. F., Huffman D. R., 1983, Absorption and scattering of
light by small particles
Bruderer S., van der Marel N., van Dishoeck E. F., van Kempen
T. A., 2014, A & A, 562, A26
Calcino J., Price D. J., Pinte C., van der Marel N., Ragusa E.,
Dipierro G., Cuello N., Christiaens V ., 2019, MNRAS, 490, 2579
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??24 Hammer & Lin
Cazzoletti P., van Dishoeck E. F., Pinilla P., Tazzari M., Facchini
S., van der Marel N., Benisty M., Garufi A., P ´erez L. M., 2018,
A & A, 619, A161
Cimerman N. P., Rafikov R. R., 2021, MNRAS, 508, 2329
Cimerman N. P., Rafikov R. R., 2023, MNRAS, 519, 208
Cummins D. P., Owen J. E., Booth R. A., 2022, MNRAS, 515,
1276
de Val-Borro M., Artymowicz P., D’Angelo G., Peplinski A.,
2007, A & A, 471, 1043
de Val-Borro M., Edgar R. G., Artymowicz P., Ciecielag P. e. a.,
2006, MNRAS, 370, 529
Delage T. N., G ´arate M., Okuzumi S., Yang C.-C., Pinilla P.,
Flock M., Stammler S. M., Birnstiel T., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2303.15675
Delage T. N., Okuzumi S., Flock M., Pinilla P., Dzyurkevich N.,
2022, A & A, 658, A97
Dorschner J., Begemann B., Henning T., Jaeger C., Mutschke H.,
1995, A & A, 300, 503
Flores-Rivera L., Flock M., Nakatani R., 2020, A & A, 644, A50
Fu W., Li H., Lubow S., Li S., 2014, ApJ, 788, L41
Fu W., Li H., Lubow S., Li S., Liang E., 2014, ApJ, 795, L39
Fung J., Ono T., 2021, ApJ, 922, 13
Gonz ´alez-Ruilova C., Cieza L. A., Hales A. S., P ´erez S., Zurlo
A., Arce-Tord C., Casassus S., C ´anovas H., Flock M., Herczeg
G. J., Pinilla P., Price D. J., Principe D. A., Ru ´ız-Rodr ´ıguez D.,
Williams J. P., 2020, ApJ, 902, L33
Hammer M., Kratter K. M., Lin M.-K., 2017, MNRAS, 466, 3533
Hammer M., Lin M.-K., Kratter K. M., Pinilla P., 2021, MNRAS,
504, 3963
Hammer M., Pinilla P., Kratter K. M., Lin M.-K., 2019, MNRAS,
482, 3609
Huang P., Dong R., Li H., Li S., Ji J., 2019, ApJ, 883, L39
Jaeger C., Mutschke H., Begemann B., Dorschner J., Henning T.,
1994, A & A, 292, 641
Kanagawa K. D., Muto T., Tanaka H., 2021, ApJ, 921, 169
Klahr H., Hubbard A., 2014, ApJ, 788, 21
Kley W., 1999, MNRAS, 303, 696
Koller J., Li H., Lin D. N. C., 2003, ApJ, 596, L91
Kraus S., Kreplin A., Fukugawa M., Muto T., Sitko M. L., Young
A. K., Bate M. R., Grady C., Harries T. T., Monnier J. D., Will-
son M., Wisniewski J., 2017, ApJ, 848, L11
Kuznetsova A., Bae J., Hartmann L., Mac Low M.-M., 2022, ApJ,
928, 92
Latter H. N., 2016, MNRAS, 455, 2608
Lega E., Nelson R. P., Morbidelli A., Kley W., B ´ethune W., Crida
A., Kloster D., M ´eheut H., Rometsch T., Ziampras A., 2021, A
& A, 646, A166
Les R., Lin M.-K., 2015, MNRAS, 450, 1503
Li H., Colgate S. A., Wendroff B., Liska R., 2001, ApJ, 551, 874
Li H., Finn J. M., Lovelace R. V . E., Colgate S. A., 2000, ApJ,
533, 1023
Li H., Li S., Koller J., Wendroff B. B., Liska R., Orban C. M.,
Liang E. P. T., Lin D. N. C., 2005, ApJ, 624, 1003
Lin D. N. C., Papaloizou J., 1979, MNRAS, 186, 799
Lin M.-K., 2012, ApJ, 754, 21
Lin M.-K., 2014, MNRAS, 437, 575
Lin M.-K., 2021, ApJ, 907, 64
Lin M.-K., Papaloizou J. C. B., 2010, MNRAS, 405, 1473
Lin M.-K., Papaloizou J. C. B., 2011, MNRAS, 415, 1426
Lin M.-K., Youdin A. N., 2015, ApJ, 811, 17
Lissauer J. J., Hubickyj O., D’Angelo G., Bodenheimer P., 2009,
Icarus, 199, 338Lobo Gomes A., Klahr H., Uribe A. L., Pinilla P., Surville C.,
2015, ApJ, 810, 94
Lovelace R. V . E., Hohlfeld R. G., 2013, MNRAS, 429, 529
Lovelace R. V . E., Li H., Colgate S. A., Nelson A. F., 1999, ApJ,
513, 805
Lyra W., 2014, ApJ, 789, 77
Lyra W., Mac Low M.-M., 2012, ApJ, 756, 62
Lyra W., Raettig N., Klahr H., 2018, Research Notes of the Amer-
ican Astronomical Society, 2, 195
Manger N., Klahr H., 2018, MNRAS, 480, 2125
Manger N., Klahr H., Kley W., Flock M., 2020, MNRAS, 499,
1841
Masset F., 2000, A & AS, 141, 165
Moldenhauer T. W., Kuiper R., Kley W., Ormel C. W., 2021, A &
A, 646, L11
M¨uller T. W. A., Kley W., Meru F., 2012, A & A, 541, A123
Muro-Arena G. A., Ginski C., Dominik C., Benisty M., Pinilla P.,
Bohn A. J., Moldenhauer T., Kley W., Harsono D., Henning T.,
van Holstein R. G., Janson M., Keppler M., M ´enard F., P ´erez
L. M., Stolker T., Tazzari M., Villenave M., Zurlo A., Petit C.,
Rigal F., M ¨oller-Nilsson O., Llored M., Moulin T., Rabou P.,
2020, A & A, 636, L4
Nelson R. P., Gressel O., Umurhan O. M., 2013, MNRAS, 435,
2610
Nelson R. P., Lega E., Morbidelli A., 2023, A & A, 670, A113
Owen J. E., Kollmeier J. A., 2017, MNRAS, 467, 3379
Paardekooper S.-J., Lesur G., Papaloizou J. C. B., 2010, ApJ, 725,
146
Pascucci I., Testi L., Herczeg G. J., Long F., Manara C. F., Hendler
N., Mulders G. D., Krijt S., Ciesla F., Henning T., Mohanty S.,
Drabek-Maunder E., Apai D., Sz ˝ucs L., Sacco G., Olofsson J.,
2016, ApJ, 831, 125
P´erez L. M., Isella A., Carpenter J. M., Chandler C. J., 2014, ApJ,
783, L13
Pfeil T., Klahr H., 2019, ApJ, 871, 150
Ragusa E., Dipierro G., Lodato G., Laibe G., Price D. J., 2017,
MNRAS, 464, 1449
Ren B., Dong R., van Holstein R. G., Ruffio J.-B., Calvin B. A.,
Girard J. H., Benisty M., Boccaletti A., Esposito T. M., Choquet
´E., Mawet D., Pueyo L., Stolker T., Chiang E., Boer J., Debes
J. H., Garufi A., Grady C. A., Hines D. C., Maire A.-L., M ´enard
F., Millar-Blanchaer M. A., Perrin M. D., Poteet C. A., Schneider
G., 2020, ApJ, 898, L38
Richard S., Nelson R. P., Umurhan O. M., 2016, MNRAS, 456,
3571
Rometsch T., Ziampras A., Kley W., B ´ethune W., 2021, A & A,
656, A130
Shakura N. I., Sunyaev R. A., 1973, A & A, 24, 337
Stoll M. H. R., Picogna G., Kley W., 2017, A & A, 604, A28
Surville C., Barge P., 2015, A & A, 579, A100
Svanberg E., Cui C., Latter H. N., 2022, MNRAS, 514, 4581
Szul´agyi J., Mordasini C., 2017, MNRAS, 465, L64
Toomre A., 1964, ApJ, 139, 1217
van der Marel N., Birnstiel T., Garufi A., Ragusa E., Christiaens
V ., Price D. J., Sallum S., Muley D., Francis L., Dong R., 2021,
AJ, 161, 33
van der Marel N., Cazzoletti P., Pinilla P., Garufi A., 2016, ApJ,
832, 178
van der Marel N., Pinilla P., Tobin J., van Kempen T., Andrews S.,
Ricci L., Birnstiel T., 2015, ApJ, 810, L7
van der Marel N., van Dishoeck E. F., Bruderer S., Birnstiel T.,
Pinilla P., Dullemond C. P., van Kempen T. A., Schmalzl M.,
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 25
Brown J. M., Herczeg G. J., Mathews G. S., Geers V ., 2013,
Science, 340, 1199
Weidenschilling S. J., 1977, MNRAS, 180, 57
Yang Y ., Liu H. B., Muto T., Hashimoto J., Dong R., Kanagawa
K., Momose M., Akiyama E., Hasegawa Y ., Tsukagoshi T., Kon-
ishi M., Tamura M., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2303.05064
Youdin A. N., Lithwick Y ., 2007, Icarus, 192, 588
Ziampras A., Kley W., Nelson R. P., 2023, A & A, 670, A135
APPENDIX A: ACCRETION PRESCRIPTIONS
A1 Choice of fiducial scheme
Unlike in H21 in which we varied the accretion parameters to sim-
ulate a range of planet masses, we needed to choose fixed accretion
parameters for this work because we wanted study the effect of
varying the disc mass instead. We had avoided choosing fixed ac-
cretion parameters in our previous work because the actual accre-
tion process is more complex than just a pair of accretion param-
eters and in any case not well-resolved by our global simulations.
Properly incorporating the planetary accretion process would re-
quire 3-D in every simulation, radiation hydrodynamics, and a very
refined grid in the vicinity of the planet that resolves the planet’s at-
mosphere (e.g. Moldenhauer et al. 2021) and allows a circumplane-
tary disc to form (e.g. Szul ´agyi & Mordasini 2017), far beyond the
scope of this project. Although we cannot capture that much de-
tail, we can base our accretion scheme on previous work that better
resolves the accretion process as well as our own 3-D simulations.
Past work has found planets should only accrete from a frac-
tion of their Hill sphere within a radius of 0.25RH(Lissauer et al.
2009). With such a low value of Kthough, our low-resolution
simulations would not resolve the accretion zone and not accrete
any material onto the planet at all. To keep the accretion param-
eters consistent between our lower-resolution and fiducial higher-
resolution parameter study, we instead set the accretion radius to
K= 0.6RH, a large enough value to safely allow accretion. We
then choose A= 0.4so that the low-resolution simulations ap-
proximate the planet’s growth track in our fiducial high-resolution
3-D simulation with the VSI, as shown in Figure A1. We note that
this simulation has an amplified accretion rate due to the additional
Reynolds stress from the VSI compared to a 2-D simulation with
the same parameters but no VSI. Even though our other simula-
tions do not have the VSI, we still aim to mimic this accelerated
growth track because actual discs may have disc winds or other ad-
ditional sources of angular momentum transport even without the
VSI or a high viscosity (see Nelson et al. 2023 for a recent work on
this topic). Those other sources may not necessarily affect vortex
properties.
Since it is possible that the planet may indeed have a slower
growth track without any other sources of angular momentum
transport, we complement our high-resolution parameter study with
an additional study that instead uses K= 0.25RHandA= 0.9.
As discussed in the following section of the Appendix, we find sim-
ilar qualitative results.
A2 Other accretion schemes
Beyond our fiducial accretion prescription of K= 0.6RHand
A= 0.4, we tested out a more-massive prescription with a larger
accretion rate of A= 0.6and a simpler prescription in which the
accretion radius is the expected K= 0.25RHand the accretion
Figure A1. Planet mass as a function of time with the VSI and 2-D cases
with the same Σ0. The values of KandAin our fiducial 2-D simulations
were chosen to match the high-resolution 3-D case with the VSI. The 3-D
case yields a much more massive planet than the corresponding 2-D case
with the same KandAbecause the VSI drives additional angular momen-
tum transport through the disc.
rate is near unity at A= 0.9. Both the more-massive prescription
and the simpler prescription grow the planets faster, but the simpler
prescription still results in less-massive planets. With these differ-
ent prescriptions, we find that the two main regimes of low-mass
and high-mass and their corresponding behavior still exist. Like
the default prescription, the low-mass cases have short-lived dust
asymmetries and the high-mass cases have dust asymmetries that
survive the entire simulation. The only main difference we find is
that the mass ranges for these regimes shift.
The simpler prescription is intended to model the accretion
rate assuming there is no added accretion above the natural rate
from the prescribed viscosity. We choose A= 0.9instead of
A= 1.0to account for 2-D cylindrical accretion slightly overesti-
mating 3-D spherical accretion, albeit this choice does not change
the planet’s growth trajectory by much. Although the high-mass
regime is similar to that from the fiducial prescription, the highest-
mass case differs in that it does have later-generation vortices.
Nonetheless, the dust configuration for this case is still more com-
pact throughout due to its steeper density contours in the vortex.
Overall, the mass ranges for the regimes shift to lower values. The
cases with indefinite dust asymmetry lifetimes begin with planet
masses as low as Mp= 0.23MJup, almost half the value of
Mp= 0.42MJupat which this regime begins with our fiducial
prescription. If the growth tracks of actual planets better resemble
this simpler prescription, it would broaden the applicability of our
fiducial results for high-mass planets to a wider range of planet
masses.
The more-massive prescription is more similar to the fidu-
cial one because it has the same accretion radius. The regime with
indefinite dust starts at the only slightly higher mass of Mp=
0.45MJupwith the same lowest disc mass of Σ0/Σbase= 1.5
as with our fiducial prescription. In the low-mass regime, none of
the dust asymmetries survive more than 2000 orbits, a slight differ-
ence from the fiducial prescription in which the highest-mass case
in this regime had a dust asymmetry lifetime of nearly 3000 orbits.
Overall, these cases require a slightly lower planet mass to initially
trigger the RWI.
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??26 Hammer & Lin
APPENDIX B: COMPARING PLANET GROWTH IN 2-D
AND 3-D
The differences we do observe between 2-D and 3-D may in part
be due to the planet’s different growth tracks. We cannot use the
exact same accretion prescription in 2-D and 3-D because the pre-
scription depends on the grid cells, which are inherently differ-
ent depending on the number of dimensions. Figure B1 compares
the planet’s growth tracks between 2-D and 3-D for two different
disc masses: Σ0/Σbase= 5.0, which was the most different; and
Σ0/Σbase= 1.0, which like any of the lower-mass cases yielded
planets with similar mass between both numbers of dimensions.
The most obvious difference is that the planet accretes from a
sphere in 3-D compared to what is effectively a cylinder in 2-D. As
such, we expect the planets in the 3-D simulations to grow slower,
at least at first, which is what we do observe in every case. Natu-
rally, we also expect that the planet’s final mass would be lower in
3-D than 2-D; however, that only happens for the lower disc masses
when Σ0/Σbase⩽1.0. For the higher-mass cases, the 3-D planet
grows more massive than the 2-D planet. For the highest-mass case
in particular, there is a huge difference.
Some of the difference in planet masses between 2-D and 3-D,
which increases with planet mass, is due to the different smoothing
lengths used. To test the effect of having a Rs= 0.1RHin the 3-D
simulations compared to the much larger Rs= 0.6Hused in 2-D,
we ran additional low-resolution simulations that tested the planet
growth with three different coefficients: 0.1, 0.3, and 0.6. As Fig-
ure B2 shows, we found that planet masses increase as we lower
the smoothing length in both 2-D and 3-D. Had we used the same
smoothing length, the planet in a 3-D disc would still grow less
than the corresponding 2-D case, just like what happens with less
massive planets. Since actual discs don’t have a smoothing length
(Rs= 0), we suspect the planet masses attained in the 3-D sim-
ulations in which it is sensible to have a much smaller smoothing
length are more realistic and the 2-D simulations may underesti-
mate the final planet masses, particularly for the higher-mass plan-
ets. While a smoothing length of Rs= 0.6Hmay be optimal for
producing a more realistic gap structure with a fixed-mass planet
(M¨uller et al. 2012), we find that it may not be realistic for mod-
elling planetary accretion, particularly for higher-mass planets.
Another smaller difference we observe in the planet growth
trajectories is the general shapes of the curves. The 2-D curves
all follow a sort of logarithmic or inverse parabolic growth track
with negative concavity when the bulk of the planet’s growth takes
place. Meanwhile, the 3-D curves start out with a positive concav-
ity before switching to a negative concavity at a point of inflection
somewhat early on, but not right away.
APPENDIX C: STEADY-STATE DUST ASYMMETRY
In our 2-D parameter studies with h= 0.06for both static and mi-
grating planets, we find that dust asymmetries can reach a steady
state and stop decaying altogether, prolonging the dust asymmetry
lifetimes indefinitely, at minimum to at least through the end of our
simulations. With a static planet, the lack of decay originated from
later-generation vortices developing compact cores. With a migrat-
ing planet, the lack of decay happened after the planet migrated
away from the dust asymmetry. We tested whether the steady-state
outcome was physical in several different ways.
Our first test was to see if the indefinite lifetimes were due to
the vortex receiving an unlimited supply of dust. Actual discs mayindeed have an unlimited supply of dust for a significant amount of
time; however, many observed asymmetries are the outermost dust
feature in their discs, leaving them with no additional dust supply.
To test this idea, we ran two additional simulations restarted mid-
way from the highlighted case with Σ0/Σbase= 3.0. Specifically,
we restarted the gas from the default case at t= 1600 Tp, the point
when the last elongated vortex has just decayed and all that remains
is its compact core. Instead of using the dust from that timestep, we
experimented with two new sets of dust profiles. The first restarted
case used the initial dust profiles from t= 0. The second case
again used the initial profiles, but with the initial surface density
profile multiplied by a steep exponential cutoff. The cutoff is given
bye−(r/rcut)5, where the cutoff radius is at rcut= 2.0rp. These
kinds of tests are analogous to how we measured the vortex life-
times in H21. With the regular initial profile, the dust asymmetry
still survives well beyond t= 7000 Tp. With the dust cutoff, how-
ever, we find that the dust asymmetry does not even survive until
t= 3200 Tp. Such a significant difference shows that the continual
supply of dust to the vortex does indeed help extend the dust asym-
metry lifetime, even after the primary series of elongated vortices
has decayed.
Beyond limiting the dust supply, we also checked if other fac-
tors were responsible for prolonging the dust vortex lifetimes to
help assess why the dust asymmetry outlives the gas vortex. To test
whether the boundary was artificially extending the lifetime, we re-
ran the default case with a grid that was same resolution per scale
height, but double the grid size in the radial direction. We found
that the dust asymmetry still decays at about the same rate, and
in fact even slower, suggesting that the proximity of the boundary
to the asymmetry is not responsible for sustaining it. Lastly, we
checked whether there was similar behavior in our additional tests
with a lower aspect ratio that likewise form compact vortices (see
Section 3.2.3). Based on the fact that the dust asymmetries in these
cases do not have dust asymmetries that outlive the gas vortex by
anywhere near as much as in the h= 0.06cases, we suspect that
the gas not perfectly decaying into a ring also plays a role in extend-
ing the dust asymmetry lifetime. Regardless of the aspect ratio, we
observe that the extent by which the dust asymmetry outlives the
gas vortex is significantly longer with compact vortices than elon-
gated ones. We interpret this behavior as evidence that the compact
cores help sustain the dust asymmetry by making the dust configu-
ration more compact. With such a low level of dust diffusion, this
compact configuration takes a significant amount of time to decay.
Overall, we conclude that the compact dust configuration, the con-
tinuous dust supply, and the not perfectly-symmetric ring structure
all play a role in the dust asymmetry surviving the entire simulation
in our fiducial parameter studies.
C1 Dust asymmetry lifetimes with dust cutoff
Because we could not probe the trend of vortex lifetimes with the
fiducial initial dust density profiles, we ran additional simulations
that largely repeated the high-mass cases, but with the dust cut-
off. We applied the cutoff from the very beginning at t= 0, in
effect completely re-running each simulation. With the dust cut-
off, the dust asymmetry decays in all but the highest-mass case.
We find that the dust asymmetry lifetimes increase monotonically
with the planet’s final mass across the wide mass range in which
the lifetimes were indefinite without any cutoff. The lifetimes with
the cutoff are shown in Figure 2 in comparison to the main param-
eter study. Even with the cutoff, the lifetimes become rather long
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 27
Figure B1. Comparison of planet mass as a function of time for a high-mass planet in the highest-mass disc with Σ0/Σbase= 5.0(left panel ) and a low-mass
planet with the default disc mass of Σ0/Σbase= 1.0(right panel ) for 2-D and 3-D and different resolutions. At lower planet masses, there is not a significant
difference between 2-D and 3-D; however, at higher planet masses, the different smoothing lengths used creates a much larger discrepancy. Resolution has
only a small effect on the planet’s growth track in both 2-D and 3-D.
Figure B2. Comparison of planet mass as a function of time for different
smoothing lengths ( different colors ), as well as 2-D ( solid lines ) vs 3-D
(dashed lines ), for the highest-mass disc. The default smoothing lengths in
2-D and 3-D are highlighted with thicker lines. Planet growth tracks are be
very dependent on the choice of smoothing length with higher-mass planets.
at above 4000 orbits by around a mass of Mp= 0.50MJup. The
highest-mass case differs from the others because it was the only
one in which the longevity of its dust asymmetry was due to the
initial vortex and not compact later-generation vortices. As such,
the increasing trend for the vortex lifetimes extends from around
Mp= 0.25MJupto at least Mp= 1.0MJup, and likely beyond.
APPENDIX D: PLANET MASS DEPENDENCE IN
LOW-RESOLUTION 2-D AND 3-D
Besides varying the disc mass to set the planet’s growth trajec-
tory, we also ran 2-D and 3-D low-resolution simulations in which
we varied the planet’s accretion rate in order to test whether weTable D1. 3-D parameter study varying the accretion rate. The final mass
Mpis recorded at the end of the vortex lifetime.
h Σ A M p/MJ
0.06 5.787×10−40.7 1.51
0.3 1.18
0.167 0.89
0.1 0.69
0.04 0.44
0.02 0.32
0.01 0.22
could reproduce our results from H21. In that work, we had found
that low-mass planets generate longer-lived dust asymmetries than
high-mass planets in discs with h= 0.06. More generally, we
found a “U-shaped” trend in which the lifetimes increase again
above a certain mass, which we only tested at h= 0.04but had
not fully explored at h= 0.06.
In both 2-D and 3-D low-resolution simulations, we find that
planets in discs with h= 0.06induce vortices with dust asym-
metry lifetimes that qualitatively follow the U-shaped trend, as de-
picted in Figure D1. There is some quantitative disagreement in
that the 2-D low-resolution simulations appear to overestimate the
lifetimes by a significant margin, while the 3-D low-resolution sim-
ulations largely underestimate the lifetimes from H21, although by
a lesser margin. Nevertheless, the qualitative trend still holds in
both cases. Like the dust asymmetry lifetime dependence on disc
mass, the trend at high-resolution from our previous work was due
to re-triggered vortices. Also like that dependence, we are able to
reproduce the U-shaped trend even though the low-resolution sim-
ulations do not have any re-triggered vortices. Lastly, we also ran
an additional higher-resolution 2-D simulation following the fidu-
cial parameters from our previous work but with A= 1.0. We find
that this extra simulation confirms that the “U-shaped” trend also
occurs at h= 0.06at higher resolution, just as it did at h= 0.04
in our previous work.
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??28 Hammer & Lin
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
Planet Mass [Jupiter masses]0200040006000800010000Lifetime [planet orbits]h=0.06
α=3×10−5Total Lifetimes of Dust Asymmetry
(w/ varied planet accretion rates) 
2-D (MH+ 2021)
2-D low res
3-D low-res
Figure D1. Total dust asymmetry lifetimes as a function of planet mass,
varying the planet mass with accretion parameter instead of the disc mass.
The 2-D results are taken from Hammer et al. 2021 (MH+ 2021), except for
the most-massive planet, which was added for this study. In both 2-D and 3-
D, the low-resolution simulations reproduce the U-shaped trend from MH+
2021 in which dust asymmetry lifetimes are the shortest with intermediate-
mass planets, increasing at either lower or higher planet masses. Some of
the dust asymmetries survive past the end of each simulation in all cases (as
indicated by the arrows).
APPENDIX E: EXTENTS IN SYNTHETIC IMAGES
Figures E1 and E2 show how much the azimuthal extents and
the number of peaks can vary over time. The former figure high-
lights the featured simulation that grows to Mp= 0.65MJup
(Σ0/Σbase= 3.0) using two different beam sizes, and features a
clear demarcation between its early chaotic stage and simpler later
stage. The latter figure shows two other high-mass planet cases
(Σ0/Σbase= 2.0and5.0) with indefinite dust asymmetry life-
times, the first of which likewise has an early chaotic stage because
of the compact cores that develop in the re-triggered vortices and
the second of which has just a simple first-generation vortex that
never decays.
In our previous work, the expected range of observed az-
imuthal extents was typically 100◦to180◦. During the early
chaotic stage, the default case ( Σ0/Σbase= 3.0) only has such
an extent for a few hundred orbits from about t= 650 to900Tp,
and the other chaotic case ( Σ0/Σbase= 2.0) only has such an ex-
tent for several hundred orbits at the beginning. Both of these cases
also have extents in this range in the simpler later stage for around
1000 orbits, even longer than in the chaotic, as the remaining dust
from the last compact core slowly spreads out towards a full ring.
For the final case with no early chaotic stage, the vortex begins with
an azimuthal extent in the expected range before settling at around
70◦and decaying at a much slower rate than the compact cores do
in the more chaotic cases.
A loose pattern that emerges is that vortices tend to have more
peaks when they have a more elongated azimuthal extent. These
additional peaks are typically due to the dust dynamics in the vor-
tex. With a larger beam size, however, a second peak can emerge
due to the dust away from the vortex and co-orbital with the planetat a Lagrange point. In the simpler later stage, that is the sole cause
for additional peaks, as shown in the right panel of Figure E1.
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??Long-lived planet-induced vortices 29
Figure E1. Evolution of the azimuthal extents and number of peaks for the featured high-mass planet that grows to Mp= 0.65MJup from a disc with
Σ0/Σbase= 3.0, analyzed with beam diameters of 0.043′′= 6 AU ( left panel ) and 0.107′′= 15 AU ( right panel ). The probabilities the vortex will have a
certain extent or number of peaks are shown. Both the azimuthal extents and numbers of peaks vary widely in the early chaotic stage before settling into a
steady-state in the later stage when the vortex has decayed. With a poor beam diameter, the dust at the Lagrange point can widen the azimuthal extent and add
another peak, particularly in the later stage.
Figure E2. Evolution of the azimuthal extents and number of peaks for two high-mass planets, analyzed with a beam diameter of 0.043′′= 6 AU. The first
case ( left panel ) also has two distinct stages like the previous figure, while the second case ( right panel ) has a much simpler evolution because the initial vortex
never decays or re-forms.
© 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–??