arXiv:2304.00319v1  [hep-ph]  1 Apr 2023Spontaneous Human Combustion
rules out all standard candidates for Dark Matter
Frederic V. Hessman
Institut f¨ ur Astrophysik und Geophysik, University of G¨ o ttingen
J. Craig Wheeler
Dept. of Astronomy, University of Texas at Austin
(Dated: April 1, 2023)
We argue that the reported cases of Spontaneous Human Combus tion (SHC) are most likely
due to the impact of the human body with an extremely high ener gy particle like cosmic rays or
Dark Matter. Normal and antimatter cosmic rays and classica l weakly-interacting massive particles
(WIMPs) with energies of GeV to ZeV can be easily ruled out due to their inability to dump
enough energy into a small region of human tissue, leaving as the single remaining candidate massive
Dark Matter particles. While primordial Black Holes would a ppear to be very good candidates for
inducing the SHC phenomenon, we show that the estimated loca l Dark Matter density requires that
the particles have masses of ∼10kg, clearly ruling out this candidate. All of the other cla ssic DM
candidates – from scalar and pseudo-scalar spin 1/2 and spin 2 gauge singlets to nuclearitic strange
quark “bowling balls” – can be ruled out. Axions tailored to s olve the CP-problem also cannot
be invoked, no matter what mass is considered. The only parti cles left are massive mega-axions
(MaMAs), for which there are an inﬁnite number of possible st ring models.
Keywords: cosmic rays – dark matter – black holes – particles : axions – medical history
I. INTRODUCTION
Given all of the indirect signs of the existence of Dark
Matter (DM) – the rotation curves of spiral galaxies,
the velocity dispersions within and macroscopic gravi-
tational lensing from galaxy clusters, the angular struc-
tureofthecosmicmicrowavebackground,observationsof
the baryonic acoustic oscillations in the large-scalestruc-
ture of the universe – it is particularly frustrating that
the search for the underlying particle has been so unsuc-
cessful. The limits on classical weakly-interacting mas-
sive particles (WIMPs) in the range of ∼1-1000GeV are
nearly at the point of rejecting this class of candidate.
A spate of new detector experiments is in the process of
doing the same for very light particles ( ≤1eV) like ax-
ions. Onthe otherend ofthe conceivablemass-range,the
limits on the density of primordial black holes (BH) are
now also very restrictive, including experiments search-
ing for the signs of BH passages though kitchen cabinet
tops [1]. Similarly, the gravitationalmicrolensingsurveys
like MACHO and EROS in our Galaxy and Quasar mi-
crolensing observations have restricted the mass-density
of stellar-and planetary-masscandidates [2, 3]. The only
DM particle mass range that has not yet been so exhaus-
tively probed is that between the WIMPs and primordial
BH, i.e. between about 1TeV and 1011kg. On the low
end of this mass range – less than about 1 gram – is so-
called “nuclearitic” matter with nuclear densities [4] or
generic “macro” DM with cross-sections of ∼cm2[5].
We consider what constraints on the DM particle mass
can be derived based on a natural experiment that may
have been carried out since the beginning of human life
on Earth – Spontaneous Human Combustion (SHC) [6].II. SPONTANEOUS HUMAN COMBUSTION
SHC is the reported occurrence of massive fatal burns
in humans with no obvious explanation for the source
of the ignition. These events purportedly originate from
within the body of the victims and generally result in
no damage to the surroundings other than that due to
contact with the body itself.
The idea of SHC was ﬁrst reported in the scientiﬁc
literature in 1746 [7]. Thurston [8] maintained in the
British Medical Journal that the phenomenon “... at-
tracted the attention ... of the medical profession”
throughout the 19th century. Arnold [9] relates the de-
tailed history of the idea and reviews the most promi-
nent cases. All in all, there have been about 200 well-
documented reports during the last 300 years, mostly
within Europe and North America. The assumption is
that occurrences before the 18th century or in less de-
veloped societies would have been explained as magical
events due to sinister supernatural forces and so gone
largely undocumented. Of course, humans are not the
only living beings that would be suﬀering from this eﬀect
– there should be just as many spontaneously combusted
sheep, cows, raccoon dogs, and African swallows – but
the occurrence of such an event in a non-human victim
is much less likely to be noticed as something extremely
odd and much less likely to produce such an emotional
impact that it gets reported as such.
While there have been several rational/medical at-
tempts at explaining SHC – sleeping while smoking, ace-
tone produced by kertosis [10], and the mast-cell acti-
vation syndrome [11] – these mundane medical expla-
nations have never been convincing. Given our current2
knowledge of the types of highly energetic particles in
the universe, we propose that SHC is much more likely
to have been caused by a collision with a cosmic particle.
Such an interaction with human tissue could principally
result in the sudden release of considerable energy within
a fairly small volume [12]. Once started, such an event
could then induce the combustion of fatty tissue, result-
ing in a fatal burning event with a natural origin within
the body itself. Likely physical candidates are the most
extreme cosmic ray particles or Dark Matter particles,
being omnipresent and potentially having large speciﬁc
kinetic energies.
III. COSMIC RAYS AND WIMPS?
Most cosmic rays have energies of MeV to GeV, but
some have been observed up to energies of ZeV [13]. As
such, they would seem to be good candidates for the oc-
currenceofSHC.While theyhaveenoughenergytocause
considerable damage, this energy must be deposited in a
smallvolumein orderto causeSHC. Clinicalstudies have
shown that the higher energy particles do not, in fact,
have this eﬀect [14] : considerable damage can be done
by single collisions with, e.g. DNA molecules, but the en-
tire energy of the particle is not deposited. Lower energy
particlesinteract moreoften and hence can domore ther-
mal damage, but their total energies are not enough to
cause combustion. Thus, normal atomic and nuclear par-
ticles are inherently poor SHC candidates. The same ar-
gument can be made for weakly-interacting massive par-
ticles (WIMPs) with similar energies that are the classic
Dark Matter candidates [12].
Cosmic rays out of antimatter could, in principle, re-
sult in the release of lots of energy in a very localized
region. The problem with this hypothesis is that all of
the energy needed to trigger an SHC event must come
from a single annihilation that produces both the right
amount and the right type of annihilation radiation. The
energy involved in triggering a single SHC event that ini-
tially burns a fraction fSHCof it’s victim is roughly
ESHC≈mhfSHCǫfat (1)
≈2×106J/parenleftbiggmh
60kg/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggfSHC
10−3/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggǫfat
17000BTU/lb/parenrightbigg
wheremhis the mass of a typical victim and ǫfatis the
energy produced by burning animal fat [15]. The equiv-
alent annihilation rest mass is 3 ×10−11kg or an atomic
number equivalent of 2 ×1016! Even if one could trigger
the event with a factor of 1000 less fatty tissue, the cos-
mic ray nucleus involved would have an atomic number
farbeyondthatofanyknownelement. Iftheannihilation
event produced high-energy radiation (X-rays, gamma
rays), the radiation would simply exit the victim’s body
and the burning of the tissue wouldn’t be triggered.
All of these eﬀects prove that normal matter in the
form of energetic particles or even massive antimatter
cosmic rays are not capable of inducing SHC. We mustturn to forms of DM other than WIMPs in order to ﬁnd
an appropriate candidate.
IV. PRIMORDIAL BLACK HOLES?
One way to increase the interaction of an energetic
particle with human tissue is to change the interaction
mechanism from simple collisions to, for example, accre-
tion. Primordial Dark Matter in the form of BH is thus
a plausible candidate: the particles would be universally
present, have high kinetic energies, and the energy re-
leased into the tissue would be due to the intense radia-
tion produced by mass-accretion near the singularity.
In order to exist now, primordial BHmust havemasses
larger than
MBH,primordial >/parenleftbigg13.4Gyrc4
5120πG2/parenrightbigg1/3
= 1.7×1011kg (2)
(about the mass of a major mountain range; [16]). Carr
et al. [3] suggest that primordial BH should come in a
distinct range of masses – about 10−6, 1, 30, and 106M⊙
– due to instabilities at expected QCD state transitions,
and that such objects would fulﬁll all of the known as-
trophysical constraints.
SHC can add an additional constraint on the possible
masses: could the collision of a primordial BH with a
human result only in damage to the victim and not to
the surroundings? In particularly, wouldn’t there be a
noticeable gravitational ”jolt” due to the passage of a
large mass that would cause collateral damage that has
not been reported in SHC cases (see [16] for a simulation
of such an encounter)?
The asymptotic perpendicular velocity given to a hu-
man by the hyperbolic passage of a signiﬁcantly more
massive BH in the laboratory frame is
V⊥≈GMBH
bVDM(3)
≈0.05cm/s/parenleftbiggMBH
21011kg/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggb
10cm/parenrightbigg−1/parenleftbiggVDM
220km/s/parenrightbigg−1
for an impact parameter bsmall enough so that SHC
occurs, a typical local Galactic DM kinematic velocity,
and a minimal-mass primordial BH. Such a gravitational
“jolt” is unlikely to havebeen noticed, much less resulted
in anycollateraldamage, knockingvictims oﬀofchairsor
otherwise noticeable eﬀects. Thus, the only eﬀects would
be due to the release of energy due to the eﬀects of the
collision itself. However, when a planet-sized primordial
QCD BH is substituted, the jolt is relativistic, a case
clearlyruledoutbySHC:ifthereareprimordialBH,they
must have “small” masses near the cosmological lifetime
limit.
The Schwarzschild radius of a minimum-mass primor-
dial BH with this mass is minuscule even by subatomic
scales, but all matter within the Hoyle-Littleton radius3
[17] of the path
rHL=2GMBH
V2
DM≈0.47nm
should be accreted during passage. This cross-section is
small, but the high density of tissue results in an accre-
tion rate of
˙MHL=4πG2M2
BHρhuman
V3
DM≈1.5×10−10kg/s (4)
or an instantaneous accretion power of about
Lacc≈0.1˙MHLc2≈1400kW (5)
i.e. more than enough energy input to cause fatty tissue
to inﬂame. The accretion energy will be emitted with a
typical equivalent black-body temperature of
Tacc>/parenleftBigg
3GMBH˙MHB
8πr2
HLσ/parenrightBigg1/4
≈2×106K (6)
The soft X-ray and EUV part of this energy will be de-
posited locally due to the rapidly rising opacity of hu-
man tissue towards the extreme ultraviolet [18], produc-
ing highly localized heating and, hence, nearly sponta-
neous combustion.
Though the available power is large enough, the in-
teraction time is very short, of order Lh/VDM≈2µs,
resulting in a very small total energy release. In order
to increase the total eﬀect, one can attempt to use a pri-
mordial BH with the largest mass consistent with SHC:
assuming that the asymptotic perpendicular velocity of
the victim can be no larger than ∼10cm/s (otherwise,
the victim would be ejected from her chair), the BH can-
not be more massive than about
MBH≈bVDMV⊥
G(7)
≈3×1013kg/parenleftbiggb
10cm/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggVDM
220km/s/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggV⊥
10cm/s/parenrightbigg
and would result in an instantaneous accretion power of
∼51GW and a total energy deposition of 5 ×104J – per-
haps enough to cause SHC (see Eqn.1). Thus, if primor-
dial BH exist and collide with humans, they will result
in the observed SHC phenomena if they have masses less
than about 1013kg. The ﬁnal question is whether the
occurrence rate of SHC is compatible with the existence
of primordial BH.
V. GENERIC CONSTRAINTS FROM THE
LOCAL DM DENSITY
The local DM density has been estimated using a va-
riety of methods, e.g. based upon the rotation curve of
the Milky Way and the kinematics of local stars [19–21].Despite many questions about the data and the reliabil-
ity of the models [22, 23], the canonical value is about
0.01M ⊙/pc3(0.4GeV/cm3). Given this estimate for the
local DM density, it is possible to constrain the mass
of the purported particle using the occurrence rate of
SHC alone. Using a typical human height of 160cm dur-
ing the 18th and 19th centuries [24], the corresponding
cross-sectionalsurfaceareaperhuman Ahumanwasabout
0.4m2. The DM ﬂux is then
φSHC≈Nevents
∆teventsNpopAhuman(8)
≈2×10−17events/m2/s (9)
whereNpop≈2×109is the meanpopulation ofthe Earth
during the last 300 years. For a typical local DM particle
velocity of 220 km/s, the mass of the DM particle must
then be
MDM=ρDMVDM
φSHC≈8kg≈4×1027GeV (10)
This value is an upper limit to the actual mass, since it
is proportional to Npopand it is unclear what fraction of
the total population at what epoch would have reported
cases of SHC. For instance, if one only considers the pop-
ulationsofEuropeandNorthAmerica, wheremostofthe
reportsof SHC havebeen made, the relevant mean popu-
lationsize woulddrop to about450million and the corre-
sponding DM particle mass to 2kg. Thus, DM particles
can best be described as astrophysical “bowling balls”
and certainly cannot be due to primordial BH produced
by QCD instabilities.
VI. SHC-CONSISTENT DM CANDIDATES?
GivenaDMparticlemassof ∼10kg,mostoftheclassic
DM candiates can be ruled out.
•WIMPsarenotmassiveenoughandcannotprovide
the needed SHC interaction cross-sections.
•Neutrinos are obviously bad candidates for SHC
interactions even if it was possible to scale them to
such high masses.
•Primordial BH must have drastically larger masses
in order to have survived until now and would have
SHC eﬀects that would be much stronger than ob-
served.
•There is no known mechanism to turn baryonic
MACHO candidate objects like planets and brown
dwarfs into microscopic bowling balls.
•Scalar, pseudo- scalar, spin 1/2 and spin 2 dark
matter particles which are gauge singlets are ruled
out [25].4
•Massiveprimordialstrangequarkmatter“nuggets”
[4] with baryon numbers of only A≃1028would
not have survived baryon evaporation [26].
We are only left with axions [27] : not only do they
have a cool name but one can assume whatever mass one
wants.
Axionsfulﬁlling the SHC constraintsmust havemasses
that are drastically larger than those previously consid-
ered. The Pecci-Quinn mechanism for explaining CP-
violation [28] – the original reason for postulating the
existence of axions – has an energy scale fAthat de-
termines the mass of the axion and the strength of all
couplings. A high axion mass would force this energy
scale to be extremely low: classically
fA≈1012GeV/parenleftbigg5.70µeV
mA/parenrightbigg
(11)
but for a mass of 10kg (6 ×1027GeV), this scale shrinks
down to about 10−21eV – way below any QCD scale.
This has profound implications for the cosmological use
of axions [29] : whereas “normal” axions with small
massesaremasslessin the earlyuniverse, SHC axioncan-
nonballs are not and never will be.
An extremely small axion energy scale has dramatic
consequencesforcouplings with photons and matter. For
example, in a standard Lagrangian, the axion-photon
coupling constant gAis
gA≡α
2πCAγ
fA(12)
where the adimensional constant
CAγ=E
N−2
34md+mu
mu+md, (13)
depends upon the mass of up and down quarks and the
ratio of two anomaly coeﬃcients EandN(the axion
“model”). For an extremely low fAandCAγ∼O(1),
the coupling would be so strong that every photon would
immediately create a shower of axions. The only reason-
able alternative is that the two CAγterms nearly can-
cel each other, amazingly producing a “normal” coupling
constant despite the tiny axion energy scale. Given that
weneedan SHC-interactionwith the axion, thecanceling
cannot be perfect ( CAγ/negationslash≡0), so a PQ-axion explanation
comes at the price of yet another symmetry breaking.
Since there are good reasons for having “normal” ax-
ions (CP-violation) and there is no reason there cannot
be many diﬀerent axion varieties – in string theory, there
can be an inﬁnite number of varieties [30]. We need
to invoke a fully new massive mega-axion (“MaMA”)
model beyond the PQ-mechanism, one that is tailored
to maximize the transfer of energy to human tissue oncea collision occurs. Since high-energy particles are not
good candidates for this transfer – otherwise they them-
selves would have been good SHC candidates – we re-
quire the post-collision creation of massive numbers of
soft X-ray and EUV photons. Indeed, this scenario is
not too much diﬀerent from that used to detect neutri-
nos: the giant containers used in instruments like Su-
perKamiokande contains water with similar densities as
human tissue and the containers are monitored by thou-
sandsofphotomultiplier tubes that detect the Cherenkov
lightproducedbyelectronscreatedbyneutrinocollisions.
If SuperKamiokande has not detected SHC-like events,
then practically all of the light must be of higher fre-
quency than that seen by photomultipliers – i.e. EUV
andbeyond–andoflowenoughfrequencytobeabsorbed
locally by the tissue, i.e. soft X-rays. Alternatively, the
MaMAsreactnot with singleprotonsbut with the higher
mass (carbon, oxygen,...) nuclei, sothat experiments like
SuperKamiokande would not show any SHC-like events.
Given the largely unconstrained freedoms of string the-
ory, we are conﬁdent that an appropriate model for an
axion-likeparticlewithbowling-ballmassescanbefound.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
We have argued that the reports of spontaneous hu-
man combustion can only be due to interactions with
astrophysical particles and that such particles must nec-
essarily be those responsible for Dark Matter. The SHC
phenomena and observed rate are powerful constraints
on the properties of such particles: the mass must be of
order 10kg. This is a mass that is wholly unexplored in
both theory and experiment and is totally inconsistent
with all previous hypotheses. We are left with a single
plausible candidate: massive mega-axions – “MaMAs” –
for which there undoubtedly exists a string model con-
sistent with the SHC phenomenon.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We want to thank David “Doddy” Marsh for brief
hallway conversations about axions that led us to think
we might know what we are doing. This research was
supported by a grant from the European Association of
Fire-Extinguisher Manufacturers . JCW would like to
acknowledge additional support from the Jim Bob and
Betty Sue Johnson Foundation for Non-Woke Cosmolog-
ical Research .5
[1] J. S. Sidhu, G. Starkman, and R. Harvey,
Counter-top search for macroscopic dark matter,
Phys. Rev. D 100, 103015 (2019).
[2] M. R. S. Hawkins, A new look at microlens-
ing limits on dark matter in the Galac-
tic halo, Astron. Astrophys. 575, A107 (2015),
arXiv:1503.01935 [astro-ph.GA].
[3] B. Carr, S. Clesse, J. Garc´ ıa-Bellido, and
F. K¨ uhnel, Cosmic conundra explained by
thermal history and primordial black holes,
Physics of the Dark Universe 31, 100755 (2021).
[4] A. de Rujula and S. L. Glashow, Nuclearites-a novel form
of cosmic radiation, Nature 312, 734 (1984).
[5] D. M. Jacobs, G. D. Starkman, and
B. W. Lynn, Macro dark matter,
Mon. Not. Roy. Ast. Soc. 450, 3418 (2015),
arXiv:1410.2236 [astro-ph.CO].
[6] Spontaneous Human Combustion,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spontaneous_human_com bustion
(2022), accessed: 2021-04-01.
[7] P. Rolli, An Extract, by Mr. Paul Rolli, F.R.S. of an
Italian Treatise, written by the Rev. Joseph Bianchini, a
Prebend in the City of Verona; upon the Death of the
Countess Cornelia Zangari and Bandi, of Cesena, Philo-
sophical transactions of the Royal Society of London 21,
447 (1746).
[8] G. Thurston, Spontaneous human combustion, The
British Medical Journal 1, 1340 (1938).
[9] L. Arnold, Ablaze!: The Mysterious Fires of Spontaneous
Human Combustion (M. Evans & Co., 1995).
[10] B. J. Ford, Solving the Mystery of Spontaneous Human
Combustion, The Microscope , 63–72 (2012).
[11] L. B. Afrin, Never Bet Against Occam: Mast Cell Ac-
tivation Disease and the Modern Epidemics of Chronic
Illness and Medical Complexity (Sisters Media, LLC.,
2016).
[12] K. Freese and C. Savage, Dark matter collisions
with the human body, Physics Letters B 717, 25 (2012),
arXiv:1204.1339 [astro-ph.CO].
[13] K. Kotera, D. Allard, and A. V. Olinto,
Cosmogenic neutrinos: parameter space
and detectabilty from PeV to ZeV,
JCAP2010(10), 013, arXiv:1009.1382 [astro-ph.HE].
[14] P. Bennett, N. Cutter, and B. Sutherland,
Split-dose exposures versus dual ion expo-
sure in human cell neoplastic transformation,
Radiation and Environmental Biophysics 46, 119–123 (2007).
[15] BTU Values of Various Solid and Liquid Wastes,
http://balboa-pacific.com/WasteToEnergy/BTU_Values. pdf(2022), accessed: 2022-03-27.
[16] J. R. Wheeler and J. C. Wheeler, The Krone Experiment ,
independent ﬁlm, http://thekroneexperiment.com (1999).
[17] F. Hoyle and R. A. Lyttleton, On the
accretion theory of stellar evolution,
Mon. Not. Roy. Ast. Soc. 101, 227 (1941).
[18] S. L. Jacques, Optical properties of biological tissue s: a
review, Phys. Med. Biol. 58, 37 (2013).
[19] J. Bovy and H.-W. Rix, A Direct Dynamical Measure-
ment of the Milky Way’s Disk Surface Density Pro-
ﬁle, Disk Scale Length, and Dark Matter Proﬁle at
4 kpc<R<9 kpc, Astrophys. J. 779, 115 (2013),
arXiv:1309.0809 [astro-ph.GA].
[20] J. Wang, F. Hammer, and Y. Yang, Milky
Way total mass derived by rotation curve
and globular cluster kinematics from Gaia
EDR3, Mon. Not. Roy. Ast. Soc. 510, 2242 (2022),
arXiv:2111.09324 [astro-ph.GA].
[21] J. Binney and E. Vasiliev, Self-consistent models of
our Galaxy, Mon. Not. Roy. Ast. Soc. 520, 1832 (2023),
arXiv:2206.03523 [astro-ph.GA].
[22] F. V. Hessman, The diﬃculty of measuring the local dark
matter density, Astron. Astrophys. 579, A123 (2015),
arXiv:1506.00384 [astro-ph.GA].
[23] S. Sivertsson, J. I. Read, H. Silverwood, P. F.
de Salas, K. Malhan, A. Widmark, C. F. P. La-
porte, S. Garbari, and K. Freese, Estimating the lo-
cal dark matter density in a non-axisymmetric wob-
bling disc, Mon. Not. Roy. Ast. Soc. 511, 1977 (2022),
arXiv:2201.01822 [astro-ph.GA].
[24] N. R. F. C. (NCD-RisC), A century of trends in adult
human height, eLife 5, e13410 (2016).
[25] X. Calmet and F. Kuipers, Theoretical bounds on dark
matter masses, Physics Letters B 814, 136068 (2021),
arXiv:2009.11575 [hep-ph].
[26] P. Bhattacharjee, J.-E. Alam, B. Sinha, and S. Raha,
Survivability of cosmological quark nuggets in the chro-
moelectric ﬂux-tube ﬁssion model of baryon evaporation,
Phys. Rev. D 48, 4630 (1993).
[27] I. G. Irastorza, An introduction to axions and their
detection, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2109.07376 (2021),
arXiv:2109.07376 [hep-ph].
[28] R. D. Peccei and H. R. Quinn, CP con-
servation in the presence of pseudoparticles,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 1440 (1977).
[29] D. J. Marsh, Axion cosmology,
Physics Reports 643, 1 (2016), axion cosmology.
[30] A. Arvanitaki, S. Dimopoulos, S. Dubovsky,
N. Kaloper, and J. March-Russell, String axiverse,
Phys. Rev. D 81, 123530 (2010).