© 2023 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or
future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for
resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
Communications-Aware Robotics: Challenges and Opportunities
Daniel Bonilla Licea1, Giuseppe Silano1, Mounir Ghogho2, and Martin Saska1
Abstract — The use of Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs)
and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UA Vs) has seen signiﬁcant
growth in the research community, industry, and society. Many
of these agents are equipped with communication systems that
are essential for completing certain tasks successfully. This
has led to the emergence of a new interdisciplinary ﬁeld
at the intersection of robotics and communications, which
has been further driven by the integration of UA Vs into 5G
and 6G communication networks. However, one of the main
challenges in this research area is how many researchers tend to
oversimplify either the robotics or the communications aspects,
hindering the full potential of this new interdisciplinary ﬁeld.
In this paper, we present some of the necessary modeling
tools for addressing these problems from both a robotics and
communications perspective, using the UA V communications
relay as an example.
Index Terms — Communications; Control Design; Motion
Planning; Multi-Rotor UA Vs; Communications relay.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The intersection of communications and robotics has gar-
nered increasing attention, as demonstrated by the growing
number of publications in both the robotics [1], [2] and
communications [3], [4] communities. This interest is partly
due to the development of 5G and 6G technologies that aim
to integrate Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UA Vs) into cellular
communication networks [5]. These interdisciplinary prob-
lems can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories based on
the application scenario: Robotics-assisted Communications
(RaC) and Communications-assisted Robotics (CaR).
In RaC applications, one or more robots are integrated
into a communication network to improve their performance.
They can serve as mobile relays [5] or as Base Stations
(BSs) that extend the communication range of the network
or provide communication to more network users, respec-
tively. In traditional mobile communication, the position of
the transceiver is considered “uncontrollable” and random.
In RaC, the position of the transceiver is “controllable”, rep-
resenting an additional communication system parameter to
be optimized. This difference presents exciting opportunities
for the design of communication systems involving robots.
1Daniel Bonilla Licea, Giuseppe Silano, and Martin Saska are with the
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague,
Czech Republic (emails: fbonildan, giuseppe.silano,
martin.saska g@fel.cvut.cz ).
2Mounir Ghogho is with the International University of Rabat, Morocco
(email: mounir.ghogho@uir.ac.ma ).
This work was partially funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme AERIAL-CORE under grant agreement
no. 871479, by the CTU grant no. SGS23/177/OHK3/3T/13, by the Czech
Science Foundation (GA ˇCR) within research project no. 23-07517S, and by
the OP VVV funded project CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16 019/0000765 “Research
Center for Informatics”.In CaR applications, robots can exchange information
with other agents in the ﬁeld, such as other robots or BSs,
to facilitate various tasks. Examples of these tasks include
exchanging localization and state estimation data in robot
swarms [6], using information exchange to help robots
escape mazes faster [7], and transmitting real-time data from
surveying robots to a control center [8]. To perform these
tasks effectively, the robots must consider how their own
motion affects the quality of the communication channel.
To achieve success in RaC and CaR applications, it
is necessary to have a comprehensive understanding of
both communication and robotics. Ignoring either aspect
can result in inefﬁcient or infeasible solutions. When only
considering communication, a solution may be inefﬁcient
in terms of energy consumption or not feasible given the
robot’s dynamic and physical constraints. On the other
hand, focusing only on robotics and ignoring the impact
of communication may result in the failure of the robot to
complete its task due to unexpected communication failures
caused by poor connectivity or lower than expected bit rates.
Therefore, it is important to approach these problems with
an interdisciplinary perspective to develop functional and
effective solutions and fully capitalize on the opportunities
presented in this growing research ﬁeld. This importance
has also been recently highlighted in [9], [10]. However,
existing literature often lacks an interdisciplinary approach
to addressing CaR and RaC applications. While some recent
tutorials [5], [11] have been published on these problems,
they tend to oversimplify either the communications or
robotics aspects.
The purpose of this paper is to address the gap in re-
search on the intersection of communications and robotics
by highlighting the need for an interdisciplinary approach.
To illustrate this point, in Section II, we examine a gen-
eral mathematical structure for the problem of Trajectory
Planning (TP) in the context of CaR and RaC applications,
referred to as Communications-aware Trajectory Planning
(CaTP). Then, in Section III, we provide an example of
a Communications-aware Trajectory Planning (CaTP) prob-
lem by discussing our work on UA Vs acting as commu-
nication relays between two agents. Finally, we outline
several research opportunities and challenges of this exciting
research area in Section IV.
II. C OMMUNICATIONS -AWARE TRAJECTORY PLANNING
The goal of CaTP optimization problems is to ﬁnd tra-
jectories that take into account both the communications
(e.g., communication energy consumption, quality of the
communications link, number of transmitted bits) and thearXiv:2304.06644v1  [cs.RO]  13 Apr 2023robotics aspects (e.g., kinematic and dynamic constraints,
motion energy consumption, physical actuation limits). The
general structure of a CaTP optimization problem that seeks
to determine the predetermined trajectory of a single robot
can be expressed as:
minimize
u;x;C;TJ(u;x;C;T) (1a)
s.t. motion model ; (1b)
channel model ; (1c)
trajectory constraints ; (1d)
communications constraints ; (1e)
where uandxare the robot’s control signal and system
state, respectively; Cis the set of all communications-related
parameters to be optimized, such as modulation order or
transmission power1; andTis the set of the remaining
parameters to be optimized that are not directly related to
the communication system, such as the completion duration
of the trajectory.
The CaTP optimization problem (1) consists of ﬁve el-
ements: the optimization target (1a), which is given by
J(u;x;C;T); the motion model (1b), which describes how
the robot’s state xevolves based on the control signal
u; the wireless channel model (1c), which describes how
the received and transmitted signals behave depending on
the robot’s position and orientation; generic trajectory con-
straints (1d), such as maximum velocity and acceleration
for the robot; and ﬁnally, constraints (1e) related to the
communication system performance and/or goals. We now
discuss these ﬁve elements in more detail.
Optimization target : the optimization target of CaTP
problems can vary, but it can generally be divided into
three categories: those that include both communications and
robotics terms, those that only consider robotics aspects,
and those that only consider communication aspects. A
common robotics-related term used in the cost function (1a)
of CaTP problems is the energy consumed by the robot
while tracking the desired trajectory, i.e., ku>uk2. Another
common robotics-related term is the distance traveled by
the robot. This assumes that the energy consumption due to
motion can be accurately obtained from the distance traveled
by the robot. Another common robotics-related metric is
the total time that the robot takes to complete the designed
trajectory, i.e., t=tf ti, wheretfandtirepresent the
end and start times of the robot’s motion, respectively. As
for the communication-related term Cin the optimization
target (1a), typical examples include the energy spent by
the robot’s communication system, the total number of bits
transmitted, and the amount of time during which the robot
was disconnected from the communication network. Alter-
natively, the optimization target J(u;x;C;T)is constant in
certain problem formulations, resulting in an optimization
problem (1) that becomes a constraint satisfaction problem.
The solution to this problem would then yield a trajectory
(or set of trajectories) that satisﬁes all constraints.
1Note that if all of the communications parameters are ﬁxed, then C=;.Motion model : the motion model in CaTP optimization
problems describes how the robot’s state xchanges based
on the control signal u. This can be represented as either
a continuous or discrete function, such as _x=f(x;u)or
xk+1=f(xk;uk)2. The motion model can include kinematic
or dynamic models of the robot, which may be nonlinear with
respect to the control signal u. While nonlinear models can
provide more accurate results, they may be more complex
to work with. Linearizing the motion model can simplify
the control and optimization process, though the resulting
solution may be suboptimal [12].
Channel model : the channel model speciﬁes how the
signals that are transmitted and received by the robot vary
based on the robot’s position and orientation (also known
as its pose) and the physical surroundings in which it is
communicating. This includes whether the environment is
indoors or outdoors, urban or rural, and so on. The channel
model is often based on a statistical model of the wireless
channel, which can be either deterministic or stochastic
depending on the amount of information available about
the channel. It is used to predict the strength of the signal
or the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) at the receiver based
on the transmitter and receiver positions, the frequency of
the transmission, and other factors, such as shadowing or
multipath fading [13]–[15]. Additionally, the channel model
is used to determine the required transmission power or
modulation scheme needed to achieve a certain level of
performance. The channel model plays a crucial role in
the CaTP problem because it determines the feasibility and
performance of the communication links between the robot
and other nodes, which in turn affects the robot’s ability to
perform its tasks.
Trajectory constraints : there are three categories of
optimization targets in CaTP problems. The ﬁrst category
includes constraints related to both communications and
robotics (e.g., maximum robot velocity and acceleration,
and maximum bandwidth for the communication channel).
The second category includes exclusively robotics-related
constraints (e.g., maximum robot velocity and acceleration)
with the third category including only communications-
related constraints (e.g., maximum bandwidth for the com-
munication channel). The speciﬁc constraints set up can vary
based on the requirements of the mission.
Communications constraints : these affect the overall
performance of the communication system or the wireless
channel experienced by the robot along its entire trajectory.
When using stochastic channel models, the constraints re-
lated to the wireless channel are probabilistic. For example,
we can require that the robot transmit an average of at least
Nbits along its trajectory, as expressed by the following
constraint:
ZT
0E[R(SNR( p1(t);p2(t);t))]dtN; (2)
2xkandxk+1represent the next and current states of the discrete-time
dynamical system, respectively.where SNR( p1(t);p2(t);t)is the instantaneous SNR ob-
served at time instant tfor the link between the robot at
position p1(t)and to another node at p2(t). The function
R()determines the bit rate transmission as a function of the
instantaneous SNR, depending on the modulation scheme.
The expected value in (2) is taken with respect to (w.r.t.) all
possible realizations of the wireless channel. It is important
to note that due to the stochastic nature of the wireless
channel, the constraint (2) does not guarantee that the robot
will always be able to transmit at least Nbits, but rather that,
on average, robots following the same trajectory in the same
environment will transmit at least Nbits. Additionally, (2)
assumes that the transmission process is continuous (as indi-
cated by the integral and the fact that the integrand is treated
as a continuous function of time). Although the transmission
process may not be continuous (data may be transmitted in
packets rather than as a continuous, uninterrupted ﬂow), we
can still assume that it is continuous for simplicity, since the
dynamics of the motion process are generally much slower
than the dynamics of the transmission process.
There are also constraints that directly affect the wireless
channel. One advantage of directly constraining the wireless
channel is that it makes the optimization problem indepen-
dent of the speciﬁc communication system being used (e.g.
modulation type). One common type of constraint has the
following form:
Pr (SNR( p1(t);p2(t);t)0)1 ";8t2[0;T];(3)
where Pr (SNR( p1(t);p2(t);t)0)is the probability that
SNR( p1(t);p2(t);t)0occurs. This constraint ensures
that the robot’s communication system experiences an SNR
greater than 0with a probability of 1 "throughout
the entire trajectory. If the minimum SNR required for
the robot to establish communication is 0, then satisfying
the constraint (3) ensures that the robot stays connected
throughout the trajectory with a probability of 1 ".
Not all ﬁve elements in (1) are necessary for all CaTP
optimization problems, however the robot motion model
(which may not be explicitly mentioned if it is simple
enough), the channel model, and the optimization target are
essential. As for the constraints, there are three possible
scenarios:
1)Case 1 : the optimization target involves both commu-
nications and robotics aspects. In this case, we may not
need any trajectory or communications constraints;
2)Case 2 : the optimization target only involves robotics
aspects. For example, the optimization target may
consider only the motion energy of the robot (i.e.,
the communications energy is considered negligible
compared to the motion energy). In this case, the CaTP
problem includes communications constraints and has
a reduced set of trajectory constraints, such as only the
initial and ﬁnal positions of the robot;
3)Case 3 : The optimization target only involves commu-
nications aspects. In this case, the CaTP problem may
not have any communication-related constraints.The constraints discussed previously are hard constraints ,
meaning they must either be satisﬁed or not. In some
cases, these types of constraints can cause issues in the
optimization problem. One such issue is the infeasibility of
the optimization problem (1). There may be certain values of
the parameters that make it impossible to satisfy some of the
hard constraints of the CaTP problem, rendering it infeasible.
This can be particularly challenging to identify in com-
plex CaTP problems with many parameters and complicated
constraints. Another issue is related to the performance of
the solution for the optimization problem (1). It may happen
that a trajectory slightly violates a hard constraint in (1) and
achieves a signiﬁcantly lower value in the optimization target
compared to the actual optimal trajectory that satisﬁes all
constraints. These issues can be addressed by relaxing some
hard constraints and turning them into soft constraints [16].
Let us consider the inequality constraint g(u;x;C;T)0.
There are two ways to relax this constraint. The methods
to relax equality constraints are similar and only require
slight modiﬁcations. The ﬁrst method involves converting
the hard constraint into a penalty term that is added to the
optimization target in (1). One way to represent this penalty
term is as follows:
Pf=1exp(2g(u;x;C;T)); (4)
where1;2>0are large constants. The term (4) imposes a
heavy penalty on the optimization target when the constraint
g(u;x;C;T)0is not satisﬁed, i.e., when g(u;x;C;T)>
0. If the constraint g(u;x;C;T)0is upheld, thenPf
0. We have used this in [2] to avoid obstacles in a CaTP
problem.
The second method involves the use of slack vari-
ables [16]. To relax the inequality constraint men-
tioned above (4), this method reshapes the constraint to
g(u;x;C;T)sg, withsg0, and adds the term kss2
g
to the optimization target in (4), with ks0. The slack
variablesgallows for a slight violation of the constraint
g(u;x;C;T)0. The degree of this violation is controlled
by the parameter ks. It is worth noting that when ks= 0,
the constraint becomes an hard constraint.
Some hard constraints in (4) are related to desired per-
formance and are usually imposed by the designer. For
instance, constraints of this type might involve the time
needed to complete the mission, the ﬁnal position of the
robot, or the minimum number of bits to transmit. These
types of constraints can be relaxed if the speciﬁc application,
for which the CaTP problem is being solved, permits the
relaxation. On the other hand, there are hard constraints that
are imposed by the physical world. Examples include the
dynamics of the robot, its kinematic or dynamic model, the
presence of obstacles, or the maximum transmission power.
Relaxing this type of constraint might result in solutions that
will not work in the real world.
III. UAV C OMMUNICATIONS RELAYS
To demonstrate the importance of considering both the
robotics and communication aspects in CaTP problems, wethe particularity that they can either stay still in the air by
hovering, or move towards any desired destination, as long
as their dynamics constraints are not violated. In order to
move, the quad-rotor needs to tilt; its direction of movement
(p), velocity ( v) and acceleration ( a) depend on its Euler
angles [17]: roll ( ϕ), pitch (ϑ) and yaw (ψ).
We consider a discrete-time dynamic model for the quad-
rotor; letTs∈R≥0andT∈R≥0denote the UA V
sampling period and trajectory time, respectively, and let
t= [0,Ts,...,NTs]/latticetop∈RN+1, withkt=kTs,k∈N≥0,
andNTs=T. We also deﬁne the state xand control u
sequences askx= [kp(1),kv(1),kp(2),kv(2),kp(3),kv(3)]/latticetop
andku= [ka(1),ka(2),ka(3)]/latticetop, wherekp(j),kv(j), andka(j),
withj={1,2,3}, represent the vehicle’s position, velocity,
and acceleration at time instant kalong thej-axis of the
inertial frame OW, respectively.
In [18], the authors present motion primitives to design
trajectories that satisfy the UA V’s dynamic constraints. This
method allows to generate feasible quad-rotor motion primi-
tives. This method provide the following splines that we will
use to account for the dynamics of the quad-rotor UA V:

k+1p(j)
k+1v(j)
k+1a(j)
=
α
120kt5+β
24kt4+γ
6kt3+ka(j)kt2+kv(j)kt+kp(j)
α
24kt4+β
6kt3+γ
2kt2+ka(j)kt+kv(j)
α
6kt3+β
2kt2+γkt+ka(j)
,
(1)
whereα,βandγare design parameters that determine the
behaviour at the start and end points [18, Appx. A].
B. Communications System
The communications system consists of two communica-
tions links: UA V- 2→UA V- 1and UA V- 1→BS. Both UA Vs
are equipped with a single antenna; we arbitrarily choose the
half-wave dipole1, but the proposed method apply to other
types of antennas. The q-th UA V antenna is located at its center
of mass pq, and is aligned to its zBqaxis, see Fig. 1. The gain
experienced by the wave transmitted by the q-th UA V’s is [19]:
Gq(ϑ) =Dcos(cos(ϑ)π/2)
sin(ϑ), q ={1,2}, (2)
whereDis the half-wave dipole’s directivity ( ≈1.64),ϑis
the Angle of Departure (AoD) of the radiated wave measured
w.r.t. the antenna’s axis zBq. Note that (2) also describes
the gain experienced by the received wave, in which case ϑ
becomes the Angle of Arrival (AoA).
To highlight the effect of the coupling between the UA Vs’
tilt and its antenna orientation, we perform the following
simpliﬁcations: we assume Line of Sight (LoS) for both
communications links, we neglect small-scale fading, and we
assume that the BS tracks UA V- 1using beamforming. Then,
we model the communications channels by using the free
space model and including the effect of the antennas’ radiation
pattern. Thus, the UA V- 2→UA V- 1channel is modeled as:
r1=/parenleftBigg
G2(ϑD
2,1)G1(ϑA
2,1)
/bardblp2−p1/bardbl/parenrightBigg
s2+n1, (3)
1Half-wave dipole is a common type of antenna.p1 p2
p0UA V-1UA V-2
ϑA
2,1
ϑD
1,0ϑD
2,1
BSOB2zB2
OB1zB1
OWzW
xW
Fig. 1: Multi-rotor UA V- 1as a communications relay between
the multi-rotor UA V- 2and the BS.
wherer1ands2are the signals received and transmitted by
the UA V- 1and UA V- 2, respectively; n1is the zero-mean
complex Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) with power
σ2
1generated at the UA V- 1’s receiver; ϑD
2,1andϑA
2,1are
the AoD and AoA measured w.r.t. the axes zB2and zB1,
respectively. Using simple geometry, we have that:
ϑD
2,1= arctan
h(3)
2,1/radicalBig
(h(1)
2,1)2+ (h(2)
2,1)2
−π
2, (4)
ϑA
2,1= arctan
h(3)
1,2/radicalBig
(h(1)
1,2)2+ (h(2)
1,2)2
−π
2, (5)
whereh(r)
w,qis ther-element of the vectorWRBq(pw−pq)
withWRBqthe rotation matrix from the global ( OW) to the
q-th UA V coordinate system [17]. The UA V- 1→BS channel
is obtained by performing the following changes on the UA V-
2→UA V- 1channel equations: (i) exchanging the subindexes
as follows 2→1and1→0; (ii) setting G0(ϑA
1,0) =DB
for allϑA
1,0(to model the beamforming implemented by
the BS) where DBis the directivity of the main beam tracking
the UA V- 1. Finally, we denote ξ2,1andξ1,0the SNRs of
the UA V- 2→UA V- 1and UA V- 1→BS channels, respectively.
III. P ROBLEM STATEMENT & S OLUTION
While UA V- 2follows a trajectory T2it must transmit data
to the BS. To improve the communications and extend UA V-
2’s range of action, another UA V (i.e., UA V- 1) acting as a
relay is integrated to the system. We assume that UA V- 2
communicates only with UA V- 1which simultaneously relays2
the data to the BS located at p0. The end-to-end channel
capacity of this system corresponds to the capacity of the
channel having the poorest SNR. Now, given T2, we want
to optimize the predetermined UA V- 1trajectory so as to
maximize the number of bits transmitted from UA V- 2to
2This can be achieved by using Frequency-Division Duplexing (FDD).Fig. 1: UA V- 1serving as a communications relay between
the UA V- 2and the BS.
OBzB
(a)
OBzB
(b)
OBzB
(c)
OWzW
xW
Fig. 2: (a) quadrotor hovering, (b) quadrotor moving to the
left, and (c) quadrotor moving to the right.
will consider the scenario of a robotic relay system between
a BS and another UA V. In particular, we will focus on the
case of a multi-rotor UA V, speciﬁcally a quadrotor. As shown
in Fig. 1, both quadrotors are equipped with a single antenna
each and need to communicate while moving. One of the key
challenges in this problem is the fact that the quadrotors must
tilt in order to move, as depicted in Fig. 2. This motion causes
the angular orientation between the antennas to change as
the UA Vs move. As a result, the antenna gain experienced
by the UA V can be signiﬁcantly affected by its motion,
depending on the antenna directivity.
A. Motion planning
As stated in Sec. III, the communication system consists
of two communications links: UA V- 2!UA V- 1and UA V-
1!BS. Both UA Vs are equipped with a single antenna,
speciﬁcally a half-wave dipole antenna. However, this does
not limit the generality of the proposed approach, as it can
be easily extended to other types of antennas.
Let us consider a discrete-time dynamic model Hfor the
quadrotor and denote the UA V sampling period as Ts2R0
and the trajectory time as T2R0. The time interval
is represented by the vector t= [0;Ts;;NTs]>2
RN+1, wherekt=kTs, withk2N0andNTs=
T, is thek-th element of the vector t. Therefore, we
can deﬁne the state xand control usequences as
kx= [kp(1);kv(1);kp(2);kv(2);kp(3);kv(3)]>andku=
[ka(1);ka(2);ka(3)]>, wherekp(j),kv(j), andka(j), with
j=f1;2;3g, represent the position, velocity, and accelera-
tion of the vehicle at time instant kalong thej-axis of the
inertial frame OW, respectively (see Fig. 1).To come up with a trajectory that satisﬁes the vehi-
cle constraints, while guaranteeing rapid generation and
feasibility check, the motion primitives in [17] have
been considered. Hence, the UA V translational dynamics
[k+1p(j);k+1v(j);k+1a(j)]>can be approximated separately
along eachj-axis with the motion primitives [17] as:
2
4
120kt5+
24kt4+
6kt3+ka(j)kt2+kv(j)kt+kp(j)

24kt4+
6kt3+
2kt2+ka(j)kt+kv(j)

6kt3+
2kt2+kt+ka(j)3
5;(5)
wheref;;g2Rare design parameters that determine
the behavior of the system at the start and end points.
To emphasize the effect of the coupling between
the UA Vs’ tilt and its antenna orientation, the following
simpliﬁcations were performed: (i) Line of Sight (LoS)
is assumed for both communications links, (ii) small-scale
fading is neglected, and (iii) it is assumed that the BS uses
beamforming to track UA V- 1. Under these assumptions, the
communication channels are modeled using the free space
model in [2], which takes into account the effect of the
antennas’ radiation pattern.
The task objective can be formulated as ﬁnding the op-
timum UA V- 1trajectory ( p1;v1;a1) so as to maximize the
number of bits transmitted from UA V- 2to the BS via UA V- 1.
Hence, we can write:
minimize
p1;v1;a1NX
k=0 
1
logp
2
1 +k1;0;1
logp
2
1 +k2;1!1=p
(6a)
s.t.k1;0=D2
BD2g(#1;'1)>v1;0P
kkp1 p0k22
0; (6b)
k2;1=D4g(#1;'1)>v2;1g(#2;'2)>v2;1P
kkp2 kp1k22
1;(6c)
jkv(j)jv;jka(j)ja; (6d)
eq. (5);8k=f0;1;:::;N 1g; (6e)
with#1;'1= 0; (6f)
wherePis the power of the transmitted signal,
(1=logp
2(1+k1;0);1=logp
2(1+k2;1))is the smooth approxima-
tion of the max function of the normalized upper bound
for the end-to-end data bit rate at discrete time k, and
D2
BD2g(#1;'1)andD4g(#1;'1)are the antenna power
gains of the UA V- 1!BS and UA V- 2!UA V- 1communica-
tion links, respectively. The optimization problem includes
constraints on the maximum velocity vand acceleration aof
the vehicle to ensure compliance with its motion constraints.
Finally, the pitch and roll angles of the i-th UA V are rep-
resented by #iand'i, respectively. The proposed problem
formulation (6) follows the one presented in (1), including
both communication and robot dynamics constraints in the
optimization problem.
To validate the proposed approach, numerical simula-
tions in MATLAB and in the Gazebo robotics simula-
tor [18] were performed for a power tower inspection
task [17], [19], [20]. Videos with the Gazebo simula-
tions can be found at http://mrs.felk.cvut.cz/OWxWzWyW

1
2
3

4yBzB
xBOB
Fig. 3: A schematic representation of a GTMR model in the
case of four propellers ( n= 4) and coplanar orientation.
optimum-trajectory-relay , while numerical simu-
lations are available in [21].
B. Control design
This section addresses the robotic relay system problem
from a control perspective by designing a Nonlinear Model
Predictive Control (NMPC) strategy that integrates com-
munication requirements into both the optimization target
and constraints. The control strategy is inspired by prior
work [22], [23] and is intended to be applicable to a wide
range of multi-rotor vehicles, including coplanar designs like
quadrotors and fully-actuated platforms with tilted propellers.
To this end, we use a Generically Tilted Multi-Rotor Model
(GTMR) model [24] equipped with a half-wave dipole an-
tenna to describe the dynamics of the multi-rotor. The control
strategy also takes into account realistic actuation limits at
the torque level, as well as communication constraints to
maximize the number of bits transmitted between UA V-2
and the BS.
The proposed approach incorporates the nonlinear dynam-
ics of the system and realistic physical limitations on the
actuators (e.g., rotor acceleration bounds) for agile robot con-
trol, but with increased complexity compared to the previous
formulation (see Sec. III-A). The use of a GTMR model also
allows us to consider the relative orientation of the propellers
and the number of rotors nin order to describe the behavior
of both under-actuated and fully-actuated platforms. This
approach is not platform dependent, meaning it does not rely
on speciﬁc motion primitive (as in Sec III-A) for the vehicles
we use.
The model [24] describes a nonlinear dynamic system
_x=f(x;u), with state x= [p>q>v>!>]>2R3S3R6
and control input u2Rn, speciﬁcally the propeller spinning
velocity 
= [
 1;
2;;
n]>2Rn. The variables
p2R3,q2S3,v2R3, and !2R3represent the
position, orientation, and the linear and angular velocities of
the vehicle, respectively. To address the limited bandwidth of
the control action, we can extend the model by considering
the time derivative of the propeller spinning velocity _
=
[_
1;_
2;;_
n]>2Rn. Hence, the system model [24] can
be rewritten as _x=f(x;u), where x:= [p>q>v>!>u>]>
andu=_u. A schematic representation of the system is
depicted in Fig. 3.
Thus, the optimal control problem over a prediction hori-
zon ofNsteps, where N2N>0and considering the revised
020406080100120140160180
Time [s]00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Normalized Bit RateFig. 4: Normalized bit rate for an illustrative example
scenario where the UA V communications relay problem is
solved using both a trajectory generation approach (in blue)
and a control perspective (in red).
system model equations _x=f(x;u), can be formulated as
a minimization problem per each time step tk=kTs3, with
Tsbeing the sampling time and k2N>0, as follows:
minimize
x;uNX
k=0kyd;k ykk2
Q (7a)
s.t.x0=x(tk);k= 0; (7b)
xk+1=f(xk;uk);k2f0;N 1g; (7c)
yk=h(xk;uk);k2f0;Ng; (7d)
uk;k2f0;Ng; (7e)
_uk_;k2f0;N 1g; (7f)
g(uk;xk;yd;k;T)>0; (7g)
where (7a) is the objective function, (7b) sets the initial state
conditions, (7c) and (7d) express the discretized dynamic
model for the GTMR and the output signals of the system,
respectively, and actuator limits ( ;;_;_) are embedded
in (7e) and (7f). The constraints (7g) ensure that UA V-1 will
be aligned to UA V-2 and the BS while moving. The variable
Trefers to communication parameters that need to be taken
into consideration while solving the problem. Finally, the
vectors uk,xk,yd;k, and ykdenote thek-th element of
vectors u,x,yd, andy, respectively. The feasibility and ef-
fectiveness of the control strategy has been demonstrated via
closed-loop simulations achieved in MATLAB, as depicted in
Fig. 4. The proposed control strategy (7) follows the problem
in (1), embedding both communication and robot dynamics
constraints in the optimal problem formulation.
IV. R ESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES
There is increasing interest in the integration of commu-
nication systems with UGVs and UA Vs. A multidisciplinary
approach is necessary to fully realize the potential of this
ﬁeld, as there is a strong connection between the robotics
and communication aspects. Some current research topics in
this area are the following.
3Due to space constraints, an abuse of notation is made.Communication-aware trajectory for Photovoltaic
(PV) equipped robots : there has been recent interest in
adding solar PV panels to UA Vs in order to extend their ﬂight
time and increase mission endurance. However, the addition
of PV panels also introduces a new element to the CaTP
problem, as the solar power production of the UA V’s PV
panels and the quality of its communication are both func-
tions of the UA V’s state. Thus, in addition to considering the
motion and communication aspects, the energy generation
aspect must also be taken into account [25].
UA Vs and physical security : the use of UA Vs to address
cybersecurity issues in cellular networks through physical
layer techniques is an emerging and interesting application.
One example is the joint optimization of a UA V’s trajectory
and communication to improve network security against
eavesdroppers. This can be achieved through the use of
one or more UA Vs to (i) jam the eavesdropper to degrade
its SNR or (ii) act as relays between the base station and the
targeted node, allowing the latter to reduce its transmission
power and decreasing the strength of signals captured by
eavesdroppers [26].
Free Space Optical (FSO) for UA Vs : they are currently
being integrated into UA V communications [27]–[29], uses
a laser to transmit data and a Photo Diode (PD) to receive it.
One advantage over Radio Frequency (RF) communications
is its immunity against RF interference and are therefore also
resistant to electromagnetic jamming. Additionally, phys-
ically blocking the LoS between two UA Vs using FSO
communications is extremely difﬁcult, and if it does happen
it would be easily noticed by both UA Vs. But, FSO com-
munications are strongly affected by misalignment between
the laser and PD, which is exacerbated by the vibrations
of UA Vs and environmental perturbations, such as wind. To
fully realize the beneﬁts of UA V FSO communications, it
is necessary to consider the dynamic behavior of UA Vs.
The mathematical structure described in Sec. II can also be
used for CaTP for FSO communications in UA Vs by simply
replacing the RF communication channel models with the
corresponding optical communication channel models.
Finally, an extended version of this paper is available
in [30].
REFERENCES
[1] A. Gasparri et al. , “Bounded Control Law for Global Connectivity
Maintenance in Cooperative Multirobot Systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Robotics , vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 700–717, 2017.
[2] D. Licea Bonilla et al. , “Communication-Aware Energy Efﬁcient
Trajectory Planning With Limited Channel Knowledge,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Robotics , vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 431–442, 2020.
[3] Y . Zeng et al. , “Energy-Efﬁcient UA V Communication With Trajec-
tory Optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications ,
vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 3747–3760, 2017.
[4] Q. Wu et al. , “Joint Trajectory and Communication Design for Multi-
UA V Enabled Wireless Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications , vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 2109–2121, 2018.
[5] Y . Zeng et al. , “Accessing from the sky: A tutorial on uav communi-
cations for 5g and beyond,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 107, no. 12,
pp. 2327–2375, 2019.
[6] A. Ahmad et al. , “PACNav: A Collective Navigation Approach for
UA V Swarms Deprived of Communication and External Localization,”
Bioinspiration & Biomimetics , vol. 17, no. 6, p. 066019, 2022.[7] J. H. Jung et al. , “Multi-robot path ﬁnding with wireless multihop
communications,” IEEE Communications Magazine , vol. 48, no. 7,
pp. 126–132, 2010.
[8] M. Lindh ´eet al. , “Adaptive exploitation of multipath fading for mobile
sensors,” in 2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation , 2010, pp. 1934–1939.
[9] M. Calvo-Fullana et al. , “Communications and Robotics Simulation in
UA Vs: A Case Study on Aerial Synthetic Aperture Antennas,” IEEE
Communications Magazine , vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 22–27, 2021.
[10] ——, “ROS-NetSim: A Framework for the Integration of Robotic and
Network Simulators,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 1120–1127, 2021.
[11] M. Guo et al. , “Multirobot Data Gathering Under Buffer Constraints
and Intermittent Communication,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics ,
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1082–1097, 2018.
[12] B. Siciliano et al. ,Springer Handbook of Robotics , 2nd ed. Springer,
2016, ch. 26, pp. 623–670.
[13] H. El Hammouti et al. , “Air-to-Ground Channel Modeling for UA V
Communications Using 3D Building Footprints,” in Ubiquitous Net-
working . Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 372–383.
[14] A. A. Khuwaja et al. , “A Survey of Channel Modeling for UA V
Communications,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials , vol. 20,
no. 4, pp. 2804–2821, 2018.
[15] W. Khawaja et al. , “A Survey of Air-to-Ground Propagation Channel
Modeling for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles,” IEEE Communications
Surveys Tutorials , vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2361–2391, 2019.
[16] S. Boyd et al. ,Convex Optimization . Cambridge University Press,
2004.
[17] G. Silano et al. , “Power Line Inspection Tasks With Multi-Aerial
Robot Systems Via Signal Temporal Logic Speciﬁcations,” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 4169–4176, 2021.
[18] D. Hert et al. , “MRS Modular UA V Hardware Platforms for Support-
ing Research in Real-World Outdoor and Indoor Environments,” in
2022 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems , 2022,
pp. 1264–1273.
[19] G. Silano et al. , “A Multi-Layer Software Architecture for Aerial
Cognitive Multi-Robot Systems in Power Line Inspection Tasks,” in
2021 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems , 2021,
pp. 1624–1629.
[20] A. Calvo et al. , “Mission Planning and Execution in Heterogeneous
Teams of Aerial Robots supporting Power Line Inspection Operations,”
in2022 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems ,
2022, pp. 1644–1649.
[21] D. Bonilla Licea et al. , “Optimum Trajectory Planning for Multi-Rotor
UA V Relays with Tilt and Antenna Orientation Variations,” in 2021
29th European Signal Processing Conference , 2021, pp. 1586–1590.
[22] A. Dmytruk et al. , “A Perception-Aware NMPC for Vision-Based
Target Tracking and Collision Avoidance with a Multi-Rotor UA V,” in
2022 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems , 2022,
pp. 1668–1673.
[23] V . Cataffo et al. , “A Nonlinear Model Predictive Control Strategy for
Autonomous Racing of Scale Vehicles,” in 2022 IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics , 2022, pp. 100–105.
[24] G. Michieletto et al. , “Fundamental Actuation Properties of Multi-
rotors: Force–Moment Decoupling and Fail–Safe Robustness,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics , vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 702–715, 2018.
[25] Y . Sun et al. , “Optimal 3D-Trajectory Design and Resource Allocation
for Solar-Powered UA V Communication Systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Communications , vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 4281–4298, 2019.
[26] C. Liu et al. , “Safeguarding UA V Communications Against Full-
Duplex Active Eavesdropper,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Com-
munications , vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 2919–2931, 2019.
[27] M. T. Dabiri et al. , “Optimal Placement of UA V-Assisted Free-
Space Optical Communication Systems With DF Relaying,” IEEE
Communications Letters , vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 155–158, 2020.
[28] J.-H. Lee et al. , “A UA V-Mounted Free Space Optical Communication:
Trajectory Optimization for Flight Time,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications , vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1610–1621, 2020.
[29] M. T. Dabiri et al. , “Channel Modeling and Parameter Optimization
for Hovering UA V-Based Free-Space Optical Links,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications , vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 2104–2113,
2018.
[30] D. Bonilla Licea et al. , “When Robotics Meets Wireless Communica-
tions: An Introductory Tutorial,” ArXiv, 2209.02021 , 2022.