arXiv:2304.11248v1  [physics.hist-ph]  21 Apr 2023Torsion in the Classical Spacetime Context
Helen Meskhidze and James Owen Weatherall
Department of Logic and Philosophy of Science
University of California, Irvine1
Draft of April 25, 2023
Abstract
Teleparallel gravity, an empirically equivalent counterp art to General
Relativity, represents the inﬂuence of gravity using torsi onal forces. It
raises questions about theory interpretation and underdet ermination. To
better understand the torsional forces of Teleparallel gra vity, we consider
a context in which forces are better understood: classical s pacetimes. We
propose a method of incorporating torsion into the classica l spacetime
context that yields a classical theory of gravity with a clos ed temporal
metric and spacetime torsion. We then prove a result analogo us to the
Trautman degeometrization theorem, that every model of New ton-Cartan
theory gives rise, non-uniquely, to a model of this theory.
1 Introduction
How should we understand gravitational inﬂuence?2In traditional formula-
tions of Newtonian Gravity (NG), gravitational inﬂuence is underst ood as a
force. Gravitational force is mediated by a gravitational potentia l, which is
itself related to the distribution of matter. This means that, in Newt onian
Gravity, massive bodies exert attractive gravitational forces on one another.
Our current best theory of gravity, General Relativity (GR), pre sents a diﬀer-
ent understanding of gravitational inﬂuence. GR is thought to hav e taught us
that gravitational inﬂuence should be properly understood as a ma nifestation
of spacetime curvature. In particular, massive bodies curve spac etime and grav-
itational inﬂuence is a manifestation of this curvature. This means t hat, unlike
1Email addresses: helen.meskhidze@uci.edu (Helen Meskhid ze), weatherj@uci.edu (James
Owen Weatherall)
H.M. framed the project and drafted the present paper. The st atement and proof of the
degeometrization theorem were a collaboration between H.M . and J.O.W.
2Hours before submitting the, the authors became aware of a ve ry recent paper on a similar
topic (Schwartz, 2023). A cursory review suggests that the t heory described in that paper
diﬀers from what we describe here, but since there is not suﬃc ient time before the submission
deadline, we leave an analysis of the relationship to future work.
1the ﬂat spacetime background of traditional Newtonian Gravity, G R posits a
curved spacetime that depends dynamically on the distribution of ma tter.
Interestingly, the lessons of GR can be applied in the non-relativistic con-
text. Itispossibletoformulateanon-relativistic(i.e., classical)theo ryofgravity
with curvature. This theory goes by the name of Newton-Cartan t heory (NCT;
sometimes referred to as “geometrized Newtonian gravity”) and, while space
is ﬂat in this theory, space timeis curved. The curvature in NCT is dynami-
cally determined by the matter distribution, and gravitational inﬂue nces are a
manifestation of the curvature of spacetime. Models of NCT are sy stematically
related to models of GR as well as Newtonian Gravity.
The above picture is complicated by the existence of a gravitational theory
that is empirically equivalent to General Relativity, but represents g ravitational
inﬂuence as a force and is set on a ﬂat spacetime background: Telep arallel Grav-
ity (TPG). In contrast to Newtonian Gravity, the forces of TPG fe ature torsion
(or, spacetime twisting). TPG raises both questions regarding und erdetermina-
tion and more fundamental conceptual questions: Which theory, General Rela-
tivity or Teleparallel Gravity, describes our world?3How should we understand
the torsional forces posited by Teleparallel Gravity? And what is th e relation
between TPG and the other gravitational theories mentioned abov e?
Addressing these questions will be the goal here. We suggest that to better
understand the forces of TPG, a natural place to begin is another gravitational
theory that employs forces, namely, Newtonian Gravity. Newtonia n Gravity,
however, is a non-relativistic theory and gravitational force does not involve
torsion. A classical theory of gravity with torsional forces will pro ve to be a
more informative comparison. Developing such a theory to address the above
questions will be the goal of this paper.
Beyond the motivations already outlined, formulating a classical spa cetime
with torsion will also have implications for various projects in the phys ics
literature. There have been proposals for torsional classical the ories to de-
scribe the fractional quantum Hall eﬀect (Geracie et al., 2015) and to serve as
the lower-dimensional reductions to 5D quantum gravity (Christen sen et al.,
2014a; Bergshoeﬀ et al., 2014; Hartong and Obers, 2015; Afsha r et al., 2016;
Figueroa-O’Farrill, 2020). Though we will not discuss these projec ts in de-
tail, we will discuss the classical spacetimes with torsion that they de velop. In
so doing, we will trouble one assumption they share and propose an a lternative
treatment of time. In particular, it is widely claimed that a classical sp acetime
with torsion cannot have a temporal metric that is closed, in the sen se of dif-
ferential forms. As we discuss, this is not true—or rather, it holds only in the
presence of a further condition that is motivated only by speciﬁc ap plications
of classical spacetimes with torsion.
To build a non-relativistic theory with torsion, we begin with some back -
ground on the theories mentioned above. We then discuss how to inc orporate
torsion in the non-relativistic context and what we would expect of s uch a
3This question has also been addressed by Eleanor Knox (2011) . Our discussion here is
inﬂuenced by her insights about TPG.
2theory in terms of how it represents space and time, as well as how it treats
sources and forces. We next consider the relation of the propose d theory to
other classical theories with torsion in the literature. Then ﬁnally st ate and
prove a theorem, analogous to Trautman (1965)’s degeometrizat ion theorem,
that establishes that, associated with every model of Newton-Ca rtan theory,
there exists a (non-unique) model of Newtonian gravitation with to rsion with
the same mass density and particle trajectories.
2 Background
Let us begin by making the claims of the introduction more precise. As men-
tioned, our current best theory of gravity, General Relativity, r epresents gravi-
tational inﬂuence through the curvature of spacetime. We take a model of that
theory to be a pair, ( M,gab) whereMis a smooth, connected, four-dimensional,
paracompact,Hausdorﬀmanifold, and gabis asmooth, Lorentz-signaturemetric
onM. As a relativistic theory, GR places an upper bound on the speed of lig ht.
This feature of GR is formalized by the metric, gab, which determines a light
cone structure. Light-like particles (i.e., photons) follow trajecto ries along the
cone while massive particles follow trajectories that lie inside the light c ones.
In contrast, Teleparallel Gravity is set on a ﬂat spacetime backgro und and
represents gravitational inﬂuence through forces using torsion . Like GR, TPG
is a relativistic theory (it posits a Lorentz-signature metric) and, a s mentioned,
TPG is empirically equivalent to GR, at least locally. We present the form al
apparatus for understanding torsion below, but let us ﬁrst develo p an intuition
for it. The torsion tensor characterizes the twisting of the tange nt space as it
is parallel transported along a curve. One can imagine parallel trans porting
two end-to-end vectors along one other. When the torsion is vanis hing, this
procedure yields a parallelogram. However, in spaces with torsion, t he parallel-
ograms break because the vectors do not end up tip-to-tip. As Ca i, Capozziello,
De Laurentis, and Saridakis put it:
...whileincurvedspacesconsideringtwobitsofgeodesicsanddis-
placing one along the other will form an inﬁnitesimal parallelogram,
in twisted spaces the above procedure of displacing one geodesic bit
along the other leads to a gap between the extremities, i.e. the in-
ﬁnitesimal parallelogram breaks. This implies that in performing
the parallel transportation of a vector ﬁeld in a space with torsion,
an intrinsic length—related to torsion—appears. (2016, 5)
A non-relativistic spacetime (i.e., that of Newton-Cartan theory an d New-
tonian gravity) can, in general, be expressed as ( M,ta,hab,˜∇).Mis, as before,
a smooth, connected four-dimensional, Hausdorﬀ, paracompact manifold. The
metricofGR,however,isreplacedbytwodegeneratemetrics: the temporalmet-
ric,ta, and the spatial metric, hab. These metrics are orthogonal to one another
(i.e.,habtb= 0). If the temporal length of a vector is non-vanishing, we char-
acterize it as “timelike” (else, “spacelike”). Finally, we require the de rivative
3operator to be metric compatible ( ˜∇atb=0and˜∇ahbc= 0). These conditions
ensure that the metric and aﬃne structures agree.4
3 A classical gravitational theory with torsion
We now describe the features of a gravitational theory set in (ﬂat ) spacetime
with classical metrics and torsion.
3.1 Torsion
We begin with the most pressing issue: how to represent torsion in a c lassical
spacetime. Since the displacement of vectors along one another is g iven by the
derivative operator, to derive a theory of gravity with possibly non -vanishing
torsion in the classical context, we must adjust the conditions on o ur deriva-
tive operator. We deﬁne a generic (i.e., not speciﬁc to the classical c ontext)
derivative operator following Malament’s (2012) conventions but dr op the last
requirement( DO6)—that the action oftwo derivativeoperatorson a scalarﬁeld
commute—to allow torsion. This leaves:
Deﬁnition 1 ∇is a (covariant) derivative operator on Mif it satisﬁes the
following conditions:
(D01)∇commutes with addition on tensor ﬁelds.
(D02)∇satisﬁes the Leibniz rule with respect to tensor multiplica tion.
(D03)∇commutes with index substitution.
(D04)∇commutes with contraction.
(D05) For all smooth scalar ﬁelds αand all smooth vector ﬁelds, ξn:
ξn∇nα=ξ(a).
Instead of requiring that ∇commute in its action on scalar ﬁelds ( D06), we set
this to be the torsion tensor.
Deﬁnition 2 Let∇be a covariant derivative operator on the manifold M.
Then, there exists a smooth tensor ﬁeld Ta
bc, the torsion tensor, which is deﬁned
by:
2∇[a∇b]α=∇a∇bα−∇b∇aα=Tc
ab∇cα
for all smooth scalar ﬁelds α.
4In GR, the metric uniquely picks out a derivative operator an d so it need not be explicitly
speciﬁed. Since this is not the case in classical spacetimes , one needs to specify the derivative
operator explicitly.
4Note, from the deﬁnition above, that Tabcis anti-symmetric in its lowered
indices,bandc:
Ta
bc=−Ta
cb
As in the torsion-free case, the action of any two (possibly-torsio nal) derivative
operators, ∇and˜∇, can be related by a smooth tensor ﬁeld Ca
bc, with the
property that for any smooth vector ﬁeld ξa,∇aξb=˜∇aξb−Cb
anξn(and
likewise for other tensor ﬁelds). In this case we write ∇= (˜∇,Ca
bc) Unlike in
the torsion-free case, however, this ﬁeld Ca
bcneed not be symmetric in its lower
indices. Instead we have
2Ca
[bc]=Ta
bc−˜Ta
bc.
3.2 Time and space
We now consider how to represent time and space in a classical space time the-
ory with torsion. As in standard Newtonian gravitation, we will assum e that
spacetime has a temporal metric taand spatial metric hab, both of which will
be compatible with the possibly-torsional derivative operator ∇. In standard
models of Newtonian gravitation, without torsion, it follows from the compati-
bility of the temporal metric with the (torsion-free) derivative ope rator thatta
is closed, i.e., datb= 0, where dis the exterior derivative. This implies that ta
is locally exact, i.e., ta=∇atfor some smooth time function, t. Physically, the
availability of a time function means that we can have a well-deﬁned not ion of
the temporal distance between points. Indeed, if Mis simply connected, then
we will have a global time function, t:M→R. This means our spacetime
consists of global simultaneity slices stacked through time and any t wo global
time functions will diﬀer only in their assignment of the zero-point for the time
scale. Compatibility with a torsional derivative operator no longer imp lies that
tais closed in general. However, we will assume tais closed and we will only
consider derivative operators compatible with closed temporal met rics in what
follows.
The curvature of a spacetime is formalized by the Riemann curvatur e tensor.
Intuitively, the Riemann tensor measures the degree to which a vec tor fails to
returntoits originalvalue whenparalleltransportedaroundaclos edloop. More
formally, it measures the degree to which the second covariant der ivatives fail
to commute. For a torsion-free spacetime, it is deﬁned as
Rabcdξb=−2˜∇[c˜∇d]ξa.
In spaces with torsion, we adjust the deﬁnition of the Riemann tens or to
include the contribution from the torsion tensor.5This yields
Rabcdξb=−2∇[c∇d]ξa+Tncd∇nξa
5See Jensen (2005) for a derivation, though his sign conventi ons diﬀer from ours.
5There is a valuable formula relating the curvatures of two derivative opera-
tors with torsion. If ∇= (˜∇,Ca
bc), then
Ra
bcd=˜Ra
bcd+2˜∇[cCa
d]b+2Cp
[c|b|Ca
d]p−˜Tm
cdCamb.
Note only the torsion of ˜∇appears in this equation.
Let us compare the spatiotemporal geometry of NG and NCT. NG po sits
that space and time are both ﬂat (i.e., “spacetime is ﬂat”), implying th at the
Riemann tensor, Rabcd, vanishes entirely. NCT, by contrast, only requires spa-
tial ﬂatness (i.e., “space is ﬂat”). We formalize this condition as Rabcd=0,
where indices are raised using hab, and interpret it as saying that the parallel
transport of spacelike vectors in spacelike directions is, at least loc ally, path
independent.6
To develop a theory most like Teleparallel Gravity in the classical cont ext,
we will require the curvature of our spacetime to vanish, Rabcd.This is because
TPG is set on a ﬂat spacetime background, and we are seeking a class ical theory
analogous to it.
We have not, thus far, placed any constraints on the torsion tens or. Recall
that in NCT, the spatial curvature vanishes. Analogously, we prop ose that the
spatial torsion of our spacetime vanish (i.e., Tabc= 0). The vanishing of the
spatial torsion will yield a theory like NCT but with torsion, not curvat ure,
encoding gravitational inﬂuence.
3.3 Sources and forces
Finally, let us consider how we expect sources to exert (torsional) f orce in our
theory. It will be instructive to consider the treatment of source s and forces
in the non-torsional, classical context ﬁrst. In Newtonian Gravity , bodies are
subject to gravitationalforces and force is mediated by a gravita tionalpotential
(φ). The four-velocity, ξa, of a particle satisﬁes
−∇aφ=ξn∇nξa, (1)
whereφis a smooth, scalar ﬁeld and ∇denotes the ﬂat, torsion-free deriva-
tive operator of standard NG. The right-hand side of the equation describes
the acceleration that the test point particle undergoes in the pres ence of the
gravitationalpotential, φ. The gravitational potential further satisﬁes Poisson’s
equation, relating it to the distribution of matter
∇a∇aφ= 4πρ, (2)
6Often, a stronger condition is adopted in NCT, that Rabcd=0.Rabcd=0is equivalent
toRabcd= 0 if and only if Rabcd=0andthere exists a local, unit timelike vector ﬁeld ξa
that is rigid and twist-free (Malament 2012, Proposition 4. 3.1). Note that Rabcd=0implies
thatRabcd=0as we can simply raise the indices: 0=Rabpqhpchqd=Rabcd).
6whereρis the Newtonian mass density function.
In Newton-Cartan theory, like in GR, the curvature of spacetime m eans
that inertial motion is governed by the geodesic principle: in the abse nce of
external (non-gravitational) forces, bodies move along the geod esics of (curved)
spacetime. The equation of motion is given as
ξn˜∇nξa=0, (3)
where˜∇is the curved derivative operator of NCT.
To account for spatiotemporal curvature, NCT adopts a geomet rized form
of Poisson’s equation, relating the distribution of matter to the cur vature of
spacetime,
Rab= 4πρtatb. (4)
As it turns out, models of NG and NCT are systematically related. The
Trautman geometrization lemma and degeometrization theorem des cribe these
relations. Let us consider the recovery of models of NG from NCT. T his is the
direction in which force terms arise and so it will be instructive in formu lating
torsional forces. To build up to the degeometrization theorem, we will ﬁrst
consider the derivative operators of each theory. One can show t hat in the
non-torsional context, one has the following result.
Proposition 1 (Malament, 2012, Proposition 4.1.3) Let (M,ta,hab,˜∇)be a
classical spacetime. Let ∇= (˜∇,Cabc)be a second derivative operator on M.
Then,∇is compatible with taandhabif and only if Cabcis of the form:
Cabc= 2hant(bκc)n
whereκabis a smooth anti-symmetric ﬁeld on Mand the parentheses denote
symmetrization.
If we permit derivative operators with torsion, a broader class of d erivative
operators are compatible with the classical metrics. We now have th e following
generalization of the preceding proposition.
Proposition 2 Let(M,ta,hab,˜∇)be a classical spacetime with (possibly) non-
vanishing torsion. Let ∇= (˜∇,Cabc)be another derivative operator on Malso
with (possibly) non-vanishing torsion (i.e., 2Ca[bc]=Tabc−˜Tabc). Then ∇is
compatible with taandhabif and only if Cabcis of the form:
Ca
bc= 2harκ[r|b|c].
If, in addition, we require ˜Tabc=Tabc=0, then
Ca
bc= 2har(xrbtc+yrctb).
wherexabis an arbitrary smooth tensor ﬁeld and yrcis any antisymmetric ﬁeld.
7As we can see, in the presence of torsion, there is considerable fre edom
to deﬁne metric-compatible derivative operators. Below, we will limit a tten-
tion to ﬂat, metric-compatible derivative operators whose torsion has the form
Tabc= 2Fa[btc]whereFabis a smooth rank (1,1) tensor ﬁeld, spacelike in the
aindex. This is tantamount to stipulating that yabin the Prop. 2 vanishes.
This restriction clearly satisﬁes the above-outlined general form a nd ensures
that the spatial torsion vanishes. Furthermore, as will be seen in t he below
theorem, we can recover the standard, torsion-free connectin g ﬁeld assumed for
the degeometrization theorem as a special case of the above.
In describing the diﬀerence between the derivative operators, th e connecting
ﬁeld is closely related to the force ﬁeld that arises in the degeometriz ation of
a model of Newton-Cartan theory. In the torsion-free context , one typically
assumes a connecting ﬁeld of the form Cabc=tbtc˜∇aφ.7The force term is then
just the contracted connecting ﬁeld: Carnξrξn=˜∇aφ.
To adapt this to the torsional context, we want to consider the co nnecting
ﬁeld relating a non-torsional, ﬂat derivative operator to a torsiona l one. We
will capture the impact of the torsion on the trajectories of test b odies using
the above-mentioned tensor ﬁeld, Fab. In other words, we want Fabto play the
role of a torsional force term. Given a timelike geodesic of ˜∇with unit tangent
ﬁeldξa, the force equation we expect to be satisﬁed is
ξn∇nξa=ξn˜∇nξa−Ca
rnξrξn=−Fa
ntcξnξc=−Fa
nξn,(5)
where∇is the derivative operator of our torsional spacetime.
Finally, we want to relate the torsional force term to gravitational sources.
In otherwords, wewant to formulatea ﬁeld equationthat is the tor sionalanalog
to Poisson’s Equation. It will turn out to be
δn
a∇[nFa
b]= 2πρtb. (6)
Again, Poisson’s equation will be recovered as a special case of Eq. ( 6), but
Eq. (6) more generally establishes a relation between the ﬁrst-der ivative of the
force term and the mass distribution along the temporal direction.
3.4 Comparison to other classical theories with torsion
As mentioned above ( §1), a small literature has recently emerged in physics
surrounding torsional classical spacetime theories. Many in this lite rature are
interestedinincorporatingtorsionintheclassicalcontexttoaddr essthediﬀerent
notions of time proposed by GR and Quantum Gravity (QG): though G R does
not admit a global notion of simultaneity, in some formulations, QG doe s. To
resolve this diﬀerence, some authors have proposed taking the no tion of time
7A connecting ﬁeld of this form satisﬁes the more general cons traint for the connecting ﬁeld
between the derivative operators of any two classical space time models if we take κcnfrom
above to be t[c˜∇n]φ. That some φexists with the necessary properties to make this derivativ e
operator ﬂat depends on several background assumptions tha t we suppress for reasons of
space.
8presentedin QGasfundamental andallowingrelativistictime toemerg eatlarge
distances. Then, motivated by the holographic principle (i.e., that a v olume of
space can be thought of as encoded in the lower dimensional bounda ry of that
volume),8this literatureconsiders5DQG andits 4Dreduction. Theholography
considered is between Ho˘ rava–Lifshitz gravity and a new theory o f classical
gravity: twistless torsional Newton-Cartan (TTNC) theory.9
As noted above, typically in the classical spacetime context, we tak etato
be closed (i.e., datb= 0), which means it is locally exact and determines a local
time function. This is a consequence of its compatibility with any torsio n-free
derivativeoperator. Wealsoadoptthisassumptioninthetorsional gravitational
theory developed here.
The TTNC formalism, by contrast, starts with NC theory but claims t hat
taking∂µtν= 0, where ∂is a (torsion-free) coordinate derivative operator will
always result in a torsion-free spacetime. Thus they do not require temporal
metrics to be compatible with any torsion-free derivative operator ; more gener-
ally, they do not require that tais closed. Consider the following characteristic
passage:
The absence of torsion implies that the temporal vielbein10τµ
correspondsto a closed one-form and that it can be used to deﬁne an
absolute time in the space–time...TTNC geometry is characterized
by the fact that the temporal vielbein is hypersurface orthogona l
but not necessarily closed. (Bergshoeﬀ et al., 2014, 3)
In order to derive a hypersurface orthogonal temporal metric, such authors
appeal to Frobenius’ theorem. This allows them to argue that a spa cetime
admits a foliation with a time ﬂow orthogonal to the Riemannian spacelik e
slices if and only if it satisﬁes the hypersurface orthogonality condit ion (i.e.,
t[a∂btc]= 0). Notably, the “hypersurface orthogonality condition” is a wea ker
condition than the condition that the temporal metric be closed.
Aseriesofquestionsemergefromthe abovediscussion: Why doest he TTNC
literature claim that closed temporal metrics, and metric compatibilit y more
generally, are in tension with torsion? And how does the theory desc ribed
above incorporate torsion and a closed temporal metric, and thus a notion of
absolute time? The answers lies in the form of the connection assume d by the
TTNC literature.
Geracieandcollaboratorsdeﬁneaspacetimederivativeoperator ∇= (∂,Γabc),
8The projects in this literature are also sometimes motivate d as attempts to ﬁnd further
holographic correspondences beyond the AdS/CFT correspon dence (see Christensen et al.
(2014a, 1)).
9The ﬁrst paper developing this theory was Christensen et al. (2014b). A slew of oth-
ers followed including Christensen et al. (2014a); Bergsho eﬀ et al. (2014); Hartong and Obers
(2015); Afshar et al. (2016); Figueroa-O’Farrill (2020).
10It is common to see formulations of classical gravity with to rsion presented with the
vielbein formalism typical of presentations of TPG. One can simply think of the temporal
vielbein here as the temporal metric.
9where they require the form of the connecting ﬁeld Γabcto be
Γabc=va∂btc+1
2han(∂bˆhcn+∂cˆhbn−∂nˆhbc),
wherevais a unit timelike ﬁeld, and ˆhabis a spatial projection ﬁeld determined
byva, such that hanˆhnb=δab−vatb(2015, Eq. 77).11This deﬁnition is
motivated by the standard deﬁnition of a Levi-Civita derivative oper ator, and
the terms in the parentheses are always symmetric in b,c. It follows that the
torsion is given by Tabc= 2Γa[bc]= 2va∂[btc](see, e.g., Geracie et al. (2015, Eq.
79)). (Indeed, the name “twistless torsional NCT,” then, comes f rom the fact
that torsion vanishes on spacelike hypersurfaces but not in gener al.)
And so it is true that if tais closed, the torsion of this derivative operator
would vanish. However, this is only because they have adopted such a strict
deﬁnition for their connection . Put diﬀerently, their connection ensures that
the only way to allow torsion is to sacriﬁce having a closed temporal me tric.
Buttherearemanyothertorsionalderivativeoperatorsthatar ecompatiblewith
a closed temporal metric. Once we allow for a broader class of conne ctions, as
is done in the present paper, we recover metric compatibility and a no tion of
absolute time.
Classical spacetimes with torsion have also been the subject of philo sophical
analysis. In particular, James Read and Nicholas Teh (2018) have de veloped a
method for “teleparallelizing” in the classical context. A central aim of their
project is to show the relation between this classical theory and its relativistic
counterpart, TPG. They begin with NCT and teleparallelize to constr uct a
classicalspacetimewith torsion. Theirprocedureinvolvesa“masst orsion”term
that plays the role of a force. Contrary to the results derived in th e present
paper, they claim their teleparallelization method yields standard New tonian
Gravity. Their proposal is interesting in its own right. However, we w ould
argue that the spacetime developed in the present paper, in so far as it features
spacetime torsion instead of mass torsion, is a stronger analog to a classical
TPG.
4 Degeometrization with Torsion
We now state and provea theorem analogousto the Trautman dege ometrization
theorem. This result establishes that for every model of Newton- Cartan theory,
there is a corresponding model of the classical analog to teleparalle l gravity
described above.
Theorem 1 Let(M,ta,hab,˜∇)be a classical spacetime (without torsion) sat-
isfying:
˜Rab= 4πρtbtc (7)
11We have translated their formalism to match our notation.
10˜Rabcd=0 (8)
for some smooth scalar ﬁeld ρ. Then given any point pinM, there is an
open setOcontaining pand a pair (∇,Fab)onO, where∇is a derivative
operator and Fabis a smooth rank (1,1) tensor ﬁeld, which together satisfy th e
following conditions:
1.∇is compatible with taandhab;
2.∇is ﬂat;
3.∇has torsion Tabc= 2Fa[btc];
4. For all timelike curves with unit tangent ﬁeld ξa,ξn˜∇nξa=0if and only
ifξn∇nξa=−Fanξn; and
5.(∇a,Fab)together satisfy the ﬁeld equations δna∇[nFab]= 2πρtb.
The pair (∇,Fab)is not unique. Moreover, there exist pairs (∇,Fab), sat-
isfying the conditions above, for which the torsion is non-v anishing.
Proof. ExistencefollowsfromtheTrautmandegeometrizationthe orem(Malament,
2012, Proposition 4.2.5). Fix any classical spacetime ( M,ta,hab,˜∇) satsifying
˜Rabcd=0and˜Rab= 4πρtatbfor some smooth scalar ﬁeld ρ. Choose a point
pand a rigid and twist-free ﬁeld ηadeﬁned on some neighborhood of p, and
letϕa=ηn˜∇nηabe the acceleration ﬁeld associated with ηa. Then the pair
(∇,Fab), whereFab=ϕatband∇= (˜∇,Fabtc), satisﬁes conditions 1-5, with
torsionTabc= 2ϕat[btc]=0, by arguments given in Malament’s proof. Indeed,
in this case the ﬁeld equation δna∇[nFab]= 2πtbreduces to
2πtb=1
2δna(∇nϕatb−∇bϕatn) =1
2tb∇aϕa
and the resulting structure is a model of ordinary Newtonian gravit ation with
gravitational ﬁeld ϕa. (If one assumed further that ˜Rabcd=˜Rca
db, one could
conclude that ϕa=∇aϕfor some smooth scalar ﬁeld ϕ, possibly on a subneigh-
borhood of O.)
Non-uniqueness also follows from the Trautman degeometrization t heorem.
We wish to show, however, that there exist pairs ( ∇,Fab) satisfying conditions
1-5 with non-vanishing torsion. We do so by direction construction. Let∇=
(˜∇,ϕatbtc) be the ﬂat derivative operator (without torsion) considered abo ve.
Choose any spacelike vector xaatp, and extend it to a neighborhood of pby
parallel transport via ˇ∇. Finally let ψbe any smooth scalar ﬁeld deﬁned near
pwhose gradient is spacelike and normal to xa. Now deﬁne ˆFab=xa∇bψand
ˇFab=ϕatb+ˆFab. Then the pair ( ˇ∇,ˇFab), where ˇ∇= (∇,ˆFabtc), satisﬁes
conditions 1-5 with torsion Tabc= 2xat[c∇b]ψ/negationslash= 0.
To see that 1 is satisﬁed, observe that ˇ∇atb=tnˇFnatb= 0; and ˇ∇ahbc=
Fbatnhnc+Fcatnhbn. For 2, note that since ∇is ﬂat and torsion-free, and xa
is constant with respect to ∇, we have
ˇRabcd= 2xatb∇[c∇d]ψ+2xptpxatb∇[cψ∇d]ψ=0
11where the ﬁrst term vanishes because ∇is torsion-free and the second because
xais spacelike. 3 follows from the deﬁnition of ˇ∇and the fact that ∇is torsion-
free. 4 follows because for all unit timelike vector ﬁelds ξa,
ξn˜∇nξa=0⇔ξn∇nξa=−∇a⇔ξnˇ∇nξa=−ϕa−ˆFanξn=−Fanξn.
Finally, 5 is satisﬁed because
δnaˇ∇[nFa
b]=δnaˇ∇[n(ϕatb]+xa∇b]ψ)
= 2πρtb+δnaˇ∇[nxaˇ∇b]ψ)
= 2πρtb+xnˇ∇[nˇ∇b]ψ
= 2πρtb+1
2xnTa
nbˇ∇aψ
= 2πρtb+xnxat[b∇n]ψˇ∇aψ
= 2πρtb
where in the ﬁrst equality we use the facts that 0 = ∇axb=ˇ∇axb−ˆFbatbxb=
ˇ∇axband that ∇andˇ∇agree on scalar ﬁelds (because all derivative operators
do); while in the ﬁnal equality we use the fact that ˇ∇aψis normal to xa./square
5 Discussion
ThegeneralproofstrategyistoleveragetheoriginalTrautmand egeometrization
theorem results. We show that NG can be recovered as a special (t orsion-
free) case of the theorem presented above. By broadening the c lass of allowed
derivative operators, the non-uniqueness results establish the p ossibility of a
classical spacetime with non-vanishing torsion.
There are some important diﬀerences between our result and the T rautman
theorem. We do not give necessary and suﬃcient conditions to cons truct new
pairs (∇,Fab) from old ones satisfying 1-5. This is because, unlike the situation
with vanishing torsion, the derivative operators associated with mo dels of the
torsional theory (for some model of NCT) do not appear to form a n aﬃne
space. Nonetheless, we are able to establish the non-uniqueness o f torsional
models, and we give a general strategy for constructing alternat ive models with
torsionassociatedwith a givenmodel ofNCT. It would be interesting to provide
a complete description of this space.
WealsodonotrequireourmodelofNewton-Cartantheorytosatis fyRabcd=
Rcdab, as the Trautman theorem does. This is because the role of that co ndition
is to ensure that a certain ﬁeld ϕais closed, and therefore locally exact. We do
notinvokethatﬁeldintheresult, andsowedropthecondition. Inth atsense,we
generalize the Trautman theorem. Finally, we note that more gener al versions
of the theory (and theorem) discussed here are almost certainly p ossible. For
instance, one might consider force ﬁelds for which yabfrom Prop. 2 is non-
vanishing, among other variations (Malament, 2012, c.f. §4.5).
12References
H. R. Afshar, E. A. Bergshoeﬀ, A. Mehra, P. Parekh, and B. Rollier .
A Schr¨ odinger approach to Newton-Cartan and Hoˇ rava-Lifshit z gravities.
Journal of High Energy Physics , 2016(4):145, Apr. 2016. doi: 10.1007/
JHEP04(2016)145.
E. A. Bergshoeﬀ, J. Hartong, and J. Rosseel. Torsional Newton- Cartan Geome-
try and the Schr¨ odinger Algebra. arXiv e-prints , art. arXiv:1409.5555, Sept.
2014.
Y.-F. Cai, S. Capozziello, M. De Laurentis, and E. N. Saridakis. f (t) t eleparallel
gravity and cosmology. Reports on Progress in Physics , 79(10):106901, 2016.
M. H. Christensen, J. Hartong, N. A. Obers, and B. Rollier. Torsion al Newton-
Cartan geometry and Lifshitz holography. Phys. Rev. D , 89(6):061901, Mar.
2014a. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.89.061901.
M. H. Christensen, J. Hartong, N. A. Obers, and B. Rollier. Bounda ry stress-
energy tensor and Newton-Cartan geometry in Lifshitz holograph y.Journal
of High Energy Physics , 2014:57,Jan.2014b. doi: 10.1007/JHEP01(2014)057.
J. Figueroa-O’Farrill. On the intrinsic torsion of spacetime structur es.arXiv
e-prints, art. arXiv:2009.01948, Sept. 2020.
M. Geracie, D. T. Son, C. Wu, and S.-F. Wu. Spacetime symmetries of the
quantum Hall eﬀect. Phys. Rev. D , 91(4):045030, Feb. 2015. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevD.91.045030.
J. Hartong and N. A. Obers. Hoˇ rava-Lifshitz gravity from dynam ical Newton-
Cartan geometry. Journal of High Energy Physics , 2015:155, July 2015. doi:
10.1007/JHEP07(2015)155.
S. Jensen. General relativity with torsion: Extend-
ing wald’s chapter on curvature. 2005. URL
http://www.slimy.com/ ~steuard/teaching/tutorials/GRtorsion.pdf .
E. Knox. Newton–Cartan Theory and Teleparallel Gravity: The For ce of a
Formulation. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B , 42(4):
264–275, 2011.
D. Malament. Topics in the Foundations of General Relativity and
Newtonian Gravitation Theory . Chicago Lectures in Physics. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 2012. ISBN 9780226502458. URL
https://books.google.com/books?id=otV9S1BSB1sC .
J. Read and N. J. Teh. The Teleparallel Equivalent of Newton–Carta n Gravity.
Classical and Quantum Gravity , 35(18):18LT01, 2018.
13P. K. Schwartz. Teleparallel newton–cartan grav-
ity. Classical and Quantum Gravity , 2023. URL
http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6382 /accc02.
A.Trautman. Foundationsandcurrentproblemofgeneralrelativ ity. InF.K.W.
Deser, S., editor, Lectures on General Relativity , page 1–248. Englewood
Cliﬀs, NJ, 1965.
14