Hyper Suprime-Cam Year 3 Results: Measurements of Clustering of SDSS-BOSS Galaxies,
Galaxy-Galaxy Lensing and Cosmic Shear
Surhud More ,1,2Sunao Sugiyama ,2,3Hironao Miyatake ,4,5,2Markus Michael Rau ,6,7Masato Shirasaki ,8,9
Xiangchong Li ,7,2Atsushi J. Nishizawa ,10,11Ken Osato ,12,13Tianqing Zhang ,7Masahiro Takada ,2
Takashi Hamana,14Ryuichi Takahashi,15Roohi Dalal ,16Rachel Mandelbaum ,7Michael A. Strauss ,16
Yosuke Kobayashi ,17,2Takahiro Nishimichi ,18,2,19Masamune Oguri ,12,13Wentao Luo ,20,21
Arun Kannawadi ,16Bau-Ching Hsieh ,22Robert Armstrong,23James Bosch ,16Yutaka Komiyama ,24
Robert H. Lupton ,16Nate B. Lust ,16Lauren A. MacArthur,16Satoshi Miyazaki ,25Hitoshi Murayama ,26,27,2
Yuki Okura ,14Paul A. Price ,16Philip J. Tait,25Masayuki Tanaka,14and Shiang-Yu Wang22
1The Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Post bag 4, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India
2Kavli Institute for the Physics and Mathematics of the Universe (WPI),
The University of Tokyo Institutes for Advanced Study (UTIAS), The University of Tokyo, Chiba 277-8583, Japan
3Department of Physics, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-0031, Japan
4Kobayashi-Maskawa Institute for the Origin of Particles and the Universe (KMI), Nagoya University, Nagoya, 464-8602, Japan
5Institute for Advanced Research, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan
6High Energy Physics Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA
7McWilliams Center for Cosmology, Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
8National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8588, Japan
9The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Tachikawa, Tokyo 190-8562, Japan
10Gifu Shotoku Gakuen University, Gifu 501-6194, Japan
11Institute for Advanced Research/Kobayashi Maskawa Institute, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan
12Center for Frontier Science, Chiba University, Chiba 263-8522, Japan
13Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science, Chiba University, Chiba 263-8522, Japan
14National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8588, Japan
15Faculty of Science and Technology, Hirosaki University, 3 Bunkyo-cho, Hirosaki, Aomori 036-8561, Japan
16Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
17Department of Astronomy/Steward Observatory, University of Arizona,
933 North Cherry Avenue, Tucson, AZ 85721-0065, USA
18Center for Gravitational Physics and Quantum Information,
Yukawa Institute for Theoretical Physics, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan
19Department of Astrophysics and Atmospheric Sciences, Faculty of Science,
Kyoto Sangyo University, Motoyama, Kamigamo, Kita-ku, Kyoto 603-8555, Japan
20School of Physical Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China
21CAS Key Laboratory for Researches in Galaxies and Cosmology/Department of Astronomy,
School of Astronomy and Space Science, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China
22Academia Sinica Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd., Taipei 10617, Taiwan
23Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94551, USA
24Department of Advanced Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering,
Hosei University, 3-7-2 Kajino-cho, Koganei-shi, Tokyo 184-8584, Japan
25Subaru Telescope, National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, 650 N Aohoku Place Hilo HI 96720 USA
26Berkeley Center for Theoretical Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
27Theory Group, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
(Dated: November 17, 2023)
WeutilizetheSloanDigitalSkySurveyBaryonOscillationSpectroscopicSurvey(SDSS-BOSS)galaxiesand
its overlap with approximately 416 sq. degree of deep 𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑦-band imaging from the Subaru Hyper Suprime-
Cam Survey (HSC). We perform measurements of three two-point correlations which form the basis of the
cosmological inference presented in our companion papers, Miyatake et al.and Sugiyama et al.We use three
approximately volume limited subsamples of spectroscopic galaxies by their 𝑖-band magnitude from the SDSS-
BOSS: LOWZ ( 0.1<𝑧< 0.35), CMASS1 ( 0.43<𝑧< 0.55) and CMASS2 ( 0.55<𝑧< 0.7), respectively. We
present high signal-to-noise ratio measurements of the projected correlation functions of these galaxies, which
is expected to be proportional to the projected matter correlation function on large scales with a proportionality
constant dependent on the bias of galaxies. In order to help break the degeneracy between the amplitude of the
matter correlation and the bias of these spectroscopic galaxies, we use the distortions of the shapes of fainter
galaxies in HSC due to weak gravitational lensing, to measure the galaxy-galaxy lensing signal, which probes
theprojectedgalaxy-mattercross-correlationfunctionoftheSDSS-BOSSgalaxies. Wealsomeasurethecosmic
shearcorrelationfunctionsfromHSCgalaxieswhichisrelatedtotheprojectedmattercorrelationfunction. We
demonstratetherobustnessofourmeasurementsbysubjectingeachofthemtoavarietyofsystematictests. Our
useofasinglesampleofHSCsourcegalaxiesiscrucialtocalibrateanyresidualsystematicbiasesintheinferred
redshiftsofourgalaxies. Wealsodescribetheconstructionofasuiteofmocks: i)spectroscopicgalaxycatalogs
which obey the clustering and abundance of each of the three SDSS-BOSS subsamples, and ii) galaxy shapearXiv:2304.00703v3  [astro-ph.CO]  16 Nov 20232
catalogs which obey the footprint of the HSC survey and have been appropriately sheared by the large-scale
structure expected in a ΛCDM model. We use these mock catalogs to compute the covariance of each of our
observables.
I. INTRODUCTION
The concordance cosmological model, ΛCDM, is rooted
in its ability to accurately describe a variety of cosmolog-
ical observations. Primary among these are the statistics
of anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background (CMB)
[e.g., 1, 2], the distance-redshift relation obtained using type-
Ia supernovae [e.g., 3] and baryon acoustic oscillations [e.g.,
4–6], the abundance of galaxy clusters [e.g, 7, 8], the redshift
space clustering of galaxies [e.g., 9–11], and the weak grav-
itational lensing signal [e.g., 12–20]. The presence of dark
matteranddarkenergyisessentialtothesuccessofthemodel,
inwhichdarkmattercausesdensityfluctuationstogrowdueto
gravitationalinstabilities,whiledarkenergycausesanacceler-
ated expansion at late times [e.g., 21]. Although the evidence
forthepresenceofdarkmatteranddarkenergyintheUniverse
isquitecompelling,theirexistenceisagrandchallengetoour
current understanding of the physics of the Universe. The
empirical characterization of the abundance of dark matter,
the growth in its density fluctuations, and the behavior of the
equation of state for dark energy can aid in the understanding
of these components.
The measurements of density fluctuations in the early Uni-
versehavebeenmappedbyCMBexperimentssuchasWMAP
[22] and Planck [2]. These precise observations suggest that
our Universe can be described as a simple flat Λcold dark
mattermodelwithonlyahandfulofparameters. Undertheas-
sumptionsofthissimplemodel,theCMBobservationspredict
thevalueof𝜎8,whichcharacterizestherootmeansquaredis-
persioninthedensityfluctuationswhenaveragedinspheresof
radius 8ℎ−1Mpctoday. This quantity can be directly inferred
from observables in the Universe at late times.
The current observational frontier in this area is driven by
StageIIIdarkenergyexperimentswhicharedesignedtoprobe
darkenergyanddarkmatter. TheKilo-DegreeSurvey(KiDS)
[23] [24], the Dark Energy Survey (DES) [25] [26] and the
HyperSuprime-CamsurveySubaruStrategicProgram(HSC)
[27] [28] have all conducted complementary galaxy imaging
surveysthattargetmultipleprobesinordertoaddresskeyques-
tions related to dark matter and dark energy. Although these
surveys use a combination of probes to address cosmology,
gravitational lensing is the primary tool of interest. The im-
agesofbackgroundgalaxiesgetshearedinacoherentmanner
duetothepresenceofinterveningmatterdistributionbetween
them and us [e.g., 29]. The correlation of these coherent dis-
tortion patterns, commonly called the cosmic shear signal, is
relatedtotheprojectedmatterdensitydistributionandisthere-
fore sensitive to the cosmological parameters. The amplitude
of this signal and its variation with redshift can be used to
infer the growth of structure in dark matter and constrain the
parameter combination 𝑆8=𝜎8Ω0.5
m, whereΩmis the matter
density parameter.
The clustering of galaxies can also be used to probe the
large-scalestructureoftheUniverse,asgalaxiestracethemat-ter distribution [e.g., 30]. Galaxies form within dark matter
halos which are biased tracers of the matter distribution [e.g.,
31],andthegalaxybias, 𝑏,isexpectedtodependuponthehalo
biasoftheirparenthalos[e.g.32]. Onlargescalesthisbiasis
expectedtobelinear,andtheclusteringofgalaxiesthusreflects
theshapeofthemattercorrelationfunction, 𝜉mm. Suchobser-
vations can therefore constrain cosmological parameters that
determinetheshapeof 𝜉mm,butitsamplitudeisentirelydegen-
erate with galaxy bias [e.g., 33]. The dependence of the halo
biasonthemassofthedarkmatterhaloisfurtherafunctionof
thecosmologicalparameters,especially Ωmand𝜎8[e.g.,34].
Therefore, the amplitude of the matter correlation function
can be inferred if dark matter halo masses can be measured
for galaxies using the galaxy-galaxy lensing [33, 35, 36]. The
galaxy-galaxy lensing signal is the cross correlation of lens
galaxy positions with shapes of background galaxies. Thus
together a combination of the clustering measurements and
small-scale lensing measurements can help infer cosmologi-
cal constraints [e.g., 18, 33, 35, 37–39]. Another avenue to
use galaxy-galaxy lensing is to only focus on large scales so
thatthecosmologicalinferenceisnotaffectedbyissuesrelated
to galaxy assembly bias [e.g., 40]. The galaxy-galaxy lensing
signal depends upon the halo matter cross-correlation, which
on large scales is proportional to 𝑏𝜉mm. The large-scale clus-
teringofofgalaxiesissensitiveto 𝑏2𝜉mm. Thustogetherthey
canhelpdetermineboththeamplitudeandshapeofthematter
correlation function.
The cosmological parameter dependences of cosmic shear
or the combination of galaxy clustering and galaxy-galaxy
lensing signal are expected to be different and thus comple-
mentary. Thus a combination of all the three two-point cor-
relations can further reduce the uncertainties on the inferred
cosmologicalparameters[seee.g.14,20]. Thefirststepinthe
careful inference of the cosmological parameters from these
observablesisthereliablemeasurementoftheobservablesand
their covariance. There are a variety of systematics that can
affecteachofthesemeasurements,decisionsneedtobetaken
regarding the scales over which the signals can be reliably
modelled as well as a demonstration that the measurements
pass a variety of null tests. Inference of the redshift distri-
bution of source galaxies is yet another step before the weak
lensing measurements can be reliably modelled.
This is the first paper in a series of the 3 ×2pt cosmology
analyses of the Subaru HSC Year 3 data (hereafter HSC-Y3).
In this paper (Paper I), we define the lens and source galaxy
samples to be used for the 3 ×2pt cosmological analyses. We
presentmeasurementsofthethreetwo-pointfunctionsaswell
as the results of various systematics tests which allow us to
narrow down the scales to be used for cosmological analysis.
We also present mock galaxy catalogs and shear catalogs that
were used to obtain the covariance matrix of our measure-
ments. The inference of the cosmological parameters were
performed in a blind manner using these measurements, and
thoseresultswillbepresentedinMiyatake et al.[41,PaperII]3
andSugiyama et al.[42,PaperIII], respectively. PaperIIwill
use information on quasi-linear scales by using the emulator
based halo model, while the analysis in Paper III is based on
linear scales where a model based on perturbation theory can
beusedreliably. Themeasurementandthecosmologicalanal-
ysisofthecosmicsheartomographyinrealspaceandFourier
spacewillbepresentedincompanionpapers,Li et al.[43]and
Dalal et al.[44], respectively.
Thispaperisorganizedasfollows. InSectionII,wedescribe
the HSC three-year shear catalog that we use, our blinding
strategy,theconstructionofthelensgalaxysample,aswellas
theconstructionofthemockgalaxycatalogswhichareusedto
determinethecovarianceofourmeasurements. InSectionIII,
we present a brief description of our pipelines that we use to
measurethegalaxyclustering,thegalaxy-galaxylensingsignal
and the cosmic shear signal from our data. In Section IV,
we present the measurements of the galaxy clustering signal,
its covariance and a variety of systematics tests designed to
assess the robustness of our measurements. In Section V,
we present the measurements of the galaxy-galaxy lensing
signal, its covariance, and a variety of null and systematics
tests. In Section VI, we similarly present the measurements
of the cosmic shear correlation functions and its covariance,
the systematic tests as well as various PSF related systematic
tests. Finally, we summarize our results in Section VII.
When performing the galaxy clustering and galaxy-galaxy
lensing analyses, we adopt a fiducial flat ΛCDM cosmolog-
ical model with parameters consistent with the cosmic mi-
crowave background analysis from WMAP9. The cosmo-
logical model is specified by the CDM density parameter
Ωcdm=0.233, the baryon density Ωb0=0.046, the matter
densityΩm= Ω cdm+Ωb=0.279, the cosmological con-
stantΩΛ=0.721, the Hubble parameter ℎ=0.7, the ampli-
tude of density fluctuations 𝜎8=0.82, and the spectral index
𝑛𝑠=0.97. The choice of these cosmological parameters is
dictated by the cosmological parameters adopted for the sim-
ulations that form the basis of the mock catalogs that we use
for our covariance calculations [45]. While carrying out our
cosmological analyses in Paper II and III, we will account for
the cosmological dependence of our observables, so that our
choice of this fiducial cosmological model has no impact on
our cosmological inference.
II. DATA
The 3×2pt cosmological analyses for HSC-Y3 data will fo-
cus on a combination of probes: the cosmic shear signal, the
clustering of galaxies and their galaxy-galaxy lensing signal.
In this section, we describe the data we use for the gravita-
tionallensingmeasurements(SectionIIA),ourblindingstrat-
egy (Section IIB), the galaxy samples used for the clustering
and the galaxy-galaxy lensing analyses (Section IIC) as well
as the mock catalogs that are used to estimate the covariance
of these measurements (Section IID).A. Shape Catalog
The Hyper Suprime-Cam instrument (HSC) is a wide-field
optical imaging camera mounted at the prime focus of the
8.2-meter Subaru Telescope [46–49]. The wide field of view
combined with the excellent seeing conditions at Maunakea
and the large aperture make it an ideal telescope for surveys
targettingweaklensingmeasurementsoflarge-scalestructure.
The HSC-Subaru Strategic Program was allocated 330 nights
to carry out a three-layered imaging survey in multiple bands
with different depths [27]. The Wide layer, which is de-
signed for weak lensing cosmology, consists of multi-band
𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑦imaging that will cover an area of approximately 1100
deg2, upon completion. The galaxy shape measurements are
carried out in the 𝑖-band which is observed at a 5−𝜎depth
of𝑖∼26(2′′apertureforapointsource). Theimagesinthe 𝑖
band were preferentially taken under good seeing conditions,
which resulted in a median seeing of about 0.6arcsec.
The data from the survey has been processed using a fork
of Rubin’s LSST Science Pipelines catered to images taken
with HSC [50], and which is updated from time to time to
includenewfeatures,anybugfixes,andimprovementstodeal
withtheSubaruHSCdata. TheSubaruHSCsurveyhasmade
three public data releases thus far [51–53]. In this paper,
we use the shape catalog from the S19a internal data release
intermediate to PDR2 and PDR3, which was processed with
hscPipev7[54]. Therewereanumberofimprovementstothe
PSFmodeling,imagewarpingkernel,backgroundsubtraction
and bright star masks, which have improved the quality of the
shapecataloginHSC-Y3comparedtotheYear1shapecatalog
[55,56]. Thedetailedselectionofgalaxiesthatformtheshape
catalogispresentedinLi et al.[54]. Briefly,theshapecatalog
consistsofgalaxiesselectedfromthefull-depthandfull-color
region in all five filters. Apart from some basic quality cuts
related to pixel level information, we select extended objects
with an extinction corrected cmodel magnitude 𝑖 <24.5,𝑖-
band SNR≥10, resolution>0.3,>5𝜎detection in at least
twobandsotherthan 𝑖,a1arcsecdiameteraperturemagnitude
cut of𝑖 <25.5, and a blendedness cut in the 𝑖-band of 10−3.8.
The shape catalog consists of a total of 35.7 million galax-
iesspanninganareaofabout433sq.deg,aneffectivenumber
density of 19.9 arcmin−2. It is divided into six disjoint re-
gions: XMM, VVDS, GAMA09H, WIDE12H, GAMA15H
and HECTOMAP fields [see Fig. 2 in 54]. The shape mea-
surements in the catalog were calibrated using detailed image
simulations, such that the galaxy property dependent multi-
plicativeshearestimationbiasislessthan ∼10−2. Liet al.[54]
alsopresentedanumberofsystematicstestsandnulltests,and
quantifiedthelevelofresidualsystematicsintheshapecatalog
thatcouldaffectthecosmologicalscienceanalysescarriedout
using the data. Given that Li et al.[54] flag residual additive
biases due to PSF model shape residual correlations and star
galaxy shape correlations as systematics requiring special at-
tentionandmarginalization,wewillalsoinvestigatetheeffect
of these systematics on the cosmic shear measurements.
As shown in Appendix D, we exclude a ∼20sq. degree
patch of the sky in the GAMA09H region from our analysis.
Thisregionwasasignificantsourceof 𝐵-modesystematicsin4
120° 60° 0° 300° 240°
-60°-30°0°30°60°HSC Y3 (source)
SDSS (lens)
FIG. 1. The area coverage of the data used in this paper for performing 3 ×2pt measurements. The catalog of HSC galaxies used for the weak
lensing measurements are shown using the purple shaded region, while the catalog of SDSS galaxies is shown using yellow. The overlap
betweenthetwocatalogsis ∼416sq. degree. OurmeasurementoftheclusteringsignalusestheentireSDSSregion,whilethemeasurements
of the galaxy-galaxy lensing signal and the cosmic shear signal utilize source galaxies in the overlapping area.
thecosmicshearanalysispresentedinourcompanionpaperLi
et al.[43]. Theresultantareaofourshapecatalogis ∼416sq.
degree. The on-sky projection of this area is shown in Fig. 1,
as the purple shaded region.
The HSC-Y3 shape catalog is accompanied by a photo-
metric redshift catalog of galaxies based on three different
methods [57][58]. The software Mizukiis a template fitting
based photometric redshift estimate code, while DEmPzand
DNNzprovide machine learning based estimates of the pho-
tometricredshiftsofgalaxies[59]. Eachofthesemethodspro-
vides an estimate of the posterior distribution function of the
redshift for each galaxy, denoted as 𝑃(𝑧s). Photometric red-
shiftuncertaintiesareoneofmostimportantsystematiceffects
inweaklensingcosmology,andcancausesignificantbiasesin
the cosmological parameters if they are affected by unknown
residual systematic errors. To minimize the impact of such
errors,wewilladoptthemethodinOguriandTakada[60]that
allowstoself-consistentlycalibratesuchphoto- 𝑧errors,using
a single sample of photometric source galaxies and multiple
samples of spectroscopic lens galaxies in galaxy-galaxy weak
lensing measurements.
Forthispurpose,wedefineasampleofbackgroundgalaxies
that satisfies
∫7
𝑧l,max+𝑧diff𝑃(𝑧s)𝑑𝑧s≥𝑝thresh, (1)
where𝑧l,maxwas chosen to be equal to 0.70, the maximum
redshift of the lens samples that we will use for the galaxy-
galaxy lensing measurements (see below), 𝑧diff=0.05and
𝑝thresh=0.99. Such cuts significantly reduce the contamina-
tion of source galaxies which are physically associated with
the lens galaxies which can dilute the weak lensing signal at
small separations. As our default choice, we use the 𝑃(𝑧)
estimates for each galaxy provided by DEmPz.
The selection (Eq. 1) reduces the total number of galaxies
inourweaklensingsampletobejust 24percentoftheoriginal
shape catalog,[61] with an effective number density of 4.9
galaxies per square arcmin. Instead, if we use the posteriordistributions of the redshifts given by DNNzorMizuki, the
numberofgalaxiesis 9or35percentoftheentiretyoftheshape
catalog, respectively. These would correspond to an effective
number density of 1.9and6.8galaxies per square arcmin for
DNNzandMizuki, respectively. These differences in the
number density are entirely driven by the differences in the
widthsoftheindividual 𝑃(𝑧)’sinferredbythedifferentcodes.
The inferred 𝑃(𝑧)estimates for individual galaxies obtained
using DNNzare on average broader than those obtained in
MizukiandDEmPz. The broader widths result in a smaller
number of galaxies that satisfy the cut shown in Eq. (1).
Theinferredredshiftdistributionsofthesampleofourfidu-
cial sources are shown in Fig. 2 based on the Bayesian Hier-
archical Inference presented in Rau et al.[62]. These redshift
distribution inferences (90 percent credible region shown in
gray) use both the individual redshift PDFs from photomet-
ric redshift estimation codes, as well as the measurements of
clustering of the galaxies in our source sample, with that of
redgalaxiesselectedbythe CAMIRA algorithm[63,64]. The
90percent credible intervals on the redshift inference from
each of these techniques individually are shown as the red
shaded region and black points with errors, respectively. As
mentioned before, we have multiple choices of photometric
redshift estimates for our sample of galaxies. Even though
we select galaxies using the DEmPzredshift PDFs, the same
sourcegalaxysamplealsohasredshiftestimatescharacterized
by the other codes, which help in pinning down any system-
atic uncertainties. The two panels in Fig. 2 correspond to
the use of individual redshift PDFs from DEmPzandDNNz,
respectively, but for the same set of source galaxies. The
clustering method does not extend to the entire range of red-
shifts as we run out of galaxies with well calibrated redshifts
from CAMIRA beyond a redshift of 1.2. Note that the cross-
correlationresults(markedbyWX)differineachofthepanels
by their a-posteriori normalization factor from the joint like-
lihood inference between WX and DNNz/DEmPz, as can be
seen upon a close inspection of the two panels. The redshift
axes in each panel are aligned vertically for ease of compari-5
son.
In the upper panel, we see a broad agreement between
the redshift inference based on just the redshift PDFs from
DEmPzandtheclusteringredshifts. However,itisinteresting
to note that DEmPzpredicts a bimodal feature in the red-
shift distribution with a dip in the number of galaxies with
redshifts at𝑧∼1.0. The clustering redshift inferences have
large and correlated errors, but do not show any indication
of such a bimodal distribution. The redshift inference based
onDEmPzshows very small support at redshifts lower than
0.75(less than a percent), by construction. In the bottom
panel, which uses DNNzestimates of the redshift PDFs, we
do not see a substantial evidence of a dip at redshift of unity
in this inference. However, we notice that the inference using
DNNzdoesshowsomenon-zerosupportevenbelowthemax-
imum lens redshifts we use of 0.75, as seen in the clustering
measurements (although at low significance).
Any systematic differences in the redshifts of our sources
could translate into biases in the measured weak lensing sig-
nals. InAppendixA,wepresentourestimatesofsuchpotential
biases and suggest that shifting the inferred redshift PDFs by
a free parameter Δ𝑧is sufficient in order to marginalize over
such uncertainties with percent level accuracy.
B. Blinding strategy
All of our cosmological analyses are carried out in a two-
tiered blind manner similar to our strategy in our Year 1 anal-
ysis [65]. As described in the HSC-Y3 shape catalog paper
Liet al.[54], we use different multiplicative bias factors in
order to blind our analyses in the first tier, which provide a
convenient way to change the data vectors related to the weak
lensingobservables. Weobtainthreeblindcatalogs 𝑖=0,1,2
where the𝑗-th galaxy has a multiplicative bias equal to
𝑚𝑖𝑗=𝑚𝑗+d𝑚𝑖
1+d𝑚𝑖
2, (2)
where d𝑚𝑖
1is a multiplicative bias known to the analysis lead
designedtopreventunblindingduetoaccidentalcomparisons
of multiple versions of the catalog. This value is removed
in the measurement codes before performing any measure-
ments with any of the catalogs. The three values d𝑚𝑖
2are
one of the three choices (−0.1,−0.05,0.),(−0.05,0.,0.05),
(0.,0.05,0.1). These amplitude offsets are motivated by the
differences in the values of amplitude of density fluctuations,
𝜎8, as obtained by the CMB analysis by the Planck collabo-
ration [2] and other large-scale structure probes [e.g., 14, 20].
Allofourlensingrelatedmeasurementswereperformedwith
all three blinded catalogs at the same time. The cosmological
analyses and all systematics tests were performed on each of
thesecatalogs,separately. AswewilldescribeinsectionsVA
and VIA in this paper, we modify our covariances to account
for the fact that each of our catalogs has a different value of
d𝑚2(aprocedurethatcanbeperformedwithoutknowledgeof
d𝑚2). In this manner, the 𝜒2of the best fit models to mea-
surements performed using the three catalogs are not able to
accidentally distinguish the true catalog.
0 1 2 3
Redshiftz0.00.51.01.5p(z)
Photo-z(DEMPz)
Photo-z& WX
WX (0.1-1.0 Mpc)
0 1 2 3
Redshiftz0.00.51.01.5p(z)
Photo-z(DNNz)
Photo-z& WX
WX (0.1-1.0 Mpc)FIG. 2. The inferred redshift distribution of the source galaxies
used in our weak lensing analysis obtained using the techniques de-
scribed in [62]. The upper and lower panels use the photometric
redshiftPDFsforthesourcesampleasinferredbythephoto- 𝑧meth-
odsDEmPzandDNNz,respectively. Thegreyshadedregionshows
the posterior based on deconvolving the photometric redshift errors
from these PDFs, the black points with errors correspond to the red-
shift inference based purely on the clustering of our source galaxies
with the CAMIRA red galaxy sample, while the red shaded region
corresponds to the posterior combining the two measurements.
Thesecondtierofblindingisperformedattheanalysislevel.
The results of our analyses of all the three catalogs prior to
unblinding are presented by masking the value of the inferred
cosmologicalparameters. Oncealltheanalysesareperformed
and the relevant systematics checks are passed (see Paper II
and III for a detailed checklist of tests to be passed prior to
unblinding), we unblind each of the tiers, first starting with
the second tier. The first tier of the catalog level unblinding
is performed by a HSC team member external to the analysis
team right at the end. Throughout this paper, we will show
the measurements from our analysis of the blind catalog id
=2, which was found to be the true catalog post unblinding.
No changes have been made to the analysis post unblinding.
The other blinded catalogs also similarly passed each of the
systematic tests as we show here for the blind catalog id 2.6
C. Lens Galaxy Sample
We use the large-scale structure sample compiled as part
of the Data Release 11 (DR11) [66] [67] of the SDSS-III
(Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey) project [68] for
measurementsoftheclusteringofgalaxiesandaslensgalaxies
for the galaxy-galaxy weak lensing measurements. The lens
galaxysampleusedinthispaperisthesameasthatusedinthe
firstyearanalysisofHSCdata(Miyatake et al.[69],Sugiyama
et al.[70]). The methodology used to construct the catalog is
the same as that described in Miyatake et al.[71]. We briefly
describe the catalog here.
The BOSS is a spectroscopic follow-up survey of galaxies
and quasars selected from the imaging data obtained by the
SDSS-I/II and covers an area of approximately 11,000 deg2
[72]usingthededicated2.5mSDSSTelescope[73]. Imaging
data obtained in five photometric bands ( 𝑢𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑧) as part of the
SDSSI/IIsurveys[74–76]wereaugmentedwithanadditional
3,000 deg2in SDSS DR9 to cover a larger portion of the sky
inthesouthernregion[68,77–79]. Thesedatawereprocessed
by a series of the photometric processing pipelines [80–82],
and corrected for Galactic extinction [83] to obtain a reliable
photometric catalog which serves as an input to select targets
for spectroscopy [68]. The resulting spectra were processed
by an automated pipeline to perform redshift determination
and spectral classification [84]. The BOSS large-scale struc-
ture (LSS) samples are selected using algorithms focused on
galaxies in different redshifts: 0.15< 𝑧 < 0.35(LOWZ)
and0.43< 𝑧 < 0.70(CMASS). In addition to the galax-
ies targeted by the BOSS project, these samples also include
galaxies whichpass thetarget selectionbut havealready been
observed as part of the SDSS-I/II project (legacy galaxies).
These legacy galaxies were subsampled in each SDSS sector
[85] on the sky so that they obey the same completeness as
that of the LOWZ/CMASS targets in their respective redshift
ranges [86].
Various color-magnitude selections guarantee a population
ofmassivegalaxiesspanningaredshiftrange 𝑧∈[0.15,0.70]
inthespectroscopicsurvey. Theresultantsample,however,is
not entirely a volume or flux limited sample of galaxies.
The SDSS spectrograph can assign at most 1000 fibers on
the sky at one time in a circular tile region (for the BOSS
survey). Therefore an adaptive tiling algorithm was used to
maximize the completeness of the survey. The spectra ob-
tained from the observations were processed with specpipe,
the spectroscopic pipeline for determination of redshift and
spectral classification. Despite all optimizations, there exist
galaxies which obey the target selection, but cannot be as-
signed a fiber due to limitations of how close fibers can be
assigned on a given tile. In such cases, the galaxy is assigned
theredshiftofitsnearestneighbourgalaxywhichwasassigned
afiber. Asimilarprocedureisusedtoassignredshiftstogalax-
ies for which specpipe failed to determine a redshift. In the
fiducial DR11 LSS catalog, the nearest neighbouring galaxy
gets an additional weight to account for the fiber-collided or
redshift failure galaxy. We instead assign the nearest neigh-
bour redshift to photometric galaxies with fiber collisions or
redshift failures. This should be equivalent when the entire
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
redshiftarbitrary numberLOWZ CMASS1 CMASS2 HSCFIG. 3. The redshift distribution of the three spectroscopic lens
samples are shown in red, green, and orange, respectively. These
distributionscanbecomparedtotheredshiftdistributionoftheHSC
sourcegalaxysampleusedinouranalysisshowninblue. Inthisfigure
the latter is estimated using stacked 𝑃(𝑧)distribution estimated by
DEmPzfor the source galaxies used in our analysis.
sample is used. However, our method allows for making fur-
thersub-samplesbasedonabsolutemagnitude. Guo et al.[87]
have shown using detailed tests on mock galaxy catalogs that
the nearest neighbor redshift correction achieves sub-percent
accuracy in the projected galaxy auto-correlation function for
scales used in this paper.
This modified DR11 LSS sample described above forms
our parent catalog. We obtain the k+e-corrected 𝑖-band abso-
lute magnitudes for individual SDSS galaxies using the k and
e-correctionstabulatedinWake et al.[88]relyingonthe“pas-
siveplusstar-forminggalaxies”spectraltemplatesconstructed
using the stellar population synthesis model in Bruzual and
Charlot [89]) of individual galaxies based on cmodelpho-
tometry. In order to minimize the effect of k-corrections, we
k-correctthemagnitudesoftheLOWZgalaxiestoaredshiftof
0.20andthatofCMASSgalaxiestoaredshiftof0.55. Aswe
willseebelow,thesemagnitudesallowustodefinesubsamples
from this parent catalog.
We use weights provided for all galaxies to account for the
inversecorrelationbetweenthenumberdensityofgalaxiesand
that of stars [90], and that of seeing ( 𝑤∗) as provided in the
SDSS DR11 large scale structure catalogs [86].
We define three subsamples which are approximately
volume-limited by luminosity. The “LOWZ” subsample con-
sists of galaxies with 𝑧∈ [0.15,0.35], and the “CMASS1”
and “CMASS2” subsamples consists of galaxies with 𝑧∈
[0.43,0.55]and𝑧∈ [0.55,0.70], respectively. We ap-
ply further cuts on the absolute magnitude of galaxies of
𝑀𝑖−5 log h<−21.5,−21.9and−22.2for the three sub-
samples, respectively. This results in subsamples which have
anumberdensityequalto ¯𝑛g/[10−4(ℎ−1Mpc)−3]≃1.8,0.74
and0.45, respectively, which are a few times smaller than
those of the entire parent (color-cut and flux-limited) LOWZ
and CMASS samples. The redshift distribution of the three7
lenssubsamplescomparedtothestacked 𝑃(𝑧)distributionfor
the HSC source galaxy sample we use in this paper is shown
inFig.3whichshowsthewellseparatedredshiftdistributions
of our lens subsamples compared to the source galaxies.[91]
Please seeFig. 1 inMiyatake et al.[69] forthe redshift distri-
bution of the three luminosity-limited subsamples, compared
to that of the flux-limited sample. As we will show in Sec-
tions IVB and VB, use of such subsamples helps reduce sys-
tematics related to the variation of the measurements within
each of the three redshift bins.
We will use random points in order to measure the galaxy
clustering signal from these subsamples, as well as testing for
systematics in the lensing signal. The random points are also
useful to infer the potential dilution of the weak lensing sig-
nal due to the use of galaxies physically clustered with our
subsamples, but are inferred to be at a higher redshift due to
systematicandstatisticalerrorsinthephotometricredshiftdis-
tribution. The random points for each of our galaxy samples
were constructed by downsampling the DR11 LSS random
catalogs which follow the angular mask and redshift distri-
butions of all galaxies in the LOWZ and CMASS samples,
respectively,suchthattheyfollowtheredshiftdistributionsof
our galaxy subsamples.
We will show that the clustering and lensing observables
within the redshift bin of each sample do not evolve signif-
icantly given the approximate volume-limited nature of our
catalogs, compared to that for the flux-limited sample. This
is similar to the findings in Miyatake et al.[71, their fig. 3],
but for a sample of stellar mass selected galaxies. Our sam-
ples also allow a simpler treatment of the magnification bias
effectonthegalaxy-galaxyweaklensingthantheflux-limited
sample [see 69, 70].
D. Simulations For Covariance Measurements
In order to carry out the Bayesian inference of the cosmo-
logical parameters, we will compare the measurements of the
galaxy clustering and galaxy-galaxy lensing signal of the lens
subsamplesdescribedinthesubsectionabovewiththeoretical
models. The covariance matrix of these measurements pro-
vides a metric to compare the theoretical predictions to these
observations, and thus a robust determination of uncertain-
ties in the inferred parameters, which is a crucial component
of a Bayesian analysis. We use mock catalogs of SDSS and
HSC galaxies, generated from the N-body simulation based
full-sky light-cone simulations [45], to estimate the covari-
ance matrix for our observables [also see Appendix B of Ref.
69,fordetails]. WeproducealargenumberofsyntheticSDSS
galaxymockswhichareconsistentwiththemeasuredcluster-
ingpropertiesofSDSSgalaxies. TheHSCgalaxymocksalso
includepropertiesofthegalaxiessuchastheangularpositions
of each galaxy, their galaxy shapes and the simulated lensing
effect. We perform mock measurements of galaxy clustering
and galaxy-galaxy lensing signal with such synthetic galaxy
data, in order to estimate the statistical uncertainties.1. Generation of mock shape catalogs
We present the creation of the mock catalogs of galaxy
shapes for the HSC-Y3 data. We use the 108full sky lensing
simulations in Takahashi et al.[45] in order to construct the
mockcatalogs. Thesesimulationsadoptaflat ΛCDMcosmol-
ogy consistent with the 9-year WMAP cosmology (WMAP9)
[92]. Toproduceasetofgalaxyshapecatalogs,wefollowthe
same methodology as adopted in Shirasaki et al.[93].
Weuse13differentrotationsoftheHSC-Y3skyareaonthe
fullskytoextract13approximatelynon-overlappingHSC-Y3
survey footprints out of each full sky lensing map. The full
sky lensing map yields the shear for a given source redshift
at the location of each healpix pixel within the mock survey
footprints. Intotal,wethushave 108×13=1404realizations
ofshearinanumberoflensingplanesonafootprintequivalent
tothatofHSC-Y3data. Theseshearmapsarethenrotatedback
so that they occupy the same sky coordinates as the HSC-Y3
footprint.
We use these shear maps to construct mock shape catalogs
by using the observed photometric redshifts and angular po-
sitions of real galaxies from the HSC-Y3 shape catalog. We
rotate the shape of each source galaxy at random to erase the
real lensing signal imprinted on the HSC galaxies. In prac-
tice, we first rotate the distortion of individual galaxies ϵobs
and obtain the rotated distortion as ϵran=ϵobs𝑒𝑖𝜙, where𝜙is
a random number between 0 and 2𝜋. We have to be careful
that the observed distortion of a galaxy is different from the
intrinsic distortion due to the measurement error. We model
the intrinsic shape ϵintand measurement error ϵmeain the fol-
lowing manner:
ϵint= 
𝜖rms√︁
𝜖2rms+𝜎2e!
ϵran, (3)
ϵmea=𝑁1+𝑖𝑁2, (4)
where𝑁𝑖isarandomnumberdrawnfromanormaldistribution
with a standard deviation of 𝜎e. The first equation guarantees
that the root-mean-squared (rms) ellipticity of the rotated in-
trinsic ellipticity is equal to 𝜖rms. We use𝜖rms(parameter
i_shapehsmregauss_derived_rms_e ) and𝜎e(parameter
i_shapehsmregauss_derived_sigma_e )thatareprovided
on an object-by-object basis in the HSC-Y3 shape catalog.
Wedrawatrueredshiftforthegalaxyrandomlyfromitsin-
dividual photometric redshift PDF based on the photo- 𝑧code
DNNZ. The choice for the use of DNNzwas due to the avail-
abilityoftheredshiftPDFestimatesatanearlystageafterthe
internal data release on which the shape catalog is based. We
addthelensingshearonthesourcegalaxyfromtheshearmap
on a lensing plane closest to the true redshift drawn for the
galaxy thus assigning it an ellipticity given by
𝜖mock
1=𝜖int
1+𝛿1+(𝛿2/𝛿2)[1−(1−𝛿2)1/2](𝛿1𝜖int
2−𝛿2𝜖int
1)
1+δ·ϵint
+𝜖mea
1, (5)
𝜖mock
2=𝜖int
2+𝛿2+(𝛿1/𝛿2)[1−(1−𝛿2)1/2](𝛿2𝜖int
1−𝛿1𝜖int
2)
1+δ·ϵint
+𝜖mea
2, (6)8
where δ≡2(1−𝜅)γ/[(1−𝜅)2+𝛾2]and𝜅and𝛾are sim-
ulated lensing convergence and shear at the galaxy position,
taken from the ray-tracing simulation. Note 𝛿≃2𝛾in the
weak lensing regime and we do not include any multiplica-
tive and additive biases in mock catalogs in Eqs. (5) and (6).
Our method maintains the observed properties of the source
galaxies on the sky including the lensing weights.
2. Generation of mock SDSS galaxy catalogs (lens and clustering
samples)
We populate galaxies in the dark matter halos in each of
our realizations using a halo occupation distribution (HOD)
framework. The HOD ⟨𝑁⟩𝑀defines the number of galaxies
in a halo of mass 𝑀. As is standard practice, we divide the
HOD into a central and a satellite galaxy component, where
⟨𝑁gal⟩𝑀=⟨𝑁cen⟩𝑀+⟨𝑁sat⟩𝑀, (7)
with
⟨𝑁cen⟩𝑀=1
2
1+erflog10𝑀−log10𝑀min
𝜎log10𝑀
,(8)
⟨𝑁sat⟩𝑀=⟨𝑁cen⟩𝑀𝑀−𝜅𝑀𝑀min
𝑀1𝛼𝑀
. (9)
To estimate HOD parameters, we first measure the cluster-
ing abundance of LOWZ, CMASS1, and CMASS2 sample
using the clustering measurement pipeline described in Sec-
tion IIIA. The clustering covariance is obtained using 192
approximately equal area jackknife regions of the SDSS foot-
print. Wealsomeasureabundanceofeachsample. Toavoidan
over-dependence of the HOD constraints on the abundances,
weuseamoreconservative10%errorestimateonthesemea-
surements. We model these measurements by emulator-based
halo model [69] to obtain the HOD parameters, where we
adoptthefittingrange 0.5< 𝑅/[ℎ−1Mpc]<80. Notethatwe
assumeWMAP9flat- ΛCDMcosmology[92]forthemeasure-
ments and fitting. The resultant halo occupation distribution
fits are shown in Fig. 4 and the corresponding best fit param-
eters for the three subsamples are noted in Table I. Given that
we are only using the clustering signal to fit the halo occu-
pation distribution parameters, we expect a large number of
degeneracies to be unresolved.
Weusetheseparameterstopopulategalaxiesindarkmatter
halos in the following manner. For every halo in the simula-
tion, we compute the central halo occupation ⟨𝑁cen⟩𝑀, which
acts as a probability for it to host a central galaxy within the
halo. The central galaxy is assumed to reside at the center of
each halo and is at rest with respect to its host halo. For halos
whichhavecentralgalaxies,wepopulatesatellitegalaxieswith
a Poisson deviate with mean 𝜆𝑀=[(𝑀−𝜅𝑀𝑀min)/𝑀1]𝛼𝑀.
The satellite galaxies are assumed to have a radial distribu-
tionthatfollowstheNavarro–Frenk–White(NFW)profile[94]
withaconcentrationparameterasmeasuredbythehalofinder
ROCKSTAR [95]. The satellite galaxies are assigned a velocity
with respect to the halo which is drawn from a Gaussian with
zeromeanandvarianceequalto 𝜎2
vir=(1+𝑧)𝐺𝑀/(2𝑅200m).TABLEI.HODparametersthatbestfittheclusteringmeasurements
for the three different subsamples along with the median redshift are
notedinthedifferentcolumnsofthetable. Themockgalaxycatalogs
arepopulatedwiththesehalooccupationdistributionparameters. We
providetheexactnumbersweuseforthepopulationofthecatalog,the
number of significant digits mentioned are entirely for completeness
and should not be taken to indicate the error on the determination of
these HOD parameters.
LOWZ CMASS1 CMASS2
Median z 0.279 0.5206 0.6264
log𝑀min13.502510 13.835350 14.134250
𝜎20.271474 0.473399 0.699328
log𝑀114.435000 14.614390 14.686320
𝛼0.334696 1.868055 1.803775
𝜅2.620329 0.017179 0.016590
The(1+𝑧)factorinthisequationaccountsforthefactthatthe
halo radius is measured in comoving units.
III. MEASUREMENT CODES
Inthissectionwedescribethevariousanalysiscodesweuse
for carrying out the galaxy clustering, galaxy-galaxy lensing
andthecosmicshearmeasurementsaswellastheircovariances
using the mock catalogs we have described in the previous
section.
A. Clustering Pipeline
Themeasurementoftheclusteringsignalrequiresfastcom-
putation of pair counts at a variety of separations. We use
a custom ‘clustering_pipeline‘ specifically developed for the
measurementofweightedpaircountsatagivenprojectedsep-
aration𝑅andline-of-sightseparation 𝜋startingfromcatalogs
ofangularpositions,redshiftsandweights. Thecorefunctions
of the pipeline are written in C++, which are then exposed to
python using the Simplified Wrapper and Interface Generator
(SWIG).
Thenearestneighboursearchesarecarriedoutwiththehelp
of a kd-tree[96] optimized to utilize the cache and enable fast
searches for potential neighbours in the galaxy catalog in the
planeofthesky. Thevalueof 𝑅maxand𝜋maxareusedtoleave
out galaxy pairs that do not lie within the required projected
and line-of-sight distances from each other.
The python functions allow input catalogs to be read in a
variety of formats such as plain text, fits and csv files with in-
formation about the angular positions, redshifts, and weights
of galaxies. These are then passed to the C++ code in or-
der to generate the kd-tree for the paircounts. We use the
Landy-Szalay estimator in order to measure the 3-d correla-
tion function,
𝜉(𝑅,𝜋)=𝐷𝐷−2𝐷𝑅+𝑅𝑅
𝑅𝑅. (10)9
101310141015
M[h−1M⊙]10−1100101/angbracketleftN/angbracketrightMLOWZ
101310141015
M[h−1M⊙]CMASS1
101310141015
M[h−1M⊙]CMASS2
/angbracketleftNgal/angbracketright
/angbracketleftNcen/angbracketright
/angbracketleftNsat/angbracketright
FIG. 4. The number of galaxies in a halo of mass 𝑀predicted by the HOD model with HOD parameters obtained from the emulator based
model fitting to the clustering signal for each sample of the SDSS-BOSS galaxies. This HOD model is used to populate galaxies in mock
simulations, which in turn are used to compute the covariance matrix of our observables.
where𝐷𝐷denotes the number of pairs of galaxies in the
data,𝐷𝑅thenumberofnormalizedgalaxyrandompairs,and
𝑅𝑅thenumberofnormalizedrandomrandompairsatagiven
separation(𝑅,𝜋). Weuse50timesmorerandomsthanthedata
pointsinordertoreducetheshotnoiseinthedeterminationof
𝐷𝑅and𝑅𝑅.
ThecomputationofthepaircountsaredoneusingtheMes-
sagePassingInterface(MPI)usingadivisionoftasksforeach
of these pair counts. The load balancing is achieved by di-
viding the randoms into 50 separate units and computing the
pair counts separately. The C++ code can also compute jack-
knife covariances on the fly if every galaxy is associated with
a jackknife index.
Wecomputethe3dimensionalcorrelationfunction 𝜉(𝑅,𝜋)
and integrate it along the line of sight direction to obtain the
projected correlation function 𝑤p,
𝑤p(𝑅)=2∫𝜋max
0𝜉(𝑅,𝜋)𝑑𝜋. (11)
We use𝜋max=100ℎ−1Mpc. This length is smaller than the
line-of-sightdirectionwidthofoursubsamplesandlargerthan
the maximum projected distance to which we compute 𝑤p.
Themeasurementsoftheclusteringsignal 𝑤p(𝑅)aredepen-
dent upon the fiducial cosmological model used to compute
these measurements. In the modeling analysis we account
forthecosmologydependenceofthemeasurementsusingthe
formalism presented in More et al.[37] during the modeling
phase. Briefly, the fiducial cosmological model used to mea-
sure the clustering enters the measurements when the angular
separationsbetweenthegalaxiesgetconvertedintocomoving
separations and the redshift differences in to line-of-sight co-
movingseparations. Theratioofthecomovingdistancetothe
medianredshiftofeachsamplebetweenthefiducialmodeland
thecosmologicalmodelunderconsideration,aswellasasimi-
larratiobetweentheHubbleparametersinthetwomodelscan
correct for the clustering measurements. On the other hand,
for the weak lensing signal, we additionally have to consider
the dependence of the critical surface density on the fiducial
cosmological parameters and the cosmological model under
consideration.The various inputs to the clustering pipeline such as the
cosmological model to be used for the measurements, the
minimum and maximum projected distances, the number of
radial bins, the number of bins in projected radius, the types
of galaxies used to measure the clustering (cross or auto) are
passed via a simple yaml file.
The pipeline has been validated by comparing the corre-
lation function measurements against those measured by the
BOSSsurveycollaborationusingtheentireBOSS-LOWZand
BOSS-CMASS samples.
B. Galaxy-galaxy Lensing Pipeline
The gravitational lensing due to the presence of mass be-
tween us and the far away source galaxies results in coherent
distortions in their shapes. Such distortions can be inferred
from the observed distribution of ellipticities of these galax-
ies. As galaxies have intrinsic shapes, this signal needs to
be measured as a statistical average of the shapes of a large
number of galaxies.
The HSC-Y3 shape catalog provides the ellipticity compo-
nents(𝑒1,𝑒2)along with the weights for every galaxy 𝑤s, the
additiveandmultiplicativebiases (𝑐1,𝑐2,𝑚)andthevariance
of the ellipticity 𝑒RMS. Given𝜙, the angle between the line
joining the lens and the source galaxy in the plane of the sky
and the x-axis of the coordinate system, the tangential distor-
tion in shape is given by
𝑒t=−𝑒1cos(2𝜙)−𝑒2sin(2𝜙). (12)
The average of the tangential ellipticity is proportional to the
tangential shear induced on the galaxy by the matter distri-
bution correlated with the lens galaxy. The tangential shear
depends upon the surface mass density, Σ(𝑅), and the critical
surface density for lensing Σcritsuch that
𝛾t(𝑅)=Σ(< 𝑅)−Σ(𝑅)
Σcr(𝑧l,𝑧s)=ΔΣ(𝑅)
Σcr(𝑧l,𝑧s).(13)
Here, the symbol Σ(< 𝑅)denotes the average surface mass
densitywithinaprojecteddistance 𝑅fromthelens,and Σ(𝑅)10
isthesurfacemassdensityatthedistance 𝑅afterperformingan
azimuthalaverage. Thecriticalsurfacedensity, Σcr(𝑧l,𝑧s),isa
geometricalfactordependentontheangulardiameterdistances
to the lens𝐷A(𝑧l), the source 𝐷A(𝑧s)and between the two,
𝐷A(𝑧l,𝑧s). When expressed in comoving units, the critical
surface density is given by
Σcr(𝑧l,𝑧s)=𝑐2
4𝜋𝐺𝐷A(𝑧s)
𝐷A(𝑧l)𝐷A(𝑧l,𝑧s)(1+𝑧2
l).(14)
As the galaxy-galaxy lensing signal, we measure the excess
surface density ΔΣ(𝑅)=Σ(< 𝑅)−Σ(𝑅)as a minimum vari-
ance weighted statistical average,
ΔΣ(𝑅)=1
(1+ˆ𝑚) Í
ls𝑤ls𝑒t,ls
Σ−1
cr−1
ls
2RÍ
ls𝑤ls!
.(15)
The average inverse critical surface density is computed
fromthefullphotometricredshiftposteriordistribution, 𝑝(𝑧s),
⟨Σ−1
cr⟩ls=4𝜋𝐺(1+𝑧l)2
𝑐2∫∞
𝑧l𝐷A(𝑧l)𝐷A(𝑧l,𝑧s)
𝐷A(𝑧s)𝑝(𝑧s)𝑑𝑧s,
(16)
wherethelowerlimitoftheintegrationisfromthelensredshift
𝑧l. Given the photometric redshift errors, one can expect
galaxies in the foreground or at the lens redshifts to be in our
sourcesample. Toreducetheeffectsof suchgalaxiesweonly
choose those sources that have a large probability to lie at
a specified redshift according to Eq. 1. The parameter 𝑧max
can be chosen to correspond to the maximum redshifts of the
sample,andthetunableparameters 𝑧diffand𝑝cutwhichcanbe
changed to allow the cuts to be more stringent. Alternatively,
the pipeline also allows for the possibility to carry out the
source selection by using the best estimate of the photometric
redshift.
The weight used in Eq. (15), 𝑤ls=𝑤l𝑤s⟨Σ−1
crit⟩2
ls, is the
minimum variance weight for the estimator of the signal ΔΣ,
and it down weights those lens-source pairs that are close to
each other in redshift. The shear responsivity Ris given by
R=1−Í
ls𝑤ls𝑒2
RMSÍ
ls𝑤ls, (17)
and can be estimated from 𝑒RMS. Finally, the term ˆ𝑚is
the average multiplicative bias and is defined as as ˆ𝑚=
Σls𝑤ls𝑚𝑠/Σls𝑤ls.
In addition, we consider the effect on the multiplicative
and the additive selection bias. Li et al.[54] found that the
multiplicative bias and selection bias are proportional to the
fractionofgalaxiesatthesharpboundaryofselectioncutson
resolution and aperture magnitude as follows:
ˆ𝑚sel=−0.05854 ˆ𝑃(mag𝐴=25.5)+0.01919 ˆ𝑃(𝑅2=0.3),
(18)
ˆ𝑎sel=0.00635 ˆ𝑃(mag𝐴=25.5)+0.00627 ˆ𝑃(𝑅2=0.3),
(19)
respectively. Here, ˆ𝑃(𝑋)isthefractionestimateofgalaxiesat
theboundaryofselectioncuton 𝑋. Thegalaxy-galaxylensingestimate is corrected as
ΔΣ→1
1+ˆ𝑚sel(ΔΣ−ˆ𝑎selΔΣpsf), (20)
ΔΣpsf=Í
ls𝑤ls𝑒psf
t,lsÍ
ls𝑤ls, (21)
where𝑒psf
𝑖is the PSF shape.
Finally we also repeat the same exact measurement proce-
dure mentioned above for the weak lensing signal but around
random points which are 40 times larger than the number of
lenses. We use random catalogs which occupy the same area
on the sky and follow the same redshift distributions as our
lenssubsamples. Thisallowsustosubtractoutanylarge-scale
systematic effects that may exist, especially on scales com-
parable to the field of view of HSC. This changes our final
estimator from the one written in Eq. 20,
ΔΣ→ΔΣ−ΔΣrand. (22)
The weak lensing pipeline we have developed implements
the above calculations in order to measure the galaxy-galaxy
lensing signal. At its core, it needs to perform nearest neigh-
bour calculations on the plane of the sky between lens and
source galaxies. It uses the the same kd-tree code as used in
the galaxy clustering pipeline in order to speed up these cal-
culations. Thecorefunctionsofthepipelineareagainwritten
in C++ for speed, with interfaces provided via python using
SWIG. The input and output is handled on the python side
making it easier to swap in and out different catalogs for the
lensingmeasurementswhilepreservingthecorefunctionality.
In order to make the code memory efficient, we search for
lensgalaxiesaroundsourcegalaxiesratherthantheotherway
round. The computational complexity of the algorithm to
generateatreeof 𝑁pointsandtoperform 𝑛searcheswithitis
O[(𝑁+𝑛)log𝑁)], thus it is better to generate the tree out of
thesmallerofthetwonumbers. Giventheorderofmagnitude
differencebetweenthenumberoflensandthesourcesamples,
we generate the tree using the lens catalogs. This in turn also
makes the code memory efficient, because the entirety of the
sourcecatalogneednotbereadrightatthebeginninginorder
to generate the tree.
Thecomputationoftheweaklensingsignalandthecovari-
ance is parallelized using a division of tasks. Given that the
code requires to compute the weak lensing signal around ran-
dompoints,weusuallydividethetaskintocomputationofthe
weak lensing signal around the lens galaxy samples and the
randomsintoseparatetasks. Thecovariancecomputationsare
also performed by running the weak lensing pipeline over a
large number of mock catalogs. This allows us to massively
parallelizethecomputationoftheweaklensingsignalandco-
variances. The code also allows for the computation of the
weak lensing signal in different fields separately. The output
oftheweaklensingpipelinehasalltherelevantoutputswhich
can then later be combined in the post-processing.
The various inputs to the weak lensing pipeline such as
the cosmological model to be used for the measurements, the
minimum and maximum projected distances, the number of11
radialbins,thelensandsourceselectionparameterscanallbe
passed via simple yaml files. The pipeline has been validated
by comparing the weak lensing measurements with a number
of independent codes written by other authors in the HSC
survey collaboration.
C. Cosmic Shear Measurement Code
In order to compute the cosmic shear, we use the estimator
in Li et al.[54] for the shear estimate for each galaxy,
ˆ𝛾𝑖=1
(1+ˆ𝑚)h𝑒𝑖
2R−𝑐𝑖i
. (23)
In this case the weighted average multiplicative bias factor is
given by
ˆ𝑚=Í
𝑖𝑤𝑖𝑚𝑖Í
𝑖𝑤𝑖, (24)
andtheweightinthisequationcorrespondstotheshapeweight
𝑤sgivenintheHSCshapecatalog[54]. Theshearresponsivity
in this case is estimated using
R=1−Í
𝑖𝑤𝑖𝑒2
rms,iÍ
𝑖𝑤𝑖. (25)
As in the galaxy-galaxy lensing measurement, we take ac-
countofthemultiplicativeandtheadditiveselectionbiasesin
the cosmic shear measurement.
ˆ𝛾𝑖→1
1+𝑚sel(ˆ𝛾𝑖−𝑎sel𝑒psf
𝑖), (26)
where𝑚seland𝑎selare evaluated using the entire sample of
our source galaxies.
We use the software treecorr , in order to compute the
two point shear correlation functions 𝜉+and𝜉−. In our case
we use a single source sample which would allow us to self-
calibrateanyresidualuncertaintiesinthedeterminationofthe
trueredshiftdistributiongiventhephotometricredshiftsofour
galaxies. We estimate 𝜉±as
𝜉±(𝜃)=Í
𝑖𝑗𝑤𝑖𝑤𝑗
ˆ𝛾𝑖,𝑡ˆ𝛾𝑗,𝑡±ˆ𝛾𝑖,×ˆ𝛾𝑗,×
Í
𝑖𝑗𝑤𝑖𝑤𝑗,(27)
and the summation runs over all pairs of galaxies 𝑖,𝑗whose
angular separation falls within a bin of given width around 𝜃.
We also diagnose any contamination of the above corre-
lations due to the presence of point spread function (PSF)
anisotropies. Such residuals are expected to be present due
totheimperfectionsinthemodelingandthemeasurementsof
the PSF. We continue to follow the prescription presented in
Hikage et al.[97] and Troxel et al.[98], such that the system-
atics due to the PSF errors are added in a linear fashion and
arise from two sources,
𝛾sys=𝛼psf𝛾p+𝛽psf𝛾q, (28)where𝛾pis the shape of the PSF model, and 𝛾qis the dif-
ference between the true PSF of stars and the model PSF at
their locations. These two terms account for the error in the
deconvolution of the PSF from the galaxy shapes and the er-
ror in the shapes due to the imperfect modeling of the PSF.
Thesetermsgiverisetoaspuriouscomponentinthemeasured
cosmic shear signal, 𝜉psfgiven by,
ˆ𝜉psf,±(𝜃)=𝛼2
psf𝜉pp
±+2𝛼psf𝛽psf𝜉pq
±+𝛽2
psf𝜉𝑞𝑞
±.(29)
Here the quantities 𝜉pp
±and𝜉qq
±are the auto-correlations of
𝛾pand𝛾q, respectively and 𝜉pq
±corresponds to the cross-
correlation of the two quantities. These correlations can be
measured directly from the data by using the shapes of stars,
that were reserved for modeling the PSF over the entire field
of view. In HSC, the PSF measurement and modeling is
performed over each exposure, rather than the coadd and 20
percent of the stars are randomly reserved for PSF testing.
Since these stars are randomly selected during each expo-
sure, the number of stars that are never used in the PSF de-
termination is quite small. The HSC pipeline assigns a flag
i_calib_psf_used to denote stars that have been used for the
PSF determination at least in 80percent of the visits they
belong to. We use stars with flags i_calib_psf_used=True
to compute these correlations, because it is less noisy. We
also take into account the uncertainty of the predicted ˆ𝜉psf,±
whether we use i_calib_psf_used=True orFalse. In Sec-
tion VIB, we will present our constraints on the parameters
𝛼PSFand𝛽PSFand our suggested priors for the cosmological
analyses.
NotethatourtreatmentofthePSFsystematicsinthe3 ×2pt
analyses differs from the default setup used in the cosmic
shear analyses alone in our companion papers Li et al.[43]
and Dalal et al.[44], where we account for the errors in the
PSF moments upto fourth order following the methodology
developed in [99]. In Sugiyama et al.[42] and Miyatake et
al.[41], we will test the impact of including such effect for
the HSC source galaxies used in our analyses and quantify its
impact on the cosmological parameters.
Finally, we also will perform an 𝐸/𝐵mode decomposition
ofthemeasuredcosmicsheartwopointcorrelationfunctions,
such that,
𝜉E(𝜃)=𝜉+(𝜃)+𝜉′(𝜃)
2, (30)
𝜉B(𝜃)=𝜉+(𝜃)−𝜉′(𝜃)
2, (31)
where,𝜉′is given by
𝜉′(𝜃)=𝜉−(𝜃)+4∫∞
𝜃𝑑𝜃′
𝜃′𝜉−(𝜃′)−12𝜃2∫∞
𝜃𝑑𝜃′
𝜃′3𝜉−(𝜃′).
(32)
WereplacetheintegralwithaRiemannsumovertherange 𝜃′∈
[2,420]and with logarithmic bins of size Δlog𝜃=0.0222.
Largerbinsizewouldsmoothouttheangledependenceof 𝜉−,
andaffecttheaccuracyoftheRiemannsumasaconsequence.
Therefore, we use narrower bins in 𝜃for the measurement of12
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]100200300Rwp[(h−1Mpc)2]
LOWZ
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS1
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS2
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]51015R∆ Σ [106M⊙/pc]
LOWZ
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS1
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS2
101102
θ[arcmin]0.00000.0005θξ[arcmin]
ξ+
101102
θ[arcmin]
ξ−
FIG. 5. The measurements of the 3 ×2pt functions that will be used for the cosmology parameter inference in companion papers, Miyatake et
al.and Sugiyama et al. Top panels : The clustering signals of spectroscopic SDSS galaxies are shown for LOWZ, CMASS1 and CMASS2 in
redshiftbin𝑧∈[0.15,0.35],[0.43,0.55]and[0.55,0.70]fromlefttorightpanels,respectively. AlthoughthesignalisidenticaltotheYear1
analysis[18, 70],theupdated covarianceismeasuredfrom mockcatalogsdescribed inthispaper. Theshaded regionsindicatethescales used
for cosmology analyses in the companion papers: blue for the large-scale analysis with minimal bias model by Sugiyama et al., and red for
the small-scale analysis by Miyatake et al.Middle panels : The galaxy-galaxy weak lensing signals measured by combining the spectroscopic
SDSS galaxies and HSC-Y3 source galaxies. For the measurement of clustering and galaxy-galaxy lensing signals, we used a flat ΛCDM
model withΩm=0.279to convert angular separation 𝜃to physical separation 𝑅and to compute⟨Σcr⟩.Bottom panels : The cosmic shear
correlation functions for the plus and minus modes are shown in the left and the right panels, respectively. The blue shaded regions indicate
the scales used for both of the large-scale and the small-scale cosmology analyses.
𝜉±, decompose them into 𝐸/𝐵modes using above equations
and then finally smooth the signal to obtain 𝐸/𝐵signals over
similar bins as the cosmology analysis. We have carefully
checked that the results converge with the choice of the bins
we use.IV. CLUSTERING MEASUREMENTS
A. Measurements
We show the clustering signals we measure for the three
subsamplesinthethreedifferentpanelsofFig.5,respectively.
Although we have measured the signals on small scales, we
restrict to scales beyond 1 ℎ−1Mpc. The measured projected13
∆ Σ0∆ Σ1∆ Σ2ξ+ξ−wp,0wp,1wp,2∆ Σ0∆ Σ1∆ Σ2ξ+ξ−wp,0wp,1wp,2
−1.00−0.75−0.50−0.250.000.250.500.751.00
∆ Σ0 ∆ Σ1 ∆ Σ2ξ+ξ−wp,0wp,1wp,2∆ Σ0 ∆ Σ1 ∆ Σ2ξ+ξ−wp,0wp,1wp,2
−1.00−0.75−0.50−0.250.000.250.500.751.00
FIG. 6. The correlation coefficient of the full covariance matrix. Left: For the large-scale cosmology analysis with minimal bias model. The
scalesshowninthisfigureareindicatedbytheshadedregionsinFig.5. Subscriptsof0,1,and2for ΔΣand𝑤pstandfortheLOWZ,CMASS1
andCMASS2subsamples,respectively. Thecontributionofmagnificationbiasisevaluatedanalyticallyandaddedonthecovarianceestimated
from mock measurements. Right: Similar to the left panel, but for the small-scale analysis.
correlation functions falls off approximately as 1/𝑅. The de-
viation from this power law can be seen clearly when we plot
𝑤p𝑅.
The clustering of LOWZ galaxies clearly shows the transi-
tionbetweentheone-halotermandthetwo-halotermonscales
around 1.5ℎ−1Mpc. This transition is less pronounced for the
CMASS1andCMASS2subsamples. Inbothourcosmological
analyses we avoid modeling below the transition scale due to
uncertaintiesintheaccuracyoftheirmodeling. Wehavetested
the accuracy of both our modeling schemes against different
systematic uncertainties and decided on the scale cuts that we
will use for our analysis in Miyatake et al.[41] and Sugiyama
et al.[42]. The validation of the scale cuts include tests on
different models for how satellite galaxies populate dark mat-
ter halos, whether the central galaxies are off-centered within
their respective halos, the presence of incompleteness in the
halooccupationdistributionofcentralgalaxies,orthatofhalo
assembly bias, in addition to the choice of halo definitions in
simulations. Based on the validation analyses, we use a range
of[2,30]ℎ−1Mpcand[8,80]ℎ−1Mpcfor the small-scale and
large-scale analyses, respectively.
We use the 108 realizations of the full sky mock catalogs
imprinted with the BOSS LOWZ, CMASS1 and CMASS2
footprints. Within each realization we utilize 192 jackknife
regions of the SDSS survey footprint [see 71, for details],
measure𝑤pfor each jackknife region, and estimate the co-
variancematrixfromthemeasured 𝑤p’sfromallthejackknife
regions. We then average the covariances for the 108 realiza-
tionstoestimatethecovariancematrixforeachoftheLOWZ,
CMASS1, and CMASS2 subsamples. The covariance ma-
trix estimated in this way is used for our cosmology analysis.
Sincethecovariancematrixof 𝑤pisestimatedeffectivelyfrom
alargernumberofsamples 20,736=(108×192),theHartlapfactor[100]canbeignoredinevaluatingtheinverseoftheco-
variancematrixfortheclusteringsector. Thisisdifferentfrom
our analysis with Y1 data, where we just used the jackknife
estimateofthecovariancefromtherealdata. Ournewmethod
allowsthedeterminationofthecovariancewithreducednoise
properties.
One can also expect some cross-covariance between the
measurements as the CMASS1 and CMASS2 subsamples
shareaboundaryandthegalaxiesneartheboundarywillshare
the same large-scale structure, although we expect this to be
a small effect. Finally, we have also analytically checked that
the magnification bias effect on the observed galaxy number
density by gravitational lensing by foreground matter fluctua-
tionhasnegligibleeffectontheclusteringcovariance,thuswe
donotincludethecross-covariancebetween 𝑤p’sfordifferent
subsamples.
The cross-correlation coefficients of the covariance result
is shown in Figs. 5 and 6. The errorbars in Fig. 5 show the
diagonal elements of estimates covariance. Fig. 6 shows the
correlation coefficients of the covariance, over the scale used
forcosmologyanalyses: thelarge-scaleanalysiswithminimal
bias model by Sugiyama et al., and red for the small-scale
analysis with the emulator based halo model by Miyatake et
al, respectively.
Fig.7showsthecumulativesignal-to-noiseratioasthefunc-
tionofminimumscalecut. Theupperandlowerpanelsarefor
large and small-scale analysis, respectively. The total signal-
to-noise ratios of our measurements in the LOWZ, CMASS1
andCMASS2subsamplesare25.6,27.6,26.6,respectivelyfor
our large-scale analysis. When including the scales that will
be modelled in our small-scale analysis, these signal-to-noise
ratios increase to 38.5, 37.1, 35.7, respectively.14
101
Rmin[h−1Mpc]5.07.510.012.515.0cumulativeS/N (Rmin<R)
total
LOWZ
CMASS1
CMASS2
101102
Rmin[h−1Mpc]10203040cumulativeS/N (Rmin<R)
total
LOWZ
CMASS1
CMASS2
101102
θmin[arcmin]51015cumulativeS/N (θmin<θ)
total
ξ+
ξ−
101
Rmin[h−1Mpc]510152025cumulativeS/N (Rmin<R)
total
LOWZ
CMASS1
CMASS2
101
Rmin[h−1Mpc]102030405060cumulativeS/N (Rmin<R)
total
LOWZ
CMASS1
CMASS2
101102
θmin[arcmin]51015cumulativeS/N (θmin<θ)
total
ξ+
ξ−
FIG. 7. The cumulative signal-to-noise ratios as a function of minimum scale cuts for clustering, galaxy-galaxy lensing and cosmic shear are
showninthedifferentcolumns,respectively. Thetopandthebottompanelsshowthecumulativesignal-to-noiseratioforlargeandsmall-scale
analysis respectively.
B. Systematic Tests
Wecarryoutacoupleoftestsinordertounderstandthepos-
sible systematics in our analysis. The first is the dependence
ofthegalaxynumberdensityinourlenssampleonseeingand
the number density of stars. In Ross et al.[4], these relations
were calibrated based on the entire large scale structure sam-
ple. Since we are including a cut on the luminosity which
is dependent on luminosity we are preferentially selecting the
brighter galaxies. If the dependence is weaker for brighter
galaxies then we may end up giving extra weight to brighter
galaxies.
Toaccountforthereductioninthenumberdensityofgalax-
ies in regions where there is a large stellar number density,
the large-scale structure catalogs have been assigned a stellar
density weight. Since this weight is also dependent on the
magnitude of galaxies, we carry over the weights assigned to
these galaxies even in our subsamples. In order to test how
suchsystematicstellarweightsaffecttheclusteringsignal,we
showthevariationoftheclusteringsignalwithandwithoutthe
systematic star weights in Fig 8. The effects on the clustering
signalallappearwithinthestatisticalerrorbudgets,especially
considering the fact that the measurements are correlated on
large scales.Next,wealsotestouthowmuchtheclusteringsignalvaries
asafunctionofredshift. Inourcosmologicalanalyseswewill
consider the average redshift of each of the subsamples as the
representative redshift for our measurements and compare it
to the theoretical predictions for cosmological inference. The
cosmological ingredients such as the halo mass function, the
halobias,andtheclusteringofmatterwithitselfandthehalos
varies as a function of redshift. At fixed halo occupation dis-
tribution, these changes are at the sub-percent level. Further,
wealsoexpecttheclusteringsignaltovarywithredshiftifthe
halooccupationdistributionofgalaxieschangesasafunction
of redshift.
WedivideeachoftheLOWZ,CMASS1andCMASS2sub-
samplesintothreebinseachandremeasuretheclusteringsig-
nal. We show the variation of the clustering signal as a func-
tionofredshiftforthesubsamplesineachofthesub-panelsof
Fig. 9. To assess the variation of the clustering amplitudes of
the signal in each of the bins, we fit the signal with a fiducial
modelwithourfiducialcosmologicalparametersatthemedian
redshift of the sample with a free amplitude parameterized as
𝐴(𝑧)=𝐴0+𝛼(𝑧−𝑧med). (33)
Whenwefittheclusteringmeasurementsonthelargeorsmall
scales we obtain values of 𝛼all consistent within 2- 𝜎(see15
TABLE II. The slope of the systematic variation of the clustering
signal with redshift for each of the subsamples and the small and
large-scale analyses are presented in the top and bottom sections, re-
spectively. Wefindnosignificantevidenceofvariationwithredshift.
Analysis Sample 𝛼
Small scale LOWZ 0.0±0.5
CMASS1−2.5±1.4
CMASS2−1.1±0.8
Large scale LOWZ 0.2±0.7
CMASS1−2.7±1.8
CMASS2−0.6±1.1
Table II).Thisshowsthattheclusteringsignaldoesnotshow
an appreciable variation with redshift.
V. LENSING MEASUREMENTS
WeusetheweaklensingpipelinedescribedinSectionIIIB
inordertomeasurethegalaxy-galaxylensingsignalaroundthe
threesubsamplesoflensesthatweconsider. Inthissection,we
presenttheselensingmeasurementsaswellasourestimatesof
thecovarianceofthesemeasurementsusingthemockcatalogs.
We measure ΔΣin 30 logarithmic radial bins in projected
distance in the range [0.05,80.0]ℎ−1Mpc. As described be-
fore, We use the source catalog of HSC galaxies satisfying
Eq. (1) with 𝑧min=0.7,𝑧diff=0.05,𝑝cut=0.99. We carry
out our measurements of the weak lensing signal in the six
different fields separately and later on combine them in post-
processing.
The measurement of the galaxy-galaxy lensing signal in-
cludes the conversion of galaxy shear 𝛾tto the matter surface
densityΔΣand the conversion of the angular radial bin 𝜃to
theprojectedradialbin 𝑅. Todotheseconversion,weassume
a fiducial cosmology for measurement. Because we use the
radial bin in the unit of ℎ−1Mpcand it is independent to the
value of Hubble parameter ℎ, the only relevant cosmologi-
cal parameter is the matter density parameter Ωmin the flat
ΛCDM model thatwe focus in thecompanion cosmology pa-
pers. We use a flat ΛCDM model with Ωm=0.279as the
fiducial cosmology for measurement.
A. Measurements And Covariance
We show the weak lensing signal ΔΣfor the three subsam-
ples used in our analysis in the three different panels in the
middle row of Fig. 5, respectively. Although we have mea-
suredthesignalsonsmallscales,werestricttoscalesbeyond1
ℎ−1Mpcinourfigure. Themeasuredweaklensingsignalfalls
off approximately as 1/𝑅. In the figure, we plot the quantity
𝑅×ΔΣasthisshowsthedeviationsfromsuchapowerlaw. In
generalweseesimilaramplitudesfortheweaklensingsignals
across the three different subsamples.
For the covariance estimation, we measure the galaxy-
galaxy lensing signals using mock lens galaxy catalogs de-scribed in Section IID2 and the corresponding 1404mock
shape catalogs in Section IID1. We construct a total data
vectorΔΣbyconcatenatingthemeasurementsofallourthree
subsamplestogether. Weobtainthecovariancebetweenthese
measurements as
𝐶𝑖𝑗=⟨(ΔΣ𝑖−¯ΔΣ𝑖)(ΔΣ𝑗−¯ΔΣ𝑗)⟩. (34)
Our blinding scheme described in detail in Section IIB relies
ontheuseofdifferentmultiplicativebiasfactorsforthreedif-
ferent catalogs, only one of which is correct. However, our
mock simulations do not include any multiplicative bias fac-
tors. The covariance for the galaxy-galaxy lensing measure-
ments computed in this manner cannot therefore be directly
used with the three different blind catalogs.
To estimate the covariance for each of the blinded catalogs
withnon-zeromultiplicativebiases,weincludethemultiplica-
tivebiasinEqs.(5)and(6)bychanging 𝛾→(1+ˆ𝑚)(1+ˆ𝑚sel)𝛾
at the catalog level. The value of the multiplicative bias ˆ𝑚is
takenfromthecorrespondingblindcatalog. However,wehave
threedifferentblindcatalogswithdifferentmultiplicativebias,
and iterating mock measurements for all the blind catalogs is
computationallyexpensive. Toavoidthisiteration,wedevelop
a rescaling method in order to obtain the galaxy-galaxy lens-
ing signal with non-zero multiplicative bias from one without
multiplicative bias. We first note that the observed galaxy el-
lipticity in Eqs. (5) and (6) in the presence of multiplicative
biases can be expanded as
emock=2R(1+ˆ𝑚)(1+ˆ𝑚sel)γ+ϵn,(35)
tothelowestorderoftheintrinsicshapeandthelensingshear,
where ϵn=ϵint+ϵmeas. Usingthisexpansion,theestimatorin
Eq. (15) and Eq. (20) is
ˆΔΣ(ˆ𝑚)∼ ˆΔΣsim+1
(1+ˆ𝑚)Í
ls𝑤ls𝜖n
t,ls⟨Σ−1
cr⟩−1
(1+ˆ𝑚sel)2RÍ
ls𝑤ls,(36)
where the first term is
ˆΔΣsim=Í
ls𝑤ls𝛾t,ls⟨Σ−1
cr⟩−1
Í
ls𝑤ls−ˆ𝑎sel
1+ˆ𝑚selΔΣpsf,(37)
and𝜖int
t,ls,𝜖meas
t,lsand𝛾t,lsaredefinedsimilarlyasinEq.(12)but
withe→𝜖int,𝜖measandγ. Note that ˆΔΣsimcan be measured
from the mock catalog because we know 𝛾, but this is an
unknownintherealmeasurement. Themeasurementof ˆΔΣsim
canbedoneatthesametimebyusingthesamelens-sourcepair
stacking as ˆΔΣ, and does not require additional measurement.
Using the dependence of ˆΔΣ(ˆ𝑚)onˆ𝑚in Eq. (36), we obtain
anequationforrescalingthe ΔΣmeasurementsinthepresence
of multiplicative bias,
ˆΔΣ(ˆ𝑚)=ˆΔΣsim+ˆΔΣ(𝑚=0)−ˆΔΣsim
1+ˆ𝑚.(38)
This method relies on the expansion of the estimator with re-
spect to the intrinsic shape and the lensing shear in Eq. (36),
which may lead to inaccuracy in the covariance estimate. We16
100101
R[h−1Mpc]100200300Rwp[(Mpc/h)2]
LOWZ
w/ star weight
no star weight
100101
R[h−1Mpc]CMASS1
w/ star weight
no star weight
100101
R[h−1Mpc]CMASS2
w/ star weight
no star weight
FIG. 8. The dependence of the clustering signals on the systematic weights related to seeing and stellar number density. We find a very weak
dependence of these measurements on such systematic weights within the statiscal errors.
100101
R[h−1Mpc]0200400Rwp[(Mpc/h)2]
LOWZ
z∈[0.15,0.217]
z∈[0.217,0.283]
z∈[0.283,0.35]
100101
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS1
z∈[0.43,0.49]
z∈[0.49,0.55]
100101
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS2
z∈[0.55,0.60]
z∈[0.60,0.65]
z∈[0.65,0.70]
FIG.9. Thevariationoftheclusteringsignalwithineachlensredshiftbin. Here,wedividethelensgalaxysamplesintotwoorthreesubsamples
ineachredshiftbin. ThisshouldbecomparedtoFig.20,wheretheBOSSfullsample,i.ethefluxlimitedsample,isusedfor 𝑤pmeasurement
rather than the luminosity-limited samples presented in this paper.
have checked that the rescaling method works at the 1% level
inthecovarianceamplitude,byusing100mockmeasurements
andcomparingthemeasurementsmadewithoutthemultiplica-
tivebiasbutcorrectedusingourformalismtothosemadewith
the correct multiplicative biases.
The mock galaxy catalogs represent the intrinsic galaxy
distribution at the redshift of galaxy, but does not include the
magnification bias effect on the observed galaxy distribution
by gravitational lensing by foreground matter fluctuation. We
evaluate the contribution of magnification bias to the auto-
covariance of galaxy-galaxy lensing signals analytically as in
Sugiyama et al.[70] (see Appendix A of the paper). In this
paper, we also evaluate the contribution of magnification bias
tocross-covariancebetweengalaxy-galaxylensingandcosmic
shearsignals. TheformulationissummarizedinAppendixE.
Wenotethattheredshiftsinthemockcatalogswereassigned
based on the DNNzestimates due to their availability in time
when the covariance calibrations were started. Therefore the
mock measurements for the covariance were also performed
withasourcesampleselectedbasedonusingtheredshiftPDFs
from DNNzused in Eq. (1). The covariance in the galaxy-
galaxy lensing signal consists of two terms, the shape noise
and the covariance due to large-scale structure. The shapenoise depends upon the number density of the source galaxy
sample,whilethelarge-scalestructuretermarisesindependent
ofthesourcegalaxysample. Theshapenoisetermdominates
on small scales but decreases as we consider larger and larger
separations owing to the larger number of lens-source pairs,
where the large scale structure term then can play a dominant
part. We measure each of these terms separately.[101]
Given that our fiducial sample consists of galaxies selected
using redshift PDFs from DEmPzwhich results in a source
sample with a higher source galaxy number density, we scale
the shape noise term by the square root of the ratio of the
source galaxy number density when selected using DNNzto
that obtained using a selection in DEmPz. We maintain the
large-scale structure term as is.
Finally, we also note that the mock galaxy-galaxy lensing
signals are used further to estimate the cross-covariance with
thecosmic shearmeasurements bycombining thesemeasure-
ments with the cosmic shear signals measured from the same
set of mock shape catalogs in Section VIA.
Fig.7showsthecumulativesignal-to-noiseratioasthefunc-
tionofminimumscalecut. Theupperandlowerpanelsarefor
large and small-scale analysis, respectively. The total signal-
to-noise ratios of our measurements in the LOWZ, CMASS117
TABLEIII.Theslopeofthesystematicvariationofthelensingsignal
withredshiftforeachofthesubsamplesandthesmallandlarge-scale
analyses are presented in the top and bottom sections, respectively.
We find no significant evidence of variation with redshift.
Analysis Sample 𝛼
Small scale LOWZ 1.6±1.9
CMASS1−5.9±3.1
CMASS2−4.4±2.2
Large scale LOWZ 4.3±3.0
CMASS1−2.3±4.8
CMASS2−2.8±3.3
TABLE IV. Summary of systematics test of galaxy-galaxy lensing:
lensing cross mode. The chi-square, degree of freedom (dof) and p-
valueareshownintheformatof 𝜒2/dof(𝑝). Differentcolumnsshow
theresultsforlarge-scaleanalysisandsmall-scaleanalysis,where 𝜒2
is computed over the scale of cosmology analyses indicated by blue
and red shaded regions in Fig. 10.
large scale small scale
photo-𝑧lens sample
DEmPz LOWZ 7.57/4 (0.11) 16.65/9 (0.05)
CMASS1 4.87/5 (0.43) 6.86/9 (0.65)
CMASS2 3.84/8 (0.87) 7.78/9 (0.56)
DNNz LOWZ 2.28/4 (0.68) 10.47/9 (0.31)
CMASS1 7.14/5 (0.21) 12.56/9 (0.18)
CMASS2 5.48/8 (0.71) 4.98/9 (0.84)
Mizuki LOWZ 7.47/4 (0.11) 25.05/9 (0.003)
CMASS1 4.69/5 (0.45) 20.47/9 (0.02)
CMASS2 11.03/8 (0.20) 15.56/9 (0.08)
and CMASS2 subsamples are 7.6, 11.3, 10.6, respectively for
our large-scale analysis. When including the scales that will
be modelled in our small-scale analysis, these signal-to-noise
ratios increase to 13.4, 17.3, 15.8, respectively.
B. Systematic Tests
We carry out a variety of systematic tests in order to vali-
datethemeasuredweaklensingsignal. InFig.10,weshowthe
TABLE V. Summary of systematics of galaxy-galaxy lensing: boost
factor. The format is similar to Table IV
large scale small scale
photo-𝑧lens sample
DEmPz LOWZ 0.89/4 (0.93) 2.85/9 (0.97)
CMASS1 10.80/5 (0.06) 15.41/9 (0.08)
CMASS2 6.61/8 (0.58) 8.16/9 (0.52)
DNNz LOWZ 0.76/4 (0.94) 3.28/9 (0.95)
CMASS1 12.22/5 (0.03) 14.83/9 (0.10)
CMASS2 8.49/8 (0.39) 8.77/9 (0.46)
Mizuki LOWZ 0.52/4 (0.97) 3.26/9 (0.95)
CMASS1 11.21/5 (0.05) 13.83/9 (0.13)
CMASS2 6.22/8 (0.62) 8.06/9 (0.53)cross component of the weak lensing signal for the three sub-
samples for the fiducial photometric redshift estimates from
DNNzin the three different columns. Fig. 21 in Appendix C
corresponds to the same measurements but using the photo-
metric redshift codes MizukiandDEmPz. The blue color
points correspond to the measurement around the lens sam-
ples, the red ones correspond to the measurement around the
randompoints,andthegreenpointscorrespondtothesubtrac-
tion of the two.
Thecross-signalisexpectedtobezeroapartfromthepres-
ence of any systematics. On large scales, we observe a sig-
nificant deviation from zero in the LOWZ and the CMASS1
subsamples, but we do not see such effect for the CMASS2
subsample. Similarlythelensingsignalaroundrandompoints
isalsonon-zero,butitisnotlargeenoughtoexplainthedevi-
ation seen around the lenses. Therefore the cross-systematic
around the lenses still survives after subtracting the cross-
signal around random points.
One likely explanation is that the cross systematic appears
on a fixed angular scale, and given the redshift differences
in each of our subsamples, this angular scale corresponds to
a different distance in comoving coordinates for each of our
subsample. The scale where this cross systematic appears is
2.3 deg, which is slightly larger than the HSC field-of-view
size, 1.5 deg,beyondwhicheventherandomsubtractiondoes
not seem to help.
Thepresenceofthecross-systematicdictatesthelarge-scale
cutwewilluseforthecosmologicalanalysisofthesemeasure-
ments. We will use large scale cuts of 30,40and80ℎ−1Mpc
for the analysis of the signals from the LOWZ, CMASS1,
and CMASS2 subsamples, respectively. In our cosmological
analyses, we will also adopt cuts on the small-scale which
are motivated by modeling uncertainties on small scales. The
large-scaleonlyanalysiswhichusesperturbationtheorybased
techniques and the small-scale only analysis which uses a
halo occupation distribution modeling framework will use
small scale cuts of 12ℎ−1Mpcand 3ℎ−1Mpc, respectively.
In the small-scale analysis, we also discard lensing signals
over𝑅 > 30ℎ−1Mpcbecause they gives negligible contribu-
tionofsignal-to-noiseratiocomparedtosmallerscalesaround
𝑅∼3ℎ−1Mpc.
Wecomputethereducedchi-squared: 𝜒2
red=𝜒2/degreesof
freedom(dof)awayfromanullvalueofthecrosssignalaround
thelenssampleafterthesubtractionofthecrosssignalaround
random points. These values along with the corresponding
p-values to exceed the 𝜒2given the dof are also tabulated in
Table IV computed over the scales used in the large-scale and
small-scale analyses, respectively. These values justify our
choice of the scale cuts for our cosmology analysis.
We note that we do see some evidence of cross-systematic
with p-values smaller than 0.05for the LOWZ and CMASS1
subsamples when using the Mizukisource galaxy sample.
Thissampleofsourcegalaxieshasthehighestnumberdensity,
whichresultsinsmallererrors. InthebottompanelofFig.21,
we do not see a systematic deviation in one direction, but the
cross-pointslieaboveandbelowthezeroline,withascatternot
consistent with the errors on these points. We flag this issue,
in case, there is an interest in using the Mizukibased source18
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]−10010R∆ Σ×[106M⊙/pc]
LOWZ
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS1
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS2lens
random
lens-randomblind ID = 2
FIG.10. Systematicstestofgalaxy-galaxylensingsignal,i.enulltestof ΔΣ×. Fromlefttorightpanels,thecrosssignalfromLOWZ,CMASS1
andCMASS2subsamplesareshown. Thebluepointsshowslensingsignalaroundlensgalaxy,theorangepointsshowssignalsaroundrandom
points, and the green points shows the subtracted signal. The skyblue and pink shaded region indicates the scale which the large-scale only
analysis and small-scale only analysis uses for cosmology inference.
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]0.951.001.05B(R)
LOWZ
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS1
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS2blind ID=2, mizuki
FIG. 11. Systematics test of galaxy-galaxy lensing signal: boost factor for each of the lens subsamples. The boost factor is consistent with
unity in the scales of interest for LOWZ, CMASS1 and CMASS2 subsamples with p-values greater than 0.10.
sample for cosmological analyses. We proceed further by
notingthatourfiducialanalysiswillrelyonthe DEmPzbased
sample of source galaxies.
Galaxieswhicharephysicallycorrelatedwiththelenssam-
ple could seep into our source samples due to imperfections
in the photometric redshift PDFs despite our stringent cuts.
Such galaxies are not expected to be efficiently lensed by our
sample of lens galaxies. The inclusion of such galaxies could
thereforeresultinadilutedsignal. Thepresenceofcorrelated
galaxies in the source sample can be inferred by comparing
thenumberofsourcegalaxiesaroundthelenssamplewiththe
number of pairs around random points. If the source galaxies
are correlated, we expect the ratio of the two pair counts, also
called the boost factor, to be consistent with unity.
In Fig. 11, we show the boost factor for all three of our
lenssamples. Inthescalesofourinterestshownasthecolored
shadedregions,wedonotseeasignificantdeviationawayfrom
unity. The measurements shown in the Figure are expected to
be correlated. The chi-squared for the expectation 𝐵(𝑅)=1,
andthecorrespondingp-valuesforallthreecasesforthelargescale and the small-scale analysis are written in Tables V. We
find that the boost factors are consistent with unity for the
LOWZandCMASS2samples,althoughtheCMASS1sample
shows p-values smaller than 10 percent. This is related to the
largecovarianceinthemeasurementoftheboostfactorandthe
measurementsofboostvalueswhichswingfrombeingbelow
unitytoaboveunityinsomecases,whichresultsinalarge 𝜒2.
We have verified that if we ignore the covariance then the 𝜒2
values are small and result in a large p-value. Furthermore,
the boost factor values in the case of the CMASS1 subsample
areawayfromunityatthesub-percentlevel. Thereforewedo
not apply any boost factor corrections to our signals.
Just as in the case of the clustering signal we also quantify
thevariationofthegalaxy-galaxylensingsignalwithredshift.
We measure the galaxy-galaxy lensing signals in subsamples
of each redshift bin and present the result in each of the sub-
panels of Fig. 13. We fit these signals with a fiducial model
at the median redshift of the sample with fiducial cosmologi-
cal parameters with a free amplitude that varies with redshift
according to Eq. (33) and again obtain results which indicate19
a result consistent with no variation at the 2- 𝜎level (see Ta-
ble III). In addition, we also show the very weak dependence
of the weak lensing signal whether we use or do not use the
systematic weights related to the stellar density in the various
sub-panels of Fig. 12.
VI. COSMIC SHEAR MEASUREMENTS
WeusetheinfrastructuredescribedinSectionIIICinorder
tomeasurethecosmicshearsignalusingthecommonsample
ofsourcegalaxiesusedinthegalaxy-galaxylensingmeasure-
ment. Note that in the 3 ×2pt analyses, we do not perform a
tomographicmeasurementofthecosmicshear. Inthissection,
we will present these cosmic shear measurements as well as
our estimates of the covariance of these measurements using
themockcatalogs. Weuseatotalof 30logarithmicbinsstart-
ing from 0.25arcmin to a maximum distance of 360arcmin
in order to carry our measurements. As mentioned previ-
ously,wewilluseasinglesourcesample,andnotperformany
tomographic measurement of the cosmic shear signal. A sin-
gle source sample will allow us to self-calibrate any residual
source redshift uncertainties.
A. Measurements
Weshowthemeasurementsofthecosmicshearcorrelation
functions,𝜉+and𝜉−, in the bottom panels of Fig. 5. Both
the measurements approximately scale as 1/𝜃. Although we
measurethesignalsonawiderangeofscales,wewillonlyuse
thesignalshownintheshadedregions. Thecutonsmallscales
isdictatedbyourrequirementthatthemodellinguncertainties
inthepowerspectrumduetotheimpactofbaryonicphysicsdo
not result in significant biases. To this end, in our companion
paper,Miyatakeetal.,weshowthatthedarkmatteronlymodel,
compared to various models which account for the uncertain
baryonic physics give consistent cosmological inference on
scale cuts implemented in this paper. For 𝜉+this corresponds
to a small-scale cut of 8arcmin, while the corresponding cut
for𝜉−is equal to 30arcmin. On large scales, the scale cuts
are dictated by systematics in the measured signals as we will
describe below.
The measurements of the cosmic shear signals were per-
formed on the mock shape catalogs in order to obtain the
covariance of the cosmic shear signals. Note that the mock
catalogsthemselveswereconstructedwithouttheinclusionof
any multiplicative biases. Therefore, in order to estimate the
covariances for the three blind catalogs with non-zero multi-
plicative biases, we include the multiplicative bias in Eqs. (5)
and (6) by changing 𝛾→(1+ˆ𝑚)𝛾at the catalog level. The
values of the multiplicative bias ˆ𝑚are taken from the corre-
sponding blind catalog.
As mentioned in the previous section, the mocks were con-
structed based on the DNNzphotometric redshift estimates.
Wehavemeasuredthemockcosmicshearsignalswithgalaxies
fromthe DNNzselectedsourcesample. Thesemeasurementsarethenusedtomeasurethecovariancematrix. Giventhedif-
ference in the number density of DNNzandDEmPzselected
source samples, we have rescaled the shot noise related term
in the covariance matrix.
The cross-correlation coefficient of the covariance matrix
obtained from our cosmic shear measurements can be seen
as two of the blocks in Fig. 6. Since the cosmic shear mea-
surements and the galaxy-galaxy lensing measurements also
sharethesamemockcatalogs,wehavealsoobtainedthecross-
covariance between these measurements. Although they are
notverylarge,wedofindnon-zerocross-correlationsbetween
these measurements, which we will take into account in our
analyses. Thecross-correlationbetweentheclusteringandthe
lensingmeasurementsareconsideredtobezero,giventhatthe
clusteringmeasurementscomefromtheentireSDSSfootprint,
whilethelensingmeasurementsarerestrictedtoHSCregions,
which are a small fraction of the entire SDSS footprint.
Fig. 7 shows the cumulative signal-to-noise ratio for large
and small-scale analysis as a function of the minimum scale
cut. The total signal-to-noise ratios of our measurements for
𝜉+and𝜉−are 20.2 and 19.0, respectively.
B. Systematic Tests
In Fig. 14, we present our measurements of the B-mode
signals,𝜉𝐵,+and𝜉𝐵,−computed using the measurements of
𝜉+and𝜉−, respectively, obtained using finer binning to avoid
noise. The finite field size of our weak lensing shape catalog
regionscanresultinaresidualnon-zeroB-modeinthecosmic
shear signals. We evaluate the presence of such residual B-
modes using our mock shape catalogs (which do not include
any systematics) and present the mean from the mocks as a
dashed line. We compute the 𝜒2per degree of freedom and
the p-value for the 𝜒2to exceed the one measured in the data.
We use the mean mock measurement of the B-modes with
respect to the measured B-modes in our data for the above
purpose. We obtain reasonably good 𝜒2values with large p-
valuesifwerestrictourselvestoscalesbelow 50arcminfor𝜉+
and below 150arcmin for𝜉−.
Wenotethatthisresultwasobtainedafterexcludingaprob-
lematic 20 sq. deg area in the GAMA09H region whose
inclusion would result in significantly larger B-mode signal
especiallyinthecosmicsheartomographyanalysespresented
in Li et al.[43] and Dalal et al.[44]. We comment on this
region in Appendix D.
AsdiscussedinSectionIIIC,PSFleakageandresidualPSF
model error contaminate the measured cosmic shear signal.
In our cosmology analyses, we model this contamination as
Eq. (29) and add it onto the model prediction of gravitational
lensing signal. Here, we present the constraint on coefficients
𝛼psfand𝛽psftobeusedaspriorduringcosmologicalparameter
inference. We follow the method in Hamana et al.[102].
The coefficients 𝛼psfand𝛽psfcan be estimated from the cross
correlationfunctionsbetween 𝛾p,qfromstarcatalogandgalaxy
shears from galaxy shape catalog. These cross correlation20
100102
R[h−1Mpc]5101520R∆ Σ [106M⊙/pc]
LOWZ
no star weight
w/ star weight
100102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS1
no star weight
w/ star weight
100102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS2
no star weight
w/ star weight
FIG. 12. The variation of the galaxy-galaxy lensing signal with and without systematic weights related to the number density of stars and the
seeing. The difference between these signals is within the statistical errors.
100102
R[h−1Mpc]01020R∆ Σ [106M⊙/pc]
LOWZ
z∈[0.150,0.217]
z∈[0.217,0.283]
z∈[0.283,0.350]
100102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS1
z∈[0.430,0.490]
z∈[0.490,0.550]
100102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS2
z∈[0.550,0.600]
z∈[0.600,0.650]
z∈[0.650,0.700]
FIG.13. Thevariationofthegalaxy-galaxylensingsignalineachredshiftbinsisshowninthethreepanels. Ineachpanelweshowthelensing
signalinagivenredshiftbinbypointswitherrors,whilethelensingsignalwhentheredshiftbinisfurthersubdividedbysolidlinesofvarying
colors. We fit a varying amplitude as a function of redshift in each panel to the solid lines and do not find a significant evidence for evolution
given the statistical errors.
TABLE VI. Summary of cosmic shear 𝐵mode null tests. 𝜒2is
defined as the deviation from mean signal of mock measurements
indicated by the dotted line in Figs. 14 and 23.
𝜒2/𝜈(𝑝)
photo-𝑧signal
DEmPz𝜉B,+8.81/7 (0.27)
𝜉B,−6.87/7 (0.44)
DNNz𝜉B,+11.20/7 (0.13)
𝜉B,−9.94/7 (0.19)
Mizuki𝜉B,+11.44/7 (0.12)
𝜉B,−6.89/7 (0.44)
functions can be expressed as
𝜉gp
±=𝛼psf𝜉pp
±+𝛽psf𝜉pq
±, (39)
𝜉gq
±=𝛼psf𝜉pq
±+𝛽psf𝜉qq
±. (40)
All the correlation functions in the above equations are mea-
surable from star catalog and galaxy catalogs, and hence
𝛼psfand𝛽psfcan be estimated. In the following fig-
ures, we show the measurement result with stars with flagsi_calib_psf_used=True . We also perform the same analysis
withthestarswithflags i_calib_psf_used=False ,andfinally
take account of the uncertainty of ˆ𝜉psf,±due to the difference
of stars whether i_calib_psf_used=True orFalse.
Fig.15showsthecrosscorrelationsbetween 𝛾p,qandgalaxy
shears. The errorbar is estimated from the measurements of
mockgalaxyshapecatalogsandtherealstarcatalog,i.e. error-
bar takes account of the cosmic variance. We find that 𝜉gp,gq
−
are consistent with zero within the statistical uncertainty, and
hence we will focus on the 𝜉+mode alone in the following
analysis. Fig. 16 shows the auto correlations of PSF leakage
and PSF model error. We first estimate the coefficients 𝛼PSF
and𝛽PSFasafunctionofangularseparationbyfittingsignalsin
eachbin inorder to checkthe assumptionthat coefficientsare
scale independent. The result is shown in Fig. 17, indicating
thatthecoefficientsarescaleinvariantwithinthestatisticalun-
certainty. Combining the coefficient estimates over the scales
for cosmology analyses indicated by blue shaded region, we
estimate the mean coefficients and the errors on them, shown
in the horizontal orange line and shaded region.
The orange contour in Fig. 18 shows the con-
straint on the coefficients using stars with flags21
101102
θ[arcmin]−0.00050.00000.0005θξB[arcmin]
ξB,+
101102
θ[arcmin]
ξB,−
FIG. 14. Systematics test of cosmic shear signal, i.e. 𝐵-mode test. The B-mode expectations are consistent with that due to survey geometry
effects and is consistent with the expectation from mock catalogs shown as the blue dashed line in each of the panels.
−4−202ξgp[×10−5]
ξ+
ξ−
101102
θ[arcmin]−0.20.00.2ξgq[×10−5]
FIG. 15. Cross correlation function between galaxies and PSF ellip-
ticity (𝛾p) and the PSF model error ( 𝛾q) are shown in the upper and
lower panels, respectively. We model these functions to determine
the values of the PSF systematics model parameters, 𝛼psfand𝛽psf.
i_calib_psf_used=True ,whilethegreencontourshowswith
flags i_calib_psf_used=False . These contours are two di-
mensional Gaussian distribution, because Eqs. (39) and (40)
are linear in 𝛼psfand𝛽psf. The coefficients from the orange
andgreencontourpredictsslightlydifferent 𝜉psf
±. Wefindthat
this uncertainty of 𝜉psf
±due to the difference of stars whether
i_calib_psf_used=True orFalsecanbecoveredbyrescaling
thestatisticaluncertaintyoforangecontourbyafactorof 1.08
[103]. For simplicity, we also diagonalize the rescaled con-
straint with respect to 𝛼psfand𝛽psf, which will be used in the
cosmology analyses.
100101102
θ[arcmin]10−710−610−510−410−3ξ+
pp
pq
qqFIG.16. Auto-correlationandcross-correlationfunctionsofthePSF
ellipticity (𝛾p) and the PSF model error ( 𝛾q). The contribution of
each of these to the cosmic shear correlation functions are governed
by the parameters 𝛼psfand𝛽psf.
VII. SUMMARY
Ajointanalysisofthethreetwo-pointfunctions: thegalaxy
clusteringsignal,thegalaxy-galaxylensingsignalandthecos-
mic shear signal is a unique probe of cosmology. In a series
of papers, based on imaging data obtained over a three year
period from the HSC survey and the spectroscopic data from
theSDSS,wewillpresentthecosmologicalconstraintsonthe
matter density parameter as well as the amplitude of density
fluctuations. In this paper, the first in the series, we presents
robust measurements and systematic tests corresponding to
the measurement of each of the above signals. A summary
of the results and products made available in this paper are as
follows:
•We define three different subsamples of spectroscopic
lens galaxies from the large-scale structure samples
of SDSS BOSS galaxies. These subsamples are de-
fined to be approximately volume limited by abso-
lute magnitude (k+e corrected), the LOWZ, CMASS122
−0.06−0.04−0.020.00αpsf
100101102
θ[arcmin]−4−202βpsf
FIG. 17. The scale dependence of the PSF systematic coefficients
𝛼psfand𝛽psf, obtained by fitting the correlation functions shown in
Fig. 15. We do not observe any significant scale dependence in the
values of these PSF systematics coefficients.
−0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10
αpsf−4−202βpsf
resc.(1.08), diag.
reserved
used
FIG. 18. Constraint on 𝛼psfand𝛽psfparameters. The orange and
green contours show the constraints on (𝛼psf,𝛽psf)using stars se-
lected by i_calib_PSF_used=True andFalse, respectively. The
blue contour is the diagonalized Gaussian posterior with respect to
𝛼and𝛽, and the posterior size is rescaled by a factor of 1.08to
cover the uncertainty 𝜉psf,+due to the choice of star selection, i.e.
i_calib_PSF_used=True orFalse. The blue contour is used as a
conservative prior on 𝛼psfand𝛽psfin the cosmology analyses.
0.00000.0005θξ+[arcmin]
101102
θ[arcmin]0.00000.0005θξ−[arcmin]
ξpsf
ξobsFIG.19. PosteriordistributionofPSFcorrelationtermwhichcontam-
inatestheobservedcosmicshearcorrelationfunction. Themeasured
cosmic shear correlation functions are much larger than the contam-
ination from PSF systematics.
and CMASS2 subsamples of galaxies with 𝑧∈
[0.15,0.35],[0.43,0.55]and[0.55,0.70],respectively,
and absolute magnitude of galaxies of 𝑀𝑖−5 log h<
−21.5,−21.9and−22.2for the three subsamples, re-
spectively.
•We conservatively define a single subsample of source
galaxiesfromtheHSC-Y3shapecatalogthatweusefor
the weak lensing signals to be measured in this paper.
Oursubsampleofgalaxieshasagreaterthan99percent
probabilityassignedbythephotometricredshiftassign-
ment algorithm DEmPzto be above a redshift of 0.75,
higher than the redshift of any of our lens subsamples
by more than d𝑧=0.05. We also present the inferred
redshiftdistributionofoursourcegalaxiesbasedonthe
method presented in [62].
•Wehavegenerated108mockcatalogsforoursubsample
ofSDSSgalaxiestoaidinthecomputationofthecovari-
ancematrixoftheirclusteringsignal. Thesemockcata-
logswerecreatedbypopulatinghaloswithgalaxieswith
ahalooccupationdistributiondesignedtoreproducethe
abundance and clustering of the galaxy subsamples we
use on scales of 0.5ℎ−1Mpc> 𝑅 > 80ℎ−1Mpc. Our
mock catalogs further mimic the footprint of the SDSS
survey.
•We have also generated 1404 mock shape catalogs of
galaxies by randomly rotating the ellipticities of galax-
ies in our HSC-Y3 shape catalog, and distorting them
with shears that would arise from the large-scale struc-
ture distribution in a ΛCDM universe. These mock
catalogsaidinthecomputationofthecovarianceofthe23
two point measurements involving weak gravitational
lensing shears.
•We describe the codes and pipelines used to optimally
perform the three two-point correlation function mea-
surements on data as well as on the mock catalogs in
order to estimate the full covariance matrix of our ob-
servables.
•Based on the clustering pipeline, we present the mea-
surementsoftheprojectedclusteringsignalofthethree
subsamples of galaxies. In the range of scale cuts over
which we will perform our cosmological analyses with
the large-scale perturbation theory-based model (Paper
III),thesignal-to-noiseratiooftheclusteringsignalsare
25.6,27.6,26.6fortheLOWZ,CMASS1andCMASS2
subsamples, respectively. When including the small
scalesthatwillbemodelledinPaperII,thecorrespond-
ing signal-to-noise ratios are, 38.5,37.1,35.7, respec-
tively.
•We also show that the clustering signals within each
subsample do not change substantially irrespective of
the use of systematic weights, suggested by the SDSS
BOSS team, that are related to the the number density
of stars or the seeing in the SDSS imaging data used to
define the spectroscopic targets. We also show that the
clustering signal of our subsample of galaxies does not
showasubstantialevidenceforvariationwithindifferent
redshift bins.
•Using the weak lensing pipeline, we present our mea-
surementsofthegalaxy-galaxylensingsignalforeachof
ourlenssubsamplesusingthesinglesourcegalaxysam-
ple. For the large-scale analyses, the signal-to-noise ra-
tioofthegalaxy-galaxylensingsignalsare 7.6,11.3and
10.6, for the LOWZ, CMASS1, and CMASS2 subsam-
ples, respectively. The corresponding signal-to-noise
ratios for the measurements in the scales of interest rel-
evant to small-scale analysis are 13.4,17.3and15.8,
respectively.
•Wepresented anumber ofsystematic testsfor theweak
lensing signals: the null signals around random points,
thenullcross-signals,correspondingtoeachofoursub-
samplesofgalaxies. Wealsopresentedthatthecontami-
nationofourmeasuredsignalsduetopresenceofsource
galaxies physically associated with our lens galaxies is
negligibleduetoourconservativesourceselection. We
have further shown that the measured lensing signals
are not impacted by the use of the systematic weights
corresponding to the SDSS BOSS large-scale structure
subsamples. The lensing signal amplitudes within the
redshiftbinforeachsubsamplesalsoshownosignificant
variation as a function of redshift.
•Wealsopresentedthemeasurementsofthecosmicshear
correlation functions 𝜉±for our source galaxy sample.
Thesignal-to-noiseratioofourmeasurementsof 𝜉+and
𝜉−are 20.2 and 19.0, respectively. We also presentedsystematicstestsforthecosmisshearmeasurementsin-
cluding a decomposition into 𝐸and𝐵modes. The
largest scales of interest for the cosmological analyses
were chosen based on the null detection of 𝐵modes,
while the smallest scales were chosen based on the ac-
curacy of our theoretical templates.
•Finally,wealsopresentedourbestestimatesforthePSF
systematics parameters 𝛼PSFand𝛽PSFwhich quantify
the PSF leakage and the residual PSF model error. The
values we obtain will be used in the cosmological anal-
yses to model the PSF systematics component of the
cosmic shear signal, in order to marginalize over these
nuisance parameters.
The measurements presented in this paper, the covariances
and the constraints on parameter systematics have been used
in the 3×2pt analysis of the data to infer the constraints on
the cosmological parameters Ωmand𝜎8, in particular the pa-
rameter combination, 𝑆8. These results will be presented in
our companion papers Sugiyama et al.[42] and Miyatake et
al.[41].
The Subaru Hyper Suprime Cam survey has also finished
collecting data from its entirety of operations which spanned
330 nights in total. The wide survey area which is the most
useful in terms of its cosmological constraining power will
span a total of about 1100 sq. deg. Numerous challenges
will be involved in the processing of data with such statistical
power,inparticular,tokeepthesystematicerrorbudgetunder
control. As we will show in the companion papers, the pho-
tometricredshiftuncertaintiesarestillourdominantsourceof
errors. Addressing this challenge using additional measure-
ments, better data as well as innovative techniques is going to
be a necessary task before the arrival of data from the Rubin
LSST.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous referee for a careful read-
ing of the manuscript and the constructive inputs on the
version of the manuscript submitted for review. This
work was supported in part by World Premier Interna-
tional Research Center Initiative (WPI Initiative), MEXT,
Japan, and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers JP18H04350,
JP18H04358, JP19H00677, JP19K14767, JP20H00181,
JP20H01932, JP20H04723, JP20H05850, JP20H05855,
JP20H05856, JP20H05861, JP21J00011, JP21H05456,
JP21J10314, JP21H01081, JP21H05456, JP22H00130,
JP22K03634, JP22K03655, JP22K21349, JP23H00108 and
JP23H04005, by JSPS Core-to-Core Program (grant num-
ber: JPJSCCA20210003), by Japan Science and Technology
Agency (JST) CREST JPMHCR1414, by JST AIP Accelera-
tionResearchGrantNumberJP20317829,Japan,andbyBasic
Research Grant (Super AI) of Institute for AI and Beyond of
the University of Tokyo. SS was supported in part by In-
ternational Graduate Program for Excellence in Earth-Space
Science(IGPEES),WINGSProgram,theUniversityofTokyo.
RD acknowledges support from the NSF Graduate Research24
Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE-2039656. YK is
supportedinpartbytheDavidandLucilePackardfoundation.
W.L. acknowledge the support from the National Key R&D
Program of China (2021YFC2203100), the 111 Project for
"Observational and Theoretical Research on Dark Matter and
Dark Energy” (B23042), NSFC(NO. 11833005, 12192224)
as well as the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities (WK3440000006).
TheHyperSuprime-Cam(HSC)collaborationincludesthe
astronomical communities of Japan and Taiwan, and Prince-
ton University. The HSC instrumentation and software were
developedbytheNationalAstronomicalObservatoryofJapan
(NAOJ), the Kavli Institute for the Physics and Mathematics
of the Universe (Kavli IPMU), the University of Tokyo, the
High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), the
Academia Sinica Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics in
Taiwan(ASIAA),andPrincetonUniversity. Fundingwascon-
tributedbytheFIRSTprogramfromJapaneseCabinetOffice,
theMinistryofEducation,Culture,Sports,ScienceandTech-
nology (MEXT), the Japan Society for the Promotion of Sci-
ence(JSPS),JapanScienceandTechnologyAgency(JST),the
TorayScienceFoundation,NAOJ,KavliIPMU,KEK,ASIAA,
and Princeton University. This paper makes use of softwaredevelopedfortheLargeSynopticSurveyTelescope. Wethank
the LSST Project for making their code available as free soft-
ware at http://dm.lsst.org
ThePan-STARRS1Surveys(PS1)havebeenmadepossible
through contributions of the Institute for Astronomy, the Uni-
versity of Hawaii, the Pan-STARRS Project Office, the Max-
PlanckSocietyanditsparticipatinginstitutes,theMaxPlanck
Institute for Astronomy, Heidelberg and the Max Planck In-
stitute for Extraterrestrial Physics, Garching, The Johns Hop-
kins University, Durham University, the University of Edin-
burgh, Queen’s University Belfast, the Harvard-Smithsonian
CenterforAstrophysics,theLasCumbresObservatoryGlobal
Telescope Network Incorporated, the National Central Uni-
versity of Taiwan, the Space Telescope Science Institute, the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant
No. NNX08AR22GissuedthroughthePlanetaryScienceDi-
visionoftheNASAScienceMissionDirectorate,theNational
Science Foundation under Grant No. AST-1238877, the Uni-
versity of Maryland, and Eotvos Lorand University (ELTE)
and the Los Alamos National Laboratory.
BasedinpartondatacollectedattheSubaruTelescopeand
retrievedfromtheHSCdataarchivesystem,whichisoperated
by Subaru Telescope and Astronomy Data Center at National
Astronomical Observatory of Japan.
[1] Planck Collaboration, P. A. R. Ade, N. Aghanim, M. Arnaud,
M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, A. J. Banday, R. B.
Barreiro, J. G. Bartlett, and et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics
594, A13 (2016), arXiv:1502.01589.
[2] Planck Collaboration, N. Aghanim, Y. Akrami, M. Ashdown,
J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi, M. Ballardini, A. J. Banday, R. B.
Barreiro, N. Bartolo, S. Basak, R. Battye, K. Benabed, J. P.
Bernard, M. Bersanelli, P. Bielewicz, J. J. Bock, J. R. Bond,
J.Borrill,F.R.Bouchet,F.Boulanger, et al.,Astronomy&As-
trophysics 641, A6 (2020), arXiv:1807.06209 [astro-ph.CO].
[3] D. M. Scolnic, D. O. Jones, A. Rest, Y. C. Pan, R. Chornock,
R.J.Foley,M.E.Huber,R.Kessler,G.Narayan,A.G.Riess,
S. Rodney, E. Berger, D. J. Brout, P. J. Challis, M. Drout,
et al.,Astrophys.J. 859,101(2018),arXiv:1710.00845[astro-
ph.CO].
[4] A.J.Ross,F.Beutler,C.-H.Chuang,M.Pellejero-Ibanez,H.-J.
Seo, M. Vargas-Magaña, A. J. Cuesta, W. J. Percival, A. Bur-
den,A.G.Sánchez,J.N.Grieb,B.Reid,J.R.Brownstein,K.S.
Dawson, D. J. Eisenstein, et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.
464, 1168 (2017), arXiv:1607.03145 [astro-ph.CO].
[5] F. Beutler, H.-J. Seo, A. J. Ross, P. McDonald, S. Saito, A. S.
Bolton, J. R. Brownstein, C.-H. Chuang, A. J. Cuesta, D. J.
Eisenstein,A.Font-Ribera,J.N.Grieb,N.Hand,F.-S.Kitaura,
C.Modi, et al.,Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc. 464,3409(2017),
arXiv:1607.03149 [astro-ph.CO].
[6] S. Alam, M. Aubert, S. Avila, C. Balland, J. E. Bautista,
M. A. Bershady, D. Bizyaev, M. R. Blanton, A. S. Bolton,
J.Bovy,J.Brinkmann,J.R.Brownstein,E.Burtin,S.Chaban-
ier, M. J. Chapman, et al., Phys. Rev. D 103, 083533 (2021),
arXiv:2007.08991 [astro-ph.CO].
[7] S. Aiola, E. Calabrese, L. Maurin, S. Naess, B. L. Schmitt,
M. H. Abitbol, G. E. Addison, P. A. R. Ade, D. Alonso,
M.Amiri,S.Amodeo,E.Angile,J.E.Austermann,T.Baildon,N.Battaglia, et al.,JCAP2020,047(2020),arXiv:2007.07288
[astro-ph.CO].
[8] P. S. Chaubal, C. L. Reichardt, N. Gupta, B. Ansarinejad,
K. Aylor, L. Balkenhol, E. J. Baxter, F. Bianchini, B. A. Ben-
son, L. E. Bleem, S. Bocquet, J. E. Carlstrom, C. L. Chang,
T. M. Crawford, A. T. Crites, et al., Astrophys. J. 931, 139
(2022), arXiv:2111.07491 [astro-ph.CO].
[9] A. G. Sánchez, R. Scoccimarro, M. Crocce, J. N. Grieb,
S. Salazar-Albornoz, C. Dalla Vecchia, M. Lippich, F. Beut-
ler, J. R. Brownstein, C.-H. Chuang, D. J. Eisenstein, F.-
S. Kitaura, M. D. Olmstead, W. J. Percival, F. Prada,
et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 464, 1640 (2017),
arXiv:1607.03147 [astro-ph.CO].
[10] J. N. Grieb, A. G. Sánchez, S. Salazar-Albornoz, R. Scoc-
cimarro, M. Crocce, C. Dalla Vecchia, F. Montesano,
H. Gil-Marín, A. J. Ross, F. Beutler, S. Rodríguez-Torres,
C.-H. Chuang, F. Prada, F.-S. Kitaura, A. J. Cuesta,
et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 467, 2085 (2017),
arXiv:1607.03143 [astro-ph.CO].
[11] Y. Kobayashi, T. Nishimichi, M. Takada, and H. Miyatake,
Phys. Rev. D 105, 083517 (2022), arXiv:2110.06969 [astro-
ph.CO].
[12] C. Hikage, M. Oguri, T. Hamana, S. More, R. Mandel-
baum,M.Takada,F.Köhlinger,H.Miyatake,A.J.Nishizawa,
H. Aihara, R. Armstrong, J. Bosch, J. Coupon, A. Ducout,
P. Ho, et al., Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 71, 43 (2019),
arXiv:1809.09148 [astro-ph.CO].
[13] T. Hamana, M. Shirasaki, S. Miyazaki, C. Hikage, M. Oguri,
S. More, R. Armstrong, A. Leauthaud, R. Mandelbaum,
H. Miyatake, A. J. Nishizawa, M. Simet, M. Takada, H. Ai-
hara, J. Bosch, et al., Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 72, 16 (2020),
arXiv:1906.06041 [astro-ph.CO].
[14] C. Heymans, T. Tröster, M. Asgari, C. Blake, H. Hildebrandt,25
B. Joachimi, K. Kuĳken, C.-A. Lin, A. G. Sánchez, J. L.
van den Busch, A. H. Wright, A. Amon, M. Bilicki, J. de
Jong,M.Crocce, et al.,Astronomy&Astrophysics 646,A140
(2021), arXiv:2007.15632 [astro-ph.CO].
[15] S. Pandey, E. Krause, J. DeRose, N. MacCrann, B. Jain,
M. Crocce, J. Blazek, A. Choi, H. Huang, C. To, X. Fang,
J. Elvin-Poole, J. Prat, A. Porredon, L. F. Secco, et al., arXiv
e-prints , arXiv:2105.13545 (2021), arXiv:2105.13545 [astro-
ph.CO].
[16] A.Porredon,M.Crocce,J.Elvin-Poole,R.Cawthon,G.Gian-
nini, J. De Vicente, A. Carnero Rosell, I. Ferrero, E. Krause,
X. Fang, J. Prat, M. Rodriguez-Monroy, S. Pandey, A. Po-
cino, F. J. Castander, et al., arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2105.13546
(2021), arXiv:2105.13546 [astro-ph.CO].
[17] S.Sugiyama,M.Takada,H.Miyatake,T.Nishimichi,M.Shi-
rasaki, Y. Kobayashi, R. Mandelbaum, S. More, R. Taka-
hashi, K. Osato, M. Oguri, J. Coupon, C. Hikage, B.-C.
Hsieh,Y.Komiyama, et al.,Phys.Rev.D 105,123537(2022),
arXiv:2111.10966 [astro-ph.CO].
[18] H.Miyatake,S.Sugiyama,M.Takada,T.Nishimichi,M.Shi-
rasaki, Y. Kobayashi, R. Mandelbaum, S. More, M. Oguri,
K. Osato, Y. Park, R. Takahashi, J. Coupon, C. Hikage,
B.-C. Hsieh, et al., Phys. Rev. D 106, 083520 (2022),
arXiv:2111.02419 [astro-ph.CO].
[19] A. Amon, D. Gruen, M. A. Troxel, N. MacCrann, S. Dodel-
son, A. Choi, C. Doux, L. F. Secco, S. Samuroff, E. Krause,
J. Cordero, J. Myles, J. DeRose, R. H. Wechsler, M. Gatti,
et al., Phys. Rev. D 105, 023514 (2022), arXiv:2105.13543
[astro-ph.CO].
[20] DES Collaboration, T. M. C. Abbott, M. Aguena, A. Alarcon,
S. Allam, O. Alves, A. Amon, F. Andrade-Oliveira, J. Annis,
S.Avila,D.Bacon,E.Baxter,K.Bechtol,M.R.Becker,G.M.
Bernstein, et al., arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2105.13549 (2021),
arXiv:2105.13549 [astro-ph.CO].
[21] H. Mo, F. C. van den Bosch, and S. White, Galaxy Formation
and Evolution (2010).
[22] C.L.Bennett,D.Larson,J.L.Weiland,N.Jarosik,G.Hinshaw,
N. Odegard, K. M. Smith, R. S. Hill, B. Gold, M. Halpern,
E. Komatsu, M. R. Nolta, L. Page, D. N. Spergel, E. Wollack,
et al., Astrophys. J. Suppl. 208, 20 (2013), arXiv:1212.5225
[astro-ph.CO].
[23] J. T. A. de Jong, G. A. Verdoes Kleĳn, K. H. Kuĳken,
and E. A. Valentĳn, Experimental Astronomy 35, 25 (2013),
arXiv:1206.1254 [astro-ph.CO].
[24] https://kids.strw.leidenuniv.nl/ .
[25] TheDarkEnergySurveyCollaboration,arXive-prints,astro-
ph/0510346 (2005), arXiv:astro-ph/0510346 [astro-ph].
[26] https://www.darkenergysurvey.org .
[27] H. Aihara, N. Arimoto, R.Armstrong, S. Arnouts, N. A.Bah-
call, S. Bickerton, J. Bosch, K. Bundy, P. L. Capak, J. H. H.
Chan,M.Chiba,J.Coupon,E.Egami,M.Enoki,F.Finet, et al.,
Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 70, S4 (2018), arXiv:1704.05858
[astro-ph.IM].
[28] https://hsc.mtk.nao.ac.jp/ssp/ .
[29] Saas-Fee Advanced Course 33: Gravitational Lensing:
Strong, Weak and Micro (2006)arXiv:astro-ph/0407232[astro-
ph].
[30] M. Tegmark, M. R. Blanton, M. A. Strauss, F. Hoyle,
D. Schlegel, R. Scoccimarro, M. S. Vogeley, D. H. Wein-
berg, I. Zehavi, A. Berlind, T. Budavari, A. Connolly, D. J.
Eisenstein, D. Finkbeiner, J. A. Frieman, et al., Astrophys. J.
606, 702 (2004), arXiv:astro-ph/0310725.
[31] A.CoorayandR.Sheth,Phys.Rep. 372,1(2002),arXiv:astro-
ph/0206508.[32] N. Kaiser, Astrophys. J. Lett. 284, L9 (1984).
[33] U.Seljak,A.Makarov,R.Mandelbaum,C.M.Hirata,N.Pad-
manabhan, P. McDonald, M. R. Blanton, M. Tegmark, N. A.
Bahcall, and J. Brinkmann, Phys. Rev. D 71, 043511 (2005),
arXiv:astro-ph/0406594 [astro-ph].
[34] J.L.Tinker,B.E.Robertson,A.V.Kravtsov,A.Klypin,M.S.
Warren, G. Yepes, and S. Gottlöber, Astrophys. J. 724, 878
(2010), arXiv:1001.3162 [astro-ph.CO].
[35] M. Cacciato, F. C. van den Bosch, S. More, R. Li, H. J. Mo,
and X. Yang, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 394, 929 (2009),
arXiv:0807.4932 [astro-ph].
[36] F. C. van den Bosch, S. More, M. Cacciato, H. Mo, and
X. Yang, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 430, 725 (2013),
arXiv:1206.6890 [astro-ph.CO].
[37] S. More, F. C. van den Bosch, M. Cacciato, A. More, H. Mo,
and X. Yang, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 430, 747 (2013),
arXiv:1207.0004 [astro-ph.CO].
[38] M. Cacciato, F. C. van den Bosch, S. More, H. Mo, and
X. Yang, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 430, 767 (2013),
arXiv:1207.0503 [astro-ph.CO].
[39] S. More, H. Miyatake, R. Mandelbaum, M. Takada, D. N.
Spergel, J. R. Brownstein, and D. P. Schneider, Astrophys. J.
806, 2 (2015), arXiv:1407.1856 [astro-ph.CO].
[40] R.Mandelbaum,A.Slosar,T.Baldauf,U.Seljak,C.M.Hirata,
R. Nakajima, R. Reyes, and R. E. Smith, Mon. Not. Roy. As-
tron. Soc. 432, 1544 (2013), arXiv:1207.1120.
[41] H.Miyatake,S.Sugiyama,M.Takada,T.Nishimichi,X.chong
Li, M. Shirasaki, S. More, Y. Kobayashi, A. J. Nishizawa,
M.M.Rau,T.Zhang,R.Takahashi,R.Dalal,R.Mandelbaum,
M.A.Strauss, et al.,arXive-prints (2023),arXiv:2304.00704
[astro-ph.CO].
[42] S. Sugiyama, H. Miyatake, S. More, X. Li, M. Shirasaki,
M. Takada, Y. Kobayashi, R. Takahashi, T. Nishimichi, A. J.
Nishizawa, M. M. Rau, T. Zhang, R. Dalal, R. Mandelbaum,
M.A.Strauss, et al.,arXive-prints (2023),arXiv:2304.00705
[astro-ph.CO].
[43] X. Li, T. Zhang, S. Sugiyama, R. Dalal, M. M. Rau, R. Man-
delbaum, M. Takada, S. More, M. A. Strauss, H. Miyatake,
M. Shirasaki, T. Hamana, M. Oguri, W. Luo, A. J. Nishizawa,
et al.,arXive-prints (2023),arXiv:2304.00702[astro-ph.CO].
[44] R.Dalal,X.Li,A.Nicola,J.Zuntz,M.A.Strauss,S.Sugiyama,
T. Zhang, M. M. Rau, R. Mandelbaum, M. Takada, S. More,
H.Miyatake,A.Kannawadi,M.Shirasaki,T.Taniguchi, et al.,
arXiv e-prints (2023), arXiv:2304.00701 [astro-ph.CO].
[45] R. Takahashi, T. Hamana, M. Shirasaki, T. Namikawa,
T.Nishimichi,K.Osato,andK.Shiroyama,Astrophys.J. 850,
24 (2017), arXiv:1706.01472 [astro-ph.CO].
[46] S.Miyazaki,Y.Komiyama,S.Kawanomoto,Y.Doi,H.Furu-
sawa,T.Hamana,Y.Hayashi,H.Ikeda,Y.Kamata,H.Karoji,
M. Koike, T. Kurakami, S. Miyama, T. Morokuma, F. Nakata,
K. Namikawa, H. Nakaya, K. Nariai, Y. Obuchi, Y. Oishi,
N. Okada, Y. Okura, et al., Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 70, S1
(2018).
[47] Y. Komiyama, Y. Obuchi, H. Nakaya, Y. Kamata,
S. Kawanomoto, Y. Utsumi, S. Miyazaki, F. Uraguchi, H. Fu-
rusawa, T. Morokuma, T. Uchida, H. Miyatake, S. Mineo,
H.Fujimori,H.Aihara,H.Karoji,J.E.Gunn,andS.-Y.Wang,
Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 70, S2 (2018).
[48] H. Furusawa, M. Koike, T. Takata, Y. Okura, H. Miy-
atake, R. H. Lupton, S. Bickerton, P. A. Price, J. Bosch,
N. Yasuda, S. Mineo, Y. Yamada, S. Miyazaki, F. Nakata,
S. Koshida, Y. Komiyama, Y. Utsumi, S. Kawanomoto,
E.Jeschke,J.Noumaru,K.Schubert,I.Iwata, et al.,Publ.As-
tron. Soc. Japan 70, S3 (2018).26
[49] S. Kawanomoto, F. Uraguchi, Y. Komiyama, S. Miyazaki,
H. Furusawa, F. Finet, T. Hattori, S.-Y. Wang, N. Yasuda,
and N. Suzuki, Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 70, 66 (2018).
[50] J. Bosch, R. Armstrong, S. Bickerton, H. Furusawa, H. Ikeda,
M.Koike,R.Lupton,S.Mineo,P.Price,T.Takata,M.Tanaka,
N. Yasuda, Y. AlSayyad, A. C. Becker, W. Coulton, et al.,
Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 70, S5 (2018), arXiv:1705.06766
[astro-ph.IM].
[51] H. Aihara, R. Armstrong, S. Bickerton, J. Bosch, J. Coupon,
H. Furusawa, Y. Hayashi, H. Ikeda, Y. Kamata, H. Karoji,
S. Kawanomoto, M. Koike, Y. Komiyama, D. Lang, R. H.
Lupton, et al., Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 70, S8 (2018),
arXiv:1702.08449 [astro-ph.IM].
[52] H. Aihara, Y. AlSayyad, M. Ando, R. Armstrong, J. Bosch,
E. Egami, H. Furusawa, J. Furusawa, A. Goulding,
Y. Harikane, C. Hikage, P. T. P. Ho, B.-C. Hsieh, S. Huang,
H. Ikeda, et al., Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 71, 114 (2019),
arXiv:1905.12221 [astro-ph.IM].
[53] H. Aihara, Y. AlSayyad, M. Ando, R. Armstrong, J. Bosch,
E.Egami,H.Furusawa,J.Furusawa,S.Harasawa,Y.Harikane,
B.-C. Hsieh, H. Ikeda, K. Ito, I. Iwata, T. Kodama, et al.,
Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 74, 247 (2022), arXiv:2108.13045
[astro-ph.IM].
[54] X. Li, H. Miyatake, W. Luo, S. More, M. Oguri, T. Hamana,
R. Mandelbaum, M. Shirasaki, M. Takada, R. Armstrong,
A. Kannawadi, S. Takita, S. Miyazaki, A. J. Nishizawa, A. A.
Plazas Malagón, et al., arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2107.00136
(2021), arXiv:2107.00136 [astro-ph.CO].
[55] R.Mandelbaum,H.Miyatake,T.Hamana,M.Oguri,M.Simet,
R. Armstrong, J. Bosch, R. Murata, F. Lanusse, A. Leau-
thaud, J. Coupon, S. More, M. Takada, S. Miyazaki, J. S.
Speagle, et al., Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 70, S25 (2018),
arXiv:1705.06745 [astro-ph.CO].
[56] R. Mandelbaum, F. Lanusse, A. Leauthaud, R. Armstrong,
M. Simet, H. Miyatake, J. E. Meyers, J. Bosch, R. Murata,
S.Miyazaki,andM.Tanaka,Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc. 481,
3170 (2018), arXiv:1710.00885 [astro-ph.CO].
[57] A.J.Nishizawa,B.-C.Hsieh,M.Tanaka,andT.Takata,arXiv
e-prints , arXiv:2003.01511 (2020), arXiv:2003.01511 [astro-
ph.GA].
[58] However, the photo- 𝑧catalog released for PDR2 is different
from the catalog we use in this analysis. We will make the
shapecatalog,withthephoto- 𝑧information,publiclyavailable
after the cosmology papers are published.
[59] Self-organizing map is yet another way of character-
izing the photometric redshift distribution similar to
DEmPz/DNNzmethods.Thedifferencesbetweenthesemeth-
ods lie in the machine learning architecture used for the cal-
ibration and inference. Please see Rau et al.[62] for detailed
discussion about the differences in the calibration strategies
adopted in the current surveys.
[60] M. Oguri and M. Takada, Phys. Rev. D 83, 023008 (2011),
arXiv:1010.0744 [astro-ph.CO].
[61] Although a cut that retains only 24 percent of source galaxies
isquitesevere,intheseinitialroundofcosmologicalanalyses,
we stick to a single source bin at redshifts larger than any of
our lens samples to conservatively constrain any systematics
in the redshift distribution of the source galaxies and avoid
anysourcegalaxiesthatmaybephysicallycorrelatedwithour
source galaxies.
[62] M.M.Rau,R.Dalal,T.Zhang,X.Li,A.J.Nishizawa,S.More,
R.Mandelbaum,M.A.Strauss,andM.Takada,arXive-prints
, arXiv:2211.16516 (2022), arXiv:2211.16516 [astro-ph.CO].
[63] M. Oguri, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 444, 147 (2014),arXiv:1407.4693 [astro-ph.CO].
[64] M. Oguri, Y.-T. Lin, S.-C. Lin, A. J. Nishizawa, A. More,
S.More,B.-C.Hsieh,E.Medezinski,H.Miyatake,H.-Y.Jian,
L.Lin,M.Takada,N.Okabe,J.S.Speagle,J.Coupon,A.Leau-
thaud,R.H.Lupton,S.Miyazaki,P.A.Price,M.Tanaka,I.N.
Chiu, Y. Komiyama, et al., Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 70, S20
(2018), arXiv:1701.00818 [astro-ph.CO].
[65] C. Hikage, M. Oguri, T. Hamana, S. More, R. Mandel-
baum,M.Takada,F.Köhlinger,H.Miyatake,A.J.Nishizawa,
H. Aihara, R. Armstrong, J. Bosch, J. Coupon, A. Ducout,
P. Ho, B.-C. Hsieh, Y. Komiyama, F. Lanusse, A. Leauthaud,
R. H. Lupton, E. Medezinski, S. Mineo, S. Miyama, et al.,
Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 71, 43 (2019), arXiv:1809.09148
[astro-ph.CO].
[66] https://www.sdss.org/dr11/ .
[67] S. Alam, F. D. Albareti, C. Allende Prieto, F. Anders, S. F.
Anderson, T. Anderton, B. H. Andrews, E. Armengaud,
É. Aubourg, S. Bailey, S. Basu, J. E. Bautista, R. L. Beaton,
T. C. Beers, C. F. Bender, et al., Astrophys. J. Suppl. 219, 12
(2015), arXiv:1501.00963 [astro-ph.IM].
[68] K. S. Dawson, D. J. Schlegel, C. P. Ahn, S. F. Anderson,
É. Aubourg, S. Bailey, R. H. Barkhouser, J. E. Bautista, A. r.
Beifiori,A.A.Berlind,V.Bhardwaj,D.Bizyaev,C.H.Blake,
M.R.Blanton,M.Blomqvist,A.S.Bolton,A.Borde,J.Bovy,
W.N.Brandt,H.Brewington,J.Brinkmann, et al.,TheAstro-
nomical J. 145, 10 (2013), arXiv:1208.0022 [astro-ph.CO].
[69] H.Miyatake,Y.Kobayashi,M.Takada,T.Nishimichi,M.Shi-
rasaki, S. Sugiyama, R. Takahashi, K. Osato, S. More,
and Y. Park, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2101.00113 (2020),
arXiv:2101.00113 [astro-ph.CO].
[70] S.Sugiyama,M.Takada,H.Miyatake,T.Nishimichi,M.Shi-
rasaki, Y. Kobayashi, S. More, R. Takahashi, K. Osato,
M. Oguri, J. Coupon, C. Hikage, B.-C. Hsieh, Y. Komiyama,
A.Leauthaud, et al.,arXive-prints,arXiv:2111.10966(2021),
arXiv:2111.10966 [astro-ph.CO].
[71] H. Miyatake, S. More, R. Mandelbaum, M. Takada, D. N.
Spergel, J.-P. Kneib, D. P. Schneider, J. Brinkmann, and J. R.
Brownstein, Astrophys. J. 806, 1 (2015), arXiv:1311.1480.
[72] K. N. Abazajian, J. K. Adelman-McCarthy, M. A. Agüeros,
S.S.Allam,C.AllendePrieto,D.An,K.S.J.Anderson,S.F.
Anderson,J.Annis,N.A.Bahcall,C.A.L.Bailer-Jones,J.C.
Barentine, B. A. Bassett, A. C. Becker, T. C. Beers, et al.,
Astrophys.J.Suppl. 182,543(2009),arXiv:0812.0649[astro-
ph].
[73] J. E. Gunn, W. A. Siegmund, E. J. Mannery, R. E. Owen,
C.L.Hull,R.F.Leger,L.N.Carey,G.R.Knapp,D.G.York,
W. N. Boroski, S. M. Kent, R. H. Lupton, C. M. Rockosi,
M.L.Evans,P.Waddell, et al.,TheAstronomicalJ. 131,2332
(2006), arXiv:astro-ph/0602326 [astro-ph].
[74] M. Fukugita, T. Ichikawa, J. E. Gunn, M. Doi, K. Shimasaku,
and D. P. Schneider, The Astronomical J. 111, 1748 (1996).
[75] J. A. Smith, D. L. Tucker, S. Kent, M. W. Richmond,
M. Fukugita, T. Ichikawa, S.-i. Ichikawa, A. M. Jorgensen,
A. Uomoto, J. E. Gunn, M. Hamabe, M. Watanabe, A. Tolea,
A. Henden, J. Annis, et al., The Astronomical J. 123, 2121
(2002), arXiv:astro-ph/0201143 [astro-ph].
[76] M. Doi, M. Tanaka, M. Fukugita, J. E. Gunn, N. Ya-
suda, Ž. Ivezić, J. Brinkmann, E. de Haars, S. J. Kleinman,
J. Krzesinski, and R. French Leger, The Astronomical J. 139,
1628 (2010), arXiv:1002.3701 [astro-ph.IM].
[77] D. J. Eisenstein, D. H. Weinberg, E. Agol, H. Aihara, C. Al-
lendePrieto,S.F.Anderson,J.A.Arns,É.Aubourg,S.Bailey,
E. Balbinot, R. Barkhouser, T. C. Beers, A. A. Berlind, S. J.
Bickerton, D. Bizyaev, et al., The Astronomical J. 142, 7227
(2011), arXiv:1101.1529 [astro-ph.IM].
[78] C. P. Ahn, R. Alexandroff, C. Allende Prieto, S. F. Ander-
son, T. Anderton, B. H. Andrews, É. Aubourg, S. Bailey,
E. Balbinot, R. Barnes, J. Bautista, T. C. Beers, A. Beifiori,
A.A.Berlind,V.Bhardwaj, et al.,Astrophys.J.Suppl. 203,21
(2012), arXiv:1207.7137 [astro-ph.IM].
[79] H. Aihara, C. Allende Prieto, D. An, S. F. Anderson,
É. Aubourg, E. Balbinot, T. C. Beers, A. A. Berlind, S. J.
Bickerton, D. Bizyaev, M. R. Blanton, J. J. Bochanski, A. S.
Bolton,J.Bovy,W.N.Brandt, et al.,Astrophys.J.Suppl. 193,
29 (2011), arXiv:1101.1559 [astro-ph.IM].
[80] R. Lupton, J. E. Gunn, Z. Ivezić, G. R. Knapp, and S. Kent,
inAstronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems X , As-
tronomicalSocietyofthePacificConferenceSeries,Vol.238,
edited by J. Harnden, F. R., F. A. Primini, and H. E. Payne
(2001) p. 269, arXiv:astro-ph/0101420 [astro-ph].
[81] J. R. Pier, J. A. Munn, R. B. Hindsley, G. S. Hennessy, S. M.
Kent, R. H. Lupton, and Ž. Ivezić, The Astronomical J. 125,
1559 (2003), arXiv:astro-ph/0211375 [astro-ph].
[82] N. Padmanabhan, D. J. Schlegel, D. P. Finkbeiner, J. C. Bar-
entine, M. R. Blanton, H. J. Brewington, J. E. Gunn, M. Har-
vanek, D. W. Hogg, Ž. Ivezić, D. Johnston, S. M. Kent, S. J.
Kleinman,G.R.Knapp,J.Krzesinski, et al.,Astrophys.J. 674,
1217 (2008), arXiv:astro-ph/0703454 [astro-ph].
[83] D. J. Schlegel, D. P. Finkbeiner, and M. Davis, Astrophys. J.
500, 525 (1998), arXiv:astro-ph/9710327 [astro-ph].
[84] A. S. Bolton, D. J. Schlegel, É. Aubourg, S. Bailey, V. Bhard-
waj,J.R.Brownstein,S.Burles,Y.-M.Chen,K.Dawson,D.J.
Eisenstein,J.E.Gunn,G.R.Knapp,C.P.Loomis,R.H.Lup-
ton,C.Maraston, et al.,TheAstronomicalJ. 144,144(2012),
arXiv:1207.7326 [astro-ph.CO].
[85] B. Reid, S. Ho, N. Padmanabhan, W. J. Percival, J. Tinker,
R. Tojeiro, M. White, D. J. Eisenstein, C. Maraston, A. J.
Ross, A. G. Sánchez, D. Schlegel, E. Sheldon, M. A. Strauss,
D. Thomas, et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 455, 1553
(2016), arXiv:1509.06529 [astro-ph.CO].
[86] L. Anderson, É. Aubourg, S. Bailey, F. Beutler, V. Bhardwaj,
M. Blanton, A. S. Bolton, J. Brinkmann, J. R. Brownstein,
A. Burden, C.-H. Chuang, A. J. Cuesta, K. S. Dawson, D. J.
Eisenstein, S. Escoffier, et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.
441, 24 (2014), arXiv:1312.4877 [astro-ph.CO].
[87] H.Guo,I.Zehavi,andZ.Zheng,Astrophys.J. 756,127(2012),
arXiv:1111.6598 [astro-ph.CO].
[88] D. A. Wake, R. C. Nichol, D. J. Eisenstein, J. Loveday, A. C.
Edge, R. Cannon, I. Smail, D. P. Schneider, R. Scranton,
D.Carson,N.P.Ross,R.J.Brunner,M.Colless,W.J.Couch,
S. M. Croom, et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 372, 537
(2006), arXiv:astro-ph/0607629 [astro-ph].
[89] G. Bruzual and S. Charlot, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 344,
1000 (2003), arXiv:astro-ph/0309134 [astro-ph].
[90] A.J.Ross,W.J.Percival,A.G.Sánchez,L.Samushia,S.Ho,
E. Kazin, M. Manera, B. Reid, M. White, R. Tojeiro, C. K.
McBride, X. Xu, D. A. Wake, M. A. Strauss, F. Monte-
sano, et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 424, 564 (2012),
arXiv:1203.6499 [astro-ph.CO].
[91] The gap in the redshift distributions between LOWZ and
CMASS samples is due to our use of the SDSS DR11 parent
sample. Using the latest DR12 catalog would have allowed us
to add in a few more galaxies at intermediate redshifts. How-
ever, that would have required us to modify the BOSS large
scalestructuresampletoincludethefibercollidedandredshift
failure galaxies. Since this procedure was already performed
for DR11, we decided to stick with this sample.
[92] G.Hinshaw,D.Larson,E.Komatsu,D.N.Spergel,C.L.Ben-nett, J. Dunkley, M. R. Nolta, M. Halpern, R. S. Hill, N. Ode-
gard,L.Page,K.M.Smith,J.L.Weiland,B.Gold,N.Jarosik,
et al., Astrophys. J. Suppl. 208, 19 (2013), arXiv:1212.5226
[astro-ph.CO].
[93] M. Shirasaki, T. Hamana, M. Takada, R. Takahashi, and
H. Miyatake, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 486, 52 (2019),
arXiv:1901.09488 [astro-ph.CO].
[94] J. F. Navarro, C. S. Frenk, and S. D. M. White, Astrophys. J.
490, 493 (1997), arXiv:astro-ph/9611107.
[95] P. S. Behroozi, R. H. Wechsler, and H.-Y. Wu, Astrophys. J.
762, 109 (2013), arXiv:1110.4372 [astro-ph.CO].
[96] The original code was written in C++ by Matthew B Kennel,
the first author of this paper has carried out some bug fixes,
memory leaks and optimizations.
[97] C. Hikage, M. Takada, T. Hamana, and D. Spergel,
Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc. 412,65(2011),arXiv:1004.3542
[astro-ph.CO].
[98] M. A. Troxel et al.(DES), Phys. Rev. D 98, 043528 (2018),
arXiv:1708.01538 [astro-ph.CO].
[99] T. Zhang, X. Li, R. Dalal, R. Mandelbaum, M. A. Strauss,
A.Kannawadi,H.Miyatake,A.Nicola,A.A.PlazasMalagón,
M. Shirasaki, S. Sugiyama, and M. Takada, arXiv e-prints ,
arXiv:2212.03257 (2022), arXiv:2212.03257 [astro-ph.CO].
[100] J. Hartlap, P. Simon, and P. Schneider, Astronomy & Astro-
physics464, 399 (2007), arXiv:astro-ph/0608064 [astro-ph].
[101] Note that unlike cosmic shear covariance, there is no mixed
term between large structure and shape noise in the galaxy-
galaxy lensing measurements.
[102] T. Hamana, M. Shirasaki, S. Miyazaki, C. Hikage, M. Oguri,
S. More, R. Armstrong, A. Leauthaud, R. Mandelbaum,
H. Miyatake, A. J. Nishizawa, M. Simet, M. Takada, H. Ai-
hara,J.Bosch,Y.Komiyama,R.Lupton,H.Murayama,M.A.
Strauss,andM.Tanaka,Publ.Astron.Soc.Japan 72,16(2020),
arXiv:1906.06041 [astro-ph.CO].
[103] One may think that the factor of 1.08is not enough because
the blue contour does not cover the green contour in Fig. 18.
Dependingontheflags, i_calib_psf_used=True orFalse,we
not only use different coefficients but also different 𝜉pp,pq,qq,
and the difference is not so significant in predicted ˆ𝜉psfthan
how it appears in Fig. 18.
Appendix A: Systematic differences in the inferred redshift
distribution
AsshowninFig.2,weseedifferencesintheinferredredshift
distributionofoursourcesampledependinguponwhetherwe
use the redshift PDFs from DEmPzorDNNz. We estimate
the potential biases in the measured weak lensing signals due
to these systematic uncertainties.
Forthegalaxy-galaxylensingsignalthissystematicbiascan
bequantifiedbycomputingtheaverageratioofthecriticalsur-
face density of the source sample (described in Section IIA)
by utilizing the inferred redshifts from either of the two esti-
mates. Wecomputethisratiobyusingthemedianredshiftsof
each of our lens samples (described in Section IIC). We find
that for the LOWZ sample the critical surface density based
ontheredshiftsinferredbasedon DEmPzishigherby1.7per-
cent compared to those inferred based on DNNz, while this
difference grows to 3.3 and 4.2 percent for the CMASS1 and
CMASS2 subsamples.28
For the cosmic shear signal, we compute the theoretical
estimate of𝜉+and𝜉−for the source sample for the Planck
cosmological model using either of the two inferred redshift
distributions. For the cosmic shear signal, we also find that
the signals based on the redshifts inferred from DEmPzis
predicted to be about 6 percent higher than that from DNNz.
We would like to have a simple way to parameterize these
differencesandmarginalizeovertheminourcosmologyanaly-
sis. Wefindthattheaverageredshiftofthesourcesamplebased
ontheinferredredshiftdistributionfrom DEmPzishigherthan
that of DNNzbyΔ¯𝑧of0.04. If we simply shift the inferred
redshift distribution from DEmPzlower by the same amount
whilemaintainingtheshapeoftheredshiftdistribution,wecan
account for almost all of the differences. When such a shift is
included,theratiosofthevaluesofthecriticalsurfacedensity
for each of the lens subsamples is reduced to sub-percent lev-
els(<0.75percent),whilethecosmicshearsignalsalsoagree
at the sub percent level. We recommend the use of such Δ𝑧
in the systematic uncertainty analyses for cosmological infer-
ence. This is particularly important because we do not have
any clustering measurements which can constrain the redshift
PDFs at high redshifts for our source galaxy sample.
As will be shown in our companion paper Miyatake et
al.[41], using the self calibration technique of Oguri and
Takada [60], there are hints that support a value of Δ𝑧of the
order−0.06(albeitatlowsignificance),indicatingthatthetrue
meanredshiftsmaypossiblybeevenhigherthanthatsuggested
byDEmPz.
Appendix B: The variation of the signal in the redshift bin with
BOSS full sample
Inthissection,wepresentthevariationoftheclusteringsig-
nalwiththeBOSSfullsample,i.ethefluxlimitedsample. We
usedallthegalaxiesintheSDSSDR11BOSScatalogs,rather
thanapplyingtheluminositycutsusedinthemainpartofthis
paper. UsingthisBOSSfullsample,wetestedthevariationof
the clustering signal in each redshift in a similar way as Sec-
tionIVB:wedividethegalaxiesintothreeortwosubsamples
in each redshift bin and measure the clustering signal in each
subsample. Fig.20showsthevariationoftheclusteringsignal
in each redshift bin using the BOSS full sample. Comparing
to Fig. 9, we can find that the flux limited sample shows the
strongervariation,indicatingastrongerevolutionofthegalaxy
property as a function of redshift. Therefore, the luminosity
limited sample has almost the same galaxy property, and we
can model the galaxy physics with a single set of the galaxy-
related parameters, e.g. the HOD parameters or galaxy bias
parameter,withoutaccountingfortheredshiftevolutionofthe
galaxy-related parameters in the model in each redshift bin.
Appendix C: Measurements with DNNzandMizuki
Inthisappendix,wepresenttheweaklensingmeasurements
and the systematics tests but for the source samples selected
using DNNzandMizuki, respectively. The upper and lowerpanels of Fig. 21 present the cross signal measured for the
three subsamples of lenses we use for our measurements for
thetwodifferentsourcesamples. Thesamecommentsapplyas
wereobservedforthe DEmPzbasedsourcesample,aswritten
in Sec.VA. We apply the same scale cuts and show the 𝜒2
and the corresponding p-values in Table IV for the large and
small-scale analyses, respectively.
Wealsocomputetheboostfactorsforthecorrespondinglens
subsamples to estimate the contamination of the signal due to
galaxiesphysicallyassociatedwiththelenssample. Theseare
showninFig22. Thedeviationofthesesignalsfromunityand
thevaluesofthecorresponding 𝜒2perdegreeoffreedomand
the p-values, on scales that we will use for our cosmological
analyses are listed in Table V.
The B-modes from the cosmic shear measurements for the
source subsamples selected by the two methods are shown
in Figs. 23. In the scales that we consider for our analyses,
the B-mode signals are consistent with zero, as in the fiducial
analysis.
Thegalaxy-galaxylensingmeasurements,thecosmicshear
measurements as well as the redshift distributions for the
source samples will be presented in electronic form on the
data repository.
Appendix D: A problematic region in GAMA09H field
We have computed the cosmic shear signal using source
galaxies selected from DEmPzfrom the entire full depth full
color region of the HSC-Y3 shape catalog. In Fig. 24, we
present the B-mode signals measured based on 𝜉+and𝜉−and
compareittothemeanexpectationfrommockshapecatalogs.
The p-value for the B-modes computed from 𝑥𝑖+show some-
what low values of 0.07, although it is not troublingly low.
However, when we had performed this analysis previously
with a sample based on DNNzselection, we have noticed un-
acceptablylowp-values,drivenpartlybythelargeramplitude
of the B-mode signal from 𝜉+, and the erratic behaviour of
the B-mode signal from 𝜉−. By performing a field-by-field
analysis with the DNNzsample, we were able to track down
suchoddbehaviourtooneofthesubfieldswithinHSC,namely
GAMA09H. We were able to identify a 20sq degree region
boundedbyrightascensionbetween 132.5and140.0degand
declinationbetween 1.6and4.7deg. Wehavenotbeenableto
entirelytrackdownthecauseofthisissueyet,butempirically
this excluded region includes an area which was observed in
someofthebestseeingconditions. Therefore,tobeonthesafe
side, we carry out all our measurements of the galaxy-galaxy
lensing signal and the cosmic shear signal by excluding that
particular patch of the sky.
Appendix E: Analytic expression of magnification bias
covariance
In this section, we derive the analytic expression of mag-
nification bias effect on the cross-covariance between galaxy-
galaxy lensing signal and cosmic shear signal. We consider29
100101
R[h−1Mpc]0100200300Rwp[(Mpc/h)2]
LOWZ
z∈[0.15,0.217]
z∈[0.217,0.283]
z∈[0.283,0.35]
100101
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS1
z∈[0.43,0.49]
z∈[0.49,0.55]
100101
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS2
z∈[0.55,0.60]
z∈[0.60,0.65]
z∈[0.65,0.70]
FIG. 20. Similar plot as Fig. 9, but we use the BOSS full sample for the clustering measurements rather than the luminosity limited sample,
which is the fiducial lens sample used in this paper.
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]−10010R∆ Σ×[106M⊙/pc]
LOWZ
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS1
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS2lens
random
lens-randomblind ID = 2
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]−10010R∆ Σ×[106M⊙/pc]
LOWZ
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS1
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS2lens
random
lens-randomblind ID = 2
FIG. 21. Similar plot as Fig. 10, but using DNNzandMizukifor sample selection.
thegalaxy-galaxylensingofthelensattherepresentativered-
shift𝑧landthesourcesampleatsourcebin 𝑧s0,andthecosmicshear signal of the source samples at source bin 𝑧s1and𝑧s2.
Considering only the Gaussian terms, the cross-covariance is
expressed as30
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]0.951.001.05B(R)
LOWZ
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS1
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS2blind ID=2, dempz
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]0.951.001.05B(R)
LOWZ
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS1
100101102
R[h−1Mpc]
CMASS2blind ID=2, mizuki
FIG. 22. Similar plot as Fig. 11, but using DNNzandMizukifor sample selection.
101102
θ[arcmin]−0.00050.00000.0005θξB[arcmin]
ξB,+
101102
θ[arcmin]
ξB,−
101102
θ[arcmin]−0.00050.00000.0005θξB[arcmin]
ξB,+
101102
θ[arcmin]
ξB,−
FIG. 23. Systematics test of cosmic shear signal, i.e. 𝐵-mode test for the DNNzand the Mizukifor sample selections.31
101102
θ[arcmin]−0.00050.00000.0005θξB[arcmin]
ξB,+:χ2/ν= 8.25/7,p= 0.31
101102
θ[arcmin]
ξB,−:χ2/ν= 7.55/7,p= 0.37
FIG. 24. Cosmic shear 𝐵mode test with the problematic region in GAMA09H field.
Cov[ˆΔΣ(𝑅𝑛,𝑧𝑙,𝑧s0),ˆ𝜉±(𝜃𝑚,𝑧s1,𝑧s2)]
=Σcr(𝑧l,𝑧s0)1
Ωs∫ℓdℓ
2𝜋𝐽2
ℓ𝑅𝑛
𝜒𝑙
𝐽0/4(ℓ𝜃𝑚)
×
𝐶𝑔𝜅s(ℓ;𝑧l,𝑧s1)
𝐶𝜅s𝜅s(ℓ;𝑧s0,𝑧s2)+𝜎2
𝜖
¯𝑛s0𝛿K
s0,s2
+𝐶𝑔𝜅s(ℓ;𝑧l,𝑧s2)
𝐶𝜅s𝜅s(ℓ;𝑧s0,𝑧s1)+𝜎2
𝜖
¯𝑛s0𝛿K
s0,s1
+2(𝛼mag,l−1)
𝐶𝜅l𝜅s(ℓ;𝑧l,𝑧s1)
𝐶𝜅s𝜅s(ℓ;𝑧s0,𝑧s2)+𝜎2
𝜖
¯𝑛s0𝛿K
s0,s2
+𝐶𝜅l𝜅s(ℓ;𝑧l,𝑧s2)
𝐶𝜅s𝜅s(ℓ;𝑧s0,𝑧s1)+𝜎2
𝜖
¯𝑛s0𝛿K
s0,s1
.(E1)
Heretheangularcorrelationfunctions 𝐶XYaredefinedinAppendixAofSugiyama et al.[70].𝜎2
𝜖/¯𝑛s0istheshapenoisetermof
sourcesampleinredshiftbin 𝑧s0,and𝛿K
𝑋,𝑌istheKroneckerdelta. 𝑅𝑛and𝜃𝑚arethe𝑚-thand𝑛-thangularbinofgalaxy-galaxy
lensingandcosmicshearrespectively. 𝐽𝑛isthe𝑛-thorderBesselfunction,and 𝐽0and𝐽4arefor𝜉+and𝜉−respectively. 𝛼mag,lis
the magnification bias parameter of lens sample 𝑧l. The last two terms are the contribution of the magnification bias effect. In
this paper, we have single source sample, i.e. 𝑧s0=𝑧s1=𝑧s2≡𝑧s, and hence the contribution from magnification bias effect to
be added on the covariance estimated from mock measurements in Sections VA and VIA is
𝛿Cov[ΔΣ(𝑅𝑛,𝑧𝑙,𝑧s),𝜉±(𝜃𝑚,𝑧s,𝑧s)]
=2Σcr(𝑧l,𝑧s)1
Ωs∫ℓdℓ
2𝜋𝐽2
ℓ𝑅𝑛
𝜒𝑙
𝐽0/4(ℓ𝜃𝑚)2(𝛼l−1)𝐶𝜅l𝜅s(ℓ;𝑧l,𝑧s)
𝐶𝜅s𝜅s(ℓ;𝑧s,𝑧s)+𝜎2
𝜖
¯𝑛s
. (E2)