The impact of static distortion waves on
superlubricity
Lukas Hörmann,∗Johannes J. Cartus, and Oliver T. Hofmann
Institute of Solid State Physics, Graz University of Technology, Graz
E-mail: hoermann@tugraz.at
Abstract
Friction is a major source of energy loss in mechanical devices. This energy loss may
be minimized by creating interfaces with extremely reduced friction, i.e. superlubricity.
Conventional wisdom holds that incommensurate interface structures facilitate superlubricity.
Accurately describing friction necessitates precise modeling of the interface structure. This,
in turn, requires the use of accurate first-principles electronic structure methods, especially
when studying organic/metal interfaces, which are highly relevant due to their tunability
and propensity to form incommensurate structures. However, the system size required
to calculate incommensurate structures renders such calculations intractable. As a result,
studies of incommensurate interfaces have been limited to very simple model systems or
strongly simplified methodology. We overcome this limitation by developing a machine-learned
interatomic potential that is able to determine energies and forces for structures containing
thousands to tens of thousands of atoms with an accuracy comparable to conventional first
principles methods but at a fraction of the cost. Using this approach, we quantify the
breakdown of superlubricity in incommensurate structures due to the formation of static
distortion waves. Moreover, we extract design principles to engineer incommensurate interface
systems where the formation of static distortion waves is suppressed, which facilitates low
friction coefficients.
Introduction
Friction causes a significant amount of energy
consumption in any moving mechanical device.
One way to minimize this energy loss is
creating interfaces with extremely reduced
friction, i.e. superlubricity. Superlubricity is a
state of ultra-low friction, defined by a
dynamic friction coefficient below 0.01.1,2Such
low friction coefficients can be realized in form
of liquid superlubircity,2,3using control or
actuation of the normal force,4–9thermally
activated drift,10–14or structural
superlubricity.15–24
Structural superlubricity is one of the most
promising strategies to achieve ultra-low
friction.1,25,26This type of superlubricity relieson structural incommensurability, where the
two surfaces (of a substrate and an adsorbate)
that meet at the sliding interface exhibit
sightly different lattice spacings. Using the
Frenkel-Kontorova model,27it can be shown
that for a surface with a lattice spacing of a
and a rigid adsorbate with a lattice spacing of
blateral forces become infinitesimal beyond a
critical value of a/b.28However,
incommensurate structures are often subject
to deformations that may be driven by the
forces occurring during interfacial sliding,29,30
or are a result of phase transitions,31–34or
static distortion waves.35–40The precise
quantification of the impact these
deformations have on the frictional properties
1arXiv:2304.12427v3  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  22 Dec 2023is of great interest for the design of
superlubricating interfaces.
Earlier studies have demonstrated a
breakdown of the superlubric state of an
incommensurate configuration of a graphene
flake on graphite as a result of a
rearrangement into a commensurate
structure.30Moreover, the impact of the
sliding speed, sliding direction, temperature,
and normal force has been studied for the
same system.41However, both studies
concentrated on a system consisting purely of
carbon atoms and employed classical force
field potentials. In fact, many theoretical
works on nanoscale friction have focused on
idealized systems and small unit cells,42which
are too small to capture mesoscale phenomena
such as static distortion waves. Conversely,
investigations of larger or more complex
systems have largely used classical force field
methods,43,44which do not account for
quantum mechanical effects at the interface,
such as interfacical charge transfer or
hybridization.45,46These quantum mechanical
effects impact the balance of interactions at
the interface that, for instance, governs
whether a commensurate or incommensurate
structure forms.47,48Therefore, structure
determination necessitates first principles
electronic structure methods, such as density
functional theory (DFT). Consequently, the
determination for energies and forces required
to calculate friction should be done using the
same level of theory. Due to their
computational cost, first principles methods
can describe continuous interface structures
only by using periodic boundary conditions
with small unit cells (containing only one or at
most a few molecules) which, in practice,
restricts these methods to commensurate
structures. Conversely, static distortion waves
exhibit periodicities that stretch across large
unit cells containing hundreds of
molecules.39,40This large system size renders
first principles computation for
incommensurate interfaces intractable. We
overcome these limitations by developing a
machine-learned interatomic potential (MLIP)
for pseudo-incommensurate organic/metalinterface systems (containing hundreds of
molecules per unit cell). This MLIP is trained
on state-of-the-art DFT computations allowing
us to account for quantum mechanical effects
in systems that contain thousands to tens of
thousands of atoms. By considering interfaces
of this scale we push the boundaries of first
principles studies on nanoscale friction to the
previously inaccessible mesoscale.
Using this MLIP, we investigate the static
friction coefficient of interfaces between metal
substrates and molecular adlayers
(organic/metal interfaces). At the nanoscale,
the dynamic friction coefficient (which is
commonly used to define superlubricity1,2)
and the static friction coefficient are related in
the following way: During sliding, the surface
atoms must overcome energy barriers,
distorting them from their equilibrium
positions. The maximal lateral force that is
required to overcome the barrier yields the
static friction coefficient. Once a barrier is
overcome, the distortions relax, whereby
mechanical energy is dissipated (converted
into other forms of energy).49,50The amount
of dissipated energy for a given sliding
distance results in the dynamic friction
coefficient. The static friction coefficient is
usually larger than the dynamic friction
coefficient,51–53which allows us to draw
conclusions on superlubricity based on the
static friction coefficient. We thoroughly
quantify the dependence of the static friction
coefficient on the type of commensurabilty as
well as static distortion waves by focusing on
two exemplary organic/metal interfaces:
Naphthalene on Cu(111) and
tetrachloropyrazine (TCP) on Pt(111).
Naphthalene is a simple polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon. It forms a variety of physisorbed
adlayer structures on the Cu(111) surface. In
experiment54,55and theory56this system
exhibits commensurate and incommensurate
structures at various thermodynamic
conditions. Moreover, there is experimental
indication that naphthalene on Cu(111) forms
static distortion waves.55TCP is a
heterocyclic aromatic organic molecule. On
the Pt(111) surface TCP forms chemisorbed
2and physisorbed adsorption states.57In an
earlier work31we found strong evidence that
chemisorbed TCP forms commensurate and
physisorbed TCP forms incommensurate
structures. The fact that both systems exhibit
both commensurate and incommensurate
structures, including static distortion waves in
case of naphthalene on Cu(111) allows us to
study the dependence of the frictional
properties on static distortion waves.
Methods
Machine-learned interatomic potential
for incommensurate structures. The
study of the static friction coefficient of
incommensurate interface structures requires a
number of energy (and force) evaluations for
systems containing hundreds of molecules per
unit cell. We determine the formation energy
Eformof a structure from the difference
between the energy of the adsorbed system
Esysand the energy of the pristine substrate
Esubas well as the energy of the relaxed
molecule in vacuum Emolmultiplied by the
number of molecules in the unit cell N.
Eform=Esys−Esub−N·Emol(1)
The high computational cost associated with
calculating these energies prohibits the sole
use of first-principles calculations. Therefore,
we employ an MLIP based on Gaussian
process regression (GPR) and the
smooth-overlap-of-atomic-positions descriptor
(SOAP)58to efficiently determine the energies
and forces that are necessary to calculate the
static friction coefficient. Combinations of
GPR and SOAP have been highly successful
for applications including small organic
molecules, molecular crystals, metals and
semiconductors.59–65To train these MLIPs we
use the energies and forces determined with
first principles computations. Separate MLIPs
are used for the individual systems: (A)
Naphthalene on Cu(111), (B) physisorbed
TCP on Pt(111) and (C) chemisorbed TCP on
Pt(111). All MLIPs are trained to achieve a
leave-one-out-cross-validation-room-mean-square-error (LOOCV-RMSE) that is smaller
than chemical accuracy, i.e. 40 meV per
molecule or 1 kcal mol−1on the training set.
The LOOCV-RMSEs for all MLIPs are shown
in the Supporting Information.
To improve the efficiency of the approach we
employ a two-step approach: In the first step,
we determine an approximate model for the
formation energy Eapprox
form. We split this
approximate formation energy into a
contribution from the molecule-substrate
interaction and one from the
molecule-molecule interaction:
Eapprox
form =X
iEi
mol−sub+Emol−mol(2)
The molecule-substrate interaction is
calculated from the sum of molecule-substrate
interactions of an isolated molecule on the
surface Ei
mol−sub. To determine Ei
mol−subwe
train an MLIP to predict the potential energy
surface (PES) of a single isolated molecule on
the substrate (see figure 3). For the
molecule-molecule interactions Emol−molwe use
two different approaches. In the case of
physisorbed TCP on Pt(111), we train an
MLIP on energies of free-standing layers of
molecule in vacuum (i.e. adlayer structures
whose substrate was removed). This gives an
approximate value for the molecule-molecule
interaction (often called monolayer formation
energy). This allows us to produce training
data for large unit cells which could not be
calculated if the substrate was included.
However, the molecule-molecule interaction
may be altered significantly due to
interactions with the substrate, such as charge
transfer or molecular deformations.31,56This is
the case for naphthalene on Cu(111) and
chemisorbed TCP on Pt(111), where the
interactions change qualitatively. For this
reason, it is more accurate to assume
non-interacting molecules ( Emol−mol= 0) in
the first learning step.
In a second step, we learn the residual ∆Eform
resulting from predictions of adsorbed adlayers
and the respective DFT calculations.
∆Eform=Eapprox
form−Eform (3)
3This two-step procedure allows (A) using
large unit cells in the first step to learn
molecule-molecule interactions of
pseudoincommensurate adlayers and (B)
learning the influence of the substrate in the
second step. This enables us to consider
adlayer structures with hundreds of molecules
per unit cell.
Computational structure determination.
To determine the most energetically favorable
pseudo-incommensurate structure of TCP on
Pt(111) (for naphthalene on Cu(111) the
structures are known form experiment54,55),
we perform global optimization using a
Metropolis algorithm. This approach is
reminiscent of the simulated annealing
optimization we used in a previous
publication.56For the current work, the
Metropolis algorithm allows a more efficient
sampling of structures containing up to 400
molecules per unit cell: The Metropolis
algorithm chooses a new
pseudo-incommensurate structure (with new
lattice parameters) and directly evaluates its
formation energy Eform(xi+1). The new
structure is accepted based on the following
equation, where Eform(xi)is the energy of the
previous structure:
p= min
1,expEform(xi)−Eform(xi+1)
kBT
(4)
Unlike our earlier simulated annealing
optimization, the Metropolis algorithm does
not perform full local geometry optimization
on each pseudo-incommensurate structure.
Forgoing these optimizations is merited in the
case of TCP on Pt(111), since the energy
gained through geometry optimization is in
the meV-range, i.e. pseudo-incommensurate
structures of TCP on Pt(111) are already
energetically and geometrically very close to
the respective optimized structure. Based on
the results of the Metropolis algorithm, we
optimize the most energetically favorable
pseudo-incommensurate structures. Thereby
we optimize the x,y,zcoordinate andorientation around the zaxis of each of the
hundreds of molecules in the structure using a
Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno
algorithm.66–69
Density functional theory calculations.
Computational data is reused from previous
work: (A) Data for naphthalene on Cu(111)
comes from SAMPLE: Surface structure
search enabled by coarse-graining and
statistical learning56and (B) data for TCP on
Pt(111) is taken from From a bistable
adsorbate to a switchable interface:
tetrachloropyrazine on Pt (111) .31The data
are openly available in the NOMAD repository
at doi:10.17172/NOMAD/2023.05.01-1 and
doi:/10.17172/NOMAD/2022.03.15-1.
Information about convergence tests and
computational settings can be found in our
earlier publications.
Results and discussion
As discussed in the introduction, structural
superlubricity relies on incommensurability of
the interface. Whether commensurate or
incommensurate structures form is governed
by the balance of molecule-substrate
interactions and molecule-molecule
interactions.47,48Strong molecule-molecule
interactions and a comparatively weak
corrugation of molecule-substrate interactions
allow maximising the energy gain from
interactions between molecules. This will most
likely lead to incommensurate layers.
Conversely, a large corrugation of
molecule-substrate interactions and
comparatively weak molecule-molecule
interactions force the molecules to remain in
energetically favorable adsorption sites. Any
energy gain from favorable molecule-molecule
interactions would be outweighed by the
energy penalty from unfavorable
molecule-substrate interactions. This leads to
commensurate layers. Concurrently, in an
incommensurate adlayer, the aforementioned
delicate balance of interactions may change
locally depending on the respective positions
4of adsorbate atoms and atoms of the molecule.
This may lead to the formation of static
distortion waves35–40which we expect to result
in a breakdown of structural superlubricity.
Structures of continuous adlayers. To
determine the static friction coefficient of
naphthalene on Cu(111) and TCP on Pt(111)
we must first know the interface structure(s)
of both systems. Therefore, we identify the
most energetically favorable structures of both
materials. Thereby we consider both
commensurate (one molecule per unit cell) and
pseudo-incommensurate structures. Truly
incommensurate interfaces contain an infinite
number of molecules per unit cell. Since each
molecule has a different adsorption site the
friction coefficient becomes zero in this case.
However, the electronic structure of an infinite
number of molecules is impossible to calculate
with first principles methods. Therefore, we
approximate incommensurate with large but
finite (pseudo-incommensurate) unit cells that
will exhibit a finite friction coefficient.
In the case of naphthalene, we can make use
of experimentally determined commensurate
and incommensurate structures.54,55Both
structures exhibit a similar molecular
orientation and only have slightly different
molecular periodicities. We approximate the
incommensurate structure with a
pseudo-incommensurate structure containing
150molecules per unit cell (see figure 1b).
The commensurate structure contains 1
molecule per unit cell (see figure 1a).
In the case of TCP on Pt(111), we are not
aware of an experimental structure
determination. Therefore, we use theoretically
determined structures based on the results
from an earlier publication.31We select
structures based on the most favorable energy
per molecule. The energy per molecule is the
appropriate measure since a sub-monolayer
coverage is a good assumption in nanoscale
friction experiments. To determine the
energies and forces of all structures (also those
of naphthalene on Cu(111)), we use an MLIP.
As an improvement over the MLIP used in our
previous publication31we now employ a
Figure 1: Close-packed adlayer structures
used to calculate static friction coefficients;
a) commensurate structure of naphthalene
on Cu(111); b) incommensurate structure of
naphthalene on Cu(111); c) commensurate
structure of chemisorbed TCP on Pt(111);
d) commensurate structure of physisorbed
TCP on Cu(111); e) incommensurate structure
of physisorbed TCP on Cu(111); unit cells
are shown in white, for in incommensurate
structures (b, e) the unit cells of the respective
commensurate structures (a, d) are shown in
black; Lattice parameters are given below:
l1/ l 2/ α /◦
a)11.7 7.6 70.9
b)11.5 7.9 68.4
c)7.3 9.6 70.9
d)7.3 9.6 70.9
e)7.5 9.2 66.7
descriptor based on SOAP58instead of radial
distance functions. For the sake of consistency,
we recalculate the formation energy for all
structures. Details and a comparison between
the MLIP and the old machine-leaning models
are given in the Methods Section and the
Supporting Information.
As stated above, TCP forms chemisorbed
and physisorbed structures on Pt(111). For
the present study, we use the physisorbed
structure with the most favorable formation
energy per molecule, which is
pseudo-incommensurate and contains 240
molecule per unit cell (see figure 1e. We
obtain this structure by using a
Metropolis-algorithm for global minimum
5search. This search reconfirms the findings of
our earlier study,31which has strongly
indicated that the most favorable physisorbed
structure is incommensurate. Additionally, we
include a chemisorbed and physisorbed
commensurate structure, both containing 1
molecule per unit cell as reference points in
our study. The unit cells of these
commensurate structures constitute the closest
possible match compared to the one-molecule
unit cell of the pseudo-incommensurate
structure (see figure 1c and d. We note that
our previous study31has shown that the most
favorable chemisorbed structure of TCP on
Pt(111) is commensurate.
Figure 2: Displacement vectors between the
molecules of the pseudo-incommensurate and
optimized structures of a) naphthalene on
Cu(111) and b) physisorbed TCP on Pt(111);
displacement vectors are scaled by a factor of 5
and color-coded for better visualization.
So far we have only considered structures
where all molecules are neatly arranged on a
grid. However, in the
(pseudo-)incommensurate structures the
molecules assume a great variety of different
adsorption sites – some of which may be
located on energetically unfavorable positions
of the PES (see molecule-substrate
interactions). Such molecules may move to
assume more energetically favorable
adsorption sites. Naturally, this will incur an
energy penalty from unfavorable
molecule-molecule interactions. Therefore,
such deformations will only occur to the extent
where the energy gains outweigh the penalties.
We expect that deformations of a significant
magnitude, such as static distortion waves,
have a significant impact on the frictional
properties of the interface. To investigate theoccurrence of such deformations, we use our
MLIPs to conduct geometry optimizations (of
the positions and orientations of the
molecules) of all molecules in the
pseudo-incommensurate structures (the lattice
vectors remain fixed). We will hereafter refer
to these optimized pseudo-incommensurate
structures as optimized structures. The
structure ofnaphthalene on Cu(111) deforms
significantly during the geometry optimization
and forms a static distortion wave, as shown
by the Moiré pattern in figure 2. Such Moiré
patterns were observed in an experimental
study55before, albeit with a different stripe
distance. This difference likely results from
the sensitive dependence of Moiré patterns on
the lattice parameters which may differ
between theory and experiment due to the
approximation via pseudo-incommensurate
structures and the uncertainty of the
underlying DFT calculations. Conversely, the
pseudo-incommensurate structure of
physisorbed TCP on Pt(111) remains largely
unchanged. The reasons for these behaviors
will be discussed in the next section.
Interactions of the molecules on the
surface. To understand why naphthalene on
Cu(111) forms static distortion waves and why
TCP on Pt(111) does not, it is instructive to
analyze the different interactions that
determine the stability of an adlayer structure.
The stability of adlayer structures on the
metal substrate is determined by their
formation energy, which we define as the
difference between the combined interface
system and the interface components (see
Methods Section). The formation energy can
be decomposed into molecule-substrate and
the molecule-molecule interactions,47,48,56
which we will analyze in the next two
subsections.
Molecule-substrate interactions. The
molecule-substrate interactions can be
described by the PES of an isolated molecule
on the substrate. The PES not only yields
insight into the formation of possible adlayer
structures, but it contains a good
approximation of the potential barrier an
6Figure 3: PES of the molecule-substrate and molecule-molecule interactions; panels a, b and c show
the PES of molecule-substrate of individual molecules; the PESs shown represent 2-dimensional
(x,y) cross sections of the 4-dimensional (naphthalene and physisorbed TCP) or the 5-dimensional
(chemisorbed TCP) PES; the molecular orientations match the orientation of the molecules in the
energetically most favorable close-packed adlayers and the energetically most favorable coordinate
is chosen; energies shown are relative to the indicated at the bottom of each subfigure; for clarity,
the first layer of the substrate is shown; (a) PES of naphthalene; (b) PES of chemisorbed TCP; and
(c) PES of physisorbed TCP; panels d, e and f show the PES of the molecule-molecule interactions;
(d) naphthalene on Cu(111); (e) TCP in the chemisorbed state; and (f) TCP in the physisorbed
state.
individual molecule has to overcome during
interfacial sliding. We determine the PES
using the MLIP. Thereby we coarse-grain the
PES (see Methods Section) and concentrate on
the most important degrees of freedom: These
are the x,yandzcoordinate of the center of
mass of the molecule, as well as orientation
(around the zaxis) and the bending (only in
the case of chemisorbed TCP) of the molecule.
The algorithm uses DFT-calculated energies of
50 to80 adsorption geometries as input andinterpolates between them. Details about this
approach and the accuracy of the prediction
can be found in the Methods Section and the
Supporting Information.
Figure 3 shows the xandydimensions of
the PESs for naphthalene on Cu(111) as well
as TCP on Pt(111). To determine this
2-dimensional cross-section of the PES we
chose molecular orientations that match the
orientation of the molecules in the
energetically most favorable close-packed
7adlayers (see figure 1. For the height zand the
bending, we chose the energetically most
favorable coordinates. Naphthalene on
Cu(111) is physisorbed and the molecular
backbone remains planar. The corrugation of
the molecule-substrate interaction of
naphthalene on Cu(111) amounts to
approximately 0.2 eV.
TCP on Pt(111) can either be chemisorbed
or physisorbed. The molecule-substrate
interactions of chemisorbed TCP on Pt(111)
exhibit a corrugation of approximately 2.0 eV,
as we have already shown in our previous
work.31This is a result of (A) the formation of
(site-specific) covalent bonds with the
substrate and (B) the strong distortion of the
molecular geometry. Conversely, physisorbed
TCP on Pt(111) remains flat and the
corrugation of the PES is only 0.04 eV.
Notably, this is one order of magnitude
smaller than the corrugation of naphthalene
on Cu(111). We tentatively attribute this
difference in corrugation to two factors,
originating from the adsorption height on the
one hand and the molecular structure on the
other. First, the adsorption height of
naphthalene on Cu(111) is significantly lower
(varying between 2.72Å and 2.80Å56) than for
physisorbed TCP on Pt (which varies between
3.27Å and 3.31Å31). In a recent publication,
we found the corrugation of the potential
energy surface generally decreases notably
with adsorption height.70Secondly, the
distance between the two aromatic rings of
naphthalene fits almost perfectly onto the
Cu(111) lattice constant. This allows both
rings to simultaneously adopt an “ideal”
position on the surface, and results in larger
energy penalties when the molecule is moved
away from it. Conversely, TCP does not fit
perfectly onto the Pt(111) surface and thus
exhibits no such distinguished adsorption
position.
Molecule-molecule interactions. As
mentioned earlier, the formation of a given
interface structure is governed by a balance
between the molecule-substrate and the
molecule-molecule interactions. To determine
the molecule-molecule interactions, we place apair of molecules (in isolation) onto the
surface. The first molecule is kept fixed while
the second one is placed at different xandy
positions neighboring the first molecule. For
the height zwe choose the mean adsorption
height and molecular orientations reflecting
the orientation of the molecules in the
energetically most favorable close-packed
adlayers (similar to figure 3). For each
position of the second molecule, we determine
the formation energy and subtract the
molecule-substrate interaction of both
molecules. Figure 3 shows the
molecule-molecule interactions for naphthalene
on Cu(111) and TCP on Pt(111).
Naphthalene on Cu(111) exhibits exclusively
repulsive molecule-molecule interactions,
which become nearly zero outside the zone of
Pauli-pushback. If the H-atoms of two
molecules are further apart then 1.0Å, the
interaction energies are equal to or smaller
than 0.2 eV. Adlayer structures with more
closely packed molecules are thus energetically
unfavorable. The fact that naphthalene has
small and uniform molecule-molecule
interactions would commonly indicate that its
adlayers are commensurate. However, whether
a commensurate or an incommensurate
adlayer forms depends on the relative strength
of the molecule-substrate and the
molecule-molecule interactions.47,48The
molecule-substrate interactions have an
equally weak corrugation of approximately
0.2 eV. This explains why naphthalene
adlayers form commensurate as well as
incommensurate structures in experiment.54,55
Chemisorbed TCP on Pt(111) also exhibits
largely repulsive molecule-molecule
interactions (Figure 3b). The energies lie
within a range of −0.2 eVto0.2 eV. Since the
molecule-substrate interactions of chemisorbed
TCP feature a corrugation of 2.0 eVthat is
approximately an order of magnitude larger
than the molecule-molecule interactions,
chemisorbed adlayers are commensurate, as
shown in our previous publication.31
Physisorbed TCP on Pt(111) shows regions of
repulsive and attractive molecule-molecule
interactions. The interaction energies are
8comparable in size to those of chemisorbed
TCP ( −0.2 eVto0.2 eV). Notably, attractive
molecule-molecule interactions of
approximately 0.1 eVcan be observed when
Cl- and N-atoms are in close proximity (this
configuration is indicated in figure 3f). These
attractive molecule-molecule interactions in
conjunction with the very small corrugation of
the molecule-substrate interactions likely lead
to a stabilization of (pseudo-)incommensurate
adlayers.
The connection of superlubricity and
incommensurability. In discussions about
structural superlubricity, one often finds the
general statement, that incommensurate
structures lead to vanishing lateral forces and,
hence, facilitate superlubricity.1While it is
true that a perfectly incommensurate interface
would lead to superlubricity, real systems
(including the ones discusses here) may form
static distortion waves. We gauge the impact
of these distortions on the frictional properties
by comparing the following structures: (A) We
take commensurate structures of naphthalene
on Cu(111) as well as chemisorbed and
physisorbed TCP on Pt(111) as a reference
point for the static friction coefficient. (B) We
investigate perfectly pseudo-incommensurate
(identical spacing for all molecules) structures
of naphthalene on Cu(111) and physisorbed
TCP on Pt(111) to determine a lower
boundary for the friction coefficients. These
pseudo-incommensurate structures closely
match the commensurate structures to allow a
direct comparison. (C) We analyze optimized
structures of naphthalene on Cu(111) and
physisorbed TCP on Pt(111), that is
pseudo-incommensurate structures whose
molecular x,yandzcoordinates as well as
orientations were allowed to relax and to form
– in case of naphthalene – static distortion
waves.
To determine the static friction coefficient,
we shift the different molecular adlayers across
the surface. The paths are given by the
primitive substrate lattice vector of the
(111)-surface. The different directions
(hereafter called primitive directions) areindicated in figure 4. We note in passing that
opposite directions appear symmetric due to
substrate symmetries, but are strictly not
symmetric due to the adsorbate layer. At
equidistant points along these paths, we
determine adsorption energies and forces
acting on the adlayer using the MLIP.
Thereby we apply a normal force individually
to all molecules in the unit cell. To find the
equilibrium adsorption height of each molecule
thezcoordinate of its center of mass is
optimized (under the impact of the vertical
force) using the MLIP. We note in passing
that the MLIP determines forces by taking the
(numerical) derivative of the interfacial PES
Eform. For instance, the lateral force Flatis
determined using Flat=−∇Eform·⃗ s, where ⃗ s
is the sliding direction.This approach is
commonly used in literature.71,72The lateral
force is a result of the interfacial PES
(molecule-substrate plus molecule-molecule
interactions). Its maximum value opposite the
shear direction (i.e. when moving “up” an
energy barrier) directly relates to the static
friction coefficient. The friction coefficient can
be determined from the relationship of the
lateral force Flatand the respective normal
force Fz:
µs=1
Fzmax( Flat) (5)
Figures 4 and 5 present a comparison of the
static friction coefficients of naphthalene and
TCP respectively. Thereby we compare
commensurate, pseudo-incommensurate and
optimized structures. For a clear
representation in figures 4 and 5 we convert
the vertical forces into vertical pressures. The
range of vertical pressures from 0.001 GPa to
0.1 GPa reflects experimentally used
pressures.1,24
Commensurate naphthalene on Cu(111)
exhibits large static friction coefficients of
approximately 5×100to5×102that are
isotropic in all 6primitive directions of the
111-surface (see figure 5). Conversely, the
pseudo-incommensurate adlayer of
naphthalene displays a strongly anisotropic
static friction coefficient. In [0,1,¯1]- and
9Figure 4: Dependence of the static friction coefficients for different structures of naphthalene on
Cu(111) and TCP on Pt(111) on the direction of displacement; The solid dots in the plot indicate
calculated static friction coefficients while the shaded area is an interpolation which should serve
as a guide for the eye.
[0,¯1,1]-direction it has a static friction
coefficient of approximately 2×10−2to
5×10−1that is nearly 3orders of magnitude
smaller than that of the commensurate
adlayer. In the other directions, the friction
coefficients are comparable to the
commensurate naphthalene structure. The
reason for this is twofold: First, the
pseudo-incommensurate structure of
naphthalene has its largest extent in the
[0,1,¯1]/[0,¯1,1]direction (see figure S15 in the
Supporting Information). Therefore, the
lattice mismatch in this direction is maximal,
which results in a minimal static friction
coefficient. Second, the PES of the
molecule-substrate interaction (see figure 3a)
exhibits “grooves” in the
[0,1,¯1]/[0,¯1,1]-direction. The molecule can
move along these “grooves” without
encountering large barriers. In the other
primitive directions, the barriers are higher,
leading to a larger static friction coefficient.
Finally, the optimized structure exhibits a
static friction coefficient comparable to the
commensurate adlayer. This behavior is a
result of the formation of static distortion
waves, where the molecules adjust their
positions (and orientations) to benefit fromfavorable molecule-substrate interactions (see
figure 3). Hence, molecules are generally close
to the local minima of PES, similar to a
commensurate structure. When the molecular
adlayer is slid over the substrate, the lateral
forces acting on individual molecules point in
the same direction, which leads to a larger
friction coefficient.
Chemisorbed TCP on Pt(111) has a very
large static friction coefficient, with lateral
forces being larger than the vertical force. We
note that we did not allow for the sliding of
the atoms of the metal substrate, which may
in the case of chemisorbed TCP offer less
resistance to lateral movement.
Commensurate physisorbed adlayers show
significantly lower static friction coefficients of
approximately 0.9×100to1.2×102, which
are2orders of magnitude smaller than in the
chemisorbed adlayer. In both cases, the
friction coefficients are largely isotropic.
Notably, commensurate adlayers of TCP have
a static friction coefficient that is half an order
of magnitude smaller than that of
commensurate adlayers of naphthalene. This
is a result of the small corrugation of the
molecule-substrate interaction, which is 1
order of magnitude smaller than that of
10naphthalene on Cu(111). The
pseudo-incommensurate adlayer of
physisorbed TCP exhibits anisotropic static
friction coefficients, with the minimum of
1.0×10−2to0.3×10−1being found in the
[1,0,¯1]- and [¯1,0,1]-directions. We attribute
this anisotropy to, (A) “grooves” in the PES
(see figure 3c) that allow the molecule to move
in the [1,0,¯1]- and [¯1,0,1]-directions without
encountering large barriers and (B) a maximal
lattice mismatch in the respective primitive
directions. These results are comparable to
those of a pseudo-incommensurate adlayer of
naphthalene. Compared to that the static
friction coefficient of the optimized structure is
minimally larger ( 5.0×10−2to6.0×100) and
the directional dependence becomes isotropic.
This friction coefficient is 2orders of
magnitude smaller than that of the
commensurate adlayer of physisorbed TCP.
Importantly, when comparing physisorbed
TCP and naphthalene we find that the static
friction coefficients exhibit a significantly
different behavior when optimizing the
respective pseudo-incommensurate structures:
In the case of physisorbed TCP the friction
coefficient increases by half an order of
magnitude, whereas, in the case of
naphthalene the friction coefficient increases
two orders of magnitude. This is because the
formation of static distortion waves in
pseudo-incommensurate adlayers of TCP is
suppressed by attractive molecule-molecule
interactions, in contrast to naphthalene
adlayers, where molecule-substrate
interactions are dominant.
We note in passing that the static friction
coefficients for all structures exhibit a
considerable dependence on the vertical
pressure. This has two reasons: First, friction
coefficients are calculated using equation 5,
where the vertical force (which results from
the vertical pressure) is in the denominator.
Hence, in the case of similar lateral forces, a
larger vertical force leads to a smaller friction
coefficient. Second, a larger vertical pressure
“pushes” the molecular adlayer closer to the
substrate. In an earlier work70we have shown
that the corrugation of the interfacial PESincreases when the adsorption height
decreases.
In summary, we find a strong impact of the
type of commensurability on the static friction
coefficient. As expected,
pseudo-incommensurate structures exhibit
ultra-low friction. Lower friction coefficients
could in principle be computationally obtained
with structures containing even more
molecules per unit cell, but we do not expect
that larger unit cell sizes impact the likelihood
of the formation of static distortion waves.
Static distortion waves cause a significant
increase in friction. The formation of
incommensurate organic/metal interfaces
requires a physisorbed state since chemisorbed
molecules are usually strongly bonded to a
specific site on the substrate. Moreover, static
distortion waves may occur if the
molecule-molecule interactions are small
compared to the molecule-substrate
interaction, as is the case for naphthalene on
Cu(111). The stabilization of an
incommensurate adlayer requires strongly
corrugated molecule-molecule interactions that
leads to distinguished molecular arrangement,
as is the case in physisorbed TCP.
Conclusion
In conclusion, we quantify the dependence of
the static friction coefficient on the type of
commensurability and in particular on the
formation of static distortion waves. This
requires the determination of the energetically
most favorable interface structures, which
depend on a balance of molecule-molecule
interactions and molecule-substrate
interactions. Because these interactions are
governed by quantum mechanical effects such
as interfacial charge transfer, we conduct our
simulations using DFT-level accuracy. This
precision allows us to model the formation
static distortion waves. However, static
distortion waves are a mesoscale structural
phenomenon, which necessitates system sizes
that are intractable with DFT alone. We
overcome this challenge by developing an
11Figure5: ComparisonofstaticfrictioncoefficientsfordifferentstructuresofnaphthaleneonCu(111)
and TCP on Pt(111).
MLIP capable of calculating energies and
forces of interface structures containing
hundreds of molecules per unit cell. Using this
MLIP, we investigate the frictional properties
of two exemplary organic/metal interfaces:
naphthalene on Cu(111) and TCP on Pt(111).
Naphthalene on Cu(111) is physisorbed while
TCP on Pt(111) can be either physisorbed or
chemisorbed. We compare static friction
coefficients of (A) commensurate, (B)
pseudo-incommensurate and (C)
geometry-optimized pseudo-incommensurate
adlayer structures of both interfaces. We find
that the optimized pseudo-incommensurate
structure of naphthalene on Cu(111) exhibits
static distortion waves leading to a static
friction coefficient of similar magnitude as in
commensurate structures. This is a result of
dominant molecule-substrate interactions
compared to the molecule-molecule
interactions. Conversely,
pseudo-incommensurate structures of TCP on
Pt(111) are stabilized by strongly corrugated
molecule-molecule interactions. Therefore, the
pseudo-incommensurate structure of TCP on
Pt(111) displays a static friction coefficient
that is approximately 2orders of magnitude
smaller than that of naphthalene on Cu(111).
Based on these results we can formulate design
principles to produce organic/metal interface
systems that display superlubricity: (A) The
formation of incommensurate structures
requires relatively uniform molecule-substrate
interactions, which are commonly only foundin physisorbed systems. (B) Perfectly
incommensurate structures, which
(potentially) exhibit superlubricity, are
geometrically stabilized in systems with
strongly corrugated molecule-molecule
interactions. On this basis, we can state that
in organic/inorganic interface systems,
incommensurability implies ultra-low friction
only in systems where dominant
molecule-molecule interactions suppress the
formation of static distortion waves.
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information contains details
on the MLIPs used for the calculations of
static friction coefficients in this work. We
explain the construction of the MLIPs and
test their accuracy. Additionally, we provide
further analysis of the molecule-molecule
interactions and convergence test for the unit
cell size of the pseudo-incommensurate
structures.
Data availability
The data supporting this research are openly
available in the NOMAD repository at
doi:10.17172/NOMAD/2023.05.01-1 and
doi:/10.17172/NOMAD/2022.03.15-1.
12Acknowledgements
Financial support by the UFO grant of the
Land Steiermark via the project “Schaltbare
Superschmierfähigkeit” is gratefully
acknowledged by LH. JJC and OTH gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the
Austrian Science Fund (FWF) via the project
Y1157-N36 “MAP-DESIGN”. Computational
results have been achieved using the Vienna
Scientific Cluster (VSC).
Author contributions
statement
Lukas Hörmann: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal
analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Funding
acquisition, Writing – original draft, Writing –
review & editing. Johannes J. Cartus:
Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing –
review & editing. Oliver T. Hofmann:
Conceptualization, Resources, Investigation,
Project administration, Funding acquisition,
Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
References
(1) Baykara, M. Z.; Vazirisereshk, M. R.;
Martini, A. Emerging superlubricity: A
review of the state of the art and
perspectives on future research. Appl.
Phys. Rev. 2018,5, 041102.
(2) Zhai, W.; Zhou, K. Nanomaterials
in superlubricity. Advanced Functional
Materials 2019,29, 1806395.
(3) Han, T.; Zhang, S.; Zhang, C. Unlocking
the secrets behind liquid superlubricity:
A state-of-the-art review on phenomena
andmechanisms. Friction 2022,10, 1137–
1165.(4) Socoliuc, A.; Bennewitz, R.; Gnecco, E.;
Meyer, E. Transition from Stick-Slip to
Continuous Sliding in Atomic Friction:
Entering a New Regime of Ultralow
Friction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004,92,
134301.
(5) Medyanik, S. N.; Liu, W. K.; Sung, I.-
H.; Carpick, R. W. Predictions and
Observations of Multiple Slip Modes in
Atomic-Scale Friction. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2006,97, 136106.
(6) Socoliuc, A.; Gnecco, E.; Maier, S.;
Pfeiffer, O.; Baratoff, A.; Bennewitz, R.;
Meyer, E. Atomic-scale control of friction
by actuation of nanometer-sized contacts.
Science 2006,313, 207–210.
(7) Gnecco, E.; Socoliuc, A.; Maier, S.;
Gessler, J.; Glatzel, T.; Baratoff, A.;
Meyer, E. Dynamic superlubricity on
insulating and conductive surfaces
in ultra-high vacuum and ambient
environment. Nanotechnology 2008,20,
025501.
(8) Ma, X.; Tan, X.; Guo, D.; Wen, S. Active
control of friction realized by vibrational
excitation: Numerical simulation based
on the Prandtl-Tomlinson model and
molecular dynamics. Friction 2023,11,
1225–1238.
(9) Shi, S.; Guo, D.; Luo, J. Micro/atomic-
scale vibration induced superlubricity.
Friction 2021,9, 1163–1174.
(10) Krylov, S. Y.; Jinesh, K. B.; Valk, H.;
Dienwiebel, M.; Frenken, J. W. M.
Thermally induced suppression of friction
at the atomic scale. Phys. Rev. E 2005,
71, 065101.
(11) Jinesh, K. B.; Krylov, S. Y.; Valk, H.;
Dienwiebel, M.; Frenken, J. W. M.
Thermolubricity in atomic-scale friction.
Phys. Rev. B 2008,78, 155440.
(12) Steiner, P.; Roth, R.; Gnecco, E.;
Baratoff, A.; Maier, S.; Glatzel, T.;
Meyer, E. Two-dimensional simulation
13of superlubricity on NaCl and highly
oriented pyrolytic graphite. Phys. Rev. B
2009,79, 045414.
(13) Perez, D.; Dong, Y.; Martini, A.;
Voter, A. F. Rate theory description of
atomic stick-slip friction. Phys. Rev. B
2010,81, 245415.
(14) Dienwiebel, M.; Verhoeven, G. S.;
Pradeep, N.; Frenken, J. W. M.;
Heimberg, J. A.; Zandbergen, H. W.
Superlubricity of Graphite. Phys. Rev.
Lett.2004,92, 126101.
(15) Liu, Z.; Yang, J.; Grey, F.; Liu, J. Z.;
Liu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Yang, Y.; Cheng, Y.;
Zheng, Q. Observation of microscale
superlubricity in graphite. Phys. Rev.
Lett.2012,108, 205503.
(16) Zhang,R.; Ning,Z.; Zhang,Y.; Zheng,Q.;
Chen, Q.; Xie, H.; Zhang, Q.; Qian, W.;
Wei, F. Superlubricity in centimetres-long
double-walled carbon nanotubes under
ambient conditions. Nat. Nanotechnol.
2013,8, 912–916.
(17) Song, Y.; Mandelli, D.; Hod, O.;
Urbakh, M.; Ma, M.; Zheng, Q.
Robust microscale superlubricity in
graphite/hexagonal boron nitride layered
heterojunctions. Nat. Mater. 2018,17,
894–899.
(18) Cihan, E.; Ipek, S.; Durgun, E.;
Baykara, M. Z. Structural lubricity under
ambient conditions. Nat. Commun. 2016,
7, 1–6.
(19) Benassi, A.; Ma, M.; Urbakh, M.;
Vanossi, A. The breakdown of
superlubricity by driving-induced
commensurate dislocations. Sci. Rep.
2015,5, 1–13.
(20) Ma, M.; Benassi, A.; Vanossi, A.;
Urbakh, M. Critical length limiting
superlow friction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015,
114, 055501.(21) Sharp, T. A.; Pastewka, L.;
Robbins,M. O.Elasticitylimitsstructural
superlubricity in large contacts. Phys.
Rev. B 2016,93, 121402.
(22) Berman, D.; Deshmukh, S. A.;
Sankaranarayanan, S. K.; Erdemir, A.;
Sumant, A. V. Macroscale superlubricity
enabledbygraphenenanoscrollformation.
Science 2015,348, 1118–1122.
(23) Berman, D.; Narayanan, B.;
Cherukara, M. J.;
Sankaranarayanan, S. K.; Erdemir, A.;
Zinovev, A.; Sumant, A. V. Operando
tribochemical formation of onion-like-
carbon leads to macroscale superlubricity.
Nat. Commun. 2018,9, 1–9.
(24) Liu, S.-W.; Wang, H.-P.; Xu, Q.; Ma, T.-
B.; Yu, G.; Zhang, C.; Geng, D.; Yu, Z.;
Zhang, S.; Wang, W., et al. Robust
microscale superlubricity under high
contact pressure enabled by graphene-
coated microsphere. Nat. Commun. 2017,
8, 1–8.
(25) Hirano, M.; Shinjo, K. Atomistic locking
and friction. Phys. Rev. B 1990,41,
11837.
(26) Shinjo, K.; Hirano, M. Dynamics of
friction: superlubric state. Surf. Sci.
1993,283, 473–478.
(27) Kontorova, T.; Frenkel’, Y. K teoriyi
plastychnoyi deformatsiyi ta podviynosti.
Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 1938,8, 89.
(28) Peyrard, M.; Aubry, S. Critical behaviour
atthetransitionbybreakingofanalyticity
in the discrete Frenkel-Kontorova model.
J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 1983,16,
1593.
(29) Filippov, A. E.; Dienwiebel, M.;
Frenken, J. W.; Klafter, J.; Urbakh, M.
Torque and twist against superlubricity.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008,100, 046102.
(30) de Wijn, A. S.; Fusco, C.; Fasolino, A.
Stability of superlubric sliding on
graphite. Phys. Rev. E 2010,81, 046105.
14(31) Hörmann, L.; Jeindl, A.; Hofmann, O. T.
From a bistable adsorbate to a switchable
interface: tetrachloropyrazineonPt(111).
Nanoscale 2022,14, 5154–5162.
(32) Panich, A.; Mogilyansky, D.; Sardarly, R.
Phase transitions and incommensurability
in the layered semiconductor TlInS2—an
NMR study. J. Phys. Condens. Matter.
2012,24, 135901.
(33) Stephens, P. W.; Heiney, P. A.;
Birgeneau, R. J.; Horn, P. M.;
Moncton, D. E.; Brown, G. S. High-
resolution x-ray-scattering study of the
commensurate-incommensurate transition
of monolayer Kr on graphite. Phys. Rev.
B1984,29, 3512.
(34) Kilian, L.; Stahl, U.; Kossev, I.;
Sokolowski, M.; Fink, R.; Umbach, E.
The commensurate-to-incommensurate
phase transition of an organic monolayer:
A high resolution LEED analysis of the
superstructures of NTCDA on Ag (1 1 1).
Surf. Sci. 2008,602, 2427–2434.
(35) Novaco, A. D.; McTague, J. P.
Orientational epitaxy—the orientational
ordering of incommensurate structures.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1977,38, 1286.
(36) Novaco, A. D. Theory of orientational
epitaxy in the self-consistent phonon
approximation. Phys. Rev. B 1979,19,
6493.
(37) McTague, J.; Novaco, A. Substrate-
induced strain and orientational ordering
in adsorbed monolayers. Phys. Rev. B
1979,19, 5299.
(38) Novaco, A. D. Theory of the structure
and lattice dynamics of incommensurate
solids: A classical treatment. Phys. Rev.
B1980,22, 1645.
(39) Meissner, M.; Sojka, F.; Matthes, L.;
Bechstedt, F.; Feng, X.; Müllen, K.;
Mannsfeld, S. C.; Forker, R.; Fritz, T.
Flexible 2D crystals of polycyclicaromatics stabilized by static distortion
waves. ACS Nano 2016,10, 6474–6483.
(40) Forker, R.; Meissner, M.; Fritz, T.
Classification of epitaxy in reciprocal and
real space: rigid versus flexible lattices.
Soft Matter 2017,13, 1748–1758.
(41) Filippov, A. E.; Dienwiebel, M.;
Frenken,J.W.M.; Klafter,J.; Urbakh,M.
Torque and Twist against Superlubricity.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008,100, 046102.
(42) Wang, J.; Wang, F.; Li, J.; Wang, S.;
Song, Y.; Sun, Q.; Jia, Y. Theoretical
study of superlow friction between two
single-side hydrogenated graphene sheets.
Tribol. Lett. 2012,48, 255–261.
(43) Samadashvili, N.; Reischl, B.;
Hynninen, T.; Ala-Nissilä, T.; Foster, A.
Atomistic simulations of friction at
an ice-ice interface. Friction 2013,1,
242–251.
(44) Falk, K.; Sedlmeier, F.; Joly, L.;
Netz, R. R.; Bocquet, L. Molecular
origin of fast water transport in carbon
nanotube membranes: superlubricity
versus curvature dependent friction. Nano
Lett.2010,10, 4067–4073.
(45) Hofmann, O. T.; Zojer, E.; Hörmann, L.;
Jeindl, A.; Maurer, R. J. First-principles
calculations of hybrid inorganic–organic
interfaces: from state-of-the-art to best
practice. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2021,
23, 8132–8180.
(46) Maurer, R. J.; Freysoldt, C.;
Reilly, A. M.; Brandenburg, J. G.;
Hofmann, O. T.; Björkman, T.;
Lebègue, S.; Tkatchenko, A. Advances
in density-functional calculations for
materials modeling. Annual Review of
Materials Research 2019,49, 1–30.
(47) Hooks, D. E.; Fritz, T.; Ward, M. D.
Epitaxy and Molecular Organization on
Solid Substrates. Adv. Mater. 2001,13,
227–241.
15(48) Mannsfeld, S.; Fritz, T. Understanding
Organic–Inorganic Heteroepitaxial
Growth of Molecules on Crystalline
Substrates: Experiment and Theory.
Phys. Rev. B 2005,71, 235405.
(49) Park, J. Y.; Salmeron, M. Fundamental
aspects of energy dissipation in friction.
Chemical reviews 2014,114, 677–711.
(50) Berman, D.; Erdemir, A.; Sumant, A. V.
Approaches for achieving superlubricity
in two-dimensional materials. ACS Nano
2018,12, 2122–2137.
(51) Costagliola, G.; Bosia, F.; Pugno, N. M.
Static and dynamic friction of hierarchical
surfaces. Physical Review E 2016,94,
063003.
(52) Huang, J. Y. Coefficients of Friction:
Static Versus Dynamic. ASME/IEEE
Joint Rail Conference. 2020; p
V001T03A001.
(53) Barrett, R. T. Fastener design manual ;
1990.
(54) Yamada, T.; Shibuta, M.; Ami, Y.;
Takano, Y.; Nonaka, A.; Miyakubo, K.;
Munakata, T. Novel growth of
naphthalene overlayer on Cu (111)
studied by STM, LEED, and 2PPE. J.
Phys. Chem. C 2010,114, 13334–13339.
(55) Forker, R.; Peuker, J.; Meissner, M.;
Sojka, F.; Ueba, T.; Yamada, T.;
Kato, H. S.; Munakata, T.; Fritz, T.
The complex polymorphism and
thermodynamic behavior of a seemingly
simple system: naphthalene on Cu (111).
Langmuir 2014,30, 14163–14170.
(56) Hörmann, L.; Jeindl, A.; Egger, A. T.;
Scherbela, M.; Hofmann, O. T. SAMPLE:
Surface structure search enabled by coarse
graining and statistical learning. Comput.
Phys. Commun. 2019,244, 143–155.
(57) Liu, W.; Filimonov, S. N.; Carrasco, J.;
Tkatchenko, A. Molecular switches from
benzene derivatives adsorbed on metal
surfaces. Nat. Commun. 2013,4, 1–6.(58) Bartók, A. P.; Kondor, R.; Csányi, G. On
representingchemicalenvironments. Phys.
Rev. B 2013,87, 184115.
(59) Bartók, A. P.; Payne, M. C.; Kondor, R.;
Csányi, G. Gaussian Approximation
Potentials: The Accuracy of Quantum
Mechanics, without the Electrons. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2010,104, 136403.
(60) Deringer, V. L.; Csányi, G. Machine
learning based interatomic potential for
amorphous carbon. Phys. Rev. B 2017,
95, 094203.
(61) De, S.; Bartók, A. P.; Csányi, G.;
Ceriotti, M. Comparing molecules and
solids across structural and alchemical
space. Physical Chemistry Chemical
Physics 2016,18, 13754–13769.
(62) Bartók, A. P.; Gillan, M. J.; Manby, F. R.;
Csányi, G. Machine-learning approach
for one- and two-body corrections to
density functional theory: Applications
to molecular and condensed water. Phys.
Rev. B 2013,88, 054104.
(63) Szlachta, W. J.; Bartók, A. P.; Csányi, G.
Accuracy and transferability of Gaussian
approximation potential models for
tungsten. Phys. Rev. B 2014,90, 104108.
(64) Bartók, A. P.; De, S.; Poelking, C.;
Bernstein, N.; Kermode, J. R.; Csányi, G.;
Ceriotti, M. Machine learning unifies the
modeling of materials and molecules.
Science advances 2017,3, e1701816.
(65) Musil, F.; De, S.; Yang, J.;
Campbell, J. E.; Day, G. M.; Ceriotti, M.
Machine learning for the structure–
energy–property landscapes of molecular
crystals. Chemical science 2018,9,
1289–1300.
(66) Broyden, C. G. The convergence of a class
of double-rank minimization algorithms
1. general considerations. IMA J. Appl.
Math. 1970,6, 76–90.
16(67) Fletcher, R. A new approach to variable
metric algorithms. Comput. J. 1970,13,
317–322.
(68) Goldfarb, D. A family of variable-metric
methods derived by variational means.
Math. Comput. 1970,24, 23–26.
(69) Shanno, D. F. Conditioning of
quasi-Newton methods for function
minimization. Math. Comput. 1970,24,
647–656.
(70) Hörmann, L.; Jeindl, A.; Hofmann, O. T.
Reproducibility of potential energy
surfaces of organic/metal interfaces on
the example of PTCDA on Ag (111). J.
Chem. Phys. 2020,153, 104701.
(71) Zhong, W.; Tomanek, D. First-principles
theory of atomic-scale friction. Phys. Rev.
Lett.1990,64, 3054.
(72) Zhang, L.; Tan, X.; Jiao, J.; Guo, D.;
Luo, J. Interlayer friction behavior of
molybdenum ditelluride with different
structures. Nano Research 2023, 1–8.
17TOC Graphic
large friction
small frictionstatic distortion waves
incommensurate structure
MLIP DFT
18