MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020) Preprint 11 October 2023 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.0
The Calar Alto Legacy Integral Field Area Survey: extended and
remastered data release
S.F. S ´anchez1, L. Galbany2,3, C.J.Walcher4, R.Garc ´ıa-Benito5, J.K. Barrera-Ballesteros1
1Instituto de Astronom´ ıa, Universidad Nacional Aut´ onoma de M´ exico, A. P . 70-264, C.P . 04510, M´ exico, D.F ., Mexico.
2Institute of Space Sciences (ICE, CSIC), Campus UAB, Carrer de Can Magrans, s /n, E-08193 Barcelona, Spain.
3Institut d’Estudis Espacials de Catalunya (IEEC), E-08034 Barcelona, Spain.
4Leibniz-Institut f¨ ur Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP), An der Sternwarte 16, 14482 Potsdam, Germany.
5Instituto de Astrof´ ısica de Andaluc´ ıa (IAA /CSIC), Glorieta de la Astronom´ ıa s /n Aptdo. 3004, E-18080 Granada, Spain.
Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the extended data release of the Calar Alto Legacy Integral Field Area (CALIFA) survey (eDR). It com-
prises science-grade quality data for 895 galaxies obtained with the PMAS /PPak instrument at the 3.5 m telescope at the Calar
Alto Observatory along the last 12 years, using the V500 setup (3700-7500Å, 6Å /FWHM) and the CALIFA observing strategy.
It includes galaxies of any morphological type, star-formation stage, a wide range of stellar masses ( ∼107-1012M⊙), at an aver-
age redshift of∼0.015 (90% within 0.005 <z<0.05). Primarily selected based on the projected size and apparent magnitude,
we demonstrate that it can be volume corrected resulting in a statistically limited but representative sample of the population of
galaxies in the nearby Universe. All the data were homogeneous re-reduced, introducing a set of modifications to the previous
reduction. The most relevant is the development and implementation of a new cube-reconstruction algorithm that provides with
an (almost) seeing-limited spatial resolution (FWHM PSF∼1.0′′).To illustrate the usability and quality of the data, we extracted
two aperture spectra for each galaxy (central 1.5′′and fully integrated), and analyze them using pyFIT3D. We obtain a set of
observational and physical properties of both the stellar populations and the ionized gas, that have been compared for the two
apertures, exploring their distributions as a function of the stellar masses and morphologies of the galaxies, comparing with
recent results in the literature.
Key words: galaxies: evolution – galaxies: ISM – techniques: spectroscopic
1 INTRODUCTION
The exploration of galaxy properties and the understanding of
their evolution along cosmological times has been significantly im-
proved in the last few decades by the combination of large cos-
mological surveys (e.g. York et al. 2000a; Driver et al. 2009), de-
tailed N-body and hydrodynamical simulations (e.g., IllustrisTNG
Springel et al. 2018), and in particular by the massive exploitation
of novel techniques like integral field spectroscopy (IFS, e.g. Cap-
pellari 2016; S ´anchez 2020). Recent IFS galaxy surveys (IFS-GS)
in the nearby universe ( z∼0.01-0.03), like CALIFA (S ´anchez et al.
2012), MaNGA (Bundy et al. 2015) or SAMI (Croom et al. 2012),
have uncovered new spatial resolved relations that rules the star-
formation and chemical enrichment in galaxies (e.g. Rosales-Ortega
et al. 2012; S ´anchez et al. 2014; Cano-D ´ıaz et al. 2016; Lin et al.
2019; S ´anchez et al. 2021a), defined which is their dynamical stage
(e.g. Cappellari 2016; Zhu et al. 2018), and uncovered the patterns
that define their mass assembly and metal enrichment (e.g. P ´erez
et al. 2013; Gonz ´alez Delgado et al. 2016; Ibarra-Medel et al. 2016;
Camps-Fari ˜na et al. 2021), among many other results. Those explo-
rations were possible thanks to the unique combination of (i) the
use of statistically representative and significantly large samples of
galaxies (from∼1000 to∼10,000 objects), (ii) a wide spectroscopiccoverage (from∼3600Å up to∼10,000Å) with intermediate resolu-
tions ( R∼1000-2000), (iii) the spatial coverage of a substantial frac-
tion of their optical extension (between 1.5 to 2.5 e ffective radius,
Re), and (iv) a spatial resolution of ∼1 kpc.
More recently, the advent of new IFS instruments (e.g., MUSE
Bacon et al. 2010) and techniques (e.g., SITELLE Grandmont
et al. 2012), that allow us to obtain natural seeing-limited spatial-
resolved spectroscopic information covering a wide field-of-view
(FoV , above∼1 arcmin2), has allowed to perform systematic ex-
plorations at a sub-kiloparsec scale. This has lead to a new wave
of IFS surveys and compilations, like GASP (Poggianti et al.
2017), AMUSING ++(L´opez-Cob ´a et al. 2020) and in particular
PHANGS-MUSE (Emsellem et al. 2022), that have improved our
understanding of di fferent processes, in particular those related with
the details of star-formation and quenching mechanisms and the na-
ture of di ffuse ionized gas (e.g. Rousseau-Nepton et al. 2018; George
et al. 2019; Vulcani et al. 2019; Belfiore et al. 2022; Pan et al. 2022;
Pessa et al. 2022). These explorations highlight the importance of a
improved spatial resolution when exploring galaxy properties using
IFS. However, despite of their outstanding results, the explorations
performed using MUSE or SITELLE present intrinsic problems due
to the limitations in the spectral coverage compared to those of pre-
vious IFS galaxy surveys: for instance, the spectral range covered by
©2020 The AuthorsarXiv:2304.13022v2  [astro-ph.GA]  9 Oct 20232 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
MUSE does not allow to sample important stellar spectral features
like the 4000-break or emission lines like [O ii]λ3727. Therefore, it
is important to determine if it is possible to improve the spatial res-
olution of already existing IFS GS data.
The seek for a improved spatial resolution and a complete sam-
pling of the covered FoV using IFS data lead to the development of
innovative observational techniques and cube reconstruction tech-
niques in parallel with the development of the IFS-GS. Most of the
surveys listed before (CALIFA, SAMI and MaNGA) adopted In-
tegral Field Units (IFUs) that integrate fiber bundles as the basic
systems to sample the observed objects in di fferent discrete aper-
tures (e.g., PPAK mode of the PMAS spectrograph Kelz et al. 2006;
Roth et al. 2005). By construction the spatial resolution provided by
those IFUs is limited by the fiber-size (convolved by the natural see-
ing). Furthermore, they present an incomplete coverage of the FoV
(hexagonal or circular in general), sampling ∼60-65% of it, depend-
ing of the fiber packing. To overcome those two limitations it was
proposed an observational scheme that includes a minimum of three
dithered exposures (S ´anchez 2006; M ´armol-Queralt ´o et al. 2011), to
cover the entire FoV , and a flux-conservative variation of the Shep-
ard’s interpolation method (Shepard 1968) to re-sample the discrete
observations into a regular sampled datacube (S ´anchez et al. 2012).
This scheme, with little variations, was adapted and adopted by
the main IFS-GS described before, establishing a more or less stan-
dard procedure. One of the main requisites of this procedure is to re-
construct the image preserving the flux, minimizing the co-variance
between adjacent data, and generating a PSF with the minimum pos-
sible structure. Due to that it was preferred to other schemes, like
drizzling (e.g., Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. 2015). However, this procedure
does not guarantee that it is recovered the best possible spatial res-
olution of the data, that in general is more limited by the average
distance between sampled points (Shannon 1948), and the natural-
seeing, rather by the size of the original fiber (what defines and limits
the minimum co-variance between adjacent spaxels). For this rea-
son, the spatial resolution achieved was just slightly better than the
original fiber size convolved by the natural-seeing PSF, ranging be-
tween 1.8′′(SAMI) and 2.4′′(CALIFA, MaNGA), despite the fact
that the average distance between adjacent fibers is of the order of
two times smaller in the case of SAMI than in the case of CALIFA.
In this article we present a remastered version of the extended
CALIFA dataset (Lacerda et al. 2020; Espinosa-Ponce et al. 2020),
in which we applied a new image reconstruction algorithm. We
re-reduce just the data corresponding to the low-resolution setup
(V500) and not those observed using the high-resolution one
(V1200), as those ones have not su ffered any significant increase
in the number of objects since the last data-release (S ´anchez et al.
2016b). The new data present a clear improved spatial resolution,
achieving a PSF size near to the limit imposed by the natural seeing,
preserving the photometry and the image quality. Similar improve-
ments in the spatial resolution have been achieved by recent studies
by adopting an a posteriori deconvolution scheme, wavelength-by-
wavelength, to the reconstructed datacubes for the MaNGA survey
(Chung et al. 2021). Despite of the clear improvements of that proce-
dure, it essentially inheritate all the issues of the original observing
procedure and adopted interpolation scheme ,as already noticed and
explored by Liu et al. (2020). In particular, those introduced by (i)
the large size and aperture of the interpolation kernel, (ii) the pos-
sible mismatch of the foreseen dithering scheme and the actually
adopted along the observations, and (iii) the inevitable problems in
deriving and correcting for the di fferential atmospheric refraction
(DAR) for di fferent dithered pointings (e.g. S ´anchez 2006; Garc ´ıa-
Benito et al. 2015; Law et al. 2015; S ´anchez et al. 2016b). Our pro-cedure involves a new interpolation scheme in which the spatial res-
olution is improved and the covariance minimized by implement-
ing a narrower interpolation kernel, taking into account the obser-
vational adopted dither and the DAR at the moment of the image
reconstruction, and correcting by the irregular shape of the PSF (in-
troduced by the dithering and discrete sampling of the fiber bundle).
Furthermore we introduce additional modifications to the existing
data reduction pipeline (S ´anchez et al. 2022b) that homogenize the
dataset in terms of spectrophotometric calibration, mask and clean
the foreground stars and improves the treatment of the vignetted and
low-transmission /broken fibers.
Finally, we perform an a posteriori selection considering the qual-
ity of the data. In addition to the prior selection based mostly on the
spatial coverage of the observed galaxies and their apparent magni-
tude, the selection function defines a sample of galaxies which main
properties are described. We illustrate the quality and usability of
the new reduced dataset for this final galaxy sample by exploring the
main properties of the stellar populations and ionized gas at two dif-
ferent apertures: (i) the central region and (ii) a fully integrated aper-
ture covering the entire FoV of the instrument. We present the main
distributions of those properties as a function of the stellar masses
and morphologies of the galaxies, comparing them with recent re-
sults in the literature.
The structure of this articles is as follows: (i) Sec. 2 describes the
data adopted in this study; (ii) the modifications introduced in the
reduction are described in Sec. 2.2, making a particular emphasis in
new image reconstruction algorithm (Sec. 2.2.5) and its implemen-
tation in the cube reconstruction (Sec. 2.2.6); (iii) the identification
of the galaxies and the derivation of their structural parameters is
described in Sec. 2.3; (iv) the analysis of the quality of the data is
introduced in 2.4, which leads to the selection of the final sample of
galaxies described in Sec. 3; (v) the demonstration that this sample
behaves primarily as diameter and magnitude limited sample, and
the estimation of the volume correction is introduced in Sec. 3.1;
(vi) the analysis performed on the new dataset is explained in Sec. 4,
summarizing the adopted spectral fitting procedure (Sec. 4.1), and
describing the main properties obtained for the stellar populations
(Sec. 4.2) and the ionized gas (Sec. 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6); (vii) the results
from this analysis are included in Sec. 5, describing the distribution
of the stellar population (Sec. 5.1) and ionized gas (Sec. 5.2) as a
function of the stellar masses and morphologies; (viii) the analysis
is also used to characterize the spectrophotometric calibration, ex-
plore the behaviour of the residuals from the spectral fitting (Sec
5.3), how they compare with the errors estimated by the reduction
and how the covariance a ffects their propagation (Sec. 5.4); (ix) a
summary of the main results is included in Sec. 5.4. How to access
to the delivered dataset and the results from the analysis is described
in the CALIFA webpage1.
Throughout this article we assume the standard ΛCold Dark Mat-
ter cosmology with the parameters: H0=71 km /s/Mpc, ΩM=0.27,
ΩΛ=0.73.
2 DATA
2.1 Dataset
We collect all the data acquired by the 3.5m telescope at the Calar
Alto observatory using the PMAS (Roth et al. 2005) IFS spectro-
1official: http://califa.caha.es/ , mirror: http://ifs.astroscu.
unam.mx/CALIFA_WEB/public_html/
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)3
−25 0 25
∆R.A.−40−2002040∆DEC
−2.5 0.0 2.5
∆R.A.−4−2024∆DEC
Figure 1. Example of the three dithering scheme adopted by the CALIFA
survey. Left panel shows the distribution of the 993 fibers using the nominal
offsets between the three individual pointings, that comprises 331 fibers each
one. Right panel shows a zoom of the central region for the same distribu-
tion. In both panels the center of each fiber is represented by a blue point,
and its corresponding aperture with a light-blue solid-circle. The typical dis-
tance between adjacent fibers ( ∼1.5′′), the area covered by only one fiber ( ∼2
arcsec2), and the overlapping region between adjacent fibers is evident in this
figure.
graph in the PPAK mode (Kelz et al. 2006), using the same observ-
ing strategy as the one adopted by the CALIFA survey. This is, using
the V500 grating, configured at the same goniometer angle, with the
same integrating time (900s per pointing2), and the same dithering
scheme as the one adopted by the CALIFA observations (see de-
tails in S ´anchez et al. 2012, 2016b). This configuration corresponds
to a low-resolution setup (R ∼850, instrumental FWHM ∼6.5Å), that
samples a wavelength range between 3745 and 7500 Å, covering an
hexagonal FoV of 74′′×64′′.
The science fiber-bundle of the PPAK IFU comprises 331 fibers
with a 2.7′′/diameter. Thus, the adopted dithering scheme provides
with 993 individual sampling points of the FoV , with an average
distance between adjacent fibers of ∼1.5′′. This involves an over-
lapping between the apertures of adjacent fibers, and therefore an
inevitable co-variance between the information when applying any
image reconstruction scheme using spaxels smaller than the origi-
nal apertures. This reconstruction is required to fully correct some
observational features, such as the DAR, as we will explain below.
An additional consequence of this observing strategy is the di ffer-
ential depth achieved across the FoV , even for a target with an uni-
form light distribution, as there are regions sampled by three, two
or one fiber, respectively. Figure 1 illustrates the final distribution
of the PPAK science fibers adopting the nominal o ffsets defined by
the CALIFA observing strategy, highlighting the overlaps between
adjacent apertures. This is relevant for the modifications introduced
in the data reduction.
We should recall that the original CALIFA survey observed a sub-
sample of the objects using a V1200 setup, that provides with a
higher spectral resolution covering only the blue regime of the opti-
cal spectral range. So far we have restricted the current analysis to
the V500 setup only, comprising a total of 1088 individual observed
galaxies. The final galaxy sample would be extracted from this com-
pilation based on (i) the quality of the data and (ii) the properties of
the galaxies themselves, as we will describe later-on.
2for a handful targets the exposure time was slightly larger, ∼1000-1200s2.2 Data Reduction
Data reduction (DR) was performed using a modified version of the
CALIFA DR pipeline, formerly used in the third public data release
(i.e., version 2.2 S ´anchez et al. 2016b). This new DR-pipeline, ver-
sion 2.3, comprises exactly the same reduction steps and procedures
of the former version up to the very last steps that involve the cube
reconstruction procedures. It follows the prescriptions described in
(S´anchez 2006), using a modified version py3D (PI: B. Husemann)
adapted to python3 as the basic reduction package.
The procedures in common with version 2.2 of the DR pipeline
involve (i) pre-processing the raw data to unify the data read by
the di fferent CCD amplifiers (gluing in an homogeneous orienta-
tion, removing the bias and normalizing by the GAIN), and cleaning
cosmic-rays, (ii) tracing the location across the CCD of the science
and calibration spectra corresponding to each fiber, deriving simul-
taneously the FWHMs of the projected light-distribution in both the
cross-dispersion and dispersion axis, (iii) an optimal extraction of
the spectra using the tracing and FWHM derived in the previous
step, correcting the data for the presence of stray-light, (iv) a wave-
length calibration and regularization of the data following a linear
wavelength solution (with 2Å per spectral pixel), (v) an homog-
enization of the spectral resolution along the wavelength range to
its nominal value of FWHM =6.5Å, (vi) a wavelength-dependence
fiber-to-fiber transmission correction, (vii) a flux calibration using
the standard transmission curve derived for the considered instru-
mental along the survey, (viii) a separation of the science, calibra-
tion and sky fibers, previous to the estimation and subtraction of the
night-sky spectrum for each dither pointing, and finally (ix) an in-
tegration of the three dithering exposures into a single raw-stacked
spectra (RSS) file, with each spectra /fiber associated to a particular
(relative) location in the sky via a position-table (PT). As the vari-
ance and the masked regions (broken fibers, cosmic-rays, CCD de-
fects and vignetted regimes) are propagated through the reduction,
the final product of this set of procedures is a set of three RSS frames
(flux, error and mask), each one comprising 993 spectra. All those
procedures been extensively explained in detail in previous articles
(S´anchez 2006; S ´anchez et al. 2012; Husemann et al. 2013; Garc ´ıa-
Benito et al. 2015; S ´anchez et al. 2016b).
We describe in more detail the modifications and new procedures
introduced in version 2.3 of the DR pipeline, aimed to address
different issues present on the data.
2.2.1 Preliminar astrometry
All eCALIFA observations were first reduced using version 2.2 of
the pipeline. This provides with a reconstructed datacube that adopts
a Shepard’s interpolation scheme, with a sampling spaxel of 0.5′′
(S´anchez et al. 2016b). We synthesize the g−andr−band images
from these datacubes, by convolving them with the corresponding
filter responses. Then, adopting the nominal coordinates of the tar-
gets, we download two images of 2′and 10′size for the same bands
from the PanStarrs (PS; Chambers et al. 2016; Flewelling et al. 2020)
data archive corresponding to the PS1 public data release3. Using
this dataset we perform a coordinates matching of the eCALIFA and
PSr−band images, selecting by hand the center of each object and
performing a baricenter estimation in a 10′′×10′′box. Then, we per-
form a refined image registration by (1) matching the spatial resolu-
3https://outerspace.stsci.edu/display/PANSTARRS/
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)4 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
Figure 2. Illustration of the registration procedure for each individual dithering. Left-Panel: Distribution of flux intensities in the r−band synthesized from the
331 spectra obtained for the galaxy NGC 5947, corresponding to the 1st pointing of the three dithered exposures. Middle-Panel: Similar distribution derived by
coadding the flux intensities in the corresponding PanStarrs r−band image for each aperture of each fiber, with the absolute location of the whole fiber-bundle
shifted to match the flux intensities with those shown in the left-panel (i.e., the shift that minimizes the χ2value between both distributions). Right-Panel:
χ2-map derived from the exploration of di fferent o ffsets, with the location of the minimum value highlighted with a yellow solid-circle
tion of the PS images ( ∼1.5′′) to that of the eCALIFA v2.2 cubes
(∼2.5′′), (2) reproject and resample the PS images to that of the
eCALIFA ones, using the reproject interp routine implemented in
thereproject python module4, and finally (3) register the eCALIFA
images to the PS one, by running the chi2shift routine implemented
in the image -registration python package5. This procedure is re-
peated for both the g−andr−band images, and the average WCS
recovered is adopted as the preliminary astrometry of the eCALIFA
datacubes.
2.2.2 Dither Registration
The previous procedure was adopted assuming that the o ffset be-
tween each dithering pointing follows the nominal /foreseen one.
However, it was already noticed along the CALIFA observations that
this is not always the case (e.g. Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. 2015). For this
reason in previous versions of the pipeline it was adopted a proce-
dure to (i) obtain an astrometric solution for each individual dither
pointing, (ii) determine the real o ffsets between the three dithering
exposures, and (iii) correct for the possible changes in the trans-
parency of the atmosphere between them. This procedure uses a
broad-band image as a reference. In previous versions of the reduc-
tion, it was adopted the SDSS r−band image (Garc ´ıa-Benito et al.
2015). This choice was valid for the galaxies in the original CALIFA
sample, since they were all extracted from the SDSS catalog. How-
ever, our extended sample comprises galaxies that have not been
necessarily observed by SDSS survey. For this reason we adopted
ther−band images provided by the PS survey, already described be-
fore.
The procedure is indeed very similar to the chi2shift algorithm
indicated before, but implemented for discrete dataset (i.e., not reg-
ular grided images). First, the integrated flux is synthesized through
ther−band filter using the RSS data of each pointing, obtaining 331
photometric measurements (one for each science fiber). Then, it is
estimated the same flux intensities from the reference image using
the fiber apertures at the expected location on the sky based on the
4https://reproject.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html
5https://pypi.org/project/image-registration/preliminar astrometry described before. Afterwards, we compare the
two photometric datasets, obtaining the corresponding χ2distribu-
tion. The procedure was repeated by shifting the assumed coordi-
nates of the target within a box of 20′′width in both RA and DEC,
following a regular grid with a step of 1.5′′(in both directions). This
generates a χ2map, which minimum value is considered as the first
guess of the ∆RAand∆DEC required to match the coordinates of
the target to that of the reference image. Finally the whole proce-
dure is repeated one more time by limiting the search around this
new coordinate using a smaller box 2.5′′width and a step of 0.125′′.
Once the o ffsets that minimize the χ2are found, the photometric
values are re-evaluated deriving the average ratio between the flux
intensities measured through the fibers and those derived from the
reference image.
Figure 2 illustrates this procedure, showing the r−band photomet-
ric values extracted from one dither exposure on the galaxy NGC
5947, the corresponding values extracted from the PS image at the
location that minimizes the χ2, and finally the χ2map derived from
the second iteration described before. This procedure provide with
(1) the best absolute astrometric solution for each pointing, (2) the
real o ffset between each dithering, and (3) a flux re-calibration of
each dither-pointing that anchors the photometry to that of the refer-
ence image, limiting any possible relative photometric fluctuation
between each individual pointing (due to variations in the atmo-
spheric conditions along the observing process).
2.2.3 Broken fibers
Along the full decade in which the data was taken the PPAK fiber-
bundle has su ffered an inevitable aging process. Due to that a set
of broken fibers has appeared. For the first observations, covering
the first four years, no fiber present a degradation of the transmis-
sion. Afterwards, three fibers present a continuous degradation. This
number increased to five fibers in the last two years of the collected
period, with a negligible transmission in the last observations. In
previous versions of the DR these fibers were identified by hand and
masked. In this new version we introduce a procedure that automat-
ically detects those fibers and replaces the spectra by an inverse-
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)5
distance weighted average-spectra of the 5th nearest (non broken)
fibers.
2.2.4 Vignetted regions
As extensively described in di fferent articles (e.g. S ´anchez et al.
2012, 2016b), a 30% of the fibers are a ffected by di fferent degrees of
vignetting. This e ffect degrades the transmission down to a 30-50%
in the extremes of the wavelength range, with a fully unvignetted
regime between 4240-7140Å, in the worst cases. Due to the par-
ticular correspondence between the location of fibers in the science
bundle and the entrance of the spectrograph (and final location in the
CCD), those spectra correspond to fibers located on an annular ring
at∼15′′from the center of the FoV . However, not all spectra in this
location are a ffected by vignetting. Thus, there are fully unvignetted
spectra spatially adjacent to any set of vignetted ones. Using this
property we apply a procedure similar to the one adopted to correct
the effects of broken-fibers, replacing the vignetted regime of the
spectra of those fibers a ffected by this e ffect by a flux-scaled version
of the inverse-distance weighted average-spectra of the 5th nearest
(fully unvignetted) fibers. We selected as vignetted those regions in
which the transmission is a 70% of the average transmission within a
considered fiber. Despite of the benefits of both procedures, we keep
a record of those modified regions in the propagated mask frame.
2.2.5 Image reconstruction
One of the main goals in the new reduction is to increase the spatial
resolution of the delivered datacubes. As indicated in the introduc-
tion, the intrinsic spatial resolution is limited more by the distance
between sampling elements (1.5′′, defined by the dithering pattern)
than by the size of those elements (2.7′′, defined by the aperture of
the fibers). However, in practice, the spatial resolution is strongly
affected by the method adopted to reconstruct the cubes /images and
the parameters adopted in the interpolation kernel. For instance, the
main goal of the method adopted in previous versions of the CAL-
IFA pipeline to reconstruct the cubes was to provide with a final
smooth PSF, without evident sub-structures from the dither pattern,
preserving the spectrophotometry (S ´anchez et al. 2012). To provide
with the best possible spatial resolution was not among its main pri-
orities. Indeed, other reconstructions procedures that produce better
spatial resolutions has been explored before. For instance, Garc ´ıa-
Benito et al. (2015) experimented with the use of the drizzle method
(Fruchter & Hook 2002) in the CALIFA data, which produces a
sharper PSF, but with a considerable amount of sub-structures (i.e., a
PSF with secondary peaks). More recently, Liu et al. (2020) adopted
a covariance-regularized reconstruction procedure to reconstruct the
cubes from the MaNGA dataset. This method slightly improves the
spatial resolution and limit considerably the covariance between ad-
jacent spaxels. Finally, Chung et al. (2021) performed a spatial de-
convolution of the original MaNGA cubes, without introducing a
new image reconstruction procedure, by adopting the SDSS images
a guidance for the deconvolution process. The method we describe in
this section introduces a modification in the image reconstruction al-
gorithm, following Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. (2015) and Liu et al. (2020),
with the ultimate goal of improving the spatial resolution. We finally
implement a deconvolution process just to mitigate the e ffects of a
complex PSF. This deconvolution improves slightly the spatial reso-
lution, but it is not the main reason of the achieved /improved spatial
resolution. In this regard our method departs considerably from the
one introduced in Chung et al. (2021).As indicated before, the image reconstruction in previous version
of the pipeline adopted a modified version of the Shepard’s inter-
polation method, being broadly adopted in the reduction of fiber-
based IFS datasets that adopts a dither scheme (with certain varia-
tions Law et al. 2015; Green et al. 2018). This method assign to a
certain spaxel6a flux that results from the weighted-sum of all fluxes
from all fibers within a certain distance:
fi,j=Ni,jX
kfAwk,i,jFkwhere dk|(i,j)<dlim (1)
where kis the index of the fibers contributing to the flux in the spaxel
(i,j), denoted as fi,j. Only those fibers within a certain distance to the
considered spaxel, dlim, are considered to contribute to its flux. fAis
a scaling parameter corresponding to the ratio between the area cov-
ered by each original fiber and the one covered by the final spaxel. In
previous versions of the pipeline this factor was 5.64, as the PPAK
fibers have a diameter of 2.7′′and the final spaxel a size of 1′′×1′′.
Fkis the flux within a certain fiber, and wk,i,jis the weight (or inter-
polation kernel):
wi,j,k=exp−0.5 dk|(i,j)
σ!α
(2)
where dk|(i,j)is the distance between the fiber kand the considered
spaxel,σis a parameter controlling the width of the kernel, and α
is a parameter controlling its shape. Ni,jis just the normalization
factor, i.e., the inverse of sum of all wi,j,kcontributing to the flux in
the spaxel (i,j).
The adopted parameters for the image reconstruction changed
along the di fferent implementations of the data reduction. In early
versions of the DR, we adopted the following values: σ=1.0′′,
α=1.0 and dlim=5′′(ver. 1.2 and 1.3 S ´anchez et al. 2012; Huse-
mann et al. 2013). Di fferent explorations lead to a tuning of those
parameters, that produce an sharper image and a lower co-variance
between adjacent spaxels: σ=0.75′′,α=1.0 and dlim=3.5′′(ver.
1.5 and 2.2 Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. 2015; S ´anchez et al. 2016b). The
FWHM of the reconstructed cubes was estimated using the same
algorithm described above, when describing the preliminar astrom-
etry: the r−band image extracted from the IFS data was compared,
by aχ2, with a reference r−band image, convolved with a sequence
of Gaussian functions of di fferent width. The best-matched image
provides with an estimation of the FWHM of the PSF. In average it
was found a value of ∼2.4′′/FWHM for the DR3 CALIFA dataset
(S´anchez et al. 2016b).
To optimize the procedure it is required to explore which are the
set of parameters that reproduce better the original image (i.e., the
one provided by the natural seeing). Since we do not have a direct
image in a wavelength covered by the spectroscopic data taken si-
multaneously to the observations, once again, we adopted as a guid-
ing images the PS g−andr−band images. On these images we simu-
late the observations performed using the CALIFA setup, following
the same procedure described before i.e., we extracted the flux corre-
sponding to each fiber, following the nominal dither pattern). Then,
we use this simulated observation to explore di fferent image recon-
struction schemes. The procedure is illustrated using NGC 5947 as
an archetype CALIFA galaxy. Figure 3 shows how the original im-
age of this galaxy ( apanel) compared with both the flux distribu-
tion through the three dithered exposures ( bpanel) and the recon-
structed image using the parameters adopted in the previous version
6understood as the final sampling element of the outcome datacube
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)6 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
r-band PS imagea)
PPAK dithered ﬁbersb)
σ=0.75”;α=1.0c)
σ=0.25”;α=3.0d)
σ=0.5”;α=1.25e)
over-deconvolvedf)
ﬂat-ﬁeldedg)
relative residualh)
−2 0
−2 0
−2 0
−2 0
−2 0
−2 0
−2 0
−0.25 0.00 0.25
Figure 3. Illustration of the new image reconstruction procedure. Each panel shows: (a) PS r−band image of the archetype galaxy NGC 5947; (b) discrete
distribution of the r−band flux intensities extracted for the 993 individual spectra corresponding to the three dithering pointings observed with the 331 PPAK
science fibers (color solid-circles). Note the overlapping between adjacent fibers due to the adopted dithering scheme; (c) r−band reconstructed image using the
distribution of flux intensities shown in panel busing the interpolation scheme and parameters adopted in the previous version of the data-reduction (i.e., Eq. 1,
withσ=0.75′′andα=1.0); (d) similar reconstructed image using a sharper interpolation kernel (i.e., Eq. 1, with σ=0.25′′andα=3.0); (e) similar reconstructed
image using the parameters finally adopted in current version of the data reduction (i.e., Eq. 1, with σ=0.5′′andα=1.25); (f) image obtained by deconvolving
the image shown in panel eusing a large number of iterations in the deconvolution algorithm as indicated in the text. Note the patchy distribution with unreal
sub-structures generated by the deconvolution algorithm; (g) final image generated by the full reduction algorithm, including the final flat-fielding procedure
introduced in (Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. 2015); (h) residual image obtained by subtracting the final reconstructed image shown in panel gto the PS r−band image
shown in panel a(matching the spatial resolutions), relative to this later image. The di fference between both images is below a ∼10% for most of the FoV , with
larger di fferences found in the very central and very outer regions ( ∼30%).
of the DR ( cpanel). The resolution degradation is clearly appreci-
ated when using the same parameters for the interpolation Kernel
(eq. 2) adopted in the previous reductions of the CALIFA dataset.
We explore a wide range of values for the considered parame-
ters (0.15< σ < 1.5;∆σ=0.15, 0.75< α < 4.0;∆α=0.25), finding
that the FWHM of the reconstructed image increases with σ(i.e.,
the kernel width), and decreases with α(i.e., the kernel sharpness).
Thus, in principal the smaller σand the largest αmay produce the
best reconstructed image in terms of its PSF FWHM (i.e., a bet-
ter resolution). Indeed, for certain combination of parameters the
recovered FWHM is well below the one obtained using the nomi-
nal parameters adopted in the previous reductions of the CALIFA
dataset (i.e., FWHM <2.5′′). However, resolution is not the only pa-
rameter to take in place when weighting the quality of the recon-
structed image. A narrow and sharp interpolation kernel produces a
reconstructed image with a lot of non-realistic substructures, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 3 dpanel (σ=0.25′′andα=3.0). Those artifacts
can be characterized by the standard deviation of the residual image
derived from subtracting the best-matched image (i.e., the reference
image convolved with a Gaussian kernel to match the resolutions) to
the reconstructed image. As indicated before, this standard deviation
increases as sharper is the interpolation kernel. Thus, the optimal pa-
rameters for the image reconstruction procedure result from a com-promise between minimizing both the FWHM and the standard de-
viation of the residuals. This is achieved when σ=0.5′′andα=1.25.
Fig 3, panel e, shows the reconstructed image when adopting both
values for the interpolation kernel. The improvement in the resolu-
tion with respect to the image obtained when using the parameters
adopted in the previous version of the reduction (panel c) is evident
(FWHM c∼2.5′′vs.FWHM e∼1.8′′). However, the resolution is
still worse than that of the original image (panel a,FWHM a∼1.0′′),
and lower than the ultimate goal based on the sampling of the dither-
ing scheme (∼1.5′′). Furthermore the PSF present a complex struc-
ture, due to the adopted reconstruction scheme.
In order to improve furthermore the resolution and mitigate the
presence of secondary peaks /substructures in the reconstructed PSF
when using a sharp interpolation kernel (Fig. 3, panels (d) and (e)
we followed an approach somehow similar to the one adopted by
(Chung et al. 2021), i.e., we perform a deconvolution of the recon-
structed image with a PSF. The choose of a realistic PSF is very
important when applying a deconvolution procedure. Therefore, a
particular care was taken during this process. First, we assume that
the natural seeing PSF in the focal plane of the 3.5m telescope at
Calar Alto is well represented by a Gaussian function, following
S´anchez et al. (2008). Introducing more complex shapes, like a Mof-
fat function, does not increases significantly the characterization of
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)7
the shape of the PSF (e.g. Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. 2015). Considering
the average seeing in the observatory ( ∼0.9′′S´anchez et al. 2007),
and the turbulence introduced by the dome ( ∼10% in the best case
S´anchez et al. 2008), a Gaussian function with a width of σ=0.5′′
(FWHM∼1.3′′) is indeed a good representation of the typical PSF
at the entrance of the IFU. However, this if not by far a good rep-
resentation of the PSF for the reconstructed images, which shape
and structure are vastly dominated by the fiber-size, fiber-bundle
pattern, dithering scheme and adopted image reconstruction proce-
dure (e.g. S ´anchez 2006). Thus, to generate a realistic PSF we fol-
lowed the same procedure adopted to generate the reconstructed im-
age, i.e., we extract the flux through the dithered-fiber apertures and
we adopted the same image reconstruction procedure and same pa-
rameters. Then we deconvolve the image using the Richardson-Lucy
algorithm (Richardson 1972)7implemented in the restoration mod-
ule of the scikit python module. We should note that this procedure
involves a further optimization, as this algorithm requires two pa-
rameters. One defines a threshold below which the values are set to
zero to reduce the noise (and ghost generation) in the deconvolved
image. The other is the number of iterations for which the algorithm
is performed. A larger number of iterations generates sharper im-
ages. However it produces, again, a PSF with unreal substructures
and ghosts due to noise aggregation. This is appreciated in Fig 3,
panel f, where it is shown the result of a deconvolution adopting a
very low threshold level corresponding to 1% of the 1 σnoise level,
and a large number of 50 iterations of the deconvolution algorithm.
This is an example of an over-deconvolution of the data, that intro-
duces unreal sub-structures in the PSF, degrading the image quality.
We followed a procedure similar to the one adopted to define the
optimal parameters of the image reconstruction kernel to estimate
the optimal parameters to adopt in the deconvolution procedure.
Thus, we run the algorithm covering an ample range of thresholds
(from 10 to 0.01 σ) and number of iterations (from 1 to 100), evalu-
ating final FWHM of the reconstructed image and the standard devi-
ation of the residual ( σres) when comparing with the original image.
To evaluate both the FWHM and σreswe convolve the original im-
age with a set of Gaussian functions of variable width and compare
them with the reconstructed images using a χ2criterion. The image
that minimize this χ2provides with the FWHM of the final PSF (i.e.,
the quadratic propagation of the FWHM of the PSF of the original
image and the width of the convolved Gaussian function), and the
σres(the standard deviation of the residual of the di fference between
the reconstructed and the convolved images). We find that a thresh-
old corresponding to ∼2σthe noise level, and just 5 iterations of
the deconvolution algorithm provides the best compromise between
minimizing both the FWHM and σres. As described before larger
(lower) number of iterations decreases (increases) the FWHM, but
σresincreases (decreases). The final FWHM estimated for panel (f),
is 1.65′′, which is significant improvement with respect to the value
prior to deconvolving the image ( ∼8% FWHM reduction). However,
we remind the reader that most of the improvement in the resolution
was a result of the selection of a new set of parameters for the inter-
polation kernel, as indicated before ( ∼28% FWHM reduction)
As a final refinement, following Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. (2015), we
generate a flat-field as the ratio between the convolved PS image
(i.e., PSF-matched) and the reconstructed image from the decon-
volved spectral data, what removes any final defect. The application
of this flat-field solve some minor photometric di fferences between
7https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richardson-Lucy_
deconvolutionTable 1. Description of the DRSCUBE file.
HDU EXTENSION Dimensions1Format
0 PRIMARY (159, 151, 1877) float64
1 ERROR (159, 151, 1877) float32
2 ERRWEIGHT (159, 151, 1877) float32
3 BADPIX (159, 151, 1877) uint8
4 FLAT (159, 151) float64
5 GAIA MASK (159, 151) int64
(1) The actual spatial dimensions may change galaxy by galaxy, depending
on the real dither scheme adopted during the observations.
the three dithering pointings and anchor the absolute photometry
to the reference one (i.e. PS), being already discussed in detail in
Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. (2015) and S ´anchez et al. (2016b). Fig. 3 in-
cludes the final reconstructed image once applied the full procedure
(panel g) and the residual with respect to the original image (panel
h). The comparison between the reconstructed images correspond-
ing to the procedure adopted in the previous data-reduction (Fig.
3, panel c), and the new procedure (Fig. 3, panel g), illustrates the
clear improvement of the new procedure. Quantitatively, the recon-
structed PSF has a FWHM of ∼1.65′′, for the archetype image that
illustrates the procedure, that has an original (natural seeing) PSF
FWHM of∼1.4′′. We should note that this FWHM is not a ffected
by the flat-fielding process in any way. This is a significant improve-
ment compared to the FWHM of the PSF provided by the previous
version of the image reconstruction procedure ( ∼2.4′′). The major
drawback of the adopted procedure, as indicated before, is that it re-
lies on the quality of the reference image. Therefore, any defect of
problem on that image is propagated to the final reconstructed one
due to the flat-fielding procedure.
2.2.6 Cube reconstruction
The new image reconstruction procedure described before is fully
implemented in the data reduction in the following way: (1) for each
wavelength along the sampled range it is generated a reconstructed
image using the corresponding monochromatic flux intensities sam-
pled by dithered fibers, taking into account the o ffsets introduced by
the DAR, and using the interpolation kernel defined in Eq. 2 and
the optimal values for the σandαparameters obtained from the ex-
periment described before; (2) the resulting image is deconvolved
using a PSF generated using the same reconstruction algorithm; (3)
along this process and error propagation is performed adopting a
Monte-Carlo iteration with 100 loops, perturbing the flux intensi-
ties measured through the fibers and repeating steps (1) and (2). The
mean image from this MC iteration and the corresponding standard
deviation are stored, being adopted as the reconstructed image and
error at the considered wavelength; (4) once this procedure is iter-
ated over all the wavelength range a datacube is obtained. From this
datacube we generate the g−andr−band images, by convolving the
corresponding filter curves with the spectra at each spaxel. Those
images are used to derive the final flat-field and FWHM, following
the procedure described in the previous subsections (i.e., they are
compared based on a χ2with a set of Gaussian convolved PS g−
andr−band images). The procedure to estimate the FWHM was in-
troduced and described in detail in Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. (2015), and
adopted in further IFS studies (e.g. Law et al. 2015; Yan et al. 2016;
S´anchez et al. 2016b). This methodology is robust, as it was demon-
strated in Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. (2015) and S ´anchez et al. (2016b) by
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)8 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
comparing its results with those obtained by measuring the FWHM
directly on cube-reconstructed images corresponding to calibration
stars. We adopted the r−band derived flat-field for all the wave-
lengths, as we find not significant di fference in using this one, the
g−band one or a combination of both. We should highlight that the
flat-field is purely monochromatic, and it is not fine tuned for each
different wavelength. We note again that this flat-field was already
introduced as part of the reduction of the CALIFA data in Garc ´ıa-
Benito et al. (2015), being applied in the previous version of the
data-reduction (S ´anchez et al. 2016b)..
2.2.7 Foreground stars masking
Following the procedure described in S ´anchez et al. (2022b), we
search for the possible foreground field stars in the FoV of the ana-
lyzed datacubes. We use the Gaia DR3 catalog8(Gaia Collaboration
et al. 2016, 2021), that comprises the most complete and accurate
survey of stars covering the full sky, at least regarding its astromet-
ric solution. We selected only those sources with a measured paral-
lax at least five times higher the reported uncertainty, to ensure that
they are Galactic stars. Then, we generate a mask covering a cir-
cular aperture of 2.5′′around each star with the spatial size format
and astrometric solution of the reduced datacube. This mask will be
used later on when analyzing the data. We found a foreground star
in∼25% of the datacubes.
2.2.8 Format of the reduced data
For a more simple distribution, the final outcome of the reduction is
stored in a single file for each observed object. We adopted a format
similar to the one implemented in the CALIFA DR3 (S ´anchez et al.
2016b), and other IFS Galaxy Survey released (e.g., MaNGA for-
mat Abdurro’uf et al. 2021). It consists on a multi-extension FITS-
FILE, in which each extension comprises a particular outcome of
the reduction. Table 1 lists each of the extensions in the file, their
format and dimensions. The first four extensions consists of a set
of datacubes. The first one (PRIMARY) comprise the flux intensity
spectra corresponding to each spaxel, with the corresponding error
stored in the second extension (ERROR). The required weights to
include in error propagation due the di fferent coverage of the dither
pattern (i.e., due to the fact that each spaxel is covered by a di fferent
number of fibers), as described in Sec. 2, is included in the third ex-
tension (ERRWEIGHT). The fourth extension (BADPIX) store the
bad-pixel mask. The two final extensions store two images, the flat-
fielding described in Sec. 2.2.6, and the mask of the foreground stars
described in Sec. 2.2.7.
These files are named after the original object name included in
the PMAS software during the observations, adopting the nomencla-
ture CUBENAME.V500. drscube .fits.gz, where CUBENAME cor-
responds to the OBJECT header in the original FITSFILE. We dis-
tribute these datacubes in the following web page: http://ifs.
astroscu.unam.mx/CALIFA/V500/v2.3/reduced/ , comprising
a total of 1116 datacubes.
2.3 Galaxies segmentation and structural properties
In some cases more than one galaxy is observed within the FoV of
the instrument. As one of the goals of this exploration is to provide
with a final galaxy sample, including its individual observational
8https: //www.cosmos.esa.int /web/gaia/dr3Table 2. Description of the QC file.
column value meaning
Name cubename Prefix of the reduced datacube
QCflag 0 OK: Everything seems to be ok in the data.
1 BAD: The data are bad for a reason indicated
below. They should not be used.
2 WARNING: The data present some problems,
but they can be used for most science cases.
Reason 0 No QC issue found.
1 The targets galaxy is considerably larger than the
FoV of the instrument.
2 Severe problems with the spectra, very low-S /N,
problems with the sky-subtraction.
3 Non severe problems with the spectra, a ffecting
just a small region within the FoV .
4 The galaxy is too small compared to the FoV , it is
essentially unresolved.
5 Repeated observation of the same galaxy.
6 FoV crowded with field stars a ffecting a significant
fraction of the FoV .
7 A single very bright field star is a ffecting a
significant fraction of the FoV .
8 Evident problem in the absolute spectro-
photometric calibration.
9 Problem with the image reconstruction
procedure or defects in the PS g−band image.
10 Spectroscopic and photometric derived stellar
masses do not match.
11 The stellar population analysis does not provide
a reliable result.
Multiple 0 Only one galaxy detected in the FoV .
1 Multiple galaxies detected in the FoV .
(and physical) properties, we have performed an identification of
the objects in the field, segregating them, to treat them separately in
further analysis. For doing so, we make use of the routines included
in the photutils python package. We obtain from the PS survey a
square 10′sizeg−band image centred in location of each observed
cube. On this image we detect all the objects detected about 2 σthe
noise level, and based on an analysis of the ellipticity and the size,
we select all the stars in the field. This allow us to: (i) estimate the
FWHM of the g−band image, a required input of the reduction as
indicated before; (ii) detect small objects or faint stars not included
in the Gaia survey, that should be masked from the data too; (iii)
estimate the local background and noise level around the science
target in this image. Then, we select a central square image of 1.5′
size, mask the field stars, remove the background and perform an
isophotal analysis of each galaxy detected within the FoV of the
original IFS data. This isophotal analysis comprises the derivation
of the surface-brightness, ellipticity and position angle profiles, to-
gether with the estimation of the baricenter and e ffective radius. We
selected as representative position angle and ellipticity the one cor-
responding to a gsurface brightness of 22 mag arcsec−2. Then, the
effective radius is found by deriving the cumulative flux in succes-
sive radial apertures along the semi-major in elliptical apertures fol-
lowing the previous estimated position angle and ellipticity. Finally
a new segmentation map is generated with the same spatial size and
astrometric solution of the reduced datacube.
When more than one galaxy is detected in the FoV of a single
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)9
datacube the mask generated by the previous procedure is used to
segregate them. This way, a set of copies of the reduced datacube
is created, each one corresponding to each of the di fferent detected
galaxies, masking the rest of them. The new files adopt as prefix the
parent CUBENAME (Sec. 2.2.8), with a running index correspond-
ing to each galaxy (i.e., CUBENAME I, where I runs from 0 to the
number of galaxies). An index corresponding to the ID in the origi-
nal segregation mask is stored in the header in the LABEL keyword.
Finally, the baricenter of each object and the coordinates in the sky
are stored in the XC, YC, RA and DEC header keywords. On the
other hand, if only one galaxy is detected in the FoV , it is created
just a copy of the data cubes including the corresponding header
keywords.
Finally, the stars detected within the field-of-view by this analy-
sis and those included in the GAIA MASK extension of the reduced
data are masked from the datacubes, interpolating the flux intensities
within each of those masks. This interpolation is just adopted for fu-
ture explorations of extensive quantities (e.g., the total stellar mass).
For spatial resolved analysis we recommend to mask those regions
and exclude them.
We found 22 datacubes with multiple galaxies detected within
the FoV , in most of the cases two galaxies (only in 4 cases we
found 3 galaxies). For completeness we distribute those (i) galaxy-
segmented and (ii) field-stars mask interpolated FITSFILES, us-
ing the same format described in the previous section (Sec. 2.2.8),
through the webpage http://ifs.astroscu.unam.mx/CALIFA/
V500/v2.3/reduced_masked/ .
2.4 Data Quality
A quality control procedure is implemented to determine which data
are fully useful, flagging out the poor quality ones and indicating
with a warning those data that are still useful for most of the sci-
ence cases but may be taken with care for particular explorations.
The quality of data is weighted based on a set of simple visual, qual-
itative and quantitative analysis: (i) first, we flag as bad those dat-
acubes that do not sample the center of the galaxies, covering just a
small portion of its optical extension (i.e., FoV <<Re), and datacubes
corresponding to galaxies too small compared to the original fiber
size (Re ≲5.0′′), i.e., unresolved targets; (ii) a visual inspection of
the central aperture (1.5′′/diameter) and the FoV-integrated spectra
and the synthesized u-,g−andr−band images allows to identify evi-
dent bad quality data, that usually corresponds to very low-S /N data
and/or problems with the observations that are also evident in the
QC-flags included in version 2.2 of the data reduction (strong stray-
light, electric background, problems with the tracing and extraction
of the spectra, problems with the sky subtraction, as described in
S´anchez et al. 2016b). When those problems are observed, but they
affect just a few locations within the FoV or a limited spectral range,
and the central and integrated spectra does not show evident defects,
then the datacubes are flagged with a warning; (iii) repeated obser-
vations on the same field are compared, the best quality one is se-
lected and the worst one is flagged as bad, to avoid duplication in
the final galaxy sample; (iv) the presence of a large number of field-
stars or a single bright star, contaminating a substantial fraction of
the FoV , is considered a reason to flag a datacube as either bad or
with a warning (depending on the relative importance of the contam-
ination); (v) when there is a clear absolute or relative (blue-to-red)
photometric mismatch between the datacubes and the PS observa-
tions is used to flag the quality of the data; (vi) a visual inspection of
the reconstructed g−band image and its comparison the correspond-
ing PS image (e.g., Fig. 3, panels gandh), is used to identify clearproblems (e.g., errors in the estimated dithering pattern, image re-
construction algorithm, astrometric issues); finally we perform two
additional tests following (S ´anchez et al. 2022b), (vii) we compare
the stellar masses derived using the photometric and spectrophoto-
metric information, and (viii) we fit the central and integrated spec-
tra using pyFIT3D to identify possible issues /problems not evident
based on a pure visual inspection. We will provide more details on
these two particular analysis in the forthcoming sections.
It is possible that one cube is a ffected by more than one quality is-
sues. In this case the table reflects that issue with the strongest /worst
impact in the quality of the data.
Of the total number of 1116 datacubes, 895 has been classified
as good quality. Of them, 392 present some warning (i.e., a minor
issue as described before), and 490 passed all the explored quality
criteria. A total of 234 cubes were rejected. This may be considered
as considerable large fraction ( ∼20% of the observed cubes). How-
ever, the vast majority are rejected not due to its intrinsic bad quality,
but due to the fact that they correspond to observations covering just
a small fraction of the targeted object, or because the target object
is too small for a proper spatial resolved analysis. We provide with
some characteristic of the good quality dataset.
2.4.1 Spectrophotometric accuracy and precision
We gauge the accuracy and precision of our spectrophotometric cali-
bration by comparing the r-band magnitudes and g−rcolors derived
from the datacubes with those extracted from the PS images. For this
calculation we use the segmentation maps described in Sec. 2.3, co-
adding the fluxes within each segmentation corresponding to each
detected galaxy in the PS images corresponding to the g- and r-band,
and the same image bands synthetized from the reduced datacubes.
Figure 4 shows the comparison between r-band magnitudes and g−r
colors for both datasets. There is a remarkable good agreement, with
a distribution almost following the one-to-one relation, and with an
average o ffset of−0.06 mag for the magnitude and −0.07 mag for
the color. These o ffsets corresponds to just a 2-3% mismatch in the
absolute spectrophotometric and blue-to-red calibration between our
reduced datacubes and the PS photometry. The di fference between
ther-band magnitudes present a standard deviation of 0.22 mag, that
corresponds to a precision in the absolute photometric calibration of
∼9%. On the other hand, we estimated the blue-to-red spectrophoto-
metric precision, based on the dispersion in the di fference between
theg−rcolors (∼0.09 mag), in∼4%. Those numbers are similar
to the ones reported in previous DR of the CALIFA survey (e.g.
S´anchez et al. 2016b) and of the same order and those found by
other IFS surveys (e.g. Abdurro’uf et al. 2021). As discussed on
those articles there are multiple reasons for these di fferences, but the
dominant one is the slight di fferences in the nominal transmission
curve of the filters adopted to estimate the photometric values from
the databucubes (Gunn et al. 1998) and the real transmission curves
of the PanStarrs observations (Stubbs et al. 2010). Those curves re-
sult from the convolution of the nominal curves with the optical sys-
tem conformed by the telescope and instrument, that are di fficult to
reproduce.
2.4.2 Depth and signal-to-noise
The depth of the datacubes is gauged by estimating (i) the V-band
surface brightness magnitude (and flux intensity) at the 3 σlevel for
those datacubes fulfilling our good quality criteria in which this limit
is reached, and (ii) the typical S /N at the e ffective radius. Figure 5
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)10 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
11 12 13 14 15
r-band [mag] (cube)1112131415r-band [mag] (PS)
∆=0.04±0.22−0.50.00.5
0.0 0.5 1.0
g-r [mag] (cube)−0.20.00.20.40.60.81.01.2g-r [mag] (PS)
∆=0.07±0.09−0.25 0.00 0.25
Figure 4. Comparison between the r-band magnitudes (left panel) and g−rcolors (right panel) derived for the final sample of good quality datacubes using the
segmentation maps described in Sec. 2.3 for the PS images and the images synthesized from the IFS datacubes. Each successive contour corresponds to a density
distribution containing a 99%, 95% and 65% of the total sample. The inset shows the kernel density distribution of the di fference between both quantities, with
the average (and standard deviation) value indicated as a legend.
shows the distribution of both quantities, showing a wide range of
values, from S /N from 10 to 40, and with µVfrom 21.7 to 24.5 mag
arcsec−2, with a typical value of S /N∼20 andµV∼23.6 mag arcsec−2.
This later value corresponds to a flux surface intensity of ∼1 10−18
erg s−1cm−2Å−1arcsec−2. There is a clear trend between both quan-
tities, with datacubes reaching a lower surface-brightness magnitude
as higher is the S /N at Re, following a non-linear relation reaching a
somehow asymptotic value at high-S /N. These distributions, trends,
and typical values are indeed very similar to the values already re-
ported in previous CALIFA data-releases (e.g. S ´anchez et al. 2016b).
2.4.3 Seeing and spatial resolution
One of the main goals of the current re-reduction of the data is to
achieve a better spatial resolution. Along the reduction the FWHM
of the PSF is estimated (Sec. 2.2.5). This estimation is not very pre-
cise, due to the nature of the computation. Indeed in many cases the
FWHM estimated by the reduction procedure is poorly constrained
(i.e., a wide range of values provide similar likelihoods)9. However,
for most of the galaxies is the only estimation we have. This value
can be compared with the natural seeing FWHM provided by the
Calar Alto seeing monitor (RoboDIMM). For doing so we down-
loaded all the available values provided by this monitor and cross-
match the observing date /time for the three di fferent pointings of
each datacube with the date /time included in the seeing monitor cat-
alog. We allow for a range of 20 minutes di fference between both
times, considering the exposure time and overheads of each obser-
vation. We finally obtain the average seeing FWHM reported by the
monitor within in this range. The RoboDIMM is not always active
when observations are taking place, being active of about 2 /3 of the
9Note that this does not a ffect the reduction itself significantly, as the esti-
mated FWHM is applied to derivethe last flat-fielding described in Sec. 2.2.5,
that introduces minor changesobserving periods. We end-up with a subset of 372 estimations of the
FWHM for both the datacube PSF and the seeing monitor. Figure 6
shows the comparison between both quantities, showing a clear cor-
respondence between both of them, nearly following a one-to-one
relation. This is very encouraging as it shows that our estimation of
the FWHM PSF is not o ffby a significant quantity. However, the
trend present an o ffset at low values, with the FWHM PSF show-
ing lower values than the natural seeing one below 1.0′′. We con-
sider that this is not realistic and most probably our procedure to
estimate the FWHM of the PSF in the datacubes is not reliable for
values near to the spaxel size (0.5′′) due to the limitations of sam-
pling in the estimation of the FWHM. An additional problem is that
it is not feasible to estimate the FWHM in the cubes below the PSF
size of the reference PS image that we use to compare with (i.e.,
∼1.1′′in average). To estimate the accuracy of our estimations of
the FWHMs based on the PSF-matching described in Sec. 2.2.5, we
followed Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. (2015) and S ´anchez et al. (2016b), and
explored the FWHM in the field-stars. For doing so we selected the
foreground stars included in the Gaia DR3 adopted for the masking
described in Sec. 2.2.7. We applied an additional cut, selecting only
those stars brighter than g<18 mag, and at a distance larger than
15′′from the center of the galaxies to minimize the possible con-
tamination from this source. We end up with 91 field stars. We ex-
tracted a post-stamp image of ∼10′′×10′′size from the new g−band
image reconstructed from the new (v2.3) and old (v2.2) datacubes,
deriving their FWHM by fitting a Gaussian function. The average
FWHM derived from field-stars is 1.43 ±0.40′′(2.62′′±0.58′′) that
agrees with the value derived based on the PSF-matching procedure,
1.51′′±0.32′′(2.64′′±0.56′′) for the v2.3 (v2.2) reduced data. Once
determined the accuracy of our procedure it is evident that Fig. 6, il-
lustrates clearly the improvement in the spatial resolution of the data
introduced by the new reduction. Even considering that we may be
underestimating the FWHM of the PSF at low values, we can claim
that the new datacubes have a typical spatial resolution of ∼1.0-1.5′′
in most of the cases.
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)11
0 10 20 30 40
S/N at Re21.522.022.523.023.524.024.525.0µVat 3σ[mag arcsec−2]
Figure 5. Surface-brightness at 3 σdetection limit as a function of the S /N
at the e ffective radius in the final good quality datacubes. Each successive
contour corresponds to a density distribution containing a 99%, 95% and
65% of the total sample. The kernel density distribution of both quantities is
included in the top and right subpanels.
A more qualitative method to gauge the improvement in the im-
age quality and in particular in the resolution achieved by the new
reduction is to compare the images obtained by photometric obser-
vations with those synthesized from datacubes provided by the new
and the previous data reductions. Figure 7 shows this comparison
for three selected datacubes, corresponding to galaxies NGC 5947,
NGC 5936 and ARP 118. It comprises the true color images cre-
ated using the u−,g−andr−band images retrieved from the SDSS
survey and synthesized from the databuces of the current and the
previous reduction. A simple visual inspection of the three images
demonstrates that the resolution achieved by the new reduction is
of the same order of the one achieved by a photometric observation
(i.e., natural seeing), with an evident improvement with respect to
the previous version. We should note that, as shown in Fig. 6, the
final resolution depends on the seeing during the observation, and
therefore not all datacubes present the same image quality. Beside
the improvement in the resolution, other improvements introduced
by the new reduction, including the re-evaluation of the real loca-
tion of the dithered pointings and the masking and interpolation of
the broken fibers, are also appreciated in Fig. 7 (e.g., in the case of
images corresponding to NGC 5936).
3 GALAXY SAMPLE
We describe in this section the main properties of the compiled sam-
ple, illustrating that indeed it can be used as representative sample
of the galaxies in its redshift footprint, despite of its heterogeneous
nature. The original CALIFA sample was primarily selected based
on the diameter of the galaxies in the sky (Walcher et al. 2014). This
selection was adopted to match their optical extension to the FoV of
the PPAK science bundle ( ∼70′′). Additional restrictions were intro-
duced in that selection to focus the sample in the nearby Universe
(z∼0.015), but far enough to be out of the local cosmological bub-
ble dominated by the cosmic variance ( >20 Mpc). Finally a cut in
0 1 2 3 4 5
FWHMpsf,cube [arcsec ]1234FWHMpsf,DIMM [arcsec ]Figure 6. Comparison between the FWHM of the natural seeing measured
by the Calar Alto DIMM within a one hour range the observation and the
FWHM of the PSF estimated on each cube as part of the new reduction
scheme, as described in the text. Each successive contour corresponds to a
density distribution containing a 99%, 95% and 65% of the total sample. The
kernel density distribution of both quantities is included in the top and right
subpanels.
the apparent magnitude of the targets was introduced to explicitly
exclude dwarf galaxies that would in other case dominate the num-
ber statistics. This essentially defined the CALIFA mother sample
(MS S ´anchez et al. 2012; Walcher et al. 2014). These criteria were
relaxed to introduce galaxy types underrepresented in the MS, such
as cluster members, large ellipticals, dwarf galaxies, companions of
galaxies in interacting systems covered by the survey, and supernova
host galaxies (compiled by the PISCO, PMAS /PPak Integral-field
Supernova Hosts Compilation survey Galbany et al. 2018). All those
galaxies comprise the CALIFA extended sample (ES), described in
3rd data release (S ´anchez et al. 2016b). In this previous data release
it was distributed 646 datacubes corresponding to individual galax-
ies observed using the V500 configuration, 529 of them extracted
from the MS and 117 to the ES. The current eCALIFA compilation
comprises 895 individual galaxies, 519 corresponding to the original
CALIFA MS and 376 more to the ES.
Figure 8 shows the distribution of galaxies from the eCALIFA
sample in the sky compared to that of the SDSS galaxies extracted
from the NASA Sloan Atlas (SDSS-NSA Blanton et al. 2017). The
SDSS-NSA is one of the largest and more complete catalog of
galaxy parameters in the local universe, comprising ∼150,000 ob-
jects. Being a volume /apparent magnitude selected sample it can
be volume corrected and it is frequently used to explore the gen-
eral properties of galaxy population at low −z(e.g. S ´anchez et al.
2019a). Indeed, the full redshift range covered by the eCALIFA sam-
ple (0.0005<z<0.08) match pretty well with the one covered by the
SDSS-NSA catalog (99.8% of the galaxies included in this redshift
range). We should note that the redshift distribution of the eCALIFA
sample is not homogeneous, with a better coverage below z<0.03,
where 94% of the objects is found. Fig 8 shows that the imprint of the
eCALIFA sample in the sky is slightly wider than that of the SDSS-
NSA, being both restricted essentially to the north hemisphere. For
the region in common it is evident that the final sample cover a wide
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)12 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
−30−15 0 15 30
∆ RA (arcsec)−30−1501530∆ DEC (arcsec)SDSS
−30−15 0 15 30
∆ RA (arcsec)−30−1501530∆ DEC (arcsec)v2.3
−30−15 0 15 30
∆ RA (arcsec)−30−1501530∆ DEC (arcsec)v2.2
−30−15 0 15 30
∆ RA (arcsec)−30−1501530∆ DEC (arcsec)SDSS
−30−15 0 15 30
∆ RA (arcsec)−30−1501530∆ DEC (arcsec)v2.3
−30−15 0 15 30
∆ RA (arcsec)−30−1501530∆ DEC (arcsec)v2.2
−30−15 0 15 30
∆ RA (arcsec)−30−1501530∆ DEC (arcsec)SDSS
−30−15 0 15 30
∆ RA (arcsec)−30−1501530∆ DEC (arcsec)v2.3
−30−15 0 15 30
∆ RA (arcsec)−30−1501530∆ DEC (arcsec)v2.2
Figure 7. Selected examples to illustrate the improvements in the image quality introduced by the new reduction procedure for three di fferent galaxies: (i)
the archetype galaxy shown along this study, NGC 5947 (top panels); (ii) a face-on spiral image with clear issues in the cube reconstruction in the previous
reduction of the data, NGC 5936 (middle panels); and (iii) a merging system, ARP 118, observed during a period of extremely good seeing, ∼0.5′′(bottom
panels). From left to right each panel shows the true color image generated using the u−,g−andr−band images extracted from the SDSS survey (left panel),
synthetized from the datacubes corresponding to the new reduction (central panel) and produced by the previous version of the data reduction (right panel).
Note that there are some color di fferences due to the truncation of the u−(and r−-band) synthetized image introduced by the wavelength range covered by the
IFS data. Despite of them the improvement in the image quality is clearly appreciated in the central panels. Similar plots for the full dataset are included in the
distribution webpage: http://ifs.astroscu.unam.mx/CALIFA/V500/v2.3/
range of galaxy densities in the sky, traced by the darkest regions in
the SDSS-NSA distribution.
Like in the case of the MS sample, the eCALIFA sample was
primarily selected by diameter, traced by the e ffective radius. We
selected objects which most of its optical extension is covered by
the FoV of the IFS data and they are well resolved by the observa-
tions. Indeed, 90% of the sample is restricted to an Re between 4′′
(Re>fiber-size) and 24′′(FoV>2 Re). In addition, we do not cover
very faint objects. There is no galaxy fainter than r>18.5 mag in
the sample, and∼95% of the objects are restricted to a r−band mag-
nitude range between 11 and 15 mag. If this compilation is represen-
tative of the population in the nearby universe it must have similarproperties of that of a sample selected using similar cuts in diam-
eter and magnitude. To explore this we select a sub-sample of the
SDSS-NSA catalog imposing an e ffective radius (4′′<Re<24′′) and
r−band magnitude cut ( r<18 mag), comprising ∼45,000 galaxies
(NSA|Relimsample hereafter).
Figure 9 shows the distribution of g−rcolor as a function of
ther-band absolute magnitude (i.e., the color-magnitude diagram,
CMD) for the eCALIFA sample compared to the same distribution
for the NSA|Relimsub-sample. Like in the case of the CALIFA sam-
ple the new compilation has a pretty good coverage of the CMD,
with a reasonable sampling of galaxies in the red-sequence (mostly
early-type and massive), the blue cloud (mostly late-type and less
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)13
-75°-60°-45°-30°-15°0°15°30°45°60°75°
NSA
eCALIFA
Figure 8. Distribution of the eCALIFA galaxies in the sky (blue-solid circles)
together with the distribution fo the SDSS-NSA galaxies (grey-solid squares)
at a similar redshift range. The galaxies from the current IFS compilation are
essentially distributed in the north hemisphere, with a large fraction in them
in the same sky foot-print as the SDSS galaxies. Comparing both distribu-
tions we appreciate that the eCALIFA galaxies sample objects in di fferent
densities.
−22−20−18−16−14
r-band abs mag0.00.20.40.60.81.0g−rcoloreCALIFA
NSA|Relim
E S0 Sa Sb Sc Sd
Figure 9. Distribution in the g−rvs.r−band absolute magnitude diagram of
the eCALIFA galaxies (blue-solid circles), compared to the same distribution
for sub-sample of SDSS-NSA galaxies selected using the same diameter,
magnitude and redshift range as the eCALIFA compilation (grey contours).
Each successive contour encircles a 95%, 65% and 40% of the SDSS-NSA
galaxies. The bottom-left inset shows the morphological distribution of the
eCALIFA galaxies.
massive), and the green-valley (intermediate morphological type and
mass ones). There is a rough agreement between the distributions
traced by both samples, despite the fact that a KS-test suggest that
there is significant di fference between them. Actually, a 92% of the
eCALIFA galaxies are indeed encircled by the lowest density con-
tour tracing the distribution of the NSA |Relimsub-sample (compris-
ing to 95% of these objects). Some evident di fferences are (i) the tail
towards redder galaxies in the fainter regime of the distribution, all
out of the 95% contour. These galaxies belongs to a low-luminosity
sub-set of SNIa hosts included in the PISCO sample; and (ii) the
less defined green-valley appreciated in the eCALIFA sample. This
later di fference may indicate an excess of intermediate type galax-
ies, something that has been already noticed for the CALIFA sample
(e.g. Lacerda et al. 2020). Indeed, the morphological distribution,
shown in the inset of Fig. 9 illustrate both the wide coverage of mor-
phological types of the sample, and the clear peak in Sb (early spiral)
galaxies.
Figure 10, left panels, shows similar comparisons between both
samples for the r−band absolute magnitude and Re (in physicalunits) as function of the redshift. Like in the case of the CMD, there
is a fair agreement between the distributions described by both sam-
ples, in particular in the redshift regime better covered by the eCAL-
IFA sample ( z<0.03, as indicated before). At redshift z>0.03 the
eCALIFA sample is clearly incomplete, as illustrated by the com-
parison with the NSA |Relimdistributions. It is worth noticing that
this was the limiting redshift of the original CALIFA MS. Despite
of these di fferences in the coverage of the absolute magnitude and
effective radius with redshift, the distribution of one parameter as a
function of the other is pretty similar for both samples (left panel of
Fig. 10). Indeed,∼90% of the eCALIFA galaxies are encircled by
the lowest density contour of the NSA |Relimsample shown in this
figure, comprising 95% of these objects.
3.1 Volumen correction
All these comparisons indicate that indeed the eCALIFA behaves, at
a first order, as a diameter-selected sample at the same redshift range
extracted from a luminosity limited sample (i.e., the NSA |Relimsub-
sample). If this is the case, this sample could be representative of
the nearby universe when applying the proper volume correction.
Following Walcher et al. (2014), we derive the available volume per
galaxy using the V maxmethod described by Schmidt (1968). de Jong
& van der Kruit (1994) adopted this method, deriving the equation of
the accessible volume for a galaxy selected within a range of isopho-
tal sizes (projected diameters). Considering Re as a tracer of the di-
ameter of a galaxy, the same equation can be adopted to derive the
accessible volume for a given limiting e ffective radius:
Vlim(z,Re)=4πDL(z)
(1+z)2
Re
Relim3(3)
where DL(z) is the luminosity distance at redshift zand Re limis the
largest limiting e ffective radius adopted in the selection criteria (de-
fined by the FoV of the IFU, in our case). To estimate the luminosity
distance at a given redshift we assume a pure Hubble flow distance
and the cosmology assumed along this exploration. This is a good
approximation for the average redshift of the considered samples
(z∼0.015). However, it may introduce considerable errors for the
lowest redshift objects, where the average galaxy velocity with re-
spect to the cosmic web is of the same order of the bulk velocity
due to the cosmic expansion ( z<0.001). Fortunately we have just 2
objects below this limit ( NGC 6789 and NGC 0784).
The inverse of Vlimis the weight of each galaxy in any estimated
global property (e.g. the star-formation or mass density in the con-
sidered volume) or distribution (e.g., the luminosity or the mass
function). When selecting galaxies within a range of e ffective ra-
dius, from Re minto Re max, the corresponding weight ( ω) is derived
as the di fference between the inverse of the corresponding V minand
Vmax, and estimated using Eq. 3. This indeed defines an equivalent
accessible volume that is estimated by the equation:
1
Vcor=ω=1
Vmax−1
Vmin(4)
Note that Vcor, the equivalent volume correction depends not only
on the redshift and Re of the object, but also on the minimum and
maximum Re adopted in the selection of the sample. Finally, a cor-
rection must be applied if the accessible solid angle for the sample
is smaller than the full sky, which involves a global scaling factor.
Further corrections can be applied to take into account other limiting
factors, just as the flux-limit introduced by a limiting magnitude.
We acknowledge that this derivation relies on multiple simplifica-
tions and assumptions that have been broadly discussed in previous
studies, in particular in Walcher et al. (2014). However, despite of
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)14 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
0.02 0.04 0.06
redshift510Re [kpc]
−20−15r-band abs mag
100101
Re [kpc]−22
−20
−18
−16
−14r-band abs mageCALIFA
NSA|Relim
Figure 10. Distribution of r−band absolute magnitude (top-left panel) and e ffective radius in kpc (bottom-left panel) as a function of the redshift, and one as
a function of the other (right panel), for the galaxies in the eCALIFA compilation (solid-blue circles). For comparison purposes grey-contours show, in each
diagram, the distribution of the SDSS-NSA galaxies using the same diameter, magnitude and redshift range as the eCALIFA galaxies. Each successive contour
encircles a 95%, 65% and 40% of the SDSS-NSA galaxies. Dashed line in the left panels indicate the z=0.03 limit above which we consider that the eCALIFA
sample lose completeness.
Table 3. Observational properties of the galaxy sample∗
ID cubename galaxy RA DEC z type M abs,r g-r Re PA ϵ Vcor
deg deg mag mag′′deg Mpc3
1 IC5376 IC5376 0.3325 34.5265 0.01645 Sb -19.81 0.73 9.95 -86.1 0.97 3250155.2
2 UGC00005 UGC00005 0.7733 -1.9129 0.02405 Sbc -20.68 0.56 14.61 -43.9 0.86 2008811.2
3 NGC7819 NGC7819 1.1018 31.4725 0.01634 Sc -19.42 0.47 19.3 4.3 0.85 1352577.3
4 UGC00029 UGC00029 1.1403 28.3022 0.0293 E1 -20.98 0.7 5.57 85.1 0.53 41513.4
5 IC1528 IC1528 1.2724 -7.0925 0.01261 Sbc -18.41 0.52 23.34 -16.1 0.91 2563246.9
6 NGC7824 NGC7824 1.2754 6.9209 0.02024 Sab -21.06 0.62 7.29 65.4 0.74 66001.7
7 UGC00036 UGC00036 1.3078 6.7728 0.02075 Sab -20.88 0.67 7.03 -71.8 0.87 165870.3
8 NGC0001 NGC0001 1.816 27.7085 0.01473 Sbc -20.38 0.66 8.08 5.1 0.74 34274.9
9 NGC0023 NGC0023 2.4726 25.9244 0.01482 Sb -20.98 0.6 29.66 63.2 0.77 2017008.3
10 NGC0036 NGC0036 2.8426 6.3899 0.01978 Sb -21.09 0.66 18.18 -69.0 0.82 1565578.4
Subset of the properties of the galaxy sample: (1) CALIFA ID (S ´anchez et al. 2016b); (2) IFS cube name; (3) galaxy name, (4) right ascension; (5) declination;
(6) redshift; (7) Hubble type; (8) r−band absolute magnitude; (9) g−rcolor; (10) e ffective radius; (11) position angle; (12) eccentricity; and (13) equivalent
volume accessible for the considered target.
∗We present just ten galaxies, the remaining ones are presented electronically.
them, the approach is valid. To demonstrate it so, we have first ap-
plied it to the NSA |Relimsub-sample, a sample selected imposing a
well defined range of redshifts, magnitudes and in particular e ffec-
tive radius over a large and well defined catalog of galaxies. Based
on this volume corrections we estimate the mass-function, using the
stellar masses provided by the SDSS-NSA catalog (Blanton et al.
2017), shifted by a constant to correct for the di fference cosmology
and to match the Salpeter (1955) initial mass function (IMF). Figure
11 shows the resulting mass-function compared to the one derived
for the full SDSS-NSA catalog (Fig. 17 of S ´anchez et al. 2022b).
There is a good agreement between the two mass-functions in the
regime of masses in common, validating the adopted volume correc-
tion. Based on this result we estimate the volume correction using
this approach for the eCALIFA sample and repeat the estimation of
the mass-function. For doing so we estimate the stellar mass from
theg−andr−band photometric data obtained from the segmented
PS images described during the isophotal analysis (Sec. 2.3), imple-
menting the relation between the mass-to-light ( Υ⋆) and the g−rcolors published by (Bell & de Jong 2000) for the same IMF. We re-
fer to this stellar mass as M ⋆,phothereafter. The result of this analysis
is included in Fig. 11. Like in the case of the NSA |Relimsub-sample,
the mass function estimated for the eCALIFA sample follows pretty
well the know distribution described by the full NSA-SDSS cata-
log, for the range of stellar masses in common. The strongest devia-
tions are found at (i) ∼1010M⊙, where the eCALIFA sample seems to
present a slight excess of galaxies, and (ii) at >1011.5M⊙, where the
eCALIFA sample (and maybe the NSA |Relimsub-sample), present a
slight defect of galaxies. The excess of galaxies at ∼1010M⊙could
be due to the local fluctuations in the galaxy density in this mass
regime, already noticed in Walcher et al. (2014). In addition we note
that for the stellar masses below 108.5M⊙, not sampled by the pub-
lished NSA-SDSS mass function, the agreement between the two
mass functions derived using the described volume correction is rea-
sonable good.
Based on all the results described along this section we can fairly
claim that the eCALIFA sample, once corrected by the proper vol-
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)15
8 9 10 11 12
log(M⋆/M⊙)−5−4−3−2−1φ(M⋆) [Mpc−3dex−1]
eCALIFA
NSA|Relim
SDSS
Figure 11. Mass function estimated for the eCALIFA compilation (blue-
solid circles) assuming that it behaves as a diameter selected sample. Error
bars illustrate the width of the mass bins (x-axis) and the error propagation
based on a Monte-Carlo iteration for all parameters involved in the deriva-
tion of V olume correction (see the text). For comparison purposes we include
(i) the same estimation for the NSA-SDSS sub-sample selected adopting the
same diameter, magnitude and redshift range as the eCALIFA galaxies (grey-
solid squares) and (ii) the mass-function derived using the full SDSS-NSA
catalog (Blanton et al. 2017), already published in S ´anchez et al. (2022b).
There is a considerably good agreement between the three mass functions,
despite the di fferences between the three samples.
ume coverage, can be adopted as a representative sample of galax-
ies in the covered redshift range (i.e., the nearby Universe). Table 3
presents the main observational properties of the galaxies discussed
along this section.
4 ANALYSIS
We perform a set of analyses in order to extract the main spectro-
scopic properties of the studied galaxies and to evaluate quality and
usability of the new reduced dataset. In particular we explore the
spectra extracted in two di fferent apertures for each galaxy: (i) a
circular aperture of 1.5′′/diameter located at the center; and (ii) the
integrated spectra, obtained by co-adding all the spectra within the
IFS datacube corresponding to the spaxels with a S /N>3 at 5500Å.
The first of those spectra would allow us to characterize the spec-
troscopic properties of both the stellar populations and the ionized
gas in the inner regions of the galaxies, at scales of ∼500 pc, making
use of the improvement in the spatial resolution introduced by the
new reduction. The inner regions are particularly interesting as they
are the locations where AGN activity, galactic winds, and the e ffect
of star-formation quenching are more frequently observed. On the
other hand, the integrated spectra would allow to characterize ex-
tensive quantities (such as the integrated stellar mass and integrated
star-formation rate), the dominant ionizing source and /or the star-
formation stage.
4.1 Spectral fitting
We analyze each individual spectrum using pyFIT3D (S ´anchez et al.
2016a; Lacerda et al. 2022) to derive the main properties of stellar
populations and ionized gas components. For doing so, the code gen-
erates a model of the stellar population spectrum based on the linearcombination of a set of single stellar populations (SSP) included in
a given library. This model is convolved by a Gaussian function to
take into account the velocity dispersion ( σ⋆) and shifted according
to the systemic velocity ( v⋆). In addition, the multi-SSP model is at-
tenuated adopting a given extinction curve (Cardelli et al. 1989a, , in
this particular implementation), and a certain dust attenuation value
in the V−band (A V,⋆). These three non-linear parameters are derived
bypyFIT3D based on a brute exploration of the space of parameters,
adopting a limited version of the SSP-library, prior to the fit with the
full library, that we describe later on.
The treatment of the emission lines is done by a two steps proce-
dure. First, the wavelength location of the emission lines is masked
out and a preliminar model of the stellar population is created. This
model is then subtracted to the original spectrum. The resulting
residual spectrum comprises just the emission lines (plus noise and
imperfections associated to the modelling of the stellar population).
Then, each emission line of a defined set ([O ii]3727, Hδ, Hγ, Hβ,
[Oiii]4959,5007, H α, [N ii]6548,84 and [S ii]6717,31, in this par-
ticular case) is modelled using a single Gaussian function, deriv-
ing the flux intensity, velocity and velocity dispersion. The com-
bined model for all the emission lines is subtracted to the origi-
nal spectrum. This final spectrum, comprising just the stellar pop-
ulation component (plus noise and imperfections associated to the
modelling of the emission lines), is fitted using the full SSP library
(shifted, convolved and dust attenuated). Finally, a Monte-Carlo it-
eration is adopted to estimate the errors for each derived parame-
ter. The procedure has demonstrated to produce reliable results, be-
ing contrasted against ad-hoc created simulations and mock galaxy
spectra generated from hydrodynamical simulations (e.g., S ´anchez
et al. 2016a; Lacerda et al. 2022; Ibarra-Medel et al. 2019; Sarmiento
et al. 2022). Indeed, it has been adopted by previous several studies,
in particular focused on the analysis of IFS data (e.g. Cano-D ´ıaz
et al. 2016; S ´anchez et al. 2018, 2022b).
Figure 12 shows an example of the fitting procedure, correspond-
ing to the analysis of the integrated spectrum of the archetype galaxy
NGC 5947. It illustrates how well the observed spectrum is repro-
duced by the best-fitted model for both the stellar population and
emission line models. The typical level and shape of the residuals
is appreciated, with the location of the strong night-sky emission
lines easily identified (e.g., at 5577Å or beyond 7200Å, S ´anchez
et al. 2007). The distribution by age and metallicity of the individ-
ual weight ( wssp,⋆,L) of each SSP in the final model (i.e., the frac-
tion of light in the V-band), is also included in the figure. In the
current analysis we adopt the M aStarsLOG SSP library, generated
by an updated version the Bruzual & Charlot (2003) stellar popu-
lation synthesis code (described in Appendix A of S ´anchez et al.
2022b), using the MaStar stellar library Yan et al. (2019). The M aS-
tarsLOG library comprises 273 SSP templates, covering 39 ages
(from 1 Myr to 13.5 Gyr), in a pseudo-logarithmic sampling, and 7
metallicities (Z /Z⊙=0.006, 0.029, 0.118, 0.471, 1, 1.764, 2.353). A
solarα-enhancement is considered for all SSPs in the adopted library
(i.e., [α/Fe]=0). This library was recently adopted to analyze the last
data-release of the MaNGA (Bundy et al. 2015) IFS galaxy survey
(S´anchez et al. 2022b), and therefore, by adopting it the results can
be more easily compared with.
4.2 Stellar parameters derived by the spectral fitting
As discussed in detail in previous studies (e.g. S ´anchez et al. 2021a,
2022b), the weights or coe fficients of the decomposition can be used
(i) to derive the luminosity- and mass-weighted parameters of the
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)16 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
Figure 12. Example of the analysis performed by pyFIT3D for the two aperture spectra extracted from each IFS datacube. The current figure corresponds
to the central spectrum of the archetype galaxy NGC 5947. The top panel shows: (i) the observed spectrum (black line); (ii) the best fitted stellar population
model (yellow line); (iii) the combination of this stellar population model with the model of the analyzed emission lines (steelblue line), i.e., the stellar ; (iv)
the residual of the subtraction of the stellar population model to the original spectrum (orange line) and (v) the residual of the subtraction of the combined
model (stellar population plus emission lines) to the original spectrum (lightblue line). Dashed-dotted line show the location of the fitted emission lines in the
rest-frame, illustrating the redshift. The main properties of the stellar population derived from the fitting are listed in the right panel, including: (i) the systemic
velocity ( sys vel ); (ii) the velocity dispersion ( σ⋆); (iii) the dust attenuation (A⋆
V); (iv) the luminosity-weighted age ( A⋆,Lort⋆
L) and metallicity (Z⋆,LorZ⋆
L),
and (v) the mass-weighted age ( A⋆,Mort⋆
M) and metallicity ( Z⋆,MorZ⋆
M). Note that the errors for the sys vel ,σ⋆and A⋆
Vare all zero, as they were derived
in the first step of the fitting procedure, as described in the text. For the rest of the parameters the nominal errors are also very low, as they do not included
systematics from the procedure. The light-weights of each SSP in the adopted library (i.e., the fraction of light that each SSP contributes to the best fitted model
in the V-band) is shown in the bottom panel. Each row corresponds to one of the 7 metallicites and each column to one of the 39 ages included in the SSP
library.
stellar population ( PLWandPMW), using the equations:
logPL= Σ sspwssp,⋆,LlogPssp
logPM=Σsspwssp,⋆,LΥssp,⋆logPssp
Σsspwssp,⋆,LΥssp,⋆(5)
where (a) wssp,⋆,Lcorresponds to each coe fficient of the decomposi-
tion, (b) Psspis the value of the given parameter for a certain SSP
(e.g., age,A⋆, or metallicity,Z⋆), and (c) Υssp,⋆is the stellar mass-
to-light ratio; (ii) to derive integrated properties, such as the stellar
mass:
M⋆=LVΣsspwssp,⋆,LΥssp,⋆ (6)
where LVis the dust corrected luminosity in the V-band ( LV=
4πDL(z)2fV100.4AV,∗),fVis the observed flux intensity in the V-band,
AV,∗is the dust attenuation a ffecting the stellar populations (derived
by the fitting procedure as described before) and DL(z) is the lumi-
nosity distance already described in the previous section; and (iii) to
estimate mass- and metallicity-assembly histories of galaxies or re-
gions within galaxies, by applying Equations 6 and 5 to a restricted
age range, that corresponds to a particular look-back time (for in-
stance as described in S ´anchez et al. 2021a; Camps-Fari ˜na et al.
2022). From them it is possible to derive the star-formation and
chemical enrichment history, as the derivatives of the previous dis-
tributions (e.g. Ibarra-Medel et al. 2019).
4.3 Ionized-gas dust attenuation
The dust attenuation a ffecting the bulk of the stellar populations
(AV,∗), introduced in the previous section, is in general di fferent thanthe one a ffecting the ISM ( AV,gas). The reason for that di fference is
that the former is embedded within the stars across a galaxy, not
equally a ffecting all of them, and therefore the estimated value is the
resulting of its net e ffect. On the contrary, the later fits better with a
screen model, as the dust grains are in general distributed surround-
ing the ionized nebulae (e.g. Calzetti 2001; Wild et al. 2011; Salim
& Narayanan 2020).
We derive AV,gasfor each analyzed spectrum by comparing the
observed Hα/Hb line ratio with the expected value for photo-ionized
nebulae without dust-attenuation (H α/Hβ0), and adopting a MW-like
extinction curve (Cardelli et al. 1989b), with an extinction factor
RV=3.1. This is indeed an approximation, as R Vmay change galaxy
by galaxy and within each galaxy too, as it is the case in the MW,
what adds an uncertainty to the derivation of A V,gas. The calculation
depends on the value of H α/Hβ0. We use the usual value of 2.86, that
corresponds to a photoionized nebulae with a temperature T e=104K
and an electron density of ne=102cm−3(Osterbrock 1989). How-
ever, we acknowledge that this value is ill defined, ranging between
2.7 and 3.1 for a range of typical values of photoionized nebulae,
being a topic of study how its a ffect the estimation of the dust atten-
uation and di fferent nebulae properties (e.g. Ueta & Otsuka 2021).
Finally, the derivation of A V,gasdepends on how well it is measured
Hβ, a line that it is heavily a ffected by the modelling of the under-
lying stellar population. Being at least ∼3 times weaker than H α, in
the low-SN regime the derived ratio may present strong asymmetri-
cal deviations from the real value (an usual e ffect when comparing
line ratios of di fferent S /N, e.g., Rosales-Ortega et al. 2011).
We estimate the error associated with A V,gasby propagating the
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)17
Table 4. Stellar population properties derived by pyFIT3D for both the central and integrated spectra of each galaxy.
cubename aperture A⋆,LZ⋆,LA⋆,MZ⋆,M AV,⋆ σ⋆ log(Υ⋆) log(M ⋆)
Gyr f mass Gyr f mass mag km s−1M⊙/L⊙ M⊙
IC5376 int 3.2659 ±0.4899 0.0138 ±0.0021 5.1993 ±0.7799 0.0088 ±0.0013 0.4±0.1 128.4±19.3 0.76 10.07
” cen 6.8726 ±1.0309 0.0172 ±0.0026 7.6401 ±1.146 0.0168±0.0025 0.5±0.1 130.0±19.5 1.05 9.32
UGC00005 int 0.8419 ±0.1263 0.0161 ±0.0024 3.0662 ±0.4599 0.019 ±0.0028 0.4±0.1 287.8±43.2 0.53 10.47
” cen 2.7528 ±0.4129 0.0169 ±0.0025 5.2094 ±0.7814 0.0167 ±0.0025 0.7±0.1 62.6±9.4 0.83 8.99
NGC7819 int 0.695 ±0.1042 0.0093 ±0.0014 4.9267 ±0.739 0.0043±0.0006 0.3±0.0 29.9±4.5 0.47 9.81
” cen 0.3353 ±0.0503 0.0037 ±0.0006 4.2694 ±0.6404 0.0125 ±0.0019 0.6±0.1 398.5±59.8 0.57 8.56
UGC00029 int 7.7201 ±1.158 0.0191±0.0029 8.7365 ±1.3105 0.0205 ±0.0031 0.0±0.0 183.1±27.5 1.12 11.01
” cen 5.2782 ±0.7917 0.029 ±0.0044 6.146 ±0.9219 0.0292 ±0.0044 0.6±0.1 207.4±31.1 1.02 9.52
IC1528 int 0.9597 ±0.144 0.0043±0.0006 3.3443 ±0.5016 0.0112 ±0.0017 0.2±0.0 242.9±36.4 0.48 9.68
” cen 0.8211 ±0.1232 0.016 ±0.0024 5.0834 ±0.7625 0.0139 ±0.0021 0.6±0.1 102.8±15.4 0.65 8.05
NGC7824 int 2.7376 ±0.4106 0.0235 ±0.0035 2.9638 ±0.4446 0.029 ±0.0044 0.0±0.0 157.5±23.6 0.74 10.66
” cen 2.4005 ±0.3601 0.0258 ±0.0039 2.8525 ±0.4279 0.0262 ±0.0039 0.0±0.0 110.0±16.5 0.68 8.72
UGC00036 int 2.5892 ±0.3884 0.0254 ±0.0038 7.646 ±1.1469 0.0283 ±0.0042 0.3±0.0 288.8±43.3 0.94 10.59
” cen 5.6372 ±0.8456 0.0293 ±0.0044 6.5388 ±0.9808 0.035 ±0.0052 0.6±0.1 307.2±46.1 1.09 9.49
NGC0001 int 1.2922 ±0.1938 0.0159 ±0.0024 3.4601 ±0.519 0.0149±0.0022 0.5±0.1 180.4±27.1 0.63 10.16
” cen 2.1775 ±0.3266 0.0288 ±0.0043 3.6797 ±0.552 0.0275±0.0041 0.4±0.1 141.6±21.2 0.75 9.08
NGC0023 int 0.7246 ±0.1087 0.01 ±0.0015 4.4113 ±0.6617 0.0288 ±0.0043 0.5±0.1 151.1±22.7 0.67 10.57
” cen 0.9247 ±0.1387 0.0202 ±0.003 4.5153±0.6773 0.0325 ±0.0049 0.6±0.1 360.0±54.0 0.72 9.36
NGC0036 int 3.2041 ±0.4806 0.019 ±0.0028 10.26 ±1.539 0.0282±0.0042 0.2±0.0 96.9±14.5 1.02 11.05
” cen 3.2059 ±0.4809 0.0395 ±0.0059 3.7183 ±0.5577 0.0394 ±0.0059 0.3±0.0 178.4±26.8 0.86 9.32
UGC00139 int 0.1775 ±0.0266 0.0031 ±0.0005 4.4885 ±0.6733 0.0065 ±0.001 0.6±0.1 37.4±5.6 0.35 9.32
” cen 1.5945 ±0.2392 0.0171 ±0.0026 2.9027 ±0.4354 0.0181 ±0.0027 0.2±0.0 159.5±23.9 0.6 7.88
MCG-02-02-030 int 3.1502 ±0.4725 0.0065 ±0.001 8.8252±1.3238 0.0044 ±0.0007 0.1±0.0 161.5±24.2 0.85 10.13
” cen 0.5685 ±0.0853 0.0112 ±0.0017 9.3588 ±1.4038 0.0158 ±0.0024 1.3±0.2 309.3±46.4 0.96 8.48
We present the values for just ten galaxies. The information for the remaining one is distributed electronically.
errors estimated for the emission lines. However, for the reasons out-
lined before this error is most probably just a lower-limit to the real
one, that, including systematic e ffects would be at least ∼0.15 mag
in the best case (according to the typical uncertain in the meassure-
ment of emission lines with the adopted technique Lacerda et al.
2022). We consider that all values of A V,gasbelow this error limit,
corresponding to H α/Hβ<3 or derived from H αor Hβfluxes below
with a S /N<2, are ill defined. All of them corresponds to weak emis-
sion lines and low values of the dust attenuation. We have substituted
them by a value of 0.15 mag and set the corresponding errors to zero
to indicate that they are just upper limits.
4.4 Star-formation rate
The star-formation rate (SFR) for both apertures is derived from
the dust-corrected H αluminosity using the formulae: L Hα=
4πDL(z)2fHα100.4AV,gas), where fHαis the Hαflux intensity derived
from the spectral fitting procedure described before (Sec. 4.1), A V,gas
is the dust attenuation described in the previous section, and DL(z)
is the luminosity distance corresponding to the redshift ( z) of the ob-
ject. Finally, we use the calibrator derived by Kennicutt et al. (1989),
SFR=8 1042LHα, valid for a (Salpeter 1955) IMF. Errors of the
quantities involved in this calculation are propagated through the
different equations to estimate the corresponding SFR error.
We have estimated the SFR from H αirrespectively of the dom-
inant ionizing source (that we will discuss later on, Sec. 5.2.1),
following previous studies Cano-D ´ıaz et al. (2016); S ´anchez et al.
(2018, 2022b). In purity, only in the case that the gas is ionized by
young massive OB-stars is valid this approximation. However, as
noted in those articles, when other ionizing sources contribute to theHαluminosity the estimated SFR is just an upper-limit to the real
one, and this is how it should be interpreted.
4.5 Molecular gas mass
The molecular gas mass is estimated for the two aperture spectra
based on a dust-to-gas calibrator, following the approach proposed
by (Brinchmann et al. 2013). The particular calibrator adopted in
here is based on the comparison of the molecular gas mass den-
sity obtained from CO observations (Bolatto et al. 2017) and the
ionized-gas dust attenuation for the EDGE-CALIFA sample pre-
sented in Barrera-Ballesteros et al. (2020), recently improved by
Barrera-Ballesteros et al. (2021a). The estimations based on this
approach have been proved to provide reliable estimations of the
molecular gas densities (and integrated molecular gas) within ∼0.15
dex when comparing with both spatial resolved and single aper-
ture derivations based on CO observations (Colombo et al. 2020;
Barrera-Ballesteros et al. 2021b; S ´anchez et al. 2021a,b). The cali-
brator provides the molecular gas density ( Σgas) from the dust atten-
uation (A V,gas, Sec. 4.3), for each aperture of each galaxy. From this
surface density we estimate the integrated molecular gas (M gas) by
multiply by equivalent area, following S ´anchez et al. (2021a,b), i.e.,
4πR2
e, where R eis the e ffective radius (Sec: 2.3). When an upper-
limit was adopted for the dust attenuation, the estimated molecular
gas should be considered as an upper-limit as well. In those cases the
estimated error resulting from the propagation of the A V,gasvalue is
set to zero.
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)18 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
7 8 9 10 11 12
log(M⋆) phot [M⊙]789101112log(M⋆) int [M⊙]
E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
Figure 13. Comparison between the stellar masses derived using the PS pho-
tometry ( phot), described in Sec. 3.1, and those obtained using pyFIT3D for
the integrated spectra ( int). Black-solid contours show the density distribu-
tion, with each successive one encircling a 95%, 65% and 40% of the galax-
ies, respectively. Each shaded region corresponds to the area encircling a
85% of the galaxies of a particular morphological type, represented by a dif-
ferent color (inset legend). The normalized density distributions of both pa-
rameters, also segregated by morphology, are shown in the upper- and right-
side panels, with the mean values represented as solid circles, both using the
same color code.
4.6 Oxygen abundance
The analyzed spectra have not the required spectral resolution and
depth to derive the oxygen abundance (O /H) using the direct method,
even less to estimate the abundances using recombination lines (see
Peimbert & Peimbert 2006; Bresolin 2017, to gauge the character-
istics of the data required to apply those methods). In the case of
CALIFA data, the direct method was applicable for a small frac-
tion of the galaxies and at particular star-forming regions (Marino
et al. 2013). Thus, we make use of strong emission line calibrators
that provides with an estimation to the oxygen valid to explore the
global and local trends in galaxies to the spatial resolution of our
data (S ´anchez 2020). As we do not intend to make a detailed study
of the systematic di fferences between di fferent calibrators depending
on their nature (L ´opez-S ´anchez et al. 2012), we focus on two calibra-
tors instead of estimating the oxygen abundance using a set of them
(e.g., like in the case of S ´anchez et al. 2022b; Alvarez-Hurtado et al.
2022). We estimate O /H using the calibrators proposed by Marino
et al. (2013), that have derived empirically as a linear relation be-
tween the oxygen abundances estimated using the direct method for
a compiled sample of H iiregions and the logarithm of [N ii]/Hαand
([Oiii]/Hβ)/([Nii]/Ha) line ratios, N2 and O3N2 respectively. Due to
their nature these calibrators should be applied when the dominant
ionizing source is due to young /massive OB stars. Therefore, we de-
rive O /H for those spectra compatible with this kind of ionization
(as selection discussed later one, in Sec. 5.2.1). We acknowledge
that any contamination by other ionizing sources may introduce sys-
tematic e ffects in the derivation of the oxygen abundance that are
(somehow) mitigated when using the spatial resolved information
included in our delivered data (e.g. Mast et al. 2014; Davies et al.
2016; Lacerda et al. 2018; Vale Asari et al. 2019).5 RESULTS
We present in this section the main results of the analysis described
in the previous section, describing the main spectroscopic properties
of the eCALIFA sample of galaxies for both the central regions and
integrated galaxy wide.
5.1 Stellar population properties
Table 4 list the main properties of the stellar populations obtained for
the central and integrated spectra ( cenandinthereafter), including
(i) the LW and MW ages and metallicities ( A⋆,L,A⋆,M,Z⋆,Land
Z⋆,M), (ii) the stellar velocity dispersion ( σ⋆), (iii) the dust atten-
uation (A⋆
V), (iv) the mass-to-light ratio Υ⋆in the g−band, and (v)
the stellar mass. The properties derived using the integrated spec-
tra provides with characteristic properties of the galaxies. On the
other hand, those derived from the central aperture provides infor-
mation of the most inner regions. Although the sampled physical
region change galaxy by galaxy, in average corresponds to ∼500 pc.
Finally, the comparison between the parameters derived for these
central spectra and those derived using the integrated ones, provides
with a rough estimation of any gradient in the explored property. A
possible caveat is that the central aperture is (obviously) inscribed
in the integrated one. However its typical contribution to the total
flux is∼7%. Thus, based on Eq. 5, the parameters derived for the
integrated spectra are contaminated by the value derived for the cen-
tral spectra in a similar percentage. In general, this pollution is not
significant in most of the cases.
5.1.1 Stellar Masses
Deriving the mass in galaxies, and in particular, the stellar mass is
a topic of the greatest interest (e.g. Courteau et al. 2014, and refer-
ences therein). As described before our approach consists of decom-
posing the stellar spectrum in a set of SSPs included in a particular
library and from the mass-to-light ratio each of them ( Υ⋆,S S P), their
contribution of light to the total flux, and correcting by the dust at-
tenuation and cosmological distance, it is derived the stellar mass.
However, in previous sections we already estimated the stellar mass
using the photometric information. Figure 13 shows a comparison
between the stellar masses derived for the integrated spectra based
on the stellar population analysis (M ⋆,int), and those derived using
the PS photometry (M ⋆,phot, Sec. 3.1). This is an usual sanity check
aimed to detect possible problems in the fitting procedure, or the
quality of the data, that are not obvious to a visual inspection of
the spectra themselves (e.g. S ´anchez et al. 2018, 2022b). Despite
of the evident di fferences in the two approaches adopted to esti-
mate both stellar masses, we find a good agreement, with a clear
one-to-one correspondence ( ∆log(M⋆)=0.02±0.22 dex). As a result
of this comparison, a few galaxies were flagged from warning to
bad-quality, as indicated in Sec. 2.4. In addition it is included the
distributions segregated by morphology, showing the average values
too. The loose relation already reported in the literature (e.g. Garc ´ıa-
Benito et al. 2017) between morphology and stellar mass is clearly
shown, more evident in the average values, with late-type (early-
type) being less (more) massive and covering a wider (narrower)
range of masses.
5.1.2 Mass-to-light ratios
Figure 14, left panel, shows the distribution of Υ⋆(g-band), derived
for the central aperture spectra, as a function of the stellar masses,
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)19
7 8 9 10 11 12
log(M⋆) [M⊙]−0.50−0.250.000.250.500.751.001.25log(Υ⋆) cen [M⊙/L⊙]
E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0
log(M⋆) [M⊙]−0.50−0.250.000.250.500.751.001.25log(Υ⋆) [M⊙/L⊙]
cen
int
E S0/S0a Sa/Sab Sb/Sbc Sc/Scd Sd/Irr
Hubble Type−0.50−0.250.000.250.500.751.001.25log(Υ⋆) [M⊙/L⊙]
cen
int
Figure 14. Left panel: Distribution of the g−band mass-to-light ratio ( Υ⋆) derived for the central aperture spectra as a function of the stellar mass. Black-
solid contours show the density distribution, with each successive contour encircling a 95%, 65% and 40% of the galaxies, respectively. Each shaded region
corresponds to the area encircling a 85% of the galaxies of a particular morphological type, represented by a di fferent color (inset legend). The normalized
density distributions of both parameters, segregated by morphology too, are shown in the upper- and right-side panels, with the mean values represented as solid
circles, both using the same color code. The violin plots of the Υ⋆parameter derived for the central (cen) and integrated (int) spectra as a function of the stellar
mass and the morphology of the galaxies are shown in central and right panels, respectively.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
g-r [mag]−0.50−0.250.000.250.500.751.001.25log(Υ⋆) int [M⊙/L⊙]
E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
Figure 15. Distribution of Υ⋆in the g−band as a function of the g−rcolors
both derived for the integrated spectra. All contours, symbols, and colors are
similar to the ones adopted in Fig. 13. Dashed-line shows the Υ⋆vs.g−r
linear relation reported by Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. (2019) (Table 1 of that article),
shifted to match the IMFs and the photometric systems. The relation match
pretty-well with our reported distribution.
for all galaxies and segregated by morphology. There is a clear trend
between both parameters, with Υ⋆increasing from∼2 M⊙/L⊙at
low-mass (late-type) galaxies to ∼8 M⊙/L⊙at high-mass (early-type)
ones. This trend it is expected as the Υ⋆traces the stellar composi-
tion in galaxies, having higher values as older are the stars (being a
consequence of young stars having a much lower Υthan older ones).
As more massive /earlier type galaxies have older stellar populations
(Kauffmann et al. 2003a; Blanton & Moustakas 2009, , and refer-
ences therein), they have larger Υ⋆too. Since the pioneering studies
using broad-band photometry (e.g. Faber 1977; Peletier et al. 1990),
to the more recent explorations using IFS data (e.g. Gonz ´alez Del-
gado et al. 2014a; S ´anchez 2020; S ´anchez et al. 2021a), it is well
known that galaxies present a radial gradients in the age of their stel-
lar populations, leading to variations in the Υ⋆from the inside-out
(e.g. Zibetti et al. 2009; Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. 2019), in particular in
more massive and early-type galaxies. Fig. 14 shows the violin plot
of the Υ⋆derived for the central and integrated apertures as a func-
tion of the stellar mass (middle panel) and the morphology (rightpanel). As expected Υ⋆has higher values in the central regions of
galaxies than integrated galaxy wide, reflecting the gradient in the
stellar composition. This trend is more clear when galaxies are seg-
regated by morphology, seeing
The dependence of Υ⋆with galaxy properties, variations from the
inside out, and in particular, the analysis of the correlations with
photometric colors, is a topic that has been addressed by many pre-
vious explorations (e.g. Bell & de Jong 2000; Bell et al. 2003; Zibetti
et al. 2009; Gallazzi & Bell 2009; Taylor et al. 2011; Into & Portinari
2013; Roediger & Courteau 2015; Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. 2019). It is
beyond the scope of the current study to make a detailed comparison
with all of them. We will focus on Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. (2019), as it
is using a similar technique (spectral synthesis) for a roughly similar
dataset (the DR3 CALIFA sample), although they performed a fully
spatial resolved analysis, using a di fferent fitting code and a di ffer-
ent SSP library. The main di fferences between the results are (1) the
adopted IMF, that implies and o ffset of∼0.29 dex in Υ⋆, constant
for all stellar-masses, morphologies, and colors, and (2) the adopted
photometric system for the galaxy colors, g−r, Vega in our case and
AB in Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. (2019). This requires an additional o ffset,
that we took from Fukugita et al. (2007).
Once applied those o ffsets we find a very good qualitative and
quantitative agreement between our results. For instance, the com-
parison of the results shown in Fig. 14 with those presented in Fig.
2 of Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. (2019) (upper-panel), indicates that (i) the
trend between Υ⋆and morphology, (ii) the values reported for the
central regions, and (iii) the average values galaxy wide for each
morphological type agree within a few percentage between both
studies. A more quantitative comparison is included in Figure 15,
where it is shown the distribution of Υ⋆as a function of the g−r
color, for the total sample and segregated by morphology. We in-
clude in this figure the relation reported by Garc ´ıa-Benito et al.
(2019) for both parameters, once considered the o ffsets required to
take into account the di fferences in the IMF and photometric systems
described before. There is a remarkable agreement between the pub-
lished relation and the distribution traced by our measurements.
5.1.3 Age and metallicity
The decomposition of a stellar population in a set of SSPs naturally
provides with an age and metallicity distribution function (ADF and
MDF) in both light and mass, as is illustrated in the bottom panel
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)20 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
7 8 9 10 11 12
log(M⋆) [M⊙]7.58.08.59.09.510.0log(A⋆) cen [yr]
E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0
log(M⋆) [M⊙]7.58.08.59.09.510.0log(A⋆) cen [yr]
cen
int
E S0/S0a Sa/Sab Sb/Sbc Sc/Scd Sd/Irr
Hubble Type7.58.08.59.09.510.0log(A⋆) cen [yr]
cen
int
7 8 9 10 11 12
log(M⋆) [M⊙]−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.5[Z/H] cen
E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0
log(M⋆) [M⊙]−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.5[Z/H]
cen
int
E S0/S0a Sa/Sab Sb/Sbc Sc/Scd Sd/Irr
Hubble Type−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.5[Z/H]
cen
int
Figure 16. Distribution of the A⋆,L(top panels) andZ⋆,L(bottom panels), derived for the central aperture spectra as a function of the stellar mass ( left panels ),
together with the violin plots comparing these parameter derived for the central (cen) and integrated (int) spectra as a function of the stellar mass ( middle panels )
and the morphology ( right panels ). We use the same nomenclature adopted in Fig. 14 for each panel.
of Fig. 12. Since the early studies by Panter et al. (2003), these dis-
tributions are used to trace the mass-assembly, chemical enrichment
and star-formation histories of galaxies and regions within them (e.g.
Asari et al. 2007; P ´erez et al. 2013; Ibarra-Medel et al. 2016; Camps-
Fari˜na et al. 2021, 2022), as recently reviewed by S ´anchez (2020).
Those distributions can be studied to compare them with results pro-
vided by resolved stellar population, in particular the MDF (e.g.
Mej´ıa-Narv ´aez et al. 2020). In some cases, instead of analyzing the
full distributions, it is more convenient to collapse them into charac-
teristics value such as the luminosity- or mass-weighted values (i.e.,
those listed in Table 4). This is particular useful when exploring ra-
dial gradients in those properties or dependencies on global proper-
ties (e.g. Gallazzi et al. 2005, 2006; Gonz ´alez Delgado et al. 2014a,
2015; Goddard et al. 2017; S ´anchez 2020; S ´anchez et al. 2021a). We
should keep in mind that they only provide with a limited informa-
tion of the real distribution of those quantities, and that the informa-
tion is di fferent depending on (1) how the average is performed (in
a linear or logarithm space), (2) at which wavelength is normalized
the LW, and /or (3) if it is weighted by mass or by light. In general,
LW ages and metallicities, when normalized at ∼5000Å highlights
the contribution of young stars with respect to an underlying content
of old stars. This way, A⋆,Lcorrelates pretty well with blue-to-red
colors, stellar indices as D4000, the Υ⋆(e.g. Kau ffmann et al. 2003a;
Blanton & Moustakas 2009), and Z⋆,Lpresent some trends with the
gas-phase oxygen abundance (e.g. Gonz ´alez Delgado et al. 2014b;
Espinosa-Ponce et al. 2022). On the other hand, MW ages and metal-
licities are more representative of the bulk stellar population, and in
general they present higher values (e.g. S ´anchez et al. 2021a), being
less suitable to explore changes in the stellar populations sensitive
to the presence of young stars.
Figure 16, left-panels, shows the distribution of A⋆,L(top pan-
els) andZ⋆,L(bottom panels) derived for the central aperture as afunction of the stellar masses for the full sample of galaxies, and
segregated by morphology. We find a clear trend between both pa-
rameters and both the mass and morphology, with low-mass /late-
type galaxies having a younger /metal-poor stellar population and
high-mass /early-type galaxies having an older /meta-rich one. In this
regards we reproduce well known trends, already described us-
ing aperture limited spectroscopic surveys (e.g. Blanton & Mous-
takas 2009; Gallazzi et al. 2006) or integral field-spectroscopy (e.g.
Gonz ´alez Delgado et al. 2014b, 2015). These trends are the con-
sequence of global downsizing: more massive /early-type galaxies
form the bulk of their stars more early in the cosmological time, hav-
ing a sharper, more peaky and shorter SFH than less massive /late-
type ones (e.g. P ´erez-Gonz ´alez et al. 2008). These di fferent SFHs
(and mass assembly history, MAH) produce a di fferent chemical
enrichment history (ChEH) and a final accumulated metallicity for
galaxies of di fferent mass and morphology (Panter et al. 2003).
Recent results have shown that beyond these average trends, less-
massive /later-type galaxies present a wider range of SFHs (MAHs)
and ChEHs than more-massive /ealier-types (Ibarra-Medel et al.
2016; Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. 2017). As a consequence, the former
present a wider distribution of A⋆,LandZ⋆,L, as indeed it is ob-
served in Fig. 16, and previous results (e.g. Gonz ´alez Delgado et al.
2014b). Furthermore, the shape of the ChEH seem to be equally to
the morphology and to the stellar mass (Camps-Fari ˜na et al. 2021,
2022).
Beside the di fferent patterns in the average evolution of the stel-
lar populations galaxy-wide for galaxies of di fferent stellar mass
and morphology, there are di fferences observed at di fferent regions
within galaxies: bulge-dominated /inner-regions, those with higher
stellar mass density ( Σ⋆), present a sharper evolution than disk-
dominated /outer-regions, i.e., those with lower Σ⋆. This local down-
sizing (P ´erez et al. 2013), observed as a change in the local SFHs
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)21
(MAHs) and ChEHs from the inside-out, induce a gradient in the
radial distributions of the stellar properties. Fig. 16, shows the violin
plots of the distribution of A⋆,L(top panels) andZ⋆,L(bottom pan-
els) for both the central and integrated apertures, as a function of the
stellar masses (central panels) and morphologies (bottom panels). In
the case of theA⋆,L, for all morphologies and for M ⋆>108.0M⊙,
the inner stellar populations are always older than the outer ones. A
somehow similar pattern is observed in Z⋆,L, although in this case
low-mass (<108.5M⊙) and later-type galaxies (Sd /Irr), present simi-
lar distributions in both apertures. These patterns can be interpreted
as an inside-out growth of galaxies earlier than Sd and more massive
than M⋆>108.0−8.5M⊙.
The inside-out growth is thought to be connected on how disks
acquired their angular momentum when formed (Peebles 1969; Lar-
son 1976). However, the di fferences in the stellar-populations may
be also connected with an inside-out quenching /aging of the stellar
populations too (e.g. Gonz ´alez Delgado et al. 2016; S ´anchez et al.
2018; S ´anchez 2020), which may be connected to a lack of molecu-
lar gas in the inner regions of galaxies, dynamical stability in bulges,
the effect of AGNs, or a combined e ffect of all of them (for instance,
see the discussion in Bluck et al. 2019). For less massive /later type
galaxies an outside-in or homogeneous growth could explain the ob-
served distribution. In general, it is required to invoke a di fference
in gas inflow for di fferent galaxy types and di fferent galactocentric
distances to explain this kind of gradients (e.g. Carigi et al. 2019,
and references therein). As already discussed in the recent review
summarizing the results from di fferent IFS galaxy survey (S ´anchez
2020), these scenarios refer to how fast the star-formation happens
in different radial distances with time, not to the amount of stars. In
all galaxies it is found a negative gradient in the stellar-mass den-
sity. Thus, in all of them there are more stars formed in the central
regions along the time than in the outer ones.
5.1.4 Stellar dust attenuation
Dust is one of the components of the ISM with the lowest contri-
bution to its total mass ( <1%, e.g., Santini et al. 2014). However, it
has an strong impact in the shape of the spectral energy distribution
and in the redistribution of photons from the UV-optical (that are ab-
sorbed and attenuated) to the infrared (due to dust thermal emission).
Dust grains are condensation of metals that are formed in the atmo-
spheres of evolved stars and supernovae remnants, and therefore it is
a tracer of the evolution of stellar populations too. Being usually ag-
gregated to molecular clouds, it is as a tracer of H 2column density,
and therefore, of the molecular gas content (e.g. Brinchmann et al.
2013; Barrera-Ballesteros et al. 2020). It is known that it a ffects in
a different way the emission from the ionized gas, in which a pure
screen model provides good estimations of the dust absorption, than
to the integrated stellar populations, where dust is partially embed-
ded and not fully covering the stellar components (e.g. Calzetti 2001;
Wild et al. 2011; Salim & Narayanan 2020). As indicated before py-
FIT3D provides with an estimation of the dust attenuation (A ⋆,V)
affecting the stellar spectrum, assuming that all components of the
stellar population are a ffected by the same attenuation and adopting
a simple screen model.
Figure 17, left-panel, shows the distribution of these dust atten-
uation derived for the central aperture spectra as a function of the
stellar mass, for all galaxy types and segregated by morphology. On
the contrary to the parameters explored in the previous sections there
is no simple /clear trend /pattern traced by these distributions. For
most galaxy types the distribution is centred in A ⋆,V∼0 mag, with a
narrow range of A ⋆,Vvalues around this central one for more mas-sive and early-type galaxies (E and S0). For later-type, less massive
galaxies, the distribution presents a tail towards larger values. How-
ever, the average value is never higher than ∼0.25 mag, and there is
no further trend with the stellar mass or the morphology. The violin
plots comparing the central and integrated values as a function of the
stellar mass and the morphology (Fig. 17, middle and right panels,
respectively), show that, in general, the distribution of values is even
more concentrated around zero for the integrated spectra than for the
central ones. This trend is modulated by mass and morphology, be-
ing less clear for E and S0 galaxies, in which both values of A ⋆,Vare
rather low.
If we interpret the dust attenuation as proxy of the molecular gas
content, these results would indicate that more massive /early-type
galaxies, and the outer regions of all galaxies, present a relatively
lower gas content than less massive /late-type galaxies, and the inner
regions of all galaxies. This is indeed has been confirmed by many
previous explorations of the molecular gas content in galaxies (e.g.
Saintonge et al. 2016; Calette et al. 2018). However, due to the lim-
itations of our modelling of the dust attenuation a ffecting the stellar
component, we should take this result with a certain precaution. We
will come back to that when exploring the dust attenuation derived
for the ionized gas.
5.1.5 Velocity dispersion
The analysis provides with the velocity dispersion of the stellar com-
ponent (σ⋆) for the two apertures. The instrumental resolution of the
adopted setup (V500 grating, R ∼850), corresponds to ∼120 km s−1
at∼5500Å. Our simulations indicate that in case of good S /N the
code recovers a reliable velocity dispersion above ∼1/3 of this value
(∼40km s−1, for the current data, Lacerda et al. 2022). However, it is
unable to recover values below this value.
Figure 18, left panel, shows the distribution of σ⋆, in logarithm
scale, derived for the central aperture as a function of the stellar mass
for all galaxies and segregated by morphology. Despite of the large
scatter, in particular for low-mass /late-type galaxies, it is observed a
clear monotonic increase of σ⋆with both parameters, with a linear
trend traced by the average values (solid circles) for galaxies earlier
than Sd /Irr. Faber & Jackson (1976) first shown a tight correlation
between the central velocity dispersion and the integrated luminos-
ity in early-type galaxies (FJ relation). This relation is supposed to
be the correspondent to the relation between the rotational veloc-
ity and luminosity found for late-type galaxies (TF relation Tully &
Fisher 1977). Both of them can be described as a relation between
the corresponding kinematic parameter and the stellar mass (and the
baryonic mass in general), and being unified into a single relation
valid for all morphological types (e.g. Weiner et al. 2006; Cortese
et al. 2014; Aquino-Ort ´ız et al. 2018). The usual explanation for
both relations suggest that (i) the central velocity dispersion (rota-
tional velocity) is a good tracer of the dynamical mass in pressure
supported (rotational supported) early-type (late-type) galaxies, and
(ii) there is a tight relation between the dynamical mass traced by
those parameters and the stellar mass.
When using all morphological types (Fig. 18) the relation between
σ⋆,cenand M⋆is broader, less well defined than the FJ-relation,
showing a larger dispersion for late-type galaxies (e.g., Fig. 3 of
Aquino-Ort ´ız et al. 2018). However, for early-type galaxies and
early-spirals the average values shown in Fig. 18 trace very well the
stellar-mass FJ relation reported in the literature.
Like in the case of other stellar properties, σ⋆present known ra-
dial gradients. This is seen in the violin plots comparing the central
and integrated values for this parameter as a function of the stellar
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)22 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
7 8 9 10 11 12
log(M⋆) [M⊙]−0.50.00.51.0AV,⋆cen [mag]
E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0
log(M⋆) [M⊙]−0.50.00.51.0AV,⋆[mag]
cen
int
E S0/S0a Sa/Sab Sb/Sbc Sc/Scd Sd/Irr
Hubble Type−0.50.00.51.0AV,⋆[mag]
cen
int
Figure 17. Distribution of A ⋆,Vderived for the central aperture spectra as a function of the stellar mass ( left panel ), together with the violin plots comparing
this parameter derived for the central (cen) and integrated (int) spectra as a function of the stellar mass ( middle panel ) and the morphology ( right panel ). We
use the same nomenclature adopted in Fig. 14 for each panel.
7 8 9 10 11 12
log(M⋆) [M⊙]1.001.251.501.752.002.252.50log(σ⋆) cen [km s−1]
E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0
log(M⋆) [M⊙]1.001.251.501.752.002.252.50log(σ⋆) [km s−1]
cen
int
E S0/S0a Sa/Sab Sb/Sbc Sc/Scd Sd/Irr
Hubble Type1.001.251.501.752.002.252.50log(σ⋆) [km s−1]
cen
int
Figure 18. Distribution of σ⋆derived for the central aperture spectra as a function of the stellar mass ( left panel ), together with the violin plots comparing this
parameter derived for the central (cen) and integrated (int) spectra as a function of the stellar mass ( middle panel ) and the morphology ( right panel ). We use the
same nomenclature adopted in Fig. 14 for each panel. In addition, the dashed-black line in the left panel corresponds to the Faber-Jackson relation derived for
the CALIFA sample (Aquino-Ort ´ız et al. 2018).
mass and the morphology (Fig. 18, central and right panel, respec-
tively). All galaxies more massive than M ⋆>109.0M⊙, and earlier
than Sc (i.e., galaxies with a massive bulge), have a larger velocity
dispersion in the central aperture than integrated galaxy-wide. How-
ever, for disk-dominated and /or low-mass galaxies there is no evi-
dent gradient velocity dispersion. A possible caveat in here is that
in this later case the reported values are near the minimum σ⋆that
we can reliably recover for the current dataset with our code. In any
case, if there is some gradient it is much smoother than the one de-
scribed for the more massive and earlier type galaxies.
5.2 Properties of the ionized gas
As indicated before, the analysis performed by pyFIT3D extracts the
main properties of a set of defined emission lines that were described
in Sec. 4.1. Table 5 lists the fluxes of the strongest emission lines for
each galaxy in both apertures, with their corresponding errors. No
mask have been applied to the data. Therefore, some reported fluxes
may be negative or zero in this table. We advice the reader to apply
the required masks based on the reported errors depending on the
requirements of each particular exploration.
5.2.1 What ionizes the gas?
The segregation between the di fferent ionization sources in galax-
ies is a topic of debate (e.g. S ´anchez 2020; S ´anchez et al. 2021a),being particularly complicated when using aperture limited and /or
integrated spectra, due to the inherent mixing between di fferent ion-
izing sources (e.g. Mast et al. 2014; Davies et al. 2016; Lacerda
et al. 2018). For the current exploration we adopt an heuristic ap-
proach, adopting the classification proposed by S ´anchez et al. (2014)
and S ´anchez et al. (2018). This classification mixes two frequently
used diagnostic diagrams: (i) the classical BPT diagram, proposed
by (Baldwin et al. 1981), that compares the intensity of the [O iii]/Hβ
vs. [N ii]/Hαline ratios; and (ii) the WHAN diagram, proposed by
(Cid Fernandes et al. 2010, hereafter CF10), that introduces the use
of the EW(H α) to distinguish between di fferent ionizing sources.
Figure 19 shows the distribution of galaxies across those two di-
agrams for both analyzed apertures. In the case of the BPT dia-
grams it is appreciated the classical sea-gulf distribution frequently
described in the literature, that comprises (i) a well defined branch
in the left-side of the diagram, tracing the usual location of classi-
cal H iiregions (e.g. Osterbrock 1989), and (ii) a more extended and
less defined cloud towards the right-side of the diagram. Despite of
the general similarities between the distributions in this diagram for
both the integrated and central apertures, there are also remarkable
differences. For the integrated (central) spectra the left-side trend is
much (less) clearly defined, comprising a larger (lower) number of
galaxies, and the right-side cloud is more (less) di ffuse, covering a
more limited (extended) range towards the upper-right region of the
diagram. This clearly indicates a change in the dominant ionizing
source from the central to the outer regions in galaxies.
When segregating by morphology it is appreciated a somehow
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)23
Table 5. Emission line fluxes in units of 10−16erg s−1cm−2estimated for the central and integrated spectra of all the galaxies.
cubename aperture [O ii]3727 H β [Oiii]5007 H α [Nii]6584 [S ii]6717 [S ii]6731
IC5376 int 399.4 ±114.8 113.3 ±17.0 60.9±9.1 531.2±79.7 227.0±34.0 108.6±16.3 72.1±10.8
” cen 0.9 ±18.4 1.1 ±0.6 2.4±0.6 4.5 ±0.9 6.0±0.9 1.2±0.9 1.0±0.9
UGC00005 int 696.9 ±104.5 352.4 ±52.9 129.4±19.4 1527.2±229.1 657.5 ±98.6 369.2±55.4 264.8±39.7
” cen 5.3 ±3.1 6.5±1.0 31.1±4.7 31.2 ±4.7 37.8±5.7 10.3±1.5 7.9±1.2
NGC7819 int 664.0 ±99.6 370.7±55.6 125.8±18.9 1379.3±206.9 475.2 ±71.3 259.7±39.0 177.0±26.6
” cen 27.3 ±4.4 46.1±6.9 6.0±0.9 205.1±30.8 74.9±11.2 22.8 ±3.4 19.6±2.9
UGC00029 int 58.1 ±37.3 13.5±16.1 16.4±16.2 13.5 ±73.8 12.4±73.8 59.6±73.8 42.6±73.8
” cen 0.0 ±3.1 0.0±0.6 0.0±0.6 1.5 ±3.3 4.0±3.3 4.4±3.3 1.8±3.3
IC1528 int 451.6 ±67.7 379.5±56.9 185.7±27.9 1504.6±225.7 534.0 ±80.1 333.5±50.0 238.9±35.8
” cen 4.9 ±0.7 7.0±1.0 1.3±0.2 30.7 ±4.6 11.7±1.8 4.6±0.7 3.8±0.6
NGC7824 int 491.8 ±99.7 182.7±27.4 147.7±23.5 412.6 ±61.9 412.6±61.9 96.9±31.9 133.1±33.1
” cen -8.4 ±2.1 3.0±1.3 1.9±1.2 2.9 ±0.5 2.3±0.5 0.0±0.6 1.0±0.5
UGC00036 int 93.4 ±695.2 93.8 ±14.1 45.7±11.9 466.9 ±70.0 297.4±44.6 53.2±21.4 135.1±21.4
” cen 14.1 ±53.3 5.8 ±0.9 4.6±0.9 39.0 ±5.8 26.1±3.9 7.5±1.4 6.7±1.3
NGC0001 int 503.6 ±75.5 454.5±68.2 114.4±17.2 2140.6±321.1 834.4±125.2 323.3 ±57.8 197.2±57.8
” cen 3.6 ±1.7 16.3±2.4 4.6±0.9 78.6±11.8 33.1 ±5.0 8.2±1.5 5.3±1.5
NGC0023 int 2131.7 ±319.8 1585.1±237.8 666.2±99.9 7764.9±1164.7 3924.1 ±588.6 1506.4±226.0 1143.4±171.5
” cen 59.4 ±8.9 113.3±17.0 39.8±6.0 548.2±82.2 324.4±48.7 97.1±14.6 80.4±12.1
NGC0036 int 475.6 ±99.3 367.0±55.0 144.0±21.6 1654.7±248.2 744.6±111.7 302.7 ±45.4 198.8±45.1
” cen 2.3 ±2.1 1.1±0.6 3.1±0.6 5.9 ±1.2 13.2±2.0 2.9±1.2 2.0±1.2
UGC00139 int 934.6 ±140.2 352.4 ±52.9 220.0±33.0 807.4±121.1 236.8 ±35.5 165.8±26.2 109.4±25.9
” cen 0.3 ±8.1 4.0±0.6 0.8±0.2 14.1 ±2.1 3.2±1.3 2.7±1.2 1.8±1.2
MCG-02-02-030 int 475.8 ±141.4 388.8 ±58.3 156.2±23.4 1290.7±193.6 605.2 ±90.8 281.6±56.8 200.5±56.1
” cen 3.1 ±2.0 2.8±0.6 8.0±1.2 24.8 ±3.7 18.6±2.8 6.9±2.1 6.4±2.1
We present the values for just ten galaxies. The information for the remaining one is distributed electronically.
similar trend as the one observed when comparing the central and
integrated apertures: later-type (early-type) galaxies are more fre-
quently located in the left-side (right-side) branch of the distribution
for both apertures. This trend is observed in both the average values
and the whole distributions. Furthermore, the e ffect is modulated by
the aperture with (i) a more clear segregation in the integrated aper-
ture (a larger distinction) than for the central one, and (ii) a general
shift to the right-side for all morphologies in the central aperture.
These results have been already presented in previous studies us-
ing similar data (e.g. Lacerda et al. 2018; Law et al. 2021; Barrera-
Ballesteros et al. 2022), and discussed in recent reviews (S ´anchez
2020; S ´anchez et al. 2021a). They clearly indicate that the domi-
nant ionizing source changes from the inside-out and from earlier
to later type morphologies. It is known that the left-side branch in
the BPT diagram is the location occupied by classical H iiregions
(e.g Osterbrock 1989), being usually assigned to ionization due to
young massive OB-stars generated in recent SF events. Di fferent de-
marcation lines have been proposed to limit the region populated by
this kind of ionization (Kau ffmann et al. 2003b, ,K03 hereafter) and
(Kewley et al. 2001, ,K01 hereafter). The nature, actual meaning,
and usability of both boundaries has been extensively discussed in
the literature (e.g. S ´anchez et al. 2021a). On the contrary, the right-
side branch can be populated by ionization due to many di fferent
sources, all of them presenting a harder ionization than OB-stars: (i)
active galactic nuclei (AGNs, e.g. Osterbrock 1989); (ii) shock ion-
ization due to high- and low-speed gas winds (Heckman et al. 1990;
Bland-Hawthorn 1995; Dopita et al. 1996, e.g.); and ionization by
hot old evolved stars (HOLMES Flores-Fajardo et al. 2011), beyond
their post-AGB phase, that have lost their external envelop (e.g. Bi-
nette et al. 1994).
Different approaches have been proposed to distinguish among
the ionization sources that populate the right-branch of the BPTdiagram, including the use of the velocity dispersion (e.g. Law
et al. 2015; D’Agostino et al. 2019), explore the shape of the ion-
ized structures (e.g. L ´opez-Cob ´a et al. 2020) and /or distribution
along the galactocentric distance (e.g. Gomes et al. 2016). Most of
them required the use of the spatially resolved information, as re-
cently reviewed by S ´anchez et al. (2021a). However, for aperture
limited and integrated spectra it is frequently adopted the relative
strength of the ionized flux with respect to the underlying contin-
uum, parametrized by the EW(H α). Based on the results by Binette
et al. (1994) and Stasi ´nska et al. (2008), Cid Fernandes et al. (2010)
proposed the WHAN diagnostic diagram that compares the distri-
bution of the EW(H α)as a function of the [N ii]/Hαratio, to dis-
tinguish between SF, AGN and ionization found in retired galaxies
(RG, those that are not forming stars anymore Stasi ´nska et al. 2008),
i.e., HOLMES /post-AGB ionization. It is important to note that low-
intensity shock ionization (e.g. Dopita et al. 1996) and weak AGNs
(e.g. Ho et al. 1997) could be also present in retired galaxies (and
the center of other galaxies too). Both ionizating sources would be
indistinguishable from the proposed mechanism associated to the
presence of old /evolved stars using the adopted methodology. Their
frequency is, however, uncertain: (i) (L ´opez-Cob ´a et al. 2020) found
that only 12 out of ∼260 early-type galaxies of their sample of 635
galaxies observed with MUSE present clear evidence of shock ion-
ization, i.e., filamentary /extended ionized gas structures, with rela-
tively high velocity dispersion and [N ii]/Hαvalues, and relatively
low values of EW(H α); (ii) Ho et al. (1997) found that a non negli-
gible subset of LINERs ( ∼20%) present broad H αemission, a clear
evidence of the presence of an AGN. Considering both numbers to-
gether, we could establish that in about 25% of the early-type galax-
ies the observed LINER-like ionization could be assigned to an ion-
izing process di fferent than HOLMES /post-AGBs. On the contrary
all early-type galaxies present the required old-stellar populations to
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)24 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
−1.0−0.5 0.0 0.5
log([Nii]/Hα)−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.5log([Oiii]/Hβ)int
E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
−1.0−0.5 0.0 0.5
log([NII]/Hα)−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.5log([OIII]/H β)cen
E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
−1.0−0.5 0.0 0.5
log([Nii]/Hα)−1012log|EW(Hα)|SF
RGsAGN
wAGN
intE
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
−1.0−0.5 0.0 0.5
log([NII]/Hα)−1012log|EW(Hα)|SF
RGsAGN
wAGN
cenE
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
Figure 19. Distribution of galaxies across the BPT (top panels) and WHAN (bottom panels) based on the emission line properties derived from the integrated
(left panels) and central (right panels) spectra. It is adopted the same nomenclature adopted in Fig. 14 for each panel. In addition, the solid and dashed lines
in the BPT diagrams corresponds to the K03 and K01 demarcations lines, respectively. The dashed-lines in the WHAN diagram correspond to the boundaries
defined by CF10 between di fferent ionizing sources (as indicated in the legends). Finally, the location of galaxies candidate to host an AGNs, derived based on
the central and integrated spectra, are indicated with a back star (thus, they are a di fferent number of possible candidates).
produce this kind of ionization, that indeed is ubiquitious observed
in the presence of old stars and ionized gas (e.g. Singh et al. 2013;
Belfiore et al. 2017).. Fig 19, bottom panels, shows the distribution
of our galaxies in this diagram for both considered apertures. In the
case of the integrated spectra we find a well defined anti-correlation
between both parameters, with high (low) EW(H α) corresponding
to low (high) [N ii]/Hαvalues. This trend is followed by the galaxies
of different morphologies too, with later (earlier) type mostly found
in the upper-left (bottom-right) regions of the diagram. As values
of the EW(H α)<3Å, are assigned to ionization by old stars low-
intensity shocks and weak AGNs, this trend clearly indicate that a
combination of those mechanisms produce the observed ionization
in early-type galaxies (i.e, E /S0). On the contrary, the dominant ion-
ization in late-type galaxies, those with a considerable amount of SF,
is indeed compatible with massive young-stars.
A roughly similar trend is described by the central apertures.
However, in this case, instead of a clear anti-correlation between the
two parameters (EW(H α) and [N ii]/Hα), there is less well-defined
trend. The strongest di fference is the presence of a bump in the
region of high EW(H α) and high [N ii]/Hαthat was assigned to
strong AGN ionization by Cid Fernandes et al. (2010). When seg-
regating by morphology, the negative trend described for the inte-
grated spectra is appreciated, slightly shifted to higher values of the
[Nii]/Hαratio, and with the AGN-bump dominated mostly by early-
spirals (Sa /Sab and Sb, in agreement with previous results S ´anchez
et al. 2018; Lacerda et al. 2020). This bump is coincident with theTable 6. Distribution of the dominant ionizing sources
Ionizing integrated central
source # gal. % # gal. %
NG 164 18 227 25
UN 21 2 82 9
SF 576 64 384 43
pAGB 107 12 85 9
wAGN 10 1 37 4
sAGN 17 2 80 9
Number of galaxies segregated by the dominant ionizing source for the in-
tegrated and central apertures: NG (no gas detected), UN (unknown ioniz-
ing source), SF (young massive OB-stars), pAGB (HOLMES /post-AGB old
stars), wAGN (weak AGN-like ionization), and sAGN (strong AGN-like ion-
ization).
cloud towards the upper-right region described for the same aperture
in the BPT diagram. The obvious conclusion is that in the central
aperture the possible contribution of an AGN or an AGN-like ion-
ization could dominate or significantly pollute the observed ioniza-
tion (e.g. Davies et al. 2016), without necessarily dominate the ion-
ization galaxy-wide. This result highlights the importance of defin-
ing at which aperture it is classified the ionization of a galaxy, and
demonstrates the importance of introducing the EW(H α) as an extra
parameter to classify the ionization.
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)25
Based on all these results, following S ´anchez et al. (2021a), we
finally classified the dominant ionization in each aperture in the fol-
lowing way: (i) if the H αflux has a S /N below 3, it is considered that
there is no ionized gas detected (NG); (ii) if H αis detected above
this threshold, but the S /N of Hβ, [Nii] or [O iii] is below 1, then we
consider that the source of the ionization is unknown (UN); finally, if
the two detection thresholds are fulfilled, and (iii) the EW(H α) is be-
low 3Å, the ionization is classified as HOLMES /post-AGB (pAGB),
irrespectively of its location in the BPT diagram . We should state
clearly that, as indicated before, we cannot be 100% sure that the
dominant ionizing source in these galaxies is actually related to the
presence of old /hot evolved stars, as weak AGNs and low-intensity
shocks may also contribute to the observed ionization somehow, or
even dominate it (Dopita et al. 1996; Ho et al. 1997); on the other
hand (iv) if the EW(H α) is above 3Å and the line ratios are below
the K01 in the BPT diagram, the ionization is considered to be dom-
inated by young massive stars (SF); finally, (v) if the EW(H α) is
above 3Å and the line ratios are above the K01 in the BPT dia-
gram, the ionization is considered dominated by an AGN, segregat-
ing between a strong AGN (sAGN) when EW(H α)>6Å, and a weak
AGN (wAGN) when it is below this value. We should stress that this
classification scheme does not distinguish between AGNs and shock
ionization, and therefore when quoting AGN-ionization we refer to
AGN-like ionization (i.e., an ionization not due to an stellar source).
Table 6 show the results of this classification. The first result to
notice is the fraction of galaxies without any detected or unclassi-
fied ionized gas (∼20-30%), in both apertures. This fraction is rather
low. However, it is considerably larger than the one usually reported
when using the spatial resolved IFS with a typical resolution of ∼1
kpc (∼10% or lower Gomes et al. 2016; S ´anchez et al. 2018). The
reason behind this discrepancy is the dilution of the emission line
signal when using large apertures. As a consequence, the number of
galaxies with an ionization compatible with HOLMES /post-AGBs,
i.e., the weakest one of the considered here, is very low compared
to those previous studies too. This result highlights the advantage of
using spatial resolved spectroscopy even when deriving integrated
or global properties of galaxies.
The values in Tab. 6 agree with the distributions shown in Fig 19,
for those galaxies with detected ionized gas: (i) the over-all domi-
nating ionizing source is the presence of young massive OB stars,
in particular for the integrated spectrum ( ∼64% of the galaxies);
and (ii) the fraction of AGN-like ionization detected in the inte-
grated spectra is much lower than the one found in central aper-
ture (∼3% vs.∼12%, as expected due to the dilution of the central
ionizing source at larger apertures, e.g., Davies et al. 2016; Lac-
erda et al. 2018; Alb ´an & Wylezalek 2023), being a small frac-
tion in both cases. Figure 20 shows the distribution of the dominant
ionizing source for the di fferent morphological types. Most of the
galaxies without a clear detection of ionized gas, neither in the in-
tegrated aperture nor in the central one, are early type objects (E
and S0). In this kind of galaxies, when detected, the ionization is
dominated by HOLMES /post-AGBs, as expected in retired galax-
ies (Stasi ´nska et al. 2008; Cid Fernandes et al. 2010; Singh et al.
2013). As indicated before, based on the results using spatial re-
solved IFS, it is expected that a substantial fraction of the non-
detections present ionization due to this source that it is diluted in
the aperture limited spectra (S ´anchez 2020). On the other hand, the
ionization in the latest morphological types (Sc-Sd), is dominated by
young-massive OB stars for both apertures, as expected in actively
star-forming galaxies. They are the objects with the lowest fraction
of non-detections too. Finally, AGN-like ionization, in particular in
the central regions, is more frequently found in early-spirals (Sa and
NG UN SF pAGB wAGN sAGN255075E255075S0/S0a255075Sa/Sab255075Sb/Sbc255075Sc/Scd255075Sd/Irr255075All cen intFraction of galaxies [%]Figure 20. Distribution of the dominant ionizing sources for the di fferent
morphological types for both the central and integrated spectra, labelled
as indicated in Tab. 6. As described in the text, the dominant ionizing
source changes with morphology, with earlier (later) types presenting a larger
fraction of (i) galaxies without (with) ionized gas and (i) post-AGB (star-
formation) ionization.
Sb), although most of them are ionized by SF-related sources (in
particular galaxy wide). Regarding the non-detections they present a
fraction slightly larger than the latest morphological types, in partic-
ular for the central aperture, but significantly lower than that found
in the earliest morphological types.
As a final remark, following S ´anchez et al. (2018), we consider
that a galaxy is clearly hosting an AGN is the dominant ionization
corresponds to a strong AGN in the central aperture, irrespectively
of which is the dominant ionization in the integrated spectrum10. On
the other hand, we consider that a galaxy is actively forming stars if
the dominant ionization is due to young-massive stars in any of both
apertures. Therefore, a galaxy could belong to both categories at the
same time.
5.2.2 Ionized gas vs. stellar dust attenuation
It is well known that the dust a ffects in a di fferent way the —stel-
lar continuum than the ionized gas (e.g. Calzetti et al. 1997; Wild
et al. 2011). There are many reason of why it is so, the most relevant
ones are related to (i) the di fferent way that dust a ffects UV radiation
that produces the ionization, and it a ffects the dominant radiation
in the stellar population (oldish stars), (ii) the e ffects of the scatter
and redistribution of light in the line of sight and, maybe the most
important (iii) the geometrical distribution of the dust grains with
10Note that shock ionization may enter in this category, as indicated before
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)26 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
Table 7. Main physical properties derived from the emission line intensities.
cubename Dominant Ionization A V,gas log(SFR) 12 +log(O /H) log(M gas)
int cen int [mag] cen [mag] [M ⊙yr−1] [M ⊙yr−1]
IC5376 SF sAGN 1.55 ±0.78 0.15±0.08 -0.08±0.01 8.54±4.27 9.7±4.85
UGC00005 SF sAGN 1.3 ±0.65 1.63±0.82 0.64±0.32 8.57±4.28 10.17±5.08
NGC7819 SF SF 0.82 ±0.41 1.39±0.7 0.1±0.05 8.53±4.26 9.57±4.78
UGC00029 NG NG 0.15 ±0.08 0.15±0.08 -1.66±2.18 nan±nan 7.07±3.54
IC1528 SF SF 1.02 ±0.51 1.32±0.66 -0.03±0.0 8.52±4.26 9.75±4.88
NGC7824 pAGB pAGB 0.15 ±0.08 0.15±0.08 -0.5±0.03 nan±nan 6.99±3.5
UGC00036 SF SF 1.74 ±1.22 2.7±1.58 0.13±0.06 8.61±4.3 9.73±4.86
NGC0001 SF SF 1.56 ±0.78 1.64±0.82 0.44±0.22 8.56±4.28 9.44±4.72
NGC0023 SF SF 1.69 ±0.84 1.65±0.82 1.04±0.52 8.58±4.29 10.66±5.33
NGC0036 SF sAGN 1.43 ±0.72 0.15±0.08 0.54±0.27 8.56±4.28 10.29±5.14
UGC00139 SF SF 0.15 ±0.08 0.63±1.03 -0.62±0.02 8.48±4.24 7.19±3.6
MCG-02-02-030 SF sAGN 0.47 ±0.65 3.54±3.92 -0.35±0.02 8.57±4.28 8.43±4.22
We present the values for just ten galaxies. The information for the remaining one is distributed electronically.
7 8 9 10 11 12
log(M⋆) [M⊙]0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2AV,⋆/AV,gasintALLE
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
7 8 9 10 11 12
log(M⋆) [M⊙]0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2AV,⋆/AV,gasintSFGsE
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
Figure 21. Distribution of the ratio between the dust attenuation derived from
the fitting to the stellar component, A V,⋆, and the estimated for the ionized
gas, A V,gasfor the integrated aperture, as a function of the stellar mass, for
the full sample of galaxies (top panel), and the SFGs (bottom panel). The
distributions segregated by morphology are shown in both panels too. We
use the same nomenclature adopted in left panel of Fig. 14. The dashed line
corresponds to the ratio relation between both quantities proposed by Calzetti
(2001).respect to both components (e.g. Calzetti 2001). The e ffect of the
dust on the observed spectra is well reproduced by a simple screen
model for the ionized gas, that comprises both absorption and scat-
ter in the line-of-sight (the so-called extinction). However, the sce-
nario is more complex for the average stellar population, in which
the dust grains are embedded in the stars, and therefore the relative
geometry and spatial distribution is relevant, including scatter light
redirected into the line-of-sight, an interstellar medium of di fferent
column densities and optical depths, and an incomplete coverage of
the dust for the average stellar population, i.e., a mixing e ffect of
stars totally and partially obscured and /or not obscured at all (e.g.
Salim & Narayanan 2020).
The net e ffect is that dust produces a smoother attenuation of the
stellar spectra than the one expected from a pure screen model. Con-
sequently, Calzetti et al. (1997) and Calzetti (2001) estimated that
AV,⋆∼0.44 A V,gas, exploring a limited sample of star-forming galax-
ies (SFGs). More extensive explorations on larger samples reported
a dependence of this ratio on di fferent galaxy properties, in partic-
ular the specific SFR (sSFR =SFR
M⋆) and the inclination (e.g. Wild
et al. 2011, using SDSS data). All these explorations are limited to
SFGs in which A V,gasis more easily determined due to strength of
the emission lines.
Figure 21 shows the distribution of the ratio between both dust
attenuations, A V,⋆/AV,gas, as a function of M ⋆for the sub-sample
of galaxies for which we can estimate both quantities (420 objects,
top-panel) and for those of which dominant ionization is compatible
with SF (344 star-forming galaxies, SFGs, bottom-panel). First, we
notice that the ratio between both dust attenuations covers a wide
range of values, without no clear pattern with the stellar mass in the
case of the full sample of galaxies. If any, there is a trend with the
morphology: (i) the highest values are found it early-type galaxies
(∼0.6, E /S0); (ii) the lowest ones in early-spirals ( ∼0.2-0.3, Sa-Sbc),
and (iii) finally the values rise up again to a value near to the one
reported by Calzetti (2001) for late-spirals ( ∼0.4, Sd /Irr). A more
clear pattern with the stellar mass is observed if we limit the sample
to just SFGs, with the ratio reaching the highest (lowest) values at
low (high) masses. We attempt to explore the distributions reported
by Wild et al. (2011), in particular the trend with the sSFR and the
inclination, but we did not find clear patterns. The only galaxy pa-
rameters for which we find some trends are those that depends di-
rectly on the stellar mass, such as the oxygen abundance and the
stellar metallicity.
One possible source of discrepancy between our result and the
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)27
7 8 9 10 11 12
log(M⋆) [M⊙]−3−2−101log(SFR) [M⊙yr−1]E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
4 6 8 10 12
log(M gas) [M⊙]−3−2−101log(SFR) [M⊙yr−1]E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
7 8 9 10 11 12
log(M⋆) [M⊙]4681012log(M gas) [M⊙]E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
Figure 22. Distribution of (i) SFR as a function of M ⋆(left panel), (ii) SFR as a function of M gas(central panel) and (iii) M gasas a function of M ⋆(right
panel) for the full sample of galaxies and segregated by morphology. We adopt the same nomenclature adopted in left panel of Fig. 14. The dashed-line in each
panel corresponds to the extensive form of the SFMS, SK and MGMS relations for SFGs recently reported by S ´anchez et al. (2022a), using the AMUSING ++
compilation.
one presented in Wild et al. (2011) is the di fferent aperture at which
the dust attenuation was measured. As indicated before Wild et al.
(2011) used the 3′′aperture spectra from the SDSS survey, while
in here we are using the galaxy wide (IFU FoV limited) integrated
spectra. Barrera-Ballesteros et al. (2022) already noticed a radial
gradient in this dust ratio. For a better comparison we repeated
the exploration using the dust attenuations estimated for the central
aperture. Using these values we obtain similar average distributions,
but with an even larger scatter in the observed distributions. There-
fore, we cannot o ffer a satisfactory explanation for the described dis-
crepancy so far, beside the di fferences in galaxy samples. The SDSS
offers a several order of magnitudes larger sample than the one ex-
plored here. Maybe the patterns described by Wild et al. (2011) have
a statistical nature and they only emerge for samples large enough
to overcome the large dispersion introduced by individual objects
in more limited samples as the studied here. We will try to address
this issue in a dedicated study using the spatial resolved information
provided by the current data, that could improve the quality of the
derivation of the discussed parameters.
5.2.3 Star-formation rate scaling relations
The star-formation (SF) process in galaxies (and regions within
them) generate three relations among the main involved parameters:
(i) the rate at which star-formation happens, SFR, (ii) the accumu-
lated stellar mass, M ⋆, and (iii) the ingredient from which stars are
form, i.e., the molecular gas mass, M gas. The relation between SFR
and M⋆, known as the Star-Formation Main Sequence, is well de-
scribed by a linear relation between the logarithm of both parame-
ters, with a slope∼1 and a standard deviation of ∼0.25 dex (SFMS,
e.g. Brinchmann et al. 2004; Renzini & Peng 2015). It has been ob-
served at a wide range of redshifts, with a strong evolution towards
larger values of SFR and lower values of M ⋆in earlier cosmologi-
cal times (e.g. Speagle et al. 2014; Rodr ´ıguez-Puebla et al. 2016),
tracing the cosmic evolution of the SFR rate (e.g. S ´anchez et al.
2019a). The SFMS was first described as a relation between these
two extensive quantities in galaxies. More recently it has been de-
scribed as a relation between the surface densities of both quantities,
ΣSFRandΣ∗(i.e., two extensive quantities), being fulfilled at very dif-
ferent scales in galaxies, from galaxy wide to ∼1kpc scales (S ´anchez
2020; Cano-D ´ıaz et al. 2016; Pan et al. 2018; S ´anchez et al. 2021b).
On the contrary, the relation between the SFR and M gaswas first
described as an intensive relation between the star-formation and the
molecular gas surface densities ( Σmol): Kennicutt (1998) shown thatthe logarithm of both quantities follows a linear relation with a slope
∼1.4, in agreement with the expectations by Schmidt (1968). Like in
the case of the SFMS, this relation, known as the Schmidt-Kennicutt
(SK) law, is fulfilled at for a wide range of galaxy scales (Wong
& Blitz 2002; S ´anchez et al. 2021b, 2022a). Although there is less
agreement on its actual slope, being more near to one in the studies
at a kpc-scale (e.g. Lin et al. 2019; S ´anchez et al. 2021b), in all cases
is described as a tight relation, with a scatter of ∼0.2 dex (e.g. Bigiel
et al. 2008; Leroy et al. 2013).
Finally, a third relation, known as the Molecular Gas Main Se-
quence (MGMS), has been described between M gasand M⋆(e.g.
Saintonge et al. 2016; Calette et al. 2018). It follows a similar tight
distribution in the log-log plane of both parameters with a slope near
to one. This relation, like the other two, has a intensive correspon-
dence that it is fulfilled in a wide range of physical scales (Lin et al.
2020; S ´anchez et al. 2021a,b, 2022a). The three relations are though
to be strongly inter-connected, and nowadays it is considered that
the self-regulation of the star-formation activity due the feedback
produced by stellar winds is most probably behind them (e.g. Os-
triker et al. 2010; Sun et al. 2020; Barrera-Ballesteros et al. 2021b)
The three relations are fulfilled for actively star-forming galax-
ies, SFGs (and star-forming areas in galaxies), while galaxies in
which the SF is halted (either quenched or aged Corcho-Caballero
et al. 2023) clearly deviate from them. Retired galaxies (and regions
within them), i.e., those where the star-formation activity has been
halted, are found well below the SFMS, being the distance to this
relation ( ∆SFMS) a gauge of the quenching /halting stage of those
galaxies (regions) (e.g. Colombo et al. 2020; Bluck et al. 2019,
2020). The comparison between this distance and the o ffset with
respect to the other two relations is used to determine which is the
dominant process that drives the halting of the SF: (i) the lack of
molecular gas (in ∆SFMS correlates with ∆MGMS) or (ii) a decline
in the star-formation e fficiency (if it correlates with ∆SK) (e.g. El-
lison et al. 2020b; Colombo et al. 2020). The universality or not
of those relations is a question of debate, being described consider-
able variations galaxy to galaxy (e.g. Ellison et al. 2020b), and de-
viations with the morphological type (e.g. Gonz ´alez Delgado et al.
2016; Catal ´an-Torrecilla et al. 2017; Cano-D ´ıaz et al. 2019; M ´endez-
Abreu et al. 2019).
Figure 22 shows the distributions across the SFR-M ⋆, SFR- Mgas
and M gas-M⋆diagrams derived for the integrated spectra of our an-
alyzed sample. The distributions are shown for all galaxies and seg-
regated by morphology. For comparison purposes we included one
of the most recent derivations of the three relations described be-
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)28 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
7 8 9 10 11 12
log(M⋆) [M⊙]8.18.28.38.48.58.68.712+log(O/H)
E
S0/S0aSa/Sab
Sb/SbcSc/Scd
Sd/Irr
Figure 23. Distribution of oxygen abundance, 12 +log(O /H), as a function of
the stellar mass derived for the integrated aperture. We use the same nomen-
clature adopted in left panel of Fig. 14. The green dashed-line corresponds
to the MZR reported by S ´anchez et al. (2019b) using the oxygen abundance
measured at the e ffective radius for the SAMI survey dataset.
fore (SFMS, SK and MGMS relations), published by S ´anchez et al.
(2022a). In the three diagrams these relations traces regions with
clear high density of galaxies. However, in the case of the SFR-M ⋆
and M gas-M⋆diagrams the distribution is bimodal, with late-type
galaxies (Sb-Sd) tracing the SFMS and MGMS relations, early-type
galaxies (E /S0) well below both relations (by 2 dex in average), and
early-spirals (Sa /Sab) located within both density peaks, slightly be-
low both relations. On the contrary, the SFR-M gasdoes not present
a clear bimodal distribution. All galaxies, irrespectively of its mor-
phology seems to be located around the reported SK-law.
Based on these distributions we confirm that halting /quenching of
the SF strongly depends on the morphology, in agreement with many
previous explorations (e.g. Blanton et al. 2017; Catal ´an-Torrecilla
et al. 2017, and references therein). Indeed, it is known that SF ac-
tivity happens in the disk of galaxies, being absent of bulges (e.g.
M´endez-Abreu et al. 2019). The fact that halting of SF is related with
the presence of bulges (and bulge dominated galaxies), agree with
the scenario in which this process happens from the inside-out in
the bulk population of galaxies (e.g. Gonz ´alez Delgado et al. 2016;
Ellison et al. 2018). Whether this is connected with the presence of
an AGN or other mechanisms that may suppress the SF in the pres-
ence of a bulge is still a question of debate (e.g. S ´anchez et al. 2018;
Bluck et al. 2019; Kalinova et al. 2022). Irrespectively of which is
the actual mechanism, the described distributions confirm the results
suggesting that a lack of molecular gas is a necessary process to halt
the SF. Retired galaxies, those below the SFMS more than 1 dex,
present a deficit of molecular gas of a similar amount with respect to
the MGMS. In other words, their molecular gas fraction is consid-
erably lower than the one found for SFGs. On the contrary, they do
not present a similar o ffset with respect to the SK-law. As this rela-
tion traced the location of nearly constant star-formation e fficiency
(SFE=S FR
Mgas), our results suggest that the halting of SF, galaxy wide,
is not driven by a severe decline in the SFE. In this regards we agree
with recent results that uses more direct estimations of the molecu-
lar gas based on CO observations (e.g. Colombo et al. 2020; Ellison
et al. 2020a), although the relevance of the SFE in the modulation
of the SF process is still under debate (e.g. Lin et al. 2019; Ellison
et al. 2020b; S ´anchez et al. 2021b)5.2.4 Mass-metallicity relation
One of the main products of the stellar evolution is the generation
of metals (i.e., elements heavier than helium). Those metals can be
expelled during the life-time of stars within the stellar winds, but
primarily are distributed to the ISM in the final stages of the stellar
evolution (e.g. Yates et al. 2013). The main distributors of metals
are super-novae, with the vast majority of iron-peak elements being
produced in SN-Ia , the result of the collapse of binary systems. On
the contrary α-elements are primarily the result of core-collapse su-
pernovae, the end-phase of the evolution of very massive stars (e.g.
Matteucci 1992; Woosley & Weaver 1995; Kobayashi et al. 2020).
The connection between the production of α-elements and the star-
formation process induces a direct relation between the abundance
of those elements in the ISM and the stellar mass, known as the
mass-metallicity relation (MZR, e.g. Pilyugin et al. 2007). This re-
lation was known for decades as a relation of oxygen abundance
with galaxy luminosity (e.g. Vila-Costas & Edmunds 1992). How-
ever, it was not described and explored in detail until large spec-
troscopic surveys of galaxies were available (e.g. SDSS York et al.
2000b). Tremonti et al. (2004) demonstrates that the MZR is a tight
relation, with a dispersion of ∼0.1 dex (∼0.06 dex in the most re-
cent explorations, e.g. Alvarez-Hurtado et al. 2022), that expands
through several orders of magnitude in stellar mass (from 107M⊙
to 1013M⊙). The MZR rises from low M ⋆values following an al-
most linear shape down to M ⋆<109.5M⊙, bending afterwards and
reaching a plateau at a maximum oxygen abundance value (e.g.
Maiolino & Mannucci 2019, and references therein). This shape
clearly departs from the expectations from a pure close-box model,
with the asymptotic abundance being lower than the pure expecta-
tions from the maximum yield (e.g. Pilyugin et al. 2007). Di fferent
mechanisms have been proposed to modulate the shape of the MZR,
mostly related with the infall of pristine (or lower metallicity) gas
into the galaxy, outflows of metal rich gas, and the di fferential star-
formation histories between galaxies of di fferent final stellar masses
(e.g. S ´anchez Almeida et al. 2014; Zhu et al. 2017; S ´anchez 2020;
Maiolino & Mannucci 2019).
Figure 23 shows the distribution of oxygen abundances, derived
from the integrated spectra, as a function of the stellar masses for
the SFGs in our sample (the only ones for which we have a reliable
estimation of the oxygen abundance). In general the distribution fol-
lows the expected shape for the MZR, with a monotonic increase
from low towards high masses. No evident deviation from the global
trend is found when we explore the distributions segregated by mor-
phology, beside the mass range covered by each morphological type
withing the SFGs subsample. Beside that, the global distribution
present some di fferences with the reported trend described for the
MZR, at least with the archetypal one (Tremonti et al. 2004). First,
we do not appreciate a clear plateau or asymptotic oxygen abun-
dance at high M ⋆. Second, the scatter of the distribution seems to
be larger at low stellar masses than at high ones. We should note
that indeed both di fferences have been noticed in previous explo-
rations of the MZR using IFS data similar to the ones included in this
study (Barrera-Ballesteros et al. 2017; S ´anchez et al. 2017, 2019b;
Cresci et al. 2019; Alvarez-Hurtado et al. 2022). The lack of plateau
at high-mass is most probably due to the poor statistics (low num-
ber) of galaxies in this regime, being more evident when the data
are binned and the average oxygen abundance is estimated in dif-
ferent intervals of stellar masses (e.g. Alvarez-Hurtado et al. 2022).
On the other hand, the larger scatter at lower stellar masses is usu-
ally attributed to the fact that SDSS spectroscopic measurements are
restricted to the central areas of the galaxies, implying an aperture
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)29
0.00.51.01.5/angbracketleftOλ/O5500/angbracketrightcen Observed (O λ) Model (M λ) Residual (O λ-Mλ)
4000 4500 5000 5500 6000 6500
rest-frame wavelength [ ˚A]−505/angbracketleftRλ/O5500/angbracketright[%]
0.00.51.01.5/angbracketleftOλ/O5500/angbracketrightint Observed (O λ) Model (M λ) Residual (O λ-Mλ)
4000 4500 5000 5500 6000 6500
rest-frame wavelength [ ˚A]−505/angbracketleftRλ/O5500/angbracketright[%]
Figure 24. Statistics of the residual spectra. Top panels shows the mean normalized spectrum extracted from the central 1.5′′aperture (left panels) and integrated
across the entire FoV (regions with S /N>3, right panels), for the 895 galaxies in the final sample, normalized at ∼5500Å. In addition we include the average
of the individual stellar population models generated by pyFIT3D, and the corresponding residuals. Bottom panels show a zoom of these residual spectra, in
percentage, with a shaded rectangle encompassing the ±3% area.
effect on those data. When using IFS data, and in particular when
measuring the oxygen abundance at a particular characteristic radius
(e.g., the e ffective radius) most studies describe a similar increase in
the scatter (as indicated before).
An additional di fference with previous published results is that
the MZR described by our integrated apertures is shallower than the
one reported using spatial resolved spectroscopic data (e.g. Barrera-
Ballesteros et al. 2017; Cresci et al. 2019; S ´anchez et al. 2019b;
Alvarez-Hurtado et al. 2022). To illustrate this e ffect we include in
Fig. 23 the average relation derived for the O3N2 and N2 calibrators
using the IFS from the SAMI survey (Croom et al. 2012), applying
a global shift in the stellar masses to take into account the aper-
ture e ffects due to the limited FoV of the SAMI IFU (S ´anchez et al.
2019b). Despite of this shift there is a general o ffset, that increases
from high to low masses. We observe this pattern irrespectively of
the adopted parametrization for the MZR for the considered calibra-
tor from the di fferent publications listed above (some of them us-
ing CALIFA data too). We select this particular one since S ´anchez
et al. (2019b) reported a flattening in the distribution at low stellar
masses, what could corresponds to a shallower rise of the MZR in
this regime. However, even in this case, the o ffset is evident.
As indicated before there is a fundamental di fference in the way
we estimate the oxygen abundance for each galaxy in this explo-
ration and the way it was derived in the quoted explorations using
IFS: in here we first derive the integrated spectrum, and then we
estimate the line fluxes from which we finally estimate the oxygen
abundance (e.g. S ´anchez et al. 2022b, , for quoting an example).
On the previously quoted articles the spatial resolved spectra are an-
alyzed individually, deriving the flux intensities spatially resolved.
Then, after selecting the individual spaxels which ionization is com-
patible with young-massive OB stars, the spatial distribution of the
oxygen abundance is derived. Finally, the value at the e ffective ra-
dius is obtained, being considered the representative oxygen abun-
dance of the bulk galaxy. The reported di fference indicate that the
oxygen abundance derived from the integrated spectra is representa-
tive of the bulk distribution only at a first order. Indeed, it is known
that the dilution and the pollution by other ionizing sources alter
the line ratios and the final estimated oxygen abundances (e.g. Mast
et al. 2014; Davies et al. 2016; Lacerda et al. 2018; Vale Asari et al.
2019), however, to our knowledge this is the first time that a dif-
ferential bias depending on the stellar mass range is reported. We
will investigate this e ffect in detail in future explorations replicatingthe analysis that derive the oxygen abundance at the e ffective radius
using the improved data reduction, and expanding the comparison
using di fferent abundance calibrators.
5.3 Statistics of the residual spectra
The residual spectra, once subtracted the best fitted stellar popula-
tion model to each individual spectrum, contains valuable informa-
tion of the quality of the data and the accuracy of the data reduc-
tion (e.g. Walcher et al. 2015; Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. 2015; S ´anchez
et al. 2016b). Imperfections in the sky-subtraction, problems in the
blue-to-red spectrophotometric, and even defects in the wavelength
calibration are easily identify when exploring these residual spectra.
Following those studies we perform two di fferent analysis to explore
the information included in the residual spectra. First, we derive the
average residual, in order to enhance all the possible systematic ef-
fects/issues. Second, we the individual residual spectra at the spec-
tral pixel level, to evaluate its compatibility with the error estimated
by the reduction procedure. Despite of its benefits to identify all
these possible defects and to characterize the quality of the spectra,
we must remind that this kind of analysis has inherent limitations
related to the accuracy on how stellar population models match real
galaxy spectra (Cid Fernandes et al. 2014). These limitations should
be considering when exploring the results of this analysis.
To obtain the average residual we first shift each observed, stellar
population model and residual spectrum (as shown in Fig. 12) to a
common rest-frame making use of the redshift (systemic velocity)
obtained by the fitting procedure. This shift involves an inevitable
interpolation and re-sampling of the spectra. Once all spectra are in
the common rest-frame, we obtain the average spectrum for each
component (original, model and residual), for both aperture datasets
(central and integrated). We treat them separately as they correspond
to data with two di fferent levels of S /N, and therefore its separate
evaluation would allow to gauge better the potential impact of any
systematic e ffect.
Figure 24 shows the resulting average spectrum for each compo-
nent at each aperture, normalized at ∼5500Å. As expected there is an
evident di fference in S /N between the two average observed spectra,
∼100 for the central aperture and ∼300 for the integrated one, re-
flected in the range of values of the residuals in the bottom panels.
In the case of the integrated spectrum the residuals present almost
no pattern or substructures along the entire wavelength range shown
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)30 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
in this figure. Beside the location of the strongest emission lines,
the residual is restricted to a 1-2% band, with only two clear devi-
ations: (i) below 3900Å, where there is a systematic turn towards
values around∼−3-4%, and (ii) at∼5500Å, showing a clear miss-
match between the average observed spectrum and the model, with
the former showing a systematic dip. On the other hand, in the cen-
tral spectrum the residuals present stronger patterns and substruc-
tures, despite the evident decrease in signal-to-noise. Although the
turn-down at short wavelengths ( <3900Å) in the residual spectrum
is not appreciated, the dip at ∼5500Å is stronger and more clearly
defined. Beside that, there is a second clear dip observed at ∼5100Å
and a possible one at ∼6200Å.
The origin of all these patterns can be explained by a combination
of different reasons. The deviations at the blue end are most probably
due to (i) the di fficulty to provide with an accurate spectrophotomet-
ric calibration at the covered wavelength range, (ii) small but notice-
able errors in the estimation of the atmospheric dust estimation, and
(iii) imperfections in the subtraction of the night-sky spectrum, that
is in general bluer than most galaxies integrated (and central) spec-
tra. In addition, there are clear miss-matches between the co-added
observed spectrum and the corresponding co-added model at certain
spectral features. The most clear one corresponds to NaD ( ∼5893Å),
although there are others like TiO2 ( λ6230Å) that are also appreci-
ated, in particular in the spectrum corresponding to the central re-
gions. There is a combination of reasons for those miss-matches: (i)
a contribution of the ISM to the absorption features (e.g., NaD), (ii)
dependence of the absorption features in properties not considering
when modelling the SSPs (e.g, IMF or [ α/Fe] changes), (iii) intrinsic
imperfections in the stellar libraries used to generate the SSP and the
overall stellar synthesis modelling itself. We should note that despite
of those e ffects the deviation is of the order of 1-2% , when ignoring
the particular miss-matches discussed before. The broad dips at well
defined wavelength regimes are all associated with the location of
strong night-sky and light pollution emission lines at the observa-
tory (S ´anchez et al. 2007). Those strong lines usually produce resid-
uals in the spectra after subtraction (see the well defined residual at
5577Å in the observed spectrum shown in Fig. 12). The blue-shift
introduced in the individual spectrum to rearrange all them into a
common rest-frame to produce the described average spectrum nat-
urally generates a broad feature. The fact that this feature is negative
indicates that somehow there is a systematic over-subtraction of the
strong night-sky and light-pollution emission lines, of the order of
a∼2-3%. In any case, those wavelength should be masked in any
spectroscopic analysis of the data, and therefore, they have a limited
effect in the quality of any science result.
5.4 Characterization of the noise
Figure 25 shows the histogram of the individual residuals at each
spectral pixel for all the central aperture spectra of all the galaxies
in our sample, once removed the best fitted model, relative to the er-
ror value estimated by the reduction procedure at the same spectral
pixel. In the case of a perfect estimation of the pixel-wide error and
a perfect modelling of the stellar population (that, as we discussed
before is not the case) this distribution should follow a perfect Gaus-
sian distribution with a σ=1. We include this expected distribution
for comparison purposes , in particular as most of the users would
adopt a Poisson distribution for most of their calculations. The dis-
tribution of residuals follows a well defined symmetrical shape, cen-
tred in the zero value, indicating that it is not dominated by any
strong systematic deviation, in agreement with the results from the
analysis of Fig. 24. Its shape is clearly sharper /peaky than the one
−2 0 2
(Oλ-Mλ)/ελ0.20.40.60.81.0Number of spectral pixels×105Figure 25. Histogram of the reduced residuals, (O λ-Mλ)/ελ, where O λand
Mλcorresponds to the observed and model spectra for the central aperture
of each good quality datacube which average value is shown in Fig. 24, and
ελis the error estimated by the reduction procedure. A total of ∼1.5 mil-
lion spectral pixels are included in the figure. The red line shows a Gaussian
function scaled to the peak of the histogram with a width of one
traced by a Gaussian distribution, and present wider wings. Indeed
a Power spectrum would represent better the observed distribution
than a Gaussian function. This indicates that in some spectral pix-
els the residuals are slightly smaller than the estimated noise, and in
other ones they are slightly larger. This is somehow expected, due
to the statistical nature of the current comparison: the residuals are,
in the best case, a realization of the errors, if the errors are perfectly
estimated and all residuals are the result of a pure stochastic fluctu-
ation driven by photon (white) noise. Furthermore, in the presence
of systematic e ffects the residuals should be considerable larger, in
absolute value, what may explain the wider tails with respect to the
expected distribution. Indeed, as indicated in the previous section,
the adopted stellar spectra modelling introduce several systematic
residuals that are not accounted by a pure Poisson statistics. Despite
of those details this comparison shows that statistically speaking the
estimated errors are representative (i.e., of the same order) of the
observed residuals.
Once determined how representative is the error reported by the
data reduction of the real one, it is important to illustrate how to
propagate it when co-adding spectra. Any image reconstruction al-
gorithm that combines dithered exposures with an original aper-
ture (e.g., fibers) larger than the final selected sampling pixel in-
evitable generates a noise covariance between adjacent pixels. This
needs to be taken into account for a correct error propagation when
combining /spatial-binning spectra to increase the signal-to-noise,
what it is required in many cases when analyzing IFS data (e.g. Cap-
pellari & Copin 2003). Some data reduction procedures provide with
the spatial covariance of the individual datasets to address this issue
(e.g. Sharp et al. 2015). In the di fferent versions of the data reduc-
tions of the CALIFA data we adopted a simpler and a more practi-
cal approach to take into account the noise correlation, by provid-
ing the noise correction factor introduced by the spatial covariance
β(N). This parameter is the ratio between the error estimated on the
combined spectrum and the one derived analytically by propagat-
ing the individual errors of each spectra. By construction βdepends
on the number of co-added spectra ( N). To estimate this parameter
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)31
0 20 40 60 80 100
N (number of coadded spectra)123456β(N)β= 1.00 + 1.69 log(N)
Figure 26. Correction factor to the noise introduced by the spatial covari-
ance,β(N), as a function of the number of co-added adjacent spaxels for the
new reduced dataset for a typical target with S /N>20. Shaded regions in-
dicate the 1 σ, 2σand 3σwidth areas around the average value, traced by
the grey solid circles. The solid-line shows the best fitted model, following
logarithmic parametrization, as shown in the legend.
we randomly generate a set of circular apertures of di fferent sizes
(and number of encircled spaxels) and extract the corresponding co-
added spectra for the final reduced set of datacubes. We select those
spectra with a minimum S /N>20, iterating the procedure until we
reach a total of∼1 million spectra. Then, for each aperture, we es-
timate (i) the error empirically as the standard deviation obtained
from the detrended spectra within the 5590-5710Å range in the rest
frame, and (ii) the expected error, in the absence of co-variance, de-
rived by propagating the individual errors in each spectra within the
considered aperture, using the same exact procedure. The ratio be-
tween both parameters provides the βparameter for the correspond-
ing spectrum.
Figure 26 shows the distribution of the resulting ∼1 millon estima-
tions ofβ(N) as a function of the number of co-added spaxels /spectra
(N). Like in the case of previous data-reductions, this distribution is
well parametrized by a logarithmic function:
β(N)=1+αlog(N) (7)
with a slope α=1.69. This value is considerable larger than the
reported in previous data-releases (e.g. Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. 2015;
S´anchez et al. 2016b). The reason behind that is the finally se-
lected spaxel size (0.5′′), half of the one adopted in previous data-
reductions. As already indicated, the new adopted cube reconstruc-
tion algorithm (Sec. 2.2.6), improves the spatial resolution, what
forces us to select a smaller spaxel scale (for a proper sampling of the
final PSF). However, it cannot decrease the level of covariance, that
for smaller spaxels is larger as the original fiber size has not changed.
In other words, the same number of adjacent binned /co-added spec-
tra corresponds to an smaller aperture (in arcsec) in the current data-
set than in the previous ones. Therefore, they correspond to spaxels
covered by a lower number of originally independent spectra (i.e.,
different fibers).
We should stress that this derivation of the e ffect of the co-
variance in the error propagation is completely empirical and does
not require the use of the errors provided by data reduction. Thus
this correction is valid even in the case that the original errors are
not well represented by a Poisson distribution (see discussion onFig. 25 above), as it accounts for the covariance between adjacent
spaxels. A detail description on how to use this correction in a prac-
tical way when co-coadding spectra was already included in the arti-
cles presenting the second public data-release of the CALIFA survey
(Garc ´ıa-Benito et al. 2015). We refer the reader to that manuscript
avoiding a repetition of its content.
6 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Along this article we have described a new procedure to recon-
struct the datacubes from dithered fiber-feed IFS observations that
improves the final spatial resolution, being now limited by (1) the
distance between adjacent (dithered) fibers and (2) the input /natural
seeing. We apply this procedure to the extended CALIFA dataset,
a compilation of∼1000 galaxy observations in the nearby universe
(z∼0.015) using the low-resolution setup adopted along that survey.
This provides us with a remastered version of the datacubes that we
distribute to the community. From this compilation we select a sub-
set of good quality observations, based on a detailed quality exam-
ination, comprising a galaxy sample which main selection criteria
is that its diameter (roughly) match with the FoV of the PPAK in-
strument. We characterized the main properties of this sample of 895
galaxies, providing with the location, redshift, morphological type, a
sub-set of the photometric properties. We demonstrate that it is pos-
sible to obtain a rough but reliable volume correction for this sam-
ple, based on the equivalent volume accessible due to the diameter
selection. The information regarding this galaxy sample, including
the volume correction, is distributed too.
We extract two spectra for each galaxy, one covering the central
regions and another one covering the full FoV of the IFU, to demon-
strate the quality and usability of the new data. We perform a spec-
tral fitting on each individual spectrum decoupling the contribution
of the stellar populations and ionized gas, and deriving a set of cen-
tral and integrated properties for both components. Among them we
estimate, for the stellar populations, the average ages, metallicities,
and mass-to-light ratios, together with the dust attenuation a ffecting
them and the velocity dispersion. For the ionized gas, we estimate
the flux intensities of the strongest emission lines within the wave-
length range of the dataset,. From them we explore the dominant
source of the ionization, the dust attenuation a ffecting the ionized
gas, the star-formation rate and the oxygen abundance. Using all this
dataset we present the main patterns and distributions of the di fferent
parameters and physical properties as a function of the stellar mass
and the morphology of the considered galaxies. When suitable we
compare the behaviour for the inner regions with those obtain galaxy
wide, tracing possible radial trends within galaxies. Once more, all
these parameters and dataproducts have been distributed within the
current manuscript.
We compare our results with previous ones extracted from the lit-
erature, both using photometric, single aperture and spatial resolved
IFS data. In general we find a considerable agreement with previous
results. A coherent picture emerges, in which (i) the stellar popula-
tion content in galaxies, traced by the average ages and metallicities,
(ii) the star-formation stage, (iii) the gas content, (iv) its metallicity,
and (v) the dominant ionizing source strongly depend on the final
stellar mass, morphology and location within each galaxy (primar-
ily the galactocentric distance). These results agree with those of the
most recent studies on the topic (e.g, Blanton et al. 2017; Kewley
et al. 2019; Maiolino & Mannucci 2019; S ´anchez 2020, and refer-
ences therein).
In a forthcoming article we will present the analysis of the spa-
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)32 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
tial resolved data distributed here, following S ´anchez et al. (2022b),
making a particular e ffort in the exploitation of its improved spatial
resolution.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge the comments and suggestions by the anonymous
referee that has helped to improve this manuscript.
We want to thanks Prof. M. Blanton, who motivated us to improve
the datacube reconstruction algorithm with a series of presentations
and discussions on the topic.
S.F.S. thanks the PAPIIT-DGAPA AG100622 project.
J.K.B.B. and S.F.S. acknowledge support from the CONA-
CYT grant CF19-39578. R.G.B. acknowledges financial
support from the grants CEX2021-001131-S funded by
MCIN /AEI/10.13039 /501100011033, SEV-2017-0709, and to
PID2019-109067-GB100. L.G. acknowledges financial support
from the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovaci ´on (MCIN), the
Agencia Estatal de Investigaci ´on (AEI) 10.13039 /501100011033,
and the European Social Fund (ESF) ”Investing in your future”
under the 2019 Ram ´on y Cajal program RYC2019-027683-I and
the PID2020-115253GA-I00 HOSTFLOWS project, from Centro
Superior de Investigaciones Cient ´ıficas (CSIC) under the PIE
project 20215AT016, and the program Unidad de Excelencia Mar ´ıa
de Maeztu CEX2020-001058-M.
This study uses data provided by the Calar Alto Legacy Inte-
gral Field Area (CALIFA) survey (http: //califa.caha.es /). Based on
observations collected at the Centro Astron ´omico Hispano Alem ´an
(CAHA) at Calar Alto, operated jointly by the Max-Planck-Institut
f¨ur Astronomie and the Instituto de Astrof ´ısica de Andaluc ´ıa
(CSIC).
The Pan-STARRS1 Surveys (PS1) and the PS1 public science
archive have been made possible through contributions by the In-
stitute for Astronomy, the University of Hawaii, the Pan-STARRS
Project O ffice, the Max-Planck Society and its participating insti-
tutes, the Max Planck Institute for Astronomy, Heidelberg and the
Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, Garching, The
Johns Hopkins University, Durham University, the University of Ed-
inburgh, the Queen’s University Belfast, the Harvard-Smithsonian
Center for Astrophysics, the Las Cumbres Observatory Global Tele-
scope Network Incorporated, the National Central University of Tai-
wan, the Space Telescope Science Institute, the National Aeronau-
tics and Space Administration under Grant No. NNX08AR22G is-
sued through the Planetary Science Division of the NASA Science
Mission Directorate, the National Science Foundation Grant No.
AST-1238877, the University of Maryland, Eotvos Lorand Univer-
sity (ELTE), the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the Gordon
and Betty Moore Foundation.
This research made use of Astropy,11a community-developed
core Python package for Astronomy (Astropy Collaboration et al.
2013, 2018).
11http://www.astropy.orgDATA A V AILABILITY
The raw and reduced version of the data explored along this article
are accessible through the Calar Alto Observatory Archive12and the
eCALIFA DR webpage, accessible through the CALIFA webpage13.
As part of this data release we distribute:
•The datacubes reduced using version 2.3 of the data re-
duction for all the originally compiled observations using the
V500 setup: http://ifs.astroscu.unam.mx/CALIFA/V500/
v2.3/reduced/
•The datacubes corresponding to the final sample of galaxies
described in Sec. 3, once masked the possible companion objects and
foreground field stars http://ifs.astroscu.unam.mx/CALIFA/
V500/v2.3/reduced_masked/
•A fitsfile table including all the galaxy properties explored and
discussed along this article, comprising the parameters included
in Tables 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7: http://ifs.astroscu.unam.mx/
CALIFA/V500/v2.2/reduced/
•The datacubes reduced using the previous version of the
data reduction (ver. 2.2 S ´anchez et al. 2022b), for the com-
plete compiled observations: http://ifs.astroscu.unam.mx/
CALIFA/V500/v2.2/reduced/
REFERENCES
Abdurro’uf et al., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2112.02026
Alb´an M., Wylezalek D., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2302.08519
Alvarez-Hurtado P., Barrera-Ballesteros J. K., S ´anchez S. F., Colombo
D., L ´opez-S ´anchez A. R., Aquino-Ort ´ız E., 2022, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2202.11651
Aquino-Ort ´ız E., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 479, 2133
Asari N. V ., Cid Fernandes R., Stasi ´nska G., Torres-Papaqui J. P., Mateus A.,
Sodr ´e L., Schoenell W., Gomes J. M., 2007, MNRAS, 381, 263
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2013, A&A, 558, A33
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2018, aj, 156, 123
Bacon R., et al., 2010, in SPIE Conf. Series. , doi:10.1117 /12.856027
Baldwin J. A., Phillips M. M., Terlevich R., 1981, PASP, 93, 5
Barrera-Ballesteros J. K., S ´anchez S. F., Heckman T., Blanc G. A., The
MaNGA Team 2017, ApJ, 844, 80
Barrera-Ballesteros J. K., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 492, 2651
Barrera-Ballesteros J. K., et al., 2021a, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2101.02711
Barrera-Ballesteros J. K., et al., 2021b, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2101.04683
Barrera-Ballesteros J. K., et al., 2022, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2206.07058
Belfiore F., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 466, 2570
Belfiore F., et al., 2022, A&A, 659, A26
Bell E. F., de Jong R. S., 2000, MNRAS, 312, 497
Bell E. F., McIntosh D. H., Katz N., Weinberg M. D., 2003, ApJS, 149, 289
Bigiel F., Leroy A., Walter F., Brinks E., de Blok W. J. G., Madore B., Thorn-
ley M. D., 2008, AJ, 136, 2846
Binette L., Magris C. G., Stasi ´nska G., Bruzual A. G., 1994, A&A, 292, 13
Bland-Hawthorn J., 1995, Publ. Astron. Soc. Australia, 12, 190
Blanton M. R., Moustakas J., 2009, ARA&A, 47, 159
Blanton M. R., et al., 2017, AJ, 154, 28
Bluck A. F. L., Maiolino R., Sanchez S., Ellison S. L., Thorp M. D., Pi-
otrowska J. M., Teimoorinia H., Bundy K. A., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:1911.08857
Bluck A. F. L., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 499, 230
Bolatto A. D., et al., 2017, ApJ, 846, 159
12http://www.caha.es/science-mainmenu-95/public-archives
13official: http://califa.caha.es/ , mirror: http://ifs.astroscu.
unam.mx/CALIFA_WEB/public_html/
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)33
Bresolin F., 2017, in Knapen J. H., Lee J. C., Gil de Paz A., eds, As-
trophysics and Space Science Library V ol. 434, Outskirts of Galaxies.
p. 145 ( arXiv:1612.05278 ), doi:10.1007 /978-3-319-56570-5˙5
Brinchmann J., Charlot S., White S. D. M., Tremonti C., Kau ffmann G.,
Heckman T., Brinkmann J., 2004, MNRAS, 351, 1151
Brinchmann J., Charlot S., Kau ffmann G., Heckman T., White S. D. M.,
Tremonti C., 2013, MNRAS, 432, 2112
Bruzual G., Charlot S., 2003, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 344, 1000
Bundy K., et al., 2015, ApJ, 798, 7
Calette A. R., Avila-Reese V ., Rodr ´ıguez-Puebla A., Hern ´andez-Toledo H.,
Papastergis E., 2018, Rev. Mex. Astron. Astrofis., 54, 443
Calzetti D., 2001, PASP, 113, 1449
Calzetti D., Meurer G. R., Bohlin R. C., Garnett D. R., Kinney A. L., Lei-
therer C., Storchi-Bergmann T., 1997, AJ, 114, 1834
Camps-Fari ˜na A., Sanchez S. F., Lacerda E. A. D., Carigi L., Garc ´ıa-Benito
R., Mast D., Galbany L., 2021, MNRAS, 504, 3478
Camps-Fari ˜na A., et al., 2022, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2203.01159
Cano-D ´ıaz M., et al., 2016, ApJ, 821, L26
Cano-D ´ıaz M., ´Avila-Reese V ., S ´anchez S. F., Hern ´andez-Toledo H. M.,
Rodr ´ıguez-Puebla A., Boquien M., Ibarra-Medel H., 2019, MNRAS,
488, 3929
Cappellari M., 2016, ARA&A, 54, 597
Cappellari M., Copin Y ., 2003, MNRAS, 342, 345
Cardelli J. A., Clayton G. C., Mathis J. S., 1989a, ApJ, 345, 245
Cardelli J. A., Clayton G. C., Mathis J. S., 1989b, ApJ, 345, 245
Carigi L., Peimbert M., Peimbert A., 2019, ApJ, 873, 107
Catal ´an-Torrecilla C., et al., 2017, ApJ, 848, 87
Chambers K. C., et al., 2016, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1612.05560
Chung H., Park C., Park Y .-S., 2021, ApJS, 257, 66
Cid Fernandes R., Stasi ´nska G., Schlickmann M. S., Mateus A., Vale Asari
N., Schoenell W., Sodr ´e L., 2010, MNRAS, 403, 1036
Cid Fernandes R., et al., 2014, A&A, 561, A130
Colombo D., et al., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2009.08383
Corcho-Caballero P., Ascasibar Y ., S ´anchez S. F., L ´opez-S ´anchez ´A. R.,
2023, MNRAS, 520, 193
Cortese L., et al., 2014, ApJ, 795, L37
Courteau S., et al., 2014, Reviews of Modern Physics, 86, 47
Cresci G., Mannucci F., Curti M., 2019, A&A, 627, A42
Croom S. M., et al., 2012, MNRAS, 421, 872
D’Agostino J. J., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 487, 4153
Davies R. L., et al., 2016, MNRAS, 462, 1616
Dopita M. A., Koratkar A. P., Evans I. N., Allen M., Bicknell G. V ., Suther-
land R. S., Hawley J. F., Sadler E., 1996, in Eracleous M., Koratkar A.,
Leitherer C., Ho L., eds, Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference
Series V ol. 103, The Physics of Liners in View of Recent Observations.
p. 44
Driver S. P., et al., 2009, Astronomy and Geophysics, 50, 5.12
Ellison S. L., S ´anchez S. F., Ibarra-Medel H., Antonio B., Mendel J. T.,
Barrera-Ballesteros J., 2018, MNRAS, 474, 2039
Ellison S. L., Lin L., Thorp M. D., Pan H.-A., S ´anchez S. F., Bluck A. F. L.,
Belfiore F., 2020a, MNRAS,
Ellison S. L., et al., 2020b, MNRAS, 493, L39
Emsellem E., et al., 2022, A&A, 659, A191
Espinosa-Ponce C., S ´anchez S. F., Morisset C., Barrera-Ballesteros J. K.,
Galbany L., Garc ´ıa-Benito R., Lacerda E. A. D., Mast D., 2020, MN-
RAS, 494, 1622
Espinosa-Ponce C., S ´anchez S. F., Morisset C., Barrera-Ballesteros J. K.,
Galbany L., Garc ´ıa-Benito R., Lacerda E. A. D., Mast D., 2022, MN-
RAS,
Faber S., 1977, in Larson B. M. T. . R. B., ed., The Evolution of Galaxies and
Stellar Populations. p. 157
Faber S. M., Jackson R. E., 1976, ApJ, 204, 668
Flewelling H. A., et al., 2020, ApJS, 251, 7
Flores-Fajardo N., Morisset C., Stasi ´nska G., Binette L., 2011, MNRAS, 415,
2182
Fruchter A. S., Hook R. N., 2002, PASP, 114, 144
Fukugita M., et al., 2007, AJ, 134, 579
Gaia Collaboration et al., 2016, A&A, 595, A1Gaia Collaboration et al., 2021, A&A, 649, A1
Galbany L., et al., 2018, ApJ, 855, 107
Gallazzi A., Bell E. F., 2009, ApJS, 185, 253
Gallazzi A., Charlot S., Brinchmann J., White S. D. M., Tremonti C. A.,
2005, MNRAS, 362, 41
Gallazzi A., Charlot S., Brinchmann J., White S. D. M., 2006, MNRAS, 370,
1106
Garc ´ıa-Benito R., et al., 2015, A&A, 576, A135
Garc ´ıa-Benito R., et al., 2017, A&A, 608, A27
Garc ´ıa-Benito R., Gonz ´alez Delgado R. M., P ´erez E., Cid Fernandes R.,
S´anchez S. F., de Amorim A. L., 2019, A&A, 621, A120
George K., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 487, 3102
Goddard D., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 466, 4731
Gomes J. M., et al., 2016, A&A, 588, A68
Gonz ´alez Delgado R. M., P ´erez E., Cid Fernandes R., et al. 2014a, A&A,
562, A47
Gonz ´alez Delgado R. M., et al., 2014b, ApJ, 791, L16
Gonz ´alez Delgado R. M., et al., 2015, A&A, 581, A103
Gonz ´alez Delgado R. M., et al., 2016, A&A, 590, A44
Grandmont F., Drissen L., Mandar J., Thibault S., Baril M., 2012, in McLean
I. S., Ramsay S. K., Takami H., eds, Society of Photo-Optical In-
strumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series V ol. 8446, Ground-
based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy IV . p. 84460U,
doi:10.1117 /12.926782
Green A. W., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 475, 716
Gunn J. E., et al., 1998, AJ, 116, 3040
Heckman T. M., Armus L., Miley G. K., 1990, ApJS, 74, 833
Ho L. C., Filippenko A. V ., Sargent W. L. W., 1997, ApJ, 487, 568
Husemann B., et al., 2013, A&A, 549, A87
Ibarra-Medel H. J., et al., 2016, MNRAS, 463, 2799
Ibarra-Medel H. J., Avila-Reese V ., S ´anchez S. F., Gonz ´alez-Samaniego A.,
Rodr ´ıguez-Puebla A., 2019, MNRAS, 483, 4525
Into T., Portinari L., 2013, MNRAS, 430, 2715
Kalinova V ., et al., 2022, A&A, 665, A90
Kauffmann G., et al., 2003a, MNRAS, 341, 33
Kauffmann G., et al., 2003b, MNRAS, 346, 1055
Kelz A., et al., 2006, PASP, 118, 129
Kennicutt Jr. R. C., 1998, ApJ, 498, 541
Kennicutt Jr. R. C., Keel W. C., Blaha C. A., 1989, AJ, 97, 1022
Kewley L. J., Dopita M. A., Sutherland R. S., Heisler C. A., Trevena J., 2001,
ApJ, 556, 121
Kewley L. J., Nicholls D. C., Sutherland R. S., 2019, Annual Review of As-
tronomy and Astrophysics, 57, 511
Kobayashi C., Karakas A. I., Lugaro M., 2020, ApJ, 900, 179
Lacerda E. A. D., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 474, 3727
Lacerda E. A. D., S ´anchez S. F., Cid Fernandes R., L ´opez-Cob ´a C., Espinosa-
Ponce C., Galbany L., 2020, MNRAS, 492, 3073
Lacerda E. A. D., S ´anchez S. F., Mej ´ıa-Narv ´aez A., Camps-Fari ˜na A.,
Espinosa-Ponce C., Barrera-Ballesteros J. K., Ibarra-Medel H., Lugo-
Aranda A. Z., 2022, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2202.08027
Larson R. B., 1976, MNRAS, 176, 31
Law D. R., et al., 2015, AJ, 150, 19
Law D. R., et al., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2112.11281
Leroy A. K., et al., 2013, AJ, 146, 19
Lin L., et al., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1909.11243
Lin L., et al., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2010.01751
Liu D., Blanton M. R., Law D. R., 2020, AJ, 159, 22
L´opez-Cob ´a C., et al., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2002.09328
L´opez-S ´anchez ´A. R., Dopita M. A., Kewley L. J., Zahid H. J., Nicholls
D. C., Scharw ¨achter J., 2012, MNRAS, 426, 2630
Maiolino R., Mannucci F., 2019, A&ARv, 27, 3
Marino R. A., et al., 2013, A&A, 559, A114
M´armol-Queralt ´o E., et al., 2011, A&A, 534, A8
Mast D., et al., 2014, A&A, 561, A129
Matteucci F., 1992, Mem. Soc. Astron. Italiana, 63, 301
Mej´ıa-Narv ´aez A., S ´anchez S. F., Lacerda E. A. D., Carigi L., Galbany L.,
Husemann B., Garc ´ıa-Benito R., 2020, MNRAS, 499, 4838
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)34 S.F .S´ anchez et al.
M´endez-Abreu J., S ´anchez S. F., de Lorenzo-C ´aceres A., 2019, MNRAS,
488, L80
Osterbrock D. E., 1989, Astrophysics of gaseous nebulae and active galactic
nuclei. University Science Books
Ostriker E. C., McKee C. F., Leroy A. K., 2010, ApJ, 721, 975
Pan H.-A., et al., 2018, ApJ, 854, 159
Pan H.-A., et al., 2022, ApJ, 927, 9
Panter B., Heavens A. F., Jimenez R., 2003, MNRAS, 343, 1145
Peebles P. J. E., 1969, ApJ, 155, 393
Peimbert M., Peimbert A., 2006, in Revista Mexicana de Astronomia y As-
trofisica Conference Series. p. 163
Peletier R. F., Davies R. L., Illingworth G. D., Davis L. E., Cawson M., 1990,
AJ, 100, 1091
P´erez-Gonz ´alez P. G., Trujillo I., Barro G., Gallego J., Zamorano J., Con-
selice C. J., 2008, ApJ, 687, 50
P´erez E., et al., 2013, ApJ, 764, L1
Pessa I., et al., 2022, A&A, 663, A61
Pilyugin L. S., Thuan T. X., V ´ılchez J. M., 2007, MNRAS, 376, 353
Poggianti B. M., et al., 2017, ApJ, 844, 48
Renzini A., Peng Y .-j., 2015, ApJ, 801, L29
Richardson W. H., 1972, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 62, 55
Rodr ´ıguez-Puebla A., Primack J. R., Behroozi P., Faber S. M., 2016, MN-
RAS, 455, 2592
Roediger J. C., Courteau S., 2015, MNRAS, 452, 3209
Rosales-Ortega F. F., D ´ıaz A. I., Kennicutt R. C., S ´anchez S. F., 2011, MN-
RAS, 415, 2439
Rosales-Ortega F. F., S ´anchez S. F., Iglesias-P ´aramo J., D ´ıaz A. I., V ´ılchez
J. M., Bland-Hawthorn J., Husemann B., Mast D., 2012, ApJ, 756, L31
Roth M. M., et al., 2005, PASP, 117, 620
Rousseau-Nepton L., Robert C., Martin R. P., Drissen L., Martin T., 2018,
MNRAS, 477
Saintonge A., et al., 2016, MNRAS, 462, 1749
Salim S., Narayanan D., 2020, ARA&A, 58, 529
Salpeter E. E., 1955, ApJ, 121, 161
S´anchez S. F., 2006, Astronomische Nachrichten, 327, 850
S´anchez S. F., 2020, ARA&A, 58, 99
S´anchez Almeida J., Elmegreen B. G., Mu ˜noz-Tu ˜n´on C., Elmegreen D. M.,
2014, A&ARv, 22, 71
S´anchez S. F., Aceituno J., Thiele U., P ´erez-Ram ´ırez D., Alves J., 2007,
PASP, 119, 1186
S´anchez S. F., Thiele U., Aceituno J., Cristobal D., Perea J., Alves J., 2008,
PASP, 120, 1244
S´anchez S. F., et al., 2012, A&A, 538, A8
S´anchez S. F., et al., 2014, A&A, 563, A49
S´anchez S. F., et al., 2016a, Rev. Mex. Astron. Astrofis., 52, 21
S´anchez S. F., et al., 2016b, A&A, 594, A36
S´anchez S. F., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 469, 2121
S´anchez S. F., et al., 2018, Rev. Mex. Astron. Astrofis., 54, 217
S´anchez S. F., et al., 2019a, MNRAS, 482, 1557
S´anchez S. F., et al., 2019b, MNRAS, 484, 3042
S´anchez S. F., Walcher C. J., Lopez-Cob ´a C., Barrera-Ballesteros J. K.,
Mej´ıa-Narv ´aez A., Espinosa-Ponce C., Camps-Fari ˜na A., 2021a, Rev.
Mex. Astron. Astrofis., 57, 3
S´anchez S. F., et al., 2021b, MNRAS, 503, 1615
S´anchez S. F., G ´omez Medina D. C., Barrera-Ballesteros J. K., Galbany L.,
Bolatto A., Wong T., 2022a, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2212.03738
S´anchez S. F., et al., 2022b, ApJS, 262, 36
Santini P., et al., 2014, A&A, 562, A30
Sarmiento R., Huertas-Company M., Knapen J. H., Ibarra-Medel H.,
Pillepich A., S ´anchez S. F., Boecker A., 2022, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2211.11790
Schmidt M., 1968, ApJ, 151, 393
Shannon C. E., 1948, The Bell System Technical Journal, 27, 379
Sharp R., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 446, 1551
Shepard D., 1968, Proceedings of the 1968 ACM National Conference, 1,
517
Singh R., et al., 2013, A&A, 558, A43Speagle J. S., Steinhardt C. L., Capak P. L., Silverman J. D., 2014, ApJS,
214, 15
Springel V ., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 475, 676
Stasi ´nska G., et al., 2008, MNRAS, 391, L29
Stubbs C. W., Doherty P., Cramer C., Narayan G., Brown Y . J., Lykke K. R.,
Woodward J. T., Tonry J. L., 2010, ApJS, 191, 376
Sun J., et al., 2020, ApJ, 901, L8
Taylor E. N., et al., 2011, MNRAS, 418, 1587
Tremonti C. A., et al., 2004, ApJ, 613, 898
Tully R. B., Fisher J. R., 1977, A&A, 54, 661
Ueta T., Otsuka M., 2021, PASP, 133, 093002
Vale Asari N., Couto G. S., Cid Fernandes R., Stasi ´nska G., de Amorim A. L.,
Ruschel-Dutra D., Werle A., Florido T. Z., 2019, MNRAS, 489, 4721
Vila-Costas M. B., Edmunds M. G., 1992, MNRAS, 259, 121
Vulcani B., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 488, 1597
Walcher C. J., et al., 2014, A&A, 569, A1
Walcher C. J., Coelho P. R. T., Gallazzi A., Bruzual G., Charlot S., Chiappini
C., 2015, A&A, 582, A46
Weiner B. J., et al., 2006, ApJ, 653, 1049
Wild V ., Charlot S., Brinchmann J., Heckman T., Vince O., Pacifici C.,
Chevallard J., 2011, MNRAS, 417, 1760
Wong T., Blitz L., 2002, ApJ, 569, 157
Woosley S. E., Weaver T. A., 1995, ApJS, 101, 181
Yan R., et al., 2016, AJ, 151, 8
Yan R., et al., 2019, ApJ, 883, 175
Yates R. M., Henriques B., Thomas P. A., Kau ffmann G., Johansson J., White
S. D. M., 2013, MNRAS, 435, 3500
York D. G., et al., 2000a, AJ, 120, 1579
York D. G., Adelman J., Anderson Jr. J. E., Anderson S. F., et al. 2000b, AJ,
120, 1579
Zhu G. B., Barrera-Ballesteros J. K., Heckman T. M., Zakamska N. L.,
S´anchez S. F., Yan R., Brinkmann J., 2017, MNRAS, 468, 4494
Zhu L., et al., 2018, Nature Astronomy, 2, 233
Zibetti S., Charlot S., Rix H., 2009, MNRAS, 400, 1181
de Jong R. S., van der Kruit P. C., 1994, A&AS, 106, 451
MNRAS 000, 1–??(2020)