arXiv:2304.01652v2  [eess.SY]  13 Dec 2023Barrier Function-based Distributed Symbolic Controller f or
Multi-Agent Systems
David Smith Sundarsingh1,˚, Ratnangshu Das1,˚, Adnane Saoud2, and Pushpak Jagtap1
Abstract — Because of the scalability issues associated with the
symbolic controller synthesis approach, employing it in a m ulti-
agent system (MAS) framework becomes difﬁcult. In this pape r,
we present a novel approach for synthesizing distributed sy m-
bolic controllers for MAS, that enforces a local Linear Temp oral
Logic (LTL) speciﬁcation on each agent and global safety spe ci-
ﬁcations on the MAS, in a computationally efﬁcient manner by
leveraging the concept of control barrier functions (CBF). In
addition, we also provide an analysis on the effect of the CBF
parameters on the conservatism introduced by our proposed
approach in the size and domain of the synthesized controlle r.
The effectiveness of this approach is demonstrated through a
comparison with the conventional monolithic symbolic cont rol,
using simulation as well as hardware demonstrations.
I. I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, MAS has emerged as a prominent ﬁeld
of research, encompassing various domains such as robotics ,
automation, and artiﬁcial intelligence. These systems con sist
of multiple autonomous agents coordinating their actions
to achieve common objectives. When subjected to complex
speciﬁcations, ensuring that each agent accomplishes its l ocal
task while adhering to global tasks is crucial. Consider the
example where a swarm of autonomous drones is deployed
to perform a search and rescue operation. Each drone is as-
signed a speciﬁc local task, like scanning designated regio ns
or delivering essential supplies. However, it is imperativ e to
ensure that the drones operate safely and do not pose a risk
to each other or the people on the ground. In this case, the
global speciﬁcations would include rules and constraints t hat
govern the behavior of the drone swarm to prevent collisions ,
maintain desired distances, and avoid hazardous situation s.
The behavior and performance of MAS critically depend
on the design and implementation of their controllers. Such
complex tasks can efﬁciently be represented using linear
temporal logic (LTL) [1]. To synthesize controller enforci ng
LTL speciﬁcations, the symbolic control approach [1], [2]
is widely used. However, these approaches often face chal-
lenges related to computational complexity, scalability, and
the ability to handle large-scale MAS effectively, resulti ng
in the issue of the so-called curse of dimensionality.
Controller synthesis for MAS is usually done in two
ways - top-down and bottom-up approaches. The top-down
This work was supported in part by the Google Research Grant, the SERB
Start-up Research Grant, and the CSR Grants by Siemens and No kia.
˚The authors contributed equally.
1D. S. Sundarsingh, R. Das, and P. Jagtap are with the Robert
Bosch Centre for Cyber-Physical Systems, IISc, Bangalore, India
{davids,ratnangshud,pushpak }@iisc.ac.in
2A. Saoud is with the College of Computing, University Mohamm ed VI
Polytechnic, Benguerir, Morocco adnane.saoud@um6p.maapproach involves the decomposition of global tasks into
local ones. For example, [3] and [4] decompose global
controllers, and each agent solves for the decomposed strat -
egy. The authors in [5] modiﬁed this approach by only
solving for a sub-group of the MAS, which has mutual
speciﬁcations. [6] and [7] assign tasks to each agent based
on a global speciﬁcation. These approaches assume that the
global speciﬁcation is decomposable. On the other hand,
bottom-up approaches solve for local speciﬁcations with
some constraints [8] or synthesize controllers again after
composing the system from individually controlled agents
[9], [10]. While these methods can solve local and global
speciﬁcations, they require some assumptions on the system
[9], [8] or on the speciﬁcations [10]. A combination of the
two approaches [11], decomposes the system, solves the loca l
speciﬁcation, and removes any conﬂicts after recomposing
the system. This process is repeated iteratively with no
guarantee on the convergence of the solution.
Controller synthesis for MAS using CBFs has gained
signiﬁcant attention in recent research [12], especially f or
enforcing a fragment of signal temporal logic (STL) spec-
iﬁcations. The authors in [13] used barrier functions to
synthesize a least-violating controller for collision avo idance.
Additionally, the integration of CBFs within symbolic cont rol
techniques has also been explored. In [14] and [15], the
controller computes a discrete plan and employs barrier
functions to ensure safe transitions. Furthermore, [16] bu ilds
upon the work in [13] by employing a nominal controller
synthesized in a centralized manner and projecting it onto
each agent to fulﬁl LTL speciﬁcations in addition to collisi on
avoidance. However, since this approach uses centralized
controller synthesis, it encounters scalability challeng es.
To address these limitations, we presented a novel bottom-
up symbolic controller synthesis approach for MAS by
leveraging the concept of barrier certiﬁcates. The control ler
synthesis is done in three steps: synthesizing local con-
trollers for individual agents using symbolic control tech -
niques, composing these controllers using barrier certiﬁc ates
for safety speciﬁcation, and then synthesizing a controlle r
for the resulting multi-agent system to ensure both local
LTL speciﬁcations and global safety speciﬁcation. While
the proposed approach signiﬁcantly enhances computationa l
efﬁciency compared to conventional centralized technique s,
it introduces a degree of conservatism in terms of the size
and domain of the controller. The preliminary results are
presented in [17]. In this paper, we build on the work by
providing formal guarantees and a thorough analysis on the
effect of the barrier certiﬁcate parameters on conservatis mand computational efforts. Furthermore, a comparative stu dy
between the controller synthesized by our approach and the
conventional monolithic controller synthesis illustrate s the
signiﬁcant reduction in the computation time. Finally, we
conduct hardware studies to showcase the practicality of th e
proposed approach using a MAS setup with local reach-avoid
and global safety speciﬁcations.
II. P RELIMINARIES AND PROBLEM DEFINITION
Notations: ForxPRn,xqrepresents the qthelement of
the vectorx, whereqPt1,...,nuand the inﬁnity norm of
xis/bardblx/bardbl:“maxqPt1,...n u|xq|. Fora,bPpRYt´8,8uqn,
whereaďbcomponent-wise, the closed hyper-interval is
denoted by /llbracketa,b/rrbracket:“RnXpra1,b1sˆ¨¨¨ˆran,bnsq. A
relationRĎAˆBcan be deﬁned as a map R:AÑ2B
as follows:bPRpaqiffpa,bqPR. The relation Ris strict
ifRpaq‰H ,@aPA. The inverse of the relation is deﬁned
asR´1:“tpb,aqPBˆA|pa,bqPRuand can be written
asaPR´1pbq. Given a set S,IntpSqandBSrepresent
the interior and the boundary of S, respectively. Consider
NsetsAi,iPt1,...,Nu, the Cartesian product of sets is
given byA“ś
iPt1,...,N uAi:“tpa1,...,a Nq|aiPAi,iP
t1,...,Nuu. GivenNfunctionsfi:XiÑAi, the Cartesian
product of functions is f:XÑA:“ś
iPt1,...,N ufi“
pf1px1q,...,f NpxNqq. The composition of two maps Hand
RisH˝Rpxq:“HpRpxqq. A function α:R`
0ÑR`
0is of
classKifαp0q“0, and it is strictly increasing. If αPKis
unbounded, it is of class K8.
A. Discrete-time Multi-Agent Systems
Consider a collection of NPNagents and let I“
t1,...,Nu. Each agent’s state evolution is given by the
following discrete-time control system:
xipk`1q“fipxipkq,uipkqq, iPI, kPN0, (1)
wherexipkq PXiĂRniis the state of the ithagent and
uipkqPUiĂRmiis the input to the agent.
The evolution of the multi-agent system (MAS) is given by:
xpk`1q“fpxpkq,upkqq, kPN0, xp0qPX0, (2)
whereX0is the set of initial states, xpkqPX:“ś
iPIXiĂ
Rnis the state of the multi-agent system, n“ΣiPIni,
upkqPU:“ś
iPIUiĂRmis the input to the system and
m“ΣiPImi. The function fis given by f:XˆUÑX
andfpxpkq,upkqq:“ś
iPIfipxipkq,uipkqq. The trajectory of
system (2) starting from a state xPX0under the input signal
uis given by xxuandxxupkqgives the value of the state of
the system along that trajectory at sampling instance k.
The reachable set of system (2) from a set XĎXunder
an inputuPUis given by ReachpX,uq:“Ť
xPXfpx,uq,
which is the set of all states that the system ”reaches” when
an inputuis applied at all the states in Xin a one-time
step. This reachable set is difﬁcult to compute, so we use
the over-approximated reachable set, Reachpx,uq. Several
approaches are available in the literature for computing th is
over-approximated set; for example, [18], [19] and [2].B. Transition Systems
We now introduce the notion of transition systems [1]
which will serve as a uniﬁed representation for discrete-ti me
control systems and their corresponding symbolic models.
Deﬁnition 2.1: A transition system is a tuple Σ“
pX,X0,U,Fq, whereXis the set of states, X0ĎXis
the set of initial states, Uis the set of inputs, and the map
F:XˆUÑXis the transition relation.
The set of admissible inputs for xPXis denoted by
Uapxq:“ tuPU|Fpx,uq‰Hu . We usex1PFpx,uq
to represent the u-successor of state x.
Consider the discrete-time control system of agent ias given
in (1). The transition system representation of the ithagent is
given by the tuple Σi“pXi,X0
i,Ui,Fiq, whereXiĂRni
is the set of the states of agent i,X0
iĎXiis the set of
initial states, UiĂRmiis the set of inputs for agent iand
forxiPXi,uiPUi,Fipxi,uiq:“fipxi,uiq.
The composition of the Ntransition systems, which repre-
sents the multi-agent system (2) is given by deﬁnition below .
Deﬁnition 2.2: Given a collection of NPNagents
represented as tΣiuiPI, whereI“t1,...,Nu, the composed
transition system is Σ“`
X,X0,U,F˘
, where
‚X“ś
iPIXi,X0ĎX,U“ś
iPIUi,
‚forxPXanduPU,Fpx,uq“ś
iPIFipxi,uiq.
C. Problem Formulation
Next, we formally state the problem considered here:
Problem 2.3: GivenNagents with dynamics as in (1),
local speciﬁcations ψiexpressed as LTL formulae [20] for
each agent and global safety speciﬁcation Φover the MAS
(2); design a controller for the MAS that enforces global
safety speciﬁcation and the local LTL speciﬁcations.
One can solve Problem 2.3 for a MAS monolithically
using symbolic control techniques (as discussed in Section
III) for satisfying the global and local speciﬁcations ϕ“
Ψ^Φ, whereΨ“Ź
iPIψi, but scalability and computational
efﬁciency are stringent issues for controller synthesis.
To deal with the scalability issue and, as a consequence,
to reduce computational complexity, we propose to use a
bottom-up approach consisting of three steps:
1) We construct a symbolic controller for each of the
NagentsΣito satisfy the corresponding local LTL
speciﬁcation ψi, whereiPt1,...,Nu, as explained in
Section III. Using the symbolic controller, we construct
the individual controlled agents.
2) For the composed controlled MAS, resulting from
the composition of the controlled agents obtained in
stepp1q, we construct a barrier function [21] that
enforces the global safety speciﬁcation Φ. We use a
notion of barrier functions (introduced in Section IV)
as certiﬁcates to remove transitions that violate the
safety speciﬁcation in the composed system.
3) Since the local speciﬁcations may be violated due to
the safety-enforcing barrier functions, we synthesize a
controller for the controlled system obtained in step
p2qto achieve the speciﬁcation Ψ“Ź
iPIψi.The proposed controller ensures that the MAS satisﬁes the
local speciﬁcation Ψand the global speciﬁcation Φ.
III. S YMBOLIC CONTROL
In this section, we will brieﬂy discuss symbolic control
and how it can be used to synthesize controllers to satisfy
a given speciﬁcation. In order to relate the discrete-time
control system and its symbolic model, we use the notion
of feedback reﬁnement relation [2].
A. Feedback Reﬁnement Relation
Deﬁnition 3.1: Consider two transition systems Σ“
pX,X0,U,FqandˆΣ“ pˆX,ˆX0,ˆU,ˆFq. A strict relation
QĎXˆˆXis said to be a feedback reﬁnement relation
fromΣtoˆΣ, denoted by ΣĺQˆΣ, if for eachpx,ˆxqPQ
the following conditions hold:
‚ˆUapˆxqĎUapxq,
‚uPˆUapˆxq ùñQpFpx,uqqĎˆFpˆx,uq.
The feedback reﬁnement relation Qallows to transform a
controller for the symbolic model ˆΣinto a controller for the
original system Σas any input available for ˆΣis available
forΣand the transitions of ˆΣpreserve behavioural relations
with the corresponding transitions in Σ.
B. Construction of Symbolic Models
In order to synthesize controllers for the concrete system
Σ, we need to construct its symbolic model ˆΣ, which is
related to Σthrough the feedback reﬁnement relation.
Deﬁnition 3.2: The symbolic model of the system Σis
given by ˆΣ“pˆX,ˆX0,ˆU,ˆFq, where
‚ˆXis a cover over Xwhose elements are closed hyper-
intervals called cells. Let¯ˆXĎˆXbe a compact set of
congruent hyper-rectangles aligned on a uniform grid
parameterized with a quantization parameter ηPpR`qn.
EachˆxP¯ˆXis given bycˆx`/largellbracket
´η
2,η
2/largerrbracket
, wherecˆxPηZn
andηZn“ tcPRn|DlPZn@qPt1,...,n ucq“lqηqu. The
cells inˆXz¯ˆXare called overﬂow cells,
‚ˆX0“ˆXXX0andˆUis a ﬁnite subset of U,
‚forˆxP¯ˆXandˆuPˆU, a setA:“ tˆx1PˆX|ˆx1X
Reachpˆx,ˆuq‰H}. IfAĎ¯ˆXandˆx1RˆXz¯ˆX,@ˆx1PA
thenˆFpˆx,ˆuq“A.
For a detailed procedure on constructing the symbolic model ,
refer [22].
Theorem 3.3: [2, Theorem VIII.4] If ˆΣis the symbolic
model of Σconstructed according to Deﬁnition 3.2 then the
relationQĎXˆˆXdeﬁned byQ“tpx,ˆxqPXˆˆX:xP
ˆxuis feedback reﬁnement relation from ΣtoˆΣ.
C. Controller Synthesis using Symbolic Models
Consider the transition system Σ“ pX,X0,U,Fqand
a memoryless controller C:XÑU, where for all xP
X,Cpxq ĎUapxq. Let the domain of the controller be
dompCq:“txPX|Cpxq‰Hu .
Deﬁnition 3.4: Given a controller Cand a transition sys-
temΣ, the controlled system is given by the tuple Σ|C“
pXC,X0
C,UC,FCq, where
‚XC“XXdompCq,X0
CĎXC,UC“U,‚forxCPXCanduCPUC,x1
CPFCpxC,uCqiff
x1
CPFpxC,uCqanduCPCpxCq.
LetPbe the set of atomic propositions that labels the
states inXĂRnthrough a labelling function L:XÑ2P
andϕbe an LTL speciﬁcation over P. The control inputs u
applied to the system according to Cgenerates a trajectory
xxufrom the initial state x. We say that the system Σ|C|ù
ϕifLpxxuq |ùϕ. For more information on speciﬁcation
satisfaction, refer [2, Deﬁnition VI.1].
Given the symbolic model ˆΣand the relation QĎXˆˆX,
we ﬁrst synthesize a controller ˆCsuch that ˆΣ|ˆC|ùˆϕusing
graph theoretical approaches [1], where ˆϕis the symbolic
speciﬁcation associated with Σ,ˆΣ,Qandϕsuch that, if
LpˆxqĎˆϕandpx,ˆxqPQ, thenLpxqĎϕ.
Theorem 3.5: [2, Theorem VI.3] If ΣĺQˆΣandˆCis the
symbolic controller such that ˆΣ|ˆC|ùˆϕ, thenΣ|C|ùϕ,
whereC:“ˆC˝Q.
The controller ˆC, synthesized for symbolic model ˆΣ
satisfying global and local speciﬁcations, deﬁned in Probl em
2.3, can be reﬁned for the concrete system Σwith the help of
relationQ. The controlled system Σ|C|ùϕ, whereϕ:“Ψ^
Φis the combination of local and global speciﬁcations. Many
toolboxes are available for symbolic controller synthesis ,
for example, [22], [23] and [24]. For scalability, we ﬁrst
synthesize a controller that satisﬁes the local speciﬁcati on
ψifor theithlocal symbolic model ( ithagent) with Ψ“Ź
iPIψiand enforce global safety speciﬁcation Φon the
composed symbolic model with the notion of control barrier
functions, discussed in the next section.
IV. B ARRIER CERTIFICATE FOR SYMBOLIC MODELS
To deal with global safety speciﬁcation Φ, we leverage the
concept of control barrier function [25]. Consider a discre te-
time system as deﬁned in (2). Let the safe set SĎXĂRn
be deﬁned as the superlevel set of a continuous function
B:RnÑRand is given by:
S“txPX|Bpxqě0u, (3)
IntpSq“txPX|Bpxqą0u, (4)
BS“txPX|Bpxq“0u. (5)
Deﬁnition 4.1: Given the transition system Σ“
pX,X0,U,Fqin Deﬁnition 2.1 and a set SĎX. The setS
is said to be controlled invariant for the transition system Σ
if for allxPS, there exists uPUsatisfyingFpx,uqĎS.
Theorem 4.2: [25, Lemma 1] Given the discrete-time con-
trol system (2) and a safe set SĎXĂRnas deﬁned in (3)-
(5) as a superlevel set of a continuous function B:RnÑR.
The setSis controlled invariant for the system (2) if there
exists aK8mapα, satisfying αprqăr, for allrą0and
such that the following holds: for all xPX, there exists uP
Usatisfying
Bpfpx,uqq´Bpxqě´αpBpxqq. (6)
To solve Problem 2.3 in a scalable way, we ﬁrst deﬁne a
symbolic safe set ˆSthat is compatible with the symbolicmodel using barrier function B(3)-(6) deﬁning safe set S
for the original system (2). For this, we need the following
assumption over function B:XÑR.
Assumption 4.3: The barrier functions B:XÑR
deﬁned in Theorem 4.2 satisfy the global Lipschitz continui ty
condition: there exists a constant LxPR`
0such that
}Bpxq´Bpyq}ďLx}x´y}for allx,yPX.
Given Assumption 4.3 and a symbolic model ˆΣ“
pˆX,ˆX0,ˆU,ˆFqwith a symbolic state given by ˆx:“cˆx`/largellbracket
´η
2,η
2/largerrbracket
PˆXand state space discretization η“pη1,...,η nq
PpR`qnas deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.2, we deﬁne a symbolic
safe setˆSusing barrier function Bin Theorem 4.2 as:
ˆS“tˆxPˆX|Bpcˆxq´Lxηmax
2ě0u, (7)
IntpˆSq“tˆxPˆX|Bpcˆxq´Lxηmax
2ą0u, (8)
BˆS“tˆxPˆX|Bpcˆxq´Lxηmax
2“0u, (9)
whereηmax“maxjPt1,...,n uηj.
Theorem 4.4: Consider a system Σ“ pX,X0,U,Fq,
its symbolic model ˆΣ“ pˆX,ˆX0,ˆU,ˆFqconstructed with
relationQĎXˆˆXand state space quantization ηPpR`qn
as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.2, a safe set Sas deﬁned in (3)-(5),
and the symbolic safe set ˆSas deﬁned in (7)-(9). If for all
ˆxPˆS, there exists ˆuPˆUapˆxqsuch that
minˆ x1PˆFpˆ x,ˆ uqrBpcˆx1q´Bpcˆxqsě´αpBpcˆxq´Lxηmax
2q,
whereB:XÑRandαPK8are deﬁned in Theorem 4.2,
thenQ´1pˆSqĂSandˆSis invariant for system ˆΣ.
Proof: Let us ﬁrst show that Q´1pˆSqĂS.
From Deﬁnition 3.2, we have ˆx:“cˆx`/largellbracket´η
2,η
2/largerrbracket
PˆXand
using the fact ηmax“maxjPt1,...,n uηj, one obtains for all
px,ˆxqPQ,/bardblcˆx´x/bardblďηmax
2.Using Lipschitz continuity of
B,@px,ˆxqPQ, we get
Bpcˆxq´Bpxqď/bardblBpcˆxq´Bpxq/bardblďLx/bardblcˆx´x/bardblďLxηmax
2,
whereLxis the Lipschitz constant of the function B. Thus,
@px,ˆxqPQ, Bpcˆxq´Lxηmax
2ďBpxq. (10)
Thus,Bpcˆxq´Lxηmax
2ě0ùñBpxq ě0, i.e., for all
ˆxPˆS,Q´1pˆxqĂS. Thus we have Q´1pˆSqĂS.
Now to show that ˆSis invariant for ˆΣ, we have that for all
ˆxPˆSthere exists ˆuPˆUapˆxqsuch that
minˆ x1PˆFpˆ x,ˆ uqrBpcˆx1q´Bpcˆxqs
“minˆ x1PˆFpˆ x,ˆ uqrBpcˆx1q´Lxηmax
2´Bpcˆxq`Lxηmax
2s
ě´αpBpcˆxq´Lxηmax
2q.
Thus one has for all ˆxPˆSthere exists ˆuPˆUapˆxqsuch that
Bpcˆx1q ´Lxηmax
2´Bpcˆxq `Lxηmax
2ě ´αpBpcˆxq ´Lxηmax
2q,
ù ñBpcˆx1q ´Lxηmax
2ě pId´αq ˝ pBpcˆxq ´Lxηmax
2q,
for allˆx1PˆFpˆx,ˆuq. SinceαPK8one has thatpId´
αq PK8which implies from condition (7) (i.e., Bpcˆxq´Lxηmax
2ě0for allˆxPˆS) that for all ˆxPˆSwe have
Bpcˆx1q´Lxηmax
2ě0ùñˆx1PˆS,@ˆx1PˆFpˆx,ˆuq. This
proves the invariance of the set ˆS.
Remark 4.5: Since we know that Q´1pˆSq ĂS(from
Theorem 4.4) and with ˆSas invariant, the system does not
violate the safety speciﬁcation Φby staying inside S.
V. S CALABLE CONTROLLER SYNTHESIS FOR
MULTI -AGENT SYSTEMS
A. Controller Synthesis for Each Agent (Symbolic Model)
Consider the problem of controller synthesis for each
agent (1) represented by the transition system Σi“
pXi,X0
i,Ui,Fiqgiven a local LTL speciﬁcation ψi. Using
symbolic control, we ﬁrst construct the symbolic model of
each agent Σigiven by ˆΣi“pˆXi,ˆX0
i,ˆUi,ˆFiq(as discussed
in Section III-B) such that ΣiĺQiˆΣi, whereQiĎXiˆˆXi
is the strict feedback reﬁnement relation. We then synthesi ze
a controller ˆCisuch that ˆΣi|ˆCi|ùˆψi, where ˆψiis the
symbolic speciﬁcation for ˆΣi(related toψi,ΣiandQi).
Theorem 3.5 shows that we can reﬁne the controller ˆCiusing
the feedback reﬁnement relation Qiand the reﬁned controller
Ci:“ˆCi˝Qiis such that Σi|Ci|ùψi.
After controller synthesis, we obtain the controlled agent s
ˆΣi|ˆCi“pˆXCi,ˆX0
Ci,ˆUCi,ˆFCiq,iPt1,2,...,Nu, as shown
in Deﬁnition 3.4, where ˆXCi“ˆXiXdompˆCiq,ˆX0
CiĎˆXCi,
ˆUCi“ˆUiand forˆxPˆXCi,ˆuPˆUCi,ˆx1PˆFCipˆx,ˆuqiff
ˆx1PˆFipˆx,ˆuqandˆuPˆCipˆxq.
B. Composition using Control Barrier Certiﬁcates
We will now compose the individual symbolic models of
the controlled systems of each agent.
Given a collection of NpPNqcontrolled systems
where each controlled system is given by ˆΣi|ˆCi“
pˆXCi,ˆX0
Ci,ˆUCi,ˆFCiqandI“ t1,...,Nu, the composed
controlled system is given by ˆΣ|ˆC“ pˆXC,ˆX0
C,ˆUC,ˆFCq
constructed based on Deﬁnition 2.2, where ˆXC“ś
iPIˆXCi,
ˆX0
CĎˆXC,ˆUC“ś
iPIˆUCiand forˆxPˆXCandˆuPˆUC,
ˆFCpˆx,ˆuq“ś
iPIˆFCipˆx,ˆuq.
Deﬁnition 5.1: LetB:XÑRbe the CBF that enforces
the safety speciﬁcation Φ. We construct the safety controller
ˆCSfor the system ˆΣ|ˆCdeﬁned above, as follows:
‚ˆCSpˆxq“tˆuPˆUa
Cpˆxq|minˆ x1PˆFpˆ x,ˆ uqrBpcˆx1q´Bpcˆxqsě
´αpBpcˆxq´Lxηmax
2quand
‚dompˆCSqĎˆSXtˆxPˆXC|ˆCSpˆxq‰Hu .
We can now construct a controlled system pˆΣ|ˆCq|ˆCS“
pˆXS,ˆX0
S,ˆUS,ˆFSqas deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.4, where ˆXS“
ˆXCXdompˆCSq,ˆX0
SĎˆXS,ˆUS“ˆUCand forˆxPˆXSand
ˆuPˆUS,ˆx1PˆFSpˆx,ˆuqiffˆx1PˆFCpˆx,ˆuqandˆuPˆCSpˆxq.
Remark 5.2: Note that only the transitions that lead back
to the set ˆSare included in the transition system pˆΣ|ˆCq|ˆCS.
At some ˆxPˆXS,ˆUa
Spˆxqmay be empty because there could
be no inputs inś
iPIˆUa
Cipˆxiqthat brings the system to ˆS.
To restore the local speciﬁcations (violated due to the
safety-enforcing barrier certiﬁcate), it is necessary to s yn-
thesize a controller ˆCBfor the composed symbolic model’s
speciﬁcation given by ˆΨ“Ź
iPIˆψi.The following result shows that the combination of the
controllersCB,CSandCi,iP t1,2,...,Nu, designed
before makes it possible for the discrete-time control syst em
in (2) to satisfy the control objective deﬁned in Problem 2.3 .
Theorem 5.3: Given the controlled agents ˆΣi|ˆCiwith
iPI“ t1,...,Nu, the strict relation QiĎXiˆˆXi,
LTL speciﬁcation Ψ :“Ź
iPIψi, symbolic speciﬁcation ˆΨ
resulting from the concrete speciﬁcation Ψ, the symbolic safe
setˆSdeﬁned in (7)-(9) and the safe set Sdeﬁned in (3)-
(5), ifˆCBis a controller such that ppˆΣ|ˆCq|ˆCSq|ˆCB|ùˆΨ
then,ppΣ|Cq|CSq|CB|ùΨ, whereCB:“ˆCB˝Qand
the trajectories of the controlled MAS ppΣ|Cq|CSq|CBstays
inside the safe set S.
Proof: From [2, Theorem VI.3] and [2, Corollary VI.5],
we know that Σi|CiĺQiˆΣi|ˆCisinceΣiĺQiˆΣiby
construction and Ci:“ˆCi˝Qi.
By composing the controlled agents and since there is
no coupling between the agents, one gets Σ|CĺQˆΣ|ˆC,
whereΣis the MAS resulting from the composition of
the agents Σi, whereiPIandI“ t1,...,Nu,ˆΣis the
transition system resulting from the composition of the loc al
symbolic models ˆΣi,iPI. The set of states for the composed
MAS and the composed local symbolic models are given
byX:“ś
iPIXiandˆX:“ś
iPIˆXi, respectively. The
controllerC:XÑUis deﬁned for x“px1,...,x NqPX
asu“pu1,...,u NqPCpxqif and only if uiPCipxiq, for
alliPI. Similarly the symbolic controller ˆC:ˆXÑˆUis
deﬁned for ˆx“pˆx1,...,ˆxNqPˆXasˆu“pˆu1,...,ˆuNqP
ˆCpˆxqif and only if ˆuiPˆCipˆxiq, for alliPI. The feedback
reﬁnement relation QĎXˆˆXis deﬁned as Q:“tpx,ˆxqP
XˆˆX| pxi,ˆxiq PQi,@iPIu.We synthesize a safety
controller ˆCSas given in Deﬁnition 5.1 for the system ˆΣ|ˆC.
By construction, this controller ensures that the controll ed
systempˆΣ|ˆCq|ˆCSnever leaves ˆS. The reﬁned controller
CS:“ˆCS˝Qis such that,pΣ|Cq|CSĺQpˆΣ|ˆCq|ˆCSsince
Σ|CĺQˆΣ|ˆC.
We now synthesize a controller ˆCBsuch that
ppˆΣ|ˆCq|ˆCSq|ˆCB|ùˆΨand sincepΣ|Cq|CSĺQpˆΣ|ˆCq|ˆCS,
CB:“ˆCB˝Qis the reﬁned controller such that
ppΣ|Cq|CSq|CB|ùΨdue to Theorem 3.5.
With the composed controlled system we have,
ppΣ|Cq|CSq|CBĺQppˆΣ|ˆCq|ˆCSq|ˆCB. (11)
SinceˆCBpˆxq ĎˆUSpˆxqanddompˆCBq ĎˆXS, all tra-
jectories of the system ppˆΣ|ˆCq|ˆCSq|ˆCBevolve within the
setˆS. From (11), it is clear that ppΣ|Cq|CSq|CBwill also
remain in ˆS, which implies from Theorem 4.4 that the
systemppΣ|Cq|CSq|CBalways remains in S. Hence, the
combination of reﬁned controllers C,CSandCBallows
to satisfy the speciﬁcations deﬁned in Problem 2.3.
C. Conservativeness of the Proposed Approach
The size and domain of the controller synthesized by the
proposed approach are inﬂuenced by the class- K8function
αprq. The following theorem provides an analysis of the
effect of the function αon the obtained controller.11.11.21.31.41.51.6Controller Size (x 1e5)
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Gamma102030405060708090Total Run Time (secs)Barrier-based Composition
Monolithic Controller
Fig. 1: Variation of running time and controller size (mea-
sured by the number of allowed transitions) with γcompared
for proposed and monolithic controller synthesis approach .
Theorem 5.4: Given the symbolic model of a controlled
systemˆΣ|ˆC“ pˆXC,ˆX0
C,ˆUC,ˆFCq, constructed as shown
in Deﬁnition 3.2, global safety speciﬁcation Φexpressed
in the form of barrier functions as shown in (7) - (9) and
safety controllers ˆCS1pˆxqwithαprq:“γ1randˆCS2pˆxqwith
αprq:“γ2r,@rPR`as given in Deﬁnition 5.1, where
γ1,γ2P p0,1q, ifγ1ąγ2, thenˆCS2pˆxq ĎˆCS1pˆxqfor all
ˆxPˆXCanddompˆCS2qĎdompˆCS1q.
Proof: The control barrier function-based controller, as
deﬁned in Deﬁnition 5.1 with αprq:“γr,@rPR`after
rearrangement of terms is given by:
ˆCSpˆxq:“tˆuPˆUa
Cpˆxq|minˆx1PˆFCpˆx,ˆuqrBpcˆx1qs
ěp1´γqBpcˆxq`γLxηmax
2u,(12)
for each ˆxPˆS. Consider two constants γ1,γ2Pp0,1qand
withγ1ąγ2. After negating, multiplying with Bpcˆxq´
Lxηmax
2and addingBpcˆxqon both sides,
Bpcˆxq´γ1´
Bpcˆxq´Lxηmax
2¯
ăBpcˆxq´γ2´
Bpcˆxq´Lxηmax
2¯
,
p1´γ1qBpcˆxq`γ1Lxηmax
2ăp1´γ2qBpcˆxq`γ2Lxηmax
2.
(13)
Let us now consider two sets E1andE2as deﬁned below.
E1:“tˆx1PˆFCpˆx,ˆuq|minˆ x1PˆFCpˆ x,ˆ uqrBpcˆx1qs
ěp1´γ1qBpcˆxq`γ1Lxηmax
2u,
E2:“tˆx1PˆFCpˆx,ˆuq|minˆ x1PˆFCpˆ x,ˆ uqrBpcˆx1qs
ěp1´γ2qBpcˆxq`γ2Lxηmax
2u,for each ˆxPˆSand@uPˆUa
Cpˆxq.
Case 1: Ifˆx1PE1andˆx1PE2,
Bpcˆx1qěp1´γ2qBpcˆxq`γ2Lxηmax
2
ąp1´γ1qBpcˆxq`γ1Lxηmax
2.
Case 2: Ifˆx1PE1andˆx1RE2,
p1´γ1qBpˆxq`γ1Lxηmax
2ďBpcˆx1q
ăp1´γ2qBpˆxq`γ2Lxηmax
2.
Both case 1 and case 2 holds true given (13).
Case 3: Ifˆx1RE1andˆx1PE2,
p1´γ2qBpˆxq`γ2Lxηmax
2ďBpcˆx1q
ăp1´γ1qBpˆxq`γ1Lxηmax
2,
which contradicts (13). Hence, we conclude that E2ĂE1.
Consider controllers ˆCS1andˆCS2constructed as shown
in Deﬁnition 5.1 with αprq:“γ1ˆrandαprq:“γ2ˆr,
@rPR`respectively. The controllers CS1andCS2can be
given as in (12) with γ“γ1andγ“γ2respectively. Given
E2ĂE1and (12),DuPˆUa
Cpˆxqsuch that,uPCS1pˆxqbut
uRCS2pˆxqsince the set of ˆFCpˆx,uqallowable for ˆCS1pˆxq,
deﬁned byE1, is larger. Thus, we have ˆCS1pˆxqĎˆCS2pˆxq.
From the deﬁnition of the domain of controller, one has
dompˆCS2qĎdompˆCS1q. This ends the proof.
Remark 5.5: The theorem can be generalized to any map
αprq, even non-linear ones. From Theorem 4.2, αprq ăr,
@rą0. Thus,αprq ďγr,@rą0, whereγP p0,1qis
the smallest value for which the condition holds. If α1prqą
α2prq,α1prq ďγ1r,α2prq ďγ2r,@rą0andγ1,γ2P
p0,1qis the smallest value for which the conditions hold,
thenγ1ąγ2, and the proof follows as shown.
Remark 5.6: The theorem above shows that with an in-
crease inγ, the size and domain of the safety controller in-
crease. Atγ“1, the inequality is maxˆ x1PˆFCpˆ x,uqBpcˆx1qě
Lxηmax
2which will lead to all input values uPˆUa
Cleading
to safe states being included in the controller giving us a
fully permissible controller for safety. However, this is n ot
possible as αprq ăr,@rPR`as given in Theorem 4.2,
which leads to γă1asαprq:“γˆr. This condition is
necessary for the control invariance of the safe set.
VI. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We compare the proposed approach with a centralized
controller synthesis technique. We simulate a discrete sys tem
where each agent is given by
xipk`1q“xipkq`uipkq, iPI, kPN0, (14)
whereI“t1,...,Nu,xipkqPX“r0,10sˆr0,10sĂR2
is the state of the system and uipkq PU“
tp´2,0q,p´1,0q,p1,0q,p2,0q,p0,´2q,p0,´1q,p0,1q,p0,2qu
ĂR2is the input to the system. We ran two experiments
Fig. 2: Simulation for a multi-agent system with three agent s
TABLE I: Computation time comparison
Number of Computation Time (secs)
Robots Monolithic Proposed Percent reduction
2 170.24 32.11 81.25
3 >4 weeks 85985.05 >96.5
withN“2andN“3. The global safety speciﬁcation is
given by a set of pair-wise CBFs as
Bijpxq“/bardblxi´xj/bardbl´dij,@i,jPIandi‰j, (15)
wheredij“3is the desired distance between the agents
iandj. The local LTL speciﬁcation for agent iis given
byψi“♦Target i^pl/visualspacepObs1_Obs2qq, whereTarget i
is the target of agent i,Obs1andObs2are the obstacles
in the state-space, land♦represent temporal operators
always and eventually, respectively. We used a computer wit h
AMD Ryzen 9 5950x, 128 GB RAM, and NVIDIA RTX
3080Ti graphics card to perform simulations that were run
on MATLAB. The state quantization parameter is η“r1,1s.
Table I shows the synthesis time of the proposed technique
compared to that of the monolithic approach. For the 2
agent example, the proposed technique took 32.082 secs
for controller synthesis, 81.25% lower than the 170.2421
secs taken by the monolithic approach. For 3agents, the
proposed technique took 85985.05secs for synthesis, while
the monolithic approach did not ﬁnish synthesizing after 4
weeks, raising the reduction in time to more than 96.5%. The
proposed technique gets progressively faster compared to t he
monolithic approach with increased state-space dimension s.
We synthesize the controller using our approach for differ-
ent values of γforαprq“γrin Deﬁnition 5.1. As indicated
by Theorem 5.4, the number of transitions allowed by the
controller increased with higher γvalues, as illustrated in
Figure 1(top). We also depicted a γvs synthesis time graph
in Figure 1(bottom), demonstrating that increasing γled to a
gradual rise in synthesis time. Consequently, we can obtain
a less conservative controller with a high γvalue without
signiﬁcantly compromising synthesis time.
Figure 2 shows the simulation of a three-agent system with
a local speciﬁcation of avoiding the obstacles, Obs 1and
Obs2, and reaching the corresponding targets while ensuring0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Time Step23456789Distance between agentsd1 2
d2 3
d1 3
Fig. 3: Distance between two agents for MAS with Three
Agents. The grey line is lower bound on the safe distance.
the global safety speciﬁcation. One can see that the MAS
satisﬁes both local and global speciﬁcations. The orange li ne
shows the trajectory of agent 1; the purple line shows the
trajectory of agent 2; and the yellow line shows the trajectory
of agent3. Figure 3 shows the distance between the agents
as they move in the arena. The grey horizontal line shows
the lower bound on the distance between agents. The graph
clearly shows that all three agents never get closer than thr ee
units to each other, satisfying the global speciﬁcation.
We have implemented our algorithm in a real-world setup
comprising of two heterogeneous agents: Mecanum drive,
given by (14), and Omni-directional, given by 9x“ucosθ`
vsinθ,9y“usinθ´vcosθ,9θ“ω, wherepx,yqandθ
are the robot’s position and orientation respectively. The
control inputs, u,v, andωare linear velocities and angular
velocity, respectively. The demonstrations can be found he re
https://youtu.be/GtmgvIhH93o .
VII. C ONCLUSION
We proposed a three-step bottom-up symbolic approach
for MAS by combining symbolic control and CBFs. We have
proven the correctness of our approach and have formally
shown that the ﬁnal controlled multi-agent system satisﬁes
both local LTL and global safety speciﬁcations. We also
formally analysed the conservatism of our barrier function -
based approach by analyzing the effect of the control barrie r
function parameters on the size and domain of the controller .
We have also demonstrated the inﬂuence of these parameters
on synthesis time and implemented our controller synthesis
algorithm in a simulation as well as a real-world heteroge-
neous system, which shows the practicality of our approach.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Tabuada, Veriﬁcation and control of hybrid systems: a symbolic
approach . Springer Science and Business Media, 2009.
[2] G. Reissig, A. Weber, and M. Rungger, “Feedback reﬁnemen t relations
for the synthesis of symbolic controllers,” IEEE Transactions on
Automatic Control , vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1781–1796, 2017.
[3] R. Majumdar, K. Mallik, M. Salamati, S. Soudjani, and M. Z areian,
“Symbolic reach-avoid control of multi-agent systems,” in Proceedings
of the ACM/IEEE 12th International Conference on Cyber-Phy sical
Systems , pp. 209–220, 2021.
[4] J. Dai and H. Lin, “Automatic synthesis of cooperative mu lti-agent sys-
tems,” in 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control , pp. 6173–
6178, 2014.[5] A. Nikou, J. Tumova, and D. V . Dimarogonas, “Probabilist ic plan syn-
thesis for coupled multi-agent systems.,” IFAC-PapersOnLine , vol. 50,
no. 1, pp. 10766–10771, 2017. 20th IFAC World Congress.
[6] P. Schillinger, M. B¨ urger, and D. V . Dimarogonas, “Auct ioning over
probabilistic options for temporal logic-based multi-rob ot cooperation
under uncertainty,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) , pp. 7330–7337, 2018.
[7] J. Chen, R. Sun, and H. Kress-Gazit, “Distributed contro l of robotic
swarms from reactive high-level speciﬁcations,” in IEEE 17th Inter-
national Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE) ,
pp. 1247–1254, 2021.
[8] A. Nikou, D. Boskos, J. Tumova, and D. V . Dimarogonas, “Co op-
erative planning for coupled multi-agent systems under tim ed tem-
poral speciﬁcations,” in 2017 American Control Conference (ACC) ,
pp. 1847–1852, 2017.
[9] S. Andersson, A. Nikou, and D. V . Dimarogonas, “Control s ynthesis
for multi-agent systems under metric interval temporal log ic speciﬁ-
cations.,” IFAC-PapersOnLine , vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 2397–2402, 2017.
20th IFAC World Congress.
[10] A. Saoud, P. Jagtap, M. Zamani, and A. Girard, “Composit ional
abstraction-based synthesis for interconnected systems: An approxi-
mate composition approach,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Net-
work Systems , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 702–712, 2021.
[11] R. Alur, S. Moarref, and U. Topcu, “Compositional and sy mbolic
synthesis of reactive controllers for multi-agent systems ,”Information
and Computation , vol. 261, pp. 616–633, 2018. 4th International
Workshop on Strategic Reasoning.
[12] M. Srinivasan, S. Coogan, and M. Egerstedt, “Control of multi-agent
systems with ﬁnite time control barrier certiﬁcates and tem poral logic,”
inIEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pp. 1991–1996,
2018.
[13] L. Wang, A. D. Ames, and M. Egerstedt, “Safety barrier ce rtiﬁcates for
collisions-free multirobot systems,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics ,
vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 661–674, 2017.
[14] M. Mizoguchi and T. Ushio, “Abstraction-based symboli c control
barrier functions for safety-critical embedded systems,” IEEE Control
Systems Letters , vol. 6, pp. 1436–1441, 2022.
[15] P. Nilsson and A. D. Ames, “Barrier functions: Bridging the gap
between planning from speciﬁcations and safety-critical c ontrol,” in
IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pp. 765–772, 2018.
[16] J. Chen, S. Moarref, and H. Kress-Gazit, “Veriﬁable con trol of
robotic swarm from high-level speciﬁcations,” in Proceedings of the
17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Mul tiAgent
Systems , AAMAS ’18, (Richland, SC), p. 568–576, 2018.
[17] D. S. Sundarsingh, J. Bhagiya, Saharsh, J. Chatrola, A. Saoud, and
P. Jagtap, “Scalable distributed controller synthesis for multi-agent
systems using barrier functions and symbolic control,” IEEE 62nd
Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , 2023.
[18] A. A. Kurzhanskiy and P. Varaiya, “Reach set computatio n and control
synthesis for discrete-time dynamical systems with distur bances,”
Automatica , vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 1414–1426, 2011.
[19] O. Maler, “Computing reachable sets: An introduction, ” 2008.
[20] C. Baier and J.-P. Katoen, Principles of Model Checking . The MIT
Press, 2008.
[21] A. D. Ames, S. Coogan, M. Egerstedt, G. Notomista, K. Sre enath,
and P. Tabuada, “Control barrier functions: Theory and appl ications,”
in18th European Control Conference (ECC) , pp. 3420–3431, 2019.
[22] M. Rungger and M. Zamani, “SCOTS: A tool for the synthesi s
of symbolic controllers,” in Proceedings of the 19th international
conference on hybrid systems: Computation and control , pp. 99–104,
2016.
[23] M. Khaled and M. Zamani, “Omegathreads: Symbolic contr oller de-
sign forω-regular objectives,” in Proceedings of the 24th International
Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control , HSCC ’21,
(New York, NY , USA), Association for Computing Machinery, 2 021.
[24] P. Jagtap and M. Zamani, “QUEST: A tool for state-space
quantization-free synthesis of symbolic controllers,” in Quantitative
Evaluation of Systems (N. Bertrand and L. Bortolussi, eds.), (Cham),
pp. 309–313, Springer International Publishing, 2017.
[25] Y . Xiong, D.-H. Zhai, M. Tavakoli, and Y . Xia, “Discrete -time control
barrier function: High-order case and adaptive case,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Cybernetics , pp. 1–9, 2022.