Chapter 2 3 
 
This is a preprint of the following chapter: M. Mezera , C. Florian, G.-w. Römer , J. Krüger , J. Bons e, Creation of Material Functions 
by Nanostructuring , published in Ultrafast Laser Nanostructuring – The Pursuit of Extreme Scales , edited by R. Stoian  and J. Bonse , 
2023 , Springer Nature Switzerland AG ; reproduced with permission of Springer Nature Switzerland AG . The final authenticated 
version is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-031-14752 -4_23 
 
 
Creation of Material Functions by Nanostructuring  
 
Marek Mezera1, Camilo Florian2, Gert -willem Römer3, Jörg Krüger1, Jörn Bonse1,* 
 
1 Bundesanstalt für Materialforschung und  -prüfung (BAM) , Unter den Eichen 87, 1220 5 
Berlin , Germany  
2 Princeton Institute for the Research and Technology of Materials (PRISM), Princeton 
University, Princeton, USA  
3 Chair of Laser Processing, Department of Mechanics of Solids, Surfaces & Systems (MS3), 
University of Twente,  7500 AE, Enschede, The Netherlands  
e-mails: camilofb1@gmail.com  ; g.r.b.e.romer@utwente.nl  ; joerg.krueger@bam.de  ; 
joern.bonse@bam.de   
*corresponding author  
 
Abstract  
Surface nanostructures provide the possibility to create and tailor surface functionalities mainly 
via controlling their topography along with other chemical and physical material properties.  
One of the most appealing technologies for surface functionalization via micro - and 
nanostructuring is based on laser processing . This can b e done either via direct contour -shaping 
of the irradiated material using a tightly focused laser beam, or in a self -ordered way that allows 
employing  larger laser beam diameters along with areal scanning to create  a variety of laser -
induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS). For the latter approach, particularly ultrashort 
pulsed lasers have recently pushed the borders across long -lasting limitations regarding the 
minimum achievable feature sizes and  additionally  boosted up the production times. This 
chapter  reviews the plethora of recently investigated applications of LIPSS  - for example via 
imposing  diffractive or plasmonic structural colors, the  management of liquids and surface 
wetting properties, biomedical a nd bio -inspired functionalities, beneficial effects in tribology 
for reducing friction and wear, the manipulation of optical  scattering and absorption  in 
photovoltaics, or the manipulation of magnetic or superconductin g surface properties in other 
energy applications.  The footprint of the LIPSS -based technology is explored  in detail  
regarding the current state of industrialization, including an analysis of the market and 
associated  LIPSS  production costs.  
Keywords: Laser -induced periodic surface str uctures (LIPSS); Surface functionalization; 
Nanostructures; Microstructures; Laser processing; Bio -inspired surfaces; Surface wetting    
1. Introduction : 
Laser -induced Periodic Surface Structures  – LIPSS  
1.1  Zoology  of LIPSS  
1.2  Physical and Chemical Properties of LIPSS  
 
2. Applications of LIPSS  
2.1  Optical Applications  
2.2 Liquid Management and Surface Wetting  
2.3 Biological Applications  
2.4 Tribological Applications  
2.5 Energy Applications  
2.6 Other Technical Applications  
 
3. Industrialization  
3.1 Marke t Analysis  
3.2 Production Costs 
3.3 Patent Situation  
 
4. Outlook  
  1. Introduction : 
Laser -induced Periodic Surface Structures – LIPSS  
Laser -induced periodic surface structures  (LIPSS) were reported for the first time more than  
fifty years ago [Birnbaum, 1965]. Already during their early times, it became clear that LIPSS 
are a universal phenomenon that occurs when intense and coherent laser radiation is interacting 
with the surf ace of solids [van Driel, 1982]. Depending  on the polarization state of the laser 
radiation (linear, circular, radial, vector states carrying an angular momentum, etc.), the formed 
LIPSS can exhibit very different surface morphologies and geometrical characteristics, e.g., 
spatial periods, modulation depths, aspect ratios, orientations, etc. (for a detailed classification 
of LIPSS see the following Section 1.1).  
During the last decades, the topic of LIPSS has evolved into a scientific evergreen [Bonse, 
2017]. While during the 1980s the fundamental theories on LIPSS were successfully developed 
[Sipe, 1983], the LIPSS phenome non itself was rather considered as curiosity that finally did 
not entered the stage of practical applications. Later, starting around the turn of the millennium 
– with the broader availability of ultrashort pulsed laser systems in research laboratories – the 
topic has experienced again a vivid revival. From that time on, lots of scientific research has 
again focused on the fundamental formation mechanisms of LIPSS, particularly when created 
with femtosecond laser pulses . In that case, the stages of energy deposition to the solid driving 
the material into a strongly excited state, and the stage of subsequent matter re -organization are 
temporally well separated. For detailed review articles on the origin of LIPSS the reader is 
referred to [Siegman, 1986 / Bon se, 2012 / Vorobyev, 2013 / Buividas, 2014 / Abere, 2016 / 
Bonse, 2017 / Bonse, 2020a / Bonse, 2021] and to Chapter 1 (Derrien  et al.) , Chapter 2 (Ivanov 
et al.) and Chapter 5 (Rudenko et al.)  of this book. Moreover, during the last five to ten years, 
a systematic screening of potential applications  of LIPSS was performed [Vorobyev, 2013 / 
Liu, 2019 / Florian, 2020 / Gräf, 2020 / Bonse, 2020b / Stratakis, 2020 / Bonse, 2021], pointing 
towards many different scientific and practical aspects of LIPSS.  
The fol lowing Chapter aims to provide a comprehensive review on the variety of different 
surface functionalizations that can be created through LIPSS. These specific surface functions 
finally can be transferred into various applications in optics, fluidics, medic ine, tribology, 
energy saving , etc. 
 
1.1  Zoology of LIPSS  
 
In this Section  the variety of different kinds of self -organized laser -induced surface structures 
is presented, providing a systematic and strict classification of LIPSS along with current 
terminologies that can be found in the literature. We focus particularly on low spa tial frequency 
LIPSS  (LSFL), high spatial frequency LIPSS  (HSFL), triangular nanopillars  (TNP) and explain 
how these sub -wavelength structures can be distinguished from supra -wavelength Grooves  and 
more irregular Spikes  structures.  
Depending on the laser processing strategy (“spot processing” vs. “scanning processing” of 
lines or larger area s) and the specific laser irradiation parameters (fluence, number of pulses, 
spatial beam profile, etc.), structures of a single type of LIPSS, spatially separated regions of distinct LIPSS, or even multiple mixed types of LIPSS or hierarchical surface str uctures may 
be simultaneously observed [Bonse, 2021].  
In a strict classification, LIPSS represent a 1D - or sometimes 2D -quasi -periodic grating 
structure and are usually classified with respect  to their spatial period  (compared to the 
irradiation  waveleng th ), their relation to the laser beam polarization  (linear, circular, etc.), 
and their depth -to-period aspect ratio A. 
 
Low Spatial Frequency LIPSS (LSFL)  
The most prominent type of LIPSS that was historically observed first in 1965  by Birnbaum 
[Birnbaum, 1965] are LSFL. For radiation that is incident normal to the surface of a solid (angle 
of incidence  = 0°), LSFL typically have periods close to or somewhat smaller than the laser 
irradiation wavelength  used to create them (λ/2 ≤ ΛLSFL ≤ λ) and an aspect ratio A 
typically  < 1. These structures usually form in the ablative regime at fluence  levels  up to several 
times the ablation threshold (material specific), although also melting -induced or oxidative 
LSFL were reported [Bonse, 2017]. For strongly  absorbing materials such as metals or 
semiconductors, LSFL are typically oriented perpendicular to th e linear laser beam polarization 
(type LSFL -I), while for weakly absorbing wide band gap dielectrics, they are typically parallel 
to it (type LSFL -II). Note that the numbering of the different types of LIPSS with Roman letters 
(-I/-II) follow the historic order of observation.  
The dissimilarity of both types of LSFL arises from the different coherent optical scattering 
mechanisms involved in their formation . LSFL -I originate from the excitation of so -called 
Surface Electromagnetic Waves  (SEWs) [Akhmanov , 1985 / Bonch -Bruevich, 1992], such as 
Surface Plasmon Polaritons  (SPPs) and the optical interference of their electromagnetic fields 
with the incident laser beam itself, resulting in a spatially modulated pattern of the locally 
deposited optical energy that finally translates into a periodically corrugated surface topography 
[Bonse, 2009 / Bonse, 2020 a]. For p -polarized laser radiation, the surface grating relief then 
exhibits spatial periods close to the wavelength  (LSFL -I,p ~ λ/[1±sin()]). In contrast, for 
dielectrics, the LSFL -II are seeded some hundreds of nanometers below the surface and 
originate from the interference of the incident (propagating) laser radiation with light coherently 
scattered at the surface roughness (via radiativ e fields that are propagating towards the far -field 
region) [Rudenko, 2017]. Via multiple laser pulse irradiation and incubation effects in the 
material (inter -pulse feedback), the  LSFL -II signature emerges at the surface once the covering 
near-surface mat erial is removed through ablation ( LSFL -II ~ λ/{n[1±sin()]}, with n being the 
(real valued) refractive index of the dielectric [Siegman, 1986]).  
Figure 1 exemplifies LSFL -I that were formed at the surface of a niobium metal sheet upon 
scanning fs -laser pulse irradiation in air environment [790 nm, 30 fs, 1 kHz, [Cubero, 2020 a]]. 
Fig. 1(a) shows a scanning transmission electron micrograph (STEM) of a cross -sectional cut 
through the surface of the processed LSFL. It can be observed that the LSFL -I are almost 
sinusoidal with a period of ~570 nm and a modulation depth of ~300 nm. Note the fine boundary 
(marked by five white arrows) that separates the laser -affected region from the non -affected 
poly-crystalline niobium bulk material underneath. Supposedly, the niobium surface was 
melted up to this boundary during the fs -laser scan processing, resulting in a re -solidified 
superficial layer of 40 to 300 nm here [Cu bero, 2020 a]. Figure 1(b) provides  a corresponding 
top-view scanning electron micrograph of the LSFL -I.  
Fig. 1: (a) STEM micrograph of the cross -sectional surface profile of LSFL -I on poly -crystalline niobium [790 
nm, 30 fs, 1 Hz]. (b) Top -view SEM micrograph of the corresponding surface structures. The white arrows in (a) 
mark at the boundary between laser -affected zone and non -affected bulk material. (Reprinted  (adapted)  from 
[Cubero, 2020a] , Cubero  et al. , Surface superconductivity changes of niobium sheets by femtosecond laser -
induced periodic nanostructures, Nanomaterials (Basel, Switzerland) 10:2025, Copyright 2020 under Creative 
Commons BY 4.0 license. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.3390/nano10122525 ).  
 
High Spatial Frequency LIPSS (HSFL)  
HSFL typically have periods smaller than half of the irradiation wavelength (Λ HSFL < λ/2)  and 
are oriented either parallel or perpendicular to the laser beam polarization  (materials 
dependent) . They are formed at fluence  levels  very close to the damage threshold of the  
irradiated material and predominant ly for ultrashort pulse durations in the  fs- to ps -range.  Two 
types are usually distinguished.  
HSFL -I are mainly observed on transparent materials ( dielectrics and  semiconductors ). They  
consist of very narrow periodic grooves  having individual widths  of a few tens of nanometer s 
only, while their depth  can reach up to several hundreds  of nanometers . Given their large aspect 
ratio A > 1, some authors call these nanostructures  “deep -subwavelength ripples/structures” . 
For (semi)transparent materials  and normal incident laser radiation HSFL -I usually  exhibit 
spatial pe riods of  ΛHSFL -I ∼ λ/(2n), with n being the refractive index of the material. HSFL -I 
originate from the near -(sub) -surface interference of the incident (p ropagating) laser radiation 
with light coherently near -field scattered at nanoscale surface corrugations (via non -radiative 
fields confined to the near -field region of the scattering centers) [Rudenko, 2017].  
Figure 2 demonstrates the large depth -to-period  aspect ratio A of the HSFL -I (b,c) that were 
formed in the periphery of an LSFL -I covered ablation crater (a) at the surface of a silicon 
carbide (SiC) crystal after spot processing by fs -laser pulses in air [800 nm, 150 fs, 50 Hz, 
[Tomita, 2009]].  
 
Fig. 2: (a) Top -view  SEM image LSFL -I (center) and HSFL -I (periphery) on SiC. The dashed black line marks 
the position where the cross -sectional profiles (b,c) were acquired [800 nm, 150 fs, 50 Hz]. (b) Cross -sectional 
SEM micrograph of the whole irradiate d spot. (c) Detailed magnification of selected area (c) marked in (b). 
Taken from [Tomita, 2009]. (Reprinted by permission from Springer -Verlag : Applied Physics A 97:271–276 
(Cross -sectional morphological profiles of ripples on Si, SiC, and HOPG, Tomita , T. et al.) , Copyright (2009) ).  
 
In contrast,  HSFL -II have depths of only a few tens of nanometers and spatial  periods of the 
order of ~100 nm. Hence , the resulting aspect ratio  is far smaller than one ( A << 1). These 
shallow structures  are often observed on  metal surfaces, and different formation mechanisms 
were  suggested , including surface oxidation or twinning effects.  
From the three observations that both types of HSFL  mainly form upon irradiation with 
ultrashort laser pulses,  are strictly related to the direction of the linear laser  beam  polarization, 
and have a lower period limit of a few tens o f nanometers  (caused by thermal diffusion effects 
washing out too small spatial modulations during the electron -phonon relaxat ion stage), it was 
concluded that ultrafast energy deposition dominates their formation [Bonse, 2017]. However, 
for the HSFL -II, recent numerical 3D Finite -Difference Time -Domain  (FDTD) calculations 
[Skolski, 2012] combined with a numerical solution of the  Navier -Stokes equations , point 
towards a complex interplay of coherent electromagnetic scattering and subsequent 
thermoelastic and hydrodynamic effects, all triggered by the strong ultrafast laser excitation of 
the solid [Rudenko, 2020] (see also Chapter 5 (Rudenko et al.) ). 
 
Triangular Nanopillars (TNP)  
Starting in 2018, another characteristic surface morphology was reported by several groups for 
the irradiation of different metals by ultrashort laser pulses in a scan -processing geometry under 
specific laser processing conditions [Romano, 2018 / Liu, 2018 a / Fraggelakis, 2018 / van der 
Poel, 2019, Mezera, 2020]. These surface structures consist of nanometric triangular -shaped 
nanopillars as building blocks  for hexagonally arranged meta -units tha t finally form a large area 
2D-grating at the laser -processed surface. Therefore, this type of LIPSS is referred to either as 
“triangular nanopillars”  (TNPs) or as “ hexagonally arranged nano -triangles ” in the pertinent 
literature. While in Romano et al. [R omano, 2018] the TNPs were realized on stainless steel 
with multiple circularly polarized fs -laser pulses at high repetition rate (1032 nm, 310 fs, 250 
kHz), Liu et al. [Liu, 2018 a] reported their formation on tungsten surfaces upon low repetition 
rate (80 0 nm, 50 fs, 1 kHz) double -fs-pulse irradiation using cross -polarized linear polarization 
and an inter -pulse delay of ~1 ps and with cylinder lens focusing. Fraggelakis et al. 
[Fraggelakis, 2019] used high repetition rate (1030 nm, 350 fs, 100 kHz) double -fs-pulse with 
circular counter rotating polarizations and inter -pulse delay up to a few nanoseconds and with 
spherical lens focusing for their processing. Later, van der Poel et al. [van der Poel, 2019] 
generated these TNPs on a cobalt –chrome –molybdenum –alloy (CoCrMo) with multiple 
circularly polarized ps -laser pulses (1030 nm, 6.7 ps, 400 kHz). An example from that work is 
provided in Fig. 3, where two top -view SEM micrographs (a,b) are shown that were taken at 
different magnifications. Figure 3(c) is a 2D -Fast Fourier Transform (2D -FFT) of the 
micrograph displayed  in (a), representing a 2D -histogram (map) of the spatial frequencies 
contained in the transformed image. The characteristic arrangement of the pronounced peaks in 
Fig. 3(c) reflects the hexagonal  symmetry of the TNP -grating structure, while the ir positions 
indicate very similar spatial periods  of TNP ~860 nm found in several directions here.  
The physical origin of the TNPs  is currently vividly discussed in the scientific community . 
Since their spatial periods are very close to that of the LSFL -I when formed at the same material 
(TNP  LSFL -I), it is reasonable that a SPP -based formation mechanism should be invoked for 
their explanation [Liu, 2018 a / Makin, 2020 / Zhang, 2020]. Additionally, a nonlinear 
hydrodynamic convection flow mechanism was proposed to be relevant [Fraggelakis, 2019]. 
(see also Chapter 5 (Rudenko et al.)).  
 
Fig. 3: (a,b ) Top -view SEM micrographs of TNPs processed on CoCrMo -alloy upon scan -processing with 
circularly polarized ps -laser pulses [1030 nm, 6.7 ps, 400 kHz]. (c) 2D -FFT of the micrograph shown in (a) 
indicating a hexagonal symmetry of the TNP arrangement along w ith spatial periods of TNP ~ 860 nm. (Adapted 
and r eprinted from  [van der Poel, 2019] , van der Poel et al. , Fabricating Laser -Induced Periodic Surface 
Structures on Medical Grade Cobalt –Chrome –Molybdenum : Tribological, Wetting and Leaching Properties , 
Lubricants  (Basel, Switzerland) 7:70, Copyright 20 19 under Creative Commons BY 4.0 license. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.3390/lubricants7080070 ).  
 
Classification of Laser -Generated  Surface Structures  
Figure 4 orders  the plethora of different laser -generated surface structures in a single scheme. 
The branch of the LIPSS was discussed already in detail in the previous sub -sections. Apart 
from the LIPSS, also supra -wavelength Grooves  (Grooves  > ) were observed, typica lly 
featuring an orientation parallel to the laser beam polarization and periods in the few 
micrometers  range. Even larger structural sizes are observed for the irregular Spikes  
morphology (sometimes referred to as Micro-Cones) which exhibit a very weak co rrelation to 
the polarization only and “periods” up to some tens of micrometers ( Spikes >> ).  
The general requirements on the laser fluence and the number of laser pulses for the generation 
of the different surface nano - and micro -structures are indicat ed by the arrow in the bottom part 
of Fig. 4. For a more detailed discussion of the specific formation mechanisms of Grooves and 
Spikes the reader is referred to the specialized literature [Stratakis, 2020 / Bonse, 2020 a / 
Mezera, 2020  / Nivas, 2021 ]. 
 
Fig. 4: Classification of laser -generated surface structures. Adapted from [Mezera, 2020].  
 
1.2  Physical and Chemical Properties of LIPSS  
 
In this Section  physical and chemical surface properties are discussed that may be altered and 
controlled through LIPSS for creating specific surface functions. Figure 5 summari zes the 
different properties that are discussed in more detail in the following two sub-sections Physical 
Properties  and Chemical Properties .  
 
Fig. 5: Scheme o f properties affected by LIPSS and resulting  applications for surface functionalization, 
providing the frame for this book chapter. Inspired by  [Florian, 2020 a]. 
 
Physical Properties  
LIPSS can create  various specific physical surface properties. The most obvious  one is the  
characteristic  grating -like surface topography  that is describing the interface between the 
sample material and the ambient environment . Since the formation of LIPSS includes  a complex 
chain of different stages , starting with  the optical material excitation via absorpti on by  the 
electrons of the solid, followed by the transfer of the energy from the electrons to the lattice  of 
the solid , and a cascade of subsequent relaxation processes,  such as melting, ablation, 
solidification  in amorphous or crystalline states , etc. [Bäuerle , 2011  / Bonse, 2020 a], it becomes 
obvious  that also structural material properties can be altered  through the laser -processing of 
LIPSS . As consequence , e.g., the materials hardness  [Bonse , 2018 ], the dielectric permittivity  
[Hwang, 2010 ], the electric conductivity  [Lopez‐Santos, 2021 ], surface superconductivity 
[Cubero , 2020 a], etc. can be locally modified  through the presence of LIPSS , featuring specific 
applications in tribology, photonics , or electronics  [Florian , 2020 a / Gräf, 2020  / Bonse , 2021] . 
 
Chemical Properties  
Apart from changes of physical properties, the formation of LIPSS is usually accompanied by 
chemical surface alteration s, particularly if the laser -processing is performed in air environment 
– a requirement that is strongly demanded for large area or industrial laser processing.  Most 
prominent, t ypically surface oxidation occurs since  high transient temperatures are reached in 
the reactive atmosphere air upon the processing of LIPSS [Kirner , 2017 a / Kirner, 2018  / 
Florian , 2020b /  Florian , 2020c ]. Hence, in a n interfacial surface layer, the chemical 
composition of the irradiated material may change.  
Apart from intrinsic stoichiometric  material  alterations , other topography - and roughness -
related effects can be render ed possible through LIPSS : the enlarged surface area of the LIPSS 
allows molecules , such as hydrocarbons,  to adsorb from the ambient environment  [Kietzig , 
2009 / Yasumaru, 2017 /  Gregorčič , 2021 ]. Through such “ageing” effects , even a transition 
from an initially hydrophilic surface into a superhydrophobic state  can manifest  – without any 
signifi cant change of the surface topography.  For many biomedical or healthcare applications, 
such topographic and surface wetting effects are particularly relevant for the controlled 
adhesion (repellent or adducent) of specific biological cells or even for the prevention of the 
formation of bacterial biofilms  [Larrañaga -Altuna, 2021  / Zheng, 2021 ]. On the other hand, the 
LIPSS -enhance d total  surface  area can help to increase the efficiency of catalytic chemical 
reactions [Lange , 2017 ]. 
From all these  effects, different fields of surface functionalization can be identified that are 
discussed in the following sub -Chapter 2 Application of LIPSS , including Optical Applications  
(Section 2.1), Liquid Management and Surface Wetting  (Section 2.2), Biological Applications  
(Section 2.3), Tribological Applications  (Section 2.4), Energy Applications  (Section 2.5), and 
Other Applications  (Section 2.6). Finally, sub -Chapter 3 analyses the current state of 
Industrialization  of LIPSS, providing a Market Analysis  (Section 3.1), some quantitative 
estimates of the Production Costs  (Section 3.2), and a compilation of the actual  LIPSS -related 
Patent  Situation  (Section 3.3).  
 
2. Applications of LIPSS  
As outlined  in the previous sub -Chapter, LIPSS exhibit some very specific intrinsic properties 
that can be used to create and tailor very different surface functionalities. Most of the m finally 
fall back either to the topographic characteristics  of LIPSS , or to the specific surface chemistry 
involved during their formation (or even later ). These surface functionalities enabled various 
applications that were studied already in detail in t he context of LIPSS.  
 
2.1  Optical Applications  
 
In this Section  optical applications of laser -induced nanostructures on surfaces and sub -surface 
layers are addressed. It is discussed that laser -induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS, 
ripples), n anostructure -textured microgrooves , and n anospikes  can lead to diffractive structural 
coloring effects on metals (via ripples), modify the optical absorption of metal or semiconductor 
surfaces towards “black” materials (via microgrooves) or can decrease the reflectance on dielectrics leading to an anti-reflection effect  (via nanospikes). Apart from optical e mission and 
absorption management , safety tags can be realized via near surface 3D -self-organization of 
nanocomposite films.  
 
Structural Colo r 
LIPSS with periods of the order of visible wavelengths can efficiently act as optical diffraction 
gratings and, thus, generate structural colors for optical applications. While some applications 
require the processing of individual spots or tailored line s, most of these utilizations rely on the 
homogeneous processing of LIPSS on large surface areas. Usually, this is implemented through 
laser scanners realizing a relative motion between the focused laser beam and the workpiece.  
Figure 6 exemplifies the processing of spots, lines, and areas on a polished steel surface, see 
the scheme in Fig. 6(a). For a fixed laser source (wavelength and pulse duration), the period of 
the LIPSS can be controlled by the laser fluence ( 0) and the effective number of laser pulses 
per beam spot diameter ( Neff). On the sample, individual spots and lines connecting the areas 
generated through a meandering line -wise motion were processed by a Ti:Sapphire fs -laser 
system. Depending on the LIPSS period, different s tructural colors appear as result of optical 
diffraction upon illumination of the sample with a white light source. This is demonstrated in 
Fig. 6(b), where color effects can be seen  for the structured areas, lines and even spots.  
 
 
Fig. 6: (a) Scheme of laser processing. (b) Photograph of a polished 100Cr6 steel sample (24 mm diameter) after 
fs-laser processing [800 nm, 30 fs, 1 kHz] of spots, lines, and areas. The colors arise from optical diffraction of 
ambient light at laser generated L SFL. (© 2016 IEEE.  Reprinted, with permission, from [Bonse, 2017], Bonse, 
J., et al., Laser -induced periodic surface structures —A scientific evergreen, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron, 
2017 , 23:9000615).  
A pioneering work demonstrating the application of LIPSS for color marking and decoration 
purposes was presented by Dusser et al. [Dusser, 2010] encoding a  miniaturized, colored picture 
of the painter van Gogh on a steel surface, see Fig. 7. The color variation was implemented by 
a variation of the orientation of LSFL for a fixed angle of observation here.  
For a more detailed dis cussion of structural color the reader is referred to the recent review 
article of Liu et al. [Liu, 2019] and the references included.  
 
 
Fig. 7: Photograph (right) of a polished 316L stainless steel sample after fs -laser processing [800 nm, 150 fs, 5 
kHz] of a miniaturized self -portrait of the painter Vincent van Gogh. The insets (left) are top -view scanning 
electron micrographs of LSFL with two different local orientations. (Reprinted with permission from [Dusser, 
2010], © Optical Society of America).  
 
Absorption and Emission Management  
Hierarchical micro -nanostructures (e.g.  microgrooves and spikes) largely increase the effective 
surface of a sample. Due to locally non -normal incident rays and multiple reflections, these 
surface topographies can cause an increase in the absorption of light. This effect is visualized 
in Fig. 8 for nanostructure -textured microgrooves on platinum forming a “black metal” 
[Vorobyev, 2013]. The figure compares the spectral dependence of the reflectance of the 
polished Pt surface (full squares) with that of a fs -laser processed black Pt surface (full  circles). 
The latter surface exhibits hemispherical reflectances of less than 5% in the ultraviolet to 
infrared spectral range (~250 nm to 2500 nm). The inset provides a picture of the corresponding 
laser -processed black Pt sample.  
Regarding the emission management , Kirchhoff’s law can be exploited. It states that the 
emittance of a surface equals its absorbance in thermal equilibrium. Hence, surfaces of 
increased absorption simultaneously feature a n elevated emission.  The effect can be used e.g. 
for filam ents of incandescent lamps. This application has been demonstrated  in a tungsten 
filament lamp increasing its optical emission efficiency by a factor of three in the visible range 
compared to an untreated filament [Vorobyev, 2009 a]. 
 
Fig. 8: Photograph  of a fs -laser processed [800 nm, 65 fs, 1 kHz] “black platinum” sample covered with 
nanostructure -textured microgrooves (right). The corresponding total hemispherical reflectance spectrum is 
shown (left, violet full circles) along with a measure ment of the polished surface as a reference (left, blue full 
squares). (Reprinted from [Vorobyev, 2013]  by permission from Wiley -VCH -Verlag GmbH : Laser Photonics 
Rev. 7:285–307 (Direct femtosecond laser surface nano/microstructuring and  its applications , Vorobyev , A.Y.  
and Guo , C.), Copyright (2012) ).  
For transparent materials optical scattering effects can be used to create omnidirectional 
broadband antireflective surfaces [Stratakis, 2020]. Papadopoulos et al. [Papadopoulos, 2019]  
used cir cularly polarized fs -laser pulses to generate randomly arranged nanospikes  for 
mimicking the wing of the butterfly Greta Oto . These laser -generated structures exhibit random 
height and widths distributions in the few hundreds of nanometer range, resulting in surface 
reflectance  level s down to 1% in the visible spectrum.  
 
Information Encoding  
Different technical approaches were employed to realize the encoding of information through 
self-organized nanostructures, e.g. for security tag applications. Apart from the obvious 
application of using a long -lasting structural coloring to avoid falsifica tion of (Canadian) coins 
[Guay, 2017], more complex laser processing strategies were suggested by the groups around 
N. Destouches and J. Siegel [Liu, 2017  / Sharma, 2019a  / Sharma, 2019b]. The technique 
applies silver salts embedded into (meso -)porous tita nia films to create layered and LIPSS -
periodically arranged Ag -nanoparticle systems that can be used for multiplexed image encoding 
for brand identification, authentication  of goods, and smart visual effects [Sharma, 2019a].  
Figures 9(a,b,c) sketches the encoding of two distinct grating structures that can be processed 
in different depths in a mesoporous Ag:TiO 2-film on glass upon high -repetition rate fs -laser 
pulse exposure (500  kHz) at different scanning speeds, i.e. “low speed” (LS) and “high -speed” 
(HS). The gratings arise from a plasmonically driven precipitation of Ag nanoparticles within 
the titania matrix, along with Ostwald ripening effects, resulting in a complex 3D -arrangement 
of differently sized Ag nanostructures ( for details see [Liu, 2017]). These effects can be used 
for encoding several pictures in a multiplexed way, that can be optically read out under different 
rotational angles, see Figs. 9(d,e,f). Such an image encoding could be used for ID cards, etc.  
 
 
[Fig. 9: (a) Scheme of laser -induced 3D -self-organization in the mesoporous Ag:TiO 2 nanocomposite film. 
Linearly polarized laser pulses [515 nm, 370 fs, 500 kHz] excite simultaneously a surface wave and a guided 
wave, both propagating in perpendicular directions. The waves interfere with the incident pulse and cause an 
intensity modulati on either close to the film surface parallel to the polarization, or within the film in the 
perpendicular to it. Both interference patterns feature different spatial periods. (b,c) Top -view micrographs of 
structures “HS” (b; processed with high speed of 10 0 mm/s) and “LS” (c; processed with a low speed of 10 
mm/s) and their respective 2D -Fourier transforms (inset). The linear polarization direction is indicated by the red 
double arrows. (Images (a) -(c) reprinted with permission from [ Liu, 201 7] (Liu et al.,  Three -dimensional self -
organization in nanocomposite layered systems by ultrafast laser pulses , ACS  Nano 11:5031 –5040 ). Copyright 
(2017) American Chemical Society).  (d,e,f)  Inscription of multiple “hidden” images. (d) Angular ranges of 
LIPSS used to encode the 256 grey -levels of each image. The three raster images have been interlaced and 
printed as different fames onto a 1.18 cm2 surface. The red, blue and yellow colors repr esent false colors used for 
interlacing. The three frames contain gratings whose orientation varies (red:0° –15°; blue: 60° –75°; yellow:120° –
135°. (e) Scheme of the setup used for taking photographs of the sample, indicating the incidence angle i of the 
white light collimated beam and the angle 1g of the first diffraction order in the plane of incidence for green 
light at a wavelength of 537 nm. (f) Photographs of the sample printed onto a polycarbonate substrate recorded 
for three different azimuthal angl es upon rotating the sample in its plane. Three different images appear at 0°, 
60° and 120°, respectively.  (Images (d )-(f) republished with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry, from  
[Sharma , 2019a] , Laser -driven plasmonic  gratings for multiple image  hiding,  Sharma, N., et al. , Mater. Horiz . 6: 
978–983, 2019 ; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center,  Inc.). 
 
2.2  Liquid Management and Surface Wetting  
 
In this Section  wetting and liquid management applications of laser -induced micro - and 
nanostructures on surfaces are addressed. That is, besides surface chemistry, specific surface 
morphologies , including laser -induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS, ripples), can b e 
exploited to tune and optimize the wetting properties of a surface. First the physics governing 
surface wetting are addressed briefly. Next examples are discussed showing that surface 
textures (including LIPSS ) can be used to create surfaces which are se lf-cleaning, or allow to 
direct fluids, show reduced adhesion to liquid food, reduce drag, reduce the Leidenfrost 
temperature , and last but not least, show anti -icing properties.  
Physics Governing Surface Wetting  
Wettability of a solid surface is the degree to which a surface can get wet by a liquid. The 
wetting properties of a liquid (droplet) on a solid surface, in a gaseous environment (a so -called 
solid –liquid –vapour system) are typically quantified by contact angle measurements, see Fig . 
10(a). I n this figure, the balance of capillary forces acting at the liquid –solid –vapour interface, 
results in the so -called Young’s contact angle  Y [Young, 1805], which is related to the 
interfacial surface tension vs of the vapour -solid, sl of the solid -liquid and lv of the liquid -
vapour, which are related as cos( Y) = (vs-sl)/ lv. The interfacial surface tensions are chemical 
material parameters [Samanta, 2020].  
 
Fig. 10: (a) Definition of contact angle Y [] of a liquid (droplet) resting on a flat solid in a gaseous environment 
(solid –liquid –vapour system).  (b) Wenzel state, in which the liquid fully wets the surface (c) Cassie -Baxter state, 
in which air is trapped below the liquid. (d) Liquid on a hierarchical (here dual -scale) surface topology 
composed of micrometer and nanometer scale surface roughness, resulting in increased Apparent Contact Angle  
(APCA) . (e) SEM mi crograph of the surface topology of a Lotus leaf, composed of nanometer sized “hairs” on 
top of micrometer  sized “pillars”, showing hydrophobic and self -cleaning properties. (f) A n SEM micrograph of 
a laser -processed surface resulting in a dual -scale surface texture  — i.e. microscale pillars superimposed with 
LIPSS, replicating the surface topo graphy  of a Lotu s leaf. (g) A water drop, with a large APCA, sitting on top of 
a laser dual -scale surface texture.  Images (a) -(d) and (f),(g) adapted and reprinted by permission of [Arnaldo del 
Cerro, 2014]. Image (e) adapted from [Barthlott, 2017], Barthlott et al., Plant Surfaces: Structures and Functions 
for Biomimetic Innovations , Nano -Micro Lett . 9:23, Copyright 201 6 under Creative Commons BY 4.0 license. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40820 -016-0125 -1. 
 
If the liquid is water, a (flat) surface is referred to as hydrophilic if Y < 90 and hydrophobic —
i.e. water repellent, if Y > 90. A surface is con sidered superhydrophobic if Y > 150. If a 
surface repels oily liquids it is referred to as oleophobic [Tuteja, 2007] and omniphobic if it 
repels all types of liquids. A superhydrophobic surface is usually only achieved if a roughness 
(texture) is present on the surface. In the latter case, Y cannot be calculated using the above 
equation, but st ill the contact angle can be measured and is then referred to as the Apparent 
Contact Angle  (APCA) [Stratakis, 2020]. Depending on the wetting state (or wetting regime), 
the APCA can be calculated using one of two models. If the liquid (droplet) is in full  contact 
with the surface of the solid, the Wenzel model applies [Wenzel, 1936], see Fig . 10(b). If the 
liquid does not fully penetrate into the “valleys” of the surface roughness, but rests on the peaks 
of the texture, the Cassie -Baxter model applies [Cas sie, Baxter, 1994], see Fig . 10(c). In this 
figure, the location of the contact line between the liquid and the solid is determined by the 
slope of the texture and the local Young’s contact angle on the slope, see Fig . 10(c). The steeper 
the slope, the hig her the contact line (closer to the peak) and therefore the less the liquid -solid 
contact area. As a result, a droplet easily rolls off, when the surface is tilted. Surface properties 
like self -cleaning, anti -icing and microfluidic applications are attribu ted to this small liquid -
solid contact area. In the case of water, effects of increased APCA, when compared to flat 
surfaces, occur at micrometer scale roughness levels. If on this roughness scale, an additional 
nanometer scale roughness is superimposed, t he APCA can be even further increased, due to 
the increased local slopes of the nanometer roughness, see Fig . 10(d). The self -cleaning 
properties of the Lotus leaf are attributed to this dual roughness scale, see Fig . 10(e). When 
designing a surface topolo gy for improved wetting applications, LIPSS can be exploited on top 
of a micrometer scale texture, to obtain a dual -scale roughness, see Fig . 10(f)-(g). Many 
industrial processes and applications of LIPSS to adapt surface wetting of a surface or for liquid  
management are inspired by engineered replication of biological systems, such as the Lotus leaf 
[Stratakis, 2020  / Yong, 2015  / Nishimoto, 2013]. Also, many biomedical applications of LIPSS 
rely (partly) on surface wetting, see Section 2.3 Biological Applications . 
Self-Cleaning  
Contaminants and debris on the surface of a product, such as tiles, textile s and solar -panels, can 
negatively influence not only its main function, but can also induce other effects such as tear 
and wear. It should be noted that, for optical applications, such as solar -panels or window glass, 
(super)hydrophobicity and transparency are competitive properties, because for roughness 
levels exceeding about 100 nm, optical transparency is compromised due to light s cattering 
[Nishimoto, 2013]. A self -cleaning surface will reduce time and, therefore, costs associated 
with active cleaning procedures. If a surface exhibits (super)hydrophobic behaviour, water 
droplets easily roll off the surface and will pick up and carr y away surface contaminants. 
Several authors, including Jagdheesh et al. and Piccolo et al. found that LIPSS increase the 
(apparent) contact angle on various materials up to tens of percent, when compared to “flat” or micromet er textured surface morpho logies [Jagdheesh, 201 1 / Piccolo, 2020]. Milles et al. 
[Milles, 2020], characterized the self -cleaning property of superhydrophobic hierarchical 
surface textures on aluminium, created  by direct laser writing (DLW, using  = 1064  nm and 8 
ns and 14 ns pulse d urations) , direct laser interference patterning (DLIP) and LIPSS (using  = 
1064  nm and 10 ps pulse duration), which were contaminated with various particles including 
polyamide (PA) particles (~100 μm), see Fig . 11. Several droplets of 10 μl deionized water 
were dropped on contaminated laser -structured samples, which were tilted to allow droplet to 
roll of the sample and pick -up the particles, see Fig . 11(b). After each droplet, the number of 
particles on the region  of interest was measured, see Fig . 11(c). The authors found high self -
cleaning efficiencies of the DLW + DLIP + LIPSS structures with a remaining contamination 
as low as 1% when 100 μm diameter MnO 2 and PA particles were used, see Fig . 11(d). 
 
 
 
Fig. 11: (a) Top -view SEM micrograph of a hierarchical surface texture from resulting of the combination of 
DLW and DLIP and LIPSS showing self -cleaning properties. (b) Test setup used to assess self -cleaning 
properties of various surface textures. (c) The amount  of particl es on the region of interest was measured after 
each droplet rolled off. (d) Relative amount of particles in the various textures as functions of the number of 
rolled off droplets. (Reprinted and adapted from [Milles, 2020], Appl. Surf. Sci., Vo l. 525, Milles et al., 
Characterization of self -cleaning properties on superhydrophobic aluminum surfaces fabricated by direct laser 
writing and direct laser interference patterning , 146518 , Copyright (20 20), with permission from Elsevier).  
 
Fluidic Transport  
In nature, hierarchical surface textures on the mm to nm scale are known to allow direct liquid 
flow. For example, the skin texture of moisture harvesting lizards living in arid regions consists 
of microstructured overlapping scales with capillar y channels in  between [Hermens, 2017]. The 
(micro)structure (10 mm to 30 μm) on the lizard scale “holds” a water film through which the 
skin can become super wettable. Due to the combination of capillary channels and the micro -
structured scales, liquid is collected, as well as transported to the snout of the animal. Such 
surface properties can be exploited industrially for e.g. transport of cooling lubricants 
[Comanns, 2016] or lubricants in tribological applications, see Section  2.4 Tribological 
Applicatio ns. Hermens et al. [Hermens, 2017] employed a ps pulsed laser source at 532 nm to 
texture 16MnCr5 steel surfaces in order to mimick  the scales and capillary channels of a desert 
horned lizard, see Fig s. 12(a) and 12(b). The unidirectional transport of liquid, over distances 
in the range of centimeters, in/on such a surface texture is attributed to the network of 
interconnected capilla ries that narrow and widen periodically. The authors characterized the 
liquid transport properties by depositing droplets of cooling lubricant K -40 at one side of the 
surface and observe the liquid transport using a video camera. It was found that the liqu id 
propagates, from left to right in Fig . 12(c), at 0.49 mm/s velocity.  
 
Fig. 12: (a) 3D surface topography of micrometer -sized 6 -sided textured polygons ("scales"), with in between 
capillary "channels" consisting of micrometer -sized dimples (diameter ~10 µm) covered by sub -micrometer 
LSFL. (b) SEM micrograph (detail) of the surface texture in the capillary channels. (c) Image of lubricant K -40 
(artificially coloured blue) at 0.2 seconds after a droplet wa s deposited near the left side of the image. (d) 
Sequence photographs (top -view) demonstrating the unidirectional flow of a water droplet, placed in the centre 
of a gradient of surface textures (top: Spikes, bottom: LSFL) on steel. (Images (a) -(c) reprinted from [Hermens, 
2017], Appl. Surf. Sc i., Vol. 418, Hermens et al., Mimicking lizard -like surface structures upon ultrashort laser 
pulse irradiation of inorganic materials, 499 –507, Copyright (2016), with permission from Elsevier. Image (d) 
taken from [Kirner, 2017b]. (Reprinted by permission from Springer -Verlag GmbH : Applied Physics A 123:754 
(Mimicking bug -like surface structures and their fluid transport produced by ultrashort laser pulse irradiation of 
steel, Kirner, S.V. et al.) , Copyright (2017) ). 
As another example, Kirner et al. applied a 170 fs pulsed laser source at  = 1026 nm to texture 
the surface of 42CrM04 steel with a gradient of surface morphologies ranging from LSFL over 
grooves to spikes ( see Section 1.1  Zoology of LIPSS ), by varying the laser fluence from 0.07  
J/cm2 (bottom of the rectangle) to 1.05 J/cm2 (top of the rectangle), in order to mimic the 
transport properties of the skin of a bark bug ( Aradidae ) [Kirner, 2017 b]. It was found, using 
video recordings, that, whe n applying an 8 μl droplet of deionized water in the center of the 
textured surface, shortly after laser processing, the liquid quickly spread at ~75 mm/s towards 
the area covered by spikes, and not to the area covered by grooves or LSFL, see Fig . 12(d). 
Another facet related to the transport of fluids is the laser -based creation of superwicking  
surfaces. For this functionality, t he combination of capillary forces, e.g., in laser -generated 
parallel microgrooves, along with the philicity of the nanostructure -covered inner channel  
surfaces  can effectively transport liquid s even agains t gravity [Vor obyev, 20 09b], see Fig. 13 .  
 
Fig. 13: (a) -(d) Photographs showing the methanol transport against gravity on a vertically standing laser -
processed black platinum surface.  (e)-(f) Photographs showing the vertical transport of methanol and liquid 
accumulation across a sample edge.  (Reprinted from [Vorobyev, 2009b],  Vorobyev  et al., Metal pumps liquid 
uphill , Appl. Phys. Lett.  94:224102  (2009) ], with the permission of AIP Publishing .) 
Different applications based on such superwicking surface functionality were proposed and 
demonstrated  already . Due to the capillary action, a liquid  drop quickly spreads on the wicking  
surface and fo rms a thin film over a large surface area,  finally  resulting in efficient  evaporation.  
Taking benefit of such a transport of water against gravity and the simultaneously strongly 
enhanced  absorption of laser -processed black metals for optical radiation in the visible and 
infrared spectral range (see Section 2. 1 Optical Applications ), Singh  et al. [ Singh , 2020]  
demonstrated  a solar-trackable superwicking black metal panel  for photothermal water 
sanitation  and desalination (see Fig. 1 4). 
 
Fig. 1 4: (a) Schematics of a sun-tracking superwicking and super -light-absorbing ( SWSA) aluminium solar -
based water sanitizer that (b) promotes interfacial heating while ensuring that water is continuously transported 
across the solar absorber.  (c) S chematic of the water sanitation/desalination setup. (d) Water sanitation of various 
heavy metals, salts, and industrial/domestic/human water pollutants (EG: ethylene glycol). (Reprinted (ad apted) 
from [ Singh, 2020 ], Singh  et al., Solar -trackable super -wicking black metal panel for photothermal water 
sanitation. Nat. Sustain . 3:938–946, Copyright 2020 under Creative Commons BY 4.0 license. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893 -020-0566 -x). 
On laser -processed aluminum, s uch superwicking surface functionalities even persist  for water  
at elevated temperatures up to  120°C and may have applications  in boilers with enhanced 
critical heat  flux or in  heat exchangers for enhancing energy efficiency in power generation 
[Vorobyev, 2021 ]. 
 
Anti -adhesive Packaging for Liquid Food 
Viscous liquids , which adhere to packaging surfaces  of, for example, food, cosmetics and agro -
chemical products leads to wastage, an increase of recycling costs, and consumer annoyance. 
Inspired by the Nepenthes  pitcher plant , Kar kantonis et al. created l ubricant -impregnated 
textured surfaces ( LIS) to impr ove the shedding behaviour of polymer surfaces of viscous 
liquids [Karkantonis, 2020]. In this approach, the lubricant is chosen such that i t wets the 
micro/nanotextured surface instead of repelling it, and such that the viscous liquid, which is to 
be repe lled, is immiscible with the lubricant. A 310 fs pulsed laser source (  = 1030 nm) was 
applied to texture an X6Cr17 stainless steel surface with a dual -scale texture consisting of a 
micrometric hatch pattern and LIPSS, see Fig . 15(a). This surface morphology was 
subsequently replicated in sheets of polystyrene (PS) and polypropylene (PP) by hot embossing. 
Silicone oil was selected as the lubricant.  
 
Fig. 15: (a) SEM micrograph of dual -scale laser textured steel surface, consisting of a micrometric hatch pattern 
and LIPSS (insert). (b) Photographs of the dripping behaviour of PP samples (impregnated with silicone oil) 
after submergence in honey; left: non-textured plain sample; center: sample covered with LIPSS; right: sample 
with dual -scale roughness. (Images adapted and reprinted from [Karkantonis, 2020], Surf. Coat. Technol., Vol. 
399, Karkantonis et al., Femtosecond laser -induced sub -micron and multi -scale topographies for durable 
lubricant impregnated surfaces for food packaging applications , 126166 , Copyright (2020), with permission from 
Elsevier).   
 
The shedding behaviour of various liquids was assessed by exposing the LIS polymer samples 
in various liquids, including honey, milk and ketchup. Figure 15(b) shows photographs of a 
submerging test of polypropylene (PP) samples in honey. The authors found that LIPSS -LIS 
treated thermoplastics demonstrated anti -adhesive properties even after 50 cycle s with all tested 
liquids, while there was a slight stickiness on the dual -scale -LIS substrates after 43 and 20 
dipping cycles in milk and honey, respectively.  
Drag Reduction  
Drag is a force acting on a (solid) object when it moves in a fluid and acts in opposite direction 
to the  relative motion of to object in the fluid . Drag reduction is beneficial in, for example, 
biomedical devices  (e.g. in lab-on-a-chip applications ), swim -suits, piping to transport liquids, 
ship hulls  and aerospace industry [Nishimoto, 2013]. Compared to flat surfaces, reduction of 
drag can be achieved by surface textures, because a shear free boundary condition occurs at the 
air-liquid menisci, in the Cas sie-Baxter state [Jagdheesh, 2010], see Figure 10(c)-(d) and the 
no-slip condition between the liquid and the roughness peaks of texture [Ahmmed , 2016]. 
Hence, reducing relative fraction of the (textured) solid surface that is in contact with the liquid, 
will result in drag reduction. Drag reduction can be quantified by measuring the so -called “slip 
length” of the (textured) solid, e.g. using a rh eometer or  Particle Image Velocimetry  (PIV). A 
large (effective) slip length reduction, implies a large drag reduction. Therefore, Tanvi 
Ahmmed and Kietzig applied a <85 fs pulsed 800 nm laser source to texture the surface of pure 
copper with various micro meter scale patterns, including parallel lines (grate structures, see 
Fig. 16(a)) and various pillar structures (square and rhombic shaped, see Fig s. 16(b)-(c)) all of 
which the sidewalls were found to be covered with LIPSS and the peaks with nanoparticles  
[Ahmmed, 2016].   
 
Fig. 16: (a)-(c) SEM micrographs of various multiscale surface morphologies for liquid drag reduction, 
consisting of micrometer  scaled patterns superimposed by LIPSS on the slide walls and nanoparticles on the 
peaks. (d) SEM micrographs of LSF L on mould steel aiming a drag reduction in polymer injection moulding. 
(Images (a) -(c) republished with permission of R oyal Society  of Chemistry, from [Ahmmed, 2016] , Drag 
reduction on laser -patterned hierarchical  superhydrophobic surfaces , Ahmmed, K.M.T. and Kietzig. A. -M., Soft 
Matter 12:4912 –4922, 2016 ]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center,  Inc. Image (d) adapted 
and reprinted from [ Sorgato, 2018 ], CIRP Annals, Vol. 67, Sorgat o et al., Effect of different laser -induced 
periodic surface structures on polymer slip in PET injection moulding , 575–578, Copyright (201 8), with 
permission from CIRP).  
Next, the samples were coated with fluoroalkylsilane in order to chemically enhance the 
hydropho bicity of the surface. The authors employed water and a rheometer to quantify the slip 
lengths, by calculating from measured torques at different shear rates. The slip length on a 
smooth (so untextured) hydrophobic surface is small and varies from nm to a few μm [Ahmmed, 
2016]. The authors found significantly larger slip lengths of their samples, varying from 70 μm 
to about 140 μm.  
As another example, Sorgato et al. employed an 8 ps, 1064 nm laser source to cover mould steel 
with LSFL (see Fig . 16(d)) in order to reduce the drag of a polymer (PET) in an injection 
moulding setup [Sorgato, 2018]. That is, because especially in injection moulding of small 
plastic parts, e.g. in electronic packaging applications, drag is high. Therefore, high pressures 
are req uired to fill the mould. The authors covered mould insert with two different orthogonal 
orientations of LSFL, parallel (P) and transverse (T) to the flow direction of the polymer, see 
Fig. 16(d). It was found that LSFL transverse to the melt flow have a ne gligible effect on the 
injection pressure, whereas LSFL parallel to the flow direction was found to reduce the required 
injection pressure up to 23%.  
Leidenfrost Effect 
If a liquid droplet is applied on a surface which is significantly hotter than the boil ing point of 
the liquid, an insulating vapour “cushion”  forms below the droplet, such that it hovers over the 
solid and does evaporate slowly. This phenomenom is known as the Leidenfrost effect . By 
applying a surface texture the Leidenfrost temperature — i.e. the critical temperature of the 
solid over which the Leidfrost effect occurs — reduces [Dubnack, 2020  / Arnaldo del Cerro, 
2014  / Marín, 2012]. The roughness level required to reduce the Leidenfrost temperature for 
water is in the µm range [Arnaldo del Cerro, 2014  / Marín, 2012]. Moreover, based on the 
Leidenfrost effect, assymetric surface textures, such as a saw tooth profile, can be exploited to 
direct the movement of droplets, even against gravity, similar to the superwicking effect (see 
above). These movements are induced by  pressure gradients introduced by the asymetric 
inclination of the surface morpholgy, as well as due to rot ation of droplets due to Marangoni 
flows. These effects, and the reduction of the Leidenfrost temperature have potential 
applications in e.g. lab-on-a-chip devices and piping to transport liquids, as it reduces drag. 
Dubnack et al. employed a 300 fs, 1025 nm wavelength laser source to cover the tips of a saw 
tooth profile in aluminium with LSFL, see Fig . 17(a) [Dubnack, 2020].  The samples were 
coated with fluoro octyl triethoxysilane  to increase the hydrophobicity chemically. Next, the 
authors measured the temperature which initiated a water droplet (volumes 60 to 200 μl) to start 
moving. This temperature was found to equal about 170 C for the texture without LIPSS and 
only about 115  C for the textures with LIPSS, see Fig . 17(c). 
  
Fig. 17: (a) Millimetric saw tooth surface profile covered with LIPSS to accelerate water based on the 
Leidenfrost  effect. (b) SEM micrograph of the LSFL on the tips of the saw tooth surface profile on the 
aluminium substrate. (c) Frame from a video sequence showing a moving droplet (starting from the left of the 
frame) at a reduced Leidenfrost temperature. (Reprinted  from [Dubnack, 2020], Appl. Surf. Sci., Vol. 532, 
Dubnack et al., Laser -induced Leidenfrost surfaces , 147407, Copyright (2020), with permission  from Elsevier) .  
 
 
Anti -Icing 
Ice (frost, glaze, rime, snow) can cause problems when it adheres and accumulated on solar 
panels, aircraft, wind turbines, power - or communication -lines, to name a few [Volpe, 2020]. 
Anti-icing properties can be obtained by increasing the surface roughnes s of a substrate in order 
to increase the hydrophobicity of the surface. Designing a (super)hydrophobic surface aims at 
increasing the time delay in the solidification of water, promote roll -off of water before freezing 
occurs (see self -cleaning) and reduc es adhesion of ice after it formed on the surface [Volpe, 
2020]. A reduction of the relative solid fraction of the surface in contact with the water 
droplet(s) promotes anti -icing properties. A low relative solid fraction is achieved in the Cassie -
Baxter s tate (see Fig s. 10(c) and 10(d)), which lowers the heat conduction between the droplet 
and the surface, promotes roll -off and reduces ice adhesion, when compared to the Wenzel state 
and to flat or smooth surfaces.  
Milles et al. assessed the freezing time o f water droplets on aluminium surfaces covered with 
hierarchical surface textures created using the same techniques (DLW and DLIP) and laser -
systems as described above (see self -cleaning) [Milles, 2009]. The freezing time of the DLW 
structures, DLIP struct ures and the hierarchical structures (DLW+DLIP+LSFL, see Fig . 11(a)) 
was measured by imaging the solidification of 8 μl water droplets on the surface in air of -20 
C, see Fig . 18(a). As can be observed from this graph, the freezing time of the droplet on the 
hierarchical structure (22.3 s) is about 2.6 times longer than on the smooth reference sample 
(8.7 s). Furthermore, the authors found that 13 μl droplets, when dropped from a height of 20 
mm on samples cooled down to -20 C, would only bounce on the hi erarchical structures, but 
not on the DLW structures , nor the DLIP structures. Droplet rebounding was found to increase 
the freezing time.  
Römer  et al. studied the roll -off of water droplets on a laser textured stainless steel sample in a 
representative rain test and a rime test [ Römer , 2009]. To that end, the authors employed a 7 
ps, 1030 nm wavelength laser to create a hierarchical surface texture consisting of pillars (height 
20 μm, pitch 20 μm) covered with LSFL, see Fig . 18(b). The pit ch of the pillars was chosen 
such that several peaks will support a water droplet in the Ca ssie-Baxter state, see Fig . 10(d). 
Next the surface was covered by a Perfluorinated OctylTrichloro -Silane (FOTS) coating to 
increase the hydrophobicity of the surfac e chemically. After the rain test (water droplets at -0 
C, climate chamber at -5 C, 9 m/s wind speed, which are icy conditions for airplanes) of 10 
seconds a photograph was taken, see Fig . 18(c). It was found that the laser textured area is 
almost comple tely free of frozen droplets. Further, it was found, in a rime ice test, that the laser 
textured surface only slightly slows down the formation of rime, see Fig . 18(d). The latter can 
be attributed to the fact that the diameter of water droplets forming ri me are (much) smaller 
than the pitch of the pillars in Fig . 18(b). 
 
 
Fig. 18: (a) Average freezing time of water droplets on an untreated reference, DLW, DLIP, 
DLW + DLIP+LSFL structures. (b) Top -view SEM micrograph of a steel surface texture consisting of 20 μm 
pitched pillars covered with LSFL (c) Photograph of the FOTS coated laser textured steel sample, 10 seconds 
after the rain test. The laser textured area (black) of several cm2 in size is almost completely free of frozen 
droplets. (d) Photograph of the FOTS coated laser textured steel sample after the rime test. (Image (a) reprinted 
from [Milles, 2019], M illes et al., Fabrication of superhydrophobic and ice -repellent surfaces on pure aluminum 
using single and multiscaled periodic textures, Sci. Rep. 9:13944, Copyright 2019 under Creative Commons BY 
4.0 license. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -019-49615 -x. (Images (b) -(d) adapted and 
reproduced from [Römer, 2009], Römer  et al., Ultra short pulse laser generated surface textures for anti -ice 
applications in aviation. Proceedings International Congress on Applications of Lasers & Electro -Optics 
(ICALEO), 2 -5 Nov., Orlando, USA, p. 30 –37 (2009) , https://doi.org/10.2351/1.5061570  with the permission of 
the Laser Institute of America .) 
 
2.3  Biological  Applications  
 
In this Section  biological applications of laser -induced surface structures are addressed. It will 
be discussed that LIPSS can be used to control the adhesion and growth of bacterial films  and 
affect the alignment of cells on medical implants. Moreover, LIPSS can be used in biochemistry 
for significantly enhancing Raman spectroscopic signals in lab -on-a-chip devices.  
 
Biofilm Growth Control  
 
Most common issues with prosthetics, such as e.g. , dental implants [Hanif, 2017], hip and knee 
prosthetics [Löwik , 2017], as well as biomedical devices such as catheters, cardiac pacemakers 
and stents [Siddiquie, 2020] are joint infections and thrombosis. This causes additional 
hospitalization and costs and may end lethal in the worst case. A solution to this problem  could 
be the implementation of anti -bacterial surfaces on such devices.  
The wings of butterflies and cicadas as well as the skins of geckos show anti -bacterial properties 
mainly due to well -ordered micro - and nanostructures [Tripathy, 2017]. LIPSS on diff erent 
stainless steel  alloys [Fadeeva, 2011 / Truong, 2012 / Cunha, 2016 / Chan, 2017 / Epperlein, 
2017 / Lutey, 2018 / Zwahr, 2019 / Müller, 2020 / Selvamani, 2020 / Luo, 2020] and various 
types of polymers [Schwibbert, 2019 / Siddiquie, 2020] have shown similar antibacterial 
properties.  
It is to be believed that the laser process leads to an oxidation of metal surfaces, which may act 
bactericidal [Chan, 2017 / Müller, 2020]. Additionally, it may be concluded that the presence 
of a topographic surface reli ef with characteristic dimensions smaller that the bacterium size 
and with very dense features reduces the contact area between bacteria and the surface, 
inhibiting bacterial colonization and reducing bacteria retention [Fadeeva, 2011 / Truong, 2012 
/ Cunh a, 2016 / Chan, 2017 / Schwibbert, 2019 / Müller, 2020]. However, this  depends on the 
sizes and shapes of the bacteria as shown in Fig . 19 by Epperlein et al. [Epperlein, 2017]. That 
figure  shows fluorescence microscopy images of corrosion -resistant steel (V4A) samples 
partially covered with LIPSS (LSFL) with a period of about 700 nm, colonized for (a) 18 hours 
with Escherichia coli  and (b) 20 hours with Staphylococcus aureus . It can be observed that the 
rod-shaped E. coli  bacteria (with dimensions of ca. 0.5 µm × 2 µm) exhibit reduced adhesion 
on the LIPSS -covered area, whereas the spherically -shaped S. aureus  bacteria (diameter 0.5 - 1 
µm) show increased adhesion on the LIPSS -covered area. It was stated by the authors, th at the 
increased adhesion results from the bacteria shape aligning with the direction of the 
nanostructures and hence increases the contact area between bacteria and surface [Epperlein, 
2017].  
 
 
Fig. 19: Fluorescence microscope images of steel samples (V4 A), partially processed with LSFL and 
subsequently colonized with dye -stained (a) E. coli bacteria  after incubating of 18h and (b) S. aureus bacteria 
after incubating of 20h. (Reprinted from [Epperlein, 2017], Appl . Surf. Sci., Vol. 418, Epperlein  et al., Influence 
of femtosecond laser produced nanostructures on biofilm growth on steel, 420 –424, Copyright (2017), with 
permission from Elsevier).  
 
Hierarchical micro -/nanostructures consisting of a combination of micro -sized structures 
covered with nano -scaled features can also act bactericidal, as was shown e.g. by Luo et al. 
[Luo, 2020]. Figure 20(b) shows E. coli  on different types  of laser -induced surface structures 
on titanium. That is, “type 1” consists of LSFL with a spatial period of about 400 nm, “type 2” 
contains LSFL interrupted by shallow sinusoidal grooves with a distance of about 1 µm and 
“type 3” is composed of LSFL with a period of about 500 nm interrupted by grooves which are 
about 200 nm deeper than the grooves of type 2. All three structure types show an anti -bacterial 
effect, as can be summarized in Fig . 20(a), showing the reduction of bacteria counts in 
percentage of t he three surface structure types compared to polished titanium as a reference. 
All three types also show bactericidal effects, with structure type 3 showing the highest bacteria 
reduction by 56%. The proportion of live and dead bacteria after incubation ti me of the live and 
dead bacteria vary for the surface topographies. It can be observed in Fig . 20(b) that the bacteria 
tend to form clusters of several  bacteria (highlighted by a yellow circle) on structure type 1 
(LSFL) in order to prevent rupturing. Clus ter formation was observed less on type 2 and 3 but 
the bacteria were located more at the bottom of the grooves, especially for type 3. Rupturing of 
the bacteria is caused either on top of nanostructures, which leads to a platy form or between 
two microstr uctures, leading to a lacerated form. For surface texture type 1 mostly platy 
ruptured dead bacteria were observed, whereas for structure type 3 the lacerated form is 
primarily present [Luo, 2020].  
 
Fig. 20: (a) Anti -bacterial ratio (the total dead cells on LIPSS of the total cell numbers on polished titanium) for 
E. coli  of three types  of surface structures . (b) Top -view SEM images of bacterial cells adhesion states for three 
types of surface morphologies a fter 24h of bacterial cell culture. Yellow ellipses show survival strategies such as 
cluster formation over several LIPSS ridges or cells lying between the LIPSS maintaining their original shape. 
Red ellipses show two type s of dead cells including platy fo rm and lacerated form. The platy form means the 
dead cells spread wrapping the top of surface structures and the lacerated form represents the stretched dead cells 
hanging between the surface structures. (Reprinted from [Luo, 2020] , Opt. Las. Technol., Vol. 124, Luo et al., 
Biocompatible nano -ripples structured surfaces induced by femtosecond laser to rebel bacterial colonization and 
biofilm formation , 105973, Copyright (2019), with permission from  Elsevier) . 
Conceptually, different surface roughness or nanoscale  topography -mediated effects can be 
distinguished that may all led to a reduced bacterial colonization , for example  
• Bactericidal effects, where sharp or nanomet ric spiky features of the surface topography 
can perforate the cell membrane  [Elbourne, 2017] ; 
• Obstru ction or hampering of proliferation of bacterial cells , e.g.,  through their spatial 
confinement  [Mahanta, 2021] ; 
• Reduced adhesion of bacterial cells during th e early stage of biofilm formation ; 
• etc. 
 
In the lat ter context, surface topography -induced hydrophobicity can feature a low surface 
wettability and low surface energy to promote a low drag surface under flow conditions that is 
finally preventing microbial colonization at the surface through the reduced strength of 
adhesion of the bacteria to surface [Linklater, 2021].  
 
Moreover, v ery recently, Richter et al. [Richter, 2021] demonstrated that a repellence of E. Coli  
bacteria of up to ~90% can be obtained by controlling  the spatial period of UV ns -laser 
processed sub -micrometric LSFL on polyethylene terephthalate  (PET) foils. This study  point ed 
out that the efficiency of bacteria -repellent surfaces can be significantly improved when surface 
nano structures impair the adhe sion for bacterial nanofiber -appendages , such as pili . These pili 
typically feature diameters of less than 10 nm  and are establishing bacterial cell -surface and 
cell-cell contacts  as seen in  the SEM micrograph s shown in Fig. 21. 
 
Fig. 21: SEM micrographs of E. coli  bacteria on (a,c) non -irradiated (flat) PET and (b,d) laser -structured PET 
covered with LSFL of < 300  nm spatial period. Note the different scale bars.  (Reprinted from [ Richter, 2021 ], 
Richter et al., Spatial Period of Laser -Induced Surface Nanoripples on PET Determines Escherichia coli  
Repellence. Nanomaterials  11:3000 (2021) , Copyright 202 1 under Creative Commons BY 4.0 license. Retrieved 
from https://doi.org/10.3390/nano11113000 )  
 
It must be noted that certain micro - and nanostructures are not well suited for metal -on-polymer 
bearing surfaces in joint prosthetics due to increased friction and abrasion, which results in a 
shortening of the lifetime of the joint prosthetics [van der Poel, 2019]. Nonetheless, for static 
implants, laser surface texturing can offer a valid technique to control biofilm growth on the 
implant surfaces . Moreover, in aqueous media, surface wetting effects of the laser -processed 
surfaces (see Section 2.2  Liquid Management and Surface Wetting ) may be relevant for 
bacterial film formation.  
 
Cell Growth and Alignment  
Another reason to add surface micro - and n anostructures on medical devices is to control the 
growth and alignment of biological tissue at the implant surface  (see also Chapter 3 1 
(Buchberger et al.)).) . While an accelerated and aligned cell growth for improved 
osseointegration is preferable for the interface between bone tissue and load bearing implants, 
such as dental implants or hip joint prosthetics [Li, 2020a], a decreased cell growth of 
fibroblasts is desired for other implants which are intended to be removed after some time, such 
as catheters, cardiac pacemakers or contraceptives [Heitz, 2017].  
One of the standard materials for dental and orthopedic implants is Ti6Al4V titanium alloy 
because of it s excellent mechanical properties such as low weight, high corrosion resistance 
and hardness, but is also a bioinert material which osseointegration abilities could be further 
improved to reduce the possibility of long -term implant failure [Li, 2020a]. Pol ystyrene is a 
widely used biomaterial for cell culture applications for its non -toxicity and low production 
cost [Rebollar, 2008 / Wang, 2008], but its hydrophobic surface hinders cell adherence and 
growth [Wang, 2008]. Therefore, the relatively fast, cont act-less one -step LIPSS processing is 
a viable choice for enhancing biocompatibility via topographical and chemical changes due to 
the fact, that it can be applied on a wide range of materials, ranging from strong absorbing 
metals to transparent polymers [ Heitz, 2017 / Petrovic, 2020 / Mezera, 2019].  
It was shown that regular nanostructures (LSFL) on titanium alloys and polystyrene increase 
the growth rate, adhesion and density of mammalian cells [Rebollar, 2008], osteoblastic cells 
[Li, 2020a], glioma cell s [Wang, 2008] and fibroblastic cells [Petrovic, 2020]. Moreover, the 
cells align parallel to the LSFL ridges and their shape elongates along the latter. Figure 22 by 
Rebollar et al. [Rebollar, 2008] exemplifies the elongating and parallel aligning of mamm alian 
cells along LSFL processed by ns -UV laser radiation on polystyrene surfaces. This alignment 
occur red for LIPSS periods above a critical, cell type specific value.  
In contrast, laser -generated hierarchical micrometric spikes covered by nanometric LSFL  on 
titanium alloys and silicon wafers [Ranella, 2010] can suppress the growth of fibroblasts, 
particularly if an additional anodization step is performed after the laser processing [Heitz, 2017 
/ Fosodeder, 2020 / Lone, 2020]. It was shown by Klos et al. [Klos, 2020], that cell growth, 
adhesion and migration towards predetermined areas can be controlled by a site -selective 
combination of nanometer -scaled LSFL and micrometer -scaled spikes.  
 
Fig. 22: Phase contrast optical micrographs of CHO -K1 cells (a) 27 h and (b) 52 h after seeding on PS foils 
laser -processed at an angle of incidence of   = 45°. Arrows indicate the direction of the LIPSS. In the insets 
typical magnified atomic force microscopy images (1.4 µm × 1.4 µm) of the LIPSS textured PS foils are  shown. 
(Reprinted from [Rebollar, 2008], Biomaterials, Vol. 29, Rebollar et al. , Proliferation of aligned mammalian 
cells on laser -nanostructured polystyrene, 1796 –1806 , Copyright (2008), with permission from Elsevier ).  
 
SERS Lab -on-a-chip  
 
It was shown by several authors [Chang, 2011 / Buividas, 2012 / Li, 2020b] that LIPSS on 
suitable materials can be beneficial for surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) - leading to 
a sensitivity increasement of up to 2000 times compared with flat samples [Buividas, 2012]. 
The approach may be useful for applications in food safety, bioscienc es, and eco -pollution. 
Moreover, given its flexibility, laser processing is an outstanding candidate for SERS Lab -on-
a-chip products due to its ability to structure complex shapes [Chang, 2011], its simple, precise 
and controllable process for achieving fl uidic inlets, hydrophilic, liquid self -propagating 
microchannels and LIPSS using a single laser processing setup [Li, 2020b]. An example of such 
a laser processed SERS Lab -on-a-chip is shown in Fig . 23 [Li, 2020b], where (A) shows an 
overview over the whol e chip, (B) shows a liquid inlet, (C) shows the microchannels, and (D) 
shows the LIPSS processed SERS active site.  
 
This concept of spatially confining and transporting the chemical analyte through laser -textured 
surfaces can be even extended by combining it with the idea of evaporational concentration 
enhancement. This approach was realized by Hu et al. [Hu, 2020] via fs -laser processing of 
polytetrafluoroethylene surfaces to generate extremely superhydrophobic surfaces. For the 
spatial confinement of anal yte droplets, small square -shaped areas of the surface remained 
unprocessed and served as “trapping areas” for the analyte. In  combination with evaporation 
concentration of the analyte, e.g., rhodamine 6G dye molecules with a concentration of 10-6 M 
it was  shown that the corresponding spectroscopic intensity detected via the SERS effect can 
be enhanced by up to two orders of magnitude on the laser fabricated samples when compared 
to the non -processed surface.  Pavliuk et al. demonstrated an easy -to-implement  laser -printed 
device for ultrasensitive SERS -based identification of various analytes dissolved in water 
droplets at trace concentrations sensitivity levels down to 10-12 M [Pavliuk, 2020].  
 
 
Fig. 23: (a) Photograph of the whole microfluidic platform. (b) Optical image of the 2  × 2 mm2 square inlet. (c) 
3D topography and SEM images of the microchannel. (d) Optical, 3D -topography and SEM images of the SERS 
active site. (Republished with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry, from  [Li, 2020b ], A self -driven 
microfluidic surface -enhanced  Raman scattering device for Hg2+ detection  fabricated by femtosecond laser , Li, 
X., et al. , Lab on a Chip  20:414–423, 2020 ; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center,  Inc.).  
 
2.4  Tribological  Applications  
 
This Section  provides a brief survey on how LIPSS -covered surface can provide beneficial 
tribological properties, e.g., for the reduction of the coefficient of friction (CoF ) or the wear 
between different solid bodies being in mechanical contact – or even for the manifestation of a 
passive directional transport of liquid lubricants towards the tribological contact area. Such a 
reduction of the CoF, even if nominally small, ma y have a tremendous potential for energy 
(fuel) saving and CO 2 reduction when accumulated over the entire lifetime of technical devices 
[Holmberg, 2017]. Simultaneously, the reduction of wear can significantly increase the 
servicing -intervals and enhance t he devices life cycles. Hence , tribological applications of 
LIPSS and other tailored microstructures bear  an enormous societal and economic  potential.  
 
Reduction of Friction and Wear  
It is a perception of paramount importance that properties such as the CoF (often referred to via 
the symbol µ) or wear rates are not simply material properties but must be considered as system 
properties [Czichos, 2015]. A tribological system usually consists of (at least) two bodies being 
in touch with each other via their surfaces – either through a conformal or a non -conformal 
contact, featuring locally potentially very complex and even transient (multi -)contact areas. 
Moreover, some macroscopic forces are typically acting between the two bodies (e.g., shear 
forces or a no rmal force FN), among other relevant environmental parameters, such as the 
temperature, humidity, etc. Additionally, there may be a liquid or solid lubricant added in the 
tribological contact region (e.g. graphite, grease, oil, water, etc.). Often the rela tive motion 
between the two bodies can be further characterized through their relative velocities vrel, some 
specific stroke trajectories and lengths S, or even varying operational modes of relative motion 
(rotating, reversing, reciprocating), a certain nu mber of repetitive sliding cycles, etc. Many of 
these complex conditions can be set -up, controlled, and tested with so -called “tribometers” 
[Czichos, 2015].  
Several authors  already reported an improved tribological  performance of LIPSS -covered 
surfaces on different materials, in various non -lubricated or lubricated tribological test 
conditions [Yu, 1999 / Mizuno, 2006 / Eichstädt, 2011 / Pfeiffer, 2013 / Bonse , 2014 / 
Gnilitskyi, 2019 / Ayerdi, 2019] and upon exploring some specific applications, including the 
improvement of mechanical seals [Chen, 2012], the optimization of the performance of cutting 
tools [Kawasegi, 2009], medical implant materials [van der Poel, 2019 / Kunz, 2020], etc. 
Summarizing this research, the basic ideas of using LIPSS for tribolo gical applications are 
related to (i) a change in the geometrical contact area or roughness, (ii) a confinement of the 
lubricant in the valleys of the LIPSS being in tribological contact - acting as reservoir, (iii) an 
enhanced wetting of the lubricants at  the laser -processed surfaces, or even laser -induced (iv) 
chemical or (v) structural surface modifications, such as oxidation or graphitization, that may 
(vi) additionally improve the efficiency of wear -reducing additives contained in many 
commercial lubri cants. For more details on the tribological properties of LIPSS, the reader is 
referred to the pertinent literature here, such as Refs. [Bonse, 2018 / Bonse, 2021].  
 In the following, three specific examples of beneficial tribological performances of LIPSS -
processed surfaces through a reduction of the CoF are presented in Figs. 24 to 27. These results 
demonstrate some prominent tribological test geometries/conditions, i.e., linearly reversing 
ball-on-disk tests (referred to as reciprocating sliding tribological tests, RSTT, see Fig. 24, 
right) and rotating pin-on-disk (Fig. 26, left) or ring-on-disk (Fig. 27(b)) tests.  
Figure 24 summarizes the galvanometer laser -scanne r-based processing of LIPSS on a Al 2O3-
ZrO 2-Nb dielectric -metal composite  material (left). The fs -laser irradiation conditions were 
chosen to selectively form LSFL only on the elongated Nb -flakes of the composite (middle). 
These laser -processed samples wer e subsequently subjected to linear reciprocating sliding 
tribological tests (RSTT: 1 Hz reversing frequency, FN = 1.0 N normal force) against a 10 -mm-
diameter ball of polished Al 2O3, employing a stroke length of S = 1 mm, and a direction 
perpendicular to the elongated direction of the metal flakes in a Ringer solution as aqueous 
lubricant (right) [Kunz, 2020].  
 
Fig. 24: Scheme of fs -laser processing and reciprocating sliding tribological tests (RSTT) on selectivel y LIPSS -
structured Al 2O3-ZrO 2-Nb composites. (Reprinted from [Kunz, 2020], Appl. Surf. Sci., Vol. 499, Kunz et al., 
Tribological performance of metal -reinforced ceramic composites selectively structured with femtosecond laser -
induced periodic surface structures, 143917, Copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier) . 
The results of the RSTT for samples processed with a fs -laser [1025 nm, 300 fs, 1 kHz] at three 
different laser peak fluence  level s along with that of a non -irradiated (polished)  reference are 
presented in Fig. 25. The graphs show the CoF vs. the number of sliding cycles (here, up to 
1000) for stroke directions either perpen dicular to the LSFL ridges or parallel to it. In both 
cases, an up to a factor of three reduced CoF can be s een for the LSFL -covered Nb -flake 
samples when compared to the polished reference surface . 
 
Fig. 25: Coefficient of friction (µ) vs. the number of RSTT sliding cycles for selectively LIPSS -structured 
Al2O3-ZrO 2-Nb composite surfaces (see Fig. 21) upon fs -laser processing with three different peak fluence 
values (0.23 J/cm2, 0.29 J/cm2, 0.40 J/cm2) along with a reference of the non -irradiated material. The insets 
indicate the direction of the LIPSS (LSFL) with re spect to the stroke direction used in the RSTT (a: 
perpendicular, b: parallel). (Reprinted from [Kunz, 2020], Appl. Surf.  Sci., Vol. 499, Kunz et al., Tribological 
performance of metal -reinforced ceramic composites selectively structured with femtosecond laser -induced 
periodic surface structures, 143917, Copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier) . 
 
A similar beneficial tribological effect of LIPSS was reported by Gnilitskyi et al. [Gnilitskyi, 
2019] for fs -laser processed [1030 nm, 213 fs , 600 kHz] initially polished stainless  steel 
(X5CrNi1810) samples, when tested in a pin -on-disk test against a 2 -mm-diameter pin of 
chrome steel (100Cr6) in a commercial engine oil as a lubricant [ FN = 0.5 to 7.5 N, vrel = 7 
mm/s]. Figure 26 shows the so -called Stribeck curve  (CoF vs. Stribeck number) of the fs -laser 
processed and a polished surface, acquired in the regime of boundary lubrication to mixed 
lubrication. The Stribeck number SN = ×vrel/P considers the dynamic viscosity  of the oil, 
the relative velocity vrel between the pin and the rotating disc surface, and the areal pressure P. 
In the entire tested range of SN, a reduction of the CoF by 10% to 25% can be seen in Fig. 26(b) 
when comparing the results of the LSFL -covered surface  (red open circles) with that of the 
polished reference (black open squares). Simultaneously, a reduction of the wear by ~65% was 
found [Gnilitskyi, 2019].  
 
Fig. 26: (a) Scheme of pin -on-disk tribological test. (b) Stribeck curve of LIPSS (LSFL, referred to as “pattern”) 
on stainless  steel along with a reference curve for a polished (flat) surface.  (Reprinted from [Gnilitskyi, 2019] 
Gnilitskyi et al. , Tribological Pr operties of High -Speed Uniform Femtosecond Laser Patterning on Stainless 
Steel, Lubricants (Basel, Switzerland) 7:83, Copyright 2019 under Creative Commons BY 4.0 license . Retrieved 
from https://doi .org/10.3390/lubricants7100083 ). 
 
A beneficial effect through LIPSS was also reported by Chen et al. [Chen, 2012], studying the 
CoF of partially fs -laser -processed [800 nm, 120 fs, 1 kHz] initially polished silicon carbide 
(SiC) surface (Fig. 27(a)) in a ring -on-disk tribological test configuration in water environment 
(Fig. 27(b)). The CoF of such a fully  textured SiC seal is ~20% sm aller than that of a 
conventional polished one (Fig. 27(c)). 
 
 
Fig. 27: (a) SiC seal consisting of two disks, of which one was fs -laser textured with LIPSS on eight individual 
segments. (b) Scheme of water -lubricated ring -on-disk tribometer. (c) CoF vs. o perational time of the tribometer 
for a non -textured seal (left) and a LIPSS -textured seal (right). Image (a) -(c) taken from [Chen 2012]. (Reprinted 
by permission from Springer -Verlag : Applied Physics A 107:345–350 (Microstructure and lubricating property 
of ultra -fast laser pulse textured silicon carbide seals, Chen, C.Y. et al.) , Copyright (2012) ).  
 
 
Management of Lubricants  
 
Stark et al. [Stark, 2019] explored another tribological situation related to starvation lubrication 
conditio ns (Fig. 28). The authors demonstrated through in -situ optical microscopy and with a 
rotating ball -on-three -plates tribometer that parallel microchannels with periods of a few 
micrometers and depths below 1.5 µm generated by direct laser interference patterning (DLIP ; 
1030 nm, 6 ps, 400 kHz) on a stainless  steel (X90CrMoV18) surface can induce a directed 
passive flow of lubricant (here polyalphaolefin oil, PAO, at room temperature) directly into the 
<250 µm diameter tribological contact area [Stark, 2019]. The effect is mainly driven by 
capillary forces of the lubricant within the microchannel surface structure (see also Section 2.2  
Liquid Management and Surface Wetting ). 
 
Fig. 28: (a) Side -view of the laser -processed sample (bottom) and a transparent glass lens (top) made for in -situ 
observation of the lubricant fluid flow into the tribo -contact (middle). (b) Through -the-lens microscopic imaging 
of the tribo -contact (central brigh t disk) centered in the meniscus of lubricant confined between the lens and the 
sample. (c) Surface topography of ps -DLIP generated parallel microchannels on stainless steel for a passive 
directed lubricant (PAO) transport. (d -f) Temporal evolution of the PAO transport into the tribo -contact area 
through capillary forces within the horizontally oriented microchannels . (Reprinted from [Stark, 2019], Stark et 
al., Avoiding Starvation in Tribocontact Through Active Lubricant Transport in Laser Textured Surface s, 
Lubricants (Basel, Switzerland) 7:54, Copyright 2019 under Creative Commons BY 4.0 license. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.3390/lubricants7060054).  
 
2.5  Energy  Applications  
 
The ever -growing world’s energy needs constantly open multidisciplinary challenges for 
researchers and engineers when developing efficient methods and infrastructures to harvest, 
transport and storage energy. Laser micro - and nanoprocessing of materials vi a LIPSS 
constitute a versatile processing method with potential to surface functionalization for certain 
energy applications. The fabrication of LIPSS can modify surface properties by producing 
topographical changes (either to enhance optical absorption/ transmission /scattering, to alter 
electronic properties such as the electric conductivity,  or to increase the effective surface area 
for surface -based chemical processes) or by inducing localized chemical changes as a product 
of the modulated laser fluence i mprint. In the following, a set of applications will be discussed 
where LIPSS influence the final material -device functionality including solar cells, 
heterogeneous conductive structures on indium -doped  tin oxide (ITO) substrates, 
superconductive surfaces,  and enhanced battery storage capabilities.  
Solar Cells 
The fabrication of solar cells usually requires the assembling of at least three materials disposed 
as stacked layers: a top transparent electric contact, followed by a doped semiconductor, and 
finall y a back electric contact. The processing  of LIPSS improve the overall efficiency by 
modifying one of the layered materials in basically two ways: by modifying transparent surfaces 
to increase light transmission into the semiconductor active layer [Knüttel , 2013 / Liu, 2018 b / 
Nigo, 2020], or by inducing localized chemical changes in the semiconductor active material 
[Cui, 2016 / Rodriguez -Rodriguez, 2018].  
One of the first experimental realizations of LIPSS on fully functional organic solar cells is 
presen ted in Fig. 29. The general thin -film solar cell architecture is illustrated in Fig. 29(a). In  
this case, laser irradiation from a pulsed ns -Nd:YAG laser with an output wavelength of 532 
nm (second harmonic) is directed over Poly(3 -hexylthiophene) thin films (P3HT) previously 
deposited onto an ITO substrate. For details on the specific layer chemical compositions and 
thicknesses, see [Cui, 2016]. The morphology of the LIPSS was characterized by atomic force 
microscopy (AFM) data, showing parallel polymeric line structures with heigh variations of 
about ~100 nm, and spatial periods corresponding to ~430 nm (Fig. 29(b)). The efficiency of 
regular and LIPSS -based solar  cells was characterized by current vs. voltage ( I-V) curves (Fig. 
29(c)). From the reported data, such a LIPSS -corrugated solar cell features an overall increase 
of 10% efficiency with respect to the  same solar cell composition/architecture without LIPSS.  
 
Fig. 29: (a) Scheme of the bilayer device architecture tested for photovoltaic characterization (b) Surface 
topography of the P3HT surface just after laser irradiation. A cross -sectional height profile of the LIPSS is 
provided at the bottom of the image. (c) I-V characteristics of the LIPSS solar cell in the dark and under 
illumination. Note that the current ( I) is transformed here into the current density J. (Reprinted with permission 
from [Cui, 2016] ( Cui et al., Laser -induced periodic surface structures on P3HT and on its photovoltaic blend 
with PC 71BM, ACS  Appl.  Mater. Interfaces 8:31894 –31901 ). Copyright (2016) American  Chemical Society ). 
Anisotropic Electric Conductivity  
LIPSS fabrication on electrically conductive thin film surfaces ha s potential for the fabrication 
of individual parallel and periodic conductive surface -filaments that can be used for energy 
transport applications in the micro - to nanoscale. This potential has been reported on LIPSS 
fabricated on ITO thin films deposited on glass with electrical characterizations via AFM 
conductivity measurements [Gutierrez -Fernandez, 2020]. It was demonstrated that partial 
segregation of the conducting domains towards the valleys of the LIPSS could induce 
preferential (anisotropic) electr ical conductivity along the LIPSS ridges.  
The experimental realization with direct electrical characterization via macroscopic and 
microscopic 4 -point probe resistivity measurements was reported in [Lopez‐Santos, 2021]. 
Here, LIPSS with spatial periods of  about ~900 50 nm are responsible for resistivity 
differences longitudinally ( “Micro -L”) or transversally ( “Micro -T”) to the LIPSS orientation.  
The anisotropy is naturally imposed by the LIPSS orientation, and a wide range of resistivities 
are feasible mainly due to changes in the crystalline structure of the ITO layers  as a result of 
the femtosecond pulses interaction. The actual micro -characterization via the 4 -point probe 
method is displayed in Fig. 30(a), where the microprobes are placed longitudinally and 
transversally to the LIPSS orientation. The current vs. voltage  (I-V) curves for two areas 
fabricated by a low (LF: 0.64 J/cm2) and a high (HF: 0.89 J/cm2) peak laser fluence  level  are 
presented in Figs. 30(b) and 30(c), respectively. In both graphs, the slopes of the lines 
correspond to the electric resistivity in each case, showing clear differences between Micro -L 
and Micro -T characterization. In particula r, for the low fluence sample, there is a slope 
difference of a factor of two , higher for the Micro -L configuration  than for the Micro -T one. 
These finding suggest that the presence of anisotropic conductivity is induced due to a 
combination between the LI PSS topography and local resistivity changes due to the laser 
irradiation.  
 
Fig. 30: (a) Micro -configuration 4 -point probe measurements. The actual distance between the electrodes is 
determined from SEM images. Finger -tip-like metallic electrodes are carefully located at the ridges of the 
structures. (b), (c) I-V curves measured for the l ow fluence (LF) conditions in the macro -configuration and for 
high fluence (HF) conditions in the micro -configuration, with the electrodes aligned longitudinally ( Micro -L) 
and transversally ( Micro -T) to the LIPSS direction. The I-V curve of a non -irradiate d film is included as 
reference in (b). (Reprinted from [Lopez -Santos, 2021], Lopez -Santos et al. Anisotropic resistivity surfaces 
produced in ITO films by laser‐induced nanoscale self ‐organization, Adv. Opt. Mater. 9:2001086, Copyright 
2020 under Creative Commons BY 4.0 license. Retrieved from  https://doi.org/10.1002/adom.202001086 ). 
 
Surface Superconductivity  
Femtosecond laser irradiation for the fabrication of LIPSS can be used to modify the magnetic 
responses of a material. This opens widely unexplored possibilities in terms of the final surface 
properties that can be accessible through surface processing tec hniques based on LIPSS. 
Recently, it has been demonstrated that magnetic responses obey topographical and chemical 
changes induced by the laser treatments including LIPSS [Czajkowski, 2017 / Sanchez, 2020]. 
For applications where the material’s magnetic re sponse is a defining factor, such as surface 
superconductivity, the realization of LIPSS constitutes an important parameter to study.  
The realization of LIPSS on superconductor materials such as niobium, has been reported in 
[Cubero, 2020a / Cubero, 2020b] , where direct current (DC) magnetization and alternating 
current (AC) susceptibility measurements at cryogenic temperatures with external magnetic 
fields of different amplitude and orientation were analyzed and reported for samples with and 
without LIPSS,  produced on different atmospheres, as indicated in Fig s. 31(a)-31(d). The 
electric characterizations demonstrated a correlation of the surface superconducting properties  
and the LIPSS orientation. In fact, the upper  critical field, Hc2, was found not to be affected by 
the LIPSS, but t he surface critical field, Hc3, presented higher values when the external magnetic 
field ( H) was set parallel to the LIPSS orientation (Fig . 31(e)). Hence, it is possible to define a 
preferred superconductivity direction by t he orientation of the imprinted structures at the 
surface. Interestingly, despite the induced effects of laser irradiation on the surface 
superconducting properties, the Hc3 values are almost unaffected by differences in the LIPSS 
period [Cubero, 2020 a]. 
 
Fig. 31: SEM micrographs (secondary electrons) of the fs -laser -irradiated surfaces produced under different 
gaseous atmospheric conditions: (a) and (b) in air, (c) in nitrogen and (d) in argon. The scale bar corresponds to 
2 µm for all micrographs. The ro lling direction of the pristine Nb sheet material is parallel to the y-axis in all 
samples, except for FS_air2 in (a), where it is parallel to x. (e) Critical surface fields, μ0Hc3, of all analyzed 
samples. (Reprinted from [Cubero, 2020a], Cubero et al. Su rface superconductivity changes of niobium sheets 
by femtosecond laser -induced periodic nanostructures, Nanomaterials (Basel, Switzerland) 10:2025, Copyright 
2020 under Creative Commons BY 4.0 license. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.3390/nano10122525 ). 
 
Energy Storage  
The functionalization of nickel metal electrodes  acting as a cathode material optimized via 
LIPSS for micro -batteries applications has been reported i n [Neale, 2014]. It was demonstrated 
that the fabrication of LIPSS at throughputs of 4 cm2/s constitutes a valuable  and fast one -step 
approach for reliable and reproducible micro -scale surface modifications on nickel -based 
batteries electrodes.  
The morphology of the fabricated LIPSS via SEM micrographs is displayed in Figs. 32(a)-
32(d), showing structures with periods around ~1 µm. Cyclic voltammetry characterization with 
LIPSS -covered and non -irradiated nickel samples showed that the anodic peak  current density 
of the laser processed sample at electric potentials between 0.35 V to 0.40 V (Fig. 32(e)) was 
over 2.5 times larger than the equivalent peak current density for the unprocessed nickel 
electrode (25.6 mA/cm2 against 9.9 mA/cm2). This is tr anslated into net charge densities of 1.2  
mC/cm2 for the unprocessed nickel foil and 4 mC/cm2 for the processed sample. This increase 
in electrochemical activity is attributed, on one hand, to  an overall increase of the effective 
surface area relative to a  non-modified nickel surface, and on the other, to chemical changes in 
the form of thicker oxide layers that may benefit the overall performance. Different fs - and ps -
laser -processing conditions to produce the LIPSS were also studied, including laser 
wavel engths (532 nm, 775 nm and 1064 nm), in order to identify the influence of the different 
topographies/periods on the maximum peak current density achieved. It was demonstrated that 
the percentage of surface coverage influences the electrode performance, as  it can be observed 
in the data plotted in Fig. 32(f). 
 
Fig. 32: (a)-(c) Top -view scanning electron micrographs of LIPSS fabricated with a laser wavelength of 1064 nm 
on nickel surfaces under different magnifications. (d) SEM micrograph center ed in the boundary of laser -
processing, showing a relatively planar non -irrad iated nickel surface (left) and the LIPSS (right). (e) Cyclic 
voltammetry at 500 mV/s of a LIPSS -covered nickel electrode (blue curve) and a non -irradiated nickel foil 
electrode as reference (orange curve). (f) Anodic peak current density values for full r ange of scan rates and 
irradiation wavelengths. “% LIPSS” corresponds to the LIPSS -coverage across the nickel surface. (Reprinted 
from [Neale, 2014], Neale et al., Electrochemical performance of laser micro -structured nickel oxyhydroxide 
cathodes, J. Power  Sources 271:42, Copyright 2014 under Creative Commons BY 3.0 license. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.07.167).  
 
 2.6 Other Technical Applications  
This Section is dedicated to LIPSS applications, which do not fall in one of the other application 
areas mentioned above. It will be discussed, that LIPSS can improve the performance of 
piercing punch tools as well as the improvement of gasoline injection nozzles, and the catalytic 
activities of electrodes.  
 
Improved Piercing Punch Tool Performance  
It was demonstrated by Aizawa et al. [Aizawa, 2020], that the LIPSS nanostructure pattern 
processed on the curved surface area of a diamond -coated cylindrical WC (Co) punch tool was 
transcribed onto the side wall of the concurrent metal sheet  piercing hole during the punching 
process, which finally lead to a smoother metal sheet hole surface. Figure 33 illustrates  SEM 
micrographs of the diamond -coated punch tool without (a) and with LIPSS (b), as well as 
images of the pierced metal hole surface after punching it without (c) and with LIPSS (d).  
 
 
Fig. 33: (a) SEM micrograph of unstructured CVD (Chemical Vapor Deposition) -diamond coated WC punch 
tool; (b) SEM micrograph of laser -structured CVD (Chemical Vapor Deposition) -diamond coated WC punch 
tool with magnified inlet of LIPSS; (c) side -view of hole with rough surface punched by unstructured WC punch 
tool; (d) side -view of hole punched by laser -structured WC punch tool with smooth area with magnified inlet of 
SEM micrograph showing imprin ted microstructures onto the punched side wall.  (Reprinted from [Aizawa, 
2020], Aizawa  et al., Simultaneous Nano -Texturing onto a CVD -Diamond Coated Piercing Punch with 
Femtosecond Laser Trimming , Appl. Sci. (Basel, Switzerland) 10:2674 , Copyright 20 20 under Creative 
Commons BY 4.0 license. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.3390/app10082674 ). 
 
Improved Gasoline Injection Nozzles  
It was demonstrated, that LIPSS in the spray hole of gasoline direct injection nozzles enhance 
the atomization process of the fuel by decreasing the average droplet size of about 10% and by 
simultaneously increasing the spray angle by 20% with respect to regular laser trepanned holes 
[Romoli, 2014]. Figure 34 shows SEM micrographs of a cross -section of a fs -laser drilled spray 
hole with the corresponding LIPSS on the inner surface of the hole [Romoli, 2014]. 
Furthermore, fs -laser drilled spray holes covered with LIPSS consist of smaller surface features 
than compared to micro -Electrical Discharge Machining (µ -EDM) or Laser  Micro -Jet (LMJ) 
machining, at which the process related craters (µ -EDM) and grooves (LMJ) are in the scale of 
several micrometers, and produces the sharpest edges with a radius of less than 1 µm, while the 
µ-EDM edge radius typically lies between 2 and 4 µm and LMJ produces unwanted and 
uncontrollable protrusions [Romoli, 2015].  
 
Fig. 34: SEM micrographs of a cross -section of a fs -laser drilled spray hole (left) and the magnified 
nanostructures in the center of the surface of the spray hole (right). (Repr inted from [Romoli, 2014],  CIRP 
Annals, Vol. 63, Romoli, et al. , Ultrashort pulsed laser drilling and surface structuring of microholes  in stainless 
steels, 229 –232, Copyright (2014), with permission from CIRP ). 
 
Increased catalytic activity  
The fabrication of LIPSS typically leads to an increase of the nanoscale surface roughness and 
the total surface area. Therefore, LIPSS can enhance t he catalytic activity [Neale, 2014 / Lange, 
2017], depending on the specific interfacial interactions and chemical reactions. It was found 
by Lange et al. that the electrochemical activity in the oxygen reduction reaction on laser 
processed platinum plates  increased by a factor of 1500  [Lange, 2017].  
 
3. Industrialization  
 
This sub -Chapter sheds some light on the current state of industrialization of LIPSS by briefly 
analyzing the available market segment (Section 3.1  Market Analysis ), providing examples for  
estimating the production costs of LIPSS based on  the currently available technology (Section 
3.2 Production Costs ), and giving a survey  on patent  applications that are  relying on LIPSS 
(Section 3.3  Patent Situation ). 
 
 3.1 Market Analysis  
 
Although LIPSS and their applications have been extensively studied , their practical 
manufacturing has not yet emerged from an experimental status ( Technology Readiness Levels  
of TRL 3 to 5) into industrial applications (TRL > 5). A main reason for this obstacle is the 
relatively low areal processing rate when scanning the pulsed laser beam across the surface of 
the workpiece via galvanometer scanners, which typically offer sca n velocities up to 10 m/s in 
a line. However, upcoming modern laser systems with high average laser powers in the kilowatt 
regime with pulse repetition frequencies in the megahertz range  in combination with polygon 
scanners with scan velocities up to 1000 m/s [Streek, 2019] open the door for achieving 
industrial rate processing times [Fraggelakis, 2017 / Schille, 2020]. Currently, the areal LIPSS 
processing rates are at the m2/min level [Schille, 2020]. It can, however, be expected that future 
improvements in ultrafast laser technology that are enabling high energy laser pulses at (burst) 
repetition frequencies in the Gigahertz range [Mi shchik, 2019] along  with advanced  laser 
scanner technologies and in combination with smart scanning strategies for controll ing the 
residual heat load to the laser irradiated material, will enable areal LIPSS processing rates at 
the m2/s level [Bonse, 2020 b]. 
Moreover, it must be noted that the specific LIPSS processing parameters presented in most 
scientific publications were not optimized for enabling the lowest overall processing time for 
the used laser wavelength and the given material. A method to predict the laser processing 
parameters for optimized production rates given the used laser and material was p rovided by 
Mezera et al. [Mezera, 2019].  
Nevertheless, there are many applications that do not rely on large area processing but on the 
tailored marking of goods, tools, etc. One example is given by medical tools used in surgery 
that must be trackable duri ng their entire lifetime , e.g. by marking serial numbers, bar codes, or 
data matri x codes with high optical contrast.  For that  application , an industrial process relying 
on ultrashort laser -generated LIPSS named “black marking” was already established  by the 
industry . The ultrafast laser blackened surface regions feature good corrosion resistance when  
a chromium containing steel is used. [Neugebauer, 2017 ].  
In regard of the rapid developments on the laser market it is worth noting  that the average power 
of ultrashort lasers is obeying an analogon to the famous Moore’s law that was framing the 
developments in the field of computer technology for decades: a doubling of complexity every 
two years . More precisely, [Han, 2021]  underline d that since the year 2000, the increase of the 
average laser power of ultrashort (sub -ps) pulsed lasers can be described by a power law, i.e., a 
growth rate ~2Q/2 with Q being the number of the years from beginning of the trend  – 
consistently with the dat a presented in [Schille, 2021] .  
It is difficult to establish accurate forecasts toward a  precise  market analysis. However, the 
prices for ultrafast laser have been dropping in recent years [StrategiesUnlimited, 2020] and, 
just as a lan dmark, the world-wide annual growth rate  of the  revenue created by lasers in the 
market segment of fine metal processing is estimated to be 9.4% during the next 5 years , raising 
from a level of ~420 million  USD in 2019 up to  ~700 million  USD in 20 25 
[Strat egiesUnlimited, 2020]. Considering the wide fields of applications, the emerging up -
scaling of the LIPSS manufacturing process to industrial demands, the dropping costs for 
ultrashort pulsed lasers and scanners and  that first companies offering laser -based  surface 
functionalization as a commercial service, it is only a matter of time until LIPSS are a standard 
industrial manufacturing technique.  
 
 3.2 Production Costs  
 
In order to  estimate the overall fabrication costs per area required to fabricate LIPSS, it is 
necessary to consider the individual costs for a basic set of devices and optical elements needed 
for the configuration of a standard laser direct laser  writing  setup. Usua lly, an ultrashort pulsed 
laser source provides a continuous train of pulses that will be directed to  the surface of the 
material of interest after passing through a focusing element. Ultimately, the deposited energy dose (sometimes referred to as accumula ted laser fluence ) is given by product of the laser 
fluence 0 and the effective number of laser pulses Neff that are hitting the surface per spot area 
unit (acc = 0 × Neff). For a single scanned line, t he latter is given by a  relation between the 
laser pulse repetition frequency and the scanning speed for a given laser spot geometry at the 
focus  (see Eq. (1)) . In traditional  systems, the laser beam remains static and translation stages 
position the sample at user defined posit ions and speeds. However, the increasing availability 
of high -repetition -rate ultrashort lasers impose a minimum laser scanning speed that is hard to 
reach by regular mechanical translation stages. For this reason, high -repetition -rate lasers are 
usually c ombined with fast laser scanners based on a set of individually controlled 
galvanometric or on polygonal mirrors. The laser scanning systems are subsequently coupled 
with F -theta lenses to guarantee the same focusing conditions even over extended surface a reas. 
Table 1 summarizes the general requirements and estimated pri ces for the given elements. It is 
important to note that the operational costs (physical space required, energy consumption, 
insurances, local regulations  taxes, and operator salary) are no t included in this estimation, 
mainly because these values depend on the country where the laser processing  system is located. 
A generalized total cost estimation over a return -on-investment period of 5 years for 3 -axes 
laser processing systems based on ga lvanometric or polygonal mirrors currently is ~254,000, - 
€ and ~294,000, - €, respectively.  
 
Category  Element/Device  Features  Average prize 
estimation (2021)  
Laser system 
(Ls) High -repetition rate 
ultrashort laser  IR wavelength, Rep. 
frequency  < 5 MHz, Pulse 
Energy < 100 µJ, Pulse 
duration ~500 fs  ~180,000 €  
Scanner  
(Sc) a. Galvanometric 
mirror -based 
scanner + F -theta 
lens with AR 
coating  <15 m/s  ~10,000 €  
b. Polygonal mirror -
based scanner  48 – 256 m/s  ~50,000 €  
Safety  
(Sf) Radiation safety  and 
dosage control  Lead blinds, passive 
dosimeters  ~5,000 €  
Air filtering, exhaust 
system  Mobile station  ~3,000 €  
Eye protection  Safety goggles  ~1,000 €  
Maintenance 
(Ma)  General maintenance 
and technical service  Filters, chiller refrigeration 
liquids, eventual system 
optimization  ~5,000 €/year  
Miscellaneous 
(Ms)  Optical elements  Mirrors, mounts  ~5,000 €  
Translation stages  Independent X-Y-Z axes ~5,000 €/per axis  
Optical table  Optical table with active 
isolation legs  ~10,000 €  
Tab. 1: Elements needed for a general laser processing system and its estimation pri ce on the market 
(Information consulted on May 26th, 2021).  
 The relation between the number of effective pulses per beam spot diameter ( 𝑁eff_1D), the laser 
beam waist radius at the material surface  (𝑤0), the laser pulse repetition frequency ( ) and scan 
velocity (vscan) is generally described by the Eq. ( 1): 
 
𝑁eff_1D=2∗𝑤0∗𝑣
𝑣scan,  (1) 
 
According to [Florian, 2018], it is possible  to fabricate low spatial frequency LIPSS (LSFL) on 
steel with a high -repetition rate laser using Neff_1D  = 10. With this value and considering a laser 
beam waist  radius  w0 = 50 µm, and a galvanometric scanner operating at vscan = 15 m/s, the 
maximum laser repetition frequency is  = 1.5 MHz according to Eq. ( 1). Under these 
conditions, it is theoretically possible to reach throughputs (areal processing rates) of 0.45 m2/h. 
On the other han d, regular polygonal scanners operating at 50 m/s with the same beam waist at 
the surface allow for a laser repetition frequency  of  = 5 MHz while keeping Neff_1D  = 10, 
resulting in throughputs of 1.5 m2/h. Note that for polygonal scanners operating at 950 m/s, 
recently processing rates of ~1.5 m²/min were demonstrated for large -area surface texturing of 
metals [Schille, 2020].  
For this calculation we assumed irradiations over a squared area of 1 m  1 m accounting a total 
of 20,000 parallel  lines of 1 m in length and 100 µm in width, all separated at a line distance  
= 50 µm (50% lateral beam overlap). Also, for the mirrors positioning times, 100 ms for 
polygonal mirrors and 333 ms for galvanometric mirrors (~5 times the processing time, 1 
m/vscan) per line were assumed.  
For an estimation of the total laser -processing time, we consider a time tyear corresponding to 
the average number of working days per year, e.g. tyear = 260, and we assume that the system 
operational (production) time is in average top = 18 h per day. In order to estimate the “Photonic 
costs”  to produce LSFL under the above specified conditions following a similar calculation as 
in [Bonse, 2015], a return -on-investment period of 5 years ( p = 5) was considered. The formula 
for this calculation is included in Eq. ( 2) and considers the cost listed in Table 1 : 
 
Photonic  costs  [€/m2]=Total  setup  price
Total  throughput=𝐿𝑠+𝑆𝑐+𝑆𝑓+𝑀𝑎∗𝑝+𝑀𝑠
(1200 ∗𝑤0∗𝑣∗∆
𝑁eff_1D s
h)∗𝑡𝑜𝑝∗𝑡𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 ∗𝑝,  (2) 
 
In conclusion, for a typical current ultrashort laser processing system that uses a galvanometric 
scanner, the photonic costs for the processing of LSFL are ~24 €/m2, and for a polygonal 
scanner ~9 €/m2. 
 
 3.3 Patent Situation  
 
The technological advancements for industrial interests are usually considered for publication 
as a patent rather than scientific papers, in order to grant intellectual property rights to the inventors and developers of such technology for protecting their  business. Importantly, patent 
publications are distinctly different from scientific literature, especially because of the 
economic and legal interests that are at play. Since the granting of a patent is country specific, 
and there are different stages tha t such patent documents will pass, we focus our attention here 
in publicly accessible patent applications - regardless of its legal approval status. The following 
Table 2 lists a number of published patents where LIPSS are used. Wherever possible, just the  
international WO patent  number is provided. If not available, the  European or national patent 
numbers are given . Regarding  the use of the LIPSS, the type of application is additionally  
specified . 
Patent number  Title  Application  Publication date  
WO2004035255  Cyclic structure formation method and surface 
treatment method  LIPSS 
fabrication  29/4/ 2004 
WO2006027850  Method for enhancing adhesion of thin film  Surface adhesion  16/3/ 2006 
WO2006065356  Applications of LIPSS in polymer medical devices  Antibacterial 
surfaces  22/6/ 2006 
WO2007012215  Method and device for the defined structuring of a 
surface with a laser unit  LIPSS 
fabrication  1/2/2007 
WO2008097374  Ultra -short duration laser methods for the 
nanostructuring of materials  LIPSS 
fabrication  14/8/ 2008 
CN101319347  Method for crystal surface self -organizing growth of 
fine-nano -structure with femtosecond laser  LIPSS 
fabrication  10/12/ 2008 
US20080299408  Femtosecond laser pulse surface structuring methods 
and materials resulting therefrom  LIPSS 
fabrication  04/12/2008  
WO2009090324  Method and device for marking a surface using 
controlled periodic nanostructures  Marking  23/7/ 2009 
WO2009117451  Laser -based material processing methods and systems  LIPSS 
fabrication  24/09/2009  
WO2012019741  Method for producing embossing tools for 
microstructure elements using ultra -short laser pulses  Surface adhesion  16/2/ 2012 
EP2692855  Surface structuring for cytological and/or medical 
applications  Antibacterial 
surfaces  17/7/2013 
US2014083984  Formation of laser induced periodic surface structures 
(LIPSS) with picosecond pulses  LIPSS 
fabrication  27/3/2014 
WO2014102008  Method for producing structures on a surface of a 
workpiece  LIPSS 
fabrication  3/7/2014 
WO2014111697  Measurement scale  Optical  24/7/2014 
WO2014111696  A method of reading data represented by a periodic, 
polarising nanostructure  Data storage  24/7/2014 
KR1427688*  Laser processing device and processing method  LIPSS 
fabrication  1/8/2014 
RU2544892  Method of producing micro - and nanostructures of 
surface of materials  LIPSS 
fabrication  20/3/2015 
US20150136226  Super -hydrophobic surfaces and methods for producing 
super -hydrophobic surfaces  Surface wetting  21/5/2015 
WO2016039419  Method for forming surface structure of zirconia -based 
ceramic, and zirconia -based ceramic  LIPSS 
fabrication  17/3/2016 
WO2016090496  Laser-induced metallic surface colouration processes,  
metallic nanoscale structures resulting therefrom and 
metallic products produced thereby  Optical  16/06/2016  
WO2017053198  Femtosecond laser -induced formation of single crystal 
patterned semiconductor surf ace LIPSS 
fabrication  30/3/2017  
WO2017063844  Method for producing a scattering optical unit, 
scattering optical unit, and lamp having a scattering 
optical unit  Optical  20/4/2017 
WO2017153750  Method of reducing photoelectron yield and/or 
secondary electron yield of a ceramic surface; 
corresponding apparatus and product  Surface 
enhancement  14/09/2017  
WO2018010707  Method and system of ultrafast laser writing of highly -
regular periodic structures  LIPSS 
fabrication  18/1/2018 US20180117797  Methods of making hydrophobic contoured surfaces 
and hydrophobic contoured surfaces and devices made 
therefrom  Surface adhesion  3/5/2018 
WO2018100952  Method for manufacturing transfer mold roll having 
fine periodic structure and transfer mol d roll  Surface adhesion  7/6/2018 
US 10,876,193  Method and apparatus for structural coloration of 
metallic surfaces  Optical  1/1/2019  
CN109132998  Method for inducing periodic surface structure of 
transparent dielectric material with single -pulse 
nanosecond laser  Wetting and cell 
adhesion  4/1/2019 
US20190054571  Nanosecond laser -based high -throughput surface nano -
structuring (NHSN) process  LIPSS 
fabrication  21/2/2019 
US20190168905  Beverage container with internal antimicrobial texture  Antibacterial 
surfaces  6/6/2019 
WO2019141626  Mold for injection molding processes and molding 
process using the mold  Surface adhesion  25/7/2019 
WO2019166836  Using lasers to reduce reflection of transparent solids, 
coatings and devices employing transparent solids  Optical  6/9/2019 
WO2020003090  A component of a mold for molding preforms, a mold 
for molding preforms and a process for obtaining the 
component  Surface adhesion  2/1/2020 
WO2020012137A1  Process for nanostructuring the surface of a material by 
laser; assembly allowing this process to be 
implemented  LIPSS 
fabrication  16/1/2020  
WO2020039217  Laser fabricated superoleophilic  metallic component 
with oil retention properties for friction reduction  Friction 
reduction  27/2/2020 
KR1020200053368  Metal surface color implementing method and metal 
plate with surface color implemented thereon  Optical  18/5/2020 
CN111168233  Method for inducing periodic structure on surface of 
optical glass by picosecond laser  Optical  19/5/2020 
WO2020104370  Sensor device and method for producing a sensor 
device  Surface wetting  28/5/2020 
CN111250874  Method of multi -pulse picosecond laser -induced 
semiconductor material periodic surface structure  LIPSS 
fabrication  9/6/2020 
US20200198063  Method for manufacturing substrate with transparent 
conductive film, substrate with transparent conductive 
film, and solar cell  Optical  25/6/2020 
KR102131165  Laser marking method using surface reflectance control  Optical  7/7/2020 
US 10,786,874 B2  Femtosecond laser pulse surface  structuring methods 
and materials resulting therefrom  LIPSS 
fabrication  29/09/2020  
US 10,876,193 B2  Nanostructured materials, methods, and applications  LIPSS 
fabrication  29/12/2020  
WO2021041166  Elements for mitigating electron reflection and vacuum 
electronic devices incorporating elements for 
mitigating electron reflection  Optical  4/3/2021 
WO2021048704  Method of gluing metal parts  Surface adhesion  18/3/2021 
US20210121983A1  Process for nanostructuring  the surface of a material by 
laser context and technological background  LIPSS 
fabrication  25/3/2021  
Tab. 2: Compilation  of patents (Patent number, title, type of application, publication date) that include the 
formation of LIPSS within its description and the claims  included in  the patent application . The list is ordered by 
the publication dates ranging from 04/2004 to 04/ 2021.  
 
4. Outlook  
More than 50 years after their discovery, the topic of LIPSS moved from the field of 
fundamental research towards a pre -industrial stage that is currently screening systematically a 
plethora of possible applications  - all are enabled through a remarkable  variety of different 
surface functions  of LIPSS  (see Fig. 5 to recall the content of this Chapter) . In view of the rapid 
ongoing progress of laser - and scanner -technology  that further reduces the production costs of 
LIPSS and s imultaneously boost up the manufacturing rates , it can be expected that during the coming five years, some industrial applications  of LIPSS will be realized that will enter our 
daily life.  
  Acknowledgements  
The authors acknowledge the projects Laser4Fun, CellFreeImplant, BioCombs4Nanofibers, 
and LaserImplant. These projects have received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 
2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreements No. 675063 (Laser4F un, 
https://www.laser4fun.eu ), No. 800832 (CellFreeImplant), No. 862016 
(BioCombs4Nanofibers, http://biocombs4nanofibers .eu), and No. 951730 (LaserImplant , 
http://laserimplant. eu). C.F . acknowledges the Individual Fellowship Marie Skłodowska -Curie 
project FOCUSIS  under grant agreement No.  844977 . 
 
References  
 
[Abere, 2016]  Abere, M.J. ; Zhong, M.L. ; Krüger, J. ; Bonse J. : Ultrafast laser -
induced morphological transformations. MRS Bull. 41, 969 –974 (2016) 
https://doi.org/10.1557/mrs.2016.271   
[Ahmmed, 201 6] Ahmmed, K.M.T.; Kietzig, A. -M.: Drag reduction on laser -patterned  
hierarchical superhydrophobic surfaces . Soft Matter  12, 4912 –4922 ( 2016) 
https://doi.org/10.3390/mi5041219   
[Aizawa, 2020]  Aizawa, T.; Tomomi, S.; Yoshihiro, K.; Tadahiko , I.: Simultaneous 
nano -texturing onto a CVD -diamond coated piercing punch with femtosecond laser trimmi ng. 
Appl. Sci. 10, 2674 (2020) https://doi.org/10.3390/app10082674  
[Akhmanov, 1985]  Akhmanov, S.A. ; Emel’yanov, V.I. ; Koroteev, N.I. ; Seminogov, V.N.: 
Interaction of powerful laser radiation with the surfaces of semiconductors and metals: 
nonlinear optical effects and nonlinear optical diagnostics. Sov. Phys. Usp. 28, 1084 –1124 
(1985) https://doi.org/10.1070/PU1985v028n12ABEH003986  
[Arnaldo del Cerro, 2014]  Arnaldo del Cerro, D.: Picosecond pulsed laser 
microstructuring of metals for microfluidics. PhD -thesis. University of Twente, the Netherlands 
(2014)  https://doi.org/10.3990/1.9789036537261   
[Ayerdi, 2019]  Ayerdi, J.J.; Slachciak, N.; Llavori, I.; Zabala, A.; Aginagalde, A.; 
Bonse, J.; Spaltmann, D.: On the role of a ZDDP in the tribological performance of 
femtosecond laser-induced periodic surface structures on titanium alloy against different 
counte rbody materials. Lubricants 7, 79 (2019) https://doi.org/10.3390/lubricants7090079   
[Bäuerle, 2011]  Bäuerle , D. Laser Processing and Chemistry , 4th edn. Springer, Berlin, 
2011.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-642-17613 -5  
[Barthlott, 2017]   Barthlott, M.; Mail, M.; Koch, K.: Plant surfaces: structures and 
functions for biomimetic innovations . Nano -Micro Lett . 9, 23 (2017) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40820 -016-0125 -1  
[Birnbaum, 1965]  Birnbaum, M.: Semiconductor surface damage produced by ruby 
lasers. J. Appl. Phys. 36, 3688 –3689 (1965) https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1703071  
[Bonch -Bruevich, 1992]  Bonch -Bruevich, A.M. ; Libenson, M.N. ; Makin, V.S. ; 
Trubaev , V.V.: Surface electromagnetic waves in optics. Opt. Eng. 31, 718 –730 (1992) 
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.56133  [Bonse, 2009]  Bonse, J. ; Rosenfeld, A. ; Krüger, J.: On the role of surface plasmon 
polaritons in  the formation of laser -induced periodic surface structures upon irradiation of 
silicon by femtosecond -laser pulses. J. Appl. Phys. 106, 104910 (2009) 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3261734  
[Bonse, 2012]  Bonse, J. ; Krüger, J. ; Höhm, S. ; Rosenfeld, A. Femtosecond laser -
induced periodic surface structures. J. Laser Appl. 24, 042006 (2012) 
https://doi.org/10.2351/1.4712658  
[Bonse, 2014]  Bonse, J.; Koter, R.; Hartelt, M.; Spaltmann, D.; Pentzien, S.; Höhm, 
S.; Rosenfeld, A.; Krüger, J.: Femtosecond laser -induced periodic surface structures on steel 
and titanium alloy for tribological applications. Appl. Phys. A 117, 103 –110 (2014) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339 -014-8229 -2  
[Bonse, 2015]  Bonse, J.; Koter, R.; Hartelt, M.; Spaltmann, D.; Pentzien, S.; Höhm, 
S.; Rosenfeld, A.; Krüger, J.: Tribological performance of femtosecond l aser-induced periodic 
surface structures on titanium and a high toughness bearing steel. Appl. Surf. Sci. 336, 21–27 
(2015) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2014.08.111  
[Bonse, 2017]  Bonse, J. ; Höhm, S. ; Kirner, S.V. ; Rosenfeld , A.; Krüger, J.: Laser -
induced periodic surface structures – a scientific evergreen . IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum 
Electron. 23, 9000615 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTQE.2016.2614183   
[Bonse, 2018]  Bonse, J.; Kirner, S.V.; Griepentrog, M.; Spaltmann, D.; Krüger, J.: 
Femtosecond laser texturing of surfaces for tribological applications. Materials 11, 801 (2018) 
https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ma11050801   
[Bonse, 2020 a] Bonse, J. ; Gräf, S.: Maxwell meets Marangoni – A review of theories 
on laser -induced periodic surface structures. Laser Photonics Rev. 14, 2000215 (2020) 
https://doi.org/10.1002/lpor.202000215  
[Bonse, 2020b]  Bonse, J. Quo Vadis LIPSS? — Recent and  future trends on laser-
induced periodic surface structures. Nanomaterials 10, 1950 (2020) 
https://doi.org/10.3390/nano10101950   
[Bonse, 2021]  Bonse, J. ; Kirner, S.V .; Krüger, J.: Laser -induced periodic surface 
structures (LIPSS). In Handbook of Laser Micro - and Nano -Engineering ; Sugioka, K., Ed.; 
Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 202 1. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319-69537 -2_17 -2 
[Buividas, 2012]  Buividas, R. ; Stoddart, P.R. ; Juodkazis, S.: Laser fabricated ripple 
substrates for surface -enhanced Raman scattering. Ann . Phys . 524, L5-L10 (2012) 
https://doi.org/10.1002/andp.201200140   
[Buividas, 2014]  Buividas, R. ; Mikutis, M. ; Juodkazis, S. : Surface and bulk structuring 
of materials by ripples with long and short laser pulses: Recent advances. Prog. Quantum 
Electron. 38, 119 –156 (2014) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pquantelec.2014.0 3.002  
[Cassie, Baxter, 1944]  Cassie, A.B.D. ; Baxter, S.: Wettability of porous surfaces. Trans . 
Faraday Soc . 40, 546 –551 (1944)  https://doi.org/10.1039/TF9444000546  
[Chan, 2017]  Chan, C. -W.; Carson, L. ; Smith, G.C. ; Morelli, A. ; Lee, S.: Enhancing 
the antibacterial performance of orthopaedic implant materials by fibre laser surface 
engineering. Appl. Surf. Sc. 404, 67–81 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.01.233  [Chang, 2011]  Chang, H.W. ; Tsai, Y.C. ; Cheng, C.W. ; Lin, C.Y. ; Lin, Y.W. ; Wu, 
T.M.: Nanostructured Ag surface fabricated by femtosecond laser for surface -enhanced 
Raman scattering. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 360, 305 –308 (2012) 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2011.04.005   
[Chen, 2012]  Chen, C.Y.; Chung, C.J.; Wu, B.H.; Li, W.L.; Chien, C.W.; Wu, P.H.; 
Cheng, C.W.: Microstructure and lubricating property of ultra -fast laser pulse textured silicon 
carbide seals. Appl. Phys. A 107, 345 –350 (2012) https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00339 -012-
6822 -9  
[Comanns, 2016]  Comanns, P. ; Winands, K. ; Pothen, M. ; Bott, R.A. ; Wagner, H. ; 
Baumgartner, W.: The Texas horned lizard as model for robust capillary structures for passive 
directional transport of cooling lubricants. Proceedings of the SPIE 9797 , 979711 (2016) 
https://doi.org/10.11 17/12.2218873  
[Cunha, 2016]  Cunha, A. ; Elie, A. -M.; Plawinski, L. ; Serro, A.P. ; Botelho do Rego, 
A.M. ; Almeida, A. ; Urdaci, M.C. ; Durrieu, M. -C.; Vilar, R.: Femtosecond laser surface 
texturing of titanium as a method to reduce the adhesion of Staphylococcus aureus and 
biofilm formation. Appl. Surf. Sci. 360, 485 –493 (2016) 
https://doi.org /10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.10.102   
[Cubero, 2020 a]  Cubero, Á. ; Martínez, E. ; Angurel, L.A. ; de la Fuente, G.F. ; Navarro, 
R.; Legall, H. ; Krüger, J. ; Bonse, J.: Surface superconductivity changes of niobium sheets by 
femtosecond laser-induced periodic nanostructures. Nanomaterials 10, 2525 (2020) 
https://doi.org/10.3390/nano10122525  
[Cubero, 2020b]  Cubero , A.; Martínez, E.; Angurel, L.A.; de la Fuente, G.F.; Navarro, 
R.; Legall, H.; Krüger, J.; Bonse, J.: Effects of laser -induced periodic surface structures on the 
superconducting properties of Niobium. Appl. Surf. Sci. 508, 145140 (2020)  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2019.145140   
[Cui, 2016]  Cui, J.; Rodríguez -Rodríguez, A.; Hernández, M.; García -Gutiérrez, 
M.C.; Nogales, A.; Castillejo, M.; Moseguí González, D.; Müller -Buschbaum, P.; Ezquerra , 
T.A.; Rebollar, E.: Laser -induced periodic surface structures on P3HT and on its photovoltaic 
blend with PC 71BM. ACS  Appl.  Mater. Interfaces 8, 31894 –31901 (2016) 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b090 53 
[Czajkowski, 2017]  Czajkowski, K.; Ratzke, M.; Varlamova, O.; Reif, J.: Femtosecond -
laser -induced periodic surface structures on magnetic layer targets: The roles of femtosecond -
laser interaction and of magnetization. Appl. Surf. Sci. 418, 84 –87 (2017) 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.03.148   
[Czichos, 2015]  Czichos, H.; Habig, K. -H.: Tribologie -Handbuch – Tribometrie, 
Tribomaterialien , Tribotechnik, 4th ed.; Springer  Vieweg: Wiesbaden, Germany, 2015.  
[Dubnack, 2020]  Dubnack, O.; Kunz, C.; Gräf, S.; Müller, F.A. : Laser -induced 
Leidenfrost surfaces. Appl. Surf. Sci. 532, 147407 (2020) 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2020.147407   
[Dusser, 2010]  Dusser, B. ; Sagan, Z. ; Soder, H. ; Faure, N. ; Colombier, J. -P.; Jourlin, 
M.; Audouard, E.: Controlled nanostructures formation by ultra f ast laser pulses for color 
marking. Opt. Express 18, 2913 –2924 (2010)  https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.18.002913  [Elbourne, 2017]  Elbourne , A; Crawford, R.J.; Ivanova, E.P.: Nano -structured 
antimicrobial surfaces: From nature to synthetic  analogues . J. Colloid Interface Sci . 508, 603–
616 (2017)  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2017 .07.021   
[Epperlein, 2017]  Epperlein, N. ; Menzel, F. ; Schwibbert, K. ; Koter, R. ; Bonse, J. ; 
Sameith, J. ; Krüger, J. ; Toepel , J.: Influence of femtosecond laser produced nanostructures on 
biofilm growth on steel. Appl. Surf. Sci. 418, 420 –424 (2017) 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.02.174  
[Eichstädt, 2011]  Eichs tädt, J.; Römer, G.R.B.E.; Huis in’t Veld, A.J.: Towards friction 
control using laser -induced periodic surface structures. Phys. Proced. 12, 7–15 (2011) 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phpro.2011.03.099   
[Fadeeva, 2011]  Fadeeva, E. ; Truong, V.K. ; Stiesch, M. ; Chichkov, B.N. ; Crawford, 
R.J.; Wang, J. ; Ivanova, E.P.: Bacterial retention on superhydrophobic titanium surfaces 
fabricated by femtosecond laser ablation. Langmuir 27, 3012 –3019 (2011) 
https://doi.org/10.1021/la104607g   
[Florian, 2018]  Florian, C.; Skoulas, E.; Puerto, D.; Mimidis, A.; Stratakis, E.; Solis, 
J.; Siegel, J.: Controlling the wettability of steel surfaces processed with femtosecond laser 
pulses. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 36564 –36571 (2018) 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.8b13908   
[Florian, 2020 a]  Florian, C.; Kirner, S.V.; Krüger, J.; Bonse, J.: Surface 
functionalization by laser -induced periodic surface structures. J. Laser Appl. 32, 022063 
(2020) https://doi.org/10.2351/7.0000103   
[Florian, 2020b]  Florian, C.; Déziel, J.L.; Kirner, S.V.; Siegel, J.; Bonse, J.: The role of 
the laser -induced oxide layer in the formation of laser -induced periodic surfac e structures. 
Nanomaterials 10, 147 (2020). https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/nano10010147   
[Florian, 2020c]  Florian, C.; Wonneberger, R.; Undisz, A.; Kirner, S.V.; Wasmuth, K.; 
Spaltmann, D.; Krüger, J.; Bonse, J.: Chemical effects  during the formation of various types 
of femtosecond laser -generated surface structures on titanium alloy. Appl. Phys. A 126, 266 
(2020). https://dx.doi.or g/10.1007/s00339 -020-3434 -7 
[Fraggelakis, 2017]  Fraggelakis, F.; Mincuzzi, G.; Lopez, J.; Manek -Hönninger, I.; Kling, 
R.: Texturing metal surface with MHz ultra -short laser pulses. Opt . Express 25, 18131 –18139  
(2017) https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.25.018131  
[Fraggelakis, 2018]  Fraggelakis, F. ; Mincuzzi, G. ; Lopez, J. ; Kling, R. ; Manek -Hönninger, 
I.: Controlling micron and submicron scale laser induced surface structures on  stainless steel 
with industrial femtosecond lasers. J. Laser Micro/Nanoeng. 13, 206 –210 (2018) 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2961/jlmn.2018.03.0010  
[Fosodeder, 2020]  Fosodeder, P. ; Baumgartner, W. ; Steinwender, C. ; Hassel, A.W. ; 
Florian, C. ; Bonse, J. ; Heitz, J.: Repellent rings at titanium cylinders against overgrowth by 
fibroblasts. Adv. Opt. Technol. 9, 113 –120 (2020) https:// doi.org/10.1515/aot -2019 -0070   
[Fraggelakis, 2019]  Fraggelakis, F. ; Mincuzzi, G. ; Lopez, J. ; Manek -Hönninger, I. ; Kling, 
R.: Controlling 2D laser nano structuring over large area with double femtosecond pulses. 
Appl. Surf. Sci. 470, 677 –686 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.11.106   [Gnilitskyi, 2 019]  Gnilitskyi, I.; Rota, A.; Gualtieri, E.; Valeri, S.; Orazi, L.: Tribological 
properties of high-speed uniform femtosecond laser patterning on stainless steel. Lubricants 7, 
83 (2019) https://doi.org/10.3390/lubricants7100083   
[Gräf, 2020]  Gräf, S.: Formation of laser -induced periodic surface structures on 
different materials: Fundamentals, properties and applications. Adv. Opt. T echnol. 9, 11–39 
(2020) https://dx.doi.org/10.1515/aot -2019 -0062   
[Gregorčič, 2021]  Gregorčič, P.: Comment on “Bioinspired reversible switch between 
underwater superoleophobicity/ superaerophobicity and oleophilicity/ aerophilicity and 
improved antireflective property on the nanosecond laser-ablated superhydrophobic titanium 
surfaces”. ACS Appl. Mater. Inter. 13, 2117 (2021) https ://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b23462  
[Guay, 2017]  Guay, J. -M.; Calà Lesina, A. ; Côté, G. ; Charron, M. ; Poitras, D. ; 
Ramunno, L. ; Berini, P. ; Weck, A.: Laser -induced plasmonic colours on metals. Nat. 
Commun. 8, 16095 (2017)  https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms16095  
[Gutierrez -Fernandez, 2020]  Gutierrez -Fernandez, E.; Gabaldon -Saucedo, I.; 
Rodriguez -Rodriguez, A.; Solano, E.; Garcia -Gutierrez, M.C.; Nogales, A.; Cirera, A.; 
Ezquerra , T.; Rebollar, E.: Laser nanostructuring of thin films of PEDOT:PSS on ITO: 
Morphology, molecular structure and electrical properties. Appl. Surf. Sci. 509, 145350 (2020) 
https://doi.org/10.1016 /j.apsusc.2020.145350  
[Han, 2021]  Han, M.; Smith, D.; Ng, S.H.; Anand, V.; Katkus, T.; Juodkazis, S.:  
Ultra -short pulse lasers – materials – applications . Proceedings  (2021), in press  
https://sciforum.net/manuscripts/11143/manuscript.pdf   
[Hanif, 2017]  Hanif, A. ; Qureshi, S. ; Sheikh, Z. ; Rashid, H.: Complications in 
implant dentistry. Eur. J. Dent. 11, 135 –140 (2017) 
https://dx.doi.org/10.4103%2Fejd.ejd_340_16   
[Heitz, 2017]  Heitz, J. ; Plamadeala, C. ; Muck, M. ; Armbruster, O. ; Baumgartner, 
W.; Weth, A. ; Steinwender, C. ; Blessberger, H. ; Kellermair, J. ; Kirner, S.V. ; Krüger, J. ; 
Bonse, J. ; Gunter, A.S. ; Hassel, A.W.: Femtosecond laser -induced microstructures on Ti 
substrates for reduced cell adhesion. Appl. Phys.  A 123, 734 (2017) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339 -017-1352 -0  
[Hermens, 2017]  Hermens, U. ; Kirner, S.V. ; Emonts, C. ; Comanns, P. ; Skoulas, E. ; 
Mimidis, A. ; Mescheder, H. ; Winands, K. ; Krüger, J. ; Stratakis., E. ; Bonse, J.: Mimicking 
lizard -like surface structures upon ultrashort laser pulse irradiation of inorganic materials. Appl. 
Surf. Sci. 418, 499 –507 (2017) https://doi.o rg/10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.12.112  
[Holmberg, 2017]  Holmberg, K.; Erdemir, A.: Influence of tribology on global energy 
consumption, costs and emissions. Friction 5, 263 –284 (2017) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40544 -017-0183 -5  
[Hu, 2020]   Hu, X. ; Pan, R. ; Cai, M. ; Liu, W. ; Luo, X. ; Chen, C. ; Guochen, J. ; 
Zhong, M.: Ultrafast laser micro -nano structured superhydrophobic teflon surfa ces for 
enhanced SERS detection via evaporation concentration. Adv. Opt. Technol. 9, 89–100 
(2020) https://doi.org/10.1515/aot -2019 -0072   [Hwang, 2010 ] Hwang , T.Y.; Guo, C.: Angular effects of nanostructure -covered 
femtosecond laser induced  periodic surface structures on metals . J. Appl. Phys.  108, 073523  
(2010) http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3487934   
[Jagdheesh, 2010]  Jagdheesh, R. ; Pathiraj, B. ; Gomez Marin, A. ; Arnaldo del Cerro, D. ; 
Lammertink, R.G.H. ; Lohse, D. ; Huis in 't Veld, A.J.; Römer, G.R.B.E.: Ultra fast laser 
machined hydrophobic stainless steel surface for drag reduction in laminar flows. Proceedings 
of the 11th Internat ional Symposium on Laser Precision Microfabrication (LPM), June 7 -10, 
Stuttgart, Germany (2010)   
[Jagdheesh, 2011]  Jagdheesh, R. ; Pathiraj, B. ; Karatay, E. ; Römer, G.R.B.E. ; Huis in ‘t 
Veld, A.J.: Laser -snduced nanoscale superhydrophobic structures on metal surfaces . Langmuir 
27, 8464 –8469 (2011)  https://doi.org/10.1021/la2011088  
[Karkantonis, 2020]  Karkantonis, T. ; Gaddam, A. ; See, T.L. ; Joshi, S.S. ; Dimov , S.: 
Femtosecond laser -induced sub -micron and multi -scale topographies for durable lubricant 
impregnated surfaces for food packaging applications. Surf. Coat. Technol. 399, 126166 (2020) 
https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfcoat.2020.126166   
[Kawasegi, 2009]  Kawasegi, N.; Sugimori, H.; Morimoto, H.; Morita, N.; Hori, I.: 
Development of cutting tools with microscale and nanoscale textures to improve frictional 
behavior. Precis. Eng. 33, 248 –254 (2009) 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2008.07.005   
[Kietzig, 2009]  Kietzig, A.M.; Hatzikiriakos, S.G.; Englezos , P.: Patterned 
superhydrophobic metallic surfaces. Langmuir 25, 4821 –4827 (2009) 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/la8037582  
[Kirner, 2017 a]  Kirner, S.V.; Wirth, T.; Sturm, H.; Krüger, J.; Bonse, J.: Nanometer -
resolved chemical analyses of femtosecond laser -induced periodic surface structures on 
titanium. J. Appl. Phys. 122, 10490 (2017) https://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4993128   
[Kirner, 2017b]  Kirner, S.V. ; Hermens, U. ; Mimidis, A. ; Skoulas, E. ; Florian, C. ; 
Hischen, F. ; Plamadeala, C. ; Baumgartner, W. ; Winands, K. ; Mescheder, H. ; Krüger, J. ; Solis, 
J.; Siegel, J. ; Stratakis, E. ; Bonse, J.: Mimicking bug -like surface structures and their fluid 
transport produced by ultrashort laser pulse irradiation of steel. Appl. Phys. A 123, 754 (2017)  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339 -017-1317 -3  
[Kirner, 2018]  Kirner, S.V.; Slachciak, N.; Elert, A.M.; Griepentrog, M.; Fischer, D.; 
Hertwig, A.; Sahre, M.; Dörfel, I.; Sturm, H.; Pentzien, S.; Koter, R.; Spaltmann, D.; Krüger, 
J.; Bonse, J.:  Tribological performance of titanium samples oxidi zed by fs -laser radiation, 
thermal heating, or electrochemical anodization. Appl. Phys. A 124, 326 (2018) 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00339 -018-1745 -8 
[Klos, 2020]  Klos, A. ; Sedao, X. ; Itina, T.E. ; Helfenstein -Didier, C. ; Donnet, C. ; 
Peyroche, S. ; Vico, L. ; Guignandon, A. ; Dumas, V.: Ultrafast laser processing of 
nanostructured patterns for the control of cell adhesion and migration on titanium alloy. 
Nanomaterials 10, 864 (2020) https://doi.org/10.3390/nano10050864   
[Knüttel, 2013]  Knüttel, T.; Bergfeld, S.; Haas, S.: Laser texturing of surfaces in thin -
film silicon photovoltaics — A comparison of potential process es. J. Laser Micro Nanoeng. 8, 
222–229 (2013) https://doi.org/10.2961/jlmn.2013.03.0007  [Kunz, 2020]  Kunz, C.; Bonse, J.; Spaltmann, D.; Neumann, C.; Turchanin, A.; 
Bartolomé, J.F.; Müller, F.A.; Gräf, S.: Tribological performance of metal -reinforced ceramic 
composites selectively structured with femtosecond laser -induced periodic surface structures. 
Appl . Surf. Sci. 499, 143917 (2020) https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2019.143917   
[Lange, 2017]  Lange, K.; Schulz -Ruhtenberg, M.; Caro, J.: Platinum electrodes for 
oxygen reduction catalysis d esigned by ultrashort pulse laser structuring. Chem Electro Chem 
4, 570 –576 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1002/celc.201600630   
[Larrañaga -Altuna, 2021]  Larrañaga -Altuna , M.; Zabala, A.; Llavori, I.; Pearce, O.; 
Nguyen, T.D.; Caro, J.; Mescheder, H.; Endrino, J.L.; Goel, G.; Ayre, W.N.; Seenivasagam, 
R.K.; Tripathy, D.K.; Armstrong, J.; Goel, S.: Bactericidal surfaces: An emerging 21st -
century ultra -precision manufacturin g and materials puzzle. Appl. Phys. Rev. 8, 021303 
(2021) https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0028844  
[Li, 2020a]   Li, C. ; Yang, Y. ; Yang, L. ; Shi, Z. ; Yang, P. ; Cheng, G.: In vitro 
bioactivity and biocompatibility of bio-inspired Ti -6Al-4V alloy surfaces modified by 
combined laser micro/nano structuring. Molecules 25, 1494 (2020) 
https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules25071494   
[Li, 2020b]   Li, X .; Yuan, G. ; Yu, W. ; Xing, J. ; Zou, Y. ; Zhao, C. ; Kong, W. ; Yu, 
Z.; Guo, C.: A self -driven microfluidic surface -enhanced Raman scattering device for Hg( 2+) 
detection fabricated by femtosecond laser. Lab Chip 20, 414 –423 (2020) 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c9lc00883g   
[Linklater, 2021]  Linklater, D.P.; Baulin, V.A.; Juodkazis, S.; Crawford, R.J.; Stoodley , 
P.; Ivanova , E.P.: Mechano -bactericidal actions  of nanostructured surfaces . Nat. Rev. 
Microbiol . 19, 8–22 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579 -020-0414 -z  
[Liu, 2017]   Liu, Z. ; Siegel, J. ; Garcia -Lechuga, M. ; Epicier, T. ; Lefkir, Y. ; 
Reynaud, S. ; Bugnet, M. ; Vocanson, F. ; Solis, J. ; Vitrant, G. ; Destouches, N.: Three -
dimensional self-organization in nanocomposite layered systems by ultrafast laser pulses. 
ACS Nano 11, 5031 –5040 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.7b01748   
[Liu, 2018 a] Liu, Q. ; Zhang, N. ; Yang, J. ; Qiao, H. ; Guo, C.: Direct fabricating 
large -area nanotriangle structure arrays on tungsten surface by nonlinear lithography of two 
femtosecond laser beams. Opt. Express 26, 11718 –11727 (2018) 
https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.26.011718   
[Liu, 2018b]  Liu, P. ; Wang, W.; Pan, A; Xiang, Y.; Wang, D.: Periodic surface 
structures on the surface of indium tin oxide film obtained using picosecond laser. Opt. Laser 
Technol. 106, 259 –264 (2018) https://do i.org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2018.04.019  
[Liu, 2019]  Liu, H. ; Lin, W. ; Hong, M. : Surface coloring by laser irradiation of 
solid substrates. APL Photonics 4, 051101 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5089778  
[Lone, 2020]  Lone, S.A. ; Muck, M. ; Fosodeder, P. ; Mardare, C.C. ; Florian, C. ; 
Weth, A. ; Krüger, J. ; Steinwender, C. ; Baumgartner, W. ; Bonse, J. ; Heitz, J. ; Hassel, A.W.: 
Impact of femtosecond laser treatment accompanied with anodization of titanium alloy on 
fibroblast cell growth. Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 217, 1900838 (2020) 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pssa.2019 00838   [Löwik, 2017]  Löwik, C.A.M. ; Wagenaar, F.C. ; van der Weegen, W. ; Poolman, 
R.W. ; Nelissen, R. ; Bulstra, S.K. ; Pronk, Y. ; Vermeulen, K.M. ; Wouthuyzen -Bakker, M. ; van 
den Akker -Scheek ; I., Stevens, M. ; Jutte, P.C.: LEAK study: design of a nationwide 
randomised controlled trial to find the best way to treat wound leakage after primary hip and 
knee arthroplasty. BMJ Open 7, e018673 (2017) https:/ /doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen -2017 -
018673   
[Lopez‐Santos, 2021]  Lopez‐Santos, C. ; Puerto, D. ; Siegel, J. ; Macias‐Montero, M. ; Florian, 
C.; Gil‐Rostra, J. ; López‐Flores, V. ; Borras, A. ; González‐Elipe, A.R. ; Solis, J. : Anisotropic 
resistivity surfaces produced in ITO films by laser‐induced nanoscale self‐organization. Adv. 
Opt. Mater. 9, 2001086 (2021)  https://doi.org/10.1002/adom.202001086  
[Luo, 2020]  Luo, X. ; Yao,  S.; Zhang, H. ; Cai, M. ; Liu, W. ; Pan, R. ; Chen, C. ; 
Wang, X. ; Wang, L. ; Zhong, M.: Biocompatible nano -ripples structured surfaces induced by 
femtosecond laser to rebel bacterial colonization and biofilm formation. Opt. Las. Technol. 
124, 105973 (2020) https://doi .org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2019.105973   
[Lutey, 2018]  Lutey, A.H.A. ; Gemini, L. ; Romoli, L. ; Lazzini, G. ; Fuso, F. ; Faucon, 
M.; Kling, R.: Towards laser-textured antibacterial surfaces. Sci. Rep. 8, 10112 (2018) 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -018-28454 -2  
[Mahanta, 2021]  Mahanta, U .; Khandelwal, M.; Deshpande, A. S.: Antimicrobial 
surfaces: a review of synthetic  approaches, applicability  and outlook . J. Mater . Sci. 56, 
17915 –17941  (2021) . https://doi.org/10.1007/s10853 -021-06404 -0  
[Makin, 2020]  Makin, V.S. ; Pestov, Y.I. ; Makin, R.S.: The Mechanism of formation 
of nanostructures o f hexagonal symmetry on surfaces of metals by a sequence of doubled 
ultrashort pulses of radiation of orthogonal polarization. Opt. Spectrosc. 128, 264 –268 (2020) 
https://doi.org/10.1134/S0030400X20020149  
[Marín, 2012]  Marín, A.G. ; Arnaldo del Cerro, D. ; Römer, G.R.B.E. ; Pathiraj, B. ; 
Huis in 't Veld, A. J.; Lohse, D.: Capillary droplets on Leidenfrost micro -ratchets. Phys. Fluids 
24, 122001 (2012) https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4768813   
[Mezera, 2019]  Mezera, M. ; Römer, G.R.B.E.: Model based optimization of proces s 
parameters to produce large homogeneous areas of laser -induced periodic surface structures. 
Opt. Express 27, 6012 –6029 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.27.006012   
[Mezera, 2020]  Mezera M., Picosecond Laser -Induced Periodic Surface Structures – 
Process Strategies for Metals, Silicon and Polymers , PhD Thesis, University of Twente, The 
Netherlands, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.3990/ 1.9789036550529  
[Mishchik, 20 19] Mishchik, K.; Bonamis, G.; Qiao,  J.; Lopez,  J.; Audouard, E .; Mottay,  
E.; Hönninger,  C.; Manek -Hönninge r, I.: High -efficiency femtosecond ablation of silicon with 
GHz repetition rate laser source . Opt. Lett. 44, 2193 –2196  (2019)  
https://doi.org/10.1364/OL.44.002193   
[Milles, 2019]  Milles, S. ; Soldera, M. ; Voisiat, B. ; Lasagni, A.F.: Fabrication of 
superhydrophobic and ice -repellent surfaces on pure aluminium using single and multiscaled 
periodic textures. Sci. Rep. 9, 13944 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -019-49615 -x 
[Milles, 2020]  Milles, S. ; Soldera, M. ; Kuntze, T. ; Lasagni, A.F.: Characterization of 
self-cleaning properties on superhydrophobic aluminum surfaces fabricated by direct laser writing and direct laser interference patterning. Appl. Surf. Sci . 525, 146518 (2020)  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2020.146518  
[Mizuno, 2006]  Mizuno, A.; Honda, T.; Kiuchi, J.; Iwai, Y.; Yasumaru , N.; Miyazaki, 
K.: Friction properties of the DLC film with periodic structures in nano -scale. Tribol. Online 
1, 44–48 (2006) https://doi.org/10.2474/trol.1.44  
[Müller, 2020]  Müller, D.W. ; Lößlein, S. ; Terriac, E. ; Brix, K. ; Siems, K. ; Moeller, 
R.; Kautenburger, R. ; Mücklich, F.: Increasing antibacterial efficiency of Cu surfaces by 
targeted surface functionalization via ultrashort pulsed direct laser interference patterning . 
Adv. Mater. Interfaces 8, 2001656 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.202001656   
[Neale, 2014]  Neale, A.R.; Jin, Y.; Ouyang, J.; Hughes, S.; Hesp, D.; Dhanak, V.; 
Dearden, G.; Edwardson, S.; Hardwic k, L.J.: Electrochemical performance of laser micro -
structured nickel oxyhydroxide cathodes. J. Power Sources 271, 42 –47 (2014) 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.07.167  
[Neugebauer, 2017]  Neugebauer, C.; Aalderink, D.; Maurer, E.; Faisst, B.; Budnicki, A.: 
Ultrafast lasers for precise and corrosion free marking on chirurgical steels. Proc. SPIE 10092 , 
1009204 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2252029    
[Nigo, 2020]  Nigo, F.; Hashida, M.; Tsukamoto, M.; Sakabe, S.; Kusaba, M.: 
Reflectance and crystallinity of silicon solar cells with LIPSS produced by XeCl excimer laser 
pulses. App. Phys. A 126, 129 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339 -020-3305 -2 
[Nishimoto, 2013]  Nishimoto, S. ; Bhushan, B.: Bioinspired self -cleaning surfaces with 
superhydrophobicity , superoleophobicity, and superhydrophilicity. RSC Adv. 3, 671 –690 
(2013) https://doi.org/10.1039/C2RA21260A   
[Nivas, 2021]  Nivas, J.J. ; Amoruso, S. : Generation of supra-wavelength grooves in 
femtosecond laser surface structuring of silicon. Nanomaterials 11, 174 (2021) 
https://doi.org/10.3390/nano11010174  
[Papadopoulos, 2019]  Papadopoulos, A. ; Skoulas, E. ; Mimidis, A. ; Perrakis, G. ; Kenanakis , 
G.; Tsibidis, G.D. ; Stratakis, E.: Biomimetic omnidirectional antireflective glass via direct 
ultrafast laser nanostructuring. Adv. Mater. 31, 1901123 (2019)  
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201901123   
[Pavliuk, 2020]  Pavliuk, G.; Pavlov, D.; Mitsai, E.; Vitrik, O.; Mironenko, A.; 
Zakharenko, A.; Kulinich, S.A.; Juodkazis, S.; Bratskaya, S.; Zhizhchenko, A.; Kuch mizhak, 
A.: Ultrasensitive SERS -Based Plasmonic Sensor with Analyte Enrichment System Produced 
by Direct Laser Writing. Nanomaterials 10, 49 (2020) https://doi.org/10.3390/nano10010049   
[Petrovic, 2020]  Petrovic, S. ; Perusko, D. ; Mimidis, A. ; Kavatzikidou , P.; Kovac, J. ; 
Ranella, A. ; Novakovic, M. ; Popovic, M. ; Stratakis, E.: Response of NIH 3T3 fibroblast cells 
on laser-induced periodic surface structures on a 15x(Ti/Zr)/Si multilayer system. 
Nanomaterials 10, 2531 (2020) https://doi.org/10.3390/nano10122531   
[Pfeiffer, 2013]  Pfeiffer, M.; Engel, A.; Gruettner, H.; Guenther, K.; Marquardt, F.; 
Reisse, G.; Weissmantel , S.: Ripple formation in various metals and super -hard tetrahedral 
amorphous carbon films in consequence of femtosecond laser irradiation. Appl. Phys. A 110, 
655–659 (2013) https://doi.org/10.1007/ s00339 -012-7146 -5  [Piccolo, 2020]  Piccolo, L. ; Sorgato, M. ; Batal, A. ; Dimov, S. ; Lucchetta, G. ; Masato, 
D.: Functionalization of plastic parts by replication of variable pitch laser-induced periodic 
surface structures. Micromachines 11, 429 (2020) https://doi.org/10.3390/mi11040429   
[Ranella, 2010]  Ranella, A. ; Barberoglou, M. ; Bakogianni, S. ; Fotakis, C. ; Stratakis, 
E.: Tuning cell adhesion by controlling the  roughness and wettability of 3D micro/nano 
silicon structures. Acta Biomater. 6, 2711 –2720 (2010) 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2010.01.016   
[Rebollar, 2008]  Rebollar, E. ; Frischauf, I. ; Olbrich, M. ; Peterbauer, T. ; Hering, S. ; 
Preiner, J. ; Hinterdorfer, P. ; Romanin, C. ; Heitz, J.: Proliferation of aligned mammalian cells 
on laser -nanostructured polystyrene. Biomaterials 29, 1796 –1806 (2008) 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2007.12.039   
[Richter, 2021]  Richter, A.M.; Buchberger, G.; Stifter, D.; Duchoslav, J.; Hertwig, A.; 
Bonse, J.; Heitz, J.; Schwibbert, K. : Spatial Period of Laser -Induced Surface Nanoripples on 
PET Determines Escherichia coli  Repellence. Nanomaterials 11, 3000  (2021 ). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/nano11113000    
[Rodriguez -Rodriguez, 2018] Rodri guez -Rodriguez, A.; Rebollar, E.; Ezquerra, T.; Castillejo, 
M.; Garcia -Ramos, J.V.; Garcia -Gutierrez, M.C.: Patterning conjugated polymers by laser: 
synergy of nanostructure formation in the all -polymer heterojunction P3HT/PCDTBT. 
Langmuir 34, 115 –125 (201 8) https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b03761  
[Römer , 2009]  Römer, G.R.B.E. ; Arnaldo del Cerro, D. ; Sipkema, R.C.J. ; 
Groenendijk , M.N.W. ; Huis in ‘t Veld, A.J.: Ultra short pulse laser generated surface textures 
for anti -ice applications in aviation. Proceedings International Congress on Applications of 
Lasers & Electro -Optics (ICALEO), 2 -5 Nov., Orlando, USA, p. 30 -37 (2009) 
https://doi.org/10.2351/1.5061570   
[Romano, 2018]  Romano, J.M. ; Garcia -Giron, A. ; Penchev, P. ; Dimov, S.: Triangular 
laser -induced submicron textures for functionalising stainless steel surfaces. Appl. Surf. Sci. 
440, 162 –169 (2018) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.01.086  
[Romoli, 2014]  Romoli, L.; Rashed, C.A.A.; Lovicu, G.; Dini, G.; Tantussi, F.; Fuso, 
F.; Fiaschi, M.: Ultrashort pulsed laser drillin g and surface structuring of microholes in stainless 
steels. CIRP Annals 63, 229 –232 (2014) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2014.03.0 53 
[Romoli, 2015]  Romoli, L.; Lovicu, G.; Rashed, C.A.A.; Dini, G.; De Sanctis, M.; 
Fiaschi M.: Microstructural changes induced by ultrashort pulsed lasers in microdrilling of fuel 
nozzles. Proc . CIRP 33, 508 –513 (2015) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2015.06.064  
[Rudenko, 2017]  Rudenko, A. ; Colombier, J. -P.; Höhm, S. ; Rosenfeld, A. ; Krüger, J. ; 
Bonse, J. ; Itina, T.E.: Spontaneous periodic ordering on the surface and in the bulk of 
dielectrics irradiated by ultrafast laser: a shared electromagnetic origin. Sci. Rep. 7, 12306 
(2017) https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -017-12502 -4  
[Rudenko, 2020]  Rudenko, A. ; Abou‐Saleh, A. ; Pigeon, F. ; Mauclair, C. ; Garrelie, F. ; 
Stoian, R. ; Colombier, J.‐P.: High -frequency periodic patterns driven by non -radiative fields 
coupled with Marangoni convection instabilities on laser -excited metal surfaces, Acta Mater. 
194, 93–105 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2020.04.058  [Sanchez, 20 20]  Sanchez, E.; Rodriguez -Rodriguez, G.; Aragon, R.; Arranz, M.; 
Rebollar, E.; Castillejo, M.; Colino, J.: Anisotropy engineering of soft thin films in the 
undulated magnetic state. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 514, 167149 (2020) 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmmm.2020.167149  
[Samanta, 2020]  Samanta, A. ; Wang, Q. ; Shaw, S.K. ; Ding, H.: Roles of chemistry 
modification for laser textured metal alloys to achieve extreme surface wetting behaviors. 
Materials & Design 192, 108744 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.202 0.108744   
[Schille, 2020]  Schille, J.; Schneider, L.; Mauersberger, S.; Szokup, S.; Höhn, S.; 
Pötschke, J.; Reiß, F.; Leidich, E.; Löschner, U. : High -rate laser surface texturing for 
advanced tribological functionality. Lubricants 8, 33 (2020) 
https://doi.org/10.3390/lubricants8030033   
[Schille, 2021]  Schille, J.; Löschner U.: Ultrashort pulse lasers in high -rate laser 
micro processing – Quo vadis?  Adv. Opt. Techn. 10, 233–237 (2021 ) 
https://doi.org/10.1515/aot -2021 -0049   
[Schwibbert, 2019]  Schwibbert, K. ; Menzel, F. ; Epperlein, N. ; Bonse, J. ; Krüger, J.: 
Bacterial adhesion on femtosecond laser-modified polyethylene. Materials 12, 310 7 (2019) 
https://dx.doi.org/10.3390%2Fma12193107   
[Selvamani, 2020]  Selvamani, V. ; Zareei, A. ; Elkashif, A. ; Maruthamuthu, M.K. ; 
Chittiboyina, S. ; Delisi, D. ; Li, Z. ; Cai, L. ; Pol, V.G. ; Seleem, M.N. ; Rahimi, R.: Hierarchical 
micro/mesoporous copper structure with enhanced antimicrobial property via laser surface 
texturing. Adv . Mater . Interfaces 7, 1901890 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.201901890   
[Sharma, 2019a]  Sharma, N. ; Vangheluwe, M. ; Vocanson, F. ; Cazier, A. ; Bugnet, M. ; 
Reynaud, S. ; Vermeulin, A. ; Destouches, N.: Laser -driven plasmonic gratings for h iding 
multiple images. Mater. Horiz. 6, 978 –983 (2019)  https://doi.org/10.1039/C9MH00017H   
[Sharma, 2019b]  Sharma, N. ; Destouches, N. ; Florian, C. ; Serna, R. ; Siegel, J.:  
Tailoring metal -dielectric nanocomposite materials with ultrashort laser pulses for dichroic 
color control. Nanoscale  11, 18779 (2019)  https://doi.org/10.1039/C9NR06763A   
[Siddiquie, 2020]  Siddiquie, R.Y. ; Gaddam, A. ; Agrawal, A. ; Dimov, S.S. ; Joshi, S.S.: 
Anti-biofouling properties of femtosecond laser-induced submicron topographies on 
elastomeric surfaces. Langmuir 36, 5349 –5358 (2020) 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.0c00753   
[Siegman, 1986]  Siegman, A.E. ; Fauchet, P.M.: Stimulated Wood’s anomalies on laser -
illuminated surfaces. IEEE. J. Quantum. Electron. 22, 1384 –1403 (198 6) 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JQE.1986.1073133  
[Singh, 2020]  Singh,  S.C.; ElKabbash, M.; Li, Z.; Li, X.; Regmi,  B.; Madsen,  M.; 
Jalil,  S.A.;  Zhan, Z.; Zhang , J.; Guo, C.: Solar -trackable super -wicking black metal panel for 
photothermal water sanitation . Nat. Sustain . 3, 938 –946 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893 -020-0566 -x  
[Sipe, 1983]  Sipe, J.E. ; Young, J.F. ; Preston, J.S. ; van Driel ; H.M. : Laser -induced 
periodic surface structure. I. Theory. Phys. Rev. B 27, 1141 –1154 (1983) 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.27.1141  [Skolski, 2012]  Skolski, J.Z.P. ; Römer , G.R.B.E ; Obona, J.V. ; Ocelik, V. ; Huis in ’t 
Veld, A.J. ; De Hosson, J.T.M.: Laser -induced periodic surface structures: Fingerprints of light 
localization. Phys. Rev. B 85, 075320 (2012) https://d oi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.85.075320   
[Sorgato, 2018]  Sorgato, M. ; Masato, D. ; Lucchetta, G. ; Orazi , L.: Effect of different 
laser -induced periodic surface structures on polymer slip in PET injection moulding. CIRP 
Annals 67, 575 –578 (2018) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2018.04.102   
[Stark, 201 9]  Stark, T.; Kiedrowski, T.; Marschall, H.; Lasagni, A.F.: Avoiding 
starvation in tribocontact through active lubricant transport in laser textured surfaces. 
Lubricants 7, 54 (2019) https://doi.org/10.3390/lubricants7060054   
[Stratakis, 2020]  Stratakis, E. ; Bonse, J. ; Heitz, J. ; Siegel, J. ; Tsibidis, G.D. ; Skoulas, 
E.; Papadopoulos, A. ; Mimidis, A. ; Joel, A. -C.; Comanns, P. ; Krüg er, J. ; Florian, C. ; Fuentes -
Edfuf, Y. ; Solis, J. ; Baumgartner, W.: Laser engineering of biomimetic surfaces. Mater. Sci. 
Eng. R 141, 100562 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mser.2020.100562  
[StrategiesUnlimited, 2020]  Strategies unlimited: The worldwide market for lasers - 
trends and five-year forecast (2019 –2025) . (2020)  https://store.strategies -u.com/products/the -
worldwide -market -for-lasers -market -review -and-forecast -2020.html   
[Streek, 2019]  Streek, A.; Loeschner, U. ; Liebers, R.: Ultrafast laser machining: High-
rate laser microprocessing handles large -area substrates . Laser Focus World (October, 2019) 
https://www.laserfocusworld.com/lasers -sources/article/14039800/highrate -laser -
microprocessing -handles -largearea -substrates   
[Tomita, 2009]  Tomita, T. ; Kumai, R. ; Matsuo, S. ; Hashimoto, S. ; Yamaguchi, M.: 
Cross -sectional morphological profiles of ripples on Si, SiC, and HOPG. Appl. Phys. A 97, 
271–276 (2009) https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339 -009-5364 -2 
[Tripathy, 2017]  Tripathy, A. ; Sen, P.; Su, B. ; Briscoe, W.H.: Natural and bioinspired 
nanostructured bactericidal surfaces. Adv. Colloid. Interface Sci. 248, 85–104 (2017) 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2017.07.030   
[Truong, 2012]   Truong, V.K. ; Webb, H.K. ; Fadeeva, E. ; Chichkov, B.N. ; 
Wu, A.H. ; Lamb, R. ; Wang, J.Y. ; Crawford, R.J. ; Ivanova, E.P.: Air -directed attachment of 
coccoid bacteria to the surface of superhydrophobic lotus -like titanium. Biofouling 28, 539 –
550 (2012) https://doi.org/10.1080/08927014.2012.694426   
[Tuteja, 2007]  Tuteja, T. ; Choi, W. ; Ma, M. ; Rutledge, G.C. ; McKinley, G.H. ; Cohen, 
R.E.: Designing superoleophobic surfaces. Science 318, 1618 –1622 (2007) 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1148326   
[van der Poel, 2019]  van der Poel, S.H. ; Mezera, M. ; Römer, G.R.B.E. ; de Vries, E.G. ; 
Matthews, D.T.A.: Fabricating laser-induced periodic surface structures on medical grade 
cobalt –chrome –molybdenum: Tribological, wetting and leaching properties. Lubricants 7, 70 
(2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/lubricants7080070   
[van Driel, 1982]  van Driel, H.M. ; Sipe, J.E. ; Young, J.F. : Laser -induced periodic 
surface structures on solids: A universal phenomenon. Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1955 –1958 (1982) 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.49.1955  [Volpe, 2020]  Volpe, A.; Gaudiuso, C.; Ancona, A. : Laser fabrication of anti-icing 
surfaces: A review. Materials 13, 5692 (2020) https://doi.org/10.3390/ma13245692   
[Vorobyev, 2009 a] Vorobyev, A.Y. ; Makin, V.S. ; Guo, C.: Brighter light sources from 
black metal: Significant increase in emission efficiency of incandescent light sources. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 102, 234301 (2009)  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.234301   
[Vorobyev, 2009b]   Vorobyev, A. Y.  and Guo, C. Metal pumps liquid uphill. Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 94, 224102 (2009) . https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3117237  
[Vorobyev, 20 13]  Vorobyev, A.Y. ; Guo, C. : Direct femtosecond laser surface 
nano/microstructuring and its applications. Laser Photonics Rev. 7, 385 –407 (2013) 
https://doi.org/10.1002/lpor.201200017   
[Vorobyev, 2021]  Fang, R.; Zhang, X.; Zheng, J.; Pan, Z.; Yang, C.; Deng, L.; Li, R.; 
Lai, C.; Yan, W.; Maisotsenko, V.S.; Vorobyev, A.Y. : Superwicking Functionality of 
Femtosecond Laser Textured Aluminum at High Tem peratures. Nanomaterials 11, 2964  
(2021 ) https://doi.org/10.3390/nano11112964   
[Wang, 2008]  Wang, X. ; Ohlin, C.A. ; Lu, Q. ; Hu, J.: Cell directional migration and 
oriented division on three -dimensional laser -induced periodic surface structures on 
polystyrene. Biomaterials 29, 2049 –2059 (2008) 
https://doi.org/10 .1016/j.biomaterials.2007.12.047   
[Wenzel, 1936]  Wenzel, R.M.: Resistance of solid surfaces to wetting by water. Ind . 
Eng. Chem . 28, 988 –994 (1936)  http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ie50320a024   
[Yasumaru, 2017]  Yasumaru, N.; Sentoku, E.; Kiuchi, J.: Formation of organic layer on 
femtosecond laser -induced periodic surface structures. Appl. Surf. Sci. 405, 267 –272 (2017) 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.02.084  
[Yong, 2015]  Yong, J. ; Chen, F. ; Yang, Q. ; Hou, X. : Femtosecond laser controlled 
wettability of solid surfaces . Soft Matter, 11, 8897 –8906  (2015) 
https://www.doi.org/10.1039/c5sm02153g   
[Young, 1805]  Young, T.: An essay on the cohesion of fluids. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 
Lond. 95, 65–87 (1805)  https://doi.org/10.1098/rstl.1805.0005   
[Yu, 1999]   Yu, J.J.; Lu, Y.F.: Laser -induced ripple structures on Ni -P substrates. 
Appl. Surf. Sci. 148, 248 –252 (1999) https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169 -4332(98)00900 -3  
[Zhang, 2020]  Zhang, N. ; Chen, S. -C.: Formation of nanostructures and optical 
analogues of massless Dirac particles via femtosecond lasers. Opt. Expr ess 28, 36109 –36121  
(2020) https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.403336   
[Zheng, 2021]  Zheng, S.; Bawazir, M.; Dhall, A.; Kim, H. -E,; He, L.; Heo, J.; 
Hwang, G.: Implication of surface properties, bacterial motility, and hydrodynamic conditions 
on bacterial surface sensing and their initial adhesion. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9, 643722 
(2021) https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2021.643722  
[Zwahr, 2019]  Zwah r, C.; Helbig, R. ; Werner, C. ; Lasagni, A.F.: Fabrication of 
multifunctional titanium surfaces by producing hierarchical surface patterns using laser based 
ablation methods. Sci. Rep. 9, 6721 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1038/s415 98-019-43055 -3  