arXiv:2305.02834v1  [cs.GT]  4 May 2023Strategic ﬂip-ﬂopping in political competition∗
Ga¨ etan Fournier†, Alberto Grillo‡, Yevgeny Tsodikovich§
May 5, 2023
Abstract
We study candidates’ positioning when adjustments are possible in r esponse to new
information about voters’ preferences. Re-positioning allows can didates to get closer
to the median voter but is costly both ﬁnancially and electorally. We ex amine the
occurrence and the direction of the adjustments depending on th e ex-ante positions and
the new information. In the unique subgame perfect equilibrium, can didates anticipate
the possibility to adjust in response to future information and diver ge ex-ante in order
to secure a cost-less victory when the new information is favorable .
JEL Classiﬁcation : C72, D72, D82
Keywords : Spatial voting, Imperfect information.
∗The authors wish to thank the participants of the Game Theory seminar in IHP, the eco-lunch seminar
in AMSE, the Workshop on Dynamic Games and Applications in Pa ris 2 and the Workshop on Stochastic
Methods in Erice for their highly valuable comments. YT ackn owledges the support of the Israel Science
Foundationgrants#2566/20, #1626/18 &#448/22. GFthankst he“France 2030”investmentplanmanaged
by the French National Research Agency (reference :ANR-17- EURE-0020) and from Excellence Initiative of
Aix-Marseille University – A*MIDEX.
†Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, AMSE, Marseille, France. gaetan.fournier@univ-amu.fr
‡Universit´ e Paris-Panth´ eon-Assas, LEMMA, Paris, France .alberto.grillo@u-paris2.fr
§Department of Economics, Bar Ilan University, Israel. yevgets@gmail.com1 Introduction
Intherun-uptoanelection, candidates largely relyonpoll stolearnaboutvotingintentions.
Uncovering the electorate’s leanings, what is known as the policy mood [Stimson,1991;
Stevenson ,2001], help them shape their campaign message but may also pose a d iﬃcult
choice: should they change their positions to get closer to v oters? In the long run, it is
well documented that politicians adapt their stances to reﬂ ect the evolving preferences of
their constituencies [ Glazer and Robbins ,1985;Stratmann ,2000;Miler,2016]. Yet, policy
changes that are too sudden involve substantial costs, in te rms of not only communication
eﬀortsbutalsoelectoral appeal. InthehistoryoftheU.S.pr esidentialelections, forexample,
thedefeats of JohnKerry in2004 and Matt Romney in 2012 areof ten linked to their shifting
views on salient issues1.
This paper studies re-positioning choices as a strategic ga me between candidates. We
assume that voters prefer candidates with platforms aligne d with their ideal policies, but
dislikeﬂip-ﬂoppers , i.e. candidates who strategically change their positions during the
campaign. We examine which candidates are more likely to adj ust their positions following
new information, in which direction, and how successfully. We also investigate how the
anticipation of possible changes aﬀects candidates’ positi ons ex-ante, before the information
is revealed.
A theory of policy adjustments is useful in light of the bias o f the empirical evidence. As
pointedoutby TomzandVanHouweling [2012],“historical data [...] reveal the consequences
of re-positioning only in the speciﬁc circumstances when po liticians thought re-positioning
would be optimal” . Our analysis of the involved trade-oﬀs aims to clarify what t hese speciﬁc
circumstances are.
Model. We enrich the Downs-Hotelling framework by supposing an inf ormation shock
creating a two-stage game. The shock reveals the location of the median voter. This cap-
tures the idea that voters’ aggregate preferences ﬂuctuate over time and that their current
leanings are disclosed during the electoral campaign. In th e model, two oﬃce-motivated
candidates ﬁrst select their positions before the shock, kn owing only the distribution of the
median voter’s location. They can then revise their positio ns after the shock (after learning
the actual location). We assume that such a change involves b oth anelectoral cost – voters’
discount their evaluation of a candidate who changed positi on – and an organizational cost
– the candidate’s payoﬀ is reduced due to the policy change.
1Speciﬁcally concerning Kerry’s opposition to the war in Ira q after his previous support and Romney’s
multiple shifts, notably on abortion [ Croco,2016].
1On the one hand, the electoral cost represents voters’ negat ive feeling toward a ﬂip-ﬂop.
This aversion may be interpreted as a higher uncertainty abo ut what the candidate would
do if elected, i.e. to an undermined credibility of the posit ion [Enelow and Munger ,1993].
Alternatively, voters may value consistency on policy issu es as a cue for character [ Kartik
and McAfee ,2007], or as a signal for quality of implementation of the ex-post policy. We
model voters’ dislike for ﬂip-ﬂops in a reduced form, throug h a penalty in their utility if a
candidate changes position.
Ontheotherhand, theorganizational cost representsall ot hercostsinvolved byachange
of position which are not related to voters’ reaction. The mo st prominent is the organiza-
tional and ﬁnancial cost for candidates of communicating th e change to the voters. While
justifying a policy change to the public may reduce its elect oral harm, such communication
requires costly advertising.
Results. We study the subgame-perfect equilibria of the game, using b ackward in-
duction. In the second stage, if the revealed information is not clearly in favor of one
candidate, the adjustment choices determine the winner of t he election. The advantaged
candidate would like to adjust only if the other candidate th reatens the advantage by also
moving, while the disadvantaged candidate would like to adj ust only if his opponent does
not. Theonlyequilibriumisthereforeinmixedstrategies, withbothcandidatesﬂip-ﬂopping
with positive probability and having a chance to win the elec tion. If instead the revealed
information strongly favors one candidate, there are no inc entives to ﬂip-ﬂop as the election
cannot be disputed anymore.
In the ﬁrst stage, candidates anticipate their strategic re sponses to the information
shock. The game has at most one subgame-perfect equilibrium , which exists if both the
electoral and the organizational costs are suﬃciently high . In such equilibrium, candidates
contradict the median voter theorem: they choose diﬀerentia ted platforms to secure a cost-
less victory when the information is in their favor.
Contribution. Assuming suﬃciently high adjustment costs, our model yield s several
implications concerning the occurrence of ﬂip-ﬂops. First , along the equilibrium path, re-
positioning happens only toward the center, while candidat es never adjust toward more
extreme positions. This highlights a moderation eﬀect , according to which candidates culti-
vateseparateelectorates whenelections arefarintimeand thensoftentheirpositionsduring
the campaign. In the U.S., such an eﬀect is often attributed to the presence of primary
elections, in which candidates need to convince a more extre me median voter [ Agranov,
2016]. Our framework provides a diﬀerent rationale for a similar d ynamic, which can play
2out even in the absence of primary elections.
A second prediction is that ﬂip-ﬂops consist mostly of small adjustments made by an
advantaged candidate in order to secure his victory. Only a m inority of ﬂip-ﬂops are large
adjustments made by a disadvantaged candidate who seeks to r everse the likely outcome
of the election. Indeed, on the one hand, when the favorite ca ndidate adjusts his position,
the magnitude of the adjustment is smaller than when his oppo nent adjusts. On the other
hand, we ﬁnd that a candidate favored by the new information i s more likely to adjust
his position than a disadvantaged candidate. Hence, an adju stment by the advantaged
candidate guarantees his victory but an adjustment by the ch allenger is more likely to be
unsuccessful.
Finally, we providecomparative statics results with respe ct tochanges in theadjustment
costs. We ﬁnd that an increase in the electoral cost decrease s the polarization of candidates
but increases their equilibrium payoﬀs. Indeed, such an incr ease makes ﬂip-ﬂopping less
likely, because it increases the probability that the elect ion is secured after the information
shock, which guarantees the favorite candidate a cost-less victory.
Extension. We look at how the results are modiﬁed by an asymmetry between can-
didates. Asymmetry in organizational costs has no impact on the results. Asymmetry in
electoral costs makes the more ﬂexible candidate choose a mo re central platform, while the
less ﬂexible candidate oﬀers a more polarized platform. We sh ow that a candidate who is
signiﬁcantly less ﬂexible in adjusting his position loses t he election in equilibrium, even if
he is favored by the information on voters. In the general asy mmetric game, payoﬀs are
decreasing in candidates’ own electoral cost, but increasi ng in the opponent’s electoral cost.
Literature. Following the seminal work by Hotelling [1929] andDowns[1957], most
models of political competition assume that candidates can freely commit to any elec-
toral platform. At the extreme opposite, some papers take ca mpaign announcements as
cheap-talk and assume that, once elected, candidates act ac cording to their own preferences
[Alesina,1988;Osborne and Slivinski ,1996;Besley and Coate ,1997].
We lay down a more realistic framework, in which platforms ar e binding although not
immutable, and candidates can costly adjust them over time. The evidence that politicians
respond in an adaptive way to changes in voters’ preferences is substantial in political
science, see Stimsonet al. [1995],Adams et al. [2004], andKousseret al. [2007].Karol[2009]
argues that elite replacement is not necessary for parties’ policy changes, which are often
driven by incumbent politicians. Adams et al. [2006] ﬁnd that mainstream parties engage in
re-positioning more than niche parties, while Tavits[2007] relates the likelihood of success
3to whetherthe change concerned pragmatic or principlediss ues. Thisliterature has a strong
empirical focusand recently turnedalso to experimental se ttings [Tomz and Van Houweling ,
2012;Doherty et al. ,2016;Robison,2017]. We see our theoretical investigation as a useful
complement to this existing research.
Key to our analysis is the assumption that policy changes are costly. Models by Bern-
hardt and Ingberman [1985],Ingberman [1989] andEnelow and Munger [1993] consider a
voters’ utility function which is decreasing in the size of a change in candidates’ policies.
In these studies, the loss is derived from the increased unce rtainty concerning the policy
that will be eﬀectively implemented. Evidence of an intrinsi c preference of voters for con-
sistency is also discussed as a “waﬄe eﬀect” in political psyc hology [Carlson and Dolan ,
1985].Hoﬀman and Carver [1984] found that even proposing a policy in agreement with
the voters’ preferences may not be rewarded if it follows an i nconsistent track-record. Our
speciﬁcation is consistent with DeBacker [2015], who ﬁnds empirically that the electoral
cost is increasing in the size of the change. The organizatio nal cost, instead, captures in
a reduced form the idea that informative advertising direct ed towards voters is costly for
candidates [ Coate,2004;Ashworth ,2006]. Our model abstracts away the role of interest
groups in ﬁnancing political campaigns, and assumes for sim plicity that candidates bear
communications costs themselves.2
Given the result of ex-ante divergence, our paper belongs to a class of models in which
policy diﬀerentiation is adopted to soften competition in a s econd dimension. The baseline
argument is familiar in industrial organization models, in which ﬁrms diﬀerentiate their
products in order to reduce the subsequent competition in pr ices [Tirole,1988;Shaked
and Sutton ,1982]. In political competition, Ashworth and Bueno De Mesquita [2009] and
Zakharov [2009] examine the reduced need for diﬀerentiated candidates to in vest in valence.
Eyster and Kittsteiner [2007] consider parties as collections of candidates. Parties ch oose
general platforms ﬁrst and candidates can deviate from thei r party’s platform at a cost, in
ordertoincreasetheirchancesintheirspeciﬁcconstituen cy. Divergenceofparties’platforms
results from the incentive to minimize the aggregate cost of candidates’ re-positioning for
the party. In Balart et al. [2022], candidates diverge to minimize future costly advertisin g,
which would beneeded to impress voters if the ideological di vide were low. We focus instead
on candidates’ choice of changing their own position over ti me, when doing this is not only
ﬁnancially costly but also penalized electorally. While ex -ante divergence arises analogously
to thesepreviousmodels intheliterature, ourframework al lows ustohighlight theemerging
2SeePrato and Wolton [2019] for a similar assumption.
4patterns of ﬂip-ﬂopping along the (subgame-perfect) equil ibrium.
The paper is more loosely related to three other research lin es. First, ﬂip-ﬂopping has
been investigated in two-stage models with primary electio ns [Hummel,2010;Agranov,
2016]. Although we do not have primary elections, our model exhib its a similar dynamic of
moderation during the campaign stage. Second, the paper sha res withKamada and Sugaya
[2020] an interest in the dynamic aspect of policy announcements d uring the campaign
stage. In their paper, however, the opportunity to revise a p osition arises stochastically in
a revision game ` a la Kamada and Kandori [2020], and the focus is on candidates’ reactions
to each others’ announcements. Finally, policy adjustment s in our model can be seen as a
pandering phenomenon. However, such pandering only descri bes a spatial movement and
ignores considerations of optimality from a common-value p erspective, addressed in Maskin
and Tirole [2004] andAndreottola [2021].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section2presents the model
and Section 3the equilibrium analysis and the results. We study the case o f asymmetric
candidates in Section 4. Technical proofs and lemmas are postponed to the appendix.
2 The Model
There are two oﬃce seeking candidates (namely, candidate 1 a nd 2) and a continuum of
voters that we identify with their ideal policy tPR. The location of the median voter m
is drawn according to a uniform distribution on a compact int erval, w.l.o.g. ﬁxed to r0,1s,
and is revealed during the campaign. Candidates choose thei r platforms twice, both before
and after the reveal of the median voter’s position. We denot e the ex-ante platforms x1and
x2, and the ex-post platforms y1andy2.
We interpret the choice of the ex-post platforms as the adjus tment that candidates may
make with respect to their previous positions after learnin g the electorate’s preferences
more precisely. The choice of the ex-ante platforms reﬂects instead the positions in which
candidates invest over the long term, knowing that future re visions are allowed but costly.
Votert’s utility from a victory of candidate idepends on both the candidate’s ex-ante
and the ex-post platform according to the following functio nal form
utpxi,yiq “ ´pt´yiq2´apyi´xiq2. (1)
The ﬁrst term represents voters’ preference for a candidate whose ﬁnal policy is closer to
their ideal one. The second term represents how voters penal ize candidates for changing
their platform with respect to their previous position. In o ur model, voters trust that policy
5yiwill be implemented if candidate iwins, hence do not care about the distance between
tandxi. Yet, they have an intrinsic preference for candidates who a re consistent. The
parameter aą0 measures the relative eﬀect of this electoral penalty and th us how voters
trade oﬀ policy considerations with their dislike for a cand idate changing position.
The election is decided by majority rule. Because voters’ pr eferences are single-peaked
and their utilities have the same functional form, the candi date that attracts the median
voter wins the election. The payoﬀ of the candidates depends on both the outcome of the
election and the possible organizational cost of a policy ch ange. The beneﬁt from winning
the election is set to 1 and that from losing to 0. In addition, a candidate that changed his
policy, by selecting yi‰xi, pays a ﬁxed cost φP p0,1
2q.3We interpret φas the cost induced
by the need to communicate the change of policy to the public. Although greater changes
may require more substantial communication strategies, we abstract from the dependency
of the organizational cost on the magnitude of the change for technical simplicity. Our
assumption of a ﬁxed φcaptures the presence of some ﬁxed cost, which is likely pres ent
independently of the magnitude of the change. The payoﬀ of ca ndidateiis then
gipx,yq “Ep1liwins´φ1lyi‰xiq,
where 1l iwinsis the indicator that candidate iwins the election, and the expectation is taken
with respect to the position of the median voter mand the possibly mixed actions of the
players. Ties are broken by a toss of a fair coin, so in case of a tie,Ep1liwinsq “1
2.
To summarize, the timing of the game is as follows.
1.First Stage: The two candidates choose ex-ante platforms x1andx2.
2.Information Shock: The position of the median voter mis revealed.
3.Second Stage: The two candidates choose ex-post platforms y1andy2.
4.The Voting: Thecandidate’spreferredbythemedianvoteriselected and candidates’
payoﬀs are realized.
3 Equilibrium analysis
We are interested inthesubgame-perfect equilibriumof the game. Hence, wesolve thegame
usingbackwardinductionandstartbystudyingthestrategi cﬂip-ﬂoppingofcandidatesafter
3We assume that the cost φis smaller than1
2, which is the expected gain from competing in the election
since players are symmetric. If φą0.5, saving the organizational costs is more important than co mpeting
for the election.
6their observation of the ex-ante platforms x1,x2and the location of the median voter m
(Propositions 1and2). The analysis shows that two scenarios are possible in the s econd
stage: either theadvantage of onecandidateis too large and heissuretowin, or theelection
is still openandtheoutcome dependsoncandidates’ reactio ns. Intheﬁrstcase, it is optimal
for both candidates not to change platforms and remain at the ir ex-ante positions. In the
second case, both candidates mix between moving to an ex-pos t optimal position and not
moving.
Next, given the strategies in the second stage, we analyze th e optimal choice of ex-
ante platforms. We show that for suﬃciently high values of th e costs pa,φq, the unique
subgame-perfect equilibrium requires candidates to inves t in divergent ex-ante positions
(Proposition 3). Candidates diﬀerentiate in order to maximize the chances o f having a
suﬃcient advantage in the second stage, for which they save o n the organizational cost of
changing policy. In the remaining region of the parameter sp ace (see Figure 3), a subgame-
perfect equilibrium does not exist but an ǫ-equilibrium exists in which candidates take
centrist positions one ǫaway from each other (Proposition 4). Finally, we summarize the
implications in terms of ﬂip-ﬂopping behavior that emerge f rom our equilibrium analysis
(Proposition 5and6).
3.1 Second Stage: Choice of Ex-Post Platforms y1,y2
We takex1,x2andmas given andconsider separately thecases wheretheex-ante platforms
are the same or diﬀerent, as the analysis in these two cases diﬀe rs signiﬁcantly.
3.1.1 Diﬀerent Ex-Ante Platforms x1‰x2
Let us assume ﬁrst x1‰x2and consider, without loss of generality, the case x1ăx2. Given
m, we refer to the candidate with ex-ante platform closer to mas thefavoritecandidate.
Deﬁnition 1. Candidate iis thefavoriteand candidate jis thechallenger if|xi´m| ă
|xj´m|.
The intuition for the term favoriteis that, if candidates do not change their platforms,
the favorite candidate iwins the election as umpxi,xiq ąumpxj,xjq. We ignore the case
wherem“x1`x2
2which occurs with null probability.
In the case where m“x1, candidate 1 can win the election without changing platform
and incurring the organizational cost φ, as the median voter has the highest possible utility
from his victory. Candidate 2, on the other hand, loses the el ection regardless of his ex-post
7platform, so it is optimal for both candidates to not move and save on the organizational
cost. This argument remains true when m‰x1but is close enough to x1: candidate 1 still
wins the election without changing his platform, and candid ate 2 also does not change his
platform as he loses the election anyway. In this case, we say that the favorite candidate
hassecuredthe election.
Deﬁnition 2. The election is securedfor the favorite candidate iifumpxi,xiq ąmax
yPr0,1sumpxj,yq.
Otherwise, the election is still open .
A favorite candidate who has secured the election has a stric tly dominant strategy
yi“xi, by which he wins without paying the organizational cost φ. The challenger also
has a strictly dominant strategy yj“xj, as he cannot win the election and should save the
organizational cost. Hence, if the the election is secured, the strategies y1“x1,y2“x2
constitute the unique equilibrium of the second stage subga me. The equilibrium payoﬀs
are 1 for the favorite candidate and 0 for the challenger. In L emma1in the appendix, we
solve the inequality that appears in Deﬁnition 2and show that the election is secured for
candidate 1 whenever mP pm,mq, where
m:“αx1´x2
α´1_0,m:“αx1`x2
α`1,
and where
α“b
1`a
a(2)
is a useful parameter. Similarly, the election is secured fo r candidate 2 whenever mP pn,nq
where
n:“αx2`x1
α`1,n:“αx2´x1
α´1^1.
Figure1summarizes the regions where each candidate has secured the election, and those
in which the election is still open. We observe that the elect ion is secured if mrealizes in a
neighborhood of each candidate’s ex-ante platform xi.
0mx1m x1`x2
2nx2n11FS 2FS 1FO 1FO 2FO 2FO
Figure 1: An illustration of the status of each player being t he favorite while the election
is secured (FS) or still open (FO) before choosing the ex-pos t platform, with respect to the
position of the median voter mP r0,1s.
8If the election is still open, the favorite candidate wins th e election if neither candidate
changes his platform. However, he can lose the election if he keeps the platform while the
challenger moves closer to the median voter. Hence, the chal lenger wants to move if the
favorite does not change his platform. Analogously, the fav orite also wants to move if the
challenger moves, in order to secure his victory. In Lemma 2in the appendix, we show that
in this case both candidates have an optimal platform ˆ yiwhich they want to adopt if they
decide to change their ex-ante platform. The optimal platfo rm is given by
ˆyi“m`axi
1`a. (3)
This optimal platform is a weighted average between the ex-a nte platform xiand the
realization of the median voter location m. For each candidate, the platform ˆ yiis optimal
in the sense that all other platforms diﬀerent from xiare either dominated or redundant, as
proved also in Lemma 2. We can represent the ex-post game between the two candidate s by
the following 2 ˆ2 one-shot game, assuming that each candidate chooses betwe en moving
to ˆyiand not moving. Without loss of generality, we consider cand idate 1 as the favorite.
Favorite candidate 1Challenger candidate 2
ˆy2 x2
ˆy1p1´φ,´φq p1´φ,0q
x1 p0,1´φq p1,0q
Table 1: The normal form game that candidates face if the elec tion is still open.
If both candidates move to their optimal platforms, candida te 1 wins the election: his
ex-ante platform is closer to the median voter, so his ex-pos t platform is both closer to the
median voter and requires a smaller adjustment |ˆy1´x1| ă |ˆy2´x2|. We observe that
the favorite candidate wants to take the same action as the ch allenger, while the challenger
wants to take the opposite action as the favorite. Hence, suc h a game has no equilibrium
in pure strategies but has a unique equilibrium in mixed stra tegies. At this equilibrium,
the favorite changes his platform with probability p1´φqand the challenger changes his
platform with probability φ. The expected equilibrium payoﬀs are 1 ´φfor the favorite
candidate and 0 for the challenger.
This discussion is summarized in the following proposition .
Proposition 1 (Equilibrium in the second stage subgame for x1‰x2).Suppose that
diﬀerent ex-ante platforms x1‰x2were chosen. The reaction of the candidates to the
revelation of mis:
9•If the favorite candidate has secured the election, the uniqu e subgame equilibrium
ispy1,y2q “ px1,x2q. The equilibrium payoﬀs are 1for the favorite and 0for the
challenger.
•If the election is still open, the unique subgame equilibrium is in mixed strategies:
yi“#
ˆyiwith probability 1´φ,
xiwith probability φ,
for the favorite candidate iand
yj“#
ˆyjwith probability φ,
xjwith probability 1´φ,
for the challenger j. The equilibrium payoﬀs are p1´φqfor the favorite and 0for the
challenger.
Proof.See Appendix A.2.
If the the election is secured, the uniqueness of the equilib rium is clear, as px1,x2qare
strictly dominant strategies. Otherwise, the uniqueness c oncerns the equilibrium payoﬀ
but not the equilibrium strategies, as in some conﬁguration s other strategies might be
redundant to the strategies ˆ yiand constitute an equilibrium with the same payoﬀs. As
shown in Lemma 2, disregarding these strategies is without loss of generali ty because it
does not impact the payoﬀs nor the analysis.
The comparison of the subgame equilibrium payoﬀs when the ele ction is secured or
open illustrates the ineﬃciency of the second scenario. Whe n the election is still open, the
favorite gets p1´φqand the challenger 0 (in expectation), which is the same payo ﬀs as if
the challenger were to concede but the favorite candidate st ill paid the organizational cost
to change his policy.
3.1.2 Identical Ex-Ante Platforms x1“x2
In the case of identical ex-ante platforms, the election is a lways open and there is neither
a favorite nor a challenger, which breaks down the analysis f rom Proposition 1. As before,
both candidates have an optimal platform ˆ yiwhere they want to move if they do. This
optimal position is again equal to ˆ yi“m`axi
1`aand is now identical for both candidates.
Hence, if both candidates move or both do not move, each has a p robability of1
2to win the
election. We can then restrict our attention to the ex-post g ame given by the 2 ˆ2 matrix
in Table 2.
10Candidate 1Candidate 2
ˆy2 x2
ˆy1p1
2´φ,1
2´φq p1´φ,0q
x1 p0,1´φq p1
2,1
2q
Table 2: The normal form game that candidates face if the ex-a nte platforms are identical.
Sinceφă1
2, we have1
2´φą0 and 1 ´φą1
2. It follows that keeping the ex-ante
platform is a strictly dominated strategy and in the unique e quilibrium both candidates
choose platforms ˆ y1“ˆy2. The above discussion proves the following Proposition:
Proposition 2 (Equilibrium in the second stage of the game for x1“x2).Suppose that
ex-ante, the identical platforms x1“x2were chosen. The unique subgame equilibrium in
the second stage is pˆy1,ˆy2q(given by Eq. (3)). The equilibrium payoﬀs are p1
2´φ,1
2´φq.
Note that1
2´φis the worst possible equilibrium payoﬀ in this game. Indeed , no matter
the strategy of his opponent, candidate ican select xi“1
2andyi“ˆyi. By doing so he
wins the election with probability of at least1
2, while paying the organizational cost φ.
3.2 First Stage: Choice of Ex-Ante Platforms x1,x2
By backward induction, candidates choose their ex-ante pla tforms by considering that the
subgame equilibrium given by Proposition 1or2is played in the second stage. In the ﬁrst
stage, we restrict attention to pure strategies xifor both candidates.
A ﬁrst result is that there cannot exist a subgame-perfect eq uilibrium in which candi-
dates select the same position in the ﬁrst stage. If the ex-an te positions were identical, each
candidate would have a proﬁtable deviation by playing an inﬁ nitesimally diﬀerent ex-ante
position, since such a deviation induces a better equilibri um payoﬀ after the second stage.
We prove this claim within the proof of Proposition 4below but anticipating this result
allows us to focus on ex-ante platforms that properly deﬁne a favorite and a challenger, as
in Section 3.1.1.
Thenextpropositionshowsthatif φandaaresuﬃcientlybig, thentheex-anteplatforms
diverge from the center in the unique subgame-perfect equil ibrium. The intuition behind
this result is that, conditional on being the favorite, cand idates prefer the election to be
secured rather than still open, when the position of mis revealed. Divergence occurs
because the probability of a secured election is proportion al to the distance between the
ex-ante platforms |x2´x1|. More precisely, given the uniquesubgame equilibrium desc ribed
11in Proposition 1, each candidate i’s expected payoﬀ is:
1ˆPpiis the favorite and the election is secured q`
` p1´φq ˆPpiis the favorite and the election is still open q `0 (4)
where the probability Prepresents the randomization of the median voter’s locatio n and
the 0 is the expected payoﬀ if iis the challenger. On the one hand, player prefer to be
the favorite, which creates an incentive to move towards the opposite candidate in order to
increase the likelihood of being the closest candidate to m. On the other hand, being the
favorite is not the only concern of the candidates, because t hey also want to maximize the
probability of the election being secured conditional on be ing the favorite. The fact that
the probability that the election is secured for the favorit e is proportional to the distance
betweenex-anteplatforms |x2´x1|creates anincentivetodiverge. Indeed, bydiﬀerentiating
their platforms, candidates create “secure electorates” – regions of the policy space which
guarantee a victory of a candidate if the median voter is reve aled in such a region without
the need of a costly adjustment of platform. This centrifuga l force is to be traded oﬀ with
the centripetal force and prevails in equilibrium if the con dition on φin Proposition 3holds.
Proposition 3 (Diﬀerentiation of ex-ante platforms) .Suppose that φą1
1`4?
ap1`aqand
without loss of generality that x1ďx2. In the unique subgame-perfect equilibrium, candi-
dates’ ex-ante platforms are
px˚
1,x˚
2q “ˆ1
α`1,α
α`1˙
(5)
whereα“b
1`a
a, and the ex-post behavior is according to Propositions 1and2.
The equilibrium expected payoﬀs are
g˚
1“g˚
2“1
2´φ
2ˆα´1
α`1˙2
(6)
Proof.See Appendix A.3.
In these equilibrium payoﬀs, the ﬁrst term represents the exp ected gain of the election
and the second term represents the expected organizational cost. Indeed, in equilibrium
the election is still open with probability´
α´1
α`1¯2
and in this case each player deviates with
probability 1 ´φorφwhether heis thefavorite or not, sohepays thecost φwithprobability
1
2φ`1
2p1´φq “1
2.
120x1“1
α`12α
pα`1q21
2α2`1
pα`1q2x2“α
α`111FS 2FS 1FO 2FO
Figure 2: The status of each player being the favorite when th e election is secured (FS) or
still open (FO) at the subgame-perfect equilibrium describ ed by Proposition 3, with respect
to the position of the median voter m.
Figure2shows the intervals on the policy space in which the election is secured for the
favorite candidate or still open at the subgame-perfect equ ilibrium, which depend only on
the electoral cost athrough the parameter α.
The following proposition shows that if the condition on aandφin Proposition 3is
reversed, a subgame-perfect equilibrium does not exist. In stead, we prove the existence of
anǫ-equilibrium, at which neither candidate can unilaterally improve his payoﬀ by more
thanǫ, for every ǫą0.
Proposition 4. If0ăφă1
1`4?
ap1`aq, there does not exist a subgame-perfect equilibrium.
There exists instead an ǫ-equilibrium, given by px1,x2q “ p1
2´ǫ,1
2`ǫqfor every ǫą0small
enough.
Proof.See Appendix A.4.
The intuition for the result is that if the organizational co st of changing platform is
suﬃciently small, candidates prefer to converge towards th e center to increase the chances
of being the favorite candidate, even if this decreases the p robability of a secured election.
However, the centripetal incentive stops when candidates t ake the same position because
of the discontinuity in the payoﬀ when x1“x2. Indeed, if candidates have minimally
diﬀerentiated platforms, each has an advantage in the second stage if the median voter is
located on his side of the policy space. Formally, by converg ing fully to x1“x2“1
2each
candidate obtains an expected payoﬀ equal to1
2´φ. Instead, by minimally diﬀerentiating
from the center and choosing x1“1
2´ǫ,x2“1
2`ǫthey both obtain a higher expected
payoﬀ, which converges to1
2´φ
2asǫgoes to 0.
The condition on the parameters for the existence of a subgam e-perfect equilibrium is
drawn in Figure 3in the pa,φqplane. The region dealt with in Proposition 3is designated
byR0and formally deﬁned as tpa,φq|Ψpaq ăφă1
2uwhere
Ψpaq “1
1`4a
ap1`aq. (7)
13In the region named R1, only an ǫ-equilibrium exists.
0.5 1 1 .5 2 2 .5 30.10.20.30.40.5
R1: No SPNER0: SPNEx1‰x2
Ψpaq
aφ
Figure 3: The two regions R0andR1in thea´φspace. The colored region represents the
areaR0concerned with Proposition 3.
3.3 Adjustments along the equilibrium path
Inlight ofouranalysis, wecannowputforwardafewimplicat ions concerningtheoccurrence
of candidates’ policy changes. We focus on the parameter reg ion in which the electoral and
organizational costsarehighenough, andthusasubgame-pe rfectequilibriumwithdivergent
ex-ante positions exists.
Proposition 5. Suppose that φą1
1`4?
ap1`aq. At the subgame-perfect equilibrium,
(i) candidates ﬂip-ﬂop to voters’ preferences only towards the center;
(ii) the favorite candidate is more likely to ﬂip-ﬂop than th e challenger;
(iii) when the favorite candidate ﬂip-ﬂops, the magnitude o f the adjustment is smaller than
when the challenger ﬂip-ﬂops;
(iv) ﬂip-ﬂopping is always successful when done by a favorit e candidate, while it is more
likely to be unsuccessful than successful for a challenger.
Proof.See Appendix A.5.
14Property ( i) describes a dynamic of moderation along the electoral camp aign, according
to which candidates start out with more extreme positions an d converge to the center if
and once the median voter realizes in the center. The propert y also implies that candidates
never cross over the position of the opponent. As such, even ﬂ ip-ﬂopping candidates always
keep their relative ideological stands, despite the fact th at they are oﬃce seekers and have
no preferred policy.
The intuition behind property ( ii) relies on the mixed strategies used by candidates at
equilibrium: thefavorite is indiﬀerent between ﬂip-ﬂoppin gor not only whentheprobability
to lose the election is relatively small, that is when his opp onent is less likely to ﬂip-
ﬂop. Instead, the disadvantaged candidate is indiﬀerent onl y when the victory is relatively
unlikely, that is when the favorite secures his advantage wi th high probability.
Property ( iv) means that a ﬂip-ﬂopping favorite always wins the election in equilibrium,
while a ﬂip-ﬂopping challenger loses whenever the favorite also ﬂip-ﬂops, i.e. with prob-
ability 1 ´φą1
2. Taken together, these properties suggest that campaign ﬂi p-ﬂopping
consists most often in a minor adjustment by the favorite can didate in order to consolidate
his victory, and only less likely it is a major and risky move b y the challenger who tries to
reverse the election outcome.
The next proposition focuses on the comparative statics pro perties with respect to the
electoral cost parameter a.
Proposition 6. When the electorate is more tolerant towards candidates cha nging positions,
that is when adecreases,
(i) the candidates’ ex-ante policies are more polarized;
(ii) the election is more likely to be still open after the rev eal ofm, hence each candidate
is more likely to ﬂip-ﬂop;
(iii) the candidates’ equilibrium payoﬀs are lower.
Proof.See Appendix A.6.
The comparative statics analysis highlights two main pheno mena. First, candidates
prefer an intransigent electorate that is less tolerant of ﬂ ip-ﬂopping. The underlying mech-
anism is described in claim ( ii): more tolerant electorates lead to increased competition ,
with more elections to be still open after the revelation of t he median. As a result, winning
elections without ﬂip-ﬂopping becomes less likely, leadin g to smaller equilibrium payoﬀs.
15Additionally, while the electoral cost is a necessary ingre dient in Proposition 5to obtain
diﬀerentiation, the degree of polarization decreases as the electoral cost increases. Indeed,
in equilibrium, candidates push their secured intervals to the limits of the policy space, as
m“0 andn“1, and they position in the middle of these intervals. Howeve r, whenais
small, these intervals shrink due to increased competition (the challenger can more easily
ﬂip-ﬂop to reverse the election), causing the center of thes e intervals to shift closer to the
extremities, and the degree of candidates polarization is t hus larger.
4 Asymmetric candidates
Inthis section, werelax the symmetrybetween candidates by supposingthat voters penalize
diﬀerently each candidate for changing platform, via diﬀeren t values of the parameter a.4
Thus, the utility of voter tfrom voting for candidate iwith ex-ante and ex-post platforms
xiandyiis
ui
tpxi,yiq:“ ´pt´yiq2´aipyi´xiq2(8)
as opposed to Eq. ( 1).
An interesting phenomenon results from this heterogeneity between candidates: for
a range of possible realizations of the median voter’s locat ion, the favorite candidate is
not guaranteed to win the election even if he adjusts his posi tion. Indeed, the optimal
adjustments are still given by weighted averages between th e ex-ante platforms and the
realization of the median voter, namely ˆ yi“m`aixi
1`ai, but because the weights are diﬀerent
for each candidate, the challenger might attract the median voter after both candidates
adjust. Suppose, for example, that a1ăa2and that platforms x1ăx2were chosen ex-
ante. Ifmrealizes suﬃciently close tox1`x2
2then candidate 1 can adjust his position closer
tomthancandidate 2, thankstohis smaller electoral cost, andw in theelection. Thisis true
even ifmis larger thanx1`x2
2, i.e. if candidate 2 is the favorite according to Deﬁnition 1.
This justiﬁes the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 3. Candidate iis a weak favorite and candidate jis a strong challenger if
|xi´m| ă |xj´m|butui
mpxi,ˆyiq ăuj
mpxj,ˆyjq.
In other terms, a weak favorite candidate wins the election w hen no candidate adjusts,
but looses the election when both candidates adjust their pl atforms. More precisely, the
(second-stage) game played by a weak favorite and a strong ch allenger is as follows:
4A similar analysis can be made to consider diﬀerent organiza tional costs φ, without aﬀecting the results
signiﬁcantly.
16Strong challenger candidate 1Weak favorite candidate 2
ˆy2 x2
ˆy1p1´φ,´φq p1´φ,0q
x1 p0,1´φq p0,1q
The game admits pˆy1,x2qas its unique equilibrium, since both actions are strictly d om-
inant. That is, in equilibrium, a strong challenger adjusts his position and wins the election
with certainty, while a weak favorite does not move. The equi librium payoﬀs are given by
p1´φ,0qand are identical to the case in which candidate 1 is the favor ite and the election
is still open in the symmetric game.
Fora1ăa2, by solving u2
mpx2,ˆy2q ău1
mpx1,ˆy1qwith respect to m, we ﬁnd that candi-
date 2 is a weak favorite when mP px1`x2
2,˜mq, in which ˜ m“α1x2`α2x1
α1`α2andαi“b
1`ai
ai.
This region is represented in light blue in Figure 4.
0 x1 m x1`x2
2˜mnx2 11FS 2FS 1FO 2FO2WF
Figure 4: The status of each player being the favorite when th e election is secured (FS) or
still open (FO) at the subgame-perfect equilibrium describ ed by Proposition 7, with respect
to the position of the median voter m, fora1ăa2. In the light blue region, candidate 2 is
the weak favorite (WF)
The analysis of the second stage in all other regions (when th e favorite is not weak) is
the same in the asymmetric game as in the symmetric game of the previous sections. The
next proposition describes the subgame-perfect equilibri um considering both stages of the
game.
Proposition 7 (Equilibrium with asymmetric electoral costs) .Assume that a1ăa2and
thatφąmaxpΨpa1q,Ψpa2qq. There exists a unique subgame-perfect equilibrium, in whic h
the ex-ante locations are given by
px˚
1,x˚
2q “ˆα1´1
α1α2´1,α2pα1´1q
α1α2´1˙
whereαi“b
1`ai
ai.
The ex-post behavior depends on m:
•FormP”x˚
1`x˚
2
2,˜mı
where˜m“α1x˚
2`α2x˚
1
α1`α2“α2pα2
1´1q
pα1α2´1qpα1`α2q, candidate 1adjusts to
ˆy1and wins the election, whereas candidate 2remains at x˚
2and loses the election.
17•Otherwise, it follows Proposition 1.
IfφămaxpΨpa1q,Ψpa2qq, there is no subgame-perfect equilibrium.
Proof.See Appendix A.7
While the ex-ante positions were symmetric around1
2in the case of identical electoral
costs, we now have that
x˚
1`x˚
2
2“1
2`α1´α2
2pα1α2´1q(9)
hence, the candidate with a lower a(a higher α) takes a more centrist ex-ante position and
has a higher expected payoﬀ. Expected payoﬀs in equilibrium ar e modiﬁed with respect to
the expressions in Eq. ( 6) by the possibility for the favorite to be weak, as follows:
g1“1ˆ”
2α2pα1´1q
pα1α2´1qpα2`1qı
` p1´φq ˆ”
pα1´1qpα1α2`α2q
pα1α2´1qpα1`α2q´2α2pα1´1q
pα1α2´1qpα2`1qı
g2“1ˆ”
1´pα1α2`1qpα1´1q
pα1α2´1qpα1`1qı
` p1´φq ˆ”
pα1α2`1qpα1´1q
pα1α2´1qpα1`1q´α2pα2
1´1q
pα1α2´1qpα1`α2qı(10)
With respect to Proposition 5, if candidates are asymmetric, it is still true that ﬂip-
ﬂopping happens only towards the center. It is no longer true , in general, that a favorite
candidate is more likely to ﬂip-ﬂop than a challenger or that the magnitude of his adjust-
ment is smaller. The validity of these statements depends no w on whether the favorite
is weak or not and on the exact diﬀerence in the electoral costs ai. Flip-ﬂopping is now
always successful both for a favorite candidate (recall tha t a weak favorite never ﬂip-ﬂops
in equilibrium) and for a strong challenger, while it remain s more likely unsuccessful than
successful for a challenger who is not strong.
Theintroductionof heterogeneous electoral costs alsoall ows usto reﬁnethecomparative
statics properties in Proposition 6. We can deduce from Eq. ( 9) and Eq. ( 10) that, when
voters are more tolerant towards a change of position by cand idatei(i.e. ifaidecreases
for a given aj), the ex-ante position of iis more centrist and his expected payoﬀ is higher,
while the ex-ante position of jis more extreme and his expected payoﬀ is lower. Hence,
while in the symmetric case, candidates are better oﬀ when th e electorate penalizes ﬂip-
ﬂopping more, in the asymmetric case candidates are better o ﬀ only if a higher electoral
cost concerns the opponent. In principle, a higher electora l cost could be beneﬁcial for a
candidate by reducing the likelihood of adjusting the posit ion and paying the organizational
cost. We ﬁnd instead that, in equilibrium, each candidate wo uld prefer voters to be more
tolerant with himself. Indeed, the region in which a candida teihas a secured election
is independent of aiand only depends on the electoral cost ajfor the opponent. Hence,
18any increase in aisimply decreases the likelihood of ibeing in a better position (non-weak
favorite or strong challenger) in a still-open election, an d it is therefore detrimental.
A Proofs
A.1 Useful Lemmas
In this section we present results which we use in the paper. M ost of these results are simple
computation and are omitted from the main text for the ease of reading.
Lemma 1. Suppose x1‰x2and without loss of generality x1ăx2. Candidate 1has
secured the election if and only if mP pm,mqwith
m:“αx1´x2
α´1_0
m:“αx1`x2
α`1
candidate 2has secured the election if and only if mP pn,nqwith
n:“αx2`x1
α`1
n:“αx2´x1
α´1^1
Proof.candidate 1 has secured the election when u1
mpx1,x1q ąmax
yu2
mpx2,yq. After sim-
pliﬁcation, we ﬁnd that it is the case when:
pm´x2q2ą1`a
apm´x1q2
A case by case analysis (whether măx1,mP rx1,x2sormąx2gives that candidate 1
has secured the election if mP pαx1´x2
α´1,αx1`x2
α`1q. Because mhas a support in r0,1sthat
ismP pm,mq. The computations are symmetric for candidate 2. We easily v erify that
măx1ămăx1`x2
2ănăx2ăn.
Lemma 2. Consider the ex-post platform that maximizes the utility of t he median voter
from candidate i:
ˆyi“argmax
yiumpxi,yiq “m`axi
1`a
We have:
1. If candidate iis the favorite, any platform yiR txi,ˆyiuis either dominated by or
redundant with a strategy in txi,ˆyiu.
192. If candidate iis the challenger, any platform yiR txi,ˆyiuis weakly-dominated by the
platform ˆyi.
3. Weakly dominated actions are not played in equilibrium.
Hence, at equilibrium, candidates select ˆyiwhen they adjust their platforms.
Proof.Suppose w.l.o.g. that candidate 1 is the favorite. For any pa ir of ex-ante platforms
px1,x2q, we deﬁne W1:“ ty1|u1
mpx1,y1q ąmax
y2u2
mpx2,y2qu, the set of policies of candidate 1
that guarantee him to win the election.
1. By deﬁnition, ˆ y1PW1. In addition, If x1PW1, any action y1‰x1is strictly
dominated by x1becausex1yields a payoﬀ of 1 and any other actions yields at most 1 ´φ,
hence it is strictly dominated by x1.
Ifx1RW1, any action y1PW1,y1‰ˆy1is redundant with ˆ y1and any action y1R
W1,y1‰x1is weakly dominated by ˆ y1. Indeed, consider yPW1ztˆy1u. Bothyand ˆy1
ensure a victory with payoﬀ 1 ´φregardless of the platform of candidate 2. Hence, yis
redundant with ˆ y1.
Consider instead yRW1,y‰x1. Consider strategy σthat chooses ywith positive
probability and strategy σ1which is identical to σ, except that it plays ˆ y1instead of y.
Then the payoﬀ of candidate 1 with σ1is weakly higher than with σregardless of the
strategy of candidate 2. Indeed, the expected payoﬀ when usi ngyincludes a term of the
formp´φ, wherepistheprobabilitytowinwhenusing yagainst thestrategy ofcandidate2,
while the corresponding term when using ˆ y1is 1´φ, as ˆy1wins with probability 1. The
other terms in the expected payoﬀ remain the same.
2. Any strategy that chooses yR tˆy2,x2uwith some positive probability is weakly
dominated by a strategy that transfers this probability to ˆ y2. In both cases, φis paid, but
u2
mpx2,ˆy2q ąu2
mpx2,yqso ˆy2wins in all the events in which ywins (and possibly in other
events), resulting in a weakly higher payoﬀ.
3. Weakly dominated action cannot be played in equilibrium. Suppose yRW1,y‰x1
and suppose that in equilibrium, candidate 1 plays ywith positive probability. Then his
expected payoﬀ when choosing y(which, by indiﬀerence, is his equilibrium payoﬀ) is p´φ
wherepis the probability of winning the election, pď1. Ifpă1, then ˆy1is a proﬁtable
deviation of candidate 1 as he obtains 1 ´φ. Ifp“1, candidate 2 always looses the
election and his expected payoﬀ is non-positive. Then in equ ilibrium candidate 2 must
choosey2“x2which grants a payoﬀ of 0, and candidate 1 again has a proﬁtabl e deviation
20toy1“x1which yields a payoﬀ of 1. This contradicts the assumption th atyis played with
positive probability in equilibrium.
A.2 Proof of Proposition 1
If the favorite candidate has secured the election, he has a s trictly dominant strategy yi“xi
whosebestreplyforthechallenger is yj“xj. Hencethis istheuniquesubgameequilibrium.
If the election is still open, by Lemma 2, we can limit the analysis to the 2 ˆ2 game in
Table1. The game has no pure strategy equilibria. The unique mixed s trategy equilibrium
is such that bothcandidates are indiﬀerent between the two pu restrategies, given the mixed
strategy of the opponent. Hence the probability pof playing ˆ yifor the favorite candidate
solves
´pφ` p1´pqp1´φq “0ñp“1´φ,
and the probability qof playing ˆ yifor the challenger candidate solves
p1´φq “ p1´qq ñ q“φ.
A.3 Proof of Proposition 3
We perform a backward analysis by supposing that after choos ing actions x1,x2, players
play the second-stage equilibrium provided in Proposition 1and Proposition 2.
We ﬁrst show that in equilibrium, the best response to a certa in ex-ante platform is
never a more extreme platform to the same side. Formally and w ithout loss of generality,
ifx2ă1
2thenBR1px2q ěx2, and ifx2ą1
2thenBR1px2q ďx2, whereBR1is the best
response ex-ante platform of Candidate 1 to the ex-ante plat formx2of Candidate 2.
To prove that, we show that if x1ăx2ă1
2theng1px1,x2q ăg1p1´x1,x2q. By the
uniform distribution of m,g1px1,x2q “g1p1´x1,1´x2q. Hence, proving g1px1,x2q ă
g1p1´x1,x2qis equivalent to proving that g1px1,x2q ăg1px1,1´x2q. Whenx1ăx2ă1
2
and Candidate 2 moves from x2to 1 ´x2:
•candidate 1 is the favorite more often asx1`x2
2increases with x2.
•candidate 1 secures the election more often as both mincreases and mdecreases with
x2.
We conclude that the expected payoﬀ g1of candidate 1 is larger, given g1“1ˆPp1 FS q `
p1´φq ˆPp1 FO q. We can therefore suppose that x2ě1
2and conclude that the best
21response of Candidate 1 belongs to r0,x2s.5The case where x2ď1
2andx2ďx1is
symmetric.
Forx1ăx2, in each region of the graph in Figure 1, the payoﬀ is determined by
Proposition 1:6
•IfmP pm,mq, candidate 1 has secured the election and his second-stage e quilibrium
payoﬀ is 1.
•IfmP r0,mq Y pm,x1`x2
2q, candidate 1 has secured the election and his second-stage
equilibrium payoﬀ is 1 ´φ.
•IfmP px1`x2
2,1s, candidate 1 is the challenger and his second-stage equilib rium payoﬀ
is 0.
Because mis uniformly drawn on the unit interval, the ex-ante payoﬀ of candidate 1 is
g1px1,x2q “ pm´mq ` p1´φq`x1`x2
2´m`m´0˘
Substituting the values of mandmfrom Lemma 1, we have that for x1ăx2
g1pr,xq “#
x1p1´φ
2`φα
α`1q `x2p1´φ
2`φ
α`1qif 0ďx1ďx2
α
x1p1´φ
2´2φα
α2´1q `x2p1´φ
2`2φα
α2´1qifx2
αăx1ăx2
The payoﬀ function g1is therefore increasing with x1in the region r0,x2
αs. In the region
rx2
α,x2q, the function g1decreases with x1when1´φ
2´2φα
α2´1ă0, which is equivalent to
φąα2´1
α2`4α´1“1
1`4?
ap1`aq“Ψpaq
It follows that the best response to x2for candidate 1 in the region r0,x2qisx˚
1px2q “x2
α.
If instead x1“x2, then according to Proposition 2the payoﬀ g1is1
2´φ, regardless of x2.
Note that by choosing x1“x2´ǫ, the payoﬀ g1would be x2p1´φq, which is always greater
than1
2´φfor anyx2ě1
2andφą0. Hence x1“x2cannot be a best reply for candidate 1.
The same arguments apply to candidate 2 for any x1ď1
2. The function g2is increasing
withx2in the rx1,1´1´x1
αsregion and decreasing with x2in the r1´1´x1
α,1sregion,
whenφąΨpaq.Hence, the best response to x1for candidate 2 in the region px1,1sis
x˚
2px1q “1´1´x1
α. Choosing x2“x1cannot be optimal as it is dominated by x2“x1`ǫ.
To conclude, when φąΨpaqthe function g1admits a global maximum in x˚
1px2q “x2
α
and the function g2admits a global maximum in x˚
2px1q “1´1´x1
α. In equilibrium, both
5In the border case where x2“1
2, both sides of x2are symmetric and for every best response x1in
rx2,1s, the ex-ante platform 1 ´x1P r0,x2sis also a best response.
6We can safely ignore null probability events regarding the b oundaries, such as m“m.
22candidates best respond to each other, and these two equatio ns provide the unique proﬁle:
x˚
1“1
α`1andx˚
2“α
α`1. The payoﬀs associated with these locations are:
g˚
1“g˚
2“1
2´φ
2ˆα´1
α`1˙2
A.4 Proof of Proposition 4
According to the proof of Proposition 3, sinceφăΨpaq, the payoﬀ g1is strictly increasing
withx1in the r0,x2qregion. The unique possible equilibrium is then x1“x2, where the
payoﬀ is discontinuous. At the limit x1Ñx2, bothmandmconverge to x2, so:
lim
x1Ñx2g1px1,x2q “lim
x1Ñx2x1`x2
2p1´φq `φpm´mq “x2p1´φq
On the other hand, the second stage equilibrium when x1“x2yields a payoﬀ of g1“1
2´φ.
The condition for equilibrium can then be written x2p1´φq ď1
2´φor equivalently x2ď
1
2´φ
1´φ. Because 0 ăφă1
2the right hand side of the previous inequality is smaller tha n1
2,
sox2ă1
2. By repeating the same calculation for candidate 2, we obtai n thatx1“x2is an
equilibrium only when x1ą1
2, which cannot hold with x1“x2andx2ă1
2.
We now prove that if φăΨpaq,px1,x2q “ p1
2´ǫ,1
2`ǫqis anǫ-equilibrium. Based
on the expression computed in subsection A.3, candidate 1’s payoﬀ is g1p1
2´ǫ,1
2`ǫq “
p1
2´ǫqp1´φ
2´2φα
α2´1q ` p1
2`ǫqp1´φ
2`2φα
α2´1q “1´φ
4`ǫ4αφ
α2´1. On the other hand, because
φăΨpaq,g1px1,1
2`ǫqis increasing with x1in the region r0,1
2`ǫq, therefore we can bound
from above the possible payoﬀ of candidate 1 by lim
x1Ò1
2`ǫgpx1,1
2`ǫq “1´Φ
4`ǫ1´φ
2. The
loss of candidate 1 when playing1
2´ǫis
lim
x1Ñ1
2´ǫg1px1,1
2`ǫq ´g1p1
2´ǫ,1
2`ǫq “1´φ
4`ǫ1´φ
2´1´φ
4`ǫ4αφ
α2´1
“ǫˆ1´φ
2´4αφ
α2´1˙
Ñ0 asǫÑ0.
A.5 Proof of Proposition 5
(i) Based on Proposition 1and3, the election is open if and only if mP”
2α
pα`1q2,α2`1
pα`1q2ı
.
On the other hand, x˚
1is on the left of this interval and x˚
2on the right. Because candidate
ieventually ﬂip-ﬂops to ˆ yi“m`ax˚
i
1`a, he ﬂip-ﬂops towards the center.
(ii) At the mixed equilibrium played in the second stage, if the e lection is still open, the
favorite candidate ﬂip-ﬂops with probability 1 ´φą1
2and that the challenger ﬂip-ﬂops
with probability φă1
2.
23(iii) Based on Eq. ( 3), the optimal platforms ˆ y1and ˆy2are the same weighted average of m
and respectively x1andx2. If player 1 is the favorite, x1is closer to mthanx2. Therefore,
the distance between ˆ y1andx1is smaller than the distance between ˆ y2andx2.
(iv) By point ( ii) and the fact that a favorite candidate ialways wins if he moves to ˆ yi.
A.6 Proof of Proposition 6
(i) Based on Proposition 3, equilibrium location are given by´
1
1`α,α
1`α¯
. The distance be-
tween ex-ante platforms is therefore equal toα´1
α`1which is increasingwith α, thus decreasing
witha.
(ii) Propositions 1and3together prove that at equilibrium, the election is still op en with
probability´
α´1
α`1¯2
which is also increasing with α, thus decreasing with a. Conditionally
on the election to be still open, the likelihood of ﬂip-ﬂoppi ng does not depend on a(it is
1´φandφfor the favorite and the challenger respectively).
(iii) Proposition 3gives that equilibrium payoﬀs are decreasing with the probab ility of the
election to be still open´
α´1
α`1¯2
, so this claim is a corollary of claim ( ii).
A.7 Proof of Proposition 7
We follow the proof of the symmetric competition (Appendix A.2andA.3) and discuss the
diﬀerences. First, the optimal ex-post positions (given by E q. (3) in the symmetric case)
diﬀers with ai: we ﬁnd ˆ yi“m`aixi
1`ai. A candidate with a larger aiis more penalized by the
voters andchanges less hisex-ante platformthan hisoppone nt. Second, theinterval of mfor
which each candidate has secured the election generalizes t opm,mq “ pα2x1´x2
α2´1_0,α2x1`x2
α2`1q
for candidate 1 and pn,nq “ pα1x2`x1
α1`1,α1x2´x1
α1´1^1qfor candidate 2, where αi“b
1`ai
ai.
Notice that the region where each candidate has secured the e lection does not depend on his
own parameter αibut on his opponent’s. The intuition is that the region where candidate
ihas secured the election is the region where he wins the elect ion without moving, so
the penalty for his movement does not play a role. Moreover, t he larger aj, the smaller
movement of candidate jtowards themedianvoter andthereforetheregionwherecand idate
ihas secured the election is on a broader region of possible m.
Next, we solve the inequality u1
mpx1,ˆy1q ąu2
mpx2,ˆy2q, which holds for măα1x2`α2x1
α1`α2:“
˜m. Note that ˜ mąx1`x2
2fora1ăa2with equality when a1“a2. Hence, in the region
`x1`x2
2,˜m˘
candidate 2 is favorite, the election is still open and candi date 2 cannot defend
his advantage: whencandidate 1 moves to ˆ y1, he wins the election regardless of the action of
candidate2. Sincecandidate1loses theelection ifhedoesn ot move, movingis adominating
24strategy and in this region the optimal strategy for candida te 1 is to move, for candidate 2
not to move and the payoﬀ is p1´φ,0q.
Note that the organizational costs are unchanged, so the sec ond stage remains strictly
identical to Proposition 1formR`x1`x2
2,˜m˘
. Moreover, the payoﬀ in`x1`x2
2,˜m˘
is exactly
the same as the expected payoﬀ in the region where candidate 1 is favorite and the election
is still open, so, although the second stage strategy is diﬀer ent, in terms of continuation
payoﬀ we can analyze the ﬁrst stage as if candidate 1 is favori te and the election is still
open in the region rm,˜msinstead of rm,x1`x2
2s.
Finally, repeating the argument in Appendix A.3, we ﬁnd that it is necessary and suﬃ-
cient to have φąΨpa1qto guarantee the existence of a best response of candidate 1, which
is given by x1px2q “x2
α2, and analogously, we have x2px1q “1´1´x1
α1whenφąΨpa2q.
Together, we conclude that if φąmaxpΨpa1q,Ψpa2qq, thenx˚
1“α1´1
α1α2´1andx˚
2“α2pα1´1q
α1α2´1.
If any of the thresholds is higher than the organizational co st, there exists no equilibrium.
References
James Adams, Michael Clark, Lawrence Ezrow, and Garrett Gla sgow. Understanding
change and stability in party ideologies: Do parties respon d to public opinion or to
past election results? British journal of political science , 34(4):589–610, 2004.
James Adams, Michael Clark, LawrenceEzrow, andGarrettGla sgow. Arenicheparties fun-
damentally diﬀerent from mainstream parties? the causes and the electoral consequences
of western european parties’ policy shifts, 1976–1998. American Journal of Political Sci-
ence, 50(3):513–529, 2006.
MarinaAgranov. Flip-ﬂopping, primaryvisibility, andthe selection ofcandidates. American
Economic Journal: Microeconomics , 8(2):61–85, 2016.
Alberto Alesina. Credibility and policy convergence in a tw o-party system with rational
voters.The American Economic Review , 78(4):796–805, 1988.
Giovanni Andreottola. Flip-ﬂopping and electoral concern s.The Journal of Politics , 83(4):
1669–1680, 2021.
ScottAshworth. Campaignﬁnanceandvoterwelfarewithentr enchedincumbents. American
Political science review , 100(1):55–68, 2006.
25Scott Ashworth and Ethan Bueno De Mesquita. Elections with p latform and valence com-
petition. Games and Economic Behavior , 67(1):191–216, 2009.
Pau Balart, Agustin Casas, and Orestis Troumpounis. Techno logical change, campaign
spending and polarization. Journal of Public Economics , 211:104666, 2022.
M Daniel Bernhardt and Daniel E Ingberman. Candidate reputa tions and the ‘incumbency
eﬀect’.Journal of Public Economics , 27(1):47–67, 1985.
Timothy Besley and Stephen Coate. An economic model of repre sentative democracy. The
quarterly journal of economics , 112(1):85–114, 1997.
James M Carlson and Kathleen Dolan. The waﬄe phenomenon and c andidates’ image.
Psychological Reports , 57(3):795–798, 1985.
Stephen Coate. Political competition with campaign contri butions and informative adver-
tising.Journal of the European Economic Association , 2(5):772–804, 2004.
Sarah E Croco. The ﬂipside of ﬂip-ﬂopping: Leader inconsist ency, citizen preferences, and
the war in iraq. Foreign Policy Analysis , 12(3):237–257, 2016.
Jason Matthew DeBacker. Flip-ﬂopping: Ideological adjust ment costs in the united states
senate.Economic Inquiry , 53(1):108–128, 2015.
David Doherty, Conor M Dowling, and Michael G Miller. When is changing policy positions
costly for politicians? experimental evidence. Political Behavior , 38(2):455–484, 2016.
Anthony Downs. An economic theory of political action in a de mocracy. Journal of political
economy, 65(2):135–150, 1957.
James M Enelow and Michael C Munger. The elements of candidat e reputation: The eﬀect
of record and credibility on optimal spatial location. Public choice , 77(4):757–772, 1993.
Erik Eyster and Thomas Kittsteiner. Party platforms in elec toral competition with hetero-
geneous constituencies. Theoretical Economics , 2(1):41–70, 2007.
Amihai Glazer and Marc Robbins. Congressional responsiven ess to constituency change.
American Journal of Political Science , pages 259–273, 1985.
Hillary S Hoﬀman and Charles S Carver. Political waﬄing: Its e ﬀects on the evaluations of
observers 1. Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 14(4):375–385, 1984.
26Harold Hotelling. Stability in competition. The Economic Journal , 39(153):41–57, 1929.
Patrick Hummel. Flip-ﬂopping from primaries to general ele ctions.Journal of Public Eco-
nomics, 94(11-12):1020–1027, 2010.
Daniel E Ingberman. Reputational dynamics in spatial compe tition.Mathematical and
Computer Modelling , 12(4-5):479–496, 1989.
Yuichiro Kamada and Michihiro Kandori. Revision games. Econometrica , 88(4):1599–1630,
2020.
Yuichiro Kamada and Takuo Sugaya. Optimal timing of policy a nnouncements in dynamic
election campaigns. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 135(3):1725–1797, 2020.
David Karol. Party position change in American politics: Coalition manag ement. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2009.
NavinKartikandRPrestonMcAfee. Signalingcharacter inel ectoral competition. American
Economic Review , 97(3):852–870, 2007.
Thad Kousser, Jeﬀrey B Lewis, and Seth E Masket. Ideological a daptation? the survival
instinct of threatened legislators. The Journal of Politics , 69(3):828–843, 2007.
Eric Maskin and Jean Tirole. The politician and the judge: Ac countability in government.
American Economic Review , 94(4):1034–1054, 2004.
Kristina Miler. Legislative responsiveness to constituen cy change. American Politics Re-
search, 44(5):816–843, 2016.
MartinJOsborneandAlSlivinski. Amodelofpolitical compe tition withcitizen-candidates.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 111(1):65–96, 1996.
Carlo Prato and Stephane Wolton. Campaign cost and electora l accountability. Political
Science Research and Methods , 7(1):1–21, 2019.
JoshuaRobison. Therole of elite accounts inmitigating the negative eﬀects of repositioning.
Political Behavior , 39(3):609–628, 2017.
AvnerShakedandJohnSutton. Relaxingpricecompetition th roughproductdiﬀerentiation.
The review of economic studies , pages 3–13, 1982.
27Randolph T Stevenson. The economy and policy mood: a fundame ntal dynamic of demo-
cratic politics? American Journal of Political Science , pages 620–633, 2001.
James A Stimson. Public opinion in america: Moods, cycles, a nd swings, transforming
american politics, 1991.
James A Stimson, Michael B MacKuen, and Robert S Erikson. Dyn amic representation.
American political science review , 89(3):543–565, 1995.
Thomas Stratmann. Congressional voting over legislative c areers: Shifting positions and
changing constraints. American Political Science Review , 94(3):665–676, 2000.
Margit Tavits. Principle vs. pragmatism: Policy shifts and political competition. American
Journal of Political Science , 51(1):151–165, 2007.
Jean Tirole. The theory of industrial organization . MIT press, 1988.
Michael Tomz and Robert Van Houweling. Political repositio ning.Unpublished Manuscript ,
2012.
Alexei V Zakharov. A model of candidate location with endoge nous valence. Public Choice ,
138(3):347–366, 2009.
28