arXiv:2305.16980v1  [cs.SI]  26 May 2023Spawning Nodes Generate Deterministic Scale-Free Network s
Peter R. Conwell,∗Kaushik Chakram, and Valeria J. Villegas-Medina
(Dated: 5/25/2013)
In this paper we present a deterministic vertex spawning mod el that yields a scale-free network.
Themodel speciﬁes thataparentvertexproducesachildvert exinatime intervalapproximatelypro-
portional to the current time and inversely proportional to the number of edges currently connected
to the parent. Spawned oﬀspring maintain an undirected edge with its parent. No information
about the network as a whole is required to obtain scale-inva riant behavior. Although the algorithm
is deterministic, the number of nodes spawning in a small tim e interval quickly becomes random-
ized. We show theoretically and with simulations that such a spawned network will have a degree
distribution obeying a power law with exponent 2.5. Simulat ions show that the distribution matches
a Zipf distribution.
∗Emeritus Professor, Physics, Westminster College, Salt La ke City, UT, peterrconwell@gmail.com2
I. INTRODUCTION
Viewed through a certain lens almost any aggregate object, physic al or abstract, can be seen as a network of simple
nodes (vertices) and the connections between them (edges). Su ch a network perspective can be a propitious tool
to describe generalized topology, growth, and aggregation of disp arate entities ranging from the organization of the
internet to social interactions. Indeed, network research has b ecome a discipline in and of itself. [3],[6],[10]
Albert-L´ aszl´ o Barab´ asi and R´ eka Albert seemingly initiated a ph ase transition in network research with their 1999
Science article [4]. They re-discovered that networks evolving with new node s attaching preferentially to existing
nodes obey a power law distribution
pk=Ck−α, (1)
wherepkis the probability of a node having kconnections, Cis a normalization constant, and α= 3. Networks
that have a power law distribution are said to be scale-free or scale- invariant. The key feature of a scale-free network
is the long tail of the distribution. This means that there are nodes, albeit sparse, that have a large number of
connections. In general, scale-invariance implies that there exists a fundamental relation that doesn’t change when
some independent variable is multiplied by constant. This is evident in eq uation 1: if kis scaled by an arbitrary
constant, the only factor that changes is the normalization const antC. Scale invariance is a symmetry. Like any
symmetry, it simpliﬁes the attendant model of any physical system s it represents.
Barab´ asi and Albert’s Sciencearticle, with its emphasis on the scale-invariant symmetry of power la w distributions,
struck a chord with physicists primed by the simplicity of scale-invaria nt symmetries [16]. They found that the scale-
free property emerged from two biases. First, nodes are linked to existing nodes, consequently older nodes receive
more connections. This ﬁrst bias is a natural consequence of any e volving network where the growth consists of a
steady addition of new nodes and their subsequent connections. S econd, the new connections are attached to existing
nodes with a probability proportional to the number of connections preexisting on a potential target. This latter bias
they dubbed preferential-linking. As preferential linking is probabilis tically dependent on the degree of connections
of the existing nodes, it implies that global knowledge is available and ut ilized in order to make new attachments.
Barab´ asi and Albert were not the ﬁrst to recognize the applicabilit y of power law distributions to a wide assortment
of natural phenomenon. In fact, Barab´ asi discusses the histo ry of the mathematics and applications of power law
distributions that preceded the 1999 paper in ([3] pp. 116, 189). P articularly relevant are Herbert Simon’s investiga-
tions of distributions, like power laws, that have long tails[14]. Derek d e Solla Price was perhaps the ﬁrst to utilize
preferential-linking in a network model ([12],[11]) of scientiﬁc citations , and he highlighted the power law behavior.
Mark Newman presented a cogent and detailed re-examination of th e Price model, in ([10] pp 487-513).
V´ azquez [15] and Nather, et al. [8] have presented models of evolv ing networks with local rules. In [8] Nather et al
demonstrate a model that is scale-free and yields hierarchical clus tering. Similarly, in the model by V´ azquez, nodes
are connected to previous nodes in the neighborhood of the new no de. The networks generated are also scale-free
and demonstrate a natural clustering hierarchy. In both of thes e models connections are made probabilistically to
nearby nodes. Consequently they require knowledge of their neigh borhood. In contrast, our intent is to eliminate any
requirement for knowledge of external topology. The only local co nnections in our network are the connection from
the parent to a child and vice versa.
Here we present a local, deterministic, scale-invariant growth mode l that is neither probabilistic in how connections
are made nor one that require global knowledge of the connection d egree of any other nodes. This new model satisﬁes
a diﬀerent sort of preferential attachment. Nodes are spawned by existing nodes at a rate approximately proportional
to the number of connections possessed by the parent and invers ely proportional to time elapsed since the initial
birth of the ﬁrst node. Nodes with more connections spawn faster . Our intent with this scheme was to eliminate
any requirement for knowledge of external topology and still obta in scale-invariant symmetry. In particular, we were
drawn to the idea that oﬀspring could oﬀer positive reproductive fe edback. The only local connections in our network
are the parent to child and vice versa. Consequently, if the connec tion to an oﬀspring providedadditional reproductive
energy, a parent’s fecundity increases. Figure 1 shows such a con structed network of one hundred nodes.
This idea of rapid unlimited nodal growth by nodes giving birth to new no des was inspired by inﬂation models of
the early universe. From an energy perspective, the fuelfor the enhanced growth in our model has to come from some
inﬁnitely large nutrient rich environment. Similarly, In inﬂationary models, the energy densit y is ﬁxed by a scalar
ﬁeld which provides the fuel for the expansion. This runs contrary to the usual conception that density is inversely
proportional to volume. For a pedestrian view see [7, p. 170])
Ours is not the only scale-free deterministic model. In [5], Barab´ asi et al. demonstrate a clever copying scheme. As
the network grows, patches of the network are copied and attac hed to the existing network.The resulting network has
a degree exponent of α=log(3)
log(2). Obviously, this scheme requires knowledge of previous parts of th e current network.
In the next section we present the model details and simulations. In section III, we discuss the theoretical under-
pinnings, in IV we show the results of the simulations and compare the m with theoretical predictions of the degree3
FIG. 1. A spawned network of one hundred nodes. The node with t he most connections, roughly centered in the ﬁgure, is node
1, the seed node. The node just to its right is node 2.
distributions, and in V we oﬀer conclusions and a review.
II. MODEL SIMULATION
We simulated the model using the methods outlined by Newman in [10] ( pp. 282-290). The simulation software
maintains the network by labeling every new node with an integer and n otes whenever that node spawns. At time
t= 1 we assume that node 1 simply exists and is a starting seed for the n etwork. Further, we assume that node 1
birthed node 2 at t= 2, and they are connected with an undirected link. Thus, the simula tion begins at t= 3 with
the two connected nodes. Node 1 is initialized to spawn at t= 3; node 2 at t= 4. At each subsequent time step all
existing nodes are examined to see if they are ready to spawn. Ever y node has an internal countdown timer. When
a node is examined, and its timer is zero, the following occurs: 1) a nod e spawns a new node, 2) the parent’s timer
is reset to be current time divided by the number of connections of t he parent minus one. 3) As it has no previous
connections, the child’s count-down timer is set to be proportional to the current time minus one. 4) an undirected
edge is established between the parent node and oﬀspring. 5) Durin g this examination of all nodes, nodes that don’t
spawn havetheir timers decremented by one. After all the nodes a re examined for the possibility of spawning, external
time is incremented by one.
For example, consider the timeline of node 2 just after it spawns at t imet= 4. It has one prior connection—the
connection from node 1. Therefore node 2’s timer is set to 4 /1−1 = 3. It will spawn again when its timer decrements
to zero. Misleadingly, because the simulation is serialized, it requires f our time steps until it spawns again. On the
third subsequent time increment, at t= 7, the timer steps down to zero. However, it is not discovered unt il the clock
ticks one more time, and all nodes are examined to see if their timer is z ero. So, node 2 will spawn again when t= 8.
Figure 2 shows the raw result of a simulation in the form of a log-log plot of the number of connections verses the
node label. The simulation generated a total 1 million nodes. Since many nodes can be produced in a single external
time step, only about 30,000 such steps are required to produce a n etwork of this size.
The deterministic nature of the model is evident by examining the spa wning times of individual nodes. Let T(n)
be the time of a node spawning for the nthtime. Since a node acquires another connection when it spawns, nis also
equal to the number of connections. Following the description of mo del, the relation between the time of the nth
spawning and the previous spawning time is given by the recursion rela tion
T(n) =T(n−1)+T(n−1)
n−1. (2)
With the speciﬁcation of the ﬁrst spawning time, we can use Eq.(2) to ﬁnd the time of spawning of any oﬀspring
of any node. As an example we can compute the 4 thspawning time of the second node. The initial spawning time of
node 2 is 4, so T(1) = 4. Applying Eq(2) once gives the second spawning time 8, twice g ives 12, and three times 16,
thusT(4) = 16. In fact, if T(1) =T0is the ﬁrst spawning time of a node, then it is readily seen that T(n) =nT0is
thenthspawning time.4
FIG. 2. Log-Log Plot of Number of Connections vs. Node Label. The 1st, 2nd, and 3rd nodes are highlighted in red.
III. THEORY
In this section, we leverage the theory behind the model developed by Derek de Solla Price in the 1970s [11] and in
Newman’smasterequationalternativeanalysistothe Pricemodel in Networks ([10] pp. 487-495). Price’spicturesque
analogy of negatively decaying atoms mirrors our spawning nodes. W e also leaned on Newman’s analysis of the Yule
process in [9].
Letnbe the total number of nodes in the network at the current time. I n the usual way we separate the overall
collection of nodes into non-overlapping sets. Every node in a set ha s the same number of connections. Diﬀerent sets
have nodes with a diﬀerent number of connections, q. By the nodes spawning, the set with qconnections feeds the
set of nodes with q+1 connections, while gaining nodes from the set with q−1. Whenever any node spawns in any of
the sets, the child enters the set of q= 1. This q= 1 set loses members to the q= 2 set whenever any of its members
spawn. Because it contains all the most recent oﬀspring, this set w ill always have the most members. Subsequently,
we will develop an expression of the degree distribution : the fraction of all nodes in each set. Let pq(n) be that
distribution.
Consider the case when a single node in any set spawns. First note th at the population of the entire network
increases by one. Second, a spawning parent automatically receive s a connection from its oﬀspring. Consequently, a
parent node will move from a set of nodes with qconnections to the set of nodes with q+1. As we discussed in the
previous section, the time interval before the next spawning is app roximately proportional to the current time divided
by the number of connections. Therefore, the spawning rate , the inverse of that time interval, will be approximately
proportionaltothe numberofconnectionsdivided bythe current time. Anynodewith thesamenumberofconnections
is equally likely to spawn in some short time interval. The more connectio ns a node has, the higher the likelihood of it
spawning. However, the probability of a node spawning cannot be st rictly proportional to the number of connections.
(This issue is discussed at length in [10] and in [11].) The probability of a s pawning must be proportional to the
number of connections plus some additive constant: q+a. In our case a= 1.) To normalize the probability of a node
spawning, we divide by the sum over all the nodes in the network plus o ne. Thus, the probability of a node spawning
is
q+1/summationtextn
i(qi+1)=q+1/summationtextn
iqi+/summationtextn
i1. (3)
We can simplify this result by utilizing the average number of connectio ns per node. Let Qbe the total number
of connections for all nodes. From our simulations, with N= 1,000,000, we have Q=/summationtextN
i=1qi= 1,999,998. So,
< q >= 2. Eq.(3) then becomes
q+1
2n+n. (4)
The denominator of Eq.(4) then becomes 3 nand the probability of a node spawning is
q+1
3n. (5)5
If the average number of connections per node is two, then the an ticipated number of new connections due to nodes
spawning is
2q+1
3n. (6)
From the deﬁnition of pq(n) as the fraction of nodes that have q connections, we see that th ere arenpq(n) nodes
within a set of nodes with q connections. Consequently, the assume d number of spawnings within some small time
interval for nodes with qconnections is
npq(n)2(q+1)
3n=2(q+1)
3pq(n). (7)
Reiterating: when parent nodes with q−1connections spawn they movefrom the set of nodes with q−1connections
to the set of nodes with qconnections. Therefore, the expected number of nodes that ma ke this jump and add to the
set of q connections is
2
3qpq−1(n). (8)
Similarly, the expected number of nodes in the set with qconnections that will be lost will be
2(q+1)
3pq(n). (9)
The change in the number of nodes for the set with nodes of qconnection is then the number of nodes that jump
into the set minus the number of nodes that jump out of the set:
(n+1)pq(n+1)−npq=2
3qpq−1(n)−2(q+1)
3pq(n). (10)
Eq.(10) is the master equation for our spawning process. It is valid f or all values of qgreater than 1. By ﬁrst letting
n→ ∞, we iterate Eq.(10) with an appropriate initial value for p1to generate an asymptotic form of pq. (Notionally
we will indicate this transition to large nby simply writing pqinstead of pq(n).)
For the initial case of q= 1, we gain a child node when any node in the network spawns, thus th e ﬁrst term on the
right in Eq.(10) is simply one. The initial condition is then
p1= 1−4
3p1, (11)
or
p1=3
7. (12)
We can also rearrange and simplify Eq.(10) to get
pq=q
5
2+qpq−1 (13)
We iterate Eq(13) starting with p1=3
7. Two constants, µ=7
2andδ=3
7, facilitates recognizing and simplifying
patterns. The resulting expression after iterating is:
pq=δ(1+1)(1+2)(1+3) ···(1+(q−1))
1
µ(µ+1)(µ+2)(µ+3)···(µ+(q−1). (14)6
Gamma functions with integer arguments are often associated with expression like that in Eq.(14). For example, we
can use the identity below, Eq.(15) (see [2] pg. 256),
x(x+1)(x+2)···(x+n−1) =Γ(x+n)
Γ(x), (15)
to transformandsimplify Eq.(14) intoexpressionsinvolvinggammafu nctions. With this identity equation 14becomes
µδΓ(1+q)Γ(µ)
Γ(µ+q), (16)
where we have used Γ(1) = 1 .
The asymptotic form we seek is easier to ﬁnd if we convert some of th e gamma functions to beta functions using
the identity,
Γ(x+y) =Γ(x)Γ(y)
B(x,y). (17)
Applying Eq.(17) to Eq.(16) yields,
µδB(µ,q)
B(1,q). (18)
Whenxis large and yis ﬁxed, the asymptotic form of the beta function is B( x,y)∼Γ(y)x−y. Using this result
in Eq.(18) with qlarge, we get
µδΓ(µ)q1−µ. (19)
Substituting the values of the constants, and Γ(7
2) =15√π
8into Eq.(19), we obtain the asymptotic form for pq,
pq∼45√π
16q−5
2. (20)
For large values of qEq.(20) shows the classic power law behavior with α= 2.5.
IV. RESULTS
The simulation aggregates nodes with the same number of connectio ns into sets. Consequently, we can explicitly
examine the growth of these sets. In particular, we study their ov erall growth rate and how set membership changes
per unit time.The simulation shows that the number of nodes from all s ets increases slowly initially then accelerates
obeying the power law,
y= 0.27t1.46. (21)
With successively decreasing importance, nodes with the smallest nu mber of connections dominate overall network
growth. For instance, nodes with just one connection provide abo ut 60% of the nodes out of a total of 1 ,000,000.
Nodes with two connections provide 7% of the total. Since the overa ll network growth obeys a power law, it is
not surprising that the nodal growth of individual sets of nodes wit h the same number of connections show similar
behavior. For instance, growth for nodes in the set with two conne ctions obey the power law
y= 0.018t1.47. (22)
Even though our model is deterministic, the results can be quasi-ra ndom. Unlike the behavior of some non-linear
dynamical systems, where chaotic behavior is caused by sensitivity to initial conditions, the randomness in our model7
FIG. 3. Network Growth. Overall network growth shown in dott ed blue with power law curve ﬁt in solid green. Growth of
nodes in the set with two connections is shown in dotted purpl e with power law curve ﬁt in solid red line. (The growth of the
total number of nodes looks as though it would exceed 1,000,0 00 nodes in much less time than is actually the case. This is
misleading. For y= 1,000,000 and solving for time in Eq.(21) yields x= 31,554 which is consistent with our simulations.)
FIG. 4. Number of nodes spawned per unit time from t= 1000 to t= 2000.
is a consequence ofthe inter-generationalmixing of birthing times. Because nodes arelikely to havea diﬀerent number
of connections, the timing of new births intermingle. For example, fo ur new nodes are born at t= 54. Node 1 gives
birth to its 18th oﬀspring, node 94; node 3 gives birth to its 9th oﬀsp ring, node 95; node 9 gives birth to its 4th
oﬀspring, node 96; and node 37 gives birth to its second oﬀspring, n ode 97. However, at t= 53 their are no births.
Consequently, without the maintenance of a detailed log of when eve ry node is born and its spawning times, as the
computer code provides, it is diﬃcult to predict when a particular time step has no births, or 260 births. Figure
4 oﬀers a glimpse of this noise like behavior. It shows the number of no des produced during each unit time step
over the span of t= 1000 to t= 5000. In this time range the number of nodes produced in a unit time step vary
from 0 to 260. We also generated an empirical distribution. (An empir ical distribution is a non-parametric way of
establishing a distribution-like object based on empirical data.) of th e number of nodes produced in 30,000 time
steps—the approximate number of time steps required to produce 1 ,000,000 nodes. The distribution has a mean
of 32 and a standard deviation of 440 nodes spawned. Figure 5 show s a histogram of 1000 random deviates taken
from the this distribution. Note that histogram shows a long tail. Unf ortunately the distribution is not characterized
simply by known distributions.
The simulation provides a list of the number of connections for each n ode. Recall that each node is labeled in the
order it was produced. The older nodes always have more connectio ns. Therefore the list is automatically sorted by
the decreasing number of connections. This was shown in the log-log graph in ﬁgure 2. The negative sloping straight8
FIG. 5. Histogram of the frequency of births of nodes per unit time.
line of this graph strongly hints that the network’s degree distribut ion obeys a power law. We generated another
empirical distribution from this list and took random variates to exam ine the resulting degree distribution.
Given this automatic sorting of the most connected nodes to the lea st connected, it would seem that the Zipf
distribution is a natural choice for the resulting distribution. The inc eption of Zipf’s law comes from the observation
by George Zipf that if words in any written language are sorted by th e most frequently used to the least used their
ranking follows a power law. ([13] pp. 35-37) More formally, the Zipf distribution is a discrete distribution with a
long tail. Equation 23 shows its probability mass function.
f(x) =x−(ρ+1)
/summationtextn
i=1x(ρ+1)
i, (23)
whereρis a parameter greater or equal to zero and n is a natural number.
Assuming the results indicated we had degree distribution with a powe r law of the form Eq.(1), we attempted the
methods discussed in [1] to identify the value of α. These methods require that we omit some of initial values of the
data with a parameter xmin. However, we found the methods unstable with respect to any valu e of this parameter.
We also attempted optimizing the ﬁt of the Zipf distribution paramete r to the data using diﬀerent statistical methods
and even diﬀerent discrete distributions with long tails. These metho ds consistently pointed to a Zipf distribution
with a value for ρ= 1.32. However, with this value of ρthere was a clear diﬀerence in a simple visual inspection
on a log-log plot of one minus the cumulative probability distribution (CD F) of samples of the Zipf distribution and
1−CDFof samples of the empirical distribution of our results. We are aware of the problems of relying on visual
ﬁts, nevertheless we believe that the best value of ρis 1.5. From the probability mass function Eq.(23) of the Zipf
distribution, we see that a value of ρ= 1.5 implies a power law distribution with an exponent of α= 2.5. This is
consistent with our results in III where we predicted a power law with α= 2.5. The ﬁt it oﬀers we show in Eq.(6).
In that ﬁgure we also show the Zipf distribution with a parameter ρ= 1.3.
V. CONCLUSION
We have oﬀered a new deterministic scale-invariant description of a u nique birthing process and the resulting
network. This is a network formed solely by undirected connections of parents to their children. It emerges from
the development of long chains of generations of oﬀspring and the c hildren of those oﬀspring. The older the nodes,
the longer the chains, and the larger the sub-network of oﬀspring . The network develops without information being
shared between nodes. The only requirement is that parents modu late their fecundity by making the time between
births be approximately proportional to the current time divided by the number of previous births. The power law
aspect of our model results simply from the requirement that node s with more previous births spawn more often.
Nodes must be able to maintain an internal clock in order to set their s pawning time. It is likely that the internal
timerswillneedtobesynchronized. However,itisnotcleartowhate xtentthevariousfeaturesofthemodelbreakdown9
FIG. 6. Cumulative Distributions of the Spawning Model and t he Zipf Distribution with parameter 1.5.
when the internal clocks between nodes deviate signiﬁcantly. It is p ossible that we have introduced unanticipated
artifacts because of the serial nature of the simulation. Conceiva bly, this could be addressed by randomizing the
inspection of node timers for each time step. These explorations we save for future work. Also, we attribute the issues
we had with standard statistical methods to estimate the power law exponent to be due to the unique features of our
model. Our hypothesis is twofold. First, we have a very small number of nodes with many connections. These make
the statistics unreliable for this part of the data. Second, whenev er a simulation is halted, be it for ten thousand
nodes or one million nodes it is a hard stop. There is always a large bolus o f nodes on the verge of birthing in the next
time increment. We think this biases the statistics for nodes with few connections. This too needs to be investigated
further.
The authors acknowledge the help of John Hurdle MD,PhD in their prep aration of this document.10
[1] M. E. J. Newman Aaron Clauset, Cosma Rohilla Shalizi. Pow er-law distributions in empirical data. arXiv:0706.1062v2
physics.data-an , 2009.
[2] M Abramowitz. Handbook of mathematical functions with f ormulas, graphs, and mathematical tables. Published by
General Publishing Company Ltd, Toronto, Canada, Dover Pub lications Inc., New York, USA, Card Nr. 65-12253 , 1965.
[3] Albert-L´ aszl´ o Barab´ asi. Network Science . Cambridge university press, 2016.
[4] Albert-L´ aszl´ o Barab´ asi and R´ eka Albert. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science, 286(5439):509–512, 1999.
[5] Albert-L´ aszl´ o Barab´ asi, Erzsebet Ravasz, and Tamas Vicsek. Deterministic scale-free networks. Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications , 299(3-4):559–564, 2001.
[6] Sergei N Dorogovtsev and Jos´ e FF Mendes. Evolution of networks: From biological nets to the Internet and WWW . OUP
Oxford, 2013.
[7] Alan H Guth. The inﬂationary universe: the quest for a new theory of cosmi c origins . Random House, 1998.
[8] Peter N´ ather, M´ aria Markoˇ sov´ a, and Boris Rudolf. Hi erarchy in the growing scale-free network with local rules. Physica
A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications , 388(24):5036–5044, 2009.
[9] M. E. J. Newman. Power laws, pareto distributions and zip f’s law.arXiv:0412004v3 cond-mat.stat-mech , 2006.
[10] Mark Newman. Networks: an introduction . Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2010.
[11] Derek de Solla Price. A general theory of bibliometric a nd other cumulative advantage processes. Journal of the American
society for Information science , 27(5):292–306, 1976.
[12] Derek J De Solla Price. Networks of scientiﬁc papers: Th e pattern of bibliographic references indicates the nature of the
scientiﬁc research front. Science, 149(3683):510–515, 1965.
[13] Manfred Schroeder. Fractals, chaos, power laws: Minutes from an inﬁnite paradi se. Courier Corporation, 2009.
[14] Herbert A Simon. On a class of skew distribution functio ns.Biometrika , 42(3/4):425–440, 1955.
[15] Alexei V´ azquez. Growing network with local rules: Pre ferential attachment, clustering hierarchy, and degree co rrelations.
Phys. Rev. E , 67:056104, May 2003.
[16] Kenneth G Wilson. Problems in physics with many scales o f length. Scientiﬁc American , 241(2):158–179, 1979.