Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Theory and simulation of shock waves freely
propagating through monoatomic
non-Boltzmann gas
Malte D ontgen1*
1*Chair of High Pressure Gas Dynamics, Shock Wave Laboratory,
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, 52056, Germany.
Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s):
doentgen@hgd.rwth-aachen.de;
Abstract
The eect of non-Boltzmann energy distributions on the free propa-
gation of shock waves through a monoatomic gas is investigated via
theory and simulation. First, the non-Boltzmann heat capacity ratio
, as a key property for describing shock waves, is derived from rst
principles via microcanonical integration. Second, atomistic molecular
dynamics simulations resembling a shock tube setup are used to test
the theory. The presented theory provides heat capacity ratios ranging
from the well-known = 5=3for Boltzmann energy-distributed gas to
!1for delta energy-distributed gas. The molecular dynamics simu-
lations of Boltzmann and non-Boltzmann driven gases suggest that the
shock wave propagates about 9 % slower through the non-Boltzmann
driven gas, while the contact wave appears to be about 4 % faster if it
trails non-Boltzmann driven gas. The observed slowdown of the shock
wave through applying a non-Boltzmann energy distribution was found
to be consistent with the classical shock wave equations when apply-
ing the non-Boltzmann heat capacity ratio. These fundamental ndings
provide novel insights into the behavior of non-Boltzmann gases and
might help to improve the understanding of gas dynamical phenomena.
Keywords: Microcanonical, Heat Capacity Ratio, Atomistic Molecular
Dynamics, Non-Boltzmann Shock Wave
1arXiv:2305.10243v1  [physics.flu-dyn]  17 May 2023Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
2
1 Introduction
Non-equilibrium gas dynamics are essential for describing atmospheric entry
processes [1, 2], hypersonic cruise [3], and nozzle ow [4, 5]. The mathemat-
ical formulation of such processes is well-established through the Boltzmann
equation [6, 7], which allows for a continuous description of, typically, rar-
eed gas dynamics. Non-Boltzmann dynamics of dense gases are commonly
modeled through approximate schemes, many of which use the assumption
of microcanonical equilibrium. The present work provides a microcanoni-
cal non-equilibrium derivation of the heat capacity ratio of non-Boltzmann
energy-distributed monoatomic gas. Atomistic molecular dynamics simulations
of shock waves freely propagating through Boltzmann and non-Boltzmann
energy-distributed monoatomic gases are utilized to validate the theoretical
ndings. Ultimately, the simulation results are compared to ideal equilibrium
shock calculations using non-equilibrium heat capacity ratios.
The non-equilibrium state of a monoatomic gas is characterized by vari-
ations of the number density over the entire accessible phase space, spanned
by the positions qand the momenta p. The Boltzmann equation provides
the means for continuously describing the evolution of such a non-equilibrium
state by phase space integration [7]. Solving the Boltzmann equation, however,
becomes increasingly demanding with decreasing Knudsen number, hence it
is typically applied only for rareed gas ows [6]. Probably the most popular
approach for averting the high computational eorts required for solving the
Boltzmann equation is the use of Direct Simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC),
which was pioneered by Bird [8]. For a good overview of relevant studies about
and with the DSMC method, please refer to Gallies [9].
For the transition regime from large to small Knudsen numbers, usually
more ecient, yet more approximate approaches are utilized [10]. For inter-
mediate Knudsen numbers the use of moment equations has been established,
for which Torrilon [10] provided a good overview of how moments are dened
and how these equations can be used for modeling non-equilibrium gas ows.
For the strong non-equilibrium start-up phase of a shock tube process for
instance, Au et al. [11] found that the use of moment equations allows for reli-
ably describing the rst moments of start-up, which cannot be captured by the
Navier-Stokes equation. Another example is provided in the recent special issue
on "nonequilibrium thermodynamics" edited by V an [12], in which Ottinger
et al. [13] formulated moment equations for rareed gases based on the Boltz-
mann equation, showing that the rotational extended thermodynamics (RET)
approach [14] is a special case of the general equation for the non-equilibrium
reversible-irreversible coupling (GENERIC) [15], with both approaches being
used for describing non-equilibrium gas dynamics.
With increasing gas density, i.e. decreasing Knudsen number, the models
used for describing non-equilibrum start using the assumption of Boltzmann
energy-distributed gases. Various approaches for describing non-equilibrium
thermodynamics have been developed [16], such as superstatistics [17], stochas-
tic thermodynamics [18], and local equilibrium thermodynamics [19]. TheSpringer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
3
above methodologies all aim at formulating an unied description of non-
equilibrium thermodynamics [12], yet they do not necessarily include non-
Boltzmann energy distributions, i.e. local non-equilibrium in the momentum
space. The most widely used approach for modeling microcanonical non-
equilibrium gas states is the use of distinct temperatures for distinguishable
degrees of freedom [20]. For instance, Kosareva et al. [2] recently applied a
four-temperatures kinetic model for modeling the vibrational relaxation of
CO2during atmospheric entry. This approach can generally be used to sepa-
rate excitation of translational, rotational, vibrational, and electronic degrees
of freedom, yet it is still based on the concept of the Boltzmann energy
distribution.
Besides the research on the Boltzmann equation and its derivatives for
describing non-Boltzmann energy distributions, the role of non-Boltzmann
energy distributions has been intensely investigated in the eld of theoretical
chemical kinetics recently [21, 22]. In 2015, Klippenstein and co-workers [21, 22]
revived the topic of non-Boltzmann chemical kinetics, which had probably been
initially observed in the 1970s and 1980s [23, 24, 25]. Subsequent studies by
Labbe et al. [26, 27] and by D ontgen et al. [28, 29] advanced the fundamental
understanding of non-Boltzmann chemical kinetics. In particular, the prompt
dissociation reactions of radical species was found to signicantly aect macro-
scopic properties, such as the ame speed [27] and the ignition delay time [30].
The combination of non-Boltzmann gas dynamics and non-Boltzmann chemi-
cal kinetics was intensely investigated by Kustova and co-workers [31, 2, 32, 33],
who investigated not only the role of vibrational exciation on CO2chemistry
during atmospheric entry [2], but also the behavior of N2[31], O2[32], and
CO [33] in vibrationally excited gas dynamical ows. In this context, the use
of state-to-state dynamics is widely established for describing the transition
between energy levels and chemical states [31, 34, 35, 2, 32, 33].
Non-equilibrium eects are known to or might be aecting various gas
dynamical experiments. For instance, Campbell et al. [36] compared calcu-
lated and experimentally derived thermodynamic variables for postshock states
of vibrationally excited, i.e. non-Boltzmann, gases. The authors highlighted
that vibrational excitation can lead to deviations in temperatures of up to
8 % [36]. As a less denite example, Bedin [37] found an anomalous alteration
of the velocity of a shock wave traversing a non-equilibrium plasma, which
was intensely re-investigated experimentally [38, 39] and numerically [40, 41].
The controversial discussion of the underlying mechanism is not yet fully
resolved [42], indicating the high complexity of the underlying mechanism and
non-equilibrium gas dynamics in general.
The present work will show that non-Boltzmann energy distributions aect
the heat capacity ratio, as the most relevant gas dynamical property, even
at high density conditions. First, the heat capacity ratio of a non-Boltzmann
energy-distributed monoatomic gas will be derived from rst principles by
applying and integrating a microcanonical formulation of the heat capacity
ratio, weighted by prototypical energy distributions. Second, the theoreticalSpringer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
4
dependence of the heat capacity ratio on the energy distribution will be val-
idated through atomistic molecular dynamics simulations of a monoatomic
gas for the two presently limiting energy distributions: The Boltzmann and
the delta energy distributions. Third, the shock velocities obtained through
the molecular dynamics simulations will be compared to the ideal equilibrium
shock calculations, carried out with the theoretical heat capacity ratios of the
Boltzmann and delta energy distributions. The present work will provide fun-
damental insights into the role of non-Boltzmann energy distributions on the
most fundamental gas dynamical property: The heat capacity ratio.
2 Theory
The microcanonical heat capacity ratio, i.e. isentropic coecient, of a
monoatomic ideal gas with an arbitrary energy distribution is derived here.
In the present work, the Boltzmann energy distribution (B) will be used as
reference of systems in thermal equilibrium and a delta function ( ) will be
used to represent the upper limiting case of non-Boltzmann energy distribu-
tions. In essence, a delta energy distribution represents a system in which all
particles have exactly the same energy. Such an energy distribution has lim-
ited physical relevance, since any collisional interaction would disrupt the delta
energy distribution. However, it allows to quantify the upper limiting eect of
non-Boltzmann energy distributions on the heat capacity ratio.
The general denition of the heat capacity ratio is given as follows [43]:
=CP;j
CV;j; (1)
withjidentifying the energy distribution, CP;jbeing the the isobaric heat
capacity of distribution j, andCV;jbeing the isochoric heat capacity of distri-
butionj. The heat capacity is typically dened as the second derivative of the
Helmholtz free energy with respect to temperature. Here, however, it is more
suitable to describe the heat capacity through the energy uctuations of the
system. In a Boltzmann energy-distributed system, the heat capacity is given
as:
Ci;j=kBhE2ii;j hEi2
i;j
(kBT)2; (2)
withibeingPorV,kBbeing Boltzmann's constant, Ebeing the energy, and
h:::ibeing the microcanonical averaging operator. When combining equations
1 and 2, one obtains the following expression:
=hE2iP;j hEi2
P;j
hE2iV;j; hEi2
V;j(3)
Since equation 3 solely depends on the averaged squared and squared aver-
aged energies,hE2iandhEi2, respectively, it is applicable for arbitrary energySpringer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
5
distributions. The averaged squared energy hE2iis given as:
hE2ii;j=1R
0E2i(E)fj(E)dE
1R
0i(E)fj(E)dE; (4)
withi(E) being either the isobaric density of states ( i=P) or the isochoric
density of states ( i=V) andfjbeing the propabilities of energy distribution
j. The squared averged energy hEi2is given as:
hEi2
i;j=0
BB@1R
0Ei(E)fj(E)dE
1R
0i(E)fj(E)dE1
CCA2
: (5)
For a monoatomic gas, the density of states is obtained through inverse
Laplace transformation of the translational partition function [44] and is inde-
pendent of the energy distibution. In case an isobaric state is considered, the
density of states is given as:
P(E) =qtr=p
 (5=2)(E)3=2; (6)
with the translational partition function pre-factor qtr= (2m=h2)3=2, the
pressurep, and the gamma function  . In case an isochoric state is considered,
the density of states is given gas:
V(E) =qtrV
 (3=2)(E)1=2; (7)
with the volume V.
Combining equations 3 to 7 yields the heat capacity ratio for a given
energy distribution fj(E). For the Boltzmann energy distribution fB(E) =
exp( E=k BT) and the delta energy distribution f(E) =(E E0),can
be obtained analytically and amounts to = 5=3 and!1, respectively. To
allow for comparability between dierent energy distributions, the total energy
of the compared energy distributions is required to be equal. For the delta and
Boltzmann energy distributions, the following equation relates the delta peakSpringer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
6
positionE0to the temperature Tof the Boltzmann energy distribution.
hEi!=hEBi
,1R
0E(E)f(E)dE
1R
0(E)f(E)dE=1R
0E(E)fB(E)dE
1R
0(E)fB(E)dE
,1R
0Ep
E(E E0)dE
1R
0p
E(E E0)dE=1R
0Ep
Eexp
 E
kBT
dE
1R
0p
Eexp
 E
kBT
dE
,E0= 3=2kBT(8)
The transition between the Boltzmann and delta energy distributions
is modeled through the Gaussian energy distribution fG(E) =1p
2b
exp
 (E EG;0)2
2b2
with the Gaussian width band the Gaussian position EG;0.
When settinghEGi!=hEBi, the Gaussian width bcan be determined numeri-
cally for a given Gaussian position EG;0. Through this procedure, the Gaussian
distribution can be converged to the Boltzmann distribution for EG;0!-1
and to the delta distribution for EG;0!3=2kBT. For the Gaussian energy
distributions, however, cannot be determined analytically and the integrals
in equations 4 and 5 have to be solved numerically.
3 Methodology
Pseudo three-dimensional Lennard-Jones (LJ) molecular dynamics (MD) sim-
ulations have been carried out with super-critical Argon in the driver and
driven sections at an initial temperature of 300 K and ideal gas pressures of
500 and 50 bar, respectively, using the LAMMPS software package [45]. The
Lennard-Jones potential used in the present MD simulations is dened as
follows [46]:
VLJ(r) = 4"
r12
 
r6
; (9)
with distance rbetween two LJ particles, LJ well depth ", and LJ diameter .
The large pressures in the driver and driven sections are selected to generate
a suciently strong shock wave for shock position post-processing and to keep
the width of the shock wave rather small. Thermodynamic real gas eects will
be considered in the theoretical shock velocity calculations, as detailed below.
Argon is modeled via the LJ well depth "= 114 K and the LJ diameter
3D= 3:47A. To reduce the simulation size, the three-dimensional domain
has been projected onto a two-dimensional domain and the LJ diameter has
been adopted by requiring that the ideal gas LJ collision frequencies [47] of
the three- and two-dimensional domains are equal, yielding 2D= 22
3D=L,Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
7
withLbeing the reference length of the reduced dimension. Here, L= 5A
has been used.
The two-dimensional simulation box was 1 µm long and 0 :2µm wide. The
area dened by the rst 0 :1µm of the long axis was lled with 11941 driver gas
molecules, the remaining area was lled with 10852 driven gas molecules. All
molecules have been randomly positioned inside the respective areas. Both ends
of the short axis were modeled with periodic boundary conditions, through
which the corresponding dimension of the simulation was pseudo-innite. The
boundaries at both ends of the long axis were modeled as perfectly reecting
walls, through which collisions of gas particles with these walls were perfectly
elastic. The driver and driven sections were initially separated by ve layers
of particles with frozen positions. Before removing the separating particle lay-
ers, the particle velocities were randomly distributed so that they resemble a
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution and each section was thermalized at 300 K
for 0.1 ns using a Nos e-Hoover thermostat. Then, the separating particle layers
were removed and the entire system was simulated for 2 ns without thermo-
stating. Post-processing, however, was stopped before the shock wave reached
the endwall of the driven section. A total of ve repetitions with dierent ran-
dom number generator seeds have been carried out for the Boltzmann and the
delta energy-distributed driven gases.
The propagation of the contact wave between the driver and driven gases
and the shock wave inside the driven gas was tracked through the particle
density over the long axis of the simulation box. The driven gas density was
tted using two logistic functions, one for modeling the contact wave and the
other for modeling the incident shock wave. The positions of the transitions
from the lower to the upper limits of the logistic functions are used as contact
and shock wave positions in the post-processing.
Simulation of the Boltzmann energy-distributed driven gas was imme-
diately possible, since the driven gas had been thermalized through the
Nos e-Hoover thermostat and the subsequent constant particle (N), constant
volume (V), and constant energy (E) simulations preserved the Boltzmann
energy distribution in the driven gas. A delta energy-distributed gas, how-
ever, would rapidly thermalize towards a Boltzmann energy-distributed gas at
the present high-pressure conditions, which come with large collision frequen-
cies. Any collision within the driven gas would re-distribute the kinetic energy
and relax the energy distribution towards the Boltzmann distribution. This
relaxation is especially pronounced for the delta energy distribution, as can
be concluded from the H-function presented in Figure 2. In order to limit the
time available for relaxation of the delta energy distribution prior to arrival
of the shock front at a specic point in the driven section, the delta energy
distribution was actively maintained in the present simulations. Based on a
readily available thermostat routine, a novel routine has been implemented
in the LAMMPS software package which rescales the velocities of the driven
gas particles to a target velocity, which was dened so that the driven gas
kinetic energies of the Boltzmann and delta energy distributions are equal. ToSpringer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
8
allow unbiased interactions of the driven gas with the shock front, the rou-
tine was applied to a dynamically shrinking sub-section of the driven section.
This shrinking sub-section spanned the entire short axis of the driven section,
had one side xed to the endwall of the driven section, and had the other side
move towards the endwall at a constant velocity. The shrinking velocity was
the shock velocity obtained through the simulations of the Boltzmann energy-
distributed gas, which was larger than the shock velocity obtained through
the simulations of the non-Boltzmann energy-distributed gas. Through this, a
buer zone between the sub-section in which the delta energy distribution was
actively maintained and the shock front was implemented.
For comparison, the ideal shock velocities for the above simulated con-
ditions were calculated using the Shock- and Detonation Toolbox [48] in
conjunction with the Cantera software package [49]. The eective pressures
of the driver and driven sections used for shock velocity calculation were
obtained through the Van-der-Waals equation of state with a molar co-volume
of 0.03201 l/mol and a co-pressure of 135 :5 Pal2=mol2[50]. This leads to eec-
tive pressures of 821 and 48 bar for the driver and driven sections, respectively.
The pronounced real gas eects leading to the large driver pressure are accept-
able in the present simulations, since the real gas interactions in the driver gas
are not aecting the shock velocity in the driven section. This shock veloc-
ity only depends on the ratio of eective pressures between driver and driven
sections, the initial temperature, the molar mass, and the heat capacity ratio
of the driven gas. Since the driven gas is suciently well described by the ideal
gas law (4 % deviation from ideal gas pressure), the presently calculated heat
capacity ratios of the monoatomic ideal gases with a Boltzmann and a delta
energy distribution can be used to determine the shock velocity in the driven
section. These shock velocities will be used for validating the present molecu-
lar dynamics simulations of Boltzmann energy-distributed gas and for testing
if the same theories are applicable to non-Boltzmann energy-distributed gases.
4 Results and Discussion
4.1 Non-Boltzmann Heat Capacity Ratio
The theoretical heat capacity ratio of non-Boltzmann energy-distributed
monoatomic gases provided above is evaluated numerically for a Gaussian
energy distribution with the limiting cases of the Boltzmann and delta energy
distributions. As mentioned above, the Gaussian energy distribution converges
to the Boltzmann energy distribution if the Gaussian position EG;0diverges to
 1 and the average energies of the two distributions are set to be equal. For
the sake of compact representation, however, the ratio of the isochoric aver-
aged squared energies (cf. equations 4 and 7) of the Boltzmann and Gaussian
distributionshE2
Bi=hE2
Giis used to characterize the deviation from the Boltz-
mann distribution. This ratio yields unity in case the Gaussian distribution
resembles the Boltzmann distribution and it yields 15 =91:67 in case the
Gaussian distribution resembles the delta distribution.Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
9
Figure 1 shows the heat capacity ratio of a Gaussian energy-distributed
monoatomic gas Gas function of the ratio of the averaged squared energies
of the Boltzmann and Gaussian distributions. The dashed lines represent the
Boltzmann heat capacity ratio (cf. black dashed line, B= 5=3), the Boltzmann
limiting case of the Gaussian distribution (cf. blue dashed line, hE2
Gi=hE2
Bi),
and the delta limiting case of the Gaussian distribution (cf. red dashed line,
hE2
Gi=hE2
i).
Fig. 1 : Heat capacity ratio Gof a Gaussian energy-distributed monoatomic
gas as function of the ratio of the averaged squared energies hE2iof the
Boltzmann and Gaussian energy distributions. The horizontal dashed line
represents the well-established heat capacity ratio of a Boltzmann energy-
distributed monoatomic gas B= 5=3. The vertical dashed lines represent the
limiting cases dened through the Boltzmann and delta energy distributions,
hE2
Gi=hE2
BiandhE2
Gi=hE2
i, respectively.
As would be expected, the Gaussian heat capacity ratio resembles the
Boltzmann and delta heat capacity ratios if the Gaussian distribution con-
verges to either of these two limiting distributions. However, there is an
unexpected minimum for hE2
Bi=hE2
Gi1:47, for which the heat capacity ratio
of the respective Gaussian distribution amounts to G0:92. This averaged
squared energy ratio corresponds to a Gaussian position rather close to the
upper limiting case of E0= 3=2kBT, withEG;0= 0:9E0. It was tested if the
observed minimum can be attributed to numerical uncertainties, yet changing
the convergence threshold and the energy increment of the numerical integra-
tions from 10 9to 10 15and from 1 cm 1to 0:1 cm 1, respectively, had a
negligible eect on in the range of 10 5. This means that the numerically
calculatedGcurve is an accurate representation of the underlying theory and
that the observed G<1 is theoretically valid.
From a classical thermodynamics perspective, the heat capacity ratio deter-
mines the volume response to adiabatic temperature changes as d V=dT=Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
10
(Cp CV)=p. In this classical context, a heated gas with  >1 would expand,
with= 1 its volume would not change, and with  < 1 it would con-
tract. In the present work, the eect of non-Boltzmann energy distributions
on the adiabatic change of states was tested by randomly sampling veloc-
ities from Gaussian energy distributions and optimizing the Gaussian peak
positionEG;0and widthbso that the pressure, the internal energy, and the
entropy remained constant. All presently tested Gaussian energy-distributed
monoatomic gases expand with increasing temperature according to the well-
established description of isentropic expansion within numerical uncertainties:
V2=V1= (T1=T2)1=( 1), with= 5=3. This means that the non-Boltzmann
heat capacity ratio must not be confused with the classical heat capacity ratio
for thermal equilibrium.
The observed  < 1 originates from the energy dependencies of the iso-
choric and isobaric densities of states. While the isochoric density of states
increases sub-proportional with energy, the isobaric density of states increases
super-proportional with energy. As a consequence, the relative population of
low energy states is larger and the relative population of high energy states is
smaller for isochoric conditions compared to isobaric conditions. While this still
leads toCP> C Vfor probability distributions which monotonically decline
with energy, such as the Boltzmann distribution or the Gaussian distribution
withhE2
Bi=hE2
Gi<1:22, it results in CPCVfor a range of non-monotone
Gaussian distributions with hE2
Bi=hE2
Gi'1:3. For these Gaussian energy dis-
tributions, the contributions of the densely populated low energy states to the
isochoric heat capacity exceed the contributions of the sparsely populated high
energy states to the isobaric heat capacity.
While the energy of the presently investigated probability distributions is
set to be equal, the entropy is certainly not. Here, Boltzmann's H-theorem [51]
is utilized to obtain insights into the stability / entropy of the Boltzmann,
Gaussian, and delta energy distributions. Figure 2 shows the H-function of the
Boltzmann energy distribution (left-most limit), of the delta energy distribu-
tion (right-most limit), and of the Gaussian energy distributions interpolating
between these two limiting cases. The H-function is calculated as follows:
H=X
kpkln (pk); (10)
with the probability pkof energyEk, dened as pk=i(Ek)fj(Ek)=1R
0i(E)
fj(E)dE.
As would be expected, the Boltzmann energy distribution comes with the
smallest value of the H-function. The delta energy distribution comes with a
H-function value of zero, which indicates that the entropy of the delta energy
distribution is also zero. This underlines that the Boltzmann and delta energy
distributions are suitable limits for the investigation of non-Boltzmann energy
distributions. Starting from the delta energy distribution, the H-function ofSpringer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
11
Fig. 2 :H-function of the Boltzmann, Gaussian, and delta energy distributions
as function of the ratio of the averaged squared energies hE2iof the Boltzmann
and Gaussian energy distributions. The vertical dashed lines represent the
limiting cases dened through the Boltzmann and delta energy distributions,
hE2
Gi=hE2
BiandhE2
Gi=hE2
i, respectively.
Gaussian energy distributions rapidly drops from zero to a monotonous con-
vergence towards the H-function value of the Boltzmann energy distribution.
The rapid drop of the H-function close to the delta limiting case indicates that
the delta energy distribution is entropically extremely unstable.
4.2 Atomistic Shock Wave Simulations
The present atomistic molecular dynamics simulations are used to test and val-
idate the above theoretical ndings on the non-Boltzmann heat capacity ratio.
The simulations resemble an ideal shock tube process, as the heat capacity
ratio directly aects the velocity at which shock waves propagate through the
driven gas. First, potential non-idealities of the simulations will be discussed,
followed by discussion of the simulation results and their comparison to theory.
Fixed particles have been used as diaphragm between the driver and driven
sections of the simulation to allow independent thermalization of the two gases.
The abrupt removal of the diaphragm particles, however, leaves a 12.32 A wide
void between the two sections. Based on the rather large eective pressure ratio
between the driver and driven sections of about 17 it is assumed that the void
between the driver and driven sections is solely penetrated by the driver gas.
This penetration through the driver gas into the void generates expansion and
compression waves bouncing forth and back within this void during the rst
12 ps of the simulation, which have been traced through the driver gas count.
Figure 3 shows an exemplary driver gas count during the inception phase of
the main simulation directly after abruptly removing the diaphragm particles.
When loosely attributing kinks and jumps in the driver gas count to
expansion and compression waves, one can nd three characteristic velocities:Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
12
Fig. 3 : Driver gas count during the inception phase directly after abrupt
removal of the diaphragm particles which separated the driver and driven
sections during thermalization. The theoretical vacuum expansion velocity [52]
for the simulated condition is provided as reference.
899-926 m/s, 616-680 m/s, and 513 m/s. Each characteristic velocity comes in
pairs, indicating that each wave which traverses the void towards the driven
section is being reected at the interface between the void and the driven
section. With each expansion and compression process, the void is lled with
more driver gas particles, leading to a reduction in the characteristic velocities
of the succeeding waves. While the very rst forth and back propagating wave
has a characteristic velocity comparable to the theoretical vacuum expansion
velocityvvac= 963 m=s based on the formula provided by Greenspan and
Butler [52], the characteristic velocities of the two succeeding forth and back
propagating waves are already rather close to the shock velocity of the main
shock wave propagating through the bulk of the driven gas after the inception
phase (vS= 545:56 m=s for the particular example in Figure 3, cf. Table 1 for
all resutls).
After the third forth and back propagating wave has traversed the void
between the driver and driven sections, the driver gas ow is established and
the driver gas count remains constant at the time scale relevant for the incep-
tion phase. The large volume ratio of the driven section to the driver section
of 9, however, causes a signicant drop in driver gas concentration at later
times, as visible in the sequence of frames provided in Figure 4. Neither the
dropping pressure in the driver section nor the observed bouncing expansion
and compression waves during the inception phase are expected to aect the
shock velocity of the main shock wave freely propagating through the bulk of
the driven gas.
Each simulation is post-processed based on the driver and driven gas par-
ticle counts along the long axis of the simulation, which ranges from -1000 ASpringer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
13
to 9000 A. In order to improve statistics, ten subsequent simulation steps are
always merged into a single frame, yielding a total of 119 410 driver gas par-
ticles and 108 520 driven gas particles for evaluating the particle distribution
along the x-axis. Figure 4 shows two sequences of such particle distributions
together with snapshots of the simulation boxes for a Boltzmann energy-
distributed driven gas (4a) and for a non-Boltzmann energy-distributed driven
gas (4b). Note that both simulations have an identical random number genera-
tor seed, thus are identical except for the energy distribution of the driven gas
preceding the shock wave. The particle counts are discretized along the long
axis in 100 A increments with the driver gas particles shown in red and the
driven gas particles shown in blue for both the simulation snapshots and the
particle count plots. The red left pointing arrow and the blue right pointing
arrow in the particle count plots assign the left and right y-axes of the plots to
the driver and driven gas particle counts, respectively. The upward pointing
red and blue arrows directly below the simulation snapshots in turn indicate
the contact and shock wave positions, respectively. These positions were deter-
mined through the steps of the double sigmoid ts to the driven gas particle
counts (black lines). The full video of the presently provided simulation frames
can be found in the supplementary information.
The rst observation from Figure 4 is that the shock positions dier
between the Boltzmann and non-Boltzmann energy-distributed driven gases.
In the Boltzmann case, the shock velocity extracted from the provided example
is 545.56 m/s, while the shock velocity in the corresponding non-Boltzmann
case is only 477.18 m/s. Interestingly, the shock front appears to be thicker
in the Boltzmann case compared to the non-Boltzmann case, with a sigmoid
width of 70.12 A for the Boltzmann case and 28.64 A for the non-Boltzmann
case, averaged over the entire simulations. The dierences in shock velocities
and in shock front widths can be qualitatively explained by the dierences
in the energy distributions. The presently applied non-Boltzmann energy dis-
tribution closely resembles a delta energy distribution, thus the driven gas
particles have almost exclusively one randomly oriented velocity. This means
that the driven gas particles do not have high or low velocity particles, as it is
the case for a Boltzmann energy-distributed driven gas. The high velocity gas
particles facilitate a faster shock propagation, leading to the observed larger
shock velocity in the Boltzmann case. At the same time, the low velocity par-
ticles are trailing the shock front, leading to a more stretched shock front in
the Boltzmann case.
For each replica simulation of the Boltzmann and the non-Boltzmann
cases, the contact and shock wave positions are obtained as described above
and traced over time. Figure 5 shows the wave position proles for the two
exemplary simulations provided in Figure 4. The reported wave velocities
and uncertainties are obtained via linear tting, with the uncertainties being
explicitly for the slope of the linear t.
This linear tting procedure is carried out for all replica simulations and
the resulting contact and shock wave velocities with their respective ttingSpringer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
14
(a) Boltzmann
 (b) non-Boltzmann
Fig. 4 : Sequences of frames taken from the post-processing of the simulations
of Boltzmann and non-Boltzmann energy-distributed driven gases with the
same random number generator seed.Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
15
Fig. 5 : Contact and shock wave positions over simulation time for two
exemplary simulations of a comparable Boltzmann and non-Boltzmann case.
Table 1 : Shock wave velocities vSand contact wave velocities vCof the
Boltzmann and non-Boltzmann driven gases.
Replica vS;sim vS;simerr. vC;sim vC;simerr.
m/s m/s m/s m/s
Boltzmann
1 545.56 1.99 185.77 1.25
2 555.43 2.58 182.73 1.10
3 558.66 1.63 180.83 1.16
4 549.24 1.75 181.44 1.06
5 536.65 1.52 183.45 1.33
non-Boltzmann
1 477.18 2.02 197.87 0.80
2 502.92 2.33 188.64 1.05
3 516.63 3.62 191.27 1.08
4 515.82 3.13 188.12 1.05
5 493.42 2.17 182.76 1.53
uncertainties are tabulated in Table 1. The wave velocities are sorted by the
energy distribution case of the driven gas, either Boltzmann or non-Boltzmann.
The dierences observed in Figure 4 for a single example of a Boltzmann
and a non-Boltzmann case prevail in the other replica simulations, as well as
in the averaged velocities. The ve simulations with the Boltzmann energy-
distributed driven gas give an average shock velocity of vS;B;sim= 549:11Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
16
6:40 m=s and the ve simulations with the non-Boltzmann energy-distributed
driven gas give an average shock velocity of vS;;sim= 501:1912:72 m=s.
This means that the presently employed non-Boltzmann energy distribution,
which closely resembles the delta distribution, hinders the free propagation of
shock waves through the monoatomic gas by about 9 % with respect to the
shock velocity. Note that convergence of the presented results has been tested
by simulating with a doubled temporal resolution and post-processing with
doubled spatial resolution, resulting in -0.08 % and -0.1 % deviations in the
shock velocity, respectively. In addition, the total energy of the present NVE
simulations should be constant and was found to deviate by 0.13 % over the
entire simulation time at most.
Therefore, the presented results are assumed to be suciently converged
and the observed scatter is solely attributed to the statistical uncertain-
ties inherent to molecular dynamics simulations [53]. For the non-Boltzmann
molecular dynamics simulation, the speed of the dynamically shrinking sub-
section which is used to maintain the delta energy distribution has been
modied as well, resulting in a shock velocity within the aforementioned
methodological uncertainty.
Interestingly, the contact wave appears to accelerate from an average of
vC;B;sim= 183:041:25 m=s tovC;;sim= 189:733:87 m=s when applying
a delta energy distribution to the driven gas. This eect amounts to about
4 % and is larger than the observed statistical uncertainties of the simulations.
Noteworthy, this eect is trailing the incident shock wave, yet the gas behind
the shock wave would typically be expected to be unaected by the energy
distribution in front of the shock wave.
The averaged shock velocities of the Boltzmann and non-Boltzmann cases
agree well with the ideal shock calculations using the incident shock prediction
of the Shock- and Detonation Toolbox [48], which yields vS;B;calc= 548 m=s
for= 5=3 andvS;!1;calc= 494 m=s when slowly converging to unity.
While the shock velocity is ill-dened for = 1, it converges with !1.
Although the value for !1 is slightly below the average simulation result,
it is clearly within the statistical uncertainty of the simulations. The compar-
ison of the ideal shock calculation with the present simulations show that a
non-Boltzmann heat capacity ratio can be combined with the standard descrip-
tion of ideal shock waves, which has originally been formulated for Boltzmann
energy-distributed gases. As mentioned above, however, the non-Boltzmann
heat capacity ratio should not be confused with the classical heat capacity
ratio for thermal equilibrium.
5 Conclusions
In the present study, a formulation of the heat capacity ratio of non-Boltzmann
energy-distributed monoatomic gas has been derived from rst principles. This
theory is applied to non-Boltzmann energy distributions which all exhibit the
same total energy and are limited by the Boltzmann energy distribution as theSpringer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
17
equilibrium case and the delta energy distribution as the most extreme non-
equilibrium case. A continuous description of distributions between the two
limiting cases is facilitated using a Gaussian distribution with variable peak
position. Applying the presented theory in the Boltzmann case yields the well-
established heat capacity ratio of B= 5=3, while in the delta case it yields
!1. Interestingly, applying the presented theory to the Gaussian case
with a peak position close to the delta peak position, the heat capacity ratio
appears to drop below unity. Investigation of the isentropic thermal expan-
sion behavior of non-Boltzmann energy-distributed monoatomic gas, however,
revealed that the energy distribution does not aect thermal expansion and
that a monoatomic gas always expands with a = 5=3 in the isentropic case.
To stress it once more, the non-Boltzmann heat capacity ratio should not be
confused with the classical heat capacity ratio for thermal equilibrium.
The presented atomistic molecular dynamics simulations resemble a shock
tube process and have been carried out for Boltzmann and non-Boltzmann
energy-distributed driven gases. The contact wave and shock wave velocities
extracted from these simulations reveal a consistent dierence between the
Boltzmann and non-Boltzmann cases. While the shock wave propagates about
9 % slower through the non-Boltzmann driven gas, the contact wave appears to
be faster by 4 % when trailing a shock wave through a non-Boltzmann driven
gas. The dierence between the Boltzmann and non-Boltzmann shock wave
velocities are reproduced through the ideal shock equations when utilizing
the heat capacity ratios of = 5=3 and!1 for the Boltzmann and non-
Boltzmann cases, respectively, as provided by the present theory. Firstly, this
validates the present theory for non-Boltzmann heat capacity ratios in the con-
text of shock propagation and secondly, it appears that non-Boltzmann heat
capacity ratios can be combined with the classical shock wave formulations for
describing non-Boltzmann gas dynamics.
Building on the presented theory, the non-Boltzmann heat capacity ratio
should be formulated for polyatomic compounds by replacing the monoatomic
density of states with a polyatomic formulation in future studies. Further sim-
ulations of gas dynamical processes, both atomistic and continuous, would
be necessary to explore the limits of the present theory. The non-Boltzmann
energy distributions in between the Boltzmann and the delta energy distri-
butions are of particular interest, but molecular dynamics simulations will
require rather sophisticated thermostating routines for maintaining such non-
Boltzmann energy distributions. Ultimately, experiments need to be designed
which would allow to test the presented theoretical and computational ndings.
The present work provides novel insights into gas dynamics of non-
Boltzmann gases and proposes interesting and partly counter-intuitive aspects
of the heat capacity ratio. Since the heat capacity ratio is a key property for
describing gas dynamical processes, the present ndings might help to improve
the understanding of gas dynamical phenomena and could potentially allow
discovering novel phenomena.Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
18 REFERENCES
Supplementary information. Animated sequences of exemplary Boltz-
mann and non-Boltzmann molecular dynamics simulations, corresponding to
the frames presented in Figure 4.
Declarations
Conict of interest. The author has no nancial or proprietary interests
in any material discussed in this article.
References
[1] R. R. Boyce, D. R. N. Pulford, A. F. P. Houwing, and Ch. Mundt.
Rotational and vibrational temperature measurements using CARS in a
hypervelocity shock layer ow and comparison with CFD calculations.
Shock Waves , 6:41{51, 1996.
[2] A. Kosareva, O. Kunova, E. Kustova, and E. Nagnibeda. Four-
temperature kinetic model for CO2vibrational relaxation. Phys. Fluids ,
33:016103, 2021.
[3] V. M. Doroshenko, N. N. Koudriavtsev, and V. V. Smetanin. Nonequi-
librium excitation of internal molecular degrees of freedom in the shock
layer during hypersonic ight. Shock Waves , 2:139{146, 1992.
[4] M. Louviot, N. Suas-David, V. Boudon, R. Georges, M. Rey, and S. Kassi.
Strong thermal nonequilibrium in hypersonic CO and CH4probed by
CRDS. J. Chem. Phys. , 142:214305, 2015.
[5] E. Dud as, N. Suas-David, S. Brahmachary, Y. Kukarni, A. Benidar,
S. Kassi, C. Charles, and R. Georges. High-temperature hypersonic
laval nozzle for non-LTE cavity ringdown spectroscopy. J. Chem. Phys. ,
152:134201, 2020.
[6] C. Cercignani. Boltzmann Equation and Rareed Gas Dynamics , pages
75{89. Springer, Boston, United States, 1985.
[7] K. Huang. Statistical Mechanics , page 53. Wiley, New York, United
States, 1987.
[8] G. A. Bird. Molecular Gas Dynamics and the Direct Simulation of Gas
Flows . Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1994.
[9] M. A. Gallies. Graeme a. bird. https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/
1595027, 2019. SAND2019-14649J.
[10] M. Torrilhon. Modeling nonequilibrium gas ow based on moment
equations. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. , 48:429{458, 2016.
[11] J. D. Au, M. Torrilhon, and W. Weiss. The shock tube study in extended
thermodynamics. Phys. Fluids , 13:2423, 2001.
[12] P. V an. Nonequilibrium thermodynamics: emergent and fundamental.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. , 378:20200066, 2020.
[13] H. C. Ottinger, H. Struchtrup, and M. Torrilhon. Formulation of moment
equations for rareed gases within two frameworks of non-equilibrium
thermodynamics: Ret and generic. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. , 378:20190174,
2020.Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
REFERENCES 19
[14] I. M uller and T. Ruggeri. Rotational extended thermodynamics . Springer,
New York, United States, 1998.
[15] M. Grmela and H. C. Ottinger. Dynamics and thermodynamics of com-
plex uids. I. development of a general formalism. Phys. Rev. E , 56:6620,
1997.
[16] G. Lebon, D. Jou, and J. Casas-V azquez. Understanding Non-equilibrium
Thermodynamics . Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 2008.
[17] C. Beck and E. G. D. Cohen. Superstatistics. Physica A Stat. Mech.
Appl. , 322:267{275, 2003.
[18] U. Seifert. Stochastic thermodynamics: principles and perspectives. Eur.
Phys. J. B , 64:423{431, 2008.
[19] B. Hafskjold and S. K. Ratkje. Criteria for local equilibrium in a system
with transport of heat and mass. J. Stat. Phys. , 78:463{494, 1995.
[20] R. N. Schwartz, Z. I. Slawsky, and K. F. Herzfeld. Calculation of
vibrational relaxation times in gases. J. Chem. Phys. , 20:1591{1599, 1952.
[21] M. P. Burke, C. F. Goldsmith, Y. Georgievskii, and S. J. Klippenstein.
Towards a quantitative understanding of the role of non-boltzmann reac-
tant distributions in low-temperature oxidation. Proc. Combust. Inst. ,
35:205{213, 2015.
[22] C. F. Goldsmith, M. P. Burke, Y. Georgievskii, and S. J. Klippenstein.
Eect of non-thermal product energy distribution on ketohydroperoxide
decomposition kinetics. Proc. Combust. Inst. , 35:283{290, 2015.
[23] F. L. Dryer, D. Naegeli, and I. Glassman. Temperature dependence of
the reaction CO + OH=CO2+ H. Combust. Flame , 17:270{272, 1971.
[24] A. M. Dean. Predictions of pressure and temperature eects upon radical
addition and recombination reactions. J. Phys. Chem. , 89:4600{4608,
1985.
[25] P. R. Westmoreland, J. B. Howard, J. P. Longwell, and A. M. Dean.
Prediction of rate constants for combustion and pyrolysis reactions by
bimolecular QRRK. AIChE J. , 32:1971{1979, 1986.
[26] N. J. Labbe, R. Sivaramakrishnan, C. F. Goldsmith, Y. Georgievskii, J. A.
Miller, and S. J. Klippenstein. Weakly bound free radicals in combustion:
"prompt" dissociation of formyl radicals and its eect on laminar ame
speeds. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. , 7:85{89, 2016.
[27] N. J. Labbe, R. Sivaramakrishnan, C. F. Goldsmith, Y. Georgievskii, J. A.
Miller, and S. J. Klippenstein. Ramications of including non-equilibrium
eects for HCO in ame chemistry. Proc. Combust. Inst. , 36:525{532,
2017.
[28] M. D ontgen, L. C. Kr oger, and K. Leonhard. Hot -scission of radicals
formed via hydrogen abstraction. Proc. Combust. Inst. , 36:135{142, 2017.
[29] M. D ontgen and K. Leonhard. Discussion of the separation of chemical
and relaxational kinetics of chemically activated intermediates in master
equation simulations. J. Phys. Chem. A , 121:1593{1570, 2017.
[30] A. Wildenberg, M. D ontgen, I. S. Roy, C. Huang, B. Lefort, L. Le Moyne,
A. K eromn es, K. Leonhard, and K. A. Heufer. Solving the riddle of theSpringer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
20 REFERENCES
high-temperature chemistry of 1,3-dioxolane. Proc. Combust. Inst. , 39,
2023.
[31] O. Kunova, E. Kustova, M. Mekkonoshina, and E. Nagnibeda. Non-
equilibrium kinetics, diusion and heat transfer in shock heated ows of
N2/N and O2/O mixtures. Chem. Phys. , 463:70{81, 2015.
[32] D. S. Kravchenko, E. V. Kustova, and M. Y. Melnik. Modeling of state-to-
state oxygen kinetics behind reected shock waves. Vestn. St. Petersbg. ,
55:281{289, 2022.
[33] M. Y. Melnik and E. V. Kustova. Impact of electronic excitation on
the state-to-state vibrational-chemical CO kinetics. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. ,
2308:012014, 2022.
[34] Y. Sakamura. A master equation study of vibration-dissociation coupling
in shock-heated oxygen molecules. Shock Waves , 12:361{373, 2003.
[35] I. N. Kadochnikov and I. V. Arsentiev. Modelling of vibrational nonequi-
librium eects on the H2{air mixture ignition under shock wave conditions
in the state-to-state and mode approximations. Shock Waves , 30:491{504,
2020.
[36] M. F. Campbell, K. G. Owen, D. F. Davidson, and R. K. Hanson.
Dependence of calculated postshock thermodynamic variables on vibra-
tional equilibrium and input uncertainty. J. Thermophys. Heat Transf. ,
31:586{608, 2017.
[37] A. P. Bedin. Gasdynamic phenomena accompanying the motion of shock
waves and objects in a low-temperature nonequilibrium plasma. Tech.
Phys. Lett. , 24:725{727, 1998.
[38] B. N. Ganguly, P. Bletzinger, and A. Garscadden. Shock wave damping
an dispersion in nonequilibrium low pressure argon plasmas. Phys. Lett.
A, 230:218{222, 1997.
[39] V. Bityurin, A. Klimov, S. Leonov, Y. Brovkin, Y. Kolesnichenko,
N. Popov, and D. M. Van Wie. Shock wave structure and velocity
at propagation through non-homogeneous plasma. In 31stAIAA Plas-
madynamics and Lasers Conference , 2000. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.
2000-2571.
[40] J. Poggie. Modeling the eects of weak ionization on supersonic ow and
shock waves. In 37thAIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit , 1999.
https://doi.org/10.2514/6.1999-867.
[41] N. E. Molevich. Acoustical properties of nonequilibrium media. In 42nd
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit , 2004. https://doi.org/10.
2514/6.2004-1020.
[42] Q. Zhou, Z. Dong, and W. Yang. Revisiting the thermal eect on shock
wave propagation in weakly ionized plasmas. Phys. Plasmas , 23:073508,
2016.
[43] P. Atkins and J. De Paula. Physical Chemistry , page 64. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2010.
[44] M. D ontgen. Analytic energy-level densities of separable harmonic oscil-
lators including approximate hindered rotor corrections. AIP Adv. ,Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
REFERENCES 21
6:095318, 2016.
[45] S. J. Plimpton. Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular
dynamics. J. Comput. Phys. , 117:1{19, 1995.
[46] J. E. Lennard-Jones. Cohesion. Proc. Phys. Soc. , 43:461, 1931.
[47] H.-H. Carstensen and A. M. Dean. Chapter 4 the kinetics of pressure-
dependent reactions. In Robert W. Carr, editor, Comprehensive Chemical
Kinetics , volume 42, pages 101{187. Elsevier, 2007.
[48] J. E. Shepherd. Shock and detonation toolbox.
https://shepherd.caltech.edu/EDL/publicresources.html, 2014. accessed
2021/02/11.
[49] D. G. Goodwin, H. K. Moat, and R. L. Speth. Cantera: An object-
oriented software toolkit for chemical kinetics, thermodynamics, and
transport processes. http://www.cantera.org, 2016. Version 2.2.1.
[50] Engineering ToolBox. Non-ideal gas { van der waal's
equation and constants. https://www.engineeringtoolbox/com/
non-ideal-gas-van-der-Waals-equation-constants-gas-law-d 1969.html,
2017. accessed 2022/12/14.
[51] L. Boltzmann. Weitere Studien  uber das W armegleichgewicht unter
Gasmolek ulen. Sitzungsberichte Akad. Wiss. , 66:275{370, 1872.
[52] H. P. Greenspan and D. S. Butler. On the expansion of a gas into vacuum.
J. Fluid Mech. , 13:101{119, 1962.
[53] L. C. Kr oger, W. A. Kopp, and M. D ontgen. Assessing statistical uncer-
tainties of rare events in reactive molecular dynamics simulations. J.
Chem. Theory Comput. , 13:3955{3960, 2017.