How the result of a measurement of a photon’s mass can turn out to be 100
Yakov Bloch1and Joshua Foo2, 3
1Department of Physics, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan 5290002, Israel
2Centre for Quantum Computation & Communication Technology, School of Mathematics & Physics,
The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Queensland, 4072, Australia
3Department of Physics, Stevens Institute of Technology,
Castle Point Terrace, Hoboken, New Jersey 07030, U.S.A.
Bohmian mechanics has garnered signiﬁcant attention as an interpretation of quantum theory since the
paradigmatic experiments by Kocsis et. al. [Science 332, 6034 (2011)] and Mahler et. al. [Sci. Adv. 2, 2
(2016)], which inferred the average trajectories of photons in the nonrelativistic regime. These experiments
were largely motivated by Wiseman’s formulation of Bohmian mechanics, which grounded these trajectories in
weak measurements. Recently, Wiseman’s framework was extended to the relativistic regime by expressing the
velocity ﬁeld of single photons in terms of weak values of the photon energy and momentum. Here, we propose
an operational, weak value-based deﬁnition for the Bohmian “local mass” of relativistic single particles. For
relativistic wavefunctions satisfying the scalar Klein-Gordon equation, this mass coincides with the effective
mass deﬁned by de Broglie in his relativistic pilot-wave theory, a quantity closely connected with the quantum
potential that is responsible for Bohmian trajectory self-bending and the anomalous photoelectric effect. We
demonstrate the relationship between the photon trajectories and the mass in an interferometric setup.
I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum mechanics is a useful framework for the predic-
tion of measurement outcomes for systems delicate enough to
be affected by the act of measurement [1]. While accurately
predicting the probabilities of the possible measurement out-
comes and their change over time [2], the theory is bound to
uncertainty. Furthermore, it has been proven that a noncon-
textual theory that predicts observations with certainty can-
not exist [3, 4]. Although out of the ordinary theory’s scope,
the description of the individual quantum event has been the
subject of intense research, the different aspects of which–
ontological and epistemological–have been captured and scru-
tinized in the de Broglie-Bohm pilot wave theory, and the two-
state vector formalism respectively. While the Bohmian the-
ory suggested a hidden deterministic dynamics for the point-
like corpuscle, accommodating a quantum description with
the concept of particle trajectories therewith, the two-state
vector formalism has led to the advent of weak measurements,
probing quantum systems without causing wavefunction col-
lapse. Merging the two, Wiseman showed [5] how one can
in-principle obtain the deterministic Bohmian velocity ﬁeld
and the trajectories of nonrelativistic particles using the tech-
nique of weak measurements. The utility of his framework
was demonstrated in a few notable experiments by Kocsis et.
al. and Mahler et. al. [6, 7], where the average trajectories of
nonrelativistic particles were constructed using the weak val-
ues of the transverse component of the photon wave vector via
weak measurements, which was later given an interpretation
as a classical-optics effect in [8]. More recently, Foo et. al.
[9] reformulated Wiseman’s nonrelativistic weak value pre-
scription to describe the relativistic Bohmian trajectories of
photons using weak values. The authors deﬁne the velocity of
a Bohmian relativistic particle as the weak value of momen-
tum, divided by the weak value of the Hamiltonian, yielding
a Lorentz-covariant velocity ﬁeld expressed in terms of the
components of the conserved Klein-Gordon current vector.
Grounding relativistic Bohmian mechanics in a measurementframework has opened the way for experimental veriﬁcation
of the resulting deterministic trajectories in this regime.
Here, we build on the weak value framework of Foo et. al.
by operationally deﬁning the “local mass” of relativistic sin-
gle photons in terms of weak values of the photon’s energy
and momentum. Importantly, we demonstrate that this mass
is related to the one conjectured by de Broglie in his early at-
tempts at a relativistic pilot wave theory. A measurement of
the local mass would therefore constitute an experimental ob-
servation of de Broglie’s effective mass. We demonstrate how
Bohmian trajectory bending in a single photon interferomet-
ric setup can be understood in terms of the variable local mass
that the particle acquires.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II and
III we review the two-state vector formalism and relativistic
Bohmian mechanics respectively. In Sec. IV we construct our
weak value-based operational deﬁnition for the local photon
mass, and apply this to trajectories within a Michelson-Sagnac
type interferometer, simulating the trajectories in various con-
ﬁgurations. We conclude with some ﬁnal remarks in Sec. V.
II. TWO-STATE VECTOR FORMALISM
A well-understood and experimentally veriﬁed feature of
quantum mechanics is that a given system, prepared in a cer-
tain initial state, might end up in several different ﬁnal states
after measurement [10]. At best, by repeatedly preparing and
measuring the system, one can infer the probabilities of the
possible outcomes. Therefore, ordinary quantum theory re-
stricts itself to the prediction of these probabilities and the ex-
pression of their change over time. It has been noted [11],
however, that the uncertainty inherent in the outcomes of
quantum measurements is inconsistent with the principle of
time symmetry. While the initial state is deﬁnite and predeter-
mined, the ﬁnal state is uncertain and probabilistic. Follow-
ing this observation, Reznik and Aharanov proposed a time
symmetrized formulation of quantum mechanics [12]. In thearXiv:2305.00891v1  [quant-ph]  1 May 20232
theory, conditions are arranged such that time symmetry with
respect to preparation and measurement of a quantum system
is established. Accomplished in ensembles deﬁned by postse-
lection as well as preselection (where both the initial and ﬁnal
states of the system are predetermined), time symmetrization
entails fascinating opportunities for the research of extremely
delicate quantum phenomena often publicized as “paradoxes”
[13–17] or “subtle interference effects” [18, 19]. The theoret-
ical framework also proves useful in the analysis of counter-
factual communication protocols [20], among other applica-
tions. A remarkable property of time symmetrized systems is
the weak value [21], which is a measurable quantity uniquely
assigned to such systems as they evolve from their initial to
their ﬁnal state. Expressed as,
h^Awi=hj^Aj i
hj i; (1)
wherej iis the initial andhjthe ﬁnal states of the sys-
tem and ^Athe quantum observable, weak values character-
ize a quantum system without collapsing its wavefunction. In
particular, weak values generalize the concept of an expec-
tation value to pre- and postselected ensembles, and are not
restricted to the operator’s spectrum–indeed, they may in gen-
eral be complex. Weak values arise from a physical measure-
ment procedure known as a weak measurement [22], partic-
ularly useful in sensing applications [23, 24], whereby the
weak coupling of the pointer to the system (which is time
symmetrized with respect to preparation and measurement)
does not signiﬁcantly perturb the system. The ﬁnal state of
the pointer is the result of a weak measurement, correspond-
ing to the real part of a weak value, which collects information
about the measured system without destroying coherence. In-
terestingly, the two-state vector formalism has been recently
applied to advocate an ontological model for the existence of
negative-mass particles [25], facilitating positive-negative pair
“counterparticles” at the vertices of a connected graph. The
latter has, in part, inspired the theory we present in the cur-
rent paper, in which we delve into the epistemology of nega-
tive masses born out of the two-state vector formalism. That
said, the mass we analyze in this paper has its origin elsewhere
(although we do not reject the possibility of a connection be-
tween the two notions), namely that of relativistic Bohmian
mechanics, which we present in what follows.
III. RELATIVISTIC BOHMIAN MECHANICS
Another theory accounting for individual quantum events is
Bohmian mechanics [26–29]. The theory uses the wavefunc-
tion to construct a velocity ﬁeld for the quantum particle in a
way that is consistent with the predictions of standard quan-
tum theory. This construction allows quantum mechanics to
accommodate the notion of trajectory, implying that all dy-
namics can be described deterministically. To construct the
velocity ﬁeld, the particle’s “Bohmian momentum,” which is
the time derivative of its hypothesized deterministic position
multiplied by mass, is simply assumed to be proportional tothe local wavenumber [30] (in this paper, for the purpose of
presentation, we take the approach of ”de Broglie’s dynamics”
as presented in [31]. The difference between “de Broglie’s
dynamics” and “Bohm’s dynamics” is outside of this paper’s
scope since for the present purposes they are essentially the
same). This notion is inherited from the theory of wave optics,
and deﬁned as the gradient of the argument of the wavefunc-
tion,
md~ x
dt=~Imfrln g; (2)
the dynamics of which is derived from the quantum wave
equation by means of a polar decomposition of the wavefunc-
tion,
 =ReiS=~: (3)
The ansatz Eq. (3) transforms the single complex-valued
equation into a coupled pair of real ones. Speciﬁcally, in the
nonrelativistic case, the Schr ¨odinger equation,
i~@ 
@t= ~2
2mr2 +V ; (4)
wheremis the mass, and Vthe potential term to-be-
distinguished from the Bohmian “quantum potential” (see be-
low), is recast into a continuity equation,
@(R2)
@t+r
R2rS
m
= 0; (5)
and a Hamilton-Jacobi-like equation,
@S
@t+(rS)2
2m+V ~2
2mr2R
R= 0: (6)
According to the identiﬁcation in (2), the two equations spec-
ify the dynamics of the local momentum,
~ p=rS: (7)
The second equation is called the quantum Hamilton-Jacobi
equation. It differs from its classical counterpart by an extra
term called the quantum potential [32],
Q= ~2
2mr2R
R: (8)
In Bohmian mechanics, this term is interpreted as an extra po-
tential that governs the dynamics of particles and marks the
departure from classical theory. The resulting quantum force
(gradient of the quantum potential) is seen, in Bohmian theory,
as mediating the inﬂuence of the wave on the particle, guid-
ing it along its otherwise classical trajectory. In the Bohmian
interpretation, the quantum potential accounts for all quantum
phenomena. Moreover, the strength of the quantum potential
does not decay with distance, a property that accounts for the
nonlocality of quantum phenomena in the Bohmian perspec-
tive, and is also a necessary feature of the theory a la Bell’s
theorem [33, 34].3
A suitable relativistic generalization of the local wave-
vector on the right hand side of (2) is a simple replacement
of the gradient with a covariant derivative, yielding a local
four-frequency,
kImf@ln g: (9)
In the context of quantum mechanics, this four-vector is pro-
portional to the relativistic four-momentum of the particle.
Since the relativistic invariant mass is the norm of the energy-
momentum four vector, it is natural to deﬁne the “local mass”
[35] to be the norm of the local energy-momentum vector,
m2
local~2
c2kk: (10)
Such a mass, proportional to the norm of the local four-
frequency, is Lorentz invariant by construction.
In the Bohmian formulation of the massless scalar Klein-
Gordon equation,
 = 0; (11)
the polar decomposition of the wavefunction (3) uncovers the
dynamics of the local four momentum. The procedure leads
to a relativistic conservation equation,
@(R2@S) = 0; (12)
where the conserved four current is given by,
j=R2@S; (13)
along with the relativistic quantum Hamilton-Jacobi equation,
(@S)(@S) = ~2R
R; (14)
the relativistic Hamilton-Jacobi equation for a massless parti-
cle with an extra term which is a simple relativistic general-
ization of the quantum potential.
Historically, a similar treatment of the scalar Klein-Gordon
equation led de Broglie to deﬁne an effective mass [36] for
the relativistic Bohmian particle, in which its (classical) mass
squared and its quantum potential enter on an equal footing.
For a massless particle, the effective mass squared gives rise
to a relativistic generalization of the quantum potential,
m2
e ~2
c2R
R: (15)
With this deﬁnition, the quantum Hamilton-Jacobi equation
stemming from the scalar Klein-Gordon equation (14) can be
elegantly rewritten as,
m2
local=m2
e: (16)
De Broglie used the effective mass to explain some objection-
able properties of the Klein-Gordon equation in the Bohmian
perspective. First, the conserved four-current (13) might be
negative in some regions of spacetime, even for positive fre-
quency solutions [37–41]. Writing the relativistic guidanceequation as the simplest relativistic generalization of its clas-
sical counterpart [42], we have,
dx
ds/j; (17)
wheresis an afﬁne parameter, xthe position four vector and
jthe four current deﬁned in (13). When the time component
of the current is negative, the particle moves backwards in
time. As a consequence, such particles might assume several
positions simultaneously and move faster than c. Now, with
the deﬁnition in (15), writing the local mass explicitly in terms
of the local momentum and energy, we arrive at the modiﬁed
Einstein relation,
E2=p2c2+m2
ec4: (18)
Since the effective mass squared term can be negative, not
only can the photon acquire a mass, but it might also be imag-
inary. This is compatible with the anticipated tachyonic be-
haviour of relativistic particles in Bohmian mechanics. While
this peculiarity is not in strict contradiction with standard
quantum mechanical observations–since the latter only deals
with expectation values incapable of revealing the superlumi-
nal behaviour [37]–the tachyonic Bohmian trajectories still
pose a conceptual difﬁculty if one wishes to interpret them
as physically real. We believe the present work provides a
viable interpretation of such difﬁculties, as we shall explain
in the next sections. Intriguingly, the relationship between
the effective mass and the quantum potential has been pro-
posed as an explanation for the anomalous photoelectric ef-
fect [43], whereby anomalous photoelectric emission and gas
photo-ionization by light has been observed for single photons
whose energy is lower than the work function of the material.
This effect provides an experimental hint at the existence of
the local mass and its effects. Just as the possibility of a neg-
ative mass particle ontology has inspired the theoretical in-
vestigations of this paper, the anomalous photoelectric effect
motivates us to deﬁne a framework for the direct measurement
of the local photon mass, and to compute its value for single
photons. Both are accomplished in the next section.
IV . AN OPERATIONAL DEFINITION FOR LOCAL MASS
To give the local mass an operational deﬁnition, we use the
language of weak values. As suggested in [9], the Bohmian
velocity ﬁeld of the photons can be constructed in a Lorentz
covariant manner by the identiﬁcation of the local momentum
(in thex-direction),px, and energy, E, with weak values of
the associated quantum operators, ^pxand^H:
v(t;x) =c2h(^px)wi
h^Hwi; (19)
where we have specialized, without loss of generality, to one
spatial dimension. We note that in [44], a similar velocity
ﬁeld is proposed in terms of a weak value of the operator
^v=^k=(^k+ 1)1=2, whereE(k) =p
k2+ 1is the relativistic4
dispersion relation (with m= 1). However a connection with
a Bohmian interpretation of deterministic particle trajectories
is not made.
We assume that the evolution of the state vector j (t)iis
described by the Hamiltonian ^H(we choose a speciﬁc form
of the former when plotting trajectories in Sec. IV A), while
postselection of the photons occurs at the position xin the
position eigenstate,
jxi=Z
dke ikxjki: (20)
From a ﬁeld-theoretic point of view, Eq. (20) should be un-
derstood as the limit of a highly resolved (in space) projection
onto position in a particular reference frame. Inspired by the
weak value prescription given in Eq. (19), we use the con-
nection between local quantum properties and weak values, to
write the local mass in (10), as,
m2
localc4(Reh^Hwi)2 c2(Reh^pwi)2: (21)
This statement is an operational deﬁnition for the local mass
of a relativistic quantum particle. We stress that this expres-
sion does not depend on the dynamical equation satisﬁed by
the wavefunction, nor does it contain a speciﬁc form of the
operators that are to be weakly measured. In what follows we
implement the deﬁnition for scalar Klein-Gordon waves, un-
derstanding that this is a simpliﬁcation of a full vector-valued
electrodynamical theory describing photons. Nevertheless it
is pertinent to study the scalar theory since the local mass co-
incides with de Broglie’s effective mass. As suggested in [9],
we can utilise the differential forms generated from the Klein-
Gordon Hamiltonian and momentum to explicitly evaluate the
weak values in Eq. (19):
h^Hwi=hxj^Hj (t)i
hxj (t)i=( i~)hxj(@=@t)j (t)i
hxj (t)i;(22)
h(^px)wi=hxj^pj (t)i
hxj (t)i=i~hxj(@=@x )j (t)i
hxj (t)i: (23)
In analogy to the weak value velocity ﬁeld, our weak value
mass can be understood as a “classical” expectation con-
structed from repeated weak measurements performed on an
ensemble of identically prepared particles. According to (16),
when the particles are described by the scalar Klein-Gordon
equation, the local mass (which is a general property of rela-
tivistic waves) is equal to the effective mass (which is unique
to de Broglie’s Bohmian treatment of Klein-Gordon waves).
When the particle is massless, the effective mass squared is
proportional to the relativistic quantum potential, the expres-
sion of which is given in (15). In what follows we restrict our-
selves to the latter case. Using the identiﬁcations in Eq. (22)
and (23), we can express the effective mass in terms of the
Klein-Gordon conserved current, j(t;x)and conserved cur-
rent density (t;x):
m2
ec4=1
j (t;x)j4(2(t;x) c2j2(t;x)); (24)where(t;x)j0(t;x),j(t;x)j1(t;x)are the Klein-
Gordon conserved current density and conserved current re-
spectively, with j= 2Im ?(t;x) (t;x). By deﬁning the
“(squared) effective mass density”
m2
e=m2
ec4j (t;x)j4; (25)
and utilising the fact that (t;x)andj(t;x)are components
of a conserved two-vector, we ﬁnd that m2
eis an invariant
quantity under Lorentz boosts, as desired.
A. Gaussian Wavepackets
In order to plot the time and space dependence of the effec-
tive mass, we require an explicit form of the initial state. Let
us consider a similar interferometric setup as studied in [9],
where the initial state is a Gaussian wavepacket of momenta,
j (t)i=Z
dke iE(k)tf(k)jki (26)
whereE(k) =jkjcorresponds to the relativistic dispersion
for massless particles (noting again, the standard simpliﬁca-
tion to the scalar Klein-Gordon theory), m= 0, while we
assume that the wavepacket itself may be prepared in a super-
position of left- and right-moving momenta:
f(k) =Npexp
 (k k0)2
42
+p
1 exp
 (k+k0)2
42
; (27)
wherek0is the centre frequency of the wavepacket(s) and 
their bandwidth, while Nis a normalisation constant. Using
these ingredients, coupled with the optics approxiation em-
ployed in [9] (wherein the magnitude of the wavevector is
much larger than its spread, k0), it is possible to compute
explicit forms for the conserved current and conserved current
density:
j(t;x) =2
R 2
L+ 2RLS0; (28)
(t;x) =2
R+2
L+ 2RLT0; (29)
where we have deﬁned
S0=22
k0sin(2k0x); (30)
T0= cos(2k0x) 22x
k0sin(2k0x); (31)
and
2
R=r
2
exph
 2(t x)22i
; (32)
2
L= (1 )r
2
exph
 2(t+x)22i
: (33)5
The effective mass density, Eq. (25), is given by
m2
e= 42
R2
Lh
1 +T2
0 S2
0i
+ 43
LRh
cos(2k0x) +22(t x)
k0sin(2k0x)i
+ 43
RLh
cos(2k0x) 22(t+x)
k0sin(2k0x)i
:(34)
In the limits !0;1(i.e. a solely right- or left-moving
Gaussian), the effective mass density vanishes. Likewise for
0<  < 1, outside the interference region, (tx)1,
the effective mass is also negligible; the photons are light-
like in this regime. Notably, the effective mass density can
become negative (imaginary, upon taking the square root) in
certain regions, which corresponds exactly to points at which
the tangent to the velocity curve becomes spacelike (the pho-
tons becomes tachyonic). This accords with the interpretation
ofm2
eas a proxy for the metric length, m2
ec4=E2 p2c2,
whose sign corresponds with spacelike, lightlike, and timelike
spacetime intervals:
m2
e8
><
>:<0 spacelike ;
= 0 lightlike ;
>0 timelike :(35)
Indeed, the branch of solutions corresponding to imaginary
effective (rest) masses ( m2
e<0) has long been asso-
ciated with those describing relativistic tachyonic particles
[45, 46]. Crucially, our measurement-based construction of
the Bohmian velocity ﬁeld allows, as mentioned, for the ex-
istence of “anomalous weak values” through which an imag-
inary (negative) mass (squared mass) may be inferred from
weak measurements of momentum and energy.
In Fig. 1, we have plotted the relativistic Bohmian trajecto-
ries on a spacetime diagram, with the effective mass density
m2
eunderlaid. The interference fringes in the effective mass
density correspond with those observed in the actual proba-
bility density, (t;x). Figure 1(a) displays the trajectories for
a Gaussian distribution of initial conditions, weighted by the
Klein-Gordon density (t;x). As discussed, outside the in-
terference region the effective mass density is approximately
zero, corresponding to regions where the photon does not feel
the inﬂuence of the quantum potential. Near the origin of
coordinates (where the interference effects between the in-
cident wavepackets become manifest) the trajectories exhibit
features of single-particle interference, with the density of tra-
jectories matching the quantum-mechanical probability den-
sity. In particular, we observe how in the regions where the
photon acquires a positive effective mass, it decelerates (lead-
ing to the bunching of trajectories in these regions), while in
regions of destructive interference, the tangent vector to the
trajectories become spacelike, Fig. 1(b). This behaviour is
consistent with the prescription given in Eq. (35) for the sign
of the effective mass density. Likewise, when j(t;x) = 0 (i.e.
the weak value of the momentum vanishes), one recovers the
mass-energy equivalence for a particle in its rest frame:
E=mec2: (36)This accords with the association of (t;x)with the ^T00com-
ponent of the stress-energy tensor, commonly denoted the en-
ergy density of the (Klein-Gordon) wavefunction.
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
space,
x
space,
x
0.1
0.2
0.0
time,
t
 time,
t
(a)
(b)
FIG. 1. (a) Plot of the photon trajectories overlaid on the effective
mass density, m2
e. We have used the settings k0== 10 and=
0:83. (b) A zoomed-in view of (a), where we have distinguished
regions of positive m2
ewith negative m2
eusing a different color
scheme.
We can also consider the trajectories and corresponding ef-
fective mass under a Lorentz boost. It was shown in [9] that
the velocity ﬁeld given by Eq. (19) satisﬁes the relativistic ve-
locity addition rule,
v0(t;x) =v(t;x) #
1 v(t;x)#=c2; (37)
where#is the velocity of the boosted reference frame. In
Fig. 2, we have plotted the trajectories overlaid upon the ef-
fective mass density for the same wavepacket properties as
Fig. 1, in the coordinates of the boosted observer, (t0;x0) =
(t #x;x #t). The Lorentz boost enacts a Doppler shift on
the wavepackets, causing the width to broaden in the direction6
of the boost and narrow in the orthogonal direction, while the
interference fringes become time-dependent due to the cou-
pling of the spatial and temporal variables. Importantly, and
as highlighed in Fig. 2(b), the trajectories can retropropagate
in the coordinates of the boosted observer (have a tangent vec-
tor pointing in the past lightcone). The segments of the trajec-
tories that behave in this manner correspond exactly to those
regions in which the above mentioned condition, m2
e<0
and0(t0;x0)<0, is satisﬁed.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.0
1.0
0.5
0.0
space,
x
space,
x
time,
t
 time,
t
(a)
(b)
FIG. 2. (a) Plot of the photon trajectories in a boosted reference
frame with coordinates (t0;x0), overlaid on the effective mass density
also plotted in these coordinates. We have used the same settings
as Fig. 1 with #= 0:4. (b) A zoomed-in view of (a), where the
alternate colour scheme denotes regions where both m2
e<0and
(t;x)<0, such that trajectories travel backwards-in-time.
We note that such trajectories are not problematic given
our interpretation of the velocity ﬁeld as being a coordinate
velocity obtained via measurements performed in a particu-
lar reference frame. This reference frame is originally the
one in which the wavevectors and wavepacket bandwidths are
equal. As shown in [9], it is always possible to ﬁnd a frame
in which the velocity ﬁeld is globally forward-directed. Onthe other hand, it is inevitable that coordinate velocities with
spacelike tangents will become backwards-directed upon a
Lorentz boost, namely when the denominator of Eq. (37) be-
comes zero. Finally, we note that unlike the early works of
Refs. [45, 46], and more recent studies proposing superlumi-
nal extensions to special relativity [47, 48], our framework is
restricted to the single-particle sector. Hence in the present
work, we cannot make the standard association of retroprop-
agating trajectories with forward-propagating antiparticle tra-
jectories. Nevertheless, such an interpretation motivates an
extension of the weak value framework to multiparticle inter-
actions that incorporates particle production and annihilation
effects.
V . CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have provided an operational deﬁnition for
the local mass of a photon using the language of weak values.
We connected this mass to the relativistic Bohmian trajecto-
ries of photons in an interferometric setup, and to the notion
of a quantum potential arising in relativistic generalizations of
Bohmian mechanics. Since standard quantum mechanics only
deals with what it regards as observable quantities–namely ex-
pectation values–observing the weak, locally superluminal or
locally massive photons is outside of its scope. However, us-
ing a theoretical framework which deals with individual quan-
tum events, the aforementioned peculiar qualities of a pho-
ton can be described and even measured in principle. For the
former we appeal to Bohmian mechanics, while the latter is
achieved using the language of weak values. Our construction
motivates novel opportunities for capturing phenomena that
were, until now, out of the experimentalist’s reach. Simulating
such an experiment with photons, not only do we ﬁnd locally
massive particles of light, but they are also shown to exhibit
local tachyonic behaviour, which is perceived, in a boosted
frame of reference, as time-traveling particles. Surprisingly,
this does not pose a challenge to relativistic principles, as the
velocity we operationally deﬁne in a speciﬁc frame of refer-
ence is, in fact, a coordinate velocity which might exceed c.
This is consistent with the fact that the locally spacelike trajec-
tories cannot be revealed using strong measurements since no
information, which the expectation values of quantum observ-
ables could reveal, travels faster than c. Our results are also
complementary to the “quantum metric” interpretation given
in [9], where a geometric explanation of the photon trajec-
tories was provided. There, it was suggested that a natural
generalisation of the nonrelativistic quantum potential is that
of a general relativistic metric that guides the photons along
geodesics.
We hope future research utilize this approach to demon-
strate more curious phenomena of this type, by way of
experiment and simulation. A possible suggestion for such an
experiment could be the demonstration of “locally massless”
particles of nonzero mass. Should the experiment presented
in this paper be repeated with particles of nonzero charge, an
emission of Cherenkov radiation in vacuum, in regions where
the particle becomes superluminal, should be expected [49].7
Likewise, we encourage the investigation of the possibility
of connection between the notion of mass explored herein
and the negative mass particle ontology presented in [25].
Finally, since the deﬁnition used in this paper for the velocity
ﬁeld of relativistic quantum particles is not unique (a notable
example of an alternative deﬁnition found in [44]), the dif-
ferent approaches should be compared both theoretically and
experimentally. One could gain an intuition of the underlying
physics by plotting the different trajectories side by side. We
leave this for a future work. The approach proposed herein
should be applied to other relativistic equations (such as theDirac equation) as well.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Dr. Hrvoje Nikoli ´c for useful dis-
cussions and suggestions. J.F. is supported by the Australian
Research Council Centre of Excellence for Quantum Compu-
tation and Communication Technology (No. CE1701000012).
[1] D. Z. Albert, Quantum mechanics and experience (Harvard
University Press, 1994).
[2] L. Vervoort, The instrumentalist aspects of quantum mechanics
stem from probability theory, in AIP Conference Proceedings,
V ol. 1424 (American Institute of Physics, 2012) pp. 348–353.
[3] S. Kochen and E. P. Specker, The problem of hidden variables
in quantum mechanics, Ernst Specker Selecta , 235 (1990).
[4] J. S. Bell, On the problem of hidden variables in quantum me-
chanics, Reviews of Modern physics 38, 447 (1966).
[5] H. M. Wiseman, Grounding Bohmian mechanics in weak val-
ues and bayesianism, New Journal of Physics 9, 165 (2007).
[6] S. Kocsis, B. Braverman, S. Ravets, M. J. Stevens, R. P. Mirin,
L. K. Shalm, and A. M. Steinberg, Observing the average tra-
jectories of single photons in a two-slit interferometer, Science
332, 1170 (2011).
[7] D. H. Mahler, L. Rozema, K. Fisher, L. Vermeyden, K. J. Resch,
H. M. Wiseman, and A. Steinberg, Experimental nonlocal and
surreal Bohmian trajectories, Science advances 2, e1501466
(2016).
[8] K. Y . Bliokh, A. Y . Bekshaev, A. G. Kofman, and F. Nori, Pho-
ton trajectories, anomalous velocities and weak measurements:
a classical interpretation, New Journal of Physics 15, 073022
(2013).
[9] J. Foo, E. Asmodelle, A. P. Lund, and T. C. Ralph, Relativistic
Bohmian trajectories of photons via weak measurements, Na-
ture Communications 13, 4002 (2022).
[10] W. Heisenberg, The physical principles of the quantum theory
(Courier Corporation, 1949).
[11] Y . Aharonov, P. G. Bergmann, and J. L. Lebowitz, Time sym-
metry in the quantum process of measurement, Physical Review
134, B1410 (1964).
[12] B. Reznik and Y . Aharonov, Time-symmetric formulation of
quantum mechanics, Physical Review A 52, 2538 (1995).
[13] Y . Aharonov, I. L. Paiva, Z. Schwartzman-Nowik, A. C.
Elitzur, and E. Cohen, Time-symmetry and topology of
the aharonov-bohm effect, arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00701
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.00701 (2023).
[14] Y . Aharonov, S. Popescu, D. Rohrlich, and P. Skrzypczyk,
Quantum cheshire cats, New Journal of Physics 15, 113015
(2013).
[15] Y . Aharonov, F. Colombo, S. Popescu, I. Sabadini, D. C.
Struppa, and J. Tollaksen, Quantum violation of the pigeonhole
principle and the nature of quantum correlations, Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 113, 532 (2016).
[16] Y . Aharonov, E. Cohen, A. Landau, and A. C. Elitzur, The case
of the disappearing (and re-appearing) particle, Scientiﬁc re-
ports 7, 1 (2017).[17] Y . Aharonov, E. Cohen, A. Carmi, and A. C. Elitzur, Ex-
traordinary interactions between light and matter determined
by anomalous weak values, Proceedings of the Royal Soci-
ety A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 474,
20180030 (2018).
[18] G. Reznik, C. Versmold, J. Dziewior, F. Huber, S. Bagchi,
H. Weinfurter, J. Dressel, and L. Vaidman, Photons are lying
about where they have been, again, Physics Letters A , 128782
(2023).
[19] S. M. Barnett and M. Berry, Superweak momentum transfer
near optical vortices, Journal of Optics 15, 125701 (2013).
[20] J. Dressel, G. Reznik, and L. Vaidman, Counterporta-
tion and the two-state vector formalism, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.08962 https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.08962
(2023).
[21] Y . Aharonov and L. Vaidman, Properties of a quantum system
during the time interval between two measurements, Physical
Review A 41, 11 (1990).
[22] Y . Aharonov, D. Z. Albert, and L. Vaidman, How the result of a
measurement of a component of the spin of a spin-1/2 particle
can turn out to be 100, Physical review letters 60, 1351 (1988).
[23] A. N. Jordan, P. Lewalle, J. Tollaksen, and J. C. Howell, Grav-
itational sensing with weak value based optical sensors, Quan-
tum Studies: Mathematics and Foundations 6, 169 (2019).
[24] J. Mart ´ınez-Rinc ´on, C. A. Mullarkey, G. I. Viza, W.-T. Liu, and
J. C. Howell, Ultrasensitive inverse weak-value tilt meter, Op-
tics letters 42, 2479 (2017).
[25] M. Waegell, E. Cohen, A. Elitzur, J. Tollaksen,
and Y . Aharonov, Quantum reality with negative-
mass particles, arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.09510
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2201.09510 (2022).
[26] D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley,
The undivided universe: An ontological interpretation of quantum theory
(Routledge, 2006).
[27] D. Bohm, A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in
terms of ”hidden” variables. i, Phys. Rev. 85, 166 (1952).
[28] D. Bohm, A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in
terms of “hidden” variables. ii, Phys. Rev. 85, 180 (1952).
[29] P. R. Holland, The Quantum Theory of Motion (Cambridge
University Press, 1993).
[30] M. V . Berry, Quantum backﬂow, negative kinetic en-
ergy, and optical retro-propagation, J. Phys. A 43,
https://doi.org/10.1088/1751-8113/43/41/415302 (2010).
[31] S. Colin and A. Valentini, Instability of quantum equilibrium in
bohm’s dynamics, Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Math-
ematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 470, 20140288
(2014).8
[32] D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley, Measurement understood through the
quantum potential approach, Found. Phys. 14, 255–274 (1984).
[33] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Can quantum-
mechanical description of physical reality be considered com-
plete?, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935).
[34] J. S. Bell, On the einstein podolsky rosen paradox, Physics
Physique Fizika 1, 195 (1964).
[35] Y . Bloch, Spacetime superoscillations and the rela-
tivistic quantum potential, Foundations of Physics 53,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-023-00680-3 (2023).
[36] L. de Broglie, Interpretation of quantum me-
chanics by the double solution theory, in
Annales de la Fondation Louis de Broglie, V ol. 12 (Fonda-
tion Louis de Broglie Paris, France, 1987) pp. 1–23.
[37] H. Nikolic, Relativistic Bohmian interpretation of quantum me-
chanics, in AIP Conference Proceedings (AIP, 2006).
[38] D. Bohm, B. Hiley, and P. Kaloyerou, An ontological basis for
the quantum theory, Physics Reports 144, 321 (1987).
[39] G. Horton, C. Dewdney, and U. Ne’eman, de broglie’s pilot-
wave theory for the klein–gordon equation and its space-time
pathologies, Foundations of Physics 32, 463 (2002).
[40] P. Ghose, A. Majumdar, S. Guha, and J. Sau, Bohmian trajecto-
ries for photons, Physics Letters A 290, 205 (2001).[41] S. Colin and A. Matzkin, Non-locality and time-dependent
boundary conditions: A Klein-Gordon perspective, Euro-
physics Letters 130, 50003 (2020).
[42] D. D ¨urr, S. Goldstein, T. Norsen, W. Struyve, and N. Zangh `ı,
Can bohmian mechanics be made relativistic?, Proceedings of
the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences 470, 20130699 (2014).
[43] C. Dewdney etal., The anomalous photoelectric effect:
Quantum potential theory versus effective photon hypothesis,
Physics Letters A 105, 15 (1984).
[44] M. V . Berry, Superluminal speeds for relativistic random waves,
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 45, 185308
(2012).
[45] O. M. P. Bilaniuk, V . K. Deshpande, and E. C. G. Sudarshan,
“meta” relativity, American Journal of Physics 30, 718 (1962),
https://doi.org/10.1119/1.1941773.
[46] O. M. Bilaniuk and E. C. G. Sudarshan, Causality and space-
like signals, Nature 223, 386 (1969).
[47] A. Dragan and A. Ekert, Quantum principle of relativity, New
Journal of Physics 22, 033038 (2020).
[48] A. Dragan, K. Debski, S. Charzynski, K. Turzynski, and A. Ek-
ert, Relativity of superluminal observers in 1 + 3 spacetime,
Classical and Quantum Gravity 40, 025013 (2022).
[49] D. Rohrlich and Y . Aharonov, Cherenkov radiation of superlu-
minal particles, Physical Review A 66, 042102 (2002).