WHAT MAKES A GOOD PAUSE?
INVESTIGATING THE TURN-HOLDING EFFECTS OF FILLERS
Bing’er Jiang, Erik Ekstedt, Gabriel Skantze
KTH Speech, Music and Hearing, Stockholm, Sweden
{binger, erikekst, skantze}@kth.se
ABSTRACT
Filled pauses (or ﬁllers ), such as uhandum, are
frequent in spontaneous speech and can serve as a
turn-holding cue for the listener, indicating that the
current speaker is not done yet. In this paper, we
use the recently proposed V oice Activity Projection
(V AP) model, which is a deep learning model
trained to predict the dynamics of conversation, to
analyse the effects of ﬁlled pauses on the expected
turn-hold probability. The results show that, while
ﬁlled pauses do indeed have a turn-holding effect,
it is perhaps not as strong as could be expected,
probably due to the redundancy of other cues. We
also ﬁnd that the prosodic properties and position
of the ﬁller has a signiﬁcant effect on the turn-hold
probability. However, contrary to what has been
suggested in previous work, there is no difference
between uhandumin this regard.
Keywords: Hesitation, ﬁllers, turn-taking, spoken
dialog, computational modelling
1. INTRODUCTION
In spontaneous speech, ﬁlled pauses (or ﬁllers ),
such as uhandum, are frequent and are typically
associated with a hesitation on part of the speaker
[1]. Some studies have found an association
between the use of ﬁllers and higher cognitive
load in both monolog and dialog [2]. From
the perspective of coordinating turn-taking in
conversation [3, 4, 5], it has been suggested that
ﬁllers work as a turn-holding cue for the listener,
indicating that the current speaker is not done yet
[6, 7]. To what extent such ﬁllers are produced
intentionally for this purpose, and how much
information they carry, is not yet clear [8].
According to [7], uhandumare to be considered
as words in the speaker’s vocabulary. While these
words do not have any propositional content, it
is argued that ﬁllers conform to the “phonology,
prosody, syntax, semantics, and pragmatics of
English words”. In this view, they should be seen as
interjections (similar to ahandoh), indicating thatthe speaker wants to keep the ﬂoor. In addition,
[7] claim that uhandumhave different meanings,
where the latter signals a longer upcoming delay.
This claim is based on an analysis of the pause
length following these ﬁllers in several spontaneous
speech corpora. Later studies of other corpora have
also found such differences [2], while others have
not [9]. Another possibility is that it is not the
lexical form of the ﬁller that is important for their
function in signalling delay, but rather their prosodic
characteristics. If so, it would perhaps be wrong to
regard them as carrying distinct symbolic meaning.
However, we are not aware of any studies that have
investigated this.
A general problem with corpus-based analyses is
that we can only ﬁnd correlations, which do not
necessarily imply causation. Thus, if we compare
places with ﬁlled pauses with places without them,
we do not know whether it is the ﬁlled pauses that
actually cause the observed differences, or whether
they were due to other factors that happened to
correlate with the usage of ﬁllers. One alternative
is to perform perception experiments where stimuli
are systematically manipulated, while all other
factors are kept constant (e.g. [10, 6, 11, 12]).
However, such experiments are costly to perform on
a larger scale and they are often done with a small
set of made-up examples that do not necessarily
reﬂect general distributions. In this paper, we
take a third route: To train a model that makes
predictions in conversation and then use that model
to investigate the effects of large-scale systematic
stimuli manipulation.
Using the recently proposed Voice Activity
Projection model [13] ( VAP ), which models the
dynamics of conversation and can be used to
predict the turn-hold probability (THP ) (i.e., the
probability that the turn will not shift to the other
speaker) at any given point, we systematically
remove and insert ﬁllers in order to investigate their
effects. We want to answer the following questions:
1. How is the THP affected when ﬁllers are
removed from their natural occurrences?
2. How is the THP affected when ﬁllers are
inserted at places which should be clearly turn-arXiv:2305.02101v1  [cs.CL]  3 May 2023yielding?
3. How do the properties of the ﬁller (position,
lexical form, pitch, intensity, duration) affect
the THP?
2. VOICE ACTIVITY PROJECTION
V oice Activity Projection [13], V AP, is a predictive
model of conversational dynamics developed for
turn-taking research. The model objective is to
continuously predict the upcoming voice activity of
both speakers in a dialog. The voice activity is
deﬁned in binary terms (i.e., whether they will be
speaking or not at a certain point in time), and the
two speakers’ future activities are jointly encoded
into a discrete label that represents the next 2s of
dialog.
Similar to a language model (text-to-text),
the V AP model (speech-to-activity) is optimized
through MLE (cross-entropy). The model processes
raw spoken dialog audio and outputs a likelihood
distribution over each of the discrete activity labels.
This likelihood can then be used for controlling the
turn-taking in a spoken dialog system, or as a tool
to analyze the likelihood of turn-taking events in
recorded dialogs. In previous work, it has been
shown that the model is sensitive to prosodic cues
[14]. In this work, we utilize the V AP model to
investigate the effect of a ﬁller has on how long the
current turn holds until the other speaker takes the
turn.
The activity projection is deﬁned by eight time
window bins of a 2s window, four for each speaker
(0.2s, 0.4s, 0.6s, 0.8s respectively), which indicates
if the speaker is active or not in that time window.
The various combinations of these bins result in 28
= 256 discrete activity labels. While these labels
represent various turn-taking-related events (such as
turn-shifts and backchannels), we are here primarily
interested in calculating the probability of who will
be the next speaker. To do this, we take a weighted
average over the probability assigned to each label,
focus on the bins that cover our region of interest
(0-600ms), and compare the contributions for each
speaker. The result is a value between 0 and 1 that
represents the probability that the current speaker
will continue, deﬁned as turn-hold probability
(THP) . In our study, we apply the model on dialogs
and get incremental predictions of THP.
The model used in this experiment is a stereo
version of the original V AP model that operates on
two separate waveforms (one for each speaker) and
is trained on subsets of the Fisher part 1 and the
Switchboard corpus [15, 16]. We deﬁne a held-
Figure 1: The THP following an utterance
ending with uh. Top: the spectrogram of the
spoken utterance; Middle: the THP with the
ﬁller; Bottom: the THP without the ﬁller. The
blue/yellow areas corresponds to A/B being the
most likely next speaker. The black number bars
represent the duration of silence before a turn-shift
prediction (THP falls under 0.5).
out test set containing 577 sessions from the dialog
act annotated subset [17], swda, of the switchboard
corpus to be used in the subsequent analysis.
3. EXPERIMENT 1: EXCLUDING FILLERS
We evaluate the effect of ﬁllers through examining
how ‘soon’ the V AP model predicts a turn shift after
the end of a speech segment. In Experiment 1,
we investigate the effect of excluding a valid ﬁller
present in the data. As illustrated in Figure 1, we
apply the model to 20s of dialog (a pair of data
samples including and excluding the ﬁller), followed
by 10s of artiﬁcial silence, and track the THP over
the silence segment. While a pause of 10s is very
unlikely in real life conversations, we use a longer
length anyways to fully examine the prediction of
the turn shift. The time twhere the THP drops below
50% is considered the position of turn shift.
We select ﬁller candidates uhandum, based on
word-level transcriptions, and deﬁne three criteria in
order to consider them valid ﬁllers: 1) the duration
of the candidates must be longer than 0.2s; 2) the
ﬁllers should be followed by a pause of at least 0.2s
of the same speaker and ‘isolated’ from activity of
the listener of at least 1s, before and after the ﬁller;
3) there should be at least 20s of past dialog context
(for the model to make its predictions). This results
in 5316 valid ﬁllers from the 577 test sessions.
We use Survival Analysis to examine the results,
as some cases may not reach the turn shift predicted
by the model even at the end of the 10s silence.
TheSurvival Analysis includes a censoring status toFigure 2: Kaplan-Meier curve of turn hold
predictions through 10s of silence for Experiment
1 (excluding ﬁllers), with or without ﬁllers.
identify whether the expected event has happened or
not ( uncensored vs.censored ). In our case, dialogs
that are not predicted to reach turn shift by the end
of the silence are marked as censored .
In order to examine whether the ﬁller makes a
difference, we plot the Kaplan-Meier curve of the
two conditions. Figure 2 shows the proportion of
data samples that keep the hold (y-axis) as a function
of time (x-axis). Note that the y-axis does notreﬂect
the THP; instead, it refers to percentages of cases
where the THP are above 50%, i.e., percentages of
data that are likely to keep the hold at time t.
Figure 2 shows that the ﬁller indeed makes a
difference in holding the turn, conﬁrmed by the log-
rank test ( p< 0.001). Moreover, the effect changes
throughout time. In particular, the ﬁller does not
help holding the turn at the very beginning of the
silence, as shown by the drastic drop of the green
line. At the later stage of the silence (after 1.2s), the
effect of keeping the hold by the ﬁller becomes more
prominent, reaching the greatest between 4s and 5s,
and then decreases until the end of the silence.
While there is a clear effect of the ﬁller, it is
interesting to note that the effect is perhaps not as
big as expected; the turn hold effect is quite strong
even with the ﬁller removed. This is likely due to
other redundant turn-holding cues present before the
ﬁller (prosody, syntax, etc).
4. EXPERIMENT 2: INSERTING FILLERS
While Experiment 1 indeed shows a turn-holding
effect of existing ﬁllers, it is unclear how strong
the effect is, given the confounded turn-holding
context. In Experiment 2, we further investigate
the effects of ﬁllers in contexts that are clearly turn-
yielding. Speciﬁcally, we insert ﬁllers at the end of
yes/no questions and examine the difference in THP
between the original data samples and the ones with
Figure 3: The THP following a yes/no question.
Top: the spectrogram of the spoken utterance;
Middle: the THP with the insertion of the ﬁller
um; Bottom: the THP of the original utterance.
inserted ﬁller at the end.
We deﬁne valid utterances by the following
conditions: we ﬁrst select all utterances that are
labeled as a yes/no-question dialog act according
to the swda annotation [17]. The original
utterance annotations may include multiple dialog
act segments in a single utterance and we omit those
that do not end with a yes/no-question dialog act.
Valid utterances must be followed by a pause longer
than 0.5s (from the same speaker) and ‘isolated’
from activity of the listener of at least 0.5s, before
and after the end of the utterance. The candidates
with a context duration of less than 20s are omitted.
The ﬁnal condition is that the model assigns a turn-
shift in the ﬁrst 5s of silence when 20s of context
up and including the utterances are processed. This
approach result in 245 valid turn-shift utterances.
For each valid utterance we select all the valid
ﬁllers, from the same speaker and session, as
candidates to add to the utterance (1436 total
ﬁller candidates). Similarly to Experiment 1, we
create paired data samples constituting 20s of dialog
context, up to and including the utterances (with or
without the added ﬁller), followed by 10s of silence.
This is illustrated in Figure 3.
Following the same preprocessing as described in
Experiment 1, we plot the Kaplan-Meier curve, as
shown in Figure 4. The ﬁgure shows that inserting
a ﬁller consistently lengthens the hold, and the two
curves differ signiﬁcantly from the log-rank test ( p
< 0.001). As can be seen, for the original yes/no
questions, the model clearly predicts a fairly quick
turn shift in most cases. While adding a ﬁller does
not ﬂip all of them to turn-holds, the ﬁllers seem to
have a stronger effect here than in Experiment 1, and
so the model clearly is sensitive to them.Figure 4: Kaplan-Meier curve of turn hold
predictions through 10s of silence for Experiment
2 (inserting ﬁllers after yes/no questions), with or
without ﬁllers.
5. EXPERIMENT 3: PROSODIC AND
LEXICAL EFFECTS
Experiment 3 examines how prosodic and lexical
properties of the ﬁller affect the turn hold.
For capturing prosodic information, we include
by-speaker standardized mean pitch , by-speaker
standardized mean intensity and ﬁller duration on
the log scale. We also examine whether the lexical
form (uhorum), as well as the position of the
ﬁller in the current dialogue act ( mid orstart) has
any inﬂuence on the THP. All continuous variables
(prosody) are standardized by subtracting the mean
and divided by two standard deviations. Note that
the pitch and intensity variables are normalized with
regard to each speaker, while duration is not.
We ﬁt a Cox proportional hazards model on data
with ﬁllers from Experiment 1 to examine the joint
effects from the ﬁve factors. The independent
variables are the ﬁve factors and an interaction term
between F0 and the lexical form, and the dependent
variables are time reaching the turn shift derived
from the V AP model and the censor status.
Table 1, summarizing the Cox model, shows that
except for the ﬁller type, all four other variables
are statistically signiﬁcant. The coefﬁcients reﬂect
the change of hazards function (here, the probability
of the turn shift): a negative coefﬁcient estimate
corresponds to less ‘hazard’ of turn shift (higher
probability of turn hold), while a positive coefﬁcient
estimate indicates an increased probability of turn
shift. The exponentiated coefﬁcients are termed as
hazards ratio , which represents the difference in the
hazard of an event at any given time.
The results from Table 1 reveals that the following
factors help keep the hold (decrease the ‘hazard’):
higher pitch, start of the dialog act, higher intensity
and longer duration. Moreover, while the lexicalcoef coef(exp) SE Pr(>|z|)
F0 -0.725 0.484 0.246 0.003
Intensity -0.127 0.879 0.035 0.0003
Lex um -0.077 0.925 0.050 0.12
Duration -0.118 0.888 0.037 0.001
Pos mid -0.305 0.736 0.065 <0.0001
F0:Lex um -1.237 0.237 0.290 0.007
Table 1: Model summary of the Cox regression
model. Bold pvalues are signiﬁcant.
form of the ﬁller itself does not signiﬁcantly affect
the hold, it has an indirect inﬂuence through pitch:
uhhas higher pitch and thus results in longer holds.
Speciﬁcally, if a speaker raises their voice by 0.5
standard deviation (SD) of their pitch range, the
probability of holding the turn determined by the
model will increase by 51.6% (here, the change of
hazards of turn shift from hazards ratio is 0.484 - 1 =
-0.516). Increasing 0.5 SD of the intensity, however,
only raises the probability by 12.1%. The duration
also affects the turn hold: if the ﬁller is lengthened
by 0.5 SD, the probability is raised by 11.2% . In
terms of the position, if a ﬁller is at the beginning
of the dialog act, it tends to raise the probability by
26.4% compared to one in the middle.
6. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we use computational modelling to
evaluate the effects of ﬁllers on holding a turn, and
examine a variety of prosodic, positional and lexical
properties of the ﬁllers. Experiment 1 shows that
excluding existing ﬁllers indeed results in shorter
holds, while the effect is perhaps not as strong as
expected. This is likely due to the redundancy
of other turn-holding cues. Experiment 2 further
reveals that ﬁllers have a strong turn-holding effect
when added to clearly turn-yielding contexts (yes/no
questions). Experiment 3 shows that a number of
properties of the ﬁller contribute to the turn-hold
effect: higher pitch, higher intensity, and longer
duration of the ﬁller are associated with longer
turn hold. Moreover, utterance-initial ﬁllers have a
stronger turn-hold effect than mid-utterance ﬁllers.
However, there is no signiﬁcant difference between
the lexical forms uhand um. Nevertheless, the
two types of ﬁllers still indirectly affects the THP
through increasing the pitch of the ﬁller. Thus,
instead of the lexical forms, it is their phonetic
realization that makes a difference, as umincludes
a nasal which associates with lower pitch compared
to the oral uh. This speaks against the interpretation
given by [7], where uhandumare seen as different
words with different meanings.7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by Riksbankens
Jubileumsfond (RJ), through the project
Understanding predictive models of turn-taking
in spoken interaction (P20-0484), as well as the
Swedish Research Council, through the project
Prediction and Coordination for Conversational AI
(2020-03812).
8. REFERENCES
[1] J. E. Fox Tree, “Interpreting Pauses and Ums at
Turn Exchanges,” Discourse Processes , vol. 34,
no. 1, pp. 37–55, Jul. 2002.
[2] R. L. Rose, “Um and Uh as Differential Delay
Markers: The Role of Contextual Factors,” in
Disﬂuency in Spontaneous Speech (DiSS) , 2015.
[3] H. Sacks, E. Schegloff, and G. Jefferson, “A
simplest systematics for the organization of turn-
taking for conversation,” Language , vol. 50, pp.
696–735, 12 1974.
[4] S. Duncan, “Some Signals and Rules for Taking
Speaking Turns in Conversations,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology , vol. 23, no. 2,
pp. 283–292, 1972.
[5] G. Skantze, “Turn-taking in Conversational
Systems and Human-Robot Interaction : A
Review,” Computer Speech & Language , vol. 67,
2021.
[6] P. Ball, “Listeners’ responses to ﬁlled pauses in
relation to ﬂoor apportionment,” British Journal of
Social and Clinical Psychology , vol. 14, no. 4, pp.
423–424, 1975.
[7] H. Clark and J. E. Fox Tree, “Using uh and um in
spontaneous speaking,” Cognition , vol. 84, no. 1,
pp. 73–111, 2002.
[8] M. Corley and O. W. Stewart, “Hesitation
Disﬂuencies in Spontaneous Speech: The Meaning
of um,” Language and Linguistics Compass , vol. 2,
no. 4, pp. 589–602, 2008.
[9] D. C. O’Connell and S. Kowal, “Uh and um
revisited: Are they interjections for signaling
delay?” Journal of Psycholinguistic Research ,
vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 555–576, 2005.
[10] M. Cook and M. G. Lalljee, “The interpretation of
pauses by the listener,” British Journal of Social
and Clinical Psychology , vol. 9, pp. 375–376,
1970.
[11] J.-P. de Ruiter, H. Mitterer, and N. J. Enﬁeld,
“Projecting the end of a speaker’s turn: A cognitive
cornerstone of conversation,” Language , vol. 82,
no. 3, pp. 515–535, 2006.
[12] S. Bögels and F. Torreira, “Listeners use
intonational phrase boundaries to project turn
ends in spoken interaction,” Journal of Phonetics ,
vol. 52, pp. 46–57, Sep. 2015.
[13] E. Ekstedt and G. Skantze, “V oice Activity
Projection: Self-supervised Learning of Turn-
taking Events,” in Proc. Interspeech 2022 , 2022,pp. 5190–5194.
[14] ——, “How Much Does Prosody Help Turn-
taking? Investigations using V oice Activity
Projection Models,” in Proceedings of the 23rd
Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group
on Discourse and Dialogue . Edinburgh, UK:
Association for Computational Linguistics, Sep.
2022, pp. 541–551.
[15] C. Cieri, D. Miller, and K. Walker, “The ﬁsher
corpus: a resource for the next generations of
speech-to-text,” in Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’04) . Lisbon, Portugal:
European Language Resources Association
(ELRA), May 2004.
[16] J. J. Godfrey, E. C. Holliman, and J. McDaniel,
“Switchboard: Telephone speech corpus for
research and development,” in Proceedings of the
1992 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing . USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 1992, p. 517–520.
[17] D. Jurafsky, E. Shriberg, and D. Biasca,
“Switchboard SWBD-DAMSL shallow-discourse-
function annotation coders manual, draft 13,”
University of Colorado, Boulder Institute of
Cognitive Science, Boulder, CO, Tech. Rep. 97-02,
1997.