This paper has been accepted for publication at the 2023 International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
A Novel Concentric Tube Steerable Drilling Robot for Minimally Invasive
Treatment of Spinal Tumors Using Cavity and U-shape Drilling Techniques
Susheela Sharma1, Ji H. Park1, Jordan P. Amadio2, Mohsen Khadem3, and Farshid Alambeigi1,Member, IEEE .
Abstract — In this paper, we present the design, fabrication,
and evaluation of a novel flexible, yet structurally strong,
Concentric Tube Steerable Drilling Robot (CT-SDR) to improve
minimally invasive treatment of spinal tumors. Inspired by
concentric tube robots, the proposed two degree-of-freedom
(DoF) CT-SDR, for the first time, not only allows a surgeon
to intuitively and quickly drill smooth planar and out-of-plane
J- and U- shape curved trajectories, but it also, enables drilling
cavities through a hard tissue in a minimally invasive fashion.
We successfully evaluated the performance and efficacy of
the proposed CT-SDR in drilling various planar and out-of-
plane J-shape branch, U-shape, and cavity drilling scenarios
on simulated bone materials.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Bone is the most common site of metastatic disease after
lung and liver [1], [2] and one of the most common causes
of chronic pain among cancer patients [1], [2]. Each year,
400,000 people in the US alone suffer from bone metastases,
which includes two-thirds of patients with metastatic disease
[3]. The most frequent site of bone metastasis is seen in the
spine and particularly vertebrae, which includes 50% of all
bone metastatic disease (Fig. 1) [4]. Traditional therapeutic
methods for spinal tumors involve chemotherapy and possi-
bly radiation, pain management, etc. However, many patients
have a minimal or only brief response to these therapies
and onset of pain relief can take months [5]. Additionally,
invasive surgical procedures depend on the nature and lo-
cation of the tumor (Fig. 1) and are usually not warranted
in these patient populations due to significant blood loss,
post-op pain, wound healing issues, and coexisting health
problems [6].
Despite invasive surgical methods, minimally invasive
(MI) procedures such as thermal ablation, vertebroplasty,
and kyphoplasty are safe and effective treatments of painful
spinal metastatic lesions [7]. In these manual image guided
procedures, typically, a surgeon advances a rigid instrument
through the skin and vertebra on a patient’s back under
X-ray guidance to confirm that it has entered the lesion
**This work is supported by the National Institute Of Biomedical
Imaging and Bioengineering of the National Institutes of Health under
Award Number R21EB030796.
1S. Sharma, J. H. Park, and F. Alambeigi are with the Walker Department
of Mechanical Engineering and the Texas Robotics at the University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 78712, USA. Email: {sheela.sharma, jihwan-
park98 }@utexas.edu, farshid.alambeigi@austin.utexas.edu
2J. P. Amadio is with the Department of Neurosurgery, The University
of Texas Dell Medical School, TX, 78712.
3M. Khadem is with the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh,
UK.
Fig. 1: Conceptual illustration of the proposed CT-SDR,
drilling to access a metastatic tumor in the vertebral body of
an L5 vertebra compared with a conventional rigid drilling
instrument constrained to linear trajectories. As shown the
proposed CT-SDR is composed of a stationary rigid outer
tubing and a steering guide for a drill tip.
area in vertebra. Then, to stabilize the typically fractured or
degraded bone in vertebra, a rigid pedicle screw is utilized
and/or bone cement, using a rigid syringe, is injected into
the fractured vertebra for fixation [8]. However, due to the
rigidity of the utilized instruments and complex and sensitive
anatomy of spine surrounded by nerves, these procedures
typically suffer from the lack of enough accessibility to the
tumor lesion and therefore cannot completely remove/treat
the tumor and in some cases may even increase the risk of
tumor spread to blood vessels [9].
As shown in Fig. 1, to address the aforementioned limi-
tation of existing rigid instruments, surgeons can use novel
flexible robotic systems to minimally invasively navigate to
harder to reach regions within the vertebral body by drilling
in curved trajectories and reach the tumor area (e.g., [10],
[11], [12], [13]). After the drilling procedure, using the
robotic system, different treatment procedures can then be
delivered locally and precisely to the tumor area to perform
either a high dose radiation for brachytherapy [14] and abla-
tion [15] procedures, or the robot can be used to completely
excise the tumor area (e.g., [16], [17]). Nevertheless, these
applications require a flexible, yet structurally strong, robot
capable of safely drilling through the bone to access these
difficult to reach areas without buckling or experiencing
1arXiv:2305.15570v1  [cs.RO]  24 May 2023structural failure. Ensuring this balance between structural
stiffness and flexible dexterity is the essential challenge in
designing steerable drilling robotic systems [12], [18], [19].
To overcome the aforementioned challenges, literature
documents a few cases of flexible drilling robots which
have been developed to improve access to areas within a
patient’s hard tissues. For instance, Alambeigi et al. [10],
[12] utilized a one degree-of-freedom (DoF) tendon-driven
flexible manipulator to develop a robotic system to drill
curved tunnels for treatment of femoral head osteonecro-
sis. However, the proposed one DoF system suffers from
several limitations including a small workspace limited to
only planar and short J-shape trajectories (only reaching 35
mm in length and 40◦from the original cutting angle), and
very slow drilling procedure (as long as 5-9 minutes). This
can mainly be attributed to the restrictions placed on the
geometry of the robot and tendon’s maximum load capacity
and the stiffness of the robotic system in regards to the
force required to actuate a bend in a system of this size.
This system was recently improved by Ma et al. [20] to a
handheld device while addressing certain system limitations.
While the system could produce greater motion from the drill
tip, similar to the previous robotic version, the stiffness and
bending behavior of the robot are limited to the stiffness of
the continuum manipulator and the max loading capacity of
the actuation tendons. Of note, in these systems, the curvature
of the drilled trajectory is heavily reliant on the properties of
the hard tissue being actively interacted with at the time of
drilling, and cannot directly be controlled using the proposed
force-based control procedure. Additionally, the steering of
the proposed handheld device (i.e., simultaneous control of
insertion and bending Degrees-of-Freedom (DoF)) is highly
unintuitive and is greatly limited in its ability to produce
accurate surgical procedures by the user’s expertise. In other
words, the user does not have a direct control on the curva-
ture of the drilled trajectory and requires an active sensing
approach to ensure the safety and accuracy of the procedure.
In an effort towards addressing the limitations discussed
previously, recently, Wang et al. [21], [22] have proposed
an actively controlled tendon-driven surgical drilling system
for spinal applications. While this drill grants more access to
areas within the hard tissue when compared to conventional
rigid drilling instruments, it does not allow for smooth curved
trajectories. In other words, the drill trajectories are restricted
to multi-segment straight/linear paths due to the use of a rigid
shaft with articulated wrist/hinge.
To collectively address the aforementioned limitations and
as our main contributions, in this paper, we propose the
design, fabrication, and evaluation of a novel flexible yet
structurally strong concentric tube steerable drilling robot
(CT-SDR) to improve the process of spinal tumor treatments.
Inspired by concentric tube robots (e.g., [23], [24]), the
proposed two DoF CT-SDR, for the first time, not only allows
the surgeon to intuitively and quickly drill planar and out-of-
plane J- and U-shape curved trajectories, but it also, enables
drilling continuous cavities to completely excise an spinal
tumor in a minimally invasive fashion. Thanks to the utilized
Fig. 2: The NiTi steering guides and the flexible shaft that
correspond to the two inner tube systems of the CT-SDR. A
close view of the designed drill bit is shown in the subfigure.
pre-shaped NiTi tubes, the robotic system also removes the
unintuitive active control from the user and decouples the
remaining DoFs to provide an easy-to-steer system. This
feature completely addresses the mentioned challenge in
active steering of the previous robotic systems (i.e., [10],
[20], [21]). The performance of the proposed CT-SDR has
been assessed under varying experimental conditions and
goals while drilling both smooth curved trajectories and
cavities within simulated bone materials.
II. D ESIGN AND FABRICATION OF THE CT-SDR
To meet the needs of surgeons for complete treatment of
spinal tumors, the CT-SDR needs to provide (i) required
DoFs to enable a planar and out-of-plane generic J- and U-
shape drilling trajectories as well as enabling cavity cutting
based on the geometry of the tumor, (ii) flexible power
transmission from a high rpm drill motor to carry rotational
motion to the drill’s cutting tip; (iii) sufficiently strong and
flexible guides to steer the drill’s cutting tip towards the
areas of interest within the patient without deviation; and (iv)
an actuation unit and control system to allow a surgeon to
actively control the drill tip’s position throughout a surgical
procedure. The following sections will address in detail
these different requirements and the components that were
designed and manufactured to meet them [25].
A. Concentric Tube Steering Guides
To create the required pathways and cavities, the CT-SDR
required steering guides that could move the drill’s cutting
tip into areas of interest by the surgeon. These guides would
need to be both flexible enough to bend outward from the
drill’s entry point to access hard-to-reach areas, but strong
enough to not deflect under the forces experienced by the
cutting tip during drilling. Our design takes advantage of
the superelastic properties of NiTi metal (Euroflex GmbH,
Germany), to provide a solution to these contrasting require-
ments. This superelastic, biocompatible, shape memory alloy
is heat treated to a pre-designed curvature, which establishes
the CT-SDR’s range of motion. Following the heat treatment
procedures provided in previous studies (e.g., [26]), the NiTiFig. 3: The design of the CT-SDR system. The rotational actuation sub-system is highlighted in orange, the translational
subs-system in purple. (1) shows an interior view of the Main Housing Unit and the components of the rotational and
translational sub-systems housed there. (2) Depicts an interior view of the drill carriage which houses a majority of the
components to control the drill tip’s rotational speed.
tubes in their original straight state were constrained to a
desired shape using a CNC-fabricated stainless steel jig and
placed in a furnace to create the designed drill trajectories.
After heat treatment, the tubes had curvatures of 71.1 and
39.9 mm radii. The steering guides used in this paper are
shown in Fig. 2. Of note the selected curvatures and tubing
dimensions were arbitrarily chosen based on the geometry
of an L4 vertebra. Nevertheless, these curvatures can readily
be changed depending on the vertebral level and geometry.
When assembled into the CT-SDR system, the NiTi
steering guide is nested within a larger stainless steel tube
which provides the structural strength and rigidity required
to constrain the NiTi tube into a straight configuration.
This utilization of nestled tubes with differing rigidity pulls
inspiration from designs of concentric tube robots for soft
tissue manipulation (e.g., [23], [24], [27]). The stainless steel
tube, which holds the role of the concentric tube’s outer tube
and is shown in Fig. 1, is static in this design of the CT-
SDR, and the NiTi steering guide is actuated through it. As
the guide is moved forward and out of the constraining outer
tube, the portion of the guide removed from the stainless steel
returns to its heat treated, pre-programmed shape/curvature.
In the process of returning to it’s pre-programmed shape, the
guide steers the drill’s cutting tip along the guide’s trajectory,
creating a curved and smooth drilled path.
B. Flexible Power Transmission and Cutting Tool
As shown in Fig. 2, each flexible tool comprises of a
small rigid cutting tip, a flexible torque coil, and a straight
rigid tube. To secure the components to one another, epoxy
(1813A243, McMaster-Carr) is used at the part intersections.
A ball nose end mill (8878A42, McMaster-Carr) was selected
for the drill tip, as it produced clean smooth tunnels in
earlier testing and has large flutes for faster material removal.
Notably, the main concern in selecting a drill tip was the
cutter’s ability to remove material not only at the distal tip
but also on the sides of the cutter during planar and out-
of-plane drilling procedures. The cutting tip has a diameterof 6.75 mm, a cutting tip 10 mm in length, and a shank 8
mm in length with a ground down diameter to 1.75 mm. The
drill tip geometries and torque coil connection are shown in
Fig. 2. The power transmission and the tool’s flexibility was
possible through the utilization of a torque coil (Asahi Intec.
USA, Inc.) placed behind the drill’s cutting tip. This torque
coil is 115 mm in length, runs through the curved section of
the NiTi tubing to serve as a method for delivering rotational
motion around a curve in a reliable way. The coil did not
connect directly to the drill chuck in the CT-SDR’s design
to avoid crush damage to the coil, and instead was attached
to a straight brass tube (8859K231, McMaster-Carr), with a
diameter of 1.56 mm.
C. CT-SDR Actuation Design and Controls
A primary requirement for the design of the two DoF CT-
SDR, shown in Fig. 3, was to keep the utilized motors that
actuate the steering guides and the cutting tool stationary to
minimize the inertia of the system’s moving components and
subsequently the required power for actuating the system. To
satisfy this design requirement, we utilized different methods
for transmitting both translational and rotational motions
through the system, to produce the desired motion for the
steering guides and the CT-SDR’s drill tip. As shown in Fig.
3, the CT-SDR’s insertion DoF is controlled by a NEMA 23
stepper motor (6627T530, McMaster-Carr) rotating a lead
screw (98940A305, McMaster-Carr) to adjust the position
of a nut (6350K41, McMaster-Carr) rigidly held within
the main housing unit. The main housing is supported by
a carriage sliding on a linear rail (6709K431, McMaster-
Carr), which allows for lower friction during translation
as the lead screw actuates the housing. The NiTi steering
guide’s rotational orientation DoF is also controlled by a
NEMA 23 stepper motor, this time controlling a spline shaft
(61145K145, McMaster-Carr) which allows for the housing
to have unrestricted motion along the linear rail, while still
transmitting the rotational position of the connected stepper
motor. The ball spline (61145K430, McMaster-Carr), withinFig. 4: Experimental set-up used to evaluate the CT-SDR, including C-arm X-ray machine, a six DoF load cell, laser cut
template and sawbone test sample. (1) An overview of the entire set-up with the C-arm’s visual cone. (2) a closer view of
the sample set up, and CT-SDR, including a side view of the load cell, and a top view of the alignment of the laser guide
with the system. The Main Housing Unit of the CT-SDR can also be seen in this view.
the main housing, is secured within a belt and pulley system
connected to the NiTi steering guide’s coupler. The designed
pulleys were selected to have a 1:1 ratio for easy control by
the stepper motor. An idler pulley was also designed into
the system to ensure enough belt tension is maintained in
the system.
To control the drill tip’s rotational speed, a carriage was
rigidly attached to the top of the main housing unit to serve
as a channel for the high speed rotations of the drill motor to
be transmitted through. The drill motor (B075SZZN4J, Ama-
zon) is mounted in a custom holder above the stepper motors
at the back of the system and connected to another spline
shaft (61145K143, McMaster-Carr) that runs the length of
the system. Similar to the steering guide’s rotational control
shaft, this one allows the carriages to slide freely along
the shaft direction while transmitting the rotational motion
provided by the drill motor. Another 1:1 pulley system with
idler pulley transmits this motion to a drill chuck (2812A19,
McMaster-Carr) mounted on a stainless steel hollow shaft.
Also, as shown in Fig. 3, the NiTi steering guide is attached
to the main housing unit with a designed 3D printed coupler
and set screw, which allows for the main housing components
to control the guide’s position and orientation. End plates
placed at either end of the system provide support for many
of the actuation unit’s moving parts. These plates and the
stepper motor mounts were 3D printed in PLA and secured
to an optical breadboard for stability.
The utilized stepper motors were controlled with Rtelligent
R60 motor drivers (B07SBFZ596, Amazon), an Arduino Uno
R3 microcontroller board, and a custom program written with
the AccelStepper.h Arduino library. The written program
allowed for independent control of both the insertion and
rotation degrees of freedom, or could be modified to control
these freedoms simultaneously. The speed of the system in
both rotation and insertion were also adjustable allowing us
to optimize the different settings we used in drilling.III. E VALUATION EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Set-Up
Fig. 4 shows the experimental setup used to thoroughly
evaluate the pefrormance of developed CT-SDR in drilling
planar and out-of-plane J- and U-shape trajectories together
with creating cavities within a hard tissue. The experiments
used Sawbone biomechanical bone model phantoms (block
5 and 10 PCF, Pacific Research Laboratories, USA) to
simulate diseased human bones with lower bone mineral
densities compared with a healthy tissue [28]. As can be
seen in Fig. 4, the CT-SDR system, mounted on an optical
breadboard, was placed on a wooden table with the specimen
held in front of the drilling tip on an acrylic stand. The
materials of the table and the stand were selected so that
they showed minimal interference with the C-arm X-ray
(OEC One CFD, GE Healthcare) placed next to the system
to monitor the CT-SDR’s progress through the test sample
during experiments. The addition of the C-arm allowed for
real time monitoring of the experiment by the user, and as
an option for analysis after a test’s conclusion. Views from
the C-arm for different drilling experiments can be seen in
Fig. 6. To measure and compare trends in drilling forces
on the CT-SDR’s drill tip to previous studies, a six DOF
force/torque load cell (Mini45, ATI Industrial Automation)
was placed with a sample holder beneath the test specimen.
An additional camera was placed separately from the other
components to provide another viewpoint of the tests, and
provide tracking for the experiments. Recorded videos of the
performed experiments with these visuals have been provided
in the complementary uploaded media file.
B. Drilling Experiments
Each experiment run with the CT-SDR was designed to
test the capabilities of the proposed two DoF robotic system
and evaluate if it could reliably produce predictable long
planar and out-of-plane curved drilling trajectories and, as
shown in Fig. 1, minimally invasively remove cavities of
material by entering from a small hole (e.g., vertebrae’sFig. 5: X-ray view of a U-shape trajectory test performed
with a 39.9 mm steering guide in PCF 10 sawbone. Visible
at the top is a 35 mm radius laser cut template to view the
accuracy of the CT-SDR’s path.
pedicle) with the diameter of the drill bit and remove
materials within the anatomy (ie.e, vertebral body).
1) U-shape Planar Drilling: U-shape drilling is an exten-
sion and extreme representation of the J-shape planar drilling
concept, in which a NiTi steering guide is inserted and held
by the CT-SDR with the cutting plane parallel to the optical
table’s surface. However, the steering guide’s used in U-
shape drilling are much longer and take the drill tip through
a nearly 180◦rotation as the drill tip is actuated through a
circular trajectory. For this test, a 39.9 mm radius steering
guide with a length of 120 mm was used. A 10 PCF sawbone
test sample was secured with the front face of the sample
perpendicular to the CT-SDR’s initial cutting direction. The
drill motor was accelerated to 8250 rpm, which in turn rotates
the CT-SDR’s cutting tip at the same speed. Once the drill
tip was at the desired cutting speed, the drill was actuated
forward at 1.6 mm/s for the length of the steering guide.
When the steering guide reached the end of its length, the
drill motor was powered off and the C-arm was used to take
X-ray images of the CT-SDR’s tip position within the sample,
and a laser cut template corresponding to an ideal 35 mm
radius steering guide was used to determine the accuracy
of the drilled U-shape trajectory. The angle of the final cut
was measured from the analyzing the angle between the
insertion orientation of the CT-SDR’s drill tip and the final
orientation. This could be measured via the X-ray images
taken of the test. Fig. 5 shows the X-ray view of the drilled
U-shape trajectory and the used laser cut template to evaluate
the accuracy of the CT-SDR. Also, Fig. 6 shows the X-ray
images demonstrating progression of the CT-SDR through
the Sawbone samples during this experiment.
2) Cavity Drilling: The original design of the CT-SDR
was centered around its ability to produce out-of-plane
cuts both through multiple J-shape branch trajectories and
through simultaneous rotations and insertions while within a
test sample. Several variations of cavity drilling tests were
performed with both the 39.9 mm and 71.1 mm steering
guides to evaluate the success of the CT-SDR’s design. In
each test, the sawbone sample was secured in front of the
CT-SDR, the drill motor was accelerated to 8250 rpm, and
the test was carried out with an insertion speed of 1.6 mm/s
Fig. 6: X-ray images showing progression of a test by moving
the CT-SDR through free space with a 39.9 mm radius
steering guide. Top: U-shape trajectory view. Middle: A
singular rotation of a pure rotation test, in which the CT-SDR
would do a pure rotation at several depths of cut. Bottom:
A spiral test in which the rotation and insertion DoFs move
together.
and a rotation speed of 9.6◦/s (unless otherwise specified).
Fig. 6 shows the X-ray images demonstrating progression of
the CT-SDR through the Sawbone samples during the cavity
drilling scenarios.
(i) J-shape Branch Drilling: To test the initial functionality
of the CT-SDR’s rotational DoF, a J-shape branch test was
designed. In this test, the NiTi steering guide was actuated
through the test sample in a J-shape trajectory, retracted
fully, rotated out of plane, and re-inserted through the same
entry point to drill another J-shape trajectory. This inser-
tion/retraction/rotation was repeated until 3 paths had been
drilled from the same entrance hole.
(ii) Independent 2-DoF Drilling (Pure Rotational motion):
In this test, the CT-SDR was tested with both insertion and
rotation DoFs of the steering guides while the CT-SDR’s drill
tip was within the test specimen. For this test, the CT-SDR
was inserted approximately 10 mm and then the insertion
was paused as the CT-SDR performed a full rotation of
the steering guide before inserting and rotating again. This
process was repeated for the length of the steering guide used
for the test.
(iii) Simultaneous 2-DoF Drilling (Spiral motion): The
final cavity tests conducted with the CT-SDR were centered
around coupling the insertion and rotation DoFs together.
For this test, the system was set to run with an insertion
speed of 0.96 mm/s and a rotation speed of 4.7◦/s, chosen to
ensure that a full rotation would occur before the CT-SDR
had translated a full length of the drill tip.
3) Experimental measurement: After the conclusion of
each test, as the resulting cavities were not clearly visible
with a C-arm, 3D models were made from the drilled test
samples. Plaster was poured through the entrance hole of the
test and allowed to harden. The Sawbone material was then
removed to leave an inverted view of the drilled cavity. These
models were then laser scanned (Space Spider, Artec3D)
and imported into 3D CAD software (SolidWorks, Dassault
Syst`emes) where they could be measured and analyzed. Fig.
7 shows the exemplary plaster and laser scanned models.Fig. 7: 3D renderings (left) of actual cavity drilling models
(right). (a) A Pure Rotational test performed in 10 PCF
sawbone with the 71.1 mm steering guide. (b) A Pure
Rotational test performed in 5 PCF sawbone with the 39.9
mm steering guide, though rotated only 92◦instead of a full
360◦. (c) A Branches test in 10 PCF sawbone with the 71.1
mm steering guide. (d) A spiral test performed in 5 PCF
sawbone with the 39.9 mm steering guide.
IV. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Fig. 5 shows the results of the U-shape drilling with a
NiTi steering guide with a radius of curvature of 35 mm.
From the figure, it is clear that the CT-SDR can drill around
an obstacle and reach a point 82 mm in a perpendicular
direction to the entry trajectory. In this experiment, the angle
of change in which the CT-SDR’s cutting tip has moved
through during the test (as measured counter-clockwise from
it’s original position) was 153◦. Previous studies that have
documented their orientation change throughout their curved
drilling process, such as Wang et al. [22], have shown
orientation angle changes as large as 65◦for wrist hinge
drilling devices; Alambeigi et al. [10] showed a change of
up to 40◦in their experiments. To our knowledge, this is the
is the first successful U-shape drilling in a hard tissue.
The performed cavity tests lead to the following results:
Branches : In the branches tests (Fig. 7-C), the goal was to
reach locations out of plane with accurate trajectories created
by the steering guides. In a block of 5 PCF sawbone, the
steering guide with a radius of 71.1 mm produced 3 branches
with an average radius only 2.6% different from the guide,
showing that out of plane cuts had little to no effect on the
CT-SDR’s behavior.
Pure Rotational: Perhaps the most significant test run by
the CT-SDR, the addition of actuating the rotational DOF
during the drilling process created the first true cavities seen
by this system. Shown in Fig. 7-A, the laser scanned render
of the cavity rotation test run in 10 PCF sawbone with the
71.7 mm steering guide. From the first rotation within the
material to the final ring made by the drill tip, the diameter
of the cut material more than doubled, going from 10.34 mm
to 26.64 mm in a distance of 30.03 mm. The rotational tests
took approximately 2min, significantly faster than Alambeigi
et al. [10] in which each curved path took up to 5-9 min.
Tests were also run with a steering guide of radius 39.9 mm,
instead of rotating a full 360◦at each insertion step, the CT-
SDR was rotated 92.46◦to create a partial cavity in 5 PCF
sawbone shown in Fig. 7-B. The diameter of the projected
Fig. 8: Components of both the measured and smooth forces
during a pure rotational cavity drilling test performed in 10
PCF sawbone with the 71.1 mm steering guide.
cut increased from 17.74 mm to 31.96 mm.
Spiral: The coupled insertion/rotation cavity tests dis-
played similar success to their decoupled counterparts.
Drilling through 5 PCF sawbone, the 39.9 mm radii steering
guide was used while simultaneously actuating the rotational
and translational components together. The result was a
cavity similar in size and dimension to those in previous
tests, with an insertion radius of 5.18 mm and a final radius
of 15.98 mm as measured as the distance from the final
drilling location to the axis of rotation. However, instead
of rings that increase in diameter as the test progressed, a
spiral shape was formed. Comparing between the decoupled
and coupled DoF tests, decoupled pure rotation had better
accuracy on holding to the trajectory of the steering guide,
only 3.4% away from the desired 71.1 mm radius. These
comparisons can be seen between the different laser scanned
models in Fig. 7, along with the smooth surface quality.
Fig. 8 illustrates the average directional loads applied to
the drill tip and the test sample during a pure rotational cavity
drilling experiment using a 10 PCF sawbones block and 71.1
mm radius steering guide. The forces were captured by the
load/torque cell (with frequency of 1 kHz) and were smoothed
with a span of 100 and averaged in MATLAB using the
smooth function (MATLAB, MathWorks). The forces felt in
both the X and Z-directions oscillate as the test progresses,
as these directions are both perpendicular to the direction of
initial cut. As the drill bit cycles around, it’s primary cutting
force is rotated in different directions. The force felt in the
Y-direction increased each time the drill was inserted further
into the test sample. When the components of the drilling
force are resolved into a singular magnitude, the maximum
force felt throughout the experiment was 7.13 N. While this
magnitude is slightly larger than other drills in literature (e.g.,
[10], [22], [19]) this could be attributed to the speed at which
the drill tip was moving at the time of the end of the test.
V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
With the goal of improving current minimally invasive
spinal tumor treatments, we proposed a novel two DoF
CT-SDR system to address a lack of dexterity seen in the
existing rigid surgical instruments. The proposed design was
evaluated for both direct path and cavity drilling scenarios,and proved itself capable in both regards. Reaching up to
82 mm in the perpendicular direction to the point of entry,
and surpassing 150◦angles with the drill tip for U-shaped
path drilling was one of the unique features of the proposed
robotic system. Moreover, the performance of the system
was verified in accurate out-of-the plane J-shape branch and
cavity cutting scenarios; performing tests in approximately
2 min, faster than previous studies [10].
In the future, we will take advantage of the modular design
of the proposed CT-SDR by adding additional carriages
for enabling long S-shape cutting trajectories. We will also
evaluate our system on an integrated robot-assisted steerable
drilling procedure on animal bones and human cadaveric
specimens [29], [30], [31].
REFERENCES
[1] N. C. Hatrick, J. D. Lucas, A. R. Timothy, and M. A. Smith, “The
surgical treatment of metastatic disease of the spine,” Radiotherapy
and Oncology , vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 335–339, 2000.
[2] G. Maccauro, M. S. Spinelli, S. Mauro, C. Perisano, C. Graci, and
M. A. Rosa, “Physiopathology of spine metastasis,” International
journal of surgical oncology , vol. 2011, 2011.
[3] W. B. Jacobs and R. G. Perrin, “Evaluation and treatment of spinal
metastases: an overview,” Neurosurgical focus , vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 1–
11, 2001.
[4] D. Choi, A. Crockard, C. Bunger, J. Harms, N. Kawahara, C. Mazel,
R. Melcher, and K. Tomita, “Review of metastatic spine tumour
classification and indications for surgery: the consensus statement of
the global spine tumour study group,” European spine journal , vol. 19,
no. 2, pp. 215–222, 2010.
[5] P. R. Anchala, W. D. Irving, T. J. Hillen, M. V . Friedman, B. A.
Georgy, D. M. Coldwell, N. D. Tran, F. D. Vrionis, A. Brook, and J. W.
Jennings, “Treatment of metastatic spinal lesions with a navigational
bipolar radiofrequency ablation device: a multicenter retrospective
study,” Pain physician , vol. 17, no. 4, 2014.
[6] C. Pusceddu, B. Sotgia, R. M. Fele, and L. Melis, “Treatment of bone
metastases with microwave thermal ablation,” Journal of Vascular and
Interventional Radiology , vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 229–233, 2013.
[7] M. P. Steinmetz, A. Mekhail, and E. C. Benzel, “Management of
metastatic tumors of the spine: strategies and operative indications,”
Neurosurgical Focus , vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 1–6, 2001.
[8] S. Becker, A. Chavanne, R. Spitaler, K. Kropik, N. Aigner, M. Ogon,
and H. Redl, “Assessment of different screw augmentation techniques
and screw designs in osteoporotic spines,” European Spine Journal ,
vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 1462–1469, 2008.
[9] D. A. Nussbaum, P. Gailloud, and K. Murphy, “A review of compli-
cations associated with vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty as reported to
the food and drug administration medical device related web site,”
Journal of Vascular and Interventional Radiology , vol. 15, no. 11, pp.
1185–1192, 2004.
[10] F. Alambeigi, Y . Wang, S. Sefati, C. Gao, R. J. Murphy, I. Iordachita,
R. H. Taylor, H. Khanuja, and M. Armand, “A curved-drilling ap-
proach in core decompression of the femoral head osteonecrosis using
a continuum manipulator,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1480–1487, 2017.
[11] F. Alambeigi, M. Bakhtiarinejad, A. Azizi, R. Hegeman, I. Iordachita,
H. Khanuja, and M. Armand, “Inroads toward robot-assisted internal
fixation of bone fractures using a bendable medical screw and the
curved drilling technique,” in 2018 7th IEEE International Conference
on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (Biorob) . IEEE, 2018,
pp. 595–600.
[12] F. Alambeigi, M. Bakhtiarinejad, S. Sefati, R. Hegeman, I. Iordachita,
H. Khanuja, and M. Armand, “On the use of a continuum manipulator
and a bendable medical screw for minimally invasive interventions
in orthopedic surgery,” IEEE transactions on medical robotics and
bionics , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 14–21, 2019.
[13] F. Alambeigi and M. Armand, “Steerable drill for minimally-invasive
surgery,” Jan. 2 2020, uS Patent App. 16/490,751.[14] S. L. Zuckerman, J. Lim, Y . Yamada, M. H. Bilsky, and
I. Laufer, “Brachytherapy in spinal tumors: A systematic
review,” World Neurosurgery , vol. 118, pp. e235–e244, 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1878875018313822
[15] C. L. Brace, “Radiofrequency and microwave ablation of the liver,
lung, kidney, and bone: what are the differences?” Current problems
in diagnostic radiology , vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 135–143, 2009.
[16] L. B. Kratchman, G. S. Blachon, T. J. Withrow, R. Balachandran,
R. F. Labadie, and R. J. Webster, “Design of a bone-attached parallel
robot for percutaneous cochlear implantation,” IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering , vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 2904–2910, 2011.
[17] T. Yang, H. B. Da Silva, and L. N. Sekhar, “6 - surgical positioning,
navigation, important surgical tools, craniotomy, and closure of cranial
and spinal wounds,” in Principles of Neurological Surgery (Fourth
Edition) , fourth edition ed., R. G. Ellenbogen, L. N. Sekhar, N. D.
Kitchen, and H. B. da Silva, Eds. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2018, pp.
103–115.e1.
[18] O. M. Omisore, S. Han, J. Xiong, H. Li, Z. Li, and L. Wang, “A review
on flexible robotic systems for minimally invasive surgery,” IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems , vol. 52,
no. 1, pp. 631–644, 2022.
[19] F. Alambeigi, Y . Wang, R. J. Murphy, I. Iordachita, and M. Armand,
“Toward robot-assisted hard osteolytic lesion treatment using a con-
tinuum manipulator,” in 2016 38th Annual International Conference
of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) .
IEEE, 2016, pp. 5103–5106.
[20] J. H. Ma, S. Sefati, R. H. Taylor, and M. Armand, “An active steering
hand-held robotic system for minimally invasive orthopaedic surgery
using a continuum manipulator,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1622–1629, 2021.
[21] Y . Wang, H.-W. Yip, H. Zheng, H. Lin, R. Taylor, and K. W. S.
Au, “Design and experimental validation of a miniaturized robotic
tendon-driven articulated surgical drill for enhancing distal dexterity
in minimally invasive spine fusion,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on
Mechatronics , 2021.
[22] Y . Wang, H. Zheng, R. H. Taylor, and K. W. Samuel Au, “A handheld
steerable surgical drill with a novel miniaturized articulated joint
module for dexterous confined-space bone work,” IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering , vol. 69, no. 9, pp. 2926–2934, 2022.
[23] P. E. Dupont, J. Lock, B. Itkowitz, and E. Butler, “Design and control
of concentric-tube robots,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 26,
no. 2, pp. 209–225, 2009.
[24] R. J. Webster III and B. A. Jones, “Design and kinematic modeling
of constant curvature continuum robots: A review,” The International
Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 29, no. 13, pp. 1661–1683, 2010.
[25] S. Sharma, Y . Sun, S. Go, J. P. Amadio, M. Khadem, A. H. Eskandari,
and F. Alambeigi, “Towards biomechanics-aware design of a steerable
drilling robot for spinal fixation procedures with flexible pedicle
screws,” in 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Medical Robotics
(ISMR) , 2023, pp. 1–6.
[26] D. Hodgson, “Fabrication, heat treatment and joining of nitinol
components,” in SMST-2000, Proc. Int. Conf. on Shape Memory and
Superelastic Technologies , 2001, pp. 11–24.
[27] J. Burgner-Kahrs, D. C. Rucker, and H. Choset, “Continuum robots
for medical applications: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics ,
vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1261–1280, 2015.
[28] A. C ¸ etin and D. A. Bircan, “Experimental investigation of pull-out
performance of pedicle screws at different polyurethane (pu) foam
densities,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers,
Part H: Journal of Engineering in Medicine , vol. 235, no. 6, pp. 709–
716, 2021.
[29] S. Sefati, R. Hegeman, F. Alambeigi, I. Iordachita, P. Kazanzides,
H. Khanuja, R. H. Taylor, and M. Armand, “A surgical robotic system
for treatment of pelvic osteolysis using an fbg-equipped continuum
manipulator and flexible instruments,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on
Mechatronics , vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 369–380, 2020.
[30] P. Wilkening, F. Alambeigi, R. J. Murphy, R. H. Taylor, and M. Ar-
mand, “Development and experimental evaluation of concurrent con-
trol of a robotic arm and continuum manipulator for osteolytic lesion
treatment,” IEEE robotics and automation letters , vol. 2, no. 3, pp.
1625–1631, 2017.
[31] F. Alambeigi, S. Sefati, and M. Armand, “A convex optimization
framework for constrained concurrent motion control of a hybridredundant surgical system,” in 2018 Annual American Control Con-
ference (ACC) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 1158–1165.