arXiv:2305.01308v1  [physics.hist-ph]  2 May 2023Retrospectively Diagnosing Einstein with
Asperger’s Syndrome and the Dismal Failure of
Debunking Myths
Galina Weinstein
Reichman University, The Eﬁ Arazi School of Computer Science, He rzliya;
University of Haifa, The Department of Philosophy, Haifa, Israel.
May 3, 2023
Abstract
In 2003, Simon Baron-Cohen, a world expert on autism, diagno sed
Einstein posthumously with Asperger’s syndrome. I think we cannot di-
agnose a dead person. Historians of science have ﬁercely obj ected to this
trend of diagnosing deceased scientists by reconstructing from scant evi-
dence, calling these diagnoses myths. Despite the historia ns’ eﬀorts at de-
molishing myths, Einstein has been constantly diagnosed wi th Asperger’s
syndrome. I will stick myneckout and suggest in this paper th at although
historians’ critique of Baron-Cohen and others includes de bunking myths,
it piggybacks on another myth that uses the following metaph ors: a dull
and socially adept Einstein who worked at Zurich, Prague, Be rlin, and
Princeton, an industrious scientist who earned his living t hrough his work
as a professor at the university; he had a special gift of frie ndship and col-
legiality, and he was deeply embedded in the academic commun ity. These
explanations do not make sense from the perspective of Einst ein sitting
in his oﬃce at Princeton, let alone Einstein sitting in the pa tent oﬃce.
This perhaps explains the tendency of people to ﬁnd counterc laims and
myths more persuasive than historians’ explanations which seem deeply
problematic.
1 Introduction
With some apprehension, I lectured about retrospectively diagnos ing Einstein
with autism (Asperger’s syndrome) at the conference ”Actually Au tism” at
Ben-Gurion University. I was reluctant to meddle in Einstein’s private life. I
prefer to occupy myself with Einstein’s physics. I decided to get invo lved in this
topic and give this lecture because in trying to debunk myths, people simply
spread stigmas and prejudices about Asperger’s syndrome and tw ist Einstein’s
biography. This paper presents an adapted version of my lecture.
1Why does everybody ask if Albert Einstein had Asperger’s syndrome ? Be-
cause–asIshowin section2– in 2003,SimonBaron-Cohenmadea pos thumous
diagnosisofEinstein, suggestingheshowedmanysignsofAsperger ’ssyndrome.1
Baron-Cohen has argued that in several biographies of Einstein, it was written
that Einstein was a loner and could not speak until he was three. Bar on-Cohen
did not base his retrospective diagnosis on historical medical recor ds written
by physicians. He instead diagnosed Einstein based on fragments of evidence
mainly found in biographies.
As I discuss in section 3, several caveats exist in diagnosing a dead p erson
retrospectively. The danger with historical retro-diagnosis is tha t the details of
Einstein’s thinking process are not always precise, and we cannot ex tract a few
details from a biography. Indeed, as I show in this paper, medical his torians
object to this practice saying that experts usually read a biograph y, extract
some passages dealing with medicine, and come up with a diagnosis. Wha t is
even more insidious is that retro-diagnosis is made by people who are a mateur
historians rather than historiographical-trained scholars. They, therefore, even
often draw on dubious sources to make historical diagnoses. Furt her, people
retrospectively diagnosing historical ﬁgures are susceptible to bia ses. A con-
troversy has erupted over the retro-diagnosis of Einstein. Histo rians of science
have ﬁercely objected to this trend of diagnosing deceased scient ists retrospec-
tively by reconstructing from scant evidence. Despite the historia ns’ warning,
Einstein has been constantly diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome.
1Here is a list of signs of twice-exceptionality and Asperger ’s syndrome in adults (including
the following but not limited to these): 1. Lack of cognitive empathy (ﬁnding it hard to
understand what others are thinking and feeling) and high em pathic concern (desire to reduce
other people’s suﬀering and help them at your own expense). 2 . Have the same daily routine
and get anxious if it changes. 3. Have meltdowns (tantrums), diﬃculty managing emotions
leading to outbursts, and may seem blunt and rude. 4. Are auto didacts (can teach themselves
just about anything). 5. May have weak short-term memory and very strong long-term
memory. May have a visual memory. 6. Can be atheistic or leave one religion and enter
another. 7. Have a spiky proﬁle of strengths and weaknesses. 8. May have dropped out of
high school and returned later; may have unﬁnished or partia l degrees. May have dropped out
of classes and not attended classes. 9. May have diﬃculty acc epting criticism, stubbornness,
and ﬁxation on topics. 10. Having problems expressing thems elves clearly, and talking and
laughing very loudly, though there is little to laugh about. 11. Attention to details. 12.
Tends to burn bridges with people and may rebel against autho rity. 13. Considered a ”loner”
and needs more time than others to be alone; has diﬃculty soci alizing for extended periods;
wants to spend time socializing but is overstimulated by too many people. Does not just
focuses around the clock on a special interest that may invol ve the person’s career. Tends to
be easily overwhelmed by noises and in social situations and then withdraws to a quiet spot;
needs more time alone than others. 14. Has a high sense of just ice and fairness and is too
honest. 15. On the one hand, they can be witty and sarcastic an d tend to be more childish;
on the other, they can take things very literally and may not u nderstand sarcasm, irony, or
humor from other people. May use humor to overcome social obs tacles by playing tricks on
others. 16. Have a remarkable power of concentration and can focus for long periods of time
on the special interest without eating or drinking. 17. Unus ual tolerance for unconventional
and unorthodox thinking and people. 18. May dress diﬀerentl y than their peers; often appear
eccentric; dress more for comfort than appearance. 19. May i nvent limericks and send them
to people they care about. 20. May feel things profoundly and experience intense emotions.
From: Autism Awareness Centre Inc.
2In the end, in section 4, I show that there is a twist to the story. It turns
out that historians are susceptible to biases, precisely like any othe r scholar.
2 Baron-Cohen diagnoses Einstein
It all started when Simon Baron-Cohen, a professor of developme ntal psy-
chopathology and a world expert on autism at Cambridge University, suggested
that Einstein might have shown signs of Asperger’s syndrome [3]. Bar on-Cohen
supports his thesis by 1) quoting an account by Einstein’s son Hans A lbert writ-
ten by Peter Michelmore in his biography of Einstein, Einstein, Proﬁle of the
Man,2and2)cherry-pickingEinstein’sidiosyncratichabitsfromRogerHigh ﬁeld
and Paul Carter’s book, The Private Lives of Albert Einstein .3Baron-Cohen
writes [3]:
Einstein was described as ”lonely and dreamy” as a child, with diﬃ-
culty in making friends. He was said to prefer ”solitary and taxing”
games, such as complex constructional play with blocks or making
houses of cards up to fourteen stories high. He would ”softly re-
peat every sentence he uttered—a habit he continued until the ag e
of seven.” He was still not considered ﬂuent in speech at the age of
nine. He was also a loner: ”I’m not much with people,” he would
say. ”I do not socialize because social encounters would distract m e
from my work and I really only live for that, and it would shorten
even further my very limited lifespan.”
This is almost verbatim what Highﬁeld and Carter write in their book.4
2Michelmore begins his book by saying: ”In February, 1962, I s pent two days with Hans
Albert Einstein in his home overlooking San Francisco Bay. H ans Albert, ﬁfty-seven, the older
son of Albert Einstein [...]. He had never discussed his fath er before with any writer, at least
not in depth. But he answered all my questions and waited whil e I wrote down the answers.”
3The authors base their stories on family members’ reports an d memories of people who
knew Einstein.
4The ﬁrst part of Baron-Cohen’s quotation is based on the foll owing passage from Highﬁeld
and Carter [20]:
By his description [to Bela Kornitzer], Einstein was a lonel y and dreamy child
who did not easily ﬁnd companions. He would avoid the rough-a nd-tumble
games when the children of relatives came to play in the Einst eins’ garden,
[...]. Besides assembling complicated constructions with his building blocks, he
made houses of cards up to fourteen stories high. [...] After starting to talk
comparatively late, he would softly repeat every sentence h e uttered - a habit
that continued until he was seven. Even when he was nine he lac ked ﬂuency of
speech. The problem seems to have been as much a reluctance to communicate
as any inability to do so.
The second part of Highﬁeld and Carter’s paragraph (”Beside s assembling [...]”) is based
on Maja Winteler-Einstein’s (Einstein’s sister) biograph y of her brother [39].
The second partofBaron-Cohen’squotation isbased on the fo llowingpassage fromHighﬁeld
and Carter [20]:
’I’m not much with people, and I’m not a family man.’ he told Sa laman. ’I want
3In his lecture “Scientiﬁc talent and autism: is there a connection?”, Baron-
Cohen merely repeats the arguments put forward in his previous te xt5and
adds [4]:
So he wanted to be awayfrom people and to only focus (some people
would say obsessionally) on the world of physics, and he also had a
strong interest in music when he wasn’t doing physics. And he said:
‘Music is a way for me to be independent of people.’ So you can see
that this was a man who didn’t want to spend time socializing and
instead wanted to focus on physics and music.
Again, Baron-Cohen cherry-picks quotations from Highﬁeld and Ca rter [20]
and Michelmore [29].6
my peace. I want to know how God created this world.’
Esther Salaman was a young Jewish woman who interviewed Eins tein in Berlin but pub-
lished the interview thirty years after Einstein died in 195 5. And the full quote is [35]:
”I’m not much with people, and I’m not a family man. I want my pe ace. I
want to know how God created this world. I am not interested in this or that
phenomenon, in the spectrum of this or that element. I want to know His
thoughts; the rest are details.”
The phrase ”God created the world,” so often repeated by Eins tein, represents his religious
feeling that laws of nature could be formulated in the simple st form.
The quotation ”I do not socialize because social encounters would distract me from my
work” is taken from the following source. Einstein’s physic ian and friend Janos Plesch writes
[33]:
On suitable occasions, one could also get from him [Einstein ] an uninhibited
opinion about his immediate circle. During one such open pha se during our
conversation, I told him his environment in America and aske d, ’Who are your
friends in this small town?’ He replied
[...] I do not socialize because social encounters would dis tract me
from my work and I really only live for that, and it would short en
even further my very limited lifespan. I do not have any close friends
here as I had in my youth or later in Berlin with whom I could tal k
and unburden myself. That may be due to my age. I often have the
feeling as if God has forgotten me here.
5In the case of Einstein, says Baron-Cohen,
”if you look at his childhood, he is described as being alone, having no friends,
and not being interested in mixing and socializing. Apparen tly, he was late to
talk, a language delay. Apocryphally he didn’t speak until h e was ﬁve years old.
And even then, when he did start to speak, his speech showed ec holalia. And
as an adult and as a distinguished scientist, he said: ‘I do no t socialize because
that would distract me from my work, and I really only live for that.’
6The quotation: ”[...] music is a way for me to be independent o f people” was taken from
Michelmore [29]:
Einstein worked alone now, so music was the only way to get clo se to him. That
was how Manfred Clynes ”reached” Einstein. [...] Helen Duka s called to invite
me [Cylnes] to supper. [...] Einstein himself was rather jov ial. Over the meal
of meat and vegetables and for two hours afterward, we talked about music. He
4Barbara Wolﬀ – who had a long tenure at the Albert Einstein Archives a nd
is an editor in the Einstein Papers Project – and Hananya Goodman wr ite [40]:
Some of the characterizationsofAS [Asperger’ssyndrome] descr ibed
in the paragraph above actually apply well to the young Albert as
we know him from Maja’s and Max Talmey’s recollections.
Both Maja and Talmey describe a boy who took little interest in
boisterous games and, in general, in his peers, a boy who would con-
centrate patiently on elaborate constructions with building blocks
or playing cards, delve into books and tricky arithmetic problems
or play the violin. A sort of glass pane, as he called it many years
later, separated him from his fellow human beings. Had such ”social
phobia” then been classiﬁed as a personality disorder, and had his
parents and doctors felt the need to ‘heal’ the boy by making him
conform to some norm, Albert might not have become Einstein.
It seems that Wolﬀ and Goodman agree with Baron-Cohen because, accord-
ing to the latter, Albert has become Einstein because he is an Asperg er.
3 Historians object to diagnosing Einstein with
autism
I think we cannot diagnose a dead person. Historians of science and medicine
have ﬁercely objected to Baron-Cohen’s retrospective diagnosis and have gener-
ally leveled criticism at clinicians, psychologists, and non-experts for retrospec-
tively diagnosing disorders and diseases in deceased scientists. Belo w I provide
the major objections made by historians:
1. Historians argue that people sometimes draw on dubious sources to make
retrospective diagnoses [26]. For instance, Daniela Caruso, profe ssor of law
from Boston University, diagnosed Einstein with Asperger’s syndro me based on
a children’s book. She writes [8]:
Post-mortemdiagnosesare doubtful, but Albert Einstein’s life stor y,
which begins with tales of delayed speech and abysmal performance
at school, suggests that the most accomplished scientist of all time
might have suﬀered from Asperger-like symptoms.
Caruso refers in a footnote to: “Don Brown, Odd Boy Out: Young Albert
Einstein (2004)” [8]. Odd Boy Out: Young Albert Einstein is a children’s book
by Don Brown.
told me it was as important for him to improvise on the piano as it was for him
to work on his physics. ’It is a way for me to be independent of p eople,’ he said.
’And this is highly necessary for the kind of society in which we have.’
5I am disappointed with the cheapening of history.
2. The retrospective diagnosis is a hobby of clinicians interested in his tory
who enjoy testing their diagnostic acumen on famous historical ﬁgu res. The
physicians base their diagnosis on scant evidence, usually described in a non-
medical context. They uncover intriguing medical secrets in repor ts that belong
to an accessory section for incidental topics or letters to the edit or in medical
journals. This practice raises ethical issues; in particular, the dea d scientists
cannot say no. Retro-diagnosis can expose personal details that no one in Ein-
stein’s time could have known or understood. The retrospective dia gnosescould
pose ethical problems or questions that, if revealed, may cause ha rm to the sci-
entist’s living descendants and relatives. The diagnosing physicians s trongly
violate the principles of the medical profession because they give th eir retro-
spective opinion on a patient they have never seen nor examined [31], [26], [25].
Baron-Cohen replied to the above criticism in his lecture “Scientiﬁc ta lent
and autism: is there a connection?” [4]:
This biographical approach is very interesting, but [...] I’ve sug-
gested that this might be a very unreliable way to approach the
question because biographies are always fragmented. We only have
partialinformationabout what the personwaslike, informationtha t
hassurvivedhistorically. The personisn’t heretospeakup forthem -
selves, so we don’t really know whether, if we saw them today alive,
they would meet the criteria of autism or Asperger’s syndrome. But
certainly, it’s pointing at the connection between great scientiﬁc ta l-
ents and autism or Asperger’s”.
There are two problems here: the ﬁrst problem is the impossibility of v er-
ifying or falsifying the retrospective diagnosis for obvious reasons : we cannot
examine and test the historical subject. And the second problem is ethical:
publishing a diagnosis of a patient with whom the medical expert never had a
physician-patient relationship and without consent.
One could argue that historical celebrities are immune from privacy p rotec-
tion because their lives are open to the public. And because they are long dead,
the subject of any potential harm no longer exists. But certain de fenders of the
celebrity’s image and descendants of the historical ﬁgure might obj ect to the
publication of a diagnosis that potentially stains the reputation of th e historical
ﬁgure [31].
John Stachel gave a name to people who care about Einstein’s legacy (what
he considered as the staunchest defenders of his reputation); h e called them
”keepers of the ﬂame”.7
As a result ofcriticism, Baron-Cohenadmitted there wasa problem d iagnos-
ing a person after his death because one needs the person’s conse nt. In his 2020
7Stachel writes in his book, Einstein From ’B’ to ’Z’ : ”I soon became aware of another
peril involving loss of boundaries: the danger of becoming a ‘keeper of the ﬂame’ rather than
a seeker of the truth.” [37]
6book,The Pattern Seekers: A New Theory of Human Invention , Baron-Cohen
attenuates his argument [5]:
“Some hyper-systemizers,8in a range of ﬁelds, have been described
[by the mathematician Ioan Mackenzie James from Oxford Uni-
versity] as autistic. For example, [...] Albert Einstein and Henry
Cavendish in the ﬁeld of physics have all been described [by James]
as autistic. In my view, it is unhelpful to speculate if someone –
living or not – might be autistic, since a diagnosis is only useful if
the person is seeking help and is struggling to function. Diagnosing
someone – living or not – on the basis of fragmentary biographi-
cal information is unreliable and arguably unethical since diagnosis
should always include the consent of the person and be initiated by
them. And from a scientiﬁc perspective, hyper-systemizing does n ot
automatically mean you’re autistic”.
Indeed, on January 17, 1927, Hugo Freund wrote to Einstein to as k if he
would allow himself to be psychoanalyzed ([12], Doc. 457). It is not kn own
if an answer was sent, but on the letter, in German in Einstein’s handw riting,
there is the following draft of a reply [12], Doc. 458; [14]: “I am sorry not to be
able to comply with your request, as I would very much like to remain in t he
darkness of not having been analyzed.” In other words, Einstein re fused to be
diagnosed and psychologically analyzed. Notwithstanding that, Bar on-Cohen
and others have retrospectively diagnosed Einstein.
But in the above text, Baron-Cohen tries to shrug oﬀ the diagnosis of
Einstein with Asperger’s syndrome, saying that James described Ein stein and
others as autistic. In 2012, Baron-Cohen went so far as to publish a paper
with several Cambridge University students having Asperger’s syn drome and
write: “Einstein, Mozart, Newton, Wittgenstein, and others (pre dominately
male, white, and deceased) are identiﬁed posthumously with AS and b rilliance”
[19]. This sentence is disturbing because it insinuates that the brilliant people
are predominantly white males. Baron-Cohen and his students inter twine two
diagnoses - Asperger’s syndrome and brilliance - into white males.
3. Let us move on to the third argument. Historical diseases and co ndi-
tions must be interpreted in their historical context. Retrospect ive diagnosis is
anachronistic because people try to diagnose a disease or disorder of the past
in contemporary terms. This is called ”anachronistic diagnosis.” Critic s of clin-
icians making retro-diagnosis say this kind of diagnosis can be misleadin g.
First, medicalexpertsarriveatadiagnosisofahistoricalﬁgureus ingmodern
diagnostic criteria; they reason that if historical ﬁgures had all th ese symptoms,
then they could have had these speciﬁc conditions. But in the past, people had
diﬀerent habits and lifestyles than we do [31]. Hence, we should inves tigate
social diagnosis, i.e., the name that people in the past allocated to a co ndition
[13]. If the social circumstances allowing us to perceive autism did not exist
8Hyper-systemizing is part of the cognitive style of autisti c people. [6]
7before some point relatively early in the twentieth century, then to what extent
can we say the condition existed previously? [28]
Second, medical knowledge itself changes over time. Writing historic al pa-
pers on famous patients is problematic because clinicians regard the level of
scientiﬁc knowledge at the time of writing but assess the course of a n illness in
the past.9
For example, Temple Grandin is diagnosed with autism and has a Ph.D. in
animal science. She concludes, “Einstein had many traits of an adult with mild
autism, or Asperger’s syndrome.” And [18]:
As a child, Einstein had many of these traits. He did not learn to
speak until he was three. In a letter to a mother of an autistic child,
he admitted to not being able to learn to speak until late and that
his parents had been worried about it.
This passage is anachronistic. How does Grandin know that both the child
and Einstein were autistic? Children were not yet diagnosed as autist ic in
Einstein’s lifetime.
4. Historians object to a retrospective diagnosis that does not pr ovide new
medical knowledge. This is as opposed to research based on historic al sources
that will help modern medical researchers understand the spread of diseases
around our planet during human evolution and help us plan for unexpe cted
health events. There are many good reasons to study diseases an d disorders in
the past. For instance, epidemiological analysis of data from histor ical smallpox
outbreaks has helped appropriate authorities plan for possible out breaks in the
future [30].
To this, clinicians have responded by saying that studying historical ﬁgures
might help to determine how prevalent autism was in previous generat ions [1].
But then historians try to rebut this claim - see objection 3.
Concerning autism in previousgenerations, let us return to Temple G randin.
Grandin compares herself to Einstein: ”Like Einstein, I am motivated by the
search for intellectual truth.” She then further elucidates on this point [18]:
When he developed the theory of relativity, he imagined himself on
a beam of light. His visual images were vaguer than mine, and he
could decode them into mathematical formulas. My visual images
are extremely vivid, but I am unable to make the connection with
mathematical symbols. Einstein’s calculation abilities were not phe-
nomenal. He often made mistakesand wasslow; but hisgeniuslayin
being able to connect visual and mathematical thinking. Einstein’s
dress and hair weretypical ofan adult with autistic tendencies, mos t
of whom have little regard for social niceties and rank. When he
9For instance, the historical ﬁgure, Polish composer Fr´ ed´ eric Chopin was ﬁrst (1899) di-
agnosed as having tuberculosis; then, in 1961, allergic con ditions and valvular stenosis were
oﬀered as a better explanation for his condition. In 1987 he w as diagnosed with cystic ﬁbrosis;
in 1994, other genetic defects were suggested, such as alpha -1-antitrypsin-deﬁciency [25].
8worked at the Swiss patent oﬃce, he sometimes wore green slippers
with ﬂowers on them”.
The above passage abounds in errors. But I nevertheless want to raise two
comments on this passage:
First, the people purporting to compare themselves to Einstein fail to men-
tion that his disheveled exterior reﬂected his inner humility. As he onc e said:
”I speak to everyone in the same way, whether he is the garbage ma n or the
university president” [24]. This is typical of people with Asperger’s sy ndrome,
but by the same token, this behavior is also typical of humble people. Hence,
I suggest notcomparing yourself to Einstein if only for the many things you
don’t know about him. You can’t know everything about Einstein beca use it is
impossible to read allthe primary sources. And even if you manage to read all
that, many documents have gone missing, and there is always hope o f ﬁnding
new lost letters, diaries, and manuscripts.
I will give you an example. Einstein once told Salaman: “Very few women
are creative. I should not have sent a daughter of mine to study ph ysics. I’m
glad my wife doesn’t know any science, although my ﬁrst wife did.” Gran din (a
female scholar), do you still want to compare yourself to Einstein? T his might
be a slip of the tongue because Einstein admired several women and f emale
physicists and mathematicians of his time, e.g., the brilliant genius phys icist
MarieCurieandgeniusmathematicianEmmyNoether. Overtheyears ,Einstein
madediﬀerent statementsthat depended on the people he spokew ith. He would
say one thing in the presence of distinguished scientists, cooperat ing in tributes
without questioning the narratives, and would say quite the opposit e on other
occasions. Thus, I would be extremely careful when comparing som eone to
Einstein.
Second, after Einstein’s rise to fame, Max Fl¨ uckiger wrote in his bo okEin-
stein in Bern that Einstein often appeared in green slippers trimmed with ﬂow-
ers at work. The patent oﬃce oﬃcials called him ”The man with the gree n
slippers.” A colleague also recalled that Einstein showed up at the pate nt oﬃce
one day with a saw and proceeded to shorten the legs of his chair bec ause it
was not adjustable and was too high for him [17]. Abraham Pais describ ed
Fl¨ uckiger’s book as containing several reproductions of rare do cuments about
Einstein’s younger days. But ”The text contains numerous inaccur acies” [32].
In other words, Fl¨ uckiger concocted the above stories out of t hings that never
happened.
5. Historians argue that it is often unclear how a highly speciﬁc diagno sis
would make any diﬀerence in the scholarship of the historical ﬁgure in question
[31]. It is asked: what is the objective of retrospectively diagnosing Einstein?
What goalsdoes it serve? What justiﬁes the retrospective diagnos isof historical
ﬁgures? What is the reason modern researchers retrospectively diagnose a his-
torical ﬁgure as autistic? Does the diagnosis of Einstein as autistic d eliver new
medical insight into autism? Does it help us understand how Einstein cr eated
the theory of relativity and how he arrived at his signiﬁcant discover ies?
9Ioan James writes [23]: ”In the case of Einstein, we can conclude tha t he did
have Asperger’s syndrome.” James has further stated: ”Althoug h it seems to
be widely accepted that Einstein had the syndrome, none of the man y detailed
biographies mentions this” [22]. First, such a diagnosis does not make any
diﬀerencein the scholarshipofEinsteinand the pathwaytohis theor ies. Second,
not only do none of the ”biographies mention this,” several biograph ies even try
to denounce it, as I show in the next section, claiming it is an utter myt h.
4 Historians try to debunk myths about Ein-
stein
It seems to me that in trying to debunk myths, some historians hobb le the
narrative of extraordinary and creative scientists in that they ex tend the life of
other myths. The issue is that it is not so much that historians endea vor to
debunk myths that bothers me; it is how they do so.
Although historians’ critique of Baron-Cohen and others includes d ebunking
myths, it piggybacks on another myth: presenting Einstein as a dull, conscien-
tious, agreeable person and an industrious and socially adept individu al better
suited to Thomas Kuhn’s incremental ”normal science.”
First, when I wrote my ﬁrst book, I was told that Albert Einstein, his sister
Maja Winteler-Einstein, and the family members had exaggerated th e story of
Albert, who developed slowly, learned to talk late, and whose parent s thought
something was wrong with him. I was further told that, of course, t here is no
doubt that these stories have a grain of truth, and Maja and Alber t recount
their recollections in all sincerity, but these stories sound like family t ales and
may be exaggerated. Moreover, Einstein’s friends and assistants (in interviews
and correspondences) contributed to spreading this myth. They thus inspired
biographers to create a widespread mythical public image of Albert E instein
that embodies stories about Einstein, ”the retarded genius.”
We ﬁrst conjecture that Einstein and his family members had exagge rated
the story of Albert, ”the retarded genius,” and then show that th e ”real” Albert
was a diﬀerent matter. For instance, Albert’s mother recognized t hat her son
was talented, and it does not seem that she thought he would develo p into
some eccentric. But seen from a distance of time, almost ten years after writing
my book [38], the above argument sounds improbable because Einste in and his
family are accused of inventing stories to create a myth that serve s a speciﬁc
purpose.
A diﬀerent way of considering the situation is presenting Einstein as h aving
a special gift of friendship. He may not have been working with a large group
of scientists. Still, he was deeply embedded in the academic community and
was a modern professional scientist who earned his living through his work as a
professorattheuniversity. Historiansdebunkmythsbysayingth atEinsteinwas
not an isolated genius ”working by himself in an attic with pen and paper ” [16].
10Einstein had close friendships with physicists and a special gift of colle giality
and was very well-adjusted. Then the argument goes on like this. Alt hough
Einstein was sometimes rude or insensitive, he was not unlike many indiv iduals.
Some of his social behaviors and attitudes may seem unconventiona l today, but
they were not unusual in his day and milieu. He was very sociable and wa s
emotionally involved with friends and family, even if he savored solitude when
it was within his reach to pursue his science [7].10
In his biography of Einstein, His Life and Universe , Walter Issaacson elu-
cidates why he is not convinced of the diagnosis of Einstein with Asper ger’s
syndrome: ”Even as a teenager, Einstein made close friends, had p assionate re-
lationships, enjoyed collegialdiscussions, communicated well verba lly, and could
empathize with friends and humanity in general” [21].11
In my opinion, the above narrative, very unfortunately, strips oﬀ Einstein
from his great sense of humor, from being stubborn and unconven tional and
sticking out his tongue at his pursuers to expresshis annoyance(t he photograph
that has been reproduced endlessly).
Einstein’s former Cantonal School classmate, Hans Byland, one ye ar older
than Einstein, had painted a verbal portrait of Einstein as a teenag er: Einstein
as a young man could not be ﬁtted into any pattern, an impudent Swa bian, a
restless spirit; nothing escaped the sharp gaze of his large bright b rown eyes.
”A sarcastic curl of his rather full mouth with the protruding lower lip did not
encourage Philistines to fraternize with him.” His attitude towards th e world
wasthatofalaughingphilosopher,andhiswittymockerypitilesslylash edoutat
anyconceitorpose. Einsteinmadenobonesaboutvoicinghisperson alopinions,
whether oﬀensive or not, and he had courageous adherence to th e truth [36]. Of
course, one can call this ”communicated well verbally.” We have Einst ein’s rude
letter in which he lashed out at the editor of The Physical Review : ”We (Mr.
RosenandI)hadsentyouourmanuscriptforpublicationandhadno tauthorized
you to show it to specialists before it was printed. I see no reason to address
your anonymous expert’s – in any case, erroneous – comments. Ba sed on this
incident, I prefer to publish the paper elsewhere” [27]. And Einstein attacked
his opponents at the Hebrew University and termed Judah Leon Mag nes and his
supporters “downright vermin.” On another occasion, he called the university
a “bug-infested house” [34]. It, therefore, seems that Einstein m ade no bones
about voicing his opinions, whether oﬀensive or not.
It seems to me that the supporters of the view of Einstein as a very well-
adjusted individual not only fail in demolishing myths, this narrative r epudiates
Einstein’s patent oﬃce years. Einstein’s friends and colleagues at th e patent
10I would like to correct some of the stigmas and prejudices abo ut Asperger’s syndrome
found in An Einstein Encyclopedia . Asperger’s syndrome (autism) is neither a disease nor
a mental or emotional disorder. Asperger’s syndrome (autis m) is also not a disorder people
”suﬀer” from. Asperger’s syndrome is notany of the following: a defect, developmental
anomaly, pathological conduct, a mental illness, schizoph renia, and bouts of severe depression.
11Issacson writes: ”A Google search of Einstein + Asperger’s r esults in 146 ,000 pages. I do
not ﬁnd such a long distance diagnosis to be convincing” [21] . I did the exact search, and I
found only 25 pages. Still, it does not mean that these 25 page s are convincing.
11oﬃce, his table and drawer, pen and sheets ofpaper, and especially the thoughts
he hatched there were antipodal to an academic community.
Einstein later wrote that, unlike himself, Marcel Grossmann ”was no t a
vagabond and loner”[15]. Einstein wrote to Mileva Mari´ c: “I always ﬁ nd that
I am in the best company when I am alone, except when I am with you” [ 10]
(Einstein to Mari´ c, Doc 128, Dec 17, 1901). Indeed, unlike Einste in, Grossmann
was quickly given an assistant post under Prof. Wilhelm Fiedler; Gross mann
succeeded Fiedler as a professor at the Polytechnic in 1907. On the other hand,
three years after the publication of the miraculous year papers – s pecial relativ-
ity,E=mc2ﬁrst paper, quanta and Brownian motion – Jakob Laub wrote to
Einstein, ”I must confess to you that I was surprised to read that you have to
sit in an oﬃce for eight hours a day. But, history is full of bad jokes” (Laub to
Einstein, [11], Doc. 91, March 1, 1908).
Suppose Einstein had this unique quality of being well-adjusted and de eply
embedded in the academic community, as purported. Why did he sit in t he
patent oﬃce for so long? None of this makes sense in the picture of t he well-
adjusted and embedded-in-the-science-community Einstein. A na rrative of a
socially adept Einstein does not even make sense in the context of th e later
Einstein, sitting in his oﬃce in Princeton, let alone sitting in the patent o ﬃce.
WearetryingtopressaconscientiousandagreeableEinsteinintoar ebellious
Einstein. But we don’t need Karl Popper to tell us that Einstein was o ne of
the most exciting and imaginative scientists ever to live; he was intellige nt and
creative, a vocational revolutionary scientist. And this is of utmos t importance.
He was brilliant, inspirational, abrasive, and rebellious, precisely the t ype of
truth-seeker to create a scientiﬁc revolution.12
Einstein thought that certain personal matters of his life should no t be made
public. That is the reason he did not like biographies that dealt too muc h with
his personal life [38]. But private letters are profusely found in the Collected
Papers of Albert Einstein (CPAE); forinstance, Einstein’sloveletterstohisﬁrst
wife, Mileva Mari´ c; Einstein’s later correspondencewith Mari´ can d his two sons,
Hans Albert, and Eduard; Einstein’s exchange of letters with his sec ond wife
and ﬁrst cousin, Elsa Lowenthal Einstein; correspondence with Ein stein’s sister,
Maja; letters Einstein wrote to his extra-marital lover Betty Neum ann, etc.
The reasons behind the decision to publish Einstein’s private corresp ondence
are that Einstein is not a private person anymore; his life is open to th e public.
Einstein has ceased being a private individual and belongs to history. Since
Einstein is long dead, publishing his letters cannot cause him any harm. On the
contrary, he is a historical scientist in the same category as Newto n and Galileo.
We do not think of the privacy of such historical ﬁgures. We want to know as
much as we can about them because, without full knowledge, one ca nnot fully
understand the evolution of their ideas [2].
But then, based on Einstein’s private correspondence, biography of his sister
Maja (an abridged version of which was published in the CPAE), and other
12See the discussion in [9].
12ﬁrst-hand evidence, people have written biographies and books on Einstein’s
private life. And based on these books, other people, in turn, are r etrospectively
diagnosingEinsteinwithallsortsofthings. Historianswhocareabou tEinstein’s
legacythenﬁercelyobjecttothisabuseofEinstein’sprivacyand, in turn, engage
in (futile) eﬀorts to protect his privacy. Hence, we have vicious circ ularity.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported by ERC advanced grant number 834735.
References
[1] E. L. Altschuler (2013). ”Asperger’s in the Holmes Family.” Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders 43, pp. 2238–2239.
[2] A. S. Bailey (1989). ”On the Collected Papers of Albert Einstein: T he
Development of the Project.” Proceedings of the American Philosophical
Society133, pp. 347-359.
[3] S. Baron-Cohen (2003). Male and Female Brains and the Truth about
Autism. The Essential Diﬀerence . New York: Basic Books.
[4] S. Baron-Cohen (2011). “Scientiﬁc Talent and Autism.” Lecture .
[5] S. Baron-Cohen (2020) The Pattern Seekers: How Autism Drives Human
Invention . New York: Basic Books.
[6] S. Baron-Cohen, E. Ashwin, C. Ashwin, T. Tavassoli, and B. Chak rabarti
(2009).“Talentin autism: hyper-systemizing, hyper-attentiont o detail and
sensory hypersensitivity.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B: Biological Sciences 364, pp. 1377–1383.
[7] A. Calaprice, D. Kenneﬁck, and R. Schulmann (2016). An Einstein Ency-
clopedia. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[8] D. Caruso (2010). “Autism in the U.S.: Social Movement and the Le gal
Change.” American Journal of Law and Medicine 36, pp. 483-539.
[9] B. G. Charlton (2009). ”Why are modern scientists so dull? How sc ience
selects for perseverance and sociability at the expense of intelligen ce and
creativity.” Medical Hypothesis 72, pp. 237-243.
[10]Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Volume 1: The Early Yea rs,
1879–1902 . J. Stachel, D. C. Cassidy, and R. Schulmann (eds.). Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1987.
[11]Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Volume 5: The Swiss Yea rs: Corre-
spondence, 1902–1914 . M. J. Klein, A. J. Kox, and R. Schulmann (eds.).
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993.
13[12]Collected papers of Albert Einstein. Volume 15: The Berlin Y ears: Writings
and Correspondence, June 1925-May 1927 . D. KormosBuchwald, J.Illy, A.
J. Kox, D. Lehmkuhl, Z. Rosenkranzand J. Nollar James (eds.). Prin ceton:
Princeton University Press, 2018.
[13] A. Cunningham (2002). ”Identifying disease in the past: cuttin g the Gor-
dian knot.” Asclepio 54, pp. 13–34.
[14] H. Dukas and B. Hoﬀmann (1979). The Human Side. New Glimpses from
his Archives . Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[15] A. Einstein (1955). ”Autobiographische Skizze.” In C. Seelig (19 56).Helle
Zeit – Dunkle Zeit. In memoriam Albert Einstein . Zurich: Braunschweig:
Friedrich Vieweg und Sohn/Europa.
[16] K. Fesenmaier (2014).”Einstein Online: An Interview with Diana Ko rmos-
Buchwald,” Caltech.
[17] M. Fl¨ uckiger (1974). Albert Einstein in Bern . Switzerland: Verlag Paul
Haupt Bern.
[18] T. Grandin (1995). Thinking in Pictures: My Life with Autism . New York:
Vintage Books.
[19] J. Hastwell, N. Martin, S. Baron-Cohen, and J. Hardling (2012) . “Giving
Cambridge University students with Asperger syndrome a voice: a q ualita-
tive, interview-based study towards developing a model of best pr actice.”
Good Autism Practice 13, pp. 56-63.
[20] R. Highﬁeld and P. Carter (1994). The Private Lives of Albert Einstein .
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
[21] W. Issacson (2007). His Life and Universe . New York: Simon & Schuster.
[22] I. M. James (2003). “Singular scientists.” Journal of the Royal Society of
Medicine 96, pp. 36–39.
[23] I. M. James (2006). Asperger’s Syndrome and High Achievement: Some
Very Remarkable People . London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
[24] F. Jeromeand R. Taylor(2006). Einstein on Race and Racism . New Jersey:
Rutgers University Press.
[25] A. Karenberg (2009). ”Retrospective Diagnosis: Use and Abu se in Medical
Historiography.” Prague Medical Report 110, pp. 140–145.
[26] S. Kean (2012). ”Retrodiagnoses. Investigatingthe ills of long -dead celebri-
ties”.Science337, pp. 30–31.
[27] D. Kenneﬁck (2005). ”Einstein versus the Physical Review.” Physics Today
58, pp. 43-48.
14[28] P. McDonagh (2008). “Autism and Modernism. A Genealogical Ex plo-
ration.” In M. Osteen (ed.). Autism and Representation , pp. 99-116.
[29] P.Michelmore(1962). Einstein, Proﬁle of the Man .NewYork: Dodd, Mead
& Company.
[30] P. D. Mitchell (2011). ”Retrospective diagnosis and the use of historical
texts for investigating disease in the past.” International Journal of Pale-
opathology 1, pp. 81–88.
[31] O. Muramoto(2014).”Retrospectivediagnosisofafamoushis toricalﬁgure:
ontological, epistemic, and ethical considerations.” Philosophy, Ethics, and
Humanities in Medicine 9, pp. 1-15.
[32] A. Pais (1982). Subtle is the Lord. The Science and Life of Albert Einstein .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[33] J.PleschandP.H.Plesch(1955).“SomeReminiscencesofAlber tEinstein.”
Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London 49, pp. 303-328.
[34] Z. Rosenkranz (2011). Einstein Before Israel: Zionist Icon or Iconoclast?
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[35] E. Salaman (1955) “A Talk With Einstein.” The Listener 54, pp. 370-371.
[36] C. Seelig (1956). Albert Einstein: A Documentary Biography . Translated to
English by Mervyn Savill. London: Staples Press. (1954). Albert Einstein.
Eine dokumentarische Biographie . Zurich: Europa Verlag.
[37] J. Stachel (2002). Einstein From ’B’ to ’Z’ . Boston: Birkh¨ auser.
[38] G. Weinstein (2015). General Relativity Conﬂict and Rivalries: Ein stein’s
Polemics with Physicists (Newcastle, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishin g).
[39] M. Winteler-Einstein (1924). Albert Einstein – A Biographical Sketch .
Beitrag f¨ ur sein Lebensbild .Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol. 1: The
Early Years,1879–1902 . J. Stachel, D. Cassidy, and R. Schulmann (eds.).
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987, pp. xv-xxii. (pp. xlv iii-lxvi.)
[40] B. Wolﬀ and H. Goodman (2001). “The Legend of the Dull-Witted C hild
Who Grew Up to Be a Genius.” The Albert Einstein Archives The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem.
15