Forensic analysis of the Turkey 2023 presidential election reveals extreme vote swings
in remote areas
Peter Klimek1,2,3∗, Ahmet Ayka¸ c4, Stefan Thurner1,2,3,5
1Section for Science of Complex Systems, CeDAS,
Medical University of Vienna,
Spitalgasse 23, A-1090, Austria
2Complexity Science Hub Vienna,
Josefst¨ adter Strasse 39, A-1080 Vienna, Austria
3Supply Chain Intelligence Institute Austria (ASCII),
Josefst¨ adter Strasse 39, A-1080 Vienna, Austria
4Theseus International Management Institute,
Sophia Antipolis, France
5Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road,
Santa Fe, NM 85701, USA
∗peter.klimek@meduniwien.ac.at
(Dated: June 27, 2023)
Concerns about the integrity of Turkey’s elections have increased with the recent transition from
a parliamentary democracy to an executive presidency under Recep Tayyip Erdo˘ gan. Election
forensics tools are used to identify statistical traces of certain types of electoral fraud, providing
important information about the integrity and validity of democratic elections. Such analyses of
the 2017 and 2018 Turkish elections revealed that malpractices such as ballot stuffing or voter
manipulation may indeed have played a significant role in determining the election results. Here,
we apply election forensic statistical tests for ballot stuffing and voter manipulation to the results of
the 2023 presidential election in Turkey. We find that both rounds of the 2023 presidential election
exhibit similar statistical irregularities to those observed in the 2018 presidential election, however
the magnitude of these distortions has decreased. We estimate that 2.4% (SD 1.9%) and 1.9% (SD
1.7%) of electoral units may have been affected by ballot stuffing practices in favour of Erdo˘ gan in
the first and second rounds, respectively, compared to 8.5% (SD 3.9%) in 2018. Areas with smaller
polling stations and fewer ballot boxes had significantly inflated votes and turnout, again, in favor
of Erdo˘ gan. Furthermore, electoral districts with two or fewer ballot boxes were more likely to show
large swings in vote shares in favour of Erdo˘ gan from the first to the second round. Based on a
statistical model, we estimate that these swings translate into 342,000 excess votes (SD 4,900) or
0.64% for Erdo˘ gan. Our results suggest that Turkish elections continue to be riddled with statistical
irregularities, that may be indicative of electoral fraud.
PACS numbers:
The first round of the 2023 presidential election was
held on 14 May 2023 and pitted incumbent President
Recep Tayyip Erdo˘ gan of the Justice and Develop-
ment Party (AKP) against opposition candidate Kemal
Kili¸ cdaro˘ glu, who led an alliance of six opposition parties.
The election was seen as the first real threat to Erdo˘ gan’s
presidency in a long time, as Turkey was reeling from
a prolonged economic crisis with inflation rates of up
to 85% and the aftermath of devastating earthquakes
in February 2023 that killed more than 50,000 people,
coupled with public outrage at the government’s slow re-
sponse to these crises [1]. Despite polls to the contrary,
Erdo˘ gan won by a healthy margin over Kili¸ cdaro˘ glu with
49 per cent to 45 per cent of the vote, sending Turkey into
a run-off between the two candidates on 28 May. Erdo˘ gan
won this second round of the election with a margin of
4.36% (52.18% versus 47.82%) over Kili¸ cdaro˘ glu.
While elections in Turkey are generally considered to
be free and fair, the playing field is clearly not level.
For example, according to Turkish media monitoring,
Erdo˘ gan received almost 33 hours of airtime on the mainstate television channel, compared to 32 minutes for
Kili¸ cdaro˘ glu [2]. These and other imbalances became
possible after Erdo˘ gan transformed Turkey from a parlia-
mentary democracy to an executive presidency following
a 2017 referendum in which a reform package narrowly
won. That election, however, was marred by allegations
of fraud, as unverified videos and reports emerged on
social media showing various forms of electoral malprac-
tice, such as ballot stuffing (casting multiple votes for one
candidate) and voter coercion (preventing potentially op-
posing voters from casting their ballots) [3, 4]. Also prac-
tices such as handing out cash to supporters have been
reported [5].
The emerging field of electoral forensics seeks to diag-
nose the extent to which a particular type of malpractice
may have affected the outcome of an election, in order to
identify electoral malpractice in a timely and fully quan-
titative manner [6]. A disproportionate abundance of
round numbers was often the focus of early work in elec-
tion forensics. The basic principle of these tests is that
humans have a particular tendency to favour round num-arXiv:2305.19168v2  [stat.AP]  25 Jun 20232
bers, or numbers with certain digits, when producing re-
sults. These tendencies are at odds with the statistics of
the expected number and digit distributions of fair elec-
tions [7, 8], including violations of Benford’s Law [9–11].
However, it has been shown that such digit-based tests
need to be combined with contextual information such as
country-specific risk factors, socio-economic inequalities
or ethnic fractionalisation [12].
As a result, there has been a growing interest in foren-
sic electoral testing that attempts to provide “mechanis-
tic” or generative models of the impact of specific elec-
toral malpractices on the expected distributions of votes
and turnout across polling stations, as well as on the
correlations between votes and turnout [13–19]. The ba-
sic rationale of such approaches is to consider elections
as large-scale natural experiments in which a population
is divided into a large number of electoral units in which
each registered voter makes the decision to (i) cast a valid
ballot or not, and (ii) vote for a particular candidate. The
large number of electoral units in most countries means
that certain statistical regularities can be expected to
hold. Election forensics then tests whether deviations
from these regularities are consistent with specific types
of fraud. Similar principles can be used to apply ma-
chine learning models for election forensics [20]. These
statistical tools are often complemented by analyses of
secondary data, such as exit polls or survey and sam-
pling data [21, 22].
In a forensic analysis of the 2017 election, we confirmed
that the election records indeed show specific statistical
irregularities that point toward ballot stuffing and voter
coercion [23]. More specifically, ballot stuffing, when car-
ried out on a large scale, typically leads to a correlation
between voter turnout and the vote for the candidate [16].
Voter manipulation or coercion tends to inflate votes and
turnout in smaller or more remote regions, where oppo-
nents are easier to identify and irregularities are less likely
to be observed or reported [17]. For the constitutional
referendum, we found that 11% of areas were potentially
affected by ballot stuffing and that removing the affected
influences from the data would have turned the overall
vote of the referendum from “Yes” to “No”. There were
also small but significant traces of ballot stuffing. Simi-
lar statistical irregularities were also observed in the 2018
presidential and parliamentary elections.
Here we ask whether similar forensic patterns are also
present in both rounds of the 2023 presidential election
[24]. We test whether statistical fingerprints of ballot
stuffing or voter coercion can also be found in the 2023
results. We also seek to clarify the contribution of small
and/or remote electoral units to such irregularities. In
particular, we develop a statistical test to compare the
results at the polling station level for the first and sec-
ond rounds of the presidential election. With this test,
we ask whether boxes in such areas are more likely to
show improbably large swings of votes in favour of eithercandidate from one round to the next.
DATA AND METHODS
We analyse the official and final election results of both
rounds of the 2023 presidential election, as provided by
the election commission [24]. At the finest level of aggre-
gation available, the data for the first round consists of
191,872 electoral units (here also referred to as “boxes”)
for which we consider the size of the electorate (num-
ber of eligible voters), the number of valid votes and the
number of votes for Recep T. Erdo˘ gan. The same vari-
ables were extracted from the data for the second round,
which contained 192,214 electoral units. Of these, 12 and
18 units respectively were removed because their number
of valid votes was zero.
When applying the ballot-stuffing and voter-rigging
tests, all electoral units with an electorate of less than
one hundred voters are excluded in order to rule out that
the results are driven by small number artefacts. This re-
duces the number of electoral units used to 180,301 and
180,629 respectively. The number of valid votes divided
by the size of the electorate, n(j)
i, for a ballot box iis
called the “turnout”, t(j)
i, for the first ( j= 1) or second
(j= 2) round of the election. The number of votes, Vc,j
i,
for candidate cdivided by the valid votes is called the
“vote share”, v(c,j)
i.
The election data includes multiple administrative lev-
els for each ballot box, namely 81 provinces, 948 districts
and 28,268 counties. The number of ballot boxes is very
unevenly distributed across these districts. In particular,
we identify districts that are typically smaller and more
remote as those that have only two or fewer ballot boxes.
We apply ballot stuffing [16] and voter coercion [17] to
the data as previously reported [23]. In order to inves-
tigate whether there is systematic bias in vote shifts, we
propose the following test procedure. In the first round,
Sinan O˘ gan also ran and received 5.17% of the vote, after
which he supported Erdo˘ gan in the run-off. Therefore,
we compare the vote shares of Erdo˘ gan ( c=E) or O˘ gan
(c=O) in round 1 with Erdo˘ gan’s shares in round 2. To
do this, we compute the “vote shift” at the ballot box
level as δvi=V(E,2)
i
t(2)
i−V(E,1)
i+V(O,1)
i
t(1)
i. We assume that
there is a general population-level trend in how prefer-
ences for a candidate may have shifted between the first
and second rounds, which can be obtained as the mode
of the distribution of δvi, denoted as ¯δv. Algorithmically,
we estimate ¯δvusing MatLab’s kernel density estimation
procedure. Our null hypothesis is that the vote shifts at
the ballot box level are symmetrically distributed around
this mode, i.e. the expectation Efor the deviations from
¯δvis zero, H0:E(δvi¯δv) = 0.
LetB+/−be the set of ballot boxes for which this devi-
ation is greater/smaller than zero, B+/−={i|δvi−¯δv >3
FIG. 1: Votes for Erdo˘ gan as a function of voter turnout for
2018 and 2023. For a given turnout level, the cumulative vote
share of ballot boxes with this or lower turnout is shown. In
2018, a majority of more than 50% is achieved by including
boxes with a turnout of more than 90% (blue). In the first
round in 2023 (red line) we observe similar characteristics with
higher turnout and lower vote shares (below 50%), whereas
in the second round (yellow) Erdo˘ gan reached a majority of
votes.
/ <0}. A symmetrized vote shift distribution can then
be constructed by replacing, for example, ( δvi−¯δv)∀i∈
B+by values of −(δvj−¯δv), where jwas randomly sam-
pled from B−. For the case were vote shifts typically
favor one candidate, say E(|δvi¯δv|)B+> E(|δvi¯δv|)B−
(meaning that the expectation value is taken over all
iinB+/−), one replaces vales in B+with values sam-
ple from within B−. This gives a model estimate for a
symmetrized vote shift distribution from which corrected
vote totals for individual candidates can be estimated.
By comparing the actual vote tallies with expectations
from the model with symmetrized vot shift distributions,
one obtains the number of excess votes due to large vote
swings.
RESULTS
The cumulative percentage of votes for Erdo˘ gan is
shown as a function of turnout in Figure 1. For each
turnout level (x-axis), the share of votes from boxes with
that turnout level or lower is shown on the y-axis. In
2018, the share of votes exceeds the 50% threshold only if
we include voting boxes with a turnout of more than 90%.
In 2023, we observe a similarly shaped curve with an over-
all higher turnout (the curve is shifted to the right) but
without crossing the 50% threshold in the first round of
the election. For the second round we find again a qual-
itatively similar curve as in 2018 that crosses the 50%
threshold at a turnout of around 92%.Ballot stuffing test.
In Figure 2, we test for the presence of electoral mal-
practices that lead to vote-turnout correlations (such as
ballot stuffing) using so-called electoral fingerprints, i.e.,
a 2-d histogram of the vote-turnout distribution. The fin-
gerprint for the first round and second round of the 2023
Turkish presidential election is shown in Figure 2(A,D),
respectively. The colour intensity (blue) indicates the
number of boxes with the corresponding percentage of
votes (x-axis) and turnout (y-axis), together with a box
plot of the distribution of turnout for a given percent-
age of votes. If there were no non-linear correlations be-
tween votes and turnout, the bulk of the distribution in
Figure 2(A,D) should be circular or elliptical symmetric.
Malpractices such as ballot stuffing would inflate turnout
and simultaneously increase vote shares, breaking the el-
liptical symmetry in the fingerprints if the number of
affected boxes is large enough.
Considering the region of high voting and turnout, in
both rounds we see a smearing of the bulk towards in-
flated votes and turnout, towards values of 100% votes
for Erdo˘ gan and 100% turnout. To assess whether such
deviations between symmetric and biased fingerprints are
statistically significant, we run a parametric test that was
proposed previously [23]. This model is designed to test
if the observed deviations from the normal distribution
in vote and turnout shares can be better explained by
a model where ballot stuffing occurs in a given fraction
of ballot boxes (fraud parameter f). To fit and evaluate
this statistical model, we follow a previously described
strategy [23] and further restrict the analysis to boxes
with a vote and turnout share of more than 25%.
For the first round we find a fraud parameter of f=
0.024 with a standard deviation (SD) of 0 .019 and for the
second round f= 0.19 (SD 1 .7%). Note that for 2018 we
find higher values with f= 0.085 (SD 0 .039). Therefore,
the test suggests that the number of ballot boxes affected
by such statistical irregularities has decreased from 2018
to 2023, to a point where the ballot stuffing test does not
detect statistically significant effects.
Voter rigging test.
The fingerprints shown in Figure 2(A) and (D) may
also show deviations from elliptical symmetry due to ge-
ographical effects. To account for such effects, it has
been suggested to compare the unit with other units
in close geographical proximity [17]. Here, we compare
the vote and turnout figures of a polling station with
the averages observed in other polling stations in the
same constituency. We refer to these rescaled vote and
turnout shares as standardised votes and turnout, respec-
tively. We call their joint distribution (2D histogram) the
“standardised fingerprint” . Standardised fingerprints4
FIG. 2: Forensic electoral fingerprints for the two rounds of the 2023 presidential election. The fingerprints for (A) first round
and (B) second round show joint vote-turnout distributions with color intensity encoding the number of ballot boxes with a
given vote (y-axis) and turnout (x-axis). For both elections, we find a visible correlation in the region of high vote and turnout
(e.g. more than 80%), which can be associated with ballot stuffing. A box plot (red horizontal boxes) shows the 25th, 50th
and 75th percentiles of voter turnout as a function of votes (whiskers indicate the 95% confidence interval). (C) To adjust
for regional characteristics, the fingerprints can be adjusted by rescaling the vote and turnout shares by their typical levels in
the unit’s region, resulting in the standardised fingerprint shown. (D) Traces of voter coercion can be identified by comparing
the standardised fingerprints of small (red lines) and large (blue) units, as voter coercion results in their being shifted towards
inflated votes and turnout, as observed here. (E,F) The standardised fingerprints of the second round are similar to those of
the first round.
are shown in Figure 2(C) for round 1. For the voter
coercion test, we ask whether small and large units have
different standardised fingerprints. The underlying hy-
pothesis of this test is that coercion is more likely to
occur in smaller units because they are more susceptible
to coercion tactics. Reasons for this include that (i) it
is easier to identify opponents in smaller units, (ii) fewer
eyewitnesses can be expected, and (iii) election observers
are less likely to be present. In line with these assump-
tions, voter manipulation suggests that the standardised
fingerprints of small units are biased towards increased
voting and turnout compared to larger units.
We use different definitions of “small units”. Fig-
ure 2(B) shows the standardised fingerprints for small
(red) and large (blue) units, where small units are those
in the lowest p= 10th percentile of all units. It can
clearly be seen that the fingerprints for small units are
shifted towards the upper right corner, see Figure 2(C),
which is consistent with voter manipulation. For the sec-
ond round, we found almost identical standardised fin-
gerprints, see Figs. 2(E) and 2(F).The magnitude of the displacement between the av-
erage standardised votes and the turnout of small and
large units depends on the size threshold p and is de-
noted by δ(p), see [17, 23] for methodological details. To
assess whether this shift is statistically significant, we
apply the Jimenez et al. voter rigging test [17]. The
idea behind this test is to estimate the expected shifts
between small and large units based on a reference set
of trustworthy elections, yielding a range of “acceptable
shift sizes”. We obtain this acceptable region from 21
different reference elections in ten countries, see [17, 23].
For a given election, one can now check whether the ac-
tual observed displacement between small and large units
for a size threshold plies within this region (“accepted
region”) or not.
The displacement, δ(p) , is shown in Figure 3(A) for
the reference set of elections (solid lines), the elections
in Russia and Venezuela (dashed line) next to the two
rounds in 2023 (solid magenta) and 2018 (solid black)
Turkish elections. For small size thresholds, p, all Turkish
datasets show shifts that are slightly outside the accept-5
FIG. 3: Results of the statistical test for voter manipulation.
(A) The displacement δ(p) between small and large units for
the first (solid dark magenta line) and second (solid light ma-
genta line) round of the 2023 elections is very narrowly outside
the accepted range for a restricted set of size thresholds, sim-
ilar as it was in 2018 (solid black line). These displacements
are much smaller displacements in the Russian or Venezuelan
elections (dashed lines); the reference elections are shown as
dotted lines. (B) Units in the 2023 and 2018 Turkish elections
are ranked according to their electorate size. We show the cu-
mulative vote share, cum i(v), calculated over all units with
a size greater than the given rank. As in 2018, we observe
a characteristic “hockey stick” in 2023, meaning that units
with high rank (low electorate size) show a clear tendency to
favour Erdo˘ gan.
able range. This indicates statistically significant signs
of voter manipulation, however, only for a limited region
of thresholds. The shifts in the first round in 2023 are
slightly smaller than in 2018, whereas in the second round
they were slighly larger.
To assess the potential impact of these voter rigging
effects in the data, we rank the units by their electorate
size in descending order and calculate the vote share over
all units with smaller ranks (higher electorate size), see
Figure 3(B). In this plot, voter manipulation takes the
form of a “hockey stick”, i.e., a sharp increase for the
smallest units. This signal is also found in Russia and
Venezuela, but is absolutely absent in the reference elec-
tions, see the insets in Figure 3(B).
To further show the bias in small units in the first
and second round in 2023, respectively, we compare the
fingerprint observed in all units with an electorate size
larger than 100, Figure 4(A,B), with the fingerprints of
two different definitions of “small”. First, we consider
only boxes with an electorate of one hundred or less, re-
sulting in 11,689 units, see Figure 4(C,D). Alternatively,
one can consider only boxes from areas with one or two
ballot boxes in total, resulting in 38,662 boxes in the
first round, see Figure 4(E,F). The small units show com-pletely different fingerprints when compared to the large
ones. They show a bimodal distribution with a larger
mode in the high vote-high turnout region and a smaller
mode in the low vote-high turnout region.
Comparing Figures 4(E) and (F), there is a tendency
for the high vote/high turnout mode to have shifted fur-
ther to the upper right of the plot in the second round
compared to the first. To systematically compare such
effects, we examine the shift of vote shares between
Erdo˘ gan or O˘ gan in the first round and Erdo˘ gan in the
second round (see Methods). A scatterplot of these vote
shares is shown in Figure 5(A), which shows that in the
vast majority of cases the vote shares for Erdo˘ gan (or
candidates who later endorsed him) were similar in the
first and second rounds; the points cluster around the
x=yline. The distribution of vote shifts, δvi, in Fig-
ure 5(B) shows a clear tendency for large shifts in vote
shares from Kili¸ cdaro˘ glu in round 1 toward Erdo˘ gan in
round 2 to be more common than vice versa (the distri-
bution is skewed to the right, favouring Erdo˘ gan). Fig-
ure 5(C) shows the percentage of ballot boxes that are in
regions with two or fewer ballot boxes in total for each
of the bins in the histogram (bins in the lowest or high-
est percentile have been combined). Interestingly, larger
districts (in the sense of having more than two ballot
boxes) have very small vote shifts. Strong positive vote
shifts in favour of Erdo˘ gan occur mainly in districts with
few ballot boxes.
Similar observations apply, to a lesser extent, to vote
shifts in favour of Kili¸ cdaro˘ glu. To compare the mag-
nitude of these vote shifts, we consider a symmetrized
distribution of vote shifts in which vote shifts in favour
of Erdo˘ gan follow the same distribution as those in favour
of Kili¸ cdaro˘ glu (see Methods). Overall, we find that
Erdo˘ gan received 342,000 (SD 4,900) excess votes, which
corresponds to 0.64% of all valid votes.
DISCUSSION
An electoral forensic analysis of the first and second
round of the 2023 presidential election in Turkey identi-
fies statistical irregularities similar to those observed in
the 2018 election and the 2017 constitutional referendum.
However, the estimated magnitude of these irregularities
has decreased in 2023 compared to the 2018 presidential
election. For 2023, we observe trends in turnout inflation,
as would be expected in the presence of electoral malprac-
tices such as ballot stuffing. However, the percentage of
electoral units potentially affected by these distortions
has fallen to 2.4% (SD 1.9%) in the first round and to
1.9% (SD 1.7%), making the results statistically insignifi-
cant. In both rounds in 2023, we also observe a tendency
for areas with small electorates to show different voting
and turnout patterns compared to other regions. Such
biases are consistent with the presence of voter coercion6
FIG. 4: The fingerprints in 2023 for small units (C-F) show very different patterns than those with an electorate size of more
than 100 (A,B). Considering only areas with an electorate size of less than 100 (C,D), or alternatively ballot boxes from areas
with one or two ballot boxes (E,F), results in a bimodal distribution with a large mode in the region with very high turnout
and votes for Erdo˘ gan.
or intimidation techniques, to which smaller and more
remote electoral units are more susceptible. The effect
size of these deviations is statistically significant only by
a small margin and for a limited range in the parameter
space (meaning these effects vanish when increasing the
size threshold of what constitutes “small” unit above the
20th percentile).
We found, however, suprising irregularities when con-
sidering ballot boxes in areas with two or fewer ballot
boxes in total, which typically hints at remote areas.
There are roughly 40,000 such boxes (out of 190,000
in total) that show completely different trends in their
vote–turnout distribution when compared to the other
areas. In such remote areas the vote–turnout distribu-
tion becomes bimodal with high vote/high turnout bulks
for both candidates (Erodgan and Kili¸ cdaro˘ glu, respec-
tively), though the Erdo˘ gan mode contains much more
ballot boxes compared to the Kili¸ cdaro˘ glu mode. What
is more, comparing the first and the second round of
the election, a much higher fraction of such boxes has
flipped from the Kili¸ cdaro˘ glu to the Erdo˘ gan mode com-
pared to the other way around. This high number of
districts (around 90%) that flipped from one candidate
to the other at very high turnout levels in the span of no
more than two weeks is certainly surprising. Correcting
the election results for such suprising vote shifts wouldreduce Erdo˘ gan’s vote tally by about 342,000 votes or
0.64% of valid votes.
When interpreting the results of forensic voting tests,
several limitations must be borne in mind. First and
foremost, none of these tests can provide incontrovert-
ible evidence of electoral fraud; they provide correlation,
not causation. Although most of the tests make adjust-
ments for regional characteristics and rule out the possi-
bility that these correlations are spurious artefacts from
small districts, it is not possible to control for all poten-
tial confounders. A positive result in such a test indicates
that the data are compatible with certain types of fraud
(ballot stuffing, etc.) and typically gives a quantitative
estimate of how many regions might have been affected
by such malpractice. Other non-fraudulent influences can
never be completely ruled out. In order to understand
whether the observed irregularities may be due to such
non-fraudulent phenomena, such as heterogeneous voter
mobilisation through strategic voting, forensic tests must
always be evaluated in conjunction with external infor-
mation [25, 26]. Conversely, even if the tests give a neg-
ative result, one cannot rule out the presence of other
types of fraud, which would require a different test.
Taken together, these results suggest that the presence
of certain types of electoral malpractice in both rounds of
the 2023 presidential election cannot be ruled out. How-7
FIG. 5: Statistical analysis of vote shifts from Kili¸ cdaro˘ glu
to Erdo˘ gan from the first to the second round. (A) The vote
shares for Erdo˘ gan and O˘ gan in the first round are strongly
correlated with Erdo˘ gan’s vote share in the second round,
although there are some outliers. (B) A histogram of these
vote shifts shows that these outliers typically favour Erdo˘ gan
in the sense that large shifts from anti to pro Erdo˘ gan are
much more common than the other way around. (C) Looking
at the proportion of ballot boxes coming from districts with
two or fewer ballot boxes as a function of vote shifts, we see
that these extreme vote shifts favouring Erdo˘ gan occur pre-
dominantly in districts with fewer ballot boxes.
ever, these malpractices appear to have been less fre-
quent in 2023 than in 2018, and less decisive in swinging
the vote one way or the other. There is a notion that
Turkish elections have become “free and unfair” because
Turkey’s political playing field is known to be massively
tilted in Erdo˘ gan’s favour [27]. The authors are satisfied
that Erdo˘ gan or his supporters have autocratised the me-
dia, the judiciary, civil society and academia [28, 29]. Our
analysis suggests that it may be more appropriate to de-
scribe Turkish elections as “mostly free and unfair”, as
consistent trends of small but discernible electoral irreg-
ularities can be consistently found by electoral forensic
tools. While these statistical irregularities were not large
enough to determine the outcome in 2023 on their own,
they certainly tilt Turkey’s political playing field even
further towards an illiberal democracy.
[1] “After bitter campaign, a divided Turkey votes in
critical runoff election”, Washington Post, May 28, 2023,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2023/05/28/turkey-election-runoff-Erdogan-Kilicdaroglu/ .
[2] “Turkey’s opposition denounces fairness
of vote under Erdo˘ gan”, AP News, May
8, 2023, https://apnews.com/article/
turkey-elections-opposition-43f8d2c0aba17958c8e7123cf39eeabf .
[3] “Turkey: Videos show electoral fraud and bal-
lot stuffing”, The Observers, France 24, April
18 2017, http://observers.france24.com/en/
20170418-turkey-videos-show-electoral-fraud-ballot-stuffing .
[4] “Videos Fuel Charges of Fraud in Erdo˘ gan’s
Win in Turkey Referendum”, The New
York Times, April 18, 2017, https://
www.nytimes.com/2017/04/18/world/europe/
turkey-referendum-is-haunted-by-allegations-of-voter-fraud.
html.
[5] “Erdo˘ gan hands banknotes to supporters outside Turk-
ish polling station”, The Guardian News, May 28, 2023,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LVVBYl-QcsY .
[6] Levin I, Cohn GA, Ordeshook PC, and Alvarez RM
(2009) Detecting voter fraud in an electronic voting con-
text: An analysis of the unlimited reelection vote in
Venezuela, in EVT/WOTE’09 Proceedings of the 2009
conference on Electronic voting technology/workshop on
trustworthy elections, USENIX Association, Berkeley.
[7] Cant´ u F and Saiegh SM (2011) Fraudulent Democracy?
An Analysis of Argentina’s Infamous Decade Using Su-
pervised Machine Learning. Political Analysis 19: 409–
433.
[8] Beber B and Sacco A (2012) What the Numbers Say: A
Digit-Based Test for Election Fraud. Political Analysis
20:211–234.
[9] Mebane W (2008) Election forensics: The second-digit
Benford’s law test and recent American presidential elec-
tions, in Election Fraud: Detecting and Deterring Elec-
toral Manipulation , eds Alvarez RM, Hall TE and Hyde
SD (Brooking Press, Washington DC), pp 162–181.
[10] Pericchi L and Torres D (2011) Quick anomaly detec-
tion by the Newcomb-Benford Law, with applications to
electoral processes data from the USA, Puerto Rico, and
Venezuela. Statist Sci 26:513–527.
[11] Gueron E and Pellegrini J (2022) Application of Benford–
Newcomb law with base change to electoral fraud detec-
tion. Physica A 607:128208.
[12] Montgomery JM, Olivella S, Potter JD, Crisp BF (2015)
An informed forensics approach to detecting vote irregu-
larities. Political Analysis 23(4):488–505.
[13] Lacasa L and Fernandez-Gracia J (2019) Election foren-
sics: Quantitative methods for electoral fraud detection.
Forensic Science International 294:e19-e22.
[14] Myakgov M, Ordeshook PC, and Shaikin D (2009) The
Forensics of Election Fraud , Cambridge University Press.
[15] Levin I, Cohn GA, Ordeshook PC, and Alvarez RM
(2009) Detecting voter fraud in an electronic voting con-
text: An analysis of the unlimited reelection vote in
Venezuela, in EVT/WOTE’09 Proceedings of the 2009
conference on Electronic voting technology/workshop on
trustworthy elections, USENIX Association, Berkeley.
[16] Klimek P, Yegorov Y, Hanel R, and Thurner S (2012)
Statistical detection of systematic election irregularities.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:16469–16473.
[17] Jim´ enez R, Hidalgo M, Klimek P (2017) Testing for
voter rigging in small polling stations. Science Advances
3:e1602363.
[18] Rozenas A (2017) Detecting election fraud from irreg-8
ularities in vote-share distributions. Political Analysis
25(1):41–56.
[19] Jim´ enez R (2011) Forensic analysis of the Venezuelan
recall referendum. Statist Sci 26:564–583.
[20] Zhan M, Alvarez M, Levin I (2019) Using machine learn-
ing and synthetic data for possible election anomaly de-
tection. Plos ONE 14(10):e0223950.
[21] Prado R and Sans´ o B (2011) The 2004 Venezuelan pres-
idential recall referendum: Discrepancies between two
exit polls and official results. Statist Sci 26:502–512.
[22] Hausmann R and Rigob´ on R (2011) In search of the
black swan: Analysis of the statistical evidence of fraud
in Venezuela. Statist Sci 26:543–563.
[23] Klimek P, Jim´ enez R, Hidalgo M, Hinteregger A, Thurner
S (2018) Forensic analysis of Turkish elections in 2017-
2018. Plos ONE 13(10):e0204975.
[24] Supreme Board of Elections, https://www.ysk.gov.tr ,
accessed June 6, 2023.
[25] Mebane W (2016) Election Forensics: Frauds Tests andObservation-level Frauds Probabilities. In 2016 Annual
Meeting of the Modwest Political Science Association ,
Chicago, April 7–10.
[26] Ferrari D, McAlister K, Mebane W (2018) Developments
in Positive Empirical Models of Election Frauds: Vary-
ing Dimensions. In 2018 Annual Meeting of the Modwest
Political Science Association , Chicago, April 5–18.
[27] “Turkey points to a global trend: Free and unfair
elections”, Washington Post, May 19, 2023, https:
//www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/05/19/
Erdogan-turkey-autocrats-manipulation-elections/ .
[28] Co¸ skun G¨ u and K¨ olemen A (2020) Illiberal Democracy or
Electoral Autocracy: The Case of Turkey. In The Emer-
gence of Illiberalism (Routledge, 2020), pp. 166-187.
[29] Esen B and Yardimci-Geyikci S (2020) The Turkish pres-
idential elections of 24 June 2018. Mediterranean Politics
25(5):682–689.