FACTORIALITY INSIDE BOOLEAN LATTICES
KHALID AJRAN AND FELIX GOTTI
Abstract. Given a join semilattice Swith a minimum ^0, the quarks (also called atoms in order
theory) are the elements that cover ^0, and for each x2Sn f^0ga factorization (into quarks) of xis
a minimal set of quarks whose join is x. If every element x2Sn f^0ghas a factorization, then Sis
called factorizable. If for each x2Snf^0g, any two factorizations of xhave equal (resp., distinct) size,
then we say that Sis half-factorial (resp., length-factorial). Let BNbe the Boolean lattice consisting
of all nite subsets of Nunder intersections and unions. Here we study factorizations into quarks
of join subsemilattices of BN, focused on the notions of half-factoriality and length-factoriality. We
also consider the unique factorization property, which is the most special and relevant type of half-
factoriality, and the elasticity, which is an arithmetic statistic that measures the deviation from
half-factoriality.
1.Introduction
In a commutative monoid M, a non-invertible element is called irreducible provided that it does
not decompose as a product of two non-invertible elements, and then Mis called atomic provided
that every non-invertible element of Mdecomposes as a product of nitely many irreducibles. Such
irreducible decompositions are called factorizations (into irreducibles). The rst systematic studies
of factorizations seem to go back to the sixties with the work of Carlitz [14], Narkiewicz [41, 42],
and Cohn [19] in the context of algebraic number theory and commutative ring theory. After that,
there were further sporadic investigations of factorizations, including those by Skula [45], Zaks [51, 52],
Stean [47], and Valenza [50]. In the early nineties, Anderson, Anderson, and Zafrullah [3] and Halter-
Koch [37] introduced the bounded and the nite factorization properties. Since then, a urry of papers
studying factorizations in a large variety of algebraic structures have systematically appeared in the
literature, giving shape to what we call today factorization theory (see the current surveys [9, 32] and
references therein).
When the commutative monoid is taken to be a join semilattice Swith a minimum, which must
be the identity and only invertible element of S, the notion of a factorization is vacuous because S
contains no irreducibles (as every element of Sis idempotent). However, a rich factorization theory in
join semilattices, parallel to that of factorizations into irreducibles, is still possible if we let the role of
irreducibles be played by the quarks. Following Tringali [48], we say that a quark1of a join semilattice
is an element covering the minimum. For the rest of this section, let Sbe a join semilattice with a
minimum, which we denote by ^0. Then we say that join semilattice Sis factorizable (into quarks)
provided that every element in Snf^0gis the join of nitely many quarks. For x2Snf^0g, a factorization
(into quarks) of xinSis a minimal set of quarks whose join is x. Clearly,Sis factorizable if and
only if every element in Snf^0ghas a factorization. In this paper, we mostly focus on the study of
factorizations in the class consisting of factorizable join subsemilattices of the free semilattice on N, the
2020 Mathematics Subject Classication. Primary: 11Y05, 20M13; Secondary: 06B25, 05C90.
Key words and phrases. join semilattice, factorization, factorizable semilattice, half-factoriality, length-factoriality,
elasticity.
1Although quarks have been called atoms in order theory for quite a while, we have adopted the former term here
because, in the context of factorization theory, the latter term is reserved for a special and well-studied type of irreducible
elements.
1arXiv:2305.00413v1  [math.CO]  30 Apr 20232 K. AJRAN AND F. GOTTI
set of positive integers. Therefore we will be investigating factorizations in a highly non-cancellative
setting: indeed, in a join semilattice with a minimum, the only cancellative element is the minimum
(as every element is idempotent).
Having said that, it is worth emphasizing that factorizations (into irreducibles) have been well
studied in various non-cancellative algebraic structures during the past few decades (for instance, see
[16] and references therein). Factorizations in commutative rings with zero-divisors were studied by
Anderson and Valdes-Leon [6, 7] in the nineties and more recently by Anderson and Chun [4, 18].
In the same direction, Juett et al. have provided a further insight into the same area with their
recent papers [5, 25, 39]. The arithmetic of factorizations of semigroups of ideals and modules was
studied by Fan et al. in [26]. On the other hand, factorizations in power monoids have also been the
subject of recent investigation. Given a commutative monoid M, the set consisting of all nonempty
nite subsets of Munder the Minkowski sum is called the power monoid of M. Motivated in part by
arithmetic combinatorics, factorizations in the power monoid of the additive monoid of nonnegative
integers were rst studied by Fan and Tringali in [27], where the term \power monoid" was coined.
The same were later studied in power monoids of cyclic groups by Antonious and Tringali [10] as well
as in power monoids of numerical monoids by Bienvenu and Geroldinger [12]. Finally, factorizations
in a more general setting have been studied by Cossu and Tringali in a series of recent papers (see [22]
and references therein).
LetSbe a factorizable join semilattice with minimum ^0. For each x2Snf^0g, the size of a
factorization of xis called a length of x, and the set consisting of all the possible lengths of xis
denoted by L(x) and called the set of lengths of x. We say that Sis half-factorial (resp., length-
factorial) if any two distinct factorizations of the same non-minimum element of Shave the same
length (resp., dierent lengths). Let BNbe the free lattice on N. As pointed out earlier, our primary
purpose here is to investigate factorizations inside join subsemilattices of BN. We call such join
subsemilattices Boolean sublattices. An eective traditional way to study the phenomenon of multiple
factorizations (into irreducibles) is through the lens of sets of factorizations/lengths as, intuitively, the
same phenomenon is more pronounced when the sizes of the sets of factorizations/lengths are larger.
The purpose of this paper is twofold. On one hand, we collect fundamental evidence to conclude
that factorizations in Boolean sublattices are rather nontrivial and quite interesting; we not only
identify classes of half/length-factorial Boolean sublattices, but also show that there exist Boolean
sublattices that are as far from being half-factorial as they could possibly be (we do this by considering
elasticities). On the other hand, we compare and contrast some of the results we establish here with
results already known in the more classical setting of factorizations into irreducibles.
The term \half-factoriality" was coined by Zaks in [51]. With initial motivation in algebraic number
theory, the notion of half-factoriality has been systematically investigated in the setting of monoids
and domains during the last six decades (see the classical works [14, 23, 45, 52] and the more recent
papers [31, 43]). The unique factorization property is the most special case of half-factoriality, and
the study of the former in the setting of monoids has been largely motivated by trying to establish
results similar to the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic in more abstract algebraic structures. For
instance, although Dedekind domains (specially, rings of integers) are not UFDs in general, their
nonzero ideals factor uniquely into prime ideals. This important factorization property of Dedekind
domains has inspired many authors to investigate further classes of commutative monoids satisfying
the unique factorization property (see [38] and the more recent paper [44]). We devote Section 3
to the study of half-factoriality in Boolean sublattices. In Subsection 4, we consider the special
case of the unique factorization property: we nd a sucient condition for a Boolean sublattice
to be a unique factorization semilattice and then we identify a special class of unique factorization
Boolean sublattices. In Subsection 5, we establish two characterizations of half-factoriality in the classFACTORIALITY INSIDE BOOLEAN LATTICES 3
consisting of all Boolean sublattices whose quarks have size at most 2 (a similar characterization is
given in Subsection 4 for the unique factorization property).
In the classical theory of factorizations into irreducibles, one of the most important arithmetic
statistics to measure the deviation of an algebraic structure from being half-factorial is the elasticity.
A similar notion of elasticity can be dened in our setting of join semilattices by replacing factorizations
into irreducibles by factorizations into quarks. For x2Snf^0g, we call sup L(x)=minL(x) the elasticity
ofxand we denote it by (x). The elasticity of the whole semilattice Sis then dened as sup f(x)j
x2Snf^0gg. The notion of elasticity was rst considered in the context of rings of algebraic integers
and Dedekind domains by Valenza [50] and Stean [47], respectively (the term \elasticity" being
coined by Valenza in [50]). The elasticity has been systematically studied ever since not only in
integral domains, but also in the more general setting of cancellative commutative monoids: see the
Anderson's survey [8] for the most relevant advances on the elasticity in integral domains until 2000
and see the papers [11, 34, 40, 53] (and references therein) for further advances on the elasticity in
both commutative monoids and integral domains taking place during the past two decades. Even
more recently, the elasticity has also been considered for general monoids (see [21]). In Section 6,
we establish a realization theorem for the elasticity of such join semilattices: we prove that if is
a real number that is at least 1, then there exists a factorizable Boolean sublattice whose elasticity
is(we argue the same statement for =1). This result is parallel to [1, Theorem 3.2] and [17,
Proposition 3.5] and in sharp contrast to [34, Theorems 5.7 and 5.8].
The notion of length-factoriality was introduced by Coykendall and Smith in [24] to characterize
UFDs: they proved that an integral domain is a UFD if and only if its multiplicative monoid is
length-factorial. Observe that the notion of length-factoriality somehow complements that of half-
factoriality in the sense that a monoid has the unique factorization property if and only if it is
half-factorial and length-factorial simultaneously. This justies why length-factoriality was initially
introduced in [24] under the term \other-half-factoriality" (the term \length-factoriality" was adopted
in [15] recently). Length-factoriality was rst investigated in the context of commutative monoids in
[33, Section 5], [15, Sections 3 and 5], and [20, Section 5]. Length-factoriality was also studied in [30]
in the setting of Krull monoids. In addition, length-factoriality has been recently investigated in [13,
Section 5] and [36, Section 6] in the setting of semidomains. In Section 7, we study length-factoriality
in Boolean sublattices. For Boolean sublattices whose quarks have size at most 2, we prove that
the properties of being length-factorial and that of having unique factorization are equivalent. This
result is parallel to the main result of [24] for integral domains. In the same section, we construct a
factorizable join semilattice Sthat is length-factorial but contains one element whose set of lengths is
not nite. This construction is not possible in the setting of cancellative commutative monoids (under
the most classical notion of factorizations into irreducibles) as if a cancellative commutative monoid
is length-factorial, then the set of factorizations of any non-invertible element must be nite [13,
Proposition 3.1].
2.Preliminary
In this section we briey review some notation and terminology we shall be using throughout
this paper. For undened terms in posets and lattices, see [46, Chapter 3] by Stanley and for a
comprehensive treatment in factorization theory, see the manuscript [29] by Geroldinger and Halter-
Koch.4 K. AJRAN AND F. GOTTI
2.1.General Notation. As it is customary, Z,Q,R, andCwill denote the set of integers, rational
numbers, real numbers, and complex numbers, respectively. We let NandN0denote the set of positive
and nonnegative integers, respectively. In addition, we let Pdenote the set of primes. For SR
andr2R, we setSr=fs2Sjsrgand we use the notations S>r;Sr, andS<rin a similar
manner. For a set S, we let 2Sdenote the power set of S; that is, 2S=fXjXSg. When two
setsSandTare disjoint, we often write StTinstead ofS[Tto emphasize that we are taking the
union of disjoint sets.
2.2.Posets. LetPbe a poset with its order relation denoted by . A subsetIofPis called an order
ideal if for allx2Pandy2I, the relation xyimplies that x2I. It is clear that for each y2P,
the set  y:=fx2Pjxygis an order ideal. For x;y2P, we set [x;y] :=ft2Pjxtygand
call the subposet [ x;y] ofPtheinterval fromxtoy(clearly, [x;y] is empty if and only if x6y). We
say thatPislocally nite if [x;y] is nite for all x;y2P. When the poset Pis the set of integers
with the standard order, we write Jx;y Kinstead of [ x;y]. Forx;y2P, we say that ycoversxand
writexlyprovided thatj[x;y]j= 2. A chain ofPis a nite sequence of elements x0;x1;:::;x `2P
such thatx0<x1<<x`. The length of a chainx0;x1;:::;x `is`, and we say that the chain is
saturated ifx0lx1llx`. We say that Pisgraded if there exists a rank function onP, that is, a
function:P!N0satisfying that (m) = 0 for every minimal element m2Pand(y) =(x) + 1
for allx;y2Psuch thatxly. Observe that if a poset is graded, then it has a unique rank function.
Furthermore, one can readily check that the poset Pis graded if and only if for all x;y2Pthe
interval [x;y] is nite and any two saturated chains from xtoyhave the same length.
2.3.Semilattices. IfPcontains a minimum, such a minimum is unique and we denote it by ^0. If
a least upper bound of a nite subset XofPexists, then it must be unique and it is called the join
ofXinP. In such a case, we let _Xdenote the join of X. A poset containing a minimum and
satisfying that each nite subset has a join is called a join semilattice . The dual notion of a join
semilattice is that of a meet semilattice: Pis called a meet semilattice if it contains a maximum,
which must be unique and is denoted by ^1, and each nite subset XofPhas a meet (i.e., a greatest
lower bound), which must be unique and is denoted by ^X. Forx1;:::;x n2P, if the join (resp.,
meet) offx1;:::;x ngexists, then we denote it by x1__xn(resp.,x1^^xn). A lattice is a
poset that is simultaneously a join and a meet semilattice. Since the notion of a meet semilattice does
not play a fundamental role in the context of this paper, we will reserve the single term \semilattice"
to refer to a join semilattice. One can readily verify that every locally nite semilattice Sis a lattice,
where^X=_fs2Sjsxfor allx2Xgfor any nite subset XofS. For this reason, all
the semilattices we consider in this paper, except the one constructed in Example 7.4, are indeed
lattices. Let Sbe a semilattice. For a subset XofS, the semilattice generated byX, which we
denote here byhXi, is the smallest subsemilattice of Scontaining the set f^0g[X. Ifx1;:::;x n2S,
then we denote the subsemilattice of Sgenerated byfx1;:::;x ngsimply ashx1;:::;x ni. An element
a2Sis called a quark provided that ^0la. We let A(S) denote the set of quarks of S. We say
thatSisfactorizable into quarks or simply factorizable if it is generated by its set of quarks; that is,
S=hA(S)i. A latticeSissemimodular if it is graded and its rank function satises the following
property:(x) +(y)(x^y) +(x_y) for allx;y2S. Factorizable semimodular lattices are
called geometric lattices .
2.4.Boolean Sublattices. LetYbe a set. The collection BYconsisting of all nite subsets of Yis
a poset under inclusion of sets. The poset BYis a lattice with joins and meets given by unions and
intersections, respectively. The lattice BYis often called the Boolean lattice onY. It is clear that BYis
a geometric lattice whose quarks are the singletons. The subsemilattices of BNare the primary focus ofFACTORIALITY INSIDE BOOLEAN LATTICES 5
this paper, and we call them Boolean sublattices . SinceBNis locally nite, every Boolean sublattice is a
locally nite semilattice and, therefore, a lattice (although meets may not be given by intersections). If
allthe elements of a Boolean sublattice are sets comprising only 1-digit positive integers (i.e., integers
in the interval J1;9K), then in order to simplify notation we omit the braces and the commas in the
set representation of its elements: for instance, instead of hf1;2g;f2;3g;f1;3gi, we writeh12;23;13i.
Unlike the lattice BN, Boolean sublattices are not necessarily graded or factorizables. For instance,
one can easily see that the Boolean sublattice hf1g;f2g;f2;3g;J1;nKjn3iis neither graded nor
factorizable. Given a collection Aof nite subsets of N, the Boolean sublattice hAigenerated by Ais
a lattice and, if there are no inclusion relations between any two members of A, then it is clear that
hAiis a factorizable lattice with set of quarks A.
2.5.Graphs. Throughout this paper, graphs are tacitly assumed to be undirected and simple (i.e.,
without loops and multiple edges), but they are allowed to have innitely many vertices and edges.
LetGbe a graph. We let V(G) andE(G) denote the set of vertices and edges of G, respectively.
We say that a sequence fv0;v1g;fv1;v2g;:::;fv` 1;v`g2E(G) is a path if the vertices v0;:::;v `
are distinct. On the other hand, a sequence fv0;v1g;fv1;v2g;:::;fv` 1;v`g2E(G) is a cycle if
fv0;v1g;fv1;v2g;:::;fv` 2;v` 1gis a path and v`=v0. The number of edges in a path/cycle is called
itslength . If a graph is connected and all its edges form a path (resp., a cycle), then it is called a path
graph (resp., cycle graph ) and is denoted by Pn(resp.,Cn), wherenis the number of vertices. The
diameter of a treeTis the length of a maximum-length path in T. The star graph onn+ 1 vertices,
denoted by Sn, is the complete bipartite graph Kn;1, that is, a tree with n+ 1 vertices and diameter
at most 2. A subset EofE(G) is called an edge covering of the graph Gprovided that every vertex
ofGis one of the two incidence vertices of an edge in E.
2.6.Factorizations. For a setX, the free semilattice onX, denoted here by F(X), is the collection
of all nonempty nite subsets of Xordered by inclusion. Let Sbe a semilattice. The factorization
semilattice ofSis the free semilattice F(A(S)) onA(S), and we denote it by Z(S). Since Z(S) is
free, there exists a unique semilattice homomorphism :Z(S)!Ssatisfying that (a) =afor all
a2A(S) (observe that Sis factorizable if and only if is surjective). For a1;:::;a `2A(S), we say
thatz:=fa1;:::;a `gis afactorization into quarks or simply a factorization ofa1__a`provided
that the formal join a1__a`is irredundant; that is, if _fajjj2Jg<a1__a`inSwhenever
J(J1;`K. For each z2Z, we calljzjthelength of the factorization z. For each x2S, we let Z(x)
denote the set of all factorizations of x, and we set
L(x) :=fjzj:z2Z(x)g:
We say that Sis a nite factorization semilattice (or an FFS) ifjZ(x)j<1for allx2S. When
Z(x) is a singleton for every x2Snf^0g, we say that Sis a unique factorization semilattice (or a
UFS). It follows from the denitions that every UFS is an FFS. When L(x) is a singleton for all
x2Snf^0g, we say that Sis a half-factorial semilattice (or an HFS). On the other hand, we say
thatSis a length-factorial semilattice (or an LFS) provided that any two distinct factorizations of
the same non-minimum element of Shave dierent lengths. It follows from the denitions that a
semilattice is a UFS if and only if it is both an HFS and an LFS.
LetSbe a factorizable Boolean sublattice. For any X2S, the set A(S)\Xis nite; indeed,
jA(S)\Xj2jXj, which implies that Z(X) is nite. Therefore being factorizable and being an FFS
are equivalent conditions in the class consisting of Boolean sublattices. We record this observation for
future reference.
Remark 2.1. A Boolean sublattice is factorizable if and only if it is an FFS.6 K. AJRAN AND F. GOTTI
The corresponding statement for the more general class consisting of all semilattices does not hold.
In Section 7, we will construct a factorizable join semilattice that is not an FFS.
3.Two Related Graphs
In this section, we introduce two graphs that will help us investigate factorizations into quarks
inside Boolean sublattices.
Denition 3.1. The quarkic graph of a Boolean sublattice S, denoted by G(S), is the graph whose
set of vertices is A(S) and that has an edge between distinct quarks AandBwheneverA\Bis
nonempty.
We say that a quark Aof a Boolean sublattice Sis an isolated quark ifAis disjoint from any other
quark ofS. We let AI(S) denote the set consisting of all the isolated quarks of S.
Example 3.2. Consider the Boolean sublattice S:=h12;13;23;45;46i. A fragment of the Hasse
diagram ofSis illustrated in Figure 1. It is clear that Sis factorizable with A(S) =f12;13;23;45;46g.
Observe that the quarkic graph G(S) ofSconsists of two connected components: the 3-cycle graph G1
on the set of vertices f12;13;23gand the path graph G2on the set of vertices f45;46g. Therefore S
contains no isolated quarks. In Figure 1, the Boolean sublattices hV(G1)iandhV(G2)iare highlighted
in red and green, respectively.
Figure 1. A fragment of the Hasse diagram of the Boolean sublattice generated by
the setf123;234;345;456g(including only the sets of size at most 4).
Lemma 3.3. For a factorizable Boolean sublattice S, the following statements hold.
(1)IfCis a connected component of G(S), then the Boolean sublattice hV(C)iis factorizable and
A(hV(C)i) =A(S)\hV(C)i.
(2)For each nonempty set X2S, there exist unique connected components C1;:::;C kofG(S)
and unique nonempty sets X12hV(C1)i;:::;X k2hV(Ck)isuch that
X=X1ttXk:
(3)With notation as in part (2), the function ZS(X)!ZhV(C1)i(X1) ZhV(Ck)i(Xk)given
by the assignment z7!(z1;:::;z k), wherezi:=fA2zjAXig, is a bijection.
(4)For allX2SandA2AI(S)withA6X,
Z(X_A) =fz[fAgjz2Z(X)g:FACTORIALITY INSIDE BOOLEAN LATTICES 7
Proof. (1) LetCbe a connected component of G(S). AshV(C)iis a subposet of Scontaining the
minimum of S, the inclusion A(S)\hV(C)iA(hV(C)i) holds. On the other hand, it is clear that
A6A0for anyA2A(S)nV(C) andA02V(C), which implies that A(hV(C)i)A(S)\hV(C)i.
Hence A(hV(C)i) =A(S)\hV(C)i. Verifying thathV(C)iis factorizable amounts to observing that,
for each nonempty set X2hV(C)i, the fact that A6Xfor anyA2A(S)nV(C) guarantees that
each factorization of XinSis also a factorization of XinhV(C)i.
(2) Fix a nonempty set X2S. BecauseXis a nite set, there are only nitely many connected
components CofG(S) such that Xintersects some quarks of C. LetC1;:::;C kbe such connected
components. For each i2J1;kK, setXi=SfA2V(Ci)jAXg. It is clear that each Xiis
nonempty. Also, X=X1ttXkbecause quarks of Sin distinct connected components of G(S)
are disjoint. The uniqueness of the decomposition follows immediately.
(3) Let'X:z7!(z1;:::;z k) be such a function. Fix a factorization z2ZS(X), and observe that
for eachi2J1;kK, the equality_fA2zjAXig=Xi. This, in tandem with the irredundance of z,
ensures that zi2ZhV(Ci)i(Xi). Thus,'Xis well dened. On the other hand, one can readily check
that the function ZhV(C1)i(X1) ZhV(Ck)i(Xk)!ZS(X) given by ( z1;:::;z k)7!z1ttzkis
the inverse of 'X. Hence'Xis a bijection.
(4) This is an immediate consequence of part (3). 
Remark 3.4. A Boolean sublattice Smay not be factorizable even when hV(C)iis factorizable for
each connected component CofG(S); for instance, although the Boolean sublattice S:=f;;1;12gis
not factorizable, it has only one connected component, namely C1withV(C1) =f1gandE(C1) =;,
and the Boolean sublattice hV(C1)i=f;;1gis clearly factorizable.
Boolean sublattices whose quarks have size at most 2 play an important role in this paper. There
is a natural way to construct a graph from any factorizable Boolean sublattice whose quarks have size
at most 2.
Denition 3.5. LetSbe a factorizable Boolean sublattice whose quarks have size at most 2. The
pairing graph ofS, denoted by Gp(S), is the graph whose set of vertices is Nand having an edge
between distinct vertices aandbwheneverfa;bg2A(S).
4.The Unique Factorization Property
The main purpose of this section is to study the unique factorization property in Boolean sublattices.
As the following proposition indicates, the factoriality of a factorizable Boolean sublattice determines
and is fully determined by that of the Boolean sublattices corresponding to the connected components
of its quarkic graph.
Proposition 4.1. LetSbe a factorizable Boolean sublattice, and let Cbe the set consisting of all the
connected components of G(S). ThenSis a UFS if and only if hV(C)iis a UFS for all C2C.
Proof. For the direct implication, suppose that Sis a UFS. Let Cbe a connected component of G(S).
For each nonempty set X2hV(C)i, the inclusion A(hV(C)i)A(S)\hV(C)iguarantees that
ZhV(C)i(X)ZS(X), and soXhas at most one factorization in hV(C)i. SincehV(C)iis factorizable
by part (1) of Lemma 3.3, it must be a UFS.
Conversely, suppose that hV(C)iis a UFS for all C2C. Fix a nonempty set X2S. By part (2)
of Lemma 3.3, we can uniquely decompose XasX=X1ttXkwithXihV(Ci)ifor every
i2J1;kK, whereC1;:::;C kare distinct connected components of G(S). Now it follows from part (3)
of Lemma 3.3 that jZS(X)j=jZhV(C1)i(X1) ZhV(Ck)i(Xk)j. AshV(C1)i;:::;hV(Ck)iare UFSs,
ZS(X) must be a singleton. Then we conclude that Sis a UFS. 8 K. AJRAN AND F. GOTTI
The following corollary, which we will use later, is an immediate consequence of Proposition 4.1
Corollary 4.2. A Boolean sublattice Sis a UFS if and only if hA(S)nAI(S)iis a UFS.
For a Boolean sublattice S, we say that a quark AofSis an excess quark if for eachj2Athere
existsB2A(S)nfAgsuch thatj2B; that is,Ais contained in the union of the remaining quarks.
We can use excess quarks to provide a sucient condition for a Boolean sublattice to be a UFS.
Proposition 4.3. LetSbe a Boolean sublattice. If the excess quarks of Sare pairwise disjoint, then S
is a UFS.
Proof. Assume that no two distinct excess quarks of Sintersect. Suppose, towards a contradiction,
that a nonempty element of Shas two dierent factorizations, namely, and0. Then we can write
=tand0=0tfor factorizations ;0;2Z(S) such that and0are disjoint. The
fact thatand0are distinct factorizations of the same element guarantees that both and0
are nonempty ( may be empty). Therefore, as both and0are factorizations in S, both sets
(_)n(_) and (_0)n(_) are nonempty. We claim that ( _)n(_) = (_0)n(_). To argue this,
takex2(_)n(_). Thenx2__(t) =_(0t), and so there exists A20tsuch that
x2A. Asx =2_, we see that A20and sox2_0. Hencex2(_0)n(_). As a consequence, the
inclusion (_)n(_)(_0)n(_) holds. The reverse inclusion can be argued similarly.
We proceed to show that every quark in t0is an excess quark. Take A2[0. Assume rst
thatA2. Fixx2A. Ifx2_, then there exists a quark in containingx. Suppose, on the other
hand, that x =2_. Thenx2(_)n(_) = (_0)n(_), which implies that x2_0. Therefore
there exists a quark B20such thatx2B. Thus, every element of Abelongs to some of the quarks
in eitheror0. SinceA2, andis disjoint from 0t, we conclude that Ais an excess quark.
We can similarly arrive to the same conclusion under the assumption that A20. As a result, every
quark int0is an excess quark.
Since (_)n(_) = (_0)n(_), every element in x2(_)n(_) belongs to the intersection
of a quark B2and a quark B020, which are both excess quarks. Since and0are disjoint
andx2B\B0, we see that BandB0are overlapping distinct excess quarks of S, which is a
contradiction. 
As the following example shows, the converse of Proposition 4.3 does not hold.
Example 4.4. Consider the Boolean sublattice S:=h123;234;345;456i, whose Hasse diagram is
illustrated in Figure 2. It is clear that A(S) =f123;234;345;456gand also that both 234 and 345
are excess quarks with nontrivial intersection. Still, one can readily verify that Sis a UFS.
Our next goal is to characterize the Boolean sublattices whose quarks have size at most 2 that are
UFS: we do this based on the corresponding pairing graphs. First, we need the following lemma.
Lemma 4.5. LetSbe a Boolean sublattice whose quarks have size 2. IfSis a UFS, then the following
statements hold.
(1)Gp(S)does not contain any cycle of length 3.
(2)Gp(S)does not contain a path/cycle of length 4.
Proof. (1) Observe that the existence of a length-3 cycle in Gp(S) is equivalent to the existence of dis-
tinct quarksfv1;v2g;fv2;v3g;fv3;v1ginS, in which case
fv1;v2g;fv2;v3g	
and
fv2;v3g;fv3;v1g	
would be two distinct factorizations of the element fv1;v2;v3g. However, this is not possible because S
is a UFS.
(2) First, note that the existence of a length-4 path in Gp(S) is equivalent to the existence of distinct
quarksfv1;v2g;fv2;v3g;fv3;v4g;fv4;v5ginS, which would imply that
fv1;v2g;fv2;v3g;fv4;v5g	FACTORIALITY INSIDE BOOLEAN LATTICES 9
Figure 2. Hasse diagram of the Boolean sublattice generated by the set f123;234;345;456g.
and
fv1;v2g;fv3;v4g;fv4;v5g	
are two distinct factorizations of the element fv1;v2;v3;v4;v5g. How-
ever, this is not possible because Sis a UFS. Finally, observe that the existence of a length-4 cy-
cle is equivalent to the existence of distinct factorizations fv0
1;v0
2g;fv0
2;v0
3g;fv0
3;v0
4g;fv0
4;v0
1ginS,
which would imply that
fv0
1;v0
2g;fv0
3;v0
4g	
and
fv0
1;v0
4g;fv0
2;v0
3g	
are two distinct factorizations of
fv0
1;v0
2;v0
3;v0
4g. This again is not possible because Sis a UFS. 
We are in a position to characterize the Boolean sublattices whose quarks have size at most 2 that
are UFS.
Theorem 4.6. LetSbe a Boolean sublattice whose quarks have size at most 2. Then the following
conditions are equivalent.
(a)Sis a UFS.
(b)For each connected component CofGp(S), the Boolean sublattice generated by the edges of C
is a UFS.
(c)Each connected component of Gp(S)is a tree with diameter at most 3.
Proof. Since each quark of Sthat is a singleton must be an isolated quark, in light of Corollary 4.2
we can assume that Scontains no singletons. Set G:=Gp(S).
(a))(b): Suppose that Sis a UFS. Let Cbe a connected component of G, and letSCbe the
Boolean sublattice generated by the set E(C). Since there are no singletons in S, a setA2Sis a
quark if and only if jAj= 2. Therefore A(SC) =E(C)A(S). As a result, for each X2SC, the
inclusion ZSC(X)ZS(X) holds (indeed, equality holds). Hence the fact that Sis a UFS implies
thatSCis also a UFS.
(b))(c): Suppose now that each Boolean sublattice generated by the edges of a connected
component of Gis a UFS. Let Cbe a connected component of G. IfChas exactly one edge, then we
are done. Therefore we assume that jE(C)j2.
Suppose rst that no edge of Ccorresponds to an excess quark. Since jE(C)j2, we can pick a
vertexvofCsuch that deg v2. We claim that every vertex adjacent to vinChas degree 1. To
argue this, x a vertex wadjacent to vinC. Since deg v2, there exists A2A(S) such that v2A
andA6=fv;wg. Note that the only vertex adjacent to winCmust bevas otherwise there would exist
B2A(S) withB6=fv;wgsuch thatw2Band sofv;wgA[B, which is not possible because
fv;wgis not an excess quark by assumption. Hence each vertex in Cadjacent to vhas degree 1,
which implies that Cis a star graph, that is, a tree with diameter at most 2.10 K. AJRAN AND F. GOTTI
Suppose, on the other hand, that there exists an edge of Ccorresponding to an excess quark,
namely,fv;wg. Then we can take v0;w02V(C)nfv;wgsuch thatfv;v0gandfw;w0gboth belong
toA(S). Since the Boolean sublattice hE(C)iis a UFS, it follows from part (1) of Lemma 4.5 that
v06=w0. We claim that deg v0= 1. Suppose that this is not the case. Then one could take a vertex
v00ofCsuch thatfv0;v00g2A(S) andv006=v. It follows from part (1) of Lemma 4.5 that v006=w
and, therefore, the edges fv00;v0g;fv0;vg;fv;wg;fw;w0gwould form a length-4 path (if v006=w0) or a
length-4 cycle (if v00=w0), which is not possible in light of part (2) of Lemma 4.5. Thus, every vertex
inV(C)nfwgadjacent to vhas degree 1. Similarly, we can argue that every vertex in V(C)nfvg
adjacent to whas degree 1. Hence Cis a tree with diameter 3.
(c))(a): Finally, suppose that each connected component of Gis a tree with diameter at most 3.
By virtue of Proposition 4.3, it suces to check that at most one edge in each connected component
ofGcorresponds to an excess quark of S. LetCbe a connected component of G. IfChas diameter
at most 2, then Cis either a tree with two vertices (if Chas diameter 1) or a star graph (if Chas
diameter 2), and it is clear that in both cases Chas no excess quarks. Now suppose that Chas
diameter 3, and let fv0;v1g;fv1;v2g;fv2;v3gbe three edges forming a path of length 3. Since C
has diameter 3, every vertex vadjacent to v1(resp., tov2) withv6=v2(resp.,v6=v1) must have
degree 1. This, along with the fact that no edge of Cincident to a degree-1 vertex can correspond to
an excess quark of S, implies that the only edge of Ccorresponding to an excess quark is fv1;v2g. As
a consequence, Sis a UFS. 
5.The Half-Factorial Property
In this section, we investigate the property of half-factoriality. In the context of Boolean sublattices,
this property is strictly weaker than the unique factorization property. The following simple example
illustrates this observation.
Example 5.1. Consider the Boolean sublattice S:=h12;23;13i, which is factorizable with set of
quarks A(S) =f12;23;13g. Although the element 123 has three factorizations, namely, f12;13g,
f12;23g, andf13;23g, all of them has length 2. As a consequence, Sis an HFS that is not a UFS.
Our main purpose is to provide a characterization of the Boolean sublattices with quarks of size
at most 2 that are HFSs. We start with a result parallel to Corollary 4.2, whose proof immediately
follows from part (4) of Lemma 3.3.
Proposition 5.2. LetSbe a Boolean sublattice, and let AI(S)be the set of isolated quarks of S.
ThenSis an HFS if and only if hA(S)nAI(S)iis an HFS.
Let us now restrict our attention to factorizable Boolean sublattices whose quarks have size at
most 2. The following lemma will be useful in the proof of Theorem 5.7.
Lemma 5.3. LetSbe a Boolean sublattice whose quarks have size 2. IfSis an HFS, then the
following statements hold.
(1)Gp(S)does not contain any path of length 5.
(2)IfGp(S)has a component Ccontaining a cycle of length 3, thenC=C3, whereC3is the
cycle graph of length 3.
(3)IfGp(S)has a component Ccontaining a cycle of length 5, thenC=C5, whereC5is the
cycle graph of length 5.FACTORIALITY INSIDE BOOLEAN LATTICES 11
Proof. (1) Suppose, for the sake of a contradiction, that Gp(S) contains a path of length 5. Then there
exist distinct v1;v2;v3;v4;v5;v62Nsuch thatfv1;v2g;fv2;v3g;fv3;v4g;fv4;v5g;fv5;v6g2A(S). In
this case, we see that fv1;v2g_fv3;v4g_fv5;v6gandfv1;v2g_fv2;v3g_fv4;v5g_fv5;v6gare two
factorizations with distinct lengths of the element fv1;v2;v3;v4;v5;v6ginS, which contradicts the
fact thatSis an HFS.
(2) Now suppose that Cis a connected component of Gp(S) containing a cycle of length 3. Then
we can takefv1;v2g;fv2;v3g;fv3;v1g2A(S) such that v1;v2, andv3are distinct vertices of C. Now
observe that if V(C)nfv1;v2;v3gwere nonempty, then we would be able to take v42V(C) adjacent
to some vertex of C, say tov1: however, in this case fv1;v2g_fv1;v3g_fv1;v4gandfv1;v4g_fv2;v3g
would be two factorizations with distinct lengths of the element fv1;v2;v3;v4ginS, which is not
possible because Sis an HFS. Hence C=C3.
(3) The argument follows the lines of that given to establish part (2). 
Thus, for a Boolean sublattice to be an HFS, its pairing graph must satisfy the restrictions (1){(3)
in Lemma 5.3. Observe that trees with diameter at most 4 satisfy the same restrictions. There is
another more general class of connected graphs satisfying such restrictions.
Denition 5.4. A connected graph Gis called a candy graph if it satises the following two conditions.
(1)Ghas diameter at most 4.
(2)Gcontains a length- kcycle if and only if k= 4.
Candy graphs are a crucial ingredient for the characterization of half-factoriality we will provide in
Theorem 5.7. Here is an example of a candy graph.
Example 5.5. Leta;a1;a2;a3;b1;b2;b3;b4;c;c1;c2be distinct positive integers, and consider the
Boolean sublattice Swhose pairing graph is that in Figure 3. It is not hard to verify that Sis an
HFS.
Figure 3. A candy graph with 11 vertices and 4
2
cycles.
Let us prove some facts about candy graphs. Throughout the proof of Lemma 5.6, we will choose
the notation consistent with that of Example 5.5, and so looking at the candy graph illustrated in
such an example may help the reader to follow our argument.
Lemma 5.6. For a candy graph G, the following statements hold.
(1)Every vertex of degree at least 3is part of a cycle.
(2)If a non-leaf vertex is adjacent to a vertex of degree at least 3, then it has degree 2.
(3)Ghas at most two vertices with degree at least 3.
(4)IfGhas two vertices of degree at least 3, then they are at distance 2and their common adjacent
vertices are precisely the vertices of Gwith degree 2.12 K. AJRAN AND F. GOTTI
Proof. IfGdoes not contain any vertex of degree at least 3, then the four statements of the lemma
follow trivially. Thus, we assume that Ghas a vertex asuch that deg a3.
(1) Suppose, for the sake of a contradiction, that the vertex ais not part of any cycle. Let
fa;a1g;fa1;a2g;:::;fa` 1;a`gbe a shortest path from ato a cyclefa`;v1g;fv1;v2g;fv2;v3g;fv3;a`g.
Assume rst that `= 1. Thenais not adjacent to neither v1norv3becauseGcontains no length-3 cy-
cles. This, along with the fact that deg a3, ensures the existence of a02V(G)nfa1;v1;v2;v3gthat
is adjacent to a. Hencefa0;ag;fa;a1g;fa1;v1g;fv1;v2g;fv2;v3gis a path of length 5, a contradiction.
Assume, therefore, that `2. In such a case,fa;a1g;fa1;a2g;:::;fa` 1;a`g;fa`;v1g;fv1;v2g;fv2;v3g
is a path of length at least 5, which contradicts that Gis a candy graph.
(2) By part (1), the vertex amust be part of a length-4 cycle, namely, fa;b1g;fb1;cg;fc;b2g;fb2;ag.
Letb1;:::;b nbe the non-leaf vertices that are adjacent to a. Now observe that if deg bk3 for some
k2J1;nK, then after taking c02V(G)nfa;cgadjacent to bkandbi;bj2fb1;:::;b ngnfbkg, we would
be able to construct in Gthe following length-5 path fc0;bkg;fbk;ag;fa;big;fbi;cg;fc;bjg, which is
not possible. Hence deg bi= 2 for every i2J1;nK.
(3)-(4) Let the vertices b1;:::;b n, andcbe dened as in part (2). We argue rst that biis adjacent
tocfor everyi2J1;nK. Suppose, otherwise, that biis not adjacent to cfor somei2J3;nK(we
know thatb1andb2are adjacent to c). Observe that the vertices biandbjare not adjacent for any
i;j2J1;nKwithi6=jbecauseGcontains no length-3 cycles. Let b02V(G)nfa;cgbe a vertex adjacent
tobi. SinceGhas no length-3 cycles, b0=2fb1;b2g. As a result,fb0;big;fbi;ag;fa;b1g;fb1;cg;fc;b2g
is a path in Gof length 5, which contradicts that Gis a candy graph. Hence biis adjacent to cfor
everyi2J1;nK.
We can mimic the previous argument to prove that every non-leaf vertex adjacent to cis also
adjacent to a. Thus, the non-leaf vertices adjacent to care precisely b1;:::;b n. SinceGis connected
and degbi= 2 for every i2J1;nK,
V(G) =A[C[
a;c;b 1;:::;b n	
;
whereAdenotes the set of leaves adjacent to awhileCdenotes the set of leaves adjacent to c. Thus,
besidesa, the only vertex of Gthat can have degree at least 3 is c, which yields statement (3). Also,
ifcis the other vertex of Gwith degree at least 3, then the common adjacent vertices of aandcare
b1;:::;b n, which are precisely the vertices of Gwith degree 2, whence statement (4) follows. 
We are in a position to characterize half-factoriality inside the class consisting of all Boolean
sublattices whose quarks have size at most 2.
Theorem 5.7. LetSbe a Boolean sublattice whose quarks have size at most 2. Then the following
conditions are equivalent.
(a)Sis an HFS.
(b)For each connected component CofGp(S), the Boolean sublattice generated by the edges of C
is an HFS.
(c)The connected components of Gp(S)are length- 3cycles, length- 5cycles, trees with diameters
at most 4, or candy graphs.
Proof. Since each quark of Sthat is a singleton must be an isolated quark, by virtue of Proposition 5.2
we can assume that every quark of Shas size 2. Set G:=Gp(S).
(a))(b): LetCbe a connected component of G, and letSCbe the Boolean sublattice generated
byE(C). As we have seen in the proof of Theorem 4.6, the inclusion ZSC(X)ZS(X) holds for all
X2C. Therefore we can deduce that SCis an HFS from the fact that Sis an HFS.FACTORIALITY INSIDE BOOLEAN LATTICES 13
(b))(a): For each connected component CofG, letSCbe the Boolean sublattice generated
by the edges of C. Fix a nonempty set X2S. In light of part (2) of Lemma 3.3, we can write
X=X1ttXk, whereXi2SCifor everyi2J1;kK, whereC1;:::;C kare distinct connected
components of G. By part (3) of Lemma 3.3, the assignments z=z1ttzk7!(z1;:::;z k), where
z2ZS(X) andzi:=fA2zjAXigfor everyi2J1;kK, induce a natural bijection from ZS(X) to
ZSC1(X1) ZSCk(Xk). Thus, for any two factorizations z:=z1ttzkandz0:=z0
1ttz0
k
ofXinS, we see that zi;z0
i2ZSCi(Xi) for every i2J1;kK, and so the fact that SC1;:::;S Ckare
HFSs guarantees that jzj=jz0j. As a consequence, Sis an HFS.
(b))(c): LetCbe a connected component of G. We consider the following cases.
Case 1:Cdoes not contain any cycle. In this case, Cis a tree. In addition, it follows from part (1)
of Lemma 5.3 that the diameter of Cis at most 4.
Case 2:Ccontains a cycle. By part (1) of Lemma 5.3, the component Cmust contain a cycle of
length 3, 4, or 5. If Ccontains a cycle of length 3, then C=C3by part (2) of Lemma 5.3. Similarly,
part (3) of Lemma 5.3 ensures that C=C5provided that Ccontains a cycle of length 5. Therefore
suppose that Chas a cycle C4with length 4. The notation of the following three paragraphs is
consistent with that of Example 5.5.
Letfa;b1g;fb1;cg;fc;b2g;fb2;agbe the edges of C4. IfC=C4, thenCis a candy graph, and we
are done. Thus, we can assume that one of the vertices of C4, namelya, has degree strictly greater
than 2 inC. LetBbe the set of non-leaf vertices of Cthat are adjacent to a(in particular, b1;b22B).
Note that every vertex b2Bcan only be adjacent to some of the vertices in V(C4), as otherwise C
would contain a path of length 5, namely, fb0;bg;fb;ag;fa;b1g;fb1;cg;fc;b2gin case that b0were a
vertex inV(C)nV(C4) adjacent to b; however, this is not possible in light of part (1) of Lemma 5.3.
In addition, each vertex of Cadjacent to the vertex acannot be adjacent to any vertex in Bas, in
light of part (2) of Lemma 5.3, the graph Ccannot contain any 3-cycles. As the vertices in Bare not
leaves, the last two observations guarantee that no two vertices in Bare adjacent and also that every
vertex inBis adjacent to c. Thus, we have proved that every non-leaf vertex of Cthat is adjacent
toamust be adjacent to c. By a completely similar argument, we can check that every non-leaf vertex
ofCthat is adjacent to cmust be adjacent to a. HenceBis also the set of non-leaf vertices of Cthat
are adjacent to c. BecauseCis connected, in order to conclude that Cis a candy graph, it suces to
argue that deg b= 2 for every b2B. We consider the following two subcases.
Case 2.1:jBj= 2. Since deg a3, the equalityjBj= 2 ensures the existence of a leaf a02V(C)
that is adjacent to a. In this case, deg b1= 2, as otherwise, one could take a vertex b02V(C)nfa;b2;cg
adjacent to b1to create a path with length 5, namely, fb0;b1g;fb1;cg;fc;b2g;fb2;ag;fa;a0g(observe
thatb06=a0asa0is a leaf), which is not possible in light of part (1) of Lemma 5.3. Similarly, we can
argue that deg b2= 2. Hence Cis a candy graph with precisely one cycle of length 4.
Case 2.2:jBj3. Fix a vertex b2B. Observe that deg b= 2 as, otherwise, we could take
b02V(C)nfa;cgadjacent to band then pick distinct bi;bj2Bnfbgto form the length-5 path
fb0;bg;fb;ag;fa;big;fbi;cg;fc;bjg(observe that b0=2fbi;bjgbecause it is adjacent to b), which is not
possible in light of part (1) of Lemma 5.3. As a result, Cis a candy graph (with jBj
2
cycles of length 4
in case that Bis a nite set).
(c))(b): We can x a connected component and assume, without loss of generality, that it is the
whole graph G:=Gp(S); that is, we can assume that Gis connected. When Gis either a length-3 or
a length-5 cycle, we can explicitly check that Sis an HFS (but not a UFS).
Suppose now that Gis a tree with diameter at most 4. Take X2Snf^0g, and then let GXbe
the subgraph of Ginduced by the vertices in Xand letSXbe the Boolean sublattice generated by
the edges of GX. It is clear that ZS(X) =ZSX(X). In light of parts (2) and (3) of Lemma 3.3, we14 K. AJRAN AND F. GOTTI
can assume that GXis connected (see the argument used to prove the implication (b) )(a)). Hence
GXis a nite tree with diameter at most 4. If Ghas diameter at most 3, then SXis a UFS by
Theorem 4.6. Thus, we assume that GXhas diameter 4. Let fv1;v2g;fv2;v3g;fv3;v4g;fv4;v5gbe a
length-4 path in GX, and letEbe the set of edges of GXthat are incident to a leaf. It is clear that E
is contained in each factorization of X. We claim that LSX(X) =fjEjgifv3is adjacent to a leaf and
LSX(X) =fjEj+ 1gotherwise. Assume rst that v3is adjacent to a leaf, and let zbe a factorization
ofXinSX. Note that, as v3is adjacent to a leaf, Eis an edge covering of GXand, therefore, z=E.
Hence LSX(X) =fjEjg. Now assume that v3is not adjacent to any leaf, and let z0be a factorization
ofXinSX. In this case, there must be a quark A2z0such thatv32A, in which case, E[fAg
is an edge covering of GX, and soz0=E[fAg. As a consequence, LSX(X) =fjEj+ 1g. Hence
jLS(X)j=jLSX(X)j= 1. AsXwas arbitrarily picked in Snf^0g, we conclude that Sis an HFS.
Finally, suppose that Gis a candy graph. Take X2Snf^0g, and letGXandSXbe dened as in
the previous paragraph. It suces to show that LSX(X) is a singleton. Observe that GXis either the
disjoint union of trees of diameter at most 4 or a candy graph. If GXis the disjoint union of trees of
diameter at most 4, then parts (2) and (3) of Lemma 3.3, used in tandem with the conclusion of the
previous paragraph, guarantee that SXis an HFS, and so LSX(X) is a singleton. Therefore we assume
thatGXis a candy graph. Observe that GXis a nite graph because the set V(GX) =Xis nite.
Once again, we adopt a notation consistent with that in Example 5.5. If GXis a length-4 cycle, then
we can explicitly verify that SXis an HFS, and so LSX(X) is a singleton. Therefore we can assume
thatGXcontains a length-4 cycle fa;b1g;fb1;cg;fc;b2g;fb2;agsuch that deg a3. Leta1;:::;a m
be the leaves that are adjacent to aand letb1;:::;b nbe the non-leaf vertices that are adjacent to a.
It follows from part (2) of Lemma 5.6 that deg bi= 2 for every i2J1;nK. In addition, we have seen
in the proof of parts (3) and (4) of Lemma 5.6 that biis adjacent to cfor everyi2J1;nK. Now, it
follows from parts (3) and (4) of Lemma 5.6 that every vertex adjacent to cthat is not infb1;:::;b ng
must be a leaf. This, along with the fact that Cis connected, guarantees that the set of non-leaf
vertices ofCisfa;cg[fb1;:::;b ng. LetEbe the set of edges of GXthat are incident to a leaf. Now
suppose that zis a factorization of XinSX. It is clear that Ez. Sincezis a factorization of X, it
is also a minimal edge covering of GX. Therefore, for each i2J1;nK, precisely one of the two edges
incident to biis contained in z. This implies that jzj=jEj+n, and so LSX(X) =fjEj+ng. Since
jLS(X)j=jLSX(X)j= 1 for every X2Snf^0g, we conclude that Sis an HFS. 
6.The Elasticity
LetSbe a factorizable (join) semilattice with jSj2. Borrowing standard notation and terminol-
ogy from factorization theory, for any x2S, we dene the elasticity(x) ofxas follows:
(x) =supL(x)
minL(x):
Then we call (S) := supf(x)jx2Sgtheelasticity ofS. Observe that Sis an HFS if and only if
(S) = 1. By denition, (x)2Q1[f1g for allx2S. In a similar way, we can dene elasticities
for other commutative algebraic structures, specially atomic monoids and rings.
Even though the elasticity of every element in a given algebraic structure (e.g., monoid, integral
domain, or lattice) is either rational or innite by denition, the elasticity of the whole structure can be
irrational. There are, however, several natural classes of atomic algebraic structures whose members
have either rational or innite elasticities. For instance, the elasticity of any numerical monoid is
rational [17, Theorem 2.1], and the elasticity of any ring of integers of an algebraic number eld is
also rational [2, Theorem 10]. In addition, the elasticity of any one-dimensional local integral domainFACTORIALITY INSIDE BOOLEAN LATTICES 15
is either rational or innite [1, Theorem 2.12]. It is also known that the elasticity of every (additive)
submonoid of N2
0is either rational or innite [34, Theorem 5.7] (however, it is still unknown whether
the same situation happens for all submonoids of any nite-rank free commutative monoid; see, for
instance, [49] and [34, Question 5.1]).
On the other hand, there are natural classes of atomic algebraic structures whose members can
realize any prescribed possible irrational elasticity. Indeed, it was proved in [1, Theorem 3.2] and
then in [17, Proposition 3.5] that for every 2R1[f1g , there exists a Dedekind domain D(with
torsion class group) such that (D) =. Also, we can use the formula given in [35, Theorem 3.2] to
argue that for each irrational 2R1[1 there exists an atomic additive submonoid MofQ0with
(M) =(see also [28, Example 4.3]). It turns out that the class consisting of all Boolean sublattices
satises a similar property, which we will prove in the next theorem.
Lemma 6.1. Leta1;:::;a kandb1;:::;b kbe positive integers such that 1<a1
b1ak
bk. Then
a1++ak
b1++bkak
bk:
Proof. Let us prove by induction on nthat
(6.1)a1++an
b1++bnan
bn
for everyn2J1;kK. Forn= 1, we see that (6.1) holds trivially. In addition, if (6.1) holds for some
n < k , thena1++an
b1++bnan+1
bn+1and, therefore, ( a1++an+1)bn+1(b1++bn+1)an+1, which
means thata1++an+1
b1++bn+1an+1
bn+1:

We proceed to prove the main result of this section.
Theorem 6.2. For any2R1[f1g , there exists a Boolean sublattice Swith(S) =.
Proof. If= 1, then it suces to take S=BN; this is because BNis a UFS and so an HFS. Therefore
we will assume that  > 1. Take a strictly increasing sequence ( qn)n1of positive rationals such
that lim n!1qn=, and write qn=an=bn, wherean;bn2Nand gcd(an;bn) = 1. As > 1, after
dropping a nite number of initial terms from the sequence ( qn)n1, we can assume that 1 < q1
and also that min fan;bng2 for every n2N. Now let ( Jn)n1be a sequence of pairwise disjoint
subsets of Nsatisfying thatjJnj=anbnfor everyn2N. Now for each n2N, we create two distinct
partitionsnandnofJnas follows: place the elements of Jnas entries of an anbnmatrixMn, and
letAn;i(resp.,Bn;j) be the set consisting of all the entries in the i-th row (resp., j-th column) for every
i2J1;anK(resp.,j2J1;bnK). Hence both n:=fAn;iji2J1;anKgandn:=fBn;jjj2J1;bnKg
are partitions of Jnwith sizesanandbn, respectively.
Now consider the Boolean sublattice Sgenerated by the set
A:=
An;i;Bn;jjn2Nand (i;j)2J1;anKJ1;bnK	
:
For eachn2N, the fact that nis a partition of Jnimplies that Jn2S. Before proving that the
elasticity of Sis, we need to argue some facts about quarks and factorizations in S.
Claim 1.Sis factorizable with A(S) =A.
Proof of Claim 1. It suces to show that A(S) =A. It is clear that A(S)A. For the reverse
inclusion, rst note that for each n2N, the fact that min fan;bng2 guarantees that no row (resp.,
column) of the matrix Mnis contained in a column (resp., row) of Mn, and soAn;iandBn;jare not
comparable in Sfor any (i;j)2J1;anKJ1;bnK. On the other hand, for any m;n2Nwithm6=n16 K. AJRAN AND F. GOTTI
the blocks of the partitions mandmare not comparable in Swith the blocks of the partitions n
andnas the sets of entries of the matrices MmandMnare disjoint. Hence AA(S), and so
Claim 1 is established.
Claim 2. For eachn2N, the following statements hold.
(1)  Jn=hAn;i;Bn;jj(i;j)2J1;anKJ1;bnKi.
(2)jZ(J)j= 1 for every J2JnnfJng.
(3)jZ(Jn)j= 2 and L(Jn) =fan;bng.
Proof of Claim 2. Fixn2N.
(1) SinceAn;iJnandBn;jJnfor each pair ( i;j)2J1;anKJ1;bnK, we see that the inclusion
hAn;i;Bn;jj(i;j)2J1;anKJ1;bnKiJnholds. For the reverse inclusion, it suces to observe that
ifJ2SwithJJn, then Claim 1 ensures that Jis the union of some of the blocks of norn.
(2) TakeJ2JnnfJng. AsJJn, the setJconsists of some entries of the matrix Mn. Letz1
andz2be two factorizations of JinS. The quarks appearing in z1orz2are some of the blocks
ofnorn. Suppose that An;i2z1for somei2J1;anK. ThenJcontains all the entries in the i-th
row ofMnand so ifAn;i=2z2, thenBn;jJfor allj2J1;bnK, which is not possible because Jis
strictly contained in Jn. HenceAn;i2z2. In a completely similar way, one can check that every quark
An;icontained in z2must be contained in z1. The quarks of the form Bn;jcan be treated mutatis
mutandis , and so we can conclude that z1=z2. Thus,jZ(J)j= 1.
(3) Now suppose that zis a factorization of JninScontaining the quark An;ifor somei2J1;anK.
Suppose, by way of contradiction, that An;kis not contained in zfor somek2J1;anK. SinceJn
contains each entry of the matrix Mnand, in particular, each entry of the k-th row of Mn, the
factorization zmust contain the quark Bn;jfor everyj2J1;bnK. This, along with the fact that
An;iBn;1__Bn;bninS, contradicts that zis a factorization. Thus, z=fAn;1;:::;A n;ang.
In a similar way, we can argue that if z0is a factorization of Jncontaining the quark Bn;jfor some
j2J1;bnK, thenz0=fBn;1;:::;B n;bng. HencejZ(Jn)j= 2 and L(Jn) =fan;bng, which concludes
our argument for Claim 2.
Claim 3.J2Shas a unique factorization if and only if Jn6Jfor anyn2N.
Proof of Claim 3. For the direct implication, suppose that JnJfor somen2N. LetfA1;:::;A `g
be a factorization of Jand assume, without loss of generality, that there exists k2J1;`Ksuch that
AiJnif and only if i2J1;kK. The fact that JnJ, along with the disjointness of the Jis,
guarantees that the join of fA1;:::;A kgisJn. As a result,fAn;1;:::;A n;ang[fAk+1;:::;A `gand
fBn;1;:::;B n;bng[fAk+1;:::;A `gare two distinct factorizations of J.
For the converse, assume that Jn6Jfor anyn2N. Suppose that z:=fA1;:::;A `gand
z0:=fA0
1;:::;A0
mgare two factorizations of JinS. Now xn2N, and then set
zn:=fAiji2J1;`KandAiJngandz0
n:=fA0
jjj2J1;mKandA0
jJng:
SetX=_zn. Clearly,XJn. Observe that znandz0
nare two factorizations of XinS. Since
Jn6J, the setXis strictly contained in Jn. ThenX2JnnfJng, and sojZ(X)j= 1 by part (2) of
Claim 2. Thus, zn=z0
n. After proceeding similarly for every n2N, we can conclude z=z0. Claim 3
is then established.
Claim 4. For eachX2S, there exist unique n1;:::;n k2Nwithn1<<nkand a unique J2S
disjoint from Jn1[[Jnksuch thatX=Jn1__Jnk_JandJn6Jfor anyn2N.
Proof of Claim 4. For the existence of such a decomposition, take n1;:::;n k2Nwithn1<<nk
such thatn2fn1;:::;n kgif and only if JnX, and then set J:=Xn(Jn1[[Jnk). It is clear
thatX=Jn1__Jnk_Jand also that Jn6Jfor anyn2N. For the uniqueness, rst noteFACTORIALITY INSIDE BOOLEAN LATTICES 17
that because Jn6Jfor anyn2N, the equalityfn1;:::;n kg=fn2NjJnJgholds. Therefore
n1;:::;n kare uniquely determined. Finally, the disjointness between JandJn1[[Jnk, in tandem
with the equality X=Jn1__Jnk_J, guarantees that J=Xn(Jn1[[Jnk). Hence Claim 4
is established.
Finally, let us come back to prove that (S) =. To argue that (S), it suces to observe
that, by virtue of part (3) of Claim 2, the equality (Jn) =qnholds for every n2Nand, as a result,
(S) = supf(X)jX2Sgsupf(Jn)jn2Ng= lim
n!1qn=:
Let us argue now the reverse inequality, namely, (S). To do so, x X2S. By Claim 4, there
exist unique n1;:::;n k2Nwithn1<<nkand a unique J2Sdisjoint from Jn1[[Jnksuch
thatX=Jn1__Jnk_JandJn6Jfor anyn2N. Claim 3 now guarantees that Jhas a unique
factorization !inS. Now take z2Z(X), and set
zi:=fA2zjAJnig
for eachi2J1;kK. For eachi2J1;kK, the equality_fAjA2zig=Jnimeans that ziis a factorization
ofJni. SinceJ=_fA2zjA6Jnifor anyi2J1;kKg, it follows that
!=fA2zjA6Jnifor anyi2J1;kKg:
As a result, any factorization of XinShas the form z1[[zk[!, whereziis a factorization of Ji
inSfor everyi2J1;kK. Therefore, after setting Y:=Jn1__Jnk, we see that
(X) =supL(X)
minL(X)=sup
j!j+L(Y)	
min
j!j+L(Y)	=j!j+ sup
L(Y)	
j!j+ min
L(Y)	(Y):
In addition, for each i2J1;kK, sincejzij2L(Ji), part (3) of Claim 2 ensures that bnijzijani. As
a consequence,
(Y) =supL(Y)
minL(Y)an1++ank
bn1++bnkqnk;
where the last inequality follows from Lemma 6.1. As a result, (X)(Y)qnk<. Finally, we
can take the supremum of the set f(X)jX2Sgto obtain that (S). 
7.The Length-Factorial Property
This subsection is devoted to the length-factorial property. First, we prove that for Boolean sublat-
tices whose quarks have size at most 2, being an LFS and being a UFS are equivalent conditions, and
then we will exhibit an example of an LFS that is not a UFS. For cancellative commutative monoids,
it was proved in [13, Proposition 3.1] that the property of being an LFM implies that of being an
FFM. We conclude this paper constructing an LFS that is not an FFS.
Recall that the set of isolated quarks of a Boolean sublattice Sis denoted by AI(S). It follows
directly from part (4) of Lemma 3.3 that a Boolean sublattice is an LFS if and only if the sublattice
generated by its set of non-isolated quarks is an LFS. We record this observation as the following
proposition.
Proposition 7.1. A Boolean sublattice Sis an LFS if and only if hA(S)nAI(S)iis an LFS.
In the class consisting of integral domains, it is well-known that satisfying the length-factorial
property is equivalent to being a UFD (see [24, Corollary 2.11]). However, in the class consisting of
all Boolean sublattices, being an LFS does not imply being a UFS. The following example sheds some
light upon this observation.18 K. AJRAN AND F. GOTTI
Example 7.2. Consider the Boolean sublattice Sgenerated by the set f123;456;14;25;36g. It is clear
thatA(S) =f123;456;14;25;36g. From the Hasse diagram of S, which is illustrated in Figure 4, we
can verify that every element of Snf^0ghas a unique factorization except the element 123456, which
has exactly two factorizations, namely, z1:=f123;456gandz2:=f14;25;36g. Sincejz1j6=jz2j, we
conclude that Sis an LFS that is not a UFS.
Figure 4. Hasse diagram of the Boolean sublattice generated by the set f123;456;14;25;36g.
Although we have seen in Example 7.2 that the property of being an LFS and that of being a
UFS are not equivalent in the whole class of Boolean sublattices, they are equivalent in the subclass
consisting of all Boolean sublattices whose quarks have size at most 2. We present this result in the
next proposition.
Proposition 7.3. A Boolean sublattice whose quarks have size at most 2is an LFS if and only if it
is a UFS.
Proof. It suces to argue that each Boolean sublattice whose quarks have size at most 2 that is an
LFS is also a UFS. Let Sbe a Boolean sublattice whose quarks have size at most 2, and assume that S
is an LFS. By virtue of Proposition 7.1, we can assume that every quark of Shas size 2. Mimicking
the proof of Lemma 4.5, we can arrive to the conclusion that Gp(S) does not contain length-3 cycles,
length-4 cycles, and length-4 paths (this is because the proof of Lemma 4.5 is based on the existence
of distinct factorizations with same length). Hence each connected component of Gp(S) must be a
tree of diameter at most 3. Now the argument given in the last paragraph of the proof of Theorem 4.6
shows that Sis a UFS. 
Let us conclude comparing the property of being length-factorial with that of having nite factor-
izations in the context of join semilattices. As an immediate consequence of Remark 2.1, we obtain
that every Boolean sublattice that is an LFS is also an FFS (as mentioned at the beginning of this
section, the corresponding statement holds in the class of cancellative commutative monoids). Ob-
serve, on the other hand, that each non-LFS factorizable Boolean sublattice is an example of an FFS
that is not an LFS. However, there are join semilattices that are LFSs but not FFSs. The following
example conrms our assertion.FACTORIALITY INSIDE BOOLEAN LATTICES 19
Example 7.4. Fori;j2Nwithij, we dene the function i;j: [0;1)!N0as follows: given
x2[0;1), take the sequence of digits from the i-th position to the j-th position (both included)
after the decimal point of the binary representation of x, and then let i;j(x) be the positive integer
represented by the obtained binary string. For example,
4;6(1=3) =4;6(0:010101:::2) = 101 2= 5,
2;5(1=4) =2;5(0:01000 2) = 1000 2= 8, and
2;2(1=4) =2;2(0:01000 2) = 1 2= 1.
For eachn2N, letTndenote the n-th triangular numbern(n+1)
2. SinceTn Tn 1=n, the image
of the function Tn 1+1;TnisJ0;2n 1K. Now, forn2Nandk2J0;2n 1K, letAn
kbe the preimage
ofkbyTn 1+1;Tn; that is,
An
k=
x2[0;1)jTn 1+1;Tn(x) =k	
:
For example, as T2+ 1 = 4 and T3= 6, the fact that 4;6(1=3) = 5 implies that 1 =32A3
5. For
eachn2N, it is clear thatfAn
kjk2J0;2n 1Kgis a partition of [0 ;1), which we call in the scope
of this example the n-th layer . Now, we let Sdenote the subsemilattice of 2[0;1)(ordered under set
inclusion) that is generated by all the sets An
k, wheren2Nandk2J0;2n 1K; that is,
S=
An
kjn2Nandk2J0;2n 1K
:
Since every layer is a (nite) partition of [0 ;1), it follows that [0 ;1)2S. We will prove that Sis
an LFS that is not an FFS. To accomplish this, it is enough to argue that Sis a factorizable join
semilattice satisfying that [0 ;1) has innitely many factorizations, each of them having a dierent
length, and also that each of the remaining elements of Shas a unique factorization.
Claim 1.Sis factorizable with A(S) =fAn
kjn2Nandk2J0;2n 1Kg.
Proof of Claim 1. It suces to show that there are no inclusion relations between members in the
dening generating set fAn
kjn2Nandk2J0;2n 1Kg. Consider the distinct blocks Am
iandAn
j,
wherem;n2Nand (i;j)2J0;2m 1KJ0;2n 1K. As distinct blocks in the same layer are disjoint,
we can assume that m6=n. Asm6=n, the intervals JTm 1+ 1;TmKand JTn 1+ 1;TnKare disjoint,
which implies that the functions Tm 1+1;TmandTn 1+1;Tndepend on disjoint ranges of digits, which
in turn implies that both sets Am
inAn
jandAn
jnAm
iare nonempty. Thus, none of the sets Am
iand
An
jis included in the other one, and so Claim 1 follows.
Since each layer is a partition of [0 ;1), it follows as an immediate consequence of Claim 1 that the
n-th layer is a factorizable of [0 ;1) of length 2n. In particular, Sis not an FFS. To argue that Sis an
LFS we use the following technical claim.
Claim 2. The following statements hold.
(1) IfX2Snf[0;1)g, then for each n2Nandk2J0;2n 1K, the inclusion An
kXimplies that
An
k2zfor anyz2Z(X).
(2)Z([0;1)) =
fAn
kjk2J0;2n 1Kgjn2N	
.
Proof of Claim 2. (1) Suppose that An
kXfor somen2Nandk2J0;2n 1K, and assume, by way
of contradiction, that An
k=2z. AsX6= [0;1), for each m2N, there exists km2J0;2m 1Ksuch that
Am
km=2z. After replacing An
knbyAn
k, we can assume that kn=k. Letx2[0;1) be the real number
such thatTm 1+1;Tm(x) =kmfor everym2N(there is a unique x2[0;1) satisfying this condition
due to the fact that fJTm 1+ 1;TmKjm2Ngis a partition of N). Now xA`
j2z. AsA`
k`=2z, the
fact thatA`
jandA`
k`are blocks in the same layer ensures that A`
j\A`
k`is empty. Thus, the fact that
x2A`
k`implies that x=2A`
j. Hencex=2Afor anyA2z, and we conclude that x=2_z=X.20 K. AJRAN AND F. GOTTI
However, as An
kX, the previous conclusion contradicts that Tn 1+1;Tn(x) =k, and so part (1) of
Claim 2 follows.
(2) If for some n2N, a factorization z2Z([0;1)) contains all the blocks of the n-th layer, then
it is clear that z=fAn
kjk2J0;2n 1Kg. Suppose, by way of contradiction, that z2Z([0;1)) does
not contain all the blocks of any layer. Then, as in the previous part, for each m2N, there exists
km2J0;2m 1Ksuch thatAm
km=2z, and we can dene x2[0;1) similarly to arrive to the desired
contradiction.
By virtue of part (2) of Claim 2, any two distinct factorizations of [0 ;1) inShave dierent lengths.
Thus, proving that Sis an LFS amounts to verifying that each element X2Snf;;[0;1)ghas a
unique factorization in S. Fixz2Z(X). Ifz02Z(X) andA2z0, thenAX, and so it follows from
part (1) of Claim 2 that A2z. Therefore z0z, which implies that z0=z. HenceXhas a unique
factorization. As a consequence, we can now conclude that Sis an LFS that is not an FFS.
Acknowledgments
While working on this paper, the second author was kindly supported by the NSF awards DMS-
1903069 and DMS-2213323.
References
[1] D. D. Anderson and D. F. Anderson: Elasticity of factorizations in integral domains , J. Pure Appl. Algebra 80
(1992) 217{235.
[2] D. D. Anderson, D. F. Anderson, S. T. Chapman, W. W. Smith: Rational Elasticity of factorizations in Krull
domains , Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 117(1993) 37{43.
[3] D. D. Anderson, D. F. Anderson, and M. Zafrullah: Factorization in integral domains , J. Pure Appl. Algebra 69
(1990) 1{19.
[4] D. D. Anderson and S. Chun: Irreducible elements in commutative rings with zero-divisors , Houston J. Math. 37
(2011) 741{744.
[5] D. D. Anderson and J. R. Juett: Length functions in commutative rings with zero divisors , Comm. Algebra 45
(2017) 1584{1600.
[6] D. D. Anderson and S. Valdes-Leon: Factorization in commutative rings with zero divisors , Rocky Mountain J.
Math. 26(1996) 439{480.
[7] D. D. Anderson and S. Valdes-Leon: Factorization in commutative rings with zero divisors, II . In: Factorization
in integral domains (Ed. D. D. Anderson), pages 197{219. Marcel Dekker, 1997.
[8] D. F. Anderson: Elasticity of factorizations in integral domains: a survey , Factorization in Integral Domains, Lect.
Notes Pure Appl. Math. Vol. 189, Marcel Dekker (1997) 1{29.
[9] D. F. Anderson and F. Gotti: Bounded and nite factorization domains . In: Rings, Monoids, and Module The-
ory (Eds. A. Badawi and J. Coykendall) pp. 7{57 Springer Proceedings in Mathematics & Statistics, Vol. 382,
Singapore, 2022.
[10] A. A. Antoniou and S. Tringali: On the arithmetic of power monoids and sumsets in cyclic groups , Pacic J. Math.
312(2021) 279{308.
[11] M. Batell and J. Coykendall: Elasticity in polynomial-type extensions , Proc. Edinb. Math. Soc. 59(2016) 581{590.
[12] P. Bienvenu and A. Geroldinger: On algebraic properties of power monoids of numerical monoids . Israel Journal
of Mathematics (to appear). Preprint on arXiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.00982.
[13] A. Bu, J. Vulakh, and A. Zhao: Length-factoriality and pure irreducibility . Communications in Algebra (to appear).
Preprint on arXiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.06638.
[14] L. Carlitz: A characterization of algebraic number elds with class number two , Proc. Amer. Math Soc., 11(1960)
391{392.
[15] S. T. Chapman, J. Coykendall, F. Gotti, and W. W. Smith: Length-factoriality in commutative monoids and
integral domains , J. Algebra 578(2021) 186{212.
[16] S. T. Chapman, M. Fontana, A. Geroldinger, and B. Olberding (eds.), Multiplicative Ideal Theory and Factorization
Theory: Commutative and Non-Commutative Perspectives, Springer Proc. Math. Stat. 170, Springer, 2016.FACTORIALITY INSIDE BOOLEAN LATTICES 21
[17] S. T. Chapman, M. T. Holden, T. A. Moore: Full elasticity in atomic monoids and integral domains , Rocky
Mountain J. Math. 36(2006) 1437-1455.
[18] S. Chun and D.D. Anderson: Irreducible elements in commutative rings with zero-divisors II , Houston J. Math.
39(2013) 741{752.
[19] P. M. Cohn: Bezout rings and and their subrings , Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 64(1968) 251{264.
[20] J. Correa-Morris and F. Gotti: On the additive structure of algebraic valuations of polynomial semirings , J. Pure
Appl. Algebra 226(2022) 107104.
[21] L. Cossu and S. Tringali: On the niteness of certain factorization invariants . Preprint on arXiv:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.09961.
[22] L. Cossu and S. Tringali: Factorization under local niteness conditions . Journal of Algebra (to appear). Preprint
on arXiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05869.
[23] J. Coykendall: A characterization of polynomial rings with the half-factorial property . In: Factorization in Integral
Domains (Ed. D. D. Anderson) pp. 291{294, Lecture Notes in Pure and Applied Mathematics, vol. 189, Marcel
Dekker, Boca Raton 1997.
[24] J. Coykendall and W. W. Smith: On unique factorization domains , J. Algebra 332(2011) 62{70.
[25] R. A. C. Edmonds and J. R. Juett: Associates, irreducibility, and factorization length in monoid rings with zero
divisors , Comm. Algebra 49(2021) 1836{1860.
[26] Y. Fan, A. Geroldinger, F. Kainrath, and S. Tringali: Arithmetic of commutative semigroups with a focus on
semigroups of ideals and modules , J. Algebra Appl. 16(2017) 1750234.
[27] Y. Fan and S. Tringali: Power monoids: A bridge between factorization theory and arithmetic combinatorics , J.
Algebra 512(2018) 252{294.
[28] A. Geroldinger, F. Gotti, and S. Tringali: On strongly primary monoids, with a focus on Puiseux monoids , J.
Algebra 567(2021) 310{345.
[29] A. Geroldinger and F. Halter-Koch: Non-unique Factorizations: Algebraic, Combinatorial and Analytic Theory ,
Pure and Applied Mathematics Vol. 278, Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, 2006.
[30] A. Geroldinger and Q. Zhong: A characterization of length-factorial Krull monoids , New York J. Math. 27(2021)
1347{1374.
[31] A. Geroldinger and Q. Zhong: A characterization of seminormal C-monoids , Boll. Unione Mat. Ital. 12(2019)
583{597.
[32] A. Geroldinger and Q. Zhong: Factorization theory in commutative monoids , Semigroup Forum 100(2020) 22{51.
[33] F. Gotti: Geometric and combinatorial aspects of submonoids of a nite-rank free commutative monoid , Linear
Algebra Appl. 604(2020) 146{186.
[34] F. Gotti: The system of sets of lengths and the elasticity of submonoids of a nite-rank free commutative monoid ,
J. Algebra Appl. 19(2020) 2050137.
[35] F. Gotti and C. O'Neill: The elasticity of Puiseux monoids , J. Commut. Algebra 12(2020) 319{331.
[36] F. Gotti and H. Polo: On the arithmetic of polynomial semidomains . Forum Mathematicum (to appear). Preprint
on arXiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11478.
[37] F. Halter-Koch: Finiteness theorems for factorizations , Semigroup Forum 44(1992) 112{117.
[38] R. E. Johnson: Unique factorization monoids and domains , Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 28(1971) 397{404.
[39] J. R. Juett and A. M. Medina: Finite factorization properties in commutative monoid rings with zero divisors ,
Comm. Algebra 50(2022) 392{422.
[40] F. Kainrath: Elasticity of nitely generated domains , Houston J. Math. 31(2005) 43{64.
[41] W. Narkiewicz: On natural numbers having unique factorization in a quadratic number eld , Acta Arith. 12(1966)
1{22.
[42] W. Narkiewicz: On natural numbers having unique factorization in a quadratic number eld II , Acta Arith. 13
(1967) 123{129.
[43] A. Plagne and W. A. Schmid: On congruence half-factorial Krull monoids with cyclic class group , Journal of
Combinatorial Algebra 3(2020) 331{400.
[44] E. D. Schwab and P. Haukkanen: A unique factorization in commutative M obius monoids , Internat. J. Number
Theory 04(2008) 549{561.
[45] L. Skula: On c-semigroups , ACTA Arith. 31(1976) 247{257.
[46] R. P. Stanley. Enumerative Combinatorics, Volume 1 (second edition). Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathe-
matics, Cambridge University Press, New York, 2012.
[47] J. L. Stean: Longueurs des d ecompositions en produits d' el ements irr eductibles dans un anneau de Dedekind , J.
Algebra 102(1986) 229{236.
[48] S. Tringali: An abstract factorization theorem and some applications , J. Algebra 602(2022) 352{380.22 K. AJRAN AND F. GOTTI
[49] S. Tringali: Is the elasticity of a submonoid of the free abelian monoid over a nite set either rational or innite? ,
URL (version: 2017-11-16): https://mathoverow.net/questions/285971
[50] R. Valenza: Elasticity of factorization in number elds , J. Number Theory 36(1990) 212{218.
[51] A. Zaks: Half-factorial domains , Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 82(1976) 721{723.
[52] A. Zaks: Half-factorial domains , Israel J. Math. 37(1980) 281{302.
[53] Q. Zhong: On elasticities of locally nitely generated monoids , J. Algebra 534(2019) 145{167.
Department of Mathematics, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139
Email address :kajran@mit.edu
Department of Mathematics, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139
Email address :fgotti@mit.edu