arXiv:2305.16281v1  [math.CT]  25 May 2023On the relationship between Galois and
Tannakian categories: an open letter
Georgios Chara-Lambous∗
DPMMS, University of Cambridge
May 26, 2023
To my brotherΧρὶστος and his wifeΜαρὶαon the occasion of their wedding.
Abstract
It has long been said that the theories of Galois and Tannakia n cat-
egories over a ﬁeld kare just “formally similar”. With this note I will
argue that this is in fact not the case: not only do Tannakian c ategories
generalize Galois categories, but in fact the latter sit ins ide the former in
a rather structured way. In particular, in the ﬁrst part, I wi ll claim that
at the core of the general connection between k-Tannakian and Galois
categories lies a 2-functorial machine
T/mapsto→Π(T),
which takes as input any k-Tannakian category Tand associates to it
ak-Tannakian category Π( T) which, when kis a separably closed ﬁeld,
determines and is determined by a Galois category
CSep(Π( T)),
where the operation CSep( −) is deﬁned using the notion of commutative
separable algebra in a symmetric monoidal category , that Aurelio Carboni
deﬁnes and uses in the beautiful paper [Carboni] to construc t a Boolean
pretopos out of a compact closed additive category with equa lizers.
This machine behaves, in the general case where no ﬁbre funct or is
chosen on the categories, as a “2-dimensional mono-coreﬂec tor” when kis
separably closed. In the second part of this work I will demon strate this
in the simpler case where the categories are neutralized, an d in which the
results of [Carboni] are readily available, by arguing that the (2-) category
Gal∗of neutralized Galois categories is (2-) coreﬂective
NTan k,∗
Gal∗γ⊣
in the (2-) category NTan k,∗of neutralized k-Tannakian categories.
∗math.georgios@gmail.com
1Conﬁteor
I would like to apologize to everyone who has reached out to me enquir ing with
interest about this (many years old) work, aspects of which I have presented
both in Cambridge and at the PSSL 101 (Leeds) in 2017. I am extreme ly
fascinated by the Tannakian formalism and the current raison d’ ˆ e tre of my
academic life is to explore how widely applicable it is - as I strongly believe t hat
the formalism’s underlying mechanics are useful much more broadly t han it has
been recognized. While working on this more “fundamental” project , the work
presented here was put aside, mainly because the “complete demys tiﬁcation”
of the connection between Galois and Tannakian categories ended u p being a
task bigger than I initially anticipated. And even though I had na¨ ıvely hoped to
exploreeveryaspectofitalonebeforesharingmythoughts,thee motionalweight
that this attitude carries has now become unbearable; and I am thu s opening
Pandora’s box, in the hope that I will start making more material pub lic. As
a compromise, even though this article does present the main idea be hind the
connection, I will treat it as a “working” paper: I am planning to revis it it with
additions and more details, as the state of it is by no means complete.
The worldsofTannakian and Galois categoriesare beautiful garden sbearing
fruitsfrom manydiﬀerent areasofmathematics, andI havetried t odemonstrate
this by using rather diverse language here - the ﬁrst part is written with Alge-
braic Geometers in mind while the second is written with Category Theo rists
in mind. In fact I see the exploration of the connection between Galo is and
Tannakian categories as a great cooperation opportunity betwee n these com-
munities: in my opinion insight from both sides is necessary in order to h arvest
the full potential of this relationship. I welcome any questions, sug gestions and
feedback on this work, but most importantly (the reason for decid ing to publish
this in a working paper state) I would like to invite anyone who has thou ghts
and insights, either from a geometric ora categoricalperspective , to write about
them, as I really believe there are aspects that I have missed but als o fruitful
directions that deserve to be developed independently. Studying t his connection
seriously is a few decades overdue, and this has to be a collaborative eﬀort.
Acknowledgments
Firstly I would like to thank Martin Hyland for all his support: for acce ptingmy
suggestion to study the connection between Galois and Tannakian c ategories
as a research project in the ﬁrst place, for allowing me complete fre edom in
my work, for not losing hope in me regardless of my secretive attitud e, and
for his numerous attempts at convincing me to write my thoughts do wn in
detail. I would also like to thank Pierre Deligne who, through his works a nd
our correspondence, has taught me how to use the Tannakian for malism in a
“working”way-theinterpretationofmyadjunctionusing“Tannak ianAlgebraic
Geometry” is a result of his guidance. Finally, I would like to thank Pete r
Johnstone for his interest and encouragement for this work in the early stages.
2Part I
In this ﬁrst part I will use the language of gerbes and Deligne’s theor y of “Al-
gebraic Geometry internal in a Tannakian category” to describe th e connection
between Tannakian and Galois categories “both internally and exter nally” -
what this means will be made clear in the body of the text.
1 The general picture
1.1 The 1-dimensional situation
Let me start by discussing the 1-dimensional situation that the afo rementioned
procedure “categoriﬁes”. Let kbe a ﬁeld and consider the inclusion
AlgGrpSchk
´EtGrpSchkι
of the full subcategory of ´ etale (algebraic) group k-schemes in the category of
(aﬃne) algebraic group k-schemes. Every algebraic group k-scheme Ginduces
the short exact sequence of algebraic group k-schemes
0 G0:= kerqG G π0(G) 0qG
where
•the (ﬁnite)´ etalegroup k-schemeπ0(G)of connected components is deﬁned
as
π0(G) := Spec L,
withLthe largest separable k-subalgebra of the ﬁnitely generated com-
mutative Hopf k-algebraO(G), and with the map qG, induced by the
inclusion
L⊆O(G),
being a surjective map of (aﬃne) group k-schemes courtesy of the fact
thatO(G) is faithfully ﬂat over L,
•and the connected component oridentity component algebraic group k-
schemeG0, deﬁned as the kernel of qG, is connected.
This construction of π0(G) is functorial, and the induced functor π0is a left
adjoint to the inclusion ι, with every qGbeing an epimorphism (a surjective map
3of aﬃne group k-schemes is easily seen to be an epimorphism in AlgGrpSchk),
realizing ´EtGrpSchkas a full, epi-reﬂective subcategory
AlgGrpSchk
´EtGrpSchkπ0ι⊢
ofAlgGrpSchk.
The next observation is that this reﬂection Pro-completes: indeed, every
aﬃne group k-schemeGcan be written as a coﬁltered limit
G∼=lim←−iGi
of algebraic k-group schemes Gi, with each Gi= SpecO(G)icorresponding to
the ﬁnitely generated commutative Hopf k-subalgebrasO(G)i⊆O(G) realizing
O(G)i∼=lim−→iO(G)i,
as the ﬁltered union of the O(G)i. In fact,
CHopfk≃IndCHopfk,f.g
and
AﬀGrpSchk≃ProAlgGrpSchk.
Taking the group of connected components of every Giinduces a canonical
morphism
qG:G∼=lim←−iGi→lim←−iπ0(Gi) =:π0(G),
to a pro- (ﬁnite) ´ etale group k-scheme whose kernel identiﬁes with
kerqG∼=lim←−iG0
i,
and it is connected.
Remark 1.1. Notice that I am abusively using the notation π0(G)for what
really isProπ0(G); similar abuse for the quotient map notation, but I think the
context makes everything clear.
Thisprocedureof“takingthemaximalpro-´ etalequotientofanaﬃ nek-group
scheme” induces an epi-reﬂection
AﬀGrpSchk
AﬀGrpSchpro´ et
kπ0ι⊢
4whereιisnowtheinclusionin AﬀGrpSchkofthefullsubcategory AﬀGrpSchpro´ et
k
consistingofthoseaﬃne k-groupschemes that canbe written ascoﬁltered limits
of ´ etale group k-schemes.
Remark 1.2 (“Internal” Recovery) .It is a well-known fact that the counit of
a reﬂection is a natural isomorphism. In this way we can “reco ver” every pro-
´ etale group k-scheme Ethrough a canonical isomorphism ǫE:π0◦ι(E)∼=E
induced by the counit of the adjunction π0⊣ι. Notice that the “reconstruction”
happens “internally”, or “within” the category of aﬃne grou pk-schemes.
Let’s see now how the situation “externalizes” by picking a separable closure
ofk: letkbe one such separable closure of k. As it can be gathered from the
upcoming Section 3.2, the assignment
G/m⊣psto→G(k),
sendingaﬁnite´ etale k-scheme(or ﬁnite´ etale cover , intheterminologyofSection
3.2) to its (“rational”) k-points induces an equivalence
F´Etk≃Contf(Gal(k/k)),
between the category of ﬁnite ´ etale k-schemes and the category of discrete ﬁnite
sets endowed with a continuous action of the proﬁnite (Stone) abs olute Galois
group of k. Choosing now kto be separably closed kills the absolute Galois
group, Cont f(Gal(k/k)) identiﬁes with the category Setfof ﬁnite sets and by
passing to the group objects we end up with an equivalence
´EtGrpSchk→Grpf
G/m⊣psto→G(k).
By composing with π0, we get a functor
AlgGrpSchk→Grpf
G/m⊣psto→π0(−)k:=π0(−)(k).
which is left adjoint to the fully faithful functor
Grpf→AlgGrpSchk
G/m⊣psto→kG,
wherekGis the coproduct of |G|-many copies of Spec k; i.e. we have a reﬂection
AlgGrpSchk
Grpfπ0(−)k k(−)⊢
5whichPro-completes to give an adjunction (the “external” incarnation of th e
reﬂection π0⊣ιofAﬀGrpSchpro´ et
kinAﬀGrpSchkforkseparably closed),
AﬀGrpSchk
StoneGrpProπ0(−)k I⊢
where I have replaced (as a harbinger to a connection with the Pierc e spectrum
I will mention later) the expected functor Prok(−)with the functor Ideﬁned
as follows,
I:StoneGrp→AﬀGrpSchk
π/m⊣psto→SpecCont( π,kdisc),
with Cont( π,kdisc) being the commutative Hopf k-algebra of continuous func-
tions from πto the ﬁeld kendowed with the discrete topology.
Remark 1.3 (“External” Recovery) .We have a canonical isomorphism ǫπ:
π0◦I(π)∼=πfor every Stone group π.
1.2 The 2-dimensional situation
Now let’s look at general Tannakian categories over a ﬁeld kand Galois cate-
gories collectively. Write TankandGalfor their 2-categories respectively.
Remark 1.4. Notice that both Tannakian and Galois categories are consid ered
in this section without any particular ﬁbre functors attach ed.
I would like the reader to think of the situation here as similar in spirit to
its 1-dimensional counterpart discussed in the previous subsectio n. There, I ar-
gued that for kseparably closed, one can associate to a Stone group πan aﬃne
(pro-´ etale) group k-scheme I(π) and from it one can go back to (“recover”) π
canonically (cf. Remark 1.3). The point is that the same holds, in an ap pro-
priately 2-dimensional way, for Galois and Tannakian categories: fo r any ﬁeld
k, one can associate, uniquely, a Galois category C(without any chosen ﬁbre
functor) a (neutral) Tannakian category Clin, and when kis separably closed,
one can in fact recover CfromClin. In this case,CandClinhave “the same”
ﬁbre functors.
Remark 1.5. Let me elaborate on the obstruction (without going into deta ils
in its cohomological nature due to the fact that the space of ﬁ bre functors is a
space of torsors) to doing this for a general k. Firstly notice that for every two
ﬁbre functors p1,p2:C→SetfonC, we have
πGal
1(C,p1)∼=πGal
1(C,p2).
6However, if kis not assumed to be separably closed, it is possible that Clinadmits
ﬁbre functors ω1,ω2:Clin→Vecf.d
konClinwith values in k, for which
πTan
1(Clin,ω1)≇πTan
1(Clin,ω2).
In particular it is possible that for one such ﬁbre functor ω, no Stone group
π∼=lim←−iGiexists with
πTan
1(Clin,ω)∼=lim←−ikGi,
i.e.Clincan admit ﬁbre functors that are not recognizable by aﬃne gro upk-
schemes that come from Stone groups, which is, let me stress a gain, contrary to
what happens for kseparably closed.
Now let me describe how the (co-1) reﬂection is actually constructed - there
are, again, internal and external ways to look at this. To underst and the eﬀect
of the 2-coreﬂection internally - again I use this phrase just to sign ify that
everything happens within the 2-category Tank- letTbe a Tannakian category
overkand write π(T) for the fundamental group of T, as constructed in Section
8 of [Deligne90]; it is an aﬃne group T-scheme,
π(T)∈AﬀGrpT:=Grp(CMon(IndT)op)
which acts on every object of T. Now notice that the construction of the π0(G)
of an aﬃne group k-schemeGis compatible with base change, and thus we can
form the internal incarnation
π0(π(T))
ofπ0(see Exemple 8.14 of [Deligne90]), by performing the construction of the
previous subsection on the “realized” aﬃne group k-schemes
π0(π(T))ω
for every ﬁbre functor ω. This procedure induces a faithfully ﬂat morphism
qπ(T):π(T)→π0(π(T))
inAﬀGrpT. The kernel
π(T)0:= kerqπ(T)
is a normal aﬃne group sub- T-scheme of π(T), and in fact we get a short exact
sequence of aﬃne group T-schemes
0 π(T)0π(T)π0(π(T))0qπ(T)
1Notice that the 2-equivalence between Tannakian k-categories and aﬃne fpqc gerbes over
Speckiscontravariant , so it is co-reﬂective behaviour that should be expected on this side
of the theory.
7Thenormalgroupsub- T-schemeπ(T)0ofπ(T) inducesaTannakiansubcategory
Π(T)⊆T
generated by the objects of Ton which the connected component π(T)0acts
trivially (cf. [Deligne89], 6.6), which, from the gerbe perspective, co rresponds
to an fpqc gerbe whose band is a proﬁnite group k-scheme.
Assuming kto be separably closed, i.e. entering the realm in which general
Galois categories become co-reﬂective in Tannakian categories, th e rˆ ole of the
“internal” 1-dimensional reﬂector π0is played at the 2-dimensional level by the
(co-) reﬂective association
T/m⊣psto→Π(T).
In this case, the band of the Tannakian gerbe of Π( T) corresponds to a classical
proﬁnite (Stone) group, and the gerbe becomes a gerbe with a Sto ne band,
which in turn corresponds to a Galois category GalT. The rˆ ole of the external
1-dimensional reﬂector π0(k) is played, at the 2-dimensional level, by Carboni’s
construction: the Galois category GalTcan be obtained from the Tannakian
category Tas the Boolean pretopos that Carboni proves to be associable to
any compact closed additive category with equalizer, by taking commutative
separable algebras inT.
Part II
InPartII thatfollowsIelaboratefurtherontheideadiscussedab ove,bydemon-
strating how the (co-) reﬂection works, in more detail, in the case w here neu-
tralized versions of Tannakian and Galois categories are considered . Notice that
this is morally unacceptable, as interesting Tannakian categories, lik e those of
motives, come with many available “realization” ﬁbre functors, and c hoosing
one is criminal; however doing so, as I will explain below, essentially elimina tes
the eﬀects of 2-dimensional category theory, allowing me to pass t he general
idea in a simpler categorical environment. I give all the deﬁnitions and results
in detail.
2 Galois categories
2.1 Deﬁnitions
The main reference for Galois categories is [SGA1]. The deﬁnition that follows
is not Grothendieck’s original axiomatic characterization, but it is eq uivalent to
it; it consists of a more compact set of axioms than those appearing in [SGA1].
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Galois category) .AGalois category consists of a pair (C,F),
whereCis an (essentially) small category which is
(GAL1) ﬁnitely complete,
8(GAL2) ﬁnitely cocomplete,
(GAL3) and every object is a ﬁnite coproduct of connected obj ects.
for which there exists a functor
C
Setfp
to the category Setfof ﬁnite sets, called a ﬁbre functor onC, which
(GAL4) is exact, and
(GAL5) is conservative (i.e. reﬂects isomorphisms: if fis a morphism in Csuch
thatp(f)is an isomorphism, then fis an isomorphism).
I will sayCis a Galois category if I do not make a particular choice of a ﬁbre
functor on it2, while a pair (C,p)consisting of a Galois category Cand a chosen
ﬁbre functor pwill be called a neutralized Galois category .
Remark 2.2. The deﬁnition of a Galois category is equivalent to requirin g a
Boolean pretopos admitting a point (consequentlya Boolean topos). See [Johnstone]
for this formulation of the theory, a perspective on Galois c ategories which will
be necessary later when discussing Carboni’s work.
In this work I will be studying (neutralized) Galois categories collectiv ely so
let’s see what a 1-morphism between them should be.
Deﬁnition 2.3 (1-morphisms of Galois categories) .LetCandC′be Galois
categories.
•A1-morphism of Galois categories from CtoC′is a functor F:C→C′
which is exact.
•Given ﬁbre functors p,p′neutralizingCandC′respectively, a 1-morphism
of neutralized Galois categories ( C,p)→(C′,p′)is a pair (F,α)consisting
of a morphism F:C → C′of Galois categories and a chosen natural
isomorphism α:p∼=p′◦Fas follows
SetfC C′
pF
p′α
∼=
2Notice however, that any two ﬁbre functors on a Galois catego ryCare (non-canonically)
isomorphic.
9Next let’s see what 2-morphisms are.
Deﬁnition 2.4 (2-Morphisms of neutralized Galois categories) .Let(C,p)and
(C′,p′)be neutralized Galois categories. A 2-morphism of neutralized Galois
categories from(F,α)to(F′,α′)is a natural transformation τ:F⇒F′such
that we have an equality
α′·τ=α
of natural transformations, where α′·τis the vertical composition
α′·τ:=α′·(ιp′◦
2τ) :p′◦F⇒p:C→Setf,
whereιp′◦
2τis the whiskering
C C′ SetfC SetfF
F′p′
p′p′◦F
p′◦F′τ ιB′ιB′◦
2τ
with◦
2denoting the horizontal composition operation of natural t ransformations
andιp′is the identity natural transformation on the functor p′.
Proposition 2.5 (The 2-categoryofneutralized Galois categories) .Neutralized
Galois categories, 1-morphisms between them and 2-morphisms between those,
as deﬁned above, assemble into a 2-category denoted by Gal∗.
We must immediately notice that this 2-categoryis not exactly a 2-ca tegory:
it is, rather a “setoid-enriched category”, i.e. Gal∗is naturally 2-equivalent to
a 1-category: one can check that 2-morphisms are isomorphisms a nd automor-
phisms of 1-morphisms are the identity. Indeed, notice that on com ponents, for
everyC∈obC, we have by the Godement rule that
αC= (α′·τ)C=α′
C◦(ιp′◦
2τ)C=α′
C◦idpF′C◦p′(τC) =α′
C◦p′(τC),(1)
implying that, since both αCandα′
Care isomorphisms, p′(τC) must be an iso-
morphism too. But it then immediately follows from requirement (GAL5 ) that
τCisalsoanisomorphismforevery C∈obC, so2-morphismsareindeed isomor-
phisms and we are half-way there. We need to also show that automo rphisms
of 1-morphisms are the identity 2-morphism. But this follows easily by noticing
that (1) becomes in this case
αC=αC◦p′(τC),
which in turn implies
p′(τC) = idp′C
sinceαCis an isomorphism. It then suﬃces to notice that a ﬁbre functor is
faithful and the identity already gives p′(idC) = idp′C. ThusτCmust indeed be
the identity itself.
10Remark 2.6. In this way Gal∗becomes equivalent to a 1-category, and I will
be treating it as such in the sequel - hence the preﬁx “ 2-” in parentheses in front
of every instance of referring to neutralized categories co llectively. Notice that
this would by far notbe the case if we were assembling general Galois categories
into a2-category, where we do not have a “canonical” choice of ﬁbre f unctor: it
is precisely the ﬁxingof a ﬁbre functor that allows us to treat these categories
collectively as a 1-category.
2.2 Classiﬁcation of neutralized Galois categories
For a proﬁnite group π, denote by
Contf(π)
the category of discrete ﬁnite sets endowed with a continuous (lef t) action of π.
It is a Galois category admitting the forgetful functor
SetfContf(π)
U
to the categoryof ﬁnite sets as a ﬁbre functor. It turns out tha t all (neutralized)
Galois categories are of this form. To see this we need the following de ﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 2.7 (The based fundamental group of a Galois category) .LetCbe
a Galois category and let pbe a ﬁbre functor. The (Galois) fundamental group
ofCpointed at pis the group
πGal
1(C,p) := Aut( p)
of automorphisms of the ﬁbre functor p.
This fundamental group is a proﬁnite Stone group when topologized as a
closed subgroup
πGal
1(C,p)⊆/productdisplay
C∈obCAut(FC),
of the product group above, which is itself a proﬁnite group when en dowed with
the product topology (each of the ﬁnite groups Aut( FC) is given the discrete
topology), as an arbitrary product of proﬁnite groups is proﬁnite and discrete
ﬁnite groups are proﬁnite.
Grothendieck’s work on Galois categories has the following two equally im-
portant aspects:
•Reconstruction: Foranyproﬁnitegroupwehave π∼=πGal
1(Contf(π),U).
11•Recognition: A neutralized Galois category ( C,p) factorizes through an
equivalence
C Contf/parenleftbig
πGal
1(C,p)/parenrightbig
Setf≃
p
U
These constructions are (2-) functorial and we have the following result.
Theorem 2.8 (GrothendieckCharacterizationofneutralizedGaloiscategories) .
The assignment
(C,p)/m⊣psto→πGal
1(C,p)
induces a ( 2-) functor
AUT:Gal∗→StoneGrpop
which is an equivalence of ( 2-) categories (when StoneGrp is endowed with
identities as 2-morphisms). The inverse to AUTisCONT:StoneGrpop→
Gal∗, which is the ( 2-) functor that assigns to a proﬁnite group πthe neutralized
Galois category (Contf(π),U).
Proof.See [SGA1], Expos´ e V.
Remark 2.9. If we did not consider Galois categories with ﬁxed ﬁbre funct ors
on them, a fully 2-categorical equivalence statement is needed, in which Gal ois
categories should be compared with Stone gerbes.
3 Carboni’s separable algebras
Everyﬁeld kdeﬁnesitsGaloiscategory F´Etk, thecategoryof“ﬁnite´ etalecovers
overSpec k”, andtogetaﬁbrefunctoronitoneneedstopickaseparableclosu re
ofk(which is where the virtue ofchoosing kto be separablyclosedin this article
comes in). This geometrically deﬁned category admits a description u sing the
algebraicnotionof“separable”or“´ etale” k-algebra,whichispreciselythenotion
on which Carboni builds his generalized notion of commutative separable algebra
in a symmetric monoidal category that I will be using to pass from Tannakian
to Galois categories. In order to give meaning to the statements I m ade above,
I would like to discuss the notion of ﬁnite ´ etale schemes in some detail and
in particular explain their algebraic side. Thus this section starts with a brief
introduction to the relevant scheme-theoretic notions.
3.1 Basics of Scheme Theory
Let’s start with deﬁning some fundamental scheme-theoretic not ions.
12•Aringed space is a pair ( V,OV) consisting of a topological space Vand a
sheaf of ringsOVcalled the structure sheaf .
•Alocally ringed space is a ringed space ( V,OV) if the stalksOV,vofOVat
everyv∈Varelocalrings. A morphism of locally ringed spaces (V,OV)→
(W,OW) is a pair ( f,f♯) consisting of
–a continuous morphism f:V→Wof topological spaces,
–a morphism f♯:OW→f∗OVof sheaves of rings,
–such that for any v∈Vthe homomorphism of rings on the stalks
f♯
v:OW,f(v)→OV,v
is a homomorphism of local rings.
•For any commutative ring Rone can deﬁne a topology on the set Spec R
of prime ideals of R, called the Zariski topology , having a basis of open
sets given, for every r∈R, by the sets
D(r) :={P:Pprime with r /∈P},
and which admits a structure sheaf OSpecR, making (Spec R,OSpecR) into
a locally ringed space called the (prime) spectrum of R. Notice that spec-
tra of ﬁelds are just points as the only prime ideal of a ﬁeld kis the trivial
ideal so Spec k={(0)}.
•Anaﬃne scheme isalocallyringedspace( V,OV) isomorphictothe ringed
space (Spec R,OSpecR) for some commutative ring R. Amorphism of
aﬃne schemes is a morphism of locally ringed spaces. The category of
aﬃne schemes will be denoted by Aﬀ.
•Aschemeis a locally ringed space that admits an open covering by aﬃne
schemes. A morphism of schemes is a morphism of locally ringed spaces.
The category of schemes will be denoted by Sch.
In fact the construction of the (aﬃne) scheme Spec Rout of a commutative ring
R, assembles into a fully faithful functor
Spec :CRingop→Sch
R/m⊣psto→(SpecR,OSpecR).
Taking global sections of the structure sheaves of schemes (or taking the coordi-
nate ringO(V)of a scheme (V,OV), terminology inherited from the situation
generalized here from the level of aﬃne varieties) induces a functo r
O:Sch→CRingop
(V,OV)/m⊣psto→ΓV(OV) =OV(V) =:O(V),
13which is left adjoint to the functor Spec. In this way CRingopbecomes a
reﬂective subcategory of Sch,
Sch
CRingopO Spec⊢
which realizes CRingopas
CRingop≃Aﬀ,
the full subcategory of Schconsisting of aﬃne schemes.
Remark 3.1. We will refer to the adjunction above as thestructureadjunction .
Now let us recall Grothendieck’s relative point of view , in which the focus
is not just on schemes in isolation, but rather, schemes relative to s ome “base
scheme”.
Deﬁnition 3.2. LetS= (V,OV)be a scheme.
•Aschemeover S, or anS-schemeis an object of the over-category Sch/S,
i.e. a pair (X,f), consisting of a scheme Xtogether with a morphism of
schemes f:X→S, called the structural morphism .
•If(Y,g)is another S-scheme, a morphism of S-schemes from(X,f)to
(Y,g)is a morphism in Sch/S, i.e. it is a morphism of schemes u:X→
Y,
X Y
S,u
f
g
such that f=g◦u.
Remark 3.3. If the scheme Sis the spectrum SpecRfor some ring R, we will
refer to a scheme over Sas ascheme over R, or anR-scheme.
Every ring admits a unique morphism from the ring of integers Z, and ev-
ery scheme admits a unique morphism to the scheme Spec Z, courtesy of the
structure adjunction bijection
HomSch(X,SpecR)∼=HomCRing(R,O(X)),
allowing us to think of all schemes as schemes over Z. We want to obtain a
“relative to a base scheme S” version of the structure adjunction. For this, we
need to be able to “base-change”.
14Proposition 3.4. The category Schof schemes has pullbacks.
Proof.This isessentiallya consequenceofthe tensorproduct ofrings. Fo raﬃne
schemes X= SpecA,Y= SpecBandZ= SpecC, for rings A,BandC, the
pullback scheme
X×YZ X = SpecA
Z= SpecC Y = SpecB
is the aﬃne scheme corresponding to the tensor product of rings,
X×YZ= Spec(A⊗BC),
and more generally, the pullback of schemes is deﬁned by glueing toge ther aﬃne
pullbacks of the above form.
Now let us ﬁx a ring R. SinceSchhas pullbacks, we can look at the “over
R” version of the structure adjunction.
Proposition 3.5. For any ring R, the structure adjunction gives an adjunction
Sch/SpecR
CRingop/R,OR SpecR⊢
whereORis the evident induced functor and SpecRis the composite
CRingop/R∼=CRingop/(O◦SpecR)→Sch/(O◦SpecR)→Sch/SpecR
of the evident functor induced by Specwith the pullback along the (O⊣Spec)-
unit atSpecR.
Proof.Standard category theory - notice that the natural isomorphism R∼=
Γ◦SpecRfor anyR∈CRingis a consequence of the fact that CRingopis
reﬂective in Sch.
Remark 3.6 (AﬃneR-schemes) .The slice category CRingop/Rcan be iden-
tiﬁed with the category CAlgop
R, opposite to the category of commutative R-
algebras under the relative structure adjunction, and we ha ve
CAlgop
R≃Aﬀ/SpecR=:AﬀR,
with the objects of the category AﬀRoften called aﬃneR-schemes .
153.2 Finite ´ etale covers and classical separable k-algebras
The motivating example of a Galois category for Grothendieck was th e category
F´EtXof ﬁnite ´ etale covers of a connected scheme X, i.e. the full subcategory
F´EtX⊂Sch/X
consisiting of the schemes over Xwhich are “ﬁnite and ´ etale3”. For the general
deﬁnitions see Expos´ e I of [SGA1].
Remark 3.7. A morphism S→Speckis ﬁnite and ´ etale if and only if Sis
a ﬁnite disjoint union of spectra of ﬁnite separable ﬁeld ext ensions of k. In
particular, for a separably closed ﬁeld Ω, we have
F´EtSpecΩ≃Setf.
For every choice of a geometric point x: SpecΩ→XofX, where Ω is a
separably closed ﬁeld, and for any ﬁnite ´ etale X-scheme f:S→X, consider
the pullback
S×XSpecΩ S
X SpecΩf
x
and denote by
φx(S) :=|S×XSpecΩ|
the underlying set of the ﬁnite ´ etale scheme S×XSpecΩ over SpecΩ, which is
ﬁnite by Remark 3.7. In this way we get a ﬁbre functor
SetfF´EtX
φ
onF´EtXsending a ﬁnite ´ etale cover SofXtoφx(S).
Remark 3.8. The consideration of F´EtXallowed Grothendieck to deﬁne a
natural generalization of the absolute Galois group of a ﬁel dk, the´ etale fun-
damental group of Xbased at a geometric point x: the Galois fundamental
group of F´EtXbased at φ. It provides a parallel, in Algebraic Geometry, to the
(Poincar´ e) fundamental group of topological spaces based at a point.
3I will not go into the deﬁnitions of these morphisms in detail as that would divert me from
the main goal of this paper, especially because in the case of interest for us, namely when
X= Speck, ﬁnite ´ etale X-schemes take a much simpler form - see the next remark.
16Let’s now discuss the case X= Speckin more detail. In this case, a ﬁnite
´ etale scheme S→Specktakes the form
S= SpecA,
whereAis a “(ﬁnite) commutative separable k-algebra”. Let’s recall the deﬁ-
nition of these objects, as it is on this algebraic side of the theory th at Carboni
builds his monoidal notion.
Deﬁnition 3.9 (Classical Commutative Separable algebras over a ﬁeld) .Letk
be a ﬁeld. A commutative algebra Aoverkisclassically separable if for every
ﬁeld extension k⊆k′ofk,J(A⊗kk′) = 0, i.e.A⊗kk′has zero Jacobson
radical.
I will denote by
FCSepk
the full subcategoryof CAlgkon the ﬁnite4separable k-algebras. The structure
adjunction induces an equivalence
F´EtSpeck≃FCSepop
k. (2)
Notice the following standard characterization of separability, whic h is the al-
gebraic parallel of Remark 3.7.
Proposition 3.10 (Finite Commutative Separable algebras over a ﬁeld) .Let
Abe a ﬁnite commutative algebra over k. ThenAis classically separable if and
only if it is a ﬁnite direct product of ﬁnite separable ﬁeld ex tensions of k.
Thus when kis separably closed, every ﬁnite commutative separable algebra
overkis of the form kn, inducing the expected contravariant equivalence
FCSepop
k≃Setf.
Under equivalence (2), the ﬁbre functor p:FCSepop
k→Setfcan be identiﬁed
with the functor
SetfFCSepop
k
p=CAlgk/parenleftBig
−,k/parenrightBig
Remark 3.11. Notice that pisnota representable functor: kis not a separable
k-algebra.
The Galois fundamental group of this neutralized Galois category ba sed at
pidentiﬁes as
πGal
1(FCSepop
k,p)∼=Gal(k/k),
4Recall that a commutative k-algebra Aisﬁnite over kif it is ﬁnite-dimensional as a
k-vector space.
17the absolute Galois group of k(which is proﬁnite with the Krull topology). This
ﬁbre functor thus induces, by Theorem 2 .8, an equivalence
FCSepop
k≃Contf(Gal(k/k)) (3)
for any choice kof a separable closure of k.
3.3 Carboni’s Commutative Separable Algebras inamonoidal
category
Let me give the deﬁnition appearing in [Carboni] right away; a discus sion of
how to recover the classical separable algebras appearing in Groth endieck’s re-
formulation of Galois theory will follow.
Deﬁnition 3.12 (Commutative Separable Algebras in a Symmetric Monoidal
Category) .Acommutative separablemonoid in a symmetric monoidal category
Vis an object A∈obVequipped with a commutative monoid structure (A,µ,η)
and a cocommutative comonoid structure (A,δ,ǫ)satisfying the axioms
(U)µ◦δ= 1, and
(D)(1⊗δ)(µ⊗1) =δ◦µ= (δ⊗1)(1⊗µ)
Remark 3.13. Notice that in [Carboni] the order of composition of µwithδin
his axioms (U) and (D) is accidentally reversed - the composi tions should be as
in the deﬁnition above.
Thisdeﬁnition isinspiredbythe followingdeﬁnition, thatCarboniattr ibutes
to DeMeyer and Ingraham citing [DeMeyer, Ingraham].
Deﬁnition 3.14 (DeMI-separable algebras over a commutative ring R).LetR
be a commutative ring and let Abe a not necessarily commutative algebra over
R. We say that Ais a DeMI-separable algebra over RifAis projective as a
leftA⊗RAop-module under the action
·: (A⊗RAop)×A→A (4)
(a⊗a′,a′′)/m⊣psto→(a⊗a′)·a′′:=aa′′a′, (5)
whereAopdenotes the opposite ring of A.
One can then use the fact that for any DeMI-separable algebra AoverR
there exists a left A⊗RAop-module (epi-) morphism of left A⊗Aop-modules
m:A⊗RAop→A (6)/summationdisplay
iai⊗a′
i/m⊣psto→/summationdisplay
iaia′
i, (7)
called the augmentation map of A, for which the short exact sequence
0kermA⊗RAopA0m
18splits (i.e. the augmentation map madmits a section), to verify that com-
mutative DeMI-separable algebras over Rcan be identiﬁed, in the symmetric
monoidalcategory ProjRofprojectivemodulesoveracommutativering R, with
those commutative algebras ( A,µ,η) admitting also a cocommutative coalgebra
structure ( A,δ,ǫ), which satisfy precisely axioms (U) and (D) of Deﬁnition 3 .14.
Remark 3.15 (The connection with classically separable algebras) .In order
for an algebra AoverRto be DeMI-separable it is required to be projective as
a left module over A⊗RAop. IfAis also projective as a left module over R
(with the canonical action), then Ais ﬁnitely generated as an R-module (see
[DeMeyer, Ingraham], Proposition II.2.1). Thus when Ris a ﬁeld R=k, the
notion of commutative DeMI-separable algebra over kcoincides with that of a
ﬁnite (classically) separable algebra over k(recall that in the case of classically
separable algebras commutativity is part of the deﬁnition a s it is customary in
Algebraic Geometry).
For the purposes of this article, Carboni’s terminology is quite satisf actory,
as his notion of separabe algebra is used in a Galois-theoretic contex t. However,
this notion appears in modern literature in other contexts, the follo wing being
two of them which I consider useful to keep in mind.
•Denoting by Fthe PROP for commutative monoids and by Fopthe PROP
for commutative comonoids, one can view commutativeseparablealg ebras
inVas the algebras for the composite prop
Fop⊗PF
as in Example 5.4 of [Lack].
•Carboni’s notion of a commutative separable monoid also coincides with
the notion of a special commutative Frobenius monoid appearing in more
modern literature. In my opinion saying “special” to refer to a commu ta-
tive Frobenius monoid satisfying axiom (U) of Deﬁnition 3 .14 is not ideal
- perhaps “split commutative Frobenius monoid” is better terminolog y,
because of the splitting of the augmentation-induced short exact sequence
at the level of DeMI-separable algebras.
I still haven’t explained how to assemble commutative separable mono ids inV
into a category and this is on purpose - it requires a bit of attention. Indeed
one might expect that the morphisms between commutative separa ble monoids
should be those which are both monoid and comonoid homomorphisms . How-
ever this is not a good choice: in this case such morphisms are automa tically
invertible and we end up with a groupoid of them.
Remark 3.16 (2-dimensional k-TQFTs) .The aforementioned groupoid result-
ing from the case V=Vecf.d
k, i.e. the groupoid CSep(Vecf.d
k)mon,comonof ﬁnite
separable k-algebras with morphisms those which are both monoid and com onoid
19homomorphisms, famously determines 2-dimensional topological quantum ﬁeld
theories: there is an equivalence of categories
2dTQFTk:=SymMon (2dCob,Vecf.d
k)≃CSep(Vecf.d
k)mon,comon,
where2dCob denotes symmetric monoidal category of 2-dimensional cobor-
disms, sending a 2-dimensional k-TQFTF:2dCob→Veckto its value F(Σ)
at the circle Σ.
Instead, we want to use only one kind of morphisms, either monoid or
comonoid homomorphisms.
Deﬁnition 3.17. LetVbe a symmetric monoidal category. We will denote by
CSep(V)mon
the category of commutative separable monoids in Vwith morphisms the monoid
homomorphisms, and I will denote by
CSep(V)comon
the category of commutative separable monoids in Vwith morphisms the comonoid
homomorphisms.
Carboni proves that these two categories are dual to each othe r.
Proposition 3.18. LetVbe a symmetric monoidal category. We have an
equivalence of categories
CSep(V)comon≃CSep(V)op
mon.
Proof.See the Corollary of Section 3 in [Carboni].
Let’s deﬁne next the categories on which Carboni’s construction will be
applied.
4 Tannakian Categories
The main references for Tannakian categories are [Deligne90], [Delign e, Milne]
and [Saavedra-Rivano].
4.1 Deﬁnitions
Throughout this section kwill denote a ﬁeld.
Deﬁnition 4.1 (Pre-Tannakian category) .Apre-Tannakian category over k
ork-pre-Tannakian category is an essentially small category T
(PRETAN1) which is symmetric monoidal with tensor product ⊗and tensor unit 1,
20(PRETAN2) which is rigid (i.e. every object Thas a dual T∨),
(PRETAN3) and abelian as a symmetric monoidal category , i.e.⊗is required to be
biadditive, and ﬁnally
(PRETAN4) such that the endomorphism ring of the tensor unit satisﬁes End(1)∼=k.
Remarks 4.2. I would like to make the following remarks:
•As it is well-known, the requirement (PRETAN2) of rigidity o n top of
(PRETAN1) makes a symmetric monoidal category into what is k nown
as acompact closed category: such categories admit an internal hom
bifunctor
[−,−] :Top⊗T→T
(T,L)/m⊣psto→T∨⊗L,
turningTinto a closed monoidal category.
•Being abelian and thus pre-abelian, a pre-Tannakian catego ryThas all
ﬁnite limits and all ﬁnite colimits.
•Only assuming (PRETAN1)-(PRETAN3), notice that End(1)becomes a
monoid in abelian groups, i.e. a ring, and it is commutative b y the
Eckmann-Hilton argument. The left unitor induces the struc ture of an
End(1)-module on every object T∈obTand (PRETAN4) makes every
object into a k-vector space. In fact, a pre-Tannakian category Tbecomes
k-linear in such a way that ⊗becomes k-bilinear.
The notion of a ﬁbre functor is more complicated in the case of Tanna kian
categories than in the case of Galois categories.
Deﬁnition 4.3 (TannakianFibre Functors) .LetTbe a pre-Tannakian category
overk. Aﬁbre functor on Twith with values in a k-algebra Ais a functor
ω:T→Modf.g
Ato the category of ﬁnitely generated A-modules,
T
Modf.g
Aω
which is
(FIB1) strong monoidal,
(FIB2)k-linear,
(FIB3) exact,
21(FIB4) and valued in the subcategory Projf.g
Aof (ﬁnitely generated) projective A-
modules.
Remark 4.4. Similarly to the case of Galois categories, it is a consequen ce of
the axioms that a Tannakian ﬁbre functor is faithful.
We can now give the deﬁnition of a Tannakian category.
Deﬁnition 4.5 (Tannakian category) .LetTbe a pre-Tannakian category.
•We say that Tisk-Tannakian if it admits a ﬁbre functor with values in
some (nonzero) k-algebraA.
•We say that a Tannakian category is neutralif it admits a ﬁbre functor
with values in k, i.e. if it admits a ﬁbre functor
T
Vecf.g
kω
to the category of ﬁnite-dimensional k-vector spaces.
•Finally, a neutralizedTannakiancategoryover kis a pair(T,ω)consisting
of a neutral k-Tannakian category Tand a ﬁbre functor ω:T→Vecf.d
k
with values in k.
Remarks 4.6. Notice the following:
•Not every pre-Tannakian category over kis Tannakian: it is possible that
no ﬁbre functor with values in some k-algebraAexists on a pre-Tannakian
T.
•Notice also that, contrary to the case of Galois categories, ifTis a neutral
Tannakian category, and ω1,ω2:T→Vecf.d
kare two ﬁbre functors on it
valued in k, we donotnecessarily have a (monoidal) isomorphism ω1∼=
ω2.
As in the case of Galois categories, we will be studying neutralized k-
Tannakian categories collectively so and let’s deﬁne 1-morphisms.
Deﬁnition 4.7 (1-morphisms of Tannakian categories) .LetTandT′be Tan-
nakian categories over k.
•A1-morphism of Tannakian categories from TtoT′is a functor F:T→
T′which is
–strong monoidal,
–k-linear,
22–and exact.
•Given neutral ﬁbre functors ω,ω′onTandT′respectively, a 1-morphism
of neutralized Tannakian categories ( T,ω)→(T′,ω′)is a pair (F,α)con-
sisting of a morphism F:T→T′of Tannakian categories and a chosen
monoidal natural isomorphism α:ω∼=ω′◦Fas follows
Vecf.d
kT T′
ωF
ω′α
∼=,⊗
Next let’s see what 2-morphisms are.
Deﬁnition 4.8 (2-Morphisms of neutralized Tannakian categories) .Let(T,ω)
and(T′,ω′)be neutralized Tannakian categories over k. A2-morphism of neu-
tralized Tannakian categories from(F,α)to(F′,α′)is a natural transformation
τ:F⇒F′such that we have an equality
α′·τ=α
of monoidal natural transformations, where α′·τdenotes vertical composition.
Proposition 4.9 (The 2-category of neutralized Tannakian categories) .Neu-
tralized Tannakian categories over k,1-morphisms between them and 2-morphisms
between those, as deﬁned above, assemble into a 2-category denoted by NTan k,∗.
Remark 4.10. As in the case of neutralized Galois categories, NTan k,∗be-
comes equivalent to a 1-category. Since the proof of this is very similar to the
one for Galois categories, I will omit it. Again, I need to str ess that general
Tannakian categories over kcan not be treated as a 1-category.
4.2 Classiﬁcation of neutralized Tannakian categories
4.2.1 Aﬃne groups over a ﬁeld k
There are three equivalent ways to deﬁne the “concrete” object s corresponding
to neutralized Tannakian categoriesovera ﬁeld k: the “geometric”, “functorial”
and “algebraic” languages of aﬃne group schemes over k,aﬃne groups over k
andcommutative Hopf algebras over k, respectively. Let’s deﬁne these main
actors of the theory right away.
•Aﬃne group k-schemes: Notice that the category Aﬀkis cartesian,
with the product of aﬃne k-schemes X= SpecAandY= SpecBgiven
23by the pullback
X×SpeckY X = SpecA
Y= SpecB Speck
where
X×SpeckY= Spec(A⊗kB).
Anaﬃne group scheme over koraﬃne group k-scheme isthenagroupob-
ject in the category of aﬃne k-schemes and their category will be denoted
by
AﬀGrpSchk:=Grp(Aﬀk).
•Aﬃnek-groups: Anaﬃne group over koraﬃnek-groupis a functor
G:CAlgk→Grp, which when composed with the forgetful functor
U:Grp→Setbecomes representable by a k-algebra denoted by O(G)
and called the coordinate algebra of G
CAlgk Grp
Set∼=G
U CAlgk(O(G),−)
Amorphism of aﬃne k-groupsG→Hisa naturaltransformation G⇒H
and the resulting category of aﬃne k-groups will be denoted by
AﬀGrpk:= [CAlgk,Grp]rep
This deﬁnition is equivalent to that of an aﬃne k-group scheme as a
consequence of the behaviour of models (group objects in this cas e) in
presheaf toposes, which is accessible upon embedding Aﬀk≃CAlgop
kin
copresheaves on CAlgkvia Yoneda and using the fact that this Yoneda
embedding preserves ﬁnite products and thus group objects.
•Commutative Hopf k-algebras: Reversing the point of view in the
last statement, i.e. by thinking of aﬃne k-groups as group objects in
representable copresheaves on CAlgk, notice that
–the group object multiplication
mult :CAlgk(O(G),−)×CAlgk(O(G),−)⇒CAlgk(O(G),−)
24induces by Yoneda a morphism
δ:O(G)→O(G)⊗kO(G)
ofk-algebras, called the comultiplication ofO(G),
–the group object unit
unit :CAlgk(k,−)⇒CAlgk(O(G),−)
induces by Yoneda a morphism
ǫ:O(G)→k
ofk-algebras, called the counitofO(G),
–and the group object inverse
inv :CAlgk(O(G),−)⇒CAlgk(O(G),−)
induces by Yoneda a morphism
i:O(G)→O(G)
ofk-algebras, called the antipode ofO(G).
The group object interaction requirements between mult ,unit and inv
translate then precisely to the requirements that the ( δ,ǫ,i) need to sat-
isfy to endow the commutative k-algebraO(G) with the structure of a
cogroup object in the category CAlgk, equivalently a commutative Hopf
k-algebra.
To sum up, we have the equivalent perspectives
AﬀGrpSchk≃AﬀGrpk≃CHopfop
k.
on the theory.
4.2.1.1 Classiﬁcation
To present the classiﬁcation of neutralized Tannakian categories I will mostly
use the functorial language of aﬃne groups over k.
Deﬁnition 4.11 (Representations of aﬃne k-groups).
Arepresentation of an aﬃne k-groupG:CAlgk→Grpon ak-vector space V
is a natural transformation ρ:G→AutV, where
AutV:CAlgk→Grp
is the functor associating to a commutative k-algebra Athe group of A-linear
⊗-automorphisms of the A-moduleV⊗kA. A representation ρofGon a vector
spaceVis called ﬁnite-dimensional ifVis ﬁnite-dimensional as a vector space
overk.
25I will denote by
Repf.d
k(G)
the category of ﬁnite-dimensional representations of an Goverk. It is a neutral
Tannakian category over kadmitting the forgetful functor
Vecf.d
kRepf.d
k(G)
U
to the category of ﬁnite-dimensional k-vector spaces as a ﬁbre functor. Again,
as in the case of Galois categories, it turns out that all neutralized T annakian
categories are of this form.
Deﬁnition 4.12 (The based fundamental aﬃne k-groupofa neutral Tannakian
category) .LetTbe a neutral Tannakian category and let ωbe a ﬁbre functor.
The(Tannakian) fundamental aﬃne group of Tpointed at ωis the aﬃne group
πTan
1(T,ω)whose coordinate algebra is
O/parenleftbig
πTan
1(T,ω)/parenrightbig
= End∨(ω) :=/integraldisplayT∈obT
ω(T)⊗ω(T)∨,
thecommutative Hopf algebra of coendomorphisms of ωconstructed as a ( k-
linear) coend; i.e.
πTan
1(T,ω) =CAlgk/parenleftbig
End∨(ω),−/parenrightbig
.
Remark 4.13. This deﬁnition is given in a perhaps uncommon way: usually
the Tannakian fundamental aﬃne group associated to a ﬁbre fu nctorωis de-
ﬁned using (⊗-) endomorphisms of ﬁbre functors. But the two perspectives are
equivalent, and I use this deﬁnition to highlight the coend n ature of the coendo-
morphism coalgebra of ω, which is an often neglected aspect of the theory.
As in the theory of Galois categories, we have a reconstruction and arecog-
nitionaspect of the theory:
•Reconstruction: Foranyaﬃnegroup G, wehave G∼=πTan
1(Repf.d
k(G),U).
•Recognition: AneutralizedTannakiancategory( T,ω)factorizesthrough
a monoidal equivalence
T Repf.d
k/parenleftbig
πTan
1(T,ω)/parenrightbig
Vecf.d
k≃⊗
ω
U
26Remark 4.14. For any aﬃne group Gwe have an equivalence of neutral Tan-
nakian categories
Repf.d
k(G)≃Comodf.d
k(O(G))
between the category of ﬁnite-dimensional representation s ofGand the category
of ﬁnite-dimensional comodules over the coordinate commut ative Hopf k-algebra
O(G). Then the Reconstruction result also says that every commut ative Hopf
algebraHcan be recovered as
H∼=End∨(U),
whereU:Comodf.d
k(H)→Vecf.d
kis the obvious forgetful functor behaving as
a ﬁbre functor on Comodf.d
k(H).
The main result of the section is the following.
Theorem 4.15 (Saavedra-Rivano-DeligneCharacterization of neutralized Tan-
nakian categories) .The assignment
(T,ω)/m⊣psto→End∨(ω)
induces a ( 2-) functor
AUT∨:NTan k,∗→CHopfk
which is an equivalence of ( 2-) categories (when CHopfkis endowed with
identities as 2-morphisms). The inverse to AUT∨isCOMOD :CHopfk→
NTan k,∗, the (2-) functor that assigns to a commutative Hopf algebra Hover
kthe neutralized Tannakian category (Comodf.d
k(H),U).
Proof.See [Deligne90].
Remarks 4.16. Two remarks are due:
•Firstly, perhaps the reader would expect the phrasing of The orem4.15to
be using the assignment
(T,ω)/m⊣psto→πTan
1(T,ω)
to induce a ( 2-) functor
AUT:NTan k,∗→AﬀGrpop
k.
Even though this formulation is of course valid, and it would provide a
more pleasing comparison with Theorem 2.8, I have chosen the Hopf-
algebraic formulation because this perspective will make t he set-up of the
comparison landscape between the two theories more apparen t.
•Secondly, if Tannakian categories were considered without a ﬁxed ﬁbre
functor, a fully 2-categorical equivalence statement is needed, in which
Tannakian categories are compared with aﬃne fpqc gerbes ove rSpeck.
275 The result
5.1 The ( 2-) functor γ:NTan k,∗→Gal∗
The most important result in [Carboni], making the connection betw een Tan-
nakian and Galois categories possible, is the following.
Theorem 5.1. LetVbe an essentially small, rigid, additive category with co-
equalizers. Then CSepcomon(V)is an essentially small Boolean pretopos.
Proof.See Theorem 1 of Section 6 of [Carboni].
As noted in Remark 3 .15, for a ﬁeld k, Carboni’s construction associates to
the pre-Tannakian category Vecf.d
kthe Galois category
CSepcomon(Veck) =FCSepop
k= CSepmon(Veck)op
dual to the category of ﬁnite classically separable algebras over k.
Remark 5.2. From now on I assume kto be separably closed. Notice that it
then follows that Vecf.d
kis sent to Setf.
It is also proved, in Theorem 2 of Section 6 of [Carboni], that Carbo ni’s
construction associates, furthermore, to any ﬁbre functor
ω:T→Vecf.d
k
on a neutral Tannakian category Toverk, a ﬁbre functor
CSepcomon(ω) : CSepcomon(T)→Setf
on the Galois category CSepcomon(T). It in fact follows that Carboni’s con-
struction interacts well with the deﬁnitions of the (2-) categories of neutralized
Tannakian and Galois categories given earlier in this article, inducing a ( 2-)
functor
Gal∗NTan k,∗
γ
from the (2-) category NTan k,∗of neutralized Tannakian categories over kto
the (2-) category Gal∗of neutralized Galois categories.
Remark 5.3. The details of the ( 2-) functoriality of γcan be checked (easily but
tediously) using Carboni’s technology of wscc structures5, which one can slightly
adjust to get not only Galoisian ﬁbre functors but also more g eneral morphisms
of Boolean pretoposes out of Tannakian morphisms in our cont ext. However,
for the reader who is more familiar with the language of PROPs or of Frobenius
monoids, I would like to mention the following two equivalen t ways to construct
the category CSepcomon(T)that can be used to check the ( 2-) functoriality of γ:
5These structures are called hypergraph categories in modern literature.
28•Using the perspective of PROPs and the language of [Lack], th e category
CSepcomon(T)can be identiﬁed with the category
(Fop⊗PF)(T)Fop
deﬁned using the (eso, fully faithful) factorization of the forgetful functor
U
(Fop⊗PF)(T)Fop(Fop⊗PF)(T) Fop(T)U
•Using the perspective of Frobenius monoids, the reader can i dentify the
category CSepcomon(T)with the category
SCFrob (I,T)comon
of special commutative Frobenius monoidal functors from th e singleton
symmetric monoidal category ItoTand comonoidal natural transforma-
tions between them (not both comonoidal andmonoidal natural transfor-
mations, as it is customary).
Next let me remind the reader of the following deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 5.4 (Algebraic and ´ etale groups over k).Letkbe any ﬁeld.
•An aﬃne k-groupG:CAlgk→Grpoverkis said to be algebraic if its
coordinate algebra O(G)is a ﬁnitely generated k-algebra. I will denote by
AlgGrpkthe category of algebraic groups over k.
•An algebraic k-groupG:CAlgk→Grpoverkis said to be (ﬁnite) ´ etale
if its coordinate algebra O(G)is a ﬁnite commutative separable k-algebra.
I will denote by ´EtGrpkthe category of ´ etale groups over k.
We have identiﬁcations
AlgGrpk≃Grp(CAlgop
k,f.g)≃CHopfop
k,f.g(8)
and
´EtGrpk≃Grp(FCSepop
k). (9)
Next recall (say from Section 6.5 of [Waterhouse]) that any ﬁnitely g enerated
k-algebra Aadmits a maximal separable subalgebra
π0(A).
Remark 5.5 (The separable k-cogroup structure on π0(A)).WhenAis a
ﬁnitely generated commutative Hopf k-algebra, i.e. a ﬁnitely generated k-algebra
endowed with a cogroup structure, then π0(A)becomes a ﬁnite separable k-
cogroup, i.e. a cogroup object in the category FCSepkbecause the π0construc-
tion preserves coproducts, i.e. π0(A⊗kB)∼=π0(A)⊗kπ0(B), for all ﬁnitely
generated k-algebras AandB.
29For any algebraic k-groupG, the inclusion
π0(O(G))→O(G)
makesO(G) faithfully ﬂat over π0(O(G)) and thus the corresponding
qG:G→G´ et:=CAlgk(π0(O(G)),−)
is a quotient map.
Deﬁnition 5.6. LetGbe an aﬃne algebraic group over k. Thegroup of con-
nected components of Gis the (quotient) ﬁnite ´ etale algebraic group G´ etcor-
responding to the ﬁnitely generated commutative Hopf subal gebraπ0(O(G))of
O(G)under(9).
Remarks 5.7 (Connected components of algebraic k-groups and separable
k-algebras) .The following two remarks shed more light on how the connecte d
components of an algebraic k-groupGcan be described using separable k-algebras.
•The ´ etale quotient G´ etand connectedness of Spec(O(G)):It turns
out the topological space Spec(O(G))of the underlying aﬃne (group) k-
scheme of Gis connected if and only if G´ etis trivial, i.e. represented by
k. In this case Gis said to be a connected algebraic k-group.
•The connected-´ etale sequence of an algebraic k-groupG:The ker-
nel
G0:= ker(qG)
is a normal aﬃne subgroup of Gcalled the connected component oriden-
tity component ofGand it is always a connected algebraic k-group. Thus
every algebraic k-group participates in a short exact sequence
0 G0= kerqG G π0(G) 0qG
whereπ0(G)is ´ etale and G0is connected, called the connected-´ etale se-
quence of G.
This construction of the ´ etale quotient is functorial, inducing a fun ctor
(−)´ et:AlgGrpk→´EtGrpk
whose dual I will denote by
π0:CHopfk,f.g→Cogrp(FCSepk)∼=Grp(FCSepop
k)op.
Now going back to assuming kto be separably closed, the functor π0induces
a functor
Grpop
fCHopfk,f.g
π0(−)k:=CAlgk(π0(−),k)
30landing in the dual of the category of ﬁnite groups. I am going to be in terested
in theInd-completion of this functor. Notice that
IndGrpop
f≃Pro(Grpf)op≃StoneGrpop.
TheInd-completion of CHopfk,f.gis the full category of commutative Hopf
algebras over k; this is certainly well-known but as I have not found a reference
for this in the literature let me sketch the proof. So ﬁrstly notice th atCAlgkis
a locally ﬁnitely presentable category, whose essentially small full su bcategory
consistingofﬁnitelypresentableobjectsidentiﬁeswith thecatego ryCAlgk,f.gof
ﬁnitely generated commutative k-algebras; it is then a consequence of Gabriel-
Ulmer duality that CAlgk,f.ghas ﬁnite colimits and that the embedding
CAlgk
CAlgk,f.gι
preserves them, as it realizes CAlgkasCAlgk≃IndCAlgk,f.g, the free co-
completion of CAlgk,f.gunder ﬁltered colimits. Hence the fully faithful
ιop:CAlgop
k,f.g→CAlgop
k
preservesﬁnitelimitsandthereforegroupobjectscanbedeﬁned togiveafunctor
Grp(ιop) :Grp(CAlgop
k,f.g)→Grp(CAlgop
k)
G:LGrp→CAlgop
k,f.g/m⊣psto→ιop◦G,
whereLGrpdenotes the Lawveretheoryofgroups. Next, notice that the fu nctor
Grp(ιop) is fully faithful, as we clearly have
Grp(CAlgop
k)(ιop◦G,ιop◦H)∼=/integraldisplay
ℓ∈LGrpCAlgop
k/parenleftbig
ιop(G(ℓ†)),ιop(H(ℓ‡))/parenrightbig
∼=/integraldisplay
ℓ∈LGrpCAlgop
k,f.g(G(ℓ†),H(ℓ‡))
∼=Grp(CAlgop
k,f.g)(G,H),
where the second isomorphism follows from the fact that ιopis fully faithful.
The dual of this functor is the fully faithful functor
CHopfk
CHopfk,f.gGrp(ιop)op
31Proposition5.8. The functor Grp(ιop)oprealizesCHopfkas theInd-completion
ofCAlgk,f.g.
Proof.We know already that the functor is fully faithful, and since CAlgkis
cocomplete, the only requirement that needs to be satisﬁed is that the closure
ofCHopfk,f.ginCHopfkunder ﬁltered colimits is CHopfkitself. But this
follows from the fact that a commutative Hopf algebra Hcan be written as a
ﬁltered colimit (often also called “ﬁltered union” because the transit ion maps
of the colimit are injective)
H∼=lim−→iHi
of its ﬁnitely generated Hopf subalgebras (see section 3.3 of [Water house]).
Thus the Ind-completion of the functor π0is a functor
StoneGrpop.CHopfk
Indπ0(−)k
Now given a neutralized Tannakian category ( T,ω), and writing the coen-
domorphism commutative Hopf algebra
O/parenleftbig
πTan
1(T,ω)/parenrightbig∼=lim−→iO/parenleftbig
πTan
1(T,ω)/parenrightbig
i
as the ﬁltered colimit of its ﬁnitely generated Hopf subalgebras O/parenleftbig
πTan
1(T,ω)/parenrightbig
i,
we can conclude, using Carboni’s theory, that the fundamental gr oup of the Ga-
lois ﬁbre functor constructed from ( T,ω) using commutative separable monoids,
can be realized
πGal
1(CSep(T)comon,CSep(ω)comon)∼=lim←−iCAlgk/parenleftbig
π0/parenleftbig
O(πTan
1(T,ω)i,k/parenrightbig/parenrightbig
(10)
as the coﬁltered limit of the ﬁnite groups arising as the k-points of the maximal
separable subalgebras of each O/parenleftbig
πTan
1(T,ω)/parenrightbig
i, inducing an identiﬁcation
NTan k,∗ CHopfk
Gal∗ StoneGrpop∼=γAUT∨≃
Indπ0(−)k
CONT
≃
ofγwith the composite CONT◦Indπ0(−)k◦AUT∨.
325.2 The fully faithful left ( 2-) adjoint to γ
LetGbe a ﬁnite group and let kbe a general ﬁeld. Recall that the constant
algebraic group Gkhas as underlying scheme the disjoint union of copies of
Spec(k) indexed by the elements of G, i.e.
|Gk|=/unionsqdisplay
g∈GSpec(k);
its coordinate algebra O(Gk) is just the set of functions Set(G,k) with is usual
algebra structure and thus as an aﬃne group over k,Gkis the functor
Gk:CAlgk→Grp
A/m⊣psto→CAlgk(Set(G,k),A).
Remarks 5.9. The reader might want to notice the following:
•On the “constant” terminology: We have an isomorphism
Set(G,k) =/productdisplay
γ∈Gk=:kG
ask-algebras (hence Set(G,k)is a ﬁnite separable k-algebra), and for
everyk-algebraAwhoseSpecAis connected, a k-algebra morphism from
kGtoAis zero on exactly one copy of k, hence
Gk(A) =CAlgk(Set(G,k),A) =G
i.e. theA-points of Set(G,k)correspond precisely to elements of G. This
explains the terminology “constant” algebraic group.
•The Hopf algebra structure on kG:The functor Gkis indeed an
algebraic k-group: the commutative Hopf k-algebra structure on kGis the
following:
–the comultiplication is given by δ(φ)(g⊗h) =φ(gh),
–the antipode is given by i(φ)(g) =φ(g−1),
–and the counit is given by ǫ(φ) =φ(e),
for allφ∈Set(G,k),gandhinGande∈Gthe identity.
•Comparison of kGwith the group algebra k[G]:The reader might
want to notice that the commutative Hopf algebra kGconstructed above
from a ﬁnite group Gisnotthe group algebra k[G](which is also a Hopf
algebra over kand which is cocommutative by construction), but rather it
can be identiﬁed with its dual.
33For the rest of the section assume kto be separably closed. The assignment
G/m⊣psto→Gkinduces a functor
(−)k:Grpf→AlgGrpk
which is fully faithful, corresponding to the full embedding of ´ etale g roups in
algebraic groups. I will denote its dual functor by
Grpop
fCHopfk,f.g
k(−)
It is easy to see that k(−)is left adjoint to π0(−)k, i.e. we have a coreﬂection
CHopfk,f.g
Grpop
fπ0(−)k k(−)⊣
ofGrpop
finCHopfk,f.g; indeed, we have, naturally in Γ ∈GrpandH∈
CHopfk,f.g, the isomorphisms
Grpop
f(Γ,π0(H)k)∼=CHopfk,f.g/parenleftBig
kΓ,kπ0(H)k/parenrightBig
∼=CHopfk,f.g/parenleftbig
kΓ,π0(H)/parenrightbig
∼=CHopfk,f.g/parenleftbig
kΓ,H/parenrightbig
,
with the second isomorphism following from the fact that for any alge braic
k-groupG,G´ etis constant as we work with kseparably closed, and the last
isomorphism following from the fact that kGis separable and algebra homo-
morphisms from a separable algebra to Hfactor uniquely through the inclusion
π0(H)⊆H.
Now since both CHopfk,f.gandGrpop
fhave ﬁnite colimits, the coreﬂection
Ind-completes to produce a coreﬂection
CHopfk
StoneGrpopIndπ0(−)k Indk(−)⊣
Remark 5.10 (Relation with Pierce spectrum) .Let me give arrive now to
the coreﬂection Indk(−)⊣Indπ0(−)kfrom a perspective which might be a
bit more familiar to the category theorists, and which highl ights the algebraic
connection of connected components with idempotents. Reca ll the following two
constructions:
34•The theory of Stone duality provides us with an equivalence
SpecStone:Bool→Stoneop
between the category of Boolean algebras and the dual of the c ategory of
Stone spaces, which associates to a Boolean algebra Bthe Stone space of
its ultraﬁlters with the Stone topology,
SpecStone:B/m⊣psto→Ult(B).
I will call this functor the Stonespectrum functor. The inverse to SpecStone
is the functor
Clopen : Stoneop→Bool,
sending a Stone space to its Boolean algebra of clopens.
•Next recall that the idempotents of a commutative ring Rcan be endowed
with the structure of a Boolean algebra, under the operation s
x∧y:=xy
x∨y:=x+y−xy,
and this construction extends to a functor
Idemp :CRing→Bool
from the category of commutative rings to the category of Boo lean algebras.
After slicing appropriately to pass from rings to algebras, and combining the two
functors above, we get, for any commutative ring R, a composite functor
SpecPierce:= SpecStone◦Idempop:CAlgop
R→Stone,
which is called the Pierce spectrum functor.
WhenRis a ﬁeld R=k, this functor admits a fully faithful left adjoint
CAlgk
StoneopSpecPierce Cont(−,kdisc)⊣
where the functor
Cont(−,kdisc) :Stoneop→CAlgk
X/m⊣psto→Cont(X,kdisc)
assigns to a Stone topological space Xthek-algebra of continuous functions from
Xtokendowed with the discrete topology.
35The Pierce spectrum functor can be checked to preserve ﬁnite coproducts, and
thus we can take cogroup objects in the adjunction Cont(−,kdisc)⊣SpecStone
to arrive to a coreﬂection
Cogrp(CAlgk)
Cogrp(Stoneop)Cogrp(SpecPierce) Cogrp(Cont(−,kdisc))⊣
which identiﬁes with the coreﬂection Indk(−)⊣Indπ0(−)k.
We can thus deﬁne the fully faithful (2-) adjoint of γ
NTan k,∗ CHopfk
Gal∗ StoneGrpop:= (−)linCOMOD≃
Indk(−)
AUT
≃
as the composite ( −)lin:=COMOD◦Indk(−)◦AUT, inducing a 2-coreﬂection
NTan k,∗
Gal∗γ⊣(−)lin
Remark 5.11. I do not have a direct categorical description of (−)lin- it must
behave like a closed form of the “(Artin) motivization” proc edure used to con-
struct motives from varieties.
36References
[Carboni] A. Carboni, Matrices, Relations, andGroupRepresentat ions,Journal
of Algebras 136, 497-529, 1991.
[Deligne89] P. Deligne, Le groupe fondamental de la droite projectiv e moins
trois points, Galois Groups over Q, MSRI Publ. 16 (1989), p. 79–297.
[Deligne90] P. Deligne, Cat´ egoriesTannakiennes, The Grothendiec k Festschrift,
Volume 2, 111–195. Birkh¨ auser, 1990.
[Deligne, Milne] P. Deligne, J. S. Milne, Tannakian Categories, in Hodge c ycles,
motives, and Shimura varieties, volume 900 of Lecture Notes in Math emat-
ics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1982
[DeMeyer, Ingraham] F. DeMeyer, E. Ingraham, Separable algebr as over com-
mutative rings, in Lecture Notes in Mathematics 181, Springer, Ber lin, 1971
[SGA1] A. Grothendieck, M. Raynaud et al., Revˆ etements´ etales e t groupe fon-
damental (SGA 1), Lecture Notes in Mathematics 224, Springer 19 71
[Johnstone] P. T. Johnstone, Topos Theory, L.M.S. Monograph No . 10, Aca-
demic Press, London, 1977
[Lack] S. Lack, Composing PROPs, TAC 13 (2004), No. 9, 147–163.
[Saavedra-Rivano] N. Saavedra-Rivano, Cat´ egories Tannakienn es, Lecture
Notes in Mathematics 265, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, (197 2)
[Waterhouse] W. C. Waterhouse, Introduction to Aﬃne Group Sch emes, Grad-
uate Texts in Mathematics, 66, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1979.
37