Published in Physical Review Applied, 20, 044036 (2023)
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevApplied.20.044036
Magnetic levitation by rotation
Joachim Marco Hermansen1,†, Frederik Laust Durhuus2,†, Cathrine Frandsen2, Marco
Beleggia3,4, Christian R. H. Bahl1and Rasmus Bjørk1,∗
Abstract
A permanent magnet can be levitated simply by placing it in the vicinity of another permanent magnet that rotates
in the order of 200 Hz. This surprising effect can be easily reproduced in the lab with off-the-shelf components.
Here we investigate this novel type of magnetic levitation experimentally and clarify the underlying physics.
Using a 19 mm diameter spherical NdFeB magnet as rotor magnet, we capture the detailed motion of levitating,
spherical NdFeB magnets, denoted floater magnets, as well as the influence of rotation speed and magnet size
on the levitation. We find that as levitation occurs, the floater magnet frequency-locks with the rotor magnet, and,
noticeably, that the magnetization of the floater is oriented close to the axis of rotation and towards the like pole
of the rotor magnet. This is in contrast to what might be expected by the laws of magnetostatics as the floater is
observed to align its magnetization essentially perpendicular to the magnetic field of the rotor. Moreover, we
find that the size of the floater has a clear influence on the levitation: the smaller the floater, the higher the rotor
speed necessary to achieve levitation, and the further away the levitation point shifts. Despite the unexpected
magnetic configuration during levitation, we verify that magnetostatic interactions between the rotating magnets
are responsible for creating the equilibrium position of the floater. Hence, this type of magnetic levitation does
not rely on gravity as a balancing force to achieve an equilibrium position. Based on theoretical arguments and
a numerical model, we show that a constant, vertical field and eddy-current enhanced damping is sufficient
to produce levitation from rest. This enables a gyroscopically stabilised counter-intuitive steady-state moment
orientation, and the resulting magnetostatically stable, mid-air equilibrium point. The numerical model display the
same trends with respect to rotation speed and the floater magnet size as seen in the experiments.
1Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark - DTU, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
2Department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark - DTU, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
3DTU Nanolab, Technical University of Denmark - DTU, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
4Department of Physics, Informatics and Mathematics, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 40125 Modena, Italy
†Authors contributed equally
*Corresponding author : rabj@dtu.dk
1. Introduction
Magnetic levitation is equally science fiction and present-
day technology. Since Earnshaw’s theorem prevents stable
levitation with systems comprising only ferromagnets, current
technologies such as Maglev trains [ 1], flywheels [ 2] and high
speed machinery [ 3] rely on different physical compensation
techniques to achieve levitation.
Recently, in 2021, a novel type of magnetic levitation was
discovered [ 4] that uses two permanent magnets of similar
size. One magnet, termed “rotor”, mounted on a motor with
its north and south poles oriented perpendicular to the rotation
axis, is brought to rotate at angular velocities in the order of
10,000 RPM . The second magnet, termed “floater”, is placed
in the vicinity of the rotating magnet, it is spun in motion and
levitates towards the rotor until it floats in space a few centime-
ters below it. The floater precesses with the same frequency as
the rotor, and, if perturbed, experiences restoring forces that
bring it back to its equilibrium position. It is quite surprising
that magnetic levitation develops in such a relatively simple
system: the magnetic forces do not suddenly create a stableminimum-energy point in space just by spinning one of the
magnets, and yet levitation can be very easily reproduced in
the lab with off-the-shelf components, as shown in Video 1 or
at Ref. [5].
Ferromagnetic levitation can generally be subdivided into
three categories to counteract gravity. The first is active mag-
netic stabilisation, where a control system supplies the levitat-
ing magnet with an electromagnetic force to keep it balanced
[3;6;7]. The second type is electrodynamic suspension,
known from Maglev trains, where a moving magnet will in-
duce a current in a stationary conductor producing a repulsive
force that increases with the speed of the moving magnet [ 1].
Finally, the last category is spin stabilised levitation, where
the levitating object is spinning and uses the gyroscopic ef-
fect to keep the system stable. This is the effect seen in the
Levitron [8; 9], and the magnetic Paul trap[10; 11].
The Levitrons spinning rate is typically 500 RPM [12],
much lower than seen in the novel type of magnetic levitation.
Furthermore, since it is not a driven system, once friction with
the air slows the magnet spinning rate, it loses levitation. ThearXiv:2305.00812v3  [physics.app-ph]  23 Oct 2023Magnetic levitation by rotation — 2/23
Video 1. A demonstration of an easily reproducable
experiment using a Dremel multitool to achieve magnetic
levitation. Direct link: Video 1.
magnetic Paul trap uses a rotating gradient field for levitation,
hence is driven, however it relies on a balance between gravity
and magnetic repulsion for vertical stability. For the levita-
tion studied in this paper, both attraction and repulsion are
magnetic, so the floater magnet is fixed relative to the rotor
even when moving and rotating the whole device. Thus the
phenomenon can be used for the trapping and 3-dimensional,
contactless manipulation of magnetic objects, similar to how
Refs. [ 13;14;15] used spinning dipole magnets for handling
metal spheres. Ref. [ 13] relies on eddy currents for inducing
a coupling and complex feedback control for stability. For the
levitation presented here, eddy currents are relevant but not re-
quired for levitation and the phenomenon is inherently stable.
Determining the full range of applications requires a deeper
understanding of the present phenomenon, in particular the
scalability and range of stability for levitation, but other po-
tential applications could include trapping and manipulating
of ferromagnetic microparticles.
In the recent pioneering work [ 4], H. Ucar explains the
novel magnetic levitation in terms of two key concepts: polar-
ity free magnetic repulsion (PFR) and magnetic bound state
(MBS). PFR is a short-range repulsive force with F∝1
r7
decay with distance that is postulated to originate from the
synchronisation of the floater magnet and the rotor magnet. It
is assumed that the rotor and floater will have a constant phase
relative to each other and from that assumption the repelling
force emerges. However, this assumption is not clearly vali-
dated in the work. MBS is the stable levitation that can occur
if the rotor magnet is tilted and/or shifted with respect to the
rotation axis as this in combination with the tilt of the floater
magnet can result in an attractive force with a stable equilib-
rium point. However, this is not rigorously and systematically
investigated in H. Ucar’s work.
The pioneering paper by H. Ucar, and a short follow-up
manuscript comparing the system to a Kapitza pendulum
[16], does not decipher many key aspects of the levitation
mechanism. It is not discussed how stable the magnetic levita-
tion phenomenon is and what kinds of instabilities can cause
levitation to cease nor when these occur. Furthermore theinfluence of rotor speed, floater size and floater magnetisation
on levitation is not discussed. The detailed orientation of the
floater relative to the rotor is also not quantified experimen-
tally. Furthermore, on the theoretical side, H. Ucar exclusively
considered energy conserving models of magnetostatic cou-
pling, and an analysis of eddy currents and the effect of drag
is not considered. Studying systematically how the various
parameters influence the levitation is crucial to understanding
the physics behind this novel levitation effect. In this paper,
we consider these aspects experimentally using high-speed
video tracking. We then discuss the various physical effects in
the system and their relevance. Finally, we simulate a simple
dynamical model of the system to elucidate the mechanisms
behind levitation.
2. Experimental setup
We realized an experimental setup as follows. A spherical
NdFeB rotor magnet with a diameter of 19 mm and a nominal
remanence of 1.22-1.26 T was fixed using epoxy into a 3D
printed plastic holder. The rotor orientation was specified
and determined by placing a neodymium magnet on the side
of the 3D printed rotor mount, such that the magnetization
direction was kept aligned while the epoxy cured. The holder
was subsequently mounted onto the shaft of a high speed
motor (Vevor JST-JGF-F65A) with speed control, assembled
on an aluminium support. The motor allows for experiments
at rotational speeds up to 400 Hz or24,000 RPM , calibrated
using an induction coil and oscilloscope setup. This is compa-
rable to the work of H. Ucar, who uses rotor speeds between
5,530 RPM and105,000 RPM [4]. The intrinsic alternating
magnetic field of the motor at a typical distance of the floater
magnet is assumed to be negligible. The experimental setup
is shown in Fig. 1.
After epoxying the rotor magnet onto its holder, all three
spatial components of the magnetic field produced by the rotor
magnet were measured by a Hall probe in 361 positions in
a 190 mm by 190 mm slice 155 mm above the center of the
rotor magnet. Fitting the measured field with a dipolar field
resulted in a polar angle θr=90.5◦±2.5◦(cf. Fig. 2) i.e.
close to the desired direction.
During experiments the dynamical behaviour of the floater
magnet was filmed and the recordings post-processed with
the motion-tracking software Tracker to determine the posi-
tion and orientation of the floater as a function of time, as
demonstrated in Video 2. Two different camera setups were
used. The low-speed option consisted of an iPhone 7 camera
recording at 30 frames per second. For faster dynamics a
Chronos 1.4 high speed camera recording at 1057 frames per
second was used.
To consistently reproduce and test the magnetic levitation
phenomenon, we adopted the following experimental protocol.
First, the motor was spun at the desired speed with a 30 mm
thick aluminium plate placed 35 mm below the rotor magnet.
The purpose of the aluminium plate is to dampen the initial
transient motion of the floater through eddy currents, allowingMagnetic levitation by rotation — 3/23
NN S
SMotor 
Rotor magnet
Floater 
magnet 
Fig. 1. The experimental setup, including a closeup of the
rotor and floater magnet. The closeup is an image taken with
the high-speed camera and where the floater magnet has been
painted to indicate its magnetic poles. The floater magnet can
clearly be seen to be levitating.
Video 2. A demonstration of the motion-tracking software
Tracker used to determine the position and orientation of the
floater as a function of time. Direct link: Video 2.
for an easier initial levitation. After being inserted manually
beneath the rotor, the floater magnet quickly levitates towards
its equilibrium position. As soon as this is reached, the alu-
minium plate is removed and it is thus only present during
the initial levitation of the floater magnet. We note that with
practice the floater magnet can be levitated without the alu-
minium plate. The procedure described above is shown on a
video recording in Video 3 or at Ref. [5].
3. Results
The magnetic levitation was investigated by three different
experiments. The first was aimed at understanding the de-
tailed alignment of the rotor and floater magnets for a fixed
set of experimental parameters. The second focused on the
dynamics of the floater magnet as a function of rotor speed
for a fixed-size floater. The third experiment investigated the
role of rotor size and magnetization on levitation.
All data mentioned below, including all video captures,
Video 3. The procedure to reproduce the magnetic levitation
phenomenon. Direct link: Video 3.
r
ffmrm
fr
x
yzRotor 
magnet 
Floater 
magnet 
Fig. 2. The phase angle, ϕ, between the floater and the rotor
magnets. The phase angle is the angle between the projection
onto the xy-plane of the respective magnetization vectors of
the two magnets, m rand m f. The levitation distance is the
center-to-center distance between the rotor and the floater
magnets.
are available from the data repository, Ref. [17].
3.1 Floater alignment
First we establish the exact movement of the floater magnet.
It is particularly important to determine the orientation of
the floater magnet, i.e. the direction of its magnetization
during rotation. To establish the polar angle of the floater
magnet, θf, as well as the phase angle, ϕ, between the rotor
and floater magnetization vectors in the xy-plane (cf. Fig.
2), an experiment was performed with a spherical NdFeBMagnetic levitation by rotation — 4/23
Video 4. High speed camera footage at 1057 frame per
second of the painted magnet levitating. The rotor magnet is
rotating at 200 Hz. Direct link: Video 4.
floater magnet with a diameter of 12.7 mm and a remanence
of 1290-1320 mT, with the rotor magnet rotating at 200 Hz.
The rotor magnet was painted red on its magnetic northern
hemisphere and the floater magnet was painted red on its
northern pole side, to allow their orientations to be tracked.
The details showing the tracking method can be found in the
supplementary material [ 18] and an example experimental
video is shown in Video 4. Noticeably, the polar angle is
determined to be θf=7◦±4◦and the phase angle ϕ=6.4◦±
5.1◦. This configuration (seen in Fig. 1) is surprising from a
purely magnetostatic point of view as the magnetization of
the floater magnet is almost vertical and makes a North-North
orientation with the rotor magnet, i.e. it points essentially
perpendicular to the magnetic field of the rotor magnet. We
stress that the orientation of the magnetization vectors shown
in Fig. 2 may equally likely be North-North, as South-South.
3.2 Floater dynamics
To establish the floater movement dynamics a series of experi-
ments using the 12.7 mm diameter spherical NdFeB floater
magnet with a remanence of 1290-1320 mT was conducted.
The rotor speed was varied in steps of 5 Hz from 130 Hz to
280 Hz, with an additional measurement at 142.5 Hz, as it is
the lowest speed for which levitation was possible. Depending
on the dynamics 2-5 experiments were done for each rotor
speed.
For each experiment the dynamics of the floater magnet
was tracked using the low-speed video setup. The recorded
videos reveal one semi-stable behavior and four different types
of vibrational modes of the floater magnet, as a function of the
frequency of the rotor magnet. The semi-stable behavior is
characterized by rotation during levitation without additionaloscillation modes i.e. displacement amplitudes of <1 mm on
timescales shorter than 0.5 s. The four vibrational modes are
an Up-down mode with oscillations up to 4 mm, defined by
vertical oscillations of the floater magnet, a Side mode with
oscillations up to 8 mm, where the floater magnet oscillations
are in the horizontal plane and swing out in a horizontal circu-
lar path around the origin, a Mixed mode with oscillations up
to 3.5 mm and 7 mm for the Up-down mode and Side modes
respectively and a U-shaped mode with oscillations up to 7.5
mm, where the floater oscillations have a clear U-shape. Each
of these modes is illustrated in videos 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 or at
Ref. [5].
In all experiments the levitation is unstable and eventually
the floater magnet drops away from the rotor magnet, if the
motion of the floater is not damped by eddy current generated
in e.g. an aluminium plate below the floater.
From the tracked data the levitation time and initial levita-
tion distance is measured (Fig. 3a and 3b respectively). In Fig.
3a, it can be seen that the dynamics of the system is highly
dependent on the rotor speed. Below 142.5 Hz no levitation
was observed. At low speeds between 142.5 Hz and 180 Hz
there are no vibrational modes present and the floater magnet
slowly descends until finally dropping. At a rotor speed of 185
Hz the dynamics suddenly change and an Up-down motion
is present, which grows with time resulting in an increased
instability and a resulting decrease in levitation time. At 195
Hz the dynamics change once again and the Side mode ap-
pears. With this mode a sudden increase in levitation time
was observed. Increasing the rotor speed further results in a
rapid drop in levitation time. At 215 Hz a new mode appears,
with complex dynamics. The floater motion is here a mix of
the Side and Up-down modes. Finally, at even higher speeds
the U-shaped mode appears. The highest speed at which the
levitation could occur was 280 Hz, beyond that speed the rotor
and floater magnets collide, and the floater magnet is flung
off.
Regarding the initial levitation distance, shown in Fig.
3b, it is clear that regardless of vibrational mode, the initial
levitation distance becomes shorter at higher rotor speeds.
This clearly shows that the force between the two magnets
changes with rotation speed. Note that it is the initial levitation
distance that is shown. For all rotor speeds for this size floater
magnet, the levitation is unstable, unless e.g. an aluminium
plate is used to dampen the motion, and thus the levitation
distance increases over time. If we specifically consider the
semi-stable regime where no oscillating modes are present,
the fall rate can be investigated in more detail. Here, for each
experiment between 142.5 Hz and 180 Hz, a linear curve was
fitted to the dynamics of the floater, to find the fall rate. The
time dynamics are available in the data repository and the
determined falling rates are shown in Fig. 4. As can be seen
the falling rate decreases with increased rotor speed.Magnetic levitation by rotation — 5/23
Video 5. The
semi-stable mode.
Direct link: Video 5.
Video 6. The up-down
movement mode.
Direct link: Video 6.
Video 7. The side
movement mode.
Direct link: Video 7.
Video 8. The mixed
movement mode.
Direct link: Video 8.
Video 9. The U-shaped
movement mode.
Direct link: Video 9.
3.3 Floater magnetization and size
It is also of interest to investigate the influence of floater size
and magnetization on the rotation dynamics. The floater size
is changed by using differently sized floater magnets. These
magnets have a slightly varying magnetization, with the 5
mm and the 12.7 mm sphere having a remanence of 1290-
1320 mT, the 6 mm, 8 mm, 19 mm and 26 mm spheres have
a remanence of 1220-1260 mT and the 10 mm and 30 mm
spheres have 1260-1290 mT. The weight of the spheres are as
follows: the 5 mm sphere weighs 0.5 g, the 6 mm 0.86 g, the
8 mm 2 g, the 10 mm 4 g, the 12.7 mm 8.2 g, the 19 mm 27 g,
the 26 mm 70 g, and the 30 mm 110 g.
To vary the remanence, heating was used to reduce the
magnetization of six spherical magnets with diameter of 12.7
mm. The magnets were heated in an oven for 1 hour each at
temperatures varying from 150◦C to 200◦C with 10◦C inter-
vals, in order to gradually demagnetise them [ 19]. Along with
each spherical magnet, a cube magnet of size 7×7×7mm3
and with the same remanence was placed in the oven. Fol-
lowing heat treatment, the magnetization of the cube magnet
was measured on a Brockhaus Hystograph HG 200, which
requires samples with flat surfaces, hence the use of the cube
magnets. To avoid remagnetizing the magnet in the process
the field applied was ±0.5 kA /mduring the measurement.
The spherical magnets were then assumed to have sustained
the same loss in magnetization.
We first consider the minimum rotor speed needed to
achieve levitation. Here levitation is defined as the floater
magnet levitating for more than 0.5 s. The minimum rotor
speed as function of both the floater diameter and the rema-
nence of the floater magnet is shown in Fig. 5a. To determine
the minimum rotor speed, the speed of the rotor was decreased
from 400 Hz in steps of 2.5 Hz for the floater magnet diameter
variation and in steps of 1 Hz for the remanence variation. The
data points shown in the figure is the lowest rotor speed where
levitation was possible. As can be seen, the magnetization
does not influence the minimum rotor speed, as decreasing
the magnetisation by a third from 1180 mT to760 mT only
reduces the minimum rotor speed minimally. However, the
sphere size has a very clear influence, with the smaller the
floater magnet, the higher the rotor speed necessary to achieve
levitation. This thus makes it clear that the volume of thefloater is important in the dynamics, most likely because iner-
tial effects are playing a dominating part in levitation although
other size effects such as eddy currents could potentially also
be present.
We also consider the initial levitation distance as function
of both the floater magnet spheres diameter and the remanence
of the floater magnet. This is shown in Fig. 5b. As can be seen
from the figure, an increased remanence results in a slightly
increased levitation distance. Oppositely, increasing the size
of the floater magnet results in a shorter levitation distance.
This again hints at the interplay between inertial effects and
(electro)magnetic forces. Note that the experiments are not
done at the same rotor speed, as the floater magnet diameter
variation needs to be done at high rotor speeds to enable all
tested spherical magnets to levitate.
3.4 Discussion
In all measurements presented above, the levitation is limited
in time. However, if an aluminium plate is left below the
floater, to dampen its oscillation modes by eddy current damp-
ening, levitation will occur perpetually. In the supplementary
material the position of a 12.7 mm floater with an aluminium
plate 33.5 mm below the centre of the rotor magnet and a
rotation rate of 240 Hz is shown [ 18]. Initially, the floater
magnet falls with a rate of 0.3 mm/s for the first 20 seconds,
after which is reaches an equilibrium height where it levitates
for 40 minutes without any signs of stopping.
Additional experiments were done to explore the nature
of the levitation phenomenon. First, it was verified that if a
soft-magnetic steel sphere was used as floater, it could not
be made to levitate. This was verified for steel spheres of
diameters 8 mm, 10 mm, 12.7 mm and 20 mm and for rotor
speeds in the range 50-400 Hz. Regardless of size and rotor
speeds, the steel sphere is always attracted to the rotor magnet,
i.e. there is no repulsion force in the system.
We also performed an experiment, where the floating mag-
net was an epoxy-bonded cylindrical-shaped magnet with 77.5
vol% NdFeB magnet material. At 200 Hz this could also be
made to levitate.
We wish to note that the magnetic levitation phenomenon
does not require a complicated experimental setup to be re-
alized. We have successfully demonstrated the phenomenonMagnetic levitation by rotation — 6/23
140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280
R otor  speed [Hz]0255075100125150175Levitation time [s]aSemi-stable mode
Up-down mode
Side mode
Mixed mode
U-shaped mode
No levitation
140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280
Rotor speed [Hz]161820222426283032Initial levitation distance [mm]bSemi-stable mode
Up-down mode
Side mode
Mixed mode
U-shaped mode
Magnets touching
No levitation
Fig. 3. a) Levitation time as function of rotor speed and b)
initial levitation distance as function or rotor speed. For both
figures the color of the dots denote the mode occurring during
levitation. The multicolored dots mean that the mode changes
from the left colored mode to the right colored mode, e.g. for
the red/blue case the mode changes from an Up-down mode
exclusively to a Side mode exclusively. The levitation
distance is defined as the distance from the center of the rotor
spherical magnet to the center of the floater spherical magnet.
using a simple block magnet glued to a bolt mounted to a
high-speed Dremel cutting tool, which can then be used to
150 160 170 180
R otor speed [Hz]−0.18−0.16−0.14−0.12−0.10−0.08Falling rate [mm
s]Fig. 4. The fall rate of the floater magnet as function of motor
speed for the semi-stable region. The errorbars are the
standard deviation of three experiments for each rotor speed.
levitate another block magnet. A video of this is shown in
Video 1 or at Ref. [5].
4. The physics of levitation
There are a number of different experimental observations to
explain, including but not limited to: translational stability,
frequency locking of rotor and floater rotation, and the relative
direction of the magnetic moments. Below we summarise the
relevant physical effects in the system and show how none of
the known mechanisms of magnetic levitation, but a different
mechanism, can explain the phenomenon at hand. This is
further demonstrated in Sec. 5.
The magnetic interactions and external B-fields of static,
uniformly magnetised spheres are precisely those of point
dipoles at their centers[ 20;21]. Thus in a dipole magnetic
field, the floater magnet experiences the same force and torque
as a point dipole of magnetic moment mfat its center would.
In the quasistatic limit[ 22] Faradays law of induction leads to
the electric field E=−∂tAwhere Ais the vector potential,
but except for the fields of induced currents, the magnetic
fields are unchanged. Thus using the well-known formulas
for magnetic point dipoles[21], the fields from the rotor are
Br=µ0
4πr′3
3(ˆr′·mr)ˆr′−mr
Er=µ0
4πˆr′×˙mr
r′2(1)
where mris the magnetic moment of the rotor, r′is the po-
sition relative to the rotor center, and µ0is the vacuum per-Magnetic levitation by rotation — 7/23
5 10 15 20 25 30
Floater magnet diameter [mm]50100150200250300350400Mininmum rotor speed [Hz]a800 900 1000 1100 1200R emanence [mT]
6 8 10 12
Floater magnet diameter [mm]20222426283032Initial levitation distance [mm]b800 900 1000 1100 1200R emanence [mT]
Fig. 5. a) Minimum rotation speed to achieve levitation as function of floater magnet spheres diameter (blue points, bottom
x-axis) and remanence (red points, top x-axis). b) The initial levitation distance as function of floater magnet spheres diameter
(blue points, bottom x-axis) and remanence (red points, top x-axis) at a rotor speed of 150 Hz for the remanence variation and
300 Hz for the floater magnet diameter variation. The error bars on b) given are the standard deviation of the position as
determined from the tracker software.
meability. Also, r′=r−d, where ris position relative to
floater center, and dis the displacement vector from floater to
rotor. We use ˆto denote normalised vectors and ˙for time
derivatives.
The magnetic field leads to a dipole torque on the floater[ 20]
τdip=mf×Br(r=0), which on its own would make mrand
mfanti-align, as this is the magnetostatic energy minimum
when the positions are fixed. Anti-alignment is in direct con-
tradiction with observation, so to explain the phenomenon,
we require an opposing torque or dynamical effect to stabilise
the observed moment configuration.
Clearly superconduction and feedback stabilisation are
absent. The only non-electromagnetic couplings between the
floater and the surrounding world are gravity, which does not
exert a torque, and fluid effects such as centrifugal suction
and air resistance, which either cancels it’s own torque out or
exerts a drag torque on the floater that is opposite to ωf[23;
24;25]. This leaves electrodynamic effects, of which eddy
current drag is the most significant, and gyroscopic effects.
We discuss these in Secs. 4.1 and 4.2. It is well-established
that dissipative and gyroscopic torques can induce steady-state
configurations which are energetically unfavourable [ 26;27],
and this is indeed what we observe numerically, as will be
discussed subsequently in Sec. 5.
A hypothesis proposed by H. Ucar[ 4] is that due to a slight
out-of-plane rotation of the rotor magnetization mr, or a shift
of the rotor magnet relative to the rotation axis of its holder, Bralways has a vertical component, say Br,z, at the floater center.
Since Br,zis constant, while the horizontal field Br,⊥rotates
rapidly, the former may have a greater impact on the floater
dynamics than the small value of Br,z/Br,⊥suggests. H. Ucar
explains vertical stability by a repulsive force between the
horizontal components of mfandBrcountering an attractive
force between the vertical components.
We propose that Br,zalso dynamically stabilises the ob-
served moment configuration. In Sec. 5 we validate this
assumption by reproducing the steady-state levitation and
a number of experimental trends, using only magnetostatic
dipole interactions and viscous drag. The drag coefficient
required to reach the levitating state from rest is orders of
magnitude greater than what can be explained by air resis-
tance, suggesting that eddy currents or other electrodynamic
loss channels are important.
4.1 Electrodynamics
In the supplementary material we discuss electrodynamic
effects in detail [ 18]. The main takeaway is that the only po-
tentially significant couplings, in addition to those of magne-
tostatic interactions between rotor and floater, are between the
magnetic moments and induced eddy currents. Building on the
existing literature[ 28;29;30;31;32;33;34;35;36;37;38]
we derive (cf. the supplementary material [ 18]) an analytical
model for the coupling between the rotor moment and eddy
currents in the conductive floater and find the torque fromMagnetic levitation by rotation — 8/23
eddy currents to be
τeddy=2π
15σ(ωr−ωf)B2
0R5
fˆz, (2)
Here, σis the conductivity, Rfthe floater radius, and
B0=µ0
4πd3mr
In deriving Eq. (17) we assumed the rotor is directly above
the floater ( d=dˆz) and that both magnets only rotate around
vertical ( ˆωr=ˆωf=ˆz), which does not capture the full range
of motion. Also, we expand the rotor fields Eq. 1 in Rf/dand
only consider the leading order torque, which is equivalent
to approximating Bras uniform. This is not justified, so Eq.
17 should not be regarded as a general solution. That said,
it should yield reasonable order-of-magnitude estimates and
scaling relations.
If the rotor magnet is conductive, then the floater moment
exerts a torque of the same form on the rotor. By angular
momentum conservation, this leads to an equal and oppo-
site torque on the floater. Thus eddy current coupling of the
form in Eq. (17) is present when either floater or rotor is
magnetic and the other is conductive. Additionally as the
spinning floater induces eddy currents in the environment,
it experiences further damping, which can easily exceed air
resistance. We observed experimentally that increasing this
damping using an aluminium block qualitatively changes the
dynamics. We note that in general coupling of rotor moment
precession to floater rotation, as in Eq. 17, is distinct from
the coupling of floater moment precession to rotor rotation.
However, this subtlety is irrelevant for the subsequent argu-
ment. For the state of motion considered here, the precession
of the moments and the rotation of the bulk magnets is at the
same frequency, while this is not necessarily the case in our
simulations cf. Sec. 5.2.
In the absence of all other torques, the equation of motion
isIf˙ωf=τeddy, where Ifis the floater moment of inertia, in
which case the difference in rotation frequency of the floater
decays exponentially to the precession frequency of the ro-
tor. This is the phenomenon of frequency locking by eddy
current coupling. Using If=8
15πρfR5
fwhere ρfis the mass
density of the floater, the exponential time constant can be
written as teddy=4ρf/(σB2
0). At a relatively small levita-
tion distance of d=20 mm , and the experimentally relevant
parameters µ0Mr=1.2 T,Rr=9.5 mm ,ρf=7.5 g/cm3and
σ=667Ω−1mm−1we find teddy=25 s, while the experi-
mentally observed frequency locking happens on fractions of
a second. For comparison, if we consider only the dipolar
torque, then If˙ωf=τdip=mf×B0and by dimensional analy-
sis, we find the characteristic time tdip=p
If/(mfB0)which
for the same parameter values and Rf=6.35 mm yields 1.7
ms. Thus, the frequency locking in our experiments must be
driven by magnetostatic torques rather than eddy currents. We
support this hypothesis in Sec. 5 by numerical experiments.
In deriving Eq. (17) we made several simplifying assump-
tions on the floater motion, so in reality τeddymay have ahorizontal component. This begs the question if τeddymight
stabilise the moment orientation. Since mfis nearly vertical,
τdip≈mfB0, so in our experiments
τeddy
τdip≈1
30σ(ωr−ωf)R2
fRf
d3mr
mf≤0.004
This suggests eddy current effects are too small to balance
the magnetostatic torque. If Rfwas an order of magnitude
larger, τeddycould be significant, but then self-induction and
finite skin depth would also be important, necessitating a more
complete analysis.
In summary, no electrodynamic effects can explain the
moment orientation on their own. While including the non-
uniformity of the rotor field would yield a more correct eddy
current model, we doubt it would change this conclusion.
Instead we propose that the moment configuration is produced
by a vertical field component from imperfections in rotor
placement, in conjunction with gyroscopic stabilisation.
4.2 Gyroscopic stability
For a floater with an anisotropic mass distribution, Ifwould
be a 3-by-3 tensor and there would be an effective gyroscopic
torque of the form[ 39]τgyro=−ωf×[Ifωf]. This compli-
cation is absent in our experiments since we use spheres of
uniform density. One thing that does break the spherical sym-
metry is the intrinsic, angular momentum associated with the
floaters magnetic moment. This gyromagnetic effect has been
shown in theory to enable the stable levitation of a nanomag-
net, even with a static applied field[ 40;41], however as shown
in the supplementary material, the effect is negligibly small
for the experiments described in this work [18].
Thus in the laboratory frame, no gyroscopic terms ap-
pear in the rotational equation of motion. That is not to say
gyroscopic stability is absent, in fact in the rotor magnets’
rest frame where its magnetic field is constant, there is the
fictitious torque τfic=−Ifωr×ωf, which bears a strong re-
semblance to τgyro. The cancellation of such a gyroscopic
torque with gravity explains why a precessing top remains
upright only when rapidly spinning [ 39]. Equivalently, in the
laboratory frame, a certain angular acceleration is required
to keep the top rotating, and gravity supplies this accelera-
tion instead of making the top fall over. Similarly, for the
Levitron an initial spin around its magnetic moment is re-
quired to circumvent Earnshaws theorem and enable stable
levitation[ 42;43;44]. In both cases, the argument also works
for a spinning sphere.
For our experiments, there is no initial rotation, unlike
the Levitron. Nevertheless, in our simulations the steady-
state rotation during levitation is a combination of precession
around vertical and spinning around the magnetic moment, in
complete analogy to the spinning top. This state of rotation is
gyroscopically stabilised against changes in the polar angle θf.
So in a sense, the rotation itself counteracts the magnetostatic
torque. This is further discussed in Section 5.2.Magnetic levitation by rotation — 9/23
5. Simulations
5.1 Model
The rotors motion is fully constrained to a predefined trajec-
tory. We model the corresponding time-evolution of the floater
magnet using the following differential system
I˙ωf=mf×Br−ζrotωf (3)
m˙vf=Fdip−ζtransvf−gˆz (4)
where g=9.82 m/s2is gravitational acceleration, vfis floater
velocity, Bris the rotor field from Eq. (1)evaluated at the
floater’s center, and
Fdip
i=3µ0
4π1
r4
rf[(mf·ˆrrf)mr+(mr·ˆrrf)mf
+(mf·mr)ˆrrf−5(mf·ˆrrf)(mr·ˆrrf)ˆrrf] (5)
is the dipole force from rotor on floater, where rrfis the dis-
placement from rotor to floater. We note that these mag-
netostatic interactions are exact for uniformly magnetised
spheres[ 20]. For the drag coefficients, we use analytical solu-
tions for viscous drag but with an effective viscosity to model
eddy current damping, i.e.
ζrot=8πηeffR3
f,ζtrans=6πηeffRf
This drag is exact for an isolated sphere at low Reynolds
number[ 45] and has the same linear dependence on angular
velocity as we expect from eddy currents, confer Eq. (17).
Unless otherwise stated, we used an efficient viscosity of
η=1Pa·sin the simulations. For reference, the viscosity of
air at ambient conditions is ηair=0.02 mPa ·s, while water is
ηH2O=1 mPa·s.
This type of model is well-established for magnetic nanopar-
ticles, i.e. nanoscale, magnetised spheres suspended in liquid[ 46].
That said, eddy current damping depends strongly on floater
position, yielding more complex instabilities and transient
behaviour, so we can at best reproduce qualitative trends and
observations with the present model. The fact that the model
does produce levitation suggests the phenomenon could also
be achieved for entirely non-conducting magnets by other
means than eddy current damping. The increased drag is
possible by submerging the floater in viscous liquid.
One feature specific to the present model is in the angular
velocity around the magnetic moment, i.e. ωm=ˆmf·ωf. From
Eq. (3) we have
˙ωm= [ωf×ˆmf]·ωf+1
Ifˆmf·[mf×Br−ζrotωf]
=−ζrot
Ifωm
That is ωmcan only decrease exponentially, so when it starts
at zero, ωm=0at all times. We verified this numerically for
all simulations. This is not in general true with eddy current
coupling.
To simulate Eqs. (3)and(4)we use velocity-Verlet timestep
integration with a timestep of 1µs[47]. To rotate mfwe use
the Euler-Rodrigues’ rotation formula[48].5.2 Results: fixed floater position
We find that for most parameters, the simulated floater will
either fall under gravity or collide with the rotor and be flung
away. Therefore as a first study, we keep the center position
of the floater fixed and only consider the rotational motion.
For all simulations, the floater is initially at rest and cen-
tered on the rotation axis, which is vertical. We find that
the steady-state is not sensitive to initial orientation, so we
only used 60◦from vertical in the xz-plane, i.e. ˆmf(t=0) =
(sin(60◦),0◦,cos(60◦)). The rotor configuration is given in
general by
rr=
δrcos(2πfrt)
−δrsin(2πfrt)
d
 ,mr=
cos(ϕ0−2πfrt)
sin(ϕ0−2πfrt)
0

(6)
That is, the rotor magnet is a distance dvertically above the
floater, except for a small lateral shift of δraway from the
rotation axis. Its holder rotates clockwise at frequency fr
with the moment in the xy-plane and pointing away from the
rotation axis. We used ϕ0=60◦as initial condition. We
distinguish between distance rrfand vertical distance d, but
since δr≪d, they are nearly equal. Besides the lateral shift,
the setup is identical to Fig. 2.
With the floater centered on the rotation axis, the only
effect of δris to produce a constant, vertical B-field. Since
mrpoints away from the rotation axis, Br,z>0, while if mr
pointed towards the axis we would have Br,z<0. The same
effect can be achieved by giving mran out-of-plane tilt. We
verified that for either sign mf,zpoints in the field direction.
Without a vertical field, the steady-state always has mf
in the xy-plane, corresponding to a polar angle of θf=90◦.
While δr=1mm seems small, for some frequencies the result-
ingBr,zis sufficient to make mfnearly vertical. We find that
depending on the system parameters, there are 3 different dy-
namical phases with radically different steady-state behaviour
and sharp transitions in parameter space.
In Fig. 6 we present simulation data for a range of dif-
ferent frequencies and distances. Figs. 6a-c illustrate the 3
(”red”, ”green”, ”blue”) dynamical phases. Fig. 6a shows
that at low and high frthe phase angle is essentially constant
with a value close to either 180◦or0◦(red and blue curves,
respectively), i.e. rotor and floater are frequency locked. At
intermediate frequencies, mfrotates more slowly than mr, but
there is a secondary precession at equal frequency, hence the
fast oscillations on the green curves in Figs. 6b-c. We note
that when increasing frordthe time averaged value of θf
decreases gradually from 90◦to 0◦.
In Fig. 6d we see the distribution of dynamical phases in
parameter space. Each data point corresponds to a 5 s simula-
tion, where we computed average and standard deviation of ϕ
over the last 250 ms. Green points have standard deviations
above 1◦, while blue and red have below 1◦. Except for a few
points on the phase boundaries, the standard deviation is either
above 50◦, or less than 10−6, i.e. there is a sharp contrast, soMagnetic levitation by rotation — 10/23
Fig. 6. Simulation results at various rotor frequencies with the floater position fixed. The rotor is displaced by δr=1 mm
relative to the rotation axis, yielding a slight vertical B-field, the effective damping is η=1 Pa·s, both magnetisations are 1.18
T and the diameters are 12.7 mm and 19 mm for floater and rotor respectively. a-c)Steady-state behaviour in the 3 different
dynamical phases for d=20 mm .a-b) phase lag, ϕ, and floater polar angle, θf, vs. time over 25 ms. c)Transverse components
of the normalised floater moment over 150 ms. d)The dynamical phase of every simulation at various rotor frequencies, fr, and
rotor/floater distances d. Orange crosses mark stable force equilibria. e-f)θfand vertical force Fzfor all simulations in the blue
phase between 270 and 360 Hz. The stable equilibria are the points where spline-fits of the force curves in fig. f)cross from
positive (attractive) to negative (repulsive) as ddecreases.
the phase determination for a given simulation is unambigu-
ous. To distinguish blue and red, we use the steady-state value
ofϕ. In the supplementary material, we show similar plots
where we varied η,Rf,Mforδrinstead of fr[18].
The red phase is the energy minimum which would be the
final configuration with a static rotor, i.e. when fr=0. Thus
it makes sense the red phase occurs at lowest frequencies, and
at shorter distances where the energy minimum is deepest. At
intermediate frequencies and distances, inertia and drag means
the floater cannot keep up, so while there is a net clockwise
rotation, it is only the smaller, secondary precession which
follows the rotor frequency. As the frequency increases, the
floater is less and less susceptible to the rotating, horizontal
field, but still responds to the constant, vertical field, hence
mfbecomes increasingly vertical. When θfis near 0, the
secondary precession disappears and frequency locking is
reestablished, i.e. the green phase transitions to blue.
To explain why the blue phase occurs, we first infer an
expression for the angular velocity. We know that ˙ϕ=0, so
there is a clockwise precession around vertical at a frequency
ofωr. Also ˙θf=0, so the only possible form of rotation
is spinning around mf. That is ωf=−ωrˆz+˙ψˆm. Using
thatmf·ωf=0, as discussed in Section 5.1, we find that
˙ψ=ωrcosθf, hence the angular velocity is
ωf=ωr[−ˆz+cosθfˆm](Blue phase) (7)
We verified that each component fits the simulations to within
a relative error of 0.0004 % throughout the blue phase. Themagnitude is simply ωf=ωrsinθf.
Counter-intuitively, the floater spins around its moment
precisely because the netangular velocity around mfmust be
0 and there is a contribution from the precession of mfaround
vertical. This spinning gyroscopically stabilises against changes
inθf, analogously to how a spinning top defies gravity[ 39].
Equivalently, in the rest-frame of the rotor the spinning yields
a fictitious, gyroscopic torque that balances the magnetostatic
torque. When mfis close to vertical, the angular velocity
vectors from precession and from spinning around mfnearly
cancel, so that the magnitude of ωfis tiny. Consequently the
drag torque is small and does not hinder frequency locking.
By inserting Eq. 7 in the governing equation Eq. 3 we
get a set of equations θfandϕmust obey for self-consistency.
In the supplementary material we expand said equations to
leading order in the small angles θf,ϕand isolate, which
yields [18]
ϕ=ζrotωr
Ifω2r−mfBr,zand θf=mfBr,⊥
Ifω2r−mfBr,z, (8)
Comparing to the blue simulations in Fig. 6d, the greatest
relative error is 1.8%forϕand0.05% forθf, so higher order
corrections are more significant for ϕ. From Eq. 8 we see
that a finite moment of inertia is required for the blue phase to
occur, because a negative value of θfis unphysical, but drag is
not required for self-consistency. If∼R5
f, so the importance
of inertia may explain why the critical frequency has a strong
size dependence despite a weak dependence on magnetisation,Magnetic levitation by rotation — 11/23
as seen in Fig. 5a and the supplementary material [18].
The next question is how the computed rotational states
can produce stable levitation. In the red phase, the magnets
are consistently attractive. In the green phase, the force oscil-
lates at a frequency of fr, but it averages to a net repulsion; at
least for all parameter combinations we simulated. While this
repulsion could balance gravity in special cases, our experi-
ments showed stability regardless of whether the floater was
above or below the rotor, so this would be a different form
of levitation. That leaves the blue phase where ϕ,θfand the
vertical force Fzare all constant.
In Fig. 6f we show the vertical force for frequencies from
270 to 360 Hz. It is apparent that the force curves are non-
monotonous. This is because the magnetic force changes
from attractive ( Fz>0) to repulsive ( Fz<0) with decreasing
distance. Every point where Fzcrosses 0 from positive to
negative as ddecreases is a stable equilibrium, because a
slight displacement in either direction leads to a restoring
force. In some cases the maximum attractive force is less than
gravity, in others the magnets would collide before reaching
the stable point. In Fig. 6 we marked all mid-air, stable
points by orange crosses. We note that the levitation distance
decreases with increasing frequency, in agreement with Fig.
3.
To understand the force curves, we note that the blue
phase is close to the configuration θf=ϕ=0◦andδr/d≪1.
Therefore, we consider a Taylor expansion of the dipole force,
Eq.(5), in these 3 variables. To zeroth order, ˆmf=ˆrrf=ˆz
which is perpendicular to mr, in which case the vertical force
is 0. To first order
Fdip,z≈3µ0mrmf
4πd4
4δr
d−θf
Blue phase
The first term is an attractive force between the vertical com-
ponents of Brandmf. The second term is a repulsion between
horizontal components. From Fig. 6e we see that θfincreases
with decreasing distance, and the relative change is greater
than that in δr/d. This is why Fdip,zcan change from attractive
to repulsive in mid air. In other words, as the magnets ap-
proach, the floater moment becomes more horizontal, which
makes the repulsive dipole force grow relative to the attractive
dipole force. This explanation is in agreement with Ref. [4].
5.3 Results: free floater position
Here, the rotor is fully constrained as in Eq. (6), while the
floater is free to both rotate and translate in 3-dimensional
space. We find that with the right parameters, the model
(Eqs. (3)and(4)) does produce stable levitation. In Video.
10 is shown an example simulation at fr=300 Hz and the
same parameters as Fig. 6 except δr=1.2 mm . We were
unable to produce levitation at δr=1 mm , which we attribute
to the translational motion making frequency locking less
stable. For the same reason, the steady-state vertical distance
ofd=22.5 mm is slightly higher than expected from Fig. 6d,
i.e. from the orange cross at 300 Hz.We observe from Video 10a-b that we get the expected
dynamical phase and from Video 10c-d that the levitation is
stable in all directions. In steady-state, the floater z-coordinate
and the relative orientation of the magnets settle to constants,
while the floater’s xy-coordinates perform sinusoidal oscilla-
tions, just like the Side mode observed experimentally (see
inset in Video 10d). Note how all configurational variables
reach steady-state within half a second, which is much faster
than frequency-locking by eddy-currents, cf. Section 4.1.
We got qualitatively identical results when generating the
vertical B-field by giving mra5◦out-of-plane tilt, rather than
a lateral shift of the whole magnet. This is non-trivial as Br
scales differently with floater position for the two imperfec-
tions in rotor placement. Indeed H. Ucar found experimentally
that levitation also occurs when the constant field is from a
third, stationary dipole magnet [ 4, Fig. 20]. We conclude
that the key aspect which enables this novel form of magnetic
levitation is the superposition of stationary and time-varying
magnetic fields, not the specific rotor perturbations.
When letting the system relax at η=1 Pa·sfor 1 s then
turning off all damping, the final configuration remains sta-
ble indefinitely. It still exhibits the Side mode. This shows
that damping is not strictly required to sustain the moment
orientation that yields levitation. Rather damping serves to
facilitate reaching the levitating state from rest and to increase
the stability thereof.
5.4 Comparison of simulations and experiments
In Sections 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 we have shown that a model
including only magnetostatic (dipole) coupling and damping
can reproduce stable levitation in certain parameter ranges.
The effect of gravity is to shift the point of stability, but it alters
none of the qualitative features. The model has no features
unique to eddy currents as the same damping can be achieved
by putting the floater in liquid, and while moderate viscous
damping facilitates levitation, it is not a strict requirement.
This suggests the levitation effect is quite general, and
since dipole interactions are significant across many length-
scales, it should be scalable. The relatively small moment
of inertia might be an issue for the levitation of microparti-
cles, but perhaps this can be compensated by increasing the
frequency of the rotating field.
The simulations are qualitatively consistent with the ex-
periments in terms of how levitation distance scales with rotor
speed (compare Figs. 3b and 6d) and with floater size (see Fig.
5b and supplementary material [ 18]). These are strong indica-
tions that the model contains most of the essential physics.
Quantitatively, the simulations have room for improve-
ment. From the orange crosses in Fig. 6d we see that levitation
is predicted at higher frequencies and a narrower frequency
band than found experimentally (see Fig. 3b). Also while
Video 10d is consistent with the side mode in Video 7, we
have not observed any vertical oscillations in steady-state,
so our simulations do not reproduce the Up-down, U-shaped
or Mixed mode. Regarding the semi-stable mode, when ourMagnetic levitation by rotation — 12/23
Video 10. Simulated levitation at a rotor frequency of fr=300 Hz where the floater has full rotational and translational
freedom. Same parameters as in Fig. 6 except δr=1.2 mm. a)phase angle. b)floater polar angle. c)vertical floater/rotor
distance. d)xy-position of floater with origin on the rotors rotation axis. The inset in d)shows the last 10 ms of the 1 s
simulation. e)final configuration. Blue/red sphere is rotor, green/orange is floater and yellow arrows represent magnetic
moments. Positions and sizes are to-scale. Direct link: Video 10.
simulations reach steady-state, the system remains stable in-
definitely, even without damping.
Experimentally, we do observe indefinite stability when
an aluminium block is placed below the floater, which has
the effect of increasing damping. So our numerical model is
perhaps more representative of this setup. While the point
of stability shown in Video 10 is largely consistent with Fig.
6d, the floater orientation and force curve will change at least
slightly when including floater translation. In addition the
system is highly sensitive to the constant B-field, so quan-
titative experimental comparison requires a more accurate
determination of the rotor magnets trajectory, i.e. δrandθr.
Alternatively, one can use a stationary, third magnet to gener-
ate the constant field.
On the modelling side, we believe the main point of im-
provement is the drag. At fr=200Hz , we find that a viscosity
of at least 0.01 Pa·sis required to produce the blue phase
from rest (see supplementary material [ 18]), which cannot be
explained by air resistance. If, as we suspect, the main source
of damping is eddy currents, then this has a number of impli-
cations. The relative magnitude of translational and rotational
damping in Video 10 is most likely incorrect, Eq. (17) sug-
gests a stronger dependence on floater size and magnetisation
than the simulated model, and damping would be a function
of position. Finally there is a distinction between eddy current
damping from the stationary environment, and eddy current
coupling between the two rotating magnets, which can also
accelerate the floater.
A more accurate model of damping, rotational and transla-
tional, may be required to explain the relatively complex set of
translational modes or the gradual change in equilibrium dis-
tance observed in the semi-stable mode. In particular we note
that our explanation for the stability of the moment orientation
relies heavily on the angular velocity component ωm=ˆm·ωfbeing constantly 0. We hypothesize that the breaking of this
conservation law by eddy current coupling is related to the
very gradual decrease in levitation height over time recorded
in Fig. 4, but further investigation is required.
6. Conclusion
We have demonstrated that magnetic levitation of a perma-
nent magnet can be achieved by placing it in the vicinity of
another magnet rotating at angular velocities in the order of
200 Hz . Rotating a 19 mm diameter spherical NdFeB magnet,
the levitation phenomenon was demonstrated for spherical
magnets in the 5-30 mm diameter range. First, we showed ex-
perimentally that the floating magnet aligns to the like pole of
the rotating magnet, i.e. oppositely to what would be expected
from magnetostatics. For a floating magnet with a diameter of
12.7 mm we measured the polar and azimuthal (phase) angles
asθf=7◦±4◦andϕ=6.4◦±5.1◦, respectively. Then we
investigated the instabilities occurring during levitation, and
observed five different patterns of motion. Afterwards, we
assessed the influence of rotation speed, as well as the size and
magnetization of the floating magnet on levitation. We found
that the floating magnet’s magnetization does not affect the ro-
tation speed needed for levitation (in case of remanence fields
of 760 - 1180 mT), while its size has a very clear influence:
the smaller the floating magnet, the higher the rotor speed
necessary to achieve levitation and the further the floating
magnet levitates from the rotating magnet. Subsequently, we
discussed the underlying physics of the system. A thorough
analysis revealed that electrodynamic effects are orders of
magnitude too small to sustain the levitating state. However,
using a numerical model involving only magnetostatics and
eddy-current enhanced damping, we reproduced experimental
trends and stable levitation. The key is a constant, vertical
magnetic field component, which may originate from smallMagnetic levitation by rotation — 13/23
imperfections in the positioning of the rotor magnet. This
enables the counter intuitive steady-state moment orientation,
which is gyroscopically stabilised and in turn gives the mag-
netostatic force a stable, mid-air equilibrium point.
Data statement
All data presented in this work are available from Ref. [ 17].
This includes the videos of all experiments described in the
text. The supplementary illustrative videos can also be found
at Ref. [5].
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Sintex a/s, Jyllandsvej 14, 9500 Hobro, Den-
mark, specifically Flemming Buus Bendixen, for providing
the epoxy magnets used in parts of the experiments.
References
[1]Hyung-Woo Lee, Ki-Chan Kim, and Ju Lee. Review of
maglev train technologies. IEEE Transactions on Mag-
netics , 42(7):1917–1925, July 2006.
[2]D. K. Supreeth, Siddappa I. Bekinal, Shiva-
murthy Rokkad Chandranna, and Mrityunjay Doddamani.
A Review of Superconducting Magnetic Bearings and
Their Application. IEEE Transactions on Applied
Superconductivity , 32(3):1–15, April 2022.
[3]J. de Boeij, E. Lomonova, and J. Duarte. Contactless
Planar Actuator With Manipulator: A Motion System
Without Cables and Physical Contact Between the Mover
and the Fixed World. IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications , 45(6):1930–1938, 2009.
[4]Hamdi Ucar. Polarity Free Magnetic Repulsion and Mag-
netic Bound State. Symmetry , 13(3):442, March 2021.
[5]R. Bjørk, J. M. Hermansen, and F. L.
Durhuus. Youtube channel “Magnetic levitation”,
https://youtube.com/playlist?list=
PLOfbFSFa_WoK4PgYQXhuNucS_WcIxXDET .
2023.
[6]J. W. Jansen, C. M. M. van Lierop, Elena A. Lomonova,
and Andr ´E J. A. Vandenput. Magnetically Levitated Pla-
nar Actuator With Moving Magnets. IEEE Transactions
on Industry Applications , 44(4):1108–1115, 2008.
[7]Gerhard Schweitzer. Applications and Research Top-
ics for Active Magnetic Bearings. In K. Gupta, editor,
IUTAM Symposium on Emerging Trends in Rotor Dynam-
ics, volume 1011, pages 263–273. Springer Netherlands,
Dordrecht, 2011. Series Title: IUTAM Bookseries.
[8]M M Michaelis and D B Taylor. Stability of vertical and
horizontal axis Levitrons. European Journal of Physics ,
36(6):065003, November 2015.[9]Max M Michaelis. Horizontal axis Levitron—a physics
demonstration. Physics Education , 49(1):67–74, January
2014.
[10]Maxime Perdriat, Cl ´ement Pellet-Mary, Thomas Copie,
and Gabriel H ´etet. Planar Magnetic Paul Traps for Ferro-
magnetic Particles, December 2022.
[11]C. Sackett, E. Cornell, C. Monroe, and C. Wieman. A
magnetic suspension system for atoms and bar magnets.
American Journal of Physics , 61(4):304–309, April 1993.
[12]Roger F Gans, Thomas B Jones, and Masao Washizu. Dy-
namics of the Levitrontm.Journal of Physics D: Applied
Physics , 31(6):671–679, March 1998.
[13]Lan N. Pham, Griffin F. Tabor, Ashkan Pourkand, Jacob
L. B. Aman, Tucker Hermans, and Jake J. Abbott. Dexter-
ous magnetic manipulation of conductive non-magnetic
objects. Nature , 598(7881):439–443, October 2021.
[14]Griffin F. Tabor, Lan N. Pham, Jake J. Abbott, and Tucker
Hermans. Adaptive Manipulation of Conductive, Non-
magnetic Objects via a Continuous Model of Magneti-
cally Induced Force and Torque. In Robotics: Science
and Systems XVIII . Robotics: Science and Systems Foun-
dation, June 2022.
[15]Devin K. Dalton, Griffin F. Tabor, Tucker Hermans, and
Jake J. Abbott. Attracting Conductive Nonmagnetic
Objects With Rotating Magnetic Dipole Fields. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters , 7(4):11484–11491, Oc-
tober 2022.
[16]Hamdi Ucar. Directional quantization of an oscillatory
magnetic dipole moment associated with a moment of
inertia, Jul 2023.
[17]J. M. Hermansen and R. Bjørk. Data for
magnetic levitation by rotation. data.dtu.dk,
DOI:10.11583/DTU.22292947 , 2023.
[18]See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by
publisher] for additional experimental details, derivations
of the effect of magnetic angular momentum and eddy
current coupling and additional simulation results.
[19]Minna Haavisto, Sampo Tuominen, Timo Santa-Nokki,
Harri Kankaanp ¨a¨a, Martti Paju, and Pekka Ruuskanen.
Magnetic Behavior of Sintered NdFeB Magnets on a
Long-Term Timescale. Advances in Materials Science
and Engineering , 2014:1–7, 2014.
[20]Boyd F. Edwards, D. M. Riffe, Jeong-Young Ji, and
William A. Booth. Interactions between uniformly mag-
netized spheres. American Journal of Physics , 85(2):130–
134, February 2017.
[21]David J. Griffiths. Introduction to Electrodynamics . Pear-
son, Boston, fourth edition edition, 2013.Magnetic levitation by rotation — 14/23
[22]Jonas Larsson. Electromagnetics from a quasistatic per-
spective. American Journal of Physics , 75(3):230–239,
March 2007.
[23]Marcel Schuck, Daniel Steinert, Thomas Nussbaumer,
and Johann W. Kolar. Ultrafast rotation of magnetically
levitated macroscopic steel spheres. Science Advances ,
4(1):e1701519, January 2018.
[24]N. Lukerchenko, Yu. Kvurt, I. Keita, Z. Chara, and
P. Vlasak. Drag force, drag torque, and magnus force
coefficients of rotating spherical particle moving in fluid.
Particulate Science and Technology , 30:55–67, 1 2012.
[25]Mustafa Turkyilmazoglu. Radially expanding/contracting
and rotating sphere with suction. International Journal
of Numerical Methods for Heat & Fluid Flow , 32:3439–
3451, 10 2022.
[26]R. Krechetnikov and J. E. Marsden. Dissipation-induced
instabilities in finite dimensions. Rev. Mod. Phys. , 79:519–
553, Apr 2007.
[27]Nawaf M. Bou-Rabee, Jerrold E. Marsden, and Louis A.
Romero. Tippe top inversion as a dissipation-induced
instability. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems ,
3(3):352–377, 2004.
[28]H. Hertz. On induction in rotating spheres. The Lon-
don, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and
Journal of Science , 10(64):451–452, December 1880.
[29]T. Reichert, T. Nussbaumer, and J. W. Kolar. Complete
analytical solution of electromagnetic field problem of
high-speed spinning ball. Journal of Applied Physics ,
112(10):104901, November 2012.
[30]Kirk T McDonald. Conducting Sphere That Rotates in a
Uniform Magnetic Field.
[31]Robert C. Youngquist, Mark A. Nurge, Stanley O. Starr,
Frederick A. Leve, and Mason Peck. A slowly rotating
hollow sphere in a magnetic field: First steps to de-spin
a space object. American Journal of Physics , 84(3):181–
191, March 2016.
[32]Mark A. Nurge, Robert C. Youngquist, Ryan A. Caracci-
olo, Mason Peck, and Frederick A. Leve. A thick-walled
sphere rotating in a uniform magnetic field: The next step
to de-spin a space object. American Journal of Physics ,
85(8):596–610, August 2017.
[33]Mark A. Nurge, Robert C. Youngquist, and Stanley O.
Starr. Drag and lift forces between a rotating conductive
sphere and a cylindrical magnet. American Journal of
Physics , 86(6):443–452, June 2018.
[34]George Backus. The External Electric Field of a Rotating
Magnet. The Astrophysical Journal , 123:508, May 1956.[35]P Lorrain. Electrostatic charges in v*B fields: The Fara-
day disk and the rotating sphere. European Journal of
Physics , 11(2):94–98, March 1990.
[36]Paul Lorrain, James McTavish, and Fran c ¸ois Lorrain.
Magnetic fields in moving conductors: Four simple ex-
amples. European Journal of Physics , 19(5):451–457,
September 1998.
[37]Yunfeng Yu, Honghao Yue, Fei Yang, Haihong Zhao,
and Yifan Lu. Electromagnetic Interaction Between a
Slowly Rotating Conducting Shell and Magnetic Dipoles:
A Theoretical and Numerical Study. IEEE Transactions
on Magnetics , 57(8):1–11, August 2021.
[38]Yunfeng Yu, Honghao Yue, Haihong Zhao, Fei Yang,
and Xianfeng Chen. Optimal configuration of distributed
HTS coils for the non-contact de-tumbling of space debris.
Acta Astronautica , 191:491–501, February 2022.
[39]Grant R. Fowles and George L. Cassiday. Analytical
Mechanics . Thomson Brooks/Cole, Belmont, CA, 7th ed
edition, 2005.
[40]C. C. Rusconi, V . P ¨ochhacker, K. Kustura, J. I. Cirac,
and O. Romero-Isart. Quantum spin stabilized magnetic
levitation. Phys. Rev. Lett. , 119:167202, Oct 2017.
[41]Katja Kustura, Vanessa Wachter, Adri ´an E. Rubio L ´opez,
and Cosimo C. Rusconi. Stability of a magnetically levi-
tated nanomagnet in vacuum: Effects of gas and magne-
tization damping. Physical Review B , 105(17):174439,
May 2022.
[42]M. V . Berry. The Levitron : An adiabatic trap for
spins. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences ,
452(1948):1207–1220, December 1996.
[43]Martin D. Simon, Lee O. Heflinger, and S. L. Ridgway.
Spin stabilized magnetic levitation. American Journal of
Physics , 65(4):286–292, April 1997.
[44]T. B. Jones, Masao Washizu, and Roger Gans. Simple
theory for the Levitron®.Journal of Applied Physics ,
82(2):883–888, July 1997.
[45]S. I. Rubinow and Joseph B. Keller. The transverse force
on a spinning sphere moving in a viscous fluid. Jour-
nal of Fluid Mechanics , 11(3):447–459, November 1961.
Publisher: Cambridge University Press.
[46]Frederik Laust Durhuus, Lau Halkier Wandall, Math-
ias Hoeg Boisen, Mathias Kure, Marco Beleggia, and
Cathrine Frandsen. Simulated clustering dynamics of
colloidal magnetic nanoparticles. Nanoscale , 13(3):1970–
1981, 2021.
[47]Peter Young. The leapfrog method and other symplectic
algorithms for integrating newton’s laws of motion. Lec-
ture notes in University of california, santa cruz , 2014.Magnetic levitation by rotation — 15/23
[48]Hui Cheng and K. C. Gupta. An Historical Note on Finite
Rotations. Journal of Applied Mechanics , 56(1):139–145,
March 1989.Magnetic levitation by rotation — 16/23
Supplementary material for the article “Magnetic levitation
by rotation”
I
1. Determination of the phase angle between rotor and floater
To determine the phase angle between the rotor and floater magnet, we analyse the slow-motion video of the painted magnets.
The edge of the paint on the left side is tracked to determine the orientation of the floater magnet. In the same frames the hue of
the rotor magnet corresponding to its magnetization direction was also recorded. Each of these signals are sinusoidal and by
taking the difference between them we can find the phase. This was done for two experiments that produced similar results,
both of which are shown in Fig. 1. As can been from the figure the floater and the rotor magnet are nearly in phase with a small
phase shift of ϕ=6.4◦±5.1◦.
− π −3 π/4 − π/2 − π/4 0 π/4 π/2 3 π/4 π
Phase [rad]0.60.70.80.91.0Differe ce [a.u.]F it1: -0.26 cos(1.0 * x-0.15) + 0.65
Data1
F it2: -0.19 cos(1.0 * x-0.11) + 0.76
Data2
Figure Supp. 1. The phase between the floater and the rotor magnet. Calculated from synchronising the rotor magnet and the
floater magnet’s movement. The experiments were done at 200 Hz using the floater with a diameter of 12.7 mm.
2. Levitation distance in a high damping case.
To test if the magnets can levitate forever an experiment was conducted using rotating a 12. 7mm magnet at 240 Hz keeping an
aluminum plate 33.5 mm below the rotor magnet to dampen instabilities. It was found that the motion would initially fall with a
rate of 0.3 mm/s and after 20 seconds it drastically slows down to a speed of around 1µm
s. This slow speed decreases further
until it finds an equilibrium height. The experiment is conducted for 40 minutes with no sign of stopping.Magnetic levitation by rotation — 17/23
Figure Supp. 2. The levitation distance between the floater and the rotor magnet with an aluminum plate 33.5 mm away from
the rotor magnet. The experiments were done at 240 Hz using a floater magnet with a diameter of 12.7 mm.
3. Effect of magnetic angular momentum
It is well-known that changes in magnetisation can make an object rotate (Einstein–de-Haas effect), and that spinning an
object can magnetise it (Barnett effect). Both effects stem from the angular momentum associated with magnetic moments, i.e.
Jmag=−γ−1mwhere mis magnetic moment and γ=1.76·1011Hz/Tis the gyromagnetic ratio. Below we show that Jmagis
negligible for the levitating magnet phenomenon. All quantities are defined in the main text.
By the definition of angular velocity we have ˙mf=ωf×mf. We just consider the magnetostatic coupling, so the net torque on
the floater is mf×Bf. Using angular momentum conservation, the equation of motion for the floater is then
If˙ωf−γ−1˙mf=mf×Br=⇒If˙ωf=mf×Br+γ−1ωf×mf=mf×
Br−γ−1ωf
Thus including Jmagin the model results in an effective magnetic field of the form −γ−1ωf. At a frequency of 400 Hz, which is
the highest we tested, the effective field has a magnitude of 14 nT. This is clearly negligible.
4. Eddy current coupling
In this section we analyse electrodynamic couplings between the rotor and floater. In particular by approximating the rotor field
as uniform across the floater, we solve analytically for the charge and current distributions in the floater. The main result is the
eddy current coupling in Eq. (17), i.e. the torque exerted by the rotor field on currents induced in the conductive floater. We
show in Sec. 5 that all other electrodynamic couplings are negligible in the non-relativistic limit.
Because of Lorentz forces on the conduction electrons, the floater acquires an eddy current density at position rrelative to its
center of[21; 30]
Jeddy=σ(E+v×B),v=vCM+ω×r, (9)
where σis conductivity, v(r)is velocity of the floater at position randvCMis center-of-mass velocity. This is in addition to the
convective current ρvfrom the charge distribution ρmoving along with the floaters mechanical motion.
Eddy currents are well-known from Maglev trains and induction motors. It has been demonstrated that due to forces and torques
from B-fields on induced eddy currents, magnetic fields can be used to levitate and rapidly spin a conductive sphere[ 23]. Also
spinning dipoles can be used for contactless manipulation of the position and orientation of metal spheres[13; 14; 15].
A number of papers analytically derived the eddy currents and associated torques in special cases, for conducting spheres
spinning in constant B-fields[ 28;29;30;31;32;33]. In particular, building on the work of Hertz[ 28], Nurge, Youngquist and
co-workers[ 31;32;33] derived general solutions for all combinations of a solid or hollow sphere, uniform or azimuthally
symmetric B-field and with the symmetry axis of Bparallel or perpendicular to ω. That is, the B-field has to be rotation
symmetric around an axis through the spheres center. This would be the case if mrwas parallel the displacement vector between
the magnets, as studied by Yu et. al.[ 37;38], but not in the present geometry. Nonetheless, we can show analytically that the
frequency locking mechanism is present. Here it should be noted that Reichert et. al.[ 29] do consider a rotating B-field, but
only by assuming that the constant field analysis applies in a coordinate system which co-rotates with the B-field. Below we
prove explicitly that the relative frequency of field and spinning sphere is the key quantity.Magnetic levitation by rotation — 18/23
We assume for this derivation that the rotor is directly above the floater ( d=dˆz), that ˆmris horizontal at all times ( ˆmr·ˆz=0)
and both magnets precess around vertical ( ˆωr=ˆωf=ˆz). By Taylor expanding the rotor fields (see main text) in floater radius
per levitation distance, Rf/d, we find
Br=µ0
4πr′3
3(ˆr′·mr)ˆr′−mr
=B0+ORf
d4
Er=µ0
4πˆr′×˙mr
r′2=E0+E1+O 
R2
f
d4!
(10)
where
B0=Br(r=0) =−µ0
4πd3mr,E0=µ0
4πd3˙mr×d
are uniform, B0=|B0|, and
E1= (3z−r)×˙B0.
E0induces an electric polarisation in the floater, but no eddy currents, so we focus on B0andE1. This problem is equivalent to
the floater spinning in a uniform magnetic field. For example, if the floater was at the center of a long solenoid in the xy-plane
which rotates around vertical, the model would be nearly exact.
Since charges cannot leave the floater, we have J·r=0on the surface. In addition, we assume steady state, so that the charge
distribution is constant, i.e. ˙ρ=−∇·J=0. Inserting E=E1−∇Vin Eq. 9 and neglecting terms of order R2
f/d4, this yields the
boundary value problem
∇2V=∇·(E1+v×B0) =0 and ∂rV|r=Rf=ˆr·(E1+v×B0)|r=Rf(11)
where the boundary condition refers to the fields and potential inside the floater, while the external potential is found by
continuity of V. This is a Laplace equation with a Neumann boundary condition.
Without loss of generality, we pick coordinates such that ˆmr=ˆx, in which case B0=−B0ˆx. It follows that
E1= (3z−r)×(ωr×B0) =−ωrB0(2z−x−y)×(ˆz×ˆx) =ωrB0[2zˆx+xˆz] (12)
v×B0= [ωf×r]×B0=−ωf(B0·r)+r(B0·ωf) =ωfB0xˆz (13)
We can thus write the boundary condition in spherical coordinates as
∂rV|r=Rf= (3ωr+ωf)B0Rfsinθcosθcosφ
Interestingly, this is identical to [ 32, Eq. 18] except for a different prefactor, even though we include an induced E-field and use
a different coordinate system. The solution is
V(r,θ,φ) =3ωr+ωf
2B0sinθcosθcosφ·(
r2r≤Rf
r−3R5
fr≥Rf
as may be verified by inserting in Eq. (11). The resulting potential gradient can be expressed in Cartesian coordinates as
∇V|r<Rf=3ωr+ωf
2B0r(2sinθcosθcosφˆr+cos2θcosφˆθ−cosθsinφˆφ)
=3ωr+ωf
2B0(zˆx+xˆz) (14)
The surface charge is given by
∂ρ=ε0[−∇V(r>Rf)|r=Rf+∇V(r<Rf)|r=Rf]
=5
2ε0(3ωr+ωf)B0Rfsinθcosθcosφ (15)
Now, using Eqs. (12),(13) and (14), the eddy current is found to be
Jeddy=σ(E1−∇V+v×B0) =1
2σ(ωr−ωf)B0[zˆx−xˆz]
=1
2σ(ωr−ωf)[(B0·r)ˆz−zB0] (16)Magnetic levitation by rotation — 19/23
The physical interpretation of the preceding calculations is that charges accumulate on the floater surface, yielding a potential
gradient which redirects the internal current, and this prevents further charge accumulation.
The current in Eq. 16 induces its own B-field, which induces its own eddy current etc. ad infinitum. But we observe that Eq. 16
is identical to [ 32, Eq. 21] except ω− →ωf−ωr, so we could in principle read off the self-consistent solution in Ref. [ 32]. That
said, Ref. [32] finds that the self-induction is negligible when
Rf≲2dskin where dskin= (µ0σ|ωf−ωr|)−1/2.
We note that dskinis the low-frequency limit of the electromagnetic skin depth[ 21]. In our experiments dskin≥30 mm which
is larger than our typical floater sphere which has a radius of 13 mm. We conclude that the eddy-currents are bulk currents,
self-induction is negligible and we can get the torque directly from Eq. 16 :
τeddy=Z
floaterr×(Jeddy×B0)dr=2π
15σ(ωr−ωf)B2
0R5
fˆz (17)
The net force on eddy currents is 0.
Eq. 17 has two terms. One is a pure damping torque proportional to ωfwhich results from the conductive floater spinning in a
B-field. This damping torque is well-studied[ 32;36;28]. The second is a purely accelerating torque proportional to ωr, which
results from the E-field induced by the spinning rotor, or more precisely B0pulling on the eddy currents induced by the E-field.
To our knowledge, the accelerating torque has not been calculated previously.
From Eq. (16), it is seen that when ωf=ωf, then Jeddy=0, i.e. when rotor and floater rotate at the same rate around the same
axis, the two sources of eddy current precisely cancel. This is consistent with the result due to Backus that when a given volume
of magnetic material rotates like a rigid body, no eddy currents are induced[34].
In deriving Eq. 17 we have neglected translation, assumed that the rotor and floater both rotate around an axis through their
centers and that the rotor moment is perpendicular to said axis. In general, there may be a B-field component parallel to
ˆωf, however this does not produce an eddy current torque[ 32]. Also the accelerating and decelerating torques are not in
general parallel, resulting in more complicated dynamics than frequency locking. Finally we neglected higher order corrections
from the non-uniformity of Br. That said, Eqs. (16) and(17) is a leading order model, so it can be used to estimate the
order-of-magnitude, time-scale and parameter scaling of eddy current effects, as we do in the main text.
5. Electrodynamic torques
The eddy current torque from Eq. (17) is discussed in the main text. Here we show that all other torques resulting from
electrodynamic effects are entirely negligible. We use ω,mandRfor characteristic angular velocity, magnetic moment and
radius of both floater and rotor, and Bfor the characteristic size of the rotor B-field. In our experiments, a high frequency
isω∼1000 Hz , a typical radius is R∼10 mm and the dipole field from rotor on floater when the magnets touch is around
B∼100 mT.
In 4 we found that eddy currents lead to a surface charge density which scales as ∂ρ∼ε0RωB. There is a corresponding
convective surface current Kconv=∂ρv∼ε0R2ω2Bfrom the charges moving along with the mechanical rotation of the floater.
This leads to the torque τconv=R
surfr×(Kconv×B)d2r∼ε0ω2R5B2. Comparing to the dipole torque, τdip=m×B∼B2R3/µ0,
we find
τconv
τdip∼µ0ε0R2ω2=Rω
c2
≈10−15
For a conducting sphere spinning parallel to a uniform B-field, there is instead a charge density of the form[ 32]ρ=−2ε0ωB,
but the torque has the same approximate magnitude.
Another torque is from the induced E-field acting on the charges. The dipolar E-field scales as Edip∼µ0mω/d2∼R3ωB/d2.
Thus τE-on-ρ=Rρr×Edr∼ε0ω2R5B2R2
d2, which is even smaller than τconv. The same conclusion is found for Edipacting on
surface charges. Similar relations may be found for the forces on induced charges and convective currents, and the arguments
hold equally whether the charges and currents are induced in the floater or the rotor. We conclude, in agreement with the
literature[ 35;36;30;31], that convective currents and forces on induced charges are entirely negligible when the floater surface
moves at non-relativistic speeds.
Finally, the dipole electric fields induce an electric polarisation in the magnets. For a conductive sphere in a uniform
electric field, the surface charge distribution is[ 21]∂ρ=3ε0Ecosθ. Using the zeroth order field from Eq. (10) we find that
∂ρE0∼ε0E0∼ε0dωB0∼d
Rf∂ρ. That is, the charge density induced by E0is comparable to that from the eddy current problem,
so by the same argument all resulting forces and torques are negligible when ωR≪c.
6. Additional simulationsMagnetic levitation by rotation — 20/23
Fig. 3 shows the simulated, steady-state behaviour of the floater magnet for different parameters. By levitation distance we
mean the distance between rotor and floater along the rotation axis, but since d≪δrthis approximately equals the absolute
distance. By effective viscosity we simply mean that it takes a far greater value than for air, which we attribute to eddy current
damping. In the main text we present and discuss the variation with rotor frequency (Fig. 7). The frequencies for the diameter
and remanence variation are chosen to match the experiments (Fig. 6).
As explained in the main text, we understand the phases as follows : Red is the energy minimum, i.e. where rotor and floater
moments are always anti-parallel, hence frequency locked. In the green phase, the floater cannot keep up with the rotor, which
results in 2 precessional modes. A slow, large-amplitude mode and a small-amplitude one at the rotor frequency. As the
frequency increases further, the constant, vertical magnetic field becomes more important relative to the rotating, horizontal
field. Therefore as one increases rotor frequency, the floater moment becomes increasingly vertical. At some critical point, the
two precessional modes recombine. Then the polar angle is constant, and frequency-locking is reestablished with the floater
moments horizontal component nearly parallel to the rotor moment. This is the blue phase. We understand constancy of the
polar angle as a result of gyroscopic stability, which relies on the moment of inertia.
This explanation is consistent with all the data in Fig 3. Increasing the lateral shift increases the constant field, hence making the
blue phase more prevalent. Decreasing levitation distance or increasing remanence increases the dipole torque, which facilitates
the floater keeping up with the rotor, thus the blue phase becomes less prevalent. Drag makes the floater lag behind the rotor,
reducing the susceptibility to the rotating field, so unsurprisingly increased viscosity facilitates the blue phase. Finally, there is
floater diameter, which increases rotational drag as R3
f, moment of inertia as R5
fand floater moment hence dipole coupling
strength as R3
f. We observe that a larger floater is more prone to change phase from red to green to blue, so the increase in drag
and inertia win out over the increased dipole coupling; perhaps because of the moment of inertia’s stronger size dependence.
7. Fixed floater position : further analysis
Here we derive analytical expressions for the steady-state moment orientation and angular velocity in the blue phase, i.e. the
one we find to enable levitation. We assume the floater position is fixed vertically below the rotor.
Letˆmr(t=0) =ˆx. The rotor field and floater moment may then be written
Br=
−Br,⊥cos(ωrt)
−Br,⊥sin(ωrt)
Bz
 and mf=mf
sinθfcos(ωrt+ϕ)
−sinθfsin(ωrt+ϕ)
cosθf
,
where Br,⊥is the rotating field component in the xy-plane and Br,zis the constant, vertical field resulting from imperfections in
rotor placement. The remaining variables are defined in Fig. 2 of the main text. Note the clockwise rotation.
As pointed out in the main text, the blue phase is characterised by ˙ϕ=˙θf=0, so the angular velocity must have the general
form ωf=−ωrˆz+˙ψˆmf. The first term is precession around vertical, the second spinning around the magnetic moment. Any
other angular velocity contribution would cause a time-variation in either ϕorθf. Additionally we have the relation ˆmf·ωf=0
which holds for all our simulations when the floater starts from rest. It follows that ˙ψ=ωrcosθf, so
ωf=ωr[−ˆz+cosθfˆm] =ωr
2
sin(2θf)cos(ωrt+ϕ)
−sin(2θf)sin(ωrt+ϕ)
−2sin2θf
,
and the angular acceleration is
˙ωf=−ω2
r
2
sin(2θf)sin(ωrt+ϕ)
sin(2θf)cos(ωrt+ϕ)
0
.
The two equations above are analogous to Ref. [4, Eqs. 17-18], however we disagree on the exact form.
Now consider the governing equation:
If˙ωf=mf×Br−ζrotωf.
Without loss of generality, we insert all of the above vector formulas at t=0, which gives the 3 coupled equations
−Ifω2
r
2
sin(2θf)sinϕ
sin(2θf)cosϕ
0
=−mf
Br,zsinθfsinϕ
Br,zsinθfcosϕ+Br,⊥cosθf
Br,⊥sinθfsinϕ
+ζrotωr
2
−sin2θfcosϕ
sin2θfsinϕ
2sin2θf
.Magnetic levitation by rotation — 21/23
20 25 30 35
Levitation distance [mm]10−2100Eﬀective viscosity [Pa·s]
20 25 30 35
Levitation distance [mm]024Rotor lateral shift [mm]
20 25 30 35
Levitation distance [mm]5101520Floater diameter [mm]
20 25 30 35
Levitation distance [mm]0.60.81.01.2Floater remanence [T]
Figure Supp. 3. Distribution of the 3 dynamical phases in parameter space. Characterised by steady-state behaviour for
simulations at fixed levitation distance d. Orange crosses are predicted points of stability. See main text for details. Unless
varied, the default parameters are remanences of Mf=Mr=1.18 T, viscosity of η=1 Pa·s, floater diameter of 12.7 mm, rotor
magnet diameter of 19.7 mm and rotor lateral shift of δr=1 mm. The rotor frequency is fr=200 Hz for the viscosity- and
lateral shift variations, 300 Hz for floater diameter and 150 Hz for remanence.
The equations can in principle be solved numerically for θfandϕ, but instead we use that θf,ϕare very small in the blue phase
to solve analytically. To leading order we have
Ifω2
r
ϕ
θf
0
=mf
Br,zϕ
Br,zθf+Br,⊥
Br,⊥ϕ
−ζrotωr
−1
θfϕ
θf
.
The solution is
ϕ=ζrotωr
Ifω2r−mBr,zand θf=mBr,⊥
Ifω2r−mBr,z. (18)
We note that when θf̸=0, the general z-equation yields
sinϕ=ζrotωr
mfBr,⊥sinθf
which means that in the absence of damping, the steady-state value of ϕis exactly 0◦or 180◦.Magnetic levitation by rotation — 22/23
References
[1]Hyung-Woo Lee, Ki-Chan Kim, and Ju Lee. Review of maglev train technologies. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics ,
42(7):1917–1925, July 2006.
[2]D. K. Supreeth, Siddappa I. Bekinal, Shivamurthy Rokkad Chandranna, and Mrityunjay Doddamani. A Review of
Superconducting Magnetic Bearings and Their Application. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity , 32(3):1–15,
April 2022.
[3]J. de Boeij, E. Lomonova, and J. Duarte. Contactless Planar Actuator With Manipulator: A Motion System Without
Cables and Physical Contact Between the Mover and the Fixed World. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications ,
45(6):1930–1938, 2009.
[4]Hamdi Ucar. Polarity Free Magnetic Repulsion and Magnetic Bound State. Symmetry , 13(3):442, March 2021.
[5]R. Bjørk, J. M. Hermansen, and F. L. Durhuus. Youtube channel “Magnetic levitation”, https://youtube.com/
playlist?list=PLOfbFSFa_WoK4PgYQXhuNucS_WcIxXDET . 2023.
[6]J. W. Jansen, C. M. M. van Lierop, Elena A. Lomonova, and Andr ´E J. A. Vandenput. Magnetically Levitated Planar
Actuator With Moving Magnets. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications , 44(4):1108–1115, 2008.
[7]Gerhard Schweitzer. Applications and Research Topics for Active Magnetic Bearings. In K. Gupta, editor, IUTAM
Symposium on Emerging Trends in Rotor Dynamics , volume 1011, pages 263–273. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2011.
Series Title: IUTAM Bookseries.
[8]M M Michaelis and D B Taylor. Stability of vertical and horizontal axis Levitrons. European Journal of Physics ,
36(6):065003, November 2015.
[9]Max M Michaelis. Horizontal axis Levitron—a physics demonstration. Physics Education , 49(1):67–74, January 2014.
[10]Maxime Perdriat, Cl ´ement Pellet-Mary, Thomas Copie, and Gabriel H ´etet. Planar Magnetic Paul Traps for Ferromagnetic
Particles, December 2022.
[11]C. Sackett, E. Cornell, C. Monroe, and C. Wieman. A magnetic suspension system for atoms and bar magnets. American
Journal of Physics , 61(4):304–309, April 1993.
[12]Roger F Gans, Thomas B Jones, and Masao Washizu. Dynamics of the Levitrontm.Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics ,
31(6):671–679, March 1998.
[13]Lan N. Pham, Griffin F. Tabor, Ashkan Pourkand, Jacob L. B. Aman, Tucker Hermans, and Jake J. Abbott. Dexterous
magnetic manipulation of conductive non-magnetic objects. Nature , 598(7881):439–443, October 2021.
[14]Griffin F. Tabor, Lan N. Pham, Jake J. Abbott, and Tucker Hermans. Adaptive Manipulation of Conductive, Nonmagnetic
Objects via a Continuous Model of Magnetically Induced Force and Torque. In Robotics: Science and Systems XVIII .
Robotics: Science and Systems Foundation, June 2022.
[15]Devin K. Dalton, Griffin F. Tabor, Tucker Hermans, and Jake J. Abbott. Attracting Conductive Nonmagnetic Objects With
Rotating Magnetic Dipole Fields. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 7(4):11484–11491, October 2022.
[16]Hamdi Ucar. Directional quantization of an oscillatory magnetic dipole moment associated with a moment of inertia, Jul
2023.
[17]J. M. Hermansen and R. Bjørk. Data for magnetic levitation by rotation. data.dtu.dk, DOI:10.11583/DTU.22292947 , 2023.
[18]See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by publisher] for additional experimental details, derivations of the
effect of magnetic angular momentum and eddy current coupling and additional simulation results.
[19]Minna Haavisto, Sampo Tuominen, Timo Santa-Nokki, Harri Kankaanp ¨a¨a, Martti Paju, and Pekka Ruuskanen. Magnetic
Behavior of Sintered NdFeB Magnets on a Long-Term Timescale. Advances in Materials Science and Engineering ,
2014:1–7, 2014.
[20]Boyd F. Edwards, D. M. Riffe, Jeong-Young Ji, and William A. Booth. Interactions between uniformly magnetized spheres.
American Journal of Physics , 85(2):130–134, February 2017.Magnetic levitation by rotation — 23/23
[21]David J. Griffiths. Introduction to Electrodynamics . Pearson, Boston, fourth edition edition, 2013.
[22]Jonas Larsson. Electromagnetics from a quasistatic perspective. American Journal of Physics , 75(3):230–239, March
2007.
[23]Marcel Schuck, Daniel Steinert, Thomas Nussbaumer, and Johann W. Kolar. Ultrafast rotation of magnetically levitated
macroscopic steel spheres. Science Advances , 4(1):e1701519, January 2018.
[24]N. Lukerchenko, Yu. Kvurt, I. Keita, Z. Chara, and P. Vlasak. Drag force, drag torque, and magnus force coefficients of
rotating spherical particle moving in fluid. Particulate Science and Technology , 30:55–67, 1 2012.
[25]Mustafa Turkyilmazoglu. Radially expanding/contracting and rotating sphere with suction. International Journal of
Numerical Methods for Heat & Fluid Flow , 32:3439–3451, 10 2022.
[26]R. Krechetnikov and J. E. Marsden. Dissipation-induced instabilities in finite dimensions. Rev. Mod. Phys. , 79:519–553,
Apr 2007.
[27]Nawaf M. Bou-Rabee, Jerrold E. Marsden, and Louis A. Romero. Tippe top inversion as a dissipation-induced instability.
SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems , 3(3):352–377, 2004.
[28]H. Hertz. On induction in rotating spheres. The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of
Science , 10(64):451–452, December 1880.
[29]T. Reichert, T. Nussbaumer, and J. W. Kolar. Complete analytical solution of electromagnetic field problem of high-speed
spinning ball. Journal of Applied Physics , 112(10):104901, November 2012.
[30]Kirk T McDonald. Conducting Sphere That Rotates in a Uniform Magnetic Field.
[31]Robert C. Youngquist, Mark A. Nurge, Stanley O. Starr, Frederick A. Leve, and Mason Peck. A slowly rotating hollow
sphere in a magnetic field: First steps to de-spin a space object. American Journal of Physics , 84(3):181–191, March 2016.
[32]Mark A. Nurge, Robert C. Youngquist, Ryan A. Caracciolo, Mason Peck, and Frederick A. Leve. A thick-walled sphere
rotating in a uniform magnetic field: The next step to de-spin a space object. American Journal of Physics , 85(8):596–610,
August 2017.
[33]Mark A. Nurge, Robert C. Youngquist, and Stanley O. Starr. Drag and lift forces between a rotating conductive sphere and
a cylindrical magnet. American Journal of Physics , 86(6):443–452, June 2018.
[34]George Backus. The External Electric Field of a Rotating Magnet. The Astrophysical Journal , 123:508, May 1956.
[35]P Lorrain. Electrostatic charges in v*B fields: The Faraday disk and the rotating sphere. European Journal of Physics ,
11(2):94–98, March 1990.
[36]Paul Lorrain, James McTavish, and Fran c ¸ois Lorrain. Magnetic fields in moving conductors: Four simple examples.
European Journal of Physics , 19(5):451–457, September 1998.
[37]Yunfeng Yu, Honghao Yue, Fei Yang, Haihong Zhao, and Yifan Lu. Electromagnetic Interaction Between a Slowly
Rotating Conducting Shell and Magnetic Dipoles: A Theoretical and Numerical Study. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics ,
57(8):1–11, August 2021.
[38]Yunfeng Yu, Honghao Yue, Haihong Zhao, Fei Yang, and Xianfeng Chen. Optimal configuration of distributed HTS coils
for the non-contact de-tumbling of space debris. Acta Astronautica , 191:491–501, February 2022.
[39]Grant R. Fowles and George L. Cassiday. Analytical Mechanics . Thomson Brooks/Cole, Belmont, CA, 7th ed edition,
2005.
[40]C. C. Rusconi, V . P ¨ochhacker, K. Kustura, J. I. Cirac, and O. Romero-Isart. Quantum spin stabilized magnetic levitation.
Phys. Rev. Lett. , 119:167202, Oct 2017.
[41]Katja Kustura, Vanessa Wachter, Adri ´an E. Rubio L ´opez, and Cosimo C. Rusconi. Stability of a magnetically levitated
nanomagnet in vacuum: Effects of gas and magnetization damping. Physical Review B , 105(17):174439, May 2022.