1 
 Energy landscape reveals the underlying mechanism of 
cancer -adipose conversion with gene network models  
Zihao Chen1,2#, Jia Lu3#, Xing -Ming Zhao2, Haiyang Yu3,4*, Chunhe Li1,2,5* 
 
1 Shanghai Center for Mathematical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China  
2 Institute of Science and Technology for Brain -Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China  
3 State Key Laboratory of Component -based Chinese Medicine, Tianjin Univer sity of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, China.  
4 Haihe Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, China.  
5 School of Mathematical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China  
 
* Authors to whom correspondence should be addressed: C.L. ( chunheli@fudan.edu.cn ) and 
H.Y . (hyyu@tjutcm.edu.cn)  
# Authors contributed equally: Z.C. and J.L.  
 
Abstract  
Cancer is a systemic heterogeneous disease involving complex molecular networks. Tumor 
formation involves epithelial -mesenchymal transition (EMT), which promotes both metastasis 
and plasticity of cancer cells. Recent experiments proposed that cancer cells can be 
transformed into adipocytes with combination drugs. However, the underlying mechanisms for 
how thes e drugs work from molecular network perspective remain elusive. To reveal the 
mechanism of cancer -adipose conversion (CAC), we adopt a systems biology approach by 
combing mathematical modeling and molecular experiments based on the underlying 
molecular reg ulatory network. We identif ied four types of attractors which correspond to 
epithelial (E), mesenchymal (M), adipose (A) and partial/intermediate EMT (P) cell states on 
the CAC landscape. Landscape and transition path results illustrate that the intermedia te 
states play critical roles in cancer to adipose transition. Through a landscape control strategy, 
we identified two new therapeutic strategies for drug combinations to promote CAC. We 
further verified these predictions by molecular experiments in differ ent cell lines. Our 
combined computational and experimental approach provides a powerful tool to explore 2 
 molecular mechanisms for cell fate transitions in cancer networks. Our results revealed the 
underlying mechanism for intermediate cell states governing  the CAC, and identified new 
potential drug combinations to induce cancer adipogenesis . 
 
Introduction  
Cancer formation is a complex  process with multiple transition states governed by underlying 
gene regulatory networks (1, 2) . Tumor cells undergo both epithelial -mesenchymal transition 
(EMT) and mesenchymal -epithelial transition (MET) to obtain p lasticity and metastasis (3–6). 
The EMT process enhanc es the plasticity of the cancer cells , and has been suggested to 
promote cancer metastasis (7–9). It has been proposed that cells undergoing EMT and/or 
MET are in a highly plastic state, which may offer a window of opportunity for therapeutic 
targeting (7, 10, 11) . For example, recent work suggested that cancer cells can be induced to 
adipocytes from certain combinat ion treatments (12, 13) , while the inherent mechanisms for 
cancer -adipose conversion (CAC) have yet to be clarified. This motivates us to explore the 
underlying molecular regulatory networks controlling the cell fate decisions in CAC.  
Dynamical model ing approaches provide effective tools to analyze the functions and 
behaviors of biological networks, e.g. , for EMT and cancer network (14–18). Meanwhile, the 
stochastic description needs to be considered  in cell fate decisions, due to inherently intrinsic 
and external fluctuations in cells (19, 20) . The en ergy landscape theory, as an extension of 
the classic Waddington epigenetic landscape metaphor (21), has been developed to study the 
stochastic dynamics of gene regulatory networks (22–31), e.g. , in development and 
cancerization (24, 32 –35). From the landscape view, cell types can be characterized by the 
basins of attraction on the landscape, which re flect the probability of appearance of different 
cell types. State with lower potential or higher probability represents attractor or biological 
functional state, forming the basin of attraction  or stable state . So, a biological process such 
as tumorigenesis or differentiation can be understood as the transition from an attractor state 
to another one in the gene expression state space of the underlying gene regulatory network 
(32). Further, the dynamic al transition paths between attractors or cell types can be quantified 3 
 from the landscape based on minimum action path approaches, which provide the information 
on the order  of gene switching on or off in the transition process  (34, 36) . These approaches 
provide useful tools to explore the mechanism of the tra nsition from cancer cells to adipose 
cells.  
Here, we seek to unravel the mechanism of CAC using landscape theory. We first 
constructed a gene network model involving EMT and adipogenesis regulatory network. 
Based on the CAC model, we quantified the energy landscape to study the stochastic 
dynamics of this process (22). We identified four types of attractors on the landscape, which 
characterize epithelial tumor state (E), mesenchymal tumor state (M), adipose state (A) and 
two partial/intermediate EMT state (P1 and P2), individua lly. To quantify the transition process 
in CAC, we calculate the kinetic transition path for each transition. Based on the transition 
path results, we propose that the CAC can be interpreted as a transition from E or M tumor 
cell state  to A cell state, whi ch agrees well with bulk RNA -seq results (12). To explore the 
underlying molecular m echanism of drug induced CAC (12), we examine different drug 
combinations in the CAC  gene network model. We find that TGF -β facilitates M state, MEKi 
promotes the generation of P states with certain level of TGF -β, and Rosiglitazone promotes 
the A state with TGF -β and MEKi. These results support the hypothesis that malignant tumor 
cell ha s the potential of passing through partial EMT state and becoming adipocytes (37). 
More importantly, the landscape results provide possible  theoretical explanation s for the 
mechanism of CAC through intermediate cell states from a molecular regulatory network 
perspective.  
To infer other drug combinations to induce CAC from the landscape model, which requires 
us to uncover key molecular regulatory elements of CAC, we employ a landscape control 
approach based on the CAC gene network model. We identif y two optimized drug 
combinations, one of which is the combination of ZEB1 activator with Rosiglitazone, and 
another one is the combination of MDM2 activator with Rosiglitaz one. 
To test our predictions for combination drugs and assess their effectiveness experimentally, 
we established liver, breast, and colon cancer cell lines, applying oil red staining to detect the 4 
 accumulation of lipid droplets in these cancer cells. Immun ofluorescence staining and 
BODIPY detection by flow cytometry show that tumor cell lipid droplets increase significantly 
after combined treatment with ZEB1 activator and Rosiglitazone. The Western Blot results 
show the enhanced expression of adipocyte -related proteins, and RT -PCR results indicate 
the augment of RNA levels in adipocyte -related genes , after the treatment  of combination 
drugs . Further  RNA -seq data analys es show that the cancer cells with the treatment of 
combination drugs are transformed into cells with more characteristics of mature adipocytes.  
These experiments verified our model predictions and supported that ZEB1 activator and 
Rosiglitazone provide a potential effective combination of drug targets for inducing the 
transition of metastatic t umor cells into adipose cells.  
Taken together, our results provide a holistic and quantitative view for CAC and facilitate 
our mechanistic understanding of cancer to adipose transition process from molecular 
regulatory network perspective, by combining com putational models and molecular 
experiments. Our work provides a general framework to study the stochasticity and dynamics 
in cell fate decisions of tumor cells and inspires new ways for cancer treatment.  
Results  
Construction of a cancer -adipose conversion  gene network model  
To explore the molecular mechanism of the CAC process, we first built a gene regulatory 
network model by combining the EMT and adipogenesis circuits (Fig. 1A, Table S1).  Of note, 
our goal here is not to identify a comprehensive network for CAC, but a core molecular 
network that can potentially explain diverse cell fate transitions observed  in experiments. In 
fact, r ecent work suggest s that, although regulatory network models may not always  include  
all the regulators involved in cell  fate regulations, they still provide incredibly effective tools for 
understanding cell  fate transitions and for making useful predictions (38). To this end , we are 
focusing on  importa nt markers of  the EMT network based on previous model s (14), in which  
EMT can be understood as a switching pro cess governed by the reciprocal inhibition between 
P53-induced microRNAs (miR145, miR200 and miR34) and EMT transcription factors 5 
 (SNAIL1 and ZEB1) (7, 39, 40) . For simplicity, we pick ZEB1 and SNAIL1 to represent ZEB 
family and SNAIL family , respectively . Moreover,  P53 activates its inhibitor MDM2 to form a 
negative feedback loop (41). The cancer metastasis process involves regulatory loops 
between  P53, microRNAs, OCT4, Let7, LIN28 and BACH1 (42–46). In breast cancer cells, 
BACH1 promotes the metastasis and inhibits the transcription of the RKIP, while RKIP 
activates Let7 and inhibits LIN28 and MAPK signaling pathway (18, 47 –49).  
To acquire a core molecular network  of CAC, we integrated the above EMT network with 
the MAPK signaling pathways (marked by MEK and ERK), the adipogenesis circuit (marked 
by PPARγ and C/EBPα), and the potential drugs (TGF -β, MEKi and Rosiglitazone) (18, 37, 
50, 51) . The CAC network  involves some important genes related to EMT and adipogenesis 
such as MEK, ERK, RKIP, SNAIL1, ZEB1,  Let7, PPARγ, C/EBPα  and corresponding 
regulations underlying CAC (Fig. 1A). In this network, red arrows represent the  activation, and 
blue bars represent the inhibition (Fig . 1A).  
With the network structure, t o describe the temporal evolution of different components 
underlying CAC , we can write down the ordinary differentiation equation (ODE)  model ( see 
Materials and Methods  and SI Appendix  for details , see Table S2 and S3 for model 
parameters , and Table S3 for the robustness analysis of models ). The solutions of ODEs 
characterize multi -dimensional gene expression profiles at different times (Fig. S1). 
Depending on  different initial conditions, the solution of ODEs  may converge to different fixed 
points  at steady state, which are also called  stable  state or attractor in dynamical systems 
language. It’s important to identify multiple attractors in a high -dimensional dynamical system, 
which correspond to different cell types (Fig. S1 and S2). Also, changes in the parameters of 
a dynamical system may g ive rise to bifurcations and alter the number of attractors, leading to 
a phase transition. Since TGF -β and MEKi have been identified as  key factors for CAC in 
previous experiments (12, 13) , we f irst perform a bifurcation analysis for the model  with 
respect to TGF -β (Fig. 1B -C) and MEKi (Fig. S3).  
 6 
  
Fig.1.  Deterministic dynamical model for cancer -adipose conversion network . (A) Wiring 
diagram of cancer -adipose conversion model. The red arrows rep resent activation and the blue 
bars represent inhibition. Circle nodes represent transcription factors, with green nodes 
representing mesenchymal markers, yellow nodes representing adipogenesis markers . Orange 
hexagonal nodes represent microRNAs, and blue quadrilateral nodes represent drugs, 
including TGF -β, MEK inhibitor and Rosiglitazone. (B) Bifurcation analysis of TGF -β with 
respect to ZEB1. The solid lines with different colors represent the stable st ates and the pink 
dotted lines represent unstable states. E represents the epithelial tumor cell state, M represents 
the mesenchymal tumor cell state, and A represents the adipose cell state. P1 and P2 represent 
the partial EMT (intermediate) states. (C) B ifurcation analysis of TGF -β with respect to PPAR γ.  
The bifurcation analysis reveals the appearance of multiple attractors in CAC system with 
TGF-β raised continuously (Fig. 1B and C). We show the bifurcation diagram for the 
expression level of mesenchyma l marker ZEB1 (Fig. 1B), and the adipogenesis marker 
PPARγ (Fig. 1C), respectively, with respect to the level of TGF -β. There are up to five stable 
states (colored solid lines) and three unstable states (pink dotted lines) in the bifurcation 
diagram. We co mpare the level of these stable states with experimental data (Fig. 2B), and 
identify them as epithelial tumor cell state (E), partial EMT cell sate (P1 and P2), 
mesenchymal tumor cell state (M) and adipose (A) cell state. When the level of TGF -β is very 
low (<3.2), TGF -β fails to drive the EMT progression and all cells stay in the E state. With 
increasing level of TGF -β (ranging from 3.2 to 3.9), E and M state coexist in the system, 
which allows EMT. Further evolution of the attractors with the increase of  TGF-β is relatively 
complex. P2 state arises between the E state and M state with the expression level of TGF -β 
ranging from 3.9 to 4.8. After generation of P2 state, the A state occurs when TGF -β 
7 
 increases to the range from 4.1 to 4.4. P1 state is betwee n the E state and A state, with TGF -
β expression level between 4.3 and 7.3. When TGF -β is in a relative high level (from 4.9 to 
7.3), we can observe the coexistence of the M and P1 state in the system. When the level of 
TGF-β increases extremely high (>7.5 ), all the cells stay in M state.  
Here, a major purpose is to induce the system transition from cancer state (E or M) to A 
state. Deterministic dynamic al model suggests that more than one partial EMT states appear 
during the CAC. The window of opportunity  for the emergence of the A state requires TGF -β 
level to be maintained within  certain range . Furthermore, different partial EMT states provide 
certain intermediate stations for either M to A transition or E to A transition. With moderate 
concentration of TGF-β, the transitions of cells from either E or M state to A state pass 
through the partial EMT states (Fig. 1B and C).  
Energy landscape and transition path quantify the transition process for CAC  
The bifurcation analysis provides initial multistable stat e information from deterministic point 
of view. However, it is vital to consider the stochastic dynamics for CAC process since the 
intracellular noise may play crucial roles in cellular behaviors (20, 52, 53) . To disentangle the 
transition mechanism and study the stochastic dynamics of cancer -adipose conversion, we 
quantified the corresponding energy landscape based on underlying gene network model of 
CAC using the approaches we previously developed ( Materials and Methods) (22–25, 34) . 
For visualization, we use the dimension reduction appr oach of landscape to project the 
landscape onto a two -dimensional space (Fig. 2A, Table S4) (54). On the landscape the blue 
region represents lower potential or higher probability while the yellow region represents 
higher potential or lower probability. Consequently, we obtain five attractors on the landscape 
(Fig. 2A), which correspond to E, M, A, P1 and P2 cell states, respectively (see Table S6 for 
gene expression levels of five stable states).  
To quantify the tr ansition processes between different cell types characterized by attractors 
on landscape, we employ the minimum action paths (MAPs) method to obtain the transition 
path for each transition (55). The MAP is the most probable transition path from one  attractor 
to the other. The arrows connecting each cell state represent the MAPs among different 8 
 attractors. The pink arrows represent progression in the order of E ->P1->P2->M, which we 
assume as the process of EMT. Similarly, the yellow arrows represent the transitions from E 
or M cell state to the A cell state through P1 or P2 intermediate state. Landscape with five 
attractors shows that during EMT the epithelial tumor cells are transformed into mesenchymal 
tumor cell s, while the adipogenesis might hijac k the EMT toward another committed cell fate , 
i.e., adipose cell state  (37).  
 
 
Fig. 2. Energy landscape and transition path quantify the transition process for CAC.  
(A) The 3 -dimensional landscape and corresponding transition paths for cancer -adipose 
conversion shown in the first and second principal component s after dimension reduction of 
landscape (see Table S 4 for how PC1 and PC2 are linearly represented by different genes  in 
CAC network). The yellow lines represent the transition paths of cancer -adipose conversion, 
and the pink lines represent the transition paths for EMT process. The U axis represents the 
dimensionless potential. The transition paths repres ent the most probable path for each 
9 
 transition by minimizing the transition action. (B) Expression level s of different genes in CAC 
process from bulk RNA -seq data. A clustering method was used to identify the E, M and A 
phenotype s. By comparing the express ion level between model and experimental data, we 
speculate that the cell state in 7d is P2 state. (C) Pseudotime series expression profiles of 
different genes for the transition path  from E to M and to A  from the model. (D) Comparison 
for the expression l evel of different genes between model and experimental bulk RNA -seq 
data. Lighter block s mean smaller difference s between modeling and experimental data. The 
horizontal axis corresponds to the period of the experiment (d: Day). (E) Expression patterns 
for five stable states. Red blocks represent high expression level s, and blue blocks represent 
low expression level s. E represents Epithelial state, M represents Mesenchymal state, A 
represents adipose state, and P1/P2 represent intermediate states.  
Previous s tudies have documented three distinct states in CAC, corresponding to the E, M 
and A state s (12). Here , we compared the RNA -seq data of mesenchymal breast cells (12) 
(Fig. 2B) with our pseudotime expression profiles from the model (Fig. 2C) to verify the 
accuracy of the landscape model and transition paths. Since  the experiment begins with  the 
ablation of E -Cadherin gene (12), while the model starts from the E state, we expect that 
there will be some difference s for gene e xpression  level at the initial E state (Fig. 2B and C). 
Nevertheless, we found the simulation data (Fig. 2C) mostly match  the experimental data 
(Fig. 2B) in terms of the expression of key genes. For instance , the E state  shows high 
expression of p53 and mi R34, which are characteristics of the epithelial state (Fig. 2B and C). 
The expression profiles  from both experiment data and modeling  have similar M state with 
high level of ZEB1 and BACH1 (Fig. 2B and C). Regarding  the A state, the adipogenesis 
marker s PPARγ and C/EBPα have relatively high expression  in both simulation data and 
experimental data (Fig. 2B and C).  
We show the difference in the expression level of each gene  for the stable  state s E, M and 
A, between our model and bulk RNA -seq data  (Fig. 2D). Here lighter block s mean smaller 
difference between modeling and experimental data . The results from our model are generally  
consisten t with bulk RNA -seq data (Fig. 2D ) (12). We also show  the expression patterns of 
the five attractors (fixed points) on the landscape (Fig.  2E, corresponding to Table S6). From 
the expression pattern  of the five stable states , the E state has the highest expre ssion  level of 
P53, while the M state  has the  highest express ion of  MEK, ERK and SNAIL1. P1 and P2 
states have low er level of MEK and ERK  expression  than the M state , and  less p53 10 
 expression than the E state.  P2 and A state s both have higher expression level s of adipose 
marker s PPAR γ and C/EBPα . 
Based on the landscape, we propose two underlying transitions for the A state generation 
process, i.e., E to P1 and then to A, or M to P2 and then to A. Our quantitative results from 
landscape and kinetic paths demonstrate that the E state cells will pass through the P1 state 
to enter A state (Fig. 2A), while the M state cells  will pass through the P2 state to enter A 
state (Fig. 2A). Here, when we employ clustering method on RNA -seq data of the 
mesenchymal breast cells (12), we identified four clusters, including E, M, A cluster, and 
another one. Based on the comparisons of gene expressions (Fig. 2B and C), we speculate 
this additional cluster (experimental d ata for 7d, Fig. 2B ) is the P2 intermediate state, which 
supports our modeling results  on the intermediate states. This conclusion is also supported by 
the expression profiles based on the multi -dimensional transition paths (Fig. S4 and S5). 
During the transition from E to A, we identified a region of states which has similar expression 
level as P1 (by Pearson correlation coefficient, Fig. S4 A and B). We also identified the P2 
state along the transition path from M to A, demonstrating that the M ->A transition will pass 
through the P2 state (Fig. S4 C and D). We need to emphasize that, previ ous work (12) did 
discuss the possible roles of intermediate states, but no quantita tive results or the evidence of 
existence of intermediate states in CAC are presented. Here we provide the evidence for the 
existence of intermediate states during the CAC process from a detailed molecular network 
model.  
MEK inhibitor and Rosiglitazone in duce the transition of cancer cells into adipose cell 
through partial EMT state  
To clarify the stochastic mechanism of cell fate commitment in CAC, we altered the key 
regulators and track the change s of attractors on the landscape (Fig. 3). To visualize an d 
analyze the high -dimensional landscape, we project the landscape onto a two -dimensional 
plane to visualize multiple attractors (Fig. 3). Here we choose PPARγ (characterizing the level 
of adipogenesis) and miR145 (characterizing the level of E state) as t he two coordinates. 
These efforts allow us to understand the CAC from the two coordinates of EMT and 11 
 adipogenesis. We also show the landscape results using other pairs of genes as the 
coordinates (Fig. S6). We need to emphasize that our results are based o n the full gene 
network (Fig. 1A), and the landscape is shown in reduced dimensions for the visualization 
purpose.  
To see how the landscape changes with different drug additions, we start from the E state 
cells without TGF -β addition (Fig. 3A). The E state  has a low level of PPARγ but a high level 
of miR145 (Fig. 3A). We simulate the addition of Rosiglitazone and MEKi but without TGF -β 
(Fig. 3F). The combination of Rosiglitazone and MEKi increases the PPARγ level, but fails to 
induce the cell fate  transitio n (Fig. 3F). In another simulation , we add a moderate level  of 
TGF-β (+TGF -β) but without MEKi and Rosiglitazone (Fig. 3B). In this case, we observe the E 
and M state coexisting (bistable state), which is due to TGF -β inducing the EMT process. In 
this situation, the E state has a higher level of miR145, while E and M states have similar 
levels of PPARγ (Fig. 3B). Further more , when a high level of TGF -β (++TGF -β) was added , it 
drives all cells to M state with a lower level of miR145 and PPARγ (Fig. 3C). Of note, the 
addition of Rosiglitazone and MEKi under high level of TGF -β (++TGF -β) is not able to induce 
P state or A state (Fig. 3H). These results illustrate that an appropriate range of the TGF -β 
level is required  for inducing CAC.  That is because at a low level of TGF -β the system is in a 
monostable E state (Fig. 3A and F), while at a high level of TGF -β the system is in a 
monostable M state (Fig. 3C and H). To make the transition to A state possible, we need the 
system being pushe d to a multistable state with A state and intermediate state s (Fig. 3G).  
Therefore , the landscape results with different drug additions (Fig. 3) explain why TGF -β 
needs to be in a middle range so that the CAC is possible.   
Nevertheless, adding TGF -β alone is not enough for the generation of P1 state or A state 
(Fig. 3A -C). Rosiglitazone and MEKi are also indispensable for CAC. To further clarify the 
roles of MEKi and Rosiglitazone in the CAC, we fix the concentration of TGF -β to an 
appropriate level (+TGF -β) and add MEKi and Rosiglitazone individually (Fig. 3D and 3E). 
When we add Rosiglitazone under moderate level of TGF -β (+TGF -β), the system remains 
with two stable states (E and M state, Fig. 3D). However, when we add MEKi  under moderate 
level of TGF -β (+TGF -β), the system displays three stable states, including E, M and P1 state 12 
 (Fig. 3E). The P1 state stays in the middle of E and M state under the EMT coordinate and 
possesses more PPARγ than M and E state (Fig. 3E). Th is result demonstrate s that the MEKi 
combined with TGF -β can induce the generation of P1 state.  
 
Fig. 3. Landscapes recapitulate the effects of drug combinations used in previous 
experiments for inducing CAC.  (A-H) Landscape with different doses and combinat ions of 
TGF-β, MEK inhibitor (MEKi) and Rosiglitazone (Rosi). The landscape is projected onto the 
miR145 axis (characterizing EMT level) and the PPARγ  axis (characterizing the level of 
adipogenesis). The U axis is the dimensionless potential. The red arrow s indicate the route 
for drug additions of inducing CAC proposed in previous experiment s (12). Here we use “+” to 
mark the level of the drugs. (A) TGF -β, MEKi and Rosiglitazone are not added , and the 
system has a monostable E state , with TGF-β=1, MEKi=0.001, Rosi= 0.1. (B) Moderate TGF -β 
is added (+TGF -β or TGF-β=4.3), but MEKi  and Rosiglitazone are not added. (C) High level 
of TGF -β is added (++TGF -β or TGF -β=8), but MEKi and Rosiglitazone are not added. (D) 
TGF-β and Rosiglitazone are added (+TGF -β, +Rosi  or Rosi= 1.5), but MEKi is not added. (E) 
TGF-β and MEKi are added (+TGF -β, +MEKi  or MEKi =0.02 ), but Rosiglitazone is not added. 
(F) MEKi and Rosiglitazone are added  (+MEKi, +Rosi) , but TGF -β is not added. (G) Moderate 
TGF-β, MEKi and Rosiglitazone are added  (+TGF -β, +MEKi, +Rosi) . (H) High level of TGF -β, 
MEKi  and Rosiglitazone are added  (++TGF -β, +MEKi, +Rosi) . 
When we add moderate level of TGF -β (+TGF -β) but without MEKi and Rosiglitazone  the 
system keeps in bistable state  (Fig. 3B), whereas when we add moderate level of TGF -β 
(+TGF -β), MEKi, and Rosiglitazon e simultaneously, we obtained five stable states (Fig. 3G). 
13 
 The P2 state has higher level of PPARγ than P1 and M states, while A state has a 
significantly higher level of PPARγ than other states (Fig. 3G). These results suggest that 
Rosiglitazone combined with TGF -β and MEKi promotes the adipogenesis by promoting  the 
P2 state and A state (Fig. 3G). During the EMT process, MEKi promotes the potential of the 
system to generate the intermediate states (or partial EMT states), while the Rosiglitazone 
facilitate s the transition from the intermediate  states to adipose state (Fig. S7). Interestingly, 
our model can recapitulate well the experimental results for combination drugs inducing CAC 
proposed . Here, the red arrows indicate the dosing procedure proposed in pr evious studies 
(12, 13)  (Fig. 3). Our results suggest that switching the dosing order between MEKi  and 
Rosiglitazone does not affect the landscape and outcome of CAC (Fig. 3). Therefore, the 
landscape results from gene network model offer a quantitative explanation for the underlying 
mechanism of combination drugs inducing CAC.  
Landscape control ident ifies new drug combinations for inducing CAC  
The landscape with five stable states (Fig. 2A) provides a holistic view for the dynamical 
process of CAC, i.e., the CAC can be viewed as a transition from E or M attractor  to A 
attractor  on the landscape. The C AC process can be also understood as a two -step process 
illustrated by a cartoon (Fig. 4A). The first step is to induce the appearance of the A state and 
intermediate (P1 and P2) states. The second step is to increase the occupancy of A state. 
The balls in  the bucket represent the P1, P2 and A state in the EMT process, and the two 
pieces of woods on the barrel represent the E state and M state. Without the drug treatment, 
E and M states are the only two stable states and dominate the performance of the syst em, 
while the intermediate (P1 and P2) states and A state are hard to appear (Fig. 4A).  
Our results resemble the idea that cancer cells can be characterized by the attractors (56), 
which are determined by underlying regulatory networks. So, therapeutically , a good strategy 
should be targeting the cancer network to induce cell fate transition from cancer cell attractor s 
to non -malignant cell attractor s (14). Targeting the fat metabolism pathway has been shown 
to be a promising way against cancer in different tumor types (57–59). Several drugs have 
been suggested to be effective against cancers through MAPK pathway (60). Nevertheless, 14 
 these drugs focus on killing tumor cells (61), but not changing the landscape  of CAC gene 
networks, such as the stability of E and M states. We reason that traditional strategies for 
killing tumor cells fail to change the topological structure of the landscape and thus might be 
ineffective for cancer treatment or lead to cancer rel apse (32). We propose that a better way 
for cancer treatment should be changing landscape topography, i.e. , making cancer state less 
stable, e.g. , inducing the tra nsition from cancer cell state to adipose cell state by making 
perturbations to the underlying cancer gene networks. For example, by performing a single -
factor global sensitivity analysis on model parameters, we can uncover the critical elements 
affecting the relative stability for different attractor states (Fig. S11 -S13). Meanwhile, the 
combination therapy may be more effective than using single  drug (12, 62) , since targeting  a 
single gene or regulation  might be inadequate  in changing the landscape of the network, 
whereas altering multiple genes or regulations can better facilitate this modification (Fig. 3). 
So, a critical issue is how to identify the optimal combination of drug targets to trigger  cell fate 
transition from cancer cells to non -malignant cells, such as  adipose cells.  
 
 
15 
 Fig. 4. Landscape control identifies new drug combination for indu cing CAC. (A) 
Schematic diagram of the CAC process. (B) Critical elements to increase the occupancy of A 
state identified from landscape control. The x  axis shows the parameters identified from 
landscape control with the top 10 absolute values of relative change. The y axis shows the 
relative change ratio of the parameters identified by landscape control with respect to their 
initial value. (C) Gradient of potential with the addition of ZEB1  activator  and Rosiglitazone , 
with larger ball s correspond ing to higher occupancy. The color along the paths represents the 
gradient of potential. The occupancy of A state is enhanced after addition of ZEB1  activator  
and Rosiglitazone. E, epithelial state; M, mesenchymal state; A, Adipose cell state; P, partial 
EMT (inter mediate) state. (D) Landscape changes for different drug combinations. Gray 
arrows represent the direction and order of the dosing , with all simulations  beginning with  no 
drug additions. The first group of simulated drugs combines ZEB activator and Rosiglitazone  
with drug level of 10 times (first row, second column) and 500 times (first row, third column). 
The second group of simulated drugs combines MDM2 activator and Rosiglitazone with drug 
level of 10 and 100 times (second row). The third group of  simulated drugs combines SNAIL1 
activator with Rosiglitazone  at drug level of 10 and 100 times (third row). (E) Key drug 
combinations for ZEB1 activator and Rosiglitazone identified from landscape control in terms 
of CAC network (corresponding to Fig. S8A 1 and S8A7). The thickness of the arrow s is 
proportional to the sensitivity of the parameters obtained from the landscape control , and the 
size of the balls is proportional to the change of the ratio between the synthesis rate and 
degradation rate for each  node.  
To enable adipogenesis of malignant cancer cells as a therapeutic option, we aim at 
reducing the treatment protocol to a minimal number of drug targets in the CAC network. So, 
the question becomes  how to identify the minimal optimal combinations of drug targets to 
induce cell fate transition from cancer cells to adipose cells, since there will be numerous 
combinations for drug targets for a large gene network as we studied here (Fig. 1). To this 
end, we employ a landscape control method to identify t he most important regulations to 
maximize the occupancy of A state (8, 33, 63) . The purpose of landscape control is to find a 
set of parameters which make the objective function obta in the maximum (or minimum) value. 
Here , we set an objective function  based on transition actions to identify the optimal 
combinations of targets to reach  the highest occupancy  of A state (Fig. 4B , see Methods for 
details of landscape control ). In the landscape control results, n represents the coefficient of 
Hill function, and k I represents the generation rate of the transcription factor I. We performed 
seven experiments with different initial parameter values (Fig. S8A and S8B) and obtain ed the 
average results as the landscape control  results  (Fig. 4B). Then we picked the top 10 targets 
(parameters) according to the absolute values of sensitivity (defined as the percentage of the 16 
 relative change of each parameter at its default vale compared with the value after landscape 
control) (Fig. 4B). Th is means that the first five parameters should be increased to promote A 
state (predicted to be positive change from landscape control), and the lat ter five parameters 
should be decreased to promote A st ate (predicted to be negative change from landscape 
control) (Fig. 4B). We also predict another potential drug combination for promoting CAC (Fig. 
S10, Table S5), and illustrate the robustness of the landscape control methods against 
perturbations on initi al parameter values (characterizing heterogeneous tumor populations, 
Fig. S8).  
Since the hill coefficient n, characterizing the cooperativity for regulations, and regulatory 
strength ( λ) are usually hard to be controlled as a drug target in biological expe riments, we 
pick three major targets from these 10 parameters including Rosi  (denoting Rosiglitazone) , 
kZEB1 and k MDM2. Therefore, based on the landscape control results (Fig. 4B, 4C and S8), we 
identify  two potential drug combinations, one is activation of ZEB1 and the addition of 
Rosiglitazone, another is activation of MDM2 and the addition of Rosiglitazone. As an 
example, we will focus on  the drug combinations of ZEB1 and Rosiglitazone. We increase d 
the synthesis rate of ZEB1 and Rosiglitazone to the optimized level identified from the 
landscape control (Fig. 4C). Here, the size of the ball represents the occupancy of the 
corresponding attractor states. We find that the occupancy of the A state increase s and the 
occupancy of M state decreases after adding the combination drugs of ZEB1 and 
Rosiglitazone. Furthermore , all the transition paths are directed towards to  the A state, 
indicating that  this combination of drugs could  facilitate the CAC process and  enhance the 
transition towards the A state (Fig. 4C). Additionally, the knockdown results of the ZEB1 and 
Rosiglitazone also illustrate their strong impact on the CAC (Fig. S9). We further observed 
that at a relatively low level of ZEB1 generation rate an d Rosiglitazone addition , the system 
shifted to  a bistable state system (Fig. S9). As previously mentioned  (Fig. 4A), the system 
with only E and M state s is unable to generate A state (Fig. S9).  
Following the landscape control results, we further test the  effect s of two kinds of drug 
combinations from modeling (Fig. 4D). To quantify the efficiency of these drug combinations 
from model ing, we also provide a control group of drug combinations including EMT 17 
 transcription factor SNAIL1 and Rosiglitazone, which does not appear in our landscape 
control results (Fig. 4D). We quantified the drug effects by perturbing the corresponding 
targets in the network and tracing the attractor modifications. All simulations begin without 
adding TGF -β, MEKi, Rosiglitazone, or any other drugs, i.e., all the cells start from the  E state 
(Fig. 4D). The first drug combination , i.e., adding the activator of ZEB1 and Rosiglitazone can 
convert E state to A state successfully , with 10 -fold or 500 -fold dose of the drugs  (Fig. 4D, the 
first row) . The second drug combination , i.e., adding the activator of MDM2 and Rosiglitazone  
can also  transform the cells to A state  (Fig. 4D, the second row) . The third drug combination, 
which is the acti vator of SNAIL1 and Rosiglitazone, was tested as a control example that was 
not in our prediction (Fig. 4D, the third row). SNAIL1 is another important transcription factor 
in EMT process. Activation of SNAIL1 and Rosiglitazone with 10 -fold dose can induce  the 
transition from the E state to the M state (Fig. 4D). However, as the concentration of the drug 
combination  was increase d to 500 -fold, high level s of the combination caused  all of the cells  
to transition to the M state (Fig. 4D), without generating adipose cells. In our network, SNAIL1 
direct ly inhibits the RKIP, which is an inhibitor to the MEK pathway. The activation of SNAIL1 
might activate the MEK pathway, which goes against  the CAC. Th is might be why ZEB1 ca n 
promote  the appearance of A state , but not for  SNAIL1.  These results partially support the 
effectiveness of combination drugs identified from the landscape control.   
As shown on the landscape, the drug combinations predicted from landscape control can 
generate monostable A states (Fig. 4D, the first and second row), which are better than the 
combination of TGFβ, MEK inhibitor and Rosiglitazone proposed in previous stud y (12), which 
will generate multiple cell types including both adipose cell and othe r tumor cell states (Fig. 3, 
red path). This phenomenon can be understood from the network perspective (Fig. 4E). Here, 
the thickness of the edges represents the weight (corresponding to the sensitivity of 
parameters) of corresponding regulations, calculat ed through the landscape control. ZEB1a 
represents the activator of ZEB1, which intensifies the inhibitory effect on the P53 -induced 
microRNAs (Fig. 4E). This effort drives the EMT process and provides a window of 
opportunity for the appearance of intermed iate states (Fig. 4E). From the network 
perspective, Rosiglitazone activates the adipogenesis markers C/EBPα and PPARγ which 18 
 promote adipogenesis. Previous study  also suggested  that ZEB1  is the core component of 
adipogenic gene regulatory network, by  regulat ing numerous other transcription factors that 
promote the development of fat cells (64). These results  provide intuitive and quantitative 
explanations for why the proposed  drugs can work for inducing CAC.  
Molecular experiments verified the effectiveness of drug combination f or inducing 
cancer cell adipogenesis  
According to our modeling results, the cancer -adipose conversion can be achieved through 
drug-mediated EMT  process. Next, we aim to perform corresponding molecular experiments 
to test the  effects of  the two drug combinations on promoting the CAC. To test the drug 
effects of overexpressing ZEB1 in combination with Rosiglitazone, we selected relatively 
more aggressive liver cancer (Hep3B, Huh -7), breast cancer (MDA -MB-231), and colorectal 
cancer (SW480, SW6 20) cell lines to construct a ZEB1 overexpression model. When ZEB1 
was overexpressed, the cell volume became larger, and the proliferation rate was 
accelerated. Further, after 24 hours of Rosiglitazone treatment, the cells showed a circular 
change (Fig. 5A ). Colony formation assays showed that overexpression of ZEB1 in Hep3B, 
MDA -MB-231 cell lines promoted cell proliferation, while further Rosiglitazone treatment for 
24h inhibited the cell proliferation  (Fig. 5B).  Next, we used oil red staining to detect li pid 
droplet formation in cells. With ZEB1 overexpression and Rosiglitazone  treatment, lipid 
droplet formation can be clearly observed , indicating the possible occurrence of adipose cells  
(Fig. 5C).   
Meanwhile, we conducted  western blot and qRT -PCR analyses to detect lipid metabolism 
and adipogenesis -related markers, including PPARγ, C/EBPα, and Fabp4. The results 
showed that the combination of ZEB1 overexpression and Rosiglitazone c ould significantly 
enhance cellular  lipid metabolism and promote fat formation (Fig. 5D). Th is was  also 
observed in liver cancer cells (Huh -7) and colorectal cancer cells (SW480 and SW620) (Fig. 
S16 A and S1 6B). To further verify this , we performed lipid staining with BODIPY , and found  a 
noticeable increase of lipid drople ts in tumor cells following  combined treatment with ZEB1 19 
 overexpression and Rosiglitazone (Fig. 5F). To determine  the effect of ZEB1  overexpression 
and Rosiglitazone combination on tumor cell invasiveness, we used wound healing assay 
(Fig. 5G) and transwell (Fig. 5H). The results showed that ZEB1 overexpression enhanced 
tumor invasiveness, while the further addition of Rosiglitazone significantly attenuated the 
effect of ZEB1 overexpression on tumor cell migration (Fig. 5G and H). Notably , the breas t 
cancer cell line (MDA -MB-231) we used was a P53 mutant cell line , and the liver cancer cell 
line (Hep3B) was a P53 wildtype cell line . Thus , our combination drugs work ed for both cell 
lines with and without P53 mutation , which was also supported by  our modeling results (Fig. 
S14). 
We further tested the effects of another drug combination from our model prediction, i.e., 
the addition of Rosiglitazone and overexpression of MDM2. We found that MDM2 protein 
expression was elevated when ZEB1 was overexpres sed in Hep3B cell line (Fig. S1 6C), 
probably due to the indirect activating role of ZEB1 on MDM2 through miR -145 (Fig. 1A). 
Similarly, the effects of combination of MDM2 overexpression and addition of Rosiglitazone 
on promoting CAC were also experimentally  verified. As shown in Fig. S1 6D and S1 6E, 
immunofluorescence positive staining for BODIPY and flow cytometry for BODIPY showed 
that with the combined treatment the tumor cell lipid droplets were increased. At the same 
time, transwell  assay showed that tumor invasiveness was enhanced after overexpression of 
MDM2, and the addition of Rosiglitazone significantly reduce d the ability of  the tumor cell 
migration (Fig. S1 6F). 
To further test the effects of combination drugs (ZEB1 activator a nd Rosiglitazone) on 
inducing cancer to adipose transition, we performed  bioinformatics analysis  to the RNA -seq 
data from our experiments  (SI Appendix , Supplementa l methods) . The results are shown  in 
Fig. S17 (MDA -MB-231 cell line  and Hep3B cell line).  
For MDA -MB-231 cell line , the ZEB1 overexpression group contain s 7198 differential ly 
expressed  genes compared to the untreated group, and the group with overexpression of 
ZEB1 and Rosiglitazone contains 4184 differential ly expressed  genes compared with the 
ZEB1 overexpression group (Fig . S17A, top panel ). Differentially expressed genes are 
significantly reduced in the Hep3B cell line (Fig. S17A, bottom panel).  We use d the KEGG 20 
 database to further identify the enriched pathways with differential gene  expressi on (FDR < 
0.1, p value < 0.05). The results show that when comparing the untreated group and the 
group with overexpression of ZEB1 and Rosiglitazone, the differential genes are mainly 
enriched in TNF signaling pathway, p53 signaling pathway,  cell cycle -related pathways, and 
MAPK signaling pathway  (Fig. S17B , left panel ), as well as apoptosis, glycolysis, and 
metabolism related pathways (Fig. S17B, right panel) . These pathways are all critically related 
to the hallmarks of cancer  (1, 2) , illustrating the potential  of combination drugs inducing the 
cell fate transition of tumor cells. We further select  several typical pathways  (large gene 
number and small p -value)  for the heat map  analysis. The results  show that genes related to 
cell migration ability, such as SERPINE1, are significantly downregulated in the group  with 
combination drug treatment , while  the cell cycle inhibitory genes CDKN1A, TP53, and 
PMAIP1 are significantly upregulated in the group with combination drug treatment  (Fig. 
S17C) . CEBP, which plays a significant role in adipogenesis, is also upregulated after treated 
with ZEB1  overexpressio n and Rosiglitazone. These results support that the treated cells with 
combination drugs become less aggressive.  
To further investigate  whether the induced cells are similar  to adipose cells, we explored 
the correlation between different groups  after combi nation drug treatment  and the human 
Simpson -Golabi -Behmel syndrome (SGBS) preadipocyte cell , a typical tool for studies of 
human adipocyte s (GSE161111) (65). Correlation analys es reveal a close resemblance of the 
differentiated states in SGBS cell line adipogenesis (day 7) with our induced cells after 
combination drug  treatment (correlation coefficient increases from 0.69 to  0.72 for MDA -MB-
231 cell line, and correlation coeffici ent increases from 0.52 to 0.74 for Hep3B cell line , 
compared with untreated cells,  Fig. S17D ), which illustrates that the cancer cells with 
combination drug  treatment are induced to cells with more characteristics of mature 
adipocytes. In summary, the RNA -seq results further support that our predicted combination 
drugs are effective for inducing the transition from cancer cells to adipose cells.  21 
  
Fig. 5. The combination of Rosiglitazone and overexpressing ZEB1 promotes the 
transformation of tumor cells into adipose cells. (A) Morphological changes of Hep3B and 
MDA -MB-231 cells exposed to ZEB1  activator  and Rosiglitazone for the time indicated 
(magn ification, x100). (B) Colony -formation assays show that ZEB1  overexpression  combined 
with Rosiglitazone reduce the proliferation of Hep3B and MDA -MB-231 cells. (C) Oil red 
staining  was used  to detect intracellular lipid droplets  in the Hep3B and MDA -MB-231 cell 
lines (magnification, x100). (D) The expression of adipocyte -related proteins was verified by 
Western Blot. (E) Changes in related gene expression (RNA) levels such as ZEB1, PPARγ, 
C/EPBα, Klf4 and Snail were detected by RT -PCR. (F) Bodipy  changes  in Hep3B cells after 
ZEB1  overexpression  and Rosiglitazone combined treatment were detected by 
immunofluorescence staining and flow cytometry. (G, H) Overexpressing ZEB1 and addition 
22 
 of Rosiglitazone reduce the migration of tumor cells as shown in  transwell and Wound -healing 
assay s. 
Discussion  
A critical  hallmark of EMT in metastasis formation is the acquisition of ‘cancer stem cell’ 
properties, which leads to the resistance to therapy (66–69). Traditional cancer drugs which 
focus on their killing power against tumor cells might be troubled with EMT (70). So, inducing 
the conversion of cancer cells into adipocytes, which benefits from the EMT, might be a better 
way in cancer treatment. Previous study proposed that the combinations of TGF -β, MEKi and 
Rosiglitazone will contribute to the CAC, while the underlying mechanisms have yet to be 
further clarified (12, 13) . 
In this study, we constructed a comprehensive gene regulatory network model characterizing 
the transition process from cancer to adipose cells. To provide a holistic view of the stochasticity 
and dynamics in the CAC process, we quantified the landscape and  transition paths among the 
five attractors, which correspond to E, A, M state and two intermediate states (P1 and P2 ). 
Some studies  reported that there were more than one intermediate states during EMT (15, 71, 
72), while our results revealed the crucial  role of the intermediate states in CAC. Previous 
experiments observed the transition from M state to A state (12, 13) , while our landscape results 
further revealed two possible transitions, including E ->P1->A and M ->P2->A (Fig. 2A). This was 
supported  by the pseudotime series expression profiles, which matched the bulk RNA -seq data 
in the number of clusters and the expression level of regulatory genes. Thus, our analysis 
clarifies the dynamical mechanism for the transition of cancer cells into adipose cells through 
the partial EMT (intermediate) states.  
To identify the optimized drug combinations for inducing CAC, we employ ed a landscape 
control approach, and reveal ed the key factors to promote the A state. We propose two new 
drug combinations  for prom oting CAC , including  raising the ZEB1 and Rosiglitazone , and 
raising the MDM2 and Rosiglitazone . Our molecular experiments further verified  the effects of 
the two combination drugs on promoting CAC (Fig. 5 and Fig. S1 6). 
Previous work suggested a drug combination including TGF -β, MEK inhibitor, and 
Rosiglitazone for inducing CAC (12, 13) . Here, the drug combinations we identified are simpler 23 
 than theirs in terms of potential for clinical applications, since we only ne ed two drugs for 
inducing CAC. From modeling results, we also found that the previous combinations with TGF -
β, MEK inhibitor, and Rosiglitazone focused on generation of the A state, which failed to make 
all the stable states associated with tumors become u nstable (Fig. 3), while our results provide 
optimized drug combinations to promote CAC, by eliminat ing all the tumor associated states 
and only keep the stable A state (Fig. 4E). Also, our molecular network models revealed the 
underlying molecular mechanism for CAC regarding the critical roles of intermediate state s.  
An important insight from the landscap e of the CAC is that in the process of transformation 
from E or M state to A state, cells go through multiple intermediate states. Recent studies have 
identified intermediate hybrid phenotypes both at single -cell level and population level across 
different  cancer types (7, 72, 73) . How P1 and P2 state can be detec ted explicitly in molecular 
experiments warrants further explorations. It is important to note  that cancer is a complex 
disease, which involves many hallmarks (1, 2) , and this work  only modeled a few of these 
hallmarks  (including EMT , metastasis and adipogenesis ) using  a core molecular network of 
CAC . Future work can incorporate other critical genes or circuits (and/or other hallmarks of 
cancer) , e.g., important EMT factors TWIST, SNAIL2 and ZEB2 , into the models of cancer 
regulatory networks (14, 74) , which may provide more insights into underlying regulatory 
mechanisms for cancer metastasis and CAC.  Our modeling framework also allows for 
integrating multiple feedback loops between distinct genes or pathways, given the network 
structure. For example, by integ rating the autoregulation of TGF -β into the CAC network, we 
can obtain consistent results for multiple stable states (Fig. S 15). 
In this work,  our major conclusions focus on the fate transition from cancer cells to adipose 
cells. We investigat e this problem by focusing on the EMT circuit and adipogenesis circuit as 
well as their interaction s. Our experiments have successfully verified  the effects of the 
combination drugs for inducing CAC. However, the tumor metastasis is a very complicated 
proce ss which involves other molecular regulatory networks. How to regulate the metastasis 
ability of th ese adipose cells (e.g., control the dose of drugs)  warrants further explorations from 
both theoretical and experimental efforts.  
In summary, our work provid es a comprehensive understanding of cancer -adipose 
conversion through gene network modeling. The landscape and transition paths offer a 24 
 framework for understanding the underlying mechanisms of cell fate decisions in cancer 
network and help to design princi ples to optimize the combination drug strategies for cancer 
treatment.  
 
  25 
 Materials and Methods  
Cancer -adipose conversion model  
We summarized previous work regarding the regulatory circuits of EMT and adipogenesis (8, 
41, 44, 46, 75) , and constructed an ODEs model to describe the cancer -adipose conversion. 
The ODEs share their common forms as in Equation (1):  
𝑑𝑋
𝑑𝑡=𝑔𝑋·G-k𝑋·K·𝑋 (1) 
Here, X represents the level of gene expressions, 𝑔𝑋 and 𝑘𝑋 represent the basal synthesis 
and degeneration rate of X(t), individually . G and K denote the regulation of other genes on 
the synthesis and the degradation of X(t). The regulations amo ng different components can 
be described by the product of the shifted Hill function:  𝐻𝑠(𝑌,𝑆,𝜆,𝑛)=1+(𝜆−1)𝑌𝑛
𝑆𝑛+𝑌𝑛   (14, 
76). Here, λ represents the fold change for the regulations, S represents the thresh old of the 
sigmoidal function, and n is the Hill coefficient, which determines the steepness of the 
sigmoidal function. Y represents the regulator. The Hill function depends on λ in the following 
way: 
         Hs(Y, S, 𝜆, n){      <1      𝜆<1
      =1      𝜆=1
      >1      𝜆>1(2) 
Here,  the fold change λ decides whether this regulation is activation or inhibition (λ > 1 for 
activation and λ < 1 for inhibition) and the strength of regulations. The CAC network 
comprises a few subnetworks. The f irst subnetwork is the EMT process, which involves the 
reciprocal interaction between p53 -induced microRNAs and EMT transcription factors (ZEB1, 
SNAIL1). The second subnetwork is cancer metastasis process, which involves RKIP, Lin28, 
Let7, Bach1, EMT trans cription factors and p53 -induced microRNAs. The third subnetwork is 
MAPK pathway and adipogenesis. MEK is inhibited by ERK, RKIP and other MEK inhibitor 
(75). ERK is activ ated by MEK and has both self -activation and self -inhibition effect (77). 
PPARγ and C/EBPα form a positive feedback loop with each other (78). We also modeled the 26 
 three drugs corresponding to TGF -β, MEKi and Rosiglitazone by introducing three input 
nodes in the CAC network (Fig. 1A, see SI Appendix  for detailed model).  
Self-consistent mean fi eld approximation  
The probability distribution 𝑃(𝑋(1),𝑋(2),…,𝑋(𝑛),𝑡) of a dynamical system is governed by 
probabilistic diffusion equations , where 𝑋(1), 𝑋(2),…, 𝑋(𝑛) represent concentration of 
proteins or gene expression level s in cells. To obtain the probability distribution of a gene 
regulatory network model, we follow a self -consistent mean field approach (23, 34, 79, 80)  to 
split the probability into products of the in dividual ones, i.e., 
𝑃(𝑋(1),𝑋(2),…,𝑋(𝑛), 𝑡)~∏𝑃(𝑋(𝑖),𝑡)𝑛
𝑖  and solve the probability self -consistently.  
Diffusion equations are hard to solve directly  for high -dimensional systems, so  we started 
from the moment equations  instead . By assum ing Gaussian distribution as an approximation, 
we need to calculate two moments, the mean and the variance. When the diffusion coefficient 
D is small, the moment equations can be approximated by (81, 82) : 
𝐱̅̇(t)=𝐅[𝐱̅(𝐭)] (3) 
𝛔̇(t)=𝛔(t)𝐀𝐓(t)+𝐀(t)𝛔(t)+2𝐃[𝐱̅(t)] (4) 
Here, 𝐱, 𝛔(𝑡), and 𝐀(𝑡) are vectors and tensors, and 𝐀𝐓(𝑡) is the transpose of 𝐀(t). The 
elements of matrix 𝐴 are specified as:  
𝐴𝑖𝑗=∂𝐹𝑖[𝑋(𝑡)]
∂𝑥𝑗(𝑡)(5) 
Based on these equations, we can solve 𝐱̅(𝑡) and 𝛔(t). Here, we only consider the diagonal 
elements of 𝛔(𝑡) from the mean field approximation. Therefore, the evolution of probability 
distribution for each variable can be obtained from the Gaussian approximation:  
𝑃(𝑥,𝑡)=1
√2𝜋𝜎(𝑡)𝑒𝑥𝑝 −[𝑥−𝑥̄(𝑡)]2
2𝜎(𝑡)(6) 
Here, 𝐱̅(t) and 𝛔(𝑡) are the solutions of Eq. (3) and (4) . The probability distribution obtained 
above corresponds to one stable state. If the system has multiple stable states, there should 
be several probability distributions localized at each basin with different variances. Thus, the 
total probability is the weighted sum of all these individual probability distributions. From the 27 
 mean field approximation, we can extend this formulation to the multidimensional case by 
assuming that the total probability is the product of each individual probability for each 
variable. Finally, with the total probability, we can construct the potential landscape by: 
𝑈(𝑥)=-lnPss(𝑥), with Pss(𝑥) representing steady state  probability  distribution  (22, 23) .  
Transition paths and landscape control  
A dynamical system in the fluctuating environments can be addressed by:  
𝐱̄̇(𝑡)=𝐅[𝐱̄(𝑡)]+𝜁 (7) 
Here,  𝐱 =(𝑥1(𝑡),𝑥2(𝑡),… , 𝑥𝑛(𝑡)) represents the vector of the expression level of proteins or 
genes. 𝐅[𝐱(𝑡)] is the vector for the driving force from the dynamical system, ζ is the 
Gaussian white noise term, which satisfies E[𝜁𝑖(𝑡)𝜁𝑗(0)]=2𝐷𝛿𝑖𝑗𝛿(𝑡). Here, 𝐷 is the constant 
diffusion co efficient characterizing the level of noise, 𝛿(𝑡) is Dirac Delta function, which 
means that the noises at different times are independent, and 𝛿𝑖𝑗 satisfies:  
{𝛿𝑖𝑗=1,𝑖=𝑗
𝛿𝑖𝑗=0,𝑖≠𝑗(8) 
Following the approaches (33, 55)  based on the Freidlin -Wentzell theory (83), the most 
probable transition path from attractor i at time 0 to attractor j at time T, can be acquired by 
minimizing the action functional over all po ssible paths:  
𝑆𝑇[𝜑𝑖𝑗]=1
2∫|𝜑̇𝑖𝑗−𝐹(𝜑𝑖𝑗)|2𝑇
0𝑑𝑡 (9) 
This path is called the minimized action path (MAP). We calculated MAPs numerically by 
applying minimum action methods (55). 
To id entify the optimal combination of drugs for promoting CAC, we employ the landscape 
control method for the CAC model (8, 33, 63) . Here, our goal is to predict therapeutic targets 
(189 parameters characterizing synthesis rate, degradation rate and interaction intensity etc., 
see SI Appendix  for details) that can promote the transition from E, M, and partial EMT state 
to the A state. As such , the optimization process is to minimize the t ransition action from E, M, 
and partial EMT state to the A state and maximize the transition action from A to E, M, and 
partial EMT state (smaller transition action means larger transition probability), by tuning each 28 
 of 189 parameters. To this end, we def ine the cost function for maximizing the occupancy of 
the A state as ΔS A= (S M->A-SA->M) + (S E->A-SA->E) + (S P1->A-SA->P1) + (S P2->A-SA->P2), and our aim 
is to minimize ΔS A. We used the Adaptive Minimum Action Method (55) to calculate the 
transition action, and the matlab function “fmincon” to perform the minimization of transition 
actions.  
 
Experiment al methods  
Cell culture  
The breast cancer cell line (MDA -MB-231), hepatoma cell line (Huh -7 and Hep3B), and colon 
cancer cell line (SW480 and SW620) were obtained from the Cell Bank of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, China) , and  cultured at 37 ℃ in 5% CO 2. 
Western blot  
Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer containing 1 mM PMSF (Solarbio, Beijing, China). The  protein 
concentration was measured using BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein 
samples were boiled and then separated on 8% –10% SDS -PAGE gels, followed by transfer on 
polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore). The se membrane s were blocked for 1  
hour in 5% (w/v) skimmed milk at room temperature and then incubated at 4 ℃ with primary 
antibody overnight. After washing with TBS -T three times, the membranes were incubated with 
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) -conjugated secondary antib ody for 1  hour at room temperature. 
Finally, the b lots were visualized with enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) reagent (Millipore).  
qRT-PCR  
Total RNA was isolated from cells by using mirVana miRNA Isolation Kit (Life Technologies, 
Grand Island, NY, USA) or TRIzol Reagent (Life Technologies) according to the standard 
protocol. For miRNA, reverse transcriptions were performed using the TaqMan miRNA Reverse 
Transcription Kit (Life Technologies), and cDNA amplification was performed using the TaqMan 
miRNA Assay Kit (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The 
expression of mRNA was determined using the GoTaq qPCR Master Mix (Promega, Madison, 
WI, USA) , with a ctin used as the endogenous control. Gene expression fold changes were 29 
 assessed u sing the 2DCt method. The primers used are listed in following table.  
Pparg2  GCTGTGAAGTTCAATGCACTGG  GCAGTAGCTGCACGTGCTCTG  
Klf4 CGGGAAGGGAGAAGACACT   GAGTTCCTCACGCCAACG  
C/EBPa  AAACAACGCAACGTGGAGA  GCGGTCATTGTCACTGGTC  
Zeb1  GCCAGCAGTCATGATGAAAA  TATCACAATACGG GCAGGTG  
Snail1  CTCTGAAGATGCACATCCGAA  GGCTTCTCACCAGTGTGGGT  
β-actin  TCCCTGGAGAAGAGGCTACGA  AGGAAGGAAGGCTGGAAGAG  
 
Wound -healing assay  
Cells were cultured and grown to 90% confluence in 6 -well plates and then cultured overnight 
in serum -free medium. The cell wound was drawn by a 10 mL pipette tip in a straight line. After 
wash ing with PBS, wound healing images were taken immediately via an inverted microscope 
imaging system (Olympus). Then cells were  then cultured in medium containing 1% FBS for 24 
hours. The 24 h ours images were taken in the same way.  
Colony -formation assays  
For a colony -formation assay, 500 cells were seeded in 6 -well plates. After incubation at 37 ℃ 
about 3 weeks, the colonies were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 30 min at room 
temperature and stained with 0.2% crystal violet for 15 min. The number of visible colonies 
were counted using  Adobe Photoshop (version 2020).  
Oil red O staining  
The cells in each group were washed twice with PBS, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 
min, stained with oil red O solution for 10 min utes, and then restained with hematoxylin solution 
for 5 min utes. After washing, under  a light microscope, the red granular material in the 
cytoplasm was the lipid in the cytoplasm stained with oil red O solution,  and the nucleus was 
blue.  
Bodipy dye  
The cells to be stained were removed from the intercellular area and cleaned with PBS before 
fixation. After fixation, Bodipy working solution was added to stain for 30 -60min, and the cell 
culture plate was wrapped wit h tinfoil paper to avoid light. After staining, the cells were washed 30 
 with PBS for 3 times, DAPI working solution was added to stain the nuclei, and PBS was 
cleaned again for 3 times, and fluorescence microscope was used to take photos.  
Flow cytometric analysis  
Hep3B cell s were seeded at a density of 1.5 ×  105 cells/well in six -well plates, grown for 20 
hours, and then pre -incubated for 24 h ours under ZEB1 or MDM2 with ROSi conditions prior to 
incubation with BODIPY. After incubation for 30 min utes, the cells were gently scraped, 
suspended in PBS (Gibco), and transferred to flow cytometry tubes. Subsequently, the cells 
were analyzed using a flow cytometer (Attune NxT, Thermo Fisher) for Alexa Fluor 488. All 
analyses were carried out in triplicate us ing at least 10,000 cells.  
Statistical analysis  
Data are shown as the mean with standard error. The one -way ANOVA or Student’s t test was 
used to determine differences between groups. A p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically 
significant, and calculati ons were performed with Statistical Package for Social Science (SPSS 
for Windows, version 22; Chicago, IL, USA).  
Acknowledgements  
C.L. is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2019YFA0709502) and the 
National Natural Science Foundation of China (12171102).  C.L. is a member of LMNS, Fudan 
University.  H.Y. is supported by the Science and Technology Project of Haihe Laboratory of 
Modern Chinese Medicine (22HHZYSS00008).  
Author Contributions:  C.L. designed research; Z.C. and J.L. performed research; Z.C., J.L., 
X.Z., H.Y . and C.L. analyzed data; and Z.C., J.L., H.Y. and C. L. wrote the paper.  
Competing Interest Statement: The authors declare no competing interests.   31 
 Reference  
1.  D. Hanahan, R. A. Weinberg, The Hallmarks of Cancer. Cell 100, 57–70 (2000).  
2.  D. Hanahan, R. A. Weinberg, Hallmarks of cancer: The next generation. Cell 144, 
646–674 (2011).  
3.  B. Bakir, A. M. Chiarella, et al., EMT, MET, Plasticity, and Tumor Metastasis. Trends 
Cell Biol  30(10) , 764 –776 (2020).  
4.  T. Celià -Terrassa, et al. , Hyste resis control of epithelial -mesenchymal transition 
dynamics conveys a distinct program with enhanced metastatic ability. Nat. Commun.  
9 (2018).  
5.  K. Polyak, R. A. Weinberg, Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal states: 
acquisition of malignant a nd stem cell traits. Nat Rev Cancer  9(4), 265 –273 (2009).  
6.  S. Tripathi, H. Levine, M. K. Jolly, The Physics of Cellular Decision Making During 
Epithelial –Mesenchymal Transition. Annu. Rev. Biophys.  49, 1–18 (2020).  
7.  I. Pastushenko, A. Brisebarre, et al., Identification of the tumour transition states 
occurring during EMT. Nature  556, 463 –468 (2018).  
8.  C. Li, G. Balazsi, A landscape view on the interplay between EMT and cancer 
metastasis. npj Syst Biol Appl  4 (2018).  
9.  T. Brabletz, R. Kalluri, M. A. Nieto, R. A. Weinberg, EMT in cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer  
18, 128 –134 (2018).  
10.  M. A. Nieto, R. Y. -J. Huang, R. A. Jackson, J. P. Thiery, EMT: 2016. Cell 166, 21–45 
(2016).  
11.  S. Gupta, K. Joshi, J. D. Wig, S. Arora, et al. , High frequency of loss of allelic integrity 
at Wilms’ tumor suppressor gene -1 locus in advanced breast tumors associated with 
aggressiveness of the tumor. Indian J. Cancer  46, 303 (2009).  
12.  D. Ishay -Ronen, et al. , Gain Fat —Lose Metastasis: Converting Invasive Breast Cancer 
Cells into Adipocytes Inhibits Cancer Metastasis. Cancer Cell  35, 17-32.e6 (2019).  
13.  D. Ishay -Ronen, G. Christofori, Targeting Cancer Cell Metastasis by Converting 
Cancer Cells into Fat. Cancer Res.  79(21) , 5471 –5475 (2019).  
14.  X. Kang, J. Wang, C. Li, Exposing the Underlying Relationship of Cancer Metastasis 
to Metabolism and Epithelial -Mesenchymal Transitions. iScience  21, 754 –772 (2019).  
15.  M. Lu, M. K. Jolly, H. Levine, J. N. Onuchic, E. Ben -Jacob, MicroRNA -based 
regulation  of epithelial --hybrid --mesenchymal fate determination. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.  
110, 18144 –18149 (2013).  
16.  S. N. Steinway, et al. , Network Modeling of TGF$ \beta$ Signaling in Hepatocellular 
Carcinoma Epithelial -to-Mesenchymal Transition Reveals Joint Son ic Hedgehog and 
Wnt Pathway ActivationNetwork Modeling of Epithelial -to-Mesenchymal Transition. 
Cancer Res.  74, 5963 –5977 (2014).  
17.  X.-J. Tian, H. Zhang, J. Xing, Coupled reversible and irreversible bistable switches 
underlying TGF$β$ -induced epithelial  to mesenchymal transition. Biophys. J.  105, 
1079 –1089 (2013).  
18.  J. Lee, et al. , Network of mutually repressive metastasis regulators can promote cell 
heterogeneity and metastatic transitions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.  111, E364 --E373 
(2014).  32 
 19.  M. Thattai, A. Van Oudenaarden, Intrinsic noise in gene regulatory networks. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci.  98, 8614 –8619 (2001).  
20.  P. S. Swain, M. B. Elowitz, E. D. Siggia, Intrinsic and extrinsic contributions to 
stochasticity in gene expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.  99, 12795 –12800 (2002).  
21.  C. H. Waddington, The strategy of the genes: a discussion of some aspects of 
theoretical biology  (Allen and Unwin, 1957).  
22.  J. Wang, Landscape and flux theory of non -equilibrium dynamical systems with 
application to biology. Adv. Phys  64, 1–137 (2015).  
23.  C. Li, J. Wang, Landscape and flux reveal a new global view and physical 
quantification of mammalian cell cycle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA  111, 14130 –14135 
(2014).  
24.  J. Wang, K. Zhang, L. Xu, E. K. Wang, Quantif ying the Waddington landscape and 
biological paths for development and differentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA  108, 
8257 –8262 (2011).  
25.  C. Li, T. Hong, Q. Nie, Quantifying the landscape and kinetic paths for epithelial -
mesenchymal transition from a core  circuit. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys  18, 17949 –
17956 (2016).  
26.  C. Lv, X. Li, et al., Energy Landscape Reveals That the Budding Yeast Cell Cycle Is a 
Robust and Adaptive Multi -stageProcess. PLoS Comput Biol  11, e1004156 (2015).  
27.  M. Lu, J. Onuchic, E. Ben -Jacob, Construction of an effective landscape for multistate 
genetic switches. Phys. Rev. Lett.  113, 78102 (2014).  
28.  P. Ao, Emerging of Stochastic Dynamical Equalities and Steady State 
Thermodynamics from Darwinian Dynamics. Commun. Theor. Phys.  49, 1073 (2008).  
29.  H. Ge, H. Qian, et al., Mesoscopic kinetic basis of macroscopic chemical 
thermodynamics: a mathematical theory. Phys Rev E  94, 52150 (2016).  
30.  B. Zhang, P. G. Wolynes, Stem cell differentiation as a many -body problem. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. S ci. USA.  111, 10185 –10190 (2014).  
31.  M. Choi, J. Shi, S. H. Jung, X. Chen, K. -H. Cho, Attractor landscape analysis reveals 
feedback loops in the p53 network that control the cellular response to DNA damage. 
Sci. Signal.  5, ra83 --ra83 (2012).  
32.  C. Li, J. Wang, Quantifying the Landscape for Development and Cancer from a Core 
Cancer Stem Cell Circuit. Cancer Res  75, 2607 –2618 (2015).  
33.  C. Li, Identifying the optimal anticancer targets from the landscape of a cancer --
immunity interaction network.  Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  19[1] C. L , 7642 –7651 
(2017).  
34.  C. Li, J. Wang, Quantifying Cell Fate Decisions for Differentiation and Reprogramming 
of a Human Stem Cell Network: Landscape and Biological Paths. PLoS Comput Biol  
9(8), e1003165 (2013).  
35.  S. Huang, G. Eichler, Y. Bar -Yam, D. E. Ingber, Cell fates as high -dimensional 
attractor states of a complex gene regulatory network. Phys. Rev. Lett.  94, 128701 
(2005).  
36.  X. Qiu, et al. , Mapping transcriptomic vector fields of single cells. Cell, 1–22 (20 22). 
37.  S. Hinz, M. A. LaBarge, Hijacking EMT: Better Fat Than Dead. Cancer Cell  35, 1–2 
(2019).  33 
 38.  S. Tripathi, D. A. Kessler, H. Levine, Minimal frustration underlies the usefulness of 
incomplete regulatory network models in biology. Proc. Natl. Acad . Sci.  120, 
e2216109120 (2023).  
39.  T. Kim, A. Veronese, et al., p53 regulates epithelial -mesenchymal transition through 
microRNAs targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2. J Exp Med  208(5) , 875 –883 (2011).  
40.  N. Oshimori, D. Oristian, E. Fuchs, TGF -β Promotes Heterogen eity and Drug 
Resistance in Squamous Cell Carcinoma. Cell 160, 963 –976 (2015).  
41.  L. T. Vassilev, B. T. Vu, et al., In vivo activation of the p53 pathway by small -molecule 
antagonists of MDM2. Science (80 -. ). 303(5659) , 844 –848 (2004).  
42.  T. Kawamura, J. Suzuki, et al., Linking the p53 tumour suppressor pathway to somatic 
cell reprogramming. Nature  460(7259) , 1140 –1144 (2009).  
43.  S. Dangi -Garimella, et al. , Raf kinase inhibitory protein suppresses a metastasis 
signalling cascade involving  LIN28 and let -7. EMBO J.  28, 347 –358 (2009).  
44.  D. G. Zisoulis, Z. S. Kai, et al., Autoregulation of microRNA biogenesis by let -7 and 
Argonaute. Nature  486(7404) , 541 –544 (2012).  
45.  S. Davudian, N. Shajari, et al., BACH1 silencing by siRNA inhibits mi gration of HT -29 
colon cancer cells through reduction of metastasis -related genes. Biomed 
Pharmacother  84, 191 –198 (2016).  
46.  C. Liu, et al. , Abnormal gametogenesis induced by p53 deficiency promotes tumor 
progression and drug resistance. Cell Discov.  4 (2018).  
47.  A. Shvartsur, K. B. Givechian, et al., Overexpression of RKIP and its cross -talk with 
several regulatory gene products in multiple myeloma. J Exp Clin Cancer Res  36(1) , 
62 (2017).  
48.  J. Yun, C. A. Frankenberger, et al., Signalling pathway f or RKIP and Let -7 regulates 
and predicts metastatic breast cancer. EMBO J  30(21) , 4500 –4514 (2011).  
49.  S. Davudian, B. Mansoori, et al., BACH1, the master regulator gene: A novel 
candidate target for cancer therapy. Gene  588(1) , 30–37 (2016).  
50.  S. Sas agawa, Y. Ozaki, et al., Prediction and validation of the distinct dynamics of 
transient and sustained ERK activation. Nat Cell Biol  7(4), 365 –373 (2005).  
51.  A. W. Lamber, D. R. Pattabiraman, et al., Emerging Biological Principles of 
Metastasis. Cell 168(4), 670 –691 (2014).  
52.  M. B. Elowitz, A. J. Levine, E. D. Siggia, P. S. Swain, Stochastic gene expression in a 
single cell. Science (80 -. ). 297, 1183 –1186 (2002).  
53.  G. Balá zsi, A. Van Oudenaarden, J. J. Collins, Cellular decision making and biological 
noise: from microbes to mammals. Cell 144, 910 –925 (2011).  
54.  X. Kang, C. Li, A Dimension Reduction Approach for Energy Landscape: Identifying 
Intermediate States in M etabolism -EMT Network. Adv. Sci.  8, 1–17 (2021).  
55.  X. Zhou, W. Ren, W. E, Adaptive minimum action method for the study of rare events. 
J. Chem. Phys.  128, 104111 (2008).  
56.  S. Huang, I. Ernberg, S. Kauffman, Cancer attractors: a systems view of tumors  from a 
gene network dynamics and developmental perspective in Seminars in Cell \& 
Developmental Biology , (2009), pp. 869 –876. 
57.  M. Goto, S. Osada, et al., FAD104, a regulator of adipogenesis, is a novel suppressor 
of TGF -$β$-mediated EMT in cervical ca ncer cells. Sci Rep  7(1), 16365 (2017).  34 
 58.  M. Petruzzelli, M. Schweiger, et al., A switch from white to brown fat increases energy 
expenditure in cancer -associated cachexia. Cell Metab  20(3) , 433 –447 (2014).  
59.  T. Wang, J. F. Fahrmann, et al., JAK/STAT 3-Regulated Fatty Acid $β$ -Oxidation Is 
Critical for Breast Cancer Stem Cell Self -Renewal and Chemoresistance. Cell Metab  
27(6) , 1357 (2018).  
60.  C. G. Kinsey, et al. , Protective autophagy elicited by RAF→ MEK→ ERK inhibition 
suggests a treatment strategy  for RAS -driven cancers. Nat. Med.  25, 620 –627 (2019).  
61.  A. L. Goldberg, Development of proteasome inhibitors as research tools and cancer 
drugs. J. Cell Biol.  199, 583 –588 (2012).  
62.  K. L. Bryant, C. A. Stalnecker, et al., Combination of ERK and auto phagy inhibition as 
a treatment approach for pancreatic cancer. Nat Med  25(4) , 628 –640 (2019).  
63.  D. K. Wells, W. L. Kath, A. E. Motter, Control of stochastic and induced switching in 
biophysical networks. Phys. Rev. X  5, 31036 (2015).  
64.  C. Gubelmann, et al. , Identification of the transcription factor ZEB1 as a central 
component of the adipogenic gene regulatory network. Elife 3, e03346 (2014).  
65.  P. Fischer -Posovszky, F. S. Newell, M. Wabitsch, H. E. Tornqvist, Human SGBS cells -
-a uniqu e tool for studies of human fat cell biology. Obes. Facts  1, 184 –189 (2008).  
66.  K. Bensaad, et al. , Fatty acid uptake and lipid storage induced by HIF -1α contribute to 
cell growth and survival after hypoxia -reoxygenation. Cell Rep.  9, 349 –365 (2014).  
67.  A. Ladanyi, et al. , Adipocyte -induced CD36 expression drives ovarian cancer 
progression and metastasis. Oncogene  37, 2285 –2301 (2018).  
68.  E. Lengyel, L. Makowski, J. DiGiovanni, M. G. Kolonin, Cancer as a matter of fat: The 
crosstalk between adipose ti ssue and tumors. Trends Cancer  176, 139 –148 (2018).  
69.  K. M. Nieman, et al. , Adipocytes promote ovarian cancer metastasis and provide 
energy for rapid tumor growth. Nat. Med.  17, 1498 –1503 (2011).  
70.  C. Cano, Y. Motoo, J. L. Iovanna, Epithelial -to-mese nchymal transition in pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma. ScientificWorldJournal.  10, 1047 –1057 (2010).  
71.  T. Hong, et al. , An Ovol2 -Zeb1 Mutual Inhibitory Circuit Governs Bidirectional and 
Multi -step Transition between Epithelial and Mesenchymal States. PLoS Com put. Biol.  
11, 1–20 (2015).  
72.  J. Zhang, et al. , TGF -β-induced epithelial -to-mesenchymal transition proceeds through 
stepwise activation of multiple feedback loops. Sci. Signal.  7, ra91 (2014).  
73.  M. K. Jolly, et al. , Implications of the hybrid epithelial/mesenchymal phenotype in 
metastasis. Front. Oncol.  5, 155 (2015).  
74.  N. Meyer -Schaller, et al. , A hierarchical regulatory landscape during the multiple 
stages of EMT. Dev. Cell  48, 539 –553 (2019).  
75.  D. Prusty, B . H. Park, et al., Activation of MEK/ERK signaling promotes adipogenesis 
by enhancing peroxisome proliferator -activated receptor $γ$ (PPAR$γ$ ) and 
C/EBP$alpha$ gene expression during the differentiation of 3T3 -L1 preadipocytes. J 
Biol Chem.  277(48) , 46226 –46232 (2002).  
76.  B. Huang, et al. , Interrogating the topological robustness of gene regulatory circuits by 
randomization. PLoS Comput. Biol.  13, e1005456 (2017).  
77.  E. B. Ünal, F. Uhlitz, N. Blü thgen, A compendium of ERK targets. FEBS Lett.  591, 
2607 –2615 (2017).  35 
 78.  S. Sauer, Ligands for the Nuclear Peroxisome Proliferator -Activated Receptor 
Gamma. Trends Pharmacol Sci  36(10) , 688 –704 (2015).  
79.  M. Sasai, P. G. Wolynes, Stochastic gene expression as a many -body problem. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA  100, 2374 –2379 (2003).  
80.  A. M. Walczak, M. Sasai, P. G. Wolynes, Self -consistent proteomic field theory of 
stochastic gene switches. Biophys. J.  88, 828 –850 (2005).  
81.  N. G. Van Kampen, Stochastic processes in Chemistry and Physics , 1st Ed. (North 
Holland,  1992).  
82.  G. Hu, Stochastic Forces and Nonlinear Systems , B. L. Hao, Ed. (Shanghai Scientific 
and Technological Education Press, 1994).  
83.  M. Freidlin, A. Wentzell, Random Perturbations of Dynamical Systems (Springer 
Science & Business Media, 2012)  (Springer, 2012).  
 