HybridNet: Dual-Branch Fusion of Geometrical and
Topological Views for VLSI Congestion Prediction
(Extended Abstract)
Yuxiang Zhao1, Zhuomin Chai2, Yibo Lin1,3,4∗, Runsheng Wang1,3,4, Ru Huang1,3,4
1School of Integrated Circuits, Peking University
2School of Physics and Technology, Wuhan University
3Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Integrated Circuits
4Institute of Electronic Design Automation, Peking University, Wuxi, China
Abstract —Accurate early congestion prediction can prevent unpleasant
surprises at the routing stage, playing a crucial character in assisting de-
signers to iterate faster in VLSI design cycles. In this paper, we introduce
a novel strategy to fully incorporate topological and geometrical features
of circuits by making several key designs in our network architecture. To
be more specific, we construct two individual graphs (geometry-graph,
topology-graph) with distinct edge construction schemes according to
their unique properties. We then propose a dual-branch network with
different encoder layers in each pathway and aggregate representations
with a sophisticated fusion strategy. Our network, named HybridNet, not
only provides a simple yet effective way to capture the geometric interac-
tions of cells, but also preserves the original topological relationships in
the netlist. Experimental results on the ISPD2015 benchmarks show that
we achieve an improvement of 10.9% compared to previous methods.
Index Terms —Congestion Prediction, HybridNet, Dual-Branch Net-
work, Multi-View Graph, Machine Learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
As design complexity increases, efficient and accurate prediction of
routing congestion is critical to assist placement to achieve routability
in the design flow. To better achieve this target, machine learning
has been used to help predict congestion. Existing methods can be
divided into two parts, vision-based and graph-based methods, in
terms of the model’s input characteristics. Vision-based methods treat
the grid-level feature directly as pixel channels of an image, turning
the prediction problem into an image-to-image translation task [1]–
[4]. [5] use the popular Pix2Pix methods to accomplish this task by
converting the hand-crafted features input image to make final predic-
tions. However, the fundamental feature representing the topological
relationship in netlist data is overlooked in the pixel conversion
process. Graph-based methods focus on capturing node relationships
by transforming the raw netlist data into a graph structure with
geometric information. [6], [7]. CircuitGNN [8] uses a heterogeneous
graph to link the cell-net interconnection and mixes the topology
and geometric features together through each aggregation layer. This
method confuses the message-passing function to distinguish the finer
difference between two different types of features and will affect the
prediction performance.
In this study, we aim to improve the representation of such
netlist data for congestion prediction. We’re motivated by the similar
characteristics shared by multiple individuals in the social network
domain [9]. Individuals in real-world social networks are in contact
with others through a variety of relationship types. These relation-
ships correspond to distinct views of the underlying network, which
are naturally represented as multi-view graphs in each relationship
type. Such multi-view nature can also be found in VLSI circuits.
∗Corresponding author: yibolin@pku.edu.cn
Fig. 1. Circuit design with placement solution and the HybridNet architecture.
Thus, we propose to consider the original netlist as a multi-view
graph: (i) The topology-graph is formed by the intrinsic configuration
in the netlist logic structure, with each node containing features
designed by human experts as described in the Methodology section.
(ii) The geometry-graph is built by leveraging the Delaunay trian-
gulation algorithm for node interaction, where inter-node distances
and coordinates are provided as extra features for edges and nodes
respectively. To this end, we introduce our framework, HybridNet, a
dual-branch network consisting of two paths that operate separately
on topological and geometric graphs. The main contributions of our
work are summarized as follows:
•We consider a circuit netlist as a multi-view graph and establish
a topological-geometrical view graph structure for the inter-node
relationship, which is exactly suited to represent the unique
properties of the netlist compared to the single-view counterpart.
•We propose HybridNet, a novel dual-branch network for learning
multi-view graph representations that exploits a more promising
netlist context through feature aggregation.
•Experimental results on ISPD2015 benchmarks demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method and achieve better accuracy
compared to previous works in the literature.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Multi-view Graph Construction
As shown in Figure 1a, after the logic synthesis step we formalise
a circuit design into a gate-level netlist. Cells and Nets are the twoarXiv:2305.05374v2  [cs.LG]  13 Jun 2023basic elements of the netlist, where Cells refer to the logic gate and
Nets refer to the electronic connection between cells. We then obtain
the geometric properties of each cell to form the physical layout of
the entire circuit after placement, as shown in Figure 1 b. Consider
defining a single view graph data G= (V,E), where vrepresents
the sets of Nnodes, eij∈ E denotes the relationship between node
iand node j. We thus construct our multi-view graph data with
topological and geometrical properties. From the topological view, the
edge (v, u)in the graph Gtrepresents the topology of cell connections
stored in nets. Like [8], the feature matrix Xtcontains the handicraft
features like pin density, node density, net density, etc. From the
geometrical view, the connection between cells depends on the layout
structure. We use Delaunay triangulation algorithms [10] to build cell
interactions in Gg. Additional information such as coordinates and
distance are used as auxiliary structure features in Xg.
B. HybridNet
HybridNet, shown in Figure 1 c, can be described as having two
networks with topological and geometrical pathways that focus on
different views of graphs.
Topology Pathway can be any graph neural network that works on
node message-passing. Due to the input netlist can contain millions
of nodes in VLSI circuit design, we hope to focus on the most
relevant parts of the input to produce plausible representations. The
self-attention mechanism is the most promising method to approach
this goal. Therefore, we stack llayers of the Graph Attention
Network [11] as a topology aggregation module to instantiate this
pathway.
Geometric Pathway consists of two functional modules, a position
encoding module and a graph aggregation module. Position encoding
is the crucial part of the former module, which is a popular technique
used in natural language processing by mapping spatial coordinates
with sine and cosine functions [12]. Instead of pre-computing the
position encoding feature, we design a learnable position encoding
module combined with a multi-layer perceptive network (MLP) to
adaptively represent the geometric information and cell order. In
parallel to the topological pathway, we instantiate this pathway
with continuous-filter convolutions which are the basic block of
SchNet [13].
Fusion Strategy After llayers feature propagation, a simple yet
effective fusion strategy is performed to aggregate multi-view graph
features. We concatenate the output of each pathway with its original
features and run each through MLP.
Finally, the cell representation is obtained by concatenating the
above features as input to the last MLP layer.
III. E XPERIMENT
To evaluate our methods, we perform experiments on 9 designs
from the ISPD2015 competition benchmarks [13]. We use 6 for
training and 3 for testing, where all designs in the training and testing
sets have no overlap. To make the dataset more convincing, we use
Cadence Innovus for placement and routing. The output congestion
maps are treated as golden labels. Following the protocol of [8],
we use Pearson/Spearman/Kendall correlation metrics as the primary
metrics to evaluate the the performance of the models.
In order to verify the generalisability of our method, we choose
the following typical methods and their variant network as a basic
baseline: GCN [14], GAT [11], the two path variants of the above two
methods, and the heterogeneous graph-based method NetlistGNN [8].
We train the models with the AdamW optimizer for 500 epochs
with an initial learning rate 2e-4. The baseline methods GCN, GATTABLE I
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON ISPD 2015 BENCHMARKS [15].* DENOTES
THE ARCHITECTURE IMPLEMENTED BY OURSELVES .
Method Pearson Spearman Kendall
GCN 0.290 0.250 0.203
GAT [11] 0.131 0.005 0.004
Two Pathways GCN* 0.357 0.230 0.186
Two Pathways GAT* 0.308 0.273 0.221
NetlistGNN* [8] 0.413 0.216 0.189
HybridNet (ours) 0.522 0.271 0.220
and their variants with the same number of layers start with the
same graph data as our HybridNet. For NetlistGNN, we generate
the heterogeneous graph with the same setting presented in [8]. In
addition, the experiments on pix2pix show that it cannot learn a
generalised representation in such a small training set, so the results
of vision-based methods are not presented in this paper. Table 1 shows
the comparison with the baseline results for our HybridNet, the best
and second-best scores of the baseline methods are highlighted and
underlined . Obviously, our best model provides higher correlation
accuracy compared to vanilla GCN, GAT and their variants. It shows
that our HybridNet has a stronger ability to make accurate congestion
predictions. Furthermore, using the Pearson correlation metric, our
model (52.2%) is 10.9% better than the best result presented in
NetlistGNN (41.3%), demonstrating that multi-view graphs have a
better representational ability than both the single-view homograph
and the heterogeneous graph.
IV. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a new perspective on the construction
of a topological-geometric view graph by considering the nature of
multi-views in circuit netlists. We further propose HybridNet, a dual-
branch network that fully aggregates two different types of graphs,
accompanied by an effective fusion strategy to provide accurate
congestion prediction. The empirical study shows that our network
can achieve significant improvements over conventional methods. We
hope that multi-view graph construction and aggregation network will
foster further research in the EDA domain.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Key Research
and Development Program of China (No. 2021ZD0114702).
REFERENCES
[1] P. Isola, J.-Y . Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros, “Image-to-image translation
with conditional adversarial networks,” in Proc. CVPR , 2017, pp. 1125–
1134.
[2] Z. Chai, Y . Zhao, Y . Lin, W. Liu, R. Wang, and R. Huang, “Circuitnet:
An open-source dataset for machine learning applications in electronic
design automation (eda),” Science China Information Sciences , vol. 65,
no. 12, pp. 227 401–, 2022.
[3] Z. Xie, Y .-H. Huang, G.-Q. Fang, H. Ren, S.-Y . Fang, Y . Chen, and
J. Hu, “Routenet: Routability prediction for mixed-size designs using
convolutional neural network,” in Proc. ICCAD . IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–8.
[4] S. Liu, Q. Sun, P. Liao, Y . Lin, and B. Yu, “Global placement with
deep learning-enabled explicit routability optimization,” in Proc. DATE .
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1821–1824.
[5] M. B. Alawieh, W. Li, Y . Lin, L. Singhal, M. A. Iyer, and D. Z. Pan,
“High-definition routing congestion prediction for large-scale fpgas,” in
Proc. ASPDAC . IEEE, 2020, pp. 26–31.
[6] R. Kirby, S. Godil, R. Roy, and B. Catanzaro, “Congestionnet: Routing
congestion prediction using deep graph neural networks,” in Proc. VLSI-
SoC. IEEE, 2019, pp. 217–222.
[7] C. Ma, Y . Xiao, S. Wang, J. Yu, and J. Chen, “Congestnn: An bi-
directional congestion prediction framework for large-scale heteroge-
neous fpgas,” in Proc. ASICON . IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–4.[8] S. Yang, Z. Yang, D. Li, Y . Zhang, Z. Zhang, G. Song, and H. Jianye,
“Versatile multi-stage graph neural network for circuit representation,”
inProc. NeurIPS , 2022.
[9] C. Xu, D. Tao, and C. Xu, “A survey on multi-view learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1304.5634 , 2013.
[10] D.-T. Lee and B. J. Schachter, “Two algorithms for constructing a de-
launay triangulation,” International Journal of Computer & Information
Sciences , vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 219–242, 1980.
[11] P. Veli ˇckovi ´c, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and
Y . Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. ICLR , 2017.
[12] D. Lu, Q. Xie, M. Wei, L. Xu, and J. Li, “Transformers in 3d point
clouds: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.07417 , 2022.
[13] K. Sch ¨utt, P.-J. Kindermans, H. E. Sauceda Felix, S. Chmiela,
A. Tkatchenko, and K.-R. M ¨uller, “Schnet: A continuous-filter con-
volutional neural network for modeling quantum interactions,” in
Proc. NeurIPS , 2017.
[14] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” Proc. ICLR , 2016.
[15] G.-J. Nam, C. J. Alpert, P. Villarrubia, B. Winter, and M. Yildiz, “The
ispd2005 placement contest and benchmark suite,” in Proceedings of the
2005 international symposium on Physical design , 2005, pp. 216–220.