Some remarks on the notion of transitions
F. M. Ciaglia1,3
, F. Di Cosmo1,2,4
1Depto. de Matemáticas, Univ. Carlos III de Madrid, Leganés, Madrid, Spain
2ICMAT, Instituto de Ciencias Matemáticas (CSIC-UAM-UC3M-UCM)
3e-mail: fciaglia[at]math.uc3m.es
4e-mail: fcosmo[at]math.uc3m.es
Abstract
In this paper some reﬂections on the concept of transition are presented: groupoids are
introduced as models for the construction of a “generalized logic” whose basic statements
involve pairs of propositions which can be conditioned. In this sense, we could distinguish
between classical probability theory where propositions can be conditioned if they have a non-
zero intersection, from cases where “non-local” conditioning are allowed. The algebraic and
geometrical properties of groupoids can be exploited to construct models of such non-local
description.
1 Introduction
The origin of information theory dates back to the work by Shannon on the mathematical theory
of communication [1]. His aim was to introduce a mathematical description of the process of
communication: a message elaborated by an information source that reaches the destination via a
channel.It is clear that in this description both the concepts of states and transition between states are
primitive objects and it is necessary to ask oneself what are their properties and what mathematical
structure would properly encode them. From a more philosophical point of view, we could summarize
the previous discussion by saying that a mathematical description of information sources, and more
generally of communication processes, would require a way to implement both the concept of “being”
and “becoming”. It is, then, evident that these aspects will play a crucial role also when passing to
the quantum description but with some diﬀerences, since there are plenty of experiments showing
how distant quantum and classical mechanics could be.
In this paper we are going to present some reﬂections on the concept of transition and how
groupoids could actually encode their properties both from a classical and a quantum point of view.
Even if some of these ideas have already been discussed in our previous works on the Schwinger’s
1arXiv:2305.12479v1  [math-ph]  21 May 2023picture of Quantum Mechanics [7,11], in this paper we are going to revisit those considerations from
the point of view of a “generalised logic”. Indeed, in a previous work [8] the authors showed that the
functions on a groupoid can be endowed with a von Neumann algebra [2] structure and the associated
lattice of projections is an orthocomplemented lattice. This lattice, therefore, represents an example
of a propositional calculus satisfying the axioms introduced by Birkhoﬀ and von Neumann [4]. But
what can one say about transitions? The lattice approach, in this sense, seems to look at the logical
structure of the experimental propositions providing information about the state of the system. How
can it provide information about transitions?
As a ﬁrst attempt towards a statistical deﬁnition of transition, one could say that a transition
between two events could happen if the occurrence of one could be conditioned by the other.
Therefore, one could introduce a “generalized logic” whose basic propositions are pairs of “experimental
propositions” that can be conditioned. In classical probability theory one implements the conditioning
in a “local” way: the two events involved in the transition must have a non-empty intersection.
Therefore, if we assume that the lattice of experimental proposition is atomic, the basic atoms cannot
be conditioned, since they have empty intersections. However, one could go beyond this “local”
approach introducing the concept of measurable groupoid.
From an algebraic point of view, a groupoid is a set Gof morphisms with a partial composition law,
on which two maps are deﬁned which associate to each morphism two objects, its source and target.
These objects belong to another set, say Ω. If we introduce a Boolean lattice of measurable subsets of
the groupoid, we have a measurable groupoid. Using the composition law one can deﬁne a product
among sets of the groupoid, whereas the source and the target maps send every set of morphisms to
some sets of objects. Both these structures can be used to deﬁne a notion of “non-local” conditioning
among subsets of the set of objects. In this paper we are going to show that using a measurable
groupoid and introducing a generalized notion of conditioning between sets of objects, a measure
on the groupoid determines a grade-2 measure on the set of objects [3]. Grade-2 measures where
introduced by Sorkin in his formulation of Quantum Mechanics as a generalization of probability
theory which could allow for the description of interference phenomena. Interestingly, using a groupoid
the above mentioned grade-2 measure can be also associated with a state on the algebra of the
functions on the groupoid and from this perspective the sets of zero 2-measure can be seen as elements
in the Gelfand ideal of this state.
2 The lattice of propositions
In this section we are going to shortly recall the basic notions introduced by Birkhoﬀ and von Neumann
to describe the logic of Quantum Mechanics, which is the set Pof all “experimental proposition”
that can be inferred about a system. These propositions are basic ingredients for the formulation
of every physical model, and consequently they will share some common properties. In order to
convey more clearly the idea we will restrict to a situation where only a ﬁnite set of propositions
2are considered. The basic relation existing on this set is an order relation, say ⊂, which is the
mathematical implementation of the implication relation between propositions. Once we have this
order we assume that for every pair of elements a,b∈Pthere is a greatest lower bound, a∧b, and a
least upper bound, a∨b, which are, respectively, the greatest (with respect to the previous order)
of all the propositions which are implied by aandb, and the least of all the propositions which
imply both aandb. Additionally, we can always ﬁnd two special propositions: the one which is
always true, denoted by I, and the one which is always false, say ∅. The ﬁnal property of the set
Pis that for every proposition athere is a complementary proposition a⊥satisfying the conditions
a∨a⊥=Ianda∧a⊥=∅. A setPendowed with the previous structures (⊂,∧,∨,⊥)is called
an orthocomplemented lattice, and this is the basic structure implementing the operations among
“experimental propositions”. The property that distinguishes the classical setting, however, is the
distributive character of the two operations, i.e., a∧(b∨c) = (a∧b)∨(a∧c). Then, when we
have a ﬁnite distributive lattice Pcwe can identify Iwith the set Γof all its atoms, and Pcwill be
isomorphic to the power set P(Γ). On the other hand, when we relax the distributive requirement,
we can describe a lattice whose propositions are vector subspaces of a certain Hilbert space, which is
the departure point in the von Neumann description of Quantum Mechanics. In particular, if one
assumes a weaker form of the distributive identity, called modular identity, which in formulas reads
a⊂c⇒a∨(b∧c) = (a∨b)∧c (1)
it is possible to prove that any complemented modular lattice of ﬁnite dimensions is isomorphic to
the direct product of a ﬁnite Boolean algebra and a ﬁnite number of projective geometries. Moreover,
if one additionally assumes irreducibility of the lattice, which means that the only elements x∈P
satisfying
a= (a∧x)∨(a∧x⊥)∀a (2)
arex=∅,I, then the modular lattice is a ﬁnite projective geometry. In general by a projective
geometry is meant any system satisfying the following axioms [5]:
•Two distinct points are contained in one and only one line
•If A, B, C are three points not on the same line and E /negationslash=D are points such that B, C, D are on a
line and A, C, E are on a line,then there is a point F such that both A, B, F are on a line and
D, E, F are on a line
•Every line contains at least three points
•The points on lines through any k-dimensional element and a ﬁxed point not in the element are
a (k+1)-element, and every (k+1)-element is deﬁned in this way.
The setC(H)of Hilbert subspaces of the Hilbert space H, is the prototype of a projective geometry.
In this case k-dimensional elements correspond to (k+1)-dimensional closed subspaces of H. On the
3other hand, one can replace any closed subspace with the associated orthogonal projector, obtaining a
new lattice where the operation of meet and join, however, do not coincide with the sum and product
of the algebra, generically.
Once the structure of the experimental propositions is given, it is possible to associate to every
event its probability: for Boolean lattices, monotone additive functions will play the role. For the
modular case, in general, one can always deﬁne a dimension function d:P → [0,1]obeying the
following properties:
•d(a)>d(b)iffb⊂a
•d(a) +d(b) =d(a∧b) +d(a∨b).
This dimension function corresponds to the normalized trace of each projection and represents the
dimension of each closed subspace of the Hilbert space. More generally, however, one can consider
real valued functions mon the lattice which are additive only with respect to the meet of orthogonal
projections. In this case Gleason theorem [6] ensures the existence of a density matrix ρsuch that
m(a) =Tr(ρPa)withPathe projection corresponding to the closed subspace ain the Hilbert space
H. This point of view, therefore, allows to give a statistical interpretation to each event, but only to
events: we are interpreting only the “static” information. What about transitions? The standard
approach introduced by von Neumann, deﬁne the probability transitions between two states of the
system in terms of the square modulus of the scalar product of the vectors corresponding to the
two states. In the rest of this short paper we will try to follow a diﬀerent approach to the notion of
transition.
3 Groupoid and grade 2-measures
In this section we are going to introduce a generalized model of conditioning via the concept of
groupoids. In order to avoid inessential technical diﬃculties and for the sake of communicability
we are going to limit the discussion to ﬁnite groupoids and consider the extension to the non-ﬁnite
case in forthcoming works. The departure point, therefore, is the deﬁnition of groupoids. From the
algebraic point of view, a groupoid GΩ, is a setGof morphisms, together with a pair of maps
s,t:G→Ωfrom the set of morphisms to the set of objects Ω, these maps being called source and
target, respectively.
Given the groupoid G, we will denote Gjthe set of morphisms whose target is j∈Ω(analogously
we denoteGjthe set of morphisms whose source is j). The set of morphisms having the same source
and target object j∈Ωis a group, the isotropy group at j, and will be denoted Gj
j. Two morphisms
αandβwill be said to be composable if s(α) =t(β)and their composition will be denoted α◦β, this
operation being associative. Units in the groupoid Gwill be denoted as 1j:j→jand they satisfy
the conditions
α◦1i=α, 1j◦α=α (3)
4provided that α:i→j. Finally there is an inverse operation τ:α/mapsto→α−1such that
α−1◦α= 1i, α◦α−1= 1j. (4)
Some basic examples of groupoids, which will be used in the rest of the paper, are provided by
the following ones. Firstly, the groupoid of pairs G(Ω) = Ω×ΩΩof an arbitrary set Ω: it has
source and target maps s(j,i) =i,t(j,i) =j, respectively, composition law (k,j)◦(j,i) = (k,i),
units 1i= (i,i)and inverse (j,i)−1= (i,j). Secondly, standard sets are groupoids, i.e., if Ωis a set
we consider the groupoid ΩΩwith only units (corresponding to each point of the set), so that a
morphism is composable only with itself.
Since a groupoid Gis a set of morphisms, we can consider the lattice P(G)of all its subsets and,
as we have already discussed in the previous section, P(G)is a Boolean algebra. However, apart from
this family of subsets, one can use the algebraic structure of the groupoid to generalize the “local”
concept of conditioning expressed in terms of non-vanishing intersections. Indeed, if one considers
two subsets A,B⊂Git is possible to construct a new subset C=B◦Aas follows:
C={G/ownerγ=β◦α|β∈B, α∈A}. (5)
In other words, cis the set of all morphisms obtained by composing one morphism from the set Aand
one from the set B. One can prove that this product is distributive with respect to the union of disjoint
sets, but it is not commutative. In particular, one can take A=s−1(a)andB=τ−1(s−1(b)) =t−1(b)
witha,bbeing two subsets of the set Ωof all objects of the groupoid. Then, we can say that two
eventsa,b∈P(Ω)are conditioned iﬀ τ−1(s−1(b))◦s−1(a)/negationslash=∅. It can be straightforwardly proven
that conditioned pairs form the graphs of a reﬂexive and symmetric relation, which in general fails
to be transitive. In the two main examples of groupoids above introduced, this deﬁnition can be
speciﬁed as follows:
•for the groupoid G(Ω)Ωof pairs of points of the set Ω, one can consider only the products
(j,i) =τ−1(s−1(j))◦s−1(i)wherei,j∈Ωare atoms inP(Ω), since the other sets are obtained
via the distributive property of the product with respect to the union of disjoint events. It is
then easily shown that (j,i) ={(j,i)}which is the set containing the morphisms with source at
iand target at j.
•for the groupoid ΩΩmade up of units only, the product c=τ−1(s−1(b))◦s−1(a) =b∧a.
Once we have the lattice P(G)we can introduce a measure on G, sayµ. How can we use it to give
a statistical interpretation to subsets of the groupoid? First of all, due to the algebraic structure of
the groupoid, we will consider measures which are compatible with the composition and the inversion,
in a way that generalizes the usual Haar measure for a group. Therefore, we will endow the groupoid
Gwith a measure µwhich admits the following disintegration
µ(A) =/summationdisplay
j∈Ωλ(j)νj(A), (6)
5with respect to a measure λon the space of objects Ω. The family{νj}is a family of measures each
one concentrated on the set Gj. It is called a left Haar system of measures if they satisfy the following
properties:
•forα:i→j,((Lα)∗ν(i)) =ν(j)where (Lα)∗is the pushforward under the map Lα:Gi→Gj
representing the left multiplication by the morphism α, i.e.,Lα(β) =α◦β. This property
generalizes the left-invariance of the Haar measure to a framework where the composition among
morphisms is only partially deﬁned.
•τ∗µ=δ−1µ, whereδ−1is called the modular function and it is a homomorphism of the groupoid
Gto the group of positive real numbers R+. This property means that by inversion we cannot
transform a set of measure zero into a set of non-zero measure or viceversa. Once more, the
modular function for groupoids generalizes the modular function for groups.
The triple (G,P(G),[µ])with [µ]denoting the class of all measures equivalent to the left system of
Haar measure µ, will be called a measure groupoid. Let us remark that in this class, there is always
one measure Λwhich is invariant with respect to the inversion, i.e., τ∗(Λ) = Λ. Instead of considering
the whole latticeP(G), let us focus, now, only on pairs of conditioned subsets (b,a)inP(Ω)×P(Ω).
Then, we can deﬁne the following two-set function D:P(Ω)×P(Ω)→R:
D(b,a) = Λ(τ−1(s−1(b))◦s−1(a)). (7)
It can be easily seen, that this function satisﬁes the following properties:
•positivityD(a,a)≥0
•bi-additivity D(a,b∪c) =D(a,b) +D(a,c)wheneverb∩c=∅
•symmetryD(b,a) =D(a,b).
Let us remark that everything would work in the same manner if the measure Λwould be weighted
with a phase factor eiSwith the function S:G→Rsatisfying the “logarithmic” properties S(β◦α) =
S(β) +S(α)andS(α−1) =−S(α). The only diﬀerence would consists in the replacement of the
symmetry condition with the hermiticity, since the function will be complex valued.
The properties of the function Dcharacterize what is called a decoherence functional and
consequently the associated quadratic form µ2(a) =D(a,a)determine a grade 2-measure. Sorkin [3]
introduced the notion of grade 2-measure in his generalization of probability theory in order to
account for the description of quantum phenomena. Diﬀerently from a traditional measure, a grade
2-measureµ2on a Boolean lattice P(Ω)satisﬁesµ2(a∨b)−µ2(a)−µ2(b) =I(a,b)for every pair
(a,b)of disjoint subsets of Ω. The two-set function I(a,b)is the interference functional, and in
principle does not vanish. However, a grade 2-measure satisﬁes the condition 0 =I(3)(a,b,c ) =
µ2(a∨b∨c)−µ2(a∨b)−µ2(a∨c)−µ2(b∨c)+µ2(a)+µ2(b)+µ2(c). Summarizing the above discussion,
6the algebraic structure of groupoids permit to introduce a generalized notion of conditioning between
pairs of sets of a Boolean algebra. Once a suitable measure is introduced on the groupoid, a grade
2-measure is determined on the space of objects Ω.
The above picture can be analyzed, also, from an algebraic point of view by considering the space
of functions on the groupoid. Let C(G)be the space of complex valued continuous functions on the
ﬁnite groupoid G. On a ﬁnite groupoid this set is isomorphic to some vector space, say CNwhereN
is the number of morphisms in G. Generalizing the construction for group-algebras, we can introduce
a algebra structure on C(G)as follows:
f ⋆h =/parenleftBigg/summationdisplay
α∈Gfαδα/parenrightBigg
⋆
/summationdisplay
β∈Ghβδβ
=
=/summationdisplay
γ∈G/summationdisplay
(α,β)∈G(2)|α◦β=γfαhβµ(γ)δγ,(8)
whereδαis the function which takes value 1 at αand 0 everywhere else, µdenotes the left invariant
Haar system in the class [µ], andG(2)denotes the set of composable pairs. This product, called
convolution product, is associative. Moreover we can deﬁne the following involutive operator on C(G):
f†=/summationdisplay
α∈Gδ−1(α)fαδα−1, (9)
so thatC(G)is endowed with a ∗-algebra structure. Here δis the modular function associated with
the measure groupoid structure. Moreover, it is possible to introduce a suitable topology [10] on this
space so that we eventually get a von Neumann algebra, which we will denote ν(G). Once we have
obtained this algebraic structure it is possible to express the previous decoherence functional in an
alternative way. Indeed, it is easy to see that the product A◦B=Cbetween subsets of Gcan be
expressed in terms of characteristic functions as follows:
χC=χA⋆χB, (10)
whereχCis the characteristic function supported on the set C=A◦B, and analogously one deﬁnes
χAandχB. It can be proven [9] that the integration of a function f∈ν(G)with respect to the
measureµdetermines a positive linear functional on the von Neumann algebra which is normalized
whenever the measure λon the set of objects Ωis a probability measure. Let us denote ωµthis state.
Then, by direct computation one can show that
D(b,a) =ωµ((χs−1(b))†⋆χs−1(a)). (11)
Once this algebraic point of view is introduced, we can recognize that the sets whose corresponding
characteristic functions are in the Gelfand ideal [2] of the state ωµcorrespond to sets whose grade
2-measureµ2is zero. Therefore, we can interpret the GNS construction as the construction of a
suitable Hilbert space associated with the set of events of the groupoid.
74 Conclusions
In this paper we have presented some reﬂections on the notion of transitions, associated with the
concept of pairs of conditioned events. After a brief review of the approach to quantum logic introduced
by Birkhoﬀ and von Neumann, we have discussed a diﬀerent model where groupoids are the departure
point. Indeed, using the rich algebraic structure deﬁning a groupoid, we can introduce a way of
conditioning sets which generalize the “local” approach of classical probability in a straightforward
way. Of course, groupoid are not the only way to obtain this non-local conditioning. However, we
have shown that using a groupoid this notion can be related to the C∗-algebraic approach to Quantum
Mechanics and to the corresponding notion of state.
Acknowledgements
FMC acknowledges that this work has been supported by the Madrid Government (Comunidad de
Madrid-Spain) under the Multiannual Agreement with UC3M in the line of “Research Funds for
Beatriz Galindo Fellowships” (C&QIG-BG-CM-UC3M), and in the context of the V PRICIT (Regional
Programme of Research and Technological Innovation). FDC thanks the UC3M, the European
Commission through the Marie Sklodowska-Curie COFUND Action (H2020-MSCA-COFUND-2017-
GA 801538) for their ﬁnancial support through the CONEX-Plus Programme.
References
[1]C. E. Shannon A mathematical theory of communication The Bell System Technical Journal
27(3), 379–423 (1948). ↓1
[2] Takesaki, M. Theory of Operator Algebras I ; Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2002. ↓2, 7
[3]Sorkin, R.D. Quantum mechanics as quantum measure theory. Modern Physics Letters A 9(33),
3119–3127 (1994). ↓2, 6
[4]Birkhoﬀ, G.; J., V.N. The Logic of Quantum Mechanics. Annals of Mathematics 37, 823–843
(1936).↓2
[5]Birkhoﬀ, G. Combinatorial Relations in Projective Geometries. Annals of Mathematics 36, 743–748
(1935).↓3
[6]Gleason, A.M. Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert space. Journal of Mathematics and
Mechanics 6, 885–893 (1957). ↓4
[7]Ciaglia, F.M.; Di Cosmo, F.; Ibort, A.; Marmo, G. Schwinger’s Picture of Quantum Mechanics.
International Journal of Geometric Methods in Modern Physics 17(14), 2050054 (2020). ↓2
8[8]Ciaglia, F.M.; Di Cosmo, F.; Ibort, A.; Marmo, G. Evolution of Classical and Quantum States in
the Groupoid Picture of Quantum Mechanics. Entropy 22(11), 2050054 (2020). ↓2
[9]Ciaglia, F.M.; Ibort, A.; Marmo, G. Schwinger’s Picture of Quantum Mechanics III: The Statistical
Interpretation. International Journal of Geometric Methods in Modern Physics 16(11), 1950165
(2019).↓7
[10]Ibort, A.; Rodriguez, M.A. An introduction to the theory of groups, groupoids and their
representations ; CRC, Boca Raton, 2019. ↓7
[11]Ciaglia, F.M.; Ibort, A.; Marmo, G. A gentle introduction to Schwinger’s formulation of quantum
mechanics: the groupoid picture. Modern Physics Letters A, 33(8), 1850122 (2018). ↓2
9