Growing and Serving Large Open-domain Knowledge Graphs
Ihab F. Ilyas
iilyas@apple.com
AppleJP Lacerda
jpl@apple.com
AppleYunyao Li
yunyaoli@apple.com
Apple
Umar Farooq Minhas
ufminhas@apple.com
AppleAli Mousavi
amousavi@apple.com
AppleJeffrey Pound
pound@apple.com
Apple
Theodoros Rekatsinas
trekatsinas@apple.com
AppleChiraag Sumanth
csumanth@apple.com
Apple
ABSTRACT
Applications of large open-domain knowledge graphs (KGs) to
real-world problems pose many unique challenges. In this paper,
we present extensions to Saga [ 11] our platform for continuous
construction and serving of knowledge at scale. In particular, we
describe a pipeline for training knowledge graph embeddings that
powers key capabilities such as fact ranking, fact verification, a
related entities service, and support for entity linking. We then
describe how our platform, including graph embeddings, can be
leveraged to create a Semantic Annotation service that links un-
structured Web documents to entities in our KG. Semantic anno-
tation of the Web effectively expands our knowledge graph with
edges to open-domain Web content which can be used in various
search and ranking problems. Finally, we leverage annotated Web
documents to drive Open-domain Knowledge Extraction. This tar-
geted extraction framework identifies important coverage issues in
the KG, then finds relevant data sources for target entities on the
Web and extracts missing information to enrich the KG.
Finally, we describe adaptations to our knowledge platform
needed to construct and serve private personal knowledge on-
device. This includes private incremental KG construction, cross-
device knowledge sync, and global knowledge enrichment.
ACM Reference Format:
Ihab F. Ilyas, JP Lacerda, Yunyao Li, Umar Farooq Minhas, Ali Mousavi,
Jeffrey Pound, Theodoros Rekatsinas, and Chiraag Sumanth. 2023. Growing
and Serving Large Open-domain Knowledge Graphs. In Companion of the
2023 International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD-Companion
’23), June 18–23, 2023, Seattle, WA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 7 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3555041.3589672
1 INTRODUCTION
Constructing and serving large knowledge graphs (KG) has become
a common component of many important real-world application
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGMOD-Companion ’23, June 18–23, 2023, Seattle, WA, USA
©2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9507-6/23/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3555041.3589672scenarios such as search, question answering, entity linking, and
information extraction. In these use cases, knowledge from a KG is
used to construct enriched representations of queries, documents,
and entities in order to support semantic reasoning grounded in
factual knowledge. As an example, a query “benicio del toro movies”
can be semantically annotated with:
“benicio del toro”→entityid_123 ,
“movies”→ontology_type_movie
to support retrieval of matching entities from a KG (ie., movies
directed by Benicio Del Toro); ranking of facts from a KG (ie., which
movies directed by Benicio Del Toro are most important); retrieval
and ranking of Web documents that mention Benicio Del Toro and
his movies; and related entities (e.g., other similar movie directors)
which can be used to suggest related queries to a user.
We previously introduced Saga [ 11], a state-of-the-art platform
for constructing and serving knowledge at scale. In this work, we
describe applications of and extensions to Saga which leverage
ML-based KG techniques for an important set of problems related
to growing and serving knowledge graphs. In particular:
•We present a graph embedding pipeline built on Saga’s
Graph Query Engine that trains and indexes embeddings of
KG entities . These graph embeddings have many direct use
cases, such as fact ranking, fact verification, entity linking,
and computing related entities.
•We describe a platform for scalable semantic annotation of
text. In particular, we address challenges in scaling semantic
annotation to tackle the problem of linking the Web ; to an-
notate occurrences of entities occurring in a large corpus of
Web documents.
•Many KG use cases depend on good coverage of facts and
entities. To improve KG coverage, we describe our approach
to Open Domain Knowledge Extraction (ODKE), a targeted
information extraction technique designed to extend the KG
with high-valued facts and entities.
•Finally, we discuss challenges in applying our platform on-
device. In this scenario, data is private and all computation
must happen locally on the device. Constructing and serving
a KG in a resource constrained environment poses a number
of unique challenges; including privacy, resource constraints,
cross-device sync, and global knowledge enrichment.arXiv:2305.09464v1  [cs.AI]  16 May 2023SIGMOD-Companion ’23, June 18–23, 2023, Seattle, WA, USA Ihab F. Ilyas et al.
Graph EngineKG ConstructionBatchStreamingKnowledge Sources
Web DocumentsView Deﬁnitions…………Graph EmbeddingsVector IndexKG ViewsQuery logs
ODKEEmbedding ServiceSemantic AnnotationReal-time SourcesWeb doc annotation
Knowledge ExtractionOntology
Figure 1: The Saga Knowledge Platform extended for Graph Embeddings, Semantic Annotation for Linking Web Documents
to KG entities, and Open Domain Knowledge Extraction (ODKE).
Overview. Figure 1 gives an overview of our extensions to Saga.
An embedding service provides access to learned vectorized rep-
resentations of entities, and allows similarity calculations as well
as efficient 𝑘-nearest-neighbour retrieval. Next, our Semantic An-
notation service leverages graph embeddings to link mentions of
entities in text to the knowledge graph. We apply this service at
scale to “link the Web”, extending our KG with edges linking KG
entities to unstructured Web documents. Finally, we leverage an-
notated Web documents as well as traditional retrieval methods to
find sources of missing KG information. We then extract missing
KG facts, improving coverage of our KG’s data.
2 KNOWLEDGE GRAPH EMBEDDINGS
Knowledge graphs (KGs) can be instrumental to many downstream
machine learning (ML) applications in virtual assistants. Examples
of these applications include:
•Fact Verification . Industrial-scale KGs are continuously up-
dated based on new data from different sources and across
diverse domains. Hence, it is necessary to reason about the
correctness and completeness of these facts at scale.
•Fact Ranking . Entities in KGs might have several facts asso-
ciated to a specific relation. As an example, a person might
have several occupations noted in a KG. Therefore, for a
query such as "What is the occupation of X?" a virtual assis-
tant needs to infer an importance-based ranking over facts
in the graph to generate a high-quality answer.
•Related Entities . When virtual assistants are queried about a
specific entity, they can help users to discover facts and learn
about its related entities. This pro-active way of information
representation provides a richer user experience.
•Entity Linking . In order to give a proper answer to a query, or
sometimes a richer answer, virtual assistants need to identify
the set of KG entities that are present in the user query and
the corresponding answer. Therefore, they should be able to
detect mentions and properly link them to entities in KGs.Figure 2 depicts example queries and answers for each of these
applications. In all of these applications, we have an ML system
which uses a KG as input during reasoning. Therefore, a major
success factor in designing such systems is to represent a KG in
a space that is easy to consume by ML models. Given that most
modern ML models operate over vector-based representations, we
represent the entities and predicates of a KG using a continuous
vector space such that their inherent structure is preserved. KG
representation learning comes with its own challenges such as
vectors being trained on non-relevant or noisy data that may exist in
the KG, scalability of training and inference, and the design of the
embedding model .
Open-domain knowledge graphs include data from different
sources. Beyond exhibiting a rich semantic structure (consider the
union of multiple schemata), it is also possible that facts in the
KG are noisy. In this setting, many facts can be irrelevant to a spe-
cific downstream embedding task. For example, facts that capture
numeric values of entities might not be useful for generating em-
beddings useful for a related entities service. Example of such facts
can correspond to the height of a person, or the National Library
ID of a book, or the number of social media followers of celebrities,
which while useful for question answering might not be important
for learning an embedding for an entity. As a result, such facts may
need to be ignored during the training process. This process is also
common in fine-tuning foundation models if one wants to achieve
high accuracy for specific downstream tasks [21].
After filtering non-relevant facts, frequency of certain predicates
in the graph could drop to below a threshold and we might not have
enough information about those predicates to learn high-quality
representations for them. Therefore, triples having those predicates
could create noise during the learning process and filtering them
out can produce a cleaner training set.
Industrial-scale KGs can scale to billions of facts and entities.
Therefore, scalability of training methods is one of the major issues
to consider for learning high-quality representations. At a high-
level, we consider two major types of KG embedding models [ 10]:Growing and Serving Large Open-domain Knowledge Graphs SIGMOD-Companion ’23, June 18–23, 2023, Seattle, WA, USA
LeBron  JamesBasketball
PlayerOccupationTelevision ActorOccupationOccupationScreenwriterFact RankingQ: <LeBron James, Occupation, ?>
A: 1- Basketball Player 
    2- TV Actor 
    3- ScreenwriterFact VeriﬁcationLeBron  JamesCarpool KaraokeTV ShowGraduate TogetherTV ShowTV ShowMore Than an AthleteQ: <LeBron James, Occupation, TV Actor> ?
A: CorrectRelated EntitiesLeBron  JamesNBA Most Valuable Play AwardAwardSpouseQ: <LeBron James, Related, ?> 
A: 1- Stephen Curry
     2- Kobe Bryant
     3- Savannah James Stephen CurryAwardKobe BryantAwardSavannah JamesEntity LinkingLeBron  JamesNBA Most Valuable Play AwardAwardMichael JordanAwardUniversity ProfessorMichael JordanOccupationQ: Michael Jordan and LeBron James have received the same award. 
A: Michael Jordan (Basketball Player)
Michael Jordan (University Professor)
Figure 2: Examples of machine learning applications for vir-
tual assistants in which KGs and their embeddings play a
central role.
1) shallow embedding models and 2) reasoning-based embedding
models. For shallow embedding models, random edge-based parti-
tioning of the graph is a major technique to combat the scalability
challenge and hence, they can easily benefit from multi-node dis-
tributed training. Shallow embedding models often learn embed-
ding matrices of entities and predicates by optimizing a contrastive
objective on both existing and non-existing edges in the graph. On
the other hand, reasoning-based embedding models are used for
more complex tasks that involve multi-hop reasoning combined
with logical operators. In this case, edge-based graph partitioning
can yield poor locality for graph neighborhoods and thus different
approaches are needed to obtain high-quality models. There is a
diverse array of solutions to address this challenge: 1) many sys-
tems opt for infrastructure with sufficient main or GPU memory to
hold the entire graph, 2) others use IO-optimized disk-based graph
operations to enable global sampling of graph neighborhoods, and
3) several propose pre-computing graph traversals to constract
samples.
In our settings, we consider variations of the last two approaches
depending on the models and the downstream task. For general KG
embeddings we use disk-based training while for specialized related
entity embeddings we use the scalable graph processing capabilities
of our graph engine to pre-compute graph traversals. Figure 3
depicts the overview of the designed system for embedding training
and inference. During training, we leverage a computational graph
engine to generate a view of the KG by filtering out non-relevant
facts and possible noises. Depending on the application, the graph
engine might do additional filtering to generate a desired view of
Graph EngineEmbeddingModelKnowledgeGraphGraph ViewFilteringGraph EngineKnowledgeGraphCandidateEntities/RelationsCandidateGenerationTrainingInferenceEmbeddingModelGPU ClusterBatch Multi-GPUInferenceGPU ClusterSingle or Multi-nodeMulti-GPU trainingModel Registry
Inference ResultsCandidateEntities/RelationsEmbeddingsCandidateTripleScoresFigure 3: Overview of Embedding Training and Inference
triples in the graph. Once we have a filtered view of the graph,
depending on the ML model we use for learning the embeddings,
we use a single-node or multi-node multi-GPU cluster to train
the embedding model. During the inference, similar to the training
phase we use the graph engine to generate a set of candidate entities
and/or predicates. This set represents candidates corresponding
to a specific query. As an example, it might include facts that we
need to verify their correctness or even rank them; or it might
contain entity pairs for which we need to infer relatedness between
them. Once we materialize the candidates, we use a batch inference
setting to retrieve embeddings from the learned model and obtain
scores for each candidate which denotes its plausibility.
3 SEMANTIC ANNOTATIONS
In this section, we present an overview of the ML-based services
that use the KG to enable various downstream use-cases e.g., ques-
tion answering and improved Web search. We collectively call these
“semantic annotation services” refering to tasks such as, mention
detection ,named and nominal entity recognition and entity link-
ing,contextual entity ranking , and searching related entities . Let us
consider an example of Named Entity Recognition and Entity Link-
ing. Our semantic annotation services can disambiguate between
two different entities based on the context in which they were
mentioned e.g., “Michael Jordan stats” should link to KG entity
for Michael Jordan the Basketball player while “Michael Jordan
students” should link to the KG entity for Michael Jordan the pro-
fessor (please see Figure 2). This is a very challenging task since
lexical similarity-based features alone cannot disambiguate in these
scenarios. Such contextual reranking (or disambiguation) between
different entities that have names similar to an entity mention in
the text can be achieved by computing embeddings on the textual
features of the KG entities (e.g., name, description, popularity) and
computing a similarity with the query embedding. Such a service
can be used to produce more relevant answers in question answer-
ing systems or to improve Web document ranking.
3.1 Linking the Web to KG
The World Wide Web is a large source of structured, semi-structured,
and unstructured (textual) data and it has a role in many important
user experiences. However, the Web in its raw form has limitedSIGMOD-Companion ’23, June 18–23, 2023, Seattle, WA, USA Ihab F. Ilyas et al.
Root hits hundred as England turn the screw on India in third TestBillion Scale Web CrawlSemantic Annotation Services
Apple KGRoot hits hundred as England turn the screw on India in third TestAnnotated Web CrawlCricket PlayerCricketTeamCricketTeamNews ArticleExtraction, Web Ranking,Q&A
IndiaEngland
Joe Root
Figure 4: Web-scale Semantic Annotations
utility. To enhance the representation of Web documents, we ex-
tend them with semantic annotations from the KG (Figure 4). For
example, we link all mentions of named or nominal entities to the
corresponding KG entities including the corresponding entity types
and additional meta-data, such as popularity scores for these entities
from various data sources. This enriched view of The Web can be
used to improve question answering, ranking related tasks, and for
targeted extraction of new facts and entities (see Section 4), among
others. However, applying semantic annotations to the whole Web
is very challenging for the following reasons:
•Scale: The Web contains hundreds of billions of webpages.
Our service needs to be able to operate at that scale.
•Variety: The Web contains different types of data including,
textual, tabular, images and videos. Webpages can also be
written in different or mixed languages. Our service needs
to be able to handle different data modalities and needs to
be multilingual.
•Rate of change: The Web is not static. New webpages are
constantly created and existing webpages get updated fre-
quently. The service needs to handle incremental changes
timely and efficiently.
•Price/Performance: Annotating the whole Web is a very
costly operation in monetary terms. Our service must be
able to navigate the price/performance curve in an effective
way i.e., it should provide the best performance with the
lowest cost possible.
3.2 An Extensible Semantic Annotations
Service
Given the above challenges, we are implementing a scalable se-
mantic annotation service that can annotate billions of webpages
with good price/performance. Our extensible semantic annotation
service supports various classical and neural-based components
for tasks such as mention detection, named entity recognition, and
entity linking with contextual reranking. These services are (1)
modular, allowing custom deployments for different use-cases; for
example, to balance the requirements for quality (precision and
recall) and performance (latency and throughput) to suit the needs
of various downstream applications. And (2) are dynamic i.e, are
able to surface new and updated entities from the KG, thus ensuring
freshness of annotations.
To improve scalability, we precompute entity embeddings us-
ing the methods described in Section 2 for the contextual reranker
Figure 5: Overview of Open Domain Knowledge Extraction
and cache the results in a low-latency key-value store. During
query time, we only compute the query embeddings and their sim-
ilarity with the cached entity embeddings. We are also working
on extending the service for multiple languages. Our annotation
pipeline is able to efficiently process only the changed webpages at
a given frequency (e.g., daily or weekly). Last, we are also pushing
the boundaries on price/performance by training better and more
efficient models using state of the art model distillation and com-
pression techniques that can target different hardware (e.g., CPUs,
GPUs, or TPUs) to meet different price/performance SLAs.
4 OPEN DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE
EXTRACTION
An ongoing challenge for any knowledge graph is performing con-
tinuous updates which ensure the completeness and freshness of
entities and facts in the graph. The coverage and freshness of a
knowledge graph directly impacts the quality of downstream appli-
cations (e.g. the number of questions that can be correctly answered
using the graph). The goal of open domain knowledge extraction
(ODKE) is to harvest high-quality facts from the Web to improve
the coverage and freshness of a an open domain knowledge graph
at scale. ODKE needs to address the following key challenges:
•Volume of data . The amount of data and facts contained
on the Web is enormous and continuously growing. We need
to handle the scalability challenge posed by Web-scale data.
•Variety of data and tasks . The Web contains wide varieties
of data from plain text to semi-structured data and mixtures
of both. Meanwhile, an open domain knowledge graph con-
tains many different types of entities and facts about these
entities. In order to extract high-quality facts from the Web,
we need to create extractors that are capable of extracting a
wide range of high-quality facts for different types of entities
from different data sources.
•Veracity . The Web is noisy and often contains wrong and
conflicting facts. In addition, certain facts, such as someone’s
marital status or net worth, may also change over time. As
such, we need to identify the most accurate and recent facts.
Figure 5 depicts our system designed to address the aforemen-
tioned challenges. To address the data volume challenge, we focus
on missing and stale facts that matter most and leverage Web search
to find relevant documents (Query Synthesizer and Web Search).Growing and Serving Large Open-domain Knowledge Graphs SIGMOD-Companion ’23, June 18–23, 2023, Seattle, WA, USA
Figure 6: Example for Open Domain Knowledge Extraction:
①tuple representing a missing fact; ②auto-generated search
queries based on the missing fact; ③a list of relevant Web
documents obtained using the search queries; ④candidate
facts extracted from the documents; ⑤final high-quality
fact determined based on different evidences and signals.
The important missing/stale facts can be identified in three differ-
ent ways. First of all, we can reactively identify missing and stale
facts by analyzing query logs and finding user queries that are not
answered correctly due to missing or stale facts. We can also proac-
tively identify potential coverage and freshness issues within the
existing knowledge graph via knowledge graph profiling. In addi-
tion, we can predict new facts missing from the current knowledge
graph by analyzing potential trending queries or requirements of
new use cases.
Important missing or stale facts are given as an input to OKDE.
We then use the Query Synthesizer to automatically generate search
queries to identify relevant documents that are likely to contain
these facts. As illustrated in Figure 6, for each missing/stale fact,
using a similar approach as [ 12], we automatically compose multiple
search queries to obtain the relevant documents to gather the fact
of interest. Such a targeted search strategy allows us to effectively
leverage existing Web search capabilities to significantly reduce
the data volume that we need to handle while minimizing impact
on the final outcome.
To overcome the second challenge and properly handle the wide
variety of data and tasks that we need to support, we focus on de-
signing different extractors to handle different types of data sources
with different types of models. For instance, simple rule-based mod-
els can be used to extract key-value pairs from webpages embedded
with structured data that conform to schema.org types, while more
complex neural models based on large language models are used
to extract facts from plain text and leveraging annotations pro-
duced by web-scale semantic annotation service as weak labels.
In addition, as described in Section 3, the webpages are already
linked to the KG via semantic annotation and the annotations can
be leveraged to improve retrieval and extraction quality.
Finally, to address the veracity challenge, we leverage diverse
evidence and signals via a trained machine learning model as fea-
tures to corroborate and identify high quality facts from the list of
candidates extracted earlier. For instance, as illustrated by Figure 6,after extracting fact candidates from various relevant data sources
using the corresponding extractors, we can correctly determine that
the missing date of birth for the music artist Michelle Williams is
1979-07-23 instead of 1980-09-09 (which is the date of birth for
theactress Michelle Williams) based on a combination of evidences
such as the number of support, extractor type and confidence, and
quality of the source page.
5 ON-DEVICE KNOWLEDGE
Personal devices provide a rich source of private and personal infor-
mation that can be leveraged to personalize on-device experiences
such as search, navigation, and recommendations. Because this
data is private, all computation must be performed on the users’ de-
vices which introduces a number of unique challenges compared to
knowledge construction and serving tasks addressed by our server
side knowledge platform [11].
•Privacy: On-device data sources are private and all computa-
tion must happen on the devices themselves.
•Resource constrained environments: devices have a wide
range of capabilities, and knowledge-based services must be
functional within the resource constraints of each hardware
environment.
•Sync: a user’s data ecosystem may span multiple linked de-
vices, knowledge must be kept consistent across devices
when allowed or be isolated based on a user’s per-source
sync preferences.
•Global knowledge enrichment: a user’s personal knowledge
graph needs to be personalized with global knowledge in a
privacy preserving way. Global knowledge helps enrich the
context of user preferences, such as preferred music genres,
news topics, or sports preferences.
Our goal for on-device knowledge is to support the full capa-
bilities of the Saga platform, in a private, decentralized, resource
constrained environment.
Personal KG Construction. Personal devices have multiple sources
of overlapping information that must be linked. For example contact
lists, message senders, and calendar invitees all provide sources of
Person entities in different formats and namespaces. These sources
must be integrated and linked to provide a consolidated represen-
tation in a unified ontology. As a motivating example, consider the
user utterance “send a message to Tim” . There may be a “Tim” in
the user’s contact list, a “Tim” that sent the user a text message,
and a “Tim” that is an invitee on an upcoming calendar event. If
we know that the message sender and the contact have the same
phone number; that the contact and calendar invitee have the same
email address; and that all have similar names; then we may link
these three source entities into a unified representation of a single
Person entity. This allows an utterance understanding algorithm
to interpret the reference to “Tim” as a reference to a single entity
with multiple attributes derived from different sources, rather than
having the user disambiguate among three different hypothetical
“Tims.” Figure 7 illustrates this integration scenario.
This knowledge graph construction task shares many similar-
ities to the graph construction task addressed by our server-side
open domain knowledge platform [ 11]. However, in an on-deviceSIGMOD-Companion ’23, June 18–23, 2023, Seattle, WA, USA Ihab F. Ilyas et al.
ContactFirst name: TimLast name: SmithHome: +1 (123) 555 1234email: Tim@example.comCalendar EventAttendee: “Tim Smith” <tim@example.com>MessagesSender: “Tim Smith”Number: 123-555-1234Given name“Tim”Family name“Smith”Phone+11235551234NumberHomeCategoryEmail“Tim@example.com”
Figure 7: Entity linking for a personal knowledge graph.
context we must adapt the knowledge platform architecture to
accommodate privacy, sync, and resource constraints.
Privacy. To ensure all user data is kept private, we build a user’s
personal knowledge graph entirely on-device. This entails running
source ingestion, entity linking, and graph fusion as described in
Saga [ 11] on the users device. Because resources are limited and
highly contended with other on-device background processes, we
implement an incremental continuous construction pipeline . This
pipeline can be paused and resumed at any point without losing
state, allowing deferral of the construction process in favor of any
other higher priority task (e.g., the user sends a request to the device
or another background task is due for scheduling).
Sync. When possible, a user’s personal knowledge graph should be
consistent across their devices. This involves privately syncing the
KG data in a manner that allows a consistent KG to be constructed
on each device. While distributed consistency is a well studied prob-
lem, personal KG sync has some unique challenges. In particular, a
user may decide to sync or not to sync on a per source basis. For
example, a user may sync their contacts and email to all devices,
but choose not to sync their calendar. This means the device which
contains the calendar source will have additional entities and inter-
actions not present on other devices. However, the sync’d sources
still need to be consistently represented across devices. Second,
devices have a wide range of compute capabilities (e.g., compare
a laptop to a watch). Ensuring a consistent knowledge experience
across devices may require offloading expensive computation to
more powerful devices, such as expensive views or inference on
larger models (see Section 3 of Saga [11]), and syncing the result.
Resource Constraints. To accommodate strict resource constraints
that come with on-device processing, we optimize our construction
pipeline to be disk oriented with tunable memory buffer sizes. At
any given point in the construction pipeline, the amount of mem-
ory used is bounded and expensive computations (e.g., pairwise
blocking and entity matching described in Section 1 of Saga [ 11])
spill to disk as necessary. Furthermore, we optimize ML models
for on-device deployment. On-device ML models are kept small
by engineering smaller model architectures (e.g., fewer and more
narrow neural layers); compressing learned models (e.g., by floating
point precision reduction); or by distillation [ 9]. We also leverage
CoreML to optimize models for our hardware platforms.Semantic Annotation. Similar to our server-side counterpart, we
have a need on device to annotate text with semantic annotations.
Semantic annotation can be used to aid in query and document
understanding. As described in Section 3, we also have a need for
contextual relevance ranking. As an example, consider a user that
has two contacts named “Tim”. If the user issues the following
utterance: “message Tim that I’ve added comments to the SIGMOD
draft” , we want to annotate “Tim” with the contact most relevant
to the query context. In this case, a coworker that has meetings
and conversations with the user about “SIGMOD” should be ranked
above other less relevant contacts named Tim. We achieve this
on-device by porting the same Semantic Annotation architecture
described in Section 5 of Saga, with smaller models optimized for
on-device deployment. This includes a compact neural mention
generation and reranker model.
Global Knowledge Enrichment. While a user’s personal knowledge
graph privately captures context about personal entities and their
relationships, it is valuable to complement that with personalized
knowledge . Information about the user’s music, sports, and habit-
ual preferences provide important context that allow the KG to be
leveraged for on-device private personalization of experiences. As
an example, knowing the typical genre and release year of music
the user likes to listen to can help personalize music recommenda-
tions. However, querying a server for this information would break
user privacy. To address this we extend the on-device knowledge
platform with three global knowledge enrichment paths.
(1)Static knowledge asset: a set of popular entities and facts that
are relevant to many users can be sent to every device. As
there is no client-side request needed to fetch this artifact, it
does not leak any private information. This global knowledge
subgraph is implemented as a Graph Engine view in Saga.
As the set of popular entities changes over time, the view is
automatically maintained and can be shipped to devices.
(2)Dynamic enrichment from a user’s server interactions: user
interactions with global knowledge already involve a request
to a server, such as the query “what is the score in the Blue
Jays game?” . In these scenarios we can piggy-back general
knowledge about referenced entities in order to enrich the
user’s personal graph. Ie., we can include the fact that the
Blue Jays are a baseball team located in Toronto.
(3)Private knowledge retrieval: in scenarios where we need
global knowledge that is not covered by the static knowl-
edge asset or dynamic enrichment from a user request, we
can leverage Differentially Private [ 7] knowledge queries or
Private Information Retrieval [ 4] to fetch global knowledge
with provable privacy guarantees. While such approaches
are expensive, they can be leveraged for high-value use cases.
6 RELATED WORK
There are two directions related to KG embedding that have been
extensively studied. The first is the development of new embedding
models such as translational distance embedding models and their
generalizations [ 3,23], semantic matching embedding models [ 22],
and reasoning-based models [ 18]. The second direction is learning
embeddings at scale. Due to the significant growth in the size of
KGs in recent years, there is an active line of research on designingGrowing and Serving Large Open-domain Knowledge Graphs SIGMOD-Companion ’23, June 18–23, 2023, Seattle, WA, USA
systems that can handle large-scale training of KG embeddings,
such as Marius [16, 19], Pytorch Biggraph [15], and DGL-KE [24].
Various semantic annotation tasks, including entity linking and
disambiguation, have received renewed interest from the research
community, especially for deep learning based approaches [ 8,13,
14,17]. Prior works have also discussed the applications of semantic
annotations to enrich webpages for improved question answering
and web search [1].
Harvesting knowledge from Internet sources is a well-studied
problem [ 20]. Many existing knowledge bases, such as Yago (yago-
knowledge.org), Google Knowledge Graph [ 5], Amazon Product
Knowledge Graph [ 6], IBM Financial Content Knowledge Base [ 2]
and many others, are at least partially automatically constructed
based on Internet sources. Many efforts are based on distantly su-
pervised approach, centered on the principle of pattern-fact duality.
The most popular source for knowledge harvesting is Wikipedia,
including semi-structured elements such as InfoBox as well as plain
text. Web-scale resources have also been exploited but to a much
lesser degree and mostly focusing on extraction from tables [ 5].
We are not aware of any published work that focus on web-scale
extraction on top of web-scale semantic annotation and leverage
wide variety of sources with more sophisticated extractors such as
ones based on neural networks.
7 CONCLUSION
We have presented important extensions to our knowledge platform,
Saga. Graph embeddings form a core capability on which we build
enabling features such as fact ranking, fact verification, a related
entities service, and support for entity linking. In particular, entity
linking can be leveraged as part of a general semantic annotation
service. We have described how this service can be leveraged to link
Web documents to our KG, extending our notion of a knowledge
graph to include links from entities to unstructured documents.
Finally, we have described how our KG grow with targeted fact
extraction using Open Domain Knowledge Extraction.
We also presented adaptations to our knowledge platform needed
to construct and serve private personal knowledge on-device. This
includes the unique challenges of private incremental KG construc-
tion, knowledge graph sync, and global knowledge enrichment.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was made possible by the hard work of many people at
Apple. We would like to thank the entire Knowledge Platform and
Intelligence Platform teams for their many contributions.
REFERENCES
[1] Krisztian Balog. 2018. Entity-oriented search . Springer Nature.
[2]Shreyas Bharadwaj, Laura Chiticariu, Marina Danilevsky, Samarth Dhingra,
Samved Divekar, Arnaldo Carreno-Fuentes, Himanshu Gupta, Nitin Gupta, Sang-
Don Han, Mauricio A. Hernández, Howard Ho, Parag Jain, Salil Joshi, Hima
Karanam, Saravanan Krishnan, Rajasekar Krishnamurthy, Yunyao Li, Satishku-
maar Manivannan, Ashish R. Mittal, Fatma Ozcan, Abdul Quamar, Poornima
Raman, Diptikalyan Saha, Karthik Sankaranarayanan, Jaydeep Sen, Prithviraj Sen,
Shivakumar Vaithyanathan, Mitesh Vasa, Hao Wang, and Huaiyu Zhu. 2017. Cre-
ation and Interaction with Large-scale Domain-Specific Knowledge Bases. Proc.
VLDB Endow. 10, 12 (2017), 1965–1968. https://doi.org/10.14778/3137765.3137820[3]Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Duran, Jason Weston, and Ok-
sana Yakhnenko. 2013. Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational
data. Advances in neural information processing systems 26 (2013).
[4]Benny Chor, Eyal Kushilevitz, Oded Goldreich, and Madhu Sudan. 1998. Private
information retrieval. Journal of the ACM (JACM) 45, 6 (1998), 965–981.
[5]Xin Dong, Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Geremy Heitz, Wilko Horn, Ni Lao, Kevin
Murphy, Thomas Strohmann, Shaohua Sun, and Wei Zhang. 2014. Knowl-
edge vault: a web-scale approach to probabilistic knowledge fusion. In The 20th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
KDD ’14, New York, NY, USA - August 24 - 27, 2014 , Sofus A. Macskassy, Clau-
dia Perlich, Jure Leskovec, Wei Wang, and Rayid Ghani (Eds.). ACM, 601–610.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2623330.2623623
[6]Xin Luna Dong. 2018. Challenges and Innovations in Building a Product Knowl-
edge Graph. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD 2018, London, UK, August 19-23, 2018 ,
Yike Guo and Faisal Farooq (Eds.). ACM, 2869. https://doi.org/10.1145/3219819.
3219938
[7]Cynthia Dwork. 2006. Differential privacy. In Automata, Languages and Program-
ming: 33rd International Colloquium, ICALP 2006, Venice, Italy, July 10-14, 2006,
Proceedings, Part II 33 . Springer, 1–12.
[8]Octavian-Eugen Ganea and Thomas Hofmann. 2017. Deep Joint Entity Disam-
biguation with Local Neural Attention. In EMNLP’18 . 2619–2629.
[9]Jianping Gou, Baosheng Yu, Stephen J Maybank, and Dacheng Tao. 2021. Knowl-
edge distillation: A survey. International Journal of Computer Vision 129 (2021),
1789–1819.
[10] William L. Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Representation Learning
on Graphs: Methods and Applications. IEEE Data Eng. Bull. 40, 3 (2017), 52–74.
http://sites.computer.org/debull/A17sept/p52.pdf
[11] Ihab F. Ilyas, Theodoros Rekatsinas, Vishnu Konda, Jeffrey Pound, Xiaoguang Qi,
and Mohamed Soliman. 2022. Saga: A Platform for Continuous Construction and
Serving of Knowledge at Scale. In Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference
on Management of Data (Philadelphia, PA, USA) (SIGMOD ’22) . Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2259–2272. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3514221.3526049
[12] Pranav Kamath, Yiwen Sun, Thomas Semere, Adam Green, Scott Manley, Xi-
aoguang Qi, Kun Qian, and Yunyao Li. 2022. Improving Human Annotation
Effectiveness for Fact Collection by Identifying the Most Relevant Answers. In
Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Data Science with Human-in-the-Loop (Lan-
guage Advances) . Association for Computational Linguistics, Abu Dhabi, United
Arab Emirates (Hybrid), 74–80. https://aclanthology.org/2022.dash-1.10
[13] Nikolaos Kolitsas, Octavian-Eugen Ganea, and Thomas Hofmann. 2018. End-to-
End Neural Entity Linking. In CoNNL’18 . 519–529.
[14] Phong Le and Ivan Titov. 2018. Improving Entity Linking by Modeling Latent
Relations between Mentions. In ACL’18 . 1595–1604.
[15] Adam Lerer, Ledell Wu, Jiajun Shen, Timothee Lacroix, Luca Wehrstedt, Abhijit
Bose, and Alex Peysakhovich. 2019. Pytorch-biggraph: A large scale graph
embedding system. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 1 (2019), 120–
131.
[16] Jason Mohoney, Roger Waleffe, Henry Xu, Theodoros Rekatsinas, and Shivaram
Venkataraman. 2021. Marius: Learning massive graph embeddings on a single
machine. In 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implemen-
tation (OSDI) 21 .
[17] Jonathan Raiman and Olivier Raiman. 2018. DeepType: Multilingual Entity
Linking by Neural Type System Evolution. In AAAI’18 .
[18] Hongyu Ren, Weihua Hu, and Jure Leskovec. 2020. Query2box: Reasoning
over knowledge graphs in vector space using box embeddings. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.05969 (2020).
[19] Roger Waleffe, Jason Mohoney, Theodoros Rekatsinas, and Shivaram Venkatara-
man. 2023. MariusGNN: Resource-Efficient Out-of-Core Training of Graph Neural
Networks. EuroSys‘23 (2023).
[20] Gerhard Weikum, Johannes Hoffart, and Fabian M. Suchanek. 2019. Knowledge
Harvesting: Achievements and Challenges. In Computing and Software Science
- State of the Art and Perspectives , Bernhard Steffen and Gerhard J. Woeginger
(Eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 10000. Springer, 217–235. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91908-9_13
[21] Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. 2023. Data
Selection for Language Models via Importance Resampling.
[22] Bishan Yang, Wen-tau Yih, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, and Li Deng. 2014. Em-
bedding entities and relations for learning and inference in knowledge bases.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6575 (2014).
[23] Shuai Zhang, Yi Tay, Lina Yao, and Qi Liu. 2019. Quaternion knowledge graph
embeddings. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019).
[24] Da Zheng, Xiang Song, Chao Ma, Zeyuan Tan, Zihao Ye, Jin Dong, Hao Xiong,
Zheng Zhang, and George Karypis. 2020. Dgl-ke: Training knowledge graph
embeddings at scale. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval . 739–748.