arXiv:2305.05431v1  [physics.ed-ph]  9 May 2023Presentation of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in introductory p hysics textbooks and
consequences for its teaching
Álvaro Suárez
Departamento de Física, Consejo de Formación en Educación, Montevideo, Uruguay
Arturo C. Marti
Instituto de Física, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de l a República, Iguá 4225, Montevideo, 11200, Uruguay
Kristina Zuza
Department of Applied Physics and Donostia Physics Educati on Research Group,
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), San Sebastian 2 0018, Spain
Jenaro Guisasola
Donostia Physics Education Research Group, University of t he Basque Country (UPV/EHU), San Sebastian 20018, Spain
School of Dual Engineering, Institute of Machine Tools (IMH ), Elgoibar, Spain
(Dated: May 10, 2023)
Textbooks play a fundamental role in teaching and learning i n school science classrooms. In this
paper we investigate the presentation of the nature of the el ectromagnetic ﬁeld in a dozen of the
world’s most popular introductory university physics text books. We analyse, from an epistemolog-
ically based teaching approach, the didactic treatment of t he electromagnetic ﬁeld in relation to its
sources, Maxwell’s laws and electromagnetic waves. With th is objective, we elaborate a rational
reconstruction of the developments that led to the formulat ion of the nature of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld, Maxwell’s laws and their meaning, as well as electroma gnetic waves. Next, we formulate cri-
teria based on the key aspects derived from the reconstructi on that are useful in the evaluation
of electromagnetism textbooks at the introductory level an d apply them to the sample of selected
books. In light of the results, we reﬂect on their consequenc es for teaching. Our analysis indicates the
existence of certain inconsistencies in the approach to the electromagnetic ﬁeld and its relationship
with its sources, Maxwell’s laws and electromagnetic waves in many of the books analysed.
I. INTRODUCTION
The teaching/learning of electromagnetism has been
the object of multiple studies in Physics Education Re-
search (PER) [1–7]. Nevertheless, it still raises signiﬁca nt
challenges in many aspects, such as the attribution of
causal relationships between electromagnetic ﬁelds and
the diﬃculty of identifying the nature of their sources
[8–14]. In fact, research into high school and university
students’ diﬃculties in understanding and implementing
Maxwell’s laws has systematically proven that a signiﬁ-
cant percentage of students still rely on misconceptions
[15–20]. This poor learning progress has been attributed
to diﬀerent factors, including the nature of conventional
science teaching and the diﬃculties that hinder a bet-
ter learning of scientiﬁc theories. Empirical research has
also established that physics textbooks play a crucial role
when it comes to presenting scientiﬁc theories and models
in an accurate and coherent way. There is no doubt about
the need to do further research into the representation,
the logical correction, the structure and the systematics
of the contents in textbooks, regarding speciﬁc curricu-
lum topics. In this paper, we analyse the ways the nature
of the electromagnetic ﬁeld is presented in a dozen text-
books, which rank amongst those most frequently used
to teach introductory physics at universities.
The analysis of textbooks is justiﬁed by the impor-
tance of their inﬂuence on both teaching and learning.Research has systematically established that, to a large
extent, science textbooks dictate the content and empha-
sis of science study plans, as well as the nature and scope
of instructional activities and the discourse in most class -
rooms [21–23]. Undoubtedly, they are a mayor curricu-
lar and didactic resource for both junior and experienced
science teachers. Students also use them in addition to
other online resources to do their homework and prepare
for exams [24]. Thus, the structure, the logic and coher-
ence of the contents is crucial for its educational eﬃciency
[25, 26].
International organizations such as UNESCO promote
the educational analysis of textbooks and put forward
factors to consider in such analysis [27]. The Ameri-
can Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)
Project 2061 defends the development of analysis pro-
tocols to evaluate the educational eﬃciency of science
textbooks [28], due to the fact that they frequently rep-
resent over 75 percent of the tasks assigned by the teacher
[29]. In this research, we focus on introductory physics
textbooks published in the USA, since they are the most
widely recommended in introductory physics courses in
Science and Engineering degrees worldwide. It can rea-
sonably be supposed that the trends in American science
textbooks are likely to signiﬁcantly impact the teaching
and learning of sciences in multiple world markets [30].
Furthermore, it is reasonable to suggest that textbook
evaluation, based on criteria derived from the key as-2
pects of rational reconstruction of classical electromag-
netism, can provide teachers with an idea of how models
or theories develop. Ignoring such key aspects and their
development in textbooks can deprive students of the op-
portunity of becoming familiar with the scientiﬁc practice
and progress.
In accordance with the above considerations, our re-
search question is the following: How do introductory
physics textbooks explain the nature of the electromag-
netic ﬁeld? More speciﬁcally, we aim to answer these
research questions:
•How do they explain Maxwell’s laws and what at-
tention is paid to the sources of the ﬁelds?
•How do they treat the generation and propagation
of electromagnetic waves?
•How is the electromagnetic ﬁeld presented in rela-
tion to diﬀerent reference systems?
In order to answer these questions, we analyse, from
an epistemologically grounded approach to teaching, how
physics textbooks deal with the electromagnetic ﬁeld in
relation to its sources, Maxwell’s laws and electromag-
netic waves. To achieve this objective, ﬁrst we carry out
a rational reconstruction of the developments that led
to the formulation of the nature of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld, Maxwell’s laws and their meaning, as well as elec-
tromagnetic waves in classical electromagnetism. Then,
we formulate the criteria based on key aspects derived
from the reconstruction, which may yield results in the
evaluation of introductory-level electromagnetism text-
books. We examine the textbooks and, in the light of
results obtained, consider their implications for teachin g.
II. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Recent studies that examine science teaching underpin
the importance of both the history and the philosophy of
sciences for science teaching [31, 32]. The epistemologi-
cally grounded approach to teaching involves considering
contributions related to the nature of science and its in-
ﬂuence on teaching [33–36]. This approach indicates that
knowledge results from a complex process where prob-
lems are solved and initial hypotheses tested, a process
that enables the identiﬁcation of the way ideas evolve
to their current status [37]. Recognising the evolution
of the concepts underlying the diﬀerent models can con-
tribute to identifying epistemological and ontological ba r-
riers that scientists have to overcome in order to develop
their theories. Such epistemic characteristics can use-
fully inform teaching approaches and help avoid inaccu-
rate or excessively simplistic perspectives. Furthermore ,
we must keep in mind that educational standards set in
the last few decades [38, 39] demand that the presenta-
tion of concepts and theories is meaningful and includes
the origin and development of key ideas. As a conse-
quence, textbooks are required to not only focus on the“products” of science, i.e. concepts, theories, principle s
and laws of nature, but also put them into context within
the epistemological characteristics that enabled their de -
velopment [40].
Concerning the process of constructing epistemologi-
cally grounded teaching, one major requirement is to de-
tect key features of the epistemological development of
theories the understanding of which can facilitate stu-
dents’ learning [41, 42]. Scientiﬁc research tends to seek
explanations to empirical or theoretical questions that
are not understood, generating research problems that
seek to deﬁne key aspects that allow the development
and consolidation of theories [43]. Science curricula can-
not ignore the importance of these key aspects that al-
lowed the development and consolidation of theories.
The history of electromagnetic theory from the 19th
to the late 20th century shows the models of M. Fara-
day, J. C. Maxwell, H. Lorentz and O. Jeﬁmenko evolv-
ing in rapid succession. They had to overcome compet-
ing models based on ontological beliefs and rival research
programs, such as the theory of action at a distance or
the ether theory. This period, in which Maxwell’s laws
present a framework for analysing electromagnetic inter-
actions and identifying their sources, has spurred much
debate and controversy in the History and Philosophy of
Physics literature [44–47]. According to this perspective ,
it is important to analyse introductory university-level
electromagnetism textbooks to determine the extent to
which they address the key aspects of the classical the-
ory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, its fundamental laws,
and the sources of the electromagnetic ﬁeld.
III. CONTRIBUTIONS OF EPISTEMOLOGY OF
PHYSICS ON THE NATURE OF THE
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD
During the 19th century, the confrontation between
two major models – one based on action at a distance and
the other on a theory of ﬁelds – resulted in a crucial ad-
vance of the electromagnetic theory [45]. Several factors
inﬂuenced this process and the ﬁnal result was the for-
mation of the currently accepted, modern concept of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld. The ﬁrst factor that aﬀected the
evolution of the conceptualisation of electromagnetism
was the contribution of Michael Faraday, who conceived
a model of ﬁelds where interactions are transmitted as
disturbances along the medium, as opposed to the pre-
vious ideas of instantaneous transmission at a distance
[44]. This vision provided a reasonable interpretation for
various electrical and magnetic interactions.
In mid-19th century, Maxwell, inspired by the ideas
of Faraday and William Thomson, developed a theory
of the electromagnetic ﬁeld based on the idea of contin-
ually transmitting electrical and magnetic actions. An
essential component were the lines of force (introduced
by Faraday in his model) as states of mechanic ether gov-
erned by Newton’s laws [47]. In 1855, Maxwell published3
“On Faraday’s Lines of Force” , where he mathematically
formulates the lines of force based on the use of analo-
gies with the movement of an incompressible ﬂuid [48].
An important landmark in the development of the the-
ory is the conceptualization of ether as a quasi-material
element that supports the lines of force. Not surpris-
ingly, in the following years Maxwell’s objective was to
ﬁnd a mechanical model for ether that could describe the
electromagnetic ﬁeld and allow to determine the speed of
propagation of interactions. This process is completed
in 1861, with the publication of “On Physical Lines of
Force” where he takes his analogies to a diﬀerent level
by introducing an extremely complex mechanical model
of ether that allows him to develop an electromagnetic
theory of light and deduce the propagation speed of elec-
tromagnetic waves [46].
One of the most original aspects of Maxwell’s theory
was the introduction of electrical displacement and the
current of displacement as another source of ﬁelds. In
1864, Maxwell clearly described the meaning of both
magnitudes.
“Electrical displacement consists in the oppo-
site electriﬁcation of the sides of a molecule
or particle of a body which may or may not
be accompanied with transmission through the
body [...] The variations of the electrical dis-
placement must be added to the currents p, q,
r to get the total motion of electricity...” [49,
p 554]
Years later, in “A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism” ,
he makes clear his position on the displacement current
as a source of magnetic ﬁelds:
“The current produces magnetic phenomena
in its neighbourhood [...] We have reason
for believing that even when there is no proper
conduction, but merely a variation of electric
displacement, as in the glass of a Leyden jar
during charge or discharge, the magnetic ef-
fect of the electric movement is precisely the
same.” [50, pp 144-145]
Given Maxwell’s conception of space, and more specif-
ically his conviction about the existence of ether, the
displacement current, conceived as a consequence of the
variation of the electric displacement in any mechanical
medium, was always associated with a motion of bound
charges.
The second important factor that inﬂuenced the devel-
opment of the electromagnetic theory was the progressive
rejection of the ether theory and the beginning of the
adoption of an analytic interpretation. Maxwell, aware
of the limitations and diﬃculties associated with his me-
chanical model of ether, decided to make it independent
of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. In 1864, he published “A
Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field” where
he presented eight equations of the electromagnetic ﬁeldand an electromagnetic theory of light that can be ex-
perimentally contrasted [44]. In this task, he faced the
diﬃculty of how to interpret the set of developed equa-
tions. This is when the analytical interpretation arises:
the charge and the currents become fundamental magni-
tudes and the ﬁeld acts directly on the matter in the point
of interest, and as a consequence, the mechanisms of con-
tinuous action imagined by Faraday disappear [47]. Nine
years later, Maxwell published his most important work,
“A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism” , where he pre-
sented the whole electromagnetic theory in detail. It con-
tinues with his analytical interpretation of the model, al-
though he still ﬁrmly believed in the existence of some
mechanism subordinated to Newton’s laws [47].
Despite Maxwell’s formidable advances, there were still
many things that needed to be explained. These were,
among others, the development of an adequate theory
of charge, the explanation of the properties of the di-
electrics, and the complete determination of the ﬁelds
around time-varying charges and currents. In addition,
experiments needed to be conducted to provide evidence
which would support his ﬁeld theory [45]. Years after
Maxwell’s death in 1887, Heinrich Hertz experimentally
demonstrated the existence of electromagnetic waves,
thus conﬁrming the ﬁeld theory as an alternative to the
theory of action at a distance [44]. At the same time,
Oliver Heaviside, used vector calculus to analytically ex-
press the equations of Maxwell’s ﬁelds, writing the equa-
tions as we know them today [47].
In 1892, Hendrik Lorentz took one more step in the
development of the classical electromagnetic ﬁeld theory
by assuming that all charged bodies have charged parti-
cles and that ether is immobile and unperturbed by their
movement. This, consequently, means that the only pos-
sible interpretation of the ﬁeld equations is the analytica l
one [47]. Lorentz further assumed that electric and mag-
netic ﬁelds are qualitatively diﬀerent, although they are
produced and propagated outward by the charged parti-
cles [51]. In contrast to Maxwell’s view, Lorentz consid-
ered an immobile ether and allowed for the existence of
a displacement current in the absence of matter, which
would make it a simple term directly proportional to the
rate of change of the electric ﬁeld [52].
The third important factor in the development of ﬁeld
theory were the contributions that identiﬁed electric and
magnetic ﬁelds as related entities, the deﬁnitive rejec-
tion of the existence of ether and the clariﬁcation of the
sources of the ﬁelds. In 1905, Albert Einstein postu-
lated the theory of special relativity. In this framework,
he shows that Maxwell’s laws adopt the same expres-
sions in all inertial reference frames and that the com-
ponents of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds relate to each
other in the various inertial reference frames by means of
Lorentz’s transformations. He concluded that, contrary
to Maxwell’s and Lorentz’s theories, electric and mag-
netic ﬁelds should not be considered as separate entities,
but are in fact both part of one entity: the electromag-
netic ﬁeld [46]. In this way, Einstein managed to resolve4
the asymmetries that appeared when applying Maxwell’s
electrodynamics to moving bodies [53]. If an observer de-
tects only a magnetic ﬁeld in a reference frame, another
observer in motion will always measure an electric and a
magnetic ﬁeld. Similarly, if an electric ﬁeld is measured
in a reference frame, an electric and a magnetic ﬁeld will
always be detected in another. From Einstein’s theory
of special relativity onwards, the existence of ether lost
itsraison d’être , and by the 1920s its existence in the
scientiﬁc community was a thing of the past, and the
analytic interpretation of the ﬁeld equations became the
dominant one.
Another important milestone came in the 1960s when
Oleg Jeﬁmenko elucidated the problem of the sources of
the electromagnetic ﬁeld [54]. In his work he presents
general solutions for the electric and magnetic ﬁelds at a
given instant and point in space as a function of charge
and current distributions which can be expressed as [55]
E=1
4πε0/integraldisplay/parenleftBigg
ρ(r′,t′)
|r−r′|3+˙ρ(r′,t′)
c|r−r′|2/parenrightBigg
(r−r′)dv′
−1
4πε0/integraldisplay˙J(r′,t′)
c2|r−r′|dv′(1)
B=µ0
4π/integraldisplay/parenleftBigg
J(r′,t′)
|r−r′|3+˙J(r′,t′)
c|r−r′|2/parenrightBigg
×(r−r′)dv′(2)
where the ﬁelds EandBare evaluated at position rat
time instant t, being r′the distance from the origin of
coordinates to charge density ρand current density J,c
is the speed of light and t′=t−|r−r′|/c.
From these equations, Jeﬁmenko concludes that the
sources of the ﬁelds are charge and current distributions
[8, 9, 12, 56–58]. Given that electric and magnetic ﬁelds
have the same sources, when charge and current distri-
butions vary over time, both ﬁelds are generated simulta-
neously and correlated through Faraday’s and Ampere-
Maxwell laws [12]. All terms of Maxwell’s laws in diﬀer-
ential form are evaluated at the same instant of time and
at the same point in space, therefore, they do not imply
cause-and-eﬀect relationships and none of them can be
the source of the other [10, 11]. From the point of view
of the relativistic formulation of electromagnetism, elec -
tric and magnetic ﬁelds form a single entity, the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld tensor [59]. Just as it does not make sense
to think that one component of a vector is the cause of
another component of the same vector, it does not make
sense that one component of the tensor is the cause of
another component of the same tensor [9]. Hence, it is
impossible to obtain the temporal evolution of one of the
ﬁelds knowing the temporal evaluation of the other, since
it ignores that they are components of the same entity
and, therefore, cannot interact with each other.
In summary, the historical and epistemological devel-
opment of electromagnetic ﬁeld theory reveals importantmilestones in the process: a) a mechanistic interpreta-
tion of electromagnetic interaction (Faraday-Maxwell);
b) a further development that lead to an analytical in-
terpretation based on Maxwell’s laws which contradicts
the earlier model (Lorentz, Heaviside) and succeeds in
experimentally contrasting its prediction of electromag-
netic waves (Hertz); c) an evolution towards a uniﬁed
theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, with Lorentz’s trans-
forms (Einstein) and the deﬁnition of charge and current
distributions as the only sources of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld (Jeﬁmenko). Through this gradual elaboration of
the theory with Maxwell’s laws as a framework which
helped us analyse electromagnetic interactions, certain
fundamental epistemic features arise that allow us to de-
ﬁne a number of key concepts to be accounted for in the
textbooks, from an epistemologically grounded approach
to teaching. Next, we deﬁne these key ideas in relation to
the classical electromagnetic ﬁeld theory, the equations
that govern it and the sources of the ﬁelds for university-
level introductory physics:
•KC1. The interpretation of Maxwell’s laws implies
non-causal relationships between the fundamental
magnitudes of electromagnetic theory ( E,B,Jand
ρ) at the same instant of time.
•KC2. The sources of electromagnetic ﬁelds are
charge and current distributions.
•KC3. The cause of the ﬁelds in an electromagnetic
wave (as well as that of electric and magnetic ﬁelds)
at a certain instant is the distribution of charges
and currents (generally time-varying) at an earlier
time.
•KC4. The electric and magnetic ﬁelds associate and
form one single entity, the electromagnetic ﬁeld,
whose components are linked in diﬀerent inertial
systems by means of Lorentz’s transformations.
IV. METHODOLOGY
A. Selection of textbooks and assumptions of the
analysis
In the sample of selected textbooks we use the most
appropriate non-probabilistic strategy, known as “purpo-
sive sampling” according to Cohen et al [60]. Our aim is
for the sample to be representative, i.e. to reﬂect a situa-
tion common to the research objective. The review took
into account the bibliography recommended in the intro-
ductory physics programmes presented on the websites of
Physics departments at prestigious universities in Spain,
Latin America and the USA. We chose 12 textbooks that
introductory physics academic programmes at universi-
ties recommend the most, with the condition that they
had been published in the last 15 years. In principle, this
condition makes it possible to incorporate the abundant5
research in PER with regards to electromagnetism and
Maxwell’s laws. Some textbooks that were very inﬂuen-
tial in introductory physics programs in the past are not
within the scope of our current research and were left
out.In each textbook we analyse the chapters dealing
with magnetic ﬁelds, Faraday’s and Ampere-Maxwell’s
Laws, AC circuits, as well as with electromagnetic waves
and special relativity. In Table I we show the name of
each textbook of the sample and the chapters analysed.
The analysis was carried out by the four authors of
the article who are professors or assistant professors in
physics departments. They have extensive experience in
teaching introductory physics courses, as well as courses
in electrodynamics, thermodynamics and computational
physics.
We have taken into account that the epistemological
criteria deﬁning the key concepts involve abstract con-
cepts whose mathematical developments, such as the
Jeﬁmenko equations, are dealt with in electrodynamics
courses. However, in the analysis we have restricted our-
selves to the introductory level of the textbooks analysed.
In general, the approaches used are based on qualitative
reasoning inspired on experimental facts rather than on
mathematical formalism typical of advanced courses. So,
we have analysed the key ideas as deeply as the textbooks
themselves deﬁne them.
We designed a textbook-review protocol based on three
criteria from the epistemological analysis and the key
ideas deﬁned in the previous section. We consider the
theoretical explanations as well as the questions and
solved examples used to illustrate the explanations. We
have included the solved examples in the analysis be-
cause they illustrate the explanations of the theory and
have allowed us to clarify the meaning that the authors
explained in the theory sections. For the same reason,
the analysis does not include the questions and exercises
proposed at the end of chapters. Each criterion is de-
veloped through a protocol that constitutes a tool for
analysis, which is explained in the following section.
B. Instrument
We describe in this section the instruments of analysis
for each criterium.
Criterion 1. The treatment of Faraday and Ampère-
Maxwell’s laws in relation to the sources of the electric
and magnetic ﬁeld.
Maxwell’s laws do not imply cause-and-eﬀect relation-
ships (KC1) but present mathematical relationships be-
tween diﬀerent magnitudes at the same instant of time.
There cannot be a causal relationship between the dif-
ferent terms of the equations. We understand causality
according to the principle of delayed action:
“there is always a time delay between the cause and the
eﬀect, the former being prior in time to the latter, so that
(relatively to a given physical system, such as a reference
system), C and E cannot be both distant in space andsimultaneous.” [61, p 62]
Thus, charge and current distribution are the causes of
the ﬁelds which determine line integrals based on Faraday
and Ampère-Maxwell laws (KC2).
Faraday’s Law in integral form
ε=/contintegraldisplay
E·dl=−d
dt/integraldisplay
B·dA (3)
Ampère-Maxwell’s law in integral form
/contintegraldisplay
B·dl=µ0I+µ0ε0d
dt/integraldisplay
E·dA (4)
Using Criterion 1 we will examine whether the follow-
ing aspects are explained in the textbooks:
C1.1 Faraday and Ampère-Maxwell’s laws describe
mathematical relationships between diﬀerent magnitudes
at the same instant of time.
C1.2 It is explained that the ﬁelds described in Faraday
and Ampère-Maxwell’s laws do not imply causal relation-
ships between electric or magnetic ﬁeld operators and the
generation of electric or magnetic ﬁeld.
Criterion 2. Presenting the generation and propaga-
tion of electromagnetic waves in relation to their sources.
Changes in the characteristics of an electromagnetic
wave’s ﬁelds at a certain point are associated with
changes in the distribution of charges or currents that
generated it at an earlier time (KC3). This aspect of the
electromagnetic theory is key to understanding that in-
formation propagates with ﬁnite speed and there exists
a causal relationship between the wave and its sources.
Therefore, this Criterion will examine whether the fol-
lowing aspects are explained in the textbooks:
C2.1 Time-varying charge or current distributions over
time generate electromagnetic waves, linking the electro-
magnetic wave to its sources.
C2.2 Electric and magnetic ﬁelds in electromagnetic
waves are associated with each other and are simulta-
neous in time without establishing a causal relationship
between them.
Criterion 3. Presenting the electromagnetic ﬁeld as a
single entity in relation to diﬀerent reference systems.
The analysis of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in diﬀerent
reference systems related by Lorentz transformations al-
lows us to explain clearly that there is one single elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld that presents diﬀerent components, in
terms of EandB, to diﬀerent observers (KC4). In this
respect, this Criterion will analyse whether the following
aspects are included in the textbooks:
C3.1 It is explained that, if an electric or magnetic ﬁeld
is observed in one inertial reference frame, both ﬁelds are
detected in any other reference frame.
C3.2 Lorentz transformations for electric and magnetic
ﬁelds are introduced, the electromagnetic ﬁeld is pre-
sented as a single entity with two components: the elec-
tric ﬁeld and the magnetic ﬁeld.6
Authors Titles Year Chap. analysed
P. A. Tipler and G. Mosca Physics for Scientists and Engineers 2008 26 to 30 and 39
J. Walker, R. Resnick and D. Halliday Fundamentals of physics 2014 28 to 33 and 37
D. C. Giancoli Physics for scientists and engineers
with modern physics2014 27 to 31 and 36
W. Bauer and G. Westfall University physics with modern physics 2014 27 to 31 and 35
R. W. Chabay and B. A. Sherwood Matter and Interactions 2015 17 and 20 to 23
D. M. Katz Physics for Scientists and Engineers:
Foundations and Connections2015 30 to 34 and 39
T. A. Moore Six ideas that shaped physics: Electric
and Magnetic Fields are Uniﬁed2017 8 to 17 and ap-
pendix A
R. A. Serway and J. W. Jewett Physics for scientists and engineers 2019 28 to 33 and 38
R. L. Hawkes, J. Iqbal, F. Mansour,
M. Milner-Bolotin and P. J. WilliamsPhysics for scientists and engineers: an
interactive approach2019 24 to 27 and 30
H. D. Young and R. A. Freedman University Physics with Modern
Physics2020 27 to 32 and 37
R. Wolfson Essential University Physics 2020 26 to 29 and 33
R. Knight Physics for Scientists and Engineers:
strategic approach with modern
physics2022 29 to 32 and 36
TABLE I. Textbooks and chapters analysed.
C. Data analysis
In the ﬁrst phase of data analysis, one of the re-
searchers reviewed six books from the sample according
to the initial protocol that included the three criteria.
Subsequently, all four researchers met to analyse and dis-
cuss the analysis protocol and suggest improvements on
the type of information expected. The analysis adopted
does not involve comparing a given textbook with an
ideal book or ranking it in relation to the criteria. In
general, in each textbook we aim to identify explanations,
examples or questions which provide evidence about the
presentation of the topic in relation to the criteria es-
tablished, which we agreed to evaluate according to the
following classiﬁcation:
•Complies (C): the treatment of the theory, law or
concept is considered appropriate to the Criterion
set.
•Partially complies (PC): some aspects of the Cri-
terion are mentioned but not explained. When the
content of a Criterion is not explicitly detected in
the text but seems to be commented upon, it is
included in this category.
•Does not comply (NC): mentions elements that are
not compatible with the theoretical framework or
presents information that could lead to misunder-
standings.
•Does not address the issue (NT): does not address
the issues included in the Criterion.
The revised protocol was applied by two of the re-
searchers who analysed the 12 textbooks independently.
Subsequently, all researchers met to discuss the resultsobtained and to clarify any doubts that arose during the
analysis process. We agreed that the four researchers
will carry out a second round of reviews, with the ﬁnal
protocol (see Results below), to guarantee the validity
of the analysis. The review and validation protocols, as
well as the two rounds of review in which each textbook
has been analysed by at least three researchers, allow us
to reduce possible bias in the information extraction of
this literature review. At the end of the second round,
there was a strong consensus among the researchers on
whether or not the criteria were met and on the com-
ments on each textbook. Finally, we determined Cohen’s
kappa coeﬃcient, for the categories deﬁned by the four
evaluators. The statistic expresses a measure of the de-
gree of agreement between evaluators who classify items
into mutually exclusive categories and takes into account
the possibility that they may agree by chance. We ob-
tained an overall value of 0.94. Values above 0.80 imply
a high degree of agreement [62]. In the next section we
present the results of Cohen’s kappa coeﬃcient for each
particular criterion.
V. RESULTS
Here we describe the results obtained from the evalua-
tion of each criterion. Summarised results for all criteria
can be found in Table V.
A. Textbooks treatment of Maxwell’s laws in
relation to electromagnetic ﬁeld sources
Criterion 1 assesses the ability to identify the sources
of the ﬁelds and to recognise that Maxwell’s laws describe
mathematical relationships between diﬀerent terms at7
the same instant in time. The Cohen’s kappa coeﬃcient
obtained for this criterion was 1.0. Table II shows the re-
sults of the evaluation of the aspects included in criterion
1 for each of the textbooks.
As can be seen from Table II, all texts appropriately ex-
plain that Faraday and Ampère-Maxwell’s laws describe
mathematical relationships between diﬀerent magnitudes
at the same instant of time, giving correct analytical de-
scriptions of the laws (Criterion 1.1). For example, Tipler
and Mosca [63, p 1034] state that:
“Faraday’s law states that the line integral of
the electric ﬁeld E around any closed curve
C equals the negative of the rate of change of
the ﬂux of the magnetic ﬁeld B through any
surface S bounded by curve C.”
Whereas Ampère-Maxwell law [63, p 1034]:
“...states that the line integral of the magnetic
ﬁeld B around any closed curve C equals 0
multiplied by the sum of the current I through
any surface S bounded by the curve and the
displacement current IDthrough the same
surface.”
It is worth pointing out that the books analysed com-
plement the analytical descriptions of Maxwell’s laws
with diﬀerent application examples where it is clear that
the diﬀerent magnitudes involved are evaluated at the
same instant of time. For example, Bauer [64, p 880]
presents the following problem of Faraday’s law:
“A current of 600mAis ﬂowing in an ideal
solenoid, resulting in a magnetic ﬁeld of
0.025Tinside the solenoid. Then the current
increases with time, t, according to
i(t) =i0/bracketleftbig
1+/parenleftbig
2.4s−2/parenrightbig
t2/bracketrightbig
If a circular coil of radius 3.4cmwithN=
200windings is located inside the solenoid
with its normal vector parallel to the magnetic
ﬁeld (Figure 29.8), what is the induced poten-
tial diﬀerence in the coil at t= 2.0s?"
In solving this problem, an expression is found for the
magnetic ﬁeld generated by the solenoid as a function
of the current intensity. Then, to determine the induced
emf, the magnetic ﬁeld ﬂux is calculated and derived with
respect to time, resulting in
ε=−AB0/bracketleftbig
2/parenleftbig
2.4s−2/parenrightbig
t/bracketrightbig
(5)
where A is the cross-sectional area of the solenoid, while
B0is its magnetic ﬁeld in t= 0s. Finally, the induced emf
att= 2.0sis found. The presentation of problems like
the one described, where the emf has to be determined
for a certain value of t, allows to infer that the terms
involved are evaluated at the same instant of time.According to Criterion 1.2, the ﬁelds described in Fara-
day and Ampère-Maxwell’s laws do not imply causal re-
lationships between electric or magnetic ﬁeld operators
and the generation of electric or magnetic ﬁeld. This
aspect of Maxwell’s laws is only taken into account in
two of the textbooks analysed. One of the texts that
complies with the Criterion is Moore’s [65, p 271] where,
explaining Faraday’s law, he explicitly states that:
“I have been very careful to state that this is
the electric ﬁeld that is correlated with the
changing magnetic ﬁeld, not created by that
ﬁeld. Electromagnetic ﬁelds are created only
by stationary or moving charged particles."
However, 10 of the 12 textbooks analysed interpret
Faraday and Ampère-Maxwell’s laws as describing cause-
and-eﬀect relationships between diﬀerent terms, such
that the time-varying magnetic ﬁeld is the source of the
electric ﬁeld (Faraday’s law) and vice versa, the time-
varying electric ﬁeld is the source of the magnetic ﬁeld
(Ampère-Maxwell’s law). This interpretation is explicitl y
presented, for example, when summarising the physical
meaning of Maxwell’s laws. It states:
“Faraday’s law: An electric ﬁeld can also be
created by a changing magnetic ﬁeld.
Ampère-Maxwell law, ﬁrst half: Currents cre-
ate a magnetic ﬁeld.
Ampère-Maxwell law, second half: A mag-
netic ﬁeld can also be created by a changing
electric ﬁeld." [66, p 939]
Interpretations like this are reinforced through the
analysis of diﬀerent situations where Faraday and
Ampère-Maxwell’s laws are applied. One of the most
representative cases is the calculation of the electric ﬁel d
around a solenoid where the current intensity changes
with time. For example, the following problem is enti-
tled“E produced by changing B” :
“A magnetic ﬁeld B between the pole faces of
an electromagnet is nearly uniform at any in-
stant over a circular area of radius as shown
in Figs. 27a and b. The current in the wind-
ings of the electromagnet is increasing in time
so that changes in time at a constant rate
dB/dt at each point. Beyond the circular re-
gion(r > r0)we assume B= 0at all times.
Determine the electric ﬁeld E at any point P
a distance r from the center of the circular
area due to the changing B." [67, p 892]
In this problem, the time-varying magnetic ﬁeld is ex-
plicitly described as the cause of the electric ﬁeld, how-
ever, both ﬁelds are generated at the same time and have
a common cause: the varying current.
In the case of Ampère-Maxwell law, the 10 textbooks
that do not comply with Criterion 1.2 provide explana-
tions of the eﬀects of the displacement current that could
be a source of misunderstandings, for example:8
Authors Criterion 1.1 Criterion 1.2
P. A. Tipler and G. Mosca C NC
J. Walker, R. Resnick and D. Halliday C NC
D. C. Giancoli C NC
W. Bauer and G. Westfall C NC
R. W. Chabay and B. A. Sherwood C C
D. M. Katz C NC
T. A. Moore C C
R. A. Serway and J. W. Jewett C NC
R. L. Hawkes, J. Iqbal, et al. C NC
H. D. Young and R. A. Freedman C NC
R. Wolfson C NC
R. Knight C NC
TABLE II. Results corresponding to treatment of Faraday and Ampère-Maxwell’s laws in relation to the sources of the elec tric
and magnetic ﬁeld. C1.1 refers to the explanation that these laws describe mathematical relationships between diﬀeren t
magnitudes at the same instant of time while C1.2 implies tha t they do not imply causal relationships the ﬁelds. In this ta ble
and the followings the keys are: C Complies, PC, Partially co mplies, NC does not comply, NT does not address.
“Although changing electric ﬂux isn’t the same
thing as electric current, it has the same ef-
fect in producing a magnetic ﬁeld. For this
reason Maxwell called the term ε0dΦE/dtthe
displacement current. The word displacement
has historical roots that don’t provide much
physical insight. But current is meaningful
because displacement current is indistinguish-
able from real current in producing magnetic
ﬁelds." [68, p 582]
Assuming that the displacement current generates a
magnetic ﬁeld may lead students to believe that there
is a cause-and-eﬀect relationship between the diﬀerent
terms of Ampère-Maxwell law. Even more so, if we take
into account that one of the ﬁrst applications of the dis-
placement current is the calculation of the magnetic ﬁeld
between the plates of a capacitor that is charging. For
example, in one of the textbooks analysed, the following
situation arises:
“You might well ask at this point whether dis-
placement current has any real physical sig-
niﬁcance or whether it is just a ruse to satisfy
Ampère’s law and Kirchhoﬀ’s junction rule.
Here’s a fundamental experiment that helps
to answer that question. We take a plane cir-
cular area between the capacitor plates (Fig.
29.23). If displacement current really plays
the role in Ampère’s law that we have claimed,
then there ought to be a magnetic ﬁeld in the
region between the plates while the capacitor
is charging." [69, p 972]
Next, the magnetic ﬁeld between the capacitor plates is
determined from the Ampère-Maxwell law. To do this, a
closed curve placed between the capacitor plates is taken
and the displacement current through the surface delim-
ited by this curve is determined. Then, the displacement
current is expressed as a function of the conduction cur-
rentI, and the magnetic ﬁeld is determined at a distancerfrom the symmetry axis of the capacitor, for points
such that r≤R, being Rthe radius of the plates, we
obtain:
B=µ0I
2πr
R2(6)
In arriving at equation 6, it is concluded that:
“When we measure the magnetic ﬁeld in this
region, we ﬁnd that it really is there and
that it behaves just as Eq. (29.17) predicts.
This conﬁrms directly the role of displacement
current as a source of magnetic ﬁeld. It is
now established beyond reasonable doubt that
Maxwell’s displacement current, far from be-
ing just an artiﬁce, is a fundamental fact of
Nature." [69, p 972]
In contrast, in the textbooks that comply with the Cri-
terion, they do not associate the term ε0dΦE/dtwith
a current. For example, when analysing the diﬀerent
terms of Ampere-Maxwell’s law, Chabay and Sherwood
[70, p 941] conclude that:
“We interpret the Ampere–Maxwell law as
saying that a time-varying electric ﬁeld is al-
ways associated with a magnetic ﬁeld."
The fact that Ampere-Maxwell law can be used to cal-
culate a magnetic ﬁeld whose circulation is directly pro-
portional to the speed with which the electric ﬁeld ﬂux
varies does not mean that it is generated by it. As dis-
cussed in Section III, a time-varying electric ﬁeld does
not generate a magnetic ﬁeld; the sources of the mag-
netic ﬁeld between the plates of a charging capacitor are
the surface currents in its plates and the conduction cur-
rents in the wires [8, 71–73].
The results indicate that, depending on the context, 10
textbooks recognise the presence of four possible sources
of ﬁelds EandB: a) charges; b) current; c) variation of E
generates B; d) variation of Bgenerates non-coulombic9
E. They do not consider it contradictory to indicate
charges and currents as sources on the one hand, and
time-varying electric and magnetic ﬁelds on the other.
B. Presenting the generation and propagation of
electromagnetic waves in relation to their sources
The study of the generation and propagation of electro-
magnetic waves provides a unique opportunity to clarify
the sources of the ﬁelds, to recognise that information
does not propagate instantaneously and that electric and
magnetic ﬁelds in waves are correlated but there is no
causal relationship between them. These aspects are as-
sessed through Criterion 2. The Cohen’s kappa coeﬃ-
cient obtained for this criterion was 0.88. Table III shows
the results of the evaluation of the aspects included in
criterion 2 for each of the textbooks.
Table IIIreveals that a large majority of the textbooks
analysed explicitly describe that the sources of the waves
are the accelerated charges. They do this using diﬀerent
approaches and depths, often relying on the analysis of
radiation emitted by oscillating charges in an antenna.
Especially noteworthy is the textbook by Hawkes et
al. [74], which takes a diﬀerent approach based on the
analysis of the ﬁelds generated by a point charge in dif-
ferent inertial reference frames. A point charge perform-
ing an URM generates an electric ﬁeld and a magnetic
ﬁeld around itself. An observer at rest with respect to
the charge detects only a static electric ﬁeld, so for such
an observer the charge does not radiate electromagnetic
waves. With this in mind, Hawkes et al. [74, p 974] state:
“The laws of physics must be the same in all
frames that move with a uniform velocity with
respect to each other. So, if a charge cannot
emit electromagnetic radiation in its own ref-
erence frame, it cannot emit electromagnetic
radiation in any frame moving with uniform
velocity with respect to the charge. Thus, a
charge can emit electromagnetic radiation in
free space only when accelerating."
Regardless of the approach used, we can see a general
agreement on the fact that the electromagnetic wave con-
sists of a disturbance of the propagating electromagnetic
ﬁeld and that the origins of such disturbances are accel-
erated charges. For instance, Wolfson [68, p 593] writes:
“All it takes to produce an electromagnetic
wave is a changing electric or magnetic
ﬁeld...Ultimately, changing ﬁelds of both
types result when we alter the motion of elec-
tric charge. Therefore, accelerated charge is
the source of electromagnetic waves."
However, when electromagnetic wave generation pro-
cesses are explained, we must pay attention to the lan-
guage if we wish to avoid possible misunderstandings. Inthis respect, two of the textbooks analysed do not com-
ply with Criterion 2.1. Depending on the context, they
suggest two possible sources of electromagnetic waves:
accelerated charges or a time-varying electric ﬁeld. For
example, when explaining the generation of the waves,
one of the textbooks describes the transmitter of Hertz’s
original experiment, which consists of a voltage source
connected to an induction coil using a switch and a par-
allel connected capacitor made of two metal rods sepa-
rated by a gap and two spheres connected at their ends.
It arrives to the following conclusion:
“When the transmitter is turned on, a strong
electric ﬁeld builds up in its gap. The elec-
tric ﬁeld ionizes the air, and acceleration of
the resulting free electrons causes more ion-
ization until the air conducts a spark. The
plates of the capacitor charge and discharge
periodically, while the sparks in the gap oscil-
late at the natural frequency of the LC circuit.
The electric ﬁeld oscillation creates an elec-
tromagnetic wave." [75, p 1094]
In our analysis of the way the textbooks address the re-
lationship between electric and magnetic ﬁelds in electro-
magnetic waves we found that every case demonstrates
that in a plane wave the ﬁelds are in phase and are math-
ematically linked according to the equation:
E(t)
B(t)=c (7)
Which involves, according to Serway and Jewett [76,
p 881]:
“...at every instant, the ratio of the magni-
tude of the electric ﬁeld to the magnitude of
the magnetic ﬁeld in an electromagnetic wave
equals the speed of light."
In contrast, when explaining the propagation of elec-
tromagnetic waves, only one third of the selected text-
books explain propagation without establishing causal
relationships between electric and magnetic ﬁelds (Cri-
terion 2.2). For instance, Bauer [64, p 943] writes that:
“Electromagnetic waves consist of electric and
magnetic ﬁelds, can travel through vacuum
without any supporting medium, and do not
involve moving charges or currents. The
existence of electromagnetic waves was ﬁrst
demonstrated in 1888 by the German physi-
cist Heinrich Hertz (1857–1894). Hertz used
an RLC circuit that induced a current in an
inductor that drove a spark gap. A spark gap
consists of two electrodes that, when a po-
tential diﬀerence is applied across them, pro-
duce a spark by exciting the gas between the
electrodes. Hertz placed a loop and a small
spark gap several meters apart. He observed10
Authors Criterion 2.1 Criterion 2.2
P. A. Tipler and G. Mosca C C
J. Walker, R. Resnick and D. Halliday C NC
D. C. Giancoli C NC
W. Bauer and G. Westfall C C
R. W. Chabay and B. A. Sherwood C C
D. M. Katz NC NC
T. A. Moore C C
R. A. Serway and J. W. Jewett C NC
R. L. Hawkes, J. Iqbal, et al. C NC
H. D. Young and R. A. Freedman C NC
R. Wolfson C NC
R. Knight NC NC
TABLE III. Summary of the results about the generation and pr opagation of electromagnetic waves in relation to the sourc es
of the electromagnetic waves. C2.1 implies the explanation that time-varying charge or current distributions generat e electro-
magnetic waves while C2.2 implies in electromagnetic waves both ﬁelds are associated with each other and are simultaneo us in
time without establishing a causal relationship between th em.
that sparks were induced in the remote loop
in a pattern that correlated with the electro-
magnetic oscillations in the primary RLC cir-
cuit. Thus, electromagnetic waves were able
to travel through space without any medium
to support them."
We note that the author describes the propagation of
waves in a way that is simple and understandable for
students without referring to any interaction between the
electric and magnetic ﬁelds of the electromagnetic wave.
In line with this, Chabay and Sherwood [70, p 947]
state that:
“Maxwell concluded that light must be a com-
bination of time-varying electric and mag-
netic ﬁelds that can propagate through oth-
erwise empty space, far from any charges or
currents."
Later, when referring to the electric and magnetic ﬁelds
of the electromagnetic wave, Chabay and Sherwood [70,
p 948] write that:
“...a pulse of radiation must contain both elec-
tric and magnetic ﬁelds, so that the pulse can
move forever through otherwise empty space,
far from any charges. The transverse electric
ﬁeld is accompanied by a transverse magnetic
ﬁeld perpendicular to the electric ﬁeld, with
E×Bin the direction of propagation."
It can be deduced from the explanation that the elec-
tric and magnetic ﬁelds in electromagnetic waves do not
interact with each other, being generated at the same
time. The explanation given by Chabay and Sherwood
is in accordance with equation 7, according to which the
ﬁelds in a point in space always vary in the same way
and simultaneously, so that one ﬁeld cannot be the cause
of the other.
However, two thirds of the textbooks analysed con-
sider that the propagation of electromagnetic waves liesin a supposedly self-sustaining mechanism, originated by
a time-varying electric ﬁeld that is supposed to generate
a time-varying magnetic ﬁeld that would in turn generate
an electric ﬁeld and so on. Let us consider the following
examples:
“Once an electromagnetic wave is generated,
it propagates on its own and does not require
any physical medium to continue its propa-
gation. The wave generates itself because a
time-varying electric ﬁeld generates a time-
varying magnetic ﬁeld, which in turn gener-
ates a time-varying electric ﬁeld. This process
is continually repeated." [74, p 962]
“First consider the magnetic ﬁeld. Because
it varies sinusoidally, it induces (via Fara-
day’s law of induction) a perpendicular elec-
tric ﬁeld that also varies sinusoidally. How-
ever, because that electric ﬁeld is varying si-
nusoidally, it induces (via Maxwell’s law of
induction) a perpendicular magnetic ﬁeld that
also varies sinusoidally. And so on. The two
ﬁelds continuously create each other via in-
duction, and the resulting sinusoidal varia-
tions in the ﬁelds travel as a wave—the elec-
tromagnetic wave." [77, p 976]
C. Presenting the electromagnetic ﬁeld as a single
entity in relation to diﬀerent reference systems
The special theory of relativity laid the foundation for
a new conception of electric and magnetic ﬁelds by no
longer considering them as separate entities but parts of
a single entity, the electromagnetic ﬁeld, which adopts
diﬀerent expressions depending on the reference system.
These aspects of the electromagnetic ﬁeld are assessed
through Criterion 3. The Cohen’s kappa coeﬃcient ob-
tained for this criterion was 0.94. Table IV shows the11
results of the evaluation of the aspects included in crite-
rion 3 for each of the textbooks.
Research in Physics Education has advocated the in-
clusion of a simpliﬁed relativistic approach to electro-
magnetism in introductory physics courses, in order to
establish coherence and encourage the construction of a
synthesised view of electric and magnetic ﬁelds as com-
plementary facets of the same entity [1]. However, more
than half of the textbooks analysed do not address any
of the aspects contained in Criterion 3. As far as the
analysis of electric and magnetic ﬁelds in diﬀerent refer-
ence systems is concerned, fewer than half of the text-
books deal with the subject (Criterion 3.1), while ﬁeld
transformations are dealt with by three of the textbooks
analysed (Criterion 3.2).
The place within the study of electromagnetism where
the aspects mentioned in Criterion 3 are addressed
changes depending on the text analysed. For example,
Chabay and Sherwood [70, p 678], following Biot-Savart’s
law, explain a “thought experiment” with ﬁctitious stu-
dents. Jack is sitting in the classroom and has an electri-
cally charged tape and a compass. Since, in his opinion,
the tape is at rest, it detects an electric ﬁeld, but the
compass does not deﬂect. Meanwhile, Jill, who also has
a compass in her hands, runs at high speed in front of
Jack. Jill detects an electric ﬁeld, but because in her
opinion the charged tape is moving, her compass deﬂects
and detects a magnetic ﬁeld. Thus, Chabay and Sher-
wood [70, p 678] conclude:
“Up until now we have implied that electric
ﬁelds and magnetic ﬁelds are fundamentally
diﬀerent, but this “thought experiment” shows
that they are in fact closely related."
Furthermore, Wolfson [68, p 682] deals with the rela-
tive nature of the ﬁelds in the chapter on special relativ-
ity, after having dealt with Maxwell’s laws and electro-
magnetic waves. To do so, he starts from the example
of a charge performing an URM with respect to a cer-
tain inertial reference frame and compares the ﬁelds that
would be detected by an observer located in that frame
versus the other who is at rest with respect to the charge.
Thus, Wolfson [68, p 682] conclude:
“So electric and magnetic ﬁelds aren’t abso-
lutes; what one observer sees as a purely elec-
tric ﬁeld another may see as a mix of elec-
tric and magnetic ﬁelds, and vice versa. You
can think of the electric and magnetic ﬁeld
as components of a more fundamental electro-
magnetic ﬁeld; how that ﬁeld breaks out into
electric and magnetic ﬁelds depends on your
frame of reference."
Within the textbooks that address ﬁeld transforma-
tions and present the electromagnetic ﬁeld as a single
entity, we come across two very diﬀerent approaches to
the problem. Knight’s textbook [66], for example, has asimilar structure to most of the texts analysed in terms
of the order and presentation of the topics and devotes
an entire chapter to discuss the electromagnetic ﬁeld,
its transformations and the electromagnetic waves. He
starts by comparing the forces on a charged particle in a
magnetic ﬁeld, for observers in diﬀerent reference frames
and assuming that the force is invariant, he concludes
[66, p 930]:
“Whether a ﬁeld is seen as “electric” or “mag-
netic” depends on the motion of the reference
frame relative to the sources of the ﬁeld."
Knight then deduces an approximation for the trans-
formation of the ﬁelds at low velocities and introduces
the notion of the electromagnetic ﬁeld [66, p 932]:
“We can no longer believe that electric and
magnetic ﬁelds have a separate, independent
existence. Changing from one reference frame
to another mixes and rearranges the ﬁelds.
Diﬀerent experimenters watching an event
will agree on the outcome, such as the de-
ﬂection of a charged particle, but they will
ascribe it to diﬀerent combinations of ﬁelds.
Our conclusion is that there is a single elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld that presents diﬀerent faces,
in terms of E and B, to diﬀerent viewers."
Furthermore, in Moore’s textbook [65] the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld is introduced before Maxwell’s own laws
and after having presented the ﬁelds EandBin situa-
tions with constant charges and currents. Moore, after
analysing the electric and magnetic forces on an elec-
tron in the neighbourhood of a conductor through which
current ﬂows for diﬀerent inertial reference systems and
applying the principle of relativity and Lorentz’s contrac -
tion, concludes [65, p 187]:
“...we must recognize that electric and mag-
netic ﬁelds are but two diﬀerent aspects of an
electromagnetic ﬁeld, whose reality and eﬀects
are frame independent, but whose division
into electric and magnetic parts is not. The
degree to which we interpret a given electro-
magnetic ﬁeld as being electric and/or mag-
netic depends on one’s choice of reference
frame. For example, the electromagnetic ﬁeld
of a charged particle at rest is purely electric,
but is a mixture of electric and magnetic ﬁelds
in a frame where the particle is moving."
Moore [65] then introduces Lorentz transformations for
ﬁelds and applies them in order to study the electromag-
netic ﬁeld generated by a charged particle.
VI. DISCUSSION
Within the framework of the deﬁned criteria, in this
section we discuss the results of the research questions12
Authors Criterion 3.1 Criterion 3.2
P. A. Tipler and G. Mosca NT NT
J. Walker, R. Resnick and D. Halliday NT NT
D. C. Giancoli NT NT
W. Bauer and G. Westfall NT NT
R. W. Chabay and B. A. Sherwood C C
D. M. Katz NT NT
T. A. Moore C C
R. A. Serway and J. W. Jewett NT NT
R. L. Hawkes, J. Iqbal, et al. C NT
H. D. Young and R. A. Freedman NT NT
R. Wolfson C NT
R. Knight C C
TABLE IV. Results of the criterion 3 evaluating whether the t extbooks selected present the electromagnetic ﬁeld as a sin gle
entity. C3.1 refers to, if an electric or magnetic ﬁeld is obs erved in one inertial reference frame, both ﬁelds are detect ed in any
other reference frame while C3.2 is related to the presentat ion of the Lorentz transformations and the electromagnetic ﬁeld as
a single entity.
that examined how the selected textbooks introduced
and explained the nature of electromagnetic ﬁelds. We
start by focusing on the descriptions of Maxwell’s equa-
tions, then we analyse how the textbooks explain the gen-
eration and propagation of electromagnetic waves. We
conclude by looking at their explanations as to how the
electromagnetic ﬁeld is presented depending on the frame
of reference chosen.
Regarding the introduction of Maxwell’s equations and
sources of magnetic ﬁelds, we found that all the text-
books gave clear explanations of the mathematical re-
lationships between the various terms in Faraday’s and
Ampère–Maxwell’s laws, but most only oﬀered causal in-
terpretations, identifying four possible sources of elect ro-
magnetic ﬁelds (Criteria 1.1 and 1.2, Table II). However,
an epistemological analysis of the nature of electromag-
netic ﬁelds reveals that the ﬁeld sources are charge and
current distributions. The sometimes confusing presen-
tation of Maxwell’s equations may play a part in some
of the diﬃculties students display in their understanding
of electric and magnetic ﬁelds, for instance, when they
mix up force with ﬁeld or do not know how to deﬁne
the main characteristics of an electric or magnetic ﬁeld
[20, 78, 79]. If the sources of electromagnetic ﬁelds were
introduced in line with the epistemological analysis, it
would promote easier comprehension and a better un-
derstanding of electric and magnetic ﬁelds, and it might
help prevent students from developing a cause-and-eﬀect
interpretation of Faraday’s and Ampère–Maxwell’s laws.
In the case of Faraday’s law, for example, a clear account
of how a changing current in a solenoid generates both an
electric ﬁeld and a magnetic ﬁeld (caused by the current)
would allow students to visualise how the law describes
the mathematical relationship between the circulation of
an electric ﬁeld around a closed curve and the magnetic
ﬁeld ﬂux variation; and without implying a cause-and-
eﬀect relationship between the two terms.
As for Ampère–Maxwell’s law, we found that most
textbooks in the sample (Criterion 1.2) attribute thecause of the magnetic ﬁeld between the plates of a parallel
plate capacitor to the displacement current. This inter-
pretation has endured over time and is a possible cause
of misunderstandings. Nevertheless, the epistemological
analysis of the classical theory of electromagnetism shows
that the magnetic ﬁeld is caused by the conduction cur-
rents in the capacitor plates. To avoid confusion, Rosser
[71] suggested renaming ε0dΦE/dtthe “Maxwell term”
and discontinuing the use of “displacement current”. In-
complete explanations may complicate the students’ abil-
ity to understand Maxwell’s equations and their applica-
tion to concrete phenomena by confusing ﬂux changes
with ﬁeld sources [13, 14, 80, 81].
When we analysed how the textbooks presented the
generation and propagation of electromagnetic waves in
relation to their sources, we found that most gave suit-
able explanations about the origin of waves, i.e., that
they are caused by time-varying charge or current distri-
butions. Furthermore, two-thirds of the textbooks used
arguments based on a supposed mechanism of mutual
generation between the time-varying ﬁelds to account
for the propagation of electromagnetic waves (Criteria
2.1 and 2.2, Table III). This kind of explanation may
have arisen from a causal interpretation of the diﬀerential
equations in which time was considered an independent
variable [61]. Thus, if we apply the diﬀerential form of
Faraday’s law to the ﬁelds in an electromagnetic wave,
it is reasonable to conclude that the time-varying mag-
netic ﬁeld is the cause of the electric ﬁeld. However,
the diﬀerential equations do not imply that the change
in one phenomenon over time is the cause of the other;
they only help aﬃrm, in the case of Faraday’s law, for
example, that the rate of change of the magnetic ﬁeld is
associated with a spatial variation in the electric ﬁeld.
The causal interpretation between diﬀerent phenomena
connected by a law is based on the explanations of the
phenomena and described with semantic rules of corre-
spondence [61], as is the case with Newton’s second law,
where the diﬀerential equation can be interpreted as a13
typical lineal causal relationship in which the force is the
cause of the acceleration. The sort of incomplete descrip-
tions of electromagnetic waves that we observed in some
of the textbooks could culminate in students ﬁnding it
hard to assimilate the concepts behind electromagnetic
waves and their propagation [82, 83].
We have shown that more than half of the textbooks
in the study did not include Einstein’s contributions to
the development of electromagnetic theory (Criteria 3.1
and 3.2, Table IV). Yet, an assessment of the asymme-
tries that appear in electromagnetic phenomena when
Maxwell’s equations are applied within diﬀerent iner-
tial frames of reference could help students better un-
derstand the relativistic nature of electromagnetic ﬁelds
and the theory’s coherence. Since electromagnetic in-
duction is explained from the perspective of diﬀerent ob-
servers, for example, then it provides the perfect oppor-
tunity to explain away these supposed asymmetries in
the electromagnetic ﬁeld and encourage students to think
about the explanatory power of electromagnetic theory
[1, 66, 70, 84]
VII. CONCLUSIONS
Scientiﬁc theories are characterised by their consis-
tency and predictive power. These qualities are broadly
accepted, but it is often hard to transmit them to physics
students. The analysis of textbooks is justiﬁed by the im-
portance of its inﬂuence in both teaching and learning in
the classrooms where sciences are taught. In this paper,
we research into the way the nature of the electromag-
netic ﬁeld is presented in a dozen of textbooks chosen
amongst those most frequently used to teach Introduc-
tory physics at university.
Our analysis, which focused on the epistemological
development of electromagnetic theory, highlights that
many of the textbooks exhibited inconsistencies in their
approach to electromagnetic ﬁelds and their relationship
with their sources, Maxwell’s equations and electromag-
netic waves. In most of the textbooks analysed there is
a tendency to make cause-eﬀect interpretations between
the diﬀerent terms of Maxwell’s equations. Ten of the
twelve books analysed (see Table II) explicitly state that
Faraday’s law implies that a varying magnetic ﬁeld gen-
erates an electric ﬁeld and that the Ampère-Maxwell law
implies that a varying electric ﬁeld generates a magnetic
ﬁeld, without discussing other more intuitive sources such
as electric charges at rest or in motion previously dis-
cussed. Therefore, one could interpret that there are
multiple sources of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, including
theoretical constructs such as the ﬂux of the time vary-
ing electric ﬁeld. However, as we have contrasted in the
epistemological analysis, the only sources of any electro-
magnetic ﬁeld are charge and current distributions. See,
for example, how this is explained at the introductory
physics level in one of the books reviewed [65, p 271].
Regarding the propagation of electromagnetic waves,eight of the twelve textbooks analysed explain it through
a mechanism of mutual induction, where a variable elec-
tric ﬁeld generates a variable magnetic ﬁeld that in turn
generates a variable electric ﬁeld and so on (see Table
III). In this way the ﬁelds continuously create each other
and travel generating the electromagnetic wave. This ex-
planation may lead students to think that there are mul-
tiple sources of the electromagnetic ﬁeld and promote an
incomplete view by considering the electric ﬁeld and the
magnetic ﬁeld as two independent entities. This ignores
the fact that these ﬁelds have a common cause and are
components of the same entity, the electromagnetic ﬁeld,
and therefore cannot interact with each other [9].
The inconsistencies detected in our analysis suggest
that electromagnetism should be taught with an empha-
sis on the relationship between the diﬀerent terms in
Maxwell’s equations so that students can appreciate that
both the electric and magnetic ﬁelds in an electromag-
netic wave must simultaneously fulﬁl Maxwell’s equa-
tions. As such, students couldn’t possibly imagine one
ﬁeld existing without the other and it would be mean-
ingless to ask which is the cause and which is the ef-
fect. Each ﬁeld depends on the other and neither can
be considered the source of the other, hence there is a
relationship of circular causality between the ﬁelds [85].
The ﬁelds of an electromagnetic wave constitute a single
entity: the electromagnetic ﬁeld, which is produced by
accelerated charges and propagates at the speed of light.
We believe that if there were a greater emphasis on these
points, along with a suitable description of electromag-
netic ﬁeld sources, students would be able to develop a
more accurate mental construct of the generation and
propagation of electromagnetic waves by simplifying and
clearly separating the two processes. This would set the
stage to address the concept of the electromagnetic ﬁeld
and connect both processes through the notion that the
ﬁelds propagate at a ﬁnite velocity.
In respect of the criterion 3, considering the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld as a single entity in relation to diﬀerent
reference systems, we ﬁnd that, unlike the other criteria
analysed, less than half of the books address the subject
(see Table IV). The books that mention this aspect do
so in line with the epistemological development of the
theory. However, it would be desirable for introductory
physics textbooks to qualitatively analyze these aspects
of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, as it is a key topic for estab-
lishing coherence in the theory and providing a uniﬁed
view of the ﬁeld.
An introduction to the Lorentz transformations can be
used to resolve the asymmetries and contradictions that
arise when electromagnetic theory is applied to diﬀerent
inertial frames of reference and to formally describe the
singularity of electromagnetic ﬁelds. Considering that
the special theory of relativity is covered in more ad-
vanced courses, it is hard to imagine the inclusion of the
Lorentz transformations in introductory courses on elec-
tromagnetism. Nevertheless, we believe it is feasible to
introduce a simpliﬁed relativistic framework for electro-14
magnetism that is consistent with courses on classical
mechanics. The invariance of the force could be used to
resolve the contradictions in the predictions made for dif-
ferent observers, which would bestow the Lorentz force
a more fundamental status compared to that of the elec-
tric and magnetic force [86, 87]. This approach could
provide a suitable framework for students to understand
that the ﬁeld transformations originate from the need
for simple physical situations, by using links between
the perspectives of two observers in relative motion to
each other [1, 66]. Although Galilean transformations
do not resolve the asymmetries and contradictions that
arise when Maxwell’s equations are applied to diﬀerent
inertial frames of reference, their introduction means stu -
dents can appreciate the inherently relativistic nature of
electromagnetism and develop a consistent concept of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld in keeping with current scientiﬁc
knowledge.
The inconsistencies in the presentation of the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld found in the textbooks in the sample co-
incide with some of the learning diﬃculties detected by
research in PER [16, 78, 82]. This leads us to think that
similar attention to PER results devoted by textbook
authors and curriculum designers in other physics top-
ics (e.g., in mechanics) would be desirable in the topic of
electromagnetic ﬁeld sources and their propagation. Thisattention could help students to a greater understanding.
In the table V, we note that two books stand out that
meet all the assessed aspects, Matter and interactions
[70] and Six ideas that shaped physics [65]. These books
are distinctive in that they pay particular attention to
PER outcomes, and because their use in the classroom
has been subject to evaluation in relation to the learning
achieved by students [88, 89].This is not to say that just
paying attention to PER results when explaining the-
ory would improve student learning, but rather that tak-
ing these research ﬁndings into account in textbooks is
a factor that can improve learning. We hope this study
provides some ideas to inspire the development of new
teaching materials that are more in line with scientiﬁc
practice and progress and the current status of classical
electromagnetic theory.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank PEDECIBA (MEC,
UdelaR, Uruguay) and express their gratitude for the
grant Fisica Nolineal (ID 722) Programa Grupos I+D
CSIC 2018 (UdelaR, Uruguay). Part of this research was
funded by the Spanish government (MINECO\FEDER
PID2019 -105172RB-I00)
[1]I. Galili and D. Kaplan, Changing approach
to teaching electromagnetism in a concep-
tually oriented introductory physics course,
American Journal of Physics 65, 657 (1997) .
[2]R. Chabay and B. Sherwood, Restructuring the
introductory electricity and magnetism course,
American Journal of Physics 74, 329 (2006) .
[3]K. Zuza, J.-M. Almudí, A. Leniz, and J. Guisas-
ola, Addressing students’ diﬃculties with fara-
day’s law: A guided problem solving approach,
Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 10, 010122 (2014) .
[4]K. Jelicic, M. Planinic, and G. Planinsic, Analyzing high
school students’ reasoning about electromagnetic induc-
tion,Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 13, 010112 (2017) .
[5]J. Li and C. Singh, Investigating and improv-
ing introductory physics students’ understand-
ing of electric ﬁeld and the superposition princi-
ple: The case of a continuous charge distribution,
Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 15, 010116 (2019) .
[6]E. Campos, E. Hernandez, P. Barniol, and G. Zavala,
Phenomenographic analysis and comparison of stu-
dents’ conceptual understanding of electric and
magnetic ﬁelds and the principle of superposition,
Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 17, 020117 (2021) .
[7]E. Campos, E. Hernandez, P. Barniol, and G. Zavala,
Analysis and comparison of students’ conceptual under-
standing of symmetry arguments in gauss’s and ampere’s
laws,Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 19, 010103 (2023) .
[8]A. P. French, Is maxwell’s displacement current a cur-
rent?, The Physics Teacher 38, 274 (2000) .[9]O. D. Jeﬁmenko, Presenting electromagnetic the-
ory in accordance with the principle of causality,
European Journal of Physics 25, 287 (2004) .
[10]S. E. Hill, Rephrasing faraday’s law,
The Physics Teacher 48, 410 (2010) .
[11]S. E. Hill, Reanalyzing the ampère-maxwell law,
The Physics Teacher 49, 343 (2011) .
[12]M. Tran, Evidence for maxwell’s equations, ﬁelds, force
laws and alternative theories of classical electrodynamic s,
European Journal of Physics 39, 063001 (2018) .
[13]A. Suárez, A. C. Martí, K. Zuza, and J. Guisas-
ola, Las relaciones causa-efecto en las ecuaciones
de maxwell y sus implicancias en la enseñanza del
electromagnetismo en los cursos introductorios de
física, Revista Brasileira de Ensino de Física 44,
10.1590/1806-9126-RBEF-2022-0230 (2022).
[14]A. Suarez, A. C. Marti, K. Zuza, and J. Guisasola, Uni-
ﬁed approach to the electromagnetic ﬁeld: the role of
sources, causality and wave propagation, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.13479 (2022).
[15]S. Rainson, G. Tranströmer, and L. Viennot, Stu-
dents’ understanding of superposition of electric ﬁelds,
American Journal of Physics 62, 1026 (1994) .
[16]J. Guisasola, J. M. Almudí, J. Salinas, K. Zuza,
and M. Ceberio, The gauss and ampere laws: diﬀer-
ent laws but similar diﬃculties for student learning,
European Journal of Physics 29, 1005 (2008) .
[17]C. A. Manogue, K. Browne, T. Dray, and B. Edwards,
Why is ampère’s law so hard? a look at middle-division
physics, American Journal of Physics 74, 344 (2006) .15
Authors Cr. 1.1 Cr. 1.2 Cr. 2.1 Cr. 2.2 Cr. 3.1 Cr. 3.2 Criteria satisﬁed
P. A. Tipler and G. Mosca C NC C C NT NT 3
J. Walker, R. Resnick and D. Halliday C NC C NC NT NT 2
D. C. Giancoli C NC C NC NT NT 2
W. Bauer and G. Westfall C NC C C NT NT 3
R. W. Chabay and B. A. Sherwood C C C C C C 6
D. M. Katz C NC NC NC NT NT 1
T. A. Moore C C C C C C 6
R. A. Serway and J. W. Jewett C NC C NC NT NT 2
R. L. Hawkes, J. Iqbal, et al. C NC C NC C NT 3
H. D. Young and R. A. Freedman C NC C NC NT NT 2
R. Wolfson C NC C NC C NT 3
R. Knight C NC NC NC C C 3
TABLE V. Results corresponding to all criteria.
[18]J. Guisasola, J. M. Almudi, and K. Zuza, University stu-
dents’ understanding of electromagnetic induction, Inter -
national Journal of Science Education 35, 2692 (2013).
[19]C. S. Wallace and S. V. Chasteen, Upper-
division students’ diﬃculties with ampère’s law,
Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 6, 020115 (2010) .
[20]E. Campos, G. Zavala, K. Zuza, and J. Guisasola,
Electric ﬁeld lines: The implications of students’ in-
terpretation on their understanding of the concept
of electric ﬁeld and of the superposition principle,
American Journal of Physics 87, 660 (2019) .
[21]E. L. Chiappetta, G. H. Sethna, and D. A. Fillman, A
quantitative analysis of high school chemistry textbooks
for scientiﬁc literacy themes and expository learning aids ,
Journal of research in science teaching 28, 939 (1991).
[22]T. W. Shiland, Quantum mechanics and conceptual
change in high school chemistry textbooks, Journal of
Research in Science Teaching: The Oﬃcial Journal of
the National Association for Research in Science Teach-
ing34, 535 (1997).
[23]J. E. Roseman, L. Stern, and M. Koppal, A method for
analyzing the coherence of high school biology textbooks,
Journal of Research in Science Teaching: The Oﬃcial
Journal of the National Association for Research in Sci-
ence Teaching 47, 47 (2010).
[24]C. Ruggieri, Students’ use and perception of text-
books and online resources in introductory physics,
Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 16, 020123 (2020) .
[25]N. Didi ş Körhasan and M. Hıd ır, How should
textbook analogies be used in teaching physics?,
Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 15, 010109 (2019) .
[26]L. Zeng, C. Smith, G. H. Poelzer, J. Rodriguez,
E. Corpuz, and G. Yanev, Illustrations and sup-
porting texts for sound standing waves of air
columns in pipes in introductory physics textbooks,
Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 10, 020110 (2014) .
[27]F. Pingel, UNESCO guidebook on textbook research and
textbook revision (Unesco, 2010).
[28]M. Koppal and A. Caldwell, Meeting the challenge of
science literacy: Project 2061 eﬀorts to improve science
education, Cell Biology Education 3, 28 (2004).
[29]E. Chiappetta, T. Ganesh, Y. Lee, and M. Phillips,
Examination of science textbook analysis research con-
ducted on textbooks published over the past 100 years
in the united states, in annual meeting of the National
Association for Research in Science Teaching, San Fran-cisco, CA (2006).
[30]D. Butler, The textbook of the future: undergradu-
ate textbooks are going digital. declan butler asks how
this will shake up student reading habits and the multi-
billion-dollar print textbook market, Nature 458, 568
(2009).
[31]R. A. Duschl, Research on the history and philosophy of
science, Handbook of research on science teaching and
learning 2, 443 (1994).
[32]M. R. Matthews, History, philosophy and science teach-
ing: New perspectives (Springer, 2017).
[33]J. Guisasola, J. M. Almudí, and C. Furió, The nature of
science and its implications for physics textbooks, Scienc e
& Education 14, 321 (2005).
[34]K. Ruthven, C. Laborde, J. Leach, and A. Tiberghien,
Design tools in didactical research: Instrumenting the
epistemological and cognitive aspects of the design
of teaching sequences, Educational researcher 38, 329
(2009).
[35]R. Duit, H. Gropengießer, U. Kattmann, M. Ko-
morek, and I. Parchmann, The model of educational
reconstruction–a framework for improving teaching and
learning science, in Science education research and prac-
tice in Europe (Brill, 2012) pp. 13–37.
[36]K. Zuza, P. Sarriugarte, J. Ametller, P. R. L. Heron,
and J. Guisasola, Towards a research program in de-
signing and evaluating teaching materials: An exam-
ple from dc resistive circuits in introductory physics,
Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 16, 020149 (2020) .
[37]N. J. Nersessian, Should physicists preach what they
practice?, Science & Education 4, 203 (1995).
[38]N. R. Council et al.,National science education standards
(National Academies Press, 1996).
[39]M. Rocard, P. Csermely, D. Jorde, D. Lenzen,
H. Walberg-Henriksson, and V. Hemmo, Science
education now: A renewed pedagogy for the fu-
ture of europe, brussels: European commission,
Retrieved from: http://ec . europa. eu/research/science-
society/documen-t_library/pdf_06/report-rocard-
onscience-education_en. pdf (2007).
[40]B. Bensaude-Vincent, Textbooks on the map of science
studies, Science & Education 15, 667 (2006).
[41]J. Guisasola, Teaching and learning electricity: The re-
lations between macroscopic level observations and mi-
croscopic level theories, in International handbook of
research in history, philosophy and science teaching16
(Springer, 2014) pp. 129–156.
[42]D. Hodson, Nature of science in the science curriculum:
Origin, development, implications and shifting emphases,
inInternational handbook of research in history, philoso-
phy and science teaching (Springer, 2014) pp. 911–970.
[43]I. Lakatos, History of science and its rational reconstruc-
tions, in PSA: Proceedings of the biennial meeting of the
philosophy of science association , Vol. 1970 (D. Reidel
Publishing, 1970) pp. 91–136.
[44]P. M. Harman and P. M. Harman, Energy, force and
matter: the conceptual development of nineteenth-century
physics (Cambridge University Press, 1982).
[45]E. Whittaker, A History of the Theories of Aether and
Electricity: Vol. I: The Classical Theories; Vol. II: The
Modern Theories, 1900-1926 , Vol. 1 (Courier Dover Pub-
lications, 1989).
[46]N. J. Nersessian, Faraday to Einstein: Constructing
meaning in scientiﬁc theories , Vol. 1 (Springer Science
& Business Media, 2012).
[47]W. Berkson, Fields of Force: The Development of a
World View from Faraday to Einstein. (Routledge, 2014).
[48]O. Darrigol, Electrodynamics from Ampere to Einstein
(Oxford University Press, 2000).
[49]J. C. Maxwell, The Scientiﬁc Papers of James Clerk Maxwell ,
edited by W. D. Niven, Cambridge Library Collection -
Physical Sciences, Vol. 1 (Cambridge University Press,
2011).
[50]J. C. Maxwell, A treatise on electricity and magnetism ,
Vol. 2 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1881).
[51]J. Roche, Explaining electromagnetic induction: a criti-
cal re-examination. the clinical value of history in physic s,
Physics Education 22, 91 (1987) .
[52]J. Roche, The present status of maxwell 's displacement
current, European Journal of Physics 19, 155 (1998) .
[53]A. Einstein et al., On the electrodynamics of moving bod-
ies, Annalen der physik 17, 891 (1905).
[54]O. D. Jeﬁmenko, Electricity and Magnetism: An Intro-
duction to the Theory of Electric and Magnetic Fields
(Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1966).
[55]O. D. Jeﬁmenko, Electricity and magnetism: an introduc-
tion to the theory of electric and magnetic ﬁelds (Electret
Scientiﬁc Company, 1989) pp. 516–517.
[56]M. A. Heald and J. B. Marion, Classical electromagnetic
radiation (Saunders College Publishing, 1995) pp. 261–
262.
[57]D. J. Griﬃths, Introduction to Electrodynamics. Always
learning (Pearson Education, 2013) pp. 449–450.
[58]G. Rosser, Interpretation of classical electromagnetism ,
Vol. 78 (Springer Science & Business Media, 2013) pp.
48–49.
[59]R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feyn-
man Lectures on Physics. Vol. II. (Boston: Addison-
Wesley Publishing Company, 1963) Chap. 26.
[60]L. Cohen, L. Manion, and K. Morrison, Research methods
in education (Taylor & Francis Group, 2007) Chap. 4, pp.
114–115.
[61]M. Bunge, Causality and modern science. New Brunswick
(NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2009).
[62]M. Banerjee, M. Capozzoli, L. McSweeney, and D. Sinha,
Beyond kappa: A review of interrater agreement mea-
sures, Canadian journal of statistics 27, 3 (1999).
[63]P. A. Tipler and G. Mosca, Physics for Scientists and
Engineers (W.H. Freeman and Company, 2008).[64]W. Bauer and G. Westfall, University physics with mod-
ern physics (McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2014).
[65]T. A. Moore, Six ideas that shaped physics: Electric and
Magnetic Fields are Uniﬁed. Unit E. (McGraw-Hill New
York, 2017).
[66]R. D. Knight, Physics for scientists and engineers: a
strategic approach with modern physics Global Edition
(Pearson Higher Ed., 2022).
[67]D. C. Giancoli, Physics for scientists and engineers with
modern physics (Pearson Education, 2014).
[68]R. Wolfson, Essential University Physics Global Edition ,
Vol. 2 (Pearson Education, 2020).
[69]H. D. Young and R. A. Freedman, University Physics
with Modern Physics (Pearson Education, 2020).
[70]R. W. Chabay and B. A. Sherwood, Matter and interac-
tions (John Wiley & Sons, 2015).
[71]W. G. V. Rosser, Does the displacement cur-
rent in empty space produce a magnetic ﬁeld?,
American Journal of Physics 44, 1221 (1976) .
[72]J. A. Milsom, Untold secrets of the slowly charging ca-
pacitor, American Journal of Physics 88, 194 (2020) .
[73]T. Hyodo, Maxwell’s displacement current and
the magnetic ﬁeld between capacitor electrodes,
European Journal of Physics 43, 065202 (2022) .
[74]R. L. Hawkes, J. Iqbal, F. Mansour, M. Milner-Bolotin,
and P. J. Williams, Physics for scientists and engineers:
an interactive approach (Nelson, 2019).
[75]D. M. Katz, Physics for Scientists and Engineers: Foun-
dations and Connections, Advance Edition, Volume 2 ,
Vol. 2 (Cengage Learning, 2015).
[76]R. A. Serway and J. W. Jewett, Physics for scientists
and engineers , Vol. 2 (Cengage learning, 2019).
[77]J. Walker, R. Resnick, and D. Halliday, Halliday and
resnick fundamentals of physics (Wiley, 2014).
[78]J. Guisasola, J. M. Almudí, and J. L. Zubi-
mendi, Diﬃculties in learning the introductory mag-
netic ﬁeld theory in the ﬁrst years of university,
Science Education 88, 443 (2004) .
[79]K. Zuza, P. van Kampen, M. De Cock, T. Kelly,
and J. Guisasola, Introductory university physics
students’ understanding of some key characteris-
tics of classical theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld,
Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 14, 020117 (2018) .
[80]K. Zuza, J. Guisasola, M. Michelini, and L. Santi, Re-
thinking faraday 's law for teaching motional electromo-
tive force, European Journal of Physics 33, 397 (2012) .
[81]E. Kuo and C. E. Wieman, Toward instructional design
principles: Inducing faraday’s law with contrasting cases ,
Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 12, 010128 (2016) .
[82]B. S. Ambrose, P. R. L. Heron, S. Vokos, and L. C. Mc-
Dermott, Student understanding of light as an electro-
magnetic wave: Relating the formalism to physical phe-
nomena, American Journal of Physics 67, 891 (1999) .
[83]N. S. Podolefsky and N. D. Finkelstein, Analogi-
cal scaﬀolding and the learning of abstract ideas in
physics: An example from electromagnetic waves,
Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 3, 010109 (2007) .
[84]J. Potters and B. Leuridan, Studying scientiﬁc thought
experiments in their context: Albert einstein and electro-
magnetic induction, Studies in History and Philosophy
of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics 58, 1 (2017).
[85]F. Halbwachs, Réﬂexions sur la causalité physique, in Les
théories de la causalité , edited by M. Bunge, F. Halb-17
wachs, T. S. Kuhn, and J. Piaget (Presses Universitaires
de France Paris, 1971) pp. 19–36.
[86]G. Preti, F. de Felice, and L. Masiero, On the
galilean non-invariance of classical electromagnetism,
European Journal of Physics 30, 381 (2009) .
[87]J. A. Heras, The galilean limits of maxwell’s equa-
tions, American Journal of Physics 78, 1048 (2010) ,
https://doi.org/10.1119/1.3442798 .[88]M. A. Kohlmyer, M. D. Caballero, R. Catram-
bone, R. W. Chabay, L. Ding, M. P. Hau-
gan, M. J. Marr, B. A. Sherwood, and M. F.
Schatz, Tale of two curricula: The performance
of 2000 students in introductory electromagnetism,
Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 5, 020105 (2009) .
[89]T. A. Moore, Six ideas that shaped physics. instructor’s manual
(2017).