Dielectric environment sensitivity of carbon centres in hexagonal
boron nitride
Danis I. Badrtdinov,1Carlos Rodriguez-Fernandez,2Magdalena Grzeszczyk,3
Zhizhan Qiu,4Kristina Vaklinova,3, 5Pengru Huang,3, 5, 6Alexander Hampel,7
Kenji Watanabe,8Takashi Taniguchi,9Lu Jiong,4, 10Marek Potemski,11, 12, 13
Cyrus E. Dreyer,7, 14Maciej Koperski,3, 5,and Malte Rösner1,y
1Institute for Molecules and Materials, Radboud University,
Heijendaalseweg 135, 6525 AJ Nijmegen, Netherlands
2Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Tampere University, 33720 Tampere, Finland
3Institute for Functional Intelligent Materials,
National University of Singapore, 117544, Singapore
4Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, 117543, Singapore
5Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
National University of Singapore, 117575, Singapore
6Guangxi Key Laboratory of Information Materials, Guilin
University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China
7Center for Computational Quantum Physics, Flatiron
Institute, 162 5thAvenue, New York, NY 10010, USA
8Research Center for Functional Materials, National
Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan
9International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics,
National Institute for Materials Science, 305-0044, Japan
10Centre for Advanced 2D Materials, National University of Singapore, 117546, Singapore
11Laboratoire National des Champs Magnétiques Intenses,
CNRS-UGA-UPS-INSA-EMFL, 25 Av. des Martyrs, 38042 Grenoble, France
12CENTERA Labs, Institute of High Pressure Physics, PAS, PL-01-142 Warsaw, Poland
13Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, ul. Pasteura 5, 02-093 Warszawa, Poland
14Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, New York 11794-3800, USA
(Dated: May 16, 2023)
1arXiv:2305.08240v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  14 May 2023Abstract
A key advantage of utilizing van der Waals materials as defect-hosting platforms for quantum
applications is the controllable proximity of the defect to the surface or the substrate for improved
light extraction, enhanced coupling with photonic elements, or more sensitive metrology. However,
this aspect results in a signiﬁcant challenge for defect identiﬁcation and characterization, as the
defect’s optoelectronic properties depend on the speciﬁcs of the atomic environment. Here we
explore the mechanisms by which the environment can inﬂuence the properties of carbon impurity
centres in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). We compare the optical and electronic properties of such
defects between bulk-like and few-layer ﬁlms, showing alteration of the zero-phonon line energies,
modiﬁcations to their phonon sidebands, and enhancements of their inhomogeneous broadenings.
Todisentanglethevariousmechanismsresponsibleforthesechanges, includingtheatomicstructure,
electronic wavefunctions, and dielectric screening environment of the defect center, we combine ab-
initiocalculations based on a density-functional theory with a quantum embedding approach. By
studying a variety of carbon-based defects embedded in monolayer and bulk hBN, we demonstrate
that the dominant eﬀect of the change in the environment is the screening of the density-density
Coulomb interactions within and between the defect orbitals. Our comparative analysis of the
experimental and theoretical ﬁndings paves the way for improved identiﬁcation of defects in low-
dimensional materials and the development of atomic scale sensors of dielectric environments.
I. INTRODUCTION
Point defects in semiconductors and insulators have emerged as robust and manipulatable
quantum systems for applications such as qubits for quantum computers [1–4], single-photon
emitters (SPEs) for quantum communication [5, 6], and nanoprobes for quantum metrology
[7]. In this context, two-dimensional van der Waals (2DvdW) bonded compounds have been
proposed as promising host materials. One key beneﬁt arises from the potentially atomically
perfect surfaces of these materials. Quantum defects may reside in close proximity to the
surface without suﬀering instabilities in their optoelectronic and/or coherence properties due
tosurfacedanglingbonds, adsorbates, orlocalchargevariations. Thishasseveraladvantages
msemaci@nus.edu.sg
ym.roesner@science.ru.nl
2for creating sensors of local ﬁelds at the nanoscale, better extraction eﬃciency for defect
SPEs, and direct imaging or manipulating defects by scanning probe techniques [8, 9]. The
most developed of such host material is hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)[10, 11]. It is widely
available [12] and its large band gap is conducive to the formation of deep quantum levels.
There have been many reports indicating hBN hosts SPEs [13–16] with some allowing for
spinmanipulationswithinthenegativelychargedboronvacancydefects[17–19]. Speciﬁcally,
it has been shown experimentally [20, 21] and theoretically [22–25] that carbon impurities in
hBN can give rise to a plethora of defect centres with a wide variety of properties attractive
for quantum applications.
The existence of defects in proximity to surfaces and interfaces also presents a signiﬁcant
challenge. Quantum technologies often require arrays of defects with identical properties
and though the surfaces and interfaces of the substrate can be atomically clean, proximity
to them may change the properties of the defect, including emission energies and linewidths
[26]. For example, hBN ﬁlms are usually multilayer and range from tens of nanometers to a
few atomic layers. Even a defect with the same chemical composition may exhibit diﬀerent
experimental signatures depending on its position with respect to the interface, surface,
or edge of the ﬁlm. A quantitative understanding of these eﬀects is necessary for defect
identiﬁcation and quantum applications.
In order to understand the inﬂuence of surfaces and interfaces on the properties of defects in
hBN and other 2DvdW materials, several eﬀects must be disentangled. First, the diﬀerent
distances to surrounding atoms or vacant spaces may change the structure of the defect,
especially if it involves displacements of atoms out of the 2D plane. Such structural modiﬁ-
cations will also impact the electron-lattice coupling responsible for the phonon broadening
of optical transitions. The electronic wavefunctions associated with the defect states may
also evolve according to the variations in symmetry and environment. Additionally, the
alteration of the dielectric screening environment experienced by the defect will modify the
Coulomb interactions between electrons occupying the defect levels. The latter has been
recognized before as an important contribution to correlation eﬀects in layered materials,
such as for exciton formation [27–29] and magnetism [30]. The relative importance of all
of these factors is expected to diﬀer between defects with diﬀerent atomic and electronic
structures of the ground and excited states.
In this work, we use a combination of experimental characterization, via optical and scan-
3ning probe spectroscopy, and ﬁrst-principle theoretical analysis to elucidate the inﬂuence
of the environment of the defects in 2DvdW materials on their properties. We inspect
the environmental sensitivity of the carbon impurity and native defect centres in hBN, as
intentional carbon doping allows us to create reproducible defect centres with stable photo-
luminescence (PL) resonances. Thus, we can control the defect density and the proximity
of the defects to the surface by isolating ﬁlms of varied thicknesses. We demonstrate the
evolution of the optical spectra from ensembles of speciﬁc defect types in 50nm thick
hBN ﬁlms to individual defects in 10atomic layers of hBN. We interpret the modiﬁcation
of the PL spectra based on a combination of density-functional theory (DFT) calculations
and a recently-developed quantum embedding approach [31], supported further by scanning
tunneling spectra (STS). We apply the theoretical approaches to defects in monolayer and
bulk hBN, which allows us to disentangle the various eﬀects on defect properties arising
from the surrounding environment.
We ﬁnd that the dominant eﬀect of the environment is the change in dielectric screening,
which aﬀects the intra- and interorbital density-density Coulomb interaction between elec-
trons in defect states. The enhanced screening in bulk form of the crystal signiﬁcantly
reduces the energy of intradefect optical transitions if they depend on such interactions. In
addition, we propose that this sensitivity to the dielectric environment can be utilized as a
sensor for local dielectric constants when brought into contact with surfaces, adsorbates, or
liquids. We highlight that the optical transitions of the defects based on the substitutional
carbon dimer have the potential for such applications.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we describe our experimental optical and
scanning-probe measurements, which motivate the systematic theoretical study of environ-
mental eﬀects on defects given in Sec. III. In Sec. IV we discuss the main results and the
implications for defect identiﬁcation/characterization, as well as the use of defects to detect
changes in a dielectric environment.
II. EXPERIMENTAL CHARACTERIZATION OF CARBON-ENRICHED hBN
In this study, we characterise ultra-pure hBN crystals grown via high-pressure-temperature
gradient methods. Carbon doping is achieved post-growth by annealing the crystals in a
graphite furnace at 2000C for one hour, which gives rise to multiple optically active defect
4centres [20]. Details on the growth and sample fabrication are given in the Methods Section.
The overall goal of our experimental characterization of these samples is twofold. Firstly,
we aim to determine the general properties of the defects that are present to motivate the
choices of defects for our theoretical study. Secondly, we aim to inspect how the environment
changes the experimental signatures of these defects.
A. Scanning probe measurements
To address the ﬁrst objective, we perform scanning-tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy
(STM/STS) measurements on a three-layer-thick sample. We can correlate defects observed
directly via STM with features of the electronic structure via STS that we expect to see in
our theoretical calculations. This allows us to get an overview of the properties of relevant
defects in our samples, which is important for the next theoretical steps, as there is a huge
variety of carbon-related defects that may occur in hBN [22–25]. We present some represen-
tative cases in Fig. 1. The STM data (panels on the right) demonstrates well-isolated defect
centres that appear as symmetric or asymmetric features in the colour maps. In the dI=dV
STS spectra we see that several of these defects (labelled #1 to #3), involve resonances
near the hBN conduction or valence bands, consistent with simple defects, such as carbon
substitutions for boron or nitrogen vacancies [32, 33]. Accordingly, we start with simple
defects in our theoretical modelling discussed in Sec. III.
B. Photoluminescence spectroscopy
We now analyze the optical PL response of carbon-doped hBN in the visible and near-
infrared spectral range. We study the eﬀect of the defect environment by considering two
samples. The ﬁrst is bulk-like, characterized by a thickness of about 50 nm. Here, the
defects are more likely embedded within the bulk of hBN rather than being localized at the
surface or the interface with the SiO 2substrate. The second sample is about 10 hBN layers
in thickness, such that on average the defects are in closer vicinity to the surface/interface.
In all cases, optical and scanning probe measurements were conducted far from the edges of
the samples.
We ﬁrst focus on defect centres in the bulk-like hBN:C ﬁlms. In Fig. 2(a) we show the PL
5FIG. 1. Scanning tunneling spectra (STS) for defects located in 3-layer thick carbon-doped hBN
ﬁlm, which were initially identiﬁed through scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM). The STM
images are presented next to the corresponding STS curves. All experiments were performed at
the temperature T= 77K, except for the defect #4, which was inspected at T= 4:7K. STM
images of defects #1  #3 were measured under the conditions Vs= 5V,It= 30pA. For defect
#4, STM image was obtained under the conditions Vs= 4:5V,It= 100pA. The STS #0 was
measured on a pristine hBN area free of defects. The inset constitutes the magniﬁed image of the
STS curve of defect #4, which demonstrates the ﬁne structure of the vibrionic response arising due
to the electron-phonon coupling. The scale bar in the STM images corresponds to 2 nm.
6FIG. 2. The PL spectra of bulk (about 50 nm thick) hBN:C ﬁlm measured at low temperature
(1.6K)inmicroscopicbackscatteringgeometry(a). Fourdistinctspectralfeaturescanbeidentiﬁed,
which we attribute to speciﬁc defect centres active in near-infrared (A1 and A2) and visible (A3
and A4) spectral regions. The spectra of the speciﬁc defects (b-e) are normalized towards uniform
maximum intensity for ease of comparison. A comparative representation of PL spectra of hBN:C
in the bulk limit ( 50 nm thick) and a few layers’ limit (about 10 layers) is presented for defects A3
(f) and A4 (g). The second-order photon correlations g(2)()measurements done for the emission
resonances in 10-layer thick ﬁlms demonstrate an antibunching indicative of single photon emission
for defects A3 (h) and A4 (i).
spectrum together with a comparative analysis of the four most pronounced defect centres
given in Fig. 2(b-e). Defect A1 displays emission in form of a broad asymmetric band
indicative of strong electron-phonon coupling. The emission spectra of defects A2 and A4
are dominated by narrow resonances characteristic of centres exhibiting atomic character
[20]. Defect A3 displays a spectrum typically observed for more complex defect structures
such as nitrogen-vacancy centres in diamond, where the well-pronounced dominant zero-
phonon line (ZPL) is accompanied by lower-energy phonon sidebands [20].
We can characterize the luminescence signatures of the bulk hBN defect centres in the frame-
work of a simple one-dimensional Franck-Condon model [34]. In that model, the lineshape
is governed by the coupling of the electronic transition to a single eﬀective vibrational mode
and is parameterized by the Huang-Rhys factor SHR, which gives the average number of
phonons emitted in an optical transition. SHRdepends on the diﬀerence in atomic structure
between the electronic states involved in the transition, and the curvature of the potential
energy surface for each state with respect to displacements of the eﬀective vibrational mode.
Experimentally, SHRcan be determined from the ratio of the spectrally integrated intensity
7TABLE I. Experimentally measured Debye-Waller and Huang-Rhys factors of defects A1-A4 re-
sponsible for the luminescence peaks in Fig. 2(a).
ZPL Debye-Waller factor Huang-Rhys factor
A1 1.38 eV 0:0320:006 3:40:2
A2 1.54 eV 0:290:08 1 :20:3
A3 2.00 eV 0:120:03 2 :10:2
A4 2.31 eV 1:0 0:0(atomic)
of the ZPL and the intensity of the total defect emission (i.e., the Debeye-Waller factor
w=IZPL=Itotal) using the phenomenological relation SHR= ln(w). In Table I we present
wandSHRfor the defects in bulk-like hBN. We see that they are characterized by small to
medium strength of the electron-phonon coupling. For A1, the value of SHRshould be taken
as a lower bound since the ZPL is not discernible. Similarly, the phonon sideband for A4 is
not distinctive, and thus we report SHRnear zero.
Since these defect centres yield reproducible and well-recognizable spectral characteristics,
we can directly compare defects in the bulk-like and few-layer samples. In Fig. 2(f,g) we
show the corresponding PL spectra for energies around A3 and A4 in bulk and 10-layer thick
hBN:C ﬁlms. Importantly, we ﬁnd for both hBN thicknesses PL resonances at similar but
not identical emission energies. In the A3 energy range, we see that the ZPL blueshifts by
about 50 meV from the bulk to the 10-layer sample, which is accompanied by a reduction of
theZPLlinewidth(reductionof IZPL)indicativeoftheremovalofinhomogeneousbroadening
and by an increasing Huang-Rhys factor SHRfrom 2.1 to 3.2. As the phonon sideband is
not drastically aﬀected, we attribute the enhanced SHRto the reduced inhomogeneous ZPL
broadening.
The two-peak structure of A4 is visible for both hBN thicknesses and shows a linewidth
reduction, without clear signs of a blueshift and the same value of SHR'0. For both
defect types, in the few-layer sample, we conﬁrm that we are probing individual defects [15,
35, 36] by measuring the antibunching in the second order correlation function g(2)()[see
Fig. 2(h,i)].
These optical measurements explicitly reveal the signiﬁcant changes in defect properties,
but the particulars vary from defect to defect. This observation provides the motivation for
our theoretical investigation of environmental eﬀects on diﬀerent defects in the next section.
Since the attribution of such optical signals with speciﬁc defects is still controversial, we will
8discuss general defects that are likely to exist in hBN:C samples [22–25], and provide further
commentary on how our results could be used to aid defect identiﬁcation in Sec. IV.
III. THEORETICAL MODELLING
(a) bulk (c) monolayer (b) constrained monolayer
FIG.3. Schematicoftheoreticalsituationsusedtoisolatediﬀerentenvironmentaleﬀectstoimpurity
complexes(vacanciesandCsubstitutions, thelatterinred)embeddedin2DvdWhBNhosts(black).
(a) Bulk: defect in the inﬁnite bulk environment. (b) Constrained monolayer: defect in a monolayer
constrained to the monolayer structure as in the bulk case. (c) Monolayer: defect with fully relaxed
structure in monolayer. In (a) and (b) we sketch intradefect electric ﬁeld lines to highlight the
diﬀerence in the screening environment. Note in (c) that the impurity positions are diﬀerent.
We proceed by analyzing how the defect structure and the dielectric environment of the
hBN host material control intradefect excitations and the Huang-Rhys factors of these ex-
citations. We consider a variety of charge-neutral native and C-containing defects in three
diﬀerent structures: bulk ( P63=mmc), constrained monolayer, and free-standing monolayer
hBN, as depicted in Fig. 3. The bulk and monolayer structures are fully relaxed, while the
constrained monolayer structure corresponds to the impurity embedded in a monolayer but
with the same structure as in bulk. With these three structures, we are able to theoretically
disentangle the eﬀects of screening and relaxations going from bulk to monolayer hBN. We
note that well-controlled impurities in free-standing monolayer hBN are diﬃcult to realize
in realistic samples, nevertheless, it serves as a theoretical limit of the strongest environ-
mental sensitivity of defect centres. We combine ﬁrst-principles DFT calculations with the
quantum embedding scheme described in Ref. 31, which allows us to systematically study
how changes in the environment and modiﬁcations in the impurity structure in the ground
and excited states aﬀect the impurity properties.
9A. Computational approach
The eﬀect of the environment on the atomic relaxations around the defect is treated at the
DFT level and constrained DFT calculations are used to relax the defect structure in excited
electronic states. We furthermore estimate how the electron-phonon coupling associated
with defect transitions is aﬀected by evaluating the Huang-Rhys factor SHR, introduced in
Sec. IIB. A full picture of the vibrational coupling requires determining SHRfor all relevant
modes in the system, which is a challenging task for transitions with moderate SHR3
as the defects observed in PL [37, 38]; however, often a qualitative picture of the strength
of the electron-phonon coupling can be obtained by considering a single eﬀective mode
corresponding to the structural diﬀerence between the ground and excited electronic states
[39, 40]. Under this assumption, and presuming the vibrational coupling is equal in the
excited and ground state, SHR=EFC=~!, whereEFC= (Eabs Eem)=2is the Frank-Condon
relaxation energy (half of the diﬀerence between vertical absorption and emission energies),
and!is the frequency of the mode [34, 39, 41]. In addition, if we assume that the mode is
harmonic, we can write SHR=Q
~q
EFC
2, where Qis the absolute change of the nuclear
coordinate between the ground and excited defect state indicative of the renormalization of
the inter-atomic bond strength.
The electronic eﬀects of the environment will be elucidated using an embedding approach
within which we map the complicated many-electron problem of the defect in hBN to an
eﬀective Hamiltonian with only a small number of defect-related states i;j;k;lof the form:
H= X
ij;(tijcy
icj+H.c.)
+1
2X
ijkl;0Uijklcy
icy
j0cl0ck
 HDC X
i;cy
ici;(1)
whereis the chemical potential to control the occupation of the defect states, is the
spin, andcy
iandciare corresponding electronic creation and annihilation operators. HDC
denotes the so-called double counting correction term [31]. Diagonalizing this Hamiltonian
results in many-body energies and wavefunctions of intradefect excitations.
The “active space” of defect-related states is isolated from the host hBN electronic structure
10via the construction of Wannier functions, which allows us to determine the hopping matrix
elementstij. Changes in the hopping matrix elements reﬂect changes in the properties of the
defect states on the DFT level. The screened Coulomb matrix elements Uijklare computed
in the static constrained random-phase approximation (cRPA) [42] level, which takes the
environmental screening into account. Comparing the unscreened (bare) Coulomb matrix
elementsvijkl(which are only sensitive to changes in defect Wannier functions) with Uijkl
givesusinsightintohowthedielectricenvironmentaﬀectstheintradefecttransitionenergies.
For computational details, see the Sec. V.
We can also obtain EFCfrom the intradefect transitions calculated from the many-body en-
ergies of Eq. (1). The procedure that makes this possible is to calculate the transition energy
in both the ground state geometry and the excited state geometry. Under the assumptions
discussed above, half of their diﬀerence gives EFC.
B. Single carbon impurities
We start our theoretical discussion with single carbon impurities either replacing a boron
(CB) or a nitrogen (C N) site, as depicted in Fig. 4. Both yield single occupied in-gap states,
closetothehBNconductionband(C B)orvalencebands(C N), ingoodqualitativeagreement
with the STS/STM data shown in Fig. 1.
With only one electron in a single state, there are no intra-impurity excitations possible.
Nevertheless, these most simple defects already allow us to study the impact of the envi-
ronment on the impurity orbitals. For both of these cases, the change in atomic structure
between bulk and monolayer is negligible, with C-N (C-B) bond lengths changing by 0.003 Å
(0.004 Å).
We construct localized Wannier orbitals for both C impurities, as depicted in Fig. 4(b).
Thesepz-like Wannier functions allow us to calculate the on-site energies tii, bare (v=viiii)
and cRPA screened ( U=Uiiii) Coulomb matrix elements, which we list in Tab. II. We see
that the diﬀerence in the bare Coulomb matrix elements between monolayer and bulk is
quite small (4%), indicating that the single-particle electronic structure [i.e., the shape of
thepz-like Wannier functions, see Fig. 4(b)] does not change signiﬁcantly between monolayer
and bulk. However, Uchanges signiﬁcantly, increasing by more than 50% in the monolayer
case compared to bulk. We can cast this into a change in the eﬀective dielectric constants
11ГM KГ ГM KГVN
ГM KГ ГM KГ-5-4-3-2-1012
-3-2-101234
-6-5-4-3-2-1012Energy (eV)
-2-1012345CB (a)
(b)CN VB
FIG. 4. (a) DFT band structure of hBN bulk in the presence of carbon substitution centres and
vacancies. Defect states are highlighted with red colours, parametrized using Wannier functions
(b).
"=v=Ufelt by the electrons in the defect state; for bulk and monolayer hBN we ﬁnd
"3:8and2:4, respectively. Note that this trend follows the out-of-plane dielectric
constant decrease from bulk to monolayer hBN [43].
C. Boron and nitrogen vacancies
Boron and nitrogen vacancies, VBandVN, yield more complex impurity states, as illus-
trated in Fig. 4. The VNdefect gives rise to a half-ﬁlled level below the conduction
band accompanied by two additional nearly degenerate empty defect levels within the
12TABLE II. Bare ( v=viiii) and screened ( U=Uiiii) Coulomb matrix elements (in eV) of single C
impurities. "=v=Uis the eﬀective dielectric constant.
monolayer bulk
v U " v U "
CB 6.27 2.65 2.4 6.54 1.70 3.9
CN 7.25 2.85 2.5 7.04 1.87 3.8
edge of the conduction band, which is also in qualitative agreement with the STS/STM
data of impurity #1in Fig. 1(a). The VBdefect creates three levels originating from
the dangling bonds due to the missing B atom. Two of these states are in close vicinity
to the valence band edge, nearly degenerate, and host together one electron, while the
third level is deeply buried within the valence band. In these cases, the hopping ma-
trixtijhas a 33form, while the screened Coulomb interaction Uijklis a rank-4 ten-
sor with three elements per dimension. To compare the Coulomb interactions, we de-
ﬁne the average intra-orbital density-density interaction U0=N 1
orbP
iUiiii, inter-orbital
density-density interaction U1= [Norb(Norb 1)] 1P
i6=jUijij, and exchange interaction
J= [Norb(Norb 1)] 1P
i6=jUijji, whereNorbis the number of Wannier orbitals. Further-
more, we deﬁne the eﬀective dielectric constant "=v(d)
l=U(d)
lusing the leading eigenvalues
of the bare and cRPA screened density-density Coulomb matrices [44].
In Tab.III we compare all these parameters together with the single-particle energy sepa-
ration E=t00 t11between Kohn-Sham eigenvalues for monolayer and bulk hBN hosts.
We ﬁnd that single-particle energies associated with these defects [and thus the hoppings
in Eq. (1)] change by 2% for VBand 4% for VN. In contrast, the screened density-density
interactions decrease signiﬁcantly from monolayer to bulk by more than 50%. Similar to
the screening eﬀects for the C substitutional defects, this is driven by the eﬀective dielectric
constants decrease from 3in the bulk to2in the monolayer. Notably, the exchange
elementsJare nearly unaﬀected by the changes in the environment as a result of their
dipolar character. Indeed, macroscopic dielectric environmental screening mostly aﬀects
density-density Coulomb interactions in layered materials and does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect
non-density-density elements [30, 44]. Thus, many-body properties which are strongly af-
fected by density-density Coulomb interactions, such as charge excitations, will be in general
most prone to changes in the dielectric environment, e.g., resulting from transition from bulk
13to monolayer hBN, while exchange interaction driven many-body states, such as spin exci-
tations, will be less aﬀected.
TABLE III. Coulomb matrix elements (in eV) of single B/N vacancies. See Sec. IIIC for the
deﬁnition of variables.
monolayer bulk
U0U1" J EU0U1" J E
VB5.04 2.17 2.4 0.03 1.86 3.45 1.31 3.6 0.03 1.82
VN3.50 3.00 2.2 0.23 1.60 2.47 2.00 3.2 0.23 1.54
Thisbehaviourisvisibleinthemany-bodyenergiesof VB, assummarizedinTab.IV.Forboth
monolayer and bulk hBN hosts, the VBground state corresponds to four-times degenerate
quadruplet state Q0, which is approximately given by three electrons fully occupying the
lowest and partially occupying the degenerate single-particle states. From the corresponding
excitation energies, we ﬁnd that nearly all excited states decrease in energy by about 500 to
600 meV (with Q1as the sole exception) in bulk. This demonstrates that these transitions
are decisively aﬀected by the density-density Coulomb interactions.
ForVNweﬁndasimilartrendwithdoubletsasthegroundstateandthefollowingquadruplet
excited state. However, all these states are occupied by a single electron, which eliminates
any Coulomb contribution. The diﬀerences we see in the excited energies stem from the
slightly altered single-particle properties as indicated in Tab. III.
TABLE IV. Many-body states of single B/N vacancies.
spin Enmonolayer (in eV) Enbulk (in eV)
VBQ0 0 0
Q1 0.51 0.63
Q2 2.82 2.31
D1 3.18 2.61
D2 3.63 3.00
Q3 4.63 4.04
VND0 0 0
Q1 1.48 1.37
14D. Impurity complexes
The picture that emerges from the simple defects discussed in the previous two chapters
outlines the key role of diﬀerential dielectric screening, which inﬂuences density-density
Coulombinteractionswithinandbetweendefectorbitals, inducingachangeintheproperties
upon varying the defect environment.
We now consider more complex defect/impurity structures, which have in-gap intradefect
transitions with possible technological relevance, and that could be detected by optical
means, as exempliﬁed in Sec. IIB. Speciﬁcally, we consider a carbon dimer (C BCN) replacing
nearest-neighbour B and N atoms with carbon, a carbon-vacancy complex (C BVN), and a
combination of a dimer with a neighbouring vacancy (C BCNVN). Especially C BCNhas
recently attracted signiﬁcant attention, as it was proposed as the origin of the 4.1 eV ZPL
single-photon emitter [45–47] observed in hBN based on the energetics of emission [48] and
calculations of photoluminescence lineshapes [49, 50]. All these impurity complexes have
modest formation energies [23, 25] and are thus likely to occur in both, monolayer and bulk
hBN upon C exposure. In Fig. 5 we summarize all model details.
From the DFT band structure calculations presented in Fig. 5 (a-c) we see that all three
impurity complexes form in-gap defect states with varying occupations (two electrons in
CBCNand C BVNand three electrons in C BCNVN). We use these states as the active space for
our minimal modelling [see Supplemental Material (SM) sec. S2 for details]. The resulting
lowest excited many-body levels are shown in Fig. 5 (d-f) with indications of the ground and
excited state types, singlets (S), doublets (D), triplets (T), and quadruplets (Q). We show
these energies calculated in the three cases schematically depicted in Fig. 3. Speciﬁcally,
the inclusion of a constrained monolayer, i.e., where the defect structure is kept the same
as in bulk but the other atomic layers are removed, allows us to isolate the eﬀects of the
dielectric environment from changes in structure from the atomic environment. We thus
ﬁrst comment on the comparison between bulk and constrained monolayer, and then on the
eﬀect of relaxations between bulk and monolayer.
Throughout all impurity complexes, we see a consistent trend of decreasing optical transition
energies when changing from the constrained monolayer to the bulk hBN. Upon allowing
for further relaxation of the monolayer host system, this trend is mostly preserved. The de-
creasing excitation energies are more pronounced for singlets than for doublets and are often
1501234Energy (eV)
01234Energy (eV)
01234Energy (eV)-3-2-10123
 Г  Г M K-3-2-10123
 Г ГM K  Г ГM K-2-101234Energy (eV)
ε = 2.0 ε = 3.2 ε = 2.1ε  = 3.2 ε = 2.1 ε = 3.3CBCN (a)
(d) (e) (f)(b) (c)CBVN CBCNVN
bulk monolayer constr. monolayer constr. monolayer bulk monolayer bulk monolayer
T1T2
S0T1S1
S0T1S1
S0T1S1
S1S2
S0 D0D1D2Q1
D3
D0D1D2Q1D3
T1T2
S1S2
S0T1T2
S1S2
S0 D0D1D2Q1D3
constr. monolayerFIG.5. (a-c)DFTbandstructuresofeachconsideredimpuritycomplexesembeddedintobulkhBN
with highlighted in red impurity states, which were parametrized using Wannier functions. Black
dots demonstrate initial occupations and their modiﬁcation upon optical excitations. (d-f) Many-
body impurity states embedded into bulk, constrained monolayer, and free-standing monolayer of
hBN. Arrows demonstrate the possible excitations, which properties are given in Table V.
vanishingly small for triplets and quadruplets, which is a direct measure of how much the
many-body states are controlled by density-density and exchange Coulomb matrix elements
as illustrated for each defect below.
E. Many-Body States
1. CBCNMany-Body States
The C BCNcarbon dimer impurity can be approximately modeled as a half-ﬁlled Hubbard
dimer [31, 51]. Analytically, the many-body eigenstates of the Hubbard dimer are solely
controlled by the ratio of the local density-density Coulomb repulsion Uand the hopping
tbetween the sites. In our case this dimer is formed by localized pz-like orbitals at the
16two C positions with local U0and interorbital Coulomb interactions U1, see Fig. 5(a). In
this scenario the eﬀective local Coulomb interaction magnitude is approximately given by
U=U0 U1[52, 53]. Upon increasing the screening from monolayer to bulk, both U0and
U1are signiﬁcantly but similarly reduced (e.g., U01:3eV and U11:1eV), such
that the resulting Udiﬀer by U0:2eV. This corresponds to a relative change of
nearly 40%. As the electronic hopping between the two pzWannier functions is aﬀected by
only 3% through the monolayer to bulk transition, we can again state that modiﬁcations
to the many-body properties are mostly driven by the changes in the dielectric screening.
This explains the reduction of the S1state by about 0:2eV. In contrast, the lower triplet
statesT1is less aﬀected by this screening, as it depends more strongly on Hund’s exchange
elements, which are nearly unaﬀected (see SM Table SIV). Further, the data presented in
Fig. 5(d) shows that atomic relaxations of the defect between bulk and monolayer do not
play a signiﬁcant role here (c.f. constrained monolayer and monolayer).
TABLE V. The absolute change of conﬁguration coordinates Q(inpamuÅ), Franck-Condon
energyEFC(ineV)andHuang-Rhysfactor SHRforimpuritycomplexesembeddedintofree-standing
monolayer and bulk hBN.
CBCN CBVN CBCNVN
monolayer bulk monolayer bulk monolayer bulk
#Q E FCSHRQ E FCSHRQ E FCSHRQ E FCSHRQ E FCSHRQ E FCSHR
10.24 0.06 0.65 0.26 0.07 0.75 3.37 0.80 33.0 2.00 0.62 17.20 2.95 0.59 24.80 1.68 0.44 12.19
2 1.51 0.23 8.0 0.78 0.18 3.67 1.79 0.65 15.78 1.46 0.64 12.81
3 2.81 0.13 11.00 1.12 0.08 3.38
2. CBVNMany-Body States
For C BVNthe spinless DFT Kohn-Sham (KS) ground state is approximately given by two
electrons mostly residing in a C-centered px-like state [see side panel of Fig. 5(b)] with a
distortion of the C atom position out of the plane. The fully interacting many-body ground
state of this impurity can be well approximated as a single Slater determinant with two
electrons of opposite spin in the lowest Kohn-Sham state forming a singlet ground state. The
many-body singlet-singlet transitions approximately promote one of these electrons either
into a C-centered pz-like state (S0!S1, which lets the C atom relax back to the hBN plane)
17or into a delocalized state with two pz-like wavefunctions centered at the neighbouring B
atoms(S0!S2withreducedout-of-planeCpositiondistortion). Thebulkscreeningreduces
thecorrespondingtransitionenergiesby 0:2eVandby 0:24eVforS1andS2, respectively[c.f.
constrained-monolayer to bulk transitions in Fig. 5(e)]. A similar approximate Uanalysis
(using orbital averaged U0andU1given in the SM) yields an estimate of U0:2eV
(ca.20%). As the single-particle energies only change by less than 5% and since the Hund’s
exchange elements are nearly unaﬀected between the bulk and constrained monolayer hosts,
the overall trend in the many-body levels can again be explained based on modiﬁcations
to the density-density Coulomb matrix elements. Full relaxations towards the free-standing
monolayer enhance the out-of-plane C position distortion, which mainly aﬀects the single-
particle energies, while screened density-density and Hund’s exchange elements are nearly
unaﬀected (see Table SV). The single-particle KS energies change by about 0:1to0:2eV
in the freestanding monolayer with respect to the constrained monolayer, which is the same
order of magnitude as the many-body excitation energies change between the two systems.
3. CBCNVNMany-Body States
ThisdefectcomplexcanbeinterpretedasacombinationofC BCNandC BVN. TheKSground
state corresponds approximately to a fully occupied pz-like state centered on the C atom
farthest from the vacancy and a half occupied px-like state centered at the C adjacent to
the vacancy. This impurity thus hosts three electrons. Due to the spin degree of freedom of
the unpaired electron, the many-body ground state is two-fold degenerate forming a doublet
state, whosewavefunctionscanagainbewellapproximatedbyasingleSlaterdeterminantin
the band basis (see Table SX). The ground state structure shows an out-of-plane distortion,
mostly in the C position. Doublet-doublet excitations approximately promote the unpaired
electron from the pxorbital to delocalized pz-like orbitals at the neighbouring B (D0!D1
letting the C atom relax back to the plane), one of the electrons from the C pzto the C
px(D0!D2with enhanced out-of-plane distortions) and the unpaired electron from the
Cpxto Cpz(D0!D3also letting the C position relaxing back to the plane). Here,
the many-body energies are less inﬂuenced by the dielectric environment. D1,D2, andD3
change by about 0:03, 0:13, and 0:08eV respectively, although, as before the eﬀective
density-density Coulomb matrix element is reduced by about U0:15eV, while the
18single particle energies are aﬀected by less than 5% when changing from the constrained-
monolayer to the bulk hBN host. Thus only the D 2transition approximately follows U,
while the other excitations are less aﬀected. We attribute this diﬀerent behaviour to the
diﬀerence in the nature of the excitations: D1andD3are single electron excitations, while
D2takes place among three electrons and involves signiﬁcant modiﬁcations to the impurity
charge density. Under further relaxation towards the free-standing monolayer hBN, which
enhances the out-of-plane distortion, the main diﬀerence is that the many-body states D1
andD2become nearly degenerate. This is driven by modiﬁcations to the single-particle
Kohn-Sham energies, while the screened Coulomb interactions are approximately the same
(see monolayer to constrained-monolayer transition in Table SV).
4. Huang-Rhys factors
We now turn our focus to the Huang-Rhys factors SHR. In Tab. V we summarize all Q,
EFCandSHRfor both the free-standing monolayer and bulk hBN hosts. For both cases, we
ﬁnd thatSHRcorresponding to the excited states in C BCNare considerably smaller than
in C BVNand C BCNVN. Quantitatively this is driven by the decisive out-of-plane distortion
of the C BVN/CBCNVNground state which is reduced in their excited states, yielding large
Q. This is related to the decisively modiﬁed impurity charge densities in C BVN/CBCNVN
upon excitation. In the ground states we ﬁnd an in-plane charge density with pxsymmetry
localized partially on carbon and partially on the nearest boron sites in presence of the N
vacancy. Hartree terms (i.e. bare Coulomb repulsions) between these two partial densities
destabilize the planar crystal structure, shifting the carbon up in z-direction in the ground
state. Further full relaxation towards the free-standing monolayer limit enhances this out-
of-plane distortion, which consequently increases SHRvia enhancing Q. However, we note
that in actual experiments these additional distortions are likely suppressed by the presence
of a substrate or capping layer. In addition to Q, there is also a slight but consistent
trend ofEFCbeing less in bulk than in monolayer (C BCNis again the exception, though the
change is negligible).
19IV. DISCUSSION
A. Mechanisms for environmental eﬀects on defect properties
In Sec. II, we experimentally showed via PL measurements that the environment of carbon-
based defects aﬀected their properties, such as the energy of optical resonances and Huang-
Rhys factors SHR. In Sec. III, we explored theoretically the possible mechanisms for these
changes by comparing monolayer and bulk hBN hosts. In the following we summarize
our ﬁndings, focusing mostly on defect complexes with technologically relevant intradefect
transitions.
Firstly, we consider diﬀerences in defect structure between monolayer and bulk hBN. These
changes are relatively minor when the distortions related to the defect are purely in the
hBN plane, as is the case for the single vacancies, single C impurities, and C BCN(see, e.g.,
Table V and SM). For defects with ground-state out-of-plane corrugation (e.g., C BVN), the
displacements are larger in monolayer than in bulk hBN hosts as there are no other hBN
layers to constrain them (see SM). The eﬀect of the increased distortions on the many-body
energy diﬀerences and Frank-Condon relaxation energies is relatively modest. However, SHR
can be signiﬁcantly larger in freestanding monolayer hBN hosts than in bulk ones for ex-
citations accompanied by out-of-plane to in-plane geometry relaxations, which signiﬁcantly
increase Qfor the corresponding transitions.
We furthermore show, that changing the hBN host environment mostly aﬀects screened
density-density Coulomb matrix elements within the impurity states, which can be reduced
in the bulk by up to 1:3eV, while single particle energies are modiﬁed by only up to 0:2eV,
and Hund’s exchange Coulomb matrix elements barely change. Both the interorbital and in-
traorbital density-density interactions are reduced signiﬁcantly in bulk hBN hosts by 50%
compared to the monolayer case. Quantifying this change with an eﬀective dielectric con-
stant give"bulk3to4, while"ML2to2:5depending on the defect. However, the extent
to which these changes aﬀect the intradefect many-body energies depends on how much
the many-body levels depend on the interplay and compensation of the (partially various)
density-density interactions and Hund’s exchange parameter J. Overall, the resulting trend
is that the energy separation of intradefect levels decreases in bulk compared to monolayer,
which is, in general, most prominent in charge excitations.
20B. Implications for defect identiﬁcation
OurﬁndingshavesigniﬁcantimplicationsfortheidentiﬁcationofdefectsinhBNand2DvdW
layered hosts in general. Firstly, we point out that renormalization of optical transitions
from interactions and the correct treatment of spin symmetry is important for accurate com-
parison between experiment and theory, as is clear from comparing the KS single-particle
states in Fig. 5(a)-(c) with the many-body states (d)-(e). Here, this was achieved by our
embedding approach, which can often also be achieved, e.g., via SCF calculations utilizing
hybrid functionals and possibly corrections for spin contamination [54]. A representative ex-
ampleofthisobservationisC BVN, whereinthesingleparticlepicturetwotransitionsofabout
2 eV are expected, while in the many-body picture the singlet-singlet transitions appear at
energies above 3 eV, and triplet-triplet transition occur at about 1 eV [see Fig. 5(b,e)].
Moreover, we have shown that intradefect transitions within 2DvdW hosts are controlled
by additional degrees of freedom, i.e., the surrounding environment of the defects. In our
optical measurements this was tuned by the host-material thickness, while in theoretical cal-
culations we considered defects in bulk and monolayer hBN. The general trend of increasing
intradefect energies and increasing SHRin monolayer compared to bulk hosts are summa-
rized in Fig. 6: the host material can change both, QandEFC. Thus, for experimental
defect identiﬁcations within 2DvdW hosts, shifts in many-body energies and changes in SHR
should be taken into account across samples. On the other hand, such trends can be used to
aid defect identiﬁcation and characterization if a signal can be correlated between samples
of diﬀerent thicknesses, or on diﬀerent substrates.
In light of these results, we can reexamine the defects observed in the PL measurements
described in Sec. IIB. In the considered energy range, we observed four types of defects
with varying emission energies and Huang-Rhys factors SHR, which behave diﬀerently upon
variation of the hBN ﬁlm thickness. The defects A2andA4have PL resonances in the range
of the doublet-doublet transitions related to VNandVBcontaining defects, respectively.
However,SHRfor these defects is much larger than observed experimentally [55]. A3likely
involves a defect similar to the carbon dimer, which might be coupled to neighbouring
vacancies, as it shows a relatively small SHRand strong sensitivity of the PL resonance
energy to the hBN ﬁlm thickness. Defect A1is characterised by the largest SHRand lowest
emission energy (within our series). Assuming that A1is a simple defect, we could attribute
21ΔQBΔQMEM
FC
EB
FCBulkMonolayerEnergyFIG. 6. Conﬁguration coordinate diagram for defect complexes embedded to bulk and monolayer
sample.
it to the triplet-triplet transition within C BVN. However, it is also plausible that this defect
does not belong to the defect space considered here. Interestingly, the investigated defects
exhibit vanishing small Zeeman splitting, when the magnetic ﬁeld is applied perpendicularly
to the hBN plane (see SM, Fig. S1). This observation may indicate that the optically active
transitions are dominated by singlet-singlet transitions, however, the transitions between
the parallel branches of the spin-split doublets and triples cannot be excluded.
Finally, we point out that we have not explicitly considered the eﬀect of a substrate in
22this work. Depending on the substrate the impact on the defect properties may change
signiﬁcantly. On one hand, we would expect that the substrate could conﬁne out-of-plane
lattice distortions caused by the defect similar to the additional layer within bulk hBN hosts.
On the other hand, the dielectric screening from certain substrates might be signiﬁcantly
larger compared to the moderate enhancement from monolayer to bulk hosts. Substrates
with signiﬁcant lattice contributions to the dielectric susceptibility may result in eﬀective
relative dielectric constants of 20 and above [56, 57].
C. Defects for detecting local dielectric susceptibility
We can use the sensitivity of defects in 2DvdW materials as probes of the local dielec-
tric environment of, e.g., other surfaces, adsorbed molecules, or conﬁned liquids [58]. An
ideal defect for such applications should exhibit an optically accessible intradefect transi-
tion that has a strong dependence on the dielectric environment. Also, the defect should
be characterized by a spectrally narrow optical signal providing good sensitivity and res-
olution for determining the properties of the dielectric environment. Thus a small SHRis
desired. Finally, it would be ideal if the defect properties were relatively insensitive to other
environmental stimuli such as external magnetic or electric ﬁelds.
Experimentally, defect A3appears as the best candidate for detecting the local dielectric
constant. The PL emission resonance shifts by E= 60:1meV between the 50 nm thick
hBN ﬁlm and 10-layer-thick hBN ﬁlm. We can estimate the upper bound of the modiﬁcation
of the relative dielectric constant sensed by the defect within the two ﬁlms based on our
calculation to be "<2. Therefore, we can conclude that our sensitivity towards the local
dielectric constant is better than "=E < 0:03meV 1. The resolution is limited by the
linewidth of the PL resonance , which also depends on the layer thickness. In the bulk
form, the line exhibits its largest broadening, = 7:4meV, which corresponds to the change
of the relative dielectric constant " <0:22. In the monolayer form, = 1:5meV, which
yields "<0:05.
From our theoretical point of view, the singlet-singlet transition in C BCNis a promising
candidate. Although it has rather high energy, its ZPL has been detected and identiﬁed
previously [45–48]. Here, we have demonstrated that it is highly sensitive to the defect
environment. Also, it has a Huang-Rhys factor that does not change with the dielectric
23environment, so its ZPL will remain sharp. Finally, it is a singlet-singlet transition, such
that it likely will not be aﬀected by stray magnetic ﬁelds. It may however shift under the
application of electric ﬁelds since the defect has a relatively low symmetry (point group C2v).
Therefore, carbon defect centres in hBN can be used as sensitive detectors of local dielectric
constants, addressing the need of measuring the environmental eﬀects on a nanoscale.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Using a combination of experiment and theory, we have elucidated the eﬀect of the environ-
ment on defect properties in hBN. We show via PL measurements of few-layer and bulk-like
samples, that carbon-based defects exhibit shifts in ZPL energies, as well as changes in
phonon sidebands and ZPL lineshapes, which can be quantiﬁed via Huang-Rhys factors.
Using ﬁrst-principles theory and embedding methods applied to monolayer and bulk hBN,
we show that the key eﬀect of the environment arises from modiﬁcations in the eﬀective
local dielectric screening acting on the correlated impurities. This alters the inter- and
intra-orbital impurity Coulomb interactions and plays a role in reducing optical emission
energies for intradefect transitions in bulk versus mono/few-layer hBN hosts. These eﬀects
must be taken into account when performing defect identiﬁcation via a comparison between
experiment and theory. A plausible application of our ﬁndings is a detector for local dielec-
tric constants, easily integrable with solid, soft, and liquid matter systems in pristine and/or
functionalized form.
METHODS
Crystal growth Thepristineultra-purehBNcrystalshavebeengrownviathehigh-pressure
temperature-gradient method. A part of the crystals from a single growth batch was an-
nealed in a graphite furnace at a temperature of 2000C for an hour.
Sample fabrication The hBN:C ﬁlms were isolated through mechanical exfoliation of bulk
crystals onto 300 nm thick Si/SiO 2substrates. In the transfer process, the substrates were
heated to 50C to increase the yield of thin hBN:C ﬂakes, which exhibit homogeneous and
reproducible optical emission. The thickness of the ﬁlms, typically ranging between a few
layers to a few tens of nanometers, was determined by optical force microscopy.
24For STM studies, hBN:C crystals were mechanically exfoliated onto 90 nm-thick Si/SiO 2
substrates. 1 up to 3 layer-thick ﬁlms, identiﬁed via optical contrast and AFM techniques,
were subsequently lifted with a PDMS/PC stamp and transferred onto a large graphite
ﬂake that was partially covered by a Cr/Au ﬁlm, providing a conductive surface for the
STM measurements. The samples were cleaned with DCM, ACE, and IPA, and ﬁnally
annealed in an ultra-high vacuum in the STM chamber to remove any polymer residues
from the transfer process.
Optical characterisation The PL spectra were measured in a back-scattering geometry
under continuous-wave 514 nm excitation. The sample was cooled down via exchange gas in
aclosed-loopcryostatorviacoldﬁngerinacryostatcooledwithliquidhelium. Thelaserwas
focused on the surface of the sample to a spot of about 1 m via an objective. The sample
was positioned under the objective using x-y-zpiezo-scanner system. The PL signal was
resolved by a spectrometer and detected by a charge-coupled device camera. The second-
order photon correlations were measured in the Hanbury-Brown and Twiss conﬁguration
with avalanche photodiodes acting as photon detectors.
Scanning tunneling microscopy The scanning tunneling microscopy was done in a low-
temperature Createc system with base pressure below 10 10mbar. In our samples, the
tunnelling occurred between the tungsten tip and graphite substrate through a 3-layer-thick
carbon-doped hBN barrier. The dI/dVtunnelling spectra were measured at a modulated
voltage between 3 meV and 10 meV at the frequency of 700-900 Hz. The tip was calibrated
for spectroscopy against the surface state of gold in 111 orientation.
Theoretical methods Density functional (DFT) electronic structure calculations are
performed within the Vienna ab initio simulation package ( vasp) [59, 60] utilizing the
projector-augmented wave (PAW) [61] formalism with PBE generalized-gradient approxi-
mation (GGA) [62] of exchange-correlation functional. For details on of the mapping to the
minimal models and their solutions see SM.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was supported by the Ministry of Education (Singapore) through the Re-
search Centre of Excellence program (grant EDUN C-33-18-279-V12, I-FIM), AcRF Tier 3
25(MOE2018-T3-1-005). ThismaterialisbaseduponworksupportedbytheAirForceOﬃceof
Scientiﬁc Research and the Oﬃce of Naval Research Global under award number FA8655-21-
1-7026. J. Lu acknowledges the support from Agency for Science, Technology and Research
(A*STAR) under its AME IRG Grant (Project No. M21K2c0113). K.W. and T.T. acknowl-
edge support from JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Numbers 19H05790, 20H00354 and 21H05233).
P.H. acknowledges the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51801041) and schol-
arshipfromtheGuangxiEducationDepartment(China). C.R.FacknowledgestheEuropean
Union’sHorizon2020researchandinnovationprogrammeundertheMarieSkłodowska-Curie
grant agreement N895369. M.P acknowledges the support from EU Graphene Flagship and
FNP-Poland (IRA - MAB/2018/9 grant, SG 0P program of the EU). C.E.D. acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DMR-2237674. D.I.B. was
supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme, grant agreement 854843-FASTCORR
DATA AVAILABILITY
The authors declare that the data supporting the ﬁndings of this study are available within
the paper and in the supplementary material ﬁles.
VI. SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Appendix A: Photoluminescence of hBN in magnetic ﬁeld
To gain a better sense of the nature of the observed spectral lines in photoluminescence
(PL) experiments, we studied the optical response of the material in a magnetic ﬁeld. Low-
temperature micro-magneto-PL experiments were performed in the Faraday conﬁguration,
where the magnetic ﬁeld is applied perpendicularly to the crystal plane. Measurements were
carried out with the aid of a split-coil superconducting magnet up to 14 T. The sample was
placed on top of an x-y-z piezo-stage kept at T = 4.2 K and was excited using a laser
diode with energy below the hBN band gap. The combination of a quarter wave plate and
a linear polarizer placed in the insert was used to analyse the circular polarization of the
signal. The emitted light was dispersed with a 0.75 m long monochromator and detected
with a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera. The result for +polarization from +14 T
26to -14 T (reversing the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld yields the information corresponding
to the other polarization component) is presented in Fig.7. As can be appreciated from
the false-colour map no signiﬁcation changes can be observed while applying the external
magnetic ﬁeld, we do not detect any Zeeman splitting of the emission. The lack of magnetic
ﬁeld eﬀects on the optical spectra of hBN:C is likely to indicate that the optically active
transitions are dominated by singlet-singlet transitions, nevertheless, transitions between
parallel branches of spin doublets and triplets cannot be ruled out.
Appendix B: Theoretical methods overview
Density functional (DFT) electronic structure calculations are performed within the Vi-
ennaab initio simulation package ( vasp) [59, 60] utilizing the projector-augmented wave
(PAW)[61]formalismwithPBEgeneralized-gradientapproximation(GGA)[62]ofexchange-
correlation functional. In these calculations, we set the energy cutoﬀ 500 eV and the energy
convergence criteria 10 8eV and 33  -centered k-mesh. We start with the experimental
FIG. 7. Photoluminescence spectra of few layer hBN:C as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld, showing
the insensitivity of the transition energies.
27bulk hBN lattice ( a= 2.51 Å,c= 6.66 Å) using 5 51 unit cell size, where we remove
or replace atomic positions with carbon atoms. All atomic positions are relaxed until all
residual force components of each atom were less than 0:510 3eV/Å. To study the trends
between bulk to thinner samples, we construct defects embedded in an hBN monolayer with
15 Å vacuum space along zdirection from the fully relaxed bulk geometries. This corre-
sponds to the constrained monolayer case, while further relaxation of these supercells results
in the free-standing monolayer setups. Excited states were studied by performing structural
optimization with the constrained occupation of single-particle states (constrained DFT).
The defect related electronic states were constructed from Wannier functions [63] (see Fig. 8)
i, which we calculate using the wannier90 package [64]. These Wannier functions form
the basis to construct the extended Hubbard models. In order to preserve the symmetry
of the system, we do not perform a maximal localization of the Wannier functions. This
procedure allows to directly determine all hopping parameters tij=hijHDFTjji. Coulomb
interaction matrix elements are calculated according to:
Uijkl=hijj^Ujkli (B1)
=Z Z
d3rd3r0
i(r)k(r)U(r;r0)
j(r0)l(r0);
whereby we partially screen the interaction matrix elements within the constrained random
phase approximation (cRPA) in the static limit ( != 0) [42] using its recent implementation
inVASP[65]. Additionally, to avoid double counting of Coulomb interaction terms acting
on the single-particle (hopping) terms as a result of the DFT starting point, we use a Hartree
double counting (DC) correction term [31] of the form:
HDC=X
i;j;cy
icjX
klPklUiljk; (B2)
wherePklis the DFT single particle density matrix in Wannier basis. The chemical potential
was chosen to constrain the nominal occupation of the defect states. All many-body
states are derived from the exact diagonalization of the full Hamiltonian using the triqs
library [66].
28FIG. 8. Charge densities of defect-related states and constructed localized Wannier functions for
defect complexes. The leading atomic contributions of the partial charge densities were used as
initial projections for the construction of Wannier functions (see Table VI).
TABLE VI. Atomic contributions to defect-related states in Fig. 8
CBCN#1 0:07jC1(pz)i+ 0:31jC2(pz)i
#2 0:35jC1(pz)i+ 0:04jC2(pz)i
CBVN#1 0:24jC(px)i+ 0:06jC(pz)i
#2 0:15jC(px)i+ 0:33jC(pz)i
#3 0:47jBc(pz)i
CBCNVN#1 0:08jC1(pz)i+ 0:26jC2(pz)i
#2 0:30jC1(px)i
#3 0:12jC1pxi+ 0:10jC1pzi+ 0:20jBc(pz)i
#4 0:22jC1(pz)i+ 0:02jC2(pz)i
291. Details of Hamiltonian
In this section we provide single-particle hopping terms tij(Table VII), density-density
Coulomb and exchange interactions (both bare in Table VIII and screened in Table IX) in
the Wannier basis for defect complexes embedded in free-standing monolayer, constrained
monolayer and bulk hBN lattices. A summary of orbitally averaged parameters is given in
Table X.
30TABLE VII. Hopping matrices (in meV)
CBCN CBVN CBCNVN
basisjC1(pz)C2(pz)ijC(px)C(pz)Bc(pz)ijC1(pz)C2(pz)C1(px)Bc(pz)i
monolayer0
@2:158 1:673
 1:673 0:9301
A0
BBBB@0:516 0:756 0:606
0:756 1:221 0:469
0:606 0:469 1:7531
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@0:783 1:504 0:388 0:514
 1:504 1:204 0:023 0:181
0:388 0:023 0:387 0:494
 0:514 0:181 0:494 1:3281
CCCCCCCA
constr. monolayer0
@2:158 1:672
 1:672 0:9221
A0
BBBB@0:404 0:708 0:473
0:708 1:184 0:495
0:473 0:495 1:6181
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@0:688 1:443 0:341 0:572
 1:443 1:521 0:087 0:098
0:341 0:087 0:213 0:212
 0:572 0:098 0:212 1:1261
CCCCCCCA
bulk0
@2:517 1:315
 1:315 0:2771
A0
BBBB@0:315 0:666 0:474
0:666 1:145 0:446
0:474 0:446 1:5211
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@0:658 1:382 0:323 0:494
 1:382 1:502 0:086 0:072
0:323 0:086 0:201 0:217
 0:494 0:072 0:217 1:1121
CCCCCCCA
31TABLE VIII. Bare Coulomb vand exchange jHinteraction matrices (in eV)
CBCN CBVN CBCNVN
basisjC1(pz)C2(pz)ijC(px)C(pz)Bc(pz)ijC1(pz)C2(pz)C1(px)Bc(pz)i
vmonolayer0
@6:689 4:747
4:747 6:5971
A0
BBBB@10:269 7:760 5:434
7:760 8:263 3:797
5:434 3:797 5:9551
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@6:879 4:935 7:115 3:622
4:935 6:167 5:310 3:331
7:115 5:310 9:822 5:186
3:622 3:331 5:186 5:7921
CCCCCCCA
vconstrained monolayer0
@6:675 4:745
4:745 6:6031
A0
BBBB@10:296 7:660 5:513
7:660 8:052 3:806
5:513 3:806 5:9701
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@6:585 4:885 6:966 3:576
4:885 6:180 5:332 3:316
6:966 5:332 9:877 5:200
3:576 3:316 5:200 5:7721
CCCCCCCA
vbulk0
@6:012 4:570
4:570 6:2701
A0
BBBB@10:117 7:405 5:238
7:405 7:613 3:563
5:238 3:563 5:4911
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@5:877 4:528 6:569 3:302
4:528 5:811 5:176 3:096
6:569 5:176 9:830 4:938
3:302 3:096 4:938 5:1591
CCCCCCCA
jHmonolayer0
@6:689 0:155
0:155 6:5971
A0
BBBB@10:269 0:461 0:174
0:461 8:263 0:039
0:174 0:039 5:9551
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@6:879 0:253 0:345 0:052
0:253 6:167 0:071 0:055
0:345 0:071 9:822 0:165
0:052 0:055 0:165 5:7921
CCCCCCCA
jHconstrained monolayer0
@6:675 0:155
0:155 6:6031
A0
BBBB@10:296 0:456 0:184
0:456 8:053 0:040
0:184 0:040 5:9701
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@6:585 0:273 0:338 0:063
0:273 6:181 0:063 0:057
0:338 0:063 9:877 0:162
0:063 0:057 0:162 5:7731
CCCCCCCA
jHbulk0
@6:012 0:202
0:202 6:2701
A0
BBBB@10:117 0:446 0:173
0:446 7:613 0:040
0:173 0:040 5:4911
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@5:877 0:233 0:317 0:086
0:233 5:812 0:060 0:053
0:317 0:060 9:830 0:152
0:086 0:053 0:152 5:1601
CCCCCCCA
32TABLE IX. Screened Coulomb Uand exchange JHinteraction matrices (in eV)
CBCN CBVN CBCNVN
basisjC1(pz)C2(pz)ijC(px)C(pz)Bc(pz)ijC1(pz)C2(pz)C1(px)Bc(pz)i
Umonolayer0
@3:238 2:504
2:504 3:2711
A0
BBBB@4:777 3:428 2:741
3:428 3:904 2:078
2:741 2:078 3:0451
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@3:216 2:536 3:056 2:041
2:536 2:982 2:622 1:967
3:056 2:622 4:361 2:623
2:041 1:967 2:623 2:8741
CCCCCCCA
Uconstrained monolayer0
@3:233 2:503
2:503 3:2741
A0
BBBB@4:765 3:378 2:757
3:378 3:796 2:077
2:757 2:077 3:0441
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@3:109 2:516 3:013 2:019
2:516 2:995 2:629 1:959
3:013 2:629 4:392 2:622
2:019 1:959 2:622 2:8721
CCCCCCCA
Ubulk0
@1:903 1:424
1:424 2:0061
A0
BBBB@3:423 2:144 1:587
2:144 2:410 1:038
1:587 1:038 1:7411
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@1:783 1:374 1:815 0:980
1:374 1:788 1:539 0:950
1:815 1:539 3:167 1:486
0:980 0:950 1:486 1:5761
CCCCCCCA
JHmonolayer0
@3:238 0:078
0:078 3:2711
A0
BBBB@4:777 0:326 0:108
0:326 3:904 0:020
0:108 0:020 3:0451
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@3:216 0:115 0:241 0:025
0:115 2:982 0:050 0:024
0:241 0:050 4:361 0:098
0:025 0:024 0:098 2:8741
CCCCCCCA
JHconstrained monolayer0
@3:233 0:078
0:078 3:2741
A0
BBBB@4:765 0:317 0:114
0:317 3:797 0:021
0:114 0:021 3:0441
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@3:109 0:121 0:234 0:029
0:121 2:995 0:046 0:025
0:234 0:046 4:393 0:097
0:029 0:025 0:097 2:8721
CCCCCCCA
JHbulk0
@1:903 0:080
0:080 2:0061
A0
BBBB@3:423 0:282 0:097
0:282 2:411 0:017
0:097 0:017 1:7421
CCCCA0
BBBBBBB@1:783 0:089 0:202 0:031
0:089 1:789 0:041 0:020
0:202 0:041 3:168 0:084
0:031 0:020 0:084 1:5761
CCCCCCCA
33TABLE X. Comparison of single-particle eigenvalues E, averaged values of bare intraorbital Coulomb v0, screened intraorbital Coulomb
U0, screened interorbital Coulomb U01, screened exchange Jparameters (all in eV) and eﬀective screening "for impurity complexes.
CBCN CBVN CBCNVN
monolayer constr. monolayer bulk monolayer constr. monolayer bulk monolayer constr. monolayer bulk
E3.56 3.56 3.45 1.95, 2.31 1.76, 2.19 1.72, 2.09 2.03, 3.34, 4.05 2.25, 3.14, 4.10 2.19, 3.11, 3.91
v06.64 6.64 6.14 8.16 8.11 7.74 7.16 7.10 6.67
v14.75 4.75 4.57 5.66 5.66 5.40 4.92 4.88 4.60
j0.16 0.16 0.20 0.22 0.23 0.22 0.16 0.16 0.15
U03.25 3.25 1.96 3.90 3.87 2.53 3.36 3.34 2.08
U12.50 2.50 1.42 2.75 2.74 1.59 2.47 2.46 1.36
J0.08 0.08 0.08 0.15 0.15 0.13 0.09 0.09 0.08
"2.0 2.0 3.2 2.1 2.1 3.2 2.1 2.1 3.3
342. Details of many-body spectra
In this section we provide all many-body states for C BCN(Tables XI and XII), C BVN(Tables
XIII and XIV) and C BCNVN(Tables XV and XVI) embedded into free-standing monolayer,
constrained monolayer and bulk lattices of hBN.
TABLE XI. Many-body spectra of C BCN(in band basisjb1b2;b1b2i, overline represents spin-down
part). Only leading terms of eigenstates j	niare shown.
Enmonolayer Enconstr. monolayer Enbulk j	ni S(S+ 1)ms
0 0 0 j10; 10i 0 0
3.530 3.538 3.5020:71j01; 10i 0:71j10; 01i2 0
j00; 11i 2 1
j11; 00i 2 -1
4.163 4.171 3.976 0:71j01; 10i 0:71j10; 01i0 0
8.237 8.254 7.913 j01; 01i 0 0
TABLE XVII. Evolution of Huang-Rhys factor SHRfor impurity complexes embedded into free-
standing monolayer, constrained monolayer, and bulk hBN.
CBCN CBVN CBCNVN
monolayer constr. monolayer bulk monolayer constr. monolayer bulk monolayer constr. monolayer bulk
10.65 0.63 0.75 33.0 18.2 17.2 24.8 12.6 12.2
2 8.0 3.8 3.7 15.8 12.9 12.8
3 11.0 2.9 3.4
[1] Weber, J. R. et al.Quantum computing with defects. P. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107, 8513–8518
(2010). URL http://www.pnas.org/content/107/19/8513.abstract .
[2] Kane, B. E. A silicon-based nuclear spin quantum computer. Nature393, 133 (1998). URL
https://www.nature.com/articles/30156 .
35TABLE XII. Many-body spectra of C BCN(in orbital basisjC2(pz)C1(pz);C2(pz)C1(pz)i, overline represents spin-down part). Only leading
terms of bulkeigenstatesj	niare shown.
Enmonolayer Enconstr. monolayer Enbulk j	ni S(S+ 1)ms
0 0 0 0:14j01; 01i+ 0:38j01; 10i+ 0:38j10; 01i+ 0:83j10; 10i 0 0
3.530 3.538 3.502 0:71j01; 10i+ 0:71j10; 01i 2 0
j00; 11i 2 1
j11; 00i 2 -1
4.163 4.171 3.976 0:47j01; 01i+ 0:50j01; 10i+ 0:50j10; 01i 0:53j10; 10i 0 0
8.237 8.254 7.913 0:87j01; 01i 0:33j01; 10i 0:33j10; 01i+ 0:16j10; 10i 0 0
TABLE XIII. Many-body spectra of C BVN(in band basisjb1b2b3;b1b2b3i, overline represents spin-down part). Only leading terms of bulk
eigenstatesj	niare shown.
Enmonolayer Enconstr. monolayer Enbulk j	ni S(S+ 1) ms
0 0 0 0:98j100; 100i 0 0
2.639 2.542 2.4580:68j100; 010i 0:68j010; 100i 2 0
0:96j000; 110i 2 1
0:96j110; 000i 2 -1
3.410 3.243 3.041 0:68j100; 010i+ 0:68j010; 100i 0 0
3.659 3.502 3.3420:67j100; 001i 0:67j001; 100i 2 0
0:95j000; 101i 2 1
0:95j101; 000i 2 -1
4.022 3.900 3.662 0:68j100; 001i+ 0:68j001; 100i 0 0
36TABLE XIV. Many-body spectra of C BVN(in orbital basisjBc(pz)C(pz)C(px);Bc(pz)C(pz)C(px)i, overline represents spin-down part).
Only leading terms of bulkeigenstatesj	niare shown.
Enmonolayer Enconstr. monolayer Enbulk j	ni S(S+ 1)ms
0 0 0 0:74j001; 001i 0:40j001; 010i 0:40j010; 001i 0 0
2.639 2.542 2.4580:68j001; 010i 0:68j010; 001i 2 0
0:95j000; 011i 2 1
0:95j011; 000i 2 -1
3.410 3.243 3.041 0:62j001; 001i 0:34j001; 010i 0:34j010; 001i+ 0:47j010; 010i 0 0
3.659 3.502 3.3420:60j001; 100i 0:60j100; 001i 2 0
 0:22j000; 011i+ 0:85j000; 101i 0:48j000; 110i 2 1
 0:22j011; 000i+ 0:85j101; 000i 0:48j110; 000i 2 -1
4.022 3.900 3.662 0:57j001; 100i+ 0:57j100; 001i 0 0
TABLE XV. Many-body spectra of C BCNVN(in band basisjb1b2b3b4;b1b2b3b4i, overline represents spin-down part). Only leading terms of
bulkeigenstatesj	niare shown.
Enmonolayer Enconstr. monolayer Enbulk j	ni S(S+ 1)ms
0 0 0 0:98j1000; 1100i 0.75 0.5
0 0 0 0:98j1100; 100i 0.75 -0.5
2.315 2.076 2.049 0:97j1000; 1010i 0.75 0.5
2.315 2.076 2.049 0:97j1010; 1000i 0.75 -0.5
2.300 2.525 2.400 0:99j0100; 1100i 0.75 0.5
2.300 2.525 2.400 0:99j1100; 0100i 0.75 -0.5
3.340 3.279 3.2200:54j1000; 0110i 0:54j0100; 1010i+ 0:54j0010; 1100i 3.75 0.5
0:54j1100; 0010i 0:54j1010; 0100i+ 0:54j0110; 1000i 3.75 -0.5
0:94j0000; 1110i 3.75 1.5
0:94j1110; 0000i 3.75 -1.5
3.308 3.335 3.252 0:98j1000; 1001i 0.75 0.5
3.308 3.335 3.252 0:98j1001; 1000i 0.75 -0.5
37TABLE XVI. Many-body spectra of C BCNVN(in orbital basisjBc(pz)C1(px)C2(pz)C1(pz);Bc(pz)C1(px)C2(pz)C1(pz)i, overline represents
spin-down part). Only leading terms of bulkeigenstatesj	niare shown.
Enmonolayer Enconstr. monolayer Enbulk j	ni S(S+ 1)ms
0 0 0 0:39j0001; 0110i+ 0:39j0010; 0101i+ 0:75j0010; 0110i 0.75 0.5
0 0 0 0:39j0101; 0010i+ 0:39j0110; 0001i+ 0:75j0110; 0010i 0.75 -0.5
2.315 2.076 2.049 0:32j0001; 0011i+ 0:59j0010; 0011i 0:52j0010; 1010i 0.75 0.5
2.315 2.076 2.049 0:32j0011; 0001i+ 0:59j0011; 0010i 0:52j1010; 0010i 0.75 -0.5
2.300 2.525 2.400 0:35j0100; 0011i+ 0:33j0100; 0101i+ 0:74j0100; 0110i 0.75 0.5
2.300 2.525 2.400 0:34j0011; 0100i+ 0:33j0101; 0100i+ 0:74j0110; 0100i 0.75 -0.5
3.340 3.279 3.220 0:48j0011; 0100i+ 0:48j0101; 0010i 0:48j0110; 0001i 3.75 -0.5
 0:48j0001; 0110i+ 0:48j0010; 0101i 0:48j0100; 0011i 3.75 0.5
0:83j0000; 0111i+ 0:23j0000; 1101i+ 0:52j0000; 1110i 3.75 1.5
0:83j0111; 0000i+ 0:23j1101; 0000i+ 0:52j1110; 0000i 3.75 -1.5
3.308 3.335 3.252 0:59j0010; 0011i+ 0:53j0010; 1010i 0.75 0.5
3.308 3.335 3.252 0:59j0011; 0010i+ 0:53j1010; 0010i 0.75 -0.5
38[3] Pla, J. J. et al.A single-atom electron spin qubit in silicon. Nature489, 541–545 (2012). URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature11449 .
[4] Wu, Y., Wang, Y., Qin, X., Rong, X. & Du, J. A programmable two-qubit solid-state quantum
processor under ambient conditions. npj Quantum Information 5, 9 (2019).
[5] Aharonovich, I. et al.Diamond-based single-photon emitters. Rep. Prog. Phys. 74, 076501
(2011). URL http://stacks.iop.org/0034-4885/74/i=7/a=076501 .
[6] Aharonovich, I., Greentree, A. D. & Prawer, S. Diamond photonics. Nat. Photonics 5, 397–405
(2011). URL https://www.nature.com/articles/nphoton.2011.54 .
[7] Schirhagl, R., Chang, K., Loretz, M. & Degen, C. L. Nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond:
Nanoscale sensors for physics and biology. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 65, 83–105 (2014). URL
https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-physchem-040513-103659 .
[8] Lee, D., Gohlke, D., Benjamin, A. & Gupta, J. A. Inﬂuence of the local environment on
Mn acceptors in GaAs. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 27, 154202 (2015). URL
https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-8984/27/15/154202 .
[9] Lee, D. & Gupta, J. A. Perspectives on deterministic control of quantum point defects
by scanned probes. Nanophotonics 8, 2033–2040 (2019). URL https://doi.org/10.1515/
nanoph-2019-0212 .
[10] Kubota, Y., Watanabe, K., Tsuda, O. & Taniguchi, T. Deep ultraviolet light-emitting hexag-
onal boron nitride synthesized at atmospheric pressure. Science317, 932–934 (2007). URL
https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.1144216 .
[11] Cassabois, G., Valvin, P. & Gil, B. Hexagonal boron nitride is an indirect bandgap semicon-
ductor. Nature Photonics 10, 262–266 (2016). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.
2015.277 .
[12] Wang, H., Zhao, Y., Xie, Y., Ma, X. & Zhang, X. Recent progress in synthesis of two-
dimensional hexagonal boron nitride. Journal of Semiconductors 38, 031003 (2017). URL
https://doi.org/10.1088/1674-4926/38/3/031003 .
[13] Tran, T. T., Bray, K., Ford, M. J., Toth, M. & Aharonovich, I. Quantum emission from
hexagonal boron nitride monolayers. Nature Nanotechnology 11, 37–41 (2016). URL https:
//doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2015.242 .
[14] Tran, T. T. et al.Robust multicolor single photon emission from point defects in hexagonal
boron nitride. ACS nano 10, 7331–7338 (2016). URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.
391021/acsnano.6b03602 .
[15] Koperski, M., Nogajewski, K. & Potemski, M. Single photon emitters in boron nitride: More
than a supplementary material. Optics Communications 411, 158–165 (2018). URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0030401817310039 .
[16] Turiansky, M. E., Alkauskas, A., Bassett, L. C. & Van de Walle, C. G. Dangling bonds in
hexagonal boron nitride as single-photon emitters. Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 127401 (2019). URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.127401 .
[17] Exarhos, A. L., Hopper, D. A., Patel, R. N., Doherty, M. W. & Bassett, L. C. Magnetic-ﬁeld-
dependent quantum emission in hexagonal boron nitride at room temperature. Nature commu-
nications 10, 1–8 (2019). URL https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-018-08185-8 .
[18] Ivády, V. et al.Ab initio theory of the negatively charged boron vacancy qubit in hexagonal
boron nitride. npj Computational Materials 6, 41 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41524-020-0305-x .
[19] Guo, N.-J. et al.Generation of spin defects by ion implantation in hexagonal boron nitride.
ACS Omega 7, 1733–1739 (2022). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.1c04564 .
[20] Koperski, M. et al.Midgap radiative centers in carbon-enriched hexagonal boron nitride.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 117, 13214–
13219 (2020).
[21] Mendelson, N. et al.Identifying carbon as the source of visible single-photon emission from
hexagonal boron nitride. Nature Materials 20, 321–328 (2021). URL https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41563-020-00850-y .
[22] Huang, B. & Lee, H. Defect and impurity properties of hexagonal boron nitride: A ﬁrst-
principles calculation. Phys. Rev. B 86, 245406 (2012). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRevB.86.245406 .
[23] Maciaszek, M., Razinkovas, L. & Alkauskas, A. Thermodynamics of carbon point defects in
hexagonal boron nitride. Phys. Rev. Materials 6, 014005 (2022). URL https://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.6.014005 .
[24] Wang, D. S., Ciccarino, C. J., Flick, J. & Narang, P. Hybridized defects in solid-state materials
as artiﬁcial molecules. ACS nano 15, 5240–5248 (2021). URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/
abs/10.1021/acsnano.0c10601 .
40[25] Huang, P. et al.Carbon and vacancy centers in hexagonal boron nitride. Phys. Rev. B 106,
014107 (2022). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.106.014107 .
[26] Jungwirth, N. R. et al.Temperature dependence of wavelength selectable zero-phonon
emission from single defects in hexagonal boron nitride. Nano Letters 16, 6052–
6057 (2016). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b01987 . PMID: 27580074,
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b01987.
[27] Raja, A. et al.Coulomb engineering of the bandgap and excitons in two-dimensional materials.
Nature Communications 8, 15251 (2017).
[28] Andersen, K., Latini, S. & Thygesen, K. S. Dielectric genome of van der Waals heterostruc-
tures.Nano Lett. 15, 4616–4621 (2015). URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/
acs.nanolett.5b01251 .
[29] Steinhoﬀ,A. et al.Excitonﬁssioninmonolayertransitionmetaldichalcogenidesemiconductors.
Nature Communications 8, 1166 (2017).
[30] Soriano, D., Rudenko, A. N., Katsnelson, M. I. & Rösner, M. Environmental screening and
ligand-ﬁeld eﬀects to magnetism in Cr I3monolayer. npj Computational Materials 7, 1–10
(2021).
[31] Muechler, L. et al.Quantum embedding methods for correlated excited states of point defects:
Case studies and challenges. Phys. Rev. B 105, 235104 (2022). URL https://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.105.235104 .
[32] Attaccalite, C., Bockstedte, M., Marini, A., Rubio, A. & Wirtz, L. Coupling of excitons
and defect states in boron-nitride nanostructures. Phys. Rev. B 83, 144115 (2011). URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.83.144115 .
[33] Auburger, P. & Gali, A. Towards ab initio identiﬁcation of paramagnetic substitutional carbon
defects in hexagonal boron nitride acting as quantum bits. Phys. Rev. B 104, 075410 (2021).
URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.104.075410 .
[34] Stoneham, A. M. Theory of Defects in Solids: Electronic Structure of Defects in Insulators
and Semiconductors (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2001).
[35] Koperski, M. et al.Towards practical applications of quantum emitters in boron nitride.
Scientiﬁc Reports 11, 15506 (2021). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-93802-8 .
[36] Tran, T. T. et al.Robust multicolor single photon emission from point defects in hexagonal
boron nitride. ACS nano 10, 7331–7338 (2016).
41[37] Alkauskas, A., Buckley, B. B., Awschalom, D. D. & Van De Walle, C. G. First-principles the-
ory of the luminescence lineshape for the triplet transition in diamond NV centres. New Jour-
nal of Physics 16, 073026 (2014). URL https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/
1367-2630/16/7/073026/meta .
[38] Razinkovas, L., Doherty, M. W., Manson, N. B., Van de Walle, C. G. & Alkauskas, A. Vi-
brational and vibronic structure of isolated point defects: The nitrogen-vacancy center in
diamond. Phys. Rev. B 104, 045303 (2021). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevB.104.045303 .
[39] Alkauskas, A., McCluskey, M. D. & Van de Walle, C. G. Tutorial: Defects in semiconduc-
tors—combining experiment and theory. J. Appl. Phys. 119, 181101 (2016).
[40] Alkauskas, A., Lyons, J. L., Steiauf, D. & Van de Walle, C. G. First-principles calculations
of luminescence spectrum line shapes for defects in semiconductors: The example of GaN
and ZnO. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 267401 (2012). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.109.267401 .
[41] Alkauskas, A., Dreyer, C. E., Lyons, J. L. & Van de Walle, C. G. Role of excited states
in Shockley-Read-Hall recombination in wide-band-gap semiconductors. Phys. Rev. B 93,
201304(R) (2016). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.93.201304 .
[42] Aryasetiawan, F. et al.Frequency-dependent local interactions and low-energy eﬀective models
from electronic structure calculations. Phys. Rev. B 70, 195104 (2004). URL https://link.
aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.70.195104 .
[43] Laturia, A., Van de Put, M. L. & Vandenberghe, W. G. Dielectric properties of hexagonal
boron nitride and transition metal dichalcogenides: from monolayer to bulk. npj 2D Materials
and Applications 2, 6 (2018). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41699-018-0050-x .
[44] Rösner, M., Şaşıoğlu, E., Friedrich, C., Blügel, S. & Wehling, T. O. Wannier function approach
to realistic coulomb interactions in layered materials and heterostructures. Phys. Rev. B 92,
085102 (2015). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.92.085102 .
[45] Era, K., Minami, F. & Kuzuba, T. Fast luminescence from carbon-related defects of hexago-
nal boron nitride. J. Lumin. 24-25, 71–74 (1981). URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0022231381902234 .
[46] Museur, L., Feldbach, E. & Kanaev, A. Defect-related photoluminescence of hexagonal
boron nitride. Phys. Rev. B 78, 155204 (2008). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
42PhysRevB.78.155204 .
[47] Du, X. Z., Li, J., Lin, J. Y. & Jiang, H. X. The origin of deep-level impurity transitions in
hexagonal boron nitride. Appl. Phys. Lett 106, 021110 (2015). URL https://doi.org/10.
1063/1.4905908 .
[48] Mackoit-Sinkevičien˙ e, M., Maciaszek, M., Van de Walle, C. G. & Alkauskas, A. Carbon dimer
defect as a source of the 4.1 eV luminescence in hexagonal boron nitride. Applied Physics
Letters115, 212101 (2019). URL https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5124153 .
[49] Linderälv, C., Wieczorek, W. & Erhart, P. Vibrational signatures for the identiﬁcation of
single-photon emitters in hexagonal boron nitride. Phys. Rev. B 103, 115421 (2021). URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.103.115421 .
[50] Jara, C. et al.First-Principles Identiﬁcation of Single Photon Emitters Based on Carbon
Clusters in Hexagonal Boron Nitride. J. Phys. Chem. A 125, 1325–1335 (2021).
[51] Ocampo, O. N. Study of the dimer Hubbard Model within Dynamical Mean Field Theory and
its application to VO 2. Ph.D. thesis (2017). URL https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/
tel-01690699 .
[52] Schüler, M., Rösner, M., Wehling, T. O., Lichtenstein, A. I. & Katsnelson, M. I. Optimal
hubbard models for materials with nonlocal coulomb interactions: Graphene, silicene, and
benzene. Physical Review Letters 111, 036601 (2013). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevLett.111.036601 .
[53] Carrascal, D. J., Ferrer, J., Smith, J. C. & Burke, K. The hubbard dimer: A density functional
case study of a many-body problem 27, 393001 (2015).
[54] von Barth, U. Local-density theory of multiplet structure. Phys. Rev. A 20, 1693–1703 (1979).
URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.20.1693 .
[55] Li, S. & Gali, A. Bistable carbon-vacancy defects in h-BN. Frontiers in Quantum Science and
Technology 1(2022). URL https://doi.org/10.3389%2Ffrqst.2022.1007756 .
[56] Müller, K. A. & Burkard, H. SrTi O3: An intrinsic quantum paraelectric below 4 K. Phys. Rev.
B19, 3593–3602 (1979). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.19.3593 .
[57] Robertson, J. High dielectric constant oxides. Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys. 28, 265–291 (2004).
URL https://doi.org/10.1051/epjap:2004206 .
[58] Fumagalli, L. et al.Anomalously low dielectric constant of conﬁned water. Science360,
1339–1342 (2018). URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.aat4191 .
43[59] Kresse, G. & Hafner, J. Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals. Phys. Rev. B 47,
558–561 (1993). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.47.558 .
[60] Kresse, G. & Furthmüller, J. Eﬃcient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations
using a plane-wave basis set. Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169–11186 (1996). URL https://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.54.11169 .
[61] Blöchl, P. E. First-principles calculations of defects in oxygen-deﬁcient silica exposed to hy-
drogen. Phys. Rev. B 62, 6158–6179 (2000). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevB.62.6158 .
[62] Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized gradient approximation made sim-
ple.Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865–3868 (1996). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.77.3865 .
[63] Marzari, N. & Vanderbilt, D. Maximally localized generalized wannier functions for composite
energy bands. Phys. Rev. B 56, 12847–12865 (1997). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevB.56.12847 .
[64] Pizzi, G. et al.Wannier90 as a community code: new features and applications. Jour-
nal of Physics: Condensed Matter 32, 165902 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1088%
2F1361-648x%2Fab51ff .
[65] Kaltak, M. Merging GW with DMFT. URL http://othes.univie.ac.at/38099/ .
[66] Parcollet, O. et al.TRIQS: A toolbox for research on interacting quantum systems. Com-
puter Physics Communications 196, 398–415 (2015). URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0010465515001666 .
44