arXiv:2305.06964v3  [math.AT]  15 Mar 2024KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS
CONNOR MALIN
Abstract. We show that Koszul duality for operads in pTop,ˆqcan be expressed via generalized Thom complexes.
As an application, we prove the Koszul self duality of the rig ht module EMassociated to a framed manifold M. We
discuss implications for factorization homology, embeddi ng calculus, and conﬁrm an old conjecture of Ching on the
relation of Goodwillie calculus to manifold calculus.
Contents
1. Introduction 1
2. Operads and right modules of interest 4
3. Ching’s conjecture 7
4. Parametrized spectra 8
5. Verdier Duality 12
6. Koszul-Verdier duality of operads and right modules 15
7. Self duality for submanifolds of Rn23
8. Weiss cosheaves in the category RMod O 24
9. Self duality of EM, Poincar´ e-Koszul duality, and embedding calculus 29
References 31
1.Introduction
Consider the topological category Mﬂdnofn-dimensional smooth manifolds and smooth embeddings. This
category has an important full subcategory Disknfor which the objects are ﬁnite disjoint unions of Rn. Associated
to a manifold MPMﬂdnis the presheaf on Diskn
ğ
iPIRnÞÑEmb pğ
iPIRn,Mq.
It was observed by Boavida de Brito–Weiss and Turchin [11,46] tha t these presheaves determine the behavior of
manifoldcalculustowers[49]associatedtoanyenrichedpresheafo nMﬂdn. Inparticular,itisknownthatincodimen-
sion ě3, the derived mapping space Maph
DisknpEmb p´,Mq,Emb p´,Nqqhas the homotopy type of Emb pM,N q[22].
These presheaves also occur in factorization homology – a theory o f integrating various types of En-algebras
overn-manifolds. In particular, one observes that factorization homolo gy only depends on the homotopy type of
this presheaf. One calculational tool that appears in factorizatio n homology is Poincar´ e-Koszul duality [6]. This
intertwines the self duality of manifolds with the geometric bar-coba r duality of En-algebras introduced by Ayala-
Francis. Their construction, which we denote bar, sendsEn-algebras to En-coalgebras. Bar-cobar duality for
En-algebras bears a strong resemblance to the classic form of Koszu l duality, which we denote by B. However, there
are important diﬀerences: if one applies barto anEn-algebra it produces an En-coalgebra, but if one applies B
to anEn-algebra, it produces a BpEnq-coalgebra. This distinction is unsurprising, since Koszul duality app lies to
algebrasoverany operad, while the bar-cobarduality of En-algebrasthat appears in factorization homologyis unique
toEn-algebras. It is interesting to ask if there is an interpretation of Po incar´ e-Koszul duality which uses the more
classical setting of Koszul duality. This is strongly suggested by th e existence of “Poincar´ e-Koszul”equivalences over
arbitrary operads, constructed separately by Ching, in the case of left modules, [16, Proposition 6.1] and Amabel in
the case of algebras [1, Main theorem].
The essence of Koszul duality is exhibited in the commutativity of the diagram of algebraic operads:
12 CONNOR MALIN
snlie poisn com
snKpcomqsnKppoisnqKplieq» » »
This diagram says the Koszul dual Kp´q:“Bp´q_of the commutative operad is the Lie operad, the Koszul
dual of the Lie operad is the commutative operad, and the Koszul d ual of the n-Poisson operad is itself, up to
a shift [30, Chapter 13]. This diagram encodes the following observat ions: the Koszul dual of a Lie algebra is a
commutative algebra, the Koszul dual of a commutative algebra is a Lie algebra, and the Koszul dual of an n-Poisson
algebra is a shifted n-Poisson algebra.1If we recall that H˚pEnq –poisn[18], we see the bar-cobar duality of
En-algebras is reﬂected as a theorem about Koszul self duality of the homology of En.
Koszul duality was originallyformulated for operads in pDGVect Q,bq, but was generalizedto operads in pTop˚,^q
and pSp,^qby Ching and Salvatore, independently [15,43]. Koszul duality for t opological operads has had great
success, particularly in the realm of Goodwillie calculus. Arone-Ching u sed Koszul duality to endow the Goodwillie
derivatives B˚Fof a functor F: Top ÑTop with the structure of a lie : “Kpcomqbimodule [2]. The point-set
level construction of Koszul duality, combined with its interaction w ith Goodwillie calculus, often allows for explicit
computation. One can deduce unstable results from stable techniq ues, not just in theory, but also in practice. The
explicit cooperad structure on Bpcomqwas utilized by Behrens to calculate the ring of F2Dyer-Lashof operations of
the spectral Lie operad, which he used to give a novel calculation of the unstable homotopy groups of spheres up to
the 19-stem [9].2
It is natural to ask if there is a diagram of operads in spectra which lif ts the previous diagram of algebraic operads
snlie Σ8
`En com
snKpcomqsnKpΣ8
`EnqKplieq» » »
After much speculation, this was recently realized by Ching-Salvato re[17]. To complete the programoftranslating
Poincar´ e-Koszul duality into a more classical form, one must also e stablish a Koszul self duality result for the right
modules EM, the conﬁgurations of disks in M. In this paper, we construct a compatible diagram of right modules
which witnesses the compactly supported Koszul self duality of EM. Combined with work of Ching on Koszul duality
for operads in spectra, this gives a construction of a Poincar´ e-K oszul equivalence for factorization homology of left
En-modules.
Around the time the self duality of Enwas initially conjectured, Ching noticed the stabilized conﬁguration s paces
of framed manifolds could be endowed with the structure of a shifte d Lie right module in two ways: one through
Goodwillie calculus of the functor XÑΣ8Map pM`,Xqand one through manifold calculus combined with the
hypothesized self duality of En[14]. He conjectured that these two right module structures shou ld coincide. We
prove this as a consequences of the self duality of EM.
The main work that occurs in proving the self duality of EMis ﬁnding a way to access the operad equivalence
Σ8
`En»snKpΣ8
`Enqin a way that minimizes the diﬃcult point-set level constructions of Ch ing-Salvatore. This
operad equivalence is rather technical, involving many models of the Enoperad and sphere operads CoEnd pSnq. It
is reasonable to expect that alterations to the arguments could ad dress the self duality of EM, but we expect this to
be prohibitively complex.
Instead, we interpret Koszul duality in terms of Spivak normal ﬁbr ations. Analogously to the classic theory of
Poincar´ e complexes [45], we deﬁne the Koszul dualizing ﬁbration of a n operad, which has the structure of an operad
in parametrized spectra. Using Verdier duality, we show that the Th om complex of the dualizing ﬁbration is a model
of the Koszul dual of O. We then prove that self duality is equivalent to trivializing the Koszul dualizing ﬁbration
as an operad in parametrized spectra. This procedure lifts the hom ological theory of Poincar´ e/Koszul operads
of [35, Section 5] to operads in spectra, analogous to how Atiyah du ality lifts Poincar´ e duality in (co)homology to a
statement in spectra.
A parallel story holds true for right modules over operads. By a com bination of the locality of the Koszul dualizing
ﬁbration for codimension 0 embeddings and a constructionof nonco mpact Koszul self duality for the right En-module
1We use the convention that Lie algebras have a bracket of degr ee´1.
2It is worth noting that recently Konovalov completed the cal culation at odd primes without relying on the point-set cons truction of
Koszul duality, in contrast with Behrens [27].KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 3
ERn, we are able to explicitly construct a zigzag of maps showing that cod imension 0 subsets of Rnhave compactly
supported Koszul self duality, lifting the homological statement of [35, Theorem 7.8]. Ultimately, we extend this
result to all tame, framed n-manifolds using the theory of Weiss cosheaves. Of particular note , the argument we
present is compatible with any zigzag of maps implementing the Koszul self duality of En.
Main Results
Precise statements of the following results can be found in the given sections.
The main ingredient for the compactly supported Koszul self duality ofEMis an interpretation of Koszul duality
in terms of Thom complexes Th p´qof operads and right modules in the category of parametrized spec tra.
Proposition 1.1 (Propositions 6.14, 6.32: Koszul-Verdier duality) .To an operad Oand right module pair pR,A q
inpTop,ˆqwe can associate an operad ξOand right module ξpR,A qinpParSp,¯^qfor which there are compatible
equivalences
ThpξOq»Ý ÑKpΣ8
`Oq
ThpξpR,A qq»Ý ÑKpΣ8R{Aq.
The above result quickly leads to the compactly supported Koszul s elf duality in the case of tame open subsets of
Rn, which we then extend to all tame, framed manifolds using the theor y of Weiss cosheaves (Deﬁnition 8.6). The
statement of Koszul self duality involves operadic suspension sn(Deﬁnition 6.22) and right module suspension spn,nq
(Deﬁnition 6.39).
Theorem 1.2 (Theorem 9.1: Koszul self duality of EM).For a framed n-manifold M, there are equivalences
compatible with the self duality of En:
Σ8
`EM»spn,nqKpΣ8EM`q.
The self duality of EMhas a range of applications due to the interaction of EMwith various forms of functor
calculus. With respect to Goodwillie calculus, it leads directly to a resolu tion of Ching’s conjecture:
Corollary 1.3 (Corollary 9.2: Ching’s conjecture) .For a framed n-manifold M, there is an equivalence of right
lie-modules
resliepsp´n,´nqΣ8
`EMq » B ˚pΣ8Map˚pM`,´qq.
With respect to embedding calculus, we have a Pontryagin-Thom typ e construction which extends one point
compactiﬁcation of open embeddings to arbitrary maps of right mod ules:
Theorem 1.4 (Theorem 9.3: Pontryagin-Thom equivalence) .For framed n-manifolds M,Nthere is a map
Maph
Σ8
`EnpΣ8
`EM,Σ8
`ENq ÑMaph
Σ8
`EnpΣ8EN`,Σ8EM`q.
Supposing Conjecture 9.4 that K: RMod Σ8
`EnÑRMod KpΣ8
`Enqis an equivalence when restricted to ﬁnite type right
modules, this map is an equivalence.
With respect to factorization homology, we achieve a versionof Poin car´ e-Koszulduality [6] for left Σ8
`En-modules:
Theorem 1.5 (Theorem 9.5: Poincar´ e-Koszul duality for left Σ8
`En-modules) .For a framed n-manifold Mand a
leftΣ8
`En-module Lthere is an equivalence
ż
Σ8
`EML»Ý Ñżspn,n qΣ8E_
M`
BpLq.
Acknowledgements
Among many people who contributed to this paper through patient c onversation, I am especially grateful to
Araminta Amabel, Mark Behrens, and Alexander Kupers for their co mments on previous versions of this paper. I
also thank the anonymous referee for their careful review of this paper. The author acknowledges the support of
NSF grant DMS-1547292.
Outline
Ourgoalistoremainasconcreteaspossiblewithout makingargumen tsorconstructionsprohibitivelycomplicated.
Those who have preferences for 8-categorical approaches will have no trouble translating our appr oach to Verdier
duality to that of Lurie [33, 5.5.5].
In Section 2, we introduce (co)operads and right (co)modules usin g partial (de)composites, and we recall two
models of the Enoperad and the right modules EM, as well as an extension of this construction to the one-point4 CONNOR MALIN
compactiﬁcation M`. In Section 3, we recount a conjecture of Ching regarding manifold calculus and Goodwillie
calculus. In Section 4, we give a review of parametrizedspectra. In Section 5, we proveVerdier duality for the functor
of relative sections ΓAp´q. In Section 6, we review the Koszul duality of Ching and Salvatore an d construct the
Koszul dualizing ﬁbration ξOassociated to an operad in unpointed spaces. In Section 7, we prov e that codimension
0 submanifolds of Rnsatisfy noncompact Koszul self duality. In Section 8, we discuss We iss cosheaves taking value
in the category of right modules over an operad. In Section 9, we pr ove the main result that EMis Koszul self dual
and give applications.
Conventions
By Top or Top˚we mean a convenient category of topological spaces or pointed to pological spaces. All manifolds
are assumed tame, i.e. diﬀeomorphic in an unspeciﬁed way to the inter ior of a compact manifold with boundary. By
Sp we mean the category of orthogonal spectra. We model the ca tegory of parametrized spectra ParSp by orthogonal
sequences of ex-spaces, i.e. retractive spaces (explained in Sect ion 4). The homology of an unpointed space is always
unreduced, and the homology of a pointed space is always reduced. In the ﬁnal two sections, we use several models of
8-categories: topological categories, Kan complex enriched categ ories, topological model categories, simplical model
categories, and quasicategories. These are related as follows:
CatTopCatKanQuasiCat
ModelCatTopModelCatSSetSing N
Singres|bifibrant res|bifibrant
Nmodel
For our purposes, the construction of interesting functors will t ake place in ModelCatTopand the categorical
homotopy theory will take place in each of ModelCatSSet,CatKan,and QuasiCat. These models of 8-categories are
suitably equivalent. For instance, they have the same theory of ma pping spaces and diagram categories [31, Theorem
2.2.0.1, Proposition 4.2.4.4.]. Using these comparisons, we will reduce th e statements of our many of our theorems
to versions which we verify in QuasiCat .
2.Operads and right modules of interest
Inthissection,wegiveabriefreviewofoperadsandtheirrightmodu les. Forextendeddiscussion,andacomparison
to˝-product deﬁnitions, we refer to [15].
Deﬁnition 2.1. Let Fin denote the category of nonempty ﬁnite sets and bijections . A symmetric sequence in Cis
a functor F: Fin ÑC.
We denote the category of symmetric sequences by ΣSeq pCq. Given ﬁnite sets I,JwithaPI, we deﬁne the
inﬁnitesimal composite
IYaJ:“I´ tau \J.
Deﬁnition 2.2. An operad in a symmetric monoidal category pC,bqis a symmetric sequence OinCtogether with
morphisms called partial composites for all aPIand a unit:
OpIq bOpJq ÑOpIYaJq
1bÑOpt˚uq.
These must satisfy straightforward equivariance and unitality con ditions. As well, for a,a1PA,b PBwe require
an associative law corresponding to the identiﬁcation pA˝aBq ˝bC“A˝apB˝bCqand a parallel composition law
corresponding to the identiﬁcation pA˝aBq ˝a1C“ pA˝a1Cq ˝aB.
Deﬁnition 2.3. A cooperad in a symmetric monoidal category pC,bqis a symmetric sequence PinCtogether with
morphisms called partial decomposites for all aPIand a counit:
PpIYaJq ÑPpIq bPpJq
Ppt˚uq Ñ1b.
These must satisfy straightforward equivariance and counitality c onditions. As in the case of operads, these should
satisfy coassociativity and parallel cocomposition laws.
From now on we restrict to reduced (co)operads, i.e. those coope rads whose underlying symmetric sequence Shas
Spt˚uqequal to the unit of b.KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 5
Deﬁnition 2.4. A right module Rover an operad OinpC,bqis a symmetric sequence RinCwith morphisms
called partial composites:
RpIq bOpJq ÑRpIYaJq
for allaPI. These must satisfy straightforward equivariance and unitality co nditions, as well as associativity and
parallel composition laws.
Deﬁnition 2.5. A right comodule Rover a cooperad PinpC,bqis a symmetric sequence RinCtogether with
morphisms called partial decomposites:
RpIYaJq ÑRpIq bPpJq
for allaPI. These must satisfy straightforward equivariance and counitality conditions, as well as coassociativity
and parallel cocomposition laws.
Of course operads, cooperads, right modules, and right comodule s assemble into categories we call Operad pC,bq,
Cooperad, pC,bq,RMod O,RComod Pwhere morphisms respect all the structure. If Chas a notion of weak equiv-
alences, then weak equivalences in any of these categories are deﬁ ned as those which levelwise consist of weak
equivalences, and if Cis topologically enriched, then all of these categories are also topolo gically enriched.
It is important to note that all maps respect the symmetric group a ctions, but the symmetric group actions do not
aﬀect whether a given (co)operad/right (co)module map is a weak e quivalence. In this sense, the theory of operads
is strongly related to the world of Borel Σ n-equivariant homotopy theory.
Often we will be dealing with right modules over diﬀerent operads. The re is an obvious compatibility condition
for maps of right modules over diﬀerent operads.
Deﬁnition 2.6. Given a map of (co)operads f:OÑP, and right (co)modules R,SoverO,P, respectively, we say
a map of symmetric sequences g:RÑSis compatible with fif all the evident diagrams commute.
More generally, if there is a zigzagof (co)operad maps from OtoPthroughQiand a zigzag of symmetric sequence
maps from RtoSthrough the right (co)modules WioverQi, we say the zigzags are compatible if each symmetric
sequence map is compatible with the associated (co)operad map.
In this paper, we are primarily interested in speciﬁc right modules ass ociated to framed n-manifolds. We endow
Emb pM,N qwith the compact open C8-topology. Fix a framed n-manifold M, explicitly, an n-manifold with a
vector bundle isomorphism φM:TM –MˆRn.
Deﬁnition 2.7. The Moore isotopy space of M, IsopMq, is the space of maps
Mˆ r0,as ÑGLpnqfor0 ďaă 8
such that Mˆ t0uis mapped to Id PGLpnq. This space is topologized by embedding it into
Map pMˆ r0,8q,GLpnqq ˆ r0,8q
as the pairs pf,aqwherefpx,tq “fpx,aqfor alltěa.
By pointwise composing with φM, we can think of the space Iso pMqas the space of Moore isotopies of the framing
ofM. The descriptor “Moore” is used to indicate that the isotopies are n ot required to have a ﬁxed length.
Deﬁnition 2.8. LetM,Nben-manifolds with framings φM,φN. The space EmbfrpM,N qis the subspace of
Emb pM,N q ˆIsopMqgiven by elements
i:MÑN,f:Mˆ r0,as ÑGLpnq
such that
φM¨f|Mˆtau“i˚pφNq
In other words, the space of framed embeddings is the space of em beddings from MtoNtogether with a Moore
isotopy of φMto make the embedding strictly preserve the framing. Given framed manifolds M,M1,M2there are
composition maps
EmbfrpM,M1q ˆEmbfrpM1,M2q ÑEmbfrpM,M3q
given by composition of embeddings and composition of Moore isotopie s. Since the length of Moore isotopies is
allowed to vary, this composition is strictly associative.
Deﬁnition 2.9. For|I| ě2, the operad EninpTop,ˆqis given by
EnpIq:“Embfrpğ
iPIRn,Rnq.
Operad partial composition is deﬁned by composition of framed embe ddings.6 CONNOR MALIN
This model of Enis equivalent to more classical deﬁnitions involving rectilinear embeddin gs or standard embed-
dings of disks [5, Remark 2.10].
Deﬁnition 2.10. For a framed manifold M, the right En-module EMinpTop,ˆqis given by
EMpIq “Embfrpğ
iPIRn,Mq.
Right module partial composition is deﬁned by composition of framed e mbeddings.
Heuristically, there should be a right En-module EM`which consists of the “framed embeddings of disks into
M`which are allowed to disappear at 8”. Rather than rigorously deﬁne this, we instead pass to diﬀerent m odels
ofEn,EMwhich are more amenable to one-point compactiﬁcations.
Deﬁnition 2.11. IfXis a space and Iis a ﬁnite set, the I-labeled conﬁguration space is
FpX,Iq:“ tpxiq PMI|xi“xjù ñi“ju.
From a conﬁguration of disks we may extract a conﬁguration of poin ts by recording the centers of each disks.
In order to encode operadic information into such a map, we must “e nhance” conﬁguration spaces with additional
combinatorial information.
By anI-labelled tree, we mean a tree with:
‚a distinguished root,
‚a bijection between the leaves and I,
‚and satisfying the condition that if vis an internal vertex, i.e. not a leaf or a root, the outgoing edgesepvq,
i.e. edges which are between vand some leaf, should have cardinality at least 2.
The Fulton-Macpherson operad, rigorously deﬁned in [21, Section 3.2], has a heuristic deﬁnition as follows:
Deﬁnition 2.12. A point in FnpIqis represented by an I-labeled tree whose root has one outgoing edge together
with labels for all nonroot, nonleaf vertices vwith values in FpRn,epvqq. We then quotient the labels of each vertex
by translation and positive scaling. The symmetric sequence Fnis an operad by grafting trees.
We interpret the elements of Fnas “inﬁnitesimal conﬁgurations” in Rn, modulo the given relations. The label of
the vertex adjacent to the root is the “base conﬁguration” and, if the tree branches, we imagine that the single point
labeled by that edge is actually a conﬁguration in the tangent space, and this may repeat. For a framed manifold
M, we can construct a right module over this operad, ﬁrst considere d in [38, Section 5].
Deﬁnition 2.13. A point in FMpIqis represented by an I-labeled tree with the root rlabeled by FpM,e prqq. Ifv
is a nonleaf vertex adjacent to the root, it is labeled by FpTppMq,epvqqwherepis the point in the root conﬁguration
labeled by the edge connecting vto the root. Any nonleaf child v1ofvis labeled by FpTppMq,epv1qqfor the same
p, and so on. We then quotient each nonroot, labeled vertex by tran slation and positive scaling. The symmetric
sequence FMis a right module over Fnwith partial composition given by grafting trees and using the framin g to
identifyTppMqwithRn.
We interpret the elements of FMas “inﬁnitesimal conﬁgurations in M”. One important observation is that both
FMpIqandFnpIqare manifolds of dimension n|I|andn|I| ´n´1, respectively, and the partial composites
FnpIq ˆFnpJq ÑFnpIYaJq
FMpIq ˆFnpJq ÑFMpIYaJq
are inclusions of codimension 0 portions of the boundary. Using the F ulton–MacPherson compactiﬁcations, we can
formally deﬁne a model of EM`as a right module over pFnq`POperad pTop˚,^q, the Fulton-MacPherson operad
with a disjoint basepoint.
Deﬁnition 2.14. The right pFnq`-module FM`inpTop˚,^qis the levelwise one point compactiﬁcation of FM.
Warning: The space FM`pIqdoes not usually have the homotopy type of any of the following:
FpM,I q`, FpM`,Iq,ortpxiq P pM`qI|i‰jù ñxi‰xjorxi“xj“ ˚u.
Instead it has the homotopy type of
˚ Y tpxiq P pM`q^I|xi“xjù ñi“ju Ă pM`q^I.
We will always treat the one point compactiﬁcation M`as an object distinguished from both manifolds and pointed
spaces. Treatments of categories of these so-called “zero-poin ted manifolds” may be found in [3,7]. Finally, we note
thatFpRnq`ﬂFSn, and this is especially relevant in Lemma 7.2.KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 7
The formal homotopy theory of operads using model categories c an be quite complex, but just as for all model
categories, it aims to capture the structure of zigzags of morphis ms of operads for which the backwards arrows are
weak equivalences. We introduce some terminology for zigzags.
Deﬁnition 2.15. Azigzag map of operads is a zigzag of operad maps for which the backwards maps are
weak equivalences. Similarly, a zigzag equivalence of operads is a zigzag map of operads which represents
an isomorphism in the homotopy category of operads (or equivalent ly symmetric sequences) when we invert the
backwards maps.
Deﬁnition 2.16. Azigzag map of right modules relative to a zigzag map of operads is a zigzag of maps of
right modules, compatible with the zigzag of maps of operads, for wh ich the backwards maps are weak equivalences
of symmetric sequences. Similarly, a zigzag equivalence of right modules relative to a zigzag equivalence of
operads is a zigzag map of right modules which represents an isomorp hism in the homotopy category of symmetric
sequences when we invert the backwards maps.
There is a substantial diﬀerence between a zigzag equivalence and a zigzag of equivalences, but in the presence of
a model structure the existence of the former implies the existenc e of the latter.
3.Ching’s conjecture
InChing’sthesis[15], helifted thealgebraictheoryofKoszuldualityt ooperadsinspectra. Inparticular,hedeﬁned
a contravariant functor K: Operad pSp,^q ÑOperad pSp,^q, reviewed in Section 6, and showed that the Goodwillie
derivatives of the identity are equivalent, as a symmetric sequence , to the spectral Lie operad lie : “Kpcomq. Later,
it was shown that B˚Id forms an operad and the aforementioned equivalence is one of op erads. Simultaenously, it was
shown the derivatives of functors Top˚ÑSp form right modules over B˚Id. These observations were incorporated
into the theory of Goodwillie calculus to produce an elegant theory re lating Koszul duality to Goodwillie calculus [2].
Arone–Ching calculated that as a right module over lie » B ˚Id, the derivatives B˚of the functor Σ8Map˚pX,´q
are equivalent to the Koszul dual: KpΣ8X^q[2, Example 17.28]. Here
X^pIq:“X^I
is the right com-module in pTop˚,^qwith partial composites determined by the diagonal. Using the fact t hat
K: RMod OÑRMod KpOqlifts the Spanier-Whitehead dual of the derived indecomposables (i.e . the quotient by the
image of the partial composites), it is straightforward to see that as symmetric sequences KpX^q » pX^{∆fatq_,
where the fat diagonal ∆fatis the subset of X^Iwhich contains repeated entries (if |I| “1, it is deﬁned as ˚). IfX–
Mis a compact, framed n-manifold, then Atiyah duality yields pM^
`{∆fatq_»sp´n,´nqΣ8
`FpM,´q. Hence, up to
weak equivalence and a speciﬁc type of suspension spn,nq(Deﬁnition 6.39), the stabilization of ordered conﬁgurations
inMis naturally a right module over the derivatives of the identity.
The symmetric sequence of conﬁgurations FpM,´qis also equivalent to the conﬁguration space of n-disksEMvia
radial contraction. Since Mis framed, EMhas an action of En, the little disks operad. Via the self duality of En
KpΣ8
`Enq » ¨ ¨ ¨ » s´nΣ8
`En
we can produce a zigzag map Kpcomq Ñs´nΣ8
`Enby taking the Koszul dual of the map Σ8
`EnÑcom. Restricting
along this map gives a right lie-module structure to sp´n,´nqΣ8
`EM, and up to weak equivalence and suspension, to
Σ8
`FpM,´q.
Ching conjectured that these two right module structures coincid e [14]. At the time of this conjecture, the self
duality of Enhad not been proven and right modules over Enhad not been heavily studied. Recently, the study
of the mapping spaces of right modules over Enhas provoked much interest and goes by the name of “embedding
calculus” [46]. A common situation in embedding calculus is that M,Nare framed n-manifolds (often Mis a tubular
neighborhood of a submanifold of N), and we want to understand the derived mapping space of right mo dules
Maph
EnpEM,ENq.There is map
Maph
Σ8
`EnpΣ8
`EM,Σ8
`ENq ÑMaph
compΣ8M^
`,Σ8N^
`q
obtained by induction along the map Σ8
`EnÑcom (which in the model FMis simply collapsing the inﬁnitesimal
conﬁgurations to the fat diagonal). Supposing a noncompact vers ion of Ching’s conjecture is true, there is also a
restriction map
Maph
Σ8
`EnpΣ8
`EM,Σ8
`ENq ÑMaph
liepKpΣ8pM`q^q,KpΣ8pN`q^qq.
Using the two Koszul dual descriptions of the Goodwillie tower [4, Exa mple 6.28], we can write this in terms of
Goodwillie calculus ( P8) and embedding calculus ( T8).8 CONNOR MALIN
P8pΣ8Map˚pN`,´qqpM`q ÐT8pΣ8
`Embfrp´,NqqpMq ÑP8pΣ8Map˚pM`,´qqpN`q
We will see that the ﬁrst map can be constructed from a Pontryagin –Thom-esque collapse functor which inter-
changes the full subcategory of right Σ8
`En-modules consisting of the Σ8
`EMwith the full subcategory consisting of
the Σ8EM`; for maps induced by framed embeddings i:MÑN, it can be seen to coincide with the suspension
spectrum of the one point compactiﬁcation i`. For general maps of right modules, it requires the Koszul self dua lity
ofEMandENto deﬁne.
Remark3.1.Thereis a moregeneraldeﬁnition ofan operadwhich allowsforindexin g by the empty set. Ourcategory
ofoperadsin spectraembeds intothiscategoryof“unitaloperad s”bysetting OpHq “ ˚, the zeroobjectofspectra. In
the setting of Goodwillie calculus, the operads lie and com are taken wit h the assumption that lie pHq “compHq “ ˚.
In contrast, the unstable embedding tower constructed by Weiss usesEnpHq “ ˚, which is instead the monoidal unit
ofpTop,ˆq, and so produces a tower of a somewhat diﬀerent ﬂavor.
4.Parametrized spectra
In ordertogiveaninterpretationofKoszuldualityin terms ofoper adstructuresonthe Spivak normalﬁbration, we
need a suitably functorial construction of the Spivak normal ﬁbra tion associatedto a pair pX,A q. Spivak investigated
these ﬁbrations and found they were intimately related to relative P oincar´ e duality for pX,A q[45]. His construction
involved taking relative embeddings of pX,A qinto pDn,BDnq, making the regular neighborhood into a ﬁbration,
and restricting to the boundary ﬁbration. Klein found a functorial description of these boundary ﬁbrations in terms
of Borel Ω X-spectra [24]. Here the adjective Borel indicates the objects of t he category are spectra with a group
action and the weak equivalences are equivariant maps which are und erlying weak equivalences of spectra. In [25],
he supplied a partial translation of this work into the category of pa rametrized spectra.
In this section, we review basic notions of parametrized spectra ne cessary to ﬁnish translating Klein’s work on the
Spivak normal ﬁbration. We use the construction of parametrized orthogonal spectra due to May-Sigurdsson [39].
These parametrized spectra have a complex homotopy theory, wh ich we will use only a fraction of.
Deﬁnition 4.1. ForXPTop, the category TopXof ex-spaces over Xhas objects given by retractions to X, i.e.
diagrams
Z XrZsZ
such that rZ˝sZ“IdX. We call Zthe total space and Xthe base space. A map of ex-spaces is given by a map of
total spaces covering the identity of the base so that the obvious diagrams commute.
When referring to ex-spaces, we will usually leave the section implicit a nd often the retraction as well if there will
be no confusion. We will need some basic constructions in the catego ry ex-spaces in order to make constructions in
the category of parametrized spectra. Given an ex-space EÑXand a map f:YÑX, we shall denote the pullback
ex-space over Ybyf˚pEq. Iffis an inclusion, we will sometimes write E|Y. IfYis a point, this is referred to as a
ﬁber.
Deﬁnition 4.2. The external smash product E¯^Fof an ex-space EoverXand an ex-space FoverYis given by
pEˆFq{ „ ÑXˆY
where „is the equivalence relation identifying E|x_F|yĂE|xˆF|yto a point inside each ﬁber. There is a
natural section making this an ex-space by sending px,yqto the basepoint of the smash product of the ﬁbers.
Deﬁnition 4.3. The internal smash product E^Fof ex-spaces E,FoverXis
E^F:“E¯^F|∆pXq,
where ∆ pXq ĂXˆXis the diagonal, i.e tpx,xq PXˆXu.
In other words, both internal and external smash products are computed ﬁberwise, but the internal smash product
requires the ﬁbers lie over the same point.
Deﬁnition 4.4. The relative mapping space MapA
XpE,F qof two ex-spaces E,FoverXĄAis the subspace of
ex-space maps which when restricted to Afactor through the section of F. Explicitly, if MapXpE,F qis the space of
ex-space maps, then φPMapA
XpE,F q ĂMapXpE,F q, if and only if
φ|E|A“sF˝ prEq|E|A.KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 9
We use the convention that mapping spaces are always referred to by Map p´,´qand mapping spectra are always
referred to by Fp´,´q.
Deﬁnition 4.5. The category SpXof orthogonal parametrized spectra over Xhas objects given by orthogonal
sequences of ex-spaces, i.e. for all ně0 an ex-space Znwith an action of Opnqthrough ex-space automorphisms,
together with Opnq ˆOpmqequivariant maps:
σm
n:Zn¯^pSmÑ ˚q ÑZn`m
These maps should be unital, i.e. σ0
n“Id, and associative. Morphisms of orthogonal parametrized spec tra are given
by collection of ex-space maps that respect all the given structur e.
The construction p´q¯^pSmÑ ˚qwill often be referred to as ﬁberwise n-fold suspension. Our main source
of parametrized spectra are the ﬁberwise suspension spectra of ex-spaces which are deﬁned at the nth ex-space by
ﬁberwise n-foldsuspension. Givenanex-space EoverX, wedenotetheﬁberwisesuspensionspectrumΣ8E; similarly
ΣnEwill denote ﬁberwise n-fold suspension. Context will always discern suspension spectra f rom parametrized
suspension spectra and n-fold suspension from ﬁberwise n-fold suspension. If we merely have a map ZÑYwith no
section, we let Σ8
YZdenote the suspension spectrum of the ex-space Z\YÑY, with the obvious section.
Given an ex-space EoverXand an ex-space FoverY, there is an evident notion of a generalized morphism from
EtoF. It is a pair of maps EÑF,XÑYsuch that all the obvious squares commute.
Deﬁnition 4.6. The category ParSp of orthogonal parametrized spectra has ob jects the parametrized spectra over
X, asXvaries over all spaces. A morphism from a parametrized spectrum poverXtoqoverYis a map f:XÑY
and generalized ex-space maps over f,ppnq Ñqpnqwhich commute with all the structure.
Deﬁnition 4.7. The functor Base : ParSp ÑTop is given by taking a morphism of parametrized spectra
p q
X Yf
to the map f:XÑY.
Deﬁnition 4.8. Given a map g:XÑYand a parametrized spectrum poverY, letg˚ppqbe the parametrized
spectrum over Xdeﬁned by the pullbacks
g˚ppqpnq:“g˚pppnq ÑYq.
A morphism ptoqin ParSp is equivalently a morphism pÑf˚pqqin SpX. In the case g:XÑYis an
inclusion, we denote g˚pqqbyq|X. IfX“ ˚, we refer to this as a ﬁber, and it has a natural interpretation as
an orthogonal spectrum. In general, there is no relation between the ﬁbers over diﬀerent points of a parametrized
spectrum. However, every parametrized spectrum Eis levelwise equivalent to a parametrized spectrum sEover the
same base that does have equivalent ﬁbers when restricted to eac h path component of the base. Recall the usual
functor PathFib which replaces a map by an equivalent ﬁbration.
Deﬁnition 4.9. For a parametrized spectrum poverX, we deﬁne ﬁb ppqby
ﬁbppqpnq “PathFib pppnq ÑXq.
It has evident Opnq-actions, sections, and structure maps.
In general, if a parametrized spectrum levelwise consists of ﬁbratio ns, the homotopy types of the ﬁbers depends
only on the path component, and one can extract comparisons bet ween the ﬁbers over xandyvia paths from xto
y. Treating this thought extremely carefully, for Xconnected and G“ΩXone can produce an equivalence between
SpXand Borel G-spectra SpBG, which is done in [29]:
ParSpBG SpBG.monodromy
Borel construction
We will give formal deﬁnitions of the generalized Thom complex and sec tions of a parametrized spectrum, but one
mightalreadyguessthatunderthiscorrespondencetheyarehom otopyorbitsandhomotopyﬁxedpoints, respectively.
Indeed, unstably and in unbased spaces, homotopy orbits ﬁber ov erBG; when we instead work in pointed spaces,
homotopy orbits ﬁber over BG, except at a singular point. This corresponds to the collapse point o f the generalized,10 CONNOR MALIN
unstable Thom complex. A similar observation can be made in the case o f homotopy ﬁxed points and section spaces.
But in orderto even talk about such comparisons,we need to introd uce the homotopytheoryofparametrizedspectra.
Deﬁnition 4.10. For a parametrized spectrum poverXQx, we letπnpp,xq:“πnpﬁbppq|xq.
Deﬁnition 4.11. A weak equivalence of parametrized spectra over Xis a map of parametrized spectra over Xthat
induces isomorphisms on all homotopy groups with all basepoints.
There is a symmetric monoidal product ¯ ^on ParSp called the external smash product. It is given by the same
coequalizerformula as in the nonparametrizedcase, but replacing s paces with ex-spaces and using the external smash
product of ex-spaces. Since restriction to a point xcommutes with (co)limits, as it has both a left and a right adjoint,
this implies that the external smash product is computed ﬁberwise, and it has a unit Σ8pS0Ñ ˚q “Σ8
˚˚.
Deﬁnition 4.12. For a parametrized spectrum pand a spectrum Z, the ﬁberwise smash product is
p¯^Z:“p¯^pZÑ ˚q.
There is also an internal smash product ^on SpXwhich pulls back the external smash product along ∆. It has
unit given by Σ8pXˆS0q “Σ8
XX. This makes the category SpXinto a symmetric monoidal category. In fact, this
category is closed symmetric monoidal with an internal parametrize d mapping spectrum Fp´,´qwhich is ﬁberwise
computed as a mapping spectrum in the category of orthogonal sp ectra [39, Theorem 11.2.5]. This implies that there
are evaluation and composition morphisms for Fp´,´qwhich agree ﬁberwise with those of Sp.
In the literature, the unit Σ8
XXis often referred to by S0
X, we avoid this as it clashes with the convention that a
subscript Xmeans adding a disjoint section. In the same vein, we explicitly write th e unit of pTopX,^qasX\X.
Deﬁnition 4.13. Ifp,qare parametrized spectra over XĄA, the spectrum FA
Xpp,qqof relative maps over Xis
given by
FA
Xpp,qqpnq:“MapA
XpX\X,F pp,qqpnqq
Ifp“Σ8
XX, we denote this ΓApqq, the relative sections.
Note that sinceParSpXisclosedsymmetricmonoidal, FpΣ8
XX,qq –q, soΓApqqcoincideswith the spectrumwhich
at levelnis MapA
XpX\X,qpnqq, i.e. the sections of qpnq. In terms of base change functors (i.e. the adjoints f!,f˚of
restriction f˚[39, Section 11.4]), if cdenotes the constant map to a point there is an equality FXpp,qq “c˚Fpp,qq.
We note that ΓApΣ8
XXqis isomorphic to
pΣ8X{Aq_:“FpΣ8X{A,S0q.
Proposition 4.14. Ifp,q,rare parametrized spectra over XĄA, there is a natural composition map
FA
Xpp,qq ^FXpq,rq ÑFA
Xpp,rq.
Proof.Itsuﬃcestoexaminehowtakinglevelwisesectionspacesinteractsw ithinternalsmashproductsofparametrized
spectra since there is a composition map Fpp,qq ^Fpq,rq ÑFpp,rqsince SpXis closed symmetric monoidal. In
particular, we want to construct a map
c˚ppq ^c˚pqq Ñc˚pp^qq.
By adjointness, this is equivalent to a map of parametrized spectra
c˚pc˚ppq ^c˚pqqq Ñp^q
The domain is the “trivial” parametrized spectrum with ﬁber c˚ppq ^c˚pqqover every point. To construct the
above map, for every pair pc˚ppq ^c˚pqq,xqwe should construct a map of spectra to p|x^q|x. This map is given by
taking the smash product of the maps
c˚ppq Ñp|x
c˚pqq Ñq|x
given by evaluating the section at x. In other words, the original map
c˚ppq ^c˚pqq Ñc˚pp^qq
is computed by pointwise smashing the sections. The relativity of the statement follows immediately from this
description. /squareKOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 11
Deﬁnition 4.15. Suppose we have a parametrized spectrum poverXand a parametrized spectrum qoverXˆX,
andAĂX. ForxPX, letqxdenote the restriction q|txuˆX; we deﬁne parametrized spectra over Xin terms of
their ﬁbers:
FA
Xpp,qq|x:“FA
Xpp,qxq
FA
Xpq,pq|x:“FA
Xpqx,pq
In the case Ais empty, we leaveit oﬀthe notation. If the domain is Σ8
XX, we denote this by ΓAp´qand distinguish
it from Deﬁnition 4.13 based on whether the parametrized spectrum is overXorXˆX.
Remark 4.16.In comparison to the category of Borel G-spectra, parametrized spectra over XˆXplay the role of
spectra with a two sided action of G. The fact that the “parametrized maps of parametrized spectra ” construction
above leaves us with a parametrized spectrum over Xcorresponds to the fact that spectrum of equivariant maps
into or out of a two sided G-spectrum still forms a G-spectrum. If one was to do substantial homotopy theory with
this construction, it would be helpful to also consider the slices Xˆ txu. Passing back and forth between spectra
over txu ˆXand spectra over Xˆ txuis analogous to passing between G-spectra and Gop-spectra.
An ex-space is f-coﬁbrant if the distinguished section is an NDR (neig hborhood deformation retract) such that the
deformation retraction respects the ﬁbers, and a parametrized spectrum is level-f-coﬁbrant if each of its ex-spaces is
f-coﬁbrant.
Lemma 4.17. Given a map EÑXˆX, the parametrized spectrum ΓApΣ8
XˆXEqis level-f-coﬁbrant.
Proof.Of course the zeroth ex-space is f-coﬁbrant. Now assume ną0. LetDĂΓApΣ8
XˆXEqpnqdenote the
subspace which consist of sections which only take on values which ha ve a suspension coordinate in r0,.1s Y r.9,1s.
This neighborhood witnesses the image of the preferred section XÑΓApΣ8
XˆXEqpnqas a ﬁberwise neighborhood
deformation retract. /square
We refer to the weaker property of all the distinguished sections b eing Hurewicz coﬁbrations as being level-h-
coﬁbrant. Similarly, if all the retractions are Hurewicz ﬁbrations, w e call the spectrum level-h-ﬁbrant. In practice, if
one shows a spectrum is level-h-coﬁbrant by hand, almost certainly one has actually shown the stronger statement
that it is level-f-coﬁbrant.
Deﬁnition 4.18. For a parametrized spectrum poverX, the generalized Thom complex Th ppqis the spectrum
given by Th ppqpnq:“ppnq{impsppnqq.
To construct a map out of a Thom complex of pinto a spectrum H, it suﬃces to supply a family of spectrum
maps out of all the ﬁbers, i.e. a map of parametrized spectra from ptoX¯^H:“Σ8
XX¯^pHÑ ˚q. Recall our
name for the constant map c:XÑ ˚. In terms of base change adjunctions, we have that Th ppq “c!ppq. It is not
obvious,butThomcomplexespreserveweakequivalencesoflevel-h -coﬁbrant(andthuslevel-f-coﬁbrant)parametrized
spectra [36, Proposition 6.4.5]
The following is found in [36, Proposition 5.6.1]:
Proposition 4.19. The natural map Thpp¯^qq ÑThppq ^Thpqq, induced by the inclusions p|x^p|yÑThpp¯^qqof
ﬁbers into the Thom complex, is an isomorphism.
Since the category pParSp,¯^qis symmetric monoidal, we may consider operads in ParSp using our usu al partial
composite deﬁnition. We make a few simplifying assumptions:
Deﬁnition 4.20. The category ResOp is the restricted category of operads in ParS p. It has objects given by
operadsOinpParSp,¯^qconsisting of level-h-coﬁbrant parametrized spectra, and its mor phisms are given by operad
morphisms which levelwise are contained in SpBase pOpIqq. A weak equivalence is an operad map which for each Iis
a weak equivalence of parametrized spectra over Base pOpIqq.
Deﬁnition 4.21. The category ResMod Ois the restricted category of right modules over OPResOp. It has objects
given by right modules over Oin ParSp consisting of level-h-coﬁbrant parametrized spectra, an d its morphisms are
given by right module morphisms which levelwise are contained in SpBase pRpIqq. A weak equivalence is a right module
map which for all Iis a weak equivalence of parametrized spectra over Base pRqpIq.
Fromnowon,allmapsofoperadsandrightmodulesinparametrizeds pectraareassumedtolieinResOp ,ResMod O.
Note that any operad Oin ResOp has an associated operad Base pOqinpTop,ˆq. The restricted morphisms cover
the identity of Base pOq. The same is true for restricted right modules.12 CONNOR MALIN
Deﬁnition 4.22. For an operad Oin ResOp, Th pOqis the operad in pSp˚,^qgiven by
ThpOqpIq:“ThpOpIqq.
The partial composites are given by taking Thom complexes of the pa rtial composites of Oand applying the inverse
of the isomorphism of Proposition 4.19.
Deﬁnition 4.23. For a right module Rin ResMod O, Th pRqis the right module over Th pOqgiven by
ThpRqpIq:“ThpRpIqq.
5.Verdier Duality
Verdier duality is the process of encoding a colimit preserving functo r on a category Cin terms of an object cPC.
Topological Verdier duality, in its simplest form, has many formulation s: in terms of spectra valued presheaves on
8-groupoids [32], locally constant sheaves of spectra [47] [33, Sect ion 5.5.5], and Borel G-spectra. In this last setting,
Klein develops much of the theory of Verdier duality in the case of the functor
hoﬁb pp´qhGÑ p´qhHq: SpBGÑSp
associated to a topological group map HÑG[24,25].
Deﬁnition 5.1. LetPbe the parametrized spectrum over XˆXgiven by
Σ8
XˆXpev0ˆev1: Path pXq ÑXˆXq.
In other words, P|px,yq“Σ8
`Path px,yq
Lemma 5.2. For a parametrized spectrum qoverXwhich is level-h-ﬁbrant, there is an equivalence of paramet rized
spectra
FXpP,qq»Ý Ñq
which on the ﬁber over xis induced by evaluation at the constant path at x.
Proof.SincePis a ﬁberwise suspension spectrum, FXpP,qqcan be computed in an easy way. Fiberwise it may be
written as the spectrum which has its nth space
MapXpX\Path px,´q,qpnqq.
Sinceqis level-h-ﬁbrant, the question is implied by showing evaluation at the c onstant path is an equivalence
MapXpX\Path px,´q,qpnqq Ñqpnq|x.
Since we are working stably, it is no loss to assume the ﬁbers of qare connected, and so qpnqis connected for nlarge
enough. The homotopy ﬁber of evaluation consists of ex-space ma ps together with a path in qpnq|xfrom the image
of the constant path to the basepoint of qpnq|x.
Now consider the ﬁbration Φ over the total space of Path px,´qwhich has ﬁber over a path γ:xÑx1equal to the
space of paths lifting γinqpnq. Since the base of this ﬁbration is contractible, the space of sectio ns has the based
homotopy type of any ﬁber, in particular the ﬁber over the consta nt path const X, and the space of nullhomotopies of
a ﬁxed section Shas the homotopy type of the path space Path p˚,Spconstxqq. FortP r0,1sand a path γ, deﬁne the
pathγďtprq “γpminpr,tqq. Then if pf,αqis a point in the homotopy ﬁber of our evaluation map, the ex-space m ap
fdetermines a section of Φ by lifting the path γto the path tÑfpγďtq. The path αinqpnq|xthen determines a
nullhomotopyofsections ofΦ by the aboveargumentwhich demonst ratesthat the homotopyﬁber is contractible. /square
Lemma 5.3. IfZis a spectrum, the equivalence
FXpP,Σ8
XX¯^Zq»Ý ÑΣ8
XX¯^Z
has a natural section.
Proof.Thereisanaturalchoiceofpath-liftinginaproduct: theconstant one. Withthischoicethesections(expressed
here ﬁberwise)
Zpnq ÑMapXpX\Path px,´q,XˆZpnqq
are natural and commute with the structure maps of FXpP,Σ8
XX¯^Zq.
/square
Deﬁnition 5.4. The Verdier dualizing parametrized spectrum, or Verdier dual, PpX,A qof a pair pX,A qis the
parametrized spectrum over Xgiven by ΓApPq.KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 13
We areready to state Verdier duality, however,because point-se t topologyinteracts ratherpoorlywith the internal
smash product, we will have to derive the internal smash product, as well as the Thom complex, though this is less
severe and simply requires taking a cone of the preferred section r ather than quotienting. For techniques to derive
the internal smash product see [36, Page 98].
Theorem 5.5 (Verdier Duality) .Suppose AÑXis a coﬁbration such that AandXeach have the homotopy type
of a compact CW complex, then for any qPSpXthere is a zigzag,
ThpPpX,A q ^qq ÐThpPpX,A q ^FXpP,qqq ÑΓApqq
where the rightmost map is given on the ﬁber over xPXby the composition
FA
XpΣ8
XX,Σ8
XPath px,´qq ^FXpΣ8
XPath px,´q,qq ÑFA
XpΣ8
XX,qq “ΓApqq
Ifqis level-h-ﬁbrant, then after deriving ^,Ththese are equivalences.
Proof.The construction of the right hand map occurs in Proposition 4.14. L etHďGbe topological groupoids, let
bG,bHdenote the associated topological categories, and let BG,BH their topological realizations. Lastly, assume
BGďBHis a coﬁbration. We list a few correspondences under the equivalenc e SpBG»SpBG“FunpbG,Spq.
(1) The derived internal smash product of parametrized spectra overBGcorresponds to the derived smash
product of Borel G-spectra.
(2) The derived Thom complex corresponds with homotopy G-orbits, i.e. the homotopy colimit of the diagram
of spectra.
(3) The derived sections relative to BH, corresponds to
hoﬁb pp´qhGÑ p´qhHq.
Here the indicated homotopy ﬁxed points are computed as the homo topy limit of the diagram of spectra.
(4) The construction PpX,A qcorresponds to the Borel G-spectrum
hoﬁb pΣ8
`GhGÑΣ8
`GhHq.
The ﬁrst follows from the fact that smash products are computed ﬁberwise. The second follows from the explicit
construction of ZhGaspZ^Σ8
`EGqGand observing that this is the Thom complex of the Borel construct ion applied
toZ. The third is essentially dual to the second. These are worked out in [36, Example 8.1.5]. Note the derived
relative sections are computed simply by taking a level-h-ﬁbrant rep lacement since (i) the inclusion BH ÑBGis
assumed to be a coﬁbration and (2) derived mapping spectra out of a ﬁberwise CW suspension spectrum like Σ8
BGBG
are computed by taking level-h-ﬁbrant replacements of the codom ain, since it is easily checked weak equivalences
between such parametrized spectra are preserved. The fourth (proven by Klein in the case A“ H[25, Theorem
5.6]) follows from (3) and Lemma 5.2.
LetGdenote the topological path groupoid of XandHthe topological path groupoid of A. With these obser-
vations, under the equivalence of categories SpX»SpBG, the composition map described above becomes the same
as Klein’s [24, Remark 3.1] [25, Proof of Proposition 4.1].3The compactness assumptions on pX,A qthen imply that
Klein’s conditions for this map to be an equivalence hold. /square
The necessity of deriving these functors will make it diﬃcult to study the interaction of Verdier duality and
parametrized operads. However, we are interested in a simple exam ple for which we can both avoid using a zigzag
and ignore derived functors.
Corollary 5.6. IfAÑXis a coﬁbration such that AandXeach have the homotopy type of a compact CW complex,
there is a canonical equivalence
ThpPpX,A qq»Ý ÑΣ8pX{Aq_.
Proof.Letq“Σ8
XX. If we compose the section provided by Lemma 5.3 with the righthand map of underived
Verdier duality, we get a map which on ﬁbers is
FA
XpΣ8
XX,Σ8
XPath px,´qq ^S0“FA
XpΣ8
XX,Σ8
XPath px,´qq ÑFA
XpΣ8
XX,Σ8
XXq
Since we have avoided taking internal smash products and only took Thom complexes of a level-h-coﬁbrant spectrum
by Lemma 4.17, in the homotopy category this map agrees with what w e would obtain by taking derived Verdier
duality and inverting the ﬁrst map. Hence, it is an equivalence.
/square
3Strictly speaking Klein works in the setting of groups rathe r than groupoids, but the generalization to groupoids still holds (cf. [32,
Page 3]).14 CONNOR MALIN
The equivalence Th pPpX,A qq»Ý Ñ pΣ8X{Aq_has a very simple description. On the ﬁber over xPX, it is
determined by the composition
FA
XpΣ8
XX,Σ8
XPath px,´qq ^S0ÑFA
XpΣ8
XX,Σ8
XXq
whereS0is picking out the map of parametrized spectra that Lemma 5.3 produ ces. This map is simply the ﬁberwise
suspension spectrum of the ﬁberwise collapse map in MapXpX\Path px,´q,X\Xq. So in this case, Verdier duality
is given by composition with ﬁberwise collapse.
Remark 5.7.Although the parametrized spectrum Σ8
XXhas the simplest implementation of Verdier duality, one
cannot disregard the other cases. In the Borel category a similar description of Verdier duality holds for trivial G-
spectra, but it isonlyan equivalencewhen BGis compact. Thisis becauseoneﬁrst demonstratesthat Verdier du ality
isan equivalenceforfree G-spectra, then proceedsbyan induction whichrequiresthe compa ctnessof BG. [24,Section
3].
The Verdierdualizing parametrizedspectrum PpX,A qcaptures agreatdeal of informationabout Poincar´ eduality.
Letkbe a ﬁeld.
Proposition 5.8. IfAÑXis a coﬁbration of spaces with the homotopy type of compact CW complexes such that
PpX,A qhas ﬁber equivalent to S´nand there is a global choice of orientation of the ﬁbers H´npPpX,A q|x;kq, then
HnpX,A;kqhas a fundamental class rαssuch that
H˚pX,A;kqXαÝ Ý ÑHn´˚pX;kq
is an isomorphism.
Proof.This follows from Verdier duality and the Thom isomorphism theorem fo r parametrized spectra with spherical
ﬁbers [39, Theorem 20.5.8]. /square
The Verdier dual PpX,A qhas a canonical description which leads one to believe it might be funct orial. We need
a precise understanding of its functoriality in order to study the int eraction with operads.
Deﬁnition 5.9. The symmetric monoidal category pTopĂ,ˆqhas objects given by coﬁbrations of spaces with the
homotopy type of compact CW complexes. The morphisms
pAÑXq Ñ pBÑYq
are maps f:XÑYsatisfying:
(1) The map fis a quotient map onto its image.
(2) The restriction f|X´Ais an open embedding.
(3)fpclosure pX´Aqq “closure pfpX´Aqq.
(4)f´1pBq ĂA.
The pushout product ˆon TopĂis given by
pX,A q ˆ pY,B q:“ pXˆY,pXˆBq Y pAˆYqq.
A morphism f:pX,A q Ñ pY,B qin TopĂdecomposes Yinto two closed subsets: closure pfpX´Aqqqand
Y´fpX´Aq. This ﬁrst subset is the closure of the embedded copy of X´Awhich is also naturally a quotient of
X. Using this observation, we can extend relative Verdier duality to a f unctor
P: TopĂÑParSp.
Associated to a morphism pX,A qfÝ Ñ pY,B q, the map PpX,A qxÑPpY,B qfpxqis given by sending a section srelative
toAof Σ8
`Path px,´qto the section relative to Bof Σ8
`Path pfpxq,´qgiven by son the embedded image of X´A
and factoring through the zero section on Y´fpX´Aq ĄB. The conditions (2)–(4) allows this section to be
well-deﬁned and relative to Bas a set-theoretic function, while (1)+(3) imply it is actually continuo us.
The conditions on TopĂalso allow us to have a well-deﬁned collapse map associated to f:
Y{BÑX{A
yÞÑf´1pyq.
Via the collapse map, the assignment pX,A q ÞÑ pΣ8X{Aq_can be made covariantly functorial on TopĂ. By
Corollary 5.6, we understand the relation of these two functors.KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 15
Proposition 5.10. Verdier duality gives a natural equivalence of functors
pX,A q ÑThpPpX,A qq
ó
pX,A q Ñ pΣ8X{Aq_.
Given an xPX, we denote the path component of xbyXx.
Corollary 5.11. Letf:pX,A q Ñ pY,B qbe a morphism in TopĂwithYpath-connected. Suppose the ﬁbers of
PpX,A qandPpY,B qare spherical of dimension ´nand oriented with respect to the ﬁeld k. Thenfinduces an
isomorphism
H´npPpX,A q|x;kq–Ý ÑH´npPpY,B q|fpxq;kq,
if and only if it induces an isomorphism
¯HnpY{B;kq–Ý Ñ¯HnpXx{pAXXxq;kq
Proof.Choose orientations of the ﬁbers. By Proposition 5.8, this ﬁxes isom orphisms
H´npThpPpXx,AXXxqq;kq –H´npThpPpY,B qq;kq –¯HnpXx{pAXXxq;kq –¯HnpY{B;kq –k.
Under these identiﬁcations it is straightforward to check that deg ree is preserved up to a sign. /square
Finally, we observe that there is a nice interaction between the symm etric monoidal products of pParSp,¯^qand
pTopĂ,ˆq.
Deﬁnition 5.12. ForpX,A q,pY,B q P pTopĂ,ˆq, there is as natural map
PpX,A q¯^PpY,B q ÑPppX,A q ˆ pY,B qq.
Fiberwise the map is given by
PpX,A q¯^PpY,B q|px,yq–ΓApΣ8
XpPath px,´qq ^ΓBpΣ8
YpPath py,´qq
ÑΓpAˆYqYpXˆBqpΣ8
XpPath px,´qq¯^Σ8
YpPath py,´qq
–ΓpAˆYqYpXˆBqpΣ8
XˆYpPath ppx,yq,´qqq
6.Koszul-Verdier duality of operads and right modules
There are two diﬀerent constructions of Koszul duality for opera ds in spectra. One is due to Ching and Salvatore,
which we will describe in this section and refer to by Kp´q, and the other is bar p´q_which is due to the general
theory of bar-cobar duality of associative algebras due to Lurie.4Brantner has given a rigorous comparison of
these two constructions on the level of operads in Ho pSpq[12, Proposition 5.4.19], but we are not familiar with any
comparison as operads in spectra. Currently, the Koszul self dua lity ofEnis only known in regards to the point-set
construction Kp´q.
We will recall some facts about various W-constructions and bar co nstructions which can be found (with slight
variation) in [35]. The origin of these constructions can be found thr oughout [10,15,43] with explicit methods to
topologize the weighted/labeled trees. We are interested in both po inted and unpointed versions of these construc-
tions, and so to save space we will recover unpointed deﬁnitions fro m their pointed counterparts. The goal of this
section is to give a construction of the functor Kp´qin terms of generalized Thom complexes and investigate its
consequences. All operads are assumed to be reduced.
As before, an I-labelled tree is a tree with:
‚a distinguished root,
‚a bijection between the leaves and I,
‚and satisfying the condition that if vis an internal vertex, i.e. not a leaf or a root, the outgoing edgesepvq,
i.e. edges which are between vand some leaf, should have cardinality at least 2.
4In the case of the Enoperad this has not, to our knowledge, been related to Lurie’ s theory of bar-cobar duality for En-algebras or
the bar-cobar duality of Ayala-Francis.16 CONNOR MALIN
Deﬁnition 6.1 (TheW-construction of an operad) .Given an operad O in pTop˚,^q, letTpOqpIqdenote the space
ofI-labeled, rooted trees with the property that the root has a single outgoing edge and an internal vertex vis
labeled by Opepvqq, and nonroot and nonleaf adjacent edges are labeled by an element ofr0,8s; any tree containing
a vertex labeled by the basepoint is collapsed to a single point. We let WpOqpIqdenotes the quotient of TpOqpIq
by the relation that any length 0 edge can be collapsed by applying ope radic partial composition. The collection of
WpOqpIqis an operad WpOqby grafting trees via length 8edges.
Deﬁnition 6.2 (TheWr0,8s-construction of an operad) .The thickened W-construction Wr0,8spOqis given by
Wr0,8spOqpIq:“WpOqpIq ^ r0,8s`.
In terms of trees, the r0,8scoordinate is the length of the root edge. This is an operad by graft ing trees via the
labeled root edge.
We will pay particular attention to the geometry of the Wr0,8s-construction; ultimately it is the key to deﬁning
the cooperad structure on the Koszul dual cooperad Bp´q, and it will also be the key to encoding Koszul duality
into parametrized spectra.
Deﬁnition 6.3 (TheW-construction of a right module) .Given a right module RinpTop˚,^qover the operad O,
letTpRqpIqdenote the space of rooted trees such that every internal vert ex has at least 2 children with labels as
follows: the root ris labeled by Rpeprqq, the internal vertices vare labeled by Opepvqq, while nonleaf adjacent edges
are labeled by an element of r0,8s; we identify any tree containing a vertex labeled by a basepoint to a s ingle point.
We letWpRqpIqdenotes the quotient of TpRqpIqby the relation that any length 0 edge can be collapsed by applying
right module or operad partial composition. The collection of all WpRqpIqis called WpRq. It is a right module over
WpOqby grafting via length 8edges, and it is a right module over Wr0,8spOqby grafting via the r0,8scoordinate.
IfOis an operad in pTop,ˆqandRis a right module over it, WpOqandWpRq, or any of their variants, are
deﬁned by WpOqpIq:“WpO`q ´ ˚,WpRqpIq:“WpR`qpIq ´ ˚. In either the pointed or unpointed case, there are
equivalences of operads and compatible equivalences of right module s induced by composition:
WpOq ÑO,
WpRq ÑR.
Similarly for the other versions of the W-construction.
There are many similarities in the deﬁnition of the operad Fnand theW-construction of an operad. There is a
quite remarkable fact that WpFnq –Fnas operads [44]. One could point to this as the primary reason to expe ct
a Koszul self duality result for the operad En»Fn. We observed in [35, Section 7] that a minor variation of the
proofWpFnq –Fnshows that WpFMq –FMas right modules. In particular, these W-constructions turn out to be
manifolds. This observation will end up simplifying arguments in Lemma 7 .4.
Deﬁnition 6.4 (The boundary and interiors of the W-construction) .LetObe an operad in pTop,ˆqand BWpOq
denote the subsymmetric sequence of WpOqof trees with a length 8edge. We let ˚WpOq:“WpOq ´ BWpOq. We
deﬁne
˚Wp0,8qpOq:“˚WpOq ˆ p0,8q.
It is an operad via grafting trees by the p0,8qcoordinate. Let
BWr0,8spOq:“ pBWpOq ˆ r0,8sq Y pWpOq ˆ t0uq Y pWpOq ˆ t8uq ,
i.e. the trees in Wr0,8spOqwhich have an edge of length 8or the root edge has length 0.
Deﬁnition 6.5. For an operad Oand right module RinpTop,ˆq, let BWpRqdenote the subsymmetric sequence of
WpRqwhere any edge is length 8. Let˚WpRq “WpRq ´ BWpRq. This is a right module over ˚Wp0,8qpOqby grafting
via the root edge.
Deﬁnition 6.6. A right module pair pR,A qover an operad OinpTop,ˆqis a right module Rwith a chosen right
submodule Afor which ApIq ÑRpIqis a coﬁbration for all ﬁnite sets I. The quotient R{Ais the right O`-module
inpTop˚,^qgiven by RpIq{ApIq.
At this point, we observe that we may extend the construction of t he right module FMto compact framed
manifolds with boundary. Fix a framed embedding MÑNsuch that Nhas no boundary, and let FMbe the
right submodule of FNof inﬁnitesimal conﬁgurations contained in M. Based on the description of FNin terms of
inﬁnitesimal conﬁgurations, it is clear that the isomorphism type of FMdepends only on the framed diﬀeomorphism
type ofM.KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 17
Deﬁnition 6.7. IfMis a framed manifold with boundary, then pBFMis the right submodule of FMof conﬁgurations
which have a point in BM.
We use the notation pBrather than BbecauseFMpIqis a manifold and BFMpIqis larger than pBFMpIq, in particular
it also contains any conﬁgurations which have an inﬁnitesimal compon ent.
Deﬁnition 6.8. IfpR,A qis a right module pair, then DW pR,A qisWpAq Y BWpRq.
Deﬁnition 6.9. An operad OinpTop,ˆqis closed if Ohas the levelwise nonequivarianthomotopy type of a compact
CW complex, and the image of every partial composite is closed. Similar ly, a right module pair pR,A qoverOis
closed if RandAhave the levelwise nonequivariant homotopy types of compact CW co mplexes, and the image of
any of the restricted partial composites
closure pRpIq ´ApIqq ˆOpJq ÑRpIYaJq
is closed.
The most relevant example of a closed operad is Fnwhich has a closed right module pair pFM,ˆBFMq. Note that
every operad which satisﬁes the required homotopy ﬁniteness con ditions is equivalent to a closed operad since WpOq
is easily seen to be closed. Similarly, if the right module pair pR,A qsatisﬁes the homotopy ﬁniteness conditions, then
pWpRq,WpAqqis closed.
Lemma 6.10. For a closed operad Othe pair pWr0,8spOq,BWr0,8spOqqforms an operad in pTopĂ,ˆq. For a closed
right module pair pR,A qoverOthe pair pWpRq,DW pR,A qqforms a right module over pWr0,8spOq,BWr0,8spOqq.
Proof.First, note that the quotient map condition is satisﬁed by the deﬁnit ion of the Wr0,8s-constructions. Now
observe that that for the composite associated to IYaJ
BWpOqr0,8spIYaJq Ximage pWpOqr0,8spIq ˆWpOqr0,8spJqq
consists of trees which are the grafting of an I-labeled tree and J-labeled tree, which are necessarily unique, and
either some edge has length 8or the root edge has length 0. In other words the intersection is co ntained in the
image of
pWpOqr0,8spIq ˆ BWr0,8spOqpJqq Y pBWr0,8spOqpIq ˆWr0,8spOqpJqq.
This implies the boundary condition for morphisms in TopĂis satisﬁed by the partial composites. Similarly,
DW pR,A qpIYaJq Ximage pWpRqpIq ˆWpOqr0,8spJqq
consists of the points which are the grafting of an I-labeled tree and a J-labeled tree, which are necessarily unique,
and some edge has length 8or the root is labeled by A. In other words, the intersection is contained in the image of
pDW pR,A qpIq ˆWr0,8spOqpJqq Y pWpRqpIq ˆ BWr0,8spOqpJqq
which show the right module composites also satisfy the boundary co nditions. The second condition follows from the
fact the partial composites of ˚Wp0,8qpOqand˚WpRqare open inclusions [35, Proposition 4.8, Proposition 6.8], and
the third condition on closures follows from the behavior of the thick enedW-construction with respect to length 0
edges together with our requirement that Oand pR,A qare closed. /square
Let us now deﬁne the Koszul dual cooperad. This version appears in [17, Section 6] where it is observed that it
coincides with the version originally deﬁned in [15]. It bears the name “b ar construction” because Ching observed
in his thesis that it is isomorphic to Bp1,O,1q, a bar construction with respect to the ˝-product.
Deﬁnition 6.11 (The bar construction B).Given an operad OinpTop˚,^q, letBpOqdenoteWpOq ^ p0,8q`,
where the p0,8q`coordinate is interpreted as a labeling of the edge adjacent to the r oot, modulo the relations that
any tree with an 8length edge is identiﬁed with the basepoint.
This is a cooperadvia the decomposition which to an IYaJlabeled tree Treturns, if possible, the unique I-labeled
weighted tree and J-labeled weighted tree which graft along ato obtain T. If this is not possible, we send it to ˚.
Deﬁnition 6.12 (The Koszul dual Kp´q).IfOis an operad in pTop˚,^q, the Koszul dual operad in pSp,^qis
KpOq:“ pΣ8BpOqq_.
As a matter of taste, we will often write KpΣ8Oqrather than KpOqorKpΣ8
`OqifOis unpointed. This is justiﬁed
by the fact that the bar construction naturally extends to reduc ed operads in spectra, and there is an isomorphism
BpΣ8Oq –Σ8BpOq. By Deﬁnition 5.12, Lemma 6.10, and Proposition 5.10, we may endow th e sequence of Spivak
normal ﬁbrations of the pair pO,indecomhpOqqwith the structure of an operad in parametrized spectra:18 CONNOR MALIN
Deﬁnition 6.13. For a closed operad OinpTop,ˆqthe Koszul dualizing ﬁbration ξOis the operad in pParSp,¯^q
ξOpIq “PpWr0,8spOqpIq,BWr0,8spOqpIqq.
For an operad Oin parametrized spectra, we deﬁned the Thom complex operad Th pOqinpSp,^q(Deﬁnition
4.22).
Proposition 6.14 (Koszul-Verdier duality) .For a closed operad OinpTop,ˆq, there is an operad equivalence
ThpξOq»Ý ÑKpΣ8
`Oq.
Proof.Observe that Σ8BpO`q_can be computed by applying the functor
pX,A q ÞÑX{A_
topWr0,8spOq,BWr0,8spOqq. By applying Proposition 5.10, we just need to check the following diag ram commutes:
ThpPppX,A q ˆ pY,B qqq p Σ8pX{A^Y{Bqq_
ThpPpX,A qq ^ThpPpY,B qq p Σ8X{Aq_^ pΣ8Y{Bq_
The left hand map is deﬁned by taking smash products of the ﬁbers o fPpX,A qandPpY,B q, which consist of relative
sections of Σ8
XPath px,´qand Σ8
YPath py,´q, while the right hand map is deﬁned by taking smash products of maps
into the sphere spectrum S0. On each ﬁber, passing from the left side to the right side is given by c omposition with
the ﬁberwise collapse
Σ8
XPath px,´q ÑΣ8
XX,
and this commutes with taking smash products of sections.
/square
In [35], we studied a homological precursor to topological Koszul se lf duality. Suppose Ois an operad in pTop,ˆq
for which all spaces have the homotopy type of ﬁnite CW-complexes . Recall the deﬁnition of a Poincar´ e duality
pair [45].
Deﬁnition 6.15. A pair pX,A qis ann-dimensional Poincar´ e duality pair if there is an αPHnpX,A qso that
H˚pXqXαÝ Ý ÑHn´˚pX,A q
H˚pX,A qXαÝ Ý ÑHn´˚pXq
H˚pAqXBαÝ Ý Ý ÑHn´˚`1pAq
are all isomorphisms. Here Bdenotes the connecting homomorphism in homology for the pair pX,A q.
.
Deﬁnition 6.16. A distinguished n-class of an operad Ois a homology class αI, for each nonempty ﬁnite set I, in
the relative homology
Hn|I|´npWr0,8spOqpIq,BWr0,8spOqpIqq –¯Hn|I|´npBpOqpIqq
such that under the partial decomposites
αIYaJÑαIbαJ.
As a sanity check, note that
pn|I| ´nq ` pn|J| ´nq “np|I| ` |J| ´1q ´n“n|IYaJ| ´n.
Deﬁnition 6.17. An operad Owith a distinguished n-classαis Poincar´ e-Koszul of dimension nifαImakes
pWr0,8spOqpIq,BWr0,8spOqpIqq
into a Poincar´ e duality pair for all I. We call αas the fundamental class.
For the rest of our discussion on operads we ﬁx a ﬁeld kand all (co)homology and tensor products are taken with
respect to k. There is a natural notion of suspension for operads in the catego rypdgVectk,bq. For a chain complex
A, letArisdenotes the graded vector space where the gradings have been s hifted up i.KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 19
Deﬁnition 6.18. The algebraic n-sphere operad SninpdgVectk,bqis deﬁned by
SnpIq:“krn|I| ´ns
with partial composites determined by the canonical isomorphism kbk–k. The algebraic n-sphere operad is
equivalently deﬁned as the coendomorphism operad
CoEnd pkrnsq:“Map pkrns,krnsbp´qq.
We deﬁne the nth suspension of an operad OinpdgVect,bqby
snOpIq:“SnpIq bOpIq.
This naturally forms an operad. By unfolding deﬁnitions, one immediat ely obtains [35, Theorem 5.5]:
Theorem 6.19. IfOis a Poincar´ e-Koszul operad of dimension nwith fundamental class α, then there is an
isomorphism of operads
H˚pOq –snH˚pKpΣ8
`Oqq.
induced by
H˚pWr0,8spOqqXαÝ Ý Ñs´n¯H˚pBpOqq,
where we consider Hip´qas living in degree ´i. This isomorphism is natural with respect to maps of Poincar ´ e-Koszul
operads of dimension nthat preserve the fundamental n-class
Classically, there is a hierarchy of self duality:
(1) Twisted Poincar´ e complex or equivalently the Spivak normal ﬁbr ation is spherical,
(2)Z-Poincar´ e complex or equivalently the Spivak normal ﬁbration is also oriented
(3) Σ8
`X»ΣnΣ8
`X_or equivalently the Spivak normal ﬁbration is trivial [48, Corollary 3.4].
Proposition 6.20. A closed operad Ois Poincar´ e-Koszul with respect to all ﬁelds k, if and only if the ﬁbers of ξO
are all spherical, each spherical ﬁbration is k-orientable, and there are ﬁxed orientations of the ﬁbers su ch that the
partial composites induce degree 1maps of the ﬁbers.
Proof.The forwards direction follows from the well developed theory of Sp ivak normal ﬁbrations [24,25,48], in
particular the Spivak normal ﬁbration of a Poincar´ e duality pair is sp herical and respects pushout products. The
backwards direction follows from Proposition 5.8. /square
In [35, Theorem 5.10], we proved that the Enoperad is Poincar´ e-Koszul,hence ξEnconsists of spherical ﬁbrations
with orientations compatible with the operad partial composites. In analogy with the classical story, the Koszul self
duality of Enshould be equivalent to a structured trivialization of ξO. To formulate this, we must introduce n-sphere
operads.
Deﬁnition 6.21. Ann-sphere operad SninpSp,^qis an operad weakly equivalent to the coendomorphism operad
given by CoEnd pSnq
CoEnd pSnqpIq:“FpSn,pSnq^Iq.
Iff:SnÑ pSnq^I,g:SnÑ pSnq^J, we may form the inﬁniteseimal composite
Sn
Sn^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^Sn^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^Sn
Sn^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^Sn^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^Sn^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^Snf
1^¨¨¨^g^¨¨¨^1
This construction gives rise to the partial composites of the coend omorphism operad. The only aspect of Snwe
need is that H˚pSnqis the algebraic n-sphere operad. We will abuse notation by deﬁning operadic suspen sion without
an implicit model of Snin mind.
Deﬁnition 6.22. For an operad PinpSp,^q,snPisSn^P.
Deﬁnition 6.23. An operad OinpTop,ˆqis Koszul self dual of dimension nif there is a zigzag equivalence from
snKpΣ8
`Oqto Σ8
`O. We call such a zigzag equivalence a Koszul zigzag.20 CONNOR MALIN
Of course, because there are model category structures on Op erad pSp,^qwith weak equivalences given by the
levelwise weak equivalences, the existence of a Koszul zigzag is equiv alent to Σ8
`O–snKpΣ8
`Oqin the homotopy
category of operads [28].
Recall that the ﬁberwise smash product of a parametrized spectr umpwith a spectrum Eis deﬁned as p¯^E,
where we consider Eas a parametrized spectrum over ˚. We can similarly deﬁne ﬁberwise suspension of operads in
parametrized spectra:
Deﬁnition 6.24. Then-fold ﬁberwise suspension P¯^Snof an operad PinpParSp,¯^qis
pP¯^SnqpIq “PpIq¯^SnpIq
For convenience, given a spectrum Ewe will abbreviate Σ8
XX¯^EbyX¯^E. Recall that because all of our
parametrized operads Olie in ResOp (Deﬁnition 4.20), the zero sections of Oform an operad in pTop,ˆqcalled
Base pOqwhich is preserved by parametrized operad maps. We say Ocovers Base pOq.
Deﬁnition 6.25. For an operad Pin parametrized spectra, covering an operad OinpTop,ˆqa zigzag equivalence
fromPtoO¯^Snis called a (spherical) n-trivialization.
Theorem 6.26. A closed operad OinpTop,ˆqis Koszul self dual of dimension n, if and only if there is a p´nq-
trivialization of ξO.
Proof.The backwards direction is obvious given Koszul-Verdier duality. The forward direction is not diﬃcult, but
somewhat surprising. First, note that there is a zigzag map of oper ads, from Th pξOqtoS´nwhich comes from the
Koszul self duality of Oand the map OÑcom, and this latter map, of course, induces isomorphism on H0when
restricted to the individual path components of each OpIq. We conclude that there is a zigzag map Th pξOq ÑS´n
which, when restricted to the wedge summands correspondingto d iﬀerent path components of the base of ξO, induces
isomorphisms on bottom homology. At this point, note that if this was a direct map instead of a zigzag, we could
use the identiﬁcation of maps out of Thom complexes to directly cons truct a map of operads ξOÑWr0,8spOq¯^S´n.
We could then argue that this is a ﬁberwise equivalence as follows:
By construction, this map is a ﬁberwise equivalence, if and only if the c omposite ξOÑWr0,8spOq¯^S´nÑS´n
is a ﬁberwise equivalence. It suﬃces to show this for each path comp onent of Wr0,8spOqpIq. Since the ﬁbers of
ξOare spherical for a Koszul self dual operad by Proposition 6.20, it t hen suﬃces to show these are ﬁberwise
homology equivalences. This, in turn, would be implied by the map ξOpIq ÑS´npIqyielding an isomorphism on
the bottom homology of the Thom complexes when restricted to the wedge summands corresponding to the various
path components. This is because by [48, Lemma 3.1] the bottom ho mology of these wedge summands is generated
by the inclusion of a ﬁber. However, we already saw that after rest ricting to wedge summands, this map induces an
isomorphism on bottom homology, and so we would be done.
In fact, the same idea works for the zigzag. Start with the map Th pξOq»Ý ÑKpΣ8
`Oq; using the identiﬁcation of
maps out of a Thom complex, we have a map
ξOÑWr0,8spOq¯^KpΣ8
`Oq.
Note the base of either operad is Wr0,8spOqand this is, of course, not an equivalence as the ﬁbers of one are sp herical
and the ﬁbers of the other are Koszul duals of O. Applying Wr0,8spOq¯^´to the zigzag map from KpΣ8
`OqtoS´n
results in a zigzag equivalence of operads starting at ξOand ending at Wr0,8spOq¯^S´nbecause if we invert all the
backwards equivalences (in the homotopy category of parametriz ed spectra) the composition
ξOÑWr0,8spOq¯^S´n
is an equivalence by the previous argument.
/square
In this proof, we see the distinction of zigzag equivalences and equiv alences of zigzags come into play. Even if we
started with a Koszul zigzag for which every map was a weak equivale nce, the trivialization we produce only has the
weaker property that after inverting all backwards maps and com posing it becomes an equivalence.
In fact, we actually proved something stronger.
Theorem 6.27. For a closed operad OinpTop,ˆqthe following are equivalent:
(1)Ois Koszul self dual of dimension n.
(2)There is a p´nq-trivialization of ξO.KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 21
(3)Ois Poincar´ e-Koszul, and there is a zigzag map of operads fro mKpΣ8
`OqtoS´nsuch that the map
Hn´n|I|pKpΣ8
`OqpIqq ÑHn´n|I|pS´npIqq
restricts to an isomorphism on the wedge summands of KpΣ8
`OqpIqcorresponding to the diﬀerent path
components of OpIq.
Proof.We have already proven the equivalence of p1q,p2q, and the implication p1q ù ñ p3qwas also shown above.
Now we show p3q ù ñ p 2q. Assume we are given such a zigzag map of operads from KpΣ8
`OqtoS´n, we can
construct a zigzag map from ξOtoWr0,8spOq¯^S´nin the same way as in the above proof. Poincar´ e-Koszulness
detects that ξOis spherical by Proposition 6.20, hence the bottom homology of a wed ge summand of the Thom
complex corresponding to a path component is generated by the inc lusion of a ﬁber. Our assumption then implies
that the map is a ﬁberwise equivalence. /square
Remark 6.28.Knudsen has constructed the “universal enveloping algebra” fun ctor
Algbarpcom q_pSp,^q ÑAlgEnpSp,^q
where bar denotes Lurie’s bar construction from operads to coop erads [26]. It seems likely this arises from induc-
tion along a map snbarpcomq_ÑΣ8
`En. If this were the case, applying bar p´q_again, would construct a map
barpΣ8
`Enq_ÑS´n. If there is a similar Thom complex description for bar p´q_, the same argument as above would
give an equivalence of operads Σ8
`En»snbarpΣ8
`Enq_.
We now continue with theory of Koszul duality for right modules, all p roofs are almost identical to the operad
case, so we do not include them.
Deﬁnition 6.29. IfRis a right module over OinpTop˚,^q, letBpRqdenoteWpRqmodulo the relations that
any tree with a length 8edge is identiﬁed with ˚. This is a right comodule via decomposing trees, if possible, and
otherwise sending collapsing to the basepoint. If we wish to specify t he operad we are taking bar construction with
respect to, we write it as BpR,O,1q.
Deﬁnition 6.30. IfRis a right module over the operad OinpTop˚,^q, the Koszul dual right module is
KpRq:“ pΣ8pBpRqqq_.
Again, as a matter of taste, we will write BpΣ8Rq_orBpΣ8
`RqifRis unpointed, knowing that this abuse of
notation is justiﬁed by the extension of Koszul duality to operads a nd right modules in spectra. Recall that all of
our operads and right modules are levelwise nonequivariantly homoto py ﬁnite.
Deﬁnition 6.31. For a closed right module pair pR,A qover a closed operad OinpTop,ˆqthe Koszul dualizing
ﬁbration ξpR,A qis the right module over ξOinpParSp,¯^q
ξpR,A qpIq:“PpWpRq,DW pR,A qq.
Proposition 6.32 (Koszul-Verdier duality for right modules) .For a closed right module pair pR,A qover a closed
operadOinpTop,ˆq, there is a Koszul-Verdier duality equivalence of right mod ules compatible with the Koszul-
Verdier duality equivalence of O,
ThpξpR,A qq»Ý ÑKpΣ8R{Aq.
As in the operad case, we can describe a class of right module pairs wh ich has an automatic relative homological
Koszul self duality map. We recall a slight generalization of the deﬁnit ions and results from [35]. We ﬁx an operad
OinpTop,ˆqand right module pair pR,A qall of which are levelwise nonequivariantly homotopy ﬁnite. For the re st
of our discussion on right modules we ﬁx a ﬁeld kand all (co)homology and tensor products are taken with respect
tok.
Deﬁnition 6.33. A distinguished pn,dq-class of a right module pair pR,A qover an operad Owith a distinguished
n-classαis a choice for each nonempty ﬁnite set Iof an element βIin
Hn|I|´n`dpWpRqpIq,DW pR,A qpIqq –¯Hn|I|´n`dpBpR{AqpIqq,
such that under the partial decomposites
βIYaJÑβIbαJ.
As a sanity check, note
pn|I| ´n`dq ` pn|J| ´nq “np|I| ` |J| ´1q ´n`d“n|IYaJ| ´n`d.22 CONNOR MALIN
Deﬁnition 6.34. A right module pair pR,A qwith a distinguished class βover a Poincar´ e-Koszul operad Ois
Poincar´ e-Koszul of dimension pn,dqifβImakes
pWpRqpIq,DW pR,A qq
into a Poincar´ e duality pair for all I. We call βthe fundamental class.
Deﬁnition 6.35. The algebraic pn,dq-sphere right module Spn,dqover the algebraic n-sphere operad Snis deﬁned
by
Spn,dqpIq:“krn|I| ´n`ds
with partial composites determined by the canonical isomorphism kbk–k. It is equivalently deﬁned as the levelwise
d-fold suspension Snrds.
We deﬁne the pn,dq-suspension of a right P-module QinpdgVectk,bqby
spn,dqQpIq:“Spn,dqpIq bQpIq.
This naturally forms a right module over snP. As such, the suspension of right modules is a combination of two
natural notions of suspension: one which is internal to right O-modules which we write as Σd, and a more interesting
suspension which transforms right O-modules to right snO-modules. By unraveling deﬁnitions one immediately
obtains [35, Theorem 7.4].
Theorem 6.36. IfpR,A qis a Poincar´ e-Koszul right module pair of dimension pn,dqwith fundamental class βthere
is an isomorphism of right modules
H˚pRq –spn,dq¯H˚pKpΣ8R{Aqq.
induced by H˚pRqXβÝ Ý Ñsp´n,´dqH˚pBpR{Aqq, where we use the convention that Hip´qlives in degree ´i. This is
compatible with the Poincar´ e-Koszul duality isomorphism ofO. This isomorphism is natural with respect to maps of
Poincar´ e-Koszul right module pairs that preserve the fund amental pn,dq-class.
Just as in the operad case we have a topological characterization o f Poincar´ e-Koszul right module pairs.
Proposition 6.37. A closed right module pair pR,A qover a Poincar´ e-Koszul operad Ois Poincar´ e-Koszul with
respect to all ﬁelds k, if and only if the ﬁbers of ξpR,A qare all spherical, each spherical ﬁbration is k-orientable, and
there are ﬁxed orientations of the ﬁbers such that the partia l composites induce degree 1maps of the ﬁbers.
In [35, Theorem 7.8], we proved that for a compact, framed manifold with boundary M, the closed right module
pair pFM,pBFMqwas Poincar´ e-Koszul of dimension pn,nq. Hence all the ﬁbers of ξpFM,pBFMqare spherical with
compatible orientations. Ultimately, we will show that ξpFM,pBFMqis in fact trivial, and, as a consequence, that
pFM,pBFMqis Koszul self dual. Observe that for a right module Rover an operad OinpTop˚,^qorpSp,^q, the
levelwise suspension pΣdRqpIq:“ΣdRpIqis still a right O-module.
Deﬁnition 6.38. Anpn,dq-sphere right module Spn,dqover ann-sphere operad Snis a right module in pSp,^qwith
a zigzag equivalence to ΣdCoEnd pSnqcompatible with a zigzag equivalence from Snto CoEnd pSnq.
Asbefore, wewillabusenotationbynotspecifyingaspeciﬁcmodelo fSpn,dqwhendeﬁningrightmodulesuspension.
Deﬁnition 6.39. For a right module QoverPinpSp,^qthepn,dq-suspension of Qis the right snP-module,
spn,dqQ:“Spn,dq^Q.
Deﬁnition 6.40. Arightmodule pair pR,A qoveranoperad OinpTop,ˆqis Koszulselfdualofdimension pn,dqwith
respect to a Koszulzigzagof Oif there is a zigzagequivalence, called aKoszul zigzagof pR,A q, fromspn,dqKpΣ8R{Aq
to Σ8
`R, compatible with the Koszul zigzag of O.
Deﬁnition 6.41. Assume we have a right module Qover an operad Pin parametrized spectra which covers a right
moduleRover an operad OinpTop,ˆq. Given an n-trivialization of P, a zigzag equivalence from QtoR¯^Spn,dq
which is compatible with the trivializaton of Pis called a (spherical) pn,dq-trivialization.
Theorem 6.42. For a closed operad OinpTop,ˆqand a closed right module pair pR,A qoverOthe following are
equivalent:
(1)Ois Koszul self dual of dimension nand pR,A qis Koszul self dual of dimension pn,dq.
(2)There is a p´nq-trivialization of ξOand a p´n,´dq-trivialization of ξpR,A q.KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 23
(3)Oand pR,A qare Poincar´ e-Koszul of dimension n,pn,dq, respectively, and there is a pair of compatible zigzag
maps of operads and right modules from KpΣ8
`OqtoS´nandKpΣ8R{AqtoSp´n,´dqsuch that the maps
Hn´n|I|pKpΣ8
`OqpIqq ÑHn´n|I|pS´npIqq
Hn´n|I|´dpKpΣ8
`RqpIqq ÑHn´n|I|´dpSp´n,´dqpIqq
restrict to isomorphisms on the wedge summands of KpΣ8
`OqpIqandKpΣ8
`RqpIqcorresponding to the dif-
ferent path components of OpIqandRpIq.
7.Self duality for submanifolds of Rn
In this section we will show how the existence of a Koszul zigzag for Σ8
`Fngives rise to a Koszul zigzag for
pFM,pBFMqwhenMis a compact, codimension 0 submanifold of Rn. It is known that such Koszul zigzags exist for
Σ8
`Fn[17, Theorem 1.1]:
Theorem 7.1 (Ching-Salvatore) .There is a zigzag of equivalences of operads from Σ8
`Fnto then-fold suspension
of its Koszul dual:
Σ8
`Fn» ¨ ¨ ¨ »snKpΣ8
`Fnq.
For the rest of this section, we ﬁx any such Koszul zigzag.
Lemma 7.2. There is an equivalence of right BppFnq`q-comodules
BpFpRnq`q:“BppFpRnq`q,pFnq`,1q»Ý ÑΣnBp1,pFnq`,1q “: ΣnBppFnq`q.
Proof.We will show there is an equivalence of right modules FpRnq`ÑΣn1. Applying Byields a map of right
comodules which implies the result since taking Σncommutes with bar constructions of right modules. If |I| “1,
FpRnq`p˚q “Sn“Σn1p˚q, so we take the map to be the identity. In all other degrees the map is forced to be
constant, so we must show FpRnq`pIqis contractible if |I| ą1. By collar neighborhoods, we may assume we are
working with the subspace with no inﬁnitesimal conﬁgurations. In th is case, we scale by tP r1,8sto contract to the
basepoint. This is continuous since for all such conﬁgurations, the re is at least one point not on the origin. /square
Proposition 7.3. There is an n-trivialization of ξFnand a compatible pn,nq-trivialization of ξpFDn,pBFDnq.
Proof.By Theorem 6.42, it suﬃces to show pFDn,pBFDnqis Koszul self dual of dimension pn,nq. There are straight-
forward equivalences of right modules
FDn»FRn»Fn.
Hence, aKoszul zigzagfor Fntogetherwith the observation FpRnq`–FDn{pBFDnand the abovelemma, implies there
is a zigzag of right module equivalences from spn,nqKpFDn{pBFDnqto Σ8
`FDncompatible with the Koszul zigzag from
snKpΣ8
`Fnqto Σ8
`Fnafter extending the Koszul zigzag by the identities of Σ8
`Fnandspn,nqKpΣ8
`Fnqto account
for the application of the equivalences FDn»FRn»Fn. /square
Lemma 7.4. IfMis a compact, codimension 0submanifold of Rn, thenξpFM,pBFMqhas an pn,nq-trivialization.
Hence, there is a zigzag equivalence
spn,nqKpFM{pBFMqqto Σ8
`FM
which can be taken to be natural with respect to inclusion.
Proof.Without loss of generality, we prove the result for manifolds Membedded in Dn. As such, BDnXMĂ BM.
Note that the induced right module map
pWpFMq,DW pFM,pBFMqq Ñ pWpFDnq,DW pFDn,pBFDnqq
lies in TopĂbecause it is true of the map
pFM,pBFMq Ñ pFDn,pBFDnq.
To produce the required trivialization, it then suﬃces to show the ind uced map
ξpFM,pBFMqÑξpFDn,pBFDnq
is an equivalence on ﬁbers since by Proposition 7.3 the latter has a triv ialization which can be pulled back to a
trivialization of ξpFM,pBFMq. By Corollary 5.11, it suﬃces to show that for all ﬁnite sets Ithe induced map
¯Hn|I|pBpFDn{pBFDnqpIq;kq Ñ¯Hn|I|pBpFM{pBFMqpIq;kq24 CONNOR MALIN
is an isomorphism for all choices of kwhen restricted to the wedge summands corresponding to the diﬀe rent path
components of M. One observes as in [44], that the W-construction can be interpreted as adding a collar to the
manifold FMpIq, which implies the map of W-constructions is actually a codimension 0 embedding of topological
n|I|-manifolds! Since the map on bar constructions is the associated co llapse map, it induces isomorphisms on top
degree homology when we restrict our attention to the individual pa th components. /square
8.Weiss cosheaves in the category RMod O
In this section, we study Weiss cosheaves taking values in RMod O,ΣSeq pSpq, and we use them to prove the
compactly supported Koszul self duality of all tame, framed n-manifolds. It is very often in manifold theory that
showing a property Pholds for submanifolds of Rnimplies that it actually holds for all n-manifolds. One way to
approach such an argument is to demonstrate that the property Pcan be deduced from a statement about homotopy
(co)sheaves for a particular family of open covers, and then we us e this to show the local result implies the global
result.
There is aparticularlyrelevantfamily ofopen coverscalled Weiss cove rswhich aredeﬁned to be the open coversfor
which every ﬁnite subset of the manifold is contained inside some open of the cover. It is known that, as a symmetric
sequence, the collection of conﬁguration spaces is a homotopy cos heaf with respect to Weiss covers [13, Lemma 2.5].
Using this fact, we show that the assignments
MÞÑΣ8
`FM
MÞÑspn,nqΣ8KpFM`q
aretopologicalWeiss cosheaveswith values in RMod Σ8
`Fn,RMod snKpΣ8
`Fnq, respectively. Usinga classiﬁcationresult
of Ayala-Francis regarding locally constant Weiss cosheaves, we re duce the problem of ﬁnding a natural equivalence
between these functors to ﬁnding a natural equivalence of their r estrictions to the category of open subsets of Rn.
The result will then follow from the special case of codimension 0 subm anifolds of Rn, by the naturality of Lemma
7.4.
Many ﬂavors of categorical homotopy theory appear in the sectio n, related by the functors below, which we
introduce when needed. We let superscripts of categories denote enrichments, superscripts “bi” represent passage to
biﬁbrant objects, and use QuasiCat to denote the collection of qua sicategories, sometimes simply called 8-categories.
CatTopCatKanQuasiCat
ModelCatTopModelCatSSetSing N
Singres|bifibrant res|bifibrant
Nmodel
We recall some deﬁnitions relevant to Weiss cosheaves and the quas icategories of manifolds studied in [5]. An
introduction to the more 8-categorical aspects of Weiss cosheaves can be found in [8] and a r eference for general use
is [11]. We make use of Deﬁnition 2.8, which is the “homotopically correct ” deﬁnition of framed embeddings.
Deﬁnition 8.1. The topological category Mﬂdfr
nhas objects the tame, smooth n-manifolds with a choice of framing
and the morphism space from MtoNgiven by EmbfrpM,N q.
Recall the singular set functor Sing : Top ÑSSet is characterized as being adjoint to geometric realization. It is
well known to takes values in Kan complexes and respect products, so it induces a functor Sing : CatTopÑCatKan.
Let
N: CatKanÑQuasiCat
denote the homotopy coherent nerve [31, Section 1.1.5].
Deﬁnition 8.2. The quasicategory Mﬂd˚
nisNpSing pMﬂdfr
nqq.
The notation of this quasicategory of manifolds is compatible with the notation of Ayala-Francis. By our careful
choice of Deﬁnition 2.8, NpSing pMﬂdfr
nqqis a model of the category of B-framed manifolds MﬂdB
nwhenBis a
point [7, Deﬁnition 2.17]. Hence, the general theory of [5] applies to t he study of this quasicategory. We will
use vocabulary from [5] regarding 8-categories of manifolds, but this is conﬁned to our short discussio n of Weiss
cosheaves. We will always be clear to distinguish the topological cate gory of framed manifolds Mﬂdfr
nfrom the
quasicategory of framed manifolds Mﬂd˚
n.
In order to construct well behaved functors out of the quasicat egory Mﬂd˚
n“NpSing pMﬂd˚
nqqwe work with the
following paradigm:
(1) Use point-set topology to construct a continuous functor F:Mﬂdfr
nÑVof topological categories.KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 25
(2) Take Sing p´qto arrive at a functor between Kan complex enriched categories.
(3) Equip Sing pVqwith the structure of a simplicial model category.
(4) Postcompose Sing pFqwith a simplicial biﬁbrant replacement functor to land in Sing pVqbi.
(5) Apply the homotopy coherent nerve Np´qto land in NpSing pVqbiq.
There are two potential roadblocks: (1) the existence of a simplicia l model structure and (2) the existence of an
enriched biﬁbrant replacement for this model structure. It will tu rn out that these both exist in the case of RMod O
because it is a coﬁbrantly generated simplicial model category by Le mma 8.12.
Deﬁnition 8.3. The homotopy coherent nerve NmodelpCqof a simplicial model category Cis the quasicategory
NpCbiq.
Deﬁnition 8.4. IfF:CÑVis a continuous functor of topologically enriched categories and Sing pVqis equipped
with the structure of a simplicial model category with an enriched biﬁ brant replacement B, then
˜NpFq:NpSing pCqq ÑNmodelpSing pVqq
is the composite NpB˝Sing pFqq.
From now on we assume our simplicial model categories have a ﬁxed en riched biﬁbrant replacement.
Deﬁnition 8.5. A Weiss cover UofMPMﬂd˚
nis an open cover of Mwith the property that any ﬁnite subset X
ofMis contained in some UĂU.
A Weiss cover Ucan be interpreted as functor from the poset associated to Utaking values in strictly framed
embeddings:
PpUq ÑMﬂdfr
n.
Deﬁnition 8.6. A topological Weiss cosheaf on Mﬂdfr
nvalued in a topological model category Vis a continuous
functorF:Mﬂdfr
nÑVwhich is a homotopy cosheaf with respect to Weiss covers, meaning f or every Weiss cover U
ofMPMﬂdfr
n:
hocolim pPpUq ÑMﬂdfr
nFÝ ÑVq»Ý ÑFpMq
The Weiss cosheaf condition allows one to study cosheaves on categ ories of manifolds by restricting attention to
the subcategory of manifolds diﬀeomorphic to a disjoint union of disk s. It turns out in the case of Mﬂdfr
n, it is
possible to restrict to a poset category.
Deﬁnition 8.7. For a smooth n-manifold Mthe poset Disk pMqhas objects the open subsets of Mdiﬀeomorphic
toŮ
iPIRn, whereIis a ﬁnite set, and morphisms given by inclusion.
We now classify Weiss cosheaveson the categoryof framed manifold s in terms of their behavior on Rn. A monoidal
version of this statement appears in [33, Theorem 5.4.5.9], and all the ideas from our proof are found in [5,8]. Recall
that a quasicategory is presentable [31, Deﬁnition 5.5.0.18] if it admit s colimits and is accessible, meaning it is
generated under “small” ﬁltered colimits by a “small” category of “sm all” objects. In practice, most naturally
occurring quasicategories are presentable.
Proposition 8.8. SupposeF,Gare topological Weiss cosheaves on Mﬂdfr
nwith values in a Vsuch that NmodelpVqis
presentable, then there is an equivalence of functors ˜NpFq »˜NpGq, if and only if there is an equivalence of functors
˜NpFq|NpDisk pRnqq»˜NpGq|NpDisk pRnqq.
Proof.By [31, Theorem 4.2.4.1] homotopy colimits in Vand colimits in NmodelpVqagree. So following [8, Proof of
Proposition 2.22] the Weiss condition allows us to compute the value ˜NpFqpMqas
colim pNpDisk pMqq ÑMﬂd˚
nFÝ ÑNmodelpVqq.
IfWdenotes the subcategories of isotopy equivalences in any of these quasicategories, then the above composite
factors through the localization NpDisk pMqqrW´1s[33, Deﬁnition 1.3.4.1] since the continuity of Fensures that
isotopy equivalences are inverted. We have the following commutativ e diagram where all maps are induced by
inclusion or forgetting:26 CONNOR MALIN
NpDisk pMqqrW´1s NmodelpVq
Disk˚
n{MrW´1s Disk˚,lluf
n NpDisk pRnqqrW´1s˜NpFq
»˜NpFq
The category Disk˚,lluf
n, “lluf” being the reverse of “full”, is deﬁned as the closure of Disk˚
nunder equivalence, or in
other words, the subcategory of framed manifolds diﬀeomorphic t o a disjoint union of disks. Since the path following
the bottom row depends only on ˜NpFq, it suﬃces to demonstrate the equivalence claimed in the diagram. Th is
is [5, Proposition 2.19].
/square
In practice, it is much easier to deﬁne functors on the subcategor y ofMﬂdfr
nof strictly framed embeddings. For
instance, the right modules FMare functorial on this subcategory, but not the category Mﬂdfr
n.
Deﬁnition 8.9. The category Mﬂdstrict
nis the discrete category with objects framed n-manifolds and morphisms
given by open embeddings which preserve the framing.
The “downside” of this category is that there are far fewer morph isms. In particular, if Bndenotes the open unit
ball with its standard framing and |I| ě2, then there are no strictly framed embeddingsŮ
IBnÑBn. This is
because a framed embedding is automatically an isometric embedding.
Deﬁnition 8.10. IfCďDis a faithful map of topological categories, then a homotopy exten sion of a continuous
functorF:CÑVis a continuous functor ¯F:DÑVsuch that ¯F|Cis connected by a zigzag of natural weak
equivalences to F.
Recall that a functor F:C1ÑC2between model categories “creates homotopy colimits” if a diagram DinC1is
a homotopy colimit diagram, if and only if FpDqis a homotopy colimit diagram in C2. Similarly, F“creates weak
equivalences” if a morphism finC1is a weak equivalence, if and only if Fpfqis a weak equivalence in C2.
Lemma 8.11. LetT:VÑUbe a continuous functor of topological model category such t hatNmodelpVq,NmodelpUq
are presentable. Suppose Tcreates homotopy colimits and weak equivalences. If F,G: Mﬂdstrict
n ÑVare functors
such that T˝F,T ˝Gadmit homotopy extensions to Mﬂdfr
nwhich are Weiss cosheaves, then there is an equivalence
˜NpFq »˜NpGq,
if and only if, there is an equivalence of functors
˜NpFq|NpDisk pRnqq»˜NpGq|NpDisk pRnqq.
Proof.SinceT˝F,T˝Gextenduptohomotopyto Mﬂdfr
n, weconcludethatboth NmodelpFq,NmodelpGqinvertisotopy
equivalences and so factor through Mﬂdstrict
n rW´1s. In particular, their restrictions to NpDisk pRnqqfactor through
NpDisk pRnqqrW´1sand so give rise to presheaves ˆF»ˆGonDisk˚
nvia the equivalence Disk˚
n»NpDisk pRnqqrW´1s.
We may left Kan extend ˆF,ˆGalong the inclusion i:Disk˚
nÑMﬂd˚
nto get comparisons
FÐ pi!pˆFqq|NpMﬂdstrict
n q» pi!pˆGqq|NpMﬂdstrict
n qÑG.
SinceTpreserves colimits and creates weak equivalences, ˜NpTqwill commute with left Kan extensions. Applying
Proposition 8.8 to the coherent nerves of the homotopy extension s ofT˝F,T ˝Gwill imply that the outer maps are
also equivalences. /square
We nowsupplyasimplicialmodel structureto RMod OandverifySing pRMod Oqisasimplicialmodelcategorywith
enriched biﬁbrant replacement. Following observations of Arone-C hing [2, Appendix A], we may model the category
of right modules over the spectral operad Oas enriched presheaves on the pSp,^q-enriched category Operator pOq
associated to O.5
Lemma 8.12. The category RMod OforOPOperad pSp,^qadmits a simplicial model structure which is coﬁbrantly
generated and has weak equivalences and homotopy colimits c omputed objectwise. The simplicial mapping objects
areSing pMap p´,´qqwhereMap p´,´qdenotes the Topenrichment inherited from the Topenrichment of orthog-
onal spectra. As a consequence, the category admits an enric hed biﬁbrant replacement functor. The quasicategory
NmodelpRMod Oqis presentable.
5Recall the enriched category Operator pOqassociated to the operad Ohas objects given by ﬁnite sets and Hom pI,˚q “OpIq, with
the rest of the morphisms obtained in a combinatorial manner . It is also called the PROP associated to O.KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 27
Proof.The existence of a coﬁbrantly generated model structure is a con sequence of [19, Proposition 14.1.A] since the
category of orthogonal spectra with the positive model structu re is coﬁbrantly generated [37, Theorem 14.1]. The
simplicial enrichment follows formally as it does in the case of S-modules [2, Proposition A.1] where the character-
ization of homotopy colimits can also be found. From this, one can ded uce the existence of an enriched biﬁbrant
replacement functor [41, Theorem 13.5.2]. The nerveis presentable since coﬁbrantgenerationimplies a Quillen equiv-
alence with a combinatorial model category by [42].6The simplicial localizations of combinatorial model categories
are presentable [40] /square
Note that if Ois the trivial operad, this yields a model structure on ΣSeq pSpqwith the stated properties.
Proposition 8.13. The functor
Σ8
`Fp´q: Mﬂdstrict
n ÑΣSeq pSpq
has a homotopy extension to a topological Weiss cosheaf on Mﬂdfr
ngiven by
MÞÑΣ8
`FpM,´q.
Proof.First, observe that the conﬁguration spaces are functorial with respect to framed embeddings by forgetting
all framing information and using the functoriality of conﬁguration s paces with respect to embeddings. Conﬁgu-
ration spaces were observed to be excisive with respect to Day con volution of symmetric sequences [13, Lemma
2.5]. By [8, Proposition 3.14], this implies it satisﬁes the Weiss cosheaf co ndition. It is clearly a homotopy ex-
tension since conﬁguration spaces include as the interior of a manifo ld with boundary into the Fulton-MacPherson
compactiﬁcations. /square
Proposition 8.14. The functor
spn,nqKpΣ8Fp´q`q:Mﬂdstrict
n ÑΣSeq pSpq
has a homotopy extension to a topological Weiss cosheaf on Mﬂdfr
ngiven by
MÞÑ pΣ8FpU,´q`q_.
Proof.Observed in [35, Section 7], there are equivalences of symmetric seq uences natural with respect to inclusion
MÞÑspn,nqΣ8KpΣ8FM`q
Ò »
MÞÑspn,nqpΣ8FpM,´q`q_.
given by the dual of collapsing the subspace of the W-construction consisting of trees with an internal edge. The
one point compactiﬁcations of conﬁguration spaces are contrava riantly functorial with respect to framed embeddings
sinceFpM,´qis functorial (by forgetting any framing information) and an open e mbedding of manifolds determines
an open embedding of conﬁguration spaces.
To demonstrate that this extension is a Weiss cosheaf, observe th ere is pairing equivariant with respect to sym-
metric group actions and natural with respect to framed embeddin gs:
Σ8
`EM^FpM,´q`ÑSn|´|»Spn,nq
pf,pyiqq ÞÑf´1pyiq
whichisadualitypairingbycomparisontothedualitypairingof[34,Theo rem2.3]. Theadjointisthusanequivalence
and natural with respect to framed embeddings:
MÞÑspn,nqpΣ8FpM,´q`q_
Ò »
MÞÑΣ8
`EM.
This last functor is equivalent to MÞÑΣ8
`FpM,´qby passing to the origin of each disk. This functor was
just shown to be a Weiss cosheaf, and the property of being a Weiss cosheaf is invariant under zigzags of natural
equivalences.
/square
Letu: RMod OÑΣSeq pSpqdenote the forgetful functor. Note that it creates weak equiva lences and homotopy
colimits.
6This assumes a large cardinal axiom called “Vop¨ enka’s prin ciple”, likely one can avoid this by comparing this category of right
modules to a category of right modules based in a combinatori al model category of spectra.28 CONNOR MALIN
Deﬁnition 8.15. Given a zigzag map of operads pO1,f1,O2,f2,...,O i´1,fk´1,Okqand a sequence of topologically
enriched functors Fi:CÑRMod Oi, a zigzag natural transformation pF1,α1,F2,α2,...,F k´1,αk´1,Fkqof enriched
functors is a zigzag of natural transformations αi:u˝FiØu˝Fi`1which objectwise determines a zigzag map of
right modules.
A zigzag natural transformation is a zigzag natural equivalence if a llαiare objectwise zigzag equivalences, and it
is a zigzag of natural equivalences if all αiare objectwise equivalences.
In order to most easily apply the theory of Weiss cosheaves, we nee d a process which converts zigzag equivalences
of right modules over diﬀerent operads into zigzag equivalences ove r a single operad.
Deﬁnition 8.16. Suppose we have a zigzag map f“ pO1,f1,...,O kqof operads in pSp,^qsuch that all Oiare
levelwise coﬁbrant as spectra with respect to the positive model st ructure on orthogonal spectra. Then for a right
moduleRoverOk, we deﬁne the restriction res fpRqby setting i“kand iterating the process:
(1) Iffi´1is in the direction Oi´1ÑOi, replace RwithR1:“resfi´1pRq, otherwise:
(2) It must be a weak equivalence in the direction Oi»Ý ÑOi´1, and we replace RwithR1deﬁned as the derived
induction7ofRalongOi»Ý ÑOi´1.
(3) Repeat this process with R1and the zigzag equivalence of operads truncated at Oi´1.
The process terminates with a right module over O1and this is deﬁned as res fpRq.
By construction there is a zigzag map of right modules from res fpRqtoRwhich is a zigzag equivalence if fis a
zigzag equivalence of operads.
By [28], a model structure on operads in orthogonal spectra exist s and coﬁbrant operads are levelwise coﬁbrant.
Let us ﬁx a coﬁbrant replacement functor
C: Operad pSp,^q ÑOperad pSp,^q.
Deﬁnition 8.17. The functor C: RMod OÑRMod CpOqis restriction along CpOq ÑO.
Thus, for any zigzag equivalence of operads f“ pO1,f1,...,O kqand right modules f1“ pR1,f1
1,...,R kqthere is
an equivalent zigzag equivalence of levelwise coﬁbrant operads Cpfq “ pCpO1q,Cpf1q,...,C pOkqqand a compatible
zigzag of right modules Cpf1q “ pCpR1q,Cpf1
1q,...,C pRkqq. We emphasize: pCpR1q,Cpf1
1q,...,C pRkqqhas the same
underlying symmetric sequence as Ri, it is only considered as a right module over a diﬀerent operad.
Observe that if we have a zigzag natural equivalence of functors
pDÑRMod Oi,αiq
compatible with a zigzag equivalence of operads pO1,f1,...,O kq, we may use the above construction to pull back
to a zigzag natural equivalence of functors taking values in RMod CpO1q. Recall that u: RMod OÑΣSeq pSpqis the
forgetful functor.
Lemma 8.18. Given a zigzag equivalence f:pO1,f1,...,O kqof operads in pSp,^qand a continuous functor F:
Mﬂdstrict
n ÑRMod Ok, thenu˝C˝F“u˝Fadmits a homotopy extension to F1:Mﬂdfr
nÑΣSeq pSpq, if and only
ifu˝resCpfqpC˝Fqalso admits a homotopy extension to F1.
Proof.By induction, it suﬃces to show the result holds for zigzags of length one. In other words, for restriction
along a map of operads NÑOand derived induction along an equivalence O»Ý ÑP. The ﬁrst is automatic because
restriction does not change the underlying homotopy type of the s ymmetric sequence. The second follows from the
fact that derived induction of a levelwise coﬁbrant right module along a weak equivalence of coﬁbrant operads does
not change the weak homotopy type of the underlying symmetric se quence [2, Proposition 8.5]. /square
Lemma 8.19. Suppose that for i“0,1Fi: Mﬂdstrict
n ÑRMod Oiare functors such that u˝Fiadmit homotopy
extensions to Mﬂdfr
nwhich are Weiss cosheaves. If there exists a zigzag natural e quivalence ffromF1|Disk pRnqto
F2|Disk pRnq, then for any framed manifold Mthere is a zigzag equivalence of right modules from F1pMqtoF2pMq.
Proof.This theorem is implied by the following stronger statement which also e ncodes homotopy coherent naturality
with respect to strictly framed embeddings:
“The functors ˜NpC˝F1qand˜NpresCpfqpC˝F2qqare equivalent in the quasicategory
FunpNpMﬂdstrict
n q,NmodelpRMod CpO1qqq.2
7Using the coﬁbrancy assumption on O, it can be computed by the bar construction BpDpRq,Oi,Oi´1qwhereDdenotes a ﬁxed
enriched coﬁbrant replacement functor. [2, Proposition 8. 5].KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 29
To see this, ﬁrst observe that by Deﬁnition 8.16, the functor res CpfqpC˝F2qis related to F2by a zigzag natural
equivalence (Deﬁnition 8.15), and similarly for F1andC˝F1. Now recall that an equivalence in the quasicategory of
functors is an objectwise equivalence [23, Chapter 5, Theorem C], a nd an equivalence of objects in Nmodelp´qof a
simplicial model category implies the existence of a weak equivalence in the simplicial model category of the biﬁbrant
objects the vertices represent, and so we’ve shown the implication .8
We now demonstrate the quasicategorical statement. Applying Cp´qto the zigzag natural equivalence in the
statementofthe theoremandrestrictingalongthe operadzigzag equivalence Cpfq, yieldsazigzagnaturalequivalence
C˝F1|Disk pRnqto res CpfqpC˝F2q|Disk pRnq
Applying ˜N, we now have a zigzag of transformations between functors of qu asicategoriesfor which the backwards
maps are equivalences objectwise. As before, the backwards nat ural transformations are in fact equivalences of
functors, and thus can be inverted. Inverting the backwards ar rows and composing yields a natural transformation
˜NpC˝F1q|NpDisk pRnqqñ˜NpresCpfqpC˝F2qq|NpDisk pRnqq.
Bythedeﬁnitionofazigzagequivalence(Deﬁnition2.16), thisisanobj ectwiseequivalence,andthusanequivalence
of functors. As remarked earlier, the forgetful functor u: RMod OÑΣSeq pSpqcreates homotopy colimits and weak
equivalences, so since Lemma 8.18 shows these functors still have h omotopy extensions, we can apply Lemma 8.11
to conclude that the functors ˜NpC˝F1qand˜NpresCpfqpC˝F2qqare equivalent in the quasicategory
FunpNpMﬂdstrict
n q,NmodelpRMod CpO1qqq.
/square
9.Self duality of EM, Poincar ´e-Koszul duality, and embedding calculus
In this section, we combine the results of the previous two sections to prove that the right modules FMhave
compactly supported Koszul self duality, and that this is natural w ith respect to framed embeddings. We will discuss
some applications including: a resolution of Ching’s conjecture, a lift o f the Pontryagin-Thomcollapse map to stable,
framed embedding calculus, and Poincar´ e-Koszul duality for left Σ8
`Fn-modules.
Theorem 9.1 (Koszul self duality of FM).There is a zigzag of equivalences of operads
Σ8
`Fn» ¨ ¨ ¨ »snKpΣ8
`Fnq
and a compatible zigzag of equivalences of right modules
Σ8
`FM» ¨ ¨ ¨ »spn,nqKpΣ8FM`q
Proof.The restrictions of the functors
Σ8
`Fp´q: Mﬂdstrict
n ÑRMod Σ8
`Fn
MÞÑΣ8
`FM,
spn,nqKpΣ8Fp´q`q: Mﬂdstrict
n ÑRMod snKpΣ8
`Fnq
MÞÑspn,nqKpΣ8FM`q
to Disk pRnqare connected by a zigzag natural equivalence by Lemma 7.4. After composition with u, the two functors
admits topological Weiss cosheaf homotopy extensions by Lemma 8.1 3 and Lemma 8 .14. Thus we can apply, Lemma
8.19 and conclude the result.
/square
The self duality of FMhas a multitude of consequences which we begin to investigate. Reca ll that we can
construct a zigzag map of operads lie Ñs´nΣ8
`Fnby taking the Koszul dual of the standard map Σ8
`FnÑcom and
appealing to the Koszul self duality of Fn. We denote the pullback along this zigzag by res lie. Recall from Section
3, the derivatives B˚Fof a functor F: Top˚ÑSp form a right module of the lie operad.
Corollary 9.2 (Ching’sconjecture) .IfMis a framed n-manifold, there is a zigzag of equivalences of right lie-modules
resliepsp´n,´nqΣ8
`FMq » ¨ ¨ ¨ » B ˚pΣ8Map˚pM`,´qq.
8If in Lemma 8.12 we established that Sing pRMod Oqwas in fact simplicially equivalent to a combinatorial simp licial model category,
we would get the stronger statement that these zigzags of obj ects are actually natural.30 CONNOR MALIN
Proof.Recall from Section 3 that B˚pΣ8Map˚pM`,´qq “BppM`q^,com,1q_[2, Example 17.28]. As a consequence
of [20, Proposition 2.5] there is an equivalence of right Bpcomq-comodules
BpFM`,pFnq`,1q»Ý ÑBppM`q^,com,1q
derived from the fact9FM`{decom pFM`q – pM`q^{∆fat. Dualizing this equivalence and applying the compactly
supported Koszul self duality of FMyields the result. /square
Recall that Boavida de Brito–Weiss and Turchin showed that embedd ing calculus is computed as derived mapping
spaces of right modules over a framed variant of the little disks oper ad [11,46]. Using Koszul self duality, we can
replicate the collapse map associated to a codimension 0 embedding MÑNfor an arbitrary right module map
Σ8
`EMÑΣ8
`EN.
Theorem 9.3 (Pontryagin-Thom collapse for stable, framed embedding calculus) .For framed n-manifolds M,N
there is a map
Maph
Σ8
`FnpΣ8
`FM,Σ8
`FNq ÑMaph
Σ8
`FnpΣ8FN`,Σ8FM`q.
This map is an equivalence assuming Conjecture 9.4 for Σ8
`Fn.
It is not diﬃcult to see that in the case FMÑFNis induced by a codimension 0 inclusion i:MÑN, the image
under the above map is homotopic to
Σ8i`: Σ8FN`ÑΣ8FM`.
Before giving the construction, we recall a conjecture about Kos zul duality for arbitrary operads.
Conjecture 9.4 (Folklore) .For a levelwise Σ-ﬁnite, levelwise coﬁbrant operad Oand levelwise Σ-ﬁnite, levelwise
coﬁbrant right module RinpSp,^q, there is a natural zigzag of equivalences of operads and com patible natural zigzag
of equivalences of right modules
O» ¨ ¨ ¨ »KpKpOqq
R» ¨ ¨ ¨ »KpKpRqq.
A version of this result was proven for Σ8
`Enin [3, Proposition 2.7], though the Koszul duality functors there are
of a subtantially diﬀerent form from the Koszul duality functors of Ching’s thesis. A consequence of this conjecture
would be that (when derived) Kp´qis an equivalence on the subcategory of levelwise ﬁnite right modules, and thus:
Maph
OpR,R1q »Maph
KpOqpKpR1q,KpRqq.
The stated zigzag of operad equivalence is one of the main results of [16] where it was also proven R»KpKpRqq
on the level of symmetric sequences.
Proof of Theorem 9.3. Koszul duality supplies us with a map
Maph
Σ8
`FnpΣ8
`FM,Σ8
`FNq ÑMaph
KpΣ8
`FnqpKpΣ8
`FNq,KpΣ8
`FMqq
If Conjecture 9.4 is true, this map is an equivalence. The compactly s upported Koszul self duality of FMimplies
that, up to zigzags of equivalence compatible with the self duality of Fn,spn,nqKpΣ8
`FMq »Σ8FM`which allows us
to replace the second mapping space with Maph
Σ8
`FnpΣ8FN`,Σ8FM`qsincespn,nqis invertible up to homotopy. /square
The theory of Koszul duality developed by Ching has an extension th e category of left modules (without a 0
term). We refer to [15] for a detailed account.10The Koszul duality of operads, right modules, and left modules
has an interesting interaction with operadic bar constructions. Fo r any level-coﬁbrant operad O, level-coﬁbrant right
moduleR, and level-coﬁbrant left module LinpSp,^qthere is an equivalence [16, Proposition 6.1]:
BpR,O,L q»Ý ÑΩpBpRq,BpOq,BpLqq
Using the suggestive notation of [1] this can be written as
ż
RL»Ý ÑżBpRq
BpLq
in analogy with the Poincar´ e-Koszul duality arrow of [6]. For a gener al operad O, one cannot further this analogy,
however, in the case of FM, Koszul self duality of FnandFMallows us to interpret the righthand calculation as
9A similar calculation appears in [3, Proposition 3.17].
10Be warned, left modules are not deﬁned via partial composite s.KOSZUL SELF DUALITY OF MANIFOLDS 31
taking place over a suspension of the right comodule pΣ8FM`q_over a suspension of the cooperad pΣ8
`Fnq_.11
This parallels the fact that Poincar´ e-Koszul duality [6] relates En-algebra computations over MtoEn-coalgebra
computations over M`. Implicitly restricting BpLqalong the zigzag equivalence BpΣ8
`Fnq »snpΣ8
`Fnq_, we have:
Theorem 9.5 (Poincar´ e-Koszul duality for left Σ8
`Fn-modules) .For a framed n-manifold Mand a left Σ8
`Fn-
moduleLthere is an equivalenceż
Σ8
`FML»Ý Ñżspn,n qΣ8F_
M`
BpLq.
References
[1] Araminta Amabel. Poincar´ e/Koszul duality for general operads. Homology, Homotopy and Applications , 24(2):1–30, 2022.
[2] Gregory Arone and Michael Ching. Operads and chain rules for the calculus of functors . Soci´ et´ e Math´ ematique De France, 2011.
[3] Gregory Arone and Michael Ching. Manifolds, K-theory an d the calculus of functors, 2014. https://arxiv.org/abs/1410.1809 .
[4] Gregory Arone and Michael Ching. A classiﬁcation of Tayl or towers of functors of spaces and spectra. Advances in Mathematics ,
272:471–552, 2015.
[5] David Ayala and John Francis. Factorization homology of topological manifolds. Journal of Topology , 8(4):1045–1084, 2015.
[6] David Ayala and John Francis. Poincar´ e/Koszul duality .Communications in Mathematical Physics , 365(3):847–933, 2019.
[7] David Ayala and John Francis. Zero-pointed manifolds. Journal of the Institute of Mathematics of Jussieu , 20(3):785–858, 2019.
[8] David Ayala and John Francis. A factorization homology primer . CRC Press, 2020.
[9] Mark Behrens. The Goodwillie tower and the EHP sequence. Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society , 218(1026), 2012.
[10] J. M. Boardman and R. M. Vogt. Homotopy invariant algebr aic structures on topological spaces. Lecture Notes in Mathematics ,
1973.
[11] Pedro Boavida de Brito and Michael Weiss. Manifold calc ulus and homotopy sheaves. Homology, Homotopy and Applications ,
15(2):361–383, 2013.
[12] Lukas Brantner. The Lubin-Tate Theory of Spectral Lie Algebras . PhD thesis, Harvard University, 2017.
[13] RicardoCampos, NajibIdrissi, and ThomasWillwacher. Conﬁguration spaces ofsurfaces, 2019. https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.12281 .
[14] Michael Ching. Calculus of functors and conﬁguration s paces. Conference on Pure and Applied Topology Isle of Skye,
https://mching.people.amherst.edu/Work/skye.pdf .
[15] Michael Ching. Bar constructions for topological oper ads and the Goodwillie derivatives of the identity. Geometry & Topology ,
9(2):833–934, 2005.
[16] Michael Ching. Bar-cobar duality for operads in stable homotopy theory. Journal of Topology , 5(1):39–80, 2012.
[17] Michael Ching and Paolo Salvatore. Koszul duality for t opological Enoperads, 2020. https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.03878 .
[18] Frederick R. Cohen, Thomas J. Lada, and J. Peter May. The homology of iterated loop spaces . Springer-Verlag, 1976.
[19] Benoit Fresse. Modules over operads and functors . Springer Berlin, 2009.
[20] Benoit Fresse, Victor Turchin, and Thomas Willwacher. On the rational homotopy type of embedding spaces of manifol ds inRn,
2020.https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.08146 .
[21] Ezra Getzler and J. D. S. Jones. Operads, homotopy algeb ra and iterated integrals for double loop spaces, 1994.
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9403055 .
[22] Thomas G. Goodwillie, John R. Klein, and Michael S. Weis s. Spaces of smooth embeddings, disjunction and surgery. Princeton
University Press eBook Package 2014 , page 221–284, 2001.
[23] AndreJoyal.Advanced courseon simplicialmethods inh ighercategories, 2008. https://mat.uab.cat/ ~kock/crm/hocat/advanced-course/Quadern4 
[24] John R. Klein. The dualizing spectrum of a topological g roup.Mathematische Annalen , 319(3):421–456, 2001.
[25] John R Klein. The dualizing spectrum II. Algebraic & Geometric Topology , 7(1):109–133, 2007.
[26] Ben Knudsen. Higher enveloping algebras. Geometry & Topology , 22(7):4013–4066, 2018.
[27] Nikolay Konovalov. Algebraic Goodwillie spectral seq uence, 2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.06240 .
[28] Tore August Kro. Model structure on operads in orthogon al spectra. Homology, Homotopy and Applications , 9(2):397–412, 2007.
[29] John Lind and Cary Malkiewich. The Morita equivalence b etween parametrized spectra and module spectra. New Directions in
Homotopy Theory , page 45–66, 2018.
[30] Jean-Louis Loday and Bruno Vallette. Algebraic Operads . Springer, 2012.
[31] Jacob Lurie. Higher Topos Theory . Annals of Mathematics Studies. Princeton University Pres s, Princeton, NJ, 2009.
[32] Jacob Lurie. Poincar´ e spaces and Spivak ﬁbrations. https://www.math.ias.edu/ ~lurie/287xnotes/Lecture26.pdf , 04 2011.
[33] Jacob Lurie. Higher Algebra . 2017.https://people.math.harvard.edu/ ~lurie/papers/HA.pdf .
[34] Connor Malin. An elementary proof of the homotopy invar iance of stabilized conﬁguration spaces, 2022.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05947 .
[35] Connor Malin. The stable embedding tower and operadic s tructures on conﬁguration spaces, 2022.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.12654 .
[36] Cary Malkiewich. Parametrized spectra, a low-tech app roach, 2019. https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04773 .
[37] M. A. Mandell, J. P. May, S. Schwede, and B. Shipley. Mode l categories of diagram spectra. Proceedings of the London Mathematical
Society, 82(2):441–512, 2001.
[38] Martin Markl. A compactiﬁcation of the real conﬁgurati on space as an operadic completion. Journal of Algebra , 215(1):185–204,
1999.
[39] J. May and J. Sigurdsson. Parametrized homotopy theory .Mathematical Surveys and Monographs , 2006.
11In general, the dual of an operad is not naturally a cooperad s ince taking Spanier–Whitehead duals only distributes over smash
products up to weak equivalence rather than on the nose. Here O_should be interpreted as BpKpOqq[16, Remark 4.6.].32 CONNOR MALIN
[40] Dmitri Pavlov. Combinatorial model categories are equ ivalent to presentable quasicategories, 2022.
[41] Emily Riehl. Categorical homotopy theory . Cambridge University Press, 2014.
[42] J. Rosicky. Are all coﬁbrantly generated model categor ies combinatorial ? Cahiers de Topologie et G´ eom´ etrie Diﬀ´ erentielle
Cat´ egoriques , 50(3), 2009.
[43] Paolo Salvatore. Conﬁguration operads, minimal models and rational curves . PhD thesis, University of Oxford, 1998.
[44] Paolo Salvatore. The Fulton–MacPherson operad and the W-construction. Homology, Homotopy and Applications , 23(2):1–8, 2021.
[45] Michael Spivak. Spaces satisfying Poincar´ e duality. Topology , 6(1):77–101, 1967.
[46] Victor Turchin. Context-free manifold calculus and th e Fulton–Macpherson operad. Algebraic & Geometric Topology ,
13(3):1243–1271, 2013.
[47] Marco Volpe. Verdier duality on conically smooth strat iﬁed spaces, 2022. https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.02728 .
[48] C. T. Wall. Poincar´ e complexes: I. The Annals of Mathematics , 86(2):213, 1967.
[49] Michael Weiss. Embeddings from the point of view of imme rsion theory: Part I. Geometry & Topology , 3(1):67–101, 1999.
University of Notre Dame
Email address :cmalin@nd.edu