Emotion Recognition based on Psychological Components in Guided
Narratives for Emotion Regulation
Gustave Cortal1, Alain Finkel1;4, Patrick Paroubek2, Lina Ye3
1Univ. Paris-Saclay, CNRS, ENS Paris-Saclay, LMF, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
2Univ. Paris-Saclay, CNRS, LISN, 91400, Orsay, France
3Univ. Paris-Saclay, CNRS, ENS Paris-Saclay, CentraleSupélec, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
4Institut Universitaire de France, France
{gustave.cortal, alain.finkel}@ens-paris-saclay.fr ,
pap@limsi.fr ,lina.ye@centralesupelec.fr
Abstract
Emotion regulation is a crucial element in deal-
ing with emotional events and has positive ef-
fects on mental health. This paper aims to pro-
vide a more comprehensive understanding of
emotional events by introducing a new French
corpus of emotional narratives collected using
a questionnaire for emotion regulation. We fol-
low the theoretical framework of the Compo-
nent Process Model which considers emotions
as dynamic processes composed of four in-
terrelated components ( BEHAVIOR ,FEELING ,
THINKING and TERRITORY ). Each narrative is
related to a discrete emotion and is structured
based on all emotion components by the writ-
ers. We study the interaction of components
and their impact on emotion classiﬁcation with
machine learning methods and pre-trained lan-
guage models. Our results show that each com-
ponent improves prediction performance, and
that the best results are achieved by jointly con-
sidering all components. Our results also show
the effectiveness of pre-trained language mod-
els in predicting discrete emotion from certain
components, which reveal differences in how
emotion components are expressed.
1 Introduction
Emotion analysis in text consists of associating an
emotion from a predeﬁned set (e.g. fear,joy,sad-
ness) to a textual unit (e.g. word, clause, sentence).
Several psychological theories are used to deﬁne
the emotion classes to be predicted. Basic emotion
theories (Ekman, 1992) consider discrete emotions
shared by all, as they may have innate neural sub-
strates and universal behavioral phenotypes. Di-
mensional theories (Russell and Mehrabian, 1977)
deﬁne emotions through affective dimensions, such
as the degree of agreeableness ( valence ) and the
degree of physiological activation ( arousal ).
Previous studies (Bostan and Klinger, 2018)
have conducted analyses on various corpora foremotion classiﬁcation in text. Most of them ne-
glect the existing psychological knowledge about
emotions, which can be used to clarify what an
emotion is and how it can be caused. To the best
of our knowledge, only a few approaches incorpo-
rate cognitive psychological theories to classify
emotions in texts. These include a knowledge-
base-oriented modeling of emotional events (Cam-
bria et al., 2020), a corpus annotated according
to dimensions of cognitive appraisal of events
(Troiano et al., 2022), an annotation scheme for
emotions inspired by psycholinguistics (Etienne
et al., 2022), and the identiﬁcation of emotion com-
ponent classes (Casel et al., 2021) according to the
Component Process Model (CPM) (Scherer, 2005)
in cognitive psychology.
These papers, like ours, are based on the cogni-
tive appraisal theory (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984),
which posits that emotions arise from the evalua-
tion of an event based on various cognitive criteria,
such as relevance ,implication ,coping , and norma-
tive signiﬁcance . The CPM is rooted in this theory
and deﬁnes emotion as a set of cognitive appraisals
that modulate the expression of ﬁve components in
reaction to an event ( cognitive appraisal ,physiolog-
ical response ,motor expression ,action tendency ,
andsubjective feeling ). Our chosen components
are closely related to the components originally
proposed in the CPM. In this paper, we follow the
theoretical framework of the CPM by considering
emotions as dynamic processes composed of four
interrelated components: BEHAVIOR (“I’m giving
a lecture”), FEELING (“My heart is beating fast”),
THINKING (“I think he’s disrupting my lecture”)
and TERRITORY (“He attacks my ability to be re-
spected”) proposed by Finkel (2022). In our corpus,
each narrative is structured by the writers according
to these components. Table 1 shows an example of
a structured narrative.arXiv:2305.10446v1  [cs.CL]  15 May 2023Component Answer
BEHAVIOR I’m giving a lecture on a Friday morning at 8:30. A student goes out and comes
back a few moments later with a coffee in his hand.
FEELING My heart is beating fast, and I freeze, waiting to know how to act.
THINKING I think this student is disrupting my class.
TERRITORY The student attacks my ability to be respected in class.
Table 1: Example of an emotional narrative structured according to emotion components. The writer identiﬁed
that he was angry.
We rely on the same assumptions made by Casel
et al. (2021), namely that emotions in a text are
expressed in several ways. Emotion components
are associated with different linguistic realizations.
In this paper, we study how emotions are expressed
through components by introducing a new French
corpus composed of emotional narratives. Narra-
tives were collected with a questionnaire follow-
ing a new psychological method, called Cognitive
Analysis of Emotions (Finkel, 2022), which aims to
modify (negative) representations of an emotional
event to help people better regulate their emotions.
Our corpus is structured according to emotion com-
ponents and contains 812 narratives, corresponding
to 3082 answers. Each narrative contains several
answers, and each answer corresponds to a single
component.
In this paper, we describe the annotation of our
corpus and evaluate traditional machine learning
methods and pre-trained language models for dis-
crete emotion classiﬁcation based on emotion com-
ponents. To the best of our knowledge, this work is
the ﬁrst to study the interaction between linguistic
realizations of components for emotion classiﬁca-
tion. We aim to answer several questions: does a
component inﬂuence emotion prediction and, if so,
does it increase or decrease performance? Does
each component contribute equally or unequally to
the prediction? Does considering all components
lead to the best performance?
Contributions We present a new French corpus
composed of emotional narratives structured ac-
cording to four components ( BEHAVIOR ,FEELING ,
THINKING and TERRITORY ). Each narrative is re-
lated to a discrete emotion and is structured based
on all emotion components by the writers, allow-
ing us to study the interaction of components and
their impact on emotion classiﬁcation. We evaluate
the inﬂuence of components on emotion classiﬁ-
cation using traditional machine learning methods
and pre-trained language models (CamemBERT).Our results show that each component improves
prediction performance, and that the best results
are achieved by jointly considering all components.
Our results also show that CamemBERT effectively
predict discrete emotion from THINKING , but do
not improve performance from FEELING compared
to traditional machine learning approaches, which
reveal differences in how emotion components are
expressed. We believe that our analysis can provide
a further insight into the semantic core of emotion
expressions in text.
2 Background and Related Work
2.1 Psychological Theories of Emotion
Discrete and Continuous theories Among emo-
tion theories, we can distinguish between those that
suppose the existence of a ﬁnite number of distinct
basic emotions and those considering that emotion
has several dimensions. The basic emotion theo-
ries list several emotions common to human beings,
such as Ekman’s universal emotions ( sadness ,joy,
anger ,fear,disgust , and surprise ) (Ekman, 1992)
and Plutchik’s wheel of emotions (Plutchik, 2001).
Instead of categorizing an emotion according to a
discrete set, dimensional theories consider emotion
as a point in a multidimensional Euclidean space.
For example, Russell and Mehrabian (1977) con-
sider emotions along three dimensions: an emotion
is identiﬁable according to its degree of agreeable-
ness ( valence ), its degree of physiological activa-
tion ( arousal ), and its degree of felt control ( domi-
nance ).
Appraisal theories The cognitive appraisal the-
ory (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984) identiﬁes cogni-
tive dimensions of emotion, considered criteria for
evaluating an event. For example, it considers that
an individual evaluates how an event helps him or
her in satisfying a need or accomplishing a goal.
There are other appraisal criteria, such as the ability
to cope with an event based on resources availableto the individual. The type and intensity of an emo-
tion provoked by an event depend on the result of
cognitive appraisals.
Component Process Model Cognitive ap-
praisals are integrated in the Component Process
Model (CPM) (Scherer, 2005). It considers
emotion as the expression of several components
(cognitive appraisal ,physiological response ,
motor expression ,action tendency , and subjective
feeling ) that synchronize in reaction to an event.
The cognitive appraisals of an event modulate
the expression of components. For example,
during an exam, I evaluate my ability to solve an
exercise; I think I do not have the skills to solve it
and will get a bad mark ( cognitive appraisal ). I
panic ( subjective feeling ), I sweat ( physiological
response ), my legs shake ( motor expression ), I
feel like getting up and running away from the
classroom ( action tendency ). In this text, we can
infer that I am afraid ( fear). Our corpus explores
the interaction between linguistic realizations of
components. Despite being closely related, our
components proposed by the Cognitive Analysis
of Emotion differ from the original ones presented
by the CPM.
Cognitive Analysis of Emotion The Cognitive
Analysis of Emotion (Finkel, 2022) is a cognitive
appraisal theory that explores the basic emotions
(anger ,fear,joy, and sadness ) with their corre-
sponding behavioral ( BEHAVIOR ), physiological
(FEELING ), and cognitive ( THINKING and TERRI -
TORY )components. Like other psychological and
neuroscientiﬁc theories, it assumes that the mind
processes emotional information, in order to pre-
pare for and take appropriate action. If the informa-
tion is not processed satisfactorily according to an
individual’s values, beliefs, or goals, the mind may
repress, block, or loop, leading to unsatisfactory
outcomes. The Cognitive Analysis of Emotion uses
the CPM to reorganize the narrative of experienced
emotional events. This process helps individuals
better understand and regulate their emotions, as
well as prepare for necessary actions. It provides a
method for understanding emotions that can mod-
ify negative representations of emotional events.
The narratives are categorized using a question-
naire, presented in Section 3.1. Cortal et al. (2022)
introduce the use of natural language processing to
automate parts of the Cognitive Analysis of Emo-
tion.2.2 Emotion Analysis in Text
Most methods for analyzing emotions in text focus
on either the classiﬁcation of discrete emotional
states (Bostan and Klinger, 2018) or the recognition
of affective dimensions such as valence ,arousal ,
anddominance (Buechel and Hahn, 2017).
Emotion Cause Extraction Recently, some new
studies aim to not only recognize the emotional
state present in the text, but also the span of text
that serves as its underlying cause. Lee et al. (2010)
introduce the Emotion Cause Extraction task and
deﬁne it as the identiﬁcation of word-level factors
responsible for the elicitation of emotions within
text. Chen et al. (2010) analyze the corpus pre-
sented by Lee et al. (2010) and suggest that clause-
level detection may be a more suitable unit for
detecting causes. Xia and Ding (2019) propose the
Emotion-Cause Pair Extraction task, i.e., the simul-
taneous extraction of both emotions and their cor-
responding causes. Several extensional approaches
have been proposed to address this task with better
performance (Ding et al. (2020a), Wei et al. (2020),
Ding et al. (2020b), Chen et al. (2020), Singh et al.
(2021)).
Structured Emotion Analysis The goal of se-
mantic role labelling (Gildea and Jurafsky, 2000)
is to determine the participants involved in an ac-
tion or event indicated by a predicate in a given
sentence. For emotion analysis, the task shifts its
focus from actions to emotional cues, which are
words or expressions that trigger emotions. Emo-
tion semantic role labelling consists of answering
the question: “Who feels What, towards Whom,
and Why?” (Campagnano et al., 2022). Moham-
mad et al. (2013) annotate tweets during the 2012
U.S. presidential elections, Bostan et al. (2020) an-
notate news headlines and Kim and Klinger (2018)
annotate literary paragraphs. They identify emo-
tion cues with the corresponding emotion expe-
riencers, causes and targets. Campagnano et al.
(2022) propose a uniﬁed annotation scheme for
different emotion-related semantic role corpora, in-
cluding those presented previously. To the best of
our knowledge, the only French language studies
that address the identiﬁcation of emotion-related
semantic roles are the corpus for recognizing emo-
tions in children’s books (Etienne et al., 2022), the
corpus for extremist texts (Dragos et al., 2022),
and the Déﬁ Fouille de Textes campaign (Paroubek
et al., 2018), which annotates tweets related totransportation in the Île-de-France region.
Appraisal Theories for Emotion Analysis A
few approaches incorporate cognitive psycholog-
ical theories to classify emotions in text. The
ISEAR project (Scherer and Wallbott, 1994) com-
piles a textual corpus of event descriptions. How-
ever, they focus on the existence of emotion compo-
nents, but not on the linguistic expression of emo-
tion components. Cambria et al. (2020) identify
event properties including people’s goals for senti-
ment analysis using a knowledge-base-oriented ap-
proach. Troiano et al. (2022) compile a corpus that
considers the cognitive appraisal of events from
both the writer and reader perspectives. Very few
studies focus on emotion component analysis. Kim
and Klinger (2019) analyze the communication of
emotions in fan ﬁction through some variables re-
lated to emotion components such as facial and
body posture descriptions, subjective sensations,
and spatial relations of characters. Casel et al.
(2021) annotate existing literature and Twitter emo-
tion corpora with emotion component classes based
on the CPM. However, not all emotion components
are expressed to characterize an emotional event.
In our corpus, each narrative is structured based
on all emotion components, allowing us to study
the interaction of components and their impact on
emotion classiﬁcation.
Menétrey et al. (2022) represents the pioneering
effort in examining the interaction of components
for discrete emotion prediction. However, their an-
notation approach deviates from ours. They use
a scale ranging from 1 to 7 to solicit annotators’
agreement with predeﬁned descriptions (e.g. “To
what extent did you feel calm?”). This approach
disregards the linguistic manifestation of emotion
components. In contrast, our questionnaire em-
ploys open-ended questions to gather the linguistic
expression of emotional events, enabling the appli-
cation of natural language processing techniques.
3 Corpus Creation
3.1 Corpus Annotation
In a Cognitive Analysis session, the participants,
who wish to manage their emotions better, write a
narrative of an experienced emotional event with
identiﬁed characters in a given place and time. The
writer ﬁrst identiﬁes the basic emotion he/she has
experienced, then he/she structures the narratives
according to emotion components by ﬁlling in aquestionnaire. The writer also describes the actions
that could have been performed but that he/she had
not considered or that he/she had forbidden him-
self/herself to do during the emotional event. We
do not consider this last action part of the question-
naire in our study, as we are only interested in the
emotion components.1Table 1 shows a structured
narrative based on components described by Finkel
(2022). We provide a summary below :
•BEHAVIOR : the writer describes the observ-
able behaviors of himself/herself and others.
They are identiﬁed by answering “Who did
what?” and “Who said what?”. The writer
also provides the context of an emotional
event, such as location and date.
•FEELING : the writer expresses his/her physi-
cal feelings during the emotional event.
•THINKING : the writer reports what he/she
thought during the emotional event.
•TERRITORY : the writer describes whether
his/her needs are satisﬁed or not by analyzing
the different cognitive appraisals that he/she
thinks he/she has made during the emotional
event. The Cognitive Analysis of Emotion
considers that an emotion arises when we eval-
uate an event that invalidates or conﬁrms our
model of the world, the latter containing ter-
ritories associated with our needs. Territo-
ries are concrete objects such as an individual
body or home, or abstract objects such as in-
dividual values, beliefs, or self-image.
Using the questionnaire, a writer categorizes
an emotional narrative by considering four emo-
tion components ( BEHAVIOR ,FEELING ,THINK -
ING, and TERRITORY ) proposed by Finkel (2022),
closely related to components originally proposed
by the CPM. For example, FEELING may con-
tainphysiological responses (“My heart is beating
fast”) and motor expressions (“I feel I am smiling”).
THINKING may contain action tendencies (“I felt
like hitting him”) and subjective feelings (“I was
relaxed”). TERRITORY provides information on cri-
teria involved in the cognitive appraisal of an event
(“The student attacks my ability to be respected in
class”).
We point out that compared to previous studies
on emotion component analysis (Casel et al., 2021;
1We point out that, in this paper, we only study the linguis-
tic realizations of emotion components.Component #AtAEmotion %
BEHAVIOR 802 82 Anger 52
FEELING 799 27 Fear 36
THINKING 799 54 Sadness 14
TERRITORY 682 34 Joy 11
(a) Entire corpus (Total ).Component #AtAEmotion %
BEHAVIOR 392 93 Anger 48
FEELING 392 26 Fear 32
THINKING 392 59 Sadness 10
TERRITORY 392 38 Joy 10
(b) Subset of Total for the emotion classiﬁcation task ( Emotion ).
Table 2: Number of answers ( #A), average number of tokens for answers ( tA) and distribution of emotion classes.
For Total , a questionnaire can correspond to more than one emotion class.
#NtN#A % completion
Total 812 190 3082 61
Emotion 392 216 1568 100
Table 3: Number of narratives ( #N), average number
of tokens for narratives ( tN), number of answers ( #A)
and completion rate for questionnaires. Statistics for
the entire corpus (Total ) and the subset for the emotion
classiﬁcation task (Emotion ).
Menétrey et al., 2022), our corpus contains linguis-
tic realizations of all components for each emo-
tional narrative, providing a more comprehensive
understanding of emotional events. Menétrey et al.
(2022) do not consider linguistic realizations of
components, and Casel et al. (2021) do not consider
all components for each emotional event, hence
they cannot study the interaction of components.
Moreover, our corpus is annotated by the writers
of narratives themselves, rather than external an-
notators, as in Casel et al. (2021). An interesting
direction for future research would involve the in-
corporation of external annotations into our cor-
pus to conduct a comparative analysis between the
writer’s perspective and that of the reader.
3.2 Corpus Statistics
Practitioners trained in Cognitive Analysis of Emo-
tion manually collected questionnaires from indi-
viduals who chose to participate in emotion reg-
ulation trainings between 2005 and 2022. Dur-
ing these years, the format of questionnaires has
changed several times, as well as the instructions
given. All questionnaires were converted into a
standard format. Each questionnaire is completed
by a single person and corresponds to a narrative
related to a discrete emotion. We did not collect
speciﬁc data on the writers. Most of them are mas-
ter’s students (20 to 22 years old), doctoral students
(22 to 30 years old) and teachers (25 to 50 years
old, with an average around 30) studying or work-
ing in France, and who have given their consent forthe questionnaires to be collected and processed.
Narratives are disidentiﬁed using a named entity
recognition model.2We then manually verify and
correct the automatic disidentiﬁcation. Speciﬁc to-
kens replace personal names, organizations, dates,
and locations to preserve the privacy of writers. We
delete empty answers containing less than 3 tokens.
Our corpus is composed of 812 unique question-
naires, for a total of 3082 answers ( Total ). Each
answer is related to a single component. We intro-
duce a subset ( Emotion ) of our entire corpus ( Total )
composed of questionnaires with all components
ﬁlled in and corresponding to a single emotion
class. For the emotion classiﬁcation task, described
in the next section, we use the Emotion subset.
Corpus statistics obtained with SpaCy (Honnibal
and Montani, 2017) are illustrated for each com-
ponent in Table 2. Although a questionnaire corre-
sponds to one primary emotion class, sometimes
writers indicate experiencing other secondary emo-
tion classes. Table 2 also shows the distribution
of emotion classes. The dominance of negative
emotions is expected; writers usually ﬁll in a ques-
tionnaire when they want to better deal with a dis-
tressing event. Table 3 shows general statistics for
Total and Emotion .
4 Experiments and Results
4.1 Methods
In this study, we aim to examine the interaction
between linguistic realizations of emotion compo-
nents through traditional machine learning methods
and pre-trained language models. Our corpus is
unique in that it provides multiple components for
each emotional event, enabling us to investigate the
interaction of components and their impact on emo-
tion classiﬁcation. Our research questions include:
does the presence of a component impact emotion
prediction? Does considering all components result
2https://huggingface.co/Jean-Baptiste/
camembert-nerLogistic Regression CamemBERT
Component Precision Recall F1 Precision Recall F1
All 71.2 (2:6) 69.1 (2:2)67.8 (2:3)85.1 84.8 84.7
Without BEHAVIOR 77.4 (2:3) 75.8 (2:4)74.5 (2:6)80.3 79.8 79.7
Without FEELING 64.3 (1:9) 61.5 (1:2)61.3 (2:2)81.6 79.8 79.9
Without THINKING 70.9 (1:8) 69.1 (2:0)68.3 (2:2)79.6 78.5 78.7
Without TERRITORY 64.3 (4:1) 64.5 (2:4)62.3 (2:8)78.7 78.5 78.6
Only BEHAVIOR 52.1 (3:5) 54.6 (2:9)51.7 (2:9)68.4 67.1 66.6
Only FEELING 69.6 (1:5) 68.9 (2:1)68.4 (2:0)67.8 68.4 67.7
Only THINKING 50.1 (3:4) 53.8 (2:3)50.6 (2:7)70.5 70.1 70.1
Only TERRITORY 68.2 (1:8) 66.8 (2:2)66.6 (2:3)71.4 68.4 68.9
Table 4: Scores (± std) for discrete emotion classiﬁcation based on components.
in the best prediction performance? We answer the
same questions posed by Menétrey et al. (2022),
but we focus on the linguistic expression of emo-
tional events, instead of the existence of described
event properties.
Traditional machine learning methods We
train logistic regressions, support vector machines,
and random forests on our corpus represented as a
bag-of-words (unigrams), averaged using the TF-
IDF method. The words are pre-processed through
lemmatization using SpaCy. To prevent bias, we re-
move terms directly related to the emotion classes
(e.g. “fear”, “anger”, “sad”, “joy”). For model eval-
uation, we perform a ﬁve-fold cross-validation, and
we calculate F1score, recall, and precision using a
weighted mean.3For training our models, we use
Scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) with default
hyperparameters.
Pre-trained language models We ﬁne-tune a
transformers-based model (Vaswani et al., 2017) us-
ing the distilled version (Delestre and Amar, 2022)
of CamemBERT (Martin et al., 2020), a BERT
model (Devlin et al., 2019) for the French language.
We use the raw answers, but we also remove terms
directly related to the emotion classes to prevent
bias. The corpus is split into 80% for training
and 20% for evaluation. We train models for 5
epochs using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and
HuggingFace’s Transformers (Wolf et al., 2020),
with model parameters for each epoch saved. We
select the model with the highest F1score on the
evaluation data. Training hyperparameters and ﬁne-
tuned CamemBERT weights are publicly available
3As the emotion class distribution is imbalanced.on HuggingFace.4
4.2 Emotion Classiﬁcation
In this study, we aim to investigate the impact of
component interaction on discrete emotion classi-
ﬁcation. We train models on all components at
once, on all but one component at once, and on a
single component. To account for multiple compo-
nents, we concatenate their respective answers. For
example, “Only TERRITORY ” models are trained
onTERRITORY , “Without BEHAVIOR ” models are
trained on all components except BEHAVIOR and
“All” models are trained on all components, which
represent an entire narrative. Models are trained on
the Emotion subset.
Results Results are shown in Table 4. We do not
show the performance of support vector machines
and random forests since they perform worse than
logistic regressions. The best results are achieved
when all components are considered simultane-
ously, as indicated by the highest F1(84.7) with
CamemBERT “All”. The results of CamemBERT
models with the removal of individual compo-
nents show a decrease in performance compared
to CamemBERT “All”, with a decrease in F1rang-
ing from -4.8 for “Without FEELING ” to -6.1 for
“Without TERRITORY ”. Hence, each component is
relevant for classifying discrete emotions. Our ﬁnd-
ings lend support to Scherer’s hypothesis (Scherer,
2005) that an emotional event is characterized by
the synchronization of emotion components. This
result is not self-evident, as individual components
may convey conﬂicting information regarding the
emotion classiﬁcation task. Our results, coming
from a natural language processing perspective, are
4https://huggingface.co/gustavecortal/
distilcamembert-cae-allconsistent with those of Menétrey et al. (2022),
who studied the interaction of components for dis-
crete emotion prediction from the existence of de-
scribed event properties.
In general, CamemBERT models show improved
performance relative to logistic regressions, which
is in line with expectations. However, the improve-
ment is inconsistent across the models that only
considered a single component, ranging from -0.7
for “Only FEELING ” to +19.5 for “Only THINK -
ING”. Our results show an important increase in F1
for “Only BEHAVIOR ” (+14.9) and “Only THINK -
ING” (+19.5), whereas “Only TERRITORY ” shows
a slight increase (+2.3) and “Only FEELING ” shows
a slight decrease (-0.7). We discuss these results
which reveal ways in which components are ex-
pressed in a text.
Discussions For emotions expressed through
TERRITORY (+2.3 for “Only TERRITORY ”), we
believe that the way the question is asked to the
writers inﬂuences strongly the way they answer,
hence answers are biased due to the questionnaire
format. For example, according to the Cognitive
Analysis of Emotion, an attacked territory indi-
cates that the corresponding emotion is anger or
fear. Hence, the presence of only two unigrams,
“territory” and “attack” can discriminate between
anger fear andjoy sadness , which can easily be
performed by a logistic regression with TF-IDF
features.
For emotions expressed through BEHAVIOR
(+14.9 for “Only BEHAVIOR ”), we believe that
CamemBERT can discriminate the writer’s behav-
iors from the behaviors of others characters in an
emotional event, thus improving emotion predic-
tion compared to logistic regressions.
CamemBERT improves performance for emo-
tions expressed through THINKING (+19.5 for
“Only THINKING ”), while not having an impor-
tant impact on performance for emotions expressed
through FEELING (-0.7 for “Only FEELING ”). Emo-
tion expression modes (Micheli, 2014), studied in
linguistics, could explain the differences in perfor-
mance between logistic regressions and Camem-
BERT models trained on individual components.
Micheli (2014) presents a comprehensive study of
French emotion denotation, examining the diverse
mechanisms used to convey emotions in text. The
study categorizes a vast array of heterogeneous
markers into three emotion expression modes: emo-
tions directly labeled by emotional words ( labeledemotion ), emotions displayed through characteris-
tics of utterances ( displayed emotion ), and emo-
tions illustrated by the description of a situation so-
cially associated with an emotion ( suggested emo-
tion).
We hypothesize that there is an important, yet
unexplored, relationship between emotion expres-
sion modes and linguistic realizations of emotion
components. For instance, THINKING may include
suggested emotions , while FEELING may include
labeled emotions . Classifying discrete emotions
based on a suggested emotion (e.g. “I think this stu-
dent is disrupting my class”) would be more chal-
lenging compared to classifying discrete emotions
from a labeled emotion (e.g. “I am upset”). Under-
standing a suggested emotion requires the under-
standing of the entire sentence and the sociocultural
context of the emotional event, whereas understand-
ing a labeled emotion only requires identifying the
relevant emotional words (“upset”), which can eas-
ily be performed by a logistic regression. There-
fore, CamemBERT models are likely to outperform
logistic regressions in terms of performance for
emotions expressed through the suggested emotion
mode. This is due to CamemBERT’s ability to
encode the meaning of a sentence as a whole, as
well as its pre-training that allows it to grasp the
sociocultural context of an event, which logistic
regression with TF-IDF features cannot do.
4.3 Component Classiﬁcation
Model Precision Recall F1
LR 84.9 (0:3) 84.3 (0:3)84.4 (0:3)
cBERT 93.2 93.0 93.1
Table 5: Scores ( std) for emotion component classi-
ﬁcation. cBERT = CamemBERT.
We train traditional machine learning models
and ﬁne-tune CamemBERT to predict the emo-
tion component class, i.e., whether an answer is a
BEHAVIOR , aFEELING , aTHINKING , or a TERRI -
TORY . Compared to the emotion classiﬁcation task,
models are trained on the entire corpus Total .
Table 5 show the results. We obtain great perfor-
mances, logistic regression and CamemBERT can
easily identify emotion component classes in our
corpus. Training hyperparameters and ﬁne-tuned
CamemBERT weights are publicly available on
HuggingFace.5We hope our corpus will beneﬁt the
5https://huggingface.co/gustavecortal/research community for classifying components in
text, a recent task introduced by Casel et al. (2021).
5 Conclusion and Future Work
Emotion regulation is a critical aspect of emotional
events and has noteworthy implications for psy-
chological well-being. In this paper, we aimed
to provide a more comprehensive understanding
of emotional events by introducing a French cor-
pus of 812 emotional narratives (3082 answers).
Our corpus was annotated following the Compo-
nent Process Model and was collected using a re-
cent psychological method for emotion regulation,
named the Cognitive Analysis of Emotion. Casel
et al. (2021) were the ﬁrst to annotate corpora with
external annotators according to emotion compo-
nents. Our corpus differs because each narrative is
annotated by the writers and is structured according
to all components ( BEHAVIOR ,FEELING ,THINK -
ING, and TERRITORY ), which allows for the study
of their interaction.
We employed traditional machine learning meth-
ods and pre-trained language models (Camem-
BERT) to investigate the interaction of components
for discrete emotion classiﬁcation. Our results
show that each component is useful for classifying
discrete emotions, and that the model with the best
performance considers all components, supporting
Scherer’s hypothesis (Scherer, 2005) that compo-
nents synchronize during an emotional event.
Our results also show that CamemBERT effec-
tively predict discrete emotion from THINKING , but
do not improve performance from FEELING com-
pared to traditional machine learning approaches,
which reveal differences in how emotion compo-
nents are expressed. We hypothesize that this may
be explained by emotion expression modes studied
in linguistics (Micheli, 2014). To test this hypothe-
sis, we plan to annotate emotion expression modes
in our corpus using a recent annotation scheme
proposed by Etienne et al. (2022).
Limitations
In our corpus, the distribution of emotion classes
is imbalanced, which may bias the analyses, and
notably impact the performance of trained models.
Moreover, the data collected through a question-
naire may suffer from response bias, as the lan-
guage used to describe an emotional narrative can
be inﬂuenced by the questionnaire format and the
distilcamembert-cae-componentelapsed time between the emotional event and its
verbalization. We also point out that the linguistic
expression of emotion does not necessarily capture
the full extent of an emotional event, thus differ-
ent from psychological or physiological studies on
emotion (Gu et al., 2019).
Ethics Statement
In this paper, we collected data from individuals
who attended emotion regulation trainings and pro-
vided consent for the collection and analysis of
questionnaires. The corpus has not been published
yet, as it is undergoing validation by the ethics com-
mittee of École Normale Supérieure Paris-Saclay.
By disidentifying our corpus, we have taken stan-
dard precautions to mitigate the introduction of bi-
ases into our models. Despite our efforts, it is pos-
sible that our models may still contain biases that
we are not aware of. Our models are not intended
for diagnostic purposes, and we do not provide
automatic feedback to individuals for regulating
their emotion, as we would need to be sure that
such feedback does not have any adverse effects on
individuals’ mental health and, instead, facilitates
improved emotion regulation.
References
Laura Ana Maria Bostan, Evgeny Kim, and Roman
Klinger. 2020. GoodNewsEveryone: A corpus of
news headlines annotated with emotions, semantic
roles, and reader perception. In Proceedings of
the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Con-
ference , pages 1554–1566, Marseille, France. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association.
Laura-Ana-Maria Bostan and Roman Klinger. 2018.
An analysis of annotated corpora for emotion clas-
siﬁcation in text. In Proceedings of the 27th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,
pages 2104–2119, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Sven Buechel and Udo Hahn. 2017. EmoBank: Study-
ing the impact of annotation perspective and repre-
sentation format on dimensional emotion analysis.
InProceedings of the 15th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers , pages 578–585,
Valencia, Spain. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Erik Cambria, Yang Li, Frank Z. Xing, Soujanya Poria,
and Kenneth Kwok. 2020. Senticnet 6: Ensemble
application of symbolic and subsymbolic AI for sen-
timent analysis. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM In-
ternational Conference on Information and Knowl-
edge Management , CIKM ’20, page 105–114, NewYork, NY , USA. Association for Computing Machin-
ery.
Cesare Campagnano, Simone Conia, and Roberto Nav-
igli. 2022. SRL4E – Semantic Role Labeling for
Emotions: A uniﬁed evaluation framework. In Pro-
ceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , pages 4586–4601, Dublin, Ireland. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Felix Casel, Amelie Heindl, and Roman Klinger. 2021.
Emotion recognition under consideration of the emo-
tion component process model. In Proceedings of
the 17th Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing (KONVENS 2021) , pages 49–61, Düsseldorf,
Germany. KONVENS 2021 Organizers.
Xinhong Chen, Qing Li, and Jianping Wang. 2020. A
uniﬁed sequence labeling model for emotion cause
pair extraction. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,
pages 208–218, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Interna-
tional Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Ying Chen, Sophia Yat Mei Lee, Shoushan Li, and Chu-
Ren Huang. 2010. Emotion cause detection with
linguistic constructions. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (Coling 2010) , pages 179–187, Beijing, China.
Coling 2010 Organizing Committee.
Gustave Cortal, Alain Finkel, Patrick Paroubek, and
Lina Ye. 2022. Natural language processing for cog-
nitive analysis of emotions. In Semantics, Memory,
and Emotion 2022 , Paris, France.
Cyrile Delestre and Abibatou Amar. 2022. Dis-
tilCamemBERT : Une distillation du modèle
français CamemBERT. In CAp (Conférence sur
l’Apprentissage automatique) , Vannes, France.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Zixiang Ding, Rui Xia, and Jianfei Yu. 2020a. ECPE-
2D: Emotion-cause pair extraction based on joint
two-dimensional representation, interaction and pre-
diction. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 3161–3170, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Zixiang Ding, Rui Xia, and Jianfei Yu. 2020b. End-to-
end emotion-cause pair extraction based on sliding
window multi-label learning. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 3574–3583,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.Valentina Dragos, Delphine Battistelli, Aline Etienne,
and Yolène Constable. 2022. Angry or sad ? emo-
tion annotation for extremist content characterisa-
tion. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference , pages 193–201,
Marseille, France. European Language Resources
Association.
Paul Ekman. 1992. An argument for basic emotions.
Cognition and Emotion , 6(3-4):169–200.
Aline Etienne, Delphine Battistelli, and Gwénolé
Lecorvé. 2022. A (psycho-)linguistically motivated
scheme for annotating and exploring emotions in a
genre-diverse corpus. In Proceedings of the Thir-
teenth Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence, pages 603–612, Marseille, France. European
Language Resources Association.
Alain Finkel. 2022. Manuel d’analyse cognitive des
émotions: Théorie et applications . Dunod, Paris.
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2000. Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. In Proceedings of the
38th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 512–520, Hong Kong.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Simeng Gu, Fushun Wang, Nitesh P. Patel, James A.
Bourgeois, and Jason H. Huang. 2019. A model
for basic emotions using observations of behavior in
drosophila. Frontiers in Psychology , 10.
Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. 2017. spaCy 2:
Natural language understanding with Bloom embed-
dings, convolutional neural networks and incremen-
tal parsing. To appear.
Evgeny Kim and Roman Klinger. 2018. Who feels
what and why? annotation of a literature corpus
with semantic roles of emotions. In Proceedings
of COLING 2018, the 27th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics , Santa Fe, USA.
Evgeny Kim and Roman Klinger. 2019. An analysis
of emotion communication channels in fan-ﬁction:
Towards emotional storytelling. In Proceedings of
the Second Workshop on Storytelling , pages 56–64,
Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Richard S. Lazarus and Susan. Folkman. 1984. Stress,
appraisal, and coping . Springer Pub. Co New York.
Sophia Yat Mei Lee, Ying Chen, and Chu-Ren Huang.
2010. A text-driven rule-based system for emotion
cause detection. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT
2010 Workshop on Computational Approaches to
Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text , pages
45–53, Los Angeles, CA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Louis Martin, Benjamin Muller, Pedro Javier Or-
tiz Suárez, Yoann Dupont, Laurent Romary, Éric
de la Clergerie, Djamé Seddah, and Benoît Sagot.
2020. CamemBERT: a tasty French language model.InProceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , pages
7203–7219, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Maëlan Q. Menétrey, Gelareh Mohammadi, Joana
Leitão, and Patrik Vuilleumier. 2022. Emotion
recognition in a multi-componential framework:
The role of physiology. Frontiers in Computer Sci-
ence, 4.
Raphaël Micheli. 2014. Les émotions dans les discours .
De Boeck Supérieur.
Saif M. Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Joel
Martin. 2013. Identifying purpose behind elec-
toral tweets. In Proceedings of the Second Interna-
tional Workshop on Issues of Sentiment Discovery
and Opinion Mining , WISDOM ’13, New York, NY ,
USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Patrick Paroubek, Cyril Grouin, Patrice Bellot, Vin-
cent Claveau, Iris Eshkol-Taravella, Amel Fraisse,
Agata Jackiewicz, Jihen Karoui, Laura Monceaux,
and Juan-Manuel Torres-Moreno. 2018. DEFT2018
: recherche d’information et analyse de sentiments
dans des tweets concernant les transports en Île de
France (DEFT2018 : Information retrieval and sen-
timent analysis in tweets about public transporta-
tion in Île de France region ). In Actes de la Con-
férence TALN. Volume 2 - Démonstrations, articles
des Rencontres Jeunes Chercheurs, ateliers DeFT ,
pages 219–230, Rennes, France. ATALA.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam
Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca
Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Te-
jani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang,
Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. 2019. Pytorch:
An imperative style, high-performance deep learn-
ing library. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 32 , pages 8024–8035. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V . Michel,
B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer,
R. Weiss, V . Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos,
D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duch-
esnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in
Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
12:2825–2830.
Robert Plutchik. 2001. The nature of emotions: Hu-
man emotions have deep evolutionary roots, a fact
that may explain their complexity and provide tools
for clinical practice. American Scientist , 89(4):344–
350.
James A Russell and Albert Mehrabian. 1977. Evi-
dence for a three-factor theory of emotions. Journal
of Research in Personality , 11(3):273–294.Klaus R. Scherer. 2005. What are emotions? and how
can they be measured? Social Science Information ,
44(4):695–729.
Klaus R. Scherer and Harald G. Wallbott. 1994. Evi-
dence for universality and cultural variation of differ-
ential emotion response patterning. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology , 66(2):310–328.
Aaditya Singh, Shreeshail Hingane, Saim Wani, and
Ashutosh Modi. 2021. An end-to-end network for
emotion-cause pair extraction. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh Workshop on Computational Approaches
to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis,
WASSA@EACL 2021, Online, April 19, 2021 , pages
84–91. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Enrica Troiano, Laura Oberländer*, and Roman
Klinger. 2022. Dimensional modeling of emotions
in text with appraisal theories: Corpus creation, an-
notation reliability, and prediction. Computational
Linguistics , pages 1–72.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need.
Penghui Wei, Jiahao Zhao, and Wenji Mao. 2020.
Effective inter-clause modeling for end-to-end
emotion-cause pair extraction. In Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics , pages 3171–3181, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. 2020. Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language process-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations , pages 38–45, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Rui Xia and Zixiang Ding. 2019. Emotion-cause pair
extraction: A new task to emotion analysis in texts.
InProceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , pages
1003–1012, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.