Drag on a partially immersed sphere at the capillary scale
Robert Hunt1, Ze Zhao2, Eli Silver1, Jinhui Yan2, Yuri Bazilevs1, and Daniel M. Harris1∗
1School of Engineering, Brown University
2The Grainger College of Engineering,
University of Illinois Urbana-Champagne
(Dated: August 1, 2023)
1arXiv:2305.19447v2  [physics.flu-dyn]  30 Jul 2023Abstract
We study the drag on a centimetric sphere in a uniform flow in the presence of a free surface
as a function of submergence depth. Through direct force measurements in a custom benchtop
recirculating flume, we demonstrate that the drag can significantly exceed the corresponding drag in
a single-phase flow and achieves a peak at submergence depths just prior to complete immersion.
The additional drag in the partially immersed state is rationalized by considering hydrostatic
effects associated with the asymmetric surface height profile induced by the obstacle in the flow
direction which persists for flow speeds below the minimum capillary-gravity wave speed. At these
scales, the sphere’s wettability plays a pronounced role in determining the maximum possible drag
and results in hysteretic behaviors near touchdown and complete immersion. The influence of flow
speed, sphere size, and surface tension on the drag characteristics are additionally explored through
a combination of experiments and numerical simulations.
I. INTRODUCTION
Drag on a solid sphere in a single-phase flow is perhaps one of the most fundamental,
broadly applicable, and thoroughly studied problems in fluid dynamics. For the case of a
Newtonian fluid, the drag on a smooth sphere can be characterized by a single characteristic
curve for the coefficient of drag CD(CD=FD
1
2ρU2π(d
2)2) as a function of Reynolds number
Re(Re=ρUd
µ), where ρis the fluid density, Uis the free stream velocity, dis the sphere
diameter, and µis the dynamic viscosity of the fluid. Less attention has been given to a
sphere that is partially immersed at a fluid-fluid interface, although it is well known that
new drag mechanisms are possible near free surfaces due to the additional physics involved.
Attempts at extrapolation from the single-phase data are thus bound to underpredict the
actual drag on a sphere moving along an interface.
John Scott Russell performed seminal experiments measuring the drag on partially im-
mersed objects by towing ships in a canal with a varying force and measuring their speed
[1]. Reech and Froude continued this work [2, 3], characterizing the new physics at the free
surface by a scaling later referred to as the Froude number (or Reech-Froude number) Fr
∗daniel harris3@brown.edu
2(Fr=U√
gd), where gis the acceleration due to gravity. Motion at or near a free surface
is often associated with an additional drag mechanism commonly referred to as wave drag.
Even in a purely inviscid flow, obstacles create a moving disturbance of the free surface and
generate waves that carry momentum away from the object. This radiated energy of course
comes at a cost, resulting in a reciprocated non-zero drag force on the solid body. Lord
Kelvin [4] was the first to introduce a theoretical model to calculate the wave resistance
using these ideas. In the same context, Lamb calculated the wave drag in a 2D flow on
a submerged cylinder [5] using potential flow theory, which Havelock later extended for a
submerged sphere [6].
Naturally, most of the first studies of wave drag are in the context of ship design [3, 7].
Other recent studies in the area have focused on submarines [8], autonomous marine vehicles
[9], human swimmers [10, 11], and surface dwelling insects [12], to name a few.
Surprisingly, there exists only limited experimental work on geometrically simple objects
moving along an interface. In 1947, Hay considered the drag on towed, vertically oriented,
surface-piercing cylinders as a function of diameter, speed, and submergence depth [13],
which was later expanded upon by Chaplin and Teigan [14]. While a drag increase over the
expected single-phase drag (i.e. in the absence of a free surface) was measured, Chaplin and
Teigan accounted for the measured increase in their experiments with a different physical
mechanism: the free surface rises on the upstream face of the cylinder, resulting in an
additional pressure forcing on the cylinder front that can be approximated from hydrostatics.
The proposed hydrostatic pressure contribution in the upstream region above the quiescent
water line was confirmed by direct pressure measurements along the cylinder length for low
and moderate Fr. The proposed scaling and experimental results both suggested a value
ofFrat which this additional contribution to the drag coefficient should be maximal, with
the numerical value depending on the aspect ratio of the cylinder. They were thus able to
rationalize the increased drag observed at an interface without appealing to the traditional
arguments associated with excitation of propagating water waves.
When considering the effect of surface tension on the free surface dynamics, travelling
waves are predicted to exist only above a minimum wave phase speed. For instance, for the
case of a clean air-water interface, this value is 23 cm/s.
In 1996, Rapha¨ el and DeGennes discussed the capillary-gravity wave drag of a surface
point disturbance [15] and predicted exactly zero wave drag when an object moves slower
3than this minimum wave speed.
Browaeys et al. [16] measured the force on a fixed vertical wire immersed in a rotating
circular channel and observed a sharp increase in drag, consistent with the theoretical pre-
diction of Rapha¨ el and DeGennes [15]. Burghelea and Steinberg [17, 18] performed a similar
experiment with a fixed, millimetric sphere and observe a continuous transition, attributing
the discontinuity observed in Browaeys et al. [16] to experimental noise in the region of
transition. Chevy and Rapha¨ el [19] present a theoretical model which includes the effect of
force variation due the imposition of fixed depth of the travelling surface disturbance, which
causes the wave resistance to vary continuously across the critical wave speed, in qualitative
agreement with Burghelea and Steinberg [17, 18]. Richard and Rapha¨ el [20] introduce vis-
cosity to the model of Rapha¨ el and DeGennes [15] and show that, unlike the inviscid theory,
the wave resistance remains bounded near the critical wave speed, and a small contribution
to the resistance emerges below the critical wave speed. Most recently, Merrer et al. [21]
performed experiments measuring the deceleration of liquid nitrogen droplets sliding along
a liquid bath, which showed good agreement with the classical wave drag theories.
For motion along an interface at small scales, narrowing focus solely on momentum
transfer to surface waves has led to prior paradoxes such as Denny’s paradox for water
striders [22], which was eventually resolved by appealing to other complementary aspects of
the underlying bulk fluid physics [23].
Due to its geometric simplicity, in the present work we focus on the case of a partially
immersed solid sphere in a steady uniform flow. Only a few other works have focused on
this configuration, the most relevant of which we review in what follows.
Burghelea and Steinberg [17, 18] focused on the onset of wave resistance when traversing
the minimum capillary-gravity wave speed with a vertically suspended, surface-piercing mil-
limetric sphere. Only a single submergence depth was considered. They fit a second-order
polynomial to the measured drag below the transition and use the difference in force from
this curve, extrapolated above the critical wave speed, to deduce that the transition to wave
drag is continuous.
Benusiglio et al. [24] measured the drag on fully submerged centimetric spheres con-
nected to a torsion balance with a second, deeply submerged sphere, which allows for direct
measurement of the net drag difference due to the free surface. They observe a maximum
of this difference as a function of speed and show that the additional free surface drag is
4on the order of the fully submerged drag. This measured drag difference is compared with
Havelock’s inviscid gravity wave model and shown to be an order of magnitude smaller than
predicted, with the difference attributed to a saturation of the generated wave amplitude.
Kamoliddinov et al. [25] consider a floating 10 cm sphere with density chosen so that
the static sphere floats at half submergence. A fishing line is attached to the sphere and
used with a weight and pulley system to tow the sphere horizontally with a constant force.
They observe horizontal oscillations for Fr < 0.6, a significant free surface deformation
and gradual descent of the sphere position for 0 .6< Fr < 1.2, and vertical oscillations for
Fr > 1.2. Although the vertical and lateral positions of the sphere are not constrained,
an increased average drag coefficient (above that expected by considering half of a fully
immersed sphere) is observed for all speeds, with a peak near Fr≈1.
Of perhaps most direct similarity to the current study, James et al. [11, 26] studied
rigidly constrained, partially submerged decimetric spheres which are towed across a range
of speeds for four submergence depths. They observe a force maximum as a function of
Frfor each submergence depth and propose a mechanism for this critical Fr, whose value
depends on submergence depth in their study. Their model estimates the run-up height on
the upstream face of the sphere and correlates the critical Frwith the run-up height needed
to overcome the top of the sphere in a so-called Frtransition. These measurements are
performed at significantly larger flow speeds, length scales, and Reynolds numbers than the
present work.
In this work, we present detailed direct force measurements of the drag on a fixed centi-
metric sphere as a function of submergence depth. For this purpose, a custom small-scale
benchtop recirculating water flume is developed and characterized. As the sphere is lowered
into the flow, the drag steadily increases with submergence depth. As it nears complete sub-
mergence, we observe a significant drag enhancement over the fully immersed single-phase
scenario as a result of the deformations of the interface. The additional drag associated
with the free surface in the partially immersed state is well approximated by considering
the contribution of additional unbalanced hydrostatic forces stemming from the asymmetric
surface deformation, in a similar mechanism to that described by Chaplin and Teigan for the
surface piercing cylinder [14]. While the flow speed and sphere radius have only a modest
impact on the drag coefficient CDfor the regime considered, we find that the sphere wetta-
bility plays a significant role in determining the drag and results in new hysteretic behavior.
5FIG. 1. (a) Top view of the custom flume used for drag measurement experiments. (b) Experi-
mental measurements of streamise velocity along the center of the channel. Error bars indicate one
standard deviation of horizontal velocity values. Legend entries indicate the nominal velocity value
(average value over z∈[−1,0] cm) used for computation of experimental drag coefficients. (c) Side
view of sphere, stinger, and force sensor. (d) Top view of standard drag measurement configuration,
which includes contributions from the sphere and stinger. (e) Top view of alternate configuration
used to measure forces on the stinger only in the wake of an independently constrained sphere.
Furthermore, the influence of surface tension on the documented force curves is explored in
a series of companion numerical simulations.
II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
To perform direct measurements of the sphere drag, we designed, constructed, and charac-
terized a custom recirculating water channel consisting of a pump, flow conditioning section,
6parameter symbol definition value
sphere diameter d – 7 .8−12.7 mm
submergence depth h – -10 −27.5 mm
flow speed U – 18 .49−29.52 cm s−1
density (water) ρ – .997 g cm−3
kinematic viscosity (water) ν – .01 cm2s−1
surface tension γ – 72 .2 mN m−1
gravitational acceleration g – 981 cm s2
Reynolds number Re Ud /ν 2070−3750
Froude number Fr U /√gd . 52−.94
Bond number Bo ρgd2/4γ 2.1−5.5
Weber number We ρU2d/γ 6.0−15.3
coefficient of drag CD FD/1
2ρU2π
d
22−
coefficient of drag, free stream CD,0 FD,0/1
2ρU2π
d
220.41−0.43 [27]
TABLE I. Relevant parameter symbols, definitions, and values associated with our experimental
study.
constriction, test section, weir, and a stilling well shown schematically in Figure 1(a). Drag
measurements are performed in the test section downstream of the constriction. A single
sphere is held centered in the channel by a stinger attached in the downstream wake region
of the sphere. The stinger is rigidly mounted to a force sensor fixed to a motorized linear
stage, allowing for fine control of the sphere’s vertical position. Additional details regarding
the flume and force measurements are discussed in the following sections. The range of
dimensional and non-dimensional parameters explored in the present experimental work are
summarized in Table I.
7A. Flume design and characterization
We manufactured a custom recirculating water channel using primarily laser cut acrylic
and 3D-printed parts. A 1/5 hp centrifugal pump (Meziere WPX750) is used to pump water
through a 3D-printed diffuser into a 25 cm wide inlet stilling area. This allows for the flow
to stagnate before passing through an aluminum honeycomb flow conditioner of length 4.0
cm with approximately 1.0 cm wide tubules. After passing through the flow conditioner,
the water enters a converging section which reduces the width from 25 cm to the test sec-
tion width of 5.0 cm, with a constriction ratio chosen as large as possible given our design
constraints [28]. The profile of this section was designed in Rhinocerous 3D software as a
fifth-order polynomial curve enforcing continuity of curvature at the endpoints. This profile
was manufactured using fourteen stacked 5.5 mm thick acrylic sheets compressed together
using stainless steel through bolts. Two 12.7 mm thick acrylic flanges with machined mat-
ing faces and a compression seal are used to connect the converging section with the test
section. Each section is designed with mounting points corresponding to a 25.4 mm grid to
allow for installation on an optical table (Thorlabs Nexus B3648T) with passive vibration
dampers (McMaster-Carr 62075K21) to isolate the flume from external vibrations. The
optical table and dampers are installed on an extruded aluminum frame. The open test
section is manufactured from three 5.5 mm thick acrylic panels with a length of 59 cm and
assembled to form a 5.0 cm wide by 8.0 cm tall interior cross section. At the end of the test
section, laser-cut acrylic weir gates are used to control the water height in the test section.
After spilling over the top of the weir, the water enters a 48 cm deep stilling well. Water
is added to the recirculating flume until the water height in the stilling well reaches just
below the bottom of the weir gate. The water spilling into the stilling well entrains air, and
the dimensions of the stilling well were chosen to allow entrained bubbles to rise to the free
surface without being recirculated. Two laser-cut diffusers are placed below the surface of
the stilling well to diffuse the jet leaving the test section to further subdue air entrainment.
To vary the speed in the flume while keeping the water height in the test section fixed
at 5.0 cm, gates of height 18, 20, 22, 24, and 26 mm are used for the weir, with taller gates
corresponding to lower speeds. Once a particular weir is installed, the variable speed setting
on the pump controller is adjusted until the water height in the test section reaches 5.0 cm.
To characterize the flow profile in the flume, particle image velocimetry (PIV) measure-
8ments were performed in the test section. A dual-head Nd:YAG laser (New Wave Solo-I)
enters a custom sheet optic allowing for adjustment of the sheet thickness and width to
approximately 1 mm and 7.0 cm, respectively. This sheet is reflected through the bottom of
the test section to form a vertical plane aligned with the streamwise direction. PIV image
pairs taken 1.0 ms apart are recorded at a rate of 15 Hz using a Allied Vision Mako U-130B
CMOS camera with 1 MP resolution. Signals for the laser and camera trigger are generated
using custom Arduino code. The delay time between pulses is confirmed independently us-
ing a high-speed camera. PIV images are processed using PIVlab [29] in MATLAB using a
32×32 px interrogation window with 50% overlap. Images are calibrated using a custom
laser-etched calibration plate. We estimate the error contribution to the measured velocity
from the length and time calibration to be less than 1%. Velocity values along the center-
line as a function of depth at the sphere measurement location are reported in Figure 1(b).
These values are aggregated over a 2.4 cm wide area for 13 seconds. The average horizontal
speed taken over the region h∈[−1.0 cm ,0.0 cm] is used as a nominal value for Uand
used for calculations of the mean drag when reporting CD. The extrema of velocity over the
region h∈[−2.75 cm ,0.0 cm], corresponding to the total region traversed by the sphere for
force measurements reported herein, are used in calculating the uncertainty in Uwhen force
measurements are presented as CD. The mean 2D turbulence intensity value taken over the
total region traversed by the sphere for all speeds presented here is 3.1%.
B. Sphere manufacturing and surface treatment
Direct force measurements typically involve a rigid, thin body, referred to as a stinger,
to constrain the forced body. To install the stinger, acrylic spheres are compressed between
two 3D printed drill guides with a thin layer of nitrile rubber to inhibit movement of the
sphere relative to the drill guide. A drill press is used with a drill bit of 0.6 mm diameter to
bore a hole to the center of the sphere. The stinger, consisting of a .62 mm diameter high
strength steel wire, is inserted and held in place with superglue and bent upwards at a right
angle 5 mm away from the surface of the sphere. This bend is positioned in the downstream
wake of the sphere to avoid interactions with the contact line near the top or bottom of the
sphere as shown in Figure 1(c).
To manufacture superhydrophobic spheres, two-part NeverWet coating is applied to
9acrylic spheres as in prior work [30], and the stinger installed using the method described
previously. During the spray coating process, the stinger is masked with Kapton tape to
avoid also coating with NeverWet.
To manufacture superhydrophilic spheres, agar hydrogel (Acros Organics 400405000) is
cast in a 3D-printed mold. The mold is prepared with two sections and two holes, one hole
to insert the stinger, and one hole to inject the liquid agar mixture. Agar powder is weighed,
and boiling distilled water is added and weighed to yield 4%w/w agar to water. This solution
is mixed using an immersion blender. A syringe is filled with the liquid agar, then a needle
is attached to the syringe. After purging air, the liquid mixture is injected into the mold and
left to solidify. The mold is removed after approximately 15 minutes. To better adhere the
stinger to the cast agar, the part of the stinger tip which is embedded in the agar sphere is
wound into a helical shape before casting. A very small seam on the cast sphere at the mold
junction was designed to be co-planar with the stinger (aligned with the free stream flow
direction) to minimize any possible effect on the projected area and contact line. Although
cast agar is a soft elastic material, for a value of the Young’s modulus E= 540 .2 kPa as
reported previously [31], a dynamic pressure estimate corresponding to the maximum flow
velocity presented here yields a strain of less than .01%.
The nominal equilibrium contact angles for the agar, acrylic, and NeverWet coated acrylic
spheres are 15◦,70◦,160◦,respectively as determined from prior direct measurements in the
literature [32–34].
C. Force measurements
To conduct force measurements, a Futek Miniature S-Beam Jr. load cell (FSH03867) force
sensor with a maximum load of 10 grams is used. The stinger from the sphere is connected
to the force sensor by a 3D-printed coupler. The force sensor is connected to the Futek
IAA100 strain gauge amplifier. The amplifier gain is adjusted to increase the sensitivity of
the output and calibrated using a linear fit of 5 test weights independently measured using
a magnetic force balance scale (US Solid USS-DBS5) over a range of 24.5 mN. The output
from the amplifier is input to an ADS1115 16-bit analog to digital converter connected to an
Elegoo Mega R3 with ATMega2560 microcontroller. Force samples are collected at a mean
sample rate of 11 Hz.
10In our testing of many possible stinger configurations, we observed the most significant
significant effect on the drag characteristics when the stinger was attached near the top
or bottom of the sphere. When the stinger is connected to the sphere in the downstream
wake region (Figure 1(c,d)), there is only minimal effect on the flow and free surface. To
directly account for the additional drag introduced by the stinger, we measure the force
on the stinger while disconnected from the sphere but held in place behind a fixed sphere,
(Figure 1(e)) scanning the depth in both descending and ascending directions. A similar
taring procedure and stinger arrangement was proposed by James [11]. We fit a third-order
polynomial to the measured stinger drag and subtract it from the full drag obtained for
the combined sphere and stinger to arrive at the drag values for the solitary sphere. The
measured stinger drag was smaller than 0 .35 mN for all partially immersed cases.
The force sensor is attached to a linear stage actuator (Befenbay BE069-4) with 5 mm
pitch driven by a NEMA 17 stepper motor and driver (HoCenWay DM556). The Accel-
Stepper Arduino library is used to control the sphere’s vertical position for the drag mea-
surements. Force readings are acquired continuously as the sphere moved smoothly from
approximately 10 mm above the surface to 35 mm below the surface and back to the initial
position over approximately 400 seconds total. Force readings are binned within 0.25 mm
increments of height. The variation of the mean force over this distance is significantly
smaller than the observed unsteady force fluctuations.
With the exception of the single trial data presented in Figure 2, each curve presented
here comprises the mean of 5 independent trials. The uncertainty for these reported values
is calculated by the estimator of the standard error of the mean,σ√
N, where σis the cor-
rected standard deviation of the sampled means and Nis the number of trials. It is worth
noting that these uncertainties do not include the unsteady force fluctuations. The standard
deviation of fluctuations at each height for a typical trial is presented in Figure 2.
To calculate the uncertainty for drag forces reported dimensionally (mN), the nonlinear-
ity (±.098 mN), hysteresis ( ±.098 mN), and repeatability ( ±.049 mN) errors from the force
sensor documentation are added in quadrature with the standard error of the mean. To
include the uncertainty of the flume velocity in the force measurements reported as coeffi-
cient of drag CD, we use extrema of the mean velocity from PIV taken over the reported
submersion depths as worst-case estimators of error.
11D. Free-surface measurement
To measure the silhouette of the free surface from the side, a lens (United Scientific
LCV108) and reflecting mirror is placed across the channel from the camera, with an LED
light panel partially covered by colored diffuser paper placed at the focal plane of the lens.
This allows for the bulk of the fluid to appear bright, while refracted rays passing through the
free surface appear dark. The meniscus at the side of the channel also appears dark due to
this effect. Stepping and camera triggering are controlled directly from the Arduino. A Nikon
D850 with Nikon Micro-NIKKOR 105 mm macro lens is used in conjunction with a relay
module connected as remote shutter controller. In the acquired images, the sphere position
is measured using the ‘imfindcircles’ function in MATLAB. The image is binarized with a
threshold of intensity between the bright bulk and dark free surface intensity value. These
binary values are interpolated along a circular contour and filtered to keep large regions.
The transition between dark and light regions along this contour are used to identify the
position of the contact line between the sphere and free surface.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
First we will present a typical trial which demonstrates the main features of the drag
profile as a function of height for the ascending and descending sphere. Next, we present
experimental results that support a proposed mechanism for the observed increased drag.
Then, we proceed to study the influence of wettability, flow speed, and sphere size.
An important reference for all of these cases is that of the free stream drag for single-
phase (fully immersed) uniform flow. The experiments presented here are in the subcritical
range of Reynolds number preceding the onset of the drag crisis ( Re= 2−4×103) where
CD,0is relatively constant ( CD,0≈0.4) and also nearly independent of surface roughness.
The nominal value of CD,0(Re) for fully immersed spheres used in this work is taken from
established empirical results for this canonical problem [27].
We begin with data obtained from a typical single trial (Figure 2) where drag is measured
on an acrylic sphere with d= 12.7 mm, U= 26.2 cm/s as it both descends into and ascends
back out of the flume. The dimensional drag force on the sphere is denoted FD, and the
coefficient of drag as CD. Error bars denote the standard deviation of measured unsteady
12FIG. 2. (a) The measured sphere drag from a typical single trial. Acrylic sphere with d= 12.7 mm,
U= 26.2 cm/s. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the unsteady force fluctuations.
(b) Oblique photos at different submergence depths hfor the descending and ascending case.
Submergence depths of h=−0.2dandh= 1.0drepresent regions of strong hysteresis.
force fluctuations.
The drag attains a maximum value when partially immersed that significantly exceeds
the free stream value. In the case considered here, this drag reaches a value of nearly
three times that of the equivalent fully immersed case. Once the bottom of the sphere
is submerged approximately two diameters below the undisturbed free surface height, the
steady free stream drag value ( CD≈0.4) as expected from the literature is recovered.
Furthermore, there is an apparent hysteresis associated with the direction of passage
through the free surface. The largest measured drag is associated with the descending
sphere – this occurs at the point just prior to the sphere becoming completely wetted. On
the return ascent, the peak drag is lesser, as the sphere is prewetted. This result suggests
that the solid wettability plays an important role at these scales, and these effects are further
13interrogated in Section III B.
There is an additional hysteresis in the region of small submergence depths, with a sharp
drag increase associated with the initial wetting of the sphere and spontaneous capillary
rise. In the ascending case, this small additional drag persists even as the sphere is retracted
above the equilibrium height of the free surface.
The hysteretic effects documented here are not due to contact angle hysteresis, but rather
to a bistability of immersed and partially wetted states near points of topological transition
of the interface (i.e. near h/d= 0,1). A similar hysteresis of the equilibrium free surface
profile can be observed even in the case of no flow for any finite equilibrium contact angle
0< θ < π . This distinction is perhaps most clearly demonstrated in the left-most panels of
Figure 2(b) corresponding to h=−0.2d: for the descending case, the sphere has not made
contact with the water and does not have a contact line.
A. Hydrostatic resistance
Our data presented in Figure 2 demonstrates a substantial increase in drag due to the
presence of the free surface. In this section, we rationalize this additional drag by appealing
to similar hydrostatic arguments as described by Teigen and Chaplin [14] for the case of the
surface-piercing cylinder.
The Froude number characterizes the influence of inertial forces relative to those of grav-
ity. In particular, for a vertical surface of area Aand vertical length scale L, the square of
Fris proportional to the ratio of forces from inertia (1
2ρU2A) to those from hydrostatics
(ρgLA ).
Our experiments are for Fr∼O(1), which suggests that gravitational effects may con-
tribute to our measurements.
Following Chaplin and Teigen [14], we similarly postulate that the asymmetric hydro-
static pressure associated with the disturbed free surface profile contributes significantly to
the observed drag increase. To test this hypothesis, we measure the silhouette of the free
surface from the side using a Schlieren technique (see Section II D). We are able to estimate
the approximate hydrostatic contribution to the total drag by tracking the upstream and
downstream position of the free surface relative to the sphere. The relative height difference
of the upstream and downstream contact points is given as ∆ h. Away from the smallest
14FIG. 3. (a) Plot of the estimated force due to hydrostatic effects FHand the difference in height ∆ h
between the upstream and downstream contact points as measured experimentally. (b) Silhouette
photo of the free surface used to measure ∆ h, with direction of estimated force FHand flow U.
(c) Plot of mean drag for the acrylic sphere ( U= 26 .2 cm/s, d= 12 .7 mm) in the descending
and ascending directions, the estimated baseline form drag FD,0derived from the free-stream drag
scaled by the projected submerged area, estimated hydrostatic force FH, and the sum of FD,0and
FH. (d) The estimated hydrostatic pressure used to calculate the hydrostatic drag contribution
FH.
submergence depths, ∆ htakes an approximately constant value of 2 −3 mm as shown in
Figure 3(a,b) and is consistent for both the ascending and descending cases when partially
immersed. We assume the contact line is defined by the smallest circular path on the sphere
connecting the measured contact points furthest upstream and downstream. From this as-
sumption, we define the hydrostatic pressure on the sphere (Figure 3(d)) by measuring the
vertical distance to the plane containing this contact line, which is then integrated and
projected in the horizontal direction to calculate a hydrostatic drag contribution FH. This
pressure integral is similar to the approach of Havelock, where a prescribed pressure yields
an expression for the surface height predicted using potential flow theory, and the resulting
15integrand is linearized and integrated over the entire surface. In contrast, we directly mea-
sure the free surface, derive the pressure field, and perform a full non-linear integral along
the part of the free surface in contact with the sphere. To estimate the contribution of form
drag on the sphere in the absence of free surface effects, we scale the empirical free stream
drag by the fractional immersed projected area, defined as:
FD,0=1
2CD,0ρU2π d
2!2
χ(h/d)
where χis the fraction of the projected area submerged relative to the quiescent water level
and ranges from 0 (fully removed) to 1 (fully immersed). We additionally assume that CD,0
is independent of χand is equal to the corresponding single-phase value.
The additional estimated drag due to hydrostatics, FH, is on the same order of magni-
tude as the fractionally scaled form drag FD,0. These two forces, along with their sum, are
overlayed in Figure 3 with the mean drag measured experimentally for the equivalent con-
ditions (acrylic sphere, d= 12.7 mm, U= 26.2 cm/s) with very good agreement. Although
the excellent agreement may be fortuitous in this case given the number of assumptions
required in the prediction, it is nevertheless evident that the hydrostatic contribution is a
viable dominant mechanism for the observed drag increase in our partially immersed exper-
iments. Although more work across operating conditions is needed to validate the simple
model proposed herein, we expect that hydrostatic forces due to asymmetric free-surface-
solid interactions are relevant in more general scenarios whenever Fr∼O(1). As later
demonstrated in Section III C, the measured drag increase does not change significantly
whether one is above or below the critical wave speed, suggesting that wave drag due to
radiated wave energy is not the dominant free-surface drag mechanism in our experiments.
B. Influence of solid wettability
We tested the effect of solid wettability on the measured drag at all depths by performing
experiments on otherwise identical spheres with three different equilibrium contact angles:
agar (15◦), acrylic (70◦) and NeverWet coated acrylic (160◦). The results from the three cases
are overlaid in Figure 4. The drag curves demonstrate the significant influence of wettability
on the drag characteristics near the peak: for the superhydrophilic (agar) case, the large force
peak associated with the incomplete wetting in the acrylic case is absent, and the hysteretic
16FIG. 4. (a) Comparison of mean drag for three otherwise identical conditions ( d= 12 .7 mm,
U= 26.2 cm/s), varying only the equilibrium contact angle ( θ= 15◦,70◦,160◦). Inset in lower
right shows estimated uncertainty for each case. (b) Photos for the three spheres at h= 1.0dfor
the descending case and h= 0.0dfor the ascending case.
effect in this region is subdued. On the contrary, the superhydrophobic (NeverWet) case
exhibits a much larger force maximum, corresponding to the delayed transition to full wetting
which now occurs at a larger submergence depth. It is important to note that, as discussed
in the previous section, this significant hysteretic effect is not due to contact line hysteresis,
which is very small for this coating [34]. Typically, superhydrophobic coatings are associated
with drag reduction , however in this case, the high contact angle inhibits complete wetting
and increases the drag substantially near full submergence. For superhydrophilic spheres
17at submergence depths near h= 1.0d, their promotion of wetting causes a smaller overall
disturbance of the free surface and a smaller resulting drag.
For measurements in the region of small submersion depths, the superhydrophobic (Nev-
erWet) sphere does not show a sharp drag increase associated with spontaneous wetting
as in the acrylic and agar cases, and the increased drag associated with wetting when the
sphere is retracted above the equilibrium water height is similarly absent. For superhy-
drophobic spheres at small submergence depths, their reluctance to wet causes a smaller
overall disturbance of the free surface and a smaller resulting drag.
In summary, to reduce drag when the sphere is near full submergence, it is beneficial to
promote wetting. To reduce drag for small submersion depths, one should inhibit wetting.
Ultimately for a sphere at the interface to have minimal drag and hysteresis over all sub-
mergence depths, these results suggest a hybrid solution: a superhydrophobic bottom and
superhydrophilic top.
C. Influence of flow speed
Next we move to explore the influence of flow speed on the drag force within the range
of our flume’s capability. For an acrylic sphere with d= 12.7 mm, we measured the drag
at 5 different speeds Uranging from 18.5-29.5 cm/s, corresponding to Re= 2.3−3.7×103
(CD,0≈0.4) and Fr=.52−.84. The results, plotted in Figure 5, nearly collapse under
inertial rescaling. The main features initially documented in Figure 2 are robust across
the different speeds tested, including a force maximum that significantly exceeds the fully
immersed free stream drag and significant hysteretic effects near the peak. One trend,
however, is the evolution of the critical submergence depth for which full wetting occurs
in the descending case, again associated with a sharp decrease in the measured drag. In
particular, the faster flows (higher Fr) allow for complete wetting to occur at a smaller
submergence depth. For the slower flow cases, this transition occurs for h > d and tends
to the corresponding wetting transition in the case of no flow as indicated by the vertical
dashed lines in Figure 5. The exact value it tends to is expected to be strongly associated
with the solid wettability.
Furthermore, we observe a similar increase in drag coefficient over the range of speeds
considered here which spans the critical minimum wavespeed for capillary-gravity waves
18FIG. 5. Mean drag for the acrylic sphere ( d= 12 .7 mm) at five speeds ( U=
18.5,20.8,23.7,26.2,29.5 cm/s) shown (a) dimensionally and (b) nondimensionally. Inset in lower
right shows mean estimated uncertainty. The vertical dashed lines indicate the measured depth at
which an equivalent descending sphere in the absence of flow undergoes complete immersion.
(23 cm/s), suggesting the onset of wave radiation as might be predicted by pure potential
flow arguments is not a significant contributor to the excess drag measured in the present
experiments.
D. Influence of sphere diameter
Lastly, we investigate the role of sphere diameter on the observed drag characteristics.
Again, the range tested herein is only modest due to the constraints of the experimental
platform. Significantly smaller spheres would require a more accurate force sensor, whereas
significantly larger spheres would require a larger test section to avoid blockage effects. For a
fixed flow speed U= 26.2 cm/s, we studied the drag on acrylic spheres of diameters 7.9 mm,
10 mm, and 12.7 mm, corresponding to Re= 2.1−3.3×103(CD,0≈0.4) and Fr=.74−.94.
The drag curves again collapse reasonably well when non-dimensionalized under inertial
scaling. Once again, as initially observed in Figure 2, the maximum force is significantly
larger than the free stream drag, and hysteretic effects cause significant differences in the
19FIG. 6. Mean drag for acrylic spheres of three different sizes ( U= 26.2 cm/s, d= 7.9,10.0,12.7 mm)
(a) dimensionally and (b) nondimensionally. Inset in lower right shows mean estimated uncertainty.
measured drag at small submergence depths and near the force peak. Some deviations do
occur in the hysteretic regions between cases, but the uncertainty from the force sensor in
this study is relatively large in comparison to the observed differences in drag.
IV. NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS
To complement the experiments, we perform a series of numerical simulations of free
surface flow past a sphere at various immersion depths. The numerical study focuses on the
influence of surface tension which is difficult to control as an independent parameter in the
experiment.
A. Numerical methods
The intermediate energies and length scales considered in this work will lead to the co-
existence of laminar, transitional, and turbulent flow regions in the domain of interest. For
this reason, we adopt a variational multiscale (VMS) formulation [35] of fluid dynamics,
which was shown to possess excellent accuracy and stability characteristics across a wide
20FIG. 7. (a) Element distribution in the mesh where the submergence depth is h= 0.625d. The
outer box uses elements of size 5.0 mm where as the elements around the sphere and free surface
are refined for better resolution to 0.5 mm and 2.0 mm, respectively. Numerical results for (b)
drag and (c) upstream/downstream height difference in a 10 ×10 cm cross section compared with
experimental results for an acrylic sphere ( U= 26.2 cm/s, d= 12.7 mm , γ= 72.2 mN /m)
range of Reynolds numbers. For higher Reynolds number flows, VMS was shown to behave
similarly to Large-Eddy Simulation (LES) models of turbulence, but without the reliance on
empirical eddy viscosities that do not perform well in transitional flows. The VMS makes
use of a weak form of the Navier–Stokes equations and may be discretized with Finite
Element [36–42] or Isogeometric Analysis methods [43–45]. To avoid costly boundary-layer
resolution typically required for LES computations, the VMS formulation is augmented with
weakly-enforced no-slip boundary conditions [46, 47], which may be thought of as a near-wall
model.
The level-set approach [48, 49] is adopted to track the evolution of the free surface. The
aerodynamics and hydrodynamics are governed by the Navier-Stokes equations of incom-
21pressible two-fluid flow, in which the fluid density and viscosity are evaluated with the aid of
a level-set function whose zero level is passively convected with the flow and used to define
the air-water interface. In addition, we utilize a geometry-based re-distancing technique to
maintain the signed-distance property of the level-set field [50]. The free-surface framework
is augmented to include surface tension using a balanced-force surface tension model [51, 52].
The combined free-surface flow framework was extensively validated in [53–58] for similar
problems considered in this paper and is employed here to carry out the computations that
accompany the experiments presented in the prior sections.
The simulations use U= 26 .2 cm /s and d= 12 .7 mm. Ten immersion depths are
investigated (0 .25d, 0.5d, 0.625d, 0.75d, 0.875d,d, 1.125d, 1.25d, 1.5d, and 2 .5d). The
simulated domain is a box of 15 cm ×10 cm ×15 cm, and the sphere is placed 4 cm
downstream from the inlet. The depth of the water phase is 10 cm, leading to a 10 cm ×10 cm
cross-section.
The simulations utilize unstructured linear tetrahedral elements. Two additional refine-
ment boxes are generated to capture the wake behind the sphere and free surface deforma-
tion. Element sizes are 0.5 mm around the sphere, 2.0 mm near the free surface, and 5.0
mm in the outer box. Figure 7 (a) presents a snapshot of the mesh in the center plane with
a submergence depth of h= 0.625d. In the simulations, we apply a uniform inflow velocity
U= 26 .2 cm/s at the inlet and no penetration boundary condition on the lateral walls.
Hydrostatic equilibrium pressure is applied at the outlet. In addition to the physical surface
tension coefficient of γ= 72.2 mN/m, we also conduct simulations with γ= 36.1 mN/m,
and 0 mN/m. The time step size is set to 5 ×10−4s for all of the simulations. We simulate
all of the cases until the results reach a statistically stationary stage. The data in the fully
developed stage is used to obtain the mean drag coefficients from the simulation.
B. Results
To assess the influence of any possible blockage effects in our experiment, we first run
simulations at two submergence depths ( h= 0.5dand 1 .0d) using a smaller 5 cm ×5 cm
inlet flow cross-section as in the experiment. These results are compared with those of
the 10 cm ×10 cm cross-section simulations in Table II. The limited discrepancy suggests
any blockage effects are negligible. Figure 7(b) compares the experimental and numerical
22FIG. 8. (a) Numerical results for drag on a sphere of diameter d= 12.7 mm in uniform inlet
flow with speed U= 26.2 cm/s near a free surface with varying surface tension coefficient ( γ=
72.2,36.1,0.0 mN /m). Time-averaged (b) free surface and surface flow speed speed and (c)
contact line position under the various surface tensions in a partially immersed case corresponding
to submergence depth h= 0.625d.
Depth ( h)10 cm ×10 cm 5 cm×5 cm
0.5d 0.3673 0.3749
d 0.8971 0.8847
TABLE II. Time-averaged drag coefficients comparison between 5 cm ×5 cm and 10 cm ×10 cm
flow inlet cross sections at two submergence depths for sphere diameter d= 12.7 mm, flow speed
U= 26 .2 cm/s, and surface tension γ= 72 .2 mN /m). The depth h= 0.5dcorresponds to a
partially immersed case whereas the depth h=dcorresponds to a fully immersed case.
23prediction of drag coefficients using the physical surface tension coefficient 72 .2 mN/m. The
results show excellent agreement for the partially immersed cases and similarly predict a
force peak that can significantly exceed the nominal free stream value. Near the peak, the
numerical prediction of the drag peak is closer to the ascending cases which were shown in
experiment to be significantly less influenced by the solid wettability. The peak happens
approximately when the water moves fully across spheres from above. In the simulation,
once the water reaches the downstream side of the sphere, it will immediately merge into the
bulk flow. Due to the lack of contact line models in the present simulation, the water does
not have enough support to resist gravity, which is similar to the phenomenon observed
in experiments for the superhydrophilic sphere that also minimally impedes contact line
progression. In that case, the descending and ascending cases are nearly indistinguishable
near the peak. Therefore, the simulated prediction of the drag peak is closer to that of
the ascending cases. For the fully submerged cases, the measured drag is greater than the
numerical one likely due to the presence of weak free stream turbulence in experiments. The
drag of a fully submerged sphere mainly results from low-pressure regions related to flow
separation. The remaining turbulence in the experimental inflow triggers flow separation
and increases the low-pressure area behind the spheres. The different contributions to the
drag between the partially and fully immersed cases will be further studied in what follows.
Figure 7(c) shows the difference in height between the upstream and downstream con-
tact points, comparing the experimental measurements (also shown in Figure 3(a)) and the
computational results. The height difference ∆ his plotted as a function of the submergence
depth h. To compute ∆ h, the time-averaged free surface profile is projected onto the tank
side surface in the span-wise direction and the resulting curve is intersected with the circle
of diameter dthat defines the silhouette of the sphere. The intersection points upstream
and downstream of the sphere define the positions of the contact points and the difference
between the two positions defines ∆ h. As can be observed from the figure, the experimental
and computational results match very well for lower submergence depths. However, higher
submergence depths give more discrepancy in the results, which is also likely attributable to
the lack of explicit modeling of the contact line in the free-surface flow simulations. While
the current modeling approach can accurately predict the drag force increase relative to the
free-stream case, predicting the finer-scale features of the free surface near the solid object
will require the corresponding enhancements in the modeling framework, which we plan to
24undertake in the future.
Figure 8(a) presents the drag coefficient versus submersion depth with three surface ten-
sion coefficients. The drag coefficient of partially submerged spheres is negatively correlated
with surface tension while positively correlated for the fully submerged case. When the
sphere is exposed to the air, the air phase has a minimal contribution to the drag compared
to the water due to its low density. Surface tension affects the additional drag by modu-
lating the shape of the free surface and the water height difference between the front and
back of the sphere. The strength of surface tension represents the capability of generally
reducing deformations of the air-water interface. Figure 8(b) depicts the mean free surface
deformation under different surface tensions for a partially immersed case ( h= 0.625d).
Apart from small wrinkles, the presence of surface tension suppresses water climbing at the
upstream side and dropping at the downstream side, thus contributing to a lower drag as
might be anticipated by the hydrostatic mechanism described in Section III A. Figure 8(c),
which shows where the time-averaged interface contacts the sphere, further validates this
point.
Figure 9 shows how surface tension influences the free surface shape and pressure distri-
bution in a case where the spheres are fully immersed ( h= 1.0d). As mentioned previously,
we attribute the drag of a fully immersed sphere primarily to form drag which is related
to flow separation. The flattening of the surface behind the sphere due to surface tension
in this case leads to an earlier separation point, and thus a larger suction region on the
downstream side. Increased surface tension thus leads to an increased drag in this regime,
in contrast to the partially immersed regime where the trend is opposite.
V. DISCUSSION
Although conceptually similar to drag on a sphere in single-phase flow, the significant
surface deformations introduced by an obstacle penetrating a free surface preclude any
attempt at direct extrapolation from single-phase drag measurements. The subtle interplay
between the presence of an obstacle, its concomitant disturbance in the fluid flow, and the
resulting asymmetric free surface play an essential role in determining the ultimate drag
experienced by the body.
To the knowledge of the authors, there is only one prior work that has studied the drag
25FIG. 9. The time-averaged free surface and pressure distribution in the water phase along the
sphere’s central plane under various surface tension with submergence depth h=d. From left to
right, γ= 0, 36 .1, and 72 .2 mN /m, respectively.
on a fixed, surface-piercing sphere as a function of depth. James [11] explored the drag
on towed, fixed spheres of diameters d= 12.5 and 22 .5 cm, for four submergence depths
ofh=.25d, .40d, .50d,and.75d., for U= 60−370 cm/s. Due to the presence of the free
surface, they observe a non-monotonic drag enhancement, in one case reaching a factor of
four times the free stream drag. They observe a drag maximum as a function of Frand a
corresponding decrease in drag occurring when the upstream rise height reaches the top of
the sphere. In particular, they propose a similar model as Chaplin and Teigan [14], where
the rise height scales as Fr2, and successfully fit experimental observations of this observed
Froude transition with this scaling after applying a correction factor.
Our experiments exhibit a similar Froude transition corresponding to the observed force
maximum just prior to full immersion. However, the transition as documented here is
strongly hysteretic and can occur for submergence depths larger than 1 .0ddue to the signif-
icance of solid wettability in our case. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that an appre-
ciable drag enhancement is present regardless of whether one operates above or below the
minimum capillary-gravity wave speed.
The enhanced drag associated with the presence of the free surface and its sensitive
dependence on immersion depth and wettability will be useful in informing future designs of
interfacial “micro”-robots [59–62] and increasing our understanding of propulsion and drag
of surface-dwelling insects [63]. It may also prove insightful to other applications where
particles obliquely impact a free surface at shallow angles, as in the case of particulate
capture by raindrops [64] or in natural settings where surface-piercing objects appear, such
26as sediment transport in shallow streams [65] and other free-surface particulate flows [66, 67].
In this work, we have shown that the additional drag can be accounted for by considering
the asymmetric hydrostatic force contribution resulting from the difference in fluid height
between the upstream and downstream side of the sphere. This run-up effect was studied by
Hay [13] and later Chaplin and Teigan [14] in the context of submerged cylinders. The height
of the run-up relative to the quiescent water level, hrise, can be estimated from Bernoulli’s
equation as
hrise/d=1
2Fr2.
They directly measured the run-up height as a function of Re/Fr , which represents the ratio
of gravitational forces to viscous forces, and demonstrate that the Fr2scaling is recovered
in the limit of high Re/Fr . To relate this to the excess force on the cylinder, Chaplin and
Teigan proposed a model similar to ours which estimates the hydrostatic pressure on the
upstream face of the cylinder due to run-up. The additional hydrostatic contribution is
only considered above the quiescent water line however. They use this pressure estimate
to predict an additional contribution to the drag coefficient that should also scale like Fr2
for low Fr. All of their experiments were performed above the minimum capillary-gravity
wave speed and at large scales where capillarity and solid wettability are less likely to play
a significant role.
A number of previous related studies have presented experiments and theory focused
specifically on the onset of wave drag [15–18, 21, 68, 69] above the minimum capillary-
gravity wave speed as predicted by potential flow arguments. One might thus be tempted
to believe that free surface effects are unlikely to play a significant role in determining the
drag below such speeds. While Richard et al. [20] predict some drag contribution below
the threshold when weak viscous effects are introduced, a substantial drag increase is still
anticipated when crossing the threshold. While our results do not intend to rule out such
a contribution to the total drag, they do demonstrate that, in practice, interfacial drag
mechanisms are highly significant independent of whether one operates below or above this
theoretical threshold.
To conclude, we have investigated the drag on a partially immersed centimetric sphere
moving along an air-water interface. Our direct measurements and computational predic-
tions demonstrate a significant drag increase over the equivalent single-phase flow case. A
27simple model is proposed to estimate the extra drag from hydrostatics using the measured
difference in fluid height between the upstream and downstream as input. While flow speed
and sphere size have a relatively minor influence on the drag coefficients for the regime
studied herein, solid wettability is shown to play a relatively pronounced role at such small
scales. While this work has primarily focused on the influence of submergence depth and
surface wettability, in future work we plan to significantly broaden the parameter space
considered here in order to more systematically test the proposed model and better charac-
terize the sphere drag and Froude crisis over a wider range of Reynolds, Froude, and Bond
numbers. Additionally, vertical forces (lift) should be considered in future work, which are
highly relevant to bodies that freely float or self-propel at the interface. Lastly, the principal
phenomena revealed here will be explored for classes of more general body geometries and
arrays of multiple bodies.
Data presented in this work is publicly available at the following url: https://github.
com/harrislab-brown/FreeSurfaceSphereDrag .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported through the ONR Grant No. N00014-21-1-2670. The authors
wish to thank Drs. Jesse Belden, Nathan Speirs, George Loubimov, and Kristina Kamensky
of the Naval Undersea Warfare Center (NUWC), Newport for providing valuable suggestions
and feedback for this research. R.H., E.S., and D.M.H. additionally thank Prof. Kenny
Breuer for use of the laser to perform the flume characterization PIV measurements.
[1] J. S. Russell, Experimental researches into the laws of certain hydrodynamical phenomena that
accompany the motion of floating bodies..., Earth and Environmental Science Transactions of
The Royal Society of Edinburgh 14(1839).
[2] F. Reech, Cours de m´ ecanique d’apr` es la nature g´ en´ eralement flexible et ´ elastique des corps...
(Carilian-Goeury et Vor Dalmont, 1852).
[3] W. Froude, On experiments upon the effect produced on the wave making resistance of ships
by length of parallel middle body, Transactions of the Institute of Naval Architects 18(1887).
28[4] W. Thomson, On ship waves, Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers 38
(1887).
[5] H. Lamb, On some cases of wave-motion on deep water, Annali di Matematica Pura ed Ap-
plicata 21(1913).
[6] T. H. Havelock, Some cases of wave motion due to a submerged obstacle, Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London, Series A 93(1917).
[7] J. N. Newman, Marine hydrodynamics (The MIT press, 1977).
[8] E. Dawson, An investigation into the effects of submergence depth, speed and hull length-
to-diameter ratio on the near surface operation of conventional submarines , Ph.D. thesis,
University of Tasmania (2014).
[9] P. Spino and K. I. Matveev, Development and testing of unmanned semi-submersible vehicle,
Unmanned Systems 11(2022).
[10] R. Vennell, D. Pease, and B. Wilson, Wave drag on human swimmers, Journal of Biomechanics
39(2006).
[11] M. C. James, On the search to reduce a swimmer’s resistance: Surface-piercing bluff bodies
over the critical Re-Fr range , Ph.D. thesis, Universty of Southampton (2016).
[12] L. Jami, G. T. Gustafson, T. Steinmann, M. Pi˜ neirua, and J. Casas, Overcoming drag at the
water-air interface constrains body size in whirligig beetles, Fluids 6(2021).
[13] A. Hay, Flow about semi-submerged cylinders of finite length, Princeton University (1947).
[14] J. R. Chaplin and P. Teigen, Steady flow past a vertical surface-piercing circular cylinder,
Journal of Fluids and Structures 18(2003).
[15] E. Rapha¨ el and P.-G. de Gennes, Capillary gravity waves caused by a moving disturbance:
Wave resistance, Physical Review E 53(1996).
[16] J. Browaeys, J.-C. Bacri, R. Perzynski, and M. Shliomis, Capillary-gravity wave resistance in
ordinary and magnetic fluids, Europhysics Letters 53(2001).
[17] T. Burghelea and V. Steinberg, Onset of wave drag due to generation of capillary-gravity
waves by a moving object as a critical phenomenon, Physical Review Letters 86(2001).
[18] T. Burghelea and V. Steinberg, Wave drag due to generation of capillary-gravity surface waves,
Physical Review E 66(2002).
[19] F. Chevy and E. Rapha¨ el, Capillary gravity waves: A “fixed-depth” analysis, Europhysics
Letters 61(2003).
29[20] D. Richard and E. Raphael, Capillary-gravity waves: The effect of viscosity on the wave
resistance, Europhysics Letters 48(1999).
[21] M. L. Merrer, C. Clanet, D. Qu´ er´ e, ´Elie Rapha¨ el, and F. Chevy, Wave drag on floating bodies,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108(2011).
[22] M. Denny, Air and water: the biology and physics of life’s media (Princeton University Press,
1993).
[23] D. L. Hu, B. Chan, and J. W. Bush, The hydrodynamics of water strider locomotion, Nature
424(2003).
[24] A. Benusiglio, F. Chevy, ´E. Rapha¨ el, and C. Clanet, Wave drag on a submerged sphere,
Physics of Fluids 27(2015).
[25] F. Kamoliddinov, I. U. Vakarelski, and S. T. Thoroddsen, Hydrodynamic regimes and drag
on horizontally pulled floating spheres, Physics of Fluids 33(2021), 093308.
[26] M. James, A. Forrester, D. Hudson, D. Taunton, and S. Turnock, Experimental study of the
transitional flow of a sphere located at the free surface, in 9th International Workshop on Ship
and Marine Hydrodynamics (2015).
[27] F. A. Morrison, An introduction to fluid mechanics (Cambridge University Press, 2013).
[28] J. H. Bell and R. D. Mehta, Contraction design for small low-speed wind tunnels, NASA
Technical Report (1988).
[29] W. Thielicke and R. Sonntag, Particle image velocimetry for MATLAB: Accuracy and en-
hanced algorithms in PIVlab, Journal of Open Research Software 9(2021).
[30] C. A. Galeano-Rios, R. Cimpeanu, I. A. Bauman, A. MacEwen, P. A. Milewski, and D. M.
Harris, Capillary-scale solid rebounds: experiments, modelling and simulations, Journal of
Fluid Mechanics 912, A17 (2021).
[31] A. Ed-Daoui, M. Benelmostafa, and M. Dahmani, Study of the viscoelastic properties of the
agarose gel, Materials Today: Proceedings 13, 746 (2019).
[32] J. Andersson, A. Str¨ om, T. Geb¨ ack, and A. Larsson, Dynamics of capillary transport in semi-
solid channels, Soft Matter 13(2017).
[33] G. B. F. Osti, F. G. Wolf, and P. C. Philippi, Spreading of liquid drops on acrylic surfaces, in
20th International Congress of Mechanical Engineering (2009).
[34] P. B. Weisensee, J. Ma, Y. H. Shin, J. Tian, Y. Chang, W. P. King, and N. Miljkovic, Droplet
impact on vibrating superhydrophobic surfaces, Physical Review Fluids 2(2017).
30[35] Y. Bazilevs, V. Calo, J. Cottrell, T. Hughes, A. Reali, and G. Scovazzi, Variational multi-
scale residual-based turbulence modeling for large eddy simulation of incompressible flows,
Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering 197, 173 (2007).
[36] M.-C. Hsu, I. Akkerman, and Y. Bazilevs, Wind turbine aerodynamics using ALE–VMS:
Validation and the role of weakly enforced boundary conditions, Computational Mechanics
50, 499 (2012).
[37] M.-C. Hsu, I. Akkerman, and Y. Bazilevs, Finite element simulation of wind turbine aerody-
namics: validation study using NREL Phase VI experiment, Wind Energy 17, 461 (2014).
[38] Y. Bazilevs, J. Yan, M. De Stadler, and S. Sarkar, Computation of the flow over a sphere
at re= 3700: A comparison of uniform and turbulent inflow conditions, Journal of Applied
Mechanics 81, 121003 (2014).
[39] A. Pal and S. Gohari, ALE–VMS formulation for stratified turbulent incompressible flows
with applications, Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences 25, 2349 (2015).
[40] F. Xu, D. Schillinger, D. Kamensky, V. Varduhn, C. Wang, and M.-C. Hsu, The tetrahedral
finite cell method for fluids: Immersogeometric analysis of turbulent flow around complex
geometries, Computers & Fluids 141, 135 (2016).
[41] J. Yan, A. Korobenko, A. Tejada-Martinez, and R. Golshan, A new variational multiscale
formulation for stratified incompressible turbulent flows, Computers & Fluids 158, 150 (2017).
[42] Z. Zhao and J. Yan, Enriched immersed boundary method (EIBM) for interface-coupled multi-
physics and applications to convective conjugate heat transfer, Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering 401, 115667 (2022).
[43] M.-C. Hsu, I. Akkerman, and Y. Bazilevs, High-performance computing of wind turbine aero-
dynamics using isogeometric analysis, Computers & Fluids 49, 93 (2011).
[44] T. M. van Opstal, J. Yan, C. Coley, J. A. Evans, T. Kvamsdal, and Y. Bazilevs, Isogeometric
divergence-conforming variational multiscale formulation of incompressible turbulent flows,
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 316, 859 (2017).
[45] Y. Bazilevs, I. Akkerman, and D. Benson, Isogeometric analysis of Lagrangian hydrodynamics,
Journal of Computational Physics 243, 224 (2013).
[46] Y. Bazilevs, C. Michler, and V. Calo, Weak Dirichlet boundary conditions for wall-bounded
turbulent flows, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 196, 4853 (2007).
[47] Y. Bazilevs and T. J. R. Hughes, Weak imposition of Dirichlet boundary conditions in fluid
31mechanics, Computers & Fluids 36, 12 (2007).
[48] M. Sussman, P. Smereka, and S. Osher, A level set approach for computing solutions to
incompressible two-phase flow, Journal of Computational physics 114, 146 (1994).
[49] S. Osher and J. A. Sethian, Fronts propagating with curvature-dependent speed: algorithms
based on Hamilton-Jacobi formulations, Journal of Computational Physics 79, 12 (1988).
[50] Q. Zhu and J. Yan, A mixed interface-capturing/interface-tracking formulation for thermal
multi-phase flows with emphasis on metal additive manufacturing processes, Computer Meth-
ods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 383, 113910 (2021).
[51] J. U. Brackbill, D. B. Kothe, and C. Zemach, A continuum method for modeling surface
tension, Journal of computational physics 100, 335 (1992).
[52] Z. Zhao and J. Yan, Variational multi-scale modeling of interfacial flows with a balanced-force
surface tension model, Mechanics Research Communications 112, 103608 (2021).
[53] I. Akkerman and Y. Bazilevs, Isogeometric analysis of free-surface flow, Journal of Computa-
tional Physics 230, 4137 (2011).
[54] J. Yan, A. Korobenko, X. Deng, and Y. Bazilevs, Computational free-surface fluid–structure
interaction with application to floating offshore wind turbines, Computers & Fluids 141, 155
(2016).
[55] J. Yan, X. Deng, A. Korobenko, and Y. Bazilevs, Free-surface flow modeling and simulation
of horizontal-axis tidal-stream turbines, Computers & Fluids 158, 157 (2017).
[56] J. Yan, W. Yan, S. Lin, and G. Wagner, A fully coupled finite element formulation for liquid–
solid–gas thermo-fluid flow with melting and solidification, Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering 336, 444 (2018).
[57] J. Yan, S. Lin, and Y. Bazilevs, Isogeometric analysis of multi-phase flows with surface tension
and with application to dynamics of rising bubbles, Computers & Fluids 179, 777 (2019).
[58] Q. Zhu, F. Xu, S. Xu, M.-C. Hsu, and J. Yan, An immersogeometric formulation for free-
surface flows with application to marine engineering problems, Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering 361, 112748 (2020).
[59] J. Yuan and S. K. Cho, Bio-inspired micro/mini propulsion at air-water interface: a review,
Journal of Mechanical Science and Technology 26(2012).
[60] Y. Chen, N. Doshi, B. Goldberg, H. Wang, and R. J. Wood, Controllable water surface
to underwater transition through electrowetting in a hybrid terrestrial-aquatic microrobot,
32Nature Communications 9(2018).
[61] M. L. Timm, S. J. Kang, J. P. Rothstein, and H. Masoud, A remotely controlled marangoni
surfer, Bioinspiration & Biomimetics 16(2021).
[62] E. Rhee, R. Hunt, S. J. Thomson, and D. M. Harris, Surferbot: a wave-propelled aquatic
vibrobot, Bioinspiration & Biomimetics 17(2022).
[63] J. W. Bush and D. L. Hu, Walking on water: biolocomotion at the interface, Annual Review
of Fluid Mechanics 38(2006).
[64] N. B. Speirs, J. L. Belden, and A. M. Hellum, The capture of airborne particulates by rain,
Journal of Fluid Mechanics 958(2023).
[65] M. P. Lamb, F. Brun, and B. M. Fuller, Direct measurements of lift and drag on shallowly
submerged cobbles in steep streams: Implications for flow resistance and sediment transport,
Water Resources Research 53(2017).
[66] A. Singh, A. Nir, and R. Semiat, Free-surface flow of concentrated suspensions, International
Journal of Multiphase Flow 32(2006).
[67] Z. Zhou, P. M. Vlahovska, and M. J. Miksis, Drag force on spherical particles trapped at a
liquid interface, Physical Review Fluids 7(2022).
[68] C.-T. Pham, C. Nore, and M.- ´E. Brachet, Critical speed for capillary-gravity surface flows in
the dispersive shallow water limit, Physics of Fluids 17(2005).
[69] M. Benzaquen, F. Chevy, and ´E. Rapha¨ el, Wave resistance for capillary gravity waves: finite-
size effects, Europhysics Letters 96(2011).
33