arXiv:2305.06834v1  [gr-qc]  11 May 2023Black hole entropy contributions from Euclidean cores
Jens Boos∗
High Energy Theory Group, Department of Physics, William & M ary
Williamsburg, VA 23187-8795, United States
May 11, 2023
Abstract
The entropy of a Schwarzschild black hole, as computed via th e semiclassical Euclidean
path integral in a stationary phase approximation, is deter mined not by the on-shell value of
the action (which vanishes), but by the Gibbons–Hawking–Yo rk boundary term evaluated on
a suitable hypersurface, which can be chosen arbitrarily fa r away from the horizon. For this
reason, the black hole singularity seemingly has no inﬂuenc e on the Bekenstein–Hawking area
law. In this Essay we estimate how a regular black hole core, d eep inside a Euclidean black
hole of mass Mand generated via a UV regulator length scale ℓ >0, aﬀects the black hole en-
tropy. The contributions are suppressed by factors of ℓ/(2GM); demanding exact agreement
with the area law as well as a self-consistent ﬁrst law of blac k hole thermodynamics at all
orders, however, demands that these contributions vanish i dentically via uniformly bounded
curvature. This links the limiting curvature hypothesis to black hole thermodynamics.
ﬁle: euclidean-cores-v5.tex, May 11, 2023, jb
Essay written for the Gravity Research Foundation 2023 Awar ds for Essays on Gravitation;
awarded an Honorable Mention.
∗E-mail:jboos@wm.edu
11 Introduction
In their seminal 1976 paper, Gibbons and Hawking [ 1] demonstrated how to link the semiclassical
thermodynamics of vacuum black holes to the on-shell value of the g ravitational action. Nowadays,
more than 300 papers per year are devoted to the subject of blac k hole thermodynamics. The
thermodynamic behavior of black holes is rich, and often surprising, and has given rise to entirely
new subdisciplines, such as “black hole chemistry” [ 2]. The fact that black holes radiate, and
eventually evaporate completely, is also important for the informat ion loss problem of black holes.
What is the ﬁnal stage of black hole evaporation? And can it help us to address fundamental
questions in quantum gravity?
In this Essay, we would like to ask (and tentatively answer) a simple qu estion: how does the
black hole interior contribute to black hole thermodynamics, and, in p articular, to the black hole
entropy? After all, black holes in Einstein gravity contain essential s ingularities of unbounded
gravitational ﬁelds, but thermodynamics is seemingly unfazed by th ose strong ﬁelds. Conversely,
considerable eﬀort has been devoted to the resolution of classical black hole singularities both from
basic principles as well as in proposed non-singular black hole geometr ies. The study of a latter
has become an active ﬁeld of research [ 3], but the inherent ambiguity of regularizing procedures
has made it diﬃcult to favor one approach over the other.
Aswe will show, ahandful ofreasonably simple assumptions aboutth eblack holeinterior isenough
to estimate the general form of black hole entropy corrections. M oreover, as we will see, at leading
order consistent thermodynamics is compatible with a mass-depend ent, “dressed” regulator
ℓ∼ℓ2
Pl
2GM, (1)
whereMis the mass of the black hole under consideration. These are our ass umptions:
A. In a suitable extension of General Relativity, there exists a vacu um black hole solution that
features a regular, horizonless Euclidean core.
B. For astrophysical black holes described by such metrics, their H awking temperature and
near-horizon geometry are essentially identical to those of Gener al Relativity.
C. In these solutions, the new physics are parametrized via a length scaleℓ >0, which may
or may not coincide with the Planck scale ℓPl. The presence of this length scale regulates
divergences encountered in General Relativity, and for ℓ→0 we recover General Relativity.
With the assumptions stated, let us now explore what we can estimat e based on them. We will
work in units where /planckover2pi1=c=kB= 1, make use of the convention G=ℓ2
Pl, and, to avoid confusion,
we will denote the entropy as “ S” and the action as “ I.”
22 Estimating black hole entropy corrections
The total gravitational action Itot, as a sum of the Einstein–Hilbert action as well as the Gibbons–
Hawking–York boundary term, is given by
Itot=IEH+IGHY=−1
16πG/integraldisplay
Md4X√−gR−1
8πG/integraldisplay
∂Md3x√−gK, (2)
whereMisthedomainofintegration(withcoordinates Xµ),∂Misitsboundary(withcoordinates
xµ), andKis the extrinsic curvature. After moving to imaginary time, t=iτ, we can write the
partition function as Z= exp(−Itot) and we can extract the entropy via
S=β2∂
∂β/parenleftbigg
−1
βlnZ/parenrightbigg
=β2∂
∂β/parenleftbigg1
βItot/parenrightbigg
. (3)
Here,βdenotes the periodicity of imaginary time that is required to avoid a co nical angle deﬁcit
at the location of the black hole horizon.
2.1 Results in General Relativity
For a Euclideanized Schwarzschild black hole of mass Mone ﬁnds
β= 8πGM≡1
T, (4)
whereTis the temperature associated with this system. Moreover, becau se the Euclideanized
Schwarzschild metric is a vacuum solution, one has IEH≡0, and hence the black hole entropy is
generated exclusively by IGHY. After subtracting a reference ﬂat space background (which ca n be
performed at arbitrarily large distance r≫2GMaway from the black hole) one ﬁnally arrives at
S=4π(2GM)2
4ℓ2
Pl= 4πℓ2
PlM2. (5)
Note that the entropy S, the temperature T, and the black hole mass Mare not independent
quantities: they are linked by the ﬁrst law of black hole thermodynam ics, dM=TdS, which is
required for a consistent thermodynamic interpretation.
Keeping these considerations in mind, let us now estimate what happe ns if we deviate from the
Euclideanized Schwarzschild geometry deep inside the black hole.
32.2 Estimates beyond General Relativity
The presence of a Euclidean core, as per assumption B, does not inﬂ uence the location of the black
hole horizon, nor its Hawking temperature; therefore, the entro py contribution of the Gibbons–
Hawking–York boundary term coincides with that of General Relativ ity precisely. Hence, all
deviations from General Relativity have to be captured by the on-s hell value of IEH.
To keep our considerations as agnostic as possible, we need to form a regulator distance scale ℓ >0
that takes into account both the Planck scale ℓPlas well as the black hole Schwarzschild radius,
2GM. Let us hence deﬁne, in accordance with assumption C,
ℓ≡ℓα
Pl(2GM)1−α, (6)
forαa real, continuous parameter. The appearance of such a regulato r may strike the reader as
odd, due to the strongly non-linear appearance of M, but in the literature on regular black holes
such length scales arefairlywell established [ 3]. Inparticular, oneoftenﬁnds thechoice α= 1since
it leads to uniformly bound curvature (in what is called the limiting curva ture conjecture), but we
will see that while this choice is suﬃcient to guarantee a consistent ﬁr st law of thermodynamics
(subject to assumption B), at leading order it is not necessary.
Turning to the on-shell evaluation of the Euclideanized Einstein–Hilbe rt action, we now estimate
that the curvature is spatially conﬁned to a Euclidean ball of the size of the regulator scale ℓ, and
that it takes on an average value of
R∼1
ℓ2. (7)
Then, for the full on-shell action—aided by assumption A—one obta ins
IEH=1
16πG/integraldisplay
Md4XE√gER∼1
16πℓ2
Pl×β×ℓ3×1
ℓ2=Mℓ
2. (8)
The entropy contribution δSis then
δS=β2∂
∂β/parenleftbigg1
βItot/parenrightbigg
∼M2
2∂ℓ
∂M=1−α
4/parenleftbiggℓPl
2GM/parenrightbiggα−2
. (9)
Clearly, for α >2, the entropy correction is suppressed, δS≪1. Let us now check the consistency
requirement that the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics is still satisﬁed. I n order to have d M=Td(S+
δS) (since both TandMare invariant, as per assumption B), one needs requires d δS= 0. This
holds ifα= 1 orα= 2. (We could also give up assumption B, and compute the necessary δT.)
42.3 What about higher-order operators?
Let us now brieﬂy consider next-to-leading order corrections to t he black hole entropy stemming
from higher-order actions of the form
INLO=−1
16πℓ2(2−d−r)
Pl/summationdisplay
p/integraldisplay
Md4X√−gRr−p/squaredRp, (10)
where 2dcounts the number of derivatives, rthe powers of curvature tensors, and/summationtext
psums all
possible terns at that order. Following similar arguments above, we e stimate for the on-shell value
INLO∼1
16πℓ2(2−d−r)
Pl×β×ℓ3×ℓ−2d×ℓ−2r=M ℓ3−2(d+r)
2ℓ2(1−d−r)
Pl. (11)
In general, however, this results in the entropy corrections
δS=(1−α)[3−2(d+r)]
4/parenleftbiggℓPl
2GM/parenrightbigg2(d+r−2)(1−α)−α
. (12)
As a quick cross-check, for r= 1 and d= 0 we recover the previous results. Compatibility with
the ﬁrst law is only achieved if α= 1 (because then the above term vanishes identically), or, if
2(d+r−2)(1−α)−α= 0. Inserting α= 2 into that relation one ﬁnds the constraint d+r= 1,
that is, only curvature terms of the following form are allowed:
Iallowed
NLO=1
16πℓ2
Pl/integraldisplay
Md4X√−gRr−p/square1−rRp. (13)
Observe the appearance of negative powers of the d’Alembert ope rator for r >1, similar to the
nonlocal model considered by Deser and Woodard [ 4] in the context of cosmology. If one wants to
allow all possible curvature-derivative couplings, however, only α= 1 remains permissible.
Alternatively, one could again modify assumption B and stipulate that the Hawking temperature
changes by a contribution
δT
T=−δdS
dS. (14)
This would, however, shift the imaginary time integration domain from βtoβ−δT/T2, and then
again aﬀect the on-shell value of the action, leading to an iterative p rocedure that could be used
to determine these eﬀects more accurately (that is, if this iteratio n terminates reliably).
53 Conclusions
Replacing the singularity of a Euclidean black hole by a regular core of r adiusℓα
Pl(2GM)1−αleads
to corrections of the black hole entropy. If the area law and the ﬁr st law of thermodynamics
are to be left unchanged, at leading order this demands α= 1, or, remarkably, α= 2. In the
latter case, however, higher-order corrections will again spoil th e ﬁrst law, which leaves α= 1 as
the only option, unless one is either prepared to consider a restrict ed higher-order sector, similar
to a nonlocal Deser–Woodard model, or one is prepared to accept a small shift in the Hawking
temperature (more on that below).
The choice α= 1 sets all entropy corrections to zero, and it is related to a mean c urvature of
R∼1
ℓ2
Pl(15)
at the center of the core. Interestingly, this closely resembles th e limiting curvature conjecture
proposed independently by Markov and Polchinski [ 5–7], which states that the maximum value
of curvature should be uniformly bounded by the constants of nat ure, and be independent of the
black hole mass. The choice α= 2 is compatible with the limiting curvature principle, too, if the
smallest possible black hole mass is given by MPl.
But perhaps one should not disregard α= 2 too prematurely: classicalization, for example, is a
mechanism that renders gravity classical at smaller scales [ 8,9], and could hence result in a bound
state of soft gravitons at the black hole center. Viewed from that perspective, quadratic curvature
terms may not be necessary to understand gravity in these regime s. Moreover, the ﬁrst law of
black hole thermodynamics can be recovered if the Hawking tempera ture itself receives a small
correction δT=−TδdS/dS, which is proportional to the change in entropy.
At any rate, more accurate calculations are needed to compute th e entropy corrections from ﬁrst
principles, but we hope that this Essay can serve as a motivation to t hink more about the role of
the black hole center and its possible contributions to the Euclidean g ravitational path integral.
Acknowledgements
I thank the NSF for support under Grants PHY-1819575 and PHY- 2112460.
6References
[1] G. W. Gibbons and S. W. Hawking, “Action integrals and partition fu nctions in quantum
gravity,” Phys. Rev. D 15, 2752 (1977).
[2] D. Kubiznak and R. B. Mann, “Black hole chemistry,” Can. J. Phys. 93, 999 (2015),
1404.2126 [gr-qc] .
[3] V. P. Frolov, “Notes on nonsingular models of black holes,” Phys. Rev. D 94, 104056 (2016),
1609.01758 [gr-qc] .
[4] S. Deser and R. P. Woodard, “Nonlocal cosmology,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 111301 (2007)
0706.2151 [astro-ph] .
[5] M. A. Markov, “Limiting density of matter as a universal law of nat ure,”JETP Lett. 36, 266
(1982).
[6] M. A. Markov, “Problems of a perpetually oscillating universe,” Ann. Phys. (N.Y.)155, 333
(1984).
[7] J. Polchinski, “Decoupling versus excluded volume or return of th e giant wormholes,”
Nucl. Phys. B 325, 619 (1989).
[8] G. Dvali, G. F. Giudice, C. Gomez and A. Kehagias, “UV-completion b y classicalization,”
JHEP08, 108 (2011), 1010.1415 [hep-ph] .
[9] G. Dvali, “Strong coupling and classicalization,” Subnucl. Ser. 53, 189 (2017),
1607.07422 [hep-th] .
7