arXiv:2305.06778v1  [quant-ph]  11 May 2023The existence and unambiguity of the principal
axis system of the EPR tensors
Stanislav Komorovsky˚,:,;
:Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Scienc es, D´ ubravsk´ a cesta 9,
SK-84536 Bratislava, Slovakia
;Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Scie nces, Comenius University,
Ilkovicova 6, SK-84215 Bratislava, Slovakia
E-mail: stanislav.komorovsky@savba.sk
Abstract
Although the role of the electron paramagnetic resonance (E PR) g-tensor and hy-
perﬁne coupling tensor in the EPR eﬀective spin Hamiltonian i s discussed extensively
in many textbooks, certain aspects of the theory are missing . In this text we will cover
those gaps and thus provide a comprehensive theory about the existence of principal
axes of the EPR tensors. However, an important observation i s that both g- and a-
tensors have two sets of principal axes—one in the real and on e in the ﬁctitious spin
space—and, in fact, are not tensors. Moreover, we present ar guments based on the
group theory why only eigenvalues of the G-tensor, G“ggT, and the sign of the de-
terminant of the g-tensor are observable quantities (an ana logical situation also holds
for the hyperﬁne coupling tensor). We keep the number of assu mptions to a mini-
mum and thus the theory is applicable in the framework of the D irac–Coulomb–Breit
Hamiltonian and for any spatial symmetry of the system.
11 Notation
InthisworkweemploytheHartreesystemofatomicunits, soforex ampletheBohrmagneton
has the value1
2c, wherecrepresents the speed of light. Furthermore, we assume summatio n
over repeated indices; however, this rule may be broken in certain in stances: for example,
when writing the eigenvalue equation ACk“ekCk, thenkis not a summation index.
Such cases can be recognized by the same index appearing on both s ide of the equation.
Nevertheless, in cases where the violation of the summation rule is no t obvious, we state
explicitly which indices are not summed over. Also in this work the symbo lsRandI
represent the real and imaginary part of a complex number, respe ctively. Finally, variables
in bold font represent either matrices or vectors whose dimension is apparent from the text.
2 Introduction
The main aim of this work is to ﬁnd the principal axis of the g-tensor wit h no loose ends,
i.e.all assumptions must be stated and all statements proven. We will n ot specify the level
of theory for the Hamiltonians and wavefunctions, in order to make the discussion as general
as possible. We make only these two assumptions:
1. The Hamiltonian is time-reversal symmetric in the absence of magn etic ﬁelds, and
the Hamiltonian responsible for the interaction with magnetic ﬁeld is tim e-reversal
antisymmetric.
2. The quantum-mechanical (qm) Hamiltonian, expressed in a subsp ace of orthonormal
wavefunctions (populatedstates), canbe fully mappedto aneﬀec tive spin Hamiltonian
of the form
Hqm!“Heﬀ“1
2cBuguvSv. (1)
The ﬁrst of these assumptions holds, and makes the following discus sion valid, for the Dirac–
Coulomb–Breit (DCB) Hamiltonian and any approximate theory that c an be derived from
2it. The discussion is thus appropriate for the vast majority of ab initio quantum chemical
methods in use at the present time. The second assumption is warra nted only for systems
with negligible zero-ﬁeld splitting (ZFS), or for doublet systems wher e ZFS vanishes. In
addition, under assumption 1, the eﬀective spin Hamiltonian in eq (1) c ompletely describes
the ﬁeld-dependent part of Hqmonly up to triplet multiplicity. For systems with higher
multiplicities, eq (1) is valid only if higher than linear spin–orbit eﬀects ar e negligible (the
so-calledweakspin-orbit limit). Itisthereforeonlyforsystems with doublet multiplicity that
point 2 holdsfor anystrengthandorder of relativistic eﬀects. Asa result ofthis, andb ecause
every element of the SU p2qgroup can be expressed using the exponential parametrisation
presented ineq (191) with /vectorS“1
2/vectorσ, thedoublet caseis fullydescribed by thetheorydiscussed
in this work. For a more detailed discussion on the validity of eq (1) see ref 1. Finally,
note that because the operator associated with the magnetic mom ent of the nucleus is time-
reversal antisymmetric, thefollowingdiscussion isalsovalidfortheh yperﬁnecouplingtensor.
Intherestofthissectionwewillfocusonthetheorybehindtheeﬀe ctivespinHamiltonian.
In the general case, the system in the presence of the magnetic ﬁ eld is fully described by the
many-electron Hamiltonian and its eigenspectrum ( kis not a summation index)
`
H0`HZ˘
Ψk“EkΨk. (2)
HereH0istheperturbation-freeHamiltonianand HZrepresents theHamiltonianresponsible
for the interaction of the system with the magnetic ﬁeld /vectorB. In the following discussion we
will assume that the solutionof the eigenproblem for thesystem inth e absence of anexternal
perturbation is known ( kis not a summation index)
H0Φk“EkΦk. (3)
The eigenfunctions Φ kof the Hamiltonian H0form an orthonormal complete basis in the
corresponding Hilbert space, so it is convenient to express the unk nown wavefunctions Ψ k
3in the basis of those eigenfunctions. Finding the approximate solutio n of the eigenproblem
(2) then amounts to constructing the perturbation operator HZin the truncated basis of
perturbation-free wavefunctions Φ kand solving the following eigenproblem (see Appendix
A)
`
E`HZ˘
C“CE, (4)
`
HZ˘
mn“/angbracketleftbig
ΦmˇˇHZˇˇΦn/angbracketrightbig
,Ψk“CnkΦn, (5)
Emn“Emδmn,Emn“Emδmn, (6)
where the summation convention is not applied in eq (6).
The basic idea of the eﬀective spin Hamiltonian is to properly describe t he lowest energy
levels of the system under study, Em, in eq (4). For this purpose one must ﬁnd a suitable
basis, Φ nin eq (5), onto which to project the many-electron qm Hamiltonian Hqm. Note
that the basis may be formed by the eigenfunctions Φ n, or any unitary linear combinations
of them—in which case the matrix Ein eq (4) is not diagonal. The target energy levels
are then calculated as eigenvalues of the resulting matrix, Hqm“E`HZ. The role of the
eﬀective spin Hamiltonian is then to parametrize that matrix:
Hqm!“Heﬀ, (7)
wherein the g-tensor—and possibly D-tensor and A-tensor—plays the role of the expansion
coeﬃcients, and the matrices Svthat of the basis elements. The energy levels that one
needs to properly describe an EPR experiment are usually determine d by the population—
i.e.the states that are thermally populated in eq (2)—while the basis, Φ n, in which the qm
Hamiltonianmaybeexpressed isdeterminedbytheenergydiﬀerence sbetween thepopulated
energy levels and the energies En—thus one may discard basis functions Φ nthat have large
energy diﬀerences. In cases where the nonrelativistic ground-st ate multiplet is well separated
from the excited states—the usual case for transition metal com plexes—the number of basis
4functions and of populated states is the same. On the other hand, if the energy spectrum of
the studied systems does not have a large gap between populated s tates and other excited
states—which is often the case in systems containing Lanthanides o r Actinides—the number
of basis functions should be larger than the number of populated st ates.
Finally note that some of the theory presented in this work can be fo und in refs 2–4.
3 Construction of the projected Zeeman Hamiltonian
Althoughthetheorydiscussed inthissectionisapplicableforanymult iplicity oftheﬁctitious
spin—under the assumptions given in section 2—we will demonstrate v arious aspects of the
theory using the doublet case as an example.
Equation (1) represents the mapping of the projected Zeeman Ha miltonian Hqmto a
ﬁctitious (eﬀective) spin space, where the matrices /vectorSare ﬁctitious spin operators /vectorSprojected
on the ﬁctitious spin basis |S,M/angb∇acket∇ight, withSbeing the ﬁctitious spin and M“ ´S,p´S`
1q,...,S. Here we have repeated the word ”ﬁctitious” a little toomuch, but w e want to leave
no doubt that when talking about the spin in this work we refer to the ﬁctitious (eﬀective)
spin and not to the real spin of the system. In many cases the multip licity of the eﬀective
spin Hamiltonian, m“2S`1, corresponds to the spin multiplicity of the nonrelativistic
ground state of the studied system before it is split by the spin-orb it interaction. However,
in the general case, mrepresents the dimension of Hqm,i.e.the number of states that
are included in the eﬀective spin Hamiltonian. One example where the dim ension of the
matrices might not correspond to the multiplicity of the nonrelativist ic ground state is a
system where the EPR eﬀective spin Hamiltonian describes a doubly-d egenerate ground
state and a doubly-degenerate excited state. This scenario might arise as a zero-ﬁeld-split
nonrelativistic quartet ground state or it might originate from a dou blet ground state with
a low-lying doublet excited state. Anyhow, both scenarios are desc ribed by the ﬁctitious
spinS“3
2. To avoid possible confusion, note that whenever we refer to the m ultiplicity
5of a system ( e.g.a doublet case or a triplet system), we refer to the number of stat es that
are described by the eﬀective spin Hamiltonian, rather than to the s pin multiplicity of the
nonrelativistic ground state.
The integer ﬁctitious spin— Heﬀwith odd dimension, describing an odd number of
states—can only describe systems with an even number of electron s, because systems with
odd number of electrons have every energy level even-times dege nerate (see Appendix B)
in which case Heﬀmust have even dimension. On the other hand, half-integer ﬁctitiou s
spin—Heﬀwith even dimension, describing an even number of states—can in prin ciple be
used to describe systems with either an even or an odd number of ele ctrons. However, a
half-integer ﬁctitious spin describing a system with an even number o f electrons is a rather
unusual scenario. Let us consider an example where the nonrelativ istic triplet ground state
of a system with axial symmetry is split by strong SO interaction into t wo degenerate states
with lower energy (a new doubly-degenerate ground state) and on e non-degenerate state
with higher energy (which, from the point of view of qm theory, coun ts as a non-degenerate
excited state). In such a case, if the ZFS is large enough, it is suﬃcie nt for the eﬀective
spin Hamiltonian to describe only the doubly-degenerate ground sta te. This ground state is
formed by a so-called non-Kramers pair (see Appendix C), and it has an EPR spectrum with
unusual properties because the eigenfunctions of a system with a n even number of electrons
are non-magnetic, see the discussion in Appendices D, E, and F and in ref 5.
In this section we will construct the matrix Hqm, used in eq (1), as a projection of
the Zeeman Hamiltonian onto the space deﬁned by a set of wavefunc tions tΦkum
k“1. In the
previous section the wavefunctions Φ kdenoted eigenfunctions of H0, but in the following we
will also consider any unitary linear combinations of these eigenfunct ions. In other words,
we will consider any other orthonormal set of wavefunctions that deﬁnes the same space.
From the point of view of eq (1) this amounts to a choice of the basis f or the projection of
the qm Zeeman operator, and thus it should not change any physica l properties. However,
becauseHeﬀemploys the spin operators /vectorS, which in turn follow speciﬁc rules under time-
6reversal symmetry, not every choice of basis is suitable for the pr ojection. For example, in
a triplet system of C1 spatial symmetry every eigenfunction of H0is non-degenerate and
non-magnetic (up to a phase factor, see also the discussion in Appe ndix D). However, if
one wants to use the expansion in eq (1), the qm Hamiltonian must be e xpressed in a basis
where two wavefunctions form a non-Kramers pair and one wavefu nction has the property
KΨ“ ´Ψundertime-reversalsymmetry. Here, Krepresentsthemany-electrontime-reversal
operator, see Appendix G. Note that, in this example, the wavefun ctions are eigenfunctions
ofH0only if the system has axial symmetry. To choose a proper basis for the projection
of the qm Hamiltonian one should consider the behavior of the ﬁctitiou s spin eigenfunctions
under time-reversal symmetry. For ﬁctitious spin Sthe eigenfunctions of the ﬁctitious spin
operatorsS2andSzfollow the relation3
K|S,M/angb∇acket∇ight“ p´1qS´M|S,´M/angb∇acket∇ight. (8)
Forsimplicity we have used thesymbol Khere, althoughwe donot specify therepresentation
of eq (8)— i.e.we do not specify the space in which the spin states |S,M/angb∇acket∇ightare represented.
However, in every other instance in this text we use the symbol Kstrictly to mean the qm
many-electron time-reversal operatorthat acts inthe S´HbNeFock subspace for Nefermions
(see Appendix G). This minor inconsistency in notation appears only o nce in this work, in
eq (8). By imposing eq (1) we assume a correspondence between th e qm and the ﬁctitious
spin bases Φ kØ |S,M/angb∇acket∇ight, so the qm basis tΦkum
k“1must follow the relation in eq (8) as well.
For a detailed discussion and expressions on this topic see section II I in ref 4. One way to
construct the basis tΦkum
k“1that satisﬁes relation (8) is to follow this procedure:
•For an odd number of electrons: a) ﬁx the arbitrariness ( e.g.phase factors) in
the eigenfunctions of H0such that each energy level is represented only by Kramers
pairs, see Appendix B; b) ﬁx the phase factors of the selected Kra mers partners such
that they follow eq (8)—note that the choice of which Kramers part ner gets the phase
7´1 is arbitrary.
•For an even number of electrons: a) make the eigenfunctions of H0non-magnetic
according to the procedure described in Appendix D; b) arbitrarily c hoose one eigen-
function to remain non-magnetic up to a phase factor dictated by e q (8); c) from the
rest of the non-magnetic wavefunctions, construct non-Krame rs partners as described
in Appendix C and ﬁx their phases according to eq (8).
Finally, note that using this procedure for a system with an odd numb er of electrons results
in a basis that consists of eigenfunctions of H0, but for a system with an even number of
electrons this is not the case, because the procedure described in Appendix C [eq (114)] may
mix eigenfunctions that belong to diﬀerent energy levels.
As an example we will examine a system with a doubly-degenerate grou nd state and
well-separated excited states. For such a doublet system the pro per qm basis contains one
(non-)Kramers pair
Φ:“Φ1, (9)
sΦ“KΦ:“Φ2. (10)
The eigenproblem presented in eq (4) then reduces to the following f orm
¨
˚˝/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig /angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇsΦ/angbracketrightbig
/angbracketleftbigsΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig /angbracketleftbigsΦˇˇHZˇˇsΦ/angbracketrightbig˛
‹‚¨
˚˝C1k
C2k˛
‹‚“ek¨
˚˝C1k
C2k˛
‹‚. (11)
The eigenvalues ekrepresent the magnetically-induced splitting relative to the ground -state
energy in the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld, ek“Ek´E,E:“E1“E2. In this example, we
assume that the wavefunctions of a non-Kramers pair would be eige nfunctions of H0with
the same energy E(e.g.in a system with an axial symmetry). Equation (11) can be further
simpliﬁed when considering the time-reversal and Hermitian symmetr y of the Hamiltonian
8HZ, see Appendix H
¨
˚˝/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig /angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇsΦ/angbracketrightbig
/angbracketleftbigsΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig
´/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig˛
‹‚¨
˚˝C1k
C2k˛
‹‚“ek¨
˚˝C1k
C2k˛
‹‚. (12)
Also note that the oﬀ-diagonal elements are zero in the case of an e ven number of electrons—
i.e.for a non-Kramers pair—see Appendix F. As discussed in section 2 th e 2ˆ2 matrix in
eq (12) can be parametrized by the g-tensor as follows
1
4cBuguvσv!“¨
˚˝/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig /angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇsΦ/angbracketrightbig
/angbracketleftbigsΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig
´/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig˛
‹‚, (13)
whereBuare the components of the external magnetic ﬁeld, and σvis the Pauli matrix
for direction v. The individual components of the g-tensor can then be derived fr om the
elements of the 2 ˆ2 matrix in eq (13)
gu1“4cR/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΦ/angbracketrightbig
,
gu2“ ´4cI/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΦ/angbracketrightbig
,
gu3“4c/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZ
uˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig
,(14)
whereHZ“BuHZ
uand
HZ
u:“dHZ
dBuˇˇˇˇ/vectorB“0. (15)
An interesting observation is that, on changing the phase of the wa vefunction Φ, the g-tensor
elementsgu1andgu2change as well, see Appendix I. This somewhat surprising result leads
to the conclusion that the g-tensor is not an observable quantity in the fullest sense of the
term. Below we will discuss how the observable quantities derived fro m the g-tensor are the
eigenvalues of G“ggTand the sign of the g-tensor determinant.
To obtain the g-tensor for higher multiplicities using the same proced ure as outlined
for the doublet system, the system must satisfy the assumptions discussed in section 2. To
9obtainthe energy splittings one must inaddition assume that all ener gy levels are degenerate
in the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld, see eqs (4) and (11) and the discu ssion under eq (11). In
other words, in this paragraph we also assume that ZFS eﬀects are negligible and that there
are no other low-lying excited states that must be taken into accou nt. This is, however,
fully warranted only in the doublet case if the system has an odd numb er of electrons, where
each energy level must be at least doubly-degenerate even in the r elativistic domain, see
Appendix J and the discussion in section 2. Then, to ﬁnd the splitting o f the energy levels
induced by a magnetic ﬁeld one needs to solve the eigenvalue equation
ˆ1
2cBuguvSv˙
Ck“ekCk, (16)
which, for a doublet system, becomes eq (12) with Hqmparameterized according to eq (13).
One can now solve eq (16) (see Appendix K) to get the expression fo r the eigenvalues ekin
terms of the g-tensor parameters
ek“Mkˇˇ/vectorbˇˇ, bv“1
2cBuguv, MkP t´S,´pS´1q,...,S u, k “1,...,2S`1.(17)
IncontrasttoAppendixKwehaveherereorderedtheeigenvalues inascendingorder. Eq(17)
simpliﬁes if the magnetic ﬁeld is chosen along the uth Cartesian coordinate axis as follows
/vectorBu“B/vector nuÑek`/vectorBu˘
“MkB
2cb
g2
u1`g2
u2`g2
u3, (18)
withBbeing the size of the magnetic ﬁeld and /vector nubeing the unit vector in the uth direction.
The eigenvalues ekare observable physical quantities as they correspond to energy levels in
the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld /vectorB, but the form of eq (18) does not allow us to say the
same of the g-tensor parameters. In fact, as was noted above a nd as we will see in the next
section, the g-tensor is not actually an observable physical quant ity, and moreover is not
even a proper tensor.
10To conclude the doublet case discussed in this section, the eﬀect of the magnetic ﬁeld on
the system is fully described by eq (12) provided only that these two conditions be met: a)
H0is time-reversal symmetric H0; and b)HZis time-reversal antisymmetric. Furthermore,
the g-tensor parameters fully describe the doublet system and ar e calculated as presented in
eq (14). Note that this discussion does not depend on the level of t heory used for calculation
of the matrix elements/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig
and/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇsΦ/angbracketrightbig
, and is therefore valid in, for example, CAS
or the DFT class of ab initio theories.
4 Principal axes of the g-tensor
The only physical quantity in the deﬁnition of the g-tensor, eq (1), is an external magnetic
ﬁeld. The spin matrices, /vectorS, are merely a basis used for the parametrization of the Zeeman
matrix,Hqm“HZ. Then, the rotation of the laboratory frame changes only the orie ntation
of the magnetic ﬁeld, because elements of HZ
u—constructed as the inner product of HZ
uin
some basis, see e.g.eq (14)—are invariant with respect to this rotation. Thus, as we will
see later in the discussion, the task of looking for the principal axes of the g-tensor merely
by rotation of the laboratory frame—or, equivalently, by rotation of the magnetic ﬁeld—is
in the general case futile. This is also connected to the interesting o bservations that the g-
tensor is not a tensor, and moreover that it is not an observable qu antity. The easiest way to
understand why the full g-tensor is not an observable quantity is t o see/vectorSas a basis, and the
g-tensor as the associated set of expansion coeﬃcients, with whic h to represent the Zeeman
matrixHZ
u. This matrix is the projection of the Zeeman operator for the uth direction of the
magnetic ﬁeld onto a subspace in a Hilbert space of Neelectrons. Its form of HZ
u, however,
depends on the choice of the basis for that subspace. Therefore , the g-tensor itself depends
on the choice of the basis, and a change in basis is obviously not conne cted to any observable
quantity. In the following, we show that changing this basis rotates the ﬁctitious spin, and
that the g-tensor can be diagonalized when the appropriate real a nd ﬁctitious coordinate
11axis systems are chosen.
Letusﬁrst consider thetransformationoftheg-tensorcaused byachangeinthemagnetic
ﬁeld. Because theg-tensor doesnotdepend onthestrengthoft hemagnetic ﬁeld, we consider
only diﬀerent orientations of magnetic ﬁelds of the same strength,ˇˇ/vectorBˇˇ“ˇˇˇ/vectorrBˇˇˇ
/vectorrB Ñ/vectorB“O/vectorrB. (19)
HereOis an arbitrary orthogonal transformation, OTO“OOT“1, inR3,i.e.OPOp3q.
Note that the transformation Orepresents both proper and improper rotations. Proper
rotations, det O“1, have an exponential form as described in eq (216), and they for m
the special orthogonal group SO p3q. Improper rotations combine a proper rotation and a
reﬂection, and have det O“ ´1. The g-tensors derived from the magnetic ﬁelds/vectorrBand/vectorB
are then connected by the orthogonal transformation as follows
Heﬀ“1
2cBuguvSv“1
2cOuqrBqguvSv“1
2crBupOqugqvqSv“1
2crBurguvSv,(20)
rg“OTg,g“Org, (21)
where we have utilized eq (19) and the fact that Ois an orthogonal transformation.
As discussed above, the g-tensor also depends on the choice of th e basis onto which the
Zeeman operator is projected. Here we are interested in those line ar transformations of basis
functions tΦnum
n“1that preserve their orthonormality
rΦn“UmnΦm, (22)
/angbracketleftbig
ΦmˇˇΦn/angbracketrightbig
“δmn ñ/angbracketleftbigrΦmˇˇrΦn/angbracketrightbig
“δmn. (23)
Such matrices are called unitary transformations, U:U“UU:“1, and they act in Cm,
i.e.UPUpmq. Using eq (22) one can write the relation between the elements of th e Zeeman
12Hamiltonian expressed in either of these bases as
`
HZ˘
mn“/angbracketleftbig
ΦmˇˇHZˇˇΦn/angbracketrightbig
,´
rHZ¯
mn“/angbracketleftbigrΦmˇˇHZˇˇrΦn/angbracketrightbig
, (24)
/angbracketleftbigrΦmˇˇHZˇˇrΦn/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
UkmΦkˇˇHZˇˇUlnΦl/angbracketrightbig
“U˚
km/angbracketleftbig
ΦkˇˇHZˇˇΦl/angbracketrightbig
Uln, (25)
which can be written in matrix form as
rHZ“U:HZU. (26)
Each of the Zeeman matrices can be parametrized by a diﬀerent g-t ensor as follows
rHZ!“1
2cBurguvSv, (27)
HZ!“1
2cBuguvSv. (28)
Equation (26) allows us to easily transform the eﬀective spin Hamilton ian between diﬀerent
choices of basis functions that represent the studied multiplet. Th en, by applying eqs (27)
and (28) to eq (26), one gets
1
2cBurguvSv“1
2cBuguvU:SvU. (29)
Because for every UPUpmqwith detU“exppiαqandαPRthere exists U`PSUpmqwith
detU`“1 such that
U“U`I´
e, (30)
`
I´
e˘
kl“δkleiα
m, (31)
detU`“det”
U`
I´
e˘´1ı
“detUdet`
e´iα
m1˘
“1. (32)
13One may transform the right-hand-side of eq (29) as
1
2cBurguvSv“1
2cBuguv`
U`˘:SvU`. (33)
This is possible because I´
eis the identity matrix multiplied by a phase factor. For m“2
the procedure in eqs (22)–(33) covers all possible UandU`, and thus for the doublet case
it covers all possible choices of the orthonormal basis set tΦnu2
n“1. Formą2 this is not the
case, and therefore in the following we choose only such unitary tra nsformations Uin eq (22)
that lead to U`—according to eq (30)—which in turn can be written using the expone ntial
form,U`“expp´iθ/vectorS¨/vector nq. For more information on the topic see also the discussion in
Appendix L. Finally, one can employ identity (188)—derived in Appendix M—in eq (33)
1
2cBurguvSv“1
2cBuguv´
e´iθ/vectorR¨/vector n¯
vwSw, (34)
rg“gO`,O`“e´iθ/vectorR¨/vector n. (35)
Here the matrix O`is a proper rotation, det O`“1, that is deﬁned by an angle θand a
unit vector /vector n. The rotation matrices /vectorRare deﬁned in eqs (208) and (209), and a practical
prescription for the proper rotation O`is shown in eq (216), also known as Rodrigues’
formula. As discussed in Appendix N, the transformation in eq (22) a nd the matrix O`in
eq(35)correspondtorotationofthespininaﬁctitiousspinspace— belowweusethenotation
O`
f. On the other hand, the transformation of the magnetic ﬁeld in eq ( 19) corresponds to
rotation in a real space, and thus we denote it O`
r. Therefore, the transformations of the
g-tensor, eqs (21) and (35), are independent and can be combine d as follows
rg“OT
rgO`
f. (36)
Note that because these transformations are independent, the choice of which matrix is or
is not transposed is arbitrary. The fact that the transformation s in eq (36) are independent
14allows us to diagonalize the g-tensor. In the following, we show that, under the assumptions
presented in section 2, the g-tensor can be always brought to a dia gonal form.
Using only the transformation in real space Or, it is not possible, in the general case, to
diagonalize the g-tensor. It is possible, however, to diagonalize the Gmatrix instead
G“ggT, (37)
G“OrrgpOrrgqT“OrrgrgTOT
r“OrrGOT
r. (38)
BecauserGis a real symmetric matrix
rGT“ prgrgTqT“rgrgT“rG, (39)
there exists an orthogonal transformation Orthat diagonalizes it, with the eigenvalues being
real numbers. Let us assume that Orin eq (38) is such a transformation—it diagonalizes
therGmatrix, and thus Ghas a diagonal form. Orcan then be determined by solving the
eigenvalue problem. Following eqs (37) and (38) we can write ( vis not a summation index)
rGuqpOrqT
qv“GvpOrqT
uv, (40)
Gdiag“ggT, (41)
δuvGv“guqgvq, Gv:“Gvv. (42)
Here eq (40) represents the eigenvalue equation with eigenvector sOT
r. The eigenvalues Gv
are positive real numbers, because in eq (42) they are expressed as a sum of the squares of
real numbers ( uis not a summation index)
Gu“guqguq. (43)
Notethat Orineq(40)belongstothegroupO p3qrepresented in R3. However, ifdet Or“ ´1
15one can simply change the phase of one of the eigenvectors—multiply ing the vector by ´1—
to get the new transformation O`
rwith detO`
r“1. Because changing this phase factor has
no physical consequences, i.e.one can still diagonalize any Gmatrix, we can restrict the
real transformation in eq (36) to proper rotations
rg“ pO`
rqTgO`
f. (44)
Equation (42) has two important consequences. First, the eigenv aluesekin eq (18) can
beexpressed using the eigenvalues Guthanks to their dependence onthe g-tensor parameters
presented in eq (43)
/vectorBu“B/vector nuÑek`/vectorBu˘
“MkB
2cb
g2
u1`g2
u2`g2
u3“MkB
2ca
Gu. (45)
Now, it is clear that the Gmatrix is an observable physical quantity and that its eigenvalues
govern the splitting induced by the magnetic ﬁeld applied along the prin cipal axes of the
Gmatrix [see also the assumptions that led to eq (18) discussed in sect ion 3]. Moreover,
theGmatrix is a proper tensor, because under the transformation of t he magnetic ﬁeld
(or, equivalently, the coordinate system) both of its indices are tr ansformed by the same
orthogonal transformation, see eq (38). Thus, in the following, w e refer to the Gmatrix
as the G-tensor. This is in contrast to the g-tensor where only one index is transformed
when rotating the magnetic ﬁeld, see eq (21). However, one could f orce the transformations
in eq (44) to be the same, i.e.when rotating the real coordinate system by O`
rone could
simultaneously change the basis set tΦnum
n“1such that the O`
f“O`
r. This procedure would
make the g-tensor a proper tensor. However, because the g-te nsor is in the general case a
non-symmetric matrix, this choice would prohibit its diagonalization.
The second consequence of eq (42) is more subtle. The expression states that if the
G-tensor is diagonal, then the rows of the corresponding g-tenso r form an orthogonal set of
vectors. This interesting fact can be exploited in the diagonalization of the g-tensor itself.
16Let us normalize these vectors—the rows of the g-tensor—to obt ain the orthonormalized set
of vectors t/vector wvu3
v“1
pwvqq“gvqG´1
2v. (46)
For simplicity let us assume for a while that all Gvvalues are nonzero, i.e.there are no
zero rows of the g-tensor, see eq (43). Every set of real ortho normal vectors forms an
orthogonal transformation [an element of the group O pmq], if the number of the vectors
equals the dimension of the vector space—in this case m. This statement holds for any
ﬁnite-dimensional vector space with a scalar (inner) product. We w ork inR3, but the proof
can be easily extended to any complex (or quaternion) vector spac e with a ﬁnite dimension,
see Appendix O for more details. We can, therefore, write the follow ing expressions for the
set of vectors t/vector wvu3
v“1
Wqv:“ pwvqqñWTW“WWT“1,WPOp3q. (47)
Now let us use the orthogonal transformation Win eq (41) as follows
diagpGq “ggT“gWWTgT“sgsgT,sg“gW. (48)
Because of the speciﬁc form of the transformation matrix W, eqs (46) and (47), the sg-tensor
has a diagonal form with positive diagonal values ( vis not a summation index)
sguv“guqWqv“guqpwvqq“guqgvqG´1
2v“δuvG1
2v, (49)
where we have utilized eq (42). Equations (40)–(42) and (46)–(49 ) represent a recipe for
diagonalizing any real non-symmetric square matrix with two diﬀeren t orthogonal transfor-
mations where the ﬁnal diagonal elements are positive real number s. The only assumption
17was that eigenvalues of the Gmatrix are nonzero. In the case of Gvbeing zero the corre-
sponding rows of the g-tensor must be zero as well, see eq (43). Ho wever, the zero vectors
cannot be normalized, so in such a case the set t/vector wvu3
v“1does not consist of orthonormal vec-
tors. A way around this problem is to replace the zero vectors with o nes that will make the
sett/vector wvu3
v“1orthonormal. This can bealways done, althoughthechoice of such v ectors isnot,
in the general case, unique. The Wmatrix is then orthogonal, and when evaluating eq (49)
one obtains the expected zero elements—the square root of zero is zero—on the diagonal,
thanks to the corresponding zero rows of the g-tensor. Thus th e procedure of diagonalizing
thesgmatrix in eq (49) can be achieved even when some of the Gvvalues are zero.
To transform the g-tensor, as requested by eq (49), one can us e a rotation in the ﬁctitious
spin space, O`
f, see eq (44) and the corresponding discussion. However, the det erminant of
the transformation Wcan be either positive or negative, while the transformation of the
wavefunction basis tΦnum
n“1leads only to proper rotations, i.e.O`
fwith determinant equal
to one. In other words, not all required transformations Wcan be obtained by mixing
the basis set tΦnum
n“1. In the problematic case when det W“ ´1 one can deﬁne a new
transformation of the g-tensor as follows
sg“gWI´, (50)
with the matrix I´being any of these matrices
¨
˚˚˚˚˝´1 0 0
0 1 0
0 0 1˛
‹‹‹‹‚,¨
˚˚˚˚˝1 0 0
0´1 0
0 0 1˛
‹‹‹‹‚,¨
˚˚˚˚˝1 0 0
0 1 0
0 0 ´1˛
‹‹‹‹‚,¨
˚˚˚˚˝´1 0 0
0´1 0
0 0 ´1˛
‹‹‹‹‚.(51)
18The transformation WI´is then a proper rotation and it still diagonalizes the sg-tensor
`
WI´˘T`
WI´˘
“ pI´qTWTWI´“ pI´qTI´“1, (52)
`
WI´˘`
WI´˘T“WI´pI´qTWT“WWT“1, (53)
det`
WI´˘
“detWdetI´“1, (54)
sguv“guqWqppI´qpv“guqpwpqqpI´qpv“guqgpqG´1
2ppI´qpv“G1
2upI´quv.(55)
One can easily show that both g-tensors, sgandg, have the same G-tensor and thus lead to
the same energy splittings, eq (45) ( vis not a summation index)
sguqsgvq“guqgvq“δuvGv. (56)
Note that the signs of the determinants of the matrices Wandgare the same, because
combining eqs (46) and (47) results in
detW“detWT“det´
G´1
2g¯
“detG´1
2detg, (57)
where the matrix G´1
2is diagonal, with elements G´1
2u, and its determinant is thus always
positive. Therefore, if the determinant of the g-tensor is negativ e, then in the process of its
diagonalization one may choose any matrix I´from eq (51). This choice than means that
the signs of the diagonal elements of the sg-tensor—also known as the principal elements or
g-values—may be chosen in four diﬀerent ways while keeping the sign o f the determinant
(the product of the g-values) unchanged, see eq (55). Therefo re, the signs of the individual
g-values are not observable quantities. In the doublet case, ther e is no degree of freedom left
in the transformation of the basis, eq (22), that could lead to tran sformations other than O`
f
(see also Appendix L), and thus the only observable quantity is the s ign of the determinant
of the g-tensor and the eigenvalues of the G-tensor. In the case of higher multiplicities, the
additional degree of freedom in the change of the basis could in princ iple prohibit even the
19measurement of the sign of the determinant of the g-tensor—the theory presented here can
neither conﬁrm this nor rule it out. However, it turns out that the s ign of the g-tensor may
be measured even for higher multiplicies, see ref 6. Finally, note that the g-tensor has two
sets of principal axis systems, one in real space and one in the ﬁctit ious spin space.
We may summarize the procedure above for diagonalizing the g-tens or as follows:
1. Use independent rotations in real space and ﬁctitious spin space , see eq (36).
2. Diagonalize the rG-tensor,rG“rgrgT, according to eq (38), using the transformation Or
from eq (40).
3. Construct the g-tensor such that g“Orrg.
4. Construct the orthogonal matrix Wcombining eqs (46) and (47) using the g-tensor
W“gTG´1
2, (58)
whereG´1
2is a diagonal matrix with diagonal elements G´1
2vandGvrepresent eigen-
values of the rG-tensor,i.e.diagonal elements of the matrix Gin eq (38).
5. Construct the proper rotation in the ﬁctitious spin space
detgą0ñO`
f“W, (59)
detgă0ñO`
f“WI´, (60)
withI´being one of the matrices in eq (51). The resulting diagonal sg-tensor has the
form
sg“gO`
f, (61)
with the diagonal elements G1
2v, which in the case of det gă0 must incorporate a
minus sign, according to which matrix I´was chosen. Finally, note that in the case
20of detgą0, in principle one could modify the g-values in a similar way as for the
case of det gă0, but with matrices that have two values ´1 on the diagonal. This is,
however, not done in practice, and all g-values are chosen to be po sitive.
Thisprocedurerepresentsaproofofexistence, andtoacertain degreeuniqueness, ofprincipal
axes and principal values of the g-tensor. In practice, however, the principal values are
obtained simply by taking the square roots of the eigenvalues of the G-tensor (step 2) and
by modifying their sign if the determinant of the g-tensor is negative [see eq (55)]. The two
sets of principal axes—in the real space and the ﬁctitious spin spac e—are obtained in point
2 and point 5. However, when using ab initio wavefunction methods one may be interested
in the basis [eqs (22)–(26)] in which the g-tensor is diagonal. This is a m ore challenging task,
because it requires extraction of θand/vector nfrom eq (59) or (60) with O`
f“expp´iθ/vectorR¨/vector nqand
then calculation of the unitary transformation in eq (22) as U“expp´iθ/vectorS¨/vector nq. There is,
however, a better way of solving this problem, which we will discuss in t he next section.
5 An alternative procedure for the diagonalization of
the g-tensor
In this section we will discuss an alternative procedure to the diagon alization of the g-tensor
that will provide us with the basis set tΦnum
n“1—in which the g-tensor is diagonal—without
the need for extracting the parameters θand/vector nfrom the rotation in the ﬁctitious spin space
O`
f“expp´iθ/vectorR¨/vector nq, see also the last paragraph in the previous section. This procedur e is
commonly used in quantum chemical calculations, see for example ref s 4 and 7 and works
cited therein. Although this procedure is more practical then the o ne presented in section 4,
it does not provide a stand-alone proof that the g-tensor can be a lways brought to the
diagonal form. On the contrary, the procedure described here is applicable to an arbitrary
system only if a principal axis system exists for the g-tensor [and ev en then, only if the
transformation of the g-tensor can be written in the form given in e q (36)]. However, a proof
21of the diagonalizability of the g-tensor was presented in the previou s section, and we will use
some of the results from that section here.
In the following we assume that the G-matrix is already diagonal, i.e.we have already
found the principal axis system in real space. Furthermore, let us have a starting reference
basis set tΦnum
n“1that satisﬁes the same transformations under time-reversal sy mmetry as
presented in eq (8) [see also the corresponding discussion under th at equation]. The Zeeman
matrixthatcorrespondstothe uthcomponent ofthemagneticﬁeldcanthenbeparametrized
using the g-tensor as follows
HZ
u!“1
2cguvSv. (62)
Applying an arbitrary unitary transformation Uto the basis set tΦnum
n“1, eq (22), we get
rHZ
u“U:HZ
uU. (63)
This equation corresponds to eq (26) for individual components of the magnetic ﬁeld. Our
goal is to ﬁnd a unitary transformation of the reference basis set that diagonalizes the g-
tensor in eq (62). In other words, each of the three matrices, rHZ
u, should have only one
nonzero component in their expansion into the basis of spin matrices /vectorS,i.e.(uis not a
summation index)
rHZ
u“1
2crguvSv“1
2crguuδuvSv“1
2crguuSu. (64)
Because the spin matrix S3is diagonal, one can achieve this goal for the zth Zeeman matrix
by diagonalizing it
HZ
3C“Ce, (65)
22where the diagonal matrix econtains the eigenvalues and the matrix Crepresents the cor-
responding eigenvectors. Because the coeﬃcients Cform a unitary transformation, C:C“
CC:“1(see Appendix O), one can write
rHZ
3“C:HZ
3C“e,U“C. (66)
Therg33g-value can then be obtained by comparing eqs (64) and (65)
ek“1
2crg33Mk, (67)
MkP t´S,´pS´1q,...,S u, k “1,...,2S`1. (68)
There are two problems with this result. First, one should determine the g-value rg33from
eq (67), but the equation must be satisﬁed for every index k, so the problem is over-
parametrized. The second problem is that we can only use one unitar y transformation
for all three matrices rHZ
u. Both problems are a consequence of one more fundamental issue :
is there a unitary transformation that leads to eq (64) for every s ystem that satisﬁes the
assumptions discussed in section 2? The way out of this problem is to c onsider section 4 as a
proof that such a unitary matrix exists. Then, because the eigenv alues in eq (65) are unique,
eq (67) must have the same solution for every k. On the other hand, the eigenvectors that
diagonalize HZ
3are not unique, because when changing the phase factor of every eigenvector
independently, eq (65) remains satisﬁed. As a result, even though we have carefully chosen
the basis set tΦnum
n“1such that it is possible to parametrize HZ
uas presented in eq (62), the
matrices rHZ
xandrHZ
ycannot be expressed the same way for every possible unitary tran s-
formation U,i.e.with every possible choice of the phase factors. One can overcome this
problem by just using a unitary transformation of the form U“expp´iθ/vectorS¨/vector nq, because
thanks to the identity in eq (188) the vector /vectorSis simply rotated when such a transformation
is employed [see also eqs (33) and (34)]. Fortunately, another cons equence of the discussion
in sections 2–4 is that the g-tensor can be diagonalized and that the unitary transformation
23Uthat is necessary for the process [see eq (22) and related discuss ion] can be parametrized
using the exponential mapping
U“e´iθ/vectorS¨/vector n. (69)
In other words, Uis a member of the m-dimensional irreducible representation of SU p2q
[which is a subgroup of SU pmq]. This is a helpful statement, because it means that by proper
choice of the phase factors for the coeﬃcients Cin eq (65), the unitary transformation U
in eq (66) can be made to satisfy eq (69). In the following, we conside r the doublet case,
m“2, separately, because the exponential form of Uis easily guaranteed. Further on below
we will discuss the procedure for the general case of arbitrary m.
The doublet case: As we stated above, the eigenvectors that diagonalize HZ
3are not
unique, because one can change their phase factors freely and eq (65) will remain satisﬁed
pkl“δkleiαk, αkPR, (70)
p:p“pp:“1, (71)
rC“Cp,re“p:ep“e, (72)
HZ
3rC“rCe. (73)
Because the matrix Cforms a unitary transformation, its determinant is a simple phase
factor, det C“exppiγq,γPR[see eqs (195)–(198)]. Therefore, one can always choose the
phase factors for the eigenvectors such that the determinant o f the new coeﬃcient matrix rC
is equal to one
detC“eiγ,mÿ
k“1αk“ ´γñdetrC“detCdetp“1. (74)
As this procedure can be always performed, without loss of genera lity we can assume that
24the matrix Cin eq (65) already has a determinant equal to one, and can write
UPSUp2q,detU“1. (75)
When representing elements of the group SU p2qin the two dimensional complex space C2,
every group element can be written in the exponential form as pres ented in eq (69) with /vectorS“
1
2/vector σ. The transformation in eq (63) then leads to matrices rHZ
uthat can be again parametrized
using only spin matrices with expansion coeﬃcients rg[see also eqs (34) and (35)]
rHZ
u“1
2crguvSv. (76)
Therefore one can write
G“ggT“rgpO`qTrrgpO`qTsT“rgrgT“rG, (77)
withO`connected to the unitary transformation according to eq (189). Furthermore, be-
cause we have assumed that the G-tensor is diagonal, according to eq (77) the rG-tensor
is diagonal as well. Diagonalizing the matrix HZ
3then satisﬁes eq (64) for u“3, so two
elements of the rg-tensor are zero
rg31“rg32“0. (78)
In addition, because rG-tensor is diagonal, the rows of the rg-tensor form an orthogonal set of
vectors, t/vector vuu3
u“1, see also eq (46) and related discussion
pvuqv“rguv, (79)
/vector vu¨/vector vv“0, u ‰v. (80)
Note that/vector v3has the ﬁrst two components zero, see eq (78). Thus, if we furth er assume that
25rg33‰0 then
/vector v3¨/vector v1“rg33rg13“0ñrg13“0, (81)
/vector v3¨/vector v2“rg33rg23“0ñrg23“0. (82)
ñ/vector v1¨/vector v2“rg11rg21`rg12rg22“0. (83)
Combining eqs (78), (81) and (82) one gets
rg“¨
˚˚˚˚˝rg11rg120
rg21rg220
0 0rg33˛
‹‹‹‹‚. (84)
Asdiscussed above, diagonalizationof HZ
3is(inthegeneral case) notsuﬃcient to diagonalize
the g-tensor. However, one may take advantage of the remaining degree of freedom in the
coeﬃcients in eq (65) and change their phase factors such that th e determinant of the matrix
Cis preserved [see also eqs (70)–(73)]
detC“1, pkl“δkleiαk,mÿ
k“1αk“0ñdetrC“detCdetp“1.(85)
Inthedoublet case, becauseeq(85)leadsonlytomatrices pthatbelongtoSU p2q, thematrix
rC“Cpbelongs to SU p2qas well and thus can be written in exponential form. Although
this procedure works for the doublet case only, we formulate the f ollowing equations for any
multiplicity, to show that one can choose the form of the matrix psuch that it belongs to the
m-dimensional irreducible representation (irrep) of SU p2q. IfCthen belongs to this irrep, rC
will belong to the same group as well, i.e.one can write it in an exponential form, eq (69).
However, as discussed above, Cmight not belong to this irreducible representation, and thus
one needs to apply a diﬀerent procedure to diagonalize the g-tenso r for higher than doublet
multiplicities. In the doublet case, eq (85) leads to the matrix pin the following expression
26without any restrictions, while for higher multiplicities one must additio nally restrict the
choice of the phase factors
tαkum
k“1“ t´ηS,´ηpS´1q,...,ηS u, m “2S`1, η PR (86)
ñp“¨
˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˝e´iηS0...0
0e´iηpS´1q...0
............
0 0 ... eiηS˛
‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‚“e´iηS3. (87)
Using this form of the matrix pwe can then transform eq (76) as
p:rHZ
up“1
2crguveiηS3Sve´iηS3, (88)
p:rHZ
up“1
2crguv`
e´iηR3˘
vwSw, (89)
p:rHZ
up“1
2csguvSv,sg“rge´iηR3, (90)
where we have used identity (188) derived in Appendix M. Because of the form of the matrix
R3, eq (209), the exponential factor in eq (90) can be written as follo ws
e´iηR3“¨
˚˚˚˚˝0
e´iησ2
0
0 01˛
‹‹‹‹‚“¨
˚˚˚˚˝0
cosη´iσ2sinη
0
0 0 1˛
‹‹‹‹‚“¨
˚˚˚˚˝cosη´sinη0
sinηcosη0
0 0 1˛
‹‹‹‹‚.(91)
Combining eqs (84), (90) and (91) one gets
sg“¨
˚˚˚˚˝rg11rg120
rg21rg220
0 0rg33˛
‹‹‹‹‚¨
˚˚˚˚˝cosη´sinη0
sinηcosη0
0 0 1˛
‹‹‹‹‚. (92)
Our goal is to diagonalize the matrix sg, a task which amounts to solving the following two
27equations with unknown parameter η
´rg11sinη`rg12cosη“0, (93)
rg21cosη`rg22sinη“0. (94)
Becausetherowsofthe rg-tensorareorthogonalvectors, seeeq(83),andthematrixex pp´iησ2q
represents a rotation in the two-dimensional real vector space, it is always possible to ﬁnd
such a rotation if the vectors are nonzero. Indeed, the solution o f eqs (93) and (94) reads
η“tan´1ˆrg12
rg11˙
“tan´1ˆ
´rg21
rg22˙
, (95)
where we have utilized eq (83). The parameter ηin eq (95) deﬁnes the matrix pin eqs (85)
and (86) that diagonalizes the sg-tensor according to eq (90).
The only loose end is the assumption that the rows of the rg-tensor are nonzero. In the
case of one or more zero rows, one may ﬁx the above procedure us ing a solution to analogous
problem discussed in section 4.
The case of an arbitrary multiplicity: In the procedure for the doublet case we took
advantage of the fact that, by ﬁxing the determinant of the matr ixCto one, it will auto-
matically belong to the 2-dimensional irreducible representation of S Up2q—i.e.the natural
representation—and can thus be expressed using the exponentia l mapping, see eq (69). For
the case of higher than doublet multiplicity, ﬁxing the determinant of Cto one will make it a
member of the group SU pmq, but not necessarily a member of the m-dimensional irreducible
representation of SU p2q. However, as discussed earlier, there exists a choice of phase fac tors
psuch that the matrix Cpis a member of the irrep and thus can be parametrized according
to eq (69). In addition, a proper choice of pwould lead to a diagonal g-tensor, i.e.eq (64)
would be satisﬁed ( uis not a summation index)
p:rHZ
up“1
2crguuSu. (96)
28Because there exist pfor which this equation holds, the equation has the following form for
u“1
¨
˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˝e´iα10...0
0e´iα2...0
............
0 0 ... e´iαm˛
‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‚¨
˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˝0r1eiβ1... 0 0
r1e´iβ10... 0 0
...............
0 0 ... 0rm´1eiβm´1
0 0 ... r m´1e´iβm´10˛
‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‚ˆ(97)
ˆ¨
˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˝eiα10...0
0eiα2...0
............
0 0... eiαm˛
‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‚“1
2crg11¨
˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˝0r1...0 0
r10...0 0
...............
0 0...0rm´1
0 0... r m´10˛
‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‚.(98)
Here only the upper- and lower-diagonal of the matrix rHZ
1are nonzero. In addition, they are
composed of complex numbers with arbitrary phases and moduli equ al to the oﬀ-diagonal
elements of the matrix S1. Because the beta parameters are known, one can write set of
linear equations for the unknown alpha parameters as
¨
˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˝1´1 0...0 0
0 1 ´1...0 0
..................
0 0 0 ...1´1
1 1 1 ...1 1˛
‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‚¨
˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˝α1
α2
...
αm´1
αm˛
‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‚“¨
˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˝β1
β2
...
βm´1
´γ˛
‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‚. (99)
In eq (99) the last equation represents the fact that the new coe ﬃcientsrC“Cpshould
belong to the m-dimensional irreducible representation of SU pmqwith detrC“1. However,
the untransformed matrix Chas a determinant with an arbitrary phase, det C“exppiγq,
29see also eqs (70)–(74). The determinant of the matrix in eq (99) is n onzero, and therefore
the equation has a unique solution which deﬁnes the transformation matrixp, which in turn
diagonalizes the g-tensor according to eq (96). Note that this pro cedure also works for the
doublet case.
The procedure for the diagonalization of the g-tensor under the a ssumptions discussed
in section 2 can be summarized as follows:
1. Choose the reference basis set tΦnum
n“1such that it satisﬁes the same transformations
under time-reversal symmetry as presented in eq (8), see sectio n 3.
2. Construct matrices HZ
uand calculate the g-tensor, see eq (62).
3. Find the principal axes in real space, i.e.diagonalize the G-tensor, see also eqs (38)
and (40).
4. Diagonalize the matrix HZ
3and determine the rg33g-value, see eqs (65)–(68).
5. Calculate rHZ
1and determine the phase factors (alpha parameters) by solving th e linear
set of equation in eq (99).
6. Construct the matrix p,pkl“δklexppiαkq, and diagonalize the g-tensor according to
eq (96).
Acknowledgement
This project has been supported by the Slovak Grant Agencies VEG A and APVV (contract
no. 2/0135/21 and APVV-19-0516). In addition, this study has re ceived funding by the
Operation Program of Integrated Infrastructure for the proj ect, UpScale of Comenius Uni-
versity Capacities and Competence in Research, Development and I nnovation, ITMS2014+:
313021BUZ3, co-ﬁnanced by the European Regional Development Fund. I’m grateful to
James R. Asher for thorough proofreading of the text and valuab le comments.
30Appendix A
Ifonehasaccesstothesolutionsoftheperturbation-freeeigen problem, eq(3),itisconvenient
to express the wavefunctions Ψ kin the truncated orthonormal basis of Φ n
Ψk“CnkΦn. (100)
By projecting eq (2) onto the space deﬁned by the orthonormal w avefunctions Φ n, we then
obtain the following eigenvalue matrix equation
/angbracketleftbig
ΦmˇˇH0`HZˇˇΦn/angbracketrightbig
Cnk“EkCmk, (101)
“
Emδmn`/angbracketleftbig
ΦmˇˇHZˇˇΦn/angbracketrightbig‰
Cnk“EkCmk. (102)
Here we have used the eigenvalue expression in eq (3), the Kroneck er delta function δmn,
and the fact that the set of basis functions tΦnuis orthonormal,/angbracketleftbig
ΦmˇˇΦn/angbracketrightbig
“δmn.
Appendix B
Theorem: For a system with an odd number of electrons described by a time-re versal-
symmetric Hamiltonian, every energy level is even-times degenerat e and the eigenfunctions
can be chosen to form Kramers partners
Neis odd,rH,Ks “0, HΨi“EΨi (103)
ñi“1...2NE,tΨi,sΨiu P tΨiu2NE
i“1. (104)
In addition, tΨiu2NE
i“1forms an orthonormal set of wavefunctions.
Proof:In Appendices J and P it is shown that, for an odd number of electron s, Kramers
partners are orthonormal— i.e.they form two distinct wavefunctions—and that Kramers
31partners are eigenfunctions belonging to the same energy level. Th erefore, one can simply
choose any eigenfunction Ψ 1,HΨ1“EΨ1, and then by forming its Kramers partner, sΨ1“
KΨ1, one gets another eigenfunction with the same energy, HsΨ1“EsΨ1.
Without loss of generality, we can then assume that a set of 2 neigenfunctions of Hare
already orthonormal and form Kramers partners, tΨi,sΨiun
i“1. When starting the procedure
outlined below, simply set n“1. If the energy level is more than 2 n-times degenerate one
needs to construct a wavefunction Ψ 2n`1that is orthonormal to the set tΨi,sΨiun
i“1and that
is an eigenfunction of Hwith the energy E. One way to create Ψ 2n`1is by the following
projection technique
Ψ2n`1“˜
1´nÿ
i“1|Ψi/angb∇acket∇ight/angb∇acketleftΨi| ´nÿ
i“1ˇˇsΨi/angbracketrightbig/angbracketleftbigsΨiˇˇ¸
Ψorig
j, (105)
k“1...n ñ (106)
/angbracketleftbig
ΨkˇˇΨ2n`1/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
ΨkˇˇΨorig
j/angbracketrightbig
´nÿ
i“1/angbracketleftbig
ΨkˇˇΨi/angbracketrightbig/angbracketleftbig
ΨiˇˇΨorig
j/angbracketrightbig
´nÿ
i“1/angbracketleftbig
ΨkˇˇsΨi/angbracketrightbig/angbracketleftbigsΨiˇˇΨorig
j/angbracketrightbig
“0,(107)
/angbracketleftbigsΨkˇˇΨ2n`1/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbigsΨkˇˇΨorig
j/angbracketrightbig
´nÿ
i“1/angbracketleftbigsΨkˇˇΨi/angbracketrightbig/angbracketleftbig
ΨiˇˇΨorig
j/angbracketrightbig
´nÿ
i“1/angbracketleftbigsΨkˇˇsΨi/angbracketrightbig/angbracketleftbigsΨiˇˇΨorig
j/angbracketrightbig
“0.(108)
where we have utilized the fact that/angbracketleftbig
ΨkˇˇΨi/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbigsΨkˇˇsΨi/angbracketrightbig
“δkiand/angbracketleftbig
ΨkˇˇsΨi/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbigsΨkˇˇΨi/angbracketrightbig
“0.
The wavefunction Ψorig
jis from the initial set of eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian— i.e.a
set that does not necessarily consist of sets of Kramers partner s. If Ψorig
jbelongs to the
subspace formed by tΨi,sΨiun
i“1then Ψ 2n`1is zero, in which case one needs to repeat the
procedure with a diﬀerent Ψoriguntil a nonzero wavefunction is obtained. When successful
one can then normalize the wavefunction Ψ 2n`1. Because Ψ 2n`1is a linear combination of
eigenfunctions of the same energy level, it is also an eigenfunction wit h that same energy as
well.
According to Appendix J the wavefunction sΨ2n`1is orthogonal to Ψ 2n`1, and because
Ψ2n`1is orthonormal to the set tΨi,sΨiun
i“1, eqs (106)–(108), sΨ2n`1is orthonormal to this
32set as well ( k“1...n)
/angbracketleftbigsΨ2n`1ˇˇΨk/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
KΨ2n`1ˇˇΨk/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
Ψ2n`1ˇˇK:Ψk/angbracketrightbig˚“ ´/angbracketleftbig
Ψ2n`1ˇˇsΨk/angbracketrightbig˚“0,(109)
/angbracketleftbigsΨ2n`1ˇˇsΨk/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
KΨ2n`1ˇˇsΨk/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
Ψ2n`1ˇˇK:KΨk/angbracketrightbig˚“/angbracketleftbig
Ψ2n`1ˇˇΨk/angbracketrightbig˚“0,(110)
where we have utilized the fact that for an odd number of electrons the following holds [see
also eq (172)]
KK“ ´1, (111)
K:KK“ ´K:, (112)
K:“ ´K, (113)
and that Kis a unitary operator, K:K“1. In addition, note that Kramers partners have
the same norm, see Appendix (P), and thus if Ψ 2n`1is normalized to one then sΨ2n`1is
normalized to one as well. If 2 n`2ă2NEthen one should repeat the described procedure
withn“n`1. Finally, itis nowclear that every energy level must beeven-times d egenerate,
because when using the procedure described above one adds eigen functions in pairs. QED.
Appendix C
Theorem: The non-Kramers partners5can be constructed from the non-magnetic wave-
functions as follows
KΨ1“Ψ1
KΨ2“Ψ2ñΦ“1?
2pΨ1`iΨ2q
sΦ“1?
2pΨ1´iΨ2q, (114)
/angbracketleftbig
ΨiˇˇΨj/angbracketrightbig
“δij, i,j “1,2ñ/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbigsΦˇˇsΦ/angbracketrightbig
“1. (115)
33Proof:Using the fact that Kis an antilinear operator [see eq (142)], it holds that
sΦ“KΦ“1?
2KpΨ1`iΨ2q “1?
2pKΨ1´iKΨ2q “1?
2pΨ1´iΨ2q (116)
/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig
“1
2/angbracketleftbig
Ψ1`iΨ2ˇˇΨ1`iΨ2/angbracketrightbig
(117)
“1
2“/angbracketleftbig
Ψ1ˇˇΨ1/angbracketrightbig
`/angbracketleftbig
Ψ2ˇˇΨ2/angbracketrightbig
`2R`
i/angbracketleftbig
Ψ1ˇˇΨ2/angbracketrightbig˘‰
“1. (118)
And according to Appendix P (non-)Kramers partners have the sa me norm. QED.
Appendix D
Theorem: Eigenfunctions of the time-reversal symmetric Hamiltonian for a sy stem with an
even number of electrons can be chosen such that they are invaria nt under time-reversal, i.e.
they are non-magnetic (see Appendix E)
Neis even, HΨ“EΨ,rH,Ks “0ñKΨ“Ψ, (119)
and form an orthonormal set of wavefunctions.
Proof:To prove the above theorem it is suﬃcient to show that eq (119) hold s for an energy
level of arbitrary degeneracy, i“1...NE
Neis even, HΨi“EΨi,rH,Ks “0ñKΨi“Ψi. (120)
Without loss of generality, let us assume that a set of n´1 eigenfunctions of Hare already
orthonormal and non-magnetic, KΨnm
i“Ψnm
ifori“1...n ´1, and that the nth eigen-
function Ψ nis orthogonal to this set and normalized to one. When starting the p rocedure
outlined below simply set n“1. The Kramers partner sΨn:“KΨnis the eigenfunction of
Hwith the energy Eand has the same norm as Ψ n, see Appendix P. The non-magnetic
34eigenfunction of Hwith energy Ecan be constructed as
Ψnm
n“cnΨn`c˚
nsΨn, (121)
wherecn“rneiαnis a complex number chosen such that Ψnm
nis normalized to one
/angbracketleftbig
Ψnm
nˇˇΨnm
n/angbracketrightbig
“ |cn|2/angbracketleftbig
ΨnˇˇΨn/angbracketrightbig
` |cn|2/angbracketleftbigsΨnˇˇsΨn/angbracketrightbig
`c2
n/angbracketleftbigsΨnˇˇΨn/angbracketrightbig
` pc2
nq˚/angbracketleftbig
ΨnˇˇsΨn/angbracketrightbig
(122)
“2|cn|2`2R`
c2
n/angbracketleftbigsΨnˇˇΨn/angbracketrightbig˘
“2r2
n“
1`R`
ei2αn/angbracketleftbigsΨnˇˇΨn/angbracketrightbig˘‰!“1. (123)
One solution for the parameters rnandαncan be expressed as
/angbracketleftbigsΨnˇˇΨn/angbracketrightbig
“0ñrn“1?
2,@αnPR, (124)
/angbracketleftbigsΨnˇˇΨn/angbracketrightbig
‰0ñrn““
2`
1`ˇˇ/angbracketleftbigsΨnˇˇΨn/angbracketrightbigˇˇ˘‰´1
2, αn“ ´1
2arccos˜
R/angbracketleftbigsΨnˇˇΨn/angbracketrightbig
ˇˇ/angbracketleftbigsΨnˇˇΨn/angbracketrightbigˇˇ¸
.(125)
The wavefunction Ψnm
nis non-magnetic
KΨnm
n“KcnΨn`Kc˚
nsΨn“c˚
nKΨn`cnKsΨn“c˚
nsΨn`cnΨn“Ψnm
n.(126)
Furthermore, Ψnm
nis an eigenfunction of Hwith eigenvalue E, because it is composed of
two wavefunctions Ψ nandsΨnwhich are also eigenfunctions of Hwith eigenvalue E[see
also (265)]. In eq (126) we have utilized the relation K2“1, which holds for systems with
even numbers of electrons, see eq (172). Finally, because Ψ nis orthogonal to the set of
wavefunctions tΨnm
iun´1
i“1,/angbracketleftbig
Ψnm
iˇˇΨn/angbracketrightbig
“0, the non-magnetic eigenfunction Ψnm
nis orthogonal
to this set as well
/angbracketleftbig
Ψnm
iˇˇΨnm
n/angbracketrightbig
“cn/angbracketleftbig
Ψnm
iˇˇΨn/angbracketrightbig
`c˚
n/angbracketleftbig
Ψnm
iˇˇsΨn/angbracketrightbig
“c˚
n/angbracketleftbig
Ψnm
iˇˇK:KsΨn/angbracketrightbig
(127)
“c˚
n/angbracketleftbig
KΨnm
iˇˇKKΨn/angbracketrightbig˚“c˚
n/angbracketleftbig
Ψnm
iˇˇΨn/angbracketrightbig˚“0. (128)
35To repeat the procedure outlined above, one ﬁrst needs to const ruct the wavefunction
Ψn`1that is orthonormal to our given set of non-magnetic orthonorma l eigenfunctions
tΨnm
iun
i“1and that is the eigenfunction of Hwith the energy E. One way to construct
such wavefunction is to project out every wavefunction tΨnm
iun
i“1from the eigenfunction
Ψorig
j
Ψn`1“˜
1´nÿ
i“1|Ψnm
i/angb∇acket∇ight/angb∇acketleftΨnm
i|¸
Ψorig
j, (129)
k“1...n ñ/angbracketleftbig
Ψnm
kˇˇΨn`1/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
Ψnm
kˇˇΨorig
j/angbracketrightbig
´nÿ
i“1/angbracketleftbig
Ψnm
kˇˇΨnm
i/angbracketrightbig/angbracketleftbig
Ψnm
iˇˇΨorig
j/angbracketrightbig
“0.(130)
where/angbracketleftbig
Ψnm
kˇˇΨnm
i/angbracketrightbig
“δkiand Ψorig
jis an eigenfunction from the starting set of wavefunctions
in eq (120). However, if Ψorig
jbelongs to the subspace represented by the wavefunctions
tΨnm
iun
i“1, eq (129) gives a zero wavefunction. In this case one just needs t o chose a diﬀerent
Ψorigand repeat until a nonzero wavefunction is obtained. Finally, norma lize the nonzero
Ψn`1and start the process from the beginning with n“n`1. QED.
Appendix E
Theorem: For operators that are time-reversal-antisymmetric and Hermitia n, the non-
magnetic states have vanishing expectation values
O:“O,KOK:“ ´O,KΨ“Ψ ñ/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
“0. (131)
Proof: Utilizing the fact that the time-reversal operator is unitary, eq (1 41), a proper
deﬁnition of theadjoint of theantilinear operator, eq(143), andt he fact thatthe expectation
36values of a Hermitian operator are real, eq (153), one can show
/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇK:KOK:KˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
“ ´/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇK:OKˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
“ ´/angbracketleftbig
KΨˇˇOˇˇKΨ/angbracketrightbig˚(132)
“ ´/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig˚“ ´/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
. (133)
The only number that can be positive and negative at the same time is z ero. QED. Note
that the reason that the wavefunctions for which sΨ“Ψ are called ”non-magnetic” is that all
operators which represent magnetic interactions are time-rever sal-antisymmetric and Her-
mitian; and thus these wavefunctions have zero expectation value s with magnetic operators
according to theorem (131).
Appendix F
Theorem : For non-Kramers partners the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the time -reversal-anti-
symmetric and Hermitian operator Oare zero
O:“O, OK“ ´KO,sΨ“KΨ,K2“1ñ/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
“0 (134)
Proof: Non-Kramers pairs (see Appendix C) may arise only in the case of a s ystem with an
even number of electrons, because they are constructed from n on-magnetic wavefunctions,
sψ“ψ, which cannot occur for odd Ne, where/angbracketleftbig
ψˇˇsψ/angbracketrightbig
“0 (see Appendix J). For the case of
a system with an even number of electrons it holds that K2“1 [see eq (172)], and we can
write
/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOKˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
“ ´/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇKOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
“ ´/angbracketleftbig
K:ΨˇˇOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig˚“ ´/angbracketleftbig
KΨˇˇOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig˚(135)
“ ´/angbracketleftbigsΨˇˇOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig˚“ ´/angbracketleftbig
OΨˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
“ ´/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇO:ˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
“ ´/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
. (136)
37Here we are employing an identity valid for even Ne
K2“1, (137)
K2K:“K:, (138)
K“K:, (139)
as well as using the properties of the time-reversal operator in eq s (141) and (143), the
deﬁnition of a Hermitian operator, O:“O, and the deﬁnition of the adjoint of a linear
operator in eq (151). Finally, one must note that zero is the only num ber that can be
simultaneously both positive and negative. QED.
Appendix G
In the four-component framework the many-electron time-reve rsal operator, for the system
withNeelectrons, has the form
K“Neź
i“1Ki, K i“ ´iΣy,iK0,i,Σy,i“¨
˚˝σy,i0
0σy,i˛
‹‚, (140)
whereKiis the one-electron time-reversal operator, K0,irepresents the complex conjugation
operator,K0,iφp/vector riq “φ˚p/vector riq,σy,iis theyth Pauli matrix, and index iindicates on which
electron the operators are acting. Because KandKiare antilinear unitary operators it holds
38that
K:K“KK:“1, (141)
KpaΨ`bΦq “a˚KΨ`b˚KΦ, (142)
/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇKΦ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
K:ΨˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig˚, (143)
K:
iKi“KiK:
i“1, (144)
Kipaψ`bφq “a˚Kiψ`b˚Kiφ, (145)
/angbracketleftbig
ψˇˇKiφ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
K:
iψˇˇφ/angbracketrightbig˚, (146)
wherea,bPC;ψ,φ P rL2pR3qs4are four-spinors (complex vector-valued square-integrable
functions from R3toC4); and Ψ,ΦPVNe, withVNe“S´HbNeandH“ rL2pR3qs4, are
many-electron wavefunctions that belong to the Fock subspace f orNefermions. Because the
Fock subspace VNeis equipped with the inner product
/angbracketleftbig
.ˇˇ./angbracketrightbig
:VNeˆVNeÑC, (147)
deﬁned by the properties
/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig˚“/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
, (148)
/angbracketleftbig
aΨ1`bΨ2ˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig
“a/angbracketleftbig
Ψ1ˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig
`b/angbracketleftbig
Ψ2ˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig
, a,b PC, (149)
Ψ‰0ñ/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
ą0, (150)
it forms a Hilbert space. Finally, note that the deﬁnition of the adjoin t of the linear operator
O—in contrast to the antilinear operator above—is written as
/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOΦ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
O:ΨˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig
. (151)
39For a more detailed description of antilinear operators, we refer th e interested reader to the
excellent book by Messiah.2Note especially the deﬁnition of the adjoint of the antilinear
operator, see eq (143) and related discussion in Chapter XV in ref 2 .
Appendix H
Theorem : For a time-reversal-antisymmetric and Hermitian operator Othe expectation
values of (non-)Kramers partners have opposite sign
O:“O,K:OK“ ´O,sΨ“KΨ ñ/angbracketleftbigsΨˇˇOˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
“ ´/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
.(152)
Proof: BecauseOis a Hermitian operator, O:“O, the expectation values of any wave-
function are real
/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig˚“/angbracketleftbig
OΨˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇO:ˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
. (153)
Considering eq (153), the properties of the time-reversal opera torK, eqs (141)–(143), and
the fact that Ois time-reversal-antisymmetric, K:OK“ ´O, one can write
/angbracketleftbigsΨˇˇOˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
KΨˇˇOˇˇKΨ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇK:OKˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig˚(154)
“ ´/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig˚“ ´/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇOˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
. (155)
QED.
40Appendix I
Theorem : For the doublet case, if one changes the phase of the Kramers pa irtΨ,sΨu
associated with the g-tensor
gu1“4cR/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
,
gu2“ ´4cI/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
,
gu3“4c/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
,(156)
the newrg-tensor of the phase-shifted Kramers pair trΨ,srΨu
rgu1“4cR/angbracketleftbigrΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsrΨ/angbracketrightbig
,
rgu2“ ´4cI/angbracketleftbigrΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsrΨ/angbracketrightbig
,
rgu3“4c/angbracketleftbigrΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇrΨ/angbracketrightbig
,(157)
can be written in the form
rΨ“eiαΨ, α PR (158)
ñ¨
˚˚˚˚˝rg11rg12rg13
rg21rg22rg23
rg31rg32rg33˛
‹‹‹‹‚“¨
˚˚˚˚˝g11g12g13
g21g22g23
g31g32g33˛
‹‹‹‹‚¨
˚˚˚˚˝cosp2αqsinp2αq0
´sinp2αqcosp2αq0
0 0 1˛
‹‹‹‹‚.(159)
Proof: Because the time-reversal operator is antilinear, see eq (142), the Kramers partner
ofrΨ transforms as follows
rΨ“eiαΨ ñsrΨ“e´iαsΨ. (160)
Inserting the relations between trΨ,srΨuand tΨ,sΨuinto eqs (157), employing the identity
eiα“cosα`isinα, (161)
41and using the relations for the g-tensor in eq (156), one can expand the components of the
rg-tensor in terms of the elements of the g-tensor
rgu1“4cR/angbracketleftbig
eiαΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇe´iαsΨ/angbracketrightbig
“4cR/visualspace
e´i2α/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig(
“4cR/visualspace“
cosp2αq ´isinp2αq‰“
R/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
`iI/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig‰(
“4ccosp2αqR/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
`4csinp2αqI/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
“cosp2αqgu1´sinp2αqgu2,(162)
rgu2“ ´4cI/angbracketleftbig
eiαΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇe´iαsΨ/angbracketrightbig
“ ´4cI/visualspace
e´i2α/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig(
“ ´4cI/visualspace“
cosp2αq ´isinp2αq‰“
R/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
`iI/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig‰(
“ ´4ccosp2αqI/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
`4csinp2αqR/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
“cosp2αqgu2`sinp2αqgu1,(163)
rgu3“4c/angbracketleftbig
eiαΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇeiαΨ/angbracketrightbig
“4c/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇHZ
uˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
“gu3. (164)
Eqs (162)–(164) can be written in the matrix form presented in eq ( 159). QED.
Note that this theorem is a special case of the transformation of t he g-tensor presented
in eqs (33)–(35), where the key identity, eq (188), has—from the point of view of this
appendix—the form
e´iασzσueiασz“`
ei2αRz˘
uvσv, (165)
withθ“ ´2αand/vector n“ p0,0,1q. The transformation of the basis wavefunctions can be
written in the matrix form
eiασz“¨
˚˝eiα0
0e´iα˛
‹‚, (166)
which corresponds to a change of the phase in eq (160), and accor ding to eq (91) the three-
dimensional rotation exp pi2αRzqhas the form of the transformation matrix in eq (159).
42Appendix J
Theorem: For a system with an odd number of electrons described by the time- reversal-
symmetric Hamiltonian, every energy level is at least twofold degene rate and is formed by
Kramers partners.
Proof:First, let us apply the time-reversal operator Kon the eigenvalue equation (3)
H0Φk“EkΦk, (167)
KH0K:KΦk“EkKΦk. (168)
Because the Hamiltonian H0is time-reversal-symmetric, KH0K:“H0, we can write
H0Φk“EkΦk, (169)
H0sΦk“EksΦk, (170)
where we have utilized the deﬁnition of the Kramers partner, sΦk“KΦk. From expressions
(169) and (170) it follows that wavefunctions Φ kandsΦkshare the same energy. To prove
thattheenergy level Ekisatleast doubly-degenerate we needtoshow thatthewavefunct ions
are diﬀerent. To do so we will show that they are orthogonal. Note t hat two wavefunctions
are the same, up to a phase factor, if their inner product is a phase factor. For the inner
product of the above Kramers pair one can write
/angbracketleftbig
ΦkˇˇsΦk/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
K:KΦkˇˇKΦk/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
KΦkˇˇKKΦk/angbracketrightbig˚
“/angbracketleftbig
KKΦkˇˇsΦk/angbracketrightbig
“ p´1qNe/angbracketleftbig
ΦkˇˇsΦk/angbracketrightbig
. (171)
Here we have utilized the fact that Kis the antilinear unitary operator, (141) and (143), and
43the following identity for the square of the many-electron time-rev ersal operator
KK“˜Neź
iKi¸˜Neź
jKj¸
“Neź
iKiKi“Neź
ip´1q “ p´1qNe, (172)
where pKiq2“ ´1 follows directly from the deﬁnition of Kiin eq (140).
From eq (171) it follows that for an odd number of electrons the Kra mers partners are
orthogonal,/angbracketleftbig
ΦkˇˇsΦk/angbracketrightbig
“0, because the only complex number that is equal to its negative
value is zero. QED.
Appendix K
Theorem : The real linear combination of spin matrices have the following eigenv alues and
eigenvectors
rSu,Svs “iǫuvwSw,pbuSuqC“Ce,/vectorbPR3(173)
ñek“Mkˇˇ/vectorbˇˇ, MkP tS,S ´1,..., ´Su, k “1,...,2S`1,(174)
C“e´iθ/vectorS¨/vector n, θ “cos´1˜
bzˇˇ/vectorbˇˇ¸
, /vector n “´ˇˇ/vectorbˇˇ2´b2
z¯´1
2´
/vectorbˆ/vector z¯
,ˇˇ/vectorbˇˇ‰0,(175)
whereǫuvwis the Levi–Civita symbol, Sis a (half-)integer number, /vector zrepresents the unit
vector in the z direction, Care eigenvectors in columns, and eis a diagonal matrix with the
diagonal elements ek. Note that forˇˇ/vectorbˇˇ“0, eq (173) has a trivial solution.
Proof: First we transform the eigenvalue equation (173) by employing the unitary transfor-
mation from SU pmq(withm“2S`1)
eiθ/vectorS¨/vector npbuSuqe´iθ/vectorS¨/vector neiθ/vectorS¨/vector nC“eiθ/vectorS¨/vector nCe. (176)
Note that only for m“2 do these unitary transformations represent all elements of SU pmq,
although for higher mthey form the m-dimensional irreducible representation of SU p2q
44[which is a subgroup of SU pmq]. Then, because the spin matrices satisfy the commutation
relation in eq (173), we can utilize the result of Appendix M [eq (207) or (188)]
”
bu´
e´iθ/vectorR¨/vector n¯
uvSvı
eiθ/vectorS¨/vector nC“eiθ/vectorS¨/vector nCe (177)
´
˜buSu¯
˜C“˜Ce, (178)
˜C“eiθ/vectorS¨/vector nC, (179)
˜bu“´
e´iθ/vectorR¨/vector n¯
vubv“´
eiθ/vectorR¨/vector n¯
uvbv. (180)
Because the matrices exp piθ/vectorR¨/vector nqrepresent all proper rotations—all elements of SO p3q—the
length of/vectorband/vector˜bis the same,ˇˇ/vector˜bˇˇ“ˇˇ/vectorbˇˇ. Moreover, it is always possible to ﬁnd a proper
rotation of/vectorbsuch that/vector˜bwill face in the z direction
/vector˜b!“¨
˚˚˚˚˝0
0
ˇˇ/vectorbˇˇ˛
‹‹‹‹‚, (181)
providing the length of /vectorbis nonzero. To ﬁnd the proper rotation—deﬁned by /vector nandθ—which
leads to eq (181), one must realize that /vector nis a unit vector orthogonal to both vectors /vectorband
/vector˜b, and thatθis an angle between these two vectors. Thus by using standard vec tor algebra
we get two equations
/vectorb¨/vector˜b“ˇˇ/vectorbˇˇ2cosθ, (182)
/vector n“´ˇˇ/vectorbˇˇ2sinθ¯´1´
/vectorbˆ/vector˜b¯
, (183)
whose solution leads to /vector nandθin eq (175). Finally, if eq (181) is satisﬁed, then eq (178)
becomes
´ˇˇ/vectorbˇˇSz¯
˜C“˜Ce, (184)
45and because the spin matrix Szis diagonal with the diagonal elements
SkkP tS,S ´1,..., ´Su, k “1,...,2S`1, (185)
the eigenvectors ˜Chave a simple form, ˜Clk“δlk. One thus obtains the eigenvalues ekfrom
eq (174), and to get the eigenvectors Cone uses eq (179)
Clk“´
e´iθ/vectorS¨/vector n¯
lp˜Cpk“´
e´iθ/vectorS¨/vector n¯
lk. (186)
QED.
Appendix L
Because the spin operators Suthat act in m-dimensional complex space Cmsatisfy the
commutation relation in eq (205)
rSu,Svs “iǫuvwSw, (187)
the expression in eq (207) becomes
eiθ/vectorS¨/vector nSue´iθ/vectorS¨/vector n“´
e´iθ/vectorR¨/vector n¯
uvSv. (188)
To simplify the notation in this appendix we write eq (188) in the form
U`Su`
U`˘:“`
O`˘
uvSv, (189)
46with the matrices O`andU`being
O`“e´iθ/vectorR¨/vector n, (190)
U`“eiθ/vectorS¨/vector n. (191)
The operator O`is a proper rotation in a real three-dimensional vector space— i.e.it
is a member of the special orthogonal group SO p3q—while the operator U`is a unitary
transformation in a complex m-dimensional vector space— i.e.it is a member of the special
unitary group SU pmq. Thus both matrices, O`andU`, have a determinant equal to 1.
Importantly, the expression exp p´iθ/vectorR¨/vector nqrepresents all group elements of SO p3q, while, on
the other hand, the expression exp piθ/vectorS¨/vector nqrepresents all group elements of SU pmqonly in
the two-dimensional case, m“2. Note, however, that U`represents all elements of the
m-dimensional irreducible representation of SU p2q—the subgroup of SU pmq. In the physics
literature, this represenation is labeled using Srather than m, withm“2S`1.
In the rest of this appendix we will discuss the case m“2, for which eq (188) holds
for all elements of the groups SU p2qand SO p3q. The role of the unitary transformation in
eq (188)—in the context of this work—stems from the choice of the orthonormal basis in
which the qm operators are represented [see the discussion in the m ain text, e.g.eq (26)].
Therefore, in the general case, one must deal with the expressio nUSupUq:withUPUp2q,
rather than U`SupU`q:withU`PSUp2q. NotethatSU p2qisasubgroup ofU p2q. However,
as we show in the following theorem, the additional ﬂexibility in U, as compared to U`, is
redundant in the context of eq (188).
Theorem : For every UPUp2qthere exist U`PSUp2qandO`PSOp3qsuch that
USupUq:“`
O`˘
uvSv, (192)
U`Su`
U`˘:“`
O`˘
uvSv, (193)
U“eiα
2U`,detU“eiα, α PR, (194)
47withO`andU`as deﬁned in eqs (190) and (191).
Proof: Because U:U“1, the determinant of Uis a phase factor
detpU:Uq “detp1q, (195)
pdetUq˚detU“1, (196)
|detU|2“1, (197)
ñdetU“eiα, α PR. (198)
Then for every Uthere exists U`such that
U“U`I´, (199)
`
I´˘
kl“δkleiα
2. (200)
One may readily verify that the determinant of such a U`is one. Because I´is the identity
matrix multiplied by a phase factor, one can easily modify eq (192) to g ive
`
U`I´˘
Su`
U`I´˘:“`
O`˘
uvSv, (201)
U`eiα
2Sue´iα
2`
U`˘:“`
O`˘
uvSv, (202)
thus obtaining expression (193). QED.
As a direct consequence of the above theorem, there does not ex ist a unitary transforma-
tionUPUp2qthat gives an improper rotation, O´(a member of O p3qwith the determinant
equal to minus one), i.e.
USupUq:‰`
O´˘
uvSv. (203)
Theconsequenceofthisstatementisthatitisimpossibletomeasure thesignoftheindividual
g-tensor eigenvalues, and only the sign of the g-tensor determina nt is an observable quantity
48(see the main text for a more detailed discussion of this fact).
Note that the theorem presented in this appendix is valid only for m“2 because U`
represents all elements of SU p2qand thus every UPUp2qcan be decomposed as presented
in eq (199). For mą2 one may still decompose every UPUpmqin a similar way, except for
the fact that the resulting U`, with det U`“1, does not necessarily satisfy the relation in
eq (191), and thus not every such U`satisﬁes eq (193).
Appendix M
Let us consider three operators Xuon a vector space V which satisfy the following commu-
tation relation
”
˜Xu,˜Xvı
“ǫuvw˜Xw, (204)
whereǫuvwis the Levi–Civita symbol. The three operators ˜Xuare basis elements of the Lie
algebrasop3qrepresented on a vector space V. To remain consistent with the de ﬁnition of
momentum operators in quantum theory, we deﬁne a new set of ope ratorsXu“i˜Xuwhich
then satisfy the commutation relation
rXu,Xvs “iǫuvwXw. (205)
Theorem : For the operators Xuthat satisfy the commutation relation (205) the following
relations hold
eiθ/vectorX¨/vector n/vectorXe´iθ/vectorX¨/vector n“/vectorXcosθ`´
/vector nˆ/vectorX¯
sinθ` p1´cosθq/vector n´
/vectorX¨/vector n¯
,(206)
eiθ/vectorX¨/vector nXue´iθ/vectorX¨/vector n“´
e´iθ/vectorR¨/vector n¯
uvXv, (207)
whereu,v,ware Cartesian indices, θPR,/vector nis a unit vector in R3, and ´i/vectorRare basis
49elements of the Lie algebra sop3qrepresented on vector space R3
pRuqvw“ ´iǫuvw, (208)
R1“¨
˚˚˚˚˝0 0 0
0 0 ´i
0i0˛
‹‹‹‹‚, R2“¨
˚˚˚˚˝0 0i
0 0 0
´i0 0˛
‹‹‹‹‚, R3“¨
˚˚˚˚˝0´i0
i0 0
0 0 0˛
‹‹‹‹‚.(209)
Proof: To prove expression (206) we employ the Baker–Campbell–Hausdo rﬀ formula
eiθ/vectorX¨/vector n/vectorXe´iθ/vectorX¨/vector n“/vectorX` piθq”
/vectorX¨/vector n,/vectorXı
`1
2!piθq2”
/vectorX¨/vector n,”
/vectorX¨/vector n,/vectorXıı
`1
3!piθq3”
/vectorX¨/vector n,”
/vectorX¨/vector n,”
/vectorX¨/vector n,/vectorXııı
`.... (210)
Taking advantage of the commutation relation (205) we can write
”
/vectorX¨/vector n,/vectorXı
“ ´i´
/vector nˆ/vectorX¯
, (211)
”
/vectorX¨/vector n,”
/vectorX¨/vector n,/vectorXıı
“/vectorX´´
/vectorX¨/vector n¯
/vector n, (212)
”
/vectorX¨/vector n,”
/vectorX¨/vector n,”
/vectorX¨/vector n,/vectorXııı
“ ´i´
/vector nˆ/vectorX¯
. (213)
Because the commutator expressions, eqs (211) and (213), are equal, the equation (210)
simpliﬁes signiﬁcantly
eiθ/vectorX¨/vector n/vectorXe´iθ/vectorX¨/vector n“/vectorX´i8ÿ
n“0piθq2n`1
p2n`1q!´
/vector nˆ/vectorX¯
`8ÿ
n“1piθq2n
p2nq!´
/vectorX´´
/vectorX¨/vector n¯
/vector n¯
(214)
“8ÿ
n“0piθq2n
p2nq!/vectorX`8ÿ
n“0p´1qnθ2n`1
p2n`1q!´
/vector nˆ/vectorX¯
´8ÿ
n“1piθq2n
p2nq!´
/vectorX¨/vector n¯
/vector n.(215)
Recognizing the Taylor series of trigonometric functions sin θand cosθone arrives at the
expression (206).
Theright-hand-sideoftheeq(206)isRodrigues’well-knownrotat ionformula. Rodrigues’
50rotationformula provides an algorithmto compute the exponential map fromthe Lie algebra
sop3qto the Lie group of all proper rotations, SO p3q. If we consider the representation of
the Lie algebra and Lie group on the three-dimensional real vector spaceR3, the Rodrigues’
formula then rotates an element of this vector space, /vector vPR3, by given axis /vector nand angleθ
e´iθ/vectorR¨/vector n/vector v“/vector vcosθ` p/vector nˆ/vector vqsinθ` p1´cosθq/vector np/vector v¨/vector nq. (216)
Expression (206) then connects the unitary transformationof t heoperators Xuwith a proper
rotation in R3as
eiθ/vectorX¨/vector n/vectorXe´iθ/vectorX¨/vector n“e´iθ/vectorR¨/vector n/vectorX, (217)
which equals to eq (207). QED.
In eq (217) the operator Opθ,/vector nq “expp´iθ/vectorR¨/vector nqrepresents all proper rotationsin R3,i.e.
all rotations with det pOq “1. Note that operators Xucan have diﬀerent forms depending
on what vector space is chosen for the representation of the lie alg ebrasop3q. This includes,
but is not limited to, the operators
pRuqvw“ ´iǫuvw, (218)
/vectorL“ ´i´
/vector rˆ/vector∇¯
, (219)
/vectorS“1
2/vector σ, (220)
/vectorJ“/vectorL`/vectorS, (221)
with/vector σrepresenting a vector composed of Pauli matrices.
51Appendix N
In this appendix we discuss the deﬁnition of the ﬁctitious spin space a nd its consequences.
We will demonstrate the ideas using the case of the doublet system, but the theory can easily
be extended to any arbitrary multiplicity. The basic idea of the ﬁctitio us spin space is to
represent wavefunctions in the complex vector space in a way that preserves their properties.
Many-electron wavefunctions belong to the Fock subspace, which is equipped with the inner
product/angbracketleftbig
Φ1ˇˇΦ2/angbracketrightbig
ÑC, see also Appendix G. These wavefunctions are then associated wit h
vectors in the complex vector space Cm—also known as spin vectors—equipped with the dot
product/vector v¨/vector w“v:wÑC. To associate a wavefunction with a vector from the ﬁctitious
spin space, one ﬁrst selects a reference basis set tΦnum
n“1and expands the wavefunction in
it, Ψ “CnΦn. The wavefunction is then represented by the expansion coeﬃcien ts used to
construct the vector in Cm,vn:“Cn. In the doublet case, m“2, the reference basis set
itself— the Kramers pair tΦ,sΦu—is thus associated with the two-dimensional spin vectors
in the following manner
ΦÑv“¨
˚˝1
0˛
‹‚,sΦÑsv“¨
˚˝0
1˛
‹‚. (222)
As discussed in section 2, the purpose of the EPR eﬀective spin Hamilt onian is to describe
projection of the qm Hamiltonian onto a space deﬁned by a set of wav efunctions tΦnum
n“1,
i.e.Heﬀ!“Hqm. For the doublet case this equivalence is presented in eq (13). The m apping
in eq (222) then leads to the same expectation value—either of the w avefunction with the
Zeeman Hamiltonian or of the spin vector with the eﬀective spin Hamilto nian—regardless of
the type of space it is calculated in. Thus for example for the basis wa vefunction Φ it holds
52that
/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig
Ñ´
1 0¯˚¨
˚˝1
2cBuguvSv˛
‹‚¨
˚˝1
0˛
‹‚ (223)
“´
1 0¯˚¨
˚˝/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig /angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇsΦ/angbracketrightbig
/angbracketleftbigsΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig
´/angbracketleftbig
ΦˇˇHZˇˇΦ/angbracketrightbig˛
‹‚¨
˚˝1
0˛
‹‚,(224)
with/vectorS“1
2σ. Eq (223) represents an expectation value for one basis function ; the expression
for all combinations of basis functions can be written as follows
/angbracketleftbig
ΦmˇˇHZˇˇΦn/angbracketrightbig
Ñv:
mˆ1
2cBuguvSv˙
vn, (225)
with tΦ1,Φ2u “ tΦ,sΦuand tv1,v2u “ tv,svu. Choosing a diﬀerent orthonormal Kramers
pair as a basis set for representation of the Zeeman Hamiltonian cor responds to the unitary
transformation rΦm“UnmΦn. In the main text we have discussed the usefulness of the
unitary transformations that belong to the m-dimensional irreducible representations of the
SUp2qgroup [in the case of m“2 this is the natural representation of SU p2qinC2]
rΦm“´
e´iθ/vectorS¨/vector n¯
nmΦn. (226)
One of the advantages of such transformations is that if the set tΦnum
n“1satiﬁes relations
in eq (8), then the set trΦnum
n“1fulﬁlls these relations as well [see also the corresponding
discussion under eq (8)]. Therefore, for m“2, the basis set on the left-hand-side of eq (226)
forms a Kramers pair as well. According to eq (226) the spin vectors rvmassociated with the
basis functions rΦmcan be written as prvmqn“ rexpp´iθ/vectorS¨/vector nqsnm, or equivalently
rΦÑrv“¨
˚˝e´iθ/vectorS¨/vector n˛
‹‚¨
˚˝1
0˛
‹‚,rsΦÑsrv“¨
˚˝e´iθ/vectorS¨/vector n˛
‹‚¨
˚˝0
1˛
‹‚, (227)
53where trΦ1,rΦ2u “ trΦ,srΦuand trv1,rv2u “ trv,srvu. Employing eqs (226) and (188) one may
calculate the expectation values of the set trΦ,rsΦuwith the Zeeman operator in both the real
and ﬁctitious spin spaces as
/angbracketleftbigrΦmˇˇHZˇˇrΦn/angbracketrightbig
“´
eiθ/vectorS¨/vector n¯
mk/angbracketleftbig
ΦkˇˇHZˇˇΦl/angbracketrightbig´
e´iθ/vectorS¨/vector n¯
ln(228)
Ñ (229)
rv:
mˆ1
2cBuguvSv˙
rvn (230)
“´
eiθ/vectorS¨/vector n¯
mkˆ1
2cBuguvSv˙
kl´
e´iθ/vectorS¨/vector n¯
ln(231)
“ˆ1
2cBuguveiθ/vectorS¨/vector nSve´iθ/vectorS¨/vector n˙
mn(232)
“v:
mˆ1
2cBuguvrSv˙
vn (233)
“v:
m„1
2cBuguv´
e´iθ/vectorR¨/vector n¯
uwSw
vn (234)
“v:
mˆ1
2cBurguvSv˙
vn. (235)
Finally, one may calculate the orientation of the ﬁctitious spin of wave functions Φ and rΦ as
follows
/vector s“v:/vectorSv, (236)
/vector˜s“rv:/vectorSrv (237)
“rv:eiθ/vectorS¨/vector n/vectorSe´iθ/vectorS¨/vector nrv, (238)
“rv:e´iθ/vectorR¨/vector n/vectorSrv, (239)
“e´iθ/vectorR¨/vector n/vector s. (240)
One may deduce a few facts from the discussion in this appendix:
1. The ﬁrst important observation is that the orientation of the ﬁc titious spin of the
reference basis wavefunctions in the ﬁctitious spin space, see eqs (222) and (236), is
54always along the z-axis.
2. From point 1 one infers that by choosing the reference basis set one also chooses the
axis system in the ﬁctitious spin space.
3. Again from point 1, one may see that the orientation of the real a nd ﬁctitious spin are
not related unless additional assumptions are imposed.
4. From eqs (225), (230), and (240) one concludes that choosing a diﬀerent basis set
of orthonormal wavefunctions is equivalent to rotation of the ﬁct itious spin of those
wavefunctions.
5. Eqs (230) and (233) correspond to active and passive rotation , respectively, where the
active transformation rotatates spin vectors in a ﬁxed coordinat e axis system and the
passive transformation rotates the axis system—thus changing t he spin operators—
while the spin vectors remain ﬁxed.
6. Finally, eqs (234) and (235) correspond to rotation of the g-te nsor while leaving the
spin vectors and axis system unchanged.
Appendix O
Theorem : Let us consider an m-dimensional vector space Vover a ﬁeld Fof either real
Ror complex Cnumbers, with a deﬁned dot product of two vectors /vector v,/vector w PVsuch that
/vector v¨/vector wÑF. The generalization of the dot product to abstract vector space s is called the inner
product, see also eqs (147)–(150). Then, for every set of the o rthonormal vectors t/vector wvum
v“1
from the vector space V, it holds that
/vector wu¨/vector wv“δuv ñWTW“WWT“1, (241)
55where the matrix Wis composed of the coordinates of the vectors /vector wvin columns
pwvqu:“Wuv, (242)
with pwvqubeing deﬁned using the orthonormal basis set t/vector nuum
u“1such that
/vector wv¨/vector nu“ pwvqu, (243)
/vector nu¨/vector nv“δuv. (244)
Eq (243) represents a projection of the vector /vector wvonto the direction deﬁned by the vector
/vector nu. Note that the transpose sign Tin eq (241) indicates that we have chosen the ﬁeld of real
numbers; the theorem and the proof is, however, easily applicable t o the ﬁeld of complex
numbers as well.
Proof: Any vector can be viewed as a linear combination of the basis vector s with its
coordinates being the expansion coeﬃcients
/vector wv“ pwvqk/vector nk. (245)
Eq (243) may then be readily veriﬁed
/vector wv¨/vector nu“ rpwvqk/vector nks ¨/vector nu“ pwvqkr/vector nk¨/vector nus “ pwvqkδku“ pwvqu, (246)
where we have employed the orthonormalization condition for the ba sis set, eq (244). Using
thedeﬁnition ofavector throughexpansion ineq(245) andtheort honormalizationcondition
56in eq (241) one can easily prove the ﬁrst identity
/vector wu¨/vector wv“δuv, (247)
rpwuqk/vector nks ¨ rpwvql/vector nls “δuv, (248)
pwuqkδklpwvql“δuv, (249)
pwuqkpwvqk“δuv, (250)
WkuWkv“δuv, (251)
WTW“1. (252)
To prove the second identity one can simply reverse the role of the t wo vector sets, t/vector wvum
v“1
and t/vector nvum
v“1, where now one expands the vectors /vector nvin the orthonormal basis set t/vector wvum
v“1
instead
/vector nu¨/vector nv“δuv, (253)
rpnuqk/vector wks ¨ rpnvql/vector wls “δuv, (254)
pnuqkδklpnvql“δuv, (255)
pnuqkpnvqk“δuv, (256)
r/vector nu¨/vector wks r/vector nv¨/vector wks “δuv, (257)
pwkqupwkqv“δuv, (258)
WukWvk“δuv, (259)
WWT“1. (260)
To obtain eq (257) we have used eq (243) with the roles of the vecto rs/vector nuand/vector wu, (i.e.which
one is used as a basis and which is the vector being expanded) revers ed. In other words,
pnuqkmay be calculated as the projection of the vector /vector nuonto the direction deﬁned by the
vector/vector wk. QED.
57Appendix P
Theorem: If Ψ is an eigenfunction of the time-reversal symmetric Hamiltonian H, then its
(non-)Kramers partner, sΨ:“KΨ, is an eigenfunction of Hwith the same eigenvalue and
the same norm
HΨ“EΨ,rH,Ks “0ñHsΨ“EsΨ,/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbigsΨˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
. (261)
Proof:Utilizing the time-reversal symmetry of the Hamiltonian H, the fact that the time-
reversal operator is unitary, eq (141), a proper deﬁnition of the adjoint of the antilinear
operator, eq (143), and the conjugate symmetry, eq (148), on e can easily show that
HΨ“EΨ, (262)
KHΨ“KEΨ, (263)
HKΨ“EKΨ, (264)
HsΨ“EsΨ, (265)
and
/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇΨ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
ΨˇˇK:KΨ/angbracketrightbig
“/angbracketleftbig
KΨˇˇKΨ/angbracketrightbig˚“/angbracketleftbigsΨˇˇsΨ/angbracketrightbig
. (266)
QED. Note that Ψ and sΨ are not necessarily diﬀerent wavefunctions, see the case of an e ven
number of electrons discussed in Appendix D.
References
(1) Griﬃth, J. S. Some investigations in the theory of open-shell ion s.Mol. Phys. 1960,3,
79–89.
58(2) Messiah, A. Quantum mechanics ; North-Holland Pub. Co.: Amsterdam, 1961–1962; pp
1–1136.
(3) Abragam, A.; Bleaney, B. Electron Paramagnetic Resonance of Transition Ions ; Oxford
University Press: Oxford, 1970; pp 1–911.
(4) Chibotaru, L. F. Advances in Chemical Physics ; John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2013; pp
397–519.
(5) Griﬃth, J. S. Spin Hamiltonian for Even-Electron Systems Having Even Multiplicity.
Phys. Rev. 1963,132, 316–319.
(6) Pryce, M. H. L. Sign of g in Magnetic Resonance, and the Sign of t he Quadrupole
Moment of Np237.Phys. Rev. Lett. 1959,3, 375–375.
(7) Bolvin, H.; Autschbach, J. Relativistic methods for calculating electron paramagnet ic
resonance (EPR) parameters ; Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2016; pp 725–763.
59