ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE
WITH SPHERES OF FINITELY MANY SIZES
EDER KIKIANTY AND MIEK MESSERSCHMIDT
Abstract. Ford∈N, a compact sphere packing of Euclidean space Rdis a
set of spheres in Rdwith disjoint interiors so that the contact hypergraph of
the packing is the vertex scheme of a homogeneous simplicial d-complex that
covers all of Rd.
We are motivated by the question: For d, n∈Nwith d, n≥2, how many
configurations of numbers 0< r 0< r 1< . . . < r n−1= 1can occur as the radii
of spheres in a compact sphere packing of Rdwherein there occur exactly n
sizes of sphere?
We introduce what we call ‘heteroperturbative sets’ of labeled triangula-
tions of unit spheres and we discuss the existence of non-trivial examples of
heteroperturbative sets. For a fixed heteroperturbative set, we discuss how a
compact sphere packing may be associated to the heteroperturbative set or
not.
We proceed to show, for d, n∈Nwith d, n≥2and for a fixed heterop-
erturbative set, that the collection of all configurations of ndistinct positive
numbers that can occur as the radii of spheres in a compact packing is finite,
when taken over all compact sphere packings of Rdwhich have exactly nsizes
of sphere and which are associated to the fixed heteroperturbative set.
1.Introduction
Sphere packing in general has many connections to other branches of mathe-
matics, see for example [CS99]. Consider the disc packing in Figure 1.1. Such a
packing is called ‘compact ’(we give a precise definition later) .Apart from being
objects of purely mathematical interest, some compact packings have been observed
to arise in self-assembled nano-structures: Compare the nine compact disc pack-
ings packings from [Ken06] with electron micrographs from the non-mathematical
literature [CCMFT23], [PDKM15] and [CRS+21]. Compact sphere and disc pack-
ings are therefore of special interest, not just within mathematics, but also in other
scientific disciplines.
In this paper we are motivated by the following question: For d, n∈Nwith
d, n≥2, how many configurations of numbers 0< r0< r1< . . . < r n−1= 1can
occur as the radii of spheres in a compact sphere packing of Rdwherein there occur
exactly nsizes of sphere?
Letd∈N. By asphere packing pof Euclidean space Rd, we mean a family of
spheres with pairwise disjoint interiors in Rd. By radii (p)we denote the set of all
positive real numbers that occur as radii of spheres from p.
2010Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary: 52C17, 05B40. Secondary: 57Q05, 52C26.
Key words and phrases. sphere packing, compact sphere packing.
1arXiv:2305.00758v2  [math.MG]  21 Dec 2023ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 2
Figure 1.1. One of the 164 compact packings of R2by discs with
threesizesfrom[FHS21, Packing54], herewithitspackingcomplex
overlaid.
Thecontact hypergraph of a sphere packing pofRdis defined as follows: The
vertex set is taken as the set of all the centers of spheres in the packing p. As
hyperedges, we take exactly the subsets Eof the vertex set that have cardinality at
most d+ 1and that satisfy both of the following two conditions: Firstly, for every
pair of distinct vertices aandbfrom the set E, the corresponding spheres in pthat
respectively have aandbas centers are mutually tangent. Secondly, if any vertex
of the hypergraph is an element of the convex hull of the set E, then this vertex is
an element of E.
We say a sphere packing pin Euclidean space Rdiscompact if the contact
hypergraph is exactly the vertex scheme of a homogeneous1simplicial d-complex
inRdwhose underlying space is homeomorphic to Rdthrough the identity map.
We call this homogeneous simplicial d-complex the packing complex of the compact
sphere packing p. Intuitively speaking, Rdis tesselated by the d-simplices in the
packing complex (cf. Figure 1.1).
In this paper we restrict our view to compact sphere packings psatisfying
|radii(p)|<∞andmaxradii(p) = 1. With d, n∈Nwe define
Πd,n:=
radii(p)pa compact sphere packing of Rd
|radii(p)|=n,maxradii(p) = 1
.
Our work in this paper is motivated by the following conjecture.
Conjecture 1.1. For all d, n∈Nwithd, n≥2, the set Πd,nis finite.
Although this conjecture remains open in full generality, some certain special
cases have been resolved and we discuss them shortly.
In this paper we prove a general result that can be used to show, for all d, n∈N
with d, n≥2, that certain subsets of Πd,nare finite. To this end, in Section 2.4, we
define what we call heteroperturbative sets of labeled triangulations of unit spheres
(of any dimension). Roughly, what this means is that, if a spherical triangulation
from a heteroperturbative set is perturbed while preserving its combinatorics, then
one edge must grow in length, and one edge must shrink in length (cf. Section 2.4).
Every sphere in a compact sphere packing in Rdhas canonically associated to it a
1Here ‘homogeneous’ means that every simplex of the complex is contained in a d-simplex that
is also in the complex.ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 3
labeled triangulation of the unit sphere in Rd(cf. Section 2.5). For a heteropertur-
bative set Sof labeled triangulations of unit spheres and a compact sphere packing
pinRd, we say that pis associated to Sif every sphere from phas its canonical
associated labeled triangulation being an element of S.
Our main result in this paper is:
Theorem 1.2. For all d, n∈Nwith d, n≥2andSany heteroperturbative set of
labeled triangulations of unit spheres, the set
Πd,n(S) :=

radii(p)pa compact sphere packing in Rd,
pis associated to S,
|radii(p)|=n,maxradii(p) = 1


is finite.
It is easily seen that the set of alltriangulations of the unit circle in R2is het-
eroperturbative (cf. Example 2.3), so the special case for d= 2of Conjecture 1.1 is
proven by applying Theorem 1.2 (this is the main result of [Mes23]). However, the
set all triangulations of the unit sphere in R3is not heteroperturbative (cf. Exam-
ple 2.4). Therefore, to be able to apply Theorem 1.2 in attacking Conjecture 1.1
ford= 3, one is required to find an appropriate proper subset of the set of all
labelled triangulations of the unit sphere in R3, and additionally, prove that it is
heteroperturbative.
In general it is difficult to determine if a set of triangulations of unit spheres
is heteroperturbative. A consequence of recent work by Winter [Win23, Corol-
lary 4.13] shows that the set, that we denote W(cf. Example 2.6), of all triangu-
lations of unit spheres of any dimension that are determined from inscribed convex
polytopes that contain the center of their circumsphere in the interior, is heterop-
erturbative. Hence, non-trivial heteroperturbative sets do exist, and by extension,
Theorem 1.2 shows that non-trivial and fairly interesting subsets of Πd,nare finite.
We also exhibit a set of labeled spherical triangulations, denoted Q, that is
such that Πd,n= Π d,n(Q)for all d, n≥2(cf. Section 2.4). Clearly, a proof that
Qis heteroperturbative would, through application of Theorem 1.2, immediately
prove Conjecture 1.1. However, whether or not Qis heteroperturbative is an open
problem to the best of our knowledge.
Before continuing, we briefly remark on some relevant history regarding the
family of sets Πd,nford, n∈N.
It is easily seen that |Π1,n|=∞for all n≥2and that |Π2,1|= 1. For dimensions
d≥3, regular simplices do not tesselate Rd, because 2πis not an integer multiple
of the dihedral angles occurring in a regular d-simplex [Cho92, Remark 2]. Hence
|Πd,1|= 0for all dimensions d≥3. In particular, the famous E8and Leech lattice
sphere packings (cf. [CS99]) are notcompact packings.
For dimension 2, in 2006, Kennedy showed that |Π2,2|= 9by computing all
elements of the set Π2,2[Ken06]. Determining |Π2,3|turned out to be more chal-
lenging and took a number of years. A finite bound for |Π2,3|was determined by the
second named author in [Mes20], and working roughly at the same time Π2,3was
computed and was shown to have 164elements by Fernique, Hashemi, and Sizova
in [FHS21]. A crucial ingredient in showing that |Π2,3|is finite is the following
result:ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 4
Lemma 1.3. [FHS21, Lemma 6.1] There exists a constant K > 0so that every
compact disc packing pofR2withradii(p) ={r0, r1, r2}satisfying 0< r0< r1<
r2= 1is such that
K≤r0
r1.
We specifically make note of the order of the quantifiers in the above result. The
constant Kis independent of the choice of compact packing with discs of three sizes
and can be taken to be min{r0:{r0,1} ∈Π2,2}. That the ratio of the small and
medium size discs in a compact packing with three sizes of discs is related to the
radii that occur in compact packings with two sizes of discs is indicative that an
inductive argument may be used to glean information on the sets Π2,nforn >3.
Exploitingthisideain[Mes23], the secondnamedauthorshowedthat |Π2,n|isfinite
for all n≥2. Although the cardinality of these sets could be shown to be finite, the
methods in [Mes23] are non-constructive and do not produce quantitative bounds
on the cardinality of the sets Π2,nforn≥2.
For dimension 3, in [Fer21, Fer19], Fernique computed Π3,2andΠ3,3which
respectively were shown to have cardinality 1and4. Fernique himself calls his
results disappointing for the reason that, in three dimensions, compact packings
of spheres of two or three sizes arise only through the filling of interstitial holes of
close-packings of unit spheres. This is in contrast to the case in two dimensions
where, for example, there exists a rich variety of compact disc packings with three
sizes of discs that do not arise from compact disc packings with two sizes of discs
through merely filling in interstitial holes with discs (cf. [FHS21]). This contrast
in richness raises the following question:
Question 1.4. Does there exist a dimension greater than two that admits a com-
pact packing of spheres with two or more sizes which does not arise through filling
interstitial holes in a lattice packing of unit spheres?
Throughout this paper we make use of standard terminology regarding simpli-
cial complexes and related concepts. The reader unfamiliar with the terminology
may find definitions in [Mun84]. The specific standard terms we make use of are:
simplicial complex ,k-skeleton of a simplicial complex, abstract simplicial complex ,
theunderlying (topological) space of a simplicial complex, the vertex scheme of a
simplicial complex (i.e., the abstract simplicial complex that results from forget-
ting all geometric information of the simplicial complex), isomorphism of abstract
simplicial complexes , theclosed star of a vertex in a simplicial complex, the linkof
a vertex in a simplicial complex.
We now describe the path toward proving Theorem 1.2. The main flavor fol-
lows that of [Mes23]. Before giving more detail, we briefly describe the idea, which
consists of three main parts. For a fixed dimension d, firstly we define an abstract
discrete structure that is shown to always occur in every compact packing (cf. Sec-
tion 3). Secondly, we show that if such an abstract discrete structure arises from
a compact packing associated to some heteroperturbative set of labeled triangula-
tions of unit spheres, then this structure uniquely determines the radii of spheres
in the compact packing (cf. Section 4). Thirdly, we show that if such an abstract
discrete structure arises from a compact packing with nsizes of spheres that is as-
sociated to some fixed heteroperturbative set, then there exists a bound on the size
of the structure and, more importantly, this bound can be chosen so as to dependON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 5
only on the number of sizes of spheres nand the dimension d, and independently
of any particular packing (cf. Section 6). We note that, although these bounds
are shown to exist, the argument to show their existence is non-constructive. We
conclude that only finitely many such abstract discrete structures can arise from
compact packings associated to a heteroperturbative set, and the ones which do
arise in this way uniquely determine the radii in a compact packing associated to
some heteroperturbative set. This establishes Theorem 1.2.
We now move to describing the content of this paper in more detail.
Preliminary definitions and results are described in a number of subsections of
Section 2. In Section 2.1, we introduce what we call packing codes . These are
abstract simplicial complexes with labeled vertices that will be used to abstractly
describe a sphere and its neighbors in a compact packing. We introduce angle sym-
bols,realizations, andrealizers in Section 2.2. Angle symbols are used to abstractly
represent angles in the triangle formed by connecting the centers of three mutu-
ally tangent spheres with disjoint interiors and indeterminate radii. A realization
by a realizer assigns specific values to indeterminates in formal arithmetic expres-
sions. Typically realized expressions will be expressions involving angle symbols
derived from packing codes. An important result is Lemma 2.1, which establishes
a monotone relationship between realizers and the values of realized angle symbols.
This result is used later, as a first ingredient, in proving both Theorem 4.3 and
Lemma 5.2, which we are yet to discuss. In Section 2.3, we define what we mean
by aspherical simplicial complex and by a triangulation of the unit sphere in Rd.
We prove an easy lemma (Lemma 2.2) regarding the geometry of spherical trian-
gulations of unit spheres. Although easy, this result is nevertheless crucial to be
able to apply Winter’s results from [Win23] in the subsequent section. Section 2.4
sees definition of what we call heteroperturbative sets (of labeled spherical trian-
gulations of unit spheres) and we present a few relevant examples, non-examples,
and conjectured heteropertubative sets. In particular, we show that the sets T2
andW(Examples 2.3 and 2.6) are heteroperturbative, that T3(Example 2.4)
is not heteroperturbative, and we conjecture that Q(Definition 2.7) is heteroper-
turbative. In Section 2.5, we discuss how a compact packing pof spheres in Rd
is canonically labeled, determines a canonical realizer, and how each sphere in p
canonically determines a labeled spherical triangulation of the unit sphere Rd, and
byfurtherforgettingthegeometricstructureofthelabeledtriangulation, thesphere
canonically determines a packing code associated to the sphere.
In Section 3, we define what we call a fundamental set of packing codes . We
show that every compact packing gives rise to such a fundamental set of packing
codes (cf. Theorem 3.2 and Figure 3.1).
The main result in Section 4 is Theorem 4.3, showing that the radii of spheres in
a compact packing associated a heteroperturbative set is uniquely determined by
any fundamental set of packing codes that arises from the packing. As mentioned,
Lemma 2.1 is used together the defining property of a heteroperturbative set to
prove Lemma 4.1 which shows how the existence of labeled spherical triangulations
in a heteroperturbative set that are combinatorially equivalent to packing codes
from a fundamental set and whose edge lengths are determined through a realizer,
actually uniquely determines the realizer. Lemma 4.2 shows that labeled spherical
triangulations as required in Lemma 4.1 always exist in every compact packing.ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 6
The Bootstrapping Lemma (Lemma 5.2) is proven in Section 5. This lemma
is a generalization of Lemma 1.3 and is what makes the induction step work in a
strong induction toward proving the main technical result of the paper, Lemma 6.7,
from whence the name. The Bootstrapping Lemma relates the ratios of some of the
valuesoftworealizersundercertainassumptionsoftheexistenceoflabeledspherical
triangulationsofunitspheresfromaheteroperturbativesetthatarecombinatorially
equivalenttoapackingcodefromfundamentalset. Againasmentioned, Lemma2.1
along with the defining property of a heteroperturbative set is used in proving The
Bootstrapping Lemma.
Section 6 sees the proof of the main result of this paper, Theorem 1.2. For
d, n∈Nwith d, n≥2and a heteroperturbative set S, we introduce what we call
ann-essential set for Sin dimension d, which adds further technical conditions on
a fundamental set, related to the existence of two realizers ρandσand of labeled
triangulations from Srelating the two realizers ρandσto each other. We observe
that these further conditions are automatically satisfied by fundamental sets that
arise from an actual compact packing in Rdassociated to Swith nsizes of spheres:
The canonical labeled triangulations associated to spheres in the packing are taken,
and for σandρwe take both equal to the canonical realizer for the packing. This
observation, along with the previous observation that radii of the spheres in the
packingbeinguniquelydeterminedbythefundamentalset(Lemma4.1), thusshows
that the cardinality of Πd,n(S)is at most cardinality of the set, denoted Ed,n(S),
of all n-essential sets for Sin dimension d, (cf. Lemma 6.2). For any fixed d, we
thus proceed to show that the set Ed,n(S)is finite through strong induction on the
number n. As the base step of a strong induction, we show that the set Ed,2(S)
is finite (cf. Lemma 6.3). Lemma 6.7, the strong induction step, is the main
technical result. Given that the sets Ed,k(S)are finite for all k∈ {2, . . . , n −1},
using The Bootstrapping Lemma (Lemma 5.2), we show that the set Ed,n(S)is
finite by bounding the size of any element of Ed,n(S)using only features of the
finitely many elements inSn−1
k=2Ed,k(S). This proves the main result of this paper
in Corollary 6.9.
2.Preliminaries
2.1.Packing codes. Letd∈Nwith d≥2. Let Σbe any set of symbols. By a
d-dimensional packing code over Σ, or just a packing code , we mean a symbol c:T,
with c∈ΣandTan abstract homogeneous simplicial (d−1)-complex with vertices
labeled by elements from Σ. In a packing code c:T, we call cthecenterandTthe
neighbor complex of the packing code. For a vertex vinTwe denote its label by
λv∈Σ. We define λ(T) :={λv:va vertex in T}. By C(Σ), we denote the set of
alld-dimensional packing codes. The dependence on the dimension dis suppressed
in the notation C(Σ), but this should not cause confusion as dis fixed at all times.
2.2.Angle symbols and realizations. LetΣbe any set of symbols. For symbols
a, b, c∈Σwe denote the formal symbol
ca
b:= arccos(c+a)2+ (c+b)2−(a+b)2
2(c+a)(c+b)
.
We call ca
banangle symbol (over Σ). Wealwaysregard elements from Σin an angle
symbol as indeterminates. With three mutually tangent spheres with pairwise
disjoint interiors, with centers labeled a, b, and cforming a triangle, the symbolON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 7
ca
b
Figure 2.1. The angle represented by the angle symbol ca
b.
ca
bis meant to abstractly represent the magnitude of the angle formed at c(cf.
Figure 2.1). In the angle symbol ca
b, we call cthevertexof the symbol ca
b.
We define a realizerto be a map ρ: Σ→(0,∞). Given a realizer ρ: Σ→(0,∞)
and a formal arithmetic expression E, with symbols from Σ, we denote by E|ρthe
expression Ewith every symbol s∈Σoccurring in Ereplaced by ρ(s).We call E|ρ
the realization of Ebyρ.
An important result that we use multiple times in this paper is the following
lemma that establishes a specific monotone relationship between realizers and re-
alized angle symbols when the values of the realizer is kept constant on the vertex
of the angle symbol.
Lemma 2.1. LetΣbe any finite set of symbols and let a, b, c∈Σwithc̸=a. Let
ρ: Σ→(0,∞)and let ν: Σ→[0,∞)be a non-zero function.
(1)The map (0,∞)∋t7→ca
b|tρis constant.
(2)Ifν(c) = 0andν(a)>0, then the map [0,∞)∋t7→ca
b|ρ+tνis strictly
increasing.
(3)Ifν(c) =ν(a) =ν(b) = 0, then the map [0,∞)∋t7→ca
b|ρ+tνis constant.
Proof.With distinct symbols a, b, c, d ∈Σ, taking partial derivatives of the expres-
sioncb
atoward the indicated symbol, we obtain the following
∂acb
a=∂aca
b=√
bc
(c+a)√a√a+b+c,
∂acc
a=∂aca
c=c
(c+a)√
a2+2ac,
∂aca
a=2√c
(c+a)√2a+c,
∂ccb
a=∂cca
b=−(a+b+2c)√
ab
(c2+ab+ac+bc)√c√a+b+c,
∂ccc
a=∂cca
c=−a
(c+a)√
a2+2ac,∂dca
b= 0 ,
∂dca
c= 0 ,
∂dca
a= 0 ,
∂dcc
c= 0 ,
∂ccc
c= 0 .
It is easily seen from the definition of the expression ca
bthat the map (0,∞)∋
t7→ca
b|tρis constant.
Lett∈[0,∞)be arbitrary. Assuming ν(c) = 0, then the directional derivative
of map (0,∞)S∋σ7→α(x)|σatρ+tνin the direction of νis a positive scalar
multiple of
X
s∈Σ(∂sca
b)|ρ+tνν(s) =X
s∈Σ\{c}(∂sca
b)|ρ+tνν(s)≥0.ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 8
Assuming further that ν(a)>0, then at least one term of the above summation
is non-zero, and hence the map [0,∞)∋t7→ca
b|ρ+tνis strictly increasing. On
the other hand, assuming ν(c) =ν(a) =ν(b) = 0then every term in the above
summation is zero, and hence the map [0,∞)∋t7→ca
b|ρ+tνis constant. □
2.3.Spherical triangulations of unit spheres. Letd≥2,1≤k≤d. Let
G⊆Rdbe a set of kpoints with 0/∈Gso that so that G∪ {0}is affinely
independent. By the spherical (k−1)-simplex (defined by G) we mean the central
projection of the (k−1)-simplex defined by Gto the unit sphere of Rdcentered at 0.
Since 0/∈G, the spherical (k−1)-simplex is homeomorphic to the simplex defined
byGthrough central projection, and all faces of the spherical (k−1)-simplex are
contained in great spheres of the unit sphere of Rdof appropriate dimension.
By aspherical simplicial complex , we mean a simplicial complex, except with
all simplices in the complex being spherical simplices rather than usual simplices.
By aspherical triangulation of the unit sphere in Rd, we mean a homogeneous
spherical simplicial (d−1)-complex so that the underlying space of the spherical
simplicial complex is homeomorphic to the unit sphere through the identity map,
i.e., the spherical (d−1)-simplices of the spherical simplicial complex tesselate the
unit sphere of Rd.
We will say a spherical triangulation is combinatorially equivalent to an abstract
simplicialcomplex Aifthevertexschemeofthesphericaltriangulationisisomorphic
to the abstract simplicial complex A. By overloading the term, we will say two
spherical triangulations are combinatorially equivalent if the vertex schemes of both
triangulations are isomorphic to the same abstract simplicial complex.
We will say that two combinatorially equivalent spherical triangulations Pand
Qareedge-isometric if, with respect to the geodesic metric on the unit sphere,
every edge of Pis equally long to the corresponding edge of Q.
Before proceeding, we prove an elementary result regarding spherical triangula-
tions.
Lemma 2.2. Letd≥2and let Pbe a spherical triangulation of the unit sphere of
Rd.
(1)There exists no hyperplane H⊆Rd(through the origin) so that all vertices
ofPlie in one of the two closed half-spaces determined by H.
(2)The interior of the closed convex hull of all vertices from Pis non-empty.
(3)The center of the unit sphere, i.e. the origin, is contained in the interior
of the closed convex hull of all vertices from P.
Proof.We prove (1). Suppose His a hyperplane so that all vertices of Plie in
one of the two closed half-spaces determined by H. By our definition of spherical
simplices through central projection, all simplices in Rdthat define the spherical
simplices of Plie in this same closed half-space. There thus exists a point on the
unit sphere in the opposite open half-space of H, that is not covered by P. We
conclude that no such hyperplane Hexists.
We prove (2). Suppose that the closed convex hull Cof all vertices from Phas
empty interior. Then Cis contained in some affine hyperplane HofRd. Hence
Clies inside, or to one side of the hyperplane through the origin parallel to H,
contradicting (1).
We prove (3). Suppose that the closed convex hull Cof all vertices of Pdoes not
containthecenteroftheunitsphereasaninteriorpoint. Therearetwopossibilities,ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 9
either the center is a boundary point of C, or is an exterior point of C. By (2),
Chas non-empty interior. In both cases, using either the Supporting Hyperplane
Theorem or the Separation Theorem (see for instance [Lue69, Theorems 2 and 3,
p.133]), there exists a hyperplane so that all vertices of Plie in one of the two
closed half-spaces defined by this hyperplane, contradicting (1). □
2.4.Labeled spherical triangulations and heteroperturbative sets. ByT
we denote the set of all labeled spherical triangulations of unit spheres of any finite
dimension with the center of the unit sphere (the origin) and all vertices of the
triangulation carrying labels from N∪{0}. For P∈Tand vertex vinP, we define
the notation λvto denote the label in N∪ {0}of the vertex vinP.
LetP, Q∈T. We say PandQarecombinatorially equivalent with identical
labelsifPandQare combinatorially equivalent and all pairs the corresponding
vertices of PandQand their centers carry identical labels. This notion is an
equivalence relation on Tand we denote the equivalence class of PinTby[P].
Weintroducetheterm‘heteroperturbative’subsetof T, whichwedefineformally
in the next paragraph but first describe intuitively to hopefully aid the reader’s
understanding. Informally, a heteroperturbative subset of Tis such that if one
perturbs a labeled spherical triangulation from the heteroperturbative set, (while
retaining its combinatorial structure and also remaining inside the heteroperturba-
tive set), there must exist an edge of the triangulation that grows in length and
another edge that shrinks in length.
Formally, Let S⊆Tand let R∈S. For P∈[R]∩SandQ∈S, we say that Q
is aperturbation of PifQ∈[R]∩SandPis not edge-isometric to Q. We say the
equivalence class [R]∩SinSisheteroperturbative, if the following holds for any
pairP, Q∈[R]: IfPandQare not edge-isometric, then there exist two pairs of
respectively corresponding edges, uvandxyofP, and u′v′andx′y′ofQ, so that,
with respect to the geodesic metric on the unit sphere, the edge uvinPis strictly
longer than the corresponding edge u′v′inQ; and, on the other hand, the edge xy
inPis strictly shorter than the corresponding edge x′y′inQ. We say that Sis
aheteroperturbative set (of labeled spherical triangulations of unit spheres) if all
equivalence classes in Sare heteroperturbative.
Whether non-trivial/sufficiently interesting heteroperturbative sets even exist is
an obvious question, which we now briefly discuss.
It is an easy exercise to see that the set of all triangulations of the unit circle in
R2is heteroperturbative:
Example 2.3. Define T2⊆Tas all labeled spherical triangulations of the unit
circle in R2. The geodesic lengths of all edges in a triangulation from T2sum to
2π. Hence, for any P∈T2, we cannot have alledges in a perturbation of Pgrow
(shrink) as this would mean that the sum of the edge lengths in the perturbation
sum to strictly more (less) than 2π. We note that here the labels on vertices are
superfluous.
In contrast to the case for R2,the set of all labeled triangulations of the unit
sphere in R3is not heteroperturbative, as the following example demonstrates:
Example 2.4. Define T3⊆Tas all labeled spherical triangulations of the unit
spherein R3. Triangulatingtheunitspherein R3withanequatorialstripofbisected
darts (cf. Figure 2.2) shows that T3is not heteroperturbative.ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 10
Figure 2.2. The set T3is not heteroperturbative. Triangulate
the unit sphere of R3with an equatorial strip of bisected darts as
indicated on the left of the figure. By rotating the vertices and
edges on the equator around the polar axis we obtain a combi-
natorially equivalent triangulation, as on the right. On the right,
with respect to the geodesic metric on the sphere, some edges have
increased in length when compared to the corresponding edges on
the left, but no edge on the right has decreased in length when
compared to the corresponding edge on the left.
Aninterestingheteroperturbativesetofsphericaltriangulationsarisesasaconse-
quence of recent work by Winter on convex polytopes from [Win23]. The following
result is an easy consequence of [Win23, Corollary 4.13]:
Theorem 2.5 (Winter).Letd≥2and let YandZbe combinatorially equivalent
convex polytopes inscribed by the unit sphere of Rdso that the origin is contained in
the interior of Z. If there exists an edge in Zthat is strictly shorter (with respect
to Euclidean norm) than the corresponding edge of Y, then there exists an edge of
Zthat is strictly longer (with respect to Euclidean norm) than the corresponding
edge of Y.
Example2.6. Definetheset W⊆Tasallsphericaltriangulations P∈Tofaunit
sphere of any finite dimension d≥2for which the convex hull of the vertex set of P
forms a simplicial polytope whose face lattice is isomorphic, as a simplicial complex,
to the spherical triangulation Pthrough central projection onto the unit sphere. By
strict monotonicity of arcsinthere exists a strictly monotone relationship between
the length of an edge of the polytope and the geodesic length of the corresponding
edge of the triangulation P. By Lemma 2.2, the convex hull of the vertex set
ofPcontains the center of the unit sphere as an interior point, and hence by
Theorem 2.5, Wis seen to be heteroperturbative. Again, here the labels on vertices
are superfluous.
We point out that Was defined in the previous example is a proper subset of T.
Althoughitiseasilyseenthat T2⊆W,thesameisnottruefor T3, (cf. Figure2.3),
as the face lattice of convex hull of the vertices of a spherical triangulation in R3
can be different to the vertex scheme of the triangulation.
A directly relevant set of spherical triangulations is the one we now define.
Definition 2.7. Define the set Q⊆Tto be all labeled spherical triangulations
P∈Tfor which there exists a monotone map ρ:N∪ {0} → (0,∞)so that, withON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 11
c∈N∪ {0}denoting the label attached to the center of the unit sphere in P, both
of the following conditions hold:
(1) For all pairs of distinct vertices vandwofP(whether connected by an
edge or not), the geodesic distance in the unit sphere from vtowis at least
cλv
λw|ρ.
(2) For all edges vwinP, the geodesic length in the unit sphere of of vwis
exactly cλv
λw|ρ.
Intuitively, such a labeled spherical triangulation triangulation P∈Qdescribes
an arrangement of spheres around a central sphere, and with tangencies compat-
ible with the labeled spherical triangulation Pin the following way: The central
sphere, centered at the origin, has radius ρ(c). By scaling, every vertex vofP
corresponds to a point of tangency on the central sphere with a neighboring sphere
of radius ρ(λv). The first condition of Definition 2.7 ensures that the spheres of
respective radii ρ(λv)andρ(λw)that are tangent to the central sphere at points
corresponding to respectively vandwhave disjoint interiors. The second condition
of Definition 2.7 ensures that the spheres with respective radii ρ(λv)andρ(λw)
that are tangent to the central sphere at the points corresponding to vandware
tangent to each other.
By construction, canonically labeled spherical triangulations (cf. Section 2.5)
that arise in any compact sphere packing pare members of Q. A natural question
is whether or not Qis heteroperturbative.
Figure 2.3. The vertex scheme of a spherical triangulation of the
unit sphere in R3need not be isomorphic to face lattice of the
polytope obtained as the convex hull of all vertices of the trangu-
lation. Consider an octahedral triangulation of the unit sphere of
R3with the vertex at the north pole moved slightly down on one
of the meridians so as to not be lie on the vertical line through the
origin. We split this meridian into two rather “skinny” triangles as
in the figure on the left. However, two vertices XandYcan then
“see” each other over the chord connecting the vertices TandB.
It is then seen that the face lattice of the polytope formed as the
convex hull of the vertices of the triangulation is not isomorphic
to the vertex scheme of the triangulation.ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 12
Conjecture 2.8. The set Qof labeled spherical triangulations, as defined in Defi-
nition 2.7, is heteroperturbative.
A proof of Conjecture 2.8 together with Theorem 1.2 will immediately provide
a proof of Conjecture 1.1.
2.5.Canonical labelings, canonical realizers, canonical spherical trian-
gulations, and packing codes determined by compact sphere packings.
Letd, n∈Nwith d, n≥2. Let qbe any collection of spheres in Rdwith
radii(q) ={r0, r1, . . . , r n−1}satisfying 0< r0< r1< . . . < r n−1. By the canonical
labeling of q,we mean attaching the label j∈ {0, . . . , n −1}to the center of every
sphere of radius rjinq. With Σ :={0, . . . , n −1}, we define the canonical realizer
ρ: Σ→(0,∞)ofqasρ(j) :=rj, for all j∈Σ.
Letpbe any compact sphere packing of Rdwith|radii(p)|=nthat is canonically
labeled by Σ :={0, . . . , n −1}. Fix any sphere A∈p. Since the underlying space
of the packing complex of pis homeomorphic to Rdthrough the identity map,
the center of the sphere Ais an interior point of the union of the closed star of
center of the sphere A(as a set in Rdas a topological space). We obtain a labeled
triangulation of the sphere Aby centrally projecting the link of the center of Ain
the packing complex of ponto the surface of the sphere Aand carrying the labels
of vertices along. Let a∈Σdenote the label attached to the center of the sphere A.
By scaling and translating we obtain a labeled spherical triangulation of the unit
sphere of RdinTand we call this the canonical labeled triangulation associated
to the sphere A∈p. Let TAbe the abstract simplicial complex obtained as the
vertex scheme of the canonical labeled triangulation of the sphere Aby forgetting
all geometric information, but retaining all labels on the vertices. Then a:TA
is ad-dimensional packing code over Σ, and we call a:TAthecanonical packing
code associated to the sphere A.We define code (A) := a:TAand codes (p) :=
{code(A)∈C(Σ)|A∈p}.
3.Fundamental sets of packing codes
In this section, we define what we call fundamental sets of packing codes. These
structures are always present as a subset of all the packing codes obtained from a
compact sphere packing (cf. Theorem 3.2). In Figure 3.1 we display an example of
a fundamental set determined by a compact packing in two dimensions.
Fundamental sets allow us to firstly show that the combinatorics of a compact
packing associated to a heteroperturbative set uniquely determine the radii of the
spheres occurring in the packing (cf. Section 4), and to secondly establish The
Bootstrapping Lemma in Section 5 relating ratios of values of realizers under the
condition of existence of appropriate labeled spherical triangulations from a het-
eroperturbative set who are combinatorially equivalent with identical labels to the
codes in the fundamental set.
Definition 3.1. Letd, n∈Nwith d, n≥2andΣ :={0, . . . , n −1}. Let C⊆C(Σ).
We will say that Cisa fundamental set (of packing codes) if{c|c:T∈C}=
{0, . . . , n −2}and for every non-empty set K⊆ {0, . . . , n −2}there exists a code
c:T∈Cso that c∈Kand there exists a vertex from Tthat has label that is not
an element of K, i.e., λ(T)\K̸=∅.ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 13
Figure 3.1. The figure displays a compact packing pofR2from
[Fer23] with five sizes of discs. The canonical labeling of the pack-
ing is overlaid. Packing codes associated to compact disc packings
in two dimensions have cycles as their neighbor complexes. We can
therefore succinctly express the neighbor complexes of such codes
as just the string of labels on the vertices in the order that the
vertices occur in the cycle. From the figure, we thus read off the
set codes (p)(modulo reflection and rotation) as:

0 : 43142 ,1 : 421230 ,
2 : 431140 ,3 : 434210 ,
4 : 3320120

.
The conclusion of Theorem 3.2 is that {c:T∈codes (p)|c≤3}is
a fundamental set. This can be easily verified directly.
Theorem 3.2. Letd, n∈Nwith d, n≥2andΣ := {1, . . . , n −1}. Let pbe
a canonically labeled compact sphere packing in Rdwith|radii(p)|=n. The set
C:={c:T∈codes (p)|c≤n−2}is a fundamental set.
Proof.Since|radii(p)|=n, we have {c|c:T∈C}={0, . . . , n −2}. Suppose there
exists a non-empty set K⊆ {0, . . . , n −2}so that for all c:T∈Cwith c∈K
we have that λ(T)\K=∅. As there exists a sphere labeled by an element from K,
and every sphere in plabeled by an element from Konly has neighbors labeled by
elements from K, we conclude that all spheres in pmust be labeled by elements
from K. But this yields the contradiction n=|radii(p)|=|K|< n. We conclude
thatCis fundamental. □
4.Uniqueness of radii in compact packings associated to a
heteroperturbative set
In this section our goal is to prove Theorem 4.3 that shows, for some fixed
heteroperturbative set S, that the combinatorics of a compact packing associated
toSuniquely determines the radii of the spheres in the packing.
The following lemma should be seen as a generalization of the result [Mes23,
Theorem 4.2] to higher dimensions. The argument is essentially the same, pro-
ceeding through application of Lemma 2.1 and leveraging the defining property of
heteroperturbative sets.
Lemma 4.1. Letd, n∈Nwith d, n≥2andΣ := {0, . . . , n −1}. LetSbe a
heteroperturbative set of labeled spherical triangulations of unit spheres. Let C⊆ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 14
C(Σ)be a fundamental set. Let ρ, σ∈ {τ: Σ→(0,∞) :τ(n−1) = 1 }and assume,
for all c:Tc∈C, that there exist spherical triangulations Pc, Qc∈Sthat are both
combinatorially equivalent to Tcwith identical labels and are such that, for every
edgevwinTc, the corresponding edges of the triangulations PcandQcrespectively
have geodesic lengths cλv
λw|ρandcλv
λw|σ. Then ρ=σ.
Proof.We proceed by contradiction: Suppose that ρ̸=σ. Define t0:= sup {t >0 :
∀j∈Σ, tσ(j)< ρ(j)}andJ:={j∈Σ :t0σ(j) =ρ(j)}. Note that the set Jis not
empty, else t0cannot be the supremum of the set {t >0 :∀j∈Σ, tσ(j)< ρ(j)}.
Further, since ρ(n−1) = σ(n−1) = 1, we have that n−1/∈J. Since Cis
fundamental, there exists a code k:Tk∈Cwith k∈Jand some p∈V(Tk)so
thatλp /∈J. Define ν:=ρ−t0σ. The map νtakes on non-negative values and the
support of νis exactly Σ\J. By Lemma 2.1, for every edge vwofTk,
kλv
λw|σ=kλv
λw|t0σ=kλv
λw|t0σ+0ν≤kλv
λw|t0σ+1ν=kλv
λw|ρ.
Therefore no edge of Pkis strictly shorter that the corresponding edge of Qk. Fur-
thermore, since λp /∈J, again by Lemma 2.1, at least one of the above inequalities is
strict, implying that an edge of Pkis strictly longer than the corresponding edge of
Qk. Hence PkandQkare not edge-isometric, while living in the same equivalence
class in the heteroperturbative set S. This implies the existence of an edge in Pk
that is strictly shorter that the corresponding edge of Qk, contrary to our earlier
remark that this is not the case. Consequently the supposition ρ̸=σis false, and
we conclude that ρ=σ. □
Lemma 4.2. Letd, n∈Nwithd, n≥2and define Σ :={0, . . . , n −1}. Let pbe a
canonically labeled compact sphere packing in Rdwith|radii(p)|=nand normalized
so that maxradii(p) = 1. Let ρ: Σ→(0,1]denote the canonical realizer of the
packing p. The canonical labeled triangulation associated to any sphere in p(by
using the canonical realizer ρ) is an element of the set Q, as in Definition 2.7.
Proof.This follows from construction as discussed in Section 2.4. □
Theorem 4.3. Letd, n∈Nwithd, n≥2and define Σ :={0, . . . , n −1}. LetSbe
a heteroperturbative set of labeled spherical triangulations of unit spheres. Let pbe
a canonically labeled compact sphere packing in Rdwith|radii(p)|=n, normalized
so that maxradii(p) = 1, and so that the canonical labeled spherical triangulation
associated to every sphere from pis an element of S. Let C⊆codes (p)be a
fundamental set. The canonical realizer ρ: Σ→(0,1]of the packing pis the
unique map in {τ: Σ→(0,∞) :τ(n−1) = 1 }so that, for every c:Tc∈C, there
exists a spherical triangulation Pc∈Sthat is combinatorially equivalent to Tcwith
identical labels and is such that for every edge vwofTcthe corresponding edge in
Pchas length cλv
λw|ρ.
Proof.By Lemma 4.2, the canonical realizer ρofpis such that for every c:Tc∈
C, there exists a spherical triangulation Pc∈G(the canonical labeled spherical
triangulation of some sphere from p) that is combinatorially equivalent to Tcwith
identical labels and is such that, for every edge vwofTc,the corresponding edge in
Pchas length cλv
λw|ρ. But the canonical labeled spherical triangulation of all spheres
inpare all assumed to be elements of S. Therefore the canonical realizer ρsatisfies
the stated condition.
By Lemma 4.1 the canonical realizer ρis the only map in {τ: Σ→(0,∞) :
τ(n−1) = 1 }satisfying this condition. □ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 15
5.The bootstrapping lemma
This section sees the proof of The Bootstrapping Lemma (Lemma 5.2). This
result is a crucial ingredient in the induction step of the strong induction performed
in proving the main technical result of this paper (Lemma 6.7). Lemma 5.2 is
analogous to [Mes23, Lemma 5.1].
We introduce the following admittedly tortuously abused notation for which
the authors apologize. The reason for its introduction is to be able to succinctly
express how realizers relate to labeled spherical triangulations of the unit sphere in
this section and in the subsequent section.
Definition 5.1. LetΣbe any set of symbols and let c:Tc∈C(Σ). Let P∈T
be any labeled spherical triangulation of the unit sphere and let ρ: Σ→(0,∞)be
any map.
By the notation
ρ◀
c:TcP
we mean the following: Firstly, Pis combinatorially equivalent to Tcwith identical
labelings, andsecondly, forall pairsofdistinctvertices v, wofTc(notnecessarily
connected by an edge), the geodesic distance in the unit sphere between the vertices
corresponding to vandwinPis at least cλv
λw|ρ.
By the notation
ρ◁
c:TcP
we mean the following: Firstly, Pis combinatorially equivalent to Tcwith identical
labelings, and secondly, for all edges vwofTc, the geodesic length in the unit
sphere of the corresponding edge in Pis least cλv
λw|ρ.
The meaning of the notation
P◀
c:Tcρand P◁
c:Tcρ
is defined to be the same as above, but with the words ‘at least’ are replaced with
the words ‘at most’.
Lemma 5.2 (The Bootstrapping Lemma) .Letd, n∈Nwith d, n≥2andΣ :=
{0, . . . , n −1}. LetSbe a heteroperturbative set of labeled spherical triangulations
of unit spheres. Let C⊆C(Σ)be a fundamental set. If ρ, σ: Σ→(0,∞)are such
that, for all c:Tc∈Cthere exist triangulations Pc, Qc∈Sso that ρ◁
c:TcPcand
Qc◁
c:Tcσ, as in Definition 5.1, then
σ(n−2)
σ(n−1)≤ρ(n−2)
ρ(n−1).
Proof.Assume ρ, σ: Σ→(0,∞)are such that, for all c:Tc∈Cthere exist
triangulations Pc, Qc∈Sso that ρ◁
c:TcPcandQc◁
c:Tcσ.
If there exists some t∈(0,∞)so that ρ=tσ, then we immediately obtain
σ(n−2)
σ(n−1)=tσ(n−2)
tσ(n−1)=ρ(n−2)
ρ(n−1).
We hence assume, for all t∈(0,∞)thatρ̸=tσ.
Define t0:= sup {t∈(0,∞) :∀j∈Σ, tσ(j)< ρ(j)}>0and
J:={j∈Σ :t0σ(j) =ρ(j)}.ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 16
We note that Jis not empty, otherwise t0cannot be the supremum of the set
{t∈(0,∞) :∀j∈Σ, tσ(j)< ρ(j)}. Also, since for all t∈(0,∞)we have ρ̸=tσ,
we have that Jis a proper subset of Σ.
There are two cases: Either n−1∈Jorn−1/∈J. We show that we must have
n−1∈Jthrough obtaining a contradiction in the other case.
Suppose that n−1/∈J, hence J⊆ {0, . . . , n −2}. Since Cis a fundamental
set, there exists some k:Tk∈Cthat has some vertex pinTkwith λp /∈J. Define
ν:=ρ−t0σ, which can be seen to be non-negative and have support exactly equal
toΣ\J. By Lemma 2.1, for all edges vwinTk, we have
kλv
λw|σ=kλv
λw|t0σ=kλv
λw|t0σ+0ν≤kλv
λw|t0σ+1ν=kλv
λw|ρ.
Since ρ◁
c:TcPkandQk◁
c:Tcσ, by the above chain of inequalities, all edges of Pk
are longer or equal in length to the corresponding edges in Qk. Since λp /∈J,
again by Lemma 2.1, at least one of the above inequalities is strict. Therefore Pk
andQkare not edge-isometric, but belong to the same equivalence class in the
heteroperturbative set S, and therefore there exists an edge of Pkthat is strictly
shorter than the corresponding edge of Qk. This is in contradiction with the earlier
remark that all edges of Pkare longer or equal in length to the corresponding edges
inQk. We conclude that we must have n−1∈J.
With n−1∈J, we have t0σ(n−1) = ρ(n−1)andt0σ(n−2)≤ρ(n−2). Hence,
we obtain
σ(n−2)
σ(n−1)=t0σ(n−2)
t0σ(n−1)=t0σ(n−2)
ρ(n−1)≤ρ(n−2)
ρ(n−1). □
6.Essential sets and proof of the main result
In this section, we prove our main result Theorem 1.2 through the main technical
results of this paper. The arguments in this section have the proof of Lemma 1.3
in [FHS21, Lemma 6.1] as their germ, and closely follows [Mes23, Section 6].
We start with the following definition:
Definition 6.1. Letd, n∈Nwith d, n≥2andΣ :={0, . . . , n −1}. LetSbe a
heteroperturbative set of labeled spherical triangulations of unit spheres. We say a
fundamental set C⊆C(Σ)is an n-essential set for Sin dimension dif there exist
monotone maps ρ, σ: Σ→(0,∞)so that, for every c:Tc∈C, the set

P∈Sρ◀
c:TcP◁
c:Tcσ
is non-empty. We denote the set of all n-essential sets for Sin dimension dby
Ed,n(S).
Definition 6.1 places further conditions on fundamental sets. In showing that
these extra conditions are automatically satisfied by fundamental sets that arise
from compact packings associated to the heteroperturbative set S, we can show
that the cardinality of the set Πd,n(S)is bounded above by the cardinality of the
setEd,n(S)(cf. Lemma 6.2). The aim in this section is thus to show, for d, n∈N
with d, n≥2and any heteroperturbative set S, that the set Ed,n(S)is finite (cf.
Corollaries 6.8 and 6.9). This is achieved through a strong induction arglument
by showing first showing Ed,2(S)is finite, and subsequently showing that Ed,n(S)is
finite under assumption that all the ‘lower’ sets Ed,k(S)with k∈ {2,3, . . . , n −1}
are finite (cf. Lemmas 6.3 and 6.7).ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 17
Before we continue, at the request of the anonymous referee, we explain some
more of the intuition behind this section. Admittedly, our choice of Definition 6.1
may appear somewhat opaque. The reason for this apparent opacity is likely the
process at arriving at this definition through the trial and error approach taken
toward proving the results in this section withoutfirst having a concrete definition
of an essential set. Only after the results in this section had been refined by trial
and error, could one see exactly what the “correct”2definition of an essential set
mustbe. The conditions placed on the elements of Ed,n(S)by Definition 6.1 along
with the notations, ◀and◁, were then chosen in exactly such a way so as to be
able to precisely relate an element in Ed,n(S)to elements in the ‘lower’ sets Ed,k(S)
fork∈ {2,3, . . . , n −1}through the ↓-operation (cf. Definition 6.4 and Lemmas 6.5
and 6.6). Furthermore, the conditions from Definition 6.1 were chosen such that,
in relating an element CfromEd,n(S)through the ↓-operation to elements in the
‘lower’ sets Ed,k(S)fork∈ {2,3, . . . , n −1}, allows for obtaining information on the
map ρforCin terms of the σ’s from the lower essential sets through application
of The Bootstrapping Lemma (Lemma 5.2). This idea forms the heart of the proof
of Lemma 6.7.
We now proceed with the technical details of this section.
Lemma 6.2. Letd, n∈Nwith d, n≥2. LetSbe a heteroperturbative set of
labeled spherical triangulations of unit spheres. The set Πd,n(S)has cardinality at
most that of the set Ed,n(S).
Proof.Letpbeacanonicallylabeledcompactspherepackingin Rdwith|radii(p)|=
nso that maxradii(p) = 1and such that the canonical labeled triangulation of the
unit sphere associated to every sphere in pis an element of S. By Theorem 3.2 there
exists a fundamental set C⊆codes (p). Taking both maps ρandσin Definition 6.1
as equal to the canonical realizer of pand applying Lemma 4.2, we see that for
allc:Tc∈C, the set
P∈Sρ◀
c:TcP◁
c:Tcσ
is non-empty and hence Cis an
n-essential set for Sin dimension d.
Letqbe another canonically labeled compact sphere packing in Rdsatisfying
|radii(q)|=nwith maxradii(q) = 1, is such that C⊆codes (q), and has the
canonical labeled triangulation of the unit sphere associated to every sphere in q
being an element of S. By Lemma 4.3, the canonical realizers of the packings pand
qare equal.
We conclude that each compact packing associated to Sdetermines at least
one element of the set Ed,n(S), and each element of the set Ed,n(S)determines at
most one element of Πd,n(S).Therefore Πd,n(S)has cardinality at most that of the
cardinality of the set Ed,n(S). □
Lemma 6.3. Letd∈Nwith d≥2. LetSbe a heteroperturbative set of labeled
spherical triangulations of unit spheres. The set Ed,2(S)of all 2-essential sets for
Sin dimension dis finite.
Proof.LetC⊆C({0,1})be any 2-essential set for Sin dimension d. Since Cis
fundamental, for all c:Tc∈Cwe have c= 0. Further, there exist monotone maps
2By“correct” inthiscontextwemean: Firstly, thecardinalityof Ed,n(S)boundsthecardinality
ofΠd,n(S). And secondly, the definition of Ed,n(S)allows for proof of the main result through
application of The Bootstrapping Lemma in as elegant a manner as is possible.ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 18
ρ, σ:{0,1} → (0,∞)so that for all c:Tc∈Cthe set
P∈Sρ◀
c:TcP◁
c:Tcσ
is
non-empty. Since ρis monotone, we have that π/3≤00
0|ρ,01
0|ρ,01
1|ρ. Hence, for
allc:Tc∈C, every spherical triangulation from the set
P∈Sρ◀
c:TcP◁
c:Tcσ
has a geodesic distance of at least π/3between all pairs of distinct vertices.
By compactness of the unit sphere S⊆Rd, we let N∈Nbe the least car-
dinality of a cover of Sby geodesic open balls of radius π/6with centers on S.
But then for all codes c:Tc∈Cno labeled spherical triangulation from the set
P∈Sρ◀
c:TcP◁
c:Tcσ
can have more than Nvertices otherwise there would ex-
ist two distinct vertices strictly closer than π/3. Hence in every code 0 :Tc∈C,
the neighbor complex Thas at most Nvertices. We conclude that the set of all
2-essential sets or Sin dimension d,Ed,2(S), has cardinality at most that of the
powerset of the finite set {0 :T∈C({0,1})| |vertex set of T| ≤N}. □
Definition 6.4. LetΣdenote any totally ordered set of symbols. For any structure
Tlabeled by elements from Σ, for s∈Σ, byT↓swe mean a relabeling of Tin
which all labels occurring in Tthat are strictly larger than sare replaced by s.
Lemma 6.5. For any k∈N, define Σk:={0, . . . , k −1}. Let d, n∈Nwith
d, n≥2. IfC⊆C(Σn)is fundamental, then for any k∈Nwith 2≤k≤n, the set
Ck:={c:Tc↓k−1|c:Tc∈C, c≤k−2} ⊆C(Σk)is fundamental.
Proof.Let2≤k≤n.Since Cis fundamental we have that, {c|c:T∈Ck}=
{0, . . . , k −2}. Let Kbe a non-empty subset of {0, . . . , k −2} ⊆ { 0, . . . , n −2}.
Since Cis fundamental there exists some c:T∈Cso that c∈K, but with some
p∈λ(T)\K. There are two cases, p≥k−1andp < k −1. In the case that
p≥k−1, then p↓k−1=k−1/∈K, so that c:T↓k−1∈Ckis such that c∈K,
with p↓k−1∈λ(T↓k−1)\K. On the other hand, if p < k−1, then p↓k−1=p /∈K,
andc:T↓k−1∈Ckis such that p=p↓k−1∈λ(T↓k−1)\K. We conclude that Ck
is fundamental. □
Lemma 6.6. For any k∈N, define Σk:={0, . . . , k −1}. Let d, n∈Nwith
d, n≥2. LetSbe a heteroperturbative set of labeled spherical triangulations of unit
spheres. If C⊆C(Σn)is an element of Ed,n(S), then for any k∈Nwith2≤k≤n,
the set Ck:={c:Tc↓k−1|c:Tc∈C, c≤k−2} ⊆C(Σk)is an element of Ed,k(S).
Proof.Assume that C⊆C(Σn)is an n-essential set for Sin dimension d. Let
σ, ρ: Σn→(0,∞)be monotone maps so that for all c:Tc∈Cthe set

P∈Sρ◀
c:TcP◁
c:Tcσ
is non-empty.
Letk∈ {2, . . . , n }, and define Ck:={c:Tc↓k−1|c:Tc∈C, c≤k−2} ⊆
C(Σk). By Lemma 6.5, the set Ckis fundamental. Define ρ′, σ′: Σk→(0,∞)
as
ρ′(s) :=(
ρ(s) s < k−1
ρ(k−1)s=k−1(s∈Σk)ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 19
and
σ′(s) :=(
σ(s) s < k−1
σ(n−1)s=k−1(s∈Σk).
Since ρandσare both monotone, so are ρ′andσ′. Furthermore, we note, for all
c∈ {0, . . . , k −2}anda, b∈Σ, that
ca
b↓k−1|ρ′≤ca
b|ρand ca
b|σ≤ca
b↓k−1|σ′.
Therefore, for all c:Tc↓k−1∈Ck,
∅ ̸=
P∈Sρ◀
c:TcP◁
c:Tcσ
⊆
P∈Sρ′◀
c:Tc↓k−1P◁
c:Tc↓k−1σ′
.
Therefore Ckis ak-essential set for Sin dimension d. □
Lemma 6.7. Letd, n∈Nwithd, n≥2. LetSbe a heteroperturbative set of labeled
spherical triangulations of unit spheres. If, for all k∈ {2, . . . , n −1}, the set Ed,k(S)
is finite, then the set Ed,n(S)is finite.
Proof.For any k∈N, define Σk:={0, . . . , k −1}.
Assume for all k∈ {2, . . . , n −1}that the set Ed,k(S)is finite. For every k∈
{2, . . . , n −1}and every one of the finitely many D∈ Ed,k(S), we fix monotone
maps σD, ρD: Σk→(0,∞)as in Definition 6.1 so that, for all c:Tc∈D, we have

P∈SρD◀
c:TcP◁
c:TcσD
̸=∅.
For every k∈ {2, . . . , n −1}, define
Kk−2:= minσD(k−2)
σD(k−1)D∈ Ed,k(S)
∈(0,1].
LetC∈C(Σn)be any element of the set Ed,n(S). By Definition 6.1, there exist
monotone maps σ, ρ: Σn→(0,∞)so that, for every c:Tc∈C, we have

P∈Sρ◀
c:TcP◁
c:Tcσ
̸=∅.
For each k∈ {2, . . . , n −1}, by Lemma 6.6, the set
Ck:={c:Tc↓k−1|c:Tc∈C, c≤k−2} ⊆C(Σk)
is an element of Ed,k(S), and hence, for all c:Tc↓k−1∈Ck, we have
∅ ̸=
P∈SρCk◀
Tc↓k−1P◁
Tc↓k−1σCk
⊆
P∈SP◁
Tc↓k−1σCk
.
On the other hand, for each k∈ {2, . . . , n −1}, letρkdenote the restriction of ρ
toΣk. Then, for all c:Tc↓k−1∈Ck, by observing that for all a, b∈ {0, . . . , n −1},
we have ca
b↓k−1|ρk≤ca
b|ρ, and hence obtain
∅ ̸=
P∈Sρ◀
c:TcP◁
c:Tcσ
⊆
P∈Sρk◀
c:Tc↓k−1P
.
As, for each k∈ {2, . . . , n −1}, both the sets

P∈SP◁
Tc↓k−1σCk
and
P∈Sρk◀
c:Tc↓k−1P
.ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 20
are non-empty, and because ρk◀
c:Tc↓k−1Pimplies ρk◁
Tc↓k−1P, we apply The Boot-
strapping Lemma (Lemma 5.2) to obtain, for each k∈ {2, . . . , n −1}, that
σCk(n−2)
σCk(n−1)≤ρk(n−2)
ρk(n−1).
Therefore, for each k∈ {2, . . . , n −1},
Kk−2= minσD(k−2)
σD(k−1)D∈ Ed,k(S)
≤σCk(k−2)
σCk(k−1)≤ρk(k−2)
ρk(k−1)=ρ(k−2)
ρ(k−1).
Now, from
0< K 0≤ρ(0)
ρ(1),0< K 1≤ρ(1)
ρ(2), . . . , 0< K n−3≤ρ(n−3)
ρ(n−2),
we obtain
0<
k−3Y
j=0Kj
≤ρ(0)
ρ(n−2).
Define
κ(s) :=(Qk−3
j=0Kj
s= 0
1 s=n−2(s∈ {0, n−2}).
Then
0<(n−2)0
0|κ≤(n−2)0
0|ρ,
and since ρis monotone, for all a, b, c ∈Σn, with c≤n−2, we thus have that
(n−2)0
0|κ≤(n−2)0
0|ρ≤ca
b|ρ.Hence, forall c:Tc∈C, wehavethatnotriangulation
from
P∈Sρ◀
c:TcP◁
c:Tcσ
can have distinct vertices closer than (n−2)0
0|κto
each other with respect to the geodesic metric on the unit sphere in Rd.
By compactness of the unit sphere S⊆Rd, we set N∈Nto be the least
cardinality that an open cover of Swith open geodesic balls of radius (n−2)0
0|κ/2
can have. We crucially note here that the number Nis independent of the choice
of the element Cfrom the set Ed,n(S), and depends onlyon the finitely many
elements inSn−1
k=2Ed,k(S). Therefore, for every c:Tc∈C, each triangulation from
P∈Sρ◀
c:TcP◁
c:Tcσ
and hence also Tccan have at most Nvertices.
We conclude, for each of the elements c:Tcin any C∈ Ed,n(S), that the number
of vertices that Tccan have is at most N. Hence the cardinality of the set Ed,n(S)
is at most the cardinality of the power set of the finite set

c:T∈C({0, . . . , n −1})c≤n−2,
|vertex set of T| ≤N
. □
Corollary 6.8. Letd, n∈Nwith d, n≥2. LetSbe a heteroperturbative set of
labeled spherical triangulations of unit spheres. The set Ed,n(S)is finite.
Proof.This is immediate by strong induction using Lemma 6.3 and Lemma 6.7. □
This allows us to prove our main result, Theorem 1.2, in the following corollary:
Corollary 6.9. Letd, n∈Nwith d, n≥2. LetSbe a heteroperturbative set of
labeled spherical triangulations of unit spheres. The set Πd,n(S)is finite.ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 21
Proof.This follows from combining Lemma 6.2 and Corollary 6.8. □
As discussed previously, the set W(cf. Example 2.6) is heteroperturbative,
yielding the following result showing that a fairly interesting subset of Πd,nis finite
in general:
Corollary 6.10. Letd, n∈Nwithd, n≥2. With W, as defined in Example 2.6,
the set Πd,n(W)is finite.
Furthermore, as discussed, T2(cf. Example 2.3) is also heteroperturbative (in
factT2⊆W), and since Π2,n= Π 2,n(T2)we regain the previously known the case
for dimension two:
Corollary 6.11. Letn∈Nwithn≥2. The set Π2,nis finite.
Given Corollary 6.10, one may hope that the canonical labeled spherical trian-
gulations obtained from compact packings of any dimension are always elements of
W, thereby resolving Conjecture 1.1 in full generality. This seen to be the case for
compact disc packings in R2and is seen, ex post facto, to be the case for compact
sphere packings in R3with two sizes of sphere, cf. [Fer21]. However this is not true
in general. Some of the known compact packings in R3with three sizes of sphere
have spheres with associated canonical labeled triangulations of the unit sphere
that are not contained in W. An example is presented in Figure 6.1 which exhibits
the same pathology as described in Figure 2.3.
Figure 6.1. Consider the compact packing in R3from [Fer19,
Theorem 1] with spheres with radiip
3/2−1(red),√
2−1(green),
and1(yellow). The canonical labeled spherical triangulation as-
sociated to the largest spheres in such a packing are not elements
ofW(cf. Example 2.6). On a large sphere, the points of contact
of the medium and small neighboring spheres can “see” each other
over the chord connecting points of contact of other neighboring
large spheres. This can be observed on the inscribed nonconvex
polyhedroninthe figureontheright, whosecentral projectiononto
the circumscribing sphere, coincides with the canonical spherical
triangulation associated to a large sphere from this packing.ON COMPACT PACKINGS OF EUCLIDEAN SPACE WITH SPHERES 22
Acknowledgement. TheauthorsexpresstheirgratitudetoMartinWinterfornumer-
ous fruitful discussions and for specifically bringing Example 2.4 to their attention.
The authors are furthermore indebted to the anonymous referee for their careful
reading of the manuscript and for their helpful suggestions.
References
[CCMFT23] C. Chinaud-Chaix, N. Marchenko, T. Fernique, and S. Tricard, Do chemists control
plane packing, i.e. two-dimensional self-assembly, at all scales? , New J. Chem. 47
(2023), 7014–7025.
[Cho92] E.C. Cho, Dihedral angles of n-simplices , Appl. Math. Lett. 5(1992), no. 4, 55–57.
MR 1341905
[CRS+21] I. Cherniukh, G. Rainò, T. Stöferle, M. Burian, A. Travesset, D. Naumenko,
H. Amenitsch, R. Erni, R.F. Mahrt, M.I. Bodnarchuk, and M.V. Kovalenko,
Perovskite-type superlattices from lead halide perovskite nanocubes , Nature 593
(2021), no. 7860, 535–542.
[CS99] J. H. Conway and N. J. A. Sloane, Sphere packings, lattices and groups , third ed.,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1999. MR 1662447
[Fer19] T. Fernique, Compact packings of space with three sizes of spheres ,
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.02293 (2019).
[Fer21] ,Compact packings of space with two sizes of spheres , Discrete Comput.
Geom. 65(2021), no. 4, 1287–1295. MR 4249904
[Fer23] T Fernique, Packing unequal disks in the euclidean plane ,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12919 (2023).
[FHS21] T. Fernique, A. Hashemi, and O. Sizova, Compact Packings of the Plane with Three
Sizes of Discs , Discrete Comput. Geom. 66(2021), no. 2, 613–635. MR 4292755
[Ken06] T.Kennedy, Compact packings of the plane with two sizes of discs , DiscreteComput.
Geom. 35(2006), no. 2, 255–267. MR 2195054
[Lue69] D.G. Luenberger, Optimization by vector space methods , John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York-London-Sydney, 1969. MR 0238472
[Mes20] M. Messerschmidt, On compact packings of the plane with circles of three radii ,
Comput. Geom. 86(2020).
[Mes23] ,The number of configurations of radii that can occur in compact packings
of the plane with discs of n sizes is finite , Discrete Comput. Geom. (2023).
[Mun84] J.R. Munkres, Elements of algebraic topology , Addison-Wesley Publishing Company,
Menlo Park, CA, 1984. MR 755006
[PDKM15] T. Paik, B.T. Diroll, C.R. Kagan, and C.B. Murray, Binary and ternary superlat-
tices self-assembled from colloidal nanodisks and nanorods , Journal of the American
Chemical Society 137(2015), no. 20, 6662–6669.
[Win23] M. Winter, Rigidity, tensegrity and reconstruction of polytopes under metric con-
straints, https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.14194 (2023).
Eder Kikianty, Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, University
of Pretoria, Private bag X20 Hatfield, 0028 Pretoria, South Africa
Email address :eder.kikianty@up.ac.za
Miek Messerschmidt, Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, Uni-
versity of Pretoria, Private bag X20 Hatfield, 0028 Pretoria, South Africa
Email address :miek.messerschmidt@up.ac.za