Multi-AP Coordinated Spatial Reuse for Wi-Fi 8:
Group Creation and Scheduling
David Nunez?, Malcom Smith[, and Boris Bellalta?
?Wireless Networking @ Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona;[Cisco Inc., USA
Abstract —Multi-Access Point Coordination (MAPC) will be a
key feature in next generation Wi-Fi 8 networks. MAPC aims
to improve the overall network performance by allowing Access
Points (APs) to share time, frequency and/or spatial resources
in a coordinated way, thus alleviating inter-AP contention and
enabling new multi-AP channel access strategies. This paper
introduces a framework to support periodic MAPC transmissions
on top of current Wi-Fi operation. We ﬁrst focus on the problem
of creating multi-AP groups that can transmit simultaneously to
leverage Spatial Reuse opportunities. Then, once these groups are
created, we study different scheduling algorithms to determine
which groups will transmit at every MAPC transmission. Two
different types of algorithms are tested: per-AP, and per-Group.
While per-AP algorithms base their scheduling decision on the
buffer state of individual APs, per-Group algorithms do that
taking into account the aggregate buffer state of all APs in a
group. Obtained results—targetting worst-case delay—show that
per-AP based algorithms outperform per-Group ones due to their
ability to guarantee that the AP with a) more packets, or b) with
the oldest waiting packet in the buffer is selected.
Index Terms —Multi-AP Coordination, Coordinated Spatial
Reuse, Wi-Fi 7, Wi-Fi 8, IEEE 802.11be, IEEE 802.11bn, WLANs.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Nowadays, the consumption of high-bandwidth and real-
time applications constitutes a massive challenge for operators
and network companies to deliver these contents to end users.
Video streaming is becoming more popular than ever. Only
in the ﬁrst half of 2021 it represented the 53.72% of all
Internet downlink trafﬁc [1]. Beyond traditional video stream-
ing consumption, cloud gaming [2], virtual and augmented
reality (VR/AR) [3] are rapidly becoming more and more
popular, hence further contributing to increasing the demand
of interactive and delay-sensitive contents.
To get over that, Wi-Fi networks are constantly evolving to
address not only the high requirements of these applications
in terms of throughput and/or latency, but also the increasing
number of users and the trafﬁc volume on Internet. Access
Point (AP) densiﬁcation (i.e., covering the same area with
a high number of APs) has been the natural response to
cope with such a situation. This approach allows stations
to beneﬁt from high Signal to Noise (SNR) levels, as they
are close to their serving APs, resulting in the use of high
D. Nunez and B. Bellalta were supported in part by grants Wi-XR PID2021-
123995NB-I00 (MCIU/AEI/FEDER,UE), and Cisco. The authors thank the
comments and inputs received while preparing this work by Prof. S. Avallone
and Dr. P. Imputato.transmission rates. However, when the number of co-located
APs is high, the limited number of frequency channels may
result in detrimental high contention and interference levels,
as well as affecting the ability of Wi-Fi networks to provide a
reliable service. Improving this situation is set as a requirement
for future Wi-Fi 8 by the 802.11 Ultra-High Reliable (UHR)
Study Group [4].
A solution to mitigate the high contention levels in dense
Wi-Fi deployments is to coordinate transmissions from the
set of overlapping APs. To support such an objective, the
Multi Access Point Coordination (MAPC) framework [5]–[7]
was initially included as part of the IEEE 802.11be (11be)
amendment [8] candidate features, although its development
has been postponed for the future Wi-Fi 8 amendment —
likely to be named as IEEE 802.11bn— leaving Multi-link
Operation [9], [10] as the key and most disruptive fea-
ture of IEEE 802.11be. MAPC allows APs to share time,
frequency and/or spatial resources in a controlled manner,
alleviating Overlapping Basic Service Set (OBSS) contention,
and enabling the implementation of WLAN-level scheduling
mechanisms. However, there are still several challenges to
solve. Among them, we need (i) to design a protocol for
coordinating the transmissions from the set of overlapping
APs; (ii) a mechanism to decide which of the overlapping
APs are compatible to transmit at the same time by, for
instance, leveraging Spatial Reuse (SR) opportunities; and (iii)
a mechanism to decide which of those compatible APs are
allocated to each coordinated transmission.
In this paper, to deal with these aforementioned challenges,
we present a framework to support MAPC on Wi-Fi networks.
It combines i)periodic dowlink ‘MAPC transmissions’ that
are able to leverage Spatial Reuse opportunities when possible,
withii)un-coordinated CSMA/CA ‘breathing’ periods in
between to account for other downlink and uplink trafﬁc. In
detail, the main contributions of this paper are:
1) A MAPC framework, to leverage both coordinated
and uncoordinated transmissions on top of a multi-AP
WLAN.
2) A low-complexity algorithm to build groups of compat-
ible APs able to transmit simultaneously by leveraging
Spatial Reuse opportunities.
3) Different scheduling algorithms to select the groups of
APs that will be scheduled in each MAPC transmission.
Two types of algorithms are considered: per-AP and per-
Group algorithms.arXiv:2305.04846v1  [cs.NI]  8 May 20234) Insights on how to conﬁgure several key parameters used
by the group creation algorithm, and on the performance
of the per-AP vs per-Group scheduling algorithms.
This paper extends the work done in [7]. Novel aspects in
this paper include the deﬁnition of practical algorithms for
the creation of compatible groups and group scheduling under
ﬁnite load conditions.
II. R ELATED WORK
Currently, there are only a few works that delve into MAPC
to leverage Spatial Reuse opportunities, and most of the
information available are still directly coming from TGbe
documents. In [11], the process to transmit in coordinated
Spatial Reuse (c-SR) mode is split into three phases and
the authors investigate several operation issues, such as in-
formation exchange about transmission power levels (one-
way or bidirectional), path loss, and block acknowledgment.
In addition, authors in [12]–[14] provide simulation results
showing the potential performance gains of c-SR. For example,
the work in [13] showcases some of the beneﬁts of using c-
SR compared with the default Enhanced Distributed Channel
Access (EDCA) mechanism. Besides, in [12], the gains of c-
SR are two times higher than the legacy systems. Similarly,
the authors in [14] make a comparison between c-SR and
coordinated Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access
(c-OFDMA), showing that the throughput for the former
exceeds (twice in some cases) the latter. The work in [15]
exhibits a novel transmission scheme for 11be networks, uti-
lizing the concept of multi-AP c-OFDMA. The author shows
that the c-OFDMA scheme effectively allows APs to increase
the number of transmission opportunities, achieving a higher
throughput than DL OFDMA in IEEE 802.11ax. Finally, the
authors in [16], propose a scheme to identify the interference-
free APs and a method to reduce the amount of shared
information between coordinated devices using Q-learning. To
the best of our knowledge, none of the works published so far
deal with the scheduling process in MAPC networks and also
mechanisms to create groups of compatible APs that employ
c-SR scheme. Thus, this work explores alternatives to cover
these open challenges and also evaluates through simulations
the results when each of the proposed algorithms is employed.
III. M ULTI -AP C OORDINATION
To support MAPC transmissions, we consider all APs share
information with a central controller (CC1). The CC is respon-
sible for computing and periodically informing transmission
parameters, as well as the most suitable subset of transmitting
APs for every Transmission Opportunity (TXOP). APs and
CC exchange most of the information through a low-latency
and high bandwidth wired backbone.
One of the APs acts as the MAPC transmission initia-
tor, while the other APs will simply follow the received
indications. We will refer to the AP initiating the shared
1This function could be implemented on a device like an AP, but for a more
realistic approach and to avoid complexity on access points, we consider the
existence of an external central controller.transmissions as the Sharing AP, and to the rest of APs as
the Shared APs. Therefore, the Sharing AP is in charge to
initiate the transmission, reserving the channel, and inform
which other APs will participate in the TXOP, including the
parameters to do so. In this paper we assume all APs are
within the coverage area of the Sharing AP.
The operation of the proposed MAPC framework is shown
in Fig. 1. It allows several APs to share a TXOP opportu-
nity. In the proposed framework, MAPC transmissions are
scheduled periodically every Tms with uncoordinated (default
CSMA/CA) transmissions in between. A MAPC transmission
is initiated when the Sharing AP accesses the channel and
sends a MAP request-to-send (MAP-RTS) frame for channel
reservation.2If no collision occurs,3the Shared APs reply at
the same time with a MAP clear-to-send (MAP-CTS) frame.
The latter is also useful to inform stations or legacy devices
about the ongoing MAPC transmission, so it avoids unwanted
collisions with hidden devices. At this point, the Sharing
AP assumes that all neighboring devices have properly set
their network allocation vector (NA V), and so the MAPC
transmission will not be disturbed until it ends. Since it is the
Sharing AP who shares the TXOP with the other APs, we will
use both MAPC transmission and TXOP sharing transmission
terms indistinctly.
Once the Sharing AP accesses the channel, it splits the
gained TXOP in one or more temporal slots, to which we
refer as coordinated slots. One or more APs can be allocated
in each coordinated slot. To do that, the Sharing AP sends a
MAP trigger frame (MAP-TF) to allocate the next coordinated
slot to one or more APs, including also the settings to use, such
as the modulation and coding scheme (MCS) to be used by the
Shared APs. When a coordinated slot is allocated to a single
AP, the TXOP is shared following a traditional time division
multiple access (TDMA) scheme. Otherwise, if several APs
are allocated to the same coordinated slot, TDMA is enhanced
with Spatial Reuse.
To create the groups of compatible APs that can be allocated
to the same coordinated slot, the CC needs to know the
received signal strength indicator (RSSI) at the stations from
all APs. Due to the symmetry of the channel, we consider that
this information is obtained from the opposite path, i.e., by
measuring the received power from uplink frames (either data
or ACK4frames). Each AP stores the RSSI of all overheard
stations, sharing this information with the CC through the
wired backbone.
The uncoordinated CSMA/CA period after each MAPC
transmission can be used by any AP and station to transmit
either downlink or uplink trafﬁc following default Wi-Fi
operation.
2Favourable EDCA parameters can be used to almost always guarantee that
MAPC transmissions win access to the channel as earlier as possible.
3Although not extrictly necessary, the use or Restricted Target Wake Time
(R-TWT) [8] may provide extra protection to MAPC transmission.
4We assume ACKs are correctly received in all cases.Sharing AP
Shared AP
Shared AP
SIFS SIFS
SIFSSIFS
DIFS
Coordinated Slot 1 Coordinated Slot N cs Te
TTXOP-sharingTXOP-sharing
tCSMA/CA
DIFSTe0 T 2TTXOP-sharing TXOP-sharing CSMA/CA
TXOP-MAX TXOP-MAX TXOP-MAX
Figure 1: MAPC framework operation. Periodic slots start at every Tms with un-coordinated transmissions in between. The
TXOP-sharing period is divided into coordinated slots, allowing both c-TDMA and/or c-TDMA/SR transmissions.
IV. C-TDMA/SR SCHEDULING
The MAPC scheduling is split into two main stages:
theFirst Stage includes the creation of the SR-Compatible
groups5based on the signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio
(SINR) between all AP and station pairs, and the Second
Stage , which employs the built groups to select which APs
are scheduled in every MAPC transmission. We consider the
two stages are performed at the CC and communicated to the
Sharing AP.
A. First Stage: SR-Compatible group formation
The First Stage provides a procedure to verify the com-
patibility of a group of APs to transmit simultaneously. We
have designed an algorithm to create groups of compatible
APs based on the SINR at their associated stations.
1) SINR requirements: As previously indicated in Sec-
tion III, we assume reciprocal uplink and downlink links, so
the power overheard by all the APs from uplink frames is
assumed to be equivalent to the power received at the stations
from downlink transmissions. All APs share this information
with the CC, who stores it in a database for all AP-STA links.
For a given subset of APs, of size M, the power received at
each of their stations must exceed the aggregate interference
level by, at least, the value of . The CC veriﬁes such a
condition using the following expression:
min
i=1::M0
BB@10 log10(Pi) 10 log100
BB@W+JX
j=1
i6=jPi
j1
CCA1
CCA
(1)
where Piand Pi
jare vectors that contain the RSSI values
seen from all the stations associated to AP i, when AP iand
5Groups of APs that can transmit simultaneously using SR.APj(potential interferer) transmit at the same time.6Besides,
Wis the noise power, and is the SINR threshold used.
Note that, the higher the value of , the lower the probability
of ﬁnding groups with a high number of compatible access
points. Thus, all APs in the subset must satisfy (1) to form an
SR-compatible group.
2) SR-compatible group formation, At-most-K: In the fol-
lowing we describe the At-most-K algorithm we introduce in
this paper to create these groups of compatible APs.
The creation of the groups is performed taking every AP in
the network as reference (or head of a group), thus resulting
in a number of groups at most equal to the number of APs.
Then, we add another AP at every iteration until the maximum
number of APs allowed in a group, K, is reached.7For
example, considering AP 1as the reference (the CC is building
the ﬁrst coordinated group), it means that this group may
contain up to the K 1most convenient access points from
the perspective of AP 1, i.e., the algorithm sequentially adds
the otherK 1APs that have the lowest values of RSSI
seen from stations associated to AP 1(the highest RSSI value
from the other APs seen from the stations associated to AP 1
covers the worst case). Thus, at every iteration, one of these
pre-selected APs is added to the group only if the SINR at all
the involved stations is above in (1). Then, the operation is
repeated selecting another AP as the reference, and so on.
This condition of selecting the most compatible APs from
the perspective of only one AP does not guarantee that the
best possible SR group is created, because they probably are
not the best choice for other APs in the group different from
the reference one. Therefore, selecting a value of high
enough is crucial to guarantee good SINR levels for all stations
6Note that to create a group, we add APs sequentially. When a new AP is
added, we guarantee both it is compatible with the rest of APs in the group,
and that the other APs in the group are also compatible with the new one.
7K has been empirically selected for this paper, and a detailed analysis of
this is left for future work.associated to any of the APs that belong to the same group,
even if they are not the reference one.
Note that, better-located APs will belong to several groups,
but the ﬁnal decision about which group(s) will transmit in
the next TXOP is done in the Second Stage and it depends on
the number of packets that APs have in their buffers, which is
directly related to the time that a group has been waiting for
transmitting.
B. Second Stage: Trafﬁc Scheduling Algorithms
The Second Stage is intended for scheduling one SR-
compatible group (from the ones previously computed in the
First Stage) per coordinated slot based on the buffer state
information collected from all APs, which contains the number
of packets in the transmission buffer of each AP, as well as
the arrival time of the oldest packet.
a) NumPkSingle: The CC selects the AP with the highest
number of packets waiting in the buffer. Then, considering
only the groups created in the First Stage that contain the
selected AP, the CC schedules the group of APs with the
highest number of packets, calculated as the sum across all
individual APs.
b) NumPkGroup: The CC selects the group of APs with
the highest number of packets.
c) OldPkSingle: The CC selects the AP with the oldest
packet waiting in the buffer. Then using the groups created in
the First Stage that contain the selected AP, the CC schedules
the group with the highest aggregate delay, calculated as
the sum of the waiting time of the oldest packet across all
individual APs.
d) OldPkGroup: The CC selects the group with the
maximum aggregate group delay, i.e., the sum of the time
that the oldest packet in the buffer of each individual AP has
been waiting.
For the sake of fairness between groups, NumPkGroup
(OldPkGroup) values are normalized by the number of APs in
each group, so we avoid that groups with a few (large) number
of APs starve.
V. S YSTEM MODEL
To evaluate the performance of the MAPC framework,
and assess the operation of the group creation algorithm and
the proposed trafﬁc schedulers, we consider the following
scenario.
A. Deployment
We divide the area of interest in 9subareas of 10x10 meters
each, and at the center of each subarea we deploy one AP as
shown in Fig. 2. All APs are set to operate in the same channel.
We designate AP 5(the AP in the middle) as the Sharing AP
since all the other APs are within its coverage area. N= 3
stations are randomly placed in each subarea, and associated
to the nearest AP, which in this case always corresponds to
the one placed at the subarea center.
Multiple transmission rates are allowed, so stations close
(far) from their AP use higher (lower) MCSs to transmit andreceive data. The MCS used by a given AP to transmit to a
station depends on the SINR observed by the station. This
value is estimated by the CC given the group of APs that will
simultaneously transmit using the RSSI information collected
from uplink frames. This value is announced in the MAP-TF
frames by the sharing AP when a coordinated transmission
starts. To allocate a speciﬁc MCS to an AP-STA pair, we
employ the curves presented in [17]. These curves give the
SINR ranges corresponding to each MCS that ensure an error-
free transmission. A-MPDU transmissions are enabled in each
coordinated slot, with the maximum number of aggregated
packets depending on the MCS used and the slot duration.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
X-Axis [meters]051015202530Y-Axis [meters]
AP1 AP2 AP3AP4 AP5 AP6AP7 AP8 AP9
Figure 2: An Enterprise WLAN scenario, with multiple APs.
The path loss is modelled using the TGax model for
Enterprise Scenarios [18]:
PL= 40:05 + 20 log10min(d;Bp)fc
2:4
+P0+ 7Wn, (2)
wheredis the distance between the transmitter and the receiver
in meters,fcis the central frequency in GHz, Wnis the
number of walls and P0is given by P0= 35 log10(d=Bp),
whendis higher than the breaking point Bp. Otherwise, it is
zero.
Only downlink trafﬁc is considered, i.e., from the AP to
the stations. The trafﬁc generation process works as follows:
Just before every MAPC transmission, Np= 10 packets for
each station arrive at its corresponding AP with probability p
depending on the considered trafﬁc load. Three different per-
STA load levels are employed to refer to low, medium and
high load conditions: 1,6and8Mbps, respectively. For the
sake of simplicity, we assume that buffers in all APs are large
enough so that incoming packets are never lost due to buffer
overﬂow.
B. Operation
The proposed MAPC framework operates as it is shown in
Fig. 1. MAPC transmissions are scheduled to start at every
nT;n = 0;1;:::;N SN 1, whereNSN= 10000 is the total
number of MAPC transmissions considered in each simulation.
Each MAPC transmission consists of several c-TDMA or c-
TDMA/SR length-variable coordinated slots (the actual value
depends on the number of packets and the MCSs used toTable I: Simulation Parameters.
Parameter Value Parameter Value
Bp 10 Wn 3
Number of spatial streams 1 T[ms] 5
TTXOP MAX [ms] 3 11ax MCS [index] 0-10
TMAP-RTS [s] 80TMAP-CTS [s] 62
TCTS TO[s] 41TMAP TF[s] 76
Te[s] 9 AP Tx-power [dBm] 23
L[bytes] 1500 CCA [dBm] -82
transmit them), followed by uncoordinated transmissions using
the legacy CSMA/CA mechanism. The duration of a given
MAPC transmission is determined by the scheduler, although
it must not exceed its maximum value, i.e., TTXOP MAX . The
TTXOP MAX duration is also a parameter used by the CC to
control the amount of time devoted to MAPC transmissions,
and it can be modiﬁed depending on the scenario.
VI. S IMULATION RESULTS
We present and discuss the results obtained from running
simulations on Matlab and taking the Scenario described
in Section V. Results labelled with c-TDMA (without SR)
correspond to the case where only one AP is allowed to
transmit in each coordinated slot of a MAPC transmission.8
The parameters used for the numerical simulations are shown
in Table I.
A. A speciﬁc scenario
In this section, we study the scenario shown in Fig. 2 with
nine APs and three STAs per AP. Fig. 3a shows the aggregate
throughput and average delay, using NumPkSingle, NumP-
kGroup, OldPkSingle, OldPkGroup, c-TDMA-NumPk and c-
TDMA-OldPk algorithms. The same value of = 20 dBs is
used in all cases, as well as the maximum number of APs
per group, i.e., K= 3, for the SR-compatible group forma-
tion. With respect to the throughput, as expected, c-TDMA
approaches reach saturation before the SR ones. In the case
of the average delay, similarly, SR approaches outperform c-
TDMA ones. Moreover, comparing SR scheduling algorithms
between them, NumPkSingle and OldPkSingle perform better
than the rest on low ( <100 Mbps) and medium (100-200
Mbps) load conditions, pointing out the advantage of always
scheduling the AP with more packets in the buffer. For high
load all the algorithms that support SR transmissions perform
similar.
Figs. 3b and 3c show the aggregate throughput and average
delay for different values of andK. The case when = 14
is used (Fig. 3b), exhibits a worse performance (saturation
throughput is reached earlier) for K= 3 than forK= 2, due
to using a low value of . The reason is that in some cases the
SINR at the stations with K= 3is lower than for K= 2, and
therefore a more robust MCS index will be used for K= 3.
On the contrary, Fig. 3c exhibits a gain for K= 3with respect
toK= 2 because the value of is set to guarantee that the
8The advantages of c-TDMA/SR vs legacy 802.11 are shown in [7].SINR at the stations is at least 20dB. Thus, even if we have
less groups with three APs, the high value of guarantees
they will be able to use high MCS for the data transmission.
In summary, both andKare tuneable parameters that can
be optimized for each individual scenario.
Fig. 4 shows the 95th-percentile delay achieved by the
different algorithms for the case with K= 3 and= 20 .
In all cases, per-AP schemes outperform per-Group ones.
Interestingly, scheduling algorithms based on the number of
packets in the buffer outperform delay based ones also in the
worst-case delay since they are able to schedule more efﬁcient
transmissions.
B. Random scenarios
Results in this section are obtained through the simulation of
1000 random deployments. In each deployment, while stations
are generated uniformly at random inside each subarea, APs
are kept at the center of each one. In all scenarios, we have
consideredK= 3,= 20 , and a trafﬁc load of 8Mbps per
station, which represents an aggregate load of 216Mbps.
Fig. 5 exhibits the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF)
of the 95th-percentile delay over multiple generated random
scenarios. c-TDMA algorithms show the worst delay, with a
difference between them and c-SR ones exceeding 4ms for
most of the percentiles. Note that, as before, the algorithms
that schedule the groups based on the number of packets,
perform better than the ones using the oldest packet criterion.
The reason is that the delay-based algorithms are not able
to schedule as many packets per MAPC transmission as the
number of packets-based ones, which turns out to be also
counterproductive in terms of delay.
Finally, Fig. 6 shows the MAPC slot occupancy, deﬁned as
the ratio between the time spent by cooperative transmissions
and the maximum duration of MAPC transmission. The lower
the ratio, the more efﬁcient the use of the MAPC slots,
increasing the amount of time available for uncoordinated
CSMA/CA transmissions. Note that, OldPkGroup not only
achieves the worst overall results as seen previously, but also
it requires the largest MAPC transmissions.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have introduced and evaluated a framework
for multi-AP coordinated transmissions. We also proposed a
method to create groups of SR-compatible APs, and a set
of algorithms to schedule coordinated transmissions. Results
evidence that algorithms based-on per-AP selection perform
better than the per-Group selection ones.
REFERENCES
[1] Sandvine, “The Global Internet Phenomena Report,” https://www.
sandvine.com/phenomena, 2022.
[2] M. Carrascosa and B. Bellalta, “Cloud-gaming: Analysis of google stadia
trafﬁc,” Computer Communications , vol. 188, pp. 99–116, 2022.
[3] S. Zhao, H. Abou-zeid, R. Atawia, Y . S. K. Manjunath, A. B. Sediq, and
X.-P. Zhang, “Virtual Reality Gaming on the Cloud: A Reality Check,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10114 , 2021.0 100 200 300
Load [Mbps]0100200300Throughput [Mbps]load
c-TDMA-NumPk
c-TDMA-OldPk
NumPkSingle
NumPkGroup
OldPkSingle
OldPkGroup
0 100 200 300
Load [Mbps]01020304050Average delay [ms]c-TDMA-NumPk
c-TDMA-OldPk
NumPkSingle
NumPkGroup
OldPkSingle
OldPkGroup(a)= 20 dB andK= 3.
0 100 200 300
Load [Mbps]0100200300Throughput [Mbps]load
c-TDMA-NumPk
NumPkSingle, K=2
NumPkSingle, K=3
0 100 200 300
Load [Mbps]01020304050Average delay [ms]c-TDMA-NumPk
OldPkSingle, K=2
OldPkSingle, K=3 (b)K= 2 and3, with= 14 dB.
0 100 200 300
Load [Mbps]0100200300Throughput [Mbps]load
c-TDMA-NumPk
NumPkSingle, K=2
NumPkSingle, K=3
0 100 200 300
Load [Mbps]01020304050Average delay [ms]c-TDMA-NumPk
OldPkSingle, K=2
OldPkSingle, K=3 (c)K= 2 and3, with= 20 dB.
Figure 3: Aggregate (WLAN) throughput and average delay in the scenario of Fig. 2 for different values of andK.
Low Medium High
Load0510152095th-percentile delay [ms]NumPkSingle
NumPkGroup
OldPkSingle
OldPkGroup
Figure 4: 95th-percentile delay for different algorithms in the
scenario of Fig. 2, = 20 andK= 3.
5 10 15 20 25
95th-percentile delay [ms]00.51F(x)c-TDMA-NumPk
NumPkSingle
NumPkGroup
OldPkSingle
OldPkGroup
Figure 5: CDF of the 95th-percentile delay between random
scenarios.
[4] “IEEE 802.11-22/0078r3: 802.11 UHR Draft Pro-
posed PAR,” https://mentor.ieee.org/802.11/dcn/23/
11-23-0078-03-0uhr-uhr-draft-proposed-par.docx, January 2023,
accessed on 08/02/2023.
[5] A. Garcia-Rodriguez, D. L ´opez-P ´erez, L. Galati-Giordano, and
G. Geraci, “IEEE 802.11be: Wi-Fi 7 Strikes Back,” IEEE Communi-
cations Magazine , vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 102–108, 2021.
[6] E. Khorov, I. Levitsky, and I. F. Akyildiz, “Current Status and Directions
of IEEE 802.11be, the Future Wi-Fi 7,” IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 88 664–
88 688, 2020.
[7] D. Nunez, F. Wilhelmi, S. Avallone, M. Smith, and B. Bellalta, “TXOP
sharing with Coordinated Spatial Reuse in Multi-AP Cooperative IEEE
802.11be WLANs,” in 2022 IEEE 19th Annual Consumer Communica-
tions Networking Conference (CCNC) , 2022, pp. 864–870.
[8] “IEEE P802.11be Draft Standard for Information technology—
Telecommunications and information exchange between systems Lo-
92 94 96 98 100
MAPC slot occupancy [%]00.51F(x)c-TDMA-NumPk
NumPkSingle
NumPkGroup
OldPkSingle
OldPkGroupFigure 6: CDF of the MAPC slot occupancy between random
scenarios.
cal and metropolitan area networks— Speciﬁc requirements. Part 11:
Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer
(PHY) Speciﬁcations. Amendment 8: Enhancements for extremely high
throughput (EHT),” May 2022.
[9] ´A. L ´opez-Ravent ´os and B. Bellalta, “Multi-link Operation in IEEE
802.11 be WLANs,” IEEE Wireless Communications (arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.07499) , 2022.
[10] M. Carrascosa, G. Geraci, E. Knightly, and B. Bellalta, “An experimental
study of latency for IEEE 802.11 be multi-link operation,” in ICC 2022-
IEEE International Conference on Communications . IEEE, 2022, pp.
2507–2512.
[11] J. Han et al. , “Coordinated Spatial Reuse: Focus on Downlink,” May
2020, doc.: IEEE 802.11-20/0590r5.
[12] K. Aio et al. , “Coordinated Spatial Reuse Performance Analysis,”
September 2019, doc.: IEEE 802.11-19/1534r5.
[13] D. Akhmetov et al. , “Multi-AP coordination for spatial reuse,” 2020,
doc.: IEEE 802.11-20/0107r1.
[14] Y . Seok et al. , “Coordinated Spatial Reuse (C-SR) Protocol,” April 2020,
doc.: IEEE 802.11-20/0576r1.
[15] W. Ahn, “Novel Multi-AP Coordinated Transmission Scheme for 7th
Generation WLAN 802.11be,” Entropy , vol. 22, no. 12, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/22/12/1426
[16] Y . Kihira, K. Yamamoto, A. Taya, T. Nishio, Y . Koda, and K. Yano,
“Interference-free ap identiﬁcation and shared information reduction
for tabular q-learning-based wlan coordinated spatial reuse,” IEICE
Communications Express , vol. advpub, p. 2022XBL0051, 2022.
[17] A. Krotov, A. Kiryanov, and E. Khorov, “Rate Control With Spatial
Reuse for Wi-Fi 6 Dense Deployments,” IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp.
168 898–168 909, 2020.
[18] S. Merlin et al. , “TGax Simulation Scenarios,” Nov. 2015, doc.: IEEE
802.11-14/0980r16.