DreamWaltz: Make a Scene with Complex 3D
Animatable Avatars
Yukun Huang1,2∗†, Jianan Wang1∗‡, Ailing Zeng1, He Cao1, Xianbiao Qi1, Yukai Shi1,
Zheng-Jun Zha2, Lei Zhang1
1International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
2University of Science and Technology of China
(c) Woody dances with Stormtrooper. (d) Woody sits on: ( Left) a chair; ( Right ) a chair made of cheese.(b) Uzumaki Naruto in dance moves . (a) Princess Elsa in different poses.
Figure 1: DreamWaltz is a text-to-3D-avatar generation framework, which can (a, b) create complex
3D animatable avatars from texts, (c, d) ready for 3D scene composition with diverse interactions.
Abstract
We present DreamWaltz, a novel framework for generating and animating complex
3D avatars given text guidance and parametric human body prior. While recent
methods have shown encouraging results for text-to-3D generation of common
objects, creating high-quality and animatable 3D avatars remains challenging. To
create high-quality 3D avatars, DreamWaltz proposes 3D-consistent occlusion-
aware Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) to optimize implicit neural representations
with canonical poses. It provides view-aligned supervision via 3D-aware skeleton
conditioning which enables complex avatar generation without artifacts and multi-
ple faces. For animation, our method learns an animatable 3D avatar representation
from abundant image priors of diffusion model conditioned on various poses, which
could animate complex non-rigged avatars given arbitrary poses without retraining.
Extensive evaluations demonstrate that DreamWaltz is an effective and robust
approach for creating 3D avatars that can take on complex shapes and appearances
as well as novel poses for animation. The proposed framework further enables
the creation of complex scenes with diverse compositions, including avatar-avatar,
avatar-object and avatar-scene interactions. See https://dreamwaltz3d.github.io/ for
more vivid 3D avatar and animation results.
1 Introduction
The creation and animation of 3D digital avatars are essential for various applications, including film
and cartoon production, video game design, and immersive media such as AR and VR. However,
∗Equal contribution.
†Work done during an internship at IDEA.
‡Corresponding author.
Preprint. Under review.arXiv:2305.12529v3  [cs.CV]  6 Nov 2023traditional techniques for constructing such intricate 3D models are costly and time-consuming,
requiring thousands of hours from skilled artists with extensive aesthetics and 3D modeling knowledge.
In this work, we seek a solution for 3D avatar generation that satisfies the following desiderata: (1)
easily controllable over avatar properties through textual descriptions; (2) capable of producing
high-quality and diverse 3D avatars with complex shapes and appearances; (3) the generated avatars
should be ready for animation and scene composition with diverse interactions.
The advancement of deep learning methods has enabled promising methods which can reconstruct
3D human models from monocular images [ 36,45] or videos [ 44,14,46,41,12,30]. Nonetheless,
these methods rely heavily on the strong visual priors from image/video and human body geometry,
making them unsuitable for generating creative avatars that can take on complex and imaginative
shapes or appearances. Recently, integrating 2D generative models into 3D modeling [ 31,18,10] has
gained significant attention to make 3D digitization more accessible, reducing the dependency on
extensive 3D datasets. However, creating animatable 3D avatars remains challenging: Firstly, avatars
often require intricate and complex details for their appearance (e.g., loose cloth, diverse hair, and
different accessories); secondly, avatars have articulated structures where each body part is able to
assume various poses in a coordinated and constrained way; and thirdly, avatar changes shape and
texture details such as creases when assuming different poses, making animation for complex avatars
extremely challenging. As a result, while DreamFusion [ 31] and subsequent methods [ 18,5] have
demonstrated impressive results on text-guided creation of stationary everyday objects, they lack
the proper constraints to enforce consistent 3D avatar structures and appearances, which presents
significant challenges to producing intricate shapes, appearances and poses for 3D avatars, let alone
for animation.
In this paper, we present DreamWaltz, a framework for generating high-quality 3D digital avatars
from text prompts utilizing human body prior of shapes and poses, ready for animation and compo-
sition with diverse avatar-avatar, avatar-object and avatar-scene interactions. DreamWaltz employs
a trainable Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) as the 3D avatar representation, a pre-trained text-and-
skeleton-conditional diffusion model [ 48] for shape and appearance supervision, and SMPL mod-
els [2] for extracting 3D-aware posed-skeletons. Our method enables high-quality avatar generation
with 3D-consistent SDS, which resolves the view disparity between the diffusion model’s supervision
and NeRF’s rendering. By training an animatable NeRF with diffusion supervision conditioned on
human pose prior, we can deform the generated non-rigged avatar to arbitrary poses for realistic
test-time animation without retraining.
The key contributions of DreamWaltz lie in four main aspects:
• We propose a novel text-to-avatar generation framework named DreamWaltz, which is capable of
creating animatable 3D avatars with complex shapes and appearances.
•For avatar creation, we propose a SMPL-guided 3D-consistent Score Distillation Sampling strategy
with occlusion culling, enabling the generation of high-quality avatars, e.g., avoiding the Janus
(multi-face) problem and limb ambiguity.
•We propose to learn an animatable NeRF representation from diffusion model and human pose
prior, which enables the animation of complex avatars. Once trained, we can animate the created
avatar with any pose sequence without retraining.
•Experiments show that DreamWaltz is effective in creating high-quality and animatable avatars,
ready for scene composition with diverse interactions across avatars and objects.
2 Related Work
Text-guided image generation. Recently, there have been significant advancements in text-to-
image models such as GLIDE [ 26], unCLIP [ 33], Imagen [ 35], and Stable Diffusion [ 34], which
enable the generation of highly realistic and imaginative images based on text prompts. These
generative capabilities have been made possible by advancements in modeling, such as diffusion
models [ 6,39,27], and the availability of large-scale web data containing billions of image-text
pairs [ 37,38,4]. These datasets encompass a wide range of general objects, with significant varia-
tions in color, texture, and camera viewpoints, providing pre-trained models with a comprehensive
understanding of general objects and enabling the synthesis of high-quality and diverse objects.
2AvatarCLIPAvatarCraft
Complex✗Animatable✓DreamAvatarComplex✓Animatable✗DreamWaltz (Ours)Complex✓Animatable✓
Figure 2: Comparison of text-driven 3D avatar generation methods, including: AvatarCLIP [ 8],
AvatarCraft [ 13], DreamAvatar [ 3] and DreamWaltz (Ours). AvatarCLIP and AvatarCraft assume
strong SMPL constraints, which makes it straightforward for the generated avatars to align with
SMPL for animation. But due to the constraints, the avatars cannot take on complex shapes and
appearances ; With weak SMPL constraints, DreamAvatar struggles with wrong avatar geometry
andrequires retraining for each pose adjustment. Different from existing methods, DreamWaltz
enables complex and animatable 3D avatar generation benefiting from the proposed SMPL-guided
3D-consistent SDS and deformation learning from human pose prior.
Furthermore, recent works [ 48,9,15] have explored incorporating additional conditioning, such as
depth maps and human skeleton poses, to generate images with more precise control.
Text-guided 3D generation. Dream Fields [ 11] and CLIPmesh [ 23] were groundbreaking in their
utilization of CLIP [ 32] to optimize an underlying 3D representation, aligning its 2D renderings with
user-specified text prompts, without necessitating costly 3D training data. However, this approach
tends to result in less realistic 3D models since CLIP only provides discriminative supervision for
high-level semantics. In contrast, recent works have demonstrated remarkable text-to-3D generation
results by employing powerful text-to-image diffusion models as a robust 2D prior for optimizing a
trainable NeRF with Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [ 31,18,5,10]. Nonetheless, the produced
geometry and texture are static, blurry and usually lack intricate details necessary for avatar creation.
Text-guided 3D avatar generation. Avatar-CLIP [ 8] starts with initializing 3D human geometry
via a shape V AE network and subsequently employs CLIP [ 32] for shape sculpting and texture
generation. To animate the generated 3D avatar, they propose a CLIP-guided reference-based
motion synthesis method. However, this approach tends to produce less realistic and oversimplified
3D models due to the limited guidance provided by CLIP, which primarily focuses on high-level
semantic discrimination. Concurrent to our work, DreamAvatar [ 3] and AvatarCraft [ 13] both utilize
pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models and SMPL models as shape prior for avatar generation.
While DreamAvatar focuses on producing static posed-3D avatars which are incapable of animation,
AvatarCraft generates higher-quality avatars via coarse-to-fine and multi-box training and enables
animation via local transformation between the template mesh and the target mesh based on SMPL
models. We summarize the key differences between our work and related works in Fig. 2.
3 Method
3.1 Preliminary
Text-to-3D generation. Recent methods [ 31,18,21] have shown encouraging results on text-to-3D
generation of common objects by integrating three essential components:
(1) Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [ 25,1,22] is commonly adopted as the 3D representation for
text-to-3D generation [ 40,18], parameterized by a trainable MLP. For rendering, a batch of rays
r(k) =o+kdare sampled based on the camera position oand direction don a per-pixel basis. The
MLP takes r(k)as input and predicts density τand color c. The volume rendering integral is then
approximated using numerical quadrature to yield the final color of the rendered pixel:
ˆCc(r) =NcX
i=1Ωi·(1−exp(−τiδi))ci,
3where Ncis the number of sampled points on a ray, Ωi= exp( −Pi−1
j=1τjδj)is the accumulated
transmittance, and δiis the distance between adjacent sample points.
(2) Diffusion models [7,27] which have been pre-trained on extensive image-text datasets [ 33,35,40]
provide a robust image prior for supervising text-to-3D generation. Diffusion models learn to
estimate the denoising score ∇xlogpdata(x)by adding noise to clean data x∼p(x)(forward
process) and learning to reverse the added noise (backward process). Noising the data distribution to
isotropic Gaussian is performed in Ttimesteps, with a pre-defined noising schedule αt∈(0,1)and
¯αt:=Qt
s=1αs, according to:
zt=√¯αtx+√
1−¯αtϵ,where ϵ∼ N(0,I).
In the training process, the diffusion models learn to estimate the noise by
Lt=Ex,ϵ∼N (0,I)h
∥ϵϕ(zt, t)−ϵ∥2
2i
.
Once trained, one can estimate xfrom noisy input and the corresponding noise prediction.
(3) Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [ 31,18,21] is a technique introduced by DreamFusion [ 31] and
extensively employed to distill knowledge from a pre-trained diffusion model ϵϕinto a differentiable
3D representation. For a NeRF model parameterized by θ, its rendering xcan be obtained by
x=g(θ)where gis a differentiable renderer. SDS calculates the gradients of NeRF parameters θby,
∇θLSDS(ϕ,x) =Et,ϵ
w(t)(ϵϕ(xt;y, t)−ϵ)∂zt
∂x∂x
∂θ
, (1)
where w(t)is a weighting function that depends on the timestep tandydenotes the given text prompt.
SMPL [19] is a 3D parametric human body model with a vertex-based linear deformation model,
which decomposes body deformation into identity-related and pose-related shape deformation. It
contains N= 6,890vertices and K= 24 keypoints. Benefiting from its efficient and expressive
human motion representation ability, SMPL has been widely used in human motion-driven tasks [8,
47,20]. SMPL parameters include a 3D body joint rotation ξ∈RK×3, a body shape β∈R10, and a
3D global scale and translation t∈R3.
Formally, constructing a rest pose T(β, ξ)involves combining the mean template shape ¯Tfrom
the canonical space, the shape-dependent deformations BS(β)∈R3N, and the pose-dependent
deformations BP(ξ)∈R3Nto relieve artifacts in a standard linear blend skinning (LBS) [24] by,
T(β, ξ) =¯T+BS(β) +BP(ξ).
To map the SMPL parameters β, ξto a triangulated mesh, a function Mis adopted to combine the
rest pose mesh T(β, ξ), the corresponding keypoint positions J(β)∈R3K, pose ξ, and a set of
blend weights W ∈RN×Kvia a LBS function as,
M(β, ξ) = W( T(β, ξ),J(β), ξ,W).
To obtain the corresponding vertex under the observation pose vo, an affine deformation Gk(ξ, jk)
with skinning weight wkis used to transform the kthkeypoint jkfrom the canonical pose to the
observation pose as,
vo=KX
k=1wkGk(ξ, jk). (2)
3.2 DreamWaltz: A Text-to-Avatar Generation Framework
3.2.1 Creating a Canonical Avatar
DreamWaltz employs a trainable NeRF as the 3D avatar representation. It leverages SMPL prior in
two ways: (1) initializing NeRF; (2) extracting 3D-aware and occlusion-aware posed-skeletons to
condition ControlNet [ 48] for 3D-consistent Score Distillation Sampling. Fig 3 (a) illustrates our
method on how to create a canonical avatar.
4Random Camera View
Rendered
ImageControlNet
(frozen)
“Naruto Uzumaki”𝐿sds
ObservationHash Look -up
Feature Grid
Stage I: Canonical Avatar Creation
Canonical Avatar RepresentationNoise3D Consistancy
3D-consistent Score Distillation SamplingText PromptMLP𝜎
𝑐
Rendering
NetworkOcclusion Culling
 Canonical SMPL Skeleton
 Skeleton
Left Ear 
(invisible)Right Ear 
& Nose 
(visible)Keypoint
Extraction
3D-to-2D
Projection
Feature
Query
Feature
Decode
(a)Canonical Avatar Creation. We randomly sample a camera viewpoint to render both the 3D avatar and an
SMPL model. The extracted SMPL 3D keypoints are projected to a 2D skeleton image with occlusion culling.
The skeleton image is by construction 3D-consistent with the rendered avatar. We then utilize ControlNet [ 48]
conditioned on the text prompt and the skeleton image instead of the original SD [34].
Stage II: Diffusion -Guided
Animatable Avatar Learning3D-consistent Score 
Distillation SamplingRandom
Sampling
Posed SMPL
Rendered
ImageHuman Pose Prior
Keypoint
Extraction
𝐿sdsDensity WeightingClosest 
Vertex
Query
Inverse -LBSMLP𝑤𝑑
Position 
EncodingPoint -Vertex
Distance
Skeleton
ObservationRendering
NetworkHash Look -up
Feature Grid
Feature
Decode
MLP𝝈
𝑐
Animatable Avatar RepresentationArbitrary Pose -Guided Conditioning
(b)Animatable Avatar Learning. We randomly sample viable poses from off-the-shelf VPoser [ 29] for SMPL
model to condition ControlNet [ 48] and to learn a generalizable density weighting function to refine vertex-based
pose transformation, enabling animation of complex avatars.
Figure 3: Illustration of our framework for canonical and animatable avatar creation. (a) shows how
to create a canonical avatar from text with 3D-consistent occlusion-aware Score Distillation Sampling,
and (b) demonstrates how to further learn an animatable avatar with sampled human pose prior.
SMPL-guided initialization. To speed up the NeRF optimization and to provide a reasonable initial
input for retrieving informative supervision from the diffusion model, we pre-train NeRF based
on an SMPL mesh. The SMPL model could be in the canonical pose as adopted in our method to
avoid self-occlusion or in any chosen pose for posed-avatar creation [ 3]. Specifically, we render the
silhouette image xsilof the SMPL model given a randomly sampled viewpoint and minimize the
MSE loss between the NeRF-rendered image xand the silhouette image xsil. Note that our NeRF
renders images in the latent space of Stable Diffusion [ 34], so it is necessary to use the V AE-based
image encoder to transform silhouette images into the latent space for the loss calculation. We
empirically found that SMPL-guided NeRF initialization significantly improves the geometry and the
convergence speed for avatar generation.
3D-consistent Score Distillation Sampling. Vanilla SDS [ 40,43,18] as previously introduced
in Sec. 3.1 utilizes view-dependent prompt augmentations such as “front view of ...” for diffusion
model to provide crucial 3D view-consistent supervision. However, this prompting strategy cannot
guarantee precise view consistency, leaving the disparity between the viewpoint of the diffusion
model’s supervision image and NeRF’s rendering image unresolved. Such inconsistency causes
quality issues for 3D generation, such as blurriness and the Janus (multi-face) problem. Inspired by
recent works of controllable image generation [ 48,15], we propose to utilize additional 3D-aware
conditioning images to improve SDS for 3D-consistent NeRF optimization. Specifically, additional
5conditioning image cis injected to Eq. 1 for SDS gradient computation:
∇θLSDS(ϕ,x) =Et,ϵ
w(t)(ϵϕ(xt;y, t,c)−ϵ)∂zt
∂x∂x
∂θ
, (3)
where conditioning image ccan be one or a combination of skeletons, depth maps, normal maps and
etc. In practice, we choose skeletons as the conditional image type because they provide minimal
image structure priors and enable complex avatar generation. In order to acquire 3D-consistent
supervision, the conditioning image’s viewpoint should be in sync with NeRF’s rendering viewpoint.
To achieve this for avatar generation, we use human SMPL models to produce conditioning images.
Occlusion culling. The introduction of 3D-aware conditional images can enhance the 3D consistency
in the SDS optimization process. However, the effectiveness is constrained by the adopted diffusion
model [ 48] on its interpretation of the conditional images. As shown in Fig. 8 (a), we provide a
back-view skeleton map as the conditional image to ControlNet [ 48] and perform text-to-image
generation, but a frontal face still appears in the generated image. Such defects bring problems such
as multiple faces and unclear facial features to 3D avatar generation. To this end, we propose to use
occlusion culling algorithms [ 28] in computational graphics to detect whether facial keypoints are
visible from the given viewpoint and subsequently remove them from the skeleton map if considered
invisible. Body keypoints remain unaltered because they reside in the SMPL mesh, and it is difficult
to determine whether they are occluded without introducing new priors.
3.2.2 Learning an Animatable Avatar
Fig. 3 (b) illustrates our framework for generating animatable 3D avatars. In the training process,
we randomly sample SMPL models of viable poses from VPoser [ 29] to condition ControlNet [ 48]
and to learn a generalizable density weighting function to refine vertex-based pose transformation,
enabling animation of complex avatars. At test time, DreamWaltz is capable of creating an animation
based on arbitrary motion sequences without requiring further pose-by-pose retraining .
SMPL-guided avatar articulation. Referring to Sec. 3.1, SMPL defines a vertex transformation
from observation space to canonical space according to Eq. 2. In this work, we use SMPL-guided
transformation to achieve NeRF-represented avatar articulation. More concretely, for each sampled
pointpon a NeRF ray, we find its closest vertex vcbased on a posed SMPL mesh. We then utilize the
transformation matrix Tskelofvcto project pto the canonical space feature grid for feature querying
and subsequent volume rendering. When pis close to vc, the calculated articulation is approximately
correct. However, for non-skin-tight complex avatars, pmay be far away from any mesh vertex,
resulting in erroneous coordinate transformation causing quality issues such as extra limbs and
artifacts. To avoid such problems, we further introduce a novel density weighting mechanism.
Density weighting network. We propose a density weighting mechanism to suppress color con-
tribution from erroneously transformed point p, effectively alleviating undesirable artifacts. To
achieve this, we train a generalizable density weighting network MLP DWN. More concretely, we
project sampled point pand its closest vertex vcto the canonical space via the transformation matrix
Tskel, embed these two coordinates with the positional embedding function PE(·)and then use the
concatenated embeddings as inputs to MLP DWN. The process can be defined as,
d′=MLP DWN(PE(Tskel·p)⊕PE(Tskel·vc)). (4)
We then compute density weights wdaccording to the distance dbetween pandvc, and d′:
wd=Sigmoid (−(d−d′)/a). (5)
where ais a preset parameter. Finally, the density δof sampled point pis re-weighted to δ·wdfor
subsequent volume rendering in NeRF.
Sampled human pose prior. To enable animating generated avatars with arbitrary motion sequences,
we need to make sure that the density weighting network MLP DWN is generalizable to arbitrary poses.
To achieve this, we utilize VPoser [ 29] as a human pose prior, which is a variational autoencoder
that learns a latent representation of human pose. During training, we randomly sample SMPL pose
parameters ξfrom VPoser to construct the corresponding posed meshes. We utilize the mesh to (1)
extract skeleton maps as conditioning images for 3D-consistent SDS; (2) to serve as mesh guidance
for learning animatable avatar representation. This strategy aligns avatar articulation learning with
6Kratos
 Woody in
Toy StoryJoker Link in Zelda
 Spiderman
 MulanView 1 View 2
Retro astronaut 
with a bulky suit
Doctor Who
 GintokiFigure 4: Qualitative results from two views of DreamWaltz. Given text prompts, it can generate
high-quality 3D avatars with complex geometry and texture.
SDS supervision, ensuring that MLP DWN could learn a generalizable density weighting function from
diverse poses. We also observe that SDS with diverse pose conditioning could further improve the
visual quality of created avatar, e.g., sharper appearance.
3.3 Making a Scene with Animatable 3D Avatars
DreamWaltz provides an effective solution to animatable 3D avatar generation from text, readily
applicable to make a scene with diverse interactions. For example, different animatable avatars could
be rendered in the same scene, achieving avatar-avatar animation. In Fig. 1 (c), we can make the avatar
“Woody” dance with “Stormtrooper”. The animation process does not require any retraining. However,
the constructed scene might exhibit unruliness, artifacts, or interpenetration issues because the naive
composite rendering does not take into account the interactions between different components.
Although not our main contribution, we explore the refinement of compositional scene representation
with the proposed 3D-consistent SDS. Firstly, we employ DreamWaltz and Latent-NeRF [ 21] to
generate avatars and objects of the desired scene, respectively. Then, we manually set the motions
of avatars and objects, and adopt composite rendering [ 13] to obtain a scene image. For scene
refinement, we further provide a text prompt of the desired scene for ControlNet, and use animatable
avatar learning of DreamWaltz to fine-tune the whole scene representation. Benefiting from diffusion
model’s scene-related image priors, the visual quality of the generated dynamic 3D scene could be
further improved. More results and discussions are provided in Appendix B.4.
4 Experiment
We validate the effectiveness of our proposed framework for avatar generation and animation. In
Sec. 4.1, we evaluate avatar generation with extensive text prompts for both qualitative comparisons
and user studies. In Sec. 4.2, we demonstrate avatar animation given novel motion sequences. We
present ablation analysis in Sec. 4.3 and illustrate that our framework can be further applied to make
complex scenes with diverse interactions in Sec. 4.4.
Implementation details. DreamWaltz is implemented in PyTorch and can be trained and evaluated on
a single NVIDIA 3090 GPU. For the canonical avatar creation stage, we train the avatar representation
for 30,000 iterations, which takes about an hour. For the animatable avatar learning stage, the avatar
representation and the introduced density weighting network are further trained for 50,000 iterations.
Inference takes less than 3 seconds per rendering frame. Note that the two stages can be combined
for joint training, but we decouple them for training efficiency.
4.1 Evaluation of Canonical Avatars
High-quality avatar generation. We show 3D avatars created by DreamWaltz on diverse text
prompts in Fig. 4. The geometry and texture quality are consistently high across different viewpoints
for different text prompts. See Appendix A.1 for more discussions and results.
7Comparison with SOTA methods. We compare with existing SDS-based methods for complex
(non-skin-tight) avatar generation. Latent-NeRF [ 21] and SJC [ 43] are general text-to-3D models.
AvatarCraft [ 13] is not included for comparison because it cannot generate complex avatars. Further-
more, AvatarCraft utilizes a coarse-to-fine and body-face separated training to improve generation
quality, which is orthogonal to our method. DreamAvatar [ 3] is the most relevant to our method,
utilizing SMPL human prior without overly constraining avatar complexity. It is evident from Fig. 5
that our method consistently achieves higher quality in geometry and texture.
Mobile Suit Gundam CAO CAO
 DragonBall
Ours DreamAvatar Latent -NeRF SJC
Figure 5: Qualitative comparisons for complex avatar generation. Text inputs are listed below.
Latent -NeRF
SJC
DreamAvatar
Ours
1.15 1.68 3.05 3.72 1.19 1.73 2.74 3.75
Geometry Texture
Figure 6: User preference study.
DreamWaltz obtains higher scores in
both geometry and texture.User studies. We conduct user studies to evaluate the
quality of avatar generation against existing text-to-3D
generation methods: Latent-NeRF [ 21], SJC [ 43] and
DreamAvatar [ 3]. We use the 25 text prompts DreamA-
vatar released and their showcase models for comparison.
We asked 12 volunteers to score 1 (worst) to 4 (best) in
terms of (1) avatar geometry and (2) avatar texture. We
do not measure text alignment as the avatar prompts are
well-known characters universally respected by all the
competing models. As shown in Fig. 6, the raters favor
avatars generated by DreamWaltz for both better geometry
and texture quality. Specifically, DreamWaltz outperforms
the best competitor DreamAvatar by score 0.67 on geom-
etry and by score 1.01 on texture.
4.2 Evaluation of Animatable Avatars
We demonstrate the efficacy of our animation learning method with animation results on two motion
sequences as shown in Fig. 7: row (a) displays motion sequences in skeletons as animation inputs;
our framework directly applies the motion sequences to our generated avatars “Flynn Rider” and
“Woody” without any retraining. We render the corresponding normal and RGB sequences in (b) and
(c). In (d), we provide free-viewpoint rendering of a chosen sequence frame. Since we essentially
infer a posed 3D avatar for each motion frame, the renderings are by construction 3D-consistent and
we can creatively use the 3D model for novel-view video generation.
8(a) Skeleton (b) Normal (c) RGBFree View
Flynn Rider Woody in Toy Story
Motion Sequence
(d) RGBFigure 7: Animation results by applying skeleton motion sequences to animatable avatars generated
by DreamWaltz. For each pose frame we could effortlessly render 3D-consistent free-viewpoints.
4.3 Ablation Studies
To evaluate the design choices of DreamWaltz, we ablate on the effectiveness of our proposed
occlusion culling and animation learning.
Effectiveness of occlusion culling. Occlusion culling is crucial for resolving view ambiguity, both for
2D and 3D generation, as shown in Fig. 8 (a) and Fig. 8 (b), respectively. Limited by the view-aware
capability, ControlNet fails to generate the back-view image of a character even with view-dependent
text and skeleton prompts, as shown in Fig. 8 (a). The introduction of OC eliminates the ambiguity of
skeleton conditions and helps ControlNet to generate correct views. Similar effects can be observed
in text-to-3D generation, as shown in Fig. 8 (b).
(b) Text-to-3D: “Miku”
w/o OC
 w/OC
(a)ControlNet: “backview of Mulan”w/o Occlusion Culling
 w/Occlusion Culling
Figure 8: Ablation study on occlusion culling (OC). Occlusion culling refines the skeleton condition
image by removing occluded human keypoints, which helps (a) ControlNet [ 48] to correctly generate
character back view, (b) text-to-3D model to resolve the multi-face problem.
Effectiveness of animation learning. We compare our animation learning strategy with other
animation methods, including: vanilla Inverse-LBS (Baseline) and AvatarCraft [ 13]. From Fig. 9, it
is evident that our animation learning method is significantly more effective than Inverse-LBS and
AvatarCraft [ 13]. Note that AvatarCraft cannot faithfully animate complex features, e.g. Woody’s hat.
DreamWaltz (Ours)
 Inverse -LBS
 AvatarCraft
Figure 9: Comparison of different animation strategies, including: Inverse-LBS (Baseline), Avatar-
Craft [ 13], and DreamWaltz (Ours). Our method learns to animate avatars from pose-conditioned
image priors, therefore able to animate complex characters with significantly higher quality.
94.4 Further Analysis and Application
Shape control via SMPL parameter β.DreamWaltz allows shape adjustment for controllable 3D
avatar generation. As shown in Fig. 10, the body proportions of the generated avatars can be changed
by simply specifying different SMPL parameter β.
Tall “Michael Jordan”
 Tall “Lionel Messi” Fat “Michael Jordan” Short “Lionel Messi”
Figure 10: Our method supports adjusting the body proportions of avatars by adjusting the SMPL
parameter β. For example, athlete avatars of different heights and fatness can be generated.
Creative and diverse avatar generation. DreamWaltz achieves stable 3D avatar generation via
3D-consistent SDS, enabling creative and diverse 3D avatar creation with low failure rates. Given
imaginative text prompts and different random seeds, our method successfully generates various
high-quality avatars, e.g., “a doctor wearing Woody’s hat”, as shown in Fig. 11.
a doctor wearing Woody’s hat Taylor Swift in Snow White costumeseed=1 seed=2 seed=3 seed=0 seed=1 seed=2 seed=3 seed=0
Figure 11: Creative avatar creation with different random seeds and initial noises.
Scene composition with diverse interactions. Benefiting from DreamWaltz, we could compose
animatable avatars and other 3D assets into the same scene. We give a few examples to highlight
the potential for enabling diverse interactions: (1) avatar-avatar interaction as shown in Fig. 1 (c)
depicting “Woody” dancing with “Stromtrooper”; and (2) avatar-scene interaction as shown in Fig. 1
(d) with “Woody” sitting on different chairs. The interactions can be freely composed to make a
dynamic scene. More results are provided in Appendix A.3.
5 Discussion and Conclusion
Limitation. Although DreamWaltz can generate SOTA high-quality complex avatars from textual
descriptions, the visual quality can be significantly improved with higher resolution training at higher
time and computation cost. The quality of face and hand texture can be further improved through
dedicated optimization of close-up views as well as adopting stronger SMPLX instead of SMPL.
Societal Impact. Given our utilization of Stable Diffusion (SD) as the 2D generative prior, our
model could potentially inherit societal biases present within the vast and loosely curated web content
harnessed for SD training. We strongly encourage the usage to be transparent, ethical, non-offensive
and a conscious avoidance of generating proprietary characters.
Conclusion. We propose DreamWaltz, a novel learning framework for avatar creation and animation
with text and human shape/pose prior. For high-quality 3D avatar creation, we propose to leverage
human priors with SMPL-guided initialization, further optimized with 3D-consistent occlusion-
aware Score Distillation Sampling conditioned on 3D-aware skeletons. Our method learns an
animatable NeRF representation that could retarget the generated avatar to any pose without retraining,
enabling realistic animation with arbitrary motion sequences. Extensive experiments show that
DreamWaltz is effective and robust with state-of-the-art avatar generation and animation. Benefiting
from DreamWaltz, we could unleash our imagination and make diverse scenes with avatars.
10References
[1]Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla,
and Pratul P Srinivasan. Mip-NeRF: A Multiscale Representation for Anti-Aliasing Neural
Radiance Fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision , pages 5855–5864, 2021.
[2]Federica Bogo, Angjoo Kanazawa, Christoph Lassner, Peter Gehler, Javier Romero, and
Michael J Black. Keep it SMPL: Automatic estimation of 3D human pose and shape from a
single image. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part V 14 , pages 561–578. Springer, 2016.
[3]Yukang Cao, Yan-Pei Cao, Kai Han, Ying Shan, and Kwan-Yee K Wong. DreamAvatar:
Text-and-Shape Guided 3D Human Avatar Generation via Diffusion Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.00916 , 2023.
[4]Soravit Changpinyo, Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual 12M: Pushing
Web-Scale Image-Text Pre-Training To Recognize Long-Tail Visual Concepts. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3558–3568,
2021.
[5]Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fantasia3D: Disentangling Geometry and
Appearance for High-quality Text-to-3D Content Creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13873 ,
2023.
[6]Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Image Synthesis.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:8780–8794, 2021.
[7]Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020.
[8]Fangzhou Hong, Mingyuan Zhang, Liang Pan, Zhongang Cai, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Avatar-
CLIP: Zero-Shot Text-Driven Generation and Animation of 3D Avatars. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG) , 41(4):1–19, 2022.
[9]Lianghua Huang, Di Chen, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. Com-
poser: Creative and controllable image synthesis with composable conditions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.09778 , 2023.
[10] Yukun Huang, Jianan Wang, Yukai Shi, Xianbiao Qi, Zheng-Jun Zha, and Lei Zhang. Dream-
Time: An Improved Optimization Strategy for Text-to-3D Content Creation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.12422 , 2023.
[11] Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T Barron, Pieter Abbeel, and Ben Poole. Zero-Shot Text-
Guided Object Generation With Dream Fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 867–876, 2022.
[12] Boyi Jiang, Yang Hong, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang. Selfrecon: Self reconstruction your
digital avatar from monocular video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 5605–5615, 2022.
[13] Ruixiang Jiang, Can Wang, Jingbo Zhang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and
Jing Liao. AvatarCraft: Transforming Text into Neural Human Avatars with Parameterized
Shape and Pose Control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17606 , 2023.
[14] Wei Jiang, Kwang Moo Yi, Golnoosh Samei, Oncel Tuzel, and Anurag Ranjan. Neuman: Neural
human radiance field from a single video. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European
Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXXII , pages 402–418.
Springer, 2022.
[15] Xuan Ju, Ailing Zeng, Chenchen Zhao, Jianan Wang, Lei Zhang, and Qiang Xu. HumanSD:
A Native Skeleton-Guided Diffusion Model for Human Image Generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.04269 , 2023.
11[16] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2015.
[17] Ruilong Li, Shan Yang, David A. Ross, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Learn to Dance with AIST++:
Music Conditioned 3D Dance Generation, 2021.
[18] Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3D: High-Resolution Text-to-3D
Content Creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.10440 , 2022.
[19] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black.
SMPL: a skinned multi-person linear mode. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG) , 34(6):1–16,
2015.
[20] Naureen Mahmood, Nima Ghorbani, Nikolaus F Troje, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J
Black. AMASS: Archive of motion capture as surface shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
international conference on computer vision , pages 5442–5451, 2019.
[21] Gal Metzer, Elad Richardson, Or Patashnik, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Latent-NeRF
for Shape-Guided Generation of 3D Shapes and Textures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.07600 ,
2022.
[22] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi,
and Ren Ng. NeRF: Representing Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for View Synthesis.
Communications of the ACM , 65(1):99–106, 2021.
[23] Nasir Mohammad Khalid, Tianhao Xie, Eugene Belilovsky, and Tiberiu Popa. CLIP-Mesh:
Generating textured meshes from text using pretrained image-text models. In SIGGRAPH Asia
2022 Conference Papers , pages 1–8, 2022.
[24] Alex Mohr and Michael Gleicher. Building efficient, accurate character skins from examples.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 22(3):562–568, 2003.
[25] Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant Neural Graphics
Primitives with a Multiresolution Hash Encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) ,
41(4):1–15, 2022.
[26] Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. GLIDE: Towards Photorealistic Image Generation and Editing
with Text-Guided Diffusion Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741 , 2021.
[27] Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.
[28] Ioannis Pantazopoulos and Spyros Tzafestas. Occlusion Culling Algorithms: A Comprehensive
Survey. Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems , 35:123–156, 2002.
[29] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo Bolkart, Ahmed AA Osman,
Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face, and body
from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pages 10975–10985, 2019.
[30] Sida Peng, Junting Dong, Qianqian Wang, Shangzhan Zhang, Qing Shuai, Xiaowei Zhou,
and Hujun Bao. Animatable neural radiance fields for modeling dynamic human bodies. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 14314–
14323, 2021.
[31] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. DreamFusion: Text-to-3D using
2D Diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988 , 2022.
[32] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning Transferable Visual
Models From Natural Language Supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,
pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
12[33] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical
Text-Conditional Image Generation with CLIP Latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125 , 2022.
[34] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 10684–10695, 2022.
[35] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
Photorealistic Text-to-Image Diffusion Models with Deep Language Understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.11487 , 2022.
[36] Shunsuke Saito, Zeng Huang, Ryota Natsume, Shigeo Morishima, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Hao
Li. Pifu: Pixel-aligned implicit function for high-resolution clothed human digitization. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 2304–2314,
2019.
[37] Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman,
Mehdi Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. LAION-
5B: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.08402 , 2022.
[38] Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual Captions: A
Cleaned, Hypernymed, Image Alt-text Dataset For Automatic Image Captioning. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , pages 2556–2565, 2018.
[39] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models. In
International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021.
[40] Jiaxiang Tang. Stable-dreamfusion: Text-to-3d with stable-diffusion, 2022.
https://github.com/ashawkey/stable-dreamfusion.
[41] Gusi Te, Xiu Li, Xiao Li, Jinglu Wang, Wei Hu, and Yan Lu. Neural Capture of Animatable 3D
Human from Monocular Video. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference,
Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part VI , pages 275–291. Springer, 2022.
[42] Timo V on Marcard, Roberto Henschel, Michael J Black, Bodo Rosenhahn, and Gerard Pons-
Moll. Recovering Accurate 3D Human Pose in The Wild Using IMUs and a Moving Camera.
InProceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 601–617, 2018.
[43] Haochen Wang, Xiaodan Du, Jiahao Li, Raymond A. Yeh, and Greg Shakhnarovich. Score
Jacobian Chaining: Lifting Pretrained 2D Diffusion Models for 3D Generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.00774 , 2022.
[44] Chung-Yi Weng, Brian Curless, Pratul P Srinivasan, Jonathan T Barron, and Ira Kemelmacher-
Shlizerman. Humannerf: Free-viewpoint rendering of moving people from monocular video. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages
16210–16220, 2022.
[45] Yuliang Xiu, Jinlong Yang, Xu Cao, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. ECON: Explicit
Clothed humans Obtained from Normals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07422 , 2022.
[46] Zhengming Yu, Wei Cheng, Xian Liu, Wayne Wu, and Kwan-Yee Lin. MonoHuman: Animat-
able Human Neural Field from Monocular Video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02001 , 2023.
[47] Ailing Zeng, Xuan Ju, Lei Yang, Ruiyuan Gao, Xizhou Zhu, Bo Dai, and Qiang Xu. DeciWatch:
A Simple Baseline for 10 ×Efficient 2D and 3D Pose Estimation. In Computer Vision–ECCV
2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part V ,
pages 607–624. Springer, 2022.
[48] Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding Conditional Control to Text-to-Image Diffusion
Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543 , 2023.
13Appendix
In this supplementary material, Sec. A presents more qualitative results of DreamWaltz on avatar
creation, animation and interaction. Sec. B gives more analysis on the design choices of our method.
Section C provides more comprehensive implementation details.
A More Qualitative Results
We provide more results of our proposed method, including more generated avatars in Sec. A.1, more
animated avatar sequences in Sec. A.2, and more demonstrations on diverse interactions in Sec. A.3.
A.1 Avatar Creation
We provide more text-to-3D avatar generations in Fig. 12 with a wide range of text prompts including
celebrities, popular cartoon/movie characters and text descriptions. Note that DreamWaltz is capable
of generating diverse avatars. For instance, we can produce avatars with a human-realistic appearance
like “Tiger Woods”, avatars wearing intricate clothing such as “Napoleon” and “Marie Antoinette”,
and avatars tailored to user-provided characteristics like “Blue fairy with wings”, among others.
A.2 Avatar Animation
We provide more animation results on six characters as shown in Fig. 13. Please refer to the project
page at https://dreamwaltz3d.github.io/ for more animation sequences.
A.3 Diverse Interaction
We provide more results of diverse interactions in Fig. 14, including: avatar-object, avatar-scene, and
avatar-avatar interactions. Please refer to the videos on project page at https://dreamwaltz3d.github.io/
for the full sequences.
B More Analysis
B.1 Visualization of SDS Gradients
We visualize the SDS supervision gradients ∥ϵϕ(zt;y, t)−ϵ∥for NeRF renderings in Fig. 15 (a) and
the denoised images derived from noise predictions ϵϕ(zt;y, t)in Fig. 15 (b). These visualizations
are based on the text prompt yof “superman” and tof 980, while additional conditioning of depth
and skeleton is provided in the second and third row, respectively, in accordance with the current
rendering viewpoint of NeRF. It is evident that depth and skeleton images offer more informative
optimization gradients compared to text alone. However, depth images heavily rely on the SMPL
prior, leading to gradients that conform tightly to the avatar’s skin, resulting in the disappearance
of superman’s cape. On the other hand, skeleton images as adopted by DreamWaltz provide both
informative and flexible supervision, accurately capturing the avatar’s shape, pose, and intricate
details such as the cape.
B.2 Effects of Random-Pose Optimization on Avatar Quality
In Fig. 16, we present visualizations of the avatars obtained at various stages, all depicted in a
canonical pose. In Stage I, a static avatar is generated by optimizing its 3D representation with the
canonical pose. In Stage II, the system undergoes training on randomly sampled human poses to
facilitate animation learning. Although not our primary objective, this design enables the generated
avatar to further refine its appearance with different poses. As a result, minor adjustments are
observed, typically leading to sharper details. However, in some cases, the geometry may become
more simplified, aligning more closely with the SMPL prior.
14(a) View 1(b) View 2Taylor SwiftEmma StoneBallet dancerMadonna Louise CicconeTiger WoodsAlbert EinsteinAbraham Lincoln
(a) View 1(b) View 2NapoleonSuper MarioMonkey D. LuffyDoctorMarieAntoinetteSailor MoonBaseball player
(a) View 1(b) View 2
Blue fairy with wingsAriel, DisneyMerida, DisneyPeter PanSnow White, DisneyBelle, DisneyRapunzel(a) View 1(b) View 2Luke SkywalkerHarley QuinnYodaGreen ArrowThorDeadpoolBatman
(a) View1(b) View 2SupermanJack MarstonAssassin AltairDoctor StrangeHulk
LinoelMessi
Michael JordanFigure 12: Text-to-3D avatars generated with DreamWaltz, each displayed for two views.
15Joker
Thanos
Mulan GintokiFlynn Rider
Mobile Suit GundamFigure 13: Avatar animations on six characters.
(a) Avatar -object interaction. Stormtrooper holding a lightsaber and dancing.
(b) Avatar -scene interaction. Woody sitting on a chair and applauding.
(c) Avatar -avatar interaction. Woody and Stormtrooper playing basketball.
Figure 14: Avatar animations with diverse interactions.
(b) One -step denoised images (a) SDS gradientsskeleton depthControlNet Stable
Diffusion
Figure 15: Visualization of the SDS gradients (a) and the corresponding denoised images (b), given
the text prompt “superman”. The second and third rows are conditioned on additional depth and
skeleton images, respectively, as indicated in the upper left corner of each visualization. It is clear
that the skeleton image as adopted by DreamWaltz provides more informative supervision compared
to text alone. Skeleton conditioning is also less restrictive than depth conditioning, successfully
avoiding the disappearance of superman’s cape.
16After
Stage I
After
Stage II
Flynn Rider Woody Mobile Suit Gundam Joker Mulan Optimus PrimeFigure 16: Visualization of canonical avatars obtained at different stages. The optimization at Stage
II slightly changes the shape and appearance of avatars, resulting in sharper details (e.g., Woody’s
hat) but sometimes more simplified geometry (e.g., Flynn’s clothes).
B.3 Single-stage Training vs. Two-stage Training
In Fig. 17, we present a qualitative comparison between single-stage training (Stage II only) and
two-stage training (Stage I + Stage II) approaches using our proposed framework, specifically for
an avatar animation (e.g., on a dance motion sequence). When applied to different characters, the
single-stage strategy may result in problematic body topology and noticeable artifacts. In contrast,
the two-stage strategy effectively mitigates these issues, leading to improved visual quality. When
employing a single-stage strategy with end-to-end training, the model is required to simultaneously
learn the generation of avatar geometry and appearance, along with animation. This introduces
complex optimization dynamics, leading to potential slower optimization and sub-optimal results.
（a) Stage I + Stage II （b) Stage II Only （d) Stage II Only （c) Stage I + Stage II
Figure 17: Qualitative comparisons of single-stage training (Stage II only) with two-stage training
(Stage I + Stage II) on a dance motion sequence, both based on our proposed framework. For different
characters, the single-stage strategy may suffer incorrect body topology and severe artifacts, as shown
in (b). In contrast, the two-stage strategy can relieve these issues (from (b) to (a)) with better visual
quality (from (d) to (c)). The one-stage strategy tends to be subjected to slow optimization speed and
sub-optimal results.
17B.4 Effects of Joint Optimization for Scene Composition
Benefiting from DreamWaltz, we can create diverse animatable avatars that are prepared to engage
in scenes with interactions. One approach would be to simply render different animatable avatars
together in a scene. However, such composition is susceptible to issues such as artifacts and unnatural
interactions. To further improve the scene quality, we could fine-tune for each specific scene. As
shown in Fig. 18, fine-tuning brings noticeable improvements, such as enhancements to Woody’s hat
and boots, as well as more realistic “hands bumping” interactions.
w/oScene
Refinement
w/Scene
Refinement
Text Prompt for Scene Refinement: “ Woody in Toy Story playing basketball with Stormtrooper ”
Figure 18: To further enhance the visual quality of complex scene generation involving multiple
avatars and interactions, scene refinement (i.e. fine-tuning with our proposed 3D-consistent SDS)
can be applied to eliminate artifacts. As depicted in the frames marked with blue boxes, fine-tuning
brings noticeable improvements, such as enhancing the appearance of Woody’s boots and achieving
more realistic “hands bumping” effects.
B.5 Realistic Animation with Pose-dependent Changes
To further demonstrate our animation performance, we provide animation results of complex character
“Elsa” (with long hair and skirt) using our animation method, in comparison with animating extracted
mesh with the commercial application Mixamo . As demonstrated in Fig. 19, with our method, Elsa’s
skirt and hair exhibit significantly more natural displacements and movements (as highlighted in
yellow and red, respectively) as pose changes.
Canonical “Elsa”Animatable “Elsa”Extracted mesh “Elsa” animated by Mixamo
Figure 19: Animation results of complex avatar (Elsa with long hair and skirt). Our animation method
could achieve high-quality realistic animation with pose-dependent changes (hair displacement and
skirt movements as highlighted in yellow and red respectively), while animation with rigged mesh
fails with hair stuck to left arm and unrealistic skirt.
18C More Implementation Details
Diffusion Guidance. We adopt ControlNet [ 48] with Stable-Diffusion v1.5 [ 34] as the backbone
to provide 2D supervision. Specifically, we utilize the score distillation sampling (SDS) technique
introduced by DreamFusion [ 31] to obtain the back-propagation gradients of 3D avatar representation.
During training, we randomly sample the timestep from a uniform distribution of [20,980], and the
classifier-free guidance scale is set to 50.0. The weight term w(t)of SDS loss is set to 1.0, and
we normalize the SDS gradients to stabilize the optimization process. The conditioning scale for
ControlNet is set to 1.0by default.
The proposed DreamWaltz utilizes two types of conditioning: text prompt and skeleton image. The
text prompt is given by the user to provide avatar description. View-dependent text augmentation
from DreamFusion [31] is also used:


“front view of...” θcam∈[0◦,90◦]
“backside view of...” θcam∈[180◦,270◦]
“side view of...” otherwise ,
where θcamdenotes the azimuthal angle of camera position. The skeleton image is exported from the
3D SMPL mesh, where the rendering view is required to be consistent with the rendering view of
NeRF for training.
NeRF Rendering. We adopt Instant-NGP [ 25] as the implicit avatar representation. The ray
marching acceleration based on occupancy grid is disabled for dynamic scene rendering. The 3D
avatar representation renders “latent images” in the latent space of R64×64×4following Latent-
NeRF [ 21], where the “latent images” can be decoded into RGB images of R512×512×3by the V AE
decoder of Stable Diffusion [ 34]. During training, the camera positions are randomly sampled in
spherical coordinates, where the radius, azimuthal angle, and polar angle of camera position are
sampled from [1.0,2.0],[0,360] and[60,120], respectively.
Optimization. Throughout the entire training process, we use Adam [16] optimizer with a learning
rate of 1e-3, and batch size is set to 1. For the canonical avatar creation stage, we train the avatar
representation for 30,000 iterations, which takes about an hour on a single NVIDIA 3090 GPU. For
the animatable avatar learning stage, the avatar representation and the introduced density weighting
network are further trained for 50,000 iterations. Inference takes less than 3 seconds per rendering
frame. We further fine-tune the hybrid avatar representations for 30,000 more steps for scenarios with
multiple avatars and complex interactions.
Dataset. To create animation demonstrations, we utilize SMPL-format motion sequences from the
3DPW [ 42] and AIST++ [ 17] datasets to animate avatars. SMPL-format motion sequences extracted
from in-the-wild videos are also used.
19