Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin
in US Cities
Jericho McLeod1†, Unchitta Kan1†and Eduardo L´ opez1
1Department of Computational and Data Sciences, George
Mason University, 4400 University Dr, Fairfax, 22030, Virginia,
United States.
Contributing authors: jmcleod3@gmu.edu; ukanjana@gmu.edu;
elopez22@gmu.edu;
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
People interact face-to-face on a frequent basis if (i) they live nearby and
(ii) make the choice to meet. The ﬁrst constitutes an availability of social
ties; the second a propensity to interact with those ties. Despite being
distinct social processes, most large-scale human interaction studies over-
look these separate inﬂuences. Here, we study trends of interaction,
availability, and propensity across US cities for a critical, abundant, and
understudied type of social tie: extended family that live locally in sepa-
rate households. We observe a systematic decline in interactions as a func-
tion of city population, which we attribute to decreased non-coresident
local family availability. In contrast, interaction propensity and duration
are either independent of or increase with city population. The large-scale
patterns of availability and interaction propensity we discover, derived
from analyzing the American Time Use Survey and Pew Social Trends
Survey data, unveil previously-unknown eﬀects on several social processes
such as the eﬀectiveness of pandemic-related social interventions, drivers
aﬀecting residential choice, and the ability of kin to provide care to family.
Keywords: Social mixing, kinship, non-household family, family proximity,
epidemic modeling
1arXiv:2305.07944v1  [cs.SI]  13 May 20232 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
1 Introduction
A deﬁning feature of people’s lives are the pattern of how they socialize face-
to-face. These patterns are pivotal to people’s economic productivity [1], the
social support they receive for companionship or needs-based care [2–4], a
sense of belonging to their local community [5, 6], and even the epidemiology
of infectious diseases of their cities of residence [7, 8]. Such patterns of inter-
action arise from two factors, the mere presence of speciﬁc social ties living
near a person regardless of interaction, and the temporal dynamics of actually
engaging with those present ties for one or more activities. Here, we refer to the
ﬁrst of these factors as the availability of ties, and the second as the propensity
to interact with available ties. Once availability and propensity come together,
they generate observed interaction, ultimately the variable that matters for
many purposes. For a given geographic location (e.g., a city), availability and
propensity can be thought of as average per-capita quantities characterizing
the location. Furthermore, it is in principle possible for friends, family, co-
workers, or other types of ties to be more available on average in one location
than another, as well as to have diﬀerent average local propensities to engage
with types of ties. If indeed such diﬀerences exist, the patterns of interaction
across locations will change accordingly. These eﬀects, as we explain in this
paper, can have consequential implications. Here, to both show the detectable
impacts of availability and propensity, and to argue in favor of the essential
value of tracking them separately, we study the city-speciﬁc patterns of peo-
ple’s face-to-face interaction with extended family ties in the US. We call these
ties non-coresident local family (nclf), which are family members by blood or
marriage that live in the same city but not the same household.
The relevance of cities in the study of interaction is clear: cities constitute
the settings within which people conduct the overwhelming majority of their
work and social lives, which also means that the consequences of face-to-face
interaction are most palpable within those cities. These consequences, men-
tioned at the outset, encompass the economic [1, 9], social [2–5, 10, 11], and
epidemiological [8]. The focus on extended family, on the other hand, can be
explained because of their preferential status among social ties [2, 3, 12] and
overwhelming abundance (at least 75% of people in the US report to have
nclf [13, 14]). Compared to other types of social ties typically considered in
surveys, nclf ties are a particularly interesting and impactful subject of study
for their surprising neglect in the literature in the face of solid evidence of their
critical role [15, 16] and, most urgently, the important revelation of their power
to remain active [17] and very risky [18, 19] during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Therefore, in order to test our theory, in this article we empirically and
theoretically study the large-scale patterns of face-to-face interaction with nclf
of people living in US cities. With the aid of the American Time Use Sur-
vey (ATUS) and Pew Research Center’s Social Trends Survey (PSTS) data,
we develop a thorough characterization of nclf interaction, availability, and
interaction propensity. We begin by showing the signiﬁcant amount of nclf
interaction as compared to non-family interaction, providing justiﬁcation forOrigins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 3
our close attention to nclf ties. We ﬁnd that nclf interaction systematically
decays with city population size with virtual independence on the activity
(tracked by the ATUS) driving the interaction. Similarly, we observe this
decaying behavior in the availability of nclf ties as a function of city size.
To discern whether the decay in nclf interaction is driven by availability or
propensity, we construct a probabilistic model based on the propensity to
interact given availability, allowing us to calculate how population size may
aﬀect propensity. Strikingly, we ﬁnd that the propensity to interact with nclf
for many types of activities is roughly constant or slightly increasing with city
population size, implying that what dictates whether or not people see non-
coresident family is simply that they are locally available. Consistent with
this observation, we also ﬁnd that the interaction duration of activities with
nclf (also captured by the ATUS) is not typically aﬀected by population size.
Finally, we provide summary estimates of propensities that show which activ-
ities and times of the week (weekdays or weekends) contribute most to nclf
interaction.
The interest we place in relating nclf availability and propensity to city
population size and speciﬁc activities requires some elaboration. The ﬁrst,
city population, is a variable known to aﬀect many aspects of cities includ-
ing people’s average productivity [1], the average number of social ties people
have [20], residential mobility decisions [21], and the basic reproduction num-
ber (denoted Ro) of contagious diseases [22], to name a few. These eﬀects are
also known to relate to social interaction (with nclf and other ties), which
means that to properly understand interaction one must relate it to popula-
tion size. With respect to the activities people engage in with nclf, these are at
the heart of the beneﬁts provided by socializing with family, as stated above.
Thus, for example, knowing the propensity to interact with nclf for care-related
activities provides, when combined with availability, a clear picture of how
much family assumes supporting roles in the lives of their kin, and how the
social and economic consequences of those decisions may aﬀect outcomes. In
other words, in order to properly assess the social beneﬁts of nclf, an empirical
understanding of the patterns of interaction per activity is critical.
At ﬁrst glance, it may appear that a decomposition of interaction into
a set of existing available ties and a separate propensity of encounters with
those ties is an unnecessary complication, especially if what matters is their
combined product, interaction. However, each of these variables functions dif-
ferently. Available ties depend on people’s residential location, whereas the
propensity of encounters are driven by needs that are dealt with over short time
scales. This means that if a need to change interaction rapidly were to arise,
it would be propensity that should be adjusted. For example, the COVID-19
pandemic was marked by numerous restrictions to mobility [23] which modify
propensities but not availability. Another illustration of the importance of this
decomposition is highlighted by the availability of family links: if we compare
two cities with diﬀerent availabilities of family ties, needs for certain types of4 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
assistance such as care for young children [10, 24] or the elderly [11, 25] can
be met by family members more often where availability is larger.
Our work oﬀers several important contributions. Perhaps the most criti-
cal is conceptual, by introducing and supporting with evidence the idea that
interaction at the level of a city can be decomposed into the more primitive
components, availability and propensity. In particular, we show for nclf that
indeed these two quantities can behave independently of each other and thus
generate non-trivial patterns of interaction. In doing this, we oﬀer the ﬁrst
systematic attempt to empirically characterize interaction and its propensity
with nclf over a large collection of activities across a substantial sample of
US cities, preserving both city and activity individuality. It is worth noting
that, since propensity is not directly tracked in survey data, our estimation on
this novel quantity generates a new angle by which to think about the practi-
cal temporal aspects of face-to-face interaction. From the perspective of each
activity, we provide an overall picture of what brings nclf together with greater
frequency, and we do this in a way that distinguishes such contact city by city.
The implications of our ﬁndings take on several forms, inherently connected to
the diﬀerences in the way that availability and propensity operate. For exam-
ple, in the COVID-19 pandemic, the very existence of larger availability of
nclf with decreasing population suggests that smaller cities have an intrinsic
disadvantage when trying to reduce interaction given that the critical and gen-
erally favored family tie is more abundant. Another suggestion from our work
is that the ability for kin to support each other varies city by city along with
the beneﬁts of this support. Finally, two other contributions that we expand
upon in the Discussion pertain to (i) the indication that our work makes in
terms of how surveys of face-to-face interaction would improve greatly if they
captured separately availability and propensity and (ii) the way in which avail-
ability and propensity relate and possibly advance other research ﬁelds such
as network theory in their approach to interaction.
2 Results
2.1 Interaction
We deﬁne nclf interaction, denoted f, as the proportion of people in the tar-
get population of the ATUS in a city gthat engage in an activity with nclf
on a given day. Here, we consider nclf to be any family member identiﬁed by
the ATUS as not residing in the same household as the respondent (see Sup-
plementary Table 2). Because the choice to interact generally depends on the
nature of the activity (e.g., care versus social) and the type of day of the week
in which it occurs (weekday or weekend), we deﬁne a 2-dimensional vector
α= (activity, day-type), which we call activity-day, and assume that fis a
function of both gandα. We use data from the ATUS, which surveys Ameri-
cans about how they spend their time and with whom during the day prior toOrigins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 5
their survey interview, to estimate nclf interaction (see Data). Explicitly,
f(g,α) =/summationtext
i∈gwiai(α)/summationtext
i∈gwi, (1)
where the sum is over respondents iwho reside in g,ai(α) = 1 if the respon-
dent reports an αwith nclf in the ATUS and is 0 otherwise, and widenotes
the respondent sampling weights whose unit is persons and whose sum is an
estimate the target population in gof the ATUS (non-institutionalized civil-
ians aged 15 and above). The sampling weights wican be thought of as the
number of people irepresents in the population given our inability to survey
the entire population. The weights are recalibrated so that the demographic
distribution of the sample matches closely that of the target population in
each city (see Weight re-calibration). Out of 384 US metropolitan core-based
statistical areas (CBSAs, or more commonly referred to as metro areas), our
ATUS sample makes it possible to analyze 258 which account for close to 260
million people, or approximately 80% of the US population over the year of
the ATUS we focus on (2016 to 2019, inclusive). In the ATUS, certain CBSAs
are unidentiﬁed due to privacy standards. Table 1 lists the types of activities
captured by the ATUS.
It is informative to begin our results with an overall estimate of the amount
of interaction with nclf in the ATUS cities captured here. For this purpose, we
apply Eq. 1 to those cities and ﬁnd that, on average, 23 .73% of people in the
target population interact with nclf on any given day. This can be compared
to the corresponding 45 .84% of non-family interaction (see Supplementary
Fig. S5). While nclf interaction is estimated to be about half the interac-
tion with that non-family contacts, one should bear in mind that non-family
includes ties such as co-workers who are encountered with high frequency over
the work week. Assuming that the non-family interaction estimate indicates
contact on approximately a weekly basis, we see that over the cities represented
here, nclf interaction occurs at a rate of about 23 .73/45.84≈0.518 compared
to non-family. In other words, these numbers suggest that on average people
see nclf every other week.
In order to develop a more nuanced picture of nclf interaction, we now
apply more detailed analyses. To understand the broad population-size eﬀects
on nclf interaction, we analyze f(g,α) againstp(g) = log10P(g), the log of
population of g(we use log-population due to the heavy-tailed distribution of
city population in the US [26–30]). The resulting set of points {p(g),f(g,α)}g
over all the gs in our data can be analyzed in several ways in order to look for
possible trends. Here, we apply three approaches that generate complementary
information: non-parametric modal regression [31], weighted cubic smoothing
splines [32], and weighted least squares. The ﬁrst and second methods capture
the typical and average behavior, respectively, while the last method corrobo-
rates our results. In all cases, because the variance in the data is sensitive to6 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
sampling, we weigh each location gby the sample size of the survey in that
location.
Fig. 1 Heat maps of normalized densities, conditional on city population, of interaction
f(panel A), availability φ(B), propensity λ(C), and interaction duration t(D). Densities
for each of the quantities are calculated using pairs of points, one for each city g, where
the horizontal coordinate is p(g) and the vertical coordinate is the quantity ( f,φ,λ, and
t) evaluated at g. The densities are generated using kernel density estimation (KDE). The
normalization of the conditional density is done with respect to the probability of the mode of
said density. Red represents large values of the normalized density (approaching 1) whereas
blue represents small values. For the relevant panels, α=αo, which represents any activity
done on any type of day (weekday or weekend) with nclf. The light gray line in each plot
corresponds to the modal regression line of each plot (the line of most probable values of
the normalized conditional density). The black dashed line corresponds to the smoothing
spline for the same points that generate the heat map. While f,φ, andλare normalized
quantities ranging from 0 to 1, and representing a fraction of people, tis a time, measured in
hours. Both interaction (panel A) and availability (B) show decaying trends with population,
apparent from the decay of the modal line, the smoothing spline, and the red bands. On
the other hand, propensity and duration of interaction both increase with population. All
relevant displayed plots are parameterized with k= 3 inφ, the number of nclf contacts in
a city one considers to be needed for nclf interaction to occur. Robustness checks on the
eﬀects of survey sample size are provided in Supplementary Section 2.
We ﬁrst apply non-parametric modal regression to identify the typical
behavior of fwith respect to p. This regression is based on estimating
through kernel density estimation (KDE) the conditional probability den-
sityρ(f|p,α) and its conditional mode f∗(p,α), the value of fgivenpfor
whichρ(f|p,α) is largest. We ﬁrst apply the method to the most general
α=αo= (any activity, any day); this choice of αalso provides a useful base-
line against which to compare all other results. The light-gray curve in Fig. 1A
shows the mode f∗as a function of p. We can clearly observe the systematically
decaying trend of f∗(p,αo) as a function of p. For the smallest log-populationOrigins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 7
p(g)≈4.958,f∗(g,αo) is estimated to be 0 .267; for the large limit p(g)≈7.286,
f∗(g,αo)≈0.211. This represents an overall drop of ≈0.056, i.e., about 21%
of interaction over the log-population range. The concrete form of the trend
off∗withpappears to be slightly slower than linear.
Figure 1A also displays a heatmap of the conditional probability den-
sityρ(f|p,αo) scaled by ρ(f∗|p,αo). The color represents a normalized
scale across values of pof the location of the probability mass (note that
ρ(f|p,αo)/ρ(f∗|p,αo) = 1 when f=f∗). The concentration of ρ(f|p,αo)
above and below f∗(p,αo), expressed by the intense red color, crucially sug-
gests thatf(g,αo) is typically quite similar to f∗(p(g),αo), the point on the
modal regression corresponding to the population p=p(g) ofg. In addition,
sincef∗(p(g),αo) has a systematically decaying trend with p, it means that in
generalfalso decays with p.
Aside from the typical behavior of fwithp, we also analyze its average
behavior via the well-known method of cubic smoothing splines [32]. In this
method, the average behavior is captured by the function f(b)(p|αo) that
minimizes the sum of quadratic errors between f(b)(p|αo) and the data plus
a cost for curvature in f(b)(p|αo) which controls for over-ﬁtting. The ﬁtted
spline is shown as the black dotted curve in Fig. 1A, and exhibits a similar
decay pattern as the modal regression.
The decay of f∗andf(b)with respect to p, observed in Fig. 1 for αo
is not an isolated eﬀect. We now expand our analysis to include ‘social’
and ‘care’ activities reported by the ATUS respondents, deﬁned as αsocial =
(any social activity, any day) and αcare= (any care activity, any day), respec-
tively (see Supplementary Table 4 for the ATUS activity types we consider to
be social or care-related). Using these new aggregate activity-days ( αsocial and
αcare) leads to similarly decaying modal regressions with respect to p. These
can be seen in Fig. 2A (inset), where we can also notice that, depending on the
speciﬁcα, the range of values of f∗(p,α) also changes. For example, f(g,αsocial)
ranges from about 0 .226 to 0.181 as population increases, a range that is not
very diﬀerent from that of f(g,αo), whereasf(g,αcare) is constrained to the
range from 0 .078 to 0.058 over the population range.
Following the conceptual framework we proposed in the Introduction,
we would want to know whether these decaying trends in fwithporigi-
nate from availability or propensity. The fact that these trends persist across
three diﬀerent activity-days is suggestive of the hypothesis that availability
is the origin of the consistent decay because it is independent of timing and
activity by deﬁnition. Under this hypothesis, propensity would explain the
relative diﬀerences in interaction given a speciﬁc activity-day based on peo-
ple’s likelihood of interacting with nclf given the nature of the engagement.
If availability exhibits a decaying trend, the combination of α-independent
availability and α-dependent propensity could generate the observed interac-
tion behavior. To test this possibility with f∗and theαs already in Fig. 2A
(inset), we perform a scaling of f∗(p,α) by its average, given by /angbracketleftf∗(α)/angbracketright:=/integraltextpmax
pminf∗(p,α)dp/(pmax−pmin). The rescaling leads to the main part of Fig. 2A8 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
Fig. 2 Shown in A) is the scaled KDE modal regression for family interaction, f∗(p,α),
for selectα, scaled to the expected value /angbracketleftf∗(α)/angbracketrightof eachα. The inset plot shows the cor-
responding result without scaling. Similarly, B) illustrates the same for eﬀective propensity,
λ∗(p,α,k ), in the primary and inset plots, and C) shows shows the corresponding results for
t∗(p,α) in hours. Note that λis parameterized with k= 3. Panels A and B show complete
collapses (overlaps) of the lines in their scaled versions indicating that the population trends
of bothf∗(p,α) andλ∗(p,α,k ) are not greatly aﬀected by α, suggesting an underlying com-
mon trend independent of α. In Panel C, αassociated with care is the only modal line that
fails to collapse, which suggests that the actual duration of care activities may last longer as
population increases, which may reﬂect additional behavioral mechanisms in need of further
research.
in which we can see that the curves for the three diﬀerent αoverlap (collapse).
The collapse suggests that the decaying trends for each of the αs are not unre-
lated but, instead, are driven by a shared function that is independent of α(if
it wasα-dependent, the functional forms of f∗(p,α)//angbracketleftf∗(α)/angbracketrightwith respect to
pwould be diﬀerent and, hence, not collapse). Although this result is not in
itself proof that the hypothesis just presented is correct, it does suggest that
independent analyses of availability and propensity are warranted. The last
method of analysis we employ to study the relation between f(g,α) andp(g) is
weighted least squares (WLS). First, we corroborate that the set of aggregate
activities (Tab. 1, top section), corresponding to the three cases of αdiscussed
above, display negative signiﬁcant regression coeﬃcients ( β1). Note that, since
f∗(p,α) in Figs. 1A and 2A shows a non-linear decaying trend, there is value
in going beyond the analysis of averages based on WLS and smoothing splines.
Given the consistency uncovered for the aggregate activities, it is pertinent
to explore whether decaying trends also hold for other ATUS major category
activities. There are three reasons for this: (i) aggregations of several activi-
ties could be susceptible to Simpson’s paradox, generating spurious trends by
way of aggregation, (ii) if indeed a decaying trend in availability is aﬀecting
f(p,α) systematically over α, further evidence would be garnered by doing
this analysis, and (iii) for diﬀerent reasons, both modal regression and smooth-
ing spline results are not as reliable for αs that do not occur often (see last
column of Tab. 1). The β1column of Tab. 1 under the area of “Individual
activity” shows these results, which further support our thinking. Indeed, the
regression coeﬃcients for many individual activities are negative and statis-
tically signiﬁcant. The preponderance of signiﬁcant negative slopes indicates
that the trends observed using aggregate αs (such as for Figs. 1 and 2A) are not
aﬀected by aggregation eﬀects, strengthening the case for an α-independentOrigins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 9
β1 Adj.R20.025 0.975 β1 Σiai(α)
Aggregate activity f(g,α) λ(g,α)
Any -0.031*** 0.116 -0.041 -0.021 0.032** 7694
Social -0.026*** 0.099 -0.036 -0.017 0.027** 6554
Care -0.015*** 0.070 -0.021 -0.008 0.002 2366
Individual activity f(g,α) λ(g,α)
Social & Leisure -0.024*** 0.106 -0.032 -0.015 0.017* 5312
Care, Non-Coresid -0.010*** 0.043 -0.016 -0.005 0.004 1849
Eating & Drinking -0.009** 0.016 -0.017 -0.001 0.026*** 3892
Household -0.009*** 0.033 -0.014 -0.003 0.005 1813
Care, Coresid -0.006*** 0.033 -0.009 -0.002 -0.003 623
Traveling -0.005 0.004 -0.012 0.002 0.026*** 2951
Consumer Purchases -0.005** 0.015 -0.009 -0.000 0.006 1134
Religious -0.004*** 0.026 -0.007 -0.001 -0.004* 394
Sports, Exrc. & Rec. -0.004** 0.014 -0.007 -0.000 0.001 485
Volunteer -0.002** 0.016 -0.003 -0.000 -0.001 125
Work -0.000 -0.004 -0.002 0.002 0.002 238
Personal Care -0.000 -0.003 -0.001 0.001 0.000 45
Phone Calls -0.000 -0.004 -0.002 0.001 0.001 102
Govt Serv. & Civic 0.000 -0.000 -0.000 0.001 0.001* 15
Household Svc. 0.000 -0.003 -0.001 0.001 0.001 43
Prof. & Pers. Svc. 0.000 -0.003 -0.001 0.002 0.002 162
Education 0.001 0.005 -0.000 0.002 0.002* 37
Community φ(g,k= 3)
Family Availability -0.048** 0.023 -0.086 -0.010 – 1706
Table 1 Weighted Least Squares analysis of the dependence of interaction f, availability
φ, and propensity λof cities as functions of their log-population sizes. Aggregate αs are
shown at the top, followed by speciﬁc ATUS α, and ﬁnally, φcalculated with k= 3 from
the PSTS. For this table, all αdistinguish activities but combine type of day of the week
(weekday and weekend). Most slope coeﬃcients associated with f, and all the signiﬁcant
ones, are negative. In contrast, the majority of coeﬃcients for λare positive, with only one
signiﬁcant coeﬃcient with a small negative slope (corresponding to interaction with nclf
for religious activity, a trend that may reﬂect cultural trends). Signiﬁcance levels
correspond to * p<. 10, **p<. 05, and *** p<. 01.
availability that decays with p. Before proceeding to test availability, we note
that the decaying trend in nclf interaction with population is not due to an
overall decay of interaction with all non-household contacts (family or not) in
big cities. On the contrary, data shows that interaction with non-household
contacts in fact increase as cities get larger (see Supplementary Section 3).
2.2 Availability
Although the ATUS does not provide data to directly test any trend of nclf
availability with p, this can be done by leveraging a survey from the Pew
Research Center called the Pew Social Trends Survey (PSTS) [33]. As part of
the PSTS, respondents are asked how many family members live within an10 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
hour’s drive of where they live, providing a way to measure nclf availability.
The PSTS reports this number for each respondent in discrete categories (0,
1 to 5, 6 to 10, 11 to 15, 16 to 20, and 21 or more).
In establishing a link between interaction and availability, a pertinent con-
cept that should not be overlooked is that individuals do not engage with
their family members on equal footing, nor do they interact with all of
them [2, 34]—an important ﬁnding from the literature on ego networks con-
cerned with how much interaction people have with their kin and other kinds
of contacts. Instead, individuals place some kinship ties at a high level of
importance while relegating others to be of low relevance. To illustrate, while
a distant relative may be proximal to somebody in a location, this proximity
may play no role because the relative is not particularly important in the per-
son’s social network. In contrast, interacting with, say, a parent, an oﬀspring,
a sibling, or the progeny of these family members, is likely to be much more
important. This sorting, regardless of which relationships end up being impor-
tant and which do not, leads to the eﬀect that not every single kinship-tie is
necessarily useful to count.
Guided by this theory, we deﬁne for each PSTS respondent ia variablebi(k)
that takes on the value 1 when they report having kor more nclf available,
and 0 if they report having less than knclf. Then, we deﬁne a measurement
of overall availability for each location ggiven by
φ(g,k) =/summationtext
i∈gwibi(k)/summationtext
i∈gwi. (2)
Similar to the ATUS, each PSTS respondent is given a weight withat balances
the demographic distribution of the sample such that the sample is representa-
tive at the national level. Given the categorical reporting of the PSTS variable,
we develop an algorithm that allows us to reliably change kby increments of
one unit (see Supplementary Section 4.2).
In order to determine the population trend, if any, of φ(g,k) as a function
ofp(g), we carry out the modal regression and smoothing-spline analysis again.
The results are shown in Fig. 1B. As conjectured, the trends of availability
captured by φ∗(p,k) andφ(b)(p,k), respectively the modal regression and the
spline of{p(g),φ(g,k)}g, are decaying with respect to p. As an additional
consistency check for this decay, we calculate the WLS slope coeﬃcient of
φ(g,k) as a function of p(g) and ﬁnd that it is both negative and signiﬁcant
(seeβ1in Tab. 1, community section). The results presented here, and for the
rest of the paper, are for k= 3. However, varying kdoes not change the results
qualitatively (see Supplementary Figure 6).
The results here support our hypothesis that nclf interaction rates in larger
cities are lower than smaller cities because overall nclf availability is also lower
in the larger cities, but they do not yet paint a complete picture. One pending
and interesting question is how people choose to interact with family that
is local to them (their propensity). One should contemplate the possibilityOrigins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 11
that this propensity may also display negative p-dependence (i.e., that people
in larger cities have lower need or desire to see their family). The results
of Sec. 2.1, and perhaps our experience, would suggest that such a behavior
may be negligible or even unlikely. Furthermore, consideration of the various
functions that nclf perform runs counter to a propensity that decays with p.
Whilst this simple picture is convincing and in agreement with intuition, none
of our analysis so far can determine this. To be able to test propensity, we
next introduce a probabilistic framework that can help us discern between
behavioral and non-behavioral eﬀects.
2.3 Probabilistic framework for interaction, propensity,
and availability
To understand the interplay between availability and propensity that leads
to actual interaction, we introduce a probabilistic model where each of these
eﬀects is explicitly separated. The model is structured such that it is easy to
relate to typical survey data such as what we use here. An in-depth explanation
of the model can be found in Supplementary Section 5.
Consider a model with various cities. In a city g, any given individual i
is assigned two random variables, one that indicates if the individual has nclf
available (bi= 1) or not ( bi= 0), and another that indicates if they report
performing αwith nclf (ai(α) = 1) or not ( ai(α) = 0). In addition, individuals
in a location gare grouped into population strata within which they all share
the same personal characteristics. For example, imay be male, of a certain age
range, and a given ethnicity. These characteristics are captured in the vector
c(i). All individuals that share the same vector cof characteristics represent
a segment of the target population, and this induces a set of weights w(c) for
each of those individuals such that the sum/summationtext
i;c(i)=cw(g,c(i)) is the size of
the target population Q(g,c) ingwith features equal to c.
For simplicity, we ﬁrst work with given values of g,c, andα. We introduce
the probability κ(g,c,α) that an individual in stratum cof location greports
doingαwith nclf available to them. We think of this as the pure propensity
to interact. On the other hand, the probability of available nclf is given by
φ(g,c), which does not depend on α. While dealing with given g,c, andα,
we simply use κandφand then reintroduce c,g, andαwhen needed. On
the basis of these deﬁnitions, the joint probability that a given individual has
concrete values ai,biis given by
Pr(ai,bi) =κai(1−κ)1−aiφδbi,1+δai,0(1−φ)δbi,0,[ai,bi= 0,1],(3)
whereδu,vis the Kronecker delta, equal to 1 when u=v, and 0 otherwise. This
expression captures all possible combinations of availability and interaction:
people without availability have probability 1 to respond ai= 0, whereas those
with availability, which occurs with probability φ, have a chance of κφto report
interacting with family and 1 −κφto report not interacting with family.12 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
On the basis of the personal probability captured in Eq. 3, and using s=
s(g,c) to represent the number of individuals surveyed in gwithc, we can
determine the marginal distribution that y=y(g,c,α) individuals report doing
αwith nclf, equivalent to the probability that there are exactly yindividuals in
total for whom a(α) = 1. This marginal is given by the binomial distribution
Pr(y) =/parenleftbiggs
y/parenrightbigg
(κφ)y(1−κφ)s−y. (4)
It is worth remembering that this applies to a speciﬁc subset of people in g,
i.e. those respondents with personal features c.
We now use Eq. 4 and the fact that its expectation is given by y(g,c,α) =
s(g,c)κ(g,c,α)φ(g,c) to estimate the model expectation for actual interac-
tion,fm(g,α), which can in turn be related to our data. This calculation is
straightforward because the statistics for each care independent. Speciﬁcally,
since each individual with cingrepresentsw(g,c) others,fm(g,α) is equal to
the weighted average of the expectations y(g,c,α), or
fm(g,α) =/summationtext
cw(g,c)s(g,c)κ(g,c,α)φ(g,c)/summationtext
cw(g,c)s(g,c)=/summationtext
cQ(g,c)κ(g,c,α)φ(g,c)
Q(g),
(5)
where the relation between sample weights, size, and population Q(g,c) =
w(g,c)s(g,c) has been used, together with the fact that Q(g) =/summationtext
cQ(g,c).
Equation 1 can be interpreted as a trial of the current model, with expectation
given by Eq. 5.
2.4 Eﬀective propensity
Ideally, we would like to determine the propensity κ(g,c,α) for allg,c, and
α. If data allowed it, we could achieve this by equating the expectation of y,
given bys(g,c)κ(g,c,α)φ(g,c), with its sample value/summationtext
i∈gai(α)δc,c(i)(the
number of respondents that report doing αwith nclf) and solving for κ(g,c,α).
However, this strategy is hampered by the fact that we do not have enough
information to determine φ(g,c) with suﬃcient accuracy.
To address this limitation, we employ a diﬀerent strategy that is able to
provide valuable information about propensity at location gfor eachα. To
explain it, we begin by noting that availability can be written on the basis of
φ(g,c) as
φ(g) =/summationtext
cQ(g,c)φ(g,c)
Q(g). (6)
Next, we introduce the quotient between interaction and availability calcu-
lated from the model. We call this quotient λ(g,α), the eﬀective propensity ofOrigins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 13
interaction. It is given by
λ(g,α) =fm(g,α)
φ(g)=/summationtext
cκ(g,c,α)Q(g,c)φ(g,c)/summationtext
cQ(g,c)φ(g,c). (7)
In this expression, λ(g,α) is a weighted average of κ(g,c,α) over the part
of the population of gthat does have nclf available (where the weights
areQ(g,c)φ(g,c)). In other words, it constitutes the eﬀective average of
propensity.
Whilst Eq. 7 allows us to interpret the meaning of λ(g,α), its calculation
is straightforwardly done by using the sample values f(g,α) andφ(g) given
respectively by Eqs. 1 and 2. Fig. 1C, we show the modal regression λ∗(g,αo)
and smoothing-spline λ(b)(g,αo) for the set of points {(p(g),λ(g,αo))}g. Both
curves show that population size has a very small increasing eﬀect on λ(g,αo),
from which we can deduce that the propensity to interact with nclf for those
people that have nclf available is not being limited or reduced by p.
As withf∗(p,α),λ∗(p,α) for the aggregate αo,αsocial, andαcarealso col-
lapse when divided by their averages /angbracketleftλ∗(α)/angbracketright:=/integraltextpmax
pminλ∗(p,α)dp/(pmax−pmin)
(Fig. 2B). Although this may superﬁcially appear unsurprising given the rela-
tions between f,φ, andλ(Eq. 7), it is worth keeping in mind that λ∗(p,α) is
the directly estimated conditional mode of the λ(g,α) data. Thus, the collapse
suggests that the trends that govern the values of λ(g,α) for individual cities
are indeed multiplicative: a product of a φdependent on gbut independent of
α, and a pure propensity κdependent on α, predominantly.
A more comprehensive analysis of trends of λwith respect to pis performed
through WLS, shown in Tab. 1 (ﬁfth column) for the remaining αs in the
ATUS. There are 8 signiﬁcant coeﬃcients, of which only religious activities has
a negative slope, albeit with a very small value; the remaining signiﬁcant coef-
ﬁcients are positive. Among all coeﬃcients (signiﬁcant and non-signiﬁcant),
only 3 coeﬃcients altogether have negative slopes. This shows the predomi-
nant tendency for the eﬀective propensity to either increase slightly with por
be roughly independent of it.
Having studied the propensity λwith respect to p, we now focus on how
various activity-days αaﬀect it. In Fig. 3, we present box plots of the sets
of values{λ(g,α)}gfor those activity-days that are suﬃciently well-sampled.
Here, we make a distinction between weekday and weekend when constructing
αs. Median values are represented by the triangle and square shapes. Triangles
point up if λof a given αshows a statistically signiﬁcant increase with p
and squares indicate that λhas no signiﬁcant trend with p. No statistically
signiﬁcant decreasing trends of λwithpwere observed for any α. The trends
and their signiﬁcance correspond to those in Tab. 1. Aggregate versions of α
are placed at the top of the ﬁgure to provide a reference. As expected, people
exhibit a larger propensity to interact with nclf on weekends than on weekdays
for all activity categories. Spending social time with family has the largest
propensity with weekend median value of 0 .44, which can be interpreted as the14 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
Fig. 3 Box plots of interaction propensities λ(g,α,k ) for well-sampled αs in ATUS, along
with aggregate α(at the top). Here, weekends and weekdays have been kept separate to
distinguish the changes in propensity with respect to this variable. The triangles and squares
are located at the point of median of the λ(g,α,k ) for a given α. Triangles pointing up
represent an increasing trend of the propensities with pand squares represent no signiﬁcant
increasing or decreasing trend, consistent with the results on Tab. 1; triangles pointing down
would appear if a signiﬁcant decaying trend was present, but none are obtained. The bold
lines represent the IQR, thin lines the minimum of the remaining range observed or 1 .5×IQR
in each direction, and the remaining points (the outliers) are denoted with pipe-marks. The
selected activities were ﬁltered to remove those with medians not noticeably above 0. These
box plots show which activities respondents choose to do with family, ordered by aggregation
followed by propensity.
chances that an individual with nclf available would do a social activity with
them on a weekend are approximately 44%, in marked contrast to weekdays
when the propensity drops to 22 .7%. In comparison, care-related activities have
weekday propensities of 10 .4%, increasing slightly to 12 .6% on the weekends.
Another observation from Fig. 3 is that the ranges of values of λcan be large
for the most common activities. The values of λcan be used for estimation of
interaction in a variety of cases. For example, assuming independent randomOrigins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 15
draws with λas the success rate for any given α, we can quickly estimate such
quantities as the proportion of people (in a city or nationally) that meet with
nclf in a period of time (say, a month) to do α, or the average wait time until
the ﬁrst meeting to do α.
To complete our analysis of λ, we present two other summary results
in Supplementary Section 7. First, we provide a rank-ordered reference of
activities by propensity averaged over the US in Supplementary Table 4.
This shows which activities are associated with high or low propensity. Sec-
ond, to learn about how values of λ(g,α) are distributed across concrete US
metropolitan areas, and particularly which places exhibit either considerably
larger or smaller propensities than other cities of similar populations, we also
present Supplementary Table 5, which shows the top and bottom 10 locations
by average rank-order based on weighted z-scores ofλ(g,α) with respect to
λ∗(p(g),α), where ranks are averaged for values of k ranging from 1 to 3. Sim-
ilar analysis is conducted for interaction duration t(deﬁned next) and shown
in Supplementary Table 6.
2.5 Interaction duration with nclf family
As a ﬁnal analysis of the interplay between people’s nclf interaction and
population size, we study one last quantity captured in ATUS: the interac-
tion duration with nclf. The relationship between interaction duration and
population size can also be studied with the techniques we have used thus far.
Let us denote the duration of i’s interaction with nclf for αbyti(α). Thus,
for a given location gandα, the average interaction duration is given by
t(g,α) =/summationtext
i∈gwiti(α)ai(α)/summationtext
i∈gwiai(α), (8)
whereai(α) is deﬁned the same way as in Eq. 1. Note that interaction dura-
tion is averaged only over those that report nclf interaction for the αunder
consideration. This is because tclearly involves a behavioral component, and
we are interested in determining the role that population size may exert in
the behavior of people when they interact with nclf. If an increase in pwas
associated with a decrease in the duration of interaction, it could suggest, for
example, that people’s busy lives in larger cities limit how much they are able
to interact with family, which could be a signal associated with the decaying
trends forf.
In Figs. 1D and 2C we present examples of modal regressions and smooth-
ing splines of interaction duration twith respect to pfor aggregate αo,αsocial,
andαcare. In all cases, t∗(g,α) andt(b)(g,α) are either approximately steady
overpor increasing slightly. As in the case of propensity, interaction duration
captures the behavioral dimension of interaction. The lack of a decaying trend
provides further support for the notion that family availability may be the
main driver of interaction decay and that people’s attitudes towards interacting
with family are not diminished by population size.16 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
3 Discussion
The separation of interaction into two necessary factors, availability and
propensity, provides a new lens by which to understand it in a more coherent
and principled way. Over relatively short periods of time (say, weeks or months)
and at the population level of cities, patterns of availability are rigid, which is
to say they are structural and approximately ﬁxed in time and space. On the
other hand, patterns of propensity are due to day-to-day decision-making and
encompass the bulk of the agency that individuals have in controlling inter-
action at any given time in the short term; propensity is much more ﬂexible
than availability, and generally operates at shorter time scales. If we phrased
interaction in the language of social networks, availability can be thought of as
a static well-deﬁned social network based purely on underlying formal social
relations (unambiguously deﬁned for nclf, e.g., parent, sibling, in-law), while
propensity is a stochastic process occurring on the static network.
Perhaps the most salient observation we make is that, at the level of pop-
ulation of cities, availability explains the heterogeneity in nclf interaction,
eﬀectively providing clear support for our approach. In addition, for most activ-
ities propensity shows either a weak positive population-dependent trend or
no trend. This supports another one of our most important conclusions that,
when family is locally available, people take ample advantage of their pres-
ence to interact with them. Moreover, the time invested in those interactions
are not negatively impacted by population size (i.e., the busy lives of residents
of big cities do not deter them from spending time with family). Phrased in
social network theory terms, our results imply that the static social networks
of nclf diﬀer by city and those diﬀerences are the main drivers of the diﬀer-
ences in face-to-face interaction we observe, and that nclf propensity is roughly
independent of the structure of these networks.
This robust family-interaction eﬀect may have important consequences in
how people shape the rest of their social networks [12, 35]. At a more fun-
damental level, if availability plays a dominant role in nclf interaction, the
patterns that characterize this availability are also likely to characterize other
critical aspects of life that strongly depend on nclf interaction (say, care-related
outcomes [10, 11, 25] or certain aspects of people’s well-being [2, 34, 36]).
As suggested in the Introduction, another aspect that depends on interac-
tion is propagation of infectious diseases. Current research in epidemiological
modeling does not pay attention to the concepts of availability and propen-
sity when dealing with interaction data. Consider, for example, the large
scale European POLYMOD survey concerned with determining population
mixing matrices capturing patterns of social contacts [37], frequently used
in population-level epidemiological modeling in Europe. Availability is not
tracked in this survey (or most other population-level surveys of interaction),
but such information can prove critical when large disruptions to regular pat-
terns of behavior (i.e. propensity) can take place, such as has been observed
during the COVID-19 pandemic. For one, availability in most cases would notOrigins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 17
change in the rapid way propensity can change. Also, the way that propen-
sity can adjust after the start of a pandemic is constrained by availability;
i.e., availability is a template inside of which propensity can adapt to pan-
demic conditions. While not all study of human interaction is aimed at such
extremes, the framework of availability and propensity still applies. Further-
more, because the fundamental concepts of availability and propensity are
not restricted merely to family ties, our remarks here are relevant to social
interactions generally.
All the examples provided above can lead to policy considerations. Many
non-pharmaceutical interventions applied during the COVID-19 pandemic
have been directed at reducing propensity for face-to-face interaction or aid-
ing those with economic needs (see [38] for a review of intervention), but they
have hardly considered availability, which may reﬂect structural needs of the
populations of those places. In low-income areas, family support to take care
of young children [10] is an economic necessity. Asking people in such locations
to stop seeing family may prove ineﬀective. In places with low nclf availability,
the closure of daycare during the COVID-19 pandemic coupled with the lack of
family support could lead to more mothers dropping out of the workforce, per-
petuating gender inequality and slowing down economic recovery. Thus, policy
interventions that consider these needs at the local level would likely have a
better chance at being eﬀective [23]. From the standpoint of other support
roles performed by nclf, a better measurement and understanding of the inter-
play between availability and interaction may inform how to best address the
needs of people at a local level in ways not unlike those that address housing,
education, or other locally-oriented policy making.
The origin of the population pattern displayed by availability, although
not our focus here, is likely related to domestic migration [39, 40]. The more
pronounced absence of family in larger populations may be driven by the fact
that larger cities tend to oﬀer a variety of opportunities for work, education,
and access to particular services and amenities not always available in cities
with smaller populations, thus generating an in-migration that is, by deﬁnition,
a source of decreased family availability. In this scenario, one of the main
drivers of the population trend in availability would be economic (see similar
examples [41]), suggesting a feedback mechanism whereby the in-migration
leading to less family availability can be improving or sustaining economic
success, in turn perpetuating the incentives for that in-migration over time.
However, other mechanisms such as a desire to maintain close ties with family
are likely to balance the economic incentives, preventing the feedback from
becoming a runaway eﬀect [6, 14, 39, 40]. Note that this last point does suggest
a coupling between availability and propensity that operates at long time scales
(say, over one or multiple years), by which the fraction of the population that
is not willing to be far from extended family would exercise agency to adjust
their living conditions through migration to be closer to family.
Our study contains certain limitations. First, while demographic character-
istics are incorporated into our model, estimates of propensity and availability18 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
for speciﬁc demographic strata are not obtained here due to limitations in
survey sampling. Such demographic understanding of interaction is impor-
tant and should be considered in future research if appropriate data can be
obtained. Second, although the ATUS tracks a substantial variety of activi-
ties, one should not view it as a comprehensive catalog of all possible ways
in which people may interact. To name one example, activities that involve
more than a single day are not currently collected in the ATUS by design.
Other such limitations exist and researchers should be mindful of that. Third,
it may prove fruitful to consider material availability that could aﬀect inter-
action (for example, in a city without a cinema an αfor going to the movies
would have propensity = 0). We do not expect this factor to play a major
role for the αs and locations we study, as our smallest cities have populations
of≈130,000 people. However, investigations focused on more detailed activi-
ties in smaller places could require taking this eﬀect into account. Fortunately,
the structure of our model can be straightforwardly updated to include such
material availability given suﬃcient data.
At a methodological level, there are interesting observations our work sug-
gests. For example, some simple modiﬁcations to large-scale surveys of people’s
interaction and time-use behavior could lead to extremely beneﬁcial informa-
tion able to enhance the usefulness of such surveys. The ATUS could add a
few simple questions to their questionnaires that would determine whether
respondents have family, friends, or other contacts locally available to them
even if no activities have been performed with them . Such questions could pro-
vide baseline information about not just what people do but their preferential
choices, helping to distinguish the eﬀects of both propensity and availability
on interaction.
As a ﬁnal reﬂection, we relate the notions of availability and propensity to
the very successful discipline of network science and its application to spreading
processes on social networks [8, 42–45]. In this theoretical context, our concept
of availability translates to a static network structure of social connections that
exist independent of contact activity. Propensity, on the other hand, would
be represented by a temporal process of contact activity occurring on the
static network. In this context, what the results of the present work mean
for the study of processes on networks is that realistic models need to take
into account the heterogeneity in both the types of ties (network links) and
their associated contact processes. In the case of epidemics, the introduction
of frameworks such as those in [46, 47] oﬀers great promise because they are
compatible with the non-trivial structure we uncover here. This contrasts with
most other literature that basically conceives of what we call propensity as a
low-probability, permanent contact process occurring with all contacts of the
static network (the Markovian assumption [8]), a modeling choice that destroys
most of the true complexity of the process. Dedicated data that addresses
propensity will go a long way in driving the development of a new generation
of more realistic models of propagation processes on networks.Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 19
In summary, we decompose face-to-face interaction with non-coresident
local family at the city level in terms of availability and propensity to inter-
act, and ﬁnd that while availability decays with the population of those cities,
neither the propensity to interact across activities nor the duration of those
interactions shows the same decay. The decay in availability is suﬃcient to
lead to an overall decay of interaction with nclf across US cities as their pop-
ulation increases. We arrive at these results by introducing a stochastic model
that allows us to combine existing survey data, the American Time Use Sur-
vey and Pew Research Center’s Social Trends Survey, to estimate availability
and propensity at the US metro level. Analysis of the resulting propensities
show that social activities are the most common, especially on weekends. In
social networks terms, availability can be thought of as static social networks
of family relations and propensity as a process on these networks. Our ﬁndings
indicate that the availability network diﬀers by city and is the main driver of
the variance in observed face-to-face interaction, while propensity is roughly
independent of the network structure. We also discuss some of the implica-
tions of our framework and oﬀer ideas on how it is relevant for survey-design,
scientiﬁc research, and policy considerations with some particular attention to
the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
4 Material and methods
4.1 Weighted least squares
Since location sample sizes diminish with population, much of our analysis
utilizes weightings. One method we employ is weighted least squares (WLS),
deﬁned on the basis of the model
vg=β1ug+βo+/epsilon1g, (9)
wheregindexes the data points, and the error terms /epsilon1gdo not necessarily have
equal variance across g(heteroskedastic). The solution to the model is given
by the values of the coeﬃcients β1andβosuch that/summationtext
gwg/epsilon12
gover the data
points is minimized. The wgcorrespond to g-speciﬁc weighing used to adjust
how much the regression balances the importance of the data points.
The Gauss-Markov Theorem guarantees that the weighted mean error/summationtext
gwg/epsilon12
gis minimized if wg= 1/var(/epsilon1g). On the other hand, it is known that
the variance in a survey is inversely proportional to the size of the sample.
Therefore, in our analysis we use
wg=1
var(vg)=s(g)/summationtext
gs(g)(forvg=f(g,α),φ(g),λ(g,α),t(g,α)),(10)
wheres(g) is the number of respondents in g. These weights apply to f(g,α)
from the ATUS as well as φ(g) from the PSTS, where the same gmay have20 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
diﬀerent relative weights based on the samples collected for each survey in the
same location g.
To compute these weights when the dependent variable is λ(g,α), we make
use of the technique called propagation of error. For λ(g,α) =f(g,α)/φ(g), its
variance is given as a function of the variances of f(g,α) andφ(g), calculated
through a Taylor expansion up to order 1. In the limit of weak or no correlation
betweenf(g,α) andφ(g) (which is reasonable here given that the variables
are independently collected),
var(λ(g,α))≈/parenleftbigg∂λ
∂f/parenrightbigg2
var(f(g,α)) +/parenleftbigg∂λ
∂φ/parenrightbigg2
var(φ(g)). (11)
Assuming the covariance between f(g,α) andphi(g) is negligible, we calculate
wg≈/bracketleftBigg/parenleftbigg∂λ
∂f/parenrightbigg2
var(f(g,α)) +/parenleftbigg∂λ
∂φ/parenrightbigg2
var(φ(g))/bracketrightBigg−1
(forλ(g,α)),(12)
where both var( f(g,α)) and var(φ(g)) are given by the Eq. 10.
4.2 Weighted cubic smoothing splines
One of the techniques we employ to approximate the functional dependence
betweenpand, separately, f,φ,λ, andtis cubic smoothing splines [32], deﬁned
as follows. For two generic variables ugandvg, the cubic smoothing spline
v(b)(ug) is a piecewise smooth function that minimizes
/summationdisplay
gwg(vg−v(b)(ug))2+η/integraldisplaymax g{ug}
min g{ug}/parenleftbiggd2v(b)
dξ2/parenrightbigg2
dξ, (13)
whereηis a penalty parameter that controls how much to discourages v(b)from
large amounts of curvature (and thus overﬁtting), and ξis a dummy variable.
In the limit of η= 0, curvature is not penalized and the algorithm overﬁts the
data; when η→∞ , the only possible solution requires d2v(b)/dξ2→0, lead-
ing to a straight line and thus making the algorithm equivalent to weighted
least squares (WLS). In the algorithm we employ [48], the function v(b)is con-
structed from cubic polynomials between the data points along {ug}g, with the
condition that they are smooth up to the second derivative along consecutive
pieces.
The penalty parameter ηcan be either chosen arbitrarily or, instead,
determined on the basis of some selection criterion. In our case, we use gen-
eralized cross-validation [49], which optimizes prediction performance. The
algorithm is implemented as the function make smoothing spline of the
package scipy.interpolate inpython [50].Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 21
4.3 Modal regression using kernel density estimation
Another method we employ to estimate how population paﬀectsf,φ,λ, and
tis non-parametric modal regression. [31]. Intuitively, the method looks for
thetypical behavior of a random variable as a function of some independent
variable.
This method is deﬁned in the following way. Using a smoothing kernel (in
our case Gaussian), we construct the 2-dimensional kernel density estimator
ρ(u,v) for the set of data points {(ug,vg)}g[51], where we choose bandwidth
by inspection in the neighborhood of the Silverman method [52] but favor
solutions that tend towards the smoothing spline results as they are a sign of a
stable modal regression line (details can be found in Supplementary Section 6).
Then, we determine the conditional density ρ(v|u) =ρ(u,v)/ρ(u) and extract
its local mode v=v∗(u). Here, we use this method for unimodal ρ(v|u)
(multimodality can be handled by the method, but is not relevant here).
4.4 Data
Our interaction data is derived from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS)
conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) [53]. Each year, the ATUS
interviews a US nationally-representative sample regarding their full sequence
of activities through the day prior to the interview, termed a diary day.
The information collected in this process is recorded in several ﬁles, includ-
ing the “Respondent”, “Activity”, and “Who” data ﬁles. We link these ﬁles
for the period between 2016-2019 to get comprehensive information about
each respondent, activities they carried out on the diary day, as well as those
who accompanied the respondent during each activity. We consider nclf to be
companions of the respondent who are family but do not reside in the same
household (see Supplementary Table 2). These may include the respondent’s
parents, parents-in-law, own children under 18 years of age, and other fam-
ily members as long as they do not reside with the respondent. Activities are
encoded in the ATUS with codes of 6 digits, the ﬁrst two representing activ-
ity categories such as ’eating & drinking’, ’personal care’, or ’work’, to name
a few. Additional digits provide more speciﬁcity about the activity such as
the context or some other detail. We restrict our analysis to activities at the
two-digit level (called major categories in the ATUS lexicon) which encom-
pass seventeen such codes. The ATUS also captures the day of the week when
the respondent has been interviewed, which in known to play an important
role in the choices of activities people perform. We encode the combination of
activity and type of day with the 2-dimensional vector variable α. Therefore,
as an example, eating and drinking with family done on a weekend day corre-
sponds to a speciﬁc value of α. Beyond the use of the ATUS 2-digit codes, we
also create aggregate activity categories that serve as baselines to our analy-
sis and capture people’s major social functions. At the most aggregate level,
we deﬁneαowhich combines all activities in the ATUS done on either type
of day (weekday or weekend), which we refer to as ’any activity, any day’. We22 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
also deﬁne αsocial, the aggregate set of social activities with the 2-digit codes
11−14 done any day of the week. Finally, we deﬁne αcare, we combine the
2-digit codes 3−4 on any day of the week.
To estimate local family availability, we use the Pew Social Trends Survey
(PSTS) from the Pew Research Center which was conducted in 2008 using
a nationally-representative sample of 2,260 adults living in the continental
US [33]. The PSTS identiﬁes geographic location of the respondents at the
county level and the binned quantity of family members who live within a
one-hour driving distance. To work with the data at the CBSA level, we map
county FIPS codes to CBSA codes using the crosswalk downloadable from
the National Bureau of Economic Research [54]. After ﬁltering by the set of
CBSAs common to both surveys, our ﬁnal sample size is N= 30,061 for the
ATUS and N= 1,706 for the PSTS.
Metro populations are obtained from the American Community Sur-
vey (ACS) data (5-year estimates, 2015-2019) published by the US Census
Bureau [55]. We also extract various demographic variables from the US Cen-
sus population estimates to use in the recalibrations of sampling weights (see
Weight re-calibration).
4.5 Weight re-calibration
Our analysis of the time variables of the ATUS is performed with consider-
ation to sampling weights. The ATUS provides a sampling weight for each
respondent which, in essence, gives an estimated measure of how many peo-
ple within the US population the respondent represents given the respondent’s
demographic and other characteristics. (The unit of these weights is techni-
cally persons-day, although for the purpose of our study we normalize by the
number of days in the survey period since it simpliﬁes interpretation of the
weights to just population, and because our sampling period is ﬁxed.) The use
of such weights is meant to reduce bias and improve population-level estimates
of quantities captured by the raw survey data. The ATUS respondent weights
are calibrated by BLS at the national level which can be reasonable for large
cities but are not reliable for smaller CBSAs. For this reason, we perform a
re-calibration of these weights at the CBSA level, the main unit of analysis in
our study.
Our methodology for weights recalibration follows the original BLS proce-
dure which is a 3-stage raking procedure (also known as iterative proportional
ﬁtting and is widely used in population geography and survey statistics [56, 57])
but with constraints imposed at the CBSA level and without non-response
adjustments. The goal of this type of adjustments is to ﬁnd a joint distribution
of weights given dimensions of characteristics (e.g., race by sex by education
by age) such that the sum of respondent weights along a given characteristic
axis (i.e., the marginals) matches a known control or target population. For
each CBSA, the target in each stage of the 3-stage procedure corresponds to
the CBSA population by sex by race by ATUS reference day, population by sex
by education level by ATUS reference day; and population by sex by age byOrigins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 23
ATUS reference day, respectively. For the stratiﬁcation of these characteristics,
see Supplementary Table 3.
We use estimates from the US Census Bureau’s Population Estimates Pro-
gram as well as the ACS. Unavoidably, there are small diﬀerences in the target
population used by BLS and one that is used by us (for example, popula-
tion estimates from the PEP include those institutionalized and non-civilian,
whereas the universe for the ATUS does not include this sub-population).
Supplementary information. The present article is accompanied by a
Supplementary Information document.
Acknowledgments. We acknowledge helpful suggestions from Eben Kenah,
Robin Dunbar, and Serguei Saavedra. No external funding source has been
used in this research.
Funding
Not applicable
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
Ethics approval
Not applicable
Availability of data and materials
All data sources are publicly available.
Code availability
Code used in the project is mostly open source software from the python
language projects scipy ,statsmodels , and pandas .
Authors’ contributions
Supressed for double-blind review.
References
[1] Bettencourt, L.M.A., Lobo, J., Helbing, D., K¨ uhnert, C., West,
G.B.: Growth, innovation, scaling, and the pace of life in cities.24 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104(17), 7301–
7306 (2007) https://arxiv.org/abs/https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.
1073/pnas.0610172104. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0610172104
[2] Dunbar, R.I.M., Spoors, M.: Social networks, support cliques, and kin-
ship. Human Nature 6(3), 273–290 (1995). https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF02734142
[3] Wellman, B.: The community question: The intimate networks of east
yorkers. American Journal of Sociology 84(5), 1201–1231 (1979) https://
arxiv.org/abs/https://doi.org/10.1086/226906. https://doi.org/10.1086/
226906
[4] Roberts, S.G.B., Arrow, H., Gowlett, J.A.J., Lehmann, J., Dunbar,
R.I.M.: Close social relationships: An evolutionary perspective. In: R. I.
M. Dunbar (ed.), J.A.J.G.e.. Clive Gamble (ed.) (ed.) Lucy to Language:
The Benchmark Papers, pp. 151–180. Oxford University Press, Oxford
(2014). Chap. 8
[5] Scannell, L., Giﬀord, R.: Deﬁning place attachment: A tripartite organiz-
ing framework. Journal of Environmental Psychology 30(1), 1–10 (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2009.09.006
[6] Lewicka, M.: Place attachment: How far have we come in the last 40
years? Journal of Environmental Psychology 31(3), 207–230 (2011). https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.10.001
[7] Anderson, R.M., May, R.M.: Infectious Diseases of Humans: Dynamics
and Control. Oxford university press, Oxford, UK (1991)
[8] Pastor-Satorras, R., Castellano, C., Van Mieghem, P., Vespignani, A.:
Epidemic processes in complex networks. Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 925–979
(2015). https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.87.925
[9] Altonji, J.G., Hayashi, F., Kotlikoﬀ, L.J.: Is the extended family altru-
istically linked? direct tests using micro data. The American Economic
Review 82(5), 1177–1198 (1992)
[10] Compton, J., Pollak, R.A.: Family proximity, childcare, and women’s
labor force attachment. Journal of Urban Economics 79, 72–90 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2013.03.007. Spatial Dimensions of Labor
Markets
[11] Taylor, R.J., Chatters, L.M.: Patterns of informal support to elderly black
adults: Family, friends, and church members. Social Work 31(6), 432–438
(1986)Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 25
[12] R˝ ozer, J., Mollenhorst, G., AR, P.: Family and friends: Which types of per-
sonal relationships go together in a network? Social Indicators Research
127, 809–826 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-015-0987-5
[13] Choi, H., Schoeni, R.F., Wiemers, E.E., Hotz, V.J., Seltzer, J.A.: Spa-
tial distance between parents and adult children in the united states.
Journal of Marriage and Family 82(2), 822–840 (2020) https://arxiv.org/
abs/https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/jomf.12606. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12606
[14] Spring, A., Ackert, E., Crowder, K., South, S.J.: Inﬂuence of Proxim-
ity to Kin on Residential Mobility and Destination Choice: Examining
Local Movers in Metropolitan Areas. Demography 54(4), 1277–1304
(2017) https://arxiv.org/abs/https://read.dukeupress.edu/demography/
article-pdf/54/4/1277/838963/1277spring.pdf. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13524-017-0587-x
[15] Furstenberg, F.F.: Kinship reconsidered: Research on a neglected topic.
Journal of Marriage and Family 82(1), 364–382 (2020) https://arxiv.org/
abs/https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/jomf.12628. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12628
[16] Bengtson, V.L.: Beyond the nuclear family: The increasing
importance of multigenerational bonds. Journal of Marriage
and Family 63(1), 1–16 (2001) https://arxiv.org/abs/https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1741-3737.2001.00001.x.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-3737.2001.00001.x
[17] Feehan, D.M., Mahmud, A.S.: Quantifying population contact patterns in
the united states during the covid-19 pandemic. Nature Communications
12(1), 893 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-20990-2
[18] Cheng, H.-Y., Jian, S.-W., Liu, D.-P., Ng, T.-C., Huang, W.-T., Lin,
H.-H., for the Taiwan COVID-19 Outbreak Investigation Team: Contact
Tracing Assessment of COVID-19 Transmission Dynamics in Taiwan
and Risk at Diﬀerent Exposure Periods Before and After Symptom
Onset. JAMA Internal Medicine 180(9), 1156–1163 (2020) https://arxiv.
org/abs/https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/
articlepdf/2765641/jamainternal cheng 2020 oi200031 1599079428.
65582.pdf. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.2020
[19] Koh, W.C., Naing, L., Chaw, L., Rosledzana, M.A., Alikhan, M.F.,
Jamaludin, S.A., Amin, F., Omar, A., Shazli, A., Griﬃth, M., Pastore,
R., Wong, J.: What do we know about sars-cov-2 transmission? a system-
atic review and meta-analysis of the secondary attack rate and associated
risk factors. PLOS ONE 15(10), 1–23 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.024020526 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
[20] Kasarda, J.D., Janowitz, M.: Community attachment in mass society.
American Sociological Review 39(3), 328–339 (1974). Accessed 2023-03-
10
[21] Reia, S.M., Rao, P.S.C., Barthelemy, M., Ukkusuri, S.V.: Spatial structure
of city population growth. Nature Communications 13(1), 5931 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-33527-y
[22] Dobson, A.P., Carper, E.R.: Infectious diseases and human population
history. BioScience 46(2), 115–126 (1996). Accessed 2023-04-16
[23] Hale, T., Angrist, N., Goldszmidt, R., Kira, B., Petherick, A., Phillips, T.,
Webster, S., Cameron-Blake, E., Hallas, L., Majumdar, S., Tatlow, H.: A
global panel database of pandemic policies (oxford covid-19 government
response tracker). Nature Human Behaviour 5(4), 529–538 (2021). https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01079-8
[24] Ogawa, N., Ermisch, J.F.: Family structure, home time demands, and
the employment patterns of japanese married women. Journal of Labor
Economics 14(4), 677–702 (1996)
[25] McCulloch, B.J.: The relationship of family proximity and social sup-
port to the mental health of older rural adults: The appalachian context.
Journal of Aging Studies 9(1), 65–81 (1995). https://doi.org/10.1016/
0890-4065(95)90026-8
[26] Malevergne, Y., Pisarenko, V., Sornette, D.: Testing the pareto against
the lognormal distributions with the uniformly most powerful unbiased
test applied to the distribution of cities. Phys. Rev. E 83, 036111 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.83.036111
[27] Ioannides, Y., Skouras, S.: Us city size distribution: Robustly pareto, but
only in the tail. Journal of Urban Economics 73(1), 18–29 (2013). https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2012.06.005
[28] Levy, M.: Gibrat’s law for (all) cities: Comment. American Economic
Review 99(4), 1672–75 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.99.4.1672
[29] Eeckhout, J.: Gibrat’s law for (all) cities. American Economic Review
94(5), 1429–1451 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1257/0002828043052303
[30] Eeckhout, J.: Gibrat’s law for (all) cities: Reply. American Economic
Review 99(4), 1676–83 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.99.4.1676
[31] Chen, Y.-C., Genovese, C.R., Tibshirani, R.J., Wasserman, L.: Nonpara-
metric modal regression. The Annals of Statistics 44(2), 489–514 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1214/15-AOS1373Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 27
[32] Wang, Y.: Smoothing Splines: Methods and Applications. CRC press,
Boca Raton, Florida (2011)
[33] Pew Research Center for the People and the Press: The Early Octo-
ber Social Trends Survey. https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/
dataset/mobility/ (2009)
[34] Mok, D., Wellman, B.: Did distance matter before the internet?: Inter-
personal contact and support in the 1970s. Social Networks 29(3), 430–
461 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2007.01.009. Special Section:
Personal Networks
[35] David-Barrett, T., Dunbar, R.I.M.: Fertility, kinship and the evolution of
mass ideologies. Journal of Theoretical Biology 417, 20–27 (2017). https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2017.01.015
[36] Roberts, S.B., Dunbar, R.I.: Managing relationship decay. Human Nature
26(4), 426–450 (2015)
[37] Mossong, J., Hens, N., Jit, M., Beutels, P., Auranen, K., Mikola-
jczyk, R., Massari, M., Salmaso, S., Tomba, G.S., Wallinga, J., Heijne,
J., Sadkowska-Todys, M., Rosinska, M., Edmunds, W.J.: Social con-
tacts and mixing patterns relevant to the spread of infectious diseases.
PLOS Medicine 5(3), 1–1 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.
0050074
[38] Perra, N.: Non-pharmaceutical interventions during the covid-19 pan-
demic: A review. Physics Reports 913, 1–52 (2021). https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.physrep.2021.02.001
[39] Litwak, E.: Occupational mobility and extended family cohension. Amer-
ican sociological review, 9–21 (1960)
[40] Litwak, E.: Geographic mobility and extended family cohesion. American
Sociological Review, 385–394 (1960)
[41] d’Artis Kancs: The economic geography of labour migration: Competition,
competitiveness and development. Applied Geography 31(1), 191–200
(2011). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2010.04.003. Hazards
[42] Newman, M.: Networks. OUP Oxford, Oxford, UK (2018). https://books.
google.com/books?id=YdZjDwAAQBAJ
[43] Dickison, M., Havlin, S., Stanley, H.E.: Epidemics on interconnected
networks. Phys. Rev. E 85, 066109 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevE.85.06610928 Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities
[44] Holme, P., Saram¨ aki, J.: Temporal networks. Physics Reports 519(3),
97–125 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2012.03.001. Temporal
Networks
[45] Porter, M., Gleeson, J.: Dynamical Systems on Networks: A Tuto-
rial. Frontiers in Applied Dynamical Systems: Reviews and Tutorials.
Springer, Darmstadt, Germany (2016). https://books.google.com/books?
id=uzDuCwAAQBAJ
[46] Karrer, B., Newman, M.E.J.: Message passing approach for general epi-
demic models. Phys. Rev. E 82, 016101 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevE.82.016101
[47] Karsai, M., Kivel¨ a, M., Pan, R.K., Kaski, K., Kert´ esz, J., Barab´ asi, A.-L.,
Saram¨ aki, J.: Small but slow world: How network topology and burstiness
slow down spreading. Phys. Rev. E 83, 025102 (2011). https://doi.org/
10.1103/PhysRevE.83.025102
[48] Woltring, H.J.: A fortran package for generalized, cross-validatory spline
smoothing and diﬀerentiation. Advances in Engineering Software (1978)
8(2), 104–113 (1986). https://doi.org/10.1016/0141-1195(86)90098-7
[49] Golub, G.H., Heath, M., Wahba, G.: Generalized cross-validation
as a method for choosing a good ridge parameter. Technometrics
21(2), 215–223 (1979) https://arxiv.org/abs/https://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00401706.1979.10489751. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00401706.1979.10489751
[50] The Scipy Community https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/
generated/scipy.interpolate.make smoothing spline.html#scipy.
interpolate.make smoothing spline. Accessed: 2023-03-21
[51] Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J.H., Friedman, J.H.: The Elements
of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction (2nd Ed.).
Springer, New York, NY (2009)
[52] Silverman, B.W.: Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis vol.
26. CRC press, Boca Raton, FL (1986)
[53] Bureau of Labor Statistics: American Time Use Survey. https://www.bls.
gov/tus
[54] National Bureau of Economic Research: Census Core-Based Statistical
Area (CBSA) to Federal Information Processing Series (FIPS) County
Crosswalk
[55] U.S. Census Bureau: Total population, 2015-2019 American CommunityOrigins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US Cities 29
Survey 5-year estimates. https://data.census.gov (2020)
[56] Deming, W.E., Stephan, F.F.: On a least squares adjustment of a sampled
frequency table when the expected marginal totals are known. The Annals
of Mathematical Statistics 11(4), 427–444 (1940). Full publication date:
Dec., 1940
[57] Idel, M.: A review of matrix scaling and Sinkhorn’s normal form for
matrices and positive maps (2016)Supplementary Information for
Origins of Face-to-face Interaction with Kin in US
Cities
Jericho McLeod1,*,+, Unchitta Kan1,+, and Eduardo L ´opez1
1George Mason University, Computational and Data Sciences Department, Fairfax, 22030, US
*Corresponding Author: jmcleod3@gmu.edu
+these authors contributed equally to this work
ABSTRACT
S1 Assessment of ATUS data quality
S1.1 Respondents per capita
To better understand the level of coverage of the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) over the CBSAs we analyze, we present
a scatter plot of the number of respondents in each CBSA gwho are also part of our analysis (see Fig. S1). The plot has
logarithmic horizontal scale. Each dot corresponds to a city g. The horizontal coordinate corresponds to population P(g)and
the vertical to respondents per capita µ(g), given by the ratio between the number of respondents in gand the population P(g).
The plot shows how the respondents per capita approach a rate typically just above 10−4asP(g)increases, that is, a 1in
10,000uniform probability over a CBSA population, with a negligible percentage of CBSAs that drop below this rate. When
P(g)goes below≈3×105(i.e., for smaller CBSAs), µ(g)increases drastically.
Note that given Fig. S1, it is clear that the number of respondents grows approximately linearly with the CBSA population
for locations with P(g)/greaterorsimilar3×105, satisfying the equation
respondents in g≈10−4×P(g). (1)
Crucially, this relation shows that the response coverage is not biased in a way that would likely generate systematically poorer
statistics for smaller cities.
Figure S1. Repondents per capita in the ATUS for CBSAs used in our study. Each dot corresponds to a CBSA and represents
its population and ATUS respondents per capita. The horizontal scale for population P(g)is logarithmic in order to compensate
for the long-tailed distribution of CBSA sizes in the US. It is clear that the representation rate hovers just above 10−4(red
dashed horizontal line), although it is larger for less-populated CBSAs.arXiv:2305.07944v1  [cs.SI]  13 May 2023S1.2 Non-response bias
Figure S2. Scatter plot of fu(g,c)/h(g,c)and log-population p(g)as well as the corresponding WLS (blue) and OLS (red)
regression lines for the collection of cities we study in the ATUS. The ratio fu(g,c)/h(g,c)captures the unweighted nclf
interaction rate among ATUS respondents in gwith characteristic cwith respect to the response rate of sampling units in g.
Each panel corresponds to a different characteristic c, indicated in the panel title. Slope values and their statistical signiﬁcance
are reported in Tab. S1.
cβ1,WLS β1,OLS
Income less than $40,000 0.02 -0.04
Age less than 30 0.05 -0.11
Renter 0.02 -0.06
Less than college 0.01 -0.07
Hispanic 0.15* 0.11
Black -0.03 -0.18
Married -0.00 -0.07*
Has children -0.02 -0.13*
Table S1. Values of the slopes from WLS and OLS analyses done for Fig. S2. * indicates signiﬁcance levels of p< .10.
Non-response is always a major concern of any survey if the characteristics or behaviors of non-respondents systemically
differ from those of respondents, as this may introduce bias with respect to the variable of interest. For the ATUS in particular,
it has been found that while there are differences in the characteristics of respondents and non-respondents, estimates of time
use patterns with and without non-response adjustments are broadly comparable1. In practice, no tests will be able to rule out
the possibility of bias in a variable that is unobservable for the non-respondents.
For the sample we use in our study, the response rate is ≈40.35% (i.e., the non-response rate is ≈59.65%). In this section,
and considering the limitations we have just pointed out, we assess whether the potential non-response bias in ATUS could be
strong enough that the observed decaying trend with population in nclf interaction fdoes not qualitatively reﬂect the actual
trend in nclf interaction. We perform two different analyses for this assessment.
For our ﬁrst analysis, let us provide some intuition2. Ideally, we would like to be able to see how the response propensity
correlates with having an interaction with nclf among sampling units and how this correlation is related to population size.
However, because we have no way of observing the interaction variable for the non-respondents, we instead look at other
2/16variables that may be associated with interaction and how respondents behave given these other variables. For example, suppose
that among the respondents who have less than a college degree, the average probability that they interact with nclf decreases
with population size. If the response rate among sampling units (everyone that has been sampled by the ATUS whether they
responded to the survey or not) with less than a college degree also increases with population size, then it suggests that the
actual trend in fcould either be similar to what is observed or decay more strongly, considering that non-college graduates in
smaller cities are more likely to interact with nclf than non-college graduates in larger cities but they also tend to respond to the
survey at a lower rate. In other words, if the non-college graduate non-respondents in these smaller cities were to respond, f
may be higher for the corresponding population range. Other such scenarios are possible that would yield similar a situation.
To analyze this trend generally and for various characteristic variables, let us denote fu(g,c)as the unweighted average nclf
interaction rate among respondents in gwho have a characteristic c. Let us also denote h(g,c)as the response rate among the
sampling units in gwho have a characteristic c. (Here we are using unbolded cto indicate that we are working with a single
characteristic, unlike in our interaction model in the main text and in Sec. S5.) Our quantity of interest is fu(g,c)/h(g,c), which
we plot against the log-population of g, denoted p(g)as in the main text. In the example situation of non-college graduates
above, or when fu(g,c)decreases with p(g)faster than h(g,c), we would expect fu(g,c)/h(g,c)to also decrease with p(g).
Such a negative relationship could suggest that the potential bias due to non-respondents with the corresponding characteristics
may strengthen the observed decaying trend in f(p)reported in the main text. On the other hand, if there is not a relationship
between fu(g,c)/h(g,c)andp(g), it may be reasonable that the non-response bias does not affect our results in a systematic
way.
We ﬁrst perform WLS with fu(g,c)/h(g,c)as the dependent variable and p(g)as the independent (see Methods in the main
text for details on WLS). We consider the following characteristics c: having income less than $40,000; being 30 years old or
younger, being a renter, having less than a college degree, being Hispanic, being married, having children, and being Black. As
can be seen in Fig. S2 (blue lines) as well as Tab. S1, all of the WLS coefﬁcients are very weak (close to 0) and all but one are
statistically insigniﬁcant. The only coefﬁcient that is statistically signiﬁcant is positive and corresponds to the characteristic of
being Hispanic. We also repeat this analysis using OLS (Fig. S2, red lines) to not obscure the effect of the weights of gand ﬁnd
that most of the coefﬁcients are now weakly negative, although most of them remain statistically insigniﬁcant. The results from
both WLS and OLS suggest that there is no systematic linear relationship between fu(g,c)/h(g,c)andp(g), but if there is one,
the effects are likely to be too small to qualitatively change the f(p)trend observed in the main text.
To corroborate the results from this ﬁrst analysis, we perform an additional check. The ATUS is conducted via phone
calls and it may be necessary for interviewers to call a respondent more than once to initiate or complete an interview. As
suggested by Ref.1, the response of having interacted with nclf or not that is obtained from respondents who required many
calls can be suggestive of the behavior of non-respondents if we assume that these difﬁcult-to-contact respondents are more
similar to non-respondents. Furthermore, a high number of calls in a location may be a sign of difﬁculty of contact and thus
undersampling in that location. As the data on the phone calls made to the respondents are published by the ATUS, we are
well-situated to combine these two ideas into one statistic to diagnose the potential direction of non-response bias.
Let us deﬁne by eithe number of calls placed to respondent i. In a given location g, if the ATUS was able to sample every
person, one would estimate that the total number of calls placed would be ∑i∈gwiei. Now, the number of calls we would
estimate lead to an answer of ‘yes’ to interaction with nclf is equal to ∑i∈gwieiaibecause interaction is captured when ai=1.
This means that the proportion of calls needed to discover nclf interaction in gis given by ψ(g) =∑i∈gwieiai/∑i∈gwiei.
Conversely, 1−ψ(g) =1−(∑i∈gwieiai/∑i∈gwiei)gives the proportion of calls needed to discovering that no interaction with
nclf has taken place. Here, we use α=αo=(any activity, any day).
In Fig. S3, we bin ψ(g)by population and show that, as CBSA population increases, it is easier to ﬁnd nclf interaction and
hard to ﬁnd non-interaction with nclf. Following the logic in Ref.1, this suggests that the decaying trend of f(p)with respect to
pis likely to be even more pronounced than what we ﬁnd in the current study, as interviewers have a harder time obtaining that
answer as pincreases. In other words, this analysis suggests that our results may be a conservative estimate for the population
decaying trend we observe in f(p).
S2 ATUS and PSTS sample-size robustness checks
To provide further conﬁdence in the robustness of our results, we check whether the sample size of each city has an effect in
the functional dependence with respect to pfor the modal regressions f∗,φ∗,λ∗, and t∗or smoothing splines f(b),φ(b),λ(b),
andt(b). In other words, we check if Fig. 1 of the main text changes if the cities chosen to create Fig. 1 are restricted to those
where the sample sizes of people interviewed in each of the cities cannot be below a certain threshold. In Fig. S4, we present a
comparison between the modal regressions and smoothing splines in Fig. 1 of main text with the same curves made only with
CBSAs where at least 30people are sampled in the ATUS and 10in the Pew Social Trends Survey (PSTS). The results are
remarkably consistent. The differences in sample sizes required for the ATUS and the PSTS stem from the differences in survey
3/16Figure S3. Proportion of calls ψover all calls placed by interviewers needed to ﬁnd a respondent reporting to have had nclf
contact (green curve), as a function of population. Also, the additive complement with respect to 1ofψ, i.e., the proportion of
calls 1−ψover all calls placed by interviewers needed to ﬁnd a respondent reporting no nclf interaction (blue curve). This
means that as population grows, it is proportionally easier to ﬁnd respondents that report nclf interaction and harder to ﬁnd
respondents that report no nclf interaction.
sizes, which makes setting more ambitious lower bounds difﬁcult as they lead to much smaller numbers of cities with which to
analyze the data.
S3 Overall social interaction
To provide another robustness check on our ﬁnding of nclf interaction decay as a function of population, we measure overall
social interaction with non-household contacts (not just non-coresident family) as a function of log-population. We focus only
on non-work social interactions. We calculate interaction fnon−fam(g,αo)for local contacts who are both non-coresident and
non-family using the same method as with nclf (Eq. 1 in the main text). The quotient between f(g,αo)andfnon−fam(g,αo)is
then deﬁned by
r(g,αo) =f(g,αo)
fnon−fam(g,αo). (2)
We study the typical behavior of r(g,αo)using cubic smoothing splines and modal regression to obtain r(b)(p,αo)andr∗(p,αo).
In Fig. S5, we show the results and see that both interaction rate (panel A) and interaction duration (panel C) with non-coresident
non-family contacts (non-fam) in general increase with population. This suggests that the decaying trend in interaction of nclf
with population is not due to people in larger cities being less social generally. We also see that, relative to interactions with
non-family contacts (Fig. S5B), nclf interaction markedly decreases as population increases.
S4 Deﬁning family
S4.1 Pew Social Trends Survey Question
Respondents from the Pew Research Center survey were asked how many extended family members live within a one-hour
drive of the respondent, and their responses were binned to ranges of 0,1−5,6−10,11−15,16−20, and 21or more. Even
though this is not identical to asking about nclf, we consider the two meanings of extended family: family members who are
outside of the nuclear family of a focal person, and family members who do not co-reside with the focal person. The second
interpretation coincides with our deﬁnition with nclf. The survey questions included clariﬁcation on extended family, which
deﬁned it to include members of nuclear families, implying the intent of referring to nclf as extended family. We also examined
subsequent surveys from the Pew Research Center, and note that in later surveys referring to extended family, the additional
phrase "who do not live with you" is added, which highlights a transition from an implicit deﬁnition to an explicit one.
S4.2 Estimation of family availability
Guided by the theory of kinship in ego networks, in Sec. 2.2 of main text we deﬁne for each respondent iof the PSTS bi(k)
which takes on a value of 1 if ireports having at least knclf available within an hour’s drive and 0 otherwise. Given the
4/16Figure S4. Modal regressions from Fig. 1 of the main text with the same modal regressions performed after applying ﬁltering
on respondent sampling rates. A CBSA must have at least 30 respondents in ATUS and 10 respondents in PSTS. This
demonstrates the consistency of our reported results with those obtained by considering only well-sampled cities.
categorical reporting of this survey question ( 0,1−5,6−10,11−15,16−20, and 21or more), we develop an algorithm in
order to increment the resolution of kto single units (1 ,2,3,...) as follows.
Because this binning is somewhat arbitrary, we would like to obtain a reasonable estimate of the within-bin probability that
a respondent has a speciﬁc quantity of nclf within an hour’s drive given the data that is available. We achieve this by ﬁnding a
discrete probability distribution that would also conform to the overall distribution of the categorical responses of the survey
respondents given appropriate binning. Concretely, we ﬁrst determine the proportion of respondents belonging to each answer
category (bin). Then, we ﬁt a negative binomial distribution such that the error between the probability mass function summed
over the values in each bin (1 to 5 for the 1−5bin, etc.) and the proportions of respondents per bin is minimized. After the
overall distribution is ﬁtted, we derive a separate probability distribution (the negative binomial estimated in the previous step)
for each bin by normalizing the probability masses of the values falling in the bin so that they sum up to 1 (note that this restricts
the support of the distribution corresponding to each bin to just the values falling inside the bin.) We use these distributions
to estimate the probabilities of each respondent having at least knclf members within an hour’s drive for any integer kvalue
within the category reported by the respondent.
Application of this method leads to the plots in Fig. S6. Here, we also show the effects of kin the estimation of φ(p,k)
as well as λ(p,α,k)in Fig. S6. Note that as kincreases, this captures the idea that, for some individuals, not all nclf
reported available may be relevant to them in terms of interaction (for some people, some family members are not that
important emotionally, consistent with Ref.3). It is interesting to see, however, that even k=1leads to a λ∗(p,αo,k=1)and
λ(b)(p,αo,k=1)that are non-decaying.
S4.3 Classiﬁcation of family and non-family in the ATUS
The ATUS provides context for each activity reported by a respondent by including information on who was present, the
relationship type between the respondent and the companion, and whether the companion co-resides with the respondent. We
provide a summary of the non-coresident relationship types provided by the ATUS in Tab. S2, which is a direct reﬂection
of the data dictionary provided in Ref.4, and the classiﬁcation we use in our analysis to identify non-coresident family and
non-family. Note that a corresponding table is not required for the PSTS due to the design of the survey separating relationship
types explicitly.
For the purposes of Fig. S5, in cases where a single αevent occurs with both nclf and non-coresident non-family present
with the respondent, we consider it for each relationship type. The presence of additional nclf or non-coresident non-family
5/16Figure S5. Here we update ai(α)to be 1 if respondent ihas contact with the examined type of relationship; either nclf or
non-coresident non-family (non-fam), and 0 if not, and otherwise hold to our prior deﬁnitions. Using the modal regressions f∗,
r∗, and t∗, and the splines f(b),r(b), and t(b), to compare non-coresident family with non-coresident non-family contacts, it is
apparent the trends in interactions themselves differ relative to population, while the trends in interaction duration, shown in
hours, do not, precluding the ideas that people are less social or prefer to spend less time with family in cities with larger
populations.
does not further affect interaction or increase the duration of a single event.
S5 Probabilistic framework for interaction, propensity, and availability
In this section, we expand on the probabilistic model introduced in the main text. The model represents a survey which is
structured as the ATUS and PSTS used here, but it is assumed that respondents are being asked all the relevant questions in
a single hypothetical survey. The aim of the model is to separate the effects of availability and propensity on the observed
interaction, but with enough generality that from it one can derive various quantities relating back to the ATUS and PSTS.
S5.1 General Model Description
Consider a hypothetical survey where the information gathered in both the ATUS and the PSTS was collected. We model
the target population of the survey in a location gas stratiﬁed into qdemographic strata. Each stratum is described by a
d-dimensional vector of personal characteristics c. As an example, one could have a sex-by-education stratum which is
described by a 2-dimension vector c= (sex, education ), where sex and education can take the values in the sets {male, female}
and {less than high school, high school diploma or above}, respectively (see Tab. S3 for the speciﬁc characteristics used in
this article connected to the ATUS, speciﬁcally relevant for the recalibration of respondent weights, main text, Methods). The
characteristics of a respondent iof the survey are denoted by c(i). We label s(g,c)the number of respondents in location gwith
speciﬁc features c, and their respective survey sampling weights as w(g,c). The weights are created in such a way that
Q(g,c) =w(g,c)s(g,c) (3)
is satisﬁed, where Q(g,c)is the size of the target population with characteristics cing. In our model, we assume that any
pair of respondents iandjin the same gwithc(i) =c(j)have the same weight w(g,c)(this holds for the re-calibrated ATUS
weights we constructed and used in this study.)
The modeled survey asks respondents two questions about nclf: 1) whether they have non-coresident family available
locally and 2) whether they interacted with nclf on the day prior to the survey by performing an activity-day αwith their nclf
(here, activity-day αis deﬁned in the same manner as in the main text). We now introduce for each respondent itwo indicator
variables aiandbithat can only take two values, 0and1. Variable bitakes the value of 1when iindicates that they have nclf
available in their city, and 0otherwise. Similarly, ai=1when a respondent indicates they performed an activity-day αwith
nclf, and ai=0otherwise. Both aiandbiare treated as random Bernoulli variables. Note that bi=0implies ai=0because,
by construction, a respondent cannot perform an activity with nclf if there are none available.
6/16Figure S6. The effects of varying kon family availability φ(p,k)and propensity to interact λ(p,αo,k)are shown here via φ∗
andλ∗modal regressions and φ(b)andλ(b)splines. Increasing kshifts down the estimates for φbut does not change the
qualitative behavior of φ, as shown in panels A and C. λdepends on both φandf; varying k(and thus effecting φ) can change
the qualitative behavior of λas shown in panels B and D. However, regardless of which kwe choose, the results in all cases
support our ﬁnding in the main text that it is availability that drives nclf interaction down as city population increases, not
propensity.
S5.2 Fixed city g, population stratum c, and activity-day α
We now deﬁne the conditional probability of ai=1given that bi=1asκ(which is implicitly a function of g,c, and α).
Symbolically,
Pr(ai=1|bi=1) =κ. (4)
Under the same conditional assumption ( bi=1), the probability that the respondent ireplies ‘no’ to interacting with family is
1−κ, or
Pr(ai=0|bi=1) =1−κ. (5)
These two different situations can be written under the single expression
Pr(ai|bi=1) =κai(1−κ)1−ai. (6)
Conceptually, κis the same as the propensity to interact, a concept we discuss in the main text.
On the other hand, conditional on not having family available ( bi=0), the probability to respond ‘yes’ to the nclf interaction
question is 0, and to respond ‘no’ is 1, which leads to
Pr(ai|bi=0) =δai,0, (7)
where δu,vis the Kronecker delta, equal to 1 if the integers uandvare equal and 0 otherwise.
We also deﬁne the probability for ito have nclf as φ(again dependent on gandcbut independent on αby deﬁnition),
which is the probability that bi=1. Consequently, bi=0has probability 1−φ. This deﬁnition allows us to write the joint
probability of responding any combination of aiandbias
Pr(ai,bi) =κai(1−κ)1−aiφδbi,1+δai,0(1−φ)δbi,0. (8)
7/16ATUS Code Description Relationship
40 Own Non-household Child Family
51 Parents Family
52 Other nonhousehold family members < 18 Family
53 Other nonhousehold family members 18 and older Family
54 Friends Non-Family
56 Neighbors/acquaintances Non-Family
57 Other nonhousehold children < 18 Non-Family
58 Other nonhousehold adults 18 and older Non-Family
59 Boss or manager Non-Family
60 People whom I supervise Non-Family
61 Co-workers Non-Family
62 Customers Non-Family
Table S2. Classiﬁcation of ATUS relationship types4into non-coresident family and non-coresident non-family in our study.
Characteristic Possible Values
Age <23, 23-59, 60+
Gender male, female
Race/Ethnicity non-Hispanic & non-black alone, non-Hispanic & black alone, Hispanic and any race
Education completed high school, did not complete high school
Table S3. Personal characteristics for stratiﬁcation of population used the ATUS weight re-calibration (see the main text). In
addition, characteristics such as these are the model for the stratiﬁcation into various cin the model discussed in Sec. S5.
This equation corresponds to Eq. 3 of the main text. The marginals will be useful later, and thus, we have:
Pr(ai) =1
∑
bi=0Pr(ai,bi) =δai,0(1−φ)+κai(1−κ)1−aiφ (9)
and
Pr(bi) =1
∑
ai=0Pr(ai,bi) =φδbi,1+(1−φ)δbi,0. (10)
For a given set of g,c, and α, individual respondent probabilities can be combined to produce the full probability to obtain
a speciﬁc set of survey replies {ai,bi}i→a,b, which takes the form
Pr(a,b) =s
∏
i=1/bracketleftbig
κai(1−κ)1−aiφδbi,1+δai,0(1−φ)δbi,0/bracketrightbig
, (11)
where we have written s(g,c)assfor simplicity and where we have adopted the convention that respondents within gandccan
be sequentially labelled from 1 to s.
One of our key goals is to estimate the unknown value of κthrough the responses in the survey, since this would let
us express nclf interaction as a product of propensity and availability, thus explicitly showing their effects. To do this, we
determine the probability that a total of y=∑s
i=1airespondents say they have interacted with nclf, formally given by
Pr(y) =∑
a∑
bδy,∑s
iaiPr(a,b), (12)
where the sums over a= (a1,...,as)andb= (b1,...,bs)correspond to all the possible conﬁgurations the responses among the
srespondents can take. Also, because respondent’s iresponses are independent to the responses of any other respondent, these
sums over aandbcan be expanded as
∑
a∑
b=1
∑
a1=0···1
∑
as=01
∑
b1=0···1
∑
bs=0. (13)
8/16Therefore, we can expand Eq. 12 further into
Pr(y) =1
∑
a1=0···1
∑
as=0δy,∑s
iai1
∑
b1=0···1
∑
bs=0Pr(a,b). (14)
Probability Pr(a,b)is fully factorized over each i, and therefore, we can begin to simplify it. Thus, we can ﬁrst perform the
sum of factor iover bias
1
∑
bi=0/bracketleftbig
κai(1−κ)1−aiφδbi,1+δai,0(1−φ)δbi,0/bracketrightbig
=δai,0(1−φ)+κai(1−κ)1−aiφ=Pr(ai). (15)
This provides the expression
Pr(y) =1
∑
a1=0···1
∑
as=0δy,∑s
iais
∏
i=1/bracketleftbig
δai,0(1−φ)+κai(1−κ)1−aiφ/bracketrightbig
=1
∑
a1=0···1
∑
as=0δy,∑s
iais
∏
i=1Pr(ai). (16)
To complete this calculation, we now make the following observations. Since there are sseparate variables a1,...,ascapable
of contributing to produce ∑iai=y, and each has two possible values, 0or1, obtaining yfrom∑iaiis equivalent to picking
yamong the svariables to take on the value 1and the remaining s−yto take the value 0. This can be done in/parenleftbigs
y/parenrightbig
different
ways, and any such combination makes the factor δy,∑iaibecome 1. In other words, the summations ∑aover all possible
conﬁgurations of alead to/parenleftbigs
y/parenrightbig
terms that can be non-zero on the basis of the delta on y. Furthermore, for any aithat takes on the
value 1, the corresponding factor in ∏itakes the value κφ; ifai=0, the value taken by the factor is 1−φ+(1−κ)φ=1−κφ.
Since ydifferent aiare equal to 1 and s−yareai=0, these observations readily lead to
Pr(y) =/parenleftbiggs
y/parenrightbigg
(κφ)y(1−κφ)s−y, (17)
a binomial distribution with success rate κφ, and expectation/angbracketlefty/angbracketright=sκφ. This equation corresponds to Eq. 4 of the main text.
The value of φcan be estimated from the survey. This is done through a similar approach as above, by determining Pr(z),
the probability for z=∑s
ibi. It can be calculated in the same way as Pr (y), resulting in the binomial distribution
Pr(z) =/parenleftbiggs
z/parenrightbigg
φz(1−φ)s−z(18)
with success rate φand expectation/angbracketleftz/angbracketright=sφ.
S5.2.1 Derivations of location-level averages
We are now in a position to derive quantities that directly relate to the survey data used in our study. At this point, it is important
to recall that both φandκabove are dependent on g,c, and λeven though this functional dependence has been abstracted away
for notational simplicity. However, we know from our experience working with survey data that s(g,c)can be small especially
for less-populated gif the sample is stratiﬁed. This means that κ(g,c,α)andφ(g,c)where both gandcare speciﬁed may not
be reliable for some locations due to small sample size. The situation would likely be worse if αis simultaneously speciﬁed.
Thus, we must work at a greater level of aggregation, such as at the level gwhere values of care averaged over.
For location gand activity-day α, the model can be used to calculate the probability to obtain the collection y= (yc1,...,ycq)
of counts of yes answers to the question of interaction with nclf. By the independence of the different c, the joint probability of
these answers is
Pr(y) =∏
cPr(yc), (19)
where we write the product over cinstead of over the indices from 1toq(simply to avoid adding more notation). The individual
Pr(yc)satisfy Eq. 16, where it is understood that κ=κ(g,c,α)andφ(g,c)with, in general, different values for different c.
Due to independence, the expectation for this joint distribution is simply /angbracketlefty/angbracketright=∏c/angbracketleftyc/angbracketright.
The results from the joint distribution can be used to determine a location- gestimate of the fraction of people in the target
population interacting with nclf. This estimate is proportional to the expectation of the random variable ∑cw(g,c)ycwhich, by
linearity and the independence of the random variable, is equal to ∑cw(g,c)/angbracketleftyc/angbracketright=∑cQ(g,c)κ(g,c,α)φ(g,c)after applying
Eq. 3. We have seen the quantity κ(g,c,α)φ(g,c)above, and it represents the marginal likelihood that a respondent reports
having interacted with nclf (the success rate in the binomial distribution in Eq. 17). To make this last sum an expectation, we
9/16must divide by the total population ∑cQ(g,c) =Q(g), which yields the expected fraction of the target population f(g,α)that
reports performing activity-day αwith nclf, or
f(g,α) =∑cQ(g,c)κ(g,c,α)φ(g,c)
∑cQ(g,c)=∑cQ(g,c)κ(g,c,α)φ(g,c)
Q(g). (20)
This corresponds to an average interaction probability with nclf for activity-day αover individuals belonging to the target
population in location g. Equation 20 is Eq. 5 of the main text, where we distinguish modeled and measured quantities by
changing f(g,α)tofm(g,α).
A similar analysis can be conducted on the answers to the question of nclf availability, leading to
φ(g) =∑cQ(g,c)φ(g,c)
Q(g), (21)
which corresponds to the average availability over individuals located in g. This is Eq. 6 of the main text.
The location-level f(g,α)andφ(g)can be combined to produce another useful quantity denoted by λ(g)and deﬁned as
λ(g,α) =f(g,α)
φ(g)=∑cκ(g,c,α)φ(g,c)Q(g,c)
∑cφ(g,c)Q(g,c), (22)
which is Eq. 7 of the main text.
There are three reasons for introducing λ. First, it can be directly estimated from data because the sample versions of f
andφ(given in Eqs. 26 and 27 below) depend directly on the data. Second, it provides an approximation to the average κper
individual in gthat turns out to be the only such average that is conceptually sound. To be strict to the mathematics, the average
contained in λ(g,c)is not over all the target population in g, but rather the fraction of that population that has nclf available.
This becomes clear from the fact that φ(g,c)Q(g,c)is the expectation of the sub-population Q(g,c)who respond that they have
nclf. The strict average of the κover gandαis given by
κ(g,α) =∑cκ(g,c,α)Q(g,c)
∑cQ(g,c)/negationslash=λ(g,α), (23)
where the non-equality is stated simply for clarity. The problem with κ(g,α)is twofold. From a practical standpoint we
cannot directly calculate it accurately because our ability to estimate each κ(g,c,α)is very limited. More importantly, at the
conceptual level, not everybody in Q(g,c)actually has nclf with which to interact. Thus, it is not clear that κ(g,α)is deﬁned
properly in practice. Because of these conceptual considerations, we can think about λ(g,α)as an effective propensity . The
third reason to introduce λ(g,α)is because it provides a way to assess the trends in propensity as a function of log-population
p(g).
S5.3 Estimation using ATUS and PSTS data
The results above, based on a stochastic model of respondents, combined with data from the ATUS and PSTS, can be used to
make estimates of the parameters we are interested in.
Let us start by consider the most basic estimations from the model. Concentrating on a speciﬁc location g, activity-day α,
and population segment c, we can formally write an estimation for κφ. By maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), if y=ˆy
is observed for this ( g,c,α)-combination and we want to determine the value of κφmost likely to match that y, we take a
derivative of Pr(y)with respect to the combined variable κφand seek its maximum. As usual, it is more convenient to do this
with the logarithm of Pr (y), which leads to
d
d(κφ)logPr (y)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
y=ˆy=ˆy
ˆ(κφ)−s−ˆy
1−ˆ(κφ)=0=⇒ˆ(κφ) =ˆy
s=∑s
i=1ˆai
s, (24)
where ˆaiare the respondent answers, converted to 0or1, recorded in the ATUS about interaction with nclf in the group of
respondents with (g,c,α). In other words, Pr (y=ˆy)is maximized if κφis given by Eq. 24.
Taking the MLE approach, we can estimate φon the basis of the PSTS family availability data (see SI S4) on ˆz=∑s
iˆbiand
the number of respondents in each gwithcto ﬁnd
d
dφlogPr (z)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
z=ˆz=ˆz
ˆφ−s−ˆz
1−ˆφ=0=⇒ ˆφ=ˆz
s=∑s
i=1ˆbi
s. (25)
10/16As discussed in Sec. S5.2.1, we cannot actually take full advantage of these estimates because of small sample sizes for
many locations if the samples are stratiﬁed into characteristics c. Nevertheless, we can use them to empirically estimate f(g,α),
achieved by inserting Eq. 24 into Eq. 20 while taking into account Eq. 3, producing
ˆf(g,α) =∑cw(g,c)∑s(g,c)
i ˆai(α)
P(g)=∑cw(g,c)∑s(g,c)
i ˆai(α)
∑cw(g,c)s(g,c), (26)
where we explicitly highlight that the collected answer for ˆ aiis in reference to activity-day α. Similarly,
ˆφ(g) =∑cw(g,c)∑s(g,c)
iˆbi
∑cw(g,c)s(g,c). (27)
The Eqs. for ˆf(g,α)andˆφ(g)can be used directly to calculate population-weighted averages over the entire set of locations
for interaction due to a speciﬁc activity-day (sample result labeled ˆf(α)) and availability (sample result labeled ˆφ). They also
make it possible to provide the estimator ˆλ(g,α). However, to write it explicitly, we must remember that ˆφ(g)is derived from
the Pew data whereas ˆf(g,α)is obtained from the ATUS. Thus, we estimate with
ˆλ(g,α) =ˆf(g,α)
ˆφ(g).←from ATUS
←from Pew(28)
As a general statement, when the variable aiis involved, the ATUS sample sizes and weights need to be used. When biis
involved, the Pew survey sample sizes and weights are needed.
S6 Estimation of population-size dependence of interaction, availability, and propensity
through non-parametric modal regression with KDE
One of our approaches to understand how f,φ,λ, and tare affected by population is non-parametric modal regression5. To
describe the technique in detail, consider a set of random variables {ug,vg}gwhere ugis considered the independent variable.
The goal of the method is to ﬁnd a function vofuthat represents the relation between {ug,vg}g.
The method ﬁrst estimates the bi-variate probability density ρ(u,v)using kernel density estimation. In our case, we employ
a weighted Gaussian kernel estimation where the selection of the bandwidth is explained below. The algorithm we use is
gaussian_kde , part of the python package scipy.stats , and the weights of the data points are those calculated for
each gas explained in the main text, Methods section. In our implementation, the u,vspace is discretized into nu×nvtiles,
each with a value ρi,jcorresponding to the density ρ(ui,vj)where uiis a value of uequal to umin+i×duandiis an integer
between 1andnu, and vjis a value of vequal to vmin+j×dvandjis an integer between 1andnv. The values uminandvmin
are, respectively the minimum values of uandvin the region of interest. The two parameters duanddvare estimated using
du= (umax−umin)/nuanddv= (vmax−vmin)/nvwhere umaxandvmaxare, respectively the maximum values of uandvin the
region of interest.
After determining the density, we construct the conditional density ρ(v|u) =ρ(u,v)/ρ(u)where ρ(u)is the marginal
density for variable u. This marginal is numerically estimated from the joint ρ(u,v)by adding its values for ﬁxed u. In our
discretization, ρ(u)is calculated by performing the sum ∑nv
j=1ρi,jto yield ρiwhich corresponds to ρ(ui). This is then used in
ρi,j/ρiwhich corresponds to ρ(vj|ui).
To construct the modal regression, for a given uiwe locate the j, labeled j∗, that leads to the largest value of the set
{ρ(vj|ui)}j. This j∗is a function of i, that is j∗(i). Therefore, the modal regression corresponds to the set of values {ui,j∗(ui)}i
which, in terms of uandv, takes the form{ui,vj∗(i)}ior in a more familiar way, (ui,v∗(ui)). Figure 1 of the main text, and
all the versions of the same ﬁgure presented here in the SI as robustness checks are constructed with this method (excluding
the smoothing splines, explained in the Methods of the main text), where the color corresponds to ρ(vj|ui)and the modal
regression to (ui,v∗(ui)). In all cases, ucorresponds to the value of log-population p(g) =logP(g). On the other hand, vtakes
on four different forms, f,φ,λ, and t. The values for nuandnvare both equal to 2 ,000.
Bandwidth selection for the KDE is estimated by inspection in the neighborhood of the Silverman bandwidth6, of value
≈0.497. The choice is made to enhance stability of the model regression, and we settle on a value of 0.75. Fig. S7 shows how
the modal regression varies as a consequence of varying the bandwidth. The effect of larger bandwidth does not change any of
the qualitative results. The modal regression becomes more similar to the smooth spline which is consistent with our intention
to increase stability.
11/16Figure S7. Versions of Fig. 1 of the main text with different choices of bandwidth. Top corresponds to Silverman’s bandwidth
0.497, middle to 0 .6, and bottom to 0 .75, our chosen value. The larger bandwidth leads to the modal regression changing
slightly for small p, leading to more similarity with the results of the smoothing splines method.
12/16Activity ATUS Codes Avg Propensity
α /angbracketleftλ(α,k=1)/angbracketright /angbracketleft λ(α,k=2)/angbracketright /angbracketleftλ(α,k=3)/angbracketright
Any All codes 0.2894 0.3307 0.3639
Social 11, 12, 13 0.2458 0.2809 0.3093
Social & Leisure 12 0.1978 0.2265 0.2500
Eating & Drinking 11 0.1504 0.1717 0.1891
Traveling 18 0.1119 0.1279 0.1411
Care 03, 04 0.0868 0.0997 0.1105
Household 02 0.0681 0.0781 0.0865
Care, Non-Coresid 04 0.0661 0.0759 0.0841
Consumer Purchases 07 0.0418 0.0479 0.0531
Care, Coresid 03 0.0247 0.0285 0.0317
Sports, Exrc & Rec 13 0.0200 0.0228 0.0252
Religious 14 0.0148 0.0172 0.0193
Work 05 0.0085 0.0097 0.0107
Prof. & Pers. Services 08 0.0061 0.0070 0.0077
Phone calls 16 0.0048 0.0055 0.0062
V olunteer 15 0.0046 0.0053 0.0059
Education 06 0.0026 0.0031 0.0035
Household Serv. 09 0.0019 0.0022 0.0025
Personal Care 01 0.0017 0.0019 0.0022
Govt Serv. & Civic 10 0.0005 0.0006 0.0006
Table S4. Rank-ordered list of propensity values by activity over all major activity categories captured in the ATUS, for
values of kranging from 1 to 3. The numerical codes are those stated in the ATUS Lexicon of 20197. Aggregate activities are
highlighted in bold and the codes used to construct them are indicated.
S7 Summary Tables
S7.1 Average propensity per activity
It is of interest to know which speciﬁc activities people tend to be more inclined towards. To examine this directly, we average
each λfor each αover the cities, weighted by sample size, to provide an expected value for each activity. We show the results,
sorted by value, in Tab. S4, with aggregate αs shown in bold. Concretely, we compute
/angbracketleftλ(α,k)/angbracketright=∑gwgλ(g,α,k)
∑gwg(29)
where wgis the city sample size, explained in the Methods section, main text.
To categorically describe these results, it appears that social activities drive the majority of propensity to interact. These
are followed by care and home-centered activities. Following these, we observe a mixture of activities that are either rare
themselves, or common but either typically conducted alone, or where individuals have less control over who they conduct the
activity alongside. Among these we see activities such as education and work, as well as personal care (hygiene) and civic
activities (voting, seeking government assistance).
S7.2 Listing MSAs in terms of λand t
In order to measure how much a city gwith p(g)differs from the typical behavior of other cities with similar p≈p(g), we
introduce a weighted z-score that adjusts for the heteroskedasticity of our data. The speciﬁc deﬁnition is as follows. From
the estimated bivariate conditional density ρ(v|u)of the set of values {ug,vg}g, determined as explained above in Sec. S6, we
calculate the expectation
/angbracketleftv(ug)/angbracketright=/angbracketleftv(ui(g))/angbracketright=∑nv
j=1vj×ρ(vj|ui(g))
nv, (30)
13/16CBSA Name λ(g,αo,k)(rank by weighted z-score)
k=1 k=2 k=3
38060 Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ 0.389 (1) 0.473 (1) 0.563 (1)
35620 New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA 0.297 (4) 0.350 (2) 0.403 (2)
33460 Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI 0.336 (3) 0.386 (3) 0.432 (3)
16740 Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia, NC-SC 0.396 (2) 0.427 (4) 0.453 (4)
19740 Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO 0.422 (5) 0.506 (5) 0.592 (5)
45300 Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL 0.363 (6) 0.444 (7) 0.530 (8)
26900 Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson, IN 0.329 (9) 0.428 (6) 0.548 (6)
36420 Oklahoma City, OK 0.436 (8) 0.559 (8) 0.704 (10)
33100 Miami-Fort Lauderdale-West Palm Beach, FL 0.330 (7) 0.384 (9) 0.437 (11)
41180 St. Louis, MO-IL 0.309 (14) 0.367 (10) 0.426 (9)
............
44700 Stockton-Lodi, CA 0.195 (200) 0.195 (204) 0.195 (207)
21660 Eugene, OR 0.156 (199) 0.156 (207) 0.156 (208)
46060 Tucson, AZ 0.178 (211) 0.221 (208) 0.267 (195)
16700 Charleston-North Charleston, SC 0.199 (207) 0.214 (206) 0.227 (206)
49340 Worcester, MA-CT 0.204 (208) 0.204 (210) 0.204 (212)
40900 Sacramento–Roseville–Arden-Arcade, CA 0.241 (209) 0.255 (211) 0.265 (211)
28140 Kansas City, MO-KS 0.227 (210) 0.259 (212) 0.289 (209)
47900 Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-V A-MD-WV 0.247 (214) 0.298 (213) 0.351 (205)
31080 Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim, CA 0.265 (212) 0.314 (214) 0.364 (213)
14460 Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH 0.200 (215) 0.238 (215) 0.276 (215)
Table S5. Average Rank-ordered listings of the top and bottom ten CBSAs in the US for λon the basis of weight-adjusted
z-scores as deﬁned by Eq. 32, for values of kranging from 1 to 3.
where ui(g)isuiwith ithat satisﬁes ui≤ug<ui+1. Similarly, the standard deviation is estimated from the usual sample formula
σv(ug)=/radicalBigg
∑nv
j=1[vj−/angbracketleftv(ug)/angbracketright]2
nv. (31)
Finally, in order to determine the z-score, we apply
z(v(ug)) =wg
∑gwg×v(ui(g))−v∗(ug)
σv(ug)(32)
To apply this result, ualways corresponds to pandvis either the effective propensity λor the interaction duration t. The
inclusion of weights here further allows us to emphasize cities that are well-sampled, for which we show the top and bottom
ranked cities in terms of λ(g,αo,k=3)in Tab. S5, and the same selection criteria for t(g,αo)in Tab. S6.
14/16CBSA Name t(g,αo) Rank by
weighted z-score
47900 Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-V A-MD-WV 5.2334 1
35620 New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA 4.7812 2
42660 Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA 5.6429 3
26420 Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar Land, TX 4.8333 4
38060 Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ 4.9774 5
19820 Detroit-Warren-Dearborn, MI 4.9197 6
41700 San Antonio-New Braunfels, TX 5.3979 7
41860 San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA 4.9484 8
46140 Tulsa, OK 6.1930 9
26900 Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson, IN 4.7501 10
.........
19100 Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington, TX 4.0465 205
39580 Raleigh, NC 3.1891 206
36740 Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL 3.4537 207
45300 Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL 3.6301 208
41620 Salt Lake City, UT 3.1777 209
41740 San Diego-Carlsbad, CA 3.5644 210
16980 Chicago-Naperville-Elgin, IL-IN-WI 4.0296 211
36420 Oklahoma City, OK 3.0496 212
31080 Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim, CA 4.0002 213
17460 Cleveland-Elyria, OH 2.6093 214
Table S6. Rank-ordered listings of the top and bottom ten CBSAs in the US for ton the basis of weight-adjusted z-scores as
deﬁned by Eq. 32.
15/16References
1.Abraham, K. G., Maitland, A. & Bianchi, S. M. Nonresponse in the American Time Use Survey: Who Is Missing
from the Data and How Much Does It Matter? Public Opin. Q. 70, 676–703, DOI: 10.1093/poq/nﬂ037 (2006). https:
//academic.oup.com/poq/article-pdf/70/5/676/19530939/nﬂ037.pdf.
2.Lohr, S. Sampling: Design and Analysis; 3rd edition (Chapman and Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, 2021).
3.Dunbar, R. I. M. & Spoors, M. Social networks, support cliques, and kinship. Hum. Nat. 6, 273–290, DOI: 10.1007/
BF02734142 (1995).
4.Bureau of Labor Statistics. American time use survey interview data dictionary. https://www.bls.gov/tus/dictionaries/
atusintcodebk20.pdf (2020).
5.Chen, Y .-C., Genovese, C. R., Tibshirani, R. J. & Wasserman, L. Nonparametric modal regression. The Annals Stat. 44, 489
– 514, DOI: 10.1214/15-AOS1373 (2016).
6.Silverman, B. W. Density estimation for statistics and data analysis , vol. 26 (CRC press, Boca Raton, FL, 1986).
7.Bureau of Labor Statistics. American time use survey activity lexicon. https://bls.gov/tus/lexiconwex2020.pdf (2020).
16/16