This paper has been accepted for publication at the 2023 International Symposium on Medical Robotics.
Towards Biomechanics-Aware Design of a Steerable Drilling Robot
for Spinal Fixation Procedures with Flexible Pedicle Screws
Susheela Sharma*, Yuewan Sun*, Sarah Go, Jordan P. Amadio, Mohsen Khadem, Amir Hossein Eskandari,
and Farshid Alambeigi, Member, IEEE .
Abstract — Towards reducing the failure rate of spinal fixation
surgical procedures in osteoporotic patients, we propose a
unique biomechanically-aware framework for the design of a
novel concentric tube steerable drilling robot (CT-SDR). The
proposed framework leverages a patient-specific finite element
(FE) biomechanics model developed based on Quantitative
Computed Tomography (QCT) scans of patient’s vertebra to
calculate a biomechanically-optimal and feasible drilling and
implantation trajectory. The FE output is then used as a design
requirement for the design and evaluation of the CT-SDR.
Providing a balance between the necessary flexibility to create
curved optimal trajectories obtained by the FE module with
the required strength to not buckle during drilling through
a hard simulated bone material, we showed that the CT-SDR
can reliably recreate this drilling trajectory with errors between
1.7-2.2%.
I. INTRODUCTION
Osteoporosis is responsible for an estimated two million
broken bones in the United States every year [1]. The most
common type of osteoporotic fracture occurs in the spine,
with more than 1.4 million global incidence in men and
women within this age category [2]. To eliminate painful
motion caused by these fractures and restore stability of
the spine, spinal fixation surgical procedures are commonly
performed by fusing and locking the involved vertebrae
together into a solid bone. While this procedure is well
established and widely practiced around the world, for pa-
tients suffering from osteoporosis, this fixation technique
using a rigid screw is often insufficient and the fixation may
fail [3]. This failure can be mainly attributed to the lack
of dexterity and rigidity of the implants and instruments
used by the surgeons in the operating room. Of note, this
critical limitation together with the complex anatomy of
vertebrae constrain the surgeons to linear drilling trajectories
as a pilot hole for implantation of rigid pedicle screws
within the vertebral body. Also, this limitation increases
the risk of implanting the screw within the lower bone
*These authors contributed equally
**This work is supported by the National Institute Of Biomedical
Imaging and Bioengineering of the National Institutes of Health under
Award Number R21EB030796.
S. Sharma, Y . Sun, S. Go, and F. Alambeigi are with the Walker
Department of Mechanical Engineering and Texas Robotics at the University
of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 78712, USA. Email: {sheela.sharma,
yuewansun, sarah.go }@utexas.edu, farshid.alambeigi @austin.utexas.edu
J. P. Amadio is with the Department of Neurosurgery, The University
of Texas Dell Medical School, TX, 78712.
M. Khadem is with the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh,
UK.
A. H. Eskandari is with Institut de recherche Robert Sauv ´e en sant ´e et
en s´ecurit ´e du travail, Montr ´eal, Canada.
Fig. 1: Procedure of building up an FE model from QCT
scans. Figure also shows the considered desired drilling
trajectories.
mineral density (BMD) regions of the vertebral body that
may results in a fixation failure. Aside from non-optimal
instruments and implants, the drilling and, therefore, screw
implantation trajectory in spinal fixation procedures often is
not optimally selected based on the biomechanical analysis–
and particularly calculating the stress and strain distribution
along the implanted screw [4]. Nevertheless, a successful
spinal fixation procedure demands a biomechanically-aware
design of flexible instruments and implant to collectively
address the above-mentioned issues.
Despite conventional spinal fixation devices, flexible in-
struments and implants (e.g., [5], [6], [7]) enable surgeons
to drill and place implants through areas within the vertebral
body with a higher BMD index, and therefore, potentially
reduce the risk of fixation failure. In an effort to overcome the
aforementioned dexterity limitations and reduce the failure
rates of spinal fixation procedures, several robotic drilling
systems have been developed in the literature. For example,
Alambeigi et al. [6], [8], [9] designed a tendon-driven
curved drilling robot for core decompression of femoral
head osteonecrosis. While the proposed system was capable
of drilling relatively smooth, curved holes, the system had
several limitations, such as the lengthy 5-9 min drilling
time and a maximum path length of 35 mm. These two
limitations namely stem from a lack of structural rigidity
present in tendon-actuated flexible robots, leaving the system
prone to buckling and drilling failures at high insertion
speeds. Expanding on this work, Ma et al. [10] developed
a handheld version of the described robotic system. This
system suffers from the same limitations present in its
predecessor, in that the stiffness and bending behaviour are
limited by the maximum loading capacity of the tendons and
the material being drilled through. In a more recent effort,
1arXiv:2305.15304v1  [cs.RO]  24 May 2023also Wang et al. [11] proposed a tendon-driven articulated
surgical drill for spinal fusion applications. The proposed
design included an articulated wrist that enables drilling in
linear trajectories connected by a corner between the two
intersecting pathway. Of note, this limits the ability to drill a
smooth curvilinear trajectory within vertebra for implantation
of a flexible implant for the fixation procedure. Also, a review
of these literature demonstrates that all of these steerable
drilling systems have neglected considering the effect of
biomechanics during the design and evaluation of the robotic
system and defining the drilling trajectory.
To collectively address the above-mentioned limitations,
in this paper, we propose a novel biomechanically-aware
procedure to design, fabricate, and evaluate an easy-to-
control Concentric Tube Steerable Drilling Robot (CT-SDR)
for enhancing fusion stability within osteoporotic vertebrae.
Inspired by concentric tube robots (e.g., [12], [13]) and
designed to match the results given from a novel finite
element (FE) analysis framework, the CT-SDR provides
quick, reliable, and accurate access to areas of high BMD for
flexible screw implantation by following a desired trajectory
obtained from FE framework shown in Fig. 1.
II. D ESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CT-SDR
To effectively create a solution to address the aforemen-
tioned limitations discussed in section I, a biomechanically-
aware steerable drilling robot (SDR) needs to be designed to
(1) guide a flexible drilling instrument and intuitively drill
a desired straight/curved trajectory in a clinically-acceptable
amount of time, (2) provide adequate structural stiffness to
prevent its bending/buckling and ensure a predictable and
repeatable drilled trajectories, and most importantly (3) re-
create the desired trajectory determined through a patient-
specific FE analysis. Of note, the last requirement is the
critical step for a “biomechanically-aware approach” towards
the design of a SDR for a spinal fixation procedure.
To summarize, the proposed biomechanically-aware ap-
proach, firstly uses the Quantitative Computed Tomography
(QCT) scans of patients to obtain their spatial BMD dis-
tribution for the FE analysis and calculating the stress and
strain distribution along an implanted screw in a straight
or curved trajectory. Next, using this FE analysis, a desired
linear/curved drilling trajectory is determined based on ap-
propriate biomechanical metrics. This desired trajectory is
then used for the design and evaluation of a SDR. The SDR
should be able to successfully provide adequate structural
stiffness and workspace to reliably drill through a hard
tissue while followings this desired trajectory. The following
sections describes these steps in details.
III. FINITE ELEMENT MODEL BUILDUP
1) Image analysis: Quantitative Computed Tomography
(QCT) images of a real patient (male, 52 years) were
obtained using a calibration phantom [14] to build up the FE
model of a lumbar T12 vertebrae. The protocol of image ac-
quisition was approved by the review board at the University
of Texas at Austin (IRB ID: STUDY00000519). The QCT
(a) Trajectory 1
 (b) Trajectory 2
 (c) Trajectory 3
Fig. 2: The three designed trajectories analyzed in this paper.
Curvature κ1is infinite. Curvature κ2is 1/0.0695 m=14.388
m−1and curvature κ3is 1/0.035 m=28.571 m−1.
scan settings included: a 0.625 mm slice interval, 22.6 cm
field of scan, and 512 ×512 pixel resolution. To start the FE
analysis, DICOM images were first imported into MIMICS
software (Materialise, Leuven, Belgium), and segmented
with a threshold of 100 HU before being smoothed [15]. The
3D surface model of the vertebra was then exported as an
STL into 3D CAD modelling software (SolidWorks, Dassault
Systemes S.A., USA). Subsequently, as shown in Fig. 2, for
our analysis in this paper, three different trajectories were
designed and implanted with their corresponding simplified
screws following three Trajectories called Trajectory 1-3
throughout the paper. As can be seen, Trajectory 1 was
a straight reference trajectory for a rigid pedicle screw
while Trajectory 2 and 3 were curved trajectories for an
implanted flexible pedicle screws curved at 25 mm from the
posterior end with curvatures of 14.388 m−1and 28.571 m−1,
respectively (Fig. 2). After designing trajectories, a screw
with simplified geometry (D = 2.5 mm, L = 55 mm) was
implanted into the considered vertebral trajectories. Next, the
designed geometries were imported into Hypermesh software
(Altair Engineering, Troy, MI, USA) and meshed using 4-
node tetrahedral elements with average element size of 0.8
mm [16]. To increase simulation accuracy, common node
method was used on the interface of the vertebra and screws.
To simulate the heterogeneity of the bone material dis-
tribution, the elastic modulus of each bone element was
estimated directly from the QCT data by (i) converting the
Hounsfield value of element nodes to their density values,
ρ=1.122∗HU +47 [17] and then (ii) converting them
into the corresponding elastic modulus (cancellous bone:
E=0.63ρ1.35; cortical bone: E=1.89ρ1.35) [18] and lastly
(iii) taking the average of nodes density. The Hounsfield
value used to separate the cortical and the cancellous bone
was set at 1800 [19]. The average values of the elastic
modulus for the cancellous and cortical bone were roughly
2500 and 15,000 MPa, respectively. The material of screw
was simulated as stainless steel with the elastic modulus set
to 200 GPa [20]. All materials were assumed to be linear
and isotropic, with the Poisson ratio set to 0.3 [21].
2) FE model and boundary conditions: The meshed ge-
ometries of the vertebra and screws were imported into the
Abaqus software (Dassault Systemes S.A., USA). Loading
and boundary conditions were taken from literature in-vitro
studies [22] with a distributed downward force of 400 NFig. 3: Loading condition on finite element model.
[23] applied on the superior endplate of the vertebral body
while the end of the pedicle screw was clamped, as shown
in Fig. 3. The interface was modeled as a surface-to-surface
contact interaction with friction coefficient of 0.2 [24]. The
biomechanical performance of the designed trajectories were
investigated using the maximum stress and strain criteria in
cancellous bone where the screw loosening and pulling out
happens [25].
A. FE Simulation and Results
To better illustrate the stress distribution in the cancellous
bone, the upper limit of the legend was set to 10 MPa in Fig.
4. The results shows that besides the high stress region in the
pedicle region, there was a high stress region in cancellous
bone for all three trajectories. However, the maximum stress
of Trajectory 2 was significantly lower than the Trajectory 1
and Trajectory 3 (Fig. 4(b)). More specifically, the maximum
stress in cancellous bone region were calculated as 1.01
GPa, 0.20 GPa, and 0.34 GPa for Trajectory 1- Trajec-
tory 3, respectively. Moreover, to investigate the failure of
cancellous bone, strain distribution of the trajectory section
was illustrated in Fig. 5. The maximum strain was set to
1e-3. Although, all three trajectories showed high strain
regions in cancellous bone, Trajectory 2 (Fig. 5(b)) had
least maximum strain area in comparison with the other
trajectories which implies lower potential of cancellous bone
failure. The strain for the three trajectories were obtained
as 9.11e-2, 2.05e-2, and 2.129e-2. Based on this analysis,
therefore, we considered Trajectory 2 as a biomechanically-
aware desired trajectory for the design of the CT-SDR.
IV. D ESIGN OF THE CT-SDR
As mentioned, to meet the mentioned design requirements
and inspired by the concentric tube robots (e.g., [12], [13],
[26]), we propose a CT-SDR. As shown in Fig. 6, the pro-
posed CT-SDR includes three main components, (i) flexible
components to guide the drill through the optimal Trajectory
2 obtained in section III-A while providing the strength to
resist buckling; (ii) a flexible shaft to transmit torque from
the drill motor to the drill’s tip; and (iii) an actuation system
to allow the surgeon to reliably control the system. The
following sections will discuss these three components and
how they meet the design requirements set forth in this paper.
A. Concentric Guiding Tubes
As shown in Fig. 6, to provide simultaneous flexibility
and structural stiffness, we propose utilizing two concentric
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Fig. 4: Stress distribution of the three considered trajectories.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Fig. 5: Strain distribution of the three considered trajectories.
tubes including one rigid stainless steel to function as the
outer tube and one pre-curved nitinol to act as the inner
flexible tube. Notably, nitinol is a superelastic, biocompati-
ble, shape memory alloy comprised of nickel and titanium
which is being used with a growing frequency for medical
technologies and instruments. Within the design, the stainless
steel is static, while the nitinol tube is actuated through it.
When at its starting position, the nitinol is constrained to a
straight trajectory matching that of the stainless steel tube it
is held within. As the nitinol tube is actuated forward and out
of its stainless steel counterpart, the tube returns to its pre-
curved shape, and guides any flexible tools housed within
it to do the same. To program the biomechanically-optimal
drilling Trajectory 2 obtained in section III-A, the 70 mm
long NiTi tube (Euroflex GmbH, Germany) was heat treated
in a furnace, and then nested within a straight stainless steel
tube (89895K421, McMaster-Carr) with 80 mm length, outer
diameter of 3.175 mm, and 1.25 mm wall thickness. The
outer diameter of the nitinol tube was 3.61 mm with the wall
thickness 0.25 mm (Euroflex GmbH, Germany). This piece
was rigidly attached to the linear stage of the actuation unit
to control the insertion of the CT-SDR’s tip. Fig. 6 shows
the heat treated nitinol tube based on the obtained desired
trajectory and curvature in section III-A. Of note, due to
spring-back in the heat treated NiTi material, the resulting
guide had a radius of 71.1 mm ( κ=14.065m−1), which
is slightly less than the desired biomechanically-obtained
curvature κ=14.388m−1, shown in Fig. 2.
B. Flexible Shaft
Each flexible cutting tool is comprised of 3 parts: a
straight tube/rod to be grasped by the actuation unit’s motors,
a flexible torque coil to transmit power along the curved
drilling trajectories, and a rigid drill tip capable of cutting
in multiple directions. The pieces were rigidly attached
together using an epoxy adhesive (1813A243, McMaster-
Carr). Two different tools were assembled to evaluate the
influence of different factors on the performance of the CT-
SDR. The first tool comprised of a stainless steel rod of
diameter 1.56 mm (888915K11, McMaster-Carr), a 70 mm
length torque coil (Asahi Intec. USA, Inc.), and a 6.35 mmFig. 6: Breakdown of the CT-SDR design along with details of the experimental set-up. (A) shows the C-arm X-ray machine,
its position during testing and the view shown during experimentation. (B) displays the CT-SDR with labels of critical parts
of the actuation unit. (C) shows a closer view of a NiTi guide positioning the drill tip in free space. (D) shows the NiTi
guide used in this paper and the 2 drill bits used in our experiments, crucial to the flexible cutting mechanism.
diameter carbide oval/egg head bur (42955A35, McMaster-
Carr) modified after purchase to have a shank of 1.5-2 mm
diameter and 8 mm in length with a cutting length of 10
mm (Fig. 6). The second tool different from the first in that
is utilized a brass tube of diameter 1.56 mm (8859K231,
McMaster-Carr), and a 6.75 mm diameter carbide ball nose
end mill (8878A42, McMaster-Carr).
C. Actuation Unit
The actuation unit of the CT-SDR consists of a linear stage
with a linear ball screw (B085TG12D1, Amazon) controlled
by a NEMA 17 stepper motor to provide the insertion DoF
of the drill’s tip, a mini electric hand drill (B075SZZN4J,
Amazon) to control the drill rotational/cutting speed, and 3D
resin printed mounts and supports. An Arduino R3 micro-
controller board and custom-written program controlled the
stepper motor’s motion and thus the linear speed of the stage.
The provided controller for the electric hand drill controlled
the drill bit’s rotational speed. Of key importance in the CT-
SDR’s design was the alignment of the concentric tubes with
one another and the force required to actuate the nitinol
tube through the constraining stainless steel. The NEMA
17 stepper motor allowed for a compact design that met
the listed requirements while allowing for precise control of
the system throughout testing. To ensure concentricity, the
3D printed supports rigidly held various parts of the design
aligned and stabilized the entire system by mounting to an
optical board.
V. CT-SDR E VALUATION EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A. Experimental Set-Up
We designed the test set-up shown in Fig. 6 to best repli-
cate the procedure a surgeon would follow in the operatingroom A Sawbone biomechanical bone model phantom (block
10 PCF, Pacific Research Laboratories, USA) was secured
in front of the CT-SDR as if a surgeon had aligned it with
the entry point of the patient’s pedicle. Notably, PCF 10
was selected as it simulates bone with medium osteoporosis
[27]. The test then began with the tip of the CT-SDR cutting
a trajectory through the test sample, while the test’s progress
was monitored with a C-arm X-ray machine (OEC One
CFD, GE Healthcare) set up perpendicular to the cutting
plane of the CT-SDR. As the CT-SDR was actuated through
the sample, the C-arm was able to show the location of
the drill tip, steering cannula, and cutting trajectory. This
allowed us to monitor the test in real time and presented
a second avenue of data collection/analysis after the test’s
conclusion. An additional camera was set up separate from
the other components to track cutting time and review the
drill’s performance after the test’s conclusion.
B. Drilling Experiments
The experiments run with the CT-SDR were designed to
evaluate the system’s ability to match the requirements set
forth in section IV and the Trajectory 2 evaluated in section
III-A. The repeatability and predictability of the cutting
trajectory was of particular interest during these experiments.
During initial testing with the CT-SDR, and in line with
similar studies performed on compliant drilling devices [8],
[10], [11], several factors were determined to have a potential
effect on the system during a procedure: (1) the insertion
speed of the guiding tube, (2) the rotational speed of the drill
tip, (3) the geometry of the drill tip. To evaluate these factors,
two different experiments were performed and thoroughly
evaluated with two different flexible instruments.Fig. 7: Experimental Result Analysis. View of 3D CAD
measurements of mid-line cross section of tests run with the
0.85 mm/s insertion speed and a drill speed of 8250 rpm.
Also shown is the reference measurement used to calibrate
the 3D scan.
After initial testings with the CT-SDR, we determined that
a range of insertion speeds would be evaluated to identify
their effect on the drill’s performance: 0.5, 0.85, 1.25 mm/s.
Along with three different rotational speeds of the drill’s tip:
6000, 8250, 10,600 rpm. Starting with the oval head drill tip,
a total of 30 tests were performed; 5 different tests for the
above ranges each repeated 3 times. In these tests, the cutting
plane was held fixed, parallel to the optical table on which the
CT-SDR was mounted. After the conclusion of these tests,
the ball nose end mill was evaluated with insertion speeds
of 0.85 and 1.25 mm/s, and a drilling speed of 8250 rpm. In
each trial, the CT-SDR was advanced for the full length of the
heat treated NiTi trajectory while the C-arm (intermittently)
and the external camera (continuously) recorded the test’s
progress. After the completion of testing, the Sawbone test
samples were cut along the midline of the entrance holes and
photographed using a digital microscope (Jiusion, China).
The images were then analyzed using a 3D CAD Software
(SolidWorks, Dassault Syst `emes) to determine the radius
of curvature for each test and how they compare to the
actual and ideal trajectories of the NiTi guides. Fig. 7 shows
the view of the cross sections along with the 3D software
measurements.
To explore further applications of the CT-SDR, we decided
to test the system’s ability to reach different goal points
from a single entry location, or out of plane branch drilling.
This would minimize any unnecessary material removal and
bone weakening caused by multiple entry points and extra
drillings [8]. Based on the results from the previous drilling
experiments, these tests were performed with an insertion
speed of 0.85 mm/s, a rotational speed of 8250 rpm, and with
both drilling instruments. The C-arm used in the Trajectory 2
cutting experiments is useful primarily for 2D images/views
across a test sample, but is not ideal for visualization in 3D
space. Therefore, to create clear and succinct visualization
of the branched tests, each drilled out sample was filled with
plaster (B08XW9ML9P, Amazon), treating the Sawbone
sample as if it were a mold to be removed after hardening.
The plaster model was then scanned into 3D CAD software
(SolidWorks, Dassault Syst `emes) using a laser 3D scanner
(Artec Space Spider, Artec 3D Inc.). The created 3D model
shown in Fig. 8 is the results of this process, and allowed us
to quantitatively measure the trajectory’s radius of curvature,
Fig. 8: (Left) Plaster mold of a branch test, along with the
widths of each path drilled and the reference measurement
used to calibrate the software. (Right) 3D Rendered view of
the same branch test completed with Trajectory 2, along with
the measured mid-lines.
length, and cut diameter in the laboratory without requiring
complex imaging procedures such as a CT scan.
VI. D ISCUSSION
The tests performed by the CT-SDR were designed to as-
sess the repeatability and consistency of the drilled Trajectory
2 as prescribed by the biomechanics analyzed in section III-
A and then compared to the results discussed in previous
works (i.e., [6], [8], [10], [11]). This was accomplished by
analyzing the cross sections of the drilled pathways after
experimentation (shown in Fig. 7). The heat treated NiTi
guide tube had an error between the actual shape and the
biomechanically-obtained of 2.3%. When drilling, every test
had a standard deviation <0.75 mm, a minimum error of
1.7%, and a maximum error of 2.2% when compared to
the actual shape of the nitinol guide. The highest error was
recorded from the tests using the 0.85 mm/s insertion speed
and 8250 rpm drill speed, and the lowest error was seen in
the trials using the same drill speed but with an insertion
of 1.25 mm/s. When changing to the ball nose end mill,
the trajectory errors did not shift from the range seen with
the oval head bur. An average error of 3.0% was measured.
Differences in hole width was recorded between the two drill
types, with the oval head having a hole width of 8.3 mm and
the ball nose end mill having a hole width of 7.83 mm.
In Fig. 8, the surface of the drilling trajectories is best
visualized. The smoothness can be both seen and felt from
the plaster model, which demonstrates the limited vibrations
in the system which would cause ridges and waves in the
trajectories surface. Also shown in Fig. 8 are the radius
measurements of the drilled trajectories from a shared entry
point, these paths have an average radius of 70.8 mm, which
reveals only a 2% difference from the NiTi guide’s actual
radius. This result confirms the repeatability and consistency
of the CT-SDR’s ability to drill these curved trajectories both
in and out of plane.
VII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Toward reducing the failure rate of spinal fixation pro-
cedures in osteoporotic patients, we proposed a novel
biomechanically-aware design for a novel CT-SDR. The
proposed design leverages a patient-specific biomechanics
model developed based on QCT scans of patient’s vertebrato minimize the risk of a spinal fixation procedure by consid-
ering a biomechanically-optimal and feasible drilling trajec-
tory. Using the outputs of the FE framework, we designed
a robot that can address the contradictory requirements of
both the structural stiffness and adequate flexibility needed
to deviate from the traditional linear pathways. The FE
biomechanical analysis showed that utilization of flexible
implants in an optimal curved trajectory can improve the
stress and strains distribution in a patient’s vertebra by 80.1%
and 77.5%. Additionally, the results of testing the CT-SDR
demonstrated a consistent drilling of both single and multiple
drillings curved trajectories through Sawbone samples with
an error between 0.14-4.1% with respect to the planned
trajectory by the NiTi guides. In the future, we will explore
the biomechanics of more complex trajectories for flexible
instruments implanted within a patient’s vertebra. We will
also consider biomechanics of implanted screws drilled via
a CT-SDR with additional degrees of freedom [28].
REFERENCES
[1] R. Burge, B. Dawson-Hughes, D. H. Solomon, J. B. Wong, A. King,
and A. Tosteson, “Incidence and economic burden of osteoporosis-
related fractures in the united states, 2005–2025,” Journal of bone
and mineral research , vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 465–475, 2007.
[2] O. Johnell and J. Kanis, “An estimate of the worldwide prevalence
and disability associated with osteoporotic fractures,” Osteoporosis
international , vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 1726–1733, 2006.
[3] L. Weiser, G. Huber, K. Sellenschloh, L. Viezens, K. P ¨uschel, M. M.
Morlock, and W. Lehmann, “Insufficient stability of pedicle screws
in osteoporotic vertebrae: biomechanical correlation of bone mineral
density and pedicle screw fixation strength,” European Spine Journal ,
vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 2891–2897, 2017.
[4] M. Bakhtiarinejad, F. Alambeigi, A. Chamani, M. Unberath,
H. Khanuja, and M. Armand, “A biomechanical study on the use of
curved drilling technique for treatment of osteonecrosis of femoral,”
Computational Biomechanics for Medicine: Personalisation, Valida-
tion and Therapy , p. 87, 2019.
[5] F. Alambeigi, M. Bakhtiarinejad, A. Azizi, R. Hegeman, I. Iordachita,
H. Khanuja, and M. Armand, “Inroads toward robot-assisted internal
fixation of bone fractures using a bendable medical screw and the
curved drilling technique,” in 2018 7th IEEE International Conference
on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (Biorob) . IEEE, 2018,
pp. 595–600.
[6] F. Alambeigi, M. Bakhtiarinejad, S. Sefati, R. Hegeman, I. Iordachita,
H. Khanuja, and M. Armand, “On the use of a continuum manipulator
and a bendable medical screw for minimally invasive interventions
in orthopedic surgery,” IEEE transactions on medical robotics and
bionics , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 14–21, 2019.
[7] F. Alambeigi, Y . Wang, R. J. Murphy, I. Iordachita, and M. Armand,
“Toward robot-assisted hard osteolytic lesion treatment using a con-
tinuum manipulator,” in 2016 38th Annual International Conference
of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) .
IEEE, 2016, pp. 5103–5106.
[8] F. Alambeigi, Y . Wang, S. Sefati, C. Gao, R. J. Murphy, I. Iordachita,
R. H. Taylor, H. Khanuja, and M. Armand, “A curved-drilling ap-
proach in core decompression of the femoral head osteonecrosis using
a continuum manipulator,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1480–1487, 2017.
[9] F. Alambeigi and M. Armand, “Steerable drill for minimally-invasive
surgery,” Jan. 2 2020, uS Patent App. 16/490,751.
[10] J. H. Ma, S. Sefati, R. H. Taylor, and M. Armand, “An active steering
hand-held robotic system for minimally invasive orthopaedic surgery
using a continuum manipulator,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1622–1629, 2021.
[11] Y . Wang, H.-W. Yip, H. Zheng, H. Lin, R. Taylor, and K. W. S.
Au, “Design and experimental validation of a miniaturized robotic
tendon-driven articulated surgical drill for enhancing distal dexterity
in minimally invasive spine fusion,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on
Mechatronics , 2021.[12] P. E. Dupont, J. Lock, B. Itkowitz, and E. Butler, “Design and control
of concentric-tube robots,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 26,
no. 2, pp. 209–225, 2009.
[13] R. J. Webster III and B. A. Jones, “Design and kinematic modeling
of constant curvature continuum robots: A review,” The International
Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 29, no. 13, pp. 1661–1683, 2010.
[14] W. A. Kalender, D. Felsenberg, H. K. Genant, M. Fischer,
J. Dequeker, and J. Reeve, “The european spine phantom —
a tool for standardization and quality control in spinal bone
mineral measurements by dxa and qct,” European Journal of
Radiology , vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 83–92, 1995. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0720048X9500631Y
[15] A. Mastmeyer, K. Engelke, C. Fuchs, and W. A. Kalender, “A
hierarchical 3d segmentation method and the definition of vertebral
body coordinate systems for qct of the lumbar spine,” Medical
Image Analysis , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 560–577, 2006, special Issue
on Functional Imaging and Modelling of the Heart (FIMH 2005).
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1361841506000363
[16] E. Wagnac, P.-J. Arnoux, A. Garo, and C.-E. Aubin, “Finite element
analysis of the influence of loading rate on a model of the full
lumbar spine under dynamic loading conditions,” Medical & biological
engineering & computing , vol. 50, pp. 903–15, 05 2012.
[17] P. Jain and M. R. Khan, “Biomechanical Study of Fused Lumbar
Spine Considering Bone Degeneracy Using FEA,” Arabian Journal
for Science and Engineering , vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1325–1334, Mar.
2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13369-017-2848-9
[18] M. Porter and A. Summers, “Biochemical and structural properties of
the cartilaginous vertebral column of sharks,” 12 2003, pp. 828–828.
[19] J.-Y . Rho, M. Hobatho, and R. Ashman, “Relations of mechanical
properties to density and ct numbers in human bone,” Medical engi-
neering & physics , vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 347–355, 1995.
[20] T. H. Lim, J. C. Eck, H. S. An, J. Hong, J. Ahn, and J. W. You,
“Biomechanics of transfixation in pedicle screw instrumentation,”
Spine , vol. 21, p. 2224–2229, 1996.
[21] W. Skalli, S. Robin, F. Lavaste, and J. Dubousset, “A biomechanical
analysis of short segment spinal fixation using a three-dimensional
geometric and mechanical model.” Spine , vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 536–545,
1993.
[22] T. McKinley, R. McLain, S. Yerby, N. Sarigul-Klijn,
and T. Smith, “The effect of pedicle morphometry on
pedicle screw loading. a synthetic model,” Spine , vol. 22,
no. 3, p. 246—252, February 1997. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1097/00007632-199702010-00003
[23] A. Rohlmann, F. Graichen, U. Weber, and G. Bergmann, “2000 volvo
award winner in biomechanical studies: Monitoring in vivo implant
loads with a telemeterized internal spinal fixation device,” Spine ,
vol. 25, no. 23, p. 2981—2986, December 2000. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1097/00007632-200012010-00004
[24] S.-I. Chen, R.-M. Lin, and C.-H. Chang, “Biomechanical investigation
of pedicle screw–vertebrae complex: a finite element approach using
bonded and contact interface conditions,” Medical engineering &
physics , vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 275–282, 2003.
[25] E. Rometsch, M. Spruit, J. E. Zigler, V . K. Menon, J. A. Ouellet,
C. Mazel, R. H ¨artl, K. Espinoza, and F. Kandziora, “Screw-related
complications after instrumentation of the osteoporotic spine: a sys-
tematic literature review with meta-analysis,” Global spine journal ,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 69–88, 2020.
[26] J. Burgner-Kahrs, D. C. Rucker, and H. Choset, “Continuum robots
for medical applications: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics ,
vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1261–1280, 2015.
[27] A. C ¸ etin and D. A. Bircan, “Experimental investigation of pull-out
performance of pedicle screws at different polyurethane (pu) foam
densities,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers,
Part H: Journal of Engineering in Medicine , vol. 235, no. 6, pp. 709–
716, 2021.
[28] S. Sharma, J. H. Park, J. P. Amadio, M. Khadem, and F. Alambeigi,
“A novel concentric tube steerable drilling robot for minimally in-
vasive treatment of spinal tumors using cavity and u-shape drilling
techniques,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) , 2023, pp. 1–7.