Ethical Considerations for Machine Translation of Indigenous Languages:
Giving a Voice to the Speakers
Manuel Mager♡∗Elisabeth Mager♯
Katharina Kann♠Ngoc Thang Vu♢
♡AWS AI Labs♯Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
♠University of Colorado Boulder♢University of Stuttgart
Abstract
In recent years machine translation has be-
come very successful for high-resource lan-
guage pairs. This has also sparked new interest
in research on the automatic translation of low-
resource languages, including Indigenous lan-
guages. However, the latter are deeply related
to the ethnic and cultural groups that speak (or
used to speak) them. The data collection, mod-
eling and deploying machine translation sys-
tems thus result in new ethical questions that
must be addressed. Motivated by this, we first
survey the existing literature on ethical consid-
erations for the documentation, translation, and
general natural language processing for Indige-
nous languages. Afterward, we conduct and
analyze an interview study to shed light on the
positions of community leaders, teachers, and
language activists regarding ethical concerns
for the automatic translation of their languages.
Our results show that the inclusion, at differ-
ent degrees, of native speakers and community
members is vital to performing better and more
ethical research on Indigenous languages.
1 Introduction
With the advancement of data-driven machine trans-
lation (MT) systems, it has become possible to,
with varying degrees of quality, to translate be-
tween any pair of languages. The only precondition
is the availability of enough monolingual (Lample
et al., 2018; Artetxe et al., 2018) or parallel data
(Vaswani et al., 2017; Bahdanau et al., 2015). There
are many advantages to having high-performing
MT systems. For example, they increase access to
information for speakers of indigenous languages
(Mager et al., 2018) and can assist revitalization
efforts for these languages (Zhang et al., 2022).
Research on machine translation as well as nat-
ural language processing (NLP) more generally is
moving towards low-resourced setups and multilin-
gual models. Thus, the NLP community needs to
∗Work done while at the University of Stuttgart.open the discussion of repercussions and best prac-
tices for research on indigenous languages (that
in most cases are also low-resourced) since non-
artificial languages cannot exist without a commu-
nity of people that use (or have traditionally used)
them to communicate.
Indigenous languages further differ from more
widely used ones in a crucial way: they are com-
monly spoken by small communities, and many
communities use their language (besides other fea-
tures) as a delimiter to define their own identity
(Palacios, 2008; Enríquez, 2019), and have in many
cases also a certain degree of endangerment. Fur-
thermore, in some cases, highly sensitive infor-
mation – such as secret aspects of their religion –
has been encoded with the help of their language
(Barron-Romero et al., 2016). This is why, in re-
cent years, discussions around ethical approaches
to studying endangered languages have been started
(Smith, 2021; Liu et al., 2022). When we consider
the past (and present) of some of the communities
that speak these languages, we will find a colo-
nial history, where research is not the exception
(Bird, 2020). Therefore, it is possible to trespass
on ethical limits when using typical NLP and data
collection methodologies (Dwyer, 2006).
In this work, we explore the basic concepts of
ethics related to MT of endangered languages with
a special focus on Indigenous communities, survey-
ing previous work on the topic. To better under-
stand the expectations and concerns related to the
development of MT systems for Indigenous com-
munities, we then conducted an interview study
with 22 language activists, language teachers, and
community leaders who are members of Indige-
nous communities from the Americas. Addition-
ally, we also performed 1:1 dialogues with two
study participants to deepen our understanding of
the matter. The goal is to answer the following
research questions: How do community members
want to be involved in the MT process, and why?arXiv:2305.19474v1  [cs.CL]  31 May 2023Are there sensible topics that are not ethical to
translate, model, or collect data without the com-
munity’s explicit permission? How can we collect
data in an ethical way?
Surprisingly, most survey participants positively
view MT for their languages. However, they be-
lieve research on their languages should be done
in close collaboration with community members.
Open access to research discoveries and resources
is also valued highly, as well as the high quality of
the resulting translations. The personal interviews
also confirmed this. Thus, our most important find-
ing is that it is crucial to work closely with the
communities to understand delicate ethical topics
when developing MT systems for endangered lan-
guages.
A Spanish translation of this paper is included
in Appendix C. This translation aims to share our
findings with all study participants and their com-
munities and facilitate access to a broader audience
in the Americas.
2 Defining “Endangered Language”
Terms frequently used in NLP are low-resource lan-
guage ,resource-poor language , and low-resource
setting . Those terms are not highlighting the fact
that many low-resource languages are also endan-
gered (Liu et al., 2022). Instead, they empha-
size the critical machine learning problem of get-
ting a data-driven approach to perform well with
a smaller-than-ideal amount of available data (or
just fewer data than what has been used for other
languages). In this case, algorithmic or techno-
logical innovations are needed to close the perfor-
mance gap between high-resource and resource-
poor languages. This further implies that being
low-resourced is not a property of a language but
a term that only makes sense in the context of a
particular task or tasks.
In contrast, the term endangered language refers
to a language with a certain degree of danger for its
existence.1Endangered languages are relevant for
our study, as most Indigenous languages are also en-
dangered (Hale, 1992). According to the UNESCO
classification, (Moseley, 2010) languages can be
sorted into the following different categories:
•safe: spoken by all generations;
1In this paper, we will discuss only non-artificially created
languages.•vulnerable : restricted just to a certain domain
(e.g., inside the family);
•definitely endangered : it has no kids that
speak the language;
•severely endangered : only elder people speak
it;
•critical endangered : there are only speakers
left with partial knowledge, and they use it
infrequently;
•extinct , when there are no persons able to
speak the language anymore.
Languages can become endangered due to so-
cial, cultural, and political reasons; most commonly
conquests and wars, economic pressures, language
policies from political powers, assimilation of the
dominant culture, discrimination, and language
standardization (Austin and Sallabank, 2013). As
we can see, the problem of how a language gets en-
dangered involves factors that must be addressed in
the ethical approach of any study. On the machine
learning side, an additional challenge arises: data
for endangered languages is not easily available (or,
in fact, available at all), as these languages have
limited media production (TV shows, literature, in-
ternet blogs; Hämäläinen, 2021). One possible
source of data for these languages is already ex-
isting documents in form of books, records, and
archives (Bustamante et al., 2020).
3 Ethics and MT
3.1 Ethics and Data
The study of endangered languages in indigenous
communities has a long history, with the most
prominent questions being focused mainly on the
challenge of data collection (Smith, 2021).
One of the common forms of this is to use nor-
mative ethics (deontology). Examples of relevant
guidelines include those from The Australian Insti-
tute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Stud-
ies;2the Ethical statement of the Linguistic Society
of America;3and the DOBES code of conduct.4
These lists are the results of broad discussions
2https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/264
79543.pdf
3https://www.linguisticsociety.org/co
ntent/lsa-revised-ethics-statement -app
roved-july-2019
4https://dobes.mpi.nl/ethical_legal_a
spects/DOBES-coc-v2.pdfwhich have taken place over decades. In this de-
bate also, indigenous voices were inside academia
raised (Smith, 2021).
But why do we have so many attempts to set
up an ethical code for linguistic fieldwork? When
it comes to working with human societies, there
are no easy solutions for the ethical dilemmas that
arise (Dwyer, 2006). Every situation requires a
unique treatment and compromise. This is why,
in addition to the creation of a framework which
is as general as possible, the concrete application
of such principles involves continued discussion.
Dwyer (2006) suggests documenting the ethical
issues and concerns which arise during the course
of a research project and the way these issues are
addressed, such that other researchers can learn
from the experience. While a code of conduct or
principles is good, it runs the risk of introducing
either overly complicated – or even inadequate –
regulations, relegating this needed discussion.
Overall, we can summarize those principles that
appear in all suggested lists under three big themes:
•Consultation, Negotiation and Mutual Under-
standing . The right to consultation of Indige-
nous people is stipulated in convention 167
of the International Labor Organization (Ilo,
1989) and states that they “have the right to
preserve and develop their own institutions,
languages, and cultures”. Therefore, inform-
ing the community about the planned research,
negotiating a possible outcome, and reaching
a mutual agreement on the directions and de-
tails of the project should happen in all cases.
•Respect of the local culture and involvement .
As each community has its own culture and
view of the world, researchers – as well as
any governing organizations interested in the
project – should be familiar with the history
and traditions of the community. Also, it
should be recommended that local researchers,
speakers, or internal governments should be
involved in the project.
•Sharing and distribution of data and research .
The product of the research should be avail-
able for use by the community, so they can
take advantage of the generated materials, like
papers, books, or data.
Some of these commonly agreed-on principles
need to be adapted to concrete situations, whichmight not be easy to do via a general approach.
For instance, the documentation process will cre-
ate data, and the ownership of this data is a major
source of discussion (cf. Sections 4, 5). Here, the
traditional views of the communities might contra-
dict the juridical system of a country (Daes, 1993).
This problem does not have a simple solution and
needs to be carefully considered when collecting
data.
An additional call from these sources is to de-
colonize research and to stop viewing Indigenous
communities as sources of data, but rather as people
with their own history (Smith, 2021). The current
divorce between researchers and the cultural units
of the communities can lead to reinforcing colonial
legacy (Leonard, 2020).
As a final remark, we want to discuss the com-
mon assumption that any Ethical discussion must
end with a normative setup for a field. It reduces in-
digenous institutions’ collective to norms that allow
an individual approach to the matter (Meza Salcedo,
2017). This would also not allow understanding
the ethical questions with their own Indigenous
communal cosmovision (Salcedo, 2016). There-
fore, in this text, we aim to open the MT ethical
debate to the NLP researchers and the Indigenous
communities based on inclusion and dialog.
3.2 Ethics and Human Translation
For a successful translation, the inclusion of all
participants is important, requiring their equal, in-
formal, and understanding-oriented participation
(Nissing and Müller, 2009). For Rachels and
Rachels (1986), the minimum conception of moral-
ity is that when we give “equal weight to the in-
terests of each individual affected by one’s deci-
sion.” The question is how authors’ intentions re-
late to the source culture’s otherness, with their
culturally-specific values (Chesterman, 2001). Ac-
cording to Doherty (2016), “the translation process
studies emerged to focus on the translator and the
process of translation rather than on the end prod-
uct,” incorporating mixed-method designs to get
objective observations. A well-documented exam-
ple of the non-ethical misuse of translation is the
application of translation as an instrument for colo-
nial domination. The main aim of this colonialist
vision was to “civilize the savages” (Ludescher,
2001). For example, the summer institute of lin-
guistics (SIL International)5was used for this goal
5SIL International describes itself as “.. a global, faith-
based nonprofit that works with local communities around theduring the 20th century in countries with Indige-
nous cultures, translating the Bible and trying to
provoke a cultural change6in these communities
(DelValls, 1978; Errington, 2001; Carey, 2010).
Of course, these practices are not new and can be
found throughout history (Gilmour, 2007). It is es-
sential to notice that non-ethical research can still
deliver useful material and knowledge, e.g., for lan-
guage revitalization (Premsrirat and Malone, 2003),
but might inflict harm on the targeted community.
3.3 Ethics and Machine Translation
In the context of NLP research, the speakers are not
directly involved when a model is trained (Pavlick
et al., 2014). In contrast, the data collection pro-
cesses (Fort et al., 2011) and human evaluation
(Couillault et al., 2014) directly interact with the
speakers and, therefore, have central importance
regarding ethics. This is also true for the final trans-
lation service, which will interact with the broad
public.
Data collection is the first and most evident issue
when it comes to translation. Modern neural MT
systems require a large amount of parallel data
to be trained optimally (Junczys-Dowmunt, 2019).
One way to obtain data is from crowd-sourcing
(Fort et al., 2011). However, this kind of job can
be ill-paid and might constitute a problem for the
living conditions of the workers (Schmidt, 2013).
Also, data privacy is not trivial to handle. Systems
must be able to filter sensitive information.
The problem of encoding biases7, like gender
bias (Stanovsky et al., 2019), is also an ethical
concern for MT. It is also necessary to disclose the
world to develop language solutions that expand possibilities
for a better life. SIL’s core contribution areas are Bible trans-
lation, literacy, education, development, linguistic research,
and language tools.”. https://www.sil.org/
6The role of SIL is controversial, and can not be summa-
rized with one single statement. In our approach, we only refer
to the role played related to cultural change. In many cases, the
communities that got religious texts translated were already
Christians, given previous colonization actions. However,
there are also cases, where non-christian communities had
Bibles and other religious texts translated into their language,
with missionary aims. This triggered community divisions.
For example, the translation of the religious texts to Wixarika
(Fernández, 2022). This also happened in the Community of
Zoquipan (in the Mexican state of Nayarit), where Christians,
using the SIL-translated Bible, triggered an internal conflict
in the community (the first author is part of this community).
For the interested reader, we also recommend Dobrin (2009)
introductory article.
7It is also important to note the typological features that
might make this challenging. One example are polysynthetic
languages and languages without gender coding (Klavans,
2018).limitations and issues with certain systems (Leidner
and Plachouras, 2017).
NLP research can also be used as a political in-
strument of power, where we can observe mutual
relationships between language, society, and the
individual that “are also the source for the societal
impact factors of NLP” (Horváth et al., 2017). In
this way, NLP translation can be applied as an in-
strument to changing the culture of minorities as
in traditional translation (cf. Section 3.2). So col-
onizers used translation as means of imperial con-
trol and expropriation (Cheyfitz, 1997; Niranjana,
1992). The asymmetry of power is the cause of
domination, where subaltern cultures being flooded
with “foreign materials and foreign language im-
positions” is a real danger for minority cultures
(Tymoczko, 2006). Schwartz (2022) discuss the
need to decolonize the scientific approach of the
NLP community as a whole, expressing the need
for researchers to be cognizant of the history and
the cultural aspects of the communities which use
the languages they are working with. Addition-
ally, he proposes that our research should have
an obligation to provide some benefit from our
studies to the communities, an obligation of ac-
countability (and therefore be in direct contact with
their governing organizations), and an obligation
of non-maleficence. The fact that many translation
systems nowadays are multilingual8also result in
more multi-cultural challenges (Hershcovich et al.,
2022).
Finally, we also want to highlight the importance
of discussing MT systems in a text-to-text setup.
The usage of text is constrained to certain topics
and varies from community to community. For
instance, Wixarika and Quechua, languages that
are spoken across all generations, are used in a
written fashion mostly in private messaging apps
(like WhatsApp) but also have a prolific Meme and
Facebook publication generation9. Even if a certain
community does not widely adopt the written tradi-
tion, there are, at minimum legal obligations of the
States towards indigenous languages. For example,
some constitutions recognize indigenous languages
as national languages (e.g., Mexico and Bolivia),
8Multilingual systems refer in NLP to systems capable of
translating a set of languages from and to English. In some
cases, they are also able to translate between languages where
English is not involved.
9For example, Wixarika memes: https://www.face
book.com/memeswixarika2019 , Quechua speaking
group: https://www.facebook.com/groups/71
1230846397383/binding the state to the responsibility to translate
all official pages, documents, laws, etc., to indige-
nous languages. This has not been implemented,
and this case is a highly valuable application case
for machine translation to assist human translation.
However, our findings also apply to speech-to-text
translation and speech-to-speech tasks that would
cover all languages, even with no written tradition.
4 The Speakers’ Opinions
It is important to include the opinion and vision of
speakers of endangered languages in NLP research,
especially for topics such as MT. Therefore, we
conduct a survey study with 22 language activists,
teachers, and community leaders from the Amer-
icas. Importantly, our primary goal is not only to
gather quantitative input on the ethical questions
regarding MT for their languages but also to col-
lect qualitative input by asking them to expand on
their answers. Additionally, we also perform an
interview with a subset of two participants of the
initial interview study.
4.1 Study Design
We focus our study on the Americas,10selecting the
following communities: Aymara, Chatino, Maya,
Mazatec, Mixe, Nahua, Otomí, Quechua, Tenek,
Tepehuano, Kichwa of Otavalo, and Zapotec. We
want to note that our study does not aim to represent
a general opinion of all Indigenous tribes, nor is it
a final general statement on the issue. It is a case
study that surfaces the opinions of specific groups
of speakers of Indigenous languages. Furthermore,
the views of the interviewed individuals are their
own and do not necessarily represent the view of
their tribes, nations, or communities.
Quantitative and Qualitative aspects For the
quantitative study, we used a survey. Surveys are a
well-established technique to be used with Indige-
nous communities with an extensive history and are
used and documented by classics like Edward Ty-
lor, Anthony Wallace, Lewis Henry Morgan. This
is also true for well-recognized Mexican (Indige-
nous engaged) social anthropologists (Jiménez and
Ramos, 1985; Alfredo and Alberto, 1978).
For the qualitative part, we revisit existing posi-
tional papers and articles of Indigenous researchers
10Different parts of the world have very different levels of
wariness, not just from colonial history but precisely due to
interactions with field workers.and activists. Additionally, we use open ques-
tions in the survey, allowing extending the pure
quantitative view to a qualitative one. Finally, we
performed two 1-to-1 interviews with an activist
(Mixe) and a linguist (Chatino).
Participant Recruitment We contact potential
participants online in three ways. Our first ap-
proach is to establish communication through the
potential participants’ official project websites or
public online accounts. This includes e-mail, Twit-
ter, Facebook, and Instagram pages. Our second
approach is to directly contact people in our target
group with whom at least one of the co-authors has
already established a relationship. Finally, we also
published a call for participation on social media
and check if the volunteers belong to our target
group. The goals of our research, as well as the
reach and data handling, are explained directly to
each participant and are also included in the final
form. We do not gather any personal information
about the participants, like name, gender, age, etc.
All study participants are volunteers.
Questionnaire Our study consists of 12 ques-
tions. The first three questions are rather general:
they ask for the tribe, nation, or Indigenous people
the participant belongs to if they self-identify as an
activist, community leader, or teacher, and for their
fluency in their language. The remaining questions
target data policies, inclusion policies, benefits and
dangers of MT systems, and best research practices.
The full questionnaire is available in the appendix.
The questions are available in English and Spanish,
but only one form has been filled in English, while
the rest has been completed in Spanish. There-
fore, the authors have automatically translated all
comments which are shown in this paper.
4.2 Results
The results of the study can be seen in Figure 1.
Additionally, we also discuss the open answers to
each question to provide more insight.
Inclusion of Native Speakers and Permissions
to Study the Language Figure 1(a) shows that
77.3% of the participants report that their commu-
nity has no restrictions regarding the sharing of
their language with outside people. The comments
for this question show that many participants are
proud of their language and heritage: “We are sup-
portive and share our roots. Proud of who visits us”
We even find stronger statements against the pro-5 .0 %
8 5 .0 %5 .0 %5 .0 %In a machine translation project
Any team of researchers in the world can produce systems
It is preferable to integrate community members
Only community members should work
Only with express permission of the community body
These investigations should not be carried outon it77.3%
yes
no
it dependsa)
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
F avorable opinionMedicine and health
Medicinal plants
Religion and sacred songs
T ales and literature and non-sacred songs
Laws
Commercial matters
T alk everyday
Science and education
Culture and traditions
OthersW hat topics would you see as positive in which autom atic translation can
be carried out
32.4%
29.4%17.6%20.6%The data used for MT should be
Be public and without restrictions
Be owned by an organ of the community or town
Be the property of the research group that compiled it
Be the property of the speakers who made the translation
4 5 .5 %
5 4 .5 %What would you think of a system with poor translation quality? (even not
understandable translations)
Not to be used or made available to the public
It would be good, to see the progress
1 2 3 4 5
1 Not dangerous - 5 Dangerous024681012ParticipantsOn a scale from 1-5, how dangerous do you think an Machine Translation
system would be?
9.1%
77.3%13.6%In your town/nation/tribe there is some restriction to share your language
with people outside your community
yes
no
it dependsb)
c) d)
e) f)Figure 1: Study performed on 22 participants that are members of Indigenous communities from the Americas.
hibition to share: “No one has the right to restrict
the spread of the language”. However, there also
do exist communities with restrictions. Thus, we
conclude that researchers cannot assume by default
that all Indigenous groups would agree to share in-
formation about their language or would be happy
about research on it.
Benefits and Dangers of MT Systems Figure
1(b) shows that a strong majority of our participants
think that an MT system for their language would
be beneficial. However, there is also an important
number of people who see at least some degree ofdanger. In this case, we need to look at the partici-
pants’ comments to understand their worries. First,
we find that a main concern for the participants is
the translation quality. The fear of inadequate trans-
lations of cultural terms is also important. In Table
2, we can see a set of comments that illustrate these
fears. One interesting comment refers to the fear of
standardization of the participant’s language, which
could lead to a loss of diversity. In the same table,
we can also see the benefits the participants expect,
mostly in education and in elevating the status and
usefulness of their languages.Table 1 shows some answers to the open ques-
tion on possible topics that might cause damage to
the community. Most answers could not identify
any possible topic that could be dangerous. How-
ever, the second most frequent answer was related
to religion. Some answers are worried that ancient
ceremonial secrets could be revealed. Others also
show worries about the influence of Western reli-
gions. This brings us to the question if the Bible
(Christodouloupoulos and Steedman, 2015; Mc-
Carthy et al., 2020; Agi ´c and Vuli ´c, 2019) is suited
to use as our default corpora for MT, when an in-
digenous language is involved. Finally, also few
answers expressed that the usage of indigenous
languages in the internal organization of the com-
munity could be in danger with MT systems. In
contrast, figure 1(c) shows the topics that that most
positive evaluation registered: everyday talks (15),
science and education (14), culture and traditions
(14), and medicine and health (14).
What would you see as damaging topics that should
not be machine translated?
Anything ceremonial
Laws, medicine and health, science, mercantile matters,
religion and sacred songs.
Issues that threaten organic life.
Western religion
Political situations and religions unless it is in the inter-
est of the person.
Sacred songs, like those of a healer.
Table 1: Some answers to the open question on possible
dangers of MT for indigenous languages.
Can you think of any dangers to the language and
culture, if so, which?
There are cultural linguistic concepts that are only un-
derstood in our native language.
The existence of so many variants would make the
project little or not profitable and would lead the "ex-
perts" to an attempt to standardize language, which
would be a tremendous mistake.
There are cultural elements that must be taken into ac-
count.
They could undoubtedly distort the proper use of the
language.
What advantages would you see with an automatic
translation system?
The use of automatic translators in spaces such as hos-
pitals, government offices, etc.
Perhaps a contribution of modernity to the community,
preservation of the native language.
It would contribute to the status of indigenous languages
It would contribute to the social use of our language
It would facilitate teaching because you would have
many support tools.
Table 2: Open answers of speakers to questions on dan-
gers and benefits of MT systems for their communities.Participation of Members of Indigenous Com-
munities in Research Figure 1(d) shows that our
study participants think it is important to include
people from the targeted communities in research
projects. This confirms the experience in linguis-
tics, where they found a similar pattern (Smith,
2021) (see §3.1). It is important to note that only
one answer was stated that official permission is
needed to perform the study. In the comments, the
right of consulting was mentioned, together with
the advantages of involving community members
in research: “It is preferable [to integrate people
from the community] to obtain a good system, and
not just to have approximations, because only the
members of the culture know how the language
is used."; “So that the vocabulary is enriched and
some words that do not exist are not imposed.”;
“Carry out activities where the community can be
involved, win-win.”.
Data Usage and Translation Quality Regard-
ing data ownership and accessibility, we find di-
verse sets of responses. First, Figure 1(e) shows
many different opinions. Overall, we can say that
a strong feeling exists that data should be publicly
available. However, when it comes to the property
of the data, opinions are more diverse. Surpris-
ingly, an important number of participants ( 17%)
think that the external research group should own
the data. Nevertheless, a higher number of partic-
ipants think that the data should be owned by the
community ( 29.4%), and 20.6% thinks it should
be owned by the speakers who participate in the
research. This is a difficult topic, as traditional
norms and modern law systems interact (cf. Sec-
tion 3.1). In the comments, we find sad examples of
mistrust in academic institutions. For example, one
comment talks about previous problems of their
tribe, as recordings and other material taken by
linguists is not accessible to them: “Wary of aca-
demic institutions since we currently have issues
accessing recordings that belong to academics and
libraries and are not publicly accessible.” How-
ever, in general, we see a wide range of opinions:
“The work of the few who take linguistic identity
seriously should be valued”, “It could be public
but always with the endorsement and consent of
the community.” This diversity demonstrates that
there is a need for researchers to have a close re-
lationship with the communities to understand the
background and the aims of each particular case.
As discussed above, the quality of the final sys-tem is an important concern for many participants.
In Figure 1(f) we can see that publishing an experi-
mental MT system is also controversial. The possi-
bility of using an experimental system is liked by
54.8%of our participants, which is slightly higher
than the number of participants who are against
this ( 45.5%). Some opinions against it are in line
with earlier worries about incorrect translations
of cultural content: “Something that is devoid of
structure and cultural objectivity cannot be made
available to the public” and “...damage would be
caused to the language and its representatives since
the learners would learn in the wrong way.” Most
people with a positive opinion agree that an initially
poor system could be improved over time: “If it
could be improved and corrected, that would be
excellent.”
5 Discussion
In Section 3 we survey the ongoing debate on ethics
in documentation, translation, and MT, before pre-
senting an interview study in Section 4. Now we
discuss some the most important issues we have
identified in the last section in more depth.
Need for Consultations with Communities Pre-
vious experiences (Bird, 2020; Liu et al., 2022) as
well our study highlight the need for consultation
with Indigenous communities when performing re-
search involving their languages11. In some cases,
the minimal expressed requirement is to inform
speakers about new technological advances. Feed-
back and quality checks are also crucial for MT
systems and important to the members of the com-
munities. This consultation should include inter-
cultural dialog as it has been a central instrument
in the decision-making of indigenous communities
(Beauclair, 2010). We recommend doing this by in-
tegrating community members into the loop while,
of course, giving them the credit they deserve.
Legal systems vs. Traditional Views of Commu-
nal Knowledge Ownership Legal systems and,
with that, copyright laws vary by country. However,
legal rules are sometimes in conflict with the tradi-
tional views of Indigenous people (Dwyer, 2006).
Thus, when working with Indigenous communities,
we recommend discussing and agreeing upon own-
ership rights with annotators or study participants
prior to starting the work to find an arrangement
11An example of a community engaged fieldwork is
Czaykowska-Higgins (2009)everyone is happy with. We would also like to
point out that, according to our case study, a gen-
eral feeling is that data and research results need
to be accessible to the community speaking the
language. This contradicts the practice of some
documentation efforts that close the collected data
to the public and even to the speakers of the com-
munity (Avelino, 2021). Some participants in our
study even suggest the usage of Creative Commons
(CC)12for data. However, the use of CC might
not be the best licensing option, as it not designed
specifically for the needs of Indigenous. Finally,
whenever collected data are used for commercial
usage, special agreements involving financial as-
pects are crucial.
Permissions Some communities require that a
permit from their governing entity be obtained
when someone, not a member, wants to study their
language. This might be difficult as sometimes
there is no central authority. Figuring out from
whom to get permission can be challenging in such
scenarios. However, as we see in this study, many
communities do not require this permission. A
promising project that aims to simplify this topic
is the KP labels13. It is a set of labels that com-
munities can use to express their permissions and
willingness to cooperate with researchers and ex-
ternal projects.
Personal Data From the free-text answers, we
further learn that, for many speakers, using their
own language in their daily environment helps them
protect their privacy: Their conversations can only
be understood by their family or close environment.
This concern of data handling is, however, also
valid for other languages.
Concerns about Private Information of the Com-
munity The previous point can further be ex-
tended to assemblies and other organizational meet-
ings, where the language barrier is used to keep
their decisions or strategies private. This is one
worry that the communities have with MT and the
possible topics that might be harmful for them.
Some communities also have general concerns
about sharing their language with people that do
not belong to them (e.g., the Hopi Dictionary con-
troversy (Hill, 2002)). For this case, it is important
not to approach this issue from a Western legal
12https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
13https://localcontexts.org/labels/tra
ditional-knowledge-labels/point of view and go towards traditional internal
governance practices and norms and consultation
with the communities.
Religion and the Bible Regarding problematic
domains for MT, multiple survey participants men-
tioned religion. This is quite relevant for the
NLP community, as the broadest resource currently
available for minority languages is the Bible. As
seen in Section 3.2, the colonial usage of translation
of religious texts (Niranjana, 1990) is precisely the
origin of these detests. Thus, we recommend that
NLP and MT researchers use the Bible carefully,
through a consultation process, and consider its
impacts. Nevertheless, without a close relationship
with each community (e.g., in a massive multilin-
gual MT experiment), the recommendation is to
void using the Bible.
Technology and data Sovereignty Having tech-
nology for their own languages is well seen by most
study participants. However, we also find a strong
wish to participate directly in the development of
MT systems. This requires more inclusion of In-
digenous researchers in NLP. Therefore, training
Indigenous researchers and engineers is an impor-
tant task that we recommend should be valued more
highly by the NLP and MT communities. We are
aware that existing inequalities cannot be removed
immediately or in isolation, but everyone can be
supportive.14The creation of a collaborative pro-
cess is a proposal emerging from the communities
themselves: “Technology as Tequio; technologi-
cal creation and innovation as a common good”
(Aguilar-Gil, 2020). However, it is not possible
to build contemporary data-driven NLP technolo-
gies without data. And this opens the discussion
regarding Data Sovereignty. First, it is important to
mention that the communities have the right to self-
determination, and this includes the data that they
create. Applying this sovereignty to data refers
to having control over the data, knowledge15and
cultural expressions that are created by these com-
munities. As discussed in this paper, it is important
to reach agreements with the communities through
consultations and direct collaborations. This in-
cludes the licensing and ownership of the final data
14Tech sovereignty is a central topic for the Natives in Tech
conference in 2022: https://nativesintech.org/
conference/2022
15Seehttps://indigenousinnovate.org/dow
nloads/indigenous-knowledges-and-data-g
overnance-protocol_may-2021.pdfproducts.
Our Findings and Previous Work Finally, we
want to relate our findings to similar discussions
in prior work. Most previous concerns and sug-
gestions related to including and consulting people
from the communities (Bird, 2020; Liu et al., 2022)
are aligned with the wishes and desires of the par-
ticipants in our study. The inclusion of community
members as co-authors (Liu et al., 2022) should not
be an artificial mechanic but more a broad inclusion
process, including data and technology sovereignty.
This is also aligned with the community building
aimed at by Zhang et al. (2022). Additionally, we
should consider that there might exist problematic
topics and not underestimate the importance of
high-quality translations.
6 Conclusion
In this work, which is focused on ethical challenges
for MT of Indigenous languages, we first provided
an overview of relevant ethical approaches, ethical
challenges for translation in general, and more spe-
cific challenges for MT. Afterward, we conducted a
case study, for which we interviewed 22Indigenous
language activists, language teachers, and com-
munity leaders from the Americas. Our findings
aligned with previous findings regarding the need
for inclusion and consultation with communities
when working with language data. Additionally,
our participants expressed a surprisingly strong in-
terest in having MT systems for their languages
but also concerns regarding commercial usage, cul-
tural and religious misuse, data, and technological
sovereignty. We ended with specific recommenda-
tions for the NLP and MT communities, but even
more important, an open discussion framework for
the indigenous communities.
Acknowledgments
We want to thank all community members, lin-
guists, and language activists who participants in
our study. We will also thank the reviewers for
their valuable comments and Heriberto Avelino for
his useful insights. This project has benefited from
financial support to Manuel Mager by a DAAD
Doctoral Research Grant.
Limitations
This study is restricted to the Americas. There-
fore the results from this paper can not be gen-eralized, as different indigenous communities or
nations might have different pasts. Also, all opin-
ions expressed by the interviewed people are ex-
clusively personal and in should not be interpreted
as the general stand of the communities. As dis-
cussed in the paper, the main aim of this work is
not to provide a normative for MT researchers. We
rather provide a set of questions and open topics
that should be considered when performing MT
work with indigenous languages. Nevertheless, we
also provide general and broad non-normative rec-
ommendations that should be carefully applied to
the concrete case of each community.
Ethical statement
To ensure the ethics of this work, we followed well-
recognized ethical codes: The Australian Institute
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies (
AIATSIS)16and the DOBES code of conduct17. As
a result, all participants were well informed about
the intent of this work, our aims, and the complete
anonymization of their answers. Moreover, this
work was done with indigenous leadership (as sug-
gested by AIATSIS).
Here we list the ethical issues we found while
working on this work and how we try to minimize
their impact. First, we were concerned with the
data protection of the participants in this study. As
for this study, no personal data is required. There-
fore, we decided to remove any questions contain-
ing any information that could reveal the identity of
the participants. Second, as our study aims to get
substantial input from the communities, we decided
to leave as many open questions as possible and
consider the available comments section of each
question. All participants were informed about the
goals of this project and participated in a free and
informed way. To give proper recognition to the
participants of this study, we offer an option to be
included in the acknowledgment section.
References
Željko Agi ´c and Ivan Vuli ´c. 2019. Jw300: A wide-
coverage parallel corpus for low-resource languages.
InProceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics , pages 3204–
3210.
16https://aiatsis.gov.au/sites/default
/files/2020-10/aiatsis-code-ethics.pdf
17https://dobes.mpi.nl/ethical_legal_a
spects/DOBES-coc-v2.pdfYasnaya Elena Aguilar-Gil. 2020. A modest proposal
to save the world. https://restofworld.or
g/2020/saving-the-world-through-t
equiology/ .
Tecla Alfredo and Garza Ramos Alberto. 1978. Teoría,
métodos y técnicas en la investigación social. México.
Ediciones de Cultura Popular , pages 11–74.
Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, Eneko Agirre, and
Kyunghyun Cho. 2018. Unsupervised neural ma-
chine translation. In 6th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2018 .
Peter K Austin and Julia Sallabank. 2013. Endangered
languages: An introduction.
Heriberto Avelino. 2021. Nuevas perspectivas en doc-
umentaciÓn lingÜÍstica. Ciencias Antropologicas ,
pages 93–119.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyung Hyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In 3rd International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
2015 .
Carlos Barron-Romero, Mager Manuel, and
Reyes Avilés Fernando. 2016. Richard feyn-
man, los alfabetos y los lenguajes.
Nicolas Beauclair. 2010. Éticas andinas y discursos
de reivindicaciones indígenas: asociando tradición
y alter-mundialización. Tinkuy: Boletín de investi-
gación y debate , (12):9–34.
Steven Bird. 2020. Decolonising speech and language
technology. In Proceedings of the 28th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages
3504–3519, Barcelona, Spain (Online). International
Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Gina Bustamante, Arturo Oncevay, and Roberto
Zariquiey. 2020. No data to crawl? monolingual
corpus creation from PDF files of truly low-resource
languages in Peru. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages
2914–2923, Marseille, France. European Language
Resources Association.
Hilary M Carey. 2010. Lancelot threlkeld, biraban, and
the colonial bible in australia. Comparative Studies
in Society and History , 52(2):447–478.
Andrew Chesterman. 2001. Proposal for a hieronymic
oath. The translator , 7(2):139–154.
Eric Cheyfitz. 1997. The poetics of imperialism: Trans-
lation and colonization from The Tempest to Tarzan .
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Christos Christodouloupoulos and Mark Steedman.
2015. A massively parallel corpus: the bible in
100 languages. Language resources and evaluation ,
49(2):375–395.Alain Couillault, Karën Fort, Gilles Adda, and Hugues
de Mazancourt. 2014. Evaluating corpora documen-
tation with regards to the ethics and big data charter.
InProceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14) ,
pages 4225–4229, Reykjavik, Iceland. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).
Ewa Czaykowska-Higgins. 2009. Research models,
community engagement, and linguistic fieldwork:
Reflections on working within canadian indigenous
communities.
Erica-Irene A Daes. 1993. Discrimination against In-
digenous peoples: Study on the protection of the cul-
tural and intellectual property of Indigenous peoples .
United Nations, Economic and Social Council.
TA DelValls. 1978. El instituto lingüístico de verano,
instrumento del imperialismo. Nueva Antropología ,
3(9):117–142.
Lise M Dobrin. 2009. Sil international and the dis-
ciplinary culture of linguistics: Introduction. Lan-
guage , 85(3):618–619.
Stephen Doherty. 2016. Translations| the impact of
translation technologies on the process and product of
translation. International journal of communication ,
10:23.
Arienne M Dwyer. 2006. Ethics and practicalities of
cooperative fieldwork and analysis. Essentials of
language documentation , 178.
Paola Enríquez. 2019. El rol de la lengua kichwa en
la construcción de la identidad en la población indí-
gena de cañar. Lenguas en contacto: desafíos en la
diversidad , page 267.
Joseph Errington. 2001. Colonial linguistics. Annual
review of anthropology , 30(1):19–39.
José Luis Soberanes Fernández. 2022. La libertad reli-
giosa en el pueblo huichol religious freedom in the
huichol community. Revista de Garantismo y Dere-
chos Humanos , page 43.
Karën Fort, Gilles Adda, Benoît Sagot, Joseph Mar-
iani, and Alain Couillault. 2011. Crowdsourcing
for language resource development: criticisms about
amazon mechanical turk overpowering use. In Lan-
guage and Technology Conference , pages 303–314.
Springer.
Rachael Gilmour. 2007. Missionaries, colonialism and
language in nineteenth-century south africa. History
Compass , 5(6):1761–1777.
Ken Hale. 1992. Endangered languages: On endan-
gered languages and the safeguarding of diversity.
language , 68(1):1–42.
Mika Hämäläinen. 2021. Endangered languages are not
low-resourced! arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.09567 .Daniel Hershcovich, Stella Frank, Heather Lent,
Miryam de Lhoneux, Mostafa Abdou, Stephanie
Brandl, Emanuele Bugliarello, Laura Cabello Pi-
queras, Ilias Chalkidis, Ruixiang Cui, et al. 2022.
Challenges and strategies in cross-cultural nlp. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.10020 .
Kenneth C Hill. 2002. On publishing the hopi dictio-
nary. Making dictionaries: Preserving Indigenous
languages of the Americas , pages 299–311.
Csilla Horváth, Norbert Szilágyi, Veronika Vincze,
and Ágoston Nagy. 2017. Language technology re-
sources and tools for mansi: an overview. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third Workshop on Computational
Linguistics for Uralic Languages , pages 56–65.
ILO Ilo. 1989. C169-indigenous and tribal peoples con-
vention. In Convention concerning Indigenous and
Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries. Geneva:
ILO.
Alfredo Tecla Jiménez and Alberto Garza Ramos. 1985.
Teoría, métodos y técnicas en la investigación social .
Eds. Taller Abierto.
Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt. 2019. Microsoft transla-
tor at wmt 2019: Towards large-scale document-
level neural machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.06170 .
Judith L. Klavans. 2018. Computational challenges for
polysynthetic languages. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Computational Modeling of Polysynthetic
Languages , pages 1–11, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Guillaume Lample, Alexis Conneau, Ludovic Denoyer,
and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. 2018. Unsupervised ma-
chine translation using monolingual corpora only. In
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions .
Jochen L. Leidner and Vassilis Plachouras. 2017. Eth-
ical by design: Ethics best practices for natural lan-
guage processing. In Proceedings of the First ACL
Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 30–40, Valencia, Spain. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Wesley Leonard. 2020. Producing language reclamation
by decolonising’language’.
Zoey Liu, Crystal Richardson, Richard Hatcher Jr, and
Emily Prud’hommeaux. 2022. Not always about
you: Prioritizing community needs when develop-
ing endangered language technology. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.05541 .
Monika Ludescher. 2001. Instituciones y prácticas colo-
niales en la amazonía peruana: pasado y presente.
Indiana , pages 313–359.
Manuel Mager, Ximena Gutierrez-Vasques, Gerardo
Sierra, and Ivan Meza-Ruiz. 2018. Challenges of
language technologies for the indigenous languagesof the Americas. In Proceedings of the 27th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,
pages 55–69, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Arya D McCarthy, Rachel Wicks, Dylan Lewis, Aaron
Mueller, Winston Wu, Oliver Adams, Garrett Nicolai,
Matt Post, and David Yarowsky. 2020. The johns
hopkins university bible corpus: 1600+ tongues for
typological exploration. In Proceedings of the 12th
language resources and evaluation conference , pages
2884–2892.
Guillermo Meza Salcedo. 2017. Ética de la inves-
tigación desde el pensamiento indígena: derechos
colectivos y el principio de la comunalidad. Revista
de Bioética y Derecho , (41):141–159.
Christopher Moseley. 2010. Atlas of the World’s Lan-
guages in Danger . Unesco.
Tejaswini Niranjana. 1990. Translation, colonialism
and rise of english. Economic and Political Weekly ,
pages 773–779.
Tejaswini Niranjana. 1992. Siting translation: History,
post-structuralism and the colonial context. URL:
https://doi. org/10.1525/9780520911369 [2021-04-
01].
Hanns-Gregor Nissing and Jörn Müller. 2009. Grund-
positionen philosophischer Ethik: von Aristoteles bis
Jürgen Habermas . WBG.
Azucena Palacios. 2008. La lengua como instrumento
de identidad y diferenciación: más allá de la influ-
encia de las lenguas amerindias. De moneda nunca
usada .
Ellie Pavlick, Matt Post, Ann Irvine, Dmitry Kachaev,
and Chris Callison-Burch. 2014. The language demo-
graphics of amazon mechanical turk. Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2:79–
92.
Suwilai Premsrirat and Dennis Malone. 2003. Language
development and language revitalization in asia. SIL
International, Mahidol University .
James Rachels and Stuart Rachels. 1986. The ele-
ments of moral philosophy . Temple University Press
Philadelphia.
Guillermo-Meza Salcedo. 2016. El ‘vivir nosotros’
amerindio vs ‘decir nosotros’ de la global-
ización. Cuadernos de filosofía latinoamericana ,
37(114):151–166.
Florian Alexander Schmidt. 2013. The good, the bad
and the ugly: Why crowdsourcing needs ethics. In
2013 International Conference on Cloud and Green
Computing , pages 531–535. IEEE.
Lane Schwartz. 2022. Primum non nocere: Before
working with indigenous data, the acl must confront
ongoing colonialism.Linda Tuhiwai Smith. 2021. Decolonizing methodolo-
gies: Research and indigenous peoples . Bloomsbury
Publishing.
Gabriel Stanovsky, Noah A Smith, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2019. Evaluating gender bias in machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 1679–1684.
Maria Tymoczko. 2006. Translation: Ethics, ideology,
action. The Massachusetts Review , 47(3):442–461.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In NIPS .
Shiyue Zhang, Ben Frey, and Mohit Bansal. 2022. How
can nlp help revitalize endangered languages? a case
study and roadmap for the cherokee language. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.11909 .
A Questionnaire
The following questions, together with their an-
swers are listed in this section.
1.How do you consider yourself
(a) Leader of your town or community
(b) Language activist
(c) None of the above
(d) Other, explain
2.To what degree do you speak your mother
tongue (indigenous / native / native)
(a) Perfectly
(b) Fairly good, but with shortcomings
(c) I speak with difficulties
(d) I don’t speak it but I do understand
(e)I am not a speaker of the language, but I
know some words
3.What people / tribe / nation do you belong
to?
(a) Open Question
4.In your town / nation / tribe there is some
restriction to share your language with peo-
ple outside your community
(a) Yes
(b) No
(c) It depends
Comment the question5.On a scale from 1-5, how dangerous do you
think an MT system would be?
• 1 - Not dangerous
• 5 - Dangerous
Comment the question
6.What advantages would you see with an
automatic translation system
• Open ended
Comment the question
7.What dangers would you see in a machine
translation system:
• Open ended
Comment the question
8.What topics would you see as positive in
which automatic translation can be carried
out (there may be several options)
(a) Medicine and health
(b) Medicinal plants
(c) Religion and sacred songs
(d)Tales and literature and non-sacred songs
(e) Laws
(f) Commercial matters
(g) Talk everyday
(h) Science and education
(i) Culture and traditions
(j) others
9.What would you see as damaging topics
that should not be machine translated?
• Open question
10.What would you think of a system with
poor translation quality?
•Not to be used or made available to the
public
•It would be good, to see the progress and
be able to help correct it
11.To create translation systems we need data
(text in the native language aligned with
text in the foreign language). These data
should:
(a) Be public and without restrictions
(b)Be owned by an organ of the community
or town.(c)Be the property of the research group
that compiled it
(d)Be the property of the speakers who
made the translation
12.In a machine translation project
(a)Any team of researchers in the world can
produce systems
(b)It is preferable to integrate community
members
(c)Only community members should work
on it
(d)Only with express permission of the com-
munity body
(e)These investigations should not be car-
ried out
B Complete answers of the open
questions
All questions refer to the ones enumerated in ap-
pendix A. In table 5 we present the complete results
for the open question 6. In table 3 we present the
complete results for the open question 7. In ta-
ble 4 we present the complete results for the open
question 9.Original English Translation
Qué ventajas tendría un sistema de traducción automática
para su idioma?What dangers would you see in a machine translation system
(for indigenous languages):
1 Sería practico pero confuso, por las variantes (aprox. mas de 30
variantes)It would be practical but confusing, because of the variants
(approx. more than 30 variants)
2 Facilitaría el aprendizaje para los ajenos a la lengua y entender
cada uno de los nativos la forma estructura de su escritura.It would facilitate learning for those foreign to the language
and for each of the natives to understand the structure of their
writing.
3 Fácil acceso Easy access
4 La unificacion de la lengua The unification of the language
5 La ventaja de que las personas que no lo hablan, puedan comu-
nicarse con la gente monolingüeThe advantage that people who do not speak it can communicate
with monolingual people
6 Ninguna. None
7 La dispersión del aprendizaje de este The dispersion of the learning of this
8 Tal vez un aporte de modernidad a la comunidad, preservacion
de la lengua nativa.Perhaps a contribution of modernity to the community, preserva-
tion of the native language.
9 Con respeto a los derechos lingüísticos su difusión pertinencia With respect to linguistic rights its dissemination relevance
10 Facilitaría la enseñanza porque se tendría muchas herramientas
de apoyo.It would facilitate teaching because it would have many support
tools.
11 Conocer una aproximación de los significados Know an approximation of the meanings
12 Ayudaría a las personas que no hablan o ya no hablan el idioma
Popti’, ayudaría a los niños en las escuelas para aprender el
idioma.It would help people who don’t speak or no longer speak the
Popti’ language, it would help children in schools to learn the
language.
13 Contribuiría al uso social de nuestro idioma It would contribute to the social use of our language
14 El uso de traductores automáticos en espacios como hospitales,
oficinas de gobierno, etc.The use of automatic translators in spaces such as hospitals,
government offices, etc.
15 Contribuiría al Status de las lenguas indígenas y quizá también
Corpus.It would contribute to the Status of indigenous languages and
perhaps also Corpus.
16 Solo seria útil para conocer vocabulario y pequeñas frases quizás. It would only be useful to learn vocabulary and small phrases
perhaps.
17 hacer la lengua mas visible y más accesible a personas fuera de
la comunidad de hablamake the language more visible and more accessible to people
outside the speaking community
18 Mantener la lengua a través del tiempo y la distancia hold the tongue through time and distance
19 Mucha ventaja para las personas que han estado interesados en
aprender este idioma.Much advantage for people who have been interested in learning
this language.
20 nos ayudaría a normalizar la presencia del kichwa en un medio
actual de comunicación.It would help us to normalize the presence of Kichwa in a current
means of communication.
21 These are great for interview videos or audio. I don’t see any-
thing wrong with this.
22 Ayudar aprender nuestra lengua Help learn our language
Table 3: Answers for the open question 6 (see §A). All translations are automatic translations with human editing.
If the original is in English, we leave the translation field blank.Original English Translation
Podría usted commentar sobre algún posible problema que
podría generar un sistema de traducción automática para su
idioma?What dangers would you see in a machine translation system
1 Por la variedad de la Lengua, algunas palabras significan difer-
ente, no es recomendable un diccionario estandar para la lengua,
si por variante.Due to the variety of the language, some words mean differently,
a standard dictionary for the language is not recommended, if by
variant.
2 Los conceptos culturales. En su defecto hay conceptos lingüís-
ticos culturales que solo se entienden en la lengua nativa. De
igual forma, encontraremos conceptos ajenos a nuestra lengua
que no son traducibles.Cultural concepts. Failing that, there are cultural linguistic con-
cepts that are only understood in the native language. In the
same way, we will find concepts foreign to our language that are
not translatable.
3 Falta de recursos de información Lack of information resources
4 La gente de cada región se aferra a su propia variante The people of each region cling to their own variant
5 No se puede entender estrictamente como peligroso, pero si un
poco difícil porque existen muchas variantesIt cannot be strictly understood as dangerous, but it is a bit
difficult because there are many variants
6 La desnaturalización del idioma. Al tratarse de un idioma donde
no imperan los sustantivos, se carece de artículos y de algunas
preposiciones, además de ser aglutinante, el trabajo es mucho
más complicado que en otros idiomas. Además, la existencia de
tantas variantes haría que el proyecto fuera poco o nada rentable
y llevaría a los "expertos" a un intento por homologar el habla,
lo cual sería un error tremendo.The denaturation of the language. Being a language where nouns
do not prevail, articles and some prepositions are lacking, in ad-
dition to being agglutinative, the work is much more complicated
than in other languages. In addition, the existence of so many
variants would make the project unprofitable or unprofitable and
would lead the "experts" to attempt to standardize speech, which
would be a tremendous mistake.
7 Ayudaría a el aprendizaje de la lengua. It would help to learn the language.
8 Ninguna, de hecho tenemos avances y una comunidad interna-
cional(Peru, Bolivia, Argentina y Chile) de aymara formada con
este objetivo.None, in fact we have progress and an international community
(Peru, Bolivia, Argentina and Chile) of Aymara formed with this
objective.
9 Su comercialización the commercialization
10 Hay algunas palabras que no se pueden traducir, porque al hac-
erlo pierde el sentido, además de que esta lengua tiene otras
grafías que están ausentes en el sistema consonántico y vocálico
del español (que es como la referencia de todo lo que se hace).
Además de que la lengua O’dam es aglutinante, las correspon-
dencias entre palabras u oraciones no siempre será uno a uno
porque las palabras en O’dam son largas y puede significar toda
una frase. Es una lengua aglutinante pues.There are some words that cannot be translated, because by
doing so they lose their meaning, in addition to the fact that this
language has other spellings that are absent in the consonantal
and vowel system of Spanish (which is like the reference for
everything that is done). In addition to the fact that the O’dam
language is agglutinative, the correspondences between words
or sentences will not always be one to one because the words
in O’dam are long and can mean a whole sentence. It is an
agglutinative language.
11 Tomar en cuenta la cultura, existen elementos culturales que
deben tomarse en cuentaTake culture into account, there are cultural elements that must
be taken into account
12 Ninguno. None
13 Que no sea pertinente cultural y lingüísticamente Not culturally and linguistically adequate
14 Que por "practicidad" se priorice el uso de traductores automáti-
cos en lugar de aprender la lengua.That for "practicality" the use of automatic translators is priori-
tized instead of learning the language.
15 Podrían sin lugar a dudas desvirtuar el adecuado uso del idioma.
El quechua es un idioma contextual.They could undoubtedly distort the proper use of the language.
Quechua is a contextual language.
16 la pregunta anterior es muy ambigua, peligroso en qué sentido,
para sus hablantes? para el linguista? ... un problema que podría
generar es que no toda la comunidad de habla esté de acuerdo
en poner la langua al alcance de todosthe previous question is very ambiguous, dangerous in what
sense, for its speakers? for the linguist? ... a problem that could
arise is that not the entire speech community agrees to make the
language available to everyone
17 Lo primero es que no hay un teclado especial The first thing is that there is no special keyboard
18 Sería un poco difícil de realizar un translate automático del chol,
ya que es un lengua compleja y a veces solamente se entiende
viendo, estando o conociendo el contexto del habla.It would be a bit difficult to translate Chol automatically, since it
is a complex language and sometimes it is only understood by
seeing, being or knowing the context of the speech.
19 ninguno none
20 siempre y cuando la comunidad este involucrada. as long as the community is involved.
21 As long as the community owns the language corpus then I think
it would be helpful. I have concerns of other entities, academic
or commercial, being involved in handling the corpus.
22 Entes externos podrían aprovecharse económicamente External entities could take advantage economically
Table 4: Answers for the open question 7 (see §A). All translations are automatic translations with human editing.
If the original is in English, we leave the translation field blank.Original English Translation
Qué temas vería usted cómo perjudiciales en los que no se
debería realizar traducción automática para su lengua?What would you see as damaging topics that should not be
machine translated?
1 Ninguno None
2 Leyes, medicina y salud, ciencia, cuestiones mercantiles, religión
y canciones sagradas,Law, medicine and health, science, business matters, religion
and sacred songs,
3 Derecho Laws
4 Las groserías the bad words
5 No veo problema alguno en la traducción de todos lados temas I do not see any problem in the translation of all sides topics
6 ninguno None
7 Ninguno. None
8 Ninguna, pero hay muchas versiones de aymara y con influyencia
de castellano.None, but there are many versions of Aymara and with Castilian
influence.
9 Temas que atenten contra la vida orgánica Issues that threaten organic life
10 Lo sagrado ( discursos rituales, cantos, etc.) por eso de que las
palabras en el caso del Mucha fuerza al pronunciarse razón por
la que no deben decirse fuera de su contexto.The sacred (ritual speeches, songs, etc.) That is why the words
in the case of Much force when pronounced, reason why they
should not be said out of context.
11 Significados culturales cultural meanings
12 Religión occidenta western religion
13 Religión Religion
14 Conocimientos considerados sagrados. Knowledge considered sacred.
15 Las traducciones automáticas no son completamente válidas ni
aún en los idiomas modernos.Machine translations are not completely valid even in modern
languages.
16 ningun tema no topic
17 Situaciones políticas y religiones a menos que sea del interés de
la personaPolitical situations and religions unless it is in the interest of the
person
18 Los cantos sagrados, como los de un curandero. The sacred songs, like those of a healer.
19 ninguno none
21 Medicina y Salud, Plantas medicinales, Religión y canciones
sagradasMedicine and Health, Medicinal plants, Religion and sacred
songs
20 Anything ceremonial
22 curaciones y cuestiones personales cures and personal issues
Table 5: Answers for the open question 9 (see §A). All translations are automatic translations with human editing.
If the original is in English, we leave the translation field blank.C Spanish Version: Consideraciones
éticas para la traducción automática de
lenguas indígenas: dar voz a los
hablantes
Incluimos una traducción del texto original en in-
glés, para facilitar la discusión del mismo en los
países de habla hispana del continente Americano.
A si mismo esta traducción nos permite compar-
tir los resultados de nuestra investigación con los
participantes de las entrevistas y encuestas. La
traducción fue realizda con ayuda de un sistema de
tradicción automática (Google Translate) y mejo-
rada con edición manual. Todas las referencias
son enlazadas al original en inglés.
Resúmen En los últimos años, la traducción au-
tomática se ha vuelto muy exitosa para los pares
de idiomas con altos recursos. Esto también ha
despertado un nuevo interés en la investigación
sobre la traducción automática de idiomas de ba-
jos recursos, incluidos los idiomas indígenas. Sin
embargo, estos últimos están profundamente rela-
cionados con los grupos indígenas que los hablan
(o solían hablar). La recopilación de datos, modelar
y desplegar sistemas de traducción automática da
como resultado nuevas cuestiones éticas que deben
abordarse. Motivados por esto, primero exami-
namos la literatura existente sobre las considera-
ciones éticas para la documentación, la traducción
y el procesamiento general del lenguaje natural
para las lenguas indígenas. Posteriormente, real-
izamos y analizamos un estudio de entrevistas para
arrojar luz sobre las posiciones de los líderes co-
munitarios, maestros y activistas lingüísticos con
respecto a las preocupaciones éticas sobre la traduc-
ción automática de sus idiomas. Nuestros resulta-
dos muestran que la inclusión, en diferentes grados,
de hablantes nativos y miembros de la comunidad
es vital para realizar una mejor investigación y más
ética sobre las lenguas indígenas.
C.1 Introducción
Con el avance de los sistemas de traducción au-
tomática (MT) basados en datos, se ha vuelto posi-
ble, con diversos grados de calidad, traducir entre
cualquier par de idiomas. La única condición pre-
via es la disponibilidad de suficientes datos mono-
lingües (Lample et al., 2018; Artetxe et al., 2018)
o paralelos (Vaswani et al., 2017; Bahdanau et al.,
2015). Hay muchas ventajas de tener sistemas de
traducción automática de alto rendimiento. Porejemplo, aumentan el acceso a la información para
los hablantes de idiomas indígenas (Mager et al.,
2018) y pueden ayudar en los esfuerzos de revital-
ización de estos idiomas (Zhang et al., 2022).
La investigación sobre la traducción automática,
así como el procesamiento del lenguaje natural
(NLP), en general, se está moviendo hacia entornos
de bajos recursos y modelos multilingües. Por lo
tanto, la comunidad de NLP necesita abrir la dis-
cusión sobre las repercusiones y las mejores prácti-
cas para la investigación en lenguas indígenas (que
en la mayoría de los casos también son de bajos
recursos) ya que las lenguas naturales no pueden
existir sin una comunidad de personas que usan (o
han usado tradicionalmente).
Los idiomas indígenas difieren además de los
más utilizados de una manera crucial: son común-
mente hablados por pequeñas comunidades, y
muchas comunidades usan su idioma (además de
otras características) como un delimitador para
definir su propia identidad (Palacios, 2008; En-
ríquez, 2019), y tienen en muchos casos también un
cierto grado de peligrosidad. Además, en algunos
casos, información altamente confidencial, como
aspectos secretos de su religión, ha sido codificada
con la ayuda de su idioma (Barron-Romero et al.,
2016). Esta es la razón por la que, en los últimos
años, se han iniciado debates sobre enfoques éti-
cos para estudiar lenguas en peligro (Smith, 2021;
Liu et al., 2022). Cuando consideramos el pasado
(y presente) de algunas de las comunidades que
hablan estos idiomas, encontraremos una historia
colonial, donde la investigación no es la excepción
(Bird, 2020). Por lo tanto, es posible traspasar los
límites éticos cuando se utilizan metodologías típi-
cas de recopilación de datos y NLP (Dwyer, 2006).
En este trabajo, exploramos los conceptos bási-
cos de ética relacionados con la MT de lenguas en
peligro de extinción con un enfoque especial en
las comunidades indígenas, examinando trabajos
previos sobre el tema. Para comprender mejor las
expectativas y preocupaciones relacionadas con el
desarrollo de sistemas de MT para las comunidades
indígenas, luego realizamos un estudio de entrevis-
tas con 22 activistas lingüísticos, profesores de id-
iomas y líderes comunitarios que son miembros de
comunidades indígenas de América. Además, tam-
bién realizamos diálogos 1:1 con dos participantes
del estudio para profundizar nuestra comprensión
del asunto. El objetivo es responder las siguientes
preguntas de investigación: ¿Cómo quieren partic-ipar los miembros de la comunidad en el proceso
de traducción automática y por qué? ¿Hay temas
sensibles que no son éticos para traducir, modelar
o recopilar datos sin ¿el permiso explícito de la
comunidad? ¿Cómo podemos recopilar datos de
manera ética?
Sorprendentemente, la mayoría de los partic-
ipantes de la encuesta ven positivamente la tra-
ducción automática de sus idiomas. Sin embargo,
creen que la investigación sobre sus idiomas debe
realizarse en estrecha colaboración con los miem-
bros de la comunidad. El acceso abierto a los des-
cubrimientos y recursos de investigación también
se valora mucho, así como la alta calidad de las
traducciones resultantes. Las entrevistas person-
ales también lo confirmaron. Por lo tanto, nuestro
hallazgo más importante es que es fundamental
trabajar en estrecha colaboración con las comu-
nidades para comprender temas éticos delicados al
desarrollar sistemas de traducción automática para
lenguas en peligro de extinción.
C.2 Definiendo “lenguaje en peligro”
Los términos que se usan con frecuencia en la NLP
sonlenguaje de bajos recursos ,lenguaje de pocos
recursos yconfiguración de bajos recursos . Esos
términos no resaltan el hecho de que muchos id-
iomas de bajos recursos también están en peligro
(Liu et al., 2022). En cambio, enfatizan el prob-
lema crítico del aprendizaje automático de lograr
que un enfoque basado en datos funcione bien con
una cantidad de datos disponible menor a la ideal
(o simplemente menos datos que los que se han
usado para otros idiomas). En este caso, se necesi-
tan innovaciones algorítmicas o tecnológicas para
cerrar la brecha de rendimiento entre los lenguajes
de muchos recursos y los de pocos recursos. Esto
implica además que tener pocos recursos no es una
propiedad de un idioma sino un término que solo
tiene sentido en el contexto de una tarea o tareas
en particular.
En contraste, el término lenguaje en peligro se re-
fiere a un idioma con cierto grado de peligro para su
existencia.18Los idiomas en peligro son relevantes
para nuestro estudio, ya que la mayoría de los id-
iomas indígenas también están en peligro (Hale,
1992). Según la clasificación de la UNESCO, los
idiomas en peligro (Moseley, 2010) se pueden clasi-
ficar en las siguientes categorías diferentes:
18En este documento, discutiremos solo los idiomas creados
no artificialmente.•saludables : hablado por todas las genera-
ciones;
•vulnerable : restringido solo a un determinado
dominio (es decir, dentro de la familia);
•definitivamente en peligro : no tiene niños que
hablen el idioma;
•en grave peligro : sólo lo hablan las personas
mayores;
•peligro crítico : sólo quedan hablantes con
un conocimiento parcial, y lo usan con poca
frecuencia;
•extinto , cuando ya no haya personas capaces
de hablar el idioma.
Los idiomas pueden estar en peligro debido a
razones sociales, culturales y políticas; más común-
mente conquistas y guerras, presiones económicas,
políticas lingüísticas de los poderes políticos, asim-
ilación de la cultura dominante, discriminación
y estandarización lingüística (Austin and Salla-
bank, 2013). Como podemos ver, el problema
de cómo una lengua se pone en peligro involucra
factores que deben ser abordados en el enfoque
ético de cualquier estudio. Por el lado del apren-
dizaje automático, surge un desafío adicional: los
datos de los idiomas en peligro no están fácilmente
disponibles (o, de hecho, no están disponibles en
absoluto), ya que estos idiomas tienen una produc-
ción de medios limitada (programas de televisión,
literatura, blogs de Internet; Hämäläinen, 2021).
Una posible fuente de datos para estos idiomas son
los documentos ya existentes en forma de libros,
registros y archivos (Bustamante et al., 2020).
C.3 Ética y MT
Ética y datos El estudio de las lenguas en peli-
gro en las comunidades indígenas tiene una larga
historia, y las preguntas más destacadas se centran
principalmente en el desafío de la recopilación de
datos (Smith, 2021).
Una de las formas comunes de esto es usar la
ética normativa (deontología). Ejemplos de pau-
tas relevantes incluyen las del Instituto Australiano
de Estudios de los Aborígenes e Isleños del Es-
trecho de Torres;19la Declaración ética de la So-
19https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/264
79543.pdfciedad Lingüística de América;20y el código de
conducta DOBES.21Estas listas son el resultado
de amplias discusiones que han tenido lugar du-
rante décadas. En este debate también, las voces
indígenas se alzaron dentro de la academia (Smith,
2021).
Pero, ¿por qué tenemos tantos intentos de es-
tablecer un código ético para el trabajo de campo
lingüístico? Cuando se trata de trabajar con so-
ciedades humanas, no existen soluciones fáciles
para los dilemas éticos que surgen (Dwyer, 2006).
Cada situación requiere un trato y compromiso
único. Por eso, además de la creación de un marco
lo más general posible, la aplicación concreta de
tales principios implica una discusión continua.
Dwyer (2006) sugiere documentar las cuestiones y
preocupaciones éticas que surgen durante el curso
de un proyecto de investigación y la forma en que
se abordan estas cuestiones, de modo que otros in-
vestigadores puedan aprender de la experiencia. Si
bien un código de conducta o principios es bueno,
corre el riesgo de introducir regulaciones demasi-
ado complicadas, o incluso inadecuadas, relegando
esta necesaria discusión.
En general, podemos resumir los principios que
aparecen en todas las listas sugeridas bajo tres
grandes temas:
•Consulta, Negociación y Entendimiento Mu-
tuo. El derecho a la consulta de los pueblos in-
dígenas está estipulado en el convenio 167 de
la Organización Internacional del Trabajo (Ilo,
1989) y establece que “tienen derecho a preser-
var y desarrollar sus propias instituciones, id-
iomas y culturas”. Por lo tanto, informar a
la comunidad sobre la investigación planifi-
cada, negociar un posible resultado y llegar a
un acuerdo mutuo sobre las direcciones y los
detalles del proyecto debe ocurrir en todos los
casos.
•Respeto a la cultura local y participación .
Como cada comunidad tiene su propia cultura
y visión del mundo, los investigadores, así
como cualquier organización gubernamental
interesada en el proyecto, deben estar famil-
iarizados con la historia y las tradiciones de la
comunidad. Además, se debe recomendar que
20https://www.linguisticsociety.org/co
ntent/lsa-revised-ethics-statement -app
roved-july-2019
21https://dobes.mpi.nl/ethical_legal_a
spects/DOBES-coc-v2.pdfinvestigadores locales, oradores o gobiernos
internos se involucren en el proyecto.
•Compartir y distribuir datos e investigaciones .
El producto de la investigación debe estar
disponible para su uso por parte de la comu-
nidad, para que puedan aprovechar los mate-
riales generados, como documentos, libros o
datos.
Algunos de estos principios comúnmente acor-
dados están abiertos a un acuerdo deben adaptarse
a situaciones concretas, lo que podría no ser fácil
de hacer a través de un enfoque general. Por ejem-
plo, el proceso de documentación creará datos, y la
propiedad de estos datos es una fuente importante
de discusión (cf. Secciones 4, 5). Aquí, los puntos
de vista tradicionales de las comunidades pueden
contradecir el sistema jurídico de un país (Daes,
1993). Este problema no tiene una solución simple
y debe considerarse cuidadosamente al recopilar
datos.
Un llamado adicional de estas fuentes es des-
colonizar la investigación y dejar de ver a las co-
munidades indígenas como fuentes de datos, sino
como personas con su propia historia (Smith, 2021).
El divorcio actual entre los investigadores y las
unidades culturales de las comunidades puede lle-
var a reforzar el legado colonial (Leonard, 2020).
Como comentario final, queremos discutir la su-
posición común de que cualquier discusión ética
debe terminar con una configuración normativa
para un campo. Esto reduciría la trducción de toma
de decisiones colectivas de los pueblos indígenas
a normas que permitan un abordaje individual del
asunto (Meza Salcedo, 2017). Esto tampoco permi-
tiría comprender las cuestiones éticas con su propia
cosmovisión indígena comunal (Salcedo, 2016).
Por lo tanto, en este texto pretendemos abrir el
debate ético de la MT a los investigadores de la
NLP ya las comunidades indígenas a partir de la
inclusión y el diálogo.
Ética y Traducción humana Para una traduc-
ción exitosa, la inclusión de todos los participantes
es importante, requiriendo su participación equi-
tativa, informal y orientada a la comprensión (Niss-
ing and Müller, 2009). Para Rachels and Rachels
(1986), la concepción mínima de la moralidad es
que cuando damos "igual peso a los intereses de
cada individuo afectado por la decisión de uno".
La pregunta es cómo las intenciones de los autores
se relacionan con la otredad de la cultura de origen,con su valores culturalmente específicos (Chester-
man, 2001). Según Doherty (2016), “los estudios
del proceso de traducción surgieron para centrarse
en el traductor y el proceso de traducción en lugar
del producto final”, incorporando diseños de méto-
dos mixtos para obtener observaciones objetivas.
Un ejemplo bien documentado del mal uso no ético
de la traducción es la aplicación de la traducción
como instrumento para la dominación colonial. El
principal objetivo de esta visión colonialista era
“civilizar a los salvajes” (Ludescher, 2001). Por
ejemplo, el instituto lingüístico de verano (ILV)22
se utilizó para este objetivo durante el siglo XX
en países con culturas indígenas, traduciendo la
Biblia y tratando de provocar un cambio cultural23
en estas comunidades (DelValls, 1978; Errington,
2001; Carey, 2010). Por supuesto, estas prácticas
no son nuevas y se pueden encontrar a lo largo
de la historia (Gilmour, 2007). Es esencial tener
en cuenta que la investigación no ética aún puede
brindar material y conocimientos útiles, por ejem-
plo, para la revitalización del idioma (Premsrirat
and Malone, 2003), pero podría causar daño a la
comunidad objetivo.
Ética y Traducción automática En el contexto
de la investigación de NLP, los hablantes no están
directamente involucrados cuando se entrena un
modelo (Pavlick et al., 2014). En contraste, los
procesos de recolección de datos (Fort et al., 2011)
y evaluación humana (Couillault et al., 2014) in-
teractúan directamente con los hablantes y, por lo
tanto, tienen una importancia central en relación
con la ética. Esto también es válido para el servicio
22ILV se describe a sí mismo como “.. una organización
mundial sin fines de lucro basada en la fe que trabaja con
comunidades locales de todo el mundo para desarrollar solu-
ciones lingüísticas que amplíen las posibilidades de una vida
mejor. . Las principales áreas de contribución de SIL son
la traducción de la Biblia, la alfabetización, la educación,
el desarrollo, la investigación lingüística y las herramientas
lingüísticas.”. https://www.sil.org/
23El papel del SIL es controvertido, y no se puede resumir
en una sola declaración. En nuestro enfoque, solo nos refer-
imos al papel jugado en relación con el cambio cultural. En
muchos casos, las comunidades que hicieron traducir los tex-
tos religiosos ya eran cristianas, dadas las acciones de col-
onización previas. Sin embargo, también hay casos en los
que comunidades no cristianas tuvieron Biblias y otros textos
religiosos traducdios a su idioma, con fines misioneros. Esto
desencadenó divisiones comunitarias. Por ejemplo, la traduc-
ción de los textos religiosos al Wixarika (Fernández, 2022).
Esto también sucedió en la Comunidad de Zoquipan (en el
estado mexicano de Nayarit), donde los cristianos, utilizando
la Biblia traducida del ILV , desencadenaron un conflicto in-
terno en la comunidad (el primer autor es parte de esta co-
munidad). Para el lector interesado, también recomendamos
Dobrin (2009) artículo introductorio.de traducción final, que interactuará con el público
en general.
La recopilación de datos es el primer y más evi-
dente problema cuando se trata de traducción. Los
sistemas MT neuronales modernos requieren una
gran cantidad de datos paralelos para entrenarse
de manera óptima (Junczys-Dowmunt, 2019). Una
forma de obtener datos es mediante el crowdsourc-
ing (Fort et al., 2011). Sin embargo, este tipo de
trabajo puede estar mal pagado y puede constituir
un problema para las condiciones de vida de los tra-
bajadores (Schmidt, 2013). Además, la privacidad
de los datos no es trivial de manejar. Los sistemas
deben ser capaces de filtrar información confiden-
cial.
El problema de los sesgos de codificación24,
como el sesgo de género (Stanovsky et al., 2019),
también es una preocupación ética para MT. Tam-
bién es necesario revelar las limitaciones y proble-
mas con ciertos sistemas (Leidner and Plachouras,
2017).
La investigación de la NLP también se puede uti-
lizar como un instrumento político de poder, donde
podemos observar las relaciones mutuas entre el
lenguaje, la sociedad y el individuo que "también
son la fuente de los factores de impacto social de
la NLP" (Horváth et al., 2017). De esta forma, la
traducción automatica se puede aplicar como un
instrumento para cambiar la cultura de las minorías
como en la traducción tradicional (cf. Sección 3.2).
Entonces, los colonizadores usaron la traducción
como medio de control imperial y expropiación
(Cheyfitz, 1997; Niranjana, 1992). La asimetría de
poder es la causa de la dominación, donde las cul-
turas subalternas que se inundan con “imposiciones
de materiales e idiomas extranjeros” son un peli-
gro real para las culturas minoritarias (Tymoczko,
2006). Schwartz (2022) discute la necesidad de
descolonizar el enfoque científico de la comunidad
de NLP en su conjunto, expresando la necesidad de
que los investigadores sean conscientes de la his-
toria y los aspectos culturales de las comunidades
que utilizan los idiomas con los que están traba-
jando. Además, propone que nuestra investigación
debe tener una obligación de brindar algún benefi-
cio de nuestros estudios a las comunidades, una
obligación de rendición de cuentas (y por lo tanto
estar en contacto directo con sus organismos rec-
24También es importante tener en cuenta las características
tipológicas que podrían dificultar esto. Un ejemplo son los
lenguajes polisintéticos y los lenguajes sin codificación de
género (Klavans, 2018).tores) y una obligación de no tener intenciones que
contravengan los intereses de las comunidades. El
hecho de que muchos sistemas de traducción hoy
en día sean multilingües25también resultan en más
desafíos multiculturales (Hershcovich et al., 2022).
Finalmente, también queremos resaltar la im-
portancia de discutir los sistemas MT en una con-
figuración de texto a texto. El uso del texto está
limitado a ciertos temas y varía de una comunidad
a otra. Por ejemplo, el wixarika y el quechua, id-
iomas que se hablan en todas las generaciones, se
usan de manera escrita principalmente en aplica-
ciones de mensajería privada (como WhatsApp),
pero también tienen una prolífica generación de
publicaciones en Meme y Facebook26. Incluso
si una determinada comunidad no adopta ampli-
amente la tradición escrita, existen, como mín-
imo, obligaciones legales de los Estados hacia las
lenguas indígenas. Por ejemplo, algunas consti-
tuciones reconocen las lenguas indígenas como
lenguas nacionales (es decir, México y Bolivia),
obligando al Estado a la responsabilidad de traducir
todas las páginas oficiales, documentos, leyes, etc.,
a las lenguas indígenas. Esto no se ha implemen-
tado, y este caso es un caso de aplicación muy
valioso para la traducción automática para ayudar
a la traducción humana. Sin embargo, nuestros hal-
lazgos también se aplican a la traducción de voz a
texto y a las tareas de voz a voz que cubrirían todos
los idiomas, incluso sin tradición escrita.
C.4 Las opiniones de los oradores
Es importante incluir la opinión y la visión de los
hablantes de lenguas en peligro de extinción en la
investigación de la NLP, especialmente para temas
como la MT. Por lo tanto, llevamos a cabo un es-
tudio de encuesta con 22 activistas lingüísticos,
maestros y líderes comunitarios de América. Es
importante destacar que nuestro objetivo principal
no es solo recopilar información cuantitativa sobre
las preguntas éticas relacionadas con la traducción
automática para sus idiomas, sino también recopi-
lar información cualitativa al pedirles que amplíen
sus respuestas. Además, también realizamos una
entrevista con un subconjunto de dos participantes
25Los sistemas multilingües se refieren en NLP a sistemas
capaces de traducir un conjunto de idiomas desde y hacia el
inglés. En algunos casos, también son capaces de traducir
entre idiomas donde el inglés no está involucrado.
26Por ejemplo, los memes wixarika: url-
https://www.facebook.com/memeswixarika2019, grupo
de habla quechua: https://www.facebook.com/gro
ups/711230846397383/del estudio de entrevista inicial.
C.5 Diseño del estudio
Enfocamos nuestro estudio en el continente Ameri-
cano,27seleccionando las siguientes comunidades:
aymara, chatino, maya, mazateco , mixe, nahua,
otomí, quechua, tenek, tepehuano, kichwa de
Otavalo y zapoteco. Queremos señalar que nue-
stro estudio no pretende representar una opinión
general de todos los pubelos indígenas, ni es una
declaración general final sobre el tema. Es un
estudio de caso que aflora las opiniones de gru-
pos específicos de hablantes de lenguas indígenas.
Además, las opiniones de las personas entrevis-
tadas son propias y no representan necesariamente
la opinión de sus tribus, naciones o comunidades.
Aspectos Cuantitativos y Cualitativos Para el
estudio cuantitativo se utilizó una encuesta. Las
encuestas son una técnica bien establecida para
ser utilizada con comunidades indígenas con una
extensa historia y son utilizadas y documentadas
por clásicos como Edward Tylor, Anthony Wallace,
Lewis Henry Morgan. Esto también es cierto para
reconocidos antropólogos sociales mexicanos (indí-
genas comprometidos) (Jiménez and Ramos, 1985;
Alfredo and Alberto, 1978).
Para la parte cualitativa, revisamos documentos
de posición existentes y artículos de investigadores
y activistas indígenas. Además, utilizamos pregun-
tas abiertas en la encuesta, lo que permite extender
la visión puramente cuantitativa a una cualitativa.
Finalmente, realizamos dos entrevistas 1 a 1 con
un activista (mixe) y un lingüista (chatino).
Reclutamiento de participantes Nos pusimos
en contacto con participantes potenciales de tres
maneras. Nuestro primer enfoque fue establecer co-
municación a través de los sitios web oficiales del
proyecto de los participantes potenciales o cuen-
tas públicas en línea. Esto incluye las páginas de
correo electrónico, Twitter, Facebook e Instagram.
Nuestro segundo enfoque fue contactar directa-
mente a las personas de nuestro grupo objetivo
con quienes al menos uno de los coautores ya ha
establecido una relación de trabajo. Por último,
también publicamos una convocatoria de partici-
pación en las redes sociales, y comprobamos si
los voluntarios pertenecen a nuestro grupo objetivo.
Los objetivos de nuestra investigación, así como
27Diferentes partes del mundo tienen niveles muy diferentes
de consciencia, no solo por la historia colonial sino precisa-
mente por las interacciones con los trabajadores de campo.el alcance y manejo de datos, se explican directa-
mente a cada participante y también se incluyen
en el formulario final. No recopilamos ninguna
información personal sobre los participantes, como
nombre, sexo, edad, etc. Todos los participantes
del estudio son voluntarios.
Cuestionario Nuestro estudio consta de 12 pre-
guntas. Las primeras tres preguntas son generales:
preguntan por la tribu, nación o pueblo indígena
al que pertenece el participante; si se identifica a
sí mismo como activista, líder comunitario o mae-
stro, y por su fluidez en su idioma. Las preguntas
restantes se enfocan en políticas de datos, políticas
de inclusión, beneficios y peligros de los sistemas
MT y mejores prácticas de investigación. El cues-
tionario completo está disponible en el apéndice A.
Las preguntas están disponibles en inglés y español,
pero solo se ha completado un formulario en inglés,
mientras que el resto se ha completado en español.
Por lo tanto, los autores han traducido automática-
mente todos los comentarios que se muestran en
este documento al Inglés.
C.6 Resultados
Los resultados del estudio se pueden ver en la
Figura 1. Además, también discutimos las respues-
tas abiertas a cada pregunta para brindar más infor-
mación.
Inclusión de hablantes nativos y permisos para
estudiar el idioma La figura 1(a) muestra que
el 77,3% de los participantes informan que su co-
munidad no tiene restricciones con respecto a com-
partir su idioma con personas externas. Los co-
mentarios para esta pregunta muestran que muchos
participantes están orgullosos de su idioma y heren-
cia: “Somos solidarios y compartimos nuestras
raíces. Orgullosos de quien nos visita” Incluso
encontramos pronunciamientos más fuertes contra
la prohibición de compartir: “Nadie tiene dere-
cho a restringir la difusión de la lengua”. Sin em-
bargo, también existen comunidades con restric-
ciones. Por lo tanto, concluimos que los investi-
gadores no pueden asumir por defecto que todos
los grupos indígenas estarían de acuerdo en com-
partir información sobre su idioma o que estarían
contentos con la investigación sobre el mismo.
Beneficios y peligros de los sistemas MT La
figura 1(b) muestra que una gran mayoría de nue-
stros participantes piensa que un sistema de traduc-
ción automática para su idioma sería beneficioso.Sin embargo, también hay un número importante
de personas que ven al menos algún grado de peli-
gro. En este caso, necesitamos mirar los comentar-
ios de los participantes para entender sus preocupa-
ciones. En primer lugar, encontramos que una de
las principales preocupaciones de los participantes
es la calidad de la traducción. El miedo a las tra-
ducciones inadecuadas de los términos culturales
también es importante. En la Tabla 2, podemos
ver un conjunto de comentarios que ilustran estos
temores. Un comentario interesante se refiere al
miedo a la estandarización del lenguaje de los par-
ticipantes, lo que podría conducir a una pérdida de
diversidad. En la misma tabla, también podemos
ver los beneficios que esperan los participantes,
principalmente en educación y en elevar el estatus
y la utilidad de sus idiomas.
La tabla 1 muestra algunas respuestas a la pre-
gunta abierta sobre posibles temas que podrían
causar daño a la comunidad. La mayoría de las
respuestas no pudieron identificar ningún tema
posible que pudiera ser peligroso. Sin embargo,
la segunda respuesta más frecuente estuvo rela-
cionada con la religión. Algunas respuestas es-
tán preocupadas de que se puedan revelar antiguos
secretos ceremoniales. Otros también muestran
preocupación por la influencia de las religiones oc-
cidentales. Esto nos lleva a la pregunta de si la
Biblia (Christodouloupoulos and Steedman, 2015;
McCarthy et al., 2020; Agi ´c and Vuli ´c, 2019) es
adecuada para usar como nuestro corpus predeter-
minado para MT, cuando se trata de un idioma
indígena. Finalmente, también algunas respuestas
expresaron que el uso de lenguas indígenas en la
organización interna de la comunidad podría estar
en peligro con los sistemas de MT. En contraste, la
figura 1(c) muestra los temas que registraron esa
evaluación más positiva: charlas cotidianas (15),
ciencia y educación (14), cultura y tradiciones (14),
y medicina y salud (14).
Participación de miembros de comunidades indí-
genas en la investigación La figura 1(d) muestra
que los participantes de nuestro estudio piensan
que es importante incluir personas de las comu-
nidades objetivo en los proyectos de investigación.
Esto confirma la experiencia en lingüística, donde
encontraron un patrón similar (Smith, 2021) (ver
§3.1). Es importante señalar que solo se indicó una
respuesta de que se necesita permiso oficial para
realizar el estudio. En los comentarios se mencionó
el derecho a la consulta, junto con las ventajas deinvolucrar a los miembros de la comunidad en la
investigación: “Es preferible [integrar a personas
de la comunidad] para obtener un buen sistema,
y no solo tener aproximaciones, porque solo los
miembros de la cultura saben cómo se usa el id-
ioma.”; “Para que se enriquezca el vocabulario y
no se impongan algunas palabras que no existen.”;
“Realizar actividades donde la comunidad se pueda
involucrar, ganar- ganar.”.
Uso de datos y calidad de traducción Con
respecto a la propiedad y accesibilidad de los
datos, encontramos diversos conjuntos de respues-
tas. Primero, la Figura 1(e) muestra muchas opin-
iones diferentes. En general, podemos decir que
existe una fuerte tendencia a favorecer que los
datos deben estar disponibles públicamente. Sin
embargo, cuando se trata de la propiedad de los
datos, las opiniones son más diversas. Sorprenden-
temente, un número importante de participantes
(17%) piensa que el grupo de investigación externo
debería ser el propietario de los datos. Sin em-
bargo, un mayor número de participantes piensa
que los datos deberían ser propiedad de la comu-
nidad ( 29,4%), y un 20,6% piensa que deberían
ser propiedad de los ponentes que participan en
la investigación. Este es un tema complejo, ya
que las normas tradicionales y los sistemas legales
modernos interactúan (cf. Sección 3.1). En los co-
mentarios encontramos tristes ejemplos de descon-
fianza en las instituciones académicas. Por ejemplo,
un comentario habla de los problemas previos de
su tribu, ya que las grabaciones y otros materiales
tomados por los lingüistas no son accesibles para el-
los: “Cuidado con las instituciones académicas ya
que actualmente tenemos problemas para acceder a
las grabaciones que pertenecen a académicos y bib-
liotecas y no son públicas.”. Sin embargo, en gen-
eral, vemos una amplia gama de opiniones: “Debe
valorarse el trabajo de los pocos que se toman en
serio la identidad lingüística”, “Puede ser público
pero siempre con el aval y consentimiento de la
comunidad”. Esta diversidad demuestra que existe
la necesidad de que los investigadores tengan una
relación cercana con las comunidades para enten-
der los antecedentes y los objetivos de cada caso
en particular.
Como se discutió anteriormente, la calidad del
sistema final es una preocupación importante para
muchos participantes. En la Figura 1(f) podemos
ver que publicar un sistema MT experimental tam-
bién es controvertido. La posibilidad de utilizarun sistema experimental gusta a 54,8%de nue-
stros participantes, que es ligeramente superior
al número de participantes que están en contra
(45,5%). Algunas opiniones en contra están en
línea con preocupaciones anteriores sobre traduc-
ciones incorrectas de contenido cultural: “Algo que
está desprovisto de estructura y objetividad cultural
no es no se puede poner a disposición del público”
y “... se causaría daño a la lengua y sus represen-
tantes ya que los estudiantes aprenderían de forma
incorrecta”. La mayoría de las personas con una
opinión positiva están de acuerdo en que un sistema
inicialmente pobre podría mejorarse con el tiempo:
“Si pudiera mejorarse y corregirse, sería excelente”.
C.7 Discusión
En la Sección 3 examinamos el debate en curso
sobre la ética en la documentación, la traducción,
antes de presentar un estudio de entrevista en la
Sección 4. Ahora discutimos algunos de los prob-
lemas más importantes que hemos identificado en
la última sección con más profundidad.
Necesidad de consultas con las comunidades
Experiencias anteriores (Bird, 2020; Liu et al.,
2022) así como nuestro estudio resaltan la necesi-
dad de consultar con las comunidades indígenas
cuando se realizan investigaciones relacionadas con
sus idiomas28. En algunos casos, el requisito mín-
imo expresado es informar a los ponentes sobre los
nuevos avances tecnológicos. La retroalimentación
y los controles de calidad también son cruciales
para los sistemas de traducción automática e im-
portantes para los miembros de las comunidades.
Esta consulta debe incluir el diálogo intercultural
ya que ha sido un instrumento central en la toma
de decisiones de las comunidades indígenas (Beau-
clair, 2010). Recomendamos hacer esto integrando
a los miembros de la comunidad en el ciclo y, por
supuesto, dándoles el crédito que se merecen.
Sistemas legales versus visiones tradicionales de
la propiedad del conocimiento comunal Los
sistemas legales y, con eso, las leyes de derechos
de autor varían según el país. Sin embargo, las
leyes a veces están en conflicto con los puntos de
vista tradicionales de los pueblos indígenas (Dwyer,
2006). Por lo tanto, cuando se trabaja con comu-
nidades indígenas, recomendamos discutir y acor-
dar los derechos de propiedad con los anotadores o
28Un ejemplo de un trabajo de campo comprometido con la
comunidad es Czaykowska-Higgins (2009)los participantes del estudio antes de comenzar el
trabajo para encontrar un arreglo con el que todos
estén contentos. También nos gustaría señalar que,
según nuestro estudio de caso, la sensación general
es que los datos y los resultados de la investigación
deben ser accesibles para la comunidad que habla
el idioma. Esto contradice la práctica de algunos
esfuerzos de documentación que cierran los datos
recopilados al público e incluso a los hablantes
de la comunidad (Avelino, 2021). Algunos par-
ticipantes en nuestro estudio incluso sugieren el
uso de Creative Commons (CC)29para los datos.
Sin embargo, el uso de CC podría no ser la mejor
opción de licencia, ya que no está diseñado especí-
ficamente para las necesidades de los indígenas.
Finalmente, siempre que los datos recopilados se
utilicen para uso comercial, los acuerdos especiales
que involucran aspectos financieros son cruciales.
Permisos Algunas comunidades requieren que
se obtenga un permiso de su entidad gobernante
cuando alguien, que no es miembro, quiere estu-
diar su idioma. Esto puede ser difícil ya que a
veces no existe una autoridad central. Averiguar de
quién obtener el permiso puede ser un desafío en
tales escenarios. Sin embargo, como vemos en este
estudio, muchas comunidades no requieren este
permiso. Un proyecto prometedor que pretende
simplificar este tema son las etiquetas KP30. Es un
conjunto de etiquetas que las comunidades pueden
usar para expresar sus permisos y voluntad de co-
operar con investigadores y proyectos externos.
Datos personales De las respuestas abiertas,
aprendemos además que, para muchos hablantes,
usar su propio idioma en su entorno diario les
ayuda a proteger su privacidad: Sus conversaciones
solo pueden ser entendidas por su familia o en-
torno cercano. Sin embargo, esta preocupación por
el manejo de datos también es válida para otros
lenguajes.
Preocupaciones sobre Información Privada de
la Comunidad El punto anterior puede exten-
derse aún más a las asambleas y otras reuniones
organizacionales, donde se utiliza la barrera del
idioma para mantener en privado sus decisiones o
estrategias. Esta es una preocupación que tienen
las comunidades con MT y los posibles temas que
podrían ser perjudiciales para ellos. Algunas comu-
29https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
30https://localcontexts.org/labels/tra
dicional-conocimiento-etiquetas/nidades también tienen preocupaciones generales
acerca de compartir su idioma con personas ajenas
a la comunidad (por ejemplo, la controversia del
Diccionario Hopi (Hill, 2002)). Para este caso, es
importante no abordar este tema desde un punto de
vista legal occidental e ir hacia las prácticas y nor-
mas tradicionales de gobierno interno y la consulta
con las comunidades.
La religión y la Biblia Con respecto a los domin-
ios problemáticos para MT, varios participantes de
la encuesta mencionaron la religión. Esto es bas-
tante relevante para la comunidad de NLP, ya que
el recurso más amplio disponible actualmente para
los idiomas minoritarios es la Biblia. Como se vio
en la Sección 3.2, el uso colonial de la traducción
de textos religiosos (Niranjana, 1990) es precisa-
mente el origen de estos conflictos. Por lo tanto,
recomendamos que los investigadores de NLP y
MT usen la Biblia con cuidado, a través de un pro-
ceso de consulta, y consideren sus impactos. Sin
embargo, sin una relación cercana con cada comu-
nidad (por ejemplo, en un experimento masivo de
MT multilingüe), la recomendación es evitar el uso
de la Biblia.
Tecnología y soberanía de los datos Tener tec-
nología para sus propios idiomas es bien visto por
la mayoría de los participantes del estudio. Sin
embargo, también encontramos un fuerte deseo
de participar directamente en el desarrollo de sis-
temas MT. Esto requiere una mayor inclusión de
investigadores indígenas en la PNL. Por lo tanto,
la formación de investigadores e ingenieros indí-
genas es una tarea importante que recomendamos
sea valorada más por las comunidades de NLP y
MT. Somos conscientes de que las desigualdades
existentes no se pueden eliminar de inmediato o
de forma aislada, pero todos pueden brindar su
apoyo.31La creación de un proceso colaborativo
es una propuesta que surge de las propias comu-
nidades: “Tecnología como Tequio; la creación
tecnológica y la innovación como bien común”
(Aguilar-Gil, 2020). Sin embargo, no es posible
construir tecnologías contemporáneas de NLP sin
datos. Y esto abre la discusión sobre la Soberanía
de los Datos. En primer lugar, es importante men-
cionar que las comunidades tienen derecho a la au-
todeterminación, y esto incluye los datos que gen-
eran. Aplicar esta soberanía a los datos se refiere a
31La soberanía tecnológica es un tema central para la con-
ferencia Natives in Tech en 2022: https://nativesint
ech.org/conference/2022tener control sobre los datos, el conocimiento32y
cultural. expresiones que son creadas por estas co-
munidades. Como se discute en este documento, es
importante llegar a acuerdos con las comunidades a
través de consultas y colaboraciones directas. Esto
incluye la concesión de licencias y la propiedad de
los productos de datos finales.
Nuestros hallazgos y trabajos anteriores Final-
mente, queremos relacionar nuestros hallazgos con
discusiones similares en trabajos anteriores. La
mayoría de las inquietudes y sugerencias anteriores
relacionadas con la inclusión y consulta de per-
sonas de las comunidades (Bird, 2020; Liu et al.,
2022) están alineadas con los deseos y anhelos de
los participantes en nuestro estudio. La inclusión
de miembros de la comunidad como coautores (Liu
et al., 2022) no debe ser una mecánica artificial,
sino más bien un proceso de inclusión amplio, que
incluye la soberanía de los datos y la tecnología.
Esto también está alineado con la construcción de
la comunidad a la que apunta Zhang et al. (2022).
Además, debemos considerar que pueden existir
temas problemáticos y no subestimar la importan-
cia de las traducciones de alta calidad.
C.8 Conclusión
En este trabajo, que se centra en los desafíos éti-
cos para la MT de las lenguas indígenas, primero
brindamos una descripción general de los enfoques
éticos relevantes, los desafíos éticos para la traduc-
ción en general y los desafíos más específicos para
la traducción automática. Luego, llevamos a cabo
un estudio de caso, para el cual entrevistamos a ac-
tivistas de lenguas indígenas, profesores de idiomas
y líderes comunitarios de las Américas. Nuestros
hallazgos se alinearon con hallazgos previos con re-
specto a la necesidad de inclusión y consulta con las
comunidades cuando se trabaja con datos lingüísti-
cos. Además, nuestros participantes expresaron un
interés sorprendentemente fuerte en tener sistemas
de traducción automática para sus idiomas, pero
también preocupaciones sobre el uso comercial, el
mal uso cultural y religioso, los datos y la soberanía
tecnológica. Terminamos con recomendaciones es-
pecíficas para las comunidades de NLP y MT, pero
aún más importante, un marco de discusión abierto
para las comunidades indígenas.
32Verhttps://indigenousinnovate.org/dow
nloads/indigenous-knowledges-and-data-g
overnance-protocol_may-2021.pdf