Quantifying quantum chaos through microcanonical distributions of entanglement
Joaquin F. Rodriguez-Nieva,1,Cheryne Jonay,2,and Vedika Khemani2
1Department of Physics & Astronomy, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843y
2Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
(Dated: May 23, 2023)
A characteristic feature of \quantum chaotic" systems is that their eigenspectra and eigenstates
display universal statistical properties described by random matrix theory (RMT). However, eigen-
states of local systems also encode structure beyond RMT. To capture this, we introduce a quan-
titative metric for quantum chaos which utilizes the Kullback{Leibler divergence to compare the
microcanonical distribution of entanglement entropy (EE) of midspectrum eigenstates with a ref-
erence RMT distribution generated by pure random states (with appropriate constraints). The
metric compares not just the averages of the distributions, but also higher moments. The dier-
ences in moments are compared on a highly-resolved scale set by the standard deviation of the RMT
distribution, which is exponentially small in system size. This distinguishes between chaotic and
integrable behavior, and also quanties the degree of chaos in systems assumed to be chaotic. We
study this metric in local minimally structured Floquet random circuits, as well as a canonical fam-
ily of many-body Hamiltonians, the mixed eld Ising model (MFIM). For Hamiltonian systems, the
reference random distribution must be constrained to incorporate the eect of energy conservation.
The metric captures deviations from RMT across all models and parameters, including those that
have been previously identied as strongly chaotic, and for which other diagnostics of chaos such as
level spacing statistics look strongly thermal. In Floquet circuits, the dominant source of deviations
is the second moment of the distribution, and this persists for all system sizes. For the MFIM, we
nd signicant variation of the KL divergence in parameter space. Notably, we nd a small region
where deviations from RMT are minimized, suggesting that \maximally chaotic" Hamiltonians may
exist in ne-tuned pockets of parameter space.
I. INTRODUCTION
The emergence of statistical mechanics from the dy-
namics of isolated quantum systems is a topic of fun-
damental interest [1{4]. While the foundations of this
subject date back to the birth of quantum mechanics,
the topic has seen a recent revival due to remarkable ex-
perimental advances in preparing isolated quantum sys-
tems that can be coherently evolved over unprecedented
time scales [5{9]. Unlike in classical systems, notions
of \ergodicity" and \chaos" in many-body quantum sys-
tems are much more ill-dened. One prevailing approach
to characterize quantum chaos is through the eigensys-
tem properties of Hamiltonians (or time-evolution opera-
tors), specically with respect to the emergence of univer-
sal behavior described by random matrix theory (RMT).
This applies both to correlations of eigenvalues, such as
the level spacing statistics [10{12] or the spectral form
factor [13{18], and to the properties of eigenstates. In
particular, the central conjecture underpinning the cel-
ebrated eigenstate thermalization hypothesis (ETH) is
that highly-excited (innite temperature) eigenstates of
chaotic quantum systems look like random pure states
within subsystems [1{3, 19{23]. This is reected in the
eigenstate expectation values of local observables [24, 25],
as well as the behavior of the eigenstate entanglement en-
tropy (EE) [19, 20, 26{28].
Equal Contribution
yCorresponding author: jrodrigueznieva@tamu.eduIn recent years, a series of works have used the von
Neumann entanglement entropy to rene the correspon-
dence between midspectrum eigenstates of local,physical
Hamiltonians1(or Floquet systems) and random pure
states (see Ref. 28 for a recent review). A widely pre-
vailing expectation [28] is that | in the absence of ad-
ditional conservation laws | innite temperature eigen-
states of chaotic Hamiltonians (or eigenstates of chaotic
Floquet systems) are nearly maximally entangled, with
EE following the Page equation [29] derived for random
pure states (Eq. 6). More recently, the Page result has
been generalized to pure random states in various phys-
ically relevant constrained settings, in which the Hilbert
space does notfactor into a tensor product of the Hilbert
spaces of subsystems [1, 26, 30{32]. A notable example
is systems with a local additive conserved charge, such as
particle number, for which the Hilbert space is a direct
sum of tensor products in dierent charge sectors. In this
case, the typical EE for pure random states constrained
to a given charge sector was recently derived analytically
by Bianchi and Dona [30], and found in numerical studies
to agree well with the eigenstate entropy of chaotic local
Hamiltonians with particle-number conservation [28].
The fact that the eigenenergies and eigenstates of a
wide range of non-random, sparse Hamiltonians numeri-
1We may henceforth drop these qualiers (local, physical) but,
throughout this work, we will only consider Hamiltonians with
short-range, few-body interactions represented by sparse matri-
ces. For Floquet systems, the interactions are time-dependent
but still instantaeously local.arXiv:2305.11940v1  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  19 May 20232
cally display universal RMT correlations (derived for ran-
dom, dense matrices) is quite remarkable; understanding
why this happens is a longstanding question in the study
of quantum chaos. In particular, RMT ensembles, by
design, have no spatial correlations, while local Hamil-
tonians do. Further, while a random many-body wave-
function in a system of size Lhas exponentially many
(O(expL)) random parameters, a local Hamiltonian or
Floquet unitary is specied with just polynomially many
(O(L)) parameters.
Thus, various recent papers have focused on the ques-
tion of how the eigenspectra of local systems encode
structure beyond the leading-order RMT behavior, even
in the absence of additional symmetries or constraints.
For example, Refs. [33{37] have numerically and analyt-
ically studied systematic deviations between the EE of
midspectrum Hamiltonian eigenstates and the Page en-
tropy. Separately, Refs. [18, 38{43] showed that matrix
elements of local operators evaluated in the eigenbasis of
Hamiltonian or Floquet systems are correlated up to cer-
tain energy scales (or inverse time scales related to, but
possibly parameterically larger than, the so-called Thou-
less time); these works claried that these correlations
can be understood through the existence of a \light cone"
in the growth of out-of-time ordered commutators in spa-
tially local extended systems. In fact, eigenstates of local
Hamiltonians \know" that they are notRMT: the cor-
relations encoded in a single eigenstate suce to recon-
struct the entire Hamiltonian [19, 44]. However, despite
these various works, a systematic and unied understand-
ing of eigenstate diagnostics of chaos, including univer-
sal deviations from RMT, is considerably less developed.
This is in contrast to eigenvalue diagnostics of chaos for
which analytic results for the spectral form factor have
been derived for various systems, and have been shown
to display RMT `ramp' behavior for times larger than
the so-called Thouless time [13{18]. The Thouless time
encodes the eects of locality and, in general, grows with
system size; the Thouless time is minimized (and system-
size independent) in certain \maximally chaotic" kicked-
Ising Floquet models which are dual-unitary [13, 45, 46].
Our perspective in this work is to introduce an eigen-
state metric to quantify how chaotic a many-body Hamil-
tonian/Floquet system is | in the sense of providing
a continuous \ruler" measuring deviations from RMT
(Fig. 1). The metric that we propose measures a \dis-
tance" to the appropriate RMT ensemble by computing
the Kullback{Leibler (KL) divergence, DKL(PE;PR), be-
tween the microcanonical distribution of eigenstate EE,
PE(SA), and an appropriate reference RMT distribution,
PR(SA). HereSArefers to the EE of a subsystem A
of a pure state, which is chosen to be either an eigen-
state or a random state. In other words, we ask how
well the microcanonical ensemble of eigenstates repro-
duces the distribution of EE generated by an (appropri-
ately constrained) ensemble of random pure states. For
Hamiltonian systems, the microcanonical ensemble is ob-
tained from a narrow window of eigenstates centered at
FIG. 1. (a) Histograms of EE of (left) midspectrum eigen-
states of the Mixed Field Ising model (MFIM) Hamiltonian,
see Eq.(18), and (right) eigenstates of a Floquet random cir-
cuit (FRC) with nearest-neighbor Haar random gates, see
Eq. (10). The MFIM parameters are chosen to be strongly
chaotic, with g= 1:08 andh= 0:3; FRCs are averaged over
50 circuit realizations. For comparison, we plot the refer-
ence RMT distributions, Page (dotted lines) and Bianchi-
Dona (BD; dashed-dotted lines), see Secs. III A and IV A.
We see that the former is the appropriate reference distribu-
tion for Floquet systems, while the latter describes Hamiltoni-
ans with energy conservation. The reference distributions are
plotted as Gaussian functions with analytically-known means
and standard deviations (see App. A). For all distributions,
we consider a system of size L= 16 and a subsystem of size
LA= 8. (b) The distance between microcanonical distribu-
tion of eigenstate EE and RMT, as quantied through the
Kullback-Liebler (KL) divergence DKL, Eq. (3). Shown are
the values of DKLplotted for a system of size L= 16 for the
FRC and dierent MFIM parameters studied in the literature
or discussed later in the main text: Maximally Chaotic (MC),
Banulus-Cirac-Hastings (BCH) [47], and Kim-Huse (KH) [48],
see Fig. 4.
innite temperature, while we use the entire eigenspec-
trum for Floquet systems. The measure goes beyond the
rst moment by also incorporating higher moments of
the distributions, which depend on the uctuations of
EE across eigenstates. In fact, we will show that these
uctuations play a key role, and capture deviations from
RMT that may not be visible in the rst moment in cer-
tain systems.
A. Summary of Results
We study two models in this work: local Floquet
random circuits (FRCs), and a family of mixed-eld
Ising model (MFIM) Hamiltonians parameterized by the
strength of the transverse and longitudial elds. Our3
main results are summarized as follows:
First, in minimally structured FRCs (which only re-
tain locality, and have no other structure or conservation
laws), we nd that the dominant contribution to DKL
comes from the microcanonical uctuations of EE. In
particular, we nd that E, the standard deviation of
the microcanonical distribution, is systematically larger
thanR, the standard deviation of the Page distribution,
which is the reference RMT distribution. In contrast, the
means,EandR, are much better converged. We note
thatDKLfurnishes a very nely resolved comparison be-
tween the microcanonical and RMT distributions by nor-
malizing the dierences between the distributions by R,
so that the contributions of the rst two moments of the
microcanonical distribution to DKLare functions of the
ratiosjE Rj=RandE=R, see Eq. (4). For the ref-
erence RMT distribution, the standard deviation is expo-
nentially small in system size: Rp
2 L. Thus, unlike
prior works, DKLmeasures not just whether jE Rj
decreases with system size, or whether Edisplays ex-
ponentially small scaling similar to RMT, but rather it
probes these dierences on the exponentially small scale
set byR. For FRCs, we nd that the dierence in mean
between the microcanonical and RMT distributions is
small even on the scale of R, while the ratio E=R
shows a sizable and positive O(1) departure from 1 which
appears stable with system size (Fig. 2). In other words,
for FRCs, we nd that Ep
2 L, but with a system-
atically larger prefactor than the reference Page distribu-
tion. We attribute this relative increase in Eto locality,
since FRCs do not have any structure or symmetries be-
yond locality and time-periodicity.
Second, even for Hamiltonian systems, we nd that the
dierence between the microcanonical and RMT predic-
tion is exponentially small in system size (and compara-
ble toRin large regions of parameter space, away from
integrability), provided we suitably constrain the RMT
ensemble. This may seem at odds with various works
which recently noted that the EE of midspectrum Hamil-
tonian eigenstates shows a small but systematic O(1)
negative departure from the Page value [33{37]. Remark-
ably, we show instead that the departure is captured if
we instead compare Eto the mean of the Bianchi-Dona
(BD) distribution [30] obtained for systems with a local
U(1) charge. In other words, a \better" RMT ensemble
for describing midspectrum eigenstates of local Hamil-
tonians is the BD distribution (as opposed to the Page
distribution): energy conservation plays the role of an
additive local charge, even at innite temperature and
in the absence of additional symmetries such as particle
number conservation, and the BD distribution incorpo-
rates this important feature (see Fig. 1). This result is of
independent interest, and updates numerous prior studies
in which midspectrum eigenstates of local Hamiltonians
(without additional symmetries) have been compared to
the Page distribution [28]. We note that the deviation
between the average microcanonical EE for Hamiltonian
systems and the Page entropy was also previously arguedfor by Huang in Ref. [34, 35], and agrees with the results
obtained by using the BD ensemble. In Fig. 1, we plot
the microcanonical EE distribution for a non-integrable
Hamiltonian and Floquet random circuit, and show that
they are well described (to leading order) by the BD and
Page distributions respectively. In particular, Figure 1
shows that the means of the two reference RMT distri-
butions dier by0:1, which entirely captures the O(1)
deviation from Page that has previously been observed
for the EE of Hamiltonian eigenstates [33{35].
Third, for Hamiltonian systems, we nd that DKL
shows signicant variation in parameter space for the
models and system sizes we study | even in parameter
regimes where other metrics of chaos such as level statis-
tics have saturated to the RMT predictions (Fig. 4). Re-
markably, there are small islands in parameter space that
minimizeDKL, and these are quite far in parameter space
from \standard" reference values that are widely used in
studies of chaos in the MFIM, such as the \Kim-Huse"
(KH) parameters of Ref. [48]. At the strongly chaotic
points, the deviations in both jE Rj=RandE=R
are comparable, while these dierences steeply increase
away from the maximally chaotic regions, resulting in a
largeDKL. As such, our FRC and Hamiltonian results
show thatDKLcan resolve dierences in microcanoni-
cal and RMT distributions, even if the moments of the
former are \exponentially close" to the latter. This vari-
ation in parameter space suggests that there might be
\maximally chaotic" Hamiltonians in judiciously tuned
regions of parameter space, similar to maximally chaotic
dual-unitary Floquet circuits [13, 45, 46] or minimally
chaotic integrable models, with the degree of chaos that
is attainable being constrained by features such as local-
ity or the type of allowed interactions.
More generally, the approach to compare microcanon-
ical and RMT distributions, including higher moments,
is reminiscent of (but dierent in detail from) studies of
unitary- and state- design in quantum information the-
ory [49{54]. For example, studies of k design formation
compare the lowest kmoments of candidate probability
distributions over a unitary group against the uniform
Haar distribution; this approach is particularly informa-
tive in understanding distributions for which the lower
moments agree with the Haar distribution while higher
moments show deviations. Likewise, a notable feature of
our work is that the microcanonical standard deviation of
EE is informative in characterizing chaos even in models
where the mean agrees with RMT predictions.
There are also practical advantages of quantifying
chaos through the microcanonical statistics of entangle-
ment entropy. A single Hamiltonian produces its own mi-
crocanonical ensemble of eigenstates which is then used
to characterize chaos. This contrasts with other met-
rics like the spectral form factor which requires sampling
over Hamiltonian ensembles [55]. It also makes the ap-
proach quantitative as it allows one to compare the de-
gree of chaos for two dierent systems using the same
well-characterized benchmark. Further, only a relatively4
small number of eigenstates are required to characterize
the distribution of EE up to the second moment, there-
fore making the method inexpensive and relatively easy
to implement for relatively large system sizes through
various shift-invert or polynomial ltering techniques for
targeting eigenstates in small energy or quasienergy win-
dows [56, 57]. Finally, our metric of chaos is intrinsic to
eigenstates and is therefore operator-independent, unlike
methods that rely on susceptibility metrics which require
specifying a perturbing operator [58].
The outline of the rest of this paper is as follows. In
Sec. II, we introduce our metric for quantum chaos and
describe its behavior in simple limits. In Sec. III, we
begin the discussion by introducing the relevant RMT
distribution that will be used to quantify chaos in Flo-
quet Random Circuits, namely, the Page distribution.
We then present numerical results for the distribution of
EE of eigenstates in minimally-structured Floquet ran-
dom circuits, and discuss contributions of the rst two
moments to the distance measure. In Sec. IV, we be-
gin by introducing the relevant RMT distribution that
will be used to quantify chaos in Hamiltonian systems,
namely, the BD distribution. We then present numer-
ical results for the mixed eld Ising model (MFIM), a
paradigmatic Hamiltonian system that exhibits both in-
tegrable and chaotic regimes. We discuss the behavior of
the eigenstate EE distribution in the proximity of max-
imally chaotic parameters, and the dierences with re-
spect to other metrics of chaos employing spectral statis-
tics. Finally, in Sec. V, we summarize the main results
of our work and discuss directions for future work.
II. QUANTIFYING QUANTUM CHAOS
Our goal is to quantify the degree of quantum chaos in
a given Hamiltonian or Floquet unitary by comparing the
microcanonical distribution of eigenstate EE, PE(SA),
with a reference distribution for the EE of (appropri-
ately constrained) pure random states, PR(SA). We will
consider systems of size Land Hilbert space dimension
dpartitioned into two subsystems AandBwith sizes
LALB, respectively. We will nd it convenient to in-
troduce the ratio f=LA=L1=2. All the numerical
data in this work will be for one-dimensional spin 1/2
systems, but the methods readily generalize to higher di-
mensions and systems of qudits.
To obtain the microcanonical distribution, we choose
eigenstatesjkiof the Hamiltonian/Floquet system with
energy/quasienergy Ek='krespectively. The reduced
density matrix obtained from eigenstate jkiis
A;k= TrB[k]; k=jkihkj; (1)
with associated von Neumann entanglement entropy
SA;k= Tr [A;klogA;k]: (2)
For Hamiltonian systems, we construct the microcanon-
ical distribution PE(SA) by computing the EE of eigen-states in a small window centered around the middle of
the spectrum, i.e., at an energy density corresponding to
innite temperature (details are discussed in Sec. IV). For
Floquet unitaries, there is no conserved energy or notion
of temperature (or, colloquially, all states are at innite
temperature); therefore, the full eigenbasis correspond-
ing to states at all quasienergies are used to construct
PE(SA).
Our goal is to dene a distance between the micro-
canonical distribution PE(SA) and a reference random
distribution PR(SA). A natural choice for the distance
between distributions is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) diver-
gence,
DKL(PE;PR) =Z
dSAPE(SA) logPE(SA)
PR(SA)0:(3)
The KL divergence is the expectation of the logarith-
mic dierence between probability distributions, and is a
measure of the information loss when the reference dis-
tributionPR(SA) is used to approximate the empiricial
eigenstate distribution PE(SA). The KL divergence is a
type of distance, since it is always non-negative and takes
value 0 when the reference and empirical distribution are
equal. However, it is not a metric distance because it is
asymmetric in the two distributions and does not satisfy
the triangle inequality.
Let us evaluate Eq.(3) in a simple yet important limit.
Given the rst two moments E=RandE=Rof the em-
pirical (or eigenstate/microcanonical) and reference (or
random state) distributions, we make a Gaussian approx-
imation for both PE(SA)1p
22
Eexph
 (SA E)2
22
Ei
and
PR(SA)1p
22
Rexph
 (SA R)2
22
Ri
. Within this approx-
imation,DKLquanties the dierence between means
(relative to R) and the ratioE
Rthrough the non-linear
relations
DKL=D(1)
KL+D(2)
KL;
D(1)
KL=(E R)2
22
R;
D(2)
KL=1
2"E
R2
 1#
 logE
R: (4)
In what follows, we will make this Gaussian approxima-
tion and only focus on the rst two moments for the ref-
erence and empirical distributions while computing DKL.
While this isn't strictly accurate (the strict upper bound
on the value of entropy produces a skewness, for instance,
which has been computed for random states with and
without charge conservation symmetry [30]), it is still a
good approximation because the higher moments scale
with increasing powers of 1 =d, wheredis the Hilbert
space dimension [30].
The dierent PR(SA) studied in this work, i.e., the
Page and Bianchi-Dona distributions, will be discussed
in the following sections. Both distributions have R5
p
2 L; thus, as mentioned earlier, DKLprovides a highly
resolved comparison between the microcanonical and ref-
erence RMT distributions by comparing the dierences
between their moments on the exponentially small scale
set byR, as seen by the expressions for D(1;2)
KLin Eq. (4).
III. FLOQUET SYSTEMS
We start by analyzing a minimally-structured model of
chaotic thermalizing dynamics, namely, Floquet random
circuits that only feature locality and no other conserva-
tion laws. In the absence of energy or U(1) conservation,
we employ the Page distribution as the reference RMT
distribution. We include a discussion of R;Rfor the
Page distribution for completeness and to set notation,
before presenting our numerical results.
A. Reference distribution I: the Page distribution
We begin by recapitulating the `Page Distribution' for
the bipartite entanglement entropy of pure random states
chosen uniformly with respect to the Haar measure, un-
constrained by symmetry. Our nomenclature takes some
historical liberties: in fact, Page only conjectured (and
partially proved) the expression for the rst moment of
this distribution [29]; explicit derivations for the rst and
higher moments were later furnished in Refs. [30, 59, 60].
As mentioned above, we will focus on the rst two
moments of the Page distribution in this work. The exact
analytical expressions for these (for nite system sizes)
are reproduced in Appendix A, and used in our numerical
comparisons below. We briey discuss these in the limits
LA;LB1 and when 0 <f0:5 is a nite fraction as
L!1 . The rst moment in this limit is approximated
as:
hSAiPP(f)log(dA) dA
2dB; (5)
wheredA;dBrefer to the Hilbert space dimensions of
subsystems A;B respectively. We will henceforth use the
subscript `P' for `Page' in order to denote moments com-
puted with respect to the Haar measure. For a system of
qubits, this reduces to
P(f)fLlog(2) 2 L(1 2f) 1: (6)
The rst term is the volume law term which describes an
entanglement entropy scaling with the size of subsystem
A,LA=fL, while the second term is the `Page correc-
tion' which is exponentially small when f < 1=2. For
f= 1=2, it gives rise to a `half-bit' shift:
P
f=1
2
L
2log(2) 1
2: (7)
More recently, the second moment of the distribution was
calculated using various techniques [30, 59, 60] and, in thelimitLA;LB1 is approximated as [28]
2
P(f)1
2 1
4f;1
21
d2
B=1
2 1
4f;1
2
2 2L(1 f):
(8)
The second moment of the distribution Pis exponen-
tially small in L, and scales asp
1=datf= 1=2:
P
f=1
2
1
2p
2 L: (9)
BecauseP=P1, atypical random state will have EE
given by Eq.(6).
B. Numerical Results
We consider a Floquet random unitary circuit com-
prised of two layers of Haar random two-site unitary gates
acting on odd and even bonds, UF=UoddUeven, in a spin
1/2 chain of even length Lwith periodic boundary con-
ditions:
Ueven=U0;1
U2;3
U4;5
UL 2;L 1;
Uodd=U1;2
U3;4
U5;6
UL 1;0: (10)
Each of the unitary matrices Ui;i+1are chosen randomly
and uniformly from the Haar measure on U(4). The
time-evolution operator for integer times tisU(t) =Ut
F.
We emphasize that the system has locality and time-
periodicity, but no additional symmetries.
The microcanonical EE distribution PE(SA) is com-
puted as a function of LforLA=L=2, and compared
with the Page distribution of EE for pure random states.
The mean and standard deviation of the EE distribu-
tion are denoted U;Urespectively, where we use the
subscript `U' to denote eigenstates of unitary circuits,
which is more descriptive than the E,Esymbols in-
troduced in Sec. II (which referred collectively to mo-
ments of eigenstate distributions of either Hamiltonian
or Floquet systems). For each system size, we average
the microcanonical EE distribution over 50 circuit re-
alizations, and compute the microcanonical distribution
from the entire Floquet spectrum for a given realization.
ForL14, we use exact diagonalization to compute all
eigenvectors and quasienergies for UF. ForL= 16, we
use the polynomial ltering diagonalization method in-
troduced in [57] to obtain a total of 2000 eigenstates per
circuit. These are obtained in groups of 50 states cen-
tered around 40 evenly spaced quasienergies distributed
across the full quasienergy spectrum. In Appendix B, we
show that our results are not sensitive to whether the mi-
crocanonical distribution is obtained using the full spec-
trum vs. narrower windows of states clustered around
particular quasienergies.
We showed in Fig. 1(a) that the distribution PE(SA)
forL= 16 and LA= 8 shows good agreement with
the Page distribution, so that the entanglement prop-
erties of eigenstates of FRCs are well described by the6
FIG. 2. (a) Histogram of eigenstate EE for a FRC as a func-
tion of system size showing a broader distribution than that
predicted by RMT, see also Fig.1. Shown with dotted lines
is the standard normal distirbution. (b) System size scaling
of the rst two moments of the EE distribution relative to
RMT behavior: shown are convergence of dierence in EE
means (plotted both relative to Pand toP) while nite
deviations of standard deviations persists for all system sizes.
(c) Contributions to DKLby the rst two moments of the EE
distribution of FRC eigenstates.
entanglement properties of Haar random states, as ex-
pected from numerous prior works. We now provide a
more nely resolved comparison of the microcanonical
and Page distributions for dierent system sizes; in par-
ticular, we compare both the rst and second moments
of these distributions, and probe dierences on the ex-
ponentially small scale set by P. In order to do this,
for each eigenstate, we shift the EE of the eigenstate by
Pand normalize by P(the expressions for PandP
depend onLand are provided in Eqs. (A3), (A4)). With
these transformations, the Page distribution (within the
Gaussian approximation) reduces to a standard normal
distribution for all L. The shifted and rescaled distribu-
tions forx= (SA P)=Pare plotted in Fig.2(a), with
the standard normal distribution shown for comparison.
We see from this gure that while the means of the mi-
crocanonical and Page distributions are in close agree-
ment, we nd that PE(SA) converges with increasing L
to a wider distribution than Page, i.e., with larger stan-
dard deviation. Both the right and left tails of PE(SA)
contribute to the increased width so that, in comparison
to the Page distribution over random states, it is more
likely for the entropy of FRC eigenstates to show larger
positive andnegative deviations from the Page mean.
In Fig. 2(b), we compare the rst two moments ofthe Page and microcanonical distributions. We nd that
P>U, but the dierence ( P U) converges to zero
exponentially with L. First, we normalize ( P U)
byPL, and notice the exponential decrease in
(P U)=Pwith increasing L. Next, even upon nor-
malizing by Pp
2 L, which is itself exponentially
decreasing with L, we notice that not only is ( P U)
an order or magnitude smaller than P, but that the
ratio (P U)=Pstill shows a weak decrease with in-
creasingL(consistent with plateauing at larger L). In
contrast, the dierences in standard deviations is more
stark: the ratio of standard deviations U=Pplateaus
to a constant value 1:2, so that the microcanonical
standard deviation is about 20% larger than the Page
standard deviation. In other words, while Up
2 L
shows the same exponential scaling as P, the prefactor
for the scaling is 20% larger.
The dierent moments (normalized by P) contribute
toDKLaccording to Eq. (4). We show in Fig. 2(c) that
D(2)
KL, the contribution from the second moment, is more
than an order of magnitude larger than D(1)
KL, the con-
tribution from the rst moment. In other words, while
the average entropy of eigenstates of FRCs is well de-
scribed by the average entropy of random pure states,
the uctuations of the microcanonical distribution are
markedly larger, so that an increase in standard devi-
ation is the dominant source of dierence between the
microcanonical and Page distributions. Since the FRC
lacks any structure beyond locality, we attribute the rel-
ative increase in the standard deviation of PE(SA) as a
correction to RMT that arises from locality2. Indeed,
in Appendix C we show increasing convergence to the
Page moments as the constraint of locality is relaxed by
increasing the period of the Floquet circuit (i.e. by incor-
porating increasing numbers of even-odd layers). We ob-
tained similar results by increasing the gate range while
keeping the period xed (Appendix C).
There are (at least) two mechanisms by which locality
could aect entropy uctuations. First, the entanglement
entropy of eigenstates of local FRCs will be sensitive to
the entangling properties of the local unitary gates strad-
dling the entanglement cuts (in our case, these are two
two-site gates displaced by half the system size). These
local unitary gates have a much larger likelihood of be-
ing either weakly entangling (i.e. close to the identity) or
maximally entangling (for example, close to the iSWAP
gate) in comparison to global Haar random unitaries.
Thus, even though the microcanonical distribution of en-
tropy for local FRCs shows the same exponential scaling
as for global Haar random circuits, Up
2 L, the eect
2As a side remark, we note that the orthogonality of eigenstates is
not responsible for the deviation from RMT, as discussed in [33].
Indeed, we checked that the distribution of entanglement entropy
produced by a global U(N) random unitary ( i.e., in the absence
of locality) does not exhibit deviations from the Page distribution
for the rst two moments.7
of locality (and, in particular, the distribution in entan-
gling power for local gates) could contribute to a larger
prefactor for U. This suggests that exploring dierent
families of local FRCs could allow us to tune UandDKL
to identify `maximally chaotic' families of circuits where
DKLis minimized. This would be an eigenstate analog of
the property of `maximally chaotic' dual-unitary circuits
for which the Thouless time in the spectral form factor is
minimized (and system size independent) despite spatial
locality [13]. We defer this analysis to future work.
Second, Refs. [18, 41{43] showed that there are mi-
crocanonical correlations between expectation values of
local operators computed in eigenstates of local Floquet
circuits (which also imply correlations between reduced
density matrices of eigenstates, which are also used to
compute entanglement entropy). These correlations are
not present in an RMT description of the system and
they arise from the presence of light-cones in the spread-
ing of local operators (or scrambling of quantum infor-
mation) in spatially local systems. In particular, these
correlations will be present even in dual-unitary mod-
els for which the Thouless time is minimized and agrees
with RMT. While this analysis does not directly apply
to the microcanonical distribution of half-system von-
Neumann entanglement entropy, it is reasonable to ex-
pect that eigenstate correlations of reduced density ma-
trices could also aect the eigenstate entropy distribu-
tion. Understanding this connection better, and teasing
apart dierent eects induced by locality that may con-
tribute to increased Uis also an interesting direction for
future work.
In sum, the results of this section corroborate that
DKL, particularly microcanonical entropy uctuations,
furnishes a sensitive and easy-to-characterize metric for
quantifying chaos via deviations from RMT. This metric
can be used to compare dierent models with ease, and
can encapsulate various dierent eects of locality that
may individually be more dicult to calculate, bench-
mark and compare across models and observables. We
now turn to studying this metric in a family of mixed-
eld Ising Hamiltonians parameterized by the strength of
a transverse and longitudinal eld. We will identify max-
imally chaotic models within this family of Hamiltonians
by minimizing DKLin parameter space.
IV. HAMILTONIAN SYSTEMS
We now consider the microcanonical distribution of
EE produced by midspectrum eigenstates in the Mixed
Field Ising model (MFIM), a paradigmatic model that
exhibits both chaotic and integrable limits depending on
the model parameters. We rst present the Bianchi-Dona
distribution and argue why it serves as a better reference
random distribution (as compared to the Page distribu-
tion) for Hamiltonian systems with energy conservation.
We then introduce the MFIM model, generate the em-
pirical distribution of midspectrum eigenstate entropies,PE(SA), and compare the rst two moments with the
BD distribution. We quantity the distance between the
distributions using the KL divergence, Eq. (4), and com-
pare with conventional measures of quantum chaos such
as level statistics.
A. Reference distribution II: the Bianchi-Dona
distribution
The presence of symmetries can aect the distribu-
tion of the EE. We will argue that the symmmetry of
primary interest to this work corresponds to the conser-
vation of an additive local scalar charge M. We will refer
to the distribution of entanglement entropy for pure ran-
dom states subject to this constraint as the Bianchi-Dona
(BD) distribution [30], but note that some aspects of this
ensemble of random states were previously also discussed
by Huang in [34, 35]. We rst describe this distribution,
and then argue why it captures important contributions
of energy conservation to the EE of midspectrum eigen-
states of spatially local Hamiltonians.
BD considered systems with an additive local charge
which decomposes between a bipartion of the system into
subsystems AandBasM=MA+MB. For concrete-
ness, it is convenient to think of 0 MLas an integer
particle number, with each site only able to accommodate
a maximum of one particle. The Hilbert space H(M) of
states with xed charge Mno longer has a tensor prod-
uct structure, but instead decomposes as a direct sum of
tensor products:
H(M) =max(M;LA)M
MA=min(0;M LB)HA(MA)
HB(M MA):
(11)
The Hilbert space dimension of HA(MA) isdA;MA= LA
MA
, and the Hilbert space dimension of HB(M MA) is
dB;M MA= L LA
M MA
. The total Hilbert space dimension
isP
MAdA;MAdB;M MA=dM= L
M
. A random state
with xed total charge j	Mi2H (M) can be expressed
as a superposition of orthonormal basis states,
j	Mi=X
MAdA;MAX
=1dB;M MAX
=1 (MA)
;j;MAi
j;M MAi;
(12)
where the limits of the sum over MAare the same as in
Eq. (11), and  (MA)
;are uncorrelated random numbers
upto normalization.
The reduced density matrix of such a state in
subsystem Ais of block diagonal form, A;M =P
MApMAA;MA, where the factors pMA0 come
from normalizing A;MAin eachMA-sector and satisfyP
MApMA= 1. The probability to nd MAparticles
inAis given by pMA, which is thus interpreted as the
(classical) probability distribution of particle number in8
A. The entanglement entropy can then be expressed as
S(A;M) =X
MApMAS(A;MA) pMAlogpMA;(13)
where the second term on the RHS is the Shannon en-
tropy of the number distribution pMA, which captures
particle number correlations between the two halves,
while the rst term captures quantum correlations be-
tween congurations with a xed particle number [61].
The uniform measure on H(M) was derived in [30] and
is the product of the distribution on the pMA's, and the
uniform Haar measure within each number sector. The
resulting analytical expression for the rst two moments
of the EE distribution for random states of the form
Eq. (12) is reproduced in Appendix A (as a function of
L;M ), and these exact results are used in our numerical
comparison below. In this section, we again discuss these
moments in the limits LA;LB1, for which asymptotic
forms were derived in [28]. In these limits, the average
entanglement entropy of the BD distribution is given by
BD(f;m)fL[ (1 m) log(1 m) mlog(m)]
 p
Lf;1=2r
m(1 m)
2log1 m
m
+f+ log(1 f)
2 1
2f;1=2m;1=2;(14)
wherem=M=L . The rst term is the volume law term
that scales proportionately with LA=fL, and the pref-
actor accounts for the reduced Hilbert space dimension
in symmetry sector M. Whenf= 1=2, the EE has an
additionalp
Lcontribution which comes from a saddle
point evaluation of the probability distribution of m, and
which has also been discussed in [26, 27]. This correction
can make nite-size analysis more complicated, but it
vanishes at half-lling, m= 1=2, which is the maximum
entropy case that will be of interest to us in our compar-
isons with innite temperature eigenstates.
Evaluating Eq. (14) at half-lling ( m= 1=2) and for
equal bipartitions ( f= 1=2) yields:
BD(f= 1=2;m= 1=2)fLlog(2) 1
2+0:5 + log(0:5)
2:
(15)
Relative to the Page entropy at f= 1=2, Eq. (6), this
expression has an \extra" decit of size0:5+log(0:5)
2
0:0966 (see relative shifts in Page and BD distributions
plotted in Fig. 1; numerical values for PandBDshow-
ing the 0.1 dierence for L=8 to 16 is shown in table I of
Appendix A). As we will show in the next section, this
shift accounts for the O(1) deviations between innite
temperature eigenstates of local Hamiltonians (without
any additional symmetries) and the Page entropy that
have been previously noted in the literature [33{35].
The second moment of the BD distribution in the
LA;LB1 limit is approximated by
2
BD(f;n)L3=2e L; (16)where= mlogm (1 m) log(1 m) andis an
O(1) numerical prefactor in the limits of interest. At m=
f= 1=2, the variances for the Page and BD distributions
scale similarly with system size, i.e., as1=d2
B2 L.
Away from this limit, the rate of exponential decrease 
is dierent for the two distributions. However, similarly
to Page,BD=BD1 so that the average entropy of a
constrained pure state in a xed Msector is also typical.
Finally, we note that we will compare the BD distribu-
tion to the EE distribution produced by eigenstates of the
MFIM model in Eq.(18). The MFIM has time-reversal
symmetry and thus its eigenstates are real-valued vec-
tors, whereas the BD distribution was derived for com-
plex random states. Thus, the reference BDandBD
need to be adjusted. For the case of unconstrained ran-
dom states (i.e. without any symmetry), it has been
found[59, 62, 63] that the distribution of EE for both real
and imaginary pure random states asymptotically has
the same mean value, given by the Page mean, GOE
P
GUE
P, Eq. (A3). On the other hand, the standard devia-
tion of the EE distribution, P, is (asymptotically) larger
by a factor ofp
2 for real random states [59, 62, 63],
GOE
Pp
2GUE
P where GOE and GUE refer to the or-
thogonal and unitary ensembles applicable for real and
complex random states. The exact nite-size expressions
for the mean and standard deviation of the EE of real
random states look signicantly more complicated than
the expressions for the Page distribution for complex ran-
dom states, but we show in Appendix A that numerically
obtained values for the mean and standard deviation of
real random states converge to GUE
P andp
2GUE
P with
increasingL. Turning to constrained states, exact ana-
lytic results for real random states with charge conserva-
tion, i.e. the GOE version of the BD distribution, have
not yet been derived. However, similar to the Page case,
we nd numerically in Appendix A that the means of the
EE distribution produced by real and imaginary states in
a given symmetry sector converge to the same value with
increasingL, while the standard deviation is again a fac-
tor ofp
2 larger for real states. In what follows, whenever
we refer to BD, we are referring to GOE
BD, which is in-
ated by a factorp
2 relative to the exact expression for
BDin Eq. (A6), while we continue to use the expression
forBDin Eq. (A5) for the mean3.
1. Application of the BD distribution to midspectrum
Hamiltonian eigenstates
We have seen in the previous section that the approach
to compare the eigenstates of FRCs with unconstrained
pure random states captures certain properties like the
3We have checked that our results are not qualitatively changed
on using these analytic reference values, as compared to using
numerically determined moments for real random constrained
states.9
average entropy, while deviations from RMT due to lo-
cality are dominantly reected in higher moments.
To generalize this analysis to Hamiltonian systems, we
must contend with the fact that energy conservation adds
additional structure which is not captured by the Page
distribution, and which already results in nite devia-
tions in the average half-system entropy of innite tem-
perature eigenstates [33{36] (see Fig. 1). The goal is to
identify a new (more constrained) random state distribu-
tion which incorporates the eect of energy conservation,
so that dierences between the new reference distribution
and the microcanonical distribution can be dominantly
attributed to features such as locality.
We now argue for why the BD distribution furnishes a
better RMT ensemble for describing midspectrum eigen-
states of local Hamiltonians, even in the absence of addi-
tionalU(1) symmetries like particle number. The eect
energy conservation alone can be captured, within cer-
tain approximations, by that of conservation of a local
additiveU(1) charge, and the BD distribution incorpo-
rates this feature. Our arguments recapitulate and build
on part of the discussion in Ref. [35], which argued for
anO(1) deviation between the Page entropy and mean
EE of Hamiltonian eigenstates.
As mentioned, we will be interested in the eigenstate
entanglement entropy SAof a subsystem of size A. We
write the Hamiltonian as H=HA+HB+HAB, whereHA
(HB) has support on A(B) only, and HABhas support
in bothAandB. We can write any eigenstate of H
with energy E,j Ei, in the basis of tensor products of
eigenstates of HA;HB:
j Ei=X
ijcijjiiAjjiB (17)
Deutsch proposed [1] that Hamiltonian eigenstates could
be modeled as random states in which cijis a random
matrix with a narrow bandwidth which approximately
imposes that the sum of energies of the subsystems is
approximately equal to E:Eiji+j E0 (the
equality is not exact because of HAB). Ref. [27] used
ETH to rene this conjecture to a more explicit form in
whichcijis modulated by a \window function" F(Eij)
which penalizes deviations away from E= 0 on a scale
set by  =p
h EjHABj Ei.
With the condition Eij0, Eqs (12) and (17) are
conceptually very similar. However, there are also dier-
ences that we must treat with caution: (i) The presence
of theHABterm (which is also responsible for the state
being entangled in the rst place) means that the Eijis
only approximately (rather than exactly) equal to 0. (ii)
the spectrum of His dense, so that the Hilbert space does
not factor into a sum of tensor products as in Eq. (13).
Both these dierences can be addressed if we make an
approximation which sets the \window function" F(Eij)
to be strictly zero outside some width set by , so
thatcijis a strictly banded random matrix. This is
well-motivated, also because of a mathematical proof
in Ref. [64] which shows tha,t for local Hamiltonians,there exist constants c;> 0 such thatP
Eijjcijj2<
ce =. The truncated state can now be put in the form
of Eq. (12) (note that  MA
;in (12) is a banded random
matrix). This is because the same truncated state can
be equivalently obtained by discretizing the spectrum of
HA;HBin steps of size , so that all eigenvalues with
energyEi =2E < Ei+=2 are assigned to the
ith stepEi. This produces a degeneracy for Ei, simi-
lar to the degeneracy in MA=Bfor theU(1) case. Then,
the truncated state is just a random constrained state
with the strict constraint that Ei+Ej=E, which now
looks identical to the U(1) constrained state of the pre-
vious section in which the step size was 1. This factors
the Hilbert space into a sum of tensor products, as in
Eq. (13). The relative dimensions of the steps at dier-
ent energies also become equivalent to the U(1) case in
the large system limit, since the density of states of the
Hamiltonian approaches a Gaussian, as does the bino-
mial \choose" function which sets the sizes of the U(1)
sectors.
We emphasize that the locality of the Hamiltonian is
crucial for making the connection between the eigenstate
and BD distributions. The truncation scale  is set by
HAB, and we need  O(1) for the arguments above.
More colloquially, we want HABto be a weak boundary
term which is necessary to couple the subsystems, but
can be taken to be arbitrarily small while still getting a
thermal state. In contrast, we expect that eigenstates of
long-range or k-local models ( i.e., SYK models or sys-
tems with power law interactions) will have the same
universal properties as pure random states without any
constraints, and defer a more detailed analysis of this to
future work.
Finally, we note that our arguments above do not rule
out the possibility of non-universal O(1) corrections in
the mean EE induced by the truncation of the cijma-
trix and the presence of the HABterm. Nevertheless,
we nd below that the agreement between BD and the
Hamiltonian eigenstate distribution is surprisingly good,
and captures most of the observed dierence between the
eigenstate EE and Page mean. For this reason, we conjec-
ture that the BD distribution is the best universal distri-
bution to incorporate the eects of energy conservation.
B. The Mixed Field Ising model (MFIM)
We now describe the Hamiltonian model studied in this
work, the one-dimensional MFIM:
H=X
i 
z
iz
i+1+gx
i+hz
i
; (18)
where
i(=x;y;z ) are Pauli matrices, gis the trans-
verse eld, and his the longitudinal eld. We use open
boundary conditions in order to break translational sym-
metry, and add additional boundary elds h1= 0:25 and10
hL= 0:25 at the edges to break inversion symmetry.4
The MFIM has various limits of physical interest. When
h= 0, the model can be mapped to a free fermion model
through a Jordan-Wigner transformation [65], therefore
the model is non-interacting and integrable. A nite
value ofhbreaks integrability. In addition, the model
hosts two classical integrable limits: (i) g= 0 corre-
sponds to the classical Ising model (diagonal in the z
basis), and (ii) g1 corresponds to the classical para-
magnet (diagonal in the xbasis).
The MFIM has been extensively studied numerically
in the context of thermalization and chaos [48, 66, 67],
with diagnostics ranging from eigenstate entanglement
entropy to level spacing ratio [66] to entanglement
growth [48] and operator spreading dynamics [67, 68].
These numerical studies have largely worked with two
parameter choices that have been identied as showing
particularly strong thermalizing behavior even at rela-
tively small sizes: The `Banuls-Cirac-Hastings (BCH)'
parameters [47], g= 1:05 andh= 0:5, and the `Kim-
Huse (KH)' parameters [48], g= (p
5 + 5)=80:9045
andh= (p
5 + 1)=40:8090. These choices have be-
come standard in the literature, and we will refer back to
them once we discuss our numerical results. In particular,
we nd that these points are notthe most chaotic with
respect to the more resolved metric of chaos we present,
even as various other standard diagnostics look chaotic
at these parameter values.
In what follows, we focus on the distribution of entan-
glement entropy of midspectrum eigenstates for a half
subsystem, f= 1=2, centered in the middle of the sys-
tem. We use exact diagonalization to obtain the entire
spectrum for system sizes up to L= 14, and t the den-
sity of states (DOS) to nd the energy corresponding to
the peak of the DOS, i.e., to innite temperature (since
Tr(H) = 0, the value of energy corresponding to innite
temperature approaches zero with increasing size, but -
nite size systems can show small deviations within the
scale of energy uctuations). We then obtain the EE of
all eigenstates centered in a small energy window around
the peak energy, and compute the mean and standard
deviation of the EE of these eigenstates, denoted Hand
Hrespectively. Here the subscript Hrefers to `Hamil-
tonian', to be contrasted with Floquet unitaries studied
in the previous section, and is thus more descriptive than
theE,Esymbols introduced in Sec. II which referred
collectively to eigenstate distributions of either Hamilto-
nian or Floquet systems.
The number of eigenstates within the energy window
centered at the DOS peak is chosen large enough to min-
imize the uncertainty of HandH, but small enough
to avoid systematic eects induced by nite temperature
eigenstates. Here we use windows with 100, 400, and 600
4The results are not sensitive to the value of symmetry breaking
eld.
FIG. 3. Finite-size scaling of the rst moment Hof the
microcanonical entanglement entropy distribution of Hamil-
tonian eigenstates plotted as a function of the transverse eld
gin the MFIM. Results are normalized with respect to the
rst moment BDof the BD distribution. Curves are plot-
ted for system sizes L= 12;14;16 and a longitudinal eld
h= 0:3. We see that the microcanonical mean converges to
BD. The inset shows a zoomed version of the main panel
(see shaded region) showing approach to the BD distribution
(dotted dashed lines) and statistically signicant deviations
from the Page distribution (dotted lines). Indicated with ar-
rows is the standard deviation BDof the BD distribution for
the dierent system sizes.
states forL= 10,L= 12, and L= 14, respectively.
For larger system sizes ( L= 16), we do not diagonal-
ize the full spectrum but, instead, use the shift-invert
method [56] to nd 2000 eigenstates closest to E= 0.
Our results are quite robust to changes in the number
of states chosen, and a discussion on selecting a window
size with an appropriate number of states is presented in
Appendix B.
For comparison, we also show data for the level spacing
ratio [12] averaged over the same energy windows dened
above. The ratio factor is a commonly used diagnostic
of level repulsion and is dened using three consecutive
eigenstates,fEn 1;En;En+1g, as:
0rn=min(En;En+1)
max(En;En+1)1; (19)
with En=En En 1. Integrable systems exhibit un-
correlated level statistics described by a Poisson distribu-
tion with average ratio factor hri= 0:386 [10]. Chaotic
systems exhibit level repulsion described by Wigner-
Dyson statistics with an average ratio factor hri= 0:536
[10].
C. First moment of the EE distribution
We begin our discussion by focusing only on the rst
moment of the microcanonical EE distribution Hand11
study its system size dependence. Figure 3 shows H
as a function of the transverse eld gwhile keeping h
xed toh= 0:3. The choice of h= 0:3 corresponds to
a strongly chaotic cut, as will become clear in the next
subsection. All curves are normalized by the theoretical
value of the rst moment of the BD distribution, BD,
obtained from Eq. (A5) of Appendix A and evaluated
at half-lling (maximum entropy), m= 1=2, and equal
bipartition, f= 1=2.
We nd excellent agreement between the means H
andBDin a wide range of parameters centered around
g1:1. In particular, for L= 16 we nd agreement
betweenHandBDup to the fth signicant digit. In
addition, by increasing the system size, we observe that
Happroaches BDin an increasingly larger region of
parameter space: although there are sizable deviations
betweenHandBDclose to integrabile limits ( g1
org1), these tend to decrease with increasing system
size. To leading order, this behavior agrees with that
observed using spectral metrics of chaos: the MFIM ex-
hibits chaotic behavior for all nite values of gin the
thermodynamic limit.
In contrast, we observe statistically signicant devi-
ations between Hand the mean EE of pure random
states without any constraint P(dotted lines) for all
values in parameter space and for all system sizes, con-
sistent with recent observations [33{35]. Such behavior is
visible in the inset of Fig. 3, which shows a zoomed ver-
sion of the main panel with P, Eq. (A3), plotted with
dotted lines. These results provide strong numerical cor-
roboration that, in contrast to the Page distribution, the
BD distribution is a better reference RMT distribution
for midspectrum eigenstates of local Hamiltonians.
At the level of the rst moments, the Hamiltonian re-
sults are analogous to the FRC results: pure random
states (with appropriate constraints) correctly describe
the rst moment of the EE distribution of eigenstates in
quantum chaotic systems. In the following two subsec-
tions, we use the more rened metric DKLthat compares
dierences on the exponentially small scale set by Rand
also incorporates the eects of the second moment of the
EE distributions.
D. Kullback-Liebler divergence and maximally
chaotic Hamiltonians
Having discussed the behavior of the rst moment of
the microcanonical EE distribution relative to the BD
distribution, we now employ our more rened measure of
`distance between distributions' using the KL divergence.
As discussed in Sec. II, we only use the rst two moments
to compute the KL divergence via Eq. (4).
Figure 4(a) shows the value of DKLas a function of
model parameters ( g;h) forL= 14. A noticeable fea-
ture of Fig.4(a) is that, for most of parameter space,
the eigenstate and RMT distributions exhibit relatively
large deviations from each other. Indeed, there is only a
FIG. 4. Colormaps of (a) the KL divergence and (b) the av-
erage ratio factor hricomputed for the MFIM with trans-
verse eld gand longitudinal eld h, forL= 14. The
DKLcontour plot shows that, within the parameter space
of the MFIM model, the parameter values near ( g;h) =
(1:10:05;0:300:05) are most chaotic, with DKLsteeply in-
creasing away from these values. Also indicated are the Kim-
Huse (KH, square) and Banuls-Cirac-Hastings (BCH, star)
parameters that have been widely used in studies of thermal-
ization, which show much larger values of DKL. In contrast,
panel (b) shows the value of hriis saturated at the RMT value
and signals chaos in a broad region of parameter space (in-
cluding the BCH and KH parameters) and does not exhibit
the resolution observed in panel (a). (c) Horizontal linecuts
ofDKLandhriacross the MC and KH parameters, see hori-
zontal dotted-dashed and dotted lines, respectively, in panels
(a) and (b). The reference GOE and Poisson ratio factors are
indicated on the right vertical axis.
small region of parameter space where the value of DKL
is small ( i.e.,DKL.1). The minimum value for DKLis
obtained for ( g;h) = (1:100:05;0:300:05), which
thus corresponds to the most chaotic (MC) parameters
for this metric and this family of MFIM Hamiltonians.
The KL divergence increases exponentially as ( g;h) are
tuned away from the MC parameters, Fig. 4(c). The MC
parameters that we nd are relatively close to the BCH12
parameters in Ref. [47], but far from the KH parameters
in Ref. [48], even though both sets of parameter choices
are widely employed in studies of chaos in the MFIM.
Both parameter choices are indicated in Fig 4(a). In the
next subsection and in Appendix E, we show a more de-
tailed comparison between the MC parameters identied
in this work, and those commonly used in the literature.
To contrast the behavior of DKLwith other metrics
of chaos, in Fig.4(b), we plot the average level spacing
ratiohrias a function of gandh. We nd thathriis
featureless and saturates to the RMT value hri0:54
in a very broad region of parameter space, unlike DKL
which is only minimized in a small region of parameter
space around ( g;h) = (1:1;0:35). Fig. 4(c) shows two
linecuts as a function of g, at thehvalue corresponding to
the MC and KH points. We see that hriquickly saturates
to the RMT value away from the g= 0, whileDKLshows
strong variation in parameter space even for parameters
for whichhrilooks strongly chaotic. This is consistent
with the general picture discussed above which argues
thatDKLis a much more resolved metric of quantum
chaos.
The enhanced proximity to RMT behavior in a small
pocket of parameter space is quite striking: this seems
to indicate that `maximally' chaotic local Hamiltonians
| those with microcanonical distributions of EE repro-
ducing the rst and higher moments of pure random
state distributions | are not typical. Although our
two-parameter model exhibits agreement with RMT in a
small region of parameter space, a tantalizing possibility
is that these small regions shrink to a ne-tuned point
when extending the space of local Hamiltonian models
to include a larger number of parameters. This is rem-
iniscent of integrable models which are assumed to be
ned tuned points in parameter space. It is also reminis-
cent of special classes of Floquet models, namely, dual-
unitary Floquet models, in which the spectral form factor
shows a Thouless time equal to 1 and which are therefore
considered `maximally' chaotic from the lens of spectral
statistics [13]. While our analysis was restricted to the
two-dimensional parameter space of the MFIM, an inter-
esting question for future study is whether there exists a
Hamiltonian with more parameters (but still local) where
the distance to RMT behavior is provably minimal.
E. Higher moments of the EE distribution
We nish our discussion of Hamiltonian systems by
showing the full EE distribution of midspectrum eigen-
states for various representative parameter values, and
parsing how dierent moments of the microcanonical EE
distribution contribute to DKLfor dierent linecuts.
Figure 5 shows (a) jH BDj=BD, and (b)H=BD 
1 forh=1+p
5
40:8090 (the Kim-Huse choice) and as
a function of g. Both ratios are normalized with BD,
as they appear in the denition of DKL. We observe
substantial variation in these ratios as a function of g,
FIG. 5. (a) Dierence between the EE mean of midspectrum
eigenstates and BDnormalized with the EE standard devia-
tion of pure random states, and (b) ratio between EE standard
deviation of midspecturm eigenstates and and BDas a func-
tion of system size and transverse eld g. Plots are shown for
L= 12;14;16, and for h= (1 +p
5)=40:8090. The number
of states used to compute the rst two moments is discussed in
the main text. The vertical dashed indicates the most chaotic
point (minimal DKL) along this linecut ( g1:5), while the
square symbol indicates the KH parameters. (c) Histogram
of midspectrum entanglement entropy for the most chaotic
point along this linecut, ( g;h) = (1:5;0:8090:::), as a func-
tion of system size. Shown with dotted lines is the reference
standard normal distribution.
with both quantities (and hence DKL) changing by orders
of magnitude as gis tuned. The moments are closest
to the BD predictions near g1:5. Interestingly, we
observe a good collapse of both ratios as a function of Lin
the parameter region 1 .g.2 centered around g1:5.
In other words, in this regime, both the microcanonical
and RMT standard deviations scale similarly with system
size,HBDp
2 Lbut, similar to the Floquet
case,Hstill has a systematically larger prefactor by
about 20%. Likewise, the dierence between the means
is exponentially small in L, again with the same scaling as
BD. In this chaotic (but not maximally chaotic) regime,
the value of DKLappears converged with Lto a xed
value.
On tuninggaway from the chaotic region near g1:5,
we observe a crossover in the functional dependence of H
withL, which goes from displaying chaotic scaling (in
particular, Hdecreasing exponentially with increasing
system size according to Eq. (16)) to near-integrable be-
havior (Hdecreasing polynomially with increasing sys-
tem size). Accordingly, the ratio H=BDincreases expo-
nentially with Lnear-integrability ( gsmall). Similarly,
the ratiojH BDj=BDincreases exponentially with L13
in the same near-integrable regime, where the dierence
in microcanonical and BD means is only polynomially
converged. Remarkably, we see that the sensitivity of
the two ratios observes deviations from RMT over a large
range ofg's, with the \near-integrable" scaling observed
throughout the window 0 g.0:8, and persisting all
the way till g0:8, which is comparable to J. These
more-sensitive metrics also reveal that the Kim-Huse pa-
rameter choice g0:9 (marked by a square in Figure 5)
is surprisingly near the crossover from the integrable to
chaotic scaling in the ratios, in contrast to measures like
hriwhich look strongly chaotic for the KH parameters.
We note that previous works have employed the
crossover from power-law to exponential scaling of the
uctuations of local operators as a way to distinguish
chaotic from integrable behavior [58]. This was shown
to be a more sensitive probe of chaos as compared to
spectral metrics such as the ratio factor, in the sense of
detecting chaos before the ratio factor when tuning away
from an integrable point. In contrast, we use our ratios
to detect deviations from chaos even in regimes where hri
looks strongly thermal.
In Fig. 5(c), we show the full distribution of EE of mid-
spectrum eigenstates, appropriately shifted and rescaled,
forg= 1:5, which is the most chaotic point with minimal
DKLalong this linecut (denoted by a triangle in Fig. 5).
The rescaled distributions appear to be well converged
with system size. Compared to the FRC data in Fig. 2,
we notice that the mean also shows a sizable departure,
and is several standard deviations away from BD.
Indeed, in most of the parameter space away from max-
imally chaotic (MC) point marked in Fig. 4, we notice
that the main contribution to DKLcomes from the rst
moment, although D(1)
KLandD(2)
KLclosely track each other
in their qualitative behavior as a function of g. Given this
observed departure in the rst moment, in Appendix D
we also present a related diagnostic of chaos which is ag-
nostic to the reference RMT distribution, and only looks
at the (normalized) uctuations of EE: H=p
2 L. This
ratio is expected to be system-size independent and min-
imized for maximally chaotic systems, while being ex-
ponentially increasing for Lfor near integrable systems.
Fig. A5 in Appendix D shows that this ratio yields a qual-
itatively similar landscape of chaos in parameter space as
DKLin Fig. 4(a).
Next, in Fig. 6 we plot the same ratios as in Fig. 5, but
for a cut at h= 0:3 which includes the maximally chaotic
point which minimizes DKLin the (g;h) parameter space.
Again, in the near-integrable regimes ( g0 andgh),
the ratios involving both moments show an exponentially
increasing trend with L, for identical reasons to those
discussed above. There is, however, a notable dierence
from Fig. 5 in the parameter regime near the MC point
atg1:1. In particular, we nd that both ratios show a
sharp change for the largest size ( L= 16) to show much
better convergence with the BD predictions at the MC
point, and the ratio involving the rst moment shows
a steep increase away from the MC point as shown in
FIG. 6. (a) Dierence between the EE mean of midspectrum
eigenstates and BDnormalized by BD, and (b) ratio between
EE standard deviations of midspectrum eigenstates and BD
as a function of system size and transverse eld g. Plots are
shown forL= 12;14;16;and forh= 0:3. The number of
states used to compute the rst two moments is discussed in
the main text. The vertical dashed indicates the most chaotic
point (minimal DKL) along this linecut ( g= 1:08), which also
coincides with the most chaotic (MC) parameters in the 2D
parameter space. (c) Histogram of midspectrum EE for the
most chaotic (MC) parameters as a function of system size,
showing approach to RMT behavior. Shown with dotted lines
is the reference standard normal distribution.
Fig. 6(a). In fact, we also observe that for a small range
of parameters near g= 1:1, the microcanonical standard
deviation is even slightly smaller than the reference BD,
which is why we plot the absolute value of the deviation
of this ratio from 1 in Fig. 6(b). The full distribution of
midspectrum eigenstates for the MC parameters is shown
in panel (c), showing almost perfect agreement with the
BD distribution at L= 16, even more so than the FRC
data Fig. 2 which showed an observable dierence in the
second moment.
This near-perfect agreement with the BD distribution
at the MC point and the sharp change in behavior with
Landgnear this point is quite surprising | a priori ,
one might have expected deviations from BD everywhere
in parameter space given that the Hamiltonian is local
and only has two tuning parameters. We might also have
expected a gentler change in behavior in parameter space
away from the MC point, contrary to what is observed in
Fig. 6(a). We defer a more detailed analysis of the MC
point and perturbations away from it to future work.14
V. DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK
We introduce a quantitative metric of chaos which
measures the Kullback-Liebler between the microcanon-
ical distribution of EE generated by eigenstates of local
Hamiltonian/Floquet systems, and a reference random
distribution. This metric serves as a much more resolved
measure of chaos, which compares both the mean and
the standard deviations of the microcanonical and refer-
ence distributions on the exponentially small scale set by
R. This not only distinguishes between integrable and
chaotic behavior, but also furnishes a continuous \ruler"
which measures deviations from RMT even as other spec-
tral metrics such as the level spacing ratio look strongly
thermal.
Besides introducing a new method for characterizing
thermalization, we emphasize several other ramications
of our work. First, we show that the distribution of en-
tanglement entropy deviates from RMT predictions even
in paradigmatic models of strongly thermalizing dynam-
ics, namely, Floquet Random Circuits (FRC) without
any structure other than locality. This is primarily re-
ected in the ratio U=P>1, which is larger than
1 and stable with increasing system size. An interest-
ing direction for future work is to understand how dif-
ferent physical eects stemming from locality contribute
to the increased standard deviation. For example, prior
works [18, 38{43] have shown that the existence of a light-
cone in the spreading of operators in local quantum sys-
tems leads to beyond-RMT spectral correlations in the
eigenstate expectation values of local operators. It would
be fruitful to try to establish a quantitative connection
between these correlations and the increased standard
deviation of the microcanonical ensemble. Locality also
implies that the entangling properties of the local gates
in the FRC (those that straddle the entanglement cut)
plays an important role in the eigenstate entanglement.
Second, our work provides evidence that a more suit-
able reference distribution for comparing eigenstates of
local Hamiltonian systems is the Bianchi-Dona distribu-
tion (which accounts for the presence of a U(1) charge)
as opposed to the Page distribution, which has been
the standard reference distribution in almost all previ-
ous works. In particular, building on Ref. [35], we argue
that local Hamiltonians with energy conservation eec-
tively have a local scalar charge which behaves similarly
to the U(1) charge for innite temperature eigenstates
and for large enough subsystems. An important direc-
tion for future work is to better understand the eectsof nite temperature, locality, and symmetries (including
multiple, possibly non-commuting symmetries) in setting
the appropriate reference RMT ensemble for Hamilto-
nian/Floquet eigenstates, and to try to incorporate the
universal contributions of these features into the refer-
ence distribution. Separate from the challenge of nding
an appropriate reference distribution, we showed that the
microcanonical uctuations of EE (normalized byp
2 L
serves as an independent (and reference agnostic) diag-
nostic of chaos which qualitatively displays similar be-
havior toDKLin parameter space and is minimized for
the most chaotic models.
Finally, our results show a strong and surprising vari-
ation ofDKLin parameter space for the MFIM, showing
strong deviations away from RMT even for parameters
that had been previously identied as strongly chaotic,
and in parameter regimes where other metrics have sat-
urated to chaotic values. Conversely, we observe that
DKLis minimized in small pockets of parameter space,
suggesting that there might be families of \maximally
chaotic" Hamiltonians. This is somewhat reminiscent
of \minimally choatic" (integrable) systems which are
known to be ne-tuned points of measure zero in param-
eter space, or maximally chaotic dual-unitary Floquet
circuits. More detailed studies about these maximally
chaotic regions (or points), and understanding their dy-
namical properties remains an open direction for future
research.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to John Chalker, Wen Wei Ho, Nick
Hunter-Jones, David Huse, Matteo Ippoliti and Chai-
tanya Murthy for insightful discussions. JFRN acknowl-
edges the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation's EPiQS
Initiative through Grant GBMF4302 and GBMF8686 for
a postdoctoral fellowship at Stanford University. This
work was supported by the US Department of Energy,
Oce of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, under Early
Career Award Nos. DE-SC0021111 (C.J. and V.K.).
V.K. also acknowledges support from the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation through a Sloan Research Fellowship and the
Packard Foundation through a Packard Fellowship in Sci-
ence and Engineering. Numerical simulations were per-
formed on Stanford Research Computing Center's Sher-
lock cluster. We acknowledge the hospitality of the Kavli
Institute for Theoretical Physics at the University of Cal-
ifornia, Santa Barbara (supported by NSF Grant PHY-
1748958).
[1] J. M. Deutsch, \Quantum statistical mechanics in a
closed system," Phys. Rev. A 43, 2046{2049 (1991).
[2] Mark Srednicki, \Chaos and quantum thermalization,"
Phys. Rev. E 50, 888{901 (1994).[3] Marcos Rigol, Vanja Dunjko, and Maxim Olshanii,
\Thermalization and its mechanism for generic isolated
quantum systems," Nature 452, 854{858 (2008).
[4] Rahul Nandkishore and David A Huse, \Many-body lo-
calization and thermalization in quantum statistical me-15
chanics," Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 6, 15{38
(2015).
[5] S. Trotzky, Y-A. Chen, A. Flesch, I. P. McCulloch,
U. Schollw ock, J. Eisert, and I. Bloch, \Probing the re-
laxation towards equilibrium in an isolated strongly cor-
related one-dimensional bose gas," Nature Physics 8, 325
(2012).
[6] Adam M. Kaufman, M. Eric Tai, Alexander Lukin,
Matthew Rispoli, Robert Schittko, Philipp M. Preiss,
and Markus Greiner, \Quantum thermalization through
entanglement in an isolated many-body system," Science
353, 794 (2016).
[7] Yijun Tang, Wil Kao, Kuan-Yu Li, Sangwon Seo, Krish-
nanand Mallayya, Marcos Rigol, Sarang Gopalakrishnan,
and Benjamin L. Lev, \Thermalization near integrability
in a dipolar quantum newton's cradle," Phys. Rev. X 8,
021030 (2018).
[8] Govinda Clos, Diego Porras, Ulrich Warring, and To-
bias Schaetz, \Time-resolved observation of thermaliza-
tion in an isolated quantum system," Phys. Rev. Lett.
117, 170401 (2016).
[9] Hyosub Kim, YeJe Park, Kyungtae Kim, H.-S. Sim,
and Jaewook Ahn, \Detailed balance of thermalization
dynamics in rydberg-atom quantum simulators," Phys.
Rev. Lett. 120, 180502 (2018).
[10] Y. Y. Atas, E. Bogomolny, O. Giraud, and G. Roux,
\The distribution of the ratio of consecutive level spac-
ings in random matrix ensembles," Phys. Rev. Lett. 110,
084101 (2013).
[11] Y. Y. Atas, E. Bogomolny, O. Giraud, P. Vivo, and
E. Vivo, \Joint probability densities of level spacing ra-
tios in random matrices," Journal of Physics A: Mathe-
matical and Theoretical 46, 355204 (2013).
[12] Vadim Oganesyan and David A. Huse, \Localization of
interacting fermions at high temperature," Phys. Rev. B
75, 155111 (2007).
[13] Bruno Bertini, Pavel Kos, and Toma z Prosen, \Exact
spectral form factor in a minimal model of many-body
quantum chaos," Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 264101 (2018).
[14] Hrant Gharibyan, Masanori Hanada, Stephen H.
Shenker, and Masaki Tezuka, \Onset of random matrix
behavior in scrambling systems," Journal of High Energy
Physics 2018 , 124 (2018).
[15] Amos Chan, Andrea De Luca, and John T Chalker,
\Solution of a minimal model for many-body quantum
chaos," Physical Review X 8, 041019 (2018).
[16] Amos Chan, Andrea De Luca, and JT Chalker, \Spec-
tral statistics in spatially extended chaotic quantum
many-body systems," Physical review letters 121, 060601
(2018).
[17] Aaron J. Friedman, Amos Chan, Andrea De Luca, and
J. T. Chalker, \Spectral statistics and many-body quan-
tum chaos with conserved charge," Phys. Rev. Lett. 123,
210603 (2019).
[18] S. J. Garratt and J. T. Chalker, \Local pairing of feyn-
man histories in many-body oquet models," Phys. Rev.
X11, 021051 (2021).
[19] James R. Garrison and Tarun Grover, \Does a single
eigenstate encode the full hamiltonian?" Phys. Rev. X
8, 021026 (2018).
[20] Tsung-Cheng Lu and Tarun Grover, \Renyi entropy of
chaotic eigenstates," Phys. Rev. E 99, 032111 (2019).
[21] Luca D'Alessio, Yariv Kafri, Anatoli Polkovnikov, and
Marcos Rigol, \From quantum chaos and eigenstate ther-malization to statistical mechanics and thermodynam-
ics," Advances in Physics 65, 239{362 (2016).
[22] Joshua M Deutsch, \Eigenstate thermalization hypothe-
sis," Reports on Progress in Physics 81, 082001 (2018).
[23] Anatoly Dymarsky, Nima Lashkari, and Hong Liu, \Sub-
system ETH," Physical Review E 97, 012140 (2018).
[24] Mark Srednicki, \The approach to thermal equilibrium in
quantized chaotic systems," Journal of Physics A: Math-
ematical and General 32, 1163{1175 (1999).
[25] Luca D'Alessio, Yariv Kafri, Anatoli Polkovnikov, and
Marcos Rigol, \From Quantum Chaos and Eigenstate
Thermalization to Statistical Mechanics and Thermody-
namics," Advances in Physics 65, 239{362 (2016).
[26] Lev Vidmar and Marcos Rigol, \Entanglement entropy
of eigenstates of quantum chaotic hamiltonians," Phys.
Rev. Lett. 119, 220603 (2017).
[27] Chaitanya Murthy and Mark Srednicki, \Structure of
chaotic eigenstates and their entanglement entropy,"
Phys. Rev. E 100, 022131 (2019).
[28] Eugenio Bianchi, Lucas Hackl, Mario Kieburg, Marcos
Rigol, and Lev Vidmar, \Volume-law entanglement en-
tropy of typical pure quantum states," PRX Quantum 3,
030201 (2022).
[29] Don N. Page, \Average entropy of a subsystem," Phys.
Rev. Lett. 71, 1291{1294 (1993).
[30] Eugenio Bianchi and Pietro Don a, \Typical entangle-
ment entropy in the presence of a center: Page curve
and its variance," Phys. Rev. D 100, 105010 (2019).
[31] Lev Vidmar, Lucas Hackl, Eugenio Bianchi, and Mar-
cos Rigol, \Entanglement Entropy of Eigenstates of
Quadratic Fermionic Hamiltonians," Phys. Rev. Lett.
119, 020601 (2017).
[32] Siddhardh C. Morampudi, Anushya Chandran, and
Chris R. Laumann, \Universal entanglement of typical
states in constrained systems," Phys. Rev. Lett. 124,
050602 (2020).
[33] Masudul Haque, Paul A. McClarty, and Ivan M. Khay-
movich, \Entanglement of midspectrum eigenstates of
chaotic many-body systems: Reasons for deviation from
random ensembles," Phys. Rev. E 105, 014109 (2022).
[34] Yichen Huang, \Universal eigenstate entanglement of
chaotic local hamiltonians," Nuclear Physics B 938, 594{
604 (2019).
[35] Yichen Huang, \Universal entanglement of mid-spectrum
eigenstates of chaotic local hamiltonians," Nuclear
Physics B 966, 115373 (2021).
[36] Yichen Huang, \Deviation from maximal entanglement
for mid-spectrum eigenstates of local Hamiltonians,"
(2022), arxiv: 2202.01173 (2022).
[37] M. Kliczkowski, R. Swietek, L. Vidmar, and M. Rigol,
\Average entanglement entropy of midspectrum eigen-
states of quantum-chaotic interacting hamiltonians,"
(2023), arXiv:2303.13577.
[38] Anatoly Dymarsky, \Bound on eigenstate thermalization
from transport," Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 190601 (2022).
[39] Jiaozi Wang, Mats H. Lamann, Jonas Richter, Robin
Steinigeweg, Anatoly Dymarsky, and Jochen Gemmer,
\Eigenstate thermalization hypothesis and its deviations
from random-matrix theory beyond the thermalization
time," Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 180601 (2022).
[40] Jonas Richter, Anatoly Dymarsky, Robin Steinigeweg,
and Jochen Gemmer, \Eigenstate thermalization hypoth-
esis beyond standard indicators: Emergence of random-
matrix behavior at small frequencies," Phys. Rev. E 102,16
042127 (2020).
[41] Marlon Brenes, Silvia Pappalardi, Mark T. Mitchison,
John Goold, and Alessandro Silva, \Out-of-time-order
correlations and the ne structure of eigenstate thermal-
ization," Phys. Rev. E 104, 034120 (2021).
[42] Laura Foini and Jorge Kurchan, \Eigenstate thermaliza-
tion hypothesis and out of time order correlators," Phys.
Rev. E 99, 042139 (2019).
[43] Amos Chan, Andrea De Luca, and J. T. Chalker, \Eigen-
state correlations, thermalization, and the buttery ef-
fect," Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 220601 (2019).
[44] Xiao-Liang Qi and Daniel Ranard, \Determining a local
Hamiltonian from a single eigenstate," Quantum 3, 159
(2019).
[45] Bruno Bertini, Pavel Kos, and Tomaz Prosen, \Entan-
glement spreading in a minimal model of maximal many-
body quantum chaos," Phys. Rev. X 9, 021033 (2019).
[46] Sarang Gopalakrishnan and Austen Lamacraft, \Unitary
circuits of nite depth and innite width from quantum
channels," Phys. Rev. B 100, 064309 (2019).
[47] M. C. Ba~ nuls, J. I. Cirac, and M. B. Hastings, \Strong
and weak thermalization of innite nonintegrable quan-
tum systems," Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 050405 (2011).
[48] Hyungwon Kim and David A. Huse, \Ballistic spread-
ing of entanglement in a diusive nonintegrable system,"
Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 127205 (2013).
[49] Nicholas Hunter-Jones, \Unitary designs from statisti-
cal mechanics in random quantum circuits," (2019),
arXiv:1905.12053.
[50] Fernando G. S. L. Brand~ ao, Wissam Chemissany,
Nicholas Hunter-Jones, Richard Kueng, and John
Preskill, \Models of quantum complexity growth," PRX
Quantum 2, 030316 (2021).
[51] Jordan S. Cotler, Daniel K. Mark, Hsin-Yuan Huang,
Felipe Hernandez, Joonhee Choi, Adam L. Shaw, Manuel
Endres, and Soonwon Choi, \Emergent quantum state
designs from individual many-body wavefunctions," PRX
Quantum 4, 010311 (2023).
[52] Joonhee Choi, Adam L. Shaw, Ivaylo S. Madjarov, Xin
Xie, Ran Finkelstein, Jacob P. Covey, Jordan S. Cotler,
Daniel K. Mark, Hsin-Yuan Huang, Anant Kale, Hannes
Pichler, Fernando G. S. L. Brand~ ao, Soonwon Choi, and
Manuel Endres, \Emergent Quantum Randomness and
Benchmarking from Hamiltonian Many-body Dynam-
ics," Nature 613, 468{473 (2023).
[53] Wen Wei Ho and Soonwon Choi, \Exact emergent quan-
tum state designs from quantum chaotic dynamics,"
Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 060601 (2022).
[54] Matteo Ippoliti and Wen Wei Ho, \Solvable model of
deep thermalization with distinct design times," Quan-
tum6, 886 (2022).
[55] RE Prange, \The spectral form factor is not self-
averaging," Physical review letters 78, 2280 (1997).
[56] Francesca Pietracaprina, Nicolas Mac e, David J. Luitz,
and Fabien Alet, \Shift-invert diagonalization of large
many-body localizing spin chains," SciPost Physics 5
(2018), 10.21468/scipostphys.5.5.045.
[57] David J. Luitz, \Polynomial lter diagonalization of large
oquet unitary operators," SciPost Physics 11(2021),
10.21468/scipostphys.11.2.021.
[58] Mohit Pandey, Pieter W. Claeys, David K. Campbell,
Anatoli Polkovnikov, and Dries Sels, \Adiabatic eigen-
state deformations as a sensitive probe for quantum
chaos," Phys. Rev. X 10, 041017 (2020).[59] Pierpaolo Vivo, Mauricio P. Pato, and Gleb Oshanin,
\Random pure states: Quantifying bipartite entangle-
ment beyond the linear statistics," Phys. Rev. E 93,
052106 (2016).
[60] Lu Wei, \Proof of vivo-pato-oshanin's conjecture on the
uctuation of von neumann entropy," Phys. Rev. E 96,
022106 (2017).
[61] Alexander Lukin, Matthew Rispoli, Robert Schittko,
M. Eric Tai, Adam M. Kaufman, Soonwon Choi, Vedika
Khemani, Julian L eonard, and Markus Greiner, \Prob-
ing entanglement in a many-body localized system," Sci-
ence364, 256 (2019).
[62] Pierpaolo Vivo, \Entangled random pure states with or-
thogonal symmetry: exact results," Journal of Physics
A: Mathematical and Theoretical 43, 405206 (2010).
[63] Santosh Kumar and Akhilesh Pandey, \Entanglement in
random pure states: spectral density and average von
neumann entropy," Journal of Physics A: Mathematical
and Theoretical 44, 445301 (2011).
[64] Itai Arad, Tomotaka Kuwahara, and Zeph Landau,
\Connecting global and local energy distributions in
quantum spin models on a lattice," Journal of Statis-
tical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2016 , 033301
(2016).
[65] T. D. Schultz, D. C. Mattis, and E. H. Lieb, \Two-
dimensional ising model as a soluble problem of many
fermions," Rev. Mod. Phys. 36, 856 (1964).
[66] Liangsheng Zhang, Hyungwon Kim, and David A. Huse,
\Thermalization of entanglement," Phys. Rev. E 91,
062128 (2015).
[67] Daniel A. Roberts, Douglas Stanford, and Leonard
Susskind, \Localized shocks," Journal of High Energy
Physics 2015 , 51 (2015).
[68] Vedika Khemani, Ashvin Vishwanath, and David A.
Huse, \Operator spreading and the emergence of dissi-
pative hydrodynamics under unitary evolution with con-
servation laws," Phys. Rev. X 8, 031057 (2018).
[69] Madan Lal Mehta, Random Matrices , 3rd ed. (2004).
Appendix A: Moments of the entanglement entropy
distribution for pure random states
1. The Page distribution for pure random states
The distribution of entanglement entropy averaged
over pure random states was computed analytically in
several works [30, 59, 60]. A pure state j ion the com-
posite systemH=HA
HBcan be expanded as a linear
combination
j i=dAX
i=1dBX
j=1Ci;jjii
jji; (A1)
wheredA(dB) is the Hilbert space dimension of system
A(B), and the coecients Ci;jare the entries of a rect-
angulardAdBmatrixC. The reduced density matrix
for such a state after tracing out the degrees of freedom17
in systemBis
A=dAX
i;i0=1Wii0jiihi0j; (A2)
withWii0=P
jCijC
i0j= (CCy)ii0. The entanglement
entropyS(A) =P
iilniforj	iis determined from
the spectrumfigofW. For random states the coe-
cientsCi;jare independently and identically distributed
real (GOE) or complex (GUE) Gaussian variables, fol-
lowing the distributions P(C)/expf 
2Tr(CyC)g,
where= 1 for the GOE ensemble and = 1 for the
GUE ensemble. In such cases, the product W=CCy
is known as a random Wishart matrix, and the joint
probability distribution P(fig) has been well charac-
terized [69]. This allows one to compute all the moments
ofSAfor real and random state ensembles.
The statistical properties of complex random states,
which are descriptive of eigenstates of FRC or systems
with broken time-reversal symmetry (TRS), are better
understood than those of realrandom states, which are
descriptive of the eigenstates of the MFIM. We begin
by presenting the exact formulas for the mean and stan-
dard deviation of the EE distribution for complex random
states (= 2). Then, we discuss how the asymptotic val-
ues are aected when the states are real ( = 1).
FIG. A1. Numerical data for the mean entanglement entropy
of real random states constrained to the M=L=2 symmetry
sector (blue dots) and real random states in the full Hilbert
space (red dots). The numerical data is obtained from 106
randomly generated states. For comparison, the analytic Page
and BD means for the entanglement entropy distribution of
random states with and without constraints are shown with
dotted-dashed lines. (b) Numerical data for the standard de-
viations of the entanglement entropy using the same randomly
generated data as in (a) (blue and red dots), compared against
the analytic values of PandBDinated byp
2 to account
for the larger standard deviation of real random states.LPPBDBD
82.2749 0.0311 2.2062 0.0718
102.9663 0.0156 2.8866 0.0380
123.6590 0.0078 3.5745 0.0199
144.3521 0.0039 4.2652 0.0103
165.0452 0.0020 4.9569 0.0053
TABLE I. Mean and standard deviation of the Page (P) and
Bianchi-Dona (BD) distributions as a function of system size
for random complex states ( = 2) andLA=L=2. For
the BD distribution, we consider systems at half-lling, m=
M=L = 1=2.
a. Moments of the GUE ( = 2)
As shown in Ref. [30], the rst moment of the distribu-
tionP(SA) for complex random states in a qubit system
of sizeLis given by
P= 	(dAdB+ 1) 	(dB+ 1) (dA 1)
2dB;(A3)
where 	(x) =  0(x)= (x) is the digamma function, de-
ned as the logarithmic derivative of the Gamma func-
tion, and where dA= 2LA,dB= 2L LAare the dimen-
sion of the subsystems AandB. This expression can
be evaluated exactly for all system and subsystem sizes.
The asymptotic form of (A3) in the limit of L! 1
andf=LA=Lis written in Eq.(6) of the main text.
The variance of the entanglement entropy distribution
2
P=hS2
Ai hSAi2is given by
2
P=dA+dB
dAdB+ 1	0(dB+ 1) 	0(dAdB+ 1)
 (dA 1)(dA+ 2dB 1)
4d2
B(dAdB+ 1): (A4)
The asymptotic expression of Eq.(A4) in the limit of L!
1and xedf=LA=Lis given in Eq.(8) of the main text.
The numerical values for PandPfor dierent system
sizes is shown in Table I.
b. Moments of the GOE ( = 1)
Systems with TRS have a smaller eective Hilbert
space dimension than those without TRS. Consequently,
we expect the average entropy for real random states to
be upper bounded by that of complex ones. While the
exact expressions for the means dier, it was shown in
Refs. [59, 62, 63] that they are asymptotically the same
in the thermodynamic limit. However, the standard de-
viation acquires an additionalp
2 prefactor relative to
the GUE ensemble, 2
P(= 1)22
P(= 2) since the
GUE ensemble averages over both the real and complex
parts. This behavior is explicitly shown in Fig.A1, where18
the rst two moments of PR(SA) are computed numeri-
cally by generating 106real random states, and compared
against the asymptotic predictions, Pandp
2P.
2. The Bianchi Dona for constrained random states
The presence of a U(1) charge causes the reduced den-
sity matrix in (A2) to become block diagonal in the
charge sectors. To analyze the statistical properties of
such systems, we present the exact formulas for the rst
two moments of complex random states subject to an ad-
ditive constraint, which were rst derived in Ref. [30]. To
the best of our knowledge, there are no known analytic
results for constrained real states. However, based on nu-
merical experiments, we show below that the conclusions
of the unconstrained GOE ensemble translate to the con-
strained U(1) scenario, namely, uctuations are enhanced
by a factor ofp
2 relative to the GUE ensemble, whereas
the means agree in the thermodynamic limit.a. The constrained GUE ensemble ( = 2)
When the pure complex random states are constrained
to a given symmetry sector M, the rst moment of the
distribution is given by [30]
BD(M) =MX
MA=0dMA
dM(P(MA) + 	(dM+ 1)
 	(dMA+ 1)); (A5)
whereP(MA) is the Page mean, Eqs.(A3), constrained
to the subspaceHA(MA)
HB(M MA), which means
that the eective subsystem Hilbert space dimensions
aredA;MA= LA
MA
,dB;M MA= L LA
M MA
;dMA=
dA;MAdB;M MA, and the total Hilbert space dimensionP
MAdA;MAdB;M MA=dM= L
M
. The asymptotic
form of Eq.(A5) in the L!1 for xedf=LA=Land
m=M=L is given in Eq.(14) of the main text. The sec-
ond moment of the entanglement entropy distribution for
random states constrained to the M-symmetry sector is
given by
2
BD=X
MAdMA(dMA+ 1)
dM(dM+ 1)((2
P(MA) 	0(dM+ 2) + 	0(dMA+ 2) + (P(MA) + 	(dM+ 2) 	(dMA+ 2))2)
+X
M0
A6=MAdMAdM0
A
dM(dM+ 1)((P(M0
A) + 	(dM+ 2) 	(dM0
A+ 1))(P(MA) + 	(dM+ 2) 	(dMA+ 1))
 	0(dM+ 2)) 2
BD;(A6)
where2
P(MA) is the Page variance, Eq.(A4), constrained
to the subspaceHA(MA)
HB(M MA). The numerical
values ofBDandBDfor dierent system sizes is shown
in Table I.
b. The constrained GOE ensemble ( = 1)
Eigenstates of systems with TRS are real valued, thus
it is necessary to extend Eqs.(A5)-(A6) for the case of
real random states. We are not aware of any analytical
results in this case. For this reason, we numerically com-
pute the distribution of entanglement entropies of real
random states constrained to the M=L=2 symmetry
sector of a spin-1/2 chain. The moments are obtained
by considering 106samples for system sizes ranging from
L= 10 toL= 16. As shown in Fig. A1, the mean of
the EE distribution agrees with analytic expression de-
rived for complex states, whereas the standard deviation
increases by a factor ofp
2. This behavior is analogous
to the analytical results obtained for unconstrained Haar
random states.
FIG. A2. Average (a) mean and (b) standard deviation of
the EE as a function of window size. For each value of N,
we average over dierent centers for the window and over 100
circuit realizations. The vertical dotted lines indicates the
window of 50 eigenstates used in the data of the main text.
Appendix B: Window size dependence of the EE
moments
In the main text, we discuss the number of eigenstates
used to compute the microcanonical mean and stan-
dard deviations for the Hamiltonian and Floquet mod-19
FIG. A3. (a) Eigenstate entanglement entropy of the MFIM
for model parameters g= 1:08,h= 0:3 andL= 14. The
parameter  Equanties the energy window from which the
variance of SAis computed. (b) Mean and (c) standard devi-
ation of the entanglement entropy distribution as a function
of the energy window width  E. Shown with vertical dotted
lines is the  Ecorresponding to a window of 600 eigenstates
used in the main text.
els. Here, we present numerical evidence that are results
are not sensitive to the choice of window size, as long as
the window is suciently large to get reliable estimates
of the moments, and (for the Hamiltonian case) su-
ciently small to avoid the eects of lower temperature
eigenstates.
1. Floquet Random Circuits (FRC)
In Figure A2, we show data for the mean and standard
deviation of SAfor eigenstates of the FRQC on L= 12
qubits as a function of window size N. For a given cir-
cuit realization, we divide the spectrum into groups of N
states closest in quasienergy. We compute the mean and
standard deviation in each window of size N, then aver-
age these across the spectrum, and nally across circuit
realizations. The rst moment is independent of Nat
this resolution observe that only approximately 50 eigen-
states of the FRC are necessary for the ratios involving
the rst two moments to converge. In our data, we use
the full spectrum for L14, while we use windows of 50
states centered at dierent quasienergies for L= 16.
2. Mixed Field Ising Model (MFIM)
When computing the microcanonical mean and vari-
ance of the distribution PH(SA) for midspectrum energydensityEeigenstates, it is necessary to take a nite win-
dow Ein which to take samples of SA. In general,
if Eis too small, then a statistically small number of
states will be available for sampling thus resulting in large
error bars. On the other hand, if  Eis too large, then
low entanglement eigenstates will skew the distribution
and increase its variance. Similarly to the FRC case, we
argue that due to typicality only few eigenstates are nec-
essary to quantify the mean and standard deviation of the
distribution. Here we numerically show that this is the
case. In particular, we show that the value of the stan-
dard deviation of SAfor midspectrum eigenstates does
not vary appreciably when the window size is reasonably
small, thus the results does discussed in the main text are
quite insensitive to the choice of energy window width.
In Fig.A3(a), we show the distribution of entanglement
entropy computed for the MFIM with the MC parame-
tersg= 1:08 andh= 0:3 forL= 14. We compute the
mean and variance of the distribution of SAcomputed
for midspectrum eigenstates and using a variable window
Eranging from  E= 10 2(approximately the typical
eigenstate-to-eigenstate energy dierence) to  E= 10
(approximately half the bandwidth of the system). We
nd that the mean and variance of the distribution does
not vary signicantly if  E.2. In the main text, we
employ a total of 600 eigenstates for L= 14 (see vertical
dotted lines), which is a tiny fraction of the total number
of states 214= 16384. We repeat the same analysis for
all system sizes to dene the width of the windows used
in the main text for all system sizes L.
Appendix C: Fluctuations of EE as a function of
FRC gate range and period
In Fig. 2 of the main text we found deviations from
RMT in the second moment of the EE distribution of
eigenstates that persist with increasing L. These dier-
ences were attributed to locality, the only feature present
in the FRC. We now generalize the FRC model discussed
in Sec. III by relaxing the constraint of locality in order to
observe the convergence to RMT. This will be achieved
(a) by increasing the range of the local gates and (b) by
increasing the number of periods of the FRC. As such,
the circuit structure will be labeled by two parameters:
the rangerand the period T, discussed in turn below.
We consider brickwork circuits with staggered lay-
ers of range- runitary gates acting on a periodic one-
dimensional spin-1/2 chain of length L. The range ris
the number of contiguous qubits each individual gate acts
on, so thatUj;j+1;;j+(r 1)acts on sites ( j;j+1;;j+
r 1). Thus, r= 2 denotes nearest-neighbour gates
whiler= 3 is a three-site gate including both near-
est and next-nearest neighbour interactions. The matrix
Uj;j+1;;j+(r 1)is a random U(n) matrix, with n= 2r.
The generalized circuit architecture has a periodic
brickwork layout with variable period T2Z. The cir-
cuit implements discrete time evolution, and advancing20
FIG. A4. Convergence of the EE standard deviation of FRC
eigenstates, U, to the RMT prediction as a function of gate
rangerfor xed circuit depth T(squares), and as a function
of circuit depth Tfor xed gate range (circles). Here we use
a system of L= 16 qubits.
by one unit of time comprises the application of a \layer"
comprised of rstaggered sub-layers. Each sub-layer is
displaced by one lattice site with respect to the prior
sublayer. For example, for the r= 2 considered in the
main text, advancing by one unit of time entails applying
one layer of even and odd gates:
U(t+ 1;t) =Y
jU2j+1;2j+2(t)
|{z}
Uodd(t)U1(t)Y
iU2i;2i+1(t)
|{z}
Ueven(t)U0(t):(A1)
Likewise,r= 3 requires applying three staggered sub-
layers of gates starting from the (0 ;1;2), (1;2;3) and
(2;3;4) bonds respectively:
U(t+ 1;t) =Y
kU3k+2;3k+3;3k+4(t)
|{z}
U2(t)
Y
jU3j+1;3j+2;3j+3(t)
|{z}
U1(t)
Y
iU3i;3i+1;3i+2(t)
|{z}
U0(t): (A2)
More generally, for range rgates,
U(t+ 1;t) =r 1Y
=0U(t);
U(t) =Y
jUrj+;rj++1;;rj++r 1: (A3)
In cases where Lis not divisible by r, we act with an
identity matrix on the remaining sites. For a circuit with
periodicity T, the gates in the rst Tlayers are cho-
sen independently, and layers repeat after Ttime-steps:
U(t+T+ 1;t+T) =U(t+ 1;t). The generalized Flo-
quet unitary is dened as the time-evolution operator for
FIG. A5. Colormaps of midspectrum entanglement entropy
uctuations normalized with BD, computed for the MFIM
with transverse eld gand longitudinal eld h, forL= 14.
We note that the colormap agrees qualitatively with the con-
clusions obtained form DKLin Fig.4(a) of the main text.
periodT:
UG(r;T) =T 1Y
t=0U(t+ 1;t); (A4)
andU(t=nT;0) =UG(r;T)n.
Figure A4 shows that the second moment of the EE dis-
tribution of eigenstates, U, converges towards the RMT
valuePboth by increasing the period of the FRC (vary-
ingTwhile xing r= 2), or by increasing the range of the
gates (varying rwhile xing T= 2). These results cor-
roborate the expectation that reducing locality increases
convergence to RMT. However, it is striking that just
increasing the gate range from r= 2 tor= 3 is al-
ready enough to remove most of the observed dierence
in standard deviation, suggesting that other (more sen-
sitive) metrics might be needed to probe deviations from
RMT.
Appendix D: Fluctuations of EE as a function of
Hamiltonian model parameters
Since in most of the parameter space away from maxi-
mally chaotic (MC) point, the main contribution to DKL
comes from the rst moment which refers to the choice
of the BD distribution, we now also present an alter-
nate but related diagnostic of chaos which is agnostic
to the reference RMT distribution, and only looks at
the (normalized) uctuations of EE: H=p
2 L. This ra-
tio is expected to be system-size independent and mini-
mized for maximally chaotic systems, while being expo-
nentially increasing for Lfor near integrable systems. In
this way, maximally chaotic Hamiltonians can be identi-
ed by minimizing the value of H, even if the correct
reference distribution is unknown. In Fig. A5, we show
the normalized standard deviation of the microcanonical
uctuations of EE of eigenstates as a function of ( g;h).
Similarly to Fig. 4(a) of the main text which accounts
for both moments of the EE distribution, we nd that21
FIG. A6. (a) Distribution of entanglement for typically-used
values of the MFIM: MC parameters in the present work
(blue), the Banuls-Cirac-Hastings model (red), and Kim-Huse
(green). Shown with dotted dashed line is BD distribution.
Histogram of midspectrum EE obtained for the (b) BCH and
(c) KH parameters as a function of system size, showing devi-
ations from RMT behavior that persist in the thermodynamic
limit. Shown with dotted lines is the reference standard nor-
mal distribution.Hreaches a global minimum at the MC parameters and
shows qualitatively similar behavior as DKLaway from
the MC point. The colormap appears more noisy than
Fig.4(a) because second moments have larger statistical
uctuations than rst moments.
Appendix E: Distribution of EE for some standard
parameter values of the MFIM
The MFIM is a paradigmatic model of strongly quan-
tum chaotic system and has been routinely used in the
study of quantum thermalization. In particular, there are
several standard set of model parameters which are be-
lieved to be strongly chaotic. In this section, we compare
the distribution of entanglement entropy for the most
chaotic point found in the main text and previously-used
parameters in the literature. Figure A6(a) shows his-
tograms for the entanglement entropy of midspectrum
eigenstates for (i) the most chaotic (MC) parameters of
Fig.4, (g;h) = (1:08;0:30) (blue bars), (ii) for the BCH
model[47] (green bars), ( g;h) = (1:05; 0:5) and (iii) for
the Kim-Huse model ( g;h) = ((p
5 + 5)=8;(p
5 + 1)=4)
(0:9045;0:8090) [48] (red bars). We nd that the BCH
parameters agree reasonably well with the BD distribu-
tion, whereas the KH parameter strongly deviates by
more than two standard deviations.
A more rened look into the distribution of entan-
glement entropy normalized with the BD distribution is
shown in Fig.A6(b-c). We observe that, within the scale
ofBD, eigenstates in the BCH model agree well with
RMT behavior: the means of the EE distributions dier
by BD. In contrast, for the KH parameters, we
observe large deviations between the EE distribution of
eigenstates and random states: in this case, the means
dier by  5BD, and the standard deviations is
around ve times larger.