 
 
Algodoo for Online E ducation: 
Impulse and Momentum Activities  
Atakan Çoban 
Yeditepe University, Depertmant of Physics,Yeditepe  University, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, 
Department of Physics, Ataşehir, Istanbul, Turkey.  
 
E-mail: atakancoban39@gmail.com  
 
Abstract  
During the periods of sudden transition to online education, the opportunity to make 
applications that might attract students' attention to the course has decreased even more. 
Although this deficiency was tried to be eliminated with videos and simulations, it was not 
possible to ensure active participation of students in some cases. In this study, the Algodoo 
program, which can increase the efficiency of the teaching environment by ensuring active 
participatio n of stud ents in online lessons  and the applications that can be done about Impulse 
and momentum are explained in detail. A total of 6 different applications were carried out, 1 
related to the subject of impulse, 1 related to the momentum, 2 related to the relation ship 
between impulse and momentum change, and 2 related to momentum conservation.  At the 
same time, while developing these applications, the adjustments made on the simulation and 
the reasons are explained in detail. In this way, both the introduction of t he program and the 
sample application suggestion were present ed. The values obtained as a result of the 
applications were calculated and compared both theoretically and on simulation in different 
ways. As a result, it has been observed that the values have  internal consistency with each 
other and are also compatible with theoretical calculations. Algodoo program, which allows 
many interactive applications and can be downloaded for free, is a program that can be used 
both in lecturing and evaluation processe s in physics lessons while  online education process.  
Keywords: Algodoo , Online education , Impulse, Momentum  
 
1. Introduction  
Recently, online courses have been conducted almost everywhere in the world1. This situation virtualized the lecture 
environments. Suddenly going into such a proce ss left physics teachers desperate to do in -class activities. When considered 
specifically in the physics lesson, classroom practices have a very important place.  It is very important to organize activities in 
the online environment as in the classroom2. It can be efficient in providing visualization through video or ready -made 
simulations. However,  it may be insufficient to attract the attention of the students and to activate the student in the process.  
Within the scope of the physics course, current dig ital learning environments are divided into two c ategories as 'constrained ' 
and 'less constrained'3. Digital learning environments used in physics education, such as PhET simulations4, Physlets5 and 
QuVis animations6, are 'constrained'. These are ready -made simulations that focus on the points that experts who prepare 
simulations in these programs consider the most important. However, since these ready -made simulations allow limited 
applications, adjustments may not be made on all variables in some  subjects. Algodoo7, Interactive Physics8, and Fizika9 
programs are 'less constrained' digital learning programs. There are many variables in these programs such as gravity, air dr ag, 
flexibility, speed, mass, color, etc. And these variables can be given d ifferent values as desired. In this way, various unique 
simulations that focus on different points within the scope of the relevant subject are designed and provide the opportunity to 
make original applications.  Algodoo interactive physics simulation pro gram, which can be used in classroom applications that  
 2  
 require active participation of the student, can be very useful in online lessons10. The program is very small and can be 
downloaded for free11. There are many applications on this simulation program, which is developed by considering the laws of 
physics, especially on Mechanical Physics. Within the scope of the program, there are many possibilities such as adding objec ts 
in various geometric shapes, adjusting all kinds of physical properties of the obj ects, adding the graphics of many variables of 
the object relative to each other, providing the visualization of the vector representation of the variables of the object, a dding 
an inclined plane at different angles, adding forces in di fferent sizes and di rections12,13.  
 
The implementation of the Algodoo program can be done in several ways:  
 
• First, theoretical explanation is made as chapter by chapter. Then, students are asked to design a simple case study 
related to the subject on the simulation. In this wa y, it is ensured that the subject scope is learned by discovering its 
equivalent in daily life. For example, in order to analyze the relationship between mass and acceleration, forces of 
the same magnitude are added to objects of different mass, and the re lationships between accelerations of objects 
are analyzed.  
 
• An example problem written using the values of a previously prepared simulation is solved with the class after the 
lecture. Then the ready -made simulation is opened and the sample real -life probl em is analyzed by the students. It 
is ensured that the accuracy of the result reached by theoretical calculation is tested and the knowledge learned is 
reinforced. For example, students are asked to calculate the magnitude of the final velocity as a result  of the 15 m 
displacement of a static 2 kg object on a frictionless ground, with a force of 10 N on it. Then, this sample situation 
is analyzed by providing the necessary visualizations through Algodoo.  
 
• Lectures can be made directly on the algodoo program.  First, the situation related to the subject is shown on Algodoo 
and questions are asked to make students wonder and think about the subject. Then the situation is explained by 
lecturing and the simulation is taken back and analyzed again, this time with t heoretical calculations. For example, 
by enabling a force to act on an object first, the simulation is stopped after a certain period of time. At this point, it 
is explained what impulse is and what its equation is. Then the simulation is taken back and th e force -time graph 
of the object is added, the motion is started again and the impulse is calculated.  
 
• Within the scope of an example case, students can be provided to determine the relationship between variables by 
testing through the program. For example,  in an application related to projectile motion, the relationship between 
the angle and the maximum height can be analyzed by increasing the angle of the initial velocity of the object with 
the horizontal. Or, in another application, they can analyze the t ime-dependent graphs of the position and velocity 
during accelerated motion and how these graphs change depending on the force acting on the object.   
 
In this study, the development process and data analysis processes of 6 sample applications on impulse and momentum that 
can be used during the lesson using the Algodoo program will be explained.  
2. Theory  
In this section, theoretical information about the applications in the study is explained. The theoretical information used w as 
taken from the relev ant textbooks14. The product of the net force acting on the object and the duration of action ∆t is called 
impulse and is calculated by the equation  
 
𝐼⃗=𝐹⃗.∆𝑡  (1) 
 
At the same time, the area under the time -dependent graph of the force is equal to impulse.  And, objects with a certain mass 
and speed have momentum. Momentum is calculated by the equation  
 
𝑃⃗⃗=𝑚.𝑣⃗  (2) 
  
 3  
 If the net force acting on an object is not zero, the speed of the object changes. The impulse affecting the object causes th e 
momentum of the object to change. The impulse affecting the object is equal to the change in the momentum of the body and 
this relation is expressed as  
 
𝐼⃗=∆𝑃⃗⃗=𝑃2⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗−𝑃1⃗⃗⃗⃗ (3) 
 
The total momentum of a system consisting of more than one body is conservative and does not change unless an external 
force acts on the system. The momentum of the objects in the system can change as a result of various interactions (collision , 
explosion, etc.) in the syst em. But the sum of these moment a never changes. In two -dimensional isolated  systems, momentum 
is conservative in both axes, and the final momentum in both axes is equal to the initial momentum in both direction and 
magnitude.  
 
3. Applications & Results  
3.1. Impulse  
With the help of the Algodoo program, it is possible to develop activitie s by taking measurements directly on the graph and 
by putting the data obtained from the simulation into the equations. In order to develop an activity related to impulse using  the 
Algodoo program, first of all, air friction should be removed by clicking o n the bottom middle partition. Then, a rectangular 
object of insignificant dimensions is added with the help of the toolbars at the bottom left. To remove the friction of the o bject, 
the "friction" section in the "material" toolbar is set to zero.  Then, force is added to the object from the toolbars in the lower 
left corner. By double -clicking the force, it is possible to adjust the size, the point of action and the activating keys. In this 
application, the force acts continuously, but it can also be adju sted to press a key to activate the force, if desired. In the study, 
a force of 5N was preferred. By double clicking on the object, the "show plot" toolbar is selected and the time -dependent graph 
of the force acting on the x -axis is added. The simulation speed was set as 0.100 by hovering over the start button and the 
simulation was started. The motion of the object with the added force effect is observed as in figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Screenshot of the application about Impulse in Algodoo  
 
The simulation was stopped after a while. The added force had an effect from the moment the simulation was started to the 
moment it was stopped. On the graph, the time that the force is active was determined as ∆t = 0.31 s. At this point, the size  of 
the impulse can be calcu lated as 1.55 N.s with the help of equation 1. The area under the time -dependent graph of the force 
added to the simulation is also equal to the impulse and this value can be seen directly as 1.67 N.s through the simulation. By 
clicking on different points  on the graphic, the area under the graphic at that time can be determined with the help of the 
program. There is a high level of agreement between the result obtained in the theoretical calculation made with the values 
obtained through the simulation and the value read directly on the graph.   
 
 
 
 4  
 3.2. Momentum  
In the Algodoo program, it is possible to adjust objects in different masses and speeds of different sizes. In addition, velo city 
magnitudes can be adjusted in both x and y axis. Therefore, it is possible to add objects having momentum in all directions and 
sizes. With the help of the program, the momentum magnitudes in both axes can be plotted depending on different variables. 
In Figure 2, a screenshot of the simple application developed for momentum is given . 
 
 
Figure 2. Screenshot of the application about Momentum in Algodoo  
 
In the application, air friction and gravity were removed and a circular object was added. By double clicking on the object, 
the mass of the object is set as 3.0 kg in the "material" sec tion, and its speed is set as 2.0 m / s in the + x direction from the 
"velocities" section. Time dependent graph of the value of momentum on the x -axis has been added from the "show plot" 
section. The magnitude of the momentum value of the object on the x -axis was determined as 6.0 N.s both by theoretical 
calculation and on the graph.  
3.3. Impulse and momentum change  
In order to analyze the relation of impulse being equal to momentum change, a circular body was added in a simulation 
where air friction and gravity were removed, and a force of 4 N was added on the object. The vector representation and 
magnitude of the added force are provided with the help of "Visualization" from the toolbars located in the upper right corne r 
of the simulation program. The si mulation is finalized as in Figure 3 by adding the time -dependent graph of the momentum of 
the object on the x -axis. 
 
Figure 3. Screenshot of the  first application about Impulse and Momentum Change in Algodoo  
 
The duration of the force on the graph was deter mined as 2.07 s and the final value of the momentum was 8.267 N.s. The 
body was at rest when not under the force, and therefore its momentum was 0. The final momentum of the body is equal to the 
change of momentum and is 8.267 N.s. During the period of for ce of 4 N, the size of the impulse was calculated as 8.28 N.s. It 
 
 5  
 is seen that the momentum change value read from the graph added to the simulation and the impulse value calculated using 
the values in the simulation are equal to each other with a small ma rgin of deviation.  
 
In another application, an object with a mass of 5 kg has been raised to a certain height while standing still. The air frict ion 
was removed and the gravitational acceleration was adjusted to be -90o in direc tion and its magnitude to 9.8  m/s2. Velocity 
vector is visualized by selecting the view velocity section from the velocities section in visualization from the toolbars in  the 
upper right corner, and the velocity size is also visualized by selecting the show value expression in the sam e toolbar.  By double 
clicking on the object, a graphic is added as time on the x axis and force (magnitude) on the y axis through the show pilot 
option. The simulation is started, the movement of the object is monitored and the simulation is stopped. At th is moment, the 
screen shot of the simulation is as in figur e 4. 
 
 
Figure 4. Screenshot of the second application about Impulse and Momentum Change in Algodoo  
 
If the gravitational accelerati on is assumed to be g = 9.8 m/ s2, the net force acting on an object with a mass of 5 kg is the 
force of gravity and this force is 49 N as can be seen from the graph in Figure 4. The time from the start of the simulation to 
the moment it is stopped is 0.73 s. Therefore, the impulse affecting the object during this mo vement is 35.77 N.s. Impulse was 
found as 35.93 N.s from the area under the force -time graph added to the simulation. The two values are largely compatible 
with each other. It can be seen from the simulation that the linear velocity of the object that star ted to move in a stationary state 
when the  simulation stopped is 7.19 m/ s. The momentum change of an object w ith a mass of 5 kg is also ∆P= 35.95 N.s. At this 
point, it is seen that the results achieved have a high internal consistency with each other.  
3.4. Mome ntum Conservation  
The ability to add objects of different mass and velocities in different directions on the simulation leads to various 
applications for momentum conservation. In this study, two  applications related to  two di mensional elastic collision an d related 
to internal explosion have been made. A wide variety of other momentum conservation applications can be developed with the 
methods used in these applications. In the application related to the collision, two circular objects are added by removing  the 
air friction and gravity and these objects are adjusted to have a mass of 3 kg . The velocities of 4 m/s in the + x direction and 3 
m/s in the + y direction are added to the objects as shown in Figure 5 .a. For the collision to be fully flexible, the re stitution 
value is set as 0.500 and attraction 0 in the "material" section.  
 
Figure 5. a) Screenshot of the initial state of the first application of Momentum conservation in Algodoo b) Screen shot of 
the final state of the first application of Momentum conservation in Algodoo  
 
 6  
 When Figure 5a . is examined, the first momentum of the red one out of two o bjects with a mass of 3 kg can be calculated as 
12 kg.m/ s in the  + x direction and 9 kg.m /s in the + y direction of the green one. After the collision, it can be seen that the speed 
of the re d object in the x -axis is 1.5 m/s in the y -axis, 2.7 m/ s, the gre en object in the x -axis 2.5 m/s and 0.3 m/ s in the y -axis. 
Using these values, the final momentum in the x-axis is calculated as 12 kg.m/ s and the final m omentum in the y -axis is 
calculated as 9 kg.m/ s. These results appear to be the same a s the initial mo mentums in accordance with the conservation of 
momentum.  
 
In another application, it is related to the explosions that are frequently encountered in momentum conservation. In this 
application, 3 circular bodies of different masses were nested at the same po int while the simulation was in pause. Air friction 
and gravity have been removed. Visualization of momentum has been selected from the visualization toolbar in the upper right 
corner. "Show values" and "show components" options are selected in the same se ction. In this way, the components and sizes 
of the momentum vectors on the x and y axis are visualized. Simulation was started when the objects were nested at the same 
point and after a while it was stopped and a view like in figure 6 was obtained.  
 
 
Figu re 6.  Screenshot of the final state of the second  application of Momentum conservation in Algodoo  
When Figure 6 is examined  
 
• The momentum of a 4 kg red body on the x -axis is -186.22 N.s and -45.21 N.s on the y -axis. 
 
• The blue body with a mass of 3 kg has a momentum of 131.52 N.s on the x -axis and -33.81 N.s on the y -axis. 
 
• The green body with a mass of 2 kg has a momentum of 54.70 N.s on the x axis and 79.02 N.s on the y axis.  
 
Before the simulation started, all three objects were stationary at the same positi on, and the initial momentum was zero for 
both the x and y axis. When the momentum values obtained at the moment the simulation is stopped, it is seen that the total 
final momentum magnitudes on both x and y axes are also zero.  
4. Conclusion  
In online lessons, it is more difficult to attract students' attention to the lesson and to perform efficient educational processes 
than in the school environment.  At this point, it is indispensable to use different methods. Today's students are individuals who 
grew  up in the age of technology and benefit from most of the technology's opportunities.  Providing online trainings to such a 
community with direct instruction will undoubtedly not attract them to actively work in the classroom environment. In order t o 
elimin ate this problem and increase the efficiency of the education process, it is necessary to visualize the course environment 
using videos, animations and simulations. Algodoo program is a free interactive physics simulation program. The program is 
developed considering the laws of physics, and instead of watching ready -made simulations, optional changes can be made on 
physical quantities in this program. In this study, sample applications on impulse  and momentum are explained. In addition, 
technical informati on about the program is also given. Besides these applications, information that will prepare the groundwork 
for a wide variety of applications on impulse  and momentum is given. It is very difficult to make applications due to limited 
 
 7  
 opportunities in thes e times when the trainings continue online throughout the world, and at this point, applications to be made 
with the Algodoo program, which can be downloaded and used for free, will be very useful.  
References  
[1] Bao W 2020  COVID‐19 and online teaching in high er education: A case study of Peking University. Human Behavior and Emerging 
Technologies  2 113-115. 
[2] O'Brien D J 2020  Feynman, Lewin, and Einstein Download Zoom: A Guide for Incorporating E -Teaching o f Physics in a Post -COVID 
World  arXiv preprint arXiv:200 8 07441.  
[3] Euler E, Gregorcic B and Linder C 2020 Variation theory as a lens for interpreting and guiding physics students’ use of digit al learning 
environments Europen Journal of  Phys ics (https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -6404/ab895c ) 
[4] Wieman C E, Adams W K and Perkins K K 2008 PhET: simulations that enhance learning Science  322 682–683 
[5] Christian W and Bellon i M 2001 Physlets: Teaching Physics with Interactive Curricular Material  (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, Inc.)  
[6] Kohnle A, Cassettari D, Edwards T J, Ferguson C, Gillies A D, Hooley C A, Korolkova N, Llama J and Sinclair B D 2012 A new 
multimedia res ource for teaching quantum mechanics concepts American Journal of  Phys ics 80 148–153. 
[7] Gregorcic B and Bodin M 2017 Algodoo: a tool for encouraging creativity in phy sics teaching and learning Physics Teacher  55 25–28.  
[8] Roth W -M 1995 Affordances of computers  in teacher –student interactions: the case of Interactive PhysicsTM Joırnal of Research  in 
Science Teaching  32 329–347. 
[9] Radnai T, T´othn´e Juh´asz T, Juh´asz A and Jenei P 2019 Educational experiments with motion simulation programs: can gamific ation 
beeffective in teaching mechanics? Journal of Physics: Conference Series  1223  012006  
[10] Euler E, Prytz C and Gregorcic B 2020  Never far from shore: productive patterns in physics  students’ use of the digit al learning 
environment Algodoo  Physics Education  55 045015.  
[11] Algodoo web site. Taken on August 2020. http://www.algodoo.com  
[12] Gregorcic B and Bodin M 2017  Algodoo: A tool for encouraging creativity i n physics teaching and learning  The Physics Teacher  55 
25-28. 
[13] Gregorcic  B 2015  Exploring Kepler’s laws using an int eractive whiteboard and Algodoo  Physics Education  50 511. 
[14] Serway R A and Jewett J W 2018  Physics for scientists and engineers with modern physics  Cengage learning.  
 
 
 