Exploring the Adaptive Behaviors of Particle Lenia:
A Perturbation-Response Analysis for Computational Agency
Kazuya Horibe1, Keisuke Suzuki2, Takato Horii1and Hiroshi Ishiguro1
1Osaka University2Hokkaido University
horibe.289@gmail.com
Abstract
A firm cognitive subject or “individual” is presupposed for
the emergence of mind. However, with the development of
recent information technology, the “individual” has become
more dispersed in society and the cognitive subject has be-
come increasingly unstable and adaptive, necessitating an up-
date in our understanding of the individual”. Autopoiesis
serves as a model of the cognitive subject, which is unsta-
ble and requires effort to maintain itself to adapt to the envi-
ronment. In this study, we evaluated adaptivity for a highly
extensible multi-particle system model Particle Lenia through
the response perturbation. As a result, we found that Particle
Lenia has a particle configuration that is both temporally un-
stable and has multiple stable states. This result suggests that
Particle Lenia can express adaptive characteristics and is ex-
pected to be used as a computational model toward building
an autopoietic cognitive agent.
Introduction
The concept of autopoiesis, as proposed by Maturana and
Varela (Varela et al., 1974; Maturana and Varela, 1980),
posits that the mind is comprised of emerging autonomous
processes that distinguish the system itself from its envi-
ronment. Autopoiesis denotes an innate attribute of living
beings where the boundary between the system and its sur-
roundings is not initially well-established, although rather
determined and preserved by interactions with the environ-
ment. The notion of autopoiesis has been applied in a multi-
tude of research such as artificial life, biology, cognitive sci-
ence, and robotics, and has continued to be expanded to this
day (Razeto-Barry, 2012). Autopoiesis has been expanded
as a framework to explain the origin of cognition in living
organisms, leading to the development of the enaction ap-
proach (Varela et al., 1991; Thompson, 2007). The enaction
concept encompasses autonomy, operational closure, precar-
iousness, adaptivity, agency, and sense-making as its core
features (Di Paolo, 2005, 2009; Di Paolo and Thompson,
2014; Thompson, 2007).
Computer simulations for autopoietic and enaction fea-
tures have been conducted to determine the feasibility of
autopoiesis (McMullin, 2004). Studies aimed at computa-
tional autopoiesis originated from the SCL model, an arti-ficial chemistry model developed by Mcmullin and Varela
(McMullin and Varela, 1997). Suzuki and Ikegami ex-
panded the SCL model to include movement and the ability
to maintain its own membrane while in motion (Suzuki and
Ikegami, 2009; Ikegami and Suzuki, 2008). Beer developed
an autopoietic/enactive theory based on the “glider” move-
ment pattern, a well-known pattern found in the Game of
Life cellular automaton, as a cognitive agent (Beer, 2004,
2014, 2020; Beer and Di Paolo, 2023). Due to the diffi-
culty of describing the complexity of cognition in cellular
automaton-based models, various models based on category
theory (Letelier et al., 2003), finite-state automata (Carter
et al., 2018), artificial neural networks (Froese et al., 2023),
and multi-particle systems (Friston, 2013) have been devel-
oped to describe the internal state of a cognitive agent and
its hierarchical structure.
This study investigates the autopoietic property especially
adaptivity using a Particle Lenia model, which is a highly
expressive multi-particle system model (Mordvintsev et al.,
2022) to investigate a scalable autopoietic/enation system.
Particle Lenia, an extension of the expressive multi-particle
system model Lenia (Chan, 2018), explores a diverse range
of patterns resembling over 400 biological creatures using
differentiable computation within a scalable continuous cel-
lular automaton framework. Particle Lenia gains the flexi-
bility to adapt different rules and parameters to each particle
and easily extend the three-dimensional space. In this paper,
we take the first step in investigating the basic properties of
Particle Lenia’s adaptivity by measuring the response to per-
turbations in particle configuration from a stable state.
Related works
Agency through interaction between environment
Numerous techniques have been proposed for modeling cog-
nitive agents, almost all of which highlight the importance
of the agent’s interactions with its environment. However,
each approach offers a distinct perspective on how the agent
engages with its environment and how such interaction in-
fluences its cognitive processes. The autopoiesis approach
underscores the significance of the agent’s internal struc-arXiv:2305.16706v1  [nlin.AO]  26 May 2023ture, which enables it to generate self-organized behavior
and meaning via its environmental interactions (Varela et al.,
1974). The enactive approach, on the other hand, high-
lights the importance of the agent’s sensory-motor interac-
tions in cognition, suggesting that its behavior arises from
its continuous interaction with the environment (Di Paolo
and Thompson, 2014). Embodied cognition stresses the im-
portance of the agent’s physical embodiment and its inter-
action with the environment in shaping its cognitive pro-
cesses (Pfeifer and Bongard, 2006; Tani, 2016; Taniguchi
et al., 2023). Finally, the subsumption architecture approach
highlights the direct action of the agent in the environment,
without the need for internal representations, and proposes
a layered control architecture for this purpose (Braitenberg,
1986; Brooks, 1986). Each of these approaches offers a
unique advantage in comprehending different aspects of an
agent’s cognition. To fully comprehend an agent’s cogni-
tion, it is important to integrate these approaches and de-
velop a comprehensive understanding of how the agent in-
teracts with its environment.
Lenia: cellular automaton-based model
Lenia is a model of a continuous cellular automaton that has
found similar patterns in diverse organisms (Chan, 2018).
Lenia is characterized by the flexibility in defining the in-
teraction cells and updating rules. Previously, cellular au-
tomata patterns were commonly broken when noise was
added (Neumann, 1966), whereas by extending Lenia’s state
update law to multiple channels, it is now possible to ex-
press patterns that are robust against noise (Chan, 2020). In
addition, by differentiating the computation, scalable com-
putation is available on GPUs, and in combination with evo-
lutionary computation, it is possible to automatically search
for a pattern that is suitable for a specific purpose, such as
having the ability to move. Furthermore, by defining one of
the channels as an “obstacle” channel, which is an area that
the pattern cannot penetrate, the pattern can be extended to
have a sensori-moter loop function, in which the agent de-
tects an “obstacle” and changes its movement direction (Ha-
mon et al., 2022).
Lenia is a cellular automaton-based model that applies the
same rules to all of space for computation, making it diffi-
cult to interact with patterns generated by different rules. To
solve this problem, Flow Lenia has been developed to apply
local mass conservation laws to cellular automata, enabling
a variety of patterns generated by different rules to coexist in
the same space (Plantec et al., 2022). Particle Lenia used in
this study was proposed at the same time as another solution
to the problem solved by Flow Lenia (Mordvintsev et al.,
2022).
Multi particle system for artificial life
There have been many models of multi-particle systems pro-
posed for artificial life and self-organizing phenomena. TheBoid model is the well-known multi-particle system model
that describes flocks of birds and animals with simple rules
and can represent a variety of behaviors of flocks (Reynolds,
1987). The swarm chemistry is an extension of the boid
model, in which each particle has its own set of parameters
such as the parameters of the boid model, and by adjust-
ing the ratio of the number of particles with the same pa-
rameters and mixing them together, a variety of structures
can emerge (Sayama, 2009). The swarm oscillator repre-
sents particles as oscillators, each of which has a unique
frequency and interacts with each other, and it can express
synchronous phenomena that were difficult to express using
only the parameters of the boid model (Tanaka, 2007; Ceron
et al., 2023). Friston introduced the free energy principle to
many-particle systems and proposed an energy-based parti-
cle system (Friston, 2013). Minimizing the free energy can
be interpreted as building a predictive model of the envi-
ronment, which enables us to describe the motivation of the
particle agent. The predictive model of the particle agent is
defined as a Markov blanket of a Bayesian network based
on physical particle configurations. Particle Lenia, as well
as Lenia, can describe interactions with higher degrees of
freedom due to the functional type degrees of freedom of
the kernel and growth function and their multi-layering and
also can analyze free energy due to the energy-based particle
system.
Method
Model
To evaluate the adaptivity, we used Particle Lenia. Particle
Lenia (Mordvintsev et al., 2022) is a multi-particle model
that rewrites a continuous cellular automaton model called
Lenia (Chan, 2018), which can express diverse patterns.
Each particle satisfies the following differential equation:
dpi
dt=−∇E(pi) =−[∂E(pi)
∂pi]T, (1)
where piis the position of each particle. The Erepresents
the energy of the system E=R−G, where RandGcan
be written, respectively, as follows.
Rt(x) =crep
2X
i:pi̸=xmax(1 − ||x−pi||,0)2,(2)
where, crepdefines the repulsion strength. Rtis called re-
pulsion potential field, where the distance is less than 1, the
distance is multiplied by crep, and all combinations are com-
bined. Namely, particles with a distance of 1 or more are not
repulsive.
Gtcalled growth field is represented by Ut– Lenia filed
andKt– kernel, as follows.Gt(x) =G(Ut(x))
=G(X
iK(x−pt
i))
=G(X
iK(||x−pt
i||)),(3)
where G(u) = exp( −(u−µG)2/σ2
G)andK(r) =
wKexp(−(r−µK)2/σ2
K); exponential functions are em-
ployed for this paper of KandG.Kcorresponds to the
adjacent cell rule in the game of life and determines which
adjacent particle is used for the next update of its own state;
Gcorresponds to the growth function in the game of life and
determines its next state. µ∗andσ∗inKandGweight the
states of other particles for use in updating its own state.
wKis chosen so that the integral of Kover the whole
space equals one. In this paper, we used these parameter
sets:µK= 4.0, σK= 1.0, wK= 0.022,crep= 1.0. All nu-
merical simulations were performed in the 4th Runge-Kutta
method with dt= 0.01.
Measurement for adaptivity
Adaptivity is a system’s ability to adjust its internal states
and interactions with the environment in order to main-
tain viability (Di Paolo, 2005). It involves recognizing and
responding to tendencies that bring it closer to or farther
from the edge of viability, transforming harmful tenden-
cies into beneficial ones. To characterize the adaptivity in
Particle Lenia, we defined two measures; the diversity of
metastable configuration and time instability. The diversity
of metastable configurations allows multiple configurations
to be realized and respond in various ways to perturbations.
High-time instability enables the system to reach another
stable state by multiple pathways and has a high adaptive
capacity to perturbations.
The diversity of metastable configurations is a measure of
adaptivity to space, which quantifies the variety of possible
metastable particle configurations that can be achieved, each
with distinct energy values. In each simulation, we recorded
the total energy in the time direction over 2,000 steps toward
the end of the calculation (specifically, from 8,000 to 10,000
steps). We then calculated the average total energy for each
trial and determined the standard deviation of these averages
across all 100 trials (Figure 1(a)).
Time instability is a measure of adaptivity to time, which
assesses “how much the energy value fluctuates before
reaching a stable particle state.” In each trial, we monitored
the total energy fluctuations in the time direction over 2,000
steps toward the end of the calculation (specifically, from
8,000 to 10,000 steps). We then computed the standard devi-
ation of the total energy for each trial to capture the extent of
energy fluctuations during the simulation. Finally, we aver-
aged these standard deviations across all 100 trials to obtain
the time instability metric (Figure 1(a)).
(a) Time evolution of total energy
(b) Example of particle configuration
Figure 1: Response to “stretch” perturbation. (a) Gray lines
show 100 trials. Three of them are selected and displayed
in blue, orange, and green lines. Each line corresponds to
the left, middle, and right in (b). (b) Upper panel: stable
configuration before perturbation (time step = 4,000), mid-
dle panel(time step = 4,001): just after perturbation, lower
panel: stable configuration after perturbation (time step =
10,000). Green and red are low and high-energy, respec-
tively.
Results
Response to “stretch” perturbation
To investigate the adaptivity of Particle Lenia, perturba-
tions that do not change the number of particles, such as
“stretch” perturbations, were given and their statistical prop-
erties were investigated. For the “stretch” perturbation, the
x-axis of the particle position was extended in the x-axis di-
rection by applying the linear transformation xnew= 2∗x,
and the numerical calculation was resumed from that ar-
rangement. There were N= 200 particles and the initial
placement was sampled according to a uniform distribution
from spatial coordinates of −6< x < 6,−6< y < 6.
We ran 100 independent simulations with different random
seeds of uniform distribution.
Figure 1(a) shows the time evolution of the total energy
for 100 independent simulations. The total energy Etotal
was obtained by linearly summing the elements of Eand
dividing by the number of particles. We performed cal-
culations up to 4,000 steps, at which point we applied a“stretch” perturbation to the xdirection.We restarted the nu-
merical calculations from the stretched particle and com-
puted up to 10,000 steps. Before the perturbation, three
‘stable’ states with different energies were observed around
Etotal = 0,−0.2,and−0.3. As soon as the “stretch” per-
turbation was applied, the energy of the whole system in-
creased. The energy then decreased rapidly and converged
to close energy values for all 100 trials.
We confirmed the configuration of the particles before and
after the “stretch” perturbation. We found that the stable
states with different energies before the perturbation also
have different particle configurations. The stable state near
Etotal= 0(blue line in Figure 1(a)) is circular, with a high-
energy particle in the center surrounded by low-energy par-
ticles (Figure 1(b) upper panel, left). There is a ring-shaped
band with lower energy further out, but only a few particles
were present there. The stable state around Etotal =−0.2
(orange line in Figure 1(a)) had a ring of low-energy par-
ticles in the center, with a few sparse high-energy particles
just outside, and further outside, low-energy particles form-
ing a compartment (Figure 1(b) upper panel, middle). The
stable state around Etotal=−0.3(green line in Figure 1(a))
had few particles in the center of the pattern and a few high-
energy particles. It was surrounded by a thick band of low-
energy particles. Towards the outside of the band, the low-
energy particles were spiked, resulting in an overall flattened
arrangement (Figure 1(b) upper panel, right). Immediately
after the perturbation, the outer particles with lower ener-
gies in their respective stable states had higher energies, and
Etotal showed higher values. (Figures 1(a) and (b) middle
panel). After perturbation, the particles converged to a sta-
ble “rotor” with decreasing total energy (Figures 1(a) and
(b) lower panel). In summary, we confirmed different stable
particle configurations with different energies before pertur-
bation, with particles converging to a stable “rotor” with de-
creasing total energy after perturbation.
Diversity of patterns
To investigate how stable configurations are distributed in
the parameter space we calculated 100 trials for each of the
(σG, µG)in the function Gof growth filed Gtin the range
0.01< σG<0.21and0.1< µG<1.1around (σG, µG) =
(0.15,0,6), which Mordvintsev et al. have already found a
stable pattern named “rotor”(Figure 2j).
Stable configuration in pre–perturbation We found 11
different particle configurations that converge and maintain
a constant value of the total energy from the initial condition
pre–perturbation (Figure 2). Although several stable particle
configurations coexisted at the boundaries of different parti-
cle configurations, in the phase diagram, the particle config-
uration with the highest number of trials reached out of 100
trials was chosen as representative of that parameter set. The
blue particle configuration is stable when both σGandµG
Figure 2: Phase diagram of stable configuration in pre–
perturbation
were small. There was a cluster of high-energy particles in
the center and a ring of low-energy particles a short distance
around it (Figure 2a, blue, later we call “high dense core”).
The orange one was similar to that of (a)“high dense core”,
with high-energy particles in the center, but with a hetero-
geneous spread of lower-energy regions around it (Figure
2b, orange, later we call “solar flare”). The green one was
similar to that of (a)“high dense core” and (b)“solar flare”,
with high-energy particles in the center, but the energy and
particle arrangement were not homogeneous, forming mul-
tiple clusters. The high-energy region was surrounded by
a broad, low-energy heterogeneous band (Figure 2c, green,
later we call “pathological spots”). The red one was simi-
lar to that of (a)“high dense core” and (b)“solar flare”, with
a cluster of high-energy particles in the center, surrounded
by a row of low-energy particles. In contrast to the (a)“high
dense core” and (b)“solar flare”, the low-energy region had
two layers (Figure 2d, red, later we call “capsule”). The
pink one had a ring of low-energy particles in the center,
surrounded by sparse high-energy particles. Outside of the
ring, a low-energy region was formed. This region was ge-
ometrically organized into compartments and looked like
multiple spikes (Figure 2e, pink, later we call “sunflower”).
The gray one was stable in energy, with the geometry of
the (e)“sunflower” broken, and there were no high-energy
particles in the interior (Figure 2f, gray, later we call “frag-
ile”). The brown one had a high-energy particle in the cen-
ter, surrounded by a low-energy region. Higher energy par-
ticles also existed outside this energy (Figure 2g, brown,
later we call “leaking core”). The yellow-green one had a
high-energy particle in the center, surrounded by a band of
high-energy particles. Outside of it were three separate low-
energy regions (Figure 2h, yellow-green, later we call “three
clouds”). The light blue one had some high-energy particlesFigure 3: Phase diagram of stable configuration in post–perturbation (a) Phase diagram: colors means pre–perturbation. (b)
time evolution of the total energy. Parameters are µG= 1.1,µG= 0.6, and µG= 0.1for the upper, middle, and lower panels,
respectively, and σG= 0.09for all panels. Energy changes for 100 trials are shown in gray. The particle configuration at each
time is shown from a randomly selected trial shown in the blue line.
in the center, surrounded by low-energy particles. The sur-
rounding particles were spine-like and had jagged outlines
(Figure 2i, light blue, later we call “bugs”). The teal one
had a particle-free region in the center, which was elliptical.
Outside of that region were low-energy particles with multi-
ple compartments. The particles were almost constant in en-
ergy, but the entire pattern was rotating, oscillating (Figure
2j, teal, later we call “rotor”). The purple one had a cluster
of low-energy particles in the center and a zigzag shape on
the outside, similar to “bugs” (Figure 2k, purple, later we
call “sea urchin”). In summary, 11 different stable particle
configurations were distributed in σGandµGspace.
To clarify how the parameters affect the transition of par-
ticle configurations, we compared the particle configurations
when µGis fixed, and the value of σGis increased. When
µG= 0.1was fixed, and σGwas increased from small val-
ues, the stable particle configurations transitioned from (a)
“high dense core” to (b) “solar flare” and then to (c) “patho-
logical spots” (See Figure 2). The outer low-energy ring
spatially broadened and became a band, while the energy
of the central group of particles increased. Multiple clus-
ters were formed as σGexceeded 0.17. When µG= 0.6
was fixed, and σGwas increased from small values, the par-
ticle configuration shifted to (g) “leaking core”, (h) “three
clouds”, (I) “bugs” and (j) “rotor”. (g) “leaking core”, where
most particles were high energy in the center, turned into (h)
“three clouds”, where particles that had clustered in the cen-ter moved outward and formed low-energy regions on the
outside. The outer low-energy region closed and formed a
ring, growing in a zigzag structure, becoming a (j) “rotor”,
and finally, the group of high-energy particles in the cen-
ter disappeared. When µG= 0.11was fixed, and σGwas
increased from small values, a stable structure transitioned
from a (g) “leaking core” to a (k) “sea urchin”. In summary,
the larger the value of µG, the fewer the number of particles
with high energy at the center of the particle configuration,
and the larger the value of σG, the broader the spatial distri-
bution of energy.
Response configuration in post–perturbation To inves-
tigate the adaptivity of the stable particle configurations we
found, we examined their response to a “stretch” perturba-
tion at the 4,001st step and observed the subsequent time
evolution over 6,000 steps for each set of parameters. For
each parameter, we plotted the particle configuration at the
end of the computation (the 10,000th step) for one randomly
selected pattern from 100 independent trials (Figure 3(a)).
To clarify how the parameters affect the particle config-
uration, we observed the time evolution of the total energy
and the pattern change by varying µGatσG= 0.09. As
shown in Figure 3(b) γlower panel, for µG= 0.1, the
particle configuration was stable as (b) “solar flare” up to
4,000 steps (See also Figure 2). After the perturbation, the
particles stabilized gradually, forming a low-energy spot-like structure inside the higher-energy particle at the cen-
ter. The final state was similar qualitatively to (c) “patho-
logical spots”. The total energy was around 0.5 in all tri-
als before perturbation, and the total energy decreased with
perturbation. The energy decreased gradually for each trial,
and after 10,000 steps, it converged to a value near -0.5 for
all 100 trials. As shown in Figure 3(b) βmiddle panel, for
µG= 0.6, the particle configuration was stable as (i) “bugs”
up to 4,000 steps (see also Figure 2). After the perturba-
tion, the particles had high-energy particles on the outside
and low-energy particles in the center. The low-energy parti-
cles moved irregularly, taking in outer particles, and the pro-
portion of low-energy particles increased. The low-energy
particles took a variety of shapes without having a regu-
lar shape. This characteristic of the particle arrangement
was common regardless of the total energy value. The to-
tal energy decreased gradually for each trial trajectory of
100 trials from 2,000 steps to 4,000 steps. Immediately af-
ter the perturbation, the total energy increased immediately
and then some trials dropped sharply after a few hundred
steps, while some trials remained high until the end of the
calculation, resulting in a wide range of final energy val-
ues, from -0.2 to 0.4. As shown in Figure 3(b) upper panel
α, forµG= 1.1, the arrangement of particles in the ring
with lower energy was rapidly replaced while maintaining
the (g)“leaking core” particle arrangement up to 4000 steps
(see also Figure 2). After the perturbation, the low-energy
ring disappeared, and at the same time, the structure of the
inner particles that had been rapidly replacing their configu-
ration was lost, after which all the particles were no longer in
motion. Before the perturbation, the total energy fluctuated
between 0.2 and 0.4 for each trial. After the perturbation, the
total energy increased sharply for a brief period and quickly
converged for nearly all trials to a value near 0.5. In sum-
mary, for a given value of the ratio of σGtoµG, the range of
possible values of the final total energy increases and mul-
tiple particle configurations become stable, a feature that is
also observed for other σG.
To quantitatively evaluate the dynamics of particle
configurations, we measured adaptivity; the diversity of
metastable configuration and time instability. The diversity
of metastable configuration had a maximum at µG= 0.6,
andσG= 0.09. The parameter regions with relatively large
diversity were localized in the region of −25/4∗σG+0.6<
µG<25/8∗σG+ 0.6without 0.09< σ G<0.21and
0.1< µ G<0.5(Figure 4(a), white line). In most of
these localized parameter regions, the particle configuration
was similar to “worm” (Figure 5). After the perturbation, a
small number of low-energy particles existed near the center
of the particle cluster, surrounded by high-energy particles.
The few low-energy particles migrated around and took in
the high-energy particles around them, eventually taking in
almost all of the particles and forming a spiky “worm” par-
ticle configuration (Figure 5). The “worms” movement was
(a) Diversity of metastable configuration
(b) Time instability
Figure 4: Evaluation of total energy stability for “stretch”
perturbations
irregular. This irregular movement affected the overall ar-
rangement of the particles. The total energy in this particle
configuration did not take a fixed value and was found to be
stable over a wide range of values (Figure 3, middle panel).
In the rest of the parameter region, where µGis large and
σGis small, many particles remained high energy, did not
change from their initial random configuration, and the to-
tal energy converged to a similar value in every trial (Figure
3, upper panel). On the other hand, in the parameter region
where µGis small and σGis large, the particles interacted
even with relatively distant particles, showing a pattern of
sparsely distributed particles in space. Depending on the
balance between σGandµG, particles self-organize like a
dot pattern (Figure 3, bottom panel). In summary, respond-
ing particle configurations can be classified into two types ofFigure 5: Example for dynamics of “worm” pattern in post–perturbation
configurations: those that stabilize and those that destabilize
in terms of energy value. There were two types of stabiliz-
ing configurations: one in which particles remained high in
energy without interacting with other particles, and one in
which particles were sparsely distributed in space with low
total energy.
The time instability had a maximum value at σG=
0.21, µG= 1.1, and the high value region generally over-
lapped with the diversity of metastable configuration. Note
that the parameter region on µG= 25 /4∗σG+ 0.5had
low time instability, despite the high diversity of metastable
states (Figure 4(b)). The particle configurations observed
in this parameter region had multiple metastable structures
without “worm” appearing, and once stabilized in that sta-
ble pattern from the perturbation. In areas where both the
diversity and the time instability are high (Figure 4(b), high-
light area), “worm” appear, the total energy does not take
a constant value, has time instability, and by exploring the
energy landscape, the total energy can be lowered could be
done. In summary, for a “stretch” perturbation, a stable par-
ticle configuration transitions to another stable particle con-
figuration. The manner of the transition is characterized by
the time instability of the total energy and the diversity of
metastable configuration, with “worm” particle configura-
tions appearing in regions where both of the two measures
take high values.
Discussion
Summary of results
In this study, we investigated the parameter dependency of
the growth field Gon the “stretch” perturbation of Parti-
cle Lenia, in order to validate its effectiveness for a novel
model of autopoiesis. We found several stable configura-
tions depending on the parameter. Upon applying a “stretch”
perturbation to a stable particle configuration, a transition to
another stable configuration occurred. The response to the
perturbation was characterized by the diversity of metastable
configuration and time instability. We found a “worm” con-
figuration in which both of these two values are high. The
“worm” was unstable in time but maintained its structure
while dynamically changing its pattern and lowering its to-
tal energy. The conditions for the occurrence of this “worm”
were determined by the ratio of µGtoσGand other param-
eters. The ability of the “worm” to maintain its structurewhile being temporally unstable to this environmental per-
turbation is considered to have adaptivity which is one of
the autopoiesis’s features.
Future implications
Although we examined the dependency of the growth fac-
torGwhich determines the time evolution rule of the par-
ticle configuration, the role of the other parameters remains
uninvestigated. Therefore, further exploration is necessary,
specifically concerning the effect of newly introduced phys-
ical properties of particles, such as the strength and range
of repulsion, on the particle dynamics, which is vital for as-
sessing the expressive potential of Particle Lenia. Moreover,
as Particle Lenia is an energy-based model, the particle dy-
namics can be construed as energy landscape trajectories.
The used indicators, i.e., diversity of metastable configu-
ration and time instability, likely represent the landscape’s
local minima count and complexity, respectively. By esti-
mating statistical energy landscapes, such as Monte Carlo
methods, we could analyze more detailed properties of the
stability of the particle configurations.
Secondly, the diversity of metastable configuration and
time instability used in this study as an indicator of adap-
tivity has not been correctly defined. The metastable state
is defined in numerical calculations as the convergence of
the total energy value to a certain value. A more accurate
formulation of the metastable state is needed by drawing the
energy terrain and measuring the response to perturbations.
Thirdly, We investigated the properties of the model with
uniform parameters for all particles. It is worth analyzing the
case where particles with different parameters are mixed. As
shown in swarm chemistry (Sayama, 2009), particles with
different parameters could emerge with a more complex and
diverse particle configuration, so that we could find more
various stable configurations.
Finally, We investigated the stability of particle config-
urations based on the temporal variation properties of the
total energy of the system, however, to directly measure the
agency of the particles other metric needs. Friston proposed
to derive a Bayesian network from the physical configura-
tion of the particles and its Markov blanket is the boundary
that separates the agent and the environment (Friston, 2013).
Although some arbitrariness in the derivation of the Markov
blanket has been pointed out Bruineberg et al. (2022) and
the derivation is frequently updated (Friston et al., 2021),this boundary is applicable to particle systems, such as Par-
ticle Lenia. In addition, we can utilize other metrics, such
as Bayesian network-based Mechanised causal graphs (Ken-
ton et al., 2022), information theory-based indices of indi-
viduality (Krakauer et al., 2020), and Semantic information
(Kolchinsky and Wolpert, 2018), and expect to be able to
evaluate various aspects of agency.
Conclusion
Our paper broadens the scope of new applications of Parti-
cle Lenia as a tool for investigating autopoiesis. Although
this work is only a partial parameter study, the capability of
the model to generate complex particle dynamics brings us
closer to implementing autonomous agents and robots with
the properties of autopoiesis. Furthermore, considering hu-
man interaction with autonomous agents is an important pro-
cess for realizing artificial life in the real world. Through
further investigation of Particle Lenia and expansion of ca-
pacities, we expect that a greater variety of artificial agents
will be developed.
Data Sharing
The code used to generate results is available as Colab note-
book at https://github.com/KazuyaHoribe/
AdaptiveParticleLenia . Some videos of pre-
/post-perturbation also are shown in the same place.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
ber 23H04834.
We would like to thank Google Zurich team for sharing
their codes.
References
Beer, R. D. (2004). Autopoiesis and cognition in the game of life.
Artificial Life , 10(3):309–326.
Beer, R. D. (2014). The cognitive domain of a glider in the game
of life. Artificial life , 20(2):183–206.
Beer, R. D. (2020). An investigation into the origin of autopoiesis.
Artificial Life , 26(1):5–22.
Beer, R. D. and Di Paolo, E. A. (2023). The theoretical foundations
of enaction: Precariousness. BioSystems , 223:104823.
Braitenberg, V . (1986). Vehicles: Experiments in synthetic psychol-
ogy. MIT press.
Brooks, R. (1986). A robust layered control system for a mobile
robot. IEEE journal on robotics and automation , 2(1):14–23.
Bruineberg, J., Doł˛ ega, K., Dewhurst, J., and Baltieri, M. (2022).
The emperor’s new markov blankets. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences , 45:e183.
Carter, R. J., Wiesner, K., and Mann, S. (2018). Emergence and
dynamics of self-producing information niches as a step to-
wards pre-evolutionary organization. Journal of the Royal
Society Interface , 15(138):20170807.Ceron, S., O’Keeffe, K., and Petersen, K. (2023). Diverse behav-
iors in non-uniform chiral and non-chiral swarmalators. Na-
ture Communications , 14(1):940.
Chan, B. W.-C. (2018). Lenia-biology of artificial life. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1812.05433 .
Chan, B. W.-C. (2020). Lenia and expanded universe. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.03742 .
Di Paolo, E. (2009). Extended life. Topoi , 28:9–21.
Di Paolo, E. and Thompson, E. (2014). The enactive approach. In
The Routledge handbook of embodied cognition , pages 68–
78. Routledge.
Di Paolo, E. A. (2005). Autopoiesis, adaptivity, teleology, agency.
Phenomenology and the cognitive sciences , 4(4):429–452.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society
Interface , 10(86):20130475.
Friston, K., Heins, C., Ueltzhöffer, K., Da Costa, L., and Parr,
T. (2021). Stochastic chaos and markov blankets. Entropy ,
23(9):1220.
Froese, T., Weber, N., Shpurov, I., and Ikegami, T. (2023). From
autopoiesis to self-optimization: Toward an enactive model
of biological regulation. bioRxiv , pages 2023–02.
Hamon, G., Etcheverry, M., Chan, B. W.-C., Moulin-Frier, C., and
Oudeyer, P.-Y . (2022). Learning sensorimotor agency in cel-
lular automata.
Ikegami, T. and Suzuki, K. (2008). From a homeostatic to a home-
odynamic self. BioSystems , 91(2):388–400.
Kenton, Z., Kumar, R., Farquhar, S., Richens, J., MacDermott, M.,
and Everitt, T. (2022). Discovering agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2208.08345 .
Kolchinsky, A. and Wolpert, D. H. (2018). Semantic information,
autonomous agency and non-equilibrium statistical physics.
Interface focus , 8(6):20180041.
Krakauer, D., Bertschinger, N., Olbrich, E., Flack, J. C., and Ay,
N. (2020). The information theory of individuality. Theory
in Biosciences , 139:209–223.
Letelier, J. C., Marın, G., and Mpodozis, J. (2003). Autopoietic and
(m, r) systems. Journal of theoretical biology , 222(2):261–
272.
Maturana, H. R. and Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and cogni-
tion: The realization of the living , volume 42. Dordecht:D.
Reidel Publishing Co.
McMullin, B. (2004). Thirty years of computational autopoiesis:
A review. Artificial life , 10(3):277–295.
McMullin, B. and Varela, F. J. (1997). Rediscovering computa-
tional autopoiesis. In Fourth European Conference on Artifi-
cial Life , pages 38–47.
Mordvintsev, A., Niklasson, E., and Randazzo, E. (2022). Parti-
cle lenia and the energy-based formulation. https://google-
research.github.io/self-organising-systems/particle-lenia/ .Neumann, J. v. (1966). Theory of Self-replicating Automata . Uni-
versity of Illinois Press.
Pfeifer, R. and Bongard, J. (2006). How the body shapes the way
we think: a new view of intelligence . MIT press.
Plantec, E., Hamon, G., Etcheverry, M., Oudeyer, P.-Y ., Moulin-
Frier, C., and Chan, B. W.-C. (2022). Flow lenia: Mass con-
servation for the study of virtual creatures in continuous cel-
lular automata. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07906 .
Razeto-Barry, P. (2012). Autopoiesis 40 years later. a review and a
reformulation. Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres ,
42(6):543–567.
Reynolds, C. W. (1987). Flocks, herds and schools: A distributed
behavioral model. In Proceedings of the 14th annual confer-
ence on Computer graphics and interactive techniques , pages
25–34.
Sayama, H. (2009). Swarm chemistry. Artificial life , 15(1):105–
114.
Suzuki, K. and Ikegami, T. (2009). Shapes and self-movement in
protocell systems. Artificial Life , 15(1):59–70.
Tanaka, D. (2007). General chemotactic model of oscillators. Phys-
ical review letters , 99(13):134103.
Tani, J. (2016). Exploring robotic minds: actions, symbols, and
consciousness as self-organizing dynamic phenomena . Ox-
ford University Press.
Taniguchi, T., Murata, S., Suzuki, M., Ognibene, D., Lanillos, P.,
Ugur, E., Jamone, L., Nakamura, T., Ciria, A., Lara, B., et al.
(2023). World models and predictive coding for cognitive
and developmental robotics: Frontiers and challenges. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2301.05832 .
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology, and
the sciences of mind . Harvard University Press.
Varela, F. J., Maturana, H. R., Uribe, R., et al. (1974). The orga-
nization of living systems, its characterization and a model.
Biosystems , 5(4):187–196.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., and Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied
mind, revised edition: Cognitive science and human experi-
ence. MIT press.