1 
 Multi -Hill S trategy in Metadynamics for Interstitial Diffusion in C rystals  
 
Kazuaki Toyoura * 
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606 -8501, Japan  
* toyoura.kazuaki.5r@kyoto -u.ac.jp  
 
Abstract  
 We propose an efficient and general strategy  of metadynamics  (MetaD)  for investigating  
interstitial diffusion in  a crystal by exploiting crystallographic symmetry. Assuming complete 
ignorance o f the diffusion phenomenon of interest,  the three -dimensional  coordinate s of the interstitial  
atom with  the periodic boundar ies are chosen as  the collective variables  (CVs) . Multiple potential hills 
are simultaneously  deposited at all crystallographically -equivalent positions on the free energy surface  
(FES)  defined in the CV space. As a result, the proposed multi -hill strategy  highly accelerates atomic 
jumps  in comparison with  the single -hill strategy  in the conventional MetaD . The key  feature s are that 
the FES estimated from the final bias potential  is exactly satisfied with the symmetry of the host crystal 
and that all elementary  processes  of interstitial diffusion  are obtained  by the  single  MetaD  simulation 
without any prior knowl edge o n the diffusion mechanism . The high efficiency and efficacy of the 
multi -hill strategy are demonstrated , taking the proton  diffusion in  barium zirconate with the cubic 
perovskite structure as a model case. 
  2 
 I. INTRODUCTION  
Molecular dynamics  (MD) is an excellent tool for understanding diffusion phenomen a in 
solids  at the atomic level, whic h track s the time evolution of a given  system according to Newton's 
equation of motion.  However , the simulation  time scale is  limited, e.g., 1 ns at most  in the cas e of first-
principles  molecular dynamics  (FPMD) simulations . Therefore,  rare events  with a longer time scale 
than the simulation time scale cannot be treated by conventional  MD simulations . In addition,  
quantitative evaluation of atomic jump frequencies requires observation of multiple jumps to obtain 
statistical ave rages . 
Various techniques accelerating rare events in  MD simulations  have been reported  so far , such 
as umbrella sampling [ 1,2], hyperdynamics  [3,4], metadynamics [ 5-8], and variational enhanced 
sampling  [9]. In these techniques , a free energy surface (FES) is considered in  the subspace of 
configuration space defined  by a  few given collective variables (CVs)  describing the  physical  
phenomenon of interest. An external b ias potential  is added  on the low -dimensional FES  to accelerate  
rare events in  MD simulations.  Of importance  is how to choose suitable CVs for describing  the 
physical  phenomenon of interest  [8,10,11]. There are  a variety of CV candidate s, e.g., atomic positions, 
interatomic distances, bond angles, torsional angles, interbond distances, components of simulation 
cell (lattice parameters) , reaction paths, and their combinations . We should  choose the necessary and 
sufficient CVs  because  the lower -dimensional CV space leads to  the more effective acceleration . 
In the present study,  we focus on metadynamics  (MetaD)  as one of the most widely -used 3 
 adaptive bias simulation  method s, and propose an efficient  and general  utilization  of MetaD  for 
investigating  interstitial diffusion in a crystal . Assuming  complete  ignorance o f the diffusion  
phenomenon  of interest , the three -dimensional fractional coordinate s x with the periodic boundar ies 
are employed as the CVs . In the conventional  MetaD  method , a single  small  Gaussian  hill is iteratively  
deposited on the FES at a given time interval at the current position  in the CV space to gradually  fill 
the free energy basins  (single -hill strategy ). By contrast,  the proposed method  takes the strategy that 
multiple Gaussian hills are deposited at the same time by exploiting the symmetry of host crystals  to 
enhance the  basin -filling  efficiency  (multi -hill strategy ). We here demonstrate how the multi -hill 
strategy works efficiently and effectively in comparison with the single -hill strategy , taking the proton 
diffusion in barium zirconate (BaZrO 3) with the cubic perovskite structure as a model case.  
 
II. COMPUTATIONAL METHODO LOGY  
A. Proposed method  
 In the conventional  MetaD  method , the bias potential Unbias(s) after n-times deposition of 
Gaussian hills  is given by  
 Unbias(s) = Un‒1bias(s) + ℎnexp(‒(s ‒ sn)TΣ‒1(s ‒ sn)
2) ≈ Un‒1bias(s) + ℎnexp(‒‖s ‒ sn‖2
2σ2), (1) 
where hn and  are the height and  covariance matrix  of the nth Gaussian hill , respectively. s is the 
vector of CVs, and sn is the  current  position in the CV space when the nth Gaussian hill is added.  When 
 is the diagonal matrix with all elements equal, the Gaussian hills can be rewritten simply as the  4 
 rightmost side of  Eq. (1)  using the common standard deviation . hn is set to be constant ( h0) in the 
original  MetaD , while hn is rescaled  according to the bias potential  at the current position  sn in well-
tempered MetaD  (WT-MetaD)  as follows:  
 hn = ℎ0exp(‒Vn‒1(sn)
kBΔT),       (2) 
where kB is the Boltzmann constant and  T is a temperature -valued positive  parameter determining 
the decay rate of  the Gaussian  hill height.  The scaling  exponential  factor is unity  at T = ∞, equivalent 
to the original  MetaD . After all basins  on the FES  are sufficiently filled up by the deposited Gaussian 
hills, the bias potential Unmaxbias(s) can be converted into the FES F(s) as follows  [6]: 
 F(s)  = ‒ (1 + T/T) Unmaxbias(s) + const. ,     (3) 
where T is the simulation temperature.  
 In the proposed method , the three -dimensional fractional coordinate s x of the interstitial  atom 
with the periodic boundar ies are defined as CVs . The defined  CV space corresponds to  the entire 
simulation cell, which is too large to be filled up by  depositing  small Gaussian hills  one by one . 
Therefore,  the proposed method take s the strategy that multiple Gaussian hills are  simultaneously  
deposited at all crystallographically equivalent positions in the simulation cell. In this strategy, t he bias 
potential  Unbias(x) is given by  
Unbias(x)  = Un‒1bias(x) + ∑ ℎnexp(‒(x ‒ Tk∙xn)TΣ‒1(x ‒ Tk∙xn)
2) k ≈ Un‒1bias(x) + ∑ℎnexp(‒‖x ‒ Tk∙xn‖2
2σ2 ) k , (4) 
where Tk is the  symmetry operation that generates the kth point  equivalent  to the current  position  xn of 
the interstitial  atom.  5 
  
B. Model system  and computational conditions  
The p roton diffusion in the model system of  BaZrO 3 has been investigated intensively using 
theoretical calculations [ 12-16]. Figure 1  shows the proton interstitial sites ( white small  spheres) and 
two types of migration paths (black and white lines). A proton resides around an oxide ion  and migrates 
by repe ating  rotation around an oxide ion (blac k lines) and hopping between adjacent oxide ions (white 
lines). A supercell consisting of 2×2×2 BaZrO 3 unit cells including  a single proton was  employed as  
the simulation cell. The goal of the demonstration problem is that the  proton FESs around the rotati on 
and hopping paths are evaluated  accurately to estimate the proton jump frequencies. WT-MetaD  
simulations were  carried out using  the proposed  multi -hill strategy, and those under the  conventional  
single -hill strategy were also carried out for comparison. Only for the single -hill strategy,  the mobile 
region of a proton was  limited  within  the two basin  region s corresponding to the initial and final states 
for each  of the rotation and hopping  paths. Specifically, the polyhedral region composed of the  gray 
and blue  tetrahedra  in Fig. 1  was surrounded by elastic collision walls for the rotation pa th, while the 
region composed of the gray  and green tetrahedra  was surrounded by walls for the hopping path.  
All simulations were based on first -principles calculations using the projector augmented 
wave  (PAW) method  [17,18 ] implemented in the Vien na Ab initio Simulation Package  (V ASP) code  
[19-21]. The generalized gradient approximation parameterized by Perdew,  Burke, and Ernzerhof  
(PBE_ GGA) was used for the  exchange -correlation term  [22]. The 5 s, 5p, 6s, and 5 d orbitals for Ba, 6 
 4s, 4p, 5s, and 4 d for Zr and Y , 2 s and 2 p for O, and 1 s for H were treated as valence  states in the PAW 
potentials.  The plane  wave cutoff energy was set to 400 eV .  Brillouin -zone sampling  was performed 
using a 2 × 2 × 2  grid for the  supercell consisting of  2 × 2 × 2 unit cells . The NVT ensemble was 
employed with  the constant temperature controlled by the Nóse -Hoover thermostat  [23]. The time  step 
was set to 1 × 10−15 s (1 fs) and the total simulation steps were  150000 and 600 000 steps  for the multi -
hill and single -hill strategies, respectively . Pre -simulations were  preliminarily  performed for 10 000 
steps as thermal equilibration.  Gaussian hills w ere deposited at every 50 MD steps, i.e., 3000 -times 
and 12000 -times hill depositions under the multi -hill and single -hill strategies, respectively . The height 
and standard deviation of t he Gaussian hills ( h0 and ) and the scaling  parameter  (kBT) were  set to  
0.02 eV , 0.01, and 0.1 eV , respectively.  
 
C. Atomic j ump frequencies  
Proton jump frequencies were estimated from the obtained FESs based on the transition state 
theory [24]. Within classical statistical mechanics, the jump frequency  is given by  
  =√kBT
2πM∬exp(‒ F(x)
kBT)dSS
∭ exp(‒ F(x)
kBT)dVV,       (5) 
where M is the mass of diffusion species (protons). The denominator and numerator are the volume 
and area integrations, respectively, where the integral ranges are the single basin corresponding to the 
initial state and the saddle surface separating the initial a nd final states, respectively. For the proton 
rotation and hopping in BaZrO 3, the volume and area integrations were performed within a tetrahedron 7 
 shown in Fig. 1 and on the face shared by two adjacent tetrahedra, respectively.  
The jump frequencies under t he classical harmonic approximation were also estimated to 
examine the accuracy of the jump frequencies obtained from the WT -MetaD simulations. Under the 
classical harmonic approximation, the jump frequency is given by  
  = 0,harm exp(‒ΔEmig
kBT) = ∏ νiinitial 3N-3
i=1
∏ νisaddle 3N-3
i=2exp(‒ΔEmig
kBT),    (6) 
where 0,harm is the vibrational prefactor expressed by the eigenfrequencies of lattice vibrations in the 
initial and saddle -point states, νiinitial and νisaddle, respectively, ΔEmig is the potential barrier, and N is 
the number of atoms in a given system. The eigenfrequencies in the initial state and the saddle -point 
states for proton rotation and hopping in BaZrO 3 were estimated using the phonopy code [25] based 
on the small displac ement method [26,27]. Figure 2 shows the estimated eigenfrequencies at the  
point in the initial and saddle -point states for proton rotation and hopping. The single imaginary 
frequency in each of the saddle -point states corresponds to the local energy max imum along the 
migration coordinate, which is excluded in evaluating the jump frequencies according to Eq. (6).  
 
III. Results and Discussion  
A. Hill deposition profiles and FESs  
 Figure 3 shows the deposition profile s of Gaussian hills  in the  BaZrO 3 supercell  with a single 
proton  during the WT-MetaD  simulation s at 500 K . The cubic perovskite structure has space group Pm
3_
m (221) , in which the multiplicity of the general position is 48. Therefore, 384 Gaussian hills  are 8 
 deposited in the supercell consisting  of 2 × 2 × 2 unit cell s at each depo sition step (every 50 MD steps)  
under the multi -hill strategy . Under the single -hill strategy, the two deposition profiles  corresponding 
to the proton rotation and hopping  are shown in the figure, for  which  proton migration  was limited  
within  the two  adjacent  basins by elastic collision walls . Note that such limitation of proton migration  
is possible only by  exploiting  the prior knowledge shown  in Fig. 1 , i.e., infeasible  before evaluating 
the entire FES . By contrast, the multi -hill strategy does not require su ch prior knowledge o n the FES, 
which  uses only the symmetry of the host crystal.  As a result, t he deposited hil ls are distributed  
according to the crystallographic symmetry  over the entire simulation cell , which are denser than those 
under the single -hill strategy.  
 Figure 4 (a) shows the  cross -sections of the  estimated  FESs  at 500 K  on the proton rotation 
and hopping planes  after 3000 and 12000 deposition steps (150000 and 600000 MD steps) under the 
multi -hill and single -hill strategies, respectively.  The free energies are shown with reference to the 
most stable position in the CV sp ace. As shown in the figure, t he estimated FES exactly satisfies the 
symmetry of the host crystal under the multi -hill strategy, while only the  two adjacent free energy 
minima exist under the single -hill strategy. Figure 4(b) shows the  profiles of the cros s-sections of the  
estimated  FESs at 100, 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 deposition steps (5000, 25000, 50000, 100000, and 
150000 MD steps) . At the earliest step, the basins around  proton sites  are shallow due to the insufficient 
deposition of Gaussian hills. As increasing the deposited hills, the basins become deeper  gradually  and 
the boundary regions between adjacent basins  are also depressed, to enable  estimati ng proton jump 9 
 frequencies. The multi -hill strategy  always creates the FESs  according to  the symmetry of the host 
crystal even at the earl y steps in principle,  while  the two basins corresponding to the initial and final 
states of the proton jump are different  in depth and shape  under the single -hill strategy, particularly  at 
the earl y steps.  Note that the multi -hill strategy can e xtract  all elementary  processes  of interstitial 
diffusion  from  the FES obtained by  the single simulation . In this model case, the proton rotation and 
hopping paths are identified  at once  by the optimal path finding on the finally -obtained FES.  
 
B. Jump frequencies  
 Figure 5 shows the estimated jump frequencies of proton rotation and hopping  at 500 K  as a 
function of hill deposition steps.  Under the multi -hill strategy , all rotation  or hopping paths  in the 
simulation cell  are equivalently evaluated, while the forward and backward jumps between the two 
basins are not equivalent  under the single -hill strategy. Therefore , the estimated jump frequencies are 
shown  by the single lines (red  lines with solid symbols) under the multi -hill strategy and by the two  
lines (green and blue lines with open symbols)  under the single -hill strategy . The black broken lines 
denote the jump frequencies estimated under the classical harmonic approximation . Although t he jump 
frequencies tend to be overestimated  at the early  steps due to the shallow free e nergy basins , the jump 
frequencies quickly converge to the broken lines  under the multi -hill strategy. By contrast,  the 
convergence of the two lines under the single -hill strategy is relatively slow. In addition, the two lines 
corresponding to the forward and backward jump s largely  deviate from each other in the early steps, 10 
 and they do not coincide with each other per fectly even in the later steps.  In principle, the efficiency 
of the multi -hill strategy is 8 times higher than that of the single -hill strategy, because there are four 
crystallographically equivalent positions per basin in this model system . If comparing t he two 
strategies under the same condition without elastic collision walls , the multi -hill strategy should be 
384 times more efficient than the sing le-hill strategy.  
 The WT-MetaD  simulations under the multi -hill strategy were performed at various 
temperat ures i n the range of 500 K and 2000 K, to estimate t he jump frequencies for proton rotation 
and hopping . Figure 6 shows the  estimated jump frequencies as a function of inverse temperature (red 
lines with solid symbols), in which  those under the classical harmonic approximation are also shown  
by the broken lines  for comparison . The apparent activation energies  Q and pre -exponential factors 
0,app for the jump  frequencies are 0.17 eV  and 11 THz  for proton rotation , which are in reasonable 
agreement with the potential barrier ΔEmig (0.16 eV) and the vibrational prefactor 0,harm (7 THz) 
under the harmonic approximation. However,  Q and 0,app for proton hopping are 0.22 eV  and 12 THz , 
respectively , which are  comparatively  different from  the ΔEmig  and 0,harm under the harmonic 
approximation  (0.26 eV and 30 THz) . Although a possible origin of the discrepancy  is anharmonicity, 
the estimation errors of  jump frequencies by both methods are not negligible. In fact, the estimated 
jump frequencies by the WT -MetaD simulations have larger variation at lower temperatures, and the 
vibrational prefactors given by Eq. (6) are significantly affected by the errors of the estimated 
eigen frequencies at the initial and saddle -point states, particularly by low-frequency modes . 11 
  
IV . CONCLUSIONS  
 We proposed t he multi -hill strategy  in M etaD simulations for evaluating interstitial diffusion 
in crystals by exploiting the  crystallographic  symmetry. Specifically, using the fractional coordinate s 
of the interstitial  with the periodic boundaries  as the CVs, Gaussian hills are deposited at all positions  
equivalent  to the current interstitial  position . The higher symmetry of th e simulation cell leads to the 
more Gaussian hill deposition , resulting in the more efficient simulation.  The biggest advantage  of the 
multi -hill strategy  is that all elementary processes of interstitial diffusion in the crystal are obtained by 
the single  MetaD  simulation wi thout any prior knowledge o n the diffusion phenomenon of interest. 
The high efficiency and efficacy of the multi -hill strategy were  demonstrated by taking WT -MetaD 
simulations for the  proton diffusion in BaZrO 3 as a model case.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
We gratefully acknowledge the insightful discussion  with S. Takazawa. This work was 
partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI (grant number s: 19H05787 and 20H02422 ). 
 12 
 REFERENCES  
[1] G. M. Torrie and J. P. Valleau, Chem. Phys. Lett. 28, 578 (1974).  
[2] G. M. Torrie and J. P. Valleau, J. Comput. Phys. 23, 187 (1977).  
[3] A. F. V oter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3908 (1997).  
[4] R. A. Miron and K. A. Fichthorn, J. Chem. Phys. 119, 6210 (2003).  
[5] A. Laio and M. Parrinello, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. A. 99, 12562 (2002).  
[6] A. Barducci, G. Bussi, and M. Parrinello,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 020603 (2008).  
[7] J. F. Dama, M. Parrinello, and G.A. V oth, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 240602 (2014).  
[8] G. Bussi and A. Laio, Nat. Rev. Phys. 2, 200 (2020).  
[9] O. Valss on and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 090601 (2014).  
[10] D. Branduardi, F. L. Gervasio, and M. Parrinello, J. Chem. Phys. 126, 054103 (2007).  
[11] G. D. Leines and B. Ensing, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 020601 (2012).  
[12] W. Münch, K. D. Kreuer, G. Seife rt and J. Maier, Solid State Ionics 136-137, 183 (2000).  
[13] M. E. Björketun, P. G. Sundell, G. Wahnström and D. Engberg, Solid State Ionics 176, 3035 
(2005).  
[14] K. Toyoura, D. Hirano, A. Seko, M. Shiga, A. Kuwabara,  M. Karasuyama, K. Shitara and I. 
Takeuchi, Phys. Rev. B 93, 054112 (2016).  
[15] K. Kanamori, K. Toyoura, J. Honda, K. Hattori, A. Seko,  M. Karasuyama, K. Shitara, M. Shiga, 
A. Kuwabara and I. Takeuchi, Phys. Rev. B 97, 125124 (2018).  
[16] K. Toyoura, W. Meng, D. Han and T. Uda, J. Mater. Che m. A, 6, 22721 (2018).  
[17] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).  
[18] P. E. Bl öchl, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994).  
[19] G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B  48, 13115 (1993).  
[20] G. Kern, G. Kresse, and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B 59, 8551 (1999).  
[21] G. Kresse and J. Furthmuller, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996).  
[22] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).  
[23] S. Nóse, J. Chem. Phys. 81, 511 (1984).  
[24] G. H. Vineyard, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 3, 121 (1957).  
[25] A Togo and I Tanaka, Scr. Mater. 108, 1 (2015).  
[26] K. Parlinski, Z. Q. Li, and Y . Kawazoe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4063 (1997).  
[27] D. Alfè, Comput. Phys. Commun. 180, 2622 (2009).  
 
  13 
 FIGURE  CAPTIONS  
FIGURE 1. Proton sites and migration paths in 2 × 2  × 2 unit cells of BaZrO 3. The yellow, gray, and 
red spheres are Ba, Zr, and O ions, respectively, and the white small spheres are the proton sites. The 
black and white lines connecting adjacent proton sites denote proton rotation and hopping paths, 
respec tively. There is the tetrahedral region corresponding to the basin on the FES around each proton 
site. The gray tetrahedron is adjacent to the blue and green tetrahedra with face sharing, and the two 
shared faces correspond to the saddle surfaces of rotati on and hopping paths, respectively.  
 
FIGURE 2. Estimated eigenfrequencies of lattice vibration at the initial state and the saddle -point states 
for proton rotation and hopping. The region below 0 THz indicates imaginary frequencies. The three 
red lines in each state correspond to the proton vibrations.  
 
FIGURE  3. Hill deposition profiles in the BaZrO 3 supercell consisting of 2 × 2 × 2 unit cells with a 
single proton  during the WT -MetaD simulations at 500 K under the multi -hill and single -hill strategies. 
The black dots are the positions of deposited hills at 100, 500, and 1000 deposition steps. The yellow 
surfaces denote the free energy isosurfaces at 0.5 and 0.4 eV vs. the most stable site under the multi -
hill and single -hill strategies, respectively, after finishing the WT -MetaD simulations. Under the multi -
hill strategy, 384 hills are deposited on the FES at each step.  
 
FIGURE 4. (a) Cross -sections of the estimated  FESs on the proton rotation and hopping planes after 
3000 and 12000 deposition steps (150000 and 600000 MD steps) under the multi -hill and single -hill 
strategies. (b) Cross -sections of the estimated FESs at 100, 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 deposition steps.  
The free energy is shown with referenc e to the most stable position  at each step.  
 
FIGURE 5 . Estimated jump frequencies of (a) proton rotation and (b) proton hopping under the multi -
hill and single -hill strategies as a function of the deposition step. The  red lines with solid symbols 
correspond to the multi -hill strategy, while the green and blue lines with open symbols correspond to 
the forward and backward jumps under the single -hill strategy. The broken vertical lines are the jump 
frequencies estimated under the classical harmonic approximation by Eq. (6).  
 
FIGURE  6. Temperature dependence of the estimated jump frequencies for (a) proton rotation and (b) 
proton hopping under the multi -hill strategy. The estimated jump frequencies under the classical 
harm onic approximation are also shown for comparison.  
   14 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1. Proton sites and migration paths in 2 × 2 × 2 unit cells of BaZrO 3. The yellow, gray, and 
red spheres are Ba, Zr, and O ions, respectively, and the white small spheres are the proton  sites. The 
black and white lines connecting adjacent proton sites denote proton rotation and hopping paths, 
respectively. There is the tetrahedral region corresponding to the basin on the FES around each proton 
site. The gray tetrahedron is adjacent to th e blue and green tetrahedra with face sharing, and the two 
shared faces correspond to the saddle surfaces of rotation and hopping paths, respectively.  
 
  
15 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2. Estimated eigenfrequencies of lattice vibration at the initial state and the saddle -point states 
for proton rotation and hopping. The region below 0 THz indicates imaginary frequencies. The three 
red lines in each state correspond to the proton vibrations.  
 
 
  
16 
  
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE  3. Hill deposition profiles in the BaZrO 3 supercell consisting of 2 × 2 × 2 unit cells with a 
single proton during the WT -MetaD simulations at 500 K under the multi -hill and single -hill strategies. 
The black dots are the positions of deposited hills at 100, 500, and 1000 deposition steps. The yel low 
surfaces denote the free energy isosurfaces at 0.5 and 0.4 eV vs. the most stable site under the multi -
hill and single -hill strategies, respectively, after finishing the WT -MetaD simulations. Under the multi -
hill strategy, 384 hills are deposited on th e FES at each  step. 
 
  
17 
  
FIGURE  4. (a) Cross -sections of the estimated FESs on the proton rotation and hopping planes after 
3000 and 12000 deposition steps (150000 and 600000 MD steps) under the multi -hill and single -hill 
strategies. (b) Cross -sections of the estimated FESs at 100, 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 deposition steps. 
The free energy is shown with refere nce to the most stable position  at each step.   
18 
  
 
 
 
FIGURE  5. Estimated jump frequencies of (a) proton rotation and (b) proton hopping under the mult i-
hill and single -hill strategies as a function of the deposition step. The red lines with solid symbols 
correspond to the multi -hill strategy, while the green and blue lines with open symbols correspond to 
the forward and backward jumps  under the single -hill strategy. The broken vertical lines are the jump 
frequencies estimated under the classical harmonic approximation by Eq. (6).   
19 
  
 
 
 
FIGURE  6. Temperature dependence of the estimated jump frequencies for (a) proton rotation and (b) 
proton hopping under the multi -hill strategy. The estimated jump frequencies under the classical 
harmonic approximation are also shown for comparison.  
 
