Draft version January 19, 2024
Typeset using L ATEX default style in AASTeX631
Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids: insights from DART’s
encounter with the Didymos system
Harrison F. Agrusa,1, 2Yun Zhang,3Derek C. Richardson,2Petr Pravec,4Matija ´Cuk,5Patrick Michel,1, 6
Ronald-Louis Ballouz,7Seth A. Jacobson,8Daniel J. Scheeres,9Kevin Walsh,10Olivier Barnouin,7
R. Terik Daly,7Eric Palmer,11Maurizio Pajola,12Alice Lucchetti,12Filippo Tusberti,12Joseph V. DeMartini,2
Fabio Ferrari,13Alex J. Meyer,9Sabina D. Raducan,14and Paul S ´anchez15
1Universit´ e Cˆ ote d’Azur, Observatoire de la Cˆ ote d’Azur, CNRS, Laboratoire Lagrange, Nice, France
2Department of Astronomy, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
3Department of Climate and Space Sciences and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
4Astronomical Institute of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Friˇ cova 298, Ondˇ rejov, CZ 25165, Czech Republic
5SETI Institute, 339 N Bernardo Ave, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
6The University of Tokyo, Department of Systems Innovation, School of Engineering, Tokyo 113-0033 , Japan
7Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD 20723, USA
8Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
9Smead Department of Aerospace Engineering Sciences, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA
10Southwest Research Institute, Boulder, CO 80302, USA.
11Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, AZ
12INAF-Osservatorio Astronomico di Padova, Padova, Italy
13Department of Aerospace Science and Technology, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, 20159, Italy
14Space Research and Planetary Sciences, Physics Institute, University of Bern, Bern, 3012, Switzerland
15Colorado Center for Astrodynamics Research, University of Colorado Boulder, 3775 Discovery Dr, Boulder, CO 80303, USA
(Received September 28, 2023; Revised December 18, 2023; Accepted January 10, 2024)
Submitted to PSJ
ABSTRACT
We explore binary asteroid formation by spin-up and rotational disruption considering the NASA
DART mission’s encounter with the Didymos-Dimorphos binary, which was the first small binary
visited by a spacecraft. Using a suite of N-body simulations, we follow the gravitational accumulation
of a satellite from meter-sized particles following a mass-shedding event from a rapidly rotating primary.
The satellite’s formation is chaotic, as it undergoes a series of collisions, mergers, and close gravitational
encounters with other moonlets, leading to a wide range of outcomes in terms of the satellite’s mass,
shape, orbit, and rotation state. We find that a Dimorphos-like satellite can form rapidly, in a matter
of days, following a realistic mass-shedding event in which only ∼2−3% of the primary’s mass is shed.
Satellites can form in synchronous rotation due to their formation near the Roche limit. There is a
strong preference for forming prolate (elongated) satellites, although some simulations result in oblate
spheroids like Dimorphos. The distribution of simulated secondary shapes is broadly consistent with
other binary systems, measured through radar or lightcurves. Unless Dimorphos’s shape is an outlier,
and considering the observational bias against lightcurve-based determination of secondary elongations
for oblate bodies, we suggest there could be a significant population of oblate secondaries. If these
satellites initially form with elongated shapes, a yet-unidentified pathway is needed to explain how
they become oblate. Finally, we show that this chaotic formation pathway occasionally forms asteroid
pairs and stable triples, including co-orbital satellites and satellites in mean motion resonances.
Keywords: Asteroid dynamics (2210) — Asteroid satellites (2207) — Asteroid rotation (2211) — Near-
Earth objects (1092) — Small Solar System bodies (1469)arXiv:2401.09269v2  [astro-ph.EP]  18 Jan 20242 Agrusa et al.
1.INTRODUCTION
Binaries make up ∼15% of the near-Earth asteroid (NEA) population (Margot et al. 2002; Pravec et al. 2006). This
fraction increases to ∼65% for fast-rotators greater than ∼300 m in diameter (Pravec et al. 2006). Given the relatively
short median dynamical lifetimes of NEAs of about 10 Myr (Gladman et al. 2000), this high binary fraction implies
an efficient formation mechanism that can maintain a steady-state population or formation before exiting the main
asteroid belt. Among NEA binaries, the primary component is typically small, less than ∼5 km and with a moderately
sized secondary, usually less than ∼60% of the primary’s diameter. Furthermore, the two bodies are typically on close
orbits, separated by less than ∼10 primary radii. Typically, the primary is rapidly rotating and has a near-spherical
shape with an equatorial bulge (Pravec et al. 2006; Pravec & Harris 2007; Benner et al. 2015). In addition, the
secondaries of these systems frequently have an elongated shape and are typically in synchronous rotation when the
secondary is on a close, near-circular orbit (Pravec et al. 2016). The specific angular momentum of these systems is
often close to the angular momentum of a sphere having the same total mass rotating at its critical disruption limit,
indicating that the creation mechanism of these binaries must be related to some sort of fission or mass-shedding
process (Pravec & Harris 2007; Pravec et al. 2010).
The Yarkovsky–O’Keefe–Radzievskii–Paddack (YORP) effect is a process in which the absorption and re-emission
of solar radiation imparts a small torque on irregularly-shaped bodies (Rubincam 2000). The strength of the YORP
effect is highly dependent on the size and shape of the body and its heliocentric distance, and is thought to be the
dominant mechanism that spins-up small asteroids leading to rotational disruption and the formation of a binary
(Vokrouhlick´ y & ˇCapek 2002; Bottke et al. 2002). For a review of YORP and the formation of small binary asteroids,
see Walsh & Jacobson (2015).
The recent Double Asteroid Redirection Test (DART) mission was the first spacecraft to visit (albeit briefly) a
small binary asteroid (Rivkin et al. 2021). The primary, Didymos, has a flattened top-shape with a volume-equivalent
diameter of ∼760 m and a short spin period of 2.26 h (Naidu et al. 2020; Daly et al. 2023b). The satellite, Dimorphos,
has an approximately circular orbit with a semimajor axis of ∼3 primary radii (Naidu et al. 2022; Scheirich & Pravec
2022). Dimorphos was thought to be in synchronous rotation prior to DART’s kinetic impact (Richardson et al.
2022), although this could not be determined directly. Both bodies have surfaces consistent with being gravitational
aggregates or “rubble piles” (Barnouin et al. 2023), although any direct measurements of their interiors will have to
wait for the arrival of the European Space Agency’s Hera mission in 2027 (Michel et al. 2022). Dimorphos has a
volume-equivalent diameter of ∼150 m, corresponding to a secondary-to-primary size ratio of ∼0.2. If Didymos and
Dimorphos have equal bulk densities (which not known), then they would have a mass ratio of ∼0.01. Dimorphos
appears to have a remarkably oblate shape, in which its semi-major axis, a, and semi-intermediate axis, b, are nearly
identical in length and roughly ∼1.5 times longer than its semi-minor axis, c(i.e, principal rotation axis) (Daly
et al. 2023b). Additionally, the presence of rocks perched on boulders with slopes no higher than ∼35◦suggests that
Dimorphos’s surface may be cohesionless with a friction angle of ∼35◦(Barnouin et al. 2023). A ∼35◦friction angle
is also derived from an independent method based on the angularity of boulders on Dimorphos’s surface (Robin et al.
2023). Although there could be some strength at depth, some recent models of DART’s impact are consistent with a
cohesionless interior (Raducan et al. 2023).
The shape of Dimorphos came as a surprise, as previously observed systems (either via radar or lightcurve) have
found that the secondary tends to have a more prolate, or elongated, shape in which a > b > c , where a,b, and c
are the body’s respective semimajor, semi-intermediate, and semi-minor axes. Based on Dimorphos’s physical extents
(which are well-fit to a uniform ellipsoid), a preliminary estimate puts Dimorphos’s elongation at a/b= 1.02±0.03
(Daly et al. 2023b) which has since been updated to a/b= 1.06±0.03 (Daly et al. 2023a). Nevertheless, no previously
published studies employing lightcurve- or radar-based shape determination of similar binary systems have found a
satellite with a/b≲1.1 (Ostro et al. 2006; Naidu et al. 2015; Becker et al. 2015; Pravec et al. 2016). The principal
motivation for this study was to understand how Dimorphos might have formed with its present shape, but as we will
show later, the results are broadly applicable to all small binaries formed by rotational disruption.
In Sections 1.1 and 1.2, we summarize previous work on binary formation and YORP spin-up. Then we introduce
pkdgrav in Section 2 and show a full end-to-end example simulation demonstrating the formation of a binary system
via a single YORP-driven mass-shedding event in Section 2.1. Then, based on this simulation and constraints derived
by DART, we introduce the simulation set-up and initial conditions used for this study in Section 2.2. The results
from the numerical simulations are shown in Section 3 followed by conclusions in Section 4.Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 3
1.1. Previous work
There is general agreement that many small binary asteroids are likely created via YORP-induced spin-up in which
a satellite forms when the primary exceeds its critical spin limit. However, there is still some debate about precisely
how the binary system forms, which we address here.
Walsh et al. (2008) modeled the formation of a binary using a rubble-pile asteroid model consisting of thousands of
spherical particles in which angular momentum is slowly added to the system as a proxy for YORP-induced spin-up.
Through the spin-up process, the primary reshapes, forming an equatorial bulge, and the secondary is gradually built
in orbit via gravitational accumulation of material shed from the primary’s equator. This idea was revisited in Walsh
et al. (2012) with a broader simulation suite at higher resolution, finding that that the resulting top-shaped primary
and secondary properties are broadly consistent with the observed population.
However, this model suffers from a few issues. First, it has been shown that the magnitude anddirection of the
YORP torque is highly-sensitive to small changes in the primary’s shape, meaning that each landslides, mass shedding,
and natural impacts could change the strength and direction of the YORP effect. This could make YORP spin-up
effectively a random walk process and may significantly increase the amount of time required to build a secondary in
orbit (Statler 2009; Cotto-Figueroa et al. 2015; Zhou et al. 2022). This effect may significantly decrease the efficiency
of such a formation process, making a scenario in which the secondary forms from a single rotational disruption event
more attractive1. On a related note, Jacobson & Scheeres (2011) point out that a gradual process of satellite formation
suffers from the fact that single particles can escape the system before the satellite is fully formed. The argument is
that escape can occur before the next shedding event because the system has positive free energy, and the single (or
multiple) shed particles would escape before the next YORP cycle. Second, in the Walsh et al. (2008, 2012) works,
the primary was initialized in a hexagonal close-packed (HCP) arrangement and particle contacts were handled using
the Hard-sphere Discrete Element Method (HSDEM), which is ill-suited to simulate particles undergoing persistent
contact with multiple other particles (see Murdoch et al. 2015; S´ anchez & Scheeres 2012, 2016). Although this model
captures the general process of binary formation, the HCP packing and HSDEM contact physics may affect the precise
details of the mass shedding and satellite formation.
Jacobson & Scheeres (2011) presented an alternative theory for binary formation in which the secondary arises
from a single large rotational disruption event, dubbed “rotational fission” (Scheeres 2007a). There seems to be
some confusion about these two ideas in the literature, and we attempt to point out here that the “gravitational
accumulation” idea of Walsh et al. (2008) and the “rotational fission” idea of Jacobson & Scheeres (2011) are similar,
yet fundamentally distinct. Jacobson & Scheeres (2011) present a model that follows the spin-orbit coupled dynamical
evolution of a binary system following a fission event. Their model assumes the initial rubble pile consists of two
ellipsoidal components (that will later become the primary and secondary). Angular momentum is slowly added to
the single body and at fast spin rates, the long axes of the two constituent ellipsoids become aligned while still at
rest on one another, owing to this being the only stable equilibrium configuration for two ellipsoids (Scheeres 2007a).
When the critical spin limit is exceeded, the bodies then “fission” and begin to orbit each other. Jacobson & Scheeres
(2011) integrate the fully-coupled spin and orbital evolution of the binary system, accounting for their nonspherical
gravitational potentials along with a treatment for tidal evolution. For mass ratios <0.2, they argue that the post-
fission system has positive free energy (i.e., the sum of the bodies’ kinetic energies and the mutual potential), meaning
that there are one of two possible outcomes: the secondary must either escape the system or it must fission itself to
form (temporarily) a triple system. These secondary fissions occur when the secondary is gravitationally torqued by
the primary such that it exceeds its stability limit and is then split into two separate ellipsoids (whose shapes are
generated randomly). In most of their simulations the third body re-impacts the primary, but it can also escape the
system or re-impact the secondary. This ongoing fission process, along with tidal evolution, will eventually lead to a
state with negative free energy, ultimately allowing the binary system to be stable.
This model has the advantage that it only requires a single rotational disruption event, thus avoiding the “stochastic
YORP” problem. This model broadly reproduces the characteristics of the NEA population, including the existence
of asteroid pairs. A follow-up study that includes a more sophisticated asteroid population model shows that the
asteroid fission theory can reproduce many of the characteristics of binary asteroids (Jacobson et al. 2016). Recently,
1Recent work shows that all twelve of the available and reliable YORP detections show that that the asteroid’s spin rate is increasing in
time ( ˇDurech et al. 2023). This could due to YORP having an underlying preference to increase the spin rates of asteroids rather than
decrease them (Golubov & Krugly 2012). If there really is an underlying preference for spin-up rather than spin-down, then the idea of
stochastic YORP does not present a significant issue to binary formation models.4 Agrusa et al.
the rotational fission model has been extended to include 3D dynamics, and many of the conclusions still largely hold
true (Boldrin et al. 2016; Davis & Scheeres 2020; Ho et al. 2022).
The Jacobson & Scheeres (2011) suffers from one potential weakness; in order to allow for secondary fission events,
which are necessary to achieve stability, they invoke that the secondary itself is a rubble pile. This is of course a
sensible assumption, however, it presents a major issue; at the very moment of the initial fission event, when the
secondary (which is itself a rubble pile!) detaches from the primary, it must tidally disrupt, as it is lying within the
primary’s Roche limit (Holsapple & Michel 2006; Sharma 2009) rather than continue to evolve as a coherent body.
This dilemma can be avoided in cases where the secondary’s bulk density is much higher than the primary’s such that
the Roche limit lies within the primary itself, or if the secondary has a small amount of cohesion to prevent a tidal
disruption (e.g. Holsapple & Michel 2008; S´ anchez & Scheeres 2016; Tardivel et al. 2018), or if the secondary has a
bilobate shape in which the neck region could fail before the rest of the body (Hirabayashi & Scheeres 2019), or some
combination of all three. However, neither of these three contingencies seem viable for Dimorphos to form purely by
fission if it is a rubble pile with little-to-no cohesion and a friction angle of ∼35◦(Barnouin et al. 2023; Raducan
et al. 2023). If such a body were to rotationally fission from Didymos’s equator, it would immediately undergo tidal
disruption (e.g. Agrusa et al. 2022).
In this paper, we present an alternate formation path that incorporates the ideas of both the Walsh et al. (2008)
and Jacobson & Scheeres (2011) models. In our model, the secondary forms via gravitational reaccumulation, similar
to the Walsh et al. (2008) theory, however, all the required mass is shed in a single impulsive event, like Jacobson &
Scheeres (2011). We will demonstrate that this simple model of accumulation from debris shed from a single rotational
disruption event can lead to stable binary systems and secondaries having a wide range of shapes.
Recently, Madeira et al. (2023) considered the gravitational accumulation of Dimorphos from debris produced by
Didymos using a 1D ring-satellite model (HYDRORINGS) (Charnoz et al. 2010, 2011; Salmon et al. 2010). In
this model, material migrates outwards via viscous spreading until it reaches the Roche limit, at which point it is
immediately converted to a moonlet. Assuming the initial debris ring is narrowly confined at the primary’s surface,
they find that it takes ∼1 yr for the ring to spread to the Roche limit, after which Dimorphos would accrete rapidly,
reaching ∼90% of its current mass within days. This process requires ∼25% of Didymos’s mass to be put into orbit
to form a satellite with ∼1% of Didymos’s mass. Once Dimorphos forms, they estimate that the ring would take
thousands of years to disappear. In terms of timescales and the required amount of mass, the predictions of this model
differ significantly than what we present in this work, most likely due to different assumptions in the initial conditions
and necessary simplifications of the 1D model. A significant body of literature suggests that a rubble pile undergoing
rotational failure and mass shedding, due to its nonzero friction and/or cohesion, will shed material onto much wider
initial orbits (e.g. Hirabayashi et al. 2015; S´ anchez & Scheeres 2016, 2020; Zhang et al. 2018; Hyodo & Sugiura 2022)
rather than within a narrowly confined region, including several studies focused on Didymos itself (e.g., Yu et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2017, 2021). This means that satellites can start forming much quicker, without having to wait for a
ring to spread to the Roche limit. Also, the Madeira et al. (2023) study assumes that all ring particles are 1 m in
diameter, whereas Dimorphos’s contains boulders at least as large as 16 m (Pajola et al. 2023a). The presence of larger
boulders would speed up the accumulation process, due to their higher mass and larger collision cross section. Finally,
this model neglects gravity between moonlets, assuming that they undergo perfect mergers whenever they enter their
mutual Hill spheres. In this work, we will show that this is often not the case, and that the merger process of moonlets
is highly chaotic, leading to a wide range of outcomes.
1.2. YORP spin-up and mass shedding
In this study, the considered binary formation scenario is based on the idea that the progenitor body sheds substantial
surface materials in a relatively short timescale. However, this mass shedding failure behavior is not unconditional.
Prior theoretical work, relying on static stress analyses, suggests that a homogeneous ellipsoidal body would first
structurally fail internally at its center instead of at the surface during spin up (Holsapple 2010; Hirabayashi 2015).
This internal failure would lead to internal deformation, suppressing surface landslides and mass shedding. Modeling
of a rubble-pile body’s spin-up using the soft-sphere discrete element method (SSDEM) supports these static analyses,
showing that homogeneous cohesionless bodies could indeed fail through internal deformation (S´ anchez & Scheeres
2012; Hirabayashi et al. 2015) and homogeneous cohesive bodies could even fail through global tensile disruption
(S´ anchez & Scheeres 2016; Zhang et al. 2018).Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 5
For mass shedding to occur on the surface, the body’s interior must be mechanically stronger and/or denser than
the exterior layer. Research by S´ anchez & Scheeres (2018) using SSDEM simulations on a spherical rubble pile with
an internal core occupying 70% of its radius demonstrates that the interior needs to be 3 to 4 times stronger than
the shell to prevent internal failure. Similarly, Ferrari & Tanga (2022) use a polyhedron discrete element method
to show that a rigid core with a volume fraction exceeding 25% can also facilitate mass shedding, as shown for the
case of Didymos. By employing higher particle resolution ( ∼105particles) and a highly polydisperse particle size
distribution, the SSDEM spin-up simulations of Zhang et al. (2017, 2021) reveal that the large particle size difference
can reduce the internal porosity and increase the mobility of surface regolith in a rubble-pile. The resultant small scale
heterogeneity could trigger surface failure via mass shedding, even if mechanical interactions at the particle level are
uniform throughout the body. A similar effect is produced by the interactions between non-spherical particles with
irregular shape, where geometrical interlocking mechanism adds mechanical strength to the inner structure (Ferrari &
Tanga 2020). In all cases, maintaining some internal shear strength and a low surface cohesion are crucial to initiate
surface mass shedding (S´ anchez & Scheeres 2020; Zhang et al. 2022).
Beyond considering the internal structure, the evolution of a rubble-pile body after reaching its spin limit is also
heavily influenced by numerous other factors, such as shape and surface morphology (Hirabayashi & Scheeres 2019;
Hirabayashi et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022). This complexity implies that the surface failure conditions could vary
across different bodies, which determines why certain asteroids evolved into binary systems while others didn’t, and
could play some role in the apparent deficit of small binaries and pairs among primitive asteroid types relative to
silicate-rich bodies (Minker & Carry 2023). In Section 2.1, to validate the assumed binary formation scenario for
Didymos, we will present an SSDEM simulation example to showcase the feasibility of Didymos’ mass shedding failure
behavior under reasonable conditions.
We finally note that the mass shedding doesn’t have to occur solely as a result of YORP spin up. Once YORP spins
up a body near its critical limit, a natural impact could trigger the mass shedding event, for example. In fact, this
study is somewhat agnostic to the exact process causing the mass shedding, we merely require that the mass shedding
occur all at once such that enough material is put into orbit to allow a rapid reaccretion process.
2.METHODOLOGY
We use pkdgrav , a gravitational N-body tree code to model the accumulation of a rubble-pile satellite (Richardson
et al. 2000; Stadel 2001). Particle contacts are handled using the soft-sphere discrete element method (SSDEM), in
which a Hooke’s Law spring provides a normal force between overlapping particles (Schwartz et al. 2012). Parameters
such as the spring constant and coefficients of static, twisting, and rolling friction and cohesion can be adjusted to
represent desired material properties. We refer the reader to Zhang et al. (2017) for a detailed description of the
model. In short, kNandkTare the two spring constants that control the particle’s stiffness in the normal and
tangential directions respectively, ϵNandϵTare the coefficients of restitution in the normal and tangential direction
for controlling energy dissipation, µS,µR, and µTare the coefficients of static, rolling, and twisting friction. Finally,
the shape parameter βis used to approximate the non-spherical nature of real particles by statistically defining their
contact area, enabling the calculation of the associated rotational resistance.
The normal spring constant ( kN) and timestep are selected such that typical particle overlaps don’t exceed ∼1% of
a particles radius and that ∼30 timesteps take place over the course of a collision (Schwartz et al. 2012). This ensures
that particle contacts are resolved properly and that particles do not undergo a nonphysical level of interpenetration.
Based on our typical particle mass, sizes, and collision speeds this corresponds to a kN∼4×106kg s−2and a
punishingly small timestep of ∼0.15 s. Following common practice, we set kT=2
7kN(Walton 1995; Schwartz et al.
2012). In all simulations presented here, we set the restitution coefficients to ϵN=ϵT= 0.55, a typical value for rocky
material (Chau et al. 2002). µRandµTare set to 1.05 and 1.3, respectively, to represent the rough surfaces of medium
hardness rocks (Jiang et al. 2015), leaving µSandβas the only two parameters that are varied to achieve different
friction angles. These values and their corresponding friction angle are provided in Table 1.
2.1. Satellite formation via mass shedding
Here, we show an example simulation to test Didymos’s structural failure behaviors at its spin limit. Didymos is
modeled as a granular aggregate composed of 87,635 spheres with radii ranging from about 4 to 16 m. The particle
size distribution follows a cumulative power-law distribution with an exponent of −2.5, aligning with the boulder size
frequency distribution with similar radii found on Dimorphos, as observed in the images taken by the camera onboard6 Agrusa et al.
the DART spacecraft (Pajola et al. 2023a). The granular aggregate was configured based on the pre-impact Didymos
shape model (Barnouin et al. 2023) to ensure accurate representation of Didymos. To allow the initiation of surface
mass shedding and maintain the stability of Didymos at its current spin period of 2.26 h, the shape parameter βis
adopted to be 0.8, and µSis taken to be 1.0, representing a material internal friction angle of ∼40◦(Zhang et al.
2022). This friction angle is within the typical range of compacted dry sand, i.e., 33◦–43◦(Bareither et al. 2008). To
resolve the quasi-static mechanical contact between particles, we adopted a smaller timestep of ∼0.02 s and a larger
kN∼8×107kg s−2. The bulk density of the body is set to 2.7 g cm−3, consistent with Didymos’ latest bulk density
estimate constrained by the updated shape model and the binary separation, i.e., 2 .760±.130 g cm−3(Naidu et al.
2023)2. Our numerical investigation found that cohesion is no longer required to maintain the bulk structural stability
of Didymos at its current spin state for a bulk density of ≳2.7 g cm−3, and, therefore, the interparticle cohesive
strength was set to zero3. All other parameters are the same as those introduced in the previous section.
Didymos is quasi-statically spun-up (as a proxy for YORP) until structural failure is detected, which we define by
the body’s longest dimension changing by more than 1% relative to the starting shape. Then the spin-up procedure is
halted and the granular system evolves purely under its own self gravity. The results show that the primary structurally
failed at a spin period of ∼2.2596 h, where it then shed surface particles from mid-to-low latitudes, putting ∼3% of
its total mass onto low inclination orbits. Much of this material rapidly clumps into moonlets, and a Dimorphos-
mass satellite is formed within days following a series of moonlet mergers. As a result of the conservation of angular
momentum, the primary’s spin period drops to ∼2.5 h by the end of the simulation due to mass shedding and reshaping.
Material that falls back onto Didymos preferentially lands on the equator, which contributes to forming Didymos’s
equatorial ridge, similar to the process demonstrated by Hyodo & Sugiura (2022). The present-day shape of Didymos
is the subject of other ongoing and future studies (Barnouin et al. 2023, Zhang et al., in prep).
Snapshots of this simulation are shown in Fig. 1 along with a time-series plot of the satellite’s shape, mass, orbit,
and attitude in Fig. 2. In this simulation, we form an approximately Dimorphos-mass satellite in a matter of only
a few days. The satellite is also relatively oblate compared to the measured shapes of other binary systems, having
axis ratios of a/b∼1.15 and b/c∼1.5, based on the satellites dynamically equivalent equal-volume ellipsoid (DEEVE)4.
The satellite is initially in synchronous rotation with a libration amplitude of ∼45◦. However, this tidally-locked state
is broken when the satellite has a close encounter with a smaller moonlet, sending it inwards where it undergoes a
partial tidal disruption followed by an immediate merger with an another moonlet. This sequence of events breaks
the satellite’s synchronous rotation state and happens to lead to a relatively oblate shape. We encourage the reader
to view the provided movie of this simulation.
This simulation robustly demonstrates that a Dimorphos-like satellite can form rapidly from a single rotational
disruption event. In addition, the satellite’s series of close encounters and collisions with other moonlets demonstrates
that this process is highly chaotic. An infinitesimal change to the initial conditions of this simulation could lead to
a very different outcome in terms of the satellite’s physical and dynamical properties. However, due to the computa-
tional expense of these high resolution, full spin-up-to-satellite-formation simulations, they are impractical for longer
simulations as well as studying outcomes statistically, which is the focus of the rest of this study. Before proceeding to
the rest of this study, we note that the simulation presented in this subsection is a new result in its own right, although
its primary purpose is to motivate the initial conditions used in the rest of this study. This simulation also highlights
some key differences between our study and recently published papers on binary formation, which we address here.
2Due to uncertainties in the size and volume of Dimorphos, which has some degeneracy in the body separation, there is significant uncertainty
in Didymos’s bulk density. The formal uncertainty of ±.130 g cm−3is likely an underestimate and a realistic uncertainty might be larger.
3We also performed simulations using a friction angle of 35◦(µS= 0.6,β= 0.5), and found that a bulk cohesive strength of about 8 Pa is
needed for the structural stability. The mass-shedding structural failure behavior at faster spin is similar to the case presented here.
4For a body of mass mand principal moments of inertia A,B,C, its corresponding dynamically equivalent equal-volume ellipsoid axis
lengths a,b,care given by the following relations: A=m
5(b2+c2), B=m
5(a2+c2), C=m
5(a2+b2).Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 7
Figure 1. An example of a satellite forming after mass shedding from a Didymos-shaped primary. Particles are colored in
white being shed from the primary. The initial spiral arms are caused by mass shedding occurring at localized regions rather
than across the entire body. By ∼0.5 d, this asymmetry largely smooths out in azimuth before moonlets begin forming. A
movie of this simulation is provided.8 Agrusa et al.
Figure 2. A time series plot showing the shape ( a/bandb/c, based on the satellite’s DEEVE), mass ratio ( MB/MA), body
separation ( rorb/RA), and the attitude of the satellite formed via mass shedding. Within only several days, a Dimorphos-mass
satellite is formed. The satellite is initially tidally locked to the primary (starting at ∼1.3 d), but then undergoes a partial tidal
disruption followed by a merger with a moonlet, causing it to break from synchronous rotation (at ∼2.5 d). The satellite has
an oblate shape, similar to Dimorphos. However, the satellite’s shape, mass, orbit and rotational state will continue to change
as it continues to accrete more material.
Comparison with Sugiura et al. (2021) and Hyodo & Sugiura (2022) —Recently, Sugiura et al. (2021) studied the shape
evolution of a rubble pile under YORP spinup using smoothed-particle hydrodynamics (SPH) simulations. In contrast
to DEM simulations where particles represent discrete objects (i.e., rocks, boulders, etc.), SPH is used to simulate
continuum mechanics where the particles sample local quantities such as density, internal energy, and pressure. Sugiura
et al. (2021) find that spin-up can result in a “top-shaped” body for friction angles exceeding 70◦. However, it isDirect N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 9
challenging to compare this study to the result obtained due to differences in initial conditions, material models, and
spin-up procedure. First, the work of Sugiura et al. (2021) starts from spherical shapes, whereas this simulation starts
from a Didymos-like shape. Second, these simulations consider friction angles exceeding those of terrestrial and lunar
granular material (typically ∼35−45◦, e.g., Bareither et al. 2008; Al-Hashemi & Al-Amoudi 2018; Mitchell et al.
1972) as well as friction angle estimates of recently visited asteroid surfaces (also on the order of ∼35◦, e.g., Fujiwara
et al. 2006; Watanabe et al. 2019; Barnouin et al. 2019; Barnouin et al. 2023; Robin et al. 2023). This is because
Sugiura et al. (2021) consider a single “effective friction angle” that accounts for both friction and cohesion. Cohesion
is defined as the shear strength at zero pressure, where the shear strength of a granular material can be written as
Y= tan( ϕ)p+c, where ϕis the friction angle, pis the confining pressure, and cis the cohesion. Sugiura et al. (2021)
instead adopt a material mod4el of the form Y= tan( ϕ)pwhere ϕis now an “effective friction angle” that encompasses
the effects due to cohesion, which justifies their choice to explore values of ϕthat are significantly higher than real
granular materials. With this material model, we can see that as the confining pressure goes to zero (i.e., near the
surface), the shear strength goes to zero, which effectively results in the material having zero cohesion. Therefore, we
suspect that the failure mechanisms observed by Sugiura et al. (2021) are a result of the rubble pile implicitly having
a cohesionless upper layer with a stronger internal core. Ryugu and Bennu seem to have sub-Pa levels of cohesion
at their surfaces and potentially some strength at depth, so this implicit assumption by Sugiura et al. (2021) isn’t
unreasonable (Arakawa et al. 2020; Jutzi et al. 2022; Walsh et al. 2022; Barnouin et al. 2019). However, recent work by
Zhang et al. (2022) demonstrates that rubble pile failure mechanisms are highly sensitive to small changes in cohesion
at a fixed friction angle, and to small changes in friction at constant cohesion, indicating that friction and cohesion
cannot be combined into a single parameter and should be treated separately.
Finally, the spin-up procedure used here differs from Sugiura et al. (2021) in a critical way. Both methods apply
a similar angular acceleration to the rubble piles ( ∼10−10rad s−2), which ensures that the artificially induced Euler
acceleration is always negligible compared to the centrifugal acceleration. However, Sugiura et al. (2021) spin up the
rubble pile until 1% of its mass is put into orbit , whereas this study halts the spin-up process at the moment of failure
to ensure a realistic mass shedding process. Although the total angular momentum added during the mass-shedding
process by Sugiura et al. (2021) is small, this can make a critical difference for a rubble pile on the edge of stability.
As a result, Sugiura et al. (2021) typically find that ∼10% of the primary’s mass ends up going into orbit following the
spin-up process. Hyodo & Sugiura (2022) then track the formation of moons after such a mass-shedding event, where
they find similar formation timescales to what is presented in this study. However, due to their simulations starting
with 10 −20% of the primary’s mass in a debris disk, their simulations result in a system of satellites with a combined
mass of ∼5% of the primary’s mass. Although many binary asteroids have similarly high mass ratios (on the order of
5−10%), this model does not produce binary systems with smaller satellites, such as the Didymos system, where the
mass ratio is ∼1% (Pravec et al. 2016, 2019).
Comparison with Madeira et al. (2023) —In comparison to the simplified 1D model of Madeira et al. (2023), there are
several key differences to highlight based on this simulation. Of course, this model has the advantage of modeling the
system for a much longer timescales that what is possible with a direct N-body approach. In addition, their model
can provide useful insight into the formation of binaries. However, the result presented here (as well as the result of
Hyodo & Sugiura (2022)) demonstrates that the mass-shedding and accretion timescales are relatively short, meaning
that it may not be necessary to simplify the problem to one dimension. In addition, the insight of the simplified
model of Madeira et al. (2023) is only useful to the extent to which it reflects the true nature of the problem. Madeira
et al. (2023) suppose an idealized disk in which only a single satellite accretes from the Roche limit at a time. On the
contrary, this simulation demonstrates that following a realistic YORP-driven mass-shedding event, multiple moonlets
can form simultaneously before undergoing a chaotic series of close encounters and mergers until one satellite remains,
which cannot be captured by a 1D model. It is not clear that mass shedding would actually lead to a disk matching
the assumptions of Madeira et al. (2023).
Recently, Madeira & Charnoz (2024) extended their study, claiming that their model explains the oblate shape
of Dimorphos, the contact binary shape Dinkinesh’s recently discovered satellite, Selam, and the prolate shapes of
other binary asteroids, where the key difference between these three outcomes solely comes down to the mass-shedding
timescale. Some caution should be applied here until the model can address some key issues. First, the mass-shedding
timescales explored by Madeira & Charnoz (2024) are chosen arbitrarily and need some physical justification, as
there is currently no connection between the initial conditions of their model and YORP processes or the geophysical
properties of the primary body. In addition, these 1D disk-moon models do not directly account for the gravitational10 Agrusa et al.
interactions and subsequent mergers between moonlets. Rather, mergers are assumed to occur anytime two moonlets
enter one another’s Hill sphere. The shape outcome of these mergers is not demonstrated either; rather a post-merger
shape is assumed based on simulations of mergers of Saturn’s inner moons (Leleu et al. 2018). However, the geophysics
and dynamics of mergers leading to the formation of Saturn’s inner moons are very different than in the case of two
merging satellites of an S-type asteroid. For example, the moons Pan, Atlas, and Prometheus have densities below
1 g cm−3and orbit within or near Saturn’s Roche limit while Dimorphos is thought to have a bulk density on the order
of∼2.4 g cm−3and any mergers leading up to its formation are thought to occur beyond the Roche limit, according
to Madeira et al. (2023). Any model that can explain the shapes of Dimorphos, Selam, other binary satellites needs
to self-consistently address the spin-up, mass-shedding, accretion, and (potentially) merger processes. For example,
the shape of a post-merger satellite will depend on parameters such as its density, friction angle, and cohesion. At the
same time, these parameters are intimately connected with the primary’s failure mechanisms and the mass shedding
process, which will then determine the initial conditions of any orbiting debris. This is a challenging problem, and the
work presented here only attempts to address a small part of this process.
2.2. Simulation set up
The simulation shown in Figs. 1 and 2 are computational expensive requiring ∼105particles, are limited to short
integration times and are impractical for determining statistical outcomes. Therefore, we use the above result, along
with known properties of the Didymos system, to inform a simplified initial condition for a large suite of simulations.
This allows us to determine the properties of the resulting satellite from a statistical point of view. It is important to
note that the primary’s shape, density, internal structure, and material properties will all play some role in determining
the initial conditions of the shed material (e.g., S´ anchez & Scheeres 2020; Walsh et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2022; McMahon
et al. 2020). Therefore, the simplified initial conditions presented here are intentionally generic and may not be perfectly
representative of a fully realistic scenario. However, we will show this generic initial condition produces many of the
properties of both Dimorphos and other binary systems.
The primary was treated as a uniform oblate spheroid with semiaxes a=b > c , with an equatorial radius of
a=b= 400 m and a/c= 1.5, and a bulk density of 2 .4 g cm−3, similar to the best estimate for Didymos’s shape
and density at the time this study began (Daly et al. 2023b). In order to reduce the total number of particles in the
simulation, the primary is modeled as a hollow shell of particles locked together into a rigid aggregate. In order for
the primary to have moments of inertia as if it were a solid body (which is important for both gravity and collisions),
we include a single point-mass particle at the center, and then adjust the mass of the central particle and the shell
particles to achieve moments of inertia of an equivalent uniform oblate spheroid5. In other words, the point-mass and
surrounding spheroidal shell collectively behave as if they are a single, solid body with the correct moments of inertia.
As shown in Fig. 3, the radius of the shell particles are over-inflated to prevent small particles from falling through
the cracks. This approach enables a physically realistic solid-body primary without requiring an excessive number
of particles in the interior. The spin period of the primary is initially set to 2.5 h in all simulations, approximately
matching the rotation period of the primary from Section 2.1 following its rotational disruption.
The orbiting material is generated following a power-law size-frequency distribution (SFD), with a power-law index
of -3 and particle radii ranging between 3 and 10 m. This SFD is informed by (but does not match exactly) the observed
boulder SFD on Dimorphos (Pajola et al. 2022; Pajola et al. 2023b), as well as the boulder SFD seen on other rubble
pile asteroids (e.g., Dellagiustina et al. 2019; Burke et al. 2021; Michikami et al. 2019; Michikami & Hagermann 2021).
Including the smallest boulders observed on Dimorphos is impractical due to computational constraints; however, the
smallest particles in the simulation are 6 m in diameter, approximately the size of the two largest boulders Bodhran
Saxum (∼6.1 m) and Atabaque Saxum (∼6.5 m) near the DART impact site (Daly et al. 2023b). Therefore, we consider
this particle resolution sufficient for modeling the formation and shape of a Dimorphos-like satellite, as the particle
sizes in these simulations approach the actual sizes of individual large boulders on Dimorphos’s surface. Cohesion
between boulders is ignored in these simulations, as cohesion forces on rubble piles likely arise from Van der Waals
forces between fine-grained material less than ≲10µm (e.g., S´ anchez & Scheeres 2014). In a mass shedding scenario,
much of this fine-grained material (if present) would be released when the mass is first shed, and when moonlets
undergo collisions and tidal disruptions. For a Dimorphos-like system, solar radiation pressure would rapidly remove
5For a homogeneous spheroid, the moments of inertia can be written in terms of its mass Mand its semi-axes a, b, c :A=M
5(b2+c2), B=
M
5(a2+c2), C=M
5(a2+b2).Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 11
these fine grains (e.g., Ferrari et al. 2022). Therefore, we might expect the cohesion of the secondary to be no higher
than the primary’s cohesion (if present). This may explain why Didymos’s surface requires a small amount of cohesion
to maintain its surface stability while Dimorphos does not (Barnouin et al. 2023).
A disk of orbiting debris is placed in a circular region extending out to 1.5 times the equatorial radius of the primary,
which approximately corresponds to the effective Roche limit for a body with a friction angle of 35◦(Holsapple &
Michel 2006). The disk also has a finite thickness of 40 m (roughly two diameters of the largest disk particle), to
allow enough space to initialize the required number of particles. The example simulation presented in Section 1.2
demonstrates that mass shedding does not lead to a stable disk but instead material clumps almost immediately to
form moonlets. To approximate this effect here, particles are purposefully not given any initial velocity dispersion to
ensure a disk that is gravitationally unstable (i.e., a Toomre Q < 1) so material will begin clumping immediately. All
disk particles have a density of 3 .5 g cm−3, to match the grain density of L and LL chondrites (Flynn et al. 2018),
which are the best meteoritic analogues for Didymos (de Le´ on et al. 2006; Dunn et al. 2013).
Each disk particle is placed on a circular orbit, accounting for the mass of the primary and its oblateness, as well as
the mass of all other enclosed disk particles. Each disk particle’s mean motion (i.e., its initial orbital angular velocity),
can be written as a function of its radial distance ri,
n2
i=GM A
r3
i
1 +3
2J2Req
A
r2
+Mdisk(< ri)
r3
i,
where MA,Req
A, and J2are the primary’s respective mass, equatorial radius, and oblateness, M(< ri) is the mass of
all the disk particles enclosed within particle i’s position, and Gis the gravitational constant. Owing to the finite
thickness of the disk, particles are initialized with inclinations on the order of 2 −3◦. Particles are generated in a
symmetric disk to simplify the process of generating initial conditions, which is not a realistic starting condition.
However, we emphasize that, owing to the disk being gravitationally unstable, collisions and close encounters quickly
excite the eccentricities and inclinations of the disk particles, which we deomnstrate below rapidly leads to particle
orbits representative of the more realistic starting conditions following a mass-shedding event, such as that shown in
Fig. 1.
Any particles that reach a distance of 40 km (100 Req
A) are automatically deleted from the simulation. This boundary
was set purely as a precaution to prevent a single particle from being ejected from the system, which could significantly
slow down pkdgrav ’s tree due to the single extremely distant particle, and corresponds to ∼2/3 of the system’s Hill
sphere if it were located at 1 AU. We found that a small fraction of particles end up reaching this boundary and are
deleted. Typically only 1-2% of the disk’s initial mass is ejected and we verified that the vast majority of the particles
that hit this boundary and were deleted were either on escape trajectories ( eorb>1), or had an apoapse distance well
outside the Hill sphere and would have not returned to the binary system. Therefore, deleting these particles has a
negligible effect on the binary’s formation. In a some cases, a large aggregate is ejected from the system forming an
asteroid pair and is discussed in Section 3.7.1.
A core motivation of this study was to demonstrate that a Dimorphos-sized satellite could plausibly form via a single
mass shedding event. Therefore, most simulations simply vary the initial mass in the disk (i.e., number of particles),
however we also vary the friction angle of the material between 29◦and 40◦. For each set of parameters, we randomize
the initial locations of the particles to understand the chaotic nature of the satellites formation. For each disk mass
(Mdisk) and friction angle ( ϕ), we run a given number of ‘clone’ simulations, which are listed in Fig. 1. In total, we
run 120 simulations. 96 of the simulations have ϕ= 35◦and have an initial disk mass ranging between 0 .02MAand
0.04MA. These 96 simulations constitute the bulk of the results shown in the following sections. With the remaining
24 simulations, Mdiskis kept fixed at 0 .03MAand friction angles of 29◦, 32◦, and 40◦are tested. All simulations were
limited to ∼100 d (5 .8×107steps) due to the high computational cost imposed by the small timestep. Each simulation
is assigned a number between 1 and 120, and the result of each simulation is tabulated in Table 3 in the Appendix.12 Agrusa et al.
Table 1. Number of simulations
for each combination of Mdiskand
ϕ, along with the static friction co-
efficient ( µS) and shape parameter
(β) used to achieve the given fric-
tion angle ( ϕ).
Mdisk/MA ϕ N sims µS β
0.02 35◦32 0.6 0.5
0.03 35◦32 0.6 0.5
0.04 35◦32 0.6 0.5
0.03 29◦8 0.2 0.3
0.03 32◦8 0.4 0.4
0.03 40◦8 1.0 0.8
Note —In all simulations, the primary
consists of 2,371 particles, while the
number of debris particles varies be-
tween ∼4,200 and ∼8,400, depending
on the total mass in the disk. See Table
3 to see a full listing of each simulation
and its result.
Figure 3. A view of the initial conditions from the disk simulations. The primary (gold colored particles) behaves as a single
rigid body.
3.RESULTS
3.1. An example case
First, we show a representative simulation to demonstrate the model. In Fig. 4 we show 8 snapshots of a simulation in
which the Mdisk= 0.02MAandϕ= 35◦. Almost immediately, particles begin clumping and forming short-lived spiral
arms due to Keplerian shear, as a result of the disk being gravitationally unstable (e.g. Kokubo et al. 2000). A couple
days later, several moonlets form and undergo a chaotic series of close encounters and mergers until a single large
satellite remains. Interestingly, the satellite is born in a tidally-locked configuration with the primary. The immediate
tidal locking of the secondary is likely due to several factors, including its low eccentricity and formation near the
Roche limit. In addition, all the mergers in this simulation occur rather gently without significantly perturbing the
secondary’s spin state. As we will see in the next several subsections, the chaotic nature of the satellite’s formationDirect N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 13
leads to a wide range out outcomes in terms of the satellite’s physical and dynamical properties. Therefore, this
simulation is not necessarily typical of all cases.
Figure 4. An example of a simulation where the secondary is formed in synchronous rotation. This is Disk 008 in Table 3, and
has an initial disk mass of Mdisk= 0.02MAand a friction angle of ϕ= 35◦. A movie of this simulation is available.14 Agrusa et al.
Figure 5. Time-series plots of the example simulation from Fig. 4 (Disk 008). Starting from the top, we plot the satellites
DEEVE axis ratios, mass ratio, orbital distance, and Euler angles, which describe its orientation in a frame rotating with the
orbit. In only a handful of days, the satellite reaches a near-circular orbit at ∼3RAwith a mass just under 0 .01MA. The rotation
state of the satellite is excited, but tidally locked, given by all three Euler angles being large but still well under 90◦.
In order to compare whether the simplified initial condition of the disk is a reasonable representation of the more
realistic initial conditions following mass shedding, as demonstrated in Section 2.1, we compare the distributions of
semimajor axis, eccentricity, and inclinations of orbiting debris at early times. Fig. 6 compares the orbital elements of
orbiting material between the more realistic mass-shedding example from Fig. 1 and the simplified case shown in Fig.
4. Owing to the gravitationally unstable disk and the role of collisions, the orbits of disk particles are rapidly excited
to wider orbits, with higher eccentricities and inclinations, despite initially starting with circular, nearly co-planar
orbits. At least qualitatively, the distribution of orbital elements several days into the simulation reasonably reflects
the orbits of post-mass-shedding debris (i.e., Fig. 1), although the more realistic initial conditions have a slightly wider
distribution in both inclination and eccentricity.Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 15
Figure 6. A comparison of orbiting particles between the more realistic, full spin-up simulation shown in Fig. 1 and the
simplified initial conditions from the simulation shown in Fig. 4. The orbital elements are plotted when moonlets first begin
forming. For the mass-shedding simulation, this corresponds to ∼0.5 d after mass is initially shed, while for the simplified disk,
this occurs around ∼4 d into the simulation. Although the distribution of orbital elements between the two cases does not match
perfectly, due to the gravitationally unstable initial conditions of the simplified disk, we arrive at a similar range in semimajor
axis, eccentricities, and inclinations seen in the more realistic simulation.
3.2. Satellite mass and density
In Fig. 7, we plot the secondary-to-primary mass ratio for all simulations with ϕ= 35◦in order to understand how
the mass of the initial disk determines the resulting satellite mass. Assuming the primary and secondary have the
same bulk density (which is approximately true in these simulations), we also provide the size ratioDB
DA≈ MB
MA1/3
on the second y-axis. In the 96 simulations shown here, the satellite tends to reach its final mass in the first few tens
of days apart from a select few special cases that undergo late mergers or disruptions. For context, the Dimorphos-
to-Didymos size ratio is ∼0.2 which corresponds to a mass ratio ∼0.01 if the bodies have equal densities (Daly et al.
2023b). Therefore, we find that an initial disk mass of only ∼0.02−0.03MAis capable of producing a Dimorphos-mass
satellite in only a matter of days. Although their study focuses on a regime where significantly more mass and angular
momentum is put into orbit, we find that our formation timescale is broadly consistent with that found by (Hyodo &
Sugiura 2022). Our result is orders of magnitude lower (both in time and mass) than the calculation of Madeira et al.
(2023) which requires 25% of Didymos’s mass to be shed into a ring that will then take years to form a Dimorphos-mass
satellite. This disagreement likely stems from the different approach to the problem, namely in the initial conditions.
Our model starts with a disk of particles initialized on much wider orbits, given the existing body of literature on
spin-up and mass shedding (e.g., Yu et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2022; Hyodo & Sugiura 2022) and
based on the spin-up example provided in Section 2.1, whereas the Madeira et al. (2023) model supposes that the
orbiting debris starts in a narrowly confined region at the surface of the primary and slowly spreads outwards, which
substantially increases the timescale for the satellite’s formation.
We plot a histogram of the bulk density of each satellite at the end of the simulation in Fig. 8. The volume of the
rubble pile is computed by the concave hull (or “alpha shape”; (Edelsbrunner 1995)) of the set of points defined by
the edges of the outermost spheres which make up the satellite. This method of calculating bulk density provides high
accuracy by providing a “tighter fit” to the true shape of the rubble pile than other volume estimates such as the
volume of the convex hull or the dynamically equivalent ellipsoid. Since some of the large void spaces could be filled
with smaller boulders that are below the resolution of the simulations, the measured bulk density here is only notional
and should be thought of as a soft lower limit.16 Agrusa et al.
0.00.170.220.250.270.29
DB
DA
0 20 40 60 80 100
Time [d]0.0000.0050.0100.0150.0200.025
MB
MAMdisk/MA
0.02
0.03
0.04
Figure 7. The secondary-to-primary mass ratio over time, for all simulations with ϕ= 35◦. The accretion of the satellite is
highly efficient, occurring in only a matter of days. The second y-axis shows the secondary-to-primary size ratio, assuming that
the two bodies have the same bulk density (which is approximately true in these simulations). The spread in final mass among
disks with the same initial mass is due to the chaotic formation history of each system. Note: most discontinuities in this plot
are real and are due to mergers or tidal disruptions of the satellites. However, there are a couple discontinuities that result from
the nearest-neighbor search algorithm misidentifying the largest orbiting fragment.
2.12 2.14 2.16 2.18 2.20 2.22 2.24
ρbulk[g cm−3]0246810121416Count
Figure 8. The bulk density of all satellites with ϕ= 35◦at the end of the simulations. The density of all individual spheres is
3.5 g cm−3, so these rubble piles have packing fractions of ∼0.62. Realistically, it is possible for the “real” bulk density to be
slightly higher than what is measured here, as small particles which are below the resolution limit of these simulations would
fill in some void space.
3.3. Satellite orbit and rotational state
The majority of the simulations end with a single satellite on a near-circular orbit having a semimajor axis between
∼2.5 and ∼4 primary radii. Fig. 9 shows the final semimajor axis and eccentricity for the satellite in the 96 simulations
where ϕ= 35◦. Generally, we find that more massive disks tend to produce a satellite on a wider, more eccentric
orbit, simply as a result of the disk having a larger initial angular momentum. This is demonstrated in Fig. 9 where
we show the mean aorbandeorbalong with their standard deviations for each of the 3 different disk mass cases.Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 17
For each satellite, we determine its rotation state based on the 1-2-3 Euler angle set, consisting of the satellites roll,
pitch, and yaw angles in a frame rotating with its orbit (see Agrusa et al. (2021)). When the roll and pitch angles are
small, the yaw angle can be thought of as the classic planar libration angle, i.e., the angle between the secondary’s
long axis and the line-of-centers. However, many of the satellites have undergone several mergers or close gravitational
encounters, and are in excited, non-planar rotation states, necessitating the use of the Euler angle convention. In
Fig. 10, we plot the maximum roll and yaw angle for each satellite over the final 10 days of the simulation. We see
three distinct regions in this plot. If the yaw angle stays below ≲60◦, we consider the satellite to be in synchronous
rotation, since its long axis stays pointed in the direction of the primary. Out of the synchronous rotators, a minority
are in “pure” (albeit highly excited) synchronous rotation where the roll and pitch angles are also ≲60◦. Most of
the synchronous rotators, however, are in a rolling state about their long axis. In this so-called “barrel instability”,
the satellite remains on-average tidally locked to the primary although it continues to roll about its long axis ( ´Cuk
et al. 2021). This non-principal axis rotation state within the 1:1 spin-orbit resonance could be long-lived as this mode
would dissipate inefficiently by tides. Since binary YORP (BYORP) requires a synchronous secondary, this would also
substantially weaken the BYORP effect or prevent it entirely ( ´Cuk & Burns 2005; Quillen et al. 2022). Finally, we
also see many satellites in an end-over-end tumbling state, where their roll and yaw angles both reach 90◦. Generally,
the tumblers have a higher eccentricity than the synchronous rotators as indicated in the plot, however, the onset of
chaotic tumbling also depends on the satellite’s inertia ratios (Wisdom et al. 1984; Agrusa et al. 2021) as well as its
collision history.
Of course, it is no surprise that these satellites are never perfectly tidally-locked, as these are short-term simulations
in which the satellite has undergone many collisions and mergers so its rotation state is naturally excited. However,
synchronization is the fastest-evolving tidal effect (Goldreich & Sari 2009), and we would therefore expect the satellite’s
free libration to damp on relatively short timescales, potentially within hundreds of years since they are already in
synchronous rotation (Meyer et al. 2023). This may provide a simple explanation for why we observe so many
synchronous satellites (Pravec et al. 2016), without needing to invoke the more complicated dynamical processes of
rotational fission to achieve this equilibrium (Jacobson & Scheeres 2011). Instead, if the satellite forms via accumulation
of shed material, then it has a reasonable chance to form in or near a tidally-locked state.
We are not aware of any studies that demonstrate a binary asteroid can immediately form in a synchronous rotation
state following rotational disruption, although this seems like a relatively natural outcome. Formation with synchronous
rotation has been found in other studies on gravitational accumulation near the Roche limit, such as the accretion of
moonlets from Saturn’s rings (Karjalainen & Salo 2004) and from circumplanetary disks (Hyodo et al. 2015).18 Agrusa et al.
2 3 4 5 6
aorb/RA0.000.050.100.150.200.250.30eorbMdisk/MA
0.02
0.03
0.04
Figure 9. The semimajor axis (in terms of the primary’s radius) and eccentricity of the newly formed satellite, over all
simulations with ϕ= 35◦. The colors indicate the starting disk mass, and the three points with error bars show the mean and
1σstandard deviation for the three different disk masses. Although the variance is quite large, a larger disk mass typically leads
to a higher eccentricity and larger semimajor axis, due to the disk having a higher angular momentum and more collisions that
can drive up the largest satellite’s eccentricity.
0◦15◦30◦45◦60◦75◦90◦
Max Yaw Angle ( θmax
1)0◦15◦30◦45◦60◦75◦90◦Max Roll Angle ( θmax
3)
synchronousbarrel instability
(also synchronous)tumbling
0.000.020.040.060.080.10
eorb
Figure 10. The maximum roll and yaw angles for each satellite, based on the final 10 days of the simulation. There are three
distinct post-formation rotation states for the satellites, which are annotated on the plot to guide the reader’s eye. We consider
the satellite to be in synchronous rotation if its long axis remains aligned towards the secondary (i.e., yaw ≲60◦). The “barrel
instability” is a subset of the synchronous rotators where the secondary’s long-axis stays largely aligned with the primary, yet
it is able to roll about its long axis like a barrel. Finally, a significant fraction of satellites form in a tumbling state where all
three Euler angles (roll, pitch, and yaw) can reach 90◦.
3.4. Satellite shapeDirect N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 19
While there is significant literature on binary asteroid formation, there are no studies to our knowledge that directly
model the expected shapes of the satellite. Many studies consider the shape of the secondary, but do not model that
shape being formed directly (e.g. Jacobson & Scheeres 2011; Davis & Scheeres 2020).
It is important to be clear with the definition of the satellite’s shape. In this study, we define the shape of the
satellite by its three principal axis a, bandc, which correspond to the body’s three principal moments A, B, and C.
We measure its axis lengths in two different ways. The first is simply the physical extents of the body along these
axes. The second measure is the axis lengths of the dynamically equivalent equal-volume ellipsoid (DEEVE). This
is a uniform density ellipsoid having the same mass and moments of inertia of the rubble pile. If the body has an
approximately ellipsoidal shape, then these two measures of its shape will match closely. Measuring the body’s axis
ratios by its DEEVE can be useful as they don’t fluctuate significantly as a result of the motion of a single particle
on the surface, which is common as the satellite is forming. Therefore, we use the DEEVE axis ratios in any time
series plots as they are much less noisy. However, the physical extent of the body tends to better represent the “true”
shape of the body and is most analogous to real life observations. In our simulations, these two measures tend to differ
significantly for highly irregular shapes (high a/band/or b/c). This is demonstrated in Fig. 11, where the DEEVE
axis ratio tends to be quite larger than the physical extent axis ratio for large axis ratios.
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Best-ﬁt ellipsoid axis ratio1.01.21.41.61.82.02.2Physical extent axis ratioa/b
b/c
Figure 11. The DEEVE axis ratios of each simulated satellite compared to the body’s axis ratios defined by its physical
extents. Points lying under the diagonal line have a DEEVE axis ratio (either a/borb/c) that is greater than its physical
extents and vice versa. Points lying on the line indicate that the DEEVE shape is a good approximation of the physical shape.
For reference, we include the axis ratios of Dimorphos defined by its physical extents and best-fit ellipsoid, demonstrating that
Dimorphos’s shape is exceptionally well-fit to an ellipsoid. Dimorphos’s a/bandb/caxis lengths, including 1 σuncertainties,
are indicated in blue and black, respectively (Daly et al. 2023a)
Due to the discrepancy between the DEEVE-derived and extend-derived shapes highlighted above, we compare both
quantities to known secondary shapes for thoroughness. In Fig. 12 we show both the DEEVE- and extent-derived
semi-axis ratios a/bandb/cat the end of each simulation with ϕ= 35◦. We also include the shapes of the satellites of
66391 Moshup (formerly 1999 KW 4), 2000 DP 107, and 2001 SN 263, which are the only publicly available radar-derived
shapes for the satellites of other binary asteroids (Ostro et al. 2006; Naidu et al. 2015; Becker et al. 2015), as well
as the axis ratios of Dimorphos (Daly et al. 2023b,a). The updated shape of Dimorphos provided by (Daly et al.
2023a) differs slightly from the initial assessment in (Daly et al. 2023b), but the difference is small enough that we only
plot the latest values to avoid confusion. For each real asteroid system, we include 1 σuncertainties in a/bandb/c,
assuming that the reported uncertainties in a, bandcfrom each respective paper are uncorrelated, which may not be
true. Therefore, the uncertainties should only be used to guide the reader’s eye. The satellites of Moshup and DP 107
are the best comparisons with Dimorphos, as they are both S-type binaries, whereas SN 263is a C-type triple (with
large uncertainties in the satellite shapes). Fig. 12 demonstrates that, generally speaking, these simulations produce
satellites that are more elongated (high a/b) and more flattened (high b/cora/c) than the radar-derived secondaries.
However, there are many cases that produce shapes similar to radar-observed secondaries, given their uncertainties.20 Agrusa et al.
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
a/b1.01.21.41.61.82.02.2b/cDimorphos extents
Dimorphos best-ﬁt ellipsoid
66391 Moshup Beta (DEEVE)
2000 DP 107Beta (DEEVE)
2001 SN 263Beta (DEEVE)
2001 SN 263Gamma (DEEVE)
Mdisk/MA
0.02
0.03
0.04
(a) DEEVE
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
a/b1.01.21.41.61.82.02.2b/cDimorphos extents
Dimorphos best-ﬁt ellipsoid
66391 Moshup Beta (extents)
2000 DP 107Beta (extents)
2001 SN 263Beta (extents)
2001 SN 263Gamma (extents)
Mdisk/MA
0.02
0.03
0.04
 (b) Physical extents
Figure 12. The satellite’s shape, parameterized by its (a) DEEVE or (b) physical axis ratios a/bandb/cfor the 96 simulations
with ϕ= 35◦. The colored dots indicate the simulation results with varying initial disk masses. The shape and 1 σuncertainty
of Dimorphos, along with the radar-derived shapes of the satellites of Moshup (1999 KW 4), DP 107, and SN 263are shown for
comparison (Daly et al. 2023a; Ostro et al. 2006; Naidu et al. 2015; Becker et al. 2015).
Although no satellites are produced within the 1 σuncertainty region of Dimorphos’s shape, several simulations do
come close. Dimorphos’s b/cratio lies approximately in the middle of the simulated b/crange. Although there is a
preference for elongated satellites, several simulations result in a low elongation ( a/b≲1.1), like Dimorphos. These
simulations demonstrate that more elongated shapes are preferred, although immediately forming a Dimorphos-like
shape by mass shedding is not implausible. Due to the satellite’s accretion near the Roche limit, this strong preference
for more elongated shapes comes as no surprise and has been seen in analogous studies (e.g. Porco et al. 2007; Hyodo
et al. 2015). It is important to note that the simulations here are run for only 100 days and there could be longer
term processes that will modify the satellite’s shapes (impacts, landslides, etc.), so it is important to interpret any
comparison between the simulated and observed shapes with caution.
We also compare our results to the lightcurve-derived shapes from Pravec et al. (2016, 2019). Fig. 13 shows a
histogram of the simulated a/bratio compared to the dataset of Pravec et al. (2019) along with some new (not yet
published) secondaries (Pravec, personal communication). Here, we only include lightcurve secondaries in which the
primary is less than 20 km in diameter and the secondary-to-primary size ratio is less than 0.6, to ensure that we are
only comparing with binaries likely formed by YORP.
We find a remarkable agreement between the shapes of lightcurve secondaries and those simulated in this work.
Both data sets show that most satellites have a/b < 1.6, aside from a few outliers. The sharp drop-off in satellites
higha/bhas been attributed to chaotic dynamics of satellites with a/b⪆√
2 that ultimately destroys (or alters) them
(´Cuk & Nesvorn´ y 2010; Pravec et al. 2016). While this is a real dynamical effect, we suggest that it may also be that
secondaries simply don’t form with extremely high elongations to begin with.
Interestingly, there are several secondaries with low elongations ( a/b≲1.1) measured by Pravec. Naively, it appears
as if the simulations do a good job at matching this low elongation population. However, it is important to note
that lightcurves are heavily biased against detecting satellites with a a/b≲1.05 (Pravec, personal communication).
This fact, combined with Dimorphos apparently having a/b < 1.1 suggests the existence of a significant population of
secondaries with low a/b. If the simulations presented here reasonably capture the formation of these secondaries, we
would expect the simulations to produce an overabundance of low elongation secondaries compared to the observed
population. This suggests that either (1) there are other longer-term processes at play that could reshape some
satellites over time or (2), there is an effect not captured by our model resulting from our assumptions or initial
conditions.Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 21
Figure 13. Lightcurve-derived shapes are only sensitive to a/b, so we construction histograms of a/bfrom the simulations
(defined by their physical extents) to compare with a/bof satellites derived from lightcurves (Pravec et al. 2016, 2019). The y
axis is not normalized since we are comparing a similar number of real systems (87) and simulations (96).
3.5. Effect of friction angle
We conducted an additional set of simulations where the disk mass was held constant at Mdisk= 0.03MAand the
friction angle was varied between 29◦and 40◦. For each friction angle (29◦, 32◦, and 40◦), we conducted 8 simulations
with randomized initial conditions. With this smaller sample size, we are dealing with small number statistics but can
still draw a few basic conclusions.
As the friction angle is decreased, there is significantly less variation between simulations in general, including the
satellite’s formation distance, eccentricity, shape, and rotation state. In Fig.14a we show the satellite’s final semimajor
axis and eccentricity, along with an average and standard deviation for each value of ϕ. Although this is small number
statistics, there is a clear trend with friction; satellites with a lower friction angle tend to form on a closer, more
circular orbit. This is because the violent processes such as collisions and close gravitational encounters that lead to
highly excited orbits tend to disrupt lower friction moonlets. This means that the moonlets, which eventually merge
to form the final satellite, are necessarily on more circular orbits. Therefore, the final satellite will tend to have a less
excited orbit.
The axis ratios (based on the physical extents) are given in Fig. 14b. In general, there is a smaller variation in the
secondary’s shape as the friction is reduced. In addition, a lower friction tends to result in a less flattened object (i.e.,
more prolate). As the friction angle is lowered, the body is forced to reshape itself until it is structurally stable, and
bodies with higher frictions are able to maintain a wider range of shapes. In the limit that the friction angle were
reduced to 0◦, the satellite effectively behaves like a fluid and would take on the shape of a Roche ellipsoid, at its given
orbital distance (Holsapple & Michel 2006). This is not demonstrated here, simply because a simulation with ϕ= 0◦
would take an excessive amount of time to form a satellite.
A histogram of the secondary’s bulk density as a function of friction angle is shown in Fig. 14c, where there is a clear
trend. Bodies with a lower effective friction are able to achieve a more efficient packing arrangement, thus having less
void space and a higher bulk density. At a grain density of 3.5 g cm−3, this figure should be thought of as a lower limit
for the secondary’s bulk density. In reality, some void space could be filled with boulders that are below the resolution
of these simulations, so the “true” bulk density might be be higher.22 Agrusa et al.
2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5
aorb/RA0.000.050.100.150.200.25eorbFriction (φ)
29◦
32◦35◦
40◦
(a) Final orbits
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
a/b1.01.21.41.61.82.02.2b/cFriction (φ)
29◦
32◦35◦
40◦ (b) Final shapes (extents)
2.10 2.15 2.20 2.25
ρbulk[g cm−3]012345678CountFriction (φ)
29◦
35◦32◦
40◦
(c) Bulk Density
Figure 14. Plots showing the effect of friction on the resulting satellite. (a) The final semimajor axis and eccentricity from
each simulation. (b) The axis ratios of the satellite, based on its physical extents, as a function of friction angle. (c) The bulk
density of each satellite as a function of its friction angle ϕ. Generally, bodies with a lower effective friction are able to achieve
a more efficient packing and thus have a higher bulk density.
3.6. Matching the Shape of Dimorphos
Although these simulations demonstrate that immediately forming an oblate satellite is relatively rare, we show two
cases with a ϕ= 35◦that achieve shapes similar to Dimorphos. Although neither cases are a perfect match, they
do suggest that an oblate spheroid-like shape can plausibly be formed from a single mass shedding event. In Fig.
15, we show the two examples, both of which have an initial disk mass of Mdisk= 0.04MA. In the first example
(Fig. 15a), the satellite grows rapidly over the first several days until it undergoes a close encounter with another
satellite (not shown), which causes the satellite to move inwards and undergo a partial tidal disruption event with the
primary. This torques the remaining mass onto a much wider, eccentric orbit and also causes the satellite to rotate
asynchronously yet maintain principal axis rotation (as demonstrated by the roll and pitch angles remaining small
and the yaw angle circulating). As a result of the asynchronous rotation, the satellite begins accreting material in
an azimuthally symmetric manner, as it has a different orientation at each periapse passage (where there is material
available to accrete). The satellite also undergoes a merger with the last remaining moonlet at ∼20 d, which abruptlyDirect N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 23
(a) Disk 069
 (b) Disk 081
Figure 15. Two examples that result in a Dimorphos-like shape (i.e., low a/b). (a) This satellite achieves an oblate shape due
to a partial tidal disruption torquing the remaining mass onto a wide, eccentric orbit. Then, due to the body’s asynchronous
rotation, it accretes material in an azimuthally symmetric manner, as it sweeps through periapse with a different orientation
every orbit. (b) This satellite achieves an oblate shape due to serendipitous mergers having a favorable geometry and is able to
maintain its shape through the rest of the simulation. Movies of these simulations are provided
increases b/c. After the merger, the satellite continues accreting on all sides, leading to a gradual reduction in a/band
increase in b/c, until there is almost no material left to accrete. This process suggests that an oblate shape like that
of Dimorphos could plausibly be acquired if the satellite accretes material after some dynamical process triggers an
asynchronous rotation state.
In the second example (Fig. 15b), the satellite achieves its oblate shape simply by undergoing two near-head-on
mergers with other moonlets at early times (around ∼3.5 d and ∼7 d, respectively). These mergers serendipitously
lead to a more oblate shape due to their favorable geometry. In addition, the satellite’s relatively circular orbit,
which is well outside the Roche limit, prevents its shape from undergoing significant further modification, despite its
tumbling rotation state. Mergers among similar-sized moonlets have been proposed to explain the oblate shapes of
some of Saturn’s small moons (Leleu et al. 2018).
In Fig. 16, we show renderings of these two examples in each body’s respective body-fixed frame, using the same
lighting conditions and viewing geometry as the DART spacecraft on its approach to Dimorphos. Although these two
examples demonstrate that an oblate satellite can plausibly form by asynchronous rotation during accretion or by
lucky mergers, these events are relatively rare. Out of over 100 simulations, Dimorphos-like shapes are only formed
a few percent of the time. Therefore, it is feasible that Dimorphos obtained its shape through some other unexplored
mechanism.24 Agrusa et al.
(a) Disk 069
DEEVE: a/b≈1.15, b/c≈1.69
Extents: a/b≈1.14, b/c≈1.49
(b) Disk 081
DEEVE: a/b≈1.11,b/c≈1.42
Extents: a/b≈1.08,b/c≈1.37
(c) DRACO Image
DEEVE: a/b≈1.02,b/c≈1.49
Extents: a/b≈1.06,b/c≈1.47
Figure 16. A rendering of two satellites that have similar shapes to Dimorphos, with the same lighting conditions and viewing
geometry as DART’s approach.
3.7. Unique outcomes
Due to the chaotic orbital and collisional evolution of the moonlets, some simulations resulted in outcomes that were
not expected at the conception of this study. This includes the creation of asteroid pairs and triple systems. To be
clear, we do not claim that all or even a majority of pairs or triples originate from a single mass shedding event, rather
that this formation mechanism is plausible for some systems.
3.7.1. Asteroid Pairs
An asteroid pair is where two unbound asteroids have similar enough orbital elements (and colors/spectra; see Pravec
et al. (2019), and references therein) such that they can be traced back to a common origin. An asteroid cluster is
where multiple unbound bodies can be traced back to the same system. Many pairs and clusters are thought to
form either through collisions, or through rotational fission (Vokrouhlick´ y & Nesvorn´ y 2008; Pravec et al. 2010, 2018).
Because the dynamics of a newly formed binary system are chaotic and have a positive free energy for mass ratios
below ∼0.2, the secondary can be ejected purely by the internal dynamics of the system (Scheeres 2007b; Jacobson &
Scheeres 2011). This phenomenon does an excellent job at reproducing the observed correlation between the primary’s
rotation period and the mass ratio of the asteroid pair (Pravec et al. 2010, 2019). There is a distinct correlation
between asteroid pair mass ratio and the primary’s spin rate; pairs with a large mass ratio tend to have slower primary
rotation periods, presumably because more angular momentum was transferred from the rapidly rotating primary to
the secondary in order eject it from the system.
Due to the azimuthal symmetry of the primary in these simulations, there is very weak coupling between the
primary’s rotation and the satellites orbit, preventing these simulations from exploring this correlation. However, our
simulations demonstrate that pairs/clusters can also form via three-body interactions between the moonlets during
their formation. In all cases where we form a successful pair or cluster, there is always a secondary still bound to the
primary. In other words, in any case where we form a pair, it is always a “paired binary”.
As an example, we show a time-series plot of the semimajor axis and eccentricity of the two largest satellites from
Disk 040 ( Mdisk= 0.03MA,ϕ= 35◦) in Fig. 17. In this case, the smaller satellite ( M2) has a series of close encounters
with the larger satellite ( M1), which increase its semimajor axis and eccentricity until its eccentricity eventually exceeds
1, placing it on an escape trajectory. The particle then reaches the simulation boundary and is removed from the
simulation. In Fig. 18, we show snapshots of this simulation at the moment when the M2is ejected. The two satellites
have a close encounter at 48.3 d, where M1torques M2onto a hyperbolic orbit, ejecting it from the system. Meanwhile,
as a consequence of angular momentum conservation, M1’s eccentricity is raised (i.e., its periapse distance decreases)
causing it to have a close approach with the primary at 48.9 d. M1then undergoes a partial tidal disruption, loosing
some mass, reshaping, and torquing it back onto a higher orbit safe from further tidal disruption. This process also
breaks M1from its previous synchronous rotation state.Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 25
Figure 17. An example of a paired binary being formed as the larger satellite ejects the smaller satellite from the system. After
an extremely close encounter, the smaller satellite is ejected from the system ( eorb>1) before it hits the simulation boundary
at 100 Req
Awhere it is then removed. This particular simulation is Disk 040 ( Mdisk/MA= 0.03,ϕ= 35◦) and a movie of this
simulation is provided.
Figure 18. Simulation snapshots corresponding to Fig. 17 of the final close encounter that ejects the smaller satellite from the
system. When this occurs, larger satellite’s periapse distance is lowered and its eccentricity is raised. This leads to a partial
tidal disruption where the remaining satellite loses some mass and breaks from synchronous rotation. A movie of this simulation
is provided.
In Fig. 19a, we plot the size of each ejected fragment in relation to both the primary and the secondary, from
all simulations where ϕ= 35◦. It is important to note that this figure excludes fragments consisting of one or two26 Agrusa et al.
particles, of which numerous are ejected from every simulation. Here, we only show ejected fragments that contain
3 or more particles. Also, this figure only includes fragments that have been ejected within the ∼100 d pkdgrav
integrations. However, as we will see in the next section, there are several systems which still contain two satellites
after 100 d that will be ejected at a later time and would also count as a successful pair. In general, we find that a
larger initial mass shedding event tends to eject larger fragments, as there is more material and angular momentum
available. For context, the smallest size ratio observed for an asteroid pair is roughly ∼0.1, so this is a size range that
would be potentially discoverable (Pravec et al. 2019). We also show the spin rate of each ejected fragment (Fig. 19b),
which demonstrates that most fragments are spinning relatively fast, due to the high angular momentum nature of
ejecting the fragment. The observed population of asteroid pairs shows a much broader distribution of spin rates of
ejected secondaries, ranging between ∼1−9 d−1(Pravec et al. 2019). In addition, many of the pairs formed in these
simulations are in non-principal axis (NPA) rotation, whereas all observed secondaries of asteroid pairs for which there
is sufficient lightcurve coverage appear to be in principal axis rotation. This suggests that these fragments undergo
significant spin evolution after being ejected (through damping and/or YORP) or other mechanisms besides three
body interactions are responsible for the production of most asteroid pairs. The axis ratios are also shown in Fig. 19c
and are consistent with the axis ratios of observed pairs inferred from their lightcurve amplitudes (Pravec et al. 2019).
Finally, we also show the eccentricity of the fragment before it is deleted from the simulation. The vast majority are
on hyperbolic (escape) trajectories, having eorb>1. However, some of these fragments are still bound to the system.
If these fragments were kept in the simulation, they would likely have been ejected or collided during a future close
encounter. If these are near-Earth asteroids, these satellites would be lost anyways, having an apoapse outside of the
system’s Hill sphere. However, if these are main-belt asteroids with larger Hill spheres, there is a chance that these
objects deemed “pairs” could remain bound with wide eccentric orbits.
For example, asteroid (3749) Balam is a main-belt triple with a fast-rotating (2.8 h spin period), ∼4 km primary with
a relatively close inner satellite, separated by ∼13 km on a near-circular orbit (Pravec et al. 2019). The outer satellite
is on a wide orbit with an eccentricity between 0.35 and 0.77, (Merline et al. 2002; Vachier et al. 2012). The inner and
outer satellites have respective satellite-to-primary size ratios of ∼0.46 and ∼0.24 (Pravec et al. 2019), making them
relatively large. In addition, Balam is a member of an asteroid pair (Vokrouhlick´ y 2009), with backwards numerical
integrations indicating that asteroid 2009 BR 60separated from Balam less than one million years ago (Vokrouhlick´ y
2009; Pravec et al. 2019), making the Balam system very young. Due to its high eccentricity, it has been suggested
that Balam’s outer satellite could have been formed as the result of a collision (Durda et al. 2004) or by capture
(Marchis et al. 2008), while the inner satellite is consistent with YORP spin-up and rotational disruption due to the
primary’s fast rotation (Polishook et al. 2011). Since the simulations in this study considered much more mild mass
shedding events and removed these eccentric satellites, there are no direct analogs to the Balam system in our study.
However, our results suggest that a plausible explanation for the Balam system could be formation via a single, much
more massive rotational disruption event. In such a scenario, an inner satellite, an outer eccentric satellite, and an
unbound satellite could all be produced at the same time, although the details of such a scenario require further study.Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 27
0.025 0.050 0.075 0.100 0.125 0.150 0.175
Dfrag/DA0.10.20.30.40.50.6Dfrag/DBMdisk/MA
0.02
0.03
0.04
(a) Fragment size
1 2 3 4 5 6
Spin rate [d−1]02468NMdisk/MA
0.02
0.03
0.04 (b) Fragment spins
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
a/b1.01.21.41.61.82.02.2b/cMdisk/MA
0.02
0.03
0.04
(c) Fragment shapes
0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5
eorb024681012NMdisk/MA
0.02
0.03
0.04 (d) Fragment eccentricity
Figure 19. Simulation results for all ejected fragments with ϕ= 35◦. These plots ignore all fragments containing less than 3
particles, of which there are many. The different colors show the initial mass of the disk. Only a minority of simulations eject
fragments at all, but in some cases, multiple fragments are ejected in a single simulation. (a) The size of each ejected fragment
as a function of both the fragment-to-primary and fragment-to-secondary diameter ratio. Unsurprisingly, a more massive initial
disk ejects larger fragments. (b) A histogram of the spin rate of each ejected fragment. (c) The shapes of each ejected fragment,
defined by their physical extents. (d) The eccentricity each fragment relative to the primary. Most fragments are on escape
trajectories ( eorb>1) while the others have their apoapse outside of the systems Hill sphere if it were located at 1 au.
3.7.2. Triples
In some cases, we find that 3-body interactions lead to the formation of systems with two satellites on non-crossing
orbits. However, these simulations are run for less than 100 days, making it impossible to determine their stability
withpkdgrav alone. In rare cases where two satellites are still remaining at the end of the pkdgrav simulation, we
perform a brief test of the system’s stability. We hand off the masses, positions, and velocities of the primary and
its satellites to the REBOUND N-body code (Rein & Liu 2012; Rein & Spiegel 2015; Rein & Tamayo 2017). These
simulations are relatively simple; the two satellites are treated as spheres but we include the effect of the primary’s J2
using the REBOUNDx package (Tamayo et al. 2020). As these simulations do not include higher-order effects such
as spin-orbit coupling of the two satellites, tidal dissipation, BYORP, etc., we only integrate the system for 103years
and then check if both satellites still remain. In reality, higher-order effects may strongly affect the system’s evolution
and stability. Additionally, the primary is largely azimuthally symmetric, and a more realistic primary with a non-
negligible C22may make these close-in triple systems less stable. Here, we merely demonstrate that the formation of
a triple system from a single rotational disruption event is plausible. In total, we find 11 triple systems after the 100
dpkdgrav simulations, of which 7 survive after further integration with REBOUND.
We find that many of the stable triples achieved their stability due to capture into mean motion resonances (MMRs)
during the pkdgrav stage. While moonlets are growing, their orbits are constantly perturbed by collisions, mergers,
and close encounters, so capture into a MMR is effectively random. Out of the 7 stable triples, 5 are in MMRs, while
two are not in resonance.
In three of the resonant cases, the two satellites form in a co-orbital configuration (i.e., the 1:1 MMR) by co-accretion.
When this occurs, the smaller satellite occupies the L4orL5Lagrange point of the larger body. Snapshots of the three
cases are shown in Fig. 20. These systems satisfy the condition for stability, in whichM1+M2
M+M1+M2≲0.04, where Mis
the primary’s mass and M1andM2are the two satellite masses (Murray & Dermott 2000; Laughlin & Chambers 2002;28 Agrusa et al.
Figure 20. Three cases where the co-orbital configuration of two satellites remains stable after a 103yr integration with
REBOUND. The top panels show a view of the pkdgrav simulation after ∼100 d prior to handing off to REBOUND, looking
down from the primary’s spin pole. We encourage the reader to view the provided movies of these simulations. The corresponding
bottom panels show the position of the two satellites in the rotating frame of the larger satellite at each output over the 103yr
REBOUND integration, demonstrating that the smaller satellite resides in a Lagrange point (either L4orL5). In the left case
(Disk 003), the smaller satellite librates around the trailing Lagrange point ( L5) with an amplitude of ∼7.2◦, while in the middle
and right cases (Disk 010 and Disk 108), the smaller satellite librates around the leading Lagrange point ( L4) with amplitudes
of∼11.4◦and∼18.7◦, respectively. Movies of these threes simulations are provided.
Sicardy 2010). We also numerically test the system’s stability using REBOUND and find that the smaller satellite
remains in stable libration about the Lagrange point for at least 103yr. We restrict the REBOUND simulations to
only 103yr, because we neglect tides and non-gravitational forces which can tighten or loosen the tadpole orbits,
depending on the direction of migration (e.g., Fleming & Hamilton 2000). We find that co-orbital systems are only
formed when the initial disk mass is small ( Mdisk/MA≲0.03), in agreement with the study of Hyodo et al. (2015) on
the formation of multiple satellites with N-body simulations in circumplanetary disk.
We note that the idealized initial conditions of these simulations may increase the likelihood of forming co-orbital
satellites and that the primary’s azimuthal symmetry likely contributes to their long term stability. Here, we merely
point out that forming a co-orbital system via a single mass shedding event is possible , albeit unlikely . A future
detection of a triple asteroid with co-orbital satellites, however unlikely, could be explained by co-accretion following
a single mass shedding event.
The remaining two resonant cases are capture into the 2:1 and 5:2 MMRs. This occurs after a satellite is first torqued
onto a wider orbit ( ≳4RA), while there is still material near the Roche limit available to accrete. This allows a second
body to grow closer in, which can capture into a nearby MMR with the outer satellite while it is accreting. Once the
initial capture occurs, the resonance can further stabilize due to the smooth growth of the inner satellite.
In Fig. 21 we show an example of capture into the 2:1 MMR, where the inner satellite is the most massive. In Fig.
21a, we show a top-down view of the triple system at the end of the 100 d pkdgrav integration along with a time-seriesDirect N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 29
plot in Fig. 21b. Early on, both M1andM2grow rapidly until they temporarily merge into a single body which is
then quickly tidally disrupted. The tidal disruption torques one large fragment (now M2) onto a wide orbit. Then,
M2continues to grow and migrate outwards through a series of mergers and close encounters with other moonlets.
Meanwhile a new inner satellite forms (now M1) from one of the disrupted remnants and migrates inwards. This
process places M1andM2close enough to the 2:1 MMR that they capture. The resonance is then further stabilized
by the smooth growth of M1, the inner satellite. We can confirm the existence of the resonance due to the libration
of the resonance argument ϕres= 2λ2−λ1−ϖ2, where λiare the respective body’s mean longitudes and ϖ2isM2’s
longitude of pericenter. We attribute the drift in the resonance argument to the growth in the satellite masses and
collisions, both of which make the process non-adiabatic. We confirmed that the resonance argument continues to
librate when handed off to REBOUND.
We also find one example of capture into the 5:2 MMR, shown in Fig. 22. Capture into such a high-order resonance
came as a surprise and may have been enabled by the high eccentricity of the outer satellite. If a triple asteroid were
to be observed in such a resonance, then this process should be studied further.
We find two other long-term stable triples (disk 075, 085) with a more massive outer satellite having period ratios
close to 2:1 and 4:1 respectively, although we confirm that are notin resonance. However, these systems have well-
separated satellites and thus remain long-term stable in the REBOUND simulations.
Comparing our simulated triples to the known population is a problem of small number statistics. There are
very few known triple asteroids, none of which are known to be in mean motion resonances. Out of the near-Earth
asteroids, there are three confirmed triples: 1994 CC, 2001 SN 263, and 3122 Florence (Brozovic et al. 2009; Nolan
et al. 2008). Both CC and SN 263are well-characterized, not near MMRs, and also have some mutual inclination,
which as been attributed a previous close planetary encounter (Brozovic et al. 2009; Fang & Margot 2012; Becker
et al. 2015). However, no detailed dynamical studies have been published for 3122 Florence. Preliminary estimates
have put the orbit periods of the two satellites at 22 h and 7 h (Brozovic et al. 2018), which is not far from the
3:1 MMR, although a more comprehensive analysis of the satellite orbits would be needed to confirm this. Despite
our simulations occasionally resulting in a stable triple in a mean-motion resonance, a single mass shedding event is
certainly not the only way to achieve such a configuration. For example, a second mass-shedding event occurring after
the first satellite has migrated outwards, followed by convergent migration (due to tides and/or BYORP) is an equally
plausible mechanism to form a MMR triple.30 Agrusa et al.
(a) Final frame from pkdgrav simulation
 (b) Time series showing capture into 2:1 MMR.
Figure 21. An example of a stable triple system formed from a single mass shedding event. (a) A snapshot of the system at the
end of the simulation. (b) A time-series plot showing the satellite mass, semimajor axis, eccentricity, and resonance argument,
ϕres. Capture into the 2:1 MMR enables the system to remain stable.
(a) Final frame from pkdgrav simulation
 (b) Time series showing capture into 5:2 MMR
Figure 22. The two satellites capture into the 5:2 MMR around 15 d. Due to M2’s high eccentricity, the two satellites have
a close encounter, sending M1inwards where it undergoes a tidal disruption around 30 d, which destroys both M1and the
resonance. Around 60 d, a new inner satellite begins growing and quickly captures again into the 5:2 resonance again with the
more massive outer satellite, this time remaining stable.Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 31
3.7.3. Simulation outcomes
In Fig. 23, we show the simulation outcomes for all simulations with ϕ= 35◦, summarizing the resulting rotation
state of the secondary and whether the system formed a pair or triple. We consider the satellite to be in synchronous
rotation if its maximum yaw angle over the final 10 days of the simulation is <60◦. If a synchronous rotator has a
roll angle >60◦over the final 10 d, we also consider it to be in the “barrel instability” (see Fig. 10). If a fragment
consisting of 3 or more particles is ejected from the system, we count the simulation as successfully forming a pair.
Triples are only counted if the system remains stable after further integration with REBOUND. Each category is not
exclusive, in the sense that a triple could have also formed a pair, for example.
We find that a lower disk mass leads to a higher likelihood of the satellite forming with synchronous rotation, likely
due to fewer violent collisions and mergers. For similar reasons, we find that more massive initial disks are more
likely to form asteroid pairs as there is more mass (and angular momentum) that can launch fragments onto escape
trajectories. Given that the final outcomes are highly dependent on the initial angular momentum in the disk, we
caution against over-interpreting Fig. 23. A higher fidelity study with more realistic initial conditions would provide
better estimates for the fraction of triples, pairs, and synchronous rotators that could plausibly form from a single
mass shedding event.
0.02 0.03 0.04 combined
Mdisk/MA0%15%30%45%60%75%OutcomeSynchronous
Barrel InstabilityPairs
Triples
Figure 23. A summary of simulation outcomes showing the percentage of cases that have a given outcome, considering only
the 96 simulations where ϕ= 35◦. A satellite is counted as a synchronous rotator if its yaw angle remains <60◦over the final
10 d of simulation. Similarly, a satellite is considered to be in the barrel instability if its roll angle is >60◦over the final 10 d.
These thresholds are set arbitrarily and should only be considered notional.
4.CONCLUSIONS
We demonstrate that satellites can rapidly form by accretion following a single mass shedding event. The formation
time is relatively fast, with the satellite reaching its terminal mass in a matter of days. Satellites tend to form on
near-circular orbits within ∼4 primary radii, although 3-body interactions with other moonlets can sometimes put the
final satellite onto wider and more eccentric orbits. Due to the satellite’s accretion near the Roche limit, the satellite
tends to be prolate in shape and is oftentimes in synchronous rotation. Many of these synchronous rotators, however,32 Agrusa et al.
are in a rolling state about their long axis while remaining tidally locked, which would terminate or significantly weaken
any BYORP evolution until this mode is dissipated ( ´Cuk et al. 2021; Quillen et al. 2022).
The simulated secondary shapes are broadly consistent with the radar-derived shapes of other asteroid satellites,
given their uncertainties (Ostro et al. 2006; Naidu et al. 2015; Becker et al. 2015). In addition, the distribution of
secondary elongations ( a/b) agrees well with the lightcurve-derived data set from Pravec et al. (2019). Our simulations
rarely produce satellites with a/b≳1.5 in strong agreement with the observed population of secondaries. Despite the
strong preference to form elongated satellites, oblate shapes like Dimorphos are occasionally formed in our simulations.
However, the fact that lightcurves are heavily biased against measuring satellite shapes with low a/b, combined with
Dimorphos’s low a/bsuggests the existence of a significant population of oblate secondaries (unless Dimorphos is an
outlier). This implies that there may be a longer term, yet-unidentified pathway that can reshape satellites to become
oblate.
We tested four different friction angles (29◦,32◦,35◦,40◦), finding only subtle differences. Generally, higher friction
satellites have more irregular shapes. In addition, they are more resistant to disruption during close gravitational
encounters and collisions, allowing them to form on wider, more excited orbits, whereas a lower friction satellite would
disrupt and reaccrete during this process. The most noticeable difference is that higher friction tends to form satellites
with lower bulk densities, due to their ability to maintain larger interior void spaces.
The accretion process is highly chaotic, resulting in a wide range of outcomes. In some cases, moonlets are ejected
from the system via three-body interactions, effectively forming asteroid pairs. We note that this process does not
explain the population of asteroid pairs in general, as there are many other processes that can form pairs. Here, we
merely demonstrate that 3-body interactions may play some role in the production of asteroid pairs.
In a few percent of cases, we form stable triple systems, including satellites in mean motion resonances and co-
orbital satellites. Although unlikely, a future discover of a system with co-orbital satellites would be strong evidence
for formation from a single mass shedding event, as co-accretion would naturally explain their configuration.
There are some caveats and limitations of our model. These simulations are only run for 100 days due to their
computational cost and therefore cannot capture longer term effects. In addition, the primary is azimuthally symmetric
which may affect the likelihood of forming pairs and triples. Finally, this study was originally focused solely on forming
a Dimorphos-mass satellite, therefore we only explored a narrow range of disk masses. Although the initial conditions
of these simulations were intentionally simplified, we would expect the general results and trends to hold.
There are a wide range of parameters available to explore in future work, and we list a few avenues to explore. With
stronger spin-orbit coupling, an asymmetric primary may change the fraction of systems that form asteroid pairs, and
would also allow the observed correlation between pair mass ratio and primary spin rate to be explored. In addition,
this may affect the likelihood of forming a triple, as well as their long-term stability. In addition, a larger disk mass
should be explored to probe the formation of systems with larger mass ratios such as Balam, and would also strongly
affect the production of unbound fragments. Rather than a single mass shedding event, its plausible that these systems
form from multiple events. If this is the case, simulated additional mass shedding events after the satellite is initially
formed may change the distribution of secondary shapes.
The Hera mission will investigate the Didymos system for 6 months in early 2027 and will provide crucial information
for binary formation models (Michel et al. 2022). In particular, it will measure the mass of Dimorphos and its internal
properties, allowing us to check some of the predictions from our modeling. Through the landing and possible bouncing
of its CubeSats on Dimorphos’ surface, we will be able to access some of the mechanical parameters used in these
simulations. However, since the shape of Dimorphos may have changed as a result of the DART impact (Raducan et al.
2023), we may not be able to put constraints on the formation models leading to either oblate or prolate secondaries,
although all efforts will be done to relate the measured shape by Hera to the original one.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the DART mission, NASA Contract #80MSFC20D0004 to JHU/APL. H.F.A.
was supported by the French government, through the UCA J.E.D.I. Investments in the Future project managed by
the National Research Agency (ANR) with the reference number ANR-15-IDEX-01. P.P. was supported by the Grant
Agency of the Czech Republic, grant 20-04431S. P. M. acknowledges funding support from the French space agency
CNES and the University of Tokyo. M.P., A.L., and F.T. were supported by the Italian Space Agency (ASI) within the
LICIACube project (ASI-INAF agreement n. 2019-31-HH.0) and Hera project (ASI-INAF agreement n. 2022-8-HH.0).
S.D.R. acknowledges support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (project number 200021 207359). We thankDirect N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 33
Adriano Campo Bagatin, Kate Minker, and John Wimarsson for helpful discussions and feedback. We are grateful to
David Minton and the anonymous referee, whose feedback substantially improved the quality of this manuscript.
Software: pkdgrav (Richardson et al. 2000; Schwartz et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2017), REBOUND (Rein & Liu
2012), REBOUNDx (Tamayo et al. 2020), Persistence of Vision Raytracer (https://www.povray.org/), Alpha Shape
Toolbox (https://alphashape.readthedocs.io/), NumPy (Harris et al. 2020), SciPy (Virtanen et al. 2020), Matplotlib
(Caswell et al. 2020).
Facility: Simulations and analysis were performed on the ASTRA cluster administered by the Center for Theory
and Computation, part of the Department of Astronomy at the University of Maryland and on M´ esocentre SIGAMM
hosted at the Observatoire de la Cˆ ote d’Azur.
APPENDIX
A.NOTATION
For reference, Table 2 lists the notation used in this paper.
Table 2. Notation table
Variable Definition
MA Primary’s mass
MB Secondary’s massa
Mdisk Initial mass of disk placed in orbit around primary
RA,DA Primary’s radius and diameterb
Req
APrimary’s equatorial radius
RB,DB Secondary’s radius and diameterb
a Secondary’s semimajor (longest) axis lengthc
b Secondary’s semi-intermediate axisc
c Secondary’s semi-minor axis (i.e., principal spin axis)c
rorb Instantaneous binary orbital separation
aorb Semimajor axisd
eorb Orbital eccentricityd
Porb Orbital periodd
θ Libration anglee
θ1, θ2, θ3 The roll, pitch, and yaw anglesf
ϕ Friction angle
Note —aM1andM2are used when there is more than one satellite.bBased on the body’s volume-equivalent sphere.cThis length is measured
either based on the body’s physical extents, or by the axis lengths of the corresponding dynamically equivalent equal-volume ellipsoid.dKeplerian
element, based on the instantaneous body positions and velocities.eThe angle between the secondary’s long axis and the line connecting the body
centersfThe 1-2-3 Euler angle set coordinated in the secondary’s rotating orbital frame (see Agrusa et al. (2021)).
B.SIMULATION RESULTS
Table 3 shows the results of each simulation in this study.34 Agrusa et al.
Table 3 . Tabulated simulation outcomes for each simulation.
IDMdisk
MAϕ M B/MA DB/DA a/b,b/c a/b ,b/caorb
RAeorb Porb θmax Nfrag Stable?
[◦] (DEEVE) (DEEVE) (Extents) [H] [◦]
001 0.02 35◦0.0081 0.206 1.299, 1.384 1.29, 1.279 2.774 0.0407 9.8 26.1 0
002 0.02 35◦0.0069 0.197 1.241, 1.242 1.237, 1.248 3.177 0.0387 12.02 51.8 0
003 0.02 35◦0.0069 0.198 1.501, 1.656 1.474, 1.464 2.872 0.0403 10.33 12.7 0
0.0028 0.146 1.673, 1.298 1.612, 1.213 2.889 0.0371 10.44 12.7 Yes
004 0.02 35◦0.0074 0.203 1.849, 1.177 1.793, 1.131 2.706 0.0603 9.45 18 0
0.0011 0.106 1.115, 1.178 1.09, 1.197 39.539 0.9324 529.15 88.8 No
005 0.02 35◦0.0062 0.19 1.452, 1.156 1.447, 1.165 3.86 0.0126 16.1 89.3 0
006 0.02 35◦0.0099 0.226 1.308, 1.853 1.268, 1.606 2.873 0.0232 10.32 48 0
007 0.02 35◦0.0082 0.208 1.326, 1.503 1.305, 1.409 3.346 0.0296 12.98 16.2 0
008 0.02 35◦0.0085 0.21 1.318, 1.202 1.267, 1.177 3.155 0.0345 11.88 16.6 0
009 0.02 35◦0.0087 0.215 1.623, 1.422 1.51, 1.334 3.081 0.0134 11.47 23.5 0
010 0.02 35◦0.0076 0.202 1.411, 1.504 1.254, 1.506 2.743 0.0689 9.64 22.5 0
0.0014 0.116 1.723, 1.06 1.511, 1.127 2.756 0.0426 9.74 20.8 Yes
011 0.02 35◦0.0089 0.214 1.557, 1.133 1.294, 1.146 2.87 0.0175 10.31 17.6 0
012 0.02 35◦0.0078 0.204 1.535, 1.241 1.414, 1.251 3.32 0.0361 12.83 18.6 0
013 0.02 35◦0.0091 0.215 1.576, 1.183 1.419, 1.24 3.033 0.0775 11.2 30.3 0
014 0.02 35◦0.0058 0.184 1.188, 1.204 1.164, 1.168 2.639 0.0584 9.1 89.1 0
0.0027 0.143 1.207, 1.042 1.28, 1.005 4.029 0.1254 17.2 90 Yes
015 0.02 35◦0.0081 0.206 1.217, 1.148 1.154, 1.11 3.474 0.0782 13.74 89.5 0
016 0.02 35◦0.0092 0.217 1.473, 1.743 1.342, 1.701 2.807 0.0429 9.97 12.5 0
017 0.02 35◦0.0069 0.196 1.39, 1.191 1.322, 1.161 3.654 0.0315 14.82 87.9 0
018 0.02 35◦0.0069 0.197 1.316, 1.149 1.228, 1.163 3.459 0.0833 13.65 90 0
019 0.02 35◦0.0072 0.2 1.78, 1.231 1.585, 1.161 3.4 0.0233 13.31 49.1 0
020 0.02 35◦0.0089 0.215 1.356, 1.676 1.336, 1.586 2.77 0.0556 9.78 21.3 1
021 0.02 35◦0.0045 0.172 1.445, 1.261 1.411, 1.141 4.54 0.2352 20.56 89.9 0
0.0025 0.137 1.509, 1.049 1.446, 0.976 2.551 0.0716 8.67 62.5 Yes
022 0.02 35◦0.0068 0.194 1.293, 1.201 1.228, 1.23 3.741 0.1173 15.36 89.9 0
023 0.02 35◦0.0072 0.2 1.523, 1.207 1.382, 1.156 3.545 0.0188 14.16 25.7 0
024 0.02 35◦0.0076 0.203 1.669, 1.121 1.559, 1.128 3.405 0.0221 13.33 12.7 0
025 0.02 35◦0.0094 0.218 1.411, 1.723 1.385, 1.658 2.875 0.0467 10.33 7.5 0
026 0.02 35◦0.0087 0.218 1.609, 1.329 1.411, 1.34 3.061 0.036 11.35 87.5 0
027 0.02 35◦0.0082 0.208 1.583, 1.251 1.474, 1.171 2.708 0.0516 9.45 11.7 1
028 0.02 35◦0.0092 0.216 1.436, 1.638 1.414, 1.441 2.653 0.0196 9.16 36.8 0
029 0.02 35◦0.0068 0.195 1.188, 1.192 1.127, 1.24 3.432 0.0261 13.5 35.1 1
030 0.02 35◦0.0081 0.206 1.522, 1.484 1.447, 1.472 2.623 0.0692 9.01 47.6 0
031 0.02 35◦0.0084 0.211 1.718, 1.331 1.615, 1.304 3.074 0.0624 11.43 27.1 1
032 0.02 35◦0.0071 0.198 1.445, 1.357 1.377, 1.335 3.531 0.0395 14.08 25.4 0
033 0.03 35◦0.013 0.242 1.411, 1.318 1.348, 1.309 3.263 0.0277 12.47 35.9 1
034 0.03 35◦0.0137 0.246 1.726, 1.381 1.509, 1.348 3.465 0.0274 13.65 88.9 0
035 0.03 35◦0.0125 0.238 1.228, 1.445 1.134, 1.389 3.974 0.0068 16.77 89.9 0
036 0.03 35◦0.0139 0.249 1.568, 1.335 1.468, 1.22 3.136 0.0399 11.75 35 1
037 0.03 35◦0.0123 0.238 1.317, 1.208 1.337, 1.08 4.089 0.0486 17.51 89.6 0
038 0.03 35◦0.0151 0.254 1.515, 1.172 1.473, 1.156 3.256 0.0391 12.42 44.7 1
039 0.03 35◦0.0135 0.245 1.16, 1.539 1.155, 1.405 4.014 0.2034 17.02 89.6 1
040 0.03 35◦0.0099 0.221 1.249, 1.252 1.205, 1.223 3.37 0.1597 13.11 89.2 1
041 0.03 35◦0.0159 0.261 1.15, 1.968 1.095, 1.79 3.054 0.0233 11.28 56.3 0
042 0.03 35◦0.0136 0.246 1.198, 1.427 1.179, 1.383 3.677 0.0952 14.92 88.1 0
043 0.03 35◦0.0136 0.245 1.191, 1.511 1.206, 1.381 2.55 0.0647 8.61 89.6 2
044 0.03 35◦0.0146 0.253 1.449, 1.355 1.377, 1.245 3.535 0.0377 14.05 77.6 0
045 0.03 35◦0.0122 0.237 1.499, 1.455 1.38, 1.378 2.575 0.0651 8.75 22 0
0.0026 0.142 1.522, 1.188 1.297, 1.238 17.675 0.7959 158.06 89.1 No
046 0.03 35◦0.0134 0.245 1.573, 1.135 1.498, 1.129 3.684 0.0363 14.96 46.2 0
Table 3 continued on next pageDirect N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 35
Table 3 (continued)
IDMdisk
MAϕ M B/MA DB/DA a/b,b/c a/b ,b/caorb
RAeorb Porb θmax Nfrag Stable?
[◦] (DEEVE) (DEEVE) (Extents) [H] [◦]
047 0.03 35◦0.0128 0.241 1.206, 1.561 1.172, 1.423 3.84 0.1239 15.93 89 0
048 0.03 35◦0.0119 0.235 1.255, 1.232 1.241, 1.211 4.033 0.0693 17.15 89.5 0
049 0.03 35◦0.0156 0.259 1.435, 1.751 1.419, 1.648 3.154 0.0192 11.84 18.9 0
050 0.03 35◦0.014 0.248 1.148, 1.184 1.082, 1.269 3.56 0.0325 14.21 89.7 0
051 0.03 35◦0.0121 0.237 1.225, 1.54 1.208, 1.384 3.993 0.0192 16.89 77.1 1
052 0.03 35◦0.0133 0.245 1.467, 1.308 1.42, 1.243 3.656 0.0343 14.79 89.7 0
053 0.03 35◦0.015 0.255 1.462, 1.737 1.348, 1.58 3.218 0.0697 12.2 28.6 0
054 0.03 35◦0.0147 0.252 1.269, 1.963 1.225, 1.83 2.546 0.014 8.59 32.7 3
055 0.03 35◦0.0142 0.25 1.066, 1.912 1.055, 1.719 3.521 0.0544 13.98 88.4 2
056 0.03 35◦0.0147 0.252 1.544, 1.443 1.449, 1.319 3.415 0.021 13.34 45.6 0
057 0.03 35◦0.0121 0.238 1.359, 1.324 1.342, 1.175 4.075 0.0521 17.41 88 0
0.0019 0.129 1.386, 1.091 1.288, 1.1 2.397 0.0143 7.89 46.2 Yes
058 0.03 35◦0.0119 0.235 1.112, 1.259 1.074, 1.181 3.98 0.045 16.81 89.7 0
059 0.03 35◦0.0112 0.23 1.133, 1.13 1.1, 1.124 4.31 0.129 18.95 89.9 0
060 0.03 35◦0.0145 0.252 1.347, 1.779 1.331, 1.529 3.374 0.0415 13.1 53.1 0
061 0.03 35◦0.0148 0.254 1.182, 1.693 1.151, 1.581 3.361 0.029 13.03 53 1
062 0.03 35◦0.0153 0.257 1.149, 1.389 1.106, 1.324 3.269 0.0187 12.49 30 0
063 0.03 35◦0.0158 0.26 1.625, 1.71 1.479, 1.639 3.098 0.0468 11.52 12.9 0
064 0.03 35◦0.0144 0.252 1.552, 1.306 1.528, 1.27 3.493 0.1292 13.8 89.6 0
065 0.04 35◦0.0216 0.288 1.309, 2.051 1.26, 1.881 3.282 0.0721 12.53 57 0
066 0.04 35◦0.0192 0.277 1.328, 1.215 1.236, 1.178 3.863 0.0762 16.02 75.5 1
067 0.04 35◦0.0225 0.292 1.372, 1.972 1.337, 1.839 3.056 0.0118 11.26 22.7 0
068 0.04 35◦0.0174 0.267 1.288, 1.366 1.26, 1.326 4.359 0.1232 19.22 89.9 0
069 0.04 35◦0.0176 0.27 1.153, 1.686 1.137, 1.492 4.549 0.3122 20.49 89.8 0
070 0.04 35◦0.0209 0.285 1.109, 1.408 1.156, 1.325 3.627 0.1367 14.56 89.8 2
071 0.04 35◦0.021 0.284 1.289, 1.64 1.275, 1.496 3.119 0.0458 11.61 51.4 2
072 0.04 35◦0.0215 0.29 1.142, 1.768 1.133, 1.634 3.336 0.0675 12.84 27.2 0
073 0.04 35◦0.0199 0.279 1.413, 1.143 1.302, 1.159 3.619 0.0251 14.52 89.3 0
074 0.04 35◦0.0172 0.266 1.395, 1.657 1.342, 1.541 4.115 0.0788 17.64 89.8 1
075 0.04 35◦0.0172 0.266 1.355, 1.094 1.314, 1.09 3.456 0.0287 13.57 38.2 3
076 0.04 35◦0.0219 0.292 1.356, 1.901 1.208, 1.762 3.043 0.0631 11.18 41.2 0
077 0.04 35◦0.0221 0.292 1.816, 1.46 1.709, 1.289 3.037 0.0187 11.15 26.1 0
078 0.04 35◦0.0206 0.284 1.708, 1.191 1.612, 1.139 3.3 0.0697 12.64 63.9 1
079 0.04 35◦0.0196 0.28 1.209, 1.992 1.187, 1.781 3.944 0.0686 16.52 26.1 1
080 0.04 35◦0.0218 0.29 1.566, 1.827 1.516, 1.69 3.193 0.0948 12.02 25.2 0
081 0.04 35◦0.0216 0.289 1.114, 1.422 1.075, 1.367 3.311 0.0385 12.69 90 0
082 0.04 35◦0.0187 0.275 1.704, 1.195 1.484, 1.236 3.995 0.0806 16.85 87.2 0
083 0.04 35◦0.0164 0.26 1.164, 1.306 1.149, 1.235 2.718 0.0535 9.47 84.9 1
084 0.04 35◦0.0205 0.283 1.671, 1.424 1.501, 1.36 3.704 0.0179 15.03 51.7 0
085 0.04 35◦0.0095 0.218 1.089, 1.38 1.067, 1.339 6.324 0.1577 33.73 89.3 5
0.005 0.176 1.666, 1.364 1.736, 1.235 2.488 0.0612 8.34 12.2 Yes
086 0.04 35◦0.0208 0.286 1.116, 1.994 1.12, 1.864 3.705 0.0962 15.04 89.4 0
087 0.04 35◦0.0193 0.276 1.365, 1.445 1.243, 1.462 3.83 0.07 15.82 59.8 0
088 0.04 35◦0.0183 0.273 1.894, 1.232 1.744, 1.131 3.983 0.038 16.78 42.1 0
089 0.04 35◦0.0192 0.279 2.228, 1.143 1.877, 1.215 3.513 0.0379 13.89 26.9 0
090 0.04 35◦0.02 0.285 1.101, 1.443 1.063, 1.411 3.665 0.0486 14.8 89.9 0
091 0.04 35◦0.0188 0.274 1.589, 1.147 1.49, 1.12 3.941 0.0211 16.52 39.4 0
092 0.04 35◦0.0183 0.271 1.405, 1.363 1.349, 1.302 4.023 0.0136 17.03 40.4 1
093 0.04 35◦0.0196 0.277 1.189, 1.655 1.157, 1.542 3.862 0.1091 16.01 89.6 0
094 0.04 35◦0.0202 0.281 1.359, 1.386 1.292, 1.33 3.607 0.0639 14.45 54.6 1
095 0.04 35◦0.0194 0.277 1.285, 1.443 1.202, 1.414 3.943 0.1736 16.52 89.6 1
096 0.04 35◦0.0189 0.279 1.683, 1.485 1.535, 1.317 4.18 0.2117 18.04 89.6 0
Table 3 continued on next page36 Agrusa et al.
Table 3 (continued)
IDMdisk
MAϕ M B/MA DB/DA a/b,b/c a/b ,b/caorb
RAeorb Porb θmax Nfrag Stable?
[◦] (DEEVE) (DEEVE) (Extents) [H] [◦]
097 0.03 29◦0.0131 0.24 1.396, 1.174 1.355, 1.131 3.322 0.0081 12.81 53.3 0
098 0.03 29◦0.0136 0.243 1.357, 1.111 1.33, 1.117 3.221 0.0308 12.23 48.9 0
099 0.03 29◦0.0145 0.249 1.416, 1.507 1.324, 1.434 3.076 0.0167 11.41 17.1 0
100 0.03 29◦0.0139 0.244 1.268, 1.564 1.229, 1.456 3.108 0.0823 11.59 20.6 0
101 0.03 29◦0.0143 0.247 1.365, 1.266 1.232, 1.302 2.998 0.0562 10.98 31 0
102 0.03 29◦0.0148 0.249 1.312, 1.164 1.184, 1.159 3.133 0.0491 11.72 38.2 0
103 0.03 29◦0.014 0.245 1.428, 1.46 1.299, 1.465 3.072 0.0488 11.39 21.1 0
104 0.03 29◦0.0129 0.238 1.355, 1.126 1.348, 1.144 3.447 0.015 13.54 55 0
105 0.03 32◦0.0152 0.255 1.501, 1.743 1.43, 1.681 2.943 0.0891 10.67 54.4 2
106 0.03 32◦0.0145 0.252 1.444, 1.174 1.33, 1.161 3.233 0.0266 12.29 89.7 1
107 0.03 32◦0.0113 0.231 1.265, 1.22 1.228, 1.159 3.919 0.024 16.43 81.5 0
108 0.03 32◦0.0136 0.245 1.614, 1.323 1.507, 1.277 3.049 0.0412 11.26 27.1 0
0.0023 0.137 1.176, 1.23 1.155, 1.153 3.003 0.0491 11.07 89.6 Yes
109 0.03 32◦0.0158 0.258 1.386, 1.74 1.301, 1.621 2.99 0.033 10.93 37 0
110 0.03 32◦0.015 0.253 1.386, 1.721 1.353, 1.588 3.007 0.0274 11.02 20.7 1
111 0.03 32◦0.015 0.253 1.241, 1.735 1.179, 1.646 3.193 0.0288 12.06 13 0
112 0.03 32◦0.0154 0.257 1.277, 1.607 1.197, 1.594 2.98 0.0565 10.87 52.3 0
113 0.03 40◦0.015 0.257 1.439, 1.685 1.376, 1.462 3.662 0.0502 14.81 54.3 0
114 0.03 40◦0.0116 0.244 1.639, 1.219 1.383, 1.274 4.732 0.2459 21.8 89.5 1
115 0.03 40◦0.0155 0.26 1.417, 1.924 1.336, 1.67 2.867 0.0663 10.26 36.8 0
0.0013 0.115 1.11, 1.089 1.007, 1.062 40.748 0.9502 553.62 89.9 No
116 0.03 40◦0.0156 0.261 1.307, 1.741 1.267, 1.608 3.507 0.0484 13.88 89.7 1
117 0.03 40◦0.0134 0.249 1.509, 1.162 1.421, 1.102 3.944 0.0356 16.57 89.3 0
118 0.03 40◦0.0074 0.2 1.051, 1.412 1.047, 1.307 2.387 0.0722 7.83 89.5 3
0.007 0.199 1.08, 1.492 1.04, 1.444 7.467 0.5582 43.31 89.7 No
119 0.03 40◦0.0149 0.257 1.113, 1.231 1.08, 1.143 3.857 0.0408 16.02 89.9 0
120 0.03 40◦0.0174 0.274 1.494, 2.091 1.396, 1.963 3.197 0.0396 12.07 20.5 0
Note —Column Mdisk/MAis the initial disk-to-primary mass ratio, ϕis the material’s friction angle. The rest of the columns are the
simulation outcome: the resulting secondary-to-primary mass ratio ( MB/MA), the diameter ratio DB/DA, the secondary’s axis ratios
a/bandb/c(both DEEVE and extent-derived), the secondary’s semimajor axis normalized to the primary’s volume-equivalent radius
(aorb/RA), the secondary’s eccentricity ( eorb), orbit period ( Porb).θmaxis the secondary’s maximum libration angle over the final 10
days of the simulation. If this number is close to 90◦, then the secondary in an asynchronous or tumbling rotation state. Nfragis the
number of fragments ejected from the system. In cases where there is a second satellite, we include a second row in the table containing
the parameters of the satellite. The final column specifies whether that satellite was stable after the handoff to REBOUND. If the satellite
was unstable, it was either ejected from the system, or collided with the primary or secondary.Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 37
C.FINAL RENDERINGS
Here we show renderings of a subset of the simulations to give the reader a sense of the variance in satellite shape
between similar simulations and as a function of the friction angle. All renderings are cases where Mdisk= 0.03MA
and we show 8 cases for each value of friction ( ϕ). Each frame is rendered from a view looking down from the body’s
principal rotation axis.
ϕ= 29◦:
ϕ= 32◦:
38 Agrusa et al.
ϕ= 35◦
ϕ= 40◦
REFERENCES
Agrusa, H. F., Ferrari, F., Zhang, Y., Richardson, D. C., &
Michel, P. 2022, The Planetary Science Journal, 3, 158,
doi: 10.3847/psj/ac76c1
Agrusa, H. F., Gkolias, I., Tsiganis, K., et al. 2021, Icarus,
370, 114624, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2021.114624Al-Hashemi, H. M. B., & Al-Amoudi, O. S. B. 2018,
Powder Technology, 330, 397,
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2018.02.003
Arakawa, M., Saiki, T., Wada, K., et al. 2020, Science, 368,
67, doi: 10.1126/science.aaz1701Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 39
Bareither, C. A., Edil, T. B., Benson, C. H., & Mickelson,
D. M. 2008, Journal of geotechnical and
geoenvironmental engineering, 134, 1476
Barnouin, O., Ballouz, R. L., Marchi, S., et al. 2023,
(submitted)
Barnouin, O., Daly, M., Palmer, E., et al. 2019, Nature
Geoscience, 12, 247, doi: 10.1038/s41561-019-0330-x
Becker, T. M., Howell, E. S., Nolan, M. C., et al. 2015,
Icarus, 248, 499, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2014.10.048
Benner, L. A. M., Busch, M. W., Giorgini, J. D., Taylor,
P. A., & Margot, J. L. 2015, in Asteroids IV, 165–182,
doi: 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816532131-ch009
Boldrin, L. A. G., Scheeres, D. J., & Winter, O. C. 2016,
MNRAS, 461, 3982, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw1607
Bottke, W. F., Vokrouhlick´ y, D., Rubincam, D. P., & Broz,
M. 2002, in Asteroids III, 395–408
Brozovic, M., Benner, L. A. M., Nolan, M. C., et al. 2009,
IAUC, 9053, 2
Brozovic, M., Giorgini, J. D., Benner, L. A. M., et al. 2018,
in 42nd COSPAR Scientific Assembly, Vol. 42,
B1.1–80–18
Burke, K. N., DellaGiustina, D. N., Bennett, C. A., et al.
2021, Remote Sensing, 13, 1315, doi: 10.3390/rs13071315
Caswell, T. A., Droettboom, M., Lee, A., et al. 2020,
matplotlib/matplotlib: REL: v3.3.3, v3.3.3, Zenodo,
Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.4268928
Charnoz, S., Salmon, J., & Crida, A. 2010, Nature, 465,
752, doi: 10.1038/nature09096
Charnoz, S., Crida, A., Castillo-Rogez, J. C., et al. 2011,
Icarus, 216, 535, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2011.09.017
Chau, K. T., Wong, R. H. C., & Wu, J. J. 2002,
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining
Sciences, 39, 69, doi: 10.1016/S1365-1609(02)00016-3
Cotto-Figueroa, D., Statler, T. S., Richardson, D. C., &
Tanga, P. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 803, 25,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/803/1/25
´Cuk, M., & Burns, J. A. 2005, Icarus, 176, 418,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2005.02.001
´Cuk, M., Jacobson, S. A., & Walsh, K. J. 2021, The
Planetary Science Journal, 2, 231,
doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ac3093
´Cuk, M., & Nesvorn´ y, D. 2010, Icarus, 207, 732,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2009.12.005
Daly, R. T., Ernst, C. M., Barnouin, O. S., et al. 2023a,
(submitted)
—. 2023b, Nature, 616, 443,
doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-05810-5
Davis, A. B., & Scheeres, D. J. 2020, The Planetary Science
Journal, 1, 25, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ab9a39de Le´ on, J., Licandro, J., Duffard, R., & Serra-Ricart, M.
2006, Advances in Space Research, 37, 178,
doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2005.05.074
Dellagiustina, D. N., Emery, J. P., Golish, D. R., et al.
2019, Nature Astronomy, 3, 341,
doi: 10.1038/s41550-019-0731-1
Dunn, T. L., Burbine, T. H., Bottke, W. F., & Clark, J. P.
2013, Icarus, 222, 273, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2012.11.007
Durda, D. D., Bottke, W. F., Enke, B. L., et al. 2004,
Icarus, 170, 243, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2004.04.003
ˇDurech, J., Vokrouhlick´ y, D., Pravec, P., et al. 2023, Secular
change in the spin states of asteroids due to radiation
and gravitation torques. New detections and updates of
the YORP effect. https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.05157
Edelsbrunner, H. 1995, in Foundations of Software
Technology and Theoretical Computer Science, ed. P. S.
Thiagarajan (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg), 391–412
Fang, J., & Margot, J.-L. 2012, The Astronomical Journal,
143, 24, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/143/1/24
Ferrari, F., Raducan, S. D., Soldini, S., & Jutzi, M. 2022,
PSJ, 3, 177, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ac7cf0
Ferrari, F., & Tanga, P. 2020, Icarus, 350, 113871,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2020.113871
—. 2022, Icarus, 378, 114914,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2022.114914
Fleming, H. J., & Hamilton, D. P. 2000, Icarus, 148, 479,
doi: 10.1006/icar.2000.6523
Flynn, G. J., Consolmagno, G. J., Brown, P., & Macke,
R. J. 2018, Chemie der Erde / Geochemistry, 78, 269,
doi: 10.1016/j.chemer.2017.04.002
Fujiwara, A., Kawaguchi, J., Yeomans, D. K., et al. 2006,
Science, 312, 1330, doi: 10.1126/science.1125841
Gladman, B., Michel, P., & Froeschl´ e, C. 2000, Icarus, 146,
176, doi: 10.1006/icar.2000.6391
Goldreich, P., & Sari, R. 2009, The Astrophysical Journal,
691, 54, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/691/1/54
Golubov, O., & Krugly, Y. N. 2012, ApJL, 752, L11,
doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/752/1/L11
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., Van Der Walt, S. J., et al.
2020, Nature, 585, 357
Hirabayashi, M. 2015, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 454, 2249,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv2017
Hirabayashi, M., S´ anchez, D. P., & Scheeres, D. J. 2015,
The Astrophysical Journal, 808, 63,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/808/1/63
Hirabayashi, M., & Scheeres, D. J. 2019, Icarus, 317, 354,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2018.08.00340 Agrusa et al.
Hirabayashi, M., Nakano, R., Tatsumi, E., et al. 2020,
Icarus, 352, 113946, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2020.113946
Ho, A., Wold, M., Poursina, M., & Conway, J. T. 2022,
A&A, 665, A43, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202243706
Holsapple, K. A. 2010, Icarus, 205, 430,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2009.08.014
Holsapple, K. A., & Michel, P. 2006, Icarus, 183, 331,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2006.03.013
—. 2008, Icarus, 193, 283, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2007.09.011
Hyodo, R., Ohtsuki, K., & Takeda, T. 2015, ApJ, 799, 40,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/799/1/40
Hyodo, R., & Sugiura, K. 2022, ApJL, 937, L36,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac922d
Jacobson, S. A., Marzari, F., Rossi, A., & Scheeres, D. J.
2016, Icarus, 277, 381, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2016.05.032
Jacobson, S. A., & Scheeres, D. J. 2011, Icarus, 214, 161,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2011.04.009
Jiang, M., Shen, Z., & Wang, J. 2015, Computers and
Geotechnics, 65, 147
Jutzi, M., Raducan, S. D., Zhang, Y., Michel, P., &
Arakawa, M. 2022, Nature Communications, 13, 7134,
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-34540-x
Karjalainen, R., & Salo, H. 2004, Icarus, 172, 328,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2004.05.022
Kokubo, E., Ida, S., & Makino, J. 2000, Icarus, 148, 419,
doi: 10.1006/icar.2000.6496
Laughlin, G., & Chambers, J. E. 2002, AJ, 124, 592,
doi: 10.1086/341173
Leleu, A., Jutzi, M., & Rubin, M. 2018, Nature Astronomy,
2, 555, doi: 10.1038/s41550-018-0471-7
Madeira, G., & Charnoz, S. 2024, Icarus, 409, 115871,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2023.115871
Madeira, G., Charnoz, S., & Hyodo, R. 2023, Icarus, 394,
115428, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2023.115428
Marchis, F., Descamps, P., Berthier, J., et al. 2008, Icarus,
195, 295, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2007.12.010
Margot, J. L., Nolan, M. C., Benner, L. A. M., et al. 2002,
Science, 296, 1445, doi: 10.1126/science.1072094
McMahon, J. W., Scheeres, D. J., Chesley, S. R., et al.
2020, Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets), 125,
e06229, doi: 10.1029/2019JE006229
Merline, W. J., Weidenschilling, S. J., Durda, D. D., et al.
2002, in Asteroids III, 289–312
Meyer, A. J., Scheeres, D. J., Agrusa, H. F., et al. 2023,
Icarus, 391, 115323, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2022.115323
Michel, P., K¨ uppers, M., Bagatin, A. C., et al. 2022, The
Planetary Science Journal, 3, 160,
doi: 10.3847/psj/ac6f52
Michikami, T., & Hagermann, A. 2021, Icarus, 357, 114282,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2020.114282Michikami, T., Honda, C., Miyamoto, H., et al. 2019,
Icarus, 331, 179, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2019.05.019
Minker, K., & Carry, B. 2023, A&A, 672, A48,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202245538
Mitchell, J. K., Houston, W. N., Scott, R. F., et al. 1972,
Lunar and Planetary Science Conference Proceedings, 3,
3235
Murdoch, N., S´ anchez, P., Schwartz, S. R., & Miyamoto, H.
2015, in Asteroids IV, 767–792,
doi: 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816532131-ch039
Murray, C. D., & Dermott, S. F. 2000, Solar System
Dynamics, doi: 10.1017/CBO9781139174817
Naidu, S. P., Chesley, S. R., Farnocchia, D., et al. 2022,
The Planetary Science Journal, 3, 234,
doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ac91c0
Naidu, S. P., Margot, J. L., Taylor, P. A., et al. 2015, AJ,
150, 54, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/150/2/54
Naidu, S. P., Benner, L. A. M., Brozovic, M., et al. 2020,
Icarus, 348, 113777, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2020.113777
Naidu, S. P., Chesley, S. R., Moskovitz, N., et al. 2023,
submitted
Nolan, M. C., Howell, E. S., Benner, L. A. M., et al. 2008,
Central Bureau Electronic Telegrams, 1254, 1
Ostro, S. J., Margot, J.-L., Benner, L. A. M., et al. 2006,
Science, 314, 1276, doi: 10.1126/science.1133622
Pajola, M., Tusberti, F., Lucchetti, A., Barnouin, O., &
Ernst, C. M. 2023a, (Submitted)
Pajola, M., Barnouin, O. S., Lucchetti, A., et al. 2022, The
Planetary Science Journal, 3, 210,
doi: 10.3847/psj/ac880d
Pajola, M., Tusberti, F., Lucchetti, A., et al. 2023b, in LPI
Contributions, Vol. 2806, LPI Contributions, 1314
Polishook, D., Brosch, N., & Prialnik, D. 2011, Icarus, 212,
167, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2010.12.020
Porco, C. C., Thomas, P. C., Weiss, J. W., & Richardson,
D. C. 2007, Science, 318, 1602,
doi: 10.1126/science.1143977
Pravec, P., & Harris, A. W. 2007, Icarus, 190, 250,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2007.02.023
Pravec, P., Scheirich, P., Kuˇ snir´ ak, P., et al. 2006, Icarus,
181, 63, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2005.10.014
Pravec, P., Vokrouhlick´ y, D., Polishook, D., et al. 2010,
Nature, 466, 1085, doi: 10.1038/nature09315
Pravec, P., Scheirich, P., Kuˇ snir´ ak, P., et al. 2016, Icarus,
267, 267, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2015.12.019
Pravec, P., Fatka, P., Vokrouhlick´ y, D., et al. 2018, Icarus,
304, 110, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2017.08.008
—. 2019, Icarus, 333, 429, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2019.05.014
Quillen, A. C., LaBarca, A., & Chen, Y. 2022, Icarus, 374,
114826, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2021.114826Direct N-body simulations of satellite formation around small asteroids 41
Raducan, S., Jutzi, M., Cheng, A. F., et al. 2023,
(submitted)
Rein, H., & Liu, S. F. 2012, A&A, 537, A128,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201118085
Rein, H., & Spiegel, D. S. 2015, MNRAS, 446, 1424,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu2164
Rein, H., & Tamayo, D. 2017, MNRAS, 467, 2377,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx232
Richardson, D. C., Quinn, T., Stadel, J., & Lake, G. 2000,
Icarus, 143, 45, doi: 10.1006/icar.1999.6243
Richardson, D. C., Agrusa, H. F., Barbee, B., et al. 2022,
The Planetary Science Journal, 3, 157,
doi: 10.3847/psj/ac76c9
Rivkin, A. S., Chabot, N. L., Stickle, A. M., et al. 2021,
The Planetary Science Journal, 2, 173,
doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ac063e
Robin, C., Murdoch, N., Duchene, A., B., V. J., & Vivet,
D. 2023, (submitted)
Rubincam, D. P. 2000, Icarus, 148, 2,
doi: 10.1006/icar.2000.6485
Salmon, J., Charnoz, S., Crida, A., & Brahic, A. 2010,
Icarus, 209, 771, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2010.05.030
S´ anchez, D. P., & Scheeres, D. J. 2012, Icarus, 218, 876,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2012.01.014
S´ anchez, P., & Scheeres, D. J. 2014, M&PS, 49, 788,
doi: 10.1111/maps.12293
—. 2016, Icarus, 271, 453, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2016.01.016
S´ anchez, P., & Scheeres, D. J. 2018, Planetary and Space
Science, 157, 39
S´ anchez, P., & Scheeres, D. J. 2020, Icarus, 338, 113443,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2019.113443
Scheeres, D. J. 2007a, Icarus, 189, 370,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2007.02.015
—. 2007b, Icarus, 188, 430,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2006.12.015
Scheirich, P., & Pravec, P. 2022, The Planetary Science
Journal, 3, 163, doi: 10.3847/psj/ac7233
Schwartz, S. R., Richardson, D. C., & Michel, P. 2012,
Granular Matter, 14, 363, doi: 10.1007/s10035-012-0346-z
Sharma, I. 2009, Icarus, 200, 636,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2008.11.027
Sicardy, B. 2010, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical
Astronomy, 107, 145, doi: 10.1007/s10569-010-9259-5
Stadel, J. G. 2001, PhD thesis, University of Washington,
United States
Statler, T. S. 2009, Icarus, 202, 502,
doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2009.03.003
Sugiura, K., Kobayashi, H., Watanabe, S.-i., et al. 2021,
Icarus, 365, 114505, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2021.114505
Tamayo, D., Rein, H., Shi, P., & Hernandez, D. M. 2020,
MNRAS, 491, 2885, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2870Tardivel, S., S´ anchez, P., & Scheeres, D. J. 2018, Icarus,
304, 192, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2017.06.037
Vachier, F., Berthier, J., & Marchis, F. 2012, A&A, 543,
A68, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201118408
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020,
Nature methods, 17, 261
Vokrouhlick´ y, D. 2009, ApJL, 706, L37,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/706/1/L37
Vokrouhlick´ y, D., & Nesvorn´ y, D. 2008, The Astronomical
Journal, 136, 280, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/136/1/280
Vokrouhlick´ y, D., & ˇCapek, D. 2002, Icarus, 159, 449,
doi: 10.1006/icar.2002.6918
Walsh, K. J., & Jacobson, S. A. 2015, in Asteroids IV,
375–393, doi: 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816532131-ch020
Walsh, K. J., Richardson, D. C., & Michel, P. 2008, Nature,
454, 188, doi: 10.1038/nature07078
—. 2012, Icarus, 220, 514, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2012.04.029
Walsh, K. J., Ballouz, R.-L., Jawin, E. R., et al. 2022,
Science Advances, 8, eabm6229,
doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abm6229
Walton, O. R. 1995, Force Models for Particle-Dynamics
Simulations of Granular Materials, ed. E. Guazzelli &
L. Oger (Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands), 367–380,
doi: 10.1007/978-94-015-8518-7 21
Watanabe, S., Hirabayashi, M., Hirata, N., et al. 2019,
Science, 364, 268, doi: 10.1126/science.aav8032
Wisdom, J., Peale, S. J., & Mignard, F. 1984, Icarus, 58,
137, doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(84)90032-0
Yu, Y., Cheng, B., Hayabayashi, M., Michel, P., & Baoyin,
H. 2019, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy,
131, 51, doi: 10.1007/s10569-019-9930-4
Yu, Y., Michel, P., Hirabayashi, M., et al. 2018, AJ, 156,
59, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aaccf7
Zhang, Y., Michel, P., Richardson, D. C., et al. 2021,
Icarus, 362, 114433, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2021.114433
Zhang, Y., Richardson, D. C., Barnouin, O. S., et al. 2018,
The Astrophysical Journal, 857, 15,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aab5b2
—. 2017, Icarus, 294, 98, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2017.04.027
Zhang, Y., Michel, P., Barnouin, O. S., et al. 2022, Nature
Communications, 13, 4589,
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-32288-y
Zhou, W.-H., Zhang, Y., Yan, X., & Michel, P. 2022, A&A,
668, A70, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202244386