Measuring the Subjective Passage of Time
Serge Galam∗
CEVIPOF - Centre for Political Research, Sciences Po and CNRS,
1, Place Saint Thomas d’Aquin, Paris 75007, France
January 8, 2024
Abstract
I address the question of measuring the subjective perception of
the passage of time at the individual level in relation to its objective
duration using a physicist-type treatment. A simple model is thus
built in terms of a very small number of equations, which is found
to yield a quantitative framework for individual subjective perception
of time. Given an objective unit of time like the year, the hypothe-
sis is to introduce a subjective unit of time for each person, which is
inversely proportional to the number of objective units already expe-
rienced by that person. A power law is also considered. The model is
then implemented by stacking individual clocks, each being linked to
social rituals, which mark and shape the specific time of an individ-
ual throughout their life. For each person, the first of these events is
their own birth. A future horizon, as well as an origin of the past, are
then defined, along with a speed of subjective passage of time. The
model shows that the price for the first ritualized socialization is to
exit eternity in terms of a future to be lived with the simultaneous re-
ward of experiencing a moment of infinity analogous to that of birth.
The results recover common feelings about the passage of time over
a lifetime. In particular, the fact that time passes more quickly with
age.
∗serge.galam@sciencespo.fr
1arXiv:2401.03979v1  [physics.soc-ph]  8 Jan 20241 Introduction
Clocks are everywhere shaping everyone path of life at both individual and
collective levels. Moreover, the measure of the objective time has reached
an incredible precision with the Cesium atomic clocks, which serves as the
world standard [1].
The goal was to construct a time reference frame that is independent of
individuals and their histories. The objective time is measured using seconds,
minutes, hours, weeks, months, years, centuries, and millennia. Those units
of time are fixed and unaffected by the passage of time itself.
Once defined, the interest of these units lies in their ability to be counted
and added objectively, systematically, and, above all, understood by every-
one. Such an objective requires, to be achievable, the definition of a counting
origin. At this stage, while the choice of an origin is arbitrary, it requires
to be acknowledged and used by everyone. In fact, from a practical point of
view, the nature of the origin does not matters to the unification of a unique
metric of time. Regarding years, it is often an event marking the beginning
of a religion, such as the birth of Christ for the Western calendar, now used
worldwide.
Choosing and agreeing on unit specific of time allows identifying all events
in relation to each other, in a linear and orderly manner. The identification
of an event being the number of time units that have elapsed from the count-
ing origin to the occurrence of the event. The notion of duration comes in
naturally with the number of time units elapsed. Therefore, the duration
defined is the same for everyone, whether an individual or a machine. And
indeed, this was the intended purpose to bring order to the ”disorder” of
time.
While society as a whole, as well as individuals in particular, have gained
a lot from this standardization of time, an essential element has been lost,
that of the subjective perception of time. Each person has indeed experienced
the very variable perception of the passage of the same unit of time.
At individual level, the perception of the passage of time as well as its
duration, varies from one person to another and also at different moments of
the life of the same person [2–5]. The passage of time sometimes seems to
slow down, speed up or repeat itself [6–8].
Depending on the situation, an hour can seem like five minutes and some-
times like several hours. And that is the question addressed in this paper. Is
it feasible to objectively measure the subjective perception of the passage of
2time? To provide a tentative answer to this question I build a simple model
of subjective time passage using a physicist-type approach [9].
My mere hypothesis is, given an objective unit of time like the year,
to introduce a subjective unit of time for each person, which is inversely
proportional to the number of objective units already experienced by that
person. The counting of this number starts from their own birth till the
present time. Therefore, the subjective unit of time gets smaller after each
new lived objective unit.
This subjective unit of time allows introducing clock to measure the pas-
sage of time as the addition of subjective units in parallel to the addition of
the objective units. A future horizon, as well as an origin of the past, are
then defined, along with a speed of subjective time flow.
In a second step, I consider ritualized socializations, which span the life-
time of every person, similarly to the birth event, creating additional counting
of the passage of time. The model is then extended by stacking individual
clocks, each being linked to a social ritual.
The associated equations show that the price for the first ritualized so-
cialization is to exit eternity in terms of a future to be lived with the si-
multaneous reward of experiencing a moment of infinity. The results recover
common feelings about the passage of time over a lifetime. In particular, the
fact that time passes more quickly when aging is obtained.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: The definition of a subjective
unit of time associated to an objective unit of time is presented in Section 2?
As a result of a subjective unit of time, three subjective features are obtained
in Section 3 with the future horizon, the past horizon and the speed of passage
of time. Section 4 introduces the setting of ritualized socializations, which
creates additional subjective clocks. The outcome of having stacking of clocks
is shown in Section five. Concluding remarks are given in last Section.
2 At the Beginning is an Observation
The time clock is omnipresent in everyone’s life and understood by all. It
regulates all moments of life at both levels of the individual and the collective.
The measured time is deployed mainly along seconds, minutes, hours, days,
weeks, months, years, decades, centuries, millennium. On this basis, I denote
Uoany one of these various units. In the following I select the year as this
objective unit.
3While a year is perfectly well defined for everyone, its duration is perceived
differently on an individual subjective level from person to another and at
different times in the same person’s life. To introduce an element common
that is common to all, but but specific to each individual, I consider an
individual’s lived experience in terms of their total number of years lived.
Thus, for a one-year-old child, a year will be their whole life, while for
a six-month-old infant, it is completely undefined, and for a hundred-year-
old adult, it is only one hundredth of their life. Thus, every individual can
define objectively a subjective unit of time by apprehending their full life as
a unitary whole in terms of the chosen objective unit of time.
Given Uo, I denote T0the associated origin of time counting, which is both
universal and independent of individuals. For years, this origin has been set
at different historical moments by each civilization and religion. Here, I use
the origin denoted the Common Era (CE).
Along this objective linear time scale associated with the pair ( Uo, T0),
the birth of a given individual is located at some year T1. Thus, at a time
T, the person has lived nyears where n=T−T1. For this given individual,
their subjective perception of the chosen objective unit, here the year, is thus
the quantity defined as,
Us1=1
T−T1Uo, (1)
where TandT1are measured in units of Uofrom the same origin T0. This
definition of Us1makes explicit its dependence on T, the moment when the
evaluation is made.
Therefore, the unit Us1varies from one individual to another via T1and
also for the same individual, during the objective passage of time via T.
From Eq.(1) we recover that for T=T1+ 1,Us1=Uoand for T=T1+ 10,
Us1= 0.1×Uo.
Moreover, it is interesting to note that for the entire period T1≤T <
T1+1,T=T1, which gives the surprising result of an infinite unit Us1→+∞.
This result means that during the passage of time preceding the accomplish-
ment of the first objective unit of time, the subjective unit is perceived as
infinite. During a child first year of life, their related perception of time is
infinity. It is the discretization of time [10], in terms of objective units, that
produces this effect of infinite time feeling.
4PastFutureT0T1TU0……Figure 1: Schematic representation of the linear objective time: T0is the
collective origin of time counting, T1the birthdate of a given person, Tthe
current time and Uoan objective unite of time.
3 Three subjective features of a subjective
perception of time
The objective definition of the subjective unit of time Us1implies that when
objective time passes, the related subjective unit decreases. For a given
person, the perception of the year is thus increasingly shorter as more objec-
tive years have been lived. This effect allows defining several characteristic
quantities of the global subjective perception of the passage of time for each
person.
3.1 Future horizon
The first characteristic quantity is the future horizon Hf1perceived by a
given person who projects into the future, evaluating the time remaining to
reach a specific deadline. To calculate the subjective evaluation of this time
I assume that at present time T, when an individual born at T1looks ahead
at the time horizon encompassing the next myears, they automatically add
5up all the related subjective years from this moment TtillT+m. At time
Tthe future horizon for the next myears thus writes,
Hf1=mX
t=11
T−T1+tUo, (2)
which can be rewritten as,
Hf1=hT−T1+mX
t=11
t−T−T1X
t=11
ti
Uo, (3)
which is the difference between two harmonic numbers HT−T1+mandHT−T1.
Using their respective asymptotic limits, I get,
Hf1= logT−T1+m
T−T1
Uo. (4)
From Eq.(4) the variation of Hf1as a function of mis found to be para-
doxical. Looking for instance at a case of a person born at T1= 2004 looking
at time T= 2024 at 10 years ahead, i.e., at time T= 2024, their objective
age is 20 years and their related perceived future horizon equals to,
Hf1={1
20+1
21+1
22+···+1
30}Uo (5)
={0.05 + 0 .048 + 0 .045···+ 0.033}Uo
≈0.4472Uo,
which is lower than one objective year. Fig.(2) shows the series of successive
single contributions from each additional future year. The first year objective
year is included to show the steep drop of the subsequent subjective years
with at twenty year old the perception of only 0 .05Uo. The inset in Fig.(2)
exhibits the drastically shortening of the subjective unit of time towards zero.
However, for the same person looking at the future without a specific
date, Eq.(5) becomes,
Hf1=h1
20+1
21+1
22+···+1
30+···+1
∞i
Uo, (6)
which includes an infinite number of years since they have no a priori reason
to set an upper limit on their life in terms of longevity. People do not include
a date for their own death.
6Uo1 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30HpHf
0.00.20.40.60.81.0Hf
U020212223242526272829300.000.010.020.030.040.05HfFigure 2: The series of successive single year contributions (in blue) for a
twenty years old person looking ten years ahead. The first year objective year
(in red) is included to show the steep shrinking of the subsequent subjective
years with at twenty year old the perception of only 0 .05Uo. The inset exhibits
the drastically shortening of the subjective unit of time towards zero.
Accordingly, although each new term1
T−T1+tadded becomes smaller and
smaller since ( T−T1+t) becomes larger and larger, the number of terms
added grows faster than1
T−T1+tdecreases. As a result, the associated future
horizon tends to infinity ( Hf1→+∞), despite having every additional sub-
jective year tending to zero. Indeed, this infinite sum of infinitely small terms
is itself infinite, I denote this limit as a “soft infinity.” The future horizon is
therefore limitless. It is not visible.
3.2 Past horizon
The second characteristic quantity is the symmetrical quantity of Hf1in
time. It is obtained when the individual turns to the past looking at their
horizon of the past Hp1. As with Hf1at the present time T, they add up all
their subjective years already lived since their birth T1, but now in reverse,
7Uo20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1Hp
0.00.20.40.60.81.0HpFigure 3: The series of single contributions from each past year without the
infinite first one. Contrary to the case of the future horizon, for the past
horizon, each term gets larger till one just before infinity.
i.e., backwards in time. And unlike the future, where there is no limit in
principle, for the past, there is one, the birth. The past horizon writes,
Hp1=T−T1X
t=01
T−T1−tUo, (7)
which gives for the individual born in 2004 at time T= 2024,
Hp1={1
20+1
19+1
18+···+1
1+1
0}Uo (8)
={0.05 + 0 .053 + 0 .056···+ 1 +∞}Uo
≈ { 3.598 +∞}Uo
Fig.(3) shows the series of single contributions from each l past year with-
out the infinite first one. Contrary to the case of the future horizon, for the
past horizon, each term gets larger till one just before infinity.
Although this time the number of terms in the sum is finite, the result is
still infinite with Hp1→+∞. But here, the infinity is of a different nature
8Uo1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 1920 22 24 26 28 30HpHf
0.00.20.40.60.81.0Hp,HfFigure 4: Both the past Horizon (in red) without the infinite initial term and
the future horizon (in blue) for a finite time projection at ten years ahead.
than for the future horizon. Indeed, it is only the last term of the sum1
0at
t=T1(birth) that corresponds to the first experimentation of the unit of
time, which creates the limit to infinity. I denote it a ”hard infinity.” Fig.(4)
includes both the past Horizon (without the infinite initial term) and the
future horizon for a finite time projection at ten years ahead.
3.3 The subjective speed of time
At this stage, I define at time Ta third characteristic quantity with a sub-
jective flow rate of time Vs1by noting that the objective unit Uocorresponds
to the subjective flow rate Uomultiplied by the subjective unit Us1, which
yields,
Uo=Vs1Us1, (9)
which gives using Eq.(1),
Vs1=n= (T−T1), (10)
9T-T 120 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 300246810Vs1Figure 5: The increase in speed with the passing years from age twenty till
age thirty. The slope is linear with the number of lived years as seen
where nis the number of objective units of time already experienced. The
increase is linear with the number of lived years as seen in Fig.(5).
In other words, the subjective speed of time is just the inverse of the
subjective unit. And thus, the more one has lived, the faster time passes (the
speed increases), while conversely the subjective duration of the subjective
unit becomes shorter.
Intuitively, this result can be understood saying that since the unit of
time is shortening, one must go faster to cover the same objective time dis-
tance. It is like with a car where the distance traveled would correspond to
objective time. The duration of the journey would represent subjective time.
Therefore, the shorter the latter, the greater the speed must be to cover the
same distance of objective time.
For the individual born in 2004, in 2024, their flow rate is 20 objective
years per subjective year. In other words, to experience the passage of one
objective year, this person must experience the passage of twenty related
subjective years, ie, to move over twenty objective years during the perception
of one subjective year.
103.4 Main preliminary findings
At this stage, my hypothesis of a subjective unit of time given by Eq.(1) has
led to the following three main consequences with respect to the subjective
perception of time:
1. The associated future horizon is imperceptible, with the sensation of
an endless life to be lived (soft infinity).
2. In parallel, the past horizon is not localized with the sensation of a
start from an infinite time ago (hard infinity).
3. With the passage of time, a narrowing of the subjective unit of time
produces a related acceleration of its flow. The older a person gets, the
faster they experience the passage of time.
In summary, the subjective perception of the passage of time by every
person would therefore be infinite, without neither a beginning nor an end,
and with a simultaneous increase of the speed of passage of time.
4 From birth to first ritual socialization
However, it is remarkable to note that all human societies have integrated a
series of additional “social births” in addition to the birth. These social births
are set via implementing social rituals like communion in most religions,
graduation during studies, military service in some countries, weddings, birth
of children, divorce.
The ritualized social events are always in small numbers and concentrated
mostly in the first thirty years of life. They shapes the lifetime of each
member of a collective community with a series of dates T2, T3, T4, . . ., which
punctuate the shape of the passage of time in everyone lifetime.
New counting clocks are thus “naturally” added to the T1initial birth
clock, which marked the beginning of counting of objective lived time units.
To incorporate these new clocks within the framework of the model, I consider
the introduction of the first significant event at a date T2. Then, I assume
that a second clock is created in addition and similarly to that of birth.
Applying the previous mechanism of constructing the subjective unit Us1
instead of Uo, I define a new subjective unit of time, which at time Twrites,
Us2=1
T−T2Us1, (11)
11or using Eq.(1),
Us2=1
(T−T1)(T−T2)Uo. (12)
As before, during the period T2≤T < T 2+ 1,T=T2, which recovers
the effect of a hard infinity with ( Us2→ ∞ ). Thus, the reward for the first
“socialization” through the ritual, for example, of marriage, is to recreate for
the individual the initial sensation of infinity felt during their first year of
existence just after birth. As a result, the individual is quite happy with the
initiation of a second clock, in addition to the first. The subsequent effect is
the creation of a sequential memory of different subjective times.
4.1 Past horizon
With respect to the past horizon, at time Ttwo different backward sums
have now to be considered. The first corresponds to the current unit Us2,
from t=Tback to t=T2, and the second, with the subjective unit Us1,
from t=T2back to t=T1. Thus,
Hp2=hTX
t=T21
(t−T1)(t−T2)+T2X
t=T11
t−T1i
Uo. (13)
The sum is doubly infinite due to the two terms at t=T1andt=T2.
The sensation of an infinite origin is thus preserved, but it becomes blurry
with the feeling that the origin is even further away due to the addition of
two different infinities.
For the case of the individual born in 2004, if married at T2= 2034, their
origin of the past at T= 2044 would be,
Hp2=h1
10×40+1
9×39+···+1
1×31+1
0×30(14)
+1
30+1
29+1
28+. . .1
1+1
0i
Uo,
= [0 .0025 + 0 .0028 + ···+ 0.032 +∞
+ 0.033 + 0 .035 + 0 .036 +···+ 1 +∞]Uo
= [3 .995 + 0 .088 + 2 ×+∞]Uo.
The outcome is thus similar to the case prior to the first ritual socializa-
tion as seen comparing with Eq.(8).
124.2 Future horizon
However, while the introduction of a second clock did not change qualitatively
the perception of past horizon, a qualitative change does occur for the future
horizon Hf1, which writes,
Hf2=mX
t=11
(T−T1+t)(T−T2+t)Uo. (15)
Noticing that although the sum is over an infinite series of decreasing
terms as before, now the successive terms vary as1
t2instead of1
t, which in
turn has a drastic impact on the limit when the horizon is set at infinity
(m→+∞).
Indeed, it happens that1
t2tends faster to zero than the number of added
terms, and thus the sum Hf2no longer diverges towards infinity as Hf1does.
The future horizon becomes bounded, i.e., its numerical value is finite. The
asymptotic difference appears clearly in the continuous version of the time.
In this case, the horizon is obtained using the integrals of the subjective units
1
t2and1
t, which yield respectively −1
tand log twhose limits are 0 and + ∞
fort→+∞.
This qualitative change in the perception of time implies that the future
horizon suddenly becomes visible. Projection in the “infinite” future is now
at a finite distance from the present. The first ritualized socialization turns
“eternal ”humans to “mortal” humans with respect to the perception of their
ending future.
Pushing the logic of reasoning, I could hypothesize that refusing any
ritual socialization would lead to a subjective eternal life. But at the same
time, what is a life outside of any collective socialization? May be this result
could be linked to autism. However, while this connexion deserves further
exploration it is beyond my expertise.
4.3 Time acceleration
The updated subjective unit of time being Us2instead of Us1the associated
subjective speed of the passage of time becomes,
Vs2= (T−T1)(T−T2). (16)
13After the ritual socialization, which has introduced a second subjective
clock, the passage of time gets busted to pass by more quickly as a function
ofT2instead of T.
5 The stacking of clocks
The first clock-like socialization has created the condition to live again the
feeling of eternity during the completion of the following year. However, the
associated cost has been an increase of the passage of time and a shrinking
of the subjective life expectancy.
Empowered by this paradoxical life experience, people have been adding
more social ritual to create additional clocks for the subjective passage of
time. I could formulate the process as If to die, might as well increase the
moments of eternity.
Accordingly, all organized human groups have built a series of rituals
which are quasi-mandatory to go through. The net result is a stacking of
several subjective clocks. The number Lof ritual socializations and the
associated clocks is a function of the various cultural communities and may
vary from one person to another within a given community.
Each new clock is set at a different time yielding a series of initial times
T2, T3. . . , T L, which results at a subjective unit of time written as,
UsL=1QL
i=1(t−Ti)Uo. (17)
where T1the birthdate.
The subjective unit of time is now a function of1
TL, i.e., with a conver-
gence to zero extremely rapid. The larger L, the more abrupt this fall in the
subjective duration.
As a consequence, the future horizon gets rather close with,
HsL=mX
t=11QL
i=1(T−Ti+t)Uo, (18)
a distance that becomes almost zero, creating the feeling that life is over.
In parallel, the past horizon keeps getting more blurry with the addition
14of several hard infinities as seen with,
HpL=hTX
t=TL1QL
i=1(T−Ti+t)+. . . (19)
+TX
t=T21
(t−T1)(t−T2)+T2X
t=T11
t−T1i
Uo.
Along the changes of subjective unit of time, future horizon and origin of
the past, the speed of the passage of time becomes,
VsL=LY
i=1(T−Ti), (20)
indicating a high value, which increase like TLwhere Lis the number of
clocks.
6 Damping the the proportionality effect
At this stage, the main consequences of the hypothesis of the inverse pro-
portionality of Eq. (1) have been obtained. The associated trends are qual-
itatively sound but may be quantitively inappropriate. In particular, the
magnitude of Usseems to shrink too fast with the increasing of the number
nof years lived.
While the decrease of Uswith respect to of Uois sound for the first tow or
three years, a damping may be in order to make the definition more realistic.
One possible path is to introduce a power law as,
Usa=1
(T−T1)a, (21)
with 0 < a < 1. The power law reduces substantially the decreasing of Us
with nas seen in Fig. (6). The value of the exponent acould be evaluated
via a fitting to relevant data. It could a feature, which is either universal,
i.e., the same for everyone or specific to each person.
To illustrate the damping effect, Fig. (7) shows the variations of Usafor
the first thirty years of existence of a person in the case a= 0.5, which means
a square root dependence. The inset shows the variation of of Usafora= 1.
150 20 40 60 80U00.20.40.60.81.0UsFigure 6: Variation of the subjective unit of time Usaas a function of
the number of past objective unite of time for the series of exponents
a= 1,0.5,04,0.3,0.2,0.1,0, with a= 1 (in red) for the lowest curve and
a= 0 for the upper horizontal curve (in dots).
The qualitative behavior of the future horizon, the past horizon and the
speed of time are preserved using a power law with only the quantitative
values being modified.
7 Conclusion
I have presented a stylized model, which, although very simple, is able to
yield a coherent approach to describe the subjective passage of time at an
individual level. Given an objective unit of time, my main hypothesis intro-
duces an actual mirror subjective unit of time as a function of the number
of associated objective units of time already experienced by a person. This
subjective unit of time varies as 1 /nwhere nis the number of objective units
the person has already experienced. Moreover, this definition of a dynamics
16T-T11 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 290.00.20.40.60.81.0Usa
T-T11 3 5 290.00.20.40.60.81.0UsaFigure 7: The variations of Usafor the first thirty years of existence of a
person in the case a= 0.5, which means a square root dependence. The
inset shows the variation of of Usafora= 1.
subjective unit of time allows to define a future horizon, the past horizon
and the speed of time, with quantitative formulas.
Following above construction, I reproduced the same mechanism intro-
ducing a first ritualized socialization, which adds a “second birth” and then
a second counting of the passage of time. The associated subjective unit of
time now varies as 1 /n2instead of 1 /n. Along this path, several additional
subjective clocks associated with more ritualized socializations, are stacked
to shape a subjective unit of time, which has a series of singularities.
The associated equations showed that the price for the first ritualized
socialization is to exit the subjective feeling of eternity in terms of a future
to be lived with the simultaneous reward of experiencing another moment
of infinity similar to the birth. The results recover common feelings about
the passage of time over a lifetime, with particular, the fact that time passes
more quickly when aging is obtained.
Noticing that the amplitudes of the subjective units of time sound too
17small, I rescaled the number of years a person has experienced using a power
law. The qualitative results are conserved with a simultaneous damping of
the shrinking of time. The value of the exponent could be determined using
some data about the actual feeling of the passage of time reported by people.
References
[1] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caesium standard
[2] A. Bejan, Why the Days Seem Shorter as We Get Older, European
Review 27, No. 2, 187-194 (2019)
[3] A. Bruno, I. Ayhan and A. Johnston, Changes in apparent duration
following shifts in perpetual timing, Journal of Vision, 15(6), 1-18 (2015)
[4] E. P¨ oppel, A hierarchical model of temporal perception,Trends in Cog-
nitive Sciences, 1(2), 56 (1997)
[5] J. Myerson, S. Hale, D. Wagstaff, L.W. Poon and G.A. Smith, The
information-loss model: A mathematical theory of age-related cognitive
slowing, Psychological Review, 97(4), 475-487 (1990)
[6] P. Fraisse, The Psychology of Time,New York, Harper and Row (1963)
[7] B. Gorman and A. Wessman, The Personal Experience of Time, New
York, Plenum (1977)
[8] H. E. Ornstein, On the Experience of Time, London Penguin (1968)
[9] S. Galam, Epilogue : jeu sp´ eculatif sur le temps, Avec le temps... Aspects
de la temporalit´ e en psychiatrie, 8` emes journ´ ees de Maison Blanche,
Paris-Maison Blanche Association, 211-222 (2002)
[10] R. Van Rullen and C. Koch, Is perception discrete or continuous? Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 7(5), 207-213 (2003)
18