Degeneracy-breaking and Long-lived Multimode Microwave Electromechanical Systems Enabled
by Cubic Silicon-Carbide Membrane Crystals
Yulong Liu,1, 2,∗Huanying Sun,1Qichun Liu,1Haihua Wu,1Mika A. Sillanp ¨a¨a,2and Tiefu Li3,†
1Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, China
2Department of Applied Physics, Aalto University, P .O. Box 15100, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland
3School of Integrated Circuits and Frontier Science Center for Quantum Information, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
(Dated: February 12, 2025)
Cubic silicon-carbide crystals (3C-SiC), known for their high thermal conductivity and in-plane stress, hold
significant promise for the development of high-quality ( Q) mechanical oscillators. We reveal degeneracy-
breaking phenomena in 3C-phase crystalline silicon-carbide membrane and present high- Qmechanical modes
in pairs or clusters. The 3C-SiC material demonstrates excellent microwave compatibility with superconduct-
ing circuits. Thus, we can establish a coherent electromechanical interface, enabling precise control over 21
high-Qmechanical modes from a single 3C-SiC square membrane. Benefiting from extremely high mechanical
frequency stability, this interface enables tunable light slowing with group delays extending up to an impres-
sive duration of an hour . Coherent energy transfer between distinct mechanical modes are also presented. In
this work, the studied 3C-SiC membrane crystal with their significant properties of multiple acoustic modes
and high-quality factors, provide unique opportunities for the encoding, storage, and transmission of quantum
information via bosonic phonon channels.
Introduction
Silicon carbide (SiC) is a compound semiconductor that man-
ifests in multiple polytypes, each characterized by distinct
crystal structures and stacking sequences of silicon (Si) and
carbon (C) atoms. The distinctive advantages offered by in-
dividual SiC crystal structures play a pivotal role in tailor-
ing SiC-based devices to specific applications and optimizing
their performance [1–3]. The hexagonal structure, such as 4H-
SiC and 6H-SiC, represents the most commercially available
high-quality SiC crystal form and has garnered widespread
attention in the field of quantum information processing due
to its potential for hosting quantum bits (qubits) [4–16]. In
contrast to hexagonal silicon carbide, cubic silicon carbide
(3C-SiC) possesses a zinc-blende crystal structure that closely
matches the lattice constant of silicon. Currently, 3C-SiC
can be grown directly on a silicon substrate using heteroepi-
taxy techniques [17]. This compatibility facilitates the in-
tegration of 3C-SiC with existing microfabrication and ma-
chining technologies on silicon substrates [18–20], which is
challenging to achieve with bulk substrates like 4H-SiC and
6H-SiC. In recent years, tensile-loaded thin-film mechanical
resonators have achieved significant attention due to their re-
markably high Q-factors [21–27]. Crystalline thin films, in
general, have a higher theoretical limit for holding tensile
stress compared to non-crystalline or amorphous thin mem-
branes [28, 29]. The stronger atomic bonding in 3C-SiC
contributes to its higher ultimate tensile strength (approach-
ing 18 GPa) compared to hexagonal polytypes [30]. On the
other hand, the heteroepitaxial growth techniques can also re-
sult in low gradient and high in-plane stress in 3C-SiC thin
films [31]. The magnitude of in-plane stress can be con-
trolled by adjusting the growth conditions including tempera-
ture, pressure, and growth rate [32–35]. With these significant
advantages, tensile-loaded 3C-SiC is emerging as the mate-
rial of choice for developing mechanical resonators with high
Q-factors [36]. It is important to note that, while 3C-SiChas a high theoretical upper limit of stress, the actual qual-
ity factors ( Q-factors) of mechanical oscillators made from
3C-SiC are often limited by various factors such as imperfec-
tions in the crystal structure [37]. To date, 3C-SiC mechani-
cal microresonator with doubly clamped string [38, 39], can-
tilever [40], trampoline [41], phononic crystal [42], and sus-
pended square membrane [43–45] structures have been devel-
oped and measured in experiment. For the crystalline SiC me-
chanical resonator, the experimentally achieved highest qual-
ity factor reaches around one million ( Q∼106) in high vac-
uum [39–41].
In the effort to push mechanical oscillators into the quan-
tum realm, the radiation-pressure interaction in laser optome-
chanical and microwave electromechanical systems plays a
crucial role in, e.g., precisely manipulating the macroscopic
quantum state of mechanical resonator [46–49], while also
providing a transducer interface for connecting phonons with
other quantum systems [50–52]. In pursuit of one of the long-
standing goals of fundamental tests of quantum mechanics,
such as macroscopic-scale Bell tests [53–55], quantum tele-
portation [56], and tests of quantum gravity [57–59], long-
lived mechanical oscillators with extremely low thermal de-
coherence and pure dephasing rates are highly desired [60].
These urgent needs also arise in the field of quantum infor-
mation processing, particularly in developing microwave-light
interfaces for quantum computation and communication [61–
68]. Strain engineering and dissipation dilution with tram-
poline [69–71], nested [72–75], and acoustic isolation struc-
tures [76–80] have been extensively explored in laser and
microwave optomechanical devices to mitigate extrinsic me-
chanical dissipation. While acoustic radiation into the sub-
strate has been significantly suppressed due to weak connect-
ing links to the substrate, this comes at the cost of reduced
thermal conductivity to the environment [81–84]. In addi-
tion, the carefully designed mechanical structure for dissi-
pative dilution poses significant challenges for the construc-arXiv:2401.01020v2  [quant-ph]  11 Feb 20252
p
a
Cm
Cr
Lr
write field τcohcapture
read fieldretrieval storageb
dec
dpump toneprobe tonec∆ = d c - 3D laser microscopeSiC-membrane
mechanical capacitor 
-1836 nm729 nminput  signal output signalAl-Nb parallel-plate 
with a vacuum-gap
c δ =  - p
δκ10 mmSiC 
membrane
bottom 
electrode
t1 t2 t3 t4SiC 
Al
Nb Mode (1,1)
SilIcon
Cw Cw
1 mm100 µm
silicon Nb SiCx-axis
xy
FIG. 1. The microwave cavity electromechanical interface device and pump-probe schemes used in experiments. a The superconducting
3D-cavity with a SiC-membrane-based mechanical capacitor chip inserted inside its strongest electric field concentration area, forming the
dispersive type electromechanical interface device. The zoomed-in area shows the detailed structure of the mechanical parallel-plate capacitor
formed by flipping a metalized SiC membrane on top of another bottom-electrode microwave antenna. With the geometric center of the bottom
electrode as the origin, a notch appears upward in the y-axis direction. The green arrow marks the core area of the mechanical capacitor, viz.,
the upper and lower parallel electrode plates and the vacuum interlayer. 3D laser microscope of the parallel plate electrode region indicates
the vacuum gap distance in capacitors. bA schematic illustrating the stacked arrangement of the different layers is presented, with a cut along
thex-axis. cThe effective lumped-element circuit model for our device, where the photon radiation force causes SiC-membrane’s mechanical
vibration which in turn introduces a tunable capacitor ( Cm) and changes the total cavity capacitance. dis the continuous wave pump-probe
scheme. Strong pump-tone (marked by red-arrow) is detuned by ωmfrom the cavity resonance frequency and weak probe-tone (marked by
purple-arrow) is scanning the dynamics of interest occurred over the cavity mode, which has a linewidth of κ.eshows the time sequence of
the pulsed pump-probe scheme which allows an on-demand writing, storage and reading of microwave pulses by using the long-lived phonons
as the core storage element.
tion of microwave cavity optomechanical devices [28, 85–
88]. The reduced thermal conductivity, combined with an in-
crease in two-level systems or defects, introduces additional
mechanical damping and further diminishes frequency stabil-
ity [89–92]. These factors present substantial obstacles for
engineered high- Qmechanical resonators in achieving lower
thermal decoherence and pure dephasing rates in optomechan-
ical devices [93]. Using single-crystal silicon oscillators as an
example, phonon bandgap engineering has significantly low-
ered the energy relaxation rate, achieving an energy quality
factor as high as 1010[28]. When these oscillators are com-
bined with optical or microwave resonant cavities, the phonon
lifetime remains high at 1.5 seconds. However, temperature-
dependent frequency jitter and residual two-level system de-fects reduce the final coherence time of the vibration mode
to the microsecond level, representing a decrease of over four
orders of magnitude [77, 93]. Therefore, developing mechan-
ical oscillators with both high thermal conductivity and high
quality factor is crucial, as this can enhance frequency stabil-
ity and increase coherence time. Recently, both theoretical
calculations from first principles [94] and experimental mea-
surements at the wafer-scale [95] have revealed that 3C-SiC
films exhibit isotropic high thermal conductivity at room tem-
perature, which is the second highest among types of crystals
and only surpassed by diamond [96]. In the field of quantum
information processing, controlling and dissipating heat gen-
erated by quantum devices are crucial for maintaining quan-
tum coherence [97].3
In this work, the high thermal conductivity of 3C-SiC me-
chanical resonators at low temperatures ensures effective ther-
malization to millikelvin levels, resulting in exceptional fre-
quency stability and extremely small pure-dephasing. We
highlight the distinctive non-uniform tensile stress found in
crystalline membranes and provide insights into the multiple
degeneracy-broken mechanical mode pairs and clusters. Fur-
thermore, we explore their potential as numerous high- Qand
long-lived phononic modes for quantum information process-
ing, particularly focusing on their extremely low pure dephas-
ing rates and high frequency stability in conjunction with su-
perconducting quantum circuits. Benefiting from extremely
high mechanical frequency stability, this electromechanical
interface enables tunable light slowing with group delays ex-
tending up to an impressive duration of an hour . While nu-
merous experimental protocols and theoretical studies have
aimed to enhance the group delay of light, our work achieves a
substantial improvement, offering several orders of magnitude
advancement over previous pioneering efforts [78, 90, 98–
104]. We systematically explore on-demand state storage and
energy transfer between degeneracy-broken high- Qmechani-
cal modes, achieving quality factors exceeding 108. Enabling
coherent electromechanical manipulation between long-lived
multiple mechanical resonators would be instrumental in ad-
vancing the development of phononic memories, repeaters,
and transducers for microwave quantum states.
Results
3C-SiC based microwave electromechanical system
As shown in Fig. 1 a, our cavity electromechanical device con-
sists of a three-dimensional (3D) superconducting microwave
resonator and a mechanical parallel-plate capacitor chip. The
3D microwave cavity is made from bulk aluminum (Al-6061)
with a rectangle recess ( 8×12×16mm). The panel at the
right of the device shows the detailed structure of the mechan-
ical capacitor which is constructed by flipping the metalized
3C-SiC membrane chip on top of another microwave coupling
chip with antenna electrodes on its front surface. The SiC
membranes are 50 nm thick grown on 400 µm thick, width
5×5 mm square silicon frames (with a low resistivity). The
measured X-ray diffraction pattern indicates that the grown
SiC thin-film is in 3C phase. The suspended membrane win-
dow is a square measuring 500 µm×500µm, with the back-
side silicon of the membrane removed through potassium hy-
droxide wet etching. The central region of the membrane
window was deposited by a 20-nm thick aluminum (Al) film
through an electron beam evaporator. The metalized electrode
on the suspended 3C-SiC membrane working as the upper
plate of the parallel-plate capacitor is circular with a diameter
of 200 µm. The lower plate chip is fabricated by sputtering a
thin layer of niobium (Nb) with a thickness of 120 nm on top
of a high-resistivity silicon substrate ( ⟨100⟩oriented) with a
thickness of 500 µm.
The zoomed-in subfigure in Fig. 1 a, right to the capacitor
chip, shows the core area of the mechanical capacitor. The
bottom electrode structure, in shape of the letter “H”, serves asthe lower plate of mechanical parallel-plate capacitor and also
functions as a microwave antenna, wireless connecting the
mechanical capacitor to the 3D microwave cavity resonator.
The center of the membrane is metallized, making the me-
chanical capacitance changes particularly sensitive to modes
with vertical displacement at the membrane’s center. Addi-
tionally, the presence of a notch in the upper half along the y-
axis of the bottom electrode facilitates the detection of higher-
order vibration modes, particularly those exhibiting vertical
displacement at the notch position. This will be discussed in
detail in the following sections. An optical microscope pho-
tographed the entire parallel plate electrode area through the
SiC membrane window. The green interference pattern in-
dicates the gap between the SiC membrane and the bottom
silicon substrate, while the purple interference pattern origi-
nates from interference of light inside the vacuum gap of the
capacitor. To get a more accurate value, we use a 3D laser mi-
croscope to measure the height difference between the top and
bottom electrodes. From the line-cut height profile (see Sup-
plementary Note 1), it can be inferred that the vacuum gap is
around 576 nm. The side view, cut along the x-axis, schematic
illustrates the stacked arrangement of the different layers, as
presented in Fig. 1 b.
The effective lumped-element circuit model of the device
is shown in Fig. 1 c, where the photon radiation pressure cou-
ples the microwave cavity field to the mechanical vibration
of the SiC-membrane through a position-dependent capacitor
with a capacitance of C m(ˆx). The variable mechanical capaci-
tance changes the cavity resonance frequency, forming disper-
sive type cavity optomechanical interaction. The interaction
Hamiltonian can be described as Hi
int/ℏ=gia†aˆxi. The cou-
pling parameter is gi=∂ωc/∂xi, and ˆxi=xi
zpf(bi+b†
i)is
the displacement operator for each distinct mechanical mode.
The mode shape identifier i= (k, l), with kandl∈N+,
refers to the number of humps (antinodes) in the xandydi-
rections of our square 3C-SiC membrane. Here, a†(a) and
b†
i(bi) are quantized bosonic creation (annihilation) operators
of microwave cavity field and the mechanical mode (k, l), re-
spectively. Here, ωcis the cavity mode angular resonance fre-
quency, xi
zpf=p
ℏ/(2miωim)is the root-mean-square ampli-
tude of each oscillator’s zero-point fluctuations, where miand
ωi
mrepresent the effective mass and the resonance frequency
of the corresponding mechanical mode (k, l). When consider-
ing photons in the microwave frequency domain, this system
is referred to as a cavity electromechanical system. Due to
the fact that these mechanical modes are well separated by
their resonant frequency, The pump and probe schemes for
each mechanical modes will not affect the other. Thus, in the
following, we do not specify the identifier ‘ i’ unless it is ab-
solutely necessary.
The Hamiltonian used to describe each mechanical mode
that is electromechanically coupled to the microwave cav-
ity field, thereby forming a standard cavity optomechanical
system in the microwave regime, is expressed as follows:
H/ℏ=ωca†a+ωmb†b+g0a†a 
b+b†
, where g0=gxzpf
is the vacuum optomechanical coupling strength. We add a4
continuous driving tone with frequency Ωcand amplitude ξto
enhance the effective radiative pressure interaction. As shown
in Fig. 1 d, the frequency of driving-tone is red-detuned to
the cavity mode resonant frequency ( ωc) by a mechanical fre-
quency ( ωm), i.e., ωd=ωc−ωm. Working in the rotating
frame at the pump-tone frequency, the linearized Hamiltonian
is described as
H/ℏ=ωm 
a†a+b†b
+G 
a†+a)(b+b†
. (1)
Here, G=g0√Ncis the linearized and driving-field en-
hanced coupling strength. Ncis the occupation number of
photons in cavity mode. Thus, the coupling rate Gcan be con-
tinuously tuned by controlling the power of external coherent
driving-tone [105].
Taking the cavity and mechanical decay rates into consid-
eration, the set of Heisenberg-Langevin equations of a mi-
crowave electromechanical device in the presence of a driving
tone are given as follows:
˙a= (i∆−κ/2)a−iG 
b+b†
+√κsξs, (2)
˙b=−(iωm+γm/2)b−iG 
a+a†
+√γmξm,(3)
where s={in,ex}. Here, κinandκexare the intrinsic and
external microwave coupling rate to their dissipative bath, κ
is the total microwave loss rate. The symbol γmrepresents the
total decay rate of the studied mechanical mode of the square
3C-SiC membrane. The variable ∆denotes the frequency de-
tuning between the driving pump tone and the resonant fre-
quency of the cavity mode, defined as ∆ =ωd−ωc. The corre-
sponding input noise operators satisfy the commutation rela-
tions⟨ξ†
in(t)ξin(0)⟩=Nth
cδ(t),⟨ξin(t)ξ†
in(0)⟩= (Nth
c+1)δ(t),
and⟨ξ†
o(t)ξo(0)⟩=Nth
oδ(t),⟨ξo(t)ξ†
o(0)⟩= (Nth
o+ 1)δ(t).
Nth
cis the cavity mode thermal bath occupation. Subscripts
o={ex,m}represent the entering noise from cavity mode
external pump phase noise Nth
ex, and mechanical thermal bath
occupation Nth
m, respectively. From the input-output theory,
the output field can be expressed as aout=ξex−√κexa. Based
on the Wiener-Khinchin theorem, we can now calculate the
symmetrized noise power spectrum density (PSD) of the out-
put microwave field [106]. Taking the Fourier transformation
of the time derivative equations of Eqs. (2)-(3), and using the
commutation relations of noise operators in the frequency do-
main, the PSD of output mode S[ω]can be expressed as
S[ω] =1
2D
a†
out[−ω]aout[ω] +aout[−ω]a†
out[ω]E
.(4)
The optical-damping rate induced by the microwave drive
dynamical backaction is γopt= 4G2/κ. In our experiment,
the device always works in the weak optomechanical cou-
pling regime ( G≪κ). When applying the maximum side-
band pump power, the optomechanical damping rate will not
exceed one percent of the microwave cavity linewidth (viz.,
γopt≪κ). Under the aforementioned conditions, the PSD of
the output cavity field is ultimately expressed as [107]
S[ω] =nadd+4κexκNth
c
κ2+ 4˜δ2+4ηγoptγtot 
Nth
m−2Nth
c
γ2
tot+ 4˜δ2,(5)where ˜δ=ω−ωm, and η=κex/κ. The total mechanical
damping rate is defined as γtot=γm+γopt.
During the microwave measurement, the added noise, nadd,
mostly coming from the HEMT amplifiers and to a small ex-
tent from vacuum noise, creates the background noise floor
of the measured PSD. The effective microwave thermal oc-
cupation Nth
cmay come from the thermal effects caused by
defects in bulk superconducting cavities. These defects or im-
purities can induce thermal effects through ways of increas-
ing surface resistance, causing localized heating, or promoting
quasiparticle generations. Nth
mis the effective thermal occupa-
tion of mechanical mode and transfers into the microwave out-
put field via the electromechanical coupling. The second term
in Eqs. (5) indicates that cavity thermal noise spectrum is a
Lorentzian type with a linewidth of κ. The last term in Eqs. (5)
indicates that the damped mechanical mode is featured as a
Lorentzian spectrum with a total linewidth of γtot. The full-
noise PSD contains two Lorentzian peaks, where the mechan-
ical sidebands are superimposed on the Lorentzian peak of the
cavity thermal emission.
When measuring the PSD spectrum, we select a driving
power that allows the optomechanical damping and cavity
thermal occupation to be negligible, i.e., γopt≪γm, and
Nth
c≃0. Under such conditions, the expression of the PSD
spectrum reduces into a standard Lorentzian function
˜S[ω] =nadd+Gγm/2
(γm/2)2+ (ω−ωm)2, (6)
where G= 2ηγoptNth
m.
In the following sections, we will first employ the Power
Spectral Density (PSD) method to identify all the mechani-
cal modes detectable by the microwave cavity. We will par-
ticularly focus on how the breaking of degeneracy generates
multiple detectable high- Qmode pairs in the square 3C-SiC
membrane. Additionally, we will conduct ringdown measure-
ments for each distinct mechanical mode. The PSD provides
the total decay rate, while the ringdown measurements yield
the energy decay rate. By comparing the decay rates obtained
from these two measurement techniques, we will demonstrate
the exceptional performance of the square 3C-SiC membrane
as a high- Qmechanical resonator,particularly emphasizing its
extremely low pure dephasing at low temperatures.
To leverage its outstanding frequency stability, we will em-
ploy a continuous pump-probe scheme, as shown in Fig. 1 d,
to demonstrate a new record in the passive storage of classi-
cal microwave signals. Furthermore, the pulsed pump-probe
sequences depicted in Fig. 1 ewill enable on-demand ground-
state cooling, writing, storage, and reading of microwave co-
herent states based on the long-lived phononic modes of the
3C-SiC membrane. Finally, we will also demonstrate coher-
ent energy transfer between distinct mechanical modes.
Degeneracy-breaking and multiple high- Qmechanical
mode-pairs of a square 3C-SiC membrane
The device is mounted on a suspended oxygen-free copper5
a
b
c
d
(1,1)
(1,3) (3,1)(3,3)
(1,5) (5,1) (3,5) (5,3)
(1,6)(3,6)(1,7) (7,1)(5,5)
(3,7) (7,3)
(5,4)(1,8)(5,6)
(1,4) (3,4)
FIG. 2. The microwave and optical readout of multiple mechanical modes from a single square 3C-SiC crystalline membrane. a The
microwave power spectral density (PSD) readout of mechanical modes and the corresponding mode numbers ( k,l) are labeled around each
peak of the measured mechanical modes. The finite element method (FEM) simulations with non-uniform tensile stress for mode (1,1), (3,3)
and (5,5) are presented. A notch structure extends upward along the y-axis of the bottom electrode. bThe corresponding Q-factors for
each mechanical mode in a dilution refrigerator. The Q-factors are obtained through the stroboscopic ringdown measurements. Twenty-first
mechanical modes can be measured based on their independent optomechanical interaction with the same cavity field. cThe mechanical modes
from the same crystalline 3C-SiC square membrane are detected with a laser Doppler vibrometer at room temperature and corresponding Q-
factors are present in d. The laser spot is focused near the center of the square membrane.
plate, which is connected to the mixing chamber of a dry di-
lution refrigerator (with a minimum operating temperature of
8.9 mK) via copper braids. Without a mechanical isolation
system, the mechanical modes cannot be thermalized below
500 mK. We provide a detailed discussion of the mechanical
isolation techniques in Supplementary Note 2. The sheet re-
sistance of the grown 3C-SiC, measured at room temperature,
is approximately 1 Ω·cm. It is essential to verify the com-
patibility of this low-resistance 3C-SiC semiconductor mate-rial with microwave radio frequency circuits, particularly re-
garding whether this material will introduce significant dis-
sipation to the superconducting cavity mode. As shown in
Fig. 1 c, the probe field can be used to detect the cavity re-
sponses under different external pump powers. In the low
pump power regime (e.g., P=−30dBm), the measured
intrinsic and external decay rates are κin/2π= 80 kHz and
κex/2π= 120.25 kHz, respectively. Under strong pump power
(e.g., P= 20 dBm), the cavity total linewidth decreases to6
κ/2π= 160 kHz. The frequency of the resonant cavity
is quite stable. As the number of photons in the cavity in-
creases, the resonant frequency changes only around 3 kHz.
The cavity S21measurements indicate that our 3C-SiC mem-
brane is well-compatible with superconducting resonators for
microwave applications.
We now read out these mechanical modes through elec-
tromechanical interactions by applying a weak continuous mi-
crowave pump tone to the cavity field via the SMA-type (de-
picted in Fig. 1 a) input port of the 3D microwave resonator.
The driving frequency is red-detuned to the cavity resonance
by each mechanical resonance frequency, i.e., ∆ =−ωi
m. The
beam-splitter-like interaction terms Hi
int/ℏ=Gi(a†bi+b†
ia)
indicate that the voltage signal of output microwave field con-
tains information such as the mechanical resonance frequency
and cavity-field dressed mechanical linewidth.
Fig. 2 ashows the measured power spectrum density (PSD)
of the output microwave field in a wide frequency range (up
to 2.37 MHz). For this device, 21 mechanical modes cou-
pled to the cavity field have been measured. The Q-factors
for each mechanical mode are measured through stroboscopic
ringdown technology (see Supplementary Note 3) and are pre-
sented in Fig. 2 b. Remarkably, 19 of the 21 detected mechan-
ical modes have quality factors exceeding 108.
As shown in Fig. 1 band Fig. 1 c, our studied electrome-
chanical device is particularly sensitive to those mechanical
modes that exhibit a central vertical displacement. For a
square membrane, when the mode numbers kandjare equal
and both are odd, the mode shapes of these special modes con-
sistently display a central vertical displacement, making them
relatively easier to read out electromechanically. The finite
element method (FEM) solutions in COMSOL for the mode
shapes of the detected modes, such as (1,1), (3,3), and (5,5),
are presented around each measured mode peak in Fig. 2 a.
The fundamental drumhead (1,1) mode has a resonant fre-
quency of ω(1,1)
m/2π=382.15 kHz and a Q-factor of Q(1,1)=
5.76×107. The modes (3,3) and (5,5) have frequencies and
Q-factors of ω(3,3)
m/2π= 1.17MHz with Q(3,3)= 2×108,
andω(5,5)
m/2π= 1.96MHz with Q(5,5)= 3.5×108, respec-
tively.
The fundamental mode is followed by a pair of nearly res-
onant mechanical modes with mode numbers (1,3) and (3,1),
having quality factors of 1.4×108and1.8×108, respectively.
Additionally, we identify another set of four nearly resonant
mode pairs with higher mode numbers: (1,5) and (5,1), (3,5)
and (5,3), (1,7) and (7,1), as well as (3,7) and (7,3). Other
detected mechanical modes of the square 3C-SiC membrane
include (1,4), (3,4), (1,6), (5,4), (3,6), (5,6), and (1,8). In con-
clusion, these electromechanically readable distinct modes or
mode pairs share a common characteristic: the mode number
kmust be an odd number.
Next, we focus on the physical mechanism of electrome-
chanical reading of the near-resonant mode pairs in this square
3C-SiC membrane, specifically the pairs (k, l)and(l, k)as
demonstrated in Fig. 2 a, where both kandlare unequal oddnumbers. Considering a square membrane with uniform bi-
axial tensile stress, e.g., widely studied amorphous silicon-
nitride (SiN) [108–113], the natural vibration frequencies of a
square film in the stress-governed regime (membrane) in vac-
uum are given by
ω(k,l)
m/2π=1
2Lrσ
ρ(k2+l2), (7)
with the result that ω(k,l)
m=ω(l,k)
m. Here, σis the biaxial ten-
sile stress and ρis the density of the material. Equation (7)
indicates that when k̸=l, the modes (k, l)and(l, k)ex-
hibit two different mode shapes, Ψ(k,l)andΨ(l,k), but have
exactly the same frequency, which is referred to as degener-
ate modes. Since the frequencies are indistinguishable, if the
square membrane is excited at this frequency, both of these
degenerate modes will oscillate simultaneously. The overall
vibration response of the square membrane will be a combi-
nation of all the degenerate mode shapes, represented as super
modes: Ψ±
kl=aΨ(k,l)±bΨ(l,k), where a2+b2= 1. Clearly,
the formed super modes share the same frequency as the orig-
inal degenerate modes and remain degenerate.
The finite element method (FEM) simulations for the super
modes Ψ±
klare illustrated in the first row of Figure 3 a. Ad-
ditionally, the mode shapes of the original degenerate modes
Ψ(k,l)andΨ(l,k)resemble the patterns shown in the second
row of Figure 3 a. When the modes (k, l)and(l, k)are degen-
erate, their mode shapes will be symmetric, rotated by 90◦.
Interestingly, both these mode shapes feature a central verti-
cal up-and-down vibrational displacement. The superposition
of mode shapes Ψ(k,l)andΨ(l,k)can result in two situations:
constructive interference [ Ψ+
kl= (Ψ (k,l)+ Ψ (l,k))/√
2] and
destructive interference [ Ψ−
kl= (Ψ (k,l)−Ψ(l,k))/√
2] of the
vibration displacements. Constructive interference results in
an enhancement of the central vertical displacement, whereas
destructive interference leads to a reduction, ultimately elimi-
nating the central vertical displacement. In conclusion, for un-
equal odd kandl, only the constructive superposition Ψ+
klre-
tains a central vertical displacement, which can modulate the
mechanical capacitance and be read out through microwave
cavity electromechanical interaction in this work. It is impor-
tant to emphasize that the above conclusion applies specifi-
cally under the condition of uniform tensile stress on a square
membrane, where σx=σy.
However, a significant difference between the above the-
oretical analysis and our experiment is that, we detect near-
resonance mode-pairs (indicated by red-colored mode num-
bers in Fig. 2 a) instead of a single super mode Ψ+
klresult-
ing from constructive superposition. For a square membrane
resonator, when the tensile stress becomes non-uniform (i.e.,
σx̸=σy), the super modes Ψ±
klwill be broken and reduce to
near-resonance (k, l)and(l, k)mode-pairs with distinct mode
shapes Ψ(k,l)andΨ(l,k), respectively. In later sections, this
phenomenon is referred to as “ dedegenerate ”. The second row
of Fig. 3 ashows the FEM simulations of the mode shapes for
the dedegenerate (k, l)and(l, k)mode pairs with σx̸=σy.7
a
b
(1,3) (3,1)(1,5) (5,1) (3,5) (5,3) (1,7) (7,1)
 (3,7) (7,3)
Super
mode:
(1,3)+(3,1)
 (1,5)+(5,1) (1,5)-(5,1)
 (3,5)-(5,3) (3,5)+(5,3)
 (1,7)+(7,1) (1,7)-(7,1)
 (3,7)+(7,3) (3,7)-(7,3)
(1,4)
 (4,1)(3,4)
 (4,3)
 (1,6) (6,1)
 (3,6) (6,3)
 (5,6) (6,5)
(1,4)-(4,1)
 (1,4)+(4,1)
 (3,4)-(4,3)
 (3,4)+(4,3)
 (1,6)-(6,1) (1,6)+(6,1)
 (3,6)+(6,3) (3,6)-(6,3)
 (5,6)-(6,5) (5,6)+(6,5)
degenerate
     modedegenerate    brokendegenerate    modedegenerate    brokenDedegenerate modes (k,l) and (l,k):
   
SilIcon
SiC 
Al
Nb 
SilIconmode (1,4)cut along 
  y-axis
   
SilIconSiC 
Al
Nb 
SilIconmode (4,1) cut along   x-axis c d  Readable Unreadable× Dedegenerate modes (k,l) and (l,k):(1,3)-(3,1)
Super
mode:
σx ≠ σy σx ≡ σy σx ≡ σy σx ≠ σy 
FIG. 3. The mode shapes and effective mechanical capacitance for a square membrane in the stress governed regime. The first (second)
row in ashows the ( k,l) mode shapes with uniform (nonuniform) biaxial tensile stress σx≡σy(σx̸=σy). The mode number kandl
presented in aare both odd number. bpresents the mode shapes for mechanical ( k,l) modes with odd mode number kand even number l.
Similarly to a, the first and second rows correspond to uniform and nonuniform biaxial tensile stress cases, respectively. For odd kand even l,
canddschematically illustrate how the vertical mechanical oscillations of the degenerate-broken ( k,l) and ( l,k) modes induce changes in the
corresponding mechanical capacitance, using k= 1andl= 4as an example.
Remarkably, both dedegenerate mode pairs are characterized
by central vertical displacement, which can induce changes in
mechanical capacitance. Thus, the degeneracy-breaking pro-
cess allows the cavity to electromechanically read out both
mechanical modes within the near-resonance mode pair. This
represents a significant difference compared to a membrane
with uniform biaxial stress, where only the constructive su-
permodes can be electromechanically read out.
It is worth noting that even if the stress distribution of a
thin membrane, such as a well-studied SiN membrane [114–
117], is uniform at room temperature, stress redistribution and
non-uniformity may occur during the cooling process of the
refrigerator due to chip deformation. However, the stress dis-
tortion caused by this deformation often significantly reduces
the quality factor of the mechanical modes. In our experi-
ment, all detected mode pairs exhibit high- Qbehavior, with a
quality factor Qexceeding 108. To further rule out this pos-sibility, Fig. 2 candddisplay the measured mechanical reso-
nance and the corresponding Q-factors at room temperature,
obtained using a laser Doppler vibrometer with the laser spot
focused near the center of the square membrane. The mea-
surement setup and laser PSD result of each detected mechan-
ical modes are presented in Supplementary Note 4. Due to the
fact that the laser spot cannot be exactly located at the cen-
ter of the square membrane, the method using a Doppler vi-
brometer can detect more mechanical modes than the method
using microwave cavity optomechanical interaction. We can
still observe near-resonance mechanical modes at room tem-
perature that correspond to the results detected at 10 mK, as
presented in Fig. 2 aandb. It is evident that the mechanical
modes (k, l)and(l, k)are originally non-degenerate, and that
the 3C-SiC membrane initially exhibits non-uniform biaxial
tensile stress from room temperature. Additionally, Figure 2
illustrates that the Qvalues of all mechanical modes improve8
by three orders of magnitude as the environmental temper-
ature decreases from room temperature to approximately 10
mK.
The biaxial tensile stresses used in the COMSOL simu-
lation shown in Figure 3 are σx= 242 MPa, and σy=
240MPa, respectively. The simulated frequencies show good
agreement with the frequencies measured by the laser Doppler
vibrometer. The finite element analysis also indicates that
the dedegenerate initiates when difference in biaxial tensile
stresses exceeds 0.1 Mpa. Once the stress difference reaches
1 Mpa, the dedegenerate mechanical modes ( k,l) and ( l,k) ex-
hibits completely distinct mode shapes. In the special case
where the odd mode number kequals l, it is evident that, de-
spite the biaxial tensile stress not being uniform, only a single
mode exists, with no degenerate modes.
As discussed in previous sections, the central area of 3C-
SiC square membrane is metallized (as shown in Fig. 1 a),
making the change in mechanical capacitance particularly
sensitive to mechanical modes with central drumhead shapes.
However, we emphasize that the notch structure along the
y-axis in the bottom electrode (see inset of Fig. 2a for the
detail) of the mechanical capacitor enables the detection of
higher-order mechanical modes, particularly those exhibiting
significant vertical displacement around the notch area. We
thus move to demonstrate how the degenerance-breaking af-
fect the cavity electromechanical readout of the mechanical
modes with one of the mode number korlis even and the
other is odd. In Fig. 3 b, the first row illustrates the mode
shapes under uniform tensile stresses, where the mode shape
of degenerate-superposition generated super modes Ψ±
klex-
hibit a 90◦rotational symmetry. Notably, although the bottom
antenna electrode contains a notch structure, the simultane-
ous presence of peaks and dips around the central metallized
region of the square 3C-SiC membrane cancels each other
out, resulting in nearly unchanged mechanical capacitances.
Therefore, when one of the mode numbers korlis even and
the other is odd, all these degenerate supermodes cannot be
read out electromechanically through the cavity field.
Remarkably, the breaking of rotational symmetry combin-
ing with the asymmetric notch design of the capacitor bot-
tom electrode, enables the selective readout from mechani-
cal modes ( k,l) and ( l,k). As shown in Fig. 2 a, dedegenerate
modes include (1,4), (3,4), (1,6), (5,4), (3,6), (5,6), and (1,8)
are read out with Q-factors over 108. For odd kand even l,
the FEM simulation and the mode shapes for mode pair ( k,l)
and (l,k) under non-uniform biaxial tensile stress are shown
in the second row of Fig. 3 b. Owing to the notch that ex-
tends upward along the y-axis of the bottom electrode, only
the(k, l)modes from the dedegenerate mode pair, defined by
oddkand even lmode number, exhibit significant variations
in mechanical capacitance, thereby facilitating their detection
by the microwave cavity. Here the positive integer lshould be
greater than 2 because, for the (1,2) mode, the area with the
largest amplitude is not covered by the metallized aluminum
electrode. In contrast, the (l, k)modes do not induce signifi-
cant capacitance changes and therefore cannot be detected.Using k= 1 andl= 4 as an example, for mode (1,4),
the standing wave nodes are distributed along the ydirection,
which is why the schematic diagram in Fig. 3 cemploys a
cross-sectional view along the yaxis. The mode vertical dis-
placement combing the bottom antenna notch introduce the
mechanical capacitance changes. In contrast, for the (4,1)
mode, the standing wave nodes are distributed along the xdi-
rection, necessitating a cross-sectional view along the xaxis
in the schematic diagram as shown in Fig. 3 d. However, the
capacitance changes resulting from the vertical displacement
cancel each other out, rendering the (4,1)mode undetectable
by the microwave cavity. In the final scenario, when both
mode numbers are even, despite the occurrence of degeneracy
breaking, the detectability of these modes is constrained by
negligible capacitance changes, rendering them undetectable.
Multiple degeneracy-broken mechanical modes with ex-
tremely low pure dephasing
The strength of optomechanical interactions in a microwave
cavity electromechanical system can be quantified by the vac-
uum coupling rate g0. For the detected 21 mechanical modes,
the vacuum coupling rate for each mode are presented in
Fig. 4 a. Finite element modeling and a comparison between
the simulation of g0and the measurement results are presented
in Supplementary Note 5.
Although the fundamental (1,1) mode exhibits the strongest
g0, itsQ-factor is only 5.7×107, which is the minimum
among all the detected modes. Considering both the mechan-
icalQvalue and the resolved-sideband condition, our subse-
quent studies will focus on the mechanical mode (1,3) high-
lighted in red in Fig. 4 a. Meanwhile, the inset in Fig. 4 a
shows how the vertical displacement of mode (1,3) changes
the mechanical vacuum-gap capacitance, with a cut along the
y-axis. This mode has a resonance frequency of ωm/2π=
871.318kHz and a remarkable Q-factor of 1.18×108.
Using Eq. (6) to fit the measured PSD yields the mechanical
decay rate for each mechanical mode. As an example, Fig. 4 b
shows the measured PSD spectrum of mechanical mode (1,3),
and the fitted energy decay rate is of γm/2π= 8.2 mHz. Simul-
taneously applying driving and probe tone with a frequency
difference by ωmcan effectively excite the mechanical motion.
After the driving tone is abruptly turned off, the ring-down
trace of the fundamental drumhead mode is shown in Fig. 4 c.
Using exponential fitting, we obtain the energy decay of the
mechanical resonator with a rate of γm/2π= 8.13mHz,
which agrees well with the value obtained from the PSD mea-
surement in Fig. 4 b. In addition to the energy decay rate and
lifetime, pure dephasing rate is also an important parameter to
be considered.
Although the energy spectrum tests and the time-domain
ringdown tests suggest that pure dephasing is a very small ef-
fect, we will record the ringdown data for an extended du-
ration using I/Q sampling [108]. By directly comparing the
linewidth of the energy spectrum obtained after FFT trans-
formation with the energy relaxation rate derived from direct9
a b
c d   
SilIcon
SiC 
Al
Nby-axisMode (1 ,3)
SilIcon
FIG. 4. Electromechanical coupling strengthes and Q-values as a function of refrigerator temperature sweep. a The single-photon cou-
pling strength between each mechanical mode to the common microwave cavity field. The inset in aillustrates how the vertical displacement
of mode (1,3) affects the mechanical vacuum-gap capacitance, with a cut along the y-axis. bThe PSD of the mechanical mode (1,3) obtained
from the IQ measurement with a 1000 seconds sampling time. cThe mechanical energy ring-down shows a decay rate of γm/2π= 8.13mHz.
The measured mechanical resonant frequency is ωm/2π= 875 .318kHz and the spectrum linewidth via fit is obtained as γm/2π= 8.2mHz,
corresponding to a quality-factor of Q= 1.18×108.dThe linewidth and Q-value of the mechanical mode with the strongest coupling to the
microwave cavity (marked by blue-dot in a) evolve with the refrigerator’s operating temperature.
fitting (see Supplementary Note 6), we can accurately deter-
mine the magnitude of pure dephasing, which is measured at
γφ= 0.28mHz. These results indicate that dephasing does
not significantly contribute to decoherence in the SiC square
membrane resonators.
Recalling the measurements made by the Doppler vibrom-
eter at room temperature, the Qfactor for mode (1,3) was
only 2.6 ×104. This performance underwent an impressive
improvement of almost four orders of magnitude when op-
erating at a low temperature around 10 mK. To investigate
how the decrease in temperature affects the evolution of the Q-
factors, a temperature sweep experiment was conducted. The
measured Q-factors of mode (1,3) as a function of the dilu-
tion refrigerator operating temperature are depicted in Fig. 4 d.
The linewidth ( Q-factor) of the mechanical oscillator contin-
ues to decrease (increases) as the operating temperature de-creases, showing a linear dependence. For every 10 mK in-
crease in temperature, the linewidth increases by 2.66 mHz.
Furthermore, the frequency of the mechanical oscillator re-
mains highly stable across the tested temperature range of 10
mK to 190 mK, exhibiting a variation of less than 1 mHz over
a duration of one day.
For instance, the focused study on the mechanical mode
(1,3)of the 3C-SiC square membrane reveals an energy decay
time of of approximately T1= 19.9 seconds, a total linewidth
ofγm/2π= 8.2 mHz, and particular with an extremely low
pure dephasing rate of of γφ= 0.28 mHz. Table 1 summa-
rizes the pure dephasing of all detected mechanical modes and
their proportion in the total linewidth. These initial character-
izations enable us to conclude that the degeneracy-breaking
3C-SiC membrane supports multiple mechanical modes with
exceptional performance, particularly characterized by ex-10
tremely low pure dephasing. Motivated by this enhanced me-
chanical frequency stability, we proceed to demonstrate its po-
tential application as a classical microwave memory device.
Hour-level group-delay and slow-light with extremely sta-
ble mechanical modes
The pure dephasing of the studied 3C-SiC square membrane
is measured at only 0.28 millihertz, constituting just 3.5% of
the total linewidth. In comparison, the pure dephasing value
for silicon nitride (SiN), which has made significant advance-
ments in improving quality factors, accounts for over 25% of
the total linewidth [21, 22, 90, 92, 108]. This results in at
least an 86% reduction in frequency instability for the 3C-
SiC resonator compared to SiN resonators. Consequently, our
3C-SiC resonator exhibits remarkable frequency stability, as
demonstrated by a frequency shift of less than 1 millihertz per
day. The narrow linewidth of SiN mechanical resonators have
resulted in a reported maximum group delay on the order of
hundreds of seconds [118]. In this context, the limitation for
high- Qmechanical resonators is often frequency instability.
In the following section, we will demonstrate how the signif-
icantly improved frequency stability of the focused 3C-SiC
square membrane in this work can contribute to setting a new
record in the passive storage of propagating microwave sig-
nals.
We now demonstrate the transmission response of a weak
probe-tone with frequency ωpand amplitude ε, also well
known as the continuous field pump-probe experiment. The
scheme has been depicted in Fig. 1 d, where the pump-tone
is red-detuned to cavity resonance frequency by ∆ =−ωm.
The weak probe-tone is scanned by continuously changing
frequency, and the dynamics of interest occur when the probe
frequency enters in the microwave cavity resonance regime.
Working in the rotating frame at the pump-tone frequency ωd,
and considering the input-output relations, the transmission
coefficient is given as
t= 1 +ηκ(iδ−γm/2)
(iδ−γm/2) (iδ−κ/2) +G2. (8)
The amplitude and phase responses can be calculated with the
relations T=|t|2, and φ= arg ( t), respectively. The group
delay (slow-light time τ) is obtained from the slope of phase-
response, i.e., τ=∂φ/∂ω p=∂φ/∂δ . The transmission
coefficient at zero-detuning ( δ= 0) is given as
Tz=4G2−(2η−1)κγm
4G2+κγm2
, (9)
from which we find that the prerequisite for coherent per-
fect absorption (i.e., Tz= 0 ) isη > 1/2, viz., ex-
ternal overcoupling κex> κ in. For our device, the ex-
ternal coupling coefficient is determined to be η= 0.6.
Fig. 5 ashows the probe-tone S21transmission response un-
der a set of electromechanical couplings strengths G/2π=
[10.46,15.85,19.2,961.07]Hz, respectively. Under a weak
coupling strength (e.g., G/2π= 10 .46Hz), the probe-tonetransmission spectrum initially shows an additional absorp-
tion dip which is more than 30 dB lower than cavity S21
background base-line. With coupling rate Gincreasing, the
absorption dip starts to rise until it reaches the background of
the microwave cavity S21curve, and finally, a transparency
window appears.
The observed electromechanical-induced-absorption
(EMIA) and -transparency (EMIT) phenomena can be under-
stood as a result of constructive and destructive interference
between two different pathway transitions [99, 118–128].
When probe-tone frequency arrives at cavity resonance,
a beating (at a mechanical resonance frequency) between
pump- and probe-tones coherently excites the mechanical
oscillations. Based on the electromechanical coupling,
the pump-tone creates a Stokes sideband by absorbing the
mechanical excitations. Concurrently, the accompanying
anti-Stokes process is substantially suppressed as it is ener-
getically situated below the cutoff frequency of microwave
cavity. Additionally, the amplitude of this Stokes sideband
depends on the coupling strength, which can be used to
control the evolution from EMIA to EMIT.
We now focus on the interference between the photons of
the Stokes sideband and probe-tone inside the microwave cav-
ity. When electromechanical coupling rate equals the crit-
ical coupling strength Gc=p
(2η−1)κγm/4, all created
Stokes sideband photons constructively interfere with input
probe-tone photons inside the microwave cavity (correspond-
ing to destructive interference outside the cavity), leading to
a coherent perfect absorption of transmitted probe-tone (e.g.,
as shown in the first row of Fig. 5 a). Above critical cou-
pling ( G > G c), the number of converted Stokes-sideband
photons now is more than the number of probe-tone pho-
tons. Therefore, only part of the converted Stokes-sideband
photons constructively interfered with the probe-tone photons
(absorbing them). The remaining Stokes-sideband photons
are recorded and the bottom of the absorption dip starts to
rise (e.g., as shown in the second and third row of Fig. 5 aand
b). While further increasing the electromechanical coupling,
the converted Stokes-sideband photons are strong enough to
increase the transmission beyond the bare microwave cavity
background, as shown in the fourth row of Fig. 5 a. As a re-
sult, an electromechanically-induced transmission window is
observed.
The measured group delays (slow-light time τ) as a func-
tion of electromechanical coupling rate are shown in Fig. 5 b.
With increasing the electromechanical coupling rate G, group
delay shows a decreasing trend. We noticed that the rate of
group delay decrement changes dramatically when the cou-
pling strength Gis in the range where EMIA occurs. How-
ever, when Genters the range where EMIT occurs, the rate
of group delay decrement remains unchanged. Under the
condition of critical coupling G=Gc, coherent perfect ab-
sorption occurs ( Tz= 0), and at the same time, a singular
point appears in the group delay with infinity slow-light or
fast time [118]. Across the critical coupling strength Gc, there
is an abrupt transition from infinite group advance to delay.11
b
ca
EMIA
regimeEMIT
regime
FIG. 5. Continuous-wave Pump-probe experiment and ultralong group-delay and slow-light. a TheS21transmission spectrum as a
function of probe-field frequency detuning δ=ωp−ωc. Red circles are experimental data and the black-solid curves are the fitting curves.
bshows the delay time for a set of driving-tone powers. The red-solid circles represent the experimental data and the blue curve is the theory
curve calculated from parameters fitting from a. Here, “dBm” is an arbitrary unit and refers to the generator power. The dashed circles which
are colored according to the minor panels in a, and c, respectively. The use of blue and beige background colors in bsignifies EMIA and
EMIT regimes, respectively. cthe delay time as a function of probe-tone frequency detuning δ, wherein green dots and orange curves are
experimental data and fitting curves, respectively. For aandc, from left to right the pump power is gradually increased and the corresponding
slow-light time is marked by dashed circles, as shown in b.
This transition leads to a dramatic change in group delay as
the coupling strength Gbypasses the singularity. In experi-
mental scenarios, mechanical frequency jitter causes the crit-
ical coupling strength condition for achieving infinite group
delay to vary, presenting significant challenges. Conversely,
the maximum group delay that can be measured in experi-
ments is limited by the frequency stability of the mechanical
modes. Here, we report a new record for group delay time,
attributed to the inherent advantages in frequency stability.
As shown in Fig. 5 b, the longest delay time we measured in
the experiment is 4035 seconds (more than an hour), achieved
through the high Q-factors and extremely low pure dephasing
rate of 3C-SiC square membrane. Leveraging the exceptional
mechanical frequency stability, this interface enables tunable
light slowing, achieving group delays of up to an impressive
hour . This significant improvement over previous pioneer-
ing works marks a substantial advancement in optomechani-cal group delay and slow light technologies [78, 90, 98–104].
Fig. 5 cshows the measured group delay versus probe-tone
detuning δ. The maximum delay time occurs at the zero-
detuning point and delay-time gradually decreases as the cou-
pling rate increases. When the normalized transmission coef-
ficient is close to unity, the energy transfer efficiency reaches
its maximum. At the highest transmission efficiency, we em-
phasize that the delay time can still reach 40.9 ms, which is
the longest delay time achieved [99, 118–128], to the best of
our knowledge.
Sideband cooling of the dedegeneracy mechanical modes
The above continuous-fields-based pump-probe experiments
mainly demonstrate the performance of our device in storing
microwave signals for a long time. For classical applications,
the thermal noise in cavity field or mechanical mode can be
neglected. However, for quantum storage, one major obstacle12
c a
b
FIG. 6. Sideband cooling of the mechanical memory mode. a The ringdown measurement of total mechanical linewidth γtotwith a set of
sideband cooling powers P. Colored-solid dots are experiment data and black-solid curves represent the fitting. bCavity-field backaction
introduces an additional optical-damping γoptfor the mechanical resonator. γoptexhibits a linear growth with increasing the sideband driving
power P.cThe mechanical occupation is calibrated as the number of motional quanta. Nth
m(Nth
c) is the effective thermal bath occupation of
the mechanical mode (microwave cavity mode), respectively. Error bars equal one standard deviation.
is that the thermal phonons add noise into coherent mechani-
cal excitations during the storage processes. We now show ef-
fective optomechanical sideband cooling to prepare mechani-
cal oscillators toward their quantum ground state.
We add two layers of a mechanical damper to isolate ex-
ternal mechanical vibration noises (see Supplementary Note
2), including the pulse tube vibrations. We assume that the
phonon occupation of this fundamental mechanical mode can
arrive at its equilibration with environment temperature at sev-
eral hundred millikelvins (mK) provided by the cryostat. Us-
ing the Bose-Einstein statistics for mechanical thermal states,
i.e.,Nth
m= (eℏωm/kBT−1)−1, we can extract a calibration
constant between the area of mechanical sideband spectrum
and the thermal bath phonon occupations in quanta. Here,
kBis the Boltzmann constant constant and Tis the working
temperature of the cryostat. We find that the peak area grows
linearly with T(see Supplementary Note 7) when the refrig-
erator’s working temperature is above 20 mK, corresponding
to an initial phonon occupation of Nth
m= 476 .
To cool the mechanical mode, we continue to use the red-
sideband drive with an optimal detuning of ∆ =−ωm. The
scheme can be depicted as that demonstrated in Fig. 1 d, but
without the probe-tone. In the resolved-sideband regime, the
PSD of the output cavity field is finally expressed as the for-
mula given in Eq. (5). Fig. 6 ashows mechanical ringdown
curves under different sideband cooling power P. In the ex-
periment, the ringdown lifetime starts to decrease as coolingpower Pincreases. This can be intuitively understood as the
additional optical-damping broadens the linewidth of the me-
chanical mode, i.e., γtot=γopt+γm. We can obtain the
total mechanical damping rate γtotby fitting the ring-down
curves as shown in Fig. 6 a. Fig. 6 bshows that the extracted
optical-damping γoptdepends linearly on increasing the side-
band cooling power P, which is in good agreement with the
theoretical predictions.
Ideally, as the sideband cooling power increases, the num-
ber of phonons gradually decreases and the oscillator enters
the ground state. However, in the experiment, the cooling may
be limited by microwave heating which raises the bath temper-
atures of the cavity and of the mechanical resonator. The ther-
mal occupations Nth
candNth
mthus become dependent on the
sideband pump power. Noise spectra of cavity emission and
typical mechanical sidebands are presented in Supplementary
Note 8. Using the function given in Eq. (5) and through the
nonlinear least-squares fitting of the PSD, we can obtain the
values of Nth
candNth
munder different sideband cooling power
or optomechanical cooperativity. Using the solutions for b[ω],
the phonon occupation Nmcan be derived via equipartition
theorem [129, 130]. Considering the case of optimal detuning
∆ =−ωm, and κ2≫(4G2, κγ m, γm), we find
Nm=γm
γopt+γmNth
m+γopt
γopt+γmNth
c. (10)
The final steady-state occupations of mechanical mode ( Nm),
the thermal occupations of cavity field ( Nth
c) and mechanical13
ca
bȷ ȷ ȷ ȷ
FIG. 7. On-demand microwave state storage and tomography in the time domain. a Scatter plots of the measured quadratures of motion
with coherent input signals for different evolution times τ= 0.01,1,10,80s. One pulse-sequence measurement yields a point (blue dot) in
the quadrature phase space. Each figure in ais obtained by repeating the pulse-sequence measurements 3000 times. The offset of the center
of the scatter plot relative to the origin of the coordinates represents the component of the coherent excitations Ncoh.bThe coherent and
thermal components of the retrieved microwave pulse after a storage time of τ. The green triangles (red dots) are experimental data of thermal
(coherent) occupation Nτ
th(Ncoh) with error bars. At the same time, the solid lines are the corresponding exponential fit. cThe phases of input
signal pulses in the protocol of recovered microwave pulse with a phase increment of π/2.
mode ( Nth
m) bathes, as a function of both the cooling power P
and optomechanical cooperativity, are summarized in Fig. 6 c.
Equation (10) shows that the sideband cooling can never
reduce the mechanical mode occupancy below the occupancy
of the cavity thermal bath. As shown in Fig. 6 c, the value of
Nmdepends mainly on the final occupancy number of cavity
thermal bath Nth
cat the highest powers. In this experiment,
the minimum average phonon occupation is Nm= 0.9±0.03.
Towards achieving the ground-state cooling, cavity thermal
occupancy Nth
cmust be controlled within one quantum. For
currently reported cavity electromechanical systems, such as
those based on either crystalline silicon acoustic cavities [77]
or amorphous SiN membrane oscillators [22, 92, 131, 132],
significant heating effects are observed in the mechanical ther-
mal baths. However, for the 3C-SiC studied in this work, the
fundamental drumhead mode of the membrane resonator does
not exhibit a significant heating effect, which can be attributed
to the extremely high thermal conductivity of SiC in 3C phase.
On-demand state capture, storage and retrieval
We then investigate the device’s performance as an on-demand phononic memory by measuring the capture, storage,
and retrieval of itinerant microwave pulses in the time domain.
Based on the beam-splitter type optomechanical interaction
HBS=G 
a†b+b†a
, the state encoded in an itinerant mi-
crowave pulse can be written into and read out of the me-
chanical memory mode by controlling the pulse sequence of
the transfer field. A constant sideband cooling tone is added
to initialize the mechanical memory to its ground state. The
corresponding optical-damping rate is γg
opt= 12 .6Hz. The
state capture, storage, and retrieval pulse-sequence has been
depicted in Fig. 1 e. It has been experimentally verified in
the literature that matching signal growth rate Γwith side-
band cooling rate can result in an optimal state recover effi-
ciency [22, 133]. So, in this stage, we generate a microwave
pulse characterized by an amplitude that exhibits exponen-
tially growth at a specified rate of Γ =γg
opt.
The coherent state arrives at the cavity resonator at the mo-
ment of t1. From t1tot2(duration 60 ms), when a coherent
state arrives inside the microwave cavity, the constant side-
band cooling tone begins to play another role, that is transfer-
ring the amplitude and phase information of such input signal-14
pulse into the phononic memory mode of 3C-SiC membrane
resonator. As the microwave coherent state is captured, a co-
herent portion of the mechanical excitations continuously in-
creases. In this stage, the sideband cooling tone is also called
as the write field. At the moment of t2, the writing field is
closed, and the captured microwave state is stored as coher-
ent phonons inside our memory device. After a certain period
of storage ( τ), constant sideband cooling tone is added again
(60 ms from t3tot4), which maps the state from phononic
mode back to an itinerant microwave pulse. The constant side-
band cooling tone retrieves the microwave coherent state and
thus is called the readout field in the recovering stage. The
pulse sequence is completed after the time of t4. During the
entire process, the itinerant microwave coherent state has ex-
perienced the process of capture, storage, and retrieval. In
the readout stage, we use an optomechanical phase-insensitive
amplification technique (with a blue-detuned sideband pump)
to improve the signal-to-noise ratio [134–136].
During the storage procedure, the phononic mode under-
goes a rethermalization process. We now directly present the
coherent storage lifetime by recording its thermal decoher-
ence in the time domain. Turning on the readout field, the
amplitude and phase of Voutencode the state of the mechan-
ical mode after a storage time of τ. The voltage signal Vout
of recovered itinerant microwave pulses are recorded and an-
alyzed by a spectrum analyzer. The quadrature amplitudes of
mechanical motion are obtained by projecting Voutonto the
local oscillator with frequency ωout:
X1=CX
iVout(ti) cos ( ωoutti),
X2=CX
iVout(ti) sin ( ωoutti).(11)
The completion of each pulse-sequence measurement gener-
ates a single point in the quadrature phase space. We can
obtain the state tomography of the retrieved microwave state
by repeating the pulse-sequence thousands of times. From
quadrature distributions, we can distinguish the coherent com-
ponent of mechanical excitations Ncoh=⟨X1⟩2+⟨X2⟩2
and incoherent component of thermal occupancy Nτ
th=
⟨(X1− ⟨X1⟩)2⟩+⟨(X2− ⟨X2⟩)2⟩−nadd. Brackets here rep-
resent an ensemble average. Given sufficient storage time,
we postulate that the mechanical oscillator fully reverts to its
initial thermal state, achieving a state of thermal equilibrium
with a phonon occupation number of Nth
m= 476 . We thus
can calibrate the gain-factor Cin Eqs. (11) and express X1,2
in units of quanta. The calibration of the gain factor and the
added noise are presented in Supplementary Note 9.
We now demonstrate microwave coherent state storage
through the coherent electromechanical interface and the
phononic memory mode. The scatter plots of the measured
quadratures of the recovered microwave pulses are presented
in Fig. 7 a, for different storage time τ= 0s,1s,10s,80s, re-
spectively. As the storage interval τincreases, the variance
σ2=Nτ
thstarts to increase due to the re-thermalization ofthe phononic memory mode. Fig. 7 bshows the measured co-
herent and thermal components of the mechanical memory
mode, as a function of the storage time interval τ. The me-
chanical memory mode takes more than 70 seconds for the
free evolution from its ground state to a final thermal equi-
librium state. The average photon number of the captured mi-
crowave coherent state is 4.2 quanta. The coherent component
of phononic mode decays exponentially and the fit of Ncohre-
sults in γm/2π= 8.12±0.19mHz, corresponding to an en-
ergy decay rate of T1= 19.9±0.3seconds. These experiment
data show excellent agreement with the predicted evolution.
Coherent storage lifetime is an important figure of merit for
characterizing a quantum memory. Zoomed-in area in Fig. 7 b
shows the thermalization and energy decay of the mechanical
memory in shorter evolution intervals. The storage lifetime is
determined by the thermal decoherence rate of the mechani-
cal memory, which is calibrated as Γth/2π= 3.85Hz, cor-
responding to a phonon lifetime of τcoh= 41 .3ms. We fi-
nally verify the coherence of our electromechanical phononic
memory by transferring four microwave coherent states with
anπ/2increment in phase. The state tomography of recov-
ered microwave pulses is presented in Fig. 7 c, which shows
that the phase of the signal pulse is faithfully recovered after
storage.
Coherent energy transfer between distinct high- Qme-
chanical modes
In the 3C-SiC square membrane-based microwave electrome-
chanical device examined in this study, not only can the (1,3)
mode be sideband cooled to its ground state and utilized as
a coherent memory, but we can also select other mechanical
modes, such as the (3,3) mode. The thermal decoherence rate
of the (3,3) mode is Γ3,3
th/2π= 2.35Hz, corresponding to
a phonon lifetime of τcoh= 67 .75ms. Coherent manipula-
tion of phonon transport between distinct mechanical modes
is essential for preparing mechanical nonclassical states and
for potential applications in bosonic coding with long-lived
phononic modes. Since these mechanical modes are optome-
chanically coupled to the same microwave cavity, they can
interact through an intermediary microwave field.
By employing a mechanism similar to STIRAP (stimulated
Raman adiabatic passage) in atomic physics, we can couple
two distinct mechanical resonators using an effective beam
splitter interaction, demonstrating that efficient and coherent
state transfer is achievable between these frequency-separated
mechanical modes within the same microwave cavity. While
energy transfer between two separated mechanical modes has
been demonstrated in the classical regime [73, 79], in this
work, both mechanical modes are initialized in their ground
states.
As shown in Figure 8, we illustrate coherent optomechani-
cal state swapping between two frequency-separated mechan-
ical modes in the quantum regime. The state transfer pulse
sequence is similar to the scheme depicted in Fig. 1 e, but re-
places the storage duration with a swapping pulse operation.
By repeating the state-swapping pulse sequence for various15
/uni00000013 /uni00000015 /uni00000017 /uni00000019 /uni0000001b /uni00000014/uni00000013
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
 /uni00000030/uni00000052/uni00000047/uni00000048/uni00000014/uni0000001d/uni00000003/uni00000031/uni00000046/uni00000052/uni0000004b
/uni00000030/uni00000052/uni00000047/uni00000048/uni00000014/uni0000001d/uni00000003/uni00000031/uni00000057/uni0000004b
/uni00000030/uni00000052/uni00000047/uni00000048/uni00000015/uni0000001d/uni00000003/uni00000031/uni00000046/uni00000052/uni0000004b
/uni00000030/uni00000052/uni00000047/uni00000048/uni00000015/uni0000001d/uni00000003/uni00000031/uni00000057/uni0000004b
FIG. 8. Optomechanical state swapping occurs between two mechanical modes, both of which are initially sideband cooled to their
ground state. The measurement of the state-swapping pulse sequence, repeated a thousand times, yields scattering points in quadrature phase
space that enable us to calibrate the coherent and thermal components of the phonon numbers for each mechanical mode used in the state
swapping.
durations thousands of times, we can calibrate the coherent
and thermal components of the phonon number for each me-
chanical mode (corresponding to each point in Figure 8) using
the method demonstrated in Figure 7.
Discussion
We have constructed a microwave cavity electromechanical
system comprising of a 3D microwave cavity and a 3C-phase
SiC membrane resonator. We have confirmed that the low-
resistance semiconductor 3C-SiC is compatible with super-
conducting quantum circuits, ensuring a low electromagnetic
loss. The non-uniform tensile stress breaks the membrane’s
rotational symmetry, leading to the splitting of degenerate su-
perposition modes into near-resonant mode pairs with distinct
mode shapes. Both modes in the degeneracy-breaking mode
pair exhibit a vertical displacement at the exact center, in stark
contrast to the situation where only the constructive superpo-
sition mode in the degenerate mode pair has a central verti-
cal displacement, thereby increasing the mechanical modes
that the microwave cavity can read. By combining the notch-
type asymmetric structure design of the bottom electrode with
the breaking of mechanical modes degeneracy, the shared mi-
crowave cavity field enables the electromechanical readout of
21 mechanical modes. Additionally, we found that the ex-
tremely high thermal conductivity of the 3C-SiC membrane
is another advantage for mitigating the notorious mechanical
heating effect observed in other optomechanical or electrome-
chanical devices. The 3C-phase SiC membrane chip effec-
tively thermalizes to the operating temperature of the refriger-
ator, resulting in a four orders of magnitude improvement in
theQ-factors of the mechanical modes compared to the per-formance measured at room temperature. Nineteen of the de-
tected mechanical modes (over 90%) demonstrate Q-factors
exceeding 108. Frequency instability and pure dephasing are
increasingly prominent limitations for further improving the
performance of high Qmechanical resonators. To better high-
light the advantages of using a 3C-SiC square membrane as
a mechanical resonator in microwave electromechanical de-
vices, the performance of mechanical resonators made from
other materials, such as crystalline silicon or amorphous SiN,
is summarized in Table 2.
The table illustrates that previously, SiC films were pri-
marily utilized in conjunction with optical microcavities to
facilitate cavity optomechanical coupling. Our work intro-
duces the application of crystalline SiC membrane in the
realm of microwave electromechanical (EM) coupling. Un-
like other single-crystal materials, e.g., crystalline silicon
nanobeam [77, 93, 140], which exhibit extremely low en-
ergy decay rate (with a quality factor Q∼1010), the fre-
quency instability and jitter at low temperatures introduces
additional decoherence. This results in a coherence lifetime
for the oscillator on the order of hundreds of microseconds
(τcoh∼100µs). In contrast, our research demonstrates
the exceptional frequency stability of 3C-SiC oscillators at
low temperatures, with coherence times approach to the or-
der of a hundred of milliseconds, which is over three orders
of magnitude greater than that of other single-crystal oscilla-
tors. This enhanced frequency stability allows the microwave
field group delay induced by 3C-SiC square membrane oscil-
lators to exceed one hour, surpassing the best reported lev-
els of hundreds of seconds in SiN membrane oscillator sys-
tems [22, 118].16
As a perspective, integrating phonon bandgap engineering
and dissipative dilution techniques will further enhance the
quality factor of 3C-SiC oscillators. Replacing the 3D alu-
minum cavity with an annealed copper or on-chip 2D super-
conducting LC resonator can reduce the cavity field heating
effect, enabling a lower phonon occupancy number. Defects
in 3C-SiC, such as silicon vacancies (VSi) and carbon vacan-
cies (VC), can serve as qubits with long coherence times. Op-
tical fields can be used to manipulate and detect the quantum
states of these single spins. By integrating high- Qand long-
lived 3C-SiC mechanical membrane resonators, a functional
interface can be established to transfer information between
disparate quantum elements, including microwave photons,
superconducting qubits, defect spins, and even optical pho-
tons. By combining disparate quantum elements through 3C-
SiC mechanical resonators, we can enhance functionality and
expand the toolbox for quantum information processing [137–
139]. Exploring these avenues holds great potential to enable
coherent information transfer and advance hybrid quantum ar-
chitectures with enhanced capabilities.
Methods
Device fabrication
The device consists of a 3D aluminum (Al) superconducting
cavity and a mechanical capacitor chip. The Al-rectangle cav-
ity is shaped and polished after machining. The mechanical
capacitor chip is assembled by using a flip-chip bonder. The
upper parallel-plate electrode is made on a 3C-phase silicon
carbide membrane with 400 µm thick silicon frame (Norcada
PSCX5050A). The SiC window was metalized with a circular
Al electrode deposited by electron beam evaporation (JEB-
4, Adnanotek). Commercial ACC µRA flip-chip bonder was
used to align the center of the upper layer electrode on the
squared SiC window to the center of the bottom parallel plate
electrode of the coupling antenna chip. The main structure of
the bottom antenna chip is an H-shaped electrode with 120 nm
thick niobium sputtered on a high resistance silicon (orienta-
tion of ⟨100⟩) substrate with a thickness of 500 µm. The Nb
thin film is sputtered through standard physical vapor deposi-
tion technology (Syskey Technology, SP-lC4-A06). The sput-
ter working parameters are 5×10−3hPa, power 150 W and
time 800 s, respectively. To mitigate the influence of oxida-
tion on the resonator performance, the Nb film was placed in
nitrogen (a pressure of 1000 Pa) for 35 minutes. The Nb/Si
wafer was then subjected to the lithography processes. We
selected S1813 photoresist as the coating layer with a spin-
ning rate of 3000 rpm and an operating time of 1 minute. The
photoresist was then baked at 115◦Cfor 2 minutes. We used
the DWL 66+ laser lithography tool (Heidelberg Instruments)
to transfer the pattern. In the process of laser direct-writing,
the laser power, the intensity, the filter, and the focus were set
at 70 mW, 30%, 12.5%, and -20%, respectively. The devel-
opment process was carried out at 1 minute in the MF-319
developer, followed by rinsing in DIW fixing solution. When
the pattern was completely transferred, the unwanted Nb filmwas removed in the RIE process (RIE-10NR, Samco Inc).
Measurement methods
The device was mounted on the 10 mK mixing-chamber plate
of a dilution refrigerator and a circulator was used for re-
flection measurements. The cancellation line is combined
with the output line via a directional coupler. By adjust-
ing the amplitude and phase of the canceling tone, the re-
flected pump-tone can be effectively canceled to avoid the
HEMT saturation. An arbitrary waveform generator (Tek-
tronix AWG5014C) with a mixer is used to shape the sideband
pump-tone (with frequency ωc−ωm), amplify-tone (with fre-
quency ωc+ωm) and signal-tone (with frequency ωc) to pulse.
These three tones are combined through a splitter at room tem-
perature and then transmitted down to the device. To increase
the on-off switching ratio of the pulses, we have used high-
speed microwave switchers after the mixer for each tone, re-
spectively. The control signal of the switch and the pulse sig-
nal of the mixer are simultaneously generated by the AWG
in the marker channel and analog channel. A real-time signal
analyzer (Tektronix RSA5126B) is used for digitalizing the
output voltage signal. For the state tomography in the time do-
main, the frequency center of local RSA acquiring is slightly
shifted from signal-tone (i.e., fixed at ωc/2π−400Hz), to
make the acquired IQ signal have a small oscillation fre-
quency. The storage time from write-in to read-out is con-
trolled by the AWG in the time domain. To synchronize the
RSA signal acquisition with a signal pulse, the RSA is trig-
gered by an AWG pulse. For device S21parameter measure-
ment, the PNA (Agilent N5232A) probe tone is also combined
into the input line. When taking the Sparameter measurement
and spectrum measurement, the amplify-tone and signal-tone
are switched off, and the pump-tone is always kept on. All in-
struments are phase-locked by a 10 MHz rubidium frequency
standard.
Data Availability
All data supporting the findings of this study are available
within the article and the Supplementary Information file, or
available from the corresponding authors upon request.
∗liuyl@baqis.ac.cn
†litf@tsinghua.edu.cn
[1] Gerhardt, R. Properties and applications of silicon carbide
(BoD–Books on Demand, 2011).
[2] Feng, Z. C. Handbook of Silicon Carbide Materials and De-
vices (CRC Press, 2023).
[3] Cheung, R. Silicon carbide microelectromechanical systems
for harsh environments (World Scientific, 2006).
[4] Aharonovich, I. & Toth, M. Silicon carbide goes quantum.
Nat. Phys. 10, 93–94 (2014).
[5] Boretti, A. Silicon carbide’s quantum aspects. Nat. Photonics
8, 88–90 (2014).
[6] Castelletto, S. Silicon carbide incorporates quantum gates.
Nat. Mater. 21, 8–9 (2022).17
[7] Lukin, D. M., Guidry, M. A. & Vu ˇckovi ´c, J. Integrated quan-
tum photonics with silicon carbide: challenges and prospects.
PRX Quantum 1, 020102 (2020).
[8] Majety, S., Saha, P., Norman, V . A. & Radulaski, M. Quantum
information processing with integrated silicon carbide photon-
ics.J. Appl. Phys. 131(2022).
[9] Awschalom, D. D., Hanson, R., Wrachtrup, J. & Zhou, B. B.
Quantum technologies with optically interfaced solid-state
spins. Nat. Photonics 12, 516–527 (2018).
[10] Elshaari, A. W., Pernice, W., Srinivasan, K., Benson, O. &
Zwiller, V . Hybrid integrated quantum photonic circuits. Nat.
Photonics 14, 285–298 (2020).
[11] Lohrmann, A., Johnson, B. C., McCallum, J. C. & Castelletto,
S. A review on single photon sources in silicon carbide. Re-
ports on Prog. Phys. 80, 034502 (2017).
[12] Castelletto, S. & Boretti, A. Silicon carbide color centers
for quantum applications. J. Physics: Photonics 2, 022001
(2020).
[13] Gao, W. B., Imamoglu, A., Bernien, H. & Hanson, R. Co-
herent manipulation, measurement and entanglement of indi-
vidual solid-state spins using optical fields. Nat. Photonics 9,
363–373 (2015).
[14] Luo, W. et al. Recent progress in quantum photonic chips for
quantum communication and internet. Light. Sci. & Appl. 12,
175 (2023).
[15] Luo, Q.-Y . et al. Fabrication and quantum sensing of spin
defects in silicon carbide. Front. Phys. 11, 1270602 (2023).
[16] Wang, J.-F. et al. Magnetic detection under high pressures
using designed silicon vacancy centres in silicon carbide. Nat.
Mater. 22, 489–494 (2023).
[17] Zhuang, H., Yang, N., Zhang, L., Fuchs, R. & Jiang, X. Elec-
trochemical properties and applications of nanocrystalline,
microcrystalline, and epitaxial cubic silicon carbide films.
ACS Appl. Mater. & Interfaces 7, 10886–10895 (2015).
[18] Dao, D. V ., Phan, H.-P., Qamar, A. & Dinh, T. Piezoresistive
effect of p-type single crystalline 3C-SiC on (111) plane. RSC
Adv.6, 21302–21307 (2016).
[19] Phan, H.-P. et al. Single-crystalline 3C-SiC anodically bonded
onto glass: an excellent platform for high-temperature elec-
tronics and bioapplications. ACS Appl. Mater. & Interfaces 9,
27365–27371 (2017).
[20] Chatterjee, A. et al. Semiconductor qubits in practice. Nat.
Rev. Phys. 3, 157–177 (2021).
[21] Yuan, M., Singh, V ., Blanter, Y . M. & Steele, G. A. Large co-
operativity and microkelvin cooling with a three-dimensional
optomechanical cavity. Nat. Commun. 6, 8491 (2015).
[22] Liu, Y . et al. Coherent memory for microwave photons based
on long-lived mechanical excitations. npj Quantum Inf. 9, 80
(2023).
[23] Serra, E. et al. Silicon-nitride nanosensors toward room tem-
perature quantum optomechanics. J. Appl. Phys. 130, 064503
(2021).
[24] Høj, D. et al. Ultra-coherent nanomechanical resonators based
on inverse design. Nat. Commun. 12, 5766 (2021).
[25] Tsaturyan, Y ., Barg, A., Polzik, E. S. & Schliesser, A. Ul-
tracoherent nanomechanical resonators via soft clamping and
dissipation dilution. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12, 776–783 (2017).
[26] Galinskiy, I., Tsaturyan, Y ., Parniak, M. & Polzik, E. S.
Phonon counting thermometry of an ultracoherent membrane
resonator near its motional ground state. Optica 7, 718–725
(2020).
[27] Sementilli, L., Romero, E. & Bowen, W. P. Nanomechani-
cal dissipation and strain engineering. Adv. Funct. Mater. 32,
2105247 (2022).[28] Beccari, A. et al. Strained crystalline nanomechanical res-
onators with quality factors above 10 billion. Nat. Phys. 18,
436–441 (2022).
[29] Shin, D. et al. Spiderweb nanomechanical resonators via
bayesian optimization: inspired by nature and guided by ma-
chine learning. Adv. Mater. 34, 2106248 (2022).
[30] Kwon, G. et al. Room-temperature yield and fracture strength
of single-crystalline 6H silicon carbide. J. Mater. Sci. 50,
8104–8110 (2015).
[31] Phan, H.-P. et al. Ultra-high strain in epitaxial silicon carbide
nanostructures utilizing residual stress amplification. Appl.
Phys. Lett. 110, 141906 (2017).
[32] Anzalone, R., Alberti, A. & La Via, F. Evaluation of 3C-
SiC/Si residual stress and curvatures along different wafer di-
rection. Mater. Lett. 118, 130–133 (2014).
[33] Rohmfeld, S., Hundhausen, M., Ley, L., Zorman, C. A. &
Mehregany, M. Quantitative evaluation of biaxial strain in
epitaxial 3C-SiC layers on Si (100) substrates by Raman spec-
troscopy. J. Appl. Phys. 91, 1113–1117 (2002).
[34] Capano, M. A. et al. Residual strains in cubic silicon car-
bide measured by raman spectroscopy correlated with X-ray
diffraction and transmission electron microscopy. J. Appl.
Phys. 100, 083514 (2006).
[35] Colston, G. et al. Mapping the strain and tilt of a suspended
3C-SiC membrane through micro X-ray diffraction. Mater. &
Des.103, 244–248 (2016).
[36] Xu, M. et al. High-strength amorphous silicon carbide for
nanomechanics. Adv. Mater. 10, 2306513 (2023).
[37] Kermany, A. R., Bennett, J. S., Brawley, G. A., Bowen, W. P.
& Iacopi, F. Factors affecting the f×Qproduct of 3C-SiC
microstrings: What is the upper limit for sensitivity? J. Appl.
Phys. 119, 055304 (2016).
[38] Henry Huang, X. M., Zorman, C. A., Mehregany, M. &
Roukes, M. L. Nanodevice motion at microwave frequencies.
Nature 421, 496–496 (2003).
[39] Kermany, A. R. et al. Microresonators with Q-factors over a
million from highly stressed epitaxial silicon carbide on sili-
con. Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 081901 (2014).
[40] Zorman, C. A. & Parro, R. J. Micro-and nanomechanical
structures for silicon carbide MEMS and NEMS. Phys. Status
Solidi (b) 245, 1404–1424 (2008).
[41] Romero, E. et al. Engineering the dissipation of crystalline
micromechanical resonators. Phys. Rev. Appl. 13, 044007
(2020).
[42] Anufriev, R., Wu, Y ., Ordonez-Miranda, J. & Nomura, M.
Nanoscale limit of the thermal conductivity in crystalline sil-
icon carbide membranes, nanowires, and phononic crystals.
NPG Asia Mater. 14, 35 (2022).
[43] Barnes, A. C., Lee, J., Rawlinson, P. T., Feng, P. X.-L. & Zor-
man, C. A. Pressure dependence of thin polycrystalline silicon
carbide diaphragm resonators. In SENSORS, 2012 IEEE , 1–4
(IEEE, 2012).
[44] Zhou, W. et al. Fracture properties of silicon carbide thin films
by bulge test of long rectangular membrane. J. Microelec-
tromechanical Syst. 17, 453–461 (2008).
[45] Nguyen, T.-K. et al. Superior robust ultrathin single-
crystalline silicon carbide membrane as a versatile platform
for biological applications. ACS Appl. Mater. & Interfaces 9,
41641–41647 (2017).
[46] Ockeloen-Korppi, C. et al. Stabilized entanglement of massive
mechanical oscillators. Nature 556, 478–482 (2018).
[47] Riedinger, R. et al. Remote quantum entanglement be-
tween two micromechanical oscillators. Nature 556, 473–477
(2018).18
[48] Suh, J. et al. Mechanically detecting and avoiding the quantum
fluctuations of a microwave field. Science 344, 1262–1265
(2014).
[49] Mercier de L ´epinay, L., Ockeloen-Korppi, C. F., Woolley,
M. J. & Sillanp ¨a¨a, M. A. Quantum mechanics–free subsystem
with mechanical oscillators. Science 372, 625–629 (2021).
[50] Kurizki, G. et al. Quantum technologies with hybrid systems.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, 3866–3873 (2015).
[51] Han, X., Fu, W., Zou, C.-L., Jiang, L. & Tang, H. X.
Microwave-optical quantum frequency conversion. Optica 8,
1050–1064 (2021).
[52] Clerk, A. A., Lehnert, K. W., Bertet, P., Petta, J. R. & Naka-
mura, Y . Hybrid quantum systems with circuit quantum elec-
trodynamics. Nat. Phys. 16, 257–267 (2020).
[53] Vivoli, V . C., Barnea, T., Galland, C. & Sangouard, N. Pro-
posal for an optomechanical bell test. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116,
070405 (2016).
[54] Hofer, S. G., Lehnert, K. W. & Hammerer, K. Proposal to test
bell’s inequality in electromechanics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116,
070406 (2016).
[55] Marinkovi ´c, I.et al. Optomechanical bell test. Phys. Rev. Lett.
121, 220404 (2018).
[56] Fiaschi, N. et al. Optomechanical quantum teleportation. Nat.
Photonics 15, 817–821 (2021).
[57] Belenchia, A. et al. Tests of quantum-gravity-induced non-
locality via optomechanical experiments. Phys. Rev. D 95,
026012 (2017).
[58] Gely, M. F. & Steele, G. A. Superconducting electro-
mechanics to test di ´osi–penrose effects of general relativity in
massive superpositions. AVS Quantum Sci. 3, 035601 (2021).
[59] Liu, Y ., Mummery, J., Zhou, J. & Sillanp ¨a¨a, M. A. Grav-
itational forces between nonclassical mechanical oscillators.
Phys. Rev. Appl. 15, 034004 (2021).
[60] Cleland, A. Y ., Wollack, E. A. & Safavi-Naeini, A. H. Study-
ing phonon coherence with a quantum sensor. Nat. Commun.
15, 4979 (2024).
[61] Sahu, R. et al. Quantum-enabled operation of a microwave-
optical interface. Nat. Commun. 13, 1276 (2022).
[62] Arnold, G. et al. Converting microwave and telecom photons
with a silicon photonic nanomechanical interface. Nat. Com-
mun. 11, 4460 (2020).
[63] Weaver, M. J. et al. An integrated microwave-to-optics inter-
face for scalable quantum computing. Nat. Nanotechnol. 19,
166–172 (2024).
[64] H ¨onl, S. et al. Microwave-to-optical conversion with a gallium
phosphide photonic crystal cavity. Nat. Commun. 13, 2065
(2022).
[65] Stockill, R. et al. Ultra-low-noise microwave to optics conver-
sion in gallium phosphide. Nat. Commun. 13, 6583 (2022).
[66] Shen, M. et al. Photonic link from single-flux-quantum
circuits to room temperature. Nat. Photonics 18, 371–378
(2024).
[67] Delaney, R. et al. Superconducting-qubit readout via low-
backaction electro-optic transduction. Nature 606, 489–493
(2022).
[68] Mirhosseini, M., Sipahigil, A., Kalaee, M. & Painter, O. Su-
perconducting qubit to optical photon transduction. Nature
588, 599–603 (2020).
[69] Kleckner, D. et al. Optomechanical trampoline resonators.
Opt. Express 19, 19708–19716 (2011).
[70] Barzanjeh, S. et al. Stationary entangled radiation from mi-
cromechanical motion. Nature 570, 480–483 (2019).
[71] Manjeshwar, S. K. et al. High- Qtrampoline resonators from
strained crystalline ingap for integrated free-space optome-chanics. Nano Lett. 23, 5076–5082 (2023).
[72] Weaver, M. J. et al. Nested trampoline resonators for optome-
chanics. Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 033501 (2016).
[73] Weaver, M. J. et al. Coherent optomechanical state transfer
between disparate mechanical resonators. Nat. Commun. 8,
824 (2017).
[74] Bereyhi, M. J. et al. Hierarchical tensile structures with
ultralow mechanical dissipation. Nat. Commun. 13, 3097
(2022).
[75] Fedorov, S. A., Beccari, A., Engelsen, N. J. & Kippenberg,
T. J. Fractal-like mechanical resonators with a soft-clamped
fundamental mode. Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 025502 (2020).
[76] Brubaker, B. M. et al. Optomechanical ground-state cooling
in a continuous and efficient electro-optic transducer. Phys.
Rev. X 12, 021062 (2022).
[77] MacCabe, G. S. et al. Nano-acoustic resonator with ultralong
phonon lifetime. Science 370, 840–843 (2020).
[78] Kristensen, M. B., Kralj, N., Langman, E. C. & Schliesser,
A. Long-lived and efficient optomechanical memory for light.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 132, 100802 (2024).
[79] Fedoseev, V ., Luna, F., Hedgepeth, I., L ¨offler, W. &
Bouwmeester, D. Stimulated raman adiabatic passage in op-
tomechanics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 113601 (2021).
[80] Planz, E., Xi, X., Capelle, T., Langman, E. C. & Schliesser, A.
Membrane-in-the-middle optomechanics with a soft-clamped
membrane at millikelvin temperatures. Opt. Express 31,
41773–41782 (2023).
[81] Norte, R. A., Moura, J. P. & Gr ¨oblacher, S. Mechanical res-
onators for quantum optomechanics experiments at room tem-
perature. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 147202 (2016).
[82] Reinhardt, C., M ¨uller, T., Bourassa, A. & Sankey, J. C.
Ultralow-noise SiN trampoline resonators for sensing and op-
tomechanics. Phys. Rev. X 6, 021001 (2016).
[83] Huang, G., Beccari, A., Engelsen, N. J. & Kippenberg, T. J.
Room-temperature quantum optomechanics using an ultralow
noise cavity. Nature 626, 512–516 (2024).
[84] Saarinen, S. A., Kralj, N., Langman, E. C., Tsaturyan, Y . &
Schliesser, A. Laser cooling a membrane-in-the-middle sys-
tem close to the quantum ground state from room temperature.
Optica 10, 364–372 (2023).
[85] Ghadimi, A. H. et al. Elastic strain engineering for ultralow
mechanical dissipation. Science 360, 764–768 (2018).
[86] Bereyhi, M. J. et al. Perimeter modes of nanomechanical res-
onators exhibit quality factors exceeding 109at room temper-
ature. Phys. Rev. X 12, 021036 (2022).
[87] Reetz, C. et al. Analysis of membrane phononic crystals with
wide band gaps and low-mass defects. Phys. Rev. Appl. 12,
044027 (2019).
[88] Shaniv, R., Keshava, S. K., Reetz, C. & Regal, C. A. Un-
derstanding the quality factor of mass-loaded tensioned res-
onators. Phys. Rev. Appl. 19, L031006 (2023).
[89] Kalaee, M. et al. Quantum electromechanics of a hypersonic
crystal. Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 334–339 (2019).
[90] Fink, J. M. et al. Quantum electromechanics on silicon nitride
nanomembranes. Nat. Commun. 7, 12396 (2016).
[91] Barzanjeh, S. et al. Mechanical on-chip microwave circulator.
Nat. Commun. 8, 953 (2017).
[92] Seis, Y . et al. Ground state cooling of an ultracoherent elec-
tromechanical system. Nat. Commun. 13, 1507 (2022).
[93] Bozkurt, A. et al. A quantum electromechanical interface for
long-lived phonons. Nat. Phys. 19, 1326–1332 (2023).
[94] Meng, F., Ma, J., He, J. & Li, W. Phonon-limited carrier mo-
bility and temperature-dependent scattering mechanism of 3C-
SiC from first principles. Phys. Rev. B 99, 045201 (2019).19
[95] Cheng, Z. et al. High thermal conductivity in wafer-scale cu-
bic silicon carbide crystals. Nat. Commun. 13, 7201 (2022).
[96] Yan, X. et al. Single-defect phonons imaged by electron mi-
croscopy. Nature 589, 65–69 (2021).
[97] Maillet, O., Subero, D., Peltonen, J. T., Golubev, D. S. &
Pekola, J. P. Electric field control of radiative heat transfer
in a superconducting circuit. Nat. Commun. 11, 4326 (2020).
[98] Teufel, J. D. et al. Circuit cavity electromechanics in the
strong-coupling regime. Nature 471, 204–208 (2011).
[99] Zhou, X. et al. Slowing, advancing and switching of mi-
crowave signals using circuit nanoelectromechanics. Nat.
Phys. 9, 179–184 (2013).
[100] Lake, D. P., Mitchell, M., Sukachev, D. D. & Barclay, P. E.
Processing light with an optically tunable mechanical mem-
ory.Nat. Commun. 12, 663 (2021).
[101] Shandilya, P. K., Lake, D. P., Mitchell, M. J., Sukachev, D. D.
& Barclay, P. E. Optomechanical interface between telecom
photons and spin quantum memory. Nat. Phys. 17, 1420–1425
(2021).
[102] Merklein, M., Stiller, B., Vu, K., Madden, S. J. & Eggleton,
B. J. A chip-integrated coherent photonic-phononic memory.
Nat. Commun. 8, 574 (2017).
[103] Lu, T.-X., Xiao, X., Chen, L.-S., Zhang, Q. & Jing,
H. Magnon-squeezing-enhanced slow light and second-order
sideband in cavity magnomechanics. Phys. Rev. A 107,
063714 (2023).
[104] Wang, B., Liu, Z.-X., Kong, C., Xiong, H. & Wu, Y . Mechan-
ical exceptional-point-induced transparency and slow light.
Opt. Express 27, 8069–8080 (2019).
[105] Aspelmeyer, M., Kippenberg, T. J. & Marquardt, F. Cavity
optomechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 1391 (2014).
[106] Clerk, A. A., Devoret, M. H., Girvin, S. M., Marquardt, F.
& Schoelkopf, R. J. Introduction to quantum noise, mea-
surement, and amplification. Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 1155–1208
(2010).
[107] Hertzberg, J. B. et al. Back-action-evading measurements of
nanomechanical motion. Nat. Phys. 6, 213–217 (2010).
[108] Yuan, M., Cohen, M. A. & Steele, G. A. Silicon nitride mem-
brane resonators at millikelvin temperatures with quality fac-
tors exceeding 108.Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 263501 (2015).
[109] Guria, C. et al. Resolving the topology of encircling multiple
exceptional points. Nat. Commun. 15, 1369 (2024).
[110] Peterson, R. W. et al. Laser cooling of a micromechanical
membrane to the quantum backaction limit. Phys. Rev. Lett.
116, 063601 (2016).
[111] Piergentili, P., Li, W., Natali, R., Vitali, D. & Di Giuseppe,
G. Absolute determination of the single-photon optomechan-
ical coupling rate via a hopf bifurcation. Phys. Rev. Appl. 15,
034012 (2021).
[112] Yang, C., Wei, X., Sheng, J. & Wu, H. Phonon heat trans-
port in cavity-mediated optomechanical nanoresonators. Nat.
Commun. 11, 4656 (2020).
[113] Sementilli, L., Romero, E. & Bowen, W. P. Nanomechani-
cal dissipation and strain engineering. Adv. Funct. Mater. 32,
2105247 (2022).
[114] Yang, F. et al. Spatial modulation of nonlinear flexural vibra-
tions of membrane resonators. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 154301
(2019).
[115] Zhou, X. et al. High- Qsilicon nitride drum resonators
strongly coupled to gates. Nano Lett. 21, 5738–5744 (2021).
[116] Yang, F. et al. Persistent response in an ultrastrongly driven
mechanical membrane resonator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 014304
(2021).
[117] Wu, S. et al. Hybridized frequency combs in multimode cav-ity electromechanical system. Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 153901
(2022).
[118] Liu, Y . et al. Optomechanical anti-lasing with infinite group
delay at a phase singularity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 273603
(2021).
[119] Agarwal, G. S. & Huang, S. Electromagnetically induced
transparency in mechanical effects of light. Phys. Rev. A 81,
041803(R) (2010).
[120] Weis, S. et al. Optomechanically induced transparency. Sci-
ence 330, 1520–1523 (2010).
[121] Safavi-Naeini, A. H. et al. Electromagnetically induced trans-
parency and slow light with optomechanics. Nature 472, 69–
73 (2011).
[122] Karuza, M. et al. Optomechanically induced transparency in
a membrane-in-the-middle setup at room temperature. Phys.
Rev. A 88, 013804 (2013).
[123] Dong, C.-H. et al. Brillouin-scattering-induced transparency
and non-reciprocal light storage. Nat. Commun. 6, 6193
(2015).
[124] Kim, J., Kuzyk, M. C., Han, K., Wang, H. & Bahl, G. Non-
reciprocal Brillouin scattering induced transparency. Nat.
Phys. 11, 275–280 (2015).
[125] Fan, L., Fong, K. Y ., Poot, M. & Tang, H. X. Cascaded
optical transparency in multimode-cavity optomechanical sys-
tems. Nat. Commun. 6, 5850 (2015).
[126] Hocke, F. et al. Electromechanically induced absorption in
a circuit nano-electromechanical system. New J. Phys. 14,
123037 (2012).
[127] Xiong, H. & Wu, Y . Fundamentals and applications of op-
tomechanically induced transparency. Appl. Phys. Rev. 5,
031305 (2018).
[128] Liu, Y .-C., Li, B.-B. & Xiao, Y .-F. Electromagnetically in-
duced transparency in optical microcavities. Nanophotonics
6, 789–811 (2017).
[129] Dobrindt, J. M., Wilson-Rae, I. & Kippenberg, T. J. Paramet-
ric normal-mode splitting in cavity optomechanics. Phys. Rev.
Lett.101, 263602 (2008).
[130] Rocheleau, T. et al. Preparation and detection of a mechanical
resonator near the ground state of motion. Nature 463, 72–75
(2010).
[131] Liu, Y ., Zhou, J., Mercier de L ´epinay, L. & Sillanp ¨a¨a, M. A.
Quantum backaction evading measurements of a silicon ni-
tride membrane resonator. New J. Phys. 24, 083043 (2022).
[132] Higginbotham, A. P. et al. Harnessing electro-optic corre-
lations in an efficient mechanical converter. Nat. Phys. 14,
1038–1042 (2018).
[133] Palomaki, T. A., Harlow, J. W., Teufel, J. D., Simmonds, R. W.
& Lehnert, K. W. Coherent state transfer between itinerant mi-
crowave fields and a mechanical oscillator. Nature 495, 210–
214 (2013).
[134] Massel, F. et al. Multimode circuit optomechanics near the
quantum limit. Nat. Commun. 3, 987 (2012).
[135] Youssefi, A., Kono, S., Chegnizadeh, M. & Kippenberg, T. J.
A squeezed mechanical oscillator with millisecond quantum
decoherence. Nat. Phys. 19, 1697–1702 (2023).
[136] Reed, A. P. et al. Faithful conversion of propagating quantum
information to mechanical motion. Nat. Phys. 13, 1163–1167
(2017).
[137] Barzanjeh, S. et al. Optomechanics for quantum technologies.
Nat. Phys. 18, 15–24 (2022).
[138] Chu, Y . & Gr ¨oblacher, S. A perspective on hybrid quantum
opto-and electromechanical systems. Appl. Phys. Lett. 117,
150503 (2020).
[139] Xu, X.-B., Wang, W.-T., Sun, L.-Y . & Zou, C.-L. Hybrid su-20
perconducting photonic-phononic chip for quantum informa-
tion processing. Chip 1, 100016 (2022).
[140] Wallucks, A., Marinkovi ´c, I., Hensen, B., Stockill, R. &
Gr¨oblacher, S. A quantum memory at telecom wavelengths.
Nat. Phys. 16, 772–777 (2020).
[141] Forsch, M. et al. Microwave-to-optics conversion using a me-
chanical oscillator in its quantum ground state. Nat. Phys. 16,
69–74 (2020).
[142] Fong, K. Y ., Fan, L., Jiang, L., Han, X. & Tang, H. X.
Microwave-assisted coherent and nonlinear control in cav-
ity piezo-optomechanical systems. Phys. Rev. A 90, 051801
(2014).
[143] Jiang, W. et al. Lithium niobate piezo-optomechanical crys-
tals. Optica 6, 845–853 (2019).
[144] Lu, X., Lee, J. Y . & Lin, Q. High-frequency and high-quality
silicon carbide optomechanical microresonators. Sci. Reports
5, 17005 (2015).
[145] Reigue, A. et al. Cavity nano-optomechanics with suspended
subwavelength-sized nanowires. Phys. Rev. Appl. 20, 014025
(2023).
[146] Fogliano, F. et al. Mapping the cavity optomechanical interac-
tion with subwavelength-sized ultrasensitive nanomechanical
force sensors. Phys. Rev. X 11, 021009 (2021).
[147] Mercier de L ´epinay, L. et al. A universal and ultrasensitive
vectorial nanomechanical sensor for imaging 2D force field.
Nat. Nanotechnol 12, 156–162 (2017).
[148] Hamelin, B., Yang, J., Daruwalla, A., Wen, H. & Ayazi, F.
Monocrystalline silicon carbide disk resonators on phononic
crystals with ultra-low dissipation bulk acoustic wave modes.
Sci. Reports 9, 18698 (2019).
[149] Schmid, S., Villanueva, L. G. & Roukes, M. L. Fundamentals
of nanomechanical resonators , vol. 49 (Springer, 2016).
[150] Engelsen, N. J., Beccari, A. & Kippenberg, T. J. Ultrahigh-
quality-factor micro-and nanomechanical resonators using
dissipation dilution. Nat. Nanotechnol. 19, 725–737 (2024).
AcknowledgementsThis work is supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grants No. 92365210). Y . Liu ac-
knowledges the support of Beijing Municipal Science and
Technology Commission (Grant No. Z221100002722011),
Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Z240007), and Young
Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST (Grant
No. 2023QNRC001). This work is also supported by the
National Key Research and Development Program of China
(Grant No. 2022YFA1405200) and the National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (No. 12374325, No. 62074091,
No. 12304387). We acknowledge the facilities and techni-
cal support of Otaniemi research infrastructure for Micro and
Nanotechnologies (OtaNano). The work was supported by
European Research Council (101019712). The work was per-
formed as part of the Research Council of Finland Centre
of Excellence program (project 336810). We acknowledge
funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation program under the QuantERA II Programme
(13352189).
Author Contributions
Y . L. carried out the device design, fabrication and drafted the
manuscript. H. W. metalizes the SiC membrane. H. S. con-
ducts the room temperature Doppler measurements. Q. L.,
Y . L., and T. L. developed the measurement schemes. Y . L.
and M. A. S. conceived the project and coordinated the re-
search. All authors analyzed the measurement results and
gave their final approval for publication.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.21
TABLE I. The pure dephasing and its proportion of the total linewidth for each mechanical mode
mode number frequency ( 2π·) total linewidth ( 2π·) pure-dephasing ( 2π·) proportion
(1,1) 382.147 kHz 6.83 mHz 0.22 mHz 3.22%
(1,3) 871.318 kHz 8.2 mHz 0.28 mHz 3.41%
(3,1) 885.413 kHz 5.31 mHz 0.4 mHz 7.53%
(1,4) 1.144 MHz 7.9 mHz 0.33 mHz 4.17%
(3,3) 1.178 MHz 6.04 mHz 0.25 mHz 4.13%
(3,4) 1.384 MHz 7.55 mHz 0.16 mHz 2.11%
(1,5) 1.41 MHz 17.46 mHz 0.27 mHz 1.54%
(5,1) 1.426 MHz 8.56 mHz 0.28 mHz 3.27%
(3,5) 1.612 MHz 5.26 mHz 0.28 mHz 5.32%
(5,3) 1.621 MHz 7.1 mHz 0.23 mHz 3.23%
(1,6) 1.7 MHz 10.05 mHz 0.22 mHz 2.18%
(5,4) 1.776 MHz 8.09 mHz 0.37 mHz 4.57%
(3,6) 1.868 MHz 7.28 mHz 0.23 mHz 3.15%
(1,7) 1.949 MHz 7.75 mHz 0.26 mHz 3.35%
(5,5) 1.959 MHz 5.88 mHz 0.32 mHz 5.44%
(7,1) 1.971 MHz 9.7 mHz 0.31 mHz 3.19%
(3,7) 2.101 MHz 8.91 mHz 0.31 mHz 3.47%
(7,3) 2.116 MHz 8.38 mHz 0.18 mHz 2.14%
(5,6) 2.24 MHz 11.72 mHz 0.5 mHz 4.26%
(1,8) 2.25 MHz 22.58 mHz 0.62 mHz 2.74%22
TABLE II. The performance of mechanical resonators in optomechanical (OM) and electromechanical (EM) devices
materialbandgap
isolationstructure frequency Qfactor total linewidth pure dephasing group delayground-
statecoherence time
Al-stairs-drum [98] no stairs-circular plate (EM) 2π·10.69 MHz 3.6×1052π·30Hz not report ∼5ms yes 130 µs
Al-flat-drum [135] no flat circular plate (EM) 2π·1.8 MHz 1.6 ×1072π·0.135 Hz 2π·0.09 Hz not report yes 7.7 ms
SiN [99] no double clamped beam (EM) 2π·1.45 MHz 6×1052π·14.5 Hz not report 3.4 ms no not report
SiN [90] yes phononic crystal beam (EM) 2π·4.48 MHz 5.6×1052π·8 Hz not report 19.9 ms yes not report
SiN [92] yes Lotus membrane (EM) 2π·1.48 MHz 5.7 ×1082π·2.6 mHz 2π·0.5 mHz not report yes ∼100 ms
SiN [22, 118] no square membrane (EM) 2π·750 kHz 7.8 ×1072π·9.7 mHz not report ∼500 s yes 55.7 µs
SiN [78] yes Honeycomb lattice (OM) 2π·2.4 MHz 1082π·24 mHz not report 23 ms no 100 µs
crystalline silicon [77] yes phononic crystal beam (OM) 2π·5 GHz ∼4.09×1062π·1.22 kHz 2π·1.219 kHz not report yes 130 µs
crystalline silicon [93] yes phononic crystal beam (EM) 2π·5.08 GHz ∼2×1052π·31.8kHz 2π·30 kHz not report yes 5 µs
crystalline silicon [140] yes phononic crystal beam (OM) 2π·5.12 GHz ∼2.58×1062π·1.98 kHz 2π·1.42 kHz not report yes ≤112µs
gallium phosphide (GaP) [65] yes phononic crystal beam (OM) 2π·2.81 GHz 4×1042π·67 kHz 2π·64.5 kHz not report yes 2.37 µs
gallium arsenide (GaAs) [141] no phononic crystal beam (OM) 2π·2.7 GHz 1.8×1042π·179 kHz not report not report yes 0.8 µs
aluminum nitride (AlN) [142] no microdisk (OM) 2π·0.78 GHz 3.86×1032π·202 kHz not report 0.76 µs no not report
lithium niobate (LiNbO 3) [143] yes phononic crystal beam (OM) 2π·2.1 GHz 1.7×1042π·123 kHz not report not report no not report
crystalline diamond [100] no microdisk (OM) 2π·2.14 GHz 1.12×1042π·190 kHz not report ∼5 ms no not report
3C-SiC [144] no microdisk (OM) 2π·579 MHz 5.3 ×1032π·108 kHz not report not report no not report
3C-SiC [145–147] no nanowire (OM) 2π·50 kHz 1032π·50 Hz not clear not report no not report
4H-SiC [148] yes microdisk (OM) 2π·6.2 MHz 2.8 ×1062π·2.21 Hz not report not report no not report
3C-SiC [this work] no square membrane (EM)2π·871 kHz
mode (1,3)1.2×1082π·8.2 mHz 2π·0.28 mHz 4035 s yes 41.3 ms
3C-SiC [this work] no square membrane (EM)2π·1.178 MHz
mode (3,3)2×1082π·6.04 mHz 2π·0.25 mHz >5000 s yes 67.75 ms
Note: the listed Qfactors in the table correspond to the total linewidth rather than solely considering energy decay. For these properties of
other oscillators not listed in the table, please refer to the reviews [23, 27, 149, 150]