 1 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
Low Bend Loss, High Index, Composite Morphology 
Ultra -fast Laser Written Waveguides for Photonic 
Integrated Circuits  
A. J. Ross- Adams1, T. T. Fernandez1, M. J. Withford1 and S. Gross1,2,  
1 MQ Photonics, School of Mathematics and Physical Sciences, Macquarie University, 2109, 
Australia . 
2 School of Engineering, Macquarie University, 2109, Australia.  
andrew.ross -adams@mq.edu.au  
toney.teddyfernandez@unisa.edu.au  
michael.withford@mq.edu.au  
simon.gross@mq.edu.au  
 
 
 
       2 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
Abstract  
We demonstrate a novel, composite laser written 3D waveguide, fabricated in boro-
aluminosilicate glass, with a refractive index contrast of 1.12  × 10-2. The waveguide is 
fabricated using a multi -pass approach which leverages the respective refractive index 
modification mechanisms of both the thermal and athermal inscription regimes. We present the 
study and optimisation of inscription parameters for maxi mising positive refractive index 
change and ultimately demonstrate a dramatic advancement on the state of  the art of bend losses 
in laser -written waveguides. The 1.0 dB cm-1 bend loss cut -off radius is reduced from 10 mm 
to 4 mm, a t a propagation wavelength of 1550 nm. 
 
 
Keywords:  Ultrafast Laser Inscription, Thermal Inscription, Cumulative Heating, 
Athermal Inscription, Multi- scan, Multi -pass, Half -scan, Bend Loss, High Index Contrast, 
Photonic Integrated Circuit  
   
 
     
   3 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
Introduction  
Ultrafast Laser Inscription (ULI) enables the parametric design and fabrication of Photonic 
Integrated Circuits (PICs). The technique was first discovered in the 1996 by Davis et al.  and 
utilises a focused femtosecond laser to induce non- linear photoionisation in transparent 
dielectric media such as glasses, crystals and polymers, resulting in permanent, highly localised 
refractive index modifications1. In contrast to traditional planar lightwave circuits (PLCs),  ULI 
eschews the photomask requirement inhere nt to conventional photolithographic methods, 
enabling rapid prototyping. As with PLCs, a wide range of functional circuit elements can be 
fabricated, such as power splitting Y -branches2, directional couplers3, and multimode 
interference couplers4. Furthermore, it is a non- planar process capable of true 3D device 
geometries, and a diverse range of modification regimes, including optical waveguides, microfluidic channels, micro -voids, trenches and cantilevers
5. Access to three dimensions 
enables more complex structures such as photonic lanterns6 and multicore fibre fan -outs 
capable of mapping to arbitrary core layouts7. The ULI platform supports applications 
including astrophotonics8, on- chip quantum9, on- chip cubesat swarm navigation10, lab-on-a-
chip11, and space division multiplexing technologies for increasing telecommunications 
bandwidth and connection density12. In particular, there is vested interest in the development 
of Universal Photonics Processors (UPPs) which are capable of programmable signal routing13. 
The loss performance of a PIC is defined by its baseline linear propagation loss, bend losses 
and fibre coupling losses. Underpinning these loss components is the refractive index delta 
between the core and the substrate bulk material, which governs optica l mode confinement. 
Many approaches to optimising index contrast have been reported over the years, such as tuning the substrate's material composition
14, waveguide -air interfaces15, waveguide compression 
using damage -induced stress fields16, exploiting el ectronic resonances using laser -induced 
band- gap shifts17 and thermal annealing18. ULI waveguides are most commonly fabricated in 
fused silica, soda -lime and especially, boro- aluminosilicate display glasses originating from 
the consumer electronics industry, owing to their low cost, mechanical robustness and the  4 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
favourable waveguide morphologies possible with the femtosecond laser writing technique. 
Waveguide index contrasts in these materials are generally measured in the 10-3 range, which 
is comparable to that of standard 1550 nm single -mode optical fibres (approximately 0.5 × 10-
3 for Corning SMF28 Ultra, guiding a 10.4 µm  diameter mode -field). It should be noted that 
higher index contrasts in the 10-2 range are attainable, however this often sacrifices circularity 
and smoothness of the modification morphology14. The highest index contrast reported in silica 
glass is 2.2 ×  10-2 (ref. 1 9), though a higher delta of 4.5 ×  10-2 has since been reported in a 
bismuth germanate crysta l20. Though germanium doped silica PLCs  offer higher  index 
contrast,  typically on the order of 2%  (ref. 2 1), the  ULI platform  offers fine control over 
waveguide parameters, enabled by the laser writing method. By appropriately tuning inscription parameters, one may c ontrol waveguide width, cross -sectional shape and index 
contrast, allowing for advanced waveguide functionality such as arbitrary polarisation control for on -chip beam rotation
22. 
Scaling the complexity of  laser written  PICs, especially for future telecommunications 
applications such as UPPs and multicore fiber fan- outs, requires reducing the tolerable, 
minimum radius of waveguide curvature. Tighter bends allow for more compact waveguide routing within a chip, and hence,  smaller chips with increased component density and lower 
insertion loss. The present state of the art in this regard was reported by Lee et al.  in 2021, 
where a precisely controlled laser -induced crack at the edge of  the waveguide was used to 
reduce the minimum bend radius to 10 mm at a wavelength of 1550 nm
23.  
We propose a novel, non- damaging, multi -pass fabrication technique in boro -
aluminosilicate glass (Corning Eagle XG), for increasing refractive index contrast, which 
involves two sequential fabrication steps. The first pass inscribes a smooth index change 
thermal waveguide with a laser repetition rate of 5.1 MHz --  this type of modification is 
henceforth referred to as a thermal waveguide. The second pass overwrites the core with a 
multi- scan athermal modificat ion, with a repetition rate of 150 KHz , in order  to enhance the 
index contrast, and thus, reduce bend losses. The thermal regime relies on photoionisation  5 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
induced ion migration, leading to compositional change, whilst the athermal regime involves 
the formation of non -bridging oxygen hole centres  (among other defects) , to effect a positive 
refractive index change24,25. In this manuscript, we show that these two mechanisms can be 
triggered sequentially, for improved index contrast. W e present the process of optimising 
multi- pass fabrication with respect to pulse energy, feedrate, pulses per mm and spherical 
aberration , as well as characterisation methods and th e procedure for achieving high accuracy 
alignment to the waveguide core on the second the pass. 
Results  
A chip was fabricated containing two blocks of thermal waveguides, as illustrated in 
Figure 2. (a) The athermal overwrite segments feature 3 mm long adiabatic tapered 
terminations , where the pulse energy is ramped in a linear fashion from 0 – 200 nJ.  to ensure 
a smooth transition. The chip contains two blocks of waveguides, corresponding to two 
respective characterisation experiments. All experimental measurements, hereon, were 
performed using robotic 6- axis active alignment for coupling the launch and collector single -
mode fibres to the chip. 
Block 1 – Linear Propagation Loss  
This block is comprised of straight waveguides which feature multi -pass segments of 
incrementally shortened length, ranging from 8 mm to 2 mm, ending with an unmodified 
reference waveguide; this is analogous to a cutback measurement. The linear propagation loss of the composite waveguide was obtained by measuring the insertion loss of all waveguides in this block and extracting the slope of the linear relationship between insertion loss and composite segment length. The y- axis intercept of the loss curve re presents the aggregate 
contribution of coupling losses and the scattering losses associated with the athermal termination tapers. A comparison of measured mode -field profiles is shown in Figure 1. 
Coupling losses were obtained from the overlap integral of the imaged fibre and thermal  6 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
waveguide modes, hence, from the subtraction, the termination taper losses were calculated. 
The linear propagation losses of the thermal waveguides are measured simply by taking the average of the insertion loss of the 4 reference waveguides, subtracting t he coupling loss and 
dividing by the length of the chip. These data are summarised in Table 1.  
 
Figure 1. Measured mode- fields of a standard single -mode fibre, a thermal waveguide and a composite 
waveguide guiding at a wavelength of 1550 nm, imaged with an InG aAs SWIR camera . 
 
Loss Component  Magnitude  Unit  
Linear Propagation - Thermal  0.18 dB cm-1 
Linear Propagation -  Composite  0.50 dB cm-1 
Coupling Mode -Field Mismatch  0.06 dB 
Athermal Termination  0.18 dB 
 
Table  1. Waveguide linear loss components . 
The excess loss of the athermal termination tapers is due to localized glass damage in the 
low power region of the taper. This loss component also varies between 0.10 and 0.18 dB. This 
variance arises from high sensitivity to the precise transverse positio ning of these damage 
effects, relative to the waveguide core. For rigor, the worst -case value of 0.18 dB is used for 
subsequent simulation. 
 
 
 7 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
Block 2 – Bend Loss Study  
 
Figure 2. a) Schematic diagram of the multi -pass experiment chip. The upper block of waveguides 
iterates the minimum radius of curvature across a series of circular arc s -bends, in order to 
characterise the evolution of the bend -loss component. The lower block is a set of straight waveguides 
featuring composite segments of decreasing length, in order to measure linear propagation losses. The 
red lines denote regions of composite modification, where the waveguide core has been overwritten 
with an athermal modification. b) Plot showing the simulation and measurement of the bend- loss 
component  (i.e. excluding linear propagation and coupling losses) for both, conventional thermal 
waveguides and the novel composite waveguide for progressively smaller radii of curvature at 1550 nm wavelength.  
 
The second block contains sets of waveguides featuring s -bends based on two 
concatenated circular arcs with a total y -dimension side -step of 500 µ m over a prescribed 
length L in the x- dimension (see Figure 2. a)), which is varied from 8 mm to 2 mm in 0.2 mm 
increments. Circular arcs were selected since they feature constant curvature, the radius of 
which, scales proportionately to L, equating to a bend radius scan spanning 32.1 mm to 2.1 mm. For each value of L, two waveguides are studied. The first is a purely thermal modification which serves as a reference. The second waveguide features a composite modification segment spanning the length of the s -bend and a 3 mm adiabatic transition region at each end. The total 
 8 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
insertion loss was decomposed in order to extract the underlying pure bend- loss component, 
which is plotted as a function of bend radius in Figure  2. b). The composite waveguide offers 
clear advantages in tight bending scenarios, which are sufficient to outweigh the associated 
loss penalties caused by scattering and the taper losses. Subtracting the coupling losses and the contributions of the straight  waveguide lead -in segments, and considering the insertion loss of 
only the s -bends, the abscissa at which the thermal and composite regimes have equal insertion 
loss occurs at a bend radius of 9.8 mm. For a 500 µ m side-step, the measured abscissa 
corresponding to a 1.0 dB cut -off threshold for s -bend insertion loss occurs at a bend radius of 
3.0 mm for the composite waveguide and 9.15 mm for the thermal waveguide , In other words, 
the minimum x -dimension length required to achieve 1.0 dB insertion loss s -bend with a 500 
µm side -step was reduced from approximately 4.2 mm to 2.4 mm, a reduction of 43%. Next, 
consi dering specifically the extracted bend -loss component, the 1.0 dB cm
-1 cut-off occurs at a 
bend radius of 11.0 mm and 3.5 mm, for the thermal and composite waveguides, respectively, 
a 69% improvement which compares favourably with the state -of-the-art previously reported 
at 10 mm, using an integrated microcrack technique22. 
 
Extracting Refractive I ndex Contrast  
It was not feasible to directly measure the transverse refractive index profile of the 
composite waveguide, due to limitations associated with the respective measurement 
techniques. Measurement of thermal waveguides is achieved using the refracted near -field 
technique  (RNF)26; however  this method is unsuitable for studying the athermal modifications 
due to the presence of highly scattering microvoids in the region of negative index change. Conversely, quantitative phase imaging (QPI)
27, which measures optical pathlength 
differences,  is unsuitable for studying thermal waveguides  due to the requirement for a short 
modification length. This is problematic because in the thermal regime it is not possible to 
fabricate a perfect waveguide termination, instead, the transient dissipation of the  plasma 
results in rounded off and tapered structures, for which no valid measurement can be recorded.  9 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
Importantly, both techniques measure the refractive index distribution in the visible range (632 
nm for Rinck RNF profiler, 600 nm for the Phasics QPI camera), while the structures under test are intended to guide at 1550 nm. It was found that t his leads to an overestimation of 
refractive index change. Hence, it was necessary to extract the refractive index contrast via comparative study of the experimentally measured  bend losses and simulation (RSOFT 
FEMsim), based on the finite element method. This is achieved by stepping the refractive index delta of the simulation until agreement is reached by the simulated and experimentally measured bend loss curves.  
 
Figure 3. Transverse refractive index profiles measured using the refractive near- field technique 
and quantitative phase imaging, respectively, for the thermal and athermal modifications. Also shown 
is the  synthetically derived composite profile used for simulation .  
 
Bend loss is extremely sensitive to refractive index contrast. Consequently, the bend loss 
curve represents a very robust tool for extracting the index contrast. For example, the peak 
positive index change of the thermal waveguide profile is 8.5 ×  10-3 according to the RNF 
measurement. However, from the bend -loss curve, the true value is revealed to be 6.5 × 10-3, a 
30% overestimation. Since the composite index profile cannot be measured directly with either 
of the two techniques, a synthetic approximation was crafted by additively combining the 
 10 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
respective profiles of the two underlying modifications in MATLAB. The refractive index 
addition is not one -to-one, but instead equivalent to the thermal waveguide plus approximately 
44% of the athermal index change. This value was determined via iterative simulation where 
the contribution of the athermal modification is progressively increased until good agreement with measured data occurred . Further study is required to determine the physical explanation  
for the incomplete addition; we note that the therm al inscription pass has changed the structure 
and composition of the glass in the focal volume and the incident beam is being focused through the existing waveguide which influences the focal intensity distribution. The final value for the 
real positive index contrast (relative to the bulk material) was found to be 1.12 ×  10
-2, or 0.8%. 
The respective transverse refractive index profiles are shown in Figure 3. The polarization 
dependence of the composite waveguides has not been explicitly studied yet. However, the 
birefringence of athermal multiscan waveguides and annealed thermal waveguides, have been previously measured to be on the order of 2.5 × 10
-4 and 1.2 × 10-6, respectively, in boro-
aluminosilicate glass28,29. 
 
Discussion  
S-bends are essential for any photonic integrated circuit, especially UPPs. To fully 
contextualise and visualise the merit of the composite waveguide approach, it is necessary to consider other s -bend geometries, since circular arcs -  by their nature - feature constant 
curvature. Hence, the bend- loss component is constant across the entire span of the s -bend. 
Consequently, it is often preferable to design s -bends based on raised- sine and cosine curves, 
which allow for gradual transitions, while reducing the  path length over which, tight bending 
occurs . Thus, these three curve geometries form the foundational design "tool -box" for PIC 
routing. Bezier
30 and Euler31 curves are also widely used for routing in more complex device 
geometries, though these are not being considered here. By fitting an exponential model to the 
measured bend -loss as a function of curvature, the insertion loss characteristics of an arbitrary 
s-bend can be extrapolated for any given s -bend length and side -step, and for any given curve  11 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
equation. Side-step refers to the delta between the respective y -dimension (horizontal) 
positions of the s -bend start and termination points. Figure 4. shows comparative models of the 
insertion loss of arbitrary s -bends based on circular arcs and cosine bends, respectively, with, 
and without, the application of the composite waveguide technique. The insertion loss is 
calculated by applying the aforementioned bend loss model and the measured linear propagation loss to the total path length of the hypothetica l s-bend, and then applying the 
addition of the athermal termination taper losses. The white regions represent the span of the parameter space, for which a 1.0 dB insertion loss cut -off criterion is not satisfied, and thus 
visually highlight the limitations of the respective fabrication regimes. Figure 4. a) shows the 
overlapping insertion loss surfaces for cosine and arc based s -bends written purely in the 
thermal regime. Comparing a) to b), the engineering advantage of the low composite waveguide bend los ses is clearly illustrated by the dramatic reduction in the area of the region 
for which it is not possible to produce a sub 1.0 dB insertion loss s -bend. The most significant 
limiting factor constraining the efficacy of the composite waveguide tool -box is  the athermal 
termination taper loss. This is especially important for cosine and raised sine s -bend, which 
feature two separate regions of high curvature separated by a region of zero curvature, hence, the taper loss penalty is incurred 4 times. In the  model presented, the composite cosine s -bend 
is defined as a thermal waveguide, featuring the athermal overwrite modification only in regions where the radius of curvature is less than 10 mm. The taper losses may readily be reduced from 0.19 dB to 0.05 -  0.10 dB, by optimising the  taper  length and width parameters, 
and by progressively increasing the scan- line pitch to push the damage region outside of the 
core. Referring, again, to Figure 4. b), the taper losses need only be reduced below 0.15 dB for 
the com posite cosine s -bends to satisfy the 1.0 dB insertion loss cut -off criterion. This 
hypothetical gain is represented by the transparent region labelled ‘ composite cosine.'  
  12 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
 
Figure 4. a) Decision maps illustrating:  a) The span of thermal waveguide s -bend parameters for 
which a 1.0 dB insertion loss criterion is satisfied, and b) the improvement offered by incorporating 
the composite waveguide technique. The cosine model only applies composite overwriting when the radius of curvature is below 10 mm.
 
 
In summary , we present a novel, composite morphology femtosecond laser written 
waveguide based on multi -pass inscription featuring both the thermal and athermal 
modification regimes. The fabrication parameter space was optimised to maximise athermal 
refractive index contrast, which was found to scale in direct proportion to the pulse energy and 
linear density (pulses per mm) of the inscription pass, and inverse proportion to the pulse repetition rate. Optimal index cont rast was achieved at a repetition rate  of 150 kHz, with 
200,000 pulses per mm and a pulse energy of 200 nJ. Refractive index change distributions were found to bifurcate ; the region of positive index change splits across its central horizontal 
axis, resulting in two vertically stacked positive lobes with a region of negative index change set between them. This phenomenon occurs  above a pulse energy threshold of 110- 120 nJ, 
likely due to the dispersive effects inherent to the focusing of high energy, spectrally broad, 
short duration pulses. This  was addressed by exploring the effects of focusing conditions on 
the modification morphology, via experimenting with the focusing objective's spherical 
 13 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
aberration correction collar. Setting the collar to 0.50 mm , with an inscription depth of 0.25 
mm enabled maximal useful peak positive index change, with a magnitude of 1.2 ×  10-2, 
measured using QPI at 600 nm. We conclude with demonstration of the composite waveguide 
and rigorous study of propagation and bend losses for both fabrication regimes. Bend loss 
analysis provides a very accurate tool for extracting refractive index contrast, allowing for the 
correctio n of a 30% discrepancy when measuring at 600 nm versus 1550 nm, using traditional 
techniques such as RNF. Peak positive index changes of 6.5 × 10-3 and 1.12 ×  10-2 were 
observed for the thermal and composite waveguide structures, respectively.  By combining the 
thermal and athermal inscription regimes, th e 1.0 dB cm-1 cut-off for bend radius is reduced 
from 11 mm to 3.5 mm, a substantive advancement conducive to increased integration density 
for future PICs such a universal photonic processors and multi -core fibre fan -outs. 
 
Materials and Methods  
Experimental setup  
All waveguides in this work were written in Corning Eagle XG  glass , using a Ti:sapphire 
femtosecond laser (Femtosource XL500, Femtolasers GmbH), which operates at 800 nm and emits 50 fs pulses with a repetition rate of 5.1 MHz. Circularly polarised pulses were focused into the glass at a depth of 250 µm using a 1.4 NA Olympus UPLANSAPO 100× oil 
immersion microscope objective for thermal modification, and a 0.6 NA Olympus LUCPlanFLN 40× air objective for performing athermal modification. S ample translation 
through the inscription beam was controlled using an Aerotech A3200 motion controller and 3-axis air bearing linear stages. Additionally, residual stress fields induced by thermal 
inscription  result in a positive halo around the waveguide with a magnitude on the order of 
3.0 × 10
-3. After the first inscription pass, the samples were subjected to a thermal annealing 
process, as described by Arriola et al.18. The samples are raised to a temperature of 750 °C, 
which  relaxes the surrounding stress field, removing the halo, and effectively shrinks the  14 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
waveguide down to the single -mode regime while retaining a high index contrast. Compared 
to the thermal regime, the athermal regime, b y its nature, ex hibits reduced thermal stability . 
The positive index change is the net result of several types of defects in the glass network, the 
concentrations of which, are differentially modulated by temperature. For example, silicon 
unpaired bond defects are thermally stable only up to 110 °C. This has been examined in detail by Fernandez et al., who reported less than a 5% reduction in the positive index change 
for athermal waveguides in fused silica, when annealed at 400  °C (ref. 25) .  
 
After annealing, the chip's end- faces are ground back in order to remove waveguide 
termination artifacts, and then polished to optical surface quality. Thermal waveguides were 
inscribed with a feedrate of 1500 mm/ min, with a pulse energy of 183 nJ, and  a pre- annealed 
width of 30 µ m. Waveguides of this size are well characterised, feature low propagation losses 
of 0.2 dB cm
-1, good bend loss performance, and circular near -field profiles for low coupling 
losses to standard telecommunication single -mode fibers  on the order of 0.06 dB cm-1. 
Measurement of thermal waveguide refractive index distributions was performed with a Rinck refracted near field (RNF) profilometer
26 (632 nm measurement wavelength); athermal 
modifications were characterised  using a Phasics SID4HR camera (600 nm imaging 
wavelength), which is capable of quantitative phase imaging (QPI) based on quadriwave lateral shearing interferometry
27 . Mode -field diameters were measured by coupling 1550 nm 
laser light into the chip using a single -mode opti cal fib ers and imaging the near -field output 
onto a Xenics Bobcat InGaAs SWIR camera.  
 
Parameter Study  
Before proceeding with multi -pass fabrication, it was first necessary to optimise the 
inscription parameters for the secondary athermal pass. The secondary modification is, in 
essence, a multi -scan waveguide being written inside the core of a thermal waveguide. The 
athermal modification geometry is sensitive to focusing conditions and strongly confined to  15 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
the focal volume. Accordingly, the width of the modification is only on the order of 1 µ m. 
Hence, waveguides written in this regime are volumetrically constructed by inscribing 
multiple closely spaced scanlines in a raster pattern32. The parameter space to be explored 
includes pulse energy (nJ), pulse repetition rate (kHz), pulses per mm, spherical aberration, feedrate (mm/min) and scanline inscription order. Principally, we desired a multiscan 
waveguide which features high index contrast and symmetric morphology. To this end, the 
first step of the opti misation was the implementation of the half -scan algorithm which 
interleaves scan -line inscription order, evenly distributing the localised stress field. This 
yields a uniform region of index change and also raises the mechanical failure threshold, allowin g for higher inscription pulse energies and, thus, higher index contrast modifications
33. 
For all experiments the half -scan waveguide width was fixed at 4.8 µm by scan-line placement . 
This width was selected since it produces a square region of positive index change, and nicely fits inside the core region of a 30 µm (pre -annealed) thermal waveguide. The half -scan 
modification is comprised of 12 scan- lines, with a minor pitch of 400 nm, and a major pitch 
of 1200 nm.  
 Pulse Repetition Rate and Density  
It was necessary to establish the optimal pulse density for achieving maximum index contrast. 
Thus, a parameter scan was fabricated at a depth of 250 µ m. Pulse energy was fixed at 90 nJ, 
and the length of the half -scan stub was locked at 12 µ m. This pulse energy was selected 
because it had been observed during QPI analysis that this corresponds to a homogeneous  
square shaped region of index change. The index contrast was obtained by measuring the 
optical path length difference across the transverse cross -section and dividing it by the 
physical length of the stub. The pulse repetition rate was iterated from 150- 728 KHz. For each 
repetition rate, the feedrate was scaled in order to iterate pulse density from 100,000 to  
200,000 pulses per mm. The resulting modifications were subjected to QPI, which revealed a 
positive relationship between refractive index contrast and pulse density,  this is  shown in 
Figure 5. a). A slight inverse proportionality was observed between puls e repetition rate and  16 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
index contrast, allowing for an improvement of approximately 10% at 150 kHz, compared to 
728 kHz. For all subsequent experiments, the pulse density was fixed at 200,000 per mm, and the repetition rate was fixed at 150 kHz -  the upper and lower bounds, respectively, of the 
explored parameter space, yielding maximum index contrast. It is possible that contrast could be improved by pushing the envelope further, this is impractical however, as fabrication times become prohibitively long. 
 
Figure 5. a) Experimental characterisation of the influence of pulse repetition rate and pulse spatial 
density on peak positive refractive index change. b) Experimental measurement of peak positive index 
change as a function of spherical aberration compensation cond itions, with a repetition rate of 150 
kHz.  
 
 
  
 17 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
Spherical Aberration  
 
Figure 6. Collage of q uantitative phase imag ery of athermal multiscan modifications inscribed at 
a depth of 250 µ m in Eagle XG glass. The evolution of modification morphology as a function of 
focusing conditions and pulse energy is studied by scanning the power of the incident beam and 
varying the setting of the focusing objective's spherical aberration collar (SAC).  
 
It was observed in all cases, that there exists a critical threshold energy at which the region of positive index change bifurcates across its vertical axis, with a negative index change forming between the resulting positive lobes. This energy threshold was utilised as a reference point 
for future fabrication runs and is hence referred to as the bifurcation energy. It is speculated 
that the bifurcation phenomenon is a consequence of the short, 50 fs pulse duration, since this 
equates to a broader spectral bandwidth. As studied by Sun et al.
34 this incurs more severe 
dispersive effects such as temporal broadening of the pulse and wavelength dependent path-
length difference which result in non- trivial instantaneous intensity profiles. This bifurcation 
is problematic since it creates complex guid ance conditions subject to multi -mode 
interference. Various works have investigated the consequences of spherical aberration with 
regards to both the geometry of the focal volume and the resulting waveguide morphology35-
37, where aberration is controlled by varying the fabrication depth, varying the refractive index 
 18 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
of immersion oil, and via the use of spatial light modulators. In this instance, the spherical 
aberration is varied using the compensation collar built into the focusing objective, which features gradations denoting compensation depths of 0.00 mm, 0.17 mm and 0.50 mm . At a 
focusing depth of 0.25 mm, w hen the Spherical Aberration Correction collar (SAC) of the 
focusing objective is set to 0.00 and 0.17 mm, the bifurcation phenomenon manifests at approximately 110 nJ pulse energy, which effectively caps the m aximum useful positive 
index change at 3.0 ×10
-3. Figure 5. b) shows the respective refractive index contrast curves 
with respect to pulse energy, for the different SAC settings. Figure 6. shows a QPI map of the 
athermal modification morphology with reference  to the parameter space being interrogated.  
It was discovered that this limitation can be circumvented by setting the SAC to 0.50 mm. Under this regime, the bifurcation phenomenon occurs as normal at 110- 120 nJ, however, as 
the pulse energy continues to increase, the distribution of the index change  progressively 
evolves to yield a single, relatively symmetric region of strong positive index change, located directly below a similarly proportioned region of strong negative index change, as shown in 
in the bottom row of Figure 6. Consequently, peak pos itive index change is no longer 
constrained by the bifurcation limit, allowing positive index changes on the order of 1.12 ×  
10
-2, relative to the bulk material, to be readily obtained. The effect of spherical aberration on 
the relationship between pulse energy and p eak positive refractive index change is shown in 
Figure 5. b). The significance of spherical aberration for boosting the maximum accessible 
index contrast has also been noted in other recent works38, and likely was exploited 
unintentionally during early multiscan demonstrations39. It should also be noted that the 
presence of the strong negative region will serve to compress the mode -field in the vertical 
axis.  
 
 
  19 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
Alignment  
 
Figure 7. Bright -field microscope images of a 30 µm pre -annealed width, thermal waveguide, 
before and after the addition of the athermal inscription pass. Inset images show the corresponding 
brightfield transverse cross -sections.  
 
Good alignment of the athermal modification and the thermal waveguide core is critical for minimising bend losses. It was, hence, necessary to develop a reliable recipe for high quality alignment over path lengths up to 8 mm. Alignment tracks, composed of highly visible optical damage, are incorporated into the thermal inscription pass and precisely placed at known positions relative to the thermal waveguides and key coordinates such as the s -bend segment 
termini. A point -grid height profile is then measur ed across the surface of the chip, after 
which, the chip is thermally annealed and polished as described in the methodology section. For the athermal pass, the chip is placed at the same position on the vacuum chuck and the 
height profile is re -measured to verify that the flatness profile has not significantly deviated. 
A reference athermal parameter scan is inscribed in close proximity  to the chip end- face. The 
chip is temporarily removed from the fabrication setup for microscope inspection to calibrate  
pulse energy relative to the bifurcation threshold and fine tune  the vertical offset relative to 
the thermal waveguides. The alignment tracks are then set as the co -ordinate origin and the 
athermal inscription process begins. Transverse and longitudinal bright -field microscopic 
inspection of the resulting waveguides was performed to verify quality of the waveguide core overwriting alignment; an example is shown in F igure 7. The alignment recipe proved very 
 20 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
successful for a 1 µ m of deviation tolerance at any point of the point -grid height profile. Sub-
micron lateral alignment was readily attained using the reference markers. The inscription, 
annealing and post -processing of a photonic chip fabricated in the thermal regime, typically 
span a period of two days. The addition of the multi -pass step adds an additional half -day of 
processing time. 
 Acknowledgements  
This work is funded by the Australian Research Council Discovery Program under grant 
FT200100590. The work was performed in part at the OptoFab node of the Australian 
National Fabrication Facility (ANFF) utilizing Commonwealth as well as NSW state government funding.  
 
Author Contributions  
S.G. supervised and resourced  the project.  A.J.R.A, T.F. and S. G. conceived  the experiments.  
A.J.R.A  carried out design, fabrication and execution of the experiments. All authors participated in 
the analysis of data and contributed to the writing of manuscript. 
 Conflict of interest  
The authors declare no competing interests.  
Supplementary information  
Supplementary materials are available on request . 
References  
1. Davis, K. M.  et al. Writing waveguides in glass with a femtosecond laser. Optics  21 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
Letters  21, 1729- 1731  (1996) . 
2. Amorim, V. A.  et al. Optimization of broadband Y-junction splitters in fused silica 
by femtosecond laser wri ting. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters  29, 619- 622 
(2017) .  
3. Chen, W.  J. et al. Broadband directional couplers fabricated in bulk glass with high 
repetition rate femtosecond laser pulses. Optics  Express 16, 11470- 11480 (2008).  
4. Watanabe, W., Note, Y.  & Itoh, K. Fabrication of multimode interference 
waveguides in glass by use of a femtosecond laser.  Optics Letters  30, 2888- 2890 
(2005).  
5.  Osellame, R., Cerullo, G.  & Ramponi, R. Femtosecond Laser Micromachining:  
Photonic and Microfluidic Devices in Transparent Materials . (Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012),  123.  
6. Thomson, R.  R. et al. Ultrafast laser inscription of an integrated photonic lantern. 
Optics  Express 19, 5698 -5705 (2011).  
7. Gross, S.  et al . Ultrafast laser -written sub -components for space division 
multiplexing. Optical Fiber Communication Conference 2020.  San Diego : Optica 
Publishing Group, 2020, W1A.1.  
8.  Jovanovic, N.  et al . Starlight demonstration of the Dragonfly instrument: an 
integrated photonic pupil -remapping interferometer for high- contrast imaging. 
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society  427, 806-815 (2012 ). 
9.  Meany, T.  et al. Laser written circuits for quantum photonics. Laser & Photonics 
Reviews  9, 363-384 (2015) .  
10.  Hansen, J. T.  et al . Interferometric beam combination with a triangular 
tricoupler photonic chip. Journal of Astronomical Telescopes , Instruments , and 
Systems 8, 025002 ( 2022) .  22 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
11.  Osellame, R.  et al. Femtosecond laser microstructuring: an enabling tool for 
optofluidic lab- on-chips. Laser & Photonics Reviews  5, 442-463 (2011) .  
12.  Fontaine, N. K.  et al. Photonic lanterns, 3- D waveguides, multiplane light 
conversion, and other components that enable space- division multiplexing. 
Proceedings of the IEEE  110, 1821-1834 (2022 ). 
13.  Ceccarelli, F.  et al . Universal photonic processors in a glass -based 
femtosecond laser writing platform. Photonics in Switching and Computing 2021 . 
Washington: Optica Publishing Group, 2021, W2A.3.  
14.  Fernandez, T. T.  et al . Designer glasses —future of photonic device 
platforms. Advanced Functional Materials  32, 2103103 ( 2022) . 
15.  Meyer, R.  et al . Extremely high- aspect -ratio ultrafast Bessel beam 
generation and stealth dicing of multi -millimeter thick glass. Applied Physics Letters  
114, 201105 ( 2019) . 
16.  Liu, Z.  M. et al. Fabrication of an optical waveguide- mode -field compressor 
in glass using a femtosecond laser. Materials  11, 1926 (2018) .  
17.  Lapointe, J.  et al. Nonlinear increase, invisibility, and sign inversion of a 
localized fs -laser -induced refractive index change in crystals and glasses. Light: 
Science & Applications  9, 64 (2020) .  
18.  Arriola, A.  et al. Low bend loss waveguides enable compact, efficient 3D  
photonic chips. Optics  Express 21, 2978- 2986  (2013) .  
19.  Eaton, S. M.  et al. High refractive index contrast in fused silica waveguides 
by tightly focused, high -repetition rate femtosecond laser. Conference on Lasers and 
Electro -Optics  2009. Baltimore : Optica Publishing Group, 2009, CFT3.  
20.  Fernandez, T.  et al. Record -high positive refractive index change in bismuth 
germanate crystals through ultrafast laser enhanced polarizability. Scientific Reports   23 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
10, 15142 (2020 ).  
21. Takahashi, H. High performance planar lightwave  circuit devices for large 
capacity transmission. Optics  Express 19, B173 -B180 (2011).  
22. Sun, B. S. et al . On -chip beam rotators, adiabatic mode converters, and 
waveplates through low -loss waveguides with variable cross -sections. Light: Science 
& Applications  11, 214 (2022).  
23.  Lee, T.  et al.  Low bend loss femtosecond laser written waveguides exploiting 
integrated microcrack. Scientific Reports  11, 23770 (2021) . 
24. T. T. Fernandez et al., Dual Regimes of Ion Migration in High Repetition Rate 
Femtosecond Laser Inscribed Waveguides . IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 27 , 
1068- 1071, (2015).   
25. Toney Fernandez, T. et al. Thermally stable high numerical aperture integrated 
waveguides and couplers for the 3 μm wavelength range. APL Photonics  7, 126106  
(2022) . 
26.  Oberson, P.  et al. Refracted near -field measurements of refractive index and 
geometry of silica -on-silicon integrated optical waveguides. Applied Optics  37, 7268 -
7272 (1998) .  
27.  Khalil, A. A.  et al. Refractive index change measurement by quantitative 
microscopy phase imaging for femtosecond laser written structures. Optics 
Communications  485, 126731 (2021) .  
28. Brown, G. et al. Ultrafast laser inscription of Bragg- grating waveguides using the 
multiscan technique. Optics Letters  37, 491- 493 (2012).  
29. Corrielli, G.  et al. Symmetric polarization- insensitive directional couplers 
fabricated by femtosecond laser writing. Optics  Express 26, 15101- 15109 (2018).  
30. Norris, B.  R. M. et al . First on -sky demonstration of an integrated- photonic nulling  24 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
interferometer: the GLINT instrument . Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical 
Society  491, 4180- 4193  (2020) . 
31. Cherchi, M.  et al. The Euler bend: paving the way for high- density integration on 
micron -scale semiconductor platforms . Proceedings  of SPIE 8990, Silicon Photonics 
IX. San Francisco: SPIE , 2014, 899004.   
32.  Nasu, Y., Kohtoku, M. &  Hibino, Y. Low -loss waveguides written with a 
femtosecond laser for flexible interconnection in a planar light -wave circuit. Optics 
Letters  30, 723-725 (2005) .  
33.  Sun, Q.  et al . Control of laser induced cumulative stress for efficient 
processing of fused silica. Scientific Reports  10, 3819 (2020) .  
34.  Sun, B.  S., Salter, P. S. & Booth, M. J. Effects of sample dispersion on 
ultrafast laser focusing. Journal of the Optical Society of America B  32, 1272- 1280 
(2015) .  
35.  Song, J.  et al . Mechanism of femtosecond laser inducing inverted 
microstructures by employing different types of objective lens. Journal of Physics D : 
Applied Physics 44, 495402 (2011) .  
36.  Huot, N.  et al. Analysis of the effects of spherical aberration on ultrafast laser -
induced refractive index variation in glass. Optics Express 15, 12395 -12408 (2007) .  
37.  Huang, L.  et al. Aberration correction for direct laser written waveguides in a 
transverse geometry. Optics  Express 24, 10565- 10574 (2016) .  
38.  Sun, B.  S. et al. High speed precise refractive index modification for photonic 
chips through phase aberrated pulsed lasers. Print at 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.14451 (2023) .  
39. Thomson, R. R. et al. Internal gain from an erbium -doped oxyfluoride- silicate 
glass waveguide fabricated using femtosecond waveguide in scription. IEEE  25 / 25 
Accepted for Publication in Light: Advanced Manufacturing – January  2024 
 
Photonics Technology Letters  18, 1515- 1517 (2006).  
 