Exploring the Unconventional Electron Distribution Patterns in Iron -based Superconductor s 
1,2Chi Ho Wong *, 1Rolf Lortz * 
1Department of Physics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong  
2Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 
Hong Kong  
Emails: chkhwong@ust.hk , lortz@ust.hk  
Abstract:   
For more than a decade, the unusual distribution of electrons observed in ARPES (angle -resolved 
photoemission spectroscopy) data within t he energy range of  ~30meV to ~300meV below the 
Fermi level, known as the ARPES range, has remained a puzzle in the field of iron -based 
superconductivity. However, in this study, we have made  a noteworthy observation: although the 
electron -phonon coupling alone is insufficient to account for the observed ARPES pattern, our 
analysis reveals that when the instantaneous electron -phonon coupling occurring in selective 
phonon channel is enhanced by  the coexistence of antiferromagnetic spin density wave and 
charge density wave phenomena , the amplified interaction  becomes comparable to the ARPES 
range. This finding suggests that the instantaneous  interplay between these intricate phenomena 
should play  a crucial role in generati ng the observed energy range  in ARPES . Our work  may 
provide  a valuable clue towards achieving a deeper understanding of the complex relationship 
between electronic correlations, lattice structure, and superconduc tivity in iron -based materials 
for uncovering the origin of the unconventional ARPES pattern.  
Introduction:  
Iron-based superconductors have attracted considerable attention in the field of condensed matter 
physics due to their unique properties and potential applications in high -temperature 
superconductivity  [1,2,3]. However, there are numerous complex features that still lack a 
comprehensive understanding, such as the intricate effects of antiferrom agnetism, nematicity, 
gap anisotropy , spin -orbit coupling, and other facto rs on the underlying pairing mechanism  
[1,2,3]. In particular, the experimental ARPES studies have confirmed the unusual electron 
distribution pattern below the Fermi level,  where  the electron s within the energy range of 
~30meV to ~300meV below the Fermi level can be surprisingly affected by iron -based 
superconductivity and this unusual pattern has remained a longstanding puzzle  in the study  of 
iron-based superconductors  [4-6]. In spite of  exten sive research efforts over the past decade, the 
origin of this unconventional electron distribution pattern has remained elusive. Understanding 
the science underlying the unusual energy range observed in ARPES  is crucial as it may provide 
insights into the triggers of iron-based supercondu ctivity .  
To unravel the origin of the unconventional electron distrib ution pattern in the ARPES data  [4-
6], our analysis goes beyond the conventional electron -phonon coupling model and explores th e 
interplay between various electronic correlations, lattice structure, and key phenomena such as 
antiferromagnetic spin density wave (SDW) and charge density wave (C DW) in the tetrahedral regions. The presence of SDW can provide a two -fold increase  in the antiferromagnetically 
enhanced electron -phonon scattering matrix  [7]. Apart from this, t he SDW can induce the 
electric xy potential in the form of the CDW phenomenon , and further increase the electron -
phonon  scattering matrix  by another factor of ~2  [7]. These two amplification factors (Coh factor  
= 
SDW CDWRR ) of electron -phonon coupling were  proposed by Coh et al  [7], in which the non-
cancellable out -of-plane phonon in the tetrahedral zones between  the magnetic and non -magnetic 
lattice sites under antiferromagnetic spin density wave was observed  under enormous  
experimental and computational costs , resulting in a significant improvement in the agreement 
between simulation results and experimental  observations  [7,8] . By employing their proposed  
method  [7,8] , it becomes  possible to  explicitly demonstrate the emergence of an induced xy 
potential in the presence of complex phenomena . Despite t his finding providing  a more accurate 
calculation  of the experimental behavior observe d in the iron-based superconductors, the 
fundamental understanding  of the ampl ification effects may  not be comprehensive.  
In this paper, we delve  into the fundamental understanding of the Coh factor s [7] and investigate 
whether antiferromagnetism, spin density wave, and charge density wave  are the major 
ingredient s in the ARPES range . By examining their interplay, we aim to unmask  the complex 
mechanisms that drive the unconve ntional electron di stributions in the ARPES data  [4-6]. Such 
understand ing is crucial for advancing the  knowledge of these iron-based compounds  and 
facilitating the development  of new strategies for the theory of iron -based superconductors.  
 
Computational Methods  
For a lattice ion located at position 
iR , with a displacement 
( , , )iu x y z  from its equilibrium 
position 
0
iR , and assume that the potential 
()Vr of the ion is rigid, then the electron -phonon 
interaction can be expressed as 
†3( ) ( ) ( )i
iH r r V r R d r
  where 
 is the wavefunction 
of electrons and 
 is spin index. For small amplitude vibration, it can be expanded as  [9]   
03 † 0 3 † 0( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) | ...
iii i R i R
iiH d r r r V r R d r r r u V r R   
        
 
Antiferromagnetism can enhance electron phonon scattering matrix by a factor of R AF [10].  In 
the presence  of spin-density wave , the antiferromagnetic fluctuations are  expected to  form  AFM 
local minima and maxima  alternatingly  [7]. While the AFM fluctuations in the local minima a re 
rare, the spin density wave maximizes the AFM fluctuations at the local maxima  that create a 
twofold increase in the local electron -phonon scattering matrix  at the maxima . Meanwhile, th e 
non-cancellable or differential vibrational amplitude  along the out -of-plane axis (i.e. 
1 ( ) | ( ) | | ( ) | 0i i peak i peaku z u z u z   
) of the nearest Fe neighbors occurs and then induce an 
additional electrostat ic potential along the xy plane  in the form of CDW  [7], or equivalently 
amend s the electronic density of states  in the xy plane , which further  increase s the electron -
phonon scattering matrix by a factor of R CDW [7]. It is important to note that the square of the 
electron -phonon scattering matrix is proportional to  the el ectron -phonon coupling strength [10].  The AFM & SDW amplified electron -phonon  interactions on the Fermi level are estimated for  
the compressed bulk FeSe and 2D FeSe/SrTiO 3. We apply CASTEP to conduct the spin -
unrestricted calculations at the GGA -PW91  level [11,12] for estimating  the electronic density of 
states , band diagram,  exchange correlation  energy Eco and magnetic moment  MFe. The influence 
of exchange coupling to the antiferromagnetically assisted electron phonon coupling can be 
rewritten through the separation of variable, in which the electron phonon coupling is multiplied 
by the exchange enhancement factor  [13]. The exchange  enhancement factor in the form of Ising 
expression 
2
0
2
0|( ) ~|Fe co P
ex
Fe co PMEfEME
  is used to monitor the  AFM & SDW amplified electron -
phonon coupling under pressure P , where 
22
00| ~ | ( )AF P AF P exR R f E   and 
22
00| ~ || ( )
tetra tetra P P exR R f E 
[13].  
The maximum SCF cycle is set to 100 with a tolerance of 2 µeV/atom and the reciprocal k-space 
grid is 0.025(1/Å). The ultrasoft pseudopotential is used. The phonon data is calculated by the 
finite displacement mode, where the cutoff radius is 0.5nm and the interval of the dispersion is 
0.04(1/Å ). The non -cancellable or differential vibration al amplitude  along the out -of-plane axis 
is interpreted using a ground -state harmonic oscillator model  [10]. To evaluate the relevance and 
significance of AFM and SDW effects in the observed ARPES pattern  [4-6], the AFM & SDW 
amplified electron -phonon coupling s are calculated  in physical units .  
 
Results  and D iscussions : 
After emerging the non -cancellable out -of-plane phonon [7] under the influence of the 
antiferromagnetic spi n density wave , we observe that the average phonon frequency of bulk FeSe 
is decreased  by ~2%. This decrease is accompanied by a relative  out-of-plane vibrational 
amplitude  between the two adjacent Fe atoms , which is approximately 0.04Å . When compared to 
the norm of 
( , , )iu x y z in bulk FeSe , typically  ~0.15Å, the differential lattice vibrations 
()iuz
are significant. The differential orthogonal displacement of lattice ions is observed not only in 
the FeSe system but also in the FeAs system.  For example, Ba 0.6K0.4Fe2As2 superconductor [14],  
where their relative out -of-plane lattice vibrations are ~0.07Å. These findings suggest that the 
presence of alternating AFM and SDW ordering triggers the abnormal out -of-plane lattice 
vibrations in the iron -based superconductors. In particular, the magnitude of 
()iuz  in FeSe is 
smaller compared to that in the K-doped BaFe 2As2. This is attributed to the fact that the atomic 
spring constant of the FeSe bond is approximately two times weaker than that of the FeAs bond  
where a weak atomic spring constant is less effective  to create an orthogonal phonon  in the 
tetrahedral zone .  
The 11-type iron -based superconductor, bulk FeSe, exhibits a superconducting transition 
temperature (T c) of approximately 10K under ambient pressure  [15]. Notably, the T c of bulk 
FeSe can be enhanced by applying compression  [15]. Our calculatio ns indicate that the bare  
electron -phonon coupling in bulk FeSe , assuming isotropic momentum space,  is determined to be 1.8 meV  at 0GPa. It is important to highlight that the bare electron -phonon coupling strength 
exhibits a decreasing trend with increasing pressure, as depicted in Figure 1a. This observation 
indicates that the electron -phonon coupling alone is insufficient to explain both the observed 
ARPES range an d the dependence of T c on pressure. However, the magnetic moment of the Fe 
atoms and the exchange -correl ation energy increases with pressure , which convinces us to 
combine antiferromagnetism with  electron -phonon  coupling  to check if the antiferromagnetically 
assisted electron -phonon coupling can produce such strong ARPES energy range. After 
activating the spin-unrestricted mode in the ab -initio calculation, the antiferromagnetically 
assisted electron -phonon coupling of bulk FeSe raises to 2.7 meV only, where R AF ~ 1.2. 
However, when it  exhibits the coexistence in  AFM and SDW  interactions, the redistribution of 
AFM fluctuation s between the local AFM mi nima and local AFM maxima contribute s a 4-fold 
boost  in the electron -phonon interaction  (10.8meV ). Furthermore, t he effect of the out -of-plane 
phonon strengthens  the interaction to 47.6  meV, where R CDW is justified to be  2.1 in FeSe [7]. As 
an anisotropic momentum space  is observed  in FeSe  [16], the AFM & SDW electron -phonon 
interaction is then paled to 27.6  meV, which is comparable to the experimental ARPES range  
[4,6] . In unconventional superconductors, a reduction in the electron -phonon coupling strength 
has been observed due to the presence of symmetry effects  in momentum space . Specifically, 
when a 4 -fold symmetry is present in the superconducting gap, the electron -phono n coupling can 
be diminished by a factor of approximately 0.6 -0.8 [17]. Our analysis reveals that the reduction 
in the interaction attributed to the gap anisotropy is approximately 0.58  in bulk FeSe , which is 
consistent with previous findings reported in t he literature.  
 
Figure 1: (a) The bare e lectron -phonon coupling of FeSe . (b) The magnetic moment of Fe atoms 
increases with pressure, where the exchange -correlation energy increases by a few percent upon 
compression.  
 
Figure 2: Bulk FeSe; (a) AFM & SDW  enhanced electron -phonon coupling . (b) The T c measured 
in the experiments.  
 
To validate the comparability between the AFM & SDW amplified electron -phonon coupling 
and the ARPES range, it is essential to select another iron -based compound that exhibits a 
substantial contrast in the ARPES range . Therefore , our upcoming investigation  concentrate s on 
the FeSe/SrTiO 3 composite  with a high T c of ~100K  in which  its ARPES range in the experiment 
covers a broader energy range of ~0.1-0.3 eV  [5,18-20], allowing for a comprehensive 
comparison and analysis . Following the same approach, o ur simulations have revealed that the 
influence of the differential out -of-plane phonon on the AFM &  SDW electron -phonon scattering 
matrix  in the FeSe/SrTiO 3 is approximately 1.3  times greater than in bulk FeSe. This difference 
arises from the structural characteristics of the FeSe/SrTiO 3 interface. In FeSe/SrTiO 3, the upper 
tetrahedral region of FeSe film is exposed to a vacuum environment, while the lower tetrahedral 
region inte racts with the SrTiO 3 substrate. This differential proximity interaction further induces 
an imbalance in the out -of-plane lattice vibrations, leading to a more pronounced effect on the 
differential out -of-plane phonon compared to the bulk FeSe case.  The electron -phonon coupling 
of FeSe/SrTiO 3 reinforced by the antiferromagnetic spin density wave is estimated to be ~0.5  eV, 
falling within the same order of magnitude as the experimental ARPES range. Notably, the 
experimental observation  also demonstrate s a significant strength in the electron -phonon 
coupling in FeSe/SrTiO 3, with the interfacial ph onon reaching as high as 1150K [19] , where its 
ultra-strong electron -phonon coupling has been reported [18 -20]. By drawing a parallel between 
bulk FeSe and FeSe/ SrTiO 3, we observe a proportional relationship between the AFM &  SDW 
amplified electron -phonon interaction  and the ARPES range . 
The results obtained from the  iron-based compounds  raise a valid concern that the 
antiferromagnetic effect on the  electron -phonon coupling may have been significantly 
underestimated. While the antiferromagnetically assisted electron -phonon coupling alone may 
not exert a significant impact on the electrons below the Fermi level, the interplay between 
antiferro magnetis m and spin density wave synergistically enhances the electron -phonon 
interaction to a magnitude comparable to the unusual energy range observed in ARPES data. 
This amplification may demonstrate  the crucial role played by the combined influence of 
antiferro magnetism and spin density wave effects in shaping the electron -phonon interactions.  
Consequently, the lattice ions may exert a much stronger electrostatic attraction , influencing the 
behavior of e lectrons within the ARPES range during the formation of Cooper pairs.  
Calibrating the numerical parameters to achieve a good agreement with experim ental 
observations can be an important  step toward  comprehending the underlying phenomena  [7,8] . 
The subsequent step should involve  delving into the scientific princ iples that elucidate why such 
agreement is achieved. This deeper exploration aims to uncover the fundamental mechanisms 
and processes that contribute to the observed phenomenon and provide a robust scientific 
understanding of the phenomenon in question. The enormous increase in electron -phonon 
coupling observed in iron -based superconductors can be understood through the physics behind 
the redistribution of spatial antifer romagnetic fluctuations under the effect of spin-density wave . 
This redistribution lead s to the formation of alternating regions of AFM local minima and AFM 
local maxima between  nearest neighbors of Fe atoms, in which the effect of spin density wave 
transfers the antiferromagnetic energy from the AFM local minima to the AFM local maxima  per 
repeating unit . The SDW -induced redistribution of AFM fluctuations m aintains the conservation 
of antiferromagnetic  energy,  but this energy transfer  doubles the local electron -phonon scattering 
matrix at the AFM local maxima  within the repeating unit . The process of AFM redistribution 
continues over time, periodically switching the locations of AFM local maxima and local 
minima, resembling an interference -like phenomenon.  For instance , at time t, the odd -numbered 
lattice points represent the AFM maxima, while the even -numbered lattice points correspond to 
the AFM minima. However, as time progresses  to half SDW period  of oscillation , the AFM 
minima configuration switch to occur  in the od d-numbered lattice points, while the AFM 
maxima configuration appears  in the even -numbered lattice points.  In other word s, the 
alternating (odd and even) lattice points that form the AFM maxima and minima undergo 
changes in their configuration periodically  over time . This interference -like effect significantly 
increases the peak va lue of the AFM & SDW  enhanced electron -phonon coupling.   
Furthermore, antiferromagnetism always  slows down  phonons in the lattice  [13]. Lattice ions 
experiencing the AFM local maxima always vibrate slower, equivalently  exhibiting a larger 
effective atomic mass. On the other hand, the neighboring lattice ions located at the AFM local 
minima vibrate relatively faster, indicating a smaller effecti ve atomic mass. This diff erential  
effective mass among neighboring Fe atoms leads to the variation  in their vibrational amplitudes  
orthogonally  [7,10] , triggering the non-cancellable out -of-plane phonons per repe ating unit at the 
boundary between the non -magnetic and magnetic latt ice sites. At this instantaneous time, based 
on Maxwell ’s equation, electrons experience an electric  potential at the boundary , which 
generates the  charge density wave (CDW)  phenomenon , further enhancing the electron phonon 
coupling in the system. While AFM fluctuation persists, the instantaneously amplified electron -
phonon  coupling at the boundary occurs  very of ten. Altogether, the combined effects contribute 
to the significant increase in the electron -phonon coupli ng in iron -based superconductors.  In 
reality, AFM is not a mean field  in iron -based superconductor s. Hence, c onventional DFT approach  based on mean -field approximation may not be able to capture this instant aneous 
effects.  
The Ising expression [10] is believed to capture the overall behavior of how antiferrom agnetism 
changes under pressure that can make our simulation less dependence on the choice of DFT 
functional. Although the Ising expre ssion  may not provide exact quantitative values, it can still 
generate a general trend that offers valuable insights into the effects of pressure on 
antiferromagnetic behavior. Nonetheless, the primary objective of our study is to analyze 
whether the AFM a nd SDW amplified electron -phonon coupling, as well as the experimental 
ARPES range, exhibit the same order of ma gnitude. I n this context, the accuracy of our work is 
already sufficient to validate these observations.   
Our work  indicate s that the AFM & SDW amplified electron -phonon coupling not only matches 
the magnitude of the experimental ARPES range [4-6] but also follows the trend of the Tc if iron-
based superconductivity is detected.  In our investigation of the impact of spin -orbital coupling on 
the enh anced electron -phonon coupling in the antiferromagnetic spin -density wave system  [21], 
we observe that r egardless of whether we include the spin -orbital coupling in our calculations or 
not, t he changes observed in the AFM & SDW reinforced electron -phonon couplings of these 
samples are on ly around 10% . Hence , we propose that the primary factor s influen cing the 
observed ARPES range should be related to the AFM, SDW and CDW states. However, it is 
unfair if we underestimate the effect of spin -orbital coupling on the pairing mechanism of iron -
based superconductors. The reason is that although the AFM & SDW amplified electron -phonon 
coupling and the ARPES range may be correlated,  it is still an open question whether  spin-orbital  
coupling  is one of the ingredients  to pull a trigger  on activating  iron-based superconductivity  
[21].   
 
Conclusions  
Our research findings suggest  that the significantly amplified electron -phonon coupling, which 
arises from the presence of AFM and SDW , not only matches the experimental magnitude of the 
ARPES range but also exhibits a correlation with the superconduc ting transition temperature . 
These observations suggest that the instantaneous interplay between  AFM, SDW, and additional 
CDW  states should  play a critical role in shaping the  ARPES range . The effect s of the SDW -
assisted AFM & CDW states h ave been analyzed, in which SDW triggers the redistribution of 
AFM fluctuation and then create CDW state. The presence of AFM, SDW, and CDW states in 
iron-based superconductors offers valuable  insights into the fundamental mechanisms that drive 
the unconventional ARPES  patterns. These insights may play  a pivotal role in advancing the 
theoretical understanding of iron -based superconductors.  
 
References  
[1] Norman, M.R. High -temperature superconductivity  in the iron pnictides. Physics, 1, 21 
(2008)  [2] Fernandes, R.M.; Chubukov, A.V.; Schmalian, J. What drives nematic order in iron -based 
superconductor s? Nature Physics. 10, 97 –104 (2014)  
[3] Hirschfeld, P.J.; Korshunov, M.M.; Mazin, I.I. Gap symmetry and structure of Fe -based 
superconductors. Rep. Prog. Phys. 74, 124508  (2011) . 
[4] Jia, X. -W.; Liu, H. -Y.; Zhang, W. -T.; Zhao, L.; Meng, J.Q.; Liu, G. -D.; Dong, X. -L.; Wu, G.; 
Liu, R. -H.; Chen, X. -H.; et al. Common Features in Electronic Struc ture of the Oxypnictide 
Superconductor from Photoemission Spectroscopy. Chin ese Phys ics Letter. 25, 3765 –3768 
(2008)   
[5] Zhang, C.; Liu, Z.; Chen, Z.; Xie, Y.; He, R.; Tang, S.; He, J.; Li, W.; Jia, T.; Rebec, S.N. 
Ubiquitous strong electron –phonon coupli ng at the interface of FeSe/SrTiO3. Nat ure 
Commun ication, 8, 14468 (2017)   
[6] Stockert, U.; Abdel -Hafiez, M.; Evtushinsky, D.V.; Zabolotnyy, V.B.; Wolter, A.U.B.; 
Wurmehl, S.; Morozov, I.; Klingeler, R.; Borisenko, S.V.; Büchner, B. Specific heat and angl e-
resolved photoemission spectroscopy study of the  superconducting gaps in LiFeAs, Phys. Rev. B 
83, 224512  (2011)  
[7] Coh, S.; Cohen, M.L.; Louie, S.G. Antiferromagnetism enables electron -phonon coupling in 
iron-based superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 2016, 94 , 104505.  
[8] Sinisa Coh, Marvin L Cohen and Steven G Louie, Large electron –phonon interactions from 
FeSe phonons in a monolayer, New J. Phys. 17, 073027 (2015)  
[9] J. Richard Christman, Fundamentals of Solid State Physics, Wiley, ISBN -10  :  0471810959 
(1987)  
[10] Li, B.; Xing, Z.W.; Huang, G.Q.; Liu, M. Magnetic -enhanced electron -phonon coupling and 
vacancy effect in “111” -type iron pnictides from first -principle calculations. J. Appl. Phys. 2012, 
111, 033922  
[11] J. P. Perdew, et al., Atoms, molecules,  solids, and surfaces: Applications of the generalized 
gradient approximation for exchange and correlation, Phys. Rev. B 46, 6671 (1992).  
[12] A. D. Becke, Density -functional exchange -energy approximation with correct asymptotic 
behavior, Phys. Rev. A 38, 3098 (1988).  
[13] D.J.Kim, The influence of magnetism on the electron -phonon interaction in metals, Physica 
91B, pp 281 -287 (1977)  
[14] M. Rotter, M. Tegel, D. Johrendt, Superconductivity at 38 K in the Iron Arsenide (Ba 1-
xKx)Fe 2As2, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 107006 (2008).  
[15] Masaki, S.; Kotegawa, H.; Hara, Y.; Tou, H.; Murata, K.; Mizuguchi, Y.; Takano, Y. 
Precise Pressure Dependence of the Superconducting Transition Temperature of FeSe: 
Resistivity and 77Se -NMR Study. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn.78, 063704 (2012)  
[16] Takahiro Hashimoto, Yuichi Ota, Haruyoshi Q. Yamamoto, Yuya Suzuki, Takahiro 
Shimojima, Shuntaro Watanabe, Chuangtian Chen, Shigeru Kasahara, Yuji Matsuda, Takasada Shibauchi, Kozo Okazaki & Shik Shin, Superconducting gap anisotropy sensitive to nematic  
domains in FeSe, Nature Communications , Volume 9, Article number: 282 (2018)  
[17] J. Song, J. F. Annett, Electron -phonon coupling and d -wave superconductivity in the 
cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 51, 3840 (1995).  
[18] C. Zhang et al., Ubiquitous strong electron –phonon coupling at the interface of 
FeSe/SrTiO3, Nat ure Commun ication,  8, 14468 (2017).  
[19] Zhang, S.; Guan, J.; Wang, Y.; Berlijn, T.; Johnston, S.; Jia, X.; Liu, B.; Zhu, Q.; An, Q.; 
Xue, S.; et al. Lattice dynamics of ultrathin FeSe films on SrTiO 3. Phys. Rev. B, 97, 035408  
(2018)  
[20] Chenjia Tang, Chong Liu, Guanyu Zhou, Fangsen Li, Hao Ding, Zhi Li, Ding Zhang, Zheng 
Li, Canli Song, Shuaihua Ji, Ke He, Lili Wang, Xucun Ma, and Qi -Kun Xue, Interface -enhanced 
electron -phonon coupling and high -temperatu re superconductivity in potassium -coated ultrathin 
FeSe films on SrTiO 3, Phys. Rev. B , 93, 020507 (2016)  
[21] Borisenko, S., Evtushinsky, D., Liu, ZH. et al. Direct observation of spin –orbit coupling in 
iron-based superconductors. Nature Phys 12, 311 –317 (2016).  
 
 
 
 
 
 