Extracting work optimally with imprecise measurements
L. Dinis1,2,∗and J.M.R. Parrondo1,2
January 19, 2024
1Departamento de Estructura de la Materia, F´ ısica T´ ermica y Electr´ onica,
Universidad Complutense Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain
2Grupo Interdisciplinar de Sistemas Complejos (GISC)
∗Correspondence: ldinis@ucm.es
Measurement and feedback allows an external agent to extract work from a system in
contact with a single thermal bath. The maximum amount of work that can be extracted
in a single measurement and the corresponding feedback loop is given by the information
acquired via the measurement, a result that manifests the close relation between information
theory and stochastic thermodynamics. In this paper we show how to reversibly confine
a Brownian particle in an optical tweezer potential and then extract the corresponding
increase of the free energy as work. By repeatedly tracking the position of the particle and
modifying the potential accordingly, we can extract work optimally even with a high degree
of inaccuracy in the measurements.
pacs 05.70.Ln - Nonequilibrium and irreversible thermodynamics
pacs 05.40.-a - Fluctuation phenomena, random processes, entropy thermodynamics
pacs 05.40.Jc - Brownian motion
pacs 89.70.-a - Information theory
1. Introduction
Modern techniques have allowed the manipulation of objects at the microscale. A paradigmatic example are
colloidal particles trapped by optical tweezers. At this scale –the scale of Brownian motion– not only the
motion of particles but the energy fluxes, work or heat, become stochastic. Nevertheless, the combination of
manipulation and imaging or other detection techniques allow for some degree of control [1]. For instance,
in driven systems, the external driving may be modified based on outcomes of measurements, as in feedback
control, leading for example to (efficient) confinement in small region of space [2] or to the reduction of
thermal fluctuations, i.e. cooling, a technique implemented both in classical or quantum systems [3, 4] .
Other application of feedback is an increase of the performance of certain motors operating at the microscale
such as Brownian ratchets or micro-motors [5–9].
Feedback exploits the information acquired through measurement as a thermodynamic resource. It is
now known that the work needed to perform an isothermal feedback process, for a system in contact with
an environment at constant temperature T, is bounded by the following extension of the second law of
thermodynamics [9,10]:
W≥∆F−kTI, (1)
where ∆ Fis the free energy difference between the final and initial states of the process, kthe Boltzmann’s
constant, and Iis the amount of information gained in the measurement, quantified by the mutual informa-
tion from information theory. Information is always positive (or zero) and thus, in a cycle (∆ F= 0) it is
possible to extract work ( W < 0) from a single thermal bath with measurement and feedback.
Equation (1) also shows that a given level of accuracy in the measurement, quantified by the mutual
information, limits the amount of work that can be extracted in one feedback operation. Some especially
tailored protocols saturate that bound (1) and may be used to convert all the information acquired into
useful work. These are processes that are reversible under feedback [11–13]. In this article, we first review
these protocols and show how to use their special properties to extract energy with the same efficiency and
1arXiv:2401.09993v1  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  18 Jan 2024even power when operating with higher measurement errors. To fix ideas we use a well known model that
we proceed to describe in the following section.
2. Model description and cycle operation
As our system, we consider an overdamped Brownian particle in contact with a thermal bath, which acts
as its environment. The particle feels a harmonic potential. This is a well proven theoretical model for
an experimental system formed by a colloidal particle in water at constant temperature and trapped by
optical tweezers. The potential Vκ,x0=1
2κ(x−x0)2has tunable parameters x0, the position of the center
of the trap, and κ, the stiffness. As the Brownian particle position fluctuates, the energy transfers and
thermodynamic potentials become also fluctuating, in fact, they are stochastic variables. The framework to
analyse energetics for these fluctuating systems in the mesoscale is stochastic thermodynamics [14–16] .We
review the main concepts in the following. The Brownian particle may, due to a collision with the solvent,
absorb some energy and climb the potential well. Or it may transfer energy back to the thermal bath via
viscosity and go down in the potential. These energy transfers with the thermal bath constitute heat ˆQand,
and since this energy can be stored as potential energy, this is the internal energy ˆEof the particle. In our
system then the internal energy is ˆE=Vκ,x0=1
2κ(x−x0)2[17–20]. We will use ˆ ato denote a stochastic
variable and the regular letter afor the average over realizations, i.e., E=⟨ˆE⟩. Another form of energy
transfer is work ˆW: an external agent may modify the harmonic potential (changing the parameters) and
increase or decrease the potential energy of the particle. If the internal energy depends on a parameter λ
that is modified from λ0toλfthen, formally, the definition of work is:
ˆW=Zλf
λ0∂E
∂λd λ (2)
This is best seen with an example. For instance, consider a fast increase of the stiffness of the potential
from kitokf. If the increase is very fast so that the particle does not modify its position xduring the time
the stiffness is changing, the energy of the particle increases by an amount ∆ V=1
2(x−x0)2(kf−ki). This
energy is supplied by the agent controlling the potential who has performed then a work ˆW= ∆V > 0. As
a result, the particle is in a tighter parabola and the equilibrium dispersion of the position of the particle
decreases, so that this is commonly referred to as a compression. If the stiffness is decreased, work is
exerted on the agent by the system and since the distribution of particle positions will eventually widen, this
corresponds to an expansion.
With these definitions, energy is conserved and the first law is fulfilled either at the level of trajectories
ˆ∆E=ˆQ+ˆWor as averages E=Q+W[14–20].
To extract energy from the thermal bath we propose the following cyclic operation in two stages:
1. Confinement of the Brownian particle by (repeated) measuring and feedback
2. Isothermal expansion
If the work obtained in the isothermal expansion exceeds the work needed for confinement, the system
works as a motor. During a compression, the free energy of the system increases (due to the entropy decrease).
Using reversible feedback confinement [2], we can minimize the work needed for stage 1, which turns out to
vanish, and extract all the free energy increase of stage 1 as work during stage 2. Let us analyze each stage
in more detail.
2..1 Optimal confinement
Confinement of a system to a small region of the phase space (at constant temperature) implies a decrease
of entropy of the system. For the entropy of a Brownian particle we use the standard choice of Shannon’s
entropy, S=−kR
ρ(x) log( x)dx, where ρ(x) is the probability distribution of the particle position. With this
2choice, the second law of thermodynamics is fulfilled on average and the thermodynamic relation F=E−TS
is recovered for a system in contact with a thermal bath. Although strictly speaking, this is a generalization
of the free energy to non-equilibrium systems, in systems in contact to a thermal bath it plays a similar role
as the standard thermodynamic free energy, and stochastic thermodynamics for our system closely resembles
macroscopic thermodynamics [9].
Let us consider for simplicity that the internal energy change between the initial and final states of the
confinement process vanishes (we will see later that this is the case in our particular system). A reduction
of entropy then corresponds to an increase of free energy ∆ F= ∆E−T∆S. This increase in free energy
could then be extracted as work in an isothermal expansion. However, the whole process cannot operate as
a motor as this will defeat the second law (extracting work from a single thermal bath). Indeed, the second
law states for the confinement
W1≥∆F1(w/o. feedback) (3)
and then for the isothermal expansion back to the initial state (∆ F2=−∆F1)
W2≥∆F2=−∆F1(w/o. feedback) (4)
so that Wtotal=W1+W2≥0 and the system dissipates energy into the thermal bath.
However, as explained above, when measuring and feeding back to the system, Wis bounded by (1)
instead. Thus, the work needed for the confinement may be reduced and the work output of the cyclic
process (∆ Fcycle= 0) may be negative:
Wtotal≥ −kTI (5)
Notice that mutual information is always a positive quantity.
Following [2] we propose a reversible feedback confinement that can confine the particle with W1= 0, and
as will be shown later (see equation (13)), without dissipating heat to the thermal bath, so that the increase
in free energy produced by the confinement can later be completely recovered as work during a quasistatic
expansion in stage 2.
For a system in contact with a thermal bath, a feedback process is reversible if the Hamiltonian is modified
after the measurement so that probability of the state of the system conditioned on the measurement outcome
is the Gibbsian state of the new Hamiltonian. After a measurement, the probability to find a given state
changes instantaneously, the new probability distribution takes into account the information obtained and
must be updated according to Bayesian inference. If the Hamiltonian changes also rapidly and the Gibbs state
of the new Hamiltonian matches the posterior probability distribution, the system remains at equilibrium,
no further evolution of the probability distribution ensues until a new measurement is taken.
In our model we take the common assumption of Gaussian measurement errors. If the particle is located
at a position xthen the measurement outcome mis Gaussian distributed around xand the dispersion σm
quantifies the measurement error:
q(m|x) =1p
2πσ2me−(m−x)2/2σ2
m (6)
After a measurement, the probability distribution of the position of the particle updates according to Bayes’
theorem from the initial distribution ρ:
ρ′(x|m) =ρ(x)q(m|x)
π(m)(7)
where π(m) =R
dxq(m|x)ρ(x) is the marginal distribution of the measurement outcome.
For a Brownian particle in a potential, the equilibrium distribution is its corresponding Gibbs distribution:
ρ(x)∝e−V(x)/kT(8)
3-8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 600.020.040.060.080.10.120.140.160.180.2pdf
  conditioned on simulations
theory
-10 -5 0 5 1000.020.040.060.080.10.120.14pdf
x,initial positionsimulations
theoryFigure 1: Reduction of variance after measuring . Left: Initial distribution. Histogram of 40000 random
Gaussian numbers centered in 0 with standard deviation σ= 3.0 (blue bars) and a theoretical Gaussian
distribution with the same parameters (red continuous line). Right: Posterior distribution. Histogram of
particle positions with measurement outcomes in a given interval (0.89,0.98) (blue bars) and prediction
according to Bayes’ theorem (7) (red). Measurement outcomes where performed with measurement error
σm= 3.0. Using σm= 3.0 and σ= 3.0 in (10) gives σ′= 2.12 which matches the sample standard deviation
of 2.10.
In a harmonic potential it is a Gaussian, centered in the trap position x0and with variance given by
σ2=kT/κ . It can be shown [7] that after a measurement the new distribution computed according to (7)
remains Gaussian. If the initial distribution has mean ¯ xand standard deviation σ, after a measurement, the
distribution updates to a Gaussian with mean and deviation given by [2]:
¯x′(m) =σ2
m
σ2+σ2m¯x+σ2
σ2+σ2mm (9)
1
σ′2=1
σ2+1
σ2m(10)
We can make the post-measurement distribution an equilibrium distribution by setting a new center of
the trap position x′
0and stiffness κ′as
κ′=kT/σ′2(11)
x′
0(m) = ¯x′(m) (12)
Notice that κ′> κ, hence the particle is more tightly bound or confined after this change. This process
of measurement and feedback can be repeated and a new, more confined state could be achieved. Figure 2
(top) shows the confining effect of repeating this procedure. Also, equation (10) implies σ′< σso that every
measurement and feedback step further reduces the variance of the particle distribution.
To check this reduction of variance in simulation, we have computed the particle distribution after a
measurement. For this, we first generate a large number of trajectories, starting from an initial equilibrium
distribution for a harmonic potential centered in position x0= 0 and corresponding dispersion σ= 3.0,
as depicted in Figure 1(left). After some time interval, for each trajectory, we measure its position by
generating a (Gaussian) random measurement outcome maround the actual position xwith dispersion
σm= 3.0 (see details in section 5.). We can then fix a small interval around a given measurement of the
position ( m, m + ∆m) of our choice, for instance (0.89,0.98), and check only the realizations which gave a
4measurement in that interval. The distribution of the actual positions xof these particular realizations are
distributed as in (7). In our case, as a Gaussian with new reduced standard deviation σ′= 2.12 given by
(10). This can be checked in Figure 1(right).
In every measurement and feedback step, the trapped Brownian particle stays in equilibrium with the
thermal bath at temperature T. Consequently, the average energy is not modified by the feedback process.
The average internal energy Eof a trapped particle in one dimension is given by the equipartition theorem
asE=kT/2. Since the process is isothermal, ∆ E= 0. On the other hand, being always in equilibrium,
there is no relaxation of the particle distribution and the heat transferred from the heat bath vanishes on
average Q= 0. Therefore, according to the first law, the average work done on the system also vanishes:
∆E1=Q1+W1= 0⇒W1=−Q1= 0 (13)
This has been checked in simulations, as shown in Figure 2 (bottom). Details about work computation
during measurement and feedback can be found in section 5..
In general, for other feedback protocols where the stiffness of the trap is suddenly changed, work is
performed on average [21], as in the simple example described after equation (2). The feedback process used
here is different (in addition to a sudden increase of stiffness, trap position is also modified in a precisely
combined manner) and is special in the sense that average work vanishes. As encoded in equation (1),
this can solely be achieved by using information about the position through measurement in the feedback
(see equation (9) for the new trap position). To see why this matters, consider our Brownian particle in a
harmonic potential where the observer happens to know that the particle is exactly at the bottom of the well.
This would allow this external agent to increase the stiffness of the potential well with an abrupt change,
without performing work, since the energy of the particle is always zero at the bottom of the well, for any
stiffness. The confining protocol is a refinement of this idea that works for any position of the particle, by
displacing the bottom of the potential well towards the measured particle position and changing the stiffness
in a suitable manner.
Furthermore, one can compute the mutual information obtained in the process of measurement and
evaluate the increase in free energy ∆ F1for the confinement stage. From the definition of mutual information:
I(m, x) =Z
π(m)q(m|x) logq(m|x)
π(m)(14)
Considering that the measurement outcome distribution q(m|x) and the marginal distribution π(m) are
Gaussian with variance σ2
mandσ2+σ2
m=σ2
mσ2/σ′2, respectively, the information acquired in a measurement
is
I(m, x) =−1
2logσ′2
σ2≥0 (15)
Mutual information intuitively measures the decrease in uncertainty of variable xif we know the value of
m, or viceversa [22]. In our case, from (10), if the measurement error σmis very large then σ′≈σand we
extract almost no information from measuring ( I≈0). Conversely, for infinite precise measurement σm→0,
then σ′→0 and we obtain infinite information from a measurement, as an infinite precise description of a
position would require infinite number of bits to store it.
The entropy of a Gaussian of variance σ2isS(ρ) =klogσ√
2πe. In the measurement process, the
distribution changes from a Gaussian of variance σ2to a Gaussian of variance σ′2and we have
∆S1step =klogσ′√
2πe−klogσ√
2πe=k1
2logσ′2
σ2=−kI(m, x) (16)
Since ∆ E= 0, we finally obtain
∆F1step = ∆E−T∆S1step =kTI(m, x). (17)
This is valid for every measurement and feedback step using the reversible feedback protocol. In a sequence
of confinement steps with successive variances σ0, σ1, . . . , σ n, the total information is
510-310-210-1100101102103
t-3-2-101234
positionx
m
x0
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
t-4-20246
W/kTFigure 2: Confinement . Top: particle trajectory (gray line), measurement outcome (red dots) and trap
center position (blue line). Bottom: Cumulative work for different realizations (color lines) and its average
over 200 realizations (thick black line) for confinement in 10 measurement steps. See simulation details in
section 5.. Initial trap stiffness κ= 0.1 and position x0= 0. Initial condition is equilibrium with trap
potential to avoid transient due to equilibration. Particle diffusion coefficient D= 1 and friction γ= 1.
6Itotal=−1
2nX
i=1logσ2
i
σ2
i−1=−1
2logσ2
n
σ2
0. (18)
σ2
ncan be obtained from (10) by recursion, giving:
1
σ2n=1
σ2
0+n1
σ2m
(19)
Finally, the free energy difference between the final and initial states in the confinement stage is
∆F1=kTI total=kT
2logσ2
0
σ2n=kTI total. (20)
Every bit of information extracted in the measurement is turned into an increase of free energy during
the confinement stage and can be converted into useful work in the subsequent expansion.
2..2 Work extraction by isothermal expansion
As explained above, if an external agent changes the stiffness of the optical trap from κitoκf< κi, energy
is recovered as work. In a quasistatic process, the work done by the system is given by the free energy
difference. Since stage 2 completes the cycle of operation of the motor ending in the initial state, we have
∆F2=−∆F1and
Wtotal=W1+W2= 0−∆F1=−kTI total, (21)
which corresponds to extracted work. In fact, it saturates expression (5) and is the maximum possible work
that can be extracted using the information obtained in the measurements.
This result can be recovered also by direct computation of the work of a process changing stiffness
from κitoκfand taking into account that for a quasistatic process one can use the equipartition theorem
stating ⟨x2⟩=kT/κ (t), with κ(t) the instantaneous value of the stiffness. Then the average work during the
expansion, according to (2), reads:
W2=Zκf
κidκ⟨x2⟩
2=kT
2Zκf
κid κ
κ=kT
2logκf
κi(22)
The expansion starts at the end of the confinement process with a distribution of variance σnand ends at
σ0. Then, using the relation between stiffness and variance in the confinement stage (11), we have
W2=kT
2logκf
κi=−kT
2logσ2
n
σ2
0=−kTI total (23)
Notice that both during the confinement and the expansion the system must be at equilibrium in order to
transform every bit of information into useful work.
In practice though, for a process changing the stiffness of the potential to be approximately quasistatic,
it is enough that the time of the process is large compared to the inverse frequency of the trap given by
ν=κ/γ. This is the criterion that we have used for simulations. Also, it is worth noting that, even though
the work in every realization of the expansion may differ in principle in a stochastic system, work is –in this
particular example– a self-averaging quantity: for a quasistatic expansion the total work obtained in any
realization is very similar to its average value. The argument for self-averaging of the work is the following:
from work definition (2), work in a single realization when expanding is ˆW=Rx2
2dκ. If the expansion is
very slow, in the time κis modified a certain small amount, the particle position has time to fluctuate and
sample the whole quasi-equilibrium distribution and x2approximately can be replaced by its average value
(see full computation in [14]).
The complete diagram of the proposed cycle is depicted in Figure 3.
7Stage 1: multistep
optimal conﬁnement 
       (W=0)Stage 2: quasistatic
expansion (W<0)Figure 3: Cycle for extracting work from a thermal bath with inaccurate measurements
Finally, one could also define an efficiency ηas the ratio between extracted thermodynamic resource
(work) and the thermodynamic resource consumed to make the engine run, in this case information. With
this definition, this reversible feedback engine attains the maximum efficiency:
η=−W
kTI= 1 (24)
as in a similar system [23] with just one measurement per cycle.
3. Results
3..1 Work is optimal
We have performed computer simulations of the model system described above. Figure 4 depicts part of
two consecutive cycles, each of them with a confinement stage composed of 10 measurement and feedback
steps, followed by an isothermal expansion. The top panel depicts the particle position (gray line), trap
center (blue line), and measurement outcomes (red dots), whereas the bottom panel shows the evolution of
the stiffness along the cycle.
Figure 5 shows the cumulative work done on the system along the time of a single cycle. The thick solid
line represents the average over 200 cycles. Every cycle consists of a confinement achieved by measuring the
particle position 10 times and the subsequent isothermal expansion. Average work extracted ( W < 0) by the
end of the cycle approaches the expected result given by equations (18),(19) and (21), marked with dashed
black line. Shaded area represent the variance of the work, which is substantially large. As is apparent from
the figure, most of the variance comes from the confinement step, being the quasistatic work a self-averaging
quantity. Finally, work corresponding to two particular cycles is shown by thin blue lines.
85 10 15 20 25 30-1012positionx
m
x0
5 10 15 20 25 30
t24681012Figure 4: Trajectories. (Top) Particle trajectory (gray continuous line), trap center (blue continuous line),
measurement outcomes (red dots). (Bottom) Stiffness evolution during the cycle. Every cycle starts with
κ= 1, there are 10 measurement steps followed by quasistatic expansion. D= 1,γ= 1.
0 5 10 15 20
cycle time-3-2.5-2-1.5-1-0.500.511.5W/kT
Figure 5: Average cumulative work along the confinement-expansion cycle (thick blue line) computed from
200 realizations. Shaded area corresponds to one standard deviation from the average. Thin blue lines
represent cumulative in two representative cycles. Simulation parameters are: ∆ t= 0.001, time between
measurements τ= 0.1, number of measurements before expansion is 10, measurement error σ2
m= 1, initial
stiffness of the trap κ= 1, diffusion coefficient D=kT/γ = 1, drag coefficient γ= 1.
93..2 Power and efficiency with higher measurement errors
Consider two setups, AandB, with different measurement errors given by variances σ2
mAandσ2
mB= 2σ2
mA.
Suppose that only one measurement step is performed in each system before the expansion. According to
our discussion above, the measurement information that can be later transformed into work is smaller in
system Bthan in A:
IB1=1
2logσ2
mB+σ2
0
σ2
mB=1
2log
1 +σ2
0
2σ2
mA
<1
2log
1 +σ2
0
σ2
mA
=IA1 (25)
We can however obtain as much information in system Bwith two measurements as in system Awith
one measurement. After two measurements, using the reversible confinement protocol, the variance of the
equilibrium distribution σ2
B2in system Bis equal to the variance in system Aafter 1 measurement σ2
A1:
1
σ2
B2=1
σ2
0+ 21
σ2
mB
=1
σ2
0+1
σ2
mA
=1
σ2
A1(26)
Using (18), we obtain:
IB=1
2logσ2
B2
σ2
0=1
2logσ2
A1
σ2
0=IA (27)
As explained above, this implies that the same work can be extracted in the subsequent quasistatic
expansion. In fact, both systems run with the same efficiency η= 1, hence, every bit of information
is turned into work in the expansion. Furthermore, system Bcan also be run in principle at the same
power as system A. During the confinement process, after the adjustment of the potential, the particle
distribution is at equilibrium. No relaxation occurs as explained previously. Therefore, a new measurement
and feedback step could in principle be taken immediately after, in rapid succession. Thus, halving the time
between measurements in system Bas compared to system Aensures the same cycle time. As the work
obtained is also the same, both systems operate with the same power. This is depicted in Figure 6 where we
show simulation results for system Awith one measurement and expansion and system Bwith two (faster)
measurements and expansion. Approximately the same work is obtained in both systems. For reference, we
have also marked the expected extracted work for a system with measurement error given by σmBbut using
just one measurement.
4. Discussion
Reversible feedback confinement is an optimal way of reducing the entropy of a system to be later used for
work extraction. It nevertheless requires a high degree of control over the Hamiltonian, to adapt it to the new
probabilistic state after the measurement. This might be a limitation for experimental realizations, although
a low dissipation is expected even if a similar or approximate protocol is implemented. Theoretically, the
dissipation could be accounted for by using the Kullback-Leibler distance between the post-measurement
particle distribution and the equilibrium distribution of the potential after feedback [24] , if they were
different due to a less precise tuning of the potential.
In principle, for a measurement and feedback protocol, imprecision in the measurement, which will
inevitably arise in an experimental setup, will limit the work extraction or power. We have nevertheless
shown here that this limitation can be overcome by adding more measurement steps before the quasistatic
expansion, as long as the reversible feedback confinement protocol is used. In principle, the application
of this protocol is instantaneous. In practice, this means that the confinement may be applied in a very
short time, limited maybe by the response time of the feedback mechanism or the measurement acquisition
time. Thus, if response times of measurement, feedback and Hamiltonian modification are fast compared to
system’s relaxation time, optimal work extraction is feasible even with a high degree of inaccuracy in the
measurement, using repeated optimal feedback.
10Figure 6: Average work extraction for 2 different measurement errors, using 1 measurement with variance
σ2
mA= 1 (blue thick line) and using 2 measurements with variance σ2
mB= 2 (red thick line). Dashed line
represents expected work extraction and fine dashed line corresponds to expected work extraction with just
1 measurement of variance σmB. Thin lines represent single realizations of the work in system A(blue) and
B(red).
5. Materials and Methods
The confined Brownian particle evolves according to Langevin equation:
γ˙x=−V′
κ,x0(x) +ξ(t), (28)
with ξ(t) Gaussian white noise ⟨ξ(t)ξ(t′)⟩= 2kTγδ (t−t′),Tbath temperature and kBoltzmann’s constant.
The potential Vκ,x0(x) is defined above and controlled through measurement and feedback. Model simula-
tions were performed in C language, solving Langevin evolution equation with Heun method for stochastic
differential equation [25]. We provide in the following some details on work computation, measurement and
feedback steps. For full details, code is available here
•Measurement. To perform a measurement in the simulation, a Gaussian number “r” with zero average
and standard deviation 1 is generated. Then, if particle position is x, the measurement outcome mis
m=x+σmr (29)
Notice that mis then distributed according to equation (6)
•Feedback. Immediately after measurement, and using the measurement outcome mjust computed,
potential parameters κandx0are recomputed according to equations (9) to (12). Notice that the
old values need to be stored in an auxiliary variable for the work computation, as explained in the
following step.
•Work computation during feedback process. According to its definition for a trajectory, work is the
difference in potential energy when the potential is changed. If κ→κ′andx0→x′
0as a result of
measurement and feedback, then work is computed as
11∆W=1
2κ′(x−x′
0)2−1
2κ(x−x0)2(30)
This ∆ Wis added to a variable Wthat stores the cumulative work done along the whole simulation.
•After the feedback, evolution equation resumes with the new potential parameters.
•Work during expansion. Work is also performed as a result of the change in κduring an expansion.
In the simulation, during the expansion stage, κchanges an amount ∆ κ=κf−κi
Nexpin every time step,
where Nexp is the number of time steps of the expansion. Therefore, in a time step, a work
∆W=1
2∆κ(x−x0)2(31)
is performed. Again, this ∆ Whas to be added to the variable Wthat stores the total or cumulative
work of the whole process.
Author Contributions: “Conceptualization, L.D. and J.M.R.P.; methodology, L.D.; software, L.D.; vali-
dation, L.D.; formal analysis, L.D.; investigation, L.D.; writing–original draft preparation, L.D. and J.M.R.P;
writing–review and editing, L.D. and J.M.R.P; visualization L.D and J.M.R.P; supervision, L.D. and J.M.R.P;
project administration, L.D. and J.M.R.P; funding acquisition, L.D. and J.M.R.P. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.”
Funding: LD and JMRP acknowledge financial support from Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovaci´ on y Univer-
sidades grant number FIS2017-83709-R.
References
[1] H. Touchette and S. Lloyd. Information-theoreitc limits of control. Physical Review Letters , 84(6):1156–
1159, 2000.
[2] L´ eo Granger, Luis Dinis, Jordan M. Horowitz, and Juan M. R. Parrondo. Reversible feedback confine-
ment. EPL (Europhysics Letters) , 115(5):50007, sep 2016.
[3] Adam E. Cohen. Control of Nanoparticles with Arbitrary Two-Dimensional Force Fields. Physical
Review Letters , 94(11):118102, March 2005. Publisher: American Physical Society.
[4] Jan Gieseler, Bradley Deutsch, Romain Quidant, and Lukas Novotny. Subkelvin Parametric Feedback
Cooling of a Laser-Trapped Nanoparticle. Physical Review Letters , 109(10):103603, September 2012.
Publisher: American Physical Society.
[5] F. J. Cao, L. Dinis, and J. M. R. Parrondo. Feedback control in a collective flashing ratchet. Physical
Review Letters , 93(4):040603, 2004.
[6] F. J. Cao, M. Feito, and H. Touchette. Information and flux in feedback controlled brownian ratchet.
Physica A , 338(2-3):112–119, 2009.
[7] D. Abreu and U. Seifert. Extracting work from a single heat bath through feedback. Europhys. Lett. ,
94:10001, 2011.
[8] T. Sagawa and M. Ueda. Nonequilibrium thermodynamics of feedback control. Phys. Rev. E , 85:021104,
2012.
[9] Juan M. R. Parrondo, Jordan M. Horowitz, and Takahiro Sagawa. Thermodynamics of information.
Nature Physics , 11(2):131–139, 2015.
12[10] T. Sagawa and M. Ueda. Minimal energy cost for thermodynamic information processing: Measurement
and information erasure. Physical Review Letters , 102(25):250602, 2009.
[11] J. M. Horowitz and J. M. R. Parrondo. Thermodynamic reversibility in feedback processes. Europhys.
Lett., 95:10005, 2011.
[12] J. M. Horowitz and J. M. R. Parrondo. Designing optimal discrete-feedback thermodynamic engines.
New J. Phys. , 13:123019, 2011.
[13] J. M. Horowitz and J. M. R. Parrondo. Optimizing non-ergodic feedback engines. Acta. Phys. Pol. B ,
44(5):803–814, 2013.
[14] K. Sekimoto. Stochastic Energetics , volume 799 of Lect. Notes Phys. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 2010.
[15] U. Seifert. Stochastic thermodynamics, fluctuation theorems, and molecular machines. Rep. Prog. Phys. ,
75:126001, 2012.
[16] Van den Broeck C. Stochastic thermodynamics: A brief introduction. Proceedings of the International
School of Physics Enrico Fermi , 184(Physics of Complex Colloids):155–193, 2013.
[17] Valentin Blickle and Clemens Bechinger. Realization of a micrometre-sized stochastic heat engine.
Nature Physics , 8(2):143–146, February 2012.
[18] V Blickle, T Speck, L Helden, U Seifert, and C Bechinger. Thermodynamics of a Colloidal Particle in
a Time-Dependent Nonharmonic Potential. Physical Review Letters , 96:070603, 2006.
[19] Ignacio A. Mart´ ınez, ´Edgar Rold´ an, Luis Dinis, Dmitri Petrov, and Ra´ ul A. Rica. Adiabatic Processes
Realized with a Trapped Brownian Particle. Physical Review Letters , 114(12), March 2015.
[20] I. A. Mart´ ınez, ´E. Rold´ an, L. Dinis, D. Petrov, J. M. R. Parrondo, and R. A. Rica. Brownian Carnot
engine. Nature Physics , 12(1):67–70, October 2015.
[21] Tim Schmiedl and Udo Seifert. Optimal Finite-Time Processes In Stochastic Thermodynamics. Physical
Review Letters , 98:108301, 2007.
[22] Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory . Wiley-Interscience, New York,
NY, second edition, 2006.
[23] Michael Bauer, David Abreu, and Udo Seifert. Efficiency of a Brownian information machine. Journal
of Physics A-mathematical and Theoretical , 45, March 2012.
[24] R. Kawai, J. M. R. Parrondo, and C. Van den Broeck. Dissipation: The phase-space perspective.
Physical Review Letters , 98(8), 2007.
[25] Riccardo Mannella. A Gentle Introduction to the Integration of Stochastic Differential Equations. In
Jan A. Freund and Thorsten P¨ oschel, editors, Stochastic Processes in Physics, Chemistry, and Biology ,
Lecture Notes in Physics, pages 353–364, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2000. Springer.
13