Abstract
We have designed, fabricated, and characterized implantable silicon
neural probes with nanophotonic grating emitters that focus the emitted
light at a specified distance above the surface of the probe for spatially
precise optogenetic targeting of neurons. Using the holographic principle,
we designed gratings for wavelengths of 488 and 594 nm, targeting the
excitation spectra of the optogenetic actuators Channelrhodopsin-2 and
Chrimson, respectively. The measured optical emission pattern of these
emitters in non-scattering medium and tissue matched well with simula-
tions. To our knowledge, this is the first report of focused spots with the
size scale of a neuron soma in brain tissue formed from implantable neural
probes.
1arXiv:2401.04525v2  [physics.optics]  10 Jan 2024Implantable Photonic Neural Probes with
Out-of-Plane Focusing Grating Emitters
Tianyuan Xue1,2,*, Andrei Stalmashonak1, Fu-Der Chen1,2,
Peisheng Ding1,2, Xianshu Luo3, Hongyao Chua3, Guo-Qiang Lo3,
Wesley D. Sacher1, and Joyce K. S. Poon1,2,**
1Department of Nanophotonics, Integration, and Neural
Technology, Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics,
Weinberg 2, 06120 Halle, Germany
2The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, 10 King’s College
Road, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G4, Canada
3Advanced Micro Foundry Pte. Ltd., 11 Science Park Road,
117685, Singapore
*xuetiany@mail.utoronto.ca
**joyce.poon@mpi-halle.mpg.de
January 10, 2024
Introduction
Genetically encoded optogenetic actuators enable the functional interrogation of
complex neural circuits by providing a mechanism for the precise manipulation
of neuronal activity with light [1]. The excitation spectra of optogenetic actu-
ators, such as channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR-2), often lie in the visible wavelength
range [2, 3]. However, the attenuation length of light at these wavelengths in
brain tissue is limited to <1 mm [4, 5]. Implantable solutions, such as optical
fibers and implantable neural probes, can deliver illumination directly to deep
brain regions beyond the attenuation limit.[6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
Implantable silicon (Si) neural probes leverage the dense integration of pho-
tonic and electronic circuits on Si to enable concurrent electrophysiology record-
ing and optogenetic stimulation while maintaining a volume comparable to or
smaller than that of other implantable approaches [6, 13, 7, 10, 14, 8, 15]. While
both µLEDs and integrated photonic waveguide gratings have been used as light
emitters on implantable Si probes [7, 6, 16, 9, 10, 12], grating emitters have sev-
eral advantages compared to µLEDs. Grating emitters do not generate heat
2aside from light absorption by brain tissue, whereas the low wall-plug efficien-
cies of µLED emitters require mitigation of heating effects [13, 17, 16]. Further-
more, because light scattering in tissue is highly directional, beam forming can
be achieved through the design of gratings and optical phased arrays. To this
end, we have previously demonstrated the emission of highly directional beams
[9, 18, 12], steerable directional beams [19, 11, 20], and light sheet beams [10, 12]
from grating emitters on implantable Si probes.
In these previous works, the intensity of light decayed monotonically away
from the grating emitter, and neurons close to the surface of the probe were
preferentially excited. However, tissue near the probe surface is also the most
pronetodamagebytheimplant[21]. Inthiswork, wehavedesignedout-of-plane
focusinggratingemittersthatfocustheemittedlightatapointabovethesurface
of the neural probe for spatially precise targeting of neurons at a distance. The
focusing of light emission has the additional benefit of reaching the required
intensities for optogenetic actuation of ∼1 mW/mm2[2] at lower input powers
compared to other emitters. This type of grating emitters has previously been
designed for ion control [22, 23], memory addressing [24] and neural probes
[25]. However, in contrast to Lanzio et al. [25], here, the probes have been
fabricated in a foundry and the optical emission pattern has been characterized
in tissue. Our implantable neural probes contained up to 16 focusing grating
emitters on shanks that were 6 mm long. To characterize the optical profile
of these emitters, we captured the side-view beam profiles in a fluorescent dye
solution and three-dimensional (3D) profiles using fluorescent photoresist in a
water chamber. Lastly, we observed focusing of the emitted light in fixed brain
tissue with genetically encoded calcium indicator (GECI) expression. To our
knowledge, this is the first report of focusing of light emitted by a Si probe
implanted in brain tissue.
Design, Fabrication and Packaging
Design Methodology
The probe was fabricated on a silicon (Si) substrate with a low-loss visible
silicon nitride (SiN) waveguide layer on the platform detailed in Chen et al.
[12]. To transform the incident wave to the desired output beam, we used the
holographic principle to determine the set of grating curves to shape the output
phase profile. Specifically, the curves are the 2 π-spaced contours of the phase
map resultant from the sum of the phases of the input and desired output waves.
This is a modified version of the phase-matching condition found in Oton [26].
In our phase matching condition, the incident and output phase profiles are
prescribed as radial and spherical phase fronts, respectively, and are given as
2qπ=neffk0p
x2+y2+ntissue k0q
(x−x0)2+ (y−y0)2+z2
0,(1)
where (x0, y0, z0)are the spatial coordinates of the intended focus, neffand
ntissueare the effective indices of the SiN grating and brain tissue respectively.
3Grating teeth defined using this phase-matching condition, as shown in Fig. 1
(b), results in the focusing of light along the longitudinal ( x) and transverse ( y)
axes toward the intended focus site.
To obtain a smooth emission profile and a larger effective aperture, the
grating strength was modified by linearly varying the duty cycle ( DC) according
to:
DC=DC 0−Rp
(x2+y2), (2)
wheretheinitialdutycycle, DC 0andtherateatwhichthedutycyclewasvaried,
R, were constrained by a combination of the minimum feature size and grating
period obtained from the phase matching condition. To further reduce the
minimum achievable grating strength, transverse magnetic (TM) polarization
was chosen to minimize the mode overlap with the grating structure.
The grating design was optimized using two-dimensional finite-difference
time-domain (2D-FDTD) simulations on the y= 0plane by adjusting the longi-
tudinal location x0andR, while the focus height, z0, was fixed at 50 µm and the
initial duty cycle DC 0was maximized. Once these parameters were finalized,
a 3D FDTD simulation was performed with the final structure to validate the
grating design. The simulated light emission profiles in the y= 0plane from
the 3D FDTD simulations are shown in Fig. 1 (d,e).
A grating emitter for blue light ( λ= 488nm), targeting ChR-2 [2] was
designed and fabricated on 120nm thick plasma enhanced chemical vapour de-
position (PECVD) SiN with x0= 71.1 µm and R= 6003.6 m-1. Another grating
emitter for red light, targeting Chrimson [3] ( λ= 594nm) was designed and
fabricated on 200nm thick PECVD SiN with the parameters x0= 75.5 µm and
R= 4854.6 m-1. Both emitter designs fit within an area of 20 µm×60µm to
allow up to 16 such emitters on a single 100 µm-wide shank.
Optimization of the grating parameters to maximize the numerical aper-
ture of the focal point requires a balance between maintaining a wide range
of emission angles and a uniform aperture. Because the grating design is also
constrained by the minimum feature size of the fabrication process, the finalized
designs contain grating periods that contribute to higher-order grating modes.
3D FDTD simulations shown in Fig. 1(d,e) have a peak intensity ratio of -15.3
dB and -13.1 dB between the higher order grating mode and the focal spot for
the blue and red emitter designs, respectively.
Fabrication
The Si neural probes were fabricated on 200mm diameter Si wafers at Advanced
Micro Foundry (AMF) using 193nm deep ultraviolet (DUV) lithography. The
PECVDSiNwaveguidelayerwasdepositedwiththicknessesof120or200nmon
differentvariantsoftheneuralprobe. Thealuminummetalroutinglayersandti-
tanium nitride electrodes for electrophysiology recordings were available[12] but
not used in this work. The neural probe was defined with a deep trench etch,
which was then released by thinning the Si substrate to ∼100µm with back-
grinding. Figure 2(a) shows one of the fabricated probes. The cross-sectional
4Figure 1: Grating emitter design. (a) Schematic overview of an out-of-plane
focusing grating emitter with focal point located at coordinates ( x0, y0, z0). (b)
Phase map generated for λ= 488 nm. The contour lines dictated by the phase
matching condition are overlaid in green. (c) The finalized layout design of the
grating emitter for λ= 488 nm. Emitted beam profile on the y= 0plane
simulated in 3D FDTD for (d): blue emitter ( λ=488 nm), and (e): red ( λ=594
nm) emitter.
area of the shank was ∼100µm×100µm, comparable to other implantable
probes [8, 15].
Packaging
The Si neural probe was first fixed to a handle holder with a thermally curable
epoxy. Then, it was packaged by aligning each edge coupler on the probe with
a core in a multicore fiber and gluing it in place with a UV-curable epoxy using
a custom semi-automatic machine (Ficontec) [27]. Lastly, a black epoxy was
manually applied over the UV-cured epoxy to block any stray light emission
from the fiber-chip interface. Each emitter on the neural probe was spatially
addressed with a micro-electromechanical system (MEMS) mirror system by
coupling light into one of the 16 cores in the multicore fiber on the distal end
using the configuration described in [28, 12]. This method of addressing the
grating emitters allows the neural probe to be entirely passive to minimize
heating in tissue.
Experiment and Results
The side-view of the emission profile of the grating emitters was captured by
immersing the fiber-attached probe sideways in a mixture of water and fluores-
cent dye with a concentration of 100 µM. The probe was oriented such that the
captured optical beam profile was aligned with the x−zplane. An illustration
5Figure 2: The Si neural probe with out-of-plane focusing grating emitters. (a)
(top): Annotated micrograph of a neural probe. (bottom) : Optical micrograph
of an out-of-plane focusing grating emitter (brightness and contrast adjusted).
(b) A photograph of a neural probe attached to the input multicore fiber.
Figure 3: Side-view profile measurements by immersing the probe in a bath of
fluorescent dye solution. (a) Diagram of measurement setup. Captured side
profile for (b) λ= 488nm, and (c) λ= 594nm.
of this setup is shown in Fig. 3(a). Sodium fluorescein dye was used for λ= 488
nm and sulforhodamine 101 dye (Texas Red) was used for λ= 594nm. The
fluorescence was then captured with a microscope equipped with the suitable
emission filter to isolate the fluorescent signal. However, since the emitted beam
is focused in two dimensions, the side profile only captures a projection of the
beam profile onto the x−zplane.
To characterize the full 3D beam profile, a fluorescent coverslip was made
by spin coating a nominally 2 µm-thick layer of SU-8 photoresist mixed with
sodium fluorescein or Texas Red dye using a procedure similar to that of Lim et
al.[29]. The fluorescent coverslip was used as the top plate (with the fluorescent
side down) of a small chamber containing water to mimic the refractive index of
brain tissue. The fiber-attached probe was then inserted into the water chamber
and translated in the zdirection using a programmable micromanipulator in
increments of ∼1µm. An illustration of this measurement is shown in Fig. 4
(a).
Thex−ycross-sections of the beam, averaged over the thickness of the SU-8
layer, at various zpositions above the grating were captured by the fluorescent
6coverslip and imaged with the fluorescence microscope, and are shown in Fig.
4 (b,e). From linecuts of the x−ycross-sections, the side profiles of the beam
on the y= 0plane were constructed and are shown in Fig. 4 (c,f). Finally, the
beam waist profiles interpolated from the 3D profiles are shown in Fig. 4 (d,g).
The widths (full-width at half-maximum (FWHM)) of the beam waists were 4.0
µm×4.3µmand1.7µm×2.7µmforλ= 488nm and λ= 594nm, respectively.
The ratio between the peak intensity of the unwanted grating order and that of
the focal point was found to be -7 dB and -10.5 dB for the blue and red emitter
designs, respectively.
Finally, to validate optical focusing in tissue, the packaged probes were in-
sertedintofixedbraintissuethatexpressedageneticallyencodedcalciumindica-
tor (GECI). Tissues with Thy1-GCaMP6s expression were used for λ= 488 nm
[30] and tissue with Thy1-jRGECO1a expression was used for λ= 594nm [31].
The probe was inserted into the tissue in the same orientation as the side profile
measurement, such that the captured profile was aligned to the x−zplane and
close to the surface of the tissue to obtain a profile that was minimally blurred
by propagation through the tissue. The resulting fluorescent side profile was
then captured with the fluorescence microscope. The experimental setup, the
fluorescent side profiles of the beam focusing in tissue, and line cuts of the beam
waists are shown in Fig. 5. By measuring the beam waist from the side profiles,
we estimate the beam waist width (FWHM) in tissue to be 8.4 and 9.1 µm for
the blue and red emitter designs, respectively.
Discussion
In the measurement of the beam emission in the fluorescent dye solution, the
captured side profile ( x−zplane) compressed the y-axis of the beam profile.
Because the higher-order grating emission was spread out over the y-axis, as
can be seen in the captured cross-sections in Fig. 4 (b,e), this caused the higher
grating order to appear more prominent in Fig. 3 (b,c).
In the tissue measurements, the neural probe was implanted as close to the
surface as possible; however, it was difficult to predict or control the depth of the
probe implantation. The measured emission side profile in tissue consisted of a
combination of the scattering of the beam from the grating and the scattering
of the fluorescent signal. These scattering effects led to a discrepancy between
the side profiles imaged in the fluorescent dye solution in Fig. 3 (b,c) and the
side profiles imaged in tissue in Fig. 5 (c,d).
To simulate these scattering effects, we used a beam propagation scattering
model with fractal refractive index variations using the method described by
Glaser et al. [32]. Using the relationships in Rogers et al. [33], we tuned
the parameters of the fractal model based on the power law dependence of the
reduced scattering coefficient on wavelength µ′
s(λ)∝λ−1.127, the scattering
coefficient µs= 170cm−1, and the absorption coefficient µa= 5cm−1[34, 35].
We simulated the scattering from the grating into the tissue with complex
fields captured from 3D FDTD simulations to generate a 3D intensity profile
7Figure 4: Fluorescent coverslip measurement to obtain the 3D volumetric emis-
sion pattern of the grating emitter. (a) Diagram of the measurement setup. (b)
Captured cross-section profiles ( x−yplane) at various heights above the grating
forλ= 488nm. (c) Beam intensity on the y= 0plane obtained by stitching
together the captured cross-sections for λ= 488nm. (d) FWHM measurement
of the interpolated beam waist for λ= 488nm. (e, f, g): The corresponding
images to (b, c, d) for λ= 594nm.
8Figure 5: Verification of light focusing in fixed tissue. (a) Diagram of the experi-
mental setup. (b) Photograph of implanted neural probe. Captured fluorescent
side profiles with background subtracted ( x−zplane) of the emitted beam
and linecut at the beam waist from (c) red emitter implanted in fixed tissue
with jRGECO1a expression, and (d) blue emitter implanted in fixed tissue with
GCaMP6s expression.
of the emitted beam in tissue. Fig. 6 (a,c) shows a side view of the flattened
intensity profile. This 3D intensity profile was then convolved with degraded
point spread functions (PSFs) and flattened to emulate the image captured by
the fluorescent microscope, as shown in Fig. 6 (b,d). The degraded PSF was
obtained by forward propagating with scattering a Gaussian approximation of
the Airy disk defined by the 20×infinity-corrected microscope objective [36]
at the peak emission wavelengths of the GECI ( λ= 514 nmfor GCaMP6s and
λ= 600 nmfor jRGECO1a) and propagating in reverse without scattering. We
find that the side profiles measured in tissue matched well with the simulation
after taking into account the scattering, using our model, of the emitted beam
and the fluorescent signal, assuming an implantation depth of 280 µm and 310
µm for the blue and red emitters, respectively. The discrepancy between the
side profile obtained in the fluorescent dye solution and the tissue with GECI
expression was dominated by the scattering of the fluorescent signal rather than
the scattering of the beam emitted by the grating. This indicates that the
measured FWHM of the focal spot in tissue overestimates the beam width in
tissue.
Although the emitter focused as expected, the location of the focus deviated
from the simulation. The observed focal height ( z0) and the beam uniformity
over the x-axis were both lower than expected. This could suggest that the
refractive index of the PECVD SiN in the fabricated device was higher than
expected, which would have increased the emission angle (to lower z0) and
increasedthegratingstrength. Astrongergratingwouldhavemadetheemission
9Figure 6: Comparison of the scattering simulation results with the measured
beam profile in tissue. (a) Simulation of the blue emitter beam intensity profile
in tissue using beam propagation with scattering for λ= 488nm. (b) Simulated
beam intensity side profile convolved with a degraded PSF obtained at λ=
514nm. An implantation depth of 280 µm was assumed. (c) Measured beam
intensity side profile (background subtracted) in fixed tissue with GCaMP6s
expression for the blue emitter design. (d) Simulation of the red emitter beam
intensity profile in tissue using beam propagation with scattering for λ= 594
nm. (e) Simulated beam intensity side profile convolved with a degraded PSF
obtained at λ= 600nm. An implantation depth of 310 µm was assumed. (f)
Measured beam intensity side profile (background subtracted) in fixed tissue
with jRGECO1a expression for the red emitter design.
10along the x-axis less uniform and reduced the aperture dimension along the x
andyaxes due to the tapered design of the grating emitter. To reduce the
dependence of the aperture size along the yaxis on the grating strength, future
designs can widen the input waveguide instead of the grating emitter at the
expense of a larger device footprint. Nevertheless, the measured focal spot size
was comparable to the size of a neuronal soma [37]. The spatial localization of
light can be combined with optogenetic actuators that are targeted to express
in specific structures of neurons [38].
With an incident power of 2 mW on the distal end of the fiber attached
to the neural probe, the highest measured power of the blue emitter design
was 4.5 µW. Combining this with the beam waist extracted from the coverslip
experiment, an average intensity of ∼80mW/mm2is found within the contour
region seen in Fig. 4 (d), which is almost two orders of magnitude higher than
the∼1mW/mm2threshold for optogenetic actuators [2]. Thus, we expect that
the probe could deliver sufficient optical intensities for optogenetic stimulation.
In summary, we have designed, fabricated, and characterized implantable
neuralprobeswithgratingemittersthatfocuslightoutoftheplaneoftheprobe.
In a non-scattering medium, the FWHM beam waists were 4.0 µm×4.3µm
and 1.7 µm×2.7µm for the blue and red emitters, respectively. In fixed brain
tissues with GECI expression, the scattering of the fluorescence signal led to
broadened FWHM beams width of 8.4 and 9.1 µm for the blue and red emitters,
respectively. Although live tissue experiments were not performed, the probes
delivered sufficient intensities for optogenetic stimulation. The generation of
focused spots with a size scale of a neuronal soma in brain tissue using an
implantable probe is promising for applications in spatially precise optogenetic
experiments in deep brain regions.
References
[1] KarlDeisseroth. Optogenetics: 10yearsofmicrobialopsinsinneuroscience.
Nature Neuroscience , 18(9):1213–1225, Sep 2015.
[2] John Y. Lin. A user’s guide to channelrhodopsin variants: Features, lim-
itations and future developments. Experimental Physiology , 96(1):19–25,
2011.
[3] Nathan C. Klapoetke, Yasunobu Murata, Sung Soo Kim, Stefan R. Pul-
ver, Amanda Birdsey-Benson, Yong Ku Cho, Tania K. Morimoto, Amy S.
Chuong, Eric J. Carpenter, Zhijian Tian, Jun Wang, Yinlong Xie, Zhixi-
ang Yan, Yong Zhang, Brian Y. Chow, Barbara Surek, Michael Melkonian,
Vivek Jayaraman, Martha Constantine-Paton, Gane Ka-Shu Wong, and
Edward S. Boyden. Independent optical excitation of distinct neural pop-
ulations. Nature Methods , 11(3):338–346, Mar 2014.
[4] SaifI.Al-Juboori, AnnaDondzillo, ElizabethA.Stubblefield, GidonFelsen,
11Tim C. Lei, and Achim Klug. Light Scattering Properties Vary across
Different Regions of the Adult Mouse Brain. PLoS ONE , 8(7):1–9, 2013.
[5] Hillel Adesnik and Lamiae Abdeladim. Probing neural codes with two-
photon holographic optogenetics. Nature Neuroscience , 24(10):1356–1366,
Oct 2021.
[6] P Neutens, J O’Callaghan, J De Ceulaer, E Tonon, M Welkenhuysen, C M
Lopez, A Andrei, J Putzeys, Md Mahmud-Ul-Hasan, H A C Tilmans, and
B Dutta. Dual-wavelength neural probe for simultaneous opto-stimulation
and recording fabricated in a monolithically integrated CMOS / photonics
technology platform. In International Electron Devices Meeting , 2023.
[7] Aseema Mohanty, Qian Li, Mohammad Amin Tadayon, Samantha P.
Roberts, Gaurang R. Bhatt, Euijae Shim, Xingchen Ji, Jaime Carde-
nas, Steven A. Miller, Adam Kepecs, and Michal Lipson. Reconfigurable
nanophotonic silicon probes for sub-millisecond deep-brain optical stimu-
lation.Nature Biomedical Engineering , 4(2):223–231, Feb 2020.
[8] Marco Pisanello, Filippo Pisano, Leonardo Sileo, Emanuela Maglie, Elisa
Bellistri, Barbara Spagnolo, Gil Mandelbaum, Bernardo L. Sabatini, Mas-
simo De Vittorio, and Ferruccio Pisanello. Tailoring light delivery for op-
togenetics by modal demultiplexing in tapered optical fibers. Scientific
Reports, 8(1):4467, Mar 2018.
[9] Wesley D. Sacher, Xianshu Luo, Yisu Yang, Fu-Der Chen, Thomas
Lordello, Jason C. C. Mak, Xinyu Liu, Ting Hu, Tianyuan Xue, Patrick
Guo-Qiang Lo, Michael L. Roukes, and Joyce K. S. Poon. Visible-light
silicon nitride waveguide devices and implantable neurophotonic probes on
thinned 200 mm silicon wafers. Opt. Express , 27(26):37400–37418, Dec
2019.
[10] Wesley D. Sacher, Fu-Der Chen, Homeira Moradi-Chameh, Xianshu Luo,
Anton Fomenko, Prajay Shah, Thomas Lordello, Xinyu Liu, Ilan Felts Al-
mog, John N. Straguzzi, Trevor M. Fowler, Youngho Jung, Ting Hu, Junho
Jeong, Andres M. Lozano, Patrick Guo-Qiang Lo, Taufik A. Valiante, Lau-
rent C. Moreaux, Joyce K. S. Poon, and Michael L. Roukes. Implantable
photonic neural probes for light-sheet fluorescence brain imaging. Neu-
rophotonics , 8(02):1–26, 2021.
[11] Wesley D. Sacher, Fu-Der Chen, Homeira Moradi-Chameh, Xinyu Liu,
Ilan Felts Almog, Thomas Lordello, Michael Chang, Azadeh Naderian,
Trevor M. Fowler, Eran Segev, Tianyuan Xue, Sara Mahallati, Taufik A.
Valiante, Laurent C. Moreaux, Joyce K. S. Poon, and Michael L. Roukes.
Optical phased array neural probes for beam-steering in brain tissue. Opt.
Lett., 47(5):1073–1076, Mar 2022.
[12] FuDerChen, HomeiraMoradiChameh, MandanaMovahed, HannesWahn,
Xin Mu, Peisheng Ding, Tianyuan Xue, John N. Straguzzi, David A.
12Roszko, Ankita Sharma, Alperen Govdeli, Youngho Jung, Hongyao Chua,
Xianshu Luo, Patrick G. Q. Lo, Taufik A. Valiante, Wesley D. Sacher, and
Joyce K. S. Poon. Implantable nanophotonic neural probes for integrated
patterned photostimulation and electrophysiology recording. bioRxiv, 2023.
[13] Mihály Vöröslakos, Kanghwan Kim, Nathan Slager, Eunah Ko, Sungjin
Oh, Saman S. Parizi, Blake Hendrix, John P. Seymour, Kensall D. Wise,
György Buzsáki, Antonio Fernández-Ruiz, andEuisikYoon. Hectostar µled
optoelectrodes for large-scale, high-precision in vivo opto-electrophysiology.
Advanced Science , 9(18):2105414, 2022.
[14] M Schwaerzle, O Paul, and P Ruther. Compact silicon-based optrode with
integrated laser diode chips, su-8 waveguides and platinum electrodes for
optogenetic applications. Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineer-
ing, 27(6):065004, apr 2017.
[15] Sarah Libbrecht, Luis Hoffman, Marleen Welkenhuysen, Chris Van den
Haute, Veerle Baekelandt, Dries Braeken, and Sebastian Haesler. Proximal
and distal modulation of neural activity by spatially confined optogenetic
activation with an integrated high-density optoelectrode. Journal of Neu-
rophysiology , 120(1):149–161, 2018.
[16] Tae il Kim, Jordan G. McCall, Yei Hwan Jung, Xian Huang, Edward R.
Siuda, Yuhang Li, Jizhou Song, Young Min Song, Hsuan An Pao, Rak-
HwanKim, ChaofengLu, SungDanLee, Il-SunSong, GunChulShin, Ream
Al-Hasani, Stanley Kim, Meng Peun Tan, Yonggang Huang, Fiorenzo G.
Omenetto, John A. Rogers, and Michael R. Bruchas. Injectable, cellular-
scale optoelectronics with applications for wireless optogenetics. Science,
340(6129):211–216, 2013.
[17] Hiroki Yasunaga, Hibiki Takeuchi, Koyo Mizuguchi, Atsushi Nishikawa,
Alexander Loesing, Mikiko Ishikawa, Chikako Kamiyoshihara, Susumu Se-
togawa, Noriaki Ohkawa, and Hiroto Sekiguchi. Microled neural probe for
effectiveinvivooptogeneticstimulation. Opt. Express , 30(22):40292–40305,
Oct 2022.
[18] Xin Mu, Fu-Der Chen, Ka My Dang, Michael G. K. Brunk, Jianfeng
Li, Hannes Wahn, Andrei Stalmashonak, Peisheng Ding, Xianshu Luo,
Hongyao Chua, Guo-Qiang Lo, Joyce K. S. Poon, and Wesley D. Sacher.
Implantable photonic neural probes with 3d-printed microfluidics and ap-
plications to uncaging. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 17, 2023.
[19] Fu-Der Chen, Youngho Jung, Tianyuan Xue, Jason C. C. Mak, Xianshu
Luo, Patrick Guo-Qiang Lo, Michael L. Roukes, Joyce K. S. Poon, and
Wesley D. Sacher. Sidelobe-free beam-steering using optical phased ar-
rays for neural probes. In Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics , page
SW3B.2. Optica Publishing Group, 2021.
13[20] Ankita Sharma, Alperen Govdeli, Tianyuan Xue, Fu-Der Chen, Xianshu
Luo, Hongyao Chua, Guo-Qiang Lo, Wesley D. Sacher, and Joyce K.S.
Poon. Wide-angle single-lobe beam-steering using optical phased arrays on
implantable neural probes. In CLEO 2023 , page SF2E.5. Optica Publishing
Group, 2023.
[21] Richárd Fiáth, Adrienn Lilla Márton, Ferenc Mátyás, Domonkos Pinke,
Gergely Márton, Kinga Tóth, and István Ulbert. Slow insertion of silicon
probesimprovesthequalityofacuteneuronalrecordings. Scientific Reports ,
9(1):111, Jan 2019.
[22] Karan K. Mehta and Rajeev J. Ram. Precise and diffraction-limited
waveguide-to-free-space focusing gratings. Scientific Reports , 7(1):2019,
May 2017.
[23] Sabrina Corsetti, Ashton Hattori, Reuel Swint, Milica Notaros, Gavin N.
West, Tal Sneh, Felix Knollmann, Patrick T. Callahan, Thomas Mahony,
Ethan R. Clements, Dave Kharas, Cheryl Sorace-Agaskar, Robert Mc-
Connell, John Chiaverini, and Jelena Notaros. Integrated polarization-
diverse grating emitters for trapped-ion quantum systems. In Frontiers in
Optics +Laser Science 2023 (FiO, LS) , page JTu7A.3. Optica Publishing
Group, 2023.
[24] Hanna Becker, Clemens J. Krückel, Dries Van Thourhout, and Martijn
J. R. Heck. Out-of-plane focusing grating couplers for silicon photonics
integration with optical mram technology. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Quantum Electronics , 26(2):1–8, 2020.
[25] Vittorino Lanzio, Melanie West, Alexander Koshelev, Gregory Telian,
Paolo Micheletti, Raquel Lambert, Scott Dhuey, Hillel Adesnik, Simone
Sassolini, and Stefano Cabrini. High-density electrical and optical probes
for neural readout and light focusing in deep brain tissue. Journal of Mi-
cro/Nanolithography, MEMS, and MOEMS , 17(2):025503, 2018.
[26] C. J. Oton. Long-working-distance grating coupler for integrated optical
devices.IEEE Photonics Journal , 8(1):1–8, 2016.
[27] Saeed Sharif Azadeh, Andrei Stalmashonak, Kevin W. Bennett, Fu-Der
Chen, Wesley D. Sacher, and Joyce K. S. Poon. Visible spectrum multicore
fibers with 10 and 16 cores. In Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics ,
page STu4A.3. Optica Publishing Group, 2021.
[28] Fu-Der Chen, Hannes Wahn, Tianyuan Xue, Youngho Jung, John N.
Straguzzi, Saeed S. Azadeh, Andrei Stalmashonak, Hongyao Chua, Xian-
shu Luo, Prajay Shah, Homeira Moradi Chameh, Patrick Guo-Qiang Lo,
Taufik A. Valiante, Wesley D. Sacher, and Joyce K. S. Poon. Implantable
neural probe system for patterned photostimulation and electrophysiology
recording. In Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics , page JTh6A.7.
Optica Publishing Group, 2022.
14[29] Miles P. Lim, Xiaofei Guo, Eva L. Grunblatt, Garrett M. Clifton, Ayda N.
Gonzalez, and Christopher N. LaFratta. Augmenting mask-based lithogra-
phy with direct laser writing toincrease resolution and speed. Opt. Express ,
26(6):7085–7090, Mar 2018.
[30] Hod Dana, Tsai Wen Chen, Amy Hu, Brenda C. Shields, Caiying Guo,
Loren L. Looger, Douglas S. Kim, and Karel Svoboda. Thy1-GCaMP6
transgenic mice for neuronal population imaging in vivo. PLoS ONE , 9(9),
2014.
[31] Hod Dana, Boaz Mohar, Yi Sun, Sujatha Narayan, Andrew Gordus,
Jeremy P Hasseman, Getahun Tsegaye, Graham T Holt, Amy Hu, Deepika
Walpita, Ronak Patel, John J Macklin, Cornelia I Bargmann, Misha B
Ahrens, Eric R Schreiter, Vivek Jayaraman, Loren L Looger, Karel Svo-
boda, and Douglas S Kim. Sensitive red protein calcium indicators for
imaging neural activity. eLife, 5:e12727, mar 2016.
[32] Adam K. Glaser, Ye Chen, and Jonathan T. C. Liu. Fractal propagation
methodenablesrealisticopticalmicroscopysimulationsinbiologicaltissues.
Optica, 3(8):861–869, Aug 2016.
[33] JeremyD.Rogers,İlkerR.Çapoğlu,andVadimBackman. Nonscalarelastic
light scattering from continuous random media in the born approximation.
Opt. Lett. , 34(12):1891–1893, Jun 2009.
[34] Mohammed Mesradi, Aurelie Genoux, Vesna Cuplov, Darine Abi-Haidar,
Sebastien Jan, Irene Buvat, and Frederic Pain. Experimental and analyti-
cal comparative study of optical coefficient of fresh and frozen rat tissues.
Journal of Biomedical Optics , 18(11):117010, 2013.
[35] Mehdi Azimipour, Ryan Baumgartner, Yuming Liu, Steven L. Jacques,
Kevin W. Eliceiri, and Ramin Pashaie. Extraction of optical properties and
prediction of light distribution in rat brain tissue. Journal of Biomedical
Optics, 19(7):075001, 2014.
[36] Microscopes Units and Objectives (UV, NUV, Visible & NIR Region).
Technical report, Mitutoyo, 2022.
[37] John Meitzen, Kelsey R. Pflepsen, Christopher M. Stern, Robert L. Meisel,
and Paul G. Mermelstein. Measurements of neuron soma size and density
in rat dorsal striatum, nucleus accumbens core and nucleus accumbens
shell: Differences between striatal region and brain hemisphere, but not
sex.Neuroscience Letters , 487(2):177–181, 2011.
[38] Christopher A Baker, Yishai M Elyada, Andres Parra, and M McLean
Bolton. Cellular resolution circuit mapping with temporal-focused excita-
tion of soma-targeted channelrhodopsin. eLife, 5:e14193, aug 2016.
15