This draft was prepared using the LaTeX style file belonging to the Journal of Fluid Mechanics 1
Preferential orientation of floaters drifting in
water waves
Wietze Herreman1†, Basile Dhote1, Lucile Danion1,
and Fr´ ed´ eric Moisy1
1Universit´ e Paris-Saclay, CNRS, FAST, 91405, Orsay, France.
(Received xx; revised xx; accepted xx)
Elongated floaters drifting in propagating water waves slowly rotate towards a preferential
state of orientation. Short and heavy floaters tend to align longitudinally, along the
direction of wave propagation, whereas long and light floaters align transversely, parallel
to the wave crests and troughs. We investigate this phenomenon for homogeneous paral-
lelepiped floaters by combining laboratory experiments with numerical simulations and
asymptotic theory. For floaters small with respect to wavelength and for low amplitude
waves, we show that the floater orientation is controlled by the non-dimensional number
F=kL2
x/βL z, with kis the wavenumber, βthe floater-to-water density ratio, and
LxandLzthe floater length and thickness. Theory places the longitudinal-transverse
transition at the critical value Fc= 60, in fair agreement with the experiments. Using a
simplified physical model, we elucidate the physical origin of the preferential orientation.
Through its motion, the floater probes the velocity gradients along its surface. Next
to a small mean displacement (Stokes drift), this results in a net torque which, for
short floaters, always favors the longitudinal orientation. This net torque arises from a
phase correlation between the instantaneous buoyancy torque and the instantaneous yaw
angle of the floater, a mechanism analogous to the Kapitza pendulum. The transverse
equilibrium of longer floaters has a different origin and arises from the variation of the
submersion depth along their long axis. This varying submersion significantly increases
the torque in the trough positions, when the tips are more submersed, and always pushes
towards the transverse orientation.
Key words:
1. Introduction
The motion of a floating body in gravity waves is a classical problem in fluid mechanics
with evident applications in the domain of naval engineering (Faltinsen 1993; Newman
2018; Falnes & Kurniawan 2020). At first order in wave magnitude, waves cause harmonic
oscillations of the floating body in all six degrees of freedom, both linear (heave, surge,
sway) and angular (pitch, roll, yaw). At second order, waves also cause a mean drift force
and yaw moment on the body that affect surge, sway and yaw angle on long time-scales.
For small isotropic floaters, this mean motion reduces to the classical Stokes drift in the
direction of the wave propagation (Stokes 1847; van den Bremer & Breivik 2018; Calvert
et al. 2021), a problem that received considerable interest for the modeling of pollutant
transport in the oceans (Suaria et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2023; Sutherland et al. 2023).
†Email address for correspondence: wietze.herreman@universite-paris-saclay.frarXiv:2401.03254v1  [physics.flu-dyn]  6 Jan 20242 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
Figure 1. Experimental setup and chronophotographies. (a) Side view. Waves are generated in
a water channel, of length 3 m and filled at height H= 10 cm. (b) Top View. Floater of length
Lx, making an angle ψwith the direction of wave propagation. (c-d) Chronophotographies,
obtained by superimposing images acquired every wave period, for a wave length λ= 29 cm
and wave slope ϵ=ak= 0.16. The short floater (length Lx= 60 mm) gradually aligns in the
direction of wave propagation (c), while the long floater ( Lx= 100 mm) aligns parallel to the
wave crests (d).
For larger floaters of arbitrary shape, such as ships and floating structures, an angular
drift can change the floater’s orientation with respect to the wave incidence and this slow
reorientation can in turn modify its linear drift. The combined linear and angular drifts
are key features in sea keeping and maneuvering, and their modeling has been the subject
of numerous works (Faltinsen 1993; Skejic & Faltinsen 2008; Newman 2018). In this paper,
we are interested in the slow, second order yaw motion of elongated floaters drifting in
gravity waves and how a preferential state of orientation spontaneously emerges.
Research on this topic started more than a century ago, with Suyehiro (1921) who first
reported how small boat models displaced by propagating gravity waves rotate towards
a preferential state of orientation with respect to the direction of incidence. Suheyiro
believed that this was due to gyrostatic torques and hence of purely solid-mechanical
origin. Newman disagreed with this and proposed in 1967 his famous article on the
mean drift force and yaw moment due to waves (Newman 1967). Starting from a global
momentum and torque balance, he expresses the second order drift force and yaw moment
in terms of the far-field hydrodynamic wave potential (Kochin functions). Using slender
body theory, he was able to calculate this far-field potential and hence to derive the
first explicit formula for the second order yaw moment. This mean torque compared
reasonably well with the experimental data of Spens & Lalangas (1962) (reproduced in
Newman (1967)).
A key prediction of Newman’s theory is that slender floating structures of length
shorter than the wave-length should always be stable in beam seas , meaning that they
will prefer to have their long axis parallel to the wave crests. In figure 1 we show two
chronophotographs from our laboratory experiments that disagree with this prediction.
Here, small homogeneous parallelepipeds of centimer scale are left adrift in a propagatingPreferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 3
wave in a 3-m long water tank, and pictures synchronized with the wave period are taken
from above (details are given in section 2). In just a few wave periods, we observe that
long floaters align parallel to the wave crests (‘beam sea’, ψ→90o), in agreement with
Newman’s prediction, but shorter floaters align along the direction of wave propagation
(‘head sea’, ψ→0o); here ψis the yaw angle between the floater long axis and the
direction of wave propagation. Hence, it seems that preferential orientation, and by
extension the mean second order yaw moment, may depend more subtly on the floater
length and density. The main objective of this article is to clarify what physically governs
this preference and to locate where the longitudinal-transverse transition occurs for
floaters small with respect to the wavelength.
Since Newman’s pioneering work, other groups have studied the second order yaw
moment acting on floating bodies. The work of Salvesen (1974) is a simplification of
Newman’s model in which the floater is considered as a weak scatterer of the incoming
wave. In Kashiwagi (1992) and Kashiwagi & Ohkusu (1993), Parseval’s theorem is used
to evaluate the mean drift force and yaw moment, instead of the method of stationary
phase used by Newman. An entirely different, near-field approach , of direct pressure
integration was proposed by Faltinsen (1980). These different methods are compared
in Skejic & Faltinsen (2008), and show consistent results. Chen (2007) proposed a
third method, the so-called middle field formulation , to compute mean wave loads on
structures. This method, in which the potential is determined using a boundary element
method, is implemented in the software pack Hydrostar (Bureau-Veritas 2016) that is
commonly used in naval engineering applications. The experimental study of Le Boulluec
et al. (2008) on drifting cargo containers briefly mentions the fact that containers can
drift either in longitudinal positions (head-seas) or transverse position (beam-seas).
Recently, Yasukawa et al. (2019) compared theory to new experimental measurements
on a particular ship model. According to the authors, it remains difficult to make the
theory and experiments for the mean yaw moment match well.
In this article, we propose a combined experimental, numerical and theoretical study
on the preferential orientation of a model floater (homogeneous parallelepiped) drifting
in a propagating gravity wave. Our model is based on the Froude-Krylov assumption and
hence ignores all wave diffraction and wave radiation effects (no added mass, no radiation
impedance). In spite of this simplicity, this model predicts a mean yaw moment in the
limit of small floater length/wavelength ratio that is fully compatible with Newman’s
classical result (Newman 1967) and nearly in perfect agreement with mean yaw moment
calculations of Chen (2007). Moreover, our simplified model also allows us to provide a
simple physical picture for the origin of this preferential orientation.
The article is structured as follows. In section 2, we present a systematic series of
experiments investigating the preferential orientation of floaters of varying length and
density. In section 3, we define a simplified model in which we calculate the non-linear
motion of the floater using a Froude-Krylov approximation. We show that numerical
solutions of this model reproduce well the observed state of preferential orientation in
our experiments. In section 4, we propose an asymptotic solution to our Froude-Krylov
model in the double limit of small wave and small floater size. This yields the following,
idealized evolution equation for the average yaw angle ψ,
¨ψ≈ −ϵ2sinψcos3ψ
1−F
Fc
. (1.1)
This equation depends on two non-dimensional numbers: the wave-slope ϵ=ka(with k4 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
the wavenumber and athe wave amplitude) and the number F, defined as
F=kL2
x
βLz, (1.2)
with Lx, Lzthe floater length and thickness and β, the floater-to-water density ratio. We
recognise ¯h=βLzas the equilibrium submersion depth or draft of our parallelepiped
floaters. This idealised, dissipation-less evolution equation certainly does not capture all
the complexity of realistic slow yawing, but it provides insight into the preferential state
of orientation. It shows that, for F < F c, the longitudinal position ψ= 0ois stable and
hence preferred, whereas for F > F c, the transverse position ψ= 90ois stable. Our
theory predicts a transition at Fc= 60, in fair agreement with the experimental value
Fc≃45±10.
Our theory follows a ’near-field approach’, but different from that of Faltinsen (1980),
in the fact that it uses the Froude-Krylov approximation, which allows more analytical
evaluation. In section 5, we finally derive the same model using a more simple physical
procedure. This allows us to better understand what physically controls the preferential
orientation. The longitudinal equilibrium position is due to an effective torque that
appears as the floater probes low and high pressure regions while going through its
first order motion. We show that this part of the torque creates a motion that is
analogous to that of classical Kapitza pendulum, a pendulum whose anchor point is
rapidly vibrated (Kapitza 1951; Landau & Lifschitz 1960; Butikov 2001). The transverse
state of orientation is on the other hand due to the fact that long floaters have a
variable submersion along their length. This variable submersion significantly enhances
the instantaneous yaw moment in trough positions that always favors the transverse
position. In Newman’s model, only this second part of the torque is present, which
explains why he found elongated structures to be stable in beam seas. Finally, in Sec. 6,
we compare the analytical formula for the mean yaw moment in our theory to previous
results obtained by Newman (1967) and Chen (2007). The agreement is surprisingly good,
in particular when considering that we use a Froude-Krylov assumption in our model.
2. Experiments
A series of laboratory experiments with centimeter-scale floaters of varying size and
density have been performed in a water flume. The experimental setup, sketched in
figure 1(a-b), consists in a tank of length 3 m, width 0.38 m, filled with water at height
H= 0.1 m. Waves are generated by a wavemaker consisting in a paddle oscillating at
frequency ω/2πbetween 1 and 4 Hz, and are absorbed at the other end of the channel
by a sloping plate.
We determine the wave profile ζ(x, t) by imaging the instantaneous contact line through
the lateral channel wall and using a line detection algorithm. The wave profile is well
described by a simple sinus law, ζ=acos(kx+φ(t)), with φ(t) the wave phase, from
which we measure the wave amplitude aand wave number k= 2π/λwith precision ≃5%.
The measured wave number matches the dispersion relation in the gravity regime, ω2=
gktanh( kH), with wave lengths λin the range 10 −82 cm. Experiments for wavelengths
of the order of the channel width are discarded because resonant transverse sloshing
modes are excited. We work in the weakly nonlinear wave regime, for wave slopes ϵ=ak
between 0.02 and 0.23.
The floaters are homogeneous rectangular parallelepipeds with length Lxbetween 20
and 140 mm, width Ly= 10 mm and height Lzbetween 5 and 10 mm, cut from expanded
PVC or polystyrene boards of various densities. We denote Mthe floater mass, ρs=Preferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 5
0 20 40 60 80 100 120-0.06-0.04-0.0200.020.040.06
0 10 20 30 40 50-45o0o45o90o135oTransverse Longitudinal
30 mm50 mm60 mm80 mm90 mm100 mm(a) (b)
Transverse Longitudinal
Figure 2. (a) Yaw angle ψas a function of the time normalized by the wave period, for
floaters of various lengths Lx. The time origin is chosen such that ψ(0) = 45o. Wave frequency
f= 2.3 Hz, wavelength λ= 0.29 m, wave slope ak= 0.16, floater waterline depth ¯h= 2.2 mm.
(b) Normalized angular velocity ˙ψ/ω of the floater as a function of Lx.
M/(LxLyLz) its density, and β=ρs/ρthe floater-to-water density ratio. The floater size
is large enough for the capillary effects to be negligible: the vertical component of the
capillary force is less than 10% of the floater weight.
For each run, a floater is gently deposited at the surface of water at a distance x0≃
0.8 m from the wave maker, with an initial yaw angle ψ0of approximately 45o±15ofrom
thexaxis (controlling precisely ψ0is difficult because the phase of the wave is not known
at the time the floater is released). The floaters are imaged by a camera located above
the wave tank. Using a tracking algorithm (library Tracker in Python), we measure the
center of mass xc(t) and the yaw angle ψ(t) of the floater on each frame. For each run,
the floater is left adrift for about 1 m, and only trajectories staying approximately along
the center line of the channel are retained to discard possible interaction with the side
walls.
At first order, the floater motion is a combination of a back-and-forth oscillation of its
center of mass, of amplitude given by the typical horizontal excursion of the fluid particle
trajectories ( ∆x=a/tanh( kH) for waves in finite depth) and angular oscillations.
Superimposed to these fast oscillations are a slow drift of the center of mass in the
direction of the wave propagation (Stokes drift) and a slow drift of the yaw angle, either
towards the longitudinal ( ψ= 0o, denoted ‘L’) or transverse ( ψ= 90o, denoted ‘T’)
orientation. To filter out the fast oscillations and focus on the slow dynamics of ψ, we
synchronize the image acquisition with the wave maker oscillation, as illustrated in the
chronophotographies of figure 1(c-d).
We first consider a set of floaters with a density ratio β=ρs/ρ= 0.44 and thickness
Lz= 5 mm (expanded PVC foam boards “Forex”), and investigate the influence of the
floater length Lx, for a fixed wavelength λ= 290 mm and wave amplitude a= 7.4 mm
(wave slope ϵ=ka= 0.16). The time evolution of the yaw angle ψis shown in figure 2(a).
Because of the uncertainty on the initial angle ψ0, we shift the time origin so that ψis
45oatt= 0 for each run. The curves clearly separate in two groups, with small floaters
(Lx⩽60 mm) tending to ψ= 0o(longitudinal) and long floaters ( Lx⩾80 mm) tending
toψ= 90o(transverse). While short floaters precisely align in the longitudinal direction,
with ψ≃0±5oat large time, long floaters show larger variations around ψ≃90±30o.
These larger excursions can be due to the fact that long floaters are more subject to
interactions with the side walls and to residual inhomogeneities in the mean flow.
The reorientation dynamics is faster for very short or very long floaters: they reach their6 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
Figure 3. (a) Asymptotic floater orientation as a function of Lxand wavelength λ, for floaters
with density β= 0.44, width Ly= 10 mm and thickness Lz= 5 mm. Red circles: longitudinal;
Blue triangles: transverse. Black squares indicate erratic oscillations of the floater angle or
non-reproducible experiments. The separation line is Lx=√
ℓλ, with ℓ≃16±3 mm. (b)
Same data in the plan ( F, ϵ), demonstrating the independence of the orientation with the wave
steepness ϵ. The long dashed line shows the experimental transition at Fc≃50, and the short
dashed line the theoretical prediction at Fc= 60.
asymptotic orientation after approximately 5 wave periods only, while the convergence
is much slower (at least 20 wave periods) for intermediate lengths. This convergence rate
is illustrated in figure 2(b) for various floater lengths, showing the angular velocity ˙ψ
measured at t= 0 normalized by the wave frequency ω(this ratio measures the fraction
of complete turn performed by the floater during one wave period). For this particular
floater density and thickness, ˙ψ/ω crosses zero for Lx≃75 mm, which defines the
critical length Lxcseparating the longitudinal and transverse orientations. Because of
the slow dynamics at the crossover, the orientation is very sensitive to any experimental
uncertainty for Lxclose to Lxc, such as the precise choice of the the initial angle ψ0,
inhomogeneities in the streaming flow, or small defects in the wetting line.
We have systematically determined the asymptotic yaw angle for various floater lengths
Lx, wave lengths λand amplitudes a. The preferential orientation of the floaters is first
summarized in the plan ( Lx, λ) in figure 3(a). When the asymptotic angle is ψ≃0±10o,
floaters are labeled as “longitudinal” (red circles), and when ψ≃90±30othey are
labeled as “transverse” (blue triangles). Floaters with indistinct orientation are marked
with a black square. This diagram shows a clear separation between the longitudinal
and transverse orientations, with a transition line well described by a square-root law,
Lxc≃√
ℓλ, with ℓ≃16±3 mm a fitting parameter.
This square-root law nicely conforms to the prediction of the asymptotic theory
presented in the next section, which demonstrates that the preferential orientation is
independent of the wave slope ϵ=kaand governed by the non-dimensional number
F=kL2
x/βL z, with a longitudinal-transverse transition at Fc= 60. To check these
predictions, we plot in figure 3(b) the same data in the ( F, ϵ) plane. We observe a clear
separation between the longitudinal and transverse orientations, delimited by the line
F≃50, in fair agreement with the theory.
To further test the theory, we performed additional experiments with different floater
densities βand thicknesses Lz, covering a range of immersion depths h=βLzbetween
1.8 and 5.3 mm. For each wavelength λ, we determine the critical floater length LxcPreferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 7
10-1100101102
Figure 4. Critical values of F=kL2
x/βL zfor the L-T transition as a function of the wavelength,
for floaters of various densities βand thicknesses Lz. Solid line: average value F≃45±10. Dashed
line: theoretical prediction Fc= 60.
separating the longitudinal and transverse orientation, defined as the average between the
largest longitudinal and smallest transverse floaters (the uncertainty on Lxcis 10 mm).
Figure 4 summarizes the values of Fat the transition as a function of the wavelength,
yielding again a constant value, F≃45±10. We can conclude that the two key predictions
of the theory (floater orientation governed by Fand independent of the wave slope ϵ)
are well verified by our experiments.
3. Inviscid Froude Krylov model
To model the preferential state of orientation, we could in principle compute the mean
yaw moment using existing models, either using the far-field approach of Newman (1967),
the near-field approach of Faltinsen (1980) or the middle-filed approach of Chen (2007).
Here, we derive a more basic numerical model for idealised floater motion, that is based
on the Froude-Krylov assumption. We demonstrate that this model reproduces well our
experimental observations and hence, that it contains much of the essential physics.
3.1.Simplifying assumptions
The idealised model that we will use to explain preferential orientation relies on the
following simplifying assumptions:
(i) The incoming wave is a linear, inviscid potential gravity wave in deep water – The
linearity assumption is reasonably satisfied in the experiments (maximum wave slope
ϵ=ka= 0.23); the deep-water assumption is not fully satisfied (tanh( kH)≃0.65 for
the largest wave-length), but this is not essential to the theory.
(ii) Viscosity is negligible – The viscous stress on the floater is of the order ηaω/δ s,
where δs= (ν/ω)1/2is the thickness of the Stokes boundary layer. This viscous stress is
much smaller than the wave pressure variations, p∼ρaω2/k, for νk2/ω≪1, which is
well satisfied in the experiments: νk2/ω < 2×10−4.
(iii) Capillarity is negligible – The capillary length, ℓc=p
ρg/γ≃2 mm (with γthe
surface tension), is smaller than the characteristic floater size in our experiments. Note
however that the meniscus at the rim of the floater likely creates an effective shape and
may also weakly change the equilibrium immersion depth h.8 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
LxLyLz
Figure 5. (a) Sketch of the floater and notations: laboratory frame ( O, x, y, z ), moving floater
frame ( C,ex,ey,ez), and Euler angles θ(pitch), ϕ(rall) and ψ(yaw). In the simulation, we
numerically calculate the pressure force and torque on the submerged surface Ssubusing
rectangular meshes on each face and a mask function fthat indicates whether the point on the
face is submerged or not. (b) Free vertical oscillations of zcat the bobbing frequencyp
1/βδ z
in a numerical test-case without incoming wave
(iv) Steady streaming flows are negligible – The steady streaming flows is a nonlinear,
mean flow correction of order O(ϵ2) that comes along with the linear wave. This mean
flow can affect reorientation, but only if it is inhomogenous at the scale of the floater.
Steady streaming flows typically vary spatially on the scale k−1. Hence, with δ=kL≪1,
we expect a weak effect of streaming on the floater orientation.
(v) Wave scattering and wave emission are neligible (Froude-Krylov approximation)
– In principle, floaters placed in an incoming wave act as obstacles and scatter this
incoming wave. They can also move differentially with respect to the flow and hence
emit waves. However, we can neglect these effects when the floater is small with respect
to the wavelength and when differential motion is weak:
δ=kL≪1,||u−v||
||u||≪1, (3.1)
withuthe fluid velocity and vfloater velocity. We therefore assume that the floater only
moves due to pressure forces and torques associated with the incoming wave.
The Froude-Krylov approximation is the most important assumption in our model. By
neglecting the wave emission, we filter out radiative losses and added mass effects. As a
result, free “bobbing” oscillations of the floater around the equilibrium position are not
damped in our model. In practice, we avoid these free oscillations in our calculations using
a particular initialisation strategy that will be detailed below. Another consequence of the
absence of dissipation is that, as for an undamped pendulum, the equilibrium states must
be either unstable or marginally stable . In our simulations, the yaw angle ψwill oscillate
around the stable fixed point, rather then converging towards it as in the experiments.
3.2.Equations of motion
We derive equations of motion for a small parallepiped floater drifting on a propagating
gravity wave on infinitely deep water. We introduce a laboratory frame of reference
(O, x, y, z ), with ( ex,ey,ez) basis vectors (figure 5). By convention, the origin Ois on
the equilibrium fluid surface and the wave propagates along xand is y-invariant.
We use as incoming gravity wave the classical, linear potential wave solution on
infinitely deep water
ζ=asin(kx−ωt),ux= aωekzsin(kx−ωt)
uz=−aωekzcos(kx−ωt), p =p0−ρgz+ρgaekzsin(kx−ωt).
(3.2)Preferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 9
Here ζis the surface elevation, ux, uz, pthe velocity components and pressure, p0the
atmospheric pressure, and ω=√gk. In the following, we non-dimensionalise space, time,
velocity and pressure using the scales
[r] =k−1,[t] = (gk)−1/2,[u] =g1/2k−1/2,[p] =ρgk−1. (3.3)
In this unit system, Eqs. (3.2) become
ζ=ϵsin(x−t),ux= ϵezsin(x−t)
uz=−ϵezcos(x−t), p =p0−z+ϵezsin(x−t),(3.4)
and the wave slope ϵ=ka≪1 is the only remaining parameter. In line with the Froude-
Krylov assumption, we ignore the flow and pressure corrections caused by differential
motion of the floater: only the incoming wave affects the floater motion in this model.
The floater is a rectangular parallelepiped with non-dimensonal density β, non-
dimensional length, width and height ( δx, δy, δz) = ( kLx, kLy, kLz), and we assume
that δx,y,z≪1. We introduce a material frame ( C,ex,ey,ez) co-moving with the floater,
with Cat the center of mass and the unit vectors ( eex(t),eey(t),eez(t)) aligned with the
long, medium and short axes (figure 5). The instantaneous position of the floater is
determined by the 3 coordinates xc(t), yc(t), zc(t), with
rc(t) =OC(t) =xc(t)ex+yc(t)ey+zc(t)ez, (3.5)
and its orientation by the three Euler angles of roll φ(t), pitch θ(t) and yaw ψ(t). These
Euler angles define the transform that links the laboratory frame to the floater frame,
and in our angle convention (see Appendix A) we have

ex
ey
ez
=
cψcθ(cψsθsφ−sψcφ) (cψsθcφ+sψsφ)
sψcθ(sψsθsφ+cψcφ) (sψsθcφ−cψsφ)
−sθ cθsφ cθcφ

| {z }
RT
eex
eey
eez
. (3.6a)
Here and further we denote in short cψ= cos ψ,sψ= sin ψand similar for the other
angles. This transform is easily inverted because Ris an orthogonal matrix R−1=RT.
Components of a vector Aand the coordinates of the laboratory and floater frame are
also connected by this matrix,

Ax
Ay
Az
=RT
eAx
eAy
eAz
,
x−xc
y−yc
z−zc
=RT
ex
ey
ez
. (3.6b)
By definition, the floater moves as a solid. This means that an arbitrary point rof the
floater has velocity
v=vc(t) +Ω(t)×(r−rc(t)), (3.7)
withvc(t) =˙rc(t) the translation velocity of the center of mass and Ω(t) the instanta-
neous rotation velocity. We decompose vc(t) in the lab-frame and Ω(t) in the floater frame
and kinematically link these components to the derivatives of the coordinate functions
by the relations

˙xc
˙yc
˙zc
=
vc,x
vc,y
vc,z
,
˙φ
˙θ
˙ψ
=
1 sin φtanθcosφtanθ
0 cos φ −sinφ
0sinφ
cosθcosφ
cosθ

eΩx
eΩy
eΩz
.(3.8)10 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
The formula for the angles is non-trivial and depends on the convention used to define
the angles (details given in Appendix A).
We now define the floater dynamics. From Newton’s law and the angular momentum
theorem for the floater, we have
m˙vc=F,d
dt(I·Ω) =K, (3.9)
with m=βδxδyδzthe non-dimensional mass of the floater and Ithe non-dimensional
inertia tensor. The principal moments of inertia of the rectangular parallelepiped are
eIxx=m(δ2
y+δ2
z)
12,eIyy=m(δ2
z+δ2
x)
12,eIzz=m(δ2
x+δ2
y)
12. (3.10)
In our model, the floater is subject to gravity and to pressure forces and torques, given
in non-dimensional form by
F=Z
Ssub(p−p0)dS−mez,K=Z
Ssub(r−rc)×(p−p0)dS, (3.11)
withdSorientated towards the floater, and Ssubthe (time-dependent) submerged surface
of the floater. In the Froude-Krylov approximation, the pressure pis that of equation (3.4)
which contains a hydrostratic part and a dynamical part associated with the purely
hydrodynamic, incoming wave (pressure corrections due to scattered and emitted waves
are ignored in this model).
The previous surface integral formulation is used in the numerical simulations, but in
the theory, we have found it easier to use an alternative, equivalent formulation of Fand
Kin terms of volume integrals over the submerged volume Vsub. In equation (3.11), we
can replace dS=−dSextso that the surface element is pointing from the floater towards
the fluid. Using then the divergence theorem and the fact that ∂tu+ez=−∇pfor the
incoming linear wave we obtain the alternative formula
F=Z
VsubadV+Z
VsubdV−m
ez (3.12 a)
K=Z
Vsub(r−rc)×adV+Z
Vsub(r−rc)×ezdV, (3.12 b)
witha=∂tuthe local fluid acceleration. These formulas show better the leading
Archimedes balance that defines the floater equilibrium in absence of waves ( a= 0).
Notice also that with ay= 0 for the incoming y-invariant wave, we also have Fy= 0: in
this model, floaters will never be displaced along yand hence ycremains constant.
We decompose Newton’s law in the laboratory frame and the angular momentum
equation in the floater frame. Using the fact that the material frame rotates along with
the floater, i.e. that˙eei(t) =Ω(t)×eei(t), we obtain

m˙vx,c
m˙vy,c
m˙vz,c
=
Fx
Fy
Fz
,
eIxx˙eΩx
eIyy˙eΩy
eIzz˙eΩz
=
eKx+ (eIyy−eIzz)eΩyeΩz
eKy+ (eIzz−eIxx)eΩzeΩx
eKz+ (eIxx−eIyy)eΩxeΩy
. (3.13)
We recognise the Euler equations for the rotation speed. Equations (3.13) combined with
the kinematic relations (3.8) define a first order system of 12 differential equations. If we
provide an initial state for the floater position and speed, we can numerically integrate
this system forward in time.
In the absence of waves, ϵ= 0, we expect the floaters to be in equilibrium, with F= 0Preferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 11
andK= 0. Due to symmetry of the floater, we expect the Archimedes torque to vanish
for a perfectly leveled, flat floater. From the Archimedes force balance, we can calculate
the equilibrium submersion depth as h=βδz. The floater center Cis exactly δz/2 above
the bottom face of the floater. Hence, at equilibrium, we have floater coordinates
xc,yc,ψarbitrary ,zc=1
2−β
δz,θ=φ= 0. (3.14)
Here and further, we use bars to denote equilibrium positions.
3.3.Numerical simulations
To obtain a numerical solution to the specified equations of motion, we use the
standard Runge-Kutta 4th order explicit numerical scheme. The numerical calculation
of the surface integrals (3.11) that define FandKis non-trivial because the submerged
surface Ssubvaries in time. We use the following procedure to compute these integrals
(see sketch of figure 5). On each of the six faces of the floater surface, we define
two-dimensional rectangular meshes that contain ex,ey,ezcoordinates on those faces. To
evaluate the force components Fx, Fy, Fzat a given time t, we use a loop that visits
all six faces. On each face, we then first calculate the lab-frame ( x, y, z ) coordinates of
the points on that face, using the coordinate transform (3.6 b) and the present position
xc(t), yc(t), zc(t), φ(t), θ(t), ψ(t). With these lab-frame coordinates, we can then evaluate
the pressure ( p−p0) on that face using (3.4). To handle the fact that the faces can
be totally, partially or not submerged, we introduce an indicator function f= (1 +
tanh(( ζ(x, t)−z)/l)/2, with la length over which the interface is smoothed. This function
is equal to 1 in the liquid and 0 in the air and hence, the product ( p−p0)fis only non-
zero on the submerged points of that face. Using a two-dimensional quadrature rule and
the numerical values of ( p−p0)fon the face, we can then compute the surface integral
on that face. Each face gives a local contribution to the force in the direction of the
local inward normal dS, so after having visited all 6 faces, we obtain the components
eFx,eFy,eFzin the floater frame. Using the transform (3.6 a) we then finally obtain the
force components Fx, Fy, Fzin the lab frame. The torque components eKx,eKy,eKzare
calculated in the same way.
We have done several static and dynamical tests in the absence of waves ( ϵ= 0). In the
static tests, we validated the calculation of FandKon floaters that were submerged and
rotated to positions for which we could easily compute the force and torque analytically.
In the dynamical tests, we used the code to reproduce sustained free oscillations of
the floaters. When we release the floater slightly off an equilibrium position (3.14), we
expect free “bobbing” oscillations in the vertical zcor angular θ, φcoordinates, of non-
dimensional frequencies (Falnes & Kurniawan 2020)
ωz=r1
βδz, ω θ=s
1
βδzδ2x+ 6β(β−1)δ2z
δ2x+δ2z
, ω φ=s
1
βδzδ2y+ 6β(β−1)δ2z
δ2y+δ2z
.
(3.15)
Figure 5(b) shows an example of timeseries for free vertical oscillations in zc, for a floater
with β= 0.5 released slightly above its equilibrium position zc= 0. As illustrated in the
figure, the expected oscillatory motion zc=Acos(ωzt) is accurately reproduced by our
code.
The free oscillations in zc, θ, φ are useful to test the code but do not reflect the
behavior of the floaters in our experiment. Restricting to floaters much smaller than
the wavelength, δ≪1, implies that the bobbing frequencies (3.15) are much larger than12 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
Figure 6. Time series for yaw angle for numerically simulated floaters with β= 0.44,
Ly= 10 mm, Lz= 5 mm and Lxvarying from 30 to 120 mm. The incoming wave has wavelength
λ= 0.29 m and ϵ=ka= 0.16, as in the experiments of figure 2. The L-T transition occurs near
Lxc≈75 mm, in good agreement with the experiments.
the incoming wave frequency ( ω= 1 in non-dimensional units). Accordingly, such fast
bobbing oscillations are never resonant, and are expected to be rapidly damped in the
experiments, either by viscous friction or radiation loss. Since no damping is included
in the simulations, we need to minimize these parasitic bobbing excitations. We use
for this the following strategy: At time t= 0, we place the floater at its equilibrium
position (3.14), and gradually ramp up the wave amplitude in time, by replacing ϵby
ϵ(1−exp(−t/T)) in the definition of pressure and surface height (3.4). Practice shows
that with T= 15×2π, we can keep the fast bobbing oscillations of the floater motion
at low amplitude while capturing the slow dynamics induced by the wave motion.
We now consider numerical solutions for the floater motion in presence of an incoming
wave. In figure 6, we show time series of the yaw angle ψ(t), for the same experimental
conditions used in figure 2: floater size Ly= 10 mm, Lz= 5 mm and Lxvarying from 30 to
120 mm, density ratio β= 0.44, wavelength λ= 0.29 m and wave steepness ϵ=ka= 0.16,
initial yaw angle ψ0= 45o. After a transient of typically 15 wave periods given by the
ramp in the wave amplitude, the yaw angle ψshows fast oscillations (of period 2 π), that
corresponds to the back and forth motion of the floaters, superimposed to slow oscillations
around either the longitudinal position ψ= 0ofor short floaters or the transverse position
ψ= 90ofor long floaters. The fast oscillations were not visible in figure 2(a) where the
yaw angle measurement was synchronised at the wave frequency. The slow oscillations
reflect the marginal stability of the fixed points in this dissipationless model. Apart from
these differences, the numerical curves show a L-T transition somewhere in between Lx=
70 mm and 80 mm, in excellent agreement with the experimental transition estimated
atLxc= 75 mm for this set of floaters.
We have repeated the simulations for more than 500 floaters, with parameters varied in
broad ranges and even slightly beyond the ϵ, δ≪1 limit for which our model is designed:
β∈[0.03,0.97], δx∈[0.004,5.43], δy∈[0.01,0.36], δz∈[0.007,0.29], ϵ∈[0.01,0.33]. We
summarize the preferential floater orientation in figure 7 using the same representation
(F, ϵ) as in the experiments (Fig. 3). The L-T transition is clearly located at Fc= 60Preferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 13
Figure 7. Preferential state of orientation in the ( F, ϵ) plane according to the numerical
simulations. More than 500 numerical simulations have been performed for varying β, δx, δy, δz, ϵ,
showing an excellent agreement with the theoretical prediction Fc= 60.
with no dependence in ϵ, in excellent agreement with the asymptotic theory developed
in the next section.
4. Asymptotic description of floater motion
The main objective of this section is to use asymptotic theory to derive the nonlinear
evolution equation (1.1) for the slow motion of the yaw angle ψin the limit of ϵ, δ≪1,
and to prove that the criterion (1.2) describes the L-T transition.
Let us start by specifying how the floater motion is decomposed in this theory. Without
wave, ϵ= 0, the floater is in its equilibrium position (3.14). With a low amplitude wave,
ϵ≪1, deviations from equilibrium can be parametrized as


xc=xc(τ) +x′
c(t) +O(ϵ2)
yc=yc
zc=zc+z′
c(t) +O(ϵ2),

θ= 0 + θ′(t) +O(ϵ2)
φ= 0 + φ′(t) +O(ϵ2)
ψ=ψ(τ) +ψ′(t) +O(ϵ2)(4.1)
Next to ”mean” parts (bars) that are of order O(1), we find smaller O(ϵ) ”oscillations”
that vary on the rapid time-scale tof the wave (primes). We also admit that xc,ψcan
vary on a long time-scale τ=t/ϵ. The coordinate ycneeds no further consideration as it
remains constant in this Froude-Krylov model. In the calculation, we will first find the
O(ϵ) deviations x′
c(t), z′
c(t), φ′(t), θ′(t), ψ′(t), that carry the harmonic, linear response of
the floater to the incoming wave. With this we can compute the second order, O(ϵ2)
torque that defines the evolution equations of the yaw angle ψ(τ).
The fact that roll and pitch angles φ, θalways remain close to 0 allows to simplify
(linearize) all the dependencies on these angles: sθ≈θ′+O(ϵ3), cθ≈1 +O(ϵ2), sφ≈
φ′+O(ϵ3), cφ≈1 +O(ϵ2). The transform formula (3.6) then reduces to

ex
ey
ez
=
cψ−sψ(cψθ′+sψφ′)
sψ cψ(sψθ′−cψφ′)
−θ′φ′1

| {z }
RT
eex
eey
eez
+O(ϵ2) (4.2)
and similar for the transform formula for vector components and coordinates in both14 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
frames [see equation (3.6 b)]. Up to O(ϵ2), we can define the inverse transforms with the
transposed matrix R.
Let us now write a preliminary version of the evolution equations that determine these
variables. For the first order deviations x′
c, z′
c, φ′, θ′we have
m¨x′
c=F′
x, m ¨z′
c=F′
z,eIxx¨φ′=eK′
x,eIyy¨θ′=eK′
y (4.3)
The forces F′
x, F′
yand torques eK′
x,eK′
zcontain the linearized, O(ϵ) part of the total force
and torque, and we explain below how they are calculated in practice. The evolution
equation for the yaw angle ψneeds to be defined at order O(ϵ2) and this requires some
attention. With small θ, φ, we have sφ≈φ′,eΩx≈˙φ′andeΩy≈˙θ′atO(ϵ). From
Eqs. (3.8) and (3.13) we then get that the equations
˙ψ=eΩz+φ′˙θ′+O(ϵ3),eIzz˙eΩz=eKz+ (eIxx−eIyy) ˙φ′˙θ′. (4.4)
define the order O(ϵ2) description of yaw angle. These equations contain many different
terms and so the description of the second order motion of the yaw angle seems rather
complex. We remark the following simplification. Using the transform (4.2), the fact that
eKx=eK′
x+O(ϵ2),eKy=eK′
y+O(ϵ2) and the evolution equations (4.3), we can rewrite
the torque component eKzas
Kz=−θ′eKx+φ′eKy+eKz⇒eKz=Kz+eIxx¨φ′θ′−eIyyφ′¨θ′. (4.5)
If we inject this expression of eKzinto the second equation of (4.4) and use the first one
to eliminate eΩz=˙ψ−φ′˙θ′, we obtain the following equation for ψ:
eIzz¨ψ=Kz+d
dt
eIxx˙φ′θ′−eIyyφ′˙θ′+eIzzφ′˙θ′
| {z }
second order harmonics ∼e±i2t+O(ϵ3). (4.6)
In the right hand side, we find Kz, the vertical torque component in the lab-frame,
next to a term d/dt(. . .) that is a time-derivative of O(ϵ2) products. In the evolution
equation, this term can only produce harmonics with frequency ±2, but no terms that
are stationary . As a consequence, this group of terms cannot create mean motion in ψ.
Of order O(ϵ2), this term d/dt(. . .) will also have no effect on the O(ϵ) rapid motion of ψ′.
In summary, this just means that we can derive the equations for the yaw angle variables
ψandψ′from the balance eIzz¨ψ≈Kzand this is a very significant simplification with
respect to what we initially had in (4.4).
To separate the rapid from the slow motion, we still need to split the torque Kzinto
a rapidly varying O(ϵ) fluctuating part and slowly varying O(ϵ2) mean part. We denote
this as
Kz=Kz+K′
z+O(ϵ3). (4.7)
The part K′
zis of order O(ϵ) and oscillates on the time-scale of the wave. The part Kz
is of order O(ϵ2) and is stationary on the rapid time-scale of the wave. Calculating this
torque up to second order is the main difficulty in the asymptotic theory, but once we
have it, the equations of motion for the yaw angle variables are as simple as
eIzz¨ψ′=K′
z,eIzz¨ψ=Kz. (4.8)
A preliminary version of the necessary evolution equations has now been specified,
but we still need to calculate the force and torque components F′
x, F′
z,eK′
x,eK′
y, K′
z,Kz
analytically. We start from the volume formulation (3.12) of FandK. Analytical
evaluation of these volume integrals is not simple for several reasons: (i) the submergedPreferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 15
volume Vsub, is continuously changing in time and this motion needs to be parametrised
in floater frame coordinates ( ex,ey,ez), (ii) integrands are easily expressed in lab-frame
coordinates ( x, y, z ), but need to be expressed in floater frame coordinates. Both problems
can be handled by making use of the assumption that the floater is small with respect
to the wavelength. This allows to Taylor expand fields near the floater and in practice,
to calculate the integrals.
Let us first explain how we handle problem (i), how we parametrise the volume
integrals. In all calculations, we use
Z
Vsub. . . dV =Zδx/2
−δx/2Zδy/2
−δy/2Zeζ(ex,ey,t)
−δz/2. . . dex dey dez. (4.9)
We introduce here a new function, eζ(ex,ey, t), that defines the height of the water surface
as seen in the floater frame. This way of calculating the integral implicitly supposes that
the top face of the floater is never partially submerged ( eζ < δ z/2) and that the bottom
face is always totally submerged ( eζ >−δz/2) through the motion. This is a sensible
approximation for low ϵand intermediate values of β. When βgets too close to 0 (very
light floaters) or 1 (equal density floaters) we expect some discrepancies. Considering
that the floater is supposed small with respect to the wavelength, we now construct
eζ(ex,ey, t) as a polynomial approximation, locally adapted near the floater. We start by
Taylor expanding the surface elevation in the lab-frame ζ(x, t) around xc,
ζ(x, t) =ζc+ (x−xc)∂xζc+(x−xc)2
2∂2
xxζc+(x−xc)3
6∂3
xxxζc+. . . (4.10)
The index cis used to express that the field is evaluated at the center of the floater C,
e.g.ζc=ζ(xc, t) =ϵsin(xc−t),∂xζc=∂xζ|x=xc=ϵcos(xc−t), etc. We inject this
Taylor expansion in the equation z=ζ(x, t) that defines the free surface and we replace
both z≈zc+ (−θ′ex+φ′ey+ez) and x−xc≈cψex−sψey+O(ϵ), the leading order parts
of the coordinate transform formula (4.2). Reorganising this equation into ez=eζ(ex,ey, t)
allows to identify
eζ(ex,ey, t) =−zc|{z}
O(δ)−z′
c+ζc|{z}
O(ϵ)+ (θ′+cψ∂xζc)ex+ (−φ′−sψ∂xζc)ey| {z }
O(ϵδ)(4.11)
+1
2(cψex−sψey)2∂2
xxζc
| {z }
O(ϵδ2)+1
6(cψex−sψey)3∂3
xxxζc
| {z }
O(ϵδ3)+O(ϵ2, ϵδ4)
For clarity, we group the terms that have same order of magnitude in terms of powers of
δandϵ. We do not always need all the terms in this expansion but at some moments we
do. With the function eζ(ex,ey, t) known, we can split the integration over the submerged
volume Vsubin two parts:
Z
Vsub. . . dV =Zδx/2
−δx/2Zδy/2
−δy/2Z−zc
−δz/2. . . dex dey dez
| {z }R
V(0)
sub... dV =O(δ3)+Zδx/2
−δx/2Zδy/2
−δy/2Zeζ
−zc. . . dex dey dez
| {z }R
V(1)
sub... dV =O(ϵδ3).(4.12)
The integral over V(0)
subcovers the equilibrium submerged volume. The integral over V(1)
sub
covers the O(ϵ) perturbation of submerged volume caused by the wave. In the theory, we16 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
only need an O(ϵ) approximation of this V(1)
subintegral and then we can use
Z
V(1)
subf dV≈Zδx/2
−δx/2Zδy/2
−δy/2f(ex,ey,−zc)
eζ(ex,ey, t) +zc
dex dey. (4.13)
as an approximation, where fis an arbitrary field.
Let us now explain how we handle problem (ii), i.e., how we express the integrands in
the floater frame coordinates. In the force and torque formula (3.12), we find the fields
ax=∂tux=−ϵezcos(x−t), a z=∂tuz=−ϵezsin(x−t) (4.14)
These fields depend on the lab-frame coordinates x, zbut need to be expressed in terms
ofex,ey,ezvariables if we want to compute the integrals analytically. Also here, the idea
is to replace ax, azwith polynomial approximations, valid near the floater. Using Taylor
series, we have
a=ac+ (x−xc)∂xac+ (z−zc)∂zac (4.15)
+1
2(x−xc)2∂2
xxac+1
2(z−zc)2∂2
zzac+ (x−xc)(z−zc)∂2
xzac+O(ϵδ3)
Replacing x−xc=cψex−sψey+ (cψθ′+sψφ′)ezandz−zc=−θ′ex+φ′ey+ezfrom (4.2)
we get
a=a(1)+a(2)+O(ϵ3). (4.16 a)
There is an O(ϵ) part
a(1)=ac|{z}
O(ϵ)+ (cψex−sψey)∂xac+ez∂zac| {z }
O(ϵδ)(4.16 b)
+1
2(cψex−sψey)2∂2
xxac+ez2
2∂2
zzac+ (cψex−sψey)ez∂2
xzac
| {z }
O(ϵδ2)
and an O(ϵ2) part
a(2)= (cψθ′+sψφ′)ez∂xac+ (−θ′ex+φ′ey)∂zac| {z }
O(ϵ2δ)(4.16 c)
+
(cψex−sψey)(cψθ′+sψφ′)ez∂2
xxac+ (−θ′ex+φ′ey)ez∂2
zzac
+
(cψex−sψey)(−θ′ex+φ′ey) + (cψθ′+sψφ′)ez2
∂2
xzac
.
| {z }
O(ϵ2δ2)
This second order part a(2)is of no importance for the harmonic, linear response of the
floater to the wave. However, it does contribute to the second order mean torque Kz.
We now have explained all the mathematical tools that are needed to calculate the
force and torque components. Using the notations of the previous paragraphs, we use the
following formula to compute the O(ϵ) fluctuating forces and torques that appear in thePreferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 17
equations of motion (4.3):
F′
x= Z
V(0)
suba(1)
xdV!
(xc,zc,ψ)(4.17 a)
F′
z= Z
V(0)
suba(1)
zdV+Z
V(1)
subdV!
(xc,zc,ψ)(4.17 b)
eK′
x= Z
V(0)
sub
eya(1)
z+sψeza(1)
x−ezφ′
dV+Z
V(1)
subeydV!
(xc,zc,ψ)(4.17 c)
eK′
y= Z
V(0)
sub
−exa(1)
z+cψeza(1)
x−ezθ′
dV+Z
V(1)
sub(−ex)dV!
(xc,zc,ψ)(4.17 d)
To obtain the formula for these torque components, we have used r−rc=exeex+eyeey+ezeez
and the fact that a=cψaxeex−sψaxeey+azeez+O(ϵ2) in the floater frame, according
to the transform (4.2). In practice, the calculation of these integrals is not particularly
difficult as we only have to integrate polynomials. The subscript ( xc,zc,ψ) expresses that
the formula, obtained after integration, needs to be evaluated at the equilibrium position
xc≈xc,zc≈zcandψ≈ψ.
Remain the torque components KzandK′
zthat need to be calculated up to respective
orders O(ϵ2) and O(ϵ). Using the definition of Kzand the coordinate transform formula
fory−yc, we have
Kz=−Z
Vsub(y−yc)axdV=−Z
Vsub(sψex+cψey+ (sψθ′−cψφ′)ez)axdV+O(ϵ3).
Using the previous notations, we separate this torque in two parts Kz=K(1)
z+K(2)
z+
O(ϵ3) of respective orders O(ϵ) and O(ϵ2). We have
K(1)
z=−Z
V(0)
sub(sψex+cψey)a(1)
xdV (4.18 a)
K(2)
z=−Z
V(0)
sub(sψθ′−cψφ′)eza(1)
xdV−Z
V(0)
sub(sψex+cψey)a(2)
xdV−Z
V(1)
sub(sψex+cψey)a(1)
xdV.
(4.18 b)
These torques K(1)
zandK(2)
zare not yet the torques K′
zandKzthat enter the evolution
equations of ψ′andψ. The fluctuating torque is just
K′
z=
K(1)
z
(xc,zc,ψ)(4.19)
which is equation (4.18 a) evaluated at the equilibrium position. The O(ϵ2) mean torque
Kzis more subtle and has two parts
Kz=
K(1)
z
(xc+x′c,zc+z′c,ψ+ψ′)+
K(2)
z
(xc,zc,ψ)(4.20)
The bars in the right hand side denote a time-average. The second term is just the time-
average of K(2)
zevaluated at the equilibrium position. The first term is a ”drift”- like
contribution that can be understood in the same way as we understand the Stokes drift
phenomenon (Stokes 1847). As the floater moves along with the wave, goes through its
first order motion, it explores regions of slightly higher and lower velocity. On average,18 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
this can result in a net displacement (Stokes drift) and here, for our spatially extended
floaters, it also results in a weak O(ϵ2) mean torque. In practice, we calculate this ”drift”-
like torque by using a Taylor series around the equilibrium position ( xc,zc,ψ). Up to order
O(ϵ2) we may use
Kz≈
K(1)
z
(xc,zc,ψ)|{z }
0+ 
x′c∂K(1)
z
∂xc+z′c∂K(1)
z
∂zc+ψ′∂K(1)
z
∂ψ!
(xc,zc,ψ)+
K(2)
z
(xc,zc,ψ).(4.21)
The first term vanishes because we are taking the time-average of K′
zthat is by con-
structing a quantity that fluctuates on the time-scale of the wave. The second group
caries the mean effective torque and requires the first order motion x′
c, z′
c, ψ′.
The integrals defining F′
x, F′
z,eK′
x,eK′
y, K′
z,Kzor now clearly defined but one question
remains. We still need to estimate to which order in δwe must push all the Taylor series
that we use to approximate eζand the fields a(1),a(2)in the integrands. Considering the
equations of motion (4.3) and (4.8), and the fact that m=O(δ3) and I=O(δ5), we
deduce that we needed to calculate
F′
x, F′
zup to order O(ϵδ4)
eK′
x,eK′
y, K′
zup to order O(ϵδ6) (4.22)
Kzup to order O(ϵ2δ6).
The idea is that this should give access to the leading, O(ϵ) description of x′
c, z′
c, φ′, θ′, ψ′,
O(ϵ2) description of ψ, but also to floater shape-related corrections of respective orders
O(ϵδ) and O(ϵ2δ). In the limit δ≪1, these shape-corrections seem much smaller but this
is without considering that these O(ϵδ) and O(ϵ2δ) terms are actually taking the form of
O(ϵδ2
x/βδz) and O(ϵ2δ2
x/βδz) terms. For strongly elongated floater, we can easily have
δ2
x
βδz∼1 (4.23)
and in that case, the shape related corrections may become as large or even larger
than the so-called leading order terms. This is precisely what happens at the L-T
transition and a theoretical pain in the neck: we really need to push the calculation
of the forces and torques to the orders of (4.22), otherwise we will miss the terms that
stabilise the transverse equilibrium. This, on the contrary is too much and results in very
long, unpractical formula. In our view, the best way, in between calculating no shape-
related corrections and all shape related correction, is to add an extra assumption. In
the experiment, all the floaters are flat and this means that
δx, δy≫δz (4.24)
is a fair assumption. By exploiting this information in the calculation of the forces and
torques we can ignore (i) all O(δz) terms with respect to O(1) terms, (ii) all O(δ2
z)
terms with respect to O(δ2
x, δ2
y) terms. This greatly simplifies the theory and produces
a physically relevant result. We can in fact, even further simplify the model by taking
into account that our floaters are also very elongated δx≫δyin our experiments. This
will be done at the end, but in our calculation, we have found it useful to keep δx, δyat
similar magnitude as it produces more symmetrical formula that allow supplementary
checks. For now, we continue our presentation with the flat floater assumption (4.24).
Once F′
x, F′
z,eK′
x,eK′
y, K′
zare found, we immediately have the differential equations for
the first order motion x′
c, z′
c, φ′, θ′, ψ′. Solving these differential equations is rather trivialPreferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 19
and yields the harmonic response
x′
c≈ϵcos(xc−t) (4.25 a)
z′
c≈ϵ
1−1
24 
c2
ψδ2
x+s2
ψδ2
y
sin(xc−t). (4.25 b)
φ′≈ −ϵsψ 
1− 
s2
ψδ2
y
40+c2
ψδ2
x
24!!
cos(xc−t) (4.25 c)
θ′≈ −ϵcψ 
1− 
c2
ψδ2
x
40+s2
ψδ2
y
24!!
cos(xc−t) (4.25 d)
ψ′≈ϵ 
δ2
x−δ2
y
δ2x+δ2y!
sψcψsin(xc−t), (4.25 e)
Let us interpret these equations. At leading O(ϵ) order, we find in x′
candz′
cthat the
floater oscillates around its mean position, just as a material particle on the wave-surface
would do. Although this is less trivial to see, the leading O(ϵ) expressions for the angles
φ′, θ′are such that the flat floater rotates so to align with the local wave slope (imagine
the rotation of a surfboard on a long wavelength wave that passes). The yaw angle ψ′
rocks back and forth around the mean value and thus the more for sufficiently elongated
floaters with δx≫δyand for ψclose to 45o. Next the leading O(ϵ) terms, we also have
some smaller, shape-related corrections of order O(ϵδ2
x, ϵδ2
y) in the z′
c, φ′, θ′variables.
These corrections may seem utterly small but we really can not ignore them. Physically,
they are due the fact that the water surface is not perfectly flat at the scale of the
floater. This waterline curvature induces small modification in the buoyancy force that
affect the force F′
zand the torques eKx,eKy. In particular the O(ϵδ2
x) correction in z′
cis
essential in this problem: without it, we just cannot explain why long floaters prefer the
transverse equilibrium. In section 5 we provide a more physical understanding of what
this correction actually captures.
With the first order motion specified, we can continue to next order. The evaluation
of the second order mean torque Kzis a difficult and technical part in this calculation
(some elements are provided in Appendix B). More important is that for flat floaters
with δx, δy≫δz, we obtain the following nonlinear equation of motion for the slowly
varying yaw angle
¨ψ=ϵ2
sψc3
ψ
−(δ2
x−δ2
y)δ2
x
(δ2x+δ2y)2+δ4
x
60−δ2
xδ2
y
48
βδz(δ2x+δ2y)
−s3
ψcψ
−(δ2
y−δ2
x)δ2
x
(δ2x+δ2y)2+δ4
y
60−δ2
xδ2
y
48
βδz(δ2x+δ2y)

(4.26)
We can separate a common factor sψcψin the right hand side and because of this term,
we know that longitudinal ( ψ= 0o) and transverse ( ψ= 90o) positions are equilibria. We
can also verify how this equation incorporates a fundamental symmetry: if we exchange
δx↔δyand rotate the angle ψ→ψ+π/2, then the rectangular floater is in the same
physical state. When δx=δy, a new fixed point emerges at ψ= 45o, but the idea of
preferential orientation then looses its interest.
The equation for the slow evolution of yaw angle can be used to discuss the stability
of the L and T states. However, this discussion becomes even simpler with the extra
assumption of very elongated floaters: δx≫δy≫δz. Ignoring all O(δ2
y) terms with
respect to O(δ2
x) terms, we can simplify (4.26) further to find the equation of motion20 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
(1.2) already mentioned in the introduction
δx≫δy≫δz:¨ψ=−ϵ2sψc3
ψ
1−δ2
x
60βδz|{z}
F/Fc
. (4.27)
This confirms that the non-dimensional number
F=δ2
x
βδz=kL2
x
βLz(4.28)
is the control parameter that sets the preferential state of orientation. When F=Fc= 60,
the right hand side changes change sign and this is indicative of a global change in
stability. To see this better, we rewrite the equation in conservative form
¨ψ= =−dV(ψ)
dψ, V (ψ) =ϵ2
4
−1 +F
Fc
c4
ψ. (4.29)
This equation tells us that the slow motion of the yaw angle is analogous to that of a
particle in a potential well V(ψ)∼cos4ψ. For short floaters with F < F c= 60, the
longitudinal position of ψ= 0ois the minimum of the potential and hence the stable
state. For long floaters with F > F c, the situation flips and the transverse equilibrium,
ψ= 90obecomes the potential minimum and the stable state, in excellent agreement
with the experiments (figure 3) and the numerical simulations (figure 7).
5. Simplified model and physical interpretation
The asymptotic approach already provided some physical insights, but the calculation
of the second order torque Kzis so technical that much of the simpler physics remains
hidden. In this section, we show how to find the evolution equation for ψmuch more
rapidly, by bringing in some physical ideas earlier on in the calculation.
We recall that both the rapid and slow motion of yaw angle ψare controlled by the
torque component
Kz=ez·Z
Vsub(r−rc)×adV=−Z
Vsub(y−yc)axdV, (5.1)
withax=−ϵezcos(x−t). Evaluating this integral is the main difficulty in the theory and
there are numerous contributions that all need careful consideration (see Appendix B).
We have seen at the end of the previous section that the limit of strongly elongated floaters
δx≫δy≫δzis clearly adapted to capture the preferential orientation phenomenon, so
let us exploit this information directly. If the floater is indeed thin (along ez) and not
wide (along ey), we can simply ignore the eyandezvariations in this torque integral and
simplify it to
Kz≈ −Z+δx/2
−δx/2(y−yc)axδy
eζ+δz
2
|{z}
eh(ex,t)dex. (5.2)
For this formula to make sense, we must express ( y−yc)axin terms of floater frame
coordinates and ignore the eyandezvariations. We also need to find the local submersion
deptheh(ex, t) =eζ+ (δz/2) along the long ex-axis of the floater. To get this done, we use
a simplified coordinate transform. From (4.2) and ignoring all dependencies along eyand
ez, we find that
x≈xc+cψex, y ≈yc+sψex, z ≈zc−θ′ex (5.3)Preferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 21
along the long axis of the floater. The lever arm is then y−yc≈sψex. The dependence of
the field axonexcan be found by injecting this coordinate transform in the theoretical
expression. Then, making use of a Taylor expansion we get
ax≈ −ϵezc−θ′excos(xc+cψex−t)
≈ −ϵ(1 +zc−θ′ex) (cos( xc−t)−cψexsin(xc−t)) +. . . (5.4)
up to O(ϵ2). To find the local submersion depth eh(ex, t), we ignore the ey-dependencies in
the general definition of eζin (4.11). We also use the fact that −zc+ (δz/2) =βLz=his
the equilibrium submersion depth. In this way, we find that the local submersion depth
eh(ex, t) along the floater long axis is
eh(ex, t)≈h+ (−z′
c+ϵsin(xc−t)) + ( θ′+ϵcψcos(xc−t)ex−ϵ
2c2
ψex2sin(xc−t).(5.5)
The wave surface at the scale of the floater is here approximated by a second order
polynomial and this is sufficient in this simplified model (we do not need the third
derivate terms). In this expression, we need to insert the first order motion z′
candθ′.
We already know the first order motion from the asymptotic theory, but let us show
how we can alternatively find this motion using some simpler physical arguments. In the
pressure force and torque, the buoyancy terms are the largest ones, much larger than the
dynamical pressure terms. Hence, we estimate that the floater is moving in such a way
that it keeps its submersed volume nearly constant in time. This requires
1
δxZ+δx/2
−δx/2eh(ex, t)dex≈h (5.6)
Evaluating the integral using the expression (5.5), we get the result
z′
c≈ϵsin(xc−t)
1−δ2
x
24c2
ψ
. (5.7)
This indeed corresponds to the expression of z′
cthat we have obtained from a more
formal treatment of the equations of motion, in the limit δx≫δy, see equation (4.25 b).
Interestingly, we also recover the shape-related O(ϵδ2
x) correction that is quite crucial in
the model. To explain the angular motion θ′, we can use a similar physical argument.
Due to buoyancy, the floater will rotate so as to align with the local surface slope. The
local normal on the wave surface is n≈∇(z−ζ(x, t))|x=xc=ez−ϵcos(xc−t)exand
then needs to be orthogonal to the long axis eex≈cψex+sψey−θ′ez. Hence, we get
n·eex≈0⇒ θ′=−ϵcψcos(xc−t). (5.8)
This approximation is sufficient, the extra O(ϵδ2
x) correction in θ′of (4.25 d) is in fact not
so important. Replacing these expressions of z′
candθ′into (5.5), we find the following
approximation for the local shape of the waterline at the floater position
eh(ex, t)≈h+ϵc2
ψδ2
x
24−ex2
2
sin(xc−t). (5.9)
This result can be interpreted as follows: the waterline as seen from the floater center
always takes the shape of a parabola, symmetrical around ex= 0.
Combining all the elements together, we end up with the following simplified formula22 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
for the mean yaw moment Kz:
Kz≈ −Z+δx/2
−δx/2exsψ|{z}
local lever arm(−ϵ(1 +zc−θ′ex) (cos( xc−t)−cψexsin(xc−t)))| {z }
local force density fx
×
h+ϵc2
ψδ2
x
24−ex2
2
sin(xc−t)
| {z }
local submersion ehδydex. (5.10)
This integral contains all the physics that explains the preferential orientation. The torque
Kzis the result of the local force density fxthat varies along the floater’s long axis applied
on the local level arm. This force density is weighted by the local submersion depth eh
and this effect is thus more important as the floater is longer. We evaluate this integral
up to O(ϵ2) and write the evolution equation eIzz¨ψ=Kz. Approximating eIzz≈mδ2
x/12
for our elongated floater, we find
¨ψ≈ −ϵ(1 +zc)sψcψsin(xc−t)−ϵθ′sψcos(xc−t) +ϵ2δ2
x
30βδzsψc3
ψsin2(xc−t).(5.11)
We now inject in this equation the decomposition xc=xc+x′
candzc=zc+z′
c. In the
first, O(ϵ) term of (5.11), we use a Taylor expansion:
−ϵ(1 +zc+z′
c)sψcψsin(xc+x′
c−t)
=−ϵ(1 +zc)sψcψsin(xc−t)−ϵz′
csψcψsin(xc−t)−ϵx′
csψcψcos(xc−t) +O(ϵ3).(5.12)
As the floater is thin, we can approximate zc≈0. The second and third terms of (5.11)
are already of order O(ϵ2), so there we can use sin2(xc−t)≈sin2(xc−t) +O(ϵ) and
cos(xc−t)≈cos(xc−t) +O(ϵ). We then replace the first order deviations by
x′
c≈ϵcos(xc−t), z′
c≈ϵsin(xc−t), θ′=−ϵcψcos(xc−t). (5.13)
The expression of x′
ccan be found by integrating ˙ x′
c=ux|z=0, which just means that, at
lowest order, the floater translates as a fluid material particle on the surface. After these
reductions, we obtain
¨ψ≈ −ϵsψcψsin(xc−t) +ϵ2sψcψ
−1 +δ2
x
30βδzc2
ψ
sin2(xc−t) (5.14)
as evolution equation for ψ. We now also inject the decomposition ψ=ψ+ψ′and use
a Taylor expansion to replace
sψcψ=sψcψ+ψ′(c2
ψ−s2
ψ) +O(ϵ2). (5.15)
This yields
¨ψ+¨ψ′≈ −ϵsψcψsin(xc−t)
−ϵ(c2
ψ−s2
ψ)ψ′sin(xc−t) +ϵ2sψcψ
−1 +δ2
x
30βδzc2
ψ
sin2(xc−t).(5.16)
At order O(ϵ), we identify the equation for the fast yaw angle excursion ¨ψ′=
−ϵsψcψsin(xc−t), that has the solution
ψ′≈ϵsψcψsin(xc−t). (5.17)
This expression is identical to that of the asymptotic model (4.25 e) in the limit δx≫Preferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 23
C
x x x-1 -1 -1 1 1 1 0 0 0x x x-1 -1 -1 1 1 1 0 0 0
-11
0-11
0z
z(a) crest, side view (b) crest, top view, h (c) crest, top view, h
(d) trough, side view (e) trough, top view, h (f) trough, top view, h
-11
0-11
0y
yfxh fxh’  >  0
’  <0
Figure 8. Position, orientation and force distribution on the floater in wave crests and troughs.
Here δx= 0.5, δz= 0.01,β= 0.2,ϵ= 0.2 and xc= 0, ψ= 45o. (a,d) Side views on vertical
x−zplane. The circle shows the trajectory of the center of mass. The inset figures suggest the
instantaneous, parabolic shape of the waterline near the floater. (b,c,e,f) top views on x−y
plane. The arrows show the instantaneous force distribution along the floater that creates the
instantaneous torque Kz. In (b,e), without considering the variable submersion depth, using h.
In (c,f) taking into account the variable submersion eh.
δy. Injecting this expression of ψ′back into the equation, we isolate the second order
evolution equation for ψby averaging over time and find
¨ψ≈ϵ2sψc3
ψ
1−δ2
x
60βδz|{z}
F/Fc
. (5.18)
Hence, we have shown that the simplified model reproduces exactly the more formal
asymptotic theory.
The main advantage of the simplified model is that it allows a better understanding
of the physics that causes reorientation. Let us reconsider the torque Kzin (5.10),
expressed as the product of the local force density fxby the local level arm weighted
by the local submersion depth eh. The force density fxis illustrated as vector arrows
in figure 8, showing the floater at two times, t=π/2 and t= 3π/2 (wave crest
and trough); animations are available as Supplementary Materials. The parameters
areβ= 0.2,δx= 0.5, δz= 0.01 and ϵ= 0.2, corresponding to a non-dimensional
number F=δ2
x/βδz= 125, larger than the critical value Fc= 60: this floater will
prefer the transverse position at late times. In the second column [Figs. 8(b,e)], the
force distribution is weighted by the equilibrium, spatially uniform submersion depth h,
whereas in the third column [Figs. 8(c,f)] it is weighted by the true, varying depth eh.24 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
Comparing both cases allows us to illustrate the main physical mechanisms at the origin
of the longitudinal-transverse transition.
We first consider the case where the depth variation is ignored [Figs. 8(b,e)], an
approximation acceptable for small floaters only. At the wave crest, the yaw angle is
slightly larger than the mean value ψwhereas at the trough, it is slightly smaller than
ψ. The lever arm, exsinψ, is therefore larger at the crest. We also see that the local
force density fxis slightly larger at the crest than at the trough. Both effects impact the
instantaneous torque in the same way. At the crest, the floater will experience a negative
(clockwise) torque Kz<0 that is slightly larger than the positive (counter-clockwise)
torque Kz>0 in the troughs, explaining why the part −exsinψfxhin the integrand of
Kzis slowly pushing the floater towards the longitudinal position.
Figures 8(c,f) illustrates why including the varying submersion in the weighting of the
force distribution changes this conclusion in the case of long floaters. We immediately
see that there is clear influence of the variable submersion at the tips of the floater:
the weighted force density fxehis significantly changing in magnitude. As shown in
Figs. 8(a,d), at the wave crest, the extremities of the floater are less submerged, whereas
in the troughs, they are more submerged. This locally changing submersion implies that
the instantaneous torque is significantly decreased at the tips of the floater when they
are at crest and increased at the tips when the floater is in a trough. The result for this
floater with F= 125 > Fcis that the positive (counter-clockwise) torque Kz>0 acting
on the floater at the troughs is significantly larger than the negative torque at the crests,
resulting in a slow rotation towards the transverse position.
It is finally interesting to note that the yaw angle motion of small floaters is analogous
to that of the Kapitza pendulum, a pendulum with an oscillating anchor point (Kapitza
1951; Landau & Lifschitz 1960; Butikov 2001). For small floaters we have seen that the
variation of the immersion depth can be ignored and in that case, we have the evolution
equation
F≪Fc:¨ψ≈ −ϵsψcψsin(xc−t)−ϵ2sψcψsin2(xc−t). (5.19)
Using the fact that sψcψ= (1/2) sin 2 ψand changing notation 2 ψ=α, we can rewrite
this as
¨α+
−ϵ2
2|{z}
g+ϵsin(xc−t) +O(ϵ2)| {z }
g′(t)
sinα≈0. (5.20)
We recognize the equation of motion for the angle αof a Kapitza pendulum, written in
the frame of reference attached to the anchor point. The Kapitza pendulum, analogue to
our floater, would be exposed to a weak O(ϵ2) downward external gravity gand a larger
O(ϵ) oscillatory acceleration g(t) that is due to the motion of the anchor point. Using
the same multiple time-scale techniques as we have previously used, we can find that this
pendulum has two equilibria. The lower position α= 0ois stable and the top position,
α= 180ois unstable. Owing to the relation ψ=α/2, this result is entirely equivalent
to saying that short floaters prefer longitudinal positions, ψ= 0o, and avoid transverse
positions, ψ= 90o.
6. Mean yaw moment: comparison with the literature
We have formulated a theoretical model for the idealized, second order motion of the
yaw angle, but in the existing literature, the focus is not so much on the slow yaw motion,
but rather on the mean yaw moment Kz. Several articles provide quantitative results
for this mean yaw moment, either in the form of an explicit equation (equation (55)Preferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 25
in Newman (1967)) or in the form of figures that result from numerical computations
(Newman 1967; Skejic & Faltinsen 2008; Chen 2007; Yasukawa et al. 2019). In this
section, we compare the second order yaw moment that we have calculated from our
Froude-Krylov model to some existing results, focusing on the limit δx≫δy≫δzof a
strongly elongated floater.
To allow comparison, let us start by writing the dimensional yaw moment according
to our theory. By multiplying the right hand side of (1.1) with the dimensional moment
of inertia βρL3
xLyLy/12 and ω2=gk, we obtain
Kz=1
12ρga2k3L3
xLy
−βLz+kL2
x
60
sinψcos3ψ. (6.1)
This formula only applies to parallelepiped floaters that are short with respect to the
wavelength. As explained before, part of the torque (contribution −βLzin the paren-
theses) favors a longitudinal floater position (head-seas). This torque clearly depends on
how deep the floater is submerged as the draft of our floater is h=βLz. The other
part of the torque (contribution + kL2
x/60 in the parentheses) favors a transverse floater
position (beam-seas) and interestingly, it does not depend on the draft.
Newman (1967) derived an analytical formula [see his equation (55)] for the mean
yaw moment on a slender floating structure with rectangular planform, such as our
parallelepipeds. Written in our notations (wavenumber K→k, width B→Ly, length
L→Lx, angle of incidence β=−ψ), this mean yaw moment is
KNewman
z =1
2ρgka2L2
xLysinψ j11
2kLxcosψ
j21
2kLxcosψ
. (6.2)
Here j1andj2are spherical Bessel functions. In this formula, diffraction and radiation
are taken into account so it holds for any kLx. In the limit of small floater length, we can
replace the spherical Bessel functions with their small argument asymptotic expansions.
From Abramowitz & Stegun (1948), equation (10.1.2), we have j1(x)j2(x)≈x3/45 for
small x(rather than x3/3 as written in Newman (1967)), so (6.2) reduces to
kLxcosψ≪1 : KNewman
z ≈1
12ρga2k3L3
xLykL2
x
60
sinψcos3ψ. (6.3)
Interestingly, this equation contains exactly one term of our mean yaw moment (6.1), the
one that favors the transverse position. The other term, related to the draft h=βLz, is
absent, probably because Newman used a slender body approximation which may hold as
long as kL2
x/h≫1. This missing term explains why Newman’s formula does not predict a
stable longitudinal position for short floaters. The fact that our asymptotic theory based
on the Froude-Krylov assumption recovers the short floater limit of Newman’s theory is
somehow surprising: in our approach, we neglect wave diffraction and radiation, whereas
the existence of a radiated wave is essential in Newman’s far field theory. This suggests
that the diffracted/radiated wave correction in the near field of small floaters does not
contribute at leading order to the mean yaw moment acting on such small floaters.
In his middle-field formulation, Chen (2007) introduced a numerical approach to
calculate first order motion and second order load on quite general floating structures.
The potential field around the floating body is calculated using the boundary element
method and includes diffracted and radiated waves. In one numerical application, Chen
considers a very large floating platform, called FPSO (Floating Production Storage
Offloading)-unit, that is close to a parallelepiped with dimensions Lx= 300 m by
Ly= 50 m and submerged over h=βLz= 25 m – huge compared to our centimeter
scale parallelepiped floaters –, placed in waves with angle of incidence ψ=−165o.26 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
Figure 9. (a) Dimensionless mean yaw moment as a function of kLx, and (b) zoom at small
kLx. Red squares: Data from the boundary element simulations of Chen (2007), computed for
a 300-m long floating structure. Blue line: present Froude-Krylov theory (6.1), valid in the limit
kLx⩽1, when diffraction and radiation is negligible. The longitudinal-transverse transition,
where Kz= 0 (or F=Fc), is approximately the same for both methods.
In common sea conditions, wavelengths are usually shorter than 300 m, so we expect
diffraction and wave radiation corrections, ignored in our theory, to be important. In
figure 9(a), we compare the mean yaw moment calculated by Chen’s BEM approach (red
squares) and our Froude-Krylov theory (6.1) (blue line). As kLxincreases, the mean
yaw moment calculated by Chen is first negative, before changing sign and oscillating at
larger kLx, a signature of diffraction and radiation effects. As emphasized by the zoom in
figure 9(b), the −(kLx)4trend at small kLxis very well reproduced by our theory. In spite
of the strong departure of our formula from the simulation at larger kLx, it reproduces
surprisingly well the change of sign of Kz, marking the longitudinal-transverse transition.
Although this might be coincidental, this suggests that the criterium kL2
x/h≃60 for the
transition still applies at moderate kLx, even when diffraction and radiation effects are
not negligible.
7. Conclusion
In this paper we have shown that the orientation of a small elongated floater drifting
in a propagating gravity wave is governed by the non-dimensional number F=kL2
x/¯h,
where ¯h=βLzis the equilibrium submersion depth. Short and deeply immersed floaters
align longitudinally, along with the direction of propagation, whereas long and weakly
immersed floaters prefer to align transversely, along with the wave crests or troughs.
To model the preferential orientation of these drifting elongated floaters, we introduced
a Froude-Krylov theory that assumes a linear potential incoming wave in infinitely deep
water, ignoring viscous and capillary effects and all feedbacks of the floater on the
wave. We numerically solved the equations of motion and demonstrated that this model
contains the dominant physical ingredients that are needed to reproduce the preferential
state of orientation. In the limit of small wave amplitude and small floaters, ϵ, δ≪1,
we derived an asymptotic solution of the Froude-Krylov model. This classical and rather
technical asymptotic method allows us to find the second order evolution equation (1.2)
for the slow motion of the yaw angle, and places the L-T transition at Fc= 60, which is
reasonably close to the experimental value Fc≃45±10.
To gain deeper insight into the physics of the floater orientation, we have finally shownPreferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 27
that the same evolution equation (1.2) for the slow motion of the yaw angle can be found
using a simpler approach in the limit of strongly elongated floaters. This allowed us to
identify that the preferential orientation is the result of local gradients in flow magnitude
that the floater experiences through its motion. Short floaters see little variation in
submersion depth along their long axis and experience a mean torque that favors the
longitudinal position. This mean torque arises from a phase correlation between the
oscillating buoyancy force and the oscillating lever arm, a feature shared with the classical
Kapitza pendulum. For longer floaters, the variation of the submersion along the floater
has a strong effect on the instantaneous torque, that is significantly decreased in crest
positions (the tips are less submerged) and increased in trough positions (the tips are
more submerged). Since in the trough position, the instantaneous torque always pushes
towards the transverse position, long floaters prefer to take transverse positions.
We have compared our mean yaw moment formula to previously published results.
Compared to Newman’s theory, we have identified an additional contribution to the mean
yaw moment that varies linearly with the draft h. The longitudinal-transverse transition
for short floaters is due to this contribution, explaining why Newman’s prediction,
that slender structures are stable in beam-seas, does not apply for very short floaters.
Comparing our Froude-Krylov theory to Chen’s boundary element calculations applied to
a large floating structure, we obtain an excellent agreement for the mean yaw moment in
the small floater length/ wavelength limit, and a fair prediction for the longitudinal-
transverse transition. Away from this limit, diffraction and radiation are no longer
negligible and our simplified theory breaks down. It would be interesting to extend these
comparisons to smaller floating structures such as sailing boats or small yachts.
We can finally draw some parallels between our work and recent studies in relation to
the problem of plastic waste transport by waves. The effect of shape on the mean motion
of non-spherical objects in wave flows has been investigated in several studies, but limited
to fully submerged, neutrally buoyant ellipsoids (DiBenedetto et al. 2018; DiBenedetto
& Ouellette 2018; DiBenedetto et al. 2019; Clark et al. 2020; DiBenedetto et al. 2022). A
similar preferential orientation phenomenon is observed there too, but its physical origin
is very different: it results from the pressure and viscous stress distribution on their
surface (Jeffery 1922), while for floating elongated bodies it results from the non-uniform
pressure forces and spatially varying submersion. This raises the question of the drift and
preferential orientation of very small, millimeter scale, floating anisotropic particles, for
which both viscous and buoyancy effects are expected.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to J. Andriamampianina, A. Eddi, M. Le Boulluec, L. Martin-
Witkowski and M. Rabaud for fruitful discussions, and X. Chen for sharing his
numerical data on the mean yaw moment. We thank A. Aubertin, L. Auffray, J. Amarni
and R. Pidoux for experimental help.
Appendix A. Kinematics of rotation
We detail in this Appendix the Euler angle convention used in this article, and find
the kinematic relation that links ˙ φ(t),˙θ(t),˙ψ(t) to the components eΩx(t),eΩy(t),eΩz(t) of
the instantaneous rotation vector in the floater frame.
The instantaneous orientation of the floater is defined with three Euler angles θ(t)
pitch, φ(t) roll and ψ(t) yaw. These angles relate to three successive rotations that bring
the laboratory frame ( ex,ey,ez) to the floater frame ( eex(t),eey(t),eez(t)). Imagine looking28 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
at the wave from above, from the ezaxis. The yaw angle ψ(t) is the angle over which we
need to rotate the laboratory frame to align the e′
x-axis of a new frame, with the front
of the floater. This defines a first intermediate frame ( e′
x,e′
y,e′
z) as

e′
x
e′
y
e′
z
=
cosψ sinψ0
−sinψcosψ0
0 0 1

| {z }
Rψ
ex
ey
ez
. (A 1)
Rψis a first rotation matrix. We now change our point of view and look at the floater
from the side, from the e′
ydirection. The pitch angle θ(t) is the angle over which we need
to rotate the ( e′
x,e′
y,e′
z) frame to find a new e′′
xaxis that aligns with the nose of the
boat. Hence, we have a second intermediate frame ( e′′
x,e′′
y,e′′
z) defined as

e′′
x
e′′
y
e′′
z
=
cosθ0−sinθ
0 1 0
sinθ0 cos θ

| {z }
Rθ
e′
x
e′
y
e′
z
. (A 2)
Rθis a second rotation matrix. In a third and final rotation, we imagine looking at the
boat from the front, from the e′′
xdirection. The roll angle φ(t), rotates the ( e′′
x,e′′
y,e′′
z)
frame to the floater frame. Hence, we have

eex
eey
eez
=
1 0 0
0 cos φ sinφ
0−sinφcosφ

| {z }
Rφ
e′′
x
e′′
y
e′′
z
, (A 3)
andRϕis a third rotation matrix. All combined and using the fact that the rotation
matrices are orthogonal, we can explicit the passage from the laboratory frame to the
floater frame as

eex
eey
eez
=RφRθRψ|{z}
R
ex
ey
ez
,
ex
ey
ez
=RT
ψRT
θRT
φ|{z}
RT
eex
eey
eez
. (A 4)
Evaluating these matrix products explicitly we obtain formula (3.6 a).
We now explain how to find (3.8) that links ˙ψ(t),˙θ(t),˙φ(t) toeΩx(t),eΩy(t),eΩz(t). The
floater frame rotates at instantaneous speed Ω(t) which can be expressed using the
differential equation˙eei(t) =Ω(t)×eei(t) for i=x, y, z . In other terms, we have
d
dt
eex
eey
eez
=
0eΩz−eΩy
−eΩz 0eΩx
eΩy−eΩx 0

| {z }
M
eex
eey
eez
. (A 5)
Considering the transform (3.6 a), we can also compute the time-derivative of the vectors
of the floater frame by deriving the rotation matrix. We then have
d
dt
eex
eey
eez
=d
dt(RφRθRψ)
ex
ey
ez
=d
dt(RφRθRψ) 
RT
ψRT
θRT
φ
eex
eey
eez
. (A 6)Preferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 29
Comparing with (A 5) implies

R′
φRθRψ˙φ+RφR′
θRψ˙θ+RφRθR′
ψ˙ψ
RT
ψRT
θRT
φ=M. (A 7)
We denote R′
φ=∂φRϕand similar for the other matrices. Considering the orthogonality
of the rotation matrices, this simplifies to R′
φRT
φ˙ϕ+RφR′
θRT
θRT
ϕ˙θ+RφRθR′
ψRT
ψRT
θRT
ϕ˙ψ=
M. After evaluating all the matrix products, we then deduce that

eΩx
eΩy
eΩz
=
1 0 −sinθ
0 cos φ cosθsinφ
0−sinφcosθcosφ

˙φ
˙θ
˙ψ
 (A 8)
Notice that this matrix is singular, when θ=±π/2. In our applications, we do not
encounter such large pitch angles. Hence, we can always invert this relation to find the
system of equations (3.8).
Appendix B. Extra details of the asymptotic calculation
The computation of F′
x, F′
z,eK′
x,eK′
y, K′
zand the simplifications due to use of the flat
floater assumption yield the following differential equations for the first order motion
¨x′
c≈ −ϵcos(xc−t) (B 1 a)
¨z′
c+1
βδzz′
c≈ϵ1
βδz−1−1
24βδz 
c2
ψδ2
x+s2
ψδ2
y
sin(xc−t) (B 1 b)
¨φ′+1
βδzφ′≈ −ϵsψ"
1
βδz−1−1
βδz 
s2
ψδ2
y
40+c2
ψδ2
x
24!#
cos(xc−t) (B 1 c)
¨θ′+1
βδzθ′≈ −ϵcψ"
1
βδz−1−1
βδz 
c2
ψδ2
x
40+s2
ψδ2
y
24!#
cos(xc−t) (B 1 d)
¨ψ′≈ −ϵ 
δ2
x−δ2
y
δ2x+δ2y!
sψcψsin(xc−t). (B 1e)
Thez′
c,φ′andθ′equations are that of forced harmonic oscillators with natural frequenciesp
1/βδz. Notice that for flat floaters, with δz≪δx, δy, we indeed have nearly the same
natural oscillation frequencies ωz≈ωφ≈ωθ≈p
1/βδz[see the general Eqs. (3.15)].
Considering that δz≪1, we havep
1/βδz≫1, implying that the incoming wave is
never resonantly forcing the z′
c,φ′andθ′oscillations. Hence, the solution for the motion
is the sum of free oscillations at the bobbing frequency and a harmonic response. In the
theoretical calculation, we discard all free high-frequency oscillations as such motions are
strongly damped by radiative dissipation in reality.
The second order mean torque Kzis defined in (4.21) and it split in two parts Kz=
K(1)
z+K(2)
z. To find the first part, we must reconsider the calculation of the torque
K(1)
z=−Z
V(0)
sub(sψex+cψey)a(1)
xdV≈eIzz(−ϵΛsψcψezcsin(xc−t)) (B 2)
where Λ= (δ2
x−δ2
y)/(δ2
x+δ2
y). To get the first and second order parts in this torque, we
must evaluate this formula not a the equilibrium position, but on the trajectory of the
floater ( xc, zc, ψ)≈(xc+x′
c,zc+z′
c,ψ+ψ′). This generates the O(ϵ2) mean ”drift”-like
torque that we expressed in (4.21) using a Taylor expansion. Let us detail this step here.30 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
We have
eI−1
zzK(1)
z
(xc+x′c,zc+z′c,ψ+ψ′)(B 3)
≈ −ϵΛsψcψezcsin(xc−t)| {z }
K′z
−ϵΛezc
(c2
ψ−s2
ψ)ψ′sin(xc−t) +sψcψ(z′
csin(xc−t) +x′
ccos(xc−t))
+O(ϵ3).
We simplify ezc= 1 + O(δz) in the flat floater limit and inject the first order expressions
ofx′
c, z′
c, ψ′. Averaging over time and using
ψ′sin(xc−t) =ϵΛ
2sψcψ,z′csin(xc−t) +x′ccos(xc−t)≈ϵ, (B 4)
we find
eI−1
zzK(1)
z≈ −ϵ2Λsψcψ
1 +Λ
2 
c2
ψ−s2
ψ
(B 5)
as first part in the mean torque. This part of the torque always favors the longitudinal
state.
The second part of the mean torque is the sum of three terms K(2)
z=T1+T2+T3.
This notation refers here to the three separate integrals that are visible in (4.18 b). The
first contribution turns out to be negligible in the flat floater limit δz≪δx, δy. We find
eI−1
zzT1≈−eI−1zz Z
V(0)
sub(sψθ′−cψφ′)eza(1)
xdV!
(xc,zc,ψ)≈O(ϵ2δz) (B 6)
and this will always be smaller than the other terms of order O(ϵ2) and O(ϵ2δ2
x/βδz).
The second term is not negligible:
eI−1
zzT2=−eI−1zz Z
V(0)
sub(sψex+cψey)a(2)
xdV!
(xc,zc,ψ)
≈−eI−1zz Z
V(0)
sub(sψex+cψey) (−θ′ex+φ′ey)∂zax,cdV!
(xc,zc,ψ)≈ϵ2Λ
2sψcψ.(B 7)
We detail here the part of a(2)
xthat creates the leading contribution. This term captures
the small torque that is created by small vertical gradients in wave-magnitude ( ∂zax,c)
along its elongated surface and due to rotations ( θ′andφ′). The term alone creates a
slowO(ϵ2) motion that would rather be in favor of the transverse position. However, it
can never dominate the other O(ϵ2) terms in the K(1)
zmean torque.
The third contribution to K(2)
zis the longest to evaluate. In the flat floater limit, wePreferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 31
find it as
eI−1
zzT3=−eI−1zz Z
V(1)
sub(sψex+cψey)a(1)
xdV!
(xc,zc,ψ)
≈ϵezccos(xc−t)
βδz(δ2x+δ2y)"
sψ(θ′+ϵcψcos(xc−t))| {z }δ2x−cψ(φ′+ϵsψcos(xc−t))| {z }δ2y
+ 
c3
ψsψ 
−δ4
x
40+δ2
xδ2
y
24!
−s3
ψcψ 
−δ4
y
40+δ2
xδ2
y
24!!
ϵcos(xc−t)#
+ϵezcsin(xc−t)
βδz(δ2x+δ2y)"
sψcψ(δ2x−δ2y) (z′
c−ϵsin(xc−t))| {z }
+ 
c3
ψsψ 
3δ4
x
40−2δ2
xδ2
y
24!
−s3
ψcψ 
3δ4
y
40−2δ2
xδ2
y
24!!
ϵsin(xc−t)
.(B 8)
Physically, this term captures on its own the torque that is due to the changing submer-
sion of the floater (integral over V(1)
sub). The underbraced terms show more clearly how
the first order motion z′
c, θ′, φ′influences this varying submersion and hence this torque.
Quite astonishingly, we observe that the first term exactly vanishes after injecting the
solutions of θ′andφ′, even with the tiny O(ϵδ2
x, ϵδ2
y) corrections. Hence, we can deduce
that these weak corrections in θ′andφ′are in fact not so relevant in this problem. The
second term does not vanish. After injecting the z′
c-motion, we find that the very small
O(ϵδ2
x, ϵδ2
y) are crucially important. From (4.25 b), we get that
z′
c−ϵsin(xc−t) =−ϵ
24 
c2
ψδ2
x+s2
ψδ2
y
sin(xc−t). (B 9)
The right hand side may seem tiny, but without these terms, we would simply find T3= 0.
Hence, these weak buoyancy-induced corrections of the vertical motion are crucial and
the only ones that can cause T3to be non-zero in this model, at this order. After taking
the time-average, we find
eI−1
zzT3≈ϵ2
βδz(δ2x+δ2y)"
sψc3
ψ 
δ4
x
60−δ2
xδ2
y
48!
−s3
ψcψ 
δ4
y
60−δ2
xδ2
y
48!#
.(B 10)
Without considering the anisotropy of the floater, this term causes a contribution of
O(ϵ2δ) to the motion of ψthat in fact, seems smaller than the other mean torques of
order O(ϵ2). However, for strongly elongated floaters with δx≫δy≫δz, this term is
rather of magnitude O(ϵ2δ2
x/βδz) and dominates the O(ϵ2) terms. In our calculations,
we were able to retrace that this term T3was entirely due to the existence of a non-zero
curvature of the water-line at the floater position (the term (1 /2)(x−xc)2∂2
xxζcin the
Taylor expansion for eζ) and it is this physical element that brought us to the simplified
model discussed in section 5.
In the end, we have summed up all the contributions to the second order mean torque.
Expressing eI−1
zz¨ψ=Kz, we then found the equation of motion (4.26).
REFERENCES
Abramowitz, Milton & Stegun, Irene A 1948 Handbook of mathematical functions with
formulas, graphs, and mathematical tables , , vol. 55. US Government printing office.32 W. Herreman, B. Dhote, L. Danion, F. Moisy
van den Bremer, T. S. & Breivik, Ø. 2018 Stokes drift. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 376(2111), 20170104.
Bureau-Veritas 2016 Hydrostar for experts user manual. Bureau Veritas .
Butikov, E.I. 2001 On the dynamic stabilization of an inverted pendulum. Am. J. Phys 69,
1–14.
Calvert, R., McAllister, M. L., Whittaker, C., Raby, A., Borthwick, A.G.L. & Van
Den Bremer, T.S. 2021 A mechanism for the increased wave-induced drift of floating
marine litter. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 915, A73.
Chen, Xiao-Bo 2007 Middle-field formulation for the computation of wave-drift loads. Journal
of Engineering Mathematics 59(1), 61–82.
Clark, Laura K., DiBenedetto, Michelle H., Ouellette, Nicholas T. & Koseff,
Jeffrey R. 2020 Settling of inertial nonspherical particles in wavy flow. Physical Review
Fluids 5(12), 124301.
DiBenedetto, Michelle H., Clark, Laura K. & Pujara, Nimish 2022 Enhanced settling
and dispersion of inertial particles in surface waves. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 936, A38.
DiBenedetto, Michelle H., Koseff, Jeffrey R. & Ouellette, Nicholas T. 2019
Orientation dynamics of nonspherical particles under surface gravity waves. Physical
Review Fluids 4(3), 034301.
DiBenedetto, Michelle H. & Ouellette, Nicholas T. 2018 Preferential orientation of
spheroidal particles in wavy flow. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 856, 850–869.
DiBenedetto, Michelle H., Ouellette, Nicholas T. & Koseff, Jeffrey R. 2018
Transport of anisotropic particles under waves. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 837, 320–
340.
Falnes, Johannes & Kurniawan, Adi 2020 Ocean waves and oscillating systems: linear
interactions including wave-energy extraction , , vol. 8. Cambridge university press.
Faltinsen, Odd 1993 Sea loads on ships and offshore structures , , vol. 1. Cambridge university
press.
Faltinsen, Odd Magnus 1980 Prediction of resistance and propulsion of a ship in a seaway.
In13th Symposium on Naval Hydrodynamics, Tokyo , pp. 505–529.
Jeffery, G.B. 1922 The motion of ellipsoidal particles imnmersed in a viscous fluid. Soc. Lond.
A102, 161–179.
Kapitza, P.L. 1951 Pendulum with an oscillating pivot. Sov. Phys. Uspekhi 44, 7–20.
Kashiwagi, M 1992 Added resistance, wave-induced steady sway force and yaw moment on an
advancing ship. Schiffstechnik 39, 3–16.
Kashiwagi, Masashi & Ohkusu, Makoto 1993 Study on the wave-induced steady force and
moment. Journal of The Society of Naval Architects of Japan 1993 (173), 185–194.
Landau, L.D. & Lifschitz, E. M. 1960 Course of Theoretical Physics: Mechanics . Pergamon
Press.
Le Boulluec, Marc, Forest, Bertrand & Mansuy, Emmanuel 2008 Steady drift of
floating objects in waves - experimental and numerical investigations. Proceedings of the
ASME 27th International Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering .
Newman, John Nicholas 1967 The drift force and moment on ships in waves. Journal of ship
research 11(01), 51–60.
Newman, John Nicholas 2018 Marine hydrodynamics . The MIT press.
Salvesen, Nils 1974 Second order steady state forces and moments on surface ships in oblique
regular waves. In Naval Ship Research and Development Center, Washington DC, USA,
Proceedings of the International Symposium on the Dynamics of Marine Vehicles and
Structures in Waves, University College London, Paper 22, pp. 225-241 .
Skejic, Renato & Faltinsen, Odd M 2008 A unified seakeeping and maneuvering analysis
of ships in regular waves. Journal of marine science and technology 13, 371–394.
Spens, Paul G & Lalangas, Petros A 1962 Measurements of the mean lateral force and
yawing moment on a series 60 model in oblique regular waves. Tech. Rep. . Stevens Inst.
of Technology, Davidson Laboratory.
Stokes, G. G. 1847 On the theory of oscillatory waves. Trans. Camb. Phil. Soc. 8, 441–455.
Suaria, G., Berta, M., Griffa, A., Molcard, A., ¨Ozg¨okmen, T. M., Zambianchi, E. &
Aliani, S. 2021 Dynamics of transport, accumulation, and export of plastics at oceanic
fronts. Chemical Oceanography of Frontal Zones p. 355–405.Preferential orientation of floaters drifting in water waves 33
Sutherland, Bruce R, DiBenedetto, Michelle, Kaminski, Alexis & Van Den Bremer,
Ton 2023 Fluid dynamics challenges in predicting plastic pollution transport in the ocean:
A perspective. Physical Review Fluids 8(7), 070701.
Suyehiro, K 1921 The yawing of ships caused by the oscillation amongst waves. Journal of
Zosen Kiokai 1920 (26), 23–33.
Yang, M., Zhang, B., Chen, X., Kang, Q., Gao, B., Lee, J. & B., Chen 2023 Transport of
microplastic and dispersed oil co-contaminants in the marine environment. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 57, 5633–5645.
Yasukawa, Hironori, Hirata, Noritaka, Matsumoto, Akinori, Kuroiwa, Ryota &
Mizokami, Shuji 2019 Evaluations of wave-induced steady forces and turning motion
of a full hull ship in waves. Journal of marine science and technology 24, 1–15.