A Blockchain -based M odel for S ecuring Dat a Pipeline i n 
a Heterogeneous Informa tion S ystem 
Maneo Ntseliseng Ramahlosi1, Yolo M adani2 and Adeyinka A kanbi3[0000-0002-8796-0674] 
1 Central U niversit y of Technology, Free State 9 300, South Africa 
MRamahlosi@cut.ac.za
2 Central U niversit y of Technology, Free State 9 300, South Africa 
ymadani@cut.ac.za 
3 Centr al University of Technolog y, Free State 9300, Sou th Africa 
aakanbi@cut.ac.za
A
bstract. In our digital world, access to personal and public data has become an 
item of concern, with challenging security  and privacy aspects. Modern infor-
mation systems are heterogeneous in nature and have an inherent security vul-
nerability, which is susceptible to data interception and data modification due to 
unsecured communication data pipelines between connected endpoi nts. This re-
search article presents a blockchain -based model for securing data pipelines in a 
heterogeneous information system using an integrated multi -hazard early warn-
ing system (MHEWS) as a case study. The proposed model utilizes the inherent 
security features of blockchain technology to address the security and privacy 
concerns that arise in data pipelines. The model is designed to ensure data integ-
rity, confidentiality, and authenticity in a decentralized manner. The model is 
evaluated in a hybrid env ironment using a prototype implementation and simu-
lation experiments with outcomes that demonstrate advantages over traditional 
approaches for a tamper -proof and immutable data pipeline for data authenticity 
and integrity using a confidential ledger.  
Keywords:  Data security , Heterogeneous systems , Blockchain . 
1 Introduction 
Technological advancements have ushered in the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) 
and the purported Fifth Industrial Revolution (5IR), with data becoming a critical asset in modern information systems. According to the statistics [7], [8], [9], 2.5 quintillion bytes of data are created each day, estimated to be worth around $77 billion by 2025 [1]. Data is the foundation of an information system, critical to the functioning, and 
plays a vit al role in decision -making and strategic planning within an organization. To-
day, integrating data from heterogenous sources coupled with the integration of heter-ogeneous systems is an important capability for most organizations' successful deci-sion-making,  from data collection to processing and ultimately data analytics; It is crit-
ical that data accuracy and security be prioritized throughout the process. Observations based on empirical evidence indicate that the exchange of data across multiple applica-tion endpoints exposes the data to a high risk of manipulation and destruction by 2 
malicious entities [ 2]. The attacks might have originated from any source, through a 
wide variety of attack mechanisms.  
 
Typically, malicious hackers or state actors target acce ssible communication pathways 
of information systems –  usually, data pipelines, which are not protected, using attacks 
such as man -in-the-middle (MITM) attacks, Cross Site Scripting (XSS), DNS Tunnel-
ing etc. The vulnerabilities of this critical communication channel have been the focus 
of researchers in information security [10]. Several countries have protection policies 
and fines for a data breach, urging the organization to provide rigorous mechanisms in 
place for data security. For example, South Africa promulgated the Protection of Per-
sonal Information Act, 2013 (Act 4 of 2013) ('POPIA') into law on 26 November 2013 
and became fully enforceable on 1 July 2021 [ 11], with existing General Data Protec-
tion Regulation (GDPR) and other acts, resulting in, Equifax, a credit reporting agency 
agreeing to pay more than R10- billion to regulators to settle claims from a data breach 
[11]. Furthermore, if a company violates the General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR), the EU authorities may impose fines of up to 20 million euros or 4% of annual 
global revenue [ 5]. While these measures instigate the adoption of appropriate measures 
for adeq uate data security, they are not the solution.  
 
Currently, traditional security mechanisms such as cryptographic techniques [ 3] are 
frequently insufficient to maintain data integrity in this massive modern IT infrastruc-
ture. Recently, researchers have turn ed their attention to blockchain, being a distributed, 
incorruptible, and tamper -resistant ledger database. Blockchain has the potential to ad-
dress the critical security vulnerability issues of information systems, particularly on 
data integrity and reliab ility or in applications that require extra trust guarantees [ 4]. 
Blockchain technology can be used to secure data by creating a decentralized, tamper -
proof ledger of transactions. Each block in the chain contains a cryptographic hash of 
the previous block, creating a chain of trust that is difficult to alter. By storing data on 
a blockchain, it becomes much more difficult for hackers to tamper with or steal the 
data, as any changes would be immediately apparent and could be easily traced back to 
the source . Additionally, the decentralized nature of blockchain technology means that 
no single point of failure exists, which further increases the overall security of the data  
(Fig. 1) . This research explores how the application of blockchain technology could be 
used to mitigate the security challenges confronting heterogeneous information systems 
using environmental monitoring systems as a case study.  3 
 
Fig. 1. A decentralized Blockchain ledger . 
The environmental monitoring domain generates lots of critical and sensitive data 
that influences policies and strategy and is a prominent sector for the application of 
blockchain technology for data security. For example, an attacker could compromise 
the readings of the monitoring system, providing scientists with misleading data, if this 
information informs policy changes or new technologies, it could thoroughly disrupt 
environmental efforts. In such a scenario, the application of blockchain technology can 
be the more favourable approach to attain security from recognized threats and mitigate 
against possible data compromise. Blockchain can also be used to secure heterogeneous 
data from environmental monitoring systems. By storing data on the blockchain, it can 
be ensured that the data is accurate and cannot be tampered with. This can help to ensure 
that environmental monitoring systems are functioning properly. Blockchain technol-
ogy secures data using advanced encryption methods, making it nearly impossible for 
unauthorized parties to access  data stored on the blockchain on decentralized multiple 
nodes [ 12]. Decentralization is a core feature of blockchain technology, and it refers to 
the distribution of data and controls across a network of nodes, rather than having a 
central point of control – as a distributed ledger. Blockchain networks that are distrib-
uted among participants are called a consortium network. The consortium network 
gives each partner visibility into every transaction that occurs on the network. In a de-
centralized blockchain network, all nodes have a copy of the same data, containing an 
immutable ledger of all transactions. Each node has the ability to validate and record 
transactions making it easy to track and trace any changes made to the data.  
 
Fig. 2. Overview of a distributed database in comparison with a distributed ledger in block-
chain  
4 
Blockchain makes use of smart contracts, which are self -executing contracts that can 
be programmed to automatically enforce data security protocols, such as terms of an 
agreement between data producer and data consumer written into lines of code. Smart 
contracts can be written and executed on blockchains like Ethereum [ 13]. These con-
tracts are transparent and safe since they are created using code and kept on the block-
chain. Smart contracts extend blockchain from data to code. One of the main ad-
vantages of smart contracts is their ability to automate and streamline procedures, elim-
inating the need for middlemen and resulting in time and cost savings. They also offer 
some amount of security and confidence due to the public availability and verifiability 
of the contract's code. In this area, numerous applications have been pr oposed, includ-
ing hyper ledger fabric technology [ 14], Ethereum smart contracts [ 13], and other 
Blockchain as a Services (BaaS) [ 15, 16 ]. 
The goal of this research study is to explore how the application of how blockchains 
could be integrated with existing legacy and modern information systems. The main 
contributions of this paper are as follows:  
• It proposes a decentralized blockchain architecture for securing data pipelines 
of heterogeneous information systems from attacks using a multi -hazard early 
warnin g system (MHEWS) as a case study.  
• The proposed framework is implemented in the cloud using Azure Confiden-
tial Ledger  – a ledger service that provides the ability to scale and operate 
blockchain networks on the Azure infrastructure.  
• The effectiveness of our proposed framework is demonstrated and determined 
through the implementation and deployment of the Blockchain model  in the 
cloud.  
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows , section 2 discusses related works, and 
section 3 outlines the application scenario with the presentation of the proposed model. 
Section 4 of this paper covers the methodology and approach for t he experimental setup 
– for the implementation and deploying using the case study MHEWS, and section 5 
provides the conclusion and future work.  
2 Related Works  
In the past few years, there has been a significant increase in the use of blockchain 
technology f or security and privacy in information systems, the Internet of Things 
(IoT), healthcare, and cloud services. This growth is largely attributable to blockchain's 
capacity to secure data using cutting -edge encryption techniques, decentralization, Im-
mutable Ledger, and Smart Contracts. Reference [20] developed a model for ICT e -
agriculture systems with a blockchain infrastructure for use at the local and regional 
scale, with a focus on the specific technical and social requirements of blockchain tech-
nology for protecting ICT e -agriculture systems. References [21] investigate the inten-
tional use of blockchain technology for data validation, data storage, data security, and 
data transfer to create decentralized, effective, fault -tolerant, and interoperable e -agri-
culture information systems. Reference [22] suggests a paradigm that makes use of 5 
smart contracts to guarantee reliable communication between devices and sensors. The 
authors of [23] conducted a survey that provides comprehensive reporting on various 
blockchain studies and applications put forth by the research community, as well as 
their respective effects on blockchain and its use across other applications or scenarios; 
their findings showed that blockchain is increasingly being used in contemporary 
cloud- and edge -computing paradigms.  
 
The authors of [6 ] investigate how blockchain technology can be used for environ-
mental monitoring, with a focus on key metrics like the quantity of articles published, 
author collaboration networks, research institution ne tworks, and keyword co- occur-
rence in this area over an eight -year period. Some of the nine elements utilized to assess 
the literature included the number of papers published, author collaboration networks, 
research institution networks, keyword co- occurren ce, co -citation analysis, keyword 
clustering, keyword burst, time zone, and the distribution of countries and regions. The 
study used Citeseer to visually explore the elements of cross -over literature studies, the 
characteristics of the collaborations, the  influence of the contributions, etc. in addition 
to describing the qualities indicated by the data and came to a conclusion on the wide 
adoption of blockchain technology in different research fields (Fig. 3) . 
 
 
Fig. 3. Keyword concurrence  [6]. 
3 Application Scenario and Proposed Model  
In this section, we introduced the case study application scenario of an MHEWS in the 
environmental monitoring domain and the architecture of heterogeneous information 
systems from existing lega cy systems, wireless sensor networks (WSN) etc., all inte-
grated together for a comprehensive monitoring system.  
 
6 
3.1 Application Scenario  
Information systems in the environmental monitoring context are heterogeneous by na-
ture [17,18] , with interoperability a major challenge [24]. Hence, components are iso-
lated and integrated for processing based on the ETL model .  There are three identified 
parts in the application scenario as shown depicted in Fig . 4 below , data producers, data 
pipeline and data consumers. Each part of the application scenario is integrated with 
other parts. The data producers in this case study of the integrated  multi- hazard early 
warning systems ( MHEWS ) are the  legacy systems, WSN and also standalone applica-
tions. The data  pipeline consists of communication channels, which are either wired or 
wireless based on the infrastructure design. The data consumers are the endpoint appli-
cation utilizing the data from the sensors and enterprise systems. The details of these 
three part s are illustrated below: 
Data Producers.  In a typical MHWES, in -situ readings produced by different produc-
ers (sensors and devices) are incorporated into accompanying EWS in various struc-
tured formats and types are streamed via the communication channel to  the repository 
for further processing. In this case, examples of the parameters measured are tempera-
ture, pressure, moisture, humidity etc .  
Data Pipeline.  This layer represents the entire communication channel of the MHEWS. 
The communication channel coul d be wired or wireless utilizing several communica-
tion protocols like WiFi, Bluetooth, ZigBee etc. Irrespective of the communication me-
dium adopted, data are susceptible to several attacks in this layer. The common encryp-
tion method offered by the communic ation protocols is not strong enough to prevent 
data compromise.  
Data Consumers.  The consumers are software programs or tools that are designed to 
process and analyze data in order to extract valuable insights or information. These 
applications can be used  for a wide range of purposes, including business intelligence, 
machine learning (ML), predictive analytics, and data visualization.  
 7 
 
Fig. 4. An overview of an integrated Multi-hazard Early Warning System A rchitecture.  
3.2 Proposed Blockchain -based Data Security Model  
This paper proposes a Blockchain- based data security model (Fig 5 ) that applies block-
chain technology in securing the data pipeline of an integrated multi -hazard early warn-
ing system, from the data producers to the data consumers. Each process and layer of 
our proposed model is described, outlining the data flow as data are generated, en-
crypted and validated in a hybrid model approach. The data obtained from the hetero-
genous data consumers in re al-time are transmitted to the cloud using appropriate APIs 
and are added to the blockchain infrastructure in accordance with the smart contract. 
The data is cloned and replicated across all the nodes in the distributed database net-
work of the blockchain [25]. Therefore, a compromise of the data accessed in one node 
does not affect the accuracy of the entire dataset in the cluster. The validation that the 
retrieved data is immutable is achieved by cross -referencing with the blocks stored on 
the ledger and a ll user transactions.  
 
8 
 
 
Fig. 5. A Blockchain -based Data Security Model for an integrated Multi -hazard Early Warning 
System (MHEWS)  
4 Methodology 
The implementation of blockchain technology for data security can be a complex pro-
cess, herein the process adopted are simplified and broken down into several steps:  
I. Define the use case: This first step involves the identification of the specific 
data or information that needs to be secured and how it will be used, followed 
by the specific business logic and conditions that need to be encoded into the 
smart contract. In the study -  case of environmental monitoring systems, the 
minimum and maximum readings of the measured parameters are noted as 
conditions/rules encoded into the smart contract. For example, early warning 
indicators such as temperature can have low and high values of - 50celsius to 
+50celcius respectively.  
II.Choose a blockchain platform: There are several blockchain platforms that 
supports smart contract functionality, such as Ethereum or EOS with function-
ality that offers a complete end -to-end solution for developing, hosting, and 
managing blockchain solutions. In a hybrid model design that allows data 
transmission to an online repository, the use of such services in Azure Cloud 
Security, which is best in class keeps both processes and data secure [19 ]. Az-
ure Blockchain service supports Ethereum, Quorum Ledger, Corda, and Hy-
perledger Fabric.  
9 
This research employs Microsoft Confidential Ledger (ACL), a managed and 
decentralized ledger for data entry that is supported by Blockchain. Data com-
mitted to the Confidential Ledger is made tamperproof in perpetuity by ACL 
through consensus -based replicas and cryptographically signed blocks, pro-
hibiting intentional or unintentional data  alteration.  
III. Write the smart contract code: Blockchains, such as Ethereum, allow for the 
creation and execution of smart contracts. These contracts are written in code 
and stored on the blockchain, making them transparent and secure. The busi-
ness logic and conditions are coded using a programming language, such as 
Solidity.  
IV. Test and deploy the smart contract: Test the smart contract using a virtual en-
vironment, such as a Remix IDE, to ensure that it functions as intended. De-
ploy the smart contract to the bl ockchain network, making it available for ex-
ecution.  
V. Monitor and maintain: Monitor the network for any security breaches and per-
form regular maintenance to ensure the network remains secure.  
 
In this case study, the ACL is created in the cloud, based on the proposed hybrid archi-
tecture. In the cloud platform, the model is implemented, starting with the creation of 
the resource group that will contain the resources and services required for the imple-
mentation and deployment of the infrastructure. The ability to implement, deploy and 
scale are considered one of the main advantages of cloud services. Using a component 
of the MHEWS, drought early warning systems (DEWS) services are replicated in the 
cloud platform, starting with the configuration of the in -situ sensors and legacy systems 
to transmit environmental readings to the cloud repository using ledger APIs support 
certificate -based authentication process with owner roles as well as Azure Active Di-
rectory (AAD) based authentication and also role -based acces s. The data pipelines from 
the endpoints to the ledger are transmitted over a TLS 1.3 connection, which terminates 
within the hardware -backed security enclaves (Intel® SGX enclaves).  
The secure ledger is accessible via REST APIs, which can be integrated into new or 
existing applications using JSON resource connection strings as captured in a code 
snippet (Fig. 6)  and Azure service in Fig. 7 below. The data streams are created as 
blocks  in blob storage containers belonging to an Azure Storage account in an en-
crypted format and committed to the ledger. Basic operations such as create, update, 
get, and delete are supported by the Administrative APIs . 10 
 
Fig. 6. Code Snippet  – A JSON REST API for accessing the MHEWS ACL in the Azure.  
 
 
Fig. 7. The MHEWS Blockchain service in Azure Cloud.  
Smart contract manages the nodes to govern the consensus in the ledger. Smart con-
tracts are implemented on the blockchain to automate the process of data validation, 
reducing the potential for human error or manipulation. Typically, the code of a smart 
contract is composed in a high- level programming language such as Solidity before 
being compile d into bytecode and uploaded to the blockchain. The smart contract that 
can be deployed on our blockchain will be written in Solidity and Remix. However, for 
test purposes before deployment, Truffle provides a testing framework and asset pipe-
line that make s it easy and quick to deploy contracts, develop applications, and run tests 
on a local server using tools like Ganache. Using the Temperature parameter from the 
deployed sensors of the DEWS, a smart contract is created for experimental purposes 
and deployed on the local server using Remix as captured in Fig 8  below . 
11 
 
 
Fig. 8. Using the Temperaturesensor.sol  smart contract as an example in Remix for testing pur-
poses.  
 
 
 
Fig. 8. The smart contract is deployed and tested on a local server  before deployment to the 
cloud  in Remix testing environment.  
 
Publishing and using the smart contract created for the parameters of the reading in-
volves copying the ledger endpoints to the Remix a nd selecting a Web3 Provider using 
the generated Azure ledger URL. Once connected, the contract is deployed, and inter-
action with the contract is achieved through Remix for testing purposes.  
12 
Conclusion  
Blockchain is a decentralized, distributed ledger that  eliminates the need for a trusted 
third party or single point of failure. The presented blockchain security model in the 
experimental setup demonstrated has guaranteed the security of data pipelines in heter-
ogeneous information systems such as the MHEWS c ase study. This model has the 
ability to work with new or existing applications similar to any PaaS, and IaaS models, 
using cloud -based apps and storage. The ACL in our Blockchain system creates an 
ever-growing list of ordered information called blocks to create a digital ledger. This 
list is made possible by a decentralised, peer -to-peer network. Each transaction is then 
automatically verified by the network itself after being included in a block with a cryp-
tographically signed signature. This enables the security of environmental monitoring 
data by creating a decentralized and tamper -proof system for storing and sharing data.  
The use of blockchain can ensure that the data is accurate, and reliable and cannot 
be altered without leaving a traceable record. Overall, the presented architecture offers 
distinct benefits for data integrity, such as immutability, tamper -proofing, and append-
only operations in the relevant domain. These capabilities, which guarantee the preser-
vation of all records, are perfect when it's necessary to preserve essential metadata rec-
ords, such as for archive and regulatory compliance needs.  As outlined for future work 
will focus on the performance metrics of implementing the model in a hybrid model 
and possibility of containerization or deployment of the MHEWS components as a mi-
croservice.  
References  
1. Mourtzis, Dimitris, Konstantinos Angelopoulos, and Vasilios Zogopoulos. "Mapping vul-
nerabilities in the industrial internet of things landscape." Procedia CIRP 84 (2019): 265-
270. 
2. Dhondt, Karel, et al. "A Run a Day Won't Keep the Hacker Away: Inference Attacks on 
Endpoint Privacy Zones in Fitness Tracking Social Networks." Proceedings of the 2022 
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 2022.  
3. Akande, Oluwatobi Noah, et al. "A dynamic round triple data encryption standard crypto-
graphic technique for data security." Computational Science and Its Applications –ICCSA 
2020: 20th International Conference, Cagliari, Italy, July 1– 4, 2020, Proceedings, Part VI 
20. Springer International Publishing, 2020.  
4. Daneshgar, Farhad, Omid Ameri Sianaki, and Prabhat Guruwacharya. "Blockchain: a re-
search framework for data security and privacy." Web, Artificial Intelligence and Network 
Applications: Proceedings of the Workshops of the 33rd International Conference on Ad-
vanced Information Networking and Applications (WAINA -2019) 33. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, 2019.  
5. EU GDPR  Homepage, https://gdpr -info.eu/issues/fines -penalties/ , last accessed 20 23/02/21.  
6. Guo, Meiwen, et al. "Ap plication of Blockchain Technology in Environmental Health: Lit-
erature Review and Prospect of Visualization Based on CiteSpace." Technologies 10.5 
(2022): 100.  
7. Tripwire Homepage, https://www.tripwire.com/state -of-security/how -does -cybersecurity -
impact -environmental -services -and-infrastructure , last accessed 2023/02/10  13 
8. Exploding Topics, https://explodingtopics.com/blog/big -data- stats, last accessed 
2023/02/12  
9. Findstack Homepage, https://findstack.com/resources/big -data-statistics/, last accessed 
2023/01/05  
10. Fariborz Farahmand, Shamkant B. Navathe, Philip H. Enslow, and Gunter P. Sharp. 2003. 
Managing vulnerabilities of inform ation systems to security incidents. In Proceedings of the 
5th international conference on Electronic commerce (ICEC '03). Association for Compu-
ting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 348 –354. https://doi.org/10.1145/948005.948050  
11. IOL, https://www.iol.co.za/business -report/companies/massive-penalties -for-data-
breaches -31822314, last accessed 2023/03/11  
12. Rajawat, Anand Singh , et al. "Blockchain -based model for expanding IoT device data secu-
rity." Advances in Applications of Data -Driven Computing (2021): 61- 71. 
13. Metcalfe, William. "Ethereum, smart contracts, DApps." Blockchain and Crypt Currency 77 
(2020).  
14. Hyperledger Fabric, https://www.hyperledger.org/use/fabric , last accessed 2022/11/10  
15. Singh, Jatinder, and Johan David Michels. "Blockchain as a service (BaaS): Providers and 
trust." 2018 IE EE European Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW). 
IEEE, 2018.  
16. Song, Jie, et al. "Research advances on blockchain -as-a-service: Architectures, applications 
and challenges." Digital Communications and Networks 8.4 (2022): 466-475.  
17. Akanbi, A deyinka, and Muthoni Masinde. "A distributed stream processing middleware 
framework for real -time analysis of heterogeneous data on big data platform: Case of envi-
ronmental monitoring." Sensors 20.11 (2020): 3166.  
18. Akanbi, Adeyinka. "Estemd: A distributed processing framework for environmental moni-
toring based on apache kafka streaming engine." Proceedings of the 4th International Con-
ference on Big Data Research. 2020.  
19. Guerron, Ximena, et al. "A taxonomy of quality metrics for cloud services." IEEE Access 8 
(2020): 131461- 131498.  
20. Lin, Y.P., Petway, J.R., Anthony, J., Mukhtar, H., Liao, S.W., Chou, C.F. and Ho, Y.F., 
2017. Blockchain: The evolutionary next step for ICT e -agriculture. Environments, 4(3), 
p.50.  
21. Dey, K. and Shekhawat, U., 2021. Blockchain for sus tainable e-agriculture: Literature re-
view, architecture for data management, and implications. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
316, p.128254.  
22. Liao, S., Wu, J., Li, J., Bashir, A.K. and Yang, W., 2021. Securing collaborative environ-
ment monitoring in smart c ities using blockchain enabled software -defined internet of 
drones. IEEE Internet of Things Magazine, 4(1), pp.12-18.  
23. Berdik, D., Otoum, S., Schmidt, N., Porter, D. and Jararweh, Y., 2021. A survey on block-
chain for information systems management and secur ity. Information Processing & Man-
agement, 58(1), p.102397.  
24. Adebesin, Funmi, et al. "A Review of Interoperability Standards in E -health and Imperatives 
for their Adoption in Africa." South African Computer Journal 50.1 (2013): 55-72.  
25. Mafike, Senate Sylvia, and Tendani Mawela. "Blockchain Design and Implementation 
Techniques, Considerations and Challenges in the Banking Sector: A Systematic Literature 
Review." Acta Informatica Pragensia 2022.3 (2022): 396- 422. 