1
Near-Space Communications: the Last Piece of 6G
Space-Air-Ground-Sea Integrated Network Puzzle
Hongshan Liu1, Tong Qin1,2, Zhen Gao2*,3,4,5, Tianqi Mao2,3*, Keke Ying1, Ziwei Wan1, Li Qiao1, Rui Na2,3,
Zhongxiang Li2,3, Chun Hu2,3, Yikun Mei1, Tuan Li2,3,4,5, Guanghui Wen6,7, Lei Chen2,3, Zhonghuai Wu8, Ruiqi
Liu9, Gaojie Chen10, Shuo Wang11*, and Dezhi Zheng2,3
1School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China.
2MIIT Key Laboratory of Complex-Field Intelligent Sensing, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081,
China.
3Advanced Research Institute of Multidisciplinary Sciences 100081, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing,
China.
4Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Jiaxing
314000, China.
5Advanced Research Institute of Multidisciplinary Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Jinan 250307, China.
6Department of Mathematics, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China.
7Advanced Research Institute of Multidisciplinary Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081,
China.
8Beijing Key Laboratory for Precision Optoelectronic Measurement Instrument and Technology, School of Optics
and Photonics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China.
9Wireless and Computing Research Institute, ZTE Corporation, Beijing 100029, China.
105GIC & 6GIC, Institute for Communication Systems, University of Surrey, GU2 7XH Guildford, U.K.
11China Academy of Space Technology, Beijing 100094, China.
*Correspondence should be addressed to Zhen Gao: gaozhen16@bit.edu.cn; Tianqi Mao: maotq@bit.edu.cn; Shuo
Wang: evan3210@sina.com
Abstract —This article presents a comprehensive study on
the emerging near-space communications (NS-COM) within the
context of space-air-ground-sea integrated network (SAGSIN).
Specifically, we firstly explore the recent technical developments
of NS-COM, followed by the discussions about motivations be-
hind integrating NS-COM into SAGSIN. To further demonstrate
the necessity of NS-COM, a comparative analysis between the NS-
COM network and other counterparts in SAGSIN is conducted,
covering aspects of deployment, coverage, channel characteristics
and unique problems of NS-COM network. Afterwards, the tech-
nical aspects of NS-COM, including channel modeling, random
access, channel estimation, array-based beam management and
joint network optimization, are examined in detail. Furthermore,
we explore the potential applications of NS-COM, such as
structural expansion in SAGSIN communication, civil aviation
communication, remote and urgent communication, weather
monitoring and carbon neutrality. Finally, some promising re-search avenues are identified, including stratospheric satellite
(StratoSat) -to-ground direct links for mobile terminals, reconfig-
urable multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) and holographic
MIMO, federated learning in NS-COM networks, maritime
communication, electromagnetic spectrum sensing and adver-
sarial game, integrated sensing and communications, StratoSat-
based radar detection and imaging, NS-COM assisted enhanced
global navigation system, NS-COM assisted intelligent unmanned
system and free space optical (FSO) communication. Overall, this
paper highlights that the NS-COM plays an indispensable role
in the SAGSIN puzzle, providing substantial performance and
coverage enhancement to the traditional SAGSIN architecture.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The advent of the 5th generation (5G) technology has
revolutionized the way we think about communication net-arXiv:2401.00283v2  [cs.IT]  4 Mar 20242
works, enabling a plethora of new use cases and scenarios
that were not possible with previous generations of wireless
technology. 5G offers significantly higher data rates compared
to its predecessors, enabling faster downloads and smoother
streaming experiences. In July 2020, the 3rd Generation Part-
nership Project (3GPP) successfully finalized the development
of standard specifications for release 16, which is the first
release of 5G. The 5G technology framework is anticipated to
provide extensive support for a diverse array of prospective
applications, classified into three principal usage scenarios:
Enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB), Massive Machine Type
Communications (mMTC) and Ultra Reliable Low Latency
Communications (URLLC) [1]. Moreover, 5G boosts the net-
work capacity, accommodating a vast number of connected
devices simultaneously. These attributes make 5G a promising
advancement in wireless communication.
However, 5G does come with its limitations. One of the
primary challenges is its limited coverage in rural and re-
mote areas, where the deployment of infrastructure can be
economically and logistically challenging. Additionally, 5G’s
high-frequency signals have difficulty penetrating obstacles
like buildings, resulting in possible coverage gaps especially
in urban canyons where densely constructed tall buildings
increase multipath effects caused by signal reflections.
The limitations of existing networks, including capacity
constraints, latency issues and energy inefficiencies, necessi-
tate this next-generation leap. The 6th generation (6G) aims
to create a hyper-connected, intelligent and immersive digital
ecosystem [2, 3]. To meet these requirements, it needs to
overcome the limitations of 5G by providing lower latency,
seamless connectivity in diverse environments, as well as
empower new frontiers in technology, enabling the efficient
management of resources and services [4]. In response to
these demands, 6G aims to provide a comprehensive solution,
seamlessly integrating terrestrial, airborne and spaceborne
networks, which is referred to as the space-air-ground-sea
integrated network (SAGSIN). This integration will ensure
uninterrupted communication across various environments,
even in remote or other challenging locations.
A. The Development of SAGSIN
The existing 5G communication networks predominantly
rely on terrestrial communication infrastructure [5], which,
however, exhibits several notable limitations. For instance,
as future high data transmission rates venture into much
drastic frequency band, extremely high path loss will rendertraditional hexagonal cellular networks inadequate in assuring
signal quality within shadow fading regions. Thus, there is
a growing need for finding signal transmission paths in a
more flexible way. Furthermore, in the event of natural or
man-made disasters, terrestrial base stations (BSs) in affected
areas are susceptible to damage and their reconstruction can
be exceptionally challenging, often hindering relief efforts.
Additionally, to address issues of coverage and capacity, 5G
necessitates an increased deployment of small cell BSs and
network infrastructure, incurring substantial costs and complex
deployment logistics. To mitigate these challenges, there is
a growing imperative to extend communication from the
tradition terrestrial network into SAGSIN, where expansions
in vertical dimension becomes pivotal.
It is expected that one of the key objectives of fu-
ture 6G communication systems is the seamless integration
of advanced multimedia services over heterogeneous net-
works [2]. In the ever-evolving landscape of communications,
the SAGSIN has emerged as a cutting-edge paradigm that
promises to revolutionize how we connect and exchange infor-
mation [6, 7]. A traditional SAGSIN scenario mainly includes
three segments: spaceborne network, airborne network and
terrestrial network, each can work independently or inter-
operationally. By integrating heterogeneous networks among
these segments, a highly efficient hierarchical communication
network is built, providing a deep integration of systems,
technologies and applications.
The spaceborne network [8, 9] includes the geostationary
Earth orbit (GEO), medium Earth orbit (MEO) and low Earth
orbit (LEO) satellites that operate at different altitudes. The
airborne network [5, 10, 11] mainly consists of airships,
balloons, aircraft and unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs). The
terrestrial network contains ground-based infrastructures and
user devices in urban areas as well as areas that lack in-
frastructure, such as rural areas, ocean areas, disaster areas
and dense urban areas. To maintain sufficient capacity, energy
efficiency and reliability, the mentioned areas are required to
be interconnected to create a comprehensive and robust com-
munication ecosystem, in order to achieve ubiquitous coverage
on a global scale. For example, an uplink NOMA scenario was
examined in [12] within a satellite-aerial-ground integrated
network, where multiple users engaged in communication with
a satellite aided by a UA V serving as an aerial relay.3
Ocean AreasRural Areas
Remote Areas
Disater Areas
Spaceborne 
Network
Terrestrial 
Network
Urban Areas
UAV 
swarmsNS-COM 
Network Airships
Airborne 
NetworkSatellites
Balloons
Aircraft
Fig. 1: Schematic diagram of the SAGSIN architecture, consisting of spaceborne, near-space, airborne and terrestrial networks.
B. Motivations of Introducing Near-Space Communication
Network
The classical SAGSIN architecture have shown remarkable
capabilities in providing massive connectivity by integrating
spaceborne, airborne and terrestrial cellular networks, which,
however, encounters inherent technical challenges against their
respective practical implementation. Satellite systems, while
being able to offer global coverage in theory, lead to significant
latency and cost issues for real-time applications due to
their extremely high altitude. Small airborne platforms such
as UA Vs can offer several benefits like rapid deployment,
flexible maneuverability and the ability to provide temporary
coverage [13]. However, its limited coverage makes it diffi-
cult to provide connectivity to vast area. Additionally, they
also face challenges including limited endurance, regulatory
constraints in shared airspace and vulnerability to adverse
weather conditions. Moreover, the terrestrial network, strug-
gles to extend coverage to remote area economically and are
susceptible to service disruptions during disasters. It may also
experience congestion and reduced quality of service with theunprecedented increase of mobile users in the 6G era.
On the other hand, the philosophy of near-space com-
munications (NS-COM) is gradually emerging. Near-space
locates between 20 km and 100 km above the Earth’s surface,
characterized by its reduced turbulence intensity, extremely
low air pressure down to 0.05 times the standard atmospheric
pressure and temperatures as low as minus 60 degrees Celsius.
These unique physical characteristics can guarantee airships
and high-altitude balloons in this region to maintain near-
geostationary positions in the stratosphere for extended peri-
ods, often spanning several weeks or months, even with heav-
ier payloads. The near-space airships and balloons have col-
lectively been referred as stratospheric satellites (StratoSats)
, which compose the NS-COM network, an independent
networks entity separate from the traditional airborne net-
work. StratoSats are also called high altitude platform stations
(HAPSs) or near-space platform stations (NSPSs) [14]. They
are able to carry heavy payloads for extended periods and
offer controlled movement, providing a stable platform for
instruments as well as offering comparatively higher energy4
efficiency. For example, balloons follow passive drift patterns
due to stratospheric winds, making them ideal for passive
observation and data collection for the purpose of weather
forecast [15]. Aside from the aforementioned merits, the dis-
tinctive location of near-space allows the NS-COM network to
address the shortcomings of traditional spaceborne, terrestrial
and airborne networks. Positioned at the core of the network,
NS-COM plays a pivotal role in facilitating seamless cross-
network operations and resource allocation within the SAGSIN
framework, which is exhibited in Fig. 1. StratoSats can serve
as both a supplementary component and an independent ser-
vice provider. As a supplementary part of SAGSIN, StratoSats
act as crucial bridges, realizing the seamless integration be-
tween different networking layers. Specifically, their strategic
position between the lower atmosphere and space makes them
qualified for efficient cross-layer communication relaying.
Additionally, as independent service providers, StratoSats offer
several advantages over other networks [16]. Their extended
endurance allows for continuous and persistent coverage over
vast geographical areas, overcoming the limitations of airborne
platforms with their limited operational duration and reducing
the long transmission delay of traditional satellites. Operating
in the stratosphere, above regulated airspace, StratoSats sim-
plify deployment and management, reducing the complexities
associated with terrestrial and airborne network [17].
NS-COM present a promising addition to SAGSIN by
addressing the drawbacks of existing communication net-
works, making them the final piece of the SAGSIN puzzle.
It can be utilized in various scenarios, such as navigation,
positioning systems, remote sensing and emergency commu-
nications, making them a promising solution for the Internet
of Everything era. They harness the best features of the
existing communication systems, providing high-bandwidth,
low-latency connectivity over a wide area without the need
for extensive ground infrastructures. The industry has shown
significant interest in the design and production of StratoSats,
leading to the development of numerous projects and products
over the past decade. Among them, those that are relatively
representative include Project Loon, Stratobus and Yuanmeng.
Project Loon employs high-altitude balloons positioned in
the stratosphere at altitudes ranging from 18 km to 25 km
to establish an aerial wireless network capable of providing
internet access to remote areas. These balloons utilize patch
antennas, which are directional, to transmit signals. Initially,
its communication utilizes the unlicensed 2.4 G Hz and 5.8 G
Hz bands, providing speeds comparable to Third GenerationMobile Telecommunications Technology (3G). However, the
system later transitioned to Long-Term Evolution (LTE), utiliz-
ing the cellular spectrum in collaboration with local telecom-
munication operators. The typical lifespan of the balloons is
around 100 days [18]. Stratobus, with a length of 140 meters,
operates autonomously within the stratosphere at an altitude of
20 kilometers. It possesses the capability to cover a terrestrial
horizon spanning up to 500 kilometers, rendering it partic-
ularly apt for environmental monitoring missions. In terms
of observational tasks, Stratobus is equipped with both radar
and optical imaging payloads, thereby enabling continuous
surveillance irrespective of weather conditions. Its potential
extends to the telecommunications sector. Weighing nearly
seven metric tons and featuring dimensions of 115 meters in
length and 34 meters in diameter at its broadest point, Stra-
tobus accommodates payloads weighing up to 450 kilograms
and boasts an 8 kW power rating. Positioned within the zone
between the tropics, characterized by winds below 90 km/h, it
holds promise for providing uninterrupted service year-round
on a 24/7 basis [19]. Airship Yuanmeng represents China’s
inaugural near-space platform designed for both military and
civilian applications. With a payload capacity of 300 kg and
a volumetric capacity of approximately 18,000 cubic meters,
Yuanmeng is equipped with advanced systems for wideband
communication, relay, high-definition observation, and spatial
imaging. The platform boasts an impressive mission duration
of up to 6 months. Inaugurating its first flight in 2015,
Yuanmeng underwent a 48-hour test flight that ascended to
a near-space altitude of 20 kilometers to assess its operational
systems and capabilities [20].
To provide researchers with a more comprehensive under-
standing of NS-COM and inspire further advances, the rest
of the paper will present a detailed review of NS-COM. As
illustrated in Fig. 2, this survey is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we particularly introduce the characteristics of NS-
COM network while comparing it with the other networks in
SAGSIN. Section 3 discusses several technical features of NS-
COM. Section 4 highlights some typical application scenarios
for NS-COM. In Section 5, we explore candidate techniques
for NS-COM, as well as discuss some open issues therein.
Finally, the conclusions are summarized in Section 6.
Compared with existing relevant survey papers, this article
concentrates more on how NS-COM network expands cover-
age and enhance quality of service (QoS) in SAGSIN, ensuring
better service for 6G and beyond communication networks.
Relevant advanced technologies, including channel modeling,5
Fig. 2: The outline of this paper.
random access, channel estimation, array-based beam man-
agement and joint network optimization are discussed. We
also focus on the benefits and challenges of several potential
cutting-edge technologies such as StratoSat-to-ground direct
links for mobile terminals to support the implementation of
NS-COM for 6G and beyond communications in the future.
II. C HARACTERISTICS OF NS-COM N ETWORK
To demonstrate the indispensability of NS-COM, we will
provide a comprehensive investigation on its characteristics in
terms of deployment, coverage and channel characteristics, in
comparison with the traditional terrestrial/airborne/spaceborne
networks.
A. Deployment
Terrestrial network has been extensively established in ur-
ban and populated areas, providing reliable connectivity for
everyday communication needs. However, its post-deployment
flexibility is significantly inferior compared to the other net-
works. The airborne network, represented by UA Vs, offers
rapid deployment capabilities, making them suitable for tem-
porary or emergency coverage in remote or disaster-affected
regions. However, the flexibility comes with drawback of
low stability. For space communications, satellite nodes are
typically positioned in specific orbits to provide global cov-
erage, which, however, suffers from high maintenance costs
and launch costs. StratoSats, positioned in the stratosphere
above commercial aircraft but below traditional satellites,
boost an advantageous mid-altitude deployment. By combin-
ing the durability of terrestrial network and the versatilityof spaceborne network, it compensates for their respective
shortcomings. A comparative summary regarding different
aspects of deployment is presented in Table I.
•Deployment Method : Terrestrial network relies heavily
on physical infrastructure, involving the laying of cables and
erecting cell towers on the ground. While these networks
provide stable and reliable coverage in densely populated
areas, they face limitations in reaching remote or challenging
terrains, where deployment might be impractical or econom-
ically unviable. Airborne network leverages the use of UA Vs
for deployment. UA Vs offer rapid mobility and flexibility,
allowing them to establish temporary connectivity in disaster-
stricken or remote regions, albeit with limitations in flight
endurance and regulatory considerations. For spaceborne net-
work, traditional satellites, launched into GEO, MEO, or LEO
orbits, deliver global coverage but demand complex and costly
rocket deployments.
StratoSats stand out as a unique deployment approach by
reaching the stratosphere. StratoSats can be deployed using
various methods such as lifted by high altitude balloons or
launched by specialized aircrafts. This flexibility allows for
cost-effective and more frequent deployment opportunities,
enabling quicker response times for mission deployment or
network reinforcement, bringing communication services to
places that traditional terrestrial and even some satellite net-
works struggle to reach.
•Deployment Cost : For terrestrial network, initial costs
involve infrastructure investment, including cables and po-
tentially cell towers. However, operational expenses can be6
TABLE I: Comparison of Deployment Features.
Terrestrial Network Airborne Network NS-COM Network Spaceborne Network
Deployment Method Laying cables, erect-
ing cell towersUA V launch and aerial
deploymentHigh-altitude balloon
or aircraft launchRocket launch into or-
bit
Deployment Cost High initial
investment for
infrastructureModerate to high for
UA Vs and HAPsModerate for strato-
spheric platformsHigh for satellite
launch
Maintenance Mode Regular inspections
and repairsFrequent UA V
replacements and
maintenanceLess frequent Limited due to distant
orbits
Loadability No loadability con-
straintModerate payload ca-
pacity of UA VsSubstantial payload
capacity for
instrumentsVaries with satellite
design
Power Consumption Low power for ground
infrastructureUA Vs have moderate
power consumptionModerate power usage
for stratospheric plat-
formsVaries with satellite
mission
relatively lower, making them cost-effective for widespread
coverage in populated areas. Airborne network, utilizing UA Vs
for deployment, entails moderate to high costs. The de-
velopment, acquisition and operation of UA Vs add to the
deployment expenses. The need for frequent replacements
and maintenance of UA Vs due to flight endurance limitations
can also result in ongoing operational expenses, impacting
the overall cost-effectiveness of airborne network. Traditional
satellite deployment represents the highest initial cost among
the layers. The complex and costly rocket launches required
to place satellites into their respective orbits contribute signifi-
cantly to the deployment expenses. Moreover, the maintenance
and operational costs associated with traditional satellites can
be substantial due to the need for monitoring, ground station
infrastructure and satellite servicing.
StratoSats offer an economical approach to deployment
costs, striking a balance that is both sustainable and cost-
effective. While they do require a moderate investment for
launching high-altitude balloons or specialized aircraft, their
extended endurance and ability to cover vast geographical
areas demonstrate their inherent value over the long term.
This balance is crucial in a world where the demands for
continuous communication are ever-increasing. StratoSats, by
combining affordability with efficiency, stand as a viable
solution for a wide range of applications, from scientific
research and disaster management to communication relays
and Earth observation.
•Maintenance Mode : Terrestrial network requires regular
inspections and repairs of physical infrastructure, such as
cables and cell towers, to ensure uninterrupted connectiv-
ity. Although terrestrial network offers cost-effective main-
tenance once established, their reliance on physical compo-nents demands continuous monitoring and swift response to
potential issues. Airborne network, utilizing UA Vs and other
aerial platforms, presents unique maintenance challenges. The
maintenance mode involves managing UA V fleets, conducting
regular inspections and promptly addressing any malfunctions
to ensure continuous service delivery. Maintaining spaceborne
network operations poses several challenges. Due to the harsh
space environment with extreme cold temperatures and high
radiation, equipments face severe degradation, however the
repairability in space is limited.
By contrast, StratoSats platforms can stay aloft for ex-
tended periods, reducing the need for frequent maintenance.
StratoSats possess the unique capability to maintain their high-
altitude positions for significantly extended duration, which
inherently diminishes the necessity for regular maintenance.
This characteristic of StratoSats not only promotes cost-
efficiency but also underscores their advantage in terms of
operational longevity. Additionally, StratoSats benefit from
reduced regulatory burdens as they operate in near-space, away
from heavily regulated airspace.
•Loadability : The loadability problem across different
layers in the SAGSIN demands careful consideration of the
network’s capabilities and scalability to meet increasing data
demands. Terrestrial network, being deployed on the ground,
has no inherent loadability restriction and can handle substan-
tial data traffic in densely populated areas. Airborne network
utilizing UA Vs offer moderate loadability capabilities whereas
limited payload capacity [21], indicating restricted device
capacity for transmission, processing or accommodation. Typ-
ical commercial drones used in airborne network can carry
payloads ranging from a few kilograms to around 20 kg,
limiting their capacity to handle large-scale data traffic. Tra-7
ditional satellites, positioned in various orbits, exhibit diverse
loadability capacities based on their respective missions and
designs. Typical loadability values for GEO satellites range
from several hundred kilograms to a few tons, for MEO
satellites it varies from hundreds of kilograms to around one
ton. And for LEO satellites, it ranges from a few kilograms
to several hundred kilograms.
With substantial payload capacity up to almost 500 kg
of for various communication instruments [22], StratoSats
can provide extensive coverage and efficiently handle data
traffic over large areas. Simultaneously, this payload facilitates
the provision of multiple types of services, for example,
tasks such as collecting extensive measurement data within
a typhoon, which requires the deployment of a substantial
number of communication and sensing nodes, are well within
the capabilities of StratoSats.
•Power Consumption : The power consumption of different
communication networks in the SAGSIN is a critical fac-
tor influencing their operational efficiency and environmental
impact. Terrestrial network generally has lower power con-
sumption but can experience an increase in high data demand
areas. Airborne network, such as UA Vs, have higher power
consumption due to propulsion and electronics requirements.
Traditional satellites require energy on the propulsion systems
for orbit adjustments and station-keeping maneuvers. The
energy demands also include thermal control systems to regu-
late the satellite’s temperature, ensuring proper functioning of
electronic components.
StratoSats offer a balanced power consumption profile, re-
lying on solar energy, making them suitable for long-duration
missions. Their ability to remain aloft for prolonged periods,
enabling persistent and continuous coverage over large geo-
graphic areas, allowing for seamless transitions in areas re-
quiring sustained connectivity. The prolonged and continuous
operation of StratoSats to support extended missions lasting
for days or even weeks necessitates a robust and sustainable
energy supply. As a result, StratoSats predominantly rely
on solar panels as their primary energy source to harness
power from the sun. The energy extraction is supplemented by
the integration of hybrid energy sources, including light gas
(e.g., hydrogen and helium), wind and radio frequency (RF)
waves to ensure reliable energy generation even in variable
weather conditions. At the altitudes where StratoSats operate,
the wind in the stratosphere is generally weaker compared
to those in the troposphere. However, this relatively modest
airflow doesn’t deter StratoSats from optimizing their flightby adjusting their orientation to harness wind power more
efficiently. This strategic adjustment allows them to propel
forward with reduced propulsion power consumption.
B. Coverage
In this part, we will delve into the coverage differences of
each network layer. Specifically, we discuss the coverage abil-
ity of different layers from the aspects of time and space. In the
time dimension, the focus is on ensuring continuity of service,
where communication networks must maintain uninterrupted
connectivity under various circumstances. Factors such as
network reliability, resilience to disruptions and adaptability
to changing demands play critical roles in addressing this
aspect of the coverage problem. Conversely, the space dimen-
sion revolves around the coverage range, which entails how
extensively a network can reach different geographic areas.
Networks should be capable of offering localized coverage for
specific regions, extended reach to remote or rural locations
and even global coverage for broader applications.
1) Temporal Coverage: Terrestrial network offers good
continuity of service as they can operate continuously once
established. The network relies on fixed ground-based in-
frastructure, disruptions may occur due to natural disasters
or physical obstacles. However, quick restoration measures
and redundant systems ensure timely recovery and continuous
connectivity to users.
Airborne network provides flexible and mobile solutions for
communication. However, they face limitations in terms of
continuity of service due to power constraints. These platforms
may serve users for limited periods before requiring recharging
or redeployment, making them suitable for temporary or
emergency coverage.
The NS-COM ensure robust connectivity and are less sus-
ceptible to disruptions caused by adverse weather conditions or
ground-based obstacles, which makes it more time-efficient to
emergency situations in comparison with terrestrial network.
Although StratoSats may not be as flexible and convenient
as airplanes and UA Vs due to its bulky appearance, the
larger volume offers longer endurance as a compromise. Since
StratoSat operates relatively stationary with respect to the
Earth, small cell switching is avoided, which simplifies the
scheduling tasks.
For spaceborne network, LEO satellites offer extensive cov-
erage and can form large, densely deployed constellations [23].
However, they may suffer from intermittent interruptions due
to their orbital characteristics. MEO and GEO satellites, while8
providing broader coverage, may be vulnerable to weather and
atmospheric influences, affecting their capabilities to provide
continuous service.
2) Spatial Coverage: Spatial coverage is a critical aspect
of the SAGSIN that determines the geographic reach and
accessibility of communication services. The spatial coverage
capabilities of different layers in the SAGSIN are diverse and
complementary.
Terrestrial network excels in providing localized coverage
in urban and densely populated areas. It deploys infrastruc-
ture such as cell towers and BSs to create communication
cells, ensuring reliable connectivity within limited geographic
regions. The typical coverage range of a terrestrial cell is
around hundreds of meters in diameter. However, the coverage
area is inherently limited by the physical reach of terrestrial
infrastructure, making it challenging to extend connectivity to
remote and sparsely populated areas.
Airborne network, particularly UA V-based solutions and
high-altitude platforms, offers a unique advantage in ex-
tending coverage to remote and hard-to-reach regions [24].
Their mobility allows them to traverse vast areas, making
them suitable for temporary deployments in disaster-hit or
emergency scenarios. The typical operating height for UA V-
based network ranges from a few hundred meters to several
kilometers, enabling them to cover areas with a radius of
hundreds of meters during each flight. However, their coverage
area remains limited compared to stratospheric and traditional
satellites.
NS-COM provides extended coverage over larger geo-
graphic regions compared to airborne network. Positioned
in the stratosphere, they can cover extensive areas, making
them suitable for providing connectivity to rural and remote
regions without the need for complex ground infrastructure.
StratoSats can cover areas with a radius of up to 500 km
[19], depending on their positioning and altitude. It’s ability
of providing an enormous coverage area is one of its most
significant advantages compared to terrestrial network and
airborne network, making it an ideal solution for remote and
rural areas [25].
Traditional satellites operate in different orbits, providing
varying coverage ranges. LEO satellites orbit close to the Earth
at altitudes of around 500 to 2,000 km and can form large
constellations to achieve global coverage [23]. They typically
cover areas with a radius of hundreds of kilometers per satellite
pass.C. Channel Characteristics
Table. II presents the comparison of channel characteristics
among different layers in the SAGSIN. Terrestrial and airborne
network primarily operates in Sub-6 Gigahertz (GHz) bands,
benefiting from moderate path loss and low transmission
delay. StratoSats, on the other hand, utilize millimeter wave
(mmWave) frequencies to achieve high data rates, while tra-
ditional satellites use multiple bands. In terrestrial and near-
space network, interference is generally low, ensuring reliable
communication. However, it is essential to consider environ-
mental conditions, such as weather and attenuation, which may
impact airborne and stratospheric layers. Understanding these
characteristics is vital for designing efficient communication
systems that can perform optimally in diverse environments.
•Frequency Band : The frequency bands used in differ-
ent networks vary based on their unique characteristics and
communication requirements. In terrestrial network, various
frequency bands have been utilized across different generations
of cellular technology. The latest 5G network has extended
to higher frequency ranges, such as the sub-6 GHz bands
(e.g., 3.5 GHz) and mmWave bands (e.g., 28 GHz), to unlock
unprecedented data speeds and low latency. Airborne network,
specifically UA Vs, often adopt the sub-6 GHz frequency band
(e.g., 2.4 GHz and 5.8 GHz). These bands offer a good
balance between data rates, transmission range and mobility
support for UA Vs. Additionally, the sub-6 GHz bands are
widely available and globally harmonized, facilitating seam-
less communication during UA V flights. Traditional satellites,
comprising GEO, MEO and LEO satellites, deploy various
frequency bands to optimize their performance. GEO satellites
mainly use the C-band (4 to 8 GHz) and Ku-band (12 to
18 GHz) for broadcasting and data services. MEO satellites
leverage the Ka-band (26.5 to 40 GHz) for broadband internet
services. LEO satellites mainly utilize UHF-band (0.3 to 1
GHz), L-band (1 to 2 GHz) and Ku-band frequencies for
low-power communication with ground terminals. Notably,
SpaceX’s Starlink constellation employs a mix of these fre-
quency bands to offer global internet connectivity.
StratoSats, operating at high altitudes in the stratosphere,
typically utilize the mmWave frequency band. At the 1997
World Radiocommunication Conference (WRC-97), the fre-
quency bands, specifically 47.2-47.5 GHz (downlink) and
47.9-48.2 GHz (uplink), were initially designated for global
use by StratoSats [26]. The mmWave spectrum allows for
high-speed data transmission, extensive bandwidth and precise
beamforming capabilities [27]. However, due to significant9
TABLE II: Channel Characteristics of Different Layers in SAGSIN.
Aspect Terrestrial Network Airborne Network NS-COM Network Spaceborne Network
(LEO, MEO, GEO)
Frequency Band Sub-6 GHz (e.g., 2.4
GHz, 3.5 GHz)mmWave and Sub-6
GHz (e.g., 2.4 GHz,
5.8 GHz)mmWave (e.g., 47.2-
47.5 GHz) and Sub-6
GHz (e.g., 2.7 GHz)Multiple Bands (e.g.,
C-band, Ku-band, Ka-
band)
Path Loss Moderate Low to Moderate Moderate High
Transmission
LatencyVery low Low Low to moderate Moderate to high
Doppler Effect N/A Very High Negligible High for LEO/MEO,
negligible for GEO
Environmental
ConditionN/A Susceptible to weather Quasi-static Affected by
ionospheric
fluctuations
rain fading challenges and the limited maturity of technical
solutions in the higher frequency bands, during the World
Radiocommunication Conference in 2019 (WRC-19), it was
decided to allocate certain frequency bands below 2.7 GHz
for utilization by StratoSats [26]. This adjustment aims to
address the mentioned technical limitations and enhance the
effectiveness of StratoSat communication.
For most air-to-air networks (including spaceborne network,
NS-COM network and airborne network), short-haul commu-
nication can also be accomplished using terahertz (THz) and
Free-Space Optical (FSO) communication [28, 29, 30]. Espe-
cially for communication with vehicles above the stratosphere,
where atmospheric molecule absorption and rain attenuation
can be neglected [31, 32].
•Fading : Since the transmission distance issue will be
further discussed in the transmission latency section, large
scale fading is ignored in the following discussion. Terrestrial
network encounters significant shadow fading in urban settings
due to obstructions like buildings and vegetation, resulting
in signal attenuation. Fluctuations in signal strength occur
as users move within the coverage area. Airborne network
benefits from elevated positions, reducing shadow fading and
enabling direct line-of-sight (LoS) communication. This ad-
vantage enhances signal propagation and coverage, especially
in remote areas. Due to the near-vacuum conditions prevailing
in space where satellites operate, the impact of signal atten-
uation is significantly minimized. Similar to StratoSats, since
the transmission is close to free space propagation, the fading
effect is almost neglectable.
The NS-COM network experiences relatively lower fading
compared to ground-based systems, as the StratoSats are
positioned above atmospheric interference. Their higher eleva-
tion allows for extended communication range and improvedsignal transmission. The absence of scattering bodies within
this environment further reduces signal attenuation, allowing
for minimal interference or degradation in signal quality.
Additionally, the flexible positioning of the StratoSat enables
it to avoid unfavorable weather conditions, thereby enhancing
the quality of connections.
•Transmission Latency : Transmission latency, a crucial
factor in communication systems, varies significantly among
satellite network. Terrestrial and airborne networks generally
exhibit lower latency due to their shorter distance to users.
However, traditional satellite network, including LEO, MEO
and GEO satellites, encounters varying levels of latency. LEO
satellites, positioned closer to the Earth’s surface, offer low-
latency communication, typically ranging from 1.3 millisec-
onds (ms) to 6.7 ms, while GEO satellites, positioned much
farther away, exhibit higher latency, with typical one-way
latency for up to almost 1200 ms.
In comparison, StratoSat’s shorter distance to the ground
results in lower latency and path loss, with a signal delay
of only 0.06 ms, making it more advantageous in operations
such as beamforming and random access that require multiple
uplink and downlink communications.
•Doppler Effect :
Doppler shift effects in terrestrial network can range from
a few Hz to a few hundred Hz, depending on the speed of
mobile users or vehicles. For example, with highway speeds
of 120 km/h, the Doppler shift can be in the range of tens
of Hz. Typical velocities of UA Vs during surveillance and
reconnaissance missions range from 30 to 100 km/h, resulting
in Doppler shifts in the range of a few hundred Hz to a few
kHz. LEO satellites, with velocities of up to 28,000 km/h
and extremely high frequency band, encounter Doppler shifts
in the range of a few kHz to tens of kHz, depending on10
their relative motion. MEO satellites experience lower doppler
shifts, typically in the range of a few hundred Hz to a few kHz.
Since GEO satellites is quasi stationary to the Earth, it causes
minimal doppler effect.
StratoSats, being relatively stationary in the stratosphere at
altitudes of around 20 km, experience minimal doppler shift or
drift effects. Although in scenarios where users exhibit high
mobility, the StratoSat platform performs at a much higher
altitude than the moving platforms of users, therefore, it can
be approximated that the StratoSat operates directly above the
user. The relative speed between the user and the platform
primarily occurs in the vertical direction of the line connecting
the user and the platform, resulting in almost zero relative
speed in the direction of the line, thereby causing minimal
Doppler effect.
•Environmental Conditions : Terrestrial network is vul-
nerable to various weather conditions, including rain, snow
and fog. Precipitation, especially heavy rain, can cause signal
attenuation and increase path loss, leading to reduced coverage
and signal quality. Fog and other atmospheric conditions can
also scatter and absorb radio waves, affecting signal strength
and causing signal fluctuations. Additionally, extreme weather
events such as storms or hurricanes can cause damage to in-
frastructures, leading to service disruptions. Airborne network
operates in the troposphere, where they may encounter atmo-
spheric turbulence and changes in temperature and pressure.
These conditions can cause signal fading and fluctuations,
especially in non-LoS scenarios. UA Vs operating at lower al-
titudes may be more affected by weather conditions compared
to StratoSats at higher altitudes in the stratosphere.Traditional
satellites, especially those in LEO, MEO and GEO orbits, can
be significantly affected by atmosphere. Ionospheric fluctua-
tions in the atmosphere can introduce signal scintillation and
interference, impacting the reliability of traditional satellite
systems. These factors underscore the advantages of StratoSats
in providing stable and efficient communication services,
especially in challenging environmental conditions.
StratoSats operate above most weather systems in the
troposphere. As a result, they experience relatively stable
and favorable weather conditions, with minimal impact on
signal propagation. Additionally, StratoSat is highly resistant
to interference due to the extremely high spatial sparsity in
near-space, making it suitable for use in areas with a high
level of electromagnetic interference, such as urban areas. The
atmospheric channel for NS-COM in the stratospheric layer
exhibits lower attenuation, making it a suitable candidate forcommunication in higher frequencies, up to the THz band,
which can provide up to tens of GHz ultra-broadband and
terabit per second ultra-high peak data rates [33]. Additionally,
the weak wind speed in the stratosphere results in low power
consumption to maintain stability and beam accuracy for
StratoSats.
D. Unique Problems of NS-COM Network
NS-COM possesses distinct characteristics that render exist-
ing technologies used in spaceborne, airborne, and terrestrial
networks unsuitable for near-space environments. The unique
properties of NS-COM can be manifested in terms of channel
conditions and beam reliability of the platforms.
Although multipath effects almost barely exist in near-space,
the atmospheric environment undergoes complex variations
with altitude. The near-space environment of NS-COM net-
works exhibits environmental peculiarities compared to other
networks, including high radiation, low temperature, low mois-
ture and low atmospheric pressure, resulting in a propagation
environment markedly different from those at other altitudes.
The composition of the atmosphere above the Earth’s surface,
ranging from 20 km to 100 km, varies significantly with alti-
tude, leading to large-scale changes in air pressure and temper-
ature. Specifically, as illustrated in Fig. 3, the near-space region
encompasses the majority of the stratosphere, the mesosphere,
and part of the thermosphere, where the air composition,
temperature, and atmospheric pressure differ substantially. The
near-space atmosphere displays varying constituents across
different layers [14, 34]. The temperature is generally lower in
near-space but approaches zero at the top of the stratosphere
due to ozone’s radiation absorption. Temperature and density
variations also result in non-uniform atmospheric pressure,
posing challenges to conventional channel models for airborne
and satellite networks. Refraction effects, exacerbated by the
non-homogeneity of the transmission medium and aerosol
scattering, particularly affect ultra long distance near-space-
ground data links by causing non-negligible deviations of the
beam directions [14]. Moreover, while atmospheric pressure
is extremely low in most near-space regions, variations in
atmospheric pressure near the bottom of the stratosphere are
significant and cannot be ignored for channel modeling of
StratoSat-aircraft links. The density of water vapor in near-
space also induces additional frequency selectivity to the
propagation channel and propagation loss. All these factors
that increase the complexity of the channel render traditional
channel modeling impractical as a result.11
Fig. 3: The layers of Earth’s atmosphere, where the near-space region is specified, with a white line showing the atmospheric
temperature and a red line showing the pressure at various heights [14, 34].
Terrestrial or aerial network typically operates within a
range of only a few hundred meters, lacking the significant
variations in atmospheric conditions seen in near-space. Inter-
satellite network experiences minimal attenuation, leading to
simpler channel conditions. Microwave frequencies, especially
the L-band, are commonly utilized for satellite-ground com-
munication [35], yet supporting high-rate services is unreal-
istic due to bandwidth limitations. The heavily congestion of
the microwave frequency band also makes it challenging to
allocate new frequency bands.
StratoSats can use large-scale phased antenna arrays at
mmWave or higher frequencies for highly directional data
transmission. This approach meets payload budget constraints
because of the compact size of mmWave-band antenna el-
ements. However, narrow beamwidth requires precise beam
alignment, leading to severe fading due to antenna mis-
alignment from the slight rotations or wobbles of StratoSatsin windy conditions. Especially in the scenario using ultra-
massive (UM)-MIMO antenna to communicate in THz band,
the channels present the unique triple delay-beam-Doppler
squint effects, which needs specialized channel estimation
technologies for effective compensation. The technique will be
further introduced in Section 3. The reliability of beamforming
deteriorates due to two main reasons. Firstly, the long distance
of the link combined with the extremely narrow beamwidth
results in significant degradation of communication quality
due to even minor deviations in angle parameters during
positioning. Secondly, both balloons and airships operate in
quasi-static conditions with small propulsion systems, making
their positions and orientations subject to random disturbances
from the environment. Even slight rotations of the antenna
array mounted on the transceiver can lead to sub-optimal
beam pointing. Such complex scenarios are not encountered in
airborne or spaceborne networks, rendering existing solutions12
ineffective. To cope with this issue, SoftBank Corporation
have devised a footprint fixation technology. This technology
involves adjusting the cylindrical phased-array antennas of
the balloon to mitigate the effects of potential motion and
rotation of StratoSats, thereby ensuring the stability of Internet
coverage.
III. K EYTECHNOLOGIES OF NS-COM NETWORK
Having explored the disparity among different layers and
NS-COM network’s noteworthy advantages, our focus turns to
underscore the significance of investigating the key technology
of NS-COM network. This segment provides a detailed exam-
ination of its pioneering efforts in channel modeling, random
access, channel estimation, array-based beam management and
joint network optimization. Understanding these key techno-
logical aspects is crucial for unlocking the full potential of
StratoSat and advancing the capabilities of its communication
system.
A. Channel Modeling
Channel modeling is a crucial aspect of communication
system design as it involves creating mathematical represen-
tations of the transmission medium to predict signal behavior.
In the context of NS-COM network, the challenge lies in the
unique and dynamic nature of the near-space channel. Unlike
traditional terrestrial channels, the near-space environment
introduces factors such as variable atmospheric conditions,
high altitudes and platform mobility. These factors make
accurate channel modeling in NS-COM network particularly
challenging. The need to account for the intricate interplay
of atmospheric effects, platform movements and other envi-
ronmental variables complicates the development of precise
models.
To further boost signal transmission distance and quality,
the idea of introducing multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO)
has been put on the agenda [36]. MIMO technology deploys
multiple antenna elements at both the transmitter and receiver,
significantly enhancing the performance of wireless commu-
nication systems in complex multipath environments without
increasing transmission power or bandwidth [37]. Enabling
MIMO technology in NS-COM network is a promising solu-
tion for improving spectral efficiency. Therefore, investigating
the three-dimensional (3D) StratoSat-MIMO channel model
has become an indispensable aspect in NS-COM communi-
cation research. In [38], a cooperative MIMO channel model
was introduced and the spatial correlation in multiple scenarioswas examined. However, these models were designed for two-
dimensional (2D) channel models, neglecting the elevation
angle. To address multi-user scenarios more comprehensively,
the authors of [39] introduced a 3D StratoSat-MIMO channel
model. It considered the non-stationary properties of multi-
user MIMO channels, accounting for the appearance and dis-
appearance of scatterers. The significance of including moving
scatterers in propagation models was demonstrated in [40]. In
[41], a birth and death process models the appearance and
disappearance of scatterers but fell short in modeling their
reappearance behavior. The authors of [42] utilized an M-step
Markov process to portray the dynamic evolution of scatterers,
however it only considered stationary scatterers. In [43], both
the mobility and the evolution of scatterers were considered
by incorporating an M-step 2-state Markov process into the
proposed channel model.
B. Random Access
The mMTC refers to the ability of a communication system
to handle a large number of user devices simultaneously
accessing the network [44, 45]. This concept is particularly
relevant in the context of the Internet of Things (IoT) and the
upcoming 6G communication networks, where a vast number
of devices, such as sensors, smart devices and machines,
require connectivity [46]. The application of random access
techniques is crucial to efficiently manage the simultaneous
access of multiple users competing for limited resources,
especially in the NS-COM network assisted SAGSIN [47].
The necessity arises from the challenges posed by a massive
number of users attempting to access the network concurrently
[45, 48].
Grant-free sourced random access involves devices trans-
mitting non-orthogonal pilot sequences alongside payload data
to the BS for active device detection (ADD) and channel
estimation before coherent data detection [49]. It involves the
transmission of data without authorization [50]. Sparse device
activity in URLLC inspired compressed sensing-based joint
ADD and channel estimation design, with solutions addressing
single-antenna limitations but requiring adaptation for multi-
antenna systems [51, 52, 53]. The authors of [51] introduced
a coherent detection framework utilizing non-orthogonal pi-
lots, aiding in ADD and channel estimation. In [52], the
authors emphasized the sporadic nature of uplink traffic, where
only a limited number of devices activate simultaneously. By
proposing dimension reduction techniques for joint ADD and13
channel estimation, the authors of [53] focused on reducing
computational complexity.
Grant-free unsourced random access relies on a common
codebook-based non-coherent detection framework. In contrast
to sourced random access, in this scenario, the BS is focused
solely on estimating a series of transmitted messages without
concern for the identities of the transmitters. In [54], a com-
mon codebook-based non-coherent detection framework was
introduced. It emphasizes the estimation of transmitted mes-
sages without identifying specific transmitters. The authors of
[55] introduced a low-complexity coding scheme that divides
the transmission period into sub-blocks, allowing each device
to randomly choose a sub-block for transmission, thereby
reducing complexity. These approaches struggle with issues
related to codebook size, computational complexity and pay-
load efficiency in addressing stringent latency and reliability
requirements of massive URLLC. Integrating these random ac-
cess paradigms within a unified detection framework remains
a challenge, necessitating a shared random access procedure
and transceiver hardware design to optimize performance
without additional hardware complexity or cost. The authors
of [56] designed a unified semi-blind detection framework
for grant-free sourced and unsourced random access to better
enable next-generation URLLC. In [57], a StratoSat identified
as a grant-based user sought to access a satellite network
concurrently with multiple earth stations termed as grant-free
users, using NOMA-assisted semi-grant-free protocol. Two
uplink transmission schemes for both perfect channel state
information (CSI) and imperfect CSI cases were proposed to
achieve higher sum rate.
C. Channel Estimation
Channel estimation is a crucial process in communication
networks that involves predicting the characteristics of the
transmission medium [58]. The unique dynamics of the near-
space environment, including variable atmospheric conditions
and platform mobility, necessitate accurate channel estimation
for the subsequent signal transmission.
Ensuring the QoS necessitates the acquisition of reliable CSI
at the transceiver [59]. However, although StratoSat operates
in a position close to stationary relative to the Earth, which
makes the CSI less capricious than satellites, this task is
still particularly challenging due to the inherent wobbling of
aerial BSs. The high-speed mobility of aerial signal receivers
such as flying aircraft/UA Vs also adds to the difficulty when
experiencing rapid changes in their positions and orientations.Consequently, aerial communication links exhibit rapidly time-
varying fading characteristics, posing considerable difficulties
in achieving accurate channel estimation and tracking.
Several channel estimation and tracking schemes in [60, 61]
have been proposed to obtain accurate estimates of fast time-
varying channels while reducing the training overhead caused
by frequent channel estimation. The authors of [60] introduced
an efficient channel estimation and tracking scheme aimed at
resolving the performance degradation issue arising from the
distinctive triple delay-beam-Doppler squint effects observed
in aeronautical THz channels. A blind channel estimation
and equalization method to address the distortion induced by
multipath and fading in an aeronautical telemetry channel was
proposed in [61]. Utilizing the property that the variations of
angles of arrival/departure (AoAs/AoDs) are much slower than
that of path gains, the authors of [61] used staged estimation
on the aforementioned dominant channel parameters to reduce
time overhead and provide fast channel tracking.
D. Array-Based Beam Management
In the NS-COM network, array-based beam management
plays a vital role, particularly with the use of high frequencies
like millimeter-wave for ground-to-air and THz for air-to-
air links. These high frequencies offer increased data rates
but face signal attenuation issues. To tackle this, antennas
generate beams with heightened gain. Precise control of these
beams is crucial for effective aerial communication. StratoSat’s
susceptibility to orientation variations due to motion and
airflow in the troposphere and stratosphere is another fac-
tor. Beam management must ensure continuous alignment
to counter these changes. Regular monitoring and real-time
adjustments of the narrow beams are necessary to maintain
precise alignment, compensating for platform movements [62].
This capability ensures reliable communication links, vital for
NS-COM network stability in near-space environments.
While StratoSats tend to remain relatively stationary con-
cerning the Earth, users may still move, especially in scenar-
ios involving communication between airships and satellites.
However, during aerial propagation, there is an elongated
delay, leading to channel aging issues [63]. As a result, beam
tracking becomes essential to address these challenges. By
employing sophisticated array antenna systems, these plat-
forms can effectively steer and shape these narrow beams to
precisely target and serve the designated areas, optimizing
the communication link quality and ensuring reliable data
transmission [64].14
When considering antenna arrays on StratoSats, several
factors come into play. One of the primary challenges is the
limited size and weight constraints of the StatoSats, which
make it difficult to implement large and sophisticated antenna
arrays. As a result, fully-digital arrays with a large number
of elements may not be feasible due to the added weight,
power consumption and hardware cost. These factors could
significantly impact the flight duration and overall mission
capabilities [65]. On the contrary, hybrid analog-digital arrays
have been proposed and deployed on aerial vehicles [66, 67].
These arrays combine analog beamforming techniques with
digital signal processing, enabling them to achieve beamform-
ing capabilities while minimizing the number of RF chains
required [68]. This approach not only reduces power con-
sumption and hardware cost but also mitigates the difficulties
associated with fully-digital arrays.
E. Joint Network Optimization
The introduction of introducing NS-COM network into
SAGSIN presents challenges in fostering collaboration among
heterogeneous networks and within the NS-COM network
itself, particularly concerning joint beamforming and edge
computing.
Collaborative beamforming across diverse network layers
enhances optimization flexibility, thereby elevating network
throughput. Rolling out additional StratoSats within speci-
fied hotspot zones involves multiple network nodes utilizing
identical frequency bands simultaneously. To enhance network
data rates, a proposed solution in [69] introduced an iterative
approach integrating precoding and band allocation algorithms
tailored for multi-antenna StratoSats. These methods aim to
optimize data rates and employ various band allocation and
beamforming techniques. The objective of the study presented
in [70] centered on optimizing network-wide throughput. This
optimization considers constraints related to StratoSat payload
connectivity, power limitations of StratoSat and BSs, and back-
haul limitations. The study aimed to jointly determine user-
association strategies and associated beamforming vectors for
each user. To accomplish this, an iterative modular approach
was employed to solve a mixed-integer optimization prob-
lem. The authors in [71] emphasized using energy-harvesting
relays aiding data transmission from a multi-antenna HAP
to a distant receiver within a cellular system. It aimed to
maximize throughput under interference constraints at cel-
lular user equipments. The investigation carried out by the
authors in [72] centered on minimize interference originatingfrom adjacent StratoSats in a multiple user equipment (UE)
scenario. Each UE’s beamforming vector was determined by
maximizing its signal to pilot contamination ratio, then by
using solely local statistical channel details, the optimization of
signal to pilot contamination ratio is completely independent
across UEs.
Additionally, a globally supported edge computing approach
can effectively assist in joint decision-making for beam de-
ployment, resource allocation and interference mitigation [49].
Micro edge servers can be introduced owing to some recent
research that leveraged UA Vs as aerial platforms carrying edge
servers to provide various services and support ground BSs
or directly connect devices. For instance, in [80, 81], the
authors established an air-ground integrated edge computing
network where UA Vs can be flexibly deployed and scheduled
to enhance communication, caching and computing in wide-
area networks. The StratoSat enabled overloaded terrestrial
BSs to offload some computing tasks to the edge servers
carried by StratoSats. This offloading alleviates the load on
terrestrial BSs, allowing devices that cannot access them to
establish direct connectivity with NS-COM network [73].
IV. T YPICAL APPLICATION SCENARIOS
Due to StratoSat’s quasi-stationary positions relative to
the Earth and its proximity compared to satellites, these
airships offer unique opportunities and hold great promise
for revolutionizing both communication, sensing and many
other domains, making them a promising platform for various
endeavors. The forthcoming sections will delve deeper into
the specific applications and technical considerations related
to the utilization of StratoSat in various communication and
sensing scenarios, further elucidating their potential impact on
modern space technology.
A. Structural Expansion in SAGSIN Communication
StratoSats hold tremendous promise in shaping the future
network architecture due to their expansive coverage range,
stable channel conditions and quasi-stationary properties, as
such can play important roles in wireless access, backhaul link,
backbone transmission, stable interface for satellites, which are
exhibited in Fig. 4.
StratoSats play a crucial role in providing diverse commu-
nication services to users in disaster and underserved areas
(Fig. 4 (a)). Stratospheric access points extend the reach of
existing terrestrial network, bridging coverage gaps and en-
hancing connectivity. Aerial and sea users, including aircraft,15
Disater Areas Ocean AreasGateway Core Network
Airplane
UAVStratoSat Station
Gateway Core NetworkStratoSat
Remote Areas
Service Link
Terrestrial Base 
StationUAV Station
Hotspot Areas
Backhaul Link
LEO Satellite
StratoSat Gateway
Reduced handover
Core Network
Core Network
 Core NetworkStratoSat Routers(a) StratoSats  providing direct communication links. (b) StratoSats serv ing as backhaul links .
(c) StratoSats serving  as backbone links . (d) StratoSats  serving as a relay for LEO  satellites.
Fig. 4: A schematic diagram of different roles StratoSats play in the network architectures.
ships and UA Vs, benefit from seamless communication while
moving across different regions or over open waters, thanks to
StratoSats acting as floating BSs. A notable example of this ca-
pability is Project Loon by Google’s parent company Alphabet,
where stratospheric balloons equipped with communication
payloads provided internet access to remote and disaster-
affected regions [74]. The project showcased the potential
of StratoSats in narrowing the digital divide and connecting
underserved communities.
StratoSats can also serve as valuable backhaul links in the
network architecture (Fig. 4 (b)). Positioned as communica-
tion nodes above the Earth’s surface, they enable direct and
efficient communication between terrestrial BSs and the core
network. In remote regions, where laying fiber-optic cables
or other wired infrastructure can be challenging or expensive,
StratoSats offer a feasible and flexible solution for extending
backhaul connectivity. In this capacity, StratoSats complement
existing terrestrial backhaul infrastructure, particularly in ar-eas with geographical barriers, sparse population, or difficult
terrain. Also, for hotspot areas, StratoSats can efficiently
handle a large number of user connections simultaneously,
easing congestion in densely populated areas and crowded
events. A noteworthy real-world example of this application
is Project Taara, a subsidiary of Alphabet, which utilized laser
technology to establish high-speed, wireless optical communi-
cation links between terrestrial BSs in remote locations [75].
This project successfully demonstrated the feasibility of using
StratoSats to create backhaul connections, bypassing the need
for physical cables and reducing the cost and complexity of
network deployment in challenging environments.
StratoSats offer a unique advantage as backbone links in
network architecture (Fig. 4 (c)). They can act as reliable relay
nodes, establishing connections among core network hubs and
data centers, ensuring seamless data transfer and communi-
cation services even in challenging geographical locations or
areas with limited terrestrial network coverage. One significant16
advantage of utilizing StratoSats as backbone links is their
potential to support advanced transmission technologies like
mmWave and THz communications, as well as FSO [76,
77]. These high-frequency bands and optical communication
methods can enable extremely high data rates, allowing for
ultra-fast and high-capacity data transfer over long distances,
thereby enhancing the overall network performance.
Another crucial role that StratoSats can play in future
networks is serving as a relay for LEO satellites (Fig. 4 (d)).
As LEO satellites move at high speeds in their orbits, they
can cause frequent disconnections and handover issues when
communicating with ground-based terrestrial gateways [78,
79]. StratoSats’ high-altitude placement allows them to have
a broader field of view, enabling a single StratoSat to simulta-
neously handle communications with multiple LEO satellites
within its footprint. As a result, the handover problem can be
effectively managed. Moreover, the stratospheric environment
exhibits relatively stable atmospheric conditions, resulting
in reduced signal attenuation and interference compared to
ground-based systems, which further enhances the reliability
and efficiency of communication with LEO satellites.
B. Civil Aviation Communication
Currently, passengers onboard aircraft lack internet con-
nectivity, and even if available, it requires satellite access,
which can be facilitated via a StratoSat connecting to the
terrestrial core network. While terrestrial flight routes can
utilize ground-based stations, maritime routes rely solely on
satellite communication. StratoSats can extend communication
services to aircraft over maritime routes and polar routes. In
addition to catering to passenger needs, StratoSats can also
benefit other stakeholders in the aviation industry, such as
airlines, aircraft manufacturers, and air traffic control authori-
ties. By facilitating seamless communication between aircraft
and ground-based operations, StratoSats can improve flight
coordination, enhance safety measures, and optimize airspace
utilization. However, these scheduling signals require frequent
communication and have a wide communication range. There-
fore, new technologies need to be applied to StratoSat to
meet the higher quality and spectral efficiency communication
requirements.
THz communications enable the deployment of Ultra-
Massive MIMO (UM-MIMO) transceivers with tens of thou-
sands of antennas. This facilitates effective mitigation of the
substantial path loss experienced by THz signals, thereby
extending the communication range even further. The THz fre-quency band, ranging from 0.1 THz to 10 THz, is anticipated
to offer substantially wider bandwidths compared to mmWave,
enabling support for ultra-broadband in the range of tens of
GHz and ultra-high peak data rates in the Terabit per second
range. The intrinsic suitability for near-space environments
characterized by low path loss makes it a promising candidate
for 5G cellular networks, wireless local area networks, and
wireless personal area networks [60], thereby underscoring the
significance of exploring THz communication channels.
Although THz communication brings great advantages, it
also poses high demands on technology [15]. When the direc-
tion of arrival deviates from perpendicular to the array, varying
propagation delays are observed across different antennas
receiving the same signal within the array aperture. This delay
discrepancy can extend to multiple symbol periods, especially
in the context of ultra-broadband THz communications. Tra-
ditional analog beamforming employs phase shifters designed
according to the center frequency of the bandwidth, resulting
in severe beam squint effects in THz UM-MIMO systems
with ultra-broad bandwidth. To compensate the effect, the
authors of [60] introduced an angle estimation for a complex
THz band StratoSat-to-aircraft link. Through the integration
of a true-time delay unit (TTDU) module prior to the ana-
log beamformer, a frequency-dependent phase-shifter network
was developed to achieve optimal beam alignment across
the complete communication spectrum. This configuration
effectively alleviated the delay squint effect and realized a
frequency-dependent phase-shifter network to ensure desirable
beam. Fig. 5 compares the root mean square error (RMSE)
performance of the aforementioned angle estimation with the
following benchmarks. The labels “beam sweeping method” is
the algorithm presented in [80]. The labels “no TTDU module”
and “ideal TTDU module” indicate the transceiver adopting
ideal TTDU module and without considering TTDU mod-
ule, respectively. The label “conventional scheme” indicates
directly applying the conventional two-dimensional unitary
estimation of signal parameters via rotational invariance tech-
niques (TDU-ESPRIT) algorithm to estimate angles as those
used in existing mmWave systems [81]. From the simulation
result, it can be seen that the RMSE curves of “proposed
algorithm” and “conventional scheme” using “ideal TTDU
module” almost overlap, and they are very close to the Cramer-
Rao lower bounds (CRLBs) of azimuth and elevation angles
at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).17
Fig. 5: RMSE comparison of angle estimation: (a) azimuth angle; and (b) elevation angle in [60].
C. Remote and Urgent Communication
StratoSat has a vast range of applications in the field of
communication, including service for users with obstructed
ground signals, emergency service and high-speed rail com-
munication.
•Service for Users with Obstructed Ground Signals :
While terrestrial data transmission is more fragile to shadow-
ing [14], StratoSats are essential to provide extra reliable LoS
links, while the terrestrial data transmission is more fragile to
shadowing, StratoSats are essential to serve ground BS edge
users due to interference, handover problems, and low signal
power at the cellular edge, rural area or other area that lacks
LoS link to the BS [82, 83]. The challenges of deploying
ground BSs in such areas, along with terrain limitations,
make StratoSats a cost-effective and versatile solution, offering
improved coverage and communication quality without infras-
tructure constraints.
•Emergency Service : The deployment of StratoSat in
disaster-prone regions, such as those affected by tsunamis, hur-
ricanes and earthquakes, can be achieved with relative ease and
cost-effectiveness. This deployment empowers these areas with
reliable and accessible Internet connectivity. Disaster-stricken
regions require prompt completion of rescue operations and
post-disaster reconstruction [21]. Therefore, there is a high
demand for timely deployment of communication solutions.
The exceptional maneuverability of StratoSat enables them
to traverse vast distances while seamlessly transitioning be-
tween dynamic movement and strategic hovering over specific
locations. This unique capability makes StratoSats highly
versatile and effective in fulfilling various communication and
observation tasks.•High-Speed Rail Communication : In recent years, as
railways have undergone rapid growth, there has been a
growing desire among passengers to have seamless wireless
Internet access through wireless local area network technology
[84]. However, if the conventional cellular mobile system is
employed, the signal would need to frequently switch between
different cellular networks as the train moves along the railway
[85, 86]. Since StratoSats serve a much larger area than the
terrestrial network, frequent cell switching can be avoided.
D. Weather Monitoring
Near-space has unique physical characteristics, such as high
radiation, extremely low temperature and low pressure. In
recent years, the role of near-space environment detection
has become increasingly prominent, especially in the field
of climate change monitoring [87]. Conducting in-situ real-
time observations of near-space is essential for studying,
monitoring and forecasting the Earth’s atmosphere, as well
as for studying and predicting meteorological disasters [88].
StratoSat’s maneuverable control and strong payload capacity
make it well-suited for carrying equipments such as radars
and radio sondes. The distributed deployment of radio sondes
can bring higher resolution and precision to the measurement
results.
For example, typhoon is one of the most severe natural
disasters in the world, occurring over 80 times annually and
often causing devastating destruction to coastal cities [89].
Additionally, establishing a typhoon model can help people
understand the wind and current fields over the ocean, aiding
in navigation planning for ships. However, the internal circu-
lation structure of a typhoon is complex, with strong winds18
and turbulence, researchers have limited knowledge of the
structural evolution mechanism of the typhoon’s core region.
Moreover, typhoons are mainly caused by the exchange of
energy between water vapor on the sea surface, making it
difficult for shore-based detection stations to obtain data on
sea conditions [87]. For the above reasons, typhoon detection
carried out by high-pressure balloons carrying floating mete-
orological sensing nodes in conjunction with StratoSats has
become a valuable resource for studying typhoon structure
evolution and predicting typhoon trajectories. The workflow
of an actual measurement is meticulously designed as follows
and also illustrated in Fig. 6. SrtaotSats, guided by typhoon
tracking flight controllers, persistently follow the typhoon’s
path. Utilizing onboard radars for beam scanning, they closely
monitoring the typhoon’s three-dimensional wind field and
structural nuances. Then, strategic deployment of floating
meteorological sensing nodes, either directly or via precision
deployment devices, allows for detailed data collection near
the typhoon eye. The collected data, comprising temperature,
humidity, wind, and pressure readings, is transmitted back to
the airships and then relayed to a ground data center, where
a four-dimensional, high-resolution digital typhoon simulation
system integrates and simulates the data, enhancing the ac-
curacy of typhoon forecasting and contributing to a deeper
understanding of these complex natural phenomena [90]. This
integrated approach allows for more comprehensive and accu-
rate data collection, contributing to a better understanding of
typhoons and improving forecasting capabilities.
E. Carbon Neutrality
Near-space environment detection can also address the
critical issue of gas content monitoring. Greenhouse gases,
of which carbon emissions are a key component, are a major
contributor to global warming. Therefore, it is necessary to
accurately monitor and analyze carbon emissions to effectively
control the rate of global temperature rise [91]. In-situ moni-
toring is considered the most reliable and accurate method for
this purpose, as it enables direct measurements of emissions
at the source [92].
One promising approach to achieve high spatiotemporal
resolution carbon emission maps is through the deployment
of floating sensing node balloons at lower altitude compared
to StraotSats, as shown in Fig. 7. Equipped with advanced
sensors that can detect various types of greenhouse gases,
including carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide, these
balloons can capture emissions from various sources such asindustrial facilities, transportation and natural phenomena like
wildfires. The balloons use atmospheric circulation and wind
field prediction techniques for flight trajectory maintenance
and control, maintaining the ability to provide 3D spatially
layered measurements, enabling a more comprehensive un-
derstanding of carbon emissions. By combining data from
multiple balloons at different altitudes and performing data
inversion, researchers can create a detailed map of the distribu-
tion and concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere,
which can help identify and regulate the sources of emissions.
This technology not only facilitates monitoring of carbon
exhaustion from industrial facilities, but also enables high-
precision detection of forest fires, thereby contributing to forest
fire prevention.
Compared to previous 2D carbon emission maps, the use
of balloon detection nodes has the advantage of detecting
emissions and leaks in key areas such as petroleum and fac-
tories. The balloons can fly over these areas and collect data,
which can help authorities and industry regulators monitor
compliance and identify potential violations. In conclusion,
near-space environment detection has the potential to revolu-
tionize our understanding and management of greenhouse gas
emissions. The deployment of floating sensing node balloons
and balloon detection nodes can provide a more accurate and
comprehensive picture of carbon emissions, which can inform
policy decisions and guide actions to mitigate climate change.
V. O PEN ISSUES AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
Despite its potential, the research of applying other com-
munication technologies in NS-COM is still in its infancy,
many key research issues are still open. In this section,
we investigate several candidate communication techniques
for NS-COM, followed by a discussion about the potential
research opportunities therein. The application scenarios of
some of these technologies are illustrated in Fig. 8.
A. StratoSat-to-Ground Direct Links for Mobile Terminals
While satellite communications often encounter cell switch-
ing issues and beam alignment [93, 94, 95], StratoSats remain
relatively stationary with respect to the ground, eliminating
the need to consider cell switching or rapid channel varia-
tions, also resulting in minimal time and frequency offsets
between the transceiver parties. A StratoSat-to-ground direct
link is demonstrated in Fig. 8. It uses mobile devices such as
smartphones, which presents challenges in terms of hardware
limitations, antenna gain, access protocols and data frame19
Fig. 6: The process of StratoSat tracking and detecting typhoons.
structures. The hardware limitations of mobile phone antennas
result in a lower frequency band for direct communication with
StratoSats, which can easily cause interference with existing
ground-based mobile communication networks. Additionally,
limited antenna gain and a restricted number of RF chains in
mobile devices constrain communication performance, indicat-
ing that the hardware capabilities need further improvement.
Researchers are exploring innovative antenna designs and
hardware improvements to enhance mobile phone capabilities
for NS-COM. They are also developing efficient access pro-
tocols and handover procedures to optimize communication
between mobile devices and satellites. Despite the complex-
ities, the potential benefits of reliable connectivity in remote
areas drive ongoing research and development in this field. As
advancements continue, StratoSat-to-ground direct link holds
promise for revolutionizing global communication systems.
B. Emerging Antenna Design: Reconfigurable MIMO and
Holographic MIMO
Reconfigurable MIMO acts as transmission terminal to in-
crease the degree of freedom of beam pattern [96, 97, 98, 99].
A novel concept of utilizing reconfigurable MIMO has been
introduced to unlock the untapped potential of the electromag-
netic realm, aiming to amplify the efficiency of information
transmission [96]. Reconfigurable MIMO can be introduced
as terrestrial BS antennas to communicate with StratoSats
[100]. Additionally, reconfigurable MIMO has demonstrated
its ability to actively manage the transmission environment[101, 102]. Since this technique has just been introduced in
NS-COM, the pattern reconfiguration that aims to actively
manage the transmission environment for NS-COM still needs
to be modified and trained. The optimization objective can aim
at redistribute power in signal directions, enhancing interfer-
ence suppression and reinforcing energy efficiency. Estimating
the full CSI at once is not feasible for reconfigurable MIMO
due to the long communication distance of StratoSat, which
results in longer signal transmission times. The prolonged
channel estimation training process may lead to outdated
CSI, potentially affecting the accuracy of data detection and
the efficiency of precoding. On the other hand, exploiting
reconfigurable capabilities could introduce randomness into
the channel, which might be advantageous for implementing
covert communication strategies on StratoSat, such as channel
randomization or radiation pattern hopping.
A holographic MIMO involves incorporating a vast quantity
of small and cost-effective antennas or reconfigurable elements
into a confined area, achieving a holographic array with a con-
tinuously spatial aperture [77]. However, the physical channels
associated with holographic MIMO cannot be represented in
terms of the finite-dimensional matrices. The further channel
estimation and beamforming technology, requires abundant
double integral calculation due to the continuity of the antenna
surface, leading to extremely high computing performance re-
quirements. Thus, it is imperative to investigate methodologies
for integrating high-performance computing devices within the
constrained payload capacity of StratoSats.20
StratoSat platform
Carbon Emission Detector
Ground Computing 
CenterCO 2 Floating Sensing NodesData Transmission
CO 2 Atmosphere Maps 
Inverse Analysis 
Fig. 7: A schematic diagram of StratoSat based atmosphere CO 2detection system.
C. Federated Learning in NS-COM Networks
In the SAGSIN, utilizing federated learning in StratoSat
as distributed edge servers offers significant merits. Unlike
traditional centralized approaches, federated learning allows
StratoSat to directly learn a model for specific tasks, such as
trajectory control, resource scheduling, visual recognition and
beamforming, without the need to collect data from all partic-
ipating nodes. StratoSat can collaboratively update the model
parameters without sharing raw data, ensuring that sensitive
information is not compromised. Given that StratoSats might
serve various regions or user communities, there’s a critical
need for efficient resource distribution and scheduling tech-
niques to oversee federated learning operations. This includes
optimizing the allocation of computational, communicative,
and storage capacities to satisfy diverse regional or user
requirements. But since the energy supply for StratoSat may be
limited, it might be difficult to meet the high-energy demands
of federated learning. On the other hand, due to StratSat’smobility, nodes may be temporarily added or removed, re-
quiring adaptability and scalability to cope with changing
environments and demands. Flexible and scalable federated
learning algorithms and frameworks also need to be designed
to meet the needs of different scenarios and applications.
Moreover, federated learning requires the exchange of a large
amount of model parameters and gradient updates between
participants, leading to significant communication overhead.
Therefore, it is necessary to develop a gradient transmission
policy with higher energy efficiency and lower latency.
D. Maritime Communication
StratoSat’s versatility extends to providing communication
services in maritime environments. Acting as a communica-
tion relay, StratoSats establish seamless links between ships,
submarines, onshore facilities and aircrafts, especially in areas
lacking terrestrial BS service, exhibited in Fig. 8. This enables
reliable and efficient communication for maritime operations21
Fig. 8: Schematic diagram of StratoSat’s potential application scenarios with future technologies.
and safety, addressing challenges posed by vast distances and
natural barriers in sea regions. StratoSat’s deployment offers a
transformative solution, ensuring continuous and effective con-
nectivity for ships and onshore facilities, enhancing maritime
communication and coordination.
However, the maritime communication through NS-COM
also encounters several challenges. Firstly, the overlapping
coverage of different nodes and ships in the ocean results
in strong spatial correlations, leading to significant inter-user
interference. Secondly, the multitude of nodes in these areas
generates a high demand for multi-modal data transmission,
while the available bandwidth resources may not be sufficient
to meet these requirements. Thirdly, the practical constraints of
StratoSats on payload, size and hardware power consumption
limit the downlink transmission rates for maritime users.
Moreover, hardware limitations in maritime terminal sensors
also restrict the capacity of air-sea communication links.
E. Electromagnetic Spectrum Sensing and Adversarial Game
Electromagnetic spectrum sensing and adversarial game
ensure the efficient utilization of radio spectrum resources,
protect communication networks from malicious interferenceand attacks, and support military operations by jamming
enemy communications while securing one’s own networks.
Additionally, they play a crucial role in monitoring and iden-
tifying radio spectrum activities for intelligence gathering and
surveillance. Fig. 8 is a simplified illustration of electromag-
netic spectrum sensing and adversarial game. In spite of the
advantages, these applications face technical challenges. The
dynamic changes in the spectrum environment requires real-
time monitoring and adjustments. The applications also require
efficient algorithms and data processing techniques to manage
large spectrum data volumes. Additionally, there is a necessity
to accurately assess the effectiveness of countermeasures.
Another challenge is ensuring electromagnetic compatibility to
prevent interference with legitimate communications. There is
also challenge in addressing energy constraints on near-space
platforms to design energy-efficient systems for extended
operational endurance.
F . Integrated Sensing and Communications
The integrated sensing and communications system on-
board the StratoSat enables real-time data transmission and
processing, facilitating rapid acquisition and transmission of22
various detected environmental data and perception informa-
tion. This capability provides timely monitoring and response
capabilities for ground users or other systems. The integrated
sensing and communications system can consolidate multi-
ple sensors, enhancing StratoSat’s perception capabilities of
the surrounding environment. Furthermore, guided by radar
data, the system can improve the physical layer transmission
algorithms to enhance communication quality [103]. Despite
these advantages, the limited space onboard the StratoSat may
lead to densely packed communication equipment and radar
sensing devices, increasing the risk of electromagnetic inter-
ference. Such interference could potentially compromise the
performance and imaging quality. Therefore, measures must
be implemented to mitigate or suppress electromagnetic in-
terference. Moreover, integrated sensing and communications
system requires addressing compatibility and coordination
issues between different technologies to ensure overall perfor-
mance and efficiency. The complex environment surrounding
the StratoSat makes it challenging to anticipate reasonable
expectations for radar perception accuracy and range. Thus,
exploring how to balance perception indicators of the radar
and communication efficiency is imperative.
G. StratoSat-Based Radar Detection and Imaging
The StratoSat-based radar detection and imaging system
is demonstrated in Fig. 8, which enables remote monitoring
and reconnaissance over a wide coverage area, suitable for
monitoring vast ground regions or ocean surfaces, even under
complex terrain conditions. Unlike optical imaging, radar
detection and imaging is not affected by weather conditions
such as cloud cover or rain, thus providing stable and reli-
able monitoring services even in adverse weather conditions.
However, due to the continuous operation required for radar
to detect unexpected objects, the limited energy supply on
StratoSat might be unable to sustain long-term radar sensing
and imaging tasks. Therefore, energy-efficient radar systems
need to be designed, and the energy management of the
StratoSat must be optimized to extend mission duration. Ad-
ditionally, the suppression of interference and environmental
noise is critical to maintaining the integrity of imaging quality
and accuracy, affecting the system’s ability to identify and
locate targets. The ionospheric radiation above the StratoSat
may also distort radar signals.
H. NS-COM Assisted Enhanced Global Navigation System
NS-COM assisted enhanced global navigation system can
provide high-precision positioning, including indoor and com-plex environment positioning, along with extending the cov-
erage range of navigation system and ensuring reliable posi-
tioning services even in signal-obstructed areas like densely
populated urban zones or mountainous regions. Furthermore,
NS-COM facilitates real-time data transmission, enhancing the
navigation experience by enabling features such as live map
updates and real-time traffic information. On the other hand,
the implementation of NS-COM assisted enhanced global
navigation system also presents several challenges. There is a
need for effective integration of navigation and communication
systems, ensuring stability and reliability. NS-COM relies on
significant spectrum resources, particularly for communication
and positioning services in high-frequency bands, necessitating
solutions to address spectrum scarcity issues.
I. NS-COM Assisted Intelligent Unmanned System
The NS-COM technology, as shown in FSO communication
is demonstrated in Fig. 8, enables efficient collaborative oper-
ations between intelligent unmanned system, especially UA V
swarms and unmanned underwater vehicle (UUV) swarms,
extending beyond the boundaries of individual swarms. Specif-
ically, NS-COM network can enable the coordination of au-
tonomous swarms of unmanned systems, allowing them to
operate in a synchronized manner. This could be particularly
beneficial for tasks such as large-scale mapping, search and
rescue operations, and environmental monitoring, where mul-
tiple unmanned systems can work together to achieve common
goals more efficiently than a single unit. Additionally, NS-
COM technology enables multi-sensor data fusion, enhanc-
ing the system’s environmental perception capabilities and
improving its adaptability and robustness. Establishing stable
and reliable communication links among UA V swarms, UUV
swarms, and StratoSat is essential for data transmission and
collaborative operations. However, adverse weather conditions,
such as cloud cover, can affect the stability of communication
links. Therefore, contingency plans for controlling communi-
cation link disruptions and strategies for link restoration after
disruptions need to be devised. To enhance the autonomous
capabilities of unmanned systems, it is worth investigating to
use the vast amounts of data collected by NS-COM network
for machine learning model training. By analyzing patterns and
learning from diverse scenarios, these systems can improve
their decision-making processes, adapt to new environments,
and perform complex tasks with minimal human intervention.23
J. FSO Communication
Given the substantial data exchanges between space, air-
borne and terrestrial network, the demand for high-speed
connectivity escalates, making FSO communication a pivotal
player in meeting these elevated data rate requisites. FSO
communication is demonstrated in Fig. 8. Because of its highly
focused beamwidth, FSO communication offers reduced or
minimal interference, making it a promising solution of en-
hancing the QoS and spectral efficiency. The study in [104]
explored the framework of combined FSO-RF transmission
within a network integrating satellites and UA Vs to address the
growing demands of Internet of Remote Things devices, then
maximized the ergodic sum rate while adhering to constraints
on total transmit power and QoS requirements for each Internet
of Remote Things device. FSO finds considerable utility in
StratoSats, particularly in relaying scenarios, capitalizing on
its strengths. Although the direct LoS transmission inherent in
FSO signals can effectively prevent eavesdropping in contrast
to RF signals, FSO technology also grapples with sensitivity to
atmospheric obstacles like clouds and fog. Although these hin-
drances become trivial in StratoSat-satellite links, as StratoSats
reside well above the cloud cover, the challenge yet persists
when establishing optical communication between StratoSats
and the ground due to the perpetual cloud impediment. To
maintain high data rate, photodiodes at the receiver that act
as photodetectors need to be small. However, the laser beam
widens in space, restricting the beam’s travel range since
the photodiode can only detect a smaller signal fraction over
longer distances [105]. The temperature and pressure of the
atmosphere can also cause different effects on the performance
of the FSO system, which is still unpredictable. The perfor-
mance of FSO communications is inevitably degraded due to
limited transmit power affected by sky radiance and back-
ground shot noise, necessitating advanced transceiver design
to improve system error performance. Moreover, present op-
toelectronic techniques predominantly depend on large front-
end equipment, which remains inadequate for StratoSat ap-
plications due to restricted communication payload capacity.
Hence, there is a need for a compact chip-based design for
the FSO transceiver.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This article provided a thorough investigation of NS-COM
that plays an indispensable role in SAGSIN. By analyzing
the deployment, coverage, channel features across various
network layers and the unique problems of NS-COM network,we showcased significance of NS-COM in enhancing the
connectivity, coverage and transmission performance of the
classical SAGSIN architecture. The examination of technical
aspects, along with the exploration of applications and poten-
tial research directions, further reinforces the pivotal position
of StratoSats in SAGSIN. We believe that the integration
of NS-COM into SAGSIN will eventually revolutionize the
communication paradigm on a global scale, paving the way
for a future with ubiquitous broadband Internet access.
REFERENCES
[1] “Framework and overall objectives of the future de-
velopment of IMT for 2020 and beyond”. In: ITU-R
M.2083 (2015).
[2] Ruiqi Liu et al. “Beginning of the journey toward
6G: Vision and framework”. In: IEEE Communications
Magazine 61.10 (2023), pp. 8–9. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
MCOM.2023.10298069.
[3] Zhen Gao et al. “Compressive sensing techniques for
next-generation wireless communications”. In: IEEE
Wireless Communications 25.3 (2018), pp. 144–153.
DOI: 10.1109/MWC.2017.1700147.
[4] Ruiqi Liu et al. “6G enabled advanced transportation
systems”. In: arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2305.15184 (May
2023), arXiv:2305.15184. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.
15184. arXiv: 2305.15184 [cs.IT] .
[5] Xiaojing Huang et al. “Airplane-aided integrated net-
working for 6G wireless: Will it work?” In: IEEE Ve-
hicular Technology Magazine 14.3 (2019), pp. 84–91.
DOI: 10.1109/MVT.2019.2921244.
[6] Jiajia Liu et al. “Space-air-ground integrated network:
A survey”. In: IEEE Communications Surveys & Tu-
torials 20.4 (2018), pp. 2714–2741. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
COMST.2018.2841996.
[7] Bo Chang et al. “Integrated scheduling of sensing,
communication, and control for mmWave/THz com-
munications in cellular connected UA V networks”. In:
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications
40.7 (2022), pp. 2103–2113. DOI: 10.1109/JSAC.2022.
3157366.
[8] Shicong Liu et al. “LEO satellite constellations for 5G
and beyond: How will they reshape vertical domains?”
In:IEEE Communications Magazine 59.7 (2021),
pp. 30–36. DOI: 10.1109/MCOM.001.2001081.24
[9] Ziye Jia et al. “Joint HAP access and LEO satellite
backhaul in 6G: Matching game-based approaches”.
In:IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communica-
tions 39.4 (2021), pp. 1147–1159. DOI: 10.1109/JSAC.
2020.3018824.
[10] Gunes Karabulut Kurt and Halim Yanikomeroglu.
“Communication, computing, caching, and sensing for
next-generation aerial delivery networks: Using a high-
altitude platform station as an enabling technology”.
In:IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine 16.3 (2021),
pp. 108–117. DOI: 10.1109/MVT.2021.3086081.
[11] Sathyanarayanan Chandrasekharan et al. “Designing
and implementing future aerial communication net-
works”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine 54.5
(2016), pp. 26–34. DOI: 10 . 1109 / MCOM . 2016 .
7470932.
[12] KONG Huaicong et al. “Ergodic sum rate for uplink
NOMA transmission in satellite-aerial-ground inte-
grated networks”. In: Chinese Journal of Aeronautics
35.9 (2022), pp. 58–70.
[13] Lang Ruan et al. “Energy-efficient multi-UA V cover-
age deployment in UA V networks: A game-theoretic
framework”. In: China Communications 15.10 (2018),
pp. 194–209. DOI: 10.1109/CC.2018.8485481.
[14] Zhenyu Xiao et al. “Near space communications:
A new regime in space-air-ground integrated net-
works”. In: IEEE Wireless Communications 29.6
(2022), pp. 38–45. DOI: 10.1109/MWC.001.2200142.
[15] Tianqi Mao et al. “Terahertz-band near-space commu-
nications: From a physical-layer perspective”. In: IEEE
Communications Magazine (2022), pp. 1–7. DOI: 10.
1109/MCOM.004.2200429.
[16] A. Pankine et al. “Stratospheric satellites for Earth
science applications”. In: IEEE International Geo-
science and Remote Sensing Symposium . V ol. 1. 2002,
362–364 vol.1. DOI: 10.1109/IGARSS.2002.1025040.
[17] Sebastian Euler et al. “High-altitude platform sta-
tions as international mobile telecommunications base
stations: A primer on HIBS”. In: IEEE Vehicular
Technology Magazine 17.4 (2022), pp. 92–100. DOI:
10.1109/MVT.2022.3202004.
[18] X. “Loon: Expanding internet connectivity with strato-
spheric balloons”. In: https://x.company/projects/ loon/
().[19] Thales. “Whats up with strato-
bus?” In: www.thalesgroup.com/
en/worldwide/space/news/whats-stratobus ().
[20] Peter Lobner. “Chinas Yuanmeng (dream)
stratospheric airship”. In: lynceans.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/04/China-Yuanmeng
stratospheric-airship-converted.pdf ().
[21] Shihan Tan et al. “UA V control in smart city based
on space-air-ground integrated network”. In: 2021
International Conference on Internet, Education and
Information Technology (IEIT) . 2021, pp. 324–328.
DOI: 10.1109/IEIT53597.2021.00077.
[22] Zero2infinity. “Elevate project”. In:
www.zero2infinity.space/ elevate/ (2023).
[23] Shanzhi Chen, Shaohui Sun, and Shaoli Kang. “Sys-
tem integration of terrestrial mobile communication
and satellite communication the trends, challenges
and key technologies in B5G and 6G”. In: China
Communications 17.12 (2020), pp. 156–171. DOI: 10.
23919/JCC.2020.12.011.
[24] Xianpeng Wang et al. “Multi-UA V cooperative local-
ization for marine targets based on weighted subspace
fitting in SAGIN environment”. In: IEEE Internet of
Things Journal 9.8 (2022), pp. 5708–5718. DOI: 10.
1109/JIOT.2021.3066504.
[25] Daniela Renga and Michela Meo. “Can high altitude
platform stations make 6G sustainable?” In: IEEE
Communications Magazine 60.9 (2022), pp. 75–80.
DOI: 10.1109/MCOM.002.2101048.
[26] Xianbin Cao, Peng Yang, and Xiaoning Su. “Survey on
near-space information networks: Channel modeling,
networking, and transmission perspectives”. In: ().
DOI: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.09025.
[27] Sourjya Dutta, Frank Hsieh, and Frederick W. V ook.
“HAPS based communication using mmWave bands”.
In:ICC 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC) . 2019, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.
1109/ICC.2019.8761640.
[28] Ian F. Akyildiz, Josep Miquel Jornet, and Chong Han.
“TeraNets: Ultra-broadband communication networks
in the terahertz band”. In: IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions 21.4 (2014), pp. 130–135. DOI: 10.1109/MWC.
2014.6882305.
[29] Chong Han, A. Ozan Bicen, and Ian F. Aky-
ildiz. “Multi-wideband waveform design for distance-
adaptive wireless communications in the terahertz25
band”. In: IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing
64.4 (2016), pp. 910–922. DOI: 10.1109/TSP.2015.
2498133.
[30] Chong Han and Ian F. Akyildiz. “Distance-aware
bandwidth-adaptive resource allocation for wireless
systems in the terahertz band”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Terahertz Science and Technology 6.4 (2016),
pp. 541–553. DOI: 10.1109/TTHZ.2016.2569460.
[31] Xiaoyu He and Xiaojian Xu. “Physics-based predic-
tion of atmospheric transfer characteristics at terahertz
frequencies”. In: IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation 67.4 (2019), pp. 2136–2141. DOI: 10 .
1109/TAP.2019.2902423.
[32] Hadeel Elayan et al. “Terahertz band: The last piece of
RF spectrum puzzle for communication systems”. In:
IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society
1 (2020), pp. 1–32. DOI: 10 . 1109 / OJCOMS . 2019 .
2953633.
[33] Ian F. Akyildiz, Chong Han, and Shuai Nie. “Combat-
ing the distance problem in the millimeter wave and
terahertz frequency bands”. In: IEEE Communications
Magazine 56.6 (2018), pp. 102–108. DOI: 10.1109/
MCOM.2018.1700928.
[34] “Layers of Earth’s atmosphere”. In:
https://www.britannica.com/science/atmosphere/Troposphere
(2023).
[35] Athanasios D. Panagopoulos, Pantelis-Daniel M. Ara-
poglou, and Panayotis G. Cottis. “Satellite communi-
cations at KU, KA, and V bands: Propagation impair-
ments and mitigation techniques”. In: IEEE Commu-
nications Surveys & Tutorials 6.3 (2004), pp. 2–14.
DOI: 10.1109/COMST.2004.5342290.
[36] Yang Wang et al. “Transformer-empowered 6G intel-
ligent networks: From massive MIMO processing to
semantic communication”. In: IEEE Wireless Commu-
nications ().
[37] Zhen Gao et al. “Data-driven deep learning based
hybrid beamforming for aerial massive MIMO-OFDM
systems with implicit CSI”. In: IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications 40.10 (2022),
pp. 2894–2913. DOI: 10.1109/JSAC.2022.3196064.
[38] Xiang Cheng et al. “Cooperative MIMO channel mod-
eling and multi-link spatial correlation properties”. In:
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications
30.2 (2012), pp. 388–396. DOI: 10.1109/JSAC.2012.
120218.[39] Emmanouel T. Michailidis and Athanasios G. Kanatas.
“Three-dimensional HAP-MIMO channels: Modeling
and analysis of space-time correlation”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology 59.5 (2010),
pp. 2232–2242. DOI: 10.1109/TVT.2010.2042629.
[40] Alenka G. Zaji. “Impact of moving scatterers on
vehicle-to-vehicle narrow-band channel characteris-
tics”. In: IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology
63.7 (2014), pp. 3094–3106. DOI: 10.1109/TVT.2014.
2299239.
[41] T. Zwick et al. “A stochastic spatial channel model
based on wave-propagation modeling”. In: IEEE Jour-
nal on Selected Areas in Communications 18.1 (2000),
pp. 6–15. DOI: 10.1109/49.821698.
[42] Zhuxian Lian, Lingge Jiang, and Chen He. “A 3-
D wideband model based on dynamic evolution of
scatterers for HAP-MIMO channel”. In: IEEE Com-
munications Letters 21.3 (2017), pp. 684–687. DOI:
10.1109/LCOMM.2016.2637908.
[43] Jingge Hu et al. “A 3-D HAP-MIMO channel model
based on dynamic properties of scatterers”. In: 2017
9th International Conference on Wireless Communica-
tions and Signal Processing (WCSP) . 2017, pp. 1–5.
DOI: 10.1109/WCSP.2017.8171024.
[44] Yikun Mei et al. “Compressive sensing-based joint
activity and data detection for grant-free massive IoT
access”. In: IEEE Transactions on Wireless Commu-
nications 21.3 (2022), pp. 1851–1869. DOI: 10.1109/
TWC.2021.3107576.
[45] Li Qiao et al. “Joint activity and blind information
detection for UA V-assisted massive IoT access”. In:
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications
40.5 (2022), pp. 1489–1508. DOI: 10.1109/JSAC.2022.
3143255.
[46] Zhen Gao et al. “Compressive sensing-based grant-
free massive access for 6G massive communication”.
In:IEEE Internet of Things Journal (2023), pp. 1–1.
DOI: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3334878.
[47] Keke Ying et al. “Quasi-synchronous random access
for massive MIMO-based LEO satellite constella-
tions”. In: IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Commu-
nications 41.6 (2023), pp. 1702–1722. DOI: 10.1109/
JSAC.2023.3273699.
[48] Li Qiao et al. “Massive access in media modula-
tion based massive machine-type communications”.
In:IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications26
21.1 (2022), pp. 339–356. DOI: 10.1109/TWC.2021.
3095484.
[49] Malong Ke et al. “Massive access in cell-free massive
MIMO-based Internet of Things: Cloud computing
and edge computing paradigms”. In: IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications 39.3 (2021),
pp. 756–772. DOI: 10.1109/JSAC.2020.3018807.
[50] Malong Ke et al. “Compressive sensing-based adaptive
active user detection and channel estimation: Massive
access meets massive MIMO”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing 68 (2020), pp. 764–779. DOI:
10.1109/TSP.2020.2967175.
[51] Xiaodan Shao et al. “A unified design of massive ac-
cess for cellular Internet of Things”. In: IEEE Internet
of Things Journal 6.2 (2019), pp. 3934–3947. DOI:
10.1109/JIOT.2019.2893376.
[52] Xiaodan Shao et al. “Cooperative activity detec-
tion: Sourced and unsourced massive random access
paradigms”. In: IEEE Transactions on Signal Process-
ing68 (2020), pp. 6578–6593. DOI: 10 . 1109 / TSP.
2020.3039342.
[53] Byonghyo Shim and Byungkwen Song. “Multiuser
detection via compressive sensing”. In: IEEE Com-
munications Letters 16.7 (2012), pp. 972–974. DOI:
10.1109/LCOMM.2012.050112.111980.
[54] Yury Polyanskiy. “A perspective on massive random-
access”. In: 2017 IEEE International Symposium on
Information Theory (ISIT) . 2017, pp. 2523–2527. DOI:
10.1109/ISIT.2017.8006984.
[55] Or Ordentlich and Yury Polyanskiy. “Low complexity
schemes for the random access Gaussian channel”. In:
2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information
Theory (ISIT) . 2017, pp. 2528–2532. DOI: 10.1109/
ISIT.2017.8006985.
[56] Malong Ke et al. “Next-generation URLLC with mas-
sive devices: A unified semi-blind detection framework
for sourced and unsourced random access”. In: IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 41.7
(2023), pp. 2223–2244. DOI: 10 . 1109 / JSAC . 2023 .
3280981.
[57] Huaicong Kong et al. “Uplink Multiple Access With
Semi-Grant-Free Transmission in Integrated Satellite-
Aerial-Terrestrial Networks”. In: IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications 41.6 (2023),
pp. 1723–1736. DOI: 10.1109/JSAC.2023.3273707.[58] Xisuo Ma et al. “Model-driven deep learning based
channel estimation and feedback for millimeter-wave
massive hybrid MIMO systems”. In: IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications 39.8 (2021),
pp. 2388–2406. DOI: 10.1109/JSAC.2021.3087269.
[59] Dennis Ogbe et al. “Efficient channel estimation for
aerial wireless communications”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems 55.6
(2019), pp. 2774–2785. DOI: 10 . 1109 / TAES . 2019 .
2894892.
[60] Anwen Liao et al. “Terahertz ultra-massive MIMO-
based aeronautical communications in space-air-
ground integrated networks”. In: IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications 39.6 (2021),
pp. 1741–1767. DOI: 10.1109/JSAC.2021.3071834.
[61] Madhusmita Mohanty et al. “Cumulant based blind
channel estimation and equalization in aeronautical
telemetry channel”. In: 2019 International Conference
on Range Technology (ICORT) . 2019, pp. 1–4. DOI:
10.1109/ICORT46471.2019.9069646.
[62] Jehyun Heo et al. “MIMO satellite communication
systems: A survey from the PHY layer perspective”.
In:IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 25.3
(2023), pp. 1543–1570. DOI: 10.1109/COMST.2023.
3294873.
[63] Michael Schneider et al. “The multiple spot beam
antenna project Medusa”. In: 2009 3rd European Con-
ference on Antennas and Propagation . 2009, pp. 726–
729.
[64] Baptiste Palacin et al. “Multibeam antennas for very
high throughput satellites in Europe: Technologies and
trends”. In: 2017 11th European Conference on Anten-
nas and Propagation (EUCAP) . 2017, pp. 2413–2417.
DOI: 10.23919/EuCAP.2017.7928493.
[65] Zhenyu Xiao et al. “A Survey on millimeter-wave
beamforming enabled UA V communications and net-
working”. In: IEEE Communications Surveys & Tuto-
rials 24.1 (2022), pp. 557–610. DOI: 10.1109/COMST.
2021.3124512.
[66] Weizheng Zhang, Wei Zhang, and Jun Wu. “UA V
beam alignment for highly mobile millimeter wave
communications”. In: IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology 69.8 (2020), pp. 8577–8585. DOI: 10.1109/
TVT.2020.2997740.
[67] Jingjing Zhao et al. “Multiple-antenna aided aeronauti-
cal communications in air-ground integrated networks:27
Channel estimation, reliable transmission, and multiple
access”. In: IEEE Wireless Communications (2023),
pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/MWC.014.2200414.
[68] Zhen Gao et al. “Hybrid knowledge-data driven chan-
nel semantic acquisition and beamforming for cell-free
massive MIMO”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Signal Processing 17.5 (2023), pp. 964–979. DOI:
10.1109/JSTSP.2023.3299175.
[69] Dong-Hyoun Na et al. “Beamforming and band alloca-
tion for satellite and high-altitude platforms cognitive
systems”. In: IEEE Wireless Communications Letters
11.11 (2022), pp. 2330–2334. DOI: 10 . 1109 / LWC .
2022.3202641.
[70] Shasha Liu, Hayssam Dahrouj, and Mohamed-Slim
Alouini. “Joint user association and beamforming in
integrated satellite-HAPS-ground networks”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology (2023), pp. 1–
17. DOI: 10.1109/TVT.2023.3329168.
[71] Yuze Zou et al. “Joint optimization of wireless
power transfer and collaborative beamforming for re-
lay communications”. In: 2018 IEEE Globecom Work-
shops (GC Wkshps) . 2018, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
GLOCOMW.2018.8644171.
[72] Qi Xi et al. “User equipment beamforming for mas-
sive MIMO based stratospheric communications”. In:
GLOBECOM 2017 - 2017 IEEE Global Communi-
cations Conference . 2017, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
GLOCOM.2017.8255106.
[73] Malong Ke et al. “An edge computing paradigm for
massive IoT connectivity over high-altitude platform
networks”. In: IEEE Wireless Communications 28.5
(2021), pp. 102–109. DOI: 10 . 1109 / MWC . 221 .
2100092.
[74] Lavina Nagpal and Krishna Samdani. “Project Loon:
Innovating the connectivity worldwide”. In: 2017 2nd
IEEE International Conference on Recent Trends in
Electronics, Information & Communication Technol-
ogy (RTEICT) . 2017, pp. 1778–1784. DOI: 10.1109/
RTEICT.2017.8256905.
[75] Taara - X, The Moonshot Factory . https://x.company/
projects/taara/.
[76] Mohamed Alzenad et al. “FSO-based vertical back-
haul/fronthaul framework for 5G+ wireless networks”.
In:IEEE Communications Magazine 56.1 (2018),
pp. 218–224. DOI: 10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600735.[77] Ziwei Wan et al. “Terahertz massive MIMO with
holographic reconfigurable intelligent surfaces”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Communications 69.7 (2021),
pp. 4732–4750. DOI: 10 . 1109 / TCOMM . 2021 .
3064949.
[78] Zhen Gao et al. “Grant-free NOMA-OTFS paradigm:
Enabling efficient ubiquitous access for LEO satellite
internet-of-things”. In: IEEE Network 37.1 (2023),
pp. 18–26. DOI: 10.1109/MNET.003.2200445.
[79] Xingyu Zhou et al. “Active terminal identification,
channel estimation, and signal detection for grant-free
NOMA-OTFS in LEO satellite Internet-of-Things”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications 22.4
(2023), pp. 2847–2866. DOI: 10 . 1109 / TWC . 2022 .
3214862.
[80] “Wireless LAN medium access control (MAC) and
physical layer (PHY) specifications. amendment 3:
Enhancements for very high throughput in the 60 GHz
band”. In: IEEE Standard 802.11ad, 2012 (2022).
[81] Anwen Liao et al. “Closed-loop sparse channel esti-
mation for wideband millimeter-wave full-dimensional
MIMO systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Commu-
nications 67.12 (2019), pp. 8329–8345. DOI: 10.1109/
TCOMM.2019.2942911.
[82] Md Sahabul Alam et al. “High altitude platform sta-
tion based super macro base station constellations”.
In:IEEE Communications Magazine 59.1 (2021),
pp. 103–109. DOI: 10.1109/MCOM.001.2000542.
[83] Yohei Shibata et al. “A study on cell configuration for
HAPS mobile communications”. In: 2019 IEEE 89th
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2019-Spring) .
2019, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10 . 1109 / VTCSpring . 2019 .
8746491.
[84] Daniel T. Fokum and Victor S. Frost. “A survey
on methods for broadband internet access on trains”.
In:IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 12.2
(2010), pp. 171–185. DOI: 10 . 1109 / SURV. 2010 .
021110.00060.
[85] Mingchuan Yang et al. “Statistical modeling of the
high altitude platform dual-polarized MIMO propaga-
tion channel”. In: China Communications 14.3 (2017),
pp. 43–54. DOI: 10.1109/CC.2017.7897321.
[86] E. Falletti et al. “Integrated services from high-altitude
platforms: a flexible communication system”. In: IEEE
Communications Magazine 44.2 (2006), pp. 85–94.
DOI: 10.1109/MCOM.2006.1593555.28
[87] Louis Barbier and Beiyu Lin. “Poster: Unsupervised
learning for extreme space weather detection based on
spectrograms”. In: 2022 IEEE/ACM 7th Symposium on
Edge Computing (SEC) . 2022, pp. 320–321. DOI: 10.
1109/SEC54971.2022.00046.
[88] Dimov Stojce Ilcev and Sihle Sicelo Sibiya. “Weather
observation via stratospheric platform stations”. In:
2015 IST-Africa Conference . 2015, pp. 1–12. DOI: 10.
1109/ISTAFRICA.2015.7190585.
[89] Guo-Qing Jiang, Jing Xu, and Jun Wei. “A deep
learning algorithm of neural network for the parame-
terization of typhoon-ocean feedback in typhoon fore-
cast models”. In: Geophysical Research Letters 45.8
(2018), pp. 3706–3716.
[90] Dapeng Li et al. “In-situ detection system and experi-
ment of atmospheric parameters based on airborne air-
craft”. In: Measurement & Control Technology 41.18-
22+43 (2022). ISSN : 1000-8829. DOI: 10.19708/j.ckjs.
2021.12.303.
[91] Fang Wang et al. “Technologies and perspectives for
achieving carbon neutrality”. In: The Innovation 2.4
(2021).
[92] Xianhua Wu, Zhiqing Tian, and Ji Guo. “A review
of the theoretical research and practical progress of
carbon neutrality”. In: Sustainable Operations and
Computers 3 (2022), pp. 54–66.
[93] Yaohua Sun and Peng Mugen. “Low earth orbit
satellite communication supporting direct connection
with mobile phones: Key technologies, recent progress
and future directions”. In: IEEE Vehicular Technology
Magazine 14.3 (2019), pp. 84–91. DOI: 10.1109/MVT.
2019.2921244.
[94] Zhuoao Xu et al. “Enhancement of satellite-to-phone
link budget: An approach using distributed beamform-
ing”. In: IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine (2023).
[95] Zhuoao Xu et al. “Enhancement of satellite-to-
phone link budget by using distributed beamform-
ing”. In: arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2308.04818 (2023),
arXiv:2308.04818. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2308.04818.
arXiv: 2308.04818 [cs.IT] .
[96] Keke Ying et al. “Reconfigurable massive MIMO:
Harnessing the power of the electromagnetic domain
for enhanced information transfer”. In: IEEE Wireless
Communications 1.1 (2023), pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/
MWC.014.2200418.[97] Haonan Wang et al. “Achievable rate maximization
pattern design for reconfigurable MIMO antenna ar-
ray”. In: IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communi-
cations (2023), pp. 1–1. DOI: 10.1109/TWC.2023.
3238069.
[98] Mehedi Hasan, srafil Baheci, and Bedri A. Cetiner.
“Downlink multi-user MIMO transmission for ra-
diation pattern reconfigurable antenna systems”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications 17.10
(2018), pp. 6448–6463. DOI: 10 . 1109 / TWC . 2018 .
2859972.
[99] Israfil Bahceci et al. “Efficient channel estimation for
reconfigurable MIMO antennas: Training techniques
and performance analysis”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications 16.1 (2017), pp. 565–580.
DOI: 10.1109/TWC.2016.2626291.
[100] Minghui Wu et al. “Deep learning-based rate-splitting
multiple access for reconfigurable intelligent surface-
aided tera-hertz massive MIMO”. In: IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications 41.5 (2023),
pp. 1431–1451.
[101] Sisai Fang et al. “Intelligent omni surface-assisted self-
interference cancellation for full-duplex MISO sys-
tem”. In: IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communi-
cations (2023), pp. 1–1. DOI: 10.1109/TWC.2023.
3297071.
[102] Yun Wen et al. “STAR-RIS-assisted-full-duplex jam-
ming design for secure wireless communications sys-
tem”. In: arXiv e-prints (2023). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.
2309.04566. eprint: arXiv:2309.04566.
[103] Zhen Gao et al. “Integrated sensing and communi-
cation with mmWave massive MIMO: A compressed
sampling perspective”. In: IEEE Transactions on Wire-
less Communications 22.3 (2023), pp. 1745–1762.
DOI: 10.1109/TWC.2022.3206614.
[104] Huaicong Kong et al. “Beamforming Design and Per-
formance Analysis for Satellite and UA V Integrated
Networks in IoRT Applications”. In: IEEE Internet of
Things Journal 9.16 (2022), pp. 14965–14977. DOI:
10.1109/JIOT.2022.3170429.
[105] Fredrik Ege Abrahamsen et al. “Free-space optical
communication: From space to ground and ocean”. In:
IEEE Potentials 40.6 (2021), pp. 18–23. DOI: 10.1109/
MPOT.2020.2979057.