Upside down Rayleigh-Marchenko: a practical, yet
exact redatuming scheme for seabed seismic
acquisitions
Ning Wang and Matteo Ravasi
Division of Earth Science and Engineering (ErSE), King Abdullah University of
Science and Technology (KAUST), 23955-6900, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia, ning.wang.2,
matteo.ravasi@kaust.edu.sa
(January 12, 2024)
Running head: Upside down Rayleigh-Marchenko redatuming
ABSTRACT
Ocean-bottom seismic plays a crucial role in resource exploration and monitoring.
However, despite its undoubted potential, the use of coarse receiver geometries poses
challenges to accurate wavefield redatuming. This in turn, affects the quality of sub-
sequent imaging and reservoir charactherization products. We propose a reciprocal
version of the Rayleigh-Marchenko method, called upside down Rayleigh-Marchenko,
where all spatial integrals are performed over the (usually much better-sampled)
source carpet; this results in a theoretically exact redatuming scheme, which can
handle irregular and sparse receiver geometries. The proposed method requires avail-
ability of multi-component receivers and either dual-sensor sources or a pre-processing
step of model-based source deghosting, and utilizes only the down-going component
1arXiv:2401.05944v1  [physics.geo-ph]  11 Jan 2024of the receiver-side wavefield; as such, it can be interpreted as a full-wavefield exten-
sion of the mirror imaging method commonly used in seabed settings. Two synthetic
examples are used to showcase the effectiveness of the proposed method, starting from
the ideal scenario of finely and regularly sampled sources and receivers, and later con-
sidering different levels of decimation for the receiver array. Migrated images as well
as common-angle gathers reveal that our method can be used to produce structural
and amplitude-friendly imaging outputs with minimal data pre-processing.
2INTRODUCTION
Ocean-bottom seismic (OBS) represents a cost-effective, high-quality acquisition solu-
tion to image and monitor the subsurface for applications ranging from hydrocarbon
exploration and management, CO 2sequestration and monitoring, geothermal pro-
duction, and de-risking of offshore wind farms. However, due to the expensive nature
of seismic nodes and the associated costs for the deployment and retrieval of such an
equipment along the seabed, OBS surveys are routinely acquired with coarse receiver
coverage (in the crossline direction for ocean-bottom cables, and in both directions
for ocean-bottom nodes). This poses challenges to achieving accurate wavefield reda-
tuming and reliable imaging.
To deal with such shortcomings, Grion et al. (2007) proposed mirror imaging as
a way to increase the illumination of OBS data, especially for shallow targets, by
using down-going ghost reflections as a complement to the more commonly imaged
up-going primary reflections. Since then, the underlying idea interchanging the role
of sources and receivers in imaging has been adopted in other wave-equation-based
imaging algorithms to deal with the presence of sparse receivers, leveraging the usually
available denser grid of sources for wavefield extrapolation. For example, Lu et al.
(2015) developed an imaging algorithm able to handle both primaries and free-surface
multiples that only utilizes the down-going component of the recorded data. Despite
being practically attractive, such an approach relies on single-scattering assumptions
and therefore is prone to the generation of cross-talk imaging artifacts (Lu et al.,
2016).
3Marchenko redatuming (Broggini et al., 2012; Wapenaar et al., 2013; Slob et al.,
2014; Wapenaar et al., 2014; Broggini et al., 2014; van der Neut et al., 2015; Wapenaar
et al., 2017) is a data-driven method that aims to retrieve up- and down-going Green’s
functions between a virtual source (also called focal point) and receivers positioned
at the surface of the Earth. This is achieved by solving the so-called Marchenko
equations. The down-going focusing function can be interpreted as a wavefield,
which once injected at the surface of the Earth produces a focus at the defined focal
point; the up-going focusing function contains instead the waves reflected off inter-
faces from the down-going focusing function and recorded at the surface (Wapenaar
et al., 2014). As the Marchenko method can retreive full-wavefield Green’s functions,
which include accurate internal multiple reflections, resulting imaging products are
deprived of artifacts related to such multiples. Several successful field data appli-
cations of the Marchenko redatuming method have been presented to date (Ravasi
et al., 2015, 2016; Jia et al., 2017; Staring et al., 2018; Staring and Wapenaar, 2020;
Staring et al., 2021), proving its ability to deal with multiples in both simple and
complex geological scenarios. Nevertheless, tailored pre-processing sequences have
been carried out in these studies to accommodate for the strict data requirements of
the Marchenko scheme. To overcome this limitation, Ravasi (2017) introduced the
Rayleigh-Marchenko (RM) method, combining the one-way version of the Rayleigh in-
tegral representation (Wapenaar and Berkhout, 1989) with the Marchenko equations.
By doing so, the RM method accomodates for the presence of an inhomogeneous
boundary condition above the acquisition level (i.e., correctly handling free-surface
multiples), relaxes the requirement for co-location of sources and receivers, and elim-
4inates the need for an accurate estimation and deconvolution of the source signature
from the reflection data. On the other hand, the RM method requires recorded data
to be decomposed in their up- and down-going components on the receiver-side, a
step that is commonly performed when processing multi-component OBS data. De-
spite its great potential, the RM method still requires a dense and finely sampled
receiver array. This clearly represents a limitation when considering novel seabed
seismic acquisition geometries with sparse receiver arrays.
In this paper, we propose the Upside Down Rayleigh-Marchenko (UD-RM) method,
the first practical, yet exact redatuming scheme for ocean-bottom data that can the-
oretically accommodate for sparse receiver grids. This is achieved by invoking reci-
procity to interchange the role of sources and receivers. By doing so, all spatial
integrals in the new set of Marchenko equations are applied along the source side.
Moreover, since receivers are mirrored with respect to the sea surface as in mirror
imaging, the UD-RM method is expected to provide subsurface wavefields and im-
ages with expanded illumination. In terms of data pre-processing, UD-RM requires
the recorded data to be separated into up- and down-going components on both the
source and receiver sides. More specifically, the receiver-side down-going wavefield,
separated into its up- and down-going components on the source-side and deprived
of the direct wave, represents our input data. As such, the proposed methodology re-
quires availability of multi-component receivers and dual-sensor sources (Vasconcelos,
2013). Alternatively, a step of source-side deghosting can be used to accommodate
for the presence of single-sensor sources; this reduces the cost of acquiring data and
5increases the applicability of the proposed method. In our numerical example, a
deghosting method similar to that of Grion et al. (2016) is applied; however, any
other deghosting method can be equivalently used as later explained in the Discus-
sion section. Interestingly, we can interpret the approach of Lu et al. (2015) as the
application of our operator to single-scattering propagators (i.e., initial focusing func-
tions) in the subsurface.
In the following, we briefly recall the theory of Marchenko and RM redatuming
and present the theory of the proposed method. This is followed by a validation
of its numerical effectiveness on two synthetic examples of increasing complexity:
first, we consider a constant-velocity, variable-density model consisting of a simple
layered geology with a high density syncline structure; second, a 2D section of the
EAGE/SEG Overthrust model (Aminzadeh et al., 1997) with an additional water
layer is considered. In both cases, redatuming and imaging is initially performed
with a dense receiver grid; subsequent tests are presented to assess the ability of the
proposed methodology to handle geometries with increased spacing between receivers.
In the latter case, two different optimizers are considered when solving the UD-RM
equations: the same least-squares solver used to estimate the focusing functions in the
case of dense receiver grids, and, similar to Haindl et al. (2021), a sparsity promoting
solver (more precisely, the Fast Iterative Soft Thresholding algorithm - FISTA, Beck
and Teboulle (2009)) with a sliding linear Radon sparsifying transform. Despite its
increased computational cost, the latter approach is shown to produce images and
common-image gathers of comparable quality to those obtained from a dense receiver
6geometry (with up to 60% of missing receivers).
THEORY
Marchenko equations
Let us consider a heterogeneous, lossless medium below a transparent boundary (i.e.,
acquisition level Λ R) and a second boundary at a depth level Λ F(i.e., focal point
or virtual source level) as shown in Figure 1a. Given the surface reflection response
R(xR,x′
R) from sources at x′
Rplaced just above the acquisition level Λ Rto receivers at
xRand the up- and down-going focusing functions ( f−(xR,xF) and f+(xR,xF)), the
up- and down-going Green’s functions from the focal point to receivers ( g−(xF,xR)
andg+(xF,xR)) can be expressed as (Wapenaar et al., 2014; van der Neut et al.,
2015)
g−(xF,xR) =Z
ΛRR(xR,x′
R)f+(x′
R,xF)dx′
R−f−(xR,xF), (1)
−g+∗(xF,xR) =Z
ΛRR∗(xR,x′
R)f−(x′
R,xF)dx′
R−f+(xR,xF), (2)
where superscripts - and + are used to define the up- and down-going components,
while * represents complex conjugation in the frequency domain (or time reversal in
time domain); the reflection response Rcan be expressed as (Wapenaar and Berkhout,
1989)
R(xR,x′
R) =2
jωρ(x′
R)∂z′g0(xR,x′
R), (3)
where j,ω, and ρare the imaginary unit, angular frequency, and density at x′
R,
respectively. Here, g0represents the total pressure wavefield from a monopole source
7Figure 1: Geometries of (a) the original Marchenko method, (b) the RM method, (c)
the UD-RM method.
without free-surface effects and deprived the of direct wave, while ∂z′is the derivative
along the vertical axis at x′
R.
Rayleigh-Marchenko equations
The RM method (Ravasi, 2017) includes heterogeneities and/or a different boundary
condition above the acquisition level Λ R(e.g., free-surface) by coupling the Marchenko
equations with the following one-way version of the Rayleigh integral representa-
tion (Wapenaar and Berkhout, 1989)
−v−
z(x′
R,xS) =Z
ΛRv+
z(xR,xS)R(xR,x′
R)dxR, (4)
where v−
zandv+
zrepresent the up- and down-going vertical particle velocities, re-
spectively, recorded from sources at xSalong Λ Sand separated at xRalong Λ R. The
8RM equations can be obtained by pre-multiplying v+
z(xR,xS) and v+∗
z(xR,xS) to the
original Marchenko equations 1 and 2, respectively, and applying integration along
the receiver array
p−(xF,xS) =−Z
ΛRv−
z(x′
R,xS)f+(x′
R,xF)dx′
R
−Z
ΛRv+
z(xR,xS)f−(xR,xF)dxR, (5)
p+∗(xF,xS) =Z
ΛRv−∗
z(x′
R,xS)f−(x′
R,xF)dx′
R
+Z
ΛRv+∗
z(xR,xS)f+(xR,xF)dxR, (6)
where p−/+is the band-limited up-/down-going pressure wavefield that includes surface-
related multiples
p−/+(xF,xS) =Z
ΛRv+
z(xR,xS)g−/+(xF,xR)dxR. (7)
Equations 5 and 6 reveal that the RM method can include the effects of the free-
surface and allow sources and receivers to be placed at different depth levels (Figure
1b), a condition required to be able to apply such a method to OBS acquisition
geometries. Nevertheless, all spatial integrals are still applied along the Λ Rlevel,
meaning that the RM method requires a dense and finely sampled receiver array.
Upside-down Rayleigh-Marchenko equations
In practical OBS acquisition systems, the requirement of densely sampled receiver
arrays is rarely met. Therefore, we propose here to modify the RM method by
leveraging reciprocity to interchange the role of sources and receivers; this ensures
9that all spatial integrals are now carried out over the source array. To begin with, we
rewrite the Marchenko equations from sources at xSand receivers at x′
Sat the same
depth level
g−(xF,xS) =Z
ΛSR(xS,x′
S)f+(x′
S,xF)dx′
S−f−(xS,xF), (8)
−g+∗(xF,xS) =Z
ΛSR∗(xS,x′
S)f−(x′
S,xF)dx′
S−f+(xS,xF), (9)
where the reflection response Ris defined as in equation 3 with different sources and
receivers.
Let us now consider a receiver at xRand a virtual receiver at x′
Sinside an enclosing
boundary with upper boundary at Λ Sand vanishing lower boundary because of the
Sommerfeld radiation condition. If we identify a first state with the same properties of
the physical medium and free-surface (represented by g) and a second, ideal medium
without free-surface (represented by g0), the following representation theorem holds
true (Almagro Vidal and Wapenaar, 2014)
g.,−(xR,x′
S)−g0(xR,x′
S) =
−Z
ΛS2
jωρ(xS)∂zg.,+(xR,xS)g0(xS,x′
S)dxS, (10)
where the first element of the superscript.,.represents the wavefield component at the
receiver side and the second identifies the component at the source side, ∂zcorresponds
to the vertical derivative at xS. In this work, we follow the convention that wavefields
reaching a source (or a receiver) from above have a plus (+) superscript, whilst those
reaching them from below have a minus (-) superscript. After some manipulation
10(see Appendix A for the full derivation), we obtain
g+,−(xR,x′
S)−gd(xR,x′
S) =
−Z
ΛS2
jωρ(xS)∂zg+,+(xR,xS)g0(xS,x′
S)dxS, (11)
where gd(xR,x′
S) represents the direct wave from a source at x′
Sto a receiver at xR.
In order to be able to combine equation 11 with the Marchenko equations 8 and 9,
we multiply each side bys(ω)
jωρ(x′
S)∂z′:
s(ω)
jωρ(x′
S)∂z′(g+,−(xR,x′
S)−gd(xR,x′
S)) =
Z
ΛS−2
jωρ(xS)∂zg+,+(xR,xS)s(ω)
jωρ(x′
S)∂z′g0(xS,x′
S)
dxS, (12)
where srepresents the source wavelet. From equation 3, we can recognize that the
last term within parenthesis on the right hand side of this equation corresponds to
the reflection response along the source level Λ S. As such, we can write an equation
linking Rto the source-side separated, down-going wavefields at the receiver side and
the direct wave:
∂zp+,−(xR,x′
S)−∂zpd(xR,x′
S) =
−Z
ΛS∂zp+,+(xR,xS)R(xS,x′
S)dxS, (13)
where prepresents the pressure wavefield. Equation 13 effectively represents a source-
side equivalent of the well-known free-surface demultiple method by multi-dimensional
deconvolution (Hampson and Szumski, 2020; Boiero et al., 2023; Haacke and Poole,
2023). Considering the geometry in Figure 1c, which is identical to that in Figure 1b
except for the fact that sources and receivers are interchanged, the physical meaning
of equation 13 can be explained as follows: the down-going multiples are used here as
an aerial source wavefield that, once convolved with the reflection response between
11sources, give rise to the total up-going wavefield from receivers to sources minus the
direct arrival.
Akin to the RM method, after multiplying each side of equation 8 by the mirrored
down-going multiplesR
ΛS∂zp+,+(xR,xS) and each side of equation 9 by its complex
conjugatedR
ΛS∂zp+,+∗(xR,xS), and utilizing equation 13, we obtain a set of equations
whose spatial integrals are now performed only over the source coordinates:
g+,−(xR,xF) =−Z
ΛS∂zep+,−(xR,x′
S)f+(x′
S,xF)dx′
S
−Z
ΛS∂zp+,+(xR,xS)f−(xS,xF)dxS, (14)
−g+,+∗(xR,xF) =−Z
ΛS∂zep+,−∗(xR,x′
S)f−(x′
S,xF)dx′
S
−Z
ΛS∂zp+,+∗(xR,xS)f+(xS,xF)dxS, (15)
where the terms on the left-hand side are equivalent to the up- and down-going
subsurface wavefields including free-surface effects from the focal point to the available
receivers (only down-going component at receivers):
g+,−(xR,xF) =Z
ΛS∂zp+,+(xR,xS)g−(xS,xF)dxS, (16)
g+,+∗(xR,xF) =Z
ΛS∂zp+,+∗(xR,xS)g+∗(xS,xF)dxS, (17)
while ∂zep+,−(xR,x′
S) represents the source-side up-going wavefield deprived of the
direct wave:
∂zep+,−(xR,x′
S) =∂zp+,−(xR,x′
S)−∂zpd(xR,x′
S). (18)
Equations 14 and 15 can be rewritten in a matrix form:

−g+,−
g+,+∗
=
∂zP+,+∂zeP+,−
∂zeP+,−∗∂zP+,+∗

f−
f+
. (19)
12In order to be able to solve equation 19 for the focusing functions, we intro-
duce a windowing operator Θ −xR, which removes all the events after the traveltime
td(−xR,xF) of the first arriving wave from the focal point xFto the mirror receivers
−xR(i.e., a wave that propagates from the focal point to the free-surface and bounces
off towards the receiver) as well as those before the negative traveltime −td(−xR,xF).
Since the Green’s functions contain events only after the traveltime of the first arriving
wave and before the negative traveltime, the up- and down-going subsurface wave-
fields are zeroed by the windowing operator (i.e., Θ −xRg+,−=0and Θ −xRg+,+=0).
The resulting system of equations becomes:

−Θ−xR∂zeP+,−f+
d
−Θ−xR∂zP+,+∗f+
d
=
Θ−xR∂zP+,+Θ−xR∂zeP+,−
Θ−xR∂zeP+,−∗Θ−xR∂zP+,+∗

f−
f+
m
, (20)
where f+=f+
d+f+
m, meaning that the total focusing function f+is decomposed into a
direct arrival wave f+
dand the following coda f+
m. Similar to the RM method, equation
20 can be solved by the least-squares inversion (using, for example, the LSQR solver
– Paige and Saunders (1982)). Subsequently, the Green’s functions can be retrieved
according to equation 19. However, in the presence of sparse receivers, the resulting
focusing functions are affected by illumination artifacts (similar to those observed
in classical seismic migration products). An alternative approach, later used in the
numerical examples, involves re-casting the problem as a sparsity-promoting inversion
with a suitable transform S:
min
zf||d−GSHzf||2
2+λ||zf||1, (21)
where zf= [zT
f−,zT
f+
m]Tcontains the sparse representation of the up-going and the coda
13of the down-going focusing functions, dandGidentify the left-hand side vector and
the right-hand side operator in equation 20, respectively. Finally λis a user-defined
parameter to weight the role of sparsity in the inversion. Several optimization algo-
rithms have been used in the literature to solve problems of such a kind for geophysical
applications. Following Haindl et al. (2021) and Ravasi and Wang (2023), we use the
Fast Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm (FISTA - Beck and Teboulle (2009)
) solver coupled with a sliding linear Radon sparsifying transform.
NUMERICAL EXAMPLES
The proposed method is tested on two different synthetic datasets.
Syncline model
First, dual-source (i.e., monopole and dipole source), multi-component (pressure and
particle velocity) data are modeled in a constant-velocity (2400 m/s), variable-density
model (Figure 2) with free-surface effects included. In this case, we consider regular
and densely sampled source and receiver arrays, which comprise of 201 sources at 20
m depth and 201 receivers at 196 m depth (i.e., along the seafloor). A focal point at
x = 1500 m and z = 1060 m is considered in the redatuming results.
To apply our method, we first remove the direct arrival from all available wave-
fields (i.e., pressure and particle velocity data from monopole and dipole sources).
This wave is directly modelled in a constant-velocity, constant-density model. Next,
14Figure 2: Syncline density model. Red stars identify sources, blue triangles represent
receivers, and a red dot indicates the focal point used in the redatuming results.
the wavefields deprived of the direct arrival wave are separated along both the source
and the receiver side. Wavefield separation is performed here by means of PZ summa-
tion (Wapenaar, 1998). We first separate the wavefields from both the monopole and
dipole sources into their up- and down-going components at the receiver side. The
down-going components are further decomposed along the source side. However, dual
sources are not always available in practice. In such situations, source-side deghosting
can be employed to extract the source-side up- and down-going components of the
data. The single-source data is still separated using PZ summation along the receiver
side, while deghosting is applied to the receiver-side down-going component in order
to accomplish wavefield separation at the source side. However, as deghosting may
introduce some artifacts (Figure 3), this can impact the quality of the subsequent
redatuming and imaging results.
The down-down-going wavefield ∂zp+,+(down-going components at both the re-
15Figure 3: (a) Down-down-going wavefield computed using dual-source data, (b) down-
down-going wavefield computed using single-source data, (c) down-up-going wavefield
computed using dual-source data, (d) down-up-going wavefield computed using single-
source data.
16ceiver side and source side) and down-up-going wavefield ∂zep+,−(down-going compo-
nents at the receiver side and up-going components at source side) calculated by these
two approaches are now used to solve equation 20 using the LSQR solver (Paige and
Saunders, 1982), thereby yielding the up- and down-going focusing functions shown
in Figure 4. To validate the accuracy of the UD-RM method, another dataset is
modeled by placing receivers at the same locations as sources and excluding the in-
fluence of the free-surface. Subsequently, the focusing functions are computed using
the Marchenko method from this new dataset. As shown in the Theory section, the
focusing functions calculated by Marchenko method and UD-RM method must be
identical. From Figure 4, the focusing functions from the UD-RM and Marchenko
methods exhibit a substantial degree of similarity, with only minor discrepancies ob-
served in the results of the UD-RM method using dual-source data. This may be
caused by the different convergence of the LSQR solver. The focusing functions com-
puted by the UD-RM method with single-source data present more artifacts, likely
due to the deghosting process (Figures 4c and 4f). The total estimated Green’s func-
tions (Figures 5b and 5c) are determined by evaluating equation 19 with the retrieved
focusing functions and compared with the true Green’s function (Figure 5a) modeled
via finite-difference. The traces, located in the middle of the receiver array, as de-
picted in Figure 5d, exhibit an almost perfect match, validating the effectiveness of
the proposed method.
Subsequently, Green’s functions are computed in a grid (from x = 700 m to 2300
m and from z = 640 m to 1540 m, as shown in Figure 6a) with a vertical and hor-
17Figure 4: Up-going focusing function calculated by (a) the Marchenko method, (b)
the UD-RM method with dual-source data, (c) the UD-RM method with single-source
data. Down-going focusing function calculated by (d) the Marchenko method, (e) the
UD-RM method with dual-source data, (f) the UD-RM method with single-source
data.
18Figure 5: (a) True Green’s function obtained by finite-difference modeling, (b) Green’s
function retrieved by the UD-RM method with dual-source data, and (c) Green’s func-
tion retrieved by the UD-RM method with single-source data. (d) Trace comparison
between the true (red line), estimated with dual-source data (black line), and esti-
mated with single-source data (blue line) Green’s functions in the middle receiver.
19izontal spacing of 20 m. These Green’s functions are then used to perform imaging
as described in Wapenaar et al. (2017). Single-scattering, source-receiver imaging,
which is equivalent to using Green’s functions obtained from the first iteration of
the UD-RM iterative scheme, is also carried out for comparison. Since the Green’s
function obtained from the single-source data produce worse imaging results, here
we only show the single-scattering image calculated using dual-source data (Figure
6b). Due to the strong surface-related multiples, the subsurface structure cannot
be discerned from the single-scattering image, proving that single-scattering imaging
cannot be applied on unprocessed data. On the contrary, the image computed using
the wavefields from the UD-RM redatuming method with dual-source data (Figure
6c) presents a good match with the true density model. The image produced by
the UD-RM method with single-source data (Figure 6d) is also of good quality, with
most multiple-related artifacts being effectively removed. In order to further investi-
gate the imaging capabilities of our method (without fully to leveraging the stacking
power of migration), we randomly select five horizontal locations (at index 21, 31,
41, 51, and 61) from the redatumed common-virtual source gathers and calculate
their true-amplitude subsurface angle gathers (de Bruin et al., 1990; Ordo˜ nez et al.,
2014). Comparing them with those produced by single scattering imaging for the two
different input datasets (Figures 7a and 7c) reveals that the angle gathers of UD-RM
imaging (Figures 7b and 7d) are cleaner and more clearly show the angle dependent
responses from key reflectors in the model.
We now proceed to evaluate the ability of the UD-RM method to handle sparse
20Figure 6: (a) The target area used for imaging, (b) image computed by single-
scattering imaging with dual-source data, (c) image computed by the UD-RM method
with dual-source data, (d) image computed by the UD-RM method with single-source
data.
21Figure 7: Angle gathers for (a) single-scattering with dual-source data, (b) the UD-
RM method with dual-source data, (c) single-scattering with single-source data, (d)
the UD-RM method with single-source data.
Figure 8: Syncline density model with sparse receiver acquisition. Keys as in Figure
2.
22receiver arrays by randomly selecting 40 percent of the total receivers (Figure 8).
As previously discussed in the Theory section, removing receivers renders equation
20 to be a heavily under-determined inverse problem. Two strategies are assessed
to estimate the focusing functions in such a scenario: first, we solve these equations
with 30 iterations of the LSQR solver (this is the same strategy used in the previous
scenario) leading to the focusing functions in Figure 9b. When comparing these
focusing functions with the ones retrieved from the dense receiver array (Figure 9a),
we can conclude that they exhibit some artifacts, which further impact the quality of
the retrived Green’s function (Figure 10c). Second, in an attempt to further enhance
the quality of the focusing functions, we solve the problem in equation 21. In this case,
the FISTA solver is run for a total of 200 iterations, yielding focusing functions (Figure
9c) that are cleaner and better resemble those obtained from the dense receiver array
(Figure 9a). To ease visual comparison, only the traces at the available receivers are
shown for the resulting Green’s functions (Figure 10). We can conclude that with
the help of a sliding linear Radon transform as a sparse constraint, the obtained
Green’s function (Figure 10d) exhibit a better agreement with the true counterpart;
most of the illumination artifacts are suppressed (see for example the earlier arrivals
around 0.6s), as further substantiated by the comparative analysis of the middle trace
(Figure 10e). However, it is worth pointing out that since sparse inversion algorithms
are generally slower in terms of convergence (i.e., FISTA requires 200 iterations to
converge to a satisfactory solution in this example), this approach is more time-
consuming than its least-squares counterpart.
23Imaging is finally carried out in the same area used in the previous examples
(Figure 6a) with the same grid spacing (20 m) using the Green’s functions retrieved by
the UD-RM method based on least-squares and sparse inversion methods. As shown
in Figures 11a and 11b, the proposed method can deal well with sparse receiver arrays;
this is further verified by the angle gathers (Figures 12a and 12b). When comparing
the results from the least-squares and sparse inversion methods, we can conclude
that the noise presents in the Green’s functions for the least-squares inversion does
not visibly appear in the resulting image. Nevertheless, the angle gathers reveal
the benefit of applying sparse inversion when the outputs of the UD-RM method are
used in subsequent reservoir characterization studies. Next, we reduce the percentage
of available receivers to 20 percent of the original one. The resulting images are
shown in Figures 11c and 11d, and the corresponding angle gathers in Figures 12c
and 12d. Even only with 20 percent of receivers, the imaging results based on the
Green’s functions obtained by means of sparse inversion are still satisfactory. On the
other hand, those produced by Green’s functions obtained from the LSQR solution
contain larger artifacts that affect the identification of the key geological boundaries,
especially in the middle part of the imaging area. From these results, we can conclude
that whilst reducing the number of available receivers can affect, not surprisingly, the
quality of redatuming and imaging, the results obtained with the UD-RM method
prove its effectiveness in handling realistic sparse seabed geometries. It is worth noting
that all of the imaging results with sparse receiver geometries have been carried out
using dual-source data. In the presence of single-source data, we would expect the
resulting imaging products to be of slightly lower quality, as shown above for the
24Figure 9: Focusing functions obtained from (a) the dense receiver array, (b) the sparse
receiver array calculated by the LSQR solver, (c) the sparse receiver array calculated
by sparsity-promoting inversion.
dense receiver scenario.
SEG/EAGE Overthrust model
In order to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method in a more realistic geolog-
ical setting, we consider a variable-density, variable-velocity model (Figure 13). The
velocity model corresponds to a 2D slice of the SEG/EAGE Overthrust model (Am-
inzadeh et al., 1997), while the density model is constructed using Gardner’s equa-
tion (Gardner et al., 1974). A 288 m thick water column with velocity of 1500 m/s
and density of 1000 kg/m3is added on top of the original model to simulate a seabed
25Figure 10: (a) True Green’s function computed via finite-difference modeling, (b)
Green’s function obtained by solving the UD-RM equations with a dense receiver
array, (c) Green’s function obtained from the LSQR solution in the presence of a
sparse receiver array, and (d) Green’s function obtained by sparsity-promoting in-
version for the sparse receiver array. (e) Trace comparison in the middle receiver
between the true (red line), estimated with full data (black line), estimated by LSQR
solution with sparse data (blue line), and estimated by sparsity-promoting inversion
with sparse data (yellow line).
26Figure 11: Images computed using the Green’s functions estimated by (a) least-
squares inversion for 40% of receivers, (b) sparse inversion for 40% of receivers, (c)
least-squares inversion for 20% of receivers, and (d) sparse inversion for 20% of re-
ceivers.
27Figure 12: Angle gathers computed by the UD-RM method with (a) least-squares
inversion for 40% of receivers, (b) sparse inversion for 40% of receivers, (c) least-
squares inversion for 20% of receivers, (d) sparse inversion for 20% of receivers.
seismic acquisition scenario. 401 sources are placed at a depth of 20 m and 401 re-
ceivers are placed along the seafloor, both of which are uniformly distributed from x
= 500 m to x = 4500 m. A focus point is selected at x = 2200 m and z = 1206 m.
Similar to the previous example, we process dual-source data and single-source
data using PZ-summation and deghosting, respectively. In both cases, we perform
least-squares inversion to estimate the focusing functions and subsequently calcu-
late the corresponding Green’s functions. When comparing the estimated Green’s
functions with the true one calculated by finite-difference modeling (Figure 14a), we
notice that small artifacts are present in the estimated Green’s function of the dual-
source data (Figure 14b). We conjecture that the main cause of these artifacts may
be the imperfect cancellation of the direct wave (due to velocity variations along the
28Figure 13: Modified Overthrust model. (a) Velocity and (b) density models.
seafloor, which does not allow us to perfectly model and subtract the direct wave
from the recorded data). Moreover, deghosting generates additional artifacts in the
down-going wavefield, and the Green’s function obtained from the single-source data
contains additional artifacts (Figure 14c). The traces in the middle receiver array are
displayed in Figure 14d; though the estimated Green’s functions and the true one are
not perfectly fitted in some locations (especially for the single-source data), the main
events are accurately matched in both cases.
Next, imaging is carried out within a grid with a vertical and horizontal spacing
of 24 m (Figure 15a). Another dataset without free-surface effects and with both
sources and receivers at a depth of 20 m is modelled to carry out Marchenko imaging
(Figure 15c); as expected, this benchmark image shows good agreement with the
true model. Single-scattering imaging is also performed using data without free-
surface multiples (Figure 15b). Due to the weaker contribution of internal multiples,
only small differences can be observed between the single-scattering image and the
Marchenko image (as indicated by the red arrow in Figure 15b). Meanwhile, single-
29scattering imaging using the data with surface-related multiples is strongly affected
by artifacts associated to surface-related multiples (as marked by the red arrows in
Figure 15d). On the other hand, artifacts from both the surface-related multiples
and internal multiples are effectively suppressed in the image produced from the UD-
RM method (Figure 15e), proving the ability of UD-RM to handle complex subsurface
models. Finally, as shown in Figure 15f, when source deghosting is applied to separate
the data on the source-side, the quality of the resulting image is slightly compromised.
A similar conclusion can be drawn by looking at the angle gathers: single scattering
imaging (Figure 16a) produces cleaner angle gathers for data that do not contain
surface-related multiples compared to data with free-surface effects (Figures 16c and
16e). The angle gathers produced by the Marchenko method are instead successfully
deprived of any artefact associated with internal multiples in the data (Figure 16b).
The UD-RM method provides angle gathers of comparable quality, revealing once
again its ability to dealing with both surface-related and internal multiples (Figures
16d and 16f). Similar to the imaging results, the angle gathers from single source-data
are slightly noisier with visible residual artefacts.
Next, we randomly select 40 percent of the receivers. The same methods used
in the previous example are used to calculate the focusing functions (Figures 17b
and 17c). Comparing these focusing functions with those obtained from the dense
receiver array (Figure 17a) reveals that sparse inversion is more capable at suppress-
ing illumination-related artefacts than its least-squares counterpart. As far as the
resulting Green’s functions (Figure 18) are concerned, both inversion results match
30well with the true wavefield and the Green’s function obtained by sparse inversion is
cleaner. However, due to the higher computational cost of the sparse inversion, in
this example we use least-squares inversion to construct images in the same imaging
area used for the case of dense receiver array (Figure 19). Figure 19a reveals that
performing imaging with the redatumed wavefields from least-squares inversion can
provide a satisfactory representation of the subsurface main structures with good
suppression of multiple-related artefacts and limited noise from illumination-based
artefacts, which is comparable to the image created from data with a dense receiver
array (Figure 15e). Figure 19b shows the imaging result when the percentage of
selected receivers is reduced to 20 percent. This result is undoubtedly more noisy,
however it still provides a general description of the subsurface key structures. The
corresponding angle gathers (Figures 20a and 20b) are also of satisfactory quality;
this proves once again the effectiveness of the UD-RM method in handling sparse
acquisitions within complex geological settings.
DISCUSSION
As anticipated in the Introduction section, an interesting connection can be drawn
between the UD-RM method and the migration scheme proposed by Lu et al. (2015)
to image free-surface multiples in OBS datasets. Given the acquisition geometry of
the UD-RM method (Figure 1c), the source wavefield of Lu et al. (2015) can be in-
terpreted as the forward propagation of the recorded down-going data at the source
level ( ∂zP+,+) with the direct arrival from the source to the focal point (expressed
31Figure 14: (a) True Green’s function obtained by finite-difference modeling for the
Overthrust model, (b) Green’s function retrieved by the UD-RM method with dual-
source data, and (c) Green’s function retrieved by the UD-RM method with single-
source data. (d) Trace comparison between the true (red line), estimated with dual-
source data (black line), and estimated with single-source data (blue line) Green’s
functions in the middle receiver.
32Figure 15: (a) The target area used for imaging, (b) image computed by the single-
scattering imaging without the free-surface effects, (c) image computed by the original
Marchenko method without the free-surface effects, (d) image computed by the single-
scattering imaging with surface-related multiples, (e) image computed by the UD-RM
imaging using dual-source data, (f) image computed by the UD-RM imaging using
single-source data.
33Figure 16: Angle gathers for (a) single-scattering without the free-surface effects,
(b) the Marchenko method without the free-surface effects, (c) single-scattering with
dual-source data, (d) the UD-RM method with dual-source data, (e) single-scattering
with single-source data, (f) the UD-RM method with single-source data.
34Figure 17: Focusing functions for the Overthrust model obtained from (a) the dense
receiver array, (b) the sparse receiver array calculated by least-squares inversion, (c)
the sparse receiver array calculated by sparsity-promoting solution .
35Figure 18: (a) True Green’s function obtained by finite-difference modeling, (b)
Green’s function obtained from the dense receiver array, (c) Green’s function ob-
tained by least-squares inversion from the sparse receiver array, and (d) Green’s
function obtained by sparsity-promoting solution from the sparse receiver array. (e)
Trace comparison between the true (red line), estimated with full data (black line),
estimated by least-squares inversion with sparse data (blue line), and estimated by
sparsity-promoting solution with sparse data (yellow line) Green’s functions in the
middle receiver.
36Figure 19: Image of the Overthrust model obtained from least-squares inversion with
(a) 40% and (b) 20% of receivers.
Figure 20: Angle gathers of the Overthrust model obtained from least-squares inver-
sion with (a) 40% and (b) 20% of receivers.
37asGd=f+∗
din our terminology). Similarly, their receiver wavefield can be repre-
sented by the backward propagation of the recorded up-going data at the source level
(∂zeP+,−) with the direct arrival from the source to the focal point. As such their
redatumed Green’s functions can be expressed as
g+,+≈(∂zP+,+∗f+∗
d)∗=∂zP+,+Gd, (22)
g+,−≈∂zeP+,−f+
d=∂zeP+,−G∗
d. (23)
These wavefields can be also obtained from equation 19 by assuming an initial knowl-
edge of the focusing functions (i.e., f+=f+
d,f−= 0); therefore, we can conclude that
the wavefields retrieved by Lu et al. (2015) are equivalent to those obtained by our
method when ignoring the contributions of free- and internal multiples in the focusing
functions. On the other hand, when the UD-RM equations are inverted for the total
focusing functions, the retrieved Green’s functions correctly account for overburden
and free-surface effects, providing a superior input for the subsequent imaging step.
This may explain why post-imaging techniques have been developed by Lu et al.
(2016) to suppress artefacts in their imaging products due to the imperfect handling
of multiple scattering in their wavefield propagation engine. Moreover, it is worth
mentioning that the sources used within the imaging algorithm of Lu et al. (2015) are
assumed to be located at the free-surface, such that the up- and down-going wave-
fields degenerate in the same data with opposite polarity due to the reflectivity of
free-surface. Since sources are physically placed at depth in real life experiment (i.e.,
geometry in Figure 1c), the up- and down-going wavefields are effectively different
(the down-going component is equal to the up-going component further propagated
38from the source level to the free-surface and back to the source level). Not taking
this into account during redatuming leads to a broader source wavelet in the final re-
datumed wavefields and corresponding image (because of the auto-correlation of the
source wavelet and source ghost), as also acknowledged by Lu et al. (2015). Being our
method based on solid first principles of wave propagation, a recipe for the correct
handling of the different components of the total wavefield is naturally revealed in
equation equation 19 .
A current limitations of the proposed method, when compared to, for example,
the RM method, is the requirement for wavefield separation to be performed both on
the receiver and source sides. Whilst multi-component receivers are always available
in modern ocean bottom acquisition systems, dual-sensor sources are still in their in-
fancy (Halliday et al. (2012); Vasconcelos et al. (2012); O. A. Robertsson et al. (2012);
Robertsson et al. (2008)). As such, source-side deghosting represents nowadays the
most likely option to unleash the power of the UD-RM scheme. As acknowledged by
Robertsson et al. (2016); Grion et al. (2016), source deghosting remains an unsolved
problem in geophysics with few solutions available to date: most of these techniques
adopt ideas initially developed for receiver-side deghosting (e.g., Robertsson et al.
(2017); Cecconello et al. (2019)) and require dense spatial sampling. Whilst a similar
requirement holds for the spatial integrals in the UD-RM equations, previous research
(Ravasi and Vasconcelos, 2020) has shown that the Marchenko methods can success-
fully operate with mildly aliased data, a situation that is more difficult to handle
in the deghosting process. An attractive alternative for the UD-RM method might
39involve discovering a strategy that eliminates the need for source deghosting. An ap-
proach recently developed for source-side multi-dimensional deconvolution (Haacke
and Poole, 2023) can circumvent such a pre-processing step; given the similarity of
their equation with equation 11, we envision that a new UD-RM method could be
developed with no need for source deghosting.
Moreover, as shown in the Numerical Examples section, the UD-RM method can
handle coarsely sampled receiver grids when the associated equations are solved by
means of sparsity-promoting inversion; however, the improvements in the retrieved
focusing functions, and therefore in the associated Green’s functions, may not justify
the increased computational cost if the ultimate goal is structural imaging. On the
other hand, the uplift in the quality of the recovered angle gathers for both examples
seems to suggest the importance of using sparse inversion for subsequent quantita-
tive interpretation analysis. As recently shown in the context of multi-dimensional
deconvolution by Kumar et al. (2023) and Chen et al. (2023), sparsity is not the
only viable approach to provide additional prior information to inverse process; a
similar observation can be made UD-RM equations when dealing with sparse receiver
geometries. Low-rank approximations of the frequency-domain focusing functions
could, in fact, represent a more suitable choice that not only regularizes the problem
but, at the same time, reduces the dimensionality of the unknown vector. Finally,
whilst our current implementation is limited to 2D, recent research in the context of
Marchenko redatuming has shown that the extension of these computationally ex-
pensive multi-dimensional convolutional methods to 3D is within reach of our current
40compute capabilities (Ravasi and Vasconcelos, 2021; Brackenhoff et al., 2022). A key
component to such a success is represented by our ability to compress the kernels of
the convolutional integrals (in our case the down-down-going wavefield) by means of
low-rank revealing transforms (e.g., Singular Value Decomposition - SVD) as succes-
fully demostrated in Ravasi et al. (2022); Hong et al. (2021, 2022a,b); Ltaief et al.
(2023).
CONCLUSIONS
We have presented a novel Marchenko-type redatuming scheme, named the upside-
down Rayleigh-Marchenko method. Being based on a similar mathematical derivation
to that of the RM method, the UD-RM method shares all the benefits of its prede-
cessor; these include relaxed requirements in terms of source wavelet estimation and
pre-processing and positioning of sources and receivers, as well as the ability to han-
dle both free-surface and internal multiples. Moreover, by invoking reciprocity, the
UD-RM method can handle sparse receiver geometries as all spatial integrals are per-
formed over source arrays, making it a suitable candidate for accurate redatuming of
OBS acquisition systems. Similar to other mirror migration algorithm, UD-RM only
considers the down-going component of the recorded wavefield at the receiver array:
this implies that receivers are mirrored with respect to the sea surface, potentially
‘expanding’ the illumination of the retrieved Green’s functions compared to those ob-
tained by other Marchenko redatuming schemes, such as the RM method. However,
in order to obtain the input data for the proposed method, two consecutive data pro-
41cessing steps are required. In the presence of dual-source, multi-component data, the
PZ summation method can be used to separate the data both on the source and the
receiver sides. Alternatively, a step of model-based source deghosting must be per-
formed in the presence of single-source, multi-component data. Given the added algo-
rithmic complexity of source deghosting compared to data-driven wavefield separation
methods, relaxing the acquisition requirements from dual-source to single-source data
is shown to lead to the introduction of small artifacts in the reconstructed wavefields.
It is however worth mentioning that, whilst the equations derived in this paper in-
dicate that the input data is the separated wavefield from dipole sources, we have
validated that utilizing the separated wavefield from monopole sources as input yields
identical results. Finally, whilst the UD-RM equations have been shown to be well
posed and invertible by means of least-squares solvers in ideal acquisition scenarios,
numerical results in the presence of sparse receiver arrays reveal the need for more
advanced solvers. To limit the rank-deficient nature of the problem when the number
of sources far exceeds that of receivers, sparsity-promoting inversion coupled with a
sliding linear Radon transform is shown to provide more accurate focusing functions
that those from least-squares inversion.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank KAUST for supporting this research. All numerical examples have
been developed using the PyLops ramework (Ravasi and Vasconcelos, 2020) and the
associated PyMarchenko library (https://github.com/DIG-Kaust/pymarchenko).
42APPENDIX A
Since g0(xR,x′
S) on the left-hand side of equation 10 contains all those events that
reach the receiver level without having experienced any interaction with the free-
surface, it can be expressed as the sum of the direct wave (i.e, the only down-going
component of the wavefield in a medium without free-surface) and the up-going wave-
field at both xRandx′
S:
g0(xR,x′
S) =gd(xR,x′
S) +g−,−
0(xR,x′
S), (A-1)
where the second term on the right-hand side of equation A-1 can be expanded as:
g−,−
0(xR,x′
S) =g−,−(xR,x′
S)−g−,−
fs(xR,x′
S), (A-2)
where g−,−(xR,x′
S) is the total up-going wavefield at both xRandx′
Sfrom medium
with free-surface, while g−,−
fs(xR,x′
S) refers to the part of such a wavefield that has
experienced at least one interaction with the free-surface. Combining equations A-1
and A-2, the left-hand side of equation 10 can be expressed as:
g.,−(xR,x′
S)−g0(xR,x′
S)
=g.,−(xR,x′
S)−(gd(xR,x′
S) +g−,−(xR,x′
S)−g−,−
fs(xR,x′
S))
=g.,−(xR,x′
S)−g−,−(xR,x′
S)−gd(xR,x′
S) +g−,−
fs(xR,x′
S)
=g+,−(xR,x′
S)−gd(xR,x′
S) +g−,−
fs(xR,x′
S), (A-3)
where the term g−,−
fs(xR,x′
S) can be expressed using the following convolutional inte-
gral relation:
g−,−
fs(xR,x′
S) =−Z
ΛS2
jωρ(xS)∂zg−,+(xR,xS)g0(xS,x′
S)dxS. (A-4)
43Substituting equation A-4 into the left-hand side of equation 10, and moving g−,−
fs(xR,x′
S)
on the other side of the equal leads to:
g+,−(xR,x′
S)−gd(xR,x′
S)
=−Z
ΛS2
jωρ(xS)∂zg.,+(xR,xS)g0(xS,x′
S)dxS
−g−,−
fs(xR,x′
S)
=−Z
ΛS2
jωρ(xS)∂zg.,+(xR,xS)g0(xS,x′
S)dxS
+Z
ΛS2
jωρ(xS)∂zg−,+(xR,xS)g0(xS,x′
S)dxS
=−Z
ΛS2
jωρ(xS)∂zg+,+(xR,xS)g0(xS,x′
S)dxS(A-5)
which is equivalent to equation 11.
44REFERENCES
Almagro Vidal, C., and K. Wapenaar, 2014, Passive seismic interferometry by multi-
dimensional deconvolution-decorrelation: SEG Technical Program Expanded Ab-
stracts.
Aminzadeh, F., J. Brac, and T. Kunz, 1997, 3D Salt and Overthrust models: Pre-
sented at the SEG/EAGE Modeling Series, SEG Book Series Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Beck, A., and M. Teboulle, 2009, A Fast Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm
for Linear Inverse Problems: SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, 2, 183–202.
Boiero, D., S. Mahat, C. Bagaini, and M. Ortin, 2023, True-amplitude multiple pre-
diction in sparse ocean-bottom acquisitions using a multidimensional deconvolution
approach: 84th EAGE Annual Conference and Exhibition, 2023 , 1–5.
Brackenhoff, J., J. Thorbecke, G. Meles, V. Koehne, D. Barrera, and K. Wape-
naar, 2022, 3d marchenko applications: implementation and examples: Geophysical
Prospecting, 70, 35–56.
Broggini, F., R. Snieder, and K. Wapenaar, 2012, Focusing the wavefieldinside an
unknown 1D medium: Beyond seismic interferometry: Geophysics, 77, A25–A28.
Broggini, F., K. Wapenaar, J. van der Neut, and R. Snieder, 2014, Data-driven green’s
function retrieval and application to imaging with multidimensional deconvolution:
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 119, 425–441.
Cecconello, E., E. G. Asgedom, and W. Soellner, 2019, Removal of all time-varying
sea-surface effects by source deghosting and demultiple: GEOPHYSICS.
Chen, F., M. Ravasi, and K. D., 2023, Solving multi-dimensional deconvolution via a
45nuclear-norm regularized least-squares approach: 84th EAGE Annual Conference
and Exhibition.
de Bruin, C. G. M., C. P. . A. Wapenaar, and A. J. Berkhout, 1990, Angle-dependent
reflectivity by means of prestack-migration: Geophysics, 55, 1223–1234.
Gardner, G., L. Gardner, and A. Gregory, 1974, Formation velocity and density—the
diagnostic basis for stratigraphic traps: Geophysics, 39, 770–780.
Grion, S., R. Exley, M. Manin, X. Miao, A. Pica, Y. Wang, P. Granger, and S. Ronen,
2007, Mirror imaging of OBS data: First Break, 25, 37–42.
Grion, S., R. Telling, and S. Holland, 2016, Phase-shift de-ghosting: 78th EAGE
Conference and Exhibition, 2016 , 1–5.
Haacke, R., and G. Poole, 2023, Source-side multi-dimensional deconvolution using a
downgoing annihilation filter approach: 84th EAGE Annual Conference and Exhi-
bition, 2023 , 1–5.
Haindl, C., M. Ravasi, and F. Broggini, 2021, Handling gaps in acquisition geome-
tries—Improving marchenko-based imaging using sparsity-promoting inversion and
joint inversion of time-lapse data: Geophysics, 86, S143–S154.
Halliday, D., J. O. A. Robertsson, I. Vasconcelos, D.-J. van Manen, R. Laws, K.
¨Ozdemir, and H. Grønaas, 2012, Full-wavefield, towed-marine seismic acquisition
and applications: SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2012, 1–5.
Hampson, G., and G. Szumski, 2020, Down/down deconvolution: SEG Technical
Program Expanded Abstracts, 78, 3099–3103.
Hong, Y., H. Ltaief, M. Ravasi, L. Gatineau, and D. Keyes, 2021, Accelerating seismic
redatuming using tile low-rank approximations on NEC SX-Aurora TSUBASA:
46Supercomputing Frontiers and Innovations, 8, no. 2. (doi: 10.14529/jsfi210201 ).
Hong, Y., H. Ltaief, M. Ravasi, D. Keyes, and D. Vargas, 2022a, Large-scale
Marchenko imaging with distance-aware matrix reordering, tile low-rank compres-
sion, and mixed-precision computations: SEG Technical Abstract.
Hong, Y., H. Ltaief, M. Ravasi, and D. E. Keyes, 2022b, HPC Seismic Redatuming
by Inversion with Algebraic Compression and Multiple Precisions: Submitted to
International Journal of HPC Applications.
Jia, S., A. Guitton, S. Singh, and R. Snieder, 2017, Subsalt Marchenko imaging:
A Gulf of Mexico example: 87th Annual International Meeting,SEG, Expanded
Abstracts, 5588–5592.
Kumar, R., D. Boiero, C. Bagaini, and M. Vassallo, 2023, Transform-Domain Mul-
tidimensional Deconvolution – Sparsity V/S Low-Rank: 84th EAGE Annual Con-
ference and Exhibition.
Ltaief, H., Y. Hong, L. Wilson, J. M., R. M., and D. Keyes, 2023, Scaling the “Mem-
ory Wall” for Multi-Dimensional Seismic Processing with Algebraic Compression
on Cerebras CS-2 Systems: roceedings of the International Conference for High
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis.
Lu, S., A. Valenciano, N. Chemingui, and D. Lecerf, 2015, Separated wavefield imag-
ing of ocean bottom seismic (OBS) data: 77th EAGE Conference and Exhibition
2015.
Lu, S., N. Whitmore, A. Valenciano, N. Chemingui, and G. Rønholt, 2016, A practi-
cal crosstalk attenuation method for separated wavefield imaging: SEG Technical
Program Expanded Abstracts 2016.
47O. A. Robertsson, J., D. F. Halliday, D. J. van Manen, I. Vasconcelos, R. M. Laws,
K. zdemir, and H. Grnaas, 2012, Full-wavefield, towed-marine seismic acquisition
and applications: 74th EAGE Conference and Exhibition.
Ordo˜ nez, A., W. S¨ ollner, T. Kl¨ uver, and L. J. Gelius, 2014, Migration of primaries and
multiples using an imaging condition for amplitude-nor-malized separated wave-
fields: Geophysics, 5, 1–14.
Paige, C. C., and M. A. Saunders, 1982, LSQR: An algorithm for sparse linear equa-
tions and sparse least squares: Transactions on Mathematical Software, 8, 43–71.
Ravasi, M., 2017, Rayleigh-Marchenko redatuming for target-oriented, true-amplitude
imaging: Geophysics, 82, S439–S452.
Ravasi, M., Y. Hong, H. Ltaief, and D. keyes, 2022, Large-scale marchenko imag-
ing with distance-aware matrix reordering, tile low-rank compression and mixed-
precision computations: SEG.
Ravasi, M., and I. Vasconcelos, 2020, PyLops – A linear-operator Python library for
scalable algebra and optimization: SoftwareX, 11, 2352–7110.
——–, 2021, An Open-source Framework for the Implementation of Large-scale In-
tegral Operators with Flexible, Modern HPC Solutions - Enabling 3D Marchenko
Imaging by Least Squares Inversion: Geophysics, 86, WC177–WC194.
Ravasi, M., I. Vasconcelos, A. Kritski, A. Curtis, C. da Costa Filho, and G. Meles,
2015, Marchenko imaging of Volve Field North Sea: 77th Annual International
Conference and Exhibition, EAGE, Extended Abstracts.
Ravasi, M., I. Vasconcelos, A. Kritski, A. Curtis, C. A. da Costa Filho, and G. Meles,
2016, Target-oriented Marchenko imaging of a North Sea field: Geophysical Journal
48International, 205, 99–104.
Ravasi, M., and N. Wang, 2023, A reciprocal Rayleigh-Marchenko method for full-
wavefield redatuming of sparse seabed data: Second EAGE Seabed Seismic Today
Workshop.
Robertsson, J., D.-J. van Manen, K. Eggenberger, F. Andersson, and L. Amundsen,
2016, Source deghosting: SEG International Exposition and Annual Meeting, 71–
76.
Robertsson, J. O. A., D.-J. van Manen, F. Andersson, L. Amundsen, and K. Eggen-
berger, 2017, Source deghosting by depth apparition: GEOPHYSICS, 82, P89–
P107.
Robertsson, J. O. A., D.-J. van Manen, D. Halliday, and R. Laws, 2008, Seismic data
acquisition and source-side derivatives generation and application: U. S. Patent.
Slob, E., K. Wapenaar, F. Broggini, and R. Snieder, 2014, Seismic reflector imaging
using internal multiples with Marchenko-type equations: Geophysics, 79, S63–S76.
Staring, M., M. Dukalski, M. Belonosov, R. Baardman, J. Yoo, R. Hegge, R. van
Borselen, and K. Wapenaar, 2021, Robust estimation of primaries by sparse inver-
sion and Marchenko equation-based workflow for multiple suppression in the case
of a shallow water layer and a complex overburden: A 2D case study in the Arabian
Gulf: Geophysics, Q15–Q25.
Staring, M., R. Pereira, H. Douma, J. van der Neut, and K. Wapenaar, 2018, Source-
receiver Marchenko redatuming on field data using an adaptive double-focusing
method: Geophysics, S579–S590.
Staring, M., and K. Wapenaar, 2020, Three-dimensional Marchenko internal mul-
49tiple attenuation on narrow azimuth streamer data of the Santos basin, Brazil:
Geophysical Prospecting, 1864–1877.
van der Neut, J., I. Vasconcelos, and K. Wapenaar, 2015, On Green’s function retrieval
by iterative substitution of the coupled Marchenko equations: Geophyscial Journal
International, 203, 792–813.
Vasconcelos, I., 2013, Source-receiver, reverse-time imaging of dual-source, vector-
acoustic seismic data: Geophysics, 78, WA123–WA145.
Vasconcelos, I., J. Robertsson, M. Vassallo, and D. J. van Manen, 2012, Reverse-
time imaging of dual-source 4c marine seismic data using primaries, ghosts, and
multiples: 74th EAGE Conference and Exhibition.
Wapenaar, C., and A. Berkhout, 1989, Elastic wave field extrapolation: Redatuming
of single- and multi-component seismic data: Elsevier Science Publ. Co., Inc.
Wapenaar, K., 1998, Reciprocity properties of one-way propagators: Geophysics, 63,
1795–1798.
Wapenaar, K., F. Broggini, E. Slob, and R. Snieder, 2013, Three-dimensional single-
sided Marchenko inverse scattering, data-driven focusing, Green’s function re-
trieval, and their mutual relations: Phys. Rev. Lett., 110, 084301.
Wapenaar, K., J. Thorbecke, J. van der Neut, F. Broggini, E. Slob, and R. Snieder,
2014, Marchenko imaging: Geophysics, 79, WA39–WA57.
Wapenaar, K., J. van der Neut, and E. Slob, 2017, On the role of multiples in
Marchenko imaging: Geophysics, 82, A1–A5.
50