arXiv:2401.09096v2  [astro-ph.CO]  29 Feb 2024On the Possibility of Detecting a Global Signal in the Line
of the Hyperﬁne Structure of Hydrogen from the Dark Ages
О. Konovalenko1, V. Zakharenko1, B. Novosyadlyj2,3, L.I. Gurvits4,5, S. Stepkin1,
Y. Vasylkivskyi1, P. Tokarsky1, О. Ulyanov1, O. Stanislavsky1, I. Bubnov1
1Institute of Radio Astronomy of NASU, 4 Mystetstv str., 6100 2 Kharkiv, Ukraine
2Astronomical Observatory of Ivan Franko National Universi ty of Lviv,
8 Kyryla I Methodia str., Lviv 79005, Ukraine
3College of Physics and International Center of Future Scien ce of Jilin University,
Qianjin Street 2699, Changchun 130012, P. R. China
4Joint Institute for VLBI ERIC, Oude Hoogeveensedijk 4, 7991 PD Dwingeloo, The Netherlands and
5Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, Delft University of Tech nology, Kluyverweg 1, 2629 HS Delft, The Netherlands
(Dated: March 1, 2024)
We analyze the possibilities of detecting a signal in the hyd rogen 21 cm line, which was formed in
the early Universe during the the Dark Ages cosmological epo ch, using the Ukrainian radio telescopes
UTR-2 and GURT of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine . As a result of cosmological
expansion, this line is shifted to the decameter range of wav elengths ( λobs≈18m,νobs≈16
MHz) and is in the band of operational frequencies of these te lescopes. The brightness temperature
of the predicted sky-averaged global signal ranges from ∼ −0.08to∼0.02K, depending on the
cosmological model. Such a faint signal is a challenge even f or the world’s largest radio telescope
in the decameter wavelength range, UTR-2, since the signal l evel of the foreground synchrotron
radiation of the Galaxy at these wavelengths is 20000–40000 K. The paper highlights the peculiarities
of spectroscopy at the decameter waves, interfering factor s of natural and instrumental origin and the
ways of eliminating them in order to reliably detect the sign al in the 21 cm line, which can become
an important source of information both about the environme nt in which the ﬁrst stars and galaxies
were born, and about the nature of dark matter particles and t he magnitude of primordial magnetic
ﬁelds. It was concluded that the detection of such a signal us ing the most sensitive radio telescopes
at the decameter wavelength range is possible (with the sign al integration over the frequency band
of 25 MHz), the detection time will be ∼50days) and can be implemented in the coming years of
peace in Ukraine.
PACS numbers: 95.85.Fm, 95.55.Jz, 95.55.Qf, 95.75.Fg, 98. 80.-k
Keywords: cosmological Dark Ages, hydrogen 21 cm line, radi o spectroscopy, UTR-2 radio telescope
INTRODUCTION
Cosmological research is one of the most challenging
areas of modern astronomy. This is true for both the-
oretical and experimental research for relevant eﬀects.
The reasons for this encompasses the need to broaden the
classical methods of theoretical physics and astrophysics ,
the uncertainty of initial conditions, the remoteness of
the objects under study, and the faintness of eﬀects in
any range of cosmic radiation of all-wave astronomy.
The present paper suggests consolidating the eﬀorts
of theorists and experimentalists aimed at assessing the
possibilities of the existence and detection of a new cos-
mological phenomenon, i.e. the neutral hydrogen absorp-
tion lines (at the rest-frame 21 cm wavelength), which,
due to the cosmological expansion, is redshifted to the
range of decameter waves.
The research is based on the experience of the Lviv
school of theoretical astrophysics and cosmology, as well
as the achievements in the ﬁeld of decameter radio as-
tronomy, which has been developing in Kharkiv for more
than half a century. Unfortunately, the world-famous
S. Ya. Braude Radio Astronomical Observatory was de-
stroyed as a result of the aggression by the Russian Fed-
eration in 2022. Owing to the heroic actions of theArmed Forces of Ukraine, the observatory was liberated
in September 2022. Now the infrastructure and research
facilities of the Observatory are being restored gradually .
I. 21 CM LINE FROM THE DARK AGES
Сosmic microwave background (CMB), experimentally
discovered by Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson in 1965
[1], is a key source of information about our Universe and
the formation of its large-scale structure. The study of
spatial ﬂuctuations of its temperature and polarization
by COBE1, WMAP2, and Planck3space missions ush-
ered in the era of precision cosmology, when the parame-
ters of the cosmological model are determined to within a
percent [2, 3]. At the same time, fundamental questions
about the nature of the dominant components of the Uni-
verse in terms of average density – dark energy and dark
1Cosmic Background Explorer (1989-1993),
https://lambda.gsfc.nasa.gov/product/cobe/.
2Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (2001-2010),
https://map.gsfc.nasa.gov/.
3Space observatory Planck (2009-2018),
https://sci.esa.int/web/planck/2
matter, the causes of baryon asymmetry, inﬂation mod-
els, as well as the formation of the ﬁrst stars and galaxies
– remain unanswered. The latter problem has been exac-
erbated by the discovery of massive galaxies with intense
star formation at redshifts ∼13using the James Webb
Space Telescope [4, 5]. On the other hand, the reﬁnement
of the cosmological distance scale revealed a discrepancy
between the values of the Hubble’s constant according to
CMB and type Ia supernovae at the level of ∼4σ[6, 7].
These discrepancies indicate the need to search for new
cosmological tests, in particular, to analyze the possi-
bilities of detecting the 21 cm hyperﬁne structure line
of neutral hydrogen from the Dark Ages and the Cosmic
Dawn cosmological epochs, which preceded the formation
of the stars and galaxies we observe today. This line is an
important channel of information about the state of bary-
onic matter (temperature, concentration, ionization, spa -
tial inhomogeneities, etc.) in the epoch of the formation
of the ﬁrst stars and galaxies (see, for example, reviews
[8, 9]). In recent decades, experiments have been con-
ducted to record the global (sky-averaged) signal in this
line, which has been shifted by the cosmological expan-
sion of the Universe at the meter–decameter wavelength
range. In 2018, the ﬁrst registration of this signal at a fre-
quency of 78 MHz was announced in the EDGES experi-
ment (Experiment to Detect the Global Epoch of Reion-
ization Signature) [10]. However, recently published data
from a similar experiment, SARAS 3 (Shaped Antenna
measurement of the background RAdio Spectrum 3) [11],
failed to conﬁrm this discovery.
For the past several years, scientists from the Astro-
nomical Observatory of the Ivan Franko National Univer-
sity of Lviv and the Institute of Radio Astronomy of the
National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, jointly with
peers from other institutions, have been conducting the-
oretical estimates of the intensity of radio emission from
the Dark Ages and the Cosmic Dawn in the lines of the
ﬁrst molecules [12–14] and hydrogen atoms [15, 16]. In
[15], the intensity of the luminosity of protogalaxies (ha-
los) in the 21 cm line formed at redshifts z∼30−10was
estimated. In [16], the dependence of the global signal
in the 21 cm line during the Dark Ages, Cosmic Dawn,
and reionization on the parameters of cosmological mod-
els and the ﬁrst light was studied. It is shown that the
registration of the spectral features of the line at diﬀer-
ent wavelengths can be a good test for the parameters of
cosmological models, the nature of dark matter particles,
and the strength of the primary magnetic ﬁeld.
In the accompanying paper [21], we showed that in the
standard ΛCDM model with post-Planckian parameters
an absorption line λHI= 21 cm in the CMB spectrum
is formed in the Dark Ages at the redshift z= 87 and,
for an Earth-based observer, is shifted to the decameter
wavelength range: λobs=λHI(1+z)≈18m. The value
of the diﬀerential brightness temperature in the center of
the absorption line δTbr≈ −35mK, the frequency at the
absorption maximum is 16 MHz, and the eﬀective line
width is ≈25 MHz. The line depth is moderately sensi-tive toΩbandH0, faintly sensitive to Ωdmand insensitive
to the other parameters of the standard ΛCDM model.
However, the line is very sensitive to additional heating
or cooling of baryonic matter during the Dark Ages, so
it can be an eﬀective test for non-standard cosmological
models. In the models with decaying or self-annihilating
dark matter, as well as with primordial global stochas-
tic magnetic ﬁelds, the higher the density of these dark
matter components and the magnetic ﬁeld strength, the
higher the temperature of baryonic matter during this pe-
riod. The absorption line becomes shallower, disappears,
and turns into emission line at values of the component
parameters below the upper limits set for them, as follows
from the available observational data.
The largest and the most sensitive radio telescope in
this wavelength range is the Ukrainian T-shaped Radio
telescope (UTR-2) and the Giant Ukrainian Radio Tele-
scope (GURT), the development of which is being com-
pleted. In this paper, we analyze the possibilities of using
them for detecting a global signal in the line of the hy-
perﬁne structure of the basic state of hydrogen from the
Dark Ages, shifted to the decameter wavelength range.
As noted above, observational searches for such lines
have been repeatedly conducted in the 50–120 MHz band,
with successful detection at 78 MHz reported in the
EDGES experiment but refuted in the SARAS 3 exper-
iment. In recent years, tools and methods for such a
search in the 20–200 MHz band have been actively devel-
oped, taking into account the extremely low intensity of
the expected signals and the large number of interfering
phenomena inherent in low-frequency radio astronomy
[17–20]. Among the main scientiﬁc objectives of many
new generation low-frequency radio telescopes is also the
search for relevant cosmological spectral features at lowe r
frequencies.
The use of pattern recognition methods or, in other
terminology, “machine learning” and “artiﬁcial intelli-
gence” is becoming increasingly popular. At the same
time, the radio spectroscopic and interference features
of decameter-wave radio astronomy at <30MHz wave-
lengths, where the cosmological line is at ∼16MHz [21]
and which is the proposed for search in this paper, are
underrepresented in the studies and publications avail-
able to date. On the other hand, 50 years of experience
in the development of observational tools and methods
of low-frequency radio astronomy, as well as the use of
the above-mentioned Ukrainian radio telescopes, allow us
to reassess the possibilities of detecting this interestin g
and important cosmological feature and to propose an
adequate observational methodology.
II. RADIO ASTRONOMY AT DECAMETER
WAVES IN UKRAINE
It is well known that Ukraine is one of the global lead-
ers in decameter radio astronomy ( λ= 10−100m, ν=
3−30MHz). This is universally recognized, has been3
maintained for about 60 years, and is based on the cre-
ation and use of the world’s largest in this frequency
domain radio telescope UTR-2 (with a record-breaking
eﬀective area of 150 000 square meters) and the con-
struction of the unique Ukrainian Radio Interferometer
of the Academy of Sciences (URAN) system on its ba-
sis [22, 23]. The founder of this ﬁeld of science, which
is now becoming increasingly important, was the promi-
nent Ukrainian scientist S. Ya. Braude (1911–2003). We
cannot help mentioning with gratitude another unique
person, President of the National Academy of Sciences
of Ukraine B. Ye. Paton (1918–2020), who until the last
days of his bright life fully supported the development of
low-frequency radio astronomy in Ukraine.
Over the past decades, UTR-2 and URAN have been
upgraded continuously, including antenna systems, ana-
log and digital equipment, as well as observation meth-
ods. The most advanced information and telecommuni-
cation technologies were used, which led to a thousand-
fold increase in the eﬃciency and meaningfulness of na-
tional radio astronomy [24, 25]. Moreover, next to UTR-
2, a new-generation radio telescope GURT is being built,
which has a much wider wavelength band of 8–80 MHz
(this is a combined decameter-meter range) and oﬀers
many other advantages [24, 26].
Today, low-frequency radio astronomy is making rapid
progress all over the world. New decameter-meter-
wave radio telescopes, such as LOFAR, NenuFAR, LWA,
MWA, SKA-low, are being built on all continents. How-
ever, in terms of their main parameters (frequency band,
eﬀective area, sensitivity, resolution, space-frequency re-
sponse, noise immunity, dynamic range of analog and dig-
ital systems), the Ukrainian instruments remain unsur-
passed and highly demanded by the international com-
munity. They made it possible to achieve a large number
of cutting-edge astrophysical results, as well as imple-
ment hardware and methodological developments in the
course of domestic and international research projects
[27]. Figs. 1–4show the Ukrainian decameter-wave
radio telescopes and their location in Ukraine. The key
parameters of the telescopes are shown in Table I[23].
To properly formulate the requirements for the experi-
mental instrumentation intended to search for the 21 cm
hydrogen redshifted line, including the information on its
parameters given in the previous chapter, it is required to
carefully consider the speciﬁcs of decameter wave radio
astronomy, in terms of both astrophysical and hardware-
methodological parameters.
One of the key parameters of each radio telescope is
its sensitivity. It is determined by the classical ratio [28 ]
∆Smin=2kBTnoise
Aef√∆f∆tJy, (1)
where∆Sminis the minimum ﬂux density of electromag-
netic radiation detectable from a radio source, kBis the
Boltzmann constant, Tnoiseis the noise temperature of
the system, Aefis the eﬀective area of the radio tele-
scope,∆fis the frequency bandwidth of the registration(frequency resolution), and ∆tis the integration or accu-
mulation time (time resolution).
The fundamental diﬀerence at low frequencies compar-
ing to other spectral domains is that the noise tempera-
ture of the system Tnoiseis not the noise temperature of
the receiver TN, unlike the higher frequencies (it is about
tens of K). At decameter frequencies, it is determined by
the brightness temperature of the galactic background
Tnoise≈TB(ν), which reaches tens and hundreds of thou-
sands of K. However, despite this huge value, the UTR-2
radio telescope has record-breaking sensitivity due to its
gigantic eﬀective area, ∆Smin∼1Jy−1mJy (depend-
ing on the bandwidth and integration time, which in turn
are determined by the parameters of the cosmic signals
under study).
The above formula and its low-frequency features re-
quire a clariﬁcation. The approximation Tnoise≈TBis
only valid when the antenna temperature (a radio sig-
nal power from the galactic background) at the output
of the antenna or antenna element is much higher than
the noise temperature of the receiver (antenna ampliﬁer)
connected to the antenna: Ta≫TN. However, there are
losses in every antenna ηA(frequency-dependent signal
attenuation), including those which use modern broad-
band active antenna elements [29]. Thus, Ta=TBηA,
and the adjusted sensitivity formula is as follows:
∆Smin=2kBTnoise
Aef√∆f∆t/parenleftbigg
1+TN
Ta/parenrightbigg
[Jy], (2)
The sensitivity reduction factor m=Ta/(Ta+TN)can
be signiﬁcantly less than one. For example, when the
antenna background temperature is equal to the receiver
noise temperature (sometimes radio telescope designers
allow this), the sensitivity is halved, which is equivalent
to a halving of the eﬀective area (usually its maximiza-
tion is the main requirement by radio astronomers). This
makes it necessary to introduce a new quality parameter
for a low-frequency radio telescope, the System Equiva-
lent Eﬀective Area.
SEEA=AefTa/(Ta+TN) =mAef[m2].
For low-frequency radio astronomy telescopes, this is a
more suitable measure of the instrumental quality com-
pared to the traditional quality parameter at high fre-
quencies is the system equivalent ﬂux density:
SEFD= 2kBTnoise/Aeff[Jy].
At low frequencies, Tnoiseis determined primarily by TB
and cannot be reduced in any way to improve the qual-
ity of the radio telescope compared to higher frequen-
cies (millimeter to decimeter bands), where Tnoisecan be
reduced by using modern semiconductors and cryogenic
technology.
Formulas ( 1) and ( 2) are used for monitoring of point
radio sources with angular sizes smaller than the width
of the radio telescope’s beam pattern (for UTR-2, the an-
gular resolution is ∼30 arcmin). In the case of extended4
Figure 1. The North-South (left) and East-West (right) ante nnas of the UTR-2 radio telescope (2020 photo)
Table I. The main parameters of the Ukrainian radio telescop es of the decameter wavelength range.
Frequency Size, m; Number of Beam Distance VLBI angular
Raditelescope; of range, maximum elements size at from UTR-2 resolution
coordinates MHz eﬀective (l×m=N);25 MHz (LOFAR), km at 25 MHz
area, m2polarization (UTR-2 – URAN)
UTR-2 (RI NASU) 8–33 1800×900; 2040; 0.4◦×0.4◦0 –
49◦39′N 36◦56′E 140000 1 linear (≈2000)
UTR-2 (North- 8–33 1800×53;240×6=1440; 0.3◦×12◦0 –
South arm) 105000 1 linear (≈2000)
UTR-2 (West arm) 8–33 900×45; 6×100=600; 0.6◦×12◦0 –
105000 1 linear (≈2000)
URAN-1 (RI NASU) 8–33 200×29; 4×24=96; 5◦×30◦42 59′′
49◦40′N 36◦21′E 5500 2 linear (≈1950)
URAN-2 (PGO NASU) 8–33 238×116; 16×32=512; 3.5◦×7.5◦150 16′′
49◦38′N 34◦50′E 28000 2 linear (≈1850)
URAN-3 (PMI NASU) 8–33 238×58; 8×32=256; 3.5◦×15◦946 2.6′′
51◦29′N 23◦50′E 14000 2 linear (≈1100)
URAN-4 (RI NASU) 8–33 238×58; 8×32=256; 3.5◦×30◦613 4′′
46◦24′N 30◦16′E 7000 2 linear (≈1500)
GURT, 1 subarray 8–80 18×18; 5×5=25; 30◦×30◦≈1 –
(RI NASU) 650 2 linear (≈2000)
49◦39′N 36◦56′E (at 10 MHz)
and/or isotropic radio sources (such as the global signal
in the 21 cm line of hydrogen from the Dark Ages), it
is advisable to use the following expression for the mini-
mum detectable brightness temperature
∆Tmin=TB
m√∆f∆t. (3)
As can be seen in this case, the eﬀective area, i.e., the
size of the radio telescope, is not involved, thus, a small
antenna and even a single antenna element with a quasi-
isotropic radiation pattern can be used. This conclu-
sion is fundamental in the study of extragalactic nearly
isotropic cosmological eﬀects of various types. The ﬁne
spatial structure of such sources is studied at the nextstages of research after the detection of the eﬀect itself.
Maximizing the coeﬃcient mand its approach to 1 re-
mains extremely important in each case. This has been
realized for all Ukrainian radio telescopes, as we man-
aged to achieve a very high TaandTNratio of 6–10 dB,
which results in m=0.8–0.9. Moreover, this is ensured
in a wide frequency band of radio telescopes, as shown
below.
Figs.5–6show the amplitude-frequency characteristics
(bandwidth) of the UTR-2 radio telescope. These are
the real responses of the telescope to the galactic back-
ground, which occupies the entire electromagnetic radio
spectrum from hectometer to centimeter waves. These
responses also contain narrow-band radio interference,5
Figure 2. Wideband radio telescope of the new generation
GURT.
Figure 3. Radio telescopes URAN-1 (RI NASU), URAN-
2 (PGO IGF NASU), URAN-3 (PMI NASU), URAN-4 (RI
NASU).
the intensity and amount of which signiﬁcantly depends
on the time of day (much less at night) and frequency
usually almost absent at frequencies above 15–20 MHz
at the UTR-2 site). This radio frequency interference
has a width of ∆νRFI∼10kHz. The unevenness of the
characteristic is caused by the use of a special 3-band an-
tenna ampliﬁcation system with the bandwidths of 8–12,
12–18 and 18–33 MHz. This unevenness is corrected in
a certain way by calibrations and scaling. The URAN-
1 and URAN-4 radio telescopes have similar frequency
bands, 8–33 MHz (see Table I).
It is important to emphasize that this frequency band
seems to be insuﬃcient to search for very broad cosmo-
logical lines of neutral hydrogen (see below). However,
a new generation radio telescope, GURT, is being built
at the S. Y. Braude Observatory next to the UTR-2 radio
telescope. Despite its smaller size (as shown above in this
case, size is not important), this instrument has a num-
ber of advantages, among which the main one is a much
wider frequency band of 8–80 MHz. The GURT telescope
Figure 4. Location of decameter radio telescopes in Ukraine .
Frequency, MHzRelative intensity, dB
Figure 5. Response of the UTR-2 radio telescope to the radio
radiation of the galactic background during the daytime.
is assembled from 25-element bipolarized subarrays with
analog phasing in the subarray and digital phasing be-
tween them. Figs. 7–8show the amplitude-frequency
characteristics of the GURT in the daytime and at night.
A much greater uniformity of the transmission coeﬃcient
is also seen, which is useful, too.
Besides, the lower lines in both ﬁgures show the in-
trinsic noise level of the subarray, which is ∼10 dB lower
than the antenna background temperature, giving a very
high value of m≈0.9[30].
Thus, the expediency of using GURT subarrays and
even their individual elements is obvious. They pro-
vide the required frequency band, sensitivity, uniformity
of the transmission coeﬃcient, stability, noise immunity,
cost-eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of operation. It should
be recalled that the subarrays and antenna elements of
the LOFAR (the Netherlands and other European coun-
tries) and NenuFAR (France with the participation of
Ukrainian radio astronomers) systems have similar fre-
quency bands of 10(20)–80 MHz and can also be used in6
Frequency, MHzRelative intensity, dB
Figure 6. Response of the UTR-2 radio telescope at night.
Relative intensity, dB
Frequency, MHz
Figure 7. Response of the subarray of the GURT ra-
dio telescope to the radio radiation of the galactic back-
ground (amplitude-frequency characteristic with the addi tion
of narrow-band radio interference) during daytime. The red
line is the antenna temperature, the blue line is the intrins ic
noise of the subarray.
a coordinated manner to search for redshifted HI lines at
decameter-meter waves.
It should be emphasized that the appearance of the
Universe at the lowest wavelengths that can be observed
from the Earth surface (i.e. the decameter range) is
very diﬀerent from that of, for example, optics or high-
frequency radio astronomy. Non-thermal mechanisms
of radio emission, non-stationary nonequilibrium radio
emission during the propagation of waves and charged
particles in a magnetically active plasma, prevail at de-
cameter wavelengths. There is a strong interaction of
radio radiation with the plasma (absorption, refraction,
scattering), large-scale evolution and subtle atomic pro-
cesses are manifested. Thus, low-frequency radio as-
tronomy allows obtaining unique information that is not
Relative intensity, dB
Frequency, MHz
Figure 8. Response of the GURT at night. The red line is
the antenna temperature, the blue line is the intrinsic nois e
of the subarray.
available to the other methods of astrophysical research.
An important example of a low-frequency astrophysical
phenomenon is the non-thermal synchrotron radio emis-
sion of the Galaxy, which has already been mentioned
above. It is generated by the motion of relativistic elec-
trons (one of the components of cosmic rays) in the mag-
netic ﬁeld of the Galaxy and is very intense at decame-
ter wavelengths: it reaches an average of ∼5×105К
at a frequency of 10 MHz and ∼2×104K near 30
MHz. The emission spectrum has a power-law form of
theTB(ν)∝ν−2.6type. Fig. 9shows a large-scale map
of this galactic background, constructed at a frequency
of 20 MHz (20 kHz registration bandwidth) by the com-
bined use of the UTR-2 section and the URAN-2 antenna
(angular resolution of about 10◦). The principal feature
is a clearly visible change in the background luminos-
ity temperature depending on the coordinates (galactic
or equatorial). Thus, near the Galactic plane relative
to the poles, the change in the TBtemperature reaches
∼6 dB. Fig. 10shows the diurnal change in the inten-
sity of the signal received when the GURT and UTR-2
antennas, with the beams stationary in the meridional di-
rection, are oriented towards declination δ≈40◦, which
corresponds to the radio source Cyg A. The intersection
of the map in Fig. 9for the corresponding declination in
the direct ascension interval of α= 0h−24his ensured
by the diurnal rotation of the Earth.
Fig.11shows a similar experiment when the beam of
the GURT subarray is oriented at the zenith δ= 50◦.
The result of 8 days of scanning is presented in three-
dimensional form: time – frequency – intensity (bright-
ness shown: light color – maximum intensity, dark color –
minimum). It can be seen that over the entire frequency
band of 8–80 MHz, the intensity change is not less than 3
dB and is repeated from day to day with high accuracy.
It is important to note that in the case of such diurnal
observations, but with one antenna element only (hav-
ing a very wide diagrammatic directivity of θA/greaterorsimilar100◦),7
Figure 9. Map of radio emission of the galactic background at a frequency of 20 MHz [31].
Relative intensity, dBUTR-2
GURTUTR-2 (smoothed beam)Right ascension, hours
Figure 10. Daily scan of the radio emission of the Galaxy
with stationary directional diagrams of the East-West UTR- 2
antennas and the GURT subarray at a frequency of 25 MHz.
The intense peak corresponds to the radio source Cyg A ( δ=
40◦30’).
a change in the signal intensity from the galactic back-
ground of ∼3 dB (twofold) was also recorded. This was
conﬁrmed by measurements on individual active antenna
elements of the GURT and on the dipoles of the UTR-2.
The same was shown in the early 1970s during precision
experiments on half-wave antenna dipoles of decameter
waves [32]. The corresponding diurnal variation of in-
tensity is useful when implementing the methodology of
searching for faint lines, both using arrays of antennas
and for individual elements. In the latter case, low an-
gular resolution, as shown above, is acceptable, since the
radio source under study is isotropic in space.
The galactic background described above sets funda-
mental restrictions for the study of extragalactic cosmo-
logical eﬀects at decameter and meter wavelengths (this
is the so-called “foreground”). In terms of its luminositytemperature, it is tens and hundreds of thousands times
higher than the temperature of CMB TCMB= 2.73K,
which is the “background” in the formation of the HI
lines in the absorption for z∼80. Thus, the relative in-
tensity of the lines to be searched for should be estimated
in comparison with the Galactic background, which dras-
tically reduces the observability of lines in real-world ex -
periments.
III. RADIO SPECTROSCOPY AT DECAMETER
WAVELENGTHS
One of the key achievements of decameter radio as-
tronomy is the detection of an exotic astrophysical phe-
nomenon, i. e. spectral lines of extremely excited in-
terstellar carbon atoms for principal quantum numbers
n >600(ν <30MHz). This discovery was made about
45 years ago using the UTR-2 radio telescope [33]. The
corresponding recombination lines were ﬁrst observed in
the absorption against the background of strong non-
thermal radio radiation. This absorption phenomenon
provides additional advantages in the reliable identiﬁca-
tion of a faint eﬀect and must be considered when search-
ing for new absorption lines. The detected lines have be-
come a new eﬀective means of diagnosing cold partially
ionized interstellar plasma, and the Ukrainian instru-
ments remain the most convenient for the development
of this promising methodology [34, 35]. It is no coinci-
dence that the largest number of objects in the Galaxy in
the decameter wavelength range has been studied using
the UTR-2, which is important for future observations
of the other lines in the Galaxy and from extragalactic
sources [36, 37]. Besides, it is important to know the
main parameters of low-frequency recombination radio
lines and their inﬂuence on the search for cosmological8
Figure 11. Eight-time passage of the Galaxy through the ﬁxed directional diagram of the GURT subarray, which is oriented at
the inclination of δ= 50◦(the zenith position of the diagram).
lines of neutral hydrogen.
Recombination line frequencies are determined using
the Rydberg formula
νRL=cZ2R/parenleftBig
1−m
M/parenrightBig/bracketleftbigg1
n2−1
(n+∆n)2/bracketrightbigg
,(4)
whereRis the Rydberg constant, m, M are the masses
of the electron and the atom, respectively, cis the speed
of light,Zis the nucleus charge, nand∆nare the prin-
cipal quantum number and its change, respectively. It is
easy to show that on decameters, the distance between
adjacent lines is (n >>∆n∼1):
∆νRL≈3νRL
n. (5)
This creates a series of lines corresponding to diﬀerent n
and∆n. Independent series appear for diﬀerent atoms
(isotopic shift) according to factor (1−m/M). Let us take
an example of the line of a single-ionized carbon ( Z=
1), which appears as a result of the electron transition
between adjacent levels with principal quantum numbers
640 and 639 (lines appearing from ∆n= 1transitions
are called α-lines). The transition frequency according
to (4) is νRL(640)≈25MHz, and the distance to the
adjacent line ( n= 641→n= 640 ) according to (5) is
∆νRL∼125kHz.
The integral relative intensity of the lines is deﬁned as
[34]
IRL=/integraldisplay
∆TRL/TBdν≈2·106N2
elbnβn
T5/2
e,c−1,where∆TRL=−TBτRLis the absolute intensity at the
optical depth of τRL,Ne,Teare the electron density and
temperature of the interstellar cloud, lis its length along
the visual path, and bn, βnare the disequilibrium factors
determined by the population of atomic levels.
The corresponding lines’ width is determined by the
Doppler ∆νD, Stark’s ∆νPand radiative ∆νRmecha-
nisms and is equal to [34]
∆νDPR=/radicalBig
∆ν2
D+(∆νP+∆νR)2.
Currently it is well established that decameter carbon
recombination lines appear in partially ionized cold dif-
fuse interstellar hydrogen clouds when the latter is vir-
tually neutral and carbon is fully ionized [37]. This is
due to diﬀerent ionization potentials: EH= 13.6eV, and
E= 11.2eV (the main source of ionization is ultraviolet
quanta with a wavelength of 913 ˚A< λ <1100˚A). The
physical conditions in such clouds are as follows: elec-
tronic temperature Te∼50−100К, electronic concentra-
tionNe∼1−0.001cm−3, sizel∼1−100pc, turbulent
motion∆VT∼10km/s (1 kHz), and maximum radial
velocityVr∼300km/s (30 kHz). In this case, the key pa-
rameters of the decameter lines, which are conﬁrmed by
experiments and calculations, are as follows: line spacing
∆RL≈120kHz, the number of α-lines within 8–33 MHz
interval, NRL≈300, line width ∆νDPR≈1−10kHz,
relative intensity ∆TRL/TB∼10−3−10−5, and integral
relative intensity IRL∼10−10−2c−1.
To conﬁrm the above, Figs. 12,13show an example
of detecting recombination lines at a frequency of ∼269
Figure 12. High sensitive simultaneous observations of ten
recombination radio lines of carbon C 627 α– C 636αnear
the frequency of 26 MHz.
MHz in the direction of the Cas A radio source. The
parameters of the lines are quite typical for other Galaxy
objects.
Thus, it is clear that there is a large number of recom-
bination lines in the Galaxy over the entire spectrum of
decameter waves [37, 38]. They are concentrated mainly
near the Galactic plane, but also observed at rather large
galactic latitudes |b|>10◦. Despite relatively low inten-
sities of these lines, they are still signiﬁcantly higher th an
the absolute and relative intensities of the cosmological
HI lines that are proposed to be searched. Nevertheless,
the extensive knowledge of the parameters of the low-
frequency recombination lines allows us to expect their
eﬀective separation from the radio spectroscopic observa-
tional eﬀect associated with the HI absorption line shifted
towards decameter wavelengths.
As it follows from Section I and the related article [21],
the key parameters of the expected line are as follows:
•the frequency of the 21 cm hydrogen line within
its own reference frame νH= 1420 MHz, redshift
z≈87,
•frequency of the line shifted by the Universe ex-
pansion for an observer on Earth νL∼16MHz,
intensity (average) ∆TL≈0.04К4,
•the width at the level of 0.5 of the maximum ∆νL≈
25MHz,
•the width at the level of 0.1 of the maximum ∆ν′
L≈
50MHz,
•the polarity is negative, without polarization,
•the angular size of the source is ΘS= 4π
(isotropic),
4In section I, in the related article [21] and in [15, 16], the d iﬀeren-
tial brightness temperature in 21 cm lie of the neutral hydro gen
is labeled as δTbr, hereinafter ∆TL
Figure 13. Detection of α,β,γ,δ- recombination radio lines
and discovery of record highly excited states of interstell ar
atoms at n∼1000levels.
•the background temperature is TCMB(0)≈2.73K,
and
•the foreground temperature near 20 MHz TBis4×
104K.
.
Thus, in view of the above line parameters, radio spec-
troscopic requirements, and the experience of previous
research at decameter wavelengths, we are going to for-
mulate the key parameters of the experiments as follows:
•The analysis bandwidth ∆F= (2−10)∆νL≈50−
250MHz
•Frequency resolution ∆f= ∆νobs/(1−10)≈25−
2.5MHz
•The number of frequency channels M=
∆F/∆fmin= 20−10010
•The sampling frequency F≥2∆F= 100−500
MHz
•Sampling quantization q= 16bit
•Spectral resolution adjusted to the width of radio
interference or recombination lines ∆fRFI= 1−10
kHz
•The number of channels MRFI= 5000−25000
•Angular resolution ΘA= 30◦−180◦
•Polarization Np= 2
•Relative sensitivity (TB≫TCMB) ∆TL/TB≈
10−6
•The signal to noise ratio S/N→10
•The ﬂuctuation level at spectra
σ≤(∆TL/TB)/(S/N) = 10−7
•The time-based resolution is not required (the eﬀect
is stationary)
•The spectrum analyzer type a) digital autocorrelat-
ing, b) digital with direct fast Fourier transform.
Let us draw attention to some important requirements
for an experiment in the ﬁeld of low-frequency radio as-
trospectroscopy.
The analysis bandwidth should be several times larger
than the line width. This ensures applicability of rela-
tive spectroscopic measurements, which are much more
accurate than absolute ones. The intensity in a line is
compared to the neighboring spectrum level where lines
are known to be absent, which is why we choose a GURT
antenna with a bandwidth of 8–80 MHz. Estimates show
that it is almost impossible to achieve a much wider
bandwidth while maintaining the maximum sensitivity
m∼0.9and noise immunity. Antenna elements on the
far side of the Moon will improve the situation in the
future.
The resolution must be several times better than the
line width in order to determine the line shape (the num-
ber of channels is several dozens).
In the presence of narrow-band radio interference in-
herent at decameter wavelengths, the resolution should
be quite high (≤10kHz), and the number of spectral
channels should reach many thousands. The contradic-
tion of the latter two requirements is resolved by using
a higher resolution at the observing stage, and during
the secondary processing of the obtained spectra with in-
terferences and recombination lines, the latter are elim-
inated by special digital ﬁltering, and then the spectra
themselves are “smoothed” in terms of frequency and ac-
cording to the expected width of the cosmological lines.
Under these conditions, the key parameter of faint-line
radio spectroscopy is the required ∆taccumulation timeat a given sensitivity and resolution. Then, according to
(3), we get
σ= ∆Tmin/TB= 1//radicalbig
∆f∆t= 10−7. (6)
For∆f= 2.5MHz, it leads to
∆t=1
∆fσ2= 463 days. (7)
This is an extremely long period of continuous observa-
tion (≈1.3yr), which is impossible to achieve in practice.
However, ∆tcan be reduced signiﬁcantly under some
of the above considerations. If we neglect the determina-
tion of the line shape and focus on the fact of detection
itself (narrow-band interferences have already been elim-
inated), then during secondary processing we can further
smooth out the spectra with a frequency resolution of
∆f= ∆νL= 25MHz (this is optimal from the theoreti-
cal point of view on the eﬀect detection). As can be seen
from ( 7), the integration time is reduced by a factor of
10 and becomes quite realistic:
∆t=1
25·106×10−14sec≈46days.
Unfortunately, there are additional interfering factors
that greatly complicate the experiments aiming to search
for extremely faint and broad enough extragalactic spec-
tral lines, which will be discussed in the following sec-
tions.
IV. INTERFERING RADIO SPECTROSCOPIC
FACTORS AND METHODS OF SEARCHING
FOR COSMOLOGICAL HYDROGEN LINES AT
DECAMETER WAVELENGTHS
Fig.14shows the structure of the proposed experi-
ment. Extragalactic regions of the visible Universe con-
taining astrophysical objects of research, i.e. cosmic mi-
crowave background with a brightness temperature of
TCMB≈2.73K, against which the hydrogen absorption
line with intensity of ∆TLis generated and the search
for which is the main goal of the experiment, are shown
on the left side of the ﬁgure. Much closer is the Galaxy
with powerful non-thermal radio emission, which has a
continuous spectrum with a signiﬁcant gradient, ﬁlls the
entire sky, but has an intensity change of several dB
T′
BandT′′
B, depending on the galactic coordinates. The
low-frequency narrow-band recombination radio lines de-
scribed in the previous sections are formed in the Galaxy,
with intensities ∆T′
LRand∆T′′
LR, which depend on the
background radio sources T′
BandT′′
Band physical condi-
tions along the path of the optical depths τ′
LRandτ′′
LR.
The right section of the ﬁgure shows a simpliﬁed dia-
gram of the radio telescope, consisting of the antenna
system itself, antenna and trunk ampliﬁers (AA, TA),
signal transmission lines, spectrum analyzers, computers11
CMB 
Figure 14. Structure of the experiment.
for data recording and processing. This leads to the ﬁ-
nal result shown in the lower left section of the ﬁgure.
The antenna directional pattern (DP) with the width of
ΘAis displaced relative to the Galaxy due to the diurnal
rotation of the Earth. In the near-Earth space, there is
a narrow-band radio interference from ∆IRFIradio sta-
tions (mentioned in the previous section), as well as rel-
atively broadband interferences arising from certain at-
mospheric (more precisely, ionospheric-magnetospheric)
phenomena.
As can be seen from the above, only one of the factors
shown in the ﬁgure is positive and related to the subject
of the study, the cosmological line of neutral hydrogen,
which is shifted towards the decameter range of radio
waves and has a negative intensity ∆TL. All other pa-
rameters and phenomena shown in the ﬁgure and received
(or generated) by the radio telescope are interfering and
signiﬁcantly complicate the solution of the problem. Let
us analyze them in more detail, since overcoming them is
the main goal of the observational methodology proposedin this paper.
A. Free-free absorption
Free-free absorption of TBand∆TLradio radiation is
generated in the plasma environment of the Galaxy. As
can be seen from Fig. 14, on the way of extragalactic
radio radiation propagation towards the observer, there
is a thick layer of our Galaxy with an approximate size
of 20 kpc ×1 kpc, the main component of which is the
fully or partially ionized interstellar medium. One of the
phenomena in this environment is the free-free absorption
of radio radiation, which increases signiﬁcantly as the
frequency is decreasing. Such an absorption, for example,
for∆TL, is described by the following expression
∆T′
L= ∆TLexp(−τc), (8)
where∆TLis the brightness temperature of the radio
radiation before it penetrates the Galaxy, ∆T′
Lis the12
brightness temperature “at the output”, and τcis the op-
tical depth of free-free absorption in the plasma. The
latter is deﬁned as [28]
τc=0.0314N2
el
ν2T3/2
e[1.5lnTe−ln(20.2ν)], (9)
whereνis the observation frequency in GHz, TeandNe
are the electron temperature and density, respectively,
andlis the length of the medium along the line of sight.
For emission nebulae (such as the Rosette, North
America, and other HIIregions) at 20 MHz, the op-
tical depth is very large (τc≫1)at electron temper-
atures and densities Te∼104К,Ne= 10−103cm−3.
The same happens in partially ionized cold plasma at the
periphery of high-density molecular clouds Te∼20K,
Ne∼1cm−3. Consequently, there is almost complete
absorption of low-frequency radio radiation, as follows
from ( 8) and ( 9). However, these interstellar forma-
tions account for only about 10% of the total Galaxy
volume. The lion’s share of the interstellar medium is
made up of diﬀuse neutral hydrogen clouds (Te∼100K,
Ne∼0.001cm−3), and the intercloud and inter-arm
medium with Te∼104K andNe∼0.01cm−3. Even
at a distance along the line of sight of about 10 kpc, ac-
cording to ( 9), we have τc= 0.1−0.001. This gives a
very low absorption in the Galaxy when observing almost
isotropic radio emission ∆TLwith a relatively wide ra-
diation pattern of the radio telescope. The above is also
conﬁrmed by the detection of many thousands of discrete
radio sources at decameter wavelengths using the UTR-2
[39]. Spectra in the frequency range of 10–25 MHz show
a decrease in ﬂux density at the lowest frequencies only
in some cases. This is true for both the most power-
ful galactic radio sources Cas A, Tau A, and the radio
galaxies Cyg A and Vir A, which have linear spectra in
the logarithmic scale up to a frequency of 10 MHz.
B. Foreground
There is a high brightness temperature of the Galac-
tic backgrounds T′
BandT′′
Band the signiﬁcant frequency
gradient TB∝ν−2.6(see Section II). Since it is fun-
damentally impossible to reduce these parameters, the
only method to combat the drastic decrease in the rela-
tive intensity of the eﬀect being sought ∆TL/TB<10−6,
is to signiﬁcantly increase the observation time (up to
many months) and use some hardware and software im-
plementations (multi-antenna observations, eﬀective zer o
line correction).
C. Narrow-band radio interference
Narrow-band radio interference ∆IRFIfrom radiation
generated by radio stations, special service radio systems ,
parasitic radio emissions from the domestic radio tele-
scope instrumentation (computers, monitors, generators,power supplies and so on). This is inherent at decame-
ter wavelengths, but many years of research in this do-
main allowed us to develop methods for monitoring the
interference, improving electromagnetic compatibility o f
equipment, and implementing criteria for identifying use-
ful signals and interference, including complete elimina-
tion of the latter. In the case of the search for cosmo-
logical hydrogen lines, the key identiﬁcation criterion is
the fundamental diﬀerence in the frequency width of the
eﬀects for ∆TL(∆νL∼25MHz)and∆IRFI(∆fRFI=
1−10kHz). It seems very promising to use machine
learning methods to solve the problems of combating
such and other types of interference in low-frequency
radio astronomy. In any case, high frequency resolu-
tion at the observation stage, ∆fRFI= 1−10kHz, ap-
propriate noise removal and frequency averaging up to
∆f= 2.5−25MHz are required.
D. Low-frequency radio interference of natural
origins
Low-frequency radio interference ∆IATMis associated
with phenomena in the Earth lower atmosphere, iono-
sphere and magnetosphere. A typical example of nat-
ural impulsive radio interference in low-frequency radio
astronomy is the short-time radio emission that occurs
during electrostatic discharges in the atmosphere, such
as lightning. Although this eﬀect is quite powerful, at
ﬁrst glance it does not seem to be dangerous, as the time
width is very small – a few milliseconds, and the spec-
trum is quite broad, continuous, without spectral fea-
tures. However, this is true for “close” lightning. Due
to the ionospheric propagation of radio waves from “dis-
tant” discharges, spectral features with a width of tens
to hundreds of MHz can appear, which is dangerous be-
cause it is similar to the spectral width of the eﬀect be-
ing sought. Recently, a similar interference eﬀect was
detected during observations using UTR-2. It is likely
to be caused by the superposition of signals from a large
number of lightning bolts, which is typical for tropical
latitudes (about 100 lightning bolts per second, the in-
terval between them being ∼10ms). Reﬂecting from the
ionosphere at certain frequencies (/lessorsimilar15MHz)the signals
arrive at the radio telescope at angles ∆≈10◦−40◦
above the horizon and create additional relatively broad-
band power within the range of ∼8−15MHz, which is
dangerous because it falls in the range of parameters of
the expected HI line. However, it was found that a simi-
lar broadband spectral eﬀect were observed at low time-
dependent resolution ∆tp>100ms. At a high resolution
of∆tp= 1−10ms, the quasi-continuous eﬀect in terms of
time and frequency is divided into separate pulses, which
are much easier to ﬁlter out against the background of the
time-stationary broadband isotropic phenomenon of the
cosmological hydrogen line. Furthermore, observations
in the zenith direction, especially those with a moder-
ately narrow radiation pattern, will signiﬁcantly reduce13
the aforesaid interference eﬀect.
In addition to the above, there are some other atmo-
spheric and magnetospheric frequency-dependent radio
physical phenomena (auroral emission, Schumann reso-
nances, etc.). However, all of them are concentrated at
extremely low frequencies of ≪1MHz and do not aﬀect
the quality of experiments in decameter wavelength radio
astronomy.
Due to the spatial isotropy of the radio source being
searched for, such low-frequency negative phenomena as
refraction, scattering, and ﬂicker in the ionosphere, in-
terplanetary and interstellar environments are irrelevan t.
Ionospheric absorption at frequencies > 8 MHz can be
neglected.
Thus, as described in subsection B, at the observing
stage, a high time-dependent resolution of ∆tp<10ms
is required, making possible cleaning from impulse noise
(using, in particular, machine learning methods). At the
secondary processing stage, averaging over a the required
value of∆t≈4·106s is applied.
Eliminating radio interference of natural origin caused
by Solar and Jupiter bursts with a rich time-frequency
structure and maximum intensity at decameter wave-
lengths also requires a rather high time-frequency resolu-
tion at the observing stage. As in the case of other types
of RFI, appropriate ﬁltering at the secondary processing
stage is possible through machine learning.
E. Recombination lines
The value ∆TLRholds a special place among all other
interfering eﬀects captured by the radio telescope from
the environment. First of all, it is the only factor with a
negative polarity, like the hydrogen line ∆TL. If we take
into account that the value of ∆TLRis three orders of
magnitude larger than ∆TL, it seems that the recombi-
nation lines present everywhere in the Galaxy are very
confusing in the process of their reliable separation from
the extragalactic eﬀects. However, it is no coincidence
that section III describes the details of the physics of the
formation of these unusual lines and all their parameters.
Consequently, these lines become the most deterministic
and stable interfering component against the background
of all others, which are extremely non-stationary and spo-
radic. Thus, the small width of the lines described above
∆νDPR= 1−10kHz≪∆νL≈25MHz, their frequency
νRLand distance between them ∆νRL≈100kHz ( the
HI line proﬁles with a width of ∆νL≈25MHz contain
approximately 200 recombination lines), the intensity of
these lines depending on the physical conditions in the
medium and the line distribution in the Galaxy allow
us to hope for eﬀective identiﬁcation and elimination of
recombination radio lines from broadband spectra con-
taining cosmological lines of neutral hydrogen within the
domain of decameter radio waves.
Next let us consider three more types of parasitic spec-
tral eﬀects (serious interference factors), which, unlikethe previous ones, occur in the radio telescope itself and
have been poorly described in previous studies.
F.∆Ghardware noise
Each radio telescope consists of a large number of ra-
dio equipment devices and elements, e. g., antennas, ﬁl-
ters, ampliﬁers, phase shifters, transmission lines, sign al
splitters, attenuators, and recorders. All of them have
frequency-dependent transmission characteristics, whic h
are caused by deterministic active and reactive elements,
as well as unpredictable parasitic capacitances, induc-
tances, and resistors [40]. Consequently, uneven fre-
quency transmission functions are generated with charac-
teristic oscillations with a period of units to tens of MHz
and an amplitude of ∆G=TB∆K, which coincides with
the width of the expected HI line. An additional danger is
posed by the fact that these frequency oscillations occur
around a certain average power spectrum G(ν)∼TB(ν)
and, therefore, may feature negative polarity. Careful
adjustment of the elements allows minimizing these ﬂuc-
tuations, but it is impossible to reduce them to less than
1% of the average. Thus, this parasitic spectral eﬀect
can exceed the expected intensity of the HI line by four
orders of magnitude, which requires the use of special
observation methods (see below).
G.∆Phardware noise
The interference eﬀect, which is labeled in Fig. 14as
∆P∝TB∆K2looks similar to the previous ∆G, but is
based on a diﬀerent physics of origin and is dangerous,
too. From the theory of long signal transmission lines, it
is known that the power of a reﬂected noise signal with a
uniform spectrum from the loads connected by the long
line is
Pbiν(f) =r2cos(4πLf/V p),
whereris the coeﬃcient of reﬂection from loads (r=
0−1),Lis the line length, Vpis the phase velocity of
radio wave propagation in the transmission line (radio
frequency cable), and fis the spectrum frequency.
As is shown, for typical radio engineering parameters of
UTR-2, URAN, and GURT, namely, r≈0.1, L≈1−100
m;Vp= 200000 km/s, it follows that the amplitude of
oscillations along the frequency is r2= 0.01 (1%) and the
period of parasitic oscillations for typical lengths of con -
necting cables in the radio telescope structure from 1 m
to 100 m falls within the range from 1 MHz to 100 MHz.
Thus, this interference eﬀect can also coincide with the
line width of ∆νL≈25MHz, and have both positive and
negative polarity, and is quite powerful, i. e. four orders
of magnitude greater than the intensity of ∆TL.14
H.∆Qhardware noise
The eventual interference eﬀect of ∆Q∝TB∆K3was
recently discovered by Ukrainian radio astronomers [41].
Its manifestation is also similar to the previous two ef-
fects (power ﬂuctuations of a uniform noise spectrum
as a function of frequency). However, in this case, the
eﬀect is associated with the placement of antenna ele-
ments at a certain height above the ground, especially
when the latter is two- or multi-layered. As calculations
[41] show, there are multipolar oscillations relative to th e
mean value with an amplitude of up to 10% and a period
of units to tens of MHz. As in the previous cases, this
can be very similar to the spectral eﬀect sought as the
cosmological HI line, is dangerous and requires special
methods of noise-free observations.
In every radio astronomy experiment, one has to deal
with a classic observational problem: detecting a faint ef-
fect (spectral line, signal from a continuous radio source,
pulsed or sporadic signal) against a background of pow-
erful noise radiation with a broad spectrum. This can
be the intrinsic noise of the radio astronomy receiver, or
the brightness temperature of the galactic background,
as at decameter wavelengths. To eliminate this power-
ful “pedestal”, the method of comparison with the noise
spectrum of a reference source, which is subtracted from
the spectrum received by the radio telescope, is tradition-
ally used. Diﬀerent approaches to this method are called
modulation or compensation [28]. Fig. 14shows such a
reference source, i. e. noise generator NG1, the power of
which is regulated by attenuator AT1. It is desirable that
the power and spectrum of such a generator TBN(ν)be
as close as possible to the background parameters TB(ν),
which is not easy to achieve in practice. Sometimes a
numerical approximation of the broadband spectrum is
used (it is assumed that all interference eﬀects have al-
ready been eliminated) at the secondary processing stage,
but it is required to make sure that the dynamic range of
space signal registration and the accuracy of the approxi-
mation by a polynomial of a certain degree are adequate.
The method of comparison with the spectrum of a ref-
erence noise generator was used in experiments to search
for and study recombination lines at decameter wave-
lengths more than 40 years ago [42]. Fig. 15shows one
of the ﬁrst spectra (а) measured by UTR-2 in the sum-
mer of 1978. It is the diﬀerence between the spectrum
of the cosmic radio emission of the Cas A radio source
SA(ν)and the spectrum measured separately without a
radio telescope, but using the noise generator NG1 with
the spectrum of SNG(ν)connected to the spectroana-
lyzer, similarly to the one shown in Fig. 14. As can be
seen, the “pedestal” is absent, but the spectrum is dis-
torted (not ﬂat, the baseline is not equal to 0), primarily
due to the above-mentioned signiﬁcant gradient of the
frequency-dependent galactic background. Looking at
this measured spectrum, it is almost impossible to assert
the detection of a spectral line; an adequate processing
methodology must be used. In [42], a new procedure forише
MHzkHz
kHz
5 kHza
bbith
Figure 15. Detection of interstellar recombination radio l ines
at decameter waves.
correcting the baseline (“zero”) line was proposed, which
is simpler, unambiguous, and more eﬃcient than the tra-
ditional polynomial approximation, when there is always
a problem with choosing the degree of the polynomial
and the number of approximation points.
Let’s recall that for decameter radio spectroscopy, the
ﬁrst radio astronomical digital correlation spectroana-
lyzer on integrated circuits in the former USSR was de-
veloped and implemented at the UTR-2 about 50 years
ago [43]. This high-performance device measured the au-
tocorrelation function of the signal under study using the
following algorithm
R(nT) = ΣM
i=1x(iT)x(iT+nT),
wherex(iT)is the input signal sampled in terms of time
and amplitude, Tis the sampling period (frequency F=
1/T),iis the input signal reference number, nis the
reference number of the autocorrelation function, Mis
the total number of samples of the input signal, MT
is the total accumulation time in the correlation meter,
andN=nmaxis the total number of channels in the
correlation meter.15
The comparison method was implemented directly in
the correlation meter by measuring the diﬀerential auto-
correlation function as the diﬀerence between the func-
tions from the antenna and the noise generator
R(nT) =RA(nT)−RNG(nT).
At the secondary processing stage, the diﬀraction spec-
trum was calculated by direct discrete Fourier transform
S(ν) =SA(ν)−SNG(ν)
= 2TΣN
n=1R(nT)cos(2πνnT), (10)
as shown in Fig. 15(a).
It is clear that these “smooth” distortions of the broad-
band spectrum are generated by the initial samples of
the autocorrelation function, while all samples, includin g
nmax=N, are responsible for the narrow-band spectral
line.
Thus, it was shown for the ﬁrst time in [42] that “cut-
ting oﬀ” the initial section of the autocorrelation func-
tionR(nT)by the number of n=NKon condition that
NK≪Nbefore the Fourier transform completely elim-
inates broadband spectral distortions without aﬀecting
narrow-band spectral details. This is demonstrated in
Fig.15(б), when the corrected spectrum is obtained by
an extremely simple transformation, virtually indistin-
guishable from ( 10)
S(ν) = 2TΣN
n=NKR(nT)cos(2πνnT),
whereNK= 6.
Since the developed automated correlation meter [43]
measures a normalized function (R(0) = 1) , the diﬀeren-
tial spectrum becomes centered, i. e.
/integraldisplay∞
0S(ν)dν= 0.
As can be seen from Fig. 15(b), a small shift of the
observed spectral line is easily centered with respect to
the line maximum, as shown by the dashed line.
Using this transformation with a cutoﬀ of section
R(nT)n=NK= 3−6long, many thousands of mea-
sured spectra were quickly processed, which showed the
high eﬃciency of the procedure and fully proved the re-
liability of detecting a new astrophysical phenomenon,
i. e. interstellar recombination absorption lines of recor d-
highly excited atoms at extremely low radio frequencies.
The above historical scientiﬁc and technical results
show not only the possibility of eﬀective correction of the
“zero” line in the spectra. They also demonstrate the cor-
rect choice of the parameters of the spectroscopic search
experiment in accordance with the expected parameters
of interstellar low-frequency spectral lines (validation of
the choice of parameters for the search for cosmological
HI lines):
•the line frequency νL= 26.13 MHz (decameter
waves; neutral hydrogen line, or recombination line;•the absolute intensity ∆TL∼30K;
•the background temperature TB∼30 000 K;
•the relative intensity ∆TL/TD∼10−3;
•the line width ∆νL= 10kHz (∼100km/s);
•no polarization;
•the source angular size ΘS= 0.5◦−10◦.
Then the parameters of the experiment, which were
formulated about 50 years ago, are as follows (in terms
presented at the end of section III).
•The analysis bandwidth ∆F= (2−10)∆νL= 20−
100kHz.
•Frequency resolution ∆f= ∆νL/(1−10) = 1 −
10kHz.
•The number of frequency channels N=
∆F/∆fmin= 20−100.
•Sampling frequency F/greaterorequalslant2∆F= 40−200kHz.
•Sampling quantization q= 1−16bit.
•Spectral resolution adjusted to the width of radio
interference or recombination lines ∆fRFI= ∆f=
1−10kHz.
•The number of channels NRFI=N= 20−100.
•The space-based resolution ΘA= ΘS= 0.5◦−10◦.
•The relative sensitivity ∆Te/TD≈10−3.
•The signal to noise ratio S/N/greaterorequalslant10.
•The ﬂuctuation level at spectra
σ/lessorequalslant(∆TL/TB)/(S/N) = 10−4.
According to (7), the required integration time for the
∆fresolution from 1 kHz to 10 kHz is estimated as fol-
lows:
∆t= 1/(∆fσ2) = 104−105sec≈3−30hours.
The selected parameters of the experiment are shown in
Fig.15. Implemented at the UTR-2 radio telescope, they
enable detecting a very faint radio spectroscopic eﬀect
successfully. This is also conﬁrmed by much more sen-
sitive experiments [35], shown in Figs. 12,13. With an
analysis bandwidth of ∆F≈1.5MHz and an eﬀective
accumulation time of ∆t= 5000 hours, a record-breaking
sensitivity of σ≈10−5was achieved. Obviously, when
the data with a resolution of ∆f≈1kHz is “smoothed”
to∆f≈25MHz, the sensitivity will become close to
σ= 10−6−10−7, which is required to ﬁnd the HI line.
This proves the good prospects for solving many astro-
physical problems related to radio spectroscopy of cosmic
radiation at decameter wavelengths.16
Still, there is a fundamental diﬀerence between the
above experiments on recombination lines and the new
task of searching for the cosmological HI line at decame-
ter wavelengths.
First of all, the four key parameters of the exper-
iment, i. e. the width of the ∆νLline, the analysis
band∆F, the number of channels N, and the rela-
tive intensity of ∆TL/TBdiﬀer by a factor of three to
four orders of magnitude. As can be seen, when study-
ing narrow recombination lines within the accordingly
selected analysis band, there is virtually no interfer-
ence from ∆IRFI(one can ﬁnd RFI-free “windows”), the
∆IATM,∆G,∆P,and∆Qfactors are much wider than
∆νLand even ∆F. The latter only form a certain addi-
tional gradient in the frequency band of ∼50kHz, which
is eliminated eﬀectively, as shown above. The tempera-
tureTBis not detrimental for observations of recombina-
tion lines either, since the absolute intensity of the latte r
depends on TB:∆TLR=TBσLR. Thus, the search-
ing for the cosmological HI line proposed in this paper
is much more complex and requires special methods for
eliminating numerous interfering factors described at the
beginning of section III.
It should be noted that the method of comparison with
the NG1 signal shown above is quite eﬀective, but imper-
fect. As can be seen from Fig. 14, the generator signal
does not cover a signiﬁcant part of the radio telescope
elements and systems – antennas, ampliﬁers, a part of
the transmission lines, etc. In the spectrum from NG1,
there are virtually no interfering factors, either exter-
nal or internal, that would be subtracted from the inter-
ference in the spectrum received by the antenna during
the comparison process. The comparison method with
diagrammatic modulation can signiﬁcantly improve the
situation. In this case, the main beam of the radio tele-
scope (beam pattern) is directed at the radio source un-
der study, which has a rather compact size ΘS, with the
corresponding spectrum S′(ν)recorded. Another beam
with the same width ΘAis pointed (sequentially or si-
multaneously) at a neighboring part of the sky at a dis-
tance of ∆Θ>ΘS(ΘA<∆Θ), but as close to the
source as possible so that the telescope parameters do
not change. Besides, a comparative spectrum S′′(ν)is
recorded, too. It is very important that this spectrum
has all the same external and internal interfering spectral
features. Then, when obtaining the diﬀerential spectrum
S(ν) =S′(ν)−S′′(ν), we only have the positive eﬀect
of∆TL, and all others are compensated. Unfortunately,
this method is valid for compact radio sources only. In
our case of an isotropic radio source with an HI line, the
∆TLeﬀect will also be destroyed when obtaining a dif-
ferential spectrum.
In this paper, we propose another, more eﬃcient
method of comparing the spectra, namely, we use spec-
tra measured in the directions of the Galactic back-
ground with temperatures T′andT′′
B, that diﬀer by a
factor of about two (see Fig. 11). Both spectra con-
tain all the interfering factors (in slightly diﬀerent val-ues) and a positive spectral feature. This scheme can
be presented analytically. For simplicity, let us as-
sume that all interference with the narrow-band struc-
tures∆TLR,∆IRFI,∆IATM have already been elimi-
nated. Also please, note that the positive eﬀect of ∆TL
(as well as the narrow-band interference factors) is ad-
ditive to TB, while interferences ∆G,∆P,∆Qare multi-
plicative with respect to TB. Consequently, we can record
the two corresponding spectra as follows
S′(ν) =T′
B+∆TL+T′
B∆K+T′
B∆K2+T′
B∆K3,
S′′(ν) =T′′
B+∆TL+T′′
B∆K1+T′′
B∆K2+T′′
B∆K3.
For simplicity, let’s assume that T′′
B≈2T′
B, then
S′′(ν)≈2T′
B+ ∆TL+2T′
B∆K1
+ 2T′
B∆K2+2T′
B∆K3.
To equalize the total powers of both spectra (as in
the case of equalizing the powers of the spectra from the
antenna and the noise generator), we double the value of
S′(ν)and obtain the diﬀerential spectrum as follows
S(ν)≈2S′(ν)−S′′(ν)≈2∆TL−∆TL= ∆TL.
Thus, the change in the temperature of the Galactic
background (approximately by a factor of 2) due to the
diurnal rotation of the Earth with a ﬁxed radiation pat-
tern, the same change in the interfering factors propor-
tional to TB, and the invariability of the intensity of ∆TL
allow distinguishing the latter from the Galactic back-
ground itself (a large “pedestal”) and from the danger-
ous broadband (close to the HI line) interfering factors.
Deﬁnitely, the quality of these comparisons of S′(ν)and
S′′(ν)depends on the coincidence of the corresponding
spectra, one of which tends to the Galactic plane, and
the other to the high-latitude regions of the Galaxy.
The receiver-recorder of cosmic radio signals plays a
very important role in the signal path of each radio tele-
scope (Fig. 14). Its construction depends on the char-
acteristics of the signals under study. In our case, we
need a spectrum analyzer, i. e., a device measuring the
power of the input signal within rather narrow bands dis-
tributed sequentially over the widest possible frequency
band. Several constantly progressing generations of cor-
relation spectrum analyzers were developed for the UTR-
2 radio telescope [35, 43, 44] with a frequency bandwidth
increasing from ∼100kHz to∼30MHz, and the num-
ber of channels from 32, 128 to 4096 (the ﬁrst device was
brieﬂy mentioned above). This approach proved to be
quite eﬀective. Measuring the autocorrelation function of
a signal before its Fourier transform is extremely useful
because it allows correcting the “zero” line, quickly de-
tecting narrow-band radio interference, and ensures the
maximum signal accumulation with minimal computer
memory. Single-bit quantization in such analyzers sim-
pliﬁes the design as much as possible, ensuring stabil-
ity and speed. However, despite the advantages, single-
bit quantization reduces the noise immunity of broad-
band measurements ( ∆F∼50MHz) in the presence of17
narrow-band intense radio interference, which is inherent
in our proposed research. There are two obvious solu-
tions to this problem: when building a new correlation
spectrum analyzer, it is required to use an analog-to-
digital converter with at least 16 bits, as well as special
chip-based and computer equipment that is now avail-
able. The second approach is to measure the spectrum
by digital direct fast Fourier transform of the real-time
input signal in accordance with the following ratio
G(ν) =1
M/braceleftBig/bracketleftbig
ΣM
i=0x(iT)cos(2πνiT)/bracketrightbig2
+/bracketleftbig
ΣM
i=0x(iT)sin(2πνiT)]2/bracketrightbig2/bracerightBig
.
Such new-generation spectrum analyzers have already
been developed and used successfully at the UTR-2,
URAN, and GURT radio telescopes [25]. Their impor-
tant feature is extreme versatility and possibility mea-
suring all parameters of the cosmic radio signals, i. e.
power, spatial, spectral, temporal, polarization, cross-
correlation, with the highest sensitivity and noise immu-
nity. Both direct measurements of spectra and calcula-
tions of autocorrelation and cross-correlation functions
are possible (these spectrum analyzers are proposed for
the search for cosmological HI lines, at least at the ﬁrst
stages of observations).
A prospective algorithm for these observations is as
follows.
1.The antenna system of the radio telescope (one
dipole or subarray of the GURT with a bandwidth
of 8–80 MHz) shall be phased in the zenith di-
rection (the height above the horizon his90◦)
and the equatorial coordinate (direct declination)
isδ= 50◦.
2.During∼12 hours (near the maximum of the
galactic background), the power spectra at the
antenna output shall be measured with a given
pre-accumulation interval of ∆tn= 0.1−1sec
(this corresponds to the time-based resolution at
a frequency-based resolution of ∆f= 4kHz). This
sequence of spectra S′′(ν)(source data) shall be
saved in the computer memory.
3.The same procedure shall be carried out within the
next 12 hours near the background minimum, and
the sequence of spectra S′(ν)shall also be saved in
the computer’s memory.
4.After diurnal observations, it is advisable to con-
duct secondary operational processing, i. e. ﬁlter-
ing out narrow-band and impulse interference on
all partial spectra, smoothing the spectra to res-
olutions, for example, ∆f= 2.5MHz and ∆f=
25MHz, and time averaging to ∆t= 12 hours
forS′(ν)andS′′(ν)spectra. These actions sig-
niﬁcantly compress the information that should be
stored on hard disks. At the same stage, the dif-
ferential spectra of S(ν) = 2S′(ν)−S′′(ν)may be
calculated and accumulated on the same disks.5.Steps 1–4 shall be carried out diurnally for six
months to cover all positions of the Milky Way
in the sky (e. g., from winter to summer) with a
clear time account for the diurnal shift in the Milky
Way position by 3 min 57 sec per day. All spec-
tra recorded during six months shall also be saved
on disks for the ﬁnal processing and data analysis.
The latter includes, but not limited to, averaging
the data over time to the maximum accumulation
time of∆t.
The key criterion for the accuracy of the experimen-
tal methodology is the assessment of the ﬂuctuation
level in the spectra and its compliance with formula
σ= 1/√∆f∆t, taking into account the frequency res-
olution and accumulation time. The eﬀect of eliminat-
ing all types of interference shall also be evaluated by a
clear drop in the ﬂuctuation level in accordance with the
σ∼1/√
∆tlaw.
V. SOME PROSPECTS FOR IMPROVING THE
METHODOLOGY OF SEARCHING FOR THE
COSMOLOGICAL HI LINE AT DECAMETER
WAVELENGTHS
As follows from the previous sections, the search
for the cosmological phenomenon is an extremely diﬃ-
cult observational radio astronomy problem. It requires
record-breaking parameters of equipment, and methods
that have never been implemented before in decameter-
wavelength radio astronomy. The tools and methods de-
scribed above allow us to hope for positive results. How-
ever, let us point out at some additional opportunities
for improving the chances of successful search for HI cos-
mological lines.
A. Multi-antenna observations
The Galactic non-thermal radio emission is a broad-
bandδ-correlated noise distributed over the sky. When
observations are made using independent antennas
spaced at a distance of d > λ/2(at decameter-meter
wavelengths d >50m−0.5m), the signals from the
background at the antenna outputs will be decorrelated
within the corresponding frequency range of 3 MHz to
300 MHz. Thus, these signals can be averaged, which
will lead to a decrease in ﬂuctuations by a factor of√
R
(Ris the number of radio telescopes or dipoles), which
is equivalent to a decrease in the required accumulation
time by a factor of R. Since a single antenna element is
a fairly simple design, they can be easily used in a quite
large number – R≫1. The situation is complicated by
the fact that the number of spectrum analyzers must be
the same. The GURT subarray is more complex than the
element, but there are more than 10 of them, and subject
to availability of the appropriate number of recorders, the
multi-antenna methodology is also possible.18
B. Expansion of the frequency range of UTR-2 and
GURT antennas
The antenna elements and subarrays included in the
UTR-2 and URAN radio telescopes (the total number of
elements is about 4000) are traditionally used within the
8–32 MHz band, which is not suﬃcient to search for HI
lines. However, there is a reason to believe that the ac-
tual permitted frequency band of the telescopes is wider,
5–50 MHz. This needs further investigation. If the con-
clusion is positive, multi-antenna studies will be possibl e
on a large number of antennas of these radio telescopes,
too.
C. Dual-beam observations
The GURT, UTR-2, and URAN subarrays have rela-
tively narrow radiation patterns, ΘA∼30◦. If we direct
the pattern of one subarray to the point with coordinates
δ= 50◦,α= 0n, and the other to δ= 50◦,α= 12h(how-
ever, symmetrically to the polar star and the Earth’s sur-
face) from the measurements of the corresponding spec-
tra, as shown above, we obtain the similarity of S′(ν)and
S′′(ν)spectra in the “counter-phase” and the identity of
the radio interference, which are further reduced when
obtaining diﬀerential spectra, and the observation time
is halved.
D. Modeling experiments for testing the
methodology
The possibility of achieving record-breaking radio spec-
troscopic sensitivity can be tested using an instrumental
model. In this case, the experimental setup and method-
ology remain unchanged, but instead of the antenna, the
devices simulating the radio astronomy conditions are
connected. These are noise generator NG2, the power
of which is regulated by attenuator AT2 to the TBlevel
with a spectrum of 8–80 MHz, and NG3, the signal of
which is added to the signal of NG2 through a ﬁlter with
a bandwidth of ∆νL= 25 MHz, but with a strong at-
tenuation of AT3 to ensure the ratio of ∆TL/TB≈10−6.
This should conﬁrm the required accumulation time of
∆t, and the absence of a certain amount of internal in-
terference.
E. Variational method of multiple comparison
To search for new faint radio astronomy eﬀects, it
is extremely important to use diﬀerent independent
experimental facilities located in diﬀerent geographicallocations and with slightly diﬀerent experimental param-
eters, followed by comparison of the results. Even some
changes in parameters during long-term experiments
will be desirable, such as the type of dipoles, length
of transmission lines, ampliﬁers, spectrum analyzers
with diﬀerent analysis bands and resolutions. When
comparing the results, the eﬀect you are looking for
should be repeatable in any conﬁguration of devices and
parameters.
F. Lunar missions
Undoubtedly, the decisive step to fundamentally im-
prove the conditions for searching the cosmological HI
lines and other faint astrophysical eﬀects at low frequen-
cies is to install decameter-hectometer-wavelength radio
telescopes on the far side of the Moon. This will cre-
ate a unique opportunity to avoid numerous terrestrial
RFI signals, and the negative inﬂuence of the ionosphere.
There is no doubt that Lunar projects of this kind will
be implemented over the next 10–20 years.
CONCLUSIONS
The radio spectroscopic experiment proposed and de-
scribed herein is extremely complex, time-consuming,
but not hopeless. Theoretical estimates of the possibility
of the existence of neutral hydrogen lines redshifted into
the domain of decameter wavelengths and their physical
parameters justify prospective observational eﬀorts. The
instrumental requirements for such the observational pro-
gram are based on 50 years of experience in radio astron-
omy research at decameter wavelengths, including radio
astrospectroscopy. Such the experimental program ap-
pears to be feasible in the coming years.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The work was supported by the projects of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences of Ukraine (Horizon, Inter-
stellar, Radio Telescope) and departmental research top-
ics of the Department of Physics and Astronomy of the
National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, as well as
the project of the Ministry of Education and Science
of Ukraine Modeling the Luminosity of the Large-Scale
Structure Elements of the Early Universe and Galac-
tic Supernovae Remnants and Observations of Variable
Stars (state registration number 0122U001834). Vyach-
eslav Zakharenko is grateful for the ﬁnancial support of
the Europlanet 2024 RI project funded by the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program
(grant agreement No. 871149). The authors are grateful
to their European colleagues for their participation in the
preparation of the UPSCALE program proposals.19
[1]A. A. Penzias, R. W. Wilson, Astrophys. J. 142, 419
(1965); https://doi.org/10.1086/148307
[2]Planck Collaboration: N. Aghanim et al., Astron. As-
trophys. 641, A1 (2020); https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-
6361/201833880
[3]Planck Collaboration: N. Aghanim et al., Astron. As-
trophys., 641, A6 (2020); https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-
6361/201833910
[4]B. E. Robertson et al., Nature Astronomy 7, 611 (2023);
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-023-01921-1
[5]E. Curtis-Lake, Four metal-poor galaxies spectroscopi-
cally conﬁrmed beyond redshift ten, submitted to Nature
Astronomy.
[6]L. Verde, T. Treu, A.G. Riess, Nature Astronomy 3, 891
(2019); https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-019-0902-0
[7]A. G. Riess et al., Astrophys. J. Lett. 934, id. 7 (2022);
https://doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/ac5c5b
[8]V. Bromm, N. Yoshida, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.
49, 373 (2011); https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-astro-
081710-102608
[9]J. R. Pritchard, A. Loeb, Rep. Prog. Phys. 75, id. 086901
(2012); https://doi.org/10.1088/0034-4885/75/8/08690 1
[10]J. D. Bowman et al., Nature 555, 67 (2018);
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25792
[11]S. Singh et al., Nature Astronomy, 6, 607 (2022);
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01610-5
[12]B. Novosyadlyj, Yu. Kulinich, V. Shulga,
W. Han, Astrophys. J. 888, id. 27 (2020);
https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab530f
[13]Yu. Kulinich, B. Novosyadlyj, V. Shulga, W.
Han, Phys. Rev. D 101, id.083519 (2020);
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.101.083519
[14]B. Novosyadlyj, Yu. Kulinich, B. Melekh, V.
Shulga, Astron. Astrophys. 663, A120 (2022);
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202243238
[15]B. Novosyadlyj, V. Shulga, Yu. Kulinich, W. Han,
Physics of the Dark Universe 27, 100422 (2020);
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dark.2019.100422
[16]B. Novosyadlyj, Yu. Kulinich, G. Milinevsky, V.
Shulga, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 526, 2724 (2023);
https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stad2927
[17]K. Tauscher, D. Rapetti, J. O. Burns, E.
Switzer, Astrophys. J. 853, id. 187 (2018);
https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/aaa41f
[18]D. Rapetti, K. Tauscher, J. Mirocha and J.
O. Burns, Astrophys. J. 897, id. 174 (2020);
https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab9b29
[19]K. Tauscher, D. Rapetti, J. O. Burns, Astrophys.
J.897, id. 175 (2020); https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-
4357/ab9b2a
[20]K. Tauscher et al., Astrophys. J. 915, id. 66 (2021);
https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac00af
[21]B. Novosyadlyj, Y. Kulinich, O. Konovalenko,
Journal of Physical Studies 28(1), 1901 (2024);
https://doi.org/10.30970/jps.28.1901
[22]S. Ya. Braude, Antennas 26, 3 (Svyaz’ Publ., Moscow,
1978).
[23]O. O. Konovalenko et al., Radio Phys. Radio Astron. 26,
5 (2021); https://doi.org/10.15407/Rpra26.01.005
[24]A. Konovalenko et al., Exp. Astron. 42, 11 (2016);
https://doi.org/10.1007/ S10686-016-9498-X[25]V. Zakharenko et al., J. Astron. Instrum. 5, 1641010
(2016); https://doi.org/10.1142/S2251171716410105
[26]A. А. Konovalenko et al., Radio Phys. Radio Astron. 21,
83 (2016); https://doi.org/10.15407/rpra21.02.083
[27]O. O. Konovalenko et al., Radio Phys. Radio Astron. 24,
3 (2019); https://doi.org/10.15407/rpra24.01.003
[28]J. D. Kraus, Radio Astronomy (McGraw-Hill Inc., US,
1966).
[29]P. L. Tokarsky, A. A. Konovalenko, S. N. Yerin,
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 65, 4636 (2017);
https://doi.org/10.1109/tap.2017.2730238
[30]P. L. Tokarsky, A. A. Konovalenko, S. N. Yerin, I. N.
Bubnov, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 67, 7312 (2019);
https://doi.org/10.1109/tap.2019.2929322
[31]М. А. Sidorchuk et al., Radio Phys. Radio Astron. 26,
287 (2021); https://doi.org/10.15407/rpra26.04.287
[32]V. V. Krymkin, Radiophys. Quantum electron. 14, 161
(1971); https://doi.org/10.1007/bf01031395
[33]A. A. Konovalenko, L. G. Sodin, Nature 294, 135 (1981);
https://doi.org/10.1038/294135a0
[34]A. A. Konovalenko, S. V. Stepkin, In: Radio astronomy
from Karl Jansky to microjanski , (Eds.) L. I. Gurvits,
S. Frey, S. Rawlings, Vol. 15, pp. 271-295 (EAS publ.,
Budapest, 2005); https://doi.org/10.1051/eas:2005158
[35]S. V. Stepkin, A. A. Konovalenko, N. G. Kan-
tharia, N. Udaya Shankar, Mon. Not. R. Astron.
Soc.374, 852 (2007); https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2966.2006.11190.x
[36]A. A. Konovalenko, In: Radio recombination
lines: 25 years of investigation , (Eds.) M. A.
Gordon, R. L. Sorochenko, Proceedings of IAU
colloq., pp. 175-189 (Springer, Dordrecht, 1990);
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-009-0625-9_17
[37]S. V. Stepkin, O. O. Konovalenko, Y. V. Vasylkivskyi, D.
V. Mukha, Radio Phys. Radio Astron. 26, 314 (2021);
https://doi.org/10.15407/rpra26.04.314
[38]A. K. Vydula et al., Astron. J. 167, id. 2 (2024);
https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ad08ba
[39]S. Ya. Braude, A. V. Megn, B. P. Ryabov, N. K.
Sharykin, I. N. Zhouck, Astrophys. Space Sci. 54, 3
(1978); https://doi.org/10.1007/bf00637902
[40]E. P. Abranin, Yu. M. Bruck, V. V. Zakharenko,
A. A. Konovalenko, Exp. Astron. 11, 85 (2001);
https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1011109128284
[41]P. L. Tokarsky, A. A. Konovalenko, J.
Modelski, IEEE Access 11, 75225 (2023);
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3294694
[42]O. O. Konovalenko, Radio spectroscopic studies of the in-
terstellar medium at decameter waves , PhD Thesis (IRE
NASU, Kharkiv, 1982).
[43]A. А. Konovalenko, Pribory i tekhnika experimenta 6,
123 (1981);
[44]S. V. Stepkin, Radio Phys. Radio Astron. 1, 255 (1996);
http://rpra-journal.org.ua/index.php/ra/article/vie w/22/278