A Gamified Framework to Assist Therapists with
the ABA Therapy for Autism
Matteo Cordioli2, Laura Delfino1, Alessia Romani1, Elisa Mortini1, Pier Luca Lanzi2
1Spazio Autismo Cooperativa Sinergie — Mantova, Italy
https://www.solcomantova.it/servizi/autismo/
2Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria (DEIB) — Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
Abstract —We present a framework to assist therapists and
children with autism spectrum disorder in their Applied Behav-
ioral Analysis (ABA) therapy. The framework was designed in
collaboration with Spazio Autismo, an autism center in Mantova,
Italy. The framework is a first step toward transitioning from
the current paper-based to fully digital-supported therapy. We
evaluated the framework over four months with 18 children
diagnosed with classic autism, ranging from 4 to 7 years old.
The framework integrates a mobile app that children and
therapists use during the sessions with a backend for managing
therapy workflow and monitoring progress. Our preliminary
results show that the framework can improve the efficacy of
the therapy sessions, reducing non-therapeutic time, increasing
patient focus, and quickening the completion of the assigned
objectives. It can also support therapists in preparing learning
materials, data acquisition, and reporting. Finally, the framework
demonstrated improved privacy and security of patients’ data
while maintaining reliability.
Index Terms —Autism, Applied Behavioural Analysis, Serious
Games, Gamification
I. I NTRODUCTION
Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by
challenges in social interaction, communication difficulties,
and repetitive patterns of behavior or interests. It is usually
diagnosed in early childhood, and its exact cause is still
not fully understood. A cure for autism does not currently
exist; however, behavioral, developmental, educational, and
psychological intervention strategies can significantly improve
the lives of individuals [1], [2].
In recent years, serious games have shown to be valuable
potential as tools for aiding the treatment of individuals with
autism [3], [4]. This paper presents a gamified framework
we developed to assist therapists and children with autism
spectrum disorder during therapy. It has been designed in
collaboration with Spazio Autismo in Mantova, a center
specialized in supporting individuals of all ages with ASD.
Its mission is to enhance the quality of life for individuals
with autism and their families by promoting a cohesive and
integrated approach. This is achieved through collaborative
Contact authors: Matteo Cordioli (matteo.cordioli@mail.polimi.it), Dr.
Laura Delfino (laura.delfino@solcomantova.it), Dr. Alessia Romani (alero-
mani24@gmail.com), and Dr. Elisa Mortini (elisa.mortini1@gmail.com). Pier
Luca Lanzi (pierluca.lanzi@polimi.it; 0000-0002-1933-7717).efforts, with a strong focus on working with families as the
initial step towards creating a meaningful life plan.
Spazio Autismo is staffed with a team of psychologists,
consultants, and educators who act as case managers for the
families of individuals with autism. The center applies the
Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) therapy [5], [6], one of
the most effective behavioral therapies that utilizes principles
of learning theory to generate positive behavior changes and
improve the quality of life for individuals with autism.
Our framework has been conceived as a first step toward
transitioning from the paper-based protocol currently followed
at the center to a fully digital-supported therapy. It has been
designed to align faithfully with ABA guidelines, support
the entire flow of therapeutic sessions, help therapists create
personalized sessions, and prepare its learning material. The
framework comprises (i) an app for tablets for children to use
during the sessions; (ii) a backend that records performance
and behavior information; and (iii) a web frontend for thera-
pists to plan sessions and review patients’ progress.
We evaluated our framework over four months with 18
children diagnosed with classic autism, ranging from 4 to 7
years old. Our preliminary results show that time spent on
non-therapeutic activities has been reduced with an increase
between 10% to 68% of patients’ focus. They also show
a significant increase in the number of learning objectives
completed compared to the paper-based protocol over the same
period. In addition, the framework helped therapists collect
more information about the sessions and patients’ progress,
reduce the time needed to prepare the learning material, and
share the results with the families by automatically generating
progress reports.
II. A UTISM AND APPLIED BEHAVIORAL ANALYSIS (ABA)
Autism encompasses a spectrum of disorders, each with
its unique characteristics [7], and it manifests differently in
each individual [8]. There are three main types of autism:
Autistic Disorder, Asperger’s syndrome, and pervasive de-
velopmental disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS).
Autistic Disorder, or classic autism, is characterized by sig-
nificant impairments in communication, social interaction, and
the presence of repetitive behaviors. Individuals with classic
autism may exhibit delayed language development, difficultyarXiv:2401.00200v1  [cs.HC]  30 Dec 2023forming relationships, repetitive movements, or fixated inter-
ests. This type of autism is often associated with intellectual
disability. Asperger’s Syndrome is considered a milder form
of autism. Individuals with Asperger’s may have average to
above-average intelligence but struggle with social interaction
and communication. PDD-NOS is a diagnosis often used for
individuals with milder symptoms that do not meet the criteria
for either classic autism or Asperger’s syndrome.
A. Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA)
Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) [5], [6] is one of the
most effective behavioral therapies that utilizes principles of
learning theory to generate positive behavior changes and
improve the quality of life for individuals with autism and
other developmental disorders. It is a data-driven, evidence-
based approach that aims to bring meaningful and lasting
behavior changes in individuals. By applying scientifically
validated strategies, ABA helps individuals with autism and
other developmental disorders to improve their skills, enhance
their independence, and lead fulfilling lives [9].
ABA involves systematic assessment and intervention strate-
gies to target socially significant behaviors. It begins with a
comprehensive evaluation to identify the individual’s strengths,
challenges, and specific behaviors that must be addressed.
Based on the initial assessment, ABA interventions are tailored
to each person’s unique needs and abilities. Data collection
and analysis are integral components of ABA, as they provide
objective information about behavior patterns, progress, and
the effectiveness of interventions.
B. ABA Therapy Design
The frequency of ABA sessions can vary depending on
several factors, including the individual’s needs, goals, avail-
able resources, and unique circumstances of each individual
[10]. ABA is considered a long-term intervention rather than
a short-term fix. Consistency and continuity of therapy are
important for skill development and behavior change. For
some individuals, ABA may be needed for several years to
address a range of skills and maintain progress over time.
Integration of ABA principles into daily routines and activities
is crucial to promote generalization of skills beyond the
therapy sessions. ABA can be implemented across various
environments, including homes, schools, clinics, and commu-
nity settings, to support individuals in developing essential
skills, such as communication, social interaction, self-help, and
academic abilities.
C. Verbal Behavior Milestones Assessment and Placement
Program (VB-MAPP)
The Verbal Behavior Milestones Assessment and Placement
Program (VB-MAPP) is a criterion-referenced assessment
based on typical language development, thus measuring how
well an individual performs against an objective rather than
another student. In practice, the tool provides an extensive
checklist for tracking progress over time. The VB-MAPP
guidelines [11] suggest 18 categories, each with 15 objectivesthat must be completed in a predetermined order. These
categories are used to monitor the progress of ABA activities.
In this study, we focused on three categories that the
therapists identified as high priority: Tact, Listener, and Visual-
Perceptual Matching to Sample (VP-MTS). Tact is the ability
to label or describe objects, actions, or events in the en-
vironment. It involves expressing what one observes using
language. Listener skills refer to receptive language abilities
where an individual responds appropriately to verbal stimuli
or instructions from others. It includes following directions
and understanding spoken information. VP-MTS tasks involve
matching or identifying objects, pictures, or symbols based on
visual cues, often used for learning and discrimination tasks.
III. R ELATED WORK
There is a vast literature on the applications of serious
game for autism spectrum disorders that has been recently
surveyed in [3], [4]. In this section, we overview the most
relevant mobile applications available on the marketplace that
are related to ABA therapy.
AutiSpark [12] is an educational mobile app designed for
children with autism spectrum disorder that provides many
engaging and interactive learning games tailored to meet the
child’s learning needs. It covers many topics, such as spelling,
math, memory, sorting, matching, and puzzles. Its content
spans various concepts such as image association, emotional
comprehension, sound recognition, and much more. AutiSpark
is exceptionally engaging and features a variety of vibrant
colors and animated elements on the screen. This character-
istic led the therapists to suggest that the app was designed
for children who have already made some progress in their
ability to discern between essential and non-essential elements.
Furthermore, the app lacks a clear differentiation between the
various focus areas within ABA therapy. AutiSpark is designed
as an app to entertain autistic children while ensuring they
learn and enhance specific skills. However, it is not suitable
to adhere to the ABA therapy guidelines.
Autism BASICS [13] is a mobile app developed by a
team of psychologists, speech, behavioral, and occupational
therapists. It aims to engage children with autism and other
special needs, enabling parents to work closely with their
children. Autism BASICS provides daily activities assigned
by the child’s therapist or parent, a library of learning-focused
activities crucial for the development of children with autism,
and a parent’s corner with educational videos and content
to facilitate collaboration between parents and their children.
Parents or therapists assign tasks from the library, specifying
the time the child should dedicate to these daily activities.
Therapists can define multiple levels within a particular cate-
gory for the child to focus on. Each day, the child completes
these tasks presented in an engaging and enjoyable game for-
mat. Autism BASICS offers thousands of activities categorized
by significance in early childhood development for children
with autism or developmental delays. These activities cover
alphabet, spelling, math, and more, focusing on behavioral,
academic, sensory, independent/self-help, communication, andsocial skills. According to the therapists at Spazio Autismo,
some of these activities may be integrated into ABA therapy.
Autism ABC [14] encompasses a range of essential fea-
tures tailored to enhance learning and development in autistic
children. It offers a selection of learning activities that cover
cognitive, linguistic, and motor skills. The app is highly
adaptable, making it suitable for children of various ages and
autism spectrum levels. It ensures inclusivity by providing
content that aligns with different developmental stages. The
ABC App places a strong emphasis on data collection and
analysis. It meticulously tracks and records each child’s re-
sults for every activity, presenting them through user-friendly
charts and indexes. These data-driven insights are valuable
for assessing a child’s progress. The app incorporates the
concept of positive reinforcement, making learning engaging
and enjoyable for children. This approach motivates children
to participate in activities actively. However, therapists noted
that it did not strictly adhere to the ABA therapy guidelines.
The applications we evaluated with the therapists have
unique strengths but also areas for improvement with respect
to Spazio Autismo’s needs. AutiSpark impresses with its
personalized learning approach and diverse content, yet it may
benefit from increased data sharing and classification of games
under the naming of ABA therapy. Autism BASICS excels
in providing comprehensive content and user-friendliness but
could enhance its adaptability and engagement. Finally, ABC
App distinguishes itself with data-driven insights, though
diversifying content and strengthening data anonymity could
further improve its appeal. None of these apps faithfully align
with ABA therapy, a major requirement for therapeutic use at
Spazio Autismo. Accordingly, we designed a framework that
could meet such strict therapeutic needs.
IV. T HEFRAMEWORK
Our framework was designed in cooperation with the thera-
pists working at Spazio Autismo to help them transition from
the current paper-based to a digitally supported therapy. The
framework had to align with ABA guidelines faithfully, fully
support the flow of therapeutic sessions, help therapists design
personalized sessions, and preparing the learning material.
The paper-based protocol makes it very difficult to record
data about during the sessions. Accordingly, the framework
had to record all available session data, store them securely,
proving access using a web-based front-end with, possibly,
some analytic support.
A. Therapy Sessions
Patients at Spazio Autismo have been diagnosed with classic
autism . They all have high support needs, which means
they face significant challenges in social communication and
interactions. Many of them may be non-verbal or have minimal
speech, and they encounter substantial difficulties in perform-
ing daily tasks, such as self-care and vocational activities.
Sessions are one-to-one (patient-therapist) meetings that last
for approximately one hour. These sessions involve ABAactivities that are closely monitored using the VB-MAPP
categories (Section II).
Therapists interact with the patients with a deck of cards.
Each card features a white background with a cartoonish image
of an everyday object. The therapist presents these cards to the
patient, selecting them based on the exercise being conducted
and, when possible, the child’s interests (e.g., cards with
images of vehicles for children who show curiosity towards
cars).
Each VB-MAPP category consists of 15 objectives of
increasing difficulty. An objective is completed when the
specified number of correct responses, as defined by the
therapists, is attained. These values are determined for each
category and each objective and are not dependent on the
specific patient. During the session, the therapist only records
the correct responses by marking them with checkmarks on
an unstructured tracking paper sheet. Incorrect responses,
including incorrect answers and unanswered questions, are not
recorded.
Once the session is completed, the therapist has a sheet
on which the correct responses obtained from the patient are
written down. In preparation for the next session, the therapist
reviews the sheet to avoid proposing the same responses
the patient completed in the previous sessions. This tracking
process must be repeated until that objective is completed.
This tracking process can span up to several months.
Upon completing the objective, the therapist shares the
correct responses with the supervisor and the patient’s family.
To do this, the therapist transcribes all the correct answers
during the period required to complete the level into a form.
The file is then printed and handed to the family.
B. Framework Design
The design of our framework focused on faithfully repli-
cating the paper-based protocol already in place to maintain
adherence to ABA principles and facilitate the transition to a
fully digitalized protocol. Leveraging the technology’s possi-
bilities, therapists envisioned replicating the game experience
of the deck of cards in a newly developed gaming app,
introducing a gamified component. Therapists asked for tools
that could support them in preparing the digital card deck used
in the digital-based sessions. They also required the possibility
of recording children’s responses (with other performance and
timing data) during the sessions and generating the reports
shared with the family automatically. From the perspective
of privacy and security, therapists must have access only to
their patients’ data. The children’s identities must be kept
anonymous accordingly, no personal identification data is
stored on the backend.
C. The Architecture
Figure 1 shows the architecture that comprises three compo-
nents: the mobile app, a website, and the backend, enabling the
communication between these two. The creation of the mobile
app and the website became necessary to replicate ABA
therapy in the digital format. The mobile app is exclusivelyFig. 1: Data flow diagram
intended for gaming by patients during their therapy sessions,
and it is deliberately designed to be minimal and free of stimuli
that could impact children’s ability to maintain concentration
in their therapy activities. Thus, the development of separate
access via the web was necessary to provide the therapists
with a space to manage data before meeting with the patients
and after the session ended.
At the beginning of each session, the therapist logs into the
mobile app using the patient’s credentials using a tablet. The
therapist can access the patient data and view the planned
and achieved objectives stored in the backend. While the
patient plays ABA games on the tablet during a session, the
app records the patient’s performance data in the backend.
Once the session is completed, the therapist can access the
session data from the website. When the patient completes
an objective, the therapist can download the report from the
website to share with the supervisor and the family. The
therapist can add or modify the patient’s objectives from the
website if necessary. At the moment of the evaluation, the
framework has ABA games for three VB-MAPP categories
(Section II-C) that the therapists identified as high priority:
Tact, Listener, and Visual-Perceptual Matching to Sample (VP-
MTS).
V. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We evaluated our framework over four months with 18
children (7 females and 11 males) 4-7 years old following
the ABA therapy at the Spazio Autismo in Mantova, Italy.
Note that our evaluations included all the children who were
eligible to participate; other children were excluded due to
the specific requirements of their diagnoses. All the personal
and therapeutic information about the children involved in
the evaluation remained undisclosed. For research purposes,
the therapists confirmed that (i) all the children involved in
the evaluation could be collectively categorized under the
diagnosis of classic autism; they all have high support needs,
limited or no verbal communication abilities, and experience
significant obstacles in their day-to-day activities. The patients
are listed in the analysis with a unique numerical identifier.
Our evaluation focused on three main aspects: Patient Focus
During Therapy ,Speed of Objectives Completion , and the
Analysis of Error Rates .
Fig. 2: Average time spent per session in each category; bars
report the standard error of the mean.
A. Focus During Therapy
When using the paper-based protocol, children easily get
distracted due to several stimuli in their learning environment.
Our application cannot remove distractions entirely, however,
therapists told us that children appeared more focused and
engaged. We can estimate attention and involvement during
sessions by quantifying the amount of time children spend
actively engaged, computed as the difference between the last
and first answer. Figure 2 shows the average time previously
spent using the paper-based protocol (column Before) and our
framework (column After) in each category considered. Note
that, we do not report averages for the paper-based protocol
since the therapists were not collecting timing for each session;
the reported data are based on their own evaluation and session
objectives. For the Tact category, our framework does not
significantly increase the time spent actively engaged, and
the role of digital support appears to be relatively neutral in
increasing the focus during therapy. In the other categories,
when utilizing the tablet as a supportive tool, children seem
to become notably more engrossed and immersed in the ther-
apeutic activities. We discussed the results with the therapists,
who noted that Tact is the category where the children do not
actively operate on the tablet. Therefore, we recorded a slight
difference between the paper-based and the digital supports.
On the other hand, categories ( Listener andVP-MTS ) where
children are more actively involved with the tablet during the
sessions show a 32% to 68% improvement in the amount of
time patients spend actively engaged.
B. Objectives Completion
The time needed to complete therapeutic objectives (goals)
set by the therapists is a critical indicator of improvement for
ABA therapy. The children involved in this evaluation have
different starting levels in different categories, as they may
vary considerably depending on each patient diagnosis. Ac-Fig. 3: Percentage of completed objectives per category.
Fig. 4: Number of objectives completed for each category by
each patient.
cordingly, our evaluation focused on the number of additional
objectives the children could achieve in the given time frame.
For each patient, we collected, the set of completed Tact,
Listener , and VP-MTS objectives. We also analyzed the
(anonymized) paper reports collected for the same patients in
the four months prior to the evaluation using the paper-based
protocol; for consistency, we analyzed the same VB-MAPP.
In the previous four months, 92 objectives were completed
with an average of 5.11 objectives per children. At the end of
the evaluation, 119 therapeutic objectives were accomplished
using our framework with an average 6.11 objectives. Figure 3
shows the average percentage of objectives completed for
each category while Figure 4 reports the number of objectives
completed by each patient for each category. Note that the
evaluation involved a limited number of patients at different
phases of their therapy, of different categories, over a short
time window. Accordingly, these results should be viewed
solely as an assessment of a positive trend, also perceived
by the therapists during the sessions.
C. Analysis of Error Rates
Patients’ errors were not recorded during paper-based ses-
sions as they would distract the therapists from the patient. Ourframework automatically records all the patient’s interactions
with the tablet, thus allowing therapists to analyze the number
of errors and the error rate each patient makes during a session.
We compute a patient’s error rate as,
ψ=#o f Errors
#o f RightAnswersRequired
Ifψ≤1 then the patient made an equal or fewer number
of errors compared to the correct answers; if ψ>1, then
the patient committed more errors than the required number
of correct answers. It is worth noting that the objective is
considered completed once the patient attains the prescribed
quantity of correct answers, regardless of the number of errors
made in the process. Figure 5 reports the average error rate
for each category across all patients. The three categories
show substantially different error rates. Figure 6 shows the
average error rate in each category with the corresponding
range of variation. Tact exhibits the highest average error rate
(2.05), meaning that, for an objective requiring 50 correct
answers, a patient would be presented with approximately
≈150 questions (50 answered correctly and 100 answered
incorrectly). Listener has an average error rate of 1.78, and
VP-MTS has1.64. According to the therapists, the significantly
higher average error for Tact could be attributed to various
factors. Tact primarily focuses on enhancing the patient’s
ability to identify and name objects, actions, and events. This
category often serves as one of the initial areas of intervention
for patients who are new to ABA therapy and may encounter
substantial challenges. Additionally, Tact games typically lack
the captivating elements or actions that can engage children,
making it more challenging for them to maintain their focus
during these activities. In conclusion, Tact has exhibited the
least favorable results from the perspective of patient outcomes
among the three categories developed, coherently with the
therapists’ expectations, which had never been quantified
before.
D. Time Spent on Non-Therapeutic Activities
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) patients are prone to
being distracted. Before the introduction of our app, many
children lost their focus while therapists were setting up
the learning and data collection materials. Our framework
automates these two processes, and session setup is almost
eliminated or reduced to the bare minimum. According to
the therapists, our application has not only reduced their
preparation and recording time but can also be considered an
element of improvement in therapy efficacy.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
We presented a gamified framework we developed to assist
therapists in applying Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA)
therapy for autistic children. The framework includes an
application for tablets that therapists use during therapeutic
sessions with the children. The children’s therapeutic activities
are mini-games, providing safe and intuitive means to learn
and improve in various categories. The application also offersFig. 5: Error rate of each patient in each category.
Fig. 6: Error rate ψper category: mean with standard error
(blue line), minimum (green line), maximum (red line).
therapists an efficient way to record several types of data
automatically during the sessions. All the recorded data and
the sessions’ learning material can be accessed and prepared
using a web app that provides access to the recorded data and
some editing tools. We evaluated the framework at Spazio
Autismo, with 18 children diagnosed with classic autism,
ranging from 4 to 7 years old. Our preliminary results show
that time spent on non-therapeutic activities has been reduced,
the patients’ focus increased by 10% to 68%, and speed of
objectives completion accelerated, with an average of 6.61
objectives completed in 4 months, in contrast with the 5.11
before the digitalization.
ABA therapy is heavily data-driven and the paper-based ap-
proach has posed significant challenges. Our framework helps
therapists collect more data that can become integral to their
analyses of patients’ progress. For example, therapists could
tailor the therapy to each patient, something infeasible with
paper-based therapy. Parents could use our framework outside
the sessions to offer children short, engaging games anytime
during the day. This possibility fits patients undergoing ABA
therapy, which relies on the repetition of behaviors.REFERENCES
[1] K. Hume, R. Loftin, and J. Lantz, “Increasing independence in autism
spectrum disorders: A review of three focused interventions,” Journal
of autism and developmental disorders , vol. 39, pp. 1329–1338, 2009.
[2] C. for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023) Treatment and
intervention services for autism spectrum disorder. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/treatment.html
[3] A. Hassan, N. Pinkwart, and M. Shafi, “Serious games to improve social
and emotional intelligence in children with autism,” Entertainment
Computing , vol. 38, p. 100417, 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1875952121000148
[4] A. P. de Carvalho, C. S. Braz, S. M. dos Santos, R. A. C. Ferreira,
and R. O. Prates, “Serious games for children with autism spectrum
disorder: A systematic literature review,” International Journal of
Human–Computer Interaction , vol. 0, no. 0, pp. 1–28, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2023.2194051
[5] S. B.F., Science and Human Behaviour . McMillanCompany, 1953.
[6] H. Cooper, Heron, Applied Behavior Analysis . Pearson, 2014.
[7] C. Lord, E. H. Cook, B. L. Leventhal, and D. G. Amaral, “Autism
spectrum disorders,” Neuron , vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 355–363, 2000.
[8] M. Rutter, “Diagnosis and definition of childhood autism,” Journal of
autism and childhood schizophrenia , vol. 8, pp. 139–161, 1978.
[9] Q. Yu, E. Li, L. Li, and W. Liang, “Efficacy of interventions based
on applied behavior analysis for autism spectrum disorder: A meta-
analysis,” Psychiatry Investig , pp. 432–443, 2020.
[10] E. Linstead, D. Dixon, E. Hong, C. Burns, R. F. M. Novack, and
D. Granpeesheh, “An evaluation of the effects of intensity and duration
on outcomes across treatment domains for children with autism spectrum
disorder,” Translational Psychiatry , pp. 7, e1234, 2017.
[11] K. L. Montallana, “Inter-rater agreement for the milestones and barriers
assessments of the verbal behavior milestones assessment and placement
program (vb-mapp),” Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders ,
vol. 49, 2019.
[12] I. D. P. Limited. (2021) Autispark: Kids autism games. [Online].
Available: https://play.google.com/store/apps/detailsid=com.iz.autispark.
kids.autism.games.special.needs.educational.learning.therapy.social.
skills.speech
[13] W. Hub. (2022) Autism basics: Learning app. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=in.mywellnesshub.
autismbasicsunity
[14] Lollipapps. (2020) Autismo abc app. [Online]. Available: https:
//play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=air.com.lollipapps.games